==PAGE:1==
Feasibility study of Power-to-X integration in
future energy systems
An offshore hydrogen production study
Master Thesis
DTU Management
Department of Energy Economics & Modelling
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Feasibility study of Power-to-X integration in future energy systems
An offshore hydrogen production study
Master Thesis
February, 2023
By
Andreas Ipsen & Mathias Rasmussen
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Energy Economics & Modelling, Akademivej, Build-
ing 358, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.man.dtu.dk
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over six months at the Section for Energy Economics &
Modelling, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment for the degree
Master of Science in Engineering, M.Sc. Eng.
Andreas Ipsen - s170392
Signature
Date
Mathias Rasmussen - s175005
Signature
Date
ii
Feasibility study of Power-to-X integration in future energy systems
26-02-2023
26-02-2023
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
This thesis investigates how offshore wind developers can hedge their risk in volatile elec-
tricity markets with Power-to-X plants. The market for green hydrogen is expanding as
black, grey and blue hydrogen is being phased out, however slowly. The bottleneck for
the transition is the price gap between fossil-based- and renewable hydrogen, which is
projected to decrease in the near future and close in 2050. The feasibility of a hybrid
power plant consisting of 1GW offshore wind and variable-sized Alkaline electrolyser is
investigated in a user-defined energy system. Balmorel is used to simulate the energy
system with multiple scenarios being investigated and compared. Electrical price profiles
from the energy system are used in an optimisation model to determine the optimal oper-
ating strategy and dimensions in order to maximise profits. The optimal solution is then
financially assessed to determine whether the project is economically feasible.
The simulation from Balmorel yielded an energy system with a large penetration of solar
energy and very little offshore wind even in wind-intensive countries such as Denmark,
resulting in a low correlation between electricity prices and wind data.
Optimal sizing of a hybrid Power-to-X plant in various combinations of price profiles and
fixed hydrogen prices is simulated and mapped in a ”heat map”. The dimensions are then
fixed to determine the profitability of the configuration in a volatile market. The most prof-
itable configurations of both offshore and onshore options are assessed financially. The 4
investigated configurations are 1GW WF/1GW AEC without grid connection both onshore
and offshore, 1GW WF/1GW AEC/215MW HVDC and 1GW WF/550MW AEC/450MW
HVDC. In cases of dedicated hydrogen production and no grid connection, offshore pro-
duction yields an LCOH between 3.0-3.6EUR/kg while onshore is at 3.7-4.55EUR/kg. If
an HPA of 4EUR/kgH2 is secured, the dedicated hydrogen plant can achieve an IRR of
10.1%. In a design configuration with the same hybrid plant as above and a complimen-
tary 215MW grid connection, approximately the same IRR can be achieved in a historical
price-correlated scenario. However, with the price correlation derived from Balmorel an
IRR of more than 14% is achievable.
The feasibility of such a project is subject to a lot of risk and uncertainty, which can be
partially mitigated with an investigation of market dynamics. A final investment decision
is not a yes or no answer, but rather a description of opportunities in a volatile market.
Feasibility study of Power-to-X integration in future energy systems
iii
==PAGE:6==
List of abbreviations
AEC - Alkaline Electrolysis Cell
CAPEX - Capital Expenditures
CCUS - Carbon Capture Utilisation & Storage
DEA - Danish Energy Agency
DME - Dimethylether
GAMS - General Algebraic Modeling System
GHG - Greenhouse Gas
HPA - Hydrogen Purchase Agreement
HVDC - High Voltage Direct Current
LCOE - Levelised Cost of Electricity / Energy
LCOH - Levelised Cost of Hydrogen
NPV - Net Present Value
OPEX - Operational Expenditures
OPEX - Operational Expenditures
PtX - Power-to-X
PV - Photovoltaic
RE - Renewable Energy
TSO - Transmission System Operator
VRE - Variable Renewable Energy
WACC - Weighted Average Cost of Capital
WF - Wind Farm
RED II - Renewable Energy Directive II
iv
Feasibility study of Power-to-X integration in future energy systems
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
Andreas Ipsen & Mathias Rasmussen, M.Sc. Sustainable Thermal Energy, DTU
Rasmus Bo Bramstoft Pedersen, Assistant Professor, Supervisor
We would like to express our deepest gratitude for the guidance, critical feedback and
support in all processes of this thesis.
Mathias Berg Rosendal, PhD Student, Guidance regarding Balmorel
A special thank you to Mathias for always being available to answer our questions regard-
ing Balmorel and helping troubleshoot our problems.
Nicolas Jean Bernard Campion, PhD Student, Guidance regarding OptiPlant
Thank you to Nicolas for sharing his optimisation model and assisting us in altering the
model to our needs.
Feasibility study of Power-to-X integration in future energy systems
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Feasibility study of Power-to-X integration in future energy systems
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
v
1
Background
1
1.1
Security of supply
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Unlocking the potential of the North Sea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Literature overview & market screening
3
2.1
Onshore or offshore . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
RE market forecasts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.3
Green hydrogen policy & strategies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
3
Purpose
15
4
Methodology & Modelling approach
17
4.1
The Balmorel model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
4.2
Optimisation model description . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
4.3
Financial Analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
5
Main inputs, assumptions & scenarios
27
5.1
Balmorel . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
5.2
Optimisation model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
5.3
Financial modelling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
6
Results/analysis
33
6.1
Balmorel . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
6.2
Optimisation model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
6.3
Financial assessment
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49
7
Discussion
53
7.1
Balmorel . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53
7.2
Optimisation model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 55
8
Conclusion
57
Bibliography
59
A Appendix
61
A.1 Energy Transmission Costs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 61
B Appendix
63
B.1 Markets forecast . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 63
C Appendix
64
C.1 Hourly wind and price correlation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 64
Feasibility study of Power-to-X integration in future energy systems
vii
==PAGE:10==
viii
Feasibility study of Power-to-X integration in future energy systems
==PAGE:11==
1
Background
The green transition from conventional power generation using fossil fuels to renewable
sources, mainly from sources with variable generation capacity, requires new infrastruc-
ture to mitigate the uncertainty and fluctuation in production. To achieve a completely re-
newable energy system, the capacities required to fulfil demand at sub-optimal production
hours, technologies for storage, and flexible demands must be introduced. Industries such
as passenger transportation and space heating are somewhat easily converted through
direct electrification and storage without conversions such as lithium-ion and vanadium
redox flow batteries. The transition is more complicated for energy-intensive industries
such as heavy transport (Shipping, long haul trucking, and aviation) and industries that
require very high temperatures in their processes. The transformation of these indus-
tries calls for new and innovative solutions to reach climate targets set by policymakers
of the world. The solutions can be categorised as indirect electrification and entail con-
version from renewable electricity to other forms of energy. This phenomenon is called
Power-to-X (PtX) and consists of a variety of processes, where the common denominator
is using electricity from renewable sources such as wind, solar, hydro, biomass, and in
some instances nuclear, to produce hydrogen.
Figure 1.1: Power-to-X illustration Source: https://www.trena.dk/viden/
Power-to-X will potentially play an integral role in future energy systems as both a stor-
age/conversion technology and balancing of the electrical grid in terms of up-/down regu-
lation. The simplest output associated with the PtX process is green hydrogen, which can
be directly used or further converted into fuels more suited for storage such as methanol
(CH3OH), methane (CH4), or DME (CH3OHCH3) if combined with a carbon source or
ammonia (NH3) if combined with nitrogen.
1.1
Security of supply
Increased renewable energy production has been on the European agenda for decades,
however, the transition has been slow and subject to several risk factors. The main risk
related to VRE is the immutable weather dependency that defines the nature of VRE
Feasibility study of Power-to-X integration in future energy systems
1
==PAGE:12==
production. The consequence is a dependency on affordable and efficient storage tech-
nology development to mitigate unpredictable energy production. The consequences of
the Russian invasion of Ukraine in 2022 have revealed the risks of western dependencies
on fossil energy imports from historically non-allied parties. Russian energy covers ap-
proximately 20 pct. of the European Union’s combined energy consumption (2018-2020).
Historically 25 pct. of the total energy demand in the EU is covered by natural gas, 80
pct. is imported whereas 40 pct. (157M cubic meters) is imported from Russia. Coal can
be one temporary solution to the lack of natural gas, however, 40 pct. of the combined
coal import is imported from Russia (54t tonnes). Poland can intensify their production
of coal to a certain level, even though this is not the ideal sustainable solution. The third
alternative is oil, where Russia exports 25 pct. of the oil products imported from the EU
(200 tonnes) [1]. As a result, the EU is exposed to major risks in terms of the limited secu-
rity of the energy supply. The current situation is escalating the need for locally produced
energy that will keep European homes warm in the winter and cool in the summer. This
has accelerated the construction of new renewable energy sources, with offshore wind
energy being the most suitable for northwestern Europe, with the North Sea as the ideal
location.
1.2
Unlocking the potential of the North Sea
The North Sea is destined to lead the European energy transition toward the net zero
emission targets in 2050, as the region holds great potential for low-carbon energy so-
lutions with offshore wind as the main driver. Due to the attractive wind conditions and
bathymetry, the North Sea will most likely act as a European ’Power House’ in the near
future. The Danish waters alone1 can produce 170.000 GWh, which is 2 times the amount
of electricity needed in a fully electrified danish system; 80.000 GWh [2]. A natural con-
sequence of harvesting the enormous amounts of energy at the North Sea is the trans-
portation of this energy, as the existing electricity grid is not sufficient to transport these
amounts of energy to users spread across Europe. An article in the newspaper Ingeniøren
described it as ”Putting a Ferrari engine in an old Ford Taunus” [3], referring to the state
of the electrical grid. Investing in new electricity grid infrastructure to accommodate these
dimensions is very expensive and might very well not be a viable option. This challenge
has paved the way for other energy carriers to provide value to the energy system, in-
cluding hydrogen. Hydrogen can be transported in pipelines at a fraction of the cost of
HVDC electricity cables. This introduces the question; should the hydrogen be produced
offshore or onshore?. If the hydrogen is produced offshore it is cheaper to transport, how-
ever, the electrical system will not benefit from the flexibility of the offshore wind farms.
Will there be a financially viable optimum between offshore hydrogen production and par-
tial grid connection? While wind and solar took decades to become competitive with fossil
fuels, green hydrogen needs to be cost-competitive with ‘grey’ hydrogen within a decade,
to reach global climate targets [4]. How do we make this possible?
“It’s striking to see the similarities between where we were 20 years ago with offshore
wind and what we’re facing now with Power-to-X and green hydrogen. Once more, we
are maturing and upscaling new technology, making it economically and technically
viable for large projects.” - Bernd Kim Okkels, Head of Business, Power-to-X, Rambøll.
The challenges we are facing are similar to historical challenges with offshore wind, which
allows leading actors within the industry to feast on the knowledge gained over the past
20 years, but also makes it possible for newcomers to enter the market.
1Including the Baltic sea
2
Feasibility study of Power-to-X integration in future energy systems
==PAGE:13==
2
Literature overview & market screening
This chapter will give an overview of the research which has been done in the area and a
screening of the market to clarify the need for further investigation.
2.1
Onshore or offshore
To avoid losses of transport, it is commonly said that conversion to end product should
happen as early in the value chain as possible. This would indicate that conversion from
electrical power into hydrogen close to the turbine would be preferable. But when the
source of renewable electricity is offshore wind turbines, immediate conversion might not
be profitable for the hybrid plant due to the distance from shore. The question of whether
to convert VRE offshore from a system-wide perspective has been raised and answered
in the ”Going offshore or not: Where to generate hydrogen in future integrated energy
systems?” [5]. The paper investigates the value of offshore hydrogen creation through
multiple scenarios, allowing different investment options in storage, utilisation of waste
heat, and cost reduction of technologies. The results of the analysis indicate that hy-
drogen should be produced onshore rather than offshore from a socio-economic point of
view. This is mainly due to the fact that electricity costs, used to feed the electrolysers,
are cheaper when produced from onshore wind or solar PV in the given energy system.
Meanwhile, onshore H2 production allows the utilisation of waste heat from the electroly-
sis, and finally, it is concluded that offshore wind has a higher value when connected to
the grid, ensuring flexibility of supply. Additionally, the CO2 emissions in the scenarios
with forced offshore hydrogen production were higher compared to the base case over a
30-year period. To promote offshore production of hydrogen, restricting the use of excess
heat and allowing for offshore storage caverns were implemented and the share was in-
creased by 10% compared to the base case. If offshore hydrogen should be pursued,
it would be due to other factors than socio-economic benefits. This could be technical,
planning, environmental or logistical, which might make it favourable for a private investor.
The article ”Onshore, offshore or in-turbine electrolysis?” Techno-economic overview of
alternative integration designs for green hydrogen production into Offshore Wind Power
Hubs” investigates the costs of onshore, offshore and in-turbine electrolysis [6].
The
analysis concludes that the levelised costs for the three configurations were lowest in
the offshore version, with an LCOH of 2.4 USD/kg which would be competitive with blue
hydrogen. As these are very superficial and simplified calculations, the actual costs of
such a setup would probably be higher than anticipated, which their sensitivity analysis of
CAPEX also reflects.
Feasibility study of Power-to-X integration in future energy systems
3
==PAGE:14==
2.2
RE market forecasts
The development of electricity prices is affected by many parameters such as fossil fuel
prices, CO2 taxation, expansion of renewables, demand, and exchange capacity between
countries and their regions. To understand the overall expectations of electricity and hy-
drogen market developments, a screening of several forecasts has been made.
2.2.1
Future energy system
A report from Energy Brainpool [7] suggests that solar will be the dominant contributor to
’clean energy’ towards 2050, sharply followed by wind energy. The forecast can be seen
in Figure 2.1 which also shows that fossil fuels will still be a part of the energy mix in 2060
at roughly the same level as today.
Future energy system capacities forecast
Figure 2.1: Installed generation capacities in EU 27, plus NO, CH, and UK by en-
ergy source (Sources: Energy Brainpool, 2022; EU Reference Scenario, 2021; entso-e,
2022)[7]
2.2.2
Electricity market
A screening of electricity market forecasts has been assembled to compare similar trends
or deviations to the future electricity prices derived from Balmorel in this paper. The report
from Energy Brainpool suggests that the annual base load power prices in Europe will
decrease from the abnormally high prices we see today of 225 EUR/MWh and converge
to a relatively stable plateau at about 76 EUR/MWh (Real 2021) between 2030 and 2060.
4
Feasibility study of Power-to-X integration in future energy systems
==PAGE:15==
Annual average electricity prices in Europe
Figure 2.2: Annual baseload prices and range of fluctuation of national individual markets
for selected countries in Europe on average (Source: Energy Brainpool, 2022)[7]
The Danish Energy Agency suggests that the annual spot price in Denmark will be ranging
from 58-47 EUR22/MWh from 2030-2050 (58, 50, and 47) which would place the Dan-
ish energy prices at the lower end of the European average estimated in the EU energy
outlook report.[8]
Annual average electricity prices in Denmark
Figure 2.3: The uncertainties within the forecasted prices in the year 2030 are based on a
range of alternative fuel costs and CO2 taxation illustrated in the appendix, figure B.1 and
B.2, whilst the uncertainties in the years; 2040-50 are based on the range of hydrogen
off-take prices from figure B.1 [8]
Feasibility study of Power-to-X integration in future energy systems
5
==PAGE:16==
2.2.3
Hydrogen market
The industrial hydrogen demand is almost entirely supplied by fossil fuel. As a conse-
quence, the production of hydrogen is responsible for annual CO2 emissions of around
830 million tonnes [9]. The key to solving the challenge of converting the industry to a
renewable alternative is closing the price gap between green- and fossil-based hydrogen,
which is illustrated in figure 2.4 from International Energy Agency (IEA) [9].
Hydrogen produced from natural gas through steam methane reforming (SMR) is often
referred to as ’grey’ and has a large emission of CO2. Carbon Capture utilisation and
storage (CCUS) can be applied to the process, labelling the hydrogen as ’blue’ with sig-
nificantly lower carbon emission. Black hydrogen is produced through a coal gasification
process and can CO2-intensively be compared to grey hydrogen.
The International Energy Agency reveals that grey hydrogen can be produced in a price
range of approximately 1-3 USD18/kg. Adding CCUS blue hydrogen costs raise the lower
bound to 1.5 USD/kg. Black hydrogen is produced in a range of 1.2-2.2 USD/kg. Mean-
while, green hydrogen production in 2018 was produced in a range of 3-7.5 USD/kg.
Hydrogen production costs, 2018
Figure 2.4: Hydrogen production costs by production source, 2018 [9].
With decreasing costs of electrolysis and increased penetration of renewable energy, op-
portunities arise for electrolytic hydrogen. Figure 2.5 from Rethinkresearch supports the
argument that costs of 3.70 USD/kg are achievable for green hydrogen today and sug-
gests that 1.5 USD/kg green hydrogen is expected in 2030 due to electrolyser improve-
ments, economies of scale, and increased competition [10]. With increased CO2 taxes
green hydrogen would most likely be competitive with grey. The expected capital cost of
electrolysis in the near future is relatively low compared to the ’fuel cost’ being electric-
ity, thus the development of electricity prices is vital to understand the economy of green
hydrogen production.
6
Feasibility study of Power-to-X integration in future energy systems
==PAGE:17==
Hydrogen production costs projection
Figure 2.5: Hydrogen production cost projection towards 2030 [10].
The International Energy Agency agrees with the tendency that green hydrogen costs
produced from renewables will decrease in the future, they expect that long-term prices
will range between 1.6-4 USD/kg depending on geography. The tendency in figure 2.6
shows that equatorial climate regions are favourable for hydrogen production due to the
low costs of solar energy. IEA suggests that developing PtX projects at locations with
excellent RE conditions would make a competitive option for green hydrogen, despite the
additional cost of transporting hydrogen from remote renewable locations to end users
[9].
Long-term hydrogen costs from hybrid solar and onshore wind system
Figure 2.6: Global LCOH heat map, USD18.
2.2.4
Producing hydrogen offshore or onshore
Focusing on the offshore wind resource, BloombergNEF [11] estimates LCOH projections
for onshore and offshore hydrogen production until 2050.
• Onshore H2 mid-range:
6.5 USD20/kg in 2025
Feasibility study of Power-to-X integration in future energy systems
7
==PAGE:18==
4.6 USD20/kg in 2030
1.2 USD20/kg in 2050
• Offshore H2 mid-range:
7 USD20/kg in 2025
4.4 USD20/kg in 2030
0.7 USD20/kg in 2050
The Bloomberg analysis in figure 2.7, shows that the offshore mid-range LCOH is com-
petitive with onshore, in 2040 and potentially more attractive in 2050.
Both scenarios would be dependent on wind capacity factors and plant size, leaving the
last parameter varied in the analysis to be; transport distance. So why is offshore hydro-
gen production generally more uncertain?
The onshore H2-production scenario would need to transport the power to the shore, while
the offshore scenario would benefit from cheaper hydrogen pipelines, thus the onshore
electrolysis scenario should be more dependent on the transport distance.
However, the Bloomberg analysis shows that the offshore electrolysis scenario has a
much higher uncertainty, ranging from approximately 5-30 USD/kg. while onshore elec-
trolysis (still powered by offshore wind) in ranging from 5-15 USD/kg.
They do, however, comment that ”Projects using offshore rather than onshore electrol-
ysers tend to be more expensive until 2030 but then are preferred.” It might be due to
the less mature hydrogen infrastructural supply chain, which cannot accommodate these
types of projects just yet, and contingencies related to large-scale electrolysis which has
never been practiced offshore.
LCOH range for onshore (left) and offshore (right) hydrogen production
Figure 2.7: Source: BloombergNEF [11]. Note: All hydrogen cost estimates are calcu-
lated based on western PEM electrolysis costs. The green bar represents LCOH based
on a wide range of assumptions: transport distance ranging between 10-300km, offshore
wind capacity factor between 35-60%, PEM/wind farm size ranging between 100MW-
3GW. The blue range represents LCOH for Northwest European onshore wind powered
systems, assuming wind capacity factors between 30-50%.
8
Feasibility study of Power-to-X integration in future energy systems
==PAGE:19==
2.2.5
Hydrogen market potential
The International Renewable Energy Agency (IRENA) [12] has produced an overview of
the market potential revealing the potential of hydrogen production.
• Global hydrogen demand 2020:
The main use of hydrogen today is within oil refineries and steel production. The
industry demand in 2020 was 87 million tonnes (3,000TWh).
• Global hydrogen demand 2050:
IRENA’s 1.5°C Scenario.1 suggests an increase in demand towards 2050, reaching
613 million tonnes (20,430TWh).
The same study expects 2/3 of the demand should be supplied through green hydro-
gen and 1/3 from blue hydrogen and estimates that the electricity demand needed
to produce this hydrogen will reach almost the level of global electricity consumption
today.
• European hydrogen demand 2030:
The REPowerEU plan, from the European Commission, has the ambition to produce
and import a total of 20 million tonnes (665TWh) of renewable hydrogen into the
EU by 2030[13]. Corresponding to approximately 20% of the global demand.
• Eurpean hydrogen demand 2050:
A study by the European Hydrogen Backbone initiative estimates a 70 million tonnes
(2,300TWh) hydrogen demand in EU+UK by 2050 [14], which would mean decreas-
ing the European market share to 10%.
IRENA hydrogen industry demand: 1.5°C Scenario forecast
Figure 2.8: Global demand for pure hydrogen, 2000-2018 is historical data, [15], 2018-
2050 is based on IRENA’s Zero emission report with an indicative increase from 2020 to
2050.
Electrolysis roll-out
The road map described in IRENA’s 2022 World Energy Transitions Outlook foresees a
global installed electrolyser capacity of 5 TW by 2050, up from today’s 300 MW [12], which
as another IRENA report Policies for green hydrogen states is an annual installation of
160 GW electrolysis on average up to 2050 [15].
1A scenario that limits global temperature rise to 1.5 degrees Celsius and brings CO2 emissions to net
zero by 2050
Feasibility study of Power-to-X integration in future energy systems
9
==PAGE:20==
Is this a realistic target? The European Clean Hydrogen Alliance hosts an ’Electrolyser
Partnership’, which seeks to bring together electrolyser manufacturers and suppliers of
components and materials to achieve a combined annual electrolyser manufacturing ca-
pacity of 17.5 GW by 2025 in Europe. This suggests that Europe can contribute with
approximately 17.5GW/160GW = 10% of the annual global electrolysis facilities expan-
sion [13].
2.3
Green hydrogen policy & strategies
2.3.1
Green hydrogen policies
If green hydrogen becomes competitive with grey hydrogen it needs dedicated industrial
policymaking. Policies can be expressed through penalties making fossil fuel options
unattractive or through support attracting investment in green hydrogen. Historically sup-
port schemes have been used to promote the development of renewable electricity, this
similar could be expected to promote the production of green hydrogen[15]. A combina-
tion of penalty and reward would likely be the reality in the future.
IRENA suggest that the policy approach should have four central pillars:
• National strategy
What are the level of ambition for hydrogen, the pathway to reach the ambition and
the amount of support required?
• Policy priorities
Policymakers should identify and focus on the applications with the highest value.
• Guarantees of origin
GHG emissions related to hydrogen production/transportation should be transpar-
ent, to secure consumer awareness and give incentives for carbon reduction ac-
tions.
• Governance system and enabling policies
If Hydrogen is supposed to be a major energy carrier, policies should cover its inte-
gration into the broader energy system. Civil society and industry must be involved
to maximize the benefits.
National strategy
The Danish government has published a proposed Power-to-X strategy with an ambitious
Danish capacity target of 4-6 GW electrolysis by 2030, to realise the objectives in the Dan-
ish Climate Act of reducing Denmark’s total greenhouse gas emissions by 70% by 2030
compared to the 1990 level. The proposals within the strategy include heavy investments
in infrastructure with the ambition to investigate regulatory challenges within the develop-
ment of the hydrogen market and export opportunities to a European hydrogen network
[16]. Furthermore, the Danish government has budgeted 1.25 billion DKK to be granted
over a 10-year period as operational subsidies paid per produced unit of green2 hydrogen
[17].
2The EU definition of green hydrogen
10
Feasibility study of Power-to-X integration in future energy systems
==PAGE:21==
Figure 2.9: Danish hydrogen infrastructure plans [18]
Why do we need hydrogen infrastructure?
Danish PtX-actors will need access to flexibility and storage from hydrogen infrastructure,
already in 2030, several market actors plan projects in GW dimensions. Through market
dialogue the danish TSO Energinet found that H2-infrastructure can create value in the
form of flexibility, and access to bigger markets especially export to Germany.
The value of H2-infrastructure on a system level
Energinet sees big potential in the integration of H2-infrastructure with the rest of the en-
ergy infrastructure, especially in terms of meeting the flexibility demands of the electrical
system. For PtX-production to act in favour of a green energy system, it would demand
that the electrolysis would produce when the power is green and cheap, and ramp down
when the power is scarce and expensive, which corresponds to the natural dynamics of a
hybrid power/H2 plant. The H2-infrastructure has a large potential to support large-scale
PtX production in Denmark as it ensures off-take and thus optimal production conditions.
There are several synergies with the electrical system, as the need for electrical infras-
tructure investments can be minimised [19].
PtX facilities that do not produce their own electricity can make an agreement with the
TSO governing a flexibility product called ”limited grid access”. The product is an agree-
ment that rewards PtX producers through reduced tariffs if they guarantee to put their
capacity available as flexible demand, which could reduce the grid expansion invest-
ments. Favourable tariff agreements can strengthen the business case for the PtX pro-
ducer and reduce the socio-economic expenses through lower marginal prices on energy
transport[20].
Figure 2.10 shows the tendency of grid reinforcements in scenarios off full grid capac-
ity or limited grid access. The figure illustrates that electrolyser consumption should be
placed in production-dominated areas to the extent possible and limited grid access can
decelerate grid improvements.
Feasibility study of Power-to-X integration in future energy systems
11
==PAGE:22==
Figure 2.10: Danish hydrogen infrastructure plans [20]
Policy priorities
Hydrogen has a range of applications, however, the element is most commonly used in
refineries, the chemical industry, and steel factories, which are all classified as hard-to-
abate sectors and cannot be decarbonised through direct electrification, while holding vast
amounts of potential with their industrial size and centralised hydrogen demand. Figure
2.11 illustrates the maturity of hydrogen solution with examples of centralised applications
being more mature in terms of converting to hydrogen-based decarbonisation solutions.
Since the industrial hard-to-abate sector is the leading consumer of hydrogen, they are the
obvious first recipients of green hydrogen. However, there are a few barriers before green
hydrogen can fully contribute to the industrial sector, whereas the most important barrier
is the higher cost compared to grey hydrogen. Thus these barriers should be addressed
by policymakers through the support of fossil fuel independence in hard-to-abate sectors.
Guarantees of origin
If policies are used to differentiate between grey, blue and green hydrogen, it is important
to be able to distinguish between these different products. If policymakers valorise the
ability to document the origin of the hydrogen, they oblige producers to guarantee green
hydrogen, which incentives carbon reduction actions.
12
Feasibility study of Power-to-X integration in future energy systems
==PAGE:23==
Figure 2.11: https://www.irena.org/Energy-Transition/Policy/Policies-for-green-hydrogen
As an example, the danish TSO Energinet is set to develop a RED II3 compliant GO-
scheme4 with the requirements in Article 19 of the Renewable Energy Directive [21]. En-
erginet strives to support documentation requirements for green hydrogen-based fuels
and act as a foundation for a market model for future hydrogen infrastructure. [22]
This puts extra effort towards the producers in the case that electrolysers are not fully pow-
ered by renewable energy sources, but connected to the common electrical grid enabling
a power source of mixed CO2 intensity, which will be constrained on their production of
hydrogen from grid electricity and be more reliant on intelligent software to control the
operation.
3Renewable Energy Directive II
4Guarantee of origin scheme
Feasibility study of Power-to-X integration in future energy systems
13
==PAGE:24==
14
Feasibility study of Power-to-X integration in future energy systems
==PAGE:25==
3
Purpose
This paper aims to assess power-to-x integration in large-scale offshore wind energy
projects. The study will investigate the feasibility of hydrogen production in potential future
energy systems.
In ”Going offshore or not: Where to generate hydrogen in future integrated energy sys-
tems?” it is concluded that: ”If offshore hydrogen should be pursued, it would be due to
other factors than socio-economic benefits” [5]. In this paper, offshore hydrogen produc-
tion is investigated from a private-economic perspective. However, it will be discussed
how governmental actions can influence a private-economic decision towards increased
socio-economic welfare. In ”Onshore, offshore or in-turbine electrolysis? [6] they con-
clude that offshore hydrogen production had the lowest LCOH compared to onshore,
which will also be investigated.
The analysis from BloombergNEF [11] suggests that
LCOH related to offshore hydrogen production is larger than for onshore production, which
will also be discussed in this paper.
To understand the dynamics of a potential future energy system with increasing renew-
able energy, the energy system model; Balmorel has been used to optimise the social
welfare of the entire European energy system. This simulation yields an overview of
the future energy system, including installed energy production unit capacities, electricity
price forecasts, and the level of correlation with energy generation units. With the insight
into a potential future energy system, a private economic assessment has been made to
determine the feasibility of a hybrid offshore wind and Power-to-X plant.
The case study under investigation utilises the potential of a 1 GW offshore wind site
located 250km from shore, with either onshore or offshore hydrogen production. This
analysis seeks to determine the optimal capacity investments and production strategy in
multiple scenarios of power-/hydrogen prices and the correlation between wind and power
prices, given the input from the energy system derived from Balmorel and exogenous wind
data. A reference energy system has been investigated to discuss the differences and
impact of how the energy system is composed.
Finally, the economic attractiveness from an investor’s perspective will be determined and
the project’s risks will be discussed to conclude whether or not the investment is bankable.
This leads to the following problem statement and specific research questions:
How can offshore wind developers hedge their risks in a volatile electricity
market with hybrid Power-to-X plants?
• What are the characteristics of the future energy system and how does it affect the
developer’s decisions?
• How should the developer dimension a hybrid PtX plant in order to hedge the project
against future uncertainties while maximising profits?
• What level of hydrogen off-take prices make production with offshore wind energy
feasible and are subsidies required to make it competitive?
Feasibility study of Power-to-X integration in future energy systems
15
==PAGE:26==
16
Feasibility study of Power-to-X integration in future energy systems
==PAGE:27==
4
Methodology & Modelling approach
This report follows a methodology consisting of two main parts; Energy system modelling
using the Balmorel model followed by an economic feasibility study to examine the feasi-
bility of the project from the perspective of a private investor.
To simulate a future energy system in which the considered hybrid plant is located, the
Balmorel model is used. The Balmorel model has been chosen due to its ability to create
multiple scenarios where demand, costs and much more can be varied in order to create
a user-defined energy system. As the Balmorel model maximises social welfare, it could
constitute a simple socio-economic analysis, but is primarily used to create the boundaries
for the private economic analysis.
The economic analysis of the hybrid plant commences with the optimisation of its ca-
pacity, hourly H2/electricity ratio, and flows based on the electricity/H2 price forecasts.
This exercise is aimed at determining a robust strategy that will yield optimal revenue
streams. Subsequently, the strategy and its associated revenue streams are subjected
to economic analysis to ascertain the project’s feasibility and attractiveness to potential
private investors.
Figure 4.1: Illustration of the overall methodology
4.1
The Balmorel model
Balmorel is an open-source partial equilibrium model for the simultaneous optimisation of
generation, transmission and consumption of electricity and heat under the assumption of
perfectly competitive markets in a user-defined energy system. The model optimises the
social welfare of the entire system by satisfying energy demand in the most optimal way
while complying with technical, physical and regulatory constraints. Balmorel is written in
GAMS (General Algebraic Modelling System) language and built-in extensible modular
structure. This allows for add-ons such as hydrogen, transportation etc. on top of the
basic framework. The model is linear, although mixed-integer (MIP) and relaxed mixed-
integer (RMIP) may be applied to represent economies of scale and unit commitment.[23]
The model allows for large flexibility as the spatial and temporal resolution is user-defined
and can be tailored to fit the exact needs of the project. Both the spatial and temporal
resolution follows a three hierarchy layer structure.
The entities for the spatial resolution are from broadest to narrowest; Country (C), Region
(R) and Area (A). This means that countries can be split into one or more regions and
the regions split into one or more areas. This allows for a very detailed simulation where
an area can depict a single system of e.g. offshore wind or a district heating network.
Feasibility study of Power-to-X integration in future energy systems
17
==PAGE:28==
Electricity demand is defined on a regional level and the energy balance is maintained.
This results in a marginal cost of electricity production and thereby the electricity price for
the region is defined. Between regions, power transmission limitations can be determined
thus allowing congestion in a country or between countries. Regions are modelled as
”copper plate systems”, meaning no grid is assumed within the region.
The entities for the temporal resolution are from broadest to narrowest; Year (Y), Season
(S) and Term (T). The setup allows for the inclusion of one or more years, divided into
an equal number of seasons and seasons further divided into equal terms. The product
of seasons and terms constitutes the time steps in the model, where the maximum of 52
seasons and 168 terms would amount to 8736 time steps, which would correspond to 1
hour of real-time.
The model can be run in four different modes, Balbase 1, 2, 3 & 4. Balbase 1 optimises a
user-specific energy system for a one-year period, without allowing endogenous invest-
ments. The model can however solve for multiple years but without foresight. The model
thereby only optimises for the allocation of thermal plants, VRE generators, storage and
heat/power-market synergies. Balbase 2 uses Balbase 1 as a baseline but allows for
endogenous investments in generation and transmission. The model also allows for opti-
misation of multiple years, with investments being available in subsequent years. Balbase
3 optimises the energy system like Balbase 2, but the temporal resolution is much higher.
The optimisation period is set to one Season, making it much more detailed in that pe-
riod compared to Balbase 1 & 2. This model is more suited for balancing and short-term
storage as it lacks vision outside the optimised period. Balbase 4 builds on Balbase 2
containing all of the functionalities but adding the possibility of optimisation of more than
one year at a time. Furthermore, a rolling horizon approach is used, making overlapping
multi-year models to be solved. This gives the model much better foresight, making the
results more realistic. [23]
4.1.1
Add-ons
On top of the base model, several add-ons have been developed to make the model more
accurate. The add-ons described below are a few of the ones used to create the energy
system simulated in this report.
Hydrogen
To model the use of electrolysis and Power-to-X in the energy system, the hydrogen add-
on is vital. It allows the model to convert electricity to hydrogen and allows the transport
of hydrogen in dedicated pipelines between regions. This yields a price for an hourly
hydrogen price similar to the electricity prices.
Transport, Industry, Heat transfer, Individual user
In the default version of Balmorel, the consumption of electricity and synthetic fuels for
transport is not included. The transport add-on included these loads, shown as electricity
or hydrogen which can be chosen in the Balopt-file. As the consumption can be included
as hydrogen, the hydrogen add-on must be activated. Also, the EV ( Electric Vehicle )
add-on compliments the transport add-on but is not required.
The Industry add-on includes the demand for industries for electricity and heat. Further-
more, the waste heat generated by industrial processes can be supplied to the district
heating network to simulate the synergies between sectors.
The Individual Users add-on creates a more realistic and transparent simulation with a
higher resolution of electricity and heat demand. Within this add-on, it is possible to allow
the shifting of exogenous heat demand between technology groups.
18
Feasibility study of Power-to-X integration in future energy systems
==PAGE:29==
The Heat Transfer add-on, as the name indicates, allows heat transfer between areas
and possibly also investment in new transmission capacity. Optionally heat pumps can
be allowed to bring boost temperature in low-temperature areas. It is essential for a lot of
other add-ons to work, including Industry and Individual users.
4.1.2
Limitations and tradeoffs
While detailed results with a high resolution are desired, the Balmorel model is very large
and requires an enormous amount of memory to solve the system of equations. The
bottleneck for the memory requirements can be both in form of physical memory on the
computer running the simulation, or in the case of this report, the memory of the CPLEX
solver. The CPLEX solver supports up to 30 million variables, but with complete time- and
spatial resolution of the model, the number of variables is exceeded.
To overcome these constraints of the solver, the combination of the resolutions must be
lowered to achieve a number of variables lower than the cap of the solver. This means
compromising in terms of the level of detail in the results.
While the spatial resolution impacts the computing time, the extra equations associated
with including additional countries are not as significant compared to the temporal reso-
lution. The full spatial resolution is therefore used to achieve a more accurate simulated
energy system.
The temporal resolution of the simulation is the main parameter for computational time.
Aggregation of time steps is necessary to successfully simulate the energy system. Choos-
ing representative seasons and terms is key to obtaining useful output data. Thinning and
stretching the terms is a way to ensure key trends from a week are represented while re-
ducing the computational substantially. The same technique is applied to the seasons,
choosing weeks from each calendar season to represent different periods of the year. As
a consequence of thinning and stretching and any other time aggregation, the volatility
is underestimated, the energy amount may be incorrect and the chronology is simplified
[24]. While the accuracy of the results in the high-resolution scenarios is higher, the com-
puting time and allocated resources required to complete the simulations are too high to
work with. The compromise results in slightly less accurate results but is preferred in this
thesis due to time limitations.
4.2
Optimisation model description
To investigate the optimal utilisation of 1GW wind farm production, the hybrid plant has
been modelled with a linear program using the Gurobi optimiser. The model is based on
a Julia program written by Nicolas Jean Bernard Campion, PhD Student in the Energy
Economics and Modelling department at DTU.
4.2.1
Model modifications
Several modifications have been made to the program to accommodate the specific use in
this paper. The most profound changes are the conversion from minimising cost with
a specific demand to maximising profit with a specific source of wind farm capacity
and off-taker prices. Furthermore, the program has been equipped with offshore/on-
shore optionality, defining the location of the electrolyser, to investigate the impact on
transmission investments, at the distance under investigation (250km offshore).
4.2.2
Model concept overview
The program maximises profit by optimising capacity investments and operations by man-
aging the hourly energy/mass flows between units and markets. The model inputs are
techno-economic data of the offshore wind farm, electrolysers, transmission costs, and
Feasibility study of Power-to-X integration in future energy systems
19
==PAGE:30==
grid connections, as well as hourly grid electricity prices and hourly wind power profiles,
as seen in section 5.2.
Figure 4.2: Optimisation model overview
4.2.3
Mathematical formulation
The most vital equations of the optimisation program are written in the equations high-
lighted in (4.1). Furthermore, the offshore/onshore configuration of the electrolyser lo-
cation is defined as described in (4.2). Objective function: Maximising the total system
profit: Z.
Objective function
max Z =
∑
u,t
Psell[u, t] ∗Xsell[u, t]
−
∑
u,t
Pbuy[u, t] ∗Xbuy[u, t] −
∑
u,t
O&Mvar[u] ∗X[u, t]
−
∑
u
(Invcost[u] ∗Annuity[u] + O&Mfix[u]) ∗Capacity[u]
s.t.
Capacity constraints
Mincap[u] <= Capacity[u] <= Maxcap[u]
RE potential
X[u, t] = CFprofiles[u, t] ∗Capacity[u])
Energy balances
∑
u,t
H2balance[u] ∗X[u, t] = 0
∑
u,t
Elbalance[u] ∗X[u, t] =
∑
u,t
(Sc[u] ∗X[u, t]))
(4.1)
Where Psell and Pbuy is the sell and buy price of the sold and bought commodity X.
O&Mvar is the variable operating expenses dependent on the energy flow. While the
annuity of investment cost and fixed operating expenses are dependent on the installed
capacity. CFprofiles are wind capacity factor profiles, Sc are specific electricity consump-
tions, H2balance determines if a unit is producing or consuming hydrogen, and Elbalance
20
Feasibility study of Power-to-X integration in future energy systems
==PAGE:31==
determines if a unit is producing or consuming electricity. However, the electrolysis and
desalination plant is not included in the electricity balance until introduced with the specific
electricity consumption on the right-hand side of the equation.
Offshore/onshore optionality illustration
Figure 4.3: Offshore electrolysis configuration
Figure 4.4: Onshore electrolysis configuration
Offshore electrolyser
X[HV DC, t] = X[Gridsell, t] + X[Gridbuy, t]
X[Pipe, t] = X[AEC, t]
Onshore electrolyser
X[HV DC, t] = X[Wind, t] −X[Curt, t]
X[Pipe, t] = 0
(4.2)
The offshore/onshore optionality is modelled with two separate constraints dictating the
flow of the HVDC connection. If the electrolyser is placed offshore the flow in the HVDC
cable is equivalent to the sum of sold and bought electricity for each time step, while
the hydrogen pipe equals the hydrogen flow in the electrolyser. Onshore electrolysis
is modelled by forcing the HVDC flow to equal the energy production, subtracting the
potential curtailment.
Feasibility study of Power-to-X integration in future energy systems
21
==PAGE:32==
4.2.4
Modelling approach
The optimisation model will serve as a dimensioning tool, to determine the optimal hybrid
plant dimensions in several scenarios of wind-production/electricity-price profiles, access
to the electricity grid, and hydrogen off-take prices.
The technologies driving the costs in a future energy system are uncertain. For this rea-
son, 2 different sets of wind profiles and corresponding electricity prices will be investi-
gated. One with a high correlation between wind production and electricity price, and one
with low correlation.
Balmorel scenario
The Balmorel output will represent a potential future energy system. The model provides
a representative time series of 448 time steps, which is expanded to 8760 hours. The
duration curve can be found in figure 7.1.
CorRES scenario
DTU Wind’s model CorRES has provided a set of offshore time series for different wind tur-
bines, developed with the computational fluid dynamics program; PyWakes and MERRA-
2 reanalysis. Corresponding electricity prices are from Nordpool 2019. See duration
curves in figure 7.1. The CorRES wind profiles will be used across both scenarios, but
the correlation to the power price will express the difference between the scenarios.
Limited grid connection
Grid access might be limiting constraints for large scale wind-farms because the electricity
grid is not sufficient to consume and distribute all the electricity produced.
Revenue stream sensitivities
The price level of the revenue streams and the wind power available are expected to be
among the most sensitive parameters to the hybrid system design and consequently to the
project’s feasibility. Electricity price forecasts will be investigated in different combinations
of fixed HPA’s to test the sensitivity of hybrid plant design decisions.
Link to financial model
The optimal design configuration will serve as input into a financial model expressing
financial KPIs used in financial investment decisions.
The configuration with the largest annual gross profit is not necessarily the most feasible
configuration due to the costs of financing the investment. Consequently, it can be difficult
to immediately asses which configuration is most feasible. E.g. if configuration A has a
lower profit than configuration B, but considerably lower investment costs compared to
configuration B. To determine the feasibility of the total projects compared to each other, a
financial model is used on the optimal configurations to test their financing and bankability.
22
Feasibility study of Power-to-X integration in future energy systems
==PAGE:33==
4.3
Financial Analysis
To assess the feasibility of the project an financial analysis is carried out from the perspec-
tive of a potential private investor. The analysis consists of a Net Present Value (NPV)
calculation, an LCOE calculation and a bankability assessment.
4.3.1
NPV
The Net Present Value is a measure of the feasibility of a project and can be used to
compare different projects of the same size. It is calculated by taking the present value
of the expected cash flows from the investment and subtracting the initial investment.
The present value of the expected cash flows is calculated using a discount rate, which
represents the time value of money and the risk associated with the investment[25]. First,
the yearly EBITDA (Earnings Before Interest, Taxes, Depreciation, and Amortisation) are
calculated by subtracting the operational expenses from the combined annual revenues
of the hybrid plant:
EBITDAy = Revenues from electricityy + Revenues from H2y −OPEXy
(4.3)
where y denotes the year currently considered.
Depreciation and amortisation are then subtracted to find the EBIT, which is the taxable
earnings
Payable taxesy = (EBITDAy −Depreciation) · Tax Rate = EBITy · Tax Rate
(4.4)
Once the payable taxes are calculated, the free cash flows are derived from the EBITDA,
the payable taxes and the capital cost :
Free cashflowy = EBITDAy −Payable taxesy −CAPEXy
(4.5)
Please note that the CAPEX is only counted on the valuation date.
The discounted cash flows are then defined as the free cash flows multiplied by the dis-
count factor :
discount factory =
1
(1 + discount rate)n
(4.6)
where n is the number of years between the valuation date and the current year y.
Finally, the NPV is calculated as the sum of the discounted cash flows.
4.3.2
Levelised Cost of Energy
The Levelised Cost Of Energy (LCOE) represents the average lifetime cost during a
project’s lifetime. In other words, the minimum price for the product in order to make
the project economically feasible. The LCOE is a great measure for comparing costs
across different technologies and projects of different sizes. There is however no una-
nimity on which costs to include in such calculations, making the comparison crooked. It
is therefore very important to identify which costs are used to calculate the LCOE when
comparing projects.
The formula to calculate the LCOE of a project can be written as:
Feasibility study of Power-to-X integration in future energy systems
23
==PAGE:34==
LCOE =
n∑
t=0
TCt
(1 + r)t
n∑
t=0
qt
(1 + r)t
(4.7)
The expression in the denominator of the LCOE equation might seem a little odd. The
reason is that discounting is a way to account for risk. As the production in the future is
uncertain. This could be in terms of more downtime, less efficiency, less wind, or a war
breaking out.
In the case of a hybrid plant where one component uses input from another, the LCOE
becomes a bit more complex. The equation could look like this:
LCOEHybrid =
CAPEXWF + CAPEXElec +
n∑
t=0
(OPEXWF,t + OPEXElec,t)
(1 + r)t
n∑
t=0
qsold,t + qH2,t
(1 + r)t
(4.8)
4.3.3
Bankability
Even if a project is technically and economically feasible, not all investors are able to
produce 100% equity, thus acquiring consent from a bank to finance the project is key.
The ’bankability’ of a project relates to whether or not a project is financeable from a bank’s
perspective and is the ratio of instalments to profit. The relation between feasibility and
bankability is illustrated in Figure 4.5
Figure 4.5: Illustration of bankability [26]
As it is usually harder to convince bankers, compared to investors, that the project is fea-
sible, more conservative projections should be used when calculating future cash flows.
Investors will typically base their decision on the average case. Banks however require
a more conservative projection of the cash flows to hedge the risk of projects not being
able to pay their instalments. It is possible for two projects with the same base case to
have very different bankability, as the uncertainties in the forecasts might be different.
The output of a bankability analysis is a debt service coverage ratio (DSCR). The DSCR
is calculated as:
DSCR = CFADSt
Kt + It
(4.9)
24
Feasibility study of Power-to-X integration in future energy systems
==PAGE:35==
where CFADSt is the cash flow available for debt service, Kt is the repayment of the
loan in year t, It is the interest payment in year t and Kt + It is the instalment (the total
payment to the bank) [26]
For a project to be bankable, the DSCR must be above 1.0, although banks might require
a safety margin resulting in a higher value of typically 20-50% meaning a DSCR of 1.2-1.5.
Some banks might also require a certain average debt service coverage ratio across the
lifetime of a project.
ADSCR =
∑T
t=1 DSCRt
T
(4.10)
Feasibility study of Power-to-X integration in future energy systems
25
==PAGE:36==
26
Feasibility study of Power-to-X integration in future energy systems
==PAGE:37==
5
Main inputs, assumptions & scenarios
This chapter will describe the input and assumptions used in the analyses and which
scenarios are investigated in order to answer the research question
5.1
Balmorel
5.1.1
Inputs
A lot of data in the Balmorel model is provided exogenously. This data comes from various
sources and has been updated regularly through a validation system in which multiple
people must agree on the suggested changes. The exogenous data can easily be edited
in the individual branch or version to simulate different scenarios. This report focuses
primarily on changing data related to hydrogen- and electrical prices. The data changed
in the Balmorel model is described in the following section.
Discount rates
From the base case scenario, a lot of solar PV is installed in southern parts of Europe,
due to low prices and large potential. The reality would more likely be that investments
in those regions are exposed to greater risks, making them less attractive compared to
model results. The socio-economic discount rates used in the base-case scenario are
uniform and the impact of country-specific discount rates, consisting of a risk-free rate and
a risk premium is investigated for all scenarios [27]. It is expected that the introduction
of country-specific discount rates would ”push” the installed generation capacity north, to
areas with large capacity potential and lower risk of defaulting.
Electrolyser cost
The cost of electrolysers is expected to decrease following the same trend as renewable
energy producers such as solar PV and offshore wind. These technologies have accord-
ing to IRENA decreased by 82% and 39% in the period from 2010-2019 respectively.
Despite not being a new technology, electrolysis to produce hydrogen has only recently
been recognised as a viable option in the green transition, rendering it susceptible to the
same learning curve as other renewable technologies.
Demand
There is a lot of uncertainty as to how the demand for hydrogen and electricity will look in
the future. The Base scenario contains a quite modest and conservative level of demand.
To investigate the impact of the system if the demand increases substantially these param-
eters have been altered. There is a tendency when demand is increased too much, that
prices become unrealistically high due to marginal producers being extremely expensive.
5.1.2
Scenarios
Different scenarios are defined to investigate the impact of various parameters on the
system.
Temporal resolution
The temporal resolution through all scenarios is kept every third term starting from T001
and ending at T166. This simplification allows to include the interseasonal tendencies but
excludes the extremities of the data, which will inevitably lead to more average and stable
results.
To accurately simulate the seasonal tendencies within a year, 2 seasons1 are chosen in
winter, spring, summer and autumn. The chosen season are S02, S08, S15, S21, S28,
1Comparable to weeks with a year
Feasibility study of Power-to-X integration in future energy systems
27
==PAGE:38==
S34, S41, S47. Similarly to the terms chosen, excluding some seasons will lead to a loss
of information regarding extremities, which is one of the consequences of the simplification
needed to comply with technical restrictions of the hardware used for simulations.
Spatial resolution
The spatial resolution in all scenarios is maximised, meaning all available European coun-
tries are included. The simulations include Denmark, Norway, Sweden, Finland, Ger-
many, Netherlands, Poland, Belgium, France, United Kingdom, Austria, Czech Republic,
Lithuania, Latvia, Estonia, Italy, Spain, Portugal & Switzerland. Even though the report is
centred around the Danish energy system there are possible synergies associated with
many southern countries, impacting the system from a Danish perspective.
Scenario descriptions
A Base case is defined as the master version of Balmorel without any changes as of
January 2023. The first scenario, S1, investigates the effect of changing discount rates of
countries according to the specific equity risk premiums of that country. This is objectively
a more accurate estimate of the discount rates and will be used throughout the scenarios.
To investigate the effect of a steep learning curve in electrolyser technologies, the CAPEX
of electrolysers are reduced to 50% in S2. In S3 the impact of demand for hydrogen and
electricity is investigated by doubling the base case value. A scenario with decreased
CAPEX of electrolysers and H2 piping with an increased hydrogen demand is investigated
in S4. Looking at previous simulations, southern countries such as Spain & Italy tend to
be the hub for investments in large amounts of solar PV. A scenario forcing production to
happen in the northern countries by increasing discount rates substantially is investigated
in S5. An overview of the scenarios can be found in Table 5.1.
Table 5.1: Definition of investigated scenarios
Scenario name
Description
Discount rate
Electrolyser cost
H2 demand
EL demand
H2 pipeline cost
Base
Uniform
S1
Country specific
S2
Cheap electrolyser
Country specific
50%
S3
Increased demand
Country specific
200%
200%
S4
H2 favoured
Country specific
50%
200%
50%
S5
Nordic favoured
Country specific, high in south
5.1.3
Modelling procedure
To accurately estimate future electricity prices, a simulation without the cost of investment
in generation technologies is necessary. This is done by simulating the energy system
and optimising for the optimal energy mix to minimise the overall cost, thus maximising
social welfare, labelled the Investment run. When the optimal energy mix is determined,
the capacities are fixed and only the marginal costs of production are included in the
optimisation in so-called Operational run. This is also visualised in figure 4.1.
28
Feasibility study of Power-to-X integration in future energy systems
==PAGE:39==
5.2
Optimisation model
The main inputs and assumptions used in the optimisation model are described below.
5.2.1
Techno-economic input sheet
Table 5.2: Pipeline costs are derived from appendix A.1, assuming a mid-range cost of
7.5 DKK/MW/m, as the model, does not take economy-of-scale into account. The HVDC
cost are from figure A.2 Grid connection costs and production/consumption tariffs (O&M)
are from the Danish TSO [28]. Wind farm and AEC costs are from the DEA energy cat-
alogue [29]. *The AEC is assumed to have a lifetime of 30 years without taking stack
replacements into account
Economy
Technology
Type of Technology
Investment
cost
O&M
variable
O&M
fixed
Electrical
consumption
Min/Max
Capacity
Lifetime
Annuity_factor
(8%-discount)
Units
[EUR/MW]
[EUR/MW]
[EUR/Cap/yr]
[kWh/kg]
MW
[Years]
[-]
Offshore wind
€ 1,623,000
4
3%
-
1000/1000
30
0.089
Grid connection
€ 66,000
1.0/19.0
-
-
0/1000
30
0.089
HVDC
€ 977,000
-
2%
-
0/1000
30
0.089
H2 pipeline
€ 251,677
-
2%
-
0/3000
40
0.094
AEC
€ 468,000
*
3%
51.5
0/3000
30*
0.089
The techno-economic assumptions used as input in the Power-to-X optimisation model
are summarised in figure 5.2. The assumptions are based on a commissioning date in
2030 and the prices are all in real 2022.
5.2.2
Assumptions
• Electricity is always available within the given installed capacity.
• The GW plant is acting as a price taker and does not influence the price of the
system
• No ramping constraints
• No storage or line-pack
• No heat or oxygen utilisation
• In the offshore electrolysis scenario, the cost of the electrolysis is increased by 40%
to 655,200 EUR/MW
5.2.3
Scenarios
The characteristic of the future energy system derived from Balmorel will be investigated
and compared to a traditional reference energy system.
Future Energy System
The Future Energy System scenario will be based on electricity prices from the future
energy system described in section 6.1. The characteristics are a low correlation between
offshore wind and electricity prices.
Historical Energy System
The Historical Energy System scenario is based on historical electricity prices and cor-
Feasibility study of Power-to-X integration in future energy systems
29
==PAGE:40==
responding wind profiles. The characteristics are a relatively high negative correlation
between offshore wind and electricity prices.
The scenarios investigated are:
• High correlation between wind and electricity prices
• Low correlation between wind and electricity prices
• Full and limited grid capacity
• Varying electricity and hydrogen price levels
Both Energy Systems will investigate the high-level benefits of placing the electrolysis
facility offshore vs. onshore, with the main cost driver being the expensive HVDC cables
compared to a cheaper hydrogen pipeline.
The model will optimise the hybrid system with the proposed price levels derived from
Balmorel and with a set of other market forecasts from DEA [8], to see if the project is
feasible at the expected price forecasts.
Figure 5.1: Annual average price forecasts in EUR22/MWh
Sensitivity
Both Energy Systems sensitivity to revenue stream price levels will be investigated. A
fixed hydrogen price ranging from 1.5 to 4.5EUR/kg and a relative price development
with average electricity prices ranging from 30 to 90EUR/MWh, is investigated. With an
electrical consumption of 51.5 kWh/kg of the electrolyser the sets in figure 5.2 roughly
correspond to the equivalent of the each other e.g. 1.5 EUR/kg /51.5 kWh/kg = 29EU-
R/MWh.
Figure 5.2: Sensitivity parameters
5.3
Financial modelling
5.3.1
Input
The majority of the data input to the financial model is the output of the optimisation model.
The capacities and production strategies of the ratio of electricity/hydrogen are used as
input on an annual basis.
Main data from optimisation
From the optimisation model capacities for the offshore wind farm, electrolyser, HVDC
cable and hydrogen pipeline are determined and fixated in the financial model. The costs
associated with the technologies are identical in the optimisation and the financial model
which are determined exogenously and can be found in table 5.2
30
Feasibility study of Power-to-X integration in future energy systems
==PAGE:41==
Hourly data
The optimisation model yields hourly data used to find a weighted average when used
in the model to find the yearly revenue and costs of the commodities going into the net
present value of the entire project. This consists of the hourly revenue and costs of elec-
tricity, and the hydrogen produced and ”sold” at a fixed price. Internal flows such as
curtailment and electricity from WF to AEC can also be extracted from the data.
Financial data
The financial parameters used in the model are:
• Project lifetime - The lifetime of the project is assumed to be 30 years.
• WACC - Chosen at 8%. The WACC is a measure of how much the investors expect
in return for their investments and takes factors such as risk, cost of debt, cost of
equity and risk-free rate into account.
• Inflation rate - Chosen at 2%. The inflation rate is hard to forecast, but looking at
historic data, the inflation rate has been roughly around 2% for the last 2 decades,
excluding 2022 [30].
• Interest on debt - estimated at 5.21% [31].
• Share of debt - A 60% equity is assumed [31].
• Duration of loan - The duration is assumed to be half of the project’s lifetime, here
15 years [31].
5.3.2
Modelling approach & assumptions
To make the model more realistic, 3 scenarios are used for revenues. The three scenar-
ios constitute a ”base” year, a ”bad” year and a ”good” year in terms of revenues from
electricity and hydrogen sold, occurring in the pattern ”Base” - ”Low” - ”Base” - ”High”,
repeated throughout the project’s lifetime. When assessing the bankability of the project
a more conservative estimate is required, using the ”base” scenario and a low capacity
factor creating a conservative estimate.
The initial investment of 20% of the total investment is assumed to be made in 2022,
constituting a development phase, making it the valuation year from which the discounting
begins. The remaining investment is assumed to be split equally in 2026 and 2028 with
a commissioning date in 2030.
Feasibility study of Power-to-X integration in future energy systems
31
==PAGE:42==
32
Feasibility study of Power-to-X integration in future energy systems
==PAGE:43==
6
Results/analysis
This chapter will present the results of simulations, optimisations and analyses.
6.1
Balmorel
In this section, the scenarios constituting the future energy system simulated in Balmorel
will be compared. Comparing all of the scenarios in terms of the mix of electrical genera-
tion technologies, it is clear that solar energy is the dominant technology. Solar PVs have
immense potential and some reports claim that upwards of 60% of the generation mix in
2050 [32], and the results shown in figure 6.1 even indicate that up to 80% of the installed
capacity is from solar PV. Especially in S5, it is expected that offshore wind in northern
countries would be more attractive, as the discount rates in solar-heavy countries have in-
creased substantially. Although this thesis has been confirmed, increasing offshore wind
in Denmark from 0.4 GW to 4.7 GW in 2050, installation of solar PV increases from 36
GW to 69 GW, making the offshore wind close to negligible. The reality of altering the
discount rate in countries with high equity risk is that the installation of solar PV is moved
to nearby countries, especially France, but the sum is close to constant.
Figure 6.1: Electrical generation capacities in Europe across scenarios and years
The total installed capacity of offshore wind seems underestimated compared to what
policymakers have declared as plans such as the North Sea Summit declaration, which
dictates at least 65 GW in 2030 and upwards of 150GW offshore wind solely in the North
Sea by 2050, combined between Denmark, Germany, Holland & Belgium. As the decla-
ration does not directly create any projects or tenders, it is not included in the exogenous
input.
It is worth noticing that the capacity potential for solar energy in Denmark seems over-
estimated compared to forecasts. Although it might be possible to create upwards of 70
GW of solar PVs in Denmark, the model does not take into account the social acceptance
of such projects, which has proven to be a crucial aspect of energy projects. Although
not as visible as onshore wind, solar PV has been subject to the NIMBY (Not In My Back
Yard) effect, limiting the actual potential substantially.
Feasibility study of Power-to-X integration in future energy systems
33
==PAGE:44==
Similar to solar PV, onshore wind dominates offshore wind in the energy system, although
not as extreme. The maximum allowed capacity for onshore wind is 8 GW and the model
chooses to invest in the full amount in every scenario. This cap of 8 GW is quite low and
is likely subject to the inclusion of the NIMBY effect, unlike the solar potential. As of 2021,
the installed capacity was close to 5 GW, but the permitting of new onshore wind will likely
be a difficult and tedious project as the offshore wind industry keeps developing.
The installed capacity of electrolysers follows the same pattern as solar PV when changing
the discount rate of a country. Figure 6.2 compares S1, S2 and S5 to the Base case. It
is clear that electrolyser capacity in Spain, Italy and Portugal is lowered, while especially
France, Germany, Austria, Denmark and the Czech Republic increase investments in
capacity. France has the largest capacity and seems to reach the upper limit. The largest
capacities are located in France but seem to reach a cap.
Figure 6.2: Yearly development in electrolyser capacity across selected countries and
scenarios
(a) H2 transmission 2030
(b) H2 transmission 2050
Figure 6.3: Development in H2 transmission
The development in gas transmission over the 20-year period from 2030 to 2050 seen in
figure 6.3 extends the capacities by close to 10 times, which seems very unlikely given the
time frame. Investments and development infrastructure such as transmission lines tend
to be very expensive and subject to political discussion, especially between countries.
34
Feasibility study of Power-to-X integration in future energy systems
==PAGE:45==
The large transmission lines of close to 40 GW are therefore likely unrealistic when taking
these factors into account.
By ”pushing” the production of hydrogen further north (i.e. Germany & France) as seen in
figure 6.4, the need for transmission is significantly reduced as the majority of the demand
is located in regions with increasing production. Unrealistically large transmission lines
still exist in the S5 scenario still exist but seem much more realistic regarding the sizing
of transmission pipelines.
(a) Hydrogen transmission capacity Base
(b) Hydrogen transmission capacity S5
(c) Electrical transmission capacity Base
(d) Electrical transmission capacity S5
Figure 6.4: Transmission 2050
In figure 6.4 the transmission capacities for electricity and hydrogen between regions are
visualised. It can be noticed that the connection between Spain is significantly reduced
Feasibility study of Power-to-X integration in future energy systems
35
==PAGE:46==
due to the decrease in electrolyser capacity. Although the connection between countries
does not indicate flow direction, it indicates that Spain (and Portugal) will import electricity
rather than export their excess in scenario S5 compared to the Base.
The EL prices are outputs from the simulation as a product of supply and demand equilib-
rium. The prices for each country across years can be seen in figure 6.5. At first glance,
the price level of all scenarios seems quite low compared to other forecasts such as the
DEAs price forecast which dictates an average price of around 70 euro/MWh in 2030[8].
The forecast from the DEA also dictates that prices will decrease from 2030 to 2050 by
around 15-20%, but in the simulation, they only decrease by a few %. It is observed that
Balmorel yields unrealistically low prices compared to other forecasts.
Figure 6.5: El prices from 2030, 2040 & 2050
S3 is the only scenario in which prices are significantly changed. This is due to the in-
creased electrical demand, shifting the demand curve to the right, resulting in a marginal
producer with a higher cost. There is a lot of uncertainty regarding electrical demand
in the future, thus validating the need to investigate extreme cases and how the system
evolves as a result.
Due to the decrease in generation capacity in countries with higher discount rates in sce-
nario S1 through S4, but especially S5, prices tend to increase as they are forced to import
in high-demand hours.
Given that the energy system is primarily composed of solar photovoltaic (PV) technology,
the seasonal price of electricity aligns with the solar energy pattern. This implies that dur-
ing the summer season, energy production increases, thereby driving down prices during
that period. The substantial integration of solar energy in the system is also reflected in
seasons with low solar capacity, particularly in scenario S3, where there is high demand,
and seasonal prices display notable volatility with significant fluctuations. One poten-
tial explanation for these pronounced fluctuations could be insufficient storage capacity,
as evidenced by the curtailment in the system illustrated in Figure 6.7. The curtailment
closely follows the solar energy pattern, with most curtailment occurring during peak sun
periods and seasons. While investments in storage have increased proportionally with
36
Feasibility study of Power-to-X integration in future energy systems
==PAGE:47==
Figure 6.6: EL prices vs season
demand, the majority of these investments have been directed towards hydro-reservoirs
in Norway.
Figure 6.7: Curtailment in a week & in a year
6.2
Optimisation model
Since the proposed energy system derived from Balmorel has a very low share of wind
energy, dominated by solar energy and thus diminishing the correlation between wind and
power prices, we will investigate the future energy system scenario against a reference
energy system, based on the correlation between the two as of 2019.
6.2.1
Optimal design configuration at full grid capacity
Optimising for the maximum profit of the hybrid plant in the Future- and Historical Energy
System scenarios, with a fixed hydrogen off-take price of 2 EUR/kg and average electricity
prices derived from Balmorel and the Danish Energy Agency, yields the following results.
Future Energy System - Balmorel electricity market forecast
The optimal design capacities in figure 6.8 show that placing the electrolyser offshore will
decrease the investments in electricity transmissions to almost zero. This is mainly due
to the average electricity spot price forecasted in Balmorel, which is generally lower than
the equivalent value of hydrogen at 2 EUR/kg, which corresponds to approximately 39
Feasibility study of Power-to-X integration in future energy systems
37
==PAGE:48==
EUR/MWh. The import/export capacities are the same as the HVDC connection when
hydrogen is produced offshore because the HVDC cost is significantly higher than the
connections costs, thus the system will seek as much flexibility as possible, within the
boundary of the HVDC. In the onshore configuration, the electricity is forced on land, be-
fore it can be converted to hydrogen. Due to expensive transmission and low electricity
prices, it is more rewarding for the wind farm to curtail rather than expand the connec-
tion to produce hydrogen or export more electricity. This tendency is also illustrated as
curtailment increases with decreasing electricity prices over the years.
To accommodate decreasing electricity prices, more electrolysis capacity is installed to-
gether with increased import capacity. The grid connections create opportunities for the
system to import electricity at hours of low prices to increase the utilisation rate of the
electrolyser, and export in hours when the electricity price is higher than the equivalent
hydrogen price 6.10.
Installed capacities - Low price, Balmorel forecast
Figure 6.8: Installed capacities with the electricity prices forecasted by Balmorel in a fu-
ture scenario with a low correlation between wind and electricity prices and a historical
scenario with a high correlation, both scenarios investigate offshore and onshore produc-
tion of hydrogen at varying electricity price levels
Comparing the future and historical energy system scenarios
Due to the nature of the three price profile derived in the future energy scenario, the
number of hours with electricity prices valued higher than hydrogen is significantly higher
in 2030 compared to 2040 and 2050, which enhances the effect of decreasing electricity
prices, compared to the historical price profile.
Figure 6.9: Hours with electricity prices more valuable than hydrogen - Balmorel
38
Feasibility study of Power-to-X integration in future energy systems
==PAGE:49==
Offshore observations
In the year 2030 where the price profile results in 3359 hours with higher electricity prices,
compared to the hydrogen price, the model suggests investing in 129MW electricity trans-
mission. In the year 2040 where the price profile results in 714 hours with higher electricity
prices, compared to the hydrogen price, the model suggests investing in 58MW electricity
transmission. In the year 2050 where the price profile results in 715 hours with higher
electricity prices, compared to the hydrogen price, the model suggests investing in 0MW
electricity transmission. The historical results show less tendency to install electrical trans-
mission capacities, even though the amount of hours with electricity valued higher than
hydrogen is higher, cf. figure 6.9. This is likely due to the correlation between wind and
electricity prices. If wind energy is generally more valuable in the future energy system
scenario, the model will invest in more electrical transmission capacity, to utilise the hours
of valuable wind energy, compared to the historical scenario, where wind energy is gen-
erally of lower value.
Onshore observations
It is the HVDC cable that sets the boundary of electricity transported to shore. If the elec-
tricity is less valuable, less transmission capacity is installed. In the future scenario, more
transmission is installed to capture a few hours of valuable electricity, which allows for
electrolysis to become attractive in the hours when electricity is less valuable. In the his-
torical scenario transmission capacity is lower, but has a higher export capacity utilisation,
as seen in figure 6.10.
Utilisation rates
(a) Future scenario
(b) Historical scenario
Figure 6.10: Technology utilisation rates in the market forecasted in Balmorel.
Feasibility study of Power-to-X integration in future energy systems
39
==PAGE:50==
Danish Energy Agency - electricity market forecast
The electricity prices derived in the future energy system analysis in Balmorel are lower
than the expected market forecasts from the Danish Energy Agency [8]. For this reason,
a scenario with increased electricity prices has been investigated, using a relative scaling
of the electricity price curve to match the average price level suggested by the Danish
Energy Agency of 58, 50, and 47 EUR22/MWh for the three years respectively.
Installed capacities - high price, DEA forecast
Figure 6.11: Installed capacities with the electricity prices forecasted by DEA in a future
scenario with a low correlation between wind and electricity prices and a historical sce-
nario with a high correlation, both scenarios investigate offshore and onshore production
of hydrogen at varying electricity price levels
Increasing the electricity market prices will result in increased electrical transmission ca-
pacity investments in both configurations as the hours where electricity is valued higher
than hydrogen has increased, as seen in figure 6.12. In the offshore configuration, the
HVDC connection is most commonly used to export the energy to shore and sell it, while
the import utilisation rate is relatively small, due to the electricity prices being higher than
the equivalent hydrogen price, as seen in figure 6.13.
Figure 6.12: Hours with electricity prices more valuable than hydrogen - DEA
(a) Future scenario
(b) Historical scenario
Figure 6.13: Technology utilisation rates in the markets forecast by DEA.
40
Feasibility study of Power-to-X integration in future energy systems
==PAGE:51==
The highest capacity factor of the wind farm is 0.95, thus there is a natural balance be-
tween HVDC and electrolysis investments as a function of electricity prices, which results
in a total capacity between the two, close to 950MW, to prevent curtailment. Onshore
electrolysis is not favourable when electricity prices generally are above the equivalent
hydrogen price. The amount of hours with low electricity prices is too few to make the
investment attractive. As a result, curtailment increases slightly, when prices fall, as full
transmission capacity is not economically attractive. In the low-price scenario, we saw
PtX capacity decrease onshore when the correlation was high. In the high-price sce-
nario, we see the same effects as curtailment increases in the historical scenario, due to
less electrical transmission capacity.
Feasibility study of Power-to-X integration in future energy systems
41
==PAGE:52==
6.2.2
Optimal design configuration at limited exported grid capacity
Many GW-scale projects will face the challenge of limited grid connections. Thus the
same scenarios have been investigated with a limit of 50% export capacity.
Installed capacities with limited export capacity - Balmorel forecast
Figure 6.14: Installed capacities with the electricity prices forecast by Balmorel in a future
scenario with a low correlation between wind and electricity prices and a historical sce-
nario with a high correlation, both scenarios investigate offshore and onshore production
of hydrogen at varying electricity price levels
Installed capacities with limited export capacity - DEA forecast
Figure 6.15: Installed capacities with the electricity prices forecast by DEA in a future
scenario with a low correlation between wind and electricity prices and a historical sce-
nario with a high correlation, both scenarios investigate offshore and onshore production
of hydrogen at varying electricity price levels
Limiting the export capacity will generally favour PtX to prevent curtailment. The offshore
set-up in the low-price scenario is unchanged as the export capacity never exceeded
500MW, while the onshore set-up is becoming only slightly more dependent on PtX ca-
pacity, as the hydrogen price is too modest to justify additional electrical transmission and
42
Feasibility study of Power-to-X integration in future energy systems
==PAGE:53==
electrolysis investments. For the increased price scenario approximately 50MW electrol-
ysis capacity is installed in the future scenario.
Key takeaways
The historical scenario tends to curtail more than the future scenario because wind en-
ergy is less valuable in the historical scenario and limiting the export capacity will generally
favour PtX to prevent curtailment. There is almost no PtX installed in the high-price sce-
nario onshore because the costs of transmitting the wind energy plus the electrolyser costs
exceed the hydrogen off-take price. The correlation between wind and electricity prices
will influence the optimal design of a hybrid plant, as hours with high wind production and
low spot prices will favour PtX implementation for the offshore set-up. Meanwhile, the
onshore set-up is less likely to invest in PtX when the correlation is high, this is likely due
to the fact that less HVDC capacity is available, compared to the future scenario, which is
forced to invest in higher capacities to utilise the few hours of high electricity prices. This
suggests that PtX is more valuable in a volatile spot market.
6.2.3
Variable capacity design sensitivity
A Variable design sensitivity analysis investigates possible design combinations in differ-
ent electricity and hydrogen price scenarios, to decide what price levels would make the
project profitable for both the future and historical energy system scenarios. The heat
map in figure 6.16 shows the effects on the objective value expressed as; annual gross
profit, thus giving an idea of which designs will be profitable. The heat map in figure 6.17
shows the offshore hydrogen set-up performance compared to onshore. The heat map
in figure 6.18 shows the comparison of an offshore versus onshore configuration in terms
of installed capacities, with historical and potential future correlation in time series 6.18b.
Objective value / Annual gross profit
(a) Energy system with high correlation between
wind and power prices; -36%
(b) Energy system with low correlation between
wind and power prices; -2%
Figure 6.16: Annual gross profit sensitivity to electricity and hydrogen prices
Feasibility study of Power-to-X integration in future energy systems
43
==PAGE:54==
Offshore to onshore hydrogen production advantages
(a) Difference in annual gross profit.
Positive
values suggest that offshore hydrogen produc-
tion is favoured compared to onshore.
(b) Difference in annual gross profit.
Positive
values suggest that offshore hydrogen produc-
tion is favoured compared to onshore.
Figure 6.17: Offshore vs. onshore profit comparison
Gross profit observations
The annual gross profit associated with unique optimal designs illustrated in figure 6.16
shows several combinations of profitable and unprofitable scenarios when comparing hy-
drogen and electricity price levels.
Key take aways
Generally, offshore hydrogen production is favoured in the two energy system scenarios,
which was expected as the case study is located 250km offshore.
There are a few configurations that would make onshore hydrogen production projects
more economically attractive compared to offshore production. These are scenarios where
the hydrogen price is significantly higher than electricity prices, which is clear from the
comparison in figure 6.17.
The future energy system simulation generally produces higher gross profit both onshore
and offshore, because offshore wind energy is higher valued in this system, which in-
creases the opportunities for a hybrid system. Both projects suffer under bad market
terms, however, offshore hydrogen projects seem to be better hedged in most scenarios
as per figure 6.17. Since the only parameter in the model that favours onshore hydro-
gen production is the 40% decreased capital cost of electrolysis, which is not enough to
counterbalance the electrical transmission costs.
The offshore matrices in figure 6.16 show that hydrogen off-take prices of 3.5EUR/kg
would be sufficient to make the project profitable regardless of electricity prices. The ben-
efit of the variable design sensitivity analysis is that it reveals if any configurations will
result in a positive gross profit. It shows the optimal design configuration within certain
price scenarios, however, it can not tell how the unique dimensions perform in other sce-
narios than ”its own”. If a developer wants to operate and sell to an open, potentially
volatile and uncertain market, they would have to extend the analysis to understand the
sensitivity of the allegedly profitable design configurations. All design combinations are
shown in figure 6.18.
44
Feasibility study of Power-to-X integration in future energy systems
==PAGE:55==
Capacity sensitivity historical energy system characteristics
(a) Energy system with high correlation between wind and power prices; -36%
Capacity sensitivity future energy system characteristics
(b) Energy system with low correlation between wind and power prices; -2%
Figure 6.18: Design sensitivity to electricity and hydrogen prices
Optimal capacity observations
• Historical energy system: Offshore
Figure 6.16a shows that an offshore hydrogen production project is allegedly prof-
itable if hydrogen off-take prices exceed 3.5 EUR/kg, for any level of the average
electricity price scenarios. Figure 6.18a suggests the following designs at this hy-
drogen price.
If power prices are between 40-80EUR/MWh the optimisation model suggests a
pure hydrogen project, with 0MW HVDC capacity.
If power prices decrease to 30EUR/MWh, 92MW HVDC connections are established
to utilise attractive grid import, with minor profit gains.
If the power price is 80EUR/MWh, the model suggests a design with 733MW AEC
and 216MW HVDC, to increase profits from 2MEUR to 8MEUR
If power prices exceed 90EUR/MWh, the model suggests a design with 440MW
Feasibility study of Power-to-X integration in future energy systems
45
==PAGE:56==
AEC and 509MW HVDC, to secure a profit of 27MEUR.
• Future energy system: Offshore
Figure 6.16b shows that in another system, with a price profile less correlated to
wind energy, profits would generally increase. Larger grid connections can be eco-
nomically justified to sell the valuable power, which increases import opportunities
for offshore electrolysis as well. This tendency has a positive impact on the profit,
however, it might challenge the green origin of hydrogen.
• Historical energy system: Onshore
Onshore projects are profitable in fewer scenarios as the system is forced to invest
in expensive HVDC transmission. Either the project needs consistent power prices
above 90EUR/MWh, which suggests a pure power project, or prices below 70EU-
R/MWh, can make onshore electrolysis projects profitable, with a combination of
AEC capacities between 900-1860MW and cheaper access to grid imports. How-
ever, this would assume a secured hydrogen off-take price of 4.5 EUR/kg, which
would make the offshore set-up superior.
As figure 6.17 illustrates, the onshore projects will only surpass the attractiveness
of offshore if power prices are sufficiently lower than the equivalent hydrogen price,
which implies grid import dominance, leading to the discussion of ”Guarantee of
Origin” and whether the hydrogen is indeed green, but can have other grid stability
advantages.
• Future energy system: Onshore
Larger grid export investments are justified at lower power price ranges, compared
to the historical scenario. However, AEC and grid imports do also increase not due
to opportunities in the HVDC cable, as it is located onshore, but due to the correlation
between wind energy and power prices. Even though the average electricity price is
equal between the future and historical scenarios, the volatility is different, affecting
the number of hours with high or low electricity prices varies between the two series
and not just the correlation between electricity and production.
6.2.4
Fixed capacity sensitivity
The fixed design sensitivity seeks to investigate which of the variable design proposals is
more robust to a merchant electricity market. The variable design analysis showed that
an offshore hydrogen project can be profitable at the expected power price range of 60-50
EUR/MWh forecast by DEA [8], with a hydrogen off-take price of 3.5EUR/kg, however, the
developer would need a gross profit margin that allows financing the project as well. Thus
the dimensions are defined under the assumption that the developer can secure an off-
take price of 4 EUR/kg. Since offshore hydrogen production is generally more profitable
than onshore, the focus will be on offshore set-up.
With 4 EUR/kg the variable design capacity analysis suggests a few combinations. So
what is the obvious design configuration? According to forecasts is most probable that
the power price will revolve around 50-70EUR/MWh, which suggests developing a pure
offshore hydrogen project, but how many years with higher or lower prices would make
the developer regret the median price dimension? To accommodate this question 4 con-
figurations have been investigated.
• 1000MW AEC / 0MW HVDC - Dedicated hydrogen
• 1000MW AEC / 214MW HVDC - Conservative opportunity seeking
• 1000MW AEC / 500MW HVDC - Optimistic opportunity seeking
46
Feasibility study of Power-to-X integration in future energy systems
==PAGE:57==
• 1800MW AEC / 1000MW HVDC - Net consumer
Offshore profit sensitivity at fixed dimensions - Historical price profiles
(a) 1000MW AEC / 0MW HVDC
(b) 1000MW AEC / 215MW HVDC
(c) 1000MW AEC / 500MW HVDC
(d) 1800MW AEC / 1000MW HVDC
The results from the fixed capacity analysis in figure 6.19a show that a dedicated hydrogen
project selling hydrogen at 3.5 EUR/kg would make the project slightly infeasible because
the analysis assumed full capacity of 1000MW in opposition to the 950 suggested by the
model. This is a rough estimation of the decreasing efficiency caused by stack degrada-
tion. Figure 6.19b show that increasing HVDC capacity to 215MW would lower the annual
profits in the years with median prices, but increase the profits in case power prices de-
creases below 40EUR/MWh and increases above 90 EUR/MWh. Figure 6.19c show that
increasing the HVDC capacity to 500MW would decrease the annual profits compared to
the smaller HVDC investment, within the investigated price range, besides scenarios with
30EUR/MWh. Figure 6.19d show that increasing the HVDC capacity to 1000MW and the
AEC to 1800MW would enhance the trends from figure 6.19c.
Historical energy system observations
A dedicated offshore hydrogen project would under these assumptions be a safe project if
an HPA of 4 EUR/kg could be secured. If the developer would seek flexible opportunities
through grid connection, 215MW would be an attractive connection capacity, compared to
500MW. The configuration with 1800MW AEC and 1000MW HVDC might be relevant if the
developer is obliged to be fully connected to the grid and thus hedge the project against
future self-cannibalism tendencies of the wind power market, as the HVDC capacity would
be available for cheap import when the wind energy is in excess.
Future scenario with low correlation
The same analysis was done with the future energy system price profile characteristics,
which generally value offshore wind energy higher. The variable capacity analysis shows
Feasibility study of Power-to-X integration in future energy systems
47
==PAGE:58==
that no optimal design was investing in power transmission below 150MW at a hydrogen
price of 4EUR/kg. Three configurations with increasing HVDC capacity are investigated.
Furthermore, a configuration of 550MW AEC and 450MW HVDC is investigated, as the
future energy system generally favours electricity over AEC.
Offshore profit sensitivity at fixed dimensions - Future price profiles
(a) 1000MW AEC / 215MW HVDC
(b) 1000MW AEC / 315MW HVDC
(c) 1000MW AEC / 500MW HVDC
(d) 550MW AEC / 450MW HVDC
Figure 6.20: Annual gross profits for 4 fixed dimensions
Future energy system observations
The results in figure 6.20a show that the future scenario would allow hydrogen prices to
decrease to 3.5 EUR/kg with good profit opportunities and figure 6.20a show that increas-
ing the electricity transmission capacity to 315MW would increase revenues overall for a
hydrogen price of 4 EUR/kg while increasing the HVDC capacity to 500MW has a negative
impact in mid-range power price scenarios. The scenario with 550MW AEC and 450MW
HVDC in figure 6.20d shows that the project would benefit if power prices increase, and
a decreased electrolysis capacity lowers the profit in periods with low prices.
Key takeaways
The dedicated hydrogen case will be investigated as a reference, to a conservative opportunity-
seeking configuration with 215MW HVDC installed and a configuration with 550MW AEC
and 450MW HVDC. The 3 configurations will be investigated in a financial model to ad-
dress the sensitivity to volatile power markets and varying price levels and comment on
the scenarios that would make grid investment opportunities financially attractive.
48
Feasibility study of Power-to-X integration in future energy systems
==PAGE:59==
6.3
Financial assessment
6.3.1
Levelised Cost of Energy / Hydrogen
When evaluating the attractiveness of onshore vs. offshore PtX projects, comparing the
Levelised cost of Electricity, LCOE, and the Levelised Cost of Hydrogen, LCOH, in similar
projects can be a good indicator of which project has the most potential. A comparison of
two projects having the same specifications, with the only difference of one being offshore
and one being onshore is carried out.
When evaluating the comparative merits of onshore versus offshore Power-to-X (PtX)
projects, an analysis of the Levelised Cost of Electricity (LCOE) and the Levelised Cost
of Hydrogen (LCOH) in similar projects can provide a useful indicator of their relative
potential. This study involves the comparison of two projects with identical specifications,
with the sole distinction being that one project is onshore and the other is offshore.
Both projects are ”islanded,” meaning they are not connected to the grid for importing
or exporting electricity, and hydrogen production is their sole source of revenue. In the
offshore project, no high-voltage direct current (HVDC) cable is considered, whereas, in
the onshore project, no pipeline is considered.
Offshore investments are more expensive than the onshore alternative and priced at 40%
more in the model, but in this case, only applies to the electrolyser CAPEX and subse-
quently the OPEX.
When comparing the costs of the onshore and offshore scenarios while varying the ca-
pacity factors of wind generation, it is clear the offshore option is the cheaper option which
corresponds directly to the substitution of the expensive HVDC cable with a much cheaper
pipeline. This directly correlates to the LCOH as it is the sum of discounted costs divided
by the ”discounted” sum of hydrogen produced. The results of the comparison across
capacity factors can be found in table 6.1
Table 6.1: Levelised costs vs. Capacity Factor
Capacity factor
Parameter
45%
50%
55%
Offshore
LCOH [EUR/kg]
3.63
3.28
2.96
LCOE [EUR/MWh]
46.62
42.09
37.98
Onshore
LCOH [EUR/kg]
4.55
4.11
3.7
LCOE [EUR/MWh]
74.65
67.39
60.81
The LCOE of offshore wind in the European Union in 2030 is projected to be in the range
of 40-70EUR/MWh including transmission (with a 4% WACC), but just 30-50EUR/MWh
without transmission. Thus offshore wind projects would have a major advantage in terms
of cost reductions by avoiding the need for electricity transmission [33].
Comparing the LCOEs from the simulation with the projections from IRENA, it is concluded
that the values from the simulation are realistic as an 8% WACC is used rather than 4%
in the forecast.
Feasibility study of Power-to-X integration in future energy systems
49
==PAGE:60==
6.3.2
Dedicated hydrogen project
The dedicated offshore hydrogen production project yields the following key financial num-
bers at a hydrogen off-take price of 4 EUR/kg:
NPV = 566.19M€
IRR = 10.10%
DSCRavg = 2.67
When negotiating interests from lending entities, the average Debt Service Coverage ratio
must exceed 1, to allow debt payments. Lending entities typically require a DSCR of
around 1.20-1.25, which makes this project seem favourable project for lenders with less
risk of loan default.
Cf. the LCOH values in table 6.1 the off-take price could be decreased to be more compet-
itive with fossil hydrogen, especially if far offshore capacity factors. Figure 6.21 illustrate
how sensitive the project is to wind capacity factors and hydrogen off-take prices. In real-
ity, capacity factors would vary from year to year. 45% is a conservative capacity factor,
used when determining the bankability of the project. Decreasing the hydrogen price to
3 EUR/kg as suggested in figure 6.21 would increase the competitiveness in the market
and still make the project feasible as the IRR is above 8%.
Figure 6.21: IRR sensitivity to hydrogen prices and annual capacity factors expressed as
the difference from the discount rate of 8%.
Future value of money
Figure 6.22 show how CAPEX is distributed across an offshore wind farm project, ac-
cording to DEA [29]. The total cost of the project would be around 2.5bEUR, thus the
distribution of capital payments has a high impact on the project’s feasibility.
If a project has an EPC-period of 8 years Engineer, Procure and Construct with a valu-
ation year is 2022, the investment is discounted from 2022 and forwards, which means
that postponing as much as the investment as possible will benefit the business case.
Figure 6.23 shows the simplified CAPEX distribution assumed for this project. The capital
expenditures in the first couple of years would likely be allocated to project development,
which is 16% of a typical wind farm project, while procurement of the actual hardware
will be invested in later in the project. The importance of taking this element into account
in the financial model is visualised in figure 6.23 by the difference between the free and
discounted cash flow.
50
Feasibility study of Power-to-X integration in future energy systems
==PAGE:61==
Share of wind farm CAPEX elements
Figure 6.22: CAPEX share in offshore wind projects
Cashflow
Figure 6.23: Cashflow of pure hydrogen case with simplified capital expenditure distribu-
tion used in this project; at 45% capacity factor, at 4 EUR/kg
6.3.3
Conservative grid opportunities
A far offshore wind site located 250km from shore generally favours hydrogen produc-
tion offshore with no electrical transmission capacity. Only a few of the investigated price
ranges in section 6.2.3 propose investments in a large electrical transmission capacity.
This section compares the dedicated offshore hydrogen project with a project installing a
complimentary 215MW grid capacity and a configuration with 550MW AEC and 450MW
HVDC, to investigate if there are opportunity costs related to electrical transmission invest-
ments in a volatile electricity market, in hydrogen off-take price ranges of 2-4 EUR/kg.
Grid connection opportunities
As discussed in section 6.2.4 and illustrated in figure 6.19a and 6.19b Investing in 215MW
High Voltage DC transmission will allegedly decrease the annual gross profit from 37MEUR
to between 21-28MEUR depending on power prices, however, it can also result in in-
creased revenue if power prices decrease below 40EUR/MWh, while prices above 90EU-
R/MWh will make profits equal to the pure hydrogen project. This analysis investigates
how varying market dynamics affect projects with grid opportunities and which scenarios
would make the additional investments feasible. When comparing the results from the
dedicated hydrogen project in figure 6.21 for a capacity factor of 45%, it can be observed
Feasibility study of Power-to-X integration in future energy systems
51
==PAGE:62==
IRR sensitivity: 1000MW AEC / 215MW HVDC configuration
Figure 6.24: IRR sensitivity to electricity price volatility and hydrogen prices; at 45% ca-
pacity factor, expressed as the difference from the discount rate of 8%. Base: 60 EU-
R/MWh, Low: 30 EUR/MWh, High: 90 EUR/MWh-
in figure 6.24 that for a hydrogen price of 4 EUR/kg, the grid-opportunity system is rela-
tively hedged to varying prices in the historical scenario, while it benefits from the potential
price dynamics in the future scenario. For a hydrogen price of 3 EUR/kg in the historical
scenario, the project would need a significant number of years with increasing prices to
become profitable. However, taking the current situation into account it is not unrealis-
tic to imagine a scenario with prices in the range of 200 EUR/MWh cf. figure 2.2, which
would make the grid-connected option interesting for hydrogen prices above 3 EUR/Kg.
For a hydrogen price of 2 EUR/kg, it would be difficult to make a profit regardless of price
levels.
Evenly distributed configuration
The fixed design analysis in section 6.2.4 suggested a configuration with 550MW AEC
and 450MW HVDC, as illustrated in figure 6.20d. Such configuration is more sensitive
to electricity prices, as half of the energy must be sold as electricity. The configuration
diminishes the advantages of the future scenario, while it allows for higher benefits in a
high-priced historical scenario.
IRR sensitivity: 550MW AEC / 450MW HVDC configuration
Figure 6.25: IRR sensitivity to electricity price volatility and hydrogen prices; at 45% ca-
pacity factor, expressed as the difference from the discount rate of 8%. Base: 60 EU-
R/MWh, Low: 30 EUR/MWh, High: 90 EUR/MWh-
52
Feasibility study of Power-to-X integration in future energy systems
==PAGE:63==
7
Discussion
7.1
Balmorel
7.1.1
Limitations
Balmorel is a powerful tool when simulating and analysing an energy system, mainly in
the electrical and heat sectors. The model however has some limitations which need to
be taken into account when analysing the results:
• Data dependent: The Balmorel model gives results according to the exogenous
input data and boundary conditions defined. As there are loads of unknowns when
defining a future energy system, the results from the simulations need to be exam-
ined and validated. A simple quick sanity check of the results is a strong tool to
determine the state of the results. As the input data is crucial for the output, up-
dating the data to maintain a state-of-the-art model is a huge task and exposes the
model to human entry errors.
• Policies: For areas such as green hydrogen and power-to-x, it is difficult to accu-
rately forecast the demand, production and prices for the future as the input changes
constantly due to political decisions which accelerate the projects, and certainly also
those which delay or even end them. The demand for hydrogen used in this re-
port could be considered a conservative guesstimate but might be as correct as a
greater demand. A larger demand would however have a great impact on prices
and installed capacity as has been seen in S3.
• Add-ons: To more accurately simulate an energy system, add-ons are developed,
such as the OFFSHOREGRID add-on. The OFFSHOREGRID add-on was not used
for the simulations, as it caused errors in the current version, but could have had an
effect on the final results. The add-on which allows for investments in offshore grids,
mainly as hubs, could have lowered the overall cost of the system, thus maximising
social welfare.
• Cost of transmission: For H2 and its derivatives to be a viable alternative to fossil
fuels, a holistic transmission and distribution network must be built. Converting nat-
ural gas pipelines into dedicated H2 pipes is a cheap and sustainable alternative to
new investments and will very likely be necessary for the transition to be feasible.
The model invests heavily in H2 transmission infrastructure instead of moving the
production closer to regions with large demand, such as in the case of Germany.
This would indicate that H2 transport and transmission capacity costs must be (too)
low compared to the savings associated with installing generation capacity closer
to the demand. The cost of refurbishing the natural gas grid is set to 0, making the
”investment” extremely attractive. Combined with the low investment cost in new
pipelines, the placement of hydrogen generation plants (electrolysers) will be in the
region with the lowest levelised cost.
7.1.2
Generation mix
When comparing the results regarding the composition of generation technologies seen in
figure 6.1 to the forecast by Energy Brainpool in figure 2.1 it shows similarities, with a dif-
ference in the share of wind power. The Balmorel model highly favours solar power even
in countries and regions which would not be considered an ideal locations. This could
be due to Balmorel not considering the ”softer” aspects of energy projects and political
Feasibility study of Power-to-X integration in future energy systems
53
==PAGE:64==
decisions such as security of supply, local acceptance and political image. The Balmorel
model indicates that the optimal solution would be investing in solar PV in southern coun-
tries such as Spain and creating large transmission technologies to northern countries.
This strategy potentially has a lot of issues on a European level and from the perspective
of a country such as Denmark. Firstly there is a limitation to how fast the transmission
can be expanded, which could be a clear bottleneck in a strategy such as this. Secondly,
it is likely, not desirable to centralise the production due to the security of supply in the
respective countries. Thirdly, it is potentially unlikely that locals will accept such amounts
of solar PVs in their local environment.
The extensive interconnections between countries suggested in the Balmorel simulations
lead to quite steady electricity prices in all countries, making them less sensitive to the
production fluctuations in the local region. As the majority of the electricity is produced
by solar PVs the electricity price follows the same pattern and the small contribution of
onshore and offshore wind will not impact the prices significantly, even though they are
generally negatively correlated. Reducing the extensive interconnections would lead to
electricity prices with higher correlations to the dominant technology in the regions, which
in Denmark could very likely be wind power.
It is clear that solar energy will be the main driver of the green transition, but the magnitude
of wind energy is not as clear. An agreement between the countries with a stake in the
North Sea has already been made, which would contribute to offshore wind being a large
part of the energy mix in the future. A comprehensive strategy for establishment is not yet
available but national tenders have been announced such as the 9 GW tender recently
announced by the government.
The 9 GW tender was announced less than a month after the open-door projects of 15
GW offshore wind were paused due to a possible violation of EU laws, but also due to
the booming interest in these projects from developers. Before 2022 they received a
maximum of 2 applications per year but in 2022 they received 54 applications rendering
them unable to process all1. The open door projects are ”free”, but require the developer
to do all of the preliminary studies and pay all of the expenses associated, while not being
eligible to subsidies.
A reason that only a few have applied for the open-door projects, could be due to offshore
wind not being feasible without subsidies until quite recently. The outcome of the tender for
Thor wind farm was a milestone for the industry and opened the floodgates for developers
to enter the market.
7.1.3
Further work
Whilst the energy system currently encompasses a significant degree of complexity and
comprehensiveness, it is possible to integrate further supplementary features. The com-
bination of transport and hydrogen extensions enables the production of synthetic fuel,
which can be presented in the form of hydrogen or electrical demand at a regional level
and aggregated for the entire sector. However, this results in a rudimentary represen-
tation of the sector, manifested as a mere demand block. A more nuanced and precise
portrayal of the sector can be achieved by implementing more detailed demand and con-
version methods from hydrogen to synthetic E-fuel. This would facilitate the optimisation
of a more comprehensive energy system, with the potential for energy storage via conver-
sion. Such advancements would likely lead to a more efficient system and correspond-
ingly heightened social welfare.
1https://www.energy-supply.dk/article/view/896724/energistyrelsen_aben_dorpause_er_vores_beslutning
54
Feasibility study of Power-to-X integration in future energy systems
==PAGE:65==
The transport add-on is limited to demand from busses and trains and excludes personal
transport, aviation, and shipping, which account for no less than half of global energy
consumers. This underscores the need for greater investment in PtX technologies and
the incorporation of more comprehensive features into the energy system simulation.
As previously noted, the demand for electricity and hydrogen in the future are critical
variables that are subject to a considerable amount of uncertainty. Conducting a study of
demand in these sectors would substantially enhance the precision and legitimacy of the
model.
The present energy crisis has resulted in soaring energy prices, reaching levels that are
ten times higher than the customary rate. This increase has not been factored into the
model, which may account for the comparatively low energy prices depicted. Despite
the model’s emphasis on renewable sources, the surge in prices may encourage more
substantial and rapid investments to counteract the high costs.
7.2
Optimisation model
The analysis of maximising profit from far offshore sites with hydrogen production is rel-
evant to the ongoing debate on how to increase renewable energy capacity, with the
onshore deployment of VRE being constrained by social acceptance and rigid permitting.
Unlocking the potential of the north sea would be a milestone for the green transition,
because the volumes of north sea energy surpass the inland European grid capacity.
Large-scale offshore can be constrained by a limited grid connection. With the expected
hydrogen demand forecast from several international energy agencies, an offshore PtX
project delivering hydrogen to a European hydrogen backbone would not be limited by
off-take, thus the full offshore wind site potential could be utilised without the constraints
of grid accessibility. Besides the expensive cost of transporting the power to shore, further
investments must be made to adapt the onshore grid and send the massive production
to the consumers, while allowance to get grid connections with GW-scale projects can
be time-consuming and often delay projects [34]. If the hydrogen demand is sufficient,
why not make the hydrogen in the best offshore sites, furthest away from the consumer,
and produce electricity near the consumer with solar PV? If/when floating wind turbines
become a reality we suddenly unlock way more offshore wind capacity possibly even far-
ther away from shore compared to the north sea. In that case, cheap energy transport
becomes even more attractive. If in-turbine H2-production becomes a reality as well, it
would solve the need for a large hub out in the open sea, which is a potential constraint
on electrolysis capacity.
The variable design capacity analysis tends to be almost binary, in its ’onesided’ optimal
solution, which makes it difficult to define the optimal design in a merchant market, where
prices will be varying. The optimal results can jump from full capacity to zero, within
one unit of change in the parameters under investigation. Thus, the more constrained
the optimisation model will get, the stronger the tool would it be and help to conclude an
actual optimal design.
7.2.1
Wind and electricity profiles
Wind capacity factors are important and uncertain parameters in any offshore wind project
regardless of the end product. Thus, the expected capacity factors for a specific project
would be investigated through the location and wind speeds and then optimized through
turbine size and wind farm layout, taking wake losses from an increasing number of wind
farms in the north sea into account. For this project, a static wind profile is used to discuss
how to maximise profits with a given wind resource.
Feasibility study of Power-to-X integration in future energy systems
55
==PAGE:66==
The characteristics of the hourly profiles used in the optimisation will influence the result,
thus other profiles could have proven different results or trends. However, the two different
price profiles used in this paper were rather different, to investigate how these trends affect
the design choices of hybrid Power-to-X plants.
The duration curve in figure 7.1 shows that the Balmorel derived price profile has sev-
eral hours with significantly higher electricity prices compared to the historical reference
profile from Nordpool. The characteristic of the future energy profile will be enhanced
due to the relative price development method used to change the average annual power
prices in the optimisation simulations. An absolute price development approach could
have accommodated a less volatile energy price profile development.
Duration curves
Figure 7.1: Duration curves of wind and electricity profiles
7.2.2
Further work
Including excess heat of hydrogen production would add a dimension to the optimisation
problem as new investments would have to be introduced to utilise the excess heat. This
addition would most likely favour onshore hydrogen production, which was generally ne-
glected in this analysis due to the distance to shore, as a 40% increase in electrolysis cost
was not enough to make it competitive with offshore electrolysis. Onshore electrolysis had
one advantage over offshore, which was cheap access to grid imports. Constraints on
CO2 levels in electricity imported from the grid could be another theme to investigate in
future work, as green hydrogen production must fulfil the requirements in the RED II.
7.2.3
Subsidies
Subsidies for hydrogen production have not been implemented on a large scale yet in
Europe, but the Danish government has announced a tender for 168 million euros over a
period of 10 years for hydrogen production [17]. The winner of the tender will be the one
with the lowest need for subsidies in a large-scale operation. Compared to the dedicated
hydrogen case in this paper, the annually produced hydrogen will be 76 million kg. As-
suming the tender premium will be evenly distributed across the 10 years, it would result
in a 0.2 Euro/kg subsidy if the entire fund was used in a single project, which does not
make the green hydrogen produced offshore competitive with the grey version cf. 2.4
56
Feasibility study of Power-to-X integration in future energy systems
==PAGE:67==
8
Conclusion
Analysing the market showed a great need for green hydrogen in the near future and an
even larger market in 2050. The overshadowing factor for the transition from black/grey/blue-
to green hydrogen is the price gap. This price gap is projected to be closed due to the
taxation of fossil-based hydrogen and a steep learning curve similar to other renewable
energy technologies such as offshore wind and solar PVs.
The future energy system simulated in Balmorel showed an interesting and alternative ver-
sion compared to what is normally depicted in forecasts. The mix of generation capacity
heavily consists of solar energy while offshore wind plays a very insignificant role even
in countries with optimal conditions. Implementation of country-specific discount rates to
incorporate the risks associated with investments shifted the production of both electricity
and hydrogen to other countries, but the overall tendencies regarding the generation mix
have not changed. Overall electricity prices for all countries are quite low compared to
other forecasts and could be a result of the energy mix consisting mainly of solar energy.
Due to the large investments in solar energy, price profiles in all scenarios are heavily
correlated with solar energy production, granting an opportunity for a wind hybrid plant
to profit on generally low electricity prices and the ability to sell electricity outside of solar
peak hours.
There are opportunities to utilise the north sea areas furthest from shore with Power-to-
X, as wind projects far from shore favour hydrogen pipelines over expensive electrical
transmission capacity. A dedicated offshore hydrogen production facility would put the
investment cost of transporting energy to shore to a minimum. However, scenarios with
high electricity prices could make it financially attractive for investors to build hybrid off-
shore wind Power-to-X plants with complimentary grid opportunities.
The profit maximising optimisation and subsequent financial analysis of a hybrid plant
located 250km from shore, revealed that,
• A dedicated offshore hybrid plant will be able to reach LCOE levels at 47-38 EU-
R/MWh, with corresponding LCOH levels at 3.6-3.0 EUR/kg depending on capacity
factors.
• Producing hydrogen onshore will raise LCOE levels to 75-61 EUR/MWh, with cor-
responding LCOH levels at 4.55-3.7 EUR/kg, due to electrical transmission costs to
shore.
• 40% increase in electrolysis facilities alone is not enough to favour onshore hydro-
gen production for a 250km offshore site. Other factors such as the utilisation of
waste heat could make the onshore option viable, however, direct connections to
renewable energy sources are mostly available in production-dominated areas with
limited district heating infrastructure.
• Far offshore dedicated hydrogen plants can produce green hydrogen at a relatively
competitive price compared to onshore, however, volatile electricity markets allow
for investments in smaller electrical connection capacities to be a viable option, due
to peak opportunities.
• If a HPA of 4 EUR/kgH2 can be secured, a dedicated hydrogen production plant of
1GW wind and 1GW AEC will yield an IRR of 10.1%, under the financial conditions
Feasibility study of Power-to-X integration in future energy systems
57
==PAGE:68==
described in section 6.3.
• In a design configuration with the same hybrid plant as above and a complimentary
215MW grid connection, approximately the same IRR can be achieved in a historical
price-correlated scenario. However, with the price correlation derived from Balmorel
an IRR of more than 14% is achievable.
• To achieve a product which is competitive with fossil-based hydrogen in the near
future, subsidies are required. The announced plans for subsidy schemes can how-
ever only amount to a maximum of 0.2EUR/kgH2 in an unlikely best-case scenario,
where all the subsidies are granted to one producer.
Whether or not to invest in a hybrid Power-to-X plant is not a yes or no question. The
feasibility of such a project is determined by a lot of factors, with many being subject to
a lot of uncertainty. However, it is possible to hedge a lot of the risk by exploring market
dynamics and looking for strategies to exploit them.
58
Feasibility study of Power-to-X integration in future energy systems
==PAGE:69==
Bibliography
[1]
Anders Overvad. Hvor skal EU hente sin energi de næste år? 2022. URL: https:
//thinkeuropa.dk/brief/2022-07-hvor-skal-eu-hente-sin-energi-de-naeste-aar.
[2]
Energinet. Brints Potentiale. 2022. URL: https://energinet.dk/Brint/Brints-potentiale.
[3]
Henrik Heide. “”Vi er i gang med at sætte en Ferrarimotor i en gammel Ford Taunus”.
In: Ingeniøren (Feb. 17, 2023).
[4]
Rambøll. The rise of offshore hydrogen production at scale. URL: https://ramboll.
com/net-zero-explorers/articles/offshore-hydrogen-at-scale?utm_campaign=PTX.
[5]
Juan Gea Bermúdez et al. “Going offshore or not: Where to generate hydrogen
in future integrated energy systems?” In: (June 2021). DOI: 10 . 36227 / techrxiv .
14806647.v2. URL: https://www.techrxiv.org/articles/preprint/Going_offshore_
or_not_Where_to_generate_hydrogen_in_future_integrated_energy_systems_
/14806647.
[6]
Alessandro Singlitico, Jacob Ã˜stergaard, and Spyros Chatzivasileiadis. “Onshore,
offshore or in-turbine electrolysis? Techno-economic overview of alternative inte-
gration designs for green hydrogen production into Offshore Wind Power Hubs”. In:
Renewable and Sustainable Energy Transition 1 (2021), p. 100005. ISSN: 2667-
095X. DOI: https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . rset . 2021 . 100005. URL: https : / / www .
sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2667095X21000052.
[7]
Alex Schmitt and Huangluolun Zhou. EU Energy Outlook to 2060: how will power
prices and revenues develop. December 6, 2022. URL: https://energypost.eu/eu-
energy-outlook-to-2060-how-will-power-prices-and-revenues-develop-for-wind-solar-
gas-hydrogen-more/.
[8]
Danish Energy Agency. Baggrundsnotat om elprisfremskrivninger i Analyseforud-
sætninger til Energinet 2022 (AF22. 2022. URL: https://ens.dk/sites/ens.dk/files/
Hoeringer/baggrundsnotat_om_elprisfremskrivninger_i_analyseforudsaetninger_til_
energinet_2022.pdf.
[9]
INTERNATIONAL ENERGY AGENCY. The future of hydrogen. 2022. URL: https:
//www.iea.org/reports/the-future-of-hydrogen.
[10]
Rechargenews. Hydrogencosts. 2022. URL: https://www.rechargenews.com/energy-
transition/opinion- why- market- dynamics- will- reduce- the- average- price- of- green-
hydrogen-to-1-50-kg-by-2030/2-1-1292801.
[11]
Energinet. Offshore Wind-to-Hydrogen Sounds A Starting Gun. June 30, 2021.
URL: https://about.bnef.com/blog/offshore-wind-to-hydrogen-sounds-a-starting-
gun/.
[12]
IRENA. World Energy Transitions. 2022. URL: https : / / www . irena . org / Digital -
Report/World-Energy-Transitions-Outlook-2022#page-0.
[13]
EU Commission. The EU’s hydrogen strategy and REPowerEU plan. 2022. URL:
https://energy.ec.europa.eu/topics/energy-systems-integration/hydrogen_en.
[14]
INTERNATIONAL ENERGY AGENCY. Sufficient hydrogen available within reach
of the European Hydrogen backbone. 2022. URL: https://ehb.eu/newsitems#new-
study-sufficient-hydrogen-available-within-reach-of-the-european-hydrogen-backbone.
[15]
IRENA. Policies for green hydrogen. 2022. URL: https://www.irena.org/Energy-
Transition/Policy/Policies-for-green-hydrogen.
[16]
Danish parlament. Udvikling og fremme af brint og grønne brændstoffer (Power to
X strategi). 15. marts. 2022. URL: https://www.regeringen.dk/media/11146/aftale-
om-udvikling-og-fremme-af-brint-og-groenne-braendstoffer.pdf.
Feasibility study of Power-to-X integration in future energy systems
59
==PAGE:70==
[17]
Energistyrelsen. Power-to-X udbud. URL: https://ens.dk/ansvarsomraader/power-x-
og-groen-brint/power-x-udbud.
[18]
Rik van Rossum et al. European Hydrogen Backbone. April 2022. URL: https://
ehb.eu/files/downloads/ehb-report-220428-17h00-interactive-1.pdf.
[19]
Energinet. BRINTINFRASTRUKTUR. 2022. URL: https : / / energinet . dk / Brint /
Brintinfrastruktur.
[20]
Energistyrelsen. Muligheder og udfordringer ved indpasning af storskala PtX i det
danske elsystem. 14-12-2021. URL: https : / / ens . dk / sites / ens . dk / files / ptx /
muligheder_og_udfordringer_ved_indpasning_af_storskala_ptx_i_det_danske_
elsystem.pdf.
[21]
Renewable Energy Directive. Guarantee of origin. 2022. URL: https://lexparency.
org/eu/32018L2001/ART_19/.
[22]
Energinet. Guarantee of origin. 2022. URL: https : / / en . energinet . dk / hydrogen /
hydrogen-gos/.
[23]
Frauke Wiese et al. “Balmorel open source energy system model”. In: Energy Strat-
egy Reviews 20 (2018), pp. 26–34. ISSN: 2211-467X. DOI: https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.esr.2018.01.003. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S2211467X18300038.
[24]
Hans Ravn. Time aggregation in energy system models. . 2022.
[25]
H. Levy and Sarnat. Capital investment and financial decisions. . Prentice Hall In-
ternational (UK) Ltd., 1994.
[26]
Feasibility studies of energy projects. Lecture note 9. Basic financing considera-
tions. 2021.
[27]
Professor of Finance at the Stern School of Business at New York University Aswath
Damodaran. Risk Premiums by country. 2022. URL: https://pages.stern.nyu.edu/
~adamodar/New_Home_Page/datafile/ctryprem.html.
[28]
Energinet. Productions og forbrugstariffer. URL: https://energinet.dk/El/Elmarkedet/
Tariffer/Aktuelle-tariffer.
[29]
Energisyrelsen. Teknologikataloger. URL: https://ens.dk/service/fremskrivninger-
analyser-modeller/teknologikataloger.
[30]
Dansk Statistik. Forbrugerprisindeks. 2023. URL: https://www.dst.dk/da/Statistik/
emner/oekonomi/prisindeks/forbrugerprisindeks.
[31]
Lena Kitzing and Christoph Weber. “Support mechanisms for renewables: How risk
exposure influences investment incentives”. In: International Journal of Sustainable
Energy Planning and Management 7 (Nov. 2015), pp. 113–130. DOI: 10 . 5278 /
ijsepm.2015.7.9. URL: https://journals.aau.dk/index.php/sepm/article/view/1120.
[32]
Euractiv. Solar seen claiming up to 60% of EU power mix by 2050. 2020. URL:
https://www.euractiv.com/section/energy/news/solar-seen-claiming-60-of-eu-power-
mix-by-2050/.
[33]
IRENA. Offshore Wind Outlook 2019. 2019. URL: https://iea.blob.core.windows.net/
assets/495ab264-4ddf-4b68-b9c0-514295ff40a7/Offshore_Wind_Outlook_2019.pdf.
[34]
Tor. Power-to-X specialist. 29-12-2022.
60
Feasibility study of Power-to-X integration in future energy systems
==PAGE:71==
A
Appendix
A.1
Energy Transmission Costs
Figure A.1: Pipeline costs per capacity and distance
Figure A.2: Electrical transmission costs per capacity and distance
Feasibility study of Power-to-X integration in future energy systems
61
==PAGE:72==
Alternatives to hydrogen transportation
Figure A.3: Optimal hydrogen transport technology by size and distance
62
Feasibility study of Power-to-X integration in future energy systems
==PAGE:73==
B
Appendix
B.1
Markets forecast
Figure B.1: Coal and natural gas prices used by DEA to determine the power prices in
2030 and hydrogen price to determine the prices in 2040 and 2050 [8].
Figure B.2: CO2 tax used by DEA to determine the power price in 2030 together with fuel
prices [8]
Feasibility study of Power-to-X integration in future energy systems
63
==PAGE:74==
C
Appendix
C.1
Hourly wind and price correlation
Hourly wind / price correlation
Figure C.1: Hourly price correlation between wind energy and electricity price curves. BB
PP: Balmorel power price, NP PP: Nordpool power price - first 400 hours
64
Feasibility study of Power-to-X integration in future energy systems
==PAGE:75==
Feasibility study of Power-to-X integration in future energy systems
65
==PAGE:76==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Akademivej, Building 358
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 4800
www.man.dtu.dk
