==PAGE:1==
Master Thesis
Technical University of Denmark
Measurements and Simulation of a Cyclone
Mattias Bjarnø Jensen - S174200
Supervisors
Knud Erik Meyer
Jens Honore Walther
February 28th 2023
==PAGE:2==
Preface
This master thesis has been produced over a period of six months at the Department
of Mechanical Engineering at the Technical University of Denmark in order to fulfil the
requirements for acquiring a Master of Science degree in Mechanical Engineering. This
Master Thesis represents the work of 35 ECTS points.
Acknowledgements
First, I would like to extend my gratitude to my supervisors Knud Erik Meyer for his
incredible guidance throughout this project. Without his help, guidance and openness
when I was most lost, I would never have been able to complete this project. Furthermore,
I would like to thank him for pushing my project through when I had to wait for very
long periods of time for people to help me.
I would also like to thank Jens Honore Walther for teaching and helping me a lot with
my CFD work. Without him and his guidance I would not have been able to conduct my
simulations properly and the results of these would have been useless.
Next, I would like to thank Morten Berger Bentzen for helping me with various practical
tasks and production of small components needed to make this project possible.
A thanks should also be given to Simon Lautrup Ribergård both for keeping my mood up
with some good talks but also for helping me discussing the many things I did not think
about during my project.
A gratitude should also be shown to Benny Edelsten and Haim Abitan for helping me
with various minor tasks in the laboratory.
I would also like to thank Bettina Petersen and Finn Hansen from ABB Denmark for
helping me obtain (and gifting!) a new frequency converter that would make sure that my
experiments could continue.
Lastly, I would like to thank Aerotak for their guidance with respect to where the project
was heading and defining a problem statement. I would also like to thank them for their
help and feedback on the work I have performed.
Mattias Bjarnø Jensen, February 2023.
i
==PAGE:3==
Contents
1
Introduction
1
2
Problem Statement
1
3
How Does a Gas Cyclone Work
2
4
Review of Literature
5
5
General Physical Principles
9
5.1
Pitot-Static Tube . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
5.2
Laser Doppler Anemometry
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
5.3
CFD Models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
6
Cyclone Experiments
15
6.1
Description of Setup
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
6.2
Equipment Calibration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
6.3
Experimental Measurements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
6.4
Summary and Key Takeaways . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
7
CFD Analysis of Cyclone
36
7.1
Description of Geometry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
7.2
Mesh Convergence
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
7.3
Procedure for Running Simulations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
7.4
Findings for Cyclone Model with Inlet Attached . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
7.5
Investigation of Cyclone Flow . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
7.6
Summary and Key Takeaways . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
8
Comparison between Experiments and Simulation
51
8.1
Comparison of Pressure Drops . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
8.2
Comparison of Velocity Profiles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
8.3
Discussion of Model Choice
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
9
Conclusion & Future Work
63
A Matlab and Maple Code
I
A.1 Matlab Code for Calibration of Velocity Sensor
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
I
B Star CCM+ Physics Settings
VI
C Pressure Measurements - Experimental
X
ii
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
This thesis investigates a Van Tongeren cyclone. The thesis makes use of experiments and
computational fluid dynamics (CFD for short) with the commercial program Simcenter
StarCCM+. It focuses specifically on inlet velocities corresponding to 4, 6, 8, 10 m
s for the
experimental part and 4, 6, 8, 10, 12, 14, 16, 18, 20 m
s for the CFD part. In this thesis,
the velocity profile is investigated just below the vortex finder inlet in both the axial and
tangential direction using Laser Doppler Anenometry (LDA for short). The experiments
are compared to the results from the Reynolds Stress Equation Model (RSM for short)
from CFD and it is found that the model quite accurately predicts the velocity profile
in the region
r
R = 1 to
r
R = 0.5 and from
r
R = 0.3 to
r
R = 0.2 for the axial direction.
Furthermore, RSM accurately predicts the velocity profile for the tangential direction in
the region r
R = 0.95 to r
R = 0.6. The pressure drops between inlet and outlet of the cyclone
are compared between experiments and CFD analysis and in this case it is found that
the RSM model under-predicts the pressure drops between inlet and outlet with 40% and
between inlet and vortex finder with 34%. It is also concluded that the velocity profiles
are scale-able with the inlet velocities. Lastly, it is concluded that the cyclone sorted out
the measurement particles when the inlet velocity approximately exceeds 10 m
s . Therefore,
it was not possible to conduct measurements above this limit with the use of glucose for
seeding.
iii
==PAGE:5==
1
Introduction
This thesis is a continuation of the thesis written by T. B. Thomsen [23] and the work
done by L. Schou [19] and will describe pressure and velocity attributes of the cyclone
that has been built by the former named students. The thesis will generally cover how a
gas cyclone work. Velocity and pressure profiles will be presented from the experiments
conducted. A Computational Fluid Dynamics analysis has also been conducted on the
very same cyclone and will describe the benefits and deficiencies of using different models
for modelling a cyclone. The CFD analysis will be compared to the experiments and on
the basis of these, arguments will be presented for which model to use in a given situation.
With the help from Aerotak it was possible to define the following problem statement:
2
Problem Statement
This thesis investigates how the cyclone built by T. Thomsen and L. Schou [23, 19]
works. From this, it will be investigated how the pressure difference compares between
experimental measurements to the findings of CFD models. The project aims to determine
whether it is possible to extract velocity profiles with the use of Laser Doppler Anenometry
techniques. Lastly, the project aims to compare such velocity profiles with different
CFD models in order to determine what models, parts of models, if any, can be trusted.
Furthermore, it will be investigated what compromises are made by choosing one model
over another.
1 of 66
==PAGE:6==
3
How Does a Gas Cyclone Work
Gas cyclone separators are often used in the industry to filter particles in an efficient way.
This type of separator works very much like a centrifuge but with a continuous feed of
dirty air, meaning air (or gas) filled with particles to be separated.
Figure 3.1: Dimensioning and naming of cyclone components, from [13].
There are different types of gas cyclones. The one examined in this thesis is the standard
“reverse-flow“ cyclone, more specifically the design is called the Van Tongeren cyclone, cf.
[13]. As seen from fig. 3.1, the swirling motion, causing the rotation of the flow and the
generation of the vortex, is induced by having the inlet in such a manner that it forces
the gas to enter the inner body of the gas cyclone on a tangent. The inlet is usually of
rectangular cross section as seen in fig. 3.2. The term reverse-flow refers to the fact that
there is an outer vortex turning in one direction (for example clockwise as in fig. 3.1) that
traverses downwards and another vortex in the center that spins in the other direction
(anti-clockwise, fig. 3.1) and traverses upwards.
2 of 66
==PAGE:7==
Figure 3.2: A typical cyclone separator,
from [7]
A cyclone separator uses the principle of
inertia to remove particles from the flow.
In the middle of the cyclone, a cylindrical
tube is placed which is meant to “catch“
the inner vortex, see fig. 3.1. The lighter
particles have less inertia and are therefore
easily influenced by the vortex and follows
the flow path very well. This also means
that lighter particles are usually not filtered
out using a cyclone separator. Contrary
to this, heavier particles are no as easily
affected by the smaller inner vortex and
therefore, when reaching the bottom of the
conical section (fig. 3.2), the particles do not
follow the flow but instead they fall to the
bottom to what is usually called a particle
collection bucket.
The determination of which particles are separated and which are not is called the cut
size, x50, which is the particle diameter for which 50% of the particles are sorted, and is
described by eq. (3.1).
x50 =
s
vrCS9µDx
ρpv2
θCS
(3.1)
As given by [13, eq. 5.1] vrCS is the radial velocity through the control surface, µ is the
dynamic viscosity of the particle, Dx is the diameter of the vortex finder, ρp is the particle
matter density and vθCS is the tangential velocity through the control surface. The typical
sized particles that are separated are around 50 µm.
In this thesis, the gas cyclone used is described in [24] and [23]. The cyclone is of a type
called Van Tongeren cyclone and has characteristic dimensions of:
Name
D
Dx
S
H
H −Hc
a
b
Dd
Van Tongeren Cyclone
325
100
325
1231
436
149
67
130
Scaled Size, [23]
290
89
290
1098
389
134
60
116
Table 3.1: Van Tongeren AC dimensions, from [13, tab. 15.1] and Scaled Size, from [24,
tab. 1]
3 of 66
==PAGE:8==
The cyclone design was determined by Aerotak when it was initially built as it was the
most common for them to perform CFD calculations on at that time. Therefore, a scaled
version was built by [23] and [19] in order to conduct experiments on a Van Tongeren
cyclone. The characteristics of multiple different cyclones, including the Van Tongeren,
are described in [13, chap. 15].
4 of 66
==PAGE:9==
4
Review of Literature
Although gas cyclone separators have been used for decades, this machine is complicated
to model and measure attributes in. A general idea about how they work has been known
for a long time but the specific behaviour of them remains to be discovered. In 2002 a
book about cyclones was published, cf. [13]. This book is the foundation of this report.
In 2003 a paper was published about Laser Doppler Anenometry measurements in a gas
cyclone separator, cf. [16]. They discovered how different geometries at the base of the
cyclone could affect the flow. However, very little information about the velocity profiles
is stated.
J.J. Derksen, cf [5, 4, 6], has given his fair contribution when it comes to investigation of
gas cyclone behaviour. Derksen has, along with others, published many different articles
where Derksen simulates the flow in a cyclone and compares it to the measurements done
by [16]. [5] is one of the first papers to describe the flow using CFD methods in a cyclone.
Derksen makes use of a Lattice-Boltzmann Large Eddy Simulation to simulate the flow.
Derksen concludes how the particles form a sort of band in a spiral down, as has also been
described by [23, p. 30], and can be seen in fig. 4.1. This kind of behaviour has also been
noted by K. Jang, cf. [14, fig. 7].
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.1: (a) Formation of spirals, from [23, p. 30]. (b) Band formation in second picture
from left, from [5].
The literature also describes how different models for simulation have been tested.
5 of 66
==PAGE:10==
In 2010 G. Gronald and J.J. Derksen published an article comparing Finite Volume
Reynolds-Averaged Navier-Stokes equation (FV RANS), Finite Volume Large Eddy
Simulation (FV LES) and Lattice Boltzmann Large Eddy Simulation (LB LES) mod-
els to Laser Doppler Anenometry (LDA) measurements, see fig. 4.2, cf [10].
Figure 4.2: Different CFD models compared to measurements, from [10, fig. 15]. Uv is the
tangential velocity and Uin is the inlet velocity. z refers to the distance from the top of
the cyclone cylinder lid
They conclude that the best model for simulating the flow in a gas cyclone is the LB LES,
while the FV LES is also viable but does not produce as good results as the LB LES.
Furthermore, they conclude that the FV RANS model used does not predict the behaviour
nearly as accurate as the other two models, but can still be used to get a quick overview
of the general flow. This is backed up by other papers, [12].
Lastly, the precession and nutation of the vortex core has been investigated a lot the last
couple of years due to the lack of understanding with regard to this topic.
In a recent study conducted by P. Zhang et al [27], it is shown how the vortex core of a
gas cyclone is shifted out of the centerline of the cylindrical shape. This is called nutation.
Furthermore, they show how the vortex core oscillates in a circle around the nutated
6 of 66
==PAGE:11==
centerline. This is called vortex core precession (precession or PVC for short). This
phenomenon is illustrated by [27] in fig. 4.3.
Figure 4.3: Vortex core precession and nutation, from [27]
This phenomenon has been know for decades but has been very hard to simulate due to
the high computational power and the investigation of this has therefore been not possible
until recent years.
Prior to this thesis, both T. Thomsen and L. Schou built and investigated the behaviour
of the cyclone. They describe the iterative process of building and inventing new methods
in “Design of a Cyclone Separator Experiment - L. Schou T. Thomsen - Shared Project
Report“, cf.[24]. L. Schou has performed some pressure measurements with the previous
project and compared them to the literature in [19]. T. Thomsen has investigated the
total pressure drop for different velocities, the cut size of the built cyclone along with the
separation efficiency and finally described different (smaller) physical behaviours of the
cyclone both with the help of CFD and smoke, cf. [23].
There are very few studies that describe the velocity profiles using LDA in a cyclone. A
general description of findings for velocity profiles using LDA is described by [13, fig. 4.6].
It would therefore be essential to back up some of the measurements done previously in
order to make sure that they are correct and further extend the knowledge by contributing
with velocity profiles for different gas inlet velocities. This includes velocity profiles at
different velocities both for clean air entering the gas cyclone and also velocity profiles for
7 of 66
==PAGE:12==
gas with particles entering the cyclone. Some simulations have been done by Derksen and
others, cf. [4], but further experimental data is needed to back up their claims.
The main concern is that some velocity measurements have been conducted but it is
difficult to compare velocity profiles to that of CFD because the experimental velocity
profiles are often measured in different spots of the cyclone. While the book, [13, fig. 4.6],
explains that velocity profiles were measured at the transition from the cylinder geometry
to the cone geometry, another article [9] examines the flow in the cyclone above the vortex
finder. A third article, [8], measures the velocity profiles between the bottom the vortex
finder and the transition between the cylinder and cone. Therefore, it has been difficult to
find measurement to compare data to. Furthermore, the measurements have all been in
different positions in the cyclone and are therefore very difficult to compare.
Furthermore, it would be beneficial to have more detailed pressure measurements for
different velocities since it is known that a lot of different models suggest the pressure
drop over the cyclone, but does not accurately predict the pressure drop. This is seen in L.
Schou’s report about different models, cf. [19]. Here, some models fit for one inlet velocity
but not for another. Therefore, it would be essential to provide pressure profiles for many
different velocities and comparing them to the data of simulations. Lastly, a comparison
of different CFD models to an experimental cyclone would give a better insight in what
data is being overlooked or missed when choosing one CFD model over the other since
there are multiple variables to consider when choosing a model both due to accuracy, but
especially in terms of the cost in computational power and time.
8 of 66
==PAGE:13==
5
General Physical Principles
This section introduces the different physical phenomena that are used during this thesis.
It is meant as an overview over both the experimentally used principles and the models
used in CFD.
5.1
Pitot-Static Tube
The basic principle of the Pitot-static tube relies on the Bernoulli equation derived from
the Navier-Stokes equation. It assumes that the flow is:
• Invicid (ν = 0)
• Incompressible (ρ = const.)
• Steady flow
• Irrotational flow ω = 0
This leads to the eq. (5.1), cf. [15, eq. (4.19)]:
pi + 1
2ρv2
i + ρghi = constant on streamlines.
(5.1)
A pitot-static tube works by measuring the
difference between the static pressure at the
top of the tube. This tip should be pointing
directly towards the fluid flow as seen on
fig. 5.1. This creates a stagnation point and
as described by Bernoulli, there must be
conservation of energy and therefore, since
the velocity decreases, then the pressure
must increase, since the height of the fluid
does not change.
Figure 5.1: A pitot-static tube, from [26].
Therefore, it is possible to measure the difference in energy of the fluid by measuring the
difference in pressure of the oncoming fluid and the static pressure in the fluid. This leads
to eq. (5.2).
pt = ps + 1
2ρu2 ⇔|u| =
s
2 (pt −ps)
ρ
(5.2)
Thereby, it is possible to calculate the velocity of a fluid by measuring the difference in
pressure.
9 of 66
==PAGE:14==
5.2
Laser Doppler Anemometry
5.2
Laser Doppler Anemometry
Laser Doppler Anemometry (LDA for short) is a technique used for measuring the velocity
of a transparent or semi-transparent fluid using the Doppler shift (or Doppler frequency).
An LDA system consists of
five different components,
from [25]:
• Transmitting Optics
• Seeding Particles
• Receiving Optics
• Signal Processor
• Measurement
Volume
Figure 5.2: An LDA Setup , from [25].
The LDA technique is based on the Doppler shift phenomenon that occurs when there
is a relative motion between the source of the waves and the observer. In LDA, a laser
is used as the source of light waves and a detector is used to measure the frequency of
the waves as they are scattered by the moving particles in the fluid. The frequency of
the scattered waves is shifted due to the relative motion between the particles and the
detector and this shift is used to calculate the velocity of the particles. Usually, a laser
beam is split into two beams where one is shifted in frequency. This shift allows for the
calculation of the fluid direction. The governing equations for LDA described in eq. (5.3).
The measuring volume can be der-
ermined by the following equations:
δx =
4Fλ
πEDL sin

θ
2

(5.3a)
δy =
4Fλ
πEDL
(5.3b)
δz =
4Fλ
πEDL cos

θ
2

(5.3c)
Figure 5.3: Measurement Volume , from. [25].
Where F is the focal length, λ is the light wavelength, E is the beam expander ratio and
DL is the diameter of the laser beam. The angle of the laser beams can be calculated
using simple trigonometry. Lastly, the fringe spacing can be determined by:
δf =
λ
2 sin

θ
2

(5.4)
These equations are used later for calibration of the laser setup.
10 of 66
==PAGE:15==
5.3
CFD Models
5.3
CFD Models
Computational Fluid Dynamics is used in this thesis in order to simulate the flow of a
cyclone. Particularly, there are three different models used, namely; k −ω turbulence
model, Reynolds Stress Equation Model and Large Eddy Simulation. The following
equations are applicable for CFD
Conservation of mass:
∂ρ
∂t + ∇· (ρui) = 0
(5.5a)
Conservation of momentum for incompressible fluids:
ρDui
Dt = −∇p + ρgi + µ∇2ui
(5.5b)
Reynolds-Averaged Navier-Stokes Equation (RANS):
ρ
 ∂ui
∂t + uj
∂ui
∂xj
!
= ρgi + ∂
∂xj

σij −ρu′
iu′
j

(5.5c)
where
σij = −pδij + µ
 ∂ui
∂xj
+ ∂uj
∂xi
!
(5.5d)
is the stress on the fluid, from [22]. Here −ρu′
iu′
j refers to the Reynolds stress tensor. In
turbulence theory this is known as the closure problem referring to the fact that there
are four equations for the mean flow (conservation of mass and momentum in all three
directions) and three RANS equations, from eq. (5.5c), but ten unknowns. Since there are
more unknowns than equations, this problem has to be modelled in some way to devise
sufficient equations to the amount of unknowns. This can be done in multiple ways:
5.3.1
The k −ω model
In the simulations of the project the standard k −ω model is used. This model is known
as a “turbulence energy equation model“, cf. [22, p. 647]. This model introduces two
equations for describing the Reynolds Stresses, −ρu′
iu′
j, and thereby modelling the closure
problem. The two equations that are introduced are:
∂
∂t (ρk) + ∇(ρkv) = ∇[(µ + σkµt) + ∇k] + Pk −ρβ∗fβ∗(ωk −ω0k0) + Sk
(5.6a)
∂
∂t (ρω) + ∇(ρωv) = ∇[(µ + σωµt) + ∇ω] + Pω −ρβfβ

ω2 −ω2
0

+ Sω
(5.6b)
Where v is the mean velocity, µ is the dynamic viscosity, σk and σω are model coefficients,
Pk and Pω are production terms, fβ∗is the free-shear modification factor, fβ is the vortex-
stretching modification factor, Sk and Sω are user specified source terms and k0 and kω
are the ambient turbulence values that counteract turbulence decay. All the values for the
11 of 66
==PAGE:16==
5.3
CFD Models
model used can be seen in tab. 5.1.
Model Parameter
κ
β∗
β1
σk1
σω1
β2
σk2
σω2
a1
Value
0.41
0.09
0.075
0.85
0.5
0.0828
1
0.856
0.31
Table 5.1: Model parameters used for the k −ω model
Furthermore, it can be informed that the constitutive option is linear and the realizability
option has been set to Dublin Scale Limiter. For more information about the model,
see [20, p. 7857].
Shortcomings of Eddy-Viscosity (k−ω) models:
For flows where a strong circulation
(for example a vortex) is apparent the models performance is unsatisfactory and can be
upright wrong. These models assume isotropic turbulence, which in flows where a strong
swirl is apparent, can be wrong to assume.
5.3.2
The Reynolds Stress Equation Model
The Reynolds Stress Equation model is the most complex of the turbulent energy equation
models. This model avoids the Eddy-Viscosity assumptions and therefore, the individual
components of the Reynolds Stress tensor (cf. [22, eq. 9.4]) is calculated directly. This
model uses the exact Reynolds stress transport equation and account for the directional
effects and complex interactions in the turbulent flow. Essentially, it does not assume
isotropic turbulence, but instead an-isotropic turbulence behaviour, cf. [22]. The transport
equation is:
∂
∂t (ρR) + ∇(ρRv) = ∇D + P + G −2
3IΥM + ϕ −ρε + SR
(5.7a)
where R = −ρu′
iu′
j is the Reynolds stress tensor, and ρ is the density, D is the Reynolds
stress diffusion, P is the turbulent production, G is the buoyancy production, I is the
identity tensor, ΥM is the dilatation dissipation, ϕ is the pressure strain tensor, ε is the
turbulent dissipation rate tensor and SR is the user-specified source term. The Linear
Pressure Strain model is chosen.
ε = 2
3εI
(5.7b)
D =

µ + µt
σk

∇R
(5.7c)
where µt is calculated as
µt = ρCµ
k2
ε
(5.7d)
where k = 1
2tr(R) and tr is the trace of the Reynolds stress tensor. The production term
is calculated as
P = −ρ

R · ∇vT + ∇vR

(5.7e)
12 of 66
==PAGE:17==
5.3
CFD Models
The buoyancy term is calculated as
G = β µt
Prt

∇Tg + g∇T

(5.7f)
where Prt is the turbulent Prandtl number and T is the mean temperature.
∂
∂t (ρε) + ∇(ρεv) = ∇

µ + µt
σε

∇ε

+ ε
k

Cε1
1
2tr(P) + 1
2Cε3tr(G)

−Cε2ρε

(5.7g)
ΥM = ρCMkε
c2
(5.7h)
The model parameters can be seen in tab. 5.2.
Model Parameter
σk
σε
CM
CS
Cvarepsilon1
Cvarepsilon2
Cµ
Value
1
1.22
2
0.2
1.44
1.92
0.065536
Table 5.2: Model parameters for the Reynolds Stress Equation Model (RSM)
For more information about the model, see [20, p. 7878].
5.3.3
LES Modelling
Lastly, the LES Model is a simulation model instead of a turbulent energy model, which
means “[...] a complete time-dependent solution of the primitive Navier-Stokes equations
and the continuity equation is sought, and turbulent fluctuations (in space and time at all
scales) are resolved directly rather than being parameterised“, cf. [22, p. 657].
The basic idea behind LES is to model the effects of the unresolved scales of motion on
the resolved scales. The governing equations for LES are similar to the Navier-Stokes
equation which describe the conservation of mass, momentum and energy in a flowing
fluid. However, in LES, these equations are modified to account for the filtered flow field
and the effects of the unresolved scales on the resolved scales.
In StarCCM+ each solution variable ϕ is filtered into a value ˜ϕ and a sub-filtered ϕ′, from
[20, p. 7895].
ϕ = ˜ϕ + ϕ′
(5.8a)
where ϕ represents velocity components, pressure, energy, or species concentration. The
filtering is defined as
˜ϕ(t,x) =
Z Z Z ∞
−∞G (x −x′,∆) ϕ(t,x′)dx′
(5.8b)
Inserting the decomposed solution variables into the Navier-Stokes equations result in
equations for the filtered quantities, from [20]. The filtered mass, momentum and energy
13 of 66
==PAGE:18==
5.3
CFD Models
transport equations can be written as
∂ρ
∂t + ∇(ρ˜v) = 0
(5.8c)
∂
∂t (ρ˜v) + ∇(ρ˜v ⊗˜v) = −∇˜pI + ∇
˜T + TSGS

+ fb
(5.8d)
∂
∂t

ρ ˜E

+ ∇

ρ ˜E˜v

= −∇· ˜p˜v + ∇·
˜T + TSGS

˜v −∇˜q + fb˜v
(5.8e)
where ρ is the density, ˜v is the filtered velocity, ˜p is the filtered pressure, I is the identity
tensor, ˜T is the filtered stress tensor, fb is the resultant body force, ˜E is the filtered total
energy per unit mass and ˜q is the filtered heat flux. Here the WALE subgrid scale model
is used. For more information see [20, p. 7895-7901]. Lastly it is important to note that
LES requires a much finer grid compared to other turbulence models, for example RANS
models.
Description of forthcoming Sections
The next three sections, cf. sec. 6, 7, 8, of the thesis will describe the experiments conducted,
the CFD calculations carried out and the comparison between these respectively. In the
individual sections, the problems and the solutions found are described and discussed
either immediately or in sec. 8.
14 of 66
==PAGE:19==
6
Cyclone Experiments
This section of the thesis describes the experiments that have been conducted and how
they have been performed. This section also describes the equipment used, the calibration
of the equipment and the difficulties faced during the experiments and the calibration
process.
6.1
Description of Setup
The experimental setup for driving the cyclone consists of four main parts, namely: Fan
setup, Pipe Inlet, Cyclone and Pipe outlet. Additionally, the entire setup includes the
setup for flow meter calibration, pressure sensor calibration and the LDA system.
Figure 6.1: Sketch of experimental setup
The Fan Setup:
The fan setup consists of a Kongskilde TRL. 75 M. along with a
frequency converter from ABB, ACS580-01-12A7-4. This frequency converter is the latest
of three converters used in this experiment. The converter has been replaced, as the first
frequency converter that was bought along with the motor (as a combined package) was
found to be defect. As mentioned earlier in this thesis, this lead to a temporary change to
another borrowed frequency converter. Lastly, a new frequency converter was gifted from
ABB to the project for several reasons.
15 of 66
==PAGE:20==
6.1
Description of Setup
Figure 6.2: The Fan and Frequency Converter Setup.
The frequency converter provided both more flexibility and stability in which it was driving
the motor, however, another key factor was that the borrowed frequency converter had
to be handed back, which could lead to inconsistencies if / when further studies has to
be conducted on the basis of this project. Thus, the installment of the new frequency
converter ensures that the experimental results will not contain uncertainties with regards
to different equipment being used in the future and in this thesis.
Pipe Inlet:
The pipe inlet consists of spirally folded Lindab galvanized steel pipes1 with
a diameter of Dp = 200 mm with a reduction of Dred = 150 mm and can be seen in fig. 6.1
just after the flow meter. Furthermore, the the pipe transitions from a cylindrical to a
rectangular pipe with the following dimension b × h = 60 mm × 135 mm. The production
of the converter pipe is described in [23]. Lastly, the velocity flow meter used is a Lindab
UltraLink® Monitor FTMU and is described in sec. 6.2.1. As proposed by [23] the inlet
pipe was extended to approximately 15D. Furthermore, the inlet was configured in an
“in-plane“ solution as recommended by the supervisor. This lead to less shear of the air in
the pipe.
1Link: https://www.lindab.dk/produkter/ventilation/kanalsystemer/safe/ror/sr/?sort=popularity
&display=16&page=1
16 of 66
==PAGE:21==
6.1
Description of Setup
Cyclone:
The cyclone used in the experiments is unchanged from the description in [24].
The Cyclone can be seen in fig. 6.3.
Figure 6.3: The figure shows the cyclone setup for the experiment.
The dimensions of the cyclone investigated is given in tab. 3.1. As mentioned earlier, the
cyclone is a Van Tongeren cyclone.
Pipe Outlet:
The pipe outlet consists of a bag filter to filtrate any residue from either
particle seeding or leftover particles that were added to the cyclone but not successfully
filtrated in the cyclone. The classification of the bag filter has not been tested since the
particles used both for seeding and for filtering are not harmful and therefore, the bag
filter needs to filter as much as possible, but there are no specific requirements for it. This
could become a possibility later as future work. The bag filter can be seen on fig. 6.1. The
bag filter is described as a Coarse 95% filter from the company Camfil2 by [24].
2https://www.camfil.com/da-dk/
17 of 66
==PAGE:22==
6.1
Description of Setup
Software for Data Acquisition:
In order to convert the transducers’ signal from a
voltage difference to a physical value, a NiDAQ box (National Instruments Data Acquisition
Box) was used. The transducers are connected using a BNC cable to the NiDAQ module.
The NiDAQ is then connected to the computer using a USB cable. On the computer, the
software FlexLogger, by National Instruments, is used to convert the signal generated
from the transducers to a physical value in the software.
LDA Setup:
The LDA setup consists of five main components as described in sec. 5.2.
In this particular setup, some components are grouped together. The probe setup can be
seen in fig. 6.4.
Figure 6.4: Probe for emitting light and
detecting frequencies
The probe for measuring is attached to a
traversing system that can be controlled on
the computer. The laser and probe are at-
tached to a data processor that converts the
frequency from the detector to an electrical
signal. The data processor is then attached
to the computer, where the laser system
can be controlled. The laser power can be
adjusted from 0 W to a max of 500 mW.
The laser used to have two components for measuring both axial and tangential velocities,
but due to a defective power supply, only one laser was operating and therefore the laser
had to be turned 90◦manually in order to measure both tangential and axial velocities.
The focal length is given from the manufacturer to be F = 310 mm. The diameter of the
laser beam d = 1.35 mm. The beam expander ratio is E = 1.98. The distance between
the center of the two beams are D = 37.65 mm. The half angle was calculated to be
θ = 6.8562◦. The measurement volume is described in eq. (6.4). The laser light used had
a wavelength of λ = 488 nm. The frequency was processed by BSA processors and the
software used for interpreting the data was called BSA Flow Software from Dantec.
The measurements were taken through a cylindrical acrylic surface with the width of
w = 5 mm and the small refraction of the laser beam was not corrected for.
18 of 66
==PAGE:23==
6.2
Equipment Calibration
6.2
Equipment Calibration
6.2.1
Calibration Of Ultrasonic Velocity Sensor
In order to determine the velocity consistently a calibration of the velocity sensor has been
performed. The following equipment has been used for the calibration process:
• Ultrasonic Velocity Sensor: Lindab UltraLink® Monitor FTMU.3
• Micro Manometer: Furness Control FCO 510.4
• Pitot-Static Tube
A picture of the calibration setup for when the cyclone is connected can be seen in fig. 6.5.
Figure 6.5: The calibration setup with cyclone connected
3The datasheet for the velocity sensor can be found https://itsolution.lindab.com
/LindabWebProductsDoc/PDF/Documentation/ADS/Lindab/Technical/Technical-
FTMU.pdf.
4The micromanometer can be found https://www.bissistem.com/furness/files/fco510
-laboratuvar-tipi-akis-olcer.pdf.
19 of 66
==PAGE:24==
6.2
Equipment Calibration
Firstly, the displayed velocity from the ultrasonic velocity sensor was noted. Afterwards
the measured pressure difference, using the micromanometer, combined with eq. (5.2), was
used to calculate the velocity. Since the velocity profile in the pipe is not constant, a
weighted average of the velocity had to be performed. The measurements were taken in a
straight line from the center to the edge of the pipe. In fig. 6.6 the velocity profile and the
divided areas are shown along with the measurement points (black dots).
(a)
(b)
Figure 6.6: (a) Subareas for the divided pipe with measurement points. (b) Velocity profile
for the pipe with power fit curve, eq. (6.1)
As seen in fig. 6.6a the pipe is divided up into small disks where each velocity measurement
corresponds to the velocity in the specific area. Due to a physical limit only the middle
areas are split into half disks. This method ensures that a velocity measurement covering
a larger area (for example one at the edge of the pipe) weights more than the measurement
in the middle, which is covering a smaller area. The Matlab code used for calibration
can be found in app. A.1. It was not possible to measure the full velocity profile in the
middle of the pipe due to physical limitations of the equipment used, but it was possible to
extract most of the velocity profile (The mount for the pitot static tube could not traverse
further upwards). As seen the profile does come close to fit a power fit curve of
v
vmax
=

1 −r
R
( 1
n)
(6.1)
where n is a constant set to 7. Though it is not expected that the flow is fully developed
in the pipe since the measurements were taken about 12.5D down steam and the pipe
should be ≈50D in order to be fully developed. Furthermore the density of the air in
pipe is calculated using the absolute pressure, the temperature of the air in the pipe and
the ideal gas constant using eq. (6.2).
ρ =
p
RT
(6.2)
Where p is the pressure taken from the manometer in the laboratory and T is the
20 of 66
==PAGE:25==
6.2
Equipment Calibration
temperature of the room in kelvin. R is the ideal gas constant.
From fig. 6.6b the measurement points show that the velocity profile is close to being
symmetrical but is not completely symmetrical, probably due to the bend before the flow
meter as illustrated in fig. 6.1.
Although it was considered to do a loga-
rithmic distribution of the area in order
to obtain equal areas for all measurements,
this was deemed unnecessary since the res-
olution of the areas was limited to the size
of the pitot static tube. Furthermore, a
pitot static tube also adds a bit of averag-
ing since the area it covers correspond to
approximately 2 mm in diameter. Further
adding to the averaging is the length of the
pitot static tube of 30 cm.
Measured
Velocity
h
m
s
i
Displayed
Velocity
h
m
s
i
Difference
[%]
3.49
3.48
0.44
5.25
5.26
0.04
7.03
7.04
0.06
8.76
8.79
0.29
10.56
10.55
0.16
12.34
12.28
0.50
14.05
13.95
0.70
Table 6.1: Calibration Data
In fig. 6.7 the measured velocity with the pitot static tube and the displayed velocity by
the sensor is depicted along with the calibration data used, as tabulated in tab. 6.1.
Figure 6.7: The measured and displayed velocity
Note: The frequency in fig. 6.7 refers to the frequency set on the frequency converter, cf
sec. 6.1.
Clearly, as shown in tab. 6.1, it can be seen that the measured velocity by the pitot static
tube and the displayed velocity by the ultrasonic velocity sensor are very similar and the
difference, or deviation, is comparatively small. Though, it is also seen that the greater
the velocity the greater the difference between the two. This suggests that there is a
percentage wise difference which means that the measured and displayed values deviate by
21 of 66
==PAGE:26==
6.2
Equipment Calibration
≈0.5%, according to a mean of the data gathered. A setting was applied in the flow meter
that would take the bend into account but the documentation for how this was done was
inadequate and therefore it cannot be accounted for how this calibration setting works.
Though the measurements seem to be valid a strange phenomenon was observed while
measuring the pressure difference with a pitot static tube connected to the micro manometer.
This occurred because the calibration of the velocity sensor was done without the cyclone
coupled to the system meaning that as the air passed the velocity sensor it entered free air.
When the cyclone was then connected back up to the system again a sudden fluctuation
in the pressure could be observed, as seen in fig. 6.8.
Figure 6.8: The figure shows how the pressure fluctuates when the cyclone was connected
to the system
It seems that the pressure would fluctuate between one mean value (Area 1), but then
suddenly change to another mean value and fluctuate around the new mean value (Area
2). After a bit of time it would switch back again (Area 3). This observation would
continue for all pressure points measured, cf. fig. 6.6a. This phenomenon could not be
explained but merely observed. It is thought to have something to do with the micro
manometer used. It had, however, no impact on the reading of the velocity if the pressure
difference was averaged for approximately 120 s. Further adding to the mean effect was
that this happened independently in every point that was measured, as shown in fig. 6.6a.
Though when it was tried to reproduce and measure with the pressure sensor KP610 the
phenomenon could not be observed since the pressure difference was too small and the
uncertainty of the sensor was likewise imprecise. From rigorous testing this phenomenon
showed no presence in the readings from the flow meter since the total averaging made
22 of 66
==PAGE:27==
6.2
Equipment Calibration
this effect negligible.
6.2.2
Choice of Pressure Sensor:
Initially, a large effort was made to use the same pressure sensors as [23] and [19], but after
numerous attempts it was deemed that they were not suitable for proper measurements.
The main reason for using the same sensors as the prior students was that the measurement
would be done with the same equipment and therefore decrease the number of sources of
error. This, however, was not possible due to a number of facts. Firstly the pressure sensors
were miss-wired, where the positive and negative pins were switched. This fortunately did
not change anything, since the resistors are of the same size (in Ω). Unfortunately another
problem was occurring, which was also experienced and described by prior students in the
literature. The pressure sensors were very sensitive to any changes in the environment at
all and would pick up small movement even meters away from the sensor. It was also very
sensitive to small perturbations, either from touching the table or having to switch the
tubes that were used to measure. Lastly the pressure sensors “drifted“ in the software used.
This means that one sensor would for example slowly move its point of origin over time with
up to 100 Pa in 30 minutes. This was not unanimous for all four sensors used (which could
be explained by the atmospheric pressure changing over time), but in different directions
and with different amounts for each sensor used. Adding to the confusion was that the
pressure sensors were differential pressure sensors and should therefore not be affected
by the surrounding pressure at all. A new sensor was acquired; KP610 Differential
Pressure Sensor.5 The benefits of this sensor is that it had a very small margin of
error, while also having the correct range of differential pressure measurement, which was
described in the datasheet. Furthermore, the calibration of the pressure sensor was easy,
since it would only be necessary to define a minimum and maximum voltage difference.
The only pressure sensor in stock were the ones where the output was in milliamps and
therefore it had to be converted to a voltage difference because the available equipment
only allowed for measurement and logging of voltage difference. Again, with the help from
the laboratory technician, a resistor was added to the circuit and thereby converting the
output from a current output to a voltage output.
The sensor can measure up to 5 kPa in differential pressure. It also, as mentioned before,
has an uncertainty of 0.5% in linearity, which is backed up by measurements. Though,
testing showed that at very small differential pressure measurements the error can be up
to 5 Pa.
5The pressure sensor can be found: https://pressure-sensors.eu/pressure-sensors/differential-pressure-
sensors/pressure-sensor-kp610/
23 of 66
==PAGE:28==
6.3
Experimental Measurements
6.3
Experimental Measurements
6.3.1
Pressure Measurements
From the original design of the cyclone, cf. [24], sixteen (excluding inlet) different pressure
tabs were added to the cyclone in order to determine the differential pressure. Though a
re-modification has been done by [23] to the cyclone, meaning that pressure tab one has
been removed. Besides the fourteen pressure tabs on the cyclone body there is an inlet,
an outlet and a vortex finder pressure tab, cf [24]. The reason for placing both a pressure
tab at the vortex finder and the top was done because the literature has not been specific
about where the pressure has been measured and therefore it was necessary to make sure
that both the pressure in the vortex finder and the pressure at the top of the outlet was
measured such that the data produced is more easily comparable with the literature. The
pressure tabs have been placed as seen in fig. 6.9.
Pressure tabs 10, 11, 12, 13, 14 are placed on a line with 10 being the leftmost tab and 14
being the rightmost tab as seen in the figure. All pressure measurements are differential
pressure measurements in the thesis and is calculated as
dpi = pin −pi
(6.3)
Pressure tab one label is placed on the figure but it has been removed by [23] after some
of the measurements conducted by [23] and [19]. To make comparison between theses easy
the nomenclature was kept the same but measurements for p1 was not possible.
24 of 66
==PAGE:29==
6.3
Experimental Measurements
(a)
(b)
Figure 6.9: (a) Pressure tab placement in CFD, and (b) Pressure tab placement on physical
cyclone
The data measured can be seen in tab. 6.2.
25 of 66
==PAGE:30==
6.3
Experimental Measurements
Inlet Velocity
h
m
s
i
5.98
8.01
10.02
12.02
14.00
16.00
17.97
20.00
dptop[Pa]
287
529
864
1290
1789
2369
304
3875
dpV F [Pa]
206
381
624
940
1293
1703
2188
2781
dp1 [Pa]
%
%
%
%
%
%
%
%
dp2 [Pa]
70
128
205
306
426
589
758
953
dp3 [Pa]
49
85
139
203
283
394
503
623
dp4 [Pa]
35
65
100
152
204
291
372
446
dp5 [Pa]
22
42
61
97
125
170
238
278
dp6 [Pa]
14
30
39
69
79
110
170
179
dp7 [Pa]
12
25
32
64
66
96
146
140
dp8 [Pa]
11
23
30
59
57
77
133
126
dp9 [Pa]
10
24
31
67
70
89
146
164
dp10 [Pa]
14
29
42
77
83
111
171
183
dp11 [Pa]
22
41
61
102
122
166
231
264
dp12 [Pa]
31
58
91
141
183
243
327
400
dp13 [Pa]
39
73
113
177
233
325
432
524
dp14 [Pa]
55
102
163
248
334
448
582
732
Table 6.2: The table shows the data measured on the cyclone.
As described previously dp1 could not be measured, but to follow the nomenclature of
the previous reports, cf [23, 19, 24], it has been left in to make the data more easily
comparable. The data itself does not say much about the performance of the cyclone but
it will be analysed further later in the thesis where it will be compared to the data for the
CFD model in sec. 8.1.
Though it was straightforward to measure the pressure an odd phenomenon was discovered
in doing so. This could relate to the phenomenon described in sec. 6.2.1 and also seen in
fig. 6.8. The pressure would oscillate with around ± 40 −60% of the mean value, as can
be seen in fig. 6.10.
26 of 66
==PAGE:31==
6.3
Experimental Measurements
Figure 6.10: The figure shows the oscillations observed during the pressure measurements
for the new KP 610 sensor
As seen from the figure the pressure oscillates strongly but if a mean of the raw data signal
was done over a long enough time period the mean would not change dramatically. This
lead to the data acquisition being roughly 60 seconds in every point in order to make sure
that the mean pressure was was not affected by the fluctuating pressure. The pressure
measurements had a margin of error of ± 0.5% as was determined by meaning several
mean measurements. This lead to a very small margin of error for the pressure sensor
and this also follows what the manufacturer claims and therefore small deviations in the
pressure measurements could also be due to the margin of error in the pressure sensors
and not the measurements themselves. Though, as explained before, experiments showed
that the sensor had a minimum uncertainty of 5 Pa.
The explanation for the fluctuating motion depicted in fig. 6.10 is most probable explained
by the vortex core precession and nutation as described in [27], but this has not been
thoroughly examined and can therefore not be concluded. Though it is a very probable
cause. This was a phenomenon with all pressure tabs. The theory was further supported
by putting a wool thread through a pressure tab and observing the fluctuation of the wool,
which very well corresponded to the oscillations seen in the pressure measurements. It
was also observed that the fluctuations were affected by the Reynolds number, meaning a
higher Reynolds number resulted in a more strongly oscillation of the pressure and the
wool thread. This is also backed up by simulations conducted by [27].
Lastly it is important to note the differen having all the pressure tabs either covered with
studs (as seen in fig. 6.9b) or not. This was tested during the measuring of the pressure
27 of 66
==PAGE:32==
6.3
Experimental Measurements
and deemed to have little to no influence on the actual measurement.
6.3.2
LDA Analysis of the Cyclone
A Laser Doppler Anenometry analysis was conducted on the cyclone to extract velocity
profiles. The LDA setup used is described above in sec. 6.1. Firstly the measurement time
had to be established in order to make sure that the signal was not correlated. This was
done by taking a measurement of two minutes and then performing an auto-correlation
of the signal in order to determine that the particles were in fact not correlated at all.
This was true for all inlet velocities, Vin tested in areas where enough particles were
present. As explained later, the particles were sorted out by the cyclone and it therefore
became increasingly difficult to measure velocities as the inlet velocity was increased or
the measurement volume was moved closer to the center of the cyclone cylinder.
Next, the measurement volume had to be determined and the software had to be calibrated
for the laser. This was done by projecting the laser beam onto a sheet to determine the
angle between the two beams, as seen in fig. 5.2. This resulted in a slight change of the
beam spacing and the calculations for this can be seen in app. A.1. A sheet of paper was
used for the plane and the length between the sheet to where the two laser beams cross was
determined to be l = 2100 mm. The spacing width between the middle of the two beams
was determined to be w = 505 mm. It can be argued how accurate the measurement was,
but various different techniques were used to find lengths and they all showed the same
result within a millimeter over a distance of two meters. Therefore the margin of error was
considered negligible. The measurement volume was then, using eq. (5.3), calculated to be
δx = 0.07 mm , δy = 0.07 mm , δz = 0.6 mm
(6.4)
The measurement volume has the shape of an ellipsoid as seen in sec. 5.2. The setup was
configured to take steps of 0.5 mm in the interesting areas where rapid change was present
and between 2.5 mm to 5 mm in the areas where little to no change was experienced. This
also means in some areas the measurement volume overlapped slightly since the step size
was smaller than the measurement volume (δz). Approximately 55-70 measurement points
were taken with an interval of two minutes (and in some cases three minutes, which will
be explained later) which lead to a total experiment time of up to three hours. During the
experiment the velocity would fluctuate a bit and sometimes needed a bit of adjustment
in order to maintain the desired inlet velocity. An adjustment of ≈0.1 −0.2 Hz on the
frequency converter was sometimes made to ensure the constant inlet velocity.
The velocity profiles have been measured at x = 0 and 1.0172D, corresponding to 29.5 mm,
from the cyclone cylinder lid, for both the axial velocity, which can be seen in fig. 6.11a-
fig. 6.14a, and tangential velocity profiles, which can be seen in fig. 6.11b-fig. 6.14b.
28 of 66
==PAGE:33==
6.3
Experimental Measurements
(a)
(b)
Figure 6.11: (a) Axial, and (b) Tangential component velocity profiles for an inlet velocity
of Vin = 4 m
s
29 of 66
==PAGE:34==
6.3
Experimental Measurements
(a)
(b)
Figure 6.12: (a) Axial, and (b) Tangential velocity profiles for an inlet velocity of Vin = 6 m
s
30 of 66
==PAGE:35==
6.3
Experimental Measurements
(a)
(b)
Figure 6.13: (a) Axial, and (b) Tangential component velocity profiles for an inlet velocity
of Vin = 8 m
s
31 of 66
==PAGE:36==
6.3
Experimental Measurements
(a)
(b)
Figure 6.14: (a) Axial, and (b) Tangential component velocity profiles for an inlet velocity
of Vin = 10 m
s
All measurement have been taken 29.5 mm = 1.01724D from the top of the cyclone cylinder
lid, in the middle of the cylinder and is taken in a straight line from the circumference
to the center of the cyclone. This corresponds to a straight line horizontally from the
circumference of the cylinder to the center of the cylinder right under the bottom end of
the vortex finder.
32 of 66
==PAGE:37==
6.3
Experimental Measurements
The first thing to note is the lack of particles in the middle of the cyclone. It is very
interesting how the particles are removed from the flow, very likely, by the cyclone (since
in the very nature this is what it is designed to do). Secondly it is also important to note
that the greater the inlet velocity is the sooner the particles cannot be detected in the flow.
Again it is important to remember that by using LDA it is the particles and not the actual
flow that is measured and it is based on the crucial assumption that the particles actually
follow the flow. In this case, for different inlet velocities, this is not true for the center of
the cyclone. During multiple experiments with particles it seemed that the cut-off between
there being plenty of particles and there being no particles at all in the vortex finder was
approximately Vin = 3 m
s . The measurements have been conducted numerous times with
different settings in order to make sure that the data could be trusted. Adding to that,
the validation from the software side was observed multiple times during the experiments
and for all the velocity profiles depicted in the thesis the validity stated by the software
was very high (usually around 80%). Lastly it is interesting how the LDA technique could
detect particles in the tangential direction in more measurement points rather than the
axial direction. There is no clear explanation as to why this was the case other than pure
chance, since the lack of particles almost prevented the opportunity to extract data at
all. One key idea was that the measurement range of velocities was misconfigured in the
software but after rigorous testing this could be ruled out as the cause. In order to detect
more particles closer to the center the measurement time for each point was increased
from 2 minutes to 3 minutes at all the measurement points where there was a distinct lack
of data. This usually means from r
R = 0 to around r
R = 0.2.
Importantly, the measurements have been taken with a laser through a 5 mm thick cylinder
and therefore the laser (and the measurement volume) is slightly skewed by this fact.
It has not been calculated how large of an impact this has had on the measurements.
Furthermore, all the measurement points are an averaged value of all the individual
velocity values measured in the measuring time and in that measurement volume. These
values have not been weighted according to their transit time through the measurement
volume and are therefore biased due to more faster moving particles passing through the
measurement volume than slower particles in the total measurement time. In order to
calculate the true averaged velocity it should be calculated as
vmean =
P viTTi
TTtot
(6.5)
where vmean is the true mean velocity, vi is the i’th velocity measurement, TTi is the i’th
transit time (or the transit time of vi) and TTtot is the total transit time for all particles
moving through the measurement volume. It was tested whether it was necessary to
calculate the true averaged velocity but noted that it did not have a significant impact
since the true averaged velocity and the non-weighted average velocity were almost similar.
This would also have been a very tedious manual task to conduct, that could not be
33 of 66
==PAGE:38==
6.3
Experimental Measurements
automated easily due to software restrictions.
In order to check if the velocity profiles change with changing Reynolds number, all the
measured velocity profiles have been depicted in fig. 6.15.
(a)
(b)
Figure 6.15: (a) Axial, and (b) Tangential experimental velocity component profile
comparison
34 of 66
==PAGE:39==
6.4
Summary and Key Takeaways
From fig. 6.15 it can be seen that a change in inlet velocity, hence change in Reynolds
number, does not change the velocity profile, which is quite interesting since there is no
mention of this in the literature. This has not been thoroughly tested and should be
further investigated at multiple points throughout the cyclone, but in general it is possible
to scale the velocity profiles close to the vortex finder. Though the velocity profiles are very
similar to the velocity profiles from [13, fig. 3.1]. But it is important to note the difference
close to the center for the axial measurements, where Hoffmann expects a gradual increase
the measurements for the cyclone investigated here shows a large increase in velocity from
r
R ≈0.4 to r
R ≈0.2. Furthermore, Hoffman expects the axial velocity to decrease to a bit
above zero, but never dive into the negative, which is seen for the four meter per second
measurement. Though it is important to note that this is merely one measurement and
is not backed up by more data other than that for the tangential measurements, which
do look like they are comparable and scale-able for different inlet velocities. Therefore, it
is difficult to decisively conclude that this is the behaviour of the cyclone. It is also not
specified exactly where the velocity profile is extracted by Hoffmann and therefore it is
difficult to precisely compare the two.
6.4
Summary and Key Takeaways
It has been shown what interesting phenomena the author came across during the cali-
bration processes and measuring operation. From the experiments it was also possible to
measure pressures for different inlet velocities specified by Aerotak which will be presented
later. It was possible to measure most of the velocity profiles close to the vortex finder
(1.01724D from top of cyclone). Lastly it is seen that the velocity profile looks as if it is
scale-able linearly with the inlet velocity.
35 of 66
==PAGE:40==
7
CFD Analysis of Cyclone
The former student, cf [23], did not complete a CFD study of the cyclone that was designed.
Therefore, it was interesting to continue the study and find out whether the conclusions
from the previous study was indeed correct. Additionally, it would be interesting to
compare CFD data with experimental data from different models in order to find out
what the different models can and cannot predict. In essence, it is interesting to see what
compromises are made when choosing one model over the other and whether the results
given from the CFD analysis are even correct. This will also be discussed in sec. 8.
7.1
Description of Geometry
First, the idea was to draw the entire cyclone both with the inlet and the outlet. The two
geometries that have been investigated are depicted in fig. 7.1.
(a)
(b)
Figure 7.1: (a) Large geometry, and (b) small geometry investigated
The initial geometry was designed in CAD by [23]. From fig. 7.1a, only the inlet was added.
First, the idea was to investigate the entire cyclone with the inlet and the outlet in CFD
but it was too computationally extensive to simulate the entire flow of the cyclone and
therefore this approach was discontinued after some time.
7.2
Mesh Convergence
A mesh convergence study was conducted on both geometries in order to determine the
largest mesh size that was deemed good enough to resolve the cyclone and the inlet.
7.2.1
Procedure for Mesh Convergence
Even though two mesh convergence studies were conducted and both were different, the
procedure for both are the same. First, a number of prism layers were set with a defined
mesh size. Then, after convergence was obtained (or transient state is obtained in this
case), the Wall Y+ histogram was examined for the entire geometry. If all values are
either between 20-300 or all values are close to or under one, the amount of prism layers
36 of 66
==PAGE:41==
7.2
Mesh Convergence
has been determined. If not, the amount of prism layers are changed and the model is
rerun until it fulfils the requirement for the Wall Y+ histogram. The Wall Y+ histograms
for both mesh convergences can be seen in fig. 7.2. After the amount of prism layers are
determined the absolute size (thickness) of the prism layers were fixed and the base size of
the mesh was changed by approximately 20% and the simulation was rerun until the same
convergence or transient motion was observed in multiple cases.
Figure 7.2: Wall Y+ histograms for both the mesh convergence cases
The Wall Y+ is calculated as stated in eq. (7.1).
y+ = yuf
ν
, uf =
sτw
ρ
(7.1)
where y+ is a dimensionless distance from the wall, uf is the friction velocity, ν is the
kinematic viscosity and ρ is the density and τw is the wall shear stress from [22, eq. (3.12)
and (3.15)].
7.2.2
Mesh Convergence of Cyclone with Inlet Geometry
While the procedure of a mesh convergence is the same for both geometries, the larger of
the two was more difficult to conduct due to the size and the complexity of the geometry.
The mesh generated can be seen in fig. 7.3.
37 of 66
==PAGE:42==
7.2
Mesh Convergence
Figure 7.3: The figure shows the mesh generated for the large geometry shown in fig. 7.1a
As seen from fig. 7.3 more areas have refined meshes. These include the bends on the
inlet, the contractions on the pipe before the inlet of the cyclone, the cyclone itself and
the outlet. Most interestingly was the bends and the contraction and had therefore been
refined to approximately 50% of the base size of the mesh.
7.2.3
Mesh Convergence of Cyclone
After the investigation of the first model was completed, the second model was then put
through the same procedure for mesh convergence. The mesh generated can be seen in
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 7.4: (a) Mesh for the entire small model, and (b) Refined mesh around bottom of
vortex finder, and (c) refined mesh around top of votex finder and transition to outlet
38 of 66
==PAGE:43==
7.3
Procedure for Running Simulations
In fig. 7.4b the size of the cells are reduced to 25% of the base size mesh. In fig. 7.4c the
size of the cells are reduced to 20% of the base size mesh. These values were chosen on
the basis of knowledge from previous courses and experience. They were later rigorously
tested to determine whether they should be adjusted or not. It was concluded that they
led to a more stable solution and were therefore kept. The chosen areas for increased
resolution are based on recommendations from the literature, prior reports and experience.
7.3
Procedure for Running Simulations
Both simulations model procedures were conducted in the same manor. First, the simulation
mesh would be generated. Then, the simulation would be run for 10.000 iterations as a
steady solution in order to develop or initiate the flow in the cyclone. This was done based
on the experience gathered with only running the simulation using a transient solver. It
was found out that this process would take way too long to initiate the flow and time would
be saved by using a steady solver during the initiation of the flow. After a discussion with
Aerotak it was discovered that they handled the initiation of cyclone simulations in the
same way. It was later discovered that it would save approximately 15% of computational
time using this method.
After the initialisation of the flow (the 10.000 iterations) the model could then be changed
from steady state to transient flow. Additionally, the Adaptive Time Step model add-on
is used to make sure that the Courant number stays below a set value. The Courant
number is calculated using
C = U∆t
∆h
(7.2)
where U is the velocity through the cell, ∆t is the time step, C is the Courant number
and h is the height of the cell. First, the maximum Courant number was set to 25 with
a mean value of 3 until the flow had settled. Then, it was changed to a maximum of
1 with a mean value of 0.5 in order to check for changes in the flow with the changing
Courant number. As a general rule of thumb the Courant number should not exceed 5
and therefore the simulations had to be checked with a lower Courant number in order to
determine if it had any impact on the result.
7.4
Findings for Cyclone Model with Inlet Attached
Instead of dismissing the work of the first, and larger, model completely it was decided to
investigate the inlet, which was also mentioned by [23] to be a potential problem due to
the lack of pipe length before the inlet of the cyclone. It is known that the velocity profile
in the pipe is not fully developed but it is interesting to see whether the velocity profile
is developed enough or if any vortices are generated as the air propagates through the
inlet pipe. This was a phenomenon that was to be avoided due to the way the pipes were
configured (in-plane), as described in sec. 6.1. The findings, however, were quite conclusive.
39 of 66
==PAGE:44==
7.4
Findings for Cyclone Model with Inlet Attached
The vortex generated by the two 90◦bends had decayed before the flow entered the cyclone
and also before the flow meter. This can be seen in fig. 7.5a where a vortex is present at
the 9.84D marking.
(a)
(b)
Figure 7.5: (a) Cross-section of the flow in the inlet pipe. A vortex is being generated
at 9.84D upstream from the inlet of the cyclone. The model used is k −ω with linear
constitutive option, and (b) Velocity profiles of the cross sectional flow and the developing
flow. D = 290 mm and is the cyclone cylinder diameter as specified in tab. 3.1. R = 100 mm
is the inlet pipe radius and is specified in sec. 6.1 (as diameter Dp)
From fig. 7.5 it is seen how a vortex is generated just after the bend at 9.84D. The figures
show how the flow develops and that the vortex just after the bend has little to no effect
after the flow has propagated through the inlet pipe. The Flow meter is situated at 4.33D.
Multiple constitutive options were tested but yielded either the same result or no result
at all. The inlet was then removed from the CFD calculations without losing too much
information of the flow upstream of the cyclone. A comparison between the calibration
data from the flow meter, cf. sec. 6.2.1, and the CFD model is shown in fig. 7.6.
40 of 66
==PAGE:45==
7.5
Investigation of Cyclone Flow
Figure 7.6: Comparison between experimental data and CFD model
From fig. 7.6 it evidently shows that the two velocity profiles do not match up very well
at the top half. At the bottom half it seem as if the measurement points and the CFD
points are much more similar. This merely adds to the conclusion that the velocity profile
in the pipe is not fully developed.
7.5
Investigation of Cyclone Flow
After an investigation of the inlet flow, the flow in the cyclone was examined. All simulations
are run as transient Reynolds Stress Equation Model (RSM for short) simulations. The
inlet velocity of the cyclone has been set to 4, 6, 8, 10, 12, 14, 16, 18, 20 m
s respectively.
For the representation of the flow the 10 m
s simulation has been chosen, since the flow does
not change dramatically with change of inlet velocity. The reason for why the specific
velocities were chosen was that Aerotak wished to have the respective velocities examined,
but due to physical limits of the system it was not possible to examine the higher velocities
in the experimental part. Therefore the cyclone has been simulated both with the wanted
velocities from Aerotak and the velocities which were possible in the experimental setup.
The figures presented are instantaneous snapshots of the motion in the cyclone. It was
tested whether meaning the flow had a significant impact but it was considered that the
vortex core precession (or other factors) did not affect the general flow characteristics
described by the CFD model.
41 of 66
==PAGE:46==
7.5
Investigation of Cyclone Flow
7.5.1
Model Comparison
For the much smaller cyclone model, cf fig. 7.1b, three different models have been compared,
namely k −ω, RSM and LES. From the literature it is known that LES should be the
best model to predict the flow in the cyclone since it does not parameterise the turbulent
fluctuations but rather resolves them, meaning it directly solves the large eddies. This
also means that LES requires a much finer mesh than the two other models tested, cf [3].
Flow in Cyclone:
It is interesting to observe the flow of the cyclone as predicted by
the different solvers. Firstly, the flow for the RSM solver is shown in fig. 7.8. Keep in
mind that the flow is transient and if the literature is true, cf [27], the core of the vortex
is precessing and is also nutated. This means that this is an instantaneous picture of an
oscillating motion. Though the general flow does not change too much over the course of
the oscillation. From the developers of Star-CCM+ it is known that the k −ω model is
not capable of simulating strong swirling flow, which is also confirmed by simulation. This
behavior can be seen in fig. 7.7.
42 of 66
==PAGE:47==
7.5
Investigation of Cyclone Flow
(a)
(b)
Figure 7.7: (a) Cross section at center of cyclone, and (b) horizontal planes with streamline.
Both figures use the k −ω solver for Vin = 10 m
s . “Velocity“ refers to the magnitude of the
velocity vector
From the figure it is clearly seen how the k −ω model is not able to properly model
the swirling behavior of the flow in the cyclone. Therefore the k −ω model is merely
used for flow initialisation, as described in sec. 7.3. This leaves the RSM model ideal for
fast computational time but the risk of losing information due to the assumptions the
model makes. This is going to be investigated both in this section and compared to the
experimental results in sec. 8. This stands in the clear contrast to the RSM model, as seen
in fig. 7.8.
43 of 66
==PAGE:48==
7.5
Investigation of Cyclone Flow
(a)
(b)
Figure 7.8: (a) Cross sectional flow as predicted by the RSM solver, and (b) Horizontal
planes with streamlines. “Velocity“ refers to the magnitude of the velocity vector
From fig. 7.8 it can be clearly seen how the model much better predicts the general behavior
of the cyclone, according to the literature. It is also seen, by following the streamlines, that
the swirling motion is caught by the RSM model, which very likely is because an-isotropic
turbulence is assumed, rather than the isotropic turbulence in the k −ω model.
In fig. 7.8 it is seen how the flow has a tendency to swirl upwards and creating the inner
vortex as expected. Though, close to and in the vortex finder the swirling motion of the
flow is not as present as expected from the literature. This shows how the RSM model
merely predicts the flow adequately in the vortex finder but quite well predicts the flow in
the cyclone in general. This claim will be backed up later in sec. 8.
From the literature it is known that the LES solver is the most accurate to predict the
flow in a strong swirling flow. Though, the simulation had run for over one month it never
44 of 66
==PAGE:49==
7.5
Investigation of Cyclone Flow
finished due to limited computational power. For comparison, it took about a week to
run an RSM simulation and showing quite a bit of the oscillating motion. The oscillating
motion of the pressures is depicted in fig. 7.9.
Figure 7.9: Pressure Oscillations as predicted by the RSM model. Pressures are from the
Vin = 4 m
s
During the project it was not possible to run and complete the LES simulation due to the
extensive computational time and cost. Even though the simulation never completed to a
point where the oscillating motion had decreased enough and the oscillating motion was
oscillating around a steady mean, the flow could still show the difference between the LES
simulation and the other models. The flow predicted by the LES can be seen in fig. 7.10.
45 of 66
==PAGE:50==
7.5
Investigation of Cyclone Flow
(a)
(b)
Figure 7.10: (a) Cross sectional flow as predicted by the LES solver, and (b) Horizontal
planes with streamlines. “Velocity“ refers to the magnitude of the velocity vector
From the figure it is seen that the LES model predicts way more vortices in the flow inside
the core of the cyclone as the swirling motion is caught in the simulation. This is especially
illustrated in the vortex finder and the top of the vortex finder where the vortex is broken
up. It is illustrated how the flow swirls upwards in a spiralling motion as shown both on
the horizontal sectional view and the vertical. On the horizontal view it is shown by the
vector arrows pointing upwards and at an angle with respect to vertical. The velocity
is also significantly higher than the velocity predicted by the RSM solver. The lack of
streamlines on fig. 7.10b also clearly shows that the simulation has not finished.
46 of 66
==PAGE:51==
7.5
Investigation of Cyclone Flow
7.5.2
Velocity Profiles
In order to show the drastic change of the velocity profile between 1.069D and 0.9828D
six tangential velocity profiles are examined and compared. The six velocity profiles’
placement are shown in fig. 7.11.
Figure 7.11: Velocity profile placement in Cyclone simulation
Here the horizontal lines are where the velocity profiles for the cyclone are extracted
from CFD (RSM model). They are placed at the center of the cyclone (x = 0) and are
parallel with the z-axis. This also corresponds to the velocity profiles extracted in the
LDA experiments conducted. 1D corresponds to the bottom of the vortex finder. This
parameter is also named S, cf. tab. 3.1.
The velocity profile is changing dramatically in the transition to the vortex finder. This is
illustrated in fig. 7.12.
47 of 66
==PAGE:52==
7.5
Investigation of Cyclone Flow
(a)
(b)
Figure 7.12: (a) Upper, and (b) lower tangential velocity profiles from fig. 7.11 for inlet
velocity of Vin = 6 m
s at six different heights
As seen the velocity profile changes dramatically with a small variation of the height.
This is found to be the same for all RSM simulations run. It is particularly interesting to
mention the drastic change of the velocity profile that occurs from 1.0345D to 1.0172D,
which corresponds to a change of 5 mm in height in this particular model. It is a very
drastic change and clearly shows how the tangential velocity profile changes rapidly close
to the inlet of the vortex finder in the cyclone. This is also interesting for the comparison
48 of 66
==PAGE:53==
7.5
Investigation of Cyclone Flow
between the experimental and simulated velocity profiles and will be commented on later
in sec. 8.
The velocity profiles for all the different RSM simulations are collected in one figure in
order to see if any difference or trend can be seen. The velocity profile probe is placed at
the same height (1.0172D) as the height that the experiments were conducted and can be
seen in fig. 7.13.
(a)
(b)
Figure 7.13: (a) Axial, and (b) Tangential velocity profile at vortex finder inlet (1.0172D)
for all velocities simulated with RSM
From the velocity profiles it is clear to see that there is a general tendency of agreement in
the model for all simulated inlet velocities, but also with small deviations. It is interesting
though, that the change in velocity close to the vortex finder on the right side is dramatically
49 of 66
==PAGE:54==
7.6
Summary and Key Takeaways
higher than the change in tangential velocity at the left side of the vortex finder.
7.5.3
Comparison to Previous CFD Calculations
The former student of this project, cf. [23], conducted a CFD analysis of the cyclone. The
author found that the cyclone could be simulated with a steady state simulation, but
argued that this was a vague representation of the flow at best. By changing the model
from steady state to unsteady the author experienced little to no change in the flow. This
seems peculiar since a simulation of a cyclone in the literature is usually simulated using
an unsteady solver due to the large fluctuations caused by the strong swirling flow in the
cyclone. It is generally believed that the best way to simulate a cyclone in CFD is to
initialise the flow using a steady solver and then switch to an unsteady solver after the flow
has been initialised. This is also the procedure followed in this thesis. This claim is also
backed up by the literature and Aerotak. This, however, was also done by the author but
what seems peculiar is that for one; the simulation converges in the cyclone using a steady
solver, and for two; the simulation also converges using an unsteady solver. When trying
to repeat the simulation the flow always became unsteady and would never converge as
experienced in [23, fig. 5.4]. The author also comments on this and and mentions that the
simulations should not be trusted blindly and should be re-tested thoroughly.
Another interesting element from the previous CFD study is that the pressure changes with
change of mesh size. After thorough testing this seems to be due to the mesh convergence
not being properly conducted. From the simulations done in this thesis it clearly showed
that the pressure increased with decrease of mesh size (more cells) until a certain point
where it leveled off and the change in pressure with change in mesh size was minimal to
negligible.
Findings of pressure in the simulations are discussed later in sec. 8.
7.6
Summary and Key Takeaways
From the models tested it is seen that the k −ω model cannot accurately model the flow
in a cyclone. This, however, might not be the case if the Reynolds number is sufficiently
small, but then it would diminish the key principle of the cyclone by not being able to
sort particles. It is shown how the RSM model quite accurately predicts the flow in a
cyclone, but the model also has some flaws and drawbacks, which will be discussed in the
next section. It is seen how the LES model is very different to that of the other models.
Lastly, it is seen how rapid the velocity profile changes as a function of distance from the
top of the cyclone cylinder. It is seen how different velocity profiles normalised modelled
the same place compare very well with different inlet velocities, except for one.
50 of 66
==PAGE:55==
8
Comparison between Experiments and Simulation
In this section of the report the gathered data from the experiments, cf. sec. 6, and the
CFD models, cf. sec. 7, are compared. Both velocity profiles and pressures are compared
between experimental data and CFD simulations. The different CFD models are also
compared and commented on.
8.1
Comparison of Pressure Drops
The pressures from the experiments, as shown in tab. 6.2, and the pressure measurements
from the CFD calculations are being compared at all points for multiple different velocities.
All results for the comparison of the pressure drops are shown in tab. C.1 in app. C.
The experimental results are illustrated in fig. 8.1.
Figure 8.1: Normalised pressure difference between pin and pi, cf eq. (6.3), for all inlet
velocities tested
The pressure points are placed as shown in fig. 6.9.
For three chosen cases the normalised pressures have been compared in fig. 8.2
51 of 66
==PAGE:56==
8.1
Comparison of Pressure Drops
Figure 8.2: Normalised pressure difference between pin and pi, cf eq. (6.3), for three inlet
velocities and comparison to that of the CFD model
It is interesting to see that the difference between the minimum and maximum tested inlet
velocities result in quite a difference in normalised pressures. From the velocity profiles it
is known that these scale quite well with the change in inlet velocity, but it seems that
this is not the case for the pressure.
The percentual discrepancy between the experiments and the RSM CFD model is shown
in fig. 8.3.
52 of 66
==PAGE:57==
8.1
Comparison of Pressure Drops
Figure 8.3: Pressure discrepancies between RSM model and test for all pressure tabs
and the mean of each discrepancy is shown in tab. 8.1
dptop
dpV F
dp2
dp3
dp4
dp5
dp6
dp7
dp8
dp9
dp10
dp11
dp12
dp13
dp14
Percentage-wise
Discrepancy
41.14
33.99
26.21
18.68
27.62
10.94
10.64
8.07
14.41
21.78
24.25
46.62
46.95
38.31
3.47
Table 8.1: Mean discrepancy for all pressure tab comparisons between test and RSM model
From fig. 8.3 it is seen how the model deviates from the pressure measurements. Both
the data from the experiment and the RSM simulation are time averaged due to the
fluctuations in pressure. These are very likely due to vortex core precession, as described by
[27], but needs further investigation as commented on earlier. The mean of all the data is
in tab. 8.1. It is curious to see that the pressure difference measured and simulated at dptop
is very different. For all simulations it deviates from the experiments by 41% on average.
One reason for the large deviations from experiment to CFD could be the miss placement
of the pressure probe in CFD. The pressure probes are placed very carefully in order to
make sure that the readings are done in the same place both for the experiment and for
the CFD. This has been checked several times with the physical cyclone but had resulted
in the conclusion of a proper probe placement. Furthermore, small amounts of nudging of
the pressure probes placement in CFD were performed with the same conclusion. This
must therefore mean that there is a large disagreement between the RSM model and the
experimental results in some of the pressure points.
Another range of pressure probes that showed a large deviation from the measured pressure
are the dp10 −dp13, which shows pressure deviations up to 50%. When looking at fig. 7.8
53 of 66
==PAGE:58==
8.2
Comparison of Velocity Profiles
it can be seen that the RSM model’s prediction performance at the top of the cyclone (lid,
not vortex finder) differs from what is expected and this could result in the deviation in
the pressure difference measurements.
From the comparison data, cf. tab. C.1, it is interesting to see how well the pressure
difference in the vortex finder (dpV F) compares with a deviation of 30% when the pressure
difference in the top (dptop) is 40%. Again, by looking at fig. 7.8 it can be seen how the
flow moves in a straight line vertically instead of spiralling upwards, as was predicted by
the LES model, cf fig. 7.10.
From fig. 8.2 it is interesting that the RSM model under-predicts the pressure by approxi-
mately 40% at the top and 30% in the vortex finder, compared to the test results. After
the fact, it quite accurately predicts the pressure at the wall of the cyclone but then for
the top pressure tabs, cf. dp10-dp14 the model over-predicts the pressure. Though with a
much smaller margin of error as the under-prediction.
Lastly it is found that the pressures measured in [19] matches very well with the inlet
pressures measured in this thesis. It is also seen that the same “parabolic“ behaviour
observed in fig. 8.1 and fig. 8.7 are also observed by [19, fig. 5.8]. After the change in
pressure sensors and the discovery of the faults of the previous sensor, it can be argued
that it was a good idea to check if the measurements performed by previous students were
still valid, which indeed they were.
8.2
Comparison of Velocity Profiles
Since it has been possible to measure velocity profiles for the velocities 4, 6, 8, 10 m
s and
run the simulation for RSM for the velocities it is possible to compare the velocity profiles
from the experiments and the CFD calculations. The comparison of the velocity profiles
can be seen in fig. 8.4-8.6.
54 of 66
==PAGE:59==
8.2
Comparison of Velocity Profiles
(a)
(b)
Figure 8.4: Velocity profiles components for (a) Axial Vin = 4 m
s , (b) Tangential Vin = 4 m
s
55 of 66
==PAGE:60==
8.2
Comparison of Velocity Profiles
(c)
(d)
Figure 8.4: Velocity profiles components for (c) Axial Vin = 6 m
s , (d) Tangential Vin = 6 m
s
56 of 66
==PAGE:61==
8.2
Comparison of Velocity Profiles
(a)
(b)
Figure 8.5: Velocity profiles components for (a) Axial Vin = 8 m
s , (b) Tangential Vin = 8 m
s
57 of 66
==PAGE:62==
8.2
Comparison of Velocity Profiles
(a)
(b)
Figure 8.6: Velocity profiles components for (a) Axial Vin = 10 m
s , (b) Tangential Vin = 10 m
s
From the tangential velocity profiles multiple things are interesting to look at. First of
all it is interesting to look at the boundary layer for
r
R ≈1. Here it is seen that the
RSM model predicts a steep decrease in velocity due to the no-slip condition. Due to the
steep angle this suggests a turbulent boundary layer. From that, it is also seen that the
experimental data show no evidence of a boundary layer. This is very likely due to the
small size of the boundary layer. In the CFD calculations the boundary had to be resolved
in a 0.1 −0.2 mm whereas in the experiment a measurement length (volume) is determined
58 of 66
==PAGE:63==
8.2
Comparison of Velocity Profiles
to be δz = 0.6 mm, cf. eq. (6.4). This also means that the resolution of the boundary in
the experiments were not as accurate since the entire boundary layer is resolved in one
single measurement. This is thought to be the probable cause for the missing boundary
layer. It was tried to move the laser more gradually, with increments of 0.1 mm instead
of 0.5 mm, but resulted in the same data point or even readings of the wall, which was
producing “bad data“. The problem of not being able to properly resolve the boundary
layer occurred in both the axial and the tangential direction, from fig. 8.6.
Another interesting observation from the tangential velocity profiles is the dip and rise of
velocity seen roughly at
r
R = 0.25 −0.45, which is predicted by the RSM model but in
fact the velocity profile (as seen from the experimental results) does not dip and keeps
rising until about r
R = 0.2 where it dramatically drops. The drop-off point does not really
change with change in inlet velocity but it is seen that the lack of data in Vin = 8 m
s and
especially in Vin = 10 m
s prevents the further conclusion. This trend of the tangential
velocity profile is backed up by [13, fig. 3.1].
For the axial velocity profiles it is interesting to see how the outer region is also fairly
accurately predicted by the model in the outer region. Furthermore it is also seen that
the dip in velocity around r
R = 0.35 that is predicted by the model is not present in the
experimental results. Interestingly, the model predicts the steep increase in velocity at
around r
R = 0.3 but then fails to predict the decrease in velocity at r
R = 0.2.
For the left-most part of all the figures it is very difficult to say anything because it was
only possible to get enough measurement points for Vin = 4 m
s . After looking at results it
would have been interesting to conduct an experiment with lower inlet velocity since, it
from fig. 6.15, is seen that the velocity profiles are comparatively easily scale-able.
To summarise the RSM model prediction the model’s velocity profiles can be trusted
around the outer region spanning from r
R = 1 down to r
R = 0.5. Furthermore, the model
can be trusted from r
R = 0.3 down to r
R = 0.2, as seen in fig. 8.6. This should be scale-able
to other dimensions of the cyclone but it has not been tested.
Lastly, a comparison between the unfinished LES simulation, the RSM simulation and the
experiments has been conducted in order to see how well the LES model has predicted the
velocity profile. This can be seen in fig. 8.7.
59 of 66
==PAGE:64==
8.2
Comparison of Velocity Profiles
(a)
(b)
Figure 8.7: (a) Axial, and (b) Tangential velocity profile comparisons with simulation
Vin = 20 m
s . Data is measured as described by fig. 7.11 at 1.01724D from the lid of the
cyclone
From the figure it can be seen how the LES model predicts a much larger velocity. This is
also backed up by the pressure drop predicted by the LES model. It shows a much greater
pressure drop over dpin −dptop. Though the results are inconclusive due to the fact that
the simulation has not finished. Therefore it is not known whether the results are of any
use at all and will only be commented on and not concluded on. From the literature it is
60 of 66
==PAGE:65==
8.3
Discussion of Model Choice
known that the LES model should be the best model to accurately predict the flow in the
cyclone, but due to the enormous computational time this could not be tested thoroughly
within the time limit of this thesis.
8.3
Discussion of Model Choice
The k −ω model is compared to that of the RSM model and the LES model in order to
determine flaws and show why the k −ω model is not a good choice for simulations where
a strong swirling flow is present. The flow can be seen in fig. 8.8.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 8.8: (a) k −ω model, and (b) RSM model, and (c) LES model. “Velocity“ refers to
the magnitude of the velocity vector
From the figures it is seen how the k −ω model hardly predicts any swirling motion in the
cyclone and merely predicts that the flow is travelling almost straight downwards in the
outer region of the cylinder and cone, and then travels almost straight back up again in the
vortex core. This backs up the assumption and the literature which explains that the k −ω
is model not able to predict heavy swirling flow properly. It does, however, not confirm
that the flow predicted by the RSM is correct or incorrect. But a simple comparison
between the pressure measurements of the RSM model, dpin −dptop, it predicts the flow
much better than the k −ω model does. The k −ω model even predicts the pressure
61 of 66
==PAGE:66==
8.3
Discussion of Model Choice
difference at the dptop lower than the pressure difference at the dpV F, which according to
the experiments makes no sense and implicates that the k −ω model is quite inaccurate.
From the experience shared by Aerotak it was also concluded that the RSM model was
the best for giving fairly accurate results within a reasonable time frame. It is not known
for sure that the LES model would predict the flow or the pressure drops more accurately
than the RSM model since it never finished, but it is described in the literature that it
should, cf. [5, 4]. Though given the computational power and time it takes to run an LES
simulation it can be understood why the RSM model was chosen, if an adequate solution
is sought and not the most accurate solution.
From fig. 8.8c (LES model) it is seen in the vortex finder that the flow is swirling and not
only moving vertically as in the vortex finder in fig. 8.8b. It is also shown that the two
models do not at all agree on the prediction of breaking up the flow at the top of the
vortex finder, as described and shown in fig. 7.8 and 7.10.
From the arrows marked on fig. 8.8b it would be interesting to investigate whether these
vortices would explain the band formation noticed by [23] and was described in sec. 4
and shown in fig. 4.1. The vortices that are simulated by the RSM model could be the
reason for why these “bands“are formed. This has, however, not been tested and should
be thoroughly tested before any conclusions can be made.
Key Results for the RSM Model Choice:
When choosing the RSM model over
other, perhaps, more accurate models it is seen from the figures, cf. fig. 8.6, that the
velocity profile can, to some extend, be trusted to be modeled accurately. The regions
for axial velocity profiles,
r
R = 0.5 to
r
R = 1 and,
r
R = 0.2 to
r
R = 0.3 seem to be valid
according to the figure. For the tangential velocity the region
r
R = 0.6 to
r
R = 0.95 has
also been verified to match the experimental velocity profile measured. More importantly,
these velocity profiles are also backed up by the general velocity profiles described in [13,
fig. 3.1], though with slight deviations especially noticed for the axial velocity profile.
It is also known that the pressure drop over the entire cyclone is consistently under-predicted
by approximately 40% with the use of the RSM model (dpin −dptop). Furthermore,
the pressure difference between the inlet and the vortex finder is under-predicted by
approximately 34%. For the pressure difference along the side of the cyclone the the
deviations are between 10 −25%. Most of the pressure drops at the top of the cyclone
cylinder are way over-predicted by up to 50%.
If it is a question about computational time, and not necessarily accuracy, then the RSM
model a good choice since it quite accurately predicts the pressures (with a scaling) and
the velocity profile at the vortex finder.
62 of 66
==PAGE:67==
9
Conclusion & Future Work
From the experimental measurements it was possible to measure the pressure profile of
the cyclone for different velocities. It was also possible to measure velocity profiles for the
axial and the tangential direction just under the vortex finder (at 1.0172D) from the top
of the cyclone cylinder. It was also seen that the velocity profiles looked as if they were
scale-able for different inlet velocities. From the velocity profiles it was concluded that
the lack of particles to measure made it impossible to measure inlet velocities higher than
Vin > 10 m
s . It was concluded that this was very likely due to the particles being sorted
out by the cyclone since this is what the machine is supposed to do. It is proposed that
the future work for this topic should be to use a different type of seeding, for example oil
drops. This was not tried since it required quite a large modification of the setup.
From the CFD calculations it was concluded that the velocity profile of the inlet was
clearly not fully developed but the vortex that was created close to the second bend in the
experimental setup had dissolved before reaching the flow meter. This made sure that
the accuracy of the readings from the flow meter was quite high, about ± 0.5%. After
the fact, different models were used to try and model the flow inside the cyclone. It was
concluded that the flow predicted by the k −ω model was not accurate and could not be
used to give an accurate prediction of the flow inside the cyclone. It was believed that the
Reynolds Stress Equation Model (RSM) gave quite a good prediction on the flow inside
the cyclone and even catching the vortex core precession and nutation which was believed
to be there according to the experiments conducted. It was seen how radical the velocity
profile changed with very small changes in vertical height close to the vortex finder inlet.
It was also seen that the model scaled the inlet velocity quite well according to the figures.
Lastly it was noted that the LES solver should, according to literature, be much better at
predicting the flow inside the cyclone. Though this was not the case for the LES conducted
with this thesis because it never finished running, due to time constraints.
From the comparison of the pressures from the measurements and the RSM model it was
seen that the pressures varied a lot and especially the difference between the inlet and the
outlet was interesting. It was found that the RSM model quite consistently under-predicted
the pressure difference between the inlet and the outlet by 40% and the pressure difference
between the inlet and the vortex finder by 34%.
From the comparison between experimental velocity profiles and the ones extracted in
CFD using the RSM model (at 1.0172D from cylinder top and at x = 0) it was found that
the axial regions were accurately predicted from r
R = 0.5 to r
R = 1 and also from r
R = 0.2
to r
R = 0.3. For the tangential velocity profile the region r
R = 0.6 to r
R = 0.95 was found
to be valid. It was concluded that the boundary layer could not be properly resolved by
the LDA technique due to the measurement volume being too large.
63 of 66
==PAGE:68==
For future work it would be interesting to investigate the validity of an LES simulation on
the cyclone and the comparison of this to the pressure measurements conducted and the
velocity profiles measured. It would also be interesting to investigate whether the arrows
pointing at vortex edges in fig. 8.8b correspond to the “band formation“ described by [23].
It would furthermore be interesting to investigate the vortex core precession and compare
the findings from the pressure signal to [27].
64 of 66
==PAGE:69==
References
References
[1] H.-E. Albrecht. Laser doppler and phase doppler measurement techniques. Springer,
2003.
[2] I. B. Celik, Z. N. Cehreli, and I. Yavuz. Index of resolution quality for large eddy
simulations. Journal of Fluids Engineering, Transactions of the Asme, 127(5):949–958,
2005.
[3] L. Davidson. Large eddy simulations: How to evaluate resolution. International
Journal of Heat and Fluid Flow, 30(5):1016–1025, 2009.
[4] J. Derksen.
Simulation of mass-loading effects in gas-solid cyclone separators.
Engineering Turbulence Modelling and Experiments 6, pages 929–938, 2005.
[5] J. J. Derksen. Separation performance predictions of a stairmand high-efficiency
cyclone. Aiche Journal, 49(6):1359–1371, 2003.
[6] J. J. Derksen, H. E. Van Den Akker, and S. Sundaresan. Two-way coupled large-eddy
simulations of the gas-solid flow in cyclone separators. Aiche Journal, 54(4):872–885,
2008.
[7] E. Education. Cyclone seperator picture, 2023. Last accessed 11 February 2023.
[8] F. M. Erdal and S. A. Shirazi. Local velocity measurements and computational fluid
dynamics (cfd) simulations of swirling flow in a cylindrical cyclone separator. Journal
of Energy Resources Technology, Transactions of the Asme, 126(4):326–333, 2004.
[9] A. Gorton-Hülgerth, J. Woisetschläger, G. Wigley, and G. Staudinger. Investigation of
the flow field in the upper part of a cyclone with laser and phase doppler anemometry.
Particle and Particle Systems Characterization, 17(1):21–27, 2000.
[10] G. Gronald and J. J. Derksen. Simulating turbulent swirling flow in a gas cyclone: A
comparison of various modeling approaches. Powder Technology, 205(1-3):160–171,
2011.
[11] C. S. Hemmingsen, K. M. Ingvorsen, S. Mayer, and J. H. Walther. Les and urans
simulations of the swirling flow in a dynamic model of a uniflow-scavenged cylinder.
International Journal of Heat and Fluid Flow, 62:213–223, 2016.
[12] A. J. Hoekstra, J. J. Derksen, and H. E. Van Den Akker. An experimental and
numerical study of turbulent swirling flow in gas cyclones. Chemical Engineering
Science, 54(13-14):2055–2065, 1999.
[13] A. C. Hoffmann and L. E. Stein. Gas cyclones and swirl tubes : principles, design
and operation. Springer, 2002.
65 of 66
==PAGE:70==
References
[14] K. Jang, G. G. Lee, and K. Y. Huh. Evaluation of the turbulence models for gas flow
and particle transport in urans and les of a cyclone separator. Computers and Fluids,
172:274–283, 2018.
[15] P. K. Kundu, I. M. Cohen, and D. R. Dowling. Fluid mechanics: Sixth edition.
Elsevier, 2015.
[16] S. Obermair, J. Woisetschläger, and G. Staudinger. Investigation of the flow pattern
in different dust outlet geometries of a gas cyclone by laser doppler anemometry.
Powder Technology, 138(2-3):239–251, 2003.
[17] J. C. Ong, M. Zhang, M. S. Jensen, and J. H. Walther. Large eddy simulation of soot
formation in ducted fuel injection configuration. Fuel, 313:122735, 2022.
[18] P. Pechmanee, A. Namkanisorn, S. Wattananusorn, and E. Bumrungthaichaichan.
Cfd simulations of high efficiency gas cyclones: An influence of dustbin geometry.
Computer Aided Chemical Engineering, 50:529–534, 2021.
[19] L. M. Schou. Experimental investigation of flow in a gas cyclone. Bachelor thesis for
cyclone project at DTU, Department of Mechanical Engineering, 2021.
[20] Siemens. Siemens simcenter starccm+ user manual version 2021.2. delivered with
StarCCM+, 2021.
[21] Signalprocessing.com. Functioning principles of pulsed doppler ultrasound, 2022. Last
accessed 17 December 2022.
[22] B. M. Sumer and D. R. Fuhrman.
Turbulence in coastal and civil engineering.
Advanced Series on Ocean Engineering, 51:1–758, 2020.
[23] T. B. Thomsen. Experimental investigation of a cyclone seperator. Master’s thesis,
Technical University of Denmark, Department of Mechanical Engineering, 2021.
[24] T. B. Thomsen and L. M. Schou. Design of a cyclone seperator experiment. Technical
Report 1, Department of Mechanical Engineering, 2021. A technical note for the
creation and data sampling of cyclone built by the respective authors.
[25] C. Velte. Laser doppler anemometry / velocimetry. DTU Course: 41822 Experimental
Fluid Mechanics, 2021.
[26] A. Viquerat. Pitot static tube concept. https://www.researchgate.net/figure/Pitot-
Static-Tube-Concept_fig2_261178925.
[27] P. Zhang, G. Chen, W. Wang, G. Zhang, and H. Wang. Analysis of the nutation and
precession of the vortex core and the influence of operating parameters in a cyclone
separator. Chinese Journal of Chemical Engineering, 46:1–10, 2022.
66 of 66
==PAGE:71==
A
Matlab and Maple Code
A.1
Matlab Code for Calibration of Velocity Sensor
1
clear; close all; clc;
2
% Define the
distance
from
center of tube
3
distanceFromCenter = [5 ,10 ,20 ,30 ,40 ,50 ,60 ,70 ,80 ,85 ,90 ,95 ,100] -2.5;%[mm]
4
5
% Define the
velocity at that
point
6
velocity = repelem (3.478 , length( distanceFromCenter )); % [m/s]
7
8
% Pa (difference
pressure)
9
pressures =
[8.4 ,8.65 ,8.65 ,8.65 ,8.65 ,8.45 ,8.4 ,7.9 ,7.05 ,6.4 ,5.9 ,4.9 ,3.85];
10
11
temperature = [22.75 ,22.73 ,22.74 ,22.74 ,22.76 ,22.76 ,22.78 ,22.79 ,...
12
22.79 ,22.78 ,22.82 ,22.82 ,22.84];
13
% this
vector
needs to be the same
length as velocity
and
distance
from
center
14
15
roomPressure = 99795 -60; % Pa
16
17
%%% --- Calculations
--- %%%
18
rho = getDryDensity(temperature ,roomPressure);
19
areas = CalcAreas( distanceFromCenter (1: length(velocity)));
20
21
% Calculate
velocities:
22
calculatedVelocities = zeros (1, length(pressures));
23
for i=1: length(pressures)
24
calculatedVelocities (i)= sqrt (2* pressures(i)/rho(i));
25
end
26
weightedVelocity = ( calculatedVelocities *areas ’)/sum(areas);
27
28
% Printouts:
29
disp ([’The
Weighted
Velocity is ’,num2str( weightedVelocity ),’ m/s’])
30
disp ([’The Mean
Measured
Velocity is ’,num2str(mean(velocity)),’ m/s’])
31
disp ([’The total
difference is ’,num2str(abs(weightedVelocity -mean(
velocity))),’ m/s’])
32
33
% Function
Definitions
34
function
areas = CalcAreas(x)
35
totlength = length (2: length(x) -1);
36
areas = zeros (1, totlength);
37
for i=2: length(x) -1
38
xlarge = x(i)+(x(i+1)-x(i))/2;
39
xsmall = x(i) -(x(i)-x(i-1))/2;
40
currentArea = pi*( xlarge ^2- xsmall ^2);
41
areas(i-1) = currentArea;
Appendix I of XI
A
Matlab and Maple Code
==PAGE:72==
42
end
43
startArea = pi*(x(1) ^2+(x(2) -(x(2)-x(1))/2) ^2);
44
endArea = pi*(x(end)^2-(x(end -1)+(x(end)-x(end -1))/2) ^2);
45
46
areas = [startArea ,areas ,endArea ];
47
end
48
49
% density of dry air
50
function
returnDryDensity = getDryDensity(temp ,press)
51
R = 287.05;
52
returnDryDensity = zeros (1, length(temp));
53
for i=1: length(temp)
54
returnDryDensity (i) = press /(R*( temp(i)+273.15));
55
end
56
end
57
58
% Interpolating
density
from
temperature
59
function
returnDensity = getDensity(temp)
60
temps = [5 ,10 ,15 ,20 ,25 ,30 ,40];
61
rhos = [1.268 ,1.246 ,1.225 ,1.204 ,1.184 ,1.164 ,1.127];
62
returnDensity = zeros (1, length(temp));
63
64
for i=1: length(temp)
65
returnDensity(i) = interp1(temps ,rhos ,temp(i),’spline ’);
66
end
67
end
Along with the matlab code presented here there is also the matlab code for generating
plots and various calculations in the digital appendix held by Knud Erik Meyer.
Appendix II of XI
A
Matlab and Maple Code
==PAGE:73==
> 
> 
> 
> 
> 
> 
restart
Maple Calculations for LDA
Appendix III of XI
A
Matlab and Maple Code
==PAGE:74==
> 
> 
> 
> 
(3)
(3)
> 
> 
(2)
(2)
> 
> 
(1)
(1)
> 
> 
> 
> 
restart;
lambda:=488*Unit(nm)
488 nm
E:=1.98:
F1:=310*Unit(mm):
F2:=0*Unit(mm):
d:=1.35*Unit(mm):
F:=(310)*Unit(mm);
F
310 mm
theta:=2*arctan((505/2)/2100):
'theta'=evalf(%)*180/Pi:
beamExpanderDiameter:=convert(2*evalf(solve(tan(theta/2)=x/F)),
units,mm):
'beamExpanderDiameter'=beamExpanderDiameter;
beamDiamter:=beamExpanderDiameter/E:
'beamDiameter'=beamDiamter;
'halfAngle'=evalf((theta/2)*180/Pi)*Unit(deg);
beamExpanderDiameter = 74.54761904 mm
beamDiameter = 37.65031265 mm
halfAngle = 6.856221229 arcdeg
delta__z:=convert(simplify(4*F*lambda/(Pi*E*d*sin(theta/2))),units,
mm);
delta__y:=convert(simplify(4*F*lambda/(Pi*E*d)),units,mm);
delta__x:=convert(simplify(4*F*lambda/(Pi*E*d*cos(theta/2))),units,
Appendix IV of XI
A
Matlab and Maple Code
==PAGE:75==
> 
> 
> 
> 
> 
> 
(10)
(10)
(4)
(4)
(5)
(5)
> 
> 
(6)
(6)
> 
> 
> 
> 
(8)
(8)
(7)
(7)
(9)
(9)
mm)
z
0.6036253252 mm
y
0.07205973748 mm
x
0.07257875933 mm
delta__f:=convert(evalf(lambda/2/sin(theta/2)),units,um)
f
2.043923340 m
Faktor er den gamle delta_f divideret med ny delta_f.
N__f:=8*F*tan(theta/2)/(Pi*E*d)
Nf
36.08226542
L:=362*Unit(cm)
L
362 cm
delta__f_measure:=2.54/20*Unit(cm)
f_measure
0.1270000000 cm
M:=evalf(simplify(-L/4/Unit(mm)))
M
905.
delta__f_calc=convert(delta__f_measure/905,units,mm)
f_calc = 0.001403314917 mm
Appendix V of XI
A
Matlab and Maple Code
==PAGE:76==
B
Star CCM+ Physics Settings
Steady State Solver
• Three Dimensional
• Gas
– ρ = 1.184 15 kg
m3, µ = 1.855 08 × 10−5 Pa · s
• Segregated flow
• Steady
• Turbulent
• Reynolds-Averaged Navier-Stokes
• K-Omega turbulence
• SST (Menter) K-Omega
• Wall Distance
• All y+ Wall Treatment
• Solution Interpolation
• Constant Density
Appendix VI of XI
B
Star CCM+ Physics Settings
==PAGE:77==
Transient K-Omega Solver
• Three Dimensional
• Gas
– ρ = 1.184 15 kg
m3, µ = 1.855 08 × 10−5 Pa · s
• Segregated flow
• Gradients
• Constant Density
• Turbulent
• Implicit Unsteady
• Adaptive Time-step
• Reynolds-Averaged Navier-Stokes
• K-Omega turbulence
• SST (Menter) K-Omega
• Wall Distance
• All y+ Wall Treatment
Appendix VII of XI
B
Star CCM+ Physics Settings
==PAGE:78==
Transient Reynolds Stress Equation Model Solver
• Three Dimensional
• Gas
– ρ = 1.184 15 kg
m3, µ = 1.855 08 × 10−5 Pa · s
• Segregated flow
• Gradients
• Constant Density
• Turbulent
• Implicit Unsteady
• Adaptive Time-step
• Reynolds-Averaged Navier-Stokes
• Reynolds Stress Turbulence
• Linear Pressure Strain
• Wall Distance
• High y+ Wall Treatment
Appendix VIII of XI
B
Star CCM+ Physics Settings
==PAGE:79==
Transient Large Eddy Simulation Solver
• Three Dimensional
• Gas
– ρ = 1.184 15 kg
m3, µ = 1.855 08 × 10−5 Pa · s
• Segregated flow
• Gradients
• Constant Density
• Turbulent
• Implicit Unsteady
• Adaptive Time-step
• Large Eddy Simulation
• WALE Subgrid Scale
– Cw = 0.544, Ct = 3.5, κ = 0.41, Limit Length Scales is Enabled
• Wall Distance
• All y+ Wall Treatment
• Solution Interpolation
Appendix IX of XI
B
Star CCM+ Physics Settings
==PAGE:80==
C
Pressure Measurements - Experimental
Method
Inlet
Velocity
[m/s]
dptop
dpV F
dp2
dp3
dp4
dp5
dp6
dp7
dp8
dp9
dp10
dp11
dp12
dp13
dp14
RNS [Pa]
6
185
142
51
39
25
20
17
12
14
10
20
33
47
55
56
Test [Pa]
5.98
287
206
70
49
36
22
14
12
11
10
14
22
31
39
55
Difference [Pa]
0.33
102
3
19
11
10
1
3
0
2
1
6
11
16
16
0
Percentual
Discrepancy
0
55
45
38
28
41
7
16
2
18
8
30
34
34
29
1
(a) Pressure comparison data for Vin = 6 m
s
Method
Inlet
Velocity
[m/s]
dptop
dpV F
dp2
dp3
dp4
dp5
dp6
dp7
dp8
dp9
dp10
dp11
dp12
dp13
dp14
RNS [Pa]
8.00
338
277
96
73
50
36
32
26
25
18
36
61
88
106
104
Test [Pa]
8.01
530
382
128
86
65
42
30
25
23
24
29
41
58
73
102
Difference [Pa]
0.01
192
105
32
13
15
5
2
0
2
6
7
20
31
33
2
Percentual
Discrepancy
0.15
36
27
25
15
23
13
8
2
7
25
24
50
54
44
2
(b) Pressure comparison data for Vin = 8 m
s
Method
Inlet
Velocity
[m/s]
dptop
dpV F
dp2
dp3
dp4
dp5
dp6
dp7
dp8
dp9
dp10
dp11
dp12
dp13
dp14
RNS [Pa]
10.00
538
435
156
116
78
57
51
40
40
28
58
98
143
174
173
Test [Pa]
10.02
865
625
206
139
100
61
39
32
30
31
42
61
91
113
163
Difference [Pa]
0.02
327
190
50
23
22
4
11
8
10
3
16
37
52
61
10
Percentual
Discrepancy
0.20
38
30
24
16
22
6
29
25
33
11
39
61
58
54
6
(c) Pressure comparison data for Vin = 10 m
s
Method
Inlet
Velocity
[m/s]
dptop
dpV F
dp2
dp3
dp4
dp5
dp6
dp7
dp8
dp9
dp10
dp11
dp12
dp13
dp14
RNS [Pa]
12.00
778
625
232
173
114
81
73
58
57
40
85
145
214
262
262
Test [Pa]
12.02
1291
940
306
204
152
97
69
64
59
67
77
102
141
177
248
Difference [Pa]
0.02
512
315
74
31
37
16
3
6
2
27
7
43
73
85
14
Percentual
Discrepancy
0.17
40
34
24
15
25
16
5
10
3
40
9
42
52
48
5
(d) Pressure comparison data for Vin = 12 m
s
Appendix X of XI
C
Pressure Measurements - Experimental
==PAGE:81==
Method
Inlet
Velocity
[m/s]
dptop
dpV F
dp2
dp3
dp4
dp5
dp6
dp7
dp8
dp9
dp10
dp11
dp12
dp13
dp14
RNS [Pa]
14.00
1079
850
328
237
153
111
93
71
80
54
112
184
265
319
324
Test [Pa]
14.00
1790
1293
427
283
204
125
79
66
57
70
83
122
183
233
334
Difference [Pa]
0.00
711
443
99
46
51
14
13
6
23
16
29
62
83
85
10
Percentual
Discrepancy
0.00
40
34
23
16
25
11
17
9
40
23
35
51
45
37
3
(e) Pressure comparison data for Vin = 14 m
s
Method
Inlet
Velocity
[m/s]
dptop
dpV F
dp2
dp3
dp4
dp5
dp6
dp7
dp8
dp9
dp10
dp11
dp12
dp13
dp14
RNS [Pa]
16.00
1427
1115
436
310
200
152
119
81
101
70
147
242
347
417
431
Test [Pa]
16.00
2369
1704
590
395
291
170
110
96
77
89
111
166
242
325
448
Difference [Pa]
0.00
942
589
153
85
91
18
9
15
24
19
36
76
105
91
18
Percentual
Discrepancy
0.00
40
35
26
21
31
10
8
16
31
21
32
46
43
28
4
(f) Pressure comparison data for Vin = 16 m
s
Method
Inlet
Velocity
[m/s]
dptop
dpV F
dp2
dp3
dp4
dp5
dp6
dp7
dp8
dp9
dp10
dp11
dp12
dp13
dp14
RNS [Pa]
18.00
1798
1450
566
400
260
200
158
126
127
90
196
338
505
628
637
Test [Pa]
17.97
3045
2189
759
504
373
238
170
146
133
146
171
231
327
432
582
Difference [Pa]
0.03
1248
739
193
104
113
38
12
19
6
55
25
107
178
196
55
Percentual
Discrepancy
0.17
41
34
25
21
30
16
7
13
5
38
15
46
55
45
9
(g) Pressure comparison data for Vin = 18 m
s
Method
Inlet
Velocity
[m/s]
dptop
dpV F
dp2
dp3
dp4
dp5
dp6
dp7
dp8
dp9
dp10
dp11
dp12
dp13
dp14
RNS [Pa]
20
2242
1800
707
502
324
244
197
125
157
110
234
390
562
680
703
Test [Pa]
20.00
3876
2781
953
623
446
278
179
140
126
164
182
264
400
524
732
Difference [Pa]
0.00
1634
981
246
121
122
35
18
14
31
55
52
125
163
156
29
Percentual
Discrepancy
0.00
42
35
26
19
27
12
10
10
25
33
28
47
41
30
4
(h) Pressure comparison data for Vin = 20 m
s
dptop
dpV F
dp2
dp3
dp4
dp5
dp6
dp7
dp8
dp9
dp10
dp11
dp12
dp13
dp14
Percentage-wise
Discrepancy
41
34
26
19
28
11
11
8
14
22
24
47
47
38
3
(i) Mean value of percentage-wise discrepancy for all inlet velocities
Table C.1: The table shows the pressure differences along with the percentage-wise
discrepancy between all points and all velocities measured and simulated
Appendix XI of XI
C
Pressure Measurements - Experimental
