==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Master thesis
A Software-Defined based Approach for Mobile In-
ternet of Things
Andres Work (s174128)
Daniel Borisov (s205723)
Niels Georg Vendelø (s147193)
Kongens Lyngby 2023
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Technical University of Denmark
Matematiktorvet
Building 303B
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:2==
Preface
This Mater’s thesis was prepared at the Department of Applied Mathematics and
Computer Science at the Technical University of Denmark in fulfilment of the re-
quirements for acquiring an MSc Eng degree in Computer Science and Engineering.
Kongens Lyngby, April 19, 2023
Andres Work (s174128)
Daniel Borisov (s205723)
Niels Georg Vendelø (s147193)
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
With the increasing amount of IoT devices deployed in society on all levels for increas-
ingly customized functions, a way of developing applications and networking schemes.
Traditional hardware defined approaches remain stale and vendor specific, while pro-
tocols such as IPv6 routing protocol for low-power and lossy networks (RPL) have
not been designed to address these applications. The development of IoT devices
into wearable devices such as smart watches and sensors demands that networking
protocols continue to evolve to meet the demands of these devices. A new network-
ing scheme has recently been proposed, and offers the possibility of lower power
consumption, ease of deployment, centralized control, offering programability to net-
works without the need to change the hardware configuration that traditionally has
kept networking development stale due to the integration of control and data plane.
This approach labeled Software defined networking, has seen rising interest in wire-
less sensor networking, as the properties of this approach are highly desirable in IoT
networks.
In this project we investigate the properties of software defined networking for
wireless sensor networks, for mobile internet of things. We explore the time slotted
channel hopping MAC protocol defined in [1] and its properties to reduce collision
in network communication. Then We present a SDWSN-Controller featuring a pre-
diction algorithm to determine the movement of a mobile IoT device, and use this
information to calculate network routing and a contention-free time division schedule.
Finally we present and discuss our results and future work directions for our project.
==PAGE:4==
Contents
Preface
b
Summary
c
Contents
d
1
Introduction
1
1.0.1
Contribution
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Background
3
2.1
Wireless Sensor Networks
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.1.1
Characteristics, Constraints and design challenges
. . . . . . .
6
2.1.2
Control and Data planes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.1.3
Software Defined Networking . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.1.4
Medium Access Control (MAC) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
2.1.5
Frames
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
2.1.6
Time Slotted Channel Hopping - A summary . . . . . . . . . .
44
2.1.7
Synchronization
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
2.2
Contiki-NG . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
3
Related Work
49
4
Methodology
54
4.1
research questions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
4.2
search strategy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
5
(SDA-MIoT)
57
5.1
Initial project state . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
5.2
Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
5.3
Implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
5.3.1
Implementation - Summarized
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
77
6
Test and results
78
6.0.1
Mobile Node and overall Network evaluation
. . . . . . . . . .
81
==PAGE:5==
Contents
e
7
Discussion
95
8
Future Work
97
9
Conclusion
98
10 Glossary
99
A Appendix A: MacLinkTable
102
B Appendix B: MAC PIB Attributed
104
C Appendix C: full SCAN primitive, Beacon Request
106
D Appendix 4: PANDescriptor
107
Bibliography
109
==PAGE:6==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
The Internet of Things in the past few years became part of our lives in every sin-
gle aspect. They change our lives rapidly, allowing us to use them more and more
in different applications. Owners of smartphones, tablets, watches and a number of
other devices, get direct and instant access to information ranging from the current
weather forecast to the latest development in space travel technology
Not only do they ease out lives, but allow us to be innovative and further develop our
technologies, for home or business. They can be used for environmental monitoring,
predictive maintenance of equipment, military surveillance, etc., to collect data in
real-time. This trend is forecast to expand rapidly in the next coming decades.
An interesting part of the IoT devices is the low-powered, low-resource products,
and the flexibility they provide. Although they are limited in computing power, their
ability to be programmed for any application weighs more that their processing and
power limitation, and sure not to forget their usually small size.
Those types of devices became even bigger with the improvement of the Wireless
networks and in particular the Low-powered Wireless Sensor Networks.
The Wireless sensor networks allow connecting huge amount of small battery-powered
sensors which are addressed as Modes. The modes have either centralised control unit
or a decentralised which is responsible for most of the decisions that should be taken
from the modes. And that leads us to the Software-defined wireless sensor networks,
in which those modes resent sensors that are programmable and can be reconfigured
to adapt to changes in the network.
The benefit of having such networks is the easiness of changing the topologies and
the mobility in it, where mobility represents the network topology change caused by
network devices already in the network, changing position. Another benefit is the
centralised control, meaning less devices for programming in the network to perform
their tasks, as well as no hardware configuration changes are needed. Some of the
advantages over the traditional WSN are scalability and adaptability.
However, there are some challenges in designing and developing such networks, in
order to ensure eﬀicient operation:
==PAGE:7==
1 Introduction
2
Reliability in the network relies mostly on the controller, due to the fact he is the
one managing the network. If the controller fails or its design has flaws, the entire
network can be affected leading to either the network being down or to loss of data.
Even though scalability is considered a plus, SDWSN needs to be able to scale in
order to face network changes, which are not rare. However, the centralized control
unit can become the bottleneck of the network.
Given the fact, sensor nodes are mostly battery-powered and have limited energy
resources that may cause energy consumption issues. Therefore, reducing energy con-
sumption is critical to prolonging the network lifetime. However, the use of software-
defined networking (SDN) can increase energy consumption due to the additional
overhead of network management and control.
Addressing these challenges is critical to ensuring the effective and eﬀicient opera-
tion of SDWSNs. A lot of researchers are actively working on developing solutions
to these challenges, including energy-eﬀicient network management and control algo-
rithms. There is work for done for example over mobility nodes joining in TSCH
Networks, which is one of the main issues. The time required for a device to join
a TSCH network is unpredictable and theoretically has no upper limit. The joining
process to a TSCH network can take several minutes in some cases which can ensue
in significant delay and power overheads [2].
In our project, we will mostly address the Reliability issues, by proposing an Al-
gorithm which will predict the most optimal connection link for the mobile node with
a static node. As well as designing a TSCH-based algorithm for contention-free sched-
uler.
1.0.1
Contribution
All authors have participated in the coding, discussions, and reading of all sections.
The table below shows the author’s main responsibilities for each section/subsection.
Responsible
Sections
Code
Andreas
1, 2.1.0.1, 2.1.3, 2.1.4, 2.1.7, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8,9
✓
Daniel
1, 2.1.0.2, 2.1.2, 2.1.4, 2.1.5, 2.2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9
✓
Georg
1, 2.1.0.3, 2.1.1, 2.1.2, 2.1.3, 2.1.4, 2.1.5, 2.1.6, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9
✓
Table 1.1: Contribution table.
==PAGE:8==
CHAPTER 2
Background
2.1
Wireless Sensor Networks
To understand and develop protocols for wireless network communication we must
first understand the basics of Wireless Sensor Networks and outline the different
challenges associated with designing and controlling their communications scheme.
2.1.0.1
WSN
A Wireless Sensor Network (WSN) is a network focused on enabling connectivity
without the need for wires to connect to sensors, actuators or other entities in the
network [3]. These networks consist of a large number of low-cost, low-power, multi-
functional sensor nodes, deployed in an area of interest to the application they are
set up to monitor activity in [4]. While being small, the nodes are equipped with
sensors, embedded microprocessors and radio transceivers. This allows the devices to
measure whatever their design is specified for, as well as process and communicate
that information further, usually to a single node.
This single node is referred to as a sink node. A sink node can be seen as a leader or
base station, which the notes are transmitting its gathered information to [5] [3].
The sensors and the sink nodes communicate over small distances due to the
limited capabilities of the sensors, to achieve a common goal.
A WSN application can be put into two categories. Remote tracking and remote
monitoring, which then further can be divided into outdoor and indoor. [3] e.g. illus-
trates how these are used in the military as surveillance, which could be monitoring
friendly forces and tracking enemy movements.
However, even though WSN is used in different applications, it still has some chal-
lenges. The sensors are often very small and have therefore limited energy resources,
as they are battery-powered. Furthermore, because of their size, they have limited
processing and storage capabilities. As the WSN often has to support many nodes,
it is good to ensure that the network can handle these requirements [6].
Another interesting challenge comes from the medium used in WSN for communica-
tion between the nodes. As we know in traditional wired networks each node has
its dedicated individual interface - e.g copper wire - towards the connected nodes.
Whereas, in the wireless network the medium is one, the radio waves. Having that
==PAGE:9==
2.1 Wireless Sensor Networks
4
unified communication interface leads to nodes ”fighting” for their right of transmis-
sion, leading to collisions and problems with delivery rates empty citation
2.1.0.2
PAN / WPAN - FFD RFD
These networks deployed to fulfil a certain task are often referred to as Personal
Area Network (PAN) or Wireless Personal Area Network (WPAN). Formally, a low-
rate PAN or WPAN is defined as a Low-Rate Wireless Personal Area Network (LR-
WPAN) is a simple, low-cost communication network that allows wireless connectivity
in applications with limited power and relaxed throughput requirements [1].
The
IEEE standard [1] defines 2 general types of devices for WSN: A Full-Function Device
(FFD) and a Reduced-Function Device (RFD). A FFD is a device that is capable of
implementing a full-function IEEE stack network stack, enabling it to serve as a
PAN coordinator [3]. A RFD is a device that implements a minimal IEEE stack,
which makes it incapable of serving as a coordinator. It is therefore better suited to
monitor its specific application area and convey its readings to the FFD. An RFD can
communicate with FFDs and RFDs, but due to the RFDs limited implementation,
it is not capable of sending beacon frames or advanced activities to enable network
establishment. It is possible for RFDs to transmit messages received from other RFDs
to the FFD. These qualities make RFDs suited for simple monitoring or limited
functions like a light switching or keeping infrared lights running.
They have no
need to transmit large packets. The advantage of FFDs is that they can run more
complicated code since they implement the application layer. This also means that
FFDs are the only devices that can serve as the PAN Coordinators and sink nodes
in the network.
2.1.0.3
Topologies of a PAN network
The IEEE standard [1] defines two different topologies for PANs: The Star topology
and the Peer-to-Peer Topology. Both topologies consist of a combination of FFD
and RFD, and a single device operating as the main controller of the network. This
device is referred to as the PAN coordinator. The PAN coordinator is responsible for
network coordination and will often be powered by wired electricity, meaning that it
usually has no concerns about energy consumption, although this is not a requirement.
Within either topology, each device will be assigned a unique address known as the
extended address with the option of an additional short address that can be assigned
during association between the device and the network. These addresses will be used
for communication within the network. The extended address is an Extended Unique
Identifier 64-bit (EUI-64). The EUI-64 is created from the 48-bit MAC address as
follows: Split the 48 bits in the middle. Insert the 16 bits representing the hexadecimal
value FFF0 in the middle. Then flip the 7th least significant bit from 0 to 1. As an
example the address: 12 : 34 : 56 : 78 : 9A : BC the EUI created would be:
• Insert FFF0 : 21 : 34 : 56 : FFF0 : 78 : 9A : BC
==PAGE:10==
2.1 Wireless Sensor Networks
5
• Flip 7th bit from 0 to 1: 21 = 00100001 -> 00100011 = 23
• Final result: 23 : 34 : 56 : FF : F0 : 78 : 9A : BC
When these addresses are being distributed they are sent in the form defined in
the IEEE standard [1], which is the rightmost octet (RMO) to the leftmost octed
(LMO). Within the octet, it is the least most significant bit to the most significant
bit. Transferring the example EUI-64 would be conducted as follows:
Octet
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
Value
Hex-
adeci-
mal
BC
9A
78
F0
FF
56
34
23
Value
Bits
0011
1101
0101
1001
0001
0111
0000
1111
1111
1111
0110
1010
0100
0011
1100
0100
In the star network, all communication is an exchange between a device and the
coordinator. While the peer-to-peer network has a PAN coordinator, it allows for
communication between devices that are in the range of one another, this allows
for multi-hop algorithms, routing messages between any two devices in the network.
Each PAN creates a PAN ID, which is used for communication between PANs.
==PAGE:11==
2.1 Wireless Sensor Networks
6
Figure 2.1: PAN topology.
2.1.1
Characteristics, Constraints and design challenges
  Compared with traditional wireless networks a wireless sensor network is character-
ized by a different set of constraints, given their less powerful and more deployable
design [4]:
• Dense node deployment - Given their low range of communication, sensors are
usually deployed much more densely then traditional wired networks.
• Battery-Powered Sensor nodes - Sensor nodes are powered by battery
• Servere Energy, computation and Storage constraints - Limited resources on all
fronts of computation
• Application Specific - Nodes serve a specific purpose, such as reporting humidity
• Unreliable Sensor Nodes - Nodes can be deployed in hostile environments where
weather or other physical conditions wear them down.
==PAGE:12==
2.1 Wireless Sensor Networks
7
• Frequent Topology Change - Topology changes happens frequently due to node
breakdown from damage, battery lifetime etc
• Many-to-one Traﬀic Pattern - In most networks, multiple nodes have communi-
cate with a sink node to pass on information.
• Data Redundancy & correlation - The nodes work together to achieve a common
goal, thus their gathered information have a high level of correlation, and with
the density of the nodes, some reported phenomena might be redundant or
reported twice.
These characteristics and constraints give rise to a number of design objectives for
networks in general. Some of which relates to hardware design, which is out of scope
for this project, but for the sake of completion they will be listed here[4]:
• Small Node Size - Reducing the size of a node can easy deployment in a harsh
environment and lower production cost and power cost of the node.
• Low Node Cost - Lowering costs of nodes as they easily break and rarely can
be reused.
• Low Power Consumption - Reducing power consumption is one of, if not the
most important goal in WSN design objectives, as it will increase the lifetime
of the node and the network as a whole, which again will increase the data
collection.
• Self-Configureability - Networks should be able to re-configure themselves in
the event of a topology change.
• Scaleability - The amount of nodes in a WSN may vary thus network protocols
should be capable of scaling according to the needs of the network.
• Adaptability - Akin to Self-Configureability - Networks should be adaptable to
changes in network topology changes, regardless of cause.
• Reliability - Applications naturally rely on data collected from the network, as
a result it is necessary to establish measures to handle noisy, error-prone and
time-varying wireless channels.
• Fault Tolerance - As mentioned, sensor nodes are often placed in environments
where they are assaulted by the elements. As a result they should have some
degree of resilience and have ability to self-test, calibrate, repair and recover.
• Security - As with any network the communication should be secured in some
many to avoid adversaries disrupting the network at will.
• Channel Utilization - Sensors have limited resources, including bandwidth. Pro-
tocols should make the best use of the channels available.
==PAGE:13==
2.1 Wireless Sensor Networks
8
• QoS support - Different applications require different rates of QoS. Packet loss,
and time sensitivity should be balanced by the application.
Finally, the characteristics and design objectives give rise to a set of challenges we
shall have to address, fully or partially.
• Limited Energy Capacity - Sensor nodes are battery powered. Saving power
through smart protocol, software and hardware design is essential.
• Limited Hardware Resources - Low storage and processing capabilities limit the
possibilities in regards to software development
• Massive and Random Deployment - Large number of nodes combined with
random placement and topology puts requirements on network establishment
before operation of the networks task can be undertaken.
• Dynamic and Unreliable Environment - As a result of harsh environments con-
nectivity of the network may be challenged. In addition, the nodes a linked by
wireless communication, which is already prone to error and noise.
• Diverse Applications - Different applications require different solutions, which
requires software to be customized to the network task.
Addressing these characteristics, constraints, and design challenges is a tall task.
Researchers and manufacturers realised that having everyone work in a different di-
rection would be folly. To address this hurdle a few groups have created standards
to specify development, such that multiple manufacturers and researchers’ progress
can be conducted under similar conditions, such that the benefits of individual de-
velopments may be shared amongst all parties. The most prevalent standards are
the Zigbee and the IEEE 802.15.4 Standard. This project will take guidance from
the IEEE 802.15.4 Standard 2020 [1]. Published by the Institute of Electrical and
Electronics Engineers, it outlines standards for Low powered sensor networks, as well
as describes different protocols for communication between different network layers
and different entities.
Before diving into the different protocols, a view of the standard network stack is
in order. This will give reference to where and how the software operates in and
between the layers, to form a network solution, later in the project. This context
is important not only for understanding the software but also because it addresses
a design goal, namely Low power consumption. Controlling when and how nodes
should expend energy on different tasks is critical to power consumption and there-
fore wireless network design.
First an overview of the sensor node structure.
==PAGE:14==
2.1 Wireless Sensor Networks
9
2.1.1.1
Sensor node Structure
The 4 basic parts of a sensor node are A sensing unit, designed for the node use. A
processing unit, which consists of a small memory block and a microprocessor. A
communications unit and a power unit.
Figure 2.2: Sensor Node Structure - Source: [4].
2.1.1.2
Network stack - OSI model in Wireless Sensor Networks
WSN utilize the Open Systems Interconnection (OSI) model, proposed by the ISO
organisation The OSI model consists of 7 layers:
• Application Layer
• Presentation Layer
• Session Layer
• Transport Layer
• Network Layer
• Data-link layer
• Physical Layer
Although WSNs adopt the model, the session and the presentation layer are omit-
ted, as the network communicates throughout its lifetime and no other nodes than
the sink node(occasionally) will run a presentation layer to the outside internet. The
==PAGE:15==
2.1 Wireless Sensor Networks
10
rest of the network will handle how the data shall be transmitted internally through
the MAC layer, which is a sub-layer of the Data-link layer.
The application layer is responsible for running the applications/protocols that are
descriptive of its general function and for networking tasks that need addressing in
this layer. These applications include query dissemination, node localization, time
synchronization and network security [4].
The transport layer is responsible for end-to-end data delivery between the sensor
nodes and the sink nodes of the network[4]. The aforementioned restrictions on WSNs
namely the energy eﬀiciency, limited memory and limited computing power make
regular network protocols such as TCP or UDP unsuitable for sensor networks [4].
WSNs are application specific, the transport protocols have to be suitable for the
type of network. Another thing to note is that the requirements for all messages
in the network are not the same. Messages from the sink node to sensor nodes will
include instructions on how to communicate with the rest of the network, queries for
specific data, and programming binaries. All of this data is essential for operation,
and therefore has reliability requirements of ideally 100%, while the data from the
node, is essentially just data, which will have a large correlation with other data of
nearby nodes, and thus will have a degree of redundancy, meaning that the data will
be loss tolerant going upstream .
The network layer is responsible for routing the sensor nodes’ data from the nodes
to the sink node[4]. In this layer, it is important to distinguish between multi-hop
and single-hop protocols. While communication is the most costly operation for the
sensor device, communicating over long distances with a single hop will be even more
costly for the individual node.
In addition, long-range single-hop communication
will be less reliable as channel fading and signal propagation will become much larger
factors. Therefore multi-hop protocols can have an advantage over long-distance com-
munication, depending on the network size. Another problem of multi-hop is that the
nodes closer to the sink nodes will expend much more energy than the nodes further
away since they will essentially be gateways for the distant nodes. Additionally, the
relationship between the different nodes is always such that the number of sink nodes
will be less than the sensor nodes, resulting in a risk of collision and congestion which
will lead to data loss. This increased power consumption will have a large effect on
the network lifetime and thus it must be addressed. A solution to this problem is
to have a routing scheme that fairly divides the communication between the paths
from the distant nodes to the sink nodes. [4] This is the layer where protocols such
as UDP and TCP.
The User datagram protocol (UDP) has no overhead for opening, terminating and
maintaining a connection. It cannot be guaranteed that the data will be delivered to
the destination [7]. The Transmission control protocol (TCP) is establishing a con-
nection before transmitting the data and closing after. It guarantees that the data
will reach the destination router and are therefore very reliable. Therefore, it is used
==PAGE:16==
2.1 Wireless Sensor Networks
11
in etc. HTTP and HTTPS [7].
The Data link layer is responsible for multiple functions: data stream multiplexing,
data frame creation, medium access and error control. [4]. While all these functions
are important, the Medium Access Control (MAC) and error control stand out, so
much so that they are sometimes considered sublayers of the datalink layer. With
respect to the subject of this report, the MAC layer is especially important, because it
is responsible for resource distribution among the nodes, network throughput and la-
tency. Just like in the network layer, protocols designed for cellular systems (systems
where the nodes are powered through MAINS) do not have the same constraints of
power consumption as a WSN, and therefore protocols cannot be adopted one-to-one
between the two kinds of systems. In cellular systems, the main concern is quality
of service, and in WSN it is usually network lifetime. As for error control, there
are mainly 2 schemes, Forward Error Correction (FEC) and Automatic Repeat re-
Quest (ARQ) [4]. ARQ resolves packet loss by retransmission, obviously, this achieves
higher levels of reliability, but at the cost of overhead and increased energy costs for
the network. FEC includes extra bits in the transmission referred to as ”error control
codes”. Introducing additional encoding and decoding to the network. This increases
computation, which is also a power-consuming task, but nowhere near the magnitude
of communications. According to [4] it consumes 3J of energy to transmit 1 KB of
data. A general-purpose processor capable of computing 100 million instructions per
second will spend 3J on doing 300 million instructions. This leads to FEC being the
preferred error correction strategy for WSNs.
The final layer is the physical layer, which is responsible for converting the bit streams
from the data link layer to the signals that the transportation medium can understand.
In WSN the medium is usually radio signals. The IEEE standard [1] defines frequen-
cies for different applications. As they are often industrial devices, they are allowed
to run on the ISM radio bands [4].
2.1.2
Control and Data planes
Control Plane and Data planes are not layers of the OSI model but are important
concepts in network routing and package forwarding. They are not included in the
OSI model, because their functionality is traditionally embedded into routers, and
their inner workings span multiple OSI layers. A generic router consists of a number
of input and output ports, a routing processor and a unit called the switching fabric.
The input port acts as the network interface card and grants access to the router,
filtering out packets with techniques such as onboard address recognition. The input
port is also responsible for terminating the physical link at the router, which means
that the packet arriving over the physical link will be unpacked into the packet format
==PAGE:17==
2.1 Wireless Sensor Networks
12
of the network layer (Ethernet frame -> IP Datagram). It then looks up its forward-
ing table using its routing processor kept in ROM and selects the correct output port
for that packet.
The Switching fabric is the transfer mechanism between the input and the output
ports. Its function is to transfer the packages between the two. This can be done in
multiple ways[8]:
• Switching via memory: Using the processor, the packet is copied from the input
port and sent to the appropriate output port. Keeping it in memory for that
time.
• Switching via a bus: The input ports takes the packet, adds a token that
corresponds to an output port then sends the combination via the bus. The
output ports all listen on the bus, captures the packet if it contains the token
that corresponds to that port.
It then removes the token and forwards the
packet.
• Switching via interconnection network: This deploys the same strategy as via
the bus, the difference is that instead of 1 but there are 2n busses where n is
input ports + output ports and all input ports are linked to all output ports.
The output ports transmit the packets from the router out to the network. It does so
by adding a preamble and a CRC, creates the packet header and then transmitting
the packet over a physical medium.
The routing processor is in essence a CPU. It executes the routing protocol, pre-
pares the forward table and performs the look-ups in the routing table for the input
ports.
2.1.2.1
Control plane
The control plane is responsible for all functions that determine how packets should
be forwarded. This includes creating the network topology, populating the routing
table and forwarding table, and then passing these tables on to the data plane which
then operates the data packets based on the instructions from the control plane [9].
2.1.2.2
Data plane
The Data plane is responsible for executing the policies put forward by the control
plane[9]. It handles the transmission, reception and forwarding of packets arriving
on the network, using techniques like packet fragmentation, buffer allocation, table,
lookups etc. [9].
The generic router functionality distributes the data and controls plane function-
alities among the different parts of the router[8]. The import ports are responsible
==PAGE:18==
2.1 Wireless Sensor Networks
13
for unpacking incoming frames (data plane) and rely on the processor to create and
lookup in the routing table (control plane) for instructions about where to forward
the packets. The key concept is that the control plane is given a routing protocol
as a framework from creation, and then keeps the routing and forwarding table in
accordance with that protocol. The protocol is embedded in the hardware, and so
to change the scheme, one must erase the memory and upload new software to each
router in order to change the network operation. Additionally, the forwarding devices
(servers/routers) can be equipped with middleboxes that handle load balancing, fire-
walls, web caching etc.
This places a huge workload on server engineers and operators if the needs of a net-
work change from its original implementation. In IoT networks that can consist of
hundreds of sensor nodes and routing devices, that may be placed in outdoor terrain,
changing the network poses an enormous challenge.
With the internet integrated
into society’s infrastructure on a critical level, updating and furthering development
is likewise hindered by the massive amount of deployed network infrastructure and
the sensitivity to errors. The effect of this is that it is almost impossible to develop
the Internet in all areas. Physical infrastructure, protocol design and performance.
This phenomenon is referred to as ”Internet Ossification”.
2.1.3
Software Defined Networking
To alleviate the challenge of updating entire networks ”manually”, and to further
the development of networking, an alternative approach to networking has been pro-
posed: Software Defined Network (SDN). A fundamental change in this approach
which makes it different from traditional networking is that SDN separates the con-
trol plane, along with all middlebox functionality, from the data plane. By removing
the control plane from the routers and middleboxes and instead placing it in a central-
ized entity with a programmable interface, aptly named a ”controller”, that controls
the networking scheme, the routers become simple forwarding devices that handle
incoming and outgoing packets, based on the instructions they receive from the con-
troller. Through this separation it is possible to reconfigure the entire network by
updating the software running in the controller, thereby making it possible to central-
ize control of a network, simplify algorithms and create APIs to open development
for third-party apps [10].
A typical Data communications network consists of end-user devices (phones / PCs
/ Smart devices), hosts(servers) and network infrastructure (routers/ethernet cables)
connections between them. To separate the control plane from the data plane, the
controller of the network in an SDN setting takes control of the network data path,
meaning that the routers have to communicate with the controller while handling the
data packets.
==PAGE:19==
2.1 Wireless Sensor Networks
14
Figure 2.3: Traditional network and SDN architecture[10].
The figure above shows a traditional network structure compared with an SDN
structure. Note here that the forwarding device (blue boxes) is an umbrella term that
covers physical equipment, routers, switches, virtual switches, and wireless access
points. [10]. The figure also shows the packages flowing between the controller and
switches in the SDN as opposed to the traditional network.
By opening up the
underlying structure of the network through the controller, the decoupled system can
be viewed as an operating system upon which applications can be built.
==PAGE:20==
2.1 Wireless Sensor Networks
15
Figure 2.4: High level overview with control layer as OS. [10].
In the above picture:
• The Network OS is the controller
• The secure channel is a communications link between the controller and the
switch
• The abstraction layer is the switch API that the controller calls to give instruc-
tions to the switch
• The flow table is the current set of rules for forwarding packets. In flow-based
protocols, this contains the rules for flows. (Flow-based protocols: flow-based
protocols have rules for different ”flows”. A flow is a set of network communi-
cations with similar attributes: such as source, destination, protocol, incoming
port, etc. A flow rule is a rule for how to handle such as packet.)
Having controllers acting as a network operating system will need to implement
APIs to communicate with third-party applications and switches. Communication
between third parties and the controller is referred to as ”northbound” through the
northbound API, controller to switch communication is ”southbound” through the
southbound API. The northbound communication will be used to extract information
==PAGE:21==
2.1 Wireless Sensor Networks
16
about the underlying network, and so the API endpoints should aim to expose non-
critical information that allows the application to utilize the particular controller, as
controllers will have different protocols running. For example, a controller running a
TSCH protocol might expose endpoints to manipulate slotframe size or communica-
tion links, which it will then propagate to the switch through the southbound API.
The southbound API, as mentioned, is the communication between the data and
control planes. Since the forwarding protocol is controlled and manipulated through
this link, it is important that this link remains available and secure. [10] A possible
implementation of this interface is the OpenFlow protocol, which supports optional
encryption for the Transport Layer Security [10]. It also allows for multiple controllers
to be connected to the same router.
Figure 2.5: Controller with north and southbound API. Controller is in the middle
with essential functions. [10].
While opening up the control layer to development via a northbound API, it is im-
portant that the binding between the control plane and the data plane still remains
closely maintained throughout development, as different approaches to the control
plane and the abstraction model will have a large impact on the scalability of the
network. The difference in the abstraction model in regards to the control layer is
centralized versus a decentralized approach. So far we have discussed the SDN as
a separation of the control and data plane, the implication being that in SDN the
control plane takes the form of a single controller responsible for the entire network,
==PAGE:22==
2.1 Wireless Sensor Networks
17
meaning the network is centralized. This is not an accurate description of the possi-
bilities of the SDN approach. It is possible for a switch to have multiple controllers
connected, and for the controllers to communicate with each other. We differentiate
between a centralized and a decentralized approach.
The centralized approach is characterised by a single physical controller acting as
the single logical controller of the network. In this setup, the controller is the only
unit computing information based on data from the whole network passing to the
controller. The benefits of this approach are flow-rule consistency and freshness of
the network data. These properties arise from the rules of only being distributed and
decided in one controller and all the data being stored and updated as it passes to the
single controller. The downsides of this purely centralized approach are a single point
of failure stemming from the single physical controller, and a lack of scalability, as a
single logical controller receiving information from the entire network, will inevitably
lead to congestion if the network grows in size. The SDN setup in Figure 2.3 is an
example of a fully centralized approach.
The decentralized approach is characterised by having the control plane split amongst
multiple physical controllers with a decentralized logical control plane that commu-
nicates to different switches and to each other to establish the needed information
in each logical controller to operate the network collectively. The benefits of this
approach are scalability and security against any single controller failure, as other
controllers will be ready to take over should one break down. The downsides are
increased complexity in the control layer, staleness if any controller does not get
updates from the rest of the controllers, consistency issues as a result of stale infor-
mation, leading a controller or application communicating with that controller, to
believe it has the correct overview of the network.
==PAGE:23==
2.1 Wireless Sensor Networks
18
Figure 2.6: SDN network with logical and physical decentralization.
To prevent some of the pitfalls of a fully decentralized or centralized strategy some
SDN, utilize a hybrid approach, combining multiple physical controllers to prevent a
single point of failure, but maintaining a centralized logical controller. This approach
limits lookups in the logical controller, by allowing the physical controllers to operate
with an information base from the logical controller, and only forwarding data if
the controller encounters data flows that the controllers have not yet developed a
rule for. Hybrid approaches can also utilize decentralization in the logical controllers
and connect them to a global logical controller, to enable inter-networking between
multiple administrative networks. While different administrative domains would not
give up control over a single entity, it is useful for all domains to have a central
controller administering how inter-domain communication should be handled.
==PAGE:24==
2.1 Wireless Sensor Networks
19
Figure 2.7: SDN network with a centralized logical controller and decentralized
physical controllers.
==PAGE:25==
2.1 Wireless Sensor Networks
20
Figure 2.8: Internet of SDN. local logic controllers and global logic controller. De-
centralized physical controllers..
Observing the different approaches leads to an important observation: network
elements are controlled remotely, and the network congestion and network overhead
caused by traﬀic happens in the southbound communication between the control
plane and the data plane.
[10] As such different approaches to how granular the
control of the network traﬀic should be. If a packet is too large for a protocol and has
to be split into multiple packets, asking the controller for instructions on each packet
incurs a massive overhead since the instructions will be the same for all packets in
the flow. The level of granularity can range from controlling each packet to each flow
to packets that have similar attributes as mentioned earlier. While the level of con-
trol needed will be specific to different controller implementations, we differentiate
between reactive and proactive control policies.
In a reactive control model, the forwarding elements must consult a controller each
time a decision must be made, that is for new packets and in flow-based protocols,
new flows. If the controller uses flow-based granularity, a small delay will occur in
the network with every new flow, as the controller will be consulted for a decision
on the flow. The rest of the packets in that flow can then be transferred at line rate
with the forwarding hardware.[10]. While this delay is usually negligible, it highlights
the importance of physical controller placement in the network, as distant controllers
may incur a larger delay, especially if flows only contain one packet. This can be
mitigated with a decentralized physical control plane. [10]
==PAGE:26==
2.1 Wireless Sensor Networks
21
In a proactive control model, the controller pushes rules to the flow tables of the
switches. The switches then only consult the controllers if they encounter packets
not addressed by any current rule in the forwarding plane. This approach reduces
traﬀic to the logical controllers.
To summarize: The software-defined networking approach separates the control
plane and the data plane. Leaving the data plane in the routing devices, referred
to as switches and putting the control plane into a device to handle the forwarding
policy. The switches then communicate with the controllers for forwarding rules. The
benefits of the SDN approach are the programmable centralized control, elimination
of middleboxes as all functionality can be computed in decentralized controllers, and
reduced energy consumption in devices as a result of fewer computations [10].
The control plane conceptually exists as both a physical device and a logical control.
To avoid a single point of failure, the control plane should be split into multiple
physical devices that share a single logical control plane, by interchanging information.
For SDN inter-network communication, each local network will have a setup with a
shared local logical control plane and multiple physical controllers to handle local
communication and refer to a centralized global logical control plane for instructions
on how to handle inter-network communication. The control protocol approach can
be either proactive or reactive. The reactive approach requires the switches to confer
with the controller for every single incoming traﬀic flow, which does not scale well, as
there will be a slight delay for each new packet as the forwarding rule is calculated.
The proactive control protocol pushes rules onto an internal flow table in the switch.
Every time the switch encounters a traﬀic flow it does not have a rule to handle, it
confers with the controller to calculate a new rule, which is then saved in the flow
table for use in the future.
2.1.3.1
OpenFlow
OpenFlow follows the basic SDN separation principles between the control and data
frames [11]. OpenFlow is using TCP which means, that that SDN-controller easily can
interact with the switch over the network [12]. The switch contains one or more flow-
tables and an abstraction layer which communicates with the controller. Flow-tables
contain flow entries, which will be determined how the packets will be forwarded. The
flow entries consist of match fields, counters and a set of instructions or actions [12].
2.1.4
Medium Access Control (MAC)
Power consumption has been mentioned multiple times already, because of the large
role it plays as a constraint on the WSN design process. The operation consuming the
most energy is sending messages and the layer that is responsible for defining the pro-
tocols for how and when communication takes place is the MAC layer. Consequently,
it is also the layer that will handle collisions, which is a critical issue in any wireless
network, as it will cause both packet loss and increased energy consumption since
==PAGE:27==
2.1 Wireless Sensor Networks
22
lost packets will have to be re-transmitted. Therefore exploring different approaches
to MAC protocol design and how they handle the challenges of reliability and energy
eﬀiciency is in order.
MAC protocols can be divided into multiple categories, depending on the strategy
they deploy. If they are single-channel or multi-channel based, if they are contention-
based or contention-free and if they are centralized or distributed. [1]
Among the most prevalent strategies are TDMA, FDMA, CDMA and CSMA/CA.
TDMA: In Time Division Multiple Access (TDMA) each frame will be divided into
multiple timeslots, which are then distributed to the network nodes [3].
FDMA: In Frequency Division Multiple Access (FDMA) the bandwidth of a channel will
be divided into subfrequencies which can then be distributed to the network.
However, one of the largest problems here is, that the channels cannot be very
close to each other, as the main frequency outputs some energy and therefore
will interfere [3].
CDMA: In Code Division Multiple Access (CDMA) the approach is to place all nodes
in the same bandwidth at the time. The users get separated by an assigned
unique code. [3] gives an example that CDMA can be understood as being in a
room with various conversations and languages. So the people that understand
the language will listen, else reject [3].
CSMA/CA: Carrier Sense Mulitple Access with Collision Avoidance (CSMA/CA) are the
basis protocol of the IEEE 802.11MAC layer. If a node has a packet to transmit,
it will listen to see if another transmission is in progress. If true, it will wait
until the transmission is done plus a short interframe space. If false, it will start
transmission [3].
Slotted- and unslotted- are two versions of CSMA/CA. The slotted are beacon-
enabled access and the unslotted are non-beacon-access [3].
2.1.5
Frames
The messages that are transmitted between the datalink layer, conducted by the MAC
layer, between the nodes and the physical layer, are sent in frames. A frame is a se-
quence of bytes divided into 10 sections consisting of varying amounts of bytes with
different meanings attached to each bit. Different protocols assign different mean-
ings to each bit, which means the frame structure is not uniform across all networks.
That said the IEEE standard is a general frame format and a variety of other specific
purpose frames. We will here go over the general frame structure, the beacon frame,
the superframe and the slotframe structure
The general format of a frame is illustrated in the IEEE standard [1].
==PAGE:28==
2.1 Wireless Sensor Networks
23
[1]
The general MAC frame is split into 3 general components with 10 total sub-sub-
fields: The MAC header(MHR), the MAC payload and the MAC footer (MFR). The
MAC header deals with the transmission. It communicates frame types, sequence
numbers and addressing. There is a multitude of different frame types, indicated by
the frame control field. These include beacon, acknowledgement, data, multipurpose
etc. The frame control field will carry a different combination of bits in the first 3
bits, to indicate the different types. These can be found in the picture below. If
the frame needs to be split into multiple transmissions, the sequence number will be
set to indicate what part of the frame was transmitted such that the receiver can
re-assemble the frame once it arrives. Finally, the addressing fields completes the
MAC header. The 4 different address fields first the PAN ID indicating to which
network the frame is intended, secondly the address of the unit within that PAN,
the source PAN ID, which indicates the network the frame originated from and the
source address, indicating which device within the source network is the sender.
2.1.5.1
Frame control field
The frame control field describes the presence of the other fields in the frame[1]. It
consists of 2 bytes and differs between a long or a short control frame depending on
which bits are needed to fully communicate the correct format of the rest of the frame.
The first 0-7 bits constitute a short frame, with bits 8-15 being set to zero per default
unless they are needed as part of the long frame.
==PAGE:29==
2.1 Wireless Sensor Networks
24
[1]
Bit 0-2 are, as mentioned, used to represent the frame type. Bit 3 determines if
the MAC sublayer is responsible for the security of the frame. If it is set to one, the
auxiliary security header field will be included in the general frame[1]. Depending on
its value will determine the levels of security for that frame. The different levels of
security determine how strong the cryptographic protection of the data will be for
that frame. The MAC layer is capable of ensuring data confidentiality and authen-
ticity, level 0 means that no protection shall be put into effect by the MAC layer.
For levels 1-3 data authenticity is ensured by the message integrity code, increasing
in size for each level[1]. The message integrity code is calculated through a method
known only to authorized devices in the network. The sender calculates the code and
sends it to the receiver along with the rest of the frame, the receiver recalculates the
code and confirms values are the same, thus ensuring authenticity[1]. For levels 5 -
7, both data confidentiality and integrity are ensured, using ENC-MIC of increasing
lengths depending on the level. In the IEEE 2020 standard [1], level 4 is depreciated
and not yet in use after it was retracted from the previous versions of the standard.
Bit 4 is the frame pending field, it is used only in beacon frames or in frames in the
contention access period in a beacon-enabled personal area network. If a network is
operating in Time Slotted Channel Hopping mode, the frame pending bit can only
be set if no link is scheduled in that timeslot [1]
The Acknowledgement (QR) field indicates whether or not a recipient device
should acknowledge the receipt of a dataframe or MAC command.
It does so if
the field is set to 1, by sending an Acknowledgement (ACK) frame, but only if the
frame passes the filtering test required.
The PAN ID compression field indicates that the PAN ID field holds a value[1]. This
has an influence on the frame version field (bits 12-13). If that value is set to 0 or 1,
the meaning of the PAN ID field is interpreted such that the receiver will compare
the destination and source PAN identifiers [1]. If the IDs are identical the PAN ID
compression field will be set to one and the source PAN id will be omitted from the
transmitted frame. If they are different, the compression field will be set to 0 and
both PAN ID addresses will be included in the frame. If only one of the PAN IDs
(source and destination) is present, the value of the PAN ID compression field will be
==PAGE:30==
2.1 Wireless Sensor Networks
25
0 and the single address will be included in the frame [1].
The sequence number suppression indicates simply if the frame is part of a sequence
of frames. If it is set to 1, the sequence number field in the general frame will not be
present, if it is 0, then there will be a sequence number.
Information Element (IE) present field is indicating whether or not the frame has
any IE present.
The destination addressing mode field will be set to either 00, 01, 10 or 11. If this field
is set to 00 and the frame type field specifies that the frame is a Data frame or MAC
command, and the frame version field is either 0 or 1, then the source addressing
field shall be nonzero, which is an implication that the frame is meant for the PAN
coordinator with the PAN ID specified in the source PAN ID field. [1]
The frame version field is an unsigned integer. It specifies the version number corre-
sponding to the frame.[1]
The final field of the frame control field is the source addressing mode field. The
source addressing mode field. As mentioned in the destination addressing mode field,
if this field is set to 0 and the frame type is a data frame or a MAC command and
the frame version field is either 0 or 1, the destination addressing mode field will be
nonzero, which implies that the frame has originated from the PAN coordinator with
the PAN ID specified in the Destination PAN ID field. [1]
The other fields in the General frame format are almost self-explanatory: [1]
• Destination PAN ID is the address of the intended recipient network. It shall
be present with the length specified in the frame control field.
• Source PAN ID is the network the frame originated from
• Source address field specifies the source device that send the frame
• Auxiliary security header indicates the security level, but shall only be present
if it was indicated by frame control field.
• The IE field is variable length and contains multiple octets. It is composed of
the IE header and the payload sub-fields (see picture below)
2.1.5.2
Beacon frame
Beacon frames are used to announce the presence of a network to other devices and
PAN coordinators, to coordinate network IDs between them.
They also serve to
synchronize devices within the network.
Like a general frame, the Beacon frame
consists of 3 parts: Header, body and FCS.
==PAGE:31==
2.1 Wireless Sensor Networks
26
Figure 2.9: Beacon Frame [1].
According to the IEEE standard [1], if the Frame format is set to 00 or 01, then the
Superframe specification, Guaranteed Timeslot (GTS), and Pending Address Fields
are always present. If the frame is version 10, the IE present field in the Frame Con-
trol filed may be set to one to indicate the presence of IE.[1]
The frame control field uses the same frame control fields as described in the gen-
eral frame. For a beacon frame specifically, the frame type field of the frame control
field will be set to 000, the value indicating a beacon frame. The sequence number
field contains the current value of the mac Beacon Slot Number(macBSN) or the En-
hanced Beacon Frame number(macEbsn) if the beacon frame is an Enhanced Beacon
Frame. A device may send both enhanced and regular beacon frames and therefore
keeps both numbers. With the frame version field set to 00 or 01, the frame control
fields shall be set as follows:
• Source Addressing mode: source address and source PAN ID are present
• Destination addressing mode field will be set to indicate no destination address
or destination PAN ID is present
• Source PAN ID field and source address will be set to macPanID and the address
of the PAN coordinator device, respectively
• all other fields will be set to 0 and ignored by any receiver.
The Auxiliary Security header field works exactly the same way as for the general
frame format and shall be present to indicate the level of security only if the security
header field of the frame control field is set.
In the event that the frame version field is set to 10(one, zero), a couple of extra
possibilities for the Mac header will be in play: It may contain a sequence number,
any addressing field supported by the general frame format and the source address
field shall contain the address of the device transmitting the beacon. (As in frame
versions 00, and 01.)[1]
==PAGE:32==
2.1 Wireless Sensor Networks
27
If the frame is sent as a response to an enhanced beacon request command, then
the PAN ID will be - if PAN id is required - sent under the destination PAN id field
with the value of the macPanId, the source PAN ID field will be omitted[1]. The
destination source address will be set to the device requesting the enhanced beacon
frame, and the PAN ID compression field will be set in the same manner as the gen-
eral frame. [1]
The superframe specification field, illustrated in the figure below, is a longer field
consisting of 2 octets.
Figure 2.10: Superframe Specification Field [1].
The beacon order indicates the transmission interval of the beacon, which will be
set in accordance with the network’s personal area information base.Ieee The trans-
mission interval is allocated to the transmission of beacon frames. The information
base includes values for the macBeaconOrder and the macSuperframeOrder among
other values. As expected, the macBeaconOrder determines the value of this field. If
the macBeaconOrder is set to 15, then the PAN coordinator shall not transmit a bea-
con frame, unless specifically requested to through a Beacon Request Command[1].
If the field is set to 15, then the macSuperframeOrder shall be ignored. [1]
The Final contention access period (CAP) slot indicates the final superframe slot
utilized by CAP. The value of the CAP shall be greater than or equal to the aMin-
CapLength value[1], with the exception that if GTS maintenance is needed, this field
might be shortened to accommodate the increased length of the beacon frame which
is required for the process.
The Battery Lift Extension (BLE) field will be set to one if the beacon frames trans-
mitted by the beaconing device are required to start in or before the macBattLife-
ExtPeriods full backoff period after the InterFrame Spacing (IFS) period following
the transmission of the beacon. Otherwise, the field shall be 0. [1].
The PAN coordinator field simply indicates if it was a device acting as a PAN
coordinator that transmitted the beacon frame. The value will be set to 1 if so and
0 if it was not a PAN coordinator.[1]
The final field of the superframe specification is the Association Permit field, which
follows the value: macAssociationPermit value of the network. If this value is set to
==PAGE:33==
2.1 Wireless Sensor Networks
28
true then the field will be set to 1 and 0 if the value is set to false. When set to 1, this
value indicates that the PAN coordinator accepts new association requests, allowing
new devices to connect to the network[1].
With the superframe specification out of the way, we can look at the final field divided
into multiple subfields: Guaranteed Timeslot (GTS) field of the beacon frame. This
field spans two octets, which are divided further into three sub-fields:
• GTS specification
• GTS direction
• GTS List
Figure 2.11: Topology of the Beacon frame and GTS info field. Red is GTS speci-
fication field, blue is GTS direction field [1].
The GTS descriptor count specifies the number of 3-octet GTS descriptors that
will be contained in the GTS list field[1]. [1]. A picture of a descriptor can be seen
below. A descriptor contains the short address for the device the GTS is intended
for, as well as the starting slot and the length of the GTS. If the GTS descriptor
count is set to a value larger than zero the size of the contention access period will
be allowed to dip below aMinCapLength to make space for the field[1]. If this value
is zero, neither the directions field nor the GTS list field of the beacon frame will be
==PAGE:34==
2.1 Wireless Sensor Networks
29
present. [1]
GTS Permit field indicates that the PAN coordinator is accepting requests for GTS.
It follows the value of macGTSPermit as true or false. [1]
In the GTS directions fields, the direction mask identifies the directions of the
GTS in the superframe. The first bit in the mask corresponds to the first GTS in the
list and so on. The bits in the mask will be set to 1 if the GTS is a receive-only and
zero if the GTS is a transmit-only slot. The GTS direction is defined to be relative
to the Data frame transmission of the networking device [1].
The GTS list field of the GTS info field is defined by the GTS descriptor count
field of the GTS specification field. The list contains the list of GTS descriptors that
are maintained. This list shall not exceed 7[1].
Finally, a GTS descriptor contains three fields: Device short Address, GTS starting
slot and GTS length.
The Device short address field contains the short address of the device for which the
GTS is granted[1].
The GTS starting slot specifies which superframe slot the GTS assigned to that device
shall begin and the GTS length determines how long the guaranteed timeslot each,
which means it determines the size of the slot as GTS startingslot + GTS length =
GTS end[1].
Figure 2.12: GTS descriptor [1].
Next is the pending address field. It contains 2 fields, Pending address specifica-
tion which contains 4 fields. 2 reserved for future use and 2 for addresses. One field
contains the amount of pending short addresses and the other, extended addresses.
The address list field contains the set of addresses, both short and extended, with the
short being first in the list, that currently have messages pending with the network
==PAGE:35==
2.1 Wireless Sensor Networks
30
coordinator [1] and will as a result be the size equal to the sum of addresses contained.
While the beacon frame itself can not hold more than 7 addresses, if the coordinator
of the network is capable of storing more than 7, it will advertise those in the beacon
frame on a first come first serve basis [1].
Finally, the beacon frame contains the beacon payload field, which is an optional
sequence of octets that will contain the macBeaconPayload. This value will be set in
the next higher layer. [1]
Figure 2.13: Pending Address field [1].
Figure 2.14: Pending Address Specification field [1].
2.1.5.3
Slotframe
The final frame structure we are going to examine is the slotframe structure used by
the TSCH protocol. Unlike the beacon frame and general frame format, the slotframe
is not a structured set of bytes, but rather a schedule for communicating within the
network. Slotframes thus replace the superframe structure of other protocols to have
a time-divided schedule. The slotframe contains defined periods of communication
between the devices of the network by dividing the frame into a series of timeslots.
Each time slot is long enough to receive a frame and send an ACK.
The time to send and receive depends on the power of the hardware. All devices
on the network have to be time synchronized, as a result, the length of the time slot
has to conform to the lowest common denominator, aka. the weakest device in the
==PAGE:36==
2.1 Wireless Sensor Networks
31
network. In this report, we work with the assumption that a timeslot is 10ms, as
that is the general standard. [13]
A slotframe is a series of timeslots repeating in cycles.
The amount of timeslots
in a slotframe is reffered to as ”slotframe size”. Upon creation, a slotframe is assigned
a value macSlotframeHandle which can be used to identify the frame. When a times-
lot has nodes assigned to it, one to transmit and one to receive, the timeslot is said
to have a link scheduled. This link will have descriptor values as indicated in the
macLinkTable in appendix A. [1]
The PAN coordinator will keep track of the absolute slot number (ASN). This num-
ber indicates the number of timeslots that have passed since the beginning of the
network[1], or since an arbitrary start time, determined by the network’s application.
The ASN increments globally every time the length of the timeslot has passed, for-
mally this value is defined by the macTsTimesltLength[1], which as mentioned, we
consider 10ms for this project. The ASN is needed for other devices to join the net-
work, so the coordinator may include it in the beacon frame. For the established
TSCH network, the ASN is used to coordinate pairwise communication, that is times-
lots and links.
Additionally, it is used as a frame counter, which allows for time
dependant security. [1]
Figure 2.15: Slotframe with 3 timeslots. [1].
The physical channel (CH) for a link is calculated using the values from the
macLinkTable. The formula is as follows:[1]
1 CH = macHoppingSequenceList * (macASN+macChannelOffset)%
macHoppingSequenceLength)
.
Where macHoppingSequenceList is a list of integers ranging from 0x0000 →0xffff (0 →
65535) to be hopped over. macASN is the absolute slotnumber, macChannelOffset is
==PAGE:37==
2.1 Wireless Sensor Networks
32
the offset for that link, ranging from 0x0000−> 0xffff and macHoppingSequence-
Length is the number of channels in the hopping sequence[1].
A network running on timeslot-based access can run multiple slot frames of differ-
ent sizes. This can be used to divide the network into several groups running on
their own communication schedules and to give nodes longer duty cycles by includ-
ing them in multiple slot frames or multiple times in the same slotframe.[1] It is not
necessary for a network device to participate in all the different slot frames of the
network. Putting devices into different slotframes will make multiple connectivity
matrices and thus establish different communication schedules that can all work si-
multaneously[1]. Though multiple slotframes of varying lengths may be used by the
same network, they will all be aligned to ASN, which means they are always aligned
and running in parallel rather than extending each other. The consequence of this
strategy is that devices may have link schedules in overlapping timeslots in different
slotframes. When such a conflict occurs transmission takes precedence over receiving,
and lower macSlotframeHandle takes precedence over higher macSlotframeHandle[1].
2.1.5.4
Channel Hopping
In wireless networks, a channel is simply a radio frequency, over which the signals
are sent. A network may enable multiple channels, such that each device listens on
multiple frequencies for sending and receiving dataframes. The term ”channel hop-
ping” refers to the ability of the device to change to a different channel should it be
needed.[1] This technique is used to increase the reliability of the network. By uti-
lizing multiple channels, the network lowers congestion rates and thereby collisions
and loss of data. Channel hopping may take place in both slotted and unslotted net-
works. For slotted networks like TSCH, the devices in the network are synchronized
to the channel and timeslot via the network’s slotframe structure. Since the slotframe
addresses the entire network, there is no need for a device in a TSCH network to ad-
vertise their hopping schedule.
In unslotted systems without a general global clock, channel hopping can not use
network synchronization. Devices must therefore advertise their hopping schedules
to their neighbours via an enhanced beacon frame in which the device includes a chan-
nel hopping IE and a hopping timing IE. In these IEs will be included the channels
and hopping sequences, as well as the variables used to calculate the sequences such
that neighbour devices can devise their own scheme[1].
A hopping sequence is specified by its hopping sequence ID, indicated by the
macHoppingSequenceId, where ID = 0 denotes a default hopping sequence for a
particular physical layer.
[1] The default hopping sequence is a pseudo-randomly
shuffled set of all the channels that the physical layer has available. The algorithm
for the pseudo-randomness is out of scope for this report.
==PAGE:38==
2.1 Wireless Sensor Networks
33
If the macHoppingSequenceId > 0, that indicates that another sequence than the
default is being used[1].
This other sequence may be defined by another system,
such as the TSCH networks’ use of a synchronized clock. It is possible to have a
macHoppingSequenceId > 0 to have a longer or shorter list than specified by the
macHoppingSequenceList[1], this may be specified by an application or a predefined
set for that ID. An important note about channel hopping is that two devices can-
not communicate unless their physical layer (PHY) supports the same number of
channels, and they agree on either their hopping sequence or use the default hopping
sequence to synchronize. This information to coordinate can be sent in an Enhanced
Beacon frame or through a pre-configuration of the network [1]
For cases where macHoppingSequenceLength is longer than the number of available
channels to the PHY, the implication is that some channels will be used multiple
times in the sequence, the opposite is true for sequences of length shorter than the
available channels[1]. In this case, some channels will be excluded from the CHAN-
NELS array. The selection of which channels that goes into the CHANNELS array is
implication specific, and decided by the higher layers, unless running with the default
sequence.
The general calculation for a channel is as follows:
1 CH = macHoppingSequenceList * [COUNTER \% macHoppingSequenceLength]
.
2.1.5.5
Constructing Personal Area Networks
When a WSN is deployed and powered on, the first step is to establish the topology
between the devices, essentially constructing the network and working connections
within it. This process varies between different network types. We will go over the
general process and the process in a TSCH network, following the IEEE-2020 stan-
dard [1]. Our project obviously has to undergo this process as well, and as it is a time
when all nodes are active and listening and transmitting messages, it is a step that
consumes a disproportional amount of energy compared to the rest of the network’s
lifetime.
A PAN should always be started by a FFD after a set of conditions are met[1].
• 1.) The FFD must have performed a MAC sublayer reset. This can be initiated
by sending an MLME-Request, with SetDefaultPiB to TRUE.
• 2.) The FFD must have performed an Energy Detection (ED) scan
• 3.) The FFD must have found a channel through an active channel scan to
communicate on
==PAGE:39==
2.1 Wireless Sensor Networks
34
• 4.) The FFD must have established a PAN ID that is not in conflict with other
nearby network IDs.
The MLME-RESET.request primitive contains only 1 value: SetDefaultPib, which
is a boolean variable, where TRUE indicates that the PAN coordinator should the
MAC sublayer and set all attributes kept in the PAN information base to their de-
fault values, essentially resetting the network[1]. If the value is set to FALSE, the
MAC sublayer is reset, but the information base keeps all values at the same values
as before the MLME-RESET.request was sent[1].
The personal area network information base (PIB) is a set of variables stored by
each device on the network with which it is possible to control the MAC sublayer of
a device[1]. These variables can be managed by the higher layers by sending MLME-
GET/Set requests. The full list of values is stored in the PIB in appendix B.
The ED scan is a scan in which the device ascertains the energy use of each chan-
nel[1]. This can be used to determine channels with higher traﬀic and thus serves as
a point of distinction between more and lesser occupied channels[1]. During an active
ED scan, the MAC sublayer will discard all frames received via the PHY data ser-
vice[1]. The ED scan is requested by sending out an MLME-SCAN.request primitive,
in which the ScanType variable is set to indicate an ED scan[1]. The ScanType is
an enumerator. The scan is performed by the MAC layer and is executed by setting
phyCurrentChannel and phyCurrentPage to the channel to be scanned[1]. From there
the device performs an ED scan by listening to the channel to make an estimate of the
traﬀic and then calculate the energy usage on that channel. The listening duration
is calculated by the formula[1]: aBaseSuperFrameDuration ∗(2n + 1)
Where the value of the ScanDuration variable from the MLME-SCAN.request
primitive[1]. The result of the scan is communicated to the higher layers by sending
an MLME-SCAN.confirm primitive[1]. The scan terminates when all channels avail-
able to the PHY have been scanned or when the amount of channels determined by
the specific network implementation has been scanned[1]. The highest measurement
will be passed on in the MLME-SCAN.confirm.
A device can perform an active and a passive scan to locate any coordinator’s bea-
con frames in its nearby area. For the purpose of network creation, an FFD device
performs an active scan to determine any networks it might need to resolve PAN IDs
with before creating its own network[1]. The sequence chart for an active scan can
be seen below:
The active/passive/enhanced scan is initiated by the higher layers that send an
MLME-SCAN.request primitive to the Devices MAC. The primitive contains values
indicating the type of scan, the set of channels to scan, the duration of the scan, to
suppress PAN IDs or not in the scan etc[1]. See appendix C for full request.
In a loop, the device performing the active scan will:
==PAGE:40==
2.1 Wireless Sensor Networks
35
Figure 2.16: Sequence chart for active network scan. [1].
==PAGE:41==
2.1 Wireless Sensor Networks
36
Just like the ED scan the device will change phyCurrentChannel and phyCurren-
Page to the channel to be scanned and then begin the procedure[1]. In an active scan,
which is needed to start the PAN, the scanning device sends out a beacon request on
the channel currently specified[1]. (1) An enhanced scan, which is an active scan using
enhanced beacon frames. After sending out the beacon frame the device will enable its
receiver to listen for beacon frames for up to aBaseSuperframeDuration∗(2n+1)[1]
where n is the value of the ScanDuration parameter of the SCAN.request primitive[1].
Each unique beacon frame received will be stored in a list of PAN descriptors, along
with the channel and the preamble code, if the application requires it. The structure
for the PAN descriptor can be found in appendix D.
The scan procedure depends heavily on the macAutoRequest attribute stored in the
MAC PIB. If the macAutoReqeust attribute is set to TRUE, which is the default
value, then the MAC sublayer stores the list of PAN descriptors until the scan on
each channel has been completed, and then it will send them to the next higher layer
as part of the MLME.SCAN.confirm primitive[1].
Any device excepting RFD-RX and RFD-TX devices shall be able to store at least
one PAN descriptor in memory[1].
Additionally, it indicates that a channel scan finishes when the implementation-
specific beacon limit for each channel has been reached, or lacking such a limit, when
the can time for a single channel has been reached. Finally, it determines how the
entire scan procedure finishes. If the value is true, then the scan either terminates
once the implementation-specific limit for PAN descriptors has been sent. lacking
such a limit, the scan finishes when all channels have been scanned.
If the macAutoReqeust value is set to FALSE, the device will transmit the recorded
descriptors separately through MLME-Beacon.notify primitives[1]. Once all MLME-
Beacon.notify primitives are sent in a FALSE scan the scenario the device will con-
clude with an MLME.SCAN.confirm[1]. With the value set to FALSE, the scan on
a single channel will terminate only when the time indicated by the ScanDuration
attribute has passed, and the full scan procedure will terminate when all channels
have been scanned[1].
The beacon frame can be secured with different security levels, indicated by the Secu-
rity Enabled Field to be set to 1. If that is the case the device will attempt to unpack
it by going through an unsecured process[1].
The final scan case is with enhanced beacons. If a coordinator is capable of respond-
ing to an filtering an enhanced beacon frame command, it will filter the enhanced
beacon frame and respond to the command with an access method appropriate for
the type of MAC control operation mode the network is operating on[1]. A list of the
different modes, access methods and when to respond can be seen in the table below.
==PAGE:42==
2.1 Wireless Sensor Networks
37
Figure 2.17: Enhanced beacon channel access for different MAC modes.
The final step in starting a PAN is the PAN ID selection[1]. To complete this
step an FFD device selects a PAN ID different from any of the PAN IDs received in
a beacon frame through the preceding active scan[1].
Once a FFD device has been established as a PAN coordinator it can start forming a
network[1]. To do so, other devices need to be able to detect its presence and receive
the settings of the network[1]. As mentioned this advertising happens through beacon
frames and an FFD device sends beacon frames through the process of beacon gen-
eration. A device is allowed to transmit beacons if its macShortAddress is not equal
to 0xffff[1]. The process starts with an FFD issuing an MLME-START.request
primitive with the BeaconOrder parameter set to less than 15[1]. Both PAN coor-
dinators and regular FFD devices are allowed to transmit beacon frames, but FFD
devices are only allowed to advertise a PAN in this manner when they have success-
fully associated with the PAN that they are advertising. The timings of when the
different devices can send beacon frames differ. A PAN coordinator can start sending
beacon frames as soon as it has established itself as a coordinator, but a FFD device
associated with the PAN in question can only start sending once it has calculated
the correct timing. The timing is calculated by taking the StartTime parameter of
the device’s own PIB, adding that a time stamp, extracted from its local clock time
upon reception of a beacon frame from a coordinator. From there the device waits
until the currentTime = StartTime + timeStamp [1]. Once an FFD which is not a
coordinator is associated with a PAN it shall continue to transmit beacons from that
PAN. The device only stops transmitting beacons if it misses transmissions from its
coordinator enough times to equal the aMaxLostBeacon parameter of its PIB. Losing
this amount of beacons means it has lost synchronization with the PAN, it will issue
a Sync-Loss indication primitive to the next higher layer and stop all transmission of
beacon frames. To restart the transmission of beacons, the next higher layer issues a
new MLME-START.request primitive. This primitive will contain a PAN ID stored
from a previous frame. The mac layer will set that address as the PAN ID of the
==PAGE:43==
2.1 Wireless Sensor Networks
38
PIB[1], and use the macExtendedAddress stored in the PIB for a source address, un-
less the macShortAddress ̸= 0xffff, then the source address in the beacon frame
will be set to the value of the macShortAddress[1].
Devices may request enhanced beacon frames to be sent from the coordinator in
the network, should they require additional information to be forwarded before join-
ing[1]. This additional information is sent in as either header IEs. To request such
IEs the requesting device sends an IE with a length of zero[1], indicating that the
response back should be an enhanced beacon frame containing those IEs with the
values of the network that has been requested. The IIEs that can be included in an
enhanced beacon frame are identified using different attribute IDs, that will be sent
along in the filter IE that the requesting device sends to the coordinator. A table of
the different IEs and their attribute ID can be seen below. [1]
Figure 2.18: Enhanced beacon frame information elements and their associated at-
tributes [1].
If the devices are operating with beacon-enabled mode, the coordinator may re-
spond immediately without a random backoff period, as long as it aligns transmission
with the beginning of a superframe[1].
Beacon transmissions will take priority over all other transmit and receive opera-
tions [1]. Devices that are in the PAN, but are not the PAN coordinator will have
the PanCoordinator parameter of the MLME-START.request primitive set to FALSE
while transmitting beacon frames. All devices will transmit beacon frames at a range
of
aBaseSuperframeDuration ∗2n [1] where n is the value of macBeaconOrder
from the PIB[1].
==PAGE:44==
2.1 Wireless Sensor Networks
39
2.1.5.6
TSCH PAN Formation
The formation of a TSCH PAN differs from the general PAN formation in a few ways.
First, the frames used to advertise the network are sent from designated advertising
devices, second, the network is formed using exclusively enhanced beacon frames.
This is because the formation of the TSCH network requires certain s to be present
in the frame for a device to synchronize to the network[1]. And finally, the enhanced
beacon frames may not be encrypted, the reason for this is that the ASN would
then also be encrypted, and the ASN is used to calculate the nonce for decryption.
Meaning a device that lost synchronization with the network or a device wanting to
associate with the network would be unable to connect[1]. It is possible for the frames
to be authenticated[1]. The extra IEs that will be included in the TSCH enhanced
beacon frame are[1]:
• TSCH Synchronization IE, containing timing information so devices can syn-
chronize to the network [1]
• Channel hopping IE, containing information for channel hopping [1]
• TSCH Timeslot IE, containing the timeslot information describing when to
expect a frame to be transmitted and when to send ACK [1].
• TSCH Slotframe and Link IE. This IE contains an initial link and slotframe
information for new devices, so they can know when to listen and when they
are able to transmit to an advertising device. [1]
The device that wishes to join a TSCH network begins by transmitting an MLME-
SCAN.request from a higher layer to the device’s MAC[1]. From there it starts lis-
tening either passively or actively to the available channels. With the discovery of an
enhanced beacon frame, the MAC layer returns a SCAN.confirm primitive as well as
a BEACON-notify indication to the higher layer[1]. The higher layer can optionally
wait for more notifications before selecting the TSCH network to join, using the Join
Metric field in the TSCH synchronization IE[1]. Once selected the higher layer ini-
tializes the slotframe and link structure received from the TSCH network and then
switches the device into TSCH mode to begin communicating with the network[1].
From here the device is synchronized to the TSCH network. To further join the net-
work the device may send an association request to the advertising device[1]. The
PAN coordinator of the TSCH network will then allocate new links and rearrange the
slotframe to accommodate the new device, but before doing so it may request to do
a security handshake to authenticate the device, followed by configuring encryption
keys and routing information[1]. The method of allocating resources is implemen-
tation specific and thus left as the domain of the higher layer. When a device has
been associated and synchronized to be part of the network, it may start communi-
cating with other devices in the topology rather than just the advertising device it
was initially attuned to[1]. This will require a new allocation of links in the different
slotframes and may also require the device to remove the links it received from the
==PAGE:45==
2.1 Wireless Sensor Networks
40
enhanced beacon frame it initially received[1]. Additionally, the device may begin
sending enhanced beacon frames to advertise the network with the rest of the FFDs
that are part of the network[1]. Advertising rate and content are set in accordance
with the higher layers implementation, such that it accommodates the network’s al-
lowed energy consumption rate for network formation[1].
Figure 2.19: Sequence of TSCH PAN formation [1].
The different information elements used in the establishment of a TSCH network
are as mentioned above[1]:
• TSCH Synchronization IE
• Channel hopping IE
• TSCH Timeslot IE
• TSCH Slotframe and Link IE
[1]
The TSCH Synchronization IE[1] only contains two values:
• The ASN field, which indicates the number of timeslots that have passed since
the start of the network
==PAGE:46==
2.1 Wireless Sensor Networks
41
• Join Metric field. This is an unsigned integer that will be added to the macJoin-
Metric of the MAC PIB.
The Channel hopping IE contains 8 different fields [1]:
Figure 2.20: Channel hopping IE [1].
• Hopping sequence ID will take the value of the TSCH networks macHoppingSe-
quenceId
• Channel Page will take the value of the TSCH networks macChannelPage
• Number of Channels will take the value of the TSCH networks macNumerOfChan-
nels
• PHY will take the value of the TSCH networks macPhyconfiguration
• The extended bitmap is only valid for the channelpages 9 and 10. When the
channel page is set to either of those values, the bitmap indicates which channels
are to be used in the hopping sequence. This field is as long as the macNum-
berOfChannels in bits. Extra bits will be added to fill out the octet.
• Hopping sequence length field will be set to the number of channels in the
Hopping sequence field
• Hopping sequence field is a set of unsigned integers containing the channel
number of each hop in the sequence
• Current hop field is set to the index of the current position in the hopping list.
[1]
Next is the TSCH timeslot IE. The Timeslot IE may be reduced in size, by only
including the Timeslot ID field, thus decreasing the overall size of the beacon. If the
IE is not to be shortened, all values must be included[1].
==PAGE:47==
2.1 Wireless Sensor Networks
42
Figure 2.21: TSCH timeslot IE [1].
• The Timeslot ID field is set to the value of macTimeslotTemplateId encoded as
an unsigned integer.
• The CCA Offset field shall be set to the value of macTsCcaOffset encoded as
an unsigned integer.
• The CCA field shall be set to macTsCca encoded as an unsigned integer.
• The TX Offset field shall be set to macTsTxOffset encoded as an unsigned
integer.
• The RX Offset field shall be set to macTsRxOffset encoded as an unsigned
integer.
• The RX ACK Delay field shall be set to macTsRxAckDelay encoded as an
unsigned integer.
• The TX ACK Delay field shall be set to macTsTxAckDelay encoded as an
unsigned integer.
• The RX Wait field shall be set to macTsRxWait encoded as an unsigned integer.
• The ACK Wait field shall be set to macTsAckWait encoded as an unsigned
integer.
• The RX TX field shall be set to macTsRxTx encoded as an unsigned integer.
• The Max ACK field shall be set to macTsMaxAck encoded as an unsigned
integer.
• The length of the Max TX field and Timeslot Length field shall be the same
and can be determined from the length of the IE.
• The Max TX field shall be set to macTsMaxTx encoded as an unsigned integer.
• The Timeslot Length field shall be set to macTsTimeslotLength encoded as an
unsigned integer.
==PAGE:48==
2.1 Wireless Sensor Networks
43
Citation: [1]
TSCH slotframe and link IE: used in enhanced beacon frames to give devices wanting
to join the network information about slotframes and links.
Figure 2.22: TSCH Slotframe and link IE [1].
The number of slotframes field is set to the amount of descriptors that the partic-
ular IE contains. The slotframe descriptor format can be seen below:
Figure 2.23: Slotframe descripter IE Ieee2020a.
The slotframe descriptor values are as follows[1]:
• Slotframe handle will be set equal to the macSlotframeTable value for macSlot-
frameHandle. This value is the ID of the specific slotframe
• Slotframe size is the number of timeslots in the slotframe
• number of links is the number of links that belong to the slotframe identified
by the slotframe ID.
• The Link information fields shall be structured as the figure below.
Figure 2.24: [1].
• Timeslot field is set equal to macTimeSlot from the macLinkTable
==PAGE:49==
2.1 Wireless Sensor Networks
44
• channel offset is set to channelOffSet from the macLinkTable
• Link options is structured as the figure below[1]:
Figure 2.25: [1].
• The TX link will be set to one if the link is delegated to transmission and zero
otherwise.
• The RX link will be set to one if the link is delegated to receiving and zero
otherwise.
• The shared link field indicates if the link serves multiple purposes. If set to 1
in combination with either RX or TX link also being 1. If the link is a shared
TX link, a joining device may use this link to send an association request or a
request to a higher layer. If the link is a shared RX link, the link may be used
by joining devices to receive an association response or a higher-layer message
from an advertising device. A link may be both a TX and an RX link
• The timekeeping bit is set to 1 if the link is used for clock synchronization and
zero otherwise. RX devices will always have timekeeping set to 1.
• Priority bit will be set to 1 if the link has priority on the given channel and zero
otherwise.
Citation [1]
2.1.6
Time Slotted Channel Hopping - A summary
TSCH is a MAC protocol for scheduling communication in low-power wireless per-
sonal area networks (WPANS), defined in the IEEE802.15.4-2015 standard[1].
It
utilizes a slotframe structure to divide each round of communication into a series of
equal-length timeslots on each active channel. Communication is then scheduled in
each timeslot on each channel between devices in the network. A network operat-
ing in TSCH mode will have all of its devices synchronize periodically to the PAN
coordinator or any other device designated as a timekeeper indicated by that device
macLinkTimekeeping value being set to TRUE. The result of this division is that
all devices participating in a TSCH network keep a schedule allowing them to know
exactly when to transmit and receive packets. Thus reducing collisions and reducing
==PAGE:50==
2.1 Wireless Sensor Networks
45
interference on each channel, since the protocol supports channel hopping, further
increasing network performance. The scheduled communication also allows devices
to sleep during periods of downtime, which leads to lower energy consumption on
individual devices. Finally, TSCH supports dynamically changing communications
by allowing for different size timeslots, and rescheduling of communication to a dif-
ferent slot and channel should the topology of the network change. Overall TSCH
is a well-suited MAC protocol for networks that requires an adaptable, reliable and
low-power approach.
2.1.7
Synchronization
All the communication in TSCH PAN happens in timeslots. It is important that the
devices have the same notion of when the timeslots begin and end to remain synchro-
nized. The time propagates outwards in a TSCH PAN from the PAN coordinator.
A device periodically needs to synchronize its network time with at least one other
device, which is called a time source neighbour[1].
The device can be via. the ASN provides its network time to the devices on the
network. However, a higher layer can add or change the time source neighbous, no
matter when[1].
A network device can have x times neighbours as its time source. For all the
devices which are acting as a time source, the device needs to synchronize its time
between all those neighbours[1].
[1] gives an example of time propagation in a TSCH PAN, which can be seen in
the figure below
Figure 2.26: Time propagation TSCH PAN [1].
The arrows on the figure indicate how the time is distributed in a TSCH PAN. The
PAN coordinator acts as the time source for the whole network. They describe that
Device 1 only synchronizes to the PAN and so on. At last Device 4 synchronizes
to the PAN coordinator, Device 2 and Device 3[1].
==PAGE:51==
2.1 Wireless Sensor Networks
46
During a timeslot in a slotframe, a node has to send a frame, and if another node
successfully receives the frame it will send back an Enhanced-ACK frame containing
the Time Correction IE[1].
Time Correction IE contains the timing information,
which is used by the nodes for synchronization[1].
There can be both positive and negative acknowledgements. If positive the receiver
has taken ownership of the further routing within the network. If negative the frame
cannot be accepted right now but received with 0 errors[1].
When frames are sent to a unicast node address it will require a link-layer acknowl-
edgement within the same timeslot. However, if an ACK is required, but not received
within the time-out period, then the retransmission will wait until another assigned
transmit for that address occurs.[1]
In a slotframe-based network, device-to-device synchronization is necessary for main-
taining a connection with the neighbours[1].
==PAGE:52==
2.2 Contiki-NG
47
2.2
Contiki-NG
With the development of IoT and the increased usage of low-resource devices, for
example with ram less than 100kBs, there was a need for an Operation System (OS)
to run on such devices and to be somehow easily operable.
This is how Contiki was created back in 2003 and later on, became open source
in 2006.
It is an OS, designed for heavily limited resources wireless sensor devices. It had
early support for the network protocols IP and IPv6 and even some implementations
for IPv6 over Low Power Wireless Personal Area Networks (6LoWPAN). The Routing
Protocol for Low-Power and Lossy Networks (RPL) was also part of Contiki. More-
over, it uses C programming language which was a huge advantage as no longer was
needed to learn a new language for a specific purpose.[14]
Contiki OS also had Cooja integrated into it, which is a simulator for the networks
of devices running Contiki.Cooja simulator will be briefly described further in the
chapters.
Contiki-NG was released in November 2017, providing easier maintenance and
fixing some of the limitations of Contiki OS. It adds new features but at the same
time keeps some of the legacy features without modification from Contiki OS. There
was a lot of effort put into the implementation of support for new Micro-controller
(MCU) architectures and on-chip peripherals, including radio transceivers. Once this
support has been added, porting Contiki-NG to a new board is much more effortless.
Lastly, the oﬀicial repository[15] also includes support for the 16-bit MSP430
architecture, which is mainly used inside the Cooja simulator.
With all that, Contiki-NG positions itself within the leading operating systems
for embedded devices, which can be seen in the table below.
[16]
Contiki-NG source base can be classified as hardware-independent and hardware-
specific.
• hardware-independent - it provides implementations for all hardware-agnostic
components of the OS, including the kernel, software timers, data structure
libraries, and networking protocols
==PAGE:53==
2.2 Contiki-NG
48
• Hardware-specific - provides the script to make Contiki-Ng works on a cer-
tain device. It contains drivers and on-chip functionalities. In order to make
the addition of support for more devices as effortless as possible and in order
to increase code portability, Contiki-NG defines Hardware Abstraction Layers
(HALs) for common interfaces.
As mentioned above Contiki-NG strive to provide a standard-compilable low-
powered network for IoT, low-resource devices. To do that it is needed to support
selected protocols which are :
• TSCH and 6TiSCH
• RPL and RPL-lite
• CoAP (The Constrained Application Protocol ) and LWM2M (Open Mobile
Alliance (OMA) Lightweight M2M)
• MQTT (Message Queuing Telemetry Transport)
The full network stack of Contiki-NG can be seen below.
[16]
==PAGE:54==
CHAPTER 3
Related Work
The WSN were considered to be delay-tolerant and not that sensitive to packet losses.
However, the increasing number of IoT devices allows us to use them for different
applications and provides more flexible networks. Therefore, the requirements are
changing and more real-time synchronization is needed [17].
SDN are employing flexible, logically centralized network architectures that de-
couple network control from the data plane.
So to ensure no collisions and to get good power consummation a synchronization
of the transmissions had to be used. A scheduler was introduced for improved reli-
ability and low latency. In order to be eﬀicient the scheduler has to distribute the
node communication by some set rules. Ideally, collisions should be avoided so that
they do not affect reliability and energy eﬀiciency.
The algorithms for assigning traﬀic have their challenges and to face them, differ-
ent approaches were created. For example Centralized approaches, Hierarchical ap-
proaches and Distributed approaches.
The SDWSN solutions bring new prospects to WSN architecture, control, manage-
ment, and operation and give us improved WSN routing and topology control proto-
cols, better network control over the load on it and motes control from a centralised
controller. Which allows us to reduce the resource demands of constrained IoT de-
vices. Furthermore, we gain programmable features allowing for eﬀicient, adaptable
network protocol operation to the particular requirements of IoT applications.
Several works have been on this topic, but to get a better understanding and see
what other researchers have done within this we will give a short summary of the
papers below which can be seen in table 3 below. There are several works done on
the topic but we mainly focus on the ones below, given the fact they are closer to
what our project aim is.
==PAGE:55==
3 Related Work
50
Cite
Title
[18]
SD-MIoT: A Software-Defined Networking Solution for Mobile Internet of Things 
[19]
Software Defined Topology Control Strategies for the Internet of Things
[20]
A Versatile Out-of-Band Software-Defined Networking Solution for the Internet of
Things
[21]
Improving Northbound Interface Communication in SDWSN
[22]
A Survey on Machine Learning Software-Defined Wireless Sensor Networks (ML-
SDWSNs): Current Status and Major Challenges 
[2]
Mobility-Focused Joining in TSCH
[23]
A decentralized scheduling algorithm for time synchronized channel hopping
[24]
TSCH and 6TiSCH for Contiki: Challenges, Design and
[13]
Orchestra: Robust Mesh Networks Through Autonomously Scheduled TSCH
[25]
Software-Defined Networking Paradigm in Wireless Sensor Networks
In the paper SD-MIoT: A Software-Defined Networking Solution for Mobile Inter-
net of Things [18] are they demonstrating some of the features that SDWSN provides
for mobility handling of notes in the network. They are suggesting the SD-MIoT
solution, which is
”an open-source SDN solution for mobile IoT environments that consists
of a modular SDN controller and an OpenFlow-like protocol” [18]
They are using two main scenarios. Extreme sport and smart amusement park.
Their architecture can be viewed as 3 separate parts:
Infrastructure plane, which is based on regular and border router IoT motes. A
radio network control is used from the VERO-SDN’s [20] network stacks and com-
munication channels in order to provide good and standardized low-power wireless
communication.
Control plane, maintaining the SD-MIoT Controller. That controller uses sophis-
ticated network control algorithms to manipulate the network’s infrastructure.
The Application plane is where the data collection, alerting mechanisms, network
management and monitoring are happening. As well as the intelligent MODE module,
which is able to detect the movable nodes in real-time.
In [18] they evaluate the performance advantages of SD-MIoT and its correspond-
ing network mobility control mechanisms with the idea to achieve robust packet deliv-
ery performance and reduced network control overhead for mobile IoT communication
environments.
Their results provide information about the effectiveness of the MODE algorithm
with regard to the success ratio of discovering the mobility conditions of the nodes,
as well as the packet delivery susses rate.
They claim that the SD-MIoT solution provides reliable forwarding decisions and
reactive and proactive flow rule establishment processes. It is all possible due to the
MODE algorithm, which can accurately detect mobility nodes.
==PAGE:56==
3 Related Work
51
Another paper which comes up with a SDN solution is the paper Software Defined
Topology Control Strategies for the Internet of Things [19] proposes a SDN framework
for WSN named CORAL-SDN. Their main research was to achieve a reduced time
and control overhead through an advanced topology construction algorithm.
They are introducing two Topology Control algorithms for SDWSN. They are sug-
gesting that a WSN should both support the TC-NA and TC-NR algorithms, for easy
apply and configuration on the right occasion. TC-NA is based on node advertise-
ment, whereas TC-NR is based on neighbour requests.
Therefore, CORAL-SDN consists of both algorithms. Their experiments with the
proposed algorithms have shown that they are reducing the initial latency and im-
proving the data flows in the network. For future work, they want to include mobility
and heterogeneous environments scenarios. Furthermore, they want to experiment
by increasing the number of nodes by using MONROE and WISHFUL. At last, they
want to introduce relevant topology control strategies for the evolution of OpenFlow.
A Versatile Out-of-Band Software-Defined Networking Solution for the Internet of
Things [20] presents VERO-SDN, which is their SDN OpenFlow framework for IoT
networks. Here they say, that it should be a routing control overhead, and should be
through a protocol, which supports long-range control. A modular SDN controller
and an OpenFlow-like protocol will improve the quality of the communication in
many IoT scenarios. Their test on the VERO-SDN showed robust performance. Fur-
thermore, it has a reduced control overhead for alternative IoT deployments. They
compared it to RPL and had a 47% reduction in the overall end-to-end delay time.
And at last, they had a packet delivery ratio of over 99.5 %. For future work, they
plan to investigate more about mobility, energy eﬀiciency, scalability and industrial
use.
Improving Northbound Interface Communication in SDWSN [21] mentions that in
a SDWSN are both the south- and northbound interfaces important. They mention,
that most work has been made around the southbound, and therefore has lacked some
attention for the northbound interface. But they are discussing to get a better degree
of network programmability it is important to improve the northbound interface as
well. To improve this, they are seeking to improve communication by addressing the
issue of metadata in REST, and other platforms.
A Survey on Machine Learning Software-Defined Wireless Sensor Networks (ML-
SDWSNs): Current Status and Major Challenges [22] is a survey, where they mention
that with the current techniques in WSN, is it hard to reach a dynamic change in
the environmental conditions. They are presenting ML-SDWSN, which combines ML
and SDWSN. They say that Ml-SDWSN can help tp achieve improved network perfor-
mance and solve some of the challenges, which appear in some practical information
of SDWSNs.
==PAGE:57==
3 Related Work
52
Mobility-Focused Joining in TSCH Networks [2] are examined how TSCH can be
adapted to support mobile applications, by improving the joining and -rejoining pro-
cedure. The reason hereby is that the joining in TSCH can take several minutes as
it has no upper limit. Their test has shown that the joining time can be reduced by
50% and re-joining by 90%. For further work
A decentralized scheduling algorithm for time synchronized channel hopping [23]
presents a hardware-based scheduling algorithm for TSCH. It is both distributed and
managed with mobile nodes. They are presenting two scheduling algorithms. Aloha-
based and Reservation-based. Their tests have shown that the reservation-based al-
gorithm outperforms the Aloha algorithm in most practical density conditions. The
goal of the algorithms is to establish a two-way connection between the neighbour
nodes, superframe structure and physical connectivity.
TSCH and 6TiSCH for Contiki: Challenges, Design and Evaluation[24] are show-
ing different challenges when implementing a 6TISCH stack. They are describing
how these challenges can be addressed with practical solutions for e.g. scheduling.
They present experimental validation and comparison with state-of-art MAC proto-
cols. They have compared TSCH against Low-Power Listening (LPL) and
layers.
Where they show, that with proper scheduling then TSCH are achieving the highest
reliability and outperforms LPL in both latency and energy.
Orchestra: Robust Mesh Networks Through Autonomously Scheduled TSCH [13] are
introducing Orchestra. They describe that the nodes in Orchestra autonomously com-
pute their own local schedule. Furthermore, Orchestra does not require any central
or distributed scheduler, as it does not signal the overhead. In the paper they
”..demonstrate the practicality of Orchestra and quantify its benefits through
extensive evaluation in two testbeds, on two hardware platforms” [13].
They have tested Orchestras end-to-end delivery and after up to 72 hours of runs,
they managed to get the delivery over 99.99%. In the end, they compared it with
RPL in an asynchronous low-power listening network. Here did Orchestra improve
the reliability by two orders of magnitude, while they had a similar balance in the
latency energy.
The paper Software-Defined Networking Paradigm in Wireless Sensor Networks [25] is
describing and discussing different state-of-art solutions, which are designed for WSN.
One of the described solutions is a sleep scheduling protocol called SDN-ECCKN. Here
the lifetime of each sensor node is divided into multiple intervals. Each interval has
two sub-intervals, namely beacon- and execution segment [25]. Where in the beacon
segment the sensor nodes are keeping themselves awake, and sending beacon informa-
tion to the SDN-controller by using multi-hop communication. Here the controller
==PAGE:58==
3 Related Work
53
maintains the full network topology. After this, the controller will calculate the sleep
schedule of each node. In the end, each node will execute and update its own sleep
schedule and routing topology. Another one is the localization-based SDN paradigm
as it is a fundamental service, as it is meaningless in most applications if the sensor
is reading without its location.
At last, [25] is describing some of the most important challenges in SDWSN. One
of them is the support of node mobility.
==PAGE:59==
CHAPTER 4
Methodology
In this section, we will describe the process of discovering the relevant papers within
our topic which helped us find the research question of choice.
The analysis of previous works can be found in 3, which has shown that mobility in
a SDN with low-resource low energy devices is still an ongoing topic with constant
development.
We found several papers that focus on scheduling the communication between
sensor nodes, using either a centralised or decentralised approach. However, most of
them focus only on static nodes, which are fully functional devices or not dependent
on low-energy constraints. There is an example that uses Aloha-based algorithms[23]
which focus on a decentralized scheduling algorithm for time-synchronized channel
hopping for movable devices.
In their case, the devices contain the needed hard-
ware and software for being both just a sensor movable node or a sink-like node.
They present the idea to evaluate candidates for sink nodes by how close the logi-
cal connectivity gets to the physical connectivity; that is, how many of the possible
links are actually accessible. That is accomplished by nodes continuously advertising
their presence to allow neighbour nodes to discover and contact one another. That
approach is slightly differentiate from what we aim to do.
Taking into consideration the analysis we did in Related work section ?? and our
aim to have a centralised software approach with a clear separation between the static
nodes and the movable node in terms of hardware and software plus a focus on the
reliable transmission of packages from movable nodes towards the controller. That
has led to the following Research Questions (RQs), and which will be answered in
chapter 5.
4.1
research questions
• RQ 1: What are the benefits of Software-defined networks of Mobile IoT.
• RQ 2: How to have reliable transmission of packages in a mobile IoT network?
• RQ 3: How to balance the trade-off between refresh rate and accuracy of the
network?
• RQ 4: How do you design a schedule for Mobile Software-Defined Wireless
Sensor Networking?
==PAGE:60==
4.2 search strategy
55
4.2
search strategy
As our report is partially a Systematic literature review with the purpose of evaluating
the work of other research on the same topic, which in our case is WSN and more
specifically, mobile iot networks with a software approach.
The initial state of the project that we were given by our supervisors was already
using Contiki-ng as an OS for the IoT devices and the evaluation was done with the
help of Cooja Simulator. Moreover, in the majority of the paper we found Cooja was
the choice of testing simulator. Based on that we decided to continue using those
frameworks.
Given the fact we were not familiar with the frameworks needed to work on we had
to additionally research them and teach ourselves how to use them. For this purpose,
we need keywords for our search. Based on our needs and established requirements
and criteria, we ended up with the following Keywords:
TSCH, SDN, SDWSN, Cooja Simulator, Contiki-NG, Wireless Sensor Networks,
OSI Network Stack
We started our search process by finding as many as possible papers on the topics,
mostly using DTU Findit [26]. Although for the frameworks it was not a big challenge
to find relatable papers, the WSNis a wide topic so we had to be more specific. For
that purpose, we came up with the following search quarries in order to find easier
more related works to match our needs:
("Wireless Networks" AND "Sensors")
("Wireless Networks" AND "Mobility")
("Sofware Approach" AND "Wireless Networks")
("Wireless Networks" AND "Standard")
("Mobile IoT" AND "Sofware Approach")
(4.1)
The queries resulted in a large amount of documents that were used as a start-
ing point. So we had to narrow down the results. We set some criteria as checking
documents only in English followed by ordering the newer papers first - preferably
documents from the past 5 years. After reading through the introduction and conclu-
sion of the found documents we ended up using the papers shown in the table below.
Some of the papers were more used and integrated into our work?? and some were
primary for educational purposes or the Background section.
==PAGE:61==
4.2 search strategy
56
Cite
Title
[1]
IEEE Standard for Low - Rate Wireless Networks
[4]
Wireless Sensor Networks: A Networking Perspective
[3]
Wireless Sensor Networks: Principles,Design and Applications
[27]
Introduction to SDN and NFV
[25]
Software-Defined Networking Paradigm in Wireless Sensor Networks
[28]
Industrial IEEE802.15.4e networks: Performance and trade-offs
[20]
A Versatile Out-of-Band Software-Defined Networking Solution for the
Internet of Things
[18]
SD-MIoT: A Software-Defined Networking Solution for Mobile Internet
of Things
[10]
A Survey of Software-Defined Networking: Past, Present, and Future of
Programmable Networks
[19]
Software defined topology control strategies for the Internet of Things
[23]
A decentralized scheduling algorithm for time synchronized channel hop-
ping
[16]
The Contiki-NG open source operating system for next generation IoT
devices
[12]
Introduction to OpenFlow
==PAGE:62==
CHAPTER 5
(SDA-MIoT)
5.1
Initial project state
When we started the project we were not working from an empty slate. One of our
supervisors, Fernando, had suggested the project and had already been working on
implementing an SDWSN controller, in a repository of the same name. Our work
began as a branch off of his code. The SDWSN-controller was implemented for a
static network and did not include any logic to handle mobility.
The scheduling
scheme was orchestra[13]. The project did feature a fully implemented data plane, a
connection to the Cooja simulator as well as a modified version of Contiki-ng. Since
our initial project state relied on Cooja, to receive data for testing and simulating the
network, our first task was to set up Contiki-ng, Cooja and the SDWSN-Controller
project properly. As an added benefit, the SD-MIoT project [18] used Cooja to show
the results of their work. In the paper COOJA/MSPSim: Interoperability testing for
wireless sensor networks[29] paper, the authors showed how useful the Cooja Simula-
tor can be in this type of testing. These recommendations indicated that the Cooja
simulator had support from the research community, and so would add credibility to
our results.
The SDWSN-Controller needed external libraries to execute Python commands, to
be configured correctly. The needed libraries do not have equal levels of support on
all OS, meaning that the project configuration varies from OS to OS. Our accessible
hardware was running Windows and iOS. After multiple attempts at different installa-
tions, libraries and tools, we finally had a working setup on a machine running Linux.
The full details of our troubles are too extensive and out of the scope of the project
to mention here. The problems we encountered led us to create an installation guide
that will be appended to the GitHub repository for the SDWSN-Controller.
The
installation guide can be found in the appendices.
Unfortunately, we had huge issues setting up Cooja as well. Initially, it was sup-
posed to run in a Docker container [30], but doing so was not detecting the changes
in the code properly. Additionally, when trying to connect the controller with the
simulator, the controller was not connecting to the port Cooja was listening on, even
when the port number was set up explicitly to be the same. We faced a problem when
running Cooja in a docker container there was no GUI available due to compilation
errors, likely stemming from a bug in one of the necessary libraries. (Error: Only
==PAGE:63==
5.2 Design
58
one live display may be active at once). The solution was to modify the controller by
adding support for the controller to run along with the Cooja GUI naively.
The final step was to install a mobility plugin for Cooja, as it per standard does
not come with support for moving nodes. This plugin allowed us to create a .dat
file, creating movement patterns for movable nodes. Specifically, The mobility plugin
allows us to match a timestamp with a coordinate position, indicating that a node X
should be at position Y at time Z. By adding enough position + timestamp pairs for
each node, creating the impression that the node is moving.
The final step is ensuring the storage of the data received from Cooja such that
we can perform calculations on the data received.
The initial SDWSN-Controller
stored this information in a MongoDB data collection. We still store the data in a
data collection, but we also store the information during runtime and perform our
calculations for test results.
This concludes our setup. To summarize: The initial state of the project was a
controller that connected to Cooja and had an implemented data plane with a generic
TSCH schedule and routing protocol with a custom Contiki-ng to support it. After
going through multiple obstacles in the installation process, our setup running on a
Linux machine looked like this:
• SDWSN-Controller - Data plane + basic routing and scheduling
• Cooja simulator
• Contiki-ng OS to support the Cooja simulator
• MongoDB data-collection
5.2
Design
Before beginning the Design and Implementation section we have to clarify some
terminology used in it:
• Communication round (round) - One full go through the slotframe - from the
first slot to the last slot.
• Processing window - The number of packages the controller receives before it
has to re-evaluate the condition of the network. Once the controller receives
the amount of packages equal to this value, it recomputes the routing table and
TSCH schedule. Example: If processing Window = 100, the controller waits
until it has received 100 packages.
• Cycle - Unit for measuring network re-computations. Every time the controller
receives packages equal to the amount specified in the processing window, we
say a cycle has passed. This allows us to refer to each state of the network in
terms of cycles.
==PAGE:64==
5.2 Design
59
With our initial project starting with an implemented data plane, we set to work
on designing a control plane for an IoT network with a mobile node.
Designing a controller for an SDWSN has a number of challenges that must be
considered before beginning development. These constraints listed in the background
section 2 are often at odds with each other and cannot all be addressed at the same
time. Consistency and reliability are the enemies of power consumption, packet size
will decrease the speed and potentially incur flow overhead, and the list goes on.
The important thing to note is that the requirements of a network are imple-
mentation specific, and so do not exist without the context of applicability. With
the added attribute of handling mobility, which equals expected topology changes
in networking terms, the first step to any development progress is to choose an ap-
plicable use case. In the paper ”SD-MIoT: A Software-Defined Networking Solution
for Mobile Internet of Things”, Theodorou [18] proposed two different scenarios for
mobile Internet of Things, one of which is an extreme sports scenario, the running
Olympus Marathon Mythical Trail. This scenario features moveable nodes following
a predictable path, with athletes wearing sensor nodes to monitor vital signs and
delivering alerts to the static nodes that function as sinks or forwarding devices.[18]
They place the controlling device at the start of the racing trail. The idea of a sports
scenario with a predictable path appealed to us, as our initial testing of the Cooja and
Contiki software had been in simple straight-line topologies, but the single available
path of setup left much to be desired.
We decided to change the scenario to a ski resort, with the application scenario
focusing on keeping track of the guests, such that if an accident should occur, the ski
personnel can track the victim, thus improving the security of the individual skier.
The change in terms of networking is the mobility pattern and the topology. While it
is still predictable that a skier will move from point A to point B, a resort features mul-
tiple trails from the top of the lift to the bottom. Topology-wise, this means that the
node has multiple opportunities to change its path, rendering it semi-unpredictable.
Figure 5.1 features a cutout of the Catalooche ski area and a drawing of our primary
test topology. We assume the skiers are wearing smart sensors to monitor vital signs
and positional coordinates. The topology features one static node acting as the sink
and the entry to the controller, while the rest of the static nodes act as forwarding
devices.
Choosing a scenario immediately lets us concretize our design goals as well as the
different types of nodes that will constitute the structure of the network:
Design goals:
 
1.) The system should have a high level of quality of service,
==PAGE:65==
5.2 Design
60
2.) The reliability of the network must be kept high
3.) The controller must be able to quickly respond to topology changes
Hardware components:
• Controller device - Mains powered computational device
• Battery-powered static node (Static node, FFD)
• Single life sensor sensing vital signs and geo-location (Mobile node, RFD)
The challenges of this scenario are keeping a stable data transfer between the mobile
nodes and the network controller, such that the controller can receive real-time data
to track the position of the mobile nodes and calculate the communication and routing
table for the network. Secondly, there is the network lifetime. This scenario demands
a large amount of deployed battery-powered static nodes in places with varying de-
grees of accessibility. Additionally, the mobile nodes will be battery-driven and must
be small enough to be carried without hindering the skier. These small sensors cannot
carry a rechargeable battery and so will have to rely on their in-build battery to last
from the skier enters in the morning and until they leave in the afternoon. Then,
there is the issue of network congestion and collisions since the network topology and
the large deployed and mobile nodes demand a many-to-one traﬀic pattern. Finally,
the average skier’s speed ranges from standing still to 60 - 80 km/h, with the fastest
skier ever going 255 km/hr (in a purpose build gear at near free fall) according to
[31]. This puts a tremendous challenge on the timeliness and the update speed of the
network, to keep up a high level of quality of service
We immediately notice that addressing all design challenges while achieving our de-
sign goals poses a direct contradiction. Requiring a high network uptime, consistency
and being able to quickly respond puts large demands on energy consumption. The
application area gives us some leeway in what assumptions we can put on the sce-
nario to overcome this challenge. We first assume that the mobile nodes will be small
sensors, whose battery only has to last for 1 day before the skiers can receive new
ones. This does not mean that we can ignore energy consumption completely, but it
does alleviate concerns about the communication between the mobile nodes and the
static nodes, being too costly. The second assumption we consider is that the battery-
powered static sensors: 1) have a long lifetime, and 2) are rechargeable. Given that
these nodes do not have to be moved around after deployment means they can be
situated with a large power supply, and can often be placed close to a power source,
such as the lift grid. This second assumption means that the energy consumption of
the static nodes is also of less concern than our Quality of Service (QoS) design goals.
Overall this means that energy consumption is still a concern as it is in any WSN,
but it is of lesser concern than reliability, consistency and speed.
This leads us to our next design concretisation: We aim to design a reliable and
==PAGE:66==
5.2 Design
61
Figure 5.1: Cutout of a ski area with 2 different possible directions + the test topol-
ogy of for our design.
consistent protocol with a fast response time to network topology changes.
Addressing the speed of the average skier. Noticing that the speed of the mobile
node will result in a fluctuating strength of the physical connection (radio waves)
between a mobile node and a static node, we need to frequently update the commu-
nication schedule and routing table to accommodate changes in available forwarding
devices, effectively changing the topology. Additionally, the nodes will have to spend
energy establishing a new connection. The key issue is that establishing a connection
and distributing a routing and communications schedule takes time, in which the
mobile node may have moved too far away from the static node intended for commu-
nication, thus invalidating the controllers previous calculations.
Our solution to this connectivity issue is to determine which static nodes a mobile
node should connect to ahead of time, and then maintain that link until the controller
detects that the mobile node will move out of range within a short timeframe, and
thus break the link. This means the controller will have to predict the route of a
mobile node and then schedule communication between the static node ahead and
the mobile node. The aim is to increase the possible connection window such that the
mobile node does not move out of range of a static node before it can send data to
the network, while still maintaining a connection with a viable strength to minimize
==PAGE:67==
5.2 Design
62
package loss due to unstable connections.
We considered two methods to achieve this prediction. The first method was a statis-
tic approach, utilizing data to train a Machine Learning (ML) model to predict the
most likely path of a mobile node. The second was a reactionary approach to making
decisions in real time based on changes in connectivity. We opted for the second
approach for the following reasons: utilizing a data-driven approach could achieve
a high level of accuracy, but in the event the prediction was wrong, a mobile node
would vanish from the topology until the next round of neighbour discovery, in which
case all transmissions towards and from that node would fail. In a scenario like the
ski resort, where reliability and consistency are of critical concern, a node appear-
ing in an incorrect position would essentially render the system useless. In a less
critical scenario such as a smart home, the statistical approach would be fine. The
reactionary approach works in both models.
Our algorithm addresses the predictability issue in the following steps:
1) Discover mobile node direction by monitoring the RSSI value of links to
neighbouring static nodes.
2) Schedule communication with the strongest neighbouring link based on the
RSSI between the node and the potential new connecting node, when the dif-
ference between the RSSI value of the potential link(s) and the current link
reaches a preset threshold. Where the threshold is application specific. The
calculation for the difference between the two links is:
Schedule_new_Link =
{
Y,
if abs(RSSIX −RSSIY ) < T or RSSIX > RSSIY
X,
otherwise
where RSSIX is the RSSI of the current link, RSSIY is the RSSI of the link to the
potential new node, T is the application-specific value and abs returns the absolute
value.
==PAGE:68==
5.2 Design
63
Figure 5.2: Simple peer-to-peer topology.
Consider figure 5.2 above, featuring a simplified peer-to-peer topology. Node 4 is
moving towards nodes 3 and 5, with an established connection, A, between 2−4, and
two possible links, B, C between 3 −4 and 4 −5. By assessing the RSSI of the links
A, B
C, the controller can determine which static nodes a mobile node is moving
towards and away from. In the second panel, 4 has moved closer to 3 and 5, but
because abs(RSSIA −RSSIB > T and abs(RSSIA −RSSIC) > T, the connection
4−2 remains as the active link. In the final panel, 4 has moved even closer and since,
abs(RSSIA −RSSIB < T, the link 4 −2 is severed and the controller considers 4 −3
the active link to reach 4.
We opted to use TSCH as our MAC layer communications scheme, as defined in
the IEEE2020a standard [1], because of its high flexibility and smart utilization of
multiple channels and time division approach to accommodate multiple requests on
individual channels as well as the reduced collisions from dedicated communication
link in specific timeslots.
Because our mobile nodes move quite fast and we will face the challenge of having
to share 1 medium for communication as mention in WSN2.1, our network is very sen-
sitive to lost communication. Therefore we opt to create a contention-free scheduler,
==PAGE:69==
5.3 Implementation
64
with a slightly modified TSCh so we can maintain collision free communication while
we more than one active channel. Additionally, we keep a cap on the slotframe size
to reduce the length of each round of communication, thus reducing network latency.
If we reach the cap for a single channel the controller schedules TSCH-links on new
channels to accommodate the additional communication. An added benefit of TSCH
scheduling multiple links on the same channel, is that the number of active channels
is kept low, which in turn saves power in all nodes in the network.
To construct the TSCH schedule the controller creates a routing table by updating
the topology based on incoming packets.
The problem that Theodorou[18] and his colleagues tried to solve in their MODE-
algorithm was to identify mobile nodes amongst static nodes, in order to inform the
controller on how to differentiate the treatment of the nodes constituting the network.
To get around this issue, we employ a naming scheme to differentiate between mobile
and static nodes.
This concludes our design. To summarize our controller algorithm works in 3 steps:
• Predict the next link of a mobile node
• Calculate the routing table for the network
• Calculate TSCH schedule for communication
5.3
Implementation
Implementing our design means working with the control plane to create a network
controller. As mentioned, the initial project state was such that we already had an
implemented data plane and scheduler/routing classes, with basic functionality, such
as adding a TSCH link to a schedule. This meant we could extend those classes to
include the logic we needed for our design. We will omit the methods providing the
basic functionality and go over the ones we worked on to execute our intended design.
Our controller performs 11 steps to execute the prediction, routing calculation, sched-
ule calculation, and distribution.
1) Network establishment
2) Get links between nodes
3) Calculate routing matrix (prediction logic)
4) Calculate communication routes
5) Calculate Slotframe size and number of active channels
6) Calculate TSCH schedule
7) Distribute Routes
==PAGE:70==
5.3 Implementation
65
8) Distribute Schedule
9) Reset pkt_sequence and update cycle_seq
10) wait for cycle to finish
11) Repeat
In terms of functionality the steps are divided as follows:
• 1-3 Constitutes our prediction logic
• 4 Calculates the routing table
• 5-6 Calculates the TSCH schedule
• 7 - 11 Distributes and updates the network until the next cycle
The controller keeps a number of global variables that it uses as input in the different
classes it uses for the different steps in the logic. These can be seen in the table below.
Note that some of these variables will be passed on to the router and the scheduler,
meaning they will be absent from the variables tables of those classes, even though
the algorithms refer to them.
Variable
Explanation
S
set of static nodes
f_mID
first moveable node ID
l_mID
last moveable node ID
M
Set of moveable nodes
SF
SlotframeSize, calculated by: |S| + |M|
maxSF
maximum allowed slotframe size
ACH
number of active channels
pkt_seq
number of packages received per node from data plane
cycle_seq
number of cycles passed since network start
maxRSSI
minimum strength of RSSI value for a MAC} link to
be considered for communication
Processing window
Number of packages the controller waits for to com-
plete a cycle.
maxLinkDiff
maximum allowed difference between 2 links
f_M
RSSI matrix from the first cycle. Initially set to empty
R
Instance of Router class
Sch
Instance of Scheduler class
Once the network starts, the network begins the network establishment process
for a WSN running a TSCH PAN MAC protocol, as described in the background
section in section 2. The amount of cycles to establish the network varies based on
the amount of devices the network contains. During these first cycles, the network
==PAGE:71==
5.3 Implementation
66
traﬀic is higher than usual due to the amount of enhanced beacon frames and asso-
ciation requests flowing back and forth. When the network structure is settled, the
data plane sends the packages to the controller, where it is dissected and put into the
MongoDB data collection.
Those packages have a length of 127 bytes as that is the maximum allowed length
from the IEEE standard[1].When the package arrive, its data is encapsulated in dif-
ferent layers and is in a byte format.The packet dissector start reverting it back to
understandable language, layer by layer. The serial Packet is the first layer of encap-
sulation. it contains the address it came from, check sum and message type and the
rest of the payload. The message type can be either transmission or reception. Next
one is the IP layer, which contains the length of the payload, time to live, header
check sum and most importantly the source and the destination of the of the packet,
and of course the rest of the payload. The next layer to peel is the NA packet, which
contains packet length, energy consumed, rssi, checksum, payload and the current
cycle we operate in and the pecked sequence number(SQE). Here we need to take
notice of the Cycle and SEQ value, considering those are used to calculate the Packet
Delivery Ratio (PDR). And the final data packet payload contains absolute sloth
number(asn) and the actual measurement the sensor node does, which in our case is
just a mock data - e.g temperature, humidity , light.
Here we have to mention the way we calculate PDR, which is by looking at the last
received SQE at the end of the cycle and the total number of received packages(T_p)
from the node:
PDR =
Tp
SEQ
It is also worth mentioning that we do not wait for ACKs for those packages. The
reason for that is in our use case. If we wait for ACK it will take extra time per packet
sent, resulting in too much time needed to full filling the size of the processing window,
which can lead to the skier moving out of detection range. Instead, the movable node
continuously sends packages with the same Cycle number but increasing SEQ until
a new routing and scheduler are sent when the cycle number is increased and SEQ
reset.
Knowing that we do not wait for confirming the packages are sent, we can argue
that the actual PDR of a node may differ from what we calculate at the end of the
cycle until the start of the new one. For example, even if we got 10 packages which
are 100% PDR at the end of the cycle, the mobile node continues to send data until
the new cycle start, let’s say 10 more packages which add up to 20 in total, so the
actual transmission rate is 50%.
Once the packets are processed there the controller retrieves the links between
each node as RSSI values in an N ∗N matrix.
It is from this RSSI matrix, that the controller computes which links to establish a
connection. The computation happens through two functions: Compare_Matrix and
==PAGE:72==
5.3 Implementation
67
Direction_Logic. We will go through those
Algorithm 1 Compare_matrix
1: Input:
2: c_M = Matrix with links from newly completed cycle
3: f_M = Matrix with links from previous cycle
4: Output:
5: G - Network connectivity Graph structure
6: // Initialize variables
7: r_M = {} // Empty matrix
8:
9: s_M= c_M - f_M
10: f_M = c_M
11: r_M = direction_logic(s_M, c_M)
12:
13: G = createDiGraph(r_M)
14: return G
This algorithm creates the connectivity graph with the help of direction_logic. The
input is the previous matrix and the current matrix, in line 8 we subtract current
from the previous to find the changes in the network between the cycles. We set
the routing matrix to become the result of the direction_logic(). Direction_logic
takes the subtracted matrix and current matrix as inputs. The output can be seen
in figure 5.3. We can see that the connection between node 3 and node 7 goes from
c_M[7, 3] −p_M[7, 3] = 90 −70 = −20 indicating that here node 7 moved closer to
node 3.
The result of this subtraction is passed on to direction_logic which performs the pre-
diction logic based on s_M and c_M. This algorithm features a check on the node to
determine if it is a mobile node or a static node, as our logic differentiates the two.
As mentioned, we determine mobility by a naming scheme, simply put we use values.
In Cooja all nodes have an id, indexed from 1−N. The set of mobile nodes is defined
as follows:
M = {x : x ∈N and f_MID ≤x ≤l_MID}
Where N is the set of all nodes, f_mID is the index of the first mobile node, l_mID
is the index of the last mobile node.
Example:
|N| = 20, 1 −20
f_mID = 10
l_mID = 15
==PAGE:73==
5.3 Implementation
68
M = {x : x ∈N and 10 ≤x ≤15}
M = 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15
Using the same values, we can define the set of static nodes as follows:
S = {x : x ∈N and x < f_mID ≤l_mID < x}
==PAGE:74==
5.3 Implementation
69
Algorithm 2 Direction Logic
1: Input:
2: s_M - Matrix result of c_M - p_M
3: c_M - Matrix with links from newly completed cycle
4:
5: Output: Routing Matrix // Matrix with the connection links to be established.
6:
7: // Initialize variables:
8: r_M = copy(c_M)
9: i = 0
10: j = 0
11:
12: for i < length(s_M[0]) do
13:
for j < length(s_M[1]) do
14:
15:
// Check if there is a link or if link value changed
16:
if s_M[i][j] > 0 or s_M[i][j] < 0 or (c_M[i][j] = First[i][j]
17:
and
c_M[i][j] ̸= −0) then
18:
19:
//Check if position is a movable node link
20:
if i ∈M and c_M[i][j] ̸= −0 then
21:
c_c = c_M[i][j]
22:
23:
//Find Neighbours
24:
c.L.N, li, lj = Find_neighbour(left, i, j, c_M)
25:
c.R.N, ri, rj = Find_neighbour(right, i, j, c_M)
26:
r.L.N = Find_neighbour(left, i, j, rM)
27:
r.R.N = Find_neighbour(right, i, j, rM)
28:
29:
// Determine if links are valid candidates
30:
if valid_link(i, j, c.R.N, c_c, s_m, ri, rj, r_M) then
31:
r_M[i][j] = −0
32:
r_M[j][i] = −0 
33:
else if valid_link(i, j, c.L.N, c_c, s_M, li, lj, r_M) then
34:
r_M[i][j] = −0
35:
r_M[j][i] = −0
36:
else if c_c > maxRSSI and r.N.L! = None || r.N.r! = None
then
37:
r_M[i][j] = −0
38:
r_M[j][i] = −0
39:
end if
40:
end if
41:
end if
42:
end for
43: end for
44: return r_M
==PAGE:75==
5.3 Implementation
70
Direction_logic variables explanation:
Variable
Explanation
c_c
current connection
cLN/cRN
left neighbour in c_M / right neighbour in c_M 
rLN / rRN
left neighbour in r_M / right neighbour in r_M
In direction_logic we loop through all nodes in the subtracted matrix and check
if a position’s value has changed, or if there was a link to the current matrix that
had no changes. The goal is to check any potential link for each mobile node to
determine if that link should be used for a connection in the next round. This takes
place in the if statement on lines 16-17. Line 20 checks if the node is mobile and
that the value of the current link exists. By convention the value −0 in the matrix
indicates no existing link between the 2 nodes. We then set the current connection
to the current node’s active link. In lines 25-28, we find neighbours of the node to
the left and to the right in both the current matrix and the routing matrix. We use
the right and left neighbours from the current matrix to validate if they can be used
as a connection in the next cycle. valid_link is a function, its decision-making can
be seen as a flowchart in figure 5.4. In short, a link is valid if:
1) The neighbour’s RSSI signal is larger than or equal to maxRSSI
2) The current value is negative and the absolute difference between current
and neighbour is less than the minLinkDiff, and either the current value is less
than the neighbour value or the current and neighbor values are equal but they
belong to different routing paths
3) The current value is positive and the neighbour value is negative in s_M
and the absolute difference between current and neighbour in c_M is less than
the minLinkDiff, or the current value is greater than the neighbour value in
c_M.
4) The current value is equal to the neighbour value and either they belong
to different routing paths or the absolute difference between current and neigh-
bour is less than the minLinkDiff.
If valid_link returns true, it means that the neighbour of the current link being
evaluated is a link either better than the current link, or the link is improving, and has
improved enough to be within the allowed threshold for how much worse it can be than
the current link. This is illustrated in Figure 5.3. If we once again consider field [7, 3]
in p_M and c_M we see the result c_M[7, 3] = p_M[7, 3] = 90 −70 = −20 showing
up in s_M. Node 7 is mobile and moved towards node 3, and the link strengthened.
Because the difference between c_M[7, 2](the old link) and c_M[7, 3] (the potential
link) is now c_M[7, 2] −c_M[7, 3] = abs(55 −70) = 15 < minLinkDiff, r_M[7, 2]
==PAGE:76==
5.3 Implementation
71
is set to 0, indicating that no route should be included between node 7 and node 2.
Direction_logic ends with line 38, which is a check to ensure we only remove a link
that is above the maxRSSI value if it has a neighbouring value in r_M such that we
don’t isolate a node from the network, but not scheduling any connection to other
nodes.
From here we return to Compare_Matrix line 13-14, where we create and return
a directional graph, based on the routing matrix r_M created from the direction
logic. Our code is written in Python and we use the nx library to draw the graph.
This concludes the prediction part of the design.
Figure 5.3: Matrix subtraction.
Once the directional graph is created it is passed over to the Compute_Routes,
where we calculate the communication routes.
==PAGE:77==
5.3 Implementation
72
Figure 5.4: valid_link method flowchart.
In Routing table creation we start by creating an empty Dictionary ”P” which
will contain the paths for each node. We then loop through all nodes in the Graph
and check each of them if it is a movable node or not. We perform that check because
different methods of finding the path from the node towards the controller are used
based on if the node is static or movable.
If it is a movable node, 2 new lists are initialized - u_p and second_nodes. Then at
line 12 the findAllSimplePaths method from the nx library is called,whit which we
find all simple paths from the node towards the sink, where a simple path is a path
with no repeated nodes.
In lines 14 - 21, we loop through all found paths - p in node_paths - and if p[1]
is not a movable node, which if it is already used, if not add it to the u_p. Here we
make sure it is not a movable node because in our design it is not desired for movable
nodes to connect with each other and use themselves as relay nodes.
Afterwards, we add the path to P[node] and send it to the router.
In line 26 we continue by catching the case when the node is a static node.
If
the detected node is a static node, the first action performed is using Dijkstra’s algo-
rithm from nx library to compute the shortest weighted path between the node and
==PAGE:78==
5.3 Implementation
73
Algorithm 3 Routing Table Creation
1: Input:
2: G = Directional Graph
3: sink = Id of sink node.
4: Output:
5: Dictionary(key = NodeId, value = Id of node to connect to.)
6:
// Initialize variables:
7: P = {}
8: //Find paths from nodes to sink
9: for node in G do
10:
if node ∈M then
11:
unique_paths = {}
12:
second_nodes = {}
13:
14:
node_paths = findAllSimplePaths(G, node, sink)
15:
16:
for p in node_paths do
17:
if P[1] /∈M then
18:
if P[1] /∈second_nodes then
19:
unique_paths.Append(P)
20:
second_nodes.Append(P[1])
21:
end if
22:
end if
23:
end for
24:
P.Append(node, unique_paths)
25:
// add the path from Node to sink through first link in P
26:
R.Add(node,c,P[node][1])
27:
end if
28: end for
29: // static
30: if node ̸= M then node_path = Dijkstra(G, node, sink)
31:
if node_path[1] ̸= M then Path.Append(node, node_path)
32:
elsenode_paths = findAllSimplePaths(G, node, sink)
33:
end if
34:
35:
for each p in node_paths do
36:
if p[1] ̸= M then
37:
path.Append(node, P)
38:
R.Add(node, P[1]
39:
end if
40:
end for
41: end if
42: return P
==PAGE:79==
5.3 Implementation
74
the controller.
If the found path does not contain movable nodes, at line 30 we add the path to
P[node] and then again send the path to the route with R.add(node,c,node_path[1]).
However, if the path is passing through a movable node in line 31 we use
nx.all_shortest_paths(G, node, sink) and then in line 33 we loop in the found paths
and make sure we choose the one without movable nodes in it, and again add the
path to P and send it to the router.
This concludes the routing table calculations.
From here the method returns the
dictionary, P, and the controller uses that dictionary to create the schedule, using
the Slot frame logic, and Schedule_collision_Avoidance algorithms.
The next step is to calculate the SF which is specified in the variables list above??
Once the SF is determined, the number of channels is calculated automatically
using the following formula:
ACH =
{
SF
maxSF ,
if F > maxSF
SF,
otherwise
If there are more than 20 nodes in the network, the number of channels is increased
to ensure that all links have enough positions in the scheduler.
The Scheduler keeps these global variables and classes:
Variable
Explanation
N
List of all scheduled nodes
SF
SlotframeSize passed from the controller
mCh
The number of active channels
Node class
Internal class representing a node
Cell class
Internal class representing a TSCH-link
The cell class represents a TSCH link, it contains information about the transmit-
ting and receiving nodes and the time and channel slot at which it is scheduled.
The node class contains its id, and two lists of cells, rx containing cells in which the
node is receiving and tx where it is communicating.
==PAGE:80==
5.3 Implementation
75
Algorithm 4 Slotframe logic
1: Input:
2: Paths - Dictionary(key = NodeId, value = list of node_paths)
3: cSF - current slotframe size
4: cNch - current number of channels
5: mSF - Max slotframe size
6:
7: if cSF > mSF and cNch > 2 then
8:
SF = mFS
9: else
10:
SF = cSF
11: end if
12: mCh = cNch
13: for p ∈Paths do
14:
Sch.schedule(Path, SF, cNch)
15: end for
The Slotframe logic is responsible for scheduling of all the paths received from
the Routing_logic algorithm, keeping the maximum number of timeslots in the slot-
frame capped and setting the maximum number of active channels equal to the newly
calculated open channels. We check if the current slotframe size, derived from the
slotframe calculation, is larger than the maximum allowed slotframe size and if more
channels are open, in which case the slotframe size will be capped at the maximum
defined value. Otherwise, we set the slotframe size to be equal to the newly calculated
size and proceed to adjust the new amount of channels to schedule on. The loop lines
13-15 ask then schedules the link. Note that p is the key and Path is a list of nodes.
The scheduler takes the path, the slotframe size and the current number of channels.
A node can not be active on multiple channels at the same time. If it is scheduled
to transmit and receive on the same timeslot, in different channels it will fail either
task. To prevent scheduling the same node for different tasks at the same timeslot
in different channels, the scheduler attempts to schedule in an open -links in an open
timeslot on a channel and runs Schedule_collision_Avoidance to check for collisions
with other channels timeslots.
==PAGE:81==
5.3 Implementation
76
Algorithm 5 Schedule_collision_Avoidance
1: Input:
2: ts - timeslot to check
3: ch - channel to check
4: ttx - transmitting node to check
5: rrx - receiving node to check
6: N - list of all scheduled nodes
7:
8: for n in N do
9:
for rx in nRX do
10:
if rx.tOff = ts and rx.chOff = ch then
11:
return False
12:
else if rx.tOff and rx.chOff ̸= ch then
13:
if rx.src == rrx or rx.src == ttx then
14:
return False
15:
end if
16:
end if
17:
end for
18:
for tx in nTX do
19:
if tx.tOfff = ts and tx.chOff = ch then
20:
return False
21:
else if tx.tOff and tx.chOff ̸= ch then
22:
if tx.src = rrx or tx.dest = ttx then or tx.src = ttx or tx.dest = rrx
23:
return False
24:
end if
25:
end if
26:
end for
27: end for
28: return True
The scheduler keeps a list of all nodes scheduled for either transmission or recep-
tion. This method loops over all the nodes scheduled for communication and then
runs a loop over all nodes in the list of receiving nodes and another loop over trans-
mitting nodes. Note that the nodes scheduled for transmission keep a variable for
both their source and destination as opposed to the nodes scheduled for receiving,
which only keep a source. The checks on 11 and 21 check if the suggested channel
and timeslot combination are in use by any node. The check on lines 14-15 and 23-24
checks if the timeslot is in use by the node on any other channel for either receiving
or transmitting. If none of these conditions applies, the timeslot and channel number
combination is free for that node, and the function returns true, indicating that the
node can be scheduled in a TSCH-link in the slotframe.
At this point, all routes for communication have been calculated, as well as the
==PAGE:82==
5.3 Implementation
77
schedule. The controller sends out the routes and the schedule to synchronize the
network for the next cycle. It then resets the pkt_seq and updates the cycle_seq,
indicating a new cycle has begone. It then waits until it receives packages equal to
the processing window, before repeating the process.
5.3.1
Implementation - Summarized
We have presented a controller design that attempts to predict the best connection
for a mobile node in the next cycle of communication, by evaluating the direction of
the node using the changes in RSSI values between the node and its neighbours for
each cycle. To achieve this we employed a number of methods in the control plane to
predict, create routes, and schedule TSCH-links for communication. We utilized the
already-in-place functions of the initial project state to distribute the results of our
calculations to the rest of the network.
Our design only operates in the control plane of the routing model. To open it up to
3rd party applications in the application layer would require functions allowing for
configuration of the values such as slotframe_size, maxRSSI etc.
==PAGE:83==
CHAPTER 6
Test and results
In this section, we will provide our test and analyze the result from those tests, which
will display which challenges we managed to overcome and the performance of our
Software define approach mobility control mechanism. As mentioned in the Design
Section 5.2 our target is to have a stable data transfer between the mobile nodes
and the network controller, low network delay to minimize the update time of the
network, and low power consumption as possible, given the constraints of high QoS.
We use the Cooja software running on Contiki-ng to test our code. Running a simu-
lation in Cooja requires 3 parts:
• The Cooja simulator software running on Contiki-ng
• Code implementing a data plane and control plane
• a .dat file with timing and positions for the mobile node.
The content of the .dat file is a list of tuples of the form:
NodeID, (x, y)coordinate, timestamp. The Cooja simulation has an internal timer.
When the timer reaches a timestamp, the node with that ID is moved to the position
specified. This creates the illusion of movement, although technically speaking the
node appears to be teleporting around the grid, by disappearing and reappearing in
another position. However, since we consider mobility to be topology changes caused
by an existing network device changing position, this will suﬀice.
In order to evaluate our software we performed several simulations, with which we
aim to emulate close to the real-world scenarios, based on the discussed ski slope Use
case in section5.2. As we want to make it as real as possible, we assume that there
might be losses in the signal from unpredictable and random factors out in the open
world - e.g weather conditions or just obstacles passing between the devices. With
the help of added random values between -3 and 3 for each RSSI signal, we try to
simulate that behaviour.
We ended up with 2 different topologies that we tested on our Algorithm. The base
case topology represents 5 static nodes in a straight line with one sink node connected
to them and a movable node moving from the start to the end. The main test case
is an extended baseline topology as shown in 5.1.
==PAGE:84==
6 Test and results
79
In both scenarios, we test with different parameters and moving speeds in order
to find the most optimal settings and the threshold for the number of packages given
the speed of the movable nodes(skiers) and network nodes deployed.
We added an extra case, to compare the MODE-algorithms[18] performance with
ours. We recreated their topology in Cooja from their paper and their video present-
ing the project[32]. And to further evaluate our work, we also ran simulations using
the initial scheduler of the code, which was an Orchestra implementation. s
Figure 6.1: MODE - Extreme sport Topology[18].
Our evaluation will be split into two parts:
• One - evaluating only the performance of a movable node.
• Two - evaluating the overall network performance.
The evaluations are based on the Packet Delivery Ratio (PDR) of the nodes(movable/
all nodes) over the number of cycles passed during the simulations, the average Delay
per cycle for the nodes and the energy consumption. For all of the simulations, the
sink node, static nodes and movable nodes have the same setting in the following
parameters:
We evaluate our algorithms performance on 3 parameters:
• Packet Delivery Ratio (PDR) for the entire network and for the mobile node
• The average network delay
• The energy consumption of the mobile node and the network.
Each of these values will be plotted over the cycle numbers. To have a more complete
overview of the performance we have run multiple simulations for each topology. The
values plotted are the averages for all simulations in each cycle.
Sink, static and mobile nodes all have the same settings for the following processes:
==PAGE:85==
6 Test and results
80
Parameter name
Value in ms
Neighbour discovery period
10
Neighbour advertisement period
20
Data packet send period
30
Time slot duration
10
Table 6.1: IoT devices Configuration.
The next table contains the Simulation parameters and configuration set ups.
Parameters
Settings
Fork Topology
Mobility model
Ski slope
Sink Node/s
1 node / ID:1
Static Node/s
9 node / ID:2 - 10
Mobile
1 node / ID:11
Baseline
Mobility model
Ski slopes
Sink Node/s
1 node / ID:1
Static Node/s
5 nodes / ID: 2 - 6
Mobile
1 node/ ID: 7
Data
Packet size
127 bytes
Processing window
100 packages
100-45 packages
200 pakcages
Network
Transport
UDP
Network
Black Swan’s pandelium
MAC
Contention free TSCH
Simulation
Os
Contiki-Ng
Simulator
Cooja
Hardware
Mote
Cooja Mote
Radio range
50m
Table 6.2: Topology and test parameters.
We selected those exact processing window in order to match the different speeds
of the users of the ski slopes, as well as showing in what borders of what loads over the
network we can get reliable packet delivery ratios. The duration of the experiments
slightly varies between each other based on the speed of the skier and how long it
==PAGE:86==
6 Test and results
81
takes to get to the end.
During testing, we experienced that varying the processing window size had an effect
on the network establishment. If the window was too small, the network could not
send enough packages to establish itself.
A possible cause for this phenomenon could be that if it takes multiple cycles to
establish the network, a sync request packet from an edge node did not reach the con-
troller before the cycle ended, which would result in that package having the wrong
cycle_seq. This would cause the coordinator to drop the packet without looking at
the content, and cause the edge node to believe it is still waiting for acknowledgement
from the coordinator.
Regardless of the cause, the consequence has been that we have tested with different
processing windows to discover at what amount a network can successfully establish
itself.
We suspected that the amount of packages needed to establish the network was differ-
ent from the amount of packages that would be needed to keep the network topology
fresh. This led us to run tests where we used different processing windows for the
initial and the sequential cycles in an attempt to determine how to configure the
network. The different test parameters can be seen in 6.2.
With all these tests we aim to determine how we managed to overcome the chal-
lenges stated in the Design section 5.2.
6.0.1
Mobile Node and overall Network evaluation
In this part, we focus mostly on the mobile node behaviour. As we mentioned above
the main unit of measure will be the PDR. We calculate the PDR for a node by
looking at the packet with the highest pkt_sequence(SEQ) value the controller re-
ceived from that node in the given cycle. This gives us an indication as to how many
packages that node sent. We sum together how many packets the controller received
from that node(N_pack) and divide them to find PDR:
PDR = N_pack/SEQ
==PAGE:87==
6 Test and results
82
Figure 6.2: Baseline topology.
==PAGE:88==
6 Test and results
83
Figure 6.3: Baseline result with 100 packet window..
Figure 6.4: Baseline results with 100-45 packet window..
Figure 6.5: Baseline result with 200 packet window..
==PAGE:89==
6 Test and results
84
In figures 6.3, 6.4 and 6.5 we show the results from our simulations for each size
of packet window.
In 6.4 we observe the case of having 100 packages for the initialization of the net-
work where afterwards the rest of the cycles operated with 45. By running tests we
found out currently that is the optimal lowest Processing number before we start
losing packages from the nodes furthest away from the sink.
As it can be seen in terms of success rate the simulations showed that we have an
average PDR of 95.24% for the Mobile node and the Network AVG PDR is 98.04%.
We consider that a success, given the fact our target was to have 95% or above suc-
cessful transmission ratio.
In 6.3 and 6.5 again look at the baseline topology, with 100 and 200 packages for
the processing window. Here we observe similar results with slightly decreased per-
formance. The movable node delivery ratio dropped below 95% for the 100 packages
window, however, the network PDR stays above 95%.
Figure 6.6: Fork Topology.
==PAGE:90==
6 Test and results
85
Figure 6.7: Fork result with 100 packet window..
Figure 6.8: Fork result with 100-45 packet window..
Figure 6.9: Fork result with 200 packet window..
==PAGE:91==
6 Test and results
86
Next, we evaluate the Fork topology, which we consider to be a more interesting
case given that the algorithm will have to make more complex calculations to deter-
mine which static node to connect to at what time.
In those tests, as can be seen from the graphics, we did not reach our target of a
maximum 5 % error rate. The best Packet Delivery Ratio (PDR) we could reach
for the mobile node is 84.69% with the 100-45 packet window6.8 size, and the lowest
with 200 packets6.9.
Digging deeper into the test result, and evaluating each simulation and cycle sepa-
rately lead us to think the design of the topology plays a huge role in the performance
of the network. If we take for example the Fork topology 6.10 with 100-45 processing
window case.e can see that the rate remains consistent until it reaches the fork, which
is where the rest of the network also experiences a large drop in PDR. The moment
we get close to the fork (Movable node between static nodes 3,4,7), which happens
at cycle 6, we can see the general PDR of the network drops with around 30%. Then
when the mobile node gets connected to the Static node 4 or 7, its PDR decreases
with around 15% and 2 cycles later it fully fails to send data.
Observing the topology we can see that node 4 constitutes a single point of failure.
From our results in the fork performance, we can see the general drop-off for the entire
network happens in the later cycles, which is when the mobile node is moving closer
to the fork decision point. Since node 4 and 7 constitutes two single-points-of-failure,
it is likely that the drop in performance isn’t due to our algorithm, but rather due
to the topology of the scenario. We can see that the difference in how stable the
network is also varies depending on the processing window, with 200 and 100 being
the most unstable. This follows our assumption that topology matters, as the larger
processing window means the nodes on route to the sink node has to handle relatively
more traﬀic than the edge nodes.
Below is a console output showing the PDR rates of each node when the mobile
node is at the position shown in 6.11 it shows here that the set node that ended up
as bottle necks4 and the nodes that only had those nodes as a route to the sink, all
had incredibly low PDR.
Looking at the print log, we can see that whenever some of the nodes get over-
loaded with traﬀic they start dropping packages, as is expected. Due to node 4 being
Figure 6.10: Fork Fail rates.
Node:PDR => (2.0 - 0.97) , (3.0 - 0.97) , (4.0 - 0.14) , (5.0 - 0.14) , (6.0 - 0.16) ,
(7.0 - 0.14) , (8.0 - 0.16) , (9.0 - 0.14) , (10.0 - 0.14) , (11 - 0.14)
==PAGE:92==
6 Test and results
87
the only connecting point for nodes 5-10 and the mobile node they fail with a similar
rate.
Figure 6.11: Fork cycle with low PDR.
==PAGE:93==
6 Test and results
88
Figure 6.12: Mode result with 100 packet window..
Figure 6.13: Mode result with 100-45 packet window..
Figure 6.14: Mode result with 200 packet window..
==PAGE:94==
6 Test and results
89
We experienced the same behaviour when ran our algorithm with the MODE-
Algortihm[18] topology that can be seen form the Figure above. AS expected, we got
really poor results, maxing around 30 % average network PDR with 100-45 packages
and 41% average PDR for a movable node with 200 packages. We suspect that again
the position of the sink node played a huge role in the low result we gathered.
To test that theory we did 1 simulation with the sink node slightly moved closer
to the centre of the network. Doing that we immediately witnessed an increase in the
performance, which leads us to believe, that the Algorithm picks the correct routing
paths and creates a good communication link in the scheduler, but the bad setup of
the test topology leads us to the poor result.
Figure 6.15: Mode with 100 packet window with sink position changed..
The last comparison we did was against the scheduler from the initial state project
state, which uses the Orchestra algorithm for link scheduling. We picked the best-
performing processing window size from our algorithm for both baseline(100/45) and
fork topology(100), and compare our results in each topology against Orchestra with
the same processing window.
The results are showing a slightly improved delivery ratio for each of the scenarios.
As Orchestra is a contention based schedule, this indicates that our algorithm in the
given scenarios has better performance with a contention free approach. More testing
is needed for the results to be conclusive.
==PAGE:95==
6 Test and results
90
Figure 6.16: Baseline Orchestra results with 100-45 packet window..
Figure 6.17: Fork Orchestra results with 100 packet window..
As we mentioned at the beginning of the section, we measured the energy con-
sumption and the delay of the network and the movable node. In the figures below
we present the data we collected of delay, for all processing window sizes for both
fork and baseline topology..
==PAGE:96==
6 Test and results
91
Figure 6.18: Delay results in Baseline topology with 100 packet window..
Figure 6.19: Delay results in Fork topology with 100 packet window..
Figure 6.20: Delay results in Fork topology with 200 packet window..
==PAGE:97==
6 Test and results
92
We can see that the average delay is pretty low in the baseline case whenever we
have a high transmission rate. For example, if we take a look at the case of 100-45
packages for the processing window, where we hit the lowest delay at around 150 ms
for the movable node, it exactly corresponds to the result from the PDR measure-
ments. Furthermore, even in the worst case, which is the Fork topology with 200
packages the average is around 700 ms. The spikes we see after cycle 7,is the same
place where the network becomes overloaded, due to the single point of failure at
node 4. The highest delay that we see at cycle 12 is 3000, which is the default value
when a node fails to transmit any packages in a cycle.
==PAGE:98==
6 Test and results
93
Figure 6.21: Energy consumption results in Baseline topology with 100-45 packet
window..
Figure 6.22: Energy consumption results in Baseline topology with 100 packet win-
dow..
Figure 6.23: Power Consumption results in Fork topology with 100-45 packet win-
dow..
==PAGE:99==
6 Test and results
94
Although our aim was never to fully optimize the energy consumption we managed
to achieve a good average of 1000 µW across all tests.
All of the plots will be available in the Appendix.
In general, after evaluating all the data we gathered, can be conclude that in
the straightforward baseline topology where the position of the sink node is not of
such importance, we accomplished our target of above 95% PDR for both the Movable
node and entire network, as well as really good energy consumption and decent delays.
Whereas, the more complex Fork topology hits an average of 80% PDR and even lower
for the MODE topology test. However, the experiment with the change of the sink
position in the MODE topology and the immediate increase in the performance lead
us to believe that our Algorithm picks the correct routing paths and schedules links,
but due to bad placement of the sink node and design of the topology lead to low
and unsatisfactory results.
==PAGE:100==
CHAPTER 7
Discussion
We tested our SDWSN-controller running a prediction, routing and scheduling scheme
in a mobile IoT setting, on 2 different topologies, with different processing window
sizes. Additionally, We also tested our algorithm against the topology of the SD-
MioT controller [18]. Finally, we ran our prediction and routing algorithm with a
contention-based scheduling scheme, Orchestra.
Our results showed that our controller overall performs well in scenarios where the
topology of the network does not experience congestion due to single-points-of-failure,
keeping a PDR rate over 95%, with a low delay and energy consumption. This is
demonstrated by the baseline6.3,6.4,6.5 scenario performing the best under all pro-
cessing window sizes. The results from the more complicated fork topology show that
our scheme, like all networks, is susceptible to poor topology management. This is fur-
ther supported by the few tests we ran with our controller in the topology of SD-MioT
[18] as shown in figures6.12,6.13,6.14 where our algorithm performed abysmally when
the sink node was isolated, but had increases in PDR of up to 60% differing by pro-
cessing window, when the sink node was placed strategically to avoid bottlenecks6.15.
Finally, in the comparison with the Orchestra scheduling algorithm, our contention-
free TSCH schedule performed slightly better??6.17fig:Orc-base, 6.17hough this re-
sult is unreliable due to the small difference in performance, and the highly specified
scenario.
Our results imply that SDWSN is a great networking scheme for mobile IoT as the
logically centralized control plane is capable of adapting to changes in topology while
keeping a high level of QoS with low energy consumption. Additionally, the drop
in average performance that occurs when topology management is poor shows the
importance of proper sink node placement.
What our results do not show, is the scalability of our solution or the SDWSN ap-
proach in general in terms of mobile IoT. All proposed scenarios have featured a single
moveable node with varying amounts of static nodes. Neither have we attempted to
set up a network of networks to test SDWSN in inter-network scheduling. Future
research could focus on the deployment of multiple networks all running an SDWSN-
controller to investigate the SDN approach in a larger scale setting. Additionally, our
quirky result comparing Orchestra with our contention-free TSCH schedule could in-
dicate that research in the applicability of different scheduling approaches in different
==PAGE:101==
7 Discussion
96
application scenarios could yield some interesting results.
==PAGE:102==
CHAPTER 8
Future Work
To further improve our solution we should work on moving from a re-active control
protocol towards a pro-active approach. Our solution currently consults the controller
for every routing and scheduling decision in every cycle. An immediate improvement
would be a change to the data plane to prevent it from resetting the entire schedule,
but instead, update the links that have seen changes and keep the TSCH-links with
the other static nodes in the network. This would immediately reduce network traﬀic,
which we have seen our solution be sensitive to.
Our current solution has yet to be tested in a scenario of scale to see how it performs
in network denser node deployment and multiple moveable nodes. Future research
should focus on testing our solution in a larger scenario. As we have seen that higher
processing windows affect the results. Our initial scenario of the ski slope could be
reused in an inter-network project, as the different diﬀiculties of the slope put different
requirements on the network, in terms of refresh rate.
==PAGE:103==
CHAPTER 9
Conclusion
In this project, we have investigated the potential for the Software Defined Network-
ing approach to the mobile Internet of Things by developing a SDWSN-Controller for
a mobile IoT scenario, featuring a ski-slope scenario. Developing a controller for a
mobile IoT scenario requires consideration of the application to determine the design
goals and which network qualities to optimize for. In our scenario, reliability and
consistency with little regard for energy consumption.
Our results show that the benefits of the SDN approach for wireless sensor networks,
that is, adaptability to topology changes, lower energy consumption through decen-
tralized decision logic and eﬀicient communication through TSCH scheduling all re-
main in a mobile IoT configuration. We showed through our controller that it is
possible to achieve high-level reliability and low delay, but that like any other net-
work, performance correlates with proper topology management. Our controller tries
to balance between the refresh speed of the network and the accuracy. As mentioned
in our Test and Result Section we are evaluating the algorithm with different sizes of
the package window per cycle. The result showed that if we increase too much the
packages then the network slows down and even thou there will be more data received
by the controller we may lose the possibility of accurately following the movable node
and keeping a constant connection whit it. On the others side, when we reduce the
size of the package window the network refresh rate increase and allows us to better
prediction of the routing leading to a constant link with the movable node. However,
there if we reduce the number of packages per cycle too much, the data received by
the controller will be too noisy.
==PAGE:104==
CHAPTER 10
Glossary
==PAGE:105==
Glossary
6LoWPAN IPv6 over Low Power Wireless Personal Area Networks. 47
ACK Acknowledgement. 24, 30, 39, 42, 46, 66
ARQ Automatic Repeat reQuest. 11
ASN absolute slot number. 31, 32, 39, 40, 45
BLE Battery Lift Extension. 27
CAP contention access period. 27
CDMA Code Division Multiple Access. 22
CSMA/CA Carrier Sense Mulitple Access with Collision Avoidance. 22
ED Energy Detection. 33, 34, 36
EUI-64 Extended Unique Identifier 64-bit. 4, 5
FCS Frame Sequence Check. 25
FDMA Frequency Division Multiple Access. 22
FEC Forward Error Correction. 11
FFD Full-Function Device. 4, 33, 34, 37, 40, 60
GTS Guaranteed Timeslot. 26–29
IE Information Element. 25, 26, 32, 38–43, 46
IFS InterFrame Spacing. 27
IoT Internet of Things. 1, 13, 47, 49–51, 59, 95
LMO leftmost octed. 5
==PAGE:106==
Glossary
101
LR-WPAN Low-Rate Wireless Personal Area Network. 4
MAC Medium Access Control. 4, 10, 11, 21–25, 33, 34, 36, 37, 39, 41, 44, 45, 52,
63, 65
ML Machine Learning. 51, 62
OS Operation System. 47, 57, 58
OSI Open Systems Interconnection. 9, 11
PAN Personal Area Network. 4, 5, 23–29, 31, 33, 34, 36–39, 44, 45, 65
PDR Packet Delivery Ratio. 66, 79, 81, 84, 86, 89, 94, 95
PHY physical layer. 33, 34, 41
PIB personal area network information base. 34, 36–38, 41
QoS Quality of Service. 60, 95
QR Acknowledgement. 24
RFD Reduced-Function Device. 4, 36, 60
RMO rightmost octet. 5
RQ Research Question. 54
RQs Research Questions. 54
RSSI Received Signal Strength Indicator. 62, 63, 66, 70, 77
SDN Software Defined Network. 13, 14, 16–18, 21, 49, 51–54, 95
SDWSN Software Defined Wireless Sensor Network. 49–51, 53, 57–59, 95
TCP Transmission control protocol. 10, 21
TDMA Time Division Multiple Access. 22
TSCH Time Slotted Channel Hopping. 16, 24, 30–33, 39–45, 48, 52, 58, 63–65, 74,
76, 77, 95
UDP User datagram protocol. 10
WPAN Wireless Personal Area Network. 4
WSN Wireless Sensor Network. 3, 4, 9–11, 21, 33, 49, 51, 52, 55, 60, 65
==PAGE:107==
APPENDIX A
Appendix A:
MacLinkTable
Source: [1]
==PAGE:108==
A Appendix A: MacLinkTable
103
==PAGE:109==
APPENDIX B
Appendix B: MAC PIB
Attributed
Source: [1]
==PAGE:110==
B Appendix B: MAC PIB Attributed
105
==PAGE:111==
APPENDIX C
Appendix C: full SCAN
primitive, Beacon
Request
Source: [1]
==PAGE:112==
APPENDIX D
Appendix 4:
PANDescriptor
Source: [1]
==PAGE:113==
D Appendix 4: PANDescriptor
108
==PAGE:114==
Bibliography
[1]
IEEE, “Ieee standard for low-rate wireless networks,” IEEE Std 802.15.4-2020
(Revision of IEEE Std 802.15.4-2015), pages 1–800, 2020. doi: 10 . 1109 /
IEEESTD.2020.9144691.
[2]
O. Nielsen, L. K. Schnugger, C. Orfanidis, and X. Fafoutis, “Mobility-focused
joining in tsch networks,” eng, Proceedings of the 47th IEEE Conference on
Local Computer Networks, T. F. Oteafy S Bulut E, Ed., pages 271–274, 2022,
issn: 07421303. doi: 10.1109/LCN53696.2022.9843205.
[3]
S.-H. Yang, “Introduction,” in Wireless Sensor Networks: Principles,Design and
Applications. Springer London, 2014, pages 1–6, isbn: 978-1-4471-5505-8. doi:
10.1007/978-1-4471-5505-8_1. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.
1007/978-1-4471-5505-8_1.
[4]
J. Zheng and A. Jamalipour, Wireless Sensor Networks: A Networking Per-
spective. 2008, pages 1–489, Cited by: 270. doi: 10.1002/9780470443521. [On-
line]. Available: https://www.scopus.com/inward/record.uri?eid=2-
s2.0-84889462195&doi=10.1002%5C%2f9780470443521&partnerID=40&md5=
f7a220b74ce9f33747eb598db8c9e49a.
[5]
Y. Lv and Y. Tian, “Design and application of sink node for wireless sensor net-
work,” in 2010 2nd International Conference on Industrial and Information Sys-
tems, volume 1, 2010, pages 487–490. doi: 10.1109/INDUSIS.2010.5565803.
[6]
“Wireless sensor network (wsn).” Last accessed: 04.16.2023. (), [Online]. Avail-
able: https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/wireless-sensor-network-wsn/.
[7]
“Differences between tcp and udp.” Last accessed: 04.16.2023. (), [Online]. Avail-
able: https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/differences-between-tcp-and-
udp/.
[8]
“Introduction of a router.” last accessed: 04.19.2023. (), [Online]. Available:
https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/introduction-of-a-router/.
[9]
“What is the control plane?.control plane vs. data plane.” last accessed: 04.19.2023.
(), [Online]. Available: https://www.cloudflare.com/learning/network-
layer/what-is-the-control-plane/.
==PAGE:115==
Bibliography
110
[10]
B. A. A. Nunes, M. Mendonca, X.-N. Nguyen, K. Obraczka, and T. Turletti,
“A survey of software-defined networking: Past, present, and future of pro-
grammable networks,” IEEE Communications Surveys
Tutorials, volume 16,
number 3, pages 1617–1634, 2014. doi: 10.1109/SURV.2014.012214.00180.
[11]
B. A. A. Nunes, M. Mendonca, X.-N. Nguyen, K. Obraczka, and T. Turletti,
“A survey of software-defined networking: Past, present, and future of pro-
grammable networks,” IEEE Communications Surveys
Tutorials, volume 16,
number 3, pages 1617–1634, 2014. doi: 10.1109/SURV.2014.012214.00180.
[12]
M. K. Jaiswal, “Introduction to openflow,” eng, Innovations in Software-defined
Networking and Network Functions Virtualization, pages 52–71, 2018. doi: 10.
4018/978-1-5225-3640-6.ch003.
[13]
S. Duquennoy, B. Al Nahas, O. Landsiedel, and T. Watteyne, “Orchestra: Ro-
bust mesh networks through autonomously scheduled tsch,” eng, Sensys 2015
- Proceedings of the 13th Acm Conference on Embedded Networked Sensor Sys-
tems, pages 337–350, 2015. doi: 10.1145/2809695.2809714.
[14]
“Contiki-ng documentation.” last accessed: 04.19.2023. (), [Online]. Available:
https://docs.contiki-ng.org/en/develop/.
[15]
“Contiki-ng oﬀicial repository.” last accessed: 04.19.2023. (), [Online]. Available:
https://github.com/contiki-os/contiki.
[16]
G. Oikonomou, S. Duquennoy, A. Elsts, J. Eriksson, Y. Tanaka, and N. Tsiftes,
“The contiki-ng open source operating system for next generation iot devices,”
SoftwareX, volume 18, page 101 089, 2022, issn: 2352-7110. doi: https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.softx.2022.101089. [Online]. Available: https://www.
sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2352711022000620.
[17]
V. C. Gungor and G. P. Hancke, “Industrial wireless sensor networks: Chal-
lenges, design principles, and technical approaches,” IEEE Transactions on In-
dustrial Electronics, volume 56, number 10, pages 4258–4265, 2009. doi: 10.
1109/TIE.2009.2015754.
[18]
T. Theodorou and L. Mamatas, “Sd-miot: A software-defined networking so-
lution for mobile internet of things,” eng, Ieee Internet of Things Journal,
volume 8, number 6, pages 4604–4617, 2021, issn: 23722541, 23274662. doi:
10.1109/JIOT.2020.3027427.
[19]
T. Theodorou and L. Mamatas, “Software defined topology control strategies
for the internet of things,” in 2017 IEEE Conference on Network Function
Virtualization and Software Defined Networks (NFV-SDN), 2017, pages 236–
241. doi: 10.1109/NFV-SDN.2017.8169884.
[20]
T. Theodorou and L. Mamatas, “A versatile out-of-band software-defined net-
working solution for the internet of things,” eng, Ieee Access, volume 8, pages 103 710–
103 733, 2020, issn: 21693536. doi: 10.1109/ACCESS.2020.2999087.
==PAGE:116==
Bibliography
111
[21]
S. W. Pritchard, R. Malekian, G. P. Hancke, and A. M. Abu-Mahfouz, “Improv-
ing northbound interface communication in sdwsn,” eng, Proceedings Iecon 2017
- 43rd Annual Conference of the Ieee Industrial Electronics Society, volume 2017-
, pages 8361–8366, 2017, issn: 1553572x. doi: 10.1109/IECON.2017.8217468.
[22]
F. F. Jurado-Lasso, L. Marchegiani, J. F. Jurado, A. M. Abu-Mahfouz, and
X. Fafoutis, “A survey on machine learning software-defined wireless sensor
networks (ml-sdwsns): Current status and major challenges,” eng, Ieee Access,
volume 10, pages 23 560–23 592, 2022, issn: 21693536. doi: 10.1109/ACCESS.
2022.3153521.
[23]
A. Tinka, T. Watteyne, K. S. J. Pister, and A. M. Bayen, “A decentralized
scheduling algorithm for time synchronized channel hopping,” eng, Icst Trans-
actions on Mobile Communications and Applications, volume 11, number 7–9,
e5, 2011, issn: 20329504. doi: 10.4108/icst.trans.mca.2011.e5.
[24]
S. Duquennoy, A. Elsts, B. A. Nahas, and G. Oikonomo, “Tsch and 6tisch
for contiki: Challenges, design and evaluation,” eng, Proceedings - 2017 13th
International Conference on Distributed Computing in Sensor Systems, Dcoss
2017, volume 2018-, pages 11–18, 2018, issn: 23252936, 23252944. doi: 10.1109/
DCOSS.2017.29.
[25]
G. P. Gupta, “Software-defined networking paradigm in wireless sensor net-
works,” eng, Innovations in Software-defined Networking and Network Func-
tions Virtualization, pages 254–267, 2018. doi: 10.4018/978-1-5225-3640-
6.ch012.
[26]
“Dtu findit.” last accessed: 04.19.2023. (), [Online]. Available: https://findit.
dtu.dk/.
[27]
H. Sahu and M. Hungyo, “Introduction to sdn and nfv,” eng, Innovations in
Software-defined Networking and Network Functions Virtualization, pages 1–25,
2018. doi: 10.4018/978-1-5225-3640-6.ch001.
[28]
T. Watteyne, J. Weiss, L. Doherty, and J. Simon, “Industrial ieee802.15.4e
networks: Performance and trade-offs,” eng, Ieee International Conference on
Communications, volume 2015-, pages 604–609, 2015, issn: 19381883, 81649547,
15503607. doi: 10.1109/ICC.2015.7248388.
[29]
J. Eriksson, F. Österlind, N. Finne, et al., “Cooja/mspsim: Interoperability
testing for wireless sensor networks,” eng, Simutools 2009 - 2nd International
Icst Conference on Simulation Tools and Techniques, 2009. doi: 10.4108/ICST.
SIMUTOOLS2009.5637.
[30]
“Docker.” Last accessed: 04.16.2023. (), [Online]. Available: https : / / www .
docker.com/.
[31]
“Average skier speed.” last accessed: 04.16.2023. (), [Online]. Available: https:
//www.mtbskiingandfitness.com/skiing-speeds-of-an-average-beginner-
and-expert-skier/.
==PAGE:117==
Bibliography
112
[32]
T. Theodorou and L. Mamatas, “Sd-miot a software-defined networking solu-
tion for the mobile internet of things,” eng, [Online]. Available: https://www.
youtube.com/watch?v=wZLcXCciriE.
==PAGE:118==
