==PAGE:1==
Evaluating GNN Architecture Performance of
Recommender System in the Tourism Domain
Master Thesis
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
==PAGE:2==
Approval
This Master’s thesis project has been prepared over the course of three months at the
Section for DTU Compute, Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfillment for
the degree of Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng. It is the third attempt on the
same topic.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of graph, machine
learning, and recommender system.
Yushu Xie ­ s202558
Signature
Date
ii
Evaluating GNN Architecture Performance of Recommender System in the Tourism Domain
30/04/2023
==PAGE:3==
Acknowledgements
The first attempt at this Master’s thesis project began in April 2022. However, I was unable
to successfully reproduce a GNN model selected for the project, as the source code was
not available. Despite the setback, the project remained an area of great interest to me,
prompting a second attempt. Lessons were learned from the first failure, and I made sure
to select experimental models with available source code. Unfortunately, due to illness, I
was unable to deliver the results on time for the second attempt, leading to the completion
of the project on the third attempt.
Failing twice in a row on a Master’s thesis project was extremely stressful, and I would
like to express sincere gratitude to my supervisor Jes for providing constant support and
valuable feedback throughout the project. Special thanks are also due to my friend Alvils
for his assistance in deploying the project on Colab. Additionally, I am grateful for the
companionship of my friend Lingrui, who offered support during the challenging times
caused by the delays and difficulties in reproducing the project.
Evaluating GNN Architecture Performance of Recommender System in the Tourism Domain
iii
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
This study evaluates the performance of various GNN (graph neural networks) architec­
tures for tourism attraction recommendation, including Neural Graph Collaborative Fil­
tering (NGCF), Light Graph Convolutional Network (LightGCN), Low­pass Collaborative
Filter Network (LCFN), and Graph Convolutional Matrix Completion (GCMC). The exper­
iment results show that GNN models outperform baseline models (Matrix Factorization
(MF) and Neural Collaborative Filtering (NCF)) on the Google Review Rating dataset,
as measured by F1score and NDCG@k, and that the performance of the model is im­
pacted by graph structures. The study emphasizes the importance of evaluating models
on tourism domain datasets and presents a systematic mapping study on GNN in rec­
ommender systems. This study provides insights into the potential of GNN models for
tourism recommendation systems and suggests avenues for further research. To the
best of the author’s knowledge, this is the first systematic mapping study of GNN models
in recommender systems that focuses on the tourism domain and no such evaluation was
conducted before this project began.
iv
Evaluating GNN Architecture Performance of Recommender System in the Tourism Domain
==PAGE:5==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
2
2
Related work
4
2.1
Recommender system in general . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2
Recommender system in tourism domain
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3
Systematic mapping study of GNN in recommender systems
. . . . . . . .
7
3
Datasets
14
3.1
Overview
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
3.2
Google review rating dataset
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
3.3
Movie lens­1M
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
4
Experiment
19
4.1
Dataset preprocessing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
4.2
Models selection and implementation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
4.3
Parameters setting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
4.4
Evaluation protocols . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
4.5
Model tuning and analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
4.6
Test result and analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
5
Future work
28
5.1
Evaluating on Large Sparse Datasets
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
5.2
Comparing More Models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
5.3
Attempting to Improve Model Performance for Tourism Domain . . . . . . . 28
6
Conclusion
29
A Experiment result and Source code
32
Evaluating GNN Architecture Performance of Recommender System in the Tourism Domain
1
==PAGE:6==
1
Introduction
Recommender systems have become a vital component in numerous online platforms
as they offer personalized recommendations for users based on their preferences and
behavior. In the tourism domain, there is a significant demand for personalized travel rec­
ommendations, resulting in recommender systems gaining tremendous popularity. Major
platforms such as TripAdvisor, Booking, and Airbnb have acknowledged this trend and im­
plemented advanced recommender systems to provide tailored recommendations to their
users.However, the growing volume of data calls for more sophisticated recommender
systems that can handle complex data and provide accurate recommendations.
Graph neural networks (GNNs) have shown great potential in improving the performance
of recommender systems. GNNs can capture the complex relationships among users,
items, and other auxiliary information in the graph, thus enhancing recommendation ac­
curacy. However, the evaluation of GNN model performance has been largely confined
to general recommender datasets such as Movie­Lens. This project aims to bridge this
gap and assess the effectiveness of GNN models in the tourism domain by comparing
them with classic recommender systems such as matrix factorization.
This paper aims to evaluate the performance of different GNN architectures for recom­
mender systems in the tourism domain. The author commences by presenting an intro­
duction to general recommendation systems and their applications in the tourism domain,
aimed at providing readers with a fundamental understanding of conventional recom­
mender systems. The author also establishes the focus of the study on tourist attraction
recommendation. Subsequently, the author performs a systematic mapping study to ex­
plore the influence of graph neural networks (GNNs) on the efficiency of recommender
systems. The systematic mapping study was also instrumental in selecting representative
models for the experiment stage.The conclusion drawn from this study is that the feature
representation of the model is significantly impacted by different graph structures, and the
advantages of GNNs lie in their effective representation of users, items, and interactions.
The term ”interactions” encompasses not only the interactions between users and items
but also the relationships between users and users, as well as items and items, which
can also be modeled using graphs.
Next, the author performed a visual analysis of the real­world tourism datasets, specifically
the Google Review Rating dataset[17], used in the study. As seen in the Experiment
section, the dataset’s characteristics had a notable impact on the performance of the
models in the experiments. This underscores the significance of evaluating the models
on tourism domain datasets, as these datasets have unique features that can affect model
performance.
To evaluate the performance of GNN models on tourism domain data, the author designed
an experiment that compared four representative GNN models (Neural Graph Collabora­
tive Filtering(NGCF), Light Graph Convolutional Network(LightGCN), Low pass Collabo­
rative Filter Network(LCFN), and Graph Convolutional Matrix Comple(GCMC)) with two
baseline models ( Matrix Factorization(MF) and Neural Collaborative Filtering(NCF)). The
results showed that the GNN models outperformed the baseline models. Furthermore,
the evaluation metrics, including the F1 score and NDCG@k, demonstrated that the GNN
models performed better on the Google Review Rating dataset than on the Movielens­1M
dataset.
2
Evaluating GNN Architecture Performance of Recommender System in the Tourism Domain
==PAGE:7==
The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 reviews related work on recommender sys­
tems and tourism recommendation, as well as a systematic mapping study of GNN in
recommender system. Section 3 introduces the datasets used in our experiments and
the reason why it’s chosen. Section 4 describes the details of our experimental setup,
including data preprocessing, model selection and implementation, parameter setting,
evaluation protocols, and model tuning. Section 4.5 presents the test results and analy­
sis. Finally, we discuss future research directions in section 5 and conclude the paper in
Section 6.
Evaluating GNN Architecture Performance of Recommender System in the Tourism Domain
3
==PAGE:8==
2
Related work
2.1
Recommender system in general
With the explosive growth of information on the Web, recommender systems play an im­
portant role in alleviating information overload[22]. A recommender system is used for
predicting if a user is interested in an item based on their past behavior. Recommender
systems could be classified into 5 types by different recommendation techniques: collab­
orative filtering, Content­based recommendation, Hybrid recommendation, Knowledge­
based recommendation and Model­based recommendation. Figure 2.1 gives an overview
of general recommenders.
Collaborative filtering predicts recommendations based on similarities between users or
items by analyzing user behavior or item features, while content­based filtering suggests
similar items based on matching item features and user preferences. Additionally, hybrid
recommender systems that combine these two approaches are commonly used[1], albeit
their implementation can be complex.
Knowledge­based recommendation is a recommendation system approach that gener­
ates recommendation lists by leveraging domain knowledge of users and items, such as
semantic relationships and attribute information. Compared to traditional collaborative fil­
tering recommendation methods, knowledge­based recommendation performs better in
cold­start problem[20].
Model­based recommendation is a method that uses machine learning and data mining
techniques to predict user preferences and generate recommendation lists by modeling
the historical user behaviors and item attributes. In 2006, Matrix decomposition was first
introduced to recommender system domain by Simon Funk, his method Funk­SVD was
also called Latent Factor Model (LFM) by Netflix Prize winner Koren[9]. Funk­SVD is a
matrix decomposition method that decomposes a user­item interaction matrix M into two
low­rank matrices U and S, such that
Mm×n = UT
m×kSk×n
(2.1)
. Each row of S and column of U represent the latent features of users and items, respec­
tively. The dot product of the corresponding user and item features gives the predicted
rating score. Following Koren’s introduction of MF, it has become a prevalent baseline
model for recommender systems. The emergence of deep learning has enabled the de­
velopment and expansion of matrix decomposition­based models, such as those based
on neural networks and graph networks. These advancements offer new avenues for re­
search and application in recommendation systems. In Section 2.3, detailed explanations
of graph neural network models will be provided.
Figure 2.1 provides a clear overview of the categories of recommendation systems. The
red star highlights the category that is the main focus of this section, which is model­
based recommendation. This approach is commonly used in both academic and business
contexts, making it an important area of research.
4
Evaluating GNN Architecture Performance of Recommender System in the Tourism Domain
==PAGE:9==
Figure 2.1: Recommender system in general
2.1.1
Collaborative filtering
The primary focus of this paper is Graph neural network models in model­based rec­
ommendation. However, in order to achieve better recommendation performance, most
recommendation models are typically combined with collaborative filtering. Therefore, we
will introduce collaborative filtering first.
Collaborative filtering has emerged as one of the most popular recommendation systems
due to its scalability in handling large datasets with a vast number of users and items.
In the majority of collaborative filtering models, a rating matrix is used to represent the
interactions between users and items. As illustrated in Figure 2.2, this matrix consists
of columns that represent items, rows that represent users, and values that indicate the
corresponding ratings given by each user for each item.
The rating matrix plays a crucial role in collaborative filtering, as it serves as the foun­
dation for identifying patterns and similarities in user behavior, which are subsequently
utilized to generate personalized recommendations for each user. In essence, collabo­
rative filtering leverages the available ratings to predict the unknown ratings of users on
items. By analyzing the rating matrix, collaborative filtering algorithms can identify users
with similar preferences and recommend items that are popular among these users.
One of the disadvantages of collaborative filtering is that the rating matrix can become
very sparse, particularly when users only interact with a limited number of items. This is
commonly referred to as the ”cold start” problem, which poses a significant challenge for
collaborative filtering recommendations[13].The cold start problem is a common issue in
recommender systems where the system is unable to make personalized recommenda­
tions for new users or items with limited or no interaction history. This is because collabo­
rative filtering­based approaches rely heavily on the historical interactions between users
and items to calculate their similarity and generate recommendation.
2.1.2
User­based collaborative filtering
The user­based collaborative filtering approach primarily focuses on determining the sim­
ilarity between users, based on their past interactions with items. By identifying similar
Evaluating GNN Architecture Performance of Recommender System in the Tourism Domain
5
==PAGE:10==
Figure 2.2: The rating matrix in collaborative filtering
users who have rated items similarly in the past, the approach can predict the ratings of
target users for corresponding items and recommend top­rated items.
2.1.3
Item­based collaborative filtering
In the context of collaborative filtering, item­based collaborative filtering is similar to user­
based collaborative filtering, with the difference being that item­based collaborative filter­
ing focuses on identifying similarities between items. Once the target user’s ratings for
certain items are found, predictions can be made for similar items with high similarity, and
the top­rated items can be recommended to the user. Item­based CF has proven to be
successful in the field of e­commerce, as evidenced by its implementation in platforms
such as Amazon. For instance, when a user purchases a lipstick online from Amazon,
the platform utilizes item­based CF to recommend other lipsticks to the user based on
their similarity to the previously purchased item.
2.2
Recommender system in tourism domain
The demand for personalized travel recommendations has led to the widespread popular­
ity of recommender systems in the tourism domain. Leading platforms such as TripAdvi­
sor, Booking, and Airbnb have successfully incorporated recommender systems to cater
to users’ preferences and needs.
The history of recommender systems in the tourism domain can be traced back to the
early 2000s when the internet became widely available, and online travel agencies (OTAs)
emerged. These OTAs enabled travelers to book flights, hotels, and other travel services
online, which generated a vast amount of data on user preferences and behavior[15].
Initially, recommender systems in tourism primarily relied on collaborative filtering tech­
niques to provide recommendations to users. For example, Amazon­style recommenda­
tions suggested hotels or destinations based on the user’s previous bookings or search
history. However, these early systems faced limited success due to insufficient data and
challenges in developing accurate recommendation algorithms.
As more data became available, researchers began developing more sophisticated rec­
ommendation algorithms based on machine learning techniques. Notably, the Matrix Fac­
torization algorithm uses latent factors to represent user preferences and item attributes,
enabling accurate predictions even when data is sparse[9].
6
Evaluating GNN Architecture Performance of Recommender System in the Tourism Domain
==PAGE:11==
In recent years, the use of recommender systems in the tourism industry has become
more widespread, with many online travel agencies and travel planning websites incor­
porating recommendation algorithms into their platforms. These systems now provide
personalized recommendations for transportation, accommodation, food, flights, hotels
attractions, seasonal preferences and other travel services based on a user’s preferences,
behavior, and demographics [18]. In [4], a pervasive review on travel­based recommen­
dation system is presented.
In summary, the history of recommender systems in the tourism domain is closely linked to
the growth of the internet and the emergence of online travel agencies.As travel involves
various aspects, there are numerous and diverse travel­based recommendation systems.
This article will focus on attraction recommender systems, which are the primary purpose
of tourism.
2.3
Systematic mapping study of GNN in recommender
systems
To systematically explore the graph neural networks in recommender system area, the
author conducted a systematic mapping study in this field. The main steps followed the
guide proposed by Petersen and his group in Guidelines For Conducting Systematic Map­
ping Studies In Software Engineering: An Update [14]. As it shown clearly in in figure 2.3,
the study starts from the given research questions, search strings are defined from the
questions and then applied to selected trustworthy essay databases. In this step, 140
relative papers are obtained, which we called candidate papers in the following sections.
The researcher needs to filter out the more valuable candidate papers for further analysis.
So the excluding criteria and including criteria were are drawn up based on experimental
and research needs. Compared to most similar systematic mapping studies, the authors
assigned a higher weight to experimental reproduction when selecting the final candidate
papers because of the lack of useful tourism datasets and the difficulty of adapting GNN
models in the tourism field.
Figure 2.3: How systematic mapping study work
Evaluating GNN Architecture Performance of Recommender System in the Tourism Domain
7
==PAGE:12==
2.3.1
Research questions and database
As state in the introduction section, The goal of this project is to figure out if GNN ar­
chitecture have positive feedback on the tourism recommender system. However, to the
author’s limited knowledge, no such works have been done before. So the research ques­
tion of this systematic mapping study becomes:
How GNN architectures influence recommender system?
From the research question, we can easily define the following search strings in table 2.1.
In this step, the author selected ACM1 as research database. and IEEE Xplore Digital
Library2 as research database.
Table 2.1: Database and Search string
Database
Search string
Result
ACM
AllField:(GNN) AND AllField:(recommend*)
78
IEEE
”All Metadata”:GNN) AND (”All Metadata”:recommend*)
80
Total
Remove duplication
140
2.3.2
Selecting candidate papers
It can be seen in Figure 2.3 that we should narrow down the systematic mapping scope
to facilitate detailed analysis. By applying the following including criteria and excluding
criteria, 45 papers from GNN recommender field are selected for grouping and mapping.
• Including criteria:
1. The paper which introduces a model applying GNN in recommender system
field should be included.
2. The paper which is a survey about GNN model in recommender system field
should be included.
3. The paper should be in English and full text available.
4. The baseline models chosen for these candidate papers should be included if
the purpose of the proposal is to improve the performance of the recommen­
dation system.
• Excluding criteria:
1. The paper should not focus on facilitating GNN training speed or other experi­
mental level problems.
2. The recommendation model should not be session based which designed to
capture short­term and dynamic user preferences.
2.3.3
Grouping criteria and result
Table 2.2: Grouping Result
Group
Papers
Survey
5
1https://dl.acm.org/
2https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/Xplore/home.jsp
8
Evaluating GNN Architecture Performance of Recommender System in the Tourism Domain
==PAGE:13==
Homogeneous graph recommendation
6
Bipartite graph recommendation
15
Heterogeneous graph recommendation
16
The grouping methodology was first proposed in a survey paper that offered a compre­
hensive overview of the GNN recommender field. In 2020, ShiWen Wu and colleagues
made a significant contribution by introducing a scientific taxonomy to classify existing
GNN­based general recommendation models based on their graph constructions [22].
Leveraging this taxonomy, the author of the present study classified candidate papers
into four distinct categories. Notably, five survey papers were assigned to the group de­
noted as ”Survey”, which won’t be a group for the models.
As the table 2.2 shows, Bipartite graph and Heterogeneous graph are most popular in
recent years, both of them account over 30% in the candidate papers.
2.3.4
Mapping result and analysis
In this section, we will first present the graph architecture and its mathematical definition
to provide a better understanding of how the models utilize the graph to model interactions
and make predictions. Then, we will introduce representative models from each group in
detail.
Homogeneous graph based GNN recommender
First, we could define a homogeneous graph architecture as G = (V, E), where V is the
set of nodes and E is the set of edges. Let n be the number of nodes in the graph, then
we can represent the graph using an n × n adjacency matrix A, where A[i, j] = 1 if there
is an edge from node i to node j, and 0 otherwise.
In the context of recommender systems, the homogeneous graph architecture is used to
model user­item interactions. Each node V in the graph G represents either a user or
an item, and user’s ratings on items, clicks, or purchases will be modelled as the edges
E. The key idea behind the homogeneous graph architecture is to learn representations
for users and items based on their interactions with each other in the graph. This is well
illustrated in Fi­GNN (Modeling Feature Interactions via Graph Neural Networks) [10], the
authors propose a graph structure for representing multi­field features, where each feature
field is a node V , and E stores the interactions between different fields. As it leverages
the strong representational power of graphs to model sophisticated feature interactions
in a flexible and explicit manner, Li and his team test its performance for click­through
rate (CTR) prediction on two real­world dataset. The Fi­GNN got higher F1 score against
baseline models[10].
Evaluating GNN Architecture Performance of Recommender System in the Tourism Domain
9
==PAGE:14==
Figure 2.4: Homogeneous graph:only one type of node and edge
Heterogeneous graph based GNN recommender
Similarly, a heterogeneous graph can be represented as a set of node types V = {V1, V2, ..., Vm}
and a set of edge types E = {E1, E2, ..., Ek}, where each edge type connects nodes of
certain types. Let n1, n2, ..., nm be the number of nodes of each type and A1, A2, ..., Ak
be the adjacency matrices of each edge type. Then the heterogeneous graph can be
represented by a tuple G = (V, E, {A1, A2, ..., Ak}), where each adjacency matrix Ai is of
size nhi × nti, representing the relationships between nodes of different types.
Figure 2.5: Heterogeneous graph :multiple type of nodes an edges
The illustrated Figure 2.5 clearly demonstrates that the Heterogeneous graph­based rec­
ommendation system incorporates multiple types of nodes. In contrast to the conventional
division of nodes into users and items, this system may include other types of nodes as
well. Moreover, the relationships between these nodes are captured in the form of edges,
which highlights the graph­based approach of the system.
This group is highly popular and has the potential to become the future of GNN­based
10
Evaluating GNN Architecture Performance of Recommender System in the Tourism Domain
==PAGE:15==
recommendation models, owing to its ability to capture latent relations not only between
users and items but also within them.
Currently, it is primarily applied in social recommendation systems owing to its exceptional
performance in modeling social relationships. GraFRank is a neural architecture intro­
duced by Sankar[19], which leverages multi­modal user features and link communication
features to improve the representations for capturing data features. In the paper [19],
they presents a novel approach for friend suggestion on large­scale social platforms us­
ing Graph Neural Networks (GNNs). The GraFrank address the challenges posed by such
platforms, which often have heavy­tailed degree distributions, inactive users, and multi­
faceted interaction patterns. The experiments, which conducted on Snapchat dataset,
showed that GraFRank outperforms several currently popular models.
Additionally, VisGNN is a noval application, which use GNN to improve the personalized
visualization recommendation[12]. The first step of VisGNN is to model the user data and
visualizations based on a heterogeneous graph. Then it digest a ’visualization’ to data and
visual components, then VisGNN embedding them together as a large graph to generate
recommendations. The experiments in [12] show that VisGNN achieves almost two­fold
improvement in efficiency compared to the baseline model.
Bipartite graph based GNN recommender
As depicted in Figure 2.6, a bipartite graph is a type of heterogeneous graph where only
two types of nodes are present, typically referred to as U and I, representing users and
items, respectively. It is important to note that in the context of recommender systems, it is
more appropriate to say that the current use of heterogeneous graphs in recommendation
systems is inspired by bipartite graphs.
In a bipartite graph, all edges connect a node from U to a node from I, but there are no
edges connecting nodes within the same set (i.e., between two users or between two
items). So a bipartite graph is always defined as B = (U, I, E), where U is the set of user
nodes, I is the set of item nodes, and E is the set of edges connecting users and items.
Let |U| and |I| be the number of user and item nodes respectively, then we can represent
the bipartite graph using a |U| × |I| adjacency matrix A, where A[i, j] = 1 if there is an
edge connecting user i and item j, and 0 otherwise.
Evaluating GNN Architecture Performance of Recommender System in the Tourism Domain
11
==PAGE:16==
Figure 2.6: User­Item Bipartite :2 type of node,user and item when edge represents in­
teraction
After the representation of user­item bipartite graphs appear, graph neural networks have
shown great potential in recommender systems and have become a widely studied ap­
proach for recommendation systems. NGCF (Neural Graph Collaborative Filtering) is one
of the most classic examples which learns embeddings for users and items and predicts
their ratings or preferences based on these embeddings. NGCF utilizes graph convolu­
tional networks to aggregate information from neighboring nodes in the graph and learn
low­dimensional embeddings for both users and items. Compared to traditional collabo­
rative filtering approaches, NGCF has demonstrated better performance in terms of rec­
ommendation accuracy and scalability [21].
It should be noted that although NGCF is named ”collaborative filtering,” it does not belong
to the category of collaborative filtering, which recommends items based on similarity.
The term ”neural graph collaborative filtering” was chosen because NGCF uses user­item
interaction history to generate predictions. In contrast, the DGCF (dual­message graph
CF) model combines neural networks with classic collaborative filtering. DGCF uses two
GNNs to process the embeddings of each user/item, one for preferences and one for
similarities, addressing the issue of traditional CF models who only modeling user­item
preferences and implying the similarity between users/items [11].
2.3.5
Answer for the research question
In recent years, Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have emerged as a popular approach for
recommendation systems, as they enable the modeling of user­item, user­user, and item­
item interactions using graph structures. Improving the representation of users, items, and
their interactions in graphs, as well as developing methods for processing these graphs,
are the key research directions for enhancing GNN­based recommender systems. In
general, there are three types of graph structures commonly used in recommendation
systems: homogeneous graphs, user­item bipartite graphs, and heterogeneous graphs.
Among these, recommender systems based on bipartite and heterogeneous graphs have
been the primary focus of research.
During the systematic mapping study, it was found that there is a lack of research dedi­
12
Evaluating GNN Architecture Performance of Recommender System in the Tourism Domain
==PAGE:17==
cated to improving GNN­based recommender models in the tourism domain. Therefore,
this paper’s investigation can be regarded as a promising first step in addressing this
research gap.
Evaluating GNN Architecture Performance of Recommender System in the Tourism Domain
13
==PAGE:18==
3
Datasets
3.1
Overview
Dataset is a crucial part of neural network model training, both dataset size and quality
will effect the performance of model training [2]. Without enough data to train the neural
model, the model for recommendation system may not capture enough features and reg­
ularities to generate accurate predictions. Also, the quality of the data is very important,
as the model will learn based on noise, wrong or inaccurate labels in the dataset, resulting
in poor performance of the model. So in order to obtain a fair evaluation result of the GNN
performance in tourism recommendation, trusted datasets from real world is necessary.
As defined in section 2, the dataset is expected to include list of users, attractions items
and user’s rating on those attractions. The performance will be evaluate on how precise
the recommender system recommend the attractions to test users. To simulate the real
world, the ideal data resource should be collected from popular tourism platforms. How­
ever, due to the time costing on data labeling and collecting, existing travel datasets which
have been adopted for marching learning analysis will be a better choice.
Kaggle[8] and UCI (University of California, Irvine)[5] are two popular resources for ma­
chine learning datasets, which provide rich and reliable data sources for machine learning
research and dataset analysis. There are thousands of relevant datasets when the author
searched in the Kaggle and UCI for travel relevant datasets. However there are only two
reliable and clean dataset is about rating on attractions: Europe Google Review dataset
and East Asia Tripadvisor[17]. These two datasets were shared by Shini Renjith, who
evaluated cluster algorithms in the tourism domain.Comparing to Europe google review
dataset, East Asian Tripadvisor contains only 10 items and this will lead to unfair predic­
tion on Topk recommendation, so in this paper we will only evaluate the models on the
Europe google review dataset. Also, to evaluate fairly, a movielens 1M dataset is used
as a comparison for observing the expected improvement between the models.
In table 3.1, it could be seen that the interactions between user and category in Europe
Google Review is 125623 when it’s 94443 in movielens 1M. Considering the user and
category numbers of these two dataset, a huge difference on dataset sparsity is shown
that Dataset 1 is under 5% when Dataset 2 is over 90%. The Europe Google dataset is a
dense when Movie­lens 1M is sparse.
Table 3.1: Dataset Overview
Dataset
Description
Interaction
User
Category
Sparsity
Dataset 1
Europe Google Review
125623
5456
24
4.06%
Dataset 2
Movie­lens 1M
995,154
6,022
3,043
94.57%
3.2
Google review rating dataset
3.2.1
Attributes
The dataset used in this study was collected from Google reviews and includes ratings
from 5456 users for attractions from 24 categories across Europe. Users provided ratings
on a scale of 1 to 5, and the average user rating for each category was calculated [17].
14
Evaluating GNN Architecture Performance of Recommender System in the Tourism Domain
==PAGE:19==
The original dataset construction is illustrated in Figure 3.1, and a detailed description of
the attributes is presented in Table 3.2. The first attribute represents a unique user ID, and
the remaining 24 attributes represent ratings given by the users for specific categories of
travel attractions.
Figure 3.1: Original Google Review Rating Dataset(Dataset 1)
Table 3.2: Dataset 1 Europe Google Review
Attribute
Represent
Discrete & Continuous
Types
1
Unique user id
Discrete
Nominal
2
Average ratings on churches
Continuous
Interval
3
Average ratings on resorts
Continuous
Interval
4
Average ratings on beaches
Continuous
Interval
5
Average ratings on parks
Continuous
Interval
6
Average ratings on theatres
Continuous
Interval
7
Average ratings on museums
Continuous
Interval
8
Average ratings on malls
Continuous
Interval
9
Average ratings on zoo
Continuous
Interval
10
Average ratings on restaurants
Continuous
Interval
11
Average ratings on pubs/bars
Continuous
Interval
12
Average ratings on local services
Continuous
Interval
13
Average ratings on burger/pizza shops
Continuous
Interval
14
Average ratings on hotels/other lodgings
Continuous
Interval
15
Average ratings on juice bars
Continuous
Interval
16
Average ratings on art galleries
Continuous
Interval
17
Average ratings on dance clubs
Continuous
Interval
18
Average ratings on swimming pools
Continuous
Interval
19
Average ratings on gyms
Continuous
Interval
20
Average ratings on bakeries
Continuous
Interval
21
Average ratings on beauty & spas
Continuous
Interval
22
Average ratings on cafes
Continuous
Interval
23
Average ratings on view points
Continuous
Interval
24
Average ratings on monuments
Continuous
Interval
25
Average ratings on gardens
Continuous
Interval
Evaluating GNN Architecture Performance of Recommender System in the Tourism Domain
15
==PAGE:20==
3.2.2
Data preprocessing
Data preprocessing plays a crucial role in machine learning projects as it involves cleaning
and transforming raw data into a format that can be easily understood and utilized by mod­
els for further analysis. In this project, the raw data is in a csv file format, and for further
analysis, it will be split to three json file for training, validation and testing, respectively.
Firstly, data preprocessing helps in improving data quality by eliminating any inconsisten­
cies or errors in the data. This can involve correcting missing values, removing duplicate
data, and handling outliers. By improving the quality of the data, the accuracy and reliabil­
ity of the analysis can be enhanced. In Dataset 1, the column 25 ’unnamed :25’ is empty
and has no meaning, so we drop this whole column. As for the null value in Dataset 1,
we replace it with 0. In row 2712 and column 11, there is a object value ’2 \t 2’ which is
expected to be float64 value, so it is a missing value. We replace it with the mean of the
rest of the rows. After this step, the dataset is clean and ready to be further processing.
Secondly, preprocessing helps in reducing overfitting, which occurs when a machine
learning model fits too closely to the training data and performs poorly on new, unseen
data. By removing noise and irrelevant data, preprocessing can prevent overfitting and
improve model performance. There are 0s in ratings which means no interactions, so the
0 ratings will be removed when the dataset is reshaped as interaction pairs.
Lastly, preprocessing saves time and resources required for model training by removing
unnecessary data and converting the data to a more useful format. This can streamline
the analysis process, making it more efficient and effective. In our case, user, categories
and ratings are the necessary data, so we keep them.
3.2.3
Data visualization
Figure 3.2: Bar chart for user number with non­zero ratings on each category
The bar chart in Figure 3.2 presents the number of users who rated each category with
a score greater than 0. The chart shows that there are ten categories in which all users
16
Evaluating GNN Architecture Performance of Recommender System in the Tourism Domain
==PAGE:21==
participated in the ratings, including parks, theaters, museums, malls, zoos, restaurants,
pubs/bars, local services, hotels/other lodgings, and juice bars. This indicates that these
categories are highly popular and have received widespread participation and engage­
ment from users.
Figure 3.3 presents a distribution of the number of ratings given by users for the 24 cat­
egories. The chart shows that around 3500 users have rated all 24 categories, while the
minimum number of ratings given by a user is 15. This information suggests that a sig­
nificant proportion of users have provided ratings for all categories, which can potentially
improve the accuracy and effectiveness of a recommender system. However, users with
a lower number of ratings could still benefit from a personalized recommendation system,
which can be developed based on their limited ratings data.
Figure 3.3: Bar chart for missing ratings on each category
Evaluating GNN Architecture Performance of Recommender System in the Tourism Domain
17
==PAGE:22==
Figure 3.4: Average ratings for each Category
Figure 3.4 displays the average ratings for each category, and highlights that both malls
and restaurants have received an average rating exceeding 3.0. In contrast, six categories
have received an average rating around 1 point. Additionally, the chart indicates that the
overall average rating for all categories ranges between 0.5 to 4.0. These observations
emphasize the need to carefully analyze the ratings for each category and develop tailored
recommendation strategies that reflect the specific needs and preferences of users.
3.3
Movie lens­1M
As Dataset 2 is a widely used dataset in the recommendation system domain and is al­
ready clean enough for further analysis, we have skipped the data cleaning steps per­
formed on Dataset 1. Upon observation, it is evident that Dataset 2 is much more sparse
than Dataset 1. This may lead to the models performing better on Dataset 1 than on
Dataset 2, as will be demonstrated in Section 4.
18
Evaluating GNN Architecture Performance of Recommender System in the Tourism Domain
==PAGE:23==
4
Experiment
In this section, the google review dataset will be trained and tested on two baseline models
and four GNN models. The recommendation task is to recommend top_k items to the user,
and the efficiency of GNN models on tourism data will be evaluated by F −1scores and
nDCG@k. After that, both model tuning and test result will be analyzed.
4.1
Dataset preprocessing
To prepare the dataset for training and evaluation, the data is reshaped as a set of user­
item pairs with corresponding ratings. The dataset is then randomly partitioned into three
subsets: a training set consisting of 80% of the data, a validation set consisting of 10%,
and a test set consisting of the remaining 10%. This partitioning strategy allows for model
training, hyperparameter tuning, and final evaluation on independent sets of data. Ad­
ditionally, since the Movielens 1M dataset is sparse, in order to address the cold­start
problem, Dataset 2 was filtered to exclude users who have interacted with less than 20
items.
4.2
Models selection and implementation
Section 2 highlights the remarkable growth in the development of GNN models, which
has become a widely explored research area. However, a significant challenge facing the
field is the lack of transparency in the source code and data preprocessing techniques
used by model developers. This impedes the evaluation of new datasets on existing
models, rendering the replication of the model­building process time­consuming and the
effectiveness of the model uncertain. This challenge is the most demanding aspect of the
present project, and addressing it requires a comprehensive approach. Furthermore, the
models were built using different technologies. Some of the reliable packages used in
these models are no longer being maintained, and some are even incompatible with each
other.
So, the main approach for model selection is to prioritize models that have easily ac­
cessible source code and are compatible with other models. This will enable efficient
experimentation and comparison between different models, ultimately leading to the iden­
tification of the most effective one.
Additionally, when evaluating GNN models in the tourism domain, it is important to con­
sider both GNN and non­GNN models and aim to include a diverse range of GNN models.
Lastly, the models should be capable of handling user­item rating data.
Following these strategies, Matrix Factorization (MF) was selected as the baseline model
because it is a widely used and effective collaborative filtering (CF) technique that is easy
to implement and has low computational complexity.
For the second phase of the model selection, the Neural Collaborative Filtering (NCF)
model was chosen as it is a powerful hybrid recommender system that combines both CF
and neural network­based approaches. It has been shown to outperform traditional CF
methods in terms of recommendation accuracy.
For the third phase of the model selection, three different graph­based models were con­
sidered: NGCF, GCMC, and LCFN. NGCF was selected because it is based on a bipar­
tite graph, which is a common representation for recommender systems. GCMC was not
Evaluating GNN Architecture Performance of Recommender System in the Tourism Domain
19
==PAGE:24==
chosen because it is based on homogeneous graphs and may not be suitable for het­
erogeneous data. LCFN was not chosen because it is based on heterogeneous graphs,
which may be too complex for our dataset. Finally, LightGCN was selected as a simple
and effective graph­based model that has shown promising results on various benchmark
datasets.
The basic principle of these models was simply introduced in the following sections.
The entire project was developed based on the open­source code available on Wenhui­
Wu’s GitHub repository1, with modifications made by the author to adapt the project to the
selected dataset and model. The project was implemented in Python 3 and TensorFlow
1(GPU­version). PyCharm and Jupyter Notebook were utilized as the development tools
for this project, while git was employed as the version control tool. The debugging of the
project was performed within a virtual environment in Anaconda. Furthermore, due to
the considerable training time required for certain models (such as NCF and NGCF), the
project was also deployed on Google­Colab to expedite the training process.
4.2.1
BRP(Bayesian Personalized Ranking) loss
In all the models, BRP(Bayesian Personalized Ranking) loss function is adopted for Opti­
mized top_k recommendation tasks[16]. The key idea behind it is that: for each item pair
(u, i) and (u, j) that the user has interacted with, where i is an item the user likes and j is
an item the user dislikes, the BPR loss function can be defined as 4.1:
L = −
∑
(u,i,j)∈D
ln σ(xui −xuj) + λ||Θ||2
(4.1)
Here, D represents the training dataset when xui represents the score of the user u with
the item i, Θ represents the model parameters, σ(·) represents the sigmoid function, and
λ represents the regularization coefficient.
The meaning of this loss function is that for each user, the model learns user and item
features to increase the score of items the user likes and decrease the score of items the
user dislikes, thus improving the recommendation accuracy.
4.2.2
MF
The model predicts a user’s rating for an item by computing the dot product of the user
embedding vector and the item embedding vector. The embedding vectors are then op­
timized using the BPR (Bayesian Personalized Ranking) loss function, which aims to im­
prove the accuracy of the predicted ratings[9].
The MF model is designed to take in several inputs, including the number of users, number
of items, embedding dimension, learning rate, and regularization parameter. It creates
embedding matrices for both users and items and uses these matrices to predict ratings for
each user­item pair. To optimize these embedding matrices, the model employs the BPR
loss function, which seeks to minimize the difference between predicted ratings for positive
and negative items. L2 regularization is also utilized to prevent overfitting. Additionally,
the model allows for easy retrieval of top_k recommendations for each user by sorting
predicted ratings and returning the indices of the top_k items.
4.2.3
GCMC
GCMC, or Graph Convolutional Matrix Completion, is an advanced recommendation model
that using graph convolutional networks (GCNs) to learn the representations of users and
1https://github.com/Wenhui­Yu/LCFN.git
20
Evaluating GNN Architecture Performance of Recommender System in the Tourism Domain
==PAGE:25==
items and fill in missing ratings in the rating matrix. By capturing the inherent graph struc­
ture in the data, GCMC models user­item interactions as a bipartite graph and employs
a message­passing scheme to gather information from neighboring nodes in the graph.
This approach generates personalized recommendations for each user. GCMC is a high­
performing model that achieves state­of­the­art results on various benchmark datasets
and can handle both explicit and implicit feedback data[3].
The GCMC model first initializes the user and item embeddings, either with pre­trained
embeddings or random embeddings. It then defines a list of graph convolution filters,
each of which is a matrix that transforms the embeddings of one layer to the embed­
dings of the next layer. The graph convolution operation is implemented using sparse
tensor multiplication with the user­item graph. The embeddings for each layer are passed
through a sigmoid activation function before being concatenated with the embeddings
from previous layers. The final embeddings for users and items are obtained by splitting
the concatenated embeddings. The BPR loss function and L2 regularization are used for
the optimization.
4.2.4
NCF
Neural Collaborative Filtering (NCF) is a deep learning­based recommendation approach
that combines the strengths of collaborative filtering and neural networks.In NCF, the
user­item interaction matrix is first converted into numerical form using one­hot encod­
ing or embedding. The embeddings are then fed through a sequence of fully connected
layers to generate a final prediction for each user­item pair. The model is trained using
backpropagation to minimize the difference between the predicted ratings and the actual
ratings in the training data. [7].
The model consists of two parts: a Generalized Matrix Factorization (GMF) component
and a Multi­Layer Perceptron (MLP) component. The GMF component factorizes the
user­item interaction matrix into two low­dimensional matrices, representing the user and
item embeddings, respectively. The MLP component takes the user and item embed­
dings as input and feeds them through several fully connected layers with ReLU activa­
tion functions to learn a non­linear interaction function. The BPR loss function and L2
regularization are used for the optimization.
4.2.5
NGCF
NGCF (Neural Graph Collaborative Filtering) is a model­based recommendation algorithm
that belongs to the family of graph neural network recommendation algorithms. It con­
structs a graph neural network model by leveraging the interaction information between
users and items to capture the complex relationships between them, and subsequently
utilizes this model to generate personalized recommendations for users. The BPR loss
function and L2 regularization are used for the optimization.
4.2.6
LightGCN
Light Graph Convolutional Network (LightGCN) is designed to be computationally effi­
cient. It uses a low­rank approximation technique to reduce the complexity of convo­
lutional operations, making it faster and more memory­efficient compared to traditional
graph convolutional networks. Additionally, LGCN has been shown to achieve state­of­
the­art performance on various graph­related tasks, including node classification, link pre­
diction, and graph classification, while requiring significantly less training time and com­
putational resources[6]. The BPR loss function and L2 regularization are used for the
optimization.
Evaluating GNN Architecture Performance of Recommender System in the Tourism Domain
21
==PAGE:26==
4.2.7
LCFN
The Low­pass Collaborative Filter Network (LCFN) employs low­pass filtering techniques
to smooth the data and eliminate high­frequency noise, improving the model’s robustness
and accuracy. And it adopts a neural network model to embedding interactions between
users and items, enabling more fine­grained modeling of user behavior and handling more
complex user behavior data. These features making it more flexible and scalable than
traditional collaborative filtering methods[23]. The BPR loss function and L2 regularization
are used for the optimization. Here we set the FREQUENCY_USER_list to [100, 300],
and [50, 200] for items, based on the frequent interactions between user and items in
Dataset 1.
4.3
Parameters setting
4.3.1
Hardware and environment
Due to the significant time investment required for model training and the need to meet
the project deadline, the author opted to train models on both Google Colab and a local
computer simultaneously. The GPU resources employed for this purpose were the Tesla
V100 (16GB) and RTX2060 Super(16GB), respectively.
4.3.2
Parameters for tuning
Since the implementation of the models are based on Wenhui Yu and his team’s project,
the parameters setting also follows their strategies[23].To ensure fair comparisons, the
tuning and testing for all models are strictly under the same configuration. The iterations
were set to 100, for each epoch, the model was trained on all positive samples and got
test on the validation set. Grid search was adopted to find the appropriate learning rate
η and regularization coefficient λ, using a coarse­grained range of {0.0001, 0.001, 0.01} ⊗
{0.001, 0.01, 0.1}, followed by a fine­grained search based on the results of the coarse
tuning. For instance, if a particular model achieved the best performance with η = 0.001
and λ = 0.1, we then performed tuning in the range of {0.002, 0.005, 0.01, 0.02, 0.05} ⊗
{0.02, 0.05, 0.1, 0.2, 0.5}. Batch size was set as 10,0000 to utilize the GPU and accelerate
the training speed.The embedding dimension was fixed at 16 due to the small size of the
dataset.
4.4
Evaluation protocols
The test step is first to calculate the topK recommended items for each user in the test user
set which was provided by the training step, then computing the F1 score and nDCG@k
for each user. Finally, it returns the average the F1 score and nDCG@k over all users in
the test set.
4.4.1
F1 score and nDCG@k
F1 score and nDCG@k are both widely used performance metrics in machine learning
and information retrieval. The advantage of using these metrics is that they provide a
quantitative measure of model performance that can be easily compared across different
algorithms and parameter settings. Additionally, they are intuitive and easy to under­
stand, making them useful for communicating results to both technical and non­technical
stakeholders.
F1 score
F1 score is a measure of a classification model’s performance that combines both the Pre­
cision and Recall metrics. The F1 score is calculated as the harmonic mean of Precision
and Recall, and is given by the formula 4.2:
22
Evaluating GNN Architecture Performance of Recommender System in the Tourism Domain
==PAGE:27==
F1 score = 2 × (Precision × Recall)
(Precision + Recall)
(4.2)
where Precision and Recall are calculated as formula 4.3,4.4:
Precision =
TruePositives
TruePositives + FalsePositives)
(4.3)
Recall =
TruePositive
(TruePositives + FalseNegatives)
(4.4)
True Positives (TP) are the number of positive samples that are correctly classified by the
classifier, False Positives (FP) are the number of negative samples that are incorrectly
classified as positive by the classifier, and False Negatives (FN) are the number of positive
samples that are incorrectly classified as negative by the classifier.
The F1 score ranges between 0 and 1, with values closer to 1 indicating better model
performance.
nDCG@k
To obtain the nDCG@k, the model utilizes similarity metrics to rank candidate items
based on user preferences, returning the k most similar items as recommendations. To
evaluate the effectiveness of the model, the recommendation order is maintained, and
each item is labeled with its score from the original dataset. The labeled scores are used
to calculate the Discounted Cumulative Gain (DCG). The scores are then re­ranked in
descending order, and another DCG calculation is performed, resulting in the ideal DCG
(iDCG). The normalized DCG (nDCG) is obtained by dividing the DCG by (iDCG). This
approach provides an academic and concise method for evaluating the performance of
the recommendation model. In the following formula for calculating nDCG@k, k means
the k value of top_k recommendation, reli stands for the rating from user to items.
CGk =
k
∑
i=1
reli
(4.5)
DCGk =
k
∑
i=1
reli
log(i + 1)
(4.6)
nDCGk = DCGk
iDCGk
(4.7)
The nDCG@k values range from 0 to 1, with 1 indicating perfect ranking, and 0 indicating
no relevance in the recommendation list. nDCG@k is a valuable tool for evaluating the
performance of recommendation models and for comparing different models or parameter
settings.
4.5
Model tuning and analysis
As previously mentioned in section 4.3.2, grid search is utilized to determine the optimal
values for the learning rate and λ. Once a coarse tuning process has been performed to
narrow down the range of the optimal LR and λ, the tuning module will iterate through a
list of neighboring cells, selecting the one that satisfies certain conditions in order to train
Evaluating GNN Architecture Performance of Recommender System in the Tourism Domain
23
==PAGE:28==
and evaluate a model. The optimal hyperparameters are then recorded in an Excel file,
and the process is repeated 10 times for each parameter combination until all cells have
been evaluated. The tuning will generate over 1800 excel files, after batch processing,
the optimal learning rate (LR) for each model was determined based on F1 score.The MF
model achieves its best performance when the learning rate (LR) is set to 0.0002. Simi­
larly, the NCF model performs best with an LR of 0.005, while the NGCF model obtains
its optimal results when the LR is set to 0.0002. For the LightGCN model, the best per­
formance is achieved with an LR of 0.005, whereas the GCMC model performs best with
an LR of 0.002. Finally, the LCFN model achieves its optimal performance with an LR of
0.001.
Since we are dealing with a limited dataset, which cannot be substituted due to the un­
availability of other appropriate datasets featuring ratings from users for travel attractions.
To avoid overfitting, we plotted the relationship curve between the regularization param­
eter lambda and the model’s performance metric F1Score, which is know as the ”lambda
curve”. The shape of the lambda and F1Score curve is similar to the curve between
lambda and the training/testing error. When lambda is too small, the model may over­
fit, resulting in a lower F1 Score. Conversely, when lambda is too large, the model may
underfit, also leading to a lower F1 Score. Thus, selecting an appropriate lambda value
is crucial for reducing overfitting while maintaining sufficient flexibility to capture the true
patterns in the data, thereby improving the F1Score.
In figure 4.1, F1Score goes up and reach high hill when λ is 0.0005, then it goes slightly
down, we could defer that MF has reached its best performance when λ is set to 0.0005
and LR is set to 0.0002.
In Figure 4.2, it can be observed that the F1 score exhibits significant fluctuations at very
small values of λ, with a clear upward trend followed by a decline. This behavior may
be attributed to the inability of NCF to fit well on Dataset 1. Typically, smaller steps are
recommended for exploring the values of λ in such cases. However, in the interest of fair
comparison across all models and considering that NCF model has reached the minimum
step size set for fine­tuning. Besides, the model’s generalization efficiency is also an
important aspect of its performance. Hence, no further grid search was conducted to
identify the optimal value of λ.
Similarly, as shown in Figure 4.3, NGCF exhibits a similar trend. Given that both models
are based on collaborative filtering, it can be inferred that the impact of lambda values may
be related to the distribution of the data. In some cases, specific subsets of the dataset
may exhibit significant differences compared to other subsets, resulting in dramatic fluc­
tuations in the lambda­F1 curve. These findings indicate that the data characteristics in
the tourism domain differ significantly from those of other domains, such as movie recom­
mendations.
Figures 4.4 and 4.5 exhibit a similar trend where the F1 score first increases and then
decreases, indicating that the models initially underfit and subsequently overfit the data.
We could defer that LightGCN and GCMC has reached their best performance.
In Figure 4.6, the curve consistently decreases, but the slope becomes flatter. This sug­
gests that the optimal λ value was not captured, and further fine­tuning is required by
setting a λ value smaller than 0.0002.
In summary, in this section reports the performance of two benchmark models(MF, NCF)
and four GNN recommender models on Validate set of Dataset 1, where the impact of
lambda values on the F1 score is analyzed. The results indicate that MF, LightGCN, and
24
Evaluating GNN Architecture Performance of Recommender System in the Tourism Domain
==PAGE:29==
GCMC reach their best performance at certain values of lambda, while NCF and NGCF
exhibit significant fluctuations. The findings suggest that the data characteristics in the
tourism domain differ significantly from those of other domains, and further fine­tuning
may be required for some models.
Figure 4.1: Graph 1
Figure 4.2: Graph 2
Figure 4.3: Graph 3
Figure 4.4: Graph 4
Figure 4.5: Graph 5
Figure 4.6: Graph 6
4.6
Test result and analysis
Table 4.1 clearly demonstrates that the four graph neural network models outperform the
baseline models in terms of both F1­score and NDCG@k on Dataset 1 and 2 2. Specifi­
cally, MF performs marginally better than NCF when they are both baseline models, which
can be attributed to MF’s inherent advantage in handling dense matrices. Notably, NGCF
exhibits an improvement of approximately 9.2% over NCF in terms of F1­score, indicating
2the experiment result for dataset 2 is collected from [23], due to the very long training time on large
datasets
Evaluating GNN Architecture Performance of Recommender System in the Tourism Domain
25
==PAGE:30==
that the incorporation of graph structure can better capture the latent relationship be­
tween users and items in the travel recommendation domain, leading to more significant
advancements than those observed in the general used dataset such as Movielens­1M.
NCF is based on a multi­layer feedforward neural network that concatenates user and
item embedding vectors as input and predicts through multiple fully connected layers. So
it only utilizes user­item interaction information and lacks modeling of the relationships
between items, which may lead to the failure to capture potential connections between
items. This is quiet important in travel recommendation. For example, it’s evident that
people who are shopping at the mall are highly likely to eat at the mall’s restaurants.
In contrast, NGCF uses the idea of graph neural networks, treating users and items as
nodes in a graph and constructing the graph structure based on their interaction infor­
mation. Specifically, NGCF uses a multi­layer convolutional neural network based on
attention mechanism to learn the graph structure and obtain more comprehensive rep­
resentations of the relationships between items. NCF model only considers user­item
interaction information and lacks modeling of item relationships, which may lead to rec­
ommendation bias. Therefore one possible explanation for NGCF outperforming NCF in
the tourism domain could be related to the data distribution. These findings suggest that
NGCF’s ability to capture more complex data distributions may have contributed to its
superior performance in the tourism domain compared to NCF. Further investigations are
needed to confirm this hypothesis and explore other potential factors that may influence
the performance of recommendation models in the tourism domain.
In terms of the difference between GNN models, it is worth noting that LCFN outperforms
NGCF slightly. LCFN is a recommendation model based on heterogeneous graphs, while
NGCF is a recommendation model based on homogeneous graphs. Specifically, LCFN
utilizes different types of nodes and edges in the graph, representing users and items
as different types of nodes, and considers the interaction information between users and
items. On the other hand, NGCF only considers the interaction information between users
and items and performs calculations on a homogeneous graph. Although NGCF utilizes
the message passing mechanism in GNNs and incorporates similarity information be­
tween items for indirect propagation and modeling, the experimental results suggest that
heterogeneous graphs might offer a more promising future in the tourism recommendation
domain.
Table 4.1: Model performance for Top_2 (test set)
Model
Dataset 1
Dataset 2
F1­score
NDCG
F1­score
NDCG
MF
0.487305
0.489647
0.07506
0.25100
NCF
0.479785
0.482307
—
—
GCMC
0.52373
0.526122
0.07689
0.26316
NGCF
0.523779
0.526055
0.07453
0.25436
LightGCN
0.518896
0.520902
—
—
LCFN
0.522559
0.524764
0.08151
0.26129
Table 4.2 illustrates that the NDCG value initially increases and subsequently stabilizes
with the increase in top­k values while The F1 score initially increases and then decreases
to a very low score, 0.18. The NDCG value initially increasing and then stabilizing with
the increase in top­k values indicates that the recommendation system is performing well
26
Evaluating GNN Architecture Performance of Recommender System in the Tourism Domain
==PAGE:31==
and suggesting relevant items to the users. However, the initial increase followed by a
decrease in the F1 score suggests that the recommendation system is initially performing
well but then failing to suggest relevant items to the users beyond a certain point. As
explained in the data visualization section, all users rated over 10 categories, the F1score
from Top_2 is lower than Top_5 could be due to the low Recall caused by recommending
only a small number of items. the F1score from Top_10 is lower than Top_5 could be due
to the low Precise caused by recommending almost a half of categories.
The value of NDCG is related to the quality of the ranking of the recommended list. In
practice, a recommendation system needs to return a recommended list of a fixed length
k, such as k=10. As k increases, the recommended list contains more items, and it may
include more relevant items, which increases the NDCG value.
However, as k further increases, the recommended list may include more irrelevant items,
which reduces the NDCG value. Therefore, the NDCG value typically first increases and
then stabilizes as k increases. This also indicates that the length of the recommended list
needs to be adjusted based on the specific situation and cannot be blindly selected as a
fixed value.
Table 4.2: Model performance on Dataset 1
Model
F1­score
NDCG
Top_2
Top_5
Top_10
Top_20
Top_2
Top_5
Top_10
Top_20
MF
0.487305
0.562332589
0.333072917
0.181818182
0.489647
0.771897612
0.777939145
0.778206384
NCF
0.479785
0.545647321
0.333333333
0.181818182
0.482307
0.746110831
0.767345492
0.767645692
GCMC
0.52373
0.56844308
0.333333333
0.181818182
0.526122
0.791964094
0.79623542
0.796502659
NGCF
0.523779
0.568415179
0.333333333
0.181818182
0.526055
0.793379069
0.796816191
0.79715024
LightGCN
0.518896
0.569280134
0.333333333
0.181818182
0.520902
0.789210077
0.79287775
0.793094882
LCFN
0.522559
0.569084821
0.333333333
0.181818182
0.524764
0.792582401
0.795893946
0.796083258
Evaluating GNN Architecture Performance of Recommender System in the Tourism Domain
27
==PAGE:32==
5
Future work
5.1
Evaluating on Large Sparse Datasets
It is crucial to evaluate the GNN models on large and sparse datasets because these are
the types of datasets that are most commonly encountered in real­world scenarios, partic­
ularly in domains such as tourism. In this study, it is unfortunate that there was no suitable
sparse dataset available to better simulate the real­world scenario because most of the
data related to tourism destination recommendations is stored by private companies. If
there were more time, a sparse dataset for tourism attraction recommendation would be
more convincing.
5.2
Comparing More Models
Comparing different models is crucial for understanding the strengths and weaknesses of
different recommendation systems. In this study, the author compared four representa­
tive GNN models with two baseline models, and found that GNN models outperformed the
baseline models on tourism domain datasets. This comparison process can reveal which
models are more suitable for tourism recommendation, providing guidance for the devel­
opment of future recommendation systems. Comparing a larger set of models can lead
to the discovery of novel or unconventional approaches that may have been overlooked
in the literature.
5.3
Attempting to Improve Model Performance for Tourism
Domain
In addition to comparing existing models, the endeavor to enhance model performance
for the tourism domain is a critical step. This step necessitates identifying possible inade­
quacies of the current models and investigating ways to rectify them. A potential approach
in tourism recommendation is to not only prioritize the accuracy of recommendations but
also to consider their diversity and novelty. Therefore, additional features such as the
diversity and novelty of recommended attractions could be incorporated into the graph
and assigned appropriate weights to augment the overall recommendation performance.
28
Evaluating GNN Architecture Performance of Recommender System in the Tourism Domain
==PAGE:33==
6
Conclusion
This study aimed to evaluate the performance of different GNN architectures in the tourism
domain for recommender systems. The results showed that the GNN models outper­
formed the baseline models on the Google Review Rating dataset, demonstrating the
potential of GNNs for tourism recommendation systems. The findings also suggest that
the performance of the model is significantly impacted by different graph structures, and
the advantages of GNNs lie in their effective representation of users, items, and interac­
tions.
The study also highlighted the importance of evaluating models on tourism domain datasets,
as these datasets have unique features that can affect model performance. The author
presented a systematic mapping study on GNN in recommender systems, which was
instrumental in selecting representative models for the experiment stage.
In conclusion, this study provides insights into the potential of GNN models for tourism rec­
ommendation systems and emphasizes the importance of evaluating models on tourism
domain datasets. Further research could include evaluating on large sparse dataset,
comparing more models and improve the model structures for tourism feature.
Evaluating GNN Architecture Performance of Recommender System in the Tourism Domain
29
==PAGE:34==
Bibliography
[1]
G. Adomavicius and A. Tuzhilin. “Toward the next generation of recommender sys­
tems: a survey of the state­of­the­art and possible extensions”. In: IEEE Transac­
tions on Knowledge and Data Engineering 17.6 (2005), pp. 734–749. DOI: 10.1109/
TKDE.2005.99.
[2]
Yoshua Bengio, Ian Goodfellow, and Aaron Courville. Deep Learning. MIT Press,
2015.
[3]
Rianne van den Berg, Thomas N. Kipf, and Max Welling. Graph Convolutional Ma­
trix Completion. 2017. arXiv: 1706.02263 [stat.ML].
[4]
Kinjal Chaudhari and Ankit Thakkar. “A Comprehensive Survey on Travel Recom­
mender Systems”. In: Archives of Computational Methods in Engineering 27 (Nov.
2020), pp. 1545–1571. DOI: 10.1007/s11831-019-09363-7.
[5]
D. Dheeru and E. Karra Taniskidou. UCI Machine Learning Repository. https://
archive.ics.uci.edu/ml/datasets/Tarvel+Review+Ratings. [Online; accessed April 25,
2023]. 2017.
[6]
Xiangnan He et al. LightGCN: Simplifying and Powering Graph Convolution Net­
work for Recommendation. 2020. arXiv: 2002.02126 [cs.IR].
[7]
Xiangnan He et al. “Neural Collaborative Filtering”. In: Proceedings of the 26th
International Conference on World Wide Web. WWW ’17. Perth, Australia: Inter­
national World Wide Web Conferences Steering Committee, 2017, pp. 173–182.
ISBN: 9781450349130. DOI: 10.1145/3038912.3052569. URL: https://doi-org.proxy.
findit.cvt.dk/10.1145/3038912.3052569.
[8]
Kaggle. Kaggle: Your Home for Data Science. https://www.kaggle.com/. 2023.
[9]
Yehuda Koren, Robert Bell, and Chris Volinsky. “Matrix Factorization Techniques for
Recommender Systems”. In: Computer 42.8 (2009), pp. 30–37. DOI: 10.1109/MC.
2009.263.
[10]
Zekun Li et al. “Fi­GNN: Modeling Feature Interactions via Graph Neural Networks
for CTR Prediction”. In: Proceedings of the 28th ACM International Conference on
Information and Knowledge Management. CIKM ’19. Beijing, China: Association for
Computing Machinery, 2019, pp. 539–548. ISBN: 9781450369763. DOI: 10.1145/
3357384.3357951. URL: https://doi.org/10.1145/3357384.3357951.
[11]
Haodong Liu, Bo Yang, and Dongsheng Li. “Graph Collaborative Filtering Based
on Dual­Message Propagation Mechanism”. In: IEEE Transactions on Cybernetics
53.1 (2023), pp. 352–364. DOI: 10.1109/TCYB.2021.3100521.
[12]
Fayokemi Ojo et al. “VisGNN: Personalized Visualization Recommendationvia Graph
Neural Networks”. In: Proceedings of the ACM Web Conference 2022. WWW ’22.
Virtual Event, Lyon, France: Association for Computing Machinery, 2022, pp. 2810–
2818. ISBN: 9781450390965. DOI: 10.1145/3485447.3512001. URL: https://doi.org/
10.1145/3485447.3512001.
[13]
Deepak Kumar Panda and Sanjog Ray. “Approaches and algorithms to mitigate
cold start problems in recommender systems: a systematic literature review”. In:
Journal of Intelligent Information Systems 59.2 (2022). Cited by: 3, pp. 341–366.
DOI: 10.1007/s10844-022-00698-5. URL: https://www.scopus.com/inward/record.
uri?eid=2-s2.0-85128755086&doi=10.1007%5C%2fs10844-022-00698-5&partnerID=
40&md5=c48449cd8972145bfc0a56da705f23f5.
30
Evaluating GNN Architecture Performance of Recommender System in the Tourism Domain
==PAGE:35==
[14]
K. Petersen, S. Vakkalanka, and L. Kuzniarz. “Guidelines for conducting systematic
mapping studies in software engineering: An update”. In: Information and Software
Technology 64 (2015). cited By 707, pp. 1–18. DOI: 10.1016/j.infsof.2015.03.007.
[15]
Young A. Park PhD, Ulrike Gretzel, and Ercan Sirakaya­Turk. “Measuring Web Site
Quality for Online Travel Agencies”. In: Journal of Travel & Tourism Marketing 23.1
(2007), pp. 15–30. DOI: 10.1300/J073v23n01\_02. eprint: https://doi.org/10.1300/
J073v23n01_02. URL: https://doi.org/10.1300/J073v23n01_02.
[16]
Steffen Rendle et al. “BPR: Bayesian Personalized Ranking from Implicit Feed­
back”. In: Proceedings of the Twenty­Fifth Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial
Intelligence. UAI ’09. Montreal, Quebec, Canada: AUAI Press, 2009, pp. 452–461.
ISBN: 9780974903958.
[17]
Dr. Shini Renjith, A. Sreekumar, and M. Jathavedan. “Evaluation of Partitioning
Clustering Algorithms for Processing Social Media Data in Tourism Domain”. In:
2018 IEEE Recent Advances in Intelligent Computational Systems (RAICS) (2018),
pp. 127–131.
[18]
Francesco Ricci. “Recommender Systems in Tourism”. In: Handbook of e­Tourism.
Ed. by Zheng Xiang et al. Cham: Springer International Publishing, 2022, pp. 457–
474. ISBN: 978­3­030­48652­5. DOI: 10.1007/978-3-030-48652-5_26. URL: https:
//doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-48652-5_26.
[19]
Aravind Sankar et al. “Graph Neural Networks for Friend Ranking in Large­Scale
Social Platforms”. In: Proceedings of the Web Conference 2021. WWW ’21. Ljubl­
jana, Slovenia: Association for Computing Machinery, 2021, pp. 2535–2546. ISBN:
9781450383127. DOI: 10.1145/3442381.3450120. URL: https://doi.org/10.1145/
3442381.3450120.
[20]
John K. Tarus, Zhendong Niu, and Abdallah Yousif. “A hybrid knowledge­based rec­
ommender system for e­learning based on ontology and sequential pattern mining”.
In: Future Generation Computer Systems 72 (2017), pp. 37–48. ISSN: 0167­739X.
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.future.2017.02.049. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.
com/science/article/pii/S0167739X17303254.
[21]
Xiang Wang et al. “Neural Graph Collaborative Filtering”. In: Proceedings of the
42nd International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in In­
formation Retrieval, SIGIR 2019, Paris, France, July 21­25, 2019. 2019, pp. 165–
174.
[22]
Shiwen Wu et al. “Graph neural networks in recommender systems: a survey”. In:
ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR) (2020).
[23]
Wenhui Yu and Zheng Qin. Graph Convolutional Network for Recommendation with
Low­pass Collaborative Filters. 2021. arXiv: 2006.15516 [cs.LG].
Evaluating GNN Architecture Performance of Recommender System in the Tourism Domain
31
==PAGE:36==
A
Experiment result and Source code
The source code and experimental results are provided in the attached compressed pack­
age named ”GNN_Tourism_2023_source_code”. The package includes over 1800 Excel
files of tuning and test results, and a detailed readme.txt file that explains how to set up
the compilation environment and run the experiments.
Also, in the zip file there is a bib file named ”mapping_result.bib which conclude the map­
ping result of the systematic mapping study, and it could be opened by JabRef.
32
Evaluating GNN Architecture Performance of Recommender System in the Tourism Domain
==PAGE:37==
Evaluating GNN Architecture Performance of Recommender System in the Tourism Domain
33
==PAGE:38==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Richard Petersens Plads Building 324
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 3031
www.compute.dtu.dk/english
