==PAGE:1==
 
 
01/11/2022 
Project plan for MSc thesis 
Protein C receptor as a nanomedicine 
target for triple negative breast cancer 
therapy 
Katarzyna Wisniewska, S203395 
 
Purpose 
According to several independent studies, endothelial protein C receptor (EPCR) can be 
associated with increased malignancy and decreased survival prognosis in triple negative 
breast cancer (TNBC) patients. The purpose of this project is to investigate expression 
rates, as well as internalization and trafficking pathways of EPCR on several cell lines of 
different origins. The generated data will allow more in-depth characterisation of this 
nanomedicine target, and will potentially unveil some of the mechanisms making this 
receptor crucial for TNBC survival, leading to development of more precise and efficient 
therapeutic solutions for combatting this disease. 
 
Step-by-step plan 
 
Period 
Activity 
10/2022 
Introduction to the research team and equipment, necessary safety and 
laboratory trainings, literature search 
11/2022 
Kick-start of cell line cultures, first flow cytometry data 
12/2022 
Continuous cell culturing, flow cytometry data generation and analysis 
01-02/2023 Cell imaging coupled with precedent flow cytometry, data analysis, 
report writing  
03/2023 
Report writing 
==PAGE:2==
 
 
Description of steps 
October 
This month will be used for getting familiarized with the scientific staff as well as the equipment 
of building 423. I will also go through all necessary safety trainings and forms, as well as 
through basic laboratory trainings and supervised introductory cell work. I will receive detailed 
introductions to two main techniques of my thesis project: flow cytometry and spinning disk 
(SD) confocal microscopy. In my free time I will conduct an initial literature search and start 
creating my literature base for the project.  
 
November 
Main cell lines of interest (4T1, CT26, primary endothelial cells) will be thawed, seeded and 
gradually upscaled. Cell morphology and confluency will be continuously assessed with a 
standard compound microscope and a computer-coupled camera. Once at a desired 
concentration, cells will be sampled, and first flow cytometry experiments are going to be 
conducted.  
 
December 
Cell lines will be continuously cultured, with subsequent flow cytometry at the end of each 
culture. Flow cytometry data will be processed and analyzed. Initial conclusions about receptor 
expression and  internalization rates will be drawn out of the data.  
 
January & February 
Flow cytometry experiments will be succeeded by SD confocal microscopy and image 
analysis. More detailed data on receptor internalization and trafficking pathways will be 
generated.  
 
March 
The last month of the thesis project should ideally be entirely dedicated to report writing, and 
optionally to remaining final stages of data analysis.  
 
Delay risk  
Each part of the project is burdened with a certain risk of delay, which may be caused by 
various controllable and uncontrollable factors. At the point of writing this project plan, certain 
delays in trainings were already experienced, due to unexpected illness and high responsibility 
load of the qualified staff.  
The highest delay risk in the project may be attributed to the SD confocal microscopy, which 
is a complex cell imaging method. Both the equipment and software use, as well as cell image 
analysis demand experience and skill, without which a first-time user might take more time to 
achieve the same data analysis results. Therefore this part of the project will be started as 
soon as possible, and may eventually overlap with the report-writing step in the last month of 
the project.  
Other delay risks, especially regarding laboratory work, may concern high demand on 
necessary cell culturing and analysis equipment, or an unexpected limitation of the laboratory 
use, for example due to state health and safety recommendations. The latter concern, 
however, seems unlikely in this project timeline.  
==PAGE:3==
 
 
 
