==PAGE:1==
Intelligent processing of mass spectrome-
try raw data for enhanced selection of bio-
therapeutic candidates
Master thesis
DTU Bioengineering
Department of Biotechnology and Biomedicine
==PAGE:2==
Intelligent processing of mass spectrometry raw data for enhanced selection of
bio-therapeutic candidates
Master thesis
April, 2023
By
Alina Melaschenko Løbner
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Biotechnology and Biomedicine, Søltofts Pl. 221,
2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.bioengineering.dtu.dk
ISSN:
[0000-0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000-00-0000-000-0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000-0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000-00-0000-000-0] (printed version)
==PAGE:3==
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
Mass spectrometry (MS) is an increasingly essential tool to study molecular mechanisms
in cellular systems. It has become a method of choice when identifying proteins, dis-
covering their post-translational modifications and shedding light on their functions and
interactions. The robust identification of proteins and peptides through MS analysis is
often hampered by noise artifacts and the interference of overlapping signals. Identifying
spectra and classifying MS output data into signals representing the compounds of the
target sample versus noise and impurities lies at the very root of every proteomic applica-
tion. The quality of each step of a MS application, from sample preparation to processing
the output data of the generated mass spectra, can significantly influence the final result
of the MS experiment.
This master thesis report describes and discusses the motivation and development of a
project aimed at building an algorithm to detect false impurity signals in MS data. Impuri-
ties represented in high-throughput MS data cause problems for the annotation software
as they add more information and complexity to the data and can result in wrongly iden-
tified masses from the mass spectra. Adduct ions are referred to false impurities as their
masses were not present in the sample prior to the ionisation in the mass spectrometer
workflow. Adduct ions are new ions with a combination of an analyte ion and additional
atoms or molecules. The resulting new masses with the adduct ions contaminate the
output data of the mass spectrometer. In drug development, sequence validation is a
technique applied to control the active pharmaceutical ingredient and can also detect
new post-translational modifications. The sequence of the active pharmaceutical ingre-
dient gets validated by the mass spectrometer output that consists of the masses of the
sample compounds and their abundancies. The additional masses by the adduct ions
challenge the identification algorithms that aim to find the sequence of the active pharma-
ceutical ingredient with possible post-translational modifications by having a longer list of
masses from the mass spectrometer to choose from. The algorithm’s worst case predicts
wrong annotations. The wrong annotations are visible for the researcher through visuali-
sation techniques of the annotations in ion maps. It is labor intensive to look through ion
maps from high-throughput MS data and therefore this report presents an algorithm that
serves as a filtering tool for the false impurities in MS data. The algorithm is supposed to
be applied in existing MS data processing workflow before the mass annotation step to
simplify and improve the annotation process.
iii
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
I would like express my sincere gratitude to:
My university advisor, Erwin Marten Schoof, associate professor at the Technical Univer-
sity of Denmark, Department of Biotechnology and Biomedicine, for his guidance on mass
spectrometry applications throughout the project, high level discussions and encourage-
ment.
My supervisor, Henrik Rahbek-Nielsen, from the MS Characterisation department at Novo
Nordisk, for his guidance and great insight into the field of mass spectrometry.
My supervisor, Jesper Ferkinghoff-Borg head of the Advanced Analytics department at
Novo Nordisk, for his extensive help and guidance of python algorithm development on
mass spectrometry data.
There are many colleagues who have given invaluable help and contribution to the project,
and to whom I am very grateful. These include Jan Bruun Andersen, Per Franklin Nielsen,
Thomas Nylandsted Krogh, and Jun Yin Frederiksen, head of MS characterisation. I thank
these colleagues for their contributions, and apologize to anyone who I forgot to mention.
iv
==PAGE:6==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Peptide drug quality control . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Peptide sequence validation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Post-translational modification
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.4
Adduct ions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.5
Motivation for the project . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2
Theory
10
2.1
Mass spectrometry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
2.1.1
Bottom-up and top-down MS strategies
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
2.1.2
MS sample preparation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.1.3
Chromatographic separation methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.1.4
Ion source and ionization
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
2.1.5
Mass detection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
2.1.6
Data processing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
3
Materials and methods
22
3.1
Generating a dataset . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
3.1.1
Sample preparation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
3.2
Data handling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
3.3
Annotation algorithm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
3.3.1
Python libraries . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
3.3.2
Functions in the Annotations algorithm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
3.3.3
Flowchart diagram . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
4
Results
34
5
Discussion
39
5.1
Tolerances
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
5.2
Assignment of an isotopic pattern . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
5.3
Mass quantities in the isotopic distribution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
5.4
Ion losses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42
5.5
Additional atoms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
6
Conclusion
44
Bibliography
46
A Appendix
51
v
==PAGE:7==
1
Introduction
Drug discovery is initiated by new insights to diseases that enable researchers to test
molecular compounds to stop or reverse the activity of the disease. In the early stages
of testing, there may be an excessive number of potential drug candidates, but only a
few qualify for further study as a potential medical treatment. A century ago, insulin was
used to treat a person with diabetes for the first time. Starting from insulin discovery and
its introduction to medical practice, more than 80 therapeutic peptides have reached the
market that aim to treat diseases such as cancer, diabetes, multiple sclerosis, HIV and
more[1][2]. There is an increased interest in peptide drug development in pharmaceutical
research and development[3] and new technologies have accelerated the field’s progress
over the course of the last decades. Improvements in drug discovery, peptide synthesis,
structural modification and analytic tools have addressed the drawbacks of peptide drugs
and continue the advancement of this field[4]. Therapeutic peptides have several ad-
vantages. They are small in size, consist of short chains of amino acids, and have the
ability to penetrate the cell membranes. They work by binding to cell surface receptors
and trigger intracellular effects with high affinity and specificity[4]. In addition, they are
easy to synthesise and have low toxicity. However, therapeutic peptides have significant
drawbacks related to their stability and short half-life[5][3]. Like any other drug candidate,
peptide drugs must undergo strict quality control analysis to ensure their safety, purity,
and efficacy. Peptide drug quality control includes analytical tests and evaluations that
measure several aspects of the drug, including its chemical and physical properties, bio-
logical activity, and stability.
1.1
Peptide drug quality control
The process of peptide drug quality control (QC) typically includes but is not limited to
following steps:
The first step is to analize and verify the identity and purity of the drug’s active pharma-
ceutical ingredient (API). Common techniques for this purpose are the high-performance
liquid chromatography (HPLC) and can be coupled with MS[6]. The next step is quanti-
tative control, where the API’s concentration in the drug is determined[6]. The third step
involves the assessment of the biological activity of the peptide drug[6], which is its ability
to bind to its target receptor and cause the desired pharmacological reaction. Typically,
the methodologies used to evaluate biological activity in vivo and/or in vitro assays. In vivo
assays are tests and research conducted within a living organism, e.g. animal or human
clinical trials, while in vitro assays are research applied outside a living organism, e.g. in a
laboratory dish. The fourth step is stability testing[6], which is crucial to ensure the drug’s
continued effectiveness over time. Peptide drugs are susceptible to degradation due to
their chemical structure, and stability testing measures the drug’s stability when exposed
to various environmental conditions, such as temperature and humidity changes. The
fifth and final step is impurity analysis, which involves running the peptide drug samples
through HPLC and/or MS to detect degradants and potential contaminants[6]. Peptide
1
==PAGE:8==
drug QC is an essential and comprehensive procedure to ensure the peptide drugs are
safe, pure and effective for clinical use. Peptide sequence validation is introduced next
and focuses on the peptide drug QC’s first step of verifying the identity of peptides and
proteins.
1.2
Peptide sequence validation
Peptide sequence validation is a process that aims to verify the amino acid sequence
of a specified peptide or protein. By measuring the accuracy of the peptide sequence,
the sample protein can get identified together with its modifications by comparing the
experimental masses to the theoretical sequence. Peptide sequence validation is a critical
step as the sequence determines the structure and function of the protein or its variations.
Peptide sequence validation is performed on chains of organic molecules called amino
acids. The chains can be formed into peptides and a chain of peptides becomes a protein.
For instance, figure 1.1 illustrates the human insulin peptide sequence of amino acids.
Figure 1.1: The first image on the left is the amino acid chain of the human insulin. The middle and
the right images are the chemical structures of the lightest amino acid, glycine, and the heaviest
amino acid, tryptophan, including their respective monoisotopic masses.
All amino acids contain a basic amino group (−NH2), also called the N-terminal, and an
acidic carboxyl group (−COOH), also referred to as the C-terminal. Besides the N- and
C-terminals, each amino acid has a unique organic side chain, or R group[7]. The amino
acids’ size determines their monoisotopic masses, which are measured and analyzed to
validate the peptide sequence. The protein structure is distinguished between its primary,
secondary, tertiary, and quaternary structure[7]. The sequence of amino acids in a pro-
tein is referred to as the protein’s primary structure and is illustrated in figure 1.2. Due to
the side chains of the amino acids, long polypeptide chains can fold into local structures.
α-helices and β-sheets are the most common structures. The protein’s tertiary structure
is a dynamic structure stabilized by α-helices, β-sheets, disulfide bonds between cysteine
side chains, as well as hydrophobic/hydrophilic interactions between molecules. The ter-
tiary structure of proteins determines the function of the protein. The folding causes the
amino acids in the protein to be positioned in a certain way that allows them to interact
in various processes, e.g. catalyzing enzymatic reactions. The folded polypeptide chains
can interact with each other and form a protein complex. The complex is the protein’s
2
==PAGE:9==
quaternary structure, and the polypeptide chains are referred to as subunits in the final
protein[7].
Figure 1.2: Denatured amino acid sequence with the basic amino group and acidic carboxyl group
pointed out[8].
For peptide sequence validation, the protein needs to be unfolded to its primary structure
by the sample preparation techniques: denaturation, reduction, and digestion. Denatu-
ration is the process of unfolding a protein’s three-dimensional structure to make it more
accessible for digestion by exposing the protein to harsh conditions. Reduction is the
process of breaking the disulfide bonds that hold a protein’s tertiary structure together.
This is typically done by adding a reducing agent and as an advantage the proteins also
become more accessible for digestion. Digestion is the process of breaking a protein into
peptide fragments by using a proteolytic enzyme, such as trypsin, which cleaves pep-
tide bonds after specific amino acid. The polypepide chain on figure 1.2 is after sample
preparation cleaved into peptides which experimentally detected masses are compared
with the theoretical protein sequence as illustrated in figure 1.3.
3
==PAGE:10==
Figure 1.3: Peptide sequence validation. The red enzyme represents Trypsin, the dark blue is
Chymostrypsin, the green is Endoprotease GluC (E), the pink color represents Endoprotease GluC
(D&E) and the light blue is Endoprotease Asp N[8].
Digesting the protein with different enzymes has the advantage that they cleave the protein
in different patterns. The different sizes will create an overlap between fragments and can
be used to construct an overall sequence. In figure 1.3 the sequence is covered by the
use of five different enzymes.
Mass spectrometry
There are different techniques used for peptide sequencing, with the two major methods
being MS and Edman degradation. While MS is the most widely used tool, the Edman
degradation is still valuable for characterizing a protein’s N-terminus. Edman degradation
is used with a protein sequencer., which is a machine where the process is performed
on a peptide or protein sample. In each cycle, an amino acid from a peptide or protein’s
N-terminus is released and derived. The derived amino acid is then identified by an High-
performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) (formerly referred to as high-pressure liquid
chromatography), and this process is repeated continuously until the entire measurable
sequence is established.
The MS approach for sequence validation aims to identify the sequence by measuring the
abundance and mass-to-charge ratio (m/z) values of the analytes in the sample and cover
the sequence with these results. MS as a clinical diagnostic method includes following
essential steps illustrated in figure 1.4. The quality of the individual steps affects the
sensitivity and reliability of the final results of the MS outcome[9].
Figure 1.4: Mass spectrometry workflow[10].
1. Sample introduction mechanism. The sample can either be injected directly into the
next MS pipeline step, ionization, or undergo a separation process. A separation
process is preferred for complex samples as it spreads the analytes in time based
4
==PAGE:11==
on their physico-chemical properties[10]. There are several separation techniques,
and column chromatography is the most common method for protein purification[11].
Components for stationary and mobile phases in chromatography are chosen de-
pending on the sample analyte’s characteristics. The aim is to make some analytes
stay in the column longer (stationary phase) and move slower in the chromatographi-
cal system by the wash buffer (mobile phase). Other compounds move faster, hence
they elute earlier and get a shorter retention time (RT).
2. Ionization. The MS workflow requires the analytes to gain an electrical charge in
the gas phase, enabling them to be injected and accelerated as ions in the electric
or magnetic field of the mass spectrometer for analysis of their masses and mea-
surement of quantity according to their m/z values[12]. The sample can be ionized
by either adding or removing an electron to create positively or negatively charged
ions, respectively. Ionization techniques can be classified into soft ionization tech-
niques and hard ionization techniques, depending on the amount of energy evoked
to the analyte[13][14]. With soft ionization, only a small amount of energy is retained
by the analyte and therefore rarely causes its fragmentation[15]. As a result, soft
ionization yields a larger amount of high mass fragments, while the hard ionization’s
use of large energy breaks the bonds between the molecules and results in a greater
number of fragments but with lower mass.
3. The mass detection. The mass detector registers passing charged particles by their
mass-to-charge ratio (m/z) at a particular retention time (RT). The outcome is a
mass spectrum as shown in figure 1.5. About 10-20% of the peaks (precursor ions)
from the ion signals detected at the first scan (MS1) are selected for additional frag-
mentation and signal detection (MS2). The second fragmentation and detection are
referred to as tandem MS and is applied to analyze the precursor ions, which is a
helpful tool to mitigate problems arising from coeluting peaks.
Figure 1.5: Mass spectrum determined by MS. The y-axis represents the intensity of the signal
and the x-axis represents the m/z value of the signal[8].
The resolution of an MS instrument determines its abiliy to distinguish individual ions
with similar m/z values. Higher resolution instruments can detect narrower signal
5
==PAGE:12==
peaks, which represent distinct ions and allow for more accurate calculation charge
states and monoisotopic masses[16].
4. Data processing. Data processing is applied for the quantification and identifica-
tion of sample analytes’ signals shown in MS data. A high-level overview of the
data processing in the MS-omics pipeline includes algorithms for noise reduction,
feature detection, and peak-picking algorithms using the raw MS data. Prior to an-
alyte identification, the steps of deisotoping and deconvolution can be undergone
to reduce and optimize the data. The MS data processing workflow is a significant
field in development and includes multiple open problems, which will be unfolded
in the Theory chapter. For analyte identification, several available databases can
be used, depending on the interest and purpose, to compare experimental feature
observations to theoretical patterns.
Overall, peptide sequence validation is an essential step in protein characterization and
helps to ensure the accuracy and reproducibility of biochemical and biological experi-
ments. Furthermore, it is advantageous to check for post-translational modifications that
may affect the sequence or structure of a protein.
1.3
Post-translational modification
MS is one of the simplest and most powerful ways of identifying and characterizing pep-
tides[15]. Currently, MS is the the golden standard for identification, mapping, and quan-
tification of post-translational modified proteins (PTMs)[12][17]. MS has various advan-
tages for characterization of PTMs, including high sensitivity, which refers to the ability of
the MS instrument to detect and quantify very low concentrations of analytes, the capa-
bility to identify the site of PTMs, discovery of novel PTMs, and ability to identify PTMs
in complex mixtures of proteins[17]. PTMs include changes in the protein’s abundance
levels by altered expression or degradation, changes in the protein’s localization, func-
tion, and interaction with other proteins[18]. PTMs are involved in attachment, removal,
and rearrangement of functional groups to the amino acid side chains and the protein N-
termini[18]. PTMs are chemical modifications that occur on proteins after they are synthe-
sized from their corresponding genes. They are involved in a variety of cellular activities
where phosphorylation is one of the most extensively studied PTM. Phosphorylation is a
biochemical process in which a phosphate group is added to a molecule by an enzyme
called a kinase. It regulates a number of cellular functions. Alterations in phosphoryla-
tion pathways can result in serious consequences in the form of diseases[19]. Numerous
diseases are caused by PTMs and research in clinical proteomics studies of PTMs is ex-
panding[18]. A number of public databases have been developed for collecting PTMs
causing diseases[20]. Database analyses indicate that phosphorylation or dephospho-
rylation has the largest number of disease associations that are strongly associated with
cancer[19].
1.4
Adduct ions
Adduct ions are formed when either multiple molecules or a molecule and an atom react
with each other to form a new ion. The process of adduct ion formation involves the trans-
fer of electrons between the reacting molecules. In the MS workflow, adduct ions therefore
6
==PAGE:13==
evolve during ionization. By the use of Electrospray ionization (ESI) and Matrix-assisted
laser desorption/ionization (MALDI), the sample analytes are ionized by a high-energy
source, such as a laser or an electric field. In these situations the peptide ions of inter-
est can interact with the sample solvents e.g. salts, or matrix molecules, leading to the
formation of adduct ions. In MS, adduct ions are typically considered as noise when they
interfere with the analytes of interest. The noise appears in the mass spectra when the
signals of the adduct ions overlap with those of the sample analytes. As the adduct ion
formation occurs in the ionization process, they are not present in the initial sample. Their
presence in the MS output data is a contamination of the data if the purpose of the MS
experiment is to identify the sample analytes. Hence, there is an interest in minimizing
the occurence of adduct ions and developing software tools that can identify and eliminate
them. The adduct ions can be difficult to distinguish from the sample analytes and can
therefore mistakenly be interpreted as the analytes. Thus, it is important to carefully eval-
uate and interpret the mass spectra and apply appropriate data processing and analysis
methods to correctly distinguish between adduct ions and target analytes.
1.5
Motivation for the project
MS data has been analyzed to investigate a wide range of research interests, including
disease diagnostics, biological and chemical theory, and drug development. The project
”Intelligent processing of Mass spectrometry raw data for enhanced selection of biothera-
petic candidates” aims to develop an algorithm to reduce false positive annotations from
MS data. Mass spectra contain a variety of impurities, including chemical and electric
noise, throughout the MS workflow. Furthermore, signals from adduct ions arising during
ionization also contaminate the MS spectra. The additional peaks in the mass spectra
from noise including adduct ions, can blur the peaks of peptide ions. The peptide ions
of interest are defined as peptide ions representing the fragments of the protein from the
sample. It is favorable to detect and discard impurities from the output data. Adduct ions
are noise that is more difficult to detect compare to other impurities because their pattern
in the data is similar to the isotope patterns of the samples peptide ions. Therefore, an-
notation algorithms may wrongly annotate the adduct ions as peptide ions. Adduct ions
also add complexity to the data by contributing additional volume of data points for the an-
notation software to analyze. Hand-labeling annotations are used to identify annotation
errors made by the annotation software. Figure 1.6 shows an ion map, where missing
annotations by the software Genedata are identified, among other annotation errors that
were hand-labeled. Figure 1.6 also illustrates complex sample data due to overlapping ion
clusters, which the software Genedata also struggles to distinguishing from each other.
7
==PAGE:14==
Figure 1.6: Ion map performed in Genedata pointing out annotation errors of isotope clusters in
a zoomed picture in picture in the right lower corner. The colors of the squared markers around
signals represent the clusters’ annotation. The color inside the marker represents the sample
analyte’s intensity and an intensity scale is illustrated on the left side of the figure.
Hand-labeling is a time-consuming and subjective task. Therefore, the motivation behind
the project is to focus on adduct ions and develop an algorithm that can annotate peptide
ions of interest from adduct ions by running through MS peak lists. The future perspective
of the project is to integrate the filtration tool to Genedata’s workflow to improve its anno-
tation performance in the research for the next suitable biotherapeutic candidates. The
project’s interaction and connectivity with Genedata is illustrated in the flowchart diagram
in figure 1.7.
8
==PAGE:15==
Figure 1.7: flow chart diagram illustrates the project’s interaction and connectivity with Genedata.
9
==PAGE:16==
2
Theory
The theory chapter focuses on the MS workflow in order to understand the resulting MS
data and the formation of adduct ions. The quality of the output data depends on the
performance of each step, from sample preparation to data processing.
2.1
Mass spectrometry
Proteins are the fundamental building blocks of life and are composed of peptides. Pep-
tides are chains of amino acids that are synthesized by translating mRNA. While DNA
sequencing determines the protein sequences, predicting the proteins’ post-translational
modifications (PTMs) is still challenging[10]. PTMs can diversify, regulate or alter the
protein’s function and these modifications can result in disease characteristics. MS tech-
nology aims to provide information on individual protein and peptide concentrations in
samples and identify PTMs which DNA sequencing cannot. MS is a well-known technique
used to examine proteins that are fragmented into peptides. Peptides serves as unique
fingerprints for the proteins, and the MS distinguishes them by measuring the masses and
volumes of each peptide fragment. With a database containing the information of the pro-
tein’s fragmentation patterns, it is possible to identify a given protein. The MS produces a
mass spectrum showing the relative abundance of each fragment’s mass-to-charge ratio
(m/z) value. The MS workflow can first be split into the wet-lab pipeline, which begins with
preparing the sample and ends with the output of the MS. The output data from the MS
continues in the data processing pipeline, which aims to identify and quantify the masses
of the sample. Every step in the processes affects the accuracy and reliability of the result
of the MS process. Two common approaches to run MS experiments are the bottom-up
and the top-down strategies. The choice between the two determines the included steps,
and each strategy has its advantages and disadvantages. The choice of which strategy
to use depends on the study and the sample’s complexity.
2.1.1
Bottom-up and top-down MS strategies
In the bottom-up and top-down MS strategies, a sample is either injected directly with
purified, intact proteins to MS ionization or goes through a preliminary separation step.
Direct injection refers to the top-down strategy, while in the bottom-up strategy, the pro-
tein or molecule is first digested into smaller peptides before going through separation
and subsequent ionization. The top-down strategy, visualized in figure 2.1, includes the
MS in-source decay (ISD). ISD occurs in the MS ionization source, where ions can collide
into fragments before entering the mass analyzer. ISD can be applied with collision-
induced dissociation (CID) for MS/MS analysis. High-energy CID occurs after the sam-
ple’s molecules are ionized. CID takes place in the MS ion source where the sample
collides with gas molecules with high energy. The collisions cause the sample’s molecule
to undergo fragmentation, and these fragments can then get detected by the mass detec-
tor[21].
10
==PAGE:17==
Figure 2.1: The Bottom-up and Top-Down Strategies[8].
The bottom-up approach includes sample preparation and separation as shown in figure
2.1. The advantages are that the resulting tryptic peptide ions of interest are easier to
determine with high accuracy than intact protein ions because their masses are smaller.
Hence, the peptide mass database can find fewer possible combinations to fit the ion mass
from the sample, and the chances of wrong annotations are lowered. This advantage,
among others, has made the bottom-up approach dominant for proteomic studies[15].
The coverage of the protein with tryptic peptides is usually incomplete. Intact protein
analysis by the top-down approach can potentially provide a complete coverage of the
protein sequence if the fewer but heavier compounds are correctly annotated. It is also
possible to identify the protein’s PTMs without digestion by comparing the experiemental
mass with the one provided by a database for PTMs of the analytes in the sample[22].
2.1.2
MS sample preparation
Sample preparation for MS consists of: (1) Protein denaturation: protein denaturation
aims to convert the protein into its primary structure by unfolding the protein. (2) Reducing
the protein. The protein is reduced by adding a reducing reagent e.g. DTT or TCEP to
break the disulfide bonds in the protein and to unfold the protein, making it more receptive
for enzymatic digestion. Unfolding the protein affects its stability, and the sample can be
treated with an alkylating agent such as iodoacetamide (IAA) to prevent the reformation
of disulfide bonds during digestion and the rest of sample preparation. (3) Enzymatic
digestion: The digestion of proteins fragmentates the protein into peptides by applying
enzymes called proteases. The enzymes trypsin or chymotrypsin are typically applied
and they can cleave proteins at specific sites[23] e.g. Trypsin cleaves proteins at arginine
(R) and lysine (K).
2.1.3
Chromatographic separation methods
Chromatography is a biophysical technique used to separate, purify, and identify com-
ponents and their volumes in a sample. Chromatography is also commonly used with
MS and aims to separate the sample into its components by separating the constituent
components in retention time before the sample is injected into the mass spectrometer.
11
==PAGE:18==
The separation depends on the analytes’ characteristics, namely, hydrophobicity, molecu-
lar weight, shape, net charge, and affinity to the stationary phase. There are several types
of chromatographic separation techniques, including High-Pressure Liquid Chromatogra-
phy (HPLC) and Gas chromatography (GC). HPLC and GC have been coupled with MS
to form the most powerful and versatile tool for speciation analysis[24]. In HPLC-MS, a
stationary phase column is packed with designated beads, and the mobile phase consists
two liquid gradients. When the proportions of the two gradients change, the analytes are
released from the column. The type of stationary phase determines the characteristics
that trigger the analytes to elute. The most commonly used stationary phase for LC-MS
is reversed phase, which has a stronger affinity for hydrophobic compounds[10]. Hence,
the stationary phase separates the analytes, and then the mobile phase washes them
through the column in liquid chromatography. Compared to liquid chromatography (LC),
HPLC yields advantageous results for the identification and separation of amino acids,
protein, lipids, steroids, and other compounds[11]. The technique applies high pressure,
resulting in an increased flow rate of the solvents. The separation duration is controlled
by software settings[11]. If the mobile phase is gaseous instead of liquid, the technique is
GC. In GC, the mobile phase is an inert gas, such as helium or dinitrogen, that carries the
sample through the stationary phase column, which is designed to separate compounds
by their polarities[10]. GC applies a temperature gradient, and the analytes with a higher
affinity to the column elute later at a higher temperature[10]. However, GC requires the
samples to be in a gaseous form.
Chromatography in MS aims to separate the analytes from each other by spreading them
in time. One of the main advantages of applying this tool is to prevent ion suppression,
which occurs when the sample flow volume is too large for the ion source to fully ionize
the sample[10]. The result in changes to the efficiency of droplet formation or evapora-
tion, which in turn affects the amount of charged ions in the gas phase that reaches the
detector[25], as illustrated in figure 2.2 and 2.3.
2.1.4
Ion source and ionization
In the ionization state, the biomolecules receive a charge, allowing the MS detector to
estimate the mass-to-charge ratio (m/z) and intensity of each analyte. There are two
dominant ionization techniques: Electrospray ionization (ESI) and matrix-assisted laser
desorption/ionization (MALDI)[12][15]. ESI is a soft ionization technique where ions are
ejected from charged vapor droplets to produce an aerosol, as illustrated in figure 2.3.
12
==PAGE:19==
Figure 2.2: Electrospray ionization[26].
Figure 2.3: Electrospray ionization for negative ions[27].
A strong electric field, as shown in figure 2.3, usually between 1-5kV, extracts droplets
from the Taylor cone. The droplets contain the solute ions represented by the yellow
M−. Most positively charged counter ions (represented by the green balls) remain in the
ES capillary due to the negative charge of the capillary. The electric charges separate the
positive and negative ions. The negatively charged capillary repels the negatively charged
peptide ions of interest into droplet ejection[27]. The positively charged source sampling
13
==PAGE:20==
cone, at the same time, attracts the negative ions. The distance between the Taylor cone
and the sampling cone is approximately 1–3 cm[26]. In this distance, the solvent droplets
evaporate in the ion source, releasing ions to the gas phase for analysis in the mass
spectrometer. In some ESI systems, heat is used to improve the desolvation[28]. Figure
2.3 illustrates the evaporation of the solvents, represented as the red balls. When the
solvent evaporates, the droplets shrink, and the charge density on the droplets increases.
The tension of the droplet increases to an extent that the droplet can no longer hold,
potentially causing the droplet to be split by the Coulombic repulsion[27]. This process is
referred to as the Ion Evaporation Model[29].
Figure 2.3 illustrates a negative ion electrospray. Positive ion electrospray is commonly
used, and ionization occurs by applying formic acid (FA) in the mobile phase mixture. FA
donates protons to the peptide ions of interest in the strong electric field during ionization.
In positive ion electrospray, the voltages are also switched, so the source sampling cone
is negatively charged and can attract the positively charged ions. In negative ion electro-
spray, ammonia is added to the sample to receive the protons from FA during ionization;
instead, the protons are given to the peptide ions.
The second dominant ionization technique is matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization
(MALDI). In MALDI, the analyte molecules are isolated by matrix molecules, which are
often solid[15]. MALDI then uses pulses of laser light on the sample to generate ions, as
illustrated in figure 2.4.
Figure 2.4: MALDI ionization with protontation[30].
The ionization occurs when matrix molecules absorb laser energy and convert most of
it to heat, causing the sample to disintegrate into the gas phase[31], a process known
as desorption, as illustrated in figure 2.4. The matrix molecules become ionized by the
addition of a proton from, for example, acetic acid, which is a stronger acid than the formic
acid used in ESI. The desorbed mass contains neutral and ionized matrix molecules, along
with analytes from the sample. During desorption, the analyte molecules become ionized
by being either protonated or deprotonated by nearby matrix molecules[31]. The charge
of the clusters depends on whether they contain a net excess of positive or negative ions.
14
==PAGE:21==
Another theory behind MALDI ionizatoin is the “lucky survivor method”, which suggests
that the peptide ions of interest are already present in the sample solution and are liberated
into the gas phase by the laser energy, as illustrated in figure 2.5.
Figure 2.5: MALDI ionization the lucky survivor method[32].
This means the peptide molecules are already ionized and the matrix then only plays a
secondary role as it simply performs a mechanical action of liberating the peptide ions
of interest from the sample[33]. The main debate is about how the matrix transfers the
energy created by the laser to the analytes and how this energy leads to ionization[33].
There are several factors to consider in MALDI that influence the outcome, including ma-
trix choice, the sample peptide ion’s physical and chemical properties, the preparation
method, laser characteristics, and the local environment, such as pressure and tempera-
ture[31]. MALDI is considered a soft ionization technique, like ESI, with minimal fragmen-
tation and shares the same advantages of other soft ionization techniques. Additionally,
MALDI’s ionization performance is robust, fast, and relatively immune to contaminants
and common additives such as salt[12][15]. On the other hand, electrospray typically
produces more multiply-charged ions than MALDI. Multiple charges for molecules often
facilitate improved fragmentation for annotating isotope clusters and identifying proteins
with high masses, low abundances, and post-translationally modified isoforms. As a re-
sult, ESI can be used for a wide range of applications[12][15][34]. Development and re-
search to improve ESI-MS applications continues because of the need for more sensitive
and better quantitative measurements. This will expand the utility of ESI-MS for biologi-
cal applications. Current limitations include sample size and the sensitivity and dynamic
range of measurements. When the sample size is small, fractionation steps must be min-
imized or eliminated to conserve the sample. Hence, measurement sensitivity becomes
the limiting factor. The overall sensitivity is limited by ionization efficiency and ion trans-
mission efficiency into and through the MS analyzer[34]. Lowering the flow rate of the
sample for ionization will improve the ionization efficiency by producing smaller charged
droplets. The ions then transfer faster to the gas phase, allowing the ESI emitter to be po-
sitioned closer to the MS inlet. The overall predicted efficiency for converting peptide ions
of interest from solution to the gas phase improves significantly when both the flow rate
and analyte concentration are lower. One of the reasons for this is the reduced effect of
ionization suppression, which can significantly improve the quantitation measurement[34].
15
==PAGE:22==
2.1.5
Mass detection
When the charged particles pass through the mass spectrometer, their m/z values are reg-
istered at their particular retention time (RT). A single scan (MS1) represents a snapshot
of the precursor ions. These ions are selected for fragmentation and detection a second
time, making them precursor ions. Precursor ions are captured in small, continuous m/z
windows, and the selection is based on the intensity of the ions. The fragmentations are
called product ions, and they are used to identify precursor ions by matching their MS/MS
(MS2) m/z values to a database. The ratio of precursor ions selected for MS2 or tandem
fragmentation is about 10-20% of the MS1 data. Of the 10-20%, less than 60% are identi-
fied via database lookup and are still subject to false positive identifications[10][35]. This
challenge is further discussed under Data processing in the MS pipeline.
2.1.6
Data processing
A clear message from recent proteomics literature is the necessity for robust software
tools for data processing. The development of MS software tools is lagging behind the
advances in instrumentation and methodologies in the field[36]. This subchapter presents
the major challenges for robust MS software development, along with the technologies to
overcome these issues.
Data volume
During an HPLC-MS experiment, a multiply charged precursor ion is usually captured and
fragmented for MS2 to detect and collect multiple charge states of the fragment ions[16].
After extracting peak lists from the original tandem mass spectra, the observed spectra
are compared to a database of known proteins to find the most likely matches. Com-
mon search engines like Mascot and Sequest do not have the capability to distinguish the
isotopic peaks and their respective charge states[16]. This can cause false peptide identi-
fication if the search engine wrongly annotates the multiple charge fragment ions and their
isotopic clusters. There are usually two major preprocessing steps used to overcome this
issue: deisotoping, illustrated in figure 2.6, and deconvolution, illustrated in figure 2.7.
Figure 2.6: Deisotoping performed on the orange, yellow and green isoptopic clusters by deter-
mining the monoisotopic ion of each cluster and removing the rest of the peaks[10].
Deisotoping is about reducing data by removing all peaks except for the monoisotopic
peaks from multi-isotopic spectra, as in figure 2.6.
16
==PAGE:23==
Figure 2.7: Deconvolution performed on a multiple charged ion where the red cluster in the first
diagram represents the ion in charge state 3, the middle diagram with the blue cluster represents
the double charged variant, the green cluster in the third diagram from left side is the singly charged
ion cluster, and the last diagram is the sum of the intensity contribution of each charge state
represented in the singly charge state[10].
Deconvolution aims to reduce the amount of MS data by translating the spectra from a
multiple charged ion to a singly charged ion and then accumulate all the intensities from
the multiply charged states as illustrated in figure 2.7.
After applying deisotoping and deconvolution in data preprocessing, the resulting spec-
tra become simpler, which reduces the number of overlapping peaks and enables more
precise database searching for accurate peptide identification[16].
Lack of labeled data sets
Lack of labeled data sets presents a problem in algorithm development because it lacks a
ground truth to train, test, and evaluate the algorithms. Labeled data are difficult to obtain
as the size of the data sets can easily consist of millions of data points, making hand-
labeling challenging. The problem is both the volume and complexity of the data, which
makes the task of hand-labeling very time-consuming. Another obstacle is determining
what data type to choose for labeling. Raw data, such as mass spectra and peak lists,
are dependable data in the sense that it is hard to annotate a single data point without
considering the isotopic patterns, for example. To reduce the time-consuming and sub-
jective task of hand-labeling, robust MS software tools are necessary. Several strategies
for mitigating the challenge of lacking labeled data sets exist. One such strategy is to
use an evaluation method of MS software that does not require ground truth data, such
as applying a statistics approach. For example, the Pearson correlation coefficient, fea-
ture overlap rate, or coefficient of variation can be calculated. These approaches aim to
demonstrate how well the results align from replicate experiments and how they change
with variations of experiments. Multiple replicate MS runs with the same procedure and
sample are required to apply these approaches.
Label-free methods
Label-free methods are gaining attention for measuring differential protein expression as
they are cost-effective compared to hand-labeling validation.
These methods include
sequence coverage, peptide count, and spectral counting, which estimate abundances
based on MS/MS fragmentations. However, these methods tend to discard low-abundance
ions during the selection of precursor ions from MS1 to MS/MS fragmentation[37]. Tuli
17
==PAGE:24==
et al. compared the performance of four MS software tools: msInspect, Progenesis LC-
MS, XCMS and MZmine 2. They tested the tools’ sensitivity and the number of false
positives obtained from each program’s data preprocessing. Sensitivity refers to the low-
est concentration of a compound that can be detected and quantified with a certain level
of confidence by the MS instrument. False positives are wrong annotations, such as an
adduct ion annotated as a sample analyte. msInspect and Progenesis LC-MS yielded bet-
ter sensitivity, while XCMS and MZmine 2 annotated fewer false positives. However, by
selecting more stringent parameters for msInspect and Progenesis LC-MS and choosing
only high-abundance peptides, the number of false positives was comparable to or fewer
than XCMS and MZmine 2[37]. Tuli et al.’s evaluation of the software tools highlights the
challenges of being able to identify low-intensity features and improve sensitivity.
Alternatively, an approach to analyzing and comparing all ions directly at MS1 level can
potentially capture low-abundance ions because due to fewer fragments. However, this
strategy requires rigorous preprocessing steps such as peak detection, filtering, align-
ment, normalization, and noise reduction, e.g. by baseline subtraction[37], an shown in
figure 2.8.
Figure 2.8: Streps in the pre-processing pipeline and visual illustrations of their functions[38].
Spiked mixtures
Spiked mixtures is a technique that involves adding a purified and quantified measure of
a specific analyte to the a sample in order to produce a dataset with known compositions
and quantities of compounds. While these samples cannot be considered ground truth,
they can be useful in identifying ionization inefficiencies, contaminants in the sample, and
the variability of MS by registering unexpected behavior of the well-known compound’s
signal peaks. However, the accuracy obtained for a few analytes is not necessarily rep-
resentative of the performance across all analytes, particularly given the variability and
18
==PAGE:25==
limitations of MS/MS. MS/MS is used to capture the m/z of the expected analytes, but
approximately 80 −90% of the remaining sample are still kept from tandem MS[10].
Simulated data and open data
Simulated data is a representation of ground truth by referring to real labeled data sets
that have undergone m/z shifts or intensity value modifications in order to create new
pseudo data without costly experiments and hand-labeling. In silico simulated data is
a relatively new approach in MS-omics and it involves generating data using simulation
algorithms. Generating in silico simulated data requires the analysis of many ground truth
datasets, which can be challenging to obtain[10]. To facilitate algorithmic advances and
enabling evaluative comparisons between software tools in MS-omics, practitioners are
uploading their data as open source. Despite the growing amount of open source data,
it still requires collaboration with an MS laboratory and formal training to prepare quality
labeled datasets[10].
Other data processing challenges
Analyte detection from mass spectrometry output data is subject to systematic mass error
which occure as a deviation from the true mass, or random mass errors. MS instruments
undergo routine calibrations, where a known mass is analyzed in the MS to interpolate m/z
shift for a given m/z value. Additionally, the mass measurement accuracy of MS instru-
ments can be further improved by adding a spiked standard analyte to an MS experiment
for internal calibration on factors such as electric fields, mass analyzer temperature, and
space charge effects[39]. The space charge effect occurs when charged particles accu-
mulate in a confined space, such as the ionization region or ion trap of a mass spectrom-
eter. As the number of charged particles increases, they interact with each other causing
perturbations in the accuracy and precision of the measurements. Reducing the ioniza-
tion density can help overcome this problem. The temperature of the mass analyzer can
also affect the transmission efficiency of the ions. Higher temperatures can increase the
kinetic energy of the ions and result in diffusional ion loss[40]. Data processing can also
be applied to improve the MS instruments’ settings for better performance throughout the
MS pipeline.
Feature detection
Another important step in data processing is feature detection, which aims to extract var-
ious signal features from MS data. One of them, feature detection, extracts isotopic en-
velopes to includes peak picking, which is also called peak detection. The peaks need
to be identified and categorised into peptide ions of interest to identify the peptides in the
sample. Another category of MS signals is adduct ions and other noise contaminations in
the MS data, which require denoising techniques. Noise can refer to spurious data points
or distortions in the data, as illustrated in 2.9.
19
==PAGE:26==
Figure 2.9: MS data noise. The black dots represent noise in the 3D MS chromatographic spec-
trum. The colors represents the features of isotopic envelopes[10].
A common method to mitigate the influence of noise is to remove the signals by applying
a baseline. The baseline is a threshold value for the intensity or wavelet transformations
so the low-abundance signals get discarded [41], as shown in figure 5.1.
Figure 2.10: The baseline method is a threshold value applied to the signal intensity to remove
noise in MS data and is illustrated with a red line[10].
Because noise corresponds to probabilistic distributions, it is possible to estimate these
distributions and identify their parameters. By applying these parameters, the measure-
ment of noise can be described more accurately, and this information can also be used to
develop baseline algorithms[41]. Chemical noise, e.g., sodium adducts, result from mo-
bile phase impurities. Adduct ions are more complicated to remove than random noise
because they have a pattern similar to the peptide ion’s signal, which is the isotopic distri-
bution. Chemical noise can reduce mass accuracy by shifting peak’s centroids[41] if their
masses are similar to that of the peptide ions’.
Applying a baseline is an efficient data reduction method but also comes with a trade-
off. When removing low-intensity noise signals, there is a risk of also discarding signals
from low-abundance peptide ions. These, hidden behind noisy signals, peptide ions of
interest could contain important information on the sample protein or a modification of the
protein[41].
20
==PAGE:27==
Adduct ions
While the most intense m/z value in the mass spectrum will usually be an peptide ion of
interestfrom the sample, the spectrum also contains chemical and electrical noise. The
chemical impurities evolve from the sample preparation or are related to the compounds
added in the chromatography process. They represent the so-called true impurities in
the MS spectrum. The false impurities in the mass spectra are the adduct ions. Adduct
ions are one or more atoms interacting with an peptide ion of interestand forming a new
ion. The adduct ions evolve from chemicals applied in the mobile phase, and in the ion-
ization process, they interact with the peptide ions. Chemical noise is the mass of the
chemical solvent itself, while the mass of the adduct ion is the peptide ion’s mass and
the additional atom’s or molecule’s. The adduct ions add redundant information to the
mass spectrum as they contain the mass of an peptide ion of interestand are not peptides
of interest themselves. Adduct ions are common contaminants in MS, but they cause a
misrepresentation of the sample’s components in the mass spectrum. A low quantity of
the peptide ion of interestis used for the adduct ion formation, and therefore, it changes
the true representation of the abundance of the sample analytes. The additional atoms’
mass contributions to the mass of an peptide ion of interestpositions the adduct ions at a
higher m/z value than the peptide ion of interestin the spectrum. The adduct ions there-
fore form a tail after the peptide ion. peptide ions of interest can also lose an atom or
molecule, resulting in a lower mass of the new ion than the peptide ion. The additional
signals in the mass spectrum from adduct ions can blur the signals of masses from other
peptide ions of interest if the intensity levels are similar. This problem can occur between
adduct ions of a highly abundant peptide ion of interestand an peptide ion of interestwith
low abundance with similar m/z values since the intensity of an adduct ion is lower than
its associated peptide ion. The retention time of the adduct ion lies between the start and
end elution times of its associated peptide ion of interestfrom chromatography. Although
the actual formation of adduct ions occurs later in the MS workflow in the ionization phase,
the peptide ion of interestand adduct ion are co-eluting. The RT value, therefore, provides
an indication of which peptide ion of interestthe adduct ion evolved from when its peaks
interfere with another peptide ion’s isotopic pattern. Protonated, deprotonated, neutral
loss ions, together with sodium and potassium adducts, are frequently observed in elec-
trospray mass spectra. In many cases, annotation is integrated into the data processing
workflows and is based on chromatographic peak-picking tools[42]. Peak-picking is also
an essential part of the Annotation algorithm developed in this project. The peak-picking
process happens by filtering on the peaks’ parameters including, intensity, RT and m/z
values. Peak-picking is applied as a part of the Annotation algorithm to detect peptide
ions of interest from adduct ions, so the algorithm later can be integrated in the Genedata
software’s workflow to simplify and improve the annotation process of MS data.
21
==PAGE:28==
3
Materials and methods
The Materials and methods chapter includes the preparation steps of generating a MS
dataset to be applied in the Annotation algorithm development. The algorithm serves
as a filtering tool to annotate peptide ions of interest peaks from adduct ion peaks and
consists of a class and a number of functions. A flowchart diagram of the program is
created to visualize the process of the code and to provide an overview of the code’s
functionality.
3.1
Generating a dataset
The MS dataset applied in the project is self-made. The process associated with gener-
ating a data has been a helpful learning opportunity to gain insights to the field of mass
spectrometry. Hands-on experience on sample preparation, running the MS setup and
observing the mass spectrum formation on a computer screen while the MS was running,
lead to extensive understanding of the data.
The MS approach has been bottom-up and included enzymatic protein cleavage with
trypsin and HPLC chromatography before the sample was ionised by the ESI technology.
An Top-down approach has also been applied to have the advantage of an intact protein
for reference to check if the MS workflow ran as expected.
3.1.1
Sample preparation
The active ingredient protein is an antibody called aTNP. The sample preparation included
first a reduction of the protein. For reduction Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) was
applied to the sample as the reducing reagent. TCEP was introduced in the late 1980s
and is now one of the most popular protein reductants[43]. TCEP is commonly used to
reduce disulfide bonds, which are covalent bonds between two cysteine amino acids in
a protein. Breaking the disulfide bonds will unfold the protein and convert it to a more
linear form making it easier for the enzymatic digestion process. The digestion aims to
reduce the protein to smaller and more manageable fragments that can be analyzed by
the mass spectrometer. For this sample the enzyme trypsin was used to cleave the protein
at Arginine (R) and Lysine (K).
A theoretical mass list of aTNP was generated by the software GPMAW. GPMAW is a
program focusing on mass spectrometry for a detailed analysis of the primary structure of
proteins and peptides[44]. The mass list contains the theoretical masses of the peptides
fragmented from the aTNP protein by trypsin. There are 57 peptide masses. 2 missed
cleavages were detected and with the additional mass combinations the total of masses
are 330. The mass list have later been applied to compare with the experimental data
annotated by the programmed Annotation algorithm.
3.2
Data handling
The company Genedata provides multiple software solutions for MS data analysis, in-
cluding Genedata Expressionist, Genedata Analyst, and Genedata Imagence for imaging
22
==PAGE:29==
MS. Genedata’s software are used at Novo Nordisk and the software is able to collect
and handle MS data from different MS vendors: Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bruker, Wa-
ters, and different MS instruments. To improve Genedata’s ion cluster characterisation,
raw MS data was exported Excel. There are three datasets, one contains all measured
peak values from the MS sample. The second dataset contains Genedata’s assigned
isotopic clusters and finally the third dataset contains Genedata’s assigned groups. The
cluster dataset includes peaks assigned in isotopic patterns, referred to as a cluster. The
group dataset refers to groups of clusters. In each group, there is a cluster of isotopic
pattern of a fragment ion and its corresponding clusters of adduct ions’ isotopic patterns.
Figure 3.2 illustrate the relations between peaks, clusters and groups in an op map gen-
erated in Genedata. In Excel the first data exploration was handled. The peak list dataset
consists of information on the intensity of the peak signals, the m/z values, and the reten-
tion time (RT) of the signals among other data. RT is the time measured from when the
sample is injected to the column and until the compound elutes at its maximum quantity
before its peak is tailing. The peak list also contains Genedata’s annotation of the indi-
vidual peaks to a cluster and to a group. On a cluster level, information of the size and
charge or the clusters determined by Genedata. The size refers to the number of peaks
in a given cluster that Genedata categorise as an isotopic pattern. The charge is the
calculated charge state of the isotopic pattern. The group dataset illustrates Genedata’s
assignments of clusters in certain groups depending on a peptide ion of interest and its
associated adduct ions. Furthermore the group contains clusters of the peptide ions of
interest in different charge states if found in the sample. Genedata’s categorisation of
clusters and groups contains wrongly annotated peaks in clusters and wrongly predicted
groups, where for example an adduct ion’s cluster is not included in what should have
been its associated group.
Figure 3.1: Ion map generated in Genedata. Selected groups and clusters are marked.
23
==PAGE:30==
3.3
Annotation algorithm
The algorithm is programmed in Python. Python is a high-level programming language
that is used for a variety of applications, including data analysis, scientific computing, ar-
tificial intelligence, machine learning. Python is known for its simplicity and its large and
active community of developers, who contribute with libraries and frameworks that make
development faster and more efficient. These libraries and frameworks provide powerful
tools for a wide range of projects also within the field of MS. There are several Python
libraries available for mass spectrometry data analysis: PyMS provides tools for spectral
signal processing and isotope generation[45]. ms_peak_picker is a library for peak picking
and filtering in mass spectrometry data[46]. mzML provides tools for accessing and ma-
nipulating spectral data and metadata in its mzML format[47]. pymzML is a Python library
for working with mzML files for visualizing and analyzing mass spectrometry data[48].
OpenMS is a C++ library for mass spectrometry data analysis, but it also has a Python
interface PyOpenMS, that provides access to many of the features of OpenMS, including
data preprocessing, peak picking, and quantification[49].
This project’s algorithm does not include these tools. The frame of the project was too
specific and did not depend on the features provided by the python software tools. Fur-
thermore, it was a priority to build the algorithm from the bottom and not rely on ’black box’.
This approach also enhanced the explainability of the algorithm. The algorithm develop-
ment started by data exploration in Excel and plotting isotopic patterns from the peak list.
The cluster list was applied to generate plots representing peptide ions of interests and
their associated adduct ions in different charge states. To prepare an isotopic pattern plot
an intensive peak in the peak list was filtered out. Next step was to select a RT window
for the peak. Then the mass of the peak’s ion is calculated by
m = (m
z −H) ∗z
, where m is the mass of the ion, z is the charge of the ion, m/z represents the mass-
to-charge ratio of the ion, and H is hydrogen. Hydrogen consists of one proton and one
electron. When hydrogen loses its electron, it becomes a positively charged ion, called a
proton. When hydrogen gains an electron, it becomes a negatively charged ion. Hydrogen
is highly reactive and easily able to form bonds with other ions. Protonation happens in
the ionization phase in the MS workflow and the number of protons gained by the peptide
ion of interest determines the charge state of the ion. In case of an adduct ion formation
the charge state will also be determined by the additional atom or atoms from the adduct
ion formation. The H in the equation is applied to ”align” the mass spectra due to the
different charge states. The alignment happens by subtracting the equivalent number of
H to the charge state, from the m/z value. An example without the ”alignment” is illustrated
in figure 3.2.
24
==PAGE:31==
Figure 3.2: The mass contribution of one proton in charge state 3 compared to charge state 2.
When the m/z values are converted to m, the most intense peaks value is subtracted from
the other signals masses. The differences of the masses are the masses of the atoms
used to build the adduct ions. The charge states can easily be found by calculating the
m/z values between the signals. The number of peaks within 1 dalton (Da.) is a quick
approach to determine the charge state of the ion. The plot in figure 3.3 contains the
intensity of the signals for the y-axis and the m/z values of the signals for the x-axis. The
annotations were found by the equation converting the m/z value to m and are shown on
the plot in figure 3.3.
Figure 3.3: Isotopic distribution of a peptide ion of interest with the average mass of 5058,56 Da.
The x-axis is not linear but the peaks are chronologically listed by m/z value to include a broader
mass spectra.
Figure 3.4: The theoretical monoisotopic and average masses of the peptide ion of interest with the
average mass of 5058,56 Da. in different charge states and including the amino acid sequence.
The mass values are given in Da.
25
==PAGE:32==
Figure 3.4 includes theoretical information from GPMAW on the peptide ion of interest
in figure 3.3. The annotations in figure 3.3 show how the triple-charged peptide ion of
interest has sodium adduct ions. In the ionization phase the peptide ion of interest gained
one or more sodium ion which are contributing with positive charge like hydrogen. In the
next plot the data from Genedata’s cluster list were applied. Per definition of a cluster
they are isotopic patterns. By subtracting the most intense cluster’s mass from the others
within a common charge state and RT window the adduct ions are possible to find. In
figure 3.5
Figure 3.5: Distribution of a peptide ion of interest with the monoisotopic mass of 2543,12 Da. and
related adduct ions in charge state 2 and 3.
Figure 3.6: The theoretical monoisotopic and average masses of the peptide ion of interest with
the monoisotopic mass of 2543,12 Da. in different charge states and including the amino acid
sequence. The mass values are given in Da.
Figure 3.6 includes theoretical information from GPMAW on the peptide ion of interest in
figure 3.5. The masses are aligned for the two charge states of the ions in figure 3.5 by
the mass of an ion equation that subtracts the numbers of protons due to the charge state.
It therefore causes that the mass of a sodium atom is approx. 1 Da. (the mass of one
proton) lower than it should be. The same appears withe the potassium adduct ion in the
plot of figure 3.5.
The processes developed from data exploration in Excel was later translated to Python
code. The first approach was to split the functionalities of the algorithm up. The function-
alities were discussed continuously and resulted in a natural iterative coding progress. In
the next project development phase included an intense focus on the algorithm develop-
ment and assembling of the functionalities in the Enumerator class.
26
==PAGE:33==
3.3.1
Python libraries
In the beginning of the code different modules and libraries are imported for additional
functionality to Python programming. numpy and math are python libraries applied for
numerical computing and provides a wide range of functions for performing basic mathe-
matical operations. pandas is also a powerful library providing tools for working with tab-
ular data, data manipulation and analysis. shutil provides file operations such as copying
and archiving files and directories.
3.3.2
Functions in the Annotations algorithm
A set of code functions developed for the Annotation algorithm are presented. They are
chosen due to their functionalities provide the backbone of the algorithm.
The first function is most_abun_peak() and is shown in figure 3.7
Figure 3.7: Code snippet of the function most_abun_peak().
The function most_abun_peak() defines a dictionary ma_mass_dict that contains informa-
tion about the atoms’ most abundant isotopes in the isotope distributions. The function
returns a dictionary including the natural abundance (p) and the atomic mass (m) of each
atom’s most abundant isotope. The ma_mass_dict dictionary will later be used to make
adduct ion combinations. The most abundant isotope was chosen due to the adduct ion
formation. The ma_mass_dict dictionary can be expanded to include more atoms if it is
relevant.
Figure 3.8: Code snippet of the function get_chst_dict().
get_chst_dict() is a function that returns a dictionary chst_dict containing the oxidation
states of atoms that potentially can contribute in adduct ion formations. The chst_dict
dictionary can also be expanded.
27
==PAGE:34==
Figure 3.9: Code snippet of the function most_abun_masses(ma_mass_dict).
The function most_abun_masses(ma_mass_dict) uses the information from the ma_mass_dict
dictionary to calculate the mass for the atoms’ most abundant isotopes due to their natu-
ral abundances and returns a dictionary called mam_dict that contains the mass for each
most abundant isotope. k and v are the keys and values in the ma_mass_dict which
are respectively the name of the atoms and the mass information. The value, v contains
both the natural abundance, p of the most abundant isotope and the mass, m. The most
abundant mass of each atom is the product of p and m. The masses are then saved in
mass_dict[k] to their respective key, which was the name of the atom.
Figure 3.10: Code snippet of the function get_ma_mass(atom_dict, mam_dict).
The function get_ma_mass(atom_dict, mam_dict) takes two inputs: the atom_dict and
the mam_dict. It takes the information in mam_dict to assign the atoms’ most abundant
masses to a number. k and v represents the key and values in the atom_dict dictionary
where the key is the name of the atoms and the value are the number of each atoms for
example there can be H4 and N2. Then the number of each atom is multiplied with the
most abundant mass of the respective atoms and assigned to a number to have the total
mass of each combination. The atom_dict dictionary will be explained later. The same
process applies to the function get_chst(atom_dict, chst_dict) that also takes the value,
v from the input atom_dict and multiplies it with the atoms’ charge states contributions.
For example one hydrogen atom provides one proton, four hydrogen atoms provide four
protons. These results are also assigned to a number.
28
==PAGE:35==
Figure 3.11: Code snippet of the Enumerator class.
The Enumerator class takes a reference dictionary which is an atom dictionary set by
the user. The reference dictionary includes the user’s choice of relevant adduct ions to
search for and the maximum number of each. The Enumerator class has a for loop to
run through the reference dictionary to build a total_dict[k] dictionary. The total_dict[k]
dictionary contains all possible combinations of the atoms that potentially represent the
peptide ion of interest in different charge states or the part of the adduct ion that is not
the peptide ion’s mass. max_number represents the maximum number of atom combi-
nations. max_number=total_combi-1, the -1 is applied to subtract the combination where
there is 0 of all adduct ion’ atoms for example H:0, Na:0, K:0. The +1 in the code line
total_combi=total_combi(v+1) refers to the possibility of 0 of a specific atom. For exam-
ple there can by a combination of H:2, Na:0, K:1. v is the maximum number of a specific
atom set by the reference dictionary. To explain the functionality of the next two functions
get_number(self, atom_dict) and get_combi(self, anumber) a reference dictionary of H:3,
Na: 1, K: 2 is made up.
Figure 3.12: Code snippet of the function get_number(self, atom_dict).
The get_number(self, atom_dict) function has two inputs self and the atom_dict. Self is a
reference to the instance of the Enumerator class on which the function is being called.
get_number(self, atom_dict) runs through the atom_dict in a for loop and gives each com-
bination a number. The numbering system contains of natural numbers and 0, starting
from 0 to the maximum number of combinations possible from the reference dictionary.
For the reference dictionary given as an example the beginning of the numbering system
is listed in table 3.1:
29
==PAGE:36==
Number
H:3
Na: 1
K: 2
0
0
0
0
1
1
0
0
2
2
0
0
3
3
0
0
4
0
1
0
5
1
1
0
6
2
1
0
7
3
1
0
8
0
0
1
9
1
0
1
10
2
0
1
11
3
0
1
12
0
1
1
13
1
1
1
Table 3.1: The table includes an initial part of all possible atom combinations due to the reference
dictionary of H:3, Na: 1, K: 2. The combinations are numerated.
Each number represents an atom combination. It begins with the combinations of H before
it continues to include the next atoms. By the number of 4 the maximum combinations
of H are listed without other atoms. By the number of 8 the maximum combinations with
H and Na are listed before including K. These rules only applies to the specific reference
dictionary chosen as an illustrative example.
The get_combi(self, anumber) function takes a number (anumber) as an input and can
determine the atom combination of that number.
Figure 3.13: Code snippet of the function get_combi(self, anumber).
The get_combi(self, anumber) function also takes the input self referring to the instance of
the Enumerator class on which the function is being called. By giving the get_combi(self,
anumber) function anumber = 10, the function can determine the atom combination cor-
responding to 10. In the table 10 refers to the combination of 2 hydrogen atoms and 1
potassium. The get_combi(self, anumber) function determines the atom combination by
applying ’//’ on the anumber. ’//’ is used as the integer division operator in Python, which
30
==PAGE:37==
means the result is the quotient of the division rounded down to the nearest integer. The
first for loop in the function iterates through the atoms in reverse order, meaning beginning
from K in the reference dictionary instead of H. The self.total.dict[k] refers to the number
where K is represented the first time in the numbering system, which is 8. The modulo
operator ’%’ is applied to return only the remainder of the division, which i 2 from 10//8.
From the first iteration we get one ’8’ and two remainder. Then in the next iteration the
remainder, 2 is too small for the integer division of Na, as Na is introduced at the number
of 4. The remainder of 2//4 is therefore still 2. From the second iteration we got zero ’4’
but still have 2 remainders. For the last iteration of H, the remainder of 2 is divided by 1
where the hydrogen atom is introduced in the numbering system, and we get the number
of ’2’ with 0 remainder and the iterations end. Adding the results from the three iterations
together: 8, 0 and 2 the result become 10 including 1 potassium atom, 0 sodium atoms
and 2 hydrogen atoms, which is the combination asked for and which is consistent with
the illustration in table 3.1.
In the end the get_combi(self, anumber) function returns the atom_dict, which includes all
the atom combinations. The atom_dict can then be applied in the mass calculating func-
tion and charge state calculating function to find the respective most abundant masses
and charge states of each atom combination. The full code is included in the appendix.
3.3.3
Flowchart diagram
Figure 3.14 illustrates a flowchart diagram of the applied functionalities of the coded class
and functions. A flowchart diagram is a graphical representation to describe the steps or
actions in a sequence of events that lead to a specific outcome. Flowcharts are created to
help illustrate and understand complex processes and procedures with the use of symbols
and arrows to represent the flow of information or activities in a process. The oval shape
represent the beginning and the end of the program, the rectangle refers to a process and
the diamond indicates a decision.
31
==PAGE:38==
Figure 3.14: Flow chart diagram illustrating the annotation process. A diagram with the looping
arrows indications can be found in appendix.
32
==PAGE:39==
In each iteration, the peaks with the highest intensities are picked. The idea behind this
filter is that every type of organism has a number of proteins that are present with a very
high abundance. Those proteins are involved in the basic functions of a cell and are called
housekeeping proteins[50]. The following step is selecting an RT window fitting around
the eluting time of the most intensive peak. The idea behind this filter is that the RT of a
peak depends on the hydrophobicity of the corresponding peptide. If the eluting times of
the peaks are far from each other, the corresponding peptides will not be the same, as they
will then have different chemical properties even when having he same m/z values[50].
The Annotation algorithm iterates in an outer for loop 100 times before ending the pro-
gram. The algorithm begins with finding the most intensive peak after importing relevant
libraries. Next step is assigning the peptide ion’s of interest most abundant peak to an
isotopic pattern by selecting the 5 most intensive within an m/z and RT window related to
the most abundant peak. The distance between the 5 peaks determines the charge state
of the newly assembled isotopic pattern. The new isotopic pattern is then annotated in the
column ’annotation’ by its most abundant mass value calculated from its m/z value. Af-
terwards the inner loop tries to find hits by matching the peak list’s masses to all possible
variations of adduct ion combinations due to a reference dictionary set by the user. The
adduct ion combinations are built of the mass of most abundant peak found in the peak
list with the addition of the masses of the adduct ions combinations. Then the potential
adduct ions masses are run through the peak list to find a similar mass within a tolerance.
The ’primary’ masses refer to the masses from the peak list and formation of the adduct
ion mass is referred to as the ’modified’ mass.
33
==PAGE:40==
4
Results
The result of the Annotation algorithm is 91 annotated peptide ions of interest. 17 of the 91
assignments fit the theoretical masses of the peptide ions listed by GPMAW. GPMAW’s
list contains 54 peptide ion masses. 17 hits mean 31,48% of the theoretical peptide ions’
masses were detected by the Annotation algorithm for the particular MS experiment. The
17 annotated peptide ions of interest are listed in the result table 4.1. Furthermore, differ-
ent charge state variations of the peptide ions of interest are discovered by the algorithm.
The algorithm also found several adduct ions associated to the different charge states of
the peptide ion of interest. In total the Annotation algorithm assigned 666 peaks to be
either a peptide ions of interest, an alternative charge state or an adduct ion combination.
Genedata’s peak list includes a total of 6347 peak signals. A snippet of the annotations
of the algorithm are shown in figure 4.1.
Figure 4.1: Hits found by the Annotation algorithm. The last column ’annotation’ shows the Anno-
tation algorithm’s annotations in Da. An enlarged image is attached in the appendix with the full
annotation list.
An extra column is added to the original dataset structure. It is the last column and named
annotated. Besides displaying the annotations for the user the new column’s function
is also to be applied as a criterion in the annotation process. If the cell in the column
annotated is not empty it means the row, with a specific peak, is already annotated and
will not be considered in the following annotation iterations. The rest of the columns in
the table was included in the peak list from Genedata. The annotations are represented
by their most abundant masses and their charge state. If the peptide ion of interest are
discovered in other charge states than the one of the most abundant, they are referred
to as variants and the number of protons determines the alternative charge states the
peptide ions of interest were found in. Adduct ions are also assigned as variants and their
atomic combination are displayed with the mass of the peptide ion of interest.
The table 4.1 also includes the equivalent 17 masses from Genedata’s cluster list selected
by mass sizes fitting the experimental results the best. Furthermore, the table includes the
masses from the mass list exported from the software GPMAW which yields the theoretical
masses of the peptide ions in the sample. The 17 peptide ions from GPMAW’s mass list
were chosen as the closest to the annotated masses from the Annotation algorithm for
comparison. Only 17 masses of the Annotation algorithm’s 91 annotated peptide ion
masses matched the masses from GPMAW’s peptide mass list with 0 missed cleavages.
34
==PAGE:41==
0 missed cleavages are specified because 2 missed cleavages was detected from the
MS experiment. A second mass list was generated from GPMAW including the additional
masses appearing with 2 missed cleavages. The low number of matches between the
Annotation algorithms assignments of peptide ion of interest and GPMAW’s peptide mass
list with 0 missed cleavages can be due to poor performance of the Annotation algorithm
but also due to the experimental setup. For example, some signals might not have been
detected in the MS detector because of e.g. lack of peptide ionization or flyability, or the
signals are wrongly detected due to missed cleavages, or wrong cleavages.
Table of results
AA
GPMAW
Genedata
AA-GPMAW
Genedata-GPMAW
574,332490
574,332629
not found
-0,000139
not relevant
735,390562
735,391541
not found
-0,000979
not relevant
776,380288
776,381705
not found
-0,001417
not relevant
829,452941
829,454536
not found
-0,001595
not relevant
834,425637
834,426942
not found
-0,001305
not relevant
948,511943
948,512780
not found
-0,000837
not relevant
1.501,749529
1.501,751175
1.501,748815
-0,001646
-0,002360
1.807,005446
1.806,999223
1.807,006744
0,006223
0,007521
1.875,891926
1.875,892438
1.875,892792
-0,000512
0,000354
1.901,921558
1.900,920700
1.900,921758
1,000858
0,001058
1.946,020641
1.945,019685
1.945,019761
1,000956
0,000076
2.135,964691
2.134,961459
2.134,961952
1,003232
0,000493
2.364,133385
2.363,132151
2.363,131073
1,001234
-0,001078
2.504,155607
2.503,154344
2.503,154395
1,001263
0,000051
2.544,127021
2.543,124107
2.543,123506
1,002914
-0,000601
3.601,851368
3.599,852511
3.599,851646
1,998857
-0,000865
5.057,540576
5.055,539355
5.055,53735
2,001221
-0,002005
Table 4.1: The table includes the Annotation algorithm’s annotations of the peptide ions of interest
including the similar masses from GPMAW and Genedata for comparison. AA is the abbreviation
for Annotation algorithm in this table. GPMAW refers to GPMAW’s theoretical mass list with 0
missed cleavages. Genedata refers to the masses of Genedata’s assigned clusters. The fourth
column shows the results from subtracting the masses from GPMAW’s mass list from the masses
the Annotation algorithm assigned. The fifth column contains the results of subtracting the masses
of GPMAW mass list from Genedata’s cluster annotations. Masses are presented in Da.
Table 4.1 includes the Annotation algorithm’s 17 annotations of the peptide ions of inter-
est. The theoretical masses from GPMAW with similar sizes are included for comparison.
Genedata’s cluster masses are included to compare with the Annotation algorithm’s anno-
tations. The Annotation algorithm applies the peak list from Genedata. By comparing the
Annotation algorithms results to the Genedata’s cluster list, different assignments of the
isotopic patterns can be discovered. Genedata’s cluster annotation does not include the
lower masses. The lowest mass for an assigned Genedata cluster is 998,2151998 Da.
The mass of 998,2151998 Da. is not found in GPMAW’s mass lists containing the masses
from either 0 missed cleavages or the mass list including the masses with 2 missed cleav-
ages. Table 4.1 illustrates that Genedata’s cluster annotations matched better GPMAW’s
theoretical masses except for the three cases marked in red in the table. It is also impor-
tant to mention that Genedata probably has more matches with the theoretical masses
35
==PAGE:42==
besides the ones Genedata shares with the Annotation algorithm listed in table 4.1.
GPMAW’s list of masses with 2 missed cleavages was also applied to add extra values
to compare the Annotation algorithm’s results against. The Annotation algorithm found 9
similar masses to GPMAW’s mass list with the additional masses from 2 missed cleavages
while excluding the masses from the peptide ions from the mass list of 0 missed cleavages.
The mass differences between the 9 masses are between 112 ppm and 5124 ppm.
An acceptable mass difference in the annotated signals from the Annotation algorithm
and the theoretical mass list is 50 ppm. It is calculated by:
50 <= E + T
T
∗106
, E stands for the experimental mass and T for the theoretical mass. The 50 ppm is a
threshold specifically given for this project as an initial goal to strive for. A study of F.
Yu et al. on the mass measurement accuracy (MMA) of Orbitrap mass spectrometers,
stated that according to the manufacturer’s specification the MMA of Orbitrap mass spec-
trometers is 1-5 ppm, yet, up to 50 ppm has been applied to interpret Orbitrap data in the
literature[51]. The threshold of 50 ppm for the project is high but reasonable due to the F.
Yu et al.’s insight to the field.
The results reveal the mass difference is larger than the acceptable threshold. The best
peptide ion of interest result’s mass difference is 139 ppm Da. for the peptide ion of
interest of 574,332629 Da. (theoretical mass from GPMW). The results also shed light
on a systematic error in the sample of 17 resulting annotation matches. The larger the
masses of the peptide ions of interest are, the larger the mass differences between the
experimental results and the theoretical masses become as illustrated in figure 4.2.
36
==PAGE:43==
Figure 4.2: Mass difference between experimental set up and GPMAW’s theoretical monoisotopic
peptide masses with 0 missed cleavages .
The mass differences between the matches of the Annotation algorithms annotations and
the GPMAW’s theoretical masses are either approximately 0, 1 and 2 as shown in figure
4.2. The mass of 1.875,891926 Da. from the Annotation algorithm and 1.875,892438
Da. from GPMAW is the largest mass where the difference is close to 0, specifically 512
ppm. The mass of 1.901,921558 Da. from the Annotation algorithm and 1.900,920700
Da. from GPMAW is the lowest mass where the difference is close to 1, specifically
858 ppm. Between the theoretical masses of 1.875,892438 Da. and 1.900,920700 Da.
the shift between approximately 0 and 1 Da. happens in the mass difference between
the experimental set up and the theoretical. With these data it is unclear when the shift
between approximately 1 and 2 Da. difference appears. The mass gap error can be
explained by the selection criteria for the peak signals for the Annotation algorithm. The
Annotation algorithm selects the most intensive peak for each loop iteration to form an
isotopic pattern with the 4 other most intensive peaks within a window of a specific m/z
and RT values. The masses of each isotopic patterns are therefore described by the most
abundant mass by the Annotation algorithm. Genedata applies the monoisotopic mass
instead to annotate their clusters’ masses. The position of the monoisotopic peak is the
first peak in an isotopic distribution. For lower ion masses the monoisotopic peak is also
the most abundant peak, but the most abundant peak changes its position in the isotopic
pattern due to the size of the ion’s mass. The heavier the mass is, the further into the
isotopic pattern will the most abundant peak appear.
In GPMAW it was also possible to export the theoretical peptide masses listed by their
average mass. Comparing the mass differences of the annotations from the Annotation
algorithm to the average masses of GPMAW the size of the mass differences appeared
more random compared to the Annotation algorithm annotated masses and GPMAW’s
37
==PAGE:44==
monoisotopic masses. The results of the mass differences where the average masses
from GPMAW were applied are visualised in the scatter plot in figure 4.3.
Figure 4.3: Mass difference between experimental set up and GPMAW’s theoretical average pep-
tide masses with 0 missed cleavages.
The mass differences will be discussed further in the following chapter with a follow up on
the yellow marked fields in table 4.1.
38
==PAGE:45==
5
Discussion
This chapter discusses the performance of the Annotation algorithm and the result con-
ducted in the previous chapter. Furthermore, this chapter provides reflections upon pos-
sible improvements of the algorithm. Briefly, a discussion on the current state of the MS
field’s challenges relevant for this project, is introduced.
There are still challenges to MS-based research including sample preparation, throughput
size, and the complex and excessive amount of MS data for processing and analysis[12].
Sample preparation and maintenance of the mass spectrometers can be improved by a
higher degree of automation. The data analysis tools are currently focused on developing
in regards of specific scientific applications and can be improved by striving for rather
universal applicability and reproducibility. Applicability and reproducibility can strengthen
the developement of new tools. Improved data processing can also reduce the labour
intensive process for the researcher to look through annotation errors of for example false
positives assignments of MS mass values.
5.1
Tolerances
To annotate more peptide ions of interest, it is possible to regulate the threshold and
criteria applied in the Annotation algorithm. The thresholds are: The m/z window for the
most intensive peak in each run, the RT window for the most intensive peak in each run,
the number of 5 peaks to assemble an isotopic pattern, the tolerance of ±0.1 in the m/z
equation to find hits. The value of ±1, 5 to create the m/z window is reasonable. The
advantage of shrinking the window is the reduction of signals appearing in the window.
If the isotopic pattern of the most abundant peak is more than 1.5 Da. (or 3 Da. if the
most abundant peak is the center peak of the pattern) relevant isotopes of the pattern will
be missed in the window. The RT window is also narrowly selected to cover the most
intensive peak’s eluting time. The tolerance of ±0.1 to find annotation hits in the peak
list was a trial value and seemed reasonable small. Increasing the tolerance can result
in more annotating hits but also increase the risk of more false positives annotations. An
optimised tolerance value to find the highest number of correct annotation hits without
including false positives. A solution can be to use machine learning (ML) and tune the
threshold parameter to find the optimal value. sklearn is an machine learning library in
python which holds a function hyperparameter() to optimise ML parameters in this case
the tolerance value. The tolerance is chosen to be ±0.1 and is applied in the m/z equation:
m±0.1
z
, where m is the mass of the most abundant peak and z is the charge state of the ion.
The values in the peak list that fall into this m/z range is annotated as a hit. A tolerance
is needed to give the mass comparison function a relatively small span to be able to find
hits between the peak list and the atom combinations in the Annotation algorithm. If the
39
==PAGE:46==
tolerance span is too big more false positives can occur as hits. On the other hand if the
span is too small or neglected the true positives might not be found.
5.2
Assignment of an isotopic pattern
The assignment of an isotopic pattern happens by selecting the most abundant peak of
each iteration and preparing m/z and RT windows around that peak. The 5 most intense
peaks are selected to be the isotopic pattern of that iteration. They are assigned and will
not be considered in the next iteration in the loop. By this approach the low abundant
peaks will be saved for the following runs. The top 5 peaks on intensity approach has
drawbacks due to its accuracy to define isotopic patterns. For example a problem arises
if the isotopic pattern contains less or more peaks than 5. If there are less peaks than 5
then the missing peak in the pattern are potentially filled with peaks from other isotopic
patterns within the same m/z and RT windows. The m/z and RT windows aims to shrink
the number of irrelevant peaks to isotopic pattern of interest. In the case where the isotopic
peak of interest contains more isotopes than 5, only the 5 most intense are selected to
form the pattern. The left over peaks might be recognised to be a isotopic pattern in a later
iteration due to their intensity, but if there are less than 5 left, they might be mixed with
another isotopic pattern. By mixing isotope patterns a domino effect of problems arises
as the next step is to determine the charge state of the isotope pattern by subtracting the
distances of the peaks from each other. If the peaks from the different isotopic patterns
formed into a new have different charge states, it will also cause an error in the annotation
of the new pattern’s charge state. An alternative way to determine isotopic patterns, is to
look at the relative intensity between its isotopes[10]. To avoid wrongly annotated isotopic
patterns, a relative intensity distribution can be applied to validate the annotated pattern.
To improve the isotopic pattern assignment, after selecting the most intensive peak, then
only the second most intensive will be selected afterwards. Next step is then to calculate
the distance between them and within a loop add and subtract the distance to the most
intense peak’s m/z value and iterate though the other signals in the RT and m/z window.
For every iteration the distance is added and subtracted from the most intense peak’s m/z
value to find the next neighbor of isotope in the isotopic cluster. The charge state in the
approach become a selecting criteria too. To make this improvement more robust then in
case of one signal in the isotopic pattern was not detected, the ”detect isotope envelope”
functionality of the algorithm should skip a missing value once or twice in case the signal
was not read by the MS detector. The number of skipped isotopes should be kept low to
avoid the risk of detecting a peak of a neighboring cluster with the same charge state or
when the charge state are overlaying for example charge state 2 and 4. The charge state
2 isotopic patterns can interfere with every second of the charge state 4 isotopic pattern
in their m/z values are similar. Intensity should still be applied as a filtering parameter to
avoid noisy low abundant peaks that fits in the distance of the isotopic pattern of interest.
A reasonable intensity threshold has to be set relatively to the most abundant peak. To
sum up, a logical ’and’ operation in the additional loop should be applied to find isotope
candidates within a specific intensity range and distance to the most intensive peak.
5.3
Mass quantities in the isotopic distribution
The misalignment of the masses applied to base the mass of an isotopic distribution on
was touched upon in previous chapter. The Annotation algorithm uses the most abun-
40
==PAGE:47==
dant mass while Genedata applies the monoisotopic mass. The mass list exported from
GPMAW also included the monoisotopic masses. The most abundant peak can be the
same as the monoisotopic peak but can also appear later in the isotopic distribution. An
illustration of the mass quantities represented in the isotopic distribution is shown in figure
5.1.
Figure 5.1: The mass quantities represented in the isotopic distribution[52].
Depending on the size of the isotopic pattern, its charge state, and the mass of the ion
the distance between the monoisotopic peak and the most abundant can vary both due
to how many peaks there are between them and their difference in mass value. Figure
5.2 shows the most abundant peaks change in position due to the size of the peptide ion
of interest from the sample.
41
==PAGE:48==
Figure 5.2: The most abundant peak in the the isotopic distribution due to the size of masses. The
y-axis refers to the intensity of the isotopes and the x-axis refers to the mass of the ion in Da.
The four peptide ions of interest are the four which differences in mass are marked in
yellow in table 4.1. Comparing with the results in table 4.1 the experimental masses
from the Annotation algorithm align with the theoretical when subtracting the 1 Da. in
difference to the mass of 2.504,155607 Da. and 2.544,127021 Da. and subtracting 2 Da.
in difference to the mass of 3.601,851368 Da. The annotated peptide ions of interest do
still not fall into the 50 ppm criterion.
5.4
Ion losses
Ion losses in MS experiments are common and refers to the case where a peptide ion
of interest loses an ion instead of gaining one as in an adduct ion formation. Inspecting
mass spectra for ion losses are important as some ion losses provide information on
a particular functional group or substructure in the molecule. Ion losses happens often
during the ionization process or CID in the collision cell. Figure 5.3 includes a graph of
the peptide ion of interest with the monoisotopic mass of 1807 Da. and its corresponding
ion losses and adduct ions.
42
==PAGE:49==
Figure 5.3: Distribution of a peptide ion of interest with the monoisotopic mass of 1807 Da. and
related ion losses and adduct ion ions in charge state 2 and 3.
Figure 5.4: The theoretical monoisotopic and average masses of the peptide ion of interest with the
monoisotopic mass of 1807 Da. in different charge states and including the amino acid sequence.
The mass values are given in Da.
Figure 5.4 includes theoretical information from GPMAW on the peptide ion of interest in
figure 5.3. The Annotation algorithm does not consider ion losses but it can be integrated
in future work by adding the information of common ion losses in the isotopic distribution
dictionary i_dict in the function get_all_isotope_distributions() and the charge state dic-
tionary chst_dict in the function get_chst_dict(). The challenge can be that the additional
combinations of modified masses have similar masses after addition and subtracting a
wider range of atoms by considering ion losses too. The problem can therefore cause
wrong annotations by the Annotation algorithm. Stricter thresholds and conditions need
to be evaluated and applied accordingly.
5.5
Additional atoms
Atoms with more than one oxidation state like iron (Fe) are not considered in the Annota-
tion algorithm. The oxidation state of an ion is defined by the number of electrons gained
or lost relative to the neutral atom. Fe can sometimes lose two electrons to form the pos-
itively charged Fe2+ ion and other times it loses three electrons to form the Fe3+ ion. To
integrate the Fe ion as a possible adduct ion ion in the Annotation algorithm both oxidation
states must be considered in the charge state dictionary. Carbon (C) is another example
not taken into account. The most common oxidation state of the C ion is -4 in which it has
gained four electrons. Another common oxidation state for the C ion is +4, which is found
in carbon dioxide (CO2).
43
==PAGE:50==
6
Conclusion
MS is a powerful technique to analyze complex mixtures of molecules in biological sam-
ples. However, the quality of the data obtained from mass spectrometry experiments is
often affected by contaminants. Adduct ions are a common contaminant in mass spectra
and can distort the representation of the sample’s components. Adduct ions contain the
mass of the peptide ions of interest and add redundant information to the mass spec-
trum. They can also blur the signals of masses from other peptide ions of interest if their
intensity levels are close to each other and their signals are overlapping. Adduct ions
challenges annotations algorithms with their contribution on complexity and volume to the
data. The goal of this project was therefore to develop an algorithm that can detect and
remove adduct ions from MS data. By integrating the new filtration tool into the Genedata
software, the annotation process can be simplified and improved, leading to more accu-
rate identification of sample components. This could potentially enhance the selection of
suitable biotherapeutic candidates.
The developed algorithm annotates MS peaks from Excel peak lists into peptide ions of
interest and their variations if they also appeared in other charge states or in adduct ions
from the MS experiment. It is possible to download a new Excel file with the annotated
peaks from the program. The result of the Annotation algorithm is 17 peptide ions of
interest were annotated out of 54 theoretical peptide ions listed by GPMAW for the specific
sample. It equals to 31,48% of the theoretical peptide ions’ masses were detected by the
Annotation algorithm for the particular MS experiment. The mass differences between the
annotated signals from the Annotation algorithm and the theoretical masses are between
0,000139-0,006223 Da. including the adjustments of the mass difference between the
most abundant mass and the monoisotopic mass. 139 ppm is the lowest mass difference,
yet above the threshold of 50 ppm applied for the project.
The Annotation algorithm is tested on data from one MS experiment. By running the al-
gorithm on output data from other experiments with the same sample and different sam-
ples, it can shed light on the benefits and drawbacks of the algorithm’s performance and
provide information for further improvements on the algorithm. The annotated peak lists
from several MS experiments can potentially contribute to valuable insights on adduct
ion formation. The annotated peak lists can therefore in future perspectives be applied
to perform a statistical study on adduct ions. It can be interesting to find out if there are
correlations within the parameters of the peptide ions and the formation of adduct ions.
This information can potentially also be applied in the Genedata framework to guide the
user by providing the probability of the specific adduct ions detected by the Annotation
algorithm.
The Annotation algorithm is not yet integrated in the Genedata workflow. There are still
functionalities and improvements missing in the algorithm development work which are
described in the previous chapter. Without the integration of the Annotation algorithm in
Genedata the performance of the algorithm has not been tested in the Genedata workflow.
44
==PAGE:51==
A visualization by creating an ion map in Genedata with the annotations from the Anno-
tation algorithm can then be compared with Genedata’s own annotation performance.
Overall, this project stressed the importance of developing new tools and algorithms to im-
prove the accuracy and reliability of MS experiments. By addressing the challenges asso-
ciated with noise artifacts and impurities, we can enhance our understanding of molecular
mechanisms in drug development.
45
==PAGE:52==
Bibliography
[1]
Markus Muttenthaler et al. “Trends in peptide drug discovery”. In: Nature Reviews
Drug Discovery 20.4 (2021), pp. 309–325. ISSN: 1474-1784. DOI: 10.1038/s41573-
020-00135-8. URL: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41573-020-00135-8.
[2]
V P Martinovich and K U Baradzina. “Peptide Hormones in Medicine: A 100-Year
History”. In: Russian Journal of Bioorganic Chemistry 48.2 (2022), pp. 221–232.
ISSN: 1608-330X. DOI: 10.1134/S1068162022020157. URL: https://doi.org/10.
1134/S1068162022020157.
[3]
Keld Fosgerau and Torsten Hoffmann. “Peptide therapeutics: current status and
future directions”. In: Drug Discovery Today 20.1 (2015), pp. 122–128. ISSN: 1359-
6446. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.drudis.2014.10.003. URL: https://www.
sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1359644614003997.
[4]
Lei Wang et al. “Therapeutic peptides: current applications and future directions”.
In: Signal Transduction and Targeted Therapy 7.1 (2022), p. 48. ISSN: 2059-3635.
DOI: 10.1038/s41392-022-00904-4. URL: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41392-022-00904-
4.
[5]
Susan Marqus, Elena Pirogova, and Terrence J Piva. “Evaluation of the use of
therapeutic peptides for cancer treatment”. In: Journal of Biomedical Science 24.1
(2017), p. 21. ISSN: 1423-0127. DOI: 10.1186/s12929- 017- 0328- x. URL: https:
//doi.org/10.1186/s12929-017-0328-x.
[6]
Valentijn Vergote et al. “Quality specifications for peptide drugs: A regulatory-pharmaceutical
approach”. In: Journal of peptide science : an official publication of the European
Peptide Society 15 (Nov. 2009), pp. 697–710. DOI: 10.1002/psc.1167.
[7]
Vivi Kielberg. Proteiner. Copenhagen, Denmark: Gads Forlag, 2000. ISBN: 87-12-
03117-8.
[8]
Henrik Rahbek-Nielsen. “Mass spectrometric analyses of peptides and proteins”.
Biopharmaceuticals Research Unit, power point presenation. Novonordisk A/S. 2017.
[9]
Jim Samuelsson et al. “Modular, scriptable and automated analysis tools for high-
throughput peptide mass fingerprinting”. In: Bioinformatics 20.18 (Aug. 2004), pp. 3628–
3635. ISSN: 1367-4803. DOI: 10 . 1093 / bioinformatics / bth460. eprint: https : / /
academic.oup.com/bioinformatics/article-pdf/20/18/3628/48906615/bioinformatics\
_20\_18\_3628.pdf. URL: https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/bth460.
[10]
R. Smith et al. “Proteomics, lipidomics, metabolomics: a mass spectrometry tutorial
from a computer scientist’s point of view”. In: BMC Bioinformatics 15 (2014). Impact
of Post-Translational Modification on the Genesis and Progression of Diseases, p. 9.
ISSN: 1471-2105. DOI: 10.1186/1471-2105-15-S7-S9. URL: https://doi.org/10.1186/
1471-2105-15-S7-S9.
[11]
Ozlem Coskun. “Separation techniques: Chromatography.” In: North Clin Istanb 3.2
(2016), pp. 156–160. ISSN: 2536-4553. DOI: 10.14744/nci.2016.32757. URL: https:
//www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5206469/.
[12]
Juliane Hermann, Leon Schurgers, and Vera Jankowski. “Identification and char-
acterization of post-translational modifications: Clinical implications”. In: Molecular
Aspects of Medicine 86 (2022). Impact of Post-Translational Modification on the
Genesis and Progression of Diseases, p. 101066. ISSN: 0098-2997. DOI: https:
46
==PAGE:53==
//doi.org/10.1016/j.mam.2022.101066. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S0098299722000036.
[13]
Yeow-Kuan Chong et al. “Clinical Mass Spectrometry in the Bioinformatics Era:
A Hitchhiker’s Guide”. In: Computational and Structural Biotechnology Journal 16
(2018), pp. 316–334. ISSN: 2001-0370. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.csbj.2018.
08.003. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2001037018300072.
[14]
Fred W. McLafferty and Michael W. Senko. “Mass spectrometry in the development
of drugs from traditional medicines”. In: Stem Cells 12.1 (Jan. 1996), pp. 68–73.
ISSN: 1066-5099. DOI: 10.1002/stem.5530120112. eprint: https://academic.oup.
com/stmcls/article-pdf/12/1/68/40548929/stmcls\_12\_1\_68.pdf. URL: https:
//doi.org/10.1002/stem.5530120112.
[15]
Brian T Chait. “Mass spectrometry in the postgenomic era”. In: Annu. Rev. Biochem.
80.1 (2011), pp. 239–246. DOI: 10.1146/annurev- biochem- 110810- 095744. URL:
https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-biochem-110810-095744.
[16]
Quanhu Sheng et al. “Preprocessing Significantly Improves the Peptide/Protein
Identification Sensitivity of High-resolution Isobarically Labeled Tandem Mass Spec-
trometry Data*[S]”. In: Molecular Cellular Proteomics 14.2 (2015), pp. 405–417.
ISSN: 1535-9476. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1074/mcp.O114.041376. URL: https:
//www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1535947620329194.
[17]
Martin R. Larsen et al. “Analysis of posttranslational modifications of proteins by tan-
dem mass spectrometry”. In: BioTechniques 40.6 (2006). PMID: 16774123, pp. 790–
798. DOI: 10.2144/000112201. URL: https://doi.org/10.2144/000112201.
[18]
Ruzanna Mnatsakanyan et al. “Detecting post-translational modification signatures
as potential biomarkers in clinical mass spectrometry”. In: Expert Review of Pro-
teomics 15.6 (2018). PMID: 29893147, pp. 515–535. DOI: 10.1080/14789450.2018.
1483340. URL: https://doi.org/10.1080/14789450.2018.1483340.
[19]
Vishakha Singh et al. “Phosphorylation: Implications in cancer”. en. In: Protein J.
36.1 (Feb. 2017), pp. 1–6. DOI: 10.1007/s10930-017-9696-z. URL: https://doi.org/
10.1007/s10930-017-9696-z.
[20]
Haodong Xu et al. “PTMD: A Database of Human Disease-associated Post-translational
Modifications”. In: Genomics, Proteomics Bioinformatics 16.4 (2018). Bioinformat-
ics Commons (I), pp. 244–251. ISSN: 1672-0229. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/
j . gpb . 2018 . 06 . 004. URL: https : / / www . sciencedirect . com / science / article / pii /
S1672022918303188.
[21]
R. Zhu et al. “Chapter Twenty-One - Glycoprotein Enrichment Analytical Techniques:
Advantages and Disadvantages”. In: Proteomics in Biology, Part A. Ed. by Arun K.
Shukla. Vol. 585. Methods in Enzymology. Academic Press, 2017, pp. 397–429.
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/bs.mie.2016.11.009. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.
com/science/article/pii/S0076687916304281.
[22]
Simone Nicolardi et al. “Top-Down MALDI-In-Source Decay-FTICR Mass Spec-
trometry of Isotopically Resolved Proteins”. In: Analytical Chemistry 87.6 (2015).
PMID: 25719938, pp. 3429–3437. DOI: 10.1021/ac504708y. eprint: https://doi.org/
10.1021/ac504708y. URL: https://doi.org/10.1021/ac504708y.
[23]
J. Haginaka. “8.9 Chromatographic Separations and Analysis: Protein and Glyco-
protein Stationary Phases”. In: Comprehensive Chirality. Ed. by Erick M. Carreira
and Hisashi Yamamoto. Amsterdam: Elsevier, 2012, pp. 153–176. ISBN: 978-0-08-
095168-3. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/B978- 0- 08- 095167- 6.00822- 3. URL:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/B9780080951676008223.
47
==PAGE:54==
[24]
A. Sanz-Medel and M.L. Fernández-Sanchez. “ELEMENTAL SPECIATION | Overview”.
In: Encyclopedia of Analytical Science (Second Edition). Ed. by Paul Worsfold, Alan
Townshend, and Colin Poole. Second Edition. Oxford: Elsevier, 2005, pp. 472–480.
ISBN: 978-0-12-369397-6. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/B0-12-369397-7/00137-0.
URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/B0123693977001370.
[25]
Thomas M Annesley. “Ion suppression in mass spectrometry”. In: Clin. Chem. 49.7
(July 2003), pp. 1041–1044. ISSN: 0009-9147. DOI: 10 . 1373 / 49 . 7 . 1041. URL:
https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/12816898/.
[26]
Shibdas Banerjee and Shyamalava Mazumdar. “Electrospray Ionization Mass Spec-
trometry: A Technique to Access the Information beyond the Molecular Weight of
the Analyte”. In: International Journal of Analytical Chemistry 2012 (2012). Ed. by
Troy D Wood, p. 282574. ISSN: 1687-8760. DOI: 10.1155/2012/282574. URL: https:
//doi.org/10.1155/2012/282574.
[27]
Rudy Schlaf. Electrospray Thin Film Deposition of Macro-Molecular Materials Under
Ambient Pressure. Aug. 2013. URL: http://rsl.eng.usf.edu/Pages/ResearchElectrosprayAmbient.
html.
[28]
W. Clarke. “Chapter 1 - Mass spectrometry in the clinical laboratory: determining the
need and avoiding pitfalls”. In: Mass Spectrometry for the Clinical Laboratory. Ed. by
Hari Nair and William Clarke. San Diego: Academic Press, 2017, pp. 1–15. ISBN:
978-0-12-800871-3. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-800871-3.00001-8.
URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/B9780128008713000018.
[29]
Elias Ahadi and Lars Konermann. “Ejection of Solvated Ions from Electrosprayed
Methanol/Water Nanodroplets Studied by Molecular Dynamics Simulations”. In: Jour-
nal of the American Chemical Society 133.24 (June 2011), pp. 9354–9363. ISSN:
0002-7863. DOI: 10.1021/ja111492s. URL: https://doi.org/10.1021/ja111492s.
[30]
Mikayé. Matrix-unterstützte Laser-Desorption/Ionisation — Wikipedia, The Free En-
cyclopedia. [Online; accessed 11-March-2023]. 2013. URL: http://en.wikipedia.org/
w/index.php?title=Estimation_lemma&oldid=375747928.
[31]
Richard Knochenmuss. “Ion formation mechanisms in UV-MALDI”. In: Analyst 131
(9 2006), pp. 966–986. DOI: 10.1039/B605646F. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1039/
B605646F.
[32]
Michael Karas, Matthias Glückmann, and Jürgen Schäfer. “Ionization in matrix-
assisted laser desorption/ionization: singly charged molecular ions are the lucky
survivors”. In: Journal of Mass Spectrometry 35.1 (2000), pp. 1–12. DOI: https:
//doi.org/10.1002/(SICI)1096-9888(200001)35:1<1::AID-JMS904>3.0.CO;2-0. URL:
https://doi.org/10.1002/(SICI)1096-9888(200001)35:1%3C1::AID-JMS904%3E3.0.
CO;2-0.
[33]
Mario F. Mirabelli and Renato Zenobi. “Observing Proton Transfer Reactions Inside
the MALDI Plume: Experimental and Theoretical Insight into MALDI Gas-Phase
Reactions”. In: Journal of The American Society for Mass Spectrometry 28.8 (Aug.
2017), pp. 1676–1686. ISSN: 1879-1123. DOI: 10.1007/s13361-017-1677-0. URL:
https://doi.org/10.1007/s13361-017-1677-0.
[34]
Richard D. Smith. “Future directions for electrospray ionization for biological anal-
ysis using mass spectrometry”. In: BioTechniques 41.2 (2006). PMID: 16925015,
pp. 147–148. DOI: 10.2144/000112217. URL: https://doi.org/10.2144/000112217.
[35]
Annette Michalski, Juergen Cox, and Matthias Mann. “More than 100,000 Detectable
Peptide Species Elute in Single Shotgun Proteomics Runs but the Majority is Inac-
cessible to Data-Dependent LC−MS/MS”. In: Journal of Proteome Research 10.4
48
==PAGE:55==
(2011). PMID: 21309581, pp. 1785–1793. DOI: 10.1021/pr101060v. URL: https:
//doi.org/10.1021/pr101060v.
[36]
Salvatore Cappadona et al. “Current challenges in software solutions for mass
spectrometry-based quantitative proteomics”. In: Amino Acids 43.3 (Sept. 2012),
pp. 1087–1108. ISSN: 1438-2199. DOI: 10.1007/s00726-012-1289-8. URL: https:
//doi.org/10.1007/s00726-012-1289-8.
[37]
Leepika Tuli et al. “Using a spike-in experiment to evaluate analysis of LC-MS data”.
en. In: Proteome Sci. 10.1 (Feb. 2012), p. 13. DOI: 10.1021/ac504708y. URL: https:
//doi.org/10.1186/1477-5956-10-13.
[38]
Tyman E Stanford, Christopher J Bagley, and Patty J Solomon. “Informed baseline
subtraction of proteomic mass spectrometry data aided by a novel sliding window
algorithm”. en. In: Proteome Sci. 14.1 (Dec. 2016), p. 19. DOI: 10.1186/s12953-016-
0107-8. URL: https://doi.org/10.1186/s12953-016-0107-8.
[39]
Jarrett D Egertson et al. “De novo correction of mass measurement error in low
resolution tandem MS spectra for shotgun proteomics”. en. In: J. Am. Soc. Mass
Spectrom. 23.12 (Dec. 2012), pp. 2075–2082. DOI: 10.1007/s13361-012-0482-z.
URL: https://doi.org/10.1007/s13361-012-0482-z.
[40]
Jason S. Page et al. “Ionization and Transmission Efficiency in an Electrospray
Ionization–Mass Spectrometry Interface”. In: Journal of the American Society for
Mass Spectrometry 18.9 (2007), pp. 1582–1590. ISSN: 1044-0305. DOI: https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.jasms.2007.05.018. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S1044030507004357.
[41]
Jan Urban and Dalibor Stys. “Noise and Baseline Filtration in Mass Spectrometry”.
In: vol. 9044. Apr. 2015, pp. 418–425. ISBN: 978-3-319-16479-3. DOI: 10.1007/978-
3-319-16480-9_41.
[42]
Thomas Stricker et al. “Adduct annotation in liquid chromatography/high-resolution
mass spectrometry to enhance compound identification”. In: Analytical and Bioan-
alytical Chemistry 413.2 (2021), pp. 503–517. ISSN: 1618-2650. DOI: 10.1007/
s00216-020-03019-3. URL: https://doi.org/10.1007/s00216-020-03019-3.
[43]
Peiran Liu et al. “A Tris (2-Carboxyethyl) Phosphine (TCEP) Related Cleavage on
Cysteine-Containing Proteins”. In: Journal of the American Society for Mass Spec-
trometry 21.5 (2010), pp. 837–844. ISSN: 1044-0305. DOI: https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.jasms.2010.01.016. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S1044030510000486.
[44]
Protein Research Group at the University of Southern Denmark. GPNAW. 1987.
URL: http://www.gpmaw.com/index.html.
[45]
alexandrovteam. pyMSpec. 2016. URL: https://pymspec.readthedocs.io/en/latest/
pyMSpec.html,%20https://github.com/alexandrovteam/pyMSpec.
[46]
Joshua Klein. ms_peak_picker. 2022. URL: https://pypi.org/project/ms- peak-
picker/,%20https://github.com/mobiusklein/ms_peak_picker.
[47]
Proteomics Standards Initiative within Human Proteome Organization. mzML. 2008.
URL: https://www.psidev.info/mzML.
[48]
Andreas Hildebrand, Steffen Neumann, and Hannes Röst. pymzML. 2010. URL:
https://pymzml.readthedocs.io/en/latest/intro.html.
[49]
Hannes Röst et al. PyOpenMS. 2012. URL: https://pyopenms.readthedocs.io/en/
latest/index.html.
[50]
Katharina Podwojski et al. “Retention time alignment algorithms for LC/MS data
must consider non-linear shifts”. In: Bioinformatics 25.6 (Jan. 2009), pp. 758–764.
49
==PAGE:56==
ISSN: 1367-4803. DOI: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btp052. eprint: https://academic.
oup.com/bioinformatics/article-pdf/25/6/758/16892413/btp052.pdf. URL: https:
//doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/btp052.
[51]
F. Yu et al. “Mass measurement accuracy of the Orbitrap in intact proteome analy-
sis”. In: Rapid Commun Mass Spectrom 30.12 (June 2016). [DOI:10.1002/rcm.7574]
[PubMed:27197031], pp. 1391–1397.
[52]
James. Yergey et al. “Isotopic distributions in mass spectra of large molecules”. In:
Analytical Chemistry 55.2 (1983), pp. 353–356. DOI: 10.1021/ac00253a037. URL:
https://doi.org/10.1021/ac00253a037.
50
==PAGE:57==
51
==PAGE:58==
A
Appendix
Figure A.1: Flow chart diagram with loop signals.
52
==PAGE:59==
Annotation_algorithm
April 8, 2023
[1]: import numpy as np
import math
import pandas as pd
import shutil
def get_all_isotope_distributions():
i_dict=dict()
i_dict['H']=[{'p': 0.999885,'m': 1.007825},{'p': 0.000115,'m': 2.014102}]
i_dict['B']=[{'p': 0.199,'m':10.012937}, {'p': 0.801,'m':11.009305}]
i_dict['C']=[{'p': 0.9893,'m': 12.0},{'p': 0.0107,'m': 13.003355}]
i_dict['N']=[{'p': 0.99632,'m': 14.003074},{'p': 0.00368,'m': 15.000109}]
i_dict['O']=[{'p': 0.99757,'m': 15.994915},{'p': 0.00038,'m': 16.
↪999132},{'p': 0.00205,'m': 17.999160}]
i_dict['Na']=[{'p': 1,'m': 22.9897693}]
i_dict['Si']=[{'p': 0.9223,'m': 27.97693},{'p': 0.0467,'m': 28.97649},{'p':␣
↪0.0310,'m': 29.97376}]
i_dict['S']=[{'p': 0.9493,'m': 31.972071},{'p': 0.0076,'m': 32.971458},{'p':
↪
0.0429,'m': 33.967867},{'p': 0.0002,'m': 35.96708} ]
i_dict['Cl']=[{'p': 0.7578,'m': 34.968852721},{'p':
0.2422, 'm': 36.
↪96590262}]
i_dict['K']=[{'p': 0.93258,'m': 38.9637065},{'p': 0.06730,'m': 40.9618253}]
i_dict['Fe2']=[{'p': 0.05845,'m': 53.9396090},{'p': 0.91754,'m': 55.
↪9349363},{'p':
0.02119,'m': 56.9353928},{'p': 0.00286,'m': 57.9332744}]
i_dict['Fe3']=[{'p': 0.05845,'m': 53.9396090},{'p': 0.91754,'m': 55.
↪9349363},{'p':
0.02119,'m': 56.9353928},{'p': 0.00286,'m': 57.9332744}]
return i_dict
def most_abun_peak():
ma_mass_dict=dict()
ma_mass_dict['H']=[{'p': 0.999885,'m': 1.007825}]
ma_mass_dict['B']=[{'p': 0.801,'m':11.009305}]
ma_mass_dict['C']=[{'p': 0.9893,'m': 12.0}]
ma_mass_dict['N']=[{'p': 0.99632,'m': 14.003074}]
ma_mass_dict['O']=[{'p': 0.99757,'m': 15.994915}]
ma_mass_dict['Na']=[{'p': 1,'m': 22.9897693}]
1
==PAGE:60==
ma_mass_dict['Si']=[{'p': 0.9223,'m': 27.97693}]
ma_mass_dict['S']=[{'p': 0.9493,'m': 31.972071}]
ma_mass_dict['Cl']=[{'p': 0.7578,'m': 34.968852721}]
ma_mass_dict['K']=[{'p': 0.93258,'m': 38.9637065}]
ma_mass_dict['Fe2']=[{'p': 0.91754,'m': 55.9349363}]
ma_mass_dict['Fe3']=[{'p': 0.91754,'m': 55.9349363}]
return ma_mass_dict
print(most_abun_peak())
def most_abun_masses(ma_mass_dict):
mam_dict = dict()
for k,v in ma_mass_dict.items():
m=0
for iso in v:
m=m+iso['p']*iso['m']
mam_dict[k] = m
return mam_dict
print(most_abun_masses(most_abun_peak()))
def avg_masses(i_dict):
mass_dict = dict()
for k,v in i_dict.items():
m=0
for iso in v:
m=m+iso['p']*iso['m']
mass_dict[k] = m
return mass_dict
def get_chst_dict():
chst_dict = {'H':1, 'B':3, 'O':(-2), 'Na':1, 'Si':4, 'Cl':(-1), 'K':1,␣
↪'Fe2':2, 'Fe3':3}
return chst_dict
print(get_chst_dict())
def get_chst(atom_dict,chst_dict):
number = 0
for k,v in atom_dict.items():
number = number+v*chst_dict[k]
return number
def get_ma_mass(atom_dict, mam_dict):
number = 0
for k,v in atom_dict.items():
number = number+v*mam_dict[k]
return number
2
==PAGE:61==
def get_avg_mass(atom_dict, mass_dict):
number = 0
for k,v in atom_dict.items():
number = number+v*mass_dict[k]
return number
def get_annotation_str(atom_dict):
hits_list = ''
for k,v in atom_dict.items():
if v == 0:
continue
if hits_list == '':
hits_list += str(v) + str(k)
else:
hits_list += ',' + str(v) + str(k)
return hits_list
{'H': [{'p': 0.999885, 'm': 1.007825}], 'B': [{'p': 0.801, 'm': 11.009305}],
'C': [{'p': 0.9893, 'm': 12.0}], 'N': [{'p': 0.99632, 'm': 14.003074}], 'O':
[{'p': 0.99757, 'm': 15.994915}], 'Na': [{'p': 1, 'm': 22.9897693}], 'Si':
[{'p': 0.9223, 'm': 27.97693}], 'S': [{'p': 0.9493, 'm': 31.972071}], 'Cl':
[{'p': 0.7578, 'm': 34.968852721}], 'K': [{'p': 0.93258, 'm': 38.9637065}],
'Fe': [{'p': 0.91754, 'm': 55.9349363}]}
{'H': 1.007709100125, 'B': 8.818453305, 'C': 11.871599999999999, 'N':
13.95154268768, 'O': 15.95604735655, 'Na': 22.9897693, 'Si': 25.803122539, 'S':
30.3510870003, 'Cl': 26.4993965919738, 'K': 36.336773407769996, 'Fe':
51.322541452702}
{'H': 1, 'B': 1, 'C': 0, 'N': 1, 'O': 1, 'Na': 1, 'Si': 1, 'S': 1, 'Cl': 1, 'K':
1, 'Fe': 1}
[2]: class Enumerator:
def __init__(self,reference_dict):
self.reference_dict=reference_dict
total_combi =1
self.total_dict=dict()
for k,v in reference_dict.items():
self.total_dict[k]=total_combi
total_combi=total_combi*(v+1)
self.max_number=total_combi-1
self.reversed_keys=[]
for key in reversed(reference_dict.keys()):
self.reversed_keys.append(key)
def get_number(self,atom_dict):
number=0
3
==PAGE:62==
for k,v in atom_dict.items():
number=number+v*self.total_dict[k]
return number
def get_combi(self,anumber):
temp_dict=dict()
for k in self.reversed_keys:
number_of_k = anumber // self.total_dict[k]
temp_dict[k] = number_of_k
anumber = anumber % self.total_dict[k]
atom_dict = dict()
for k in self.reference_dict.keys():
atom_dict[k] = temp_dict[k]
return atom_dict
[ ]: df_original = pd.read_excel ('TNPpeaks.xlsx')
df = shutil.copy2 ('TNPpeaks.xlsx','TNPpeaks_updated.xlsx')
df_full = pd.read_excel('TNPpeaks_updated.xlsx')
df_full['annotated']=''
my_enum = Enumerator({'H':10, 'K': 3, 'Na': 5, 'B':3, 'Si':4, 'Fe2':2, 'Fe3':3})
for ntrials in range(100):
df=df_full[df_full['annotated']=='']
max_I = df[df['Intensity']==df['Intensity'].max()]
RT_min = max_I['RT Min']-0.1
RT_max = max_I['RT Max']+0.1
RT_window = df[df['RT']==df['RT'].where((df['RT'] < float(RT_max)) &␣
↪(df['RT'] > float(RT_min)))]
mz_min = max_I['m/z']-1.5
mz_max = max_I['m/z']+1.5
mz_window = RT_window[RT_window['m/z']==RT_window['m/z'].
↪where((RT_window['m/z'] < float(mz_max)) & (RT_window['m/z'] >␣
↪float(mz_min)))]
sort_RT = mz_window.nlargest(5,'Intensity')
if len(sort_RT)<2:
break
sort_mz = sort_RT.sort_values('m/z')
peak_dist = sort_mz['m/z'].diff()
4
==PAGE:63==
peak_dist_sum = peak_dist.mean()
chst = 1/peak_dist_sum.mean()
chst = round(chst)
# the average isotopic mass
all_isotopes = get_all_isotope_distributions()
avg_iso_masses = avg_masses(all_isotopes)
# the most abundant mass
most_abun_peak_dict = most_abun_peak()
most_abun_peak_masses = most_abun_masses(most_abun_peak_dict)
chst_dict = get_chst_dict()
mass_primary = ((max_I['m/z']-most_abun_peak_masses['H'])*chst).values[0]
annotation='{:.6f}'.format(mass_primary)+', '+str(chst)+'H+'
for i in sort_RT.index:
if df_full.loc[i,'annotated']=='':
df_full.loc[i,'annotated']=annotation
for i in range(1,my_enum.max_number):
df=df_full[df_full['annotated']=='']
atom_dict = my_enum.get_combi(i)
#for avg mass
#delta_m = get_avg_mass(atom_dict,avg_iso_masses)
#for most abundant
delta_m = get_ma_mass(atom_dict,most_abun_peak_masses)
this_chst = get_chst(atom_dict,chst_dict)
if delta_m > 100:
continue
if this_chst > 10:
continue
m_mod = mass_primary+delta_m
mz_mod_min = (m_mod-0.1)/this_chst
mz_mod_max = (m_mod+0.1)/this_chst
hits = RT_window[(RT_window['m/z'] > float(mz_mod_min)) & (RT_window['m/
↪z'] < float(mz_mod_max))]
5
==PAGE:64==
if len(hits) > 0:
hl = get_annotation_str(atom_dict)
hits_list = '{:.6f}'.format(mass_primary)+', Variant: '+hl
for i in hits.index:
if df_full.loc[i,'annotated']=='':
df_full.loc[i,'annotated']=hits_list
display(df_full.loc[df_full['annotated'] !=''])
if all(df_full['annotated']==''):
break
6
==PAGE:65==
Figure A.2: Annotation results of Annotation algorithm.
53
==PAGE:66==
Name
Cluster Group
Intensity
Volume
m/z
RT Min
RT Max
annotated
Peak_0563
324
43
3,75E+09
127268,05
603,674738
27,80847
28,30585 1807.005446, 3H+
Peak_0560
324
43
3,81E+09
128641,95
603,342858
27,81071
28,31034 1807.005446, 3H+
Peak_0917
828
201
3,4E+09
118123,46
652,314294
15,30592
15,78857 1953.919756, 3H+
Peak_1085
1604
2,39E+09
113493,98
676,386987
19,07926
19,63458 675.379278, 1H+
Peak_3217
1006
7
1,82E+09
192055,7
951,968488
24,60579
25,4976 1901.921558, 2H+
Peak_3208
1006
7
1,73E+09
182935,19
951,468156
24,61178
25,59715 1901.921558, 2H+
Peak_1125
356
10
2,28E+09
103018,8
680,986533
18,79278
19,46245 2039.936471, 3H+
Peak_0924
828
201
2,3E+09
79911,59
652,813165
15,30592
15,78857 1953.919756, 3H+
Peak_1121
356
10
2,12E+09
95635,61
680,655042
18,78929
19,45795 2039.936471, 3H+
Peak_0565
324
43
1,98E+09
67512,89
604,007212
27,80847
28,29055 1807.005446, 3H+
Peak_2338
417
6
1,62E+09
140241,67
849,050049
22,62383
23,37553 2544.127021, 3H+
Peak_2801
156
35
1,39E+09
142912,84
901,221801
24,741
25,71578 3601.851368, 4H+
Peak_2803
156
35
1,51E+09
155105,61
901,470551
24,73314
25,72726 3601.851368, 4H+
Peak_3348
176
5
1,37E+09
134019,42
962,959931
21,52634
22,11435 3847.808887, 4H+
Peak_3263
169
26
1,5E+09
135750,83
956,733498
22,86225
23,6163 3822.903157, 4H+
Peak_2228
411
27
1,58E+09
95917,82
835,726245
23,4341
23,98099 2504.155607, 3H+
Peak_2336
417
6
1,15E+09
99955,97
848,719116
22,62608
23,33692 2544.127021, 3H+
Peak_1126
356
10
1,48E+09
67218,11
681,319452
18,78929
19,46245 2039.936471, 3H+
Peak_0774
336
7
1,09E+09
62991,387
634,981868
24,61178
25,52953 1901.921558, Variant: 3H
Peak_2341
417
6
1,22E+09
105020,4
849,382401
22,62159
23,38163 2544.127021, 3H+
Peak_3261
169
26
1,35E+09
122219,64
956,485146
22,86225
23,60065 3822.903157, 4H+
Peak_3346
176
5
1,21E+09
118349,93
962,711015
21,52634
22,13195 3847.808887, 4H+
Peak_0772
336
7
1,05E+09
60519,773
634,648769
24,61178
25,54518 1267.282120, 2H+
Peak_2804
156
35
1,09E+09
112098,46
901,720326
24,741
25,70989 3601.851368, 4H+
Peak_3232
1006
7
1,02E+09
108337,12
952,469053
24,61178
25,42524 1901.921558, 2H+
Peak_1687
892
96
1,19E+09
66535,164
751,882474
19,04519
19,61041 1501.749529, 2H+
Peak_5569
248
39
1,01E+09
168926,42
1348,14711
26,19874
26,87575 5388.557592, 4H+
Peak_5915
272
48
1,6E+09
188422,3
1435,45909
28,79298
29,36134 5737.805532, 4H+
Peak_3351
176
5
1,14E+09
110961,83
963,208919
21,52634
22,10554 3847.808887, 4H+
Peak_3266
169
26
1,18E+09
106864,56
956,982487
22,86225
23,60853 3822.903157, 4H+
Peak_5112
233
16 926000000
145492,83
1265,39285
33,4041
34,06104 5057.540576, 4H+
Peak_2828
986
43
1,22E+09
76951,125
905,006962
27,81071
28,29279 1807.998507, 2H+
Peak_5914
272
48
1,43E+09
167893,89
1435,21158
28,79298
29,36134 5737.805532, 4H+
Peak_5114
233
16 912000000
142331,97
1265,64227
33,4041
34,07255 5057.540576, 4H+
Peak_1622
113
2
1,18E+09
59949,6
743,859747
14,62197
15,17841 2971.408153, 4H+
Peak_5567
248
39 924000000
154600,67
1347,89608
26,19874
26,87205 5388.557592, 4H+
Peak_5916
272
48
1,39E+09
163500,75
1435,70908
28,79298
29,35751 5737.805532, 4H+
Peak_2819
986
43
1,22E+09
76378,37
904,505707
27,81071
28,30585 1807.005446, Variant: 2H
Peak_2224
411
27
1,17E+09
70447,47
835,394902
23,4341
23,98099 2504.155607, 3H+
Peak_5570
248
39 860000000
143558,06
1348,39868
26,19874
26,88168 5388.557592, 4H+
Peak_2230
411
27
1,15E+09
69705,65
836,059288
23,4341
23,98099 2504.155607, 3H+
Peak_1626
113
2
1,03E+09
52228,105
744,109004
14,62197
15,17617 2971.408153, 4H+
Peak_0892
343
50
1,49E+09
81636,69
649,681256
25,9304
26,70735 1946.020641, 3H+
Peak_4170
39
39 770000000
92446,44
1078,72044
26,19874
26,86843 5388.557592, Variant: 5H
Peak_1902
397
47 967000000
71850,05
789,052171
25,21033
25,95448 2364.133385, 3H+
Peak_0888
343
50
1,38E+09
75664,08
649,348434
25,9304
26,70735 1946.020641, 3H+
Peak_1689
892
96 918000000
51645,68
752,383692
19,04519
19,61266 1501.749529, 2H+
Peak_0063
298
89
1,17E+09
26497,59
512,57161
18,50546
19,0906 1023.127802, 2H+
Peak_4169
39
39 721000000
86341,4
1078,52153
26,19874
26,88168 4310.055296, 4H+
Peak_1089
1607
836000000
39775,266
677,390253
19,07926
19,61266 675.379278, 1H+
Peak_3353
176
5 742000000
72333,234
963,458244
21,52858
22,1033 3847.808887, 4H+
Peak_2798
156
35 687000000
70424,26
900,973298
24,73314
25,63895 3601.851368, 4H+
Peak_3449
1021
50
1,26E+09
127335,06
974,017743
25,9304
26,70735 1946.020641, Variant: 2H
Peak_5115
233
16 693000000
107912,12
1265,89025
33,4041
34,06328 5057.540576, 4H+
Peak_3854
194
24 918000000
70834,45
1023,74305
20,90517
21,44851 4090.941344, 4H+
Peak_3445
1021
50
1,15E+09
115773,89
973,517254
25,9304
26,70735 972.509545, 1H+
Peak_0927
828
201 919000000
32162,16
653,313237
15,30592
15,77306 1953.919756, 3H+
Peak_2183
136
13 896000000
49929,797
829,407853
14,46297
15,03702 3313.600574, 4H+
Peak_5917
272
48 988000000
113701,84
1435,96039
28,79298
29,35751 5737.805532, 4H+
Peak_4171
39
39 646000000
77380,44
1078,91883
26,19874
26,87944 4310.055296, 4H+
==PAGE:67==
Peak_0779
336
7 628000000
36135,55
635,315315
24,60579
25,45701 1267.282120, 2H+
Peak_1899
397
47 745000000
55347,11
788,718948
25,21033
25,95448 2364.133385, 3H+
Peak_5111
233
16 652000000
102573,12
1265,14542
33,40635
34,05879 5057.540576, 4H+
Peak_2185
136
13 845000000
47036,07
829,656959
14,46297
15,03028 3313.600574, 4H+
Peak_3272
169
26 727000000
66011,31
957,232543
22,87013
23,60853 3822.903157, 4H+
Peak_5566
248
39 610000000
102312,05
1347,64694
26,19874
26,84666 5388.557592, 4H+
Peak_1617
113
2 783000000
40003,613
743,610415
14,62197
15,17139 2971.408153, 4H+
Peak_2343
417
6 637000000
54922,4
849,715132
22,61511
23,36135 2544.127021, 3H+
Peak_0067
298
89 922000000
20923,436
512,903358
18,50546
19,08717 1023.127802, 2H+
Peak_0284
307
20
1,18E+09
21873,166
556,307336
17,9826
18,41155 1665.898880, 3H+
Peak_5913
272
48 888000000
104411,68
1434,9607
28,79298
29,35526 5737.805532, 4H+
Peak_5572
248
39 599000000
99490,73
1348,64734
26,19874
26,86257 5388.557592, 4H+
Peak_1906
397
47 680000000
50683,63
789,385295
25,21033
25,95065 2364.133385, 3H+
Peak_2806
156
35 634000000
64960,723
901,969664
24,741
25,65727 3601.851368, 4H+
Peak_3856
194
24 791000000
61131,11
1023,99233
20,90517
21,44851 4090.941344, 4H+
Peak_3849
194
24 762000000
58913,793
1023,49392
20,90517
21,44626 4090.941344, 4H+
Peak_1129
356
10 744000000
33718,742
681,65216
18,79278
19,44019 2039.936471, 3H+
Peak_1763
9
26 667000000
43387,78
765,588122
22,87013
23,59287 3822.903157, Variant: 5H
Peak_2700
152
34 550000000
55840,066
890,44612
24,66929
25,46496 3557.753645, 4H+
Peak_0285
307
20
1,03E+09
19048,428
556,639509
17,9826
18,41155 1665.898880, 3H+
Peak_0567
324
43 769000000
26306,73
604,340818
27,80847
28,25419 1807.005446, 3H+
Peak_3260
169
26 637000000
57742,336
956,235562
22,87013
23,56121 3822.903157, 4H+
Peak_3342
176
5 571000000
55904,793
962,462382
21,52634
22,13195 3847.808887, 4H+
Peak_2697
152
34 523000000
52581,875
890,196038
24,66581
25,56657 3557.753645, 4H+
Peak_3571
517
2 707000000
55666,188
991,476107
14,62197
15,17139 2971.408153, Variant: 3H
Peak_5143
1123
6 525000000
83442,3
1273,06976
22,62383
23,30115 2544.127021, Variant: 2H
Peak_3623
188
37 531000000
62382,945
995,969633
25,02355
25,70989 3979.847697, 4H+
Peak_2835
986
43 657000000
41640,766
905,508746
27,80847
28,25194 1807.998507, 2H+
Peak_4780
599
35 539000000
84966,99
1201,62446
24,73314
25,65379 3601.851368, Variant: 3H
Peak_1630
113
2 649000000
33090,215
744,358749
14,62197
15,17139 2971.408153, 4H+
Peak_0896
343
50 879000000
48352,953
650,014577
25,9304
26,70735 1946.020641, 3H+
Peak_2542
430
49 845000000
39021,695
873,690889
7,445127
7,913459 2618.049538, 3H+
Peak_1762
9
26 597000000
38836,535
765,388579
22,86225
23,60065 3057.523478, 4H+
Peak_4779
599
35 506000000
79700,38
1201,29076
24,73314
25,63895 2400.566110, 2H+
Peak_4678
1106
47 573000000
78200,516
1183,07375
25,21821
25,95448 2364.133385, Variant: 2H
Peak_1787
10
5 510000000
35814,062
770,569421
21,52858
22,1033 3847.808887, Variant: 5H
Peak_4168
39
39 465000000
55778,266
1078,32454
26,19874
26,84666 4310.055296, 4H+
Peak_3579
517
2 617000000
48692,7
991,809104
14,62197
15,16914 1981.602789, 2H+
Peak_1823
903
92 569000000
30798,965
774,927418
18,70654
19,3403 2321.759126, 3H+
Peak_1777
899
89 703000000
29268,268
768,352648
18,51023
19,07926 1534.689877, 2H+
Peak_0385
1339
692000000
15388,642
575,3402
3,351966
3,738189 574.332490, 1H+
Peak_5117
233
16 432000000
68028,16
1266,13903
33,4041
34,03275 5057.540576, 4H+
Peak_1765
9
26 520000000
33829,24
765,787956
22,87013
23,57702 3057.523478, 4H+
Peak_2233
411
27 595000000
36006,65
836,391919
23,4341
23,96786 2504.155607, 3H+
Peak_2186
136
13 593000000
33043,5
829,906595
14,46297
15,03253 3313.600574, 4H+
Peak_4172
39
39 457000000
55217,926
1079,11809
26,19874
26,87944 4310.055296, 4H+
Peak_3242
1006
7 418000000
44186,062
952,969935
24,61178
25,33868 1901.921558, 2H+
Peak_1786
10
5 439000000
30774,023
770,36966
21,52858
22,1166 3077.447803, 4H+
Peak_0501
783
206 504000000
21859,916
596,830378
11,13545
11,7519 1191.645338, 2H+
Peak_3620
188
37 470000000
54890,656
995,720437
25,01565
25,84992 3979.847697, 4H+
Peak_3455
1021
50 741000000
74915,47
974,51862
25,9304
26,70735 972.509545, 1H+
Peak_0048
68
10 552000000
16338,643
510,992145
18,79278
19,42978 2039.936471, Variant: 4H
Peak_3626
188
37 447000000
51982,055
996,218559
25,01565
25,84768 3979.847697, 4H+
Peak_4487
46
1 509000000
63320,81
1136,17616
33,34395
34,0156 5675.842239, 5H+
Peak_1197
362
100 548000000
23823,07
688,334527
19,57968
20,10604 2061.980453, 3H+
Peak_2702
152
34 413000000
41917,14
890,695804
24,66929
25,56657 3557.753645, 4H+
Peak_2540
430
49 675000000
31150,842
873,35878
7,447373
7,911213 2618.049538, 3H+
Peak_4821
605
22 549000000
54867,387
1207,57599
19,5578
20,0993 3619.704834, 3H+
Peak_5918
272
48 627000000
73878,3
1436,2106
28,79298
29,34687 5740.811552, 4H+
Peak_0045
68
10 510000000
15094,452
510,742242
18,79278
19,38305 1019.469065, 2H+
Peak_1790
10
5 424000000
29750,523
770,768797
21,52858
22,10105 3077.447803, 4H+
==PAGE:68==
Peak_5144
1123
6 395000000
62543,152
1273,56964
22,62159
23,30674 2545.123858, 2H+
Peak_3859
194
24 543000000
41948,715
1024,24193
20,90517
21,44626 4090.941344, 4H+
Peak_4488
46
1 474000000
58692,434
1136,37661
33,34794
34,01335 5675.842239, 5H+
Peak_5573
248
39 374000000
62438,637
1348,89745
26,19874
26,86257 5391.558948, 4H+
Peak_2122
15
24 532000000
29461,152
819,196456
20,90517
21,44626 4090.941344, Variant: 5H
Peak_1778
899
89 562000000
23396,97
768,853301
18,51023
19,0702 1534.689877, 2H+
Peak_1194
362
100 494000000
21426,055
688,000749
19,57968
20,0993 2061.980453, 3H+
Peak_4824
605
22 537000000
53735,805
1207,9092
19,5578
20,0993 3619.704834, 3H+
Peak_3357
176
5 407000000
39746,7
963,708956
21,52858
22,0945 3850.804988, 4H+
Peak_5072
1119
27 479000000
53348,133
1253,08566
23,4341
23,97425 2504.155607, Variant: 2H
Peak_2182
136
13 515000000
28711,457
829,157814
14,46297
15,02579 3313.600574, 4H+
Peak_0724
806
205 386000000
18836,727
629,853567
11,11797
11,70137 1257.691716, 2H+
Peak_1829
903
92 451000000
24372,992
775,428649
18,71775
19,31435 2321.759126, 3H+
Peak_4562
49
48 544000000
47009,902
1148,57151
28,79298
29,34462 5737.805532, Variant: 5H
Peak_4783
599
35 397000000
62499,918
1201,95862
24,73314
25,61969 2400.566110, 2H+
Peak_4675
1106
47 434000000
59162,75
1182,57281
25,21821
25,95448 1181.565104, 1H+
Peak_2545
430
49 602000000
27722,648
874,023224
7,445127
7,911213 2618.049538, 3H+
Peak_5140
1123
6 361000000
57576,36
1272,56903
22,62608
23,24151 2545.123858, 2H+
Peak_1690
892
96 408000000
22995,797
752,884978
19,04864
19,5996 1501.749529, 2H+
Peak_3566
517
2 459000000
36062,92
991,14152
14,62197
15,16465 1981.602789, 2H+
Peak_4560
49
48 484000000
41878,223
1148,37168
28,79298
29,35526 3442.091904, 3H+
Peak_4486
46
1 419000000
51170,797
1135,97572
33,34395
34,02133 5675.842239, 5H+
Peak_2225
1933
545000000
21421,574
835,433346
12,61317
13,02729 834.425637, 1H+
Peak_3160
487
195 416000000
39022,176
946,978775
33,34395
34,03275 5675.842239, Variant: 6H
Peak_1472
7
35 326000000
23919,566
721,378079
24,741
25,70419 3601.851368, Variant: 5H
Peak_2123
15
24 459000000
25510,451
819,396185
20,90517
21,44626 3273.553902, 4H+
Peak_4680
1106
47 398000000
54332,15
1183,5752
25,21821
25,95448 1181.565104, 1H+
Peak_2121
15
24 442000000
24505,229
818,996822
20,90741
21,43964 3273.553902, 4H+
Peak_3276
169
26 387000000
35170,773
957,483189
22,87013
23,56121 3825.901920, 4H+
Peak_0070
298
89 503000000
11428,045
513,236758
18,51023
19,05765 1023.127802, 2H+
Peak_4564
49
48 476000000
41097,31
1148,76995
28,79298
29,34911 3442.091904, 3H+
Peak_3164
488
1 388000000
36675,094
947,144752
33,34794
34,01111 4730.685214, 5H+
Peak_5196
644
5 332000000
49708,113
1283,60869
21,52858
22,10105 3847.808887, Variant: 3H
Peak_3583
517
2 399000000
31603,943
992,143568
14,62982
15,16689 1981.602789, 2H+
Peak_1469
7
35 306000000
22494,957
721,177764
24,73314
25,60057 2880.680218, 4H+
Peak_0797
338
53 562000000
12563,739
637,350734
17,2301
17,64258 1910.028813, 3H+
Peak_1413
374
46 609000000
15957,237
712,99594
9,334001
9,7436 2135.964691, 3H+
Peak_0798
338
53 573000000
12821,112
637,68398
17,2301
17,64033 1910.028813, 3H+
Peak_4489
46
1 364000000
45153,38
1136,57703
33,34794
34,01335 5675.842239, 5H+
Peak_2840
157
22 399000000
26020,258
905,933837
19,5578
20,10155 3619.704834, Variant: 4H
Peak_1409
374
46 583000000
15254,845
712,663357
9,334001
9,745846 2135.964691, 3H+
Peak_6248
720
16 299000000
71055,67
1687,19118
33,4041
34,05206 3372.366950, 2H+
Peak_6247
720
16 299000000
71214,57
1686,8549
33,4041
34,035 5057.540576, Variant: 3H
Peak_2845
157
22 390000000
25473,416
906,183252
19,5578
20,0993 2715.526628, 3H+
Peak_0049
68
10 364000000
10789,626
511,242439
18,79503
19,41386 1023.127802, 2H+
Peak_1620
386
8 513000000
15540,086
743,741911
26,66379
27,11259 2228.202606, 3H+
Peak_3157
488
1 350000000
32878,812
946,812978
33,34794
34,02703 4730.685214, 5H+
Peak_2695
152
34 269000000
27049,428
889,946205
24,66581
25,37015 3557.753645, 4H+
Peak_1767
9
26 329000000
21449,588
765,987953
22,87013
23,5307 3057.523478, 4H+
Peak_1908
397
47 334000000
24918,178
789,719758
25,21033
25,95065 2364.133385, 3H+
Peak_5075
1119
27 357000000
39987,098
1253,58645
23,4341
23,972 1252.578737, 1H+
Peak_2807
156
35 296000000
30315,064
902,220737
24,741
25,64246 4506.065137, 5H+
Peak_5154
641
26 332000000
46335,33
1275,30818
22,86225
23,54548 3822.903157, Variant: 3H
Peak_5192
644
5 284000000
42680,19
1283,27612
21,52858
22,1033 2564.536830, 2H+
Peak_5067
1119
27 350000000
39020,457
1252,58447
23,4341
23,9765 1252.578737, 1H+
Peak_4828
605
22 373000000
37351,086
1208,24217
19,5578
20,09481 3619.704834, 3H+
Peak_0286
307
20 510000000
9445,365
556,972298
17,9826
18,40277 1665.898880, 3H+
Peak_1794
10
5 274000000
19198,662
770,968856
21,52858
22,08748 3077.447803, 4H+
Peak_3627
188
37 286000000
33621,63
996,469274
25,02355
25,70068 3979.847697, 4H+
Peak_1558
1738
239000000
15084,763
736,398272
11,10899
11,64868 735.390562, 1H+
Peak_2730
440
9 510000000
18804,014
893,430066
15,92211
16,34727 2677.267072, 3H+
==PAGE:69==
Peak_1634
113
2 334000000
17024,492
744,608913
14,62982
15,16465 2971.408153, 4H+
Peak_4173
39
39 274000000
33203,566
1079,31658
26,19874
26,83912 4310.055296, 4H+
Peak_0506
783
206 302000000
13123,468
597,331459
11,13545
11,74292 1191.645338, 2H+
Peak_3847
194
24 345000000
26608,338
1023,24493
20,90517
21,44402 4090.941344, 4H+
Peak_0783
336
7 250000000
14436,821
635,64932
24,61178
25,28368 1267.282120, 2H+
Peak_2704
152
34 249000000
25158,35
890,945862
24,66929
25,40161 3557.753645, 4H+
Peak_4662
587
12 490000000
30597,518
1176,91323
31,51589
31,95649 3527.716566, 3H+
Peak_5198
644
5 278000000
41787,22
1283,94346
21,52858
22,09881 2564.536830, 2H+
Peak_1202
362
100 327000000
14223,683
688,668513
19,57968
20,08119 2061.980453, 3H+
Peak_4310
563
13 325000000
27548,328
1105,54
14,46522
15,01944 3313.600574, Variant: 3H
Peak_4661
587
12 480000000
29988,143
1176,57802
31,51813
31,95424 3527.716566, 3H+
Peak_0730
806
205 261000000
12763,589
630,354978
11,11797
11,65317 1257.691716, 2H+
Peak_3821
1055
10 297000000
24816,68
1020,97575
18,79503
19,35731 2039.936471, Variant: 2H
Peak_2345
417
6 268000000
23106,143
850,048768
22,61287
23,29428 2544.127021, 3H+
Peak_2189
136
13 325000000
18128,975
830,156832
14,46522
15,02168 3313.600574, 4H+
Peak_1132
356
10 292000000
13291,769
681,98582
18,79503
19,40552 2039.936471, 3H+
Peak_4311
563
13 312000000
26447,01
1105,87323
14,46522
15,01944 2209.731034, 2H+
Peak_4566
49
48 344000000
29629,525
1148,96973
28,79724
29,34238 3442.091904, 3H+
Peak_5118
233
16 232000000
36213,418
1266,38955
33,4041
34,01784 1263.894116, 1H+
Peak_4778
599
35 240000000
37818,953
1200,95751
24,73314
25,52953 2400.566110, 2H+
Peak_5109
233
16 238000000
37474,9
1264,90183
33,40635
34,02133 1263.894116, 1H+
Peak_5150
641
26 288000000
40423,785
1274,97344
22,90166
23,45914 2545.123858, 2H+
Peak_1760
9
26 291000000
18955,885
765,188939
22,86225
23,56904 3057.523478, 4H+
Peak_1614
386
8 410000000
12421,249
743,407569
26,6593
27,10414 2228.202606, 3H+
Peak_1474
7
35 238000000
17501,092
721,578723
24,741
25,60057 2880.680218, 4H+
Peak_3165
487
195 300000000
28363,283
947,310871
33,34794
34,01784 4730.685214, 5H+
Peak_2216
940
20 416000000
14105,714
833,953271
17,9826
18,39846 1665.898880, Variant: 2H
Peak_3755
31
16 236000000
26784,547
1012,51564
33,40635
34,01335 5057.540576, Variant: 5H
Peak_3757
31
16 233000000
26554,195
1012,71631
33,40635
34,00268 4046.834388, 4H+
Peak_4697
591
34 224000000
34883,31
1186,92484
24,66581
25,34651 3557.753645, Variant: 3H
Peak_5467
670
37 234000000
42162,18
1327,62365
25,02355
25,8263 3979.847697, Variant: 3H
Peak_3817
1055
10 275000000
22948,463
1020,47365
18,79503
19,38081 1019.469065, Variant: 1H
Peak_4820
605
22 299000000
29989,027
1207,24209
19,5578
20,09481 3619.704834, 3H+
Peak_6249
720
16 227000000
54765,63
1687,52487
33,4041
34,035 3372.366950, 2H+
Peak_2124
15
24 316000000
17556,023
819,596095
20,90517
21,4374 3273.553902, 4H+
Peak_1320
369
33 457000000
26381,582
701,714502
24,394
25,27579 2102.120380, 3H+
Peak_5920
272
48 345000000
40592,66
1436,46005
28,79298
29,34911 5740.811552, 4H+
Peak_2194
1928
220000000
16276,258
830,460651
11,09347
11,63608 829.452941, 1H+
Peak_5845
263
1 281000000
47320,336
1419,96611
33,35018
33,99699 5675.842239, Variant: 4H
Peak_4559
49
48 302000000
26202,848
1148,17113
28,79724
29,34687 3442.091904, 3H+
Peak_3861
194
24 306000000
23675,627
1024,4917
20,90741
21,42412 4093.935968, 4H+
Peak_0306
1294
432000000
7009,8203
560,320165
5,780646
6,132469 1677.937368, 3H+
Peak_0676
800
203 386000000
8834,431
622,356299
18,15072
18,56317 1242.697180, 2H+
Peak_0992
3
13 279000000
11173,336
663,927228
14,46297
15,01719 2651.678076, 4H+
Peak_0990
3
13 283000000
11325,421
663,726992
14,46522
14,99843 3313.600574, Variant: 5H
Peak_4696
591
34 212000000
32926,8
1186,59042
24,67276
25,42524 2371.165430, 2H+
Peak_1780
899
89 316000000
13171,427
769,354143
18,50546
19,04519 1534.689877, 2H+
Peak_2217
940
20 369000000
12526,79
834,454788
17,9826
18,40277 1666.894158, 2H+
Peak_5846
263
1 274000000
46788,5
1420,21657
33,34794
34,01784 4257.626592, 3H+
Peak_1783
10
5 212000000
14922,153
770,169479
21,52858
22,1033 3077.447803, 4H+
Peak_4491
46
1 251000000
31192,662
1136,77719
33,34395
34,00492 5675.842239, 5H+
Peak_0902
343
50 368000000
20242,984
650,348935
25,9304
26,70511 1946.020641, 3H+
Peak_5158
641
26 253000000
35599,812
1275,6415
22,86225
23,46138 2549.267584, 2H+
Peak_4787
599
35 221000000
34868,59
1202,29299
24,741
25,61969 2400.566110, 2H+
Peak_3084
998
4 646000000
28026,371
938,953672
16,52475
16,97778 1875.891926, 2H+
Peak_3089
998
4 631000000
27366,24
939,454023
16,5225
16,97553 1875.891926, 2H+
Peak_0491
1
2 259000000
9483,025
595,289271
14,62982
15,16465 2971.408153, Variant: 5H
Peak_5575
248
39 199000000
33584,203
1349,14975
26,19874
26,83118 5391.558948, 4H+
Peak_3617
188
37 223000000
25500,08
995,469996
25,02355
25,66737 3979.847697, 4H+
Peak_6246
720
16 205000000
49355,047
1686,52028
33,40635
34,06328 3372.366950, 2H+
Peak_2841
986
43 256000000
16350,186
906,010041
27,81071
28,23449 1807.998507, 2H+
==PAGE:70==
Peak_2735
440
9 380000000
14018,754
893,762874
15,92211
16,34952 2677.267072, 3H+
Peak_3973
199
14 211000000
21738,402
1041,50841
21,48392
22,05673 3077.447803, Variant: 1H,2Na
Peak_5843
263
1 246000000
42455,55
1419,71513
33,34794
34,00492 4257.626592, 3H+
Peak_2546
430
49 317000000
14611,735
874,356347
7,445127
7,908967 2618.049538, 3H+
Peak_5912
272
48 292000000
34337,715
1434,70965
28,79724
29,35136 7168.509724, 5H+
Peak_2187
937
159 355000000
12437,038
829,901281
27,54839
28,0523 1657.787144, 2H+
Peak_5145
1123
6 207000000
32744,057
1274,07138
22,61934
23,31364 2545.123858, 2H+
Peak_4484
46
1 237000000
29048,559
1135,77517
33,35018
34,00268 2269.534918, 2H+
Peak_0696
333
4 598000000
14103,182
626,306966
16,52475
16,97553 1875.891926, Variant: 3H
Peak_2849
157
22 268000000
17524,213
906,433766
19,5578
20,0993 2715.526628, 3H+
Peak_0122
747
204 362000000
5691,26
523,286354
10,63599
11,02173 1566.835936, 3H+
Peak_0931
828
201 267000000
9373,022
653,814127
15,30817
15,77081 1953.919756, 3H+
Peak_3461
1021
50 305000000
30890,346
975,019994
25,93426
26,70062 1948.024570, 2H+
Peak_2725
440
9 375000000
13813,167
893,096142
15,92211
16,34727 2677.267072, 3H+
Peak_1318
369
33 386000000
22256,227
701,380174
24,39974
25,27579 2102.120380, 3H+
Peak_4663
587
12 352000000
21950,625
1177,24603
31,51589
31,94975 3527.716566, 3H+
Peak_1625
386
8 342000000
10347,047
744,075716
26,66603
27,11483 2228.202606, 3H+
Peak_3360
176
5 195000000
19129,227
963,958433
21,52858
22,08318 3850.804988, 4H+
Peak_0493
1
2 228000000
8344,86
595,489479
14,62197
15,15136 2377.927081, 4H+
Peak_2239
411
27 245000000
14824,114
836,72597
23,4341
23,9638 2504.155607, 3H+
Peak_0803
1512
215000000
10665,397
638,158277
22,87013
23,53416 3822.903157, Variant: 6H
Peak_0697
333
4 572000000
13531,761
626,638836
16,5225
16,97553 1876.893381, 3H+
Peak_3762
31
16 175000000
19952,389
1012,91689
33,40635
34,01784 4046.834388, 4H+
Peak_4699
591
34 169000000
26222,352
1187,2588
24,66929
25,33868 2371.165430, 2H+
Peak_0571
324
43 234000000
8075,719
604,675082
27,80228
28,23224 1807.005446, 3H+
Peak_1417
374
46 359000000
9413,979
713,328901
9,334001
9,741354 2135.964691, 3H+
Peak_2191
937
159 329000000
11545,916
830,402451
27,54615
28,04535 1657.787144, 2H+
Peak_1834
903
92 205000000
11097,235
775,929982
18,71775
19,23775 2321.759126, 3H+
Peak_1847
1819
348000000
9200,92
777,387998
8,816849
9,177711 776.380288, 1H+
Peak_5201
644
5 181000000
27097,992
1284,27596
21,52858
22,08748 2564.536830, 2H+
Peak_0836
1526
180000000
9604,1455
642,30863
21,52858
22,08748 3847.808887, Variant: 6H
Peak_1294
1654
189000000
9367,992
698,368351
19,08268
19,57537 675.379278, Variant: 1Na
Peak_4313
563
13 218000000
18440,734
1106,20676
14,46522
15,01719 2209.731034, 2H+
Peak_3171
488
1 208000000
19753,879
947,477134
33,35018
34,01784 4730.685214, 5H+
Peak_0292
77
8 305000000
6007,2603
558,058662
26,66379
27,10863 2228.202606, Variant: 4H
Peak_3751
31
16 163000000
18529,32
1012,31585
33,40635
33,98787 4046.834388, 4H+
Peak_5847
263
1 213000000
35849,17
1420,467
33,35018
34,01111 4257.626592, 3H+
Peak_3154
487
195 200000000
18829,842
946,647803
33,35018
34,0156 4730.685214, 5H+
Peak_3191
2148
212000000
12036,092
949,519652
11,33774
11,83104 948.511943, 1H+
Peak_3589
517
2 202000000
15988,64
992,476713
14,62982
15,15136 1981.602789, 2H+
Peak_0801
338
53 313000000
7018,259
638,017253
17,2301
17,63584 1910.028813, 3H+
Peak_2837
157
22 218000000
14260,439
905,683589
19,5578
20,08119 2715.526628, 3H+
Peak_1951
14
37 157000000
13170,032
796,97725
25,02355
25,76009 3979.847697, Variant: 5H
Peak_1228
862
210 232000000
8137,6387
691,827171
24,00074
24,54338 1381.638923, 2H+
Peak_1467
7
35 150000000
10993,336
720,977606
24,741
25,47848 2880.680218, 4H+
Peak_0678
800
203 270000000
6192,2305
622,857422
18,14847
18,55888 1242.697180, 2H+
Peak_1768
9
26 172000000
11258,464
766,18839
22,87013
23,48028 3057.523478, 4H+
Peak_2235
1937
225000000
8875,689
836,436094
12,61317
13,01626 834.425637, 1H+
Peak_4568
49
48 212000000
18336,033
1149,17026
28,79724
29,34462 5740.811552, Variant: 5H
Peak_1144
1621
202000000
8499,797
682,831434
20,90741
21,43515 4090.941344, Variant: 6H
Peak_0834
817
378 160000000
8546,736
642,142336
21,52858
22,10779 2564.536830, Variant: 4H
Peak_1797
10
5 155000000
10888,238
771,169357
21,52858
22,07869 3077.447803, 4H+
Peak_4833
605
22 198000000
19818,25
1208,576
19,5578
20,08779 3619.704834, 3H+
Peak_2120
15
24 201000000
11159,744
818,796829
20,90517
21,41551 3273.553902, 4H+
Peak_4309
563
13 191000000
16178,161
1105,20665
14,46522
14,99843 2209.731034, 2H+
Peak_6250
720
16 142000000
33556,67
1687,85842
33,40635
33,99699 3372.366950, 2H+
Peak_0995
3
13 188000000
7498,7544
664,127896
14,46522
15,00215 2651.678076, 4H+
Peak_1322
369
33 281000000
16160,166
702,048505
24,39974
25,27579 2102.120380, 3H+
Peak_3934
543
17 268000000
13540,235
1034,45491
7,591196
8,016794 3100.341609, 3H+
Peak_3281
169
26 173000000
15685,438
957,733407
22,87796
23,53416 3825.901920, 4H+
Peak_5078
1119
27 183000000
20538,996
1254,08721
23,4341
23,95329 1252.578737, 1H+
==PAGE:71==
Peak_0390
1342
204000000
4573,7515
576,343212
3,351966
3,729206 574.332490, 1H+
Peak_0804
1513
169000000
8337,974
638,325239
22,87013
23,56121 2549.267584, Variant: 4H
Peak_5160
641
26 164000000
22948,21
1275,97527
22,87013
23,45689 2549.267584, 2H+
Peak_0289
77
8 245000000
4833,403
557,808197
26,6593
27,0974 1670.401464, 3H+
Peak_0051
68
10 176000000
5222,4287
511,49187
18,79503
19,34373 1019.469065, 2H+
Peak_0490
1
2 169000000
6197,4663
595,089043
14,62982
15,14706 2377.927081, 4H+
Peak_1475
7
35 139000000
10202,559
721,779465
24,741
25,61969 2880.680218, 4H+
Peak_0074
298
89 205000000
4660,788
513,570468
18,51023
19,02147 1023.127802, 2H+
Peak_0988
3
13 168000000
6746,006
663,527241
14,46746
14,97373 2651.678076, 4H+
Peak_2125
15
24 179000000
9944,988
819,796202
20,90741
21,41775 3273.553902, 4H+
Peak_4660
587
12 242000000
15092,253
1176,2458
31,52038
31,94975 3527.716566, 3H+
Peak_0677
801
202 272000000
4946,3022
622,793708
11,99545
12,3565 1243.571998, 2H+
Peak_3092
998
4 378000000
16416,959
939,955041
16,5225
16,97553 1875.891926, 2H+
Peak_5189
644
5 132000000
19894,021
1282,9445
21,52858
22,0945 2564.536830, 2H+
Peak_1408
5
34 117000000
8448,362
712,557697
24,66581
25,29154 3557.753645, Variant: 5H
Peak_4493
46
1 146000000
18173,742
1136,97741
33,34794
34,00268 2269.534918, 2H+
Peak_3937
543
17 227000000
11485,199
1034,78953
7,591196
8,016794 3100.341609, 3H+
Peak_1836
123
17 219000000
7225,885
776,093544
7,591196
8,021286 3100.341609, Variant: 4H
Peak_0495
1
2 148000000
5437,257
595,689745
14,62982
15,14481 2377.927081, 4H+
Peak_5147
641
26 134000000
18941,158
1274,64524
22,93566
23,41115 2545.123858, 2H+
Peak_3349
1013
7 107000000
11413,816
962,958807
24,61402
25,29154 1901.921558, Variant: 1H,1Na
Peak_5669
682
24 162000000
19227,459
1364,65408
20,90741
21,43095 4090.941344, Variant: 3H
Peak_4695
591
34 110000000
17021,78
1186,25594
24,67276
25,29935 2371.165430, 2H+
Peak_5922
272
48 169000000
20024,035
1436,7105
28,79724
29,34238 5740.811552, 4H+
Peak_0156
1234
243000000
3637,6912
529,385104
36,9339
37,30734 528.377395, 1H+
Peak_1912
397
47 129000000
9631,985
790,053875
25,21821
25,9304 2364.133385, 3H+
Peak_1233
862
210 172000000
6045,837
692,328615
24,00299
24,55281 1381.638923, 2H+
Peak_0009
297
96 128000000
3951,8708
501,591323
19,04864
19,56658 1501.749529, Variant: 3H
Peak_0294
77
8 206000000
4047,374
558,309086
26,66603
27,10863 1670.401464, 3H+
Peak_5849
263
1 143000000
24213,049
1420,71746
33,34794
33,98213 4257.626592, 3H+
Peak_2854
157
22 144000000
9417,795
906,684526
19,5578
20,08779 2715.526628, 3H+
Peak_0699
333
4 336000000
7946,437
626,971509
16,52475
16,97553 1876.893381, 3H+
Peak_1207
362
100 139000000
6054,527
689,002716
19,58193
20,0591 2061.980453, 3H+
Peak_3766
31
16 107000000
12152,861
1013,11635
33,40635
33,97058 4046.834388, 4H+
Peak_4701
591
34
98700000
15329,291
1187,59206
24,67276
25,29935 2371.165430, 2H+
Peak_5842
263
1 136000000
23299,531
1419,46487
33,35243
34,00268 4257.626592, 3H+
Peak_3865
194
24 151000000
11678,332
1024,7416
20,90741
21,41551 4093.935968, 4H+
Peak_2808
156
35 114000000
11710,856
902,470456
24,741
25,6084 4506.065137, 5H+
Peak_0262
1281
134000000
4144,8223
553,274048
14,46746
14,98638 3313.600574, Variant: 6H
Peak_2221
940
20 181000000
6141,127
834,956481
17,98485
18,39397 1666.894158, 2H+
Peak_1565
1740
92600000
5859,7095
737,400797
11,11348
11,67735 735.390562, 1H+
Peak_2740
440
9 203000000
7472,391
894,096743
15,92211
16,33166 2677.267072, 3H+
Peak_2069
1882
127000000
9596,113
811,839812
33,35018
33,98787 5675.842239, Variant: 7H
Peak_4138
1079
46 198000000
9504,539
1068,98975
9,334001
9,741354 2135.964691, Variant: 2H
Peak_4664
587
12 193000000
12083,353
1177,58136
31,51589
31,94751 3527.716566, 3H+
Peak_2204
1930
94900000
7072,4106
831,464066
11,09572
11,59052 829.452941, 1H+
Peak_0128
747
204 195000000
3075,7705
523,787107
10,63374
11,00133 1566.835936, 3H+
Peak_4788
599
35 105000000
16531,035
1202,62768
24,741
25,45701 2400.566110, 2H+
Peak_0287
307
20 176000000
3266,8542
557,30653
17,98485
18,38948 1665.898880, 3H+
Peak_0511
783
206 108000000
4700,862
597,833429
11,1377
11,72322 1191.645338, 2H+
Peak_5576
248
39
95500000
15950,162
1349,39849
26,19874
26,78096 5391.558948, 4H+
Peak_3931
543
17 173000000
8730,179
1034,12064
7,591196
8,016794 3100.341609, 3H+
Peak_0265
1283
116000000
3526,3667
553,441434
14,46746
14,96565 2209.731034, Variant: 4H
Peak_5203
644
5
95900000
14491,431
1284,60858
21,53083
22,05673 3850.804988, Variant: 3H
Peak_0736
806
205
95600000
4699,7285
630,856065
11,12675
11,60885 1257.691716, 2H+
Peak_4315
563
13 120000000
10132,108
1106,54061
14,46971
14,97373 2209.731034, 2H+
Peak_2782
445
475
88800000
8300,095
899,10171
26,2066
26,75858 5388.557592, Variant: 6H
Peak_0806
812
406 106000000
5268,511
638,492561
22,87013
23,49628 2544.127021, Variant: 1H,1B
Peak_2196
937
159 169000000
5939,8916
830,903865
27,54839
28,01017 1657.787144, 2H+
Peak_1633
386
8 161000000
4865,903
744,409546
26,66828
27,11259 2228.202606, 3H+
Peak_0785
336
7
79800000
4607,328
635,983575
24,61402
25,16313 1267.282120, 2H+
==PAGE:72==
Peak_5384
1139
49 139000000
11768,267
1310,0319
7,449618
7,895666 2618.049538, Variant: 2H
Peak_4571
49
48 116000000
10073,208
1149,37115
28,79724
29,30383 3442.091904, 3H+
Peak_2929
990
43 117000000
7367,8545
915,998019
27,81296
28,25987 1807.998507, Variant: 1H,1Na
Peak_2925
990
43 117000000
7393,2524
915,496007
27,81684
28,27523 1807.005446, Variant: 1H,1Na
Peak_0679
801
202 179000000
3267,254
623,295153
11,99545
12,34976 1243.571998, 2H+
Peak_3911
1061
100 101000000
8098,5415
1031,99817
19,58417
20,05461 2061.980453, Variant: 2H
Peak_5146
1123
6
74500000
11921,484
1274,57248
22,62383
22,9514 2549.267584, 2H+
Peak_3364
176
5
82500000
8112,443
964,208946
21,53083
22,04584 3850.804988, 4H+
Peak_2550
430
49 133000000
6119,5005
874,689888
7,449618
7,895666 2618.049538, 3H+
Peak_3203
2154
101000000
5754,6646
950,522864
11,34814
11,79163 948.511943, 1H+
Peak_2298
414
577
76300000
6642,2188
844,097458
33,4086
33,97635 3372.366950, Variant: 4H
Peak_2296
416
596
73600000
6401,028
843,93117
33,41243
33,94759 5057.540576, Variant: 6H
Peak_0998
3
13 103000000
4115,1377
664,3279
14,46971
14,97373 2651.678076, 4H+
Peak_6245
720
16
74200000
17689,826
1686,18639
33,4086
33,99351 3372.366950, 2H+
Peak_1421
374
46 153000000
4019,8708
713,662601
9,334001
9,730516 2135.964691, 3H+
Peak_1853
1822
141000000
3741,447
778,3915
8,819094
9,170694 776.380288, 1H+
Peak_3940
543
17 136000000
6870,3506
1035,12377
7,591196
8,010057 3100.341609, 3H+
Peak_0361
770
457
67600000
3134,5017
570,294738
25,26792
25,80229 4506.065137, Variant: 5H,1Fe3
Peak_5162
641
26
85700000
12029,45
1276,30809
22,87013
23,45689 3825.901920, Variant: 3H
Peak_0313
1301
137000000
2226,522
561,323002
5,780646
6,110209 1677.937368, 3H+
Peak_0906
343
50 120000000
6568,186
650,682578
25,93832
26,69463 1946.020641, 3H+
Peak_5199
1128
6
66600000
10694,073
1284,05955
22,62608
23,09114 2544.127021, Variant: 1H,1Na
Peak_3593
517
2
84500000
6701,239
992,811184
14,63325
15,12496 1981.602789, 2H+
Peak_0437
1369
94900000
3176,4092
585,428329
20,90741
21,39979 4090.941344, Variant: 7H
Peak_0805
338
53 122000000
2744,2861
638,351136
17,23235
17,62686 1910.028813, 3H+
Peak_3749
31
16
59800000
6869,7793
1012,11691
33,41243
33,9397 4046.834388, 4H+
Peak_1325
369
33 124000000
7134,527
702,383178
24,39974
25,24952 2102.120380, 3H+
Peak_4483
46
1
75200000
9445,991
1135,57884
33,35467
33,95331 2269.534918, 2H+
Peak_3535
1031
50 105000000
10719,156
985,008045
25,93832
26,69463 1946.020641, Variant: 1H,1Na
Peak_0496
1
2
73400000
2707,502
595,890046
14,63325
15,11822 2377.927081, 4H+
Peak_4495
46
1
75200000
9230,32
1137,17526
33,35243
33,93625 2269.534918, 2H+
Peak_3467
1021
50
97400000
9852,733
975,522072
25,93426
26,68856 1948.024570, 2H+
Peak_0680
800
203 103000000
2377,6252
623,358834
18,15072
18,54559 1242.697180, 2H+
Peak_1476
7
35
62600000
4594,7007
721,979313
24,7489
25,58235 2880.680218, 4H+
Peak_3286
169
26
68900000
6262,7065
957,983073
22,8544
23,52281 3825.901920, 4H+
Peak_5079
1119
27
72900000
8183,656
1254,58785
23,4341
23,93594 1252.578737, 1H+
Peak_4704
591
34
50200000
7804,8496
1187,92495
24,6786
25,24166 2371.165430, 2H+
Peak_0053
68
10
66900000
1985,7898
511,741951
18,80297
19,30183 1019.469065, 2H+
Peak_1750
897
96
66300000
3662,1333
762,872334
19,04864
19,56658 1501.749529, Variant: 1H,1Na
Peak_4840
607
35
52300000
8311,558
1208,95183
24,7489
25,45701 3601.851368, Variant: 2H,1Na
Peak_3448
1020
7
50200000
5444,4053
973,950235
24,61402
25,13171 1901.921558, Variant: 2Na
Peak_5924
272
48
77100000
9290,559
1436,96233
28,79948
29,29485 5740.811552, 4H+
Peak_5202
1128
6
52100000
8358,171
1284,56005
22,62159
23,11733 2545.123858, Variant: 1H,1Na
Peak_4835
607
35
49700000
7895,839
1208,61763
24,75676
25,37015 2371.165430, Variant: 2Na
Peak_2397
1981
82200000
3340,7825
857,41459
12,61766
13,00026 834.425637, Variant: 1Na
Peak_4737
1107
47
58200000
8026,344
1194,06493
25,21821
25,903 2364.133385, Variant: 1H,1Na
Peak_0842
1529
53100000
2852,4126
642,809407
21,53308
22,03012 3850.804988, Variant: 6H
Peak_1152
357
363
66300000
2810,6116
683,331785
20,90966
21,39106 4093.935968, Variant: 6H
Peak_5106
1121
27
72000000
7937,2095
1264,07451
23,31364
23,86114 2504.155607, Variant: 1H,1Na
Peak_6343
731
39
49500000
12608,982
1797,19064
26,21451
26,77013 5388.557592, Variant: 3H
Peak_0297
77
8
95500000
1877,7596
558,559684
26,67194
27,10863 1670.401464, 3H+
Peak_6256
721
16
48100000
11505,867
1694,18279
33,4086
33,93625 5057.540576, Variant: 2H,1Na
Peak_2858
157
22
65000000
4258,66
906,934403
19,5578
20,04802 2715.526628, 3H+
Peak_4053
1071
33
89700000
9580,462
1052,06761
24,40683
25,24952 2102.120380, Variant: 2H
Peak_5942
275
48
68400000
8190,249
1440,95565
28,79948
29,29036 5737.805532, Variant: 3H,1Na
Peak_3909
1060
10
56900000
4790,0757
1031,96514
18,80297
19,23775 2039.936471, Variant: 1H,1Na
Peak_0702
333
4 146000000
3452,4023
627,305108
16,52475
16,97553 1876.893381, 3H+
Peak_3868
194
24
66200000
5125,165
1024,99154
20,90966
21,38881 4093.935968, 4H+
Peak_1240
862
210
72300000
2540,0054
692,830264
24,00523
24,46238 1381.638923, 2H+
Peak_1065
845
201
72400000
2622,4404
674,293324
15,31472
15,74824 1953.919756, Variant: 3Na
Peak_3258
1009
53
79400000
3270,4846
956,022264
17,23235
17,61359 1910.028813, Variant: 2H
==PAGE:73==
Peak_2994
993
43
61400000
3933,0571
926,98967
27,81684
28,23449 1807.998507, Variant: 2Na
Peak_5255
649
5
47000000
7146,8267
1290,93703
21,53083
22,03686 3847.808887, Variant: 2H,1Na
Peak_0808
1514
55000000
2733,3926
638,658985
22,87796
23,44853 3825.901920, Variant: 6H
Peak_5188
643
26
53300000
7495,7925
1282,63579
22,88587
23,41339 3822.903157, Variant: 2H,1Na
Peak_3648
522
2
55400000
4361,247
998,803195
14,6411
15,14481 2971.408153, Variant: 2H,1Na
Peak_1860
905
89
58000000
2448,3267
779,341994
18,51902
18,89217 1534.689877, Variant: 1H,1Na
Peak_5578
248
39
40700000
6911,01
1349,64562
26,2066
26,76083 5391.558948, 4H+
Peak_2989
993
43
61100000
3933,5303
926,487929
27,81684
28,25419 1807.005446, Variant: 2Na
Peak_4317
563
13
53500000
4558,2515
1106,87495
14,47195
14,89374 2209.731034, 2H+
Peak_2745
440
9
74900000
2769,7922
894,431733
15,94244
16,32717 2677.267072, 3H+
Peak_5674
682
24
54400000
6442,469
1365,65417
20,90966
21,40203 4093.935968, Variant: 3H
Peak_5596
249
39
41800000
6925,7593
1353,6424
26,2066
26,76441 5388.557592, Variant: 3H,1Na
Peak_1211
362
100
47100000
2074,695
689,336991
19,58193
20,01741 2061.980453, 3H+
Peak_1001
3
13
47700000
1917,0795
664,52803
14,4742
14,95319 2651.678076, 4H+
Peak_2809
156
35
40300000
4140,968
902,721303
24,7489
25,54518 4506.065137, 5H+
Peak_3941
543
17
64000000
3247,3518
1035,4577
7,59465
7,996289 3100.341609, 3H+
Peak_2227
940
20
64400000
2175,2856
835,45789
17,98934
18,37825 1666.894158, 2H+
Peak_0158
1236
75300000
1126,8615
530,388809
36,9339
37,29689 528.377395, 1H+
Peak_0250
1274
37300000
1589,1759
550,695173
21,53083
22,01545 3847.808887, Variant: 7H
Peak_5285
1133
6
34800000
5613,41
1295,04858
22,62832
23,08323 2544.127021, Variant: 2Na
Peak_1728
1791
31100000
2042,7191
758,379921
11,11797
11,51759 735.390562, Variant: 1Na
Peak_5165
641
26
36800000
5228,027
1276,64415
22,86225
23,39301 2549.267584, 2H+
Peak_1635
386
8
57200000
1732,2096
744,744096
26,68041
27,10414 2228.202606, 3H+
Peak_0684
801
202
68000000
1239,1036
623,796608
11,99994
12,33825 1243.571998, 2H+
Peak_0134
747
204
61400000
968,37885
524,287663
10,63823
10,97907 1566.835936, 3H+
Peak_4878
612
22
42200000
4265,6777
1214,90266
19,56209
20,04129 3619.704834, Variant: 2H,1Na
Peak_2310
944
20
51400000
1778,3162
844,943705
17,98934
18,36722 1665.898880, Variant: 1H,1Na
Peak_0305
1293
33400000
491,6467
560,300201
5,652476
5,796365 1677.937368, 3H+
Peak_5133
235
16
27100000
4362,4297
1270,88645
33,41845
33,90863 5057.540576, Variant: 3H,1Na
Peak_5151
2420
23600000
3714,6638
1274,98704
22,63706
22,94354 2549.267584, 2H+
Peak_4356
567
13
36300000
3115,8354
1112,86602
14,4742
14,88234 3313.600574, Variant: 2H,1Na
Peak_3366
176
5
29100000
2903,716
964,45959
21,53532
22,00425 3850.804988, 4H+
Peak_2361
1972
29500000
2244,9
852,442583
11,10674
11,52444 829.452941, Variant: 1Na
Peak_1376
100
1
36600000
2249,285
710,612023
33,35243
33,92617 4257.626592, Variant: 6H
Peak_3624
1038
50
33300000
3631,4956
996,001578
26,00211
26,54742 1946.020641, Variant: 2Na
Peak_4366
1095
8
47500000
2644,9026
1115,10808
26,66828
27,07577 2228.202606, Variant: 2H
Peak_5289
1133
6
26600000
4296,299
1295,55084
22,62832
23,00679 2545.123858, Variant: 2Na
Peak_0288
307
20
49700000
921,66345
557,640572
17,98934
18,36947 1665.898880, 3H+
Peak_2788
446
592
26000000
2434,501
899,601371
26,21451
26,70735 5391.558948, Variant: 6H
Peak_2624
149
12
47000000
1909,9553
882,936395
31,52262
31,91679 3527.716566, Variant: 4H
Peak_1373
99
195
33900000
2088,4558
710,485844
33,35917
33,97282 5675.842239, Variant: 8H
Peak_2313
944
20
44900000
1553,579
845,445144
17,98934
18,36291 1666.894158, Variant: 1H,1Na
Peak_1424
374
46
51300000
1350,4012
713,996765
9,336247
9,719287 2135.964691, 3H+
Peak_6266
722
16
23500000
5798,9272
1701,5076
33,42069
33,85042 5057.540576, Variant: 1H,2Na
Peak_0505
1389
41800000
974,0532
597,322123
3,356458
3,700415 574.332490, Variant: 1Na
Peak_0422
1358
50200000
865,3925
582,301457
5,778399
6,1147 1677.937368, Variant: 3Na
Peak_3619
1038
50
36800000
3773,44
995,499101
25,98929
26,60116 972.509545, Variant: 1Na
Peak_4807
1109
47
30100000
4189,725
1205,05501
25,22606
25,91536 2364.133385, Variant: 2Na
Peak_5495
671
37
25800000
4687,1733
1334,95059
25,0314
25,70419 3979.847697, Variant: 2H,1Na
Peak_0497
1
2
29900000
1094,5984
596,090133
14,64452
15,08282 2377.927081, 4H+
Peak_5152
1124
27
27900000
3196,9526
1275,07358
23,46532
23,88409 2504.155607, Variant: 2Na
Peak_5687
683
24
32000000
3839,362
1371,9801
20,91191
21,35881 4090.941344, Variant: 2H,1Na
Peak_5245
648
26
26100000
3725,1882
1289,9609
22,89382
23,38539 3822.903157, Variant: 1H,2Na
Peak_2385
421
6
22500000
1976,9757
856,374175
22,63706
23,09114 2544.127021, Variant: 2H,1Na
Peak_4886
613
35
22700000
3639,2854
1216,28144
24,76468
25,32298 3601.851368, Variant: 1H,2Na
Peak_0440
1372
30400000
1030,1984
585,85756
20,91415
21,34842 4093.935968, Variant: 7H
Peak_2287
413
413
53100000
2673,5566
843,039301
23,25287
23,7976 2504.155607, Variant: 2H,1Na
Peak_3294
169
26
24200000
2296,726
958,234126
22,8451
23,32262 3825.901920, 4H+
Peak_2597
433
49
35000000
1641,5327
881,015146
7,456355
7,862625 2618.049538, Variant: 2H,1Na
Peak_5308
654
5
23200000
3579,8796
1298,26345
21,53532
22,00871 3847.808887, Variant: 1H,2Na
Peak_1198
363
10
26600000
1217,498
688,312406
18,80865
19,21438 2039.936471, Variant: 2H,1Na
==PAGE:74==
Peak_1326
369
33
42600000
2464,6123
702,716674
24,41035
25,22606 2102.120380, 3H+
Peak_3990
1064
10
25000000
2132,5215
1042,95742
18,80865
19,21438 2039.936471, Variant: 2Na
Peak_1986
1850
42500000
1172,9448
799,370101
8,823586
9,152926 776.380288, Variant: 1Na
Peak_0824
813
205
19900000
995,1099
640,844608
11,13545
11,55725 1257.691716, Variant: 1H,1Na
Peak_5926
272
48
31300000
3742,6482
1437,21168
28,80173
29,25387 5740.811552, 4H+
Peak_1813
902
96
26000000
1459,4393
773,863628
19,06112
19,53104 1501.749529, Variant: 2Na
Peak_0999
1587
19800000
1272,4392
664,316022
25,0392
25,60057 3979.847697, Variant: 6H
Peak_0809
338
53
36800000
825,80304
638,685608
17,2346
17,58441 1910.028813, 3H+
Peak_4740
2377
17900000
2799,3567
1194,25101
24,71012
25,17103 3557.753645, Variant: 2H,1Na
Peak_3556
1034
7
17300000
1920,5753
989,417588
24,61851
25,01565 2880.680218, Variant: 1K,1Fe2
Peak_0592
791
206
21400000
942,8419
607,821121
11,14395
11,6201 1191.645338, Variant: 1H,1Na
Peak_1913
912
89
27100000
1161,68
790,332974
18,52575
18,86418 1534.689877, Variant: 2Na
Peak_5945
275
48
28600000
3436,2036
1441,70328
28,80397
29,25786 5740.811552, Variant: 3H,1Na
Peak_6100
1166
2
21500000
3252,6555
1486,70742
14,64795
15,05629 2971.408153, Variant: 2H
Peak_5433
1143
49
32500000
2785,9531
1321,02074
7,460676
7,851569 2618.049538, Variant: 1H,1Na
Peak_4687
590
12
33400000
2111,408
1184,23898
31,52262
31,89658 3527.716566, Variant: 2H,1Na
Peak_3871
194
24
25400000
1992,4476
1025,24125
20,91415
21,34842 4093.935968, 4H+
Peak_0055
68
10
22600000
669,0992
511,991489
18,81436
19,21438 1019.469065, 2H+
Peak_3435
2190
24500000
1432,361
971,501187
11,36997
11,74965 948.511943, Variant: 1Na
Peak_3984
1064
10
22500000
1910,0541
1042,45616
18,81436
19,19093 1019.469065, Variant: 1Na
Peak_0935
345
400
18100000
869,13556
654,699671
22,58186
22,97533 2544.127021, Variant: 2H,2K
Peak_2389
421
6
18500000
1608,7065
856,708377
22,63057
23,10166 2545.123858, Variant: 2H,1Na
Peak_0300
77
8
32900000
647,5722
558,8104
26,68856
27,0825 1670.401464, 3H+
Peak_1103
1610
24800000
926,564
678,768232
15,31921
15,69023 1953.919756, Variant: 1K,2Na
Peak_3734
532
74
21700000
1751,6384
1009,44808
14,6411
15,07608 1981.602789, Variant: 1H,1K
Peak_4804
1109
47
27800000
3542,7993
1204,55151
25,23389
25,85374 1181.565104, Variant: 1Na
Peak_0838
1527
12900000
753,5635
642,306568
24,62525
25,02355 1901.921558, Variant: 2H,1Na
Peak_5157
1124
27
19500000
2269,3564
1275,5556
23,469
23,83655 1252.578737, Variant: 1Na
Peak_3196
1005
4
46600000
2075,0054
949,942786
16,52699
16,96982 1875.891926, Variant: 1H,1Na
Peak_5579
248
39
16300000
2826,5466
1349,89403
26,21451
26,68041 5391.558948, 4H+
Peak_5528
1150
9
32100000
2171,158
1339,63958
15,93138
16,30312 2677.267072, Variant: 2H
Peak_3717
530
2
22300000
1763,219
1006,12914
14,64452
15,06729 2971.408153, Variant: 1H,2Na
Peak_2266
943
159
29400000
1035,6827
840,89184
27,55962
27,91192 1657.787144, Variant: 1H,1Na
Peak_3201
1005
4
47500000
2098,687
950,443827
16,53066
16,97206 1876.893381, Variant: 1H,1Na
Peak_0706
333
4
49800000
1182,5977
627,639585
16,52475
16,96635 1876.893381, 3H+
Peak_1038
85
9
31500000
753,4216
670,32425
15,93138
16,25219 2677.267072, Variant: 4H
Peak_5602
249
39
15800000
2745,6902
1354,38952
26,21451
26,65114 5391.558948, Variant: 3H,1Na
Peak_3543
1031
50
26500000
2745,069
986,010459
25,95826
26,65114 1948.024570, Variant: 1H,1Na
Peak_3274
494
510
22800000
1528,7094
957,306238
28,81053
29,23997 5737.805532, Variant: 6H
Peak_3471
1021
50
26100000
2673,7292
976,022812
25,96425
26,63527 1948.024570, 2H+
Peak_1816
902
96
19200000
1085,2866
774,36267
19,06677
19,53329 2321.759126, 3H+
Peak_0234
1261
18000000
718,829
547,136917
22,89382
23,37938 3822.903157, Variant: 7H
Peak_1717
389
145
11200000
864,41315
755,6959
25,15525
25,6084 4506.065137, Variant: 5H,1Na
Peak_6121
2507
13700000
2313,6873
1502,75757
19,06677
19,44243 1501.749529, Variant: 1H
Peak_5261
649
5
13900000
2152,4526
1291,9366
21,53952
21,96838 3850.804988, Variant: 2H,1Na
Peak_6128
291
148
19600000
2496,0696
1504,99306
25,48626
25,99286 4506.065137, Variant: 1B
Peak_1950
916
92
15400000
856,64703
796,90736
18,73723
19,08493 2321.759126, Variant: 3Na
Peak_3991
1065
100
15700000
1285,5525
1042,98902
19,5996
19,99318 2061.980453, Variant: 1H,1Na
Peak_2380
951
20
25400000
896,1384
855,934807
17,99812
18,34304 1665.898880, Variant: 2Na
Peak_4920
616
22
19300000
1967,5995
1222,2283
19,56658
20,01291 3619.704834, Variant: 1H,2Na
Peak_0957
347
50
22600000
1289,0225
657,007191
25,95826
26,62273 1946.020641, Variant: 2H,1Na
Peak_5701
685
24
16300000
1996,1151
1379,31028
20,91415
21,3163 4090.941344, Variant: 1H,2Na
Peak_1231
364
97
19100000
704,73236
691,97756
19,48883
19,84092 2715.526628, Variant: 1H,1Fe3
Peak_5537
675
37
12000000
2225,5986
1342,27797
25,0392
25,52172 3979.847697, Variant: 1H,2Na
Peak_4395
570
13
16300000
1404,7081
1120,19197
14,4828
14,87544 3313.600574, Variant: 1H,2Na
Peak_3340
175
221
14100000
1318,9187
962,226434
22,90166
23,37553 3822.903157, Variant: 3H,1Na
Peak_6331
1169
12
22600000
2607,0854
1764,86251
31,53928
31,88132 3527.716566, Variant: 2H
Peak_6284
725
16
12400000
3038,1294
1709,16469
33,42069
33,85956 3372.366950, Variant: 2Na
Peak_6346
731
39
13500000
3431,5051
1798,18964
26,22797
26,69238 5391.558948, Variant: 3H
Peak_5393
1140
6
12700000
2095,2288
1311,01921
22,63057
23,02817 2549.267584, Variant: 2K
Peak_5871
266
1
15700000
2740,5615
1425,45778
33,38273
33,86405 5675.842239, Variant: 3H,1Na
==PAGE:75==
Peak_6283
725
16
12300000
2937,3064
1708,83825
33,43145
33,88234 5057.540576, Variant: 3Na
Peak_5967
278
48
18100000
2208,2427
1446,44282
28,81053
29,21811 5737.805532, Variant: 2H,2Na
Peak_2387
951
20
22600000
789,16187
856,436108
17,99812
18,33599 1666.894158, Variant: 2Na
Peak_0093
299
92
11900000
357,8814
517,957324
18,74516
19,07926 2039.936471, Variant: 1Na,1B
Peak_3976
546
17
20000000
1010,5816
1041,78159
7,603775
7,96056 3100.341609, Variant: 2H,1Na
Peak_0921
1564
9477098
327,71582
652,428851
15,33923
15,64554 1953.919756, 3H+
Peak_4178
1082
46
21800000
1065,6458
1079,98016
9,343261
9,690449 2135.964691, Variant: 1H,1Na
Peak_5621
252
474
9979131
1757,1302
1359,13434
26,22014
26,6548 5388.557592, Variant: 2H,2Na
Peak_2810
156
35
9453117
971,43634
902,970661
24,78039
25,17103 4506.065137, 5H+
Peak_1980
1846
21900000
734,632
798,983655
33,91087
34,25921 4730.685214, Variant: 1H,1K,1Si
Peak_5354
660
5
11600000
1805,1631
1305,58864
21,53532
21,97062 3847.808887, Variant: 3Na
Peak_5197
643
26
7081739,5
1124,0269
1283,64843
22,99891
23,21882 3825.901920, Variant: 2H,1Na
Peak_2797
448
9
20300000
757,4774
900,756169
15,9357
16,27236 2677.267072, Variant: 2H,1Na
Peak_0254
1277
9970626
437,97705
551,124273
21,53952
21,93058 3850.804988, Variant: 7H
Peak_0793
82
6
8890970
505,96085
637,038722
22,6438
23,03604 2544.127021, Variant: 4H
Peak_4420
573
73
12600000
1074,073
1123,51296
14,48505
14,8151 2209.731034, Variant: 1H,1K
Peak_5303
653
26
12700000
1819,6141
1297,28812
22,90951
23,37938 3822.903157, Variant: 3Na
Peak_3893
197
220
12600000
1004,6107
1029,23683
20,9164
21,28099 4090.941344, Variant: 3H,1Na
Peak_0060
1195
12800000
357,94373
512,375605
20,92072
21,32469 4090.941344, Variant: 8H
Peak_1327
874
210
12700000
459,0313
702,815178
24,0351
24,36426 1381.638923, Variant: 1H,1Na
Peak_5273
650
132
9722668
1511,8967
1293,27949
22,90951
23,3718 2549.267584, Variant: 1H,1K
Peak_3371
176
5
9115952
920,25586
964,709414
21,54353
21,95435 3850.804988, 4H+
Peak_0758
809
203
17000000
402,33218
633,347139
18,16896
18,48319 1242.697180, Variant: 1H,1Na
Peak_5339
1137
6
8990059
1484,7947
1303,53682
22,63931
23,01466 3822.903157, Variant: 1K,1Fe2
Peak_0550
1409
8520850
475,47818
601,31722
24,77253
25,19461 3601.851368, Variant: 6H
Peak_5350
660
5
9623662
1503,937
1305,25786
21,53952
21,9624 2564.536830, Variant: 2Na
Peak_3422
181
5
8943146
907,13184
968,452282
21,54353
21,9579 3847.808887, Variant: 3H,1Na
Peak_1918
912
89
13200000
568,9159
791,334095
18,53678
18,85859 2321.759126, Variant: 1H,1Fe2
Peak_4930
618
35
7683707
1243,1445
1223,60305
24,78828
25,20254 3601.851368, Variant: 3Na
Peak_5305
653
26
9529933
1417,0079
1297,62313
22,89382
23,31364 2549.267584, Variant: 2Na
Peak_4812
1109
47
9805450
1395,3844
1206,05677
25,23389
25,81428 3557.753645, Variant: 1H,1K,1Na
Peak_0548
1408
6638183
370,2029
601,15045
24,78039
25,19461 2400.566110, Variant: 4H
Peak_4721
593
12
15000000
953,7085
1191,56591
31,53115
31,8903 3527.716566, Variant: 1H,2Na
Peak_3402
1016
53
13600000
570,24255
967,011747
17,24779
17,57114 1910.028813, Variant: 1H,1Na
Peak_4903
614
452
6834089,5
1100,4729
1218,92837
24,78039
25,20254 2400.566110, Variant: 1H,1K
Peak_0700
80
27
9378115
389,16397
627,046223
23,4524
23,7976 2504.155607, Variant: 4H
Peak_3790
536
2
9651963
802,2423
1016,44168
14,6536
15,03028 1981.602789, Variant: 1Fe2
Peak_1862
125
25
15700000
514,1608
779,359196
21,2944
21,71703 3847.808887, Variant: 3H,2Na
Peak_0127
300
340
12500000
230,92291
523,563125
19,23
19,58417 1501.749529, Variant: 3Na
Peak_4927
618
35
6509300,5
1053,8473
1223,26932
24,78039
25,22606 2400.566110, Variant: 2Na
Peak_5691
683
24
9982646
1204,1365
1372,98047
20,91191
21,2944 4093.935968, Variant: 2H,1Na
Peak_0312
1300
7553330,5
111,06748
561,302313
5,688488
5,791874 1677.937368, 3H+
Peak_3337
1012
4
21100000
954,68414
961,433857
16,53645
16,96982 1876.893381, Variant: 2Na
Peak_3771
535
2
9631701
771,37
1013,45653
14,65706
15,04544 2971.408153, Variant: 3Na
Peak_3636
1038
50
9219163
1002,5535
997,000919
26,00776
26,48937 1948.024570, Variant: 2Na
Peak_0795
82
6
6337701,5
362,32846
637,288375
22,65478
23,01466 2545.123858, Variant: 4H
Peak_4957
622
22
10100000
1041,1945
1229,55371
19,56883
19,94453 3619.704834, Variant: 3Na
Peak_1822
902
96
7093800,5
388,27655
774,861799
19,05765
19,39878 2321.759126, 3H+
Peak_4728
2374
5661427,5
744,5032
1192,65389
11,16467
11,48276 1191.645338, Variant: 1H
Peak_3335
1012
4
21900000
987,143
960,9343
16,53066
16,96068 1875.891926, Variant: 2Na
Peak_5317
655
26
7915336
1160,4082
1300,27249
22,92514
23,32262 2549.267584, Variant: 1Fe2
Peak_6275
723
575
6405412
1609,749
1704,83224
33,44107
33,84128 3372.366950, Variant: 1H,1K
Peak_5577
2457
5634856,5
1054,2579
1349,6047
25,0314
25,41738 3979.847697, Variant: 3Na
Peak_1441
6
36
5936231
429,97235
718,173683
24,98938
25,42524 2102.120380, Variant: 1H,1Fe2
Peak_5482
1147
49
11400000
995,17896
1332,0097
7,467413
7,812108 2618.049538, Variant: 2Na
Peak_5709
2471
9933041
972,7881
1382,64587
24,02444
24,35977 1381.638923, Variant: 1H
Peak_2879
456
447
7517305
471,39563
908,418747
24,54338
24,82759 3601.851368, Variant: 1Na,1B
Peak_0355
1323
5868392,5
298,6626
569,557368
25,05496
25,58584 3979.847697, Variant: 7H
Peak_4432
1099
8
10900000
619,65906
1126,09894
26,69463
27,01966 2228.202606, Variant: 1H,1Na
Peak_2356
948
159
11200000
397,7277
851,882566
27,57281
27,86114 1657.787144, Variant: 2Na
Peak_3777
535
2
8241644,5
670,2178
1013,79126
14,66484
15,03028 1981.602789, Variant: 2Na
==PAGE:76==
Peak_4065
1073
100
7870226
655,9491
1053,98027
19,60817
19,93684 2061.980453, Variant: 2Na
Peak_3874
194
24
8303406
652,1365
1025,48938
20,92072
21,31406 4093.935968, 4H+
Peak_4449
575
13
6140013
519,2304
1127,85372
14,48729
14,78379 2209.731034, Variant: 2Na
Peak_5312
654
5
6571807,5
1028,3955
1299,2634
21,54353
21,92713 3850.804988, Variant: 1H,2Na
Peak_5320
656
119
5996695
965,469
1300,91498
21,54577
21,92039 2564.536830, Variant: 1H,1K
Peak_3306
169
26
5331055,5
529,495
958,48604
22,90166
23,23249 3825.901920, 4H+
Peak_5723
688
24
8222361
990,2979
1386,63623
20,92991
21,33533 4090.941344, Variant: 3Na
Peak_2686
437
49
9500546
454,0145
888,336281
7,467413
7,818845 2618.049538, Variant: 1H,2Na
Peak_0703
80
27
7020949,5
292,61444
627,296709
23,45464
23,80591 1252.578737, Variant: 2H
Peak_3283
495
594
7613719,5
512,4983
957,806324
28,81726
29,15184 5740.811552, Variant: 6H
Peak_5971
278
48
7121396
874,73157
1447,19287
28,81726
29,16879 5740.811552, Variant: 2H,2Na
Peak_4446
575
13
6427591,5
541,18335
1127,51994
14,50022
14,78379 3313.600574, Variant: 3Na
Peak_0749
1488
6066776
323,9145
631,656211
33,38947
33,81333 5675.842239, Variant: 9H
Peak_0914
827
205
5856144
298,06396
651,836219
11,14395
11,48276 1257.691716, Variant: 2Na
Peak_1462
375
46
9536851
254,26625
720,321268
9,343261
9,665658 2135.964691, Variant: 2H,1Na
Peak_4775
598
12
9044853
583,0199
1198,89124
31,54377
31,85192 3527.716566, Variant: 3Na
Peak_0854
821
203
8057181,5
195,50949
644,338055
18,18315
18,47421 1242.697180, Variant: 2Na
Peak_6118
1167
2
5659322
868,4399
1497,70053
14,66484
14,98862 2971.408153, Variant: 1H,1Na
Peak_2859
2075
4507445
467,4308
906,966955
24,77253
25,18672 3601.851368, Variant: 3H,1Na
Peak_0659
799
206
5002243,5
228,66951
618,81195
11,17242
11,53129 1191.645338, Variant: 2Na
Peak_0708
333
4
14700000
351,1117
627,974111
16,53645
16,95501 1876.893381, 3H+
Peak_4459
577
13
5922104
513,12933
1130,50531
14,50022
14,79946 2209.731034, Variant: 1Fe2
Peak_1253
93
112
9375011
264,9218
693,813009
21,12803
21,49515 4090.941344, Variant: 3H,3Na
Peak_0302
77
8
9264263
182,35126
559,060981
26,70286
27,04393 1670.401464, 3H+
Peak_0987
350
445
7113454,5
237,77225
663,327456
24,3737
24,70223 1267.282120, Variant: 1K,1Na
Peak_1486
8
22
5801091
282,5414
724,947168
19,58417
19,90451 3619.704834, Variant: 5H
Peak_4210
1084
46
9349156
463,20688
1090,96906
9,351982
9,672394 2135.964691, Variant: 2Na
Peak_3367
502
412
7438117
377,36734
964,446741
23,228
23,51497 3825.901920, Variant: 1Na,1B
Peak_0761
811
202
9594744
178,78798
633,784807
12,0267
12,27351 1243.571998, Variant: 1H,1Na
Peak_6287
726
574
4210578,5
1080,5715
1711,82326
33,45278
33,81333 3372.366950, Variant: 1Fe2
Peak_0354
1322
3889386,8
199,32896
569,414693
25,06625
25,48626 4506.065137, Variant: 4H,1K,1B
Peak_4039
550
17
7582739,5
388,07285
1049,10583
7,611721
7,927216 3100.341609, Variant: 1H,2Na
Peak_5995
283
48
5857299,5
724,2988
1451,93855
28,82148
29,17229 5737.805532, Variant: 1H,3Na
Peak_5704
685
24
4769843,5
582,1099
1380,30732
20,93216
21,26109 4093.935968, Variant: 1H,2Na
Peak_4593
51
48
5265043
470,43497
1152,96373
28,82372
29,13135 5737.805532, Variant: 4H,1Na
Peak_5213
1129
27
5973033
710,82196
1287,05885
23,44017
23,80142 3822.903157, Variant: 2H,1K
Peak_2220
137
13
4155047
228,80295
834,900315
14,50247
14,79946 3313.600574, Variant: 3H,1Na
Peak_1686
1779
5144485,5
273,68512
751,280976
19,1136
19,44243 1501.749529, 2H+
Peak_5345
659
26
4287349
637,478
1304,28371
22,94354
23,29773 2549.267584, Variant: 1K,1Na
Peak_0145
71
33
9555841
290,94666
526,537715
24,394
25,0392 2102.120380, Variant: 4H
Peak_4090
1074
10
4011688,8
352,4353
1059,42561
18,83247
19,14623 1023.127802, Variant: 1K
Peak_4116
1076
33
7805115,5
797,1819
1063,06239
24,49612
25,10816 2102.120380, Variant: 1H,1Na
Peak_4512
2346
3740506,5
500,1765
1140,57035
33,4086
33,79725 5675.842239, Variant: 4H,1Na
Peak_5584
1154
9
7085828
485,78262
1350,63137
15,94899
16,21941 2677.267072, Variant: 1H,1Na
Peak_1273
1648
3924844,2
183,52472
695,639033
18,83471
19,12152 2039.936471, Variant: 1H,2Na
Peak_0271
76
134
5858805
129,287
553,813061
23,228
23,50418 3825.901920, Variant: 2H,1Na,1Si
Peak_5993
283
48
5151472
630,56476
1451,44254
28,82148
29,13702 7168.509724, Variant: 1H,1K,1Fe3
Peak_4494
1102
8
6054262
348,1663
1137,09
26,70062
26,97874 2228.202606, Variant: 2Na
Peak_0356
1324
3505363,2
178,99155
569,700611
25,05843
25,52172 4506.065137, Variant: 2Si
Peak_0176
753
342
5793350
109,51559
536,316297
19,44019
19,71493 2061.980453, Variant: 1H,1K,2Na
Peak_1946
1842
3521013,2
276,89346
796,375684
25,25744
25,70419 2364.133385, Variant: 2H,1Na
Peak_3961
545
25
7467086,5
363,8683
1038,8084
21,32694
21,63073 4093.935968, Variant: 2H,1K,1Na
Peak_5630
2463
3109522,5
551,2901
1359,88592
26,25157
26,60908 5391.558948, Variant: 2H,2Na
Peak_3913
2264
5066166,5
333,62903
1032,18436
28,99853
29,34687 7168.509724, Variant: 2H,2Na,1B
Peak_3185
2147
3285064,2
334,7268
948,312224
33,41243
33,78591 4730.685214, Variant: 2H,1B
Peak_2874
457
9
7113201,5
269,31903
908,082018
15,95124
16,22165 2677.267072, Variant: 1H,2Na
Peak_0965
347
50
5016465
286,22546
657,675071
25,99511
26,51485 1948.024570, Variant: 2H,1Na
Peak_6164
1168
17
5095686
471,09613
1551,17775
7,638876
7,900157 3100.341609, Variant: 2H
Peak_5911
2496
3321740,8
354,73062
1434,50288
28,83213
29,07084 7168.509724, 5H+
Peak_5424
666
5
3455554
559,67334
1318,57448
21,54802
21,90468 2564.536830, Variant: 2K
Peak_3497
1024
53
5233503
223,75688
978,000693
17,25929
17,53124 1910.028813, Variant: 2Na
==PAGE:77==
Peak_3897
197
220
3025838,5
250,19376
1029,98621
20,94971
21,20611 4093.935968, Variant: 3H,1Na
Peak_1422
880
210
3930878,5
143,28854
713,808636
24,05664
24,3207 1381.638923, Variant: 2Na
Peak_5364
660
5
3041799,5
480,96774
1306,5911
21,54802
21,91469 3850.804988, Variant: 3Na
Peak_2007
1863
1441699,8
74,5198
801,383183
18,78479
18,89217 2321.759126, Variant: 1K,2Na
Peak_0240
1266
3247052,5
133,07222
547,567434
22,94354
23,27824 3825.901920, Variant: 7H
Peak_4963
1117
47
2937015,2
446,07355
1232,51439
25,24166
25,65727 3601.851368, Variant: 2K,1Na
Peak_2028
1868
3490626,8
155,7527
805,799037
18,55233
18,80865 2321.759126, Variant: 2K,1Na
Peak_5897
2494
2608988,2
472,00928
1430,95509
33,4086
33,74621 5675.842239, Variant: 2H,2Na
Peak_5998
283
48
2883547,2
352,69873
1452,69591
28,81726
29,10438 5740.811552, Variant: 1H,3Na
Peak_3890
196
376
2623531,8
194,378
1028,72927
21,73266
22,00871 3077.447803, Variant: 1B
Peak_2349
1967
3356575
281,02826
850,981544
22,71809
23,16235 2544.127021, Variant: 1B
Peak_0086
1207
2173918,8
67,815674
516,504275
19,62868
19,87534 2061.980453, Variant: 4H
Peak_1677
1776
2434679,8
137,5939
749,353066
14,68176
14,96565 2971.408153, Variant: 3H,1Na
Peak_3818
538
2
2396980
208,5485
1020,44963
14,6942
14,96116 1981.602789, Variant: 1K,1Na
Peak_0858
822
202
4764272
90,73947
644,776523
12,03344
12,24633 1243.571998, Variant: 2Na
Peak_1360
1675
2932408,8
165,79494
709,040981
24,54338
24,93437 2102.120380, Variant: 2H,1Na
Peak_6228
2525
3496926,8
337,88727
1658,79837
27,59955
27,82529 1657.787144, Variant: 1H
Peak_6336
1170
12
3535299,5
414,30646
1775,85689
31,5612
31,79551 3527.716566, Variant: 1H,1Na
Peak_3295
171
415
3795814,5
197,90031
958,206146
23,32262
23,55333 3822.903157, Variant: 1H,1B
Peak_0544
323
554
3322696,2
75,6291
600,67485
31,55671
31,79327 3527.716566, Variant: 2H,1Na,1Fe3
Peak_6011
286
514
2418390,8
301,35965
1457,43615
28,82988
29,07773 5737.805532, Variant: 4Na
Peak_5640
1158
9
3397834,8
236,56218
1361,62194
15,95573
16,19498 2677.267072, Variant: 2Na
Peak_0219
758
204
3622017
61,040012
545,270894
10,68059
10,91193 1566.835936, Variant: 3Na
Peak_4150
1081
33
2227258
181,44594
1074,04963
24,52446
24,81977 2102.120380, Variant: 2Na
Peak_5028
2402
3657144,8
187,0222
1244,57932
12,03344
12,25512 1243.571998, Variant: 1H
Peak_6147
2513
2087364,4
250,93198
1535,69363
18,56991
18,78133 1534.689877, Variant: 1H
Peak_0119
1221
2387729,5
35,61492
523,222449
10,76482
10,92091 1566.835936, 3H+
Peak_2924
465
9
2803342
108,02591
915,409024
15,95797
16,19722 2677.267072, Variant: 3Na
Peak_2811
2071
1512380,9
151,89041
902,969029
25,17103
25,4976 4506.065137, 5H+
Peak_2755
2061
2295082,5
113,60836
895,665702
7,491823
7,731306 2618.049538, Variant: 3Na
Peak_0864
342
53
2595015
59,236904
645,010953
17,27921
17,48896 1910.028813, Variant: 2H,1Na
Peak_3213
2158
3994309,5
148,31677
951,621646
33,19776
33,4699 5675.842239, Variant: 2H,1Na,1B
Peak_1504
378
46
2723781,8
74,802055
727,643372
9,3675
9,578772 2135.964691, Variant: 1H,2Na
Peak_0712
1474
2326640,2
124,1186
628,38203
22,64155
23,08323 3057.523478, Variant: 2H,1K,2Na
Peak_3938
2270
1795372,1
149,37833
1034,72973
20,94747
21,20836 4090.941344, Variant: 2H,2Na
Peak_1258
93
112
1742362,2
48,97235
694,314313
21,19016
21,38432 4093.935968, Variant: 3H,3Na
Peak_5019
2401
1820910,9
121,76453
1243,7036
18,20487
18,39172 1242.697180, Variant: 1H
Peak_4075
553
237
1961548,1
102,3589
1056,43108
7,651392
7,842955 3100.341609, Variant: 3Na
Peak_1083
846
279
2084355,8
44,18344
675,872787
15,14706
15,32145 1953.919756, Variant: 1H,2K
Peak_1995
1856
1669094,4
55,944973
799,985514
33,9397
34,16123 4730.685214, Variant: 1H,1K,1Na,1B
Peak_6339
1171
12
1162411,5
131,91614
1786,84134
31,57855
31,74313 3527.716566, Variant: 2Na
Peak_0760
335
4
1783619,6
44,050133
633,62945
16,60719
16,86631 1875.891926, Variant: 2H,1Na
Peak_0764
335
4
1748007,4
42,39056
633,963814
16,57621
16,86856 1876.893381, Variant: 2H,1Na
Peak_0215
305
479
1022071
23,055494
544,986486
26,51485
26,72605 5391.558948, Variant: 7H,1Fe3
Peak_0245
1270
1312856
22,648844
549,743422
10,68732
10,86508 1566.835936, Variant: 1K,2Na
Peak_1640
1763
876496,4
24,246115
745,284932
14,89149
15,04955 2971.408153, Variant: 1H,1B
==PAGE:78==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Søltofts Pl. 221
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.bioengineering.dtu.dk
