==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Performance analysis of LTE-M and NB-IoT
on IoT based mobile agricultural robot
Nikolaos Tsimplis
Kongens Lyngby 2023
==PAGE:2==
DTU Electro
Department of Electrical and Photonics Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
Ørsteds Plads
Building 343
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 45256352
info@fotonik.dtu.dk
https://electro.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
In the area of IoT, especially in agriculture sector, LPWAN technologies, have gained
significant attention due to their ability to provide low-power and long-range connectivity.
This thesis aims to investigate the performance of two LPWAN technologies, NB-IoT
and LTE-M, in an IoT based mobile agricultural robot. The main focus of this study is to
analyze the coverage range and power consumption of both technologies in agricultural
settings including dense forests, open fields and elevated terrains. In the coverage range
experiments, signal quality and signal strength of the device were evaluated, and the
results show that both technologies are effective in providing connectivity over long
distances in challenging environments.
The power consumption experiments included four different cases: registering to the
network, data transmission through MQTT, and GPS power consumption, as well as the
mobile robot’s power consumption. The findings of the power consumption experiments
revealed that both technologies consume a considerable amount of power, but much less
compared with the mobile robot’s power consumption. However, this can be solved by
using larger capacity batteries. Compared to other communication technologies, NB-
IoT and LTE-M demonstrate notable advantages in terms of power consumption and
coverage range.
==PAGE:4==
Preface
All of the work presented was conducted at the Department of Electrical and Photonics
Engineering of the Technical University of Denmark in order to meet the academic
standards for completing a Master of Science degree program in Autonomous Systems.
Kongens Lyngby, April 30, 2023
Nikolaos Tsimplis (s203255)
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
Firstly, I would like to start my acknowledgements by expressing my gratitude to my
supervisors, Sarah Renée Ruepp and Henrik Wessing, for their guidance, support, and
invaluable feedback throughout the entire process of writing this thesis. Their expertise,
knowledge, and insights have been instrumental in shaping my research. I would also like
to thank Radheshyam Singh, a Ph.D. student, for his assistance and valuable suggestions
during the course of my research. I am deeply indebted to my friend Giorgos, who played
a significant role in conducting experiments in the field. I would like to acknowledge
the love and support of my brother Giorgos and my parents Christos and Olga. Their
constant presence, uplifting words and encouragement throughout the entire process of
my academic journey have been crucial in keeping me motivated and focused. Finally,
I would like to thank my partner, Georgia, for her love and understanding during this
challenging period. Her unconditional support and positive mood even in the darkest
days helped me to overcome obstacles and keep pushing forward.
==PAGE:6==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
ii
Acknowledgements
iii
Contents
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Purpose and Research Hypotheses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Structure of the Thesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Literature Review
4
2.1
Internet of Things . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2
Agriculture 4.0
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.3
Low Power Wide Area Networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3
Theoretical Background
9
3.1
LPWAN Technology
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.2
LTE Network . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.2.1
Network Architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.3
Narrowband-IoT and LTE-M Standards
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.3.1
Narrowband-IoT
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.3.1.1
Operation modes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.3.1.2
Transmission
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.3.2
LTE-M . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.3.3
Coverage Range . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.3.4
Power saving and extended battery life . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.4
IoT Protocol Stack . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.4.1
Message Queuing Telemetry Transport (MQTT) . . . . . . . . . .
21
==PAGE:7==
Contents
v
4
Methodology
22
4.1
Experiment Setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4.1.1
Hardware
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.1.2
Software . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.1.3
AT commands . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.2
Coverage Range Testing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.2.1
Retrieving RSSI values . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4.2.2
Retrieving RSRP and RSRQ values . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4.3
Power Consumption Testing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4.3.1
Registering to network . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.3.2
MQTT data transmission
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
4.3.3
GPS configuration and position retrieval . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
4.3.4
Mobile Robot testing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
5
Results
41
5.1
Coverage Analysis results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
5.1.1
Signal strength
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
5.1.2
Signal quality . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
5.2
Power Consumption results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
5.2.1
Network registration power consumption . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
5.2.2
MQTT data transmission power consumption
. . . . . . . . . . .
49
5.2.3
GPS power consumption . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
5.2.4
Mobile robot power consumption
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
5.2.5
Calculation of battery life
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
5.3
Comparison with other Communication technologies . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
6
Discussion
56
6.1
Summary of Results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
6.2
Limitations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
6.3
Further development . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
7
Conclusion
59
A
An Appendix
60
A.1 LTE-M measurements for RSSI per distance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
A.2 NB-IoT measurements for RSSI per distance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
A.3 LTE-M measurements for RSRP and RSRQ per distance . . . . . . . . .
62
A.4 NB-IoT measurements for RSRP and RSRQ per distance . . . . . . . . .
63
==PAGE:8==
Contents
vi
Bibliography
64
==PAGE:9==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
This chapter is an introduction to the overall subject matter, outlining key concepts and
the motivation behind the research. The latter parts of the chapter present a summary
of the thesis’s purpose and provide an overview of its structure.
1.1
Motivation
The impressive progress in the era of the fourth industrial revolution has increased the
interest in developing robotic systems for carrying out daily activities. Industrial sec-
tors such as agriculture, are calling for solutions to reduce operational costs and increase
eﬀiciency.
Automatization of agriculture industry using innovative technologies such
as Robotics and IoT, that simplifies farm activities like field and crop monitoring. In
order to improve the development of automation in the agricultural field, environmental
monitoring system aids in gathering fast, accurate and constant measurements required
in precision agriculture[23].
IoT based applications in agriculture are used mainly for information awareness
through monitoring, especially for stationary devices. This brings a new challenge in
the field of Smart Agriculture as there is an increased interest in agricultural driverless
mobile machinery recently. The usage of mobile robots for various agricultural purposes
brings a lot of benefits but on the other hand, it is highly costly for a farmer to buy one.
In the private industry, companies in the agricultural sector currently provide solutions
for semi or fully-autonomous tractors. However, none of these reviewed applications
integrate IoT-based solutions which are cheap, to monitor and control these driverless
vehicles.
The main problem seen in today’s Smart Agriculture applications is the unstable wire-
less communication and data transmission between end devices and operators. Farms
mostly exist in rural areas far from the cities and depend on cellular coverage. In addi-
==PAGE:10==
1.2 Purpose and Research Hypotheses
2
tion, farms in a lot of cases are surrounded or blocked by dense germination and hills.
For this reason, it is necessary to integrate the application with wireless communication
protocols that provide high coverage. Moreover, data transmission will require also suﬀi-
cient data rates depending on the application. Power consumption is also an important
parameter in this case.
The advancement of communications technologies like Low-Power Wide-Area Net-
works (LPWAN), appears to hold a significant promise for enhancing eﬀiciency and
addressing various agricultural issues, as discussed previously. Therefore, I faced the
challenge of utilizing my academic knowledge to evaluate the performance of LPWAN
communication technologies such as LTE-M and NB-IoT using a field monitoring mobile
robot. The current era’s challenges, along with the limited progress on the specific topic,
have motivated me to undertake this project.
1.2
Purpose and Research Hypotheses
The purpose of this project is to explore the feasibility of deploying a mobile robot for
agricultural purposes and the development of a corresponding system. While agriculture
IoT applications are typically employed for stationary devices and information monitor-
ing, this project aims to assess the suitability of LPWAN communication technologies,
including LTE-M and NB-IoT, for integration in mobile robots that operate in rural
agricultural settings. The focus is not on creating a mobile robot with the same level
of autonomous control as a self-driving vehicle. Instead, the aim is to demonstrate that
IoT technologies can provide the necessary communication standards for a mobile robot
or even a larger tractor to function effectively in the physical world. With this objective
in mind, the research will focus on testing the following hypotheses:
• NB-IoT and LTE-M technologies, may offer a wide coverage range and low power
consumption in wireless communications.
• Utilizing NB-IoT and LTE-M can provide advantages in mobile applications for
agriculture.
While the first question aims to test and compare the two communication protocols
integrated on the mobile robot in terms of coverage range and power consumption, the
second aims to evaluate the advantages of the two protocols in mobile applications for
==PAGE:11==
1.3 Structure of the Thesis
3
agriculture purposes. In order to answer these questions, a proposed methodology will
be presented and discussed in a subsequent chapter.
1.3
Structure of the Thesis
The thesis consists of six chapters, each focusing on a distinct aspect of the research. The
second chapter provides a literature review of IoT and LPWAN technologies and their
relevance to the agriculture sector. The third chapter outlines the key concepts used in
the project, including various topics related to LPWAN and IoT technologies. The fourth
chapter typically outlines the methods used to investigate the research hypotheses and
provides a detailed description of the research design. In the fifth section of the report,
the discoveries of the investigation are presented, which involves the outcomes of the
performance analysis on the communication protocols of LTE-M and NB-IoT. Chapter
six of the report provides a discussion on the results presented in the fifth chapter. It
also addresses the limitations and constraints of the study and proposes potential ideas
for future research. The conclusion chapter brings together the main points and findings
of the study, and provides a final assessment of the research.
==PAGE:12==
CHAPTER 2
Literature Review
The current review attempts to provide the recent state of art regarding Internet-of-
Things (IoT) application concepts, specifically focusing more on applications employed
in agricultural settings and their requirements with regard to communication standards.
The discussion is subsequently expanded to include LWPAN which constitutes the pri-
mary subject of the project.
2.1
Internet of Things
Over the past few years, there has been a steady growth in the usage of IoT applications
by consumers. Researches have shown that the global number of IoT devices will expe-
rience a nearly three-times increase from 9.7 billion in the year 2020 to over 29 billion
by 2030[45]. The range of potential IoT applications is big and continues to expand.
IoT has the potential to revolutionize numerous fields, including agriculture, healthcare,
transportation, manufacturing, and energy. IoT devices can collect and analyze vast
amounts of data in real-time, leading to more informed decision-making and enhanced
eﬀiciency.
The primary objective of IoT applications is not to improve the intelligence of devices,
but to establish connectivity between them and the internet or cloud services to enhance
their functionalities. Although wired connections are possible, wireless connections are
preferred for their convenience. However, the development of new and innovative IoT
applications poses significant challenges to existing communication technologies. For
instance, there is a need for low-power and cost-effective communication solutions that
can meet the requirements of these applications[33]. Meeting this particular demand is
an upcoming challenge for current cellular and wireless networks which were constructed
to meet the requirements of various applications.
==PAGE:13==
2.2 Agriculture 4.0
5
Figure 2.1: Distribution of different data sources [45] .
The development of IoT projects faces several barriers and challenges, with some of
the most significant being connectivity, security, device integration, and costs. Connec-
tivity issues can arise due to various factors, such as weak signal strength and network
congestion. These issues can impede the effective transmission of data between IoT de-
vices and other components, such as gateways or cloud-based platforms. Security is an-
other major concern, as IoT devices may be vulnerable to cyber-attacks, data breaches,
and unauthorized access.
Moreover, device integration challenges arise also, due to
the presence of multiple devices from different manufacturers and with varying techni-
cal specifications, which can make it diﬀicult to create a seamless network of devices.
Finally, the cost can be a significant barrier to IoT adoption, with high investments
required for hardware, software, and infrastructure development.[34]
2.2
Agriculture 4.0
IoT has great potential to transform the agricultural sector by enabling precision agricul-
ture and smart farming. Involving the adoption of recent technologies, such as IoT, Big
data, artificial intelligence (AI), cloud computing and remote sensing has significantly
improved farming processes by developing low-cost sensors and network platforms, aimed
towards the optimization of production eﬀiciency, reducing the usage of resources and
==PAGE:14==
2.2 Agriculture 4.0
6
energy with minimum environmental impact[15].
The recent achievements in the field of Industry 4.0 have led to an increased interest
in agricultural driverless mobile machinery. Recently, many researchers tried to take
advantage of the latest technology achievements based on IoT, developing various pro-
totypes of mobile robots for agricultural purposes. Poonguzhali et al[41] designed and
implemented an agriculture robot adopting IoT. The robot automates the processes of
seed sowing, field ploughing and water sprinkling. In this project, WiFi technology is
used for controlling and monitoring the robot. Temperature, humidity, PH and ultra-
sonic sensors are attached to a controller which is connected to WiFi, to track and get
the output of all the sensors. The specific setup is quite used in the development of small
scale mobile robots. Lokesh et al[42] almost using the same devices like Poonguzhali de-
veloped a mobile robot that can perform crop harvesting apart from seed sowing and
field ploughing. Moreover, Lokesh et al added Bluetooth giving one more communi-
cation option for controlling the robot. Carreras et al[11], designed and developed a
semi-autonomus IoT based prototype of a driverless bulldozer. The bulldozer is con-
trolled remotely from a user interface designed in a cloud application, where you give
the way points to drive in the work field. Furthermore, the choice of GPRS technol-
ogy provides satisfactory field coverage for mobile robots. In the aforementioned work,
is worth to be mentioned that the bulldozer allows two-way communications between
the controller in the vehicle and the cloud application through TCP/IP using Message
Queuing Telemetry Transport (MQTT)[38]. MQTT is a machine-to-machine connectiv-
ity protocol that is a suitable choice for IoT applications.
Furthermore, low-cost data gathering electronic devices are becoming popular within
the sector which includes open source hardware (OSH) like Arduino or Raspberry Pi[8][6].
The success of IoT technology in agriculture mostly depends on connectivity between
devices, various communications protocols such as Narrowband IoT(NB-IoT), LTE Cat-
M1, Zigbee, LoRa, WiFi, and Bluetooth can be used but in this case, the LPWAN is
considered to make a huge impact in smart farming agriculture, due to its improved
facilities, big coverage, low power consumption, and low costs[27][22]. Therefore, the
communication performance varies in real environments in terms of maximum transmis-
sion range, packet loss rate, packet delay or maximum throughput[53]. NB-IoT is a
new technology that was introduced by the 3rd Generation Partnership Project (3GPP)
standards organization in its Release 13. It uses the same frequency bands as those used
in LTE. To be long-range and low-power, it removes and enhances some LTE protocol
==PAGE:15==
2.3 Low Power Wide Area Networks
7
functionalities to let it be more suitable for IoT devices. Another technology proposed
in 3GPP Release 13 for IoT applications is LTE-M. Its functions are similar to those of
NB-IoT. According to the specifications, the latency of LTE-M is shorter than that of
NB-IoT[53].
2.3
Low Power Wide Area Networks
LPWAN technologies have proven to be beneficial for agriculture in rural areas making
them ideal for monitoring soil moisture, weather conditions, and crop growth, providing
farmers with real-time data on their crops’ status. Information on crop water require-
ments, nutrient needs, and optimal harvesting time can assist farmers in making decisions
regarding irrigation, fertilization, and harvest management. Overall, the implementa-
tion of LPWANs in agriculture can result in significant cost savings and productivity
improvements, making it an attractive option for farmers in rural areas.
According to researches, while short-range technologies will continue to dominate IoT
connectivity for some time, by 2025, about 25% of wireless industrial IoT connections
are expected to use LPWAN technologies such as LoRa, Sigfox, LTE-M, and NB-IoT.
This indicates that LPWAN will remain important as the IoT field evolves.[20]
Concerning the integration of LPWAN technologies with mobile robots can be chal-
lenging as it depends on specific needs and constraints of the mobile robot and its
intended use case. LPWAN is designed to transmit small amounts of data over long dis-
tances with low power consumption, which can be beneficial for mobile robots that need
to operate for extended periods without frequent battery replacements or recharging.
Singh et al [44] proposed an IoT and cloud server-based mobile robot for monitoring the
air quality of the farm in real-time using LoRa and GPRS. The findings indicated that
the connection established between the mobile robot and the cloud server was reliable
and effective. Other studies, focused more on tracking a mobile device using LPWAN
technologies. Parrino et al.[39] introduced a novel tracking system for asset shipping that
employs NB-IoT and GPS technologies. The study’s outcomes were deemed satisfactory
regarding the tracking capabilities and power consumption of the proposed system.
Recent studies have indicated that the ability for IoT devices to maintain connectivity
while transitioning between cellular cells is crucial for certain applications, such as asset
tracking. Devices utilizing LTE-M technology are deemed appropriate for scenarios that
require limited or complete mobility. In contrast, devices using NB-IoT technology are
==PAGE:16==
2.3 Low Power Wide Area Networks
8
only suitable for stationary or low mobility devices.
NB-IoT devices lack handover
support, resulting in the connection being terminated when the device moves out of the
serving cell. In such instances, the device utilizes the cell selection feature to connect to
another appropriate cell and continue transmitting data.[16]
In this context, Wang et al.[53] conducted a performance analysis of six different
LPWAN technologies and tested their performance in a drone flying at high speeds in
the air. The findings of the study revealed that LPWAN technologies have the potential
to be employed in IoT applications where end devices require mobility even at high
speeds.
==PAGE:17==
CHAPTER 3
Theoretical Background
This chapter provides an overview of the key concepts used in this research project, in-
cluding LPWAN, IoT, and Long Term Evolution (LTE) technology. The main emphasis
is on the communication protocols employed in this project.
3.1
LPWAN Technology
LPWAN is a wireless communication technology designed to connect devices over long
distances with low power consumption. The technologies applied in LPWAN are mainly
divided into two types licensed and unlicensed. Licensed LPWAN technologies are sup-
ported by 3GPP protocol and operate in a spectrum authorized by telecommunication
operators, which means that they are subject to regulatory requirements and must com-
ply with certain technical standards.
These technologies include EC-GSM, NB-IoT,
and LTE-M, which are built on existing cellular networks and provide high reliability,
security, and quality of service. On the other hand, unlicensed LPWAN technologies,
such as LoRa and Sigfox, operate in an unlicensed spectrum and this may be subject
to interference from other devices using the same spectrum[57]. Both licensed and unli-
censed LPWAN technologies have their advantages and disadvantages and are suitable
for different IoT applications depending on factors such as coverage, data rate, power
consumption, and cost.
Figure 3.1 provides a comparative overview of various wireless technologies with
respect to their data rate, power consumption, and cost. This comparison is important
for selecting the most suitable wireless technology for a given IoT application, depending
on its specific requirements and constraints. The data rate is an important factor that
determines the speed of data transfer and influences the amount of information that
can be transmitted per unit of time. Power consumption is a critical parameter in IoT
applications, as most devices are battery-powered and have limited energy resources.
The cost is another important factor that impacts the affordability and scalability of
IoT solutions.
==PAGE:18==
3.1 LPWAN Technology
10
By comparing the different wireless technologies shown in Figure 3.1, it is possible to
identify their relative strengths and weaknesses. For example, technologies such as Wi-
Fi and Bluetooth offer high data rates but are relatively power-hungry, while LPWAN
technologies provide low data rates but have low power consumption and long-range
connectivity. The cost of the technology can also vary widely depending on factors such
as the complexity of the hardware, the licensing fees, and the infrastructure requirements.
Therefore, it is essential to carefully consider the trade-offs between data rate, power
consumption, and cost when selecting a wireless technology for an IoT application, in
order to optimize its performance and ensure its long-term viability.
Figure 3.1: Comparison of Wireless Technologies[55].
In summary, the defining characteristics of LPWAN technology can be delineated as
follows:
• Long range: Provide extensive area coverage, including improved signal propa-
gation in challenging environments.
• Low power operation: Battery-powered IoT devices with extended battery life-
time[57].
• Low Cost: Keeping the cost of hardware and connectivity subscription low[1].
==PAGE:19==
3.2 LTE Network
11
3.2
LTE Network
LTE also known as 4G is a wireless broadband communication standard that has been
developed based on the Global System for Mobile Communications (GSM) and Universal
Mobile Telecommunications System (UMTS) standards. It aims to enhance and build
upon the existing capabilities of these standards for mobile devices and data terminals[9].
LTE was first introduced as a standard by the 3GPP in 2008. It was designed to
provide a significant improvement in data rates and capacity compared to previous tech-
nologies like 3G. Despite not meeting the original requirements for a 4G standard, LTE
was permitted by the International Telecommunication Union - Radiocommunication
sector (ITU-R) to be marketed as a 4G technology as long as it provided significant
improvements over 3G technology. The first LTE networks were launched commercially
in Scandinavia and the United States in 2009[54], with subsequent launches in other re-
gions around the world in the following years. Since then, LTE has become the dominant
technology for wireless broadband communication, with over 5 billion LTE connections
worldwide by 2024[7].
One of the fundamental aspects that characterizes LTE as a data-oriented technology
is its reliance on packet switching. This approach allows data to be divided into small
packets and transmitted over the network in a more eﬀicient and flexible manner[40].
This flexibility makes LTE suitable for Machine to Machine (M2M) communication,
where data transmission between devices is a primary requirement.
3.2.1
Network Architecture
LTE is based on a cellular network architecture as like its predecessors in mobile technol-
ogy. The main concept of a cellular network architecture is the spatial partitioning of a
geographic region into cells. Each cell comprises a group of end-users who communicate
with a centralized base station (BS), also known as eNodeB, positioned at the center of
the cell, which serves as the primary point of contact for all wireless transmissions and
receptions[52]. Figure 3.2 shows a typical structure of LTE cells.
==PAGE:20==
3.2 LTE Network
12
Figure 3.2: Typical structure of LTE cells.
The architecture of the LTE network consists of three primary components: the
Evolved Packet Core (EPC), the User Equipment (UE), and the radio access network
(RAN) as it is illustrated in figure 3.3.
• User Equipment: The UE is the mobile device that accesses the LTE network.
It includes a SIM card for authentication and a radio module for communication
with the LTE network.
• Evolved Packet Core: The EPC is the core network of the LTE system and is
responsible for routing data between the UE and the internet. The EPC consists of
several functional entities, including Mobility Management Entity (MME), Serving
Gateway (SGW) and Packet Data Network Gateway (PGW)[4].
• Radio access network: The RAN is responsible for establishing and maintaining
the wireless connection between the UE and the EPC. Generally, the combination
of the end user devices and the base stations make up what is called a radio access
network (RAN). The term used to refer to a base station in the LTE specification
is eNodeB.
==PAGE:21==
3.3 Narrowband-IoT and LTE-M Standards
13
The eNodeB is the main component of the RAN and is responsible for several criti-
cal functions, such as communicating with the UE and managing the allocation of radio
resources in the network. These functions include scheduling, power control, and mod-
ulation/demodulation of the radio signals[33].
In addition, it plays a crucial role in
managing the handover of the UE from one eNodeB to another, thereby ensuring that
the UE can seamlessly transition from one cell to another as it moves.
Figure 3.3: LTE network topology architecture.
Figure 3.3 illustrates the LTE network architecture and the main components of
this topology as well the connections between them. However, it should be mentioned
that IMS (IP Multimedia Subsystem) is a separate network architecture that provides
multimedia services over IP networks. Concerning PDN, which is connected to the EPC,
and the EPC acts as an intermediary between the UE and the PDN. In the context of
cellular networks, PDN is used to connect mobile devices to the internet or other IP-
based networks.[35].
3.3
Narrowband-IoT and LTE-M Standards
Due to the growing demand for M2M communication protocols within IoT applications,
in Release 13, the 3GPP introduced two cellular solutions designed to operate within
the licensed spectrum. These solutions were LTE-M for machine-type communications
and NB-IoT. According to the literature review, it has been determined that both LTE-
M and NB-IoT are classified under LPWAN technologies, which have been developed
to provide a reduced level of complexity for user equipment, extended battery life and
==PAGE:22==
3.3 Narrowband-IoT and LTE-M Standards
14
bigger coverage. In contrast to other LPWAN technologies, LTE-M and NB-IoT operate
within licensed spectrum ensuring a reliable quality of service (QoS)[19].
One of the most significant differences between LTE-M and NB-IoT is their band-
width. LTE-M offers a wider bandwidth than NB-IoT, allowing for higher data rates,
making it better suited for applications that require more significant amounts of data
transmission. In contrast, NB-IoT is optimized for ultra-low data rates and can trans-
mit small amounts of data eﬀiciently, making it ideal for applications like asset tracking,
smart metering, and other low-data-rate IoT use cases[25][28].
Another key difference between the two technologies is their deployment. LTE-M
can be deployed in both standalone and in-band modes, while NB-IoT only supports
standalone deployment. Standalone deployment means that the technology can function
independently of existing networks, making it more versatile and flexible. Furthermore,
LTE-M supports Voice over LTE (VoLTE), enabling voice calls over the network, which
is not available with NB-IoT[16].
Table 3.1: The Main Technical Specifications of NB-IoT and LTE-M
NB-IoT
LTE-M
3GPP Release
Release 13
Release 13
Spectrum
Licensed
Licensed
Data rate
∼220Kbps
∼1Mbps
Transmission Technique
FDD
FDD/TDD
Device Transmit Power
23
23
Channel Bandwidth
180 Khz
1.08-1.4 MHz
Latency
1.6-10s
10-15ms
Coverage
164 db
156 db
Both LTE-M and NB-IoT are highly promising LPWAN technologies that have
unique features and use cases especially in IoT applications. Given their potential, it is
important to investigate more these technologies to better understand their capabilities.
Therefore, a comprehensive analysis of LTE-M and NB-IoT individually will follow in
the next sections, focusing on their technical specifications.
3.3.1
Narrowband-IoT
NB-IoT is a new 3GPP radio-access technology which was part of the Release 13 spec-
ification. Its primary goals are to enhance coverage, reduce the complexity of UE, and
==PAGE:23==
3.3 Narrowband-IoT and LTE-M Standards
15
extend battery life. It was designed to achieve excellent coexistence with legacy GSM
and LTE technologies. NB-IoT requires a system bandwidth of 180 kHz for both the
uplink and downlink channels. This choice of minimum system bandwidth offers several
deployment options, such as allowing a GSM operator to replace a GSM carrier (200
kHz) with NB-IoT. Additionally, an LTE operator can allocate one of the 180 kHz chan-
nels to NB-IoT, enabling its deployment within an LTE carrier[30]. It will become more
clear in the following sections, where the deployment modes are to be discussed.
As previously mentioned, NB-IoT has been designed in a way that enables the co-
existence with LTE network and uses some of the infrastructure components, such as
the eNodeB and the Core Network.
Therefore NB-IoT is considered as a simplified
wireless communication protocol based on the LTE network architecture. The modifica-
tions made to NB-IoT, as compared to LTE, came from the necessity for reduced power
consumption and UE complexity reduction. Considering this aspect, NB-IoT technol-
ogy has certain limitations such as the limited mobility. As a result, if a device moves
away from the coverage area of the eNodeB, the network cannot perform a handover to
another eNodeB, as in the case of LTE-M. It is important to note that in M2M commu-
nications, constant connectivity from a mobile device is not typically prioritized to the
same extent as in mobile cellular networks[33]. Even though NB-IoT has limitations in
terms of mobility, it can make up for it by utilizing its high maximum coupling losses
(MCL) of up to 164 dB. This allows for extensive coverage even in indoor settings or
high-density environments.
3.3.1.1
Operation modes
As mentioned earlier NB-IoT can offer different operation modes, each with unique
characteristics and capabilities. There are three different operational modes for NB-IoT:
In-Band Operation, Guard-Band operation and Stand-alone operation.
• In-Band Operation: NB-IoT occupies one LTE Physical Resource Block (PRB)
of the LTE carrier.
• Guard-Band Operation: The deployment of NB-IoT takes place in the guard
band of an LTE carrier.
• Stand-Alone Operation: When operating in stand-alone mode, NB-IoT takes
up a 200 kHz bandwidth within a single GSM carrier.
==PAGE:24==
3.3 Narrowband-IoT and LTE-M Standards
16
Figure 3.4: NB-IoT operation modes. .
3.3.1.2
Transmission
NB-IoT physical layer characteristics were developed based on the LTE system, making
specific adjustments to meet the requirements of NB-IoT. Due to limitations in the NB-
IoT UE modules concerning low power, low complexity, and battery life, a half-duplex
frequency-division duplexing (HD-FDD) mode was chosen for UE operation. This means
that the UE can either transmit or receive, but not both at the same time. In contrast,
the eNodeB operates in full-duplex FDD mode, allowing it to transmit and receive sig-
nals simultaneously. The NB-IoT technology has the capability of utilizing 14 different
frequency bands in LTE. The NB-IoT Bands for Europe are B3 (1800 MHz), B8 (900
MHz) and B20 (800 MHz)[2].
The NB-IoT system adopts the same modulation schemes like LTE network for both
the uplink and downlink transmissions, which are OFDMA and SC-FDMA, respectively.
In the downlink transmission 12 subcarriers of 15kHz are occupied which is equivalent
to a PRB of 180kHz same as NB-IoT bandwidth. Similarly to the downlink, NB-IoT
allocates a bandwidth of 180 kHz for uplink transmission. However, in the uplink trans-
mission there are two possible subcarrier spacing options of 15 kHz and 3.75 kHz. The
choice of 15 kHz subcarrier spacing in NB-IoT is to ensure compatibility with legacy
LTE and optimal coexistence without any or minimal interference. On the other hand,
a narrower subcarrier spacing of 3.75 kHz can be used to achieve a longer signal range
due to higher power spectral density[13].
In other words, by using narrower subcarrier spacing, the transmitted signal can cover
a longer distance with the same amount of power. This may be useful for some specific
==PAGE:25==
3.3 Narrowband-IoT and LTE-M Standards
17
IoT applications that require longer range, but may come at the cost of potentially
higher interference.
3.3.2
LTE-M
In release 13, the 3GPP has proposed another standard for cellular IoT communication
called LTE-M or enhanced Machine-Type Communications (eMTC), in addition to NB-
IoT. LTE-M was designed to improve LTE coverage and reduce energy consumption,
while keeping the cost of LTE deployment lower than its original cost. LTE-M is fully
compatible with traditional LTE networks and is designed to coexist with them. One of
the advantages of LTE-M’s compatibility with legacy LTE is that it enables the integra-
tion of IoT devices from traditional cellular networks to LPWA networks. IoT devices
can easily switch to LTE-M, without requiring any additional configuration or hardware
changes.
Similar to NB-IoT, LTE-M also makes use of OFDMA in the downlink, which allows
multiple users to share the same frequency band simultaneously and SC-FDMA in the
uplink. On the other hand, compared with NB-IoT, LTE-M can only be deployed in-
band with LTE, as it fully complies with the LTE standard and occupies the bandwidth
of 6 PRBs resulting in 1.08 MHz (1.4 MHz with guard bands). Moreover, LTE-M has
the ability to operate in both full-duplex and half-duplex modes, with a maximum data
rate of 1 Mbps in full-duplex mode and 300 kbps in half-duplex mode.
This is an
advantage over NB-IoT, which only operates in half-duplex mode[31]. In addition, a
notable advantage of LTE-M over NB-IoT is the handover procedure which enhances
the mobility of the devices allowing seamless handovers between the base stations as the
device moves.
Overall, LTE-M shares many similarities with both traditional LTE networks and
NB-IoT as was discussed in the previous sections. These similarities are due to the
fact that LTE-M is built upon the same radio access technology as legacy LTE networks.
Table 3.1 represents some of the similarities and differences between LTE-M and NB-IoT.
3.3.3
Coverage Range
The use of lower frequency bands in NB-IoT and LTE-M networks is a key factor in
enabling extended coverage range.
Therefore, lower frequency bands experience less
path loss, which means that the received signal strength (RSSI) does not attenuate
==PAGE:26==
3.3 Narrowband-IoT and LTE-M Standards
18
as quickly over distance as it would in higher frequency bands. In terms of extended
coverage range, Maximum Coupling Loss (MCL) is also an important consideration
because it provides a way to quantify the maximum distance that can be covered by the
network[26]. Lower frequency bands and higher output power from the transmitter can
help to overcome the attenuation of the signal caused by distance and obstacles, and
improve the MCL and coverage range of the network.
NB-IoT and LTE-M networks can achieve MCL values of up to 164 dB and 154
dB respectively, with maximum transmit power of 23 dBm, which translates to coverage
ranges of several kilometers in ideal conditions[48]. However, actual coverage ranges may
vary depending on factors such as the terrain, the density of buildings and obstacles, and
the number of devices in the network.
3.3.4
Power saving and extended battery life
In order to achieve an extended battery life for IoT devices, it is essential that LPWAN
networks are equipped with power-saving capabilities to minimize their energy consump-
tion. Compared to traditional GSM or LTE standards, such as LTE Category 4 (Cat-4),
NB-IoT and LTE-M have lower data rates and longer transmission times due to the use
of narrower bandwidths and lower transmit power. For example, LTE Cat-4 can support
data rates up to 150 Mbps, while NB-IoT and LTE-M typically support data rates in
the range of a few hundred kbps to 1 Mbps.
However, the reduced performance of NB-IoT and LTE-M is intentional and necessary
to support low-power IoT devices with long battery life. Therefore, the key feature of
NB-IoT and LTE-M networks is the ability to operate in low power modes, allowing IoT
devices to consume minimal power while waiting for incoming data transmissions. This
is achieved through the use of Power Saving Mode (PSM) and extended discontinuous
reception (eDRX)[10]. Figure A.1 illustrates the power saving techniques.
• PSM
PSM is a power-saving scheme that allows cellular IoT devices to reduce energy con-
sumption by entering a deep sleep mode. During this mode, the device switches off
most of its circuitry, but remains registered to the network. Although the device is
not reachable from the network in this mode, it can wake up at any time to transmit
data, thus ensuring eﬀicient data transfer while conserving power. In PSM cycle, de-
vices periodically receive paging messages where the UE is informed that the network
has a message for it. The PSM cycle timer, also known as T3412, is designed to support
==PAGE:27==
3.4 IoT Protocol Stack
19
a maximum value of up to 310 hours (equivalent to 12.91 days) [47]to ensure optimal
energy conservation. This timer regulates the duration of the PSM cycle, ensuring that
the device wakes up periodically to receive messages from the network while minimizing
power consumption during idle periods.
• eDRX
In eDRX mode, the devices are able to enter an idle mode where they temporarily
stop listening to the radio channel for a specified period.
In this case, the devices
periodically become active to check for any incoming data by receiving a paging message
from the network before turning to deep sleep mode. The device remains in idle mode
until the T3324 timer expires[18]. This way, the device conserves energy while remaining
reachable to the network.
Figure 3.5: PSM and eDRX mechanisms.
3.4
IoT Protocol Stack
The architecture of an IoT ecosystem can differ depending on the solution being imple-
mented, but typically involves various devices, or things, that can communicate directly
with one another or use gateways to connect to the Internet. Gateways, are processing
data from the devices and manage traﬀic between networks that use different protocols.
==PAGE:28==
3.4 IoT Protocol Stack
20
They perform tasks such as protocol translation and proxy-related functions within the
IoT system. Due to the heterogeneous nature of these devices, they cannot communicate
with the Internet or IoT applications directly. Instead, a gateway receives data from the
devices, processes it, and transmits it to the Internet over TCP/IP, acting as a proxy[49].
Figure 3.6 represents the IoT architecture protocol stack.
Figure 3.6: IoT protocol architecture .
While TCP and UDP are commonly used protocols in the IoT stack, they are not
the only protocols used. The IoT stack can be composed of multiple layers, including
the physical layer, data link layer, network layer, transport layer, and application layer.
At the transport layer, TCP is often used for reliable, connection-oriented communi-
cation between devices. UDP, on the other hand, is often used for lightweight commu-
nication that requires low overhead and minimal latency.
However, other protocols can also be used in the IoT stack, such as CoAP (Con-
strained Application Protocol), MQTT, and AMQP (Advanced Message Queuing Pro-
tocol), which are designed to be lightweight and eﬀicient for constrained devices and
networks. Additionally, protocols like HTTP (Hypertext Transfer Protocol) can be used
at the application layer for web-based IoT applications.
==PAGE:29==
3.4 IoT Protocol Stack
21
Table 3.2: Typical IoT Protocol Stack
TCP/IP model
IoT Protocols
Application Layer
HTTP, XMPP, CoAP, MQTT, AMQP
Transport Layer
UDP, TCP
Internet Layer
IPv6, 6LoWPAN, RPL
Network and Physical Layer
IEEE 802.15.4, WiFi, Ethernet, GSM, LTE
3.4.1
Message Queuing Telemetry Transport (MQTT)
MQTT is a messaging protocol that uses a TCP connection to implement a publish-
subscribe model. The protocol is well-suited for machine-to-machine communication
and ensures that messages are delivered in both directions with consistency[32]. MQTT
clients use a TCP connection to publish messages to a specific topic, such as ’Temper-
ature’, through an MQTT server, also known as a broker. Other clients, referred to
as subscribers, can then subscribe to these topics to receive the published messages[49].
Figure 4.1 illustrates the MQTT protocol architecture.
Figure 3.7: MQTT Protocol Architecture.
==PAGE:30==
CHAPTER 4
Methodology
The primary objective of this chapter is to present the methodology employed to address
the research hypotheses of the project. This includes a detailed exposition of the testing
procedure, including the equipment used and the two principal testing phases: coverage
range field tests and power consumption testing.
4.1
Experiment Setup
The principal aim of this project is to perform a performance analysis of NB-IoT and
LTE-M technologies utilized on a mobile robot in relation to their coverage range and
power consumption. To accomplish this objective, experiments were conducted in a rural
agricultural settings in Denmark to evaluate and compare the effectiveness of these two
communication protocols. The experiments were conducted in two test scenarios.
The first scenario involved measuring the signal strength and signal quality of each
technology by placing the end device on a mobile robot moving with a speed of around
2km/h. The distance over which signal strength and signal quality were measured was
dependent on the coverage area of the enodeB, which was restricted to 2.6 kilometers.
The eNodeB station was selected based on the agricultural settings of the area and the
absence of other stations in the vicinity to prevent interference. The Cellmapper[12] was
employed to gather information for the cell towers and assist in selecting the appropriate
eNodeB for this project. Signal strength and quality were measured every 200 meters.
The second test scenario involved measuring the power consumption of the system
during various phases, such as modem registration to the network, GPS configuration
and position retrieval and MQTT data transmission. The power consumption of the
robot was also measured to assess the overall power consumption of the system. In
order to obtain precise measurements, the current absorption levels of each phase were
measured in a laboratory setting.
These values were then utilized to determine the
overall power consumption and to provide an estimation of the device’s lifespan.
==PAGE:31==
4.1 Experiment Setup
23
4.1.1
Hardware
To ensure compliance with the system’s design specifications the following hardware
components were considered necessary:
• Sodaq SARA SFF R410 Shield
The Sodaq SARA SFF R410 constitutes the main element of this project. It is a
small form factor cellular IoT development board that was used in the implementation
of the project. This board utilizes the u-blox SARA-R410M-02B cellular module, which
supports LTE Cat M1 and NB-IoT cellular standards, and is specifically designed for
low power consumption, which makes it ideal for use in battery-powered applications. In
addition to cellular connectivity, the Sodaq SARA SFF R410 also features an integrated
u-blox M8 GNSS module, which supports GPS, GLONASS, and Galileo positioning
systems, providing accurate location-based services. The board is equipped with a u-blox
MAX-M8Q GPS antenna and a u.FL PCB external antenna[50]. Furthermore, the board
includes a SIM card slot for cellular connectivity. In this case, the Telia’s IoT SIM card
was used which supports 4G cellular connectivity, providing security mechanisms, such as
encrypted communication and authentication protocols, to protect against unauthorized
access and data breaches.
Figure 4.1: Sodaq Sara SFF R410 Shield.
==PAGE:32==
4.1 Experiment Setup
24
• UNO R3 board
UNO R3 board is a fully compatible with Arduino UNO R3 board that consists of a
programmable microcontroller, digital and analog input/output pins, and various other
components that enable it to interact with the physical world. In this particular project,
the UNO R3 microcontroller is responsible for the operation of the mobile robot.
Figure 4.2: UNO R3 board.
• OSOYOO robot car kit
The mobile robot used in this project is an original design based on the Osoyoo Robot
Car Kit. This kit includes all the necessary parts to build a mobile robot car. It is a
customizable mobile robot platform that comes with various components and modules
such as motor shield, chassis, wheels, and motors[37]. The mobile robot requires a power
supply of 9 volt to operate.
Figure 4.3: Mobile robot.
==PAGE:33==
4.1 Experiment Setup
25
• DHT22 sensor
DHT22 sensor is a valuable tool for monitoring the temperature and humidity levels
in agricultural environments. The robot can act as a ”scout” for weather conditions in a
farm, providing real-time data that can be used to make informed decisions about crop
management. DHT22 sensor is attached on the Sodaq SARA SFF R410 Shield.
Figure 4.4: DHT22 Temperature-Humidity sensor.
4.1.2
Software
The development of an IoT application requires the use of software tools that enable the
collection, processing, and visualization of data in the cloud. In this project, software
played a critical role in achieving these goals, facilitating the programming of devices and
the collection of data. The software components used in this project are the following:
• Arduino IDE
The Arduino Integrated Development Environment (IDE) is an open-source software
tool used for programming and coding Arduino compatible boards[6]. For this project,
the Arduino IDE was the primary software tool used for coding and programming the
devices.
All the coding and development for the project was conducted within the
Arduino IDE environment.
• Thingspeak IoT cloud
ThingSpeak is an IoT cloud platform that enables users to collect, store, analyze,
and visualize data from IoT devices. The platform supports various communication
==PAGE:34==
4.1 Experiment Setup
26
protocols, including HTTP, MQTT, and TCP/IP, enabling seamless integration with a
wide range of devices.
In the context of this project, ThingSpeak serves as the primary server and message
broker for the collection and transmission of data from IoT devices. Through the use
of the MQTT protocol, data from the devices is transmitted to ThingSpeak, where it
is stored and made available for further analysis and visualization. In addition to its
role as a message broker and data storage platform, ThingSpeak also serves as a data
provider for the Freeboard cloud platform. This is achieved through the use of API
requests, which allow Freeboard to access and visualize the data stored on ThingSpeak
in real-time. The integration with Freeboard for data visualization purposes provides a
powerful and comprehensive toolset for IoT application development and management.
• Freeboard.io
Freeboard.io is an open-source web-based platform for creating and sharing real-
time dashboards. It allows users to connect to a wide range of data sources, such as
APIs, IoT devices, and cloud services, and visualize the data in a variety of formats,
including charts, gauges, maps, and tables. Temperature, humidity and signal strength
of the device are visualized in gauges and plots. Additionally, the platform integrates
with Google Maps to display the GPS location of the device in an interactive widget,
providing a more user friendly interface.
Figure 4.5: Freeboard.io platform.
==PAGE:35==
4.1 Experiment Setup
27
4.1.3
AT commands
AT commands (ATtention) are widely used in the telecommunications industry and are
particularly important in the development of IoT devices, as they enable remote configu-
ration and management of devices over a network. AT commands are instructions used
to control and configure various communication devices, including modems[51]. More
specifically, AT commands are composed with the prefix of AT followed by a series of
other characters that specify a particular action or configuration setting.
In this project, AT commands were utilized to configure and obtain crucial informa-
tion about the communication parameters of the U-blox modem. Table 4.1 lists all of
the specific AT commands used in the project, along with their respective definitions
or purposes. These commands were sent to the modem over a serial communication
channel, and the modem responded with information indicating the success or failure of
each command.
==PAGE:36==
4.1 Experiment Setup
28
Table 4.1: AT commands
AT Commands
Definition
AT
Check
the
communication
between
the
module and the computer
AT+CFUN=15
Silent reset
AT+UMNOPROF=1
Configures the MNO profile
AT+URAT=7
Set LTE-Cat-M1 technology ON
AT+URAT=8
Set NB-IoT technology ON
AT+CGDCONT
Defines the connection PDP parameters
AT+CEREG
Configuration of the network registration sta-
tus
AT+COPS
Select and register with the LTE network oper-
ator
AT+UMQTT
Configures or reads the parameter value of an
MQTT client profile
AT+UMQTTC
Triggers a MQTT action
AT+UCGED
Enables the protocol stack and network envi-
ronment information collection
AT+CSQ
Returns the radio signal strength
AT+CEDRXS
Configures the UEs eDRX parameters.
AT+CPSMS
Controls the setting of the UEs PSM parameters
==PAGE:37==
4.2 Coverage Range Testing
29
4.2
Coverage Range Testing
The initial testing scenario for evaluating the performance of LTE-M and NB-IoT commu-
nication protocols on an agricultural mobile robot involved coverage range tests. These
tests entailed measuring the RSSI for signal strength measurements, and reference signal
received power (RSRP) and reference signal received quality (RSRQ) for signal quality
measurements.
The testing area selected for the experiment was based on its agricultural settings,
which included open fields and dense forests. Located in Denmark, south of Lake Furesø
in Northeastern Zealand, the area was deemed ideal due to its limited presence of other
eNodeBs, making it suitable for accurate measurements.
Figure 4.6: Coverage range testing map.
However, the area was primarily covered by two eNodeBs, the first eNodeB with
PCI 310 and a coverage range of approximately 2.6 kilometers based on the Cellmapper
database [12] and the second enodeB with PCI 38 was at the end of the coverage range
of the first eNodeB. Thus, to conduct the coverage range tests, the plan was to begin
from eNodeB cell 310 and measure the signal strength and signal quality every 200
meters for both communication protocols until the edge of PCI 310’s coverage range was
==PAGE:38==
4.2 Coverage Range Testing
30
reached. More specifically, the mobile robot was placed in the ground every 200m and
measurements were taken during its movement. Every 10 seconds for a duration of 1
minute, the robot transmitted measurements to the cloud while in motion.
The main objective of this experiment is to evaluate the coverage range performance
of LTE-M and NB-IoT on mobile devices in agriculture settings.
4.2.1
Retrieving RSSI values
The first part of testing the coverage range performance of LTE-M and NB-IoT is to
test the signal strength of the communication. The most important parameter in this
case is RSSI. RSSI is a measurement of the strength of the received signal in wireless
communication systems, such as cellular networks. It is represented as a numerical value,
typically in units of decibels (dBm) and indicates the power level of the received signal
at the receiver’s antenna[56]. A higher RSSI value indicates a stronger signal and better
signal quality, while a lower RSSI value implies a weaker signal and poorer signal quality.
To obtain the RSSI value in the conducted experiment, the AT command AT+CSQ
was utilized through SARA ublox module. This command returns a value ranging from
2 to 31 or 99 when no signal is detected, where 31 represents the strongest signal and 0
represents the weakest signal. Table 4.2 shows the AT command values represented in
db and their signal conditions.
Table 4.2: RSSI values and conditions
AT+CSQ value
RSSi (dbm)
Condition
2...9
-109...-95
Marginal
10...14
-93...-85
OK
15...19
83...-75
Good
20...31
-73...-51
Excellent
Once the RSSI values were retrieved using the AT+CSQ command, they were
published via MQTT to the Thingspeak cloud every 10 seconds for real-time monitoring.
The procedure for retrieving the RSSI values and pushing them to the cloud is depicted
in Figure 4.7. The MQTT transmission to cloud procedure will be analyzed deeply in
section 4.3.2. This approach allowed for continuous monitoring of the signal strength
and provided an eﬀicient way of analyzing the performance of the LTE-M and NB-IoT
in the field.
==PAGE:39==
4.2 Coverage Range Testing
31
Figure 4.7: Retrieving RSSI values procedure.
==PAGE:40==
4.2 Coverage Range Testing
32
4.2.2
Retrieving RSRP and RSRQ values
The second part of coverage range experiment includes the signal quality evaluation. In
order to test the signal quality performance two are the main attributes that have to be
retrieved, RSRP and RSRQ.
RSRP stands for Reference Signal Received Power and represents the power level
of the LTE reference signal received by the UE. It is measured in dBm and is used to
estimate the signal strength of the serving cell. A higher RSRP value indicates a stronger
signal and better signal quality, while a lower RSRP value implies a weaker signal and
poorer signal quality[5]. The main difference between RSRP and RSSI is that RSRP
is a measurement of the received power of the reference signal from the serving cell in
LTE wireless communication systems, while RSSI is a generic measurement of the total
received power from all signals, including the serving cell and neighboring cells.
On the other hand, RSRQ stands for Reference Signal Received Quality and is cal-
culated as the ratio between the RSRP and the RSSI. It provides information about
the level of interference or noise in the received signal and the quality of the received
signal[46]. It is measured in dB and is a useful metric for evaluating the overall quality
of the received signal. A higher RSRQ value indicates a better quality signal, while a
lower RSRQ value indicates a lower quality signal.
Table 4.3: RSRP-RSRQ values and conditions
RSRP (dbm)
RSRQ (db)
Condition
>=-80
>=-10
Excellent
-80...-90
-10...-15
Good
-90...-100
15...-20
OK
<=-100
<=-20
Marginal
In the signal quality measurement process, the same approach used in the previous
procedure involving RSSI was employed. In this method, RSRP and RSRQ values were
transmitted to cloud server at regular 10 seconds intervals. However, this time, a dif-
ferent set of AT commands, specifically the AT+UCGED command, was utilized to
collect network environment data.
Through this command, RSRP, RSRQ, and PCI
of the cells were gathered.
It is worth noting that before data collection could be-
gin, it was necessary to enable this feature by activating the specific mode using the
AT+UCGED=5 command. The procedure is depicted in the following flowchart.
==PAGE:41==
4.2 Coverage Range Testing
33
Figure 4.8: Retrieving RSRP and RSRQ values procedure.
==PAGE:42==
4.3 Power Consumption Testing
34
4.3
Power Consumption Testing
As one of the primary goals of the proposed system was the reduction of power consump-
tion and thereby increase the battery life of the device, a series of measurements were
conducted to determine the current absorption of the system under different cases. To
ensure precision in these measurements, the current absorption of individual phases was
measured in a laboratory setting. These values were subsequently utilized to compute
the total power absorption and potentially estimate the lifespan of the device
In order to test the hypotheses of the project, a second test scenario was designed that
focused on power consumption testing of LTE-M and NB-IoT communication technolo-
gies. The methodology employed for evaluating the power consumed by these technolo-
gies was carefully planned, taking into consideration the critical processes of the system.
The power consumption testing was divided into five distinct cases to achieve more
discrete results: registration to network, MQTT transmission, GPS position retrieval,
PSM mode and mobile robot power consumption. Both communication technologies
were subjected to these tests.
Due to the low current consumption of the devices being tested, Power Profiler 2
(PPK2) was deemed a suitable choice to ensure precise measurements.
PPK2 is an
essential hardware tool for measuring the power consumption of electronic devices, mak-
ing it a crucial component for the project at hand. PPK2 comes with software that is
used to visualize and analyze the power consumption data collected during testing. The
selection of PPK2 is based on its ability to measure a wide range of currents, from just
a few microamps to several amps, and voltages ranging from a few millivolts to tens
of volts. Additionally, the PPK2 can measure energy consumption over time, enabling
users to evaluate power usage during different modes of operation, including sleep, idle,
and active modes. With the project requirements calling for testing the devices under
PSM, the PPK2 is well-suited for this task.
==PAGE:43==
4.3 Power Consumption Testing
35
Figure 4.9: Power Profiler Kit 2.
4.3.1
Registering to network
Measuring the power consumption of the modem during the registration process with
a network is crucial for optimizing power usage and prolonging battery life, as well as
providing insights into the power eﬀiciency of the modem for different networks. The
registration process is standard procedure in telecommunications involving exchanging
data between the modem and the network, which requires power consumption.
Taking into account the different registration methods of various communication pro-
tocols, it is worth to measure the power consumption in this case as it is a prerequisite
for the connectivity of the device. For instance, NB-IoT lacks seamless handover capa-
bility, causing a disconnection when a device moves out of range of a cell tower. This
necessitates the device to re-register with the network, leading to a momentary lapse in
connectivity and heightened power consumption. Therefore, it is essential to measure
power consumption during the registration process, particularly in protocols where con-
nectivity drops and increased power consumption occur due to network disconnection.
Registering to network procedure was accomplished with a sequence of AT commands
written in a script in Arduino IDE and uploading it to Sodaq Sara R410M module. The
sequence of commands are shown in the flowchart in figure 4.10.
Initially, through AT+URAT=7,8 the Radio Access Technologies (RAT) was cho-
sen (7 is LTE-M, 8 is NB-IoT). After the selection of RAT a reboot through AT+CFUN=15
is necessary in order for the changes to take effect. Moreover, the Packet Data Proto-
col (PDP) parameters was defined by AT+CGDCONT=1,”IP”,”internet.telia.iot”
defining the network protocol IP and the Access Point Name (APN) internet.telia.iot
==PAGE:44==
4.3 Power Consumption Testing
36
which belong to Telia mobile operator. With AT+CEREG=3 command the Cellu-
lar Network Registration Status (CEREG) indication was enabled for reporting if the
device is registered to a cellular network. The AT+COPS=1,2,”23820” command
was used to manually select Telia operator as the 23820 code is defined by the Mobile
Country Code (MCC) of Telia which is 238 and the Mobile Network Code (MNC) which
is 20. Moreover, AT+CGATT? was used to query the attachment status of the mobile
device to the Packet Switched (PS) domain of the cellular network. The PS domain
is responsible for providing data services to the device, such as Internet connectivity.
Finally, the AT+CSQ command was used to query the RSSI.
Figure 4.10: Registering to network flowchart.
==PAGE:45==
4.3 Power Consumption Testing
37
4.3.2
MQTT data transmission
The power consumption of MQTT data transmission through the Sodaq Sara R410M
modem depends on several factors, such as the frequency of transmission, the size of
the data being transmitted, and the network conditions. In general, MQTT is designed
to be a lightweight protocol, and it uses a publish-subscribe model that reduces the
amount of data being transmitted. This can help reduce the power consumption of the
modem during transmission. However, the Sodaq Sara R410M modem itself consumes
power during transmission, and the amount of power consumed will depend on factors
such as the signal strength, the network technology being used, and the configuration
of the modem. It is important to consider the power consumption during MQTT data
transmission especially in applications that require low power consumption, such as IoT
devices.
The purpose of this test, is to measure the current that is absorbed while the sensors
are collecting data and sending them to ThingSpeak cloud via MQTT. The key aspect
of this process is the establishment of a connection between the cloud server and the
UE, which is accomplished using AT commands.
A script has been developed that
contains a series of AT commands required to establish a connection with ThingSpeak
and publish sensor data to the appropriate topics in the cloud. This script enables the
seamless transmission of data and ensures that the UE is communicating effectively with
the ThingSpeak cloud. The sequence of the AT commands that are necessary for the
MQTT data transmission to the cloud is depicted in figure 4.11 on the following page.
The most important AT command is the one that publishes the data through MQTT
to cloud and has the following syntax:
• AT+UMQTTC=2,<QoS>,<retain>,<topic name>,<message>
QoS stands for Quality of Service and retain is about the message retention after a
disconnection. Topic name indicates the topic to which the given MQTT message
was published. Message is the data that will be published with a maximum length
of 256 characters.
==PAGE:46==
4.3 Power Consumption Testing
38
Figure 4.11: MQTT transmission flowchart.
==PAGE:47==
4.3 Power Consumption Testing
39
4.3.3
GPS configuration and position retrieval
The power consumption of GPS on the Sodaq Sara R410M is an important consideration
when designing battery-powered IoT devices. The GPS functionality of the modem is
powered by a separate GPS chip. The power consumption of the GPS module can vary
depending on the operating mode and settings of the module. Generally, the power
consumption of GPS modules is highest when the module is actively acquiring and
tracking satellites. In this mode, the GPS module may consume up to 50 mA or more
of current. Once a position fix has been acquired, the power consumption of the module
may drop to a few mA or less.
In this case, the procedure involved enabling the GPS module, measuring the current
consumption of the module while it searched for a position fix, and obtaining the latitude
and longitude coordinates of the GPS module’s location once a fix was acquired. The
GPS configuration and position acquisition was done through code in Arduino IDE with
the assist of Sodaq UBlox GPS library1 which allows to configure the GPS module and
retrieve position data using simple functions. Figure 4.12 illustrates the logic of the GPS
process.
Figure 4.12: GPS configuration and position retrieval flowchart.
1https://github.com/SodaqMoja/Sodaq_UBlox_GPS
==PAGE:48==
4.3 Power Consumption Testing
40
4.3.4
Mobile Robot testing
In order to elaborate more in the research hypotheses of this project it is necessary to
test if the two communication protocols that are being used in this project are suitable
for mobile applications, specifically in terms of power consumption. This is particularly
important for agriculture applications that may be located in rural areas . Applications
such as these are often required to operate independently and eﬀiciently in terms of power
supply. Therefore, it is essential to develop a system that is capable of operating with
minimal energy consumption while still meeting the required performance standards.
As described in Section 4.1, the mobile robot was programmed to move at a speed
of around 2 km/h while taking measurements of environmental conditions, simulating
an agricultural robot monitoring a field. A script was built and uploaded in Arduino
controller for the robot movement. To measure power consumption, the current absorbed
by the robot was measured while it was in motion. It’s worth noting that the robot
consists of an Arduino Uno controller, a motor shield for controlling the DC motors
and a lithium-ion 9 volt battery for power. The components of the mobile robot are
illustrated in figure 4.13.
The objective of this test is to determine the power consumption of the robot while
it moves and compare it with the power consumption of the Sodaq Sara R410M modem.
The goal is to calculate the percentage of power consumption contributed by the modem
in relation to the total power consumption of the system.
Figure 4.13: Mobile robot Components.
==PAGE:49==
CHAPTER 5
Results
5.1
Coverage Analysis results
As outlined in the methodology chapter, two test cases were employed to conduct a
coverage range analysis. These test cases involved measuring the RSSI for signal strength,
and RSRP and RSRQ for signal quality of the mobile device. The results of these test
cases are presented in the subsequent sections.
5.1.1
Signal strength
The primary objective of this experiment is to assess the signal strength of LTE-M and
NB-IoT communication protocols utilized in a mobile robot designed for monitoring
tasks in agriculture settings. Based on this, it is necessary to observe how the signal
strength is impacted by the the distance covered, the mobility of the device, as well as
the unique characteristics of an agricultural area, such as dense forests, open fields, and
uneven terrain. The aforementioned factors need to be analyzed to ensure a comprehen-
sive evaluation of the signal strength in the specific context.
The signal strength results per distance of LTE-M protocol are depicted in Figure
5.1. The initial two measurements demonstrate that the RSSI values are at their highest,
indicating an exceptional signal strength. This can be attributed to the proximity of the
robot to the cell, as well as the fact that the testing location was an open field, with no
obstacles to interfere with the signal. Furthermore, it appears that the mobility of the
robot does not have any noticeable impact on the signal strength.
After the 600 meters location, the RSSI values begin to decline, indicating a weaker
signal strength. However, the RSSI values remain within an acceptable range. Specifi-
cally, the minimum RSSI value recorded was approximately -75 dBm, which according to
Table 4.2, is indicative of a good signal strength. It is worth noting that after the 600m
distance, the terrain characteristics change, including the presence of dense forests and
==PAGE:50==
5.1 Coverage Analysis results
42
small elevations in the ground level. Given these factors, the observed signal strength
drop can be considered reasonable, and the coverage range can still be regarded as quite
satisfactory.
At the 1800 meters location, a handover occurred, resulting in a cell switching with
the device connecting to a different cell with PCI 20. However, the location of this
cell could not be determined within the testing area. Another handover took place at
the 2000 meters mark, whereby the device connected to a cell with PCI 38, which was
located much closer than the initial cell with PCI 310, resulting in better signal strength
as illustrated in Figure 4.6. This highlights the advantages of employing LTE-M, which
facilitates seamless device mobility with optimal signal strength conditions and network
connectivity.
Figure 5.1: RSSI results for LTE-M.
In the signal strength measurements illustrated in Figure 5.2, it is apparent that NB-
IoT generally performed worse and had more unstable signal strength values compared
to LTE-M. This may be due to the lower bandwidth of NB-IoT, which can limit the
amount of power that can be transmitted.
However, despite its lower signal strength, NB-IoT had a larger coverage range than
LTE-M, serving the same cell until a distance of 2000 meters, where the signal strength
became very weak. This is evident in the subsequent location at 2200 meters, where the
==PAGE:51==
5.1 Coverage Analysis results
43
device disconnected from the original cell due to the weak signal and instead connected
to cell 38, which was closer.
It’s worth noting that, according to Table 4.2, the RSSI values obtained for NB-IoT
until a distance of 2000 meters were acceptable, although they were close to the marginal
signal strength conditions. Therefore, while the signal strength of NB-IoT may be weaker
than that of LTE-M, it may still be suﬀicient for some IoT applications that require a
larger coverage range at the cost of lower data rates.
Figure 5.2: RSSI results for NB-IoT.
5.1.2
Signal quality
This section presents the outcomes of signal quality assessments conducted in this test
scenario using two crucial metrics, RSRP and RSRQ. These metrics are widely employed
in the evaluation of cellular signal quality in LTE networks, and provide valuable insights
into the network’s performance in terms of signal quality and interference levels.
As it shown in figure 5.3 it is obvious that in LTE-M measurements as RSRP drops
RSRQ follows the same drop. As a connection with RSSI values that was presented
in the previous section RSRP and RSRQ values drop the same way as RSSI and this
something that was expected.
==PAGE:52==
5.1 Coverage Analysis results
44
In the first two measurements conducted in an open field, RSRQ values varied from
-6 dB to -14 dB. This variability was suspected to be due to interference from neighboring
cells that disrupted the signal in that particular location. As the distance increased from
600 meters to 1600 meters, RSRP and RSRQ values decreased due to the distance as
well as the dense forest presence in that area. However, at the 1800 meters test point,
there was an improvement in the RSRP and RSRQ values after the handover occurred.
Figure 5.3: RSRP and RSRQ results for LTE-M.
In the last three test points, it was expected to have better RSRP and RSRQ values
as the device got closer to the new cell and the environment was an open field without
large trees. However, the existence of neighboring cells in the specific area created inter-
ference and caused lower RSRP and RSRQ values. Additionally, the last measurement
taken at 2600m was at the edge of the coverage angle of cell 38, further contributing
to the low values observed. In summary, it is evident that the quality of the LTE-M
signal is affected by external factors such as interference from neighboring cells and the
==PAGE:53==
5.1 Coverage Analysis results
45
density of the environment.
In contrast to LTE-M, NB-IoT exhibits better signal quality results. Although the
RSRP and RSRQ values consistently drop as the distance increases, it is notable that
NB-IoT demonstrates robust resistance to interference from other cells in the area, as
evidenced by the consistently good signal quality even in the presence of such interference.
This is maybe explained by the narrower bandwidth that NB-IoT is using, which reduces
the impact of interference from neighboring cells and other wireless signals. Furthermore,
NB-IoT demonstrates good signal quality in environments with dense forests, as observed
in the area beyond 600m. According to table 4.3 NB-IoT’s RSRP and RSRQ values
remain within acceptable ranges, both in areas with adequate coverage and in extreme
environments where signal quality may be significantly impacted.
Figure 5.4: RSRP and RSRQ results for NB-IoT.
==PAGE:54==
5.2 Power Consumption results
46
5.2
Power Consumption results
In the methodology chapter, it was stated that four cases were analyzed to assess the
power consumption of NB-IoT and LTE-M in mobile devices like an agricultural robot.
The results of these tests are now presented in the subsequent sections.
5.2.1
Network registration power consumption
To evaluate power consumption in the network registration case, the modem’s current
was measured using PPK2 while the modem performed registration procedures via AT
commands with each communication protocol. Current consumption was measured con-
tinuously for a duration of one minute.
According to the current consumption data presented in Figure 5.5, it can be observed
that during the LTE-M network registration process, the device consumes an average of
110 mA with occasional peaks reaching up to 240 mA. The registration process involves
a series of AT commands, which are executed with delays as explained in Section 4.3.1.
Typically, the entire process takes around 18 seconds, with the AT+COPS=1,2,”23820”
command triggered on the 18th second for manual registration to the Telia network.
Although the registration process should ideally be shorter, in this particular case,
the modem was configured to automatically scan for available networks, resulting in two
similar spikes in the first 25 seconds. The device undergoes a reboot in the 12th second,
which restarts the registration process.
==PAGE:55==
5.2 Power Consumption results
47
Figure 5.5: LTE-M current consumption in network registration process.
Overall, it can be understood from the results that during the first 25 seconds, the
modem operates in an active mode, consuming more power, and subsequently transitions
to an active mode, with a lower consumption rate of approximately 25 mA. Table 5.1
presents the outcomes from LTE-M power consumption measurements.
Table 5.1: LTE-M Network Registration outcomes
Network registration current consumption avg
∼110mA
Network registration duration
20 seconds
Active mode
∼25mA
Max current peaks
∼243mA
Power consumption avg
∼0.363W
The testing method used for NB-IoT was likely the same as that used for LTE-M,
but the results showed that NB-IoT consumes lower amounts of current, with an average
of 80-90 mA and maximum peaks of 160mA. In contrast, LTE-M likely consumed more
current than NB-IoT.
==PAGE:56==
5.2 Power Consumption results
48
Figure 5.6: NB-IoT current consumption in network registration process.
One possible reason for this difference in current consumption is that NB-IoT has
a lower bandwidth than LTE-M. This means that the modem must stay in RRC Con-
nected mode for a longer period of time to accomplish the same amount of work as
LTE-M. This can be seen in Figure 5.6, which shows that the phases in RRC Connected
mode last longer after the network registration process compared to LTE-M. However,
NB-IoT still consumes less current than LTE-M, likely due to its lower bandwidth and
other optimization techniques used in its design.
Table 5.2 displays the results of the power consumption measurements for LTE-M,
providing an overview of the outcomes obtained from the testing process.
Table 5.2: NB-IoT Network Registration outcomes
Network registration current consumption avg
∼90mA
Network registration duration
21 seconds
Active mode
∼25mA
Max current peaks
∼170mA
Power consumption avg
∼0.297W
==PAGE:57==
5.2 Power Consumption results
49
5.2.2
MQTT data transmission power consumption
As it was described in section 4.3.2 it is quite important to test the power consumption of
both NB-IoT and LTE-M protocols in the data transmission phase. As data transmission
is a critical procedure in this project, it is necessary to measure the power consumption
during this phase, especially since the devices will be transmitting data frequently.
The testing procedure involved measuring the current while the robot moved and
sent temperature and humidity data to the cloud using MQTT every 10 seconds. This
was done with the help of a PPK2, which allowed for accurate and precise measurements
of power consumption. By measuring the power consumption during data transmission,
it is possible to optimize the device’s energy eﬀiciency and extend its battery life.
Figure 5.7 shows the current consumption of the LTE-M protocol during data trans-
mission. The plot indicates 6 distinct spikes, each of which represents a transmission
phase. These spikes are large and long-lasting, which is expected since data transmission
occurs every 10 seconds. Therefore, the plot accurately depicts the normal behavior of
LTE-M protocol during data transmission.
Figure 5.7: LTE-M current consumption on MQTT data transmission phase.
From Figure 5.7, it is also possible to determine the average current consumption
during the data transmission phase of the LTE-M protocol, which is approximately
120mA. In comparison, the average current consumption in active mode is around 30mA.
To summarize the results obtained from Figure 5.7 Table 5.3 has been created to present
all the outcomes in a clear and concise manner.
==PAGE:58==
5.2 Power Consumption results
50
Table 5.3: LTE-M MQTT data transmission outcomes
Data transmission current consumption avg
∼120mA
Data transmission duration
6 seconds
Active mode
∼30mA
Max current peaks
∼230mA
Power consumption avg
∼0.396W
On one hand, compared to LTE-M, NB-IoT consumes less energy during the trans-
mission phase because it is designed to have a lower bandwidth. This can be observed in
Figure 5.8, where the current absorbed by NB-IoT during transmission is around 60mA,
which is normal for NB-IoT. However, because of its lower bandwidth, NB-IoT requires
more time to transmit messages than LTE-M.
The plot shows continuous transmission without going into active modem as it was
expected, due to the 10-second delay defined in the code for sending data every 10
seconds, as seen in Figure 5.8. Normally, it should have gone into active mode 5 times
due to the delays, but it only changed to active mode twice.
Figure 5.8: NB-IoT current consumption on MQTT data transmission phase.
Overall, the measurements of NB-IoT demonstrate that it consumes less power during
the data transmission phase than LTE-M with smaller spikes around 110mA. However,
it is worth noting that in some cases, the data transmission duration of NB-IoT may
exceed the 10-second delay defined for sending data, which could impact the overall
power consumption of the device.
==PAGE:59==
5.2 Power Consumption results
51
Table 5.4: NB-IoT MQTT data transmission outcomes
Data transmission current consumption avg
∼60mA
Data transmission duration
>10 seconds
Active mode
∼30mA
Max current peaks
∼110mA
Power consumption avg
∼0.198W
5.2.3
GPS power consumption
To test the power consumption of GPS, the GPS module of the Sodaq modem is enabled
and put into tracking mode to retrieve the device’s position. During the first attempt to
find a fix, which is also known as a cold start, it may take several minutes to establish a
connection. Once a fix is obtained and position is acquired, subsequent tracking phases
will require less time than the initial attempt. The aim of this test is to measure the
amount of current consumed by the GPS during the process of finding a fix and retrieving
the robot’s position coordinates.
Figure 5.9 depicts the power consumption of enabling the GPS and the initial attempt
to locate a fix and retrieve the location’s coordinates. During this stage, the GPS module
is actively searching for signals from the GPS satellites, which may take some time.
Figure 5.9: GPS current consumption.
The results of the test indicate that the GPS consumes more power during the
==PAGE:60==
5.2 Power Consumption results
52
tracking phase than when it is only enabled which is something that was expected.
Specifically, the GPS consumes around 40mA in tracking mode, while it only consumes
12mA when enabled.
Table 5.4: NB-IoT MQTT data transmission outcomes
GPS tracking mode current consumption avg
∼40mA
GPS enabled current consumption avg
∼12mA
Power consumption avg
∼0.132W
5.2.4
Mobile robot power consumption
As stated in section 4.3.4, to assess the overall power consumption of the system, it is
crucial to measure the power consumed by the mobile robot during its operation.
To accomplish this, PPK2 was utilized to measure the current drawn by the mobile
robot as it moves. Figure 5.10 depicts the measured current consumption of the mobile
robot.
Figure 5.10: Mobile robot current consumption.
The measurements indicate that on average, the mobile robot consumes 0.6 amperes
of current. It should be noted that the current consumption can increase up to 0.85
amperes when both motors are operating simultaneously. As mentioned in Section 4.3.4,
the mobile robot is equipped with two motors - one for steering left and right, and the
other for moving forward or backward. It is worth saying that the robot in some cases
==PAGE:61==
5.2 Power Consumption results
53
was struggling to move because of the rough terrain of the ground and maybe this is
something that explains the unstable measurements. Furthermore the mobile robot that
was used had the minimum requirements for an agriculture robot because o f the limited
budget for the project. Usually agriculture mobile robots consumes much more power.
As an example, a small-sized mobile agriculture robot designed for tasks such as weeding
or crop scouting may consume around 2-5 amps of current during normal operation[17].
Larger robots designed for tasks such as pruning or harvesting may consume anywhere
from 10-30 amps of current[21], depending on its specifications.
Table 5.5: Mobile robot power consumption outcomes
Mobile robot current consumption avg
∼0.6A
Mobile robot current consumption max peaks
∼0.85A
Power consumption avg
∼5.4W
Certainly! Based on the comparison of the current consumption between the mobile
robot and the Sodaq Sara R410M modem, it is evident that the modem consumes sig-
nificantly less power when using either the LTE-M or NB-IoT communication protocols.
The results indicate that the modem only consumes approximately one-seventh of the
total system power consumption. Therefore, utilizing these communication protocols
can be a more eﬀicient way to conserve power in mobile robot applications.
5.2.5
Calculation of battery life
Once the power consumption tests of NB-IoT and LTE-M using the Sodaq Sara R410M
were completed and the measurements were acquired, it is necessary to calculate the
battery life for each case. This will help to verify the power consumption eﬀiciency of
the two protocols.
To calculate the battery life, it is essential to define the working scenario for the
modem. The scenario involves a mobile robot moving around a field, taking temperature
and humidity measurements, and transmitting the data to the cloud every 10 seconds.
In addition, the power consumption required for the modem to register with the network
and determine its GPS position should also be included in the overall power consumption
calculation as well the duration of each procedure.
In this scenario, the procedure occurs for 10 times each day, and for the rest of
the day, the mobile robot is turned off, and the modem goes into deep sleep until the
==PAGE:62==
5.3 Comparison with other Communication technologies
54
next day. To calculate the battery life, it is crucial to determine the various values
necessary.
The battery utilized in this case is a 3.7V LiPo battery with a capacity
of 1200mAh. According to the manufacturer’s datasheet [43], the Sodaq Sara R410m
module consumes 8µΑ in deep sleep mode. The following equation provides the current
consumption per second for the project’s scenario, and the second equation gives the
corresponding battery life:
Isec = (Ireg · Treg) + (Igps + Imqtt) · T1min + (Ipsm · Tpsm)
3600
(5.1)
Battery life = Battery capacity
Isec
(5.2)
Based on the power consumption results that was acquired in the previous sections
the battery life estimation is presented below.
Table 5.6: Battery life results
LTE-M
NB-IoT
∼2days
∼3days
The results of the battery life calculations for the specific scenario indicate that using
either the LTE-M or NB-IoT communication protocols would result in a battery life of
only 2 to 3 days. However, it should be noted that the project utilized a low-capacity
and inexpensive battery. In the agricultural industry, mobile robots typically use larger
capacity batteries, which can significantly extend the battery life. As such, it is possible
to achieve a longer battery life with a higher-capacity battery in this type of applications.
5.3
Comparison with other Communication
technologies
The choice of communication technology for agricultural mobile robots ultimately de-
pends on the specific needs and requirements of the system, as well as the operational
constraints of the application. Other communication technologies such as Wi-Fi and
LoRa can also be used depending on the needs of the robot and the application. Ad-
ditionally, it is recognized that 4G and 5G technologies are widely used in agricultural
mobile robot applications[29], but they differ significantly from LPWAN technologies,
which are the focus of this project.
==PAGE:63==
5.3 Comparison with other Communication technologies
55
In particular, this section aims to compare LTE-M and NB-IoT with other commu-
nication technologies such as Wi-Fi and LoRa. These LPWAN technologies are being
increasingly used in agricultural mobile robot applications due to their ability to support
low-power, long-range communication over large areas.
The project’s main focus was on evaluating the coverage range and power consump-
tion of LTE-M and NB-IoT. To compare their relative strengths in these areas, the
project also included WiFi and LoRa in the analysis. Table 5.7, provide a comparison
of these technologies, allowing for informed decision-making based on their respective
capabilities in terms of coverage range and power consumption.
Table 5.7: Comparison of communication technologies
LTE-M
NB-IoT
LoRa
WiFi
Coverage range
∼10km
∼25km
∼11km[14]
70m [24]
Transmission consumption
∼120mA
∼60mA
∼70mA[36]
251mA [24]
Data rate
< 1Mbps
< 220Kbps
< 50Kbps
< 54Mbps
Table 5.7 highlights that both LTE-M and NB-IoT technologies are promising so-
lutions for long-range applications that require power eﬀiciency, surpassing WiFi and
LoRa in these respects. Although LoRa also exhibits favorable results in terms of power
consumption and long-range coverage, its lower data rate may render it unsuitable for
certain applications, such as mobile robot tasks that involve more complex and demand-
ing operations. Conversely, WiFi technology boasts impressive data rates, which make
it an excellent choice for mobile robot applications, but its limited coverage range and
high power consumption make it impractical for rural agricultural applications. It seems
that NB-IoT and LTE-M present a balanced solution that is well-suited for long-range
communication with low power consumption, making them ideal options for a range of
mobile robot applications.
==PAGE:64==
CHAPTER 6
Discussion
This chapter aims to provide a critical reflection on the study’s findings, presenting a
summary of the results as well indicating the limitations occurred. The chapter concludes
by presenting potential ideas for future development.
6.1
Summary of Results
The present study investigated the effectiveness of LTE-M and NB-IoT communication
technologies, in the context of mobile robotics in agriculture. Specifically, the study
conducted two main experimental tests to evaluate the coverage range and power con-
sumption of these technologies. The experiments were designed to provide a comparison
of the performance of LTE-M and NB-IoT in the agricultural setting, using a mobile
robot as the primary platform.
The analysis of the coverage range results indicated that both LTE-M and NB-IoT
technologies can be used effectively in mobile robot applications within agriculture set-
tings, particularly for long-range communications. Signal strength and signal quality
results was more than acceptable in most of the cases. However, it is worth noting that
the coverage range may be influenced by a variety of contextual factors, such as the
environmental conditions, morphology of the area, as well the availability and location
of eNodeBs in the area.
In regard to the power consumption testing, the obtained results demonstrate that
both LTE-M and NB-IoT communication technologies may not be the optimal solution
for mobile robot applications due to their power consumption requirements. The results
indicate that the demanding tasks that a mobile robot may encounter in a farm environ-
ment can significantly impact the battery life of the device. However, when comparing
the power consumption of these communication technologies with the overall power con-
sumption of the mobile robot, the results showed that LTE-M and NB-IoT consume
==PAGE:65==
6.2 Limitations
57
considerably less power. Therefore, with the integration of larger capacity batteries it
may be possible to extend the battery life.
Finally, comparing LTE-M and NB-IoT with other communication technologies such
as LoRa and WiFi it is evident that they provide viable solutions for applications that
require both good coverage range and power consumption eﬀiciency.
6.2
Limitations
While this study has provided valuable insights into the use of LTE-M and NB-IoT
communication technologies for mobile robot applications in agriculture settings, there
are several limitations that need to be acknowledged.
Firstly, the presence of other eNodeBs in the area caused interference in some cases,
which may have affected the results of the coverage range results. Another case that
may affected the coverage range results was the antenna of the modem and its direction.
Additionally, during the coverage range testing, LTE-M did a handover and attached
to an eNodeB with PCI 20, which was impossible to locate it and determine the exact
distance from the eNodeB. Another limitation was the limited capabilities of the Sodaq
Sara R410M on AT command options, which prevented the identification of the cell IDs,
as a result to determine the cells based on the PCI. Moreover, the low-budget battery
with a small capacity used for the power consumption experiments resulted in a shorter
battery lifetime, limiting the feasibility of the tests.
Finally, the inability to enable
the PSM and eDRX features which led to the reliance on the manufacturer’s indicated
values, and prevented the ability to accurately measure the actual values.
6.3
Further development
Through this study, the aim is to contribute to the growing body of research on the use of
wireless communication technologies in agriculture, while also offering practical insights
into the comparative benefits and limitations of LTE-M and NB-IoT for this application.
NB-IoT and LTE-M are considered new LPWAN technologies in the of field wireless
communications and it can be said that they still are under development. As 5G era
approaches, both NB-IoT and LTE-M will play an indispensable role in 5G, particularly
in terms of LPWAN applications. 3GPP has recognized the need to advance NB-IoT
and LTE-M to meet the evolving LPWAN use cases as part of the 5G specifications.
==PAGE:66==
6.3 Further development
58
This will enhance these two technologies with more functions, better capabilities and
faster data rates[3].
==PAGE:67==
CHAPTER 7
Conclusion
This thesis has presented a comprehensive evaluation of the performance of two LP-
WAN technologies, NB-IoT and LTE-M, in an IoT-based mobile agricultural robot. The
primary focus of the study was to conduct two experiments to evaluate the coverage
range and power consumption of both technologies. he experiments were conducted to
assess the suitability of the technologies for use in mobile robots operating in agriculture.
Based on the experiments conducted in this thesis, it can be concluded that both
NB-IoT and LTE-M are immature LPWAN technologies for use in IoT-based mobile
agricultural robots but with a prospect of becoming viable in certain applications. The
coverage range experiments showed that both technologies are effective in agricultural
settings. Additionally, the power consumption experiments revealed that both technolo-
gies consume a significant amount of power for these types of applications, but this
can be mitigated with larger capacity or rechargeable batteries. It is worth mentioning
that LTE-M and NB-IoT have a significantly lower power consumption compared to the
mobile robot. This indicates that, in general, these communication protocols are not
power-intensive in a system. Overall, the advantages of using NB-IoT and LTE-M, such
as their superior coverage range and power consumption eﬀiciency, could make them
suitable candidates for use in some mobile robot applications.
In conclusion, this study contributes to the existing knowledge of LPWAN tech-
nologies in IoT-based applications, specifically in the agricultural sector, and provides
insights into the selection of suitable LPWAN technologies for similar applications.
==PAGE:68==
APPENDIX A
An Appendix
A.1
LTE-M measurements for RSSI per distance
Figure A.1: LTE-M RSSI values per distance.
==PAGE:69==
A.2 NB-IoT measurements for RSSI per distance
61
A.2
NB-IoT measurements for RSSI per
distance
Figure A.2: NB-IoT RSSI values per distance.
==PAGE:70==
A.3 LTE-M measurements for RSRP and RSRQ per distance
62
A.3
LTE-M measurements for RSRP and RSRQ
per distance
Figure A.3: LTE-M RSRP and RSRQ values per distance.
==PAGE:71==
A.4 NB-IoT measurements for RSRP and RSRQ per distance
63
A.4
NB-IoT measurements for RSRP and RSRQ
per distance
Figure A.4: NB-IoT RSRP and RSRQ values per distance.
==PAGE:72==
Bibliography
[1]
“Nb-iot - enabling new business opportunities,” Hawei Technologies Co., Tech.
Rep., 2015. [Online]. https://www.huawei.com/minisite/4- 5g/img/NB-
IOT.pdf. Accessed: 2023-03-28.
[2]
3rd Generation Partnership Project (3GPP). User Equipment (UE) Radio Trans-
mission and Reception (Release 13, V13.9.0). Technical Specification TS 36.101.
3GPP, November 2017.
[3]
3GPP. Interim conclusions for IOT in REL-16. Discussion RP180581. Version
9.1.1. 3rd Generation Partnership Project (3GPP), 2018. url: https : / / www .
3gpp.org/ftp/tsg_ran/TSG_RAN/TSGR_79/Docs.
[4]
3GPP. TS 36.300: Overall description. Technical report 14.0.0. Technical Specifi-
cation, 2016.
[5]
Farhana Afroz et al. “SINR, RSRP, RSSI and RSRQ Measurements in Long Term
Evolution Networks.” In: International Journal of Wireless
Mobile Networks 7
(August 2015), pages 113–123. doi: 10.5121/ijwmn.2015.7409.
[6]
Arduino wikipedia. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Arduino. Accessed: 2023-
04-06.
[7]
GSM Association. The Mobile Economy 2021. https : / / www . gsma . com / r /
mobileeconomy/. 2021.
[8]
C. Balamurugan and R Satheesh. “Development of Raspberry pi and IoT Based
Monitoring and Controlling Devices for Agriculture.” In: 6 (August 2017), pages 207–
215. doi: 10.21664/2238-8869.2017v6i2.p207-215.
[9]
berhtech. https://behrtech.com/blog/6-leading-types-of-iot-wireless-
tech-and-their-best-use-cases/. Accessed: 2023-03-28.
==PAGE:73==
Bibliography
65
[10]
Suresh R. Borkar. “7 - Long-term evolution for machines (LTE-M).” In: LPWAN
Technologies for IoT and M2M Applications. Edited by Bharat S. Chaudhari and
Marco Zennaro. Academic Press, 2020, pages 145–166. isbn: 978-0-12-818880-4.
doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-818880-4.00007-7. url: https:
//www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/B9780128188804000077.
[11]
Nelson H. Carreras Guzman et al. “An IoT-Based Prototype of a Driverless Bull-
dozer.” In: 2019 15th International Conference on Distributed Computing in Sensor
Systems (DCOSS). 2019, pages 291–296. doi: 10.1109/DCOSS.2019.00068.
[12]
Cellmapper. https://www.cellmapper.net/. Accessed: 2023-04-05.
[13]
Min Chen et al. “Narrow Band Internet of Things.” In: IEEE Access PP (September
2017), pages 1–1. doi: 10.1109/ACCESS.2017.2751586.
[14]
Min Chen et al. “Narrow Band Internet of Things.” In: IEEE Access PP (September
2017), pages 1–1. doi: 10.1109/ACCESS.2017.2751586.
[15]
Muthumanickam Dhanaraju et al. “Smart Farming: Internet of Things (IoT)-
Based Sustainable Agriculture.” In: Agriculture 12.10 (2022). issn: 2077-0472. doi:
10.3390/agriculture12101745. url: https://www.mdpi.com/2077-0472/12/
10/1745.
[16]
F. John Dian and Reza Vahidnia. “LTE IoT Technology Enhancements and Case
Studies.” In: IEEE Consumer Electronics Magazine 9.6 (2020), pages 49–56. doi:
10.1109/MCE.2020.2986834.
[17]
Amin Ghobadpour et al. “Optimal Design of Energy Sources for a Photovoltaic/-
Fuel Cell Extended-Range Agricultural Mobile Robot.” In: Robotics 12.1 (2023).
issn: 2218-6581. doi: 10.3390/robotics12010013. url: https://www.mdpi.
com/2218-6581/12/1/13.
[18]
Mona Bakri Hassan et al. “6 - NB-IoT: concepts, applications, and deployment
challenges.” In: LPWAN Technologies for IoT and M2M Applications. Edited by
Bharat S. Chaudhari and Marco Zennaro. Academic Press, 2020, pages 119–144.
isbn: 978-0-12-818880-4. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-818880-
4.00006-5. url: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
B9780128188804000065.
[19]
Andreas Hoglund et al. “3GPP Release-16 Preconfigured Uplink Resources for
LTE-M and NB-IoT.” In: IEEE Communications Standards Magazine 4.2 (2020),
pages 50–56. doi: 10.1109/MCOMSTD.001.2000003.
==PAGE:74==
Bibliography
66
[20]
Augustine Ikpehai et al. “Low-power wide area network technologies for internet-
of-things: A comparative review.” In: IEEE Internet of Things Journal 6.2 (2019).
Cited by: 166; All Open Access, Green Open Access, pages 2225–2240. doi: 10.
1109/JIOT.2018.2883728.
[21]
Yasuhiko Ishigure, Katsuyuki Hirai, and Haruhisa Kawasaki. “A pruning robot
with a power-saving chainsaw drive.” In: 2013 IEEE International Conference on
Mechatronics and Automation. 2013, pages 1223–1228. doi: 10.1109/ICMA.2013.
6618088.
[22]
Parul Jhingta, Amol Vasudeva, and Manu Sood. “Applicability of Communication
Technologies in Internet of Things: A Review.” In: International Conference on
Innovative Computing and Communications. Edited by Deepak Gupta et al. Sin-
gapore: Springer Nature Singapore, 2023, pages 249–264. isbn: 978-981-19-3679-1.
[23]
L Kamelia et al. “Implementation of Automation System for Humidity Monitoring
and Irrigation System.” In: 288.1 (January 2018), page 012092. doi: 10.1088/1757-
899X/288/1/012092. url: https://dx.doi.org/10.1088/1757-899X/288/1/
012092.
[24]
Olaide Kazeem, Olubiyi Akintade, and L. Kehinde. “Comparative Study of Com-
munication Interfaces for Sensors and Actuators in the Cloud of Internet of Things.”
In: International Journal of Internet of Things 6 (June 2017), pages 9–13. doi:
10.5923/j.ijit.20170601.02.
[25]
Ala’ Khalifeh et al. “A Survey of 5G Emerging Wireless Technologies Featuring
LoRaWAN, Sigfox, NB-IoT and LTE-M.” In: 2019 International Conference on
Wireless Communications Signal Processing and Networking (WiSPNET). 2019,
pages 561–566. doi: 10.1109/WiSPNET45539.2019.9032817.
[26]
Sikandar Zulqarnain Khan et al. “DORM: Narrowband IoT Development Platform
and Indoor Deployment Coverage Analysis.” In: Procedia Computer Science 151
(2019). The 10th International Conference on Ambient Systems, Networks and
Technologies (ANT 2019) / The 2nd International Conference on Emerging Data
and Industry 4.0 (EDI40 2019) / Aﬀiliated Workshops, pages 1084–1091. issn:
1877-0509. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.procs.2019.04.154. url:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1877050919306210.
[27]
Hicham Klaina et al. “Analysis of Low Power Wide Area Network Wireless Tech-
nologies in SmartAgriculture for Large-Scale Farm Monitoring and Tractor Com-
munications.” In: Measurement 187 (October 2021). doi: 10.1016/j.measurement.
2021.110231.
==PAGE:75==
Bibliography
67
[28]
Mads Lauridsen et al. “Coverage and Capacity Analysis of LTE-M and NB-IoT in
a Rural Area.” In: 2016 IEEE 84th Vehicular Technology Conference (VTC-Fall).
2016, pages 1–5. doi: 10.1109/VTCFall.2016.7880946.
[29]
Rui Ma et al. “A GaN PA for 4G LTE-Advanced and 5G: Meeting the Telecom-
munication Needs of Various Vertical Sectors Including Automobiles, Robotics,
Health Care, Factory Automation, Agriculture, Education, and More.” In: IEEE
Microwave Magazine 18.7 (2017), pages 77–85. doi: 10.1109/MMM.2017.2738498.
[30]
Juan Mellino Zuloaga et al. “Lite NB-IoT Simulator for Uplink Layer.” In: July
2019. doi: 10.1109/RPIC.2019.8882144.
[31]
Michal Mikulasek et al. “NB-IoT vs LTE Cat M1: Demystifying Performance Dif-
ferences under Varying Radio Conditions.” In: 2022 14th International Congress on
Ultra Modern Telecommunications and Control Systems and Workshops (ICUMT).
2022, pages 133–138. doi: 10.1109/ICUMT57764.2022.9943485.
[32]
MQTT: The Standard for IoT Messaging. https://mqtt.org/. Accessed: 2023-
04-03.
[33]
Petri Niemelä. “Narrowband LTE in Machine to Machine Satellite Communica-
tion.” English. Master’s thesis. Aalto University. School of Electrical Engineering,
2018, pages 60 + 7. url: http://urn.fi/URN:NBN:fi:aalto-201806293835.
[34]
Sandro Nižetić et al. “Internet of Things (IoT): Opportunities, issues and chal-
lenges towards a smart and sustainable future.” In: Journal of Cleaner Production
274 (2020), page 122877. issn: 0959-6526. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.jclepro.2020.122877. url: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S095965262032922X.
[35]
Ronit Nossenson. “Long-term evolution network architecture.” In: December 2009,
pages 1–4. doi: 10.1109/COMCAS.2009.5385947.
[36]
Nur-A.-Alam et al. “Smart Monitoring and Controlling of Appliances Using LoRa
Based IoT System.” In: Designs (2021).
[37]
Osoyoo robot car. https://osoyoo.com/2021/04/09/sg90-servo-steering-
robot-car-kit/. Accessed: 2023-04-06.
[38]
Fathia Ouakasse and Said Rakrak. “CoAP and MQTT: Characteristics and Secu-
rity.” In: Lecture Notes on Data Engineering and Communications Technologies
(2023).
==PAGE:76==
Bibliography
68
[39]
Stefano Parrino, Giacomo Peruzzi, and Alessandro Pozzebon. “LoPATraN: Low
Power Asset Tracking by Means of Narrow Band IoT (NB-IoT) Technology.” In:
Sensors (Basel, Switzerland) 21 (2021).
[40]
Avishek Patra, Volker Pauli, and Lang Yu. “Packet scheduling for real-time com-
munication over LTE systems.” In: 2013 IFIP Wireless Days (WD). 2013, pages 1–
6. doi: 10.1109/WD.2013.6686450.
[41]
S. Poonguzhali and T. Gomathi. “Design and Implementation of Ploughing and
Seeding of Agriculture Robot Using IOT.” In: Soft Computing Techniques and
Applications. Edited by Samarjeet Borah et al. Singapore: Springer Singapore,
2021, pages 643–650. isbn: 978-981-15-7394-1.
[42]
Hari Mohan Rai et al. “AgriBot: Smart Autonomous Agriculture Robot for Mul-
tipurpose Farming Application Using IOT.” In: Lecture Notes in Electrical Engi-
neering 875 (2022).
[43]
SARA-R4 series. https://www.u-blox.com/en/product/sara-r4-series?legacy=CurrentDocumenta
-resources.
[44]
Rajesh Singh et al. “Chapter 15 - Mobile robot for air quality monitoring of land-
filling sites using Internet of Things.” In: Cognitive Computing for Human-Robot
Interaction. Edited by Mamta Mittal, Rajiv Ratn Shah, and Sudipta Roy. Cogni-
tive Data Science in Sustainable Computing. Academic Press, 2021, pages 311–325.
isbn: 978-0-323-85769-7. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-323-85769-
7.00004-5. url: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
B9780323857697000045.
[45]
Statista. https://www.statista.com/statistics/1183457/iot-connected-
devices-worldwide/. Accessed: 2023-03-23.
[46]
Cascino C. M. Stephen .M. “Design of optimized mobility capabilities in future
5G systems.” Master’s thesis. Aalborg University, 2015.
[47]
Ashish Kumar Sultania et al. “Energy Modeling and Evaluation of NB-IoT with
PSM and eDRX.” In: 2018 IEEE Globecom Workshops (GC Wkshps). 2018, pages 1–
7. doi: 10.1109/GLOCOMW.2018.8644074.
[48]
Narasimha Swamy s. “An Empirical Study on System Level Aspects of Internet
of Things (IoT).” In: IEEE Access VOLUME 8 (September 2020), pages 188082–
188134. doi: 10.1109/ACCESS.2020.3029847.
==PAGE:77==
Bibliography
69
[49]
Anurag Thantharate, Cory Beard, and Poonam Kankariya. “CoAP and MQTT
Based Models to Deliver Software and Security Updates to IoT Devices over
the Air.” In: 2019 International Conference on Internet of Things (iThings) and
IEEE Green Computing and Communications (GreenCom) and IEEE Cyber, Phys-
ical and Social Computing (CPSCom) and IEEE Smart Data (SmartData). 2019,
pages 1065–1070. doi: 10.1109/iThings/GreenCom/CPSCom/SmartData.2019.
00183.
[50]
ThingParkMarket. https://market.thingpark.com/sodaq-nb-iot-module-
sara-aff-r410.html. Accessed: 2023-04-06.
[51]
Vmac - AT commands. https://sites.google.com/site/vmacgpsgsm/understanding-
at-commands.
[52]
Jean Walrand and Shyam Parekh. “LTE.” In: Communication Networks: A Concise
Introduction. Cham: Springer International Publishing, 2018, pages 141–156. doi:
10.1007/978-3-031-79281-6_9. url: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-
79281-6_9.
[53]
Shie-Yuan Wang et al. “Comparing the Performance of NB-IoT, LTE Cat-M1,
Sigfox, and LoRa for IoT End Devices Moving at High Speeds in the Air.” In:
Journal of Signal Processing Systems 94 (January 2022). doi: 10.1007/s11265-
021-01660-4.
[54]
Wikipedia. 4G — Wikipedia, The Free Encyclopedia. https://en.wikipedia.
org/wiki/4G. Accessed: 2023-03-30.
[55]
Wikipedia. LTE (telecommunication) — Wikipedia, The Free Encyclopedia. https:
//en.wikipedia.org/wiki/LTE_(telecommunication). Accessed: 2023-03-30.
[56]
Wikipedia. Received signal strength indicator — Wikipedia, The Free Encyclopedia.
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Received_signal_strength_indicator.
Accessed: 2023-04-20.
[57]
Zhiwei Xu and Jie Ni. “A Study on Key LPWAN Technologies.” In: Journal of
Physics: Conference Series 1871.1 (April 2021), page 012011. doi: 10.1088/1742-
6596/1871/1/012011. url: https://dx.doi.org/10.1088/1742-6596/1871/1/
012011.
==PAGE:78==
