==PAGE:1==
Department of Environmental and Resource Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
Environmental Impact Assessment of sustainable
viticulture in Europe
Mette Gottschau Rozario
s195705
May, 2023
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
1
Abstract
Conventional viticulture methods can include deforestation, ﬂora control, use of synthetic pesticides,
and biodiversity loss, thus participating in climate change.
Sustainable initiatives are spreading
throughout the European vineyards, and the environmental impacts are declining.
This thesis investigates the environmental impacts of three European viticulture practices: Organic
practices, conventional practices and the use of cover crops, where plants are planted along the vines
to enhance soil health, improve biodiversity and keep naturality in the vineyards. This thesis will
consider organic practices and cover crops as sustainable practices. This study analyses the similarities
and diﬀerences in viticulture practices through a literature review, an analysis of the European Envi-
ronmental Impact Assessment, and three case studies. This is done to deliver a proposal on further
ambition for law- and winemakers that wish to initiate sustainable viticulture projects or implement
sustainable practices.
Using cover crops and organic practices signiﬁcantly increases the biodiversity in the vineyards, thus in-
creasing overall sustainability. The analysis showed a strong correlation between sustainable practices,
increased biodiversity, and decreased carbon footprint.
The lack of consensus on measuring sustainability hinders the implementation of sustainable initia-
tives. The EU directive needs an additional section to encourage and guide the conversions of existing
projects. This could be achieved by publishing the eﬀects of organic and sustainable practices to pro-
mote such initiatives. The environmental impact thresholds should be set based on similar geological
conditions rather than member states. The need for universal regulation, direction, and enforcement of
sustainable initiatives is crucial to achieving international climate goals. The agricultural sector needs
to adapt to these global challenges, including the practice of viticulture.
i
==PAGE:4==
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
2
Acknowledgements
I want to extend my gratitude to Professor Stig Irving Olsen for providing valuable perspectives
and being an attentive and understanding supervisor.
I want to thank Liv Kristensen Stranddorf for her guidance and kindness throughout this project.
Lastly, to Jakob and Rosa, for their constant motivation and support
ii
==PAGE:6==
==PAGE:7==
Abbreviations
3
Abbreviations
EU
European Union
UN
United Nation
UNEP
United Nation Environment Programme
EIA
Environmental Impact Assessment
IVES
International Viticulture and Enology Society
GHG
Greenhouse Gas
VIVA
Viticulture Impact Assessment in the Environment
IPCC
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
LCA
Life Cycle Assessment
HVE
Heute Valeur Environmentale
ESDAC
The European Soil Data Centre
SOC
Soil Organic Carbon
N
Nitrogen
iii
==PAGE:8==
==PAGE:9==
Contents
1
Abstract
i
2
Acknowledgements
ii
3
Abbreviations
iii
4
Introduction
2
4.1
Background and motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
4.2
Aim and objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
4.3
Methodology
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
4.4
Report Outline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
5
Literature review
5
5.1
Viticulture in Europe . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
5.1.1
Deﬁnition of viticulture practices . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
5.1.2
Certiﬁcates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
5.2
Biodiversity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
5.3
Sustainable viticulture methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
5.3.1
Cover Crops . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
5.4
Summary of Literature Review
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
6
Environmental Impact Assessment
14
6.1
EIA procedure
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
6.2
EU directive . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
6.2.1
Articles in directive . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
6.3
Relevance to viticulture
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
6.4
Summary of Environmental Impacts Assessment
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
7
Case studies
21
7.1
Case study 1
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
7.2
Case study 2
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
7.3
Case study 3
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
7.4
Comparing conventional and sustainable wine . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
7.5
Case studies and EIA
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
7.6
Summary of case studies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
8
Discussion
34
8.1
Summary of ﬁndings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
8.2
Scope and limitations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
8.3
Recommendation of a proposal for sustainable viticulture
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
9
Conclusion
39
9.1
Further research
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
References
40
==PAGE:10==
==PAGE:11==
Introduction
4
Introduction
4.1
Background and motivation
The world has a fatal fever, and this is caused by human activity. This is the gist of the sixth as-
sessment report published in August 2021 by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC)
[IPCC et al., 2022]. When this report was published, the conclusion was clear: “It is unequivocal that
humans have warmed the atmosphere, ocean, and land” [IPCC et al., 2022]. Our living standards have
rocketed, with few products being local or even season-determined, and our world has shrunk to the
size where people can easily travel to every corner of the globe. This has severe consequences that
are rapidly revealing its depths to the world. Therefore, attempts to prevent the planet’s decay have
reached all sectors of our lives.
The growing of wines, also known as viticulture, can be traced back to before the Roman Empire
[Feier et al., 2019]. The methods of viticulture have changed many times throughout the centuries,
and the art of viticulture has signiﬁcant cultural value in the countries and communities where it grows.
Conventional viticulture methods can include deforestation, ﬂora control, use of synthetic pesticides,
loss of biodiversity, and, therefore, a participating role in climate change. There is no speciﬁc data on
how wine production contributes to biodiversity loss. Still, humans have changed over 70% of all ice-free
land on the planet, e.g. for construction, resource extraction and other anthropogenic activities. When
land is harvested for agriculture, fauna and ﬂora may lose their habitat and face extinction [United
Nations, 2022]. In recent years, the attention on conventional viticulture methods has increased.
This increased attention focuses on the harmful environmental eﬀects of the European agricultural
landscape since it has low crop diversity and is expanding with larger ﬁelds continuously [de Vries
et al., 2007]. These growing ﬁelds can lead to factors mentioned above, such as deforestation, ﬂora
control and losing biodiversity. As wine production has been around for so long, the agricultural land-
scape for wine in Europe has happened over many generations, and the current focus is primarily on
the deforestation happening today and not the land that has already been deforested in the past. To
heed the warnings of the sixth IPCC Assessment Report [IPCC et al., 2022], it is essential to initiate
sustainable alternatives in existing agricultural areas with scarce biodiversity and not only the areas
being deforested today.
For Europe to guarantee environmental protection and transparency, the ﬁrst Environmental Impact
Assessment (EIA) directive was implemented in 1985 and has been updated four times to align with
the European Union’s (EU) commitments and developments. The currently enforced directive is from
the 2011 [European Parlament and Council, 2011]. An EIA report intends to ensure transparency of
potential environmental impacts and that any concerns are presented to the public, who can actively
engage in the process.
Europe is the world’s largest producer and exporter of wine[European Commission, 2023]. Vineyards
and their wines are a large part of European culture. Nevertheless, organic and sustainable viticulture
methods are currently popular, and vineyards are increasingly converting their conventional practices
to more sustainable ones. This thesis will consider organic practices and cover crops as sustainable
practices. For such conversion, the EU directive contains articles relevant to viticulture but not clearly
stated to simplify the process and encourage such transformations in the future.
When a vineyard is converted from a conventional method, where the soil is harvested, and only the
wine is planted, to a more sustainable method by letting diﬀerent ﬂora share the space, there are posi-
tive and potential negative impacts. One issue that could occur is the competition for resources which
could lead to a decrease in the output of the vines. This could lead to the need for more land, water
or minerals and thus becoming less sustainable than initially anticipated. This study will compare
diﬀerent vineyards and endeavour to identify the negative and positive eﬀects of introducing a more
2
==PAGE:12==
Introduction
sustainable viticulture.
Whether a conversion in viticulture practices results in positive or negative outcomes should be pre-
sented to the public and other potential stakeholders for full transparency. The EU requires an EIA
report from the union’s members to ensure transparency.
4.2
Aim and objectives
This thesis aims to investigate the environmental impacts of European sustainable viticulture methods
and propose recommendations for sustainable viticulture projects and implementation of sustainable
practices. This thesis will consider organic practices and cover crops as sustainable practices.
To achieve this aim, the underlying objectives will be as follows:
• Identify the practices of sustainable viticulture.
• Assess the diﬀerent environmental impacts of sustainable and conventional viticulture.
• Utilise the EU directive for EIAs to propose a guideline for European sustainable viticulture
projects.
This thesis will investigate sustainable practices in European vineyards and compare these to conven-
tional viticulture practices to assess the environmental impact.
4.3
Methodology
The literature for this thesis is found primarily through the DTU Findit database as the source for
extracting publications.
The search queries were constructed and used logical regular expressions
(RegEx) such as AND, OR, EXACT, and NOT to narrow the searches and ﬁnd the most relevant
papers.
Some examples:
"Cover crops" AND "water stress" or "Organic viticulture" AND "Biodiversity"
Structure
The thesis is divided into four parts: 1) the introduction, 2) the analysis of literature, EIA and case
studies, 3) The discussion and recommended proposal, and 4) the conclusion. The introduction leads
to the three analysing parts of the thesis, each with a results section. These results are summarised
in the ﬁrst section of the discussion. The discussion leads to the proposal, and the conclusion is made
from this. The structure is illustrated in Figure 1.
3
==PAGE:13==
Introduction
Figure 1: The structure of the thesis
4.4
Report Outline
1. Literature Review
This section highlights existing literature to situate the current theoretical works and emphasise
parts in the literature where further knowledge is needed.
Current viticulture practices are
presented, and sustainable methods are deﬁned in this section. The importance of biodiversity
in vineyards is studied by investigating existing data. A summary of the ﬁndings will conclude
the section.
2. EIA Analysis
This section will investigate the EU EIA directive to identify the relevant areas for viticulture
projects. This analysis will be structured as follows:
• Presenting the EIA procedure
• Presenting the EIA directive and the articles within.
• Identifying relevant components in the EIA directive for viticulture projects.
• A summary of key ﬁndings
3. Case studies
This section will focus on three case studies. These case studies introduce diﬀerent viticulture
practices and ways of measuring sustainability. The similarities and diﬀerences between the three
cases will be presented and deliberated. A summary of the ﬁndings will conclude the section.
4. Discussion
The discussion section will summarise the results from the three sections above. These results
are debated, and a recommended proposal for a guideline for sustainable projects is made based
on the results.
5. Conclusion
This section contains the conclusions based on the results, EIA analysis, case studies and discus-
sion. It concludes with suggested future research on the subject.
4
==PAGE:14==
Literature review
5
Literature review
5.1
Viticulture in Europe
. In 2020, according to the European Commission [European Commission, 2023],
• 165 million hectolitres of wines were produced in 2020. This makes the EU the world-leading in
the amount of wine produced annually.
• Vines occupied 3.2 million hectares in the EU, equivalent to about 45% of the world’s total
wine-growing areas.
• 64% of wine production occurred in the EU
• 48% of consumption happened in the EU.
3.2 million hectares in the EU are used for viticulture. Of these 3.2 million hectares, Spain, France, and
Italy accounted for approximately 75% [Eurostat, 2022]. The distribution of land used for viticulture
is shown in Figure 2.
Figure 2: Share of European land used for viticulture [Eurostat, 2022]
Neto et al. [2013] conducted a Life Cycle Assessment (LCA) on Portuguese wine production and
concluded that viticulture contributed to the most signiﬁcant environmental impact of each impact
category of the study. These impact categories included global warming, ozone depletion, water chal-
lenges and land competition [Neto et al., 2013]. Therefore, sustainable initiatives within the wine
industry should, ﬁrst and foremost, be within the ﬁeld of viticulture if the goal is to improve the envi-
ronmental eﬀects as much as possible. The subsequent focus should be improving the environmental
impacts of wine bottle production, as it is the second largest environmentally impactful part of wine
production [Neto et al., 2013].
5
==PAGE:15==
Literature review
Figure 3: A Tuscan vineyard with bare soil. Source: Winetourism.com [2022]
5.1.1
Deﬁnition of viticulture practices
The deﬁnition of viticulture is the cultivation or culture of grapes, especially for wine making [Merriam-
Webster Dictionary]. Viticulture is simply the growing of wine. There are many practices within the
viticulture process; Organic practices, biodynamic, and conventional. Some practices prioritise biodi-
versity and environmentally friendly methods. In Europe, sustainable wine is often associated with
organic wine [Ministry of Foreign Aﬀairs - The Nederlands, 2016]. Since these practices often are
associated, their similarities and diﬀerences are presented in the following section.
Conventional viticulture
Conventional viticulture is mainly associated with growing wine using synthetic chemical fertilisers,
fungicides, insecticides, and herbicides. The term conventional agriculture does not have a technical
deﬁnition, but it is the primary agricultural practice applied mostly in one region. [Le Campion et al.,
2020].
With conventional viticulture practices, the vineyard uses these pesticides and fertilisers to ﬁght dis-
eases and pests. This is done by regular scattering of pesticides, with no or little control of these
diseases or infestations. The adverse eﬀects on the vineyard’s ecosystem are not considered [Caprio
et al., 2015]. In a conventional vineyard, the soil is often bare, with no vegetation between the vines,
shown in Figure 3.
Organic viticulture
In Europe, sustainable wine is often associated with organic wine. But sustainable wine is not neces-
sarily organic [Ministry of Foreign Aﬀairs - The Nederlands, 2016]. The main characteristic of organic
farming and viticulture is the absence of synthetic fertilisers and pesticides. In Europe, the vineyards
that grow organic vines follow the European Union regulations to obtain the organic farming certiﬁ-
cation [European Commission, 2023].
Over the last decade, the popularity of organic wine has vastly increased. Between 2012 and 2017,
the global consumption of organic wine increased by 48,3%. A study shows that there is ambivalence
among consumers. Some may perceive organic wine to be lower quality, whereas the study also found
that some consumers are willing to pay a premium price for it due to a keen interest in sustainability
[Boncinelli et al., 2021]
In 2020, the European Commission published an initiative called the European Green Deal, which
presents the objective to reach 25% organically cultivated European land by 2030 [Vinci et al., 2022].
To reach this goal, the European Commission assigned 40 million euros to promote organic practices
6
==PAGE:16==
Literature review
to ensure sustainable soil and reassure the positive outcome of such conversions [Vinci et al., 2022].
Sustainable viticulture
There has yet to be an oﬃcial deﬁnition of sustainable wine. Therefore the meaning of sustainable wine
for this thesis is borrowed from the Wine Institute [2020], an American organisation interested in the
wine of all practices. Their description of sustainable wine growing is that it should be environmentally
sound, socially equitable and economically viable. This is also the deﬁnition of Terra Vitis [2022], a
certiﬁcation agency in Italy that aims to guide winemakers in their quest for increased sustainability.
Since all vineyards have to be economically viable to be sustained, this is a part of all types of viticulture
mentioned in this thesis.
Figure 4: An illustration of a vineyard with wildﬂowers as a cover crop. Source: Germolus [2019]
According to the Dutch Ministry of Foreign Aﬀairs, the main priority of sustainable wine is, ﬁrst and
foremost, the decrease of environmental impacts.
Sustainable wine may not necessarily follow the
requirements of the EU’s organic regulations. Even though there is no commonly agreed deﬁnition of
sustainable wine, it can be argued that organic practices are more sustainable than conventional wine
due to the lack of synthetic fertilisers and pesticides. For this reason, as mentioned earlier, organic
wine in Europe is often considered sustainable wine.
Certiﬁcation agencies throughout Europe [Ministry of Foreign Aﬀairs - The Nederlands, 2016] grant
certiﬁcations for vineyards that follow their guidelines. Some are more restrictive than the European
Organic regulations, while others have diﬀerent focus areas. The term sustainability is widely used
today. It is often used inconsistently and sometimes as a marketing strategy. The social demand for
environmentally friendly agricultural management requires an adaptation that guarantees the sustain-
ability of viticulture [Cataldo et al., 2021]. Therefore, a quantiﬁable deﬁnition of what makes wine
sustainable is necessary.
5.1.2
Certiﬁcates
To guarantee a certain level of sustainability and organic content in the wines. The EU introduced new
rules for organic wine in 2012 to ensure that the ‘whole process from grape to wine’ is organic[European
7
==PAGE:17==
Literature review
Commission, 2012]. If the vineyard meets these regulations, the wine can have the European Organic
logo on its bottle. There are other certiﬁcations European wines can achieve. The most recognised are
the European Organic logo, the Heute Valeur Environmentale (HVE) and Terra Vitis, as presented in
Table 1. HVE and Terra Vitis focus on environmentally friendly practices in the vineyards.
Since this thesis focuses solely on European certiﬁcates, these are the only logos viewed in Table
1. There are, however, sustainable and organic certiﬁcates for many other wine countries, including
Australia, California, Paciﬁc North West, South Africa, Chile and New Zealand, to name a few.
Table 1: Certiﬁcations of organic and sustainable wines that meet the given regulations [Salpico, 2022]
Name
Description
Logo
EU Organic certiﬁed
The European Organic certiﬁcate granted
to European vineyards by the EU to ensure
organic practices throughout wine produc-
tion. Wines that follow EU regulations can
use this logo on their bottles. This guaran-
tee of organic methods is measured through
control agencies that act under the same
rules in all EU member states.
Haute Valeur
Environnementale
(HVE)
Certiﬁcation granted by the French Min-
istry of Agriculture. It recognises environ-
mentally friendly practices of farming. It fo-
cuses on four main areas: biodiversity con-
servation, plant protection strategy, man-
agement of fertiliser use, and management
of water.[HEV]
Terra Vitis
Terra Vitis grants certiﬁcations for the
wine sector and claims to be the only na-
tional certiﬁcation for sustainable viticul-
ture. This certiﬁcation is given when spec-
iﬁcations are met that promote their three
main focus areas: Preserving the environ-
ment, social responsibility, and economic
sustainability [Terra Vitis, 2022]
5.2
Biodiversity
Bioversity is the variety of life this planet contains [European Commission and Research and Inno-
vation, 2021]. This variety needs to be balanced as it supports the well-being of all living beings.
Humans have caused a change to ecosystems all over the world, and there has never, in the history of
humans, been such a surge in extinctions of species than in the last 50 years. [European Commission
and Research and Innovation, 2021].
The EU Research and Innovation Magazine wrote an article stating that climate change and biodi-
versity should be solved simultaneously [European Commission and Research and Innovation, 2021].
Climate change causes the loss of biodiversity, but biodiversity causes climate change. As the Execu-
tive Secretary of the United Nations(UN) Convention on Biological Diversity, Elizabeth Mrema, says,
“Climate Change is a primary driver of biodiversity loss. And Climate change depends on biodiversity
as part of the solution. So clearly, the two are linked and cannot be separated” [United Nations, 2022]
When ecosystem degradation occurs, it undermines nature’s ability to regulate Green House Gas
(GHG) emissions. This ability ensures protection against extreme weather and, without it, acceler-
ates climate change. This leads to the relevance of investigating biodiversity loss in European vineyards.
Climate change aﬀects biodiversity on a global scale and the UN’s claim that a global temperature rise
of +1,5◦C, +2◦C, and +3◦C will result in the natural habitat loss for mammals of 4%,8%, and 41%,
respectively [United Nations, 2022].
8
==PAGE:18==
Literature review
Deforestation in conventional viticulture is caused by using pesticides and fertilisers, which often leaves
the soil bare with little ﬂora. As will be addressed in Section 5.3.1 about cover crops, there are methods
for improving biodiversity and more sustainable viticulture.
The UN Environment Programme UNEP [2022] describes the dangerous decline in nature and the
eﬀect and importance of biodiversity. Some of the main points are:
Table 2: UNEPs descriptions of impacts and possible solutions for protecting and maintaining biodi-
versity [UNEP, 2022]
Impacts
Solutions
• Around 3.2 billion people(40% of the world’s
population), are aﬀected by land degradation
• The world needs 1.6 Earths to maintain the
current way of life and to ensure that ecosys-
tems can keep up
• 1/8 million species of plants and animals are
close to extinction
• Up to 300 million people are at increased risk
of ﬂoods and hurricanes because of coastal
habitat loss
• Approximately $577 billion in annual global
crop production is at risk for pollinator loss.
• 75% of the land on Earth has been changed
by human activity
• 66% of the ocean on Earth has been impacted
by human activity
• Nealy 90% of the Earth’s ﬁsh stocks are either
fully exploited, overexploited or depleted.
• The food system of the Earth is the main rea-
son for the loss of biodiversity
• Agriculture is the reason for 24.000 out of the
28.000 species at risk of extinction.
• Agricultural expansion accounts for 70% of
the predicted loss of terrestrial biodiversity.
• 25% of global GHG emissions are generated
by land clearing, crop production and fertili-
sation.
• Declines in nature and biodiversity at current
trajectories will undermine progress toward 35
out of 44 of the targets of SDGs related to
poverty, hunger, health, water cities, climate,
oceans and land.
• The UN Biodiversity Conference (COP 15)
in Montreal later this year must culminate in
a clearly deﬁned, ambitious Post-2020 Global
Biodiversity Framework matched by ﬁnances
and accountability mechanisms to achieve the
framework’s targets.
• Investments in nature-based solutions will
need to at least triple by 2030 if the world
is to meet its climate change, biodiversity and
land degradation targets.
• Agriculture has altered the face of the planet
more than any other human activity. We must
transform our food systems to become more
sustainable and resilient to reverse environ-
mental degradation, restore ecosystems and
ensure food and nutritional security.
• Preventing the large-scale collapse of nature
will require the eﬀective conservation of more
of our land, inland waters and oceans, as well
as the world delivering on its current commit-
ment to restore at least one billion hectares of
degraded land in the next decade.
• Governments must assign a ﬁnancial value to
nature’s services to people so that environ-
mental action can be prioritised in policy and
investment decisions.
• Tax structures and subsidies should be re-
formed to incentivise sustainable production
and ensure that environmental degradation no
longer pays.
• All ﬁnancial players should align their busi-
ness strategies with global and national sus-
tainability goals, including the SDGs, the
Paris Agreement and the upcoming Biodiver-
sity Framework.
• Corporations should put sustainability at the
heart of decision-making and focus on new
sustainable business models to meet society’s
needs in ways less impactful on the environ-
ment.
As seen in Table 2, UNEP is aware of the adverse environmental impacts of biodiversity loss and made
suggestions as to what should be done to reach these goals.
9
==PAGE:19==
Literature review
5.3
Sustainable viticulture methods
A study by Ghiglieno et al. [2023] that included data from 25 European vineyards found no statisti-
cally signiﬁcant diﬀerences between the overall values of conventional and organic practices. The study
shows that the fuels for ﬁeld operation, such as machinery used in vineyards, are the largest contrib-
utor to GHG emissions. This thesis focuses solely on viticulture practices and will disregard the fuels
for ﬁeld operations parameters. In the organic vineyards, a higher incidence of fuel consumption was
observed. But in conventional vineyards, higher emissions were observed due to the use of synthetic
pesticides and fertiliser use. This is shown in Figure 5. .
Figure 5: Source: Sustainability [Ghiglieno et al., 2023].
These two graphs shows the emissions of conventional (CONV) and organic wine (ORG)
As mentioned in 5.1.1, the use of cover crops positively impacts the surrounding environment. A study
by Gattullo et al. [2020] investigated three seasons of the same vineyard with and without cover crops
and showed that compared to conventional cultivation, cover crops increased on average these soil
parameters:
Table 3: Source: Agronomy Journal [Gattullo et al., 2020]. The increase in soil health as a result of
cover crops in organic vineyards compared to conventional vineyards
Parameter
Description
Increase %
Soil
Organic
Car-
bon (SOC)
SOC is crucial for healthy, fertile soil and
protecting ecosystems. Soil is the primary
organic carbon pool as it stores three times
more carbon than the atmosphere
136%
Total Nitrogen (N)
Total Nitrogen is an important factor in the
growth of crops [Ma et al., 2022]
93%
The study by Borsato et al. [2020] found that organic viticulture had a carbon footprint of 16% less
than conventional viticulture. And the blue and grey water footprint, which refers to groundwater and
the water to dilute pollutants, has fallen by 26% and 96%, respectively.
Little or no eﬀects were observed on grape quality and yield when using cover crops, except for extreme
draught, when a yield reduction may occur. The study concludes that “cover crops enhance soil quality
10
==PAGE:20==
Literature review
in the short term, with potential advantages for grape production in the long term” [Gattullo et al.,
2020].
Since the increase in consumer interest and the lack of a clear guideline to what makes viticulture
sustainable, several practices contribute to the overall sustainability. Cover crops are an implemen-
tation for a more sustainable practice by increasing biodiversity and pest management with minimal
use of synthetic fertilisers. This thesis will focus on cover cropping as a sustainable viticulture practice.
5.3.1
Cover Crops
Cover crops are diﬀerent types of plants that grow along with the vines in a vineyard. Conventional
wine growing often has little vegetation in the soil between the vines, which leaves the soil bare, whereas
this bare soil can have cover crops to ﬁll out the empty areas. According to Sustainable Agriculture
Research and Education (SARE), a cover crop is “a plant used primarily to slow erosion, improve
soil health, enhance water availability, smother, help control pests and diseases, increase biodiversity”
[Clark, 2015].
A review study by Abad et al. [2021a] presents the eﬀects of using cover crops in a vineyard. The
study included 272 published papers on cover crops from the last 20 years. The conclusion is that
it has a positive impact on several factors. The positive eﬀects of cover crops include increased soil
organic carbon (SOC), which is good for soil health, improved inﬁltration and stability of water, and
reduced atmospheric erosion and Green House Gas (GHG) emission. The study also concludes that
cover crops show increased biodiversity in and over the soil [Abad et al., 2021a].
Plants inﬂuence each other by sharing resources, such as water, land and nutrients. Some plants have
speciﬁc functions that can be beneﬁcial for some and harmful for others. An Italian study by Capello
et al. [2020] presents cover crops as an eﬀective water and soil conservation measure. The study shows
that even using a simple grass cover as a crop reduces water and soil losses, even during extreme
weather events predicted to be more frequent in future climates [Capello et al., 2020]. Even with these
positive eﬀects, one concern winemakers may have about using cover crops is resource competition
and decreased quality and quantity of the vines. This is a relevant concern as Abad et al. [2021a],
concludes that even though cover crops do not constitute a signiﬁcant competition for nutrients to the
vines, the use of cover crops can reduce vine vegetative growth, causing water stress during summer
months and an increase in competition for water may occur [Abad et al., 2021a]. However, they also
conclude that the eﬀect and impact of cover crops are relative, and the positive eﬀects may outweigh
the negative implications for some vineyards.
Even though there are no oﬃcial regulations of what makes wine production sustainable and no consen-
sus on measuring such sustainability, some agencies endeavour to create guides for winemakers who try
to implement more sustainable practices. One of these agencies is Viticulture Impact Assessment on
the Environment (VIVA). An organisation that the EU supports. Through various courses, they oﬀer
a programme to teach winemakers how to improve sustainability in their vineyards. VIVA’s method
of measuring sustainability is divided into four indicators: air, water, Vineyard, and territory. VIVA
claims to have a ‘cradle to grave’ evaluation using an LCA approach [VIVA]. In Table 4, VIVA’s indi-
cators and the measurements are shown, and all four indicators have a signiﬁcant role in the viticulture
of vineyards.
11
==PAGE:21==
Literature review
Table 4: VIVAs indicators for measuring sustainabilities for their clients [VIVA]
Indicator
Measurement
Air
Carbon footprint
Water
Water footprints
Vineyard
Agronomic management practices such as sustainable use of pesticides
Territory
Socio, economic and cultural guidelines
5.4
Summary of Literature Review
In Europe, sustainable wine is often associated with organic wine Ministry of Foreign Aﬀairs - The
Nederlands [2016]. Organic wine has become increasingly popular, and the EU has strict regulations for
European wine that wishes to identify as organic through the organic certiﬁcation process. There are
several certiﬁcates that winemakers can obtain on their bottles Salpico [2022]. Section 5.1.2 mention
three of these certiﬁcations. These certiﬁcations include organic and sustainable practices in vineyards
and are optional for winemakers wishing to improve their vineyards’ environmental impacts.
It can be argued that organic viticulture is more sustainable than conventional viticulture due to the
regulations that ensure minimal fertilisers and pest management. Conventional viticulture is the most
common method for producing wine in Europe. Using synthetic fertilisers and pesticides is the main
characteristic diﬀerentiating this practice from more sustainable practices. There is no clear deﬁnition
of sustainable wine, but the main priority of sustainable wine is to decrease the environmental impacts
as much as possible.
A study by Neto et al. [2013] concludes that viticulture is part of wine production with the most
signiﬁcant environmental impact and is an essential part of the production to focus on when improv-
ing sustainability in vineyards. Sustainable wine has no oﬃcial technical deﬁnition, which makes it
challenging to ensure the extent of sustainability in winemaking.
Biodiversity
A lack of data prevents the overview of wine production’s contribution to biodiversity loss. However,
it is shown that when land is harvested for agriculture, some fauna and ﬂora lose their habitat and face
extinction United Nations [2022]. It is of utmost importance that biodiversity and the global climate
crisis are tackled simultaneously and that biodiversity conservation is highly prioritised and should
be a priority of all global ﬁnancial actors and policymakers European Commission and Research and
Innovation [2021]
Sustainable viticulture method
Cover crops improve vineyards by conserving biodiversity as the plants planted have various positive
eﬀects and can, if appropriately managed, aid the vineyards with their speciﬁc challenges. The use
of cover crops can improve soil health, water enhancement, and natural pest control with little to no
impact on grape quality.
To summarise the ﬁndings of the literature review:
• Using synthetic fertilisers and pesticides is the main characteristic diﬀerentiating sustainable and
conventional viticulture practices.
• The use of synthetic fertilisers and pesticides leads to increased GHG emissions.
12
==PAGE:22==
Literature review
• Organic viticulture aims to reduce environmental eﬀects, whereas conventional viticulture aims
to ensure maximal yield, in which it succeeds.
• Loss of biodiversity and the global climate crisis should be tackled simultaneously.
• The use of cover crops increases several parameters in the soil, improves inﬁltration, and enhances
water stability. It also decreases GHG emissions and soil erosion.
• Organic viticulture showed a carbon footprint of 16% less than conventional viticulture and
improved water footprints.
• The use of cover crops showed an increase in biodiversity
• Cover crops can lead to water stress and resource competition, but the positive eﬀects outweigh
the negative.
The above section of deﬁnitions illustrates the need for a clear explanation of sustainability in viticulture
and a quantiﬁable method of measuring sustainability.
13
==PAGE:23==
Environmental Impact Assessment
6
Environmental Impact Assessment
The EU has developed its environmental law since its establishment in the 1990s [European Union,
2011]. Hundreds of directives and regulations exist for the union member states [EUR-Lex, 2009].
When starting a project within EU borders, which can have environmental impacts, it is essential to
analyse these impacts to predict and present to the community, the authorities, the European Com-
mission, and any interested stakeholders. Such presentation should be oﬃcial, clearly structured and
supported. An EIA is used globally as a predictive procedure to inspect the impacts a project can
have on the environment. An EIA aims to ensure environmental protection and transparency in new
development projects. The outcome of an EIA is a report that allows stakeholders to get relevant
insights and actively engage in the EIA procedure. This thesis investigates the relevance to European
viticulture projects; therefore, the EU’s EIA directive [European Parlament and Council, 2011] is used.
The EU’s EIA directive deﬁnes a project as:
1. The execution of construction works or other installations or schemes
2. Other interventions in the natural surroundings and landscape, including those involving the
extraction of mineral resources
Since many vineyards have existed for many generations, and a conversion to more sustainable practices
includes the use of cover crops, which leads to competition for resources in the vineyard, the second
deﬁnition will be in focus.
6.1
EIA procedure
The European Commission has made a step-by-step guide instructing the project developers through
the EUs’ EIA process. These steps are shown in Figure 6.
Figure 6: The 7 steps of a European EIA [European Parlament and Council, 2011]
14
==PAGE:24==
Environmental Impact Assessment
When conducting an EIA, it is essential to examine the relevant articles published by the European
Commission’s EIA directive [European Parlament and Council, 2011] to identify the relevant articles
of the directive. Large projects might impact numerous environmental factors, and many articles in
the directive may need to be considered. In contrast, for smaller projects, there might only be a few
relevant and valuable articles.
These steps provide clarity when conducting an EIA, and in Table 5, each step is described.
Table 5: Explanations of each step [Peter Vajda, 2017]
Steps
Description
1. Screening
The ﬁrst step in the EIA is to identify the
relevant articles and consider each regarding
the speciﬁc project, where an evaluation of the
suitability of an EIA for a particular purpose
is made.
It is not mandatory to conduct a
screening, the screening step is used to identify
whether an EIA is necessary or not, and if not,
then this step becomes abundant. If it is nec-
essary, it is optional to include the reason why
this is necessary, as it will be disclosed in the
ﬁnal EIA report.
2. Scoping
The scoping step assesses how an eventual EIA
should be conducted in the speciﬁc project. The
scoping of a project provides an “early oppor-
tunity both for the developer and the compe-
tent authority to deﬁne the key environmental
impacts and issues of concern in the EIA pro-
cedure”. As with the screening step, it is not a
requirement for the project developer to get a
judgement of the scope and the level of detail.
It can, however, ensure early agreement on key
issues and save time and resources.
3. EIA Report
This is the most crucial step as it conducts the
EIA report. The EIA report must disclose rele-
vant and suﬃcient information and documenta-
tion to enable the competent authority to reach
development consent.
4. Information
and Consultation
The Information and Consultation step ensures
the publication of the EIA report and that in-
terested parties can engage and comment on any
aspects of the report.
5.
Decision-making
The Decision-making process is for the authori-
ties to consider all comments and objections be-
fore authorising the report and project.
15
==PAGE:25==
Environmental Impact Assessment
6. Information on
development
consent
This step ensures that the authorities’ conclu-
sion is published and delivered to the stakehold-
ers.
7. Monitoring
Monitoring the project. This is only necessary
if there is a signiﬁcant negative environmental
impact risk.
Steps 1,2, and 7 are relevant for some projects but not all, whereas all projects must construct an EIA
report, inform, consult, and manage consent using the EU Directive.
6.2
EU directive
This section will investigate the European EIA Directives to specify what relevant articles to disclose
to stakeholders when conducting an EIA report on sustainable viticulture.
The directive is divided into 1) the Legislative points, which set the frame for all projects. 2) the
articles, and 3), the Annex section elaborates on what types of projects need to conduct an EIA. The
relevant sections for viticulture are identiﬁed in this section and illustrated in Figure 7
Figure 7: Structure of the EU EIA Directive [European Parlament and Council, 2011]
6.2.1
Articles in directive
There are 16 articles in the directive, and they set the framework for the requirements of the EIA. The
articles in the directive and their eﬀect on viticulture are listed in Table 6.
16
==PAGE:26==
Environmental Impact Assessment
Table 6: Descriptions of articles and viticulture relevance based on European Parlament and Council’s
directive
Articles
Description
Relevance to viticulture
Article 1
Deﬁnes the project and the
roles in the EIA process
The roles include;
the member states,
which are the country of the vineyard, the
public, the authorities and the winemaker
as the project developer.
Article 2
Ensure the necessity of the
EIA for each project
This is relevant for the ﬁrst step, the
screening step, as mentioned in Figure 6.
The screening step is relevant for viticul-
ture projects. Changing land use to viti-
culture will require permission and predic-
tive documentation of potential environ-
mental impacts when setting up a vine-
yard. The scoping step is also relevant for
cooperation with the oﬃcial authorities to
ensure early transparency and avoid time
waste and unnecessary workload.
Article 3
Sets the requirements of the
extent of information about
possible eﬀects on 1) humans,
fauna and ﬂora, 2) soil, water
and landscape, 3) cultural her-
itage and how these interacts
For viticulture projects, these are related
and interact. Fauna, ﬂora, Soil, water us-
age and the landscape are greatly aﬀected
by a vineyard and all other agricultural
lands with crops. Viticulture is an impor-
tant cultural heritage in many countries
which might play a role in the thresholds
set by the EU Member States.
Article 4
The Member State has to de-
cide what kind of assessment
is relevant for each project.
This can be determined either
by examining each case or us-
ing the thresholds set by mem-
ber states
A case-by-case determination may be rel-
evant for viticulture projects that start a
new vineyard, as the project may signiﬁ-
cantly aﬀect the surrounding environment,
and it might be suﬃcient to refer to the
thresholds set by the Member State.
It
might not be necessary for projects that
wish to convert from conventional to more
sustainable practices to conduct an EIA,
as the environmental impacts are expected
to be below the thresholds
17
==PAGE:27==
Environmental Impact Assessment
Article 5
Member States and authori-
ties should evaluate and take
measurements to ensure that
the information the project
developer provides suﬃcient
relevant information in each
stage of the EIA procedure.
This is done through a ﬁve-
step process which is 1) a de-
scription of the project and
2) a description of measures
taken to avoid and manage ad-
verse impacts. 3) correct data
and documentation to assess
the environmental eﬀects, 4)
outline of alternatives, 5) a
non-technical summary of 1-4
These steps are as relevant for vineyards
conducting an EIA as other projects. The
proper documentation and description of
the project are pivotal to the objective
of the directive, which is to ensure trans-
parency
Article 6
Any concerned party, such as
the public or authoritative or-
ganisation, shall be informed.
Member States should let in-
terested parties express opin-
ions on the given information
from the project developer in
an appropriate timeframe
Stakeholders who are interested in or af-
fected by the viticulture project should be
able to express their concerns and opinions
on the project, and it is the wine makers’
responsibility that the information reaches
stakeholders at the proper time.
Article 7
Suppose the project will envi-
ronmentally aﬀect other Mem-
ber States. In that case, it is
required to inform the other
Member State early in the
process and oﬀer the partici-
pation of this Member State in
the decision-making
Most vineyards are within their own Mem-
ber State and rarely aﬀect the other Mem-
ber States
Article 8
When the project is going
through the development con-
sent, which is the decision of
the authorities that allows the
developer to proceed with the
project, it needs to consider
articles 5,6 and 7. These ar-
ticles ensure that relevant and
suﬃcient information is deliv-
ered to the proper parties
When a viticulture project is being ap-
proved, the authorities approving must en-
sure all information has reached relevant
parties.
Article 9
When the development con-
sent is given,
the decision
should
be
published
along
with a transparent overview of
the consent process.
When a viticulture project has been ap-
proved, the decision must be given to
the stakeholders and public once again for
transparency
Article 10
The EIA published should not
disclose any conﬁdential infor-
mation.
This article is relevant for all projects
18
==PAGE:28==
Environmental Impact Assessment
Article 11
The Member States shall en-
sure the legal system and the
public can review the proce-
dure in a court of law to
challenge procedural legality if
this is questioned
if the public or authorities disagree with
the viticulture project, they may get a re-
view in court to argue the legality of the
procedure
Article 12
The Member State and the
EU
Commission
shall
ex-
change information,
thresh-
olds and predicted impacts. If
necessary, the EU Commis-
sion may submit additional
proposals to ensure this direc-
tive is applied correctly.
If the Commission ﬁnd the viticulture
project description lacking and the en-
vironmental impact not suﬃciently dis-
closed, the Commission may propose ad-
ditional actions
Article 13
Each Member State’s national
law that is used in the EIA
must be documented to the
Commission.
This article is relevant for all projects
Article 14
Mentions of annexes that are
annulled.
Irrelevant for viticulture projects.
Article 15
The date of publication
irrelevant for viticulture projects.
Article 16
This directive is addressed to
the Member States to ensure
all EU members apply the di-
rective similarly.
The direc-
tive is also a guideline for the
project developers to inform of
the requirement.
This article is relevant for all projects
6.3
Relevance to viticulture
The relevance of the EIA directive for viticulture projects depends on various factors, such as the
project size and the signiﬁcance of environmental impact. Investigating the current EIA directive is
relevant to discover what projects need to disclose and predicted in an EIA report and which articles
should be considered. Currently, no structured guideline can help existing projects implement more
sustainable practices. This could be an obstacle for vineyards trying to do their part in the ﬁght
against the climate and biodiversity crisis.
The EIA elements that are relevant for viticulture projects which convert or implement sustainable
practices are shown in Table 7
19
==PAGE:29==
Environmental Impact Assessment
Table 7: Elements of the EIA directive with relevance to viticulture projects
Part of directive
Article number
Article
Legislative points
4)
To achieve one of the objectives of the Union, the pro-
tection of the environment and the quality of life is
necessary.
10)
Member States may set thresholds to determine which
projects should be assessed through an EIA based on
the signiﬁcance of their environmental eﬀects. Projects
below those thresholds can be determined on a case-
by-case basis.
(17)
Organisations and other parties that promote environ-
mental protection should be fostered by promoting en-
vironmental education for the public.
Article 3
a)
Human beings, fauna and ﬂora
b)
Soil, water, air, climate and the landscape
c)
Material assets and the cultural heritage
d)
The interaction between the factors referred to in
points (a), (b) and (c).
Annex ll
a)
Projects for the use of uncultivated land or semi-
natural areas for intensive agricultural purposes
b)
Projects for the use of uncultivated land or semi-
natural areas for intensive agricultural purposes
c)
Water management projects for agriculture, including
irrigation and land drainage projects
d)
Initial aﬀorestation and deforestation for conversion to
another type of land use
a)
Manufacture of vegetable and animal oils and fats
6.4
Summary of Environmental Impacts Assessment
The adverse environmental eﬀects are disclosed in an EIA following the EU directive to ensure trans-
parency in all project stages with potentially harmful impacts. This section summarizes the ﬁndings
from Sections 6.1, 6.2 and 6.3, which are as follows;
• The directive is used as a predictive decision-making tool for projects, and the outcome is a
report to disclose possible environmental impacts.
• The EU’s EIA directive for constructing an EIA report for European projects is relevant for
viticulture projects if they are above the threshold set by the member state.
• Legislative points 4,10, 17, Article 3, and Annex II are relevant for viticulture projects.
• The EIA directive is challenging for sustainable viticulture projects, as there is no framework for
sustainable conversion projects.
• An EIA is not required if the environmental impacts are below the thresholds set by the member
states. This results in insuﬃcient sustainable initiatives and a lack of consistency in projects
that are below the thresholds
20
==PAGE:30==
Case studies
7
Case studies
This Section analyses three viticulture case studies, which focus on three viticulture practices: Organic,
conventional and sustainable. The cases are based on scientiﬁc studies that were found during the re-
search phase. The method of ﬁnding these papers are mentioned in Section 4.3 in the introduction.
As no oﬃcial deﬁnition of sustainability in viticulture exists, the three cases use diﬀerent methods of
measuring sustainability. The cases’ ﬁndings will be analysed to identify the relevant articles to be
disclosed in a potential EIA and display the environmental impacts of sustainable practices in viticul-
ture. The case studies selected are meant to compare the three viticulture practices.
7.1
Case study 1
Type of Practice: Sustainable practice by the use of cover crops.
Title: Cover crops in viticulture.
The study by Abad et al. [2021b], is one study but divided into two papers. The ﬁrst paper investigates
biodiversity in the soil( Implications on soil characteristics and biodiversity in Vineyards and Cover
crops in viticulture). The eﬀect cover crops have on total nitrogen and soil organic carbon are relevant
ﬁndings from the study. The second paper investigates the performance implications of the vineyard:
Implications on vineyard agronomic performance Abad et al. [2021a].
Aim: The study’s aim is to compile and analyse the available literature on cover crops. This is done
to disclose the positive and negative aspects of a growing trend within viticulture worldwide and give
a preliminary idea of the possible consequences under certain growing conditions.
Method: The study is a literature review of selected scientiﬁc papers on the use of cover crops. The
selection of the papers was independently done by two people. The papers that were excluded by both
people in the selection process were directly discarded, but those excluded just by one of the people
were re-revised. This process led to 272 papers, on which this study is based on. These papers were
published between 1999 - 2018.
The relevant information on the eﬀect cover crops had on agroecological parameters was extracted
from the 272 papers for global analysis. The parameters that were extracted were categorised in the
location of the vineyard, the characteristics of the vineyard such as age, the vine, and variety, the
duration of the experiment, and the type of cover crops used, the climate, cultural practices such as
irrigation and fertilisation, and the soil. The cover crop characteristics were; sown or spontaneous,
monoculture or crop mixture, species, and row management.
Findings
Soil nitrogen
Nitrogen (N) is important in the growth of vines and grapes, as previously mentioned in Table 3.
In this case study, the impact of cover crops on N in the soil is analysed by examining diﬀerent soil
managements and cover crops. The parameters in Table 8 are:
• The soil management, which is either the type of cover crops or the type of soil control.
• The Total N (Ntot = organic nitrogen + mineral nitrogen), is measured by grams of N per kilo
of soil.
• N data is the number of observations.
21
==PAGE:31==
Case studies
Table 8: Total nitrogen (Ntot) in soil, grouped by type of cover crop [Abad et al., 2021a]
Since N is vital for the growth of the vines in a vineyard, a high amount of N in the soil is desired. It
can be seen in Table 8, that the use of legumes as a cover crop provides an increased amount of total
N, more than any of the other soil management. Legumes are the cover crops that give the highest
N in the soil, if it is planted alone. It is seen that the N in the soil is highest when a combination of
legumes and grass are used jointly as cover crops, which shows an average of 1.7 grams of Ntot per
kilo of soil in contrast to the concurrent use of herbicide and tillage control which has resulted in only
0,9 grams N per kilo soil. The diﬀerent soil managements and their total N are illustrated in Table 8
and it indicates that there is a signiﬁcant improvement of Total N in the soil when cover crops are used.
Climate eﬀect on vegetative growth
The climate is a parameter that cannot be aﬀected or changed by the winemaker, and they need to adapt
to the conditions of the land properties their vineyards have. The thresholds set by the member states
might not be met by viticulture practices, as mentioned in Section 6, which means that member states
which have multiple types of climates throughout the year are met with the same thresholds. Figure
8 illustrates the yield in the diﬀerent temperatures and the climate’s eﬀect on irrigation. Irrigation is
the process of applying water to crops to aid growth. It is an agricultural practice that maintains the
optimal water availability for crops while they are growing [Kizyaev et al., 2021]. This is an important
practice in vineyards for water management control. An illustrative classiﬁcation was performed of the
climate in Figure 8: cold had an average temperature below 12 ◦C, mild has an average temperature
between 12 and 15 ◦C, and a warm climate had an average temperature above 15 ◦C.
22
==PAGE:32==
Case studies
Figure 8: Eﬀect of cover crop use on vine vegetative growth according to climate and irrigation [Abad
et al., 2021b]
Figure 8 shows that the yield reduction is greater in warmer climates.
The eﬀects of cover crops are aﬀected by climate conditions. Figure 8 illustrates the reduction of
vine yield in warm, mild and cold weather conditions. It was observed that the vineyards with cooler
climate conditions show more growth, than those in warmer climates, which show a decrease in growth.
Soil Organic Carbon
The study found that the use of cover crops had a positive eﬀect on Soil Organic Carbon (SOC).
SOC is deﬁned in Table 3 in Section 5.3, as having a crucial role in healthy, fertile soil and in the
protection of ecosystems. Soil is the primary organic carbon pool as it stores three times more carbon
than the atmosphere. The ﬁndings of the study are based on analysed publications from 24 vineyards
in diﬀerent locations. It was found that cover crops increased SOC in 13 out of the 19 publications
shown in Figure 9. The increase of SOC varied based on the management style and type of cover crop
used
The parameters in Table 9 are:
• The index N
• The vineyard location
• The duration; years since cover crop establishment
• The soil management
• The type of cover crops used.
(CT=tillage control; CH=herbicide control; CTH= tillage +
herbicide control; G= grass; GL= grass + legume; L= legume; SV= spontaneous vegetation;
M= mulch)
• Initial SOC: soil organic carbon at the beginning of the experiment
• The ﬁnal SOC: soil organic carbon at the end of the experiment
• ∆SOC: the variation between the ﬁnal SOC and initial SOC
23
==PAGE:33==
Case studies
Table 9: SOC content in the soil [Abad et al., 2021a]
24
==PAGE:34==
Case studies
It can be seen in Table 9, that the observed increase of SOC varied depending on the type of cover
crop. 16 observations showed that grass cover crops increased the SOC in the vineyards by an average
of 68.5 % compared to the initial conditions. 9 observations showed that when legumes were grown as
a cover crop, an average increase of 39.2 % was observed. 8 observations of spontaneous cover crops,
mainly grass species, showed the most favourable results, with a SOC increment of 119.5 %.
25
==PAGE:35==
Case studies
Additional ﬁndings of the study are listed below:
• Out of 68 publications, 56% of the vineyards in the study reported a decrease in yield due to
cover crops.
• Covers crops are not a signiﬁcant competition for nutrients
• Cover crops improve stability and reduce erosion.
• SOC increases in the long run, and erosion reduction is greater when grasses form the cover than
legume cover.
• There is an increase in biodiversity, both in soil biodiversity and activity, as well as in populations
of arthropods, birds and small mammals. In 72 % of the cases considered, cover crops increased
the presence of species acting as natural enemies for vineyard pests.
• Cover crops can lead to reduced incidence of fungal diseases and pests.
• Cover crops reduce greenhouse gases in the atmosphere
• Cover crops tend to result in reduced vineyard vegetative growth
• 50 % of the cases reported moderate to severe, and severe levels of water stress in the vineyards.
• The increased competition for water that occurs when cover crops are used can be lessened.
Cover crops increase water inﬁltration into the soil and reduce soil evaporation, leading to lower
water needs through leaf area and yield reduction.
7.2
Case study 2
Type of Practice: Organic and conventional practice.
Title: Use of multiple indicators to compare sustainability performance of organic vs conventional
vineyard management is a study by Borsato et al. [2020]
Method: This comparative study uses existing literature and is supported by the case studies of two
vineyards in the North-East of Italy. The case study uses two vineyards within the same farm. The
used case study is located in a winery in the Nord-East of Italy and consists of two vineyards of 1.5
hectares, where each was assessed. One vineyard is managed with organic viticulture practices, while
the second is managed with conventional viticulture practices. The annual precipitation and climate
are the same for each vineyard, making a comparison possible. Also, the soil texture and initial soil
SOC are the same. In this study, diﬀerent agronomic operations were considered and included in the
comparison, such as fertilisation, plant protection treatments, irrigation, soil cultivation and canopy
management.
Aim: This study compares the environmental and economic performances of organic and conventional
vineyard management. This is based on diﬀerent indicators (Water Footprint (WF), Carbon Footprint
(CF), management practices indicator, and economic indicator).
Findings:
26
==PAGE:36==
Case studies
Yield
The competition for resources, such as water, area, minerals and sunlight, is less in conventional
vineyards than in organic vineyards. The common practice in conventional viticulture is to control
this competition by using synthetic fertilisers and pesticides. This ensures the removal of all vine
competitors. The study states that conventional viticulture aims to ensure maximum yield, whereas
organic vineyards aim to ensure the avoidance of synthetic pesticides and fertilisers. In this, they are
successful as organic production had a lower yield of 10% - 13% compared to conventional production.
Figure 9 illustrate yield from ﬁve seasons in the two vineyards is compared by ton per hectare. It can
be observed that conventional practices yield slightly more than organic wine.
Figure 9: The diﬀerence in yield in organic and conventional vineyards Source: [Borsato et al., 2020].
This graph shows that conventional wine yields slightly more than organic wine.
Water Footprint
The Water Footprint (WF) is divided into four categories. Green WF, Blue irrigation WF, Blue plant
protection WF and Grey WF. These are deﬁned in Table 10.
Table 10: Descriptions of water footprints [Borsato et al., 2020]
WF
Description
Green Water Footprint
Green WF describes the amount of wa-
ter from precipitation, which plants absorb
through evaporation.
Blue Water Footprint
Blue WF includes all water usage in
the vineyard, such as irrigation, pesticide
treatments, and equipment cleaning.
Grey Water Footprint
Grey WF includes the freshwater pollu-
tion as a consequence of synthetic pesti-
cides and fertiliser use.
The study showed that the WF was improved in the organic vineyard compared to the conventional
vineyard. The results are illustrated in Figure 10 and showed that the overall water footprint was more
signiﬁcant in the conventional vineyard because the contribution of blue and grey water footprint was
higher. Organic practices do not use synthetic pesticides and fertilisers; therefore, organic vineyards
have no Grey WF.
27
==PAGE:37==
Case studies
Figure 10: Average annual WFs under organic and conventional vineyard management practices [Bor-
sato et al., 2020]
Carbon Footprint
According to the study, conventional viticulture practices have a more signiﬁcant GHG emission than
organic vineyard management in kg CO2 eq per hectare. Air pollution was also higher in conventional
vineyards due to higher Carbon Footprint (CF) from fertilisers and fuel consumption. The organic
vineyard showed a higher CF contribution in the Pesticide parameter, but organic viticulture still has
a lower overall CF, as illustrated in Figure 11.
Figure 11: Average annual Carbon Footprint of variables involved in GHG emissions in organic and
conventional vineyards. [Borsato et al., 2020]
Additional ﬁndings of Case Study 2 are listed below:
• Organic vineyard management does not adversely aﬀect the economic productivity of vine grape
production.
• Soil Erosion was higher in conventional vineyards due to lower soil cover percentages than in
organic vineyards.
• Organic practices increase biodiversity and promote the improvement of ecosystem services.
• Organic farming beneﬁts the environment as it is easily transferable to small-scale farms.
28
==PAGE:38==
Case studies
• Biodiversity is enhanced by biological control of pests using deterrents and by attracting their
natural predators or pathogens, providing them with food and habitat.
• Organic vineyard management enhances biodiversity, improving habitats for carabids etc.
• Organic farming may increase SOC and fauna, which beneﬁts plant growth and reduces soil
erosion.
7.3
Case study 3
Type of Practice: Organic and conventional practices.
Title: Organic and Biodynamic Viticulture Aﬀect Biodiversity and Properties of Vine and Wine: A
Systematic Quantitative Review is a study by biodynamic.
Aim: This study aims to review evidence comparing conventional, organic, and biodynamic viticulture
practices on soil, biodiversity, yield, disease incidence, grape composition, sensory characteristics, and
wine quality.
Method: This study is a literature review, that uses existing literature. It reviews 84 studies that
all investigate conventional and organic or biodynamic practices. Meta-regression analysis was used
to combine and compare research ﬁndings from the 84 studies. Only papers with representative plots
or a representative number of samples were included in the literature review. Seventeen studies were
included in their quantitative analysis. Data on diﬀerences in yield were extracted from the diﬀerent
studies. These treatment means were included in the meta-analysis.
Findings:
Figure 12: The yield of conventional versus organic and biodynamic managed vineyards [Döring et al.,
2019]
A meta-regression analysis is used in literature studies to get an overview of conﬂicting and consistent
studies. Case Study 3 used linear regression to display the ﬁndings of the study, where conventional
and organic or biodynamic practices are compared. The result of the meta-regression analysis showed
that organic practices have about 18% less yield compared to conventional practices.
29
==PAGE:39==
Case studies
In Figure 12, the results of the comparisons from the included studies are plotted. Each point (triangle,
square etc) represents a study which has compared conventional to organic (or biodynamic ) practices
and their eﬀect on yield. Some studies have made multiple comparisons, and therefore there are several
points in the same study. The x-axis represents the conventional results, and the y-axis represents the
organic or biodynamic practices. By the tilted regression line, it can be seen that the tendency is
that the organic and biodynamic viticulture practices yield slightly less than conventional viticulture
practices in tons of yield per hectare.
Additional ﬁndings of Case Study 3 are listed below:
• Increase in biodiversity as the study showed that species and organism richness were 30% and 50%
higher, respectively, in vineyards with organic practices, compared to conventional management.
• Soil nutrient cycling was enhanced under organic viticulture,
• Cover crop, compost application, and the lack of herbicides might account for higher biological
activity in organic soils
• Organic practices showed an 18% lower yield compared to conventional viticulture.
• A decrease in soil moisture under organic viticulture is likely responsible for the lower growth
and yield.
• There was no overall diﬀerence in berry composition or juice and wine quality among management
systems.
30
==PAGE:40==
Case studies
7.4
Comparing conventional and sustainable wine
This section will compare the three case studies and their respective results.
Table 11 lists the case studies and their ﬁndings on the same parameters: yield, biodiversity and water
management.
Table 11: The ﬁndings of the three case studies
Parameter
Case Study
Findings
Yield
Case Study 1
The study showed that the use of cover
crops tends to result in reduced vineyard
vegetative growth. Out of the 68 publica-
tions used in the study, 56% of the vine-
yards reported a decrease in yield
Case study 2
Organic production had a lower yield of
10% - 13% less than conventional produc-
tion during the study
Case study 3
Through the literature used in this study,
organic practices showed an 18% lower
yield compared to conventional viticulture
Biodiversity
Case Study 1
In 72 % of the cases considered, cover
crops increased the presence of species act-
ing as natural enemies for vineyard pests
Case study 2
Simply states that organic vineyard man-
agement enhances biodiversity
Case study 3
On average, species richness was 30%
higher, and organisms were 50% more
abundant in organic farming systems,
compared to conventional management in
annual crops
Water management
Case Study 1
50 % of the cases reported moderate to
severe, and severe levels of water stress in
the vineyards
Case study 2
The overall water footprint was greater in
conventional vineyard management.
Case study 3
The study showed that organic vineyards
had lower water availability
As seen in Table 11, all three case studies show that sustainable practices, such as cover crops and
organic methods, can lead to a decrease in yield. This could be an obstacle to the motivation for
winemakers that considers converting to more sustainable methods, especially in the warmer regions
where water can be scarce in the summer months. The decrease in yield can be due to wrongfully
31
==PAGE:41==
Case studies
planted cover crops, competition for resources, water stress or disease in the vineyards due to the lack
of synthetic pesticides.
The three case studies agreed that the biodiversity in the vineyards is clearly enhanced in the vine-
yards which use organic methods or cover crops. This is due to the naturality of the methods. Organic
vineyards and cover crops attempt as much as possible to make the vineyards as self-sustainable as
possible with the least use of synthetic aid.
The SOC and Total N are great indicators of how healthy and fertile the soil is. In Case Study 1, it
was clear that SOC and N increased in the vineyards that implemented cover crops. Legumes were
the cover crop that increased the Total N the most, and spontaneous cover crops had the best eﬀect
on the SOC.
Water availability plays a great role in all plants. Vines and cover crops are no exception. If there is
insuﬃcient water, it will have an eﬀect on the growth and condition of the vines. Water stress can
occur in warmer climates, and it is also seen in Figure 8, that the yield decreases in warmer regions.
If water stress occurs, cover crops can become a competitor for resources instead of a companion. On
the other hand, some cover crops can improve water inﬁltration, and if managed properly, cover crops
can have a positive eﬀect in areas with scarce water availability.
The studies show diﬀerent ways of measuring sustainability, biodiversity and other factors, which shows
the need for a streamlined method of measuring sustainability and biodiversity.
7.5
Case studies and EIA
The relevant legislative points, articles and annexes are the same for the three cases. Article 3 is the
most suitable for all three cases as it requires the identiﬁcation, description and assessment of the
eﬀects of a project. This is seen in Table 7 , which lists the elements of the directive with relevance to
viticulture projects.
EIA relevance for case studies
If the three case studies were to conduct an EIA on a new vineyard based on the ﬁndings in their
respective studies, some parameters and considerations should be disclosed in the EIA report.
A vineyard that considers the use of cover crops to increase the sustainability of the viticulture should
consider the ﬁndings from Case Study 1. Implementing this practice could decrease yield, possibly
producing less wine per hectare. This could lead to a need for more land to reach a yield threshold.
In that case, this is essential to reveal in the EIA. A vineyard that considers organic viticulture, as
mentioned in Case Study 2, shows that organic viticulture had a lower yield of 10% - 13% than con-
ventional wine. Also, in Case Study 3, organic practices showed an 18% lower yield than conventional
viticulture. This should be considered as it may have an adverse eﬀect on soil and land, and thus,
according to Annex ll.1.a, which ensures projects for intensive agricultural purposes 1 and Annex ll.7,
which says manufacturing of vegetable projects should conduct an EIA.
The positive eﬀects of biodiversity in the vineyards that use cover crops correlate with pest manage-
ment. Most studies in Case Study 1 reported increased species acting as natural enemies for vineyard
pests. Also, Case Study 3 showed that, on average, species abundance was 30% higher in organic farm-
1 If the threshold set by the Member State is reached
32
==PAGE:42==
Case studies
ing systems than in conventional management. This more natural form of pest control management
should be disclosed according to Article 3. b, as it aﬀects the soil and can have both positive and
adverse eﬀects. The positive impact is primarily the increase of biodiversity, and the negative eﬀect is
the possibility of more plant disease and, thus, less yield.
Case study 1 showed that nearly half of the 272 vineyard studies on the use of cover crops showed
moderate to severe levels of water stress in the vineyards. Case Study 2 revealed that the overall water
footprint was greater in the conventional vineyard, and Case Study 3 showed that the organic vine-
yards had lower water availability which correlates to the decrease in yield. This should be documented
according to Article 3. b and Annex ll. c as it aﬀects water reserves and water management projects
for agriculture.
7.6
Summary of case studies
The results of these three case studies show a consensus about several diﬀerences, similarities, and
adverse and positive eﬀects of organic, conventional and sustainable viticulture practices. The case
studies show a need for speciﬁc parameters to measure biodiversity, water stress and overall sustain-
ability.
The adverse environmental eﬀects are disclosed in an EIA that follows the EU Directive. However,
the positive outcomes of sustainable initiatives presented in the three case studies are not required
to be revealed in an EIA, as it is only necessary to state the predicted adverse eﬀects. The positive
environmental impacts of such initiatives are relevant to present to the public.
The need for more precise requirements for sustainability, through legislation, in the European vine-
yards to ensure that existing viticulture projects also participate in the ﬁght against climate change.
The following is a summary of the main ﬁndings of these three case studies.
• The case studies conﬁrm the ﬁndings of the literature review, which states that cover crops and
organic practices increase biodiversity.
• The three case studies showed a decrease in yield when using sustainable initiatives.
• SOC and Total N were higher in the vineyards with sustainable practices, which indicates health-
ier soil in vineyards using sustainable initiatives.
• Some types of cover crops can improve water inﬁltration but can also cause competition in the
water if it is not managed carefully or insuﬃcient water is available.
• The case studies illustrated the need for a universal guideline to measure sustainability biodiver-
sity in vineyards.
33
==PAGE:43==
Discussion
8
Discussion
This section will recount the literature review ﬁndings, the EIA analysis of the case studies and
thereafter propose an EIA guideline for sustainable viticulture projects.
8.1
Summary of ﬁndings
Through the literature review, the EIA analysis and the case studies, it is clear that the environmental
impacts of European viticulture practices can be improved by implementing sustainable initiatives
that enhance biodiversity [Borsato et al., 2020]. This summary will encapsulate the ﬁndings from the
Literature review, EIA Analysis and Case Studies
Biodiversity
Biodiversity plays a crucial role in the global climate crisis and should be tackled simultaneously, as
stated in [European Commission and Research and Innovation, 2021]. However, it is still not considered
as such, based on the lack of initiatives by oﬃcial law enforcement. As plainly and directly explained
by both UNEP and IPCC, tackling this together is crucial. There is a need for speciﬁc biodiversity
measurements in every agricultural endeavour, including viticulture. There needs to be a union-wide
consensus about what makes viticulture sustainable and speciﬁc thresholds for sustainability levels. In
2012 EU made regulations for organic wine, and a quantiﬁable measure to ensure the carbon footprint
of wine goes hand in hand with current global sustainable initiatives.
Case Study 1 and the literature review revealed that implementing cover crops in European viticulture
will enhance biodiversity. The results indicate that organic and sustainable initiatives increase the
vineyards’ sustainability by using these practices. A common argument against these practices is the
decrease in yield due to resource competition, water stress and diseases in the vines. The case studies
and the literature review supported this argument, as water availability and yield tended to decrease
in sustainable practices. If ﬁnancial eﬃciency is overlooked, sustainability is undoubtedly enhanced in
organic vineyards and vineyards with sustainable practices, as biodiversity leads to healthier soil and
ecosystems. As stated by the UN in Section 5.2, biodiversity is crucial in the ﬁght against climate
change.
VIVA is mentioned in Section 6, and the organisation oﬀers sound guidance to increase biodiversity
with an approach that focuses on air, water, vineyard and territory. This guidance is an optional
product for vineyards in Europe to purchase. The oﬃcial regulation agencies in the EU should take
heed of the concept of measuring sustainability and biodiversity. The EU already has guidelines and
regulations on multiple processes in various sectors, and as discussed in Section 5.2, biodiversity and
the climate crisis go hand in hand. Therefore the next natural step for the EU is to ensure biodiversity
conservation through a directive in the agricultural, including the wine sector.
Conventional vs organic and sustainable practices
Using synthetic fertilisers and pesticides in conventional vineyards decreases the overall sustainability
of the vineyard. This is shown in the literature review and the three case studies. The results indicate
that organic viticulture reduces environmental impacts in the viticulture part of wine production due
to the lack of synthetic pesticides.
Conventional viticulture shows a better yield, correlating with
synthetic pesticides preventing vine diseases. This is displayed in Figure 9 from Case Study 2. This
is, however, contradicted by Gattullo et al. [2020], which says there are no signiﬁcant consequences to
the yield by converting to organic viticulture.
34
==PAGE:44==
Discussion
Perspective
There are two main reasons for winemakers to wish to implement sustainable practices in their vine-
yards.
1. The wine industry is very much aﬀected by climate change. It can lead to less or more precipita-
tion, and droughts can be expected in the future. Thus, any measures of improving the carbon
footprint must be of interest to winemakers worldwide if seen from an egocentric perspective.
One can argue that it is a signiﬁcant global problem where all humans can be negatively aﬀected
and should, therefore, be interested in the issue of Climate Change. Signiﬁcantly, the humans
on this earth with the highest level of livelihood, as they are the largest polluters
2. Organic practices have become increasingly popular. This can be a motivation for winemakers.
The popularity of organic practices is studied in Boncinelli et al. [2021], and one of the reasons
is that organic wine is considered the sustainable choice in Europe and many people are trying
to implement more sustainable initiatives in their everyday lives. Certiﬁcation that guarantees
sustainability could be a popular choice for consumers, based on the popularity of organic wine.
Sustainable viticulture initiatives
The literature review in Section 5.3.1 described the numerous positive eﬀects of using cover crops in
viticulture. For vineyards that aim to reach a more sustainable method of growing vines, it can be
a way of conserving biodiversity and have various beneﬁts. Plants have diﬀerent properties that can
help or harm each other, and when appropriately managed, cover crops can be a future salvation for
GHG emissions in vineyards. As concluded in the study by [Borsato et al., 2020], there is a decrease in
yield in organic practices. By the results of the literature review, a cost-beneﬁt analysis would result
in more positive outcomes when all factors are calculated. Cover crops can have various functions,
depending on the plant, and if managed and implemented correctly, they will beneﬁt the winemaker,
consumer and environment. This relatively simple way of increasing biodiversity, by using cover crops
in vineyards, could play a vital role in agricultural and environmental challenges. It seems to be a
concept that can be implemented on a large scale and help sustain the environment and biodiversity
and decrease the overall carbon footprint.
Environmental Impact Assessment
The EIA analysis and case studies support the theory that a method of measuring biodiversity is
severely needed. In the research of this thesis, it was challenging to analyse and identify the level of
sustainability in the vineyards. Each study had diﬀerent methods and parameters to measure sustain-
ability and biodiversity. Some studies based their ﬁndings on questionaries from the winemakers on
how they had observed the increase r decrease in biodiversity, other studies looked at soil fertility, and
others on carbon footprint or the number of diﬀerent species.
The EU directive mentions that “Member States may set thresholds or criteria for determining which
projects should be assessed based on the signiﬁcance of their environmental eﬀects. Member states
should not be required to examine projects below those thresholds or outside those criteria on a case-
by-case basis” [European Parlament and Council, 2011].
The cultural signiﬁcance of viticulture diﬀers from country to country, and therefore partiality can
occur. If these thresholds are not met, there is no requirement for an EIA procedure and report. The
importance of sustainable initiatives calls for universal thresholds based on unbiased and scientiﬁc
discoveries that disregard cultural signiﬁcance but solely look at the environmental impacts. It can
be argued that large wine countries such as Italy, France, and Greece, some of the world’s largest and
oldest producers of wine, may be struggling to set suitable thresholds for viticulture projects, as wine
is a part of the country’s cultural heritage.
35
==PAGE:45==
Discussion
8.2
Scope and limitations
This thesis solely investigates the viticulture part of the production of wine. To assess the environ-
mental impacts of grape to glass, other viticulture should be considered to conduct a comprehensive
analysis of the wine industry’s environmental eﬀects. These eﬀects could e.g. be revealed in a LCA of
a bottle of wine from viticulture through production, bottling and export of the ﬁnal product. This
thesis exclusively investigates viticulture and sustainable alternatives.
It is challenging to investigate sustainable practices due to the need for deﬁnitions because vineyards
can deﬁne what makes their wine sustainable. This results in the term sustainability being used as a
marketing tool. It is often used inconsistently and can confuse consumers about sustainability. The
literature review results cannot determine how the public will receive a guarantee of sustainability.
Still, based on the rise of awareness of the earth’s decline and the popularity of organic initiatives, it
can be argued that the part of the public will welcome sustainable initiatives and transparency.
One main limitation of this study is the insuﬃcient information on adverse environmental impacts
in sustainability reports. In the research literature, it appeared that the vineyards with conventional
practices mentioned all the initiatives they wished to implement, or had implemented. However, the
information on the negative impacts is scarce, and it is clear that the objective of the report is to tone
down the environmental eﬀects and highlight the initiatives with negative adverse impacts partly or
completely averted from the report. This limitation led to the initial case study methodology being
altered. The initial methodology was the analysis of three vineyards with diﬀerent practices, to compare
and examine the diﬀerences and similarities. It was impossible to gather data and information that
could be properly compared.
There is a lack of consensus on a format for monitoring sustainable indications, such as biodiversity
in the vineyards. It would be useful to obtain a streamlined method of monitoring and measuring
sustainability. This would lead to gathered data being of the same format and can therefore be used
for analysis and comparison.
8.3
Recommendation of a proposal for sustainable viticulture
The recommended proposal for future sustainable viticulture projects is based on the literature review
in Section 5, the EIA analysis from Section 6 and the case studies in Section 7.
The case studies demonstrate a direct correlation between conventional methods, such as synthetic
pesticides and fertilisers, and biodiversity decay. Combining cover crops and organic viticulture is an
ideal way of improving sustainability. The challenges of organic viticulture can be lessened by cover
cropping if appropriately managed, such as water inﬁltration and pest prevention. Such initiatives
should be further encouraged and enforced to increase sustainability. The EIA directive is used as a
predictive decision-making tool for projects. Therefore, conversions of existing conventional projects
are not guided by the existing EIA, even though there are factors to consider that might have environ-
mental impacts, such as less yield and water stress, and should be disclosed.
Section 7 identiﬁed the relevant EU directive articles for each case study, and the ﬁndings of the three
cases showed diﬀerent methods to measure sustainability.
The increase in biodiversity is vital for
sustainability as the decay in biodiversity correlates directly with the climate crisis, as mentioned in
Section 5.2. Through the literature review, EIA analysis and case studies, it can be clariﬁed that more
speciﬁc guidelines for sustainable viticulture projects and projects endeavouring to convert to more
sustainable practices in their vineyards are necessary.
The EIA is a preventive and precautionary method when initiating a large project within the EU that
has possible negative environmental impacts.
36
==PAGE:46==
Discussion
According to the legislative procedure in the EIA, conversion projects from conventional viticulture
to sustainable viticulture might not need an EIA report, as the change in environmental impact is
below the threshold the member state sets and the eﬀect is expected to improve. There are no speciﬁc
measurements of determining whether a vineyard is a project that requires an EIA, as it is up to
each member state to determine these thresholds. It would depend on factors such as the size of the
vineyard and the extent of the potential environmental impacts. Vineyards could be considered small-
scale projects below the threshold for some member states. Such projects should still be encouraged
to increase their sustainability, as these projects, on a large scale, can contribute to the ﬁght against
climate change. As the agriculture sector is one of the largest sources of pollution, one proposal to
accommodate such contribution could be to add an Annex II to the EU directive that considers sus-
tainable conversions of existing projects.
Most of these agricultural projects that changed the uncultivated land happened long before the cli-
mate crisis was seen as a global demise. Therefore, to achieve the EU and UN’s climate goals, more
legislation and precise guidelines for sustainability are needed. And if it is not enforced, vineyards’ pro-
cedures to achieve more sustainability in their viticulture should at least be supported and encouraged.
This could be done in an alternate EIA that, rather than revealing the potential adverse environmental
impacts, reveals the many potential positive factors of sustainable initiatives to promote, encourages
and guide the sustainable agenda.
Through the literature, EIA analysis and case studies, the lack of oﬃcial methods to measure biodi-
versity is often blamed on the diﬀerences in soil, weather, precipitation and temperature, resulting in
member states setting the thresholds for their respective projects. One proposal to meet the challenge
is to divide the EU into agricultural sections so the country borders are not considered. Instead, the soil
characteristics, weather conditions, and water availability should be the determinator. The European
Soil Data Centre (ESDAC)[ESDAC, 2005] has comprehensive data for classifying such agricultural sec-
tions. ESDAC uses a map to illustrate the diﬀerent types of soil found in the Union. For example, In
Figure 13, it can be seen that parts of Italy and France, Spain and Greece have similar soil conditions,
as well as most of Scandinavia.
37
==PAGE:47==
Discussion
Figure 13: Soil Map of the European Union [ESDAC, 2005].
A division based on geological soil conditions could lead to more general unbiased thresholds based on
the EU’s geological conditions and could increase biodiversity.
A summary of the proposal is as follows,
• An additional section in the EIA directive is needed to consider existing projects.
• Clear guidelines to encourage the conversion to more sustainable practices.
• More information on sustainable initiatives’ positive possibilities, challenges, and solutions.
• Thresholds should be set by soil, weather and geological conditions rather than member states
to ensure sustainability throughout the EU.
38
==PAGE:48==
Conclusion
9
Conclusion
This thesis aimed at investigating the environmental impacts of European sustainable viticulture meth-
ods. The practices that this thesis considered sustainable practices were organic practices and the use
of cover crops.
A literature review was performed to identify the practices of sustainable viticulture. Organic and con-
ventional practices, as well as the use of cover crops, were deﬁned. In the literature review, diﬀerent
environmental impacts were assessed, such as the loss of biodiversity, and carbon footprint. Further-
more, the concepts of sustainable viticulture were identiﬁed through the assessment of the diﬀerent
European sustainable viticulture certiﬁcations.
An examination of the Environmental Impact Assessment directive showed a lack of guidelines for
viticulture projects. Many sustainable viticulture projects fall under the thresholds set by EU member
states and are not required to perform an EIA. Three scientiﬁc papers were used as case studies to
compare the ﬁndings. These case studies showed agreement on lower yields in organic vineyards and
vineyards that uses cover crops, but a healthier soil with higher levels of soil organic carbon and soil
nitrogen, as well as a signiﬁcant increase in biodiversity.
It can be concluded that using cover crops and organic practices signiﬁcantly increases the biodiversity
in the vineyards, thus increasing overall sustainability.
The lack of consensus on measuring biodiversity and sustainability in a vineyard hinders the implemen-
tation of sustainable initiatives. This is apparent in both the case studies and the literature review,
as the diﬀerence in measuring sustainability in the literature makes it diﬃcult to assess and com-
pare the impacts of practices. This thesis aimed at utilising the EU directives for EIAs to propose a
guideline for European sustainable viticulture projects. It was found that the EIA directive needs an
additional section to encourage and guide the conversions of existing projects. This could be achieved
by publishing the eﬀects of organic and sustainable practices to promote and support winemakers who
want to implement sustainable practices in their vineyards. The member states of the EU currently
set the thresholds for what makes the impacts of a project signiﬁcant. This must be altered to avoid
partiality, and thresholds should be implemented based on similar conditions. The proposed solution
is to disregard the country borders but base the thresholds on soil properties, weather, and water
conditions.
To achieve the goals of the IPCC, which include adaptation eﬀorts to reduce the severe adverse conse-
quences of climate change to obtain an equitable future for humanity, the need for universal regulation,
direction and enforcement of sustainable initiatives is crucial. The agricultural sector needs to adapt
to global challenges, including the practice of viticulture. The environmental impacts are signiﬁcantly
sounder in sustainable viticulture compared to conventional viticulture. The few negative eﬀects of sus-
tainable practices can be managed and lessened and do not outweigh the adverse eﬀects of conventional
methods.
9.1
Further research
The agricultural sector, including viticulture, is an area that could use an alteration in practices.
The investigation revealed the need for streamlined methods for measuring sustainability as well as
measuring biodiversity. On this basis, future research should include the examination of cover crops,
in order to utilise them for sustainable purposes in the vineyards, as proper implementation and
management of cover crops can lead to great positive environmental outcomes.
Additionally, the
Environmental Impact Assessment should be more streamlined to simplify the applicability of projects
that wishes to convert to more sustainable practices.
39
==PAGE:49==
REFERENCES
References
IPCC, Masson-Delmotte, P. Zhai V., A. Pirani, S.L. Connors, C. Péan, S. Berger, N. Caud, Y. Chen,
L. Goldfarb, M.I. Gomis, M. Huang, K. Leitzell, E. Lonnoy, J.B.R. Matthews, T.K. Maycock, T.
Waterﬁeld, O. Yelekçi, R. Yu, and B. Zhou. Climate Change 2021: The Physical Science Basis.
Contribution of Working Group I to the Sixth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on
Climate Change. Technical report, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and
New York, NY, USA, 2022. URL https://www.ipcc.ch/assessment-report/ar6/.
Iwona Feier, Aleksandra Migała, Marta Pietruszka, and Mateusz Jackowski. Roman Wine in Bar-
baricum. Preliminary Studies on Ancient Wine Recreation.
Heritage 2019, Vol. 2, Pages 331-
338, 2(1):331–338, 1 2019.
ISSN 2571-9408.
doi:
10.3390/HERITAGE2010022.
URL https:
//www.mdpi.com/2571-9408/2/1/22/htmhttps://www.mdpi.com/2571-9408/2/1/22.
United Nations.
Biodiversity - our strongest natural defense against climate change.
2022.
URL
https://www.un.org/en/climatechange/science/climate-issues/biodiversity.
Wim de Vries, Paul F. Römkens, and Gudrun Schütze. Critical soil concentrations of cadmium, lead,
and mercury in view of health eﬀects on humans and animals. Reviews of Environmental Contam-
ination and Toxicology, 191:91–130, 2007. ISSN 01795953. doi: 10.1007/978-0-387-69163-3{\_}4.
URL
https://www.eea.europa.eu/signals/signals-2019-content-list/articles/
changing-menus-changing-landscapes-agriculture.
European Parlament and Council. Environmental Impact Assessment Directive. Oﬃcial Journal of
the European Union, 12 2011.
European Commission. Wine overview. Technical report, 3 2023. URL https://agriculture.ec.
europa.eu/farming/crop-productions-and-plant-based-products/wine_en.
Eurostat.
Vineyards in the EU - statistics - Statistics Explained,
5 2022.
URL https:
//ec.europa.eu/eurostat/statistics-explained/index.php?title=Vineyards_in_the_
EU_-_statistics#General_overview.
Belmira Neto, Ana Cláudia Dias, and Marina Machado. Life cycle assessment of the supply chain of a
Portuguese wine: From viticulture to distribution. International Journal of Life Cycle Assessment,
18(3):590–602, 3 2013. ISSN 16147502. doi: 10.1007/s11367-012-0518-4.
Merriam-Webster
Dictionary.
Viticulture
Deﬁnition
&
Meaning.
URL
https://www.
merriam-webster.com/dictionary/viticulture.
Ministry of Foreign Aﬀairs - The Nederlands. Sustainable wine in Europe CBI | Market Intelligence
Product Factsheet Sustainable wine in Europe | 2. Technical report, CBI Market Intelligence, 1
2016.
Antonin Le Campion, François Xavier Oury, Emmanuel Heumez, and Bernard Rolland. Conventional
versus organic farming systems: dissecting comparisons to improve cereal organic breeding strate-
gies. Organic Agriculture, 10(1):63–74, 3 2020. ISSN 18794246. doi: 10.1007/S13165-019-00249-3/
TABLES/3. URL https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s13165-019-00249-3.
Enrico Caprio, Beatrice Nervo, Marco Isaia, Gianni Allegro, and Antonio Rolando. Organic versus
conventional systems in viticulture: Comparative eﬀects on spiders and carabids in vineyards and
adjacent forests. Agricultural Systems, 136:61–69, 6 2015. ISSN 0308-521X. doi: 10.1016/J.AGSY.
2015.02.009.
Winetourism.com. Montepulciano, 2 2022. URL https://www.winetourism.com/wine-appellation/
montepulciano/.
40
==PAGE:50==
REFERENCES
Fabio Boncinelli, Andrea Dominici, Francesca Gerini, and Enrico Marone. Insights into organic wine
consumption: behaviour, segmentation and attribute non-attendance. Agricultural and Food Eco-
nomics, 9(1):1–16, 12 2021. ISSN 21937532. doi: 10.1186/S40100-021-00176-6/TABLES/5. URL
https://agrifoodecon.springeropen.com/articles/10.1186/s40100-021-00176-6.
Giuliana Vinci, Sabrina Antonia Prencipe, Ada Abbafati, and Matteo Filippi. Environmental Impact
Assessment of an Organic Wine Production in Central Italy: Case Study from Lazio. Sustainability
(Switzerland), 14(22), 11 2022. ISSN 20711050. doi: 10.3390/su142215483.
Wine Institute.
Sustainable Winegrowing, 1 2020.
URL https://wineinstitute.org/our-work/
responsibility/sustainability/.
Terra Vitis.
TERRA VITIS sustainable viticulture certiﬁcation, 11 2022.
URL https://www.
terravitis.com/en/certification/.
Rebecca Germolus.
Seasons in the Vineyard:
Cover Crops,
2019.
URL https://www.
alongthewineroad.com/seasons-in-the-vineyard-cover-crops/.
Eleonora Cataldo, Maddalena Fucile, and Giovan Battista Mattii.
A Review: Soil Management,
Sustainable Strategies and Approaches to Improve the Quality of Modern Viticulture. Agronomy,
11(11), 11 2021. ISSN 20734395. doi: 10.3390/agronomy11112359.
European Commission.
IP/12/113 EUROPEAN COMMISSION-PRESS RELEASE New EU rules
for ’Organic Wine’ agreed. Technical report, 2 2012. URL https://ec.europa.eu/commission/
presscorner/detail/en/IP_12_113.
Ines Salpico.
Sustainability in wine explained, 2022.
URL https://www.decanter.com/learn/
sustainability-in-wine-explained-478803/.
HEV certiﬁcation | Ministère de l’Agriculture et de la Souveraineté alimentaire.
URL https:
//agriculture.gouv.fr/hev-certification.
European Commission and Research and Innovation.
Climate change and biodiversity loss should
be tackled together, 10 2021.
URL https://ec.europa.eu/research-and-innovation/en/
horizon-magazine/climate-change-and-biodiversity-loss-should-be-tackled-together.
UNEP.
Facts
about
the
nature
crisis,
8
2022.
URL
https://www.unep.org/
facts-about-nature-crisis?gclid=Cj0KCQiApKagBhC1ARIsAFc7Mc7Q3MT0hzRUFMfZKjTHL1znIZfiiJjwrk1A72
wcB.
Isabella Ghiglieno, Anna Simonetto, Luca Facciano, Marco Tonni, Pierluigi Donna, Leonardo Valenti,
and Gianni Gilioli. Comparing the Carbon Footprint of Conventional and Organic Vineyards in
Northern Italy. Sustainability, 15(6):5252, 3 2023. ISSN 20711050. doi: 10.3390/su15065252.
Concetta Eliana Gattullo, Giuseppe Natale Mezzapesa, Anna Maria Stellacci, Giuseppe Ferrara, Giu-
liana Occhiogrosso, Giuseppe Petrelli, Mirko Castellini, and Matteo Spagnuolo. Cover crop for a
sustainable viticulture: Eﬀects on soil properties and table grape production. Agronomy, 10(9), 9
2020. ISSN 20734395. doi: 10.3390/agronomy10091334.
Jingjing Ma, Jin Cheng, Jinghua Wang, Ruoqian Pan, Fang He, Lei Yan, and Jiang Xiao. Rapid
detection of total nitrogen content in soil based on hyperspectral technology. Information Processing
in Agriculture, 9(4):566–574, 12 2022. ISSN 2214-3173. doi: 10.1016/J.INPA.2021.06.005.
Eros Borsato, Maria Zucchinelli, Daniele D’Ammaro, Elisa Giubilato, Alex Zabeo, Paolo Criscione,
Lisa Pizzol, Yaﬁt Cohen, Paolo Tarolli, Lucrezia Lamastra, and Francesco Marinello.
Use of
multiple indicators to compare sustainability performance of organic vs conventional vineyard
management.
Science of The Total Environment, 711:135081, 4 2020.
ISSN 0048-9697.
doi:
10.1016/J.SCITOTENV.2019.135081.
41
==PAGE:51==
REFERENCES
Andy Clark.
Cover Crops for Sustainable Crop Rotations.
Sustainable Agriculture Research and
Education - SARE, 2015. URL https://www.sare.org/resources/cover-crops/.
Javier Abad, Iranzu Hermoso De Mendoza, Diana Marín, Luis Orcaray, and Luis Gonzaga Santesteban.
Cover crops in viticulture. A systematic review (1): Implications on soil characteristics and biodiver-
sity in vineyard. OENO One, 55(1):295–312, 3 2021a. ISSN 2494-1271. doi: 10.20870/OENO-ONE.
2021.55.1.3599.
URL https://oeno-one.eu/article/view/3599/14688https://oeno-one.eu/
article/view/3599.
Giorgio Capello, Marcella Biddoccu, and Eugenio Cavallo.
Permanent cover for soil and water
conservation in mechanized vineyards:
A study case in Piedmont, NW Italy.
Italian Jour-
nal of Agronomy, 15(4):323–331, 12 2020.
ISSN 2039-6805.
doi: 10.4081/IJA.2020.1763.
URL
https://www.agronomy.it/index.php/agro/article/view/1763.
VIVA.
Viticulture Impact Assessment on the Environment (VIVA) | Interreg Europe - Shar-
ing
solutions
for
better
policy.
URL
https://www.interregeurope.eu/good-practices/
viticulture-impact-assessment-on-the-environment-viva.
European Union. History of the EU, EU pioneers , 5 2011. URL https://european-union.europa.
eu/principles-countries-history/history-eu_en.
EUR-Lex.
Summaries of EU legislation, 5 2009.
URL https://eur-lex.europa.eu/browse/
summaries.html?locale=en.
Peter Vajda. Focus on Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA), 2017. URL https://www.era-comm.
eu/EU_Legislation_on_Environmental_Assessments/part_2/part_2_5.html.
Javier Abad, Iranzu Hermoso de Mendoza, Diana Marín, Luis Orcaray, and Luis Gonzaga Santesteban.
Cover crops in viticulture. A systematic review (2): Implications on vineyard agronomic performance.
OENO One, 55(2):1–27, 4 2021b. ISSN 2494-1271. doi: 10.20870/OENO-ONE.2021.55.2.4481. URL
https://oeno-one.eu/article/view/4481/15735https://oeno-one.eu/article/view/4481.
Boris M. Kizyaev, Victor I. Balabanov, and Natalia B. Martynova. Deﬁnition of humidiﬁcation circuit
parameters for drip irrigation. Web of Conferences, 304, 9 2021. ISSN 22671242. doi: 10.1051/
e3sconf/202130403008.
Johanna Döring, Cassandra Collins, Matthias Frisch, and Randolf Kauer. Organic and biodynamic
viticulture aﬀect biodiversity and properties of vine and wine: A systematic quantitative review, 7
2019. ISSN 00029254.
ESDAC.
Soil Atlas of Europe ,
2005.
URL https://esdac.jrc.ec.europa.eu/content/
soil-atlas-europe.
42
