==PAGE:1==
Technical University of Denmark
Master's Thesis
Follicular growth in 3D matrices
based on physical gels: effect of
matrix viscoelasticity and cell
binding motifs
June, 2023
Author: Dóra Katalin Jánoska s213630
Supervisiors:
Johan Ulrik Lind - DTU Health Tech
Marko Mihajlovic - DTU Health Tech
Claus Yding Andersen - Rigshospitalet
Stine Gry Kristensen - Rigshospitalet
==PAGE:2==
Contents
Acronyms
1
Introduction
1
2
Background
3
2.1
Ovarian Follicle Biology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.1.1
Meiotic Events . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.1.2
Follicle Development . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.1.3
Selection of the Dominant Follicle
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.1.4
Local Control of Follicle Development
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.1.5
Mouse Ovarian Follicle Development
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.2
Comparison of Follicle Growth Culture Models in 2D and 3D Environments
9
2.2.1
Biomaterials for 3D Culture Models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
2.2.2
Physical Hydrogels . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
2.2.3
Alginate . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
2.3
Biomaterials Applied in this Study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
2.4
Rheology - Characterization of the Materials . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
3
Materials and Methods
21
3.1
Experimental Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
3.2
Preparation of the 3D Matrices . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
3.2.1
Synthesis of Nanofibrillated Cellulose Fibers
. . . . . . . . . . . . 22
3.2.2
CNFC-based Hydrogel Formulations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
3.2.3
Alginate-based Granular Hydrogel Formulations
. . . . . . . . . . 23
3.3
Characterization of Mechanical Properties of the Applied Materials . . . . 24
3.4
Handling of Experimental Animals
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
3.5
The Culture of Mouse Follicles in 3D Matrices . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
3.5.1
Follicle isolation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
3.5.2
Encapsulation of Follicles in 3D Matrices
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
3.5.3
Follicle Maturation and Imaging . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
3.6
Follicle Encapsulation Using Alginate Beads . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
3.6.1
Preparation of alginate . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
3.6.2
Preparation of cross-linking solution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
3.6.3
Follicle encapsulation and culture
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
3.7
Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
3.7.1
Analysis of Follicle Survival and Growth . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
3.7.2
Statistical Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
==PAGE:3==
4
Results
30
4.1
Rheological Characterization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
4.1.1
Strain Sweep . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
4.1.2
Time Sweep
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
4.1.3
Stress Relaxation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
4.2
Three-dimensional In Vitro Culture of Murine Ovarian Follicles
. . . . . . 41
4.2.1
Follicular Viability in 3D Matrices . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
4.2.2
Follicular Growth in 3D Matrices
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 44
5
Discussion
61
References
70
A Appendix - Materials and methods supplement tables
I
B Appendix - Three-dimensional in vitro culture of murine ovarian follicles
III
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
The carefully orchestrated follicular activity within the ovary becomes disrupted as women
enter menopause, leading to an increased risk of menopause-related diseases due to
the decline in ovarian function and hormone levels. Restoring optimal hormone pro-
duction through ovarian tissue transplants requires further investigation through both in
vitro and in vivo models.
One such model is the conventional two-dimensional follicle culture, which fails to pre-
serve the follicle architecture and communication between the oocyte and granulosa
cells. The interactions between these components are crucial, highlighting the need for
the development of three-dimensional (3D) systems.
Previous studies have utilized alginate, agarose, fibrin, matrigel, and collagen to create
3D matrices. Nevertheless, their limitations, including limited culture time and extensive
manual handling, have been observed. Therefore, we aim to investigate alternative
physical hydrogels that could create a native-like 3D environment for follicle survival
and development in vitro. This study examined two types of physical hydrogels: i) car-
boxymethylated nanofibrillated cellulose fibers (cNFC) and ii) alginate-based granular
gels with the inclusion of collagen. We assessed the viscoelastic properties of these
hydrogels and studied the correlation between their mechanical properties and follicular
survival and growth.
Murine ovaries were dissected, and secondary follicles were isolated and cultured in 3D
matrices in 96-well plates for 10 days. During the culture perios, regular imaging and
media exchange were conducted. Survival and growth of the follicles were assessed to
determine the suitability of the physical hydrogels.
We observed that softer matrices, specifically formulations of 2% cNFC and granular
alginate-collagen composite, supported better follicular survival and growth. However,
in stiffer matrices, while the follicles still survived and grew to some extent, the percent-
age of intact follicles was lower, and their growth outcomes were not as promising. The
findings highlight the importance of matrix mechanical properties in influencing follicular
viability and growth.
This study characterized the development of promising 3D matrices tailored for folli-
cle cultures. Nonetheless, future challenges and opportunities lie in determining and
engineering an optimal composition of cNFC and granular gel to further enhance this
system.
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
I would like to express my sincere gratitude to my supervisor, Associate Professor Jo-
han Ulrik Lind, for giving me the opportunity to be a part of his research group. I am
truly thankful for his helpful advice, interesting discussions, and encouraging attitude
throughout my project.
I also want to thank my co-supervisor, Postdoctoral Researcher Marko Mihajlovic, for his
continuous support in the laboratory. Marko’s organized workload and positive attitude
have been instrumental throughout my project. His contributions to the experiments
presented in this thesis and his efforts in optimizing the materials before I began working
with them have been invaluable.
I would like to acknowledge the assistance of my supervisor from the Laboratory of Re-
productive Biology (LRB) at Rigshospitalet, Stine Gry Kristensen. Her help in organizing
and carrying out the experiments, especially during the ovary harvesting procedure, has
been extremely beneficial. Her expertise with follicles has been particularly valuable.
I am grateful to the entire LRB and Tailored Materials and Tissues (TMAT) research
groups for fostering a supportive and welcoming atmosphere in the lab, providing me
with the opportunity to freely exchange thoughts and seek advice during my experi-
mental work. I would like to extend a special thanks to Ph.D. student Cristina Subiran
Adrados for her invaluable assistance, guidance, and willingness to answer all of my
questions.
==PAGE:6==
Acronyms
2D Two-dimensional
3D Three-dimensional
AMH Anti-Müllerian Hormone
BMP-15 Bone Morphogenetic Protein-15
CMC Carboxymethylated Cellulose
cNFC Carboxymethylated Nanofibrillated Cellulose
CX37 Connexin 37
CX43 Connexin 43
CXCL12 Chemoattractive Cytokine
DF Dominant Follicle
ECM Extracellular Matrix
FSH Follicle-Stimulating Hormone
GCs Granulosa Cells
GDF-9 Growth Differentiation Factor-9
GnRH Gonadotropin-Releasing Hormone
HRT Hormone Replacement Therapy
LH Luteinizing Hormone
LVER Linear Viscoelastic Range
MMPs Matrix Metalloproteinases
MSCs Mesenchymal Stem Cells
G’ Storage Modulus (Pa)
G” Loss Modulus (Pa)
RGD Arginine-Glycine-Aspartic Acid
==PAGE:7==
SST Somatostatin
TCs Theca Cells
VEGF Vascular Endothelial Growth Factor
==PAGE:8==
1
Introduction
The female reproductive system and folliculogenesis are highly orchestrated and essen-
tial for generating fertilization-competent gametes and maintaining endocrine function
through the production of hormones [1]. Sex hormones, such as estrogen and proges-
terone, regulate the menstrual cycle, promote secondary sexual characteristics, and
play a crucial role in maintaining reproductive health and overall well-being [1].
After the reproductive years, women go through menopause, during which hormonal
changes occur. Menopause is characterized by the cessation of menstrual cycles and
a decline in ovarian follicular activity, leading to reduced production of female hor-
mones [1].
The hormonal changes associated with menopause can have significant effects on
women’s health. Menopause-related diseases, such as osteoporosis, cardiovascular
disease, cognitive decline, and obesity, become more prevalent during this stage of
life [1]. Osteoporosis is a primary concern during menopause as a consequence of es-
trogen decline, which is essential for preserving bone health. It is characterized by re-
duced bone density and an increased risk of fractures, making it more prevalent among
menopausal women [2]. Cardiovascular disease, including heart disease and stroke,
also becomes a greater concern as estrogen provides protective effects on the cardio-
vascular system [1] [2].
As life expectancy continues to rise, and women spend a significant portion of their
lives in the post-reproductive stage, the prevalence of these menopause-related dis-
eases is expected to increase. Understanding the underlying causes and finding suit-
able interventions to mitigate the risks associated with menopause are of paramount
importance [2].
Hormone replacement therapy (HRT) is a treatment option for menopausal symptoms
in addition to lifestyle changes and alternative medications. However, HRT does not
replicate the intricate workings of the complex endocrine system. Additionally, HRT has
been associated with an increased risk of breast cancer, uterine cancer, heart attack,
stroke, and blood clots [1] [3]. In contrast, cell-based therapy, specifically the implanta-
tion of follicles, shows promise as an alternative approach. By mimicking physiological
feedback loops, this therapy offers a more targeted and personalized treatment option
1
==PAGE:9==
for managing menopausal symptoms and restoring hormonal balance, potentially re-
ducing the risks associated with systemic hormone therapy[2].
Therefore, the development of a novel cell-based alternative is imperative to reduce the
risks associated with menopause-related diseases. The surplus of ovarian follicles dur-
ing the reproductive years presents an opportunity for utilizing post-menopausal ovarian
tissue transplantation, allowing for the maintenance of hormonal levels. Thus, hormone
production and ovarian function can be sustained naturally from the follicles and the cor-
pus luteum [2]. Furthermore, the advancement of follicle in vitro culture techniques is
crucial in achieving the goal of cell-based therapy. The basis for any further cell-based
therapy is the ability to provide donor or stem cell-derived follicles with a microenviron-
ment that enables their long-term growth and expansion.
Historically, in vitro follicle cultures have been performed using either two-dimensional
(2D) or three-dimensional (3D) culture systems. In the 2D culture method, follicles have
shown growth, fertilization, and developmental capabilities. However, they often attach
to the bottom of the culture plate. This attachment results in partial crosstalk loss be-
tween the oocyte and the surrounding cells. As a consequence, it can potentially impair
follicle maturation, leading to reduced fertility and potential hormonal imbalances [4]. 3D
culture systems on the other hand can provide the interactions mentioned above and
yet maintain the follicle structure. Therefore, 3D native-like matrices are preferable for
creating artificial ovaries.
This study aims to investigate the potential correlation between the properties of 3D ma-
trices, including stiffness and viscoelasticity, and the survival and expansion of murine
follicles in vitro. To test this, 3D matrices with varying stiffness were created by adjusting
the concentrations of carboxymethylated nanofibrillated cellulose (cNFC) and collagen,
as well as alginate-based granular gel combined with collagen. The ability of these ma-
trices to support long-term follicle culture and growth was assessed and compared to
the gold standard method of follicle encapsulation using alginate bead encapsulation [5].
The mechanical and viscoelastic properties of these biomaterials, such as stiffness, vis-
coelasticity, and stress relaxation, were examined by means of rheology. Monitoring
follicle development and growth parameters, including follicle diameter and percentage
of intact follicles, provided insights into the performance and suitability of the applied
physical gels for promoting follicle survival and growth.
2
==PAGE:10==
2
Background
Some sections of the upcoming chapter are slightly modified versions of the special
course project, Initial evaluation of follicle growth in nanofiber matrices by Dóra Jánoska,
handed in on the 16th of December in 2022.[6]
2.1
Ovarian Follicle Biology
The pelvic cavity is connected to two small organs, the ovaries, through ligaments.
Composed of dense connective tissues, the ovary cortex contains numerous ovarian
follicles [1].
The follicle, which consists of an oocyte surrounded by granulosa cells (GCs) and theca
cells (TCs), is the fundamental functional unit of the reproductive system. Follicle de-
velopment is a highly coordinated process that involves intricate interactions between
autocrine, paracrine, and endocrine factors [7].
Ovarian follicles produce steroid and protein hormones in cyclic patterns in response to
stimulation by the hypothalamus, anterior pituitary gland, and gonads. These hormones
not only support the growth and development of follicles and oocytes, but also play
vital roles in maintaining reproductive health, cardiovascular function, and bone health.
Consequently, disruption of the endocrine system can influence hormone production by
ovarian follicles and subsequently affect reproductive functions [8].
2.1.1
Meiotic Events
The process of gamete formation initiates during fetal development in females, even
prior to birth.
In female ovaries, around 6-7 million oogonia, the precursor cells of
oocytes, are present by the fourth month of development [7].
By the time of birth,
some oogonia have already initiated meiosis, while others have degenerated. During
prophase I of the first meiotic division, meiosis pauses, and primary oocytes remain dor-
mant until puberty. At birth, females have approximately one to two million primordial
follicles [7]. However, during the period from birth to puberty, many of these primordial
follicles undergo apoptosis, leaving around 400-500 thousand of them. After menarche,
thousands of follicles are lost every month [9]. Thus, during the reproductive years lead-
ing up to menopause, the number of follicles decreases significantly, with only around
3
==PAGE:11==
400 fully developed follicles being released from the ovaries in the course of reproduc-
tive age [1].
Before ovulation, the primary oocyte undergoes its first meiotic division, which leads to
the formation of two cells: a secondary oocyte and the first polar body. The secondary
oocyte then initiates the second meiotic division, but arrests at metaphase II. This arrest
occurs before ovulation, indicating the subsequent release of the secondary oocyte.
Following ovulation, if the secondary oocyte is fertilized by a sperm cell, the remaining
process of oocyte maturation, including the second meiotic division, occurs [1].
2.1.2
Follicle Development
Follicle development takes place in the outer cortex of the ovaries. Prior to birth, primary
oocytes are enclosed by a single layer of flattened granulosa cells, known as somatic
cells, forming primordial follicles that persist until puberty (Figure 2.1). Following birth,
alongside the primordial follicles, there exist transitory and small primary follicles in a
quiescent state, collectively constituting the ovarian reserve [10].
Figure 2.1: Structure of the ovary and development of ovarian follicles. A cross-section of the ovary
illustrates follicles at major stages of development (from primordial to Graafian follicles as well as the
corpus luteum and albicans). Created by Biorender.
It takes approximately one year for primordial follicles to mature before ovulation. This
process primarily occurs during the gonadotropin-independent (pre-antral) phase, which
4
==PAGE:12==
relies on local growth factors [9].
During puberty, as some of the primary oocytes continue meiosis, the follicle begins
to grow. Primordial follicles transform into primary follicles in response to hormonal
changes [1].
At this stage of development, the primordial follicle undergoes oocyte enlargement which
is no longer surrounded by flattened GCss, they become more cuboidal in shape. GCs
undergo mitosis, enlarging in size and increasing in number. This results in a transition
from a single-layered structure to a multilayered one, forming a secondary follicle. The
secondary follicle expresses follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) receptors [9]. Addition-
ally, a thick extracellular coat called the zona pellucida forms on the outer membrane
of the primary oocyte, consisting mainly of various glycoproteins that facilitate commu-
nication between the oocyte and GCs. The GCs not only produce estrogen but also
generate and secrete follicular fluid, which accumulates within the growing follicle [1].
Secondary follicles acquire an additional layer of somatic cells known as the theca cell
layer. This layer forms when two or three layers of granulosa cells are present. The
theca interna provides blood supply to the follicle, while the theca externa contributes
to the formation of connective tissue. The theca interna develops luteinizing hormone
(LH) receptors, and in conjunction with FSH receptors, enables the follicle to respond
to their respective gonadotropins [9]
As the follicle continues to enlarge, more follicular fluid accumulates, forming a large
cavity called the antrum. At this stage, the follicle is referred to as a mature follicle [1].
The mature follicle protrudes from the ovarian surface. Before ovulation, the primary
oocyte is pushed to one side of the follicle and is surrounded by a cluster of GCs known
as cumulus cells. As mentioned previously, this is when the first meiotic division occurs,
giving rise to a secondary oocyte (approximately 140 μm) that will be released during
ovulation [1].
Following ovulation, empty and ruptured follicles undergo repair and transform into a
glandular structure called the corpus luteum or yellow body. Initially, the corpus lu-
teum does not release hormones for a brief period. However, granulosa lutein cells and
theca lutein cells that make up the corpus luteum start secreting estrogen, progesterone,
and inhibin A, leading to a gradual increase in hormone levels to support implantation
and early pregnancy. Approximately eight days after ovulation (in the absence of preg-
5
==PAGE:13==
nancy), the corpus luteum begins to degenerate, transitioning into the corpus albicans,
a regressed and non-functional remnant of the corpus luteum that does not contribute
to hormone production [1] [11].
2.1.3
Selection of the Dominant Follicle
Folliculogenesis is regulated by hormonal and cellular events, including multiple inter-
acting pathways, cell types, and feedback loops in the hypothalamic–pituitary–ovarian
axis (Figure 2.2).
The follicle development begins during each menstrual cycle, which occurs approxi-
mately every 28 days when the resting follicles leave the ovarian reserve, culminating
in the production of a single dominant follicle (DF) [10].
Although multiple follicles are selected during follicle development, many degrade, and
usually only one reaches the Graafian or mature follicle stage. These follicles may reach
up to 2.5 cm in diameter at the time of ovulation [8].
The selection of the DF occurs in four steps. The first two steps are initiation, followed by
follicle growth (as previously described). The third stage is the selection of one follicle
from a pool of selectable (≥2 mm) follicles. The fourth step is the maturation of the
preovulatory follicle.
This carefully orchestrated system includes pulses of hypothalamic gonadotropin-releasing
hormone (GnRH), which regulates the release of pituitary gonadotropins, such as FSH
and LH, to control follicle growth and the production of steroid and peptide hormones [8].
6
==PAGE:14==
Figure 2.2: Normal ovarian function and endocrine feedback loop between the hypothalamus, pituitary,
and ovaries. Gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH), luteinizing hormone (LH), and follicle-stimulating
hormone (FSH). Created by Biorender.
First, androgens stimulate the conversion of primordial to primary follicles. FSH stim-
ulates the primary follicle into an early and subsequently a late secondary follicle by
activating GCs to proliferate and produce follicular fluid, as well as the oocyte to pro-
duce the zona pellucida. This is possible since FSH receptors are present on the surface
of GCs. LH is involved in the development of the dominant follicle because it stimulates
the conversion of cholesterol into androgens in the theca cells. Androgens reach GCs,
where FSH stimulates aromatase enzyme activity, thereby converting androgens into
estrogens. Therefore, estrogen secretion is secondarily regulated by FSH [1] [8].
Increased estrogen levels lead to a negative feedback signal to the hypothalamic-pituitary-
adrenal axis, causing a decrease in circulating FSH and LH levels. Thus, the estrogen
levels also decreased. Larger follicles remain sensitive to decreasing levels of FSH and
can be selected as DF [9].
In the female reproductive system, inhibin B, produced by sustentacular cells, serves
as a modulator in the selection of the DF by exerting its effects on two key processes:
(I) inhibiting the release of FSH and (II) suppressing the development of non-dominant
follicles [1] [12].
7
==PAGE:15==
DF secretes increasing levels of estrogen, which results in positive feedback to the brain
and stimulates the hypothalamus to release GnRH and LH. Ovulation occurs in response
to a large increase in LH levels. LH triggers the Graafian follicle and activates matrix
metalloproteinases (MMPs) [13], thereby releasing the secondary oocyte. After ovula-
tion, GCs are stimulated by LH to form the corpus luteum and produce progesterone
and estrogen [1] [8] [10].
2.1.4
Local Control of Follicle Development
Early follicle development is not driven by the aforementioned hormones, but by intrin-
sic ovarian factors that control oocytic and follicular development before the follicles ac-
quire FSH responsiveness. Local factors produced by GCs, theca cells, and especially
oocytes, play key roles in the activation of resting follicles, early growth, and terminal
maturation.
Growing oocytes have been shown to accelerate follicular development in transgenic
mouse models because they appear to be operators of the process as a “folliculogenesis
clock” [10]. This indicates that they affect the rate of development by releasing various
growth factors, such as growth differentiation factor 9 (GDF-9) and bone morphogenetic
protein-15 (BMP-15), which act on GCs [8] [10].
GCs of growing follicles produce an anti-Müllerian hormone (AMH), which inhibits pri-
mordial oocytes keeping them in a dormant state and prevents the recruitment of pri-
mordial follicles. Furthermore, neuropeptide somatostatin (SST) and chemoattractive
cytokine (CXCL12) are known to have the same inhibitory effect [8].
The exchange of signaling molecules during folliculogenesis is facilitated through gap
junctions between the oocyte and surrounding GCs.
These intercellular membrane
channels allow nutrients, ions, and metabolites to go through between these cell types
in the granulosa layer. Connexin 37 (CX37) (oocyte–granulosa cell gap junctions) and
connexin 43 (CX43) (granulosa–granulosa cell gap junctions) have been shown to be
crucial in oocyte meiotic competence and follicle growth at the primary stage [8] [10].
2.1.5
Mouse Ovarian Follicle Development
This study focuses on mouse ovarian follicles as an experimental model for 3D culture,
providing insights into their development and behavior within physical gels.
In mice and humans, ovarian follicle development follows a similar pattern during fetal
and neonatal stages. After birth, oocytes in both species assemble into the primordial
8
==PAGE:16==
follicle reserve within 2-3 days [14]. However, there are notable differences between
mouse and human follicle development. In mice, the majority of primordial follicles enter
a dormant state and remain quiescent until later stages of development. This dormancy
period serves as a reserve, allowing follicles to be maintained over an extended period.
Due to the shorter and more rapid reproductive cycle in mice, which lasts approximately
4 to 5 days, this dormancy phase is crucial for ensuring a continuous supply of follicles
throughout their reproductive lifespan [15] [16].
During the reproductive period, similar to humans, in mice as well, a subset of primor-
dial follicles is activated and progresses through developmental stages. Ultimately, one
dominant follicle is chosen for ovulation, while the remaining follicles undergo degener-
ation [17] [18].
2.2
Comparison of Follicle Growth Culture Models in 2D and
3D Environments
In conventional 2D culture systems for human and mouse ovarian follicles, important
aspects such as follicle integrity, spheroid structure, and the spatial arrangement of
oocytes and granulosa cells (GCs) are not adequately preserved. This is primarily due
to the flattening and attachment of GCs to the culture dish surface, leading to a loss of
interactions among the different cell types (Figure 2.3) [4] [19]. Consequently, unorga-
nized growth and compromised functionality can occur.
Recognizing these limitations, three-dimensional (3D) culture techniques have emerged
as a promising alternative in the field of ovarian follicle culturing. Extensive research has
demonstrated the distinct advantages of 3D models over their 2D counterparts, show-
casing remarkable success in maintaining the native follicular architecture and promot-
ing the viability and development of follicles [19] [20].
Figure 2.3: Schematic design of 2D culture and 3D model in which follicles are embedded in a matrix.
Figure is adaptation from M. Zucotti et al. [20].
9
==PAGE:17==
2.2.1
Biomaterials for 3D Culture Models
By adopting 3D culture models, researchers can recreate a complex microenvironment
that more closely mimics the native conditions of the ovary. This approach allows for
more accurate cell-cell interactions, preservation of follicular structural integrity, and fa-
cilitation of intricate communication between oocytes and (GCs) [4] [21]. As a result, 3D
culture systems provide a highly relevant platform for studying follicle development, mat-
uration, and underlying molecular processes. Moreover, these systems hold promise
for potential clinical applications, such as cryopreservation, fertility preservation, and in
particular applications in cellular HRT.
Ensuring the successful growth of grafted isolated follicles and ovarian cells in 3D cul-
tures necessitates careful consideration of the biomaterial used. The selection of an
appropriate biomaterial becomes crucial as the ECM, an integral component, plays a
pivotal role in various cellular processes, including cell morphology, aggregation and
communication, proliferation, survival, and steroidogenesis.
Furthermore, the ECM
not only provides structural support for follicle formation and maturation but also acts
as a reservoir for paracrine and endocrine signals within the ovary, influencing follicle
fate [22].
Throughout the years, researchers have extensively investigated both synthetic and bi-
ological matrices for supporting follicle growth and maturation. However, these matrices
have certain limitations that this chapter delves into in detail.
2.2.2
Physical Hydrogels
Physical hydrogels are unique materials characterized by their non-covalent crosslinking
networks. Unlike chemically crosslinked hydrogels, they are formed through dynamic
and reversible cross-links, such as crystallization, ionic interactions, hydrophobic inter-
actions, electrostatic interactions, hydrogen bonding, or a combination of these.These
non-covalent interactions give physical hydrogels their viscoelastic behavior, deforma-
bility, and self-healing capabilities. By avoiding the use of chemical crosslinking agents,
physical hydrogels offer advantages in terms of biocompatibility and preparation simplic-
ity. Natural polymers, such as chitosan, alginate, cellulose and collagen, are commonly
used to create physical hydrogels due to their abundant availability, biocompatibility, and
resemblance to the extracellular matrix. These distinctive characteristics make physical
hydrogels appealing for diverse fields, such as drug delivery, tissue engineering, and
biomedical applications [23].
10
==PAGE:18==
Agarose
Agarose, a natural polysaccharide polymer with biocompatibility and unique properties,
including thermo-reversible gelation behavior and physiochemical features, has shown
promise as a biomaterial for tissue engineering [24].
In the past, follicles were often grown in agarose gel matrices. However, this approach
has certain limitations. The cross-linking step in agarose gel matrices requires a non-
physiological temperature (40°C), which could potentially harm the follicles. Studies
have shown a high rate of follicle degeneration (17.3%) when exposed to this non-
physiological temperature during cross-linking, indicating possible damage to follicles [19].
Furthermore, the use of agarose matrices did not provide sufficient structural support
for the follicles, leading to follicle deformation and flattening of granulosa cells, resulting
in a monolayer formation around the oocyte [19].
However, it was observed that secondary follicles in agarose-embedded culture systems
exhibited higher survival rates and demonstrated increased biological competence [25].
The use of agarose-based matrices has shown promise in growing human follicles, pri-
marily due to their porosity, which facilitates nutrient supply to the follicles for an ex-
tended period [26].
Matrigel
Alternatively, Matrigel is a widely used biomaterial derived from the Engelbreth-Holm-
Swarm (EHS) mouse sarcoma cells. It provides a basement membrane-like matrix that
supports the growth and development of follicles in vitro. Matrigel contains a mixture
of laminin, collagen IV, entactin, and other extracellular matrix components, providing a
favorable microenvironment for follicle growth and development [19].
Both agar and Matrigel-coated inserts have demonstrated previously the ability to sup-
port the survival and growth of human follciles for 7 days. The absence of significant
differences in follicular and oocyte diameter, apoptotic gene expressions, and hormonal
secretion have been shown and this finding suggests that agar and Matrigel have com-
parable effects on these parameters. However, the significantly higher Ki67 expression
was measured in the agar culture group which indicated a greater potential for follicle
proliferation in that system. Considering the porosity of agar and its ability to supply
nutrients for an extended period, it appeared to provide a supportive environment for in
vitro culture. In contrast, the limitations of Matrigel, such as animal-derived components,
undefined composition, and batch-to-batch variability, and potential risk of pathogen
transmission, made it unsuitable for clinical use [26].
11
==PAGE:19==
Fibrin
Fibrinogen and fibrin play crucial roles in follicle culture systems. Fibrinogen serves as
the precursor of fibrin, a natural protein involved in blood clotting and wound healing.
Fibrin hydrogels have been shown to promote the formation and maintenance of 3D
follicle structures, creating a mesh-like microenvironment suitable for follicle growth and
development. [27]. These hydrogels are biocompatible, biodegradable, and allow for
the controlled release of growth factors, supporting follicle survival and maturation [28].
Moreover, the mechanical properties of fibrin can be adjusted to mimic the stiffness of
native ovarian tissue, which is vital for follicle development [29].
Fibrin-alginate composite hydrogels offer improved mechanical stability and enhanced
follicle integrity, making them a promising choice for follicle culture. The combination
of fibrin and alginate enhances the stability of the hydrogel, while fibrin promotes cell
adhesion and follicle integrity [30].
However, it is important to consider the limitations of fibrin-based hydrogels. Fibrino-
gen derived from animal sources may carry the risk of immunogenic reactions, disease
transmission, and variations between batches [27]. Fibrin hydrogels have relatively low
viscosity, which can lead to challenges in effectively encapsulating and distributing fol-
licles, limited mechanical support, and faster nutrient depletion, potentially impacting
follicle growth and development. [30].
PEGylated fibrin hydrogels are created by covalently attaching polyethylene glycol (PEG)
chains to fibrin. This modification enhances the mechanical properties and stability of
the hydrogel, allowing for better control over its degradation rate and physical character-
istics [28]. PEGylation not only improves the biocompatibility of fibrin but also reduces
its immunogenicity, making it more suitable for follicle encapsulation and growth.
These PEGylated fibrin hydrogels provide a versatile platform for creating tailored en-
vironments for human follicle culture for 4 or 7 days. It supported sustained viabil-
ity of follicles, with no decrease in live follicle proportion from Day 1 (86.9±8.9%) to
Day 7 (83.4±6.4%), and promoted significant follicle growth, increasing diameter from
48.5±10.8 mm to 222.5±84.5 mm [28].
Nonetheless, it is important to note that the process of PEGylation can influence the
cell-binding properties, bioactivity, and susceptibility to degradation of fibrin, potentially
impacting cell adhesion, migration, and signaling [28].
12
==PAGE:20==
2.2.3
Alginate
Alginate, derived from brown seaweeds, is a natural anionic biopolymer composed
of unbranched polysaccharide chains comprising mannuronic acid (M) and guluronic
acid (G) units. Alginate is commonly cross-linked using divalent cations such as cal-
cium, which promote gelation and provide structural stability to the encapsulating ma-
trix [31]. Alginate’s composition and molecular weight can be adjusted, resulting in a
wide range of flexibility and stiffness. Additionally, its biocompatible, biodegradable and
non-immunogenic properties make it a versatile biomaterial suitable for diverse biomed-
ical applications [32].
Alginate serves as a 3D matrix that allows for the simple and efficient encapsulation
of ovarian follicles over a 10-day culture period. It creates a thin, shell-like protective
environment, enabling the growth and development of the follicles while preserving their
in vivo-like structure and characteristics [5].
Its gentle gelling properties, biochemical characteristics, and ability to form a mesh-
like structure make it an ideal material for follicle culture, allowing the diffusion of the
essential hormones (such as FSH) and proteins necessary for follicle development [33].
One challenge is controlling the degradation rate of the alginate hydrogel to match the
growth of the follicles [19] [34]. Additionally, the rigidity of the polymer can negatively
affect the further development of the follicles [34].
Studies have shown that the concentration of alginate can influence murine follicle out-
comes, with lower concentrations (0.125%) exhibiting better follicle survival and antrum
formation compared to higher concentrations (up to 3%) [35]. Similarly, softer hydro-
gels have been found to better support the development of follicles compared to stiffer
hydrogels [36]. In a study comparing various alginate concentrations (from 0.7% to 3%)
and treatments, lower stiffness hydrogels demonstrated significant diameter increases
ranging from 97.8% to 107.4%. However, higher stiffness hydrogels showed only a
modest 16.6% increase in diameter [33].
It is important to note that different mammalian species may have varying requirements
for mechanical properties, as seen in the contrasting effects of alginate concentrations
on follicle development in different species. In particular, in sheep, follicular growth
showed significant improvement in 2% alginate (increasing from 31.8 ± 0.8 μm to 54.06
± 2 μm), compared to 1% alginate (increasing from 33.1 ± 0.9 μm to 41.9 ± 1.5 μm) [37].
On the other hand, studies on 3D in vitro culture of primary-secondary follicles from non-
human primate species have shown that using a low concentration of alginate (0.25%)
13
==PAGE:21==
provided the best outcomes [38] [39].
To improve cell adhesion, alginate can be modified with cell adhesion peptides like the
arginine-glycine-aspartic acid (RGD) sequence. This modification, along with incorpo-
rating ECM proteins or RGD, has been shown to enhance the growth of the follicles and
their progesterone and estradiol secretion. Follicles cultured RGD grew larger by day
6 and continued to increase in size over the 8-day culture period, compared to follicles
cultured in alginate (alginate: -0.6%, RGD: 8.8%) [34].
Another approach is combining alginate with other polymers such as fibrin, Matrigel,
or gelatin. This combination improves cell attachment properties and the degradation
rate of the encapsulating material [30]. A fibrin-alginate matrix has demonstrated su-
periority over alginate alone in promoting follicle growth, increasing oocyte diameter,
stimulating antrum formation, and improving the percentage of competent oocytes for
fertilization [30]. Nonetheless, it is important to consider that combining alginate with
fibrin has limitations. Fibrin tends to be rapidly degraded by proteases secreted by the
growing follicles, resulting in the loss of mechanical support from the hydrogel and po-
tential structural changes in the follicles [27].
2.3
Biomaterials Applied in this Study
Collagen
Collagen is a natural component of the ECM, meaning it is the most widely distributed
protein in the human body, that provides an elastic environment and has been used as
the first natural matrix for grafting isolated preantral follicles [20] [40].
It offers advantages such as biodegradability, biocompatibility, and versatility [41] [42].
Studies have shown that collagen hydrogels hold promise for encapsulation and in vitro
culture of mouse preantral follicles, allowing for normal growth of follicles without limiting
diffusion of gases and metabolites [40].
Collagen-encapsulated mouse follicles have been successfully transplanted, although
challenges including oocyte atresia and granulosa cell luteinization were observed [43].
It was also reported that follicles cultured with collagen exhibited a loss of their spheroid
structure over time and became flattened [19].
Previous research on rat ovarian follicles encapsulated in type I collagen hydrogels
demonstrated that varying collagen hydrogel density and elasticity significantly affect
follicle development, phenotype, hormone secretion, and maturation [21]. It has been
14
==PAGE:22==
reported that higher collagen concentrations (3 mg/ml and 5 mg/ml) generally promote
better viability, smaller follicle size, and enhanced hormone production, while lower col-
lagen concentrations (1 mg/ml) can lead to reduced viability, larger follicle size, and
altered phenotype [21].
Collagen has the potential for combination with other biomaterials or undergo chemical
and physical modifications to enhance its mechanical properties [30]. However, the spe-
cific effects of these modifications on follicle survival and development in ovarian tissue
engineering have not been extensively studied. Therefore, addition of collagen com-
ponent to physical gels (alginate-based granular gels and cNFC-based gels) was used
in this study to examine whether their formulations can provide structural support, an
environment that allows follicle survival and development, and conditions encountered
in a natural ovary.
Carboxymethylated Nanofibrillated Cellulose
Carboxymethylated nanofibrillated cellulose (cNFC) has been reported as a suitable
physical gel for potential biomedical applications such as composites for bone replace-
ment, artificial skins, hydrogels for 3D bioprinting, scaffolds for tissue and cell growth,
and medical implants [44]. Besides other natural polymers, like alginate and collagen, it
shares properties similar to native tissue and ECM, such as suitable mechanical char-
acteristics for follicle growth [45]. Furthermore, its biocompatibility and remarkable dif-
fusion characteristics make it a favorable material for this study [46].
CNFC was developed to have better transparency and cell-guiding properties. This
was achieved by manipulating the fiber size through oxidation and with the present of
negatively charged fibers. This manipulation resulted in cNFC fibers with a width of
approximately 250 nm and lengths ranging from 10 to 100 μm [47]. This advancement
holds implications for monitoring cell behavior in a 3D matrix, particularly for investigat-
ing follicle survival and growth.
Despite the appealing attributes of the material, its potential in in vitro follicle culture has
not been previously explored. Nevertheless, carboxymethylated cellulose has demon-
strated promise in various applications, including tissue engineering and drug delivery.
It has shown potential in promoting cell attachment, migration, and stem cell differen-
tiation, particularly in the field of bone tissue engineering with improved osteoinductiv-
ity[44]. CNFC in cell-adhesive composite, formed by combining it with gelatin or col-
lagen, functions as a versatile biomaterial scaffold capable of aligning skeletal muscle
myotubes [47]. In addition, it was also a suitable biomaterial for fabricating skin tissue
15
==PAGE:23==
scaffolds with fibroblast and keratinocyte cells [45].
This study aims to fill the existing research gap by investigating the feasibility of using
cNFC for 3D culture of follicles.
Granular Hydrogels
Granular hydrogels, also known as microgels or particle-based hydrogels, are three-
dimensional networks of densely packed hydrogel particles. They have been widely
utilized in various fields for decades and are now gaining attention in biomedical appli-
cations [48].
Granular gels have been manufactured from a variety of materials, including synthetic
polymers like polyacrylamide (PAAm), polyethylene glycol (PEG), and polystyrene (PS),
as well as natural polymers such as gelatin, chitosan, and alginate [49].
A diverse range of methods have been developed for the formation of microgel systems,
including techniques such as emulsion, coacervation, gelation, spray drying, grinding,
and microfluidics. These particles can vary in size, shape, and crosslinking density, pro-
viding control over the mechanical and swelling properties of the resulting hydrogel [49].
The dense packing of hydrogel particles in granular hydrogels enables the formation of
interconnected networks with high porosity and tunable pore sizes, which are advanta-
geous for applications such as drug delivery, tissue engineering [49].
Granular hydrogels possess beneficial properties like shear-thinning (easy injection) and
self-healing (ability to reform), making them suitable for tissue injection and 3D printing
applications [48] [50].
Although the application of granular hydrogels in follicle cell culture remains unexplored,
their potential to facilitate nutrient and molecule diffusion, including hormones, through
interconnected microporous structures is noteworthy. This advantageous characteristic
may contribute to the growth and viability of follicle cells within the scaffold. Additionally,
the ability of cells to migrate and infiltrate within the hydrogel matrix makes granular gels
a promising biomaterial for follicle culture, offering potential opportunities for advancing
reproductive research [48].
Granular hydrogels offer modularity by allowing the incorporation of diverse microgel
populations into a single scaffold. This feature provides precise control over degra-
dation, mechanical characteristics (such as stiffness and elasticity), and drug delivery,
enhancing their versatility for applications such as in vivo tissue repair, in vitro cell cul-
16
==PAGE:24==
ture, and extrusion bioprinting [48] [50]. By customizing the stiffness and elasticity of the
hydrogel scaffold, granular hydrogels may offer researchers the opportunity to create an
environment closely resembling the natural conditions necessary for successful follicle
culture, making them valuable tools for advancing cell-based research and regenerative
medicine.
This project explores the utilization of granular alginate-collagen composite which is
an alginate-based granular gel composed of a 0.5% alginate solution combined with
3 mg/mL collagen solution in 2:1 ratio [50], as a potential alternative for ovarian folli-
cle culture. By leveraging the benefits of alginate and the advantageous properties of
granular hydrogels, the study aims to assess the suitability of granular alginate-collagen
composite for this application.
2.4
Rheology - Characterization of the Materials
Rheology provides an experimental technique for measuring the mechanical properties
of complex fluids and soft materials such as gels, polymers, and biological tissues. Im-
portant principles of rheology include deformation, stress, and strain. The two ways in
which materials can respond to applied stress are by absorbing or storing stress; they
can exhibit elastic (storage) or viscous (loss) properties [51] [52].
Viscoelasticity is a key concept in rheology that describes the combined properties of
viscosity (resistance to flow) and elasticity (the ability to recover its shape after defor-
mation) [52]. Viscoelastic materials exhibit time-dependent mechanical behavior, that
is, their response to an applied force changes over time. The rheological properties of
a viscoelastic material can be characterized by measuring its response to various types
of deformations, such as oscillatory shear, extension, or compression [53].
Understanding the viscoelastic behavior of biomaterials is essential for developing bio-
compatible and functional scaffolds for tissue engineering. The biomaterials used for
creating scaffolds must possess appropriate mechanical properties that can support
cell growth and proliferation. The mechanical properties of a biomaterial, such as its
stiffness and viscoelasticity, can significantly affect cell behavior, including migration,
differentiation, and morphogenesis [54]. For example, highly elastic or rigid biomate-
rials can prevent cell spreading and migration, whereas highly viscous materials can
restrict cell movement and induce apoptosis. In contrast, biomaterials with appropriate
viscoelastic properties can support cell migration and differentiation, leading to a better
approach for tissue modeling [55] [53].
17
==PAGE:25==
Various rheological measurements can provide valuable insights into the mechanical
properties of materials and contribute to a comprehensive understanding of the mechan-
ical dynamics and behaviors of materials. These measurements encompass amplitude
or strain sweep, time sweep or gelation protocols, and stress relaxation.
In an amplitude sweep, also known as a strain sweep or stress sweep, a small-amplitude
oscillatory deformation is applied to the material, and either the strain amplitude or the
stress amplitude is gradually increased while monitoring the response of the material.
A fundamental concept in viscoelasticity is the linear viscoelastic region (LVER), which
is the range of deformation amplitudes in which the material response is linear and re-
versible (Figure 2.4) [56]. In this region, the material behavior can be described by two
fundamental properties: the storage modulus (G’), which represents the elasticity of the
material, and the loss modulus (G”), which represents the viscosity of the material [52].
These two moduli can be measured using oscillatory rheology. A small-amplitude os-
cillatory deformation is applied to the sample placed between the two rotating parallel
plates, and the resulting stress and strain are measured while keeping the frequency
constant (Figure 2.5) [54]. It is worth noting that for incompressible materials, G’ is
approximately three times the value of the Young’s modulus.
Figure 2.4: Illustration showing the LVER for different materials as a function of applied strain. Created by
Biorender.
In addition, this amplitude sweep is useful for determining the yield stress and assessing
the irreversible effects on structures resulting from large strain amplitudes [51]. The yield
18
==PAGE:26==
stress, also known as yield point, represents the shear stress at the limit of the LVER,
where the material begins to soften. On the other hand, the flow stress, or flow point,
is the shear stress at the crossover point where the storage modulus equals the loss
modulus (G’=G”). The crossover point of physical gels is a critical point that indicates the
material transition from elastic behavior to more viscous state under applied stress [57].
The yield stress plays a crucial role in determining the mechanical stability of a gel and
its ability to withstand deformation or external forces [51].
Time sweep measurements involve subjecting materials to small-strain-amplitude de-
formations at a single frequency, allowing for the study of time-dependent behavior,
including processes like material’s stability, gelation or stress relaxation following defor-
mation [51] [56].
Figure 2.5: Schematic design of a rheometer. (A) Oscillatory and (B) stress-relaxation rheological mea-
surements. (A) The upper part of the parallel plates oscillates at different frequencies in time. The graphs
show the applied sinusoidal strain (λ) and oscillating stress (τ) in the viscous, viscoelastic, and elastic
cases. (B) During stress-relaxation rheological tests, the strain is constant and applied as a step function
(see the graph). The resulting, monotonically changing stress is shown in the three cases. Figure modified
by author [54] .
Stress-relaxation measurements are useful for studying viscoelastic systems and can
be done through simple shear or elongation. In this experiment, the sample is rapidly
deformed while monitoring the stress over time in the deformed state [51].
The resulting stress-relaxation curve represents the storage modulus as a function of
19
==PAGE:27==
time. For a viscoelastic material, the G(t) will gradually decrease on a timescale, that
is determined by the relaxation time of the sample. The relaxation modulus of a vis-
coelastic material demonstrates two possible behaviors: approaching zero (liquid-like)
or reaching a constant value (solid-like) [51].
This study aimed to assess the viscoelastic properties of cNFC and alginate-based gran-
ular hydrogel formulations, with the addition of collagen, and determine critical param-
eters for 3D culture of follicles. These parameters include stiffness, viscoelasticity, and
stress relaxation.
20
==PAGE:28==
3
Materials and Methods
3.1
Experimental Design
This study comprised four main experimental components: synthesis of the applied ma-
terials, characterization of the mechanical properties of the hydrogels, follicle isolation
from mice ovaries using mechanical dissection, and assessment of mouse follicle sur-
vival and growth in the hydrogels in vitro (Figure 3.1).
Figure 3.1: Schematic overview of the experimental procedure and examples of endpoint analyses. Cre-
ated by Biorender.
First, we fabricated the carboxymethylated nanofibrillated cellulose and alginate-based
granular gel to serve as the matrix for mouse ovarian follicle culture. We then performed
rheological experiments to identify suitable and relevant formulations for mouse ovarian
follicle culture.
21
==PAGE:29==
Next, we isolated follicles from the murine ovaries and deposited into the 3D matrices.
We evaluated follicle survival and growth in vitro by assessing follicle morphology and
measuring their diameters every other day for a period of 10 days. We investigated the
effects of matrix viscoelasticity and cell-binding motifs using different hydrogel formula-
tions, some of which incorporated collagen while others did not.
We initially tested six formulations, each with subtle differences in viscoelasticity and
cell-binding motifs. Subsequently, based on preliminary results and the viability of folli-
cles, certain formulations were discontinued, resulting in a refined set of formulations.
Lastly, we included alginate encapsulation as a reference group. The selection of this
reference group was based on its widespread adoption and recognition as the standard
approach for follicle culture. By comparing the performance of our novel formulations
against the established alginate encapsulation method, we aimed to assess the potential
for creating an improved alternative for follicle culture.
3.2
Preparation of the 3D Matrices
3.2.1
Synthesis of Nanofibrillated Cellulose Fibers
Carboxymethylation of microfibrillated cellulose to produce nanofibrillated cellulose (cNFC)
was performed by Postdoctoral Researcher, Marko Mihajlovic following a previously de-
scribed procedure with some modifications [58].
In summary, the preparation of microfibrillated cellulose (10% concentrated pulp, Bor-
regaard in Sarpsborg, Norway) involved the following steps.
Initially, 8 g of dry content (equivalent to 49.4 mmol of anhydroglucose repeating unit)
was added to a solution of 780 mL IPA:EtOH (2:1). The mixture was homogenized using
an Ultra-Turrax homogenizer equipped with an S25N-18G-ST dispensing element until
a homogeneous dispersion was achieved.
The mixture was then transferred into a 2 L round-bottom flask and heated to 35°C. Next,
100 mL of 6% NaOH solution (6 g, 150 mmol) (prepared in IPA:EtOH 2:1 a day before)
was added, and the resulting mixture was stirred for 30 min at 35°C. Subsequently, the
temperature was raised to 45°C, and monochloroacetic acid (MCA) dissolved in 30 mL
IPA:EtOH 2:1 (5.64 g, 60 mmol) was added. The mixture was stirred for an additional 3
hours at 45°C.
To adjust the pH of the mixture to 7, 50 mL of 10% (w/v) acetic acid was added. The
pH-adjusted mixture was then vacuum filtered, and the solid product was extensively
washed with IPA. The washed solid was transferred into dialysis bags (cutoff 14 kDa) and
22
==PAGE:30==
dialyzed against water for three days. Finally, the material was freeze-dried, resulting
in the production of a white cotton-like material denoted as cNFC20.
3.2.2
CNFC-based Hydrogel Formulations
Hydrogel matrices for the in vitro culture of follicles were based on cNFC and collagen
(Cultrex rat collagen I, R&D Systems, 10 mg/ml). CNFC stock solution (5% w/v) in
culture medium (Table A.4) was used for preparing the formulations: 2% and 4% cNFC
2%, without and with 1 mg/ml collagen (Table A.1). The formulations without collagen
were prepared by performing dilution of the cNFC stock solution in the culture medium.
Prior to follicles isolation, the dissolved cNFC stock was centrifuged for 4 min at 4000
rpm at 22°C and aliquoted for different formulations. The formulations containing col-
lagen were prepared according to the following procedure. From this point, everything
was kept on ice to slow down polymerization. The collagen stock solution is acidic and
only polymerizes at physiological pH. Therefore, HEPES and NaHCO3 were used to
neutralize the solution for collagen polymerization. The culture medium was mixed with
HEPES and NaHCO3, and this mixture was then added to the collagen and mixed by
pipetting up and down slowly. Subsequently, collagen was added to the fibers. From
here on, the pH of the collagen was neutralized; therefore, polymerization was initiated.
Finally, different matrix formulations were distributed in a 96-well plate by depositing a
thin layer of hydrogel (approximately 1 mm) with a positive displacement pipette. After
depositing the follicles in the wells another thin layer (also around 1 mm) of hydrogel
was distributed on top carefully (Figure 3.2).
3.2.3
Alginate-based Granular Hydrogel Formulations
The alginate-based granular hydrogel was prepared according to a previously described
procedure with some modifications [50]. First, 1% w/v alginate solution in MilliQ water
was vigorously stirred for 4 hours at 60°C. In a sterile beaker, a 2 mg/mL CaCO3 solution
in MilliQ water was prepared and mixed with the alginate solution in a 1:1 ratio. The
mixture was then stirred for 1 hour at room temperature using a magnetic stirrer with a
stir bar diameter matching that of the glassware. After 1 hour of stirring, acetic acid was
added in a 1:500 ratio and stirred overnight at 650 rpm.
The next day, the solution underwent gelation, resulting in a viscous consistency. The
gelled alginate solution was mechanically fragmented into microparticles by homoge-
nizing at 15000 rpm for 10 minutes using an Ultra-Turrax homogenizer. The resulting
solution was centrifuged at 18500 G for 20 minutes, and the supernatant was discarded.
23
==PAGE:31==
The microparticles were then resuspended in culture medium containing 2 mM NaOH
and left overnight at room temperature. Afterward, the particles were homogenized
again at 15000 rpm for 3 minutes and centrifuged at 18500 G for 10 minutes. The
supernatant was carefully discarded.
For the granular alginate-collagen composite, the jam-packed alginate microparticles
were mixed with neutralized collagen. The collagen stock solution (10.9 mg/mL) was
diluted to a concentration of 3 mg/mL and neutralized with 4% (w/v) HEPES and 4%
(w/v) NaHCO3 on ice to slow down the collagen polymerization. The composite was
prepared by combining the alginate microparticles and neutralized collagen (3 mg/mL)
in a 2:1 ratio, resulting in a final collagen concentration of 1 mg/mL. The mixture was
gently pipetted up and down on ice to ensure thorough mixing.
The composite material, similarly to the cNFC formulations (see in Section 3.2.2), was
deposited into the wells of a 96-well plate followed by encapsulation of follicles (Fig-
ure 3.2).
3.3
Characterization of Mechanical Properties of the Applied
Materials
Oscillatory shear measurements were performed to characterize the rheological prop-
erties of the hydrogel matrices. The measurements were carried out using a DHR-2
rheometer (TA Instruments) equipped with a plate-plate measuring geometry (20 mm)
and a solvent trap to prevent water evaporation. All measurements were conducted at
a controlled temperature of 37 °C.
The oscillatory strain within strain range from 0.1 to 1000% and at a frequency of 1
Hz at 37°C was conducted to determine the linear viscoelastic region (LVER) of each
hydrogel. The value at which the G′ value deviated 5% from the plateau value (according
to the standards ISO 6721–10 and EN/DIN EN 14770) was taken as the limit of LVER.
This allowed the identification of the range of strain amplitudes within which the hydrogel
exhibited a linear response.
Gelation experiments were conducted using time sweep initiated once the rheometer
reached a temperature of 37°C. The experiments were performed at a frequency of 1
Hz and a shear strain of 1%, allowing for the investigation of gelation kinetics and the
development of the gel structure over time.
Furthermore, the stress-relaxation properties of the hydrogel samples were assessed
24
==PAGE:32==
by subjecting them to a step strain with varying percentages ranging from 1% to 2% at
37°C. This allowed the evaluation of how the hydrogel responded to applied strain and
its ability to relax and dissipate stress.
3.4
Handling of Experimental Animals
Female mice (Naval Medical Research Institute (NMRI), Taconic, Denmark), aged 14-
18 days, were utilized for the collection of ovaries and subsequent isolation of follicles.
The mice were housed in group settings, provided with a pellet diet, and had unlimited
access to water. They were maintained under controlled environmental conditions with
a 12-hour light/12-hour dark cycle at a temperature range of 20-22°C. Euthanasia was
carried out by cervical dislocation.
This study involving animal subjects was conducted in accordance with the ethical guide-
lines and regulations set forth by the Danish Animal Experiments Inspectorate under
Danish legislation (case file 2020-15-0201-00549). The research protocol adhered to
the guidelines established by the Department of Experimental Medicine, University of
Copenhagen, Denmark, which is accredited by the Association for Assessment and
Accreditation of Laboratory Animal Care.
3.5
The Culture of Mouse Follicles in 3D Matrices
3.5.1
Follicle isolation
The ovaries were harvested and placed in 2 mL Eppendorf tubes containing a harvest
medium composed of 91% McCoy’s 5A medium (Gibco, 22330-021) and 9% fetal bovine
serum (FBS) (Table A.2). To prepare the ovaries for follicle isolation, any remaining fat
tissue was carefully removed in a petri dish under a microscope.
Secondary follicles, with diameters ranging from 80 to 150 μm, were isolated by dis-
secting the ovaries using two 27-gauge needles attached to 1 mL syringes. These folli-
cles were then collected in an isolation medium comprising 88.6% DMEM/F-12 (Gibco,
21041-025), 9% FBS, 1.4% HEPES (15 mM, Gibco, 15630-049), and 1% penicillin-
streptomycin (Pen/Strep) (Table A.3).
Throughout the isolation and encapsulation processes, diligent efforts were made to
maintain the follicles at a constant temperature of 37°C and a pH of 7.
3.5.2
Encapsulation of Follicles in 3D Matrices
In aseptic conditions, follicles were carefully transferred to a 96-well plate (Thermo Sci-
entific) using a sterile micropipette. The number of follicles per transfer varied between
25
==PAGE:33==
1 and 10, and only a minimal amount of culture medium (approximately 5 μL) was added
along with the follicles. The plate contained different formulations, as specified in Ta-
ble A.1.
The culture medium used in this experiment consisted of 92% α-minimal essential medium
(α-MEM) (Gibco, 12571-063), 4.8% fetal bovine serum (FBS), 1% insulin-transferrin-
selenium (ITS) (Gibco, 441400-045), 1% penicillin-streptomycin (Pen/Strep), 1% Gluta-
max (Gibco, 35050-038), 0.1% follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH), and 0.1% luteinizing
hormone (LH) (Table A.4). Prior to adding the hormones, the medium was sterilized by
passing it through a 0.22 μm pore size Minisart syringe filter (Sartorius, 16534). Addi-
tionally, some wells of the 96-well plate were filled with 150 μL of phosphate-buffered
saline (PBS) each to maintain high humidity.
The follicles were encapsulated within the wells of 96-well plates using a two-layered
approach (Figure 3.2). A thin layer (approximately 1 mm) of material was first prepared,
into which the follicles were deposited, and then an additional thin layer (also around
1 mm) was applied on top. This encapsulation process prevents their growth on the
bottom of the plate in a 2D manner and ensures they are within the appropriate magni-
fication range of the microscope.
Figure 3.2: Two-layered encapsulation of follicles in 96-well plates. The follicles were deposited into 1 mm
bottom layer, followed by the application of an additional 1 mm top layer. Created by Biorender.
26
==PAGE:34==
The plate was incubated at 37°C for 10-20 minutes to induce polymerization. Afterward,
150 μl of follicle culture medium was added to each well.
Prior to imaging, the plate was incubated for 1 hour. Images of the follicles were then
captured using a Zeiss AxioVert 135 microscope.
Throughout the 10-day follicle culture period, a partial medium exchange was performed
every other day, with half of the culture medium (50 μL) being replaced by fresh medium.
3.5.3
Follicle Maturation and Imaging
Follicles were cultured in the incubator for 10 days at 37°C, introducing 5% CO2. The cul-
ture medium was exchanged to provide optimal conditions for follicle maturation, while
images were captured every other day starting from day 0 to monitor follicle survival and
growth.
3.6
Follicle Encapsulation Using Alginate Beads
As the state-of-art method, alginate bead encapsulation was employed in this project
following the guidelines of the Laboratory of Reproductive Biology Research Group at
Rigshospitalet [31].
3.6.1
Preparation of alginate
Sodium alginate (Sigma-Aldrich) was reconstituted in DPBS without Ca2+ to the desired
concentration of 0.5%. The mixture was briefly vortexed and then placed on an orbital
agitator.
3.6.2
Preparation of cross-linking solution
A cross-linking solution was prepared by mixing 140 mM NaCl and 50 mM CaCl2 with
deionized water, followed by sterile filtration using a 0.22 µm pore-sized filter.
3.6.3
Follicle encapsulation and culture
To wash the alginate-encapsulated follicles, a 4-well plate (Thermo) was prepared with
700 µL of culture medium in each well and pre-equilibrated in a 37°C incubator with 5%
CO2 and 100% humidity overnight.
For follicle culture, a 96-well plate (Thermo) was prepared with 100 µL of culture medium
in each well, while the remaining wells were filled with DPBS to maintain humidity. The
plate was pre-equilibrated in a 37°C incubator with 5% CO2 and 100% humidity for at
27
==PAGE:35==
least 1 hour. In a 35 mm dish, a 3.5 mL cross-linking solution was prepared, and three
0.5% alginate drops of 100 µL each were placed in another dish.
The isolated follicles were sequentially transferred into the three alginate drops using
a 10 µL pipette, with approximately 4 µL of alginate containing each follicle. Before
transferring a follicle from the third drop, the Finntip was changed, and 4 µL of algi-
nate containing the follicle was aspirated. The pipette tip was then cleaned, and the
alginate beads enclosing the follicles were dropped vertically into the cross-linking so-
lution (Figure 3.3). After 1-2 minutes, the alginate beads from the cross-linking solution
were transferred to the prepared 4-well dish for washing in culture media. The beads
were washed twice and then individually transferred to a 96-well plate, with each well
containing 100 μL of culture medium.
During the 10-day follicle culture, half of the culture medium (50 μL) was replaced with
fresh medium every other day.
Figure 3.3: Alginate bead method for follicle encapsulation. Isolated follicles are encapsulated by vertically
dropping alginate droplets into a cross-linking solution (140 mM NaCl, 50 mM CaCl2). After cross-linking,
the encapsulated follicles are transferred to a 96-well plate for culturing.Created by Biorender.
28
==PAGE:36==
3.7
Analysis
3.7.1
Analysis of Follicle Survival and Growth
The viability and growth of the follicles were assessed using an inverted microscope
(Zeiss AxioVert 135). Nonviable follicles were identified based on the presence of re-
leased or compromised oocytes, incomplete granulosa cell coverage, ruptured struc-
ture, or reduced diameter (Figure 4.26). Two perpendicular diameter measurements
were taken from the outer layer of each follicle to determine the average diameter.
3.7.2
Statistical Analysis
Quantitative data is often presented as mean±standard error (SE) values.
Statistical analysis was performed to assess the growth trends of follicles in different for-
mulations. The normality of the data was evaluated using the Shapiro-Wilk test. Based
on the results, appropriate non-parametric tests were selected to analyze the data.
To compare the differences between paired observations (average diameter on Day 0
and Day 10) and determine the significance of these differences, the Wilcoxon signed-
rank test was utilized. This test is suitable for non-normally distributed data.
The Mann-Whitney U test, also known as the pairwise Wilcoxon rank-sum test, was
employed to evaluate the significance of the observed changes in follicle growth and to
compare the growth trends among the different formulations. This non-parametric test
is suitable for analyzing independent groups.
The statistical analysis was performed using R, and a level of significance of 0.05 (α
= 0.05) was used to determine statistical significance. This means that a p-value less
than 0.05 was considered statistically significant, indicating strong evidence against the
null hypothesis.
29
==PAGE:37==
4
Results
4.1
Rheological Characterization
All rheology measurements were conducted at 37°C to mimic physiologically relevant
temperature. This ensures the relevance of the rheological data in evaluating the per-
formance of the materials and mechanical properties within the context of follicle devel-
opment and culture.
4.1.1
Strain Sweep
The strain sweep analysis is a valuable technique used for multiple purposes, such as
determining the linear viscoelastic range (LVER), as discussed below, or characterizing
the yielding stress and crossover point indicating more liquid character of the material
due to breaking of the internal network. The test involves applying a fixed frequency
while varying the strain.
Characterization of the Linear Viscoelastic Region in Physical Gels
In strain sweep tests, identifying the LVER is essential as it represents the range of strain
amplitudes where the material exhibits a linear relationship between applied stress or
strain and resulting deformation. Determining the LVER allows for reliable prediction of
the material’s mechanical response and establishes the operating conditions for sub-
sequent rheological measurements, such as stress relaxation tests. Furthermore, the
LVER is important to ensure that the observed changes are only due to the specific
measurement, not disturbances from applying overly large strains.
Table 4.1: Linear viscoelastic region of the different formulations
Formulation
Limit of LVER
2% cNFC
10%
2% cNFC 1 mg/mL collagen
2%
4% cNFC
15%
4% cNFC 1 mg/mL collagen
15%
granular alginate
30%
(2:1) granular alginate : collagen (3 mg/mL)
10%
The results of the strain sweeps for the physical gels studied here are shown in Fig-
ure 4.1 and 4.2. Table 4.1 indicates the displayed LVER of the different formulations.
30
==PAGE:38==
In addition to determining the linear viscoelastic range (LVER) subsequent time sweeps
and stress relaxation measurements were then conducted to gain more detailed insights
into the material’s behavior.
Figure 4.1: Strain sweeps were conducted with increasing strain values from 0.1 to 1000% at a frequency
of 1 Hz and at 37°C to determine the linear viscoelastic region and quantify the storage modulus (G’) and
loss modulus (G”) for cNFC formulations.
31
==PAGE:39==
Figure 4.2: Strain sweeps were conducted with increasing strain values from 0.1 to 1000% at a frequency
of 1 Hz and at 37°C to determine the linear viscoelastic region and quantify the storage modulus (G’) and
loss modulus (G”) for granular alginate formulations.
4.1.2
Time Sweep
Time sweep measurements were conducted on each hydrogel formulation using strain
values of 1% or 2%. These measurements serve to evaluate the mechanical proper-
ties, particularly the stiffness, shear modulus, structural stability and gelation kinetics of
the hydrogels (Section 4.1.2). The shear modulus at equilibrium derived from the time
sweep data reflects the material’s stiffness in its fully formed gel state, with hydrogels
possessing higher equilibrium moduli generally indicating greater stiffness or rigidity,
while those with lower moduli suggest increased flexibility.
The tan δ (G′′/G′) value provides insights into the materials relative ability to store or
dissipate energy. According to Figure 4.3 and 4.4 , it can be observed that different for-
mulations of materials exhibit varying degrees of viscoelastic behavior. The tan δ value
was observed to be the highest for 2% cNFC formulation, measuring 0.57, indicating a
less elastic character with descreased stiffness and lower energy storage capabilities.
On the other hand, tan δ was closer to 0 in the cases of 2% cNFC with collagen, granular
alginate, and granular alginate-collagen composite formulations with values of 0.17,
0.16, 0.17, respectively. This implies a more elastic behavior with increased stiffness
32
==PAGE:40==
and enhanced energy storage capabilities. These findings highlight the influence of
formulation composition on the viscoelastic properties of the materials.
Time sweep measurements were performed on the granular alginate, granular alginate-
collagen composite, 2% cNFC, and 4% cNFC formulations with or without collagen. The
storage (G’) and loss (G”) moduli values are presented in Figure 4.3.
In Table 4.2, the mean (±SE) values are presented and Figure 4.6 and 4.7 illustrates
the storage modulus values for the different formulations.
Figure 4.3: Time sweeps conducted at constant strain of 1% or 2%, at frequency of 1 Hz and at 37°C.
Time-dependent variations of storage modulus (G’) and loss modulus (G”) for cNFC formulations.
33
==PAGE:41==
Figure 4.4: Time sweeps conducted at constant strain of 1%, at frequency of 1 Hz and at 37°C. Time-
dependent variations of storage modulus (G’) and loss modulus (G”) for granular alginate formulations.
Gelation
The objective of investigating the gelation behavior of the hydrogel formulations was to
evaluate the influence of collagen on the gelation process and to understand its impact
on the resulting stiffness and stability of the physical hydrogels.
In the studied hydrogel formulations, namely 2% cNFC, 4% cNFC, and granular algi-
nate, the storage modulus exhibited a linear response throughout the measurement
duration, indicating that these formulations were already in a gelled state and stable in
the experimental timescale (Figure 4.3 and 4.4).
34
==PAGE:42==
Figure 4.5: Gelation of the formulations containing collagen: 2% cNFC with 1 mg/mL collagen, and 4%
cNFC with 1 mg/mL collagen, and granular alginate-collagen composite. The measurements were con-
ducted at a strain value of 1% (or 2%), a frequency of 1 Hz, and at 37°C.
Regarding gelation, it is noteworthy to observe the varying behavior of the collagen-
containing hydrogel formulations (Figure 4.5). Among the studied formulations, the 2%
cNFC with 1 mg/mL collagen formulation showed a clear and significant increase in
storage modulus (G’) over time, indicating collagen polymerization, which contributes to
gelation. This takes place upon neutralization of the environment at 37°C.
In contrast, the 4% cNFC and granular alginate formulations with collagen demonstrated
less pronounced deviation from the initial linearity, implying a smaller effect of additional
polymerization before reaching a state of equilibrium in gelation. Although the final
stiffness of these formulations may be relatively lower than that of the granular alginate,
the presence of collagen still influences the gelation process owing to its polymerization.
Stiffness of Hydrogel Formulations
As expected, increasing the fiber concentration in the cNFC formulations led to a four-
fold increase in stiffness (Figure 4.3), demonstrating a correlation between fiber con-
35
==PAGE:43==
centration and stiffness.
The inclusion of collagen in the granular gel formulations decreased the stiffness com-
pared to the corresponding formulations without collagen. This decrease in stiffness is
attributed to the dilution of the granular alginate with the collagen solution. The pres-
ence of collagen reduced the stiffness by a factor of 3-4 for the granular alginate and
granular alginate-collagen composite formulations.
Comparing the mean storage modulus values of different hydrogel formulations, it can
be observed that the 2% cNFC and granular alginate-collagen composite hydrogels ex-
hibit similar stiffness (Figure 4.6 and 4.7). The stiffness of the 2% cNFC formulation was
57.2±12.7 Pa, while for the granular alginate-collagen composite hydrogel, the stiffness
was 57.4±12.1 Pa.
The 2% cNFC with 1 mg/mL collagen formulation demonstrated a stiffness of 84.9±9.72
Pa, while the 4% cNFC with 1 mg/mL collagen exhibited a stiffness of 115±9.72 Pa. The
4% cNFC formulation also displayed a stiffness of 94.1±18.7 Pa. Finally, the granular
alginate formulation exhibited a stiffness of 201±18.3 Pa.
Figure 4.6: Storage modulus (G’) values of 2% and 4% cNFC formulations. The solid black line represents
the mean values of the measurements. The data shown are based on measurements from 4 replicates.
36
==PAGE:44==
Figure 4.7: Storage modulus (G’) values of granular alginate and granular alginate-collagen composite
formulations. The solid black line represents the mean values of the measurements. The data shown are
based on measurements from 3 replicates.
Table 4.2: The table displays the mean (±SE) storage modulus (G’) values obtained from time sweep
measurements of cNFC and granular gel formulations.
Formulation
G’ (Pa)
±SE
2% cNFC
57.2
12.7
4% cNFC
94.1
18.7
2% cNFC 1 mg/mL collagen
84.9
9.72
4% cNFC 1 mg/mL collagen
115
9.78
granular alginate
201
18.3
(2:1) granular alginate : collagen (3 mg/mL)
57.4
12.1
4.1.3
Stress Relaxation
Stress relaxation measurements provide insight into the dynamic characteristics and
viscoelastic properties of the hydrogels. The stress–relaxation curve, which represents
the normalized stress over time (σ/σ0), allows the evaluation of the material’s ability to
37
==PAGE:45==
release stress when deformed. A more viscous and dynamic hydrogel is expected to ex-
hibit greater and quicker stress release, which is beneficial for follicle growth and move-
ment within an environment mimicking the dynamic properties of the ovarian ECM. On
the other hand, stiffer materials with a more permanent molecular structure may impose
spatial restrictions and hinder follicle development. Therefore, understanding stress re-
laxation behavior is crucial for providing appropriate mechanical cues and support for
the cultivation of follicles in vitro.
The results are depicted in Figure 4.8 and Figure 4.9.
Figure 4.8: Stress relaxation curves of 2% and 4% cNFC formulations, illustrating the normalized stress
values (σ/σ0) in time (s). The shaded regions represent the variation in measurements. The measurements
were conducted at constant strain of 1% (or 2%), at frequency of 1 Hz and at 37°C.
38
==PAGE:46==
Figure 4.9: Stress relaxation curves of granular alginate and granular alginate-collagen composite formu-
lations, illustrating the mean normalized stress values (σ/σ0) over time (s). The shaded regions represent
the variation in measurements. The measurements were conducted at constant strain of 1%, at frequency
of 1 Hz and at 37°C.
Figure 4.8 illustrates the stress relaxation profiles of the cNFC formulations, whereas
Figure 4.9 shows the stress relaxation behaviors of the granular gel formulations.
The formulations containing 2% cNFC and 2% cNFC with 1 mg/mL collagen hydrogel
demonstrated limited stress release, dissipating approximately 25% of the stress within
30 seconds and around 40% by the end of the observation period. On the other hand,
the 4% cNFC formulation exhibited slightly more efficient stress relaxation, releasing
approximately 35% of the initial stress within 30 seconds and reaching 60% over the
entire measurement period. The addition of 1 mg/mL collagen to the 4% cNFC formula-
tion slightly enhanced stress release, with 30% being dissipated within 30 seconds and
50% by the end of the measurement period.
In terms of stress relaxation, both the granular alginate and granular alginate-collagen
composite formulations exhibited a release of approximately 22% of the stress within
the first 30 seconds. However, the granular alginate formulation demonstrated more
39
==PAGE:47==
effective stress release, dissipating around 50% of the initial stress by the end of the
1000-second measurement period. In contrast, the granular alginate-collagen compos-
ite released only approximately 30% of the stress during the measurement period.
Table 4.3: Rheology Summary
Formulation
Critical strain - End of LVER
G’ (Pa)
Tan δ
Gelation time (s)
Stress Relax at 30s
2% cNFC
10%
57.2 ± 12.7
0.57
-
25%
2% cNFC 1 mg/mL collagen
2%
84.9 ± 9.72
0.17
400
25%
4% cNFC
15%
94.1 ± 18.7
0.23
-
35%
4% cNFC 1 mg/mL collagen
15%
115 ± 9.78
0.35
200
30%
Granular alginate
30%
201 ± 18.3
0.16
-
22%
(2:1) granular alginate : collagen (3 mg/mL)
10%
57.4 ± 12.1
0.17
85
22%
40
==PAGE:48==
4.2
Three-dimensional In Vitro Culture of Murine Ovarian
Follicles
The appearance of follicles encapsulated and cultured in cNFC, cNFC-collagen, granu-
lar alginate, and granular alginate-collagen composite 3D matrices was recorded every
other day. The survival and growth of follicles were assessed by monitoring their ap-
pearance and calculating the average diameter.
The following results are presented in a structured manner, with a separation based
on the experiments conducted. The separation of results into two sections, namely ex-
periments 1-5 and experiments 6-12, aligns with the progression of the study and the
subsequent refinement of the experimental focus. Starting from experiment 6, the study
narrowed its focus to the utilization of 2% cNFC and granular alginate-collagen compos-
ite formulations, along with alginate droplet encapsulation as a reference method.
4.2.1
Follicular Viability in 3D Matrices
The results of the experiments conducted in this study focused on assessing the per-
centage of intact follicles over a 10-day culture period (Figure 4.10). Through exper-
iments 1-5 (Figure 4.10a), it was observed that the best outcomes regarding follicle
viability were associated with using 2% cNFC and granular alginate-collagen composite
formulations. Building upon this observation and considering the assessment of folli-
cle growth, three formulations were subsequently discarded, namely 2% cNFC with 1
mg/mL collagen, 4% cNFC, and granular alginate.
41
==PAGE:49==
(a) Formulation comparison in Experiments 1-5.
(b) Formulation comparison in Experiments 6-12.
Figure 4.10: The plot displays the median percentage of intact follicles measured at various time points
(day) for different formulations. Error bars represent the standard error of the median. Each formulation is
presented in a separate panel.
In the subsequent experiments from 6 to 12 (Figure 4.10b), the focus was on using
2% cNFC and granular alginate-collagen composite formulations, along with alginate
42
==PAGE:50==
encapsulation as a comparison method, which is considered the current state-of-the-
art. The goal was to compare the performance of 2% cNFC and granular alginate-
collagen composite with alginate encapsulation to understand their effectiveness and
potential benefits. These experiments aimed to provide valuable insights into whether
these physical gels could serve as alternative approaches in this field.
Figure 4.11: Boxplot depicting the percent intact follicles (%) on Day 2 and 10 for different formulations.
Each boxplot represents the distribution of percent intact follicles across all experiments and shows the
median, quartiles, and outliers.
The experiments focused on monitoring the median percentage of intact follicles over
time, with a particular emphasis on comparing the values on Day 2 with those on Day
10 (Figure 4.11). For the 2% cNFC formulation, the percentage of intact follicles on
Day 2 was 92.6% (±2.42%), while on Day 10, it decreased to 20.8% (±3.25%). The
granular alginate-collagen composite formulation exhibited a percentage of intact fol-
licles of 93.4% (±0.64%) on Day 2, which decreased to 32.3% (±3.36%) on Day 10.
Notably, the highest percentage of intact follicles throughout the entire culture period
was observed with alginate encapsulation, where 93.5% (±6.45%) survived on Day 2,
and 55.8% (±0.91%) were able to endure the entire 10-day period.
43
==PAGE:51==
In contrast, the discarded formulations, namely 2% cNFC with 1 mg/mL collagen 4%
cNFC, and granular alginate, showed lower percentages of intact follicles by Day 10.
Specifically, the 2% cNFC with 1 mg/mL collagen formulation demonstrated 16.7%
(±5.56%), the 4% cNFC formulation showed 15.8% (±4.57%), and the granular algi-
nate exhibited 14.9% (±6.87%) intact follicles. These findings indicate a comparatively
lower percentage of intact follicles in the discarded formulations, while highlighting the
favorable performance of the 2% cNFC and granular alginate-collagen composite for-
mulations in maintaining follicle viability.
4.2.2
Follicular Growth in 3D Matrices
Figure 4.12 illustrates the growth trends of follicles in different formulations over the
10-day culture period. The graph focuses on follicles that remained intact for the en-
tire duration. As shown in Figure 4.12a, it is evident that the discarded formulations
performed slightly worse than the selected formulations, which exhibited similar growth
patterns.
In Figure 4.12b, the growth of follicles encapsulated in alginate, which is considered
the state-of-the-art methodology, was relatively limited compared to the materials being
investigated in the current study. Follicles that experienced growth were primarily those
that were already larger at the beginning. In contrast, the granular alginate-collagen
composite formulation showed a more favorable growth trend.
44
==PAGE:52==
(a) Formulation comparison in Experiments 1-5.
(b) Formulation comparison in Experiments 6-12.
Figure 4.12: The plot displays the average diameter of follicles measured at different time points (days)
throughout the 10-day culture period for different formulations of the physical gels. Each line represents
the change in follicle diameter over time, providing insights into growth patterns. The solid black line in the
figure represents mean values. The formulations are presented as separate panels.
45
==PAGE:53==
The growth trend of follicles in different formulations was analyzed using a boxplot to
compare their average diameter on Day 0 and Day 10 in the three different formulations:
2% cNFC, alginate bead encapsulation, and granular alginate-collagen composite.
Shapiro-Wilk test was used to assess the normality of average diameter growth between
Day 0 and Day 10 amongst follicles that survived. With p = 3.43e-8, it can be concluded
that growth does not follow a normal distribution, hence, Wilcoxon signed-ranked test
shall be used to compare the level of significance of growth.
The analysis of the growth trend revealed that the average follicle diameter exhibited
a significant increase from Day 0 to Day 10 for all of the formulations under this inves-
tigation. 2% cNFC with p = 8.87e-20, granular alginate-collagen composite with p =
4.02e-31, alginate bead encapsulation with p = 7.81e-13, indicating their potential for
promoting follicle growth in vitro.
In the 2% cNFC formulation, the average follicle diameter significantly increased from
108.98 ± 2.66 μm on Day 0 to 274.42 ± 15.82 μm on Day 10. Similarly, the granular
alginate-collagen composite formulation showed a notable increase from 112.53 ± 1.95
μm on Day 0 to 304.15 ± 12.70 μm on Day 10 The average diameter in the alginate
encapsulation group displayed a slightly less significant change from 112.75 ± 3.20 μm
on Day 0 to 157.97 ± 7.89 μm on Day 10.
The Mann-Whitney U test (or pairwise Wilcoxon rank-sum test) indicated a significant
difference (p=4.42e-7) between the 2% cNFC formulation and the alginate encapsula-
tion group in terms of follicular growth. Likewise, a significant difference (p=1.83e-11)
was observed between the growth of follicles in the granular alginate-collagen composite
formulation and in the alginate encapsulation group. However, no significant difference
was found between the growth trends in the 2% cNFC and granular alginate-collagen
composite formulations (p=0.11). These findings suggest that the 2% cNFC and granu-
lar alginate-collagen composite formulations have a more pronounced impact on follicle
growth compared to alginate encapsulation.
46
==PAGE:54==
Figure 4.13: The boxplot figure illustrates the comparison of average diameter (μm) for 2% cNFC and
granular alginate-collagen composite compared to alginate encapsulation. Each boxplot represents the
distribution of the average follicle diameter across multiple in vitro culture experiments and shows the
median, quartiles, and outliers. The significance of the differences is indicated with stars (* for p < 0.05, **
for p < 0.01, *** for p < 0.001) obtained from Wilcoxon signed-rank test.
Table 4.4: Assessment parameters of follicle survival and growth cultured in different formulations
in vitro.
Formulation
N
Viability (%)
Follicle Diameter (μm)
Day 0
Day 6
Day 10
2% cNFC
300
19
111 (±1)
190 (±5)
271 (±7)
granular alginate-collagen composite
294
33
113 (±1)
213 (±5)
313 (±7)
alginate encapsulation
61
54
112 (±3)
150 (±6)
151 (±5)
N shows the number of secondary follicles started in the cultures. Follicle diameters are described as the
Mean (±SE) of multiple follicles from different cultures.
Examples from Follicular Development and Survival in Different Formulations
In Figure 4.14, 4.15, and 4.16 examples are shown depicting the follicular development in three different
formulations over the course of 10 days. These figures illustrate the measured average follicle diameter,
offering insights into growth patterns and changes in size.
47
==PAGE:55==
Figure 4.14: Follicular development in 3D matrix containing 2% cNFC over the 10-day culture period in
vitro, depicting the measured average follicle diameter. Scale bars = 200 μm.
Figure 4.15: Follicular development in 3D matrix of granular alginate-collagen composite formulation over
the 10-day culture period in vitro, depicting the measured average follicle diameter. Scale bars = 200 μm.
48
==PAGE:56==
Figure 4.16: Follicular development in alginate encapsulation over the 10-day culture period in vitro, de-
picting the measured average follicle diameter. Scale bars = 200 μm.
Figure 4.17, 4.18, and 4.19 present a collection of 18 chosen follicles to investigate the growth pattern
observed in 2% cNFC formulation.
Similarly, Figure 4.20, 4.21, and 4.22 show follicles and their growth trend in granular alginate-collagen
composite formulation.
Lastly, Figure 4.23, 4.24, and 4.25 illustrate the follicle growth trend in alginate bead encapsulation to
make a comparison between the gold standard and our two formulations.
These figures provide a visual representation of the morphological changes exhibited by the follicles at
three distinct time points: Day 0, Day 6, and Day 10.
The growth trend in the 2% cNFC and granular alginate collagen composite matrices was observed to be
less coherent. The sizes and the appearance of the follicles can vary more in these formulations than in
alginate bead encapsulation.
In some instances, the follicles displayed a darkened appearance, which is believed to result from granulosa
cell proliferation, leading to an increased density of cells within the follicles.
49
==PAGE:57==
Figure 4.17: Growth trend of individual follicles in the 2% cNFC matrix over time (Day 0, 6, and 10). Each
row represents a single follicle. Scale bars = 200 μm.
50
==PAGE:58==
Figure 4.18: Growth trend of individual follicles in the 2% cNFC matrix over time (Day 0, 6, and 10). Each
row represents a single follicle. Scale bars = 200 μm.
51
==PAGE:59==
Figure 4.19: Growth trend of individual follicles in the 2% cNFC matrix over time (Day 0, 6, and 10). Each
row represents a single follicle. Scale bars = 200 μm.
52
==PAGE:60==
Figure 4.20: Growth trend of individual follicles in the granular alginate-collagen composite matrix over
time (Day 0, 6, and 10). Each row represents a single follicle. Scale bars = 200 μm.
53
==PAGE:61==
Figure 4.21: Growth trend of individual follicles in the granular alginate-collagen composite matrix over
time (Day 0, 6, and 10). Each row represents a single follicle. Scale bars = 200 μm.
54
==PAGE:62==
Figure 4.22: Growth trend of individual follicles in the granular alginate-collagen composite matrix over
time (Day 0, 6, and 10). Each row represents a single follicle. Scale bars = 200 μm.
55
==PAGE:63==
Figure 4.23: Growth trend of individual follicles in in alginate bead encapsulation over time (Day 0, 6, and
10). Each row represents a single follicle. Scale bars = 200 μm.
56
==PAGE:64==
Figure 4.24: Growth trend of individual follicles in in alginate bead encapsulation over time (Day 0, 6, and
10). Each row represents a single follicle. Scale bars = 200 μm.
57
==PAGE:65==
Figure 4.25: Growth trend of individual follicles in alginate bead encapsulation over time (Day 0, 6, and
10). Each row represents a single follicle. Scale bars = 200 μm.
58
==PAGE:66==
Scenarios of Follicular Atresia
In Figure 4.26, different scenarios depicting follicular atresia are presented.
The findings presented in Figure 4.27 demonstrate that oocyte release is the primary cause of follicle atresia
in the 2% cNFC and granular alginate-collagen composite formulations, accounting for 47.1% and 31.9%,
respectively.
Figure 4.28 illustrates the results regarding the specific day on which the follicles extruded their oocyte.
The analysis of both formulations revealed a trend in the timing of oocyte release. Day 2 was observed to
be the most common day for follicles to undergo oocyte release. Interestingly, the 2% cNFC formulation
exhibited a higher frequency of follicles releasing oocytes than the granular alginate-collagen composite
formulation.
Figure 4.26: Representative pictures of different scenarios of follicular atresia, which follicles were ex-
cluded from the viability and growth analysis. Scale bars = 200 μm.
59
==PAGE:67==
Figure 4.27: Percentage of reasons leading to follicular atresia in the different formulations tested during
Experiments 6-12, with comparison to the percentage of intact follicles.
Figure 4.28: Number of follicles that have released their oocyte in 2%cNFC and granular alginate-collagen
composite formulations during Experiments 6-12, examining overall 244 and 248 follicles, respectively.
60
==PAGE:68==
5
Discussion
This study aimed to investigate the influence of various mechanical properties of different physical gels on
murine ovarian follicular survival and growth within 3D matrices in vitro. Specifically, the investigation fo-
cused on examining the correlation between matrix viscoelasticity, cell-binding motifs, stiffness, and stress
relaxation of the physical gels, and their effects on the viability and development of follicles.
Viscoelastic Properties of the Hydrogels
The tan δ (G′′/G′) value offers insights into the material’s capacity to either store or dissipate energy. A
tan δ value closer to 1 suggests a viscous behavior, where the material dissipates energy and exhibits
less resistance to deformation. This suggests that the material is less stiff and more prone to flow or to
undergo deformation. Conversely, a tan δ value approaching 0 indicates a predominant elastic response
in the material, where the material can efficiently store and recover energy. This suggests that the material
has a higher resistance to deformation and is stiffer [57].
The 2% cNFC formulation showed more viscous character with a tan δ value of 0.57, while the 2% cNFC
with collagen, granular alginate, and granular alginate-collagen composite formulations exhibited tan δ
values closer to 0 (0.17, 0.16, and 0.17, respectively), implying a more elastic behavior.
Interestingly, despite having similar stiffness values of approximately 57 Pa, tan δ values for the granular
alginate-collagen composite formulation was relatively smaller than that for the 2% cNFC. This suggests
that granular alginate-collagen composite may exhibit a more elastic character, whereas 2% cNFC appears
to be more viscous.
Furthermore, it is worth mentioning that despite the variations in the tan δ values observed in the granular
alginate-collagen composite formulation and 2% cNFC, the patterns of the percentage of intact follicles
and follicle growth did not demonstrate a significant disparity in these two formulations.
These findings highlight the complex nature of material behavior and the role of stiffness in influencing folli-
cle viability and development. The observation of slightly better viability in less stiff formulations compared
to some stiffer ones supports the contribution of stiffness to the outcomes. Therefore, it can be inferred
that the interplay of different effects collectively influences follicle viability and development, with stiffness
being one of these factors.
The formulations lacking collagen exhibited flat responses and stable behavior throughout the experimental
timescale of the time sweeps. This implies that the gel structures in these formulations achieved a fully
formed state without significant structural changes.
As expected, the collagen-containing formulations demonstrated gelation behavior at 37°C. Among the
tested formulations, the granular-alginate-collagen composite exhibited the fastest gelation, reaching a
fully gelled state within 85 seconds. The formulation with 4% cNFC and 1 mg/mL collagen achieved full
61
==PAGE:69==
gelation by 200 seconds, while the formulation with 2% cNFC and collagen took 400 seconds to reach the
fully gelled state. The slower gelation in the first two formulations indicates a reduced influence of collagen
and its additional polymerization compared to the granular-alginate-collagen composite.
These findings indicate the influence of collagen concentration and the presence of other components and
internal structure on the gelation kinetics of the formulations.
Follicular Viability and Development in Relation to Material
Properties
Previous studies have shown that softer hydrogels are suitable for mouse ovarian follicles, whereas stiffer
hydrogels are more beneficial for larger mammalian species [36] [35] [37]. The Young’s modulus values of
approximately 3000 Pa, 6500 Pa and 7000 Pa were reported for human reproductive-age, prepubertal and
menopausal ovaries, respectively [59]. The Young’s modulus and storage modulus are correlated, and in
the case of incompressible materials, G’ is approximately three times the value of Young’s modulus.
Moreover, a separate study investigating the mechanical properties of murine ovaries using atomic force
microscopy reported spatially varying Young’s modulus values, ranging from approximately 0.5 to 10 kPa.
The study revealed lower stiffness (2-3 kPa) at the ovarian edge and center, which are characterized by
extra-follicular ECM rich in collagen IV. In contrast, even higher stiffness (∼7 kPa) was observed in the
intermediate zone, which is predominantly composed of large follicles with lower collagen density [60].
This observation suggests that collagen IV did not appear to be the main contributor to tissue stiffness.
Instead, the mechanical behavior of the system was primarily influenced by the presence of large follicles
and the direct interactions between them, highlighting the complexity of the follicle mechanoregulation.
In this study, the stiffness of the applied hydrogel formulations ranged from 57.2±12.7 to 201±18.3 Pa,
falling below the stiffness values observed in the native ovarian tissue. Replicating such complex spatial
variability in stiffness in vitro poses a significant challenge. The development of biomaterials that accurately
mimic this region-specific mechanical microenvironment remains a key area of research.
The survival and development of follicles cultured in vitro depend on optimal conditions that mimic the
natural ovarian environment. Previous studies emphasize the importance of factors such as surrounding
cells, extracellular matrix (ECM), hormones, and nutrients in supporting follicular development. Therefore,
in order to provide a more physiologically relevant environment for cultured follicles, it becomes imperative
to create a 3D matrix in vitro that closely mimics the complexity of the ovarian environment. This includes
factors such as the composition of surrounding cells, ECM components, and the appropriate balance of
hormones and nutrients. Consequently, excessive stiffness in biomaterials compromises follicle viability
by hindering nutrient and oxygen availability.
Although the impact of significantly higher stiffness formulations, spanning 3-4 orders of magnitude above
the tested stiffness range, was not specifically investigated in the context of in vitro follicle culture, prelimi-
nary results from our study showed that stiffer gel formulations, such as 2% cNFC with 1 mg/mL collagen,
4% cNFC, and granular alginate, resulted in a low percentage of intact follicles (<17%) (Figure 4.10a).
Increasing the fiber concentration from 2% to 4% (w/v) increased the stiffness of the material showing the
62
==PAGE:70==
clear correlation attributed to the increased solid content and entanglement of the fibers. Consequently,
the compromised survival and growth of the follicles observed in these stiffer formulations may be linked
to the restricted diffusibility of nutrients and hormones. Establishing a direct correlation between material
properties and diffusibility for nutrients and hormones might be more challenging for physical gels, but it is
an important aspect to consider.
These findings align with previous studies demonstrating that low stiffness creates a permissive environ-
ment for nutrition and hormone exchange, highlighting the impact of biomaterial stiffness on ovarian follicle
survival, growth, and oocyte maturation competency [61].
As mentioned in Section 4.1.2, the stiffness of the 2% cNFC and granular alginate-collagen composite
hydrogels was found to be comparable, measuring 57.2±12.7 Pa and 57.4±12.1 Pa, respectively. As ex-
pected, both hydrogels exhibited similar effects on the development of follicles. Although a slightly higher
percentage of intact follicles was observed in the granular alginate-collagen composite cultures, the differ-
ence in the impact on follicular growth between the two materials was not significant (p=0.11).
Previous studies have demonstrated that culturing follicles in hydrogels with reduced stiffness leads to
greater increases in follicle diameter. For instance, in a study involving alginate bead encapsulation, differ-
ent alginate concentrations ranging from 0.7% to 3% were compared. It was observed that lower stiffness
hydrogels (203±13 Pa) resulted in significant diameter increases ranging from 97.8% to 107.4%, while
higher stiffness hydrogels (1300±129 and 3010±84 Pa) only led to a modest 16.6% increase in follicle
diameter [33].
Notably, the inclusion of collagen in the 2% cNFC formulation did not provide noticeable benefits. However,
in the case of granular alginate-collagen composite, collagen demonstrated improved performance in terms
of follicular survival and growth. This can be attributed to changes in particle-particle interactions and the
formation of additional crosslinks between the microgels due to the dilution of alginate jammed particles
with a collagen solution in a 2:1 ratio [50]. While collagen, as a bioactive component unlike cNFC, may
have positive effects on follicular survival and growth, direct comparisons between the granular alginate-
collagen composite and 2% cNFC formulations revealed no significant differences in follicle performance.
Therefore, it is likely that the mechanical properties of the environment played a more dominant role in
influencing follicular outcomes, rather than the presence of collagen alone.
In the context of follicular growth, the surrounding biomaterial exerts compressive stress on the developing
follicles, which can impact their survival and development. Effective stress relaxation of the biomaterial is
crucial for maintaining favorable conditions during follicular development, as it enables a gradual decrease
in stress over time and alleviates excessive mechanical pressure on the follicles.
In line with a previous study suggesting that materials with more viscoelastic behavior have stress relaxation
half-times around 30 seconds, while those with more elastic behavior have stress relaxation half-times
around 350 seconds, this investigation also focused on analyzing the initial stress release dynamics within
a 30-second timeframe [62]. Based on the observed stress relaxation dynamics, the investigated materials
did not exhibit a significant release of half of the initial stress within the 30-second timeframe, suggesting
that their viscoelastic behavior may be limited.
63
==PAGE:71==
Furthermore, the observations of this study revealed that, despite some minor variations, all tested formu-
lations exhibited similar stress relaxation responses.
Specifically, the 2% cNFC and 2% cNFC with 1 mg/mL collagen hydrogel formulations exhibited limited
stress release, while the 4% cNFC formulation showed slightly more efficient stress relaxation. The addition
of 1 mg/mL collagen to formulations slightly enhanced stress release. The observed behavior indicates
that the stress in all of the formulations exhibits a slow dissipation, suggesting an overall similar response.
Insufficient structural changes within the cellulose fibers network may contribute to this slow stress dissi-
pation. Chain disentanglement, which one of the way of stress release, may not occur sufficiently due to
the relatively large size of the fibers.
Stress relaxation measurements performed on pure collagen gels revealed a strain-enhanced stress re-
laxation behavior, whereby higher strains applied to collagen gels resulted in accelerated stress relaxation,
indicating effective stress dissipation [63]. Nevertheless, the presence of collagen in the cNFC formulations
did not significantly influence stress relaxation.
The results suggest that collagen plays a limited role, as only minor differences were observed between
the formulations with and without collagen. This can be attributed to the lower concentration of collagen
compared to what is typically reported in the literature. Furthermore, the interplay of network structure
and additional interactions within the formulations likely contributes to the observed outcomes. Notably,
the stress relaxation behavior in the cNFC formulations appears to be primarily governed by the fibers
themselves, rather than being substantially influenced by the presence of collagen.
The stress relaxation results indicate that the granular alginate formulation showed higher efficacy in stress
release, with approximately 50% of the initial stress dissipated over the measurement period. In contrast,
the granular alginate-collagen composite formulation exhibited lower stress release, dissipating only around
30% of the stress.
The lower overall stress release in the granular alginate-collagen composite formulation can be attributed
to a more pronounced fixation of the gel structure, which is likely a consequence of increased interactions
between the components. These additional interactions lead to the formation of a less flexible system,
limiting the ability to dissipate stress effectively [63].
The observed stress relaxation did not reveal significant differences between the granular gels and cNFC
formulation, indicating that stress relaxation alone may not fully influence the variations observed in follicle
cultures. The stiffness of the materials is likely to have a more significant impact on follicular survival and
growth. However, it is important to consider that the performance of follicle cultures is likely shaped by
multiple factors, including material stiffness and dynamics, as well as the rate of diffusion of oxygen, nutri-
ents, hormones, and other environmental conditions. These combined factors contribute to the observed
variations in follicle survival and growth.
The observations of the follicles in the tested formulations revealed a tendency for the follicles to lose their
membrane and well-defined spherical structure. This observation was particularly expected to occur more
frequently in the granular alginate-collagen composite formulation, as it is known to promote cell migration
64
==PAGE:72==
and proliferation. In contrast, cNFC, being a non-cell adhesive and anionic polymer, is not expected to
facilitate cell migration. The limited control over cell adhesion, however, may impact the follicles as it
can result in weakened connections between granulosa cells (GCs) and the oocyte, potentially leading to
compromised follicular structure and the risk of atresia. This underscores the importance of refining cell
binding motifs in physical gels to enhance optimal follicular development.
Comparative Analysis of Hydrogels and Alginate Encapsulation
for Follicle Culture
In this study, a comparison was made between the applied biomaterials and the widely used alginate
encapsulation method, which is considered the current state-of-the-art in follicle culture. The objective was
to evaluate the ability of these materials to support follicle survival and growth.
The alginate encapsulation group demonstrated a high follicle viability rate, with over 50% of the follicles
maintaining their structural integrity throughout the experimental period. However, a significant difference
was observed in the growth of follicles between the examined biomaterials and alginate encapsulation.
The results in Section 4.2.2 demonstrated that the follicles cultured in 2% cNFC and granular alginate-
collagen composite exhibited a substantially greater increase in size compared to those in the alginate
encapsulation group.
Previous studies have reported that two-layer secondary follicles typically reach a size of approximately
250-300 μm after 12-14 days, while multilayer secondary follicles reach a terminal size of 350-400 μm after
6-8 days, in vitro [5] [31]. However, M. Zheng et al. (unpublished work) reported an average diameter of
190±29 μm in 0.5% alginate beads on Day 10, which is not substantially different from the findings of our
study (151±5 μm) [64].
The follicles encapsulated in alginate beads maintained a consistent spheroid 3D structure and intact mem-
brane (Figure 4.23, 4.24, 4.25), whereas the follicles in 2% cNFC and granular alginate-collagen com-
posite formulations exhibited diverse growth patterns and, in certain cases, lacked a well-defined shape
(Figure 4.17, 4.18, 4.19, 4.20, 4.21, 4.22).
The growth trend in the 2% cNFC and granular alginate-collagen composite matrices exhibited less co-
herence, resulting in greater variability in both follicle size and appearance compared to the alginate bead
encapsulation. In some instances, the darkened appearance of follicles was observed, which is believed
to be attributed to granulosa cell proliferation and increase in cell density within the follicles.
As mentioned earlier, the follicles in the 2% cNFC and granular alginate-collagen composite formulations
demonstrated the potential for increased size, but this was accompanied by a loss of their previously
well-defined membrane structure. Certain instances revealed a less compact and more loosely organized
structure of the GCs surrounding the oocyte. The connection between GCs and the oocyte is crucial
for proper follicular development, as highlighted in Section 2.1. Consequently, the compromised viability
observed in this study may be attributed to weakened connections both between GCs and between GCs
and the oocyte. These findings suggest that the loosened connections may hinder the essential cellular
65
==PAGE:73==
communication and signaling required for optimal survival and development of the follicles.
Nevertheless, it should be noted that in vivo, preovulatory mouse follicles typically achieve diameters of
500-600 μm, emphasizing their significantly larger size compared to the cultured follicles using our current
formulations [65]. This suggests that the attainment of larger sizes may not necessarily be disadvantageous
for the follicles.
Furthermore, it was observed that, in certain instances, the follicles within our two formulations displayed a
growth pattern that primarily occurred in a 2D manner, deviating from the anticipated 3D architecture. This
2D growth pattern may have implications for the spatial organization of the cells within the follicle and could
potentially impact their overall functionality. However, it is important to note that this observation was not
consistent across all follicles.
Further analysis and characterization of the follicles, including histological examination or staining tech-
niques, is warranted to gain deeper insights into the cellular dynamics and growth patterns within the
follicles. This additional investigation will contribute to a more comprehensive understanding of the poten-
tial of the cNFC and granular gel formulations, particularly in comparison to the state-of-the-art alginate
encapsulation method.
Limiting Factors
As discussed in Section 2.1, ovarian follicular development, is a highly intricate process orchestrated by a
complex interplay of factors within the ovary. In the context of in vitro cultures of murine follicles, factors
such as the choice of culture media, adequate nutrient supply, presence of cytokines and growth factors,
oxygen levels, temperature, and stage-specific hormonal supplementation can impact follicular growth and
development [66].
In particular, murine follicles rely on specific hormonal signals for their growth and development. However,
the effectiveness of hormonal supplementation in in vitro cultures can be influenced by the structure and
stiffness of the employed hydrogels. Despite the relatively low stiffness of the hydrogels (approximately
57 Pa), the diffusion and distribution of hormones within the hydrogel matrix may still be compromised.
Furthermore, when follicles are deposited within 3D matrices with a height of 2-3 mm, there is a possibility
that the top layer might be too thick, compromising the rate of diffusion.
In addition to hormonal stimuli, sufficient nutrient supply is vital for supporting follicular survival and devel-
opment. Alongside the considerations of hydrogel structure, the use of inappropriate appropriate culture
media not specifically formulated for mouse follicles can be hampering the optimal nutrient availability.
These considerations emphasize the need to optimize hydrogel structure and culture conditions to ensure
optimal hormonal and nutrient support for follicular survival and development.
The provision of a consistent and appropriate oxygen supply is a fundamental aspect in various biological
systems, including in vitro follicle cultures. Oxygen plays a critical role as both a metabolic substrate and a
signaling molecule, influencing cellular processes, including proliferation, differentiation, and the synthesis
66
==PAGE:74==
of important biomolecules [67]. Ensuring a continuous and adequate oxygen supply is essential to support
follicular metabolic activities, maintain cellular viability, and facilitate appropriate follicular function.
Although this study did not aim to measure dissolved oxygen concentration, the consideration, of whether
the oxygenation of the follicle cultures in the designed 3D matrices was sufficient enough, is still important.
It has been shown that hypoxia (<6% oxygen) can negatively impact folliculogenesis in mice since there
is a clear correlation between low oxygen levels and hormonal stimulation [68]. In addition, during native
follicular development, it has been observed that the oxygen concentration within the follicle progressively
decreases. This decrease in oxygen concentration is believed to play a role in triggering the process of
ovulation, leading to the release of the oocyte [68].
Based on the findings of this study, it was noted that the release of the oocyte was observed in the majority
of cases of follicle demise (Figure 4.27). The underlying assumption is that inadequate oxygen supple-
mentation in the culture system may result in low oxygen levels within the follicles, thus promoting oocyte
release and subsequently compromising follicular viability.
Nonetheless, the analysis of the days on which the follicles extruded their oocytes revealed that this sce-
nario frequently occurred early during the culture period, with Day 2 being the most common occurrence.
A clear correlation cannot be made, however, these observations highlight the significance of ensuring
sufficient oxygen supply and the need for further investigations.
Future Perspectives
In relation to the earlier discussion, one possible approach to improve the experimental design and address
some of these limitations is the utilization of an engineered microperfusion system [69]. This system holds
promise in overcoming the mentioned obstacle and offering a controlled oxygen supply to the follicles,
which could potentially lead to a closer mimicry of physiological conditions and enhanced results.
In future research, expanding the project’s scope to include additional investigations and evaluations can
offer valuable insights into the suitability of the materials for follicle cultures. While evaluating follicle viability
and measuring average diameter have been the primary focus of this study, exploring alternative evaluation
approaches can enhance our understanding of these materials and their potential.
Potential areas for future investigation include examining hormone secretion patterns from the follicles.
Previous studies have utilized enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) techniques to measure the se-
cretion of hormones, such as androstenedione, anti-Mullerian hormone, 17β-estradiol, and progesterone,
to assess the dynamics of follicular development and differentiation [31] [15] [70] [71]. By studying the
dynamics of hormone release, we can gain a more comprehensive understanding of the response of the
follicles to the culture environment.
Fluorescence labeling techniques provide a promising approach to enhance our understanding of follicle
physiology and their response to the culture environment. By visualizing connexin 43 (Cx43) protein and
transzonal projections (TZPs), we can gain valuable insights into the communication between the oocyte
and surrounding cells within the follicle, which is essential for follicular growth and development. Previous
67
==PAGE:75==
studies have successfully utilized these techniques, highlighting their relevance and potential for improving
the current experimental design, allowing for a comprehensive assessment of follicular dynamics in 3D
matrices of physical gels [28] [71].
Incorporating these alternative investigations and evaluations into future studies can contribute to an en-
hanced understanding of the performance of the materials of interest and their implications for follicle cul-
tures.
68
==PAGE:76==
Conclusion
In conclusion, this study aimed to investigate the influence of mechanical properties of physical gels on
murine ovarian follicle survival and growth within 3D matrices. The viscoelastic properties, stiffness, and
stress relaxation of the gels were examined in relation to follicle viability and development.
We conducted a comprehensive characterization of various physical hydrogel formulations. Among these
tested formulations, we identified that softer hydrogels, namely 2% cNFC and granular alginate-collagen
composite exhibited lower viability compared to alginate bead encapsulation. However, despite the lower
viability, these softer hydrogels demonstrated an improvement in follicle growth compared to the stiffer
hydrogels. These observations indicate the significant role played by the collective impact of different
mechanical properties on follicular outcomes, affecting nutrient, oxygen, and hormone diffusibility.
These findings contribute valuable insights into the optimization of hydrogel structure and culture condi-
tions, aiming to enhance follicular development in vitro. Moreover, the results underscore the potential
applications of these materials in the field of female reproductive health.
Further research in this area, exemplified by the utilization of engineered microperfusion systems, offers the
potential to overcome these limitations and achieve more physiological conditions in follicle cultures. Future
investigations can be expanded by exploring alternative evaluation methods, such as hormone secretion
analysis and fluorescence labeling techniques, to gain comprehensive insights into follicular responses
and communication within 3D matrices. Integrating these approaches in future studies will enhance our
understanding of material performance and its implications for follicle culture. This broader knowledge may
contribute to the development of strategies aimed at alleviating symptoms and conditions associated with
menopause.
69
==PAGE:77==
References
[1]
Cinnamon L. VanPutte, Jennifer L. Regan, and Andrew F. Russo. Seeley’s essen-
tials of anatomy & physiology. 9th ed. McGraw-Hill Education, 2016. Chap. 19,
pp. 541–551. isbn: 978-0-07-809732-4.
[2]
C. Yding Andersen et al. “Ovarian Tissue Banking to Postpone Menopause”. In:
Female and Male Fertility Preservation (2022), pp. 301–310. doi: 10.1007/978-
3-030-47767-7_23. url: https://link.springer.com/chapter/10.1007/978-3-030-
47767-7_23.
[3]
Nanette Santoro et al. “The Menopause Transition: Signs, Symptoms, and Man-
agement Options”. In: The Journal of Clinical Endocrinology & Metabolism 106
(1 Jan. 2021), pp. 1–15. issn: 0021-972X. doi: 10.1210/CLINEM/DGAA764. url:
https://academic.oup.com/jcem/article/106/1/1/5937009.
[4]
Martina Belli et al. “Towards a 3D culture of mouse ovarian follicles”. In: Interna-
tional Journal of Developmental Biology 56 (10-11-12 Feb. 2013), pp. 931–937.
issn: 0214-6282. doi: 10.1387/IJDB.120175MZ. url: http://www.ijdb.ehu.es/web/
paper/120175mz.
[5]
Aubrey Converse et al. “Recapitulating folliculogenesis and oogenesis outside
the body: encapsulated in vitro follicle growth”. In: Biology of Reproduction 108
(1 Jan. 2023), pp. 5–22. issn: 0006-3363. doi: 10.1093/BIOLRE/IOAC176. url:
https://academic.oup.com/biolreprod/article/108/1/5/6711545.
[6]
Dóra Katalin Jánoska. Initial evaluation of follicle growth in nanofiber matrices.
Technical University of Denmark, Dec. 2022, pp. 2–9.
[7]
Liyuan Li et al. “The Signaling Pathways Involved in Ovarian Follicle Develop-
ment”. In: Frontiers in Physiology 12 (Sept. 2021), p. 1610. issn: 1664042X. doi:
10.3389/FPHYS.2021.730196/BIBTEX.
[8]
Marilia Henriques Cordeiro, So Youn Kim, and Teresa K. Woodruff. “Ovarian Folli-
cle Biology and the Basis for Gonadotoxicity”. In: Cancer Treatment and the Ovary:
Clinical and Laboratory Analysis of Ovarian Toxicity (Jan. 2015), pp. 3–20. doi:
10.1016/B978-0-12-801591-9.00001-1.
[9]
Emily Cox and Veronica Takov. “Embryology, Ovarian Follicle Development”. In:
StatPearls (Aug. 2022). url: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK532300/.
70
==PAGE:78==
[10]
A. Gougeon. “Human ovarian follicular development: From activation of resting fol-
licles to preovulatory maturation”. In: Annales d’Endocrinologie 71 (3 May 2010),
pp. 132–143. issn: 0003-4266. doi: 10.1016/J.ANDO.2010.02.021.
[11]
Shelbie D. Kirkendoll and Dhouha Bacha. “Histology, Corpus Albicans”. In: Stat-
Pearls (May 2022). url: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK545270/.
[12]
Yogeshwar Makanji, Craig A. Harrison, and David M. Robertson. “Feedback Reg-
ulation by Inhibins A and B of the Pituitary Secretion of Follicle-Stimulating Hor-
mone”. In: Vitamins and Hormones 85 (Jan. 2011), pp. 299–321. issn: 0083-6729.
doi: 10.1016/B978-0-12-385961-7.00014-7.
[13]
Anna Hrabia. “Matrix Metalloproteinases (MMPs) and Inhibitors of MMPs in the
Avian Reproductive System: An Overview”. In: International Journal of Molecular
Sciences 22 (15 Aug. 2021). issn: 14220067. doi: 10.3390/IJMS22158056. url:
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC8348296/.
[14]
Jeffrey B. Kerr, Michelle Myers, and Richard A. Anderson. “The dynamics of the
primordial follicle reserve”. In: Reproduction 146 (6 Dec. 2013), R205–R215. issn:
1741-7899. doi: 10.1530/REP-13-0181. url: https://rep.bioscientifica.com/view/
journals/rep/146/6/R205.xml.
[15]
Pamela K. Kreeger et al. “Regulation of Mouse Follicle Development by Follicle-
Stimulating Hormone in a Three-Dimensional In Vitro Culture System Is Depen-
dent on Follicle Stage and Dose”. In: Biology of reproduction 73 (5 Nov. 2005),
p. 942. issn: 00063363. doi: 10 . 1095 / BIOLREPROD . 105 . 042390. url: https :
//www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2662519/.
[16]
Go Nagamatsu. “Regulation of primordial follicle formation, dormancy, and activa-
tion in mice”. In: The Journal of Reproduction and Development 67 (3 June 2021),
p. 189. issn: 13484400. doi: 10.1262/JRD.2021-040. url: https://www.ncbi.nlm.
nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC8238670/.
[17]
Ozgur Oktem and Bulent Urman. “Understanding follicle growth in vivo”. In: Hu-
man Reproduction 25 (12 Dec. 2010), pp. 2944–2954. issn: 0268-1161. doi: 10.
1093/HUMREP/DEQ275. url: https://academic.oup.com/humrep/article/25/12/
2944/552315.
[18]
Sudipta Dutta et al. “The steroid hormone environment during primordial follicle
formation in perinatal mouse ovaries”. In: Biology of Reproduction 91 (3 Sept.
2014), pp. 1–12. issn: 15297268. doi: 10 . 1095 / BIOLREPROD . 114 . 119214 /
2434107. url: https : / / academic . oup . com / biolreprod / article / 91 / 3 / 68 , %201 -
12/2434107.
71
==PAGE:79==
[19]
Nina Desai et al. “Three-dimensional in vitro follicle growth: Overview of culture
models, biomaterials, design parameters and future directions”. In: Reproductive
Biology and Endocrinology 8 (1 Oct. 2010), pp. 1–12. issn: 14777827. doi: 10.
1186/1477-7827-8-119/TABLES/2. url: https://rbej.biomedcentral.com/articles/
10.1186/1477-7827-8-119.
[20]
Maurizio Zuccotti et al. “3D culture of ovarian follicles: a system towards their
engineering?” In: International Journal of Developmental Biology 59 (4-5-6 Oct.
2015), pp. 211–216. issn: 0214-6282. doi: 10.1387/IJDB.150172MZ. url: http:
//www.ijdb.ehu.es/web/paper/150172mz.
[21]
Sunyoung Joo et al. “The effect of collagen hydrogel on 3D culture of ovarian
follicles”. In: Biomedical Materials 11 (6 Nov. 2016), p. 065009. issn: 1748-605X.
doi: 10.1088/1748-6041/11/6/065009. url: https://iopscience.iop.org/article/10.
1088/1748-6041/11/6/065009.
[22]
Teresa K. Woodruff and Lonnie D. Shea. “The Role of the Extracellular Matrix in
Ovarian Follicle Development”. In: Reproductive Sciences 14 (8suppl Dec. 2007),
pp. 6–10. issn: 19337205. doi: 10.1177/1933719107309818/METRICS. url: https:
//link.springer.com/article/10.1177/1933719107309818.
[23]
Shuxian Tang et al. “Physical hydrogels based on natural polymers”. In: Hydrogels
Based on Natural Polymers (Jan. 2020), pp. 51–89. doi: 10.1016/B978-0-12-
816421-1.00003-3.
[24]
Payam Zarrintaj et al. “Agarose-based biomaterials for tissue engineering”. In:
Carbohydrate Polymers 187 (May 2018), pp. 66–84. issn: 0144-8617. doi: 10.
1016/J.CARBPOL.2018.01.060.
[25]
Z. Huanmin and Z. Yong. “In vitro development of caprine ovarian preantral folli-
cles”. In: Theriogenology 54 (4 Sept. 2000), pp. 641–650. issn: 0093-691X. doi:
10.1016/S0093-691X(00)00379-4.
[26]
Zeinab Ghezelayagh et al. “The effect of agar substrate on growth and develop-
ment of cryopreserved-thawed human ovarian cortical follicles in organ culture”.
In: European Journal of Obstetrics and Gynecology and Reproductive Biology 258
(Mar. 2021), pp. 139–145. issn: 18727654. doi: 10.1016/j.ejogrb.2020.12.048.
url: http://www.ejog.org/article/S0301211520308423/fulltext.
[27]
Ariella Shikanov et al. “Interpenetrating fibrin-alginate matrices for in vitro ovarian
follicle development”. In: Biomaterials 30 (29 Oct. 2009), pp. 5476–5485. issn:
1878-5905. doi: 10.1016/J.BIOMATERIALS.2009.06.054. url: https://pubmed.
ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/19616843/.
72
==PAGE:80==
[28]
Arezoo Dadashzadeh et al. “Mind the mechanical strength: tailoring a 3D matrix
to encapsulate isolated human preantral follicles”. In: Human Reproduction Open
2023 (2 Mar. 2023), p. 2023. doi: 10.1093/HROPEN/HOAD004. url: https://www.
ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC10053646/.
[29]
Valérie Luyckx et al. “A new step toward the artificial ovary: survival and prolifera-
tion of isolated murine follicles after autologous transplantation in a fibrin scaffold”.
In: Fertility and Sterility 101 (4 Apr. 2014), pp. 1149–1156. issn: 0015-0282. doi:
10.1016/J.FERTNSTERT.2013.12.025.
[30]
A. Dadashzadeh, S. Moghassemi, and C. A. Amorim. “Evaluation of PEGylated
fibrin as a three-dimensional biodegradable scaffold for ovarian tissue engineer-
ing”. In: Materials Today Chemistry 22 (Dec. 2021), p. 100626. issn: 2468-5194.
doi: 10.1016/J.MTCHEM.2021.100626.
[31]
Min Xu et al. “Tissue-Engineered Follicles Produce Live, Fertile Offspring”. In:
Tissue engineering 12 (10 Oct. 2006), p. 2739. issn: 10763279. doi: 10.1089/TEN.
2006.12.2739. url: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2648391/.
[32]
Sílvia J. Bidarra, Cristina C. Barrias, and Pedro L. Granja. “Injectable alginate
hydrogels for cell delivery in tissue engineering”. In: Acta Biomaterialia 10 (4 Apr.
2014), pp. 1646–1662. issn: 1742-7061. doi: 10.1016/J.ACTBIO.2013.12.006.
[33]
Erin R. West et al. “Physical properties of alginate hydrogels and their effects on
in vitro follicle development”. In: Biomaterials 28 (30 Oct. 2007), pp. 4439–4448.
issn: 0142-9612. doi: 10.1016/J.BIOMATERIALS.2007.07.001.
[34]
Julie Vanacker and Christiani A. Amorim. “Alginate: A Versatile Biomaterial to En-
capsulate Isolated Ovarian Follicles”. In: Annals of Biomedical Engineering 2017
45:7 45 (7 Feb. 2017), pp. 1633–1649. issn: 1573-9686. doi: 10.1007/S10439-
017-1816-6. url: https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s10439-017-1816-6.
[35]
Kyung Eui Park et al. “Effects of alginate hydrogels on In Vitro maturation outcome
of mouse preantral follicles”. In: Tissue Engineering and Regenerative Medicine
9 (3 June 2012), pp. 170–174. issn: 17382696. doi: 10.1007/S13770-012-0170-
X/METRICS. url: https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s13770-012-0170-x.
[36]
Erin R. West-Farrell et al. “The Mouse Follicle Microenvironment Regulates Antrum
Formation and Steroid Production: Alterations in Gene Expression Profiles”. In:
Biology of Reproduction 80 (3 Mar. 2009), pp. 432–439. issn: 0006-3363. doi:
10.1095/BIOLREPROD.108.071142. url: https://academic.oup.com/biolreprod/
article/80/3/432/2557565.
[37]
Samaneh Sadeghnia et al. “Development of sheep primordial follicles encapsu-
lated in alginate or in ovarian tissue in fresh and vitrified samples”. In: Cryobiology
73
==PAGE:81==
72 (2 Apr. 2016), pp. 100–105. issn: 0011-2240. doi: 10.1016/J.CRYOBIOL.2016.
03.001.
[38]
Jing Xu et al. “Survival, growth, and maturation of secondary follicles from pre-
pubertal, young, and older adult rhesus monkeys during encapsulated
three-
dimensional culture: effects of gonadotropins and insulin”. In: Reproduction (Cam-
bridge, England) 140 (5 Nov. 2010), pp. 685–697. issn: 1741-7899. doi: 10.1530/
REP-10-0284. url: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/20729335/.
[39]
A. Y. Ting et al. “Morphological and functional preservation of pre-antral follicles
after vitrification of macaque ovarian tissue in a closed system”. In: Human re-
production (Oxford, England) 28 (5 2013), pp. 1267–1279. issn: 1460-2350. doi:
10.1093/HUMREP/DET032. url: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/23427232/.
[40]
C Torrance, Evelyn Telfer, and R G Gosden. “Quantitative study of the develop-
ment of isolated mouse pre-antral follicles in collagen gel culture”. In: Journal of
Reproduction & Fertility (1989), pp. 367–374. doi: 10.1530/jrf.0.0870367.
[41]
MM Dolmans, CA Amorim - Reproduction, and undefined 2019. “Fertility preser-
vation: construction and use of artificial ovaries”. In: Reproduction (2019), F15–
F25. doi: 10.1530/REP-18-0536.
[42]
Rémi Parenteau-Bareil, Robert Gauvin, and François Berthod. “Collagen-Based
Biomaterials for Tissue Engineering Applications”. In: Materials 2010, Vol. 3, Pages
1863-1887 3 (3 Mar. 2010), pp. 1863–1887. issn: 1996-1944. doi: 10 . 3390 /
MA3031863. url: https://www.mdpi.com/1996-1944/3/3/1863/htm.
[43]
Evelyn Telfer, C Torrance, and R G Gosden. “Morphological study of cultured pre-
antral ovarian follicles of mice after transplantation under the kidney capsule”.
In: Journal of Reproduction & Fertility (1990), pp. 565–571. doi: 10.1530/jrf.0.
0890565.
[44]
Mehrab Pourmadadi et al. “Novel carboxymethyl cellulose based nanocompos-
ite: A promising biomaterial for biomedical applications”. In: Process Biochemistry
130 (July 2023), pp. 211–226. issn: 1359-5113. doi: 10.1016/J.PROCBIO.2023.
03.033.
[45]
Allen Zennifer et al. “Key advances of carboxymethyl cellulose in tissue engineer-
ing & 3D bioprinting applications”. In: Carbohydrate Polymers 256 (Mar. 2021),
p. 117561. issn: 0144-8617. doi: 10.1016/J.CARBPOL.2020.117561.
[46]
Eduardo Espinosa et al. “Nanocellulose-Based Inks—Effect of Alginate Content
on the Water Absorption of 3D Printed Constructs”. In: Bioengineering 6 (July
2019), p. 65. issn: 2306-5354. doi: 10.3390/bioengineering6030065. url: https:
//www.mdpi.com/2306-5354/6/3/65/htm.
74
==PAGE:82==
[47]
Carmen Radeke et al. “Transparent and Cell-Guiding Cellulose Nanofiber 3D
Printing Bioinks”. In: ACS Applied Materials and Interfaces 15 (2022). issn: 19448252.
doi: 10.1021/ACSAMI.2C16126/ASSET/IMAGES/LARGE/AM2C16126_0009.
JPEG. url: https://pubs.acs.org/doi/full/10.1021/acsami.2c16126.
[48]
Taimoor H. Qazi and Jason A. Burdick. “Granular hydrogels for endogenous tissue
repair”. In: Biomaterials and Biosystems 1 (Mar. 2021), p. 100008. issn: 2666-
5344. doi: 10.1016/J.BBIOSY.2021.100008.
[49]
Jake P. Newsom, Karin A. Payne, and Melissa D. Krebs. “Microgels: Modular,
tunable constructs for tissue regeneration”. In: Acta Biomaterialia 88 (Apr. 2019),
pp. 32–41. issn: 1742-7061. doi: 10.1016/J.ACTBIO.2019.02.011.
[50]
Janko Kajtez et al. “Embedded 3D Printing in Self-Healing Annealable Compos-
ites for Precise Patterning of Functionally Mature Human Neural Constructs”. In:
Advanced Science 9 (25 Sept. 2022), p. 2201392. issn: 2198-3844. doi: 10.1002/
ADVS.202201392. url: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1002/advs.
202201392.
[51]
Paul A. Janmey, Penelope C. Georges, and Søren Hvidt. “Basic Rheology for
Biologists”. In: Methods in Cell Biology 83 (Jan. 2007), pp. 1–27. issn: 0091-679X.
doi: 10.1016/S0091-679X(07)83001-9.
[52]
A Basic Introduction to Rheology. 2016. url: https://theanalyticalscientist.com/
app-notes/a-basic-introduction-to-rheology.
[53]
M. Capurro and F. Barberis. “Evaluating the mechanical properties of biomateri-
als”. In: Biomaterials for Bone Regeneration: Novel Techniques and Applications
(Jan. 2014), pp. 270–323. doi: 10.1533/9780857098104.2.270.
[54]
Emily M. Carvalho and Sanjay Kumar. “Lose the stress: Viscoelastic materials
for cell engineering”. In: Acta Biomaterialia (Apr. 2022). issn: 1742-7061. doi: 10.
1016/J.ACTBIO.2022.03.058.
[55]
Rachel M. Smith, Teresa K. Woodruff, and Lonnie D. Shea. “Designing follicle-
environment interactions with biomaterials”. In: Cancer Treatment and Research
156 (2010), pp. 11–24. issn: 09273042. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4419-6518-9_2/
FIGURES/3. url: https://link.springer.com/chapter/10.1007/978-1-4419-6518-
9_2.
[56]
Jonathan M. Zuidema et al. “A protocol for rheological characterization of hydro-
gels for tissue engineering strategies”. In: Journal of Biomedical Materials Re-
search Part B: Applied Biomaterials 102 (5 July 2014), pp. 1063–1073. issn: 1552-
4981. doi: 10.1002/JBM.B.33088. url: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.
1002/jbm.b.33088.
75
==PAGE:83==
[57]
Bureau International des Poids et Mesures. The international System of Units (SI),
8th edition. 2006. url: https://wiki.anton-paar.com/fi-en/basics-of-rheology/.
[58]
V. Pushpamalar et al. “Optimization of reaction conditions for preparing carboxymethyl
cellulose from sago waste”. In: Carbohydrate Polymers 64 (2 May 2006), pp. 312–
318. issn: 0144-8617. doi: 10.1016/J.CARBPOL.2005.12.003.
[59]
Emna Ouni et al. “A blueprint of the topology and mechanics of the human ovary
for next-generation bioengineering and diagnosis”. In: Nature Communications
2021 12:1 12 (1 Sept. 2021), pp. 1–14. issn: 2041-1723. doi: 10.1038/s41467-
021-25934-4. url: https://www.nature.com/articles/s41467-021-25934-4.
[60]
Thomas I. R. Hopkins et al. “Mapping the mechanical microenvironment in the
ovary”. In: bioRxiv (Jan. 2021), p. 2021.01.03.425098. doi: 10.1101/2021.01.03.
425098. url: https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/2021.01.03.425098v1.
[61]
Eun Jung Kim et al. “The new biocompatible material for mouse ovarian follicle de-
velopment in three-dimensional in vitro culture systems”. In: Theriogenology 144
(Mar. 2020), pp. 33–40. issn: 0093-691X. doi: 10.1016/J.THERIOGENOLOGY.
2019.12.009.
[62]
Alberto Elosegui-Artola et al. “Matrix viscoelasticity controls spatiotemporal tissue
organization”. In: Nature Materials 2022 22:1 22 (1 Dec. 2022), pp. 117–127. issn:
1476-4660. doi: 10.1038/s41563-022-01400-4. url: https://www.nature.com/
articles/s41563-022-01400-4.
[63]
Sungmin Nam et al. “Strain-enhanced stress relaxation impacts nonlinear elastic-
ity in collagen gels”. In: 113 (20 2016). doi: 10.1073/pnas.1523906113.
[64]
Mengxue Zheng. “Reducing hydrogel stiffness, the addition of oestradiol in physi-
ological concentration, and increasing FSH concentration improve the 3D culture
of murine preantral follicles”. In: ().
[65]
J. M. Connolly et al. “Corrigendum to: Hypoxia limits mouse follicle growth in vitro”.
In: Reproduction, Fertility and Development 29 (2 2017), pp. 431–431. issn: 1448-
5990. doi: 10.1071/RD14471_CO. url: https://www.publish.csiro.au/rd/rd14471_
co.
[66]
Laís R.F.M. Paulino et al. “Why Is It So Difficult To Have Competent Oocytes from
In vitro Cultured Preantral Follicles?” In: Reproductive Sciences 2022 29:12 29 (12
Jan. 2022), pp. 3321–3334. issn: 1933-7205. doi: 10.1007/S43032-021-00840-8.
url: https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s43032-021-00840-8.
[67]
Ashley L. Farris, Alexandra N. Rindone, and Warren L. Grayson. “Oxygen Deliv-
ering Biomaterials for Tissue Engineering”. In: Journal of materials chemistry. B,
Materials for biology and medicine 4 (20 May 2016), p. 3422. issn: 2050750X.
76
==PAGE:84==
doi: 10.1039/C5TB02635K. url: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/
PMC4955951/.
[68]
Megan Lim, Jeremy G. Thompson, and Kylie R. Dunning. “HYPOXIA AND RE-
PRODUCTIVE HEALTH: Hypoxia and ovarian function: follicle development, ovu-
lation, oocyte maturation”. In: Reproduction 161 (1 Jan. 2021), F33–F40. issn:
1741-7899. doi: 10.1530/REP-20-0509. url: https://rep.bioscientifica.com/view/
journals/rep/161/1/REP-20-0509.xml.
[69]
Milan Finn Wesseler et al. “Optical 4D oxygen mapping of microperfused tissue
models with tunable in vivo-like 3D oxygen microenvironments”. In: Lab on a Chip
22 (21 Oct. 2022), pp. 4167–4179. issn: 1473-0189. doi: 10.1039/D2LC00063F.
[70]
Didier Dewailly et al. “The physiology and clinical utility of anti-Mullerian hormone
in women”. In: Human reproduction update 20 (3 2014), pp. 370–385. issn: 1460-
2369. doi: 10.1093/HUMUPD/DMT062. url: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
24430863/.
[71]
Jing Cai Liu et al. “DEHP exposure to lactating mice affects ovarian hormone
production and antral follicle development of offspring”. In: Journal of hazardous
materials 416 (Aug. 2021). issn: 1873-3336. doi: 10.1016/J.JHAZMAT.2021.
125862. url: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/34492810/.
77
==PAGE:85==
A
Appendix - Materials and methods
supplement tables
Table A.1: Characterized and tested formulations
Formulations
2% cNFC
2% cNFC with 1 mg/mL collagen
4% cNFC
4% cNFC with 1 mg/mL collagen
granular alginate
2:1 granular alginate : collagen (3 mg/mL) (granular alginate-collagen composite)
I
==PAGE:86==
Harvesting, isolation and culture media
Table A.2: Harvest medium
Working concentration
Stock concentration
10 mL medium
McCoy’s 5A Medium
1x
9.7 mL
10% FBS
1 mL
Table A.3: Isolation medium
Working concentration
Stock concentration
10 mL medium
DMEM/F-12 Medium
1x
9.7 mL
10% FBS
100x
1 mL
HEPES 15 mM
100x
150 μL
Pen/Strep
100 μL
Table A.4: Culture medium
Working concentration
Stock concentration
10 mL medium
α-MEM
1x
9.7 mL
5% FBS
500 μL
ITS
100x
100 μL
Pen/Strep
100 μL
Glutamax
100x
100 μL
FSH
(100 mIU/mL)
10 μL
LH
(100 mIU/mL)
10 μL
II
==PAGE:87==
B
Appendix - Three-dimensional in vitro
culture of murine ovarian follicles
Figure B.1: The plot displays the median percentage of intact follicles measured at various time points
(day) for different formulations. Each panel represent one experiment.
III
