==PAGE:1==
DTU Learn for Life 
 
 
 
 
Sustainable client consultancy in a mid-sized 
architecture company in Denmark 
 
Master of Sustainability in Client Consultancy, 2023 
Raluca-Maria Hamza 
 
 
 
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Sustainable client consultancy in a mid-sized architecture company in Denmark 
Flexible Master Thesis 15 ECTS 
June 1, 2023 
 
By 
Raluca-Maria Hamza 
Supervisor:     Tove Lading, associate professor, DTU Construct 
Copyright: 
  Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus- 
  tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc. 
Cover photo:   Vibeke Hempler, 2012 
Document 
template: 
  Christian Nicolai Nielsen, 2022 
Published by:  DTU, DTU Learn for Life, Kollegiebakken, Building 421, 2800  
  Kgs. Lyngby Denmark 
  https://learnforlife.dtu.dk/  
ISSN: 
  [00000000] (electronic version) 
ISBN:  
  [0000000000000] (electronic version) 
ISSN:  
  [00000000] (printed version) 
ISBN:  
  [0000000000000] (printed version) 
==PAGE:4==
Sustainable client consultancy in a mid-sized architecture company in Denmark
ii 
 
 
 
 
Approval 
This thesis has been prepared over four months (spring 2023) in fulfilment of the degree 
Flexible Master, Master of Sustainability in Client Consultancy.  
It is assumed that the reader has basic knowledge of the building project process.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Author ­ s190827 
 
 
 
 
Signature 
 
01-06-2023 
Date 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:5==
Sustainable client consultancy in a mid-sized architecture company in Denmark 
iii 
 
 
 
 
Abstract 
This paper considers sustainability in relation to client advising as a practice and to client 
consultancy as a business area in a case company in Denmark. It does that by describing 
and analyzing the current conditions, together with related cases and literature for a 
broader perspective, and bringing forward a possible solution involving a revised organ-
izational structure meant to integrate client consultancy as a potentially more sustainable 
business area at the case company, as well as a framework for an arguably more sus-
tainable practice of client advising and client consultancy task-solving.  
 
The case company has approximately sixty employees, therefore, in this paper, it is con-
sidered as the mid-sized architecture company in Denmark stated in the title, and is lo-
cated in Copenhagen. It remains anonymous by agreement with the firm. The information 
contained in this paper has been reviewed and validated by the client consulting chief at 
the case company.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:6==
Sustainable client consultancy in a mid-sized architecture company in Denmark
iv 
 
 
 
 
Acknowledgements 
Tove Lading, associate professor, DTU Construct  
I would like to express my gratitude to my thesis supervisor for her guidance and support 
throughout the preparation of this paper.  
 
Thor Biering Rohdin, sustainability consultant, The Danish Building and Property 
Agency (Bygningsstyrelsen)  
Thomas Tang, project manager and client consultant, Copenhagen Public Housing As-
sociation (KAB) 
I would also like to express my deepest thanks to them for sharing their valuable 
knowledge during interviews. 
 
Finally, I must express my gratitude to the client consulting chief and the, now, former 
head of sustainability at the case company for their insightful comments and moral sup-
port. They are anonymous because the name of the case company is not required in the 
context of this paper.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:7==
Sustainable client consultancy in a mid-sized architecture company in Denmark 
v 
 
 
 
 
Contents 
Approval .......................................................................................................................... ii 
Abstract .......................................................................................................................... iii 
Acknowledgements ........................................................................................................ iv 
1. Problem identification .................................................................................................. 1 
2. Description of the current situation .............................................................................. 3 
2.1 Client consultancy as a business area .................................................................. 3 
2.2 Current approach to solving client consultancy tasks ............................................ 4 
2.3 Sustainability considerations at the company level ............................................... 9 
3. Analysis ..................................................................................................................... 13 
3.1 Client consultancy, an ‘outdated’ practice ........................................................... 13 
3.2 The organizational context .................................................................................. 21 
4. Related cases and literature ..................................................................................... 34 
4.1 The Danish Building and Property Agency’s approach to sustainability .............. 34 
4.2 Copenhagen Public Housing Association’s approach to sustainability ............... 37 
4.3 A new paradigm for sustainable construction in the Danish building industry ..... 39 
4.4 Gilbert Silvius’s view on sustainable project management .................................. 41 
5. Solution ..................................................................................................................... 45 
5.1 A revised organizational structure ....................................................................... 45 
5.2 Client consultancy, a more sustainable practice ................................................. 53 
6. Conclusion ................................................................................................................ 56 
7. References ................................................................................................................ 57 
 
Appendix A: Current social, environmental, and economic sustainability considerations 
during client consultancy tasks at the case company (when solved by the client consul-
tancy business area) 
Appendix B: Transcript of an interview with the case company’s head of sustainability 
Appendix C: Transcript of an interview with The Danish Building and Property Agency’s 
sustainability consultant 
Appendix D: Transcript of an interview with a project manager and client consultant at 
the Copenhagen Public Housing Association 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:8==
Sustainable client consultancy in a mid-sized architecture company in Denmark
vi 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:9==
Sustainable client consultancy in a mid-sized architecture company in Denmark 
1 
 
1. Problem identification 
In view of the 2030 national goal for sustainable development, Værdibyg, a group of 
associations influential in the Danish building industry, published “The sustainable con-
struction process” in 2021, where the main four issues delaying the industry’s transition 
to being more sustainable were underlined, and some solutions were proposed for the 
time being (Ring, 2021).  
The problems were, as follows:  
• 
the absence of goal setting and sustainability strategies, and early cooperation 
between stakeholders on matters of sustainability, 
• 
the lack of a “common language” and tools for defining sustainability demands in 
the basis for tenders and in contracts,  
• 
and the absence of sustainability-focused human resources in firms together with 
the improper management of measures for sustainability throughout the building 
project process (Ring, 2021).  
Two years later, and the client consulting practice at the case company has remained 
constant, with no significant changes, if at all. Goal setting and strategies for sustainabil-
ity, if present, mainly constitute the client’s input to the project. The ‘common language’ 
is sometimes represented by a sustainability certification process (e.g., DGNB, Nordic 
Ecolabel), and the tools (e.g., Life Cycle Assessment and Life Cycle Cost tools) are rarely 
used. The sustainability-focused human resources are generally DGNB advisors ap-
pointed late in the building project process (i.e., in the design specification phase, during 
the evaluation of tenders, and throughout the design and construction phases), while 
other measures for sustainability are seldom present.  
Moreover, in the document describing the client advisor’s services, which is generally 
part of the contract basis for client consultancy, ‘sustainability‘ is included as an optional 
service, with little additional clarification. Since only the client’s selected services for the 
consultant should be performed throughout the contract period, ‘sustainability’ often re-
mains a matter of the client’s financial situation and interest in the subject matter.  
The initial goal of this paper was to bring forward a revised, more sustainable practice of 
client consulting in the context of a mid-sized architecture company in Denmark. 
However, throughout the research period that built the basis for the proposed solution, 
wider organizational issues were discovered which, unless dealt with, could hinder the 
transition to sustainable client consultancy at the case firm. For example, company de-
cisions such as treating client consultancy as a separate sector in the organization, keep 
it disconnected from sustainability strategies defined at the highest level in the firm’s 
hierarchy.  
Moreover, this separation is not only arguably maintaining the client consulting practice 
as an ‘outdated’ one, but could have negative effects on the firm as well. As analyzed 
further in the paper, some client consulting-specific tasks obtained in sectors in the or-
ganization other than the client consultancy one, are not being addressed accordingly. 
Instead, they are planned, and solved inefficiently, with resulting consequences. Ulti-
mately, this could have repercussions on employee wellbeing, and the company’s image.  
==PAGE:10==
Sustainable client consultancy in a mid-sized architecture company in Denmark
2 
 
 
Therefore, given the additional, organizational ‘layer’ to the problem, the initial goal 
gained a new dimension. It relates to a revised organizational structure meant to include 
client consultancy in future sustainability-related high-level decisions, as well as gener-
ate a new process for handling client consultancy tasks at the case company, which 
could ensure that they are efficiently planned, and solved. 
The idea behind this elaborate solution has to do with ‘sustainability’ being more about 
‘integration’, rather than ‘separation’. Bringing forward only a suggestion for a possibly 
more sustainable client advising practice in an arguably unsustainable organization 
would not generate long-lasting results. Instead, a fully integrated solution could bring 
benefits to both client consultancy, and the company, and truly reflect the meaning of 
‘sustainability’.  
The paper is structured into:  
• 
a description of the current situation at the case company,  
• 
an analysis of the current circumstances, related cases, and literature, and 
• 
the solution.  
The first part of the description covers a summary of the current client consulting practice 
in relation to sustainability, while the second presents the company’s general viewpoint 
on sustainability.  
The analysis chapter starts with addressing the first ‘layer’ to the problem, or the issues 
with the current client advising practice, and continues with the organizational ‘layer’ to 
the problem, derived from the separation mentioned above. 
The related cases and literature chapter covers the findings from two interviews with 
employees with relevant competences, part of publicly-owned organizations, and poten-
tial clients of the case company. Both discussions revolved around their organizations’ 
approaches to sustainability in the context of building projects, as well as their possible 
requirements of client consultants during the process. The chapter continues with an 
analysis of the Danish building industry’s newly introduced model for sustainable con-
struction, and sustainability-related services for client consultancy. Finally, for a view-
point outside the Danish building industry, the perspective of an author, researcher and 
scholar on sustainable project management is examined.  
The last chapter comprises suggestions for a revised organizational structure combined 
with a new approach to solving client consultancy tasks, as well as a framework for a 
potentially more sustainable practice of client consulting.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:11==
Sustainable client consultancy in a mid-sized architecture company in Denmark 
3 
 
2. Description of the current situation 
The following chapter introduces client consultancy as part of the case company, and 
encapsulates the current approach to handling client consultancy tasks, as well as the 
responsibilities of a client consultant during the said tasks relative to the three pillars of 
sustainability. The latter is elaborated in Appendix A.  
Additionally, for a broader perspective, the case firm’s general approach to sustainability 
is described based on the findings from an interview with the case company’s head of 
sustainability (i.e., Appendix B). It is separated into: the case company’s strategy for 
sustainability, the project-related strategy for sustainability, and the case company’s sus-
tainability-focused human resources (i.e., ‘green mentors’).  
 
2.1 Client consultancy as a business area  
Client consultancy was introduced to the case company in 2020, in a possible attempt to 
expand the firm’s services from mainly architecture and design-related to a more 
rounded offering that could perhaps create competitive advantage. Client consultancy 
constitutes a practice that covers an entire building project process, from a client’s wish 
definition to project delivery, and mainly consists of creating the bases for strategic de-
cision-making, and for tender, in the early phases, alongside planning, and overseeing 
the process on behalf of the client.  
Client consultancy is not particularly associated with competitive advantage in, for ex-
ample, larger architecture companies which may focus on distinguishing through archi-
tecturally impactful design, rather than the project process. However, in the context of 
the case company, the client advising discipline appeared well-fitting to the projects 
mostly created by the firm, which involve either a higher level of detail (e.g., renovation 
projects) or standardized design (e.g., projects involving prefabricated building compo-
nents). Hence, the increased market share was supposed to be a result of a revised 
business model involving an efficiently and effectively planned and managed building 
project process by client consultants.  
As a result, client consultancy was established as a business area next to the three ex-
isting ones,  each named after their representative types of building projects: ‘Housing 
and Private’, ‘Renovation’, as well as ‘Education, Culture, and Health’.  
Each of these business areas has been under the direction of a partner, who has the 
responsibilities of acquiring clients alongside managing the business area, and, occa-
sionally, projects. Additionally, as part of the board, the partners create strategies, and 
decide the direction of the entire business. Client consultancy, however, is headed by a 
client consulting chief, not a partner.  
Client consultancy presently consists of two employees, one with an educational back-
ground in engineering and business economics, and the other, in architecture and project 
management. Neither have any specific competences associated with sustainable con-
struction. In contrast, each of the other three business areas includes sustainability-fo-
cused human resources (i.e., ‘green mentors’), described further in the paper (i.e., 2.3.3). 
Currently, once a task is accessed by one of the partners, or the client consulting chief, 
it is usually solved within their corresponding business area.  
==PAGE:12==
Sustainable client consultancy in a mid-sized architecture company in Denmark
4 
 
 
2.2 Current approach to solving client consultancy tasks 
At the case company, based usually on the size of a project, client consultancy tasks can 
be obtained by directly contacting, or being contacted by a potential client, by tendering 
for the task, or, occasionally, by being part of, or tendering in a framework agreement 
(rammeaftale). All situations would require the consideration of a method for carrying out 
the task in order to prepare the offer, including aspects of project planning and cost es-
timation. 
However, the scenarios involving a competitive process could require further effort based 
on the demands of the award authority, which might include, for example: a description 
of the process for carrying out the task, a communication strategy, a sustainability strat-
egy, or risk management and quality assurance plans, as part of the offer. In the scenar-
ios not involving competition, only initial estimations of costs and gains, and a preliminary 
project plan are usually carried out by the client consultant, sometimes, in collaboration 
with an architect in the company, during the preparation of the bid.  
Concomitantly, to conclude the agreement, the contracting parties decide on the services 
to be performed by both the client consultant and the client during the contract period.  
These services are explained to a certain extent in the “Description of Services for Client 
Consultancy”, 2019-document, where they are grouped into different client consultancy 
processes based on the nature of the task (e.g., building projects as main contracts, 
building projects as lead contracts), or a particular phase in the building project (i.e., 
initial consultancy), etc. Additionally, the document presents supplementary services 
(e.g., ‘sustainability’), to be selected by the client if deemed necessary to perform during 
the process (Description of Services for Client Consultancy, 2019).  
Considering the case company, the most common client consultancy tasks are the fol-
lowing, as presented by the “Description of Services for Client Consultancy”: 
• 
initial consultancy,  
• 
client consultancy in connection with building projects as main contracts, and 
• 
client consultancy in connection with building projects as lead contracts.  
Initial consultancy can be performed separately, or as part of the other two processes, 
depending on the desired outcome of the client advising agreement. When separate, the 
outcome is usually a design specification document. When initial consultancy is included 
in the other two processes, the outcome is the basis for tender in connection with the 
choice of consultants, or the choice of a lead contractor, which usually consists of a 
technical component (e.g., design specification document, design proposal) together 
with a legal one (i.e., legal tendering documents, which include among other aspects, 
the selection criteria of the winning bid and the evaluation method).  
At the case company, after the agreement is concluded, the client consultancy task, just 
like the preparation of the bid, is solved within the client consultancy sector, with the 
optional involvement of an architect from a different business area, in connection with 
the design-related, or technical component of the task.  
Occasionally, however, a client consultancy job is accessed by another business area in 
the company. A client consulting-specific task is one requiring client advising compe-
tences since it involves, for example, creating the bases for strategic decision-making in 
the earliest phases of a building project, or the legal component of the basis for tender. 
==PAGE:13==
Sustainable client consultancy in a mid-sized architecture company in Denmark 
5 
 
However, in that scenario, the task is solved within the respective business area, and 
not the client consultancy one, with an inclination towards the design aspects of the pro-
ject, instead of strategy and planning. As a result, sometimes, the process can be ineffi-
ciently handled, and the ‘wrong’ solution is produced, causing delays and additional 
costs, as well as late, or no implementation of sustainability-related considerations, even 
with the presence of sustainability-focused human resources (i.e., ‘green mentors’). This 
scenario is analyzed further in the paper.  
The current way of accomplishing a client consultancy task in the client consultancy busi-
ness area is elaborated in connection with the three most common task types at the case 
company in Appendix A, where the responsibilities of the client consultant pertaining to 
sustainability are separated into social, environmental, and economic considerations.  
However, the division using the three-pillar approach to sustainability (i.e., social, envi-
ronmental, economic) is neither highlighted in the ”Description of Services for Client Con-
sultancy”, nor is it part of the current client consulting practice at the case company, but 
constitutes the assumptions of the author of this paper. The remainder of this subchapter 
contains a summary of Appendix A.  
 
2.2.1 Initial consultancy 
This type of client consultancy task generally includes four phases:  
• 
property strategy,  
• 
appraisal,  
• 
technical financing analyses, and  
• 
design specification (Description of Services for Client Consultancy, 2019). 
The process involves close collaboration between the client and the client consultant in 
the earliest stage of a building project. That includes assessing the client’s existing prop-
erties, if the case, together with advancing an action plan relative to property sales, in-
vestments, or developments; analyzing the realizability of the client’s concept for a build-
ing, as well as the feasibility of the building project; and, finally, creating the design spec-
ification document, which consists of the client’s requisites for the building (i.e., a ‘hand-
book’ meant to be used by consultants during the design phase).  
The following three paragraphs comprise the essence of the social, environmental, and 
economic considerations throughout the four phases above. Appendix A covers them 
extensively.  
The client consultant’s responsibilities related to social sustainability involve, for exam-
ple, analyzing the effects, or changes that the project might create to the client’s organi-
zation during construction and operation, and proposing an action plan accordingly. Ad-
ditionally, given that the client engaged a users’ committee (i.e., future users of the build-
ing) to provide comments during the design specification phase, the client consultant 
manages the committee’s input, and considers it accordingly. Moreover, the client advi-
sor makes an account of the customer’s requirements for safety during design, building 
construction and operation, and includes it in the design specification document. Also, in 
collaboration with the client, the client advisor prepares and includes in the design spec-
ification document, plans for stakeholder collaboration, reporting, as well as for meetings, 
==PAGE:14==
Sustainable client consultancy in a mid-sized architecture company in Denmark
6 
 
 
decision-making, and users’ committee involvement. They are meant to be used by con-
sultants during the future design phase.  
The client consultant’s responsibilities related to environmental sustainability consist of 
mainly creating an account of the client’s expectations regarding ‘sustainability’, with fo-
cus on energy consumption. In dialogue with the customer, the client advisor also man-
ages preliminary environmental investigations relative to the realizability of the concept 
for the building. Additionally, if decided by the customer, the client consultant involves 
sustainability specialists (e.g., DGNB or Nordic Ecolabel advisors) for assistance during 
the preparation of the design specification document.  
The responsibilities pertaining to economic sustainability include preparing a time sched-
ule and human resource allocation plan for the initial consultancy, as well as a project 
time schedule and project organization chart for the remaining course of the building 
project. All, while maintaining a focus on the cost and time constraints. In addition, the 
client consultant creates an account of the client’s requirements regarding the building’s 
operation and maintenance, the client’s assumptions regarding the life-cycle cost of the 
building, as well as the client’s decisions regarding tendering. The client consultant also 
carries out a risk analysis mainly related to budget control which they update throughout 
the course of the task. Also, the client consultant defines the economic framework (i.e., 
budget) for the building design and construction, and includes it in the final deliverable 
of this task.  
 
2.2.2. Client consultancy in connection with building projects as main 
contracts (Hovedentrepriser) 
This type of client consultancy task involves assisting the customer throughout a building 
project process including two tenders, one in connection with choosing consultants, and 
one with choosing a main contractor, and is composed of six phases:  
• 
initial consultancy,  
• 
choice of consultants (tender), 
• 
design,  
• 
choice of a main contractor (tender),  
• 
construction, and  
• 
delivery of the building (Description of Services for Client Consultancy, 2019).  
Arguably, the most significant segment of this process for a client consultant is the prep-
aration of the basis for tender in connection with the choice of consultants, which also 
represents the initial consultancy. As previously mentioned, when initial consultancy is 
part of this process, its outcome includes a technical component (e.g., design specifica-
tion document, design proposal) together with a legal one (i.e., legal documents for ten-
der). Its significance has to do with the fact that a large portion of the process following 
initial consultancy (i.e., the design phase) is dependent on the specifications and out-
come requirements defined in the basis for tender.  
The client consultant’s responsibilities related to social, environmental, and economic 
sustainability during the preparation of the technical component of the basis for tender 
are encapsulated in the previous sub subchapter (i.e., 2.2.1), and not reiterated here.  
==PAGE:15==
Sustainable client consultancy in a mid-sized architecture company in Denmark 
7 
 
Considering that, the following three paragraphs comprise the essence of the social, 
environmental, and economic considerations throughout the six phases of this task, with 
focus on the legal component of the basis for tender. Appendix A covers them exten-
sively.  
As part of the legal component, the client consultant addresses social sustainability when 
defining the selection criteria of the winning bid. For example, the design phase could 
involve a process where the users’ committee continues providing comments for the op-
timization of the design. Therefore, the bidders are evaluated on their method for han-
dling the said process (e.g., the way the users’ input will be integrated in the design), 
which they must describe as part of their offers. Moreover, the client consultant carries 
out an arguably transparent evaluation of both the consultants’ and the main contractor’s 
offers, since the method for assessing the offers is included in the legal basis for tender, 
for the bidders to read. Additionally, the client consultant writes, and sends out offer 
evaluation reports to all remaining bidders after the winner is selected, to justify the re-
jection of their offers. Also, throughout the building project process, the client consultant 
ensures that the defined plans (e.g., collaboration, reporting, decision-making - prepared 
during the initial consultancy) are followed and updated, if necessary, so that consistency 
in communication is maintained.  
In relation to environmental sustainability, as part of the legal component, the client con-
sultant defines selection criteria which could provide insight into the bidders’ expertise 
level with obtaining a DGNB certification for a building project, for instance. In addition, 
the client consultant involves a DGNB advisor in the evaluation of these criteria, for ob-
jectivity. Also, for the remainder of the building project process, the client consultant en-
sures, for example, that the DGNB-process is followed in accordance with the agree-
ments.  
In terms of economic sustainability, as part of the legal component, the client consultant 
defines selection criteria which could provide insight into the bidders’ expertise level with 
efficiently and effectively accomplishing the task (e.g., CVs with completed tasks), as 
well as with correctly allocating roles and resources to the building project to ensure its 
timely completion (e.g., project organization chart, resource plan, back-up CVs). Also, 
for the remainder of the building project process, the client consultant ensures that, for 
example, the project time schedule is followed, and suggests a course of action in re-
sponse to any changes to the project’s economic framework (i.e., budget), or risk analy-
sis, with the goal of avoiding delays and additional costs.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:16==
Sustainable client consultancy in a mid-sized architecture company in Denmark
8 
 
 
2.2.3. Client consultancy in connection with building projects as lead con-
tracts (Totalentrepriser) 
This type of client consultancy task involves assisting the client throughout a building 
project process requiring only one tender in connection with choosing a lead contractor, 
and is composed of five phases:  
• 
initial consultancy,  
• 
choice of lead contractor (tender),  
• 
design,  
• 
construction, and 
• 
delivery of the building (Description of Services for Client Consultancy, 2019).  
The course of this task includes very similar social, environmental, and economic sus-
tainability considerations to the previous one, which are also covered extensively in Ap-
pendix A. The difference is that this process is quicker, since most of it is carried out 
within the same project organization of the lead contractor, and a portion of the design 
and construction phases overlap. That makes it well-fitting to projects involving, for ex-
ample, standardized design, a significant component of the case company’s scope of 
work, as previously mentioned.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:17==
Sustainable client consultancy in a mid-sized architecture company in Denmark 
9 
 
2.3 Sustainability considerations at the company level 
This subchapter is based on an interview with the head of sustainability at the case com-
pany, and includes an overview of the strategies for sustainability developed at the high-
est level in the company hierarchy. The head of sustainability has resigned, however, 
during the preparation of this paper.  
 
2.3.1 The company’s strategy for sustainability  
During the interview with the head of sustainability (i.e., Appendix B), an understanding 
of the organization’s strategy for sustainability could be gained. Although still evolving, 
the strategy is based on a model created by the head of sustainability, and consisting of 
three ‘boxes’:  
• 
an image of the current situation (‘Box 1’),  
• 
the immediately required action (‘Box 2’), and  
• 
measures for the near future (‘Box 3’) respectively (Figure 2.3.1).  
The image of the current situation (‘Box 1’) can address both the company’s current 
activities, as well as external factors potentially influencing them. It is also directly linked 
to the immediately required action (‘Box 2’).  
For example, as part of ‘Box 1’, governmental measures such as the inclusion of the Life 
Cycle Assessment (LCA) in the building regulations create the need for a quick response 
in the organization (i.e., an immediately required action, ‘Box 2’). According to the head 
of sustainability, that could mean increasing the user friendliness of the existing software 
used for the assessment, with the expectation that current investments towards creating 
a more manageable digital tool can result in long term returns in the shape of efficiently 
and effectively performed Life Cycle Assessments (Figure 2.3.1).  
The first two ‘boxes’ of the company’s strategy for sustainability directly consider three 
of the four business areas in the organization: ‘Housing and Private’, ‘Renovation’, and 
‘Education, Culture, and Health’, meaning that both the image of the current situation as 
well as the decisions regarding the immediately required action are mainly defined in 
relation to the primary activities of these three sectors.   
The third ‘box’ of the company’s strategy for sustainability requires ‘thinking proactively’. 
It is concerned with discovering opportunity in what is perhaps less explored by other 
firms, and preparing a solution that combines the positive social, and environmental im-
pact with the economic one (‘Box 3’ in Figure 2.3.1).  
As the head of sustainability mentions in the interview, an example for ‘Box 3’ could be 
developing a sustainable construction solution targeting the broadly distributed public 
housing sector in Denmark. That might create an opportunity for the ‘Housing and Pri-
vate’ business area to bring considerable environmental and social benefits.  
Additionally, a solution of this size could have the potential to distinguish the firm from 
competition, since the Danish public housing sector is perhaps less ‘attractive’ to archi-
tecture firms in the industry, and seldom associated with innovative ideas. Therefore, a 
positive economic impact could be encouraged, given that the public housing associa-
tions are interested in the idea, evidently.  
==PAGE:18==
Sustainable client consultancy in a mid-sized architecture company in Denmark
10 
 
 
The initiative has been considered by the author of this paper as a contribution to estab-
lishing ‘Housing and Private’ as a form of sustainable business area within the organiza-
tion, as it takes into account not only financial growth, but social and environmental ben-
efits also. A sustainable business model, however, would require all four business areas 
in the organization to at least align with this principle.  
 
 
 
 
Box 1 
 
(Current situation) 
 
 
Box 2 
 
(Immediately required  
action) 
 
 
 
Box 3 
 
(Future action) 
 
 
Mandatory LCA for build-
ing projects (defined in the 
building regulations) 
 
Complicated LCA tool, 
time consuming assess-
ment method 
 
 
Investments towards in-
creasing the user friendli-
ness of the software, or 
creating a more managea-
ble digital tool for a quick 
LCA 
 
 
 
Developing a sustainable 
construction solution for 
the broadly distributed 
Danish public housing 
 
 
 
Figure 2.3.1: An outline of the case company's developing strategy for sustainability 
based on the interview with the head of sustainability 
 
 
 
2.3.2 The project-related strategy for sustainability  
The interview with the head of sustainability at the case company revealed that a project-
related strategy for sustainability has also been developed, and it emerged from the idea 
that, as a project progresses, the options and ability to make changes lower, while the 
information regarding the project increases (Appendix B).  
In other words, to assist clients in selecting an appropriate approach to sustainable con-
struction at the beginning of a project, a notable amount of information about it would be 
required, which can be difficult to collect.  
However, to combat that problem, it was assumed that ‘sustainability’ can still be brought 
forward, and discussed with clients at this stage, but in the form of rather general con-
siderations regarding, for example, the choice of materials relative to the environmental 
impact of the building. Concomitantly, preliminary environmental investigations and re-
source mapping on the building site should be carried out, according to head of sustain-
ability (Figure 2.3.2, the property strategy phase).  
==PAGE:19==
Sustainable client consultancy in a mid-sized architecture company in Denmark 
11 
 
For the appraisal phase, the case company has developed the ‘Green Page’, which is a 
software that allows only for initial versions of the Life Cycle Assessment and Life Cycle 
Cost (LCC), enabling, however, a ‘life cycle way of thinking’ from the start. This tool rep-
resents one of the effects of the immediately required action segment in the company 
strategy for sustainability (‘Box 2’ in Figure 2.3.1).  
As the initial stage progresses, the project-related strategy for sustainability includes 
more advanced assessments, such as daylight, choice of façade materials, or early 
building energy analyses, together with variant comparisons, or more thorough Life Cy-
cle Assessment and Life Cycle Cost of the building (Figure 2.3.2, the design specification 
phase).  
 
 
 
 
 
Property strategy 
phase 
 
 
 
Appraisal  
phase 
 
Design 
specification 
phase 
 
 
 
Materials and 
environmental 
impact 
 
 
 
Environmental 
investigations 
 
Resource 
mapping 
 
The Construction 
Material Pyramid 
 
 
Green Page 
(preliminary LCA 
and LCC) 
 
 
Variant  
comparisons 
 
More advanced 
LCA, LCC 
 
 
 
 
 
Daylight and 
energy 
 
 
 
 
 
Building orientation 
assessment 
 
Shadow study 
 
Energy framework 
 
 
Daylight study 
 
Facade materials 
 
Energy framework 
calculation 
 
Figure 2.3.2: An outline of the case company's project-related strategy for sustainability 
based on the interview with the head of sustainability 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:20==
Sustainable client consultancy in a mid-sized architecture company in Denmark
12 
 
 
2.3.3 Sustainability-focused human resources (‘Green mentors’) 
All the assessments listed in Figure 2.3.2 as well as other sustainability-related pro-
cesses throughout the course of a building project (e.g., the DGNB-, or Nordic Ecolabel- 
processes) are usually performed, or managed by in-house sustainability-focused hu-
man resources, also called ‘green mentors’ (Appendix B). 
This title should not imply that their only responsibility is carrying out sustainability-related 
assessments, since their main roles are either architect, or construction engineer (kon-
struktør). However, by completing sustainability-related higher education, or courses 
(e.g., sustainability-focused master’s programmes, DGNB-, or Nordic Ecolabel-adviser 
training), acquired the role of a ‘mentor’, while the quality of being ‘green’ presumably 
refers to their focus on the environmental dimension of sustainability, as gathered from 
the project-related strategy (Figure 2.3.2).  
The ’green mentors’ are currently spread across three of the four business areas in the 
organization: ‘Housing and Private’, ‘Renovation’, and ‘Education, Culture, and Health’.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:21==
Sustainable client consultancy in a mid-sized architecture company in Denmark 
13 
 
3. Analysis 
This chapter contains an analysis of the client advising practice when tasks are handled 
by the client consultancy business area at the case company, or the first ‘layer’ to the 
problem. In this paper, it is presented as an ‘outdated’ practice in the context of the case 
company due to sustainability not being an integral part of it, but rather an optional fea-
ture, or defined by a client’s pre-determined expectations.  
In addition, the second, organizational ‘layer’ to the problem, is explored further in the 
chapter. The second ‘layer’ to the problem stems from the idea of ‘separation’ shown in 
the case company’s organizational structure, and persistent in the application of sustain-
ability-related strategies developed at the highest level in the firm hierarchy. Moreover, 
it is also expressed in the way client consultancy tasks are handled (i.e., as part of the 
client consultancy business area, and as part of the three established business areas).  
 
3.1 Client consultancy, an ‘outdated’ practice 
Client consultancy tasks are mainly solved by the human resources in the client consul-
tancy business area, except for the ones with a more elaborate design, or technical com-
ponent. Those tasks usually require the involvement of a consultant from a different busi-
ness area in the organization during the preparation of the offer for client consultancy, 
and throughout the process.  
As previously suggested, occasionally, client consultancy tasks are accessed by part-
ners directing one of the other three business areas. In this scenario, the task is solved 
by the human resources in their respective business area, and client consulting compe-
tences are only involved in the preparation of the legal component of the basis for tender 
(e.g., choice of consultants phase). Noteworthy is that client consulting competences are 
not also part of the initial phases of the task (i.e., property strategy – design specification) 
to which the legal basis for tender is directly linked. This scenario is further analyzed 
relative to the one above in the following subchapter (i.e., 3.2).  
For now, the first, and most common scenario is considered (i.e., client consultancy tasks 
handled by the client consultancy business area). The description chapter mentions the 
multiple ways in which these tasks can be obtained (i.e., direct contact with a client, 
tendering for the task, tendering in a framework agreement). The situations requiring a 
competitive process differ from the ones accessed directly, in the way the offer is pre-
pared. While the focus is generally on economy in the latter (e.g., planning the resources 
and activities, estimating the duration and cost of the task), the first may include addi-
tional requirements, such as an organization diagram, a process description, sustaina-
bility and communication strategies, risk management and quality assurance plans, etc.  
This way, an offer for client consultancy can be evaluated by the client outside the ‘lowest 
price’ criterion, and selected as the ‘most economically advantageous’ one, for example 
(i.e., a form of best quality-price ratio). This aspect presumably depends on the client’s 
interest in the subject matter, or on the desired impact of the outcome. Usually, the more 
complex the task, the more diverse the offer requirements.  
In theory, this is a way for a client to assess the bidders’ understanding of the client 
consultancy task, which, on the surface, makes the additional requirements seem like a 
==PAGE:22==
Sustainable client consultancy in a mid-sized architecture company in Denmark
14 
 
 
sustainable measure. However, the bidders might be tempted to submit general descrip-
tions that ‘sound right’, and, instead, focus on finding ways to lower the price as much 
as possible. In that case, the additional offer requirements perhaps do not have signifi-
cant value.  
Interestingly, the requirements related to organization, process, communication, risk 
management, or quality assurance are not components of the strategy for sustainability, 
but separate. That is because the latter is customarily associated with a building sustain-
ability certification, while the first three are perhaps more commonly perceived as means 
for budget control.  
A sustainability strategy offer requirement usually translates to the bidders’ methods for 
accomplishing the client’s pre-defined demands for sustainability (e.g., commonly, a 
DGNB certification or Nordic Ecolabel). In case the client does not define any, then a 
sustainability strategy prepared as part of an offer will probably consist of standard 
measures that are widely associated with environmental sustainability (e.g., environmen-
tal investigations, considering energy usage, passive solar energy, reuse of materials, 
green roofs, etc.). Currently, social, or economic sustainability are not regular compound 
terms in an offer for client consultancy, unless explicitly requested by the client.  
For concluding the agreement, the customer and client consultant must approve of a 
selection of services and responsibilities for both during the contract period. As previ-
ously mentioned, considering the scope of  work at the case company, these services 
correspond to three types of client consultancy tasks:  
• 
initial consultancy,  
• 
client consultancy in relation to building projects as main contracts, and  
• 
client consultancy in relation to building projects as lead contracts.  
The last two processes cover an entire building project. Initial consultancy can be part of 
both, with the technical basis for tender as the outcome (e.g., design specification docu-
ment, design proposal), or performed as a separate process, with all, or only a selection 
of its four phases completed (e.g., property strategy and appraisal, for the latter).  
The process corresponding to the selected type of task should be marked on the “Service 
Plan” table, which is an appendix to the “Description of Services for Client Consultancy”-
document, and included in the contract basis. In addition, optional services, listed under 
section “7.Other Services” in both documents can also be selected by the client to be 
part of the process (Description of Services for Client Consultancy, 2019).  
Interestingly, ‘sustainability’ is also included in the ‘other services’ category (i.e., “Sus-
tainability”, subsections 7.29-7.31), together with a few mentions for each of the three 
subsections. However, they only cover customary measures for sustainability, such as 
“sustainability certifications, Life Cycle Assessment, Life Cycle Cost, resource optimiza-
tion, climate protection (…)”, and with little clarification (Description of Services for Client 
Consultancy, 2019).  
Noteworthy is also that section “7. Other Services” includes a variety of considerations 
that arguably pertain to sustainability (e.g., “7.1 ICT strategy, 7.6 Analysis of market con-
ditions, 7.9 Cost analyses, 7.15 Assessment of building sites, 7.24 Stakeholders and 
users, 7.32-7-34 Occupational health and safety, 7.35-7.38 Accessibility, 7.47 Project 
optimization, even 7.10 Risk analyses”) (Description of Services for Client Consultancy, 
2019).  
==PAGE:23==
Sustainable client consultancy in a mid-sized architecture company in Denmark 
15 
 
Although not widely known as measures for sustainability, when appropriately selected 
based on the scope of the project, and performed in the correct project phases, as well 
as in relation to one another, these ‘optional services’ could perhaps play a role in a more 
sustainable process.  
That is, because their outcome could constitute the bases for a client’s better-informed 
decisions, since they involve analyses, assessments, or strategy preparation. Otherwise, 
throughout the process, the client advisor might rely on the customer’s pre-determined 
assumptions and requirements regarding ‘sustainability’ or the other listed considera-
tions. 
At the same time, ‘optional services’ evidently imply a higher cost for the customer, and 
with no accompanying proof of its effectiveness, a client consultant’s suggestion for a 
more sustainable process including the ‘other services’ might be deemed unfeasible, and 
rejected. For an unexperienced client consultant especially, departing from the ‘outdated’ 
client consultancy norms, and bringing forward a suggestion for a process that is pre-
sumably more sustainable, as well as feasible from a client’s perspective, might prove 
challenging.  
This would require, above all, a thorough understanding of the task at hand, followed by 
a deep knowledge of the ‘optional services’, their corresponding deliverables, as well as 
the suitable phases in the building project for performing them.  
Moreover, while arguably treated as ‘add-ons’ in the “Service Plan” and the “Description 
of Services for Client Consultancy”-documents, if selected in the context of a more sus-
tainable process, the ‘optional services’ must be appropriately coordinated with the other 
mandatory services, and not addressed as additional.  
The ‘optional services’ listed above represent only an extract of the total ‘add-ons’. There 
are, however, other separate services which could relate to sustainability.  
The following three sub subchapters represent an analysis of a client advisor’s current 
sustainability-related considerations throughout the three, most common types of client 
consultancy tasks at the case company.  
 
3.1.1 Initial consultancy 
As part of the initial consultancy, a client advisor assists the customer with creating:  
• 
the basis for an action plan regarding property sales, property investments, or 
adjustments to existing buildings (i.e., the property strategy phase),  
• 
the basis for decision-making regarding the realizability of the building project 
(i.e., the appraisal phase),  
• 
the basis for decision-making regarding the feasibility of the building project 
based on the appraisal (i.e., the technical financing analysis phase), and  
• 
the design specification document comprising various detailed requirements for 
the building project, or a building ‘handbook’ to be used by consultants in the 
future design phase (i.e., the design specification phase).  
This process is particularly significant relative to sustainability, since it involves, in very 
general terms, defining the customer’s requisites for the building project based on stra-
tegic decisions made at the highest level in the client’s organization (e.g., a steering 
==PAGE:24==
Sustainable client consultancy in a mid-sized architecture company in Denmark
16 
 
 
group or political committees, common for public clients, or a board of directors for pri-
vate ones).  
It also offers the opportunity to start a project the ‘right’ way. If sustainability is imple-
mented by the customer and client consultant in the strategies that constitute the bases 
for decision-making, then there is perhaps a higher chance of sustainability measures 
being part of the remaining process.  
Currently, however, the way sustainability is addressed at this stage is by building strat-
egies around the client’s pre-determined expectations regarding sustainability. The 
method for determining the expectations and whether they are appropriate or sufficient 
in relation to social, environmental, and economic sustainability is unclear.  
The expectations can vary. However, as the authors of Værdibyg’s “The Sustainable 
Construction Process” also recognize as an issue, they are often connected to a final 
goal (i.e., a DGNB- or Nordic Ecolabel-certified building), and perhaps not as much to 
the process for achieving it (Ring, 2021). An assumption could be that there is an incli-
nation toward relying on the already determined DGNB- or Nordic Ecolabel-processes 
for ensuring sustainability. Another assumption could be that the decision for a DGNB- 
or Nordic Ecolabel-certified building is rather based on their association with status, 
hence the uncertainty regarding the appropriateness or sufficiency of a customer’s re-
quirements for sustainability, if they only constitute one of the two certifications.  
In the situations where a customer’s financial ability does not allow for an elaborate pro-
cess as the ones above, pre-determined sustainability expectations might be about en-
ergy consumption, or, not present at all, which leaves the inclusion of sustainability to 
the client consultant’s understanding of the concept, or previous experience.  
Another significant aspect is the evident focus on economy throughout the phases. For 
example, budget control is at the center of the mandatory risk assessment, instead of 
social, and environmental risks relative to financial expenses. Also, value creation for 
society and environment is considered, yet not as intensively as the return on invest-
ments.  
For example, stakeholders such as future building users (i.e., users’ committee) are in-
volved in reviewing, and commenting on the material created during the design specifi-
cation phase, or the last phase in the initial consultancy. That is, after the strategic deci-
sions have been made. The social considerations before that phase mainly address the 
client’s own organization.  
Similarly, sustainability experts (e.g., DGNB, or Nordic Ecolabel advisors) are also in-
volved for the first time during this phase, even though it is the appraisal phase when the 
realizability of the building concept is assessed. It is also in the appraisal when ‘so called’ 
preliminary environmental investigations are carried out to judge the realizability of the 
client’s concept for the building (e.g., “soil conditions, pollution, traffic conditions, access 
conditions, optional alternative locations, optional alternative building options”) (Descrip-
tion of Services for Client Consultancy, 2019). However, it is uncertain whether they are 
sufficient in relation to environmental sustainability, or not.  
Additionally, in dialogue with the customer, the client consultant also prepares a ‘user 
involvement plan’, and includes it in the design specification document, for consultants 
to use in the future design phase. However, there is no requirement for describing how 
the users’ committee’s input should influence the design. It is perhaps one thing to plan 
==PAGE:25==
Sustainable client consultancy in a mid-sized architecture company in Denmark 
17 
 
the meetings, and indicate matters of discussion, and another to determine the weight of 
the users’ committee’s requests and wishes during decision-making, when considering 
social sustainability. The same applies to other relevant stakeholders.  
Another aspect of social sustainability relates to the requirements for “health and safety 
during design, building construction, and operation” (Description of Services for Client 
Consultancy, 2019). They, again, mostly constitute the customer’s input, that the client 
advisor describes in the design specification document.  
Collaboration and reporting are also significant when considering social sustainability. 
Currently, the customer and client advisor define a process for each, and include them 
in the design specification document for consultants to use during the design phase. 
However, often, they constitute generic, descriptive plans, rather than systematic ap-
proaches.  
The current economic sustainability measures outlined in the description are mostly con-
nected to planning a process that is feasible for the client, therefore, economic feasibility 
might also be an appropriate title.  
Even so, the focus appears to be mostly on the immediate costs (i.e., design and con-
struction). However, future costs of building operation and maintenance are arguably just 
as significant, if not more. As the authors of Værgibyg’s “Operations based construction 
process” also recognize, whole-life costs (i.e., operations and maintenance included) 
should be considered “early in the process, when the crucial decisions are being taken”, 
and suggest a “structured approach” in this publication (Due et al., 2021). That is not to 
say that operation and maintenance, or the life-cycle cost are not considered. However, 
again, the client consultant only describes the customer’s expectations regarding this 
subject, while their appropriateness is uncertain.  
Another significant consideration in the initial consultancy regards the method and pro-
cess for tender, for which the design specification document represents part of the tech-
nical basis, as previously mentioned. In this paper, only the building projects as main 
contracts and building projects as lead contracts are considered. However, the pro-
cesses are slightly different, and suit different types of projects.  
The first involves two tenders, one for the choice of consultants in connection with the 
design of the building project, and one for the choice on a main contractor in connection 
with the construction of the building project. The process is evidently longer, but could 
suit a project with a high degree of complexity, and with desired architectural impact, or 
one with a higher level of detail (e.g., renovation project).  
The latter is a faster, involving only one tender for the choice of a lead contractor. A lead 
contractor represents an organization of consultants and contractors in charge of both 
carrying out the design and construction of the building project. This process could be 
suitable for a project involving standardized design (i.e., building with prefabricated com-
ponents). Another reason for its faster completion is that the design and construction 
phases slightly overlap, which is only common when a lead contractor is involved. In 
other words, the building foundation can be laid while the last details of the architectural 
project are still finalized.  
Often, the client consultant only describes the customer’s requirement in relation to the 
method for tender (i.e., a project competition or consultancy tender for the first process, 
a lead contractor competition or lead contractor tender for the second). However, this 
==PAGE:26==
Sustainable client consultancy in a mid-sized architecture company in Denmark
18 
 
 
decision should arguably be based on a ‘strategy for tender’ prepared by the client con-
sultant. The strategy should not only include a list of the options for the tender method 
so the customer could select the most economically feasible one, but a comprehensive 
image of the whole tender procedure, including the possible basis for tender (i.e., the 
technical and legal components), the possible selection criteria, the possible weight of 
each criterion (i.e., percentagewise), a brief description of the evaluation method, even 
the advantages and disadvantages of each, or recommendations.  
Although not directly linked to sustainability, a preliminary ‘strategy for tender’ could at 
least represent the foundation for a client’s informed decision. In addition, for this meas-
ure to integrate sustainability, the prepared material should include social, and environ-
mental considerations.  
All in all, unless the customer and the client consultant agree on a process including 
‘optional services’ (e.g., a ‘strategy for tender’, the ‘add-ons’ mentioned previously) that 
could reinforce the initial bases for strategic decision-making with sustainability-related 
considerations (i.e., given that they are selected and performed appropriately, with re-
spect to all three pillars of sustainability), then mainly the client’s pre-determined as-
sumptions and requirements define the sustainability of the project’s outcome. 
However, the client consultant does not necessarily need to perform all these ‘optional 
services’, since other consultants, or specialists could also be appointed to the task. As 
the “The Sustainable Construction Process” and the “Operations based construction pro-
cess” also indicate, a social and environmental sustainability consultant, as well as a 
building operations advisor could be appointed early in the initial consultancy process, 
in connection with creating the bases for strategic decision-making in collaboration with 
the customer and the client consultant (Due et al., 2021) (Ring, 2021).  
 
3.1.2 Client consultancy in relation to building projects as main contracts 
(Hovedentrepriser) 
This type of client consultancy task involves assisting the client in: 
• 
preparing the basis for tender in connection with the choice of consultants (i.e., 
the initial consultancy phase), 
• 
carrying out the tender process (i.e., the choice of consultants phase), 
• 
overseeing the architectural project process in accordance with the consultancy 
agreement concluded in the previous phase (i.e., the design phase) 
• 
preparing the basis for tender in connection with the choice of a main contractor 
(i.e., the choice of a main contractor phase), and 
• 
overseeing the execution project process (i.e., detailed project before construc-
tion), surveilling the construction of the building project, as well as supervising 
the building delivery to the customer’s organization (i.e., the construction and de-
livery phases).  
Since the first bullet point is largely covered in the previous sub subchapter (i.e., 3.1.1), 
only the legal component of the basis for tender is analyzed here. The legal basis for 
tender (i.e., legal tender documents) is particularly significant because it incorporates the 
selection criteria of the winning consultancy bid, and the evaluation method based on 
the weight of each criterion (i.e., percentagewise).  
==PAGE:27==
Sustainable client consultancy in a mid-sized architecture company in Denmark 
19 
 
The selection criteria is used by bidders when preparing their offers. Therefore, for a 
client’s well-informed decision of the winner, these criteria should be defined in a way 
that could offer the customer insight into the bidders’ expertise level with completing the 
task at hand efficiently, and effectively. Currently, a set of criteria could include:  
• 
the task fee (x%),  
• 
a project organization chart, with CVs of key employees and possible replace-
ments, as well as comprehensive descriptions of their project management pro-
cess, and of the users’ committee involvement throughout the design phase (y%), 
and 
• 
the process for sustainability (z%). 
The percentages represent the weight of each criterion as part of the evaluation method. 
Both the criteria and the percentages are defined by the customer in collaboration with 
the client consultant. Evidently, if, for example, the sustainability criterion is associated 
with a lower weight percentagewise, then the quality of the material submitted by the 
bidders will also be lower, and criteria with a higher weight percentagewise will be prior-
itized (e.g., the task fee) when preparing the offer.  
However, the way the selection criteria and weight of each criterion are defined arguably 
depends on the strategic decisions made at the beginning of initial consultancy, which 
determine the focus throughout the remaining project process.  
In general, as described in the second chapter, the social, and environmental sustaina-
bility considerations in the preparation of the legal basis for tender are somewhat mini-
mal, while the economic considerations are mostly about avoiding delays and additional 
costs for the customer, instead of addressing social and environmental costs as well 
(2.2.2). Nevertheless, all stem from the initial strategic decisions.  
Therefore, as mentioned in the previous sub subchapter, a solution could be, including 
a social and environmental sustainability consultant as well as a building operations ad-
visor in the preparation of the foundation for the initial strategic decision-making in col-
laboration with the customer and the client consultant. This way, the legal component of 
the basis for tender should also align with the initial objectives resulting from the strategic 
decisions.   
It should also be noted that, during the evaluation of the offers (i.e., in the choice of 
consultants phase), another issue has to do with the bidders’ submissions of a project 
organization chart, or their descriptions of the project management process, for instance. 
In certain cases, client consultants at the case company can encounter difficulties in 
evaluating the submitted material, due to it being erroneous, or consisting of generic 
descriptions. Eventually, it is the fee that is used as the main selection criterion, in certain 
cases.   
The rest of the building project process (i.e., the design phase, to the delivery), although 
included in Appendix A, is not encapsulated in the description segment of the paper. 
That is because, although it includes the preparation of a second basis for tender (i.e., 
the choice of a main contractor phase), the entire process arguably includes social, en-
vironmental, and economic sustainability considerations that are minimal or determined 
by regulations (e.g., requirements for occupational health and safety). Nevertheless, the 
same idea applies here, which is that all considerations, and the focus throughout the 
project process stem from the initial strategic decisions.  
==PAGE:28==
Sustainable client consultancy in a mid-sized architecture company in Denmark
20 
 
 
3.1.3 Client consultancy in relation to building projects as lead contracts 
(Totalentrepriser) 
This type of client consultancy task involves assisting the client in: 
• 
preparing the basis for tender in connection with the choice of a lead contractor 
(i.e., the initial consultancy phase), 
• 
carrying out the tender process (i.e., the choice of lead contractor phase), 
• 
overseeing the architectural project process in accordance with the agreement 
concluded in the previous phase (i.e., the design phase) 
• 
overseeing the execution project process (i.e., detailed project before construc-
tion), surveilling the construction of the building project, as well as supervising 
the building delivery to the customer’s organization (i.e., the construction and de-
livery phases).  
As previously mentioned, this type of process is faster than the previous one because it 
involves only one tender. In addition, the execution project process and the construction 
of the building project slightly overlap, allowing for a quicker delivery.  
The choice of this process does not necessarily represent a measure for sustainability 
since the initial stage is identical to the previous one, but it is influenced by, for example, 
a building project involving standardized design (i.e., a less complicated one), or the 
client’s desire for an early overview of the building project costs. The latter is possible 
here because of the single tender, meaning one offer for both the building project design 
and construction. The sustainability-related considerations throughout this process are 
similar to the previous one, and also stem from the initial strategic decisions.  
Therefore, the involvement of a social and environmental sustainability consultant and a 
building operations advisor early in the initial consultancy, during the preparation of the 
bases for strategic decision-making in collaboration with the customer and client consult-
ant, could apply to this process as well.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:29==
Sustainable client consultancy in a mid-sized architecture company in Denmark 
21 
 
3.2 The organizational context 
If the first ‘layer’ of the problem constitutes the arguably ‘outdated’ client advising practice 
in the context of tasks handled by the human resources in the client consultancy busi-
ness area, the second ‘layer’ of the problem stems from the organizational structure at 
the case company, which perpetuates the idea of ‘separation’, rather than ‘integration’, 
initially identified as part of the “Description of Services for Client Consultancy”-docu-
ment, where sustainability is arguably treated as an ‘add-on’.  
An outline of the organizational structure at the case company is illustrated in Figure 3.2, 
including the three established business areas (i.e., ‘Housing and Private’, ‘Renovation’, 
and ‘Education, Culture, and Health’) and the recently included client consultancy busi-
ness area.  
Noteworthy is that client consultancy is not depicted as a ‘cross-cutting’, or transversal 
business area, which would imply that its competences be involved in all client advising 
tasks obtained by the organization, as well as other types of consultancy tasks, for in-
stance. Instead, it is depicted as a ‘parallel entity’ functioning like the three established 
business areas.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3.2: An outline of the current organizational structure at the case company;     
diagram concept inspired by (Maylor, 2010)(Roseke, 2019) 
Housing 
and Private 
(BA1) 
Renovation 
(BA2)  
Employees 
Education, 
Culture, 
and Health 
(BA3) 
Client Consultancy 
(New business 
area) 
Partners in 
control of BAs 
Client 
consulting 
chief 
Employees 
Employees 
Employees 
Task A 
Task B 
Board 
Administration 
==PAGE:30==
Sustainable client consultancy in a mid-sized architecture company in Denmark
22 
 
 
As Figure 3.2 shows, the established business areas are under the direction of a partner, 
while client consultancy is headed by a client consulting chief. In addition, as part of the 
board, the partners develop strategies, and decide the direction of the company, as pre-
viously stated. The ‘Administration’ segment is defined by the case company’s daily man-
agement and financial activity, and is represented by the firm’s CEO and bookkeepers. 
It should be noted that although the CEO can offer recommendations to the partners, 
they do not make decisions on behalf of the partners. Therefore, the presence of the 
‘Administration’ segment is more for accuracy, than for demonstrating a particular point. 
When considering client consultancy relative to sustainability in the context of a case 
company, it is perhaps important to analyze all client advising tasks handled by the firm, 
instead of only the ones handled by the client consultancy business area.  
As suggested before, occasionally, client consultancy tasks are obtained by one of the 
three partners, and handled by the employees in their respective business areas (i.e., 
‘BA1’, ‘BA2’, ‘BA3’ in Figure 3.2). Those are generically illustrated as ‘Task A’ in Figure 
3.2, while ‘Task B’ universally represents client consultancy tasks handled by the em-
ployees in the client consultancy business area.  
However, sometimes, solving ‘Task A’ could involve client advising competences for the 
preparation of the legal basis for tender, while ‘Task B’ might require the assistance of a 
consultant from one of the other business areas during the preparation of the technical 
basis for tender. The following two sub subchapters analyze the handling of a client con-
sultancy job as ‘Task A’ and ‘Task B’.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:31==
Sustainable client consultancy in a mid-sized architecture company in Denmark 
23 
 
3.2.1 ‘Task A’ (client consultancy tasks handled by one of the three estab-
lished business areas) 
The primary competences in the three established business areas at the case company 
are associated with architecture and design (i.e., architects, landscape architects, and 
constructing engineers).  
When handling architecture and design consultancy tasks, some human resources are 
appointed as design managers (projekteringsledere), indicating that they manage con-
sultants during the design phase of a building project, and report to the client. However, 
their main competences are still architecture- and design-focused. 
As previously shown, the design phase follows the initial consultancy and the choice of 
consultants phases, which are generally associated with client advising competences. 
Regardless, when obtaining a client consultancy job, the process is handled like any 
architecture and design consultancy task solved by the respective business area (i.e., 
with a design manager in direct communication with the client).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3.2.1 shows the outline of a generic project organization chart for a client consul-
tancy task as handled by one of the three established business areas, and can apply to 
both building projects as main contracts and building projects as lead contracts. The key 
point is that the design manager takes the role of the client consultant, while the latter is 
optionally included in the process with the responsibility of creating the legal basis for 
tender.  
Client 
Design 
manager 
Consultants and main con-
tractor (rådgivere og 
hovedentreprenør) / lead 
contractor (totalentreprenør) 
Consultants and 
specialists 
Optional: Client consultant 
(legal basis for tender) 
Figure 3.2.1: Outline of a generic project organization chart for ‘Task A’ showing the 
communication hierarchy between roles (i.e., blue-colored lines) 
==PAGE:32==
Sustainable client consultancy in a mid-sized architecture company in Denmark
24 
 
 
It must be noted that in a building project process, the design phase is generally about 
implementing the client’s specifications for the building based on the strategic decisions 
in the initial consultancy. Therefore, an assumption could be that architecture- and de-
sign-focused competences, since they are usually involved in the design phase, are 
mostly associated with ‘execution’, rather than ‘objective definition’, to which client ad-
vising competences are related.  
Consequently, when architecture- and design-focused resources (i.e., design managers) 
are handling client consultancy tasks at the case company, which involve the preparation 
of the bases for strategic decision-making with the client, sometimes, there can be an 
inclination toward an arguably ‘excessive’, and evidently time-consuming consideration 
of building design-related options, for instance. In other words, it is ‘details’ (execution-
related) that are given a lot of consideration, instead of the ‘larger picture’ (i.e., objective 
definition-related).  
On the surface, the evaluation of design-related options might not seem like a negative 
measure. However, when performed by itself, and not relative to initial strategic deci-
sions, a potentially ‘unrestrained’ consideration of options with no pre-determined objec-
tives can prove critical to the course of the project and the client, respectively.  
This is also why, on some occasions, delays occur, and the ‘wrong solution’ in produced, 
which corresponds to the client’s wishes not being met, and a lack of sustainability-re-
lated considerations. That is, even with the presence of the ‘green mentors’ in the busi-
ness area. If sustainability-related objectives are not being discussed and defined, and 
the attention remains on aspects of architecture and design, then the appropriate human 
resources (i.e., ‘green mentors’) cannot be assigned to the task accordingly.  
Moreover, the inefficient handling of client consultancy tasks can affect the human re-
sources as well. Improperly assigning competences to client consultancy tasks (i.e., de-
sign managers) combined with the inability to fulfill the task (i.e., ‘wrong solutions’) can 
result in stress for the employees.  
It should also be noted that when it comes to the client consultant preparing the legal 
basis for tender, if the case (i.e., the legal documents including the selection criteria and 
the evaluation method for the offers), it is arguably so late in the process (i.e., design 
specification phase), that the client advisor cannot even attempt to rectify any error. As 
a result, sometimes, ‘sustainability’ cannot be defined as a selection criterion, if the sub-
ject matter has not been sufficiently considered until that moment in the process.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:33==
Sustainable client consultancy in a mid-sized architecture company in Denmark 
25 
 
3.2.2 ‘Task B’ (client consultancy tasks handled by the client consultancy 
business area) 
‘Task B’ is representative of client consultancy jobs obtained by the client consulting 
chief, and handled by client advisors in their respective business area. The current ap-
proach to solving these tasks relative to sustainability is analyzed in the previous sub-
chapter (i.e., 3.1).  
Figure 3.2.2 shows the outline of a generic project organization chart for ‘Task B’, which 
can apply to both building projects as main contracts and building projects as lead con-
tracts. The client advisor is directly connected to the customer in the communication 
hierarchy, as well as optionally manages consultants from other business areas during 
the preparation of the basis for tender. In addition, specialists outside the organization 
are managed during different preliminary investigations based on the scope of task at 
hand (e.g., environmental, access and traffic, noise, geotechnical).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Clearly, the main difference between ‘Task A’ and ‘Task B’ is that client advising compe-
tences are assigned to the task in direct communication with the client. This way, the 
bases for strategic decision-making can perhaps be more efficiently prepared during the 
initial consultancy.  
After decisions have been made at the highest level in the client’s organization, and 
various objectives have been set, the customer, in collaboration with the client advisor, 
Figure 3.2.2: Outline of a generic project organization chart for ‘Task B’ showing the 
communication hierarchy between roles (i.e., blue-colored lines) 
Client 
Client 
consultant 
Consultants and main con-
tractor (rådgivere og 
hovedentreprenør) / lead 
contractor (totalentreprenør) 
Specialists 
Optional: Consultant from a 
different business area 
(technical basis for tender) 
==PAGE:34==
Sustainable client consultancy in a mid-sized architecture company in Denmark
26 
 
 
and perhaps consultants from other business areas, assembles the requirements for the 
building (i.e., technical basis for tender). Concomitantly, the legal basis for tender is cre-
ated, so that ‘sustainability’ can be defined as a selection criterion.  
However, the issue here is not in the handling of the process, but rather in the insufficient 
integration of sustainability-related considerations in the bases for strategic decision-
making. As previously mentioned, perhaps the appropriate selection, and coordination 
of ‘optional services’, together with the involvement of an environmental and social sus-
tainability consultant and a building operations advisor could be part of the solution.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:35==
Sustainable client consultancy in a mid-sized architecture company in Denmark 
27 
 
3.2.3 The company’s current strategy for sustainability (based on 2.3.1) 
The interview with the, now, former head of sustainability at the case company revealed 
the existence of a company strategy for sustainability. Although still in development at 
the highest level in the firm hierarchy, some measures are already being implemented. 
As mentioned earlier in the paper, the strategy consists of three ‘boxes’: one, capturing 
the current situation in the company as well as external factors that could influence it, 
the second, listing the immediately required action based on the current situation and 
the external factors, and the third, containing a more elaborate future action plan. Evi-
dently, all three sections have ‘sustainability’ as the primary motif, but the first two boxes 
focus on the firm’s activities, while the latter addresses sustainability in relation to the 
business model, as previously described (i.e., 2.3.1).  
Interestingly, the concept of a company sustainability strategy is not widely known in the 
client consultancy business area, as knowledge of its existence was only gained during 
the interview. Therefore, the idea of ‘separation’ is maintained, as Figure 3.2.3 illustrates.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3.2.3: The company strategy for sustainability presumably applied to three of 
the four business areas in the organization 
Housing 
and Private 
(BA1) 
Renovation 
(BA2) 
Employees 
Education, 
Culture, 
and Health 
(BA3) 
Client consultancy 
(New business 
area) 
Partners in 
control of BAs 
Client 
consulting 
chief 
Employees 
Employees 
Employees 
Company strategy 
for sustainability 
Board 
Administration 
==PAGE:36==
Sustainable client consultancy in a mid-sized architecture company in Denmark
28 
 
 
At first glance, the first and second ‘boxes’ of the strategy might not include any consid-
erations for sustainability directly related to client consultancy (Figure 2.3.1).  
Perhaps, the insufficient sustainability-related considerations in the initial bases for stra-
tegic decision-making (i.e., in the initial consultancy), or in the basis for tender could also 
be articulated in ‘Box 1’. Additionally, in ‘Box 2’, where the immediately required action 
should be indicated, a new process ‘template’ for handling client consultancy tasks with 
‘optional services’ and sustainability-focused consultants and specialists could be listed 
as a possible measure in response to ‘Box 1’. 
Nevertheless, the image of the current situation relative to sustainability currently ex-
pressed in ‘Box 1’ could still be relevant to a client consultant (Figure 2.3.1). The man-
datory Life Cycle Assessment indicated in the building regulations implies that this as-
sessment cannot represent an ‘optional service’ in a client consultancy process anymore. 
However, considering that the strategy for sustainability is not widely known in the client 
consultancy business area, the Life Cycle Assessment has not been part of the manda-
tory services until now, which means that the ‘separation’ indicated in Figure 3.2.3 is 
arguably maintaining client consultancy not only ‘outdated’, but misaligned with the build-
ing regulations, in this case. 
Interestingly, the same applies to ‘Task A’ (i.e., client advising tasks handled by business 
areas other than client consultancy). Although Figure 3.2.3 could suggest that the com-
pany strategy for sustainability would impact ‘Task A’, as shown in Figure 3.2, often, it 
does not. Although undeniably relevant to all tasks, the company strategy for sustaina-
bility is perhaps mainly applied to architecture and design consultancy tasks handled by 
the three established business areas.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:37==
Sustainable client consultancy in a mid-sized architecture company in Denmark 
29 
 
3.2.4 The current project-related strategy for sustainability and ‘green men-
tors’ (based on 2.3.2 and 2.3.3) 
The interview with the, now, former head of sustainability at the case company also re-
vealed the existence of a project-related strategy for sustainability, which includes sug-
gested assessments for key phases in a building project (e.g., property strategy, ap-
praisal, design specification) (Figure 2.3.2).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The assessments are meant to be carried out by the in-house sustainability-focused re-
sources, or ‘green mentors’, distributed across the three established business areas in 
the organization (2.3.3). They are also illustrated in Figure 3.2.4 as the green-colored 
segments at the bottom of each of the established business areas (i.e., ‘GM’, ‘green 
mentors’).  
Just like the company strategy for sustainability, the project-related one is not widely 
known in the client consultancy business area, as knowledge of its contents was 
Figure 3.2.4: The project-related strategy for sustainability presumably applied to three 
of the four business areas in the organization 
Housing 
and Private 
(BA1)  
Renovation 
(BA2)  
(GM) Employees 
Education, 
Culture, 
and Health 
(BA3)  
Client consultancy 
(New business 
area) 
Partners in 
control of BAs 
Client 
consulting 
chief 
Employees 
Project-related strategy 
for sustainability 
(GM) Employees 
(GM) Employees 
Board 
Administration 
==PAGE:38==
Sustainable client consultancy in a mid-sized architecture company in Denmark
30 
 
 
gathered during the interview. Therefore, the idea of ‘separation’ remains valid, as de-
picted in Figure 3.2.4.  
Interestingly, the project-related strategy for sustainability is highly compatible with client 
consultancy tasks, since it addresses the phases of the initial consultancy, and, if ap-
plied, could strengthen the bases for strategic decision-making with environmental sus-
tainability considerations. Moreover, the ‘Green Page’ tool, developed by the case com-
pany, even allows for preliminary Life Cycle Assessment and Life Cycle Cost during the 
appraisal phase, when the basis for strategic decision-making in connection with the 
realizability of the building project is prepared (2.3.2, Figure 2.3.2). Additionally, the as-
sessments listed under the design specification phase, although mainly address the en-
vironmental pillar, could constitute a more concrete basis for tender than the current one, 
when it comes to sustainability.  
An assumption could be that the absence of ‘green mentors’ in the client consultancy 
business area is a cause for the project-related strategy for sustainability not being ap-
plied there. However, this aspect should not constitute a significant issue, since a client 
advisor can appoint a consultant from one of the other business areas during a task, as 
Figure 3.2.2 illustrates. Nevertheless, in practice, the appointed consultant is usually one 
that the client advisor has worked with before (i.e., generally, a senior architect). There-
fore, the cause rather stems from the way consultants from other business areas are 
currently assigned to ‘Task B’ (i.e., client consultancy tasks handled by the client consul-
tancy business area), than the lack of ‘green mentors’ in the client consultancy business 
area.  
‘Task A’ (i.e., client consultancy tasks handled by the three established business areas), 
for instance, could perhaps more effectively incorporate ‘green mentors’. However, alt-
hough Figure 3.2.4 might suggest that the project-related strategy for sustainability would 
be applied to ‘Task A’, often, it is not. Again, although undeniably relevant to all tasks, 
the project-related strategy for sustainability is perhaps mainly applied to architecture 
and design consultancy tasks handled by the three established business areas.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:39==
Sustainable client consultancy in a mid-sized architecture company in Denmark 
31 
 
3.2.5 A current-day SWOT analysis for the case company 
Early in the paper, an assumption is articulated. That is, client consultancy was intro-
duced to the case company in an attempt to strengthen its strategic positioning on the 
market. In other words, the addition of client advising competences to the existing archi-
tecture- and design-related ones was meant to create a distinctive offering on the market 
relative to other mid-sized architecture firms.  
However, the increasing sustainability-related demands from the government, and the 
market implicitly, could become an obstacle in fulfilling the desired strategic positioning, 
if client advising remains ‘outdated’, and some client consultancy tasks are handled in-
efficiently. 
As a general issue, the idea of ‘separation’, considered here as incompatible with sus-
tainability, was identified, in the shape of:  
• 
‘sustainability’, arguably treated as an ‘add-on’ in the “Description of Services of 
Client Consultancy”, 
• 
the client consultancy business area functioning as a ‘separate entity’,  
• 
separate ways of handling client consultancy tasks, either as part of the three 
established business areas (i.e., 3.2.1, ‘Task A’), or as part on the client consul-
tancy business area (i.e., 3.2.2, ‘Task B’), and 
• 
an ‘exclusion’ of client consultancy from the company- and project-related strat-
egies for sustainability, which arguably maintains the practice ‘outdated’.  
Moreover, this ‘separation’ problem can reverberate, impacting the employees’ wellbeing 
(3.2.1), perhaps even the company’s ‘image’, or the ability to acquire or maintain clients, 
due to the ‘outdated’ client advising practice, or inefficiently handled client consultancy 
tasks.  
To better illustrate the problem, a business-related SWOT analysis (i.e., used for identi-
fying strengths, weaknesses, opportunities, and threats in a business or project context) 
is shown in Figure 3.2.5.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:40==
Sustainable client consultancy in a mid-sized architecture company in Denmark
32 
 
 
STRENGTHS 
 
 
Architecture and design competences 
(Housing and Private, Renovation, and 
Education, Culture, and Health) 
 
Client consulting competences 
 
A developing company strategy for sus-
tainability and project-related strategy for 
sustainability 
 
In-house sustainability-focused human re-
sources (‘green mentors’) 
 
 
WEAKNESSES 
 
 
An arguably ‘outdated’ practice of client 
advising relative to sustainability consid-
erations 
 
Inefficiently handled client consultancy 
tasks (i.e., 3.2.1, ‘Task A’), with an unfit-
ting project organization chart (i.e., with a 
design manager instead of a client advi-
sor) 
 
The newly introduced client consultancy 
business area is ‘separated’ from the 
three established ones when it comes to 
strategies for sustainability 
 
 
OPPORTUNITIES 
 
 
Acquiring, and maintaining clients through 
efficiently, and more sustainably handled 
client consultancy tasks 
 
Strengthening the company’s strategic po-
sitioning on the market as a more sustain-
able organization with various compe-
tences (i.e., client advising included), and 
encouraging competitive advantage 
 
 
THREATS 
 
 
The unfitting resource allocation to client 
consultancy tasks handled by the three 
established business areas can result in 
stress for the employees 
 
Negative effects on the company’s ‘im-
age’ due to the ‘outdated’ client advising 
practice and some inefficiently handled 
client consultancy tasks 
 
In case the issues persist, there might be 
difficulties in acquiring or maintaining cli-
ents 
 
 
 
Figure 3.2.5 The outline of a business-related SWOT analysis for the case company 
used to reinforce the need for a revised organizational structure 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:41==
Sustainable client consultancy in a mid-sized architecture company in Denmark 
33 
 
As mentioned in the first chapter, only a suggestion for a more sustainable client advising 
practice could not be considered ‘sustainable’ in an arguably unsustainable organization. 
Therefore, the strengths, weaknesses, and threats identified in the SWOT-analysis are 
used, together with the described opportunities, for advancing a solution involving a re-
vised organizational structure at the case company. This solution is focused on the im-
plementation of client consultancy as a ‘cross-cutting’, or transversal business area and 
discipline, which would ensure its inclusion in strategies for sustainability developed at 
the highest level in the company hierarchy. To complement the revised organizational 
structure, the solution also involves a revised approach to handling client consultancy 
tasks. 
Moreover, by being a transversal discipline, client advising competences could also be 
included in, for instance, architecture and design consultancy tasks handled by the three 
established business areas, perhaps in connection with the initial planning of the task, 
and the basis for tender.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:42==
Sustainable client consultancy in a mid-sized architecture company in Denmark
34 
 
 
4. Related cases and literature 
The following chapter comprises the findings from two interviews conducted at the Dan-
ish Building and Property Agency, and the Copenhagen Public Housing Association re-
spectively. Both organizations are potential clients of the case company, but also work 
with client advising-specific tasks, since they cater to government departments and uni-
versities, or advise publicly-owned organizations in relation to building projects.  
In addition, the new paradigm for sustainable construction, introduced to the building 
industry at the end of 2022, is analyzed in relation to client consultancy further in the 
chapter.  
Finally, considering client consultancy’s similarity to the project management discipline, 
and for a different viewpoint outside the Danish building industry, the outcome of a review 
of 164 publications on project management and sustainability conducted by two re-
searchers, one being an author with recognized work on sustainable project manage-
ment, is analyzed in relation to client consultancy.  
 
4.1 The Danish Building and Property Agency’s approach to sus-
tainability 
For a better understanding of how a potential client of the case company perceives sus-
tainability, and what they require of a client consultant during tasks relative to this subject, 
an interview was conducted with The Danish Building and Property Agency’s sustaina-
bility consultant, who oversees sustainability during all projects (i.e., Appendix C).  
In addition to being the client, however, the Agency has responsibilities that share simi-
larities with the client consultant’s work, making the information learned during the inter-
view particularly significant, as it broadens the perspective on the approach to sustaina-
bility when solving client advising-specific tasks. 
Essentially, as the sustainability consultant mentions in the interview, government de-
partments such as ministries, justice, and police, together with universities, all to which 
the Agency caters, request building projects. From there, the process can be viewed as 
one of client advising, as it includes estimating the cost and carrying out the initial con-
sultancy until the appraisal phase in completed, with the purpose of analyzing the clients’ 
(i.e., the government departments, and universities) practical and functional needs, and 
transforming them into general objectives.  
As far as sustainability is concerned, The Agency does not have their own organizational 
strategy, and, when it comes to projects, the clients’ already defined requirements for 
sustainability are considered in the initial stage.  
What stood out during the interview was ‘economy’ as a reoccurring theme in relation to 
sustainability. In other words, apart from mandatory measures such as carrying out the 
Life Cycle Assessment, or reducing carbon emissions, sustainability-related considera-
tions (e.g., a DGNB process) seem conditional upon, for example, external funding from 
different organizations. As the Agency’s sustainability consultant mentions, “when a cli-
ent is price sensitive, economy is the focus, and sustainability, more of an option” (Thor 
Biering Rohdin, 2023 - Appendix C).   
==PAGE:43==
Sustainable client consultancy in a mid-sized architecture company in Denmark 
35 
 
Interestingly, one of the responsibilities of a client consultant during tasks at the case 
company is also describing the client’s requirements for sustainability, which are com-
monly conditional upon their financial situation as well. Seemingly, the focus on economy 
governs the ‘extent’ of ‘sustainability’ in a building project.  
One of the reasons for that, as described by the sustainability consultant, is that sustain-
ability-ensuring activities are not only difficult to define, but estimate a cost for. Planning 
a process appropriately can be largely dependent on previous experience, and since 
sustainability remains a board, even vague concept, a client can perhaps be resistant to 
a new, ‘pricy’ process without concrete proof of its efficiency and effectiveness. This as-
pect is also mentioned in connection with the selection of ‘optional services’ from the 
“Description of Services for Client Consultancy” in subchapter 3.1.  
This also signals that a client’s openness to a new course of action is perhaps also 
needed, in addition to a client advisor’s appropriately planned process.  
For the scenario where a client did not define any sustainability requirements, the way 
that The Danish Building and Property Agency tackles sustainability at the beginning of 
a project process is by assisting the client in creating a general ‘sustainability vision’ for 
the project. 
This ‘sustainability vision’ can be outlined with the use of a questionnaire that the 
Agency’s sustainability consultant took part in designing, which covers measures per-
taining to the three pillars of sustainability.  
By selecting specific measures, and creating a priority hierarchy, for example, the con-
sultant does not only gain a better understanding of the client’s focus, but also which of 
the ‘lower-ranked’ measures could perhaps be eliminated, given that the budget is ex-
ceeded throughout the project process, for instance.  
The Agency’s sustainability approach designed for the initial stage of a project process 
(i.e., outlining a ‘sustainability vision’), although less concrete, appears more inclusive 
than the case company’s first step of the project-related strategy for sustainability de-
scribed by the head of sustainability.  
Although both approaches consider the time in the project process when opportunities 
are numerous, but information about the project is lacking, the Agency’s approach offers 
the client a more comprehensive view of sustainability by considering all three pillars, 
while the case company’s strategy focuses on the environmental dimension (e.g., the 
choice of materials relative to the environmental impact of the building).  
According to the Agency’s sustainability consultant, after creating the ‘vision’, a client 
consultant is hired to “translate the ‘sustainability vision’ to more concrete activities”’, as 
part of the design specification phase, in which the requirements for the building project 
are defined (Thor Biering Rohdin, 2023 - Appendix C). In addition, sustainability-related 
‘services’ for the following phase in the building project (i.e., the design phase) should 
be indicated as necessary in fulfillment of the vision above. A client consultant should 
also prepare cost estimations for both phases (i.e., the design specification and design 
phases), which must be approved of by the client.  
At the end of 2022, a new paradigm for sustainable construction was introduced to the 
Danish construction industry, and is further explained in subchapter 4.3. Together with 
this model, a list of sustainability-focused services designed for consultants was issued, 
==PAGE:44==
Sustainable client consultancy in a mid-sized architecture company in Denmark
36 
 
 
to be used as part of the contract basis. During the interview, the sustainability consultant 
mentioned that the Agency is aware of the newly introduced model, yet is still working 
on implementing it. However, it is ‘services’ such as these that a client consultant will 
have to use in ensuring the client’s ‘sustainability vision’ is fulfilled, and base the cost 
estimations upon.  
This signals the fact that in order meet The Danish Building and Property Agency’s client 
consultancy requirements, a client advisor must thoroughly understand the new para-
digm, and the sustainability-focused services that accompany it, to appropriately plan a 
process that fulfills a client’s vision, but is also adapted to their financial situation.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:45==
Sustainable client consultancy in a mid-sized architecture company in Denmark 
37 
 
4.2 Copenhagen Public Housing Association’s approach to sus-
tainability 
A second interview was conducted outside the organization with a project manager and 
client advisor at the Copenhagen Public Housing Association (KAB), for a broader per-
spective on the case company’s potential clients’ approach to sustainability (i.e., Appen-
dix D). The Association generally works with public housing organizations in Copenha-
gen and surrounding municipalities, and assists them with, among others, the foundation 
for strategic decision-making in relation to building projects, as well as the management 
of the said projects.  
Like the Danish Building and Property Agency, KAB does not have any pre-determined 
action plan for sustainability in building projects, and mainly takes into consideration the 
client’s requirements for sustainability.  
Unlike the Agency’s clients, that are seemingly resistant to an elaborate process like the 
DGNB one, unless there is external funding for its implementation, some of KAB’s clients 
appear to aspire for a label as high as DGNB Platinum, even though their ambition might 
lower throughout the project process and settle at a DGNB Gold, or Silver levels, as the 
project manager mentions.  
That isn’t to say, however, that economy doesn’t play a major role here, as it did in the 
previous subchapter, when it comes to sustainable construction. That is, if sustainable 
construction is associated with a sustainability certification. As mentioned in the inter-
view, other clients of the Copenhagen Public Housing Association are still reluctant to 
following a process such as the DGNB, or the Nordic Ecolabel ones, and settle for the 
sustainability requirements defined in the building regulations. The main reason is the 
cost, relative to the “guarantee that the measures will be ‘enough’”, which, according to 
the project manager, is lacking (Thomas Tang, 2023 – Appendix D). Interestingly, the 
same idea occurred during the first interview. 
Considering that, an assumption could be that the decision to incorporate, for example, 
the DGNB certification process in the building project is determined by the label’s asso-
ciation with status, rather than proven effects.  
The idea of ‘guarantee’ also occurs in relation to other sustainability-related measures, 
such as the recycling of bricks or concrete blocks. As the project manager mentions, 
neither contractors, nor clients are open to taking responsibility for the ‘quality guarantee’ 
of reused materials.  
So, when the cost is too high for sustainability certifications, and recycling is not an op-
tion, the sustainability-related requirements in the building regulations are perhaps often 
the only measures clients are willing to approve of, and they barely tackle the environ-
mental dimension of the concept.  
At the same time, a measure that the Copenhagen Public Housing Association is taking, 
and is similar to the Danish Building and Property Agency’s approach, is outlining a gen-
eral ‘sustainability vision’ at the beginning of a building project process.  
A questionnaire is used in both cases that covers social, environmental, and economic 
considerations. However, for renovation projects, for example, KAB uses the question-
naire both to evaluate the current situation, as well as to determine the objectives of the 
==PAGE:46==
Sustainable client consultancy in a mid-sized architecture company in Denmark
38 
 
 
project. This approach perhaps allows for a more accurate definition of the vision, given 
the comparison between ‘current’ and ‘new’. 
In terms of working with consultants outside the organization throughout the remaining 
project process, one particular issue encountered by the KAB project manager was the 
ineffective communication between the client and the consultant, resulting in a solution 
that is overly ambitious, and not feasible for the client.  
Interestingly, the idea of producing the ‘wrong’ solution occurs at the case company when 
arguably unsuitable competences are assigned to client consultancy tasks, and the pro-
cess is handled inefficiently by a different business area than the client consultancy one 
(i.e., 3.2.1, ‘Task A’).  
Therefore, to meet KAB’s requirements, a client consultancy task should perhaps involve 
a client advisor in direct communication with the customer (i.e., 3.2.2, ‘Task B’), instead 
of a design manager.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:47==
Sustainable client consultancy in a mid-sized architecture company in Denmark 
39 
 
4.3 A new paradigm for sustainable construction in the Danish 
building industry 
During the interview at the Danish Building and Property Agency, the sustainability con-
sultant suggested, among others, that a client consultant is hired to “translate the client’s 
‘sustainability vision’ to concrete activities”, with the use of sustainability-related services 
(Thor Biering Rohdin, 2023 - Appendix C).  
The sustainability-related services that the sustainability consultant mentioned were de-
veloped as part of a new model for sustainable construction, issued at the end of 2022 
by the Danish Architects Association (DanskeArk), the Association of Consulting Engi-
neers (FRI), and the Client Association (Bygherreforeningen), with financial support from 
Realdania. It was created in response to the newly introduced requirements for environ-
mental sustainability in the building regulations, and the measures regarding investments 
for environmental sustainability on a European level (EU taxonomy) (Nu Lanceres Nyt 
Tillæg Om Bæredygtighed Til Ydelsesbeskrivelserne - Værdibyg, 2022).  
The purpose of this model is to presumably complete the original “Description of Ser-
vices”-documents created for the consulting disciplines (i.e., architectural, landscape, 
and engineering, as well as client consultancy), and reinforce the contract basis for con-
sultancy with social and environmental sustainability-focused measures (Nyt Tillæg Om 
Bæredygtighed Til Ydelsesbeskrivelserne|Danske Arkitektvirksomheder | Brancheor-
ganisation, 2022).  
As far as client consultancy is concerned, the new paradigm comes in the form of a 
supplementary document to the “Description of Services for Client Consultancy”, which 
introduces a new role to the initial consultancy type of task. That is, the sustainability 
consultant. For client consultancy in relation to building projects as main contracts, and 
as lead contracts, the supplement also introduces the role of the sustainability manager 
(Tillæg Om Bæredygtighedsydelser, 2022). 
The supplement comprises twenty-one services divided into activities with deliverables 
for each phase of a building project (i.e., from property strategy to delivery). So, each 
service is completed throughout the life cycle of the project. The difference between the 
sustainability consultant and the sustainability manager is that the first is meant to carry 
out the activities during initial consultancy (i.e., from real estate strategy to design spec-
ification), while the latter is supposed to perform the ones starting in the design phase, 
all the way to delivery (Tillæg Om Bæredygtighedsydelser, 2022). In other words, the 
sustainability consultant’s activities revolve around preliminary analyses and objective 
definition, while the sustainability manager’s ones are more about execution and docu-
mentation.  
Considering the Danish Building and Property Agency’s requirement of a client consult-
ant, which is to suggest a selection of the twenty-one services, plan the process for their 
execution during initial consultancy, for example, and estimate a cost, then that could 
perhaps be achieved, and improved with time.  
At the same time, what cannot be neglected is the new document’s presumed attribute 
of being supplementary to the established ‘performance description’ for client consul-
tancy. Although, perhaps the intended purpose of the paradigm was to offer a means for 
transition to more sustainable client consultancy, it is arguably still treating ‘sustainability’ 
as an ‘add-on’ (i.e., supplement). Arguably, the supplement proposes no alteration, or 
==PAGE:48==
Sustainable client consultancy in a mid-sized architecture company in Denmark
40 
 
 
additions to the existing client consultancy services in the original, 2019 ‘performance 
description’. Instead, it introduces a sustainability-focused, ‘parallel’ process to the client 
consultancy one, performed by a sustainability consultant. Therefore, it perpetuates the 
idea of ‘separation’, instead of ‘integration’. Although the process introduced by the sup-
plement is almost an undeniable step forward towards a more sustainable outcome of a 
building project, it arguably brings little, to no change to the client consulting practice.  
That assumption might also apply to the building project process. That is because the 
new paradigm for sustainable construction brings forward a supplement to the existing 
building project process, as it does to the client advising practice, instead of correcting 
it, or drawing a comprehensible connection between ‘current’ and ‘new’.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
To reinforce that assumption, the communication hierarchy depicted in the new project 
organization chart introduced by the paradigm shows how a client consultant receives 
information from the sustainability consultant, and reports to the client (Figure 4.3). 
Therefore, while the sustainability consultant carries out, or manages the sustainability-
focused activities, the responsibility for process planning, quality assurance and delivery 
of the material still belongs to the client consultant, that is also working in close collabo-
ration with the client.  
A client consultant cannot continue to perform within the established paradigm, with the 
occasional sustainability-related considerations, as presented earlier in the paper, while 
the sustainability consultant focuses on the social and environmental impact, as defined 
by the new paradigm for sustainable construction. Instead, the client consultant’s activi-
ties should be aligned with the sustainability consultant’s performance in terms of princi-
ples and focus areas. This way, a process for sustainability that fulfills a client’s vision, 
yet is adapted to their financial situation, could be better defined. Additionally, throughout 
the project, successful cooperation is encouraged, and the process is carried out more 
efficiently, and perhaps effectively. 
Hence, an appropriate next step could be finding ways to introduce sustainability at the 
core of the client advising practice. This matter is further explored in the next subchapter. 
Client 
Sustainability 
consultant 
Client consultant 
Figure 4.3: A section of the generic project organization chart from the "Supple-
ment to the Description of Services 2022" showing the communication hierarchy 
between roles (Tillæg Om Bæredygtighedsydelser, 2022) 
==PAGE:49==
Sustainable client consultancy in a mid-sized architecture company in Denmark 
41 
 
4.4 Gilbert Silvius’s view on sustainable project management 
Given the high degree of complexity generally associated with sustainability, a less ex-
perienced client consultant at the case company might find sustainability-related consid-
erations not only difficult to identify and coordinate, but even to grasp. Therefore, by 
exploring the perspective of an author, researcher, and scholar with recognized work on 
sustainability in project management, such as A.J. Gilbert Silvius (A.J. Gilbert SILVIUS | 
Professor | PhD, MSc, MBA | Research Profile, n.d.), a client consultant could advance 
their understanding of the subject, and perhaps redirect their attention from mainly con-
sidering the environmental pillar of the concept, to a more rounded approach.  
Particularly significant is Ron P.J. Schipper (an independent researcher) (R.P.J. SCHIP-
PER | Principal Consultant | MSc | Research Profile, n.d.) and Silvius’s review of 164 
publications about sustainability and project management issued throughout a ten-year 
period, with the objective of extracting, among others, a commonly accepted definition 
of sustainable project management, and the areas in a project where the implementation 
of sustainability-related considerations has an impact (Silvius & Schipper, 2014).  
According to the two researchers’ review, sustainable project management is commonly 
defined as “the planning, monitoring and controlling of project delivery and support pro-
cesses, with consideration of the environmental, economic and social aspects of the life 
cycle of the project’s resources, processes, deliverables, and effects, aimed at realizing 
benefits for stakeholders, and performed in a transparent, fair and ethical way that in-
cludes proactive stakeholder participation” (Silvius & Schipper, 2014).  
Although the definition is general, and meant to apply to any project, when considering 
only client consultancy tasks in the context of the case company, perhaps some ele-
ments of the definition could be applied in the shape of:  
• 
considering social, environmental, and economic sustainability during the initial 
planning of the client consultancy process (i.e., before concluding the client con-
sultancy agreement), by selecting, and coordinating the relevant services from 
both the “Description for Services for Client Consultancy”, and the supplementary 
document described in the previous subchapter (i.e., based on the scope of the 
task, and perhaps a determined ‘vision for sustainability’ – as mentioned in 4.1 
and 4.2), and assigning the relevant competences to the project organization 
chart (e.g., perhaps a social and environmental sustainability consultant and a 
building operations advisor) for performing some of the ‘optional services’, or the 
supplementary ones; 
• 
suggesting to the client the inclusion of relevant stakeholders during the prepa-
ration of the bases for strategic decision-making in the initial consultancy, instead 
of primarily during the design specification phase; 
• 
considering the social and environmental pillars also, when quality-assuring the 
material prepared by other consultants appointed to the task, instead of primarily 
the economy; 
• 
perhaps, also applying the case company’s project-related strategy for sustaina-
bility (2.3.2), as well as including quantitative data in the basis for tender (e.g., 
Life Cycle Assessment, Life Cycle Cost); and 
• 
considering social, environmental, and economic sustainability while evaluating 
offers (i.e., the choice of consultants phase), as well as while overseeing the re-
maining project process (i.e., the design phase, all the way to the delivery phase).  
==PAGE:50==
Sustainable client consultancy in a mid-sized architecture company in Denmark
42 
 
 
In addition, the two researchers list the fifteen commonly indicated areas in a project (i.e., 
from the 164 publications) where sustainability-related considerations presumably im-
pact the process. They are listed below, together with a possible way they could relate 
to client consultancy tasks in the context of the case company. This relation is revisited 
in the solution chapter.  
 
1. “The recognition of the context of the project” (Silvius & Schipper, 2014) 
The researchers clarify that the “context of the project” should be “addressed in relation 
to the organization’s strategy, but also in relation to the society as a whole” (Silvius & 
Schipper, 2014).  
Considering a client consultancy task at the case company, evidently, if the client has a 
pre-defined organizational strategy for sustainability, the client advisor must consider it 
when planning the process, and while preparing the bases for strategic decision-making. 
If the strategy only addresses the environmental pillar, for instance, then the client advi-
sor could make suggestions for tackling the social pillar as well. In case the client does 
not have any requirements for sustainability, perhaps a possible solution could be dis-
cussing, and outlining a general ‘vision for sustainability’ (as mentioned in 4.1 and 4.2) 
before concluding the client consultancy agreement, in order to plan the process accord-
ingly. 
2. “The identification of stakeholders” (Silvius & Schipper, 2014) 
For this paper, no specific stakeholder groups (interesseorganisationer) could be identi-
fied in the context of client consultancy tasks in the Danish building industry. However, 
the two researchers indicate that the presence of sustainability-related stakeholders 
such as “environmental protection pressure groups, human rights groups, non-govern-
mental organizations, etc.”, is significant in relation to sustainability in the project man-
agement process (Silvius & Schipper, 2014).  
Nevertheless, in terms of the stakeholders closely associated with the task (e.g., future 
building users), they should perhaps be identified before the client consultancy agree-
ment is concluded (i.e., initial planning), and involved in the process right from the be-
ginning.  
3. “The project specifications/requirements/deliverables/quality criteria” (Silvius & Schip-
per, 2014) 
Considering a client consultancy task, the integration of sustainability-related considera-
tions in the design specification document (i.e., the requirements for the building project, 
that are also part of the basis for tender), for instance, should come in response to the 
sustainability-related objectives defined in the preceding phases of initial consultancy 
(i.e., the strategic decisions at the end of property strategy, appraisal, and technical fi-
nancing analyses). 
4. “The business case cost/benefits” (Silvius & Schipper, 2014) 
Perhaps an appropriate example for understanding sustainability as part of this area in 
a project could be the measure expressed in ‘Box 3’ of the case company’s strategy for 
sustainability, created by the, now, former head of sustainability. That is, the ‘sustainable 
construction solution for the broadly distributed Danish public housing’ (2.3.1). The 
==PAGE:51==
Sustainable client consultancy in a mid-sized architecture company in Denmark 
43 
 
motivation behind this solution is to distinguish the firm from competition (i.e., encourage 
economic benefits), while also making a positive social and environmental impact, as 
explained in sub subchapter 2.3.1.  
For a client consultancy task, this could be relevant when, for instance, deciding whether 
to accept a task, or make an offer for a task. Perhaps, the possible social and environ-
mental costs associated with the presumed outcome of the task should play a role in this 
decision, instead of only the financial gains for the company handling the task. 
5. “The dimensions of project success” (Silvius & Schipper, 2014) 
According to the two researchers, for a more sustainable process and outcome, a pro-
ject’s success should be viewed as a positive social and environmental impact relative 
to financial gains, instead of within the established ‘time, cost, quality’ paradigm. 
In a client consultancy task, that could translate to a focus on social and environmental 
sustainability considerations, in addition to the return on investments, during the first 
stage of initial consultancy, when strategic decisions are made, and objectives are de-
fined. In addition, throughout the process, unexpected changes should, again, be ad-
dressed from the three-pillar perspective. 
6. “The selection and organization of a project team” (Silvius & Schipper, 2014) 
When assembling a project organization chart for a client consultancy task, competences 
should be assigned appropriately and fairly, and not necessarily based on previous ex-
perience with said human resources. In addition, not only the fulfillment of the task should 
be considered, but also the employees’ skills improvement as a result of their contribution 
to the task. The employees’ wellbeing outside daily work should also be considered.  
7. “Project sequencing and schedule” (Silvius & Schipper, 2014) 
For this area in a project, the two researchers refer to the idea of “minimizing waste” 
when planning the project process, and creating the project time schedule, for instance 
(Silvius & Schipper, 2014). 
For a client consultancy task, this could mean that during the initial planning, the client 
advisor should thoroughly consider the relevant services to be performed throughout the 
task, based on the scope of the task, client’s organizational strategy, and perhaps a 
‘vision for sustainability’, and create a time schedule accordingly. Perhaps, the same 
should apply when creating a project time schedule as part of the basis for tender (i.e., 
in the design specification phase).  
8. “Materials used” (Silvius & Schipper, 2014) 
For this area in a client consultancy task, perhaps the first measure in the case com-
pany’s project-related strategy for sustainability could be relevant. That is, starting the 
initial consultancy with discussing the choice of possible materials relative to the envi-
ronmental impact of the building project (2.3.2).  
9. “Procurement” (Silvius & Schipper, 2014) 
Currently, during client consultancy tasks at the case company, as part of the basis for 
tender in connection with the choice of consultants, the choice of a main contractor, and 
the choice of a lead contractor, a ‘strategy for sustainability’ can be included as a selec-
tion criterion. However, since a client consultant often receives generic descriptions from 
==PAGE:52==
Sustainable client consultancy in a mid-sized architecture company in Denmark
44 
 
 
bidders (as mentioned in 3.1.2), perhaps defining more concrete criteria could be a next 
step towards a more sustainable client advising practice.  
10. “Risk identification and management” (Silvius & Schipper, 2014) 
For this area in a project, the two researchers suggest that a risk assessment should not 
only be prepared in connection with the customer's objectives, but also in relation to 
other stakeholders’ goals (Silvius & Schipper, 2014). 
Currently, during client consultancy tasks handled by the case company, budget control 
is at the center of the mandatory risk assessment (as mentioned in 3.1.1). Instead, po-
tential social and environmental costs should also be given significant attention when 
preparing the assessment.  
11. “Stakeholder involvement” (Silvius & Schipper, 2014) 
For this area in a project, the two researchers suggest that various stakeholders’ input 
should also be considered during, for instance, initial process planning, time scheduling, 
or risk assessments (Silvius & Schipper, 2014). 
Currently, this is not part of the usual client advising practice at the the case company.  
12. “Project communication” [and] 13. “Project reporting” (Silvius & Schipper, 2014) 
The two researchers suggest that, for a more sustainable project management practice, 
all information about the project should be openly shared with stakeholders, instead of 
“only the information that is needed” (Silvius & Schipper, 2014). 
14. “Project handover” (Silvius & Schipper, 2014) 
The two researchers suggest that for the project management practice to be considered 
sustainable, the project handover (or delivery) to the client’s organization must, evidently, 
happen (Silvius & Schipper, 2014). Until now, no building project overseen by a client 
consultant at the case company has been rejected by the client’s organization.  
15. “Organizational learning” (Silvius & Schipper, 2014) 
For this area in a project, the researchers recommend preparing a report of the “lessons 
learned” throughout the course of the project, with the expectation that documenting ‘er-
rors’ could contribute to organizational learning (Silvius & Schipper, 2014). 
Preparing a report like this is not currently a practice at the end of client consultancy 
tasks handled by the case company. However, it could potentially be valuable when done 
for each of the three most common types of tasks (i.e., initial consultancy, client consul-
tancy in relation to building projects as main contracts, and client consultancy in relation 
to building projects as lead contracts).  
 
The sustainability-related considerations for client consultancy presented throughout this 
subchapter could have a role in ‘articulating’ the relation between ‘current’ and ‘new’ that 
the supplement analyzed in the previous subchapter arguably misses, by introducing a 
‘parallel’ process to the current client consultancy one.  
 
==PAGE:53==
Sustainable client consultancy in a mid-sized architecture company in Denmark 
45 
 
5. Solution 
In view of the issues identified with the current practice of client consulting relative to 
sustainability (3.1), the strengths, weaknesses, and threats, together with the opportuni-
ties identified in the business-related SWOT analysis (3.2.5, Figure 3.2.5), as well as the 
related cases and literature, this chapter includes suggestions for a revised organiza-
tional structure at the case company, a new approach to handling client consultancy 
tasks, as well as a framework for a potentially more sustainable practice of client advis-
ing.  
 
5.1 A revised organizational structure 
In the Analysis chapter, the organizational context, also considered as the second ‘layer’ 
to the problem, is addressed after the current client advising practice, or the first ‘layer’ 
to the problem, in order to express how the idea of ‘separation’, initially identified in the 
“Description of Services for Client Consultancy”-document where ‘sustainability’ is dis-
played as an ‘optional service’, is perpetuated when it comes to client consultancy as a 
business area in the case company.  
However, because both the client advising practice and the case company’s organiza-
tional structure are considered as part of the solution, this chapter must begin with the 
organizational context. 
Currently, the client consultancy business area is depicted in the present organizational 
structure of the case company as a ‘parallel entity’, functioning like the three established 
business areas (Figure 3.2). Even so, since not all client consultancy tasks at the firm 
are obtained by the client consulting chief, and solved by the client consultancy sector in 
the organization (i.e., 3.2.2, ‘Task B’), the ones that are accessed by either of the three 
partners are handled similarly, in the sense that they are solved in each of their respec-
tive sectors (i.e., 3.2.1, ‘Task A’).  
The separate ways of handling client consultancy tasks, evidently imply different meth-
ods for solving them, and different outcomes. Handling ‘Task A’, for instance, means 
assigning a design manager (i.e., with architecture- and design-focused competences) 
to the client advisor’s role, in direct communication with the client. Consequently, as sug-
gested in the analysis of this scenario, there can be an inclination towards an arguably 
‘excessive’ consideration of design-related options in the preparation of the bases for the 
client’s strategic decision-making, resulting in, on some occasions, unforeseen delays, 
the client’s wishes not being met (i.e., due to improperly defined objectives), even a lack 
of sustainability-related considerations.  
Another way the idea of ‘separation’ is expressed, is through the way the company- and 
project-related strategies for sustainability are developed and communicated across the 
organization. Although both are relevant to the client consultancy business area, not only 
are they not applied to client consultancy tasks handled in this sector, but they also do 
not even represent common knowledge among the employees in this sector (3.2.3, 
3.2.4).  
This issue of ‘separation’ at the company level is arguably maintaining client consultancy 
as an ‘outdated’ practice. Moreover, as indicated in the business-related SWOT analysis 
==PAGE:54==
Sustainable client consultancy in a mid-sized architecture company in Denmark
46 
 
 
earlier in the paper, it can also impact employee wellbeing, or even the company’s ‘im-
age’ on the market. 
In response to all the above, a revised organizational structure for the case company is 
proposed here (Figure 5.1).  
Instead of displaying client consultancy as a ‘separate’ business area, functioning simi-
larly to the three established ones, the revised organizational structure is meant to ‘inte-
grate’ client consultancy as a transversal business area and discipline.  
This model is inspired by an arguably common example of organizational structure where 
project management is depicted as a ‘cross-cutting’ discipline across all departments of 
the business (Maylor, 2010).  
Moreover, although not part of the board, the client consulting chief is now integrated 
into a suggested ‘Partner Council’, primarily meant for the coordination of the firm’s ac-
tivities.  
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5.1: Outline of a revised organizational structure, showing: client consultancy as 
a transversal business area, the newly defined ‘Partner Council’, as well as the com-
pany’s strategies for sustainability applied to the entire organization 
Housing 
and Private 
(BA1) 
Renovation 
(BA2)  
Education, 
Culture, 
and Health 
(BA3) 
Board 
‘Partner Council’ 
 
Sustainability strategy  
(GM) Employees 
(GM) Employees 
(GM) Employees 
Client consultancy 
(BA4) 
Administration 
==PAGE:55==
Sustainable client consultancy in a mid-sized architecture company in Denmark 
47 
 
The revised organizational structure is divided into the following: 
1. Board 
The board is composed of the partners in charge of the three established business areas 
in the organization (i.e., ‘Housing and Private’, ‘Renovation’, and ‘Education, Culture, 
and Health’), where they develop strategies and decide the direction of the entire busi-
ness.  
2. ‘Partner Council’ 
One of the primary changes that the revised organizational structure brings forward is 
the inclusion of the client consulting chief into a ‘partner forum’ alongside the three part-
ners, therefore establishing the idea of ‘integration’ at the highest level currently possible 
in the case company hierarchy, and ensuring that information is effectively communi-
cated across the entire organization. To emphasize this aspect, Figure 5.1 only indicates 
the ‘Partner Council’ (i.e., the dark, blue-colored stippled rectangle), instead of using 
separate titles for the partners in charge of the three established business areas, and 
the client consulting chief (i.e., as shown in the current organizational structure, Figure 
3.2). 
The ‘Partner Council’ could oversee the implementation of the strategies developed by 
the board into all tasks handled by the four business areas. That includes the company- 
and project-related strategies for sustainability (i.e., described in 2.3.1 and 2.3.2, and 
analyzed in 3.2.3 and 3.2.4), depicted as a green box with a stippled outline, and gener-
ically titled ‘Sustainability strategy’ in Figure 5.1.  
The ‘Partner Council’ could also discuss, and act upon market conditions, as well as 
coordinate consultancy offers. Moreover, upon accessing tasks, the ‘forum’ could appro-
priately allocate them to the relevant business areas. The role of the ‘Partner Council’ 
when it comes to client consultancy tasks is presented in more detail in sub subchapter 
5.1.1.  
3. Administration 
As previously mentioned, the ‘Administration’ segment is defined by the case company’s 
daily management and financial activity, and represented by the firm’s CEO and 
bookkeepers. This segment has not been reconsidered as part of the revised organiza-
tional structure introduced in this paper. However, it could be viewed relative to sustain-
ability when it comes to the daily management of human resources, which should prior-
itize employee wellbeing and skill improvement.  
4. Business areas 
The business areas are the following: 
• 
‘Housing and Private’ (BA1), related to a partner, 
• 
‘Renovation’ (BA2), related to a partner, 
• 
‘Education, Culture, and Health’ (BA3), related to a partner, and 
• 
‘Client consultancy’ (BA4), related to a client consulting chief.  
The client consultancy segment is not shown as a ‘new business area’ anymore (i.e., as 
it is in Figure 3.2). Instead, it is depicted as an integrated, transversal business area in 
the organization (Figure 5.1).  
==PAGE:56==
Sustainable client consultancy in a mid-sized architecture company in Denmark
48 
 
 
This model defines a new, and singular way of handling client consultancy tasks (i.e., 
instead of as ‘Task A’, or ‘Task B’, as analyzed in 3.2.1 and 3.2.2), which involves plan-
ning, and overseeing them in the client consultancy business area, with appropriately 
assigned competences from the other business areas based on the particularities of the 
task at hand. This new way is elaborated in sub subchapter 5.1.1.  
Also, due to the addition of a ‘Partner Council’, corporate sustainability strategies can 
now be applied efficiently to all client consultancy tasks (i.e., now, the ‘Sustainability 
strategy’ incorporates client consultancy in Figure 5.1).  
Moreover, by being a transversal discipline also, client advising competences could be 
included in, for instance, architecture and design consultancy tasks handled by the three 
established business areas, perhaps in connection with the initial planning of the task 
and basis for tender. Coordinating these two areas in any task is particularly important 
when it comes to sustainability, since the initial planning involves defining the process 
for the task, and the basis for tender should ensure that sustainability objectives are 
appropriately integrated in the shape of offer demands for the bidders. Therefore, the 
involvement of client consulting competences in these areas regardless of the type of 
consultancy task could be very significant in relation to sustainability.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:57==
Sustainable client consultancy in a mid-sized architecture company in Denmark 
49 
 
5.1.1 A revised approach to handling client consultancy tasks 
In response to the revised organizational structure at the case company, a revised, po-
tentially more sustainable approach to handling client consultancy task should be out-
lined.  
The new way of handling client consultancy tasks is divided into the following: 
1. Access to a client consultancy task 
As previously indicated, client consultancy tasks are commonly obtained by directly con-
tacting, or being contacted by a client, by tendering for the task, or by tendering in a 
framework agreement (rammeaftale).  
However, in the revised way of handling these tasks, the ‘Partner Council’ should play a 
role at this stage. That is, instead of each partner or client consulting chief obtaining, and 
solving the tasks in their respective business areas, a ‘forum’ should be held beforehand. 
Before contacting a client (or after being contacted by one), or making an offer for a client 
consultancy task, the implications of accessing the task should be discussed by the three 
partners and the client consulting chief in the ‘Partners Council’ (perhaps, together with 
the CEO as well), or, in other words, the social, environmental, and economic costs and 
benefits associated with it.  
As Silvius and Schipper also suggest (4.4), in the decision regarding accepting a task or 
making an offer for one, the possible social and environmental costs associated with the 
potential outcome of the task should also play a role, instead of only the financial gains 
for the firm (Silvius & Schipper, 2014). 
Therefore, a ‘business case’ should be prepared by the client consulting chief, and 
brought forward to the ‘Partner Council’ for consideration, including, for instance: 
• 
a description of the task, 
• 
the known objectives of the task (including the client’s demands for sustainability, 
if present),  
• 
an overview of costs and gains (i.e., with respect to society and environment, in 
addition to the financial gains for the firm),  
• 
the task’s connection to the firm’s sustainability strategy (i.e., the company- and 
project-related strategies for sustainability), and 
• 
a preliminary risk assessment (i.e., with social, environmental, and economic 
considerations).  
If the task is deemed ‘attractive’ to the company, then an offer should be made, or the 
task should be accepted.  
Either in connection with the preparation of the offer, or after accessing the task directly, 
only a client consultant should define the process for solving it, assemble the organiza-
tion chart, and assign human resources accordingly.  
Due to client consultancy being a ‘cross-cutting’ business area in the revised organiza-
tional structure, competences from across the organization should be assigned to a client 
consultancy task, based on the particularities of the task, as well as in accordance with 
the corporate sustainability strategies. Of course, that should be done after the ‘Partners 
Council’s’ consideration, and approval.  
==PAGE:58==
Sustainable client consultancy in a mid-sized architecture company in Denmark
50 
 
 
For instance, if the client consultancy task involves initial consultancy in relation to a new 
school building, although the task will be handled by the client consultancy business 
area, the required additional human resources (e.g., ‘green mentor’, architect) could be 
assigned to the task from the ‘Education, Culture, and Health’ business area. Moreover, 
the human resources should not be assigned purely based on previous experience, but 
in a way that encourages skill development for all employees. Of course, their wellbeing 
should also be a priority, as Silvius and Schipper mention (Silvius & Schipper, 2014). 
2. Planning the task 
Regardless of whether the client defined sustainability-related demands for the client 
consultancy offer (i.e., for the scenarios involving tender), or not, the client consultant 
appointed to the task should discuss ‘sustainability’ in the initial meeting with the cus-
tomer, together with the assigned ‘green mentor’.  
The ‘supplement’ for client consultancy, presented in subchapter 4.3, as well as 
Værdibyg’s “The sustainable construction process” mention the inclusion to the process 
of a ‘sustainability consultant’ from the beginning (Tillæg Om Bæredygtighedsydelser, 
2022) (Ring, 2021). Arguably, not much information is offered regarding the educational 
background, or competences of the ‘sustainability consultant’. Therefore, it is assumed 
here that the inclusion of sustainability-focused human resources at the case company 
(i.e., ‘green mentors’) is sufficient, for the time being. The same arguably applies to the 
inclusion to the task of a building operations advisor, as suggested by Værdibyg’s “Op-
erations based construction process” (Due et al., 2021). Based on the particularities of 
the task, a specialist, third-party advisor, or, again, a ‘green mentor’ should be assigned 
from the beginning.  
During the initial meeting, as both The Danish Building and Property Agency’s sustaina-
bility consultant and KAB’s project manager and client consultant mention, perhaps the 
use of a questionnaire previously prepared by the client advisor and the ‘green mentor’ 
could be valuable in determining a ‘vision for sustainability’ for the task, which should of 
course address all three pillars of sustainability. In addition, as The Danish Building and 
Property Agency’s sustainability consultant suggests, a hierarchy of priority could also 
be outlined among the sustainability considerations that make up the ‘vision for sustain-
ability’, to better understand the client’s focus. However, a balance between the three 
pillars should still be maintained.  
The initial meeting should also be used by the client advisor and the ‘green mentor’ for 
gaining a thorough understanding of the task. As previously mentioned, that, together 
with a deep knowledge of the ‘optional services’ in the “Description of Services for Client 
Consultancy”, and, now, also with the ones in the “Supplement to the Description of Ser-
vices”, is required for planning an arguably more sustainable process that could also 
fulfill the client’s ‘vision for sustainability’. The deep knowledge of the ‘optional services’ 
as well as the supplementary ones is needed to appropriately coordinate them with the 
‘mandatory’, original services for client consultancy, instead of treating them as optional 
‘add-ons’. Moreover, it is needed for “minimizing waste” during planning, which Silvius 
and Schipper consider important in relation to sustainable project management (Silvius 
& Schipper, 2014), as well as, of course, for an accurate cost estimate of the task.  
With the acquired understanding of the task, and a preliminary process defined, a project 
organization chart could perhaps be assembled. The ‘preliminary’ attribute is used to 
point out that, as Silvius and Schipper also mention in the publication analyzed earlier, a 
==PAGE:59==
Sustainable client consultancy in a mid-sized architecture company in Denmark 
51 
 
project manager (or client consultant, in this case) should move from the “predictable, 
established approach to management, to a flexible one which embraces opportunity and 
complexity” (Silvius & Schipper, 2014), which means that the process could be adjusted 
throughout the task, as the objectives become more concrete. 
The outline of a generic project organization chart which could apply to both building 
projects as main contracts, and building projects as lead contracts, is shown in Figure 
5.1.1.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The difference between the revised project organization chart in Figure 5.1.1, and the 
‘current’ one, presented in Figure 3.2.2 in relation to ‘Task B’ (i.e., client consultancy 
tasks handled by the client consultancy business are), is the added ‘green mentor’ in 
direct communication with the client consultant and ‘specialists’.  
The addition of a ‘green mentor’ is of course in response to the changes in paradigm 
introduced by the “Supplement to the Description of Services”, analyzed in subchapter 
4.3 (i.e., more specifically, Figure 4.3). The connection between the ‘green mentor’ and 
the ‘specialists’, however, has to do with the assumed high degree of complexity asso-
ciated with some of the supplementary services. If decided on by the client, certain ser-
vices might require specialists, or third-party advisors in the process. That could apply to 
Figure 5.1.1: Outline of a revised (generic) project organization chart showing the com-
munication hierarchy between roles (i.e., blue-colored lines) 
Client 
Client 
consultant 
Consultants and main con-
tractor (rådgivere og 
hovedentreprenør) / lead 
contractor (totalentreprenør) 
Specialists 
Optional: Consultant from a 
different business area 
(technical basis for tender) 
Green mentor 
==PAGE:60==
Sustainable client consultancy in a mid-sized architecture company in Denmark
52 
 
 
some of the ‘optional services’ from the “Description of Services for Client Consultancy” 
as well.  
Although the client consultant is responsible for the quality assurance of the prepared 
material before delivering it to the customer, the coordination between the work of the 
‘green mentor’ and the required specialists might still be necessary, hence the commu-
nication line between the two roles. Optionally, a consultant from the relevant business 
area in the organization is assigned to the task in relation to the preparation of the tech-
nical basis for tender. However, the client consultant should ensure that there is con-
sistency between the work of the ‘green mentor’, specialists, and the consultant, as the 
technical basis for tender should align with the objectives for sustainability resulting from 
previous strategic decisions.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:61==
Sustainable client consultancy in a mid-sized architecture company in Denmark 
53 
 
5.2 Client consultancy, a more sustainable practice 
This subchapter comprises possible solutions to some of the main issues identified in 
the Analysis chapter regarding the client advising practice. Although it might not cover 
all matters in detail, this subchapter still introduces a general framework for an arguably 
more sustainable client consulting practice.  
 
5.2.1 Initial consultancy 
During the first stage of the process, as both Værdibyg’s “The Sustainable Construction 
Process”, and Silvius and Schipper’s publication outline, the identification and involve-
ment of relevant stakeholders is particularly important (Ring, 2021) (Silvius & Schipper, 
2014). Perhaps, the client consultant together with the ‘green mentor’ could assist the 
customer in identifying the relevant stakeholders from their own organization and outside 
it, and, together, participate in a start-up meeting, when the general goals of the task 
could be clarified. The preliminary process for the task assembled by the client consultant 
and ‘green mentor’ in collaboration with the customer could also be discussed, and ad-
justed.  
Sometimes, the customer has a pre-determined, clear, end goal of a DGNB certification 
or Nordic Ecolabel, in which case, the client consultant must coordinate the respective 
steps for obtaining either one, with the rest of the process.  
In other instances, the customer does not have any sustainability-related goal, and ex-
presses no interest in the subject matter. Then, the case company’s project-related strat-
egy for sustainability (Figure 2.3.2) could represent an alternative, as it covers most 
phases of the initial consultancy, and provides an attainable sustainability-related goal in 
the shape of quantitative and qualitative assessments suited for each phase (e.g., ‘The 
Construction Material Pyramid’ consideration, ‘resource mapping’, the ‘Green Page’, ‘en-
ergy framework’, Life Cycle Assessment, Life Cycle Cost, as shown in Figure 2.3.2).  
Regardless of the scenario, the client advisor must ensure the inclusion of sustainability-
related considerations in the bases for strategic decision-making specific to the phases 
of the initial consultancy. Moreover, as Silvius and Schipper also recognize as a signifi-
cant, when outlining “the dimensions of project success”, or, in this case, the task objec-
tives resulting from these strategic decisions, the positive social and environmental im-
pact should be considered perhaps as much as the return on investments (Silvius & 
Schipper, 2014). The same applies to preparing the risk assessment, which should also 
consider social, and environmental risks relative to financial expenses.  
One of the sustainability-related considerations mentioned, besides involving a ‘green 
mentor’, specialists, or third-party advisors from the beginning of the process (i.e., based 
on the particularities of the task), could be, including relevant stakeholders (e.g., future 
building users, or the users’ committee) in every phase of the initial consultancy, instead 
of mainly in the design specification phase. This way, their input could also be used in 
the preparation of the bases for strategic decision-making. Moreover, during the design 
specification phase, the users’ committee’s input could also be considered when prepar-
ing the ‘user involvement plan’ (i.e., for consultants to use in the future design phase, as 
mentioned in 3.1.1).  
==PAGE:62==
Sustainable client consultancy in a mid-sized architecture company in Denmark
54 
 
 
As Silvius and Schipper also suggest (Silvius & Schipper, 2014), communication and 
reporting is particularly significant in a client consultancy task as well. Therefore, a sys-
tematic approach should be developed for both, perhaps involving the use of digital tools 
for effective communication and reporting among task members, as well as, perhaps, 
other relevant stakeholders. Moreover, the client could consider managing the ‘infor-
mation flow’ regarding the progress of the task in a way that also includes relevant stake-
holders. 
When considering the tender method and process, perhaps the ‘strategy for tender’ could 
become a requirement, such as other mandatory services defined by the “Description of 
Services for Client Consultancy”, to serve as basis for a client’s informed decision. As 
previously mentioned, the ‘strategy for tender’ should offer the customer a comprehen-
sive image of the tender process for every tender method, including the course of action, 
suggestions for the basis for tender (i.e., for both the technical and legal components), 
advantages and disadvantages for each method, and perhaps the recommended 
method based on the particularities of the task.  
 
5.2.2 Client consultancy in connection with building projects as main con-
tracts, and as lead contracts 
As suggested before, the choice of either process (i.e., building projects as main con-
tracts, involving two tenders, or building projects as lead contracts, involving one tender) 
should perhaps be based on a comprehensive image captured by the ‘strategy for tender’ 
prepared by the client advisor, in collaboration with the client, ‘green mentor’, other task 
members task, and even other relevant stakeholders.  
However, since the ‘strategy for tender’ is prepared with respect to the particularities of 
the task, mainly the legal component of the basis for tender (i.e., specifically, the selec-
tion criteria of the winning bid, and the weight of criteria percentagewise) is considered 
in this sub subchapter, because the proposed solutions could apply to both processes. 
As previously mentioned, given that the bases for strategic decision-making in the initial 
consultancy include sustainability-related considerations, then the basis for tender 
should also align with the objectives for sustainability resulting from those strategic de-
cisions. Currently, it is common for client consultants at the case company to include a 
sustainability-related selection criterion (e.g., ‘process for sustainability’, as mentioned in 
3.1.2) as part of the legal basis for tender (i.e., in connection with the choice of consult-
ants, or the choice of a lead contractor). However, since the submitted material often 
consists of generic descriptions, a more concrete criterion should be defined. 
Therefore, as a minimum requirement, the offer demand could be, for example, a ‘pro-
cess for sustainability’ corresponding to a Life Cycle Assessment and Life Cycle Cost 
prepared as part of the technical basis for tender. This way, the client could gain insight 
into the bidders’ expertise level with achieving concrete objectives, rather than indefinite 
ones, pertaining to sustainability in general. Of course, if the client has a pre-determined 
end goal of a building sustainability certification (e.g., DGNB, Nordic Ecolabel), then the 
‘process for sustainability’ should be prepared by the bidders relative to achieving this 
goal. Otherwise, if other sustainability-related services have been selected by the cus-
tomer (i.e., from the “Supplement to the Description of Services”), then, evidently, the 
‘strategy for sustainability’ should take them into account as well. 
==PAGE:63==
Sustainable client consultancy in a mid-sized architecture company in Denmark 
55 
 
In addition, the weight of this sustainability-related criterion (i.e., percentagewise) should 
be a consistent one to ensure that the material submitted by the bidders is of appropriate 
quality, and ‘sustainability’ is a point of reference during the evaluation of the offers, in-
stead of mainly the price-related criterion, as it often is now (3.1.2).  
Moreover, after the agreement is concluded between the client and the consultants, or 
the lead contractor, the client advisor should assist the customer in overseeing the pro-
cess for sustainability in accordance with the agreement. 
Finally, at the end of the client consultancy task, as Silvius and Schipper suggest, per-
haps the preparation of a report documenting the “lessons learned” throughout the pro-
cess could contribute to “organizational learning”, as long as the documented ‘errors’ are 
revisited at the beginning of a new client consultancy task (Silvius & Schipper, 2014). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:64==
Sustainable client consultancy in a mid-sized architecture company in Denmark
56 
 
 
6. Conclusion 
Sustainable client consultancy in a mid-sized architecture case company in Denmark is 
viewed in this paper as an integrated, transversal sector in the firm’s organizational struc-
ture, allowing for its coordination with the corporate strategies for sustainability, as well 
as for an efficient, and possibly more sustainable approach to handling client consultancy 
tasks. Additionally, a general framework for an arguably more sustainable client consult-
ing practice is provided.  
The elaborate solution came in response to the multilayered, identified problem, having 
to do with the arguably ‘outdated’ client advising practice, as well as the organizational 
issues in the context of the case company, possibly hindering a transition to more sus-
tainable client consultancy. However, the idea of ‘separation’, viewed in this paper as 
incompatible with sustainability, was recognized as a general issue, expressed in the 
shape of: ‘sustainability’ being addressed as separate client advising services, or  ‘add-
ons’, client consultancy as a business area being ‘excluded’ from strategies for sustain-
ability developed at the highest level in the case company hierarchy, or client consultancy 
tasks being obtained, and solved separately in the organization. Also, possible repercus-
sions for employees, or the company’s ‘image’ are considered due to this general issue 
of ‘separation’. Similarly, the new paradigm for sustainable construction introduced to 
the Danish building industry arguably brings forward a sustainability-focused ‘parallel’ 
(supplementary) process to the established one for client consultancy, meant to be han-
dled by the sustainability consultant, instead of an integrated solution. 
Key findings from two interviews outside the organization, with The Danish Building and 
Property Agency’s sustainability consultant, and KAB’s project manager and client con-
sultant are considered as part of the suggested general framework for a more sustaina-
ble client advising practice. Some of the findings, include:  
• 
the ‘sustainability vision’ of the task, outlined in collaboration with the client in an 
initial meeting, after accessing the task,  
• 
the required understanding of the new paradigm for sustainable construction and 
the associated sustainability-focused services, or 
• 
the importance of thoroughly understanding the task to plan a process with an 
outcome that meets the client’s wishes, yet is adapted to their financial situation. 
Moreover, aspects from the new paradigm for sustainable construction, such as a seg-
ment of the generic project organization chart introduced by the model, as well as Silvius 
and Schipper’s analysis of 164 publications about sustainability and project manage-
ment, particularly the areas in a project where sustainability-related considerations have 
an impact, are also considered as part of the process for handling client consultancy 
tasks which accompanies the revised organizational structure, as well as the general 
framework.  
Perhaps, the solution brought forward in this paper considers more than Værdibyg’s 
highlighted issues hindering the building industry’s transition to being more sustainable, 
by also considering the organizational context (in relation to client consultancy), particu-
larly, the highest possible level in the firm hierarchy, before the board (the suggested 
‘Partner Council’). However, a real-life implementation of this solution would be required 
for judging its effectiveness, as well as further research for developing it, which could be 
covered in a future project. 
==PAGE:65==
Sustainable client consultancy in a mid-sized architecture company in Denmark 
57 
 
7. References 
A.J. Gilbert SILVIUS | Professor | PhD, MSc, MBA | Research profile. (n.d.). Retrieved 
May 20, 2023, from https://www.researchgate.net/profile/Aj-Gilbert-Silvius-2 
Description of Services for Client Consultancy. (2019). The Danish Association of Con-
sulting Engineers (FRI), The Danish Association of Architectural Firms, The Dan-
ish Association of Construction Clients. 
Due, P. H., Tolstrup, C., & Teisen, O. (2021). Operations based construction process. 
In Værdibyg Vejledning 12. Værdibyg. 
Maylor, H. (2010). Project Management. Financial Times/Prentice Hall. 
Nu lanceres nyt tillæg om bæredygtighed til ydelsesbeskrivelserne - Værdibyg. (2022, 
October 7). https://vaerdibyg.dk/nu-lanceres-nyt-tillaeg-om-baeredygtighed-til-
ydelsesbeskrivelserne/ 
Nyt tillæg om bæredygtighed til ydelsesbeskrivelserne|Danske Arkitektvirksomheder | 
Brancheorganisation. (2022, October 5). https://www.danskeark.dk/content/nyt-
tillaeg-om-baeredygtighed-til-ydelsesbeskrivelserne 
Ring, J. (2021). The Sustainable Construction Process. In Værdibyg Minivejledning. 
Værdibyg. 
Roseke, B. (2019, August 16). The 4 Types of Project Organizational Structure. Project 
Engineer. https://www.projectengineer.net/the-4-types-of-project-organizational-
structure/ 
R.P.J. SCHIPPER | Principal Consultant | MSc | Research profile. (n.d.). Retrieved May 
20, 2023, from https://www.researchgate.net/profile/Rpj-Schipper 
Silvius, A. J. G., & Schipper, R. P. J. (2014). Sustainability in project management: A 
literature review and impact analysis. Social Business, 4(1). 
https://doi.org/10.1362/204440814x13948909253866 
Tillæg om Bæredygtighedsydelser. (2022). Rådgivende Ingeniører (FRI), Danske Arki-
tektvirksomheder og Bygherreforeningen. 
  
Appendix A: Current social, environmental, and economic sustainability considerations 
during client consultancy tasks at the case company (when solved by the client consul-
tancy business area) 
Appendix B: Transcript of an interview with the case company’s head of sustainability 
Appendix C: Transcript of an interview with The Danish Building and Property Agency’s 
sustainability consultant 
Appendix D: Transcript of an interview with a project manager and client consultant at 
the Copenhagen Public Housing Association 
 
 
==PAGE:66==
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Technical University of                                                                                                                 
Denmark 
DTU bygning 421 
Kollegiebakken 
2800 Kgs. Lyngby                                                                                                          
Tlf. (+45) 4525 4525 
https://learnforlife.dtu.dk/ 
