==PAGE:1==
DTU Wind
Development and implementation of data 
driven control for district heating power plant 
to provide grid support
Ditlev Lundegaard Bredahl Leth 
DTU Wind-M-0599
June 2023
==PAGE:2==
DTU Wind-M-0599 
June 2023
Project period: 
September 2022 - June 2023
ECTS: 35
Education: Master of Science
Supervisor(s):
Guangya Yang
Aysegül Kahraman
DTU Wind and Energy Systems
Remarks:
This report is submitted as partial 
fulfillment of the requirements for 
graduation in the above education at the 
Technical University of Denmark.
Technical University of Denmark 
Department of Wind and Energy 
Systems Frederiksborgvej 399
DK-4000 Roskilde
www.wind.dtu.dk
Author: Ditlev Lundegaard Bredahl Leth
Title:
Development and implementation of data 
driven control for district heating power 
plant to provide grid support
DTU Wind and Energy Systems is a department of the 
Technical University of Denmark with a unique 
integration of research, education, innovation and 
public/private sector consulting in the field of wind and 
energy. Our activities develop new opportunities and 
technology for the global and Danish exploitation of 
wind and energy. Research focuses on key technical-
scientific fields, which are central for the development, 
innovation and use of wind energy and provides the 
basis for advanced education.
==PAGE:3==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over nine months at the Department for Wind and Energy,
at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in fulfillment of the degree Master of Science
in Engineering, MSc Eng.
Ditlev Lundegaard Bredahl Leth - s173913
Signature
Date
Implementation of data driven control for district heating power plant to provide grid support
iii
01/06-2023
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
With a significant increase expected in the share of renewable energy sources within the
energy mix in the upcoming years, the demand for ancillary services to support the elec-
tricity grid will also grow. While automatic reserves have been implemented for many
years, they have primarily relied on frequency control, with the transmission system op-
erator assuming complete control over the service.
The utilization of intelligent control using model-free methods like reinforcement learning
to offer a similar control service has never been realized. This thesis aims to develop
and implement a reinforcement learning-based controller for managing a mixed-fuel dis-
trict heating facility as a proof-of-concept. Although reinforcement learning is not a new
technology, its recent rapid development has led to significant improvements, making it a
more viable candidate than ever for such control schemes.
The Østerlars District Heating plant serves as the inspiration for implementing a simplified
model of the facility. The available data is reviewed, and an initial reinforcement learning
agent is designed and trained using a deep Q network algorithm. The agent undergoes
training and validation using simplified observations, exhibiting promising results. Grid
support is achieved by continuously comparing the spot price of electricity in the grid with
the fixed cost of biomass fuel. The agent is modified and exposed to different signals
and observations through thorough experimentation, exploring various signal manipula-
tion and denoising types to enhance its performance.
The reinforcement learning agent successfully achieved a 10% reduction in fuel costs
compared to a scenario using biomass fuel alone. The presented solution is logically valid,
but practical limitations within the district heating plant prevent its direct implementation.
Various strategies were attempted to address these issues, but further work is required
to resolve these problems effectively.
iv
Implementation of data driven control for district heating power plant to provide grid support
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank my thesis supervisors Guangya Yang for his guidance and support
throughout this project, and Aysegül Kahraman for providing invaluable assistance when-
ever needed.
Finally, I would like to thank my friends and family for their continued support and encour-
agement throughout the duration of this thesis.
Implementation of data driven control for district heating power plant to provide grid support
v
==PAGE:6==
List of Abbreviations
Abbreviation
Description
AI
Artificial Intelligence
BOEF
Bornholms Energi Og Forsyning
CNN
Convolutional Neural Network
DDPG
Deep Deterministic Policy Gradient
DHN
District Heating Network
DHP
District Heating Plant
DNN
Deep Neural Network
DQN
Deep Q-Network
DSO
Distribution System Operator
FCR
Frequency Containment Reserve
FFR
Fast Frequency Reserves
FFT
Fast Fourier Transformation
FRR
Fast Restoration Reserves
GPI
Generalized Policy Iteration
HVAC
Heating, Ventilation and Air Conditioning
IPCC
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
MC
Monte Carlo
MDP
Markov Decision Process
mFFR
Manual Frequency Restoration Reserve
MVA
Moving Average
NLP
Natural Language Processing
NN
Neural Network
NPLA
Normalised Price Look Ahead
PID
Proportional Integral Derivative
PLA
Price Look Ahead
PPO
Proximal Policy Optimization
PSD
Power Density Spectrum
PV
Photovoltaic
ReLU
Rectified Linear Unit
RES
Renewable Energy Sources
RL
Reinforcement Learning
SARSA
State Action Reward State Action
SCADA
Supervisory Control And Data Acquisition
TD
Temporal Difference
TD3
Twin-Delayed Deep Deterministic Policy Gradient
TRPO
Trust Region Policy Optimization
TSO
Transmission System Operator
ØDHP
Østerlars District Heating Plant
vi
Implementation of data driven control for district heating power plant to provide grid support
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
v
List of Abbreviations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
vi
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Previous work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.3
Contributions, limitations, and scope . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.4
Reading guide
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2
Theory and Background
7
2.1
Reinforcement Learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2
Østerlars district heating plant . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
3
Data presentation and Methods
19
3.1
Data inspection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
3.2
Price signal pre-processing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
3.3
Development of RL model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
3.4
Training methodology
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
3.5
Simulation, verification and quantification of performance
. . . . . . . . . . 32
4
Initial testing using simple price signals
35
4.1
Square price signal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
5
Results
41
5.1
Investigation of price signal pre-processing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
5.2
Investigation of PLA features . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
5.3
Investigation of start-up cost on MVA price signal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 52
5.4
Multi level control . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 58
5.5
Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 62
6
Discussion and future work
63
6.1
Practical limitations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 63
6.2
RL agent parameters and algorithms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 65
6.3
Grid support . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 65
6.4
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 66
7
Conclusion
69
Bibliography
75
A Reward function testing - extended
77
B Investigation on PLA features - extended
80
C Investigation of start-up cost on MVA price signal - extended
93
Implementation of data driven control for district heating power plant to provide grid support
vii
==PAGE:8==
D Multilevel Control - extended
101
E
Code repository
108
viii
Implementation of data driven control for district heating power plant to provide grid support
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
1.1
Motivation
Denmark has pledged to reduce its CO2 emissions by 70% by 2030 when compared to
the emissions level in 1990. Furthermore, a goal has been set to reach carbon neutrality
by 2050. To this end, policies aiding in achieving this goal have been implemented by the
Danish Parliament, including a target of a 50-54% reduction by 2025.
In 2020, a research collaboration between selected European and Indian partners named
”Re-Empowered” was formed. The Re-Empowered project aims to develop a set of tech-
nologies to aid in the green transition, also called the ’eco toolset’. The project has three
pillars[1]:
• Increased energy efficiency, Renewable Energy Sources (RES) utilization, and re-
liability
• Fostering sustainable and economic community development
• Exchange, replicability, and scalability in the EU and India
As part of Re-Empowered, DTU is contributing to the development of these technolo-
gies, including ecoMicrogrid, which aims to optimize the utilization of RES in the energy
mix, manage flexible loads, monitor network status, energy consumption and supply, etc.
One of the test sites for the Re-Empowered project is the Østerlars District Heating Plant
(ØDHP) on the island of Bornholm. Here, the primary utility provider ”Bornholms Energi
og Forsyning” (BOEF) on the island has constructed a District Heating Plant (DHP) ca-
pable of powering the local district heating network (DHN) through different fuel sources
- mainly through a straw-fired boiler and electric boilers. An overview of the generator
setup at ØDHP can be seen in figure 1.1. Currently, the plant runs primarily on straw,
with the straw boiler being controlled by a simple PID controller relying on human input
for its set point, leaving the electric boilers virtually unused. Electric boilers are known to
be used as an ancillary service providing grid support by up or down-regulating produc-
tion. This type of service can either be realized as a Frequency Containment Reserve
(FCR), which acts automatically based on frequency changes in the grid, or as a manual
frequency restoration reserve (mFRR) which is controlled centrally from EnergiNet[2].
In this thesis, a smart controller for the ØDHP is proposed based on real-time data, such
as heat demand, electricity spot pricing, the known state of the DHN, as well as the DHP.
A simple type of grid support can be realized by having the electric boilers respond to
price signals from the electricity grid.
In recent years, great progress has been made within the fields of machine learning, rein-
forcement learning, and, in particular, deep reinforcement learning - with papers describ-
ing the use of these techniques in everything from natural language processing (NLP),
autonomous driving, healthcare, industrial control, and more [3][4][5]. In 2020, Forbes
wrote the article ”Reinforcement Learning: The Next Big Thing For AI?”[6], detailing why,
although Reinforcement learning is ”still in the nascent phases”, the technology holds
great potential.
Reinforcement learning (RL) has gained traction in recent years in both the scientific and
industrial communities for its ability to create a controller, known as an agent, without
using a pre-existing model. It is a so-called model-free method, which means the model
Implementation of data driven control for district heating power plant to provide grid support
1
==PAGE:10==
Figure 1.1: Overview of the generator setup at ØDHP. The accumulation tank can receive
and supply both warm and cold water from the DHN.
can learn a control policy without a model of the controlled environment. It learns based
on a reinforcement principle in which, during training, the agent receives a reward for
”good” actions and punishment for ”poor” actions. The weight and nature of different
actions are controlled by a reward function defined by the programmer. This approach
theoretically allows for the development of an accurate and well-performing controller with
minimal input from the developer compared to a model-based solution. Furthermore, the
model can be optimized over time as more data becomes available, allowing the system
to improve with accumulated experience.
A smart controller optimizing the utilization of RES aligns politically with the goals of the
local government of Bornholm. The municipality of Bornholm has created ”Bornholms En-
ergy Strategy 2040,” which includes strategies, policies, and goals for energy production,
energy consumption, and the green energy transition. Two goals related to heating and
heat production for commercial, residential, and industrial facilities are outlined[7]:
• Fossil-free power and heat production during normal operation.
• Plan for integrating more electricity-based heat and waste heat into the district heat-
ing system.
As the amount of energy from renewable and intermittent sources in the power grid in-
creases in the coming years, the need for grid support in the form of energy-balancing
reserves will also increase. In 2020, the Danish Transmission System Operator (TSO)
EnergiNet published a scenario report projecting the need for system services from 2022
to 2032[8]. The report describes increased demand for all types of system services, in-
cluding FCR, Fast Frequency Reserves (FFR), and Fast Restoration Reserves (FRR).
This indicates that the future electricity grid is more susceptible to frequency disturbances
if not managed correctly.
In theory, with a well-defined reward function and high-quality data, it should be possible to
train a controller or agent that can optimize the operation, behavior, and energy utilization
not only of the ØDHP but of any District Heating Plant, provided the agent is trained on
relevant data.
2
Implementation of data driven control for district heating power plant to provide grid support
==PAGE:11==
1.2
Previous work
The application of RL to scheduling problems and operational cost optimization problems
is not new, and several studies have demonstrated its potential. In 2020, Kurte et al.
conducted a study titled ”Electricity pricing aware deep reinforcement learning based in-
telligent HVAC Control” [9], where they used a Deep Q Network RL algorithm to develop
a control policy for an HVAC system to minimize operational costs. The system utilized
a set price signal with randomly distributed price steps, and historical weather data and
allowed the HVAC system to deviate 2◦C from the target temperature of the controlled
area to pre-cool the system before a price hike. ”Price Look Ahead Features” were also
generated to anticipate price increases or decreases. Although Kurte et al. successfully
reduced overall operational costs by 12-15%, it is worth noting that they used relatively
static data for a system with only two states (on and off) and simplified price signals con-
sisting of two values indicating high or low prices. This simplification significantly reduced
the complexity of the state space compared to a more realistic price signal. Nevertheless,
this study demonstrated the potential of RL for optimization purposes.
Ruelens et al. demonstrated a 15% reduction in a water heater’s energy consumption
by applying an RL technique known as fitted Q-iteration to the control system. Their
work, titled ”Reinforcement Learning Applied to an Electric Water Heater: From Theory
to Practice” [10], showed that RL can adapt to complicated physical mechanisms in a
system.
Regarding RL specifically, Minh et al. made one of the most notable advancements in
recent years in their paper ”Playing Atari with Deep Reinforcement Learning” [11]. They
trained an RL model using the DQN algorithm to play Atari games at a human level using
a convolutional neural network (CNN) as a function approximator. The RL model was
directly fed with images from the Atari games, allowing for a high-dimensional state space
on which the RL model was successfully trained. While the application of RL in playing
Atari games was deemed successful, the study also revealed certain limitations of the
algorithm. Notably, the RL model performed better in games where the goal and target
were more explicit, such as Video Pinball, Breakout, Pong, and Space Invaders. However,
in games like Montezuma’s Grave, where winning requires exploration through multiple
rooms/screens, each requiring different skills/inputs to overcome, the RL model performed
no better than random input.
The study of using RL for building energy management has also gained attention in recent
years. In 2021, Lissa et al. published the paper ”Deep reinforcement learning for home
energy management system control” [12], where they implemented a Deep RL algorithm
to optimize energy usage within a home while maintaining a specific indoor temperature.
The observed parameters in their study were indoor and outdoor temperature, water tank
temperature, Photovoltaic (PV) production, and the hour of the day. Interestingly, the
reward function in their study was divided into three separate error terms, each aiming to
optimize a different goal: one for keeping the indoor temperature within two set points,
one for maintaining the water tank temperature within allowed bounds, and one for energy
optimization by consuming power when PV electricity is available. These three error terms
were balanced using an aggregation equation, allowing the programmer to determine the
relative prioritization of one goal over another, even if they might be contradictory.
These studies demonstrate that RL can solve cost optimization problems in a dynamic
environment. The HVAC study, in particular, is of special interest. However, it is essential
to note that these studies relied on a single generator, whereas the DHN in question
consists of two different generators with different price signals.
Implementation of data driven control for district heating power plant to provide grid support
3
==PAGE:12==
1.3
Contributions, limitations, and scope
In alignment with the principles of the Re-Empowered project and considering the existing
solutions and constraints set by BOEF and the ØDHP, an RL-based controller will be
developed. It should be noted that BOEF has communicated that they will not be able to
supply data for this project. The limited data available from the plant has been gathered by
the author during a site visit in October 2022, consisting of pictures and print-outs of control
systems. Therefore, this project will not attempt to create a 1:1 representation of the
ØDHP but will serve as a proof-of-concept for an RL controller. The overarching question
is: Does the idea of RL control for district heating plants warrant further investigation and
allocation of resources? The following goals have been defined for the project:
• Research the ØDHP and determine the possibilities and limitations within their setup
to develop an RL agent capable of controlling it. The simulated environment should
be representative of the ØDHP.
• Develop and implement an RL agent in Matlab capable of controlling a multi-generator
setup inspired by ØDHP. The control of the individual generators should be based
on electricity price signals and demand signals from the DHN, ideally able to pro-
vide grid support. In this case, grid support is defined as utilizing electricity when
demand/price is low and limiting electricity usage when demand/price is high.
• Determine and evaluate different approaches to data pre-processing and Price-
Look-Ahead (PLA) features required for optimal operation by the RL agent.
• Based on the results, discuss the possibility of implementing the RL-based controller
in a live environment.
As demand data from the Østerlars DHN isn’t available, a dataset containing hourly heat
consumption data for a group of single-family homes [13] will be scaled to the total size of
the Østerlars DHN. Electricity price signals will be based on historical data from NordPool
[14]. The focus will not be on detailed modeling of the DHP mechanics but rather on
the implementation and application of RL in a series of scenarios. The RL agent will be
based on a DQN algorithm, first introduced by Minh et al.[11], as it has proven to be a
viable option for this type of problem. Optimizing and investigating the hyperparameters
used for the RL agent, including the neural network architecture employed within it, are
considered beyond the scope of this project.
1.4
Reading guide
This thesis is divided into the following chapters:
• Chapter 2: Theory and background on RL and the ØDHP.
• Chapter 3: Data presentation and methods used in the project, providing an initial
indication of possibilities and limitations within the chosen RL approach.
• Chapter 4: RL testing using simplified price signals akin to those used by Kurte et
al. [9].
• Chapter 5: Results of further testing on dynamic price signals and experimentation
of RL agents. The tested parameters include signal pre-processing methods, price
look-ahead features, and modified reward functions.
• Chapter 6: Discussion of results of the RL agent, limitations and possibilities, and
ideas for future work and further improvement.
4
Implementation of data driven control for district heating power plant to provide grid support
==PAGE:13==
• Chapter 7: Conclusion
Implementation of data driven control for district heating power plant to provide grid support
5
==PAGE:14==
6
Implementation of data driven control for district heating power plant to provide grid support
==PAGE:15==
2
Theory and Background
First, a theoretical background within RL will be provided, briefly explaining the notion
of basic reinforcement learning, deep learning concepts, Q-learning, and the concept of
a Deep Q-Network (DQN) algorithm. Following that, a general description of the ØDHP
will be provided, along with information regarding its day-to-day operation and on-site
infrastructure. The information for this section was largely gathered during a site visit and
was only communicated orally to the author[15].
2.1
Reinforcement Learning
Figure 2.1: Summary of the RL pro-
cess
Advanced machine and deep learning are consid-
ered by many as a black-box approach to problem-
solving. This perception arises from the fact that the
exact inner workings of machine learning often re-
main unknown to many. However, the next section
will provide some insight into the process governing
the black-box mechanism. If the reader has experi-
ence with RL, it is advised to skip ahead to section
2.1.6, which specifically explains the DQN algorithm
used in this project.
Machine learning is commonly grouped into three
categories:
unsupervised learning,
supervised
learning, and reinforcement learning. Supervised
learning is used for problems such as regression (predictions, forecasting, optimization),
while unsupervised learning is used for clustering large data sets. RL has gained popu-
larity in recent years for its ability to solve complex sequential decision-making problems
without the need for an intricate model explaining the environment or labeled data [16][17].
The goal for the RL agent (often referred to as the ’actor’ or ’controller’ in the RL system)
is to maximize the long-term cumulative reward. This is achieved through a series of
training sessions known as episodes, during which the agent learns through trial and
error, optimizing itself to achieve better results with each episode. If done correctly, the
reward received during training converges at some point, and an apparent optimal solution
is found.
The RL process is visualized in figure 2.1, which illustrates the four key steps in the RL
process:
1. The RL agent takes an action in the environment
2. The environment translates this action into a reward and a new state of the system/
new observations from the system
3. The reward is fed back to the agent
4. The RL agent updates the target values used for determining the appropriate action
and repeat
This process is repeated until the cumulative reward of each consecutive episode con-
verges. Once training is completed, the finished agent can be deployed as a controller.
Implementation of data driven control for district heating power plant to provide grid support
7
==PAGE:16==
In order to provide a fundamental understanding of the concepts behind RL, specifically
the DQN algorithm used in this project, the notion of a Markov decision process (MDP) is
briefly introduced as this is the underlying mathematical framework for RL. Subsequently,
the concepts necessary for understanding Q-learning, along with deep learning, are de-
scribed. Finally, Deep Q-Network reinforcement learning (DQN) is introduced.
2.1.1
Markov Decision Process
”Reinforcement Learning” by Sutton and Barto[18] is by many considered the bible of RL.
The following is in large based on this work. In this section, the Markov Decision Process
will be introduced. This is the underlying mathematical framework of RL.
First, we define a sequential decision problem. That is a problem, which relies on sequen-
tial decision-making: autonomous driving, playing games, finance etc. In these types of
problems, the outcome depends on several observations of the environment, actions, and
the sequence in which these are made. A certain probability links these - when driving,
if the brake lights turn on in front of you, the probability that it is a good idea to break is
high. If the destination is to the right, the probability of turning left will yield a good result
is low.
Continuing the example of driving: If a set of observations is known as a state (speed,
acceleration, brake pressure, the direction of the car, which way the steering wheel point,
what are the road conditions, etc.), and a reward is defined based on proximity to the
destination, then there is always an optimal action that will lead to the optimal reward -
which is continuously moving towards the destination, and eventually the destination itself.
Mathematically these problems can be formulated as Markov Decision problems[18].
The goal of the agent (could also be referred to as the controller of the system) is to
optimize the long-term cumulative reward. The agent considers the environment, made
up of states s, the reward r (feedback) given from the previous action a taken by the agent.
The agent defines the states based on the observations fed to it, and through experience,
an estimated future reward from a given state can be calculated. This gives the notion
that an optimal path through a sequential decision-making problem exists. In order to link
states to form a path, the transition probability p of moving to a new state s′ (provided a
given action a) can be described by:
p(s′, r|s, a) ˙=Pr{St = s′, Rt = r|St−1 = s, At−1 = a}
(2.1)
Capital letters are used to indicate sets. S represents a set of s. This can be understood
as that for certain random values there is a probability p of those values occurring at
time t, given particular values of the preceding state and action, and thus by adjusting
the transition probability between all states, a behavior through the problem and state-
space is formed. This roughly makes up what is known as the Markov Decision Process
(MDP). In essence, it can be used to describe the relationship between S, R, A and P,
and provided that all four are known, it intuitively makes sense each can be computed
from the three others. This allows for solving the optimal solution to a problem through
dynamic programming[18]. Although we do not apply it explicitly, the notation is relevant
for further understanding and discussion as the idea of an MDP is the foundation for most
RL.
For each action taken by the RL agent, it receives a reward denoted as R. The goal or
cumulative reward, denoted as G, is to maximize the long-term reward of the system. This
can be described as the total return:
8
Implementation of data driven control for district heating power plant to provide grid support
==PAGE:17==
Gt = Rt+1 + Rt+2 + Rt+3 + Rt+n
(2.2)
This is a very simple case, where all returns are of equal value to the agent. What action
was taken in e.g. 10.000 time steps carries the same weight as an action taken in two
time steps. In order to give meaning to the idea of short-term and long-term reward, the
reward from sequential states in a sequence of states is discounted with a discount factor
γ which can take a value between 0 and 1. This means that the cumulative reward at time
t becomes:
Gt = Rt+1 + γRt+2 + γ2Rt+3 + · · · =
∞
∑
k=0
γkRt+k+1
(2.3)
In this way, by adjusting the value of γ it’s possible to adapt the agent to either favor short
rather than a long-term reward or vice versa. The idea is to be able to sacrifice a little at
time t in order to achieve a larger possible reward at time t + k, as the best path through
a problem might require sub-optimal actions along the way.
2.1.2
Fundamentals of RL
The RL agent governs the decision-making process concerning what action to take from
a given state. The agent consists of several elements that make up its behavior. In the
following, the different attributes an RL agent can hold will be explained briefly in order to
give a better understanding of the DQN algorithm explained next.
Agent Policy
The policy π is what steers the agent’s choice of action from a given state. A policy π
can be written as π(a|s) which is the probability of taking action a given the state s[18].
RL training methods can be either on- or off-policy methods. Agents using an on-policy
method updates the same policy as they are following during training, whereas off-policy
agents use a different policy for sampling during training than it is following. In this way,
it is possible for the agent to act greedily with respect to optimizing future rewards, while
still exploring the state space using an exploratory policy and learning through this policy.
This will be elaborated further in section 2.1.3.
Value Function
The policy and the value function are very closely intertwined. A value function estimates
the expected future reward from a state when following the policy π in order to evaluate
the value or ”how good” it is to be in a given state. Value functions are often defined in
terms of a given policy, as the expected future reward must depend on the value of taking
a given action from a given state that the policy governs. For this reason, it is sometimes
referred to as the ’state-value function for policy π’ This relation can be expressed by the
following[18]:
vπ ˙= Eπ [Gt|St = s] = Eπ
[ ∞
∑
k=0
γkRt+k+1|St = s
]
, for all s ∈S
(2.4)
In essence - the expected future value v of a state s under a policy π. This is what is
known as a value function. This can be expanded to what is known as a state-action-
value function, also called a Q-value function. Starting in state s, taking action a and then
following the policy π[18]:
Implementation of data driven control for district heating power plant to provide grid support
9
==PAGE:18==
qπ(s, a) ˙= Eπ [Gt|St = s, At = a] = Eπ
[ ∞
∑
k=0
γkRt+k+1|St = s, At = a
]
(2.5)
The action value function computes the value of taking a certain action a from a certain
state s. By computing the action-value function for all states, an optimal solution to the
sequential decision problem can be found.
Temporal Difference Learning
An intuitive approach for solving MDPs is by using Monte Carlo Methods (MC), which
involve repeated random sampling. However, MC methods, in their raw form, are suit-
able only for episodic tasks, which are tasks of finite length with a finite number of states
[18][19]. MC is not ideal for handling large state spaces. Instead, we can utilize temporal
difference learning (TD), which can be seen as a mixture of MC and dynamic program-
ming methods. Both TD and MC are model-free methods, meaning they do not require
information about the transition probabilities. However, they differ in how they update the
value function. MC considers complete episodes and updates the policy only after an
episode is completed, whereas TD learning updates the value function after each step
within an episode. This means that with TD learning, it is possible to learn ”on the go”
without knowing the final outcome, which also allows for a continuous environment with
an infinite number of steps.
As training is progressing, TD learning updates the estimated value of an action. Equation
2.6[18] explains the one-step TD procedure, where the updates happen after each step,
but TD learning can (and is often) extended to an n-step procedure following the same
principle. The target value V is introduced, which is used to update the value of a state
or action. In one-step TD, when moving to the next state St+1 an update to the estimate
of V (St) is made based on the reward Rt+1 and the next estimate V (St+1). The term
Rt+1 + γV (St+1) is the target in this case of TD.
V (St) ←V (St) + α [Rt+1 + γV (St+1 −V (St)]
(2.6)
α is a constant between 0 and 1 and is known as the learning rate. A high learning rate
implies the update term
[
Rt+1 + γV (S(t + 1) −V (St)
]
will be higher, and the target will be
adjusted more aggressively, which can lead to more fluctuations during training, while a
smaller value will adjust the target value slowly, thus making the function converge slower.
Generalized policy iteration and ϵ-Greedy algorithms
Figure 2.2: Illustration of the GPI pro-
cess, ultimately ending in an optimal pol-
icy. Figure from [19], page 11
The evaluation of a policy and improving that
same policy are two simultaneous processes.
This is referred to as the Generalized policy it-
eration (GPI), where during the policy evalua-
tion, the Q-value function is computed, while
the improvement step updates the policy based
on the value function. These two processes, al-
though they can seem counteracting, will even-
tually converge when repeated, to an optimal
policy π∗(∗the optimal policy). The concept
is sketched in figure 2.2. The two processes,
although moving away from each other, both
slightly converge towards the target for each
step, eventually ending in the optimal solution.
10
Implementation of data driven control for district heating power plant to provide grid support
==PAGE:19==
The example shown in figure 2.2 depicts a pol-
icy that is acting greedily ie. when deciding an action, it is picking the action with the high-
est Q-value. However, this means only well-defined parts of the state-space are picked
by the policy, as they have been explored, while other parts of the state-space might
never be explored if the policy keeps picking the optimal action. To solve this problem,
the ϵ-greedy exploration strategy is introduced in which a random action is chosen with
probability ϵ and the greedy action is chosen with a probability 1−ϵ. This guarantees that
the state space continues to be explored throughout the training process. The ϵ-greedy
strategy can be stated as[19]:
π(a, s) =
{
ϵ/m + 1 −ϵ
if Lmaxa∗= arg maxa∈A Q(s, a)
ϵ/m
if otherwise
(2.7)
With m being the possible actions.
2.1.3
Q-learning
One of the most well-known RL algorithms is known as Q-learning and was first proposed
by Watkins in 1989 [20]. The update rule for a Q-value in Q-learning is given in 2.8[18].
Q(St, At) ←Q(St, At) + α
[
Rt+1 + γ arg max
a
Q(St+1, a) −Q(St, At)
]
(2.8)
Q-Learning is an off-policy TD method and several similarities between equation 2.6 and
2.8 can be seen. The Q-value for the state action pair at time t Q(St, At) is updated based
on the reward R received from taking action a from state S, the discount factor γ and the
difference between the best action to take from the next state and the currently estimated
Q-value.
That Q-Learning is an ”off-policy” method refers to the fact, that Q-learning doesn’t learn
from the same policy that it is following. The ’target policy’ π - the policy that is learned
- is greedy while the ’behavior policy’ µ - the policy being followed - is ϵ-greedy meaning
it will explore more of the state space. In this way, the agent can use µ to learn from the
environment making exploratory moves while updating the target policy π with only the
best values[19]
Q-learning works by maintaining a Q-table, a table that holds all Q-values for the MDP.
As explained in the previous section, for each state-action pair, the action value function
Q(s, a) is calculated, returning the expected cumulative reward. Once the table has been
built, the optimal policy π∗is found for each state, picking the action value - Q-value - with
the highest value. This implies that all states and actions in the MDP are known, which
might not be the case. This can be handled with different techniques, the most common
being to apply a function approximator, which approximates the value function.
2.1.4
Value function approximation
It’s relatively trivial to imagine an MDP, where the optimal solution lies in a 2D space/table
with actions in one dimension, states in the other, and then the table containing the value.
However, when dealing with complex problems, the state space expands rapidly, which
can result in memory limitations or excessive computational loads. This approach be-
comes impractical, as evaluating the value of every individual state is not feasible or mean-
ingful. Instead, a value function approximator is introduced. Several types of approxima-
tors exist[21] such as linear approximators, tree-based approximators, Nearest Neighbour
etc. Historically a linear approximator has been the most common approach[11], but in
Implementation of data driven control for district heating power plant to provide grid support
11
==PAGE:20==
Figure 2.4: Basic model of a neural network with two hidden layers. Figure from [23]
recent years the use of Neural networks have gained popularity[21]. A value function ap-
proximator can be thought of as a black-box taking a state as an input and then computing
the Q-value for all possible actions. This idea is illustrated in figure 2.3 with the W being
the weights of the function approximator.
Neural Networks and deep learning for function approximation
Figure 2.3:
Illus-
trating a function
approximator. Fig-
ure from [21]
As shown in figure 2.4 a neural network (NN) consists of an input
layer, an output layer, and a number of hidden layers, each layer
consisting of a number of nodes. Briefly summarized, each node
is assigned an input, output, weights for each input, and a thresh-
old. Weights are then multiplied with the corresponding input, thus a
higher weight adds more relative value to a variable making it con-
tribute more to the output, and summed. An activation function cal-
culates the output from the sums, and if the threshold is surpassed,
the node fires, passing the output to the next layer in the network and
eventually reaching the output layer. The explained approach is what
is known as a ’feed-forward network’ and is what is used to estimate
the Q-values with back-propagation being utilized during training to
adjust the weights [21][22].
The benefits of using a NN approximator rather than a linear are[21]:
• Non-linear behavior
• The weight assignment to different inputs/features happens
’automatically’. Determining what data takes priority can be challenging. In these
cases an automatic weight assignment is highly desired
• The ability to handle highly dimensional environments, which
can be difficult with a linear approximator
• Improved performance in complex environments.
2.1.5
Experience replay
Experience replay is essentially a method to train and update the NN and combat the natu-
ral issue of strong correlation between two successive states and thus prevent overfitting,
which can help the agent to learn more efficiently. We define experiences as a tuple of
(s, a, r, s′)) with s′ being the successor state. During training, while following the policy,
12
Implementation of data driven control for district heating power plant to provide grid support
==PAGE:21==
upon each transition between states experiences are stored in an experience buffer. Pe-
riodically, a small batch of experiences is sampled from the experience buffer and used
to calculate a loss using a loss function - in this case, one-step minimization loss[24]. The
loss is then used to calculate the error between the predicted Q-value and the target Q-
value, averaged over all state-action pairs in the mini-batch. The loss is used to update
the neural network through backpropagation in order to optimize the function approxima-
tor. Over time this will tune the neural network to minimize the error between predicted
and target Q-values, leading to better predictions of Q-values [19].
The size of the buffer ie. how ’old’ the contained data is, the mini-batch size itself, and the
periodicity of these updates are all tuneable hyperparameters, which will not be investi-
gated further.
The one-step loss function is given in equation 2.9[24], with y being the target value, ˆy
the predicted value, and m is the size of the mini-batch.
L =
1
2m
m
∑
t=1
(yt −ˆyt)2
(2.9)
2.1.6
Deep Q-Network Algorithm
The Deep Q-network Algorithm (DQN) was synthesized by Minh et. al [11] in 2015. The
goal of DQN was to create an agent that was able to handle high-dimensional data input
and able to solve various problems within the same algorithm. Although algorithms had
been formulated to tackle single problems, the holy grail of a ’universal’ algorithm for
general use had not been achieved. The DQN algorithm would prove success full at
playing various Atari computer games at human-like levels or better, marking a milestone
within RL development, but still required individual agents for each game.
The main invention was the use of a convolutional neural network (CNN) as a function
approximator. A CNN is a neural net that is especially good at handling high-dimensional
data such as audio and images. This does not mean DQN is exclusively for pictures, it
has proven to handle other types of RL problems well as discussed in section 1.2.
DQN combines ideas from Q-learning with deep learning principles to achieve a func-
tion approximator that can handle high-dimensional data. It uses a replay memory or an
experience buffer to store experiences from which it then samples randomly.
The training algorithm as described by the Matlab RL toolbox implementation[24]:
1. From state s, choose an action a following an ϵ-greedy policy.
2. Act according to a, observe the received reward r and the next state s′.
3. Save the gained experience (s, a, r, s′) in the experience buffer.
4. Sample a small random batch M of the experiences from the experience buffer.
5. Update the target function y:
yt = rt + γ max
a′
Q(s′, a′)
(2.10)
If the next state s′ is the terminal state, this expression should simply be set to rt
Implementation of data driven control for district heating power plant to provide grid support
13
==PAGE:22==
6. Update the policy µ using the loss function across all sampled experiences:
L =
1
2M
M
∑
t=1
(yt −Q(st, at))2
(2.11)
7. Update the target policy π
This thesis will use the DQN algorithm with a fully connected deep Nneural network as a
function approximator.
2.2
Østerlars district heating plant
The district heating network (DHN) of Østerlars consists of several interconnected compo-
nents, from the generation of the heat itself at the central heating plant to the transmission
and distribution network and finally the loads in form of the end-users. In this chapter the
layout and current operation method of the DHN will be presented and explained.
The Østerlars DHN is powered by ”Østerlars District Heating Plant” which is a plant ca-
pable of running on a mix of different heating-sources. It should be noted that much of
the information gathered about the operation of the plant was communicated orally to the
author of this thesis through interviews with the plants site-operations manager and BOEF
officials[15]. Presented data was acquired from the site’s Supervisory control and data
acquisition (SCADA) system.
Figure 2.5 shows an overview of the system.
The plant has three different heating elements: a straw-fired, a wood-fired, and electric
boilers. The main source of heat in the system is a 5 MW straw-fired boiler as shown on
the right in Figure 2.5. The primary heat source in the DHP has proven able to handle the
load during regular as well as peak hours.
The straw-fired boiler is always kept at least 80°C by means of re-circulating water through
the system from the hot water storage tank as cooling of the boiler tubes will lead to
clogging of the internal piping system as well as the burner. For the same reason the
boiler shouldn’t go too long between start-ups, however, the exact time frame for this is, is
not defined. The ramp-time from 0 to 100% output of the straw-fired boiler is 120 minutes
and behaves linearly. This limitation comes from the straw-burning process itself. Ramp
times as short as 60 minutes have been attempted, but this leads to excessive amounts
of soot in the exhaust as well as leftover unburned material in the tailings. This happens
as the burner isn’t able to draw in sufficient oxygen in the start-up phase. The straw boiler
is run at 90% whenever possible, as this is the ideal operating load for optimal efficiency.
In this thesis when referring to ’straw’, this is in relation to the generation of heat energy
for the DHN system using straw boilers.
The second red block from the right in figure 2.5 is a ”CombiKrat” modular wood-pellet
fired boiler that was initially bought as a ”start-up” boiler, which was moved between the
DHN’s of Bornholm during their respective construction phases to secure heating while
the main-plants were under construction. For this reason, it physically sits outside the
ØDHP building and is a self-contained unit inside a shipping container. The boiler is
currently implemented as a peak-load boiler but rarely sees any use. It’s also used as an
alternative source for DHN’s on Bornholm during the maintenance of the primary plants.
The four series connected red blocks in the middle of figure 2.5 are the 0.6 MW electric
boilers with a combined heating capacity of 2.4 MW. Though initially intended to assist
14
Implementation of data driven control for district heating power plant to provide grid support
==PAGE:23==
Figure 2.5: A print-out of the SCADA HMI system controlling the Østerlars heating plant.
The print was made on the 3’rd of September 2022 and as such the main functionality of
the DHN is to supply hot water for the consumers rather than heating. It’s noted only the
straw-fired boiler is operating.
during peak load, they have never been appropriately configured, so during power-up
they ramp instantly to 100% load and thus blow the fuses of the plants electricity sys-
tem[25]. Furthermore, the straw boiler turned out to be sufficient for the network and thus
the electric boilers remained unused and are currently not in operation during day-to-day
operations. BOEF has in 2022 contracted Nordic Power Balance to re-configure the boil-
ers to use them for mFRR, a manual reserve capacity service handled by Energinet[13].
For this reason, BOEF is working on re-configuring the controlling PLC’s to ensure correct
ramp-up operation. Although this will conflict with the interest of the author’s project, as
essentially it removes all control possibilities from the boilers, it will also mean that an API
for controlling the boilers will be developed.
To the left of the boilers in figure 2.5, a component representing the hot water accumulation
tank can be seen. The hot-water accumulation tank is (when filled) able to supply the DHN
with heat for about 36 hours during average use in the fall and spring. The water flowing
into the tank is generally kept around 90-95°C. It’s not desirable to keep the temperature
any higher as this will lead to boiling in the top of the hot water tank and the opening of
over-pressure valves. Large water tanks are prone to stratification, meaning the water
temperature in the tank depends on where in the tank you measure. Typically the warmer
water rests at the top, and the colder at the bottom. This behavior can be seen to the left
of the tank, where different temperature measurements of the watertank are displayed.
The magnitude of the temperature difference depends on how long the water has been
resting in the tank and when water was last drawn from or added to the tank. Warm water
from the tank can be pumped from the top to the DHN and cold water from the bottom to
be recirculated through the boilers.
To the very left, the connection to the three subsystems is seen: Østerlars, Østermarie,
and Gudhjem. Each is fitted with its own pump which regulates the flow to the subsystem.
The temperature of the outgoing water can be adjusted by a shunting valve connecting
the forward- and return flow. It should be noted that the Gudhjem subsystem currently
doesn’t have a shunting valve at the plant, but rather at the local pumping station. At
the time of writing an additional shunting valve located at the Østerlars plant was under
Implementation of data driven control for district heating power plant to provide grid support
15
==PAGE:24==
Figure 2.6: A printout of setpoints and loading of the straw-fired boiler. The top figure
shows 24 hours of operation, the bottom figure shows the previous 96 hours. Red is the
loading of the boiler, green is the output effect, blue is the output of the washer (energy
reclamation system), and yellow is the setpoint.
construction.
2.2.1
Operation of the Østerlars district heating plant
The daily operations of the heating plant are highly automated (automatic feeding of the
straw boiler, cleaning of ashes etc.), while the control systems - mainly PID controllers -
rely on input from the operators gained from the experience of running the plant to en-
sure efficient and smooth operations. This also suggests that some control actions the
operators make are conducted on a ”because-that-is-how-we-have-always-done-it-and-
it-works” practice. An example of this is the daily operations of the straw boiler shown in
figure 2.6. The top part of the figure shows 24 hours of operations along the x-axis, with
the bottom part showing 96 hours. It is noticed that the boiler only operates between 06
AM and 10 PM. The bottom figure shows a similar pattern of only day-time operation.
Although the plant has a 24-hour operator watch, night-time watch is permitted through
remote monitoring. For this reason, the boilers are usually shut down at night to prevent
alarms requiring onsite intervention and thus increase the working conditions of the staff.
Instead, the boiler is operated during the day to the extent possible in order to fill up the
hot water storage tank such that it will last the night.
The shunts in each subsystem are used to lower the temperature of the forward water
flow as much as possible. That is low enough that the ’last’ load in the network is ensured
a temperature of at least 60°C on the inflow of water which BOEF is contractually bound
to provide. The valves are configured in such a way that when mixing in the return water
to the forward flow, the pull from the hot water storage tank is correspondingly lowered,
resulting in a lower outflow temperature from the plant and thus lower energy draw at the
same flow rate resulting in less heat loss in the DHN. This happens as the loss of energy
(heat) in the transmission network is directly dependent on the temperature difference
between the water and surroundings. The lower the water temperature in the district
16
Implementation of data driven control for district heating power plant to provide grid support
==PAGE:25==
Figure 2.7: SCADA HMI overview of the Gudhjem pumping station, which is located after
a 10 km transmission pipe from the Østerlars heating plant
heating transmission and distribution network, the lower the loss. This means an ideal
forward temperature of the water must exist, where the last load is secured at its minimum
temperature while minimizing losses.
As previously mentioned, the Gudhjem subsystem is not fitted with a shunting valve on the
plant site, but only at the pump station site after a 10 km transmission pipe. An overview
of the Gudhjem pumping station can be seen in figure 2.7. This results in relatively high
losses in the transmission pipes and it has been estimated that the shunting valve currently
under construction can lower this by at least 20-30%. The used optimal valve setpoints
have been obtained through experience by the operators and as such is a result of hand-
tuning.
Furthermore, the set points the boilers are run at are obtained through experience, sug-
gesting more optimized values and control could be achieved.
2.2.2
Economic considerations
In 2020 a memo was published by BOEF discussing the feasibility of enabling the electric
boilers[2]. It describes the cost of 1 MWh of district heat using straw as the means of
production to be about 160.5 DKK. The cost of producing using electricity can be consid-
ered to be equal to the spot price + Transmission System Operator (TSO) and Distribution
System Operator (DSO) fees. The DSO and TSO fees total 176 DKK/MWh alone, mak-
ing the fees higher than the price of straw production, essentially only making production
with electric boilers feasible when the electricity price is negative. This will be considered
further in section 3.3.3.
Implementation of data driven control for district heating power plant to provide grid support
17
==PAGE:26==
18
Implementation of data driven control for district heating power plant to provide grid support
==PAGE:27==
3
Data presentation and Methods
This chapter outlines the selected approach for designing a controller for the ØDHP. First,
the data used for the project will be presented and an initial analysis will be made in order
to determine suitable methods to be employed in this project. The subsequent section
presents the chosen course of action. The next chapter presents initial results in order to
further explain and justify the decisions made.
3.1
Data inspection
As RL learns solely from observing the environment and the associated reward, the qual-
ity and nature of the developed agent is highly dependent on the data that is learned
from during training. For this reason, a preliminary data analysis will be made in order to
establish boundaries, limitations, and potential pitfalls. Furthermore, two pre-processing
techniques of the price signal will be presented.
3.1.1
Heat Demand Data
Although production and demand data for the ØDHP and the DHN connected to the plant
does exist, it was not possible for BOEF to supply the data. Instead, a data set containing
hourly electricity consumption data from 20 single family residences in 2011 was obtained
through a former DTU project[13]. The data set contains two sets of measurements: Elec-
tricity consumption of 10 single family homes that were heated by a non-electric sources,
and the total electricity consumption of 10 single family homes heated by heat pumps.
The average heat consumption of a single-family home is calculated by first calculating
the average electricity consumption for each group of 10 homes at each time step. Then
the two are subtracted, yielding the average energy spent on heating by a single family
home in kWh.
The data set contains hourly heat demand data in kWh for a year from January 1’st until
December 31’st, yielding a total of 8760 data points. The full data-set after processing is
displayed on figure 3.1. To give an idea about the seasonal variation, the demand in the
first week of January, April, July and October is shown in figure 3.2. The figure reveals a
periodicity within the data, although the mean clearly is shifted as expected with seasonal
temperature variation. In figure 3.3 the hourly mean value over a year is computed on a
weekly basis. It is evident that heat demand is higher in the morning and evening hours.
Implementation of data driven control for district heating power plant to provide grid support
19
==PAGE:28==
January 1st
Febuary 1st
March 1st
April 1st
May 1st
June 1st
July 1st
August 1st
September 1st
October 1st
November 1st
December 1st
0.5
1
1.5
2
Heat demand in kWh
Mean daily value
Figure 3.1: Heat demand of a single family home on Bornholm in 2011 on an hourly basis
through a year.
50
100
150
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2
Monday
Tuesday
Wednesday
Thursday
Friday
Sauterday
Sunday
First Week of January
First Week of April
First Week of July
First Week of October
Figure 3.2: Heat demand in highlighted
weeks.
50
100
150
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
Monday
Tuesday
Wednesday
Thursday
Friday
Sauterday
Sunday
Standard deviation
mean
Figure 3.3: Average heat demand and
standard deviation through a week,
sampled hourly.
3.1.2
Electricity price Data
The electricity price data was obtained from Nordpool[14] who is the operator of the north-
European energy trading market. Northern Europe is divided into sub-markets within each
country, where Denmark is divided into two DK-1 (west of the Great Belt) and DK-2 (east
of the Great Belt). For Historical reasons Bornholm belongs to DK-2 although the rest
of DK-2 and Bornholm are only connected through the sourthern swedish SE-4 grid[26].
Hourly (spotprice) electricity price for DK-2 in DKK/MWh is displayed in figure 3.4 to give
an indication of the price fluctuation over a year. Data was obtained for 2020, 2021 and
2022 as these were the only publicly available data sets with hourly sample-rate.
The higher price of electricity in 2022 compared to 2021 and 2022 clearly stands out. This
20
Implementation of data driven control for district heating power plant to provide grid support
==PAGE:29==
January 1st
Febuary 1st
March 1st
April 1st
May 1st
June 1st
July 1st
August 1st
September 1st
October 1st
November 1st
December 1st
0
2000
4000
6000
2022
2021
2020
Figure 3.4: Spot price in DK-2 for 2020, 2021 and 2022
is generally attributed to the increase in gas prices caused by the war in Ukraine[27].
Figure 3.5 displays the first week of data in January, April, July and October 2020, divided
into days from midnight to midnight. As with the heat demand, it is evident that a certain
periodicity lies from Monday through Friday, with a slightly different patter in the weekends.
Again, by taking an average for each hour of the day on a weekly basis and averaging the
electricity price as shown in figure 3.6, it’s clear that these patterns repeat on a weekly
basis. The energy peaks seen in the morning and evening hours are what is considered
’peak-hours’. Reducing the load on the power-grid during these hours is refereed to as
”peak-shaving” and can be characterized as a type of grid support. Furthermore, it’s
noticed that electricity prices are generally lowest during the night.
50
100
150
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
Monday
Tuesday
Wednesday
Thursday
Friday
Sauterday
Sunday
First Week of January
First Week of April
First Week of July
First Week of October
Figure 3.5: Electricity price in DKK/MWh
in January, April, July and October 2020
50
100
150
100
150
200
250
300
350
Monday
Tuesday
Wednesday
Thursday
Friday
Sauterday
Sunday
Standard deviation
mean
Figure 3.6: Average Electricity price and
standard deviation through a week in
2020, sampled hourly.
Implementation of data driven control for district heating power plant to provide grid support
21
==PAGE:30==
3.2
Price signal pre-processing
To improve the RL learning, pre-processing of data signals can be advantageous in order
to make it easier for the RL agent to interpret. Early testing indicated that the agent had
trouble making sense of the raw price signal in regard to scheduling the electric boilers
strategically due to the noisy nature of the price signal. The results indicated the agent
did not grasp any trends in the data.
Two methods will be used in this paper - Moving Average and denoising using Fast Fourier
Transformation (FFT). In the following sections, the two methods will be presented and
their effects on the price signal compared. The methods will be evaluated in section 5.1.
3.2.1
Moving Average
Moving average is a simple method to reduce the significance of short-term changes to a
signal by averaging the values in the signal over a certain period. The Moving Average is
calculated as a normal average, but instead of using the entire data set, a certain window
length n is used for the averaging. Typically a moving average is calculated as a centered
value taking values from n/2 time steps before and after to do the averaging. It can be
written as:
A = S1 + S2 + ...Sn
n
(3.1)
Where A is the moving average, S the data points and n the window for the averaging.
A sample of The Moving Average of the price signal (500 time steps) with n = 10 based
on the 2020 dataset is shown in figure 3.7 along with the original signal. Throughout this
paper, a window size of 10 was used. This value was found experimentally and chosen
as it proved to convey the trends in the data well while removing unwanted noise.
50
100
150
200
0
100
200
300
400
Original Price Signal
Moving Average Price Signal
Figure 3.7: Comparison of the original price signal and a Moving Average of that signal.
Window size is 10.
3.2.2
Denoising using the Fast Fourier Transform
All signals can be described as a combination of sine waves[28]. A Fast Fourier Transform
can be used to extract information regarding these frequencies that lie within a signal and
essentially show the frequency contents. Once the high energy frequencies in the signal
have been determined, an inverse Fourier transform is used to generate a new signal
22
Implementation of data driven control for district heating power plant to provide grid support
==PAGE:31==
using only the high energy frequencies, removing any potential noise from the original
signal. Figure 3.8 shows first the original price signal, then the power density spectrum
(PSD) which highlights the high energy frequencies as spikes, and third the de-noised
or new constructed signal. On figure 3.8 the PSD spectrum threshold is also drawn. By
selecting only the frequencies with a higher power level than the threshold and performing
an inverse FFT on these, the red FFT-based signal was produced. This will create a new
signal where only the strongest trends are present, effectively denoizing the original signal.
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
3500
4000
0
100
200
300
400
Original Price Signal
FFT based signal
3000
3100
3200
3300
3400
3500
3600
3700
3800
3900
4000
0
100
200
300
400
Original Price Signal
FFT based signal
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0
5
10
105
Thresshold
3500
3550
3600
3650
0
100
200
300
400
Original Price Signal
FFT based signal
Figure 3.8: The original price signal, and the signal after FFT processing as well as the
PSD spectrum with the thresholds used. The X-axis has been altered for the three price
plots to better show how the signals correlate.
3.2.3
Initial data analysis
The overall heat-demand profile is as expected, with relatively lower demand in summer
months, and higher in the winter. When the demand profile is utilized for the RL model,
the load will be multiplied relative to the size of the DHN (2000 households).
In the electricity price data on figure 3.4 it’s clear that fluctuations in price are relatively
much higher in 2022 compared to 2021, and 2021 is still somewhat higher although much
Implementation of data driven control for district heating power plant to provide grid support
23
==PAGE:32==
more comparable to 2020 levels. Therefore, 2022 could for this reason be considered an
outlier year. For training the RL agent the 2020 data set will be the primary learning set,
however as the RL agent developed in this project specifically is targeted at a real-life
deployment, it should ideally be able to operate under all three data sets. 2021 will be
used for validation of the controller, although a performance variation should be expected.
Ideally, the training would happen across all three data-sets, but as the computational
resources available for this project are limited, that option is deemed impractical.
Clear peak periods exist in both electricity prices and heat demand in the morning and
evening. This can pose a challenge for the RL, as it will have to learn to anticipate a
demand or price spike, and ideally adjust for that ahead of time. As an example, a con-
ceivable goal is to achieve peak-shaving by running the electric water boilers at night
when the price for electricity (on average) is lower disregarding the importance of the
Electricity price relative to that of straw. Anticipating a rise in price from a given state,
some type of indication of this peak-event should be passed as an observation that is
independent of the numerical price observation at time t itself. The easy solution is to
pass the electricity prices at t, t + 1, t + 2....t + n, which is not vastly beyond what could
be considered practically possible, as Nordpool publishes the spot price for the next 24
hours every day at 13:00. One solution could be to forecast prices, however, a different
suggestion would be to include a time-stamp as an observation, as this is the same type
of indicator humans would rely on anticipate morning and evening demand. This require-
ment of independence of the price event relative to the price level is derived from the
following consideration. If the agent observes a state simply by its numerical price value
and classifies it as a price-increase event, then if a similar set of observations appear at
a different time of year, the agent would anticipate a spike in price, regardless of it this is
actually the case. This could happen regardless of the time of day for instance, as this
information is not available to the agent. Any observation a human would use to anticipate
a certain action by the environment should be considered passed to the agent.
3.3
Development of RL model
For this project, Matlab was chosen as the development platform for its integration of RL
into the Matlab Simulink simulation environment. Simulink is essentially a block-diagram
simulation tool allowing for easy modeling and simulation of physical environments. Al-
though the chosen modeling approach is not particularly detailed, Simulink does allow for
an easy ’drag and drop’ approach which also makes it easy to make changes quickly.
An overview of the RL environment can be seen in figure 3.9. Each block represents a
signal manipulation/calculation while lines denote signal transmission in the direction of
the arrows. The bottom block with the ’brain’ picture indicates the RL agent. This block
receives observations, a reward signal, and a manual ”isDone” signal, which is a flag that
can be set upon which the episode will be terminated. For the purposes of this thesis, the
flag was not used and thus this signal was set to 0.
In the following sections, first, the physical environment will be established. Second, the
attributes of the RL agent will be defined, and third, the reward function will be defined
and discussed. Finally, different price-look-ahead features will be considered.
3.3.1
Environment
Strictly speaking the environment in RL is made up of states s with each state consisting of
a set of observations. However, in this case, there is also a simulated ’physical’ environ-
ment that generates the feedback for the reward functions and updates the observations
fed to the RL agent. The two environments will from this point be referred to as the ’phys-
24
Implementation of data driven control for district heating power plant to provide grid support
==PAGE:33==
Figure 3.9: An overview of the general model used for RL testing. Note that not all later
shown results are a direct result of simulation on the displayed model, as signals and the
manipulation of these vary across testing.
ical environment’, although it is a simulation that is referred to, and ”the environment” as
the state space environment.
The following observations are passed to the agent, cursive indicates the observations
that is only passed in certain tests:
• The electricity price at hour t
• The heat demand at hour t
• The (water) level in the accumulation tank
• The Cost of heat production the previous hour
• Spotprice at hour t + 1, t + 2....t + n
• Price look ahead indicators
Implementation of data driven control for district heating power plant to provide grid support
25
==PAGE:34==
All observations are normalised, allowing the RL agent to apply the relevant weights to
the observations itself.
The physical environment has been kept simple in order to reduce the risk of potential pit-
falls and reduce computing time during training. The top sub system in 3.9 marked in blue
color handles the physical environment, and it runs exclusively in Watt-hours for further
simplicity. Figure 3.10 shows the subsystem consisting of two blocks representing the
straw and electric boilers respectively, each regulating their output based on the received
action signal. The blocks calculate an output in kWh to a sum, where the heat demand
is subtracted. The remaining term is sent to a memory and time-step delay block, which
acts as the accumulation tank of the system. If the term sent from the sum of is negative,
the value sent out of the subsystem decreases, thus indicating a lower water/heat/energy
level in the tank, and a vice versa for a positive value. Although the system is capable
of over-flow, it does not make sense to operate with a +100% capacity, as the capacity
in the accumulation tank is finite, and thus the a hard ceiling for the max value of the ac-
cumulation tank is implemented, as well as the level not being able to go below 0 MWh.
The wood pellet fired boiler from the SCADA scans shown on figure 2.5 in section 2.2 has
been left out, as BOEF has informed this boiler is rarely in use, and should be considered
a back-up.
The system does not consider any losses, and thus the water tank is also considered
ideally isolated. Although this might seem a very rough assumption, losses in water tanks
are typically relatively low over a short time span (hours)[29] and with the continuous
flow expected in such a system, the assumption is not unreasonable. Losses are also
considered non existent during transport in the DHN.
The reward function depends on the price of the produced energy, and it is through the
optimization of this parameter the grid support is indirectly achieved. The calculation of
the cost of the produced heat is handled by the sub-system named ’CostCalculations’ on
figure 3.11. The block takes the control signal from the agent, and uses this to calcu-
late the price of produced energy at the current set point for both the electric and straw
boiler, based on a fixed straw-price pr kWh produced energy, and the current spot price
of electricity. These are then summarised and used by the reward function and given as
an observation to the agent. The usage of the cost signal in the reward function is further
explained in section 3.3.3.
Figure 3.10: Block diagram from Matlab Simulink showing the energy production and
storage modelling of the system.
26
Implementation of data driven control for district heating power plant to provide grid support
==PAGE:35==
Figure 3.11: The Subsystem calculating fuel costs of the system
3.3.2
RL Agent
The RL agent is effectively the controller which it is attempted to train and have learned
the behaviour of the environment in order to optimally control the DHP. The central in- and
outputs of the RL agent are the reward signal it receives, the actions it can take, and the
observations it sees. How the agent learns is governed by the chosen RL algorithm.
Deep Q Learning algorithm
In this project a DQN algorithm will be utilized, which was described in section 2.1.6. The
DQN algortihm was chosen for it’s known strength with large state-spaces. Furthermore
it’s a well documented algorithm with many studies utilizing it for various RL applications
and projects [10] [9]. Most famously in the 2015 article ”Human-level control through deep
reinforcement learning” by Mnih et. al.[11] the DQN algorithm was trained to play a variety
of computer games, and shown to perform at or better than human-level given the same
time to train and learn the games. In 2020 Kurte et al. [9] utilized the DQN algorithm to
implement electricity pricing aware control in an HVAC system. Finally, the DQN algorithm
is pre-implemented in the Matlab RL toolbox enabling a quick setup with the environment.
It should be noted that all of these studies used very limited action spaces.
RL actions
The programmer of the RL agent is able to specify, what control actions the agent has
at its disposal. The actions define the set point of the straw- and electric boilers. Two
different actions-strategies will be tested:
1. Binary control - the RL agent outputs a 2x1 vector where value each can take either
a 0 denoting no output or 1 for full output, giving the agent a total of 4 control actions.
The control options are summarized in table 3.1.
2. Multilevel control - The RL agent outputs a 2x1 vector, where each value can take
five different values which in the following computational blocks will be interpreted
as indicated in table 3.2. As an example, the vector [1,4] orders a setpoint of the
electric boilers at 600 kW, and 4500 kW from the straw boiler. This means the agent
has a total of 25 different control actions to choose from.
The maximal load of the straw boiler is here considered to be 90% of the 5MW rating, as
that is the optimal set point for the boiler as explained in section 2.2.
Table 3.1: Binary control set points
Load [%]
Load electric
boiler [kW]
Load straw
boiler [kW]
Control signal
0
0
0
0
100
2400
4500
1
Implementation of data driven control for district heating power plant to provide grid support
27
==PAGE:36==
Figure 3.12: Architecture of the DNN from an agent with 28 inputs and 4 outputs.
Table 3.2: Multilevel control set points
Load [%]
Load electric
boiler [kW]
Load straw
boiler [kW]
Control signal
0
0
0
0
25
600
1125
1
50
1200
2250
2
75
1800
3375
3
100
2400
4500
4
Neural network for function approximation
The deep neural network (DNN) used in this thesis consists of an input layer, 3 hidden
layers and an output layer. Figure 3.12 sketches the network with the first layer being an
input layer. This is followed by three hidden layers with 32 nodes per layer, each using
a rectified linear unit (ReLU) activation function and ending with the output layer. The
size of the input and output layers vary between agents, but the size of the hidden layers
remains the same. All layers are fully connected. In this project, the network architecture
will not be investigated further. The values used were hand-tuned during training and then
disregarded.
3.3.3
Reward function
While the agent governs what action it takes in a given state, it does this in an attempt
to maximise the reward and thus depends on the reward function to dictate what a ’good’
or ’bad’ behavior is. This also indicates that a reward function must be constructed with
a relatively high level of clarity in regard to the goal the programmer is trying to achieve.
For this project, the following are the requirements in prioritized order:
1. Heat must always be available to the consumer.
2. The system should not produce more heat than what can be contained in the accu-
mulation tank.
28
Implementation of data driven control for district heating power plant to provide grid support
==PAGE:37==
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
0
0.005
0.01
0.015
0.02
Reward penalty
Figure 3.13: Plot of the relative error term in the reward function
3. The system should provide grid support by scheduling the production to be as cheap
as possible.
Achieving one or two of these goals are relatively simple, but achieving all three is a
challenge, especially when they have to be balanced. At what cost is it accepted that no
heat is available in the network to the consumer? Is overproduction accepted, as long as it
maximizes the reward? For instance, if energy prices are negative, and the accumulation
tank is full, is it then allowed to keep producing? These are considerations that should all
be kept in mind when constructing the reward function.
Note that grid support i.e. peak shaving can be realized through the third listed require-
ment, as electricity prices will be lower when the load on the grid is lower, and higher
when the demand is higher during peak hours.
The reward function will be defined in terms of negative rewards. A reward function that
penalises relatively to the mistake is introduced in equation 3.2. R being the computed
reward, L being the fill level in the accumulation tank, Lmax the max allowable level, and
P the cost of the produced heat. It should be noted that L is bound between Lmin and
Lmax, thus negative or overflow values do not occur. The reason for penalizing relative
to the mistake is to not discourage the use of the outer bounds of the accumulation tank
completely but to encourage water levels that remain closer to the mean value of the tank.
Additionally −1 is added to the 10% and 90% cases, as otherwise there is a case for not
producing at all, reducing P to 0 and instead taking the relative penalty which is much
smaller. By penalizing based on fuel cost, the function incentivizes a reduction in cost
and thus indirectly the prediction of peak hours and adjustment of production ahead of
time.
R(L, Lmax, P) =





−P
if Lmax · 0.1 ≤L ≤Lmax · 0.9
−P −(L −Lmax · 0.9)2 −1
if Lmax · 0.9 < L
−P −(Lmax · 0.1 −L)2 −1
if Lmax · 0.1 > L
(3.2)
A plot of the error in regards to the accumulation tank level L is seen on figure 3.13. Note
it’s plotted against a relative value of 1, 0 being an empty tank and 1 being a full tank.
Another issue that would be discovered was the erratic on/off operation of the straw boiler
Implementation of data driven control for district heating power plant to provide grid support
29
==PAGE:38==
due to the RL agent trying to optimize for the immediate reward. This is a perfectly logical
solution by the RL agent, but practically turning the straw boiler on and off every hour will
not be a valid solution. For this reason, a start-up cost is added to the reward function
penalizing the start-up of the straw boiler and incentivizing continuous operation. The
reward is defined as:
R(As−1, As−0) =
{
−0.5
if As−1 = 0 & As0 = 1
0
otherwise
(3.3)
A being the value of the action (0 or 1 for off and on), S −1 being the previous state, and
S0 being the current state. During training and testing, the penalty for a start-up will be
evaluated and tested, and thus the penalty of −0.5 in equation 3.3 is only an example.
The total reward is then the sum of the two parts:
Rtotal = R(L, Lmax, P) + R(As−1, As−0)
(3.4)
Straw Price determination
The cost of straw is a critical variable in this setup. The goal of the controller is to optimize
production to realize grid support through economic optimization. This means that the
agent will favor whatever production is cheaper - electric or straw. The question of ’What
makes up peak hours’ is not explicitly defined other than when the electricity price is
cheaper compared to the straw price. As discussed in section 2.2, straw production is
ultimately the cheapest when not factoring in negative electricity prices. For this reason,
the straw-price will be artificially raised, allowing for the electric production to compete
with the straw production. An example of the artificial straw price plotted against the 2020
price signal can be seen on figure 3.14 showing the first 2000 time steps representing
January 1st until the latter half of March.
The straw price has been set at 172,9 DKK/MWh, effectively competing directly with the
spot price and disregarding any DSO or TSO tariffs. Furthermore, the straw price is well
balanced with the electricity price.
Further justification for raising the cost of straw is discussed in section 6.1.1.
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
1600
1800
2000
0
100
200
300
400
2020 price signal
Straw price
Figure 3.14: Moving Average Price Signal and artificial straw price.
30
Implementation of data driven control for district heating power plant to provide grid support
==PAGE:39==
3.3.4
Price Look Ahead Features
What is being attempted in this project could be formulated as a scheduling or an opti-
mization problem, however, a conventional optimization finds an optimal solution given
the entire data set, which is not the goal here. The goal is to create a controller that
intelligently optimizes the production based on the information presented to it. The inclu-
sion of observations that project or give an indication about the future price of electricity
should be included to enhance performance. Price look ahead (PLA) features have been
engineered in various ways as presented in section 1.2.
Two different PLA features will be tested here:
• Normalised-Price-Look-Ahead
• The next 24 hours price information as separate observations per hour
The Normalised-Price-Look-Ahead (NPLA) feature is inspired by Kurte et al.[9].
The
NPLA is a normalized value based on equation 3.5:
NPLA = P1 −P2
P1 + P2
(3.5)
P1 is the price at time step t and P2 is the price at time step t + n, with n being some
amount of time-steps in the future. This means the NPLA will take a value between 1
and 0, indicating either development of the price in a positive or negative direction, as
well as the relative size of this price change. In [9] additional price look ahead features
were presented as observations to the agent. However, this study used a square price
signal with only two possible values, simplifying the computation of these. The RL agent in
the study was given five different look ahead features as observations: The time to next
price change, Time duration of the new price, Current Price, Next price and the NPLA
feature. These features will no be included in this project. Furthermore, the study states
the authors are not entirely sure about the necessity of all five features, but they have
been included nonetheless. In this project, only the NPLA feature will be tested with the
time step n being set to 3.
Presenting the agent with electricity prices for the next 24 hours as 24 separate observa-
tions will be tested, as well as reducing the number of observations provided to the agent
to 0 to evaluate the importance of this type of PLA feature.
Moving forward, the normalized price look ahead feature will be referred to as NPLA, and
the sampling of future electricity prices will be referred to simply as PLA features.
3.4
Training methodology
Although the above sections give the impression that RL is a simple matter of implement-
ing and running the algorithm, once it’s running a great deal of tweaking and tuning must
be made. The diagram in figure 3.15 explains the implementation pipeline. After the agent
has been defined and the environment has been designed in Simulink, testing will reveal
potential weaknesses in the setup. During training, three factors are monitored:
• Convergence of the RL agent. During training, each episode will yield a cumulative
reward. This reward will vary from episode to episode as the agent is exploring and
optimizing itself.
• The cost of fuel. The cost will be used to quantify the performance of the agent,
relative to other agents trained in a similar environment.
Implementation of data driven control for district heating power plant to provide grid support
31
==PAGE:40==
• Actions relative to observed signals in the model.
N
Agent is
designed
Environment
(ENV)
is defined
Trained
Agent
Train agent
yes
No
simulation
Are the results
satisfactory?
Redefine ENV with
new data for
verification
Export agent for
application
yes
No
Verify results
Are the results
satisfactory?
START
Re-design ENV
and/or agent
Figure 3.15: RL development pipeline.
3.5
Simulation, verification and quantification of
performance
All agents were trained for 2000 time steps using the 2020 price data set until conver-
gence was reached, which was usually after 200-300 episodes. Afterwards the behavior
learned by the agent was evaluated by analyzing how the trained agent reacted to differ-
ent developments in the data. The type of plots used for evaluation is presented in chapter
5. Following, the agent was simulated on the 2021 price data set, and the cumulative fuel
cost was calculated, representing the total cost of energy production in that scenario. This
metric will be used to quantitatively evaluate performance and compare different agents,
regardless of behavior. It can be described as:
n
∑
t=1
Cet · Pet + Cst · Pst
(3.6)
Where t is the time-step, Ce is the costs related to electric production, Pe the electric
production, Cs the cost related to straw production, and Ps the straw production.
It should be noted that the 2021 price data set used for validation was lowered with 180
DKK in order to create scenarios where the relative lower and upper bound in the data
was in line with the 2020 data set used for training.
Furthermore, in order to evaluate ’how much’ information from the PLA features the agent
relies on, a test was performed, decreasing the number of observed future price steps from
24 to 0. As the NPLA vector relies on data from time-step t0 and t3, the NPLA feature will
be removed from time-step < t3.
An example of a training session can be seen in figure 3.16. It was found that leaving the
agent to train for longer did not yield any further improvement.
32
Implementation of data driven control for district heating power plant to provide grid support
==PAGE:41==
Figure 3.16: Total cumulative rewards (also known as episode rewards) during training,
starting with a large reward for the inexperienced agent at episode 0 and ending with a
trained agent after about 1.5 hours of training and 308 episodes.
Implementation of data driven control for district heating power plant to provide grid support
33
==PAGE:42==
34
Implementation of data driven control for district heating power plant to provide grid support
==PAGE:43==
4
Initial testing using simple price signals
In this chapter, an RL agent will be trained and tested against a simple two-value square
price signal as previous literature[9] has found working, as discussed in section 1.2. This
proves the trained agent’s ability to react as intended to simplified price signals and dif-
ferent reward functions. Further testing using relevant data will be shown in chapter 5.
All results will be presented as seen in figure 4.1 to facilitate easy comparison between
models.
The top graph shows the water level in the accumulation tank over time. As mentioned
in section 3.3.3, the highest priority for the system is to ensure water is always available
to the consumers, and for this reason, going below 10% capacity is penalized. The same
applies to going over 90%, and although overproduction theoretically is not an issue, in
practice it causes physical problems as stated in section 2.2.
The second graph presents the energy contribution from electric and straw boilers to the
system. The demand from the system is also displayed to indicate over- and underpro-
duction at different time steps. This allows for investigation of the agent’s strategy by
comparing this to the following graph detailing energy prices. Note the highest production
level for the straw boiler is 4.5 MW and 2.4 MW for the electric boilers.
The third graph is a reference showing the observed price of energy production using
straw and electricity.
In chapter 5, fuel costs and the average cost of electricity will be computed, allowing for
cost comparison across models and control strategies. While different signal processing
methods will be tested on the price signal, the fuel costs will be calculated using the actual
price signal, allowing for model comparison.
For each test, a single scenario consisting of 500 time steps will be presented. The agent
is evaluated against three additional scenarios to validate that the result in the first case is
not merely due to chance. These supplementary results will be provided as an appendix
to the extent deemed necessary and as providing additional value to the data analysis.
The results in the appendix mirror those presented unless otherwise specified.
4.1
Square price signal
An agent was trained using the DQN algorithm, restricted to binary control (0 or 100%
load) of the boilers and given all PLA features as discussed in section 3.3.4 as observa-
tions.
4.1.1
Reward function with no start-up cost
A simple square price signal data set was created where the electricity prices can take a
value of 0.01 or 1 (unitless value) with randomly distributed ”peak hours” taking the value
of 1. The straw price was kept constant at 0.2. Figure 4.1 shows time step 1 to 500 of
the simulation with the trained agent. Initially, the agent attempts to keep the water level
about 50% while almost constantly running the electric boilers and supplementing with
the slightly more expensive straw boiler as needed, as the electric boilers can’t keep up
with demand alone. As soon as the price increase take effect, the electric boilers are
deactivated and the straw boilers are used more aggressively. As demand decrease, it’s
noticed the agent allows for the water level to rise in the accumulation tank from hour
Implementation of data driven control for district heating power plant to provide grid support
35
==PAGE:44==
300-380 as the electric boilers run exclusively and supply slightly more water than the
system demands. The electric boiler is shut off during the price spike in this period, and
the straw boiler is again used to supplement supply. It is unclear if the agent is allowing
for the increased level in the water tank due to it foreseeing the price increase at hour
380, or simply allowing the increase as it cheaper to produce using electricity while still
maintaining the bounds of the water tank.
The straw boiler behaves erratically by switching on/off rapidly. This happens as the RL
agent will always prioritize optimizing the immediate reward higher than the state two
steps in the future, as was governed by the γ term in equation 2.3 shown in section 2.1.1.
Although it’s a logically valid solution, this will not be a valid solution for a real life appli-
cation. Ramp up/down time for the boiler is about 2 hours (not modelled in this project)
and further more it is inefficient to turn the boiler on and off frantically. This problem will
be addressed in the following section.
36
Implementation of data driven control for district heating power plant to provide grid support
==PAGE:45==
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
0%
50%
100%
Waterlevel
90% fill level
max fill level
10% fill level
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
Straw Output
Electric Output
DHN Demand
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Electricity Price
Straw Price
Figure 4.1: Square signal emphasizing avoiding using electricity when it’s expensive.
Model reference: DHNV81219
Implementation of data driven control for district heating power plant to provide grid support
37
==PAGE:46==
4.1.2
Reward function with start-up cost
To mitigate the issue of unstable operation of the straw boiler, a term was added to the
reward function, penalizing the start-up of the boiler and thus encouraging continuous
operation. The added term is explained in section 3.3.3. The same test data was used
as in the previous simulation without a start-up cost. The results are presented in figure
4.3. It’s noticed the operation of the straw boiler is much less erratic, and the straw boiler
no longer turns on and off for single hours. For this test, the start-up cost was set to 0.5,
which was chosen after a series of tests that are further elaborated later in section 4.1.3.
However, for further testing with correct price signals, the start-up cost will be reduced
to 0.17 as it should be scaled relative to the bounds of the straw and electricity price for
optimal performance.
4.1.3
Reward function testing
During the development of the RL model, several different reward functions were tested
until the reward function presented in section 3.3.3 was selected and used for the results
presented in this project. As a case study of how the agent responds to different penal-
ties for straw boiler start-up, three different iterations of the reward function with different
penalties will be tested in addition to the two (0 and 0.5 start-up cost) shown in figure
4.1 and 4.3 respectively. The start-up cost of the straw boiler will be varied between 0.1,
0.3, 0.5, and 0.7 recalling that the reward function is based on normalized data. This test
used square binary electricity price signals as the price input. The number of times the
boiler is switched on within the first 500 time steps is plotted in figure 4.2. Further analysis
can be made from the plots in appendix A detailing the agent’s behavior. It is shown that
the number of start-ups decreases with the increase in penalty until -0.5, after which it
again increases. This indicates that reducing the number of start-ups cannot simply be
solved by increasing the penalty but that an optimal penalty value exists. The value of the
start-up penalty should be considered in the context of other components of the rewards
function, where all inputs are normalized values between 0 and 1.
0
-0.1
-0.3
-0.5
-0.7
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
Figure 4.2: Relation between the increased penalty for the start-up of the straw boiler
plotted against the number of times the straw boiler turned on.
38
Implementation of data driven control for district heating power plant to provide grid support
==PAGE:47==
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
0%
50%
100%
Waterlevel
90% fill level
max fill level
10% fill level
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
Straw Output
Electric Output
DHN Demand
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Electricity Price
Straw Price
Figure 4.3: Implementing a start-up cost in the reward function shows a less erratic oper-
ation of the straw boiler. A penalty of -0,5 was used. Model reference: DHNV812110
Implementation of data driven control for district heating power plant to provide grid support
39
==PAGE:48==
40
Implementation of data driven control for district heating power plant to provide grid support
==PAGE:49==
5
Results
This chapter contains several key sections. Firstly, a comparison is presented, evaluating
agents with applied MVA, FFT, and no pre-processing techniques on the price signal. Sec-
ondly, an examination was conducted to assess the impact of various price look-ahead
features. Based on these investigations, an agent is designed and tested incorporating
the start-up cost in regard to the straw boiler in the reward function. Thirdly, additional
efforts to reduce the number of start-ups by the straw boiler are made through the imple-
mentation of a multi-level control agent capable of adjusting the boiler loads in increments
of 25%. Finally, the chapter concludes with a summary of the achieved results.
5.1
Investigation of price signal pre-processing
In this section, the two different price signal pre-processing strategies, MVA (Moving Av-
erage) and FFT(fast Fourier Transform), will be tested and evaluated against a baseline
which is the non-pre-processed price signal. The three agents (one per strategy) were
trained over the first 2000 time steps of the 2020 price data and then evaluated on the first
500 time steps of the 2021 data. For these tests, the agents were given all PLA features
as discussed in section 3.3.4, which includes the NPLA value as well as the electricity
price for the coming 24 hours. The future price values were sampled from the processed
data set in the case of the MVA and FFT tests, while the actual price used for the cost
calculations were sampled from the non-processed signal. The 2021 data set used for the
evaluation was offset by subtracting 180 DKK from all data points compared to what was
presented in section 3.2.3 figure 3.4. This was done as the straw-price would otherwise
be lower than the electricity price, thus giving the agent no incentive to use electricity.
Two main metrics will be used to quantify the results: Total fuel cost (denoted ”Total cost”)
and the average cost per MWh of electricity consumed (denoted El. cost pr MWh). While
the overall goal is to provide grid support using the electric boilers, this should be done
while minimizing fuel costs. Grid support was in section 3.3.3 defined as reducing the load
in the grid during the hours when the electricity is most expensive while producing when
it is cheapest, relative to the straw price. For this reason, the average cost per MWh of
electricity consumed should be kept relatively low. That is lower than straw, but also high
enough that production is actually realized, as too low will mean the agent refrains from
adequately using the electric boilers.
Table 5.1 shows an overview of the tests and results while figure 5.1, 5.2 and 5.3 show
the behavior of the non-pre processed base signal, MVA and FFT signal, respectively.
Compared to a straw boiler-only case, where electricity was not utilized, all three agents
reduce total fuel costs by 10-12%.
Implementation of data driven control for district heating power plant to provide grid support
41
==PAGE:50==
Table 5.1: Comparison of the three price signal processing strategies: No processing,
MVA and FFT (Fast Fourier Transformation). The total costs all lie within 1% of each other,
while the processed cases with 10% reduce the average cost of electricity. Compared to
a straw-only case, all three agents show a reduction in fuel cost of about 10-12%
Scenario
Summer
El Prod.
[MWh]
El cost
[DKK]
El. cost
pr MWh
[DKK]
Straw
prod.
[MWh]
Straw
cost
[DKK]
Total cost
[DKK]
Non
904,8
129.479
143,10
576
99.634
229.113
MVA
592,8
77.532
130,79
886,50
153.343
230.875
FFT
609,60
80.366
131,83
873
151.008
231.374
Straw only
0
0.00
0.00
1480
256.004
256.004
Price signal with no pre-processing
Inspecting the results in table 5.1 reveals that the overall cost savings are negligible be-
tween the three cases. The total cost in each case differs by less than 1%, which falls
within the expected margin of random variation. Closer inspection of table 5.1 reveals that
the agent is seemingly unable to schedule the electric boilers intelligently. The price per
produced MWh of heat energy using electricity is by far the most expensive compared to
the FFT and MVA case, with an average price per MWh of 143,1 DKK, which is 10% more
expensive when compared to the MVA signal case. These results are in accordance with a
visual inspection of figure 5.1. There is no clear pattern of electric production when prices
are low or high. Inspecting time steps 170-190 and 332-340, where prices are exception-
ally high, the agent applies electric production, which would go against the conventional
thinking of optimizing for reduced costs. This indicates that the agent does not grasp how
the electricity prices will develop. The total costs of the unprocessed price signal agent
and the processed agents being almost identical seems to be purely incidental.
Price signal with MVA processing
The MVA case was the best performer among the three, with FFT being 0,2% more ex-
pensive, which is again considered within the margin of random variation. Inspecting
figure 5.2, it’s noticed that the agent seems to be dividing the electricity price up into three
sections which are: cheaper, about the same as straw, and expensive. At hours 50-80,
when the price is lower, the electric boiler is used at every time step with the straw boiler
supplementing and stopping again as the electricity price rises. This happens again at
time step 130-140, 260-270, 390-300, 470-500. The agent also shuts the electric boilers
entirely off when the price is too high, as seen at time steps 150-165, 175-190, 320-340,
and 345-355. The agent prefers a more significant variation between the straw price and
electricity price to make a decision on utilizing electricity or not, while when the two are
hovering around the same value as seen from time steps 0-50, 70-120, and 200-250 the
agent uses the two boilers to complement each other seemingly on equal pricing terms.
Price signal with FFT processing
The FFT, although performing slightly worse than the MVA case, shows interesting and
desired behavior. Analyzing figure 5.3, the previously discussed erratic, logically correct,
although practically not feasible, on/off switching of the straw boiler and even the electric
boiler has been reduced. How this happens cannot be explained with certainty as it’s
not possible to inspect the agent to see how the weighting of the function approximator
comes to be, but a theory could be the more repetitive nature of the FFT signal makes it
easier for the agent to predict behavior. It could also be a case of ’lucky’ training. While
acknowledging the potential of the FFT signal denoising technique, this thesis will not
investigate this approach further.
42
Implementation of data driven control for district heating power plant to provide grid support
==PAGE:51==
5.1.1
Summary
MVA and FFT methods for pre-processing the price signal were tested. Total fuel costs
for all three agents was within 1% of each other. Despite not being able to reduce the
total fuel costs, the FFT and MVA showed improved performance in relation to the cost
pr MWh electricity consumed with a 10% reduction in electricity costs pr. unit electric
energy consumed. Moving forward, only the MVA processed will be considered as the
price signal observed by the agent. Furthermore, compared to the straw-only case, total
costs are ∼10% lower for all three agents.
Implementation of data driven control for district heating power plant to provide grid support
43
==PAGE:52==
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
0%
50%
100%
Waterlevel
90% fill level
max fill level
10% fill level
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
0
1
2
3
4
Straw Output
Electric Output
DHN Demand
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
0
200
400
600
Electricity Price
Straw Price
Figure 5.1: Plot showing the behaviour of the agent when trained on and exposed to
non-processed price data. The agent is mostly focussed on keeping the waterlevel within
bounds.
44
Implementation of data driven control for district heating power plant to provide grid support
==PAGE:53==
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
0%
50%
100%
Waterlevel
90% fill level
max fill level
10% fill level
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
0
1
2
3
4
Straw Output
Electric Output
DHN Demand
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
100
200
300
400
500
Electricity Price
Straw Price
Figure 5.2: Plot showing an agent trained on an MVA signal derived from the original signal
with an averaging window of 10 samples. The agent clearly shows to be knowledgeable
about when the electricity is cheapest.
Implementation of data driven control for district heating power plant to provide grid support
45
==PAGE:54==
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
0%
50%
100%
Waterlevel
90% fill level
max fill level
10% fill level
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
0
1
2
3
4
Straw Output
Electric Output
DHN Demand
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
-200
0
200
400
600
Electricity Price
Straw Price
Figure 5.3: Plot showing an agent trained on Data processed using FFT. Interestingly, the
agent seems to be less erratic with operation of both the straw and electric boilers.
46
Implementation of data driven control for district heating power plant to provide grid support
==PAGE:55==
5.2
Investigation of PLA features
In the previous section 5.1 all PLA and NPLA features were active during the training of
the agents. In this section, the importance of these features will be tested and analyzed.
First, a base case with no PLA or NPLA features enabled will be tested. This will give
an indication of the performance of the agent when it has no knowledge of the future.
Second, the NPLA feature alone will be tested, followed by a range of tests adding future
price information from timestep t + 1, t + 2...t + n in increments of two. This serves to test
the value of providing the agent with additional information, but also if the change in the
size of state space has an impact on the performance of the agent.
Testing followed the same procedure as in section 5.1, that is the agent was tested for
2000 timesteps on the 2020 dataset and then evaluated on 500 time steps of the 2021
dataset.
The numeric results can be seen in table 5.2 which also includes figure references. While
the key metrics ”Electric energy consumed”, ”Average price pr unit electric energy con-
sumed” and ”Total fuel cost” are also plotted in figure 5.4. The plots for the tests that are
not shown in this section have been included in appendix B.
When comparing the agents, the reduction in PLA features does not make a noticeable
difference in the fuel costs of the system. Inspecting the behavior of the agents does not
reveal any dominating traits as to the control strategy in correlation with the reduction of
PLA features as indicated on figure 5.4, where no clear trends are seen. The average
price pr unit of electricity consumed is roughly the same across all tests, and the same is
the case with the total fuel cost. The amount of electric energy consumed varies greatly
between tests and no obvious trend is shown.
The base case with no PLA or NPLA features, and thus no insights into the future, is shown
in figure 5.5. It is noticeable how it has the highest fuel cost of the 12 tests, while also
showing the lowest average electricity price pr consumed electric energy unit and lowest
electricity utilization. This indicates that the agent is not able predict future electricity
prices, and thus only utilizes the electric energy, when the electricity is absolutely cheapest
to guard against a sudden price spike. This behavior is as would be expected from an
agent with no knowledge of the future.
The NPLA has been shown to play a key role in the agent’s behavior. The case of no PLA
features, but the NPLA feature enabled is shown on figure 5.6. The figure shows the agent
clearly avoids electric energy consumption during the most expensive hours - for instance
at hour 150-200 and 325-375 - while running at full load throughout the hours of low prices
such as hour 50-80, 90-110, 120-130 and 450-500. Erratic on/off behavior is shown at
periods when the straw and electricity prices are relatively similar such as hour 40-50
and 230-240. The advantageous behavior from the NPLA feature may also be correlated
with the use of the MVA price signal. In order for the NPLA feature to contribute correct
information in regard to trends in future electricity prices, the NPLA feature relies heavily
on clean data that indicate clear trends.
5.2.1
Summary
The results give an indication that the PLA features are of no relevance to the agent.
Conversely, they don’t hurt the performance either. Only for this reason, they will be left
on for the rest of the tests. This also indicates the agent is able to effectively sort through
observations, applying those deemed relevant and disregarding all others.
Implementation of data driven control for district heating power plant to provide grid support
47
==PAGE:56==
Case A
Case B
Case C
Case D
Case E
Case F
Case G
Case H
Case I
Case J
Case K
Case L
Case M
Case N
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
El. Energy consumed [MWh]
Average price pr unit El. Energy Consumed [DKK/MWh]
Total fuel cost [KDKK]
Figure 5.4: Summary of the data shown in table 5.2. The purpose of this figure is to
investigate a potential correlation in the data. No clear correlation is shown between the
amount of PLA features provided to the agent and the result.
48
Implementation of data driven control for district heating power plant to provide grid support
==PAGE:57==
Table 5.2: Overview of RL agent results. The associated figures can be seen in appendix B .No pattern is seen from the reduction of PLA
features.
Case
Price signal
NPLA
PLA
Reward Function
Control
type
Figure
El production
[MWh]
El. cost
[DKK]
El. cost pr.
MWh [DKK]
Straw prod.
[MWh]
Straw cost
[DKK]
Total cost
[DKK]
A
MVA
no
1,23
without start,up cost
binary
B.1
487,2
59187,67
121,49
994,50
172.024,73
231212,40
B
MVA
yes
1,23
without start,up cost
binary
5.2
592,8
77532,54
130,79
886,50
153.343,31
230875,85
C
MVA
yes
1,21
without start,up cost
binary
B.2
523,2
62686,70
119,81
954,00
165.019,20
227705,90
D
MVA
yes
1,19
without start,up cost
binary
B.3
655,2
82090,52
125,29
828,00
143.224,21
225314,73
E
MVA
yes
1,17
without start,up cost
binary
B.4
592,8
71323,27
120,32
891,00
154.121,71
225444,98
F
MVA
yes
1,15
without start,up cost
binary
B.5
765,6
97946,02
127,93
715,50
123.764,40
221710,42
G
MVA
yes
1,13
without start,up cost
binary
B.6
403,2
46775,23
116,01
1071,00
185.257,40
232032,63
H
MVA
yes
1,11
without start,up cost
binary
B.7
290,4
30922,92
106,48
1192,50
206.274,00
237196,92
I
MVA
yes
1,9
without start,up cost
binary
B.8
427,2
55829,18
130,69
1048,50
181.365,44
237194,62
J
MVA
yes
1,7
without start,up cost
binary
B.9
415,2
47864,50
115,28
1066,50
184.479,01
232343,51
K
MVA
yes
1,5
without start,up cost
binary
B.10
504
62992,16
124,98
976,50
168.911,16
231903,32
L
MVA
yes
1,3
without start,up cost
binary
B.11
592,8
76884,26
129,70
882,00
152.564,92
229449,18
M
MVA
yes
1
without start,up cost
binary
B.12
801,6
106753,54
133,18
675,00
116.758,87
223512,41
N
MVA
yes
0
without start,up cost
binary
5.6
758,4
97506,11
128,57
724,50
125.321,18
222827,29
O
MVA
no
0
without start,up cost
binary
5.5
218,4
21785,49
99,75
1264,50
218.728,28
240513,77
P
MVA
yes
1,23
with start,up cost
binary
5.7
914,4
133789,76
146,31
558,00
96.520,66
230310,42
Q
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
0
0
0
1480
256004,63
256004,63
Implementation of data driven control for district heating power plant to provide grid support
49
==PAGE:58==
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
0%
50%
100%
Waterlevel
90% fill level
max fill level
10% fill level
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
0
1
2
3
4
Straw Output
Electric Output
DHN Demand
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
100
200
300
400
500
Electricity Price
Straw Price
Figure 5.5: RL agent with no PLA features. Model reference: DHNV812165
50
Implementation of data driven control for district heating power plant to provide grid support
==PAGE:59==
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
0%
50%
100%
Waterlevel
90% fill level
max fill level
10% fill level
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
0
1
2
3
4
Straw Output
Electric Output
DHN Demand
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
100
200
300
400
500
Electricity Price
Straw Price
Figure 5.6: RL agent with no PLA features, but with the NPLA feature enabled. Model
reference: DHNV812165
Implementation of data driven control for district heating power plant to provide grid support
51
==PAGE:60==
5.3
Investigation of start-up cost on MVA price signal
Having investigated the relevant PLA features, price signal processing methods and mod-
ified the reward function to stear the behaviour of the agent, the three factors will now be
combined. The reward for start-up of the straw-boiler was set at 0.17 remembering that
the reward is calculated based on normalized values between 0 and 1. The penalty was
determined as trade-off between a penalty that is large enough that it encourages less
erratic operation of the straw boiler, but also small enough that the agent does not favor
utilizing relatively more expensive electric energy during peak price hours compared to a
start-up of the straw boiler.
The numeric results are shown in table 5.3 and the behaviour of the agent is shown in
figure 5.7. The fuel costs are in line with the previous test that did not utilize a start-up
cost for the straw boiler, but interestingly the system has the highest utilization of electric
energy along with the highest average electricity price pr. consumed MWh. This indicates
that the agent is acting on the before mentioned trade-off, applying the electric boilers even
when the electricity price is higher than the straw price as to avoid turning on the straw
boiler. The fuel cost savings are ∼11% for both the agent with and without the start-up
cost compared to the straw boiler only case.
Inspecting figure 5.7 it’s clear that the agent is utilizing more of the water tanks range
compared to previous agents who either keep the water level near the top or the bottom
of the water tank. This behaviour was also observed when adding the start-up cost to the
square signal in section 4.1.2. Inspecting hour 0-100 a large price dip is seen at hour 50-
75. If not considering demand or tank level, the assumption would be that an agent that
is able to anticipate this price change would reduce production in anticipation of this, and
thus allowing for the electric boilers to fill the thank. However, due to the demand being
higher than what the electric boilers can provide, the agent has to make a compromise.
At time step 50, just before the price change, the water level is low, incentivizing the agent
to turn on the straw boiler to cope with demand. As the the straw boiler is already turned
on, the best strategy for the agent is to keep it on until the water tank is filled, and then
trying to offset the drainage from the tank by running the electric boilers. As the tank is
drained at hour 65, the straw boiler is once again turned on and the cycle repeats. This en-
capsules the issue of the the two objectives - less erratic operation of the straw boiler, and
optimizing fuel costs - fighting each other as the agent tries to use the most economically
feasible fuel. The electric boilers cannot supply enough to cover demand, and thus the
agent needs to strategically use the straw boiler despite what possible gain running the
electric boilers might produce. This could be addressed by allowing multi-level control of
the boilers, as opposed to the binary 0% / 100% used in this scenario, the idea being that
Table 5.3: RL agent with and without start-up cost compared to the base case. Both the
case with and without start-up costs reduce cost with ∼11% compared to the straw-only
case, while the case without offers the lowest electricity cost per MWh, but also the lowest
electricity consumption of the two.
Scenario
[Winter]
Control
type
El Prod.
[MWh]
El cost
[DKK]
El. cost
pr MWh
[DKK]
Straw
prod.
[MWh]
Straw
cost
[DKK]
Total cost
[DKK]
With
binary
914,4
133.789,8
146,3
558,0
96.520,7
230.310,4
Without
binary
592,8
77.532,5
130,8
886,5
153.343,3
230.875,9
Straw only
binary
0,0
0,0
0,0
1.480,00
256.004,6
256.004,6
52
Implementation of data driven control for district heating power plant to provide grid support
==PAGE:61==
if there is no cost to simply lowering the output of the straw boiler, the electric boilers can
be used without conflict caused by not meeting demand.
5.3.1
Scenarios with lower demand
A different approach to testing this statement is by running a scenario with lower demand.
As shown in section 3.2.3 summers have lower demand levels compared to the winter
(used in the previous tests). In figure 5.8 and 5.9 a scenario from July 21’st to August
10’th 2021 are shown, the first without and the second with a start-up cost included in
the reward function. The summer of 2021 was also a summer of comparatively higher
electricity prices, and interestingly also see cases of negative electricity prices.
Figure 5.8 shows regular short bursts of use of the straw boiler, keeping the water level
relatively low in the accumulation tank. Though it is possible for the agent to fill the tank
to a higher level, the utilized operation favors an immediate higher reward of zero cost,
resulting in this ”burst” operation of the straw boiler which is a valid solution. Operation
of the electric boiler is only achieved during hours of electricity price that is close to that
of straw for instance at hour 80-95, and when it’s negative at hour 170-190 and 420-430.
During the latter two intervals, it’s noticed the agent does fill the tank to higher levels of
70-95% compared to the otherwise favored lower levels in the 30-50% range indicating
the agent does to some extent recognize the value of filling the tank, while the price is
low. Ideally, the agent would fill the tank to the 90% level during these low price hours.
Again realizing this erratic on/off operation of the straw boiler isn’t a practically valid so-
lution, the reward function penalising start-up of the straw boiler is introduced, and the
results are shown in figure 5.9. The electric boilers are predominantly used in this sce-
nario, although the electricity price is much higher than the straw price. This happens as
the demand is low, the run time of the straw boiler would be relatively short if used. Short
enough that the start-up cost does not justify its operation compared to consuming elec-
tricity albeit more expensive. Interestingly, the agent is still able to detect relative price
drops and increases. Hour 75-100 and 170-180 shows increased utilization of the straw
boiler, when the price is low, while avoiding operation during local price spikes such as
hour 215-230 and 345-355.
Table 5.4 compares fuel costs, average electricity price, fuel consumption etc. As this is
a new scenario compared to previously, a new base case utilizing only straw is shown
as well. The agent with a start-up cost performs worse compared to the unrestricted
agent with total fuel costs increasing to 34% compared to the base case, and an average
electricity price above that of straw. The agent with no start-up cost did again prove
to decrease the total fuel costs by 9% Additional summer scenarios were run to further
verify these results and the points shown in the compared scenarios. These results show
a similar pattern, with the agent with start-up cost having higher total fuel costs compared
to the base case, while the agent with no start-up cost either reduced fuel costs or were
in-line with the straw-only case. The plots and quantitative results from these additional
scenarios can be seen in appendix C.
Implementation of data driven control for district heating power plant to provide grid support
53
==PAGE:62==
Table 5.4: Results of the summer scenarios with an RL agent trained with and without
start-up cost penalty. A base case of straw boiler only operation is also included for com-
parison. The case with the start-up cost offers 9% savings over the base case, while the
agent with a start-up cost increases the costs by 34% compared to the base case.
Scenario
Summer
Control
type
El Prod.
[MWh]
El cost
[DKK]
El. cost
pr MWh
[DKK]
Straw
prod.
[MWh]
Straw
cost
[DKK]
Total cost
[DKK]
Without
binary
72,0
7.915,9
109,9
261,0
45.146,8
53.062,6
With
binary
304,8
65.729,6
215,6
31,5
5.448,7
71.178,3
Straw only
binary
0,0
0,0
0,0
335,0
57.946,99
57.946,99
54
Implementation of data driven control for district heating power plant to provide grid support
==PAGE:63==
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
0%
50%
100%
Waterlevel
90% fill level
max fill level
10% fill level
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
0
1
2
3
4
Straw Output
Electric Output
DHN Demand
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
100
200
300
400
500
Electricity Price
Straw Price
Figure 5.7: RL agent with a start-up cost for the straw fired boiler of 0.17. All PLA features
are enabled for the agent. The agent shows similar performance to the agents with no
start-up cost. Model reference: DHNV812165
Implementation of data driven control for district heating power plant to provide grid support
55
==PAGE:64==
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
0%
50%
100%
Waterlevel
90% fill level
max fill level
10% fill level
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
0
1
2
3
4
Straw Output
Electric Output
DHN Demand
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
0
200
400
Electricity Price
Straw Price
Figure 5.8: RL agent with no start-up cost tested on data from July 21’st
August 10’th.
Model Reference DHNV812165
56
Implementation of data driven control for district heating power plant to provide grid support
==PAGE:65==
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
0%
50%
100%
Waterlevel
90% fill level
max fill level
10% fill level
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
0
1
2
3
4
Straw Output
Electric Output
DHN Demand
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
0
200
400
Electricity Price
Straw Price
Figure 5.9: RL agent with start-up cost (0.17) tested on data from July 21’st August 10’th
2021. Model Reference DHNV812165
Implementation of data driven control for district heating power plant to provide grid support
57
==PAGE:66==
5.4
Multi level control
Trying to further mitigate the issues of rapid on/off status change of the straw boiler, mul-
tilevel control as explained in section 3.3.2 will be implemented in the RL agent testing
the reward function with and without the start-up penalty. The results are shown in table
5.6, figure 5.10 and 5.11.
There are no clear indications of a particular behavior in terms of reaction to price changes
for either agent. The agent without start-up costs on figure 5.6 seems most concerned
about keeping the water tank level within bounds, while dropping the level from ∼80%
to 50% at hour 30 and 230 with the only commonality being the lowered price signals.
However, it is at these times it’s desirable to have the agent run the electric water boilers
at full capacity to reduce costs. Furthermore, the agent seems to be relying heavily on a
few actions through out the scenario listed in table 5.5.
Table 5.5: The most used actions by the multi level agent. In total the agent had 25
different actions at its disposal.
Set point for electric boilers
Set point for straw boiler
75%
50%
0%
0%
75%
75%
25%
75%
The agent with the start-up cost on figure 5.11 seems favors 100% or 0% operation of the
straw boiler, while generally keeping the electric boilers active. There is no clear indication
of adapting to high or low electricity prices. During the large price spikes at hours 160,
180, and 325, there is no sign of winding down electric production. The price spike at
hour 350 incentivizes little change to the operation of the boilers.
Both agents do reduce overall fuel costs by 5.5% and 4.2% respectively, although it could
be argued that this happens by chance rather than by a well-trained agent who is un-
derstanding the environment. The Multilevel agents were tested against three further
scenarios, who vary in results from reducing to increasing fuel costs. These results can
be seen in table 5.7 with the plots of these scenarios being shown in appendix D.
Furthermore, the average electricity price incurred by the two agents is the highest when
compared to previous agents, further undermining the objective of grid support.
Table 5.6: Multilevel control results. The reduction in fuel cost is 5.5% and 4.2% re-
spectively, but is the worst compared to other tested agents. The average consumed
electricity cost is also the highest of all tested agents, reducing the performance in terms
of grid support.
Scenario
Control
type
El Prod.
[MWh]
El cost
[DKK]
El. cost
pr MWh
[DKK]
Straw
prod.
[MWh]
Straw
cost
[DKK]
Total cost
[DKK]
With
multi-level
767,4
119.246,1
155,4
709,9
122.791,4
242.037,5
Without
multi-level
531,6
80.830,7
152,1
947,3
163.851,6
244.682,3
Straw Only
multi-level
0,0
0,0
0,0
1480,0
256.004,6
256.004,6
58
Implementation of data driven control for district heating power plant to provide grid support
==PAGE:67==
Table 5.7: Overview of additional scenarios testing the performance of the multi-level
control action agent. The results are mixed with some scenarios showing improvement
and some deterioration in performance. Negative percentage values are better, positive
denotes worse performance. The plots of the scenarios are presented in appendix D.
Agent
Scenario
Total fuel cost
[DKK]
Difference compared
to straw-only case
Multi-level without Start-up cost
1
244.682,3
-4%
Multi-level with start-up cost
1
242.037,5
-5%
Straw-only
1
256.004,6
n/a
Multi-level without Start-up cost
2
238.345,5
1%
Multi-level with start-up cost
2
239.984,5
2%
Straw-only
2
235.247,5
n/a
Multi-level without Start-up cost
3
263.763,7
-5%
Multi-level with start-up cost
3
260.649,0
-6%
Straw-only
3
278.699,2
n/a
Multi-level without Start-up cost
4
191.969,9
-7%
Multi-level with start-up cost
4
182.812,7
-12%
Straw-only
4
206.706,4
n/a
5.4.1
Summary of Multilevel control agents
Neither agent are performing to the level seen by the binary (on/off) action agents. Further-
more, the agents do not solve the challenges presented in previous sections of rapid/on
changes in straw boiler operation nor the issue of utilizing expensive electricity rather than
turning on the straw boiler.
Implementation of data driven control for district heating power plant to provide grid support
59
==PAGE:68==
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
0%
50%
100%
Waterlevel
90% fill level
max fill level
10% fill level
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
0
1
2
3
4
Straw Output
Electric Output
DHN Demand
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
100
200
300
400
500
Electricity Price
Straw Price
Figure 5.10: RL agent with multi-level control. No Penalty for straw boiler start-up. Model
Reference DHNV812167
60
Implementation of data driven control for district heating power plant to provide grid support
==PAGE:69==
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
0%
50%
100%
Waterlevel
90% fill level
max fill level
10% fill level
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
0
1
2
3
4
Straw Output
Electric Output
DHN Demand
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
100
200
300
400
500
Electricity Price
Straw Price
Figure 5.11: RL agent with multi-level control. Penalty for straw boiler start-up is -0.17.
Model Reference DHNV812167
Implementation of data driven control for district heating power plant to provide grid support
61
==PAGE:70==
5.5
Summary
Two signal processing methods were tested and compared against the base signal. Total
fuel costs remained approximately the same, with the MVA and FFT cases performing
better in terms of scheduling the electric boiler and reducing the price pr. consumed unit
of electric energy by 10% compared to the base signal case. The agent favored a rapid
on/off pattern of actions for the boilers which is considered a logically valid solution, but
practically invalid. All three cases reduced fuel costs ∼10% compared to the straw-only
case.
The influence of PLA and NPLA features on the agent was tested. The results con-
cluded the NPLA and the price information from timestep t+1 did increase performance,
but adding further PLA features did not improve performance.
An attempt was made to address the problem of rapid on/off control by implementing a
penalty for straw boiler start-up. It was successful in reducing the number of start-ups,
but it also increased the average price of consumed electric energy, thus reducing the
contribution towards the grid support goal. As it was evident this action was caused by
the two objectives counteracting each other, alternative summer scenario with a lower
demand were tested. These gave inconclusive results.
Further attempts at mitigating the on/off control issue were made by implementing a multi-
level control agent which was capable of controlling the output from boilers at 0, 25, 50, 75
and 100%. Despite reducing fuel costs by roughly 5% compared to the straw-only case,
the observed actions did not indicate behavior that supported the goal of grid support. The
results also showed the highest procurement cost of electric energy among any tested
agent.
62
Implementation of data driven control for district heating power plant to provide grid support
==PAGE:71==
6
Discussion and future work
In the previous chapters, multiple RL agents were developed, implemented, and tested.
While certain versions of these agents did prove to reduce fuel costs with ∼10% com-
pared to a straw-boiler-only scenario, and the solution is logically valid, certain practical
considerations render it invalid or impractical. This chapter will outline and discuss these
limitations, propose potential solutions, and ultimately offer recommendations for future
improvements and suggestions for further research.
6.1
Practical limitations
This section will discuss and evaluate practical limitations found within the found solution
in its current form.
6.1.1
Validity of scenarios
Due to limitations in data availability from BOEF, except from what could be gathered from
a on-site vist to ØDHP[15] and various internal memos from BOEF[25], the data that the
agent was trained on and validated against was specifically generated for this study. While
the data set holds value, as it was derived from actual data and scaled to the approximate
size of the DHN, it was nevertheless synthetically composed. This entails that evaluation
of this RL agent should not be seen strictly in the context of ØDHP specifically, but serves
as a proof-of-concept for this type of system in general. The demonstrated success of
the RL agent and the utilization of the dataset does warrant further investigation, thereby
incentivizing potential industry partners (such as BOEF) to provide data for more precise
modeling and simulation of their system.
Fuel pricing
Operational costs were not considered in this thesis, and the production of heat was strictly
based on the fuel costs. As mentioned in section 2.2 a memo by BOEF[15] outlines the
economic background for the decision to not utilize the electric boilers in daily operation
of ØDHP as being too high fuel costs. In fact, the DSO and TSO fees alone were 176
DKK/MWh in 2020, with the cost of producing 1 MWh of heat energy for the system using
straw were 160,5 DKK/MWh resulting in the water boilers very rarely being feasible, as
the electricity costs must be negative to achieve feasibility. In this thesis, the cost of
fuel for straw production was raised slightly and fixed at 173 DKK/MWh, while any DSO
and TSO fees were disregarded. This was done mainly to ensure the electricity price
signal was leveled with the straw price, thus creating high and low price hours throughout
the scenario. For the same reason, the electricity prices from the 2021 validation were
reduced by 180 DKK/MWH as otherwise there would be little to no case for the electric
boilers.
An argument for the price adjustment can be found by considering potential CO2 emis-
sions fees. Currently, the danish government considers biomass a renewable energy
source and thus it is not subject to emissions fees. However, in recent years several stud-
ies and researchers have questioned this status[30][31] and a memo from the DEA[32]
also confirms that even accounting for CO2 recaptured by the regrown organic mate-
rial, the production of biomass does contribute to an overall emission of CO2 with emis-
sions from production, transportation etc. estimated around 1.6-2.7 kg CO2 pr. MWh
(based on wood-based biomass production). CO2 emissions from energy production uti-
lizing biomass vary greatly. A report released by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Implementation of data driven control for district heating power plant to provide grid support
63
==PAGE:72==
Change (IPCC)[33] estimates the carbon emissions from biomass in electric energy pro-
duction to be anywhere from 130g to 420g CO2 equivalents pr kWh. Note that this number
is from electricity production, while this thesis considers district heating production. Con-
sidering an emissions fee ranging from 375-750 DKK per ton of CO2 taking effect from
2025[34], and assuming optimal plant operation, a careful estimation suggests a fee rang-
ing from 6-488 DKK/MWh of energy produced when firing with straw. It is important to
acknowledge that these calculations involve significant uncertainties, both politically and
technically, and should not be regarded as a definitive reference but rather as an illustra-
tive example. If straw or the production thereof were to lose its carbon-neutral status, it
becomes essential to consider the financial implications associated with biomass-fueled
heat production.
6.1.2
Operation of boilers
One practical issue that was revealed in chapter 4 was the rapid and erratic on/off oper-
ation of the straw boiler in particular. The straw boiler relies on a combustion process for
heat generation, and thus naturally can neither start-up or shut down instantaneously. It
was attempted to mitigate this issue with modifications to the reward function as well as
to the possible control actions the agent has at its disposal. This did not improve the op-
eration meaningfully, rather it simply contributed to an increased reliance on the electric
boilers, and the straw boiler continued to be utilized in short bursts. Furthermore, inspect-
ing the figures from ØDHP’s SCADA system in section 2.2, the straw boiler is shown to
have a ramp-up and ramp-down time of approximately 2 hours, which should also be
considered.
Implementation of ramp up/down time
The simple solution would be implementing a ramping limitation for the boiler in the sim-
ulated environment, however, this might lead to instabilities in the control signals as the
agent attempt to switch the set point of the boiler but does not see a response in the obser-
vations until several time steps later. This could potentially be mitigated by investigating
the influence of different hyperparameters on the agent. An investigation into these was
considered outside of the scope of this project. It will be discussed further in section 6.2.
The ramp-up/down constraint could also be implemented through the reward function.
This could be formulated either as a reduction in cost pr cycle/time step the straw boiler is
kept within continuous operation or as a penalty whenever the control signal is changed
within a given time frame from last change. The challenge of implementing this constraint
in the reward function is balancing the weight of this principle relative to the other require-
ments. As it was shown in section 4 the behavior of such reward function changes and
the weighting of these have a significant impact on the agent’s behavior. As more terms
and constraints are added to the reward function, it will also become increasingly diffi-
cult to dissect what part of the reward function is causing what behavior, making further
development of the agent cumbersome.
Mitigation of erratic control
The same potential solutions and challenges apply to the issue of erratic control. When
attempting to mitigate the problem through the reward function it was shown that for certain
scenarios it was more feasible for the agent to simply supply the system using expensive
electricity. This happens as the agent didn’t value the cost saving of the straw boiler to
outweigh the start-up cost. If the agent was able to run the straw boiler for longer, the
start-up cost could be offset. One solution would be increasing the size of the storage
tank, or decreasing the set-point of the straw boiler. The latter was attempted without
success, but could also be caused by the chosen algorithm and/or hyperparameters not
being appropriate for the presented problem.
64
Implementation of data driven control for district heating power plant to provide grid support
==PAGE:73==
6.2
RL agent parameters and algorithms
When approaching an RL problem, the first consideration is the selection of RL algorithm.
There is an abundance standardized algorithms to choose from, which can be applied
directly or modified for the specific problem. As Matlab already has various algorithms
implemented and the focus of this project was not an investigation in the algorithm it-
self, it was decided to apply one of the pre-implemented options which include Q, DQN,
SARSA, PPO, TRPO, DDPG and TD3. Many aspects of the problem contribute to the
selection of an algorithm, especially the type of action space - discrete or continuous.
A continuous action space allows for the agent to freely select a value within a defined
range as a control action, whereas the discrete action space only allows for the selection
of discrete values as was the case in this thesis. For a problem as the control of ØDHP
a continuous action space seems obvious, but continuous action-space algorithms such
as the Deep Deterministic Policy Gradient (DDPG) are known to suffer from worse con-
vergence properties compared to discrete action-space algorithms such as DQN[18]. For
this reason, a common approach to RL problems is to discretize the action-space, so a
discrete action space algorithm can be used, as was the case in this thesis. Adding to
choice of DQN, the algorithm has seen widespread use in the examined research papers
including those presented in section 1.2 and is known to generally perform well given
good feature engineering for its observations and a well defined reward function[11].
Hyperparameters
The tuning of hyperparameters was in section 1.3 deemed to be outside of the scope
of this project. However, optimizing them correctly could prove to contribute positively
towards the performance of the agent and thus does warrant further analysis. The hy-
perparameters are the parameters that control how the NN and RL agent is learning as
introduced in section 2.1. The most relevant are: ϵ the exploration rate that controls the
amount exploration vs exploitation the agent will perform (equation 2.7), ϵ −decay, and γ
defines the weight of future steps (equation 2.3). It is also possible to control the number
of steps to include by the state-action-value function. Finally, the size and type of neural
network should also be explored.
The results for multilevel control shown in section 5.4 could indicate that the action-space
was not fully explored, or that the agent wasn’t fully aware of the long term implications
of the different possible actions. Changing the value for ϵ and the ϵ −decay and thus
increasing the amount of exploration done by the agent could positively affect this issue
as more areas of the state space would be explored. This will lead to longer training time
as the amount of episodes required for convergence will increase, resulting in a higher
demand for computational resources.
The impact of increasing γ and the number of steps the algorithm looks ahead should also
be investigated. Logically, this should incentivize the agent to strongly prioritize long-term
rewards over short-term gains as was the exact problem causing the erratic boiler control
pattern. Again, it should be noted this comes with a great performance penalty in terms
of computing time.
6.3
Grid support
Beyond intelligent control and economic optimization of the DHP, one of the contributions
of this thesis is to intelligently provide grid support using electric boilers. Traditional grid
support is activated whenever the frequency of the grid deviates too far from the normal 50
Hz, which is in contrast to the proposed controller in this project which relies on electricity
pricing information. The risk of the frequency deviating from 50 Hz is increased during
heavy loading of the grid also known as peak hours. FCR works autonomously in the
Implementation of data driven control for district heating power plant to provide grid support
65
==PAGE:74==
sense that the reserve measures the voltage at the point of connection of the grid, and
if this deviates to far from the set point, an up or down-regulation is activated. For the
electric boilers in ØDHP, a simple implementation would be to either constantly run the
electric boilers and offer a down-regulation reserve, or keep them constantly switched off
and offer an up-regulation reserve. In contrast, a more active control scheme as proposed
in this thesis could yield greater overall benefits.
In this thesis, a simplification was made by defining peak hours as those when the elec-
tricity price exceeded the straw price. The results in section 5.1 show that the agent was
generally successful in up and down-regulating the electric production based on the re-
ceived price signal. However, The agent did not react to all changes equally, and as seen
in the summer scenarios in section 5.3.1, if the economic gain is not large enough, it may
deviate from the desired behaviour. In a grid support setting, this behavior is not tolerable.
If the agent is to provide FCR services, the behavior must be consistent.
To include FCR services in the proposed controller, the comparison of a dynamic and a
static price signal applied in this project, will not suffice. Incorporating the frequency as
an observation to the agent during training and modifying the reward function to prioritize
FCR functionality should be explored. This will require careful balancing of the different
goals in the reward function, which can be a challenging endeavor as shown in section
5.3. Here, it was demonstrated that an excessive bias towards one goal over another
can direct the agent towards a control action that ensures the first goal, while partly or
completely preventing the realization of the other.
6.4
Future work
The work presented in this thesis is a proof-of-concept aiming at exploring if a model-free
control approach such as RL can be realized to provide grid support through the control
of a DHP with a mixed generator setup. Understanding the possibilities and limitations
of such a control implementation, any further work should attempt to solve the discussed
issues but also investigate the potential economic foundation for an RL-based controller.
Mitigation of control issues
As presented in the previous section, the erratic on/off operation of in particular the straw
boiler should be reduced to a minimum. Solving this issue will be paramount in realizing
a controller that can be implemented in a live environment. Potential solutions include
a modified reward function, larger accumulation tank and alternative training algorithms
which allow for a continuous action space such as DDPG.
Modelling of physical environment
The system presented in this thesis did not include any losses or other physical aspects
of the mechanics involved with operating a DHP. Further research and additional data
should be procured from BOEF detailing the layout and design parameters of ØDHP to
help realize a simulation environment that is more true to the actual case.
Investigation of economic foundation for grid support using FCR og mFFR
A thorough feasibility study should be conducted, detailing the possible implementations
of different ancillary services such as FCR and mFFR. One of the main selling points of a
novel control solution is the potential financial gain. If there is no economic advantage to
the proposed controller, the industry will be hesitant to adopt it.
On-site testing and implementation
Control signals and sensors at the ØDHP must analysed and incorporated into the con-
troller design for a live implementation. Furthermore, control systems ensuring the trained
agent does not take inadvertent actions in case of unforeseen circumstances such as un-
66
Implementation of data driven control for district heating power plant to provide grid support
==PAGE:75==
usual observations and missing and/or incorrect data in the observations must be imple-
mented.
Computational resources
Adding computational resources to these further studies should also be considered. Train-
ing and simulation times grew with increased complexity, and especially if hyperparameter
tuning with the added need for training and increased episode count is attempted, further
computational capacity will be needed to keep running times down.
Implementation of data driven control for district heating power plant to provide grid support
67
==PAGE:76==
68
Implementation of data driven control for district heating power plant to provide grid support
==PAGE:77==
7
Conclusion
This thesis aimed to develop and implement a reinforcement learning-based controller
for grid-support in a mixed fuel district heating plant, taking inspiration from the Østerlars
District Heating Plant[25]. Grid support was achieved by comparing a dynamic electricity
price signal with a static straw price signal, defining peak hours based on the relative cost
of electricity compared to straw.
Initially, the developed RL agent was tested using simple dynamic price signals, limited
to values of 0.01 and 1, and control actions were limited to 0% or 100% load. The agent
exhibited desirable behavior by prioritizing electric production during low electricity price
periods and straw production during high electricity price periods. However, the agent did
not demonstrate anticipation of price changes, as production changes occurred parallel
to price signal changes rather than in anticipation. This was attributed to the high demand
level requiring straw boiler participation and limitations of the accumulation tank size not
allowing for further pre-heating capacity.
Additionally, a start-up cost for the straw boiler was implemented to reduce the number
of short start-ups of the straw-boiler. While the economic performance of the agent was
reduced, the solution was enhanced to become more practically applicable.
Further experiments involved testing different signal processing methods on real-life dy-
namic price signals to enhance agent performance. MVA and FFT methods did not reduce
fuel costs compared to the non-processed signal, but agents using processed signals had
10% lower average procurement costs of electricity. The MVA processed signal was se-
lected for further testing.
Various price look-ahead features were evaluated for their impact on performance. Nor-
malized Price Look Ahead (NPLA) features and simple future electricity prices were tested
as features. Beyond the electricity price for the next time step and the NPLA, providing
any further information showed no impact on performance, positive or negative.
Using an agent trained on an MVA signal with all price look ahead features enabled and in-
corporating a start-up cost for the straw-boiler, fuel costs were reduced by 11% compared
to the straw-boiler only case, representing the current operation of the ØDHP. The sav-
ings were comparable to the agent with no start-up cost implemented, but the agent with
the start-up cost had a 12% higher average procurement cost of electricity. This happens
as the start-up cost entices the agent to utilize expensive electric production under certain
circumstances. This behavior was confirmed by testing the agent in multiple scenarios.
Finally, further attempts to mitigate rapid on/off control of the straw-boiler were attempted
by increasing the state space to allow control of the generators in 25% increments. This
yielded unfavorable results, as the agent struggled to optimize operation within the ex-
panded state space.
In summary, a logically valid solution was achieved, reducing fuel costs by 11% com-
pared to the current operation mode of the ØDHP. However, the solution includes practi-
cal limitations that render it invalid or impractical, necessitating further considerations and
modifications if the controller is to be implemented in a live environment.
Implementation of data driven control for district heating power plant to provide grid support
69
==PAGE:78==
70
Implementation of data driven control for district heating power plant to provide grid support
==PAGE:79==
List of Figures
1.1
Overview of the generator setup at ØDHP. The accumulation tank can re-
ceive and supply both warm and cold water from the DHN.
. . . . . . . . .
2
2.1
Summary of the RL process . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2
Illustration of the GPI process, ultimately ending in an optimal policy. Figure
from [19], page 11
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
2.4
Basic model of a neural network with two hidden layers. Figure from [23]
. 12
2.3
Illustrating a function approximator. Figure from [21] . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
2.5
A print-out of the SCADA HMI system controlling the Østerlars heating
plant. The print was made on the 3’rd of September 2022 and as such
the main functionality of the DHN is to supply hot water for the consumers
rather than heating. It’s noted only the straw-fired boiler is operating. . . . . 15
2.6
A printout of setpoints and loading of the straw-fired boiler. The top fig-
ure shows 24 hours of operation, the bottom figure shows the previous 96
hours. Red is the loading of the boiler, green is the output effect, blue is the
output of the washer (energy reclamation system), and yellow is the setpoint. 16
2.7
SCADA HMI overview of the Gudhjem pumping station, which is located
after a 10 km transmission pipe from the Østerlars heating plant
. . . . . . 17
3.1
Heat demand of a single family home on Bornholm in 2011 on an hourly
basis through a year. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
3.2
Heat demand in highlighted weeks. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
3.3
Average heat demand and standard deviation through a week, sampled
hourly. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
3.4
Spot price in DK-2 for 2020, 2021 and 2022 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
3.5
Electricity price in DKK/MWh in January, April, July and October 2020 . . . 21
3.6
Average Electricity price and standard deviation through a week in 2020,
sampled hourly. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
3.7
Comparison of the original price signal and a Moving Average of that signal.
Window size is 10. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
3.8
The original price signal, and the signal after FFT processing as well as the
PSD spectrum with the thresholds used. The X-axis has been altered for
the three price plots to better show how the signals correlate. . . . . . . . . 23
3.9
An overview of the general model used for RL testing. Note that not all later
shown results are a direct result of simulation on the displayed model, as
signals and the manipulation of these vary across testing. . . . . . . . . . . 25
3.10 Block diagram from Matlab Simulink showing the energy production and
storage modelling of the system. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
3.11 The Subsystem calculating fuel costs of the system
. . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
3.12 Architecture of the DNN from an agent with 28 inputs and 4 outputs. . . . . 28
3.13 Plot of the relative error term in the reward function . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
3.14 Moving Average Price Signal and artificial straw price. . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
3.15 RL development pipeline. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
3.16 Total cumulative rewards (also known as episode rewards) during training,
starting with a large reward for the inexperienced agent at episode 0 and
ending with a trained agent after about 1.5 hours of training and 308 episodes. 33
Implementation of data driven control for district heating power plant to provide grid support
71
==PAGE:80==
4.1
Square signal emphasizing avoiding using electricity when it’s expensive.
Model reference: DHNV81219
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
4.2
Relation between the increased penalty for the start-up of the straw boiler
plotted against the number of times the straw boiler turned on.
. . . . . . . 38
4.3
Implementing a start-up cost in the reward function shows a less erratic
operation of the straw boiler. A penalty of -0,5 was used. Model reference:
DHNV812110 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
5.1
Plot showing the behaviour of the agent when trained on and exposed to
non-processed price data. The agent is mostly focussed on keeping the
waterlevel within bounds.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 44
5.2
Plot showing an agent trained on an MVA signal derived from the original
signal with an averaging window of 10 samples. The agent clearly shows
to be knowledgeable about when the electricity is cheapest. . . . . . . . . . 45
5.3
Plot showing an agent trained on Data processed using FFT. Interestingly,
the agent seems to be less erratic with operation of both the straw and
electric boilers. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46
5.4
Summary of the data shown in table 5.2. The purpose of this figure is to
investigate a potential correlation in the data. No clear correlation is shown
between the amount of PLA features provided to the agent and the result. . 48
5.5
RL agent with no PLA features. Model reference: DHNV812165
. . . . . . 50
5.6
RL agent with no PLA features, but with the NPLA feature enabled. Model
reference: DHNV812165
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51
5.7
RL agent with a start-up cost for the straw fired boiler of 0.17. All PLA
features are enabled for the agent. The agent shows similar performance
to the agents with no start-up cost. Model reference: DHNV812165
. . . . 55
5.8
RL agent with no start-up cost tested on data from July 21’st August 10’th.
Model Reference DHNV812165 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 56
5.9
RL agent with start-up cost (0.17) tested on data from July 21’st
August
10’th 2021. Model Reference DHNV812165 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 57
5.10 RL agent with multi-level control. No Penalty for straw boiler start-up. Model
Reference DHNV812167
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 60
5.11 RL agent with multi-level control. Penalty for straw boiler start-up is -0.17.
Model Reference DHNV812167 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 61
A.1 RL agent with a 0.1 start-up cost reward function. The boiler is switched
on a total of 68 times. Model reference: 812110 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 77
A.2 RL agent with a 0.3 start-up cost reward function. The boiler is switched
on a total of 39 times. Model reference: 812110 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 78
A.3 RL agent with a 0.7 start-up cost reward function. The boiler is switched
on a total of 31 times. Model reference: 812110 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 79
B.1 RL agent acting on the MVA processed signal. NPLA is active. PLA fea-
tures: hour 1-23 (all). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 81
B.2 RL agent acting on the MVA processed signal. NPLA is active. PLA fea-
tures: hour 1-21. No start-up cost of the straw boiler. . . . . . . . . . . . . . 82
B.3 RL agent acting on the MVA processed signal. NPLA is active. PLA fea-
tures: hour 1-19. No start-up cost of the straw boiler. . . . . . . . . . . . . . 83
B.4 RL agent acting on the MVA processed signal. NPLA is active. PLA fea-
tures: hour 1-17. No start-up cost of the straw boiler. . . . . . . . . . . . . . 84
72
Implementation of data driven control for district heating power plant to provide grid support
==PAGE:81==
B.5 RL agent acting on the MVA processed signal. NPLA is active. PLA fea-
tures: hour 1-15. No start-up cost of the straw boiler. . . . . . . . . . . . . . 85
B.6 RL agent acting on the MVA processed signal. NPLA is active. PLA fea-
tures: hour 1-13. No start-up cost of the straw boiler. . . . . . . . . . . . . . 86
B.7 RL agent acting on the MVA processed signal. NPLA is active. PLA fea-
tures: hour 1-11. No start-up cost of the straw boiler. . . . . . . . . . . . . . 87
B.8 RL agent acting on the MVA processed signal. NPLA is active. PLA fea-
tures: hour 1-9. No start-up cost of the straw boiler.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . 88
B.9 RL agent acting on the MVA processed signal. NPLA is active. PLA fea-
tures: hour 1-7. No start-up cost of the straw boiler.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . 89
B.10 RL agent acting on the MVA processed signal. NPLA is active. PLA fea-
tures: hour 1-5. No start-up cost of the straw boiler.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . 90
B.11 RL agent acting on the MVA processed signal. NPLA is active. PLA fea-
tures: hour 1-3. No start-up cost of the straw boiler.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . 91
B.12 RL agent acting on the MVA processed signal. NPLA is active. PLA fea-
tures: hour 1. No start-up cost of the straw boiler. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 92
C.1 RL agent acting on summer scenario 1 with no start-up cost of the straw-
boiler and all PLA and NPLA Features enabled. Model reference DHNV812165. 95
C.2 RL agent acting on summer scenario 3 with no start-up cost of the straw-
boiler and all PLA and NPLA Features enabled. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 96
C.3 RL agent acting on summer scenario 4 with no start-up cost of the straw-
boiler and all PLA and NPLA Features enabled. Model reference DHNV812165. 97
C.4 RL agent acting on summer scenario 1 with a start-up cost of the straw-
boiler and all PLA and NPLA Features enabled. Model reference DHNV812165. 98
C.5 RL agent acting on summer scenario 3 with a start-up cost of the straw-
boiler and all PLA and NPLA Features enabled. Model reference DHNV812165. 99
C.6 RL agent acting on summer scenario 4 with a start-up cost of the straw-
boiler and all PLA and NPLA Features enabled. Model reference DHNV812165.100
D.1 RL agent with multi-level control. No Penalty for straw boiler start-up. Sce-
nario 2. Model Reference DHNV812167 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 101
D.2 RL agent with multi-level control. No Penalty for straw boiler start-up. Sce-
nario 3. Model Reference DHNV812167 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 103
D.3 RL agent with multi-level control. No Penalty for straw boiler start-up. Sce-
nario 4. Model Reference DHNV812167 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 104
D.4 RL agent with multi-level control. Penalty for straw boiler start-up: 0.17.
Scenario 2. Model Reference DHNV812167 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 105
D.5 RL agent with multi-level control. Penalty for straw boiler start-up: 0.17.
Scenario 3. Model Reference DHNV812167 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 106
D.6 RL agent with multi-level control. Penalty for straw boiler start-up: 0.17.
Scenario 4. Model Reference DHNV812167 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 107
Implementation of data driven control for district heating power plant to provide grid support
73
==PAGE:82==
List of Tables
3.1
Binary control set points . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
3.2
Multilevel control set points . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
5.1
Comparison of the three price signal processing strategies: No processing,
MVA and FFT (Fast Fourier Transformation). The total costs all lie within
1% of each other, while the processed cases with 10% reduce the average
cost of electricity. Compared to a straw-only case, all three agents show a
reduction in fuel cost of about 10-12% . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42
5.2
Overview of RL agent results. The associated figures can be seen in ap-
pendix B .No pattern is seen from the reduction of PLA features. . . . . . . 49
5.3
RL agent with and without start-up cost compared to the base case. Both
the case with and without start-up costs reduce cost with ∼11% compared
to the straw-only case, while the case without offers the lowest electricity
cost per MWh, but also the lowest electricity consumption of the two. . . . . 52
5.4
Results of the summer scenarios with an RL agent trained with and without
start-up cost penalty. A base case of straw boiler only operation is also
included for comparison. The case with the start-up cost offers 9% savings
over the base case, while the agent with a start-up cost increases the costs
by 34% compared to the base case. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 54
5.5
The most used actions by the multi level agent. In total the agent had 25
different actions at its disposal. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 58
5.6
Multilevel control results. The reduction in fuel cost is 5.5% and 4.2% re-
spectively, but is the worst compared to other tested agents. The average
consumed electricity cost is also the highest of all tested agents, reducing
the performance in terms of grid support.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 58
5.7
Overview of additional scenarios testing the performance of the multi-level
control action agent. The results are mixed with some scenarios showing
improvement and some deterioration in performance. Negative percentage
values are better, positive denotes worse performance. The plots of the
scenarios are presented in appendix D.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 59
C.1 Overview of the tested summer scenarios with and without start-up cost and
compared to straw-only scenarios. In general, the scenarios with start-up
costs have considerably higher fuel costs. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 94
D.1 Overview of the Winter scenarios with a multi level control, with and without
start-up cost and compared to straw-only scenarios. Both the agent with
and without start-up cost have roughly the same fuel costs as the straw
only scenarios. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 102
74
Implementation of data driven control for district heating power plant to provide grid support
==PAGE:83==
Bibliography
[1]
Renewable Energy Empowering European and Indian Communities. 2020. URL:
https://reempowered-h2020.com/the-project/.
[2]
Torben Jørgensen. Description of Østerlars Heatplant and DHN. Dec. 2020.
[3]
Jiming Liu Chao Yu and Shamim Nemati. “Reinforcement Learning in Healthcare:
A Survey”. In: (Apr. 2020). URL: https://arxiv.org/pdf/1908.08796.pdf.
[4]
Caiming Xiong Romain Paulus and Richard Socher. “A deep Reinforced Model for
Abstractive Summarization”. In: (Nov. 2017). URL: https://arxiv.org/pdf/1705.
04304.pdf.
[5]
Jiwei Li; Will Monroe; Alan Ritter; Michel Galley; Jianfeng Gao and Dan Jurafsky.
“Deep Reinforcement Learning for Dialogue Generation”. In: (Sept. 2016). URL:
https://arxiv.org/pdf/1606.01541.pdf.
[6]
Tom Taulli. “Reinforcement Learning: The Next Big Thing For AI (Artificial Intelli-
gence)?” In: (June 2020). URL: https://www.forbes.com/sites/tomtaulli/2020/
06/05/reinforcement-learning-the-next-big-thing-for-ai-artificial-intelligence/?sh=
19830a4262ba.
[7]
Bornholms Regions Kommune. Bornholms Energistrategi 2040. 2020. URL: https:
/ / www . brk . dk / Indflydelse - Politik / Politikker / Documents / Energistrategi % 5C %
202040%5C%20Bornholms%5C%20Regionskommune.pdf.
[8]
EnergiNet. SCENARIERAPPORT 2022 – 2032, Forventninger til fremtidens Syste-
mydelser. Tech. rep. EnergiNet, 2022.
[9]
Kuldeep Kurte; Jeffrey Munk; Kadir Amasyali; Olivera Kotevska; Borui Cui; Teja Ku-
ruganti; Helia Zandi. “Electricity Pricing aware Deep Reinforcement Learning Based
Intelligent HVAD Control”. In: (Nov. 2020).
[10]
F. Ruelens; B. J. Claessens; S. Quaiyum; B. De Schutter; R. Babuška; R. Belmans.
“Reinforcement Learning Applied to an Electric Water Heater: From Theory to Prac-
tice”. In: (Dec. 2016).
[11]
Volodymyr Mnih; Koray Kavukcuoglu; David Silver; Alex Graves; Ioannis Antonoglou;Daan
Wierstra; Martin Riedmiller. “Playing Atari with Deep Reinforcement Learning”. In:
(Dec. 2013).
[12]
Paulo Lissa; Conor Deane; Michael Schukat; Federico Seri; Marcus Keane; Enda
Barrett. “Deep reinforcement learning for home energy management system con-
trol”. In: (2021).
[13]
Data provided by DTU. 2022.
[14]
Market data for Media. 2023. URL: https://www.nordpoolgroup.com/en/market-
data-for-media/.
[15]
Ditlev Lundegaard Bredahl Leth. Torben Jørgensen. Interview with Torben Jørgensen,
Project Manager at BOEF (Bornholms Energi og Forsyning. 2022.
[16]
Wouter van Heeswijk. Why Hasn’t Reinforcement Learning Conquered The World
(Yet)? Nov. 2021. URL: https://towardsdatascience.com/why-hasnt-reinforcement-
learning-conquered-the-world-yet-459ae99982c6.
[17]
Renu Khandelwal. Supervised, Unsupervised, and Reinforcement Learning. July
2022. URL: https://arshren.medium.com/supervised-unsupervised-and-reinforcement-
learning-245b59709f68.
[18]
Richard S. Sutton and Andrew G. Barto. Reinforcement Learning: An Introduction.
The MIT Press, 2020. URL: https://web.stanford.edu/class/psych209/Readings/
SuttonBartoIPRLBook2ndEd.pdf.
Implementation of data driven control for district heating power plant to provide grid support
75
==PAGE:84==
[19]
David Silver. UCL Course on RL, Model-Free Controll. 2015. URL: https://www.
davidsilver.uk/wp-content/uploads/2020/03/control.pdf.
[20]
Christopher John Cornish Hellaby Watkins. “Learning from Delayed Rewards”. PhD
thesis. Cambridge, UK: King’s College, May 1989. URL: http://www.cs.rhul.ac.uk/
~chrisw/new_thesis.pdf.
[21]
David Silver. UCL Course on RL, Value Function approximation. 2015. URL: https:
//www.davidsilver.uk/wp-content/uploads/2020/03/FA.pdf.
[22]
Simeon Kostadinov. Understanding Backpropagation Algorithm. Aug. 2019.
[23]
F. Li; J. J.; Serena Y. CS231n Convolutional Neural Networks for Visual recognition.
2020. URL: https://cs231n.github.io/convolutional-networks/.
[24]
MathWorks. Deep Q-Network (DQN) Agents. Tech. rep. MathWorks, 2019. URL:
https://se.mathworks.com/help/reinforcement-learning/ug/dqn-agents.html#mw_
46a25460-7793-4671-9169-1075b5ea3f3e.
[25]
Hans Henrik Ipsen. Notat: Elkedler Østerlars Halmvarmeværk. Nov. 2018.
[26]
LJK/DGR. Notat, BORNHOLM – OFTE STILLEDE SPØRGSMÅL SAMT SVAR.
2023. URL: https://energinet.dk/media/5ddbqsw4/bornholm- ofte- stillede- sp%
5C%C3%5C%B8rgsm%5C%C3%5C%A5l-samt-svar.pdf.
[27]
Michiyuki Yagi; Shunsuke Manag. “The spillover effects of rising energy prices fol-
lowing 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine”. In: (Dec. 2022). URL: https://www.
sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0313592622002338?via%5C%3Dihub.
[28]
B. P. Lathi. Signal Processing and Linear Systems. Oxford University Press, 2010.
[29]
EASE - European Associaton for Storage of Energy. Thermal Energy Storage. Tech.
rep. 2016. URL: https://ease-storage.eu/wp-content/uploads/2016/03/EASE_TD_
HotWater.pdf.
[30]
Mary S. Booth; Brendan Mackey; Virginia Young. “It’s time to stop pretending burn-
ing forest biomass is carbon neutral”. In: (2020). URL: https://onlinelibrary-wiley-
com.proxy.findit.cvt.dk/doi/pdf/10.1111/gcbb.12716.
[31]
Gilbert Ahamer. “Why Biomass Fuels Are Principally Not Carbon Neutral”. In: (Dec.
2022). URL: https://www.mdpi.com/1996-1073/15/24/9619.
[32]
Anders Tærø Nielsen. Recalculation of CO2 emissions from biomass use in district
heating and combined heat and power plants in Denmark with 2021 input data.
Tech. rep. Remixed Nature ApS, 2023. URL: https://ens.dk/sites/ens.dk/files/
Basisfremskrivning/nielsen_2023_-_recalculation_of_co2_emissions_from_biomass_
use_in_district_heating_and_combined_heat_and_power_plants_in_denmark_
with_2021_input_data.pdf.
[33]
Schlömer S.; T. Bruckner; L. Fulton; E. Hertwich; A. McKinnon; D. Perczyk; J. Roy;
R. Schaeffer; R. Sims; P. Smith; and R. Wiser. Annex III: Technology-specific cost
and performance parameters. In: Climate Change 2014: Mitigation of Climate Change.
Contribution of Working Group III to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovern-
mental Panel on Climate Change [Edenhofer, O., R. Pichs-Madruga, Y. Sokona, E.
Farahani, S. Kadner, K. Seyboth, A. Adler, I. Baum, S. Brunner, P. Eickemeier, B.
Kriemann, J. Savolainen, S. Schlömer, C. von Stechow, T. Zwickel and J.C. Minx
(eds.) Tech. rep. IPCC, 2014. URL: https://www.ipcc.ch/site/assets/uploads/2018/
02/ipcc_wg3_ar5_annex-iii.pdf.
[34]
Finansministeriet. Regeringen indgår bred aftale om en ambitiøs grøn skattereform.
June 2022. URL: https://fm.dk/nyheder/nyhedsarkiv/2022/juni/regeringen-indgaar-
bred-aftale-om-en-ambitioes-groen-skattereform/.
76
Implementation of data driven control for district heating power plant to provide grid support
==PAGE:85==
A
Reward function testing - extended
This appendix contains the figures referenced in chapter 4.
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
0%
50%
100%
Waterlevel
90% fill level
max fill level
10% fill level
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
Straw Output
Electric Output
DHN Demand
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Electricity Price
Straw Price
Figure A.1: RL agent with a 0.1 start-up cost reward function. The boiler is switched on a
total of 68 times. Model reference: 812110
Implementation of data driven control for district heating power plant to provide grid support
77
==PAGE:86==
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
0%
50%
100%
Waterlevel
90% fill level
max fill level
10% fill level
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
Straw Output
Electric Output
DHN Demand
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Electricity Price
Straw Price
Figure A.2: RL agent with a 0.3 start-up cost reward function. The boiler is switched on a
total of 39 times. Model reference: 812110
78
Implementation of data driven control for district heating power plant to provide grid support
==PAGE:87==
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
0%
50%
100%
Waterlevel
90% fill level
max fill level
10% fill level
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
Straw Output
Electric Output
DHN Demand
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Electricity Price
Straw Price
Figure A.3: RL agent with a 0.7 start-up cost reward function. The boiler is switched on a
total of 31 times. Model reference: 812110
Implementation of data driven control for district heating power plant to provide grid support
79
==PAGE:88==
B
Investigation on PLA features -
extended
This appendix contains the figures referenced in section 3.3.4.
80
Implementation of data driven control for district heating power plant to provide grid support
==PAGE:89==
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
0%
50%
100%
Waterlevel
90% fill level
max fill level
10% fill level
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
0
1
2
3
4
Straw Output
Electric Output
DHN Demand
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
100
200
300
400
500
Electricity Price
Straw Price
Figure B.1: RL agent acting on the MVA processed signal. NPLA is active. PLA features:
hour 1-23 (all).
Implementation of data driven control for district heating power plant to provide grid support
81
==PAGE:90==
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
0%
50%
100%
Waterlevel
90% fill level
max fill level
10% fill level
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
0
1
2
3
4
Straw Output
Electric Output
DHN Demand
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
100
200
300
400
500
Electricity Price
Straw Price
Figure B.2: RL agent acting on the MVA processed signal. NPLA is active. PLA features:
hour 1-21. No start-up cost of the straw boiler.
82
Implementation of data driven control for district heating power plant to provide grid support
==PAGE:91==
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
0%
50%
100%
Waterlevel
90% fill level
max fill level
10% fill level
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
0
1
2
3
4
Straw Output
Electric Output
DHN Demand
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
100
200
300
400
500
Electricity Price
Straw Price
Figure B.3: RL agent acting on the MVA processed signal. NPLA is active. PLA features:
hour 1-19. No start-up cost of the straw boiler.
Implementation of data driven control for district heating power plant to provide grid support
83
==PAGE:92==
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
0%
50%
100%
Waterlevel
90% fill level
max fill level
10% fill level
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
0
1
2
3
4
Straw Output
Electric Output
DHN Demand
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
100
200
300
400
500
Electricity Price
Straw Price
Figure B.4: RL agent acting on the MVA processed signal. NPLA is active. PLA features:
hour 1-17. No start-up cost of the straw boiler.
84
Implementation of data driven control for district heating power plant to provide grid support
==PAGE:93==
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
0%
50%
100%
Waterlevel
90% fill level
max fill level
10% fill level
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
0
1
2
3
4
Straw Output
Electric Output
DHN Demand
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
100
200
300
400
500
Electricity Price
Straw Price
Figure B.5: RL agent acting on the MVA processed signal. NPLA is active. PLA features:
hour 1-15. No start-up cost of the straw boiler.
Implementation of data driven control for district heating power plant to provide grid support
85
==PAGE:94==
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
0%
50%
100%
Waterlevel
90% fill level
max fill level
10% fill level
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
0
1
2
3
4
Straw Output
Electric Output
DHN Demand
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
100
200
300
400
500
Electricity Price
Straw Price
Figure B.6: RL agent acting on the MVA processed signal. NPLA is active. PLA features:
hour 1-13. No start-up cost of the straw boiler.
86
Implementation of data driven control for district heating power plant to provide grid support
==PAGE:95==
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
0%
50%
100%
Waterlevel
90% fill level
max fill level
10% fill level
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
0
1
2
3
4
Straw Output
Electric Output
DHN Demand
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
100
200
300
400
500
Electricity Price
Straw Price
Figure B.7: RL agent acting on the MVA processed signal. NPLA is active. PLA features:
hour 1-11. No start-up cost of the straw boiler.
Implementation of data driven control for district heating power plant to provide grid support
87
==PAGE:96==
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
0%
50%
100%
Waterlevel
90% fill level
max fill level
10% fill level
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
0
1
2
3
4
Straw Output
Electric Output
DHN Demand
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
100
200
300
400
500
Electricity Price
Straw Price
Figure B.8: RL agent acting on the MVA processed signal. NPLA is active. PLA features:
hour 1-9. No start-up cost of the straw boiler.
88
Implementation of data driven control for district heating power plant to provide grid support
==PAGE:97==
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
0%
50%
100%
Waterlevel
90% fill level
max fill level
10% fill level
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
0
1
2
3
4
Straw Output
Electric Output
DHN Demand
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
100
200
300
400
500
Electricity Price
Straw Price
Figure B.9: RL agent acting on the MVA processed signal. NPLA is active. PLA features:
hour 1-7. No start-up cost of the straw boiler.
Implementation of data driven control for district heating power plant to provide grid support
89
==PAGE:98==
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
0%
50%
100%
Waterlevel
90% fill level
max fill level
10% fill level
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
0
1
2
3
4
Straw Output
Electric Output
DHN Demand
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
100
200
300
400
500
Electricity Price
Straw Price
Figure B.10: RL agent acting on the MVA processed signal. NPLA is active. PLA features:
hour 1-5. No start-up cost of the straw boiler.
90
Implementation of data driven control for district heating power plant to provide grid support
==PAGE:99==
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
0%
50%
100%
Waterlevel
90% fill level
max fill level
10% fill level
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
0
1
2
3
4
Straw Output
Electric Output
DHN Demand
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
100
200
300
400
500
Electricity Price
Straw Price
Figure B.11: RL agent acting on the MVA processed signal. NPLA is active. PLA features:
hour 1-3. No start-up cost of the straw boiler.
Implementation of data driven control for district heating power plant to provide grid support
91
==PAGE:100==
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
0%
50%
100%
Waterlevel
90% fill level
max fill level
10% fill level
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
0
1
2
3
4
Straw Output
Electric Output
DHN Demand
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
100
200
300
400
500
Electricity Price
Straw Price
Figure B.12: RL agent acting on the MVA processed signal. NPLA is active. PLA features:
hour 1. No start-up cost of the straw boiler.
92
Implementation of data driven control for district heating power plant to provide grid support
==PAGE:101==
C
Investigation of start-up cost on MVA
price signal - extended
This appendix contains the figures referenced in chapter 5.3. An overview of the results
can be seen in table C.1.
Implementation of data driven control for district heating power plant to provide grid support
93
==PAGE:102==
Table C.1: Overview of the tested summer scenarios with and without start-up cost and compared to straw-only scenarios. In general, the
scenarios with start-up costs have considerably higher fuel costs.
Summer
scenario
Reward Function
Control
type
Figure
El production
[MWh]
El. cost
[DKK]
El. cost pr.
MWh [DKK]
Straw prod.
[MWh]
Straw cost
[DKK]
Total cost
[DKK]
1
without start-up cost
binary
C.1
28,8
4.666,96
162,05
346,50
59.936,22
64.603,18
2
without start-up cost
binary
5.8
72
7.915,88
109,94
261,00
45.146,76
53.062,64
3
without start-up cost
binary
C.2
21,6
4.255,96
197,04
391,50
67.720,14
71.976,10
4
without start-up cost
binary
C.3
0
0
0
499,50
86.401,56
86.401,56
1
with start-up cost
binary
C.4
302,4
77.489,32
256,25
76,50
13.232,67
90.721,99
2
with start-up cost
binary
5.9
304,8
65.729,59
215,65
31,50
.5448,75
71.178,34
3
with start-up cost
binary
C.5
261,6
66.432,86
253,95
153,00
26.465,34
92.898,20
4
with start-up cost
binary
C.6
105,6
43.546,08
412,37
391,50
67.720,14
111.266,22
1
straw only
N/A
N/A
N/A
0
0
0
378,90
65540,64
65540,64
2
straw only
N/A
N/A
N/A
0
0
0
336,30
58171,86
58171,86
3
straw only
N/A
N/A
N/A
0
0
0
414,60
71715,89
71715,89
4
straw only
N/A
N/A
N/A
0
0
0
497,10
85986,42
85986,42
94
Implementation of data driven control for district heating power plant to provide grid support
==PAGE:103==
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
0%
50%
100%
Waterlevel
90% fill level
max fill level
10% fill level
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
0
1
2
3
4
Straw Output
Electric Output
DHN Demand
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
0
200
400
600
Electricity Price
Straw Price
Figure C.1: RL agent acting on summer scenario 1 with no start-up cost of the straw-boiler
and all PLA and NPLA Features enabled. Model reference DHNV812165.
Implementation of data driven control for district heating power plant to provide grid support
95
==PAGE:104==
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
0%
50%
100%
Waterlevel
90% fill level
max fill level
10% fill level
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
0
1
2
3
4
Straw Output
Electric Output
DHN Demand
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
200
400
600
Electricity Price
Straw Price
Figure C.2: RL agent acting on summer scenario 3 with no start-up cost of the straw-boiler
and all PLA and NPLA Features enabled.
96
Implementation of data driven control for district heating power plant to provide grid support
==PAGE:105==
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
0%
50%
100%
Waterlevel
90% fill level
max fill level
10% fill level
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
0
1
2
3
4
Straw Output
Electric Output
DHN Demand
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
200
400
600
800
1000
Electricity Price
Straw Price
Figure C.3: RL agent acting on summer scenario 4 with no start-up cost of the straw-boiler
and all PLA and NPLA Features enabled. Model reference DHNV812165.
Implementation of data driven control for district heating power plant to provide grid support
97
==PAGE:106==
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
0%
50%
100%
Waterlevel
90% fill level
max fill level
10% fill level
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
0
1
2
3
4
Straw Output
Electric Output
DHN Demand
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
0
200
400
600
Electricity Price
Straw Price
Figure C.4: RL agent acting on summer scenario 1 with a start-up cost of the straw-boiler
and all PLA and NPLA Features enabled. Model reference DHNV812165.
98
Implementation of data driven control for district heating power plant to provide grid support
==PAGE:107==
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
0%
50%
100%
Waterlevel
90% fill level
max fill level
10% fill level
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
0
1
2
3
4
Straw Output
Electric Output
DHN Demand
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
200
400
600
Electricity Price
Straw Price
Figure C.5: RL agent acting on summer scenario 3 with a start-up cost of the straw-boiler
and all PLA and NPLA Features enabled. Model reference DHNV812165.
Implementation of data driven control for district heating power plant to provide grid support
99
==PAGE:108==
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
0%
50%
100%
Waterlevel
90% fill level
max fill level
10% fill level
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
0
1
2
3
4
Straw Output
Electric Output
DHN Demand
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
200
400
600
800
1000
Electricity Price
Straw Price
Figure C.6: RL agent acting on summer scenario 4 with a start-up cost of the straw-boiler
and all PLA and NPLA Features enabled. Model reference DHNV812165.
100
Implementation of data driven control for district heating power plant to provide grid support
==PAGE:109==
D
Multilevel Control - extended
This appendix contains the figures referenced in section 5.4. The results are shown in
table D.1.
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
0%
50%
100%
Waterlevel
90% fill level
max fill level
10% fill level
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
0
1
2
3
4
Straw Output
Electric Output
DHN Demand
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
0
200
400
600
Electricity Price
Straw Price
Figure D.1: RL agent with multi-level control. No Penalty for straw boiler start-up. Sce-
nario 2. Model Reference DHNV812167
Implementation of data driven control for district heating power plant to provide grid support
101
==PAGE:110==
Table D.1: Overview of the Winter scenarios with a multi level control, with and without start-up cost and compared to straw-only scenarios.
Both the agent with and without start-up cost have roughly the same fuel costs as the straw only scenarios.
Winter
scenario
Reward Function
Control
type
Figure
El production
[MWh]
El. cost
[DKK]
El. cost pr.
MWh [DKK]
Straw prod.
[MWh]
Straw cost
[DKK]
Total cost
[DKK]
1
without start-up cost
Multi
-level
a
531,6
80.830,7
152,1
947,3
163.851,6
244.682,3
2
without start-up cost
Multi
-level
b
459,0
81.888,7
178,4
904,5
156.456,9
238.345,5
3
without start-up cost
Multi
-level
b
553,8
80.063,1
144,6
1.062,0
183.700,6
263.763,7
4
without start-up cost
Multi
-level
c
487,8
68.983,9
141,4
711,0
122.986,0
191.969,9
1
with start-up cost
Multi
-level
d
767,4
119.246,1
155,4
709,9
122.791,4
242.037,5
2
with start-up cost
Multi
-level
d
758,4
136.069,1
179,4
600,8
103.915,4
239.984,5
3
with start-up cost
Multi
-level
e
764,4
113.922,0
149,0
848,3
146.727,0
260.649,0
4
with start-up cost
Multi
-level
f
799,8
114.897,9
143,7
392,6
67.914,7
182.812,7
1
straw only
N/A
N/A
N/A
0
0
0
1.480,0
256004,6
256004,6
2
straw only
N/A
N/A
N/A
0
0
0
1.360
235247,5
235247,5
3
straw only
N/A
N/A
N/A
0
0
0
1.614
278699,2
278699,2
4
straw only
N/A
N/A
N/A
0
0
0
1.195
206706,4
206706,4
102
Implementation of data driven control for district heating power plant to provide grid support
==PAGE:111==
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
0%
50%
100%
Waterlevel
90% fill level
max fill level
10% fill level
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
0
1
2
3
4
Straw Output
Electric Output
DHN Demand
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
200
400
600
800
Electricity Price
Straw Price
Figure D.2: RL agent with multi-level control. No Penalty for straw boiler start-up. Sce-
nario 3. Model Reference DHNV812167
Implementation of data driven control for district heating power plant to provide grid support
103
==PAGE:112==
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
0%
50%
100%
Waterlevel
90% fill level
max fill level
10% fill level
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
0
1
2
3
4
Straw Output
Electric Output
DHN Demand
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
0
100
200
300
Electricity Price
Straw Price
Figure D.3: RL agent with multi-level control. No Penalty for straw boiler start-up. Sce-
nario 4. Model Reference DHNV812167
104
Implementation of data driven control for district heating power plant to provide grid support
==PAGE:113==
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
0%
50%
100%
Waterlevel
90% fill level
max fill level
10% fill level
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
0
1
2
3
4
Straw Output
Electric Output
DHN Demand
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
0
200
400
600
Electricity Price
Straw Price
Figure D.4: RL agent with multi-level control. Penalty for straw boiler start-up: 0.17.
Scenario 2. Model Reference DHNV812167
Implementation of data driven control for district heating power plant to provide grid support
105
==PAGE:114==
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
0%
50%
100%
Waterlevel
90% fill level
max fill level
10% fill level
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
0
1
2
3
4
Straw Output
Electric Output
DHN Demand
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
200
400
600
800
Electricity Price
Straw Price
Figure D.5: RL agent with multi-level control. Penalty for straw boiler start-up: 0.17.
Scenario 3. Model Reference DHNV812167
106
Implementation of data driven control for district heating power plant to provide grid support
==PAGE:115==
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
0%
50%
100%
Waterlevel
90% fill level
max fill level
10% fill level
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
0
1
2
3
4
Straw Output
Electric Output
DHN Demand
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
200
400
600
800
Electricity Price
Straw Price
Figure D.6: RL agent with multi-level control. Penalty for straw boiler start-up: 0.17.
Scenario 4. Model Reference DHNV812167
Implementation of data driven control for district heating power plant to provide grid support
107
==PAGE:116==
E
Code repository
More than 30 different RL model revisions were created during this project. A generic
example including pre-trained agents is available at:
https://github.com/DitlevL/DataDrivenControlForGridSupport
108
Implementation of data driven control for district heating power plant to provide grid support
==PAGE:117==
Implementation of data driven control for district heating power plant to provide grid support
109
==PAGE:118==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Matematiktorvet, Building 329
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.wind.dtu.dk
