==PAGE:1==
DTU Wind
Cost-Benefit analysis; socio-economic 
impacts of offshore wind in Denmark
Antoine Francois Marcel Puchaud
DTU Wind-M-0648
June 2023
==PAGE:2==
DTU Wind-M-0648 
June 2023
Project period: 
January - June 2023
ECTS: 30
Education: Master of Science
Supervisor(s):
Lena Kitzing
Ahti Simo Laido
DTU Wind and Energy Systems
Remarks:
This report is submitted as partial 
fulfillment of the requirements for 
graduation in the above education at the 
Technical University of Denmark.
Technical University of Denmark 
Department of Wind and Energy Systems 
Frederiksborgvej 399
DK-4000 Roskilde
www.wind.dtu.dk
Author: Antoine Francois Marcel Puchaud
Title:
Cost-Benefit analysis; socio-economic 
impacts of offshore wind in Denmark
DTU Wind and Energy Systems is a department of the 
Technical University of Denmark with a unique 
integration of research, education, innovation and 
public/private sector consulting in the field of wind and 
energy. Our activities develop new opportunities and 
technology for the global and Danish exploitation of 
wind and energy. Research focuses on key technical-
scientific fields, which are central for the development, 
innovation and use of wind energy and provides the 
basis for advanced education.
==PAGE:3==
MSc Thesis - Antoine Puchaud
Executive Summary
To limit the climate change, efforts are made to reduce CO2 emissions in electricity systems. Be-
cause of its extremely low CO2 emission factor, offshore wind is growing fast, notably in Denmark
which has a large share of wind power in its electricity mix. However, this technology has many en-
vironmental and socio-economic consequences, which raises the question of the value such a project
creates for the society as a whole. This project aims to assess the value that an offshore wind farm
creates in Denmark for the society, from a socio-economic point of view. The case study of this
project is Horns Rev 3, a Danish wind farm commissioned in 2019. Because of the nature of the
different costs and benefits of an offshore wind farm (some are indirect, or do not have a market
price), a cost-benefit analysis approach is used to compare them.
It appears from a literature review that existing studies are either in other countries or dated,
thus certain results or assumptions cannot be used for the case studied here.
The indirect and non-market costs and benefits are qualitatively described to understand their
relevance and how to take them into account. After a qualitative analysis, noise and visual distur-
bances and impact on tourism appears as negligible for offshore wind farms in Denmark. Impacts
on biodiversity are harder to assess accurately as they necessitate very site-specific data, however
according to existing literature and observation on similar projects, they appear as low.
The quantitative analysis consists of a discounted cash flow model of the different costs and benefits.
The main costs and benefits are quantified and adapted to the case study using its main charac-
teristics. Using electricity market data of Denmark, electricity prices and subsidies are calculated,
allowing to calculate the benefits from electricity production and the tax distortion linked to sub-
sidies. Pollutant emissions or savings are valued using their social price. The marginal emission
factor of the Danish power system is calculated in order to quantify the CO2 emission abatement
and average emission factor are used to quantify SO2 and NOx abatement. Pollutant emissions are
quantified using data from a technical report of the project. Moreover, a limit to the cost of losses
to fisheries is evaluated according to data from a technical report of the project.
Results show that the mean net present value of this project is 0.8 billion DKK, which indicates
that the Horns Rev 3 project benefits the Danish society. Scenario analysis give a lowest NPV of
-6.6 billion DKK and a highest NPV of 12.1 billion DKK. This wide range of possible NPVs mainly
comes from the uncertainties of the social price attributed to CO2 emissions, highlighting that the
profitability of an offshore wind farm for a society depends mainly on the price of electricity and
on the price this society attributes to CO2 savings. Horns Rev 3 also benefits from high electricity
price due to the current energy crisis.
I
==PAGE:4==
MSc Thesis - Antoine Puchaud
Acknowledgement
I would like to sincerely thank my supervisors from DTU, Lena Kitzing and Ahti Simo Laido, for
their advice, their feedback and the time they took to help me with this project. I am also grateful
to the different teachers I met during this MSc, as many of their lectures proved useful for this
project.
II
==PAGE:5==
Contents
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Global Warming and Fossil Fuels replacement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Wind Energy development and current state . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Wind Energy and carbon reduction goals in Denmark
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.4
Purpose of this Thesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.5
Outline of the report . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2
Literature Review
6
3
Qualitative analysis of effects difficult to measure in monetary terms
8
3.1
Noise and visual impact on local populations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3.2
Impact on tourism . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3.3
Valuing pollutant emissions and abatement
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.4
Costs for the power system
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.5
Impacts on ecosystems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.5.1
Impact on marine biodiversity and fisheries . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.5.2
Impact on birds . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.6
Summary of investigated impacts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4
Quantification of direct and indirect impacts
19
4.1
Socio-economic analysis with a Cost Benefit Analysis approach . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4.1.1
Cost Benefit Analysis principles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4.1.2
Recommendations to conduct CBAs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4.1.3
Frame of this CBA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4.2
Characteristics of the case study
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.3
Social Discount Rate . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4.4
Private costs and benefits . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4.4.1
Payment from electricity production . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4.4.2
Private costs : CAPEX, OPEX and DECEX
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4.5
External costs and benefits
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.5.1
Cost of grid operations and market balancing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.5.2
Impact on fisheries . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4.5.3
Tax distortion losses from subsidies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.5.4
Avoided and emitted pollutants . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
5
Results
36
5.1
Intermediate results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
5.2
Upper limit of uncertain costs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
5.3
Central scenario
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
5.4
Sensitivity analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
6
Discussion
42
7
Conclusion
44
References
45
==PAGE:6==
Introduction
MSc Thesis - Antoine Puchaud
1
Introduction
1.1
Global Warming and Fossil Fuels replacement
After two centuries of massive growth in the use of fossil fuels, a drastic reduction of their use
is crucial to limit the impact on the environment. Indeed, since the industrial revolution, human
activities have had an increasing impact on the environment. A significant warming of the climate
has been observed since then, caused by massive CO2 emissions, which raised consequently the
CO2 concentration in the atmosphere (Figure 1), strengthening its greenhouse effect. If greenhouse
gas emissions are increased or even maintained, it will have dramatic and irreversible consequences
on biodiversity and human well-being. Compared to the average climate of 1850-1900, current
global warming projections indicates that the average global warming in 2100 would range between
+1.4oC and +4.4oC depending on whether or not efforts are made in terms of ecological transition
[1]. In 2019, greenhouse gas emissions reached about 59 GtCO2-equivalent (about two third of it
is from direct CO2 emissions and rest is from other greenhouse gases or land-use change converted
in CO2-equivalent).
Figure 1:
CO2 amounts released in the atmosphere between 1750 and 2020,
source: NOAA - Climate.gov
Since the creation of the IPCC group in 1988, six reports have been published, the latest in 2021.
They describe the visible effects of global warming, the physics behind it, how to mitigate it and
the different trajectories of global warming that could be envisaged depending on the measures
taken. While the subject of global warming has been discussed for some decades, awareness has
increased in the last decade, as extreme and devastating effects such as record-breaking heatwaves
have been observed with increasing frequency almost everywhere in the world. According to these
reports, the global energy supply sector is the highest contributor to CO2 emissions with about
20GtCO2-equivalent in 2019 [2].
A major leverage on CO2 emissions reduction therefore lies in decarbonization of electricity sys-
tems and electrification of other sectors such as transportation and building heating. Among the
different technologies of power plants, the emission factors vary widely as shown on (Table 1) from
IPCC [3]. Renewable energies and nuclear power plants appear as the best possible solutions to
1
==PAGE:7==
Introduction
MSc Thesis - Antoine Puchaud
replace conventional fossil fuels such as oil, natural gas and coal power plants. Thus many govern-
ments choose to encourage the development of renewables through subsidies and a more favorable
legislation.
Technology
Median direct emissions
Median lifecycle emissions
Coal
760
820
Gas (Combined Cycle)
370
490
Hydropower
0
24
Nuclear
0
12
Concentrated Solar Power
0
27
Solar PV - Rooftop
0
41
Wind Onshore
0
11
Wind Offshore
0
12
Geothermal
0
38
Table 1: Technology specific emission factors in gCO2/kWh
1.2
Wind Energy development and current state
Wind energy was the second renewable energy in terms of production after hydropower in 2021,
it is also one of the most represented green technologies in the net zero scenario which aims at
0 net CO2 emissions in 2050 (wind energy should be the first renewable energy in term of power
production in 2030) [4]. From wind turbines of 50kW in 1980, the wind industry has been through
decades of development, and in 2023 the biggest wind turbines are about 15MW, with a radius
of 236m for the latest Vestas model V236-15MW (Figure 2). Moreover, since the end of the 20th
century wind turbines can be installed offshore to take advantage of stronger and more constant
winds.
Figure 2: Evolution of Vestas wind turbines, source: Vestas
2
==PAGE:8==
Introduction
MSc Thesis - Antoine Puchaud
According to IEA [5], the total installed wind capacity in the world was 180.8GW in 2010 and
830GW in 2021, which represents an average annual growth rate of capacity of 14.8%. The "net
zero" scenario from IEA expects about 3100GW of installed wind capacity in 2030, which means
maintaining this exponential growth of installed capacity. When looking at the breakdown of this
installed capacity, offshore wind power represented 3.2GW in 2010 and 55.7GW in 2021, it has
therefore increased more than fifteenfold in a decade. This interest in offshore wind farms is due to
the higher power production they offer compared to onshore wind farms, but also to the very high
potential of this technology, as it opens wide areas to power production (for example offshore wind
potential in Europe could cover more than ten times its power consumption) [6]. However offshore
wind power is still considered as an expensive technology, but the decrease of the cost of offshore
wind power due to improving technology and experience learned from development should make
it more competitive [7]. All these considerations underline the growing role offshore wind should
have in future energy systems and decarbonization strategies.
1.3
Wind Energy and carbon reduction goals in Denmark
When the oil crisis of 1973 occurred, oil represented 90% of Denmark energy consumption. Because
of that the Danish government aimed to reduce the high dependency of the country’s economy
to oil price fluctuation, through the development of other power plants technologies. It was an
opportunity for wind power, with first modern wind turbines erected in 1976 and Vestas’ production
of wind turbines which started in 1979. However, wind power represented a small share of the energy
mix, as oil had mainly been replaced by coal, which highly increased the carbon intensity of Danish
electricity. It is during the 1990’s that the Danish government aimed at reducing the high CO2
density of its electricity production through ambitious development of renewables (mainly wind
power and biomass) [8]. The first offshore wind farm installed in 1991 was in Denmark: it was
the Vindeby Offshore Wind Farm which was about 5MW. Since then, other offshore wind farms
have been built and in 2021, Denmark had 15 offshore wind farms for a total installed capacity of
2.3GW. In 2023, the biggest offshore wind farm in Denmark is Kriegers Flak with a capacity of
about 600MW. The interest in offshore development for Denmark lies in the fact that the country
has a large shallow sea area, while areas for onshore wind turbines are becoming scarcer. In addition,
the Baltic Sea and the North Sea offer more favourable wind conditions for wind power: the winds
are stronger and more regular. For the last decades Denmark has developed a strong wind energy
industry and is still recognized as a pioneer country in wind energy. From a small share in domestic
electricity production, wind energy now represents about half of electricity produced in Denmark
(Figure 3) [9].
3
==PAGE:9==
Introduction
MSc Thesis - Antoine Puchaud
Figure 3: Electricity generation by source in Denmark, source : iea.org
Denmark has set ambitious climate targets : the country’s carbon neutrality target, which is
generally set at 2050 in EU countries, is brought forward to 2045.
The electricity production
should be carbon neutral around 2030 according to the Danish Ministry of Climate, Energy and
Utilities [10].
1.4
Purpose of this Thesis
The fact that a government is encouraging the construction of wind farms, even though they do
not always compete with fossil fuels in a private economic point of view, indicates that wind energy
does not only produce electricity, but also creates other indirect values, be they economic, social
or ecological, on a local and a national scale. Wind farm projects can therefore be judged more
advantageous in socio-economic terms than in private economic terms. The main impact that has
motivated this strong development is the reduction of CO2 emissions compared to the conventional
electricity system in place. However, there are other, sometimes less obvious, external impacts
associated with these wind farms. For example, onshore wind projects are frequently contested,
mainly locally, because of noise and landscape inconveniences and impacts on biodiversity (mainly
on birds and bats). The rapid evolution of the wind turbine technology has been accompanied by a
change in these impacts: as the wind turbines are now installed offshore, the local populations are
distanced from them, but the production of electricity conflicts with other activities such as fishing
and the species in contact with the park are no longer the same. To also take these impacts into
account a socio-economic analysis can therefore be carried out, in order to assess whether or not
this technology produces a positive value for the society. Because of this rapid evolution and the
dependence of certain impacts on the region, an analysis in Denmark today could bring different
results compared to old or foreign studies.
In this master thesis, I aim to investigate whether offshore wind power is desirable for the Danish
society. Because of the diverse nature of the impacts of offshore wind farms, the cost benefit analysis
is the approach chosen for this study, as it allows to take into account the indirect consequences of
4
==PAGE:10==
Introduction
MSc Thesis - Antoine Puchaud
the project, as well as giving a value to effects that have no market value. This makes it possible to
reduce all the impacts of the project to a single dimension - cash flows - in order to compare them
and determine whether or not the project is positive for society. The cost-benefit analysis focuses
on a case study which is the offshore wind farm Horns Rev 3, a Danish project commissioned in
2019. The first step of this project is to identify relevant indirect socio-economic and environmental
impacts of existing offshore projects, then it is necessary to collect information from scientific and
technical sources in order to qualitatively describe these impacts and to adapt them to the case
study to monetize them. By performing a cost-benefit analysis, the objective is to calculate the
net present value of an existing wind farm to compare the conventional costs and benefits with
the monetized indirect impacts, in order to determine whether such a project is beneficial for the
Danish society.
1.5
Outline of the report
The report is structured as follows. To start, the first section consists of a literature review of
existing socio-economic analyses on wind energy in European countries over the last two decades.
The purpose is to identify the main weaknesses of these analyses, but also the most recurrent
impacts and the methods used to assess them. A second part consists of a review and a qualitative
analysis of the different external costs and benefits, to understand their relevance and how they are
usually quantified and possibly monetised.
In a third section, a description is made of socio-economic assessments and the concept of cost
benefit analysis. The main principles and the usual recommendations for performing such analyses
are explained. Moreover, the case study is presented, then the methods used for the monetizing
the different costs and benefits are explained.
The next section presents the results of the cash flow modelling, with sensitivity analyses on the
most significant and uncertain parameters. Different scenarios are developed using the different
assumptions of the sensitivity analysis.
After that, a discussion is led on the results and the limits of some hypothesis. The costs and
benefits that are only described qualitatively are compared with the quantitative results to state
on the profitability of the case study for the Danish society.
Finally, a conclusion of the whole project is made and additional work suggestions are givens.
5
==PAGE:11==
Cost Benefit Analysis
MSc Thesis - Antoine Puchaud
2
Literature Review
Various publications have already attempted to evaluate the socio-economic impact of wind power,
but either in other countries (Greece, USA, Germany...) or at different period and on different
levels (a single wind farm or the wind power in a country).
Munksgaard & Larsen (1998) [16] assessed the LCOE of onshore wind in Denmark, compared
to conventional coal and gas power. They included social and environmental impacts these tech-
nologies had and in the LCOE of each one.
The LCOE of the different power plants includes
noise impact, visual impact, CO2, SO2 and NOx emissions, to take into account the social and
environmental costs and benefits of wind energy. The main finding is that noise and visual impacts
are negligible when compared to the usual LCOE, however the cost of CO2 emissions makes wind
power LCOE equivalent to gas power plants LCOE, when the higher LCOE is that of coal power
plants.
Ortega-Izquierdo & del Río (2020) [17] focused their socio-econonmic assessement on the EU mem-
ber states. They looked into the socio-economic and environmental benefits from development of
wind energy between 2008 and 2016. They quantified are the jobs created, the fuel savings (which is
another way to account the electricity production than sale of electricity), and the CO2 abatement
in the member states.
Alba Economics (2021) [18] investigated the socio-economic net present value of an hypotheti-
cal floating wind farm in Greece. The CBA compared the usual investment and O&M costs with
the social, economical and environmental costs and benefits of such a project. The benefits from
electricity production were also taken into account as fuel savings (i.e. coal or gas that will not be
imported due to Coal or Gas power plants phased out due to wind power). The main environmental
benefit is CO2 abatement. The main costs are visual impact for local communities and impact on
tourism as tourism in this area is strongly based on the beauty of the landscape, besides the impact
on biodiversity is also investigated. These last impacts were assessed using the Willingness to Pay
of local communities to avoid these negative effects. It turned out that at a national scale, the
net present value of the project is highly positive, as electricity production and CO2 abatement
outweight the private costs, additionally the social and environmental costs are low compared to
the benefits. However, when looking at a more regional scale (the island concerned by the project),
the NPV is negative as the main negative externalities are at a local scale (visual impact, impact
on tourism...), while the benefits are for all the country. So the negative impacts are negligible at
a national scale but not at a local scale.
Denny (2007) [19] studied the impact of increasing wind penetration in Ireland, which is an is-
land grid system. The costs taken into account are: the costs of grid reinforcement, the Capex, the
Opex, the additional reserve costs and the costs associated with the additional cycling of conven-
tional units (gas or coal power plants). The benefits are quantified as fuel savings, CO2 abatement
and the capacity benefit of wind, i.e. the capacity of conventional generators replaced by wind
power. The main result of this study is an optimal wind penetration level in Ireland. Over this
wind penetration level, further development of wind power is considered unprofitable for the Irish
power system, as the additional reserve costs and the costs associated with the additional cycling
of conventional units outweigh the benefits.
The different studies reviewed are summarized and compared in Table 2.
6
==PAGE:12==
Cost Benefit Analysis
MSc Thesis - Antoine Puchaud
Study
Munksgaard & al.
Alma Economics
Ortega-Izquierdo & al.
Denny
Area
Denmark
Greece
Europe
Ireland
Year
1998
2021
2020
2007
Scope
Power system
Single Floating WF
Power system
Power system
Pollutant abatement
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Tax distortion loss
No
No
No
No
Impact for the rest of the grid
No
No
No
Yes (simulated)
Noise and visual impact
Yes
Yes
No
No
Table 2: Comparison of the studies reviewed
While all of them took into account usual direct costs and benefits, the different publications did
not focus on the same indirect costs and benefits. They all included avoided pollution, but the
methods used are no longer relevant in today’s context. Moreover, some studies emphasized the
impact on the electricity grid, others insisted on the impact on local populations or on tourism and
others on job creation. However none of them took into account tax distortion loss from subsidies.
Moreover, many publications concern wind power in general or onshore projects as they were the
majority of wind energy projects in the past decades in Europe. But differences arise between on-
shore and offshore projects: local residents are not impacted in the same way, the species impacted
are not the same, nor in the same way either, the sectors impacted are different and the investments
needed on the grid differ because the capacity of an offshore wind farm is usually much larger than
that of an onshore wind farm. Finally, some results have been rendered out of date by the rapid
evolution of wind turbine technology, but also because the power system in which wind farms are
developed is not the same nowadays.
7
==PAGE:13==
Literature Review
MSc Thesis - Antoine Puchaud
3
Qualitative analysis of effects difficult to measure in monetary
terms
The literature review of existing socio-economic analysis of wind farms highlights indirect costs and
benefits. Some are specific to their case, depending on the technology and the area, while some
others are relevant for all wind projects. A qualitative analysis of the different impacts is carried
out in this section to determine their relevance for the case study and to find out how to quantify
them.
3.1
Noise and visual impact on local populations
Noise issues is one of the main complain from local residents for onshore wind farms. However, a
study by Ladenburg (2008) [20] indicated that locating a project offshore reduces the visual impact
without eliminating it and removes the noise issue encountered by local communities. So this im-
pact does not occur for offshore wind farms because they are further away from local communities,
as noise from offshore wind farms operation are not audible by humans from shore. Moreover, the
study includes a survey on Danes showing that only 5% of them have a negative attitude towards
further offshore wind development.
Because of their height, wind turbines are visible from long distances, thus they impact the land-
scape, which is often seen as an inconvenience by local communities. Many papers tried to quantify
this visual impact of wind farms over the last decade, such as Ladenburg (2023) [21]. He used
the willingness to pay for alternative options and showed that people in Denmark tend to prefer
a wind farm located offshore than onshore. The Willingness-to-pay (WTP) is a concept used to
assess non-market socio-economic values in the contingent valuation method. It consists in sur-
veys, where people indicate how much they could pay to avoid a given disamenity (visual in this
case), this WTP is an estimation of the cost of the negative impact. Using survey to assess the
willingness-to-pay of people for having the offshore project built at 12, 18 and 50 km instead of 8
km, he found a positive willingness to pay, meaning that at 8 km from the coast, the visual impact
is negative (people would pay to reduce it). However, the WTP to have the wind farm at 18 km
and 50 km are not significantly different, which corresponds to the findings of other studies on the
topic : people prefer a wind farm further away from the coast, but their marginally WTP decreases
with the distance.
This means that over a certain distance from shore, people do not mind having the wind farm
located further away or not, so the negative visual impact becomes negligible for offshore wind
farms that are far from shore (at least over 18km), but it should still be considered for nearshore
projects.
3.2
Impact on tourism
In the CBA from Alba Economics (2021) [18] mentioned in section 2, the negative impact on
tourism activity came from the fact wind turbines would alter the landscape while people might
visit Greek islands for their natural and "paradisiac" landscapes. However, offshore wind farm’s
impact on tourism might depend on the kind of tourism that take place in the country, so the
same impact can not be simply supposed for Danish wind farms. This is what Cook (2004) [25]
explained: the impact on tourism depends on the country where the wind farm is located, he de-
scribed Denmark as an urbanized country known for its many wind farms, thus he explained that
tourism in Denmark is not centered nor dependent on the notion of “wilderness experience and
8
==PAGE:14==
Literature Review
MSc Thesis - Antoine Puchaud
unspoilt nature” contrarily to countries such as Scotland.
One of the fears of opponents of offshore wind projects is that the visual impact will affect the
tourist activity in the area. The argument behind this is the degradation of the "unspoilt nature"
aspect of the area, which is an element that encourages tourism. Tourism depends on the land-
scape and activities available in an area, which makes the impact of wind turbines more difficult
to determine as it is very location specific. Studies focusing on existing offshore wind farm has
been conducted in Europe. In Denmark, Kuehn (2003) [22] conducted a qualitative analysis on
the attitude of local people towards the offshore wind farms of Horns Rev 1 and Nysted before
the construction and one year after the construction. Tourism is a major activity sector around
Horns Rev, and many summerhouses are located on the coast, hence there was opposition to the
wind farm. However, she found that after the construction of the wind farm, there was a growing
acceptance of the project, as experience showed that it did not impact the number of tourists, and
the summerhouse prices which had increased in line with other properties located elsewhere in the
country. As the Hedonic Approach suggests that the observable impacts of a project (such as visual
impacts that would hamper tourism) are reflected in a fall in property prices in the surrounding
area. As a result, Kuehn concluded that the 110m wind turbines of Horns Rev 1 located 14km
from the coast have finally proved to be acceptable for local people and have no negative impact
on tourism.
Glasson &al. (2022) [23] studied offshore wind farms in UK and their impact on tourism, they
found this impact negligible, and in some cases positive. They also mentioned synergies between
tourism and offshore projects, such as at Scroby Sands, in UK, where an educational center has
been created around the offshore wind farm. 35,000 visitors went there during the six first months
of the center, suggesting an interest for offshore wind farms and a positive impact on the tourism
sector. Such concepts have also been developed in Denmark [24], notably in Copenhagen where the
Middelgrunden wind farm is part of the city’s landscape. A park visit activity has been set up, so
people go to visit the site and can climb to the top of the wind turbines, there is about 30 boats a
year.
Finally, because this impact depends heavily on the region of the wind farm, a reasonable hypoth-
esis is that the tourism impact of Horns Rev 3 is equivalent to the tourism impact of Horns Rev 1,
as they are only a few kilometres away from each other, so this impact is considered as neutral.
3.3
Valuing pollutant emissions and abatement
Quantifying emissions abatement was done in some CBAs with a simple approach. In the socio-
economic assessement of Munksgaard & Larsen mentioned above, two estimates of the CO2 abate-
ment from wind power are calculated using the CO2 content of the same power production either
from gas power plants or from coal power plants. The hypothesis made was that wind farms were
replacing this kind of conventional power plants. The CBA from Alma Economics in Greece as-
sumed that wind power replaces a mix of half oil power plants and half gas power plant. However,
the power system is not the same nowadays in Denmark, and a mix of various power plants is
replaced by new power plants. As a result, it is harder to estimate the avoided emissions.
CO2 abatement is hard to tackle as there are different ways to quantify it. A.D. Hawkes, (2010)
[32] stated that CO2 reduction is often calculated using the AEF of the system, or a speculative
MEF, however the different methods used to estimate the MEF of a system leads to different re-
sults. From his calculation of the MEF of UK’s power system between 2002 and 2009, he finds
a MEF of 0.69gCO2/kWh, when the AEF of this power system was 0.51gCO2/kWh and the long
9
==PAGE:15==
Literature Review
MSc Thesis - Antoine Puchaud
term MEF provided by the British government is 0.43gCO2/kWh. Using inaccurate data can lead
to major underestimation of CO2 abatement. Thus, an estimate of MEF is important for CO2
reduction policies.
His study aimed at explaining the methods used to estimate MEF. He de-
scribed different methods already used for calculating the MEF of a country’s electricity system,
with their advantages and drawbacks and he developed another one based on the hourly observa-
tions of the power production and the pollution emitted by the different power plants of the system.
MEF is a better estimates than AEF because not all generators respond to a demand or a produc-
tion change. Depending on wind conditions, some generators such as wind turbines are operating
, while others which are more controllable can be switched off or can reduce their output. It is
only the CO2 that these generators would produce that are avoided or emitted when demand or
production is slightly changed (or replaced by other generators in the case of this study).
A common approach to assess MEF is the “merit order based approach”: it assumes that, ac-
cording to the merit order, the power generators that are first turned off are the most expensive
to operate. The MEF at a given time is thus the CO2 intensity of the the most expensive unit
operating. However, it does not take into account logistical constraints of power plants’ operation,
or grid transmission, thus there are differences between the merit order approach and the observed
dispatch when there is a change in the system load.
The second common approach is the “empirical approach”. This method identifies the average
response of each type of power plant to changes in the system load (using a linear regression on
observed data), then the emission factor of each technology is applied to its production and the
contributions of all power plants are summed, which gives the MEF of the overall system. By
assessing the average response of every technology, it therefore automatically takes into account
the constraint of the power plants and the grid.
Another approach is developed by Hawkes, based on the two others. In his method, emission fac-
tors are determined for every conventional generator depending on their technology. Using this and
the hourly output of every generator, it gives for every hour CO2 emissions of the power system
and conventional production. From this, hourly variations of conventional production and CO2
emissions of the system are calculated. A linear regression then fit the hourly variations of system
emissions and of the conventional generation. The slope of the linear regression is an estimate of
the MEF.
However, wind farms also release pollutants in the atmosphere during construction, operation
and maintenance of the project. CO2, SO2 and NOx emissions from construction phase and O&M
are usually estimated in Life Cycle Assessment Reports of wind turbines or Life cycle comparisons
with different technologies. In a life cycle comparison of different electricity generation technolo-
gies from UNECE (2021) [33], the estimated average emission rate of offshore wind is between
12gCO2eq./kWh and 23gCO2eq./kWh when O&M and construction phase are taken into account,
however wind turbines does not use any fuel to produce power, thus they have a 0gCO2/kWh
marginal emission rate . It is a simple way to estimate CO2 emissions caused by the project, how-
ever because it is calculated per kWh, it does not reflect whether the CO2 is emitted during the
construction phase or during the operation. Such data is provided in technical reports of offshore
wind farms.
In order to value emitted or avoided pollutants, a market price or a social cost per emitted ton of
gas is needed. Market prices sometimes exist for given gas, in a define area for specific sectors. The
EU has set the European Union Emissions Trading System (EU-ETS) in 2005, which sets quotas
10
==PAGE:16==
Literature Review
MSc Thesis - Antoine Puchaud
on CO2 emissions for the EU members, Iceland, Norway and Lichtenstein. It concerns specific
sectors: power plants, aviation within the concerned states and energy-intensive industries (such
as oil refineries, production of metals, cement, glass ...). An installation that produces CO2 must
have enough CO2 emissions allowance to cover its emissions over a year : according to its industry
sector, the installation receive a given quantity of CO2 emissions allowance, it is then free to sell
or buy CO2 emissions allowance on the market. This pricing of CO2 emissions gives incentives
to reduce CO2 emissions and thus promotes technologies that are more carbon neutral. The EU
sets quotas, but the price is determined on the market of EU-ETS, based on supply and demand
(Figure 4) [34].
Figure 4: Price of CO2 in the EU-ETS, source : https://icapcarbonaction.c
om/fr/node/839
However, this market price only reflects the need for CO2 emissions allowance, whose number is
set arbitrarily by the EU to limit CO2 emissions. It acts as an incentive to reduce CO2 emissions
but it does not reflect the cost such gases causes, because of their impacts on health, biodiversity
or climate. Many studies focus on assessing the social cost of pollutant emissions, mainly on social
cost of CO2. The results they give serve as a basis for socio-economic calculations but are not
precise and exact values.
For instance, Rennert &al.
(2021) [35] highlighted that the cost of CO2 used by the US gov-
ernment was too low compared to recent scientific research on the damage caused by CO2. They
proposed alternative higher estimates based on the open-source "Greenhouse Gas Impact Value
Estimator" (GIVE) model. Their calculations took into account damages that arise from global
warming on: sea-level rise, agriculture, energy costs and mortality. The calculations correspond
to a marginal emission of CO2 in 2020 and take into account the long term effects of CO2 as a
greenhouse gas. Their estimates of the social cost of CO2 vary with the discount rate and the
damage function they used, so they give their preferred mean social cost of CO2 estimate which is
$185/tCO2 with a low value of $44/tCO2 and a high value of $413/tCO2 (5%–95% quantile range),
(all values are in 2020 US dollars).
These studies only assess the social cost of pollutants for the current year, they do not give a
11
==PAGE:17==
Literature Review
MSc Thesis - Antoine Puchaud
projection. The social cost of NOx and SO2 used here are constant over years. However, this is not
the case for all CO2 social price estimates, whose major impact is on global warming. Damages
from global warming are not constant with time, but increases with the intensity of global warming,
so it could be expected that the social cost of CO2 will become increasingly high. The Climate
Bank Roadmap of the European Investment Bank Group (2020) [36] suggested to adopt the grow-
ing social cost of CO2 developed by France Stratégie (2019) [37] , Figure 5 shows this increasing
cost of CO2 for 2020, 2030, 2040 and 2050. However, this price is not based on the damages CO2
causes on society, but on the carbon tax level needed to meet the +1.5oC goal in 2050.
Figure 5: Proposed shadow cost of CO2 in the EU used by EIB
Shindell (2014) [38] assessed the socio-economic cost of various gases including SO2 and NOx,
depending on the impact they have on climate change and the damage they cause to human health.
He quantified the economic damages that a marginal change of emission of a given atmospheric
pollutant causes on air quality and climate, leading to damages on human health and climate
change. His results are the following for the medium scenario : one ton of NOx released in the
atmosphere corresponds to a social cost of $67000 and one ton of SO2 has a social cost of $42000
(all values are in 2020 US dollars). This study took into account that SO2 cools the climate, thus
has a positive impact on climate, while NOx has no important effect on climate. However, the main
social cost of these two gases lies in the high damage they cause to human health. These values
were calculated using data that are specific to the US, such as the Value of a Statistical Life (VSL)
in the US or the climate change consequences for the US, which can differ from Europe. In its
Levelized Cost of Energy (LCoE) Calculator [39], the Danish Energy Agency applied the following
socio-economic costs for the year 2018 and beyond : the price of SO2 is 31000 EUR2020/ton and
the price of NOx is24000 EUR2020/ton. Even if the calculator did not provide any detail on how
these prices are derived, they have the same order of magnitude as social prices in Shindell (2014),
indicating that they take the same kind of impact into account. As they are applied to European
power plants, these numbers will be favoured for this study.
A pollutant that can be emitted because of the operation of an offshore wind farm is SF6, according
to Holst & Jespersen (2021) [40]. It is a gas used in transformers to prevent fires in case of short
circuits, so it is widely present in offshore substation of wind farms. According to an IPCC report
12
==PAGE:18==
Literature Review
MSc Thesis - Antoine Puchaud
of 2007 [41], one kg of SF6 released in the atmosphere has the warming potential of 22.8 tonnes of
CO2 (at a 100 years horizon), so it is a very potent greenhouse gas.
3.4
Costs for the power system
Transmission grids transport power of high voltage level over long distances, it is owned and op-
erated by the Transmission System Operators (TSO). Energinet.dk is the TSO in Denmark, it is
a state-owned company. A TSO is responsible of ensuring the system balance via the regulating
power market. Distribution system operators (DSO) own and operate distribution networks, trans-
porting power at lown medium and sometimes high voltage levels to industrial zones or cities.
The Danish grid is divided into two areas: West Denmark (DK1) and East Denmark (DK2),
both are integrated in NordPool: a power exchange with Scandinavian and Baltic countries [42].
In the spot market, hourly contracts for power delivery during the next day are traded based on a
merit-order, it fixes a price per area and per hour. Due to this liberalized power exchange, power
flows between the different countries, constrained by the transmission capacities between them. A
consequence of this is that – depending on the transmission capacity - a lack of production in one
country may be compensated by cross-border trading.
With the integration of wind power some challenges arise for the grid, concerning grid infras-
tructures, system flexibility and stability.
Wind energy requires a suitable grid to transport wind energy to consumption centers, which
is an additional cost for the grid. Wind farms with high installed capacity can be located in regions
with a low population density, which are equipped with lines that have a relatively low capacity
or a low voltage [43]. Thus, upgrading the local transmission lines might be necessary to connect
the wind farm to consumption centers, which means they require more investment on the grid
infrastructures. These costs are usually covered by the TSO.
System flexibility means ensuring back-up production when there is no wind.
Because of the
merit-order effect and the low marginal costs of renewables, wind power replaces conventional
power plants, thus impacting their economy by reducing their revenues. However, sufficient flexi-
ble power generation capacity is needed to cover the demand when wind farms produces less power.
This can be dealt with by establishing peak generators that receive capacity payment. It is the
case in the study from Denny (2007) [19] on wind power penetration in Ireland, where back-up ca-
pacities from conventional power plants were considered as a direct cost from wind power expansion.
Flexibility in Denmark is helped by the use of Combined Heat and Power plants (CHP) : these
power plants can switch a part of their production between power and heat. With combined cycle
gas turbines, the low-pressure turbine can be used to produce additional electricity instead of heat,
or it can be bypassed to provide heat. It is used in Danish power plant to optimize production ac-
cording to the power price [43]: when wind power production is not sufficient, power price increases
and the power plant produces electricity only, but when there is a lot of wind power, power price
decreases and the power plant can produce heat instead of extra electricity. It is coupled with heat
storage so that CHP can be totally turned off with high wind generation. This result in balancing
operations on the electricity market.
13
==PAGE:19==
Literature Review
MSc Thesis - Antoine Puchaud
Another way to ensure system flexibility is to increase the integration of the national grid with
neighboring countries using interconnectors.
Denmark has a high interconnection capacity with neighboring countries. In 2017, the total export
capacity from Denmark to Norway and Sweden was about 4,000 MW, about 2400 MW with Ger-
many and 600MW between DK1 and DK2. Besides this, the Kriegers Flak project added 400 MW
of indirect connection capacity with Germany, an interconnector of more than 1000 MW with the
UK is planned and 700 MW with the Netherlands were also planned. This interconnection capacity
with neighboring countries is high enough to cover the average Danish electricity consumption that
is why Denmark is considered an extremely well connected country [43].
A consequence of this liberalized electricity market and the large interconnector capacity between
Denmark and neighboring countries is that when wind is not sufficient to cover the Danish electric-
ity demand, imports can offset the difference between production and demand. On the other hand,
when wind production exceed demand, Denmark is able to export its electricity. The importance
of exchanges and the adaptability of power plants to wind production is shown on Figure 6, where
the top curve indicates the demand, and the area below 0 shows exports. Denmark mainly exports
power to Sweden and Norway, because Germany tends to have high wind power production at the
same time as Denmark.
Figure 6:
Resulting dispatch for the last week in September 2015 - from Ea
Energy Analyses
As wind power production varies highly during a day, it is necessary to forecast it accurately, be-
cause differences between production forecast and real production can lead to imbalances between
demand and production and so frequency disturbances.
Control of frequency is done at different level. The primary reserve is used automatically, it aims
at stabilizing the grid at an acceptable frequency within 5 to 30 seconds after a disturbance. The
secondary reserve is also used automatically and aims to restore the frequency of the grid within
up to 15 minutes after a disturbance. The tertiary control is controlled manually at the TSO level,
it is used to restore the operating reserve or to anticipate expected disturbances, and it is usually
used between 15 minutes and one hour [44].
The reserve requirement is designed to comply with the “n-1 contingency criterion”: if a major
14
==PAGE:20==
Literature Review
MSc Thesis - Antoine Puchaud
power plant interrupts suddenly its production, the system should be able to stabilize and restore
its nominal frequency without interruption in the electricity supply. It corresponds to the loss of
a 700 MW power plant in Denmark, so the tertiary reserve requirement is 700 MW. On the other
hand, with forecasting the mean average error one hour before operation is 1-2% of total installed
wind power capacity. With 5 GW of wind power capacity in Denmark, the mean average error is
50-100 MW, thus far under the already existing 700 MW tertiary reserves[43]. A 400 MW wind
farm like Horns Rev 3, adds 4-8 MW to the mean average error of forecasting, which will still be
much lower than 700 MW. So no extra reserves are necessary because of wind power.
3.5
Impacts on ecosystems
The impact of offshore wind on ecosystems covers a wide range of aspects. UNECE (2021) [33]
assessed the impact of different power plant technology on ecosystems (without climate change
and biodiversity impacts) considering their use of land, their transformation of land, their toxicity
for marine environment and their alteration of fresh water and soils. The comparison is made on
Figure 7, and shows that offshore wind is one of the power generation technologies with the lowest
impact on ecosystems.
Figure 7: Comparison of life cycle impacts of power generation technologies on
ecosystems
With the exception of nuclear power and onshore wind, the other technologies have an impact 5 to
30 times higher than for offshore wind. Therefore, it appears that offshore wind power has a low
impact on ecosystems and compared to the use of conventional generators, it results in more fresh
water and more land available.
However this life cycle impact does not cover the impact on biodiversity, which is one of the
most debated impacts of offshore wind power. This impact on biodiversity can be divided into two
parts: the impact on marine life (and therefore on fishing) and the impact on birds. The difficulty
in assessing these impacts arises firstly from the difficulty of accurately describing the populations
of species affected, and secondly from the value to be placed on an individual of an affected species.
While some species of fish are caught, and therefore have a market price for society, other species
are not ’useful’ from an economic point of view, and therefore do not have a market price. One
15
==PAGE:21==
Literature Review
MSc Thesis - Antoine Puchaud
approach is to estimate their value using the WTP of people to protect these species, however this
requires specific surveys to be carried out in the vicinity of the project.
3.5.1
Impact on marine biodiversity and fisheries
According to the Technical Report of Horns Rev 3 on impact on mammals [28], the wind farm
may have impacts on fish and mammals such as harbor porpoises or grey seals during the con-
struction phase and the operation phase. This impact during construction phase is mainly due
to the increased activity of boats, the noise emitted by pile driving and the sediment spills by
operations on the sea bed. A sound level over 180 dB is expected to cause injuries on mammals at
830 to 890 m from the pile driving activities. The operation of wind turbines is supposed to create
permanent effects mainly in terms of noise, however the frequencies of these noise is outside of the
range of best hearing of concerned mammals and the sound level are considered as low. The report
indicated that “Harbour porpoises have been observed in different operational offshore wind farms
indicating usage of the wind farm in the same way as surrounding areas” and highlighted that “The
Horns Rev area is considered to be of no special importance to grey seals and the number of grey
seals will be low”, so it concluded that the impact on mammals will be low during operational phase.
As Horns Rev 1 is a wind farm which was completed in 2002, many studies have been carried
out on it, including on its impact on fish resource. Leonhard & al. (2011) [29] reported that the
number of species observed increased from 30 in 2003 to 41 in 2009 and some benthic species where
located close to the artificial reef created.
The study concluded that "no negative effects were
observed for any of the species encountered and therefore there is no expectation of any negative
effects from the Horns Rev I Offshore Wind Farm or other existing (Horns Rev II) or planned
offshore wind farms in the Horns Reef area". Thus it will be assumed for this study which focuses
on Horns Rev 3 that the fish density does not change during the operation of the wind farm, and
the impact on marine biodiversity is minor.
However, the construction and operation of an offshore wind farm also influences other marine
activities such as fishing. A report from the European Parliament (2020) [26] summarized the
impact of offshore renewables on fisheries in Europe. Because of the spatial expansion of offshore
renewables, conflicts between offshore wind farms and other marine activities may arise. A dia-
logue is usually established between the fishermen and the wind farm project, in order to mitigate
the impacts by finding an optimal location for the turbines for both stakeholders. A reduction in
fishermen’s activity may lead to financial compensations.
The impact on fisheries depends on the types of fisheries practiced in the area, which in turn
depend on the marine species present. These conflicts include the loss of fishing areas during the
construction phase of the project as well as restrictions on fishing activities in certain areas for
certain types of gear during the operation of the wind farm. These security measures during the
operation phase are intended to protect infrastructures. All fishing gears are not affected in the
same way, the most affected gears are the trawlers: as they fish in the seabed, they cannot operate
over the array cables or the export cables.
On the other hand, offshore wind farms may create artificial reef, which are ideal conditions for
certain benthic species. This is the case of Krone &al. (2013) [27] who investigated the impact of
16
==PAGE:22==
Literature Review
MSc Thesis - Antoine Puchaud
underwater structures on demersal species. They compared shipwrecks with an offshore platform
in the North Sea. They found out that the fauna living around both kind of artificial reefs is very
similar. Thus, they estimated that because of the thousands of wind turbines that will be installed
in the North Sea, they will be more than 4 times more available artificial reefs, which could increase
the stocks of demersal fishes in that area by between 25% and 165%.
Moreover, the construction of the wind farm creates an area where fishing is more limited (es-
pecially around the turbines and export cables) which can serve as a refuge for species that will be
able to reproduce and grow with less fishing pressure. This would ultimately create larger stocks
of fish and shellfish from which fisheries could benefit [26].
The economic impact of offshore wind farms on fisheries depends on the number of fishing fleets
operating in the area, their fishing gear and their target species, so it depends heavily on the lo-
cation. There is a need for spatially resolved data on catches per species that enables a spatially
resolved estimation of revenues from fisheries. However, even when it is the case, it is not sufficient
to determine if the change of catches per year is due to an offshore wind farm because total catches
vary greatly between years. Finally, the report from the European Parliament points out the lack
of harmonized and spatially resolved data to quantify the impact of offshore renewables on fisheries.
3.5.2
Impact on birds
A common argument opposed to wind turbines is the threat they pose to birds. The sea used to be
a safe environment for birds, so they are not used to threats such as the blades of the wind turbines.
Depending on their rotational speed, a collision can be deadly for a bird. A study carried by Fox
& Petersen (2019) [30] focused on many Danish and other European wind farms, their conclusion
was that there are low rates of collision with offshore wind turbines “especially among long-lived
large-bodied bird species considered most at risk”. These birds tend to deviate their migratory
route by a few kilometers to avoid wind farms, so the probabilities of collision are minimized but
the migration distances are extended.
A study [31] conducted over two years at Vattenfall’s Thanet offshore wind farm in UK aimed
to observe bird movements in the wind farm area. This wind farm consists of 100 3MW wind
turbines and covers an area of 35 km2, which is of the order of magnitude of current offshore wind
farms. Data was obtained thanks to seabird observers and radars. The study shown that only
6 seabirds died because of collision with wind turbines in these two years, and confirmed that
observed seabirds mostly changed their flight path to avoid the wind farm.
3.6
Summary of investigated impacts
As discussed in this section, many effects investigated can be quantified and thus monetized, but
this is not the case for all of them. This section only considered indirect effects, because usual costs
and benefits are widely assessed and calculated. The different costs and benefits considered in this
analysis are evaluated using different ways. They are summarized below (Table 3).
17
==PAGE:23==
Literature Review
MSc Thesis - Antoine Puchaud
Costs
Benefits
Cost
Method of accounting
Benefits
Method of accounting
Capex
Monetization : market prices
CO2 abatement
Monetization : shadow prices
Opex
Monetization : market prices
Other pollutants
abatement
Monetization : shadow prices
Decex
Monetization : market prices
Electricity production
Monetization : market prices
Tax distortion
Monetization : distortion rate
Reef effect
Qualitative description
Operation and
market operation
Monetization : market prices
Security of supply
Qualitative description
System stability
requirement
Qualitative description, null
Cost for grid expansion
Monetization : market prices
Pollutant emissions
Monetization : shadow prices
SF6 leakage risk
Evaluation of magnitude
Impact on fisheries
Monetization (upper limit) : market prices
Impact on biodiversity
Qualitative description
Visual Impact
Qualitative description : negligible
Noise Impact
Qualitative description : negligible
Impact on tourism
Qualitative description : negligible
Table 3: Summary of costs and benefits considered
18
==PAGE:24==
Methodology
MSc Thesis - Antoine Puchaud
4
Quantification of direct and indirect impacts
4.1
Socio-economic analysis with a Cost Benefit Analysis approach
Socio-economic studies are used to evaluate a project from a societal point of view. The purpose of
such a study is to answer the question "is this project as a whole beneficial to society?" by assessing
all the consequences of a project. The results of such an assessment can then be used as a tool for
political decisions, such as whether or not to support a technology, for example through subsidies
or more favorable legislation. It can also be used to describe the societal impacts of private projects
in order to better convince policy makers and concerned public.
The project is considered and inspected in its entirety from a societal point of view: this means
that, unlike the analyses of private actors who only take into account the monetary costs and ben-
efits borne by their company, Socio-Economic assessment aims to take into account the costs and
benefits that the project causes for society. Taxes and subsidies do not enter into a socio-economic
analysis because they are only an exchange between two economic actors within the border of the
analysis (Denmark), so they are not monetary flows entering or leaving the country, simply a redis-
tribution of wealth within it. A socio-economic assessment also takes into account the externalities
caused by a project [11]. The externalities of a project are its effects - monetary or not - perceived
by other economic actors and thus not internalized by the companies responsible for the project.
Some of these social or environmental impacts have no market value in the sense that they are
not exchanged, for example a change in the landscape or damage to a wildlife species. A common
form of Socio-Economic Assessment that takes these non-monetary consequences into account is
the Cost Benefit Analysis (CBA).
4.1.1
Cost Benefit Analysis principles
CBAs were first used in the USA in 1936, within the framework of the Flood Control Act: irrigation
from flood control benefited certain activities but the floods caused could be costly for other actors,
so it was judged that the benefits of irrigation should be greater than the estimated costs to society,
in order to take into account both aspects and not just the economic benefits of irrigation for the
producers [12]. Hansson (2010) [13] defined CBA has "a collection of decision-aiding techniques
that weigh advantages against disadvantages in numerical terms. [...] (so that) multi-dimensional
problems are reduced to one dimension, usually with monetary value". In other words, CBA aims
to monetize all the direct and indirect benefits and disadvantages of an initiative, so that they can
be compared.
CBAs aim to reflect the real costs to society, which means that if markets are efficient, market
prices can be used. However, according to Kanbur (2008) [14], market prices do not always reflect
social costs, as they may be subject to distortions or they may not include the entirety of an exter-
nality (e.g. pollution). Therefore, to calculate a social benefit, shadow prices must sometimes be
used. These are prices that are calculated to reflect the real costs and benefits to society, and are
either indicated by the government, or estimated in scientific studies.
The central element of the CBA is the net present value (NPV), it is the sum of all these mon-
etized costs and benefits discounted at a reference year (often the year of the Final Investment
Decision of the project), using a social discount rate. In economics, a discount rate illustrates the
time preference for money, i.e. it is the rate at which future cash flows are discounted to reflect
their value in the present. The higher the discount rate, the lower the present value of future cash
19
==PAGE:25==
Methodology
MSc Thesis - Antoine Puchaud
flows. The social discount rate (SDR) is used for evaluating public policy decisions or to assess the
profitability of a project from the society point of view, instead of a private point of view. Usually,
the SDR is lower than discount rates used for private assessment.
A positive NPV indicates that the project is profitable for society because the benefits exceed
the costs; conversely, a negative NPV indicates that a project is too costly for society in view of
the low benefits it generates. If there is no estimate of a cost, it may be worthwhile to obtain
information on a similar cost on another project to judge the magnitude of the effect. However,
the different effects considered may have different orders of magnitude. Thus, some impacts being
so small compared to others, they may be difficult to quantify or deemed negligible. They are
therefore not included in the calculation, but are described qualitatively. In the discussion, this
qualitative description is put in perspective with the quantitative result (the NPV), so that it can
also be used to conclude whether or not the project is worthwhile [15]. Therefore, the methodology
used in this study to describe each effect of the project will be the following:
• Review the literature to see how effects are described and assessed
• If possible, quantify and monetize the effect
• Else, attempt to estimate an upper bound of the effect and judge whether or not it is negligible
• Else, describe the effect qualitatively and judge whether or not it is negligible
4.1.2
Recommendations to conduct CBAs
Not all methods used for Socio-Economic assessment are standardized, so different governments or
ministries make their own recommendations on how to conduct such an analysis. For this study,
evaluation of costs and benefits is limited to their impact within Denmark, so the guidelines given
by the Danish Finance Ministry will be favoured [15]. Cash flows must be expressed in real prices
in a given base year (usually the year in which the study is conducted). All prices must also be
comparable, which means all prices must exclude or include taxes. This is because government and
business prices exclude taxes, whereas prices observed by citizens include taxes. The prices used
in this study will exclude taxes.
According to the Danish Ministry of Finance, the macroeconomic consequences of a project (e.g.
on exports or employment) are not included in the Socio-Economic assessment as the resources
used are assumed to be alternatively used in another activity with the same macroeconomic effects.
Moreover, a tax distortion rate is applied if the project changes state expenditures. Indeed, public
initiatives can require fiscal financing (such as subsidies), which can "distort the decisions of citizens
and companies regarding consumption, savings, investments..." according to the Danish Ministry
of Finance. Thus a tax distortion rate of 10 percent is applied to public spending, to take into
account this loss. So an expenditure of 10 DKK financed by tax will result in a socio-economic loss
of 1 DKK.
Finally, shadow prices are not accurate values, but only estimates, and projections are subject to
uncertainties. Investigation variations of projections and using different shadow prices is useful
to estimate more broadly the costs and benefits associated with such data. Therefore, sensitivity
analysis and scenario analysis must be conducted on most uncertain projections and shadow prices.
4.1.3
Frame of this CBA
The objective here is to determine the profitability of the Horns Rev 3 offshore wind farm in
Denmark, for the Danish society, i.e. the costs and benefits that would have not occur if Horns Rev
20
==PAGE:26==
Methodology
MSc Thesis - Antoine Puchaud
3 had not been build. The goal is to include socio-economic and environmental costs and benefits
in addition to market costs and benefits. The time frame ranges from the first investigations for
the project (2013) to the decommissioning of the project (2044).
4.2
Characteristics of the case study
The case study is Horns Rev 3, a Danish offshore wind farm located few kilometers away from
Horns Rev 1 and Horns 2, in the North Sea, west of Jutland, in the DK1 grid region. The wind
farm consists of 49 8.3MW-turbines, Vestas V164-8.3 MW, for an installed capacity of 406.7MW .
The wind farm covers an area of 88km2 and is 34km away from the shore, at a depth of 11-19m [48].
The project was discussed by the Danish Parliament in April 2012 and tenders started in 2013.
According to the time schedule (Figure 8) provided by Energinet in 2014, investigations were con-
ducted between 2013 and 2014, then Vattenfall won the tender process in 2015 and the construction
phase began the same year. Finally the wind farm was planned to be fully commissioned at the
end of 2019 [45], but it happened in August 2019.
Figure 8: Time Schedule of development phases of Horns Rev 3, source: En-
erginet
The Annual Energy Production (AEP) is expected to be 1,700,000 MWh, corresponding to a
Capacity Factor of 48% and to 4200 Full Load Hours (FLH) [46]. The wind farm receives subsidy
payments based on a Contract-for-Difference, agreed to a tariff of 770 DKK/MWh for the first
50,000 FLH of the project (about 11-12 years) [47]. These characteristics are summarised in Table 4.
21
==PAGE:27==
Methodology
MSc Thesis - Antoine Puchaud
Commissioning year
2019
Capacity (MW)
406.7
Technical lifetime (years)
25
Distance from shore (km)
34
Water depth (m)
11-19
Capacity Factor
48%
AEP (MWh)
1700000
Subsidies
CfD
Tariff (DKK/MWh)
770
Table 4: Main characteristics of Horns Rev 3
The establishment of Horns Rev 3 was expected to increase the wind share of electricity consumption
in 2020 by 4.8% points from 46.2% to 51.0% [49].
4.3
Social Discount Rate
Discounted cash flows are used for the CBA calculations, they are calculated as follows:
DCF =
CF
(
1
1+r)y−yref
(1)
Where CF stands for Cash Flow, r is the SDR, y the year at which the cash flow occurs and yref
the reference year, at which all cash flows are discounted (here 2023).
In its 2021 catalogue [50], the Danish finance ministry recommends an SDR of 3.5% for the first
35 years of a project. However, it used to be 4% in 2013 [51], when the Horns Rev 3 project began
and 5% SDR before. Thus, the 3.5% SDR will be used for the central scenario, but calculations
will also be done with other SDR, as sensitivity analysis.
Using this discounting method, the NPV is calculated as follows :
NPV =
X
y
Costsy + Benefitsy
(1 + r)y−yref
(2)
It is the sum of costs and benefits of every year discounted at a reference year yref, here 2023.
4.4
Private costs and benefits
4.4.1
Payment from electricity production
According to the Danish Energy Agency (2017) [52], an efficient electricity market is assumed so
the spot price of electricity is used to reflect the benefit from electricity production for the society.
Indeed, because this is a market price defined every hour according to the power consumption and
the power generation of the area it reflects the true value of electricity production for society. For
example, when electricity demand is low, prices are low, so the socio-economic value from addi-
tional electricity production is low which correspond to a low need for this electricity. On the
other hand, a high electricity demand is correlated with higher prices, so the socio-economic value
from additional power production is higher. A simple definition of revenue from power plants is
22
==PAGE:28==
Methodology
MSc Thesis - Antoine Puchaud
the product of power production (MWh) and the spot price (DKK/MWh). However, the average
wholesale market spot price can not be used for wind energy. The reason is that because of its low
marginal costs, wind power production tends to push out conventional power plants, which tends
to decrease the spot price, because of the merit order effect. Moreover, because their production
cannot be controlled, wind farms can produce power at times when demand is not high, sometimes
when prices are negative. Thus, wind farms usually sell electricity at a lower average spot price.
The different power generation technologies have different market value factors (VF): it is the ratio
of the average spot price perceived per MWh by a given technology and the average spot price
perceived per MWh produced by all generators. Using market value factor allows to reflect the
true value of power production, taking into account the time at which the energy is produced.
For a given year y, the benefits from power production is calculated as follows :
Benefitsel,y = AEPy · d
πel,y · V Fy
(3)
Where AEPy is the Annual Energy Production, d
πel,y stands for the average spot price and VFy is
the value factor of offshore wind for the year y.
From this formula, it appears that the calculation of the revenue from power production requires
annual data of three different parameters. As the project was commissioned in 2019, data already
exist for the years 2019-2022, and projections for years above 2022 are also available.
The Danish Energy Agency (2022), provides data of power production from all wind farms in
its registry of data of wind power production, so production data from Horns Rev 3 are available
for 2019 to 2022 [53] [54]. As mentioned in 4.2, it is indicated that the expected AEP of Horns
Rev 3 is 1,700,000 MWh. This value will be used as a projection for all other years. An exception
is made for 2044 because the project has a lifetime of 25 years, so it should be stopped in 2044.
As the project was commissioned progressively in 2019 to be fully commissioned in August 2019,
the AEP of 2019 is about 80% of the expected AEP, so it can be assumed that wind turbines will
also be decommissioned step by step in 2044 so a production complementary to 2019 production
(about 20%) is assumed for 2044. The AEP of the project are shown in Table 5.
Year
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023 - 2043
2044
AEP (TWh)
1349
1821
1703
1871
1700
351
Table 5: AEP used for the calculations
Entso-e transparency publishes data about power production per type of generator and market
prices for different market regions in Europe [55]. Using this, the average day-ahead price per
MWh on the spot market can be calculated between 2019 and 2022.
The average market Value Factor of offshore wind power for a given year is calculated as follows:
V F =
P
t POW (t) · πel(t)
P
t POW (t)
·
P
t PTotal(t)
P
t PTotal(t)cdotπel(t)
(4)
DK1 and DK2 refer to the two separate power price areas in Denmark, DK1 covers western Den-
mark and DK2 covers eastern Denmark. Their different electricity prices are based on regional
supply and demand conditions. The value factor is calculated here using DK1 data, which is the
23
==PAGE:29==
Methodology
MSc Thesis - Antoine Puchaud
grid region to which Horns Rev 3 is directly connected.
For 2023 and beyond, the Danish Energy Agency gave projections of the market Value Factor
of offshore wind in DK1 for 2030, 2040 and 2050, based on calculations maded with the RAMSES
model (it is a techno-economic optimization model that calculates the production of electricity of
a large number of power plants in Denmark) [56]. A linear interpolation is made in this study to
have the market Value Factor for years between 2022, 2030, 2040 and 2050. The list of all value
factors calculated and used is shown in Table 6
Year
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
2026
2027
2028
2029
2030
2031
Value factor
94.0%
91.1%
92.5%
91.1%
90.5%
89.9%
89.3%
88.7%
88.1%
87.6%
87.0%
86.4%
85.8%
Year
2032
2033
2034
2035
2036
2037
2038
2039
2040
2041
2042
2043
2044
Value factor
85.3%
84.8%
84.3%
83.7%
83.2%
82.7%
82.1%
81.6%
81.1%
80.7%
80.3%
79.9%
79.5%
Table 6: Value factor of offshore wind in DK1 used for the calculations
The market Value Factor calculated here is the average revenue perceived per MWh from offshore
wind divided by the average revenue perceived per MWh produced in the region (no matter the
type of power plant). Thus the average day ahead price used here is weighted by hourly power
production, while usual average spot prices are just the mean of all hourly spot price. The average
wholesale market price weighted by hourly production is calculated as follows:
d
πel,y =
P
t PTotal,y(t) ∗πel,y(t)
P
t PTotal,y(t)
(5)
Where PTotal,y(t) and πel,y(t) are the total power production spot market price of electricity for the
year y at an hour t.
For 2023 and beyond, the Danish Energy Agency (2022) [57] gave projections of the average spot
price of electricity.
The list of all the average power price calculated and used is shown in Table 7.
Year
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
Electricity price (DKK 2019/MWh)
282.0
165.3
630.4
1307.5
647.7
549.5
529.9
Year
2026
2027
2028
2029
2030 - 2044
Electricity price (DKK 2019/MWh)
520.1
500.5
480.8
441.6
382.7
Table 7: Average electricity spot price used for the calculations
4.4.2
Private costs : CAPEX, OPEX and DECEX
The capital expenditures or CAPEX of a wind farm are here divided into two categories: the direct
costs of the project, carried by the owner of the wind farm, and the costs of connection to the grid
and of grid upgrade, carried by Energinet.dk. The total CAPEX of an offshore wind farm depends
on various parameters such as distance to shore or water depth [46]. Indeed, a greater distance
to the coast implies longer travels and therefore a more expensive installation, but also a longer
export cable. Deeper water means a higher cost for bottom-fixed wind turbines, as the foundations
become more massive and technical. Thus, being located on shallow waters is a main advantage
24
==PAGE:30==
Methodology
MSc Thesis - Antoine Puchaud
for Horns Rev wind farms.
Vattenfall has invested approximately 1 billion € (€2015) in the construction of Horns Rev 3,
or €2.46M/MW [?]. This mainly includes costs of construction of monopiles, wind turbines and
interarray cables with their installation.
Energinet for its part had planned an investment of 1,542,400,000DKK (DKK2013) (about 200M€)
related to the project [61]. This mainly includes the connection to the grid with an offshore trans-
former platform (including 3 x 140 MVA transformers), a 35km 220kV submarine export cable
connecting the offshore transformer to the compensation station and a 58km 220kV cable con-
necting the compensation station to an existing station (Endrup Station) where a new 400/220kV
transformer is to be installed (Figure 9). However, as the competitiveness of offshore wind farms
improves, it is expected in the new tenders that the winner of the tender will be responsible of some
of these elements. For example, Energinet.dk announced that for the Thor Offshore Wind Farm
(expected to be fully commissioned before the end of 2027), the winner of the concession will have
to build and operate the « offshore substation, export cables, nearshore substation all the way to
point of connection (POC)» [62].
Figure 9: Overall layout of the connection system for the Horns Rev 3 Offshore
Wind Farm.
The connection of the Endrup station to a new wind farm has changed the constraints of the local
grid, which has been upgraded to accommodate the capacity of the wind farm. Therefore a new
400kV cable from the Endrup station has been added and an existing 150kV cable has been up-
graded.
The cost breakdown of the project (Figure 10) [46] provides information on the cost of the different
equipment and installation categories. According to this estimate, the grid connection category
25
==PAGE:31==
Methodology
MSc Thesis - Antoine Puchaud
represents 18% of the costs associated with the project, which corresponds to the costs announced
for Horns Rev 3 (Energinet.dk’s investment represents 17% of the total).
Figure 10: Cost breakdown of offshore wind farms, including Equipment and
installation separated by type, from the Danish Energy Agency
The project schedule (Figure 8 in section 4.2) indicates the order in which the different phases
of the project took place. The construction phased carried out by Vattenfall started in mid 2016
and lasted 3 years (on the time schedule, Horns Rev 3 was supposed to be fully commissioned
in January 2020 but it happened in August 2019), the installation of the foundations started in
mid 2016 and ended in mid 2018, the installation of the wind turbines started in 2017 and was
completed by mid 2019. The installation of the export cable and the transformer supervised by
Energinet.dk had started in April 2015 and ended in December 2016. The assumption made here
is that the "other costs" category is fairly distributed over the construction period of the project
(2013-2019). The combination of data from the time schedule with the cost breakdown allows to
estimate the cost of each phase of the project and thus the annual capital expenditure during the
construction phase (Table 8).
Category
Cost per component
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
Other
1,693
14%
14%
14%
14%
14%
14%
14%
Foundations
1,976
25%
50%
25%
Connecton to the grid
1,903
43%
57%
Wind turbines
3,763
33%
33%
33%
Investment per year
9,335
242
242
1,058
1,823
2,484
1,990
1,496
Table 8: Annual investment in million DKK (2019 prices)
26
==PAGE:32==
Methodology
MSc Thesis - Antoine Puchaud
Operational expenditures (OPEX) correspond to the costs of operation and maintenance of the
wind farm. Part of these costs is fixed, and depends on the installed capacity, the other part is
variable and depends on the energy produced. In general, fixed costs amount to about 75% of the
total operating costs of offshore wind farms.
The Danish Energy Agency indicates an estimate of fixed and variable OPEX for wind farms
in 2020 prices in its Data sheet related to its catalogue on technology data for electricity produc-
tion [46], prices are given for 2020, 2025, 2030, 2040 and 2050 and are shown on Table 9. Values
for 2020 corresponds to 8.4 MW wind turbines which is an average of latest projects (Horns Rev
3 and Kriegers Flak), so it is the value used in this analysis for Horns Rev 3 (which consists of
8.3 MW tubines). It also gives an assessment for 2025, 2030, 2040 and 2050 showing the expected
decreasing cost of OPEX. OPEX per MW should decrease over time mainly due to the fact that
the capacity per turbine will increase while some operations only depend on the number of turbines
and not on their capacity (which results in less maintenance trips per MW).
Year
2020
2025
2030
2040
2050
Variable O&M (2020-EUR/MWh)
5
4.17
3.89
3.42
3.25
Fixed O&M (2020-EUR/MW/y)
50000
42000
39000
34000
33000
Table 9: OPEX projection from the Danish Energy Agency (2015 prices)
In the Cash Flow model, the annual OPEX are calculated as:
OPEXy = IC · OMfixed + AEPy · OMvariable
(6)
With IC the installed capacity of Horns Rev 3, OMfixed the fixed cost of O&M per MW, OMvariable
the variable cost of O&M per MWh and AEPy the energy production for the year y.
Decommissioning expenditures (DECEX) are assumed to occur in the last year.
However, as
the only decommissioning that has occurred in Denmark was for the Vindeby offshore wind farm,
which consisted of only 11 450 kW wind turbines, the evolution of the technology and the size
of wind farms would make any comparison irrelevant. Moreover, DEA does not provide data on
decommissioning costs. QBIS (2020) [60] provided a cost of decommissioning of 0.392 M€/MW is
used (based on Orsted, Vattenfall, Siemens Gamesa, Semco and BVG Associates). Since it applied
this number to different Danish parks including Horns Rev 3 and in the absence of more precise
estimates, this value will be used for the calculations in this analysis. In the Cash Flow model, the
decommissioning expenditure is assumed to occur in 2044. It is calculated as follows:
DECEX = IC · D
(7)
With D the cost of decommissioning per MW.
4.5
External costs and benefits
4.5.1
Cost of grid operations and market balancing
Integration in the power system includes grid upgrades, however this cost is already included in
the investment of Energinet.dk in the project presented previously in section 4.4.2.
27
==PAGE:33==
Methodology
MSc Thesis - Antoine Puchaud
The costs that the offshore wind farm creates for grid operation and market balancing are glob-
ally described by the tariff the TSO charges the producer. The tariff that Energinet.dk charges
producers in 2023 depends on where the producer is located [63]. If the power plant is located
in a consumption dominated area, the producer is charged 0.3 øre/kWh as a feed in tariff, while
power plants located in a production dominated area are charged 0.9 øre/kWh. This tariff aims to
reflect the cost for the grid of producing power far from consumption centers, which necessitates
a more developed grid to transport electricity over long distance and creates more power losses.
Horns Rev 3 is located in a production dominated area, thus it creates higher costs for the grid
operators. On top of this first tariff, a balance tariff for production of 0.16 øre/kWH has to be paid
by the producer, it covers "a share of Energinet’s total costs for system services and handling the
balancing market". A connection contribution is also charged to producers, but it should not be
counted here as this contribution reflects the connection of the power plant to the grid, which is
already included in the CAPEX covered by Energinet in 4.4.2. Thus the total cost of grid operation
and market balancing that occur because of the wind farm are assumed to be 1.06 øre/kWh.
The cost that the wind farm creates for the TSO is therefore calculated as:
CostTSO,y = AEPy · cproducer
(8)
Where cproducer is the tariff of 1.06 øre/kWh.
4.5.2
Impact on fisheries
As explained in section 3.5, it is complicated to give a clear estimate of the losses for fisheries.
However, it is possible to give an upper limit of this potential cost. In the technical report no. 6
of Horns Rev 3 (2014) [64], the pressure that Horns Rev 3 puts on commercial fisheries is assessed
using satellite based data on fisheries statistics from The Danish AgriFish Agency.
Horns Rev 3 Offshore Wind Farm potentially has a negative impact on the commercial fisheries,
because of restrictions which result in a loss of fishing grounds. All form of fisheries were forbidden
in the project area during the construction phase to not disturb the construction and the vessels
used. This represented a loss of around 90 km2 for the fisheries. During the operational phase
of the wind farm, all fisheries using trawls are still forbidden (bottom, pelagic and beam trawl),
however gill net fishery is allowed during the operational phase.
Horns Rev 3 is located in the ICES 40F7 fishing area, where the satellite based data show that
the total estimated annual value of the catches was approximately 25 million DKK between 2002
and 2012. These estimates detail the value of catches per species and per gear, which highlights
that bottom trawlers and beam trawlers are the most important fisheries in this area. Considering
the annual catches and the percentage of fishing effort in the Horns Rev 3 area, the annual catches
value is estimated to be 1.09 million DKK per year in the project area: the trawlers potential loss
per year is about 1,086 million DKK per year whereas gill nets potential loss is only 5400 DKK, as
shown in Figure 11.
28
==PAGE:34==
Methodology
MSc Thesis - Antoine Puchaud
Figure 11: Potential fishing losses in the Horns Rev 3 area
Thus, to calculate the potential impact on fisheries, a potential loss of 1.09M DKK per year is
considered during the construction phase and the decommissioning phase, while a potential loss of
1.086M DKK per year is considered during the operation of the wind farm.
However, this is an upper limit of the losses.
The potential loss are based on the total value
of the landing, but it does not subtract the costs of labor and operations of the fisheries. So this
potential loss is considerably higher than the real loss that could occur. Another assumption is
that the fish in the wind farm area are not caught outside of the restricted area, but many mobile
species could be caught outside of this area, which would also imply costs for fisheries as the fishing
effort would be increase. This cost will not be included in the central scenario of NPV calculation,
as it is a theoretical maximal cost and not a real cost, however it will be discussed in comparison
with other costs. This upper limit will be included in a worst case scenario.
4.5.3
Tax distortion losses from subsidies
As mentioned in section 4.1.2, the Danish Ministry of Finance indicates a tax distortion rate of
10%, meaning that even if subsidies are neutral in a socio-economic analysis, 10% of this amount
is a socio-economic loss. The tax distortion losses are calculated as follows:
TDlosses(y) = rTD · S(y)
(9)
With rTD the tax distortion rate and S(y) the subsidies paid by the government to Horns Rev
3 concession owner during year y. Thus tax distortion requires to calculate the annual subsidy
payment.
Horns Rev 3 subsidy scheme is a Contract-for-Difference (CfD), meaning that a tariff negoti-
ated with the government is granted for the first 50000 full load hours (FLH). This tariff is 770
DKK/MWh for Horns Rev 3. A FLH means an electricity production equivalent to an hour of
production at nameplate capacity. This tariff is the price that the concession owner will sell its
electricity during the first 50000 FLH. If the wholesale market price is under the negotiated tariff,
the Danish government gives the difference as a subsidy to the concession owner, with the exception
of times when prices are negative, then no payment is made. On the other hand, if the wholesale
market price is above the tariff, the concession owner does not receive any payment. However, he
does not pay the difference to the state, so it is a two-sided CfD with a balancing mechanism. In-
stead of paying the state, the owner accumulates this amount as a "negative balance". While there
29
==PAGE:35==
Methodology
MSc Thesis - Antoine Puchaud
is a negative balance, wholesale market prices under the tariff do not lead to subsidies payment, but
to a decrease of the negative balance. Subsidies are made available again only when the negative
balance goes back to zero [47].
Thus, it is important not only to calculate the subsidies that could be received every year, but
also the negative balance accumulated at the end of every year, to determine whether or not sub-
sidies should be paid out.
Entso-e data on wholesale market price and generation per type [55] has been used to calculate the
amount of subsidies and negative balance. Between 2019 and 2022, the difference of revenue at the
tariff price and revenue at the market price on the monthly power production has been calculated
as follows:
Diffm =
X
t
POW (t) · (Tariff −πel(t))
(10)
Where, POW (t) stands for the power production from offshore wind at an hour t and πel(t) stands
for the power price at an hour t.
Beyond the year 2022, the differences betwenn the revenue at the tariff price and the revenue at
the market price are calculated as follows:
Diffy = AEP · (Tariff −d
πel,y · V Fy)
(11)
Where VFy is the value factor for the year y and πel,y is the average spot price of electricity.
For every month, the Negative Balance at the end of the month (NB) is calculated as follows:
NB(m)= Max(NB(m-1) + Diff(m), 0)
It is the sum of the potential subsidies of the month and the negative balance of the previous
month. However it is a negative balance, so it is set to 0 if the result is positive.
Then potential subsidies (Sp) are calculated, depending on the negative balance, as follows:
Sp(m)=
(
0
if NB(m)<0
Diff(m) + NB(m −1)
else
If the balance is negative at the end of the month, there is no subsidies. Else, the potential subsidies
are the difference between the revenue at the tariff price and the revenue at the market price of the
month plus the negative balance of the previous month that has been compensated.
The cumulative production at the end of every year of the project (shown in Table 5) shows that
the wind farm will have produced 50000 FLH between 2019 and 2030, as a result, no subsidies
payment should be possible after 2030 as shown in (Table 10).
Year
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
2026
2027
2028
2029
2030
2031
2032-2044
Cumulated production (FLH)
3316
7772
11958
16558
20738
24918
29098
33278
37458
41638
45818
49998
54178
>50000
Production under
50000 FLH
100%
100%
100%
100%
100%
100%
100%
100%
100%
100%
100%
100%
0.04%
0%
Table 10: Cumulative production of Horns Rev 3 (FLH)
Thus, only potential subsidies between 2019 and 2030 are real subsidies and are considered in the
calculations.
30
==PAGE:36==
Methodology
MSc Thesis - Antoine Puchaud
4.5.4
Avoided and emitted pollutants
Quantification of avoided emissions
The method used to quantify avoided emissions of CO2 is the method developed by Hawkes (2010)
[32] described in section 3.3. Using the power production per type of power plant and the emission
factors of these different technologies, it is possible to visualize the link between the hourly vari-
ation of conventional power production and the hourly variation of CO2 emissions of the national
power system. As this method only includes national production, exports and imports are omitted.
If there is a strong linear correlation between these two data, the slope coefficient of the linear
regression is the marginal emission factors of the national grid.
Data used for hourly power production per type of generator are the same as in section 4.4.1,
from ensto-e transparency [55].
The emission factors used are shown in Table 11, they are based on IPCC data (for coal, gas
and hydro power plants) [3] and from (Huber &al, 2019) (for oil and waste power plants) [65]
where they calculated MEF in Germany using Hawkes’ methodology based on data of German
power plants.
Technology
Emission Factor (gCO2/kWh)
Coal
820
Gas - Combined Cycle
490
Oil
788
Waste
997
Hydro
0
Biomass
0
Table 11: Marginal emission factor of electricity generation technologies
The conventional power production Pconv is calculated for every hour t, as follows:
Pconv(t) =
X
x
Px(t)
(12)
Where Px(t) is the hourly power production of power generation technology x, with x representing
the different conventional power plants technology.
Then the system’s hourly CO2 production Γ is calculated as follows :
Γ(t) =
X
x
Px(t) · EFx
(13)
EFx stands for the emission factor of a technology x. From these n couples of observations, n-1
couples of hourly variations are derived :
∆Pconv(t) = Pconv(t) −Pconv(t −1)
(14)
∆Γ(t) = Γ(t) −Γ(t −1)
(15)
31
==PAGE:37==
Methodology
MSc Thesis - Antoine Puchaud
A linear regression is then done to fit the following equation:
∆Γ(t) = β · ∆Pconv + ε
(16)
Where β, the slope of the linear regression is the MEF.
The marginal emission factor is calculated for Denmark in 2019. Calculating the MEF of DK1
only (of which Horns Rev 3 is a part) does not give any relevant correlation between these two
data (the coefficient of determination R2 is under 0.3). This can be explained by the fact that this
method aims to find a correlation between variation of power production and pollution of a grid
region, without taking into account imports and exports. It is highly problematic in the case of
DK1 because it exchanges a lot of power with DK2, so an area can suddenly increase or decrease
its production to adapt to the demand of the other area. This problem was solved by summing the
power production per type of both area, so that imports and exports between DK1 and DK2 are
taken into account. This gives better results with a strong relationship visible on Figure 12 . This
correlation is well described by the linear regression which has a high coefficient of determination
R2 = 0.87.
Figure 12: Linear regression of the correlation between ∆Γ and ∆G
From the method used above, the MEF for electricity produced in Denmark in 2019 is estimated
to be 541 gCO2/kWh, however this only gives the marginal emission factor of a single year and it
can not be assumed to stay at this level in the future as the Danish government has carbon neutral
objectives. As the goal of the Danish government is to produce 100% electricity from renewables
in 2030, according to data published by the Danish Energy Agency (2022) [57] showing that the
electricity production in Denmark is expected to be carbon neutral in 2030, the assumption made
here is that the MEF will linearly decrease to reach 0 in 2030. This linear interpolation gives the
MEF used in this study for the lifetime of the project (shown below in Table 12). The method used
above is used again to calculate MEF of Denmark in 2018, which gives 597gCO2/kWh. This result
seems to confirm that the development of renewables reduces the production of the most polluting
power plants and thus reduce the MEF of the power system.
32
==PAGE:38==
Methodology
MSc Thesis - Antoine Puchaud
Year
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
2026
2027
2028
2029
2030 - 2044
MEF (gCO2/kWh)
541.2
492.0
442.8
393.6
344.4
295.2
246.0
196.8
147.6
98.4
49.2
0.0
Table 12: Marginal Emission Factors for electricity generation in Denmark
Avoided emissions of CO2 for the year y are calculated as:
ΓCO2,avoided,y = AEPy · MEFCO2,y
(17)
Where MEFCO2,y and AEPy are the marginal emission factor of CO2 of the Danish power system
and the Annual Energy Production of Horns Rev 3 for the year y.
For the other pollutants, the emission factors not only depend on the fuel (so on the type of
power plant), but also on the technology used in the power plant, so it is specific to every power
plants. The data used previously only gave power production and emission factors per type of
power plant, they are not power plant specific, thus they do not allow to calculate the MEF of
these gases. For this reason, SO2 and NOx savings are calculated using the average emission rate
of the Danish power system:
Γy,avoided = AEP · AEFy
(18)
Where Γy,avoided stands for the avoided emissions of a pollutant y and AEFy is the average emission
factor of pollutant y of the Danish power system. The Danish Energy Agency (2022) [57] provided
projections of AEF of different pollutants for the Danish power system (Table 13).
Year
2022
2023
2024
2025
2026
2027
2028
2029
2030 - 2044
SO2 AEF (g/kWh)
22
16
15
14
12
10
8
4
3
NOx AEF (g/kWh)
197
187
167
151
130
113
99
90
78
Table 13: AEF of SO2 and NOx for the Danish power system
Quantification of emitted pollutants
In Horns Rev 3 technical report on air emissions (2014) [66], the CO2, SO2 and NOx content
of turbines, steel foundations and their installation is assessed, as well as emissions due to opera-
tion and maintenance and the onshore installation required to connect the wind farm to the grid.
The main data are summarized in Table 14.
Activity
tCO2
tNOx
tSO2
Onshore installation (balance of power)
404,755
-
-
Turbines and foundations manufacture
345,510
-
-
Offshore installation
76,254
1,043
144
O&M (annual emissions)
7,274
74
14
Table 14: CO2, SO2 and NOx emissions from Horns Rev 3
In the calculations, 80% and 20% of emissions from O&M are respectively accounted for 2019 and
2044 as the wind farm is assumed to operate during 80% and 20% of these years. For the 2022-2043
33
==PAGE:39==
Methodology
MSc Thesis - Antoine Puchaud
period, full emissions from O&M are accounted. The time schedule given in Figure 8 in section
4.4.2 allows to attribute different emissions related to the construction phase to specific years. The
result is shown in Table 15.
Year
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
Total tCO2 per year
0
0
187,917
332,117
100,828
100,828
100,828
Total tNOx per year
0
0
209
209
209
209
209
Total tSO2 per year
0
0
29
29
29
29
29
Table 15: Annual CO2, SO2 and NOx emissions per year during the construction
of Horns Rev 3
Monetization of emitted and avoided pollutants
These amounts of pollutants emitted and avoided are monetized using the prices described in
3.3. The price of SO2 and NOx used in the cash flow model are the price used by the Danish
Energy Agency in its Levelized Cost of Energy (LCoE) Calculator [39]. The price of SO2 is 31,000
€2020/t which is about 180,000 DKK/t. The price of NOx used in the cash flow model is 24,000
€2020/t which is about 230,000 DKK/t. These prices are applied on the 2013-2044 period of the
project.
The cost (or benefit if negative) associated with the emissions (or avoided emissions) of a gas is
calculated as follows for SO2 and NOx:
Costgas,y = (Γgas,y −AEFgas,y) · cgas
(19)
Where AEFgas,y stands for the average emission factor of the given gas for the Danish power
system, Γgas,y is the amount of gas emitted during year y and cgas is the social price of the gas. If
the total cost is negative, then it is a benefit.
CO2 emissions are valued differently because of the EU-ETS which already gives a value to CO2.
The Danish Energy Agency (2022) [57] gives estimates of allowance price of CO2 for 2022-2045
(shown in Table 16 below, with 2019-2021 history data from Statista.com [67]).
Year
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2025
2026
2027
2028
2029
2030
2021 price
(DKK/t)
188
189
297
617
623
642
658
676
695
716
738
Year
2031
2032
2033
2034
2035
2036
2037
2038
2039
2040-2044
2021 price
(DKK/t)
760
785
811
838
868
900
933
969
1008
1049
Table 16: Estimates of allowance price of CO2
The Danish Energy Agency indicated that the price of CO2 allowance already represents the social
price of CO2 emissions in power production by adding a cost to polluting power plants, so the
DEA recommended to not include economic value of change of CO2 emissions in electricity system.
However, the estimated price of CO2 allowance Table 16 is far beyond the shadow prices of CO2
presented in 3.3, so it appears that it does not reflect the total consequences of CO2 on climate
and health. The choice made in this study is therefore to use shadow prices of CO2. The shadow
price used in the central scenario will be 185 $2020/tCO2 (results from Rennert &al.).
34
==PAGE:40==
Methodology
MSc Thesis - Antoine Puchaud
The price of CO2 allowances must be subtracted from the shadow price of CO2 to avoid double
counting. Thus, the benefits from CO2 abatement is calculated as follows:
BenefitCO2,y = AEFy · MEFy · MAX((cCO2,y −cCO2quotas,y), 0)
(20)
Where BenefitCO2,y is the benefit from CO2 emissions avoided for the year y, MEFy is the MEF
of the system for the year y, cCO2,y is the cost of CO2 for the year y and cCO2quotas,y is the cost of
CO2 for the year y. The MAX((cCO2,y −cCO2quotas,y), 0) means that if the shadow price of CO2 is
under the price of quotas no benefit from CO2 abatement is made (this prevents negative counting
of CO2 abatement).
Finally, the cost of CO2 emissions for the year y is calculated as follows:
CostCO2,y = ΓCO2,y · cCO2,y
(21)
Where ΓCO2,y is the CO2 emitted because of the wind farm for the year y and cCO2,y is the shadow
price of CO2 for the year y.
SF6 leak risk
The probability of an SF6 leak on the substation’s transformers is not known, the same goes
for the quantity of gas used in these installations. A way to assess the potential cost of this risk it
to use values from similar cases.
Energinet.dk reported an SF6 leak of 527kg at Asnæs Power Station in its 2020 CSR report [68].
Asnæs Power Station consists of 3 units for a total of about 1,050 MW, so it probably uses a dif-
ferent amount of SF6 than Horns Rev 3, however as they both use transformers for high voltages,
order of magnitude should be similar.
Assuming a 500 kg leaks of SF6 at Horns Rev 3 gives a theoretical upper bound of the SF6 leak
risk. 500 kg of SF6 is equivalent to 11,400 tCO2, because the warming potential of one kg of SF6 is
22.8 tons of CO2. This value will be compared to amounts of CO2 emissions and savings to judge
the relative importance of this risk.
35
==PAGE:41==
Results
MSc Thesis - Antoine Puchaud
5
Results
This chapter presents the results of the calculations of the diffents costs and benefits. The main
scenario is the central scenario, but a worst case scenario and a best case scenario are also inves-
tigated to give a range of possible NPVs. The assumptions made and the values applied in the
different scenarios are presented in Table 17.
Variables
Central Scenario
Worst Case Scenario
Best Case Scenario
Social Discount Rate
3.5%
Tax Distortion Rate
10%
Variation of the projected
price of electricity
0%
-31%
+31%
Social price of CO2 used
Mean price (185$/ton)
Low price (44$/ton)
High price (413$/ton)
Losses for fisheries
Neglected
Upper limit
Neglected
Table 17: Assumptions made for the different scenarios
5.1
Intermediate results
The subsidy payments has been calculated for the operational phase of the wind farm, and the
amount of pollutants emitted or avoided has been calculated over the lifetime of the project. These
results are useful to understand the final results. The subsidy payment shown in Table 18 comes
from the central scenario calculations.
Year
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
2026
2027
2028
2029
2030
2031-2044
Subsidies (million DKK)
780
1 280
446
0
0
0
0
237
351
371
423
508
0
Table 18: Annual subsidies prevision for Horns Rev 3
The construction and operation phases of Horns Rev 3 have a footprint of 1,004,369 tCO2. However
power production on the lifetime of the wind farm will save 5,520,240 tCO2, so the project results
in net CO2 savings. Quantities of CO2 avoided or emitted are shown in Figure 13.
Figure 13: CO2 emitted or avoided every year by Horns Rev 3
36
==PAGE:42==
Results
MSc Thesis - Antoine Puchaud
Additionally, the project also saves 5,536 tNOx on its lifetime, however it emits 139 extra tons
of SO2, according to the calculations made (more exactly 494 tons of SO2 are released while the
average emissions of the power system for the same power production should be 354 tons).
5.2
Upper limit of uncertain costs
Some costs were hard to assess such as cost for fisheries or the cost associated with the risk of an
SF6 leak. The choice made was to not consider them in the main calculations of the NPV of the
project, but to find a theoretical limit to these costs to judge them in regard to other monetized
costs and benefits.
SF6 potential leak is in the order of magnitude of 10,000t of CO2 equivalent, as a comparison,
the emitted and avoided amounts of CO2 which ranges in million tons of CO2 (respectively 1.0 Mt
and 5.5 Mt). This is a low value compared to the CO2 emitted during the construction phase or
the CO2 avoided, thus it justifies to neglect this risk in the main calculations.
Regarding potential loss for fisheries, the present value of this cost is 32,3 million DKK, which
is low compared to the final NPV of 1.9 billion DKK. Thus, and because this is a theoretical
maximal cost and not a real cost, it will only be considered in the worst case scenario.
5.3
Central scenario
The cash flow model main output is the total NPV of the project, it also gives the present value
of every cost and benefit. The present values of all costs and benefits in the central scenario are
given in Table 19. At the national level, the present calculations lead to estimate that the Horns
Rev 3 offshore wind farm has a positive NPV of 0.8 billion DKK (in 2023).
Central scenario
Capex
-13 232 120 622 kr.
Opex
-4 782 806 779 kr.
Decex
-646 620 520 kr.
Benefits from electricity production
16 043 683 684 kr.
Benefits from CO2 abatement
5 069 550 720 kr.
Costs from CO2 emissions
-1 616 375 146 kr.
Costs from SO2 emissions
-31 199 666 kr.
Benefits from NOx abatement
785 067 843 kr.
Tax distortion losses
-436 799 614 kr.
Cost of operation on the grid and on the market
-353 495 836 kr.
NPV (2023)
798 884 064 kr.
Table 19: Net Present Value of Horns Rev 3 (central scenario)
From these results, it appears that the Danish society benefits from Horns Rev 3. A breakdown of
all costs and benefits is shown in Figure 14 to allow a better comparison of the magnitude of the
different effects.
It appears that the most significant cost and benefit are the CAPEX and the revenues from elec-
tricity production. The costs from CO2 emissions are about one third of the benefits from CO2
37
==PAGE:43==
Results
MSc Thesis - Antoine Puchaud
abatement, this is due to the fact that a part of these benefits are included in the price of electric-
ity through the EU-ETS which accounts part of CO2 price by increasing the price of electricity.
Thus an undetermined part of environmental benefits is included in the benefits from electricity
production. It also appears that benefits from NOx reduction, cost from tax distortion and cost
from market operation and grid operation are not negligible when compared to the final NPV.
The only negligible cost considered here is SO2 abatement/emissions, which is almost zero (-30
million DKK). The value of the cost of SO2 emissions reflects that the SO2 amount emitted during
the construction and O&M phases is close to the average SO2 amount the power system would
emit for the same power production over the life time of Horns Rev 3.
Figure 14: Comparison of total costs and total benefits
5.4
Sensitivity analysis
As the main benefit is the power production, the NPV is very sensitive to the price of electricity.
The wholesale market price of electricity is known for 2019-2022, and is given by projections for
the period 2023-2044. The Danish Energy Agency does not provide any low or high estimate of the
electricity price, but specifies that sensitivity analysis should be carried on the projected electricity
price (2023-2044). The price of electricity can vary greatly between different years (for example
2022 prices are eight times higher than in 2020). As the projected data simulate a rapid return to
electricity prices comparable to pre-crisis levels, the variation applied here is the standard deviation
of yearly spot price before crisis. According to Nordpool data [69], the standard deviation of the
38
==PAGE:44==
Results
MSc Thesis - Antoine Puchaud
yearly spot price in DK1 from 2008 to 2020 (before the energy crisis) adjusted for inflation is 31%,
so the variations investigated for this sensitivity analysis are ± 31% of the projected electricity
price. The aim is to observe the impact of a change in electricity price on the NPV.
This parameter has an impact on the benefit from electricity production but also on the cost of
tax distortion as the subsidy payments are lower when the price of electricity is higher. The results
of this sensitivity analysis are displayed in Figure 15: a ± 31% variation of the projected price of
electricity results in a ± 3.75 billion DKK on the central NPV.
Figure 15: Sensitivity analysis on the projected price of electricity
Benefits from CO2 saving is the second biggest benefit, but the shadow price of CO2 is probably
the most uncertain data used in this study as the assessment of the social cost of a pollutant is
subject to many assumptions. This value varies greatly among the different studies where some
estimates can be ten times higher than others. Thus, different social prices reviewed in section 3.3
of CO2 have been considered in this sensitivity analysis. The central scenario uses a value of 183
$2020/tCO2, however the study that comes to this mean shadow price also gives a low and a high
shadow price of CO2 44 $2020/tCO2 and 413 $2020/tCO2. Because of that, calculations with these
values are also investigated. The increasing price of CO2 used by the European Investment Bank
Group is also used. All these shadow prices of CO2 are summarized in Table 20 below.
Shadow price
2020
2030
2040
2050
Mean price of CO2 ($2020/t)
188
188
188
188
Low price of CO2 ($2020/t)
44
44
44
44
High price of CO2 ($2020/t)
413
413
413
413
Increasing price of CO2 (€2016/t)
80
250
525
800
Table 20: Shadow prices of CO2 used in the sensitivity analysis
Figure 16 shows that the different shadow prices of CO2 give a wide range of results. The use of
39
==PAGE:45==
Results
MSc Thesis - Antoine Puchaud
the increasing price of CO2 (going from 80€/t in 2020 to 800€/t in 2050) gives a NPV of about -0.6
billion DKK, which is lower than in the central scenario (which uses the price of 188$/t). This is
due to the fact that the avoided emissions occur from 2019 to 2029 (because the electricity system is
supposed to be carbon neutral in 2030), so most of emission savings are valued at a cost lower than
the mean shadow price of the central scenario. The use of the low price of CO2 gives a negative
NPV of -2.8 billion DKK. On the other hand, the use of the high shadow price of CO2 gives an
NPV of 8.5 billion DKK. This sensitivity analysis reflects how the NPV depends highly on the CO2
shadow price.
Figure 16: Sensitivity analysis on the CO2 shadow price
The biggest cost is CAPEX, however no sentivity analysis is carried on it because it is based on
a cost that has already occurred, and the values come from Vattenfall and Energinet, which can
therefore be considered as reliable estimates.
A last sensitivity analysis is conducted on the social discount rate as the Danish ministry of fi-
nance has specified different values over the years. As the main cost (CAPEX) happens during the
first years of the project and benefits (power production and pollution abatement) this takes place
throughout the entire operation phase of the project, a higher discount rate mainly decrease the
present value of benefits while it affects less the costs. The 4% SDR used in 2013 gives a 0.2 billion
DKK NPV while the 5% SDR used before 2013 gives a negative NPV of -1.0 billion DKK.
40
==PAGE:46==
Results
MSc Thesis - Antoine Puchaud
Figure 17: Sensitivity analysis on the social discount rate
The higher and lower values obtained in the sensitivity analysis on CO2 social price and electricity
price are combined in a best and worst case scenario (using a common SDR of 3.5%) to give a range
of possible NPVs of the project. Moreover, the worst case scenario includes the potential losses
for fisheries. The NPVs of these two scenario are compared to the NPV of the central scenario in
Table 21. The NPV of the worst case scenario is -6.6 billion DKK and the NPV of the best case
scenario is 12.1 billion DKK.
Variables
Worst case Scenario
Central scenario
Best case Scenario
Capex
-13 232 120 622 kr.
Opex
-4 782 806 779 kr.
Decex
-646 620 520 kr.
Revenues from electricity
12 520 381 419 kr.
16 043 683 684 kr.
19 566 985 948 kr.
Benefits from CO2 abatement
231 425 929 kr.
5 069 550 720 kr.
14 720 186 727 kr.
Costs from SO2 emissions
-31 199 666 kr.
Benefits from NOx abatement
785 067 843 kr.
CO2 pollution from construction and O&M
-384 435 170 kr.
-1 616 375 146 kr.
-3 608 448 298 kr.
Tax distortion
-666 410 634 kr.
-436 799 614 kr.
-279 197 311 kr.
Cost of operation on the grid and on the market
-353 495 836 kr.
Potential losses for fisheries
-32 328 930 kr.
0 (Negligible)
Potential SF6 leak
0 (Negligible)
NPV (2023)
-6 592 542 966 kr.
798 884 064 kr.
12 138 351 487 kr.
Table 21: NPV of worst case, central and best case scenarios
41
==PAGE:47==
Discussion
MSc Thesis - Antoine Puchaud
6
Discussion
Firstly, in the result section it appears from the assumptions of the central scenario that the project
benefits the society. The main costs and benefits are the usual economic costs and benefits (CAPEX,
OPEX and revenues from power production) as these are the main economic costs and benefits of
power plants. However, only counting them would result in an underestimated and negative NPV,
the positive NPV is thus mainly due to the reduction of CO2 emissions. This result makes sens as
offshore wind power is still globally subsidized around the world (although subsidy-free projects are
planned), which means that wind power is still usually not profitable when only private costs and
benefits are considered. Nevertheless the fact wind farms are massively developed and subsidized
means that the different governments consider that they have an other valuable impact in addition
of the simple production of electricity: the CO2 emissions avoided.
However, many values are uncertain such as projected data or shadow prices. The potential range
of NPV that the project can have is thus estimated using sensitivity analysis. It shows that the total
NPV varies with the projected electricity price and O&M costs, like all energy projects. However
the main uncertainty comes from the shadow price of CO2: the high shadow price of CO2 gives
the highest NPV, which is about ten times higher than with the mean shadow price of CO2. On
the other hand, the low shadow price of CO2 gives a negative NPV. This is due to the fact that
the shadow price of CO2 is so low that it is under the EU-ETS allowance price of CO2 (except for
2019 and 2020), so the CO2 avoided emissions are supposed to be entirely included in the price of
electricity by the CO2 allowance price of the EU-ETS. For this reason, the low shadow price of CO2
gives an NPV that corresponds approximately to the recommendation of the Danish Energy Agency
of not valuing CO2 avoided emissions since they are supposed to be fully covered by the EU-ETS.
This hypothesis of considering that EU-ETS covers the shadow price of carbon is unfavourable to
offshore projects as it gives a very low negative NPV, which seems to be not consistent with the
impact that CO2 has on health and climate change.
Then, some calculations are based on hypothesis that may have led to certain impacts being over-
or underestimated.
This is the case for calculations of pollutants abatement. The marginal emission factor of CO2
calculated for the Danish electricity system gives more accurate results than the average emission
factor used for NOx and SO2 abatement. This is due to the fact that MEF reflects the real power
plants that operate less because of renewables, while AEF is a simpler assumption, stating that
renewables replaces partially all power plants of the system. The use of AEFs was due to the fact
that MEFs of SO2 and NOx are more complex than MEF of CO2. This assumption has probably
led to underestimated abatement of these two gases. This explains the slightly negative present
value of SO2 emissions, while other studies reviewed suggested SO2 abatement. So it does not prove
that Horns Rev 3 project results in more SO2 emissions for Denmark. However, the magnitude of
an AEF and a MEF is usually the same, so the estimated benefits from NOx is a relevant estimate
in term of magnitude. A result from the study is that environmental impact from CO2 savings is
way higher than the impact from NOx and SO2, which is in line with results from other studies
reviewed in 2, so it can be concluded that the use of MEFs would give more accurate results of SO2
and NOx net emissions but should not have a significant impact on the final NPV.
Moreover, the decommissioning expenditures used in the calculation are probably a high estimate,
because it is not decided whether the foundations and cables will be removed or used for another
42
==PAGE:48==
Discussion
MSc Thesis - Antoine Puchaud
purpose, it will only be decided before the decommissioning phase. Moreover some parts could be
reused or recycled and therefore have a scrap value. A result of this is that the full decommissioning
of a wind farm is more a worst case scenario. Even if the cost of decommissioning used is based
on interviews with the industry, a decommissioning of an offshore wind farm of this size has never
been undertaken to date, so the estimated costs remain highly hypothetical.
Additionally, as explained in section 4.5.3, the potential loss for fisheries is a high estimate, even
for an upper limit of the cost. It is largely over estimated mainly due to the fact it only considers
a loss of catches without subtracting the cost of work and operations. Because of that and the fact
that the upper limit of loss for fisheries is small compared to other costs and benefits, the real cost
for fisheries can be considered as negligible for society.
It is worth noting that benefits from power production are particularly high during the first years
of the project, because of the high wholesale market price of electricity in the wake of the Covid
19 crisis and the war in Ukraine. In 2022, at the peak of the electricity price, the non-discounted
benefit from power production is eight times higher than in 2020. This also reduced the subsidies
from 2022 to 2025, so the tax distortion losses are also low. This calculations are correct but reflect
a crisis, so future projects will probably not benefit from such high electricity prices. Nevertheless,
tax distortion losses will not occur on subsidy-free project.
A limitation of this analysis is that some costs or benefits are grouped together and therefore
are more difficult to visualize. This is the case for the investment required for the grid: Energinet’s
CAPEX includes grid upgrade, but also the components for connecting the wind farm to the grid,
however it does not provide a detailed breakdown of this cost. This CAPEX is grouped together
with Vattenfall’s CAPEX in the results, which does not allow to visualize the share of this cost
linked to the offshore wind farm and the share linked to the grid upgrade. The same problem occurs
with the benefits from power production, as a part of the electricity price is due to EU-ETS, so
the benefits from electricity production also includes a part of benefits from CO2 abatement, but it
is not possible to know how much of this benefits really represents electricity production and how
much really represents CO2 savings.
Finally, most of the effect described qualitatively where judged negligible, such as noise and visual
disamenities, impact on tourism or the impact on ecosystems (excluding impact on biodiversity)
when compared with other technologies. However the impact on biodiversity is hard to quantify as
it is very case-specific and it is hard to measures. It appeared low when compared to other similar
wind farms, so it has been neglected in the calculation. The impact on fisheries is estimated to be
negligible when compared to costs and benefits at a national level, however this might not be the
case at a local scale where it could be a bigger part of local economy. On the other hand, about
25-30 full time jobs have been created for maintenance, so the project also creates local activity.
Finally, none of these elements appears to exceed the benefits of the project and therefore do not
indicate that the project as a whole is socially detrimental.
43
==PAGE:49==
Conclusion
MSc Thesis - Antoine Puchaud
7
Conclusion
The purpose of this work was to assess the profitability of an offshore wind farms for the Danish
society, when considering socio-economical and environmental impacts, through a cost benefit anal-
ysis on the case study of Horns Rev 3. This study has shown which costs and benefits are the most
significant and which are neutral or negligible in Denmark, through monetization of non-market
impacts and qualitative description of the most uncertain or low impacts.
A qualitative result from the literature review is that Danish offshore wind farms located far
from the coast appear to not cause significant noise or visual disturbances to people living near
the project and do not harm tourism. Additionally, the impact on ecosystems is estimated as low
when compared to other technologies currently used. Moreover, even if the impact on biodiversity
depends highly on a project, analogies with existing wind farms in Horns Rev, rest of Denmark of
UK indicates that this impact is probably low for Horns Rev 3.
The impact on fisheries activity is difficult to quantify, but a high and probably overestimated
cost of about 30 million DKK has been provided, demonstrating the relative weakness of this im-
pact compared to other consequences such as CO2 abatement, CAPEX or revenues from electricity,
which amount several billion DKK.
The main non-market costs monetized have been the pollutants emission and the tax distortion
loss. The marginal emission rate of the Danish power system has been calculated, as it is the most
accurate way to quantify CO2 savings, whereas NOx and SO2 savings are calculated using average
emission rates which are based on a simpler assumption. Tax distortion losses have been evaluated
thanks to a calculation of subsidies.
The case study Horns Rev 3 appears to be profitable for the Danish society with an NPV of
0.8 billion DKK in the central scenario, which means its benefits outweigh its costs. However, it
should be highlighted that the potential range of the NPV of this project goes from a negative
value of -6.6 billion DKK to a high positive value of 12.1 billion DKK. The main uncertainty comes
from the shadow price of CO2, so one of the main results of this study is that the value created
by an offshore wind farm depends mainly on the method used to assess the shadow price of CO2.
Moreover, this value depends highly on the electricity market context as electricity prices can vary
greatly and are the main advantage of such a project.
Further work could be done on monetizing the impact on biodiversity, but also on estimating
more accurately the SO2 and NOx abatement, for example with the use of marginal emission fac-
tors. The use of energy market simulation models can also increase the accuracy of costs on market
balancing, as the costs derived from Energinet tariffs do not take into account many of the project’s
characteristics. It is unlikely to change the final outcome, however it will describe more accurately
these impacts.
44
==PAGE:50==
Conclusion
MSc Thesis - Antoine Puchaud
References
[1] IPCC, (2021). Summary for Policymakers. In: Climate Change 2021: The Physical Science
Basis. Contribution of Working Group I to the Sixth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental
Panel on Climate Change from https://www.ipcc.ch/report/ar6/wg1/
[2] IPCC, (2022). Summary for Policymakers. In: Climate Change 2022: Mitigation of Climate
Change. Contribution of Working Group III to the Sixth Assessment Report of the Intergovern-
mental Panel on Climate Change from https://www.ipcc.ch/report/ar6/wg3/
[3] IPCC, (2014). Annex III: Technology-specific cost and performance parameters. In: Climate
Change 2014: Mitigation of Climate Change. Contribution of Working Group III to the Fifth
Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change from https://www.ip
cc.ch/site/assets/uploads/2018/02/ipcc_wg3_ar5_annex-iii.pdf
[4] IEA, (2022). Renewable Electricity, from https://www.iea.org/reports/renewable-elect
ricity
[5] IEA, (2022), Wind Electricity from https://www.iea.org/reports/wind-electricity
[6] IEA, (2019), Offshore Wind Outlook from https://iea.blob.core.windows.net/assets/4
95ab264-4ddf-4b68-b9c0-514295ff40a7/Offshore_Wind_Outlook_2019.pdf
[7] DNV, 2022. Energy Transition Outlook
[8] Rüdiger, M., (2014). The 1973 oil crisis and the designing of a Danish energy policy, Historical
Social Research, 39, 94-112, from https://doi.org/10.12759/hsr.39.2014.4.94-112
[9] Danish Energy Agency, (2020). Performance of offshore wind farms from https://ens.dk/s
ites/ens.dk/files/Globalcooperation/english_factsheet_performance_of_offshore_
wind_farms.pdf
[10] Danish Ministry of Climate, Energy and Utilities, (2021) - SDG7 Energy Compact of Denmark
A next Decade Action Agenda to advance SDG7 on sustainable energy for all, in line with the
goals of the Paris Agreement on Climate Change from https://www.un.org/sites/un2.un.
org/files/2021/09/210920_final_energy_compact-denmark.pdf
[11] Weimer, L. D., (2008). The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics, 2nd edition DOI
10.1057/978-1-349-95121-5_381-2
[12] Mishan, E.J. & Quah, E., (2021). Cost-Benefit Analysis, sixth edition,
[13] Hansson, S .O. (2010). The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics, online edition DOI
10.1057/978-1-349-95121-5_2918-1
[14] Kanbur, R., (2008). The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics, 2nd edition DOI 10.1057/978-
1-349-95121-5_1314-2
[15] Finansministeriet, (2017). Vejledning i samfundsøkonomiske konsekvens vurderinger from
https://fm.dk/udgivelser/2017/august/vejledning-i-samfundsoekonomiske-konsekv
ensvurderinger/
[16] Munksgaard, J. & Larsen, A. (1998). Socio-economic assessment of wind power – lessons from
Denmark, Energy Policy, 26, 85-93, from https://doi.org/10.1016/S0301-4215(97)00009-8
45
==PAGE:51==
Conclusion
MSc Thesis - Antoine Puchaud
[17] Ortega-Izquierdo, M. & del Río,P., (2020). An analysis of the socioeconomic and environmental
benefits of wind energy deployment in Europe, Renewable Energy, 160, 1067-1080, from https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.renene.2020.06.133.
[18] Alma Economics, (2021). Offshore wind energy in Greece: Estimating the socio-economic im-
pact from https://www.almaeconomics.com/alma-blog/2021/07/21/offshore%20wind%20e
nergy
[19] Denny, E., (2007). A Cost Benefit Analysis of Wind Power
[20] Ladenburg, J., (2008). Attitudes towards on-land and offshore wind power development in
Denmark; choice of development strategy, Renewable Energy, 33, 111-118, from https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.renene.2007.01.011
[21] Ladenburg, J., (2023). Distance to Offshore Wind Farms and Onshore Wind Power Spillover
Relations and the Willingness to Pay for Farshore Large-Scale Wind Power Development from
https://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.4390647
[22] Kuehn, S., (2005). Sociological Investigation of The Reception of Horns Rev and Nysted Off-
shore Wind Farms In the Local Communities from https://www.osti.gov/etdeweb/servlet
s/purl/20780434
[23] Glasson, J., Durning, B. & Welch, K., (2022) The Impacts of Offshore Wind Farms (OWFs) on
Local Tourism and Recreation – Evolving Lessons from Practice, Journal of Energy and Power
Technology, 4, from http://dx.doi.org/10.21926/jept.2204037
[24] UNITED, accessed March 2023 from https://www.h2020united.eu/pilots-denmark
[25] Cook, G., (2004).Renewable Energy Policy in Denmark — An Introduction; Scottish Parlia-
ment Information Centre
[26] European Parliament, (2020).Impact of the use of offshore wind and other marine renewables
on European fisheries, from https://www.europarl.europa.eu/thinktank/en/document/I
POL_STU%282020%29652212
[27] Krone, R., Gutow, L., Brey, T., Dannheim, J. & Schröder, A., (2013). Mobile demersal
megafauna at artificial structures in the German Bight – Likely effects of offshore wind farm
development, Estuarine, Coastal and Shelf Science, 125, 1-9, from http://dx.doi.org/10.10
16/j.ecss.2013.03.012
[28] Energinet.dk, Orbicon, BioConsult SH & IfAÖ, (2014). Horns Rev 3 Offshore Wind Farm
Technical report no. 7 - Marine Mammals from https://ens.dk/sites/ens.dk/files/Vind
energi/marine_mammals_v3.pdf
[29] Stenberg, C., van Deurs, M., Støttrup, J., Mosegaard, H., Grome, T., Dinesen, G., Christensen,
A., Jensen, H., Kaspersen, M., Berg, C. W., Leonhard, S. B., Skov, H., Pedersen, J., Hvidt, C. B.
& Klaustrup, M., (2011). Effect of the Horns Rev 1 Offshore Wind Farm on Fish Communities
Follow-up Seven Years after Construction, DTU Aqua Report, 246, from https://tethys.p
nnl.gov/sites/default/files/publications/Horns-rev-1-fish-communities.pdf
[30] Fox, A. D. & Petersen, I. K., (2019). Offshore wind farms and their effects on birds, Dansk
Orn. Foren. Tidsskr., 113, 86-101 from https://pub.dof.dk/artikler/454/download/dof
t-113-2019-86-101-havvindmoeller-og-deres-paavirkning-af-fugle
46
==PAGE:52==
Conclusion
MSc Thesis - Antoine Puchaud
[31] ORJIP, (2018). Bird Collision Avoidance Study, from https://tethys.pnnl.gov/sites/de
fault/files/publications/Skov-et-al-2018.pdf
[32] Hawkes, A. D., (2010). Estimating marginal CO2 emissions rates for national electricity sys-
tems, from https://doi.org/10.1016/j.enpol.2010.05.053
[33] United Nations Economic Commission for Europe, (2021). Life Cycle Assessment of Electricity
Generation Options, from https://unece.org/sites/default/files/2021-10/LCA-2.pdf
[34] European Commission. EU Emissions Trading System (EU ETS), accessed March 2023 from
https://climate.ec.europa.eu/eu-action/eu-emissions-trading-system-eu-ets_en
[35] Rennert, K., Errickson, F., Prest, B.C. & al, (2022). Comprehensive evidence implies a higher
social cost of CO2, Nature, 610, 687–692, from https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-022-052
24-9
[36] European Investment Bank Group, (2020). Climate Bank Roadmap 2021-2025, from https:
//www.eib.org/attachments/thematic/eib_group_climate_bank_roadmap_en.pdf
[37] France Stratégie, (2019). The Value for Climate Action A shadow price of carbon for evaluation
of investments and public policies, from https://www.strategie.gouv.fr/sites/strategi
e.gouv.fr/files/atoms/files/fs-the-value-for-climate-action-final-web.pdf
[38] Shindell, D.T., (2015). The social cost of atmospheric release, Climatic Change, 130, 313–326,
from https://doi.org/10.1007/s10584-015-1343-0
[39] Danish Energy Agency. Levelized Cost of Energy (LCoE) Calculator accessed February 2023
from https://ens.dk/en/our-responsibilities/global-cooperation/levelized-cos
t-energy-calculator
[40] Holst, E., Jespersen, K. (2021). Unaccounted Risk: The Case of Sulfur Hexafluoride (SF6) in
Offshore Wind Energy, CBS Sustainability, from http://www.bos-cbscsr.dk/2021/05/01/
case-of-sf6-in-offshore-wind-energy/
[41] IPCC, (2007). Technical Report. In: Climate Change 2007: The Physical Science Basis. Con-
tribution of Working Group I to the Fourth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel
on Climate Change, from https://www.ipcc.ch/report/ar4/wg1/
[42] Ea Energy Analyses (2016). Summary of Danish experiences enabling maximum wind power
integration, from https://www.ea-energianalyse.dk/wp-content/uploads/2020/02/1532_
Summary_of_Danish_experiences_enabling_maximum_wind_power_integration-2.pdf
[43] Ea Energy Analyses, Energinet.dk, Embassy of Denmark & Danish Energy Agency, (2017).
Integration of Wind Energy in Power Systems - A summary of Danish experiences from https:
//ens.dk/sites/ens.dk/files/Globalcooperation/integration_of_wind_energy_in_po
wer_systems.pdf
[44] Ackermann, T., (2012). Wind power in power systems, second edition
[45] Energinet.dk, (2014). Technical Project Description for the large-scale offshore wind farm (400
MW) at Horns Rev 3 from https://ens.dk/sites/ens.dk/files/Vindenergi/horns_rev
_3_offshore_technical_project_description_28.04.201.pdf
47
==PAGE:53==
Conclusion
MSc Thesis - Antoine Puchaud
[46] Danish Energy Agency, (2016). Technology Data - Energy Plants for Electricity and District
heating generation from https://ens.dk/service/fremskrivninger-analyser-modeller/
teknologikataloger/teknologikatalog-produktion-af-el-og
[47] Green Power Denmark, (2022). Forventet havvindmøllestøtte i 2022 og frem
from https:
//greenpowerdenmark.dk/files/media/document/Metodenotat_Forventet-havvindmoel
lestoette-2022-og-frem.pdf
[48] Campbell, S. (2019). Horns Rev 1, 2, 3: three generations of turbine output analysed from
https://www.windpowermonthly.com/article/1663417/horns-rev-1-2-3-three-generat
ions-turbine-output-analysed
[49] 4Coffshore, (2015). Horns Rev 3 Winner - Vattenfall at €0.1031 per kWh from https://www.
4coffshore.com/news/horns-rev-3-winner---vattenfall-@-800.1031-per-kwh-nid14
02.html
[50] Finansministeriet, (2021). Nøgletalskatalog from https://fm.dk/media/18510/noegletals
katalog-marts-2021_a.pdf
[51] Finansministeriet, (2013). Faktaark - Ny og lavere samfundsøkonomisk diskonteringsrente from
https://fm.dk/nyheder/nyhedsarkiv/2013/maj/ny-og-lavere-samfundsoekonomisk-dis
konteringsrente/
[52] Energistyrelsen, (2017). Samfundsøkonomiske Beregningsforudsætninger for Energipriser og
emissioner from https://ens.dk/sites/ens.dk/files/Analyser/samfundsoekonomiske_b
eregningsforudsaetninger_2017.pdf
[53] Energistyrelsen, (2022). Stamdataregister for vindkraftanlæg ultimo januar 2022 from https:
//ens.dk/service/statistik-data-noegletal-og-kort/data-oversigt-over-energisek
toren
[54] Energistyrelsen, (2022). Stamdata fra 2022 from https://ens.dk/service/statistik-dat
a-noegletal-og-kort/data-oversigt-over-energisektoren
[55] Entsoe Transparency Platform, accessed March 2023 from https://transparency.entsoe.
eu/dashboard/show
[56] Energistyrelsen, (2022). AF22 – datasaet med elpriser, from https://ens.dk/sites/ens.d
k/files/Hoeringer/af22_-_datasaet_med_elpriser.xlsx
[57] Energistyrelsen, (2022). Samfundsøkonomiske Beregningsforudsætninger for Energipriser og
emissioner from https://ens.dk/sites/ens.dk/files/Analyser/soeb22.pdf
[58] Reutersevents, (2017). Offshore wind opex set to fall 40% by 2030 as suppliers dig deep from
https://www.reutersevents.com/renewables/wind-energy-update/offshore-wind-ope
x-set-fall-40-2030-suppliers-dig-deep
[59] Roser, M., (2020). Why did renewables become so cheap so fast?, from https://ourworldin
data.org/cheap-renewables-growth
[60] QBIS, (2020). Socioeconomic impacts of offshore wind, from https://www.danishshipping
.dk/politik/offshore/download/Publications_Model_Publication/53/presentation-s
ocioeconomic-impacts-of-offshore-wind-01.07.2020.pdf
48
==PAGE:54==
Conclusion
MSc Thesis - Antoine Puchaud
[61] Energinet.dk, (2013). Business Case for nettilslutning af Horns Rev 3 Havmøllepark, from
https://energinet.dk/media/bebocfyz/13-93508-4-business-case-for-nettilslutnin
g-af-horns-rev-3-havmllepark-offentlig-udgave.pdf
[62] Energinet.dk. Thor Offshore Wind Farm - Site-investigations and grid connection., accessed
April 2023 from https://en.energinet.dk/infrastructure-projects/projektliste/tho
r-offshore-wind-farm/
[63] Energinet.dk. Aktuelle Tariffer, accessed April 2023 from https://energinet.dk/el/elma
rkedet/tariffer/aktuelle-tariffer//
[64] Energinet.dk & Orbicon, (2014). Horns Rev 3 Offshore Wind Farm Technical report no. 6 –
Commercial Fisheries, accessed April 2023 from https://ens.dk/sites/ens.dk/files/Vind
energi/commercial_fisheries_v4.pdf
[65] Huber, J., Lohmann, K., Schmidt, M. & Weinhardt, C., (2021). Carbon efficient smart charging
using forecasts of marginal emission factors, Journal of Cleaner Production, 284, from https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2020.124766
[66] Energinet.dk & Orbicon, (2014). Horns Rev 3 Offshore Wind Farm Technical report no. 22 –
Air Emissions, accessed April 2023 from https://ens.dk/sites/ens.dk/files/Vindenergi
/air_emissions_v6.pdf
[67] Statista. Average closing spot prices of European Emission Allowances (EUA) from 2010 to
2021, accessed March 2023 from https://www.statista.com/statistics/1329581/spot-p
rices-european-union-emission-trading-system-allowances/#:~:text=Average%20spo
t%20prices%20of%20European%20Emission%20Allowances%20(EUA)%202010%2D2021&text=
The%20average%20spot%20price%20of,of%20carbon%20dioxide%20in%202021.
[68] Energinet.dk, (2020). CSR REPORT 2020, from https://en.energinet.dk/about-our-r
eports/reports/csr-report-2020/
[69] Nord Pool group. Market Data, accessed May 2023 from https://www.nordpoolgroup.com/
en/Market-data1/Dayahead/Area-Prices/DK/Yearly/?view=table
49
