==PAGE:1==
Improving Human-Robot
Interaction for Autonomous Mobile
Robots in Warehouses
Deina Kellezi (s174258)
Erik Gylling (s173896)
Mathias C. Riis (s173914)
Kongens Lyngby 2023
Thesis in M.Sc.Computer Science and Engineering
==PAGE:2==
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Richard Petersens Plads, building 324,
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
This master’s thesis explores how human-robot interaction (HRI) can be improved in
warehouse environments to enable more opportunities for warehouses with both human
workers and autonomous mobile robots (AMRs), using Mobile Industrial Robots (MiR)
as a source of inspiration. To improve HRI, an extensive literature review is carried out
together with company ﬁeld research to determine important HRI aspects to consider.
This leads to four diﬀerent conﬂict resolution strategies based on cost maps, combined
with the A∗search algorithm. First, a heat map strategy, which is based on assigning
costs to popular areas of the warehouse. Then a social map strategy, which assigns costs
around humans, enforcing social distances, followed by a strategy that enforces social
norms. Finally, a probabilistic strategy using predictions through plan recognition to
assign costs to probable plans. The four strategies are compared with a model of MiR’s
current strategy and a stop-and-wait strategy.
The improvements are demonstrated
through simulations modelling human behaviour in a generalised warehouse domain,
and are evaluated on three areas; safety, comfort and eﬃciency.
The best strategy
concerning safety and comfort is shown to be the probabilistic strategy. The safety
area is especially improved, decreasing safety intrusions by 60% −65% and robot safety
stops by 60% −79%, but it compromises eﬃciency.
The more balanced heat map
strategy provides moderate improvements in safety and comfort without compromising
throughput.
==PAGE:4==
Preface
This master’s thesis was prepared under the supervision of Professor Thomas Bolander
at the Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science at the Technical
University of Denmark and Mobile Industrial Robots in fulﬁlment of the requirements
for acquiring a Master of Science in Engineering degree in Computer Science and Engi-
neering. The thesis was developed during the 5-month period from January 2, 2023, to
June 2, 2023. All three participants used 30 ECTS points.
Deina Kellezi - s174258
Erik Gylling - s173896
Mathias C. Riis - s173914
02/06-2023
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
We would like to thank our supervisor Thomas Bolander for invaluable academic guid-
ance and for providing us with relevant literature. We would also like to thank Mobile
Industrial Robots for providing insights into the practicality of this thesis, especially
Morten Steen Nørby and Björn Helgason for being available for guidance and questions.
==PAGE:6==
Contents
1
Introduction
1
2
Preliminary Work and Scope
2
2.1
Company Field Research . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2.2
Literature Review . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3
Academic Scope . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3
Background
14
3.1
Informed Search Strategies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.2
Plan and Goal Recognition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4
Domain Representation
27
4.1
Assumptions and Simpliﬁcations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.2
Domain Deﬁnition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
5
Simulation Environment
34
5.1
System Overview
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
5.2
Modelling the Simulator . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
5.3
Modelling the Robot . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
5.4
Modelling Humans
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
6
Strategy Design
49
6.1
Comparative Strategies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
6.2
Improvements to Conﬂict Resolution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
7
Results and Evaluation
65
7.1
Evaluation Method and Parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
7.2
Simulation Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
70
8
Discussion
91
8.1
Solution Recommendation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
91
8.2
From Assumptions to Deployment
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
94
9
Conclusion
101
==PAGE:7==
CONTENTS
v
A Appendix: Boltzmann or Sigmoid
iv
B Appendix: MiR Interview
viii
C Appendix: Inconsistent Plans
xiv
D Appendix: Simulation Data
xvi
==PAGE:8==
Chapter 1
Introduction
This thesis investigates human-robot interaction (HRI) in warehouse environments and
how it can be improved through socially aware autonomous mobile robots (AMRs),
using Mobile Industrial Robots (MiR) as a source of inspiration. The motivation for
the research question lies in the fact that integrating AMRs into logistics processes is
revolutionising warehouses by enabling faster order fulﬁlment, increased eﬃciency and
lower labour costs. However, AMRs are often isolated in speciﬁc zones to avoid friction
with human workers, and staﬀeducation can be a requirement to ensure more caution
towards robots. This work will investigate how to reduce the extra measures needed
by building a simulator, developing conﬂict resolution strategies and evaluating their
impact on diﬀerent parameters. The thesis is structured as follows:
Ch.2 Preliminary Work and Scope will present the ﬁeld research at MiR, together with
a literature review on HRI, conﬂict resolution, human modelling and navigation
to understand existing research on the topic.
Ch.3 Background describes the theories from the literature review, hypothesised to be
most promising for the project, i.e. the best ﬁrst searches A∗and D∗Lite, and
plan recognition for prediction of humans.
Ch.4 Domain Representation describes how a simpliﬁed version of a general ware-
house domain is modelled using domain theory and STRIPS, with a number of
assumptions.
Ch.5 Simulation Environment presents a simulation environment built on the domain
deﬁnition and modelling of humans to reﬂect the behaviour of warehouse workers.
Ch.6 Strategy Design presents conﬂict resolution strategies, which are based on the
idea of cost maps and trajectory predictions.
Ch.7 Results and Evaluation introduces the evaluation parameters safety, comfort and
eﬃciency, and each strategy is tested to evaluate its strengths and weaknesses.
Ch.8 Discussion & Ch.9 Conclusion discuss the assumptions made in the project and
the strategies’ characteristics depicted from the results, and ﬁnally conclude on
the thesis.
==PAGE:9==
Chapter 2
Preliminary Work and Scope
This chapter introduces preliminary research used to form a research question. This
includes ﬁeld research of Mobile Industrial Robots (MiR), to understand their current
algorithmic solutions, use cases, challenges and technical speciﬁcations. Furthermore,
it includes a literature review of relevant topics within human-robot interaction (HRI)
and autonomous mobile robots (AMRs).
2.1
Company Field Research
To gain insight into AMR solutions in the industry, a partnership with MiR is formed.
This provides an opportunity to ﬁnd a suitable use case where AMRs can be improved.
As described in [Rob23b], MiR is a robotics company that was founded in 2013. They
currently have seven oﬃces around the world with more than 220 employees and 167
distributors in 48 countries. This gives them maturity in understanding the practical
applications of AMRs.
In the preliminary research phase, a number of formal and informal interviews were
conducted, as well as an onsite visit to MiR’s physical test labs. This was to understand
how pathﬁnding, conﬂict resolution and multi-agent communication are performed in
their solutions, as well as the hardware speciﬁcations such as available sensors. MiR
also provided access to part of their internal documentation.
The content of this section is based on the interview transcribed in Appendix B, as well
as MiR’s public webpage and internal documentation. The latter cannot be shared in
the thesis.
2.1.1
Planning and Navigation
Some hardware parts of MiR’s robots are provided by external manufacturers.
The
solutions transforming these parts into a moving robot that can sense, move and act in
a customer environment are handled by MiR. This includes everything from propagating
sensor data to tangible data, that can be used for navigation, to low-level and high-level
motion planning.
==PAGE:10==
2.1 Company Field Research
3
2.1.1.1
Planning
In terms of high-level motion planning, MiR uses the A∗algorithm. On top of this,
the company uses three diﬀerent methods for planning: (1) global planning, (2) local
planning, and (3) semi-global planning. In global planning, MiR’s robot is assigned a
goal and needs to compute a plan for it, using a static map of the environment so that
walls and known obstacles are avoided. Local planning is used when the robot meets
an obstacle within its sensor range not part of its static map. In MiR’s local planning,
the original plan is reused as much as possible, and the new plan is only allowed to
deviate by 30 centimetres. The old heuristic is reused but with a local cost map on top.
Lastly, the semi-global plan is for cases where it is not possible to deviate by less than
30 centimetres. All unknown obstacles are represented as walls in the local cost map,
meaning that the robot must always ﬁnd a route around them. This also means that the
robot does not take human trajectories into account, and it will therefore replan every
time a human changes location in its path. This leads to many iterations of replanning
if a human walks towards the robot. It is also possible to instead conﬁgure the robot to
simply stop and wait whenever a conﬂict occurs.
2.1.1.2
Multi-agent Systems
MiR uses a ﬂeet component for their robots. The component enables the robots to
track each other’s position and speed. Additionally, the ﬂeet component provides the
ability to specify areas where agents should operate under certain rules. These rules
could be that only a certain number of robots may enter the area at the same time,
similar to a semaphore, or that robots are only allowed to move in a speciﬁc direction in
some areas. However, conﬂicts with humans are handled on an individual robot level.
2.1.1.3
Hardware Speciﬁcations
The hardware speciﬁcations of the robot are important to understand for a number of
reasons. It is necessary to know the limitations of the hardware in terms of the robot’s
sensor range and computational power. These are part of constraining what solutions
can work on the robots. In terms of physical dimensions, the robot moves with four
wheels and is approximately 580mm x 800mm wide, with a height of 303mm. The
total carry load varies depending on the model, and most of them can be conﬁgured with
top modules like hooks[Rob23c]. In Figure 2.1 an AMR produced by MiR is depicted,
which is one of their popular models.
The robots are equipped with two sensors, front and rear, that provide a 360-degree
ﬁeld of view with a range of 8m. Sensor data goes through a ﬁltering function that
identiﬁes distances from objects. To propagate this data into something the robot can
identify as objects, two additional depth cameras are mounted on the robot to create
==PAGE:11==
2.1 Company Field Research
4
Figure 2.1: The MiR250 model can carry a load of 250kg and has a battery time of
up to 13 hours[Rob23c]. Picture: Mobile Industrial Robots
point clouds and a detailed picture of the robot’s environment. The robot has built-in
signals such as lights and audio speakers that can give an indication of its direction.
In terms of processing power, the AMRs use Intel® NUC Kit with 7th Generation
Intel® Core™Processors.
This provides suﬃcient processing power for multi-agent
communication using wireless networks, pathﬁnding algorithms and processing sensor
and camera data. The processing power is important to keep in mind when designing a
solution as it does impose some computational limitations.
2.1.2
Domain Applications
MiR’s robots operate within manufacturing, logistics, life science, healthcare, and con-
sumer goods to name a few[Rob23d]. Their tasks often involve moving objects from A
to B such as moving blood samples in a hospital or moving warehouse goods.
2.1.2.1
Relevant Cases
There are still notable diﬀerences in the mentioned use cases. At a hospital, doctors
and patients might not be accustomed to a robot moving around, compared to workers
in a warehouse, where the robots perform similar tasks to the workers. The layout of a
hospital might also not be as suited for a robot compared to a warehouse with lots of
open space and ﬁxed shelves and racks. The study should therefore be narrowed down
to one domain, because HRI is highly dependent on the environment.
A generalised warehouse seems like a straightforward domain to investigate. Workers
in warehouses are fairly rational because they are measured on their productivity, and
tasks often involve navigating from one point to another, e.g. picking up and delivering
packages. Only personnel is allowed inside a warehouse, compared to a hospital, where
there is a mixture of doctors, nurses, patients and visitors, who all have diﬀerent opin-
ions and incentives towards a robot. Second of all, many of MiR’s robots are used in
warehouses, where the varying factor is the type of goods stored.
==PAGE:12==
2.1 Company Field Research
5
Figure 2.2: An example of AMRs moving goods in a warehouse[Rob23e].
Picture:
Mobile Industrial Robots
2.1.2.2
Industry Overview
Research points to the fact that in 2021, 58% of logistics providers used AMRs, and by
2024, it will hit 100%, according to MiR’s website[Rob23a]. This makes it an interesting
candidate for a research case, as this also means that smaller warehouses will use AMRs.
These smaller companies might not have the resources to restructure their warehouses
to ﬁt AMRs, such as setting up robot zones, and will need robots that can coexist with
their workers. Robotics Business Review also suggests that robots focused on HRI are
attractive to companies who require ﬂexible solutions, but may not have the scale of
work or resources needed to justify larger investments in automation systems[Pet20].
This indicates the need for AMR solutions that can oﬀer productivity increase without
compromising the productivity and satisfaction of human workers for smaller warehouses.
2.1.3
Robots and Humans
The onsite visit brought the opportunity of visiting MiR’s test facility. The test facility
is modelled as a simple warehouse, and new solutions can be deployed directly to their
robots. The robots are often placed in isolated robot zones or marked paths within the
test facility. Extensive testing with humans did not seem to be the main focus area of
the facility compared to ﬂeet communication.
2.1.3.1
Rules and Safety Standards
While MiR has many clients that use their robots in coexistence with humans, it typically
comes with some restrictions. The robots might be restricted to certain areas of the
warehouse, or the workers might have guidelines on how they should act around the
==PAGE:13==
2.2 Literature Review
6
robot. This could be not moving into marked robot zones or paths, or simply walking
to the right when they encounter a robot. Worker education is a key emphasis for MiR
and is often encouraged. As such a lot is done to make sure workers adjust to the robot.
It is important to note that the robots adhere to necessary security regulations for AMRs,
which means that if any of the eight security functions with respect to ISO 13849-1 is
triggered, a full security stop will be performed[Rob23c]. Therefore, this thesis focuses
on improving the coexistence of robots and humans.
2.1.4
Testing Tools
MiR can test their solutions in testing facilities. There are also simulation tools available
for software developers. However, these are, according to the company, limited to testing
certain aspects of the solutions and do not support testing dynamic objects, i.e. entities
that cannot communicate with the ﬂeet, such as robots from other manufacturers and
humans.
2.1.4.1
Simulation Tools
A simulation tool supporting dynamic objects is currently on the way according to MiR,
but will not be ready during this thesis. It is also not possible to get access to data
from client sites or a speciﬁc warehouse due to non-disclosure agreements. MiR has
therefore agreed to let us model a generalised warehouse. As such it is necessary to
investigate how to model a warehouse domain, and based on that, build a simulation
tool, before developing solutions for improved HRI. The company has shared some
envisioned architectural designs for their upcoming simulator, such as the ability to
inject multiple dynamic objects, conﬁgure diﬀerent types of planning solutions, and
modelling domains using a grid.
2.2
Literature Review
To support the ﬁeld research, a literature review is carried out to investigate researchers’
work within HRI, theory of mind, conﬂict resolution and multi-agent pathﬁnding. It will
also cover aspects of how to model human actors. The literature review will focus on
literature relevant to AMRs in warehouses. The papers investigated are based on the
relevance of the titles, abstracts, and the number of citations. The search terms used
for the research include the following:
• Theory of Mind
• Human-Robot Interaction
==PAGE:14==
2.2 Literature Review
7
• Warehouse and logistics
• Multi-Agent Systems
• Multi-Agent Pathﬁnding
• Goal and Plan Recognition
• Autonomous Mobile Robots
• Human actors and rationality
The following sections are summaries of relevant articles that can be useful for developing
a ﬁnal research question.
2.2.1
Human-Robot Interaction
This section presents research on HRI and how it can be improved. HRI is the study
of interactions between humans and robots and is a broad multidisciplinary ﬁeld that
can be researched from diﬀerent points of view. This literature review is focused on
HRI within navigational domains, where robots perform tasks independently of humans.
Therefore the essence of HRI in the thesis is more about making sure that the robots
are socially aware and do not unnecessarily disturb humans. This will be elaborated in
the following section.
2.2.1.1
Evaluation Parameters
It is necessary to understand how literature generally evaluates HRI. In [KPAK13], three
deﬁnitions are introduced to help understand important things to investigate, besides
safety: Comfort, Naturalness and Sociability. A lack of comfort in humans can be caused
when a robot moves too fast, too close or is in the way of humans. To reduce discomfort,
the review suggests considering things such as social distance aspects. The aspect of
comfort is interesting to investigate since the ﬁeld research at MiR indicates that safety
is usually handled by collision detection combined with replanning or a stop-and-wait
mechanism.
In terms of naturalness and sociability, these two categories focus more on modifying
robot behaviour to satisfy a given ideal. According to the same authors, naturalness
strives more to imitate nature, such as human motion. This works well when trying to
evaluate low-level parameters of behaviour, like motion planning and velocity. Sociabil-
ity addresses high-level aspects of whether or not robots make the same decisions as
humans.
==PAGE:15==
2.2 Literature Review
8
2.2.1.2
Pathﬁnding Algorithms
[KPAK13] suggests that many navigational modules in the industry contain simple col-
lision avoidance towards humans using robot navigation strategies such as a minimal
"required obstacle distance" or stop-and-wait behaviour in situations of conﬂict. The
main goal of this is to ensure safety, i.e. robots do not collide with humans, and these
approaches often make use of pathﬁnding algorithms such as A∗.
If this would be
extended to avoiding getting close to humans altogether, it requires variations in evalu-
ation functions used in algorithms such as A∗, so that other parameters are taken into
account, rather than just the optimal route in terms of the agent’s own goal. Some of
these parameters could be safety, avoiding close proximity to humans or similar. The
main disadvantage of human-aware navigation is the diﬃculty of making good use of
evaluation functions in the absence of optimality properties.
2.2.1.3
Conﬂict Avoidance
As mentioned earlier, safety is only one concern for evaluating HRI. Comfort is another,
and includes not allowing robots to conﬂict with humans in the ﬁrst place. According
to [KPAK13], this means that robots should avoid navigating to areas that could cause
interference with others. This might require some sort of prediction of humans in order
for the robot to not interfere with their path. Since robots and humans do not have to
collaborate to achieve one goal in the case of the warehouse use case, it is interesting to
dive deeper into the literature concerning conﬂict avoidance and trajectory predictions
of humans.
2.2.1.4
Social Norms and Costs
One way of avoiding conﬂicts, which can be combined with pathﬁnding algorithms, is
through the implementation of known social norms using cost maps. In [SM18], they
present a pathﬁnding algorithm that uses the rule that the robot should move to the
right of pedestrians. The algorithm uses three kinds of maps: One is a global cost map
used to make a path from a start position to a goal. Another is a local cost map, that
is used for avoiding obstacles. The third is an attractive force cost map, which makes
the robot keep to the right along a corridor. When there is no pedestrian, the robot
goes to a goal while avoiding moving obstacles based on the local cost map. When
the robot detects pedestrians, it begins to keep to the right. The results indicate that
cost maps combined with social norms, which could be known rules or prior knowledge
about the domain, are an eﬀective solution when it comes to improving HRI and conﬂict
avoidance.
One application of this is in the paper [TM21]. The authors investigate the use of AMRs
in a hospital environment. The focus of the article is analysing and improving HRI, using
==PAGE:16==
2.2 Literature Review
9
human guidelines to improve the robots. Their solution is based on a social map, A∗and
a neural network based on ToMnet[RPS+18] used to predict human behaviour. Their
results show a 90.5% prediction accuracy, improving aspects of safety and comfort,
although negatively impacting throughput. The human actors seem to be modelled as
fully rational, which does not accurately reﬂect the real world.
2.2.1.5
Plan and Goal Recognition
Another ﬁeld of research that tackles prediction of agent goals and plans is goal and
plan recognition. Goal and plan recognition is the task of predicting an agent’s top-
level goals and plans based on its observed actions. This stands in contrast to classical
planning approaches, where the goal is known and a plan needs to be found. Literature
suggests that there are diﬀerent methods of goal and plan recognition using either
classical machine learning approaches or logic-based approaches. It also reveals that the
rationality of other agents is important to consider, which is a deﬁnition of the agent’s
observed behaviour as more or less optimal[MS19].
Towards Eﬃcient Human-Robot Collaboration with Robust Plan Recognition and Tra-
jectory Prediction investigates the use of plan recognition for human-robot collaboration
in an industrial context[CS20]. They present a human-robot collaboration framework
that accurately recognises human plans in industrial settings and improves time eﬃciency
using the hierarchical relationship between plans and trajectories. The work suggests
that plan and goal recognition methods can be relevant to further research. Experiments
were conducted on an industrial robot to verify the proposed framework, which gives an
indication that these methods can actually work in the industry.
Ramírez and Geﬀner have done extensive research in the ﬁeld of logic-based plan recog-
nition in articles [RG09], [RG10] and [RG11]. In 2009, they suggest that the problems of
inferring plans from observations can be done eﬃciently with classical planners. Their
results suggest that their methods might be eﬀective in grid-based navigational domains
where agents need to move objects. In 2010, their work is extended to more general
problems of probabilistic plan recognition where a probability distribution over a set of
goals is sought, provided that both agent and observer have complete information about
the initial state. Finally, in 2011, they extend the method to handle partial observable
environments.
[BD18] suggest the application of goal recognition is useful in the context of light
conﬁgurations. Their work involves creating a system that can predict what light con-
ﬁguration a user wants, by observing their actions. A key point made in the paper is the
importance of clustering goals to decrease noise between similar goals and computation
time. This ﬁnding is something that could be generalised to other applications of goal
recognition, for instance when working with paths.
==PAGE:17==
2.2 Literature Review
10
2.2.1.6
Comparison of Recognition Methods
In [VHP21], the review suggests that using machine learning for plan recognition is
useful in handling uncertainty, which is often the case when dealing with partial ob-
servability, noisy data, non-rational agents or dynamic domains. In addition, machine
learning approaches do not require prior knowledge of the domain, since parameters and
probabilities can be learned given enough data. The disadvantage is the requirement
of high amounts of data, and models need to be trained again when the environment
changes. The networks are also often not very transparent, which can make it diﬃcult
to understand how the agent reaches its results. According to European Commission’s
Ethics Guidelines for Trustworthy AI, transparency should be a priority when designing
AI systems [INT19].
Logic-based approaches might in some cases be suﬃcient in situations with rational hu-
mans and a well-deﬁned domain. These have the advantage of working well with highly
structured representations. Logic representations can deﬁne diﬀerent kinds of relation-
ships among entities, such as preconditions, mutual exclusions, or decomposition, and
allow these systems to generate new plausible candidate plans which can be compared
to actual observations. This allows their designers and users to easily understand the
meaning of their output, as well as how they have reached that conclusion.
In addition, when combined with probabilistic reasoning techniques, logic-based systems
can reduce some of their main weaknesses, such as not being able to handle uncertainty.
This makes it an interesting approach to investigate. In the case of warehouses, there
is generally much data available that could be used to deﬁne possible priors, such as
schedules and sales history. Furthermore, the layout and tasks of the warehouse are well-
deﬁned, and humans are also more rational in working environments. While machine
learning is considered useful and eﬀective in many applications, planning methods and
logical representations are still dominating in navigation.
2.2.2
Simulating Human Actors
The literature on how to model human actors is not very extensive, and it is even more
limited concerning warehouses. It is, however, crucial for the development of social
robots. The material could be scarce for a number of reasons. For instance, real experi-
mentation is costly, diﬃcult to perform and can put human participants in danger in the
initial testing stages. Secondly, the evaluation requires agreeing on important human
parameters, something that researchers do not all agree on. Lastly, if experimentation
is done through simulation tools, it is diﬃcult to model human actors in a realistic way.
==PAGE:18==
2.2 Literature Review
11
2.2.2.1
Individual Human Navigation
The literature shows that many of the current state-of-the-art simulation approaches
are based on models of crowd movement, such as in [HM95] and [TH20], which work
well when evaluating crowds of human actors, such as in pedestrian areas. These tools,
however, tend to lose realism on the local actor level. Their approaches are therefore
not well-suited for a work environment such as a warehouse, where the robot will more
likely encounter one or a handful of human actors at a time, and where human workers,
in general, do not have as many close distance interactions as a group of pedestrians
would have.
The research conducted in [RP22] looks into developing a new pathﬁnding algorithm
inspired by current research on how the brain learns and builds cognitive maps. The
algorithm is built on the fact that, as humans become more familiar with their envi-
ronment, their paths become shorter and more consistent with the optimal A∗search.
Human workers in a warehouse would be quite familiar with the environment, provided
that it is not their ﬁrst day of work, indicating that it can be feasible to model the
human workers’ pathﬁnding with simple search algorithms that can be tweaked to be
more or less optimal.
2.2.2.2
Human Navigation towards Robots
A paper was published near the end of this project, titled: HuNavSim: A ROS 2 Human
Navigation Simulator for Benchmarking Human-Aware Robot Navigation [PHOCM23].
The paper presents an open-source tool for the simulation of diﬀerent human navigation
behaviours in scenarios with robots. While the tool uses known crowd movement models
and social force models also used in the aforementioned tools, their approach is extended
with a set of realistic human behaviours to the robot, some of the most interesting ones
being:
• Regular: Humans treat the robot like another human.
• Impassive: The human deals with the robot like a static obstacle.
• Scared: Humans stay away from the robot.
• Curious: Humans abandon their goal and start to approach the robot.
• Threatening: Humans try to block the path of the robot.
These parameters can be conﬁgured, together with a list of goals in the domain, the
number of human actors, and a set of typical domains such as warehouses and cafeterias.
This shows the importance of not only focusing on how to model human navigation
correctly but also modelling how humans act around the robot.
==PAGE:19==
2.3 Academic Scope
12
2.3
Academic Scope
The company research showed that warehouses are an attractive domain to explore.
According to Appendix B, some clients have isolated robot areas, but many are in
a transition phase where humans and robots need to be able to work in the same
space.
Naturally, this means that there is a case for improving HRI. The literature
review uncovered that it often comes down to conﬂict avoidance to improve the safety
and comfort of human workers.
The next step for the thesis is to look at how to
improve HRI using pathﬁnding algorithms combined with cost-based conﬂict resolution
strategies, such as social maps and norms. Selected methods from plan recognition can
extend these strategies to predict human paths.
2.3.1
Research Question
The following research question has been developed based on the above scoping con-
siderations, the company research and the literature review. The question is:
How can HRI be improved in warehouses, using MiR as a source of inspiration?
Figure 2.3: Three sub-problems (1) Building a simulator, (2) Improving conﬂict avoid-
ance, and (3) Evaluation parameters, are necessary to work with in order
to answer the research question.
To answer this question, a number of sub-problems have been formulated. The project
can be divided into three major categories: (1) A simulation tool must be built that
encompasses both the model of MiR’s solution and the modelling of human behaviour.
(2) Improvements to conﬂict avoidance will be explored through pathﬁnding algorithms
and cost-based conﬂict resolution strategies. (3) The evaluation parameters must be
chosen from an eﬃciency and HRI perspective and used to compare strategies by running
a number of simulations.
==PAGE:20==
2.3 Academic Scope
13
By addressing the research question through these three sub-problems, this project can
hopefully contribute to research in both academia and industry. MiR has previously
expressed interest in improving HRI and hopefully, the work done in this project can
serve as inspiration.
On the academic side, contributions can be made in terms of
researching how methods within HRI can be used in a practical company setting.
==PAGE:21==
Chapter 3
Background
When creating AMRs with social awareness, multiple problems arise.
This chapter
introduces theories that are useful in solving these problems, some of which have been
introduced in Chapter 2. The hypothesis is that certain theories will be relevant for
solving the problem statement, and these are elaborated on in this section.
3.1
Informed Search Strategies
Search algorithms are used on graphs that are represented by a set of vertices S and a set
of edges E. Informed search strategies are eﬃcient for solving problems with large search
spaces, such as pathﬁnding problems, because they use problem-speciﬁc knowledge
beyond the problem. An instance of an informed search strategy is the strategy called
best-ﬁrst search. The strategy uses an evaluation function to ﬁnd the most promising
vertices and expands them ﬁrst, leading to fewer expansions than uninformed search
strategies.
This is especially important in dynamic domains, such as a warehouse,
where unexpected obstacles can appear. This could be either humans or robots from
other manufacturers, making it necessary for the robot to reconsider its current plan.
3.1.1
The A* Algorithm
When an agent has to ﬁnd a plan from its location to a goal location, an eﬃcient
solution is to use a best-ﬁrst search algorithm called A∗. Given a ﬁnite graph with non-
negative edge costs the algorithm is complete, meaning it will always ﬁnd a solution if
one exists and terminate if none exists[RN10]. The solution will always be optimal if
the used heuristic is admissible, as deﬁned in Equation (3.1), and (forward) consistent,
as deﬁned in Equation (3.2).
The purpose of a heuristic h(s,s′) is to estimate the cost of reaching s′ ∈S from s ∈S.
h(s,sgoal) ≤h∗(s,sgoal) ￿s ∈S
(3.1)
In A∗the heuristic will always estimate the cost to reach the goal sgoal ∈S.
h(sgoal,sgoal) = 0
h(s,sgoal) ≤C(s,s′) + h(s′,sgoal) ￿(s,s′) ∈E
(3.2)
==PAGE:22==
3.1 Informed Search Strategies
15
Where h∗(s,sgoal) is the optimal cost of reaching sgoal from s, and C(s,s′) is the cost
of traversing the edge (s,s′) ∈E.
A∗diﬀers from other best-ﬁrst search algorithms by taking the cost g(s) of reaching the
current vertex s ∈S from the initial vertex into account. To evaluate a vertex s ∈S, the
algorithm uses an evaluation function, f(s), which is the sum of g(s) and h(s,sgoal).
f(s) = g(s) + h(s,sgoal)
(3.3)
A∗is a suitable algorithm for pathﬁnding problems in static domains that can be deﬁned
as a ﬁnite graph, where A∗always terminates. The warehouse domain is however not
static, in the case that humans walk around and act as dynamic objects that the robot
has to avoid. A solution could be to use A∗to create a new plan for the robot’s goal
when a plan becomes invalid. However, it seems ineﬃcient to calculate a completely
new plan when only a part of the plan is invalid. Hence, A∗could be used to ﬁnd an
alternative plan for the invalid part of the plan and substitute it. The result is a slightly
modiﬁed plan that tries to reuse as much from the original plan as possible. But this
solution is now constrained to reach a subgoal, before the ﬁnal goal, meaning that the
plan can become unnecessarily long.
3.1.2
The D* Lite Algorithm
Algorithm 1 [KL02]
1: function Initialize( )
2:
U ←￿
3:
km ←0
4:
for all s ∈S do
5:
rhs(s) ←g(s) ←∞
6:
end for
7:
rhs(sgoal) ←0
8:
U.Insert(sgoal,CalculateKey(sgoal))
9: end function
In [KL02] a more complex algorithm, D∗Lite, is described and can be seen in Algo-
rithms 1 to 5. D∗Lite is also a best-ﬁrst search algorithm that uses an evaluation
function that takes the cost of traversed edges into account. A big diﬀerence from A∗
is that D∗Lite not only ﬁnds a plan, but it also waits for feedback when the agent fol-
lows the plan [Algorithm 3, lines 5-18]. This means the graph and the frontier are kept
in memory until the termination of the plan. The purpose is to constrain the number of
expanded vertices by updating its existing graph when replanning without compromising
on optimality. This is in contrast to A∗and the described substitution strategy, which
respectively creates a new graph, and compromises optimality.
==PAGE:23==
3.1 Informed Search Strategies
16
Algorithm 2 [KL02]
1: function ComputeShortestPath( )
2:
while U.TopKey()˙<CalculateKey(sstart) or rhs(sstart) ≠g(sstart) do
3:
kold ←U.TopKey()
4:
u ←U.Pop()
5:
if kold ˙<CalculateKey(u) then
6:
U.Insert(u,CalculateKey(u))
7:
else if g(u) > rhs(u) then
8:
g(u) ←rhs(u)
9:
for all s ∈Pred(u) do
10:
UpdateVertex(s)
11:
end for
12:
else
13:
g(u) ←∞
14:
for all s ∈Pred(u) ∪u do
15:
UpdateVertex(s)
16:
end for
17:
end if
18:
end while
19: end function
Algorithm 3 Main function of D∗[KL02]
1: function Main( )
2:
slast ←sstart
3:
Initialize( )
4:
ComputeShortestPath( )
5:
while sstart ≠sgoal do
6:
sstart ←mins′∈Succ(sstart)(C(sstart,s′) + g(s′))
7:
Move to sstart
8:
Scan graph for changed edge costs
9:
if any edge costs changed then
10:
km ←km + h(slast,sstart)
11:
slast ←sstart
12:
for all directed edges (u,v) with changed edge costs do
13:
Update the edge cost C(u,v)
14:
UpdateVertex(u)
15:
end for
16:
ComputeShortestPath( )
17:
end if
18:
end while
19: end function
==PAGE:24==
3.1 Informed Search Strategies
17
D∗Lite has been proven in [KL02] to be optimal given a heuristic that is admissible for
any two vertices as deﬁned in Equation (3.4) and forward-backward-consistent as deﬁned
in Equation (3.5). In the same article, it is also proven that a heuristic is backward-
consistent and forward-consistent if it satisﬁes Equation (3.4) and Equation (3.5).
h(s,s′) ≤h∗(s,s′) ￿s,s′ ∈S
(3.4)
h(s,s′′) ≤h(s,s′) + h(s′,s′′) ￿s,s′,s′′ ∈S
(3.5)
The search is performed from the goal vertex, sgoal ∈S, to the agent’s location, sstart ∈
S, to minimise the number of vertices that need to update their evaluations when the
agent replans. To ﬁnd the initial path the algorithm works like an A∗. First, the graph
is initialised with Algorithm 1, and afterwards Algorithm 2 are used to expand vertices
on the frontier U until sstart is reached, thereafter a path can be extracted.
3.1.2.1
Locally inconsistent and consistent vertices
Algorithm 4 [KL02]
1: function UpdateVertex(u)
2:
if u ≠sgoal then
3:
rhs(u) ←mins′∈Succ(u)(C(u,s′) + g(s′))
4:
end if
5:
if u ∈U then
6:
U.Remove(u)
7:
end if
8:
if g(u) ≠rhs(u) then
9:
U.Insert(u,CalculateKey(u))
10:
end if
11: end function
Since the graph is kept in memory and is used to ﬁnd multiple paths, a vertex s ∈S
may contain outdated information about the cost of reaching sgoal from s, in such case
s is said to be locally inconsistent. To handle this two parameters, rhs and g, are used
to represent the cost of reaching sgoal from s. g(s) is the cost for reaching sgoal last
time s was expanded. Note that s can be added to U, but ﬁrst be expanded after
multiple replans where edge costs may have changed. This means that g(s) can be
outdated and cause problems when ﬁnding the optimal path. Hence a more informed
parameter is needed; rhs(s) is the cost for reaching sgoal from s last time s was updated
with Algorithm 4. The calculation of rhs(s) relies on the successors s′ of s to contain
==PAGE:25==
3.1 Informed Search Strategies
18
updated information about g(s′), as seen in Equation (3.6).
rhs(s) =
￿￿￿￿￿￿￿
0
￿s = sgoal
mins′∈Succ(s)(C(s,s′) + g(s′))
￿otherwise
(3.6)
Where Succ(s) ⊆S, denotes the successors of s, and C(s,s′) is the cost of (s,s′) ∈E.
A locally inconsistent vertex s ∈S is said to be locally underconsistent if g(s) < rhs(s)
and locally overconsistent if g(s) > rhs(s). A vertex s becomes locally overconsistent
when it becomes less expensive to expand. This happens in the initial planning but also
when the agent replans [Algorithm 3, lines 4 & 16]. Locally underconsistent vertices
may only be present in the graph when the agent replans due to changes in edge costs.
A vertex s is said to be locally consistent if g(s) = rhs(s), meaning that s contains
updated information.
Note that a majority of vertices s are locally consistent with
g(s) = rhs(s) = ∞, which means that C(s,s′) + g(s′) = ∞for all successors s′ of s.
Thus g(s) = rhs(s) = ∞is updated information in the perspective of s.
It is proven in [KL02] that u ∈U ↔rhs(u) ≠g(u), meaning that U contains exactly
the inconsistent vertices. Thus Algorithm 2 is used to update only locally inconsistent
vertices u ∈U to contain updated information about g(u) until sstart is connected to
sgoal through a path of locally consistent vertices.
3.1.2.2
Evaluation Function
Algorithm 5 [KL02]
1: function CalculateKey(s)
2:
return [min(g(s),rhs(s)) + h(sstart,s) + km; min(g(s),rhs(s))]
3: end function
To guide the search, a diﬀerent evaluation function is used than the one in Equation (3.3)
to keep in mind that vertices can be locally over- and underconsistent. The evaluation
function is shown in Algorithm 5 and uses min(g(s),rhs(s)) in the main evaluation
f(s)[0] for a vertex s ∈S, and also as the tiebreaker f(s)[1] due to evaluations being
compared lexicographically, as shown in Equation (3.7).
f(s)˙≤f(s′)
↔
f(s)[0] < f(s′)[0] ￿(f(s)[0] = f(s′)[0]￿f(s)[1] ≤f(s′)[1])
(3.7)
The use of min(g(s),rhs(s)) is important in f(s). It is proven in [KL02] that s will
be locally consistent after being expanded at most twice in Algorithm 2. Once when
s is locally underconsistent, and once when it is locally overconsistent. When a locally
==PAGE:26==
3.1 Informed Search Strategies
19
underconsistent vertex s is expanded, outdated information in g(s) is reset and it be-
comes locally consistent with rhs(s) = g(s) = ∞, or locally overconsistent with rhs(s) <
g(s) = ∞, meaning that f(s) is now dependant on rhs(s) = min(g(s),rhs(s)). If s
becomes locally consistent a successor of s might be expanded later on resulting in s
becoming locally overconsistent, i.e. a decrease of rhs(s). If s is locally overconsistent
when expanded it becomes locally consistent with rhs(s) = g(s) and remains locally
consistent until termination of Algorithm 2. In this case, s may be included in the path
between sstart and sgoal, because f(s)˙≤f(sstart) and s is locally consistent.
Assuming the expansion in Algorithm 2 continues until the frontier is empty. Then a
locally overconsistent vertex will be expanded at most once and a locally underconsis-
tent vertex at most twice before it stays consistent until termination. Thus a vertex
can be expanded at most twice and the algorithm will eventually terminate when all
vertices are locally consistent. If all vertices s ∈S are locally consistent it can be derived
from rhs(s) = g(s) and Equation (3.6) that g(s) is updated for all vertices, and an
optimal path from sstart to sgoal can be found if one exists. By removing the assump-
tion it is clear that the evaluation function is used in the guard of the while loop to
stop the expansion when sstart and all vertices s with f(s)˙<f(sstart) are locally con-
sistent. A further expansion of locally inconsistent vertices s with f(s)˙≥f(sstart) will
not contribute to an optimal path from sstart to sgoal [Algorithm 2, line 2].
3.1.2.3
Updating Edges and Replanning
When the agent observes that a part of the path is invalid, the algorithm uses the
observation to update the costs of impacted edges and vertices [Algorithm 3, lines
9-15].
If the observation directly impacts a vertex s ∈S that is included in the previously
found path, it will become locally inconsistent and added to the frontier U.
Now
Algorithm 2 can be executed to expand vertices. At least one expansion will happen
because f(s)˙<f(sstart). This is the case because g(s) < g(sstart) and h is admissible.
However, this is only possible if the agent has not moved, meaning sstart is unchanged.
If the agent has moved from slast to sstart since the last execution of Algorithm 2, the
evaluations of vertices u ∈U is dependant on h(slast,u), whereas evaluations of newly
added vertices s will depend on h(sstart,s). Since slast ≠sstart the evaluations are
incomparable.
In this case, the main evaluation of a vertex on the frontier can have decreased at most
h(slast,sstart) if it was going to be updated, which is the case when slast ∈U. For all
other vertices, the decrease will be smaller. This is valid because the heuristic is forward-
consistent as deﬁned in Equation (3.2) and admissible as deﬁned in Equation (3.4). To
preserve the order of the frontier, h(slast,sstart) must be subtracted from all main
evaluations of vertices u ∈U, i.e f(u)[0] = f(u)[0] −h(slast,sstart).
It is not a
==PAGE:27==
3.1 Informed Search Strategies
20
problem to make an evaluation of u better than it should be, because it will simply
be chosen for expansion earlier and get an updated evaluation before it gets expanded
[Algorithm 2, lines 3-6]. It would be a problem if an evaluation of a relevant vertex u
was made worse than it should be as it works against the admissibility of h and thus
the algorithm would not be optimal.
However, updating all vertices u ∈U is expensive. Instead of decreasing f(u)[0] by mak-
ing the subtraction, f(u)[0] = f(u)[0] −h(slast,sstart), an increase of h(slast,sstart)
can be made to f(s)[0] when a vertex s is added to U, i.e f(s)[0] = f(s)[0] +
h(slast,sstart). This preserves the order as well, without every u ∈U needing to get a
new evaluation.
When the agent moves from sstart to snext and observes the path is invalid again, the
agent has moved at most h(slast,sstart) + h(sstart,snext) since the agent made the
ﬁrst execution of Algorithm 2. Thus when a vertex s is going to be added to U, f(s)[0]
must be increased even further by f(s)[0] = f(s)[0]+h(slast,sstart)+h(sstart,snext).
This is why the variable km is used in Algorithm 5. It is shown in Algorithm 1 that
initially km = 0, but before a replan, where the agent has moved from slast to sstart, it
will be updated to km = km + h(slast,sstart), [Algorithm 3, line 10]. Thus adding km
to the main evaluation will preserve the order of U.
3.1.2.4
Finding a Path
After Algorithm 2 has been used to expand locally inconsistent vertices u ∈U to contain
updated information about g(u). A path of locally consistent vertices connects sstart
to sgoal. This path can be found by always transitioning from the current vertex s,
starting at sstart, to any successor s′ ∈Succ(s) that minimises C(s,s′) + g(s′) until
sgoal is reached [Algorithm 3, lines 5-6].
It is proven in [KL02] that after Algorithm 2 has terminated, any locally consistent
vertex s contains updated information of g(s) corresponding to Equation (3.8).
g(s) = rhs(s) =
￿￿￿￿￿￿￿
0
￿s = sgoal
mins′∈Succ(s)(C(s,s′) + g(s′))
￿otherwise
(3.8)
Furthermore, the evaluations of the vertices s on the path from sstart to sgoal will be
better than the evaluation of sstart, i.e. f(s)˙<f(sstart), and therefore locally consis-
tent. This is because h is admissible resulting in f(s)[0] ≤f(sstart)[0], and because
the tiebreaker is min(g(s),rhs(s)). With this it can be derived from Equation (3.8)
that f(s)[1] < f(sstart)[1]. Furthermore, the path is optimal because h is backward-
consistent as deﬁned in Equation (3.9).
h(sstart,sstart) = 0
h(sstart,s) ≤h(sstart,s′) + C(s′,s) ￿(s′,s) ∈E
(3.9)
==PAGE:28==
3.2 Plan and Goal Recognition
21
Thus after Algorithm 2 has terminated the optimal path from sstart to sgoal can be found
by always transitioning from the current vertex s, starting at sstart, to any successor
s′ ∈Succ(s) that minimises C(s,s′) + g(s′) until sgoal is reached.
3.2
Plan and Goal Recognition
As the research suggests in Section 2, goal and plan recognition is hypothesised to be
useful in logistics domains to predict other agent’s behaviour, for instance, the future
trajectory of humans in order to avoid potential conﬂicts. This section will dive deeper
into relevant theories describing this ﬁeld. To understand these, we must ﬁrst understand
how plan and goal recognition are deﬁned separately.
Goal recognition refers to the problem of inferring the intention of humans or other
autonomous agents by observing a set of actions performed by those agents. This task
usually gets as input an ordered sequence of actions and a set of conceivable goals. The
task outputs the goal that best explains the observed actions - or a set of goals with
corresponding probabilities. Goal recognition is especially appropriate for applications
where we need a fast detection of the goal and the detailed plan is not relevant [VHP21].
Plan recognition is like planning but in reverse: while in planning the goal is given and
a plan is sought, in plan recognition, part of a plan is observed, and the agent goal is
sought. A plan recognition task has several things in common with a goal recognition
task, but is more general. Plan recognition includes goal recognition and complements
it with the task of deﬁning a structure with the set of observed and predicted actions
that will lead to that goal, as well as their connection. In the ﬁeld of predicting the
next actions of a human, it becomes clear that plan recognition is a more appropriate
method, as it will allow one to couple goals with the probable plans for these goals.
3.2.1
Knowledge Representation
It is crucial to consider how knowledge in the domain should be represented when
working with plan and goal recognition. The way knowledge is represented impacts
the time complexity and ﬂexibility of the recognition.
Approaches to plan and goal
recognition are commonly divided into two major representations: implicit and explicit
representations.
Implicit representations represent the agent’s initial state, potential goals and actions.
There is no speciﬁc way for an agent to achieve a particular goal, which means the
observer has to search through the agent’s actions to ﬁnd a plan that satisﬁes its goal.
It is common to combine this approach with representations of domain knowledge that
use classical planning.
Ramirez and Geﬀner use implicit representations in [RG09],
[RG10], and [RG11] to solve plan recognition as a planning problem.
==PAGE:29==
3.2 Plan and Goal Recognition
22
Explicit representations represent the agent’s initial state, potential goals, actions, and a
plan library that deﬁnes valid plans. The idea is to reduce online recognition computation
by doing computations oﬄine or constraining search space with grammar.
A good
example is Geib and Goldman, that built the PHATT plan library by using a probabilistic
context-free tree grammar [GG09].
For this project, an implicit representation is explored because MiR produces AMRs
with a general purpose that are used in multiple industries with very diﬀerent tasks.
Furthermore, implicit representation minimises the required domain knowledge, as it is
more general and does not use a plan library for validation.
3.2.2
A Short Introduction to STRIPS
Before continuing, it is important to understand what STRIPS is. STRIPS is a formal
language for expressing a planning problem, which can be solved by a problem solver of
the same name[FN71]. A planning problem in STRIPS is a quadruple ￿P,I,A,G￿.
• P is a set of propositional variables
• I ⊆P is the initial state from where the problem has root
• A is a set of actions. An action a ∈A has a precondition PRE(a) ⊆P and an
eﬀect EFF(a) ⊆P
• G is a set of goal states G ⊆P
A state s is formally a set of propositions that are true in s, i.e. s ⊆P. Thus the state
space is S = 2P , where 2P is the set of all subsets of P. Transitions between states
are performed by actions a ∈A, where PRE(a) determines in which states the action
is applicable, while EFF(a) determines what happens to a state when a is applied.
A sequence of actions is a solution to a planning problem ￿P,I,A,G￿if the actions
performed consecutively starting in I will reach a goal state G ∈G.
In some cases, it is practical to have a planning problem, without G. This is called a
planning domain and is deﬁned as a triplet PD = ￿P,I,A￿. A planning problem can then
be deﬁned by a planning domain PD and G as PD[G]. If G is a singleton, i.e. G = {G},
the planning problem may be written as PD[G].
3.2.3
Plan Recognition as Planning
Plan recognition as planning is known as an implicit representation or so-called domain-
theory approach to plan recognition. In these approaches, oﬀ-the-shelf planning systems
are used to generate candidate plans for the observed agent. These planning approaches
==PAGE:30==
3.2 Plan and Goal Recognition
23
often rely on planning languages, such as PDDL and STRIPS, which makes it possible
to describe the state of the domain and the eﬀects of the possible actions to develop
candidate plans that lead to some goal. These candidate plans can then be weighed
by the plan recognition system with respect to the observed actions and infer the most
likely plans and/or goals.
The plan recognition problem given a set of goals G can be understood, at an abstract
level, as the problem of ﬁnding a goal G ∈G with a plan ⇡that satisﬁes the observations.
We can then deﬁne a plan recognition problem more formally using a planning domain
and assuming that this planning domain is deﬁned as a STRIPS planning domain:
Definition 3.1 A plan recognition problem or theory is a triplet T = ￿PD,G,O￿
where PD = ￿P,I,A￿is a planning domain, G is the set of possible goals G, G ⊆
P, and O = o1,...,om is an observation sequence with each oi being an action in
A[RG09].
The solution to such a plan recognition problem is expressed as the subset of goals G ∈G
such that some optimal plan in the planning problem PD[G] satisﬁes the observation
sequence O. An action sequence a1,...,an satisﬁes the observation sequence o1,...,om
iﬀ. it embeds it, i.e. if each observation appears in the plan in the same order it appears
in the observation sequence. As an example, the action sequence ⇡= {a,b,c,d,a,f}
is consistent with the observation sequence O1 = {b,d,a}, but not O2 = {b,d,c}. O1
satisﬁes ⇡, since all elements in O1 appear in ⇡and preserve the order in which they
appear in ⇡. The set of optimal plans is considered as it represents the behaviour of a
fully rational agent pursuing a given goal[RG09].
The classical plan recognition problem can be extended by inferring a probability dis-
tribution over likely goals, yielding a probabilistic plan recognition problem, which can
formally be deﬁned as:
Definition 3.2 A probabilistic plan recognition problem is a quadruple T =
￿PD,G,O,Prob￿, where PD is a planning domain, G is the set of possible goals, O
is an observation sequence, and Prob is a probability distribution over G[RG09].
3.2.4
Probability Distribution and Bayes Theorem
The deﬁnition of a probabilistic plan recognition problem requires mapping likely plans
to a probability distribution. According to the literature, this can be done by adopting a
Bayesian formulation. By Bayes Theorem, the probability of a hypothesis H given the
observation sequence O, P(H￿O) is given by the formula:
==PAGE:31==
3.2 Plan and Goal Recognition
24
P(H￿O) = P(O￿H)P(H)
P(O)
where P(O￿H) represents how well the hypothesis H predicts O, P(H) stands for how
likely the hypothesis H is prior to any observations, and P(O) measures how surprising
the observations are, aﬀecting all hypotheses equally. Bayes Theorem can be ﬁt to the
problem of plan and goal recognition, where the hypothesis is instead the destination
of an agent, a goal G. This can be modelled with an example, taking a starting point
in Figure 3.1. With the assumption that the agent is rational and tries to minimise
the cost of its plan to its goal, goals GA and GB are better predictors than GC, GD
and GE, since the robot is moving towards them. GB also predicts O better than GA,
because the robot follows the optimal plan for GB, but there exists a better inconsistent
plan towards GA.
Figure 3.1: A goal recognition problem in a navigational domain.[GB13]
The reasoning above reduces the problem to how well each possible goal predicts the
observed action sequence. In addition to this, how well a goal G predicts an observation
sequence O seems to be dependent on costs. In particular, the cost of achieving G
through a plan consistent with O, and the cost of achieving G through a plan that is
inconsistent with O.
3.2.4.1
Cost Diﬀerence
C(G,O) is the cost of an optimal plan to goal G that is inconsistent with the obser-
vations. C(G,O) is the cost of an optimal plan to goal G that is consistent with the
observations. These concepts can be combined to yield a cost diﬀerence for each goal.
It can be argued that the higher the value of ∆(G,O), the better G predicts O, and
hence the higher the likelihood of P(O￿G).
==PAGE:32==
3.2 Plan and Goal Recognition
25
∆(G,O) = C(G,O) −C(G,O),∈[−∞,+∞]
(3.10)
Equation (3.10) means that ∆(G,O) is ∞when all the plans for G are consistent with
O, and −∞when none of them are consistent with O. In the example in Figure 3.1,
assuming that the action cost of vertical and horizontal moves is 1, and the action cost
of a diagonal move is
√
2 ≈1,4, then for goal B, the cost of a plan consisting of the
observations would be moving straight ahead, i.e. C(G,O) = 4, while the cost of a plan
inconsistent with the observations would be substituting two of the observation actions
with diagonal moves, resulting in C(G,O) = 4.8.
3.2.4.2
Sigmoid Function
The cost diﬀerence can be mapped into the likelihood for P(O￿G). In [GB13], the
sigmoid function is used for mapping the cost diﬀerence ∆(G,O) = C(G,O) −C(G,O)
into the likelihoods P(O￿G):
P(O￿G) =
1
1 + e−β∆(G,O)
(3.11)
Recall again that agents can be more or less rational. The constant β represents said
rationality.
It becomes clear why higher cost diﬀerences are better predictors than
low values through the sigmoid function. If we assume β = 1, a cost diﬀerence of 3
would yield a probability of P(O￿G) =
1
1+e(−3) = 0.95, a cost diﬀerence of 0 would yield
P(O￿G) =
1
1+e0 = 0.5, and cost diﬀerence of −1 would be P(O￿G) =
1
1+e−(−1) = 0.27.
Let us look at how rationality weighs into the equation. For non-negative cost values,
lower rationality β = 0.5, would mean that a cost diﬀerence of 3 would now yield a lower
likelihood than before, e.g. P(O￿G) =
1
1+e(−0.5⋅3) = 0.82. For a cost diﬀerence of 0, the
rationality factor has no eﬀect on the exponent. For a negative cost diﬀerence, lower
rationality would actually make the probability higher. The intuition behind this is that
a worse predictor actually becomes more likely if the agent is irrational. In the earlier
paper [RG10], the Boltzmann distribution was used instead of the sigmoid function.
The characteristics of the two likelihood functions are discussed in Appendix A.
3.2.4.3
Posterior Probabilities
The target distribution and posterior probabilities P(G￿O) over the possible goals G ∈G
given the observation sequence O can thus be obtained in a few steps using Bayes Theo-
rem as described in Section 3.2.4. For probabilistic plan recognition, a prior distribution
P(G) over the goals G is assumed to be given. The posterior P(G￿O) can be calculated
==PAGE:33==
3.2 Plan and Goal Recognition
26
based on these priors and the idea of cost diﬀerence:
P(G￿O) = P(O￿G)P(G)
P(O)
= ↵P(O￿G)P(G)
(3.12)
First, the costs of achieving each possible goal G with plans that are consistent and
inconsistent with the observations are calculated.
The resulting cost diﬀerences are
plugged into Equation (3.11) for each goal. The resulting likelihoods are then plugged
into Bayes Theorem together with the priors. The probabilities P(O) used in Bayes
Theorem are obtained by normalisation, which is represented with the normalisation
factor ↵.
The simplest version of posterior probabilities can be found by omitting the priors and
leaving out the idea of cost diﬀerences. Let us say that we wanted to know only the
goals which are likely given the observations, and the goals that are not likely. This
would instead yield a probability distribution that is uniform. Say that all likely goals
would yield P(O￿G) = 1, and P(O￿G) = 0 for all unlikely goals. Furthermore, suppose
the priors for each goal would be the same, which could be P(G) = 1. By normalisation,
this would mean that all the likely goals would have a total probability of 100%. The
probability would then be equally divided with each goal. This method is also called
ﬁltering and is described in one of the early papers of Ramirez and Geﬀner in 2009[RG09].
==PAGE:34==
Chapter 4
Domain Representation
In order to solve the planning problems for both robots and humans, it is necessary
to have a clear deﬁnition of the domain. Its representation is loosely modelled after
a simpliﬁed warehouse, where AMRs perform tasks alongside humans.
This section
will argue for the assumptions and simpliﬁcations made to the representation, how the
domain is formalised using STRIPS, and what actions and goals can be performed by
the agents in the systems.
4.1
Assumptions and Simpliﬁcations
The domain must resemble the world in which one robot operates. It is, however, not
necessary to model every detail of the real world to obtain a useful representation of the
domain. However, it also poses the risk that a solution might not work in production.
Since the focus is on modelling planning and conﬂict avoidance between the robot and
humans, it has not been deemed necessary to model low-level motion planning and
reﬁlling shelves.
Low-level motion planning does play an important part in conﬂict
avoidance, but to reduce the complexity of the exploration, high-level motion planning
is deemed suﬃcient for the initial testing of conﬂict avoidance methods.
Real world
Warehouse simulation
Continuous environment
Discrete environment
Multi-dimensional
2D dimensional
Humans and robots diﬀer in size
Both take up one cell
Low-level motion planning
High-level action schemes
Dynamically changing velocities
Constant velocity for all agents
Software modelled in relation to hardware
Hardware properties not modelled
Sensor data processed into dynamic objects
Sensor data not modelled
Sensor with 360 degree FoV
FoV approximated
Table 4.1: Overview of assumptions and simpliﬁcations made compared to the real
world, e.g. MiR’s physical robotics solutions and actual warehouses.
This section will argue for the assumptions and simpliﬁcations made when modelling
the domain. Table 4.1 gives an overview of the decisions made by comparing it to the
real world and MiR’s robots.
==PAGE:35==
4.1 Assumptions and Simpliﬁcations
28
4.1.1
Warehouse Knowledge
The domain is modelled after a generalised warehouse layout with [FLE22] as inspiration.
According to an American warehouse company, the average warehouse size is between
20,000 - 50,000 square feet which is approximately 1800 - 4700 square meters [Eag23]. It
is diﬃcult to ﬁnd reliable sources on the average number of warehouse workers per square
foot, and this is also highly dependent on the type of warehouse and to what degree
the warehouse is automated. The industrial commercial market analysis, [Ree21], states
that the average employment density for an e-commerce facility is 700 square feet per
worker, which would be approximately 14 workers on 10,000 square meters. However,
as most warehouses today have some degree of automation, the number is probably
1.5 −2 times higher for more labour-intensive warehouses with little to no automation.
4.1.2
Discrete Grid
A practical simpliﬁcation is how the map is represented. Coordinates in the real world
belong to real numbers, meaning that it is a continuous grid. This is problematic because
an uncountable amount of coordinates exist. To avoid uncountable many coordinates
the map is made discrete, i.e. coordinates are tuples of integers. Humans and the robot
occupy one location each that corresponds to a unique cell in a grid representation.
It could be argued that a grid representation is not close enough to the real domain.
The assumptions can be challenged on diﬀerent levels: First of all, it lacks the ability
to model complexity and details, as well as the micro-adjustments that agents make to
their plans. It is also more computationally heavy to plan in a continuous environment,
which is not accurately depicted in a discrete representation. However, the choice is
made based on conversations with MiR and their future plan of building a simulator,
which will also be represented as a grid. The grid’s size is based on a human’s step
being approximately 0.5m.
With the intention of representing a small warehouse with the size of 900m2, the di-
mensions of the grid are set to 30 × 120. It would also be possible to make the grid
more accurate by making it ﬁner, but this is not necessary for comparing the diﬀerent
solutions presented in this thesis.
Figure 4.1: With a discrete grid, the world can be simpliﬁed to look at a limited number
of outcomes, e.g. moving one step into adjacent cells as depicted on the
right.
==PAGE:36==
4.2 Domain Deﬁnition
29
Due to the map being represented as a discrete grid, the robot has eight adjacent
locations.
It can move to these locations or stay at its current location.
This is a
simpliﬁcation compared to the real world where the robot can move in any direction
at any speed below its speed limit. The notion of time in the domain is synchronous,
meaning that every human and the robot perform exactly one action per time step. This
is helpful in terms of simplicity but eliminates the possibility of handling distinctions in
human velocity. Sometimes humans walk fast, and in that case, the robot may need to
act faster and less elegantly than when a human is approaching slowly. This could be
modelled more closely by varying the number of actions performed by humans in each
time step, but will for now be kept constant for both types of agents.
4.1.3
Modelling Sensor Data and Priors
Assumptions also need to be made regarding what data is available from sensors and the
environment. It is assumed that historical data is available at warehouses to determine
which packages are popular, and therefore, which shelves and drop-oﬀzones are popular.
This historical data can be used to construct a probability distribution of goals needing
to be accomplished. It is also assumed that breaks from regular work tasks can be
researched to ﬁnd an average.
In the real world, the robot uses sensors to measure the distance of free space in every
direction. The sensors are assumed to be unable to distinguish between objects but
can collect the location of these. In a discrete grid representation, it is a bit harder to
tell whether a cell is visible or not because a cell covers a small amount of area. How
much of the cell’s area should be visible before the cell is deﬁned to be visible? In the
domain an approach has been taken that tells whether a cell is in line of sight within
the range of the sensors and if it contains an object. This will be explained further in
Section 5.3.2.
The sensor has a range of 8m, and since one action corresponds to one cell, it is
estimated that one cell is approximately 0.5m × 0.5m, meaning that the robot has a
view of 16 cells in all directions. The company also has a selection of diﬀerent robots
and they are all rectangular. For convenience, the robot is assumed to be of square form
and ﬁt perfectly into a cell.
4.2
Domain Deﬁnition
The domain is modelled as a 2-dimensional grid of cells to represent the warehouse.
The grid uses a 2n-neighbour representation, where n = 3, as such each location has
eight neighbours. To model the cells after the actual domain, cells can be represented
diﬀerently.
==PAGE:37==
4.2 Domain Deﬁnition
30
• Wall: A cell that contains a wall. Agents cannot move into walls.
• Entry: A cell that is an entry into and out of the warehouse. The robot does not
distinguish diﬀerent types of entries as all entries are inaccessible to the robot,
although individual entries can have diﬀerent popularity for humans.
• Special Area: A cell with a special purpose inside the warehouse, such as the
area surrounding a coﬀee machine, where humans take breaks.
• Charging Station: A cell containing the robot’s charging station. Only the robot
is allowed to enter this cell.
• Shelf: A cell with a shelf that contains packages. Shelves are assumed to hold
inﬁnite packages. The agents pick up packages from the shelves.
• Drop-oﬀ: A drop-oﬀarea is a cell in the warehouse where packages can be
delivered to. The agents go to these areas to drop oﬀpackages that have been
picked up from a shelf.
• Normal: A cell that is neither of the above types. Any agent may enter this cell
given it is not occupied.
Figure 4.2: Text representation of the domain, where ’+’ denotes walls, ’C’ charging
station, ’E’ entries, ’S’ shelves, ’D’ drop-oﬀs and ’A’ special areas.
4.2.1
Formalisation
The robot should be able to navigate and complete planning problems in this domain.
For this reason, a function-free ﬁrst-order language L is used to formalise the domain as
==PAGE:38==
4.2 Domain Deﬁnition
31
a set of states, S, that are deﬁned by ground atoms of L, i.e. S = 2PL where PL is the set
of ground atoms of L. This makes it possible to represent the domain in STRIPS, which
describes the state changes by actions, rather than entire new states[FN71]. Actions are
described by action schemas that contain a precondition and an eﬀect. As mentioned
in Section 3.2.2, the precondition determines in which states the action is applicable,
while the eﬀect determines what happens to the state when the action is applied.
The following predicates are contained in L and build on three sets, the agents A, the
locations C, and the packages Packages:
• Human(agt): Agent agt is a human.
• Robot(agt): Agent agt is a robot.
• Package(pac): pac is a package.
• Wall(x): Location x is a wall.
• Entry(x): Location x is an entry.
• Shelf(x): Location x is a shelf.
• Dropoff(x): Location x is a drop-oﬀarea.
• SpecialArea(x): Location x is a special area.
• ChargingStation(x): Location x is a charging station.
• Neighbours(x,y): Location y is one of the eight adjacent cells to location x in
the grid.
• Free(x): Location x is not occupied.
• AgentAt(agt,x): Agent agt is located at the location x.
• PackageAt(pac,x): Package pac is located at the location x.
• Carries(agt,pac): Agent agt carries the package pac.
• Available(agt): Agent agt does not carry any packages and is available.
• HasBreak(agt): Human agt is having a break.
==PAGE:39==
4.2 Domain Deﬁnition
32
4.2.2
Agents and their Actions
The domain contains two types of agents: robots and humans. Meaning that A contains
one robot and a positive number of humans.
Humans are modelled in the domain as workers in a warehouse, where the focus is to
mimic human behaviour to a point where it can challenge the robot’s conﬂict avoidance
and navigation. Each human starts at an entry and will move packages throughout their
workday until they exit the warehouse. Humans may also procrastinate on their work
tasks by moving to special areas to get coﬀee or sit down for a break.
The robot always starts its day in the charging station, and throughout the day, the
robot is assigned a task whenever it is available for work.
The robot will continue
receiving tasks for as long as it has enough charge. Typically, the tasks involve moving
packages from point A to point B in the warehouse.
All warehouse tasks are distributed via an IT system and are typically related to orders.
Humans can select tasks from this system, while the robot is automatically delegated
tasks from the system. To achieve these goals and tasks, the agents must be able to
move around, sometimes wait and interact with the robot. Thus a set of actions, A,
need to be deﬁned for the domain to enable the agents to achieve their goals. The
STRIPS action schemes in Figure 4.3 are a generalisation of how agents can act in the
domain.
With the six action schemas in Figure 4.3, an agent can navigate between other agents,
wait if it has to let someone else pass before it can move on, pick up packages oﬀshelves
and drop packages in drop-oﬀareas. Humans can also take a break in special areas.
Note that Wait is the same as doing nothing. Doing nothing changes nothing in the
state, thus the eﬀect of Wait is empty. An agent should always be able to do nothing
thus Wait has an empty precondition.
The warehouse tasks can now be described as a STRIPS planning problem by ￿PL,s0,A,G￿.
Where PL is the ground atoms of L, s0 ∈S is the initial state from where the agent
starts solving the planning problem, and G ⊆S is the set of states that satisfy a goal
formula, 'G, which is a conjunction of ground literals of L.
==PAGE:40==
4.2 Domain Deﬁnition
33
ACTION: MoveRobot(agt, from, to)
PRE:
Neighbours(from,to) ∧Free(to) ∧AgentAt(agt,from) ∧¬Wall(to) ∧
Robot(agt)
∧¬Entry(to) ∧¬SpecialArea(to)
EFF: Free(from) ∧¬Free(to) ∧¬AgentAt(agt,from) ∧AgentAt(agt,to)
ACTION: MoveHuman(agt, from, to)
PRE:
Neighbours(from,to) ∧Free(to) ∧AgentAt(agt,from) ∧¬Wall(to) ∧
Human(agt)
∧¬ChargingStation(to)
EFF:
Free(from) ∧¬Free(to) ∧¬AgentAt(agt,from) ∧AgentAt(agt,to) ∧
¬HasBreak(agt)
ACTION: Wait()
PRE:
EFF:
ACTION: TakeABreak(agt,loc)
PRE: Human(agt) ∧AgentAt(agt,loc) ∧SpecialArea(loc)
EFF: HasBreak(agt)
ACTION: PickUp(agt, loc, pac)
PRE: Available(agt) ∧Shelf(loc) ∧Package(pac) ∧PackageAt(pac,loc)
∧AgentAt(agt,loc)
EFF: ¬PackageAt(pac,loc) ∧¬Available(agt) ∧Carries(agt,pac)
ACTION: Drop(agt, loc, pac)
PRE: Carries(agt,pac) ∧AgentAt(agt,loc) ∧Dropoff(loc)
EFF: ¬Carries(agt,pac) ∧Available(agt) ∧PackageAt(pac,loc)
Figure 4.3: The agents’ actions deﬁned as STRIPS action schemas
==PAGE:41==
Chapter 5
Simulation Environment
This chapter dives into the design and implementation of the ﬁrst category of the
problem statement described in Figure 2.3. This includes an overview of the system,
the design of the simulator, and how the agents are modelled.
5.1
System Overview
The system is divided into four diﬀerent parts, as can be seen in Figure 5.1.
The
simulator keeps track of what state the domain is in, imitates the task distribution,
and the humans walking around the warehouse.
The planning module ﬁnds a plan
using information provided by an agent. The conﬂict-resolving module handles conﬂicts
according to the chosen conﬂict resolution strategy. The planning and conﬂict-resolving
modules we provide are based on the solutions presented in Chapter 6. An agent is
created based on the choice of planning and conﬂict-resolving modules.
Figure 5.1: An overview of the system, where the diﬀerent components and their re-
lations are depicted.
==PAGE:42==
5.2 Modelling the Simulator
35
5.2
Modelling the Simulator
The simulator contains the domain representation, a speciﬁed number of humans, main-
taining the current state of the simulation, and a controller. The controller is responsible
for distributing tasks, updating the individual agents’ states, and updating the state of
the domain with actions received from agents.
5.2.1
Updating the Domain
The domain’s state is updated by sequentially applying the actions received from agents.
First from all humans, and then from the robot. If an action is applicable in the domain,
the domain is updated as per the eﬀect of the action. Assuming all provided actions
to be part of a valid plan from the point of view of the providing agent, an invalid
action must lead to a conﬂict between one or more agents. Conﬂicts may happen due
to agents not having perfect knowledge of the domain and other agents’ plans.
When a conﬂict occurs we assume the two agents end in their respective locations
prior to the conﬂict, because humans can, through interaction with each other, avoid
collisions. If the robot and a human were about to collide it is assumed that a safety
protocol would stop the robot in time. In both cases, the outcome is that the two agents
would not end up in the same location.
5.2.1.1
Modelling Imperfect Knowledge
The agents’ imperfect knowledge of the domain is modelled by the vision range of
agents. In the case of humans, this is the limitation of human eyes, and for the robot,
the limitations of the sensors as described by Sections 4.1.3 and 5.3.2. As such agents
can not use the domain’s state to plan from. Instead, each agent has its own relaxed
state wherein the propositions of cells within the agent’s vision are described, and all
other propositions are equal to a state with no agents. When an agent moves, its vision
changes and it needs new information about the domain’s state. This information is
provided by the controller.
With the updated state the agent can use the conﬂict-
resolving module to construct a cost map, which can be used to ﬁnd a plan. This will
be further explained in Section 5.3.3.
To simulate the robot’s delay between sensing and acting, the robot’s state is updated
before any agent has moved and the robot’s action is performed last, which means the
robot always acts in a state of uncertainty. As humans are assumed to have a sense of
social awareness, they have their states updated before acting. Figure 5.2 gives an idea
of the ﬂow of a simulation.
==PAGE:43==
5.3 Modelling the Robot
36
Figure 5.2: A simpliﬁed view of the ﬂow during a simulation from the point of view of
the simulator.
5.2.2
Task Distribution
Tasks are distributed by the controller based on a probability distribution derived from
the sales history of a warehouse. Using the sales history to distribute tasks provides
realism towards, how people would perform tasks in a warehouse.
Tasks related to
popular orders that need to be shipped out will naturally be distributed more often than
less popular orders.
The task distribution is furthermore based on the fact that many warehouses typically
have a central IT system from which tasks are either assigned to workers or available
for taking as orders come in. Since the robot has access to a wireless connection and is
more often than not coupled to the customer’s system in some way, the assumption is
that the robot has knowledge of the tasks in the system that are currently active.
5.3
Modelling the Robot
The purpose of the robot is to increase the throughput of the warehouse by performing
tasks such as moving a box from a shelf to a drop-oﬀarea. To enable this the robot
should be assigned a task, ﬁnd a plan for the task, execute the plan, and solve occurring
conﬂicts. In Figure 5.3, the ﬂow of the robot logic is depicted. The robot follows a
strategy that is often referred to as the Sense-Think-Act paradigm, and it forms the
basis for the behaviour of most robotic systems. At each iteration, sensing updates the
robot’s understanding of the current situation; thinking is used to update or reﬁne the
current plan; acting brings the robot closer to a desired outcome. For this reason, one
typically refers to the sense-think-act loop[Sie03].
The robot contains a planning module that is conﬁgurable with diﬀerent pathﬁnding
algorithms that all use Euclidean distance as the heuristic. Moreover, the robot also has
a conﬁgurable conﬂict-resolving module. Based on conﬁgurations, it will either handle
==PAGE:44==
5.3 Modelling the Robot
37
Figure 5.3: An overview of the robot ﬂow built on the Sense-Think-Act paradigm. The
robot receives a new goal and forms an initial plan. It then continuously
tries to execute the next action in its plan. Whenever a conﬂict is identiﬁed
or predicted, the related costs are updated and the robot replans according
to those.
occurring conﬂicts or prematurely predict conﬂicts.
5.3.1
Planning for a Task
The tasks that the robot is given are all of the same kind: Move a package from its shelf
to a drop-oﬀarea. To solve this task, Robot ∈A needs to move from its current location,
L ∈C, to the shelf, S ∈C. From the shelf, pick up the package Pac ∈Packages. While
carrying the package move to a drop-oﬀarea, D ∈C, and deliver the package.
As mentioned in Section 4.2.2 a task is described as a STRIPS planning problem,
T = ￿PL,s0,A,G￿, with 'G = PackageAt(Pac,D). It is assumed that all locations are
reachable from all locations and it is a closed world, i.e. predicates not explicitly claimed
to be true are false. In the assignment of s0 the predicates Neighbours, Free, Wall
and Entry have been abstracted away to keep it simple.
==PAGE:45==
5.3 Modelling the Robot
38
• PL: The ground atoms of L deﬁned in Section 4.2.1.
• s0: Package(Pac) ∧Shelf(S) ∧PacakgeAt(Pac,S) ∧Available(Robot)
∧AgentAt(Robot,L) ∧Dropoff(D)
• A: The set of actions shown in Figure 4.3
• G: {G ∈S ￿G ￿'G}
Using a standard informed search algorithm such as A∗will generate the states on the
go and will most often avoid a huge state space. In the case where it is impossible to ﬁnd
a plan, all reachable states will be expanded, and this may take a considerable amount
of time. For more robust planning algorithms such as D∗Lite, previously expanded
states are required to be stored in memory for the algorithm to work when replanning.
To reduce the worst-case computation time and memory used, the state space should
be kept to a minimum when planning.
A signiﬁcant part of the state space consists of the robot carrying a speciﬁc package.
At any location, the robot may carry a speciﬁc package, resulting in distinct states with
distinct neighbouring states for every distinct package leading to an enormous state
space. However, the movement of the robot is not aﬀected by carrying any package,
meaning the navigation from A to B is the same.
To make the planning more eﬃcient a hierarchical task network (HTN) is used to
decompose T into multiple subtasks. The ﬁrst subtask is for the robot to move to the
shelf. The second subtask is for the robot to pick up the package. The third subtask
is for the robot to move to the drop-oﬀarea. The fourth subtask is for the robot to
deliver the package.
The ﬁrst and third subtasks are only about moving, thus ground atoms about packages
are not needed in the planning for these subtasks. The second and fourth subtasks can
both be completed by a single action, meaning they will simply be replaced by a PickUp
or Drop action without doing any planning.
To solve the ﬁrst and third subtasks a high-level action (HLA) is deﬁned by the reﬁne-
ment schemas and action schema in Figure 5.4.
With the reﬁnement schemas and the action schema of Navigate, it is possible to
create an HLA plan that solves T. The plan is made by using the reﬁnement schema,
DeliverPackage shown in Figure 5.5.
==PAGE:46==
5.3 Modelling the Robot
39
REFINEMENT: Navigate(agt, x, y)
PRE: Neighbours(x,z) ∧AgentAt(agt,x) ∧Robot(agt) ∧¬Entry(y)
STEPS: [MoveRobot(agt,x,z),Navigate(agt,z,y)]
REFINEMENT: Navigate(agt, x, y)
PRE: Neighbours(x,y) ∧AgentAt(agt,x) ∧Robot(agt) ∧¬Entry(y)
STEPS: [MoveRobot(agt,x,y)]
ACTION: Navigate(agt, x, y)
PRE: AgentAt(agt,x) ∧Robot(agt) ∧¬Entry(y)
EFF: ¬AgentAt(agt,x) ∧AgentAt(agt,y)
Figure 5.4: Reﬁnement schemas and action schema for the HLA Navigate.
REFINEMENT: DeliverPackage(agt, pac x, y, z)
PRE: At(agt,x) ∧Robot(agt) ∧PackageAt(pac,y) ∧Shelf(y) ∧DropOff(z)
STEPS: [Navigate(agt,x,y),PickUp(agt,y,pac),Navigate(agt,y,z),
Drop(agt,z,pac)]
Figure 5.5: Reﬁnement schema for the HLA DeliverPackage
The high-level plan of DeliverPackage enables the robot to relax its search for a plan
that will achieve 'G. It exploits the knowledge that the robot will always navigate to a
shelf, pick up a package, navigate to a drop-oﬀarea and deliver the package. It means
only the navigation part is left to be planned. Thus the complexity of carrying a package
in the navigation can be relaxed and Navigate can be used to ﬁnd a plan for getting
from one location to another with or without a package.
5.3.2
Visible Cells
When is a cell visible for the robot in a discrete grid representation? How much of the
cell’s area should be visible before the cell is deﬁned to be visible? These are some of
the questions that should be considered when modelling the robot’s sensors. However,
the most important question is: What is the purpose? The purpose of modelling the
sensors is to constrain the robot’s vision in an eﬃcient manner without removing vision
that would be visible for real sensors.
A straightforward solution is to say that a cell is visible if it has a visible adjacent cell
that is closer to the robot. However, this solution is too simple and Figure 5.6 presents
two problems. Figure 5.6a shows that the robot can see humans in a separate aisle
because the solution does not state anything about walls. In case the robot can not see
==PAGE:47==
5.3 Modelling the Robot
40
through walls, another problem may occur and is shown on Figure 5.6b. The robot can
see the human because a visible adjacent cell exists that is closer to the robot and not
a wall.
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.6: Two problems occur when a cell is visible if it has a visible adjacent cell
that is closer to the robot. a) The robot can see through walls. b) The
robot can see the human because a visible adjacent cell exists that is not
a wall and is closer to the robot.
These problems are handled by Deﬁnition 5.1 that allows the robot to see through
humans.
Definition 5.1 A cell is visible if a visible adjacent cell exists that is not a wall
and is included in an optimal plan from the robot to the cell that ignores obstacles.
In Figure 5.7a the idea is visualized with a situation of the robot and three humans.
What can be said about the optimal plans when ignoring obstacles in the grid? All
optimal plans try to describe the vector between the robot and the cell c as shown
on Figure 5.7b, and the vector will at most go through two adjacent cells of c. The
adjacent cells of c, which the vector goes through, will be on some optimal plan, and
hence one of these should be visible for c to be visible. To decide which cells are visible,
all adjacent cells of the robot are marked as visible. Then for every visible cell that is
not a wall, adjacent cells will be compared to Deﬁnition 5.1 to decide whether they are
visible. On Figure 5.7c red cells are not visible.
The result of Deﬁnition 5.1 can be seen in Figure 5.8 where it has been applied to the
scenarios in Figure 5.6. It can be seen that the new deﬁnition solves the two problems.
A problem with this deﬁnition is that a cell c can have a free adjacent cell that is visible
and on an optimal path between the robot and c, while c should not be visible in the
real world. This makes it possible for the robot to look around corners inside its sensor
range. This problem is shown on Figure 5.9, where the cell c at the end of the vector
should be hidden by the wall closer to the robot. However, since the vector goes through
the visible cell north of c that is not a wall, then c is deﬁned to be visible. This results
in all cells within the sensor range and south of c being visible.
==PAGE:48==
5.3 Modelling the Robot
41
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 5.7: The process of determining which cells should be visible. a) Robot and
humans in a grid.
b) Find adjacent cells on optimal paths by using a
vector. c) Find visible cells with the deﬁnition. Red cells are not visible.
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.8: Deﬁnition 5.1 applied to the scenarios in Figure 5.6 a) Robot can not see
through walls. b) The robot can not see the human behind the wall on
Figure 5.6b.
To solve this problem it could have been required that all adjacent cells the vector goes
through must be visible and not walls. However, this solution will ﬁlter partly exposed
cells, which contain small areas that should be visible to the robot. The purpose of the
modelling was to constrain the robot’s vision, but not to a degree where partly exposed
cells would be ﬁltered. As such Deﬁnition 5.1 is chosen over its alternative, and due to
time constraints, the problem on Figure 5.9 is accepted and will not be solved.
Figure 5.9: The deﬁnition states that the cell at the end of the vector should be visible,
however, it should be hidden by a wall.
==PAGE:49==
5.3 Modelling the Robot
42
5.3.3
Solving Conﬂicts
Before the robot starts moving it is conﬁgured with a map to gain initial knowledge
about the domain. This includes the dimensions of the map, the locations and types
of goals, the location of the charging station, and the locations of the walls.
This
provides the robot with the fundamental knowledge needed for navigating from A to B.
However, humans are present in the domain and they move around as well. If the robot
simply relies on its initial knowledge it will move into several humans while navigating,
because the robot’s initial state does not contain information about nearby humans.
On Figure 5.10 an example is shown. Figure 5.10a shows the state of the domain that
includes both the robot and the human, whereas the human is not included in the robot’s
state shown on Figure 5.10b. Furthermore, the robot’s plan is shown to go through the
human’s location which may cause a conﬂict with the human.
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.10: a) The state of the domain, including a robot and a human. b) The state
of the robot, and its plan for reaching its goal.
To solve this problem, the robot uses the data it receives from its sensors and a cost
map. If the sensors sense an object in a location that is not a wall, the robot will
assume the object is a human and use this information to update its state. Likewise,
when the robot’s sensors stop sensing an object in a location, the robot assumes the
human has left the location and will update its state accordingly. A cost map is a grid
of the same dimensions as the map, that contains extra costs for cells in the map. The
extra costs are used to represent information of the robot’s state, e.g. the locations of
nearby humans. These extra costs can be considered in the planning module, where all
ingoing edges to a cell will have a corresponding extra cost. Since the planning module
is searching for the plan of minimum cost, these extra costs can be seen as penalties,
because they make cells less attractive. The result is that the planning module will
try to ﬁnd a plan that avoids humans. The optimal path is now the path with the
best compromise between avoiding humans and the shortest distance. Note that adding
extra costs to all ingoing edges of a cell preserves the admissibility and consistency of
the heuristic.
How are these penalties determined? That is the purpose of the conﬂict-resolving mod-
ule. This module uses the state and determines penalties based on a chosen strategy.
==PAGE:50==
5.4 Modelling Humans
43
The result of using a naive strategy on the scenario in Figure 5.10 is shown on Fig-
ure 5.11b, where locations of humans are penalised with the highest penalty ∞. The
robot will then ﬁnd a plan to avoid the human by any means necessary. Multiple and
more advanced strategies will be presented in Chapter 6.
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.11: a) The scenario from Figure 5.10a. b) The cost map of the robot, and its
plan for reaching its goal. The conﬂict-resolving module uses a strategy
where locations of humans receive a cost of ∞.
5.4
Modelling Humans
The motivation behind having humans in the simulator is to create a realistic environ-
ment for the robot to traverse.
Rather than modelling human behaviour to perfection, as this would be an extensive
task by itself, human modelling is focused on factors that have the highest impact on
testing the robot. For instance, it is important to model the fact that humans can
follow sub-optimal plans because that is very much the case in real life, and it would
impact the robot’s ability to predict their intention. It is however less relevant to model
smaller, stationary social interactions, e.g. two or three people standing still, engaging
in a conversation.
The robot, regardless of how sophisticated its conﬂict resolution
strategy is, will easily plan around them, so that type of interaction is not relevant to
test.
5.4.1
Rationality, Discipline and Caution
To model humans, we introduce three concepts: rationality, discipline and caution.
These concepts will attempt to cover the most crucial human behaviour with respect
to testing conﬂict resolution strategies and are inspired by the literature review in Sec-
tion 2.2.2. Rationality is based on the fact that humans do not always follow optimal
paths and builds on the idea of over- and underestimation, a simpliﬁcation of some of
the concepts in Section 2.2.2.1 such as the more known environment, the more rational
the agents. It is also a widely used concept in plan and goal recognition. Discipline
==PAGE:51==
5.4 Modelling Humans
44
is concerned with the fact that humans at times procrastinate at work, which is quite
speciﬁc for a work environment. Caution is based on how cautious humans are towards
robots and is inspired by the HuNavSim simulator introduced in Section 2.2.2.2, as well
as MiR’s explanation of worker education.
5.4.1.1
Rationality
To increase the realism of human behaviour, we assign each human an amount of
rationality R ∈]0;1] that denotes how sub-optimally humans plan for their goals. When
it comes to rationality, irrational agents can be modelled in diﬀerent ways, but common
for all solutions is that it should cause the human to deviate from its optimal plan. This
can either be done by inserting random actions into the optimal plan, or by modifying
the heuristic values when computing a plan. The latter has been chosen, due to humans’
tendency to overestimate or underestimate. Given a heuristic value h(c) for the cell c
and a rationality R the estimate E(c) is deﬁned by Equation (5.1).
E(c) ∈￿R ⋅h(c); h(c)
R ￿
(5.1)
To give an example assume R = 0.5 and h(c) = 100. Then the result would be an
estimate E(c) ∈[50;200]. The interval is relatively balanced meaning that the decrease
is relatively equal to the increase, i.e. R ⋅1
R = 1. This reﬂects the hypothesis that
humans with higher rationality are better at estimating. A human with R = 1 will make
perfectly precise estimations E(c) ∈[h(c);h(c)], while a human with R ≈0 makes
imprecise estimations E(c) ∈]0;∞[.
To apply the estimation function E in the informed search strategy used by humans the
evaluation function in Equation (3.3) is modiﬁed to use E(c) instead of h(c):
f(c) = g(c) + E(c)
(5.2)
Humans use A∗as their search strategy.
A∗is only optimal when the heuristic is
admissible and consistent. E is not admissible as it may overestimate costs. E is not
consistent as it can both underestimate and overestimate costs, which may result in the
cost of a direct path to c′ from c to be overestimated, while the cost of a path from c to
c′ via c′′ can be underestimated. Thus A∗is not optimal with the evaluation function
in Equation (5.2) for R < 1, meaning that humans are not guaranteed to follow optimal
plans.
To show the eﬀect of rationality an example is shown on Figure 5.12 where R = 0.5 and
the heuristic value h(c) for the cell c is equal to the distance to the goal. Recall costs
of diagonal moves are
￿
(2) ≈1.4 and the costs of non-diagonal moves are 1.
==PAGE:52==
5.4 Modelling Humans
45
(a) Human with R = 0.5
(b) g(c)
(c) h(c)
(d) Interval of E(c)
(e) Interval of f(c)
Figure 5.12: The intermediate calculations for the the evaluation value f(c) for every
cell c. a) A human (yellow) uses A∗to ﬁnd a path to the goal (green).
b) The cost function g(c) is calculated. c) The heuristic value h(c) is
calculated. d) The estimation E(c) is within the shown interval. f) The
evaluation value f(c) is within the shown interval.
Figure 5.12c shows an admissible and consistent heuristic h. In Figure 5.12d the esti-
mation interval is shown for every cell c and is based on h(c). For the human’s cell cH,
highlighted by yellow, assume the highest estimation E(cH) = 8.4 for reaching the goal
cell cG. The actual cost of reaching cG is shown in Figure 5.12b to be g(cG) = 4.2. This
shows E is not admissible because E(cH) > g(cG). Furthermore, for the cell c′ below
cH, assume the lowest estimation E(c′) = 1.9. The action cost between cH and c′ is
C(cH,c′) = 1 because it is a non-diagonal move. This shows that E is not consistent
because E(cH) > E(c′) + C(cH,c′).
5.4.1.2
Discipline
Each human is also assigned an amount of discipline D ∈[0,1]. The amount of discipline
determines how often a human procrastinates on work-related tasks, that is taking a
break in some capacity. Discipline is, contrary to rationality, a term that is deﬁned as
==PAGE:53==
5.4 Modelling Humans
46
part of this project to improve the modelling of human behaviour. It can be argued
that procrastination can be seen as a subset of rationality, but from a design point of
view, it is easier to separate these two concepts. Discipline is about the irrationality
of procrastination in terms of changing what the human is currently doing, while the
concept of rationality is about how a human’s current goal can be solved more or less
sub-optimally.
A human with high discipline will rarely procrastinate, whereas a human with low dis-
cipline will procrastinate often.
Assuming a uniform distribution between [0;1] the
probability of a human procrastinating is deﬁned to be 1 −D in each timestep. The
average frequency of human procrastination can then be calculated as
1
(1 −D)
To give an example, a discipline of D = 0.995 would mean that humans in the warehouse
would procrastinate every 200th step on average. The fact that this is only an average
and not a certainty, contributes to the fact that not all humans procrastinate equally
often. Some people never take a break, and some take multiple.
5.4.1.3
Caution and Worker Education
Lastly, each human is also assigned a caution C ∈[0;1] to signal how close they are
willing to get to the robot when planning.
It is inevitable that new technology in
a workplace is viewed diﬀerently by each individual and will impact how humans act
around the robot. Some will avoid the robot at all costs, either to not interrupt it or
because they feel unsafe, others will do the opposite, either because they do not mind
intervening with the robot’s tasks or because they trust its safety measures. In the
paper by [TM21], a survey on hospital workers’ relation to AMRs in the workplace was
conducted, and the results clearly show that most workers would prefer a distance of
1
2 −1 metres to the robot.
One could of course argue that hospital workers and warehouse workers could have
diﬀerent views on AMRs, since there might be greater caution in an environment with
patients and where automation technologies are not as widespread. This diﬀerence is
supported by the company ﬁeld research, which has revealed that it is common practice
for the company to promote worker education at client sites. This means that the workers
at the company purchasing the robot, that have to work alongside it, are encouraged
to receive education on rules of how to handle the robot. One example of a rule is
that humans should always walk to the side when getting near the robot. This way,
unnecessary planning issues can be avoided for the robot.
Due to humans having diﬀerent views towards the robot, it has been made possible
to vary whether or not the simulated humans are cautious towards the robot.
As
==PAGE:54==
5.4 Modelling Humans
47
an example, a caution of C = 1 would mean that a human would penalise the cells
surrounding the robot with a range of one. A caution of C = 0 would mean that no
extra penalties are given, except for the cell that the robot is positioned in.
5.4.1.4
Determining Correct Values
Determining how rational, disciplined and cautious humans are is extremely hard because
individuals can be very diﬀerent from each other. A warehouse is very structured as such
warehouse workers would normally have a good idea of how to navigate the warehouse
after they have been employed for a month. Assume all humans in our domain have
been employed in the warehouse for at least a month, such that they all have a good
idea of how to navigate in the warehouse. When ﬁnding a path humans normally rely on
eye measurement and memory to estimate distances. These methods are rarely precise
due to humans forgetting and eye measurement being subjective. As such the humans’
rationality should be close to optimal but make room for miscalculations. This is why
the humans in this domain are modelled with a rationality of R = 0.95. Tests have
shown that R = 0.95 will on average make a plan of 40 actions 5% longer than the
optimal plan, and a plan of 100 actions 10% longer. All humans will have a rationality
of R = 0.95 but may behave diﬀerently in simulations because rationality is based on
randomness. Thus the robot will encounter diﬀerent human behaviour on pathﬁnding.
Discipline is dependent on warehouse workers’ willingness to interrupt their work to do
something else. In a real warehouse, this can be estimated by counting the number
of interruptions the warehouse workers have on average or asking them. We do not
have that opportunity so we will make a simple estimation. Assume that the average
warehouse worker has four visits to the bathroom, a lunch break and three coﬀee breaks.
On top of this, some warehouse workers like to socialise and some do not, as such we
assume ﬁve interruptions to ask a colleague on average. Adding a break for a cigarette
and a break for extra snacks will result in a total of 15 interruptions. Assuming the
average warehouse worker walks 10.000 steps a day at work, this will mean a warehouse
worker interrupts their work every 10.000
15
≈667 step. This frequency corresponds to
a discipline of D = (667 −1)￿667 = 0.9985. All humans share this value of discipline
such that humans will on average procrastinate every 667th step. This means some
humans procrastinate often, and others may procrastinate rarely. Some humans may
procrastinate often in a short period and less in other periods. Thus the robot will
encounter diﬀerent human behaviour regarding procrastination.
How cautious workers are is related to how much education they have received. To
test the eﬀects of education two types of simulations will be made. One type where all
humans have a caution of C = 0, which means they do not keep their distance to help
the robot. And the second type is where all humans have a caution of C = 1, which
means they keep their distance and move according to social norms to help the robot.
The same value of caution is shared by all humans to make the impact more clear.
==PAGE:55==
5.4 Modelling Humans
48
5.4.2
Human Planning
Having introduced variables to model how a human behaves, we can now deﬁne the
method by which humans plan for their tasks. Tasks for humans are similar to that
of the robot, with the additional tasks of leaving the room by going to an entry and
procrastinating at a special area. A human with a task will, like the robot, decompose
the task into multiple subtasks.
Each subtask can then be viewed as an individual
STRIPS planning problem and solved using their planning module, state and cost map.
Humans use A∗for pathﬁnding and not D∗Lite due to the extra complexity introduced
with rationality. Furthermore, the computation time for humans only matters to the
rate at which test results can be produced and do not have any impact on the test
results.
5.4.2.1
Social Awareness
To increase the knowledge of each human and model their social awareness, a cost map
is used. The cost map holds values depicting the perceived likelihood of other agents
being in locations at a given time from the predicting human’s Hp point of view. In the
cost map, a higher value means a higher likelihood of an agent being in that location.
To assign values to the cost map, Hp diﬀerentiates between humans and the robot.
Hp assumes all agents follow the implicit social norm of keeping to the right. As such
Hp will try to stay mostly to its right and let other agents pass on its left. This is done
by penalising the left side less than the right side if possible.
The human-to-robot prediction is described by caution and is meant to discourage
Hp from going too close to the robot if Hp is cautious, rather than predicting actual
locations.
In the case of human-to-human prediction, humans have the advantage of being able
to communicate in many diﬀerent ways, whether it is through body language, eye
contact, or verbal. It makes humans skilled at inferring the intention or direction of
each other.
This is something that is extremely diﬃcult to model in a simulation
environment.
However, as we are mostly interested in the resulting eﬀect of these
implicit communication mechanisms, it can be simpliﬁed to allow Hp to view the ﬁrst
part of nearby humans’ plans and penalise their upcoming locations. Furthermore to
model the evasion of other humans’ personal space, Hp penalises cells surrounding other
humans with a range of 1.
==PAGE:56==
Chapter 6
Strategy Design
This chapter dives into the design and implementation of the second component used
to answer the research question described in Figure 2.3. To answer the question, we
must ﬁrst dive into modelling the company’s current solution for planning and conﬂict
resolution and the stop-and-wait strategy used widely in the industry. Afterwards, we
will explore methods for planning and conﬂict resolution to improve the robot.
6.1
Comparative Strategies
The goal is to investigate how the strategies can be improved. This requires modelling
these strategies in a way that makes them comparable. This section will describe the
stop-and-wait baseline strategy, which is also a strategy that some MiR clients choose
to conﬁgure, as well as the model of MiR’s standard solution for planning and conﬂict
resolution.
6.1.1
Baseline: Stop and wait
The simplest strategy for the robot to handle conﬂicts between itself and humans, while
still being able to perform its tasks, is by enforcing a stop-and-wait strategy.
The
stop-and-wait strategy ﬁnds a plan for its goal and will not utilise any replanning.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 6.1: The baseline robot calculates a plan for its goal. This plan is preserved,
but a wait action is performed when a human is blocking its next action.
The stop-and-wait strategy essentially means that the robot will plan for a given goal
without considering humans in its sensor range. When a conﬂict between the robot and
==PAGE:57==
6.1 Comparative Strategies
50
a human arises, i.e. that the robot is not able to perform the next action in its plan,
it will stop and perform a wait action instead. The robot will do this until the human
is no longer blocking the next action. According to MiR, some customers choose to
conﬁgure robots to do this, and the literature review in Section 2 also suggests that
some companies working with AMRs opt for this strategy. The beneﬁts are that it is a
much simpler implementation, the robot does not need to perform any extra replanning,
and it makes the robot predictable for the human workers. The disadvantages are that
it might reduce the throughput in terms of the number of tasks the robot can perform
in a given time frame, as well as being an annoyance to human workers by blocking their
path and possibly requiring them to receive extra training on how to navigate around
the robot.
6.1.2
MiR: Current Strategy
Based on the interview with MiR’s navigation expert in Appendix B, MiR conﬁgures the
robot with a static map of the environment and uses an A∗algorithm, combined with
three layers of planning. Figure 6.2 shows how these three layers are combined.
Figure 6.2: MiR’s three-point approach to planning. The ﬁrst step is to calculate a
global plan from the start position to the goal. If an obstacle is detected,
the local plan ﬁnds a new plan that deviates a maximum of 30cm from the
original plan. If this does not work, the semi-global planner tries to ﬁnd
a plan that deviates no more than 8m. If both fail, a new global plan is
found.
Due to the simpliﬁcations made in the domain representation, precise deviations down
to 30 centimetres will not be possible to model.
The interpretation of the solution
is therefore simpliﬁed to an extent where it is still analogous to MiR’s solution: The
local and semi-global planning elements are consolidated into one semi-global replanner,
which attempts to ﬁnd a plan that deviates less than 8 metres away from the original
plan whenever a human is within its sensor range and close to the previously found
plan. Failing to ﬁnd a semi-new plan the global planner will attempt to ﬁnd a complete
plan from the current location to the goal. As such the main idea of MiR’s replanning
==PAGE:58==
6.2 Improvements to Conﬂict Resolution
51
strategy is maintained in the sense that conﬂicts are handled in increasing order of
complexity.
6.2
Improvements to Conﬂict Resolution
This section will look at possible strategy improvements to conﬂict resolution in the
warehouse robot. More speciﬁcally, it will take a starting point in the most important
HRI parameters discovered in Section 2.2.1.1 from the literature review, and the conﬂict
resolution strategies will all be cost-based. The approach will be iterative in the sense
that we will start by exploring simpler strategies and then expanding on these by ad-
dressing the pitfalls regarding HRI. This leads us to four iterations, where intermediate
steps have not been included in the results in Section 7.2:
1. The heat map strategy
2. The social map strategy
3. The social norms strategy
4. The probabilistic strategy
The third iteration, the social norms strategy, is based on the intermediate step, which
is the same direction strategy. The ﬁnal iteration, the probabilistic strategy, is based on
the intermediate step, the ﬁlter strategy.
6.2.1
Utilising Cost Maps
Cost maps can be used in planning to represent the cost of traversing diﬀerent areas
of the map. If properly designed, grid-based cost maps can be computed eﬃciently to
avoid areas where the robot has a higher risk of conﬂicting with other agents.
6.2.1.1
Planning with Costs
A robot’s cost map is updated in each timestep, meaning that the penalties will change
often and the robot should consider new plans to follow. To avoid the robot constantly
replanning, it will only replan when an increase in its plan’s cost exceeds a certain
threshold. This ﬁlters irrelevant penalties that do not aﬀect the robot’s plan, and as
such replanning is not required.
However, having an eﬃcient pathﬁnding algorithm
when planning and replanning is still beneﬁcial because the robot is a real-time system,
where many conﬂicts may occur.
Two pathﬁnding algorithms are explored: A∗that is eﬃcient in static domains, and
D∗Lite that is built for dynamic domains by considering domain changes. As already
==PAGE:59==
6.2 Improvements to Conﬂict Resolution
52
touched upon in Section 3.1 the two algorithms have diﬀerent beneﬁts and drawbacks.
A∗ﬁnds an optimal path, given a forward consistent and admissible heuristic, with no
additional overhead. However, A∗needs to perform a completely new search each time
the robot replans. The best case for A∗comparatively should be when the robot does
not replan at all. D∗Lite is also optimal and performs well in dynamic and partially
observable domains, where the robot replans often. The algorithm keeps the frontier
and graph in memory to replan eﬃciently, but this also means that the graph must be
updated to contain consistent information before ﬁnding a plan. Essentially the question
is what is most eﬃcient, to update the existing graph or simply build a new one.
To answer this question a comparison of the two algorithms will be made in Sec-
tion 7.2.3.3 to determine whether a pathﬁnding algorithm that is built for replanning is
more eﬃcient in the warehouse domain than a pathﬁnding algorithm that performs a
new search when replanning.
6.2.1.2
Heat Map
A heat map is a graphical representation of data where the individual values contained
in a matrix or table are represented as colours. Typically, higher values are represented
by brighter or more intense colours. Given some prior probability data, the idea of heat
maps can be used to model the likelihood of traﬃc distributed around the warehouse.
In the implementation, the heat map is a cost map where the penalty of a cell corresponds
to its heat. The higher the heat the more likely a human is to traverse that cell. This
enables the robot to make informed decisions about areas that should be avoided since
there is a higher likelihood that it could result in conﬂicts.
The most straightforward approach would be to assume the warehouse can provide a
speciﬁc heat for each cell in the grid representation of the warehouse using cameras. This
assumption has a steep entry as it requires a lot of cameras, time and the willingness of
the warehouse to record. The implementation is based on a more realistic assumption,
where warehouses have sales data of products on each shelf, how often each unloading
station is used, and similar data on taking breaks and leaving the building. Provided
this data, a heat map can be created where the penalty P(c) of each cell c is calculated
by Equation (6.1).
P(c) = ￿
G∈G
Pop(G) ⋅(Dim −Dist(c,cG))
(6.1)
Where Pop(G) is the popularity of goal G, Dim is the largest dimension of the heat
map, and Dist(c,cG) is the distance from c to the cell cG of the goal G. An example
of a heat map creation can be seen in Figure 6.3.
==PAGE:60==
6.2 Improvements to Conﬂict Resolution
53
Figure 6.3: Assignment of penalties in a heat map, where each green cell is a goal
with its popularity shown by the number in square brackets and Dim = 5.
The colour of a number shows which goal added the value to the cell, for
instance, all blue values are added by the goal G with Pop(G) = 1. The
black number in each cell is the calculated penalty.
As seen in Figure 6.3, cells surrounding goals with high popularity have higher penalties,
making them less attractive for the robot to traverse. However, as the robot moves
around it gains knowledge of all cells within vision. To reﬂect the increased knowledge,
visible cells are assigned the value 0 if the cell is free or assigned ∞when occupied by a
human. When a cell disappears from vision, it will return to its original penalty. While
the heat map is eﬀective in avoiding populated areas, it has its weaknesses in terms of
navigating around nearby humans.
6.2.1.3
Social Map
As indicated in the literature review, a social map can be used to inform the robot
about social distancing, and it addresses the problem of the heat map not being able to
navigate eﬀectively around nearby humans. Unlike a heat map, where heavily populated
areas are indicated beforehand, the social map only contains penalties surrounding visible
humans as can be seen in Figure 6.4.
The social map is based on a deﬁned social range R, which indicates how far values
should be propagated outwards from humans, and a base penalty Pb, which controls
the willingness to avoid the area within the social range. Using R and Pb it is possible
to control if the robot should value throughput or comfort when being around a human.
The penalties P(c) of cells c within the social range of a human at cell cH is calculated
by Equation (6.2).
P(c) = Pb ⋅2R−Dist(cH,c) −1
(6.2)
==PAGE:61==
6.2 Improvements to Conﬂict Resolution
54
Figure 6.4: The social map seen from the robot perspective on a human within the
sensor range, with Pb = R = 2. First, the human starts one cell further up,
and the robot’s initial plan is depicted by the blue path. When the human
moves one step closer, the penalties will have changed on the initial path
of the robot, and it will replan to the green path.
In Figure 6.4 it is evident that the social map does not predict a direction of a human,
but makes it less attractive to get close to a human’s location. The robot’s cost map
is updated whenever a human is within the sensor range and will use the cost map to
replan if necessary.
During the simulations, the values Pb and R have been set to Pb = R = 2 for the
robot that uses the social map. Higher values have been observed to overvalue comfort
compared to throughput using the test map. This is mainly due to the many narrow
corridors on the map. On the contrary, lower values will cause the penalties to be low,
resulting in the robot not keeping its distance, which is the purpose of the social map.
6.2.2
Naive Direction Prediction
A social map has its limitations in the sense that it does not say anything about the
direction a human is going. The social map is formed based on the current state alone
and does not take observations into account. This leads to situations where the robot
tries to navigate around the human in the direction that the human is actually heading,
causing the robot to replan more often and delay a potential conﬂict.
A simple and fast baseline for predicting a human’s next move is assuming that a
human will continue in its current trajectory. That is, if a human is observed to move in
a direction, it is more likely that they will continue moving in that direction instead of
moving the opposite way. The idea is based on the assumption that humans are headed
towards a general direction and prefer not to change direction more than necessary. This
==PAGE:62==
6.2 Improvements to Conﬂict Resolution
55
idea can be used to make a path for each human in the range of the robot which the
robot should avoid.
6.2.2.1
Building Observations
The idea of using the previous actions of a human to predict its plan introduces the
problem of how to identify what actions the human has performed. The reason is that
humans are indistinguishable from the robot because it is assumed that its sensors are
unable to distinguish between dynamic objects. However, the sensors can collect the
locations of dynamic objects within range. So formally the problem is how to pair each
location from the prior timestep co ∈Co with one of the new locations cn ∈Cn to
estimate which human performed which action.
A straightforward method to solve this problem would be to pair neighbouring locations.
Let N(co) ⊆Cn denote the set of unpaired neighbours to co, and N(cn) ⊆Co the
unpaired neighbours of cn. Then pair each co ∈Co with an unpaired neighbour cn ∈
N(co). The method can however lead to unmatched locations, that could have been
paired in other combinations, as can be seen in Figure 6.5.
Figure 6.5: In the ﬁgure all new locations are green circles and old locations are yellow
circles, the numbers are used to diﬀerentiate the circles. By pairing ran-
domly, the method could pick circle 2 to start with and pair it with circle
3, followed by circle 4 with circle 5. This would lead to 1 and 6 being
unpaired.
This problem can be corrected by continuously picking the unpaired location co ∈Co
that has the fewest unpaired neighbours ￿N(co)￿, and pairing it with the neighbour
with the fewest options, i.e. argmincn∈N(co)￿N(cn)￿. Any unpaired location co ∈Co is
assumed to be a previous location of a dynamic object that has disappeared, and any
unpaired location cn ∈Cn is assumed to be a location of a newly appeared dynamic
object. An example is shown on Figure 6.6.
From the pairs of locations, it can be derived what action a dynamic object performed
in the current timestep. Over a sequence of timesteps, a sequence of actions is built and
is said to be an observation sequence of a dynamic object. Furthermore, the locations
where the actions were performed are said to be the observations’ respective locations,
and the ﬁrst location is referred to as the origin of the observations.
==PAGE:63==
6.2 Improvements to Conﬂict Resolution
56
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 6.6: a) shows ￿N(cn)￿on each circle for all new locations i.e. green circles, and
￿N(co)￿, for all old locations, i.e. yellow circles. b) shows the situation
after the ﬁrst pair has been found, and the neighbour counts have been
updated. c) shows the ﬁnished pairing, which can be identiﬁed by colour.
The presented method of building observations is a guess as to which dynamic object
ﬁts together with what action. However, due to time restrictions and the knowledge
that humans try to keep a distance from each other, improving the method has not
been prioritised.
6.2.2.2
Introducing Social Norms
The social map strategy not only has its limitations in terms of not considering direction
- it also does consider that one side of the human might be more attractive to pass than
the other. The strategy of assuming that a human will continue in the same direction
is therefore combined with the social map to model the social norm of keeping to the
right.
The strategy is based on the social norm that humans tend to keep to the right when
approaching each other, and also the fact that many of MiR’s customers receive training
and rules for how to act around the robot. According to the company, these rules usually
involve stepping aside for the robot. As explained in section Section 5.4.2.1, humans
do this by keeping to the right.
As shown on Figure 6.7, instead of penalising all surrounding cells of humans equally,
penalties can be shifted to favour the social norm of keeping to the right side. Meaning
that if the robot and a human is walking towards each other, the left side of the
human would be penalised from the robot’s perspective. Simultaneously, the human
would, in most cases, also try to pass the robot on its right side, seen from its own
perspective. The calculation for assigning values to the cost map is the same as shown
in Equation (6.2). The social norms and social map are similar, meaning the same
reasons hold when choosing Pb = R = 2 for the simulations.
==PAGE:64==
6.2 Improvements to Conﬂict Resolution
57
Figure 6.7: An example of how penalties are calculated based on social norms for the
robot and a human with C = 1. Penalties in the robot’s cost map are blue,
and based on the values Pb = R = 2. Penalties in the human’s cost map
are yellow and based on the values Pb = 4 and R = 1.
6.2.3
Plan Recognition
The assumption that a human continues on its current path is naive, as the strategy
only considers the last observation of a human. A more realistic way of predicting the
direction of a human would be to give all applicable actions a probability based on the
observations of the human. One method of providing such probabilities is by using plan
recognition. This method extends the strategy of predicting a direction to predict what
likely plans a human may follow.
6.2.3.1
Filtering
From the literature study in Chapter 2, it became evident that many methods for plan
recognition exist. One of the most straightforward approaches suggested is in [RG09],
where the concept of ﬁltering is introduced, this concept is also described in Section 3.2.
The gathered observations are used to check for consistency with all optimal plans from
the origin of the observations to all possible goals. Those that are not consistent are
ﬁltered, i.e. not considered possible paths, while the rest remain possible. This approach
gives us a likelihood function in the sense that the inconsistent plans are viewed as having
a likelihood of 0%, while the remaining are equally likely.
The theory suggests that one must compute all the plans online, which is extremely
costly. It also suggests that the entirety of the plans from the origin of the observations
to the goal should be computed. Both of these aspects contribute to the complexity
of the algorithm and, from a theoretical standpoint, invalidate the practicality of the
approach. So when designing ﬁltering, some implementation details must ensure that the
complexity of these two problems is brought signiﬁcantly down. To begin, the deﬁnition
of when a plan is consistent can be modiﬁed to ﬁt the domain. As an observation
sequence is only obtained with consecutive observations within the sensor range, a
==PAGE:65==
6.2 Improvements to Conﬂict Resolution
58
consistent plan must contain the observation sequence at its beginning.
Definition 6.1 A plan ⇡is consistent with a sequence of observations O with
origin c0 and n actions iﬀ: ⇡[0] is performed in c0, and ⇡[0..n −1] == O.
6.2.3.2
Goal Recognition to Reduce Overhead
The problem with ﬁltering is that the set of optimal plans from the origin of an ob-
servation sequence to all goals needs to be calculated.
This is not computationally
feasible and still remains infeasible when only considering the ongoing tasks of workers.
However, we can exploit the fact that the observations need to be consistent with the
plans in order for us to consider them. We can therefore use goal recognition to ﬁnd
the goals consistent with the observations and as such narrow down the plans we need
to compute. This is done by introducing a pre-computed lookup table generated using
a Breadth First Search, which contains information about the cost of reaching any goal
from every cell. An example of a lookup table is shown on Figure 6.8.
Figure 6.8: Lookup table for one goal.
The lookup table enables us to easily check if the observations are contained in an
optimal plan for some goal, instead of calculating the optimal plan from the origin
of the observations to all goals and then selecting those that are consistent. Equa-
tion (6.3) is used to ﬁnd the consistent goals G∗⊆G given a sequence of observations
O = [o0,o1...,on−1,on] and their respective cells C = [c0,c1...,cn−1,cn], where oi is
performed in ci.
Initially G∗= G, and is updated for each observation oi ∈O by using Equation (6.3).
The cost of oi is denoted by C(oi) and Result(ci,oi) denotes the cell that is reached
by performing oi in ci. The cost of reaching the cell cG of goal G from ci is found by
using the lookup table and is denoted by C(ci,cG)
G∗= {G ∈G∗￿C(ci,cG) == C(Result(ci,oi),cG) + c(oi)}
(6.3)
==PAGE:66==
6.2 Improvements to Conﬂict Resolution
59
After G∗has been updated, the only thing left is to compute all the optimal plans for
every consistent goal G ∈G∗.
6.2.3.3
Constraining Predictions
Even with the approach described above, computing plans for each consistent goal can
still result in a massive amount of plans. One goal can have many optimal plans as
depicted in Figure 6.9, and in the case of the warehouse domain, there are potentially
as many ongoing tasks as workers in a much larger area compared to the example.
Figure 6.9: One example of the number of optimal plans for two consistent goals with
the observations of the human (yellow arrows). Each goal has four possible
plans that are all optimal.
Considering that this needs to be done every time a new observation is made for a
visible human, the computation time becomes infeasible in a real-time system. With
inspiration from [BD18] and their use of goal clustering, we can therefore simplify the
computations even more by exploiting two facts:
1. The robot is only interested in predicting a human when it is within a smaller
prediction range than the robot’s vision
2. The robot is only interested in penalising the cells near a human in the predicted
direction, not the entire plan
The prediction then essentially becomes a cost map surrounding a human, with the
likelihood of which direction is most likely based on the number of consistent goals
in that direction. An example is shown in Figure 6.10. Three of the four goals are
consistent with the observations of the human, as such the robot only considers the
optimal plans for these goals, as shown on Figure 6.10a. To avoid conﬂicts with the
human, the beginning of these plans are penalised, as shown on Figure 6.10b. In this
==PAGE:67==
6.2 Improvements to Conﬂict Resolution
60
example, a range of R = 2 and a base penalty of Pb = 2 are used. Pb is a measure of
the minimum penalty, while R determines the prediction range and how many cells of
a plan should be penalised. During the simulations, a range of R = 4 is used instead
because the computation time is feasible while the robot has enough time to avoid
making humans uncomfortable.
(a)
(b)
Figure 6.10: a) Three consistent goals and their optimal plans. b) Penalties of the
plans, where Pb = 2 and R = 2
As shown on Figure 6.9 a consistent goal G ∈G∗may have multiple optimal plans
⇡∈⇧G, meaning that a cell c ∈⇡may not be in all plans ⇡′ ∈⇧G. To determine the
probability P(c￿G) of traversing c to achieve G, let ⇧G(c) denote the plans where c
is one of the ﬁrst R positions, i.e. ⇧G(c) = {⇡∈⇧G ￿c ∈⇡∧Pos(⇡,c) ≤R}. Then
P(c￿G) can be calculated by P(c￿G) = ￿⇧G(c)￿
￿⇧G￿, under the assumption that all ⇡∈⇧G
are equally likely. Furthermore, c will have the same position in all ⇡because all plans
⇡∈⇧G(c) are optimal. Thus Pos(⇧G(c),c) is the position of c in any plan ⇡∈⇧G(c).
Then the penalty P(c) of c can be calculated by Equation (6.4).
P(c) = ￿
G∈G∗Pb ⋅2R−P os(⇧G(c),c) ⋅P(c￿G)
(6.4)
6.2.3.4
Probable Predictions
Filtering has the limitation of excluding unlikely goals and not considering prior knowl-
edge of the domain. It does not consider how the observations can aﬀect the actual
likelihood of the next action the agent will take. In practice, we want something more
guiding, such as an actual probability distribution over the next actions, to make in-
formed decisions.
By applying probabilistic plan recognition, we can obtain what is
==PAGE:68==
6.2 Improvements to Conﬂict Resolution
61
shown in Figure 6.11. The penalties in the surrounding cells will then need to be inﬂu-
enced by the probabilities.
Figure 6.11: An example of a probability distribution over the next actions of a human.
In Section 3.2.3, the theory behind using Bayes Theorem to calculate the probabilities is
introduced. The formula is straightforward to use in the sense that the prior probabilities
P(G) can simply be found and normalised given the popularity of the goals. Similarly,
the values for β and ∆(G,O) can also be plugged into the sigmoid function to get
P(O￿G) and the posterior P(G￿O) can then be obtained by Equation (6.5).
P(G￿O) = ↵P(O￿G)P(G)
(6.5)
The diﬃcult part is determining β and calculating ∆(G,O), as well as how the resulting
probabilities can be converted into penalties that the robot can navigate from.
6.2.3.5
Determining Cost Diﬀerences
As the theory suggests in Section 3.2, the probability of a goal given a set of observations
can be approximated with the idea of cost diﬀerence, Bayes Theorem, and a prior
distribution of goal probabilities. The cost diﬀerence can be found for each goal by
computing the minimum cost of a plan consistent with the observations and computing
the minimum cost of a plan inconsistent with the observations. Computing the cost of
a plan consistent with the observations is trivial with the lookup table. We can simply
look up the observed agent’s current cell to ﬁnd its minimum cost to goal. On top of
this cost, the costs of the observations are added, because a consistent plan needs to
include the observations. It is not necessary to compute the plan, only the cost.
For the inconsistent plans, it becomes a bit more tricky. For a plan to be inconsistent,
at least one of the observations must be excluded from the plan, the observations not
being consecutive or the observation not being at the beginning of the plan, according
to Deﬁnition 6.1. Since we need to ﬁnd the minimum cost of an inconsistent plan, there
==PAGE:69==
6.2 Improvements to Conﬂict Resolution
62
are many variations of plans that need to be checked. Instead of computing said plans,
the lookup table can again be used for providing a solution to this problem in linear
time. The minimum inconsistent cost can be described by the minimum cost of reaching
the goal from one of the observations’ neighbours added to the cost of reaching that
neighbour from the origin of the observations.
To describe this formally, let O = [o0,o1...,on−1,on] be an observation sequence and
C = [c0,c1...,cn−1,cn] be the respective cells of the observations. The set of neighbours
of ci that are not contained in C ∪{cH} is denoted by N(ci), i.e. N(ci)∩(C ∪{cH}) =
￿, where cH denotes the current cell of the human. Then the minimum cost of an
inconsistent plan can be described by Equation (6.6).
C(G,O) = min
ci∈C
min
nj∈N(ci)￿
i
￿
k=1
C(ck−1,ck)￿+ C(ci,nj) + C(ni,cG)
(6.6)
This method will ﬁnd a cost that corresponds to a plan that will satisfy neither Deﬁnition
6.1 nor the deﬁnition in [RG10] under the assumption that all corridors have at least
two lanes. A proof is given in Appendix C.
Figure 6.12: Observed locations of a human agent is depicted with yellow, and the
agent is depicted with blue. The goal cell cG, we are trying to ﬁnd the
minimum consistent and inconsistent cost of, is marked with green. The
values in each cell depict the cost of reaching cG.
In Figure 6.12, a scenario is shown where the minimum cost of an inconsistent plan is
required to ﬁnd the cost diﬀerence for a given goal. Figure 6.13 only shows the approach
for two of the observations, but the approach is repeated for all. The result is a cost
of C(G,O) = 5.8. From the example, it should be clear that the minimum inconsistent
cost can be achieved by swapping any of the observations with a downward diagonal
move.
==PAGE:70==
6.2 Improvements to Conﬂict Resolution
63
Now, to ﬁnd the minimum cost of a consistent plan, the approach is more straightfor-
ward. We can sum the minimum cost of reaching the goal from the agent’s location
with the action costs of all the observation costs leading up to it. In the case of the
example given in 6.12, this will be C(G,O) = 2 + 1 + 1 + 1 = 5.
Figure 6.13: An example of how the costs for the inconsistent plans are found. We
start expanding the ﬁrst observation and add all observations to a set
of evaluated cells. The neighbours of the expanded observation will be
evaluated if they have not been evaluated. For each of these neighbours,
we sum the action cost of getting to that cell, the prior observation costs,
and the cost of reaching the goal from the neighbour. On the right, it is
clear that cell (1,2) has the minimum cost of all cells. This is continued
for each observation until the minimum cost is found.
6.2.3.6
Determining the Rationality Factor
In Chapter 3, the theory behind probabilistic plan recognition included a β parameter to
explain the rationality of the observed agents. To recap, the lower the rationality, the less
we trust the cost diﬀerence measure and the observations. It can be tricky to determine
exactly what this value should be, as it is diﬃcult to convert this value to something
tangible that can be measured in terms of agents’ rationality. One way of approaching
the problem would be to do some sort of parameter tuning on the environment. It is
however clear that the value should not be β = 1. As described in Chapter 5, some of
the time humans will over- or underestimate their path, but will most of the time follow
optimal routes. However, they are also inﬂuenced by other humans as well as the robot.
When calculating the probabilities, we look at the optimal cost values from a cell to a
goal and do not consider these factors. This means that the method is most likely a
good approximate when only observing one human, but will be less good in situations
where other humans are around to inﬂuence the planning.
==PAGE:71==
6.2 Improvements to Conﬂict Resolution
64
6.2.3.7
Determining Penalties
(a)
(b)
Figure 6.14: a) Three consistent goals and their optimal paths. b) Penalties of the
paths, where Pb = 2 and R = 2
Recall how ﬁltering calculated a penalty for a cell c by Equation (6.4). In ﬁltering a
goal G is said to be likely, based on G being consistent with a sequence of observations
O. This can be interpreted as the posterior P(G￿O) = 1 for G ∈G∗and P(G￿O) = 0
for G ∉G∗. With this in mind Equation (6.7) can be used to calculate the penalties of
ﬁltering, because all inconsistent goals G ∉G∗, will not contribute to the sum due to
P(G￿O) = 0.
P(c) = ￿
G∈G
Pb ⋅2R−P os(⇧G(c),c) ⋅P(c￿G) ⋅P(G￿O)
(6.7)
In probabilistic plan recognition, sub-optimal plans for inconsistent goals must also be
considered.
Instead of P(G￿O) being binary, it is now a continuous likelihood, i.e.
P(G￿O) ∈[0;1].
With this change, Equation (6.7) can also be used to calculate
penalties for probabilistic plan recognition.
The example from Figure 6.10 is continued on Figure 6.14, where probabilistic plan
recognition is used instead of ﬁltering. It is shown on Figure 6.14a that all goals are
now considered. The likelihood P(G￿O) is written on the goals and shows that the
inconsistent goal G has a signiﬁcantly small likelihood compared to the three consistent
goals. The penalties calculated with Equation (6.7) are shown on Figure 6.14b. The
penalties reﬂect that G is unlikely compared to the consistent goals. However, G is still
considered as an opportunity and that is why the optimal path from the human to G is
penalised.
==PAGE:72==
Chapter 7
Results and Evaluation
In this chapter, the developed conﬂict resolution strategies will be evaluated against
three areas: safety, comfort and eﬃciency. The goal is to assess how newly developed
strategies compare to the MiR-based strategy and the stop-and-wait baseline strat-
egy, when they are applied on robots. The results will afterwards be presented and
interpreted, comparing the performance of each robot, as well as selected subjective as-
sessments. Furthermore, a small comparison is made on the two pathﬁnding algorithms
A∗and D∗Lite to determine whether a pathﬁnding algorithm for dynamic domains will
improve response time.
7.1
Evaluation Method and Parameters
There are two main evaluation methods that can be used to evaluate HRI. MiR uses
both methods to test and evaluate updates to their robots, and their approach serves
as inspiration for this evaluation. The ﬁrst method is to place the physical robot in
a human environment to create interactions and conﬂicts that produce both quantita-
tive and qualitative data, such as sensor measurements and visual observations. The
second method involves running automated experiments in a simulator that models the
environment. The latter is chosen, as it allows us to isolate the analysis to focus on
high-level navigation and conﬂicts, disregarding hardware.
7.1.1
Evaluation Method
The evaluation method is based on simulating a robot with every conﬂict resolution
strategy in Table 7.1. This approach should lead to answering the problem statement
in Section 2.3.1, i.e. determining which strategies improve HRI and are worth for MiR
to consider. The reason for comparing to a stop-and-wait baseline strategy as well is
to ﬁgure out if a simple strategy is suﬃcient, given that the literature review uncovered
the stop-and-wait strategy to be common in the AMR industry.
It is important to note that the strategies in Table 7.1 can be combined. However,
exploring the results individually might give a more explicit isolated eﬀect of each,
which can later allow for an understanding of how some can be combined to exploit
their strengths and mitigate some weaknesses. This is a point of discussion that will be
brought up in Section 7.2.6.
==PAGE:73==
7.1 Evaluation Method and Parameters
66
Strategies tested
Iteration
Non-cost based
Baseline
Stop-and-wait
MiR-based
Three-level replanning
Iteration
Cost-based
Heat map
Penalise around goals weighed with popularity
Social map
Penalise around humans
Social norms
Penalise around humans considering social norms
Probabilistic
Penalise probable plans based on observations & priors
Table 7.1: The table shows all conﬂict resolution strategies that have been tested using
the speciﬁcations in Table 7.2.
7.1.1.1
Test Conﬁguration
To ensure that each strategy iteration can be compared fairly, some variables in the
testing environment are kept constant. These variables are kept constant for all simu-
lations to isolate the eﬀects of the evaluation parameters, e.g. one test corresponds to
running all strategy iterations with the same variables. The initial start locations and
task distributions are randomised, while the constant variables are shown in Table 7.2.
Since a part of the simulator is based on randomness, seeds are stored to be reused
across tests to keep these values constant. The only thing that will be varied will be the
parameter caution, to test how the robots perform when human workers are educated
and when they are not.
Simulation speciﬁcations
No. timesteps per simulation
10.000
No. simulations per strategy
100
No. humans
25
Map size
30 × 120 cells, shown in Figure 4.2
No. goals
580
Rationality
R = 0.95
Discipline
D = 0.9985
Caution
C = 0 and C = 1
Pathﬁnding algorithm
The A∗algorithm
Table 7.2: Test run speciﬁcations
To reduce the likelihood that the observed results are not due to chance or random
error, but instead are due to a true eﬀect of the improvements made to the robots, the
simulations need to be run a signiﬁcant number of times. It is important to strike a
balance between the number of simulations needed and the time and resources available
for the project. The test speciﬁcation can be seen in Table 7.2.
==PAGE:74==
7.1 Evaluation Method and Parameters
67
7.1.2
Evaluation Parameters
The evaluation of the robots takes place in the simulated environment described in
Chapter 4. One robot is included in the environment. Three overall evaluation areas
have been introduced as safety, comfort, and eﬃciency. Each of these has been deﬁned
with inspiration from the literature review on HRI evaluation described in Chapter 2.
The parameters that are encompassed by these three areas are shown in Table 7.3.
Evaluation parameters measured
Evaluation parameters
Measurement
Safety intrusions
0.5m distance within human
Human safety stops
No. emergency stops due to robot
Robot safety stops
No. emergency stops due to humans
Comfort intrusions
1m distance within human
Human replans
No. replans due to robot
Robot replans
No. replans due to human
Tasks completed by humans
No. pickup & drop-oﬀtasks completed
Tasks completed by robot
No. pickup & drop-oﬀtasks completed
Robot response time
Total time used by the robot in ms
Table 7.3: The evaluation parameters measured in each simulation run.
7.1.2.1
Safety
Safety is the most important aspect of HRI in a warehouse and is an aspect that is usually
never compromised with AMRs in the industry, as the consequences can be catastrophic.
Most commonly, many navigation modules at AMR companies are designed to prevent
collisions with humans or other objects by enforcing a required safety distance to objects
and triggering a safety mechanism if within that distance, as described in Section 2.1.3.1
in the background research.
In practice, collisions would therefore only be possible if humans in the environment
completely disregard all professional practices and decide to run into the robot on pur-
pose. The safety area will therefore not focus on actual safety incidents but is narrowed
down to factors that aﬀect the feeling of safety for workers. This includes:
• Safety intrusions
• Human safety stops
• Robot safety stops
Safety intrusions are deﬁned as the robot getting within the safety range shown on
==PAGE:75==
7.1 Evaluation Method and Parameters
68
Figure 7.1. In some cases, safety intrusions might be deemed necessary if the warehouse
prioritises throughput highly.
Figure 7.1: The red area depicts the surrounding cells of a human that would cause a
safety intrusion.
Human safety stops are a measure of any human being forced to stop and recalculate
their plan due to the robot. As such this is a good measure of inconvenience and safety
for humans. A warehouse, where humans must be constantly aware of robots driving
around, is a less comfortable and safe work environment. Safety stops are also measured
for the robot and occur every time the robot would have triggered the safety mechanism.
This is a measure of the correctness of the robot’s prediction of humans. It is especially
important to measure robot safely stops as one’s feeling of safety can be violated if the
robot almost collides and needs to perform a sudden stop.
7.1.2.2
Comfort
As the literature suggests, comfort is an important parameter to evaluate in human-
aware robot navigation. Comfort in the context of HRI can generally be deﬁned as
follows:
"... the absence of annoyance and stress for humans in interaction with
robots."[KPAK13, p. 1728]
As mentioned, this is not the same as safety. It is suggested that in navigation, dis-
comfort can for instance be caused when a robot moves too close to humans[KPAK13].
Most literature suggests the distance a robot needs to keep from humans to be the most
impactful and easiest thing to measure, and although other aspects, such as orientation,
pose and gaze of the robot also impact humans feeling of comfort, distance impacts
most. This is not only concerning collision avoidance but also in terms of emotional or
social discomfort humans can feel. There are diﬀerent social distances humans choose
when interacting with other humans depending on their relationship. Social distance is
==PAGE:76==
7.1 Evaluation Method and Parameters
69
generally between 1.2−3.6m between humans who are strangers to each other[KPAK13].
Inspiration has been drawn from this when determining whether or not discomfort was
caused by the robot to a human in the simulation. This measure is deﬁned as comfort
intrusions and the speciﬁc range of comfort intrusion can be seen on Figure 7.2.
Figure 7.2: The red area depicts the surrounding cells of a human that would cause a
comfort intrusion.
As one cell in the discrete grid corresponds to 0.5m in the simulation, the robot would
have to be two cells away from a human in order to keep a distance of one meter. If
the robot is closer than that, we will log it as a violation of comfort.
Another point of discomfort for a human is the number of times the robot interferes
with a worker’s job in the sense that the worker has to change their original plan. The
number of times a human replans due to the robot is therefore also measured, as this
can be an annoyance factor. Similarly, the number of robot replans is also measured.
This shows the robot’s predictability. If the robot continuously changes its direction
due to replanning, it will be less predictable for humans and can add to a feeling of
discomfort and lack of trust in the robot.
Based on this, comfort is measured with the following parameters:
• No. comfort intrusions
• No. human replans
• No. robot replans
7.1.2.3
Eﬃciency
Eﬃciency is related to creating value. In a simple warehouse, many tasks are related
to physically moving products or packaging goods. When these goods are ready to go
to the customer, they are shipped out. The speed at which products can go out to
==PAGE:77==
7.2 Simulation Results
70
customers directly correlates with the revenue a company can make. For instance, by
avoiding bottlenecks in warehouse storage, or receiving more customers due to better
and faster service, the revenue will increase. It also allows workers to spend time on
other tasks. The eﬃciency parameters measured are therefore related to the number
of tasks that can be performed during a time frame at the warehouse, in other words,
throughput.
However, it is also related to how eﬃciently the robot can compute a
plan to get from A to B, meaning that computation time also has an inﬂuence. The
parameters investigated are therefore:
• No. tasks completed by humans
• No. tasks completed by robot
• Robot response time
The number of tasks is relevant for both humans and robots. If one strategy results
in an extremely eﬃcient robot, but compromises the eﬃciency of the humans by being
in the way or demoralising the workforce, the total throughput might go down. It is
important to note that the eﬀect on human eﬃciency is small with one robot, but if
there are many robots in a warehouse, the eﬀects become more obvious.
Lastly, we will also measure the total response time of the robots to ﬁgure out whether
or not the computation time is feasible. The total response time includes the time used
on planning, resolving conﬂicts and sending the action to the simulator.
7.2
Simulation Results
This section presents the results of every strategy in Table 7.1 applied on a robot in
terms of the three evaluation areas with a total of nine diﬀerent parameters described
in Table 7.3. The robots will be compared to two "comparative" robots: The stop-and-
wait baseline and the MiR-based robots. Furthermore, in some of the parameters, the
robots will also be compared to a setting with only humans and no robot. The results
will be presented and summarised, as well as the key diﬀerences when comparing each
strategy. The results will also be compared with the original hypothesis of each strategy
iteration introduced in Chapter 6. The reason for showing multiple iterations instead of
just selecting the best iterations is that the results and the iterations should serve more
as inspirational concepts for future improvements and give an indication of what can be
combined.
7.2.1
Safety
Safety measures the safety or feeling of safety for human workers in the warehouse.
This section will cover results for safety intrusions, robot safety stops and human safety
==PAGE:78==
7.2 Simulation Results
71
stops as described in Section 7.1.2.1.
7.2.1.1
Safety Intrusions
(a) Number of safety intrusions with C = 0.
(b) Number of safety intrusions with C = 1.
Figure 7.3: The number of safety intrusions made by the robots.
The ﬁrst measurement of the safety area is the number of safety intrusions made by
the robot.
The total number of safety intrusions across all simulations is shown in
Figure 7.3 through box plots for each robot. It is clear from the ﬁgure that robots with
cost-based strategies have signiﬁcantly lower numbers of safety intrusions compared to
the comparative robots, which clearly follows the hypothesis that cost-based strategies
are eﬀective when it comes to keeping a minimum distance from humans.
The exact percentage change can be seen in Table 7.4. The robots that perform best on
this parameter are the probabilistic robot and the social norms robot. The probabilistic
robot decreases the number of safety intrusions by 63.93% compared to the baseline
robot and 59.16% compared to the MiR-based robot, where the social norms robot
decreases it by 62.75% and 57.59%, respectively. This is for C = 0, while for simulations
with C = 1, the improvements are slightly higher for both. The improvement at C = 1
seems to aﬀect the social norms robot more, which makes sense since the robot takes
social rules into account. The improvement across the social map, social norms and
the probabilistic robots, when humans are more cautious, is contributed to the fact that
humans will also take part in avoiding robots more.
The heat map robot will still perform better than the baseline and MiR-based robots
with C = 1, but not relatively as much as with C = 0. The improvement in the number
of safety intrusions with C = 1 for the MiR-based robot will be more apparent since the
MiR-based robot will generally meet more humans than the heat map. The heat map
==PAGE:79==
7.2 Simulation Results
72
robot will still navigate to areas where the likelihood of meeting humans is smaller, and
therefore the impact of C = 1 will not be as big.
Safety intrusions
Heat map
Social map
Caution
C = 0
C = 1
C = 0
C = 1
Baseline robot
−28.47%
−20.20%
−55.37%
−58.82%
MiR-based robot
−19.04%
−9.25%
−49.43%
−53.17%
Social norms
Probabilistic
Baseline robot
−62.75%
−65.98%
−63.93%
−65.46%
MiR-based robot
−57.79%
−61.31%
−59.16%
−60.72%
Table 7.4: Percentage diﬀerence of the number of safety intrusions made by the robots
compared against the baseline and MiR-based robots. The values marked
with grey show the best-performing robots.
As hypothesised in Section 6.2.1.3, the social norms and social map robots perform well
as they penalise all cells around humans no matter what, i.e. it is not dependent on
wrongful predictions, which can occur with the probabilistic robot. The probabilistic
robot seems to predict somewhat accurately, given that it is better than the social map
robot in terms of a decrease in safety intrusions, and the social norms robot when C = 0.
The reason why the social norms robot is better than the probabilistic robot when C = 1
is that the social norms robot is provided with knowledge as to how humans tend to
pass the robot when using C = 1, whereas the probabilistic robot does not have this
knowledge.
The social norms robot performs better than the social map robot due to a number
of reasons. First of all, it considers the direction of humans and the fact that humans
might be more likely to move to the right than the left, which can bring the robot faster
out of the interaction. Although with a caution of C = 0, humans will technically not
prefer moving to the right in the simulation when it comes to the robot. However,
penalising the direction of humans and having a higher sum of penalties will still result
in a better outcome for safety.
The reason for the heat map robot being better than the comparative robots ﬁts the
fact that many situations of conﬂict occur in narrow corridors, which the heat map robot
tries to avoid because many of the shelves and goals are within corridors.
7.2.1.2
Robot Safety Stops
The number of safety stops made by each robot is shown in Figure 7.4, which happens
when a robot needs to stop immediately to avoid colliding with a human, diﬀering from
==PAGE:80==
7.2 Simulation Results
73
(a) Number of robot safety stops with C = 0.
(b) Number of robot safety stops with C = 1.
Figure 7.4: The number of safety stops made by the robots.
a safety intrusion which only looks at the distance to a human. The overall pattern
is that the robots predicting directions perform best, which makes sense since avoiding
safety stops is not just about distance, but also the next intention of a human. The
probabilistic robot performs best, followed by the social norms robot as can be seen in
Table 7.5.
Robot safety stops
Heat map
Social map
Caution
C = 0
C = 1
C = 0
C = 1
Baseline robot
−8.24%
3.64%
−63.39%
−34.44%
MiR-based robot
−14.53%
−5.69%
−65.93%
−40.34%
Social norms
Probabilistic
Baseline robot
−72.06%
−39.75%
−77.42%
−60.54%
MiR-based robot
−74.03%
−45.18%
−78.94%
−64.10%
Table 7.5: Percentage diﬀerence of the number of robot safety stops made by each
robot against the baseline and MiR-based robots. The values marked with
grey show the best-performing robots.
When C = 0, the probabilistic robot and social norms robot are quite close. the prob-
abilistic robot decreases with 77.42% and 78.94% compared to the social norms robot
which decreases with 72.06% and 74.03%. For C = 1, only the probabilistic robot can
maintain the percentage decrease in safety stops. While, when looking back to safety
intrusions, the decreases seen in the social map, social norms and probabilistic robot
results were somewhat similar. The reason most likely lies in how the probabilistic robot
handles corridors. Once the robot and a human are inside a narrow corridor, the safety
intrusion might be diﬃcult to avoid. However, robot safety stops can be avoided by
==PAGE:81==
7.2 Simulation Results
74
choosing the right direction with respect to the human’s direction. These results are an
indication that the probabilistic robot manages to predict direction somewhat correctly.
7.2.1.3
Human Safety Stops
(a) Number of human safety stops with C = 0.
(b) Number of human safety stops with C = 1.
Figure 7.5: The number of human safety stops caused by the robots.
Human safety stops are similar to robot safety stops, but seen from the human per-
spective. It measures the number of times a human needs to immediately stop due to
the robot, i.e. the robot is standing in a cell that a human wanted to move into. For
C = 1, it is diﬃcult to see any clear pattern of which robot is best. All robots have
low numbers, which is most likely because humans will generally always try to avoid the
robot more and will almost never put themselves in a position where they will need to
perform a safety stop due to the robot.
Human safety stops percentage improvement
Heat map
Social map
Caution
C = 0
C = 1
C = 0
C = 1
Baseline robot
−10.0%
17.95%
−10.6%
6.37%
MiR-based robot
−16.0%
−3.73%
−16.3%
−13.19%
Social norms
Probabilistic
Baseline robot
−20.0%
9.30%
−48.38%
17.11%
MiR-based robot
−24.5%
−10.80%
−51.64%
−4.42%
Table 7.6: Percentage diﬀerence of the number of human safety stops caused by each
robot against the baseline and MiR-based robots. The values marked with
grey show the best-performing robot.
==PAGE:82==
7.2 Simulation Results
75
The eﬀects of some of the strategies are however more apparent with C = 0.
The
probabilistic robot sees a decrease of 48.38% and 51.64%, compared to the baseline and
MiR-based robots respectively. This is most likely due to the fact that the probabilistic
robot will have managed to predict the trajectory of the human at an earlier point,
avoiding putting itself in a position where it is blocking a human’s next move.
7.2.2
Comfort
As explained, Comfort measures a number of factors that might annoy or otherwise
disturb workers.
This includes the number of times the robot moves into a social
distance range of a human and the number of times humans have to replan due to the
robot. Further description can be found in Section 7.1.2.2.
7.2.2.1
Comfort Intrusions
(a) Number of comfort intrusions with C = 0.
(b) Number of comfort intrusions with C = 1.
Figure 7.6: The number of comfort intrusions made by the robots.
The results for the number of comfort intrusions can be seen in Figure 7.6. For C = 0,
the best improvement compared to the baseline and to the MiR-based robots regarding
comfort intrusions is the probabilistic robot with decreases of 42.98% and 40.80% re-
spectively. The next best is the social norms robot with a 37.63% decrease compared
to the baseline robot and 35.23% to the MiR-based robot.
The reason for the improvement in the probabilistic robot compared to the social norms
robot is due to the correct predictions. However, with C = 1, the social norms robot
comes closer to the probabilistic robot, since the humans will now also keep to the right
of the robot, enforcing the social norm that the robot is modelled after.
==PAGE:83==
7.2 Simulation Results
76
Comfort intrusions
Heat map
Social map
Caution
C = 0
C = 1
C = 0
C = 1
Baseline robot
−22.41%
−23.52%
−34.53%
−43.63%
MiR-based robot
−19.42%
−19.29%
−31.94%
−40.51%
Social norms
Probabilistic
Baseline robot
−37.63%
−48.50%
−42.98%
−50.00%
MiR-based robot
−35.23%
−45.64%
−40.80%
−47.23%
Table 7.7: Percentage diﬀerence of the number of comfort intrusions made by each
robot against the baseline and MiR-based robots. The values marked with
grey show the best-performing robots.
The pattern is quite similar to the pattern seen in the number of safety intrusions, which
intuitively makes sense. For instance, the social norms robot performs well because
comfort is prioritised highly. In practice, there would be situations where the social
norms robot would encounter a human that is positioned close to a wall in a corridor,
only exposing its right side with the high costs. It could result in the robot choosing to
enter the corridor from the other side to avoid high penalties. This choice to navigate to
the other side of the corridor instead might not be made as frequently in other robots.
7.2.2.2
Robot Replans
(a) Number of robot replans with C = 0.
(b) Number of robot replans with C = 1.
Figure 7.7: The number of replans made by the robots.
The results for the number of robot replans are shown in Figure 7.7. The percentage
increases and decreases are shown in Table 7.8. Note that there is no comparison to
the change for the baseline robot as the robot does not replan at any point.
==PAGE:84==
7.2 Simulation Results
77
The more a robot replans and changes trajectory, the more unpredictable it becomes and
making it diﬃcult for humans to understand its intentions. Replans are on an overall
level aﬀected by two things: 1) the number of times the robot encounters a human, and
2) the amount of time it is stuck in the situation. This is clearly depicted in the results.
The social map and social norms robots have to replan the most since the large area of
costs surrounding humans will trigger more replans, but not necessarily bring them out
of the interaction, compared to the probabilistic robot. This underlines the hypothesis
that, while these robots are good at avoiding getting near humans, they fail to quickly
navigate away from an interaction, even though they keep their distance. The eﬀect
is a 104.49% increase in replans with the social map robot and 97.42% for the social
norms robot with C = 0.
Across all robots using cost-based strategies, the probabilistic robot performs best,
which only increases the number of replans by 3.4% and 2.51% for C = 0 and C = 1
respectively. The robot seems to stay in the interaction for a shorter amount of time,
which could be another indication that the predictions are somewhat correct.
Robot replans
Heat map
Social map
Caution
C = 0
C = 1
C = 0
C = 1
Baseline robot
N/A
N/A
MiR-based robot
−21.65%
−22.88%
104.49%
108.89%
Social norms
Probabilistic
Baseline robot
N/A
N/A
MiR-based robot
97.42%
102.59%
3.40%
2.51%
Table 7.8: Percentage diﬀerence of the number of replans made by each robot against
the baseline and MiR-based robots. The values marked with grey show the
best-performing robot.
The heat map robot performs best for obvious reasons. The only trigger the robot has
for replans is the exact positions humans are in to avoid the actual collision. There are
no additional costs around the human that could trigger replans. The reason for it being
better than the MiR-based robot is most likely due to the original plan already avoiding
routes that put the robot in situations where it needs to replan.
7.2.2.3
Humans Replans
The results for the number of human replans caused by the robots are shown in Fig-
ure 7.8. The corresponding percentage changes can be seen in table 7.9. The results
clearly show that when C = 1, the number of human replans caused by the robot in-
creases by a factor of two across many robots because the humans are now more aware
==PAGE:85==
7.2 Simulation Results
78
(a) Number of human replans with C = 0.
(b) Number of human replans with C = 1.
Figure 7.8: The number of human replans caused by the robots.
of the robot and will more actively try to avoid it by moving to the left of the robot and
seeking to keep a minimum distance.
The results show that humans replan the least with the heat map robot. This again
underlines the hypothesis that many conﬂicts happen in corridors with shelves which as
mentioned the robot tries to avoid.
Human replans
Heat map
Social map
Caution
C = 0
C = 1
C = 0
C = 1
Baseline robot
−16.2%
−6.02%
4.7%
9.72%
MiR-based robot
−19.3%
−11.81%
1.0%
2.97%
Social norms
Probabilistic
Caution
C = 0
C = 1
C = 0
C = 1
Baseline robot
5.2%
7.72%
−13.13%
4.06%
MiR-based robot
1.5%
1.09%
−16.16%
−2.34%
Table 7.9: Percentage diﬀerence of the number of human replans caused by each robot
against the baseline and MiR-based robots. The values marked with grey
show the best-performing robots.
The probabilistic robot is a closer runner-up, when C = 0, with a 13.13% decrease of
human replans compared to the baseline robot, and a 16.66% decrease compared to the
MiR-based robot. The reason for this is, humans will replan when the robot is within a
certain threshold, but if the robot never reaches that threshold due to the robot already
having predicted the human’s direction, it will naturally happen less.
==PAGE:86==
7.2 Simulation Results
79
7.2.3
Eﬃciency
Eﬃciency is measured to investigate how the diﬀerent robots, taking human factors into
account, aﬀect the eﬃciency of the overall warehouse. This includes the throughput of
the robot, the humans, and the total response time of the robot to ensure computational
feasibility, which is explained in section 7.1.2.3.
7.2.3.1
Throughput
For the number of tasks completed by the robot, it is clear that almost all cost-based
robots result in fewer completed tasks compared to the baseline and MiR-based robots,
with the best-performing cost-based robot being the heat map robot, which only has
a decrease of 2.73% compared to baseline and a similar amount of tasks completed
compared to the MiR-based robot.
(a) Number of robot tasks completed with C =
0.
(b) Number of robot tasks completed with C =
1.
Figure 7.9: The number of tasks completed by each robot.
This ﬁts the hypothesis that when prioritising safety and comfort, it will aﬀect through-
put. Both the baseline and MiR-based robots are very eﬃciency-focused in the sense
that they will avoid humans, but no extra costs are introduced that would force the
robots to replan more than strictly necessary to avoid collisions or keep an extra dis-
tance. The baseline robot will simply push through and follow the most eﬃcient plan,
and although it will have to wait in moments of conﬂict, this is mitigated by the fact
humans will fairly easily get themselves out of the conﬂict situation, and the robot can
move on.
The robots that generally perform well under the safety and comfort evaluation areas
take an overall fall when it comes to eﬃciency. This is mostly due to the fact that the
==PAGE:87==
7.2 Simulation Results
80
penalties around humans are higher, causing the robot to sometimes take long routes,
for instance when being in narrow corridors, to avoid getting close to humans.
The probabilistic robot is almost as ineﬃcient in task completion as the social norms
robot, with a decrease of 16.23% compared to the baseline robot and 13.84% compared
to the MiR-based robot. However, it performs better on the safety and comfort param-
eters compared to the social norms robot. This must mean that, although the robot is
good at correctly predicting the path around humans, it does not necessarily increase its
overall eﬃciency because the route to avoid the human might still be quite ineﬃcient.
No. robot and human tasks completed
Comparison
No. robot tasks
No. humans tasks
Heat map
Baseline robot
−2.73%
−0.01%
MiR-based robot
0.08%
−0.03%
Social map
Baseline robot
−12.80%
0.02%
MiR-based robot
−10.11%
−0.01%
Social norms
Baseline robot
−16.86%
0.08%
MiR-based robot
−14.36%
0.04%
Probabilistic
Baseline robot
−16.23%
−0.08%
MiR-based robot
−13.84
−0.10%
Table 7.10: Percentage diﬀerence of the number of robot tasks and the number of
human tasks completed for each robot against the baseline and MiR-based
robots. The values marked with grey show the best-performing robots.
When it comes to the number of tasks completed by humans, it is diﬃcult to say
anything deﬁnitive from Table 7.11. The number is measured to see how much delay a
robot is causing the humans by being in the way or blocking humans from being able
to complete their tasks. The results show that the eﬀect of every robot is extremely
minor due to the fact that there are 25 humans, roughly 3600 cells in the domain and
only one robot. However, it does have an impact when the number of robots scales
up. The social norms robot performs best of all robots, with an increase of 0.08% on
human tasks completion compared to the baseline robot and 0.04% compared to the
MiR-based robot. This is expected, as the robot that is most considerate of humans
also will be the one to have the most positive eﬀect on their eﬃciency.
For the remaining robots, the heat map and probabilistic robots actually cause small
decreases in human eﬃciency below 0.10%. It is however still diﬃcult to say which
robot is deﬁnitively best because the diﬀerences are so minimal.
==PAGE:88==
7.2 Simulation Results
81
Tasks completed
Robot
Robot tasks
Human tasks
Total tasks
No robot
−
184.71
4617.75
Baseline robot
200.52
184.19
4805.27
MiR-based robot
194.84
184.24
4800.84
Heat map robot
195
184.18
4799.5
Social robot
175.02
184.22
4780.52
Social norms robot
166.78
184.35
4775.55
Probabilistic robot
167.88
184.05
4769.14
Table 7.11: The average number of tasks completed in a simulation by the robot and
the average human. Total tasks is the average number of tasks completed
by all agents.
7.2.3.2
Total Robot Response Time
Figure 7.10: The response time used by each robot throughout the simulations.
The total response time for each robot is shown in Figure 7.10, and includes both
conﬂict avoidance and planning. Since the baseline robot only makes one plan for each
goal, its response time is many factors lower than the other robots. This is followed by
the MiR-based robot, which is also eﬃcient due to two planning levels, ensuring that in
most cases, only minor changes are made to plans instead of computing a completely
new global plan whenever an obstacle appears. The remaining robots are comparatively
similar, apart from the probabilistic robot, which is approximately 4 times slower than
the MiR-based robot and approximately 2.75 times slower than the other robots. The
median shows that the probabilistic robot uses approximately 32 seconds on responding
during 10.000 time steps, which is 3.2 milliseconds per time step. This response time
comparison can be used to gauge to what extent a speciﬁc robot can be viable.
==PAGE:89==
7.2 Simulation Results
82
7.2.3.3
Improvements to Response Time
Planning also aﬀects the robots’ response time, and to determine whether changing the
pathﬁnding algorithm of the robots will result in better response times, two tests on our
implementations of A∗and D∗Lite are performed.
The ﬁrst test is inspired by the "Goal-Directed Navigation in unknown Terrain test" from
[KL02] and tests the eﬃciency measured in vertices accessed and vertices explored. The
test randomly generates 100 diﬀerent maps for 7 diﬀerent map sizes, with 4 diﬀerent
densities of unknown static objects ranging from 10%−40%. Static objects do not move
and are not forgotten when out of range. The sensor range used in this test is one cell,
meaning a robot can only see what is directly surrounding it. Figure 7.11 shows that
increasing the size of the map increases the diﬀerence between the two algorithms, with
D∗Lite being increasingly better. In a map of size 40 × 40, A∗accesses 72.9% more
vertices and expands 136.7% more vertices than D∗Lite. This shows the fact that D∗
Lite is built for dynamic domains and is designed with a focus on replanning.
(a)
(b)
Figure 7.11: a) The average number of vertices accessed while planning and replanning.
A vertex being accessed is deﬁned as any time, the vertex is read or written
to. The vertical lines show a 95% conﬁdence interval. b) The average
number of vertices expanded while planning and replanning. A vertex
being expanded is deﬁned as any time the vertex is removed from the
frontier.
Although the results are not equal to the results presented in [KL02], it shows the same
tendency. Increasing the size of the map increases the usefulness of D∗Lite compared
to A∗. The diﬀerence between the results could be due to having implemented the ﬁnal
version of D∗Lite and not the ﬁnal optimised version. The reason could also be that
the D∗Lite algorithm has been implemented to ﬁt a robot that forgets objects.
==PAGE:90==
7.2 Simulation Results
83
Having seen that D∗Lite accesses and expands a signiﬁcantly smaller number of vertices
than A∗on most map sizes, it is interesting to see if this results in a shorter response
time in the warehouse domain. The two algorithms are tested over 100 simulations with
three diﬀerent conﬂict-resolution strategies in the warehouse domain, where the robot
has a sensor range of 16 cells. The three conﬂict-resolution strategies are chosen due
to having very diﬀerent methods of assigning costs, which are used when planning.
• Naive: only locations of humans are penalised with ∞
– No predeﬁned costs
– Costs is updated for locations of humans
• Heat map: as explained in Section 6.2.1.2
– Predeﬁned costs
– Costs of locations in vision are updated
• Social map: as explained in Section 6.2.1.3
– No predeﬁned costs
– Costs of locations in vision and around humans are updated
The naive strategy requires the least number of costs to be updated in each timestep,
whereas the social map requires the most. The heat map is diﬀerent because it has
predeﬁned costs for locations distant from the robot. The test results can be seen on
Table 7.12, which shows the average total response time.
The results show that A∗is faster with all strategies except the heat map. This means
the amount of time needed to update the graph with D∗Lite, is lower than the time
it takes to do a completely new A∗search when using the heat map. The question is
why the outcome diﬀers when using the heat map.
Response time
Strategy
Algorithm
Total response time (s)
Naive
A∗
6.91
Naive
D∗Lite
7.66
Heat map
A∗
10.16
Heat map
D∗Lite
7.54
Social map
A∗
11.02
Social map
D∗Lite
11.86
Table 7.12: Response time measurement showing the average total response time of
100 simulations in seconds for diﬀerent conﬂict resolution strategies paired
with diﬀerent pathﬁnding algorithms
==PAGE:91==
7.2 Simulation Results
84
One reason could be the high costs of the heat map. Having higher costs than what the
heuristic estimates forces both searches to be more extensive and expand more vertices.
However, this aﬀects D∗Lite less as it saves the expanded vertices, and does not have
to expand them again when replanning without it being necessary, leading to the time
improvement.
The reason for D∗Lite being slower using the naive strategy is that few penalties are
present in the cost map. This means the heuristic is good at estimating the correct cost
to the goal, and the time required to update the graph is simply worse than ﬁnding a
completely new plan. The reason for D∗Lite being slower using the social map is the
same as the naive strategy but with an increased amount of changes to costs that may
be updated in the graph, before the algorithm ﬁnds the optimal path.
The social norms and probabilistic strategies assign penalties to similar areas as the
social map strategy, as such D∗Lite will most likely also be slower than A∗when
combined with these strategies. This test shows that when the robot replans with A∗
and D∗Lite in the warehouse domain, it is slower to update the existing graph instead
of creating a new one.
It has therefore been deemed unnecessary to explore other
pathﬁnding algorithms.
7.2.4
Parameter Tuning
The base penalty Pb used has a huge eﬀect on the results, and it can be diﬃcult for
especially the probabilistic robot to infer exactly what value will yield the best results.
Intuitively, if Pb is too high it will result in lower throughput. If Pb is too low, the
penalties will be so small that the robot will end up getting too close to humans.
Similarly to Pb, it is diﬃcult to infer logically which β value is most ﬁtting for the
humans in the domain, as described in section 6.2.3.6.
Two parameter tunings are performed. One to approximate the best Pb and another
to approximate the best β ∈[0,1]. The ultimate goal is to choose the parameters in a
way that balances important parameters, such that the probabilistic robot on average
performs better than the social map and social norms robots.
7.2.4.1
Base Penalty Pb
To ﬁgure out what ﬁts best to the domain, Pb has been conﬁgured through parameter
tuning. A number of simulations have been run with diﬀerent values for Pb, which can
be seen in Figure 7.12 for some of the more important parameters. The conclusion of
the parameter tuning is to use Pb = 8 when weighing all the beneﬁts.
The test runs show a clear correlation between higher values of Pb and fewer safety
==PAGE:92==
7.2 Simulation Results
85
and comfort intrusions. However, higher penalties also show a signiﬁcant decrease in
throughput for the robot. When it comes to the number of robot safety stops, the
improvements start to stagnate after Pb = 8. However, it is clear that for most base
penalties, the probabilistic robot is signiﬁcantly better than all other robots at avoiding
robot safety stops.
(a) Diﬀerent base penalties and the resulting
no. safety intrusions.
(b) Diﬀerent base penalties and the resulting
no. robot safety stops.
(c) Diﬀerent base penalties and the resulting
no. comfort intrusions.
Figure 7.12: Parameter tuning of base penalties ranging from 21,...,28 over 50 simu-
lations.
7.2.4.2
Rationality Factor β
As the humans in the domain are assumed to be somewhat rational, the explored values
of β are between 0 and 1. The results of said experimentation can be seen in ﬁgure 7.13.
The results slightly favour mid-range values such as β = 0.6 on important areas such as
==PAGE:93==
7.2 Simulation Results
86
safety and eﬃciency, and this value will be chosen for the probabilistic robot. This follows
the hypothesis that cost diﬀerences should not be trusted completely as predictors, since
human agents in the domain will sometimes follow sub-optimal plans or procrastinate.
A β = 0 does not aﬀect the results nearly as well, but as the value increases, the results
generally improve, but will start to stagnate and even worsen after β = 0.6.
(a) Diﬀerent β values and the resulting no.
safety intrusions.
(b) Diﬀerent β values and the resulting no.
robot safety stops.
(c) Diﬀerent β values and the resulting no.
comfort intrusions.
(d) Diﬀerent β values and the resulting no.
robot tasks.
Figure 7.13: Parameter tuning of β ∈[0;1] on 50 simulations.
Something to keep in mind is that the β should be re-tuned, if something in the workforce
changes, e.g. many new workers have just started and are not as eﬀective at navigating
the warehouse.
==PAGE:94==
7.2 Simulation Results
87
7.2.5
Subjective Assessment
To understand the results better it is important to include subjective assessments of
selected scenarios in the simulations, which might help highlight possible causation of
the data and explain the strengths and weaknesses of the diﬀerent robots. This section
will go through a number of examples on how robots act in diﬀerent situations around
humans.
Scenario 1: Long interactions due to non-directed social map
The example in Figure 7.14 shows some of the ineﬀectiveness of the social map and
social norms robot. Due to the penalties of these strategies and the goal location, the
robot will try to avoid the human by going in the same direction as the human.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 7.14: An example of the limitations of the social map and social norms robot.
The robot has chosen a plan around the human, but the plan is in the
same direction as the human is headed. The robot could choose either the
shown path or a path above the human in the situation on Figure 7.14c.
The probabilistic robot solves some of these issues by penalising more of the human’s
direction. The issue is a part of the motivation that led to the development of a more
sophisticated conﬂict resolution strategy. One might argue that a solution would be
to increase the range of R of the social map and social norms robots.
This would
unfortunately lead to an increased amount of problems, some of which are shown in
scenarios 2 and 3.
Scenario 2: Corridor avoidance due to high social penalties
The example in Figure 7.14 shows an issue that arises with the social norms and social
map robots. Both robots follow the path of minimum cost. Meaning that if another
==PAGE:95==
7.2 Simulation Results
88
path exists with a higher length, but a lower total cost, they will choose the longer route.
This issue can be seen in Figure 7.15. Assuming a diagonal cost of 1.4, the shown path
has a cost of 12.2 while the minimum cost going through the corridor would have a cost
of 16.2.
Figure 7.15: The social norms robot takes a longer path because the path in the
corridor is more expensive than going around the corridor.
The length of the path taken depends on the sum of penalties surrounding the human
from the robot’s point of view. It is quite clear that this becomes a choice between
safety and comfort and the throughput of the robot. Given the fact that there are many
corridors like the one shown in Figure 7.15 with even more goals, this problem occurs
quite often and it is therefore very likely that this is part of the decrease in throughput.
Scenario 3: Corridor avoidance and the forgetful robot
Expanding on the problem mentioned in Scenario 2, imagine the situation depicted in
Figure 7.16. This is another consequence of the social map and social norms robots and
their tendency to navigate out of corridors.
Figure 7.16: A continuation of the scenario depicted in Figure 7.15. The penalties
surrounding H1 have been forgotten and the robot can see the penalties
surrounding H2 leading to a new plan for the robot.
==PAGE:96==
7.2 Simulation Results
89
The problem arises because the robot will forget H1 and all the penalties surrounding
the human. This will eventually lead to the robot returning to the corridor with H1
inside it due to encountering another human, H2. This pattern will repeat if nothing
changes in the scenario, i.e. if the humans remain in the same position. The scenario of
humans standing still in a corridor is not likely in the simulation, and as such this issue
has not been prioritised.
Both scenarios 2 and 3 could be an explanation for the slight increase in human replans
and the larger increase in robot replans seen in the social map and social norm robots.
The problems would not be as apparent with the probabilistic robot. Depending on the
predicted direction of H1 and H2, the robot would not have the same area of penalties
as the social map and social norms robot does, leading to fewer robot replans.
Scenario 4: The unmoving human
A case not included in the simulations is when a human does not want to move out of a
location, which could be a reason for the baseline robot’s impressive throughput. In the
simulation, humans keep performing actions, apart from taking a break in one of the
special areas. However, if a human were to stop for a long period of time at a location
the baseline robot wanted to enter, the robot would simply wait, leading to a decrease
in throughput for the baseline robot, but not for the robots able to replan.
7.2.6
Evaluation of Results
The following section will summarise the key points that the results show about each
robot. The three areas are evaluated on a scale from 1−5 in Table 7.13, Table 7.14 and
Table 7.15, which is deﬁned relative to the best and worst result value for the speciﬁc
parameter.
Safety intrusions
Robot safety stops
Human safety stops
Baseline robot
5
5
4
MiR-based robot
4
5
5
Heat map robot
3
5
3
Social map robot
1
2
3
Social norms robot
1
2
2
Probabilistic robot
1
1
1
Table 7.13: Summary of results for safety on a scale from 1−5 on the three parameters.
The grading shows that the probabilistic robot performs best on most parameters, except
robot replans, task completed and response time. The baseline, MiR-based and heat
map robots perform well on these three parameters, but not as well on everything related
to safety and comfort.
==PAGE:97==
7.2 Simulation Results
90
Comfort intrusions
Robot replans
Human replans
Baseline robot
5
1
2
MiR-based robot
5
3
4
Heat map robot
4
3
1
Social map robot
2
5
5
Social norms robot
1
5
4
Probabilistic robot
1
3
1
Table 7.14: Summary of results for comfort on a scale from 1 −5 on the three param-
eters.
Tasks completed
Response time
Baseline robot
1
1
MiR-based robot
2
2
Heat map robot
2
3
Social map robot
4
3
Social norms robot
5
3
Probabilistic robot
5
5
Table 7.15: Summary of results for eﬃciency on a scale from 1 −5 on the two param-
eters. Note that number of tasks completed by humans and robots are
combined.
However, even though all of these evaluation areas are important to improving HRI,
how much each is weighed depends highly on the company and their employees. It also
depends on other factors that are not evaluated here, which are the feasibility and R&D
investments required to implement the strategies on robots. Some of the robots might
perform well on some parameters in the simulation but relies heavily on assumptions
that could change the results drastically when used in practice. These considerations
will be discussed further in Section 8.1.
Another aspect that is not considered is how the conﬂict resolution strategies in the
diﬀerent robots can be combined to get the best of both worlds. Many throughput
issues occur because robots constantly try to navigate around humans. However, if the
robots avoid getting near humans at all from the beginning, just like the heat map robot
does by avoiding corridors when unnecessary, the throughput could be brought up for
the probabilistic robot, while keeping the safety and comfort beneﬁts. This will also be
discussed further in Section 8.1.
==PAGE:98==
Chapter 8
Discussion
In the previous chapters, many of the choices made throughout the project have been
argued for in relation to answering the research question formulated in Section 2.3.1.
This chapter will bring up many of these choices again and critically reﬂect on their
feasibility, as well as future work that lies ahead for the project to go from simulation
to real-world implementation. This includes the underlying assumptions in the project,
the chosen methods that have been explored and implemented to improve HRI, and the
modelling of human agents.
8.1
Solution Recommendation
In Section 7.2.6, an evaluation was conducted of the diﬀerent robots in the three areas
of safety, comfort and eﬃciency. However, it is important to reﬂect on the individual
client’s needs. Some clients might ﬁnd it important that robots are socially aware and
keep their distance because their workforce is not as acquainted with or used to working
with autonomous robots. In this case, the probabilistic robot might be a good choice.
Others might be going through an optimisation project in the warehouse, where every
part of the warehouse is sought to be more eﬃcient, including the throughput of the
robot. In this case, the heat map, baseline, and MiR-based robots are the best options.
8.1.1
Eﬃcient or Social Robot
Although the literature suggests that parameters evaluated under safety and comfort are
generally important in HRI, some clients will value throughput higher, and some clients
will also prefer micro-improvements across all parameters instead of huge improvements
in a selected number of areas. For instance, the heat map robot improves all areas
of safety and comfort without compromising throughput compared to the MiR-based
robot. Although the improvement in safety and comfort is not as signiﬁcant as with
the probabilistic robot, the heat map robot is a very simple solution that can easily be
implemented, i.e. the R&D eﬀort to bring this initiative to production is low.
One thing not shown in the results is the possibility of combining conﬂict resolution
strategies, depending on client needs. A combination that is hypothesised to maintain
high throughput, while still performing well on safety and comfort, is the combination
==PAGE:99==
8.1 Solution Recommendation
92
of probabilistic plan recognition and a heat map. The results of this combination can
be seen in Table 8.1.
Percentage improvements for Probabilistic Heat Robot
Heat map robot
Probabilistic robot
Caution
C = 0
C = 1
C = 0
C = 1
Safety intrusions
−33.56%
−31.83%
31.73%
57.50%
Robot safety stops
−54.56%
−32.65%
84.42%
76.91%
Comfort intrusions
−19.98%
−22.06%
8.91%
19.22%
Robot replans
10.46%
6.13%
−16.31%
−20.15%
Human replans
−7.77%
−0.27%
−11.14%
−9.93%
Robot tasks completed
−2.98%
−3.36%
12.69%
12.82%
Table 8.1: Percentage improvements gained from a robot using both probabilistic plan
recognition and a heat map, compared to the heat map robot and the
probabilistic robot for selected parameters.
To summarise, the results give an indication of a potentially good strategy. The through-
put of the heat map robot is somewhat maintained by the probabilistic heat robot, and
while the safety and comfort parameters are generally not as good as the probabilistic
robot, it still performs quite well. It is also important to note that the results are just
from combining the two strategies as is. For future work, some tweaks would need to be
made to show the combination’s full potential. For instance, values in the heat map are
currently very large compared to the penalties given in the probabilistic robot. This will
cause the heat map values to weigh multiple factors more than the human predictions.
The next step for this combination would therefore be to lower the values of the heat
map and perhaps redo the parameter tuning for the base penalties. The heat map values
are also causing a problem for A∗in Section 7.2.3.3, where every replan is shown to
be very extensive. The problem is that the heuristic has too little impact to guide the
search, and lowering the values will not solve this before they become insigniﬁcant and
ignored when navigating. D∗Lite can mitigate these issues.
The compromise in throughput seen in the probabilistic robot can perhaps be mitigated
by combining it with the heat map, but there are still other problems that need to
be considered.
The heat map robot does not rely on as many assumptions as the
probabilistic robot, which is very much dependent on the assumptions of how easy it is
to process the dynamic objects observed by the sensors into tangible actions that can
be mapped to observations used for goal and plan recognition.
==PAGE:100==
8.1 Solution Recommendation
93
8.1.2
Plan and Goal Recognition in the Industry
In general, there are many uncertainties when it comes to using logic-based plan and
goal recognition in practice. These uncertainties are based on three underlying issues:
1) computation time, 2) representation of observations, and 3) human behaviour.
When implementing plan recognition as described in Ramirez and Geﬀner’s work, the
solution is computationally demanding. However, a lot of adjustments have been made
as part of the project to mitigate this as described in Section 6.2.3. This includes only
considering ongoing tasks, goal clustering, using a lookup table to ﬁnd costs of plans, and
only computing parts of plans that are relevant for determining penalties. Moreover,
if the hardware on the system allows it, multiple processes can be run in parallel to
calculate the penalties of diﬀerent humans. Issues 2) and 3) can also be minimised in
various ways. In terms of observations, cameras can be used to model actions more
precisely, and in terms of 3), parameter tuning can be used to better understand how
constants can be tweaked to ﬁt the trajectories that humans in the environment follow.
Although there are solutions to many of these problems, the measures that need to be
taken are quite extensive. Therefore it is questionable whether or not AMR companies
are willing to make these R&D investments compared to what can be gained from
implementing a simple heat map or adding penalties around humans.
8.1.3
Eﬀect of Worker Education
As described in Section 5.4.1.3, worker education is common at client sites to ensure
that the robot can operate smoothly among them. The eﬀect alone of implementing a
common protocol for workers and their behaviour towards the robot is quite apparent.
For instance, implementing worker education alone decreases the number of robot safety
stops with 78.45% for the baseline robot and 77.91% for the MiR-based robot, which is
very similar to the decrease seen in the probabilistic robot at C = 0. For safety intrusions,
worker education reduces the numbers for both the baseline and MiR-based robots by
approximately 34%, which is half of the improvement seen with the probabilistic robot.
When looking across some of these values, it is clear that worker education has a positive
impact on many of the evaluated parameters. Combined with the probabilistic robot,
the total safety and comfort impact is huge.
However, it does bring up the question of whether or not it is strictly necessary to
develop a more socially aware robot when worker education alone has an eﬀect that for
some clients might be suﬃcient. It is important that the needs of the client sites are
evaluated clearly, for instance through surveys, because there might be some workers
that value safety and comfort distances higher than others.
==PAGE:101==
8.2 From Assumptions to Deployment
94
8.2
From Assumptions to Deployment
During this project, a number of assumptions have been made in Section 4.1. This
section will dive deeper into the assumptions and simpliﬁcations and how these aﬀect
the developed conﬂict resolution strategies and their results.
8.2.1
Discrete Grid and Motion Planning
Many of the simpliﬁcations lie under the discrete representation of the domain and the
modelling of motion planning of humans and robots. The simpliﬁcations remove the
possibility of agents moving at diﬀerent speeds and limit the number of directions.
8.2.1.1
Speed
The speed of the robot and humans is modelled to be equal. In the real world, the robot
would be slower than humans and they may have diﬀerent speeds. This assumption will
cause some diﬀerences in the real world. For instance, if humans are faster than the
robot, the robot will need to act earlier to avoid potential conﬂicts.
Similarly, acceleration would mean that the robot needs to have some notion of time.
Say for predictions, if the human moves at a faster pace, it would be necessary to punish
cells further away from the human, because said human could potentially reach those
cells faster. This would require that the robot actually kept track of the speed changes
and where the human would be at a speciﬁc time step.
Introducing speed and acceleration also brings a new perspective to HRI. It is not diﬃcult
to imagine that robots moving with a speed higher than the average speed would have
an eﬀect on the feeling of safety and comfort, as it aﬀects the predictability of robots,
the ability to react to unforeseen increases in speed and so forth. Therefore, introducing
speed requires a reconsideration of the HRI evaluation parameters.
8.2.1.2
Finer Grid
Another problem related to this is that the robot and humans are both the size of one
cell and the fact that the grid is discrete. In the real world, a human could for instance
move with a speed that is 1.5x faster than the speed of a robot. If this was modelled,
it would mean that the human would be positioned between two cells. Another similar
problem is that each step a human takes is not always 0.5m. Both problems can be
made insigniﬁcant by making the grid ﬁner, such that the robot and humans must be
contained in multiple cells. The ﬁner the grid, the closer the representation is to a
continuous representation.
==PAGE:102==
8.2 From Assumptions to Deployment
95
Obviously, this will not solve the problem completely, but at some point, the cells are
so small that the problem becomes insigniﬁcant. By making the grid ﬁner, another
problem arises. The response time of the robot will become slower, due to more com-
prehensive planning and the fact that more cells must be penalised. The planning will
be more comprehensive because it is possible to make micro-adjustments. However, the
state expansion can be constrained by creating high-level actions that correspond to
moving 1m in some direction, and using these high-level actions to navigate will ease
the planning.
8.2.2
Human and Social Modelling
Humans are extremely complex in their intentions and how they accomplish them. In
Section 5.4 social awareness was introduced together with rationality, caution and dis-
cipline to model human behaviour. Rationality models the fact that humans will not
always ﬁnd an optimal plan between two points. Discipline models the fact that humans
will abandon work-related tasks to move to pre-determined areas of procrastination such
as the lunch room or coﬀee machine. Caution models the fact that humans will keep a
minimum social distance from each other. Each of these concepts is a simpliﬁcation of
forces that humans act through in the real world and will be discussed in the following
section.
8.2.2.1
Paths and Causality
A diﬃcult aspect is ensuring that a robot takes the intentions of humans into account.
For instance, sometimes humans choose to deviate from an optimal path on purpose.
A human may observe a sick colleague, causing them to keep a distance due to health
reasons, which results in a sub-optimal route seen from the robot’s perspective in terms
of the true distance to its goal. From a human’s point of view, this will be an optimal
path with respect to their own intention of keeping a reasonable health distance. The
robot will not see this deviation as having anything to do with the sick colleague but as
a result of the human underestimating the path to its goal. The robot’s understanding
of the causality in this situation is incorrect.
If this situation is taken from the perspective of the probabilistic robot, the actual goal
of the human will be less probable due to the deviation. However, the goal would still be
equally probable if the robot had an understanding of causality. It would be interesting
to give the robot knowledge of human caution.
It could be a parameter providing
knowledge about the approximate average distance that humans keep from each other.
However, this has not been included since it is extremely complicated to model these
causalities, given that social interactions can aﬀect the possible plans for the goal in so
many ways and would increase the computation time of the predictions even more.
==PAGE:103==
8.2 From Assumptions to Deployment
96
In the implementation, this is instead mitigated by reducing β, which still seems to
give reasonable results for the probabilistic robot.
However, it is important to note
that, in the real world, this problem would be even more apparent, as there would be
substantially more causalities that the robot would not have knowledge of. One should
be aware of the fact that it might be necessary to perform additional parameter tuning
on β in a physical environment, to take into consideration the weight of these causalities
in the paths that humans take.
8.2.2.2
Procastinations
The discipline parameter was introduced to model how often humans would procrastinate
in "known" areas in the warehouse, such as bathrooms, lunch and coﬀee breaks. In
Section 5.4.1.4 it was estimated that a human would interrupt its work 15 times to
procrastinate. This estimate is questionable because it is hard to say how many times
a human procrastinates.
However, the idea behind enabling humans to procrastinate was to make a robot consider
the possibility that a human suddenly can change its intention. The degree to which the
robot considers this needs to reﬂect how often humans would actually procrastinate in
the real world. In the real world, humans will also tend to procrastinate through certain
activities more than others, e.g. bathroom breaks are more frequent than lunch breaks
during a typical work day, and this is what is modelled with procrastination goal priors.
To obtain the goal of priors in an actual warehouse, or at least make them more precise,
these values could be estimated by creating surveys for employees to ﬁll out.
This
information could be used to conﬁgure the robot’s knowledge of human procrastination
in the domain, just like many other things are conﬁgured on the robot. Otherwise,
online material can be used as a basis.
8.2.2.3
Social Awareness and Predictions
In the real world, humans are able to walk among each other, because they have social
awareness. They can communicate in many ways counting body language, eye contact
and verbal. In this project, it is not interesting to model the speciﬁc communication
medium. However, to model a similar behaviour, humans are allowed to see the ﬁrst
part of nearby humans’ plan. One could argue that not all humans are equally good at
predicting where other humans are going, but as this is a work environment, it is assumed
that everyone is somewhat focused on their tasks and are willing to interact with the
other humans in the warehouse. Note that simulated humans sometimes wrongfully
predict other humans’ actions. If a human in the simulation suddenly changes their
plan, any predictions made about that human would have been wrong. This ﬁts quite
well with reality as a sudden direction change is hard to predict for real humans as well.
==PAGE:104==
8.2 From Assumptions to Deployment
97
8.2.3
Synthesised Data and Priors
Many research databases exist with pre-computed data for diﬀerent domains and situ-
ations. For instance, some of the research that models human navigation utilises data
sets that include data from pedestrian movements. Something similar could be done if
there existed data on warehouse workers. For the data to be useful, it must be created in
a generalised warehouse domain. Furthermore, it should measure the typical trajectories
of warehouse workers from a shelf to a drop-oﬀarea over time, how many tasks were
completed, as well as other activities that would aﬀect their trajectories such as taking
breaks.
Unfortunately, it was not possible to ﬁnd proper data that could be used, and as it
is diﬃcult to obtain data from actual customers of MiR, it is necessary to develop a
more generalised way of modelling human trajectories and the priors in the domain.
When it comes to priors, however, it seems reasonable to synthesise them based on
the assumption that warehouses have sales data and that sales data is related to order
history.
If this was to be set up in a warehouse, the priors are something that could be conﬁgured
together with the client by using available data that reﬂects the popularity of goals.
Conﬁgurations are already made for the internal map of the domain and the goals in
the system, as such the priors could also work similarly.
8.2.4
Sensor Data and Observations
The sensor of the robot and humans is modelled to be able to see through people.
For humans, this makes sense, as humans are able to distinguish the depth diﬀerence
between two humans standing in a line unless they are completely the same size and
stand in the exact same position, which is unlikely. The assumption that the robot
is able to do the same is based on the fact that it uses depth cameras in addition to
other sensors. To state that this is as good as humans’ ability to analyse depth is an
overestimation, but it is assumed to be able to diﬀerentiate between two objects 0.5m
apart.
8.2.4.1
Line of Sight
The line of sight concept described in Section 5.3.2 presented the problem that the
robot could look around corners. The method was deemed suﬃcient, as the additional
knowledge gained from looking around corners was only slight and all robots tested
were able to do this. The described problem can be solved with inspiration from the ray
casting approach presented in [Gam20] and deﬁning a cell to be visible if the centre of
the cell is within a visible region. To model line of sight more realistically, a ﬁner grid
==PAGE:105==
8.2 From Assumptions to Deployment
98
should be used. As the dimensions of the cells approach zero, the modelling of line of
sight would approach reality.
8.2.4.2
Observations Based on Locations
The problem of deﬁning observations only on gathered location data would still be a
problem in reality. The method presented in Section 6.2.2.1 is in essence a guess as
to which observations ﬁt together, and the solution is not ideal. One approach is to
keep track of all possible paths and perform the chosen prediction algorithm using all
of them. However, this would have a branching factor of 9 and potentially lead to an
enormous increase in response time.
Another idea is to calculate probabilities for each applicable action of a human and use
these probabilities to determine the most likely combination of old and new locations.
This approach would unfortunately have some of the same issues as the implemented
method. For instance, if a human leaves the robot’s vision and another human enters
the robot’s vision at the same location and time, the two humans would be identiﬁed as
the same object. From the robot’s point of view, the observation sequence would not
be broken, and the object would just have performed a wait action.
If the robot could tell humans apart from each other, the robot could be certain of which
human performed what action. MiR’s AMRs are currently not able to make this kind
of distinction, as such it has not been modelled in the domain. It could be interesting
to see the impact on the results if a robot is able to recognise humans, and would be a
good next step to increase the quality of predictions. The viability analysis of this idea
is left for future work.
8.2.5
Synchronous Simulation
It has been made clear throughout the report that the actions of diﬀerent agents are
performed synchronously on the domain’s state, meaning that each action does not
happen at the same time, but one after the other. In reality, agents would sense, think,
and act simultaneously. The diﬀerence has been somewhat mitigated by choosing to
send sensor data to the robot before any action was performed in each timestep, and
by moving the robot after all humans. However, it would be interesting to improve the
realism of the simulation in this aspect. This could be done by making the simulation
asynchronous, meaning that the simulator controller would handle both receiving actions
from agents, updating the domain, and sending sensor data to the agents in parallel.
The conversion would, however, introduce several new problems. One example would
be the need to normalise the speed of agents during their diﬀerent sense, think and act
stages, as the time it takes to think is substantially longer than acting. For instance,
==PAGE:106==
8.2 From Assumptions to Deployment
99
assume calculating a plan takes 100 milliseconds, and sending an action takes 1 mil-
lisecond. The diﬀerence in time would make it look like humans were either slow-witted
or running around. This is one of many problems introduced by asynchronous time and
due to time constraints, the system has been kept synchronous.
8.2.6
Hardware and Response Time
In the real world hardware is crucial and needs to be considered when developing soft-
ware.
In this project hardware properties have not been the focus.
However, it is
necessary to critically reﬂect on how realistic it would be to use the probabilistic robot
in a real-time system. Some of the factors that have not been taken into consideration
when calculating the response time of the robot in Figure 7.10 are:
• The hardware diﬀerences between the test computer and the hardware of MiR’s
robots
• The additional response time required to process a continuous world compared to
a discrete
• The time it takes to process sensor data
A true hardware comparison between the simulation hardware and the actual robot
hardware is diﬃcult to make since it would require knowledge about the percentage of
the processor used for planning and conﬂict resolution. A simple next step would be to
obtain the current response time of the MiR robots. This would allow a comparison to
the response time of the tested robots and provide a hint towards real-world feasibility.
The biggest issue with the probabilistic robot is its response time, which may cause it
to be infeasible. One way to reduce the response time could be to use a pathﬁnding
algorithm that updates the graph instead of creating a new one. This should result
in fewer expanded and accessed vertices, and hopefully a shorter response time. The
idea is tested in Section 7.2.3.3 using D∗Lite and the outcome shows indeed that
fewer vertices are expanded and accessed, but updating the existing graph requires too
much time and the response time increases. Due to this outcome and because conﬂict
resolution is responsible for most of the response time it was not prioritised to explore
other pathﬁnding algorithms.
8.2.7
Robot Fleet
MiR typically sell robots in ﬂeets that can communicate. The question of ﬂeets has
not been considered in this thesis, as it is assumed that conﬂict resolution on one robot
would just be replicated if multiple robots existed.
==PAGE:107==
8.2 From Assumptions to Deployment
100
8.2.7.1
Social Eﬀect
A question would be whether or not humans would act any diﬀerently if they had to
navigate in an environment with multiple robots compared to one robot. One could
argue that humans would be more aware of multiple robots. One could also argue that
the robots would have to be more socially aware because a larger amount of robots
would aﬀect human workers more, or would require more worker education.
8.2.7.2
Eﬀect on Human Throughput
As described in Section 7.1.2.3, it is diﬃcult to measure the eﬀect of each robot on the
throughput of human workers. However, this is mostly due to the test conﬁguration
setup of the domain. The tests are focused on one robot acting in an environment with
many humans, more speciﬁcally 25 human workers, meaning that the robot does not
have much impact on the individual human. One way to test the eﬀect of the robot on
human throughput would be to reverse the conﬁguration, e.g. see what would happen
in a domain with very few workers and many robots.
8.2.7.3
Communication
There could also be some beneﬁts that could be drawn from the ﬂeet when it comes
to predictions of humans. For instance, if two robots are in the range of a human and
start predicting, the computational load could be moved so that only one robot needs
to perform the prediction and then share its ﬁndings with the ﬂeet.
This could be done even more centralised, as the ﬂeet usually has some sort of cen-
tral server. This central server could compute the predictions and return the relevant
probability distribution to the robots. However, utilising a central server would require
developing a sophisticated protocol capable of handling many requests at once and
identifying requests in similar positions, while not compromising on response time. This
would be diﬃcult in practice.
==PAGE:108==
Chapter 9
Conclusion
This chapter concludes the thesis by answering the overall research question and the
presented sub-problems in Section 2.3.1. The research question was deﬁned as:
How can human-robot interaction (HRI) be improved in warehouses, using Mobile
Industrial Robots (MiR) as a source of inspiration?
To answer this research question, the sub-problems are addressed: 1) A simulator has
been built to model a warehouse domain and humans using rationality, discipline, caution
and social awareness, 2) conﬂict resolution strategies have been developed based on the
idea of cost maps, 3) these strategies have been evaluated in three areas; safety, comfort
and eﬃciency.
The four evaluated strategies are:
• The heat map strategy: Avoids conﬂicts by applying historical data in navigation
• The social map strategy: Avoids conﬂicts by keeping its distance from humans
• The social norms strategy: Avoids conﬂicts by following social norms
• The probabilistic strategy: Avoids conﬂicts by predicting humans’ intentions using
plan recognition
The best-performing strategy in regard to improving comfort and safety is the probabilis-
tic strategy, which decreases the number of safety intrusions with 60%−65% and robot
safety stops with 60% −79% to name the most outstanding improvements. However,
this comes with a trade-oﬀin eﬃciency, and the probabilistic strategy relies on a number
of assumptions that need to be investigated further. The easiest overall improvement
to implement, when compared with MiR’s current strategy, is the heat map strategy. It
improves the comfort and safety parameters, without compromising throughput. How-
ever, it also became apparent that worker education alone has a signiﬁcant impact on
safety and comfort as well.
When applying any of these strategies on a robot, its response time increases due to
dynamically changing costs which forces the robot to replan more. To address this, some
==PAGE:109==
102
research was conducted on the D∗Lite algorithm, which in theory is more eﬃcient than
A∗in dynamic domains with partial observability. While there were some indications of
the algorithm being more eﬃcient than A∗in accessed and expanded vertices, it was
not the case for the robot’s response time in the warehouse domain.
There is no perfect strategy for all warehouses because it is highly dependent on the
priorities of the individual warehouse. For most, the answer will most likely be a com-
bination of the presented strategies to harness the strengths that ﬁt best with their
workplace.
In conclusion, this thesis shows various ways that HRI can be improved in a ware-
house environment, and can hopefully serve as inspiration for future development of
autonomous mobile robots. The next step for expanding on this thesis would be to
remove some of the assumptions and simpliﬁcations, to verify the results in a more
realistic setting.
==PAGE:110==
Bibliography
[BD18]
Thomas Bolander and Andrea Dittadi.
Smart innovation project with
shade: Goal recognition for intelligent light control, 3 2018.
[CS20]
Yujiao Cheng and Liting Sun. Towards eﬃcient human-robot collaboration
with robust plan recognition and trajectory prediction. IEEE ROBOTICS
AND AUTOMATION LETTERS, 2020.
[Eag23]
Cisco Eagle.
The typical warehouse: What is the average warehouse
size?
https://www.cisco-eagle.com/vector/516/the-typical-
warehouse, 2023. Accessed: 2023-05-15.
[FLE22]
FLEXQUBE.
Optimizing
warehouse
layout
for
eﬃciency
and
safety.
https://www.flexqube.com/news/optimizing-warehouse-
layout-for-efficiency-and-safety/, 2022. Accessed: 2023-05-15.
[FN71]
Richard E. Fikes and Nils J. Nilsson.
Strips: A new approach to the
application of theorem proving to problem solving. Artiﬁcial Intelligence
(general Ed.), 2(2):189–208, 1971.
[Gam20]
Red Blob Games.
2d visibility.
https://www.redblobgames.com/
articles/visibility/#ray-casting, 2020. Accessed: 2023-05-22.
[GB13]
Hector Geﬀner and Blai Bonet.
A concise introduction to models and
methods for automated planning. Synthesis Lectures on Artiﬁcial Intelli-
gence and Machine Learning, 22(2):1–141, 2013.
[GG09]
Christopher W. Geib and Robert P. Goldman. A probabilistic plan recog-
nition algorithm based on plan tree grammars.
Artiﬁcial Intelligence,
173(11):1101–1132, 2009.
[HM95]
D HELBING and P MOLNAR. Social force model for pedestrian dynamics.
Physical Review E, 51(5):4282–4286, 1995.
[INT19]
HIGH-LEVEL EXPERT GROUP ON ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE. Ethics
guidelines for trustworthy ai. https://ec.europa.eu/futurium/en/ai-
==PAGE:111==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
ii
alliance-consultation/guidelines/1.html#Transparency,
2019.
Accessed: 2023-05-19.
[KL02]
S. Koenig and M. Likhachev. Improved fast replanning for robot navigation
in unknown terrain.
http://idm-lab.org/bib/abstracts/papers/
tr-dstarlite.pdf, 2002. Accessed: 2023-05-10.
[KPAK13]
Thibault Kruse, Amit Kumar Pandey, Rachid Alami, and Alexandra Kirsch.
Human-aware robot navigation: A survey.
Robotics and Autonomous
Systems, 61(12):1726–1743, 2013.
[MS19]
Peta Masters and Sebastian Sardina. Goal recognition for rational and
irrational agents. AAMAS, 2019.
[Pet20]
Andrew
Peterson.
Collaborative
robots
spot
on
for
small-
to-medium
manufacturers,
but
challenges
remain.
https:
//www.roboticsbusinessreview.com/opinion/collaborative-
robots-spot-on-for-small-to-medium-manufacturers-but-
challenges-remain/, Oct 2020. Accessed: 2023-05-15.
[PHOCM23] Noé Pérez-Higueras, Roberto Otero, Fernando Caballero, and Luis Merino.
Hunavsim: A ros 2 human navigation simulator for benchmarking human-
aware robot navigation, 2023.
[Ree21]
Chris
Reeves.
Industrial
market
analysis:
(10)
commercial
market.
https://www.pdx.edu/realestate/sites/g/files/
znldhr3251/files/2021-06/Q1%20Industrial_Chris_Reeves_v2%
20-%20Meagan%20An.pdf, 2021. Accessed: 2023-05-22.
[RG09]
Miquel Ramírez and Hector Geﬀner. Plan recognition as planning. Ijcai
International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence, pages 1778–1783,
2009.
[RG10]
Miquel Ramirez and Hector Geﬀner. Probabilistic plan recognition using
oﬀ-the-shelf classical planners.
Proceedings of the Twenty-fourth Aaai
Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (aaai-10), pages 1121–1126, 2010.
[RG11]
Miquel Ramírez and Hector Geﬀner. Goal recognition over pomdps: Infer-
ring the intention of a pomdp agent. Ijcai International Joint Conference
on Artiﬁcial Intelligence, pages 2009–2014, 2011.
[RN10]
Stuart J. Russell and Peter. Norvig.
Artiﬁcial intelligence : a modern
approach. Pentice Hall„ 2010.
[Rob23a]
Mobile Industrial Robots.
Logistics & 3pl.
https://www.mobile-
industrial-robots.com/industries/logistics-3pl/, 2023.
Ac-
cessed: 2023-05-27.
==PAGE:112==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
iii
[Rob23b]
Mobile
Industrial
Robots.
Mir
history.
https://www.mobile-
industrial-robots.com/cz/about-mir/mir-history/, 2023.
Ac-
cessed: 2023-05-27.
[Rob23c]
Mobile Industrial Robots. Mir250. https://www.mobile-industrial-
robots.com/solutions/robots/mir250/, 2023. Accessed: 2023-05-22.
[Rob23d]
Mobile Industrial Robots. Optimized internal logistics in countless indus-
tries.
https://www.mobile-industrial-robots.com/industries/,
2023. Accessed: 2023-05-27.
[Rob23e]
Mobile Industrial Robots.
Visteon mexico.
https://www.mobile-
industrial-robots.com/case-studies/mir100-visteon-mexico/,
2023. Accessed: 2023-05-27.
[RP22]
Vahid Rahmani and Nuria Pelechano. Towards a human-like approach to
path ﬁnding. Computers & Graphics, 102:164–174, 2022.
[RPS+18]
Neil C. Rabinowitz, Frank Perbet, H. Francis Song, Chiyuan Zhang, and
Matthew Botvinick. Machine theory of mind. 35th International Confer-
ence on Machine Learning, Icml 2018, 10:6723–6738, 2018.
[Sie03]
Mel Siegel. The sense-think-act paradigm revisited. In The sense-think-act
paradigm revisited, page 5 pp., 07 2003.
[SM18]
Morito Sato and Masahiko Mikawa. Social norm based collision avoidance
in human-robot coexistence environment.
IECON 2018 - 44th Annual
Conference of the IEEE Industrial Electronics Society, 2018.
[TH20]
Nathan Tsoi and Mohamed Hussein. Sean: Social environment for au-
tonomous navigation. CoRR, abs/2009.04300, 2020.
[TM21]
Charlotte Friis Theisen and Laura Marott.
Artiﬁcial intelligence for
human-robot interaction on mobile hospital robots, kunstig intelligens til
menneske-robot-interaktion på mobile hospitalsrobotter, 2021.
[VHP21]
Franz A. Van-Horenbeke and Angelika Peer. Activity, plan, and goal recog-
nition: A review. Frontiers in Robotics and AI, 8, 2021.
==PAGE:113==
Appendix A
Appendix: Boltzmann or
Sigmoid
In [GB13], Geﬀner and Bonet used a sigmoid function to model the likelihood of P(O￿G).
But Ramirez and Geﬀner used a Boltzmann distribution in [RG10]. A Boltzmann distri-
bution is designed in mechanics to express the likelihood of a system being in a certain
state as a function of the energy of the state. The Boltzmann distribution is not only
useful in mechanics as the energy parameter can be substituted with any parameter. In
[RG10] it was useful because the energy parameter could be substituted with the cost
of a plan C(⇡) to determine the likelihood of the plan ⇡given it is a plan for the goal
G, as shown in Equation (A.1).
PB(⇡￿G) ∝e−βC(⇡)
(A.1)
where β is a positive constant introduced to model rationality, and C(⇡) ≥0 meaning
the plan can not have a negative cost. This means a plan with a lower cost will have a
higher likelihood and is built on an assumption from [RG10].
"... when the agent is pursuing a goal G, he is more likely to follow cheaper plans than
more expensive ones." [RG10, p. 1124]
This assumption seems reasonable for agents that are at least a little bit rational, mod-
elled by β > 0. The reasoning is that an agent will try to minimise the cost of its plan
from its perspective. The agent’s perspective might not be consistent with the ground
truth, but this is the reason for including β as a weight on the cost. If agents are not
rational at all they will perform actions in blindness until the goal somehow is reached.
Meaning they are not more likely to follow cheaper plans.
For this reason, assume
agents are at least a little bit rational and β > 0. This makes it possible to describe the
ratio of likelihood between two plans pursuing the same goal G by using the Boltzmann
factor. For instance a consistent plan ⇡and an inconsistent plan ⇡′ with respect to an
observation sequence O, where C(⇡) = C(G,O) and C(⇡′) = C(G,O).
PB(⇡￿G)
PB(⇡′￿G) = e−βC(G,O)
e−βC(G,O) = e−β(C(G,O)−C(G,O))
(A.2)
This ratio of likelihood between a consistent plan and an inconsistent plan to G, is
then used to deﬁne the likelihood of observing O given the agent is pursuing G i.e.
==PAGE:114==
v
P(O￿G) ∝e−β(C(G,O)−C(G,O)). However in the cases with a negative cost diﬀerence
(C(G,O)−C(G,O)) < 0 the Boltzmann distribution produces a likelihood P(O￿G) > 1,
which doesn’t make a lot of sense, as the likelihood should be capped at 1. In [RG10]
a normalization factor, ↵, is used to make posteriors P(G￿O) sum up to 1, as shown in
Equation (3.12). So it is not a problem to have P(O￿G) > 1. However, this raises the
question of whether a better method exists for mapping the cost diﬀerence to the range
between 0 and 1. A problem with the Boltzmann function occurs with cost diﬀerences
with a relatively small diﬀerence and is shown in Example A.1.
Example A.1 Assume G = {G,G′}, P(G) = P(G′), β = 1 and an observation sequence
O, where C(G,O) −C(G,O) = −x and C(G′,O) −C(G′,O) = −(x −1). By using the
Boltzmann distribution for P(O￿G) and P(O￿G′) in Equation (3.12) the likelihoods are
calculated by the following equation:
P(G￿O) = ↵P(O￿G)P(G)
=
P(O￿G)P(G)
P(O￿G)P(G) + P(O￿G′)P(G′)
=
P(O￿G)
P(O￿G) + P(O￿G′)
=
e−β(−x)
e−β(−x) + e−β(−(x−1))
=
e1
e1 + e0
≈0.73
P(G′￿O) ≈0.27
These likelihoods could be reasonable for smaller values of ￿x￿. However, when x →∞
the relative diﬀerence between the cost diﬀerences of the two goals becomes insigniﬁ-
cant, as such it would be expected that the likelihood of the goals would move towards
being equally likely, limx→∞P(G￿O) = P(G′￿O).
However, this is not the case with the Boltzmann Distribution. The equation can be
reduced to an equation that is independent of x, and dependent on the diﬀerence
between the two cost diﬀerences. As such the likelihoods can be calculated without
considering the magnitude ￿x￿. This seems unreasonable for larger values of ￿x￿.
To handle the problem in Example A.1 the sigmoid function can be used. It is commonly
used to map values to the range ]0;1[. Furthermore e−x is present in the denominator,
which can easily be substituted with the Boltzmann factor. However, in the Boltzmann
==PAGE:115==
vi
distribution, a small value produces a high likelihood, whereas in the sigmoid function
a high value produces a high likelihood. Thus the fraction in Equation (A.2) must be
inverted as shown in Equation (A.3). Note that the fraction continues to be a Boltzmann
factor.
PB(⇡′￿G)
PB(⇡￿G) = e−βC(G,O)
e−βC(G,O) = e−β(C(G,O)−C(G,O)) = e−β∆(G,O)
(A.3)
The sigmoid function can then be used to map cost diﬀerence into likelihoods for
P(O￿G) as shown in Equation (A.4).
P(O￿G) ∝
1
1 + e−β∆(G,O)
(A.4)
To show that the sigmoid function solves the problem in Example A.1, the example
is continued in Example A.2 but with the sigmoid function as the likelihood function
instead of the Boltzmann distribution.
Example A.2 To continue from Example A.1, assume now that the likelihood function
for P(O￿G) and P(O￿G′) is the sigmoid function showed in Equation (A.4). Note that
∆(G,O) = x and ∆(G′,O) = x −1. When x →∞the new likelihoods become:
lim
x→∞P(G￿O) = lim
x→∞↵P(O￿G)P(G)
= lim
x→∞
1
1+e−βx
1
1+e−βx +
1
1+e−β(x−1)
=
1
1 + 1
= 0.5
P(G′￿O) = 0.5
It seems reasonable that G and G′ are equally likely as the relative diﬀerence between
the cost diﬀerences becomes insigniﬁcant when x →∞.
==PAGE:116==
vii
This should also be the case when x →−∞.
lim
x→−∞P(G￿O) =
lim
x→−∞↵P(O￿G)P(G)
=
lim
x→−∞
1
1+e−βx
1
1+e−βx +
1
1+e−β(x−1)
=
1
1+∞
1
1+∞+
1
1+∞
= 0.5
P(G′￿O) = 0.5
As expected the same likelihoods are produced when x →−∞and when x →∞.
Now let x →0 to ensure the sigmoid function produces reasonable likelihoods for cost
diﬀerences of a small magnitude.
lim
x→0P(G￿O) = lim
x→0↵P(O￿G)P(G)
= lim
x→0
1
1+e−βx
1
1+e−βx +
1
1+e−β(x−1)
=
1
1+1
1
1+1 +
1
1+e1
= 0.65
P(G′￿O) = 0.35
In this case, the relative cost diﬀerence between ∆(G,O) and ∆(G′,O) is signiﬁcant
compared to ￿x￿and it is expected that P(G￿O) > P(G′￿O). This is reﬂected by the
resulting likelihoods.
From Example A.2 it is shown that the sigmoid function considers the relative diﬀer-
ence between cost diﬀerences when producing the likelihoods. This is important in a
warehouse domain where shelves and drop-oﬀzones are located in clusters and are seen
as goals. As such the diﬀerence between the cost diﬀerences of adjacent goals might
be relatively small compared to their cost diﬀerences.
==PAGE:117==
Appendix B
Appendix: MiR Interview
Interviewer: Vi ønsker jo i bund og grund at ﬁnde ud af hvilke metoder I bruger ift
path planning, konﬂikthåndtering osv. Har du haft tid til at kigge på spørgsmålene?
MIR: Ja.
Interviewer: Vi havde forståelse af, at I bruger noget der hedder D*. Det er en dynamisk
version af A*, som gemmer de costs den har tidligere, så de ikke behøver replanne hele
planen, men derimod kan bruge de samame costs hvis den har de samme mål.
MIR: Ja - det gør vi ikke.
Interviewer: Okay?
MIR: Det var en tanke på et tidspunkt, det gav nogle problemer og simpelthen var det
bare nemme at genberegne heuristikken.
Interviewer: Dvs. det I gør lige nu, fx i Rosengårdscentret, lad os tale lidt ud fra den.
Det er ikke det domæne vi bruger, men lad os bruge eksemplet. Der laver i simpelthen
en ny A*, hvis der er mennesker, der kommer ind foran?
MIR: Ikke helt. Vi har tre forskellige måde at planlægge på. Så vi har vores global
planning, hvor vi står et sted og skal have en plan til et andet sted, og hvor vi laver
en hel plan med det hele fra start til målet. Så har vi også en lokal planning og en
semi-global planning. Den lokale replanning handler om, at vi har vores originale plan,
og så siger vi, at vi må deviere fra den originale plan med 30 cm. Vi genbruger den
gamle plan, men prøver at planlægge indenfor samme plan og genrbuger den gamle
heuristik, men med lokalt cost map ovenpå. Den semi-globale, der planlægger vi også
op til 8 meter fremad, men der har vi så nogle mål, der ligger på originale plan, og så
prøver vi at planlægge til de forskellige mål, så håber vi på at ﬁnde en løsning rundt om
vores objekt. Jeg har nogle slides, jeg kan vise omkring det.
Interviewer: Det kunne være fedt.
MIR: Bare lige hurtigt, så målet er at lave en plan fra A til B. Vi tager udgangspunkt
i den her ROS pakke, der hedder lattice planner. Det er en ROS-pakke, man kan få,
==PAGE:118==
ix
som den er. Så har vi denne her lokale plan, så vi får en lille ændring på kortet, og så
prøver vi at genplanne rundt om vores originale sti. Med den semi-globale kan vi se, at
der ligger en stor forhindring, vi ikke har på vores kort, og så skal vi planlægge rundt om
den. Der kan vi så få lov til at planlægge mere end 30 cm. Og til sidst vores globale,
hvor vi laver en helt ny plan. Jeg holder de her slides åben, så kan jeg vise jer andre
ting.
Interviewer: Vi vil meget gerne have de slides hvis muligt. Opfølgning til det, bare lige
hurtigt, hvordan kan det være at I endte med at gå væk fra at bruge D*?
MIR: Det var simpelthen for svært at holde styr på heuristikken.
Interviewer: Så grunden til I bruger A*, er fordi den er mere simpel?
MIR: Også ligeså meget et spørgsmål om hvor hurtigt det går og hvor mange ram. Vi
har nogle rimelige hårde contraints ift. hvad robotten kan køre.
Interviewer: Okay, det sådan set også et spørgsmål, vi gerne vil komme ind på. Hvad
er robottens specs?
MIR: Tror bare det er en NUC7 processor. Ved ikke lige. . . tror robotterne bruger en
NUC7. Vi kan læse op på spescne på den.
Interviewer: Og det bliver stavet NUC7 yes, mange tak.
Interviewer: Så vil jeg gå lidt tilbage til det her med A*. Hvordan deﬁnerer I jeres cost
function og jeres edge costs? Og det er også ift. det map, I allerede har.
MIR: Okay, så lad os tage et eksempel. Kan I se UI’et på robotten her? Vi har alle
sammen tre niveauaer af kort, vi bruger. Det normale kort, som består af vægge og
gulv og lignende ting. Og så har vi et andet view her. Vi har vores normale kort, som vi
planlægger i, men der er ligesom forskellige lag, vi skal tage hensyn til samtidig. Altså
når vi laver vores BFS, når vi udbedrer vores heuristik giennem vores map, så er der
forskellige ting vi skal tage højde for. En ting er vores direction zoner, man må gå
den ene eller anden retning. Så den tager også højde for hvilken retning, vi må køre
i. Unpreferred og preferred zoner tager den også hensyn til, så den øger eller mindsker
cost for at bevæge sig i disse områder. Så vi bevæger os meget basic med BFS fra start
til mål, og tager så højde for alle de her forskellige ting. Vi går ikke bare normale ﬁre
felter rundt om os, men bruger prædeﬁnerede “splines”. 8 eller 16 splines til at udbedre
os, så vi har en idé om, at robotten kan køre indefor disse splines. Til sidst bliver der
så kørt noget smoothing, så den er pæn at kigge på, planen altså.
Interviewer: Okay. Jeg kan næsten gætte mig til svaret, men bliver jeres planning
ændret fra domæne til domæne?
==PAGE:119==
x
MIR: Tror ikke helt jeg er med.
Interviewer: Tror også det er et dårligt spørgsmål, men generelt, måske et hospitals-
domæne har nogle andre ting de skal tage højde for end et domæne som Rosengårds-
centret?
MIR: Nej, det tager vi ikke højde for i vores planlæning. Det er et spørgsmål om, at
hvis kunden ønsker noget specielt, så må de selv opbygge deres kort ud fra de ting, vi
skal tage højde for.
Interviewer: Så I giver dem ligesom bare nogle værktøjer til, at de kan understøttte
sådan nogle ting, okay. Hvordan håndterer I konﬂikter mellem robotter og mennesker?
MIR: På den enkelte robot gør vi ikke rigtig, med det sagt, så hvis I kigger på mit ﬁne
kort igen, kan I se de her sorte skyer rundt om væggene. de er baseret på vores lokale
cost map. Vi har jo ligesom det globale, som robotten bruger til sin planlægning, og så
det lokale, som det der fortæller om forhindringer robotten kan se udfra sin sensordata,
og ting som den ved om. Fx væggen derovre, kan den ikke se længere, men den ved den
er der. Og så ved den det nok stadig er der. Det lokale cost map projekterer vi ned på
det globale map, når vi laver de her semi-globale og lokale replanning. Og så bruger vi
data derfra til at sige, at der er forhindring vi ikke kan køre igennem. Fx mennesker, der
bevæger sig, de bliver set som ting der står stille, og så prøver vi at bevæge os udenom.
Interviewer: Så hver gang mennesket ændrer position, så bliver der replannet? Og der
bliver ikke taget højde for menneskets retning?
MIR: Lige præcis.
Interviewer: Men er det så sådan, at der hvor menneskets position er registreret,
kommer der så en høj cost på det felt?
MIR: Nej. vi siger bare, at det er en væg i kortet. Noget vi ikke må køre igennem eller
røre ved.
Interviewer: Har I en zone omkring den væg? Måske skal vi ikke komme for tæt på
væggen.
MIR: Det så det jeg prøvede at vise med kortet her.
Interviewer: De skygger der, du snakkede om.
MIR: Præcis. Der ligger nogle blå punkter på væggen, og dem inﬂater vi så baseret
på størrelsen af vores footprint, og så behøver vi kun tjekke et punkt om det kolliderer.
Det samme med menensker, vi vil se dem som at stå i midten.
==PAGE:120==
xi
Interviewer: Har I kigget ind på.. lød næsten som om, at I havde overvejet at forudse
hvor mennesker er på vej hen osv.
MIR: Ja, en af vores folk i navigation har skrevet ph.d. om menneskelig interaktion
mellem robotter, men det er aldrig blevet prioriteret. Så er det bare ikkke blevet arbejdet
videre med det.
Interviewer: Det var et godt svar - så det næste spørgsmål er jo så, hvordan får I
sensordata ind i jeres system? Og her har du allerede lidt snakket om det, men de
sensorer vi kan se på hjemmesiden, er det nuværende specs? De I bruger generelt?
MIR: Godt spørgsmål, lad os lige kigge. Jeg er ikke sikker. Hvis vi tager MIR250, hvad
står der så? Tror der står to laserscannere og to kameraer.
Interviewer: Det lyder rigtigt, præcis.
MIR: Det er det, vi bruger. Så, fx vores laserscannere er ret simple, vi får et scan rundt
om os, som så projeketeres ned i cost mappet. Og så ud fra kameraerne får vi nogle
punktskyer, og så har vi værdier for hvor høj vores robot er, så hvis tingene er indenfor
robottens højde, så projekterer vi det også ned. Så hvis højden ville køre ind i den, så
ville det være en forhindring, selvom det ikke ville være set af laserscanneren. Men det
kræver ligesom, at robotten kan se det.
Interviewer: Hvordan bliver det data så til objekter i jeres kort? Er der en ﬁltrerings-
funktion? Vi behøver selvføglelig ikke gå i detaljer.
MIR: Ja der er nogle moduler, der sørger for at lave punktskyer, baseret på vores
kamaerer og ud fra de datapunkter, der har vi så lagt det ned i 2D plan, hvis de er
indenfor højde af robotten. Der foregår ikke noget sindssygt der, det er rimelig lige til.
Ikke noget ekstra behandling. Man kan også selv gå ind på robotten og slå det fra,
at robotten bruger det her data. Hvis kameraet ikke er ordentlig kalibreret, så kan der
ligge forhindringer, som faktisk ikke er der.
Interviewer: Så laserescannere bliver primært brugt.
MIR: Yes.
Interviewer: Så er næste spørgsmål: Hvordan fungerer jeres multiagent-ﬂeet kom-
muikation? Jeg ved, I har sådan en interﬂeet, hvor I kan have ﬂere agenter på en gang.
Hvordan fungerer kommunikationen mellem dem?
MIR: Lad mig lige ﬁnde et eksempel igen. . .
nå, men, ideen er vi har forskellige
funktionaliteter i vores robot, som man kan bruge til ﬂåde-komponenter.
Man kan
putte zoner ind i sit kort, så er en ﬂeet lock, og så kan man speciﬁcere hvor mange
==PAGE:121==
xii
robotter der må være i den. Så når robotten vil ind, kan den requeste, ligesom en
semaphor, om den må komme ind.
Kan jeg få lov til at være herinde?
Hvis ikke,
så står du bare og venter indtil du får lov til at komme ind. På den måde kan kunder
administrere hvorhenne og hvor mange robotter, der er ﬂere steder af gangen. En anden
ting vi også har, er at robotterne kan tracke hinanden, det gør de så igennem ﬂåden.
Så ﬂåden har en liste over alle robotter, og det kan den fortælle den enkelte robot.
Hvor er den, hvilket foot print, og hvor hurtigt bevæger den sig. Og det kan robotterne
lægge ned i cost map og se det som forhindring. De andre robotter vil kunne ses med
laserescannere og de her trackers.
Interviewer: Det giver super god mening. så er der en logik om hvornår den replanner,
alt efter hvor tæt den er på?
MIR: Ja, den ville kigge på om planen krydser forhindringen og hvis ja, så planlægger
den rundt om. Men igen, hvis det er en lokal forhindring, så skal det være indenfor
det lokale cost map før den planlægger rundt om. Tror det er 12x12 ﬁrkant rundt om
robotten.
Interviewer: Godt, ift. de opgaver robotten får, hvordan får robotten opgaver ind?
Plejer det at være et centralt it-system hos kunden, som feeder den opgaver, eller er
det noget forprogrammeret eller hvordan fungerer det?
MIR: Helt op til den enkelte kunde. Den meget lavpraktiske løsning er, at en kunde
bruger selve interfacet de får tilbudt, det I ser her. Herinde kan de oprette misioner
og få robotten til at køre på dem, og så har du en iPad på robotten, hvor man kan
bestemme hvilke missioner, robotten kører. Men så har alle robotter også en API, man
kan kalde den på. Hvor de har en masse RES kommandoer, med get, put, post, delete,
og herinde kan du så også sende missioner til dem, og læse dens PLT registre o.lign. Vi
har eksempel på, at vi kører sådan nogle docking celler, nede i vores testhal. Vi har der
her setup, hvor vi har nogle qr-koder, og så er ideen at robotten har sin egen qr-koden,
og docker, og så sætter den et PLC-register som vi så kan læse, og så kan vi fortælle
robotten, at den skal gøre noget andet. Ligeledes kan en kunde have en projektionslinje,
hvor robotten skal aﬂevere noget, og så kan den fortælle, at nu har den aﬂeveret det.
Interviewer: Fedt, jeg tror egentlig, vi er kommet igennem de spørsmål, vi har skrevet
ned. Eller, jeg har et enkelt, vi har jo snakket lidt med vores primære kontaktperson
omkring det her med mange af jeres kunder måske har nogle eksklusive robotzoner, og
hvor der ikke rigtig er mennesker. Men vi har lidt svært ved at ﬁnde ud af, fx i varehuse
eller lign., hvor mange der egentlig har mennesker, der render rundt og kan konﬂikte,
eller om de er isolerede fra medarbejdere.
MIR: En af vores ting med robotterne er, at de kan arbejde sammen med mennesker,
så rigtig mange steder går mennesker rundt mellem robotter, og så skal robotterne
håndtere det selv. Vi har eksempler på kunder, der gerne vil isolere det, kun robotter,
==PAGE:122==
xiii
men mange steder i dag er der tranisitons, der stadig er i gang. I den her mellemfase
arbejder de sammen.
Interviewer: Så der er ligesom en case til at forbedre det her aspekt af robotten?
MIR: Ja, og så er der også nogle tilfælde, hvor de bare gerne vil have, at robotten
står stille, i stedet for i vildskab prøve at planlægge rundt om mennsker, og det kan se
underligt ud, hvis de står tæt på, det varierer.
==PAGE:123==
Appendix C
Appendix: Inconsistent Plans
The problem with using the original deﬁnition for a consistent plan in [RG10] is to ﬁnd
the minimum cost of an inconsistent plan, which is computationally heavy. To avoid
this, Deﬁnition 6.1 enables us to ﬁnd the minimum inconsistent cost C(G,O) in linear
time in the number of observations, O(￿O￿). However, this method is not guaranteed to
work when the observations are inside a single-lane corridor, which is too narrow for two
humans to pass each other. Since single-lane corridors are rarely present in a warehouse,
it seems like a feasible requirement.
The method for ﬁnding the minimum inconsistent cost will ﬁnd a cost that corresponds
to a plan that will satisfy neither Deﬁnition 6.1 nor the deﬁnition in [RG10] if all corridors
have at least two lanes. To prove this, assume an optimal path exists that is inconsistent
with the observations O, then the best inconsistent plan will be optimal and satisfy
neither of the deﬁnitions.
Now assume the other case, where all optimal plans are
consistent with O, then an inconsistent plan ⇡would simply use one action instead of
following an observation o ∈O followed by another action to get back to an optimal
plan. This is always possible because a corridor will have at least two lanes. Thus ⇡is
inconsistent for both deﬁnitions because o ∉⇡.
To visualise this, three scenarios are shown in Figure C.1. In the case where O contains
a diagonal action o, the best inconsistent plan ⇡will be the optimal plan where o is
replaced by a horizontal and vertical action, as shown in Figure C.1a. The cost C(⇡) of ⇡
will then become C(⇡) = C(G,O) = C(G,O)+0.6 because the cost of diagonal actions is
√
2 ≈1.4 and 1 for horizontal/vertical actions. If O does not contain a diagonal action,
it means that O only contain horizontal or vertical actions. Suppose the optimal plan
only contains one horizontal/vertical action o, which also means O = {o}. In this case,
⇡will be the optimal plan where o is replaced by one horizontal/vertical action and a
diagonal action, as shown in Figure C.1b. The result is C(⇡) = C(G,O) = C(G,O)+1.4.
If the optimal plan contains more than one action, two horizontal/vertical actions will
be replaced by two diagonal actions to construct ⇡, which results in C(⇡) = C(G,O) =
C(G,O) + 0.8 and is shown in Figure C.1a.
A plan that would satisfy the deﬁnition in [RG10] but not Deﬁnition 6.1, is a plan ⇡′
that contains two opposite actions at the beginning followed by a consistent plan. The
minimum cost of two opposite actions is 2, which is the case for two horizontal/vertical
moves. As such the minimum cost of ⇡′ is C(⇡′) = C(G,O) = C(G,O) + 2. Since
==PAGE:124==
xv
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure C.1: In three scenarios where only one optimal plan exists, an agent has made
one or more optimal moves (yellow squares) towards a goal. In each sce-
nario, an inconsistent plan for the goal can be found by using two actions
(red arrows) to deviate from the observations and return to the optimal
plan.
C(⇡) < C(⇡′) for all three scenarios, C(⇡) will always be found by the method for ﬁnding
the minimum inconsistent cost, C(G￿O). Thus the plan corresponding to C(G￿O) will
satisfy neither of the two deﬁnitions.
A consequence of this is that ∆(G,O) ≤1.4. However, O can have the size, ￿O￿= ∞,
meaning the cost diﬀerence will be −∞≤∆(G,O) ≤1.4. As a result of this, the cost
diﬀerences of diﬀerent paths can still be compared on an inﬁnitely big scale ] −∞;1.4],
thus the likelihoods continue to reﬂect the probabilities.
==PAGE:125==
Appendix D
Appendix: Simulation Data
Baseline robot C = 0
Baseline robot C = 1
Parameter
Average
Sum
Average
Sum
Safety intrusions
1558
155800
1024.66
102466
Robot safety stops
124.78
12478
26.89
2689
Human safety stops
138.9
13890
20.11
2011
Comfort intrusions
3652.84
365284
3099.74
309974
Robot replans
0
0
0
0
Human replans
583.96
58396
1161.82
116182
Robot tasks
200.52
20052
202.6
20260
Human tasks
4604.71
460471
4586.01
458601
Robot response time
197.34
19734
187.05
18705
Table D.1: Simulation data from the results presented in Section 7.2 for the baseline
robot.
MiR-based robot C = 0
MiR-based robot C = 1
Parameter
Average
Sum
Average
Sum
Safety intrusions
1376.09
137609
901.03
90103
Robot safety stops
133.79
13379
29.55
2955
Human safety stops
148.26
14826
24.64
2464
Comfort intrusions
3518.32
351832
2937.11
293711
Robot replans
2092.72
209272
2013.3
201330
Human replans
605.09
60509
1238.02
123802
Robot tasks
194.84
19484
197.68
19768
Human tasks
4605.98
460598
4588.57
458857
Robot response time
6388.38
638838
7555.81
755581
Table D.2: Simulation data from the results presented in Section 7.2 for the MiR-based
robot.
==PAGE:126==
xvii
Heat map robot C = 0
Heat map robot C = 1
Parameter
Average
Sum
Average
Sum
Safety intrusions
1114.17
111417
817.71
81771
Robot safety stops
114.37
11437
27.87
2787
Human safety stops
125
12500
23.72
2372
Comfort intrusions
2834.88
283488
2370.66
237066
Robot replans
1639.61
163961
1552.71
155271
Human replans
488.76
48876
1091.83
109183
Robot tasks
195
19500
197.26
19726
Human tasks
4604.38
460438
4583.17
458317
Robot response time
10160.05
1016005
12628.45
1262845
Table D.3: Simulation data from the results presented in Section 7.2 for the heat map
robot.
Social map robot C = 0
Social map robot C = 1
Parameter
Average
Sum
Average
Sum
Safety intrusions
695.05
69505
421.95
42195
Robot safety stops
45.63
4563
17.63
1763
Human safety stops
124.23
12423
21.39
2139
Comfort intrusions
2391.69
239169
1747.18
174718
Robot replans
4275.01
427501
4205.59
420559
Human replans
611.53
61153
1274.73
127473
Robot tasks
175.02
17502
174.8
17480
Human tasks
4605.45
460545
4584.5
458450
Robot response time
11021.41
1102141
9166.59
916659
Table D.4: Simulation data from the results presented in Section 7.2 for the social map
robot.
==PAGE:127==
xviii
Social norms robot C = 0
Social norms robot C = 1
Parameter
Average
Sum
Average
Sum
Safety intrusions
580.68
58068
348.57
34857
Robot safety stops
34.8
3480
16.2
1620
Human safety stops
110.95
11095
21.98
2198
Comfort intrusions
2277.08
227708
1596.5
159650
Robot replans
4137.09
413709
4078.72
407872
Human replans
614.49
61449
1251.51
125151
Robot tasks
166.78
16678
166.38
16638
Human tasks
4608.69
460869
4593.54
459354
Robot response time
11017.69
1101769
9451.47
945147
Table D.5: Simulation data from the results presented in Section 7.2 for the social
norms robot.
Probabilistic robot C = 0
Probabilistic robot C = 1
Parameter
Average
Sum
Average
Sum
Safety intrusions
561.97
56197
353.92
35392
Robot safety stops
28.18
2818
10.61
1061
Human safety stops
71.7
7170
23.55
2355
Comfort intrusions
2082.96
208296
1549.85
154985
Robot replans
2163.88
216388
2063.75
206375
Human replans
507.31
50731
1209
120900
Robot tasks
167.88
16788
168.98
16898
Human tasks
4601.26
460126
4589.48
458948
Robot response time
36105.19
3610519
33419.91
3341991
Table D.6: Simulation data from the results presented in Section 7.2 for the proba-
bilistic robot.
