==PAGE:1==
Domain adaptation method for semantic seg­
mentation in marine vessel inspection
Mateusz Krzysztof Dyduch
June 2023
DTU Electro
Department of Electrical and Photonics Engineering
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Domain adaptation method for semantic segmentation in marine vessel inspection
Report written by:
Mateusz Krzysztof Dyduch
s202379
Advisor(s):
Evangelos Boukas, Associate Professor at the Department of Electrical Engineering and
Photonics, DTU
Rasmus Eckholdt Andersen, Research Assistant at Department of Electrical Engineering
and Photonics, DTU
Department of Electrical and Photonics Engineering
Ørsteds Plads Building 343
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
www.electro.dtu.dk
Project period:
3rd January ­ 2nd June 2023
ECTS:
30
Education:
M.Sc.
Field:
Autonomous Systems
Edition:
1. edition
Remarks:
This report is submitted as partial fulfillment of the requirements for grad­
uation in the above education at the Technical University of Denmark.
Copyright:
©Mateusz Krzysztof Dyduch, 2023
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
The Inspectrone project is a collaboration between Danmarks Tekniske Universitet (DTU),
FORCE Technology, Lloyd’s Register and NORDEN A/S. The aim is to develop autonomous
drones capable of performing hazardous inspections jobs on large marine vessels (e.g.
ballast tanks).
This thesis is a continuation of the Inspectrone project, focusing on domain adaptation for
semantic segmentation task. The interior of the ballast tank changes drastically during
operational period of the vessel in harsh marine environment. Accurate segmentation
is crucial for the success of the project, therefore there is a need for a solution, which
will guarantee good segmentation results, no matter the condition of the ballast tank. The
goal is to develop domain adaptation method, to be employed together with segmentation
model to improve the performance of the model across different domains. Since the real­
world data from the ballast tank is not available, the approach is to develop a photo realistic
simulation and collect a synthetic data for the training of deep learning models. For the
purpose of segmentation two popular architectures ­ ResNet and Unet are employed in
various complexity variants. Domain adaptation is performed by learning domain invariant
features, using Gradient Reversal Layer based approach.
The developed segmentation models presented good performance, while being trained
and tested on the same domain. The domain adaptation method significantly improved
the segmentation performance of the models on the target domain, while not decreasing
the computational efficiency of the models.
ii
Domain adaptation method for semantic segmentation in marine vessel inspection
==PAGE:5==
Contents
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.2
Thesis Outline
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.3
Related work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2
Dataset
5
2.1
Related work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.3
Model of the ballast tank . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.4
Photo­realistic simulation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.5
Image processing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3
Semantic Segmentation
11
3.1
ResNet
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.2
U­Net
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
3.3
Scaled down U­Net . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
4
Domain Adaptation
19
4.1
Domain­Adversarial Neural Network . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
5
Performance metrics
23
6
Training and results
27
6.1
Training of segmentation models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
6.2
Results of Segmentation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
6.3
DANN Training . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38
6.4
Domain Adaptation Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
7
Conclusion
47
8
Future work
49
Bibliography
51
A Appendix
55
B Appendix
57
Domain adaptation method for semantic segmentation in marine vessel inspection
iii
==PAGE:6==
iv
Domain adaptation method for semantic segmentation in marine vessel inspection
==PAGE:7==
1
Introduction
According to the United Nations [1] over 80% of merchandise trade, by volume, is car­
ried by marine transport, due to both efficiency and cost optimisation reasons. Based on
the same source, between 2019 and 2024 maritime trade is projected to grow on aver­
age 3.4% per year, being one of the key components of global value chains. Throughout
its operational period in the marine environment, the vessels, often carrying hazardous
for the environment cargo, are exhibiting progressive corrosion, a natural electrochemi­
cal process involving the deterioration and degradation of metallic materials. Advanced
stage corrosion of structural components of the vessel may lead to operational failure,
which can have a catastrophic consequences for the marine environment and induce a
disruptive state in the supply chain. In the most unfortunate cases, such incidents were
responsible for the loss of crew members. However, despite the efforts of shielding the
marine vessels from corroding, incidents due to weakened structures still occur [2]. To as­
sure the structural integrity and therefore minimize the risk of operational failure, vessels
have to undergo periodic, extensive inspections every 5 years in dry­docks. Based on
the severity of the defects, the vessel may have to undergo reparation and maintenance
processes, before the vessel is permitted to resume to operation. Besides the reasons
stated above, these inspections are important for the vessel owner, since they give a di­
rect estimate of the operational lifetime of the vessel. Since the inspections require costly
equipment, drydock rental and specialists opinion, there is an incentive for the ship owner
to perform them as fast as possible and with as highest possible accuracy. Until now,
human experts have performed these inspections by entering and examining all areas of
the vessel. Ballast tanks are one of the areas on a vessel, where defects occur frequently
(Figure 1.1). Simultaneously they are one of the most hazardous areas to be inspected
by humans, due to lack of light, slippery and uneven surfaces, confined spaces and risk
of toxic gasses. Another problem is the fact that, these assessments are performed by
human experts, who tend to be subjective and heavily dependent on past experience.
Due to the lack of consistency in their assessments, tracking the condition of the vessel
and predicting its operational lifetime becomes difficult.
In the aforementioned context, Inspectrone project was founded in collaboration between
Danmarks Tekniske Universitet (DTU), FORCE Technology, Lloyd’s Register, and NOR­
DEN A/S. The long­term goal of the project is to automate the vessel inspection process
using unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs). The purpose of developing such an autonomous
system is to alleviate the need for humans traversing dangerous areas of the vessel, en­
hance efficiency, accuracy, and consistency of the inspection process, while minimizing
risks faced by inspectors. The UAV used in this project is equipped with, among other
sensors, cameras for navigating in GPS denied areas, and for detecting any present cor­
rosion.
The goal of this thesis is to develop and test a domain adaptation method for semantic
segmentation of the ballast tank interior, which will be used by the system during inspec­
tion process. The shade, color and condition of the ballast tank, and therefore a domain
for segmentation, change drastically during its operational lifetime. Hence the method
Domain adaptation method for semantic segmentation in marine vessel inspection
1
==PAGE:8==
should enable to obtain satisfying segmentation performance, using the same model to
segment the ballast tank in a different stages of its life cycle, without being retrained.
Additionally to machine learning, a major focus of this thesis will be placed in the devel­
opment and testing of photo realistic simulation, with attention to aerial robot simulation.
The domain adaptation method is to be trained and tested on simulated data, generated
in the developed simulation.
Figure 1.1: Ballast tank in marine vessel
Figure 1.2: Inspectrone Drone operating in the mock­up ballast tank, Source: DTU Elektro
2
Domain adaptation method for semantic segmentation in marine vessel inspection
==PAGE:9==
1.1
Objectives
The purpose of this Master Thesis is to develop a domain adaptation method for semantic
segmentation on color images of the interior of marine vessel ballast tank. The following
objective were identified:
• Perform research on domain adaptation methods
• Define semantic segmentation approach for inspection, and baselines
• Development of model and simulation environment for aerial robots in marine ves­
sels, with multiple level of corrosion
• Generate and process data using said simulator
• Implement and train semantic segmentation models on generated data
• Develop and train a method for domain adaptation for segmentation models
• Test the developed method
• Document the development and resulting method
1.2
Thesis Outline
In the following chapters, each of the elements and architectures used for the develop­
ment of the project were presented. Including the creation and development of a cus­
tom synthetic image dataset used to train selected models, related work, segmentation
models, i.e. Residual Neural Network (RNN) and U­Net used as a backbone for the de­
veloped method. Next the Gradient Reversal Layer based domain adaptation method
was presented along the conducted experiments. The results and the metrics adopted
to evaluate the different models’ performances were documented. Finally, the outcomes
and conclusions of the project were presented.
Previous knowledge of computer vision and deep learning are required from the reader.
Domain adaptation method for semantic segmentation in marine vessel inspection
3
==PAGE:10==
1.3
Related work
Majority of the related work in regards to marine vessel inspection was focusing on var­
ious defect detection and classification. General overview of marine vessel inspection
can be found in [3]. In [4] authors proposed a similar concept to this project, where mi­
cro aerial vehicle was employed for a vision based corrosion detection in the periodic
visual inspection of marine vessels. Authors of [5] also used a micro­aerial vehicle along
two magnetic climbing robots to assist the surveyor during inspection of marine vessels.
Vision based classification was performed by the chain of two weak classifiers used to
detect the cracks and damages. Magnetic climbing robot was also used in the surveil­
lance of marine vessels in [6], yet only for the purpose of video recording the inspected
object, without automatic inspection. In [7] authors applied Bayesian image classification
to detect rust on images collected using magnetic climbing robot during the inspection of
marine vessels. Interesting investigation of deep learning architectures for the use case
of classification for marine vessel inspection was proposed in [8], where authors com­
pare performance of state of the art classification networks in ballast tank environment.
In [9] a defect detection method based on image saliency in marine vessel structures was
presented. Further examples of employment of deep learning models in marine vessel
inspection can be found in [10], [11]. Computer vision based structural inspection is pro­
posed in [12], where authors employ region based deep learning ­ Faster R­CNN model,
to detect multiple damage types in a domain of civil engineering.
Work related to particular models and methods used in the development of this project,
can be found in their dedicated chapters.
4
Domain adaptation method for semantic segmentation in marine vessel inspection
==PAGE:11==
2
Dataset
Deep Learning models are well known for their accuracy and performance, yet for the pur­
pose of training, their require a significant amount of annotated data. Since the real world
data from original ballast tank was not available, the approach was to use a synthetic data
generated in the photo­realistic simulation. In this chapter the methodology employed to
generate dataset used in this project is described.
2.1
Related work
The concept of using syntheticly generated data for the training of deep learning mod­
els has been investigated and implemented across various industries. In [13] approach
analogical to the one used in this project is proposed. Data for training deep learning
object detection models for quality inspection in automotive industry was generated in 3D
graphic simulator. Similar solution was presented in [14], where authors used 3D graphic
software (Blender) to create synthetic data of defected steel samples, later used for train­
ing detection and classification deep learning algorithms. Authors of [15] proposed the
idea of collecting image dataset in UAV graphic simulator and use it for training a pipeline
consisting of deep learning classification and segmentation models, that was later applied
on a real­world data. In depth overview of the use of synthetic data in training both basic
computer vision and high level deep learning models was introduced in [16]. The author
included discussion on different domain where synthetic data can be used for training e.g.
autonomous driving, robotics, aerial navigation and applications outside of computer vi­
sion. The discussion on synthetic­to­real domain adaptation was also included, together
the with state of the art domain adaptation techniques.
2.2
Background
Throughout its operational period in the marine environment, a vessel, specifically a bal­
last tank is a subject to the occurrence of corrosion, leading to significant alterations in
its condition and color. Initially having a white or light grey hue, the ballast tank progres­
sively transforms, eventually getting dark yellow or near­orange shades with clear corro­
sion marks. The inspections have to be conducted on the vessels in all various states
and condition. Therefore, for the purpose of this project, the data should include images
of two drastically different versions of the same ballast tank. First version should repre­
sent the ballast tank in good condition, where structural integrity and initial paint coating
remain relatively intact, with little to no corrosion marks. The other version should imitate
the ballast tank after several years in operation and continuous exposure to the marine
environment. The color of its interior differs drastically from its original state and the cor­
rosion marks occur frequently, changing the hue of the structures.
Domain adaptation method for semantic segmentation in marine vessel inspection
5
==PAGE:12==
2.3
Model of the ballast tank
The real­world marine vessel ballast tank dimensions are approximately 14 x 8 x 3 meters.
The first step was to create its detailed, scaled 3D model including all of the structures as
separable components. The model consisted of 6 types of object structures: inner and
outer walls, webframes, stiffeners, ladders and floors. A critical consideration was the se­
lection and application of textures and meshes for the model. As mentioned in the section
above, this was essential for the subsequent project phases to include in the dataset, to
represent the ballast tank model in both good, almost newly­constructed condition and in
a deteriorated, corroded state. The models were designed using Blender, an open­source
3D computer graphics software, as it enables seamless integration and export of created
objects into other software platforms.
2.4
Photo­realistic simulation
The simulated environment was developed using Unreal Engine, a game engine founded
by Epic Games. It is advanced real­time 3D creation tool for photo­realistic visuals. In
addition to game development, Unreal Engine is also utilized in various other industries
such as film and television production, architectural visualization, automotive design, and
virtual reality (VR) applications. As the inspection was intended to be conducted by an
Unmanned Aerial Vehicle (UAV), AirSim, a simulator for drones and cars, built on Unreal
Engine, was employed. AirSim is an open­source, cross platform solution, that supports a
software­in­the­loop simulation, functioning as a plug in that can be integrated into Unreal
environment. For the objectives of this project, a popular flight controller ­ PX4 (Figure
2.1) was used for physically and visually realistic simulation.
Figure 2.1: PX4 drone, controlled using AirSim Python API
6
Domain adaptation method for semantic segmentation in marine vessel inspection
==PAGE:13==
Figure 2.2: UAV inside ballast tank model in the Unreal Engine simulated environment
Three versions of the ballast tank model were imported into the simulated environment,
representing the tank in a good condition, deteriorated/corroded condition and a version
with distinct classes of structure elements, were labelled by unique colors. Three PX4
drones were programmed to fly simultaneously inside the ballast tanks along a predefined
trajectory. The trajectory was defined to enable the drones to acquire comprehensive and
detailed representations of the ballast tank’s structures and components, rendering the
images suitable for generating a dataset for training deep learning models. The images
were taken in continues way during the whole flight with predefined frequency, using three
build in drone high resolution cameras with wide 120 degree angle lenses. To accurately
replicate the conditions of real world ballast tank environment, all external light sources
were eliminated. Consequently the images were taken using build­in drone light sources
only. Collected images were exported from the simulated environment and a dataset was
assembled, with the parameters presented in Table 2.1 for each of the two included do­
mains and corresponding labelled masks.
Size
2016
Image Resolution
1080x720
Classes included
6
Table 2.1: Parameters of created custom dataset
Domain adaptation method for semantic segmentation in marine vessel inspection
7
==PAGE:14==
2.5
Image processing
The concept underlying the pipeline was to obtained a dataset partitioned into three sub­
sets, each consisting of mirroring images representing distinct domains. The first subset,
representing the ballast tank in a good condition (Figure 2.3), served as a source do­
main for the training of segmentation models. Following it, the target domain consisted of
images presenting an old ballast tank (Figure 2.4), used to train and test the developed
domain adaptation model. The final subset consisted of images of ballast tank divided
into 6 classes of structures, labelled with the colors masks with following RGB values:
• Class 1: Outer walls ­ RGB (255, 0, 0)
• Class 2: Webframes ­ RGB (0, 255, 0)
• Class 3: Ladders and cages ­ RGB (0, 255, 255)
• Class 4: Inner walls ­ RGB (0, 0, 255)
• Class 5: Floor ­ RGB (255, 0, 255)
• Class 6: Stiffeners ­ RGB (255, 255, 0)
all of which are presented in Figure 2.5. Elements of this subset serve as a ground truth
masks for training deep learning models. By utilising this approach the time consuming
process of a manual annotation of images was circumvented.
Since the color coating of objects in the mask images was not perfectly even and given
the presence of minor variations in RGB values across mask image pixels, all masks
were processed using a K­means clustering algorithm to classify each pixel into one of 6
classes and therefore obtaining even class coloring across whole set.
Figure 2.3: Model of a ballast in a good condition in Unreal Engine simulated environment.
Image taken by PX4 drone camer.
8
Domain adaptation method for semantic segmentation in marine vessel inspection
==PAGE:15==
Figure 2.4: Model of a ballast in a corroded state in Unreal Engine simulated environment.
Image taken by PX4 drone camera.
Figure 2.5: Model of a ballast tank with color labelled classes (mask) in Unreal Engine
simulated environment. Image taken by PX4 drone camera.
Domain adaptation method for semantic segmentation in marine vessel inspection
9
==PAGE:16==
10
Domain adaptation method for semantic segmentation in marine vessel inspection
==PAGE:17==
3
Semantic Segmentation
Semantic segmentation, also known as pixel­based classification, is a sub­domain of com­
puter vision and deep learning, which aims to categorize each pixel of the image as be­
longing to specific class. The objective of this process is to produce a dense pixel­wise
segmentation map of an image, where each pixel is assigned to a specific class or object.
Semantic segmentation is often performed using Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs),
which are well suited for learning hierarchical features and patterns within images. CNNs
consist of a series of convolutional, pooling, and fully connected layers that process the
input image through a sequence of nonlinear transformations, ultimately producing an
output that can be used to generate a pixel­wise classification.
In this chapter, the models used for segmentation are discussed in detail, with particular
focus placed on the elements that are used to the final architecture developed for this
project. While choosing the models employed in the project, a significant emphasis was
placed on their computational efficiency and memory usage. Models were chosen selec­
tively, taking into consideration hardware limitations of Nvidia Jetson Xavier NX, a module
used in the inspection drone. Nvidia Jetson Xavier NX module offers high performance,
while being a compact size, what makes it ideal candidate for autonomous machines like
delivery and logistics robots, factory systems, and UAVs.
3.1
ResNet
The ResNet architecture was first introduced in [17]. The authors address the common
problem of vanishing gradient in deep networks, wherein the network’s accuracy saturates
and then degrades as the deepth of the network is being increased. This degradation
issue is not due to overfitting, but rather the difficulty of optimizing the deeper layers of
the network. The magnitude of the gradient is becoming continuously smaller during
backpropagation, leading to ineffective training of the initial layers of the network.
A series of experiments were conducted in [18] to show how only increasing the depth of
the network is not beneficial for CNNs, since it affects the accuracy. Several experiments
were also conducted in [19] on a plain feedforward neural network with increased depth
to prove how a deeper architecture can influence the network accuracy.
ResNet overcomes this issue by introducing shortcut connections [20] between layers.
This connections allow the input to a layer to skip a layer or several layers and be directly
connected to a subsequent layer. This enables the network to learn the residual func­
tions (difference between input and output) instead of the entire desired function, which
simplifies the optimization problem.
Domain adaptation method for semantic segmentation in marine vessel inspection
11
==PAGE:18==
Figure 3.1: Residual Learning building block
As presented in Figure 3.1, considering the desired underlying mapping as H(x), the goal
for the stacked non­linear layers become to fit a different mapping, i.e. F(x) := H(x) ­ x
and therefore the original mapping is recast into F(x) + x. This method can be applied in
any feed­forward neural network.
The architecture of ResNet can vary in the number of layers it compromises. Outlined
by the authors in [17], different depths of the model are visualized in Figure 3.2. These
different architectures represent trade­offs between computational efficiency and the per­
formance of the model. As the number of layers in ResNet increases, the capacity of the
model to learn complex patterns and features increases, potentially leading to higher ac­
curacy. However, this increased complexity also leads to higher computational demands
for processing power and memory requirements. Choosing the most appropriate ResNet
model for the purpose of this project, require a balance between accuracy and compu­
tational efficiency. Three different ResNet models: ResNet8, ResNet18, and ResNet34,
were deployed to ascertain their effectiveness for the task of segmentation of ballast tank.
These models were chosen to represent a range of computational demands and perfor­
mance, enabling a more informed choice of the optimal model for this project.
Figure 3.2: ResNet architectures
In order to adapt the ResNet architecture to the task of semantic segmentation, several
modifications were made to the model presented in [17]. While the core structure of
ResNet and its residual connections remained intact, the changes were focused on the
output layers to facilitate segmentation.
12
Domain adaptation method for semantic segmentation in marine vessel inspection
==PAGE:19==
First, the fully connected layers, which in the original ResNet architecture are used for
classification, were removed. Instead, a 1x1 convolutional layer was implemented to re­
duce the number of output channels to the desired number of classes. This layer enabled
the model to learn per­pixel class predictions, which is desired for the task of semantic
segmentation.
Next, upsample layers were added to the network to increase the spatial resolution of the
output feature maps. A combination of bilinear upsampling layers and an upsampling layer
designed to directly match the target output size were employed. The bilinear upsampling
layers were applied twice, each with a scale factor of 2, to incrementally enlarge the
feature maps. The final upsampling layer, was configured to match the desired output
size of the segmentation map.
The modified ResNet architecture is suitable for semantic segmentation task and can be
easily fine­tuned for specific applications by modifying the number of output classes and
the target output size. This modified architecture allows the model to efficiently learn
and produce accurate segmentation maps while still benefiting from the robustness and
optimization advantages provided by the original ResNet architecture [17].
The concept of applying ResNet based Fully Convolutional Networks for semantic seg­
mentation tasks is a common approach in computer vision projects, with most applications
in domain of biomedical images. In [21] authors successfully employed it for segmenta­
tion of white blood cells in a microscope based images. In the same domain of medi­
cal images, Resnet based FCN was tested in segmentation tasks in [22]. The results
proving great potential of ResNet based segmentation, were presented in [23], where it
outperform CNN and U­Net, a state of the art architectures for semantic segmentation, in
multi class segmentation of brain tumors. However, application of ResNet architectures
in segmentation is not limited to biomedical images and can found applications in various
domains. In [24] it is successfully employed in autonomous concrete crack detection in
bridges inspection.
Domain adaptation method for semantic segmentation in marine vessel inspection
13
==PAGE:20==
3.2
U­Net
The U­Net model was first introduced in [25], where authors addressed the need for a
powerful segmentation model capable of providing accurate, high­resolution segmenta­
tion to be used on biomedical images. This model strongly applies data augmentation,
therefore it can produce very accurate results even with a dataset of limited size, which is
a common problem for biomedical data. Since 2015 the U­Net model is being successfully
applied to a wide range of segmentation tasks beyond biomedical imaging and became
a popular architecture for various semantic segmentation projects. It was implemented in
this project as a state of the art segmentation model, both in the original form introduced
in [25] and its scaled down version proposed in [26].
3.2.1
Model Architecture
The U­Net architecture has a characteristic symmetric encoder­decoder structure. It con­
sists of the contracting path (encoder) and an expansive path (decoder), which are con­
nected by skip connections between corresponding layers at the same resolution level,
as presented in Figure 3.3. This structure enables the model to capture both high­level
semantic information and fine­grained spatial details, resulting in accurate segmentation
maps.
Figure 3.3: U­Net model, Source: [25]
Encoder
The contracting part of the U­Net has a form of a convolution network, which consists
of four levels, each composed of two convolutional layers followed by a max­pooling op­
eration. Each convolutional layer uses a 3x3 kernel and is followed by a rectified linear
14
Domain adaptation method for semantic segmentation in marine vessel inspection
==PAGE:21==
unit (ReLU) activation function. The max­pooling operation with a 2x2 kernel is applied to
downsample the feature maps. Spatial dimensions of the feature maps are halved, while
the number of feature channels doubles.
The purpose of the encoder is to capture the context in the image by progressively de­
creasing the spatial dimensions and increasing the depth. Each level in the encoder
captures different scales of features, allowing the model to recognize various types of
patterns in the image. First levels, with smaller receptive fields, may capture small­scale,
local features such as edges or textures. As progressed deeper into the encoder, the in­
creasing receptive field allows the network to capture larger scale, more global features,
such as the shapes of objects or the layout of a scene. By capturing these different scales
of features, the encoder allows the model to recognize a wide variety of patterns in the
image, both local and global.
Bottleneck
The bottleneck is the deepest part of the U­Net, serving as a bridge between the encoder
and decoder. It consists of two convolutional layers with 1024 channels each. High di­
mensionality like this allows the bottleneck to capture the most abstract features of the
input image. This features are not directly interpretable, since they are not directly related
to visible structures in the input image. Rather, they are high­level features that have been
learned by the model to be useful for the task of segmentation.
Decoder
The expansive path of the U­Net model progressively upscales the abstracted informa­
tion from the bottleneck and combines it with high­resolution features from the encoder
via skip connections (Figure 3.3). Each level of the decoder includes an upsampling op­
eration, which is halving the number of feature channels, followed by a concatenation
with the corresponding level from the encoder, and then two convolutional operations.
The upsampling operation increases the spatial dimensions of the feature maps, while
the concatenated high­resolution features from the encoder allow the model to precisely
localize and segment the objects in the image.
Final Layer
The final layer in the U­Net model is a 1x1 convolution. This acts as a dense layer, map­
ping the complex multi­channel feature maps from the decoder to the desired number
of classes. Each pixel in the output thus represents a probability distribution over the
classes, indicating the likelihood of each class being the correct one for that pixel.
U­Net in inspection applications
High performance and ability to deliver accurate results based on datasets of limited size,
make U­Net a common choice for vision based inspection tasks. Among others, the most
interesting in terms of this project, are application in marine environment. In [4] it was used
for vessel inspection, where it perform vision based corrosion detection assisted by a mi­
cro aerial vehicle. U­Net was used as a backbone for deep probabilistic segmentation for
probabilistic inspection in [27]. Authors in [28] employed simplified U­Net for multi­class
Domain adaptation method for semantic segmentation in marine vessel inspection
15
==PAGE:22==
segmentation for corrosion identification in inspection and maintenance of critical infras­
tructure like dams, penstocks, and locks.
3.3
Scaled down U­Net
The U­Net architecture proposed in [25] is renowned for its outstanding performance in se­
mantic segmentation tasks. However, one of the fundamental challenges associated with
this model is its high computational demand. Consequently, this imposes limitations on
its usefulness in resource constrained environments or real­time applications, like in this
project. To improve computational efficiency, while maintaining the effective qualities of
a standard U­Net, scaled down version of U­Net, proposed in [26] for automated analysis
of atomic structure of graphene, was employed. Similar to its original version, the model
consists of an encoder (downsampling path), a bottleneck, and a decoder (upsampling
path), creating a characteristic U­shape structure.
A defining feature of the scaled­down U­Net is its reduced dimensionality, as presented in
Figure 3.4. While an original U­Net architecture traditionally scales up the channel depth
in powers of two (64, 128, 256, 512, 1024), the scaled­down model operates with signifi­
cantly fewer channels at each corresponding layer: (32, 64, 128, 256).
Figure 3.4: Scaled­down U­Net model, Source: [26]
The lower channel depth at each stage results in the model learning fewer features than
the standard U­Net, making it less computationally demanding. This dimensionality re­
duction might slightly compromise the performance of the network, but it also makes the
model faster, less comutationally heavy and more suitable for applications where compu­
tational resources are limited.
16
Domain adaptation method for semantic segmentation in marine vessel inspection
==PAGE:23==
Another significant difference is the depth of the network. The standard U­Net typically
consists of 4 levels in both encoder and decoder, plus the bottom layer. The scaled­
down version operates with only 3 levels in the encoder and decoder. This reduced depth
implies that the network is operating on fewer scales of abstraction, which speeds up
computation without drastically compromising the model’s performance.
In the standard U­Net architecture the bottleneck usually consists of two convolutional
layers with 1024 channels. In the scaled­down version it is simplified with only 256 chan­
nels, still maintaining two convolutional layers for feature extraction and abstraction. This
change significantly reduces the number of parameters.
The final classifier in the scaled­down U­Net is a 1x1 convolutional layer, similar to the
standard U­Net, however, the depth of the feature maps just before the classifier layer is
32, instead of 64.
Scaled­down U­Net is a more compact and computationally efficient variant of the stan­
dard U­Net, making it an excellent choice for applications with limited computational re­
sources or when faster inference times are required.
Domain adaptation method for semantic segmentation in marine vessel inspection
17
==PAGE:24==
18
Domain adaptation method for semantic segmentation in marine vessel inspection
==PAGE:25==
4
Domain Adaptation
The problem associated with employment of Deep Learning algorithms in Computer Vi­
sion projects is the requirement of a large amount of labeled data, usually created in a
time consuming, manual process. Moreover, in most cases the trained Deep Learning
algorithms perform well, when the data distribution for the task is the same as in the train­
ing data. Domain adaptation is a method that addresses this problem. It is a technique to
improve the performance of the model on a target domain, containing insufficient amount
of annotated data, by using the knowledge learned by the model from another, related
domain with adequate labeled data, without being retrained. Data distribution on which
the model is trained using labeled examples is called source domain, whereas a target
domain is the data distribution on which a model pre­trained on a source domain is used
to perform a similar task. The change in the statistical distribution of data between the
different domains is called a domain shift.
Domain adaptation techniques can be categorized into supervised, semi­supervised and
unsupervised, based on the availability of labeled data. In supervised domain adaptation,
labeled data is available for both the source and target domains. In unsupervised domain
adaptation, labeled data is available only for the source domain, while the target domain
has only unlabeled data available. Consequently in semi­supervised domain adaptation
the labeled data is available for source domain, but the availability is limited for target
domain.
Different approaches can be taken, when developing domain adaptation techniques. In
depth overviews of domain adaptation in computer vision applications, taking into con­
sideration both shallow methods and methods for deep neural networks can be found in
[29], [30], [31].
As already mentioned, the supervised and semi­supervised approaches require a number
of high cost annotated data within the new (target) domain. Because of that, even though,
the authors achieved good performance, using techniques presented in [32], [33] and [34],
the (semi)supervised domain adaptation potential is not as great, as it is for unsupervised
methods.
Looking at the current developments in the field, two main approaches can be distin­
guished for the unsupervised domain adaptation. First of them is to use a style­transfer of
the input images, as proposed in [35]. Generative adversarial networks (GANs) are often
used for this transfer [36]. In [37] and [38] authors used them for person re­identification
under changing lighting conditions. Domain adaptation was also performed with the use
of autoencoder networks in [39]. Presented in [40] domain separation networks are based
on the similar principals and used on low resolution images.
Another approach to unsupervised domain adaptation is to learn domain­invariant fea­
tures from the data. This approach was proposed by the authors in [41], introducing
Gradient Reversal Layer (GRL). Same author introduced Domain­Adversarial Network
Domain adaptation method for semantic segmentation in marine vessel inspection
19
==PAGE:26==
(DANN) in [42]. This approach to unsupervised domain adaptation was utilized for vari­
ous purposes in the following scientific papers: [43], [44], [45], [46], [47], [48].
Some hybrid approaches were also introduced e.g. the Duplex Generative Adversarial
Network in [49], which forces domain­invariant representation and performs a style trans­
fer, using an encoder, a generator, and two discriminators. Another combination of meth­
ods combining a discriminative model and weight sharing with a GAN loss was proposed
in [50]. Auxiliary residual network, which were presented in [51], predict parameters for
the target domain network and can be used for semi­ and unsupervised approach. In ma­
jority of papers authors perform domain adaptation on two domains only, yet it is possible
to act on multiple domains, as proposed in [52].
The method used for a domain adaptation in this project needed to be relatively uncom­
plicated, due to hardware limitations explained in Section 3. Learning domain­invariant
features approach fulfills these requirements and has an advantage of being the method,
where only single model is trained both for task of segmentation and domain adapta­
tion. Taking into account a promising performance documented in [41] and [42], Domain­
Adversarial Neural Network was chosen to be employed for this project.
4.1
Domain­Adversarial Neural Network
Domain­Adversarial Neural Network (DANN) is an architecture used for unsupervised do­
main adaptation, which is learning the domain­invariant features, that are useful for the
main prediction task in both source and target domain. This is accomplished by introduc­
ing A Gradient Reversal Layer and a domain classifier network, in addition to the main
task predictor. As shown in Figure 4.1, a Domain­Adversarial Neural Network consists of
three main components.
Figure 4.1: DANN model, Source: [41]
Feature extractor: The feature extractor network takes the input data and maps it into a
feature vector. The goal of the feature extractor is to learn representations that are useful
for the main prediction task and also invariant across domains.
Label Predictor: The label predictor network takes the features from the feature extractor
20
Domain adaptation method for semantic segmentation in marine vessel inspection
==PAGE:27==
and makes predictions for the main task.
Domain Classifier: The domain classifier network also takes the features from the feature
extractor, but its task is to predict the domain of the input data (i.e. whether it is the source
or target domain).
The model is being trained on both source and target domains, yet labels are used only
for the training of label predictor, during which its prediction loss is aimed to be minimized
to ensure good performance on the source domain. During training the loss of the do­
main classifier is aimed to be minimized, while parameters of the feature mapping, that
are maximizing the loss of the domain classifier (by making the two features distributions
as similar as possible) are sought in order to obtain domain­invariant features. A gradient
reversal layer is used to reverse the gradient from the domain classifier before it is back­
propagated into the feature extractor.
4.1.1
Gradient Reversal Layer
Introduced by Yaroslav Ganin and Victor Lempitsky in their paper ”Unsupervised domain
adaptation by backpropagation.” [41], the gradient reversal layer has no parameters as­
sociated with it (apart from the meta­parameter λ, which is not updated by backpropaga­
tion). As presented in a Figure 4.1, gradient reversal layer is inserted between the feature
extractor and domain classifier. It acts as an identity transform during the forward propa­
gation. During the backpropagation though, GRL takes the gradient from the subsequent
level, multiplies it by −λ and passes it to the preceding layer. GRL can be formalized into
4.1, where I represents identity matrix and λ is a weighting factor, that is used in order to
limit the influence of the domain discriminator.
Forward propagation: Rλ(y) = y
Backpropagation: dRλ
dy = −λ(τ)I
(4.1)
Domain adaptation method for semantic segmentation in marine vessel inspection
21
==PAGE:28==
22
Domain adaptation method for semantic segmentation in marine vessel inspection
==PAGE:29==
5
Performance metrics
In this chapter, the metrics used for evaluating the performance of the developed models
are presented.
For the aim of this project the confusion matrix [53] was calculated, based on which, five
different metrics for the performance evaluation of the model were employed on the class
specific level. Each of the metrics is evaluating the predicted segmentation of a single
image against its ground truth. For this purpose four different values are being calculated
for each class in the single image:
• True Positive (TP): pixels correctly predicted as belonging to a specific class.
• False Positive (FP): pixels incorrectly predicted as part of a particular class.
• True Negative (TN): pixels correctly predicted as not belonging to the class of inter­
est.
• False Negative (FN): pixels belonging to the class of interest, but incorrectly pre­
dicted as not belonging to it.
Figure 5.1: Confusion matrix
Intersection over Union (IoU)
IoU, also known as the Jaccard Index, is a popular segmentation performance metric de­
fined as the ratio of the intersection (area of overlap) to the union (total combined area)
of the predicted segments and ground truth. The Jaccard Index, therefore, encapsu­
lates both the effects of false positives (incorrectly segmented pixels) and false negatives
(missed pixels). Based on confusion matrix it can be defined as:
Domain adaptation method for semantic segmentation in marine vessel inspection
23
==PAGE:30==
IoU =
TP
(TP + FP + FN)
(5.1)
Precision
Precision is defined as a ratio of true positives to the sum of true positives and false
positives. It indicates the proportion of correctly identified positive observations from the
total predicted positives. A high precision score reflects a model with a low false­positive
rate.
Precision =
TP
(TP + FP)
(5.2)
Sensitivity
Also known as Recall, sensitivity measures the proportion of actual positives that are
correctly identified. In the context of semantic segmentation, it is the number of correctly
identified positive pixels (true positives) divided by the total actual positive pixels (the sum
of true positives and false negatives). Recall gives information on how well the model is
identifying particular classes, which is crucial for the purpose of this project.
Recall =
TP
(TP + FN)
(5.3)
F1 score
F1 score is a metrics that calculates harmonic mean of precision and recall, thereby pro­
vides a balance between these two metrics. Since it takes into account both false positives
and false negatives it is particularly advantageous when there is an uneven class distri­
bution, as in the dataset collected for the purpose of this project. F1 score can be defined
as:
F1 = 2 ·
Precision · Recall
(Precision + Recall)
(5.4)
Accuracy
It is defined as the ratio of correctly identified pixels (true positives and true negatives) to
the total number of pixels (true positives, false positives, true negatives and false nega­
tives). A downside of using accuracy as a main performance metric is that it could reach a
high score if the majority class in the image is correctly classified, irrespective of how other
objects of interest (the minor classes) are segmented. Despite that in particular cases it
24
Domain adaptation method for semantic segmentation in marine vessel inspection
==PAGE:31==
may not provide comprehensive insights due to its limitation in handling class imbalance,
Accuracy (Equation 5.5) is still being employed in the evaluation of the models in addition
to other metrics mentioned above.
Accuracy =
TP + TN
(TP + TN + FP + FN)
(5.5)
Frames per Second (FPS)
FPS is a metric used to assess the real­time performance of the trained models. This
metric signifies the number of frames, or unique images, a model can process within a
second, in other words what is the speed of the model. It is calculated using equation 5.6,
where T stands for time taken by the model to predict a single frame. To obtain successful
use­case of the developed project the FPS score is a crucial metric to be monitored, since
the models are meant to be applied on the video footage from UAV’s cameras in real­time.
However, it is important to highlight that a balance must be struck between achieving high
FPS and maintaining the quality of the output predictions. Overemphasis on speed could
potentially compromise the system’s accuracy or vice versa. In this project the biggest
emphasis was put on the interplay between FPS and accuracy of the models.
FPS = 1
T
(5.6)
Class specific results
The performance metrics are being calculated independently for each class, to avoid the
results being biased by factors like class imbalance. Since the goal is to segment irregular
structures, an uneven distribution of classes in dataset could cause the results not to be
objective. Therefore a comparison of performance between distinct models is based on
the mean value calculated between all classes scores, thereby ensuring more informative
results then image­specific evaluations. This approach ensures unbiased assessment of
the model’s performance in identifying and classifying individual structures of the ballast
tank.
Domain adaptation method for semantic segmentation in marine vessel inspection
25
==PAGE:32==
26
Domain adaptation method for semantic segmentation in marine vessel inspection
==PAGE:33==
6
Training and results
In this chapter, the results obtained during the deployment of the Semantic Segmentation
and Domain Adaptation models are reported, presenting the utilized architectures being
trained and tested taking different approaches. All the results are compared against each
other to conclude best performing architectures and approaches most suitable for the em­
ployment in the automated inspection.
Each model used in this project was developed using Pytorch framework and trained on
8 GPUs, working in parallel. More specifically Tesla V100 GPUs with 32 GB of memory,
which belong to DTU HPC in DTU Computing Center.
6.1
Training of segmentation models
First step was to train Resnet8, Resnet18 and Resnet34 models for the task of segmen­
tation on the developed custom dataset (Chapter 2.1). The data was randomly split in
proportion 70­15­15, where 70% of data was used for training and the rest was equally
distributed between validation and test sets. The Resnet based models underwent some
modification from the architecture developed in [23], as presented in Section 3.1. The
models were trained using cross­entropy loss function. To prevent the models from over­
fitting a series of data augmentation techniques, similar as in [25] were applied on the
training data. The hyperparameters used in training were included in Table 6.1.
Batch size
4
Epochs
50
Learning rate
0.0001
Optimizer
ADAM
Table 6.1: Training parameters for segmentation models
Next step was to train U­Net models on the exact same training and validation data used
for the training of ResNet models, using the same hyperparamteres presented in Table
6.1. As described in Section 3, in this project U­net was employed in two versions. The
exact same model introduced in [25] and its scaled down shallower version as presented
in [26]. For training of both versions of the model cross­entropy loss was used as a loss
function. Training data was subject to series of augmentations, as proposed in [25].
Training loss and validation loss plots for all models employed in the project were pre­
sented in Figures 6.1, 6.2 and 6.3.
Domain adaptation method for semantic segmentation in marine vessel inspection
27
==PAGE:34==
Figure 6.1: Training loss and validation loss plots for Resnet18 (left) and Resnet34 (right)
Figure 6.2: Training loss and validation loss plot for Resnet8
Figure 6.3: Training loss and validation loss plots for U­Net (left)
and Scaled­down U­Net (right)
Upon examination of loss plots, it is observed that validation loss demonstrate some de­
gree of variability, caused by the differences in loss values between consecutive epochs
being larger, then for training loss plot. This could be caused by the relatively small valida­
tion set in relation to training set, thus not being representative of the general distribution
28
Domain adaptation method for semantic segmentation in marine vessel inspection
==PAGE:35==
of the data and it might not provide a reliable estimate of the model’s performance. More­
over in the training and validation loss plots (Figures 6.1 and 6.2) it can be observed that
Resnet models expose a certain level of overfitting. Overfitting occurs when a model
learns the training data too well, to the point where it performs significantly worse on un­
seen data (in this case validation set), in comparison to data it is being trained on. This is
because the model has essentially ”memorized” the training set, including its noise and
outliers, rather than learning the underlying patterns that generalize well.
There are various reasons for the occurrence of overfitting (i.e. incorrect hyperparame­
ters), but most probable cause is the high level of class imbalance in the dataset. Some
elements of ballast tank are present on vast majority of the images, whereas some classes
of objects (i.e. ladders or stiffeners) occur only in small percentage of images in the
dataset. Therefore the model could be overfitting to the majority classes and underfitting
to the minority classes, leading to noisy validation loss. This could potentially lead to the
situation, where unique features or structures are present in the validation or test data,
but were not well represented in the training data and overfitting model will struggle to
classify them correctly.
Further examination of Resnet models loss plots, leads to the conclusion that overfitting is
raising and starts earlier with the increace of models depth. This aligns with expectations,
since the deeper, more complex models have a higher capacity to fit the training data,
thus are more prone to overfitting, since they have more parameters and are learning
more complex features.
The overfitting does not occur, while training U­Net models. Most likely because of U­
Net ability to learn most abstract feature of the image in deep layers of its structure and
recognizing various types of patterns, by capturing different scales of features on different
levels. Additionally U­Net was developed to perform well on limited data, which is the case
in this project.
To prevent overfitting several techniques were implemented in the training process to test
their potential for improving the performance. First Dropout regularization technique for
neural networks was implemented. During the training process, dropout randomly deac­
tivates a part of neurons in a given layer for each training sample. This means that their
contribution to the activation of downstream neurons is temporarily removed on the for­
ward pass and any weight updates are not applied to the neuron on the backward pass.
However this technique negatively affected segmentation results. Since spatial depen­
dencies within the feature maps of convolutional networks are very important, randomly
dropping features, can lead to losing important information. For that reason dropout was
not included in the training of final models.
Other technique tested in the training process was class weighting. It gives more im­
portance to under­represented classes in the data, therefore is often used for datasets
where there is a significant class imbalance, like in the one used for this project. In deep
learning models class weights are used to adjust the loss function. The concept is to pe­
nalize more heavily mistakes made on under­represented classes, than mistakes made
on over­represented classes. During the computation of the loss, each instance of a class
in the output contributes to the total loss with a value proportional to its assigned class
weight. If the class weight is large, the loss becomes larger, which signals to the model
that it should pay more attention to correctly classify those examples.
Domain adaptation method for semantic segmentation in marine vessel inspection
29
==PAGE:36==
Utilization of class weighting also did not bring the improvements in the segmentation
results, since it cannot compensate for the classes that do not appear sufficiently often
in the dataset. Moreover there is a significant level of intra­class variability within under­
represnted classes, which makes this technique less effective. In other worlds, elements
of under­represented classes differ from each other significantly. Since those classes in­
clude objects like ladders or stiffeners, which have various shapes and forms, depending
on their position in the ballast tank, they can make it challenging for the model to learn
their distinguish features. Especially taking into account relatively low size of the dataset.
6.2
Results of Segmentation
The performances in semantic segmentation of employed models was tested on the test
set consisting of 302 images, which is an equivalent of 15% of the whole dataset, not used
in the training nor validation process. The results are presented in Table 6.2. For clarity
the Table includes only Mean IoU across all 6 segmented classes, Accuracy and FPS
score, since these are the key metrics to compare the models performance in context of
this project.
In detail, complete Segmentation Performance Results for each of the models em­
ployed in the project with per­class evaluation for all metrics are included in Ap­
pendix A.
Segmentation Performance Results
Model
Mean IoU
Accuracy
FPS
ResNet18
76.3%
90.8%
64
ResNet34
79.2%
91.9%
25
ResNet8
64.6%
84.4%
128
U­Net
71.4%
85.6%
19
Scaled­Down U­Net
59.0%
73.7%
105
Table 6.2: Mean IoU, Accuracy, and FPS scores, across all models employed in the
project, on the test data.
The performance score of ResNet models aligned with the anticipated results, with mean
IoU and Accuracy metrics improving together with the depth of the model.
The observed Frames per Second (FPS) results are also consistent with expected trends,
with smaller, less complex models being significantly faster then deeper ones. Notably,
despite the considerable differences in FPS scores across the models, every score implies
the feasibility of these models for real­time segmentation, aligning with the requirements
of the current project.
Therefore selection of the most suitable model require a comprehensive analysis of the
segmentation results. Accuracy and mean IoU metrics of ResNet8 fail to deliver as high
reliability, as the other two models. Athough ResNet34 performed better on test set, than
30
Domain adaptation method for semantic segmentation in marine vessel inspection
==PAGE:37==
ResNet18, the difference was not as significant as in comparison to ResNet8, with just
2.9% points difference in mean IoU score and 1.1% point higher accuracy.
Consequently, considering the benefits of ResNet18’s shallower, less complex architec­
ture, coupled with its high FPS score, it emerges as a better choice for further application
in this project. The balance between its computational efficiency and performance on
segmentation tasks, provides an optimal solution for the task at hand.
The performance characteristics of the U­Net model and its scaled­down version fit in the
same trends observed with the ResNet models. Both the mean Intersection over Union
(IoU) and accuracy metrics for the scaled­down, shallower version of U­Net are decreased
compared to the original model, while the FPS score is significantly higher.
Despite being a state of the art model for semantic segmentation, U­Net showed marginally
worse performance compared to the ResNet models in the given task. Though the differ­
ence in results is not significant. Since the nature of the dataset, including the complexity
of images, number of classes, data imbalance, and size can significantly influence model
performance, it is possible that the dataset used here aligns more effectively with the
feature extraction capabilities of ResNet architectures. An analogical situation was docu­
mented in [23].
However, as shown in the paragraph above, U­Net model has an advantage of not over­
fitting the data in comparison to ResNet models. Therefore to further compare the use­
fulness of this two architectures in this project, the additional metrics of F1 and Recall are
presented in Table 6.3 for selected models. This metrics deliver more information on how
well the models identify particular classes in the data with uneven class distribution.
Recall and F1 comparison
Model
Mean Recall
Mean F1
ResNet18
82.7%
82.4%
ResNet34
84.7%
85.0%
U­Net
82.7%
80.2%
Table 6.3: Mean Recall and F1 scores of ResNet18, ResNet34, and U­Net models
Based on the results in the Table 6.3 it can be conducted that both U­Net and ResNet
models performed equally well in identification of specific classes, with small advantage
still being taken over by ResNet.
However, a comprehensive examination of the results of all models, included in Appendix
A, reveals a significant imbalance in class scores across all metrics. Specifically, classes
3 and 6 consistently underperformed the average. This discrepancy is caused by these
two classes being the least represented in the dataset, according to section 6.1, leading
to models’ difficulties in accurately segmenting them.
In order to gain a deeper comprehension of how these two architectures generate their
final segmentation maps, an examination of the outputs produced by the models was
carried out. In Figures 6.4 ­ 6.8 segmented maps generated by all models employed in the
project are presented together with original image and ground truth mask for comparison.
Domain adaptation method for semantic segmentation in marine vessel inspection
31
==PAGE:38==
Original image
Mask
ResNet18
ResNet8
ResNet34
U­Net
Scaled­down U­Net
Figure 6.4: Segmentation maps generated by employed models
32
Domain adaptation method for semantic segmentation in marine vessel inspection
==PAGE:39==
Original image
Mask
ResNet18
ResNet8
ResNet34
U­Net
Scaled­down U­Net
Figure 6.5: Segmentation maps generated by employed models
Domain adaptation method for semantic segmentation in marine vessel inspection
33
==PAGE:40==
Original image
Mask
ResNet18
ResNet8
ResNet34
U­Net
Scaled­down U­Net
Figure 6.6: Segmentation maps generated by employed models
34
Domain adaptation method for semantic segmentation in marine vessel inspection
==PAGE:41==
Original image
Mask
ResNet18
ResNet8
ResNet34
U­Net
Scaled­down U­Net
Figure 6.7: Segmentation maps generated by employed models
Domain adaptation method for semantic segmentation in marine vessel inspection
35
==PAGE:42==
Original image
Mask
ResNet18
ResNet8
ResNet34
U­Net
Scaled­down U­Net
Figure 6.8: Segmentation maps generated by employed models
36
Domain adaptation method for semantic segmentation in marine vessel inspection
==PAGE:43==
In an extensive evaluation of sampled segmentation maps, it is conducted that the quality
of the segmented masks generally aligns with the models’ performance as presented in
Table 6.2. Notably, significant differences in the form of segmented masks between U­Net
and ResNet architectures can be observed.
U­Net is creating segmented maps with well defined, sharp edges, precisely segmenting
the shapes of complex structures. This observation align with expectations, since U­Net
high dimensionality, allow the model to accommodate a vast array of abstract features.
Even its scaled­down version is effectively segmenting detailed structures like ladders
and webframes.
A certain challenge, which seems to have an effect on an overall performance metrics
are misclassifications of certain clusters of pixels within areas of background classes,
like walls and floors. While this is a factor, it is important to acknowledge that U­Net still
maintains a high performance in segmenting background classes. For the purpose of
employment in this project, those misclassifications are not a major concern, as long as
the general background structure is segmented correctly. Small clusters of misclassified
pixels, randomly detected as wrong class without having any organised structure, will not
influence decision making negatively, knowing that over 80% of the surrounding pixels is
detected as belonging to the same major class (e.g. wall). However, any decision making
based on the U­Net outputs should include some sort of generalization algorithm, which
take into consideration larger areas of image. This misclassifications are affecting the
performance metrics of U­Net quite significantly, which aligns with the results included in
Table 6.2 and provide explanation to the results being lower then expected.
Another observation is that U­Net is more light sensitive in comparison to ResNet based
architectures. Since the images are being taken in the complete darkness with drone on­
board light being the only light source, the images invariably exhibit significant areas of
shadow. These darkened areas pose a challenge to U­Net, which appears to struggle in
producing accurate segmentations of them. Contrarily ResNet demonstrates an equiva­
lently good performance in segmenting both brightly lit and shaded regions of the image.
A potential concern is the occurrence of overfitting during the training of ResNet models,
especially deeper ones, suggesting that these models might have simply memorized cer­
tain shapes and structures. However this hypothesis remains unconfirmed, since more
complex ResNet models could potentially be just performing better in environment with
less light. This hypothesis should be further explored and tested in the future work on this
project.
Segmented masks produced by ResNet models present different shape form as in com­
parison to the ones produced by U­Net. The masks output by ResNet tend to display less
precisely defined edges and often more ”blob” like structures, where pixels being cluster
into more loosely arranged structures with indistinct borders.
Although this method lacks the precision of the U­Net model in segmenting complex struc­
tures of minor classes, it perform exceptionally well in segmenting major background
classes, with negligible or no misclassification of pixels within major class areas. When
present, misclassified pixels originated from major classes, are typically located along the
contact edges between different class objects. This exceptional performance in major
class segmentation contributes to the high scores observed in the performance metrics
presented in Tables 6.2 and 6.3.
Domain adaptation method for semantic segmentation in marine vessel inspection
37
==PAGE:44==
Both U­Net and ResNet architectures have demonstrated high performance on the test
data and delivered reliable segmentation masks, as observed in Figures 6.4 ­ 6.8, each
of them demonstrating unique advantages.
While U­Net demonstrate exceptional accuracy in segmentation of details in complex
structures within images, it also shows a tendency for marginally higher overall misclassi­
fication. Moreover, in contrast to ResNets, overfitting was not observed during the training
of U­Net models. ResNet presents a better overall performance, although it faces chal­
lenges in precisely segmenting object details and edges. The selection of a final model for
deployment within this project will depend on its specific scope and use case. If compu­
tational efficiency is a requirement alongside segmentation, ResNet may emerge as the
more appropriate choice. However, it is recommended that both models be subjected to
additional real­world testing to further validate their performance and suitability for future
project development.
To further improve the results obtained in task of ballast tank segmentation it is suggested
to train the models on larger amount of data, coming both from simulated environment and
real­world ballast tank. This could potentially adress the challenges associated with lim­
ited dataset size, that were encountered in this project, like overfitting and imbalance in
scores between classes. While data augmentation methods, dropout layers, and class
weighting did not yield the anticipated results, exploration of alternative techniques such
as oversampling of underrepresented classes or implementing more sophisticated data
augmentation strategies should be tested in future work.
6.3
DANN Training
Following the successful implementation of semantic segmentation models, obtaining
high performance, the objective was to enhance their robustness to domain shifts in the
data they are applied on.
To accomplish this, a domain adaptation model was built based on the ResNet archi­
tecture, utilizing the methodology proposed by Ganin et al. in [42]. The ResNet model,
adopted for semantic segmentation task, was retained to ensure the benefits of this archi­
tecture performance in handling complex images. The convolutional layers of the ResNet
serve as the feature extractor in this domain adaptation model.
The core modifications lie in the integration of a domain classifier and a Gradient Reversal
Layer [41] into the model, integrated to process the output from last layers of the ResNet
model.
As presented in Section 4.1.1, the Gradient Reversal Layer (GRL) is a module, that acts
as an identity function during the forward propagation, passing the input directly as the
output. However, during backpropagation, it negates the gradient, effectively creating
confusion between source and target samples, by minimizing the distance between their
feature distributions. During training the loss from the domain classifier will be backprop­
agated with a reversed sign to the feature extractor (ResNet layers), pushing it to learn
features that confuse the domain classifier, which are domain­invariant features. An adap­
tive average pooling layer follows the GRL to reduce the spatial dimensions of the feature
38
Domain adaptation method for semantic segmentation in marine vessel inspection
==PAGE:45==
maps, preparing them for the domain classifier.
The domain classifier is a feedforward neural network with three fully connected layers
and ReLU activation functions, which aims to classify the input image into either the source
or target domain.
The U­Net based domain adaptation model features a more complex structure due to its
inherent encoder­decoder architecture with skip connections. In this model, the domain
classifier and the gradient reversal layer were applied after the bottleneck section. The
domain classifier is again a separate module comprising a fully connected network. How­
ever, unlike the ResNet model, the U­Net’s domain classifier receives input from both the
encoder and decoder parts of the model, getting more diverse set of features to learn
from. The gradient reversal layer, similar to the ResNet model, is used before the domain
classifier to confuse the model and improve domain invariance.
All of the segmentation architectures employed in the project were transformed into DANN
models using a described methodology. For the training of DANNs data from both source
and target domain was used, yet the target domain images were used only in the training
of a domain classifier. Balanced training process between the source and target domain
was ensured by iterative cycling through the source and target loaders, making sure that
for every source image, a target image was also processed. Hyperparameters used in
the training were similar to the ones used in training of segmentation models and were
included in Table 6.1.
Three types of losses were computed during training:
Segmentation loss was a cross­entropy loss computed between the segmentation out­
put and the ground truth masks for the source image, similar as in the training of standard
segmentation model.
Source domain loss was a binary cross­entropy loss computed between the domain
classifier’s output for source images and the ground truth labels.
Target domain loss was a cross­entropy loss computed between the domain classifier’s
output for target images and the ground truth labels.
The overall loss is the sum of these three losses, which is then backpropagated to update
the model parameters.
Since the gradient is reversed before backpropagation through the domain classifier, the
model is pushed to make the domain classifier’s output as similar as possible for both
source and target domains, making the shared features domain­invariant.
The use of different domain images in training helps the model generalize well when used
on unseen target domain images, thus accomplishing the task of unsupervised domain
adaptation.
Domain adaptation method for semantic segmentation in marine vessel inspection
39
==PAGE:46==
6.4
Domain Adaptation Results
In the table 6.4 the performance scores of the developed DANN models in segmentation of
test images from target domain are presented. The table also includes the performance
scores of segmentation models, before domain adaptation modifications, tested on the
same target domain data for comparison of the results.
In detail, complete Segmentation Performance Results, comparing performance on
target domain for each of the developed models, with per­class evaluation for all
metrics, are included in Appendix B.
Models’ Performance Comparison
Model
Mean IoU
Accuracy
FPS
Resnet18*
46.7%
64.7%
10
Resnet18 DA
52.4%
67.7%
51
Resnet34*
49.7%
78.3%
11
Resnet34 DA
61.7%
78.5%
25
Resnet8*
31.8%
34.3%
116
Resnet8 DA
34.6%
37.2%
104
Unet*
26.4%
35.5%
88
Unet DA
41.5%
53.7%
106
Scaled­Down Unet*
15.6%
19.2%
104
Scaled­Down Unet DA
19.0%
23.6%
112
Table 6.4: Performance metrics for models tested on the target domain test data.
”DA” denote for models modified into DANN and ” * ” represents segmentation models
trained on source domain only.
Upon assessing the results of developed DANNs in semantic segmentation on target do­
main images, there was an evident upgrade in performance across all tested models fol­
lowing the integration of a domain adaptation method, in comparison to the segmentation
models trained on source domain only.
Moreover majority of the models significantly improved speed (FPS) of output map gen­
eration. Depending on the metric, the improvements were significant, with Resnet34 and
U­Net seeing a rise in their mean Intersection over Union (mIoU) by 12% points and 15.1%
40
Domain adaptation method for semantic segmentation in marine vessel inspection
==PAGE:47==
points respectively. In particular the improvements in results were higher for more com­
plex models in opposition to shallow ones, where the score improvements were not as
significant.
One hypothesis for this observation is that while deep, complex models have a larger
capacity to learn more complex and abstract features, they risk overfitting to the source
domain. This was particularly observable in the case of ResNet models employed in this
project. Without domain adaptation, these models demonstrated high performance on
the source domain, but encountered difficulties with the target domain, since they were
learning features that were too specific to the source domain. By integrating a Gradient
Reversal Layer for domain adaptation, these deep models can leverage their high capac­
ity to learn more generic, domain­invariant features, therefore improve the performance
significantly. This could lead to a larger performance gap between source and target do­
mains for deeper models in contrast to shallower ones. Since shallower models have less
tendency to overfit the source domain, the improvement achieved after implementing the
Gradient Reversal Layer may not be as significant as that observed for deeper models.
Essentially the hypothesis is that deeper models may experience more significant bene­
fits from domain adaptation using the Gradient Reversal Layer, since they have a greater
initial disparity between their performance on the source and target domains due to overfit­
ting. This technique allows them to better leverage their representation learning capacity
to reduce this disparity. The hypothesis shall be further investigated in the future devel­
opment of Gradient Reversal Layer based domain adaptation studies.
Even though improved performance of DANN based on more complex models such as
ResNet18, ResNet34, and U­Net, could potentially qualify them to be effectively used in
subsequent stages of this project, the results of segmentation of ResNet8 and Scaled­
down U­Net, despite being improved compared to their original versions, remained sub­
optimal. As shallow models primarily focus on learning low­level features, the integration
of GRL might shifted the focus to make these low­level features domain­invariant, which
could potentially negatively impact their overall performance. Based on the results pre­
sented in Table 6.3 and the complete results provided in Appendix B, it appears that the
scores achieved by these models are insufficient for further application in this project.
For the more complex models employed, the scale of improvements align with those at­
tained by using a Gradient Reversal Layer approach in comparable studies (e.g. [41],
[49]), which is a positive sign. However, to ensure effective application in the final au­
tomated inspection system, the results on the target domain could potentially be further
improved. The introduction of a Gradient Reversal Layer for learning domain­invariant
features is a simple, yet effective approach, which is highly beneficial for the development
of computationally efficient models. A significant advantage of this approach is training
only one network for both segmentation and domain adaptation purpose. Nevertheless,
the improvements obtained are also somewhat limited. If the following improvements of
the results are sought, a more complex approaches should be explored.
For a deeper understanding of the performance of the developed DANN models, the seg­
mentation maps produced as an outputs from best performing models are presented in
Figures 6.9 ­ 6.13. To simplify direct comparison and maintain consistency, the specific
images of the ballast tank interior and their corresponding masks presented in this Figures
are the same as those selected in section 6.2..
Domain adaptation method for semantic segmentation in marine vessel inspection
41
==PAGE:48==
Original image
Mask
ResNet18 DA
ResNet34 DA
U­Net DA
Figure 6.9: Segmentation maps generated by Domain Adaptation models
Upon examination the segmented output maps generated by the DANN models, the same
patterns, observed in the original segmentation models, as discussed in Section 6.2,
clearly persisted. The disparity in form and shape of segmented masks across U­Net
and ResNet­based architectures is even more pronounced.
Despite average performance metric scores, ResNet based architectures generated masks
that accurately segment different classes. Similar to the output of previously developed
ResNet architectures, the shapes of segmented classes are not sharply defined, exhibit­
ing non­geometrical shapes of objects and not accurately segmented details. The differ­
ence between outputs of ResNet18 and ResNet34 based networks are more significant
than in previous task, with ResNet34 generating noticeably more accurate predictions.
However, the overall positioning and dispersal of classes within the segmented maps
align well with the ground truth masks for both models. Clusters of misclssified pixels oc­
cur recurrently in both segmented maps, yet their presence does not confuse the overall
perception of the map.
42
Domain adaptation method for semantic segmentation in marine vessel inspection
==PAGE:49==
Original image
Mask
ResNet18 DA
ResNet34 DA
U­Net DA
Figure 6.10: Segmentation maps generated by Domain Adaptation models
This misclassified clusters of pixels affected the performance metrics of ResNet based
DANN models as presented in Table 6.4. However, analogically to segmented maps of
U­Net in section 6.2, this misclassification areas, randomly detect as wrong class without
having any organised structure or shape, should not have strong negative influence on
decision making, based on generated predictions. Yet, similarly to the solution proposed
in Section 6.2, if used for decision making process, DANN ResNet should be supported
with generalization algorithm, which would take into account a series of images of the
same area, taking into account broader context of the image.
Domain adaptation method for semantic segmentation in marine vessel inspection
43
==PAGE:50==
Original image
Mask
ResNet18 DA
ResNet34 DA
U­Net DA
Figure 6.11: Segmentation maps generated by Domain Adaptation models
The quality of the segmented maps generated by U­Net based DANN is significantly lower
than ResNet based ones, as also reflected from the results presented in Table 6.4. De­
spite the occurrence of misclassifications, both in terms of small pixel clusters and entire
object classes within the generated masks, complex structures in the maps are still rep­
resented accurately and in detail, even in comparison to better performing ResNet based
models. However, the segmented boundries between objects do not uphold the precision
characteristic to the U­Net model. The model’s sensitivity to lighting conditions, observed
in section 6.2, has increased, leading to the misclassification of substantial areas where
shadows are present. Since in extreme cases, the whole objects are being misclassified
in the generated maps, model’s useability for the further implementation in the project is
being doubt and require further investigation.
44
Domain adaptation method for semantic segmentation in marine vessel inspection
==PAGE:51==
Original image
Mask
ResNet18 DA
ResNet34 DA
U­Net DA
Figure 6.12: Segmentation maps generated by Domain Adaptation models
Upon considering the metric scores presented in Table 6.4 and the quality of the generated
segmented maps, ResNet based DANN architectures evidently surpass those founded
based on U­Net. The model based on ResNet34 architecture has demonstrated superior
performance on the target domain, with the satisfactory results qualifying it for the utiliza­
tion in subsequent phases of the project. Nonetheless, the model based on ResNet18
has a benefit of being less computationally demanding, capable of processing twice as
many frames per second. Each of the developed architectures could benefit from being
trained on the larger amount of data, coming both from target and source domain. The
final choice of the model to be utilized should be guided by a well­defined project scope,
weighing the balance between performance and computational efficiency.
Domain adaptation method for semantic segmentation in marine vessel inspection
45
==PAGE:52==
Original image
Mask
ResNet18 DA
ResNet34 DA
U­Net DA
Figure 6.13: Segmentation maps generated by Domain Adaptation models
46
Domain adaptation method for semantic segmentation in marine vessel inspection
==PAGE:53==
7
Conclusion
The goal of this project was to develop a method for deep domain adaptation for semantic
segmentation of ballast tanks in marine vessels. The project consisted of three main
separable phases: synthetic data genertion, semantic segmentation using deep learning
models and development of domain adaptation method for those models.
Since real­world data from the ballast tank was not available, the approach was to gen­
erate and use synthetic data for the training of deep learning models in the project. The
dataset of images was collected in the simulated photo­realistic visual environment, de­
veloped for the purpose of this project using Unreal Engine. A 3D model of an actual
ballast tank was imported into the developed environment and AirSim simulator was used
to collect the images of the ballast tank interior in three versions (good condition, corroded
state and with color labelled classes) by UAV with predefined trajectory. This approach
resulted in complete dataset divided into three domains: source domain, target domain
and labeled masks, used as a ground truth for training the models. Each of the domains
contained 2016 images with 6 classes of objects in them.
For the purpose of semantic segmentation task two popular deep learning architectures
were effectively implemented with different complexity variants. First ResNet [17] based
approach was implemented, specifically ResNet8, ResNet18 and ResNet34 were tuned
for semantic segmentation and trained on developed dataset. Another model employed
in the project was U­Net, a state of the art architecture for semantic segmentation. In
addition to the original U­Net model [25], which is computationally demanding, the scaled­
down, shallower version of it was implemented in the project. Models developed based
on both architectures presented promising segmentation results, with the performance
scores being proportional to complexity of the models (deeper models presented better
results). For the purpose of further developments based on this project the selection of
the most appropriate model should be made based on desired use case, since each of
the two architectures demonstrated unique advantages.
In order to enhance the robustness of the segmentation models towards domain shifts,
a domain adaptation technique was developed introducing Gradient Reversal Layer [42]
into the segmentation models. This method performs domain adaptation by utilizing fea­
ture extractor from segmentation model, Gradient Reversal Layer and a domain classifier
network to make the model learn domain­invariant features. Trained on both source and
target domain, without using target domain for training segmentation network, this method
successfully improved the results of segmentation in target domain, in comparison to the
models trained on source domain only, with some of the architectures improved their per­
formance metrics by 15% points. Even though, each of the employed models benefited
from transformation into DANN, ResNet18 and ResNet34 based proved to perform best
on target domain test data, with the satisfactory results qualifying them for utilization in
subsequent phases of the project.
Domain adaptation method for semantic segmentation in marine vessel inspection
47
==PAGE:54==
All the experiments were conducted using DTU HPC resources. Relevant steps of the
development of semantic segmentation and domain adaptation models for the task of
ballast tank inspection, together with generation of synthetic image dataset were docu­
mented and presented in this report. This enables the reader to recapitulate all the work
carried out, process and evaluate the presented results for their own use case and pro­
ceed with the next phases in the advancement of this project, building upon the existing
work conducted.
48
Domain adaptation method for semantic segmentation in marine vessel inspection
==PAGE:55==
8
Future work
For the proposed future work on this project, several key improvements and experiments,
as discussed throughout this report, should be considered.
The first recommendation is to significantly increase the amount of training data to po­
tentially improve the performance of segmentation models and address the problem of
imbalance in scores across object classes. Furthermore, larger dataset has a potential
to minimize overfitting observed in training of ResNet models. The performance could
also benefit from enhancing the representation or potentially over­sampling of currently
under­represented classes in the dataset.
The hypothesis proposed in section 6.2 regarding ResNet performing exceptionally well
in shadow regions of the image, due to it overfitting the data should be further examined.
By increasing the dataset size and minimizing overfitting, a more definitive investigation
into this theory should be possible. Simultaneously the sensitivity of U­Net to poor light
conditions should also be assessed, specifically to evaluate how it compares to ResNet
under different lighting conditions.
To make U­Net more practical for decision­making based on segmented maps, it would
be beneficial to develop a generalization method, which should consider broader image
areas and potentially a series of consecutive image. Such a strategy could help offset
the minor pixel misclassification in U­Net segmented maps (as described in section 6.2),
thereby preventing it from negatively influencing decision­making processes.
Additionally the exploration of alternative performance metrics should be included in the
scope of future research. While the current metrics utilized for result evaluation are com­
monly employed for assessment of semantic segmentation tasks and are often referenced
in computer vision literature (e.g., [25], [49]), there is a need for more task­specific metrics.
Ideally, these metrics should be able to represent class imbalance scores.
The hypothesis presented in Section 6.4, that deeper models may experience more sig­
nificant benefits from domain adaptation using the Gradient Reversal Layer, since they
have a greater initial disparity between their performance on the source and target do­
mains due to overfitting, shall be further investigated. Gradient Reversal Layer based ap­
proach should be incorporated into segmentation models of various complexity to asses
the proposed theory.
Since Gradient Reversal Layer based approach to domain adaptation challenge is rather
simple, the development of more complex domain adaptation method for the purpose of
presented task is another promising strategy, to improve the quality of the results, that
should be explored. The overview of the state of the art domain adaptation methods,
which could possibly be applied in the project can be found in Section 4 of this report.
Domain adaptation method for semantic segmentation in marine vessel inspection
49
==PAGE:56==
Lastly the developed methods should be tested on the real­world data, coming from the
original ballast tank in diverse conditions and stages, thereby represent different domains.
Such an approach would allow both segmentation and domain adaptation methods to be
evaluated for their applicability and effectiveness in the autonomous inspection of marine
vessels.
50
Domain adaptation method for semantic segmentation in marine vessel inspection
==PAGE:57==
Bibliography
[1]
Shamika N Sirimanne et al. “Review of maritime transport 2019”. In: United Nations
conference on trade and development, Geneva, Switzerland. 2019.
[2]
Thomas Hofer. “Tanker safety and coastal environment: prestige, erika, and what
else?” In: ESPR­Environmental Science and Pollution Research­International 10.1
(2003), pp. 1–5.
[3]
C Rizzo. “Inspection of aged ships and offshore structures”. In: Condition assess­
ment of aged structures (2008), pp. 367–406.
[4]
Alberto Ortiz et al. “Vision­Based Corrosion Detection Assisted by a Micro­Aerial
Vehicle in a Vessel Inspection Application”. In: Sensors 16.12 (2016).
[5]
Markus Eich et al. “A robot application for marine vessel inspection”. In: Journal of
Field Robotics 31.2 (2014), pp. 319–341.
[6]
Markus Eich and Thomas Vögele. “Design and control of a lightweight magnetic
climbing robot for vessel inspection”. In: 2011 19th Mediterranean Conference on
Control & Automation (MED). IEEE. 2011, pp. 1200–1205.
[7]
Rosalia Maglietta et al. “A vision­based system for robotic inspection of marine ves­
sels”. In: Signal, Image and Video Processing 12 (2018), pp. 471–478.
[8]
Rasmus Andersen et al. “Investigating Deep Learning Architectures towards Au­
tonomous Inspection for Marine Classification”. In: 2020 IEEE International Sym­
posium on Safety, Security, and Rescue Robotics (SSRR). 2020, pp. 197–204.
[9]
Francisco Bonnin­Pascual and Alberto Ortiz. “A generic framework for defect de­
tection on vessel structures based on image saliency”. In: 2016 IEEE 21st Inter­
national Conference on Emerging Technologies and Factory Automation (ETFA).
2016, pp. 1–4.
[10]
Luciane Soares et al. “A visual inspection proposal to identify corrosion levels in ma­
rine vessels using a deep neural network”. In: 2021 Latin American Robotics Sym­
posium (LARS), 2021 Brazilian Symposium on Robotics (SBR), and 2021 Work­
shop on Robotics in Education (WRE). IEEE. 2021, pp. 222–227.
[11]
Li Yu et al. “Surface Defect Detection and Evaluation for Marine Vessels using Multi­
Stage Deep Learning”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.09580 (2022).
[12]
Young­Jin Cha et al. “Autonomous structural visual inspection using region­based
deep learning for detecting multiple damage types”. In: Computer­Aided Civil and
Infrastructure Engineering 33.9 (2018), pp. 731–747.
[13]
Isabel Rio­Torto et al. “Automatic quality inspection in the automotive industry: a
hierarchical approach using simulated data”. In: 2021 IEEE 8th International Con­
ference on Industrial Engineering and Applications (ICIEA). 2021, pp. 342–347.
[14]
Aleksei Boikov et al. “Synthetic Data Generation for Steel Defect Detection and
Classification Using Deep Learning”. In: Symmetry 13 (2021).
[15]
Mateusz Żarski et al. “Computer Vision Based Inspection on Post­Earthquake With
UAV Synthetic Dataset”. In: IEEE Access (2022), pp. 108134–108144.
[16]
Sergey I Nikolenko. “Synthetic data for deep learning”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1909.11512
(2019).
Domain adaptation method for semantic segmentation in marine vessel inspection
51
==PAGE:58==
[17]
Kaiming He et al. “Deep Residual Learning for Image Recognition”. In: Proceedings
of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR). June
2016.
[18]
Kaiming He and Jian Sun. “Convolutional neural networks at constrained time cost”.
In: Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition.
2015, pp. 5353–5360.
[19]
Rupesh Kumar Srivastava, Klaus Greff, and Jürgen Schmidhuber. “Highway net­
works”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1505.00387 (2015).
[20]
Christopher M Bishop et al. Neural networks for pattern recognition. Oxford univer­
sity press, 1995.
[21]
Amal H Alharbi et al. “Segmentation and classification of white blood cells using the
unet”. In: Contrast Media & Molecular Imaging 2022 (2022).
[22]
Lei Bi, Dagan Feng, and Jinman Kim. “Dual­path adversarial learning for fully con­
volutional network (FCN)­based medical image segmentation”. In: The Visual Com­
puter 34 (2018), pp. 1043–1052.
[23]
Lamia H Shehab et al. “An efficient brain tumor image segmentation based on deep
residual networks (ResNets)”. In: Journal of King Saud University­Engineering Sci­
ences 33.6 (2021), pp. 404–412.
[24]
Cao Vu Dung et al. “Autonomous concrete crack detection using deep fully convo­
lutional neural network”. In: Automation in Construction 99 (2019), pp. 52–58.
[25]
Olaf Ronneberger, Philipp Fischer, and Thomas Brox. “U­net: Convolutional net­
works for biomedical image segmentation”. In: Medical Image Computing and Computer­
Assisted Intervention–MICCAI 2015: 18th International Conference, Munich, Ger­
many, October 5­9, 2015, Proceedings, Part III 18. Springer. 2015, pp. 234–241.
[26]
Robbie Sadre et al. Deep Learning Segmentation of Complex Features in Atomic­
Resolution Phase Contrast Transmission Electron Microscopy Images. Dec. 2020.
[27]
Rasmus Eckholdt Andersen and Evangelos Boukas. “Probabilistic Inspection us­
ing Deep Probabilistic Segmentation”. In: 2022 IEEE International Conference on
Imaging Systems and Techniques (IST). 2022, pp. 1–6.
[28]
Ty Nguyen et al. “U­net for mav­based penstock inspection: an investigation of fo­
cal loss in multi­class segmentation for corrosion identification”. In: arXiv preprint
arXiv:1809.06576 (2018).
[29]
Gabriela Csurka. “Domain adaptation for visual applications: A comprehensive sur­
vey”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1702.05374 (2017).
[30]
Mei Wang and Weihong Deng. “Deep visual domain adaptation: A survey”. In: Neu­
rocomputing 312 (2018), pp. 135–153.
[31]
Hemanth Venkateswara, Shayok Chakraborty, and Sethuraman Panchanathan. “Deep­
learning systems for domain adaptation in computer vision: Learning transferable
feature representations”. In: IEEE Signal Processing Magazine 34.6 (2017), pp. 117–
129.
[32]
Ting Yao et al. “Semi­supervised domain adaptation with subspace learning for vi­
sual recognition”. In: Proceedings of the IEEE conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition. 2015, pp. 2142–2150.
[33]
Shruti Saxena, Shreelekha Pandey, and Pritee Khanna. “A semi­supervised domain
adaptation assembling approach for image classification”. In: Pattern Analysis and
Applications 21 (2018), pp. 813–827.
[34]
KS Neethu and Dany Varghese. “An incremental semi­supervised approach for vi­
sual domain adaptation”. In: 2017 International Conference on Communication and
Signal Processing (ICCSP). IEEE. 2017, pp. 1343–1346.
52
Domain adaptation method for semantic segmentation in marine vessel inspection
==PAGE:59==
[35]
Amir Atapour­Abarghouei and Toby P Breckon. “Real­time monocular depth esti­
mation using synthetic data with domain adaptation via image style transfer”. In:
Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition.
2018, pp. 2800–2810.
[36]
Konstantinos Bousmalis et al. “Unsupervised pixel­level domain adaptation with
generative adversarial networks”. In: Proceedings of the IEEE conference on com­
puter vision and pattern recognition. 2017, pp. 3722–3731.
[37]
Weijian Deng et al. “Image­image domain adaptation with preserved self­similarity
and domain­dissimilarity for person re­identification”. In: Proceedings of the IEEE
conference on computer vision and pattern recognition. 2018, pp. 994–1003.
[38]
Slawomir Bak, Peter Carr, and Jean­Francois Lalonde. “Domain adaptation through
synthesis for unsupervised person re­identification”. In: Proceedings of the Euro­
pean conference on computer vision (ECCV). 2018, pp. 189–205.
[39]
Haoliang Li et al. “Domain Generalization With Adversarial Feature Learning”. In:
Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
(CVPR). June 2018.
[40]
Konstantinos Bousmalis et al. “Domain separation networks”. In: Advances in neural
information processing systems 29 (2016).
[41]
Yaroslav Ganin and Victor Lempitsky. “Unsupervised Domain Adaptation by Back­
propagation”. In: Proceedings of the 32nd International Conference on Machine
Learning. Ed. by Francis Bach and David Blei. 2015, pp. 1180–1189.
[42]
Yaroslav Ganin et al. “Domain­adversarial training of neural networks”. In: The jour­
nal of machine learning research 17.1 (2016), pp. 2096–2030.
[43]
Liang Yan et al. “Adversarial domain adaptation with a domain similarity discrimi­
nator for semantic segmentation of urban areas”. In: 2018 25th IEEE International
Conference on Image Processing (ICIP). IEEE. 2018, pp. 1583–1587.
[44]
Pedro O Pinheiro. “Unsupervised domain adaptation with similarity learning”. In:
Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition.
2018, pp. 8004–8013.
[45]
Zhongzheng Ren and Yong Jae Lee. “Cross­domain self­supervised multi­task fea­
ture learning using synthetic imagery”. In: Proceedings of the IEEE conference on
computer vision and pattern recognition. 2018, pp. 762–771.
[46]
Rui Shu et al. “A dirt­t approach to unsupervised domain adaptation”. In: arXiv
preprint arXiv:1802.08735 (2018).
[47]
Elyor Kodirov et al. “Unsupervised Domain Adaptation for Zero­Shot Learning”. In:
Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV). Dec.
2015.
[48]
Guoliang Kang et al. “Deep Adversarial Attention Alignment for Unsupervised Do­
main Adaptation: the Benefit of Target Expectation Maximization”. In: Proceedings
of the European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV). Sept. 2018.
[49]
Jan­Aike Bolte et al. “Unsupervised domain adaptation to improve image segmenta­
tion quality both in the source and target domain”. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Workshops. 2019, pp. 0–
0.
[50]
Eric Tzeng et al. “Adversarial discriminative domain adaptation”. In: Proceedings of
the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition. 2017, pp. 7167–
7176.
[51]
Artem Rozantsev, Mathieu Salzmann, and Pascal Fua. “Residual parameter trans­
fer for deep domain adaptation”. In: Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Com­
puter Vision and Pattern Recognition. 2018, pp. 4339–4348.
Domain adaptation method for semantic segmentation in marine vessel inspection
53
==PAGE:60==
[52]
Han Zhao et al. “Adversarial multiple source domain adaptation”. In: Advances in
neural information processing systems 31 (2018).
[53]
Jingsai Liang. “Confusion Matrix: Machine Learning”. In: POGIL Activity Clearing­
house 3.4 (Dec. 2022).
54
Domain adaptation method for semantic segmentation in marine vessel inspection
==PAGE:61==
A
Appendix
Full results of employed models in semantic segmentation of ballast tank images from
test subset.
ResNet18 Performance Scores
Metric
Mean
Class 1
Class 2
Class 3
Class 4
Class 5
Class 6
IoU
76.3%
94.8%
89.4%
56.4%
78.9%
83.6%
54.8%
Precision
83.3%
97.8%
95.2%
66.3%
86.6%
89.8%
62.9%
Recall
82.7%
96.9%
94.7%
62.1%
91.4%
89.4%
61.8%
F1
82.4%
97.4%
94.7%
63.5%
88.4%
90.0%
60.3%
Accuracy
90.8%
­
­
­
­
­
­
FPS
64
­
­
­
­
­
­
Table A.1: Performance of Resnet18 on the test data. Mean value is the score calculated
between classes.
ResNet34 Performance Scores
Metric
Mean
Class 1
Class 2
Class 3
Class 4
Class 5
Class 6
IoU
79.2%
96.3%
91.5%
56.9%
83.8%
88.3%
59.7%
Precision
85.4%
98.4%
96.6%
69.6%
90.4%
91.2%
66.1%
Recall
84.7%
98.1%
95.1%
61.2%
92.2%
92.8%
68.6%
F1
85.0%
98.2%
95.6%
64.2%
90.1%
92.5%
69.2%
Accuracy
91.9%
­
­
­
­
­
­
FPS
25
­
­
­
­
­
­
Table A.2: Performance of Resnet34 on the test data. Mean value is the score calculated
between classes.
Domain adaptation method for semantic segmentation in marine vessel inspection
55
==PAGE:62==
ResNet8 Performance Scores
Metric
Mean
Class 1
Class 2
Class 3
Class 4
Class 5
Class 6
IoU
64.6%
82.6%
81.6%
44.4%
59.5%
72.1%
47.5%
Precision
75.8%
93.6%
89.6%
63.7%
66.6%
82.5%
59.2%
Recall
77.7%
86.6%
90.0%
51.4%
83.8%
82.9%
65.7%
F1
75.0%
89.9%
89.7%
55.5%
72.8%
81.1%
61.2%
Accuracy
84.4%
­
­
­
­
­
­
FPS
128
­
­
­
­
­
­
Table A.3: Performance of Resnet8 on the test data. Mean value is the score calculated
between classes.
U­Net Performance Scores
Metric
Mean
Class 1
Class 2
Class 3
Class 4
Class 5
Class 6
IoU
71.4%
86.9%
88.9%
53.3%
62.2%
78.6%
60.8%
Precision
80.7%
96.7%
95.1%
66.5%
68.1%
87.3%
72.8%
Recall
82.7%
87.6%
91.1%
63.2%
87.9%
87.0%
80.0%
F1
80.2%
92.0%
93.2%
62.5%
75.4%
85.2%
73.1%
Accuracy
85.6%
­
­
­
­
­
­
FPS
19
­
­
­
­
­
­
Table A.4: Performance of Unet on the test data. Mean value is the score calculated
between classes.
Scaled­down U­Net Performance Scores
Metric
Mean
Class 1
Class 2
Class 3
Class 4
Class 5
Class 6
IoU
59.0%
72.3%
72.7%
44.7%
51.9%
65.8%
50.3%
Precision
66.7%
80.1%
78.5%
55.2%
56.4%
72.4%
60.4%
Recall
68.3%
72.6%
75.4%
52.4%
72.8%
72.0%
66.4%
F1
66.3%
76.2%
77.1%
51.8%
62.6%
70.6%
60.7%
Accuracy
73.7%
­
­
­
­
­
­
FPS
105
­
­
­
­
­
­
Table A.5: Performance of scaled­down Unet on the test data. Mean value is the score
calculated between classes.
56
Domain adaptation method for semantic segmentation in marine vessel inspection
==PAGE:63==
B
Appendix
Complete segmentation results of Domain Adaptation models, along the models trained
on source domain only, tested on the target domain.
ResNet18 Performance Scores
Metric
Mean
Class 1
Class 2
Class 3
Class 4
Class 5
Class 6
IoU
46.7%
59.3%
63.7%
13.6%
41.8%
33.7%
22.3%
Precision
54.6%
70.3%
87.4%
37.0%
52.0%
49.4%
30.8%
Recall
59.2%
77.0%
69.8%
15.3%
63.9%
41.4%
32.4%
F1
57.1%
71.9%
76.1%
19.3%
54.4%
42.8%
29.7%
Accuracy
64.7%
­
­
­
­
­
­
FPS
10
­
­
­
­
­
­
Table B.1: Performance of Resnet18 on target domain test data. Mean value is the score
calculated between classes.
ResNet18 based DANN Performance Scores
Metric
Mean
Class 1
Class 2
Class 3
Class 4
Class 5
Class 6
IoU
52.4%
52.4%
69.8%
49.0%
38.5%
70.0%
28.5%
Precision
59.6%
91.6%
83.4%
70.2%
41.0%
81.4%
31.5%
Recall
64.9%
45.7%
76.0%
49.8%
77.9%
75.1%
64.8%
F1
59.3%
63.3%
77.8%
53.8%
51.9%
80.6%
38.1%
Accuracy
67.7%
­
­
­
­
­
­
FPS
51
­
­
­
­
­
­
Table B.2: Performance of Resnet18 based DANN on target domain test data. Mean
value is the score calculated between classes.
Domain adaptation method for semantic segmentation in marine vessel inspection
57
==PAGE:64==
ResNet34 Performance Scores
Metric
Mean
Class 1
Class 2
Class 3
Class 4
Class 5
Class 6
IoU
49.7%
73.7%
76.1%
24.5%
53.8%
42.2%
28.0%
Precision
60.9%
86.7%
88.2%
41.6%
60.1%
54.9%
34.3%
Recall
59.8%
81.5%
83.4%
30.1%
75.3%
50.5%
38.4%
F1
58.5%
82.9%
85.1%
32.5%
64.4%
50.8%
35.2%
Accuracy
78.3%
­
­
­
­
­
­
FPS
11
­
­
­
­
­
­
Table B.3: Performance of Resnet34 on target domain test data. Mean value is the score
calculated between classes.
ResNet34 based DANN Performance Scores
Metric
Mean
Class 1
Class 2
Class 3
Class 4
Class 5
Class 6
IoU
61.7%
75.0%
73.6%
47.4%
53.9%
74.2%
46.1%
Precision
75.9%
90.0%
89.8%
73.8%
57.7%
87.0%
57.2%
Recall
76.7%
79.0%
80.0%
51.8%
87.4%
81.1%
71.4%
F1
72.3%
83.2%
83.5%
57.5%
65.8%
83.3%
60.4%
Accuracy
78.5%
­
­
­
­
­
­
FPS
10
­
­
­
­
­
­
Table B.4: Performance of Resnet34 based DANN on target domain test data. Mean
value is the score calculated between classes.
ResNet8 Performance Scores
Metric
Mean
Class 1
Class 2
Class 3
Class 4
Class 5
Class 6
IoU
31.8%
35.4%
21.2%
44.9%
35.6%
25.2%
28.8%
Precision
44.1%
74.1%
66.6%
57.6%
31.2%
57.6%
37.6%
Recall
42.4%
37.0%
21.5%
43.4%
69.7%
40.8%
42.4%
F1
35.7%
41.6%
25.5%
43.4%
25.2%
45.2%
33.4%
Accuracy
34.3%
­
­
­
­
­
­
FPS
116
­
­
­
­
­
­
Table B.5: Performance of Resnet8 on target domain test data. Mean value is the score
calculated between classes.
58
Domain adaptation method for semantic segmentation in marine vessel inspection
==PAGE:65==
ResNet8 based DANN Performance Scores
Metric
Mean
Class 1
Class 2
Class 3
Class 4
Class 5
Class 6
IoU
34.6%
37.9%
24.1%
49.8%
39.0%
26.4%
30.2%
Precision
58.8%
79.4%
75.6%
64.0%
34.2%
60.3%
39.3%
Recall
46.0%
39.6%
24.4%
48.2%
76.3%
42.8%
44.4%
F1
38.6%
44.6%
29.0%
48.2%
27.6%
47.3%
35.0%
Accuracy
37.2%
­
­
­
­
­
­
FPS
104
­
­
­
­
­
­
Table B.6: Performance of Resnet8 based DANN on target domain test data. Mean value
is the score calculated between classes.
U­Net Performance Scores
Metric
Mean
Class 1
Class 2
Class 3
Class 4
Class 5
Class 6
IoU
26.4%
26.5%
30.0%
15.4%
15.8%
47.7%
23.1%
Precision
50.7%
74.9%
73.1%
44.5%
17.6%
66.2%
27.2%
Recall
46.7%
14.9%
29.7%
22.7%
89.9%
59.8%
63.3%
F1
34.7%
19.2%
37.4%
29.6%
22.0%
65.6%
34.5%
Accuracy
35.5%
­
­
­
­
­
­
FPS
88.8
­
­
­
­
­
­
Table B.7: Performance of U­Net on target domain test data. Mean value is the score
calculated between classes.
U­Net based DANN Performance Scores
Metric
Mean
Class 1
Class 2
Class 3
Class 4
Class 5
Class 6
IoU
41.5%
47.3%
49.2%
24.9%
44.8%
57.7%
20.9%
Precision
50.4%
54.3%
48.9%
39.4%
65.0%
45.1%
41.1%
Recall
54.2%
78.6%
71.3%
33.6%
59.0%
48.1%
24.5%
F1
51.8%
64.2%
57.4%
39.8%
61.9%
52.3%
34.6%
Accuracy
53.7%
­
­
­
­
­
­
FPS
106
­
­
­
­
­
­
Table B.8: Performance of U­Net based DANN on target domain test data. Mean value
is the score calculated between classes.
Domain adaptation method for semantic segmentation in marine vessel inspection
59
==PAGE:66==
Scaled­down U­Net Performance Scores
Metric
Mean
Class 1
Class 2
Class 3
Class 4
Class 5
Class 6
IoU
15.6%
18.0%
23.5%
8.0%
15.1%
18.6%
9.4%
Precision
39.5%
51.4%
65.2%
31.3%
38.2%
29.3%
21.4%
Recall
28.2%
21.6%
26.9%
31.0%
20.0%
10.9%
86.6%
F1
24.6%
30.4%
38.1%
18.0%
26.3%
15.9%
17.1%
Accuracy
19.2%
­
­
­
­
­
­
FPS
104
­
­
­
­
­
­
Table B.9: Performance of scaled­down U­Net on target domain test data. Mean value is
the score calculated between classes.
Scaled­down U­Net based DANN Performance Scores
Metric
Mean
Class 1
Class 2
Class 3
Class 4
Class 5
Class 6
IoU
19.0%
21.2%
32.5%
10.4%
19.0%
20.6%
10.4%
Precision
49.3%
60.7%
90.2%
40.9%
48.1%
32.3%
23.6%
Recall
39.4%
40.5%
37.2%
25.2%
12.1%
25.5%
95.6%
F1
30.3%
36.0%
52.7%
23.5%
33.1%
17.6%
18.9%
Accuracy
23.6%
­
­
­
­
­
­
FPS
91
­
­
­
­
­
­
Table B.10: Performance of sclaed­down based DANN on target domain test data. Mean
value is the score calculated between classes.
60
Domain adaptation method for semantic segmentation in marine vessel inspection
==PAGE:67==
Domain adaptation method for semantic segmentation in marine vessel inspection
61
==PAGE:68==
DTU Electro
Department of Electrical and Photonics Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
Ørsteds Plads Building 343
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Denmark
www.electro.dtu.dk
