==PAGE:1==
Evolution of Gender Diversity in Academia
Master Thesis
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Evolution of Gender Diversity in Academia
Master Thesis
June, 2023
By
Marie Sjørslev Pedersen, s174329@student.dtu.dk
Supervisor
Sune Lehmann Jørgensen, sljo@dtu.dk
Laura Alessandretti, lauale@dtu.dk
Jonas Lybker Juul, jlju@dtu.dk
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title,
etc.
Published by:
DTU, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science,
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 321, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.compute.dtu.dk
ECTS:
30
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over five months at the Section for Cognitive Systems,
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science, at the Technical University
of Denmark (DTU), in partial fulfilment for the degree Master of Science in Engineering,
MSc Eng.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of statistics.
2. June 2023
ii
Evolution of Gender Diversity in Academia
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Traditionally it has been mainly men who have been the invited speakers at computer
science (CS) conferences. Recently, various aspects of our society have begun examining
gender representation. Fields such as politics, cinema, and academia are all in the spot-
light. This thesis looks closer at the evolution of diversity in academia by collecting data
on 17 different computer science conferences in the period from 2003 to 2022. Variables
included in the thesis were for instance the number of publications published at the time
of the conference and the years of academic seniority. Based on the conference included
there has been an increase in the number of females invited to CS conferences. However,
the ratio of male and female invited speakers is still in favor of the males. By using the
nearest neighbor algorithm to find females who were similar to other males, it turned out
that when the previously mentioned variables were balanced females were actually more
likely to be invited than males. By inviting more females the visibility is increased which
creates a feedback loop, where the current female scientists act as role models for the fu-
ture generation of young girls. Future work should be devoted to exploring the long-term
effect that increased visibility will increase the overall number of invited female speakers.
Evolution of Gender Diversity in Academia
iii
==PAGE:6==
Contents
Preface
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Scope
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.3
Outline of the Thesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Literature Review
4
2.1
Exploring various sources to investigate diversity in academia . . . . . . . .
4
2.2
Gender Complexity in Research . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
3
Data
6
3.1
Data Collection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3.2
Data Preprocessing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.3
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
4
A Descriptive Analysis of the Gender Representation
18
4.1
The Gender Gap in Computer Science Conferences . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
4.2
Factors Affecting Gender Diversity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4.3
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
5
Examining Gender-Based Disparities Using Permutation Testing
29
5.1
Permutation Test . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
5.2
Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
5.3
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
6
Gender Bias in Conference Invitations: A Nearest Neighbor Analysis
33
6.1
Nearest Neighbor . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
6.2
Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
6.3
Ratio of females based on potential speakers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
6.4
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
7
Discussion
43
7.1
Key Findings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
7.2
Limitations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
7.3
Improvement and Future Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
8
Conclusion
47
Bibliography
48
A GitHub
53
B Additional Plots
54
iv
Evolution of Gender Diversity in Academia
==PAGE:7==
1
Introduction
In recent years diversity, equity, and inclusion are becoming increasingly important topics
in most aspects of our life. People are making an effort to include minorities in univer-
sities[1], movies[2], politics[3], etc. In this thesis, I am going to focus on understanding
diversity, equity, and inclusion in an academic context. Academia plays an important
part in the society we live in. It is a major producer of the knowledge and technology
which we surround ourselves with every day. Academia is also responsible for the educa-
tion of a subset of the next generation, which will ground the foundation of their work
in governments, businesses, and other organizations. It is very important to understand
how diversity is incorporated into the academic environment. Firstly, diversity ensures
that a broader range of perspectives is represented in research and teaching, which en-
sures that underrepresented groups are not harmed [4] [5]. Secondly, by highlighting the
achievements of underrepresented groups in academia, we can help inspire the next gen-
eration of scientists and scholars to pursue a career in academia. Despite the increasing
awareness of the importance of diversity, equity, and inclusion in various domains, certain
groups remain underrepresented in academia. According to the National Center for Ed-
ucation Statistics, in 2021, only 26.2% of doctorates in engineering in the United States
were awarded to females [6] [7]. In Denmark, 39.2 % of the Ph.D. students in 2021 within
Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM) are females according to
Danmarks Statistik [8]. Females have fewer publications [9] and receive lower funding [10]
than males. In this thesis, I will address the area of diversity by studying invited speakers
at various academic conferences. Diversity has multiple meanings such as; gender, race,
sexual orientation, disability, age, religion, and cultural [11]. To limit the project this
thesis will research gender diversity.
1.1
Background
Gender definition
It is important to acknowledge that gender is not always binary and that there are in-
dividuals who identify as gender non-conforming. I will throughout this thesis use the
term ”gender” which can be either a female or a male. Gender is considered binary for
simplicity. The word male or female will reflect, that there is a high probability that
a person identifies as the respective gender based on frequency proportion. While some
individuals may not fit into the category of either female or male, it is important to still
include them in the project.
Exploring the pros and cons of diversity
Traditionally, decision-making positions have been held by individuals who come from
similar backgrounds, leading to a lack of representation of diverse perspectives politics[3].
However, there have been efforts to close this gap and increase diversity in various fields,
such as politics, comedy [12], and academia. This involves narrowing the gender gap and
promoting diversity.
Increasing diversity can have advantages and disadvantages, and
some individuals support and oppose this trend. In the following section, I will highlight
some of the pros and cons of diversity.
Studies done by Phillips et. al. (2012) highlight some of the many advantages of diversity
[13]. The scientists found that in a diverse group, there were more conflicts of opinions
and perspectives. However, these conflicts drove the group to work harder and question
themselves, which lead to better outcomes compared to a more homogeneous group. These
Evolution of Gender Diversity in Academia
1
==PAGE:8==
results were supported by the work of Hong and Page (2004) [14]. In the search for a
more diverse campus environment, Harvard College includes race as a factor among many
when determining its incoming class.
Harvard themselves says that: ”applicants must
have multiple areas of strength to be admitted to Harvard, and race does not determine
admissions outcomes any more than a number of other factors” [15]. However, in 2014 the
Students of Fair Admissions (SFFA) filed a lawsuit against Harvard College for this. SFFA
argued that Harvard College unlawfully discriminated against Asian-American applicants
and seeks to ban racial information from applications [16]. Xu (2021) writes that: ”...in
their eyes[Harvard College], Asian-Americans are too successful to be helped.”[17].SFFA
asked the Supreme Court in 2021 to take the case [18].
Heather Mac Donald is a prominent opponent of diversity and the author of the best-selling
book ”The Diversity Delusion: How Race and Gender Pandering Corrupt the University
and Undermine Our Culture” [19].
In a video from PragerU, she says: ”The unique
accomplishments of western science were achieved without regard to the sex or skin color
of its creators.
Now, however, funders, industry leaders, and academic administrators
want us to believe that diversity is the key to the future.
But the truth is the exact
opposite: we want our best scientific minds to be free to do their best job” [20]. Donald
argues that there is no need to create drastic steps to increase the diversity within science,
because science has been able to make many great accomplishments before, and will be
able to do in the future. She makes a point that science should always look at the quality
and not the author. However, Hekkenberg (2017) argued at a TEDx conference that even
though we want to believe, that this is what we are doing, the facts are that it is not what
we actually are doing. She calls this implicit bias and mentions that people are not even
aware of how biased they are. The reason for implicit bias is due to stereotypes, prejudice,
and discrimination [21]. Furthermore, she argues why diversity is important: ”We need to
maximize our intellectual capital. We simply can’t ignore the intellectual contribution of
half of the world’s population and still expect the best results”[22].
Exploring the importance of conferences
Diversity is not a newly discovered research area within academia.
Two-thirds of the
conferences this thesis investigates even have a section on their websites explaining their
steps to provide an inclusive conference. The conferences are an essential aspect to inves-
tigate when researching diversity. A conference is a place to expand your knowledge and
learn the newest methods within your field, and thus improve your skills. It is also an
opportunity to network and meet other scientists. Networks like these could potentially
result in a citation in future papers. Ahmed (2022) explains how citations are academic
bricks, which are used as building blocks to your career: ”...citations are used to measure
a scholar’s success, granting access to post-doctoral or permanent positions, promotions,
higher salaries, fundings, collaborative opportunities, invitations to speak at conferences
and so on” [23]. This explains somewhat of a self-reinforcing feedback loop; it is essen-
tial to get many citations to attend conferences, but it is also important to be invited
to conferences to increase the visibility of your work and get more citations [24]. These
conferences are a way to boost your CV, which can lead to the many things Ahmed men-
tioned.
The problem is when there is a strong imbalance in the gender of conference
speakers will lead to an imbalance of gender in research and publications and give females
fewer opportunities. With these arguments for why conferences are an essential source of
investigating diversity, it is yet an unexplored area within computer science. In the field
of computer science conferences are even more important compared to other fields which
still rely heavily on journals to eﬀiciently share their research. The conferences are the
primary focus for computer scientists [25]. This is why it is important to study diversity
in computer science by using conferences as the main source.
2
Evolution of Gender Diversity in Academia
==PAGE:9==
1.2
Scope
I have established why it is important to study diversity in academia and established why
conferences are important for the field of computer science. However, the literature is
quite limited. There are many unanswered questions as to what is happening in the field
of computer science. One such question is how diversity has evolved in recent decades, and
what impact this has on computer science researchers. That is why I will focus on diversity
in computer science by collecting historical data on invited speakers and proceedings at
conferences. To the best of my knowledge, this has never been collected before, and the
data set is therefore very unique. The thesis will address three research questions:
1. How do invited female and invited male speakers in computer science conferences
differ from each other?
2. How has invited females’ representation at computer science conferences changed
over time?
3. Does the increased visibility of females attract more females to computer science
conferences?
I will explore these questions by looking at data from the last 20 years and across different
fields within computer science.
1.3
Outline of the Thesis
The report will consist of eight chapters and two appendices.
First, an introduction to the topic of diversity in academia. This chapter included some of
the advantages and disadvantages of diversity. Finally, it states the scope of the project.
Next, the literature review discusses previous studies on diversity in academia with a
critical view and outlines the gaps in this research field. Chapter 3 will detail describe
how the data was collected, and what limitations and comprises were needed to obtain the
final result. Afterward, a chapter will provide a descriptive analysis of the data and outline
the current gender representation in computer science. Chapter 5 will use a permutation
test to study how often there is a significant difference between females and males. The
nearest neighbor algorithm in Chapter 6 will be used in order to determine if females and
males are equally likely to be invited to a computer science conference. Furthermore, a
discussion about the key finding is made as well as highlighting some of the limitations of
the project, will be presented in Chapter 7. Lastly, a conclusion will tie the thesis together
and conclude the most important findings.
Appendix A will include a link to the corresponding GitHub project, where the code used
in this project can be found. The second appendix B includes additional plots.
Evolution of Gender Diversity in Academia
3
==PAGE:10==
2
Literature Review
The previous chapter presented the scope of the thesis and included several sources that
highlighted the advantages and disadvantages of diversity. In this chapter, I will perform
a literature review and describe how previous studies on diversity in academia have been
carried out. Two focus areas will be of interest; i) what data the studies present and ii)
how gender is determined. Moreover, I will discuss some of the limitations of the respective
studies’ methods.
2.1
Exploring various sources to investigate diversity in
academia
Diversity in academia has been studied by using various sources such as publications rates
[26], research grant applications [27], and Nobel awards [28]. A key aspect of this project
was the collection of data, which was based on computer science conference attendees.
Other studies such as the paper made by Teich et al. (2021) [29] used citations from
over one million physics journals to quantify gender inequality. They found that papers
made by women were significantly under-cited compared to papers written by men. They
used methods such as a generalized additive model (GAM) to predict the probability that
papers were written by men or women. Based on the estimate of the GAM they were able
to calculate the percentage difference between the observed number of citations compared
to the expected number of citations. However, the paper did not cover the full complexity
of gender inequity, since it did not include any information on the academic seniority of
the authors.
One year after the publication of Teich et al. (2021), a study made by Kong et al. (2022)
[30] further developed the idea of studying citations within physics journals. They showed
that men were cited more because they had a first-mover advantage, due to women join-
ing the field later and at a slower rate, hence they included a seniority aspect of the
analysis. They assessed the gender disparity by identifying similarities between papers,
specifically by using bibliographic coupling and hypergeometric statistical tests. While
similarity matching will be of interest for this study, the methods presented by Kong et
al. did not apply to data on conference participants. To broaden the scope of the paper it
could have been interesting to investigate how other similarity methods could have been
used in other fields.
A study made by Koﬀi (2021) [31] shared many similarities with the work of Kong et al.
(2022) and Teich et al. by studying citations in academic journals in order to quantify gen-
der inequality. Unlike the previous papers, Koﬀi (2021) studied citations within economics
and computed the similarity index between the papers with the cosine similarity. With
the similarity similarity, Koﬀi (2021) used a logit model to find the probability of a paper
omitting another paper, when it should have been cited according to the similarity index.
The results show that the odds of being omitted for a citation is 20 % - 30% higher for
all-female teams compared to all-male teams. Citations have also been studied in the field
of Cognitive Neuroscience [32] and communication [33]. I identified that there was a gap
in the literature and there was a need for a study that performed these similarity-matching
techniques presented here on conference speakers.
The works done by Teich et al. (2021), Kong et al. (2022), and Koﬀi (2021) were examples
of comprehensive analyses of gender inequality in academia by using citations. However,
since my project revolved around data from computer science conferences, I wanted to
4
Evolution of Gender Diversity in Academia
==PAGE:11==
find papers that used a similar source of data.
Some of the first studies on scientific
conference data were made by Gurevitch (1988) [34]. She collected data from the 1987
Ecological Society of America (ESA) Annual Meeting and wanted to compare the result
with research completed by Blumer (1984), which studied the 1983 ESA annual meeting.
The two studies were diﬀicult to statistically compare because of the lower number of
observations available from Blumer’s (1984) study. However, one of the aspects Gurevitech
(1988) investigated was the impact of female organizers on female invited speakers, and
she found that females were far less likely to be invited if the organizers were exclusively
males. My analysis of invited speakers will many times be compared with the participating
speakers in the proceedings to understand the underlying distribution. Gurevitech (1988)
did something similar, where she compared the proportion of female invited speakers with
those who submitted their work. She found that females were less likely to be invited, but
more likely to submit their work. It was important to remember that while Gurevitech’s
research provided some interesting results, the research is 35 years old, and there was a
need to view this with a newer perspective.
Débarre (2018) [35] gave a new perspective to the results made by Gurevitect (1988), by
collecting information about speakers at 161 conferences, 67 congress symposia, and 88
courses within the field of evolutionary biology from April 2016 to September 2017. By
combining data from announcements sent to the EvolDir mailing list and surveys to the
organizers, their results suggested a higher proportion of women among the organizers
had a positive, significant effect on the proportion of women among the invited speakers.
However, this study only focused on one field and a period of one year.
To the best of my knowledge, I identified that the literature describing the evolution of
diversity in academia was limited and not examined for the field of computer science.
2.2
Gender Complexity in Research
The second aspect of the literature review is about the determination of gender given
a person’s name. Teich et al. (2021) [29] resolved the issue of determining gender by
investigating the first names of the authors. For those who wrote their first name with
initials, they used Crossref’s API to determine the first name. Once they had the first
name Teich et al. used Gender API, a paid service, to categorize gender based on the first
name. This method allowed them to assign a gender to 60 % of the authors. A method for
mapping the gender may have been more applicable if the service was free. Karimi et al.
(2016) [36] did exactly that. They presented multiple free methods to map the gender of
a person. The methods were either name-based or image-based. Their study was centered
around 1.416 individuals, from whom the group knew the ground truth about gender
based on a previous study that uses the US Social Security database [37]. Karimi et al.
concluded from their tests, that a mixed approach of both name-based and image-based
yielded the highest accuracy. While the methods did provide a reasonable result, many
of the presented methods were limited by only including names from a US database or by
the size of samples.
I identified a need for mapping gender which included a higher number of unique names
and the perspective of nationality.
Evolution of Gender Diversity in Academia
5
==PAGE:12==
3
Data
The previous chapter highlighted some of the explored areas and methods in order to study
diversity in academia. The following chapter is split into two main sections; A description
of how the data sets were collected and a section on the preprocessing steps needed.
3.1
Data Collection
Firstly, it is important to establish that there did not already exist a complete data set
of all the invited speakers nor the proceedings at computer science conferences. This was
my first task of the project, finding suitable data, which became the foundation of the
analysis. I wanted to explore a new source of data. One unexplored area was the scientific
conference within computer science and thus the invited speakers. A great advantage of
a conference as a source was that the data were publicly available for the majority of the
conferences. The data I needed were data sets on the invited speakers and the proceedings.
Furthermore, I wanted to enrich the data with two additional data sets which would use
the data from the first two tables as an input. In total, four data sets were collected:
1. A data set of the proceedings for each conference and year
2. A list of the invited speakers for each conference and year
3. A table with names and the associated genders
4. A table that shows the number of papers published by each author in the first two
data set.
I mentioned in the introduction, that citation was the currency in the academic commu-
nity and conferences were a great way to get more exposure on your work which could
lead to potential new citations. Within computer science conferences it was important
to distinguish between people who were invited speakers and people who actively applied
to participate in a conference. Conferences used different terms such as invited speak-
ers, keynote speakers, and some conferences even called it panel talks. In this report, I
used the term invited speakers for people who were especially highlighted in the confer-
ence programs. Being invited as a speaker definitely contributed to more exposure since
conferences often made a specific page about these people describing their previous and
current studies or highlighting the names on the front page of the website or program.
Furthermore, invited speakers got to present in front of a wider audience, for instance
in plenary sessions which include all participants in the conference. Being selected as an
invited speaker was also a recognition of their role in science. Who got invited was en-
tirely up to the conference committee and it was important to study if they were indeed
working towards a more diverse conference. The proceedings, i.e. those who applied to
participate in the conference, were a subset of all submitted papers within the field of
computer science that met a certain quality threshold after peer review. Proceedings were
the equivalent of journal publications in other fields. While there were on average 4.5
invited speakers per year per conference, there were on average 664.3 proceedings per year
per conference. The proceedings included contributions from a wider range of individuals.
Therefore, analyzing the proceedings helped to provide a more accurate picture of gender
diversity within the computer science community. It was reasonable to assume that the
proceedings could be used to describe the underlying distribution since it represented a
large representative sample of the papers in the field. An essential source of criticism of
6
Evolution of Gender Diversity in Academia
==PAGE:13==
using the proceedings was that while the scientists might have applied themselves, it did
not necessarily mean that they were accepted. Many of the conferences publicly stated the
acceptance rate and for many conferences, the acceptance rate was around 30 % (this was
an average based on the seven conferences within the Association for Computing Machin-
ery (ASM)). The process of being accepted included sending an abstract of the proposed
poster, talk, or paper to a committee that would then read the abstract and selects who
should be accepted to attend the conference. Already here there might have been some
implicit bias that was not detected since it was only possible to retrieve information about
the accepted proceedings. However, I considered this to be the best possible source to
describe the underlying distribution, and the study continued with this source. It was
important to notice, that the list of invited speakers only included those who accepted
the invitation. The names of all invitations were not collected in the project due to time
constraints. From hereon, the definition of invited speakers are speakers who accepted the
invitation.
Conference selection
In the project, the scope was limited to computer science conferences, but there were
over a hundred conferences, some of which had been held annually for several decades.
To find these conferences, the main source used was a list from Wikipedia called List of
computer science conferences [38]. The list included 168 conferences and was categorized
by different fields such as algorithms and theory, operating systems, artificial intelligence,
and so on. Conferences from different fields were included since, as later discovered, there
were differences in gender representation between the fields. Unfortunately, it was not
possible to find a combined list of all the invited speakers from each computer science
conference, so a new strategy was needed. Initially, the approach was to start from the
top of the Wikipedia list and work through each conference, but this turned out to be
a time-consuming task and was hindered by the project’s time constraints. To preserve
the information I had already found and be selective about what conference to look at
next, I used a ranked list of the best computer science conferences from Research.com
[39]. I focused on the top ten conferences to start with, excluding three conferences -
European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV), International Conference on Image
Processing (ICIP), and Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR)
- as it was not possible to collect the necessary information about the invited speakers.
One additional conference was added - International Conference for Computational Social
Science (IC2S2) - due to prior knowledge from one of the advisors (Alessandretti). It
was also important to select conferences that would have data that was somewhat easy
to access, as I learn more about in subsection 3.1.3.
The data collection process was
ongoing throughout the project, and while the effort was most significant in the beginning,
data was still added later in the process. The goal was to collect information from all
168 conferences, but due to time constraints, it was not possible.
Finally, I collected
information about 17 different conferences. A list of all conferences included in this study
is listed in table 3.1.
3.1.1
Data Collection Methods
I used web scraping for many of the data sets I collected, and this section will explain the
process of web scraping.
There exist different types of web mining, this project used web content mining [40]. It was
a process where the information on a website was extracted, which offered the end-user
to save the data in a structured way for further analysis. One of the main advantages of
web content mining was the time saved compared to retrieving the information manually.
Generating a code that could access a website, retrieve the information, and store it in
Evolution of Gender Diversity in Academia
7
==PAGE:14==
Table 3.1: Overview of all conferences included in this study. The conferences are listed
in their respective fields.
Conference Name
Acronym
Field
Algorithms and Data Structures Symposium
WADS
Algorithm and Theory
Scandinavian Symposium and Workshops on Al-
gorithm Theory
SWAT
Algorithm and Theory
Symposium on Discrete Algorithms
SODA
Algorithm and Theory
Symposium on Logic in Computer Science
LICS
Algorithm and Theory
Symposium on Theory of Computing
STOC
Algorithm and Theory
Workshop on Logic, Language, Information and
Computation
WoLLIC
Algorithm and Theory
Conference on Artificial Intelligence
AAAI
Artificial Intelligence
Conference on Neural Information Processing
Systems
NuerIPS
Artificial Intelligence
International Conference on Machine Learning
ICML
Artificial Intelligence
International Joint Conference on Artificial In-
telligence
IJCAI
Artificial Intelligence
International Conference for Computational So-
cial Science
Ic2s2
Computational Social Science
Asia and South Pacific Design Automation Con-
ference
ASP-DAC
Computer Architecture
International Conference on High Performance
Computing
HiPC
Concurrent, distributed and
parallel computing
Supercomputing Conference
SC
Concurrent, distributed and
parallel computing
Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data
Mining
KDD
Data Management
World Wide Web Conference
WWW
Data Management
Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems
CHI
Human-Computer Interaction
the desired format in just a few seconds yielded a highly eﬀicient work process. Secondly,
web mining could be scalable. With web mining, collecting the same information from
different websites became an easy task. For many of the websites needed in this project,
the URL had the same format www.[website]/[conference_name][year], allowing for a
for-loop to be run with the year changed, which quickly collected the needed information.
In contrast, the manual process of entering each website and saving the data in the same
structure could take hours or days.
There are two methods of web content mining: a) Application programming interface
(API) or b) web crawling/scraping [41]. API is an easy way to get data and the data
is often very structured. It requires an API key or other forms of authorization and by
following the terms and conditions you will not get banned.
However, APIs were not
always available and the free APIs were often limited in that the response often did not
8
Evolution of Gender Diversity in Academia
==PAGE:15==
contain all the information.
That was why I used web scraping in this project.
Web
scraping is very flexible, but it also requires a strict format to run optimally. Changing
the URL each year or creating a new layout for the website for each year and conference
can make it impossible to web scrape. Secondly, it is important not to make too many
requests on one website, which could result in the user being banned. In order not to get
banned, I included the time package while web scraping. I chose the strategy of randomly
waiting between 1-5 seconds between each request to avoid being detected.
There were several ways to web scrape and Python. In this project, I used BeautifulSoup,
because it was simple to use and could handle HTML parsing.
3.1.2
Proceedings Data Set
Web scraping the proceedings
Proceedings were the first out of four data sets I collected. Once the conferences were
selected I needed to find information about the proceedings each year. The proceedings
were the simplest data to collect. Database Systems and Logic Programming (dblp.org) is
an online bibliography for computer science and the website has a nice consistent overview
of each conference and the respective proceeding by each year. The data were collected
by web scraping the web pages using BeautifulSoup.
Speaker identification using unique links
I was able to collect almost all the data I needed about the proceedings from this website.
Another great advantage of using dblp.org was that each speaker had a link to their
own respective profiles.
Using names as identification was not going to be a suitable
solution, since it would be impossible to distinguish between two people with the same
name. By having a unique link for each person I was able to distinguish among several
individuals with the same name. This will be explained more in section 3.2. However, a
few of the proceedings were not possible to collect. For instance, it was not possible to
collect historical proceedings of the first years for a few of the conferences. The IC2S2
conference’s proceedings were not available on dblp.org and were provided by the advisor
(Alessandretti). I was able to collect 98.3 % of the proceedings. Please view figure 3.1 for
a full overview of what proceedings I managed to collect.
Figure 3.1: Overview of the collected proceedings. On the top are all the years from 1969
to 2022 and on the left are the conferences. The black color indicates that there is no
conference for the given year. The blue color indicates that the respective data for a given
year is collected. The white squares indicate the missing data, i.e. the years in which I
did not manage to collect the proceedings.
Other methods were tried to collect the missing data including searching on different
research portals and sending emails to various people involved with the conference. While
Evolution of Gender Diversity in Academia
9
==PAGE:16==
communication was established it was not possible to collect the missing data.
The collected information about the proceedings was the full name of the presenter, the
year of the conference, the conference name, and a direct link to their respective profile
on dblp.com with a list of all the published material by each speaker. The table consisted
of 283,579 rows. A description of each attribute in the data set is listed in table 3.2.
Table 3.2: Overview of the attributes for the initial data set of the proceedings
Attribute
Type
Description
Full name
String
Name of the speaker
Year
Integer
Year of the conference
Conference
String
Acronym of the conference
Link
String
URL to the speaker’s profile on dblp.org
3.1.3
Invited Speakers Data Set
Getting hold of data
Getting a list of the invited speakers was a much more diﬀicult task. As I mentioned earlier,
a combined list of all invited speakers at computer science conferences did not exist, and
a product of the thesis has been the collection of these data. The initial approach was to
find a conference that consistently had the same website layout and thus make it possible
to easily web scrape the pages each year. However, this was not the case for most of
the conference. Conferences created a new website each year and the URL could easily
differ for each year. Even though it was preferable only to select conferences that had
a nice format, thus allowing for easy web scraping, it simply was not possible to find
enough conferences that had such a strict format each year. A few conferences such as
the WoLLIC conference had a nice and easy layout, which made it quick to gather all the
needed information. The collection for all other conferences required a quite manual task,
which was very time-consuming. Thus, web scraping was not possible for these data. The
process of collecting information about the invited speakers is presented in figure 3.2.
Unfortunately, some websites were not accessible anymore or the website did not list the
invited speaker anywhere on the web page, which complicated the data collection. This
meant that more time would be spent searching for other sources where the data would be
available. When it was not possible to find the information online I tried to contact some
of the people who helped organize the conferences via email. While much email contact
were established in this process, many were not able to help because they did not possess
that information or did not know to who to redirect my request. However, I did manage
to get some additional information this way, hence enriching the data set. The target was
to collect all historical data for each conference, but in the end, it was not possible.
I have not collected any data on invited speakers for 2023, since it was not all conferences
that had announced the invited speakers at the time of this project. Please view figure
3.3 for a full overview of which years I managed to collect for each conference.
Streamlining the data
An important step while collecting data was to ensure the data quality.
Some of the
sources I used were old scanned front matters of proceedings. When I tried to copy the
name to the list it sometimes created problems. For instance, the name ’Jim Meadlock’
turned out to be ”im Mead10ck” when pasted into the file. When mistakes like these were
found, I quickly changed them back.
10
Evolution of Gender Diversity in Academia
==PAGE:17==
Is it possible to find a
list of the invited
speakers?
Does the conference
has a functional
website for the given
year?
Write an email to a
member in the 
committee
Are they able to provide
the necessary
infomation?
Save the information
about the speakers
and year in a .csv file
Is it possible to collect the
information from the front
matter of the proceedings or
other sources?
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
Yes
Figure 3.2: The figure presents the different processes that went into collecting data of
the invited speakers each year. The figure has two end-points; either it is possible to find
information online or try to contact someone on the committee. If email contact is not
possible, then it is definitely not possible to collect.
Figure 3.3: Overview of the collected invited speakers. On the top are all the years from
1969 to 2022 and on the left are the conferences. The black color indicates that there is no
conference for the given year. The blue color indicates that the respective data for a given
year is collected. The white squares indicate the missing data, i.e. the years in which I
did not manage to collect the invited speakers.
Differences in how conferences labeled their participants
Some sources differentiated between highlighting every author on a paper as the invited
speaker while other sources only showed the first name of the paper as an invited speaker.
This was for instance the case for the LICS conference in 2014, where the oﬀicial website
stated four speakers: Christel Baier, Patrick Cousot, Assia Mahboubi and Jasmin Fisher
[42]. The speakers were presenting a paper, which was made in collaboration with other
scientists. The dblp.org website however acknowledged every author as an invited speaker
[43]. For instance, the paper ”Trade-off analysis meets probabilistic model checking” by
Evolution of Gender Diversity in Academia
11
==PAGE:18==
Christel Baier, Clemens Dubslaff, Sascha Klüppelholz [44] only highlights Christel Baier
on the oﬀicial LICS 2014 website. A few cases like this arose and I decided not to include
dblp.org as a source for the invited speakers, due to the fact that the purpose of that
website is to name every author of a paper and not the specific authors who actually
participated in the conference. Here I found the names on the oﬀicial website more reliable.
Some conferences displayed an image of the invited speaker along with a descriptive text
of that person’s work and studies. In some cases, the text used the person’s, assumable,
preferred pronouns.
Based on facial characteristics, the full name of the speaker, and
pronouns I assigned these people to a gender. This includes my own implicit bias of what
I perceive as a male and female.
Preferably, I should have checked these individuals’
personal websites to hopefully confirm the gender, but due to time constraints, this was
not possible. 21 % of the invited speakers had an image attached next to their names.
Unlike the proceedings, it was not possible to get any links to the respective profiles that
could help distinguish between the speakers. For the invited speakers the name will serve
as the identification.
The table of the invited speakers consisted of 1,877 rows. A description of each attribute
in the data set is listed in table 3.3.
Table 3.3: Overview of the attributes for the data set of the invited speakers
Attribute
Type
Description
Full name
String
Name of the speaker
Year
Integer
Year of the conference
Conference
String
Acronym of the conference
Sex
String
Either F or M and NaN for the rest
3.1.4
Published Papers Data Set
Collecting the number of publications per year
Right now the only information I have about the speakers and the proceedings is the full
name of that person. Even though I later will add gender to the person, I wanted to
enrich the data about each speaker. I did that by adding information about the number of
papers published each year and cumulatively summing how many papers they published
at the given time of the conference. These attributes will show something about their
seniority and also who is still actively publishing new papers. From the literature review,
I know from previous studies that there do not exist many senior female scientists, and I
also learned that seniority within a field can have an advantageous role in your academic
career [30].
In order to collect the number of publications per year dblp.org was used again. Other
sources were also considered such as Google Scholar, but that source did not include as
many papers as dblp.org did.
dblp.org lists all contributions by an author in several
categories including material at conferences and workshops. This yielded a higher count
using dblp.org than Google Scholar. Again, dblp presents its data in a nicely consistent
format, which made it possible to web scrape the websites with beautiful soup. And
lastly, since I had already found the direct link to almost every speaker in the proceedings
this process would be fairly easy. For those speakers for who I did not have a link, such
as all the invited speakers and a few of the proceedings, I would be using the name of the
speaker in order to find their respective profile. All data regarding published papers were
collected before the 21st of April 2023. While the process was not troublesome to set up,
12
Evolution of Gender Diversity in Academia
==PAGE:19==
it was a rather time-consuming task because of the large number of samples in the data
sets.
Challenges with adding additional speaker information
I had the desire to add more information about the speakers such as their age, which
would strengthen the information about seniority. Initially, Wikipedia was used to gather
that information, however there only existed a web page for less than 30 % of the invited
speakers. When I controlled the data afterward I found many mistakes. It became obvious
that it was too diﬀicult to control that Wikipedia chose the correct page. Wikipedia was
unfit for use for this purpose.
3.1.5
Harvard Gender Data Set
The literature review presented multiple approaches to detect the gender of a person by
the name of that person. While searching for methods I came across a data set from
Dataverse, a free online data repository from Harvard College [45]. The World Gender
Name Dictionary (WGND) includes more than 26 million records and is linked to 195
different countries and territories [46]. My study has been using version two of WGND,
as it is a revised version of the first edition.
The WGND 2.0 data set includes five data sets. All data sets were tried, and the selected
file to map the gender is called ”wgnd_2_0_name-gender-code”. Besides being the file
with the most unique names available, the data set also proved to be able to detect
most names and were selected in the end. The data set includes 4,148,968 unique names,
covering 195 countries and territories. It is important to have a data set that is able to
distinguish between different nationalities. A name that would typically belong to a male
person in Denmark might not be associated with a male person in another country. The
data set is structured in such a way that a name is listed with a proportion of frequency
corresponding to belonging either to male ”M” or female ”F” from a scale of 0 to 1, where
0 means that no name belonged to that gender and 1 means that all people with the same
name were assigned to the same gender. Rows, where the proportion frequency is 0, are
omitted. If the assigned gender is conflicted within the same area, the name will show on
two rows with the corresponding weight. An example is presented in table 3.4.
Table 3.4: Example of WGND 2.0 name-gender-code data set. Notice how there are two
lines for Australia (AU) where the name could be either female or male, However, it seems
to be most likely to belong to a female person. In Denmark (DK) it is very certain that the
name ’Andrea’ is female, whereas Italy (IT) is also very certain that the name is associated
with a male person.
Name
Country
Gender
wgt
Andrea
AU
F
0.931
Andrea
AU
M
0.069
Andrea
DK
F
1
Andrea
IT
M
1
The advantage of the WGND data set and this method is that it does not require anything
else than a first name. Secondly, it does not need any assumption about having an image
available on for instance Google which one study did [30]. Furthermore, it is a free and
accessible data set.
The limitation of this method is of course that the file does not contain every unique
name combination. There will be some names, which can not be mapped. Furthermore,
the assumption that just because the majority of the population with a name belongs to
a certain gender, it does not necessarily apply to all individuals. Thus, it is important
Evolution of Gender Diversity in Academia
13
==PAGE:20==
to emphasize that there will properly be some individuals who do not identify with the
assigned gender. However, it is not possible to collect this information about every par-
ticipant in the data set, and the presented data set is nevertheless a suﬀicient proxy for
this purpose.
A description of each attribute in the data set is listed in table 3.5.
Table 3.5: Overview of the attributes for the gender mapping data set
Attribute
Type
Description
name
String
First names in lowercase
code
String
Country code
gender
String
F, M
wgt
Float
Value from ]0:1], where a value closer to 1 has a higher
frequency proportion, i.e. higher certainty that every-
one with this name and country code has the same
gender.
3.2
Data Preprocessing
The previous section described what data were collected and how. The following chapter
will discuss the necessary steps that went into preparing the data for analysis. While many
minor things were adjusted, which included controlling the column types and renaming
the column names, the important steps are categorized into four sections; Name Tidying,
Gender Mapping, Published Papers Mapping, and Date Filtering. Please notice that I
have two tables, a table with all the invited speakers and a table with all proceedings.
Each step below were performed on both data sets unless otherwise stated.
I used Python as the programming language to solve any issues with the preprocessing,
and more specifically a Python notebook. Python has many beneficial packages that excel
in modifying tabular data set such as pandas and numpy.
3.2.1
Name Tidying
Challenges with identifying speakers
One of the biggest issues with the proposed data set of invited speakers at the conferences
was the lack of unique identification of each person. Names are always diﬀicult to work
with, especially if there does not exist a unique id for each person. Using a name as a
unique identifier is highly critical, however, with the given time constraint of the project
it will have to be a suﬀicient solution. When web scraping the proceedings I was able to
find a unique link for the speakers and thereby separate people with the same name. But
for the invited speakers it was much more diﬀicult. I will now highlight some of the issues
and describe how it was taken into account.
Handling issues with identification of speakers in the proceedings
While I did have a direct link for the majority of the speaker’s respective profile for the
proceedings, there were unfortunately some cases, where the link was still directed to the
general page of multiple people with the same name. I found the speakers who had more
than 300 published papers at the time of the conference. The number 300 was somewhat
an arbitrary value but based on the assumption that publishing ten papers per year on
average in a 30-year career would indicate very high productivity. I then checked these
speakers again. dblp.org makes a box at the top of the website if it is a disambiguation
page. The disambiguation page means that the author of the publications has not been
assigned yet. This link will list all publications by a given name, that has not been assigned
14
Evolution of Gender Diversity in Academia
==PAGE:21==
to an author yet. If the box appeared, I would remove these speakers, since they did not
reflect one person but multiple. This process removed around 1 % of the participants from
the proceedings. If I were to repeat this process again, I would include a check mark if
the page was a disambiguation page when I first collected the data.
Challenges in standardization: Dealing with middle names and abbreviation
Some conferences included middle names when listing the speakers while others did not.
This could potentially mean that the same person would be counted as two different
people. In the same manner, some conferences would write a name as Charles L. Isbell Jr
while others would write Charles Lee Isbell Jr. In some cases, it was reasonable to assume
that the actual middle name behind the abbreviation ”L.” was in the table. By finding
all authors who had the same first name and last name but different middle names I went
through each case. Based on my judgment I would then overwrite the middle name with
the extended name.
While I was inspecting individuals with the same first and last there were also cases where
I assumed the speakers might have changed last names, for instance in connection with
marriage. However, there was no way to ensure that it was the case, and those who were
suspected were left unchanged.
Another problem was related to the first name. Shortly, I will describe how I mapped
gender based on the first name. However, this became a problem once I noticed that 127
of the invited speakers and 1,828 of the proceedings had a first name that only consisted
of an abbreviation. Time constraints of the project did not allow, that I manually could
check all of these individuals and find their first names nor did time constraints allow me
to use Crossef’s API to find the missing first names, which had successfully worked for
Teich et. al. [29]. I decided that the invited speakers were the most important, and I
found the name manually by searching various bibliographic databases. I managed to find
the first name of 126 of the invited speakers. For the 1828 individuals in the proceedings,
I decided to omit these rows. Unfortunately, this meant that one conference was no longer
useful since most data had been removed due to insuﬀicient naming of the speakers. While
I was ensuring the quality of the first name for the gender mapping, I observed that some
first names included accents such as ö,é, ñ, etc. This was not allowed for WGND 2.0 data
set and I created a temporary column with only the first name decoded to UTF-8.
Challenges with non-western names in speaker identification
In the beginning, when I checked the names I found many non-Western names, many of
which seemed to have had an Asian origin. When a pinyin transcription of a Chinese
name is translated to Roman letters it removes some of the tones, that otherwise made
it more unique. Hence increasing the similarity between the names. It made me suspect
that some information was wrongfully combined within one individual instead of several.
This has been very diﬀicult to prove. Having the direct link to the speaker’s profile for
the proceedings definitely helped. However, for the invited speakers I did not manage to
conclude that any of these names hid several people [47].
3.2.2
Name-Based Assignment of Speakers Gender
In the previous section, I detailed some of the issues faced with working with names
without having an identification key on each individual. In the following section, I will
describe how the gender was mapped to each speaker.
In section 3.1.5 I mentioned which data set I would be using from the WGND 2.0 database.
The data set contains 195 country codes that specifically state the frequency proportion
for the respective country. It would have been desirable to collect information about each
speaker’s country of origin however, that has not been possible. I needed to decide which
country codes to include and I decided to use the ’US’ country code, as many of the
Evolution of Gender Diversity in Academia
15
==PAGE:22==
conferences had an American origin. If there was doubt about the gender, I took the
gender with the highest proportion. Finally, I merged the tables with the WGND data
set. This method was able to assign a gender to 91.8 % of the invited speakers and 71.7
% of the proceedings.
Remember in section 3.1.3 where I mentioned that for some invited speakers there was a
picture attached to the name. Based on that, I assigned each person to a gender. Those
who had been given a predetermined gender, that gender would overwrite the assigned
gender from the WGND data set. There were 12 instances.
3.2.3
Published Papers Mapping
For the published papers table the first task was to cumulatively sum the number of papers
per author each year. This allowed me to create an additional column with the maximum
number of published papers per author and a column that would indicate the year in
which the first paper was published.
The major task was to successfully merge it with the table of the conference speakers, i.e.
invited and proceedings. One problem was that there existed only a row for the paper
table if an author had published something for the respective year. Vice versa for the
conference table, there only existed a row if a person participated in the conference. In
some cases, this created a problem for the merging, because there did not exist a unique
combination of a speaker and the year. In those cases, I modified the code to take the
latest record.
With a merged table that included information about the speakers at a conference and
the cumulative sum of papers published in the given year, it was possible to calculate the
seniority as:
Seniority = Year of conference −Year of first paper
For those cases where the seniority was negative, the speakers who attended a conference
before publishing any work were omitted. Finally, with the seniority column it was possible
to determine the productivity as the following:
Productivity = Cumulative Paper Count
Seniority
This would calculate the average number of papers published per year since the year of
the first publication. This says something about the productivity of the speaker.
3.2.4
Date Filtering
The data set with the invited speakers will be the most important data set, and it was
important to be able to compare the invited with the proceedings. Since I was far from
able to collect all the necessary data on the invited speakers I created a filter to only
include conferences that had all the data on invited speakers and proceedings for a given
year. This allowed me to include conferences in the period from 2003 to 2022. It was
unfortunate that historical data from the proceedings and invited speakers before 2003
were not going to be used, but it served little purpose with the invited speakers data.
3.3
Summary
Data collection is often a challenging task, and this project was no exception. Multiple
sources were utilized, making the process even more complex. While I did manage to
control the data in many ways, it was equally important to stop the preprocessing at a
certain point. During the analysis phase, additional mistakes were discovered. Rather
than continually altering the data, the decision was made to proceed with the analysis
16
Evolution of Gender Diversity in Academia
==PAGE:23==
while acknowledging any errors found along the way. These errors will be identified as
they are detected.
Table 3.6 summarises the invited speakers’ data frame. It included information about the
conferences, speakers, published papers, and gender. Please notice that the table of the
proceedings was identical.
Table 3.6: Overview of the final attributes for the data set of the invited speakers. Please
notice that the table with proceedings is structured in the same way.
Attribute
Type
Description
Full name
String
Name of the speaker
First name
String
First name of the speaker
Middle name
String
Middle name of the speaker
Last name
String
Last name of the speaker
Gender
String
F,M
Year
Integer
Year of the conference
Conference (Short)
String
Acronym of the conference
Conference (Long)
String
Full name of the conference
Field
String
The field of the conference based on [38]
Cumulative Paper Count
Integer
Cumulative sum of papers at the year of the conference
Max Paper Count
Integer
The total number of papers
First Paper Year
Integer
Year of the first publication.
Seniority
Integer
Year of conference −Year of first paper
Productivity
Decimal
Cumulative Paper Count
Seniority
Both tables contained information about 17 different conferences listed in table 3.1 in the
period from 2003 to 2022. The total number of invited speakers was 1,311 and 194,638
participated in the proceedings and the respective fraction of females was 23.1 % and 20.8
%.
Evolution of Gender Diversity in Academia
17
==PAGE:24==
4
A Descriptive Analysis of the Gender
Representation
In the previous chapter, I established how the different data sets are structured and in
this chapter, it is time to explore those data sets. As I mentioned in section 3 it is a new
data set that has not been explored before, which is why a descriptive analysis deserves
its own chapter.
4.1
The Gender Gap in Computer Science Conferences
LICS
SODA
STOC
SWAT
WADS
AAAI
NeurIPS
WoLLIC
IJCAI
ICML
IC2S2
ASPDAC
HiPC
SC
WWW
KDD
CHI
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
Number of invited speakers
Number of invited speakers per conference
Field og study
Algorithm and Theory
Artificial Intelligence
Computational Social Science
Computer Architecture
Concurrent, distributed and parallel computing
Data Management
Human-Computer Interaction
(a)
SODA
STOC
LICS
WADS
SWAT
NeurIPS
AAAI
ICML
IJCAI
WoLLIC
IC2S2
ASPDAC
SC
HiPC
KDD
WWW
CHI
0
5000
10000
15000
20000
25000
30000
35000
Number of participants
Number of participants per conference
(b)
Figure 4.1: Distribution of speakers for each conference. The bar chart at the top shows the
invited speakers and the plot at the bottom displays the participants in the proceedings.
The number of invited speakers seems to be more evenly compared to the proceedings.
18
Evolution of Gender Diversity in Academia
==PAGE:25==
The number of speakers per conference varied, both because some conferences were only
held biannually and also because some conferences tended to include more than the av-
erage number of speakers. The distribution of speakers per conference is shown in figure
4.1. It was important to establish such an overview in the beginning in case one or several
conferences were highly over-/underrepresented. I saw that the distribution between the
conferences was somewhat equal for the invited speakers. The reason why the SC confer-
ence was quite low compared to the other conferences was that the conference only invited
one person each year. The distribution of the participant varied a bit more, it seemed
that the conferences either included several thousand or just a few hundred participants.
I noted that the Artificial Intelligence field was overrepresented in the proceedings com-
pared to the other fields.
The next figure looked closer at the ratio of gender per conference, please see figure 4.2.
Based on the aggregated level over the last 20 years I saw that male speakers were found
more often than female speakers in the given computer science conferences. While some
conferences had a higher ratio of female speakers than others, there was no conference,
when I looked at it aggregated, that had a ratio of female and male speakers of 50/50
over the last 20 years. Three-fourths of conferences had more invited female speakers than
female participants, but the difference between invited and proceedings was slim in most
cases. Some of the conferences that had the highest ratio of invited female speakers were
IC2S2 and CHI, which represented two different fields of study. The conferences with the
lowest ratio of invites females were ASPDAC and HiPC. ASPDAC had only one invited
female speaker at their conference since 2003.
AAAIASPDAC CHI
HiPC IC2S2 ICML
IJCAI
KDD
LICS NeurIPS SC
SODA STOC SWAT WADS WWWWoLLIC
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Gender ratio
Ratio of gender per conference
Female invited
Male invited
Female proceedings
Male proceedings
Figure 4.2: An aggregated view of the ratio of female and male speakers per conference in
the last 20 years. In general male speakers are seen more often at these conferences than
females. The conference with the highest ratio of invited females is IC2S2.
A similar overview for each field was found in figure 4.3.
Again, no field had a ratio
of over 50 % females, when viewing the aggregated counts over the last 20 years. Not
for the proceedings or the invited. Please keep in mind that while Computational Social
Science and Computer Architecture represented the fields with the largest and lowest
ratio of invited females respectively, they only represented one conference each.
Thus
hardly qualified for representing an entire field.
The four fields which include two or
more conferences were very similar in magnitude, both with respect to the invited and the
proceedings.
In the previous chapter, I learned that 23.1 % of the invited speakers were female. It would
be interesting to see if the same distribution followed the ten most recorded speakers, see
table 4.1. Please notice that three more people had a count of four for the invited speakers:
Josh Tenenbaum (M), Susan Athey (F), and Yann LeCun (M).
Evolution of Gender Diversity in Academia
19
==PAGE:26==
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Gender ratio
Algorithm and Theory
Artificial Intelligence
Computational Social Science
Computer Architecture
Concurrent, distributed and parallel computing
Data Management
Human-Computer Interaction
Ratio of gender per field of study
Female invited
Male invited
Female proceedings
Male proceedings
Figure 4.3: An aggregated view of the ratio of female and male speakers per field in the
last 20 years. In general male speakers are seen more often at these conferences than
females. Please keep in mind that Human-Computer Interaction, Computational Social
Science and Computer Architecture only represent one conference respectively.
Table 4.1: Top 10 speakers for the invited speakers and participants. The values indicate
the number of records per person and the value in parenthesis indicates the gender.
Invited
Proceedings
1
Tim Berners-Lee: 9 (M)
Michael I. Jordan: 148 (M)
2
Prabhakar Raghavan: 7 (M)
Andreas Krause: 147 (M)
3
Daphne Koller: 7 (F)
Qiang Yang: 140 (M)
4
Cynthia Dwork: 6 (F)
Heng Huang: 134 (M)
5
Lisa Getoor: 5 (F)
Philip S. Yu: 130 (M)
6
Jon Kleinberg: 4 (M)
Lawrence Carin: 130 (M)
7
Oren Etzionis: 4 (M)
Bernhard Schölkorpf: 121 (M)
8
David Haussler: 4 (M)
Eric P. Xing: 119 (M)
9
Christos Papadimitriou: 4 (M)
Yoshua Bengio: 116 (M)
10
Michael Kearns: 4 (M)
Rong Jin: 114 (M)
The list of invited speakers included people such as Tim Berners-Lee, considered the
inventor of the World Wide Web, Prabhakar Raghavan, Senior Vice President at Google,
and Daphne Koller a Stanford University Professor. For the invited speakers I saw that
the ratio of female speakers was 30 %, thus close to the ratio for all invited speakers.
However, for the participants, the ratio of females was much lower with no females in the
top ten.
Figure 4.2 and 4.3 gave a good indication of the ratio of female and male speakers in the
data set. However, it was a rather static view, and the next step was to plot the number
of female and male speakers per year to understand how gender representation evolved
in the last 20 years.
Please see figure 4.4.
I saw some fluctuations in the number of
male and female speakers, which was because some conferences are only held biannually.
The number of male speakers was relatively steady with around 45-55 speakers. For the
females, I saw a clear increase in the number of invited speakers which start around 2011.
The years with the lowest number of females were back in 2009 with only four invited
female speakers. The year with the highest number was 2021 with 34 invited females
compared to 49 invited male speakers.
20
Evolution of Gender Diversity in Academia
==PAGE:27==
2003
2005
2007
2009
2011
2013
2015
2017
2019
2021
10
20
30
40
50
60
Number of invited speakers
Number of invited speakers per year
gender
F
M
Figure 4.4: The lines show how the number of male and female invited speakers has
changed over the last 20 years. The number of male speakers is relatively steady with
around 45-55 speakers per year, whereas I see a rise in female speakers around 2011.
For an overview of the female and male participants in the proceedings please view figure
4.5. I observed a switch around 2015 with regard to the number of participants. Con-
ferences were including much more people at the conferences than previously. Although,
the number of females also increased, the biggest contributor to the larger number of
participants was due to the large number of male participants. It was clear that the gap
between male and female participants was getting larger and larger.
2003
2005
2007
2009
2011
2013
2015
2017
2019
2021
0
2500
5000
7500
10000
12500
15000
17500
Number of participants
Number of participants per year
gender
F
M
Figure 4.5: The lines show how the number of male and female participants has changed
over the last 20 years.
The number of male speakers are dominating the increase in
participants since 2015.
The next figure took the ratio of female and male speakers per year, please see figure 4.6.
The ratio of invited females was defined as such:
Ratio of invited female speakers =
Finvited
Minvited + Finvited
(4.1)
Similar to what I saw in figure 4.4 and 4.5, I saw a clear rise in the ratio of female speakers.
The female participants were rising more slowly but at a constant rate. The increase from
2004 to 2022 was only 8.8 percentage points. The invited females were increasing faster
and with more fluctuations. The overall ratio of invited female speakers was 23.1 %, but
from the figure, I saw that the ratio through time continued to be above 23.1 % after 2014.
Again, for no year was the ratio of female speakers 50/50. The important message from
Evolution of Gender Diversity in Academia
21
==PAGE:28==
the previous figures was that while the number of invited speakers increased in the last
20 years, it was not only because more men were invited, but also because females were
increasingly invited more. Thus reducing the gap between female and male invited.
2003
2005
2007
2009
2011
2013
2015
2017
2019
2021
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
0.30
0.35
0.40
Ratio of female speakers
Ratio of female speakers per year
Invited
Proceedings
Figure 4.6: The ratio of female speakers has increased, both with respect to invited speak-
ers and participants over the last 20 years.
When I looked closer at the individual fields I saw a difference in the number of invited
females, see figure 4.7. A figure with all fields can be found in Appendix B figure B.1.
Please notice since Computer Architecture only included one female speaker it was not
included. One notable comment about all fields was that Human-Computer Interaction
was the first field to have a ratio of more than 50 % of invited females back in 2006.
Artificial Intelligence and Algorithm and Theory represented the fields with the most
conference, five each, I will study those further now. They both had approximately the
same ratio of female participants, which was very low. Artificial Intelligence showed a
small increase and Algorithms and Theory seemed more to fluctuate. When it came to
the invited speakers, in spite of great fluctuations from both fields, Artificial Intelligence
seemed to make more progress towards including more females in the last 20 years than
Algorithm and Theory.
2003
2007
2011
2015
2019
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
Ratio of female speakers
Artificial Intelligence
2003
2007
2011
2015
2019
Algorithm and Theory
Invited
Proceedings
Ratio of females speakers per year
Figure 4.7: The ratio of females for two different fields. Artificial Intelligence has increased
from 10 % to 35% in the last 20 years. The increase of invited females for algorithms and
Theory has not been as much.
4.2
Factors Affecting Gender Diversity
The analysis of the thesis focused on three main variables. It was important to study
these variables beforehand, in order to know if any patterns existed that could have an
impact on the analysis. The three variables were; Cumulative Paper Count, Seniority,
22
Evolution of Gender Diversity in Academia
==PAGE:29==
and Productivity. Each variable was explained in greater detail in chapter 3 and table
3.6. Please notice that for all variables presented below, all zeroes were removed. This
was done because zero indicated that it was not possible to retrieve information about the
publications. Hence, not possible to calculate the remaining variables.
Cumulative Paper Count
First, I explored the variable Cumulative Paper Count.
This variable summed all the
publications made by a person at the given time at the conference. This included books,
journals, workshop papers, etc. The average number of publications published at the time
of the conference was 97 and 55 respectively for the invited and the proceeding. Thus, it
seemed that to be invited, a speaker must have published much more than a speaker who
was participating. The histogram of the cumulative paper count is available in figure 4.8.
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
1600
Number of publications
0.000
0.002
0.004
0.006
0.008
0.010
0.012
0.014
0.016
Density
Dist. of publications per speaker
Invited
Proceedings
100
101
102
103
log(Number of publications)
10
6
10
5
10
4
10
3
10
2
10
1
Probability Density
Dist. of log(publications) per speaker
Invited
Proceedings
(a) The two plots are grouped by the role of the speaker. Invited speakers publish more papers
before being invited compared to participants. However, participants are the ones with extremely
many publications at the time of the conference
0
200
400
600
800
Number of publications
0.000
0.002
0.004
0.006
0.008
0.010
Density
Dist. of publications per invited
Female
Male
(b) This plot only included the invited speakers.
There is not much difference between the female
and male invited speakers.
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
1600
Number of publications
0.000
0.002
0.004
0.006
0.008
0.010
0.012
0.014
Density
Dist. of publications per participant
Female
Male
(c) This plot only included the participants.
There is not much difference between the female
and male participants
Figure 4.8: The following plots shows the cumulative number of publications at the time
of the conference per speaker. There is a difference between the invited and participants,
but not between the females and males.
Evolution of Gender Diversity in Academia
23
==PAGE:30==
The plot in the top (4.8a) showed that the distributions of the paper count were very
similar for the invited and the proceedings. Although, I saw that the first bar was lower
for the invited than the proceedings. I saw that the distributions were also very right-
skewed. Hence, most speakers published very few papers and few people published many
papers. Because of the skewness, I plotted the same data in the log-log scale on the right.
Plotting in a log-log scale could make it easier to analyze skewed data. I saw that the
red and blue lines crossed each other around 40 publications. That meant that after this
point invited speakers published more papers before a conference than the participants.
The maximum number of published papers for an invited person was 938 and 1596 for
a participant. Philip S. Yu was a professor at the University of Illinois at Chicago and
was the author who had contributed to the most papers and academic journals in this
data set. Philip S. Yu was also the fifth most frequent participant in the proceedings
(reference table 4.1) and had participated in seven different conferences in this data set.
The female with the highest cumulative paper count was Elisa Bertino, a professor from
Purdue University, with 1095 publications.
The two plots at the bottom (4.8b and 4.8c) split the data into invited and proceedings and
plotted the distributions of cumulative paper counts per gender. Surprisingly, there was
not much difference between males and females for either the invited or the proceedings.
My hypothesis was that females would more clearly differentiate themselves from the
males, by having fewer paper counts. The hypothesis was based on the fact that females
had been in the fields for a shorter time than males. However, based on these results that
did not seem to be the case. A log-log plot of 4.8b and 4.8c could be found in appendix
B in figure B.2.
It was also interesting to study how two variables interacted with each other. Figure 4.9
shows the number of publications across the five different age groups for both genders.
The result was not surprising.
I saw how the number of publications rose along with
higher seniority. An interesting finding was that females actually had a higher number of
publications on average compared to males for four out of five of the age groups. figure
B.3. Lastly, I also saw for every age group there were some invited speakers who had not
published very many papers at the time of the conference. The boxplot of the participants
can be found in Appendix B
0-5
5-10
10-15
15-20
>20
Age Group
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
Number of publications
Publication distribution of invited speakers by age group
gender
F
M
Figure 4.9: The boxplots show how the speakers with higher seniority have published more
papers at the time of the conference compared to the younger speakers. The boxplot does
not include outliers.
24
Evolution of Gender Diversity in Academia
==PAGE:31==
Finally, the last step was to plot the cumulative paper count variable for each field. Figure
B.4 and B.5 in Appendix B showed the distribution of the paper count for the invited
speakers and participants respectively for each field of study. Since, I already had focused
on two fields, namely Artificial Intelligence and Algorithm and Theory, I plotted those in
figure 4.10. There was no great difference between the females and males in the two fields.
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
Number of publications
0.000
0.002
0.004
0.006
0.008
0.010
0.012
Density
Artificial Intelligence
0
100
200
300
400
500
Number of publications
0.000
0.001
0.002
0.003
0.004
0.005
0.006
0.007
Density
Algorithm and Theory
Female
Male
Dist. of publications per invited speaker
Figure 4.10: The distribution of publications at the time of the conference between the
invited female and male speakers for two fields. Again, there is no great difference between
the invited females and males.
Seniority
The second variable I explored was seniority. Seniority was the variable that subtracted
the year of the first paper from the year of the conference. Hence, under the assumption
that a person started their academic career by publishing a paper, this variable explained
how long a given speaker had been in the academic world. The histograms for the variable
are shown in figure 4.11.
0
20
40
60
Academic age
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
Density
Dist. of seniority for All
Invited
Proceedings
(a) Grouped by the role of
the speaker I see how people
who are invited speakers of-
ten have much more experi-
ence than the participants
0
20
40
60
Academic age
0.00
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
Density
Dist. of seniority for invited
F
M
(b) This plot only includes in-
vited speakers.
Females in
general are young than males
when they are invited.
0
20
40
60
Academic age
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.10
Density
Dist. of seniority for Participants
F
M
(c) This plot only includes
participants. There is no ma-
jor difference between the fe-
male and male participants.
Figure 4.11: The three plots shows the distribution of seniority by the speakers at the
time of the conference.
Evolution of Gender Diversity in Academia
25
==PAGE:32==
The first plot (4.11a) grouped the data into invited and proceedings.
I saw that the
participants in the proceedings were much younger compared to the invited speakers. Very
few people were invited to speak at a conference in the early stage of their career. However,
it seemed that it was not that uncommon to see very young scientists as a participant.
The invited speakers were fairly normally distributed with an average academic age of
21.5 years, whereas the average academic age for the participants was 11.8 years.
I was curious about the invited speakers who had less than five years of experience but
were still invited. I found 56 instances of speakers who were invited whom it was less than
five years after their first publication. I randomly checked ten of the speakers. Please see
table 4.2.
Table 4.2: Ten randomly selected speakers who are invited to a conference less than five
years after their first publication.
Invited
Profession
Jeff Hawkins (M)
Industry: Palm Inc.
Duncan Watts (M)
Sociologist Professor
Gian Fulgoni (M)
Industry: Comscore
Michael Cavaretta (M)
Industry: Ford Motor Company
Konrad Feldman (M)
Industry: Quantcast
Robin Li (M)
Industry: Baidu
Richard Sutton (M)
Professor: Computer Scientist
Drew Purves (M)
Industry: DeepMind
Donna Cox (F)
Professor: Scientific Visualization
Clayton M. Christensen (M)
Professor: Business economics
Knowing the significance of a conference for the field of computer science, my hypoth-
esis was that the list would only include speakers from the academic society. However,
when I looked at the list it became obvious that the reason why some speakers had
such a low academic age was because they had never belonged in the academic world.
Speakers such as Robin Li who is the CEO of Baidu (China’s top search engine) have
only published one conference and workshop paper according to dblp.org. It seemed rea-
sonable that he only had very few papers.
When I looked at the speakers who were
professors, I question whether they were in fact this young at the time of the conference.
With a quick Google search, I found several papers made by Richard Sutton for instance.
Figure 4.12: Example of how a wrong
profile is chosen for Richard S. Sutton
When I then checked dblp.org again I no-
ticed why he only had one publication.
The
code which found the record of publications for
Richard Sutton used the wrong profile, see im-
age 4.12. Because the conference did not list the
’S.’ in Richard’s name, the code simply chose
the first profile. The correct profile would have
been ’Richard S. Sutton’ who has made 169
records. Although this was a regrettable error,
it was unclear the magnitude of similar issues.
Constraints of the project did not allow that I
spent more time processing the data.
26
Evolution of Gender Diversity in Academia
==PAGE:33==
Figure 4.11b and 4.11c showed the academic age grouped by gender. Again, the plot was
split for invited speakers and participants. For the invited speakers (4.11b), I saw how the
two distributions were different from each other. Females were a bit younger than males.
Out of the people who had more than 40 years of experience, males were the dominating
gender. Only one female in the data set of invited speakers had an academic career above
40 years.
For the proceedings, it was hard to tell how large the difference between the males and
females was from figure 4.11c. Most of the females participating in the proceedings were
at the early stage of their careers. About half of the female participants had less than ten
years of academic experience before participating in a conference. I could also see that
the same went for the males, where most of the male participants were very young.
The distribution of the seniority for each field is placed in Appendix B figure B.6 and B.7
for invited speakers and participants respectively.
Productivity
The last variable is productivity, which divides the cumulative paper count with the se-
niority. This variable indicates the average number of publications per year since the first
publication. Please find the histograms in figure 4.13.
0
20
40
60
Productivity
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.10
0.12
0.14
0.16
Density
Dist. of productivity for all
Invited
Proceedings
(a) Grouped by the role of
the speaker, I see how there
is not much difference be-
tween the yearly productivity
for invited speakers and par-
ticipants.
0
5
10
15
20
25
Productivity
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
Density
Dist. of productivity for invited
F
M
(b) The plot only includes in-
vited speakers.
Females are
in general a bit more produc-
tive than the males
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Productivity
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.10
Density
Dist. of productivity for participants
F
M
(c) The plot only includes
participants. There is almost
no difference between the fe-
males and males.
Figure 4.13: The three plots shows the distribution of productivity (i.e. average number
of publications per year ) by the speakers at the time of the conference.
Again, I started by plotting all the data and grouped it into an invited and proceedings
distribution, as seen in figure 4.13a. I saw that the data, similar to the cumulative paper
count, was very right-skewed. Hence, most speakers published a low number of papers
each year, and few people published extremely many during a year. The means were 4.3
and 4.3 publications per year since the first publications for the invited and proceedings,
respectively. Hence, there was not a big difference between the productivity level as an
invited speaker and as a participant in the proceedings. When I looked only at the invited
speaker grouped by gender in figure 4.13b, I did see some fluctuations, where the majority
switched between the females and males. However, I would not say that I could clearly
see a difference in the two distributions. The difference was even smaller when I looked
at the proceedings 4.13c, where they were almost identical.
Evolution of Gender Diversity in Academia
27
==PAGE:34==
Finally, I looked at the productivity variable across the five age groups for the invited
speakers with respect to the females and males. Please see figure 4.14. I was not surprised
when I saw, how it was mostly a speaker with a very high academic seniority who was
most productive. However, when I looked at the four oldest age groups females were more
productive than males with respect to the mean, first quantile, median, and third quantile.
The plot for the participants can be found in figure B.8 in Appendix B.
0-5
5-10
10-15
15-20
>20
Age Group
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
Average number of publication per year
Productivity distribution of invited speakers by age group
gender
F
M
Figure 4.14: The boxplots show how the speakers with higher seniority are more produc-
tive at the time of the conference compared to the younger speakers. Females are more
productive compared to males. The boxplot does not include outliers.
The plot of the distribution of productivity for each field can be found in Appendix B
figure B.9 and B.10 for invited speakers and participants respectively.
4.3
Summary
This chapter explored how gender evolution was in the last 20 years for 17 different com-
puter science conferences. Although females were increasingly being invited more often at
conferences, there was still not a year where there was the same number of females and
males across all conferences in the data set.
Next, the three values which will be used in the analysis in the next chapter, Cumulative
Paper Count, Seniority, and Productivity were explored. For the first variable, it was
seen how the numbers of publications were extremely right-skewed, but overall were very
similar between the invited and proceedings and between the females and males. When the
seniority variable was looked at, a clear difference was observed. The variable suggested
that invited speakers were older than participants and females tended to be younger than
the males when looking at the invited speakers only. Finally, the last variable, productivity,
did not differ much between the males and females or between the invited and proceedings.
Overall, it seemed that females were younger, but equally and a bit more productive than
the males
28
Evolution of Gender Diversity in Academia
==PAGE:35==
5
Examining Gender-Based Disparities
Using Permutation Testing
The previous chapter presented a descriptive analysis of the unique data set. This analysis
provided insights into the invited speaker between female and male speakers and high-
lighted some potential differences between them.
However, descriptive statistics alone
cannot determine whether these differences are statistically significant. By conducting a
permutation test, I was able to determine whether the observed differences were statisti-
cally significant. The test was done on the three key variables: Cumulative Paper Count,
Seniority, and Productivity.
5.1
Permutation Test
In the following, I will describe the statistical methods I used in order to examine gender-
based disparities. The permutation test is a non-parametric method for testing if a label
is significant with respect to a variable. In this project, the label I examined was gender.
The variables I tested were: Cumulative Paper Count, Seniority, and Productivity. The
idea was to give a speaker a new gender label n times for the female and male population of
speakers, XF and XM respectively. If the label did not have an influence on the variables,
then it should not make a difference if I changed the label.
The null hypothesis would then be that there was no difference between the females and
males:
H0 : XM = XF
I used the average as the test statistic. The average was simple to calculate and easy to
interpret. If the null hypothesis was true, i.e. there was no difference between females and
males, then the average of the two genders should be approximately the same.
The p-value is the probability of observing a value that is more extreme than the observed
value. I used a significance level of 1 % [48]. In order to reject the null hypothesis I would
need a p-value of less than 1 %.
Table 5.1 below describes the implementation of the test in more detail [49]:
Table 5.1: The following table describes how the permutation test was used in my analysis.
Permutation Test
1. Calculated the mean between µM and µF for XM and XF
2. Found the empirical delta as ∆µ = µF −µM
3. Calculated the proportion of male and female speakers
4. New labels were randomly assigned to each observation without replacement and
while the proportion of male and female speakers in the data set was preserved.
5. Pooled observations from each group and calculated ¯XM and ¯XF for the two groups.
6. Calculated the delta as ∆¯X = ¯XF −¯XF
7. Repeated steps 4., 5. and 6. n = 10, 000 times.
8. The one-sided p-value was calculated as the proportion of means ¯XM and ¯XF less
or higher than µM and µF respectively.
The advantage of using the permutation test is the flexibility. It can be used on non-
parametric data. I saw in figure 4.8, 4.11, 4.13, that it was only the distribution of the
Evolution of Gender Diversity in Academia
29
==PAGE:36==
invited speakers’ seniority that seemed to follow a normal distribution.
Secondly, the
test provides an approximate p-value that is not based on any assumptions about the
data distribution. A limitation of the permutation test is on the other hand that it can
be computationally intensive if the sample size is large or if the variable is continuous.
However, the data I used for the analysis were only conducted on the invited speakers
(1311 samples) and the variable I tested was categorical (F or M). Therefore, I found the
permutation test to be a suitable test in this context. However, it is worth noticing that
the permutation test does not provide any information about causality. There may be
other variables that are driving the observed difference.
5.2
Results
Figure 5.1 shows the result of the permutations test for the three variables for the invited
speakers.
20
10
0
10
20
30
XF - XM paper count
0.00
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
0.06
0.07
0.08
Density
Permutation test for invited speakers on paper count
XF - XM
F - 
M: -2.89
(a) The empirical mean is closely placed in the
center, which suggests that the difference be-
tween females and males with respect to the
number of publications at the time of the con-
ference is not significant.
3
2
1
0
1
2
3
XF - XM Seniority
0.00
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
0.06
0.07
0.08
Density
Permutation test for invited speakers on Seniority
XF - XM
F - 
M: -3.13
(b) The plot suggests that the difference between
the females’ and males’ seniority is significant.
Females are younger than males.
Few, if not
none, samples are more extreme than the true
difference in the means.
0.75
0.50
0.25
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
XF - XM Productivity
0.00
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
0.06
0.07
Density
Permutation test for invited speakers on Productivity
XF - XM
F - 
M: 0.38
(c) The true difference suggests that there might be some significant dif-
ference between the females and males with respect to the yearly produc-
tivity.
Figure 5.1: The following plots demonstrates a permutation test between the females and
males with respect to three different variables. The permutation test is done with the
difference between the average female and the average male.
30
Evolution of Gender Diversity in Academia
==PAGE:37==
To compute the test statistic, the difference between the average values for females and
males (i.e. ∆¯X = ¯XF −¯XM and ∆µ = µF −µM) was calculated, as described in table 5.1.
The permutation test was performed on the raw data before the averages were subtracted,
and the results of this analysis are presented in Appendix B in figure B.11.
Cumulative paper count
In figure 5.1a I saw that the empirical mean for the cumulative paper count between the
females and males was very close to each other because the empirical delta was close to
zero. Females had on average published 94.82 publications, whereas males had published
97.7 publications at the time of the conference. This led to a delta value of -2.89. This
meant that by randomly resampling the label for the females, yielded a higher average
paper count for the simulated data than for the empirical value.
The empirical value of the paper count was closely centered on the distribution obtained
by reshuffling the gender labels. This meant that it did not seem that gender had an
influence on the number of publications at the time of the conference. I calculated the
p-value for the permutation test by counting the number of occurrences more extreme
than the true delta value of -2.89 and divided that by the total n.
p-value =
3494
10, 000
= 34.9%
With a significance level of 1 %, I accepted the null hypothesis. This meant that there
was a fairly high probability that gender did not influence the number of publications at
the time a speaker was invited to a conference.
Seniority
The second permutation test was for the seniority variable, please see figure 5.1b. Here it
was much more clear that there was a difference in the seniority between invited females
and invited males. The empirical delta had a negative value of -3.13, which meant the
invited males had on average three more years of experience compared to invited females.
This was the same result I saw in figure 4.11b, where invited females were younger than the
invited males. From the visual inspection, I saw that the empirical value was not within
the distribution. This suggests that there was a significant difference between genders.
Furthermore, it suggested that the difference was unlikely to have occurred by chance if
the null hypothesis was true. The p-value from the permutation test was:
p-value =
1
10, 000
<
1
10, 000
The result yielded an extremely significant p-value when I used the same 1 % significance
level.
It meant that those females invited to speak at a computer science conference
were significantly younger than a group of 10,000 random speakers. However, this did
not necessarily mean that the observed difference was causal, or that the difference was
due to gender. There might be other variables or factors that were driving the observed
differences in seniority between males and females.
Productivity
The final permutation test was made for the productivity variable, please see figure 5.1c.
This variable showed an interesting result.
The empirical delta was positive by 0.38.
This meant that the invited females on average published 0.38 publications per year more
Evolution of Gender Diversity in Academia
31
==PAGE:38==
compared to the invited males. Of course, an author can not publish 0.38 papers, but
since the variable was an average of many numbers it made sense. It was the first variable
where the difference between the females and males was positive. I figure 4.13b it was
diﬀicult to get a sense of the difference between females and males. However, it was more
clear in figure 5.1c after the permutation test. The empirical delta seemed to be rather
far on the right-hand side. The p-value could declare if gender in fact was significant or
not.
p-value =
795
10, 000
= 7.9%
The p-value was not significant.
This meant that those females invited to speak at a
computer science conference were not significantly more productive than a group of 10,000
random speakers.
Evolution of the p-values
The final step for the permutation test was to plot the p-values for the three different
variables for each year and examine how the significance changed every year. In some
years a variable might be significant and the next year not. The variable which described
the seniority of the speakers was significant most times.
2003
2005
2007
2009
2011
2013
2015
2017
2019
2021
Year
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
P-value
Evolution of p-value for invited speakers
Cum. paper count
Seniority
Productivity
Significance level
Figure 5.2: The result of the p-values for each year with respect to the three key variables.
I see how the p-values are very noisy and change every year. It is diﬀicult to conclude
much based on these results.
5.3
Summary
The previous chapter conducted a permutation test in order to statistically determine if
there was a significant difference between the invited females and invited males based on
the three key variables. It was only the variables that explained the academic seniority
that was significant between the females and males. Females tended to be younger than
the males. The other two variables were not significant.
32
Evolution of Gender Diversity in Academia
==PAGE:39==
6
Gender Bias in Conference
Invitations: A Nearest Neighbor
Analysis
The previous chapter demonstrated how methods could be used to determine if there was
a difference between females and males for various variables. This chapter will examine
gender bias in the conference invitation by using the nearest neighbor algorithm.
The underrepresentation of females in computer science conferences and their lower like-
lihood of being invited was established in Chapter 4 (see Figure 4.6). In this chapter,
I look at the actual characteristics of females and males. The characteristics I examine
are cumulative paper count, seniority and productivity. I then look at the participants as
the underlying population, and as people that could potentially become invited speakers.
Please see figure 6.1. If I take a male there would be a certain likelihood that he would
be invited. If I take a female who was similar to a male speaker, that female had either
a lower or higher likelihood of being invited. In the following, I compare the likelihood
that female speakers who are similar to male speakers are invited to conferences.
By
comparing invitations for similar males and females, instead of the entire male and female
population, I increase the likelihood that any differences in invitations are due to gender
differences, not confounding variables such as publications, seniority, and productivity.
Invited
Speakers
Participants
~
Figure 6.1: The figure illustrates how there is a relationship between the invited speakers
and participants. The assumption is that participants are a population of potential invited
speakers.
To find similar females speaker based on a male speaker I use the nearest neighbors method,
which I describe in the following section.
6.1
Nearest Neighbor
In the following section, I will describe the nearest neighbor algorithm. The algorithm
is used to find female speakers who are similar to male speakers. The nearest neighbor
algorithm is a supervised classification method. The idea is to find the k data points in
a data set that are closest to another data point. Based on the majority vote, a new
observation will be classified in the class to which the k nearest neighbors belong. The
closeness is based on a distance measure [50].
I did not use the nearest neighbor method to classify. I used it solely to approximate
matching. That means the algorithm finds the k closest observations based on a distance
measure.
Finding a suitable similarity measure
A natural question to ask is why I used the nearest neighbor and not another similar-
ity measure, for instance, the cosine similarity. I did try the cosine similarity initially
Evolution of Gender Diversity in Academia
33
==PAGE:40==
sklearn.metrics.pairwise.cosine_similarity(). My reason was that it was a simple
method, which calculated the angle between one observation and every other observation.
However, when I combined the observations of the invited speakers and proceedings I
needed to calculate angles between 143,359 males and 36,643 females, which led to a total
of 5,253,103,837 distances. This result was too computationally heavy for my computer.
The cosines similarity was not suitable for this data set.
By using the nearest neighbor from sklearn.neighbors.NearestNeighbors() I would
also calculate the distance from one point and all other points. The algorithm then sorts
the distances and selects the k closest points.
The nearest neighbor algorithm differs
from the cosine similarity because the algorithm optimizes the distance calculations to
run more eﬀiciently. It does that by using different data structures. The default structure
is to automatically choose the most suitable structure given the input data. This was not
something I investigated further. However, the end result from the cosine similarity was
a 143, 359 × 36, 643 matrix. However, the end result from the nearest neighbor with for
instance k = 5 would only be 716,795 distances. This was definitely the major advantage
of the nearest neighbor method.
Finding an appropriate distance metric
The next question was, which distance metric to use? The default distance to sklearn
neighbors.NearestNeighbors() is the Euclidean distance.
It calculates the straight-
line distance between two points, for instance, an attribute for a male Mvariable and an
attribute for a similar female Fvariable:
d(M, F) =
√
(Fpaper −Mpaper)2 + (Fseniority −Mseniority)2 + (Fproductivity −Mproductivity)2
The distance is simple and intuitive. Secondly, the Euclidean distance takes the magnitude
of the points into account, whereas the cosine distance only considers the angle between
the points.
In the end, the result did not change much when I changed the distance
measure. I tried three distance metrics: Euclidean, Cosine, and Manhattan distance. The
result of all plots which will be shown later can be found with all three distance metrics
in appendix B in figure B.12. I used the Euclidean distance in the results presented below
because of simplicity.
Transformed variables
The Euclidean distance was sensitive to variables of different scales. From chapter 4.2 I
knew that the scale of the cumulative paper count was much higher than seniority and
productivity. In this analysis, it would not be essential whether a speaker had published
500, 800, or 1000 publications at the time of the conference. All values of such magnitude
indicated that a speaker had published extremely many papers. Because the paper count
was right-skewed I decided to transform the cumulative paper count by taking the natural
logarithm as such: ln(cumulative paper count). This reduced the influence of noise in
extreme values. However, there was still some difference between the variables in terms of
scale. The variable with the largest scale was now seniority. This meant that the distance
to the closest observations would be most impacted by the seniority variable. Although it
could be troublesome that one variable had a greater influence than other variables, the
seniority variable was also the only variable that turned out to be significantly different
between the males and females based on the result from chapter 5.
I tested whether
it made a difference if I scaled the variable to be within the same range.
I used the
MinMaxScaler() from sklearn to accomplish this. Normalizing the three variables did
not change the result. The result of all plots which will be shown later can be found with
normalized variables in appendix B in figure B.13, B.14, B.15, and B.16.
34
Evolution of Gender Diversity in Academia
==PAGE:41==
Filtering the data to a specific year
It was important that the females and males I compared were present at a conference
in the same year. The assumption was that it would not make sense to conclude that a
female who for instance participated in a conference in 2007 was similar to a male speaker
participating in 2017 in spite of the similarity between the three key variables. Secondly,
the field could have changed in that decade. If the field has grown, a speaker that would
have been qualified to speak in 2007 might seem to be under-qualified in 2017.
The
argument was that this female would violate the assumption of being a potential speaker.
The nearest neighbor was therefore filtered to only include speakers from the same year
upon the beginning of the algorithm.
Distance threshold
When I specified k it significantly reduced the number of distances reported in the end.
With the nearest neighbor set to, for instance, k = 5 the algorithm would always find five
females who were closest to a male speaker. However, for some males, there might not
be any likely female matches. To avoid comparing males and females that really were not
comparable, I created a threshold. The threshold ensured that the distance between male
and female matches had to be below a certain threshold in order to count as a match. To
determine a suitable threshold value, I first plotted a histogram of the distances in order
to understand the distribution. I saw that the data was right-skewed, meaning that most
similar females matched exactly or very closely with the males and few were different. The
log-log plot of these distances with different years can be found in appendix B in figure
B.17. I concluded that most of the similar females were exactly the same as the male
speaker or very close even when I tried for different years with respect to the three key
variables I used.
Calculating the relative likelihood of being invited
After I had found similar females, I calculated the relative likelihood that a female would
be invited compared to a matching male. The process is explained in figure 6.2 through
an example.
Male
Invited
Female
Invited
Female
Parti.
Female
Parti.
Male
Parti.
Female
Parti.
Female
Parti.
Male
Invited
Female
Invited
Female
Parti.
Female
Parti.
Female
Invited
Male
Invited
Female
Invited
Male
Parti.
Male
Invited
Female
Parti.
Female
Parti.
Male
Invited
Female
Invited
Male
Parti.
Male
Invited
Female
Parti.
Female
Parti.
1. iteration
n. iteration
...
P(males)
2/3
P(females)
1/3
P(females)
1/3
P(males)
2/3
Figure 6.2: The figure shows how three females are similar to a male speaker for three
different males. The first step is then to randomly select one female and calculate the
ratio of invited for the females and males respectively. For instance, in the first iteration,
one female out of the three randomly selected similar females is an invited speaker at the
time of the conference. For the males, two out of three speakers are invited. This process
is repeated n = 1, 000 times.
Evolution of Gender Diversity in Academia
35
==PAGE:42==
First, I take my list of similar females for each matching male. From the set of k similar
females, I randomly select one female. I check the male speaker if that person is an invited
speaker or a participant. I do the same for the randomly selected similar female. I then
have two lists; one with the source of all the males (invited or participants) and one with
the source of the randomly selected females source (invited or participants). Afterward,
I calculate the ratio of invited females and invited males P (Finvited) and P (Minvited).
Dividing those two results in the relative likelihood of a female being invited:
Relative likelihood of a female being invited = P(Finvited)
P(Minvited)
(6.1)
I repeat the process of randomly selecting one similar female n = 1, 000 times. After I
have a list of 1,000 relative likelihood of a female being invited I take the average and
standard deviation of that list in order to construct an error bar chart. I do this process
for each year. The result is the average relative likelihood of a female being invited per
year. If the result is above one it indicates that females are more likely to be invited. If
the result is below one, it indicates that males are more likely to be invited.
Previously, when I calculated the ratio of females I used equation (4.1). The calculation of
the relative likelihood of a female being invited is different. One might find it confusing that
1 means equality in equation (6.1), whereas 0.5 meant equality in the analysis presented
in figure 4.6. I made this choice because the relative likelihood of a female being invited is
calculated as a direct comparison of two ratios - the list of males and the list of females. In
Appendix B, I replotted figures such that 0.5 indicated equality. The plots can be found
in figure B.18, B.19, B.20, and B.21.
Example of similar speakers
Yann LeCun
log(paper): 4.7
Age: 24
Productivity: 4.9
Inivted
ICML
Allison Druin
log(paper): 4.8
Age: 24
Productivity: 5.1
Proceeding
CHI
Michael Kearns
log(paper): 4.9
Age: 25
Productivity: 5.8
Invited
KDD
Louise E. Moser
log(paper): 5.1
Age: 24
Productivity: 6.8
Proceeding
KDD
Martin Grohe
 log(paper): 4.8
Age: 19
Productivity: 6.6
Invited
SODA
Petra Mutzel
 log(paper): 4.8
Age: 19
Productivity: 6.7
Proceeding
ICML
Dana Ron
 log(paper): 4.7
Age: 19
Productivity: 6.1
Proceeding
SODA
Tim Berners-Lee
log(paper): 3.7
Age: 24
Productivity: 1.7
Invited
WWW
Hilary Johnson
  log(paper): 3.7
Age: 24
Productivity: 1.7
Proceeding
CHI
Xing Chen
log(paper): 3.6
Age: 24
Productivity: 1.5
Proceeding
AAAI
Louise E. Moser
log(paper): 5.1
Age: 24
Productivity: 6.8
Proceeding
KDD
Xing Chen
log(paper): 3.6
Age: 24
Productivity: 1.5
Proceeding
AAAI
Figure 6.3: The figure illustrates an example of how four males are similar to one and two
females respectively. All speakers attended the conferences in 2012. Most interesting is
the similarity between Martin Grohe and Petra Mutzel and between Michael Kearns and
Louise E. Moser. Both are examples of where the speakers are from the same conference
and where the males are invited and the females are participants.
36
Evolution of Gender Diversity in Academia
==PAGE:43==
As a sanity check, I took five male names from the top ten most invited speakers (table
4.1) and selected the year 2012, because that was the year where most speakers from the
list participated. Based on these five males I found the most similar females. Please see
figure 6.3. Ideally, I would create a filter for each field of study to ensure that a female
speaker was compared to a male speaker within the same field. However, the amount of
data was not suﬀicient for each field to construct such an analysis. However, this result
is still interesting. Martin Grohe is a professor of computer science at RWTH Aachen
University, Germany. Grohe participated in the SODA conference in 2012 as an invited
speaker. At the same year and conference, Dana Ron participated in the proceedings.
Ron is a professor of electrical engineering at Tel Aviv University in Israel. Based on the
three key variables they were close to exactly similar to each other at the time of the
conference. A similar example can be found between Michael Kearns who attended the
KDD conference in 2012 as an invited speaker and Louise E. Moser who was a participant.
Kearns is a professor at the University of Pennsylvania, US and Moser is a professor at
the University of California, Santa Barbara, US.
6.2
Results
Result based on the year
The result of the nearest neighbor and the likelihood estimation can be found in figure
6.4. The figure revealed that the average likelihood of females being invited has been
increasing. For instance, females were 2.25 more likely to be invited in 2022 compared
to males and only 1.25 times more likely in 2003. The likelihood was above one in most
years, except in 2004, 2008, and 2009. Remember from figure 4.4 how 2009 was the year
with the fewest invited females in the data set, only four invited females. The error bars
also indicated that more years were also below one.
2003
2005
2007
2009
2011
2013
2015
2017
2019
2021
Year
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
Likelihood of female invitation
Evolution of likelihood of female invitations
Figure 6.4: The red line represents the likelihood of females being invited to computer
science conferences based on the similar females found with the nearest neighbor algorithm
where k = 10. The dashed line indicates that values above one favors females and values
below one favor male speaker to be invited. In general, females are more likely to be
invited for most years. This means that there has been an effort to promote females in
computer science.
Remember from figure 3.2 that many of the conferences were not held annually or not
introduced yet (IC2S2 for instance) between 2003 and 2016. This can explain these fluc-
tuations for those years. After 2017 most conferences were held annually and the line
therefore indicates an actual increasing trend. Overall it seemed that there has been an
Evolution of Gender Diversity in Academia
37
==PAGE:44==
effort to invite more females because the line was above one for most years.
Changing the k value did change the result slightly. I tried k = 1, 5, 10 and 20. The result
of the four k values are attached in figure B.22 in Appendix B. A higher k resulted in a
slightly smoother line. However, I found that k = 10 resulted in a suﬀicient view of the
evolution, and the result was shown in figure 6.4.
Lastly, I tried switching the genders, such that the algorithm found males who were most
similar to female speakers.
The result is in Appendix B in figure B.24.
As expected
the evolution showed that males became decreasingly less likely to be invited, hence to
opposite of figure 6.4.
Result based on the year and age group
Next, I wanted to investigate this evolution of relative likelihood in female invitations
as compared to male invitations further. I wanted to extend the comparison from just
conference years to also include age groups. I created a new filter, similar to the year
filter. Females should now have the same age group as the male speakers in order to be
similar. The result can be found in figure 6.5. The intensity of the red color meant that
females were more likely to be invited and blue meant the opposite.
0-5
5-10
10-15
15-20
>20
Age Group
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
Year
2.87
0.90
0.53
1.45
0.59
1.80
5.04
2.72
2.03
2.29
0.50
1.36
2.59
0.86
1.13
0.55
4.73
0.83
2.14
2.22
1.27
0.35
3.74
0.71
0.98
0.70
0.55
2.55
1.10
1.58
1.51
2.74
1.36
0.92
0.72
0.78
2.86
2.38
1.06
3.62
0.85
2.51
1.32
12.47
2.25
0.55
0.29
1.15
1.25
2.48
3.89
6.02
1.21
1.11
0.33
7.87
1.24
1.08
4.08
0.22
2.68
3.21
2.18
1.92
1.99
6.76
2.31
3.67
1.85
Evolution of likelihood of female invitations for different age groups
2
4
6
8
10
12
Figure 6.5: The heatmap shows the likelihood of females being invited based on females
who were similar to male speakers.
Both the male and the similar females attended
the conference in the same year and belonged to the same age group at the time of the
conference. The colors were centered around one, where values above meant that females
were more likely to be invited. Overall there is no clear pattern. However, females were
more likely to be invited for all age groups in the last two years.
When I filtered the data on age groups, the data became very limited. The white boxes
indicated that there either was no female or male invited speaker for the given year or
38
Evolution of Gender Diversity in Academia
==PAGE:45==
age group. Recall that figure 4.11b showed that there were very few invited speakers who
were very young. Because of this most white boxes were within the first two age groups.
Overall it was diﬀicult to conclude much from figure 6.5. There was no clear pattern or
trend. The oldest age group, with speakers who it was more than 20 years since their first
publications, was the group with the most years where the males were more likely to be
invited. Given the boxes with data points the majority of values below one were before
2012. The age groups with the highest likelihood of a female invitation were 15-20, 5-10,
and 10-15. In general, it seemed that females were more likely to be invited in the last
two years when all values were above one.
Result based on the year and field
The goal was to finish this section with an additional filter based on the field of study. For
most fields, it was not possible to create a meaningful result because of the lack of data.
The result for each field can be found in Appendix B in figure B.23.
6.3
Ratio of females based on potential speakers
The first part of this chapter was based on figure 6.1. The figure illustrated that it was
reasonable to assume that participants described the underlying distribution of the invited
speakers. However, the last step in my analysis is to question this assumption. I saw in
chapter 4 that there was a considerable difference between the invited speaker and the
participants in the proceedings. For instance, invited speakers were in general older than
the participants. It was also reasonable to assume that it was not all participants who
could qualify as potential invited speakers. Figure 6.6 illustrates this relationship.
Invited
Speakers
Participants
~
?
~
Potential
Speakers
Figure 6.6: Previously I assumed that the participants explained the ground truth about
the invited speakers. However, now I questioned this assumption: Are all participants
qualified to be invited speakers? I created a new group called potential speaker. Those
participants would be more comparable with the invited speakers.
Calculating the ratio of potential female speakers
I had now created a new group called potential speakers. An example is illustrated in figure
6.7. These speakers were found in a similar manner to the way the females were found
previously, I used the nearest neighbor algorithm. For all the invited speakers I found
the k most similar speakers based on the pool of all invited speakers and all participants.
Again, I filtered the year of the conference for all speakers to be equal. One match that
was always guaranteed to occur was the match with oneself. I made sure, that an invited
speaker could not be matched with themselves.
The aim was to compare the true ratio of invited females which I saw in figure 4.6 with
the ratio of potential female speakers. After the ratio of each set of potential speakers was
found I took the mean for each year. The result compared the true ratio of invited female
speakers with the ratio of potential invited females.
Evolution of Gender Diversity in Academia
39
==PAGE:46==
Male
Female
Female
Male
Male
Female
Female
Male
Female
Female
Male
Male
1/3
2/3
1/3
Invited
Potential speakers
Figure 6.7: The figure showed how potential speakers were found based on a similarity
measure between an invited speaker. Next, the ratio of females was found for each set
of potential speakers. For instance, the first invited male speaker was similar to three
speakers. In this set, one speaker was a female, thus the ratio of potential invited females
was 1/3. Finally, the total ratio of females was found as the average of all ratios. In this
example it would be 0.44
Result: The ratio of potential invited female speakers
The result is plotted in figure 6.8. The figure shows that the ratio of potential invited
female speakers was higher than the true ratio of invited females for most years. The result
did change depending on the threshold of data I included and the number of neighbors.
Increasing the amount of data included, i.e. lowered the threshold, lowered the ratio of
potential invited female speakers. When I increased the number of neighbors the ratio fell
again. Please see figure B.25 and B.26 in Appendix B for reference.
2003
2005
2007
2009
2011
2013
2015
2017
2019
2021
Year
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
Ratio of female speakers
Ratio of invited and potential female speakers per year
True ratio of female speakers
Ratio of potential female speakers
Equal ratio of females and males
Figure 6.8: The ratio of potential invited females plotted next to the true ratio of invited
female speakers. The red line is similar to figure 4.6. The threshold was set to include
70% of the data and the number of neighbors was set to k = 10. The plot showed that for
most years, the ratio of potential females was larger than the ratio of females who were
actually invited to computer science conferences.
40
Evolution of Gender Diversity in Academia
==PAGE:47==
0.60
0.65
0.70
0.75
0.80
0.85
Ratio
Relation
F-M
2003
2005
2007
2009
2011
2013
2015
2017
2019
2021
Year
0.10
0.15
0.20
Ratio
Relation
M-F
Ratio of speaker relationships by gender over the years
Figure 6.9: The plot showed the relationship of genders between the invited speakers and
the potential speakers. The first letter in the legend (F or M) indicated the gender of
the invited speaker and the second value (F or M) indicated the gender of the potential
speaker. The data were normalized such that FF + FM = 1 and MM + MF = 1
Gender relationship between similar speakers
The last part is to investigate the reason why there were more potentially invited females
for most years in figure 6.8. One reason could be that there were simply entering more
invited females at the computer science conferences. Because of this, there might have
been a tendency for the invited females to be similar to other females. In order to test
this, I took the gender of the potential speakers and listed the relationship between these
speakers and the gender of the invited speakers. For instance, in the first row of figure 6.7
I would first have a M-M relation, then another M-M, and lastly a M-F relation.
I did that for each match and finally took the normalized ratio for each year. That meant
that FF + FM = 1 and MM + MF = 1. Since one line would always be redundant I
decided only to plot one line to better show the trend. The result is presented in figure
6.9. Firstly, it is interesting to study the blue line. Those are the cases where the invited
speaker is a male and the similar speakers (i.e. potential invited speakers) are females. It
seems that even though females are more invited to computer science conferences there
has not been much of a change in the underlying population. Thus, in most cases, an
invited male will still be most similar to another male speaker. It seems that the effect to
get more females has not had a deep impact on the community yet. However, the blue line
is slightly trending upwards in recent years. Again, this plot also changed depending on
the number of neighbors and data included. Please see figure B.27 and B.28 in appendix
B.
Figure 6.10 looked closer at the gap between the invited males and the gender of those
matches (M-M and M-F) compared with the true ratio of invited females. Not surprisingly,
I observed a negative correlation. Although this did not explain a casual relationship, it
seemed that when more females were invited the gap became more narrow.
Evolution of Gender Diversity in Academia
41
==PAGE:48==
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
0.30
0.35
0.40
True ratio of invited female speakers
4
6
8
10
12
Number of M-M / Number of M-F
Relation between invited females and male matches
2003
2005
2007
2009
2011
2013
2015
2017
2019
2021
Year
Figure 6.10: The correlation was negative, which meant that when the number of invited
females increase the gap between M-M and M-F matches.
6.4
Summary
This chapter demonstrated how the nearest neighbor algorithm could be used to find
females who were similar to male speakers at the time of the conference given the three
key variables.
The assumption was that the ratio of invited speakers given the set of
similar females could explain if females were more likely to be given an invitation. The
result showed that females had been increasingly more likely to be invited than males in
the last 20 years. Latest in 2022 females were 2.5 times more likely to be invited.
In the last part of the chapter, I created a new group called potential speakers. The group
was also made with the nearest neighbor algorithm, where matches were found between
the invited speakers and the participants. The result showed that the ratio of potential
females was higher for most years than the true ratio of invited females. In recent years the
true ratio of invited speakers has however surpassed the ratio of potential female speakers.
42
Evolution of Gender Diversity in Academia
==PAGE:49==
7
Discussion
The previous chapters have presented multiple results. This chapter will be split into
three parts; a) a section where the key findings are discussed, b) a section discussing the
limitations of the project, and finally c) some ideas for improvements and future work.
7.1
Key Findings
Difference between female and male speakers
Once the data was collected I identified three key variables; a) cumulative paper count, b)
seniority, and c) the productivity. I expected that there would be a clear difference between
the invited/participants and the females/males. However, the major difference was for the
seniority between the females and males, where females were significantly younger than
the male speakers. The other variables were not significantly different between the females
and males.
Why are there overall fewer females in computer science conferences than
males?
In connection with the collection of the data, it was for the first time possible to see how
the ratio of invited female speakers has evolved. That was presented in figure 4.6. I saw
from the figure that the ratio of invited female speakers had increased from just above 0.15
in 2003 to 0.4 in 2022. An increase over the last 20 years of a factor of 2.6. I observed that
females were still underrepresented as of 2022. Below I list possible reasons underlying
my results, building upon the existing literature
One reason why there were few females could be there were simply fewer females in the
field. Reading some of the literature, it was not hard to understand why there were fewer
females in academia.
From the physics community, I knew that females had a higher
drop-out rate [30]. Following that, a study made by Llorens et al. (2021) showed how
females have historically faced a number of different facets of gender bias throughout a
researcher’s career. Biases such as sexual harassment, family expectations, teaching, and
research grant applications, etc. [21]. The figure I referenced can be found in Appendix
B in figure B.29. Swanne Gordon, a professor of biology, has shared her experience with
biases as a female navigating academic society. ”It is hard to feel and be shown that you
need to constantly prove (and re-prove) to everyone in the room why you belong there...”
[51].
The analysis also showed that the ratio of potential invited females where higher than the
actual ratio of invited females. Please see figure 6.8. These females might not have been
traditionally a potential speaker perhaps because of their younger academic seniority.
Lastly, a reason why there were fewer invited female speakers could be due to the fact that
many females decline their invitation. My hypothesis was that anyone who received an
invitation would be thrilled and accepted. However, Schroeder et al. (2013) showed that
females in the field of evolutionary biology decline the invitation 50% of the time, whereas
males decline 26% of the time [52]. A member of the SWAT committee explained during
an email correspondence that in his experience: ”female researchers of top standing are
at least 3 times more likely to turn down such invitations”. One reason could be family
responsibility. However, most conferences had made an effort to include childcare. Addi-
tionally, invited speakers come in many different ages. Many potential invited speakers
probably do not have small children. A new study must be conducted in order to con-
clude whether this is still an issue. Another reason could be the pool size of potentially
Evolution of Gender Diversity in Academia
43
==PAGE:50==
invited females, which might be small. This means that it was the same few females who
attended conferences many times. I could imagine that this could be a tiring process in
the long term for those females and that many would therefore have to reject invitations
to a larger degree. However, this was investigated in the previous chapter in figure 6.8
and figure B.25 and B.26 in Appendix B. I saw from the figures that the ratio of potential
invited females was for many years higher than the true ratio of invited female speakers.
Thus, it seems there are more females to select. Lastly, a reason why females decline their
invitations could be the lack of visibility of other female scientists. However, why is visi-
bility so important in order to make more females attend a conference and thus increase
the diversity of computer science conferences? I will discuss this question in the following
section.
Increased ratio of invited female speakers
In the previous section, I discussed some of the possible reasons why there were still fewer
invited female speakers to computer science conferences than males. Although the ratio
of invited females and males was not equal for any years, there has still been an increase
in invited female speakers. This section discussed some of the potential driving factors for
the increase in invited females.
Firstly, the effort done to increase diversity by the universities may have increased. Uni-
versities have done various initiatives to address diversity. The Technical University of
Denmark has for instance created an engineering camp for girls in high school.
This
program allows girls to test whether education in the STEM field is something for them.
Secondly, I knew from previous studies that an increased number of females on the steering
committee can have an effect on the number of female invitations [53] [54]. A discussion
from the studies by Casadevall and Handelsman (2014) also asks if females are more likely
to accept invitations from other females [55].
Lastly, a key finding from the last analysis was from figure 6.4. The figure presented an
interesting finding. First, I selected females who were similar to a male with respect to the
three key variables. Next, I calculated the respective number of invited speakers of the
males and the similar females. The result showed that the relative likelihood of a female
being invited was increasing. For instance, in 2022 a female was two times more likely to
be invited compared to a similar male speaker. This result of mine showed that there has
been an effort to invite more females. The studies made by Damschen et al. (2005) showed
how altering the teaching material of ecology students to include more female scientists
had an effect on the student. ”... approximately half of all students entered the course
without being able to name a single woman or minority scientist; but only 10% of students
who received enriched material in both laboratory and lecture were still unable to do so”[56].
However, the study made here was only conducted over a period of one year. A study
by Dasgupta and Asgari (2004) claims to have proved evidence that frequent exposure to
female leaders can have a long-term effect on automatic gender stereotyping. The study
followed 82 female students in their first-year classes. Half the group was from a women’s
college and the other half was from a coeducational college. The idea was that a women’s
college would include more females in leadership positions than a coeducational college
[57]. However, similar to the previous study by Damschen et al (2005) the field study only
lasted one year. I believe it was discussable how the result can have a long-term effect
after only one year of field study. Nevertheless, studies have shown how an additional
effort to promote females increased visibility in general for females.
Why is visibility important?
The previous section showed how the result of the last analysis proved that there has been
an effort to invite more females. In this section, I will highlight why visibility is important
44
Evolution of Gender Diversity in Academia
==PAGE:51==
in order to increase diversity in computer science conferences.
Firstly, from the result I have presented here it is clear that the traditional perception of
an invited speaker has been a male previously. That might not have been the truth for all
fields, but for some of the fields presented here in this project, for instance, Concurrent,
Distributed, and Parallel0 Computing and the Computer Architecture field, it was rare to
find a female among the invited speakers. Increasing the visibility of invited female speak-
ers could also challenge the perception of an invited speaker within the steering committee.
Lastly, visibility creates role models and inspires the younger generation. Many tools are
already available in order to create a more diverse academic conference. Tools such as the
work done by Aanand nicely visualize and explains the chance of over- or underrepresent-
ing a certain group at a conference [58]. Another tool is the 500womenscientists.org, which
finds women scientists based on different filters, such as specialization, race, and location.
7.2
Limitations
In the following section, I will highlight some of the known limitations of this project.
Observing the effect of increased visibility
In the previous section, I discussed how there has been an effort to invite more females to
computer science conferences. I did find several sources that confirmed that the effect of
creating more visibility for females increased the overall awareness of females. However,
I also saw how the relationship between invited male speakers and participants was still
heavily dominated by M-M relations in figure 6.9. My hypothesis is, that such a process
takes time before being adopted by the steering committee for instance. I saw from figure
6.4 that the likelihood of a female invitation rose after 2016.
It is plausible that the
true effect of the boosting has not been seen yet.
The project is therefore limited in
its conclusion because the true effect might lie many years ahead of today.
Secondly,
I mentioned in chapter 3 that I was only able to collect data on the accepted invited
speakers. The effort from the increased visibility might be apparent in the number of
initially invited females. However, since this data is not publicly available, I am not able
to conclude the effect.
Data quality
Overall, the data I collected had a decent quality. Due to the time constraints of the
project, there were definitely some errors in the data that limited the projects. For in-
stance, I saw that data regarding the number of publications per speaker were not always
correct. I have highlighted any errors and compromises I have found in the data in the
report.
The last limitation I want to highlight is the conferences represented in this project. I
managed to collect data from 17 different computer science conferences. While I collected
data from several fields of study, the number of observations for most fields was too limited
to make a representative conclusion on behalf of an entire field.
7.3
Improvement and Future Work
The limitations from the previous section can be directly transferred as improvements
to future work. However, I wanted to include a few more remarks on future work and
improvements.
Include more conferences
For future work, an important step would be the collection of more data. That means a
collection of data from more conferences. As I mentioned in Chapter 3.1 the list found
on Wikipedia listed 168 conferences. This project only included 17 conferences. In order
Evolution of Gender Diversity in Academia
45
==PAGE:52==
to paint an accurate picture of the females in the field of computer science more data is
needed.
Collect historic data
It could also be interesting to collect more historic data. This project made a cutoff point
for all conferences in 2003. However, most of the conferences included in this project have
had conferences for many years prior to 2003. Although those data were diﬀicult to get
on hold of. While email contact was established with some of the committee members,
I believe more effort could have been made to collect the historic data. Collecting more
historic data will only enrich the analysis further.
The long-term effect of increased visibility
An interesting question that is yet to be explored building upon my result is whether
increasing the visibility of female speakers attracts more female speakers at conferences.
These are effects that I will see over a longer time period. It may take some time before
the community changes. But there are some hints that there something is changing.
Inclusion of more attributes
A final improvement I want to highlight could be the inclusion of new attributes. At-
tributes such as the number of citations, what university they teach at, their country of
origin, and the number of awards won or nominated. Firstly, it would be interesting to do
a similar permutation test for these variables between the females and males. Secondly,
adding more variables in the nearest neighbor will also increase credibility between the
matches. Then the similarity would not only be a distance of three variables but seven in
total.
46
Evolution of Gender Diversity in Academia
==PAGE:53==
8
Conclusion
The objective of this project was to study diversity in computer science conferences by
using historical data from 17 conferences from 2003 to 2022. My result contributes to the
current literature on the topic of diversity in academia by analyzing the pattern of male
and female invited speakers.
The first task was to collect the data, which was done by using web scraping and manual
processes. A key element of the project was to infer the gender of the speakers. I used the
World Gender Name Dictionary (WGND 2.0) which was able to associate more than 4
million unique names to a proportion of frequency based on 195 countries. A whole section
was dedicated in the literature review to address the issue of mapping genders based on a
name. With the WGND 2.0 data, I was able to assign 91.8 % of the speakers to a gender.
Dealing with names as unique identifiers, turned out to be rather diﬀicult. While many
initiatives were made in order to distinguish between the speakers, there was no precise
way to ensure that a name did not include multiple individuals.
I web scraped web pages in order to note the number of papers each speaker had published
at the time of the conference. With this information, I was able to calculate a new variable
that could help explain the seniority of the speakers. Finally, a last variable was defined as
a productivity measure i.e. the number of papers published divided by the seniority. With
these three variables, I was able to answer the first research question about how female
and male speakers differed from each other. I conducted a permutation test in order to
define which variables there was a significant difference for the invited male and female
speakers. The only variable which was significant was the second variable, which described
the seniority of the speakers. Invited females were generally younger than invited male
speakers. Females were also a bit more productive than males, however, this difference was
not significant. The difference between the number of publications for males and females
was almost identical, hence not significant.
The second research question concerned the evolution of females’ representation in com-
puter science conferences. I saw that the ratio of invited female speakers had increased
over the last 20 years from 15 % to 40%. However, I wanted to see what happened when
I took the characteristics of the speaker into account. For each male, I found the ten
most similar females by using the nearest neighbor algorithm. I was afterward able to
calculate the likelihood of a female being invited. The result showed that there had been
an increasingly high likelihood for female scientists to be invited. The result suggested
that there had been an effort to invite more females. In chapter 7 I discussed the idea of
how increased visibility of female speakers inspires the younger generation. However, this
feedback loop takes time before it is adopted by conference organizers. It may take more
years before the effect of increased visibility is observable.
The last research question is yet to be answered. As I mentioned females were increasingly
more likely to be invited. However, I also saw that invited male speakers were still most
likely to be similar to other males. In recent years there was a slight improvement, where
more and more invited males were most similar to females. Again, the effect of increased
visibility of female speakers is a process that will take time.
Evolution of Gender Diversity in Academia
47
==PAGE:54==
Bibliography
[1]
Jared Bass et al. “Advancing Diversity and Inclusion in Higher Education”. In: U.S.
Department of Education (2016).
[2]
Ana-Christina Ramón, Michael Tran, and Darnell Hunt. “Hollywood Diversity Re-
port 2023”. In: UCLA Social Science (2023).
[3]
Francesco Ripa. Europe is increasingly more diverse – when will city leadership
follow suit? 2023. url: https://blogs.lse.ac.uk/europpblog/2023/01/12/europe-is-
increasingly-more-diverse-when-will-city-leadership-follow-suit/.
[4]
Caroline Criado Perez. Invisible Women. Vintage, 2019, pp. 29–46. isbn: 9781784706289.
[5]
Mathias Wullum Nielsen et al. “Gender diversity leads to better science”. In: Proceed-
ings of the National Academy of Sciences 114.8 (2017), pp. 1740–1742. doi: 10.1073/
pnas.1700616114. url: https://www.pnas.org/doi/abs/10.1073/pnas.1700616114.
[6]
Doctor’s degrees conferred to females by postsecondary institutions, by race/ethnicity
and field of study: Academic years 2019-20 and 2020-21. 2022. url: https://nces.ed.
gov/programs/digest/d22/tables/dt22_324.35.asp.
[7]
Doctor’s degrees conferred to males by postsecondary institutions, by race/ethnicity
and field of study: Academic years 2019-20 and 2020-21. 2022. url: https://nces.ed.
gov/programs/digest/d22/tables/dt22_324.30.asp.
[8]
Own calculations based on the ’Ph.d.-uddannelse’. url: https://www.dst.dk/da/
Statistik/emner/uddannelse-og-forskning/fuldtidsuddannelser/ph-d-uddannelser.
[9]
Emil Bargmann Madsen et al. “Meta-Research: Author-level data confirm the widen-
ing gender gap in publishing rates during COVID-19”. In: eLife 11 (Mar. 2022). Ed.
by Peter Rodgers, e76559. issn: 2050-084X. doi: 10.7554/eLife.76559. url: https:
//doi.org/10.7554/eLife.76559.
[10]
Romy van der Lee and Naomi Ellemers. “Gender contributes to personal research
funding success in The Netherlands”. In: Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences 112.40 (2015), pp. 12349–12353. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1510159112. eprint:
https://www.pnas.org/doi/pdf/10.1073/pnas.1510159112. url: https://www.pnas.
org/doi/abs/10.1073/pnas.1510159112.
[11]
Patrick Glynn. 23 Types of Diversity in the Workplace You Should Know. 2022. url:
https://insightglobal.com/blog/types-of-diversity-in-the-workplace/.
[12]
Isabelle Gray. What does diversity mean to comedy? 2018. url: https://exepose.
com/2018/09/19/what-does-diversity-mean-to-comedy/.
[13]
Katherine W. Phillips, Gregory B. Northcraft, and Margaret A. Neale. “Surface-
Level Diversity and Decision-Making in Groups: When Does Deep-Level Similarity
Help?” In: Group Processes Intergroup Relations, 9(4) 9.4 (2006), pp. 467–482. doi:
”https://doi.org/10.1177/1368430206067557”.
[14]
Lu Hong and Scott E. Page. “Groups of diverse problem solvers can outperform
groups of high-ability problem solvers”. In: 101.46 (2004), pp. 16385–16389. doi:
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0403723101.
[15]
Harvard Admissions Lawsuit. Fact Check. url: https://www.harvard.edu/admissionscase/
fact-check-sffa-2/.
[16]
Students for Fair Admissions (SFFA) v. Harvard. 2020. url: https://www.lawyerscommittee.
org/students-for-fair-admissions-sffa-v-harvard/.
[17]
Kenny Xu. Diversity—Unless You’re Asian. 2021. url: https://www.city-journal.
org/harvard-race-conscious-admissions-policy.
48
Evolution of Gender Diversity in Academia
==PAGE:55==
[18]
Students for Fair Admissions vs. Harvard University. 2022. url: https://www.
lawyerscommittee.org/students-for-fair-admissions-vs-harvard-university/.
[19]
Heather Mac Donald. The Diversity Delusion: How Race and Gender Pandering
Corrupt the University and Undermine Our Culture. St. Martin’s Press, 2018. isbn:
1250200911.
[20]
Heather Mac Donald. The Diversity Delusion: How Race and Gender Pandering
Corrupt the University and Undermine Our Culture. 2019. url: https : / / www .
prageru.com/video/what-does-diversity-have-to-do-with-science.
[21]
Anaïs Llorens et al. “Gender bias in academia: A lifetime problem that needs solu-
tions”. In: Neuron 109.13 (2021), pp. 2047–2074. issn: 0896-6273. doi: https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.neuron.2021.06.002. url: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S0896627321004177.
[22]
Ans Hekkenberg. Diversity - A Requisite for Excellent Science. 2017. url: https:
//www.youtube.com/watch?v=UbvPmxkVOU4.
[23]
Perry Zurn et al. “Supporting academic equity in physics through citation diversity”.
In: Commun Phys 5.240 (2022). doi: ”https://doi.org/10.1038/s42005-022-00999-9”.
[24]
Anto Pranjić. 5 Reasons Why Attending Conferences Matters More Than You Think.
2022. url: https://www.wearedevelopers.com/magazine/5-reasons-why-attending-
conferences-matters-more-than-you-think.
[25]
Lance Fortnow. Why are CS Conferences so Important? 2004. url: https://blog.
computationalcomplexity.org/2004/07/why-are-cs-conferences-so-important.html.
[26]
Jevin D. West et al. “The Role of Gender in Scholarly Authorship”. In: PLOS ONE
8 (2013), pp. 1–6. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0066212. url: https://doi.org/10.1371/
journal.pone.0066212.
[27]
Karen E. A. Burns et al. “Gender differences in grant and personnel award funding
rates at the Canadian Institutes of Health Research based on research content area:
A retrospective analysis”. In: PLOS Medicine 16.10 (2019), pp. 1–15. doi: 10.1371/
journal.pmed.1002935. url: https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pmed.1002935.
[28]
Per Lunnemann, Mogens H. Jensen, and Liselotte Jauffred. “Gender bias in Nobel
prizes”. In: Palgrave Communications 5.46 (2019), pp. 1–15. doi: 10.1057/s41599-
019-0256-3. url: https://doi.org/10.1057/s41599-019-0256-3.
[29]
Erin G. Teich et al. “Citation inequity and gendered citation practices in contem-
porary physics”. In: Nat. Phys. 18 9.4 (2022), pp. 1161–1170. doi: ”https://doi.org/
10.1038/s41567-022-01770-1”.
[30]
Hyunsik Kong, Samuel Martin-Gutierrez, and Fariba Karimi. “Influence of the first-
mover advantage on the gender disparities in physics citations”. In: Commun Phys
5 243 (2022). doi: ”https://doi.org/10.1038/s42005-022-00997-x”.
[31]
Marlene Koﬀi. Innovative ideas and gender inequality. Tech. rep. 35. 2021. url:
http://hdl.handle.net/10419/234474.
[32]
Jacqueline M. Fulvio, Ileri Akinnola, and Bradley R. Postle. “Gender (Im)balance
in Citation Practices in Cognitive Neuroscience”. In: 1.33 (2021), pp. 3–7. doi: https:
//doi.org/10.1162/jocn_a_01643.
[33]
X. Wang et al. “Gendered citation practices in the field of communication”. In:
Annals of the International Communication Association 45.2 (2021), pp. 134–153.
doi: https://doi.org/10.1080/23808985.2021.1960180.
[34]
Jessica Gurevitch. “Differences in the Proportion of Women to Men Invited to Give
Seminars: Is the Old Boy Still Kicking?” In: Ecological Society of America 69.3
(1988), pp. 155–160. url: https://www.jstor.org/stable/20167055.
[35]
F. Débarre, N. O. Rode, and L. V. Ugelvig. “Gender equity at scientific events”. In:
Evolution Letters 2.3 (2018), pp. 148–158. doi: https://doi.org/10.1002/evl3.49.
Evolution of Gender Diversity in Academia
49
==PAGE:56==
[36]
Fariba Karimi et al. “Inferring Gender from Names on the Web: A Comparative
Evaluation of Gender Detection Methods”. In: CoRR abs/1603.04322 (2016). arXiv:
1603.04322. url: http://arxiv.org/abs/1603.04322.
[37]
Vincent Larivière et al. “Bibliometrics: Global gender disparities in science”. In:
Nature 504 (2013), pp. 211–213. doi: ”https://doi.org/10.1038/504211a.
[38]
List of computer science conferences. 2022. url: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_
of_computer_science_conferences.
[39]
Best Computer Science Conferences. 2021. url: https://research.com/conference-
rankings/computer-science.
[40]
Bing Liu and Filippo Menczer. Web Data Mining. Data-Centric Systems and Appli-
cations (DCSA). Springer, 2011, pp. 6–7. isbn: 978-3-642-19459-7.
[41]
Ryan Mitchell. Web Scraping with Python. O’Reilly Media, Inc., 2015, pp. 15–31,
175–190. isbn: 9781491910290.
[42]
LICS 2014 Invited Speakers. 2014. url: https://lics.siglog.org/csl-lics14/#invited.
[43]
dblp LICS 2014 Invited Speakers. 2014. url: https://dblp.org/db/conf/csl/csl2014.
html.
[44]
Christel Baier, Clemens Dubslaff, and Sascha Klüppelholz. “Trade-off analysis meets
probabilistic model checking”. In: LICS 2014 Proceedings (2014). doi: ”10.1145/
2603088.2603089”.
[45]
Join a growing community of Harvard and worldwide researchers who share data in
the Harvard Dataverse Repository. 2020. url: https://support.dataverse.harvard.edu/
home.
[46]
Julio Raffo. WGND 2.0. Version V1. 2021. doi: 10.7910/DVN/MSEGSJ. url: https:
//doi.org/10.7910/DVN/MSEGSJ.
[47]
Tatiana Osoblivaia. Challenges of Chinese to English translation or how to avoid
Chinglish. 2019. url: https://www.polilingua.com/blog/post/challenges-of-Chinese-
to-English-translation-or-how-to-avoid-Chinglish.htm.
[48]
Bertie Vidgen and Shaki Asgari. “P-Values: Misunderstood and Misused”. In: Front.
Phys 4 (2016), pp. 642–658. doi: https://doi.org/10.3389/fphy.2016.00006.
[49]
Rand R. Wilcox. Applying Contemporary Statistical Techniques. Academic Press,
2003, pp. 237–284. isbn: 978-0-12-751541-0.
[50]
Robert Tibshirani Trevor Hastie and Jerome Friedman. The Elements of Statistical
Learning. Springer, 2017, pp. 14–16. isbn: 9780387848570.
[51]
Vera Domingues and Swanne Gordon. “Diversity in nature and academia”. In: Nature
Ecology
Evolution 5.4 (2021), pp. 402–404. doi: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41559-
021-01415-1.
[52]
J. Schroeder et al. “Fewer invited talks by women in evolutionary biology symposia”.
In: Journal of Evolutionary Biology 26.9 (2013), pp. 2063–2069. doi: https://doi.org/
10.1111/jeb.12198. url: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1111/jeb.12198.
[53]
Christine E. Ghatan et al. “Achieving Speaker Gender Equity at the SIR Annual
Scientific Meeting: The Effect of Female Session Coordinators”. In: EDUCATION,
ECONOMICS, AND WORKFORCE 30.11 (2019), pp. 1870–1875. doi: https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.jvir.2019.07.006.
[54]
Robert F Kalejta and Ann C. Palmenberg. “Gender Parity Trends for Invited Speak-
ers at Four Prominent Virology Conference Series”. In: J Virol 91.16 (2017), e00739–
17. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00739-17.
[55]
Arturo Casadevall and Jo Handelsman. “The Presence of Female Conveners Corre-
lates with a Higher Proportion of Female Speakers at Scientific Symposia”. In: mBio
5.1 (2014), e00846–13. doi: 10.1128/mBio.00846-13. url: https://journals.asm.org/
doi/abs/10.1128/mBio.00846-13.
50
Evolution of Gender Diversity in Academia
==PAGE:57==
[56]
Ellen I. Damschen et al. “Visibility matters: increasing knowledge of women’s con-
tributions to ecology”. In: Frontiers in Ecology and the Environment 2 (4 2005),
pp. 212–219. doi: 10.1057/s41599-019-0256-3. url: https://doi.org/10.1890/1540-
9295(2005)003[0212:VMIKOW]2.0.CO;2.
[57]
Nilanjana Dasgupta and Shaki Asgari. “Seeing is believing: Exposure to counter-
stereotypic women leaders and its effect on the malleability of automatic gender
stereotyping”. In: Journal of Experimental Social Psychology 40.5 (2004), pp. 642–
658. issn: 0022-1031. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jesp.2004.02.003. url: https:
//www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0022103104000253.
[58]
Aanand Prasad. Conference Diversity Distribution Calculator. url: http://aanandprasad.
com/diversity-calculator/?groupName=women&numSpeakers=20&populationPercentage=
10.
Evolution of Gender Diversity in Academia
51
==PAGE:58==
52
Evolution of Gender Diversity in Academia
==PAGE:59==
A
GitHub
In order to align computational code across multiple workstations and allow to easily share
the work with fellow researchers the code is made available on GitHub with the following
link: https://github.com/mariespedersen/Thesis_github
Evolution of Gender Diversity in Academia
53
==PAGE:60==
B
Additional Plots
2003
2007
2011
2015
2019
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
Female ratio
Artificial Intelligence
2003
2007
2011
2015
2019
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Female ratio
Human-Computer Interaction
2003
2007
2011
2015
2019
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
Female ratio
Concurrent, distributed and parallel computing
2003
2007
2011
2015
2019
0.3
0.4
0.5
Female ratio
Computational Social Science
2003
2007
2011
2015
2019
0.2
0.4
0.6
Female ratio
Data Management
2003
2007
2011
2015
2019
0.1
0.2
0.3
Female ratio
Algorithm and Theory
Invited
Proceedings
Figure B.1: The plots show the ratio of females for each field of study. The gaps in the
plot simply mean that there were no female speakers in the given year. A value of 0.5
means that there were equally many females and males at the conference. Values above
0.5 mean that there were more females in the conference.
54
Evolution of Gender Diversity in Academia
==PAGE:61==
0
200
400
600
800
Number of publications
0.000
0.002
0.004
0.006
0.008
0.010
Density
Dist. of publications per speaker
Female
Male
100
101
102
103
log(Number of publications)
10
5
10
4
10
3
10
2
10
1
Probability Density
Dist. of log(publications) per speaker
Female
Male
Invited
(a) Distribution of the invited speakers. The plot on the right-hand side is the log-log plot of the
figure on the left-hand side.
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
1600
Number of publications
0.000
0.002
0.004
0.006
0.008
0.010
0.012
0.014
Density
Dist. of publications per speaker
Female
Male
100
101
102
103
log(Number of publications)
10
7
10
6
10
5
10
4
10
3
10
2
10
1
Probability Density
Dist. of log(publications) per speaker
Female
Male
Proceedings
(b) Distribution of the participants. The plot on the right-hand side is the log-log plot of the figure
on the left-hand side
Figure B.2: The following plots shows the cumulative number of publications at the time
of the conference between females and males for the invited speakers and participants.
Evolution of Gender Diversity in Academia
55
==PAGE:62==
0-5
5-10
10-15
15-20
>20
Age Group
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
Number of publications
Publication distribution of participants by age group
gender
F
M
Figure B.3: The plot groups the speakers in the respective age group at the time of the
conference and plots the number of publications between females and males for each age
group. Males do in general have a bit more extreme values than the females. However, the
mean, median, etc. were very similar for the female and male participants. The boxplot
does not include outliers.
56
Evolution of Gender Diversity in Academia
==PAGE:63==
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
Number of publications
0.0000
0.0025
0.0050
0.0075
0.0100
Density
Artificial Intelligence
0
100
200
300
400
500
Number of publications
0.000
0.005
0.010
0.015
Density
Human-Computer Interaction
0
200
400
600
800
Number of publications
0.000
0.005
0.010
Density
Concurrent, distributed and parallel computing
0
50
100
150
200
Number of publications
0.00
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
Density
Computational Social Science
0
100
200
300
400
500
Number of publications
0.000
0.005
0.010
0.015
Density
Data Management
0
100
200
300
400
500
Number of publications
0.000
0.002
0.004
0.006
Density
Algorithm and Theory
Female
Male
Dist. of publications per invited speaker
Figure B.4: Six histograms of the number of publications a given invited speaker had at
the time of the conference for each field of study. There was not a major difference for
each field in terms of the shape - most had published few and few had published extremely
many papers. It seemed that Computational Social Science was the field where the invited
speakers in general had published the fewest papers upon attending the conference. There
were some deviations between the females and males for each field.
Evolution of Gender Diversity in Academia
57
==PAGE:64==
0
250
500
750
1000
1250
1500
Number of publications
0.0000
0.0025
0.0050
0.0075
0.0100
Density
Artificial Intelligence
0
200
400
600
Number of publications
0.000
0.005
0.010
0.015
0.020
Density
Human-Computer Interaction
0
250
500
750
1000
1250
Number of publications
0.000
0.005
0.010
Density
Concurrent, distributed and parallel computing
0
500
1000
1500
Number of publications
0.0000
0.0025
0.0050
0.0075
0.0100
Density
Computational Social Science
0
250
500
750
1000
1250
1500
Number of publications
0.0000
0.0025
0.0050
0.0075
0.0100
Density
Data Management
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
Number of publications
0.000
0.005
0.010
0.015
Density
Algorithm and Theory
Female
Male
Dist. of publications per participant
Figure B.5: Six histograms of the number of publications a given participant had at the
time of the conference for each field of study. Females and males were generally very
similar with respect to the number of publications.
58
Evolution of Gender Diversity in Academia
==PAGE:65==
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Academic age
0.00
0.02
0.04
Density
Artificial Intelligence
0
10
20
30
40
50
Academic age
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.06
Density
Human-Computer Interaction
0
10
20
30
40
50
Academic age
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.06
Density
Concurrent, distributed and parallel computing
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Academic age
0.00
0.05
0.10
Density
Computational Social Science
0
10
20
30
40
50
Academic age
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.06
Density
Data Management
0
10
20
30
40
50
Academic age
0.00
0.02
0.04
Density
Algorithm and Theory
Female
Male
Dist. of seniority for the invited speakers
Figure B.6: Six histograms of the seniority a given invited speaker had at the time of the
conference for each field of study. It seemed that Computational Social Science was the
field where the invited speakers in general were younger upon attending the conference.
There were some deviations between the females and males for each field.
Overall, it
seemed that females were younger in all fields compared to males.
Evolution of Gender Diversity in Academia
59
==PAGE:66==
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Academic age
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.06
Density
Artificial Intelligence
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Academic age
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
Density
Human-Computer Interaction
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Academic age
0.000
0.025
0.050
0.075
0.100
Density
Concurrent, distributed and parallel computing
0
10
20
30
40
50
Academic age
0.000
0.025
0.050
0.075
0.100
Density
Computational Social Science
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Academic age
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.06
Density
Data Management
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Academic age
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.06
Density
Algorithm and Theory
Female
Male
Dist. of seniority for the participants
Figure B.7: Six histograms of the seniority a given participant had at the time of the
conference for each field of study. Females and males were generally very similar with
respect to seniority.
60
Evolution of Gender Diversity in Academia
==PAGE:67==
0-5
5-10
10-15
15-20
>20
Age Group
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
Average number of publication per year
Productivity distribution of participants by age group
gender
F
M
Figure B.8: The plot groups the speakers in the respective age group at the time of
the conference and plots the productivity between females and males for each age group.
The females were generally more productive than the males for the invited speakers, it
seemed that the female and male participants were equally productive at the time of the
conference. The boxplot does not include outliers.
Evolution of Gender Diversity in Academia
61
==PAGE:68==
0
5
10
15
20
25
Productivity
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
Density
Artificial Intelligence
0
2
4
6
8
10
Productivity
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
Density
Human-Computer Interaction
0
5
10
15
20
Productivity
0.0
0.1
0.2
Density
Concurrent, distributed and parallel computing
0
2
4
6
8
10
Productivity
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
Density
Computational Social Science
0
5
10
15
Productivity
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
Density
Data Management
0
5
10
15
20
Productivity
0.0
0.1
0.2
Density
Algorithm and Theory
Female
Male
Dist. of productivity per invited speaker
Figure B.9: Six histograms of the productivity a given invited speaker had at the time of
the conference for each field of study. There were some deviations between the females
and males for each field.
62
Evolution of Gender Diversity in Academia
==PAGE:69==
0
10
20
30
40
50
Productivity
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
Density
Artificial Intelligence
0
10
20
30
Productivity
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
Density
Human-Computer Interaction
0
10
20
30
40
50
Productivity
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
Density
Concurrent, distributed and parallel computing
0
20
40
60
Productivity
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
Density
Computational Social Science
0
10
20
30
40
50
Productivity
0.00
0.05
0.10
Density
Data Management
0
5
10
15
20
Productivity
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
Density
Algorithm and Theory
Female
Male
Dist. of productivity per participants
Figure B.10: Six histograms of the productivity a given participant had at the time of
the conference for each field of study. Females and males were generally very similar with
respect to seniority.
Evolution of Gender Diversity in Academia
63
==PAGE:70==
80
90
100
110
120
X paper count
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
Density
Permutation test for invited speakers on paper count
XF
XM
F: 94.82
M: 97.71
(a) The p-value for females and males were 0.35
and 0.34 respectively. Hence, not significant.
19
20
21
22
23
X Seniority
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
Density
Permutation test for invited speakers on Seniority
XF
XM
F: 19.09
M: 22.23
(b) The p-value for females and males were less
1
10.000 and less than
1
10.000 respectively.
The
females were significantly younger than 10.000
random female speakers and the males were sig-
nificantly older than 10.000 random speakers.
3.6
3.8
4.0
4.2
4.4
4.6
4.8
5.0
X productivity
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
Density
Permutation test for invited speakers on productivity
XF
XM
F: 4.52
M: 4.14
(c) The p-values were 0.07 for females and 0.08 for males. Hence they were
significantly different.
Figure B.11: The following plots demonstrated a permutation test between the females
and males with respect to three different variables
64
Evolution of Gender Diversity in Academia
==PAGE:71==
Figure B.12: The plots show the result with three different distance metrics. Overall the
scale of the values is the same and the conclusion remains the same.
Evolution of Gender Diversity in Academia
65
==PAGE:72==
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
Evolution of likelihood of female invitations with 10.0% data (normalized)
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
Evolution of likelihood of female invitations with 20.0% data (normalized)
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
Evolution of likelihood of female invitations with 50.0% data (normalized)
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
Evolution of likelihood of female invitations with 90.0% data (normalized)
Figure B.13: The variables used in this result are normalized. A threshold is included to
ensure that the result only includes females who are relatively similar to male speakers.
This figure visualizes how the likelihood of female invitation changes when the threshold
is changed. The change is hardly visible.
66
Evolution of Gender Diversity in Academia
==PAGE:73==
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
Evolution of likelihood of female invitations with k neigbors = 5 (normalized)
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
Evolution of likelihood of female invitations with k neigbors = 10 (normalized)
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
Evolution of likelihood of female invitations with k neigbors = 20 (normalized)
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
Evolution of likelihood of female invitations with k neigbors = 30 (normalized)
Figure B.14: The variables used in this result are normalized. This figure visualizes how
the likelihood of female invitation changes when the number of neighbors is changed. For
the last three years, the line becomes a bit more smooth when including more neighbors.
Evolution of Gender Diversity in Academia
67
==PAGE:74==
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2
4
Evolution of likelihood of female invitation for field: Artificial Intelligence (normalized)
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2
4
6
Evolution of likelihood of female invitation for field: Computer Architecture (normalized)
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
0.0
2.5
5.0
7.5
Evolution of likelihood of female invitation for field: Human-Computer Interaction (normalized)
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2
4
6
Evolution of likelihood of female invitation for field: Concurrent, distributed and parallel computing (normalized)
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2
4
6
8
Evolution of likelihood of female invitation for field: Computational Social Science (normalized)
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
0
5
10
Evolution of likelihood of female invitation for field: Data Management (normalized)
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
1
2
3
Evolution of likelihood of female invitation for field: Algorithm and Theory (normalized)
Figure B.15: The variables used in this result are normalized. This figure visualizes how
the likelihood of female invitation changes within the different fields of study. The two
fields with the most data are Artificial intelligence and Algorithm and Theory. The gaps
for the different years suggest that there were not enough females to be similar to the male
speakers. Overall, there is no clear pattern or trend in any field.
68
Evolution of Gender Diversity in Academia
==PAGE:75==
0-5
5-10
10-15
15-20
>20
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2.99
0.90
0.52
4.15
0.57
1.90
6.02
2.62
2.11
2.29
0.26
1.41
2.62
0.79
1.11
0.67
4.99
0.77
1.92
1.87
1.36
0.31
3.67
0.97
0.98
0.79
0.53
2.58
1.79
1.43
1.50
2.62
1.31
0.90
0.67
0.67
2.88
2.32
1.02
3.80
0.75
2.35
1.34
15.12
2.48
0.56
0.56
1.48
1.15
2.36
3.62
6.10
1.17
2.14
0.47
6.95
1.21
1.04
5.34
0.21
2.69
3.29
2.09
2.29
1.91
6.23
2.03
4.89
2.05
Evolution of likelihood of female invitations for different age groups (normalized)
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
Figure B.16: The variables used in this result are normalized.
Evolution of Gender Diversity in Academia
69
==PAGE:76==
10
1
100
101
Distance
10
4
10
3
10
2
10
1
100
101
102
103
Probiability density
2010
10
1
100
101
Distance
10
3
10
1
101
103
Probiability density
2011
10
1
100
101
Distance
10
3
10
1
101
103
Probiability density
2019
10
1
100
101
Distance
10
3
10
1
101
103
Probiability density
2018
Figure B.17: The plots above show the log-log histograms of the Euclidean distance be-
tween the females and the males with respect to the three key variables for four random
years. The blue line indicates a 50% threshold. I see that most distance between the
females and the males is extremely close to each other.
70
Evolution of Gender Diversity in Academia
==PAGE:77==
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
0.2
0.4
0.6
Evolution of likelihood of female invitations with 10.0% data
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
0.2
0.4
0.6
Evolution of likelihood of female invitations with 20.0% data
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
0.2
0.4
0.6
Evolution of likelihood of female invitations with 50.0% data
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
0.2
0.4
0.6
Evolution of likelihood of female invitations with 90.0% data
Figure B.18: The likelihood is calculated based on equation (4.1). This means that a value
of 0.5 represents equal likelihood. A threshold is included to ensure that the result only
includes females who are relatively similar to male speakers. This figure visualizes how
the likelihood of female invitation changes when the threshold is changed. The change is
hardly visible.
Evolution of Gender Diversity in Academia
71
==PAGE:78==
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
0.2
0.4
0.6
Evolution of likelihood of female invitations with k neigbors = 5
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
0.2
0.4
0.6
Evolution of likelihood of female invitations with k neigbors = 10
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
Evolution of likelihood of female invitations with k neigbors = 20
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
Evolution of likelihood of female invitations with k neigbors = 30
Figure B.19: The likelihood is calculated based on equation (4.1). This means that a
value of 0.5 represents equal likelihood. This figure visualizes how the likelihood of female
invitation changes when the number of neighbors is changed. The change is hardly visible.
72
Evolution of Gender Diversity in Academia
==PAGE:79==
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
0.4
0.6
0.8
Evolution of likelihood of female invitation for field: Artificial Intelligence
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
0.6
0.8
Evolution of likelihood of female invitation for field: Computer Architecture
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
0.4
0.6
0.8
Evolution of likelihood of female invitation for field: Human-Computer Interaction
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
0.4
0.6
0.8
Evolution of likelihood of female invitation for field: Concurrent, distributed and parallel computing
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
0.6
0.8
Evolution of likelihood of female invitation for field: Computational Social Science
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
0.25
0.50
0.75
Evolution of likelihood of female invitation for field: Data Management
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
Evolution of likelihood of female invitation for field: Algorithm and Theory
Figure B.20: The likelihood is calculated based on equation (4.1). This means that a
value of 0.5 represents equal likelihood. This figure visualizes how the likelihood of female
invitation changes within the different fields of study.
Evolution of Gender Diversity in Academia
73
==PAGE:80==
0-5
5-10
10-15
15-20
>20
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
0.74
0.47
0.34
0.56
0.36
0.64
0.80
0.72
0.67
0.69
0.33
0.56
0.72
0.46
0.51
0.34
0.82
0.45
0.66
0.66
0.55
0.26
0.75
0.40
0.48
0.39
0.34
0.71
0.50
0.59
0.60
0.72
0.56
0.47
0.39
0.41
0.74
0.68
0.49
0.77
0.45
0.71
0.56
0.92
0.68
0.35
0.22
0.52
0.55
0.71
0.79
0.85
0.54
0.50
0.24
0.88
0.53
0.52
0.80
0.18
0.73
0.73
0.67
0.65
0.66
0.87
0.68
0.78
0.65
Evolution of likelihood of female invitations for different age groups
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
Figure B.21: The likelihood is calculated based on equation (4.1). This means that a value
of 0.5 represents equal likelihood.
74
Evolution of Gender Diversity in Academia
==PAGE:81==
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
Evolution of likelihood of female invitations with k neigbors = 5
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
Evolution of likelihood of female invitations with k neigbors = 10
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
Evolution of likelihood of female invitations with k neigbors = 20
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
Evolution of likelihood of female invitations with k neigbors = 30
Figure B.22: The likelihood is calculated based on equation (6.1). This means that a
value of 1 represents equal likelihood. This figure visualizes how the likelihood of female
invitation changes when the number of neighbors is changed. The line becomes a bit more
smooth when including more neighbors.
Evolution of Gender Diversity in Academia
75
==PAGE:82==
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2
4
Evolution of likelihood of female invitation for field: Artificial Intelligence
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2
4
6
8
Evolution of likelihood of female invitation for field: Computer Architecture
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2.5
5.0
7.5
Evolution of likelihood of female invitation for field: Human-Computer Interaction
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2
4
Evolution of likelihood of female invitation for field: Concurrent, distributed and parallel computing
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2.5
5.0
7.5
Evolution of likelihood of female invitation for field: Computational Social Science
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
0
5
Evolution of likelihood of female invitation for field: Data Management
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
0
2
4
Evolution of likelihood of female invitation for field: Algorithm and Theory
Figure B.23: The likelihood is calculated based on equation (6.1). This means that a
value of 1 represents equal likelihood. This figure visualizes how the likelihood of female
invitation changes within the different fields of study.
76
Evolution of Gender Diversity in Academia
==PAGE:83==
2003
2005
2007
2009
2011
2013
2015
2017
2019
2021
Year
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
Likelihood of male invitation
Evolution of likelihood of male invitations
Figure B.24
Evolution of Gender Diversity in Academia
77
==PAGE:84==
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
Year
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
Ratio of female speakers
Ratio of female speakers per year with q=0.1 and k=10
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
Year
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
Ratio of female speakers
Ratio of female speakers per year with q=0.2 and k=10
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
Year
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
Ratio of female speakers
Ratio of female speakers per year with q=0.5 and k=10
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
Year
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
Ratio of female speakers
Ratio of female speakers per year with q=0.9 and k=10
True ratio of female speakers
Ratio of potential female speakers
Equal ratio of females and males
Figure B.25: This figure illustrates how the ratio of truly invited females and potentially
invited female speakers changed when the amount of data is adjusted. When more data
are included the ratio of potential speakers is lowered.
78
Evolution of Gender Diversity in Academia
==PAGE:85==
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
Year
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
Ratio of female speakers
Ratio of female speakers per year with q=0.5 and k=5
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
Year
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
Ratio of female speakers
Ratio of female speakers per year with q=0.5 and k=10
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
Year
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
Ratio of female speakers
Ratio of female speakers per year with q=0.5 and k=20
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
Year
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
Ratio of female speakers
Ratio of female speakers per year with q=0.5 and k=30
True ratio of female speakers
Ratio of potential female speakers
Equal ratio of females and males
Figure B.26: This figure illustrates how the ratio of truly invited females and potentially
invited female speakers changes when the number of neighbors is adjusted. When more
neighbors are included the ratio of potential speakers is lowered.
Evolution of Gender Diversity in Academia
79
==PAGE:86==
2003
2005
2007
2009
2011
2013
2015
2017
2019
2021
Year
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
Ratio
Ratio of speaker relationships by gender over the years with k=10 and q=0.1
2003
2005
2007
2009
2011
2013
2015
2017
2019
2021
Year
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
Ratio
Ratio of speaker relationships by gender over the years with k=10 and q=0.2
2003
2005
2007
2009
2011
2013
2015
2017
2019
2021
Year
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
Ratio
Ratio of speaker relationships by gender over the years with k=10 and q=0.5
2003
2005
2007
2009
2011
2013
2015
2017
2019
2021
Year
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
Ratio
Ratio of speaker relationships by gender over the years with k=10 and q=0.9
F-M
M-F
Figure B.27: This figure illustrates how the relationship between the invited speaker and
a similar potential invited speaker changed when the amount of data is adjusted. When
more data are included the ratios become more smooth.
80
Evolution of Gender Diversity in Academia
==PAGE:87==
2003
2005
2007
2009
2011
2013
2015
2017
2019
2021
Year
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
Ratio
Ratio of speaker relationships by gender over the years with k=5 and q=0.5
2003
2005
2007
2009
2011
2013
2015
2017
2019
2021
Year
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
Ratio
Ratio of speaker relationships by gender over the years with k=10 and q=0.5
2003
2005
2007
2009
2011
2013
2015
2017
2019
2021
Year
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
Ratio
Ratio of speaker relationships by gender over the years with k=20 and q=0.5
2003
2005
2007
2009
2011
2013
2015
2017
2019
2021
Year
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
Ratio
Ratio of speaker relationships by gender over the years with k=30 and q=0.5
F-M
M-F
Figure B.28: This figure illustrates how the relationship between the invited speaker and
a similar potential invited speaker changed when the number of neighbors is adjusted.
When more neighbors are the ratios become more smooth.
Evolution of Gender Diversity in Academia
81
==PAGE:88==
Figure B.29: This figure is a copy of figure 1 from Llorens et al. (2021): ”Expression of
the accumulation of the different facets of gender bias throughout a woman researcher’s
career organized according to when they begin to have an impact. Each line represents one
aspect of the gender bias and covers the career stages it is prevalent in. The dot represents
the estimated peak in time of a given aspect.” [21]
82
Evolution of Gender Diversity in Academia
==PAGE:89==
Evolution of Gender Diversity in Academia
83
==PAGE:90==
Technical University of Denmark
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 321
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.compute.dtu.dk
