==PAGE:1==
DTU Wind
Dynamic modelling and control of hybrid 
power plant for hydrogen production
Kalyan Kafle
DTU Wind-M-0627 
June 2023
==PAGE:2==
DTU Wind-M-0627 
June 2023
Project period: 
January - June 2023
ECTS: 30
Education: Master of Science
Supervisor(s):
Kaushik Das
Anca Daniela Hansen
DTU Wind and Energy Systems
Rafael Mogueira Nakashima
DTU Energy
Remarks:
This report is submitted as partial 
fulfillment of the requirements for 
graduation in the above education at the 
Technical University of Denmark.
Technical University of Denmark 
Department of Wind and Energy Systems 
Frederiksborgvej 399
DK-4000 Roskilde
www.wind.dtu.dk
Author: Kalyan Kafle
Title:
Dynamic modelling and control of hybrid 
power plant for hydrogen production
DTU Wind and Energy Systems is a department of the 
Technical University of Denmark with a unique 
integration of research, education, innovation and 
public/private sector consulting in the field of wind and 
energy. Our activities develop new opportunities and 
technology for the global and Danish exploitation of 
wind and energy. Research focuses on key technical-
scientific fields, which are central for the development, 
innovation and use of wind energy and provides the 
basis for advanced education.
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
The global pathway to achieve net zero emissions by 2050 requires the extensive de-
ployment of all available clean and eﬀicient energy technologies. The continued gov-
ernment policy support and decreasing cost suggest that renewable energy sources
deployment will progress significantly. However, the intermittent nature of the vari-
able renewable energy sources demands an energy storage system (ESS) to balance
the fluctuation between the generated renewable power and the demand at the grid.
Among the options available, power to hydrogen as ESS is considered in this thesis as
hydrogen is regarded as the most versatile energy carrier of the future. By combining
a wind power plant (WPP) and a hydrogen-producing electrolyzer plant (ELZ), a
hybrid power plant (HPP) is defined as a single entity behind the point of common
connection in a grid-connected power plant.
An HPP owner always intends to profit by supplying energy to different markets.
An HPP comprising WPP and ELZ can supply electricity and hydrogen to the respec-
tive markets. HPP can produce hydrogen with extra power after supplying it to the
grid to avoid the curtailment from WPP. In another scenario, HPP can produce the
required amount of hydrogen by utilizing certain or all available power. The research
gap for implementing dynamic control strategies of the HPP consisting of WPP and
ELZ is fulfilled in this thesis.
The primary objective of this thesis is to formulate control techniques for an
HPP comprising a WPP and an ELZ to enable the regulation of power flow into the
electrical grid and power distribution to the ELZ. Four level of control hierarchy is
defined in this thesis. The energy management system (EMS) is a single HPP operator
behind the PCC. EMS sends the reference signals to the HPP controller, from the
HPP controller to the WPP and ELZ controller, and from the plant controller to
the asset level controller. A novel HPP controller, which tracks and responds to the
requirement sent from EMS, is proposed in this thesis. The complete control strategy
is executed through power and mass of hydrogen tracking modes. The control modes
are simulated in MATLAB/SIMULINK to validate the proposed control strategies.
==PAGE:4==
Preface
This thesis was prepared at the Department of Wind and Energy Systems at the
Technical University of Denmark to fulfil the requirements for acquiring a Master’s
degree in Wind Energy. This thesis work was conducted between 2nd January to 2nd
June 2023, corresponding to an oﬀicial workload of 30 ECTS points.
Kalyan Kafle (s211087)
June 2, 2023
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
I would like to express my heartfelt gratitude to my supervisors, Anca Daniela
Hansen, Kaushik Das, and Rafael Mogueira Nakashima, for their exceptional
guidance, unwavering support, and invaluable insights throughout my research jour-
ney. Their collective expertise and dedication have played a pivotal role in shaping
this thesis.
A special thanks go to Kaushik for his invaluable contributions in helping me
understand the hybrid power plants in-depth and guiding me through each challenge I
faced. I am also grateful to Rafael for his assistance in understanding the electrolyzer
model and for his invaluable proofreading and insightful comments on the report. I
would also like to extend my gratitude to Soheil Pouraltafi Kheljan for his support
in understanding and refining the complicated Simulink model.
Furthermore, I am immensely grateful to my wife, Suruchi, for her sacrifices
during the journey. I also want to acknowledge the boundless joy and inspiration
from my precious daughter, Saanvi.
Last but not least, I sincerely appreciate my parents for their unwavering belief in
me and their contributions to my growth. I stand here today because of their support,
encouragement, and the values they instilled in me from an early age. Their guidance
has profoundly impacted my academic achievements, and I am forever grateful.
I am deeply grateful to all the family and friends who have supported me in this or
that way during the research. Thank you for being a part of this remarkable chapter
in my life.
==PAGE:6==
Nomenclature
Acronyms
RES
Renewable Energy Sources
VRE
Variable Renewable Energy
ESS
Energy Storage System
HPPs
Hybrid Power Plants
P2G
Power To Gas
P2H
Power To Hydrogen
WPP
Wind Power Plant
SPP
Solar Power Plant
ELZ
Electrolyzer Plant
EMS
Energy Management System
SGIG
Squirrel cage induction generator
WRIG
Wound rotor induction generator
PMSG
Permanent magnet synchronous generator
WRSG
Wound rotor synchronous generator
AWE
Alkaline Water Electrolyzer
PEM
Proton Exchange membrane (PEM)
DC
Direct Current
AC
Alternating Current
WT
Wind Turbine
PV
Photo-Voltaic
BESS
Battery Energy Storage System
EM
Electricity Market
HM
Hydrogen Market
MPPT
Maximum Power Point Tracking
PI
Proportional Integral
HPE
Hydrogen Producing Electrolyzer
E2P
Energy to Power
M2P
Mass to Power
POC
Point of Connection
PCC
Point of Common Coupling
HPPC
Hybrid Power Plant Controller
VSWTs
Variable Speed Wind Turbines
==PAGE:7==
Acronyms
v
PCS
Power Collection Systems
==PAGE:8==
List of Figures
1.1
An utility scale HPP including wind, solar, battery and electrolyzer
. . .
2
1.2
Schematic diagram of HPP taking part in two different markets
. . . . .
3
1.3
Structure of HPP power collection systems (PCS) with measurement points.
Inspired by [2]
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.1
Typical wind turbine configurations[13]
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.2
Operation principle of alkaline water electrolysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.1
HPP hierarchical control architecture. Inspired by [2]
. . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.2
Variable exchanged across the control hierarchy. Inspired by [2] . . . . . .
17
3.3
HPP controller design.Inspired by [2] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.4
Plant control level
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.5
Algorithm for active power dispatch in the HPP dispatch function, EMS-
PRT mode
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.6
Algorithm for active power dispatch in the HPP dispatch function, EMS-
MRT mode . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.1
Aggregated Model for the WPP [5] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.2
Variable speed wind turbine connected to the grid through a power elec-
tronic interface[28] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4.3
Pitch control wind turbine power curve at different pitch angles[28] . . . .
29
4.4
Model block diagram of a VSWT concept(all blocks in physical unit)[28] .
30
4.5
Pitch angle control block from figure 4.4[28] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.6
Block diagram of sub-models of advanced alkaline electrolyzer . . . . . . .
32
4.7
Input and Output from Electrolyzer model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
5.1
Controller and model output in 0.5 pu power reference case . . . . . . . .
39
5.2
Controller and model output in 0.94 pu power reference case
. . . . . . .
41
5.3
Controller and model output in 0.10 pu power reference case
. . . . . . .
43
5.4
Controller and model output in 120 kg mass reference case
. . . . . . . .
45
5.5
Controller and model output in 25 kg mass reference case . . . . . . . . .
47
5.6
Controller and model output in 160 kg mass reference case
. . . . . . . .
48
A.1 Power system model under study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
A.2 Controllers model under study
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
==PAGE:9==
List of Figures
vii
A.3 Electrolyzer model under study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
A.4 Detailed WT model under study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
==PAGE:10==
List of Tables
3.1
Case 1:EMS-PRT Mode . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.2
Case 2: EMS-MRT mode
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4.1
Parameters of the electrolyzer model from [16]
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.2
Parameters for the Faradays eﬀiciency calculated and used in our model .
34
5.1
Controller and model output in 0.5 pu power reference case . . . . . . . .
40
5.2
Controller and model output in 0.94 pu power reference case
. . . . . . .
42
5.3
Controller and model output in 0.10 pu power reference case
. . . . . . .
44
5.4
Controller and model output in 120 kg mass reference case
. . . . . . . .
46
5.5
Controller and model output in 25 kg mass reference case . . . . . . . . .
46
5.6
Controller and model output in 160 kg mass reference case
. . . . . . . .
49
B.1
Sizing of Hybrid power plant
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
B.2 Wind Turbine data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
==PAGE:11==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
ii
Acknowledgements
iii
Nomenclature
iv
Acronyms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
List of Figures
vi
List of Tables
viii
Contents
ix
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Background and Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Problem Statement and Research question . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.3
Methodology
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.4
Assumptions and Limitations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.5
Contents of Report . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2
State Of Art
8
2.1
Wind turbine technology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.2
Hydrogen Producing technology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.3
Hierrarchical Control of Hybrid Power Plants . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.4
Literature Review
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3
Hybrid Power Plant Control Design
15
3.1
Hierrarchical Control Architecture of HPP . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.2
HPP Control Algorithm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4
Modelling and Analysis
26
4.1
Modelling Representations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4.2
Aggregated Modelling
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
==PAGE:12==
Contents
x
4.3
Wind Turbine Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4.4
Dynamic Modeling of the Electrolyzer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4.5
Electrolyzer Model Validation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.6
Resizing the Electrolyzer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
4.7
Electrolyzer minimum and maximum rated power . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
5
Simulation Results
38
5.1
Simulation scenario:
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
5.2
Mode 0:EMS Power reference tracking (EMS-PRT) mode
. . . . . . .
38
5.3
Mode 1:EMS Mass reference tracking (EMS-MRT) mode . . . . . . . .
44
5.4
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
6
Conclusion and Future Work
50
6.1
Conclusions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
6.2
Future Work
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
A Simulink Model
52
B Model Parameters
54
B.1
Sizing of HPP . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
B.2 Wind Farm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
Bibliography
55
==PAGE:13==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
This chapter presents the context and issues concerning the dynamic control strategies
employed in hybrid power plants. It also presents the goals of the thesis and identifies
the assumptions and limitations that guide the research. This chapter serves as the
basis for the entire project, setting forth the primary structure for the work.
1.1
Background and Motivation
The energy sector is a source of around three-quarters of greenhouse gas emissions to-
day. The global pathway to net-zero emissions by 2050 must successfully strengthen
and implement energy and climate policies. It requires immediate and massive deploy-
ment of all available clean and eﬀicient energy technologies. As the electricity sector
becomes cleaner than today, electrification emerges as a crucial economy-wide tool
for reducing emissions. Ever-cheaper, renewable energy technologies, give electricity
the edge in the race to zero emission[1].
The increased environmental concern and priorities set by different countries
worldwide to decarbonize the energy sector have put forward more research on re-
newable energy sources (RES). RES such as wind energy, solar energy, hydro energy,
wave energy, and more sophisticated systems based on hydrogen exists today. Lower
costs and continued government policy support suggest that the RES deployment will
progress significantly in the future [2].
However, because of the intermittent nature of the leading renewable energy
sources, mostly solar and wind, it is challenging to manage the load demand and
electricity production without the help of other power-generating elements in the
grid. Wind and solar depend on weather conditions and are termed Variable Renew-
able Energy sources (VREs). For fast development of the integration of renewables,
instead of only strengthening the grid, wind and solar can be combined as these re-
sources are loosely or negatively correlated [3]. New strategies are needed to increase
grid operation flexibility for 100% of renewable energy systems in the future. Services
can be provided by adding Energy Storage System (ESS) to the grid to compensate
for or absorb differences between the generated renewable power and required grid
power.
In [4], the authors justify the need for Hybrid Power Plants (HPP), combining
RES to ESS to form utility scale HPP. It should be noted that there is a difference
between Hybrid Power System (HPS) and HPP. HPS is a system comprising loads
==PAGE:14==
1.1 Background and Motivation
2
and multiple types of generation resources more concentrated on the security of load
supply and system stability. At the same time, HPPs are exclusively utility-scale
grid-connected systems whose development goals are to maximize profits and comply
with grid codes [2]. A similar wind, solar, and battery storage model developed in [5]
and different control strategies have been studied.
Figure 1.1: An utility scale HPP including wind, solar, battery and electrolyzer.
Figure 1.1 shows an example of utility-scale HPP consisting of wind, solar, battery
storage, and electrolyzer. The solid black lines show the power exchange between the
elements of HPP. Wind and solar are the energy generators, while the battery is the
generator and also the load. But the electrolyzer only takes the power from the HPP.
It behaves only as a load to the system. The dashed lines show the control action
between a central supervisory HPP controller and each plant.
Different possible ways to implement the absorption of excess energy from the
RES are examined in [6][7]. ESS, such as Lithium-ion batteries, and energy conver-
sion systems, such as power to gas (P2G) or power to hydrogen (P2H), could be
different options to absorb the excess power from the RES. Among the RES, wind en-
ergy has been noted as the fastest-growing energy technology in the world; it attracts
interest as one of the most cost-effective ways to generate electricity from renewable
sources [8]. Wind energy now meets 15% of Europe’s electricity demands and much
==PAGE:15==
1.1 Background and Motivation
3
more in many countries: Denmark has 44%, Ireland 31%, Portugal 26%, Spain 24%,
Germany 23%. The International energy agency(IEA) expects wind to be the No.1
of power in Europe by 2027[9]. For the utility-scale HPP, a battery storage system
as ESS would not be an ideal choice because of the small capacity, high cost, leakage
of power, and environmental pollution. Therefore energy conversion system, P2H,
is attracting more concerns. Furthermore, Denmark will build a large WPP of the
scale of GW offshore. This means the transmission system operator (TSO), Energinet
in Denmark, must carry much energy onshore. It is important to note that different
power transmission technologies have varying losses. High voltage alternating current
(HVAC) transmission systems result in losses ranging from 1% to 5% for wind farms
with a capacity of 500 to 1000 MW. High voltage direct current (HVDC) systems
ranging from 2% to 4% losses depending on nominal power and distance. However,
transporting hydrogen through pipelines has much lower losses (less than 0.1%), mak-
ing hydrogen storage a more practical option [10]. Therefore, this thesis considers
a utility-scale HPP consisting of wind power and a hydrogen-producing electrolyzer.
The electrolyzer can only absorb the excess power from the WPP. Produced hydro-
gen can be again converted to electricity through the Fuel Cells (FC). However, FC
is not in the scope of this thesis. Only producing hydrogen is the primary focus of
this thesis, and a study of the dynamic behaviour of wind and electrolyzers is much
of interest. Electrical energy is converted to hydrogen through the process of water
electrolysis and can be sold hydrogen on the hydrogen market. Hydrogen has many
advantages, such as no pollution, low loss, high utilization rate, multiple utilization
form, and convenient transportation [7]. The term ”green hydrogen” refers to the
hydrogen produced only by RES.
Figure 1.2: Schematic diagram of HPP taking part in two different markets .
==PAGE:16==
1.1 Background and Motivation
4
Figure 1.2 shows the overall schematic diagram of the system proposed in this
literature. Two markets, the electricity market (EM) and the hydrogen market (HM),
are independent. The HPP decides how much energy it wants to sell to the EM and
HM. Control mechanisms must be developed inside the HPP to sell the energy to the
different markets.
HPP topologies could be AC coupled and DC coupled depending upon either
connecting the resources at the AC connection point or connecting different resources
at the DC bus of the wind turbine [3]. The HPP controller proposed in this thesis is
a central controller that supervises a WPP and ELZ controller. An HPP controller
sends dispatch signals to both controllers. The energy management system (EMS)
will bid in the electricity and hydrogen markets and send the reference signals to the
HPP controller. The control architecture will be described in detail in the following
chapters.
ELZ
PELZ
HPP
Figure 1.3: Structure of HPP power collection systems (PCS) with measurement
points. Inspired by [2].
==PAGE:17==
1.2 Problem Statement and Research question
5
Figure 1.3 represents the system structure of an HPP under study in this thesis.
The proposed HPP consist of a WPP and ELZ plant. Several WTs are aggregated
into a WPP. Each WTs have measurement points at its terminal as WTi, i = 1....n
to provide information to the asset controller. PW T i, i = 1.....n is the active power of
each single WTs. The WPP and ELZ also contain measurement points to inform the
plant controllers. The ELZ plant has only the plant controller and not the asset-level
controller. It is because the proposed electrolyzer is a single plant of the required
size.
PW P P and PELZ measure active powers at the WPP and ELZ plant.
The
WPP and ELZ plants are aggregated as a single HPP via HPP PCS. PHP P is the
measurement of the active power at the HPP PoC. As active power management is
the only function studied in this thesis, active power is measured at a different level.
The performance of the dynamic model is simulated for different control objectives,
such as maximizing green hydrogen production and producing green hydrogen only
with excess power available. The simulation is performed using MATLAB/Simulink
software.
1.2
Problem Statement and Research question
Developing effective control strategies for hydrogen and electricity production from
the HPP is challenging due to the variability of power generation and the changing
reference from the EMS. The primary challenge is maintaining the minimum and
maximum power constraints of the ELZ with variable power generation. At the same
time, the power commitment to the PCC should also be fulfilled. The HPP is only a
single entity behind the PCC in correspondence to the external TSO or the hydrogen
market. A supervisory HPP controller is needed to fulfil power reference and mass of
hydrogen reference from the EMS. The EMS must provide explicit provisions for ac-
tive power control strategies that enable the HPP controller to send reference signals
to each WPP and ELZ controller. Furthermore, based on the dynamics and response
time of each plant, it is required by the HPP controller to dispatch the correct set-
point to each WPP and ELZ plant. Discussions above are summarized as research
questions that will guide the whole project into definite scope.
Research Question: What will be the effective control strategies for
HPP comprising WPP and ELZ to eﬀiciently balance grid power injection
and hydrogen production while respecting the input power constraint of
ELZ?
Objective:
The main objective of this project is to model and design control strategies for HPPs
consisting of WPP and hydrogen-producing ELZ to produce green hydrogen. The
project focuses on designing supervisory HPP control, which receives the reference
signals from EMS and dispatches that to the WPP and ELZ controllers. The de-
partment has provided two separate base models. The HPP model was developed by
==PAGE:18==
1.3 Methodology
6
authors from [2] in Simulink and tested for different scenarios for frequency control.
Another model was developed in Simscape and is based on the literature [11] and pro-
duces hydrogen through an electrolysis process by authors from [12]. The provided
HPP model is lacking electrolyzer plant to produce hydrogen. This thesis proposes
and develops the following main tasks:
• Validate the model for hydrogen production.
• Integrate the two separate models and extend the control architecture to pro-
duce green hydrogen.
• Develop a novel supervisory HPP control architecture to receive the reference
signals from EMS and dispatch the reference to WPP and ELZ controller.
• To test the developed control algorithm on the HPP model consisting of WPP
and ELZ developed on MATLAB/SIMULINK/SIMSCAPE for different operat-
ing conditions.
1.3
Methodology
To investigate the control methods of the HPP to produce and maximize green hy-
drogen, one should know several background theories about every component utilized
in the system. After learning about the different details, one can study a detailed
literature review about the ongoing and past projects on HPP’s dynamic modelling
and control strategies. After a detailed study of the theoretical background of every
component, it can be implemented into the Matlab/Simulink/Simscape and need to
verify during the different operating scenarios. To accomplish the mentioned task,
the methodology used in this project is as below:
• Literature Review
• Design the control function and control architecture
• Implement on the Simulink/Simscape
• Verify the results obtained
1.4
Assumptions and Limitations
Following assumptions are made during the simulation to simulate precisely and not
take long simulation time as well as reduce the complexity of the system:
• The ELZ model is linearly scaled from the base model to meet the required size
• The WPP is an aggregate of the several WTs.
==PAGE:19==
1.5 Contents of Report
7
• The hydrogen and oxygen on the electrolyzer are ideal gases, and the electrolyzer
plant has no leakage.
1.5
Contents of Report
This thesis is further elaborated in the following chapters:
• Chapter 2: State of the art consists of the background knowledge related
to the control structure of the HPP, modelling of the WT and ELZ, and HPP
topology. It also presents a short description of the literature review.
• Chapter 3: Hybrid Power Plant Control Design describes the hierarchi-
cal control architecture used in HPP and different control modes for different
operating scenarios of the HPP.
• Chapter 4: Modeling and Analysis presents the method and approaches
employed in modelling the WPP and ELZ. It also describes the performance of
the model proposed.
• Chapter 5: Simulation Results presents the simulation results of the pro-
posed model under different control modes and scenarios.
• Chapter 6: Conclusion and Future Work concludes this thesis work and
provides a basis for the further study of the subject matter.
==PAGE:20==
CHAPTER 2
State Of Art
This chapter introduces the fundamental principles of a wind turbine system, a
hydrogen-producing electrolyzer system, and an HPP topology. It concludes with
a brief review of previous research conducted by other scholars on hierarchical con-
trol strategies for HPP, EMS systems, and Hydrogen producing systems.
2.1
Wind turbine technology
The technology behind producing electrical energy from wind power has developed
abruptly in recent decades.
With the development of power electronics, the tech-
nology changed from fixed-speed wind turbines to variable-speed wind turbines. In
fixed-speed wind turbines, the rotor speed of wind turbines is permanently fixed and
coupled with the frequency of the supply grid regardless of the wind speed. The fre-
quency of the supply grid, the gear ratio, and the generator design determine the rotor
speed. A directly connected induction generator to the grid, with a soft starter and a
capacitor bank, is considered the characteristic of fixed-speed wind turbines. Besides
being simple, robust, reliable, and cheap technology, it also has disadvantages. Its
disadvantages are uncontrollable reactive power consumption, mechanical stress, and
limited power quality control. The use of a capacitor bank aims to reduce reactive
power compensation. Furthermore, the fluctuations in the wind speed are further
transmitted as fluctuations in the mechanical torque and then as the fluctuation in
the electrical power on the grid. This electrical power fluctuation can result in a
change in voltage and can result in significant line losses in case of a weak grid [8]
[13].
The variable-speed wind turbine achieves maximum aerodynamic eﬀiciency over var-
ious wind speeds. The generator speed changes absorb variations in wind speed and
keep the torque reasonably constant. Variable-speed wind turbines are equipped with
an induction or synchronous generator connected to the power grid through a power
converter. Therefore, the variable-speed wind turbine has a complicated electrical
system compared to the fixed-speed wind turbine. The advantages of variable-speed
wind turbines are increased energy capture, improved power quality, and reduced
mechanical stress on the wind turbine. The disadvantages are losses in power elec-
tronics, the use of more components, and the increased equipment cost because of
power electronics.
There are four different dominating types of wind turbines depending upon the abil-
==PAGE:21==
2.1 Wind turbine technology
9
ity to control speed and the type of power control used. It is shown in the following
figure, and the difference between them are available in different literature including
[13].
Figure 2.1: Typical wind turbine configurations[13].
In the above figure, type A is a fixed-speed wind turbine, type B is a variable-speed
wind turbine with variable rotor resistance, type C is a variable-speed wind turbine
with a partial-scale frequency converter, and type D is a variable-speed wind turbine
with a full-scale frequency converter.
The broken line around the gearbox in the
==PAGE:22==
2.2 Hydrogen Producing technology
10
type D configuration indicates that there may or may not be a gearbox. Among the
above configurations, type C and type D are the most common topologies discovered.
Type D configuration corresponds to the entire variable-speed wind turbine, with
the generator connected to the grid through a full-scale frequency converter. The
frequency converter carries out reactive power compensation and a smoother grid
connection. The generator can be excited electrically (WRSG or WRIG) or by a
permanent magnet (PMSG)[13][8]. Detailed descriptions of the different aspects of
the modelling of WPP used in this thesis will be provided further in chapter 4.
2.2
Hydrogen Producing technology
Hydrogen is a versatile energy carrier produced from multiple feedstocks and used
across numerous applications. Hydrogen is found almost exclusively in compounds,
notably water molecules (hydrogen and oxygen) and fossil fuels (hydrocarbons) [14].
One can extract hydrogen from the compounds by imposing energy on the hydrogen-
containing combinations.
According to [14], the hydrogen can be classified using
different colour codes based on the production method.
• Grey hydrogen is produced with fossil fuels (e.g., hydrogen produced from
methane using steam methane reforming. Grey hydrogen is unsuitable for sus-
tainable development because it entails a substantial CO2 emission.
• Blue hydrogen has the same production process as grey hydrogen but is com-
plemented by carbon capture and storage.
• Green hydrogen is the most appropriate hydrogen for a fully sustainable
energy transition because it is produced only from a renewable energy source.
The most established technology for hydrogen production from renewable energy
is the ”water electrolysis technology”. Other technologies are not mature enough
to produce green hydrogen on a commercial scale.
2.2.1
Water electrolysis technology
The water electrolysis process is the hydrogen extraction method from the water
molecules.
The alkaline water electrolyzer (AWE) is the most mature technology
for water electrolysis. Proton exchange membrane (PEM) water electrolyzer is also
the available technology; however, it is much more expensive as compared to the
alkaline water electrolyzer [11]. In particular, these technologies operate at low tem-
peratures, making these devices suitable for pairing with intermittent wind or solar
power sources, as they can operate with constant loads and can be turned on and off
quite easily [10].
==PAGE:23==
2.2 Hydrogen Producing technology
11
2.2.2
Alkaline Water Electrolyzer
Applying a direct electric current (DC) to an aqueous electrolyte with high ionic con-
ductivity that separates two electrodes makes it possible to cause water to decompose
into hydrogen and oxygen. The complete chemical equation for this process, which
involves splitting water, is as follows:
H2O(l) + electrical energy →H2(g) + 1
2O2(g)
(2.1)
To initiate the reaction, a specific electric potential needs to be applied across both
electrodes, known as the reversible voltage, which can be calculated based on Gibb’s
energy for water splitting (explained later in chapter 4). When using an alkaline
electrolyzer, the common electrolyte is a potassium hydroxide (KOH) solution, where
the potassium ion (K+) and hydroxide ion (OH−) facilitates ionic transport. The
anodic and cathodic reactions that occur are as follows:
Anode : 2OH−(aq.) →1
2O2(g) + H2O(l) + 2e−
(2.2)
Cathode : 2H2O(l) + 2e−→H2(g) + 2OH−(aq.)
(2.3)
Figure 2.2: Operation principle of alkaline water electrolysis.
For an alkaline solution to work effectively in water electrolysis, the electrodes
must resist corrosion, have good electrical conductivity and catalytic properties, and
maintain their structural integrity. Similarly, the diaphragm should have low electrical
resistance.
One way to achieve this is by using specific materials for the anodes,
cathodes, and diaphragms, such as nickel, cobalt, iron, platinum-activated carbon
==PAGE:24==
2.3 Hierrarchical Control of Hybrid Power Plants
12
catalyst, and nickel oxide. Figure 2.2 and the equation 2.2 and 2.3 demonstrate the
working process of alkaline water electrolysis.
2.3
Hierrarchical Control of Hybrid Power Plants
An HPP can be of AC coupled and DC coupled topology depending upon the technolo-
gies integrated. A detailed description of AC-coupled and DC-coupled HPP topology
is well explained in [8]. Despite the topologies utilized, a hierarchical control architec-
ture well described in [2] is the leading interest for this literature. In [2], the authors
explained the hierarchical control architecture of the HPP consisting of WT, PV,
and BESS. It considers four levels of the control architecture: the EMS, HPP control,
plant control, and assets control. The control signals are going from a higher control
level to a lower control level; however, the status of every asset is going upward from
a lower level to a higher level. The HPP controller takes care of the information from
the EMS and releases the appropriate dispatch function from the HPP controller.
However, the HPP in [2] excludes ELZ or fuel cells. So considering ELZ as an essen-
tial aspect of HPP is the primary aim of this thesis. Therefore, the author is more
interested in designing a control hierarchy of HPP, consisting of a WPP and an ELZ
plant, and proposing an HPP controller to utilize all the excess RES to produce green
hydrogen. Moreover, following the reference from the EMS to produce the required
amount of hydrogen is another aspect. In both cases, the hydrogen produced will be
”green hydrogen” as the ELZ will not take power from the grid. A specific control
function needs to be designed to realize the abovementioned concepts, which will be
explained later in chapter 3.
2.4
Literature Review
The literature review summarizes the work to integrate utility-scale HPP into the
grid.
Several works have been performed to integrate mono-technology HPP into
the grid, but HPP consisting of muti-technology still has scope in research. Minimal
works are available in HPP consisting of hydrogen. Authors from [7] have proposed a
wind-electrolytic hydrogen storage system to participate in the electricity/hydrogen
market for selling electricity and hydrogen, which can help to improve the benefits
of wind power in the electricity markets and adree the wind power curtailment effec-
tively. The optimal operation strategy is proposed to maximize the profits of an HPP.
It is more concerned about the optimization problem of the markets but needs more
study of the system’s dynamics. A proper coordination scheme is needed to produce
and consume hydrogen in real-time. This thesis mainly targets deploying the control
mechanism to produce hydrogen. Authors from [15] have explained a little bit about
the benefit of hydrogen production and consumption together and following either
economic (EC) or sustainable (SU) objectives using two Greenlab Skive’s (GLS) con-
figurations. Authors from [2] have proposed a new control hierarchy and a controller
==PAGE:25==
2.4 Literature Review
13
design for an HPP consisting of wind, solar, and battery as ESS. People have not
mentioned the hierarchical control system consisting of a hydrogen-producing elec-
trolyzer. This thesis tries to fill the gap, implement an electrolyzer in the HPP, and
figure out the hierarchical control system architecture with the control objective.
This thesis is also about the dynamic modelling of the different systems used in the
HPP. It consists of WPP modelling together with ELZ modelling. Electrolyzer is the
major component of producing hydrogen. One of the major challenges is to make it op-
erate smoothly with intermittent power with renewable energy sources. Most research
activities on water electrolysis related to RE/H2 projects have focused on alkaline sys-
tems. Proton Exchange Membrane (PEM) electrolyzers are another electrolyzer used
for this purpose. However, the cost associated with PEM is quite high, and the market
for H2 production is still low [11]. A mathematical electrolyzer model has been devel-
oped in [11] and given a basis for the dynamic simulation. This electrolyzer model is
based on a combination of fundamental thermodynamics, heat transfer theory, and
empirical electrochemical relationships. The reference system used in this literature is
Julich’s stand-alone photovoltaic hydrogen energy plant (PHOEBUS). Comparisons
between predicted and measured data show that the model results aligned with the
experimental results. Hence the model can predict cell voltage, hydrogen production,
eﬀiciencies, and operating temperature. This model can benefit the system design
and optimization of control strategies.
A control system has been designed in [16] to ensure an eﬀicient and reliable elec-
trolyzer operation. The proposed control method can manage power and hydrogen
flows, which has been realized through a hardware-in-loop emulator of the electrolyzer
consisting of power electronic and control stages. The results of the real-time emula-
tor are also similar to the data from the PHOEBUS project mentioned before.
A similar model of a 200kW alkaline type electrolyzer has been developed in [17].
It also described that the more the current flows through the electrolyzer, the more
hydrogen will be produced.
A square wave is chosen for input current, and the
corresponding simulation results show expected system parameters that match the
manufacturer-quoted system parameters. This model also can be utilized to simulate
the dynamics of a hybrid power system. The study shows that the model is based
on the mathematical equations and manufacturers’ data on the 200kW electrolyzer
installed at Ramea.
Modelling and control coordination scheme (CCS) of a wind-to-hydrogen(W2H) set to
optimize electricity production from a variable speed wind turbine generator (WTG)
while helping balance between supply and demand in a system has been investigated in
[18]. A grid forming (GFM) inverter-based WTG is modelled, and a set of electrolyzer
and fuel cells is integrated at the DC circuit of a GFM-WTG to be coordinated. The
proposed CCS enables the GFM-WTG to extract the maximum available power from
the turbine while enabling the ELZ and FC to meet the required system demand at
any ramp rate with the fast droop control provided by the Machine Side Converter
(MSC). The simulation results show that the proposed CCS enables the W2H set in a
stand-alone power system to meet the supply and continue its maximum power point
tracking (MPPT ) operation for the uncertainty of wind and load variations.
==PAGE:26==
2.4 Literature Review
14
The operation modes and control architectures of the grid-supporting power converter
for the electrolyzer providing both voltage and frequency support have been studied
in [19]. The electrolyzer can reduce its power to support the demand rise or consume
more power in case of the load power suddenly drops. Control architecture has been
designed to support the grid. The power setpoint design determines the electrolyzer’s
power reserve to support the system if demand rises or drops. The power dispatch of
the electrolyzer is regulated via the opposite droop control at the outer loop and the
PI controller in the inner loop.
==PAGE:27==
CHAPTER 3
Hybrid Power Plant
Control Design
This chapter focuses on the development and execution of control strategies for a
hybrid power plant model that includes WPP and ELZ. The report emphasizes the
HPP’s controller capacity to regulate active power production control.
3.1
Hierrarchical Control Architecture of HPP
3.1.1
Hierrarchy
Authors from [2] proposed a hierarchical system of colocated HPP consisting of WPP,
SPP, and BESS. A similar system is proposed in this thesis, including H2 producing
electrolyzer plant together with the WPP. The hierarchical system has four control
hierarchy levels, as shown in fig 3.1. From top to bottom, there is the HPP EMS level,
HPP control level, plant control level, and asset control level. The higher control level
sends control commands and parameters to the lower control levels, while the lower
control level sends back system states to the higher control level. The figure’s red
arrows show the control commands and parameters sent from the higher to the lower
control levels. In contrast, blue arrows show the system states from lower to higher
control levels. The higher control level has a higher time resolution: for example,
the HPP EMS operates in minutes to hours time range. Lower control levels HPP
control level operates in minutes and the plant control level in seconds, whereas the
asset control level is in milliseconds.
The symbols PW Ti,PW P P ,PELZ are already described in chapter 1.1 correspond-
ing to the figure 1.3. The four levels of the control hierarchy will be described thor-
oughly in the following section of this chapter.
==PAGE:28==
3.1 Hierrarchical Control Architecture of HPP
16
Figure 3.1: HPP hierarchical control architecture. Inspired by [2].
The control mechanism between the asset and plant control levels in wind power
plants is well described in [20] and [21]. The author is also interested in a similar
control mechanism between the ELZ plants and the individual units of the electrolyzer.
At the same time, the electrolyzer plant has been scaled up to achieve a single plant
of the needed size. Therefore control mechanism between the electrolyzer plant and
individual electrolyzer units is left for future research.
Active power control is the only control function considered in this literature. The
variable exchanged in the control hierarchy is shown in the figure below in fig 3.2: The
variables used in figure 3.2 is defined below. The control variables sent from the higher
control level to the lower level for the next time window are:
• E∗
HP P : The energy reference sent from the EMS to the HPP controller.
• M ∗
H2: The mass of hydrogen reference sent from the EMS to the HPP controller.
• Priority (0/1): The priority sent from the EMS to the HPP controller. The
symbol 0 represents the power reference tracking mode and 1 represents the
mass of hydrogen tracking mode.
• P ∗
W P P : The reference signal from the HPP controller to the WPP controller.
That is the active power needs to be generated from the WPP.
• P ∗
ELZ: The reference signal from the HPP controller to the ELZ controller.
That is the active power needed for the ELZ.
The system state variables sent from lower control levels to the higher control
levels are:
• PELZ−min: The electrolyzer’s minimum rated power.
==PAGE:29==
3.1 Hierrarchical Control Architecture of HPP
17
MH2-accumulated
PHPP
MH2-accumulated
Figure 3.2: Variable exchanged across the control hierarchy. Inspired by [2].
• PELZ−max: The electrolyzer’s maximum rated power.
• MH2−accumulated: The accumulated mass of hydrogen from the electrolyzer.
• PW P P N: The rated power of WPP.
• PW P P −ava: The available power from the WPP.
• PHP P : The HPP power is fed to the grid through EMS.
3.1.2
HPP EMS Control level
The HPP EMS has an objective to maximize the revenue of HPP by optimally selling
the energy either in the electricity market or in the hydrogen market. It must also
consider the utility regulations and the power plants’ physical limits. The EMS deter-
mines the power sold to different electricity markets. Denmark’s electricity market
decides based on the price offering from the day-ahead spot market, intraday market,
reserve market, or balancing market based on the additional forecasts in different
time horizons. Authors in [22] have given insights into the HPPs as a price taker in
the energy market. The various market operators and their bidding patterns are not
in the scope of this thesis. Even the optimization problem for maximizing profit is
also not the scope of this thesis. It is assumed that the EMS sends a reference signal
to the HPP controller after EMS solves the optimization problem.
==PAGE:30==
3.1 Hierrarchical Control Architecture of HPP
18
Hydrogen is considered long-term energy storage and energy used for transporta-
tion. The author from [7] has solved an optimization problem considering a separate
hydrogen market, but with a fixed price of hydrogen. Whenever the electricity market
price is high compared to the fixed price of the hydrogen market, the power from the
HPP is used to produce electricity. However, in the future, there may be a need for
a dynamic hydrogen market that is similar to the electricity market today. The term
dynamic refers to the fact that the hydrogen market can also change the price per
the need.
In this thesis, it is assumed that the EMS deals with the markets and sends
reference signals to the HPP controller. According to the required mass of hydrogen
or energy required to the grid obtained from EMS, the HPP controller will dispatch
the active power reference to the electrolyzer plant.
3.1.3
HPP Control level
The proposed HPP controller is shown in fig 3.3. It has three inputs from the EMS,
as shown in the figure.
PWPPN
P*
HPP
PELZ-min
PELZ-max
PEL
PELZ-min PELZ-maxPWPP-ava
MH2-accumulated
Figure 3.3: HPP controller design.Inspired by [2].
Priority mode determines the functioning of the controller. The dispatch function
will handle two different scenarios. First, to produce the hydrogen only from the
excess energy obtained from the WPP after it provides the power as the commitment
to the grid. Second, it will provide reference power to the electrolyzer as per the need
of the market, obtained as a mass reference from the EMS. The EMS determines
the energy sold in the electricity market E∗
HP P , and the mass of the hydrogen sold
in the hydrogen market M ∗
H2 in a specific timeframe. These requirements are sent
to the HPP controller as reference powers, according to which the HPP controller
dispatches the reference power to the WPP and ELZ controllers as P ∗
W P P and P ∗
ELZ
respectively.
==PAGE:31==
3.1 Hierrarchical Control Architecture of HPP
19
Combining two power references, the power needed to feed the grid from HPP
( P ∗
HP P ) and power needed to produce the required amount of hydrogen from the
electrolyzer (P ∗
ELZ), is the required amount of power to produce from the WPP. In
this thesis, WPP will continuously operate at maximum power point tracking (MPPT)
producing a rated amount of power. The excess energy will be utilized to form green
hydrogen or to feed the grid.
Case I: In this scenario, the electrolyzer will produce hydrogen only from the
excess energy obtained from the WPP.
P ∗
ELZ = P ∗
W P P −P ∗
HP P
(3.1)
Case II: In this case, the EMS will send a reference mass of hydrogen in priority
mode 1. The equivalent power to produce the required mass of hydrogen P ∗
H2 will be
sent as the reference to the ELZ controller.
P ∗
ELZ = P ∗
H2
(3.2)
P ∗
HP P = P ∗
W P P −P ∗
ELZ
(3.3)
3.1.3.1
Priority Mode:
A signal to determine the priority mode is sent from the EMS to the HPP controller.
For the current model, ”mode 0” is used for the power reference priority mode and
”mode 1” is for the mass of hydrogen reference mode.
A detailed description of the operation mode as ”mode 0” and ”mode 1” will be
described with a flowchart and the results in the following chapters.
3.1.3.2
The E2P block
The E2P block converts the energy reference from the EMS to the power reference
toward the dispatch function. The measured power from the HPP will be integrated
to get the energy.
The measured energy so far subtracted from the total energy
reference divided by the remaining time gives the equivalent power reference. This
power reference, limited by the maximum power of the HPP and ramp rate limiter,
is fed to the anti-windup PI controller, which gives the saturated reference power to
the dispatch function as P ∗
HP P .
3.1.3.3
M2P Block:
The M2P block present in figure 3.3 is one of the novel proposals made in this thesis.
To produce the required mass of hydrogen as a reference obtained from the EMS,
specific active power needs to feed to the ELZ. There is a need for a mass-to-power
converter to fulfil the demand for ELZ power.
The mass of hydrogen reference M ∗
H2 needs to be converted as the energy refer-
ence. The mass-to-energy converter gives the energy reference required to produce
==PAGE:32==
3.1 Hierrarchical Control Architecture of HPP
20
the necessary amount of hydrogen. The M2P block gives the equivalent power and
refers to the dispatch function from the mass reference. For this purpose, the mea-
sured mass of hydrogen accumulated from the ELZ is calculated in every time step.
The difference between the reference mass and the collected is the mass required to
produce within the specified time frame. The mass required is converted to the energy
required.
A rough estimation of 50kWh energy required to produce 1kg of hydrogen is used
for the modelling purpose as suggested in [23]. Some other literature including [24]
have referred to the value close to the estimated value used in this thesis. However,
the energy required depends on the eﬀiciency of the electrolyzer. Much work may
need to predict the exact amount of energy required.
The mass converted to the equivalent energy is again converted to the equivalent
power to the dispatch function. The conversion process from energy to power has been
described above in the E2P block. the electrolyzer power to the dispatch function
needs to be limited within the operating range of the electrolyzer.
Therefore the
equivalent power has been passed through a limiter to control the equal power within
the scope of the minimum and maximum rated power of the ELZ.
3.1.4
Plant Control level
The plant control level consists of the WPP controller and ELZ controller.
The
purpose of the WPP controller is to control the active power generated by the WPP.
The ELZ controller controls the power intake by the ELZ. It is achieved by sending the
active power reference to the wind turbine and electrolyzer controllers. The generic
block diagram of each plant controller is shown in the figure below 3.4
Figure 3.4: Plant control level.
The PI controller ensures the correct power production from the WPP by reduc-
ing the error between the reference power and the measured power at the point of
connection (POC), as shown in figure 3.4. The output of the PI controller is further
dispatched to individual technology through proportional distribution [5].
==PAGE:33==
3.2 HPP Control Algorithm
21
3.1.5
Asset Control level
The asset control level receives the reference signal from the plant level and needs
to control the individual WT and ELZ. Similarly, each wind turbine and electrolyzer
power capability will be sent to the upper control level (i.e., WPP controller and ELZ
plant controller) in case applicable. As already mentioned, this thesis is not about
the asset control level of the ELZ.
3.1.6
PI controller
The proportional-integral (PI) controller tracks the setpoint in the PCC as accurately
as possible. It inputs the error between the measured values and the power reference.
There could be a mismatch between them because of the losses, or there might be cases
where the plants cannot provide the expected output. The PI controller compensates
for the error based on measurements. The PI controller’s output is then dispatched
to the individual power plants (i.e. WPP and ELZ). PI controllers are implemented
not only in the HPP controller but also in the individual power plant controller.
However, the output from the PI controller provides the reference to the lower-level
controller.
The response times of the individual power plant WPP and ELZ are
different. Therefore it needs to be tuned carefully to meet the following requirements:
• No steady state error
• No overshoot
• Stable system
• Less settling time
The transfer function of the PI controller is designed in the s-domain and expressed
as in the following equation:
GP I = KP I · TP Is + 1
TP Is
(3.4)
Where KP I and TP I are the proportional and time constants of the PI controller,
respectively.
The controller gain parameters KP and KI are selected and tuned
manually [5][25].
3.2
HPP Control Algorithm
Control strategies for the HPP controller (HPPC) are intended to supervise active
power among the energy resource and the electrolyzer. WPP is a power source within
the design, and ELZ is considered a system load. The HPP controller allocates the
active power generated by WPP and taken by ELZ in connection with the reference
obtained from EMS for the point of common coupling. During the controlling process,
==PAGE:34==
3.2 HPP Control Algorithm
22
the ELZ operates in total capacity, minimum capacity, or partial capacity. In order
to achieve active power control according to the reference from the EMS, two control
modes are proposed:
• Energy management system, power reference tracking (EMS-PRT)
• Energy management system, mass reference tracking (EMS-MRT)
In the first control mode, HPPC ensures that the HPP follows the power reference
set by the EMS, whereas, in the second mode, mass reference will be sent out from
the EMS to the HPPC. The EMS control strategy is based on the nominal capacity
of the WPP. The WPP operates most of the time with MPPT. It can also curtail
the power in case the ELZ is out of order, and the energy reference from the EMS is
lower than the WPP nominal capacity. However, this thesis is not taking action for
the power curtailment of the WPP and ELZ is switched off or out of order. Future
works are suggested in this research area.
3.2.1
EMS-PRT Mode
The control algorithm for mode one is shown in figure 3.5. The algorithm is divided
into three control modes which can be summarized in the table 3.1
• Control Mode 1: The available wind power PW P P ava from the WPP is higher
than the reference power from the EMS to the HPP, P ∗
HP P , the surplus power
is used to the electrolyzer to produce green hydrogen. But the surplus power
should be higher than the minimum rated electrolyzer power.
Suppose the
surplus power is less than the electrolyzer’s minimum rated power. In that case,
the electrolyzer operates at its minimum rated power, and the power going to
the grid through the EMS will be limited. The WPP continues to operate in
the MPPT mode.
• Control Mode 2: When the surplus amount of power from the WPP after
providing the reference power P ∗
HP P to the grid from the HPP lies in between the
rated minimum and maximum power of the electrolyzer, the controller simply
provides the surplus power to the electrolyzer and reference power to the HPP.
• Control Mode 3: If the surplus power after fulfilling the grid requirement as
set by EMS as P ∗
HP P is greater than the maximum capacity of the electrolyzer
P max
ELZ then either the wind power should be curtailed or the grid will be fed
with much higher power than the reference sent from the EMS. The curtailment
power will be Pcurtailment = PW P P ava −(P ∗
HP P + P max
ELZ). In this project, the
power curtailment from the WPP is avoided, whereas it is assumed that the
grid can take excess power from the HPP. The HPP will be benefited from this
action.
==PAGE:35==
3.2 HPP Control Algorithm
23
Figure 3.5: Algorithm for active power dispatch in the HPP dispatch function, EMS-
PRT mode.
One of the project’s objectives is to reduce the power curtailment and maximize
the benefit to the HPP owner.
Nevertheless, in the above explanation about the
EMS-PRT mode, it is observed that some WPP power has been curtailed in differ-
ent scenarios. It can be avoided if the surplus power, obtained after running it at
maximum capacity, could be again injected into the grid. For this purpose, the grid
constraint Pgridmax should be higher than HPP available power. The EMS or grid
operator can set the limit for the grid constraint, which is not the scope of this thesis.
Table 3.1: Case 1:EMS-PRT Mode.
Regulations
Control Modes
Power References
WPP
ELZ
WPP
ELZ
State 1
MPPT
Minimum rated power
PW P P ava
P min
ELZ
State 2
MPPT
Available power
PW P P ava
PW P P ava −P ∗
HP P
State 3
MPPT
Maximum capacity
PW P P ava
P max
ELZ
==PAGE:36==
3.2 HPP Control Algorithm
24
3.2.2
EMS-MRT mode
In this mode, the HPPC fulfils the mass of hydrogen requirement sent from the EMS
as mass reference. As mentioned, the EMS will bid in the hydrogen and electricity
markets and send the mass refers to the HPPC. The optimization process of the EMS
is out of this project’s scope, but it is assumed that there is no curtailment of WPP
power in this mode. The intelligent EMS will know the required amount of hydrogen
and electrical energy in the next time frame and the capacity of the WPP and ELZ
with their min/max constraint. The mass reference is converted into power reference
as described in section 3.1.3.
The control algorithm divided into three states are
shown in the figure and table below:
• Control Mode 1: If the mass requirement sent from the EMS to the HPP
controller is lower than the minimum capacity of the ELZ, the ELZ still produces
its minimum capacity and the excess energy after feeding the ELZ will be sent
to the grid through the EMS.
• Control Mode 2: The power reference equivalent to the mass reference for
hydrogen P ∗
H2 from EMS is used for the power reference of the electrolyzer
P ∗
ELZ. This way, the electrolyzer can produce the required amount of hydrogen.
It is known that the WPP will operate on the MPPT mode, and hence available
power from the HPP to the POC P ∗
HP P is equivalent to the extra WPP power
after utilizing the required power to the electrolyzer.
• Control Mode 3: The electrolyzer will operate at the maximum operating
point to produce the required amount of hydrogen.
At the same time, the
power feed to the grid through the HPP POC will only be the extra power after
utilizing the electrolyzer.
Table 3.2: Case 2: EMS-MRT mode.
Regulations
Control States
Power References
WPP
ELZ
WPP
ELZ
State 1
MPPT
Minimum rated power
PW P P ava
P min
ELZ
State 2
MPPT
Follow the setpoint
PW P P ava
P ∗
MH2
State 3
MPPT
Maximum capacity
PW P P ava
P max
ELZ
==PAGE:37==
3.2 HPP Control Algorithm
25
Figure 3.6: Algorithm for active power dispatch in the HPP dispatch function, EMS-
MRT mode.
==PAGE:38==
CHAPTER 4
Modelling and
Analysis
To implement control strategies for HPP, precise models of WPP and Electrolyzer are
necessary. This chapter outlines the project’s methodology for the dynamic modelling
of HPP technologies and the approaches and techniques employed.
4.1
Modelling Representations
Per unit representation, and delta models are used to model the grid and the wind
turbine used in this thesis. The detailed descriptions of these modelling representa-
tions can be found on [26]. However, a basic introduction is included in the following
chapters.
4.1.1
Per-unit representation
The per-unit system normalizes the value of a variable with a corresponding base
value. As the per unit value is the ratio of the physical value to the base value, it
is always dimensionless. Usually, the base values for power and frequency are chosen
independently in the electrical system. Therefore the per unit values of these variables
lie in the interval of 0 and 1. The per unit values could be much higher than 1 for
other variables like inertia and angular momentum. It is because the base values of
these variables are calculated based on interrelated quantities. In general, the per
unit value of the certain quantity is given in the form of 4.1
xpu =
x
xbase
(4.1)
In the power system, the base power for the whole system is chosen as the sum-
mation of the power generation capacity from individual generators. However, each
generating unit could have a base corresponding to its technology. The per unit value
can be calculated, referred to the local or global base, and switched to a new base
from an old one.
==PAGE:39==
4.2 Aggregated Modelling
27
Here in this thesis, the base value for the power is assumed to be Pbase = 120MW.
All the other active power values for the individual plant are based on this base value.
4.1.2
Delta representation
In electrical systems, together with the per-unit system, another representation used
is delta representation. It is typically used to describe deviations of quantities from
initial steady-state values.
The idea of delta representation is that any variable x can be expressed at any
moment tas the sum of its initial value denoted by x0 = x(0) and a small deviation
δx(t) from its initial value, as follows:
x(t) = x0 + ∆x(t)
(4.2)
with the condition of course that in the steady state initial condition, the deviation
is zero, i.e. ∆x(0) = 0. The delta model can be expressed as:
∆x(t) = x(t) −x0
and
∆x(0) = 0
(4.3)
The delta models are very convenient to use, as their states do not need to be ini-
tialised since they start automatically in zero[26].
4.2
Aggregated Modelling
A utility-scale HPP may consist of tens or hundreds of WPP. Modelling each WPP
is complex and takes lots of computational time. Therefore, it is necessary to model
the WPP so that the individual power can be re-scaled to represent the entire Wind
Farm (WF). Aggregation is done to facilitate individual dynamics and investigate the
impact of large power plants on the power system.
Peq =
N
∑
i=1
Pi
(4.4)
Where ”i” represents the single unit, and N represents the total number of units
aggregated at the plant level. In this thesis, N is 60 Wind turbines of 2MW each.
The process of aggregation can be represented in figure 4.1
Figure 4.1: Aggregated Model for the WPP [5].
==PAGE:40==
4.3 Wind Turbine Model
28
The following sections briefly describe the most crucial dynamic modelling of a
single wind turbine used in this thesis.
4.3
Wind Turbine Model
As mentioned, a detailed WT model for the frequency control studies mentioned in
[2] and [27] is available in the department. However, active power generation is only
the primary concern of this thesis; the model is simplified. The Simulink model can
be seen in the appendix as A.4. But the simplified model of the WT for the current
study is described in the following chapters:
4.3.1
Variable Speed Wind Turbines(VSWTs)
Variable speed wind turbines (VSWTs) are equipped with the power electronic inter-
face as shown in figure 4.2. The job of the power electronic interface is to decouple
the grid frequency with the generator’s electrical frequency of the wind turbine. As
the VSWTs operate at variable rotational speeds, the generator’s electrical frequency
varies; decoupling with the grid frequency is necessary.
Figure 4.2: Variable speed wind turbine connected to the grid through a power
electronic interface[28].
The power converter not only controls the speed of the generator but also pro-
vides other control capabilities like power, frequency, and voltage control on the grid.
Because of the power converter, wind turbines can also be considered active power
generators similar to conventional power-generating units. However, it is also to be
noted that their power production depends on the available wind resources. There
are two groups of VSWTs concept. The first concept is connected to the grid through
a partial scale frequency converter (a doubly fed induction generator DFIG wind tur-
bine concept). In contrast, the second concept is connected to the grid through a
full-scale frequency converter[28].
The VSWTs operate at the highest level of aerodynamic eﬀiciency over a wide
range of wind speeds. For this purpose, the rotational speed of the wind turbine
continuously adopts the wind speed by accelerating or deaccelerating the rotational
==PAGE:41==
4.3 Wind Turbine Model
29
speed of the wind turbine. The significant difference between the VSWTs and fixed-
speed wind turbines (FSWTs) is that the FSWTs have the maximum eﬀiciency at one
wind speed. However, the VSWTs are designed to achieve maximum aerodynamic
eﬀiciency over a wide range of wind speeds.
The VSWTs are mostly used together with the variable pitch control. The pitch
control method is the power limitation control method, where the blades can be
quickly turned out or into the wind as the power output becomes too high or too low,
respectively.[28]
Figure 4.3 contains different power curves for different aerodynamic power at
different pitch angles.
The bolded black curve shows the actual controlled power
curve.
Figure 4.3: Pitch control wind turbine power curve at different pitch angles[28].
Figure 4.4 shows the modelling block diagram of a variable speed pitch-controlled
wind turbine.
4.3.1.1
Aerodynamic Model
The aerodynamic power of the wind turbine in stationary operational conditions is:
Pwtr = 1
2 · ρ · A · U 3 · Cp(λ, θ)
(4.5)
The aerodynamic power depends on the air density (ρ), rotor swept area (A), speed
of the air (U) and the power coeﬀicient Cp(λ, θ). The power coeﬀicient is determined
==PAGE:42==
4.3 Wind Turbine Model
30
Figure 4.4: Model block diagram of a VSWT concept(all blocks in physical
unit)[28].
through the two-dimensional aerodynamic power coeﬀicient Cp(λ, θ) table where λ is
the tip speed ratio and θ is the pitch angle. The power coeﬀicient table represents
the effect of the change in rotor speed and pitch angle on the aerodynamic power.
The aerodynamic model of the figure 4.4 is described by the eq.4.5. The output
obtained from the model is aerodynamic torque, given by:
Twtr = Pwtr
ωwtr
= Pwtr
ωgen
· Ngear
(4.6)
where ωwtr is the rotational speed of the rotor in rad/s, ωgen is the generator speed
in rad/s and Ngear is the gear ratio.
4.3.2
Equation of Motion
The equation of motion is given as follows:
T
′
wtr −Tel = Iechiv
dωgen
dt
(4.7)
==PAGE:43==
4.3 Wind Turbine Model
31
where T
′
wtr is the equivalent torque on the generator side of the wind turbine, and
Iechiv is the equivalent inertia on the generator side and are given as follows:
T
′
wtr = Twtr
Ngear
(4.8)
Iechiv = Igen + I
′
wtr
(4.9)
I
′
wtr =
Irot
N 2gear
(4.10)
where Igen and Irot are the inerita of the generatro and rotor respectively. Tel is the
electrical torque in the generator.
4.3.2.1
MPPT Model
The maximum power tracking block in the figure 4.4 contains a predefined lookup
table of electrical power Pel vs generator speed ω. The maximum power tracking
block provides the electrical power reference for the equation of motion at a given
generator speed and, in turn, the power that the wind turbine will produce, neglecting
any loss [28].
4.3.2.2
Pitch Control Model
The pitch control limits the generator speed to its rated value at high wind speeds.
The pitch angle is controlled to not exceed the rated generator speed by spoiling some
available aerodynamic power. In lower wind speeds, the pitch angle remains at zero
degrees.
Figure 4.5: Pitch angle control block from figure 4.4[28].
The pitch controller uses a PI controller and an actuator.
The PI controller
produces reference pitch angle θref to the actuator. The input to the PI controller is
the error signal obtained from the generator speed ωgen and its reference value ωrated
gen .
==PAGE:44==
4.4 Dynamic Modeling of the Electrolyzer
32
The actuator compares the measured pitch angle θ to the reference pitch angle θref
and corrects the error signal ∆θ = θ −θref [28].
4.4
Dynamic Modeling of the Electrolyzer
Electrolyzer is the crucial component for producing hydrogen from water dissociation.
The original model provided by the department was designed for 26kW of electrolyzer
power. It is designed and verified with the experimental data from the PHOEBUS
project cited in [11] literature. The model can predict the cell voltage, current, hy-
drogen production rate, Faraday’s eﬀiciency, electrolyzer’s pressure, storage pressure
of the hydrogen tank, and electrolyzer operating temperature. The overall model
comprises basic submodels such as the electrical, thermodynamic, electrochemical,
and hydraulic submodels. The main components of the whole electrolyzer model are
shown in figure 4.6. Individual submodels are described in detail in the following
paragraphs.
Figure 4.6: Block diagram of sub-models of advanced alkaline electrolyzer.
[29]
4.4.1
Thermodynamic Sub-Model
The total change in enthalpy for splitting water is the enthalpy difference between
the products (H2 and O2) and the reactants (H2O). The same applies to the total
change in entropy. The change in Gibbs energy is expressed by:
∆G = ∆H −T · ∆S
(4.11)
==PAGE:45==
4.4 Dynamic Modeling of the Electrolyzer
33
The minimum voltage applied, which is suﬀicient to break down the water molecule
into hydrogen and oxygen molecule, is reversible voltage Urev given by Faraday’s law
and mentioned in the following relationship:
Urev = ∆G
zF
(4.12)
where Urev is measured in V and is sensible to reaction temperature and pressure,
z the hydrogen molecule electrons, and F = 96485.3329C/mol is Faraday constant.
The total energy demand ∆H is related to the thermoneutral cell voltage by the
following expression:
Utn = ∆H
zF
(4.13)
At standard temperature and pressure (i.e.25◦C, 1bar) reversible cell voltage Urev =
1.229V and thermoneutral cell voltage Utn = 1.482V . But these values change with
the temperature and pressure.
4.4.2
Electrical sub-Model
The electrical sub-model allows the estimation of the voltage-current relationship.
The model inputs are the electrical power and the stack temperature, whereas the
output voltage-current couple for every stack cell at different temperatures [6]. The
voltage across one electrolyzer cell is:
ucell = u0 + r1 + r2 · Telz
Ael
·iel +(s1+s2·Telz +s3·T 2
elz)·log(
t1 +
t2
Telz +
t3
T 2
elz
Ael
·iel +1)
(4.14)
Where iel is the generated current of the electrolyzer, u0 is the reversible voltage vary-
ing slowly with temperature and pressure,ri are the parameters for ohmic resistances
of the electrolyte, si and ti are the parameters for overvoltages in the electrodes, Ael
is the area of the electrode and Telz is the temperature of the electrolyte. All the
parameters have been identified through the measurement values [16] given in table
4.1.
Table 4.1: Parameters of the electrolyzer model from [16].
Parameters
Values
Unit
Parameters
Values
Unit
r1
7.3e−5
Ωm2
r2
−1.1e−7
Ωm2/ deg C
s1
1.6e−1
V
s2
1.38e−3
V/ deg C
s3
1.6e−5
V/ deg C2
t1
1.6e−2
m2/A
t2
−1.3
m2 deg C/A
t3
4.12e2
m2 deg C2/A
Ael
0.25
m2
a1
99.5
%
a2
−9.58
m2A
a3
−0.056
m2/A/ deg C2/A
a4
1502.7
m4A
a5
−70.8
m4A deg C
Nel
21
Telz
25
deg C
==PAGE:46==
4.4 Dynamic Modeling of the Electrolyzer
34
A couple of literature, including [6] and [30], have tried to simplify the polarisation
curve model, and only four parameters are left to be known from the empirical data.
4.4.3
Electrochemical sub-model
The following relation describes the electrochemical reactions in alkaline water elec-
trolysis:
Anode : 2OH−(aq.) →1
2O2(g) + H2O(l) + 2e−
(4.15)
Cathode : 2H2O(l) + 2e−→H2(g) + 2OH−(aq.)
(4.16)
According to Faraday’s law, the hydrogen production rate depends on the electrolyzer
current[16].
m′
elpro = αel(Telz, iel) · Nel
z · F · iel
(4.17)
Where Nel is the number of cells in the electrolyzer, z is the number of moles of
electrons transferred per moles of water, and F is the Faraday constant.
4.4.4
Faraday eﬀiciency sub-model
The Faraday eﬀiciency, or current eﬀiciency, can be described as the ratio of the actual
and theoretical maximum amount of hydrogen produced in the electrolyzer. It also
depends on the current density and is given by the empirical relationship [16].
αel = a1 · exp
(a2 + a3 · Telz
iel
Ael
+ a4 + a5 · Telz
( iel
Ael )2
)
(4.18)
The parameters ai are calculated from the experiments and given in table 4.1. While
in [11] the Faradays eﬀiciency is defined only based on the two variables:
αel =
( iel
Ael )2
f1 + ( iel
Ael )2 · f2
(4.19)
Our model utilizes the two values of Faraday’s coeﬀicient (f1 and f2). Therefore
Faraday’s eﬀiciency is calculated from the equation
Experimental data
f1
f2
ELZ model
0.00001451A2/cm2
0.98935
Table 4.2: Parameters for the Faradays eﬀiciency calculated and used in our model.
==PAGE:47==
4.5 Electrolyzer Model Validation
35
4.4.5
Thermal sub-model
The thermal model of the electrolyzer also needs to be considered because hydrogen
production depends on the temperature variation of the electrolyzer. The tempera-
ture of the electrolyte can be determined by solving the thermal energy balance as
shown below:
Ct · dT
dt = Q.
gen −Q.
loss −Q.
cool
(4.20)
where Ct is the electrolyzer stack thermal capacity in (W/K), T is the electrolyzer
temperature in (K), Q.
gen is the internal heat generation in (W), Q.
loss is the ambient
heat loss in (W), and Q:
cool is the cooling thermal power in (W).
A simple method to calculate electrolyzer temperature is given:
T = Tini + δT
Ct
(Q.
gen −Q.
loss −Q.
cool)
(4.21)
The method to calculate the heat variables of the above equation is described in detail
on [11].
4.4.6
Hydraulic sub-model
Neglecting leakage froom the electrolyzer, the hydrogen evolution rate m′el in the
cathode depends on the hydrogen production rate m′elpro and the outlet rate m′elout
m′el(τ) = m′elpro(τ) −m′elout(τ)
(4.22)
The hydrogen pressure in the electrolyzer can be found from the ideal gas law:
pel = RTel
Vel
· mel
(4.23)
Where pel is the pressure of the hydrogen in the electrolyzer, R is the universal gas
constant, Tel is the temperature of the electrolyzer, and Vel is the volume of the
cathode. In steady-state operation, the hydrogen outlet rate should be regulated to
be equal to the hydrogen-production rate, and the stored hydrogen quantity in the
cathode should be maintained constant, as well as the pressure [16].
4.5
Electrolyzer Model Validation
The modified model of the hydrogen-producing electrolyzer system is simulated in
Matlab/Simscape.
The figure shows that the current signal is input to the elec-
trolyzer. The variation in the power consumed by the electrolyzer is represented by
the interpretation of the input current signal to the electrolyzer. Produced H2 could
be sent to some storage tank or towards the infinite pipeline. In any case, the pres-
sure of the electrolyzer should be constant. The constant hydrogen pressure inside
the electrolyzer is essential for security and eﬀiciency reasons [16].
==PAGE:48==
4.6 Resizing the Electrolyzer
36
The initial pressure of the electrolyzer is pel is = 3.0 bar and psto = 20 bar for the
system.
Figure 4.7: Input and Output from Electrolyzer model.
These plots resemble the experimental results mentioned in [16].
This verifies
the modified and used electrolyzer model used in this thesis can be further used to
integrate into the HPP model.
4.6
Resizing the Electrolyzer
A utility-scale HPP consists of a WPP of remarkable size. Therefore it is necessary
to design and develop a model with the required capacity. In this project, the size of
the WPP is equivalent to 120MW. For the lower or zero curtailments of the wind
power, it is necessary to have an ELZ plant also in the same range as WPP. Authors
from [31] have suggested the size of ELZ 1.2 times greater than the WT. By having a
==PAGE:49==
4.7 Electrolyzer minimum and maximum rated power
37
greater size of ELZ than WT, there will be no curtailment, and they also stated that
the levelized cost of hydrogen would be reduced.
However, the size of the base model for the electrolyzer is 26kW, denoted by
Wstack. To make the electrolyzer of the size Wbase = 100MW, the parameters of the
ELZ have been scaled linearly with the factor of
Wbase
Wstack . The parameters scaled to
make the model Wbase size by linearly scaling the cell area, chamber volume, and the
mass of hydrogen. While the thermal resistance and gains in temperature control are
scaled by the factor ( Wbase
Wstack )−1. This inverse sign is because the heat and thermal
resistance are inversely proportional. So in order to scale cooling linearly, we need to
multiply the resistance by the inverse factor.
4.7
Electrolyzer minimum and maximum rated power
According to [11] most alkaline electrolyzers are designed to operate about 20% of
their rated power. If the power available is below the rated value, some unnecessary
mixing up between the hydrogen and oxygen can happen inside the electrolyzer. Some
modern research shows that minimum power can be up to 15% of rated power. Hence
in this thesis, the minimum rated power of the electrolyzer used is 15MW.
The
maximum rated power of 100MW has been used for the modelling purpose.
==PAGE:50==
CHAPTER 5
Simulation Results
This chapter evaluates and analyzes the control strategies developed for HPP using
the MATLAB Simulink tool.
The analysis examines the interaction between the
HPP controller, WPP, and Electrolyzer controller under various case studies. The
simulation results support the eﬀicacy of the proposed techniques. Finally, conclusions
are drawn from the analyzed scenarios.
5.1
Simulation scenario:
The period used for the simulation is chosen to be 5min. It is because the EMS also
has the same time frame.
5.2
Mode 0:EMS Power reference tracking (EMS-PRT)
mode
Several simulations are performed to check the effectiveness of the control strategies
developed in chapter 3 and presented as different cases.
5.2.1
Producing Hydrogen with available power
In this case, the reference power sent from the EMS to the HPP controller is 0.5pu.
The first plot in figure 5.1 shows that the reference power to the HPP is in the red
line, and the power provided by the HPP is in the blue line. It can be seen that the
measured power from the HPP follows the reference power. The overall performance
of the HPP controller and the results obtained is shown in figure 5.1 and summarized
in the table 5.1 below:
==PAGE:51==
5.2 Mode 0:EMS Power reference tracking (EMS-PRT) mode
39
Figure 5.1: Controller and model output in 0.5 pu power reference case.
The second plot shows the available wind power from the WPP. The WPP is
always in MPPT mode. Therefore, providing the maximum available power to the
HPP is always required. Here, the reference to the WPP is followed by the measured
WPP power. The electrolyzer plant inside the HPP is considered a load as it only
takes the active power but can not provide any power to the HPP. Therefore the third
plot on the above figure shows that the available per unit power to the electrolyzer is
also 0.5pu whenever the WPP power is 1pu. The measured power from the electrolyzer
plant follows the reference sent from the controller.
The fourth plot shows the hydrogen production rate per second with the available
power. Moreover, the last plot shows the accumulated hydrogen within 5min of time
from the electrolyzer with the available power. This case is power reference following
==PAGE:52==
5.2 Mode 0:EMS Power reference tracking (EMS-PRT) mode
40
Table 5.1: Controller and model output in 0.5 pu power reference case.
Power (per unit)
Power (MW)
Kg
Reference power from EMS
0.5
60
HPP power to EMS
0.5
60
Reference WPP power
1
120
Measured WPP power
1
120
Reference ELZ power
0.5
60
Measured ELZ power
0.5
60
Reference mass of H2 from EMS
0
Accumulated mass of H2 from ELZ
96
mode; therefore, it can be seen that in the last plot, there is no reference for the mass
of hydrogen, even though hydrogen is produced and accumulated with the available
power. In fact, this concept is to visualize the production of green hydrogen when
there is excess power from the WPP after fulfilling the requirement set by EMS to
provide the power to the grid.
This case is a verification of the control algorithm proposed in chapter 3 and
depicted as control state 2 in figure 3.5.
5.2.2
Minimizing the hydrogen production
In this case, the reference power sent from the EMS to the HPP controller is 0.94pu.
The WPP is producing the rated power of 1p.u. as always. The available power to
the ELZ 0.06pu. It is equivalent to 7.2MW, which is less than the rated minimum
power of 15MW of the electrolyzer. In this case, the electrolyzer plant still runs at
its minimum capacity continuously. At the same time, the remaining power, after
fulfilling the ELZ’s minimum requirement, will be fed to the grid through the EMS.
The electrolyzer needs to operate continuously, only the minimum power required is
available as the power required to the grid at this time frame is high. The performance
of the HPP controller and the electrolyzer plant is shown in figure 5.2 and the results
are summarized in table 5.2 below:
==PAGE:53==
5.2 Mode 0:EMS Power reference tracking (EMS-PRT) mode
41
Figure 5.2: Controller and model output in 0.94 pu power reference case.
It can be seen from the first plot that the reference power from the EMS to the
HPP controller, in the beginning, is 0.94pu. However, as the electrolyzer is always
prioritized, the electrolyzer’s minimum power should be available first. That means
15MW of power needs to be fed to the electrolyzer. That is 0.125pu, as shown in
the third plot of the above figure. Therefore 1 −0.125 = 0.875 pu is the power that
can be fed to the grid from the HPP, as shown in the blue line in the first plot. As
the reference power is not achieved from the beginning, which can be seen as the red
line in the first plot, the controller tries to increase the reference power to regulate
the mismatch between the reference and measured power. However, the electrolyzer
needs to feed with at least the minimum rated power; the power reference from the
EMS can not be achieved throughout the simulation time.
The first three plots of figure 5.2 show the controller’s behaviour for the reference
==PAGE:54==
5.2 Mode 0:EMS Power reference tracking (EMS-PRT) mode
42
Table 5.2: Controller and model output in 0.94 pu power reference case.
Power (per unit)
Power (MW)
Kg
Reference power from EMS
0.94
112.8
HPP power to EMS
0.875
105
Reference WPP power
1
120
Measured WPP power
1
120
Reference ELZ power
0.125
15
Measured ELZ power
0.125
15
Reference mass of H2 from EMS
0
Accumulated mass of H2 from ELZ
27
signal obtained from the EMS. In contrast, the last two plots show the behaviour of
the electrolyzer.
The last two plots signify the hydrogen production rate with the electrolyzer’s
minimum rated power and the accumulated hydrogen within the 5min time interval.
It can be noted that a 100MW electrolyzer can produce 27kg of hydrogen with a
rate of 0.09kg/s. The discussion made in this title resembles the control algorithm
developed in chapter 3. This case is particularly describing the Control State 1 of
the figure 3.5
5.2.3
Maximizing the hydrogen production
When there is very little power demand from the EMS, most power is supposed to
go to the electrolyzer. However, the maximum amount of power the electrolyzer can
take from the WPP is one constraint we need to consider. In this particular case, 100
MW is the maximum capacity of the electrolyzer. Therefore the maximum amount
of per unit power it can take is 8.33p.u. as shown in figure 5.3. The results, in this
case, are summarized in table 5.3 below:
==PAGE:55==
5.2 Mode 0:EMS Power reference tracking (EMS-PRT) mode
43
Figure 5.3: Controller and model output in 0.10 pu power reference case.
==PAGE:56==
5.3 Mode 1:EMS Mass reference tracking (EMS-MRT) mode
44
Table 5.3: Controller and model output in 0.10 pu power reference case.
Power (per unit)
Power (MW)
Kg
Reference power from EMS
0.1
12
HPP power to EMS
0.167
20
Reference WPP power
1
120
Measured WPP power
1
120
Reference ELZ power
0.833
100
Measured ELZ power
0.833
100
Reference mass of H2 from EMS
0
Accumulated mass of H2 from ELZ
150
Although the reference power to the HPP from EMS is 0.10 pu, the figure shows
that the 0.167 pu is constantly fed to the grid through the EMS. It is happening
because the maximum rated power of the electrolyzer is 100MW. Therefore 0.833pu
of power is the maximum energy that can be taken to the electrolyzer. The per unit
power generated from the WPP is 1.0pu. Therefore remaining 0.167pu power must
be fed to the grid if curtailing of power from the WPP is avoided. In this scenario,
we assumed that the excess energy could go to the grid and make some profit instead
of curtailing the WPP power. The grid code requirement or the other constraints on
feeding the power to the grid from the HPP is not the scope of this research. We
assume the excess energy can provide to the grid.
The figure shows that the maximum hydrogen production rate for the rated max-
imum amount of power is 0.5kg/s. A total of 150kg of hydrogen accumulated at the
end of simulation time of 300s. Discussions depict the control algorithm defined and
discussed in figure 3.5 as State 3in chapter 3.
5.3
Mode 1:EMS Mass reference tracking (EMS-MRT)
mode
The mass of hydrogen produced is the main priority in this control mode. Whenever
there is a higher price for hydrogen than electricity, the EMS can send a reference
signal to the HPP controller to produce the required amount of hydrogen. While con-
sidering making a higher profit from the sale of hydrogen, the technological constraint
always drags attention. As our electrolyzer’s maximum rated capacity is 100MW, it
can produce 150kg hydrogen in 300s.
5.3.1
Hydrogen production with available power
The mass reference to produce hydrogen from the EMS is achieved by deploying the
0.65pu of power constantly throughout the time period. The power provided to the
electrolyzer is limited by considering the maximum and minimum power constraints
==PAGE:57==
5.3 Mode 1:EMS Mass reference tracking (EMS-MRT) mode
45
of the ELZ. The mass of H2 required is fulfilled and the surplus power will be fed to
the grid through the HPP. It can be seen in the first plot of the figure. Even though
the reference power from EMS is 0, 0.35pu of power is dispatched to the grid from
HPP. This case replicates the control algorithm developed in chapter 3.2.2. Figure
3.6 has three control states. The State 2 has been verified in this figure 5.4. The
overall results is summarized in table 5.4 below:
Figure 5.4: Controller and model output in 120 kg mass reference case.
==PAGE:58==
5.3 Mode 1:EMS Mass reference tracking (EMS-MRT) mode
46
Table 5.4: Controller and model output in 120 kg mass reference case.
Power (per unit)
Power (MW)
Kg
Reference power from EMS
0
0
HPP power to EMS
0.35
42
Reference WPP power
1
120
Measured WPP power
1
120
Reference ELZ power
0.65
78
Measured ELZ power
0.65
78
Reference mass of H2 from EMS
120
Accumulated mass of H2 from ELZ
120
5.3.2
Minimizing the hydrogen production
This scenario is unlikely to happen as the EMS knows the minimum amount of hy-
drogen produced is 27kg in 5min of time. Even though the case rarely happens, the
controller must take control action if the mass reference from the EMS is low. Figure
5.5 and summary table 5.5 presents the results obtained in this case.
Table 5.5: Controller and model output in 25 kg mass reference case.
Power (per unit)
Power (MW)
Kg
Reference power from EMS
0
0
HPP power to EMS
0.865 upto 257.5 sec
0.875 afterwards
103.8 upto 257.5 sec
105 afterwards
Reference WPP power
1
120
Measured WPP power
1
120
Reference ELZ power
0.135 upto 257.5 sec
0.125 afterwards
16.2 upto 257.5 sec
15 afterwards
Measured ELZ power
0.135 upto 257.5 sec
0.125 afterwards
16.2 upto 257.5 sec
15 afterwards
Reference mass of H2 from EMS
25
Accumulated mass of H2 from ELZ
28.7
==PAGE:59==
5.3 Mode 1:EMS Mass reference tracking (EMS-MRT) mode
47
Figure 5.5: Controller and model output in 25 kg mass reference case.
The power given to the electrolyzer to produce such a low amount of hydrogen is
met at around 257.5s by deploying much less 0.135pu power to the electrolyzer. The
ELZ still need to run with a minimum rated power even if the mass reference from
the EMS is achieved. Therefore after 257.5s, the ELZ take the minimum rated power,
i.e.15, MW and still produce some hydrogen. Therefore the accumulated mass of the
hydrogen after the 5min time window is 28.7kg. The surplus power is fed to the grid
from the HPP even though the reference power to the HPP from the EMS is 0.
==PAGE:60==
5.3 Mode 1:EMS Mass reference tracking (EMS-MRT) mode
48
5.3.3
Maximizing the hydrogen production
This case is the State 3 of the figure 3.6. The maximum hydrogen generated from the
electrolyzer is limited to 150kg. To produce that much hydrogen, the HPP controller
deploys the maximum rated power to the electrolyzer and sends only the remaining
energy to the grid. The overall results shown in figure 5.6 and table 5.6 below:
Figure 5.6: Controller and model output in 160 kg mass reference case.
==PAGE:61==
5.4 Summary
49
Table 5.6: Controller and model output in 160 kg mass reference case.
Power (per unit)
Power (MW)
Kg
Reference power from EMS
0
0
HPP power to EMS
0.165
19.8
Reference WPP power
1
120
Measured WPP power
1
120
Reference ELZ power
0.865
103.8
Measured ELZ power
0.833
100
Reference mass of H2 from EMS
160
Accumulated mass of H2 from ELZ
150
5.4
Summary
In both modes, the electrolyzer’s operation is the main priority.
Turning off and
turning On the electrolyzer too frequently is not a good practice as it can take several
minutes to warm up. The electrolyzer can not be provided with lower power than the
rated minimum power. If the electrolyzer has lower power input, it can mix up with
hydrogen and oxygen, and many other unwanted things can happen. The electrolyzer
always operates between the minimum and maximum rated power. Therefore the
electrolyzer power is fixed between minimum and maximum rated power, and the
HPP power given from the HPP to the grid can vary according to the situation.
In the EMS power reference tracking mode, the HPP power feeding to the grid
through EMS is the main priority respecting the power constraint of the ELZ.
In the EMS mass reference tracking mode, the mass of the hydrogen is the main
priority respecting the power constraint of the electrolyzer. In this case of 100MW of
electrolyzer capacity, the minimum and maximum hydrogen production is 27kg and
150kg, respectively, within the 5min time interval. If the requirement lies between
the mentioned numbers, the electrolyzer will produce that amount by deploying a
calculated amount of power. If the mass reference from the EMS is too low, the ELZ
operates at its minimum rated capacity. Similarly, if the mass reference from the
EMS is too high, the ELZ operates at its maximum rated power. Only the surplus
power, after operating ELZ at its different power levels, depending upon different
cases, will be fed to the grid through the EMS.
All of the cases described above respect the constraints of the electrolyzer plant.
After the study of all the cases, EMS knows the capacities of the ELZ and HPP.
Therefore this thesis gives some data which can be used for the optimization problem
of the EMS. Whenever EMS solves the optimization problem considering these data,
it can participate in the bidding strategy to the market. Once the EMS knows the
capacities of the different elements of the HPP, all the cases above except Control
State II of both modes are unlikely to happen. However, the developed controller
has been tested for all the possible scenarios.
==PAGE:62==
CHAPTER 6
Conclusion and Future
Work
In this chapter, the research findings are presented, highlighting the key discover-
ies and insights.
Furthermore, various potential directions for future research are
suggested, providing opportunities for further exploration and advancement in the
field.
6.1
Conclusions
This study provides insights into the hydrogen production rate through dynamic
modelling of the hydrogen-producing alkaline electrolyzer.
The integration of the
electrolyzer with the HPP is primarily constrained by its minimum and maximum
rated power. Consequently, a control algorithm has been developed to account for
these power capacity limitations. The EMS must consider the electrolyzer’s dynamics
during the energy management optimization process for different markets. This thesis
contributes valuable information to the EMS regarding the electrolyzer’s capacity.
The control architecture presented in this thesis addresses the research gap in
integrating the electrolyzer model with the HPP. It is widely recognized that fulfilling
the power commitment of the HPP is crucial. However, the current work in this thesis
enables the reduction or increment of power supply to the grid based on the ELZ
consumption. Due to time limitations, the power commitment aspect of the HPP
could not be fully addressed in the present model. However, this thesis introduces
constraints from the ELZ plant, allowing the EMS optimization program to optimize
the situation within those limitations.
The proposed novel controller can track the mass of hydrogen produced by the
electrolyzer and provide the power needed for the electrolyzer.
Hence, the HPP
controller can track the mass reference sent from the EMS. In another control mode,
the controller can also follow the energy reference from the EMS.
The proposed control algorithm is verified by variations in active power and the
mass of hydrogen setpoints. However, the variations in wind speed can cause varia-
tions in the active power production from the WPP.
==PAGE:63==
6.2 Future Work
51
The model must be appropriately initialised as the model has been designed and
simulated in MATLAB/SIMULINK. Otherwise, transients occur once the simulation
starts.
6.2
Future Work
The developed control strategies for the HPP can be utilized for the following pur-
poses:
• Extending the model: The HPP model can be extended by adding other
RES such as PV and BESS. A new control algorithm can be developed for the
new HPP consisting of WPP, PV, BESS, and ELZ. Also, the control scenarios
can be extended to meet the grid’s power requirement together, fulfilling the
ELZ power requirement. And also addressing the power curtailment scenarios
from the WPP.
• Adding other functionalities: Only the active power dispatch has been
studied in this thesis. Other functions, such as reactive power control, voltage,
and frequency control, can be added to the system.
• Shut down and Start up of ELZ:
The ELZ has been operated continuously within the minimum and maximum
rated power range. However, the detailed modelling of ELZ with shutdown and
start-up functionality is an area for future study. In addition to that study of
the degradation model of the ELZ would be an outstanding achievement. As
per the author’s knowledge there has not been any study about the degradation
model of the electrolyzer.
• Variations in wind speed: The model has been tested for a constant wind
speed of 15m/s producing the maximum rated power. Variations in wind speed
and the variation of references together within the different time windows could
be the next research activity.
==PAGE:64==
APPENDIX A
Simulink Model
Figure A.1: Power system model under study.
Figure A.2: Controllers model under study.
==PAGE:65==
A Simulink Model
53
Figure A.3: Electrolyzer model under study.
Figure A.4: Detailed WT model under study.
==PAGE:66==
APPENDIX B
Model Parameters
B.1
Sizing of HPP
The sizing of hybrid power plants with WPP and ELZ could be a separate area
of research. It could depend upon many factors such as cost, market participation,
available area and geographical locations. For this project, the size of the WPP is
assumed to be provided and the size of electrolyzer is proposed. The values of the
size of different technologies are mentioned in Table B.1:
Technologies
Size
Units
WPP
120
MW
ELZ
100
MW
Table B.1: Sizing of Hybrid power plant.
B.2
Wind Farm
The electrical data used for wind turbine was obtained from DTU wind department
mentioned based on [28] and is illustrated in the Table B.2
Parameters
V alue
Units
Nominal power
2
MW
Type
−
Gear ratio
85
−
Rotor diameter
80
m
Rotor inertia
8682000
kgm2
Generator inertia
151
MW
Pitch Controller, Kp
1.4
−
Pitch controller KI
2.2
−
Table B.2: Wind Turbine data.
==PAGE:67==
Bibliography
[1]
Net Zero by 2050 – Analysis - IEA. url: https://www.iea.org/reports/net-
zero-by-2050 (visited on March 9, 2023).
[2]
Qian Long et al. “Hierarchical control architecture of co-located hybrid power
plants.” In: International Journal of Electrical Power
Energy Systems 143
(December 2022), page 108407. doi: 10.1016/j.ijepes.2022.108407. url:
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijepes.2022.108407.
[3]
Kaushik Das et al. “Dynamic Modelling of Wind-Solar-Storage Based Hybrid
Power Plant.” eng. In: Proceedings of the 18th Wind Integration Workshop 2019
(2019).
[4]
Kaushik Das et al. “Enhanced Features of Wind based Hybrid Power Plants.”
eng. In: Proceedings of the 4th International Hybrid Power Systems Workshop
(2019).
[5]
Shree Om Bade. “Control strategies of hybrid power plants,MSc.Thesis.” 2021.
url: www.vindenergi.dtu.dk.
[6]
Jonny Esteban Villa Londono et al. “Modelling and Control of a Grid-Connected
RES-Hydrogen Hybrid Microgrid.” In: Energies 14.6 (March 2021), page 1540.
doi: 10.3390/en14061540. url: https://www.mdpi.com/1996-1073/14/6/
1540/pdf.
[7]
Pengfei Xiao et al. “Optimal operation of a wind-electrolytic hydrogen storage
system in the electricity/hydrogen markets.” In: International Journal of Hy-
drogen Energy 45.46 (September 2020), pages 24412–24423. doi: 10.1016/j.
ijhydene.2020.06.302.
[8]
Anca Daniela Hansen and Lars Henrik Hansen. “Wind turbine concept market
penetration over 10 years (1995–2004).” In: Wind Energy 10.1 (January 2007),
pages 81–97. doi: 10.1002/we.210. url: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.
com/doi/pdfdirect/10.1002/we.210.
[9]
WindEurope asbl/vzw. Wind energy today | WindEurope. October 2022. url:
https://windeurope.org/about- wind/wind- energy- today/ (visited on
March 9, 2023).
[10]
Federica Mosca, Nicola Paltrinieri, and Luca Riboldi. Modelling and simulation
of an Offshore Wind-Hydrogen combined system for hydrogen production using
an anion exchange membrane electrolyzer. Technical report.
==PAGE:68==
Bibliography
56
[11]
Øystein Ulleberg. “Modeling of advanced alkaline electrolyzers: a system simu-
lation approach.” In: International Journal of Hydrogen Energy 28.1 (January
2003), pages 21–33. doi: 10.1016/s0360-3199(02)00033-2.
[12]
A. Bechmann et al. “The Hydrogen Wind Turbine: Design of a wind turbine
optimised for hydrogen production.” English. In: Proceedings of WindEurope
Conference 2023. Journal of Physics: Conference Series. WindEurope Confer-
ence 2023 ; Conference date: 25-04-2023 Through 27-04-2023. United Kingdom:
IOP Publishing, 2023.
[13]
Thomas Ackermann. Wind Power in Power Systems. John Wiley Sons, April
2005.
[14]
Policies for green hydrogen. url: https://www.irena.org/Energy-Transition/
Policy/Policies-for-green-hydrogen (visited on May 15, 2023).
[15]
Andrea Michiorri et al. “Optimal operation of the hydrogen-based energy man-
agement system with P2X demand response and ammonia plant.” In: Applied
Energy 304 (December 2021), page 117559. doi: 10.1016/j.apenergy.2021.
117559. url: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apenergy.2021.117559.
[16]
Tao Zhou et al. “Real-Time Emulation of a Hydrogen-Production Process for
Assessment of an Active Wind-Energy Conversion System.” In: IEEE Trans-
actions on Industrial Electronics 56.3 (March 2009), pages 737–746. doi: 10.
1109/tie.2008.2007048.
[17]
Md. Maruf-Ul-Karim and M.T. Iqbal. “Dynamic modeling and simulation of al-
kaline type electrolyzers.” In: Canadian Conference on Electrical and Computer
Engineering (May 2009). doi: 10.1109/ccece.2009.5090222.
[18]
Jin-Ho Kim, Eduard Muljadi, and R.M. Nelms. “Modelling and control coordi-
nation scheme of a wind‐to‐hydrogen set for future renewable‐based power sys-
tems.” In: Iet Renewable Power Generation 14.17 (December 2020), pages 3317–
3326. doi: 10.1049/iet-rpg.2020.0258.
[19]
Bang L. H. Nguyen et al. “Hierarchical Control of Grid-Connected Hydrogen
Electrolyzer Providing Grid Services.” In: arXiv (Cornell University) (November
2022). doi: 10.48550/arxiv.2211.02928. url: http://arxiv.org/pdf/2211.
02928.
[20]
Anca Daniela Hansen et al. “Centralised power control of wind farm with doubly
fed induction generators.” In: Renewable Energy 31.7 (June 2006), pages 935–
951. doi: 10.1016/j.renene.2005.05.011.
[21]
B.R. Karthikeya and Reiner Johannes Schutt. “Overview of Wind Park Control
Strategies.” In: IEEE Transactions on Sustainable Energy 5.2 (January 2014),
pages 416–422. doi: 10.1109/tste.2013.2285392.
[22]
Kaushik Das et al. “Optimal battery operation for revenue maximization of
wind-storage hybrid power plant.” eng. In: Electric Power Systems Research
189 (2020), page 106631. issn: 18732046, 03787796. doi: 10.1016/j.epsr.
2020.106631.
==PAGE:69==
Bibliography
57
[23]
Fact of the Month August 2018: Global Electrolyzer Sales Reach 100 MW per
Year. url: https://www.energy.gov/eere/fuelcells/fact-month-august-
2018-global-electrolyzer-sales-reach-100-mw-year (visited on May 26,
2023).
[24]
T. Nguyen et al. “Grid-connected hydrogen production via large-scale water
electrolysis.” In: Energy Conversion and Management 200 (November 2019).
issn: 01968904. doi: 10.1016/j.enconman.2019.112108.
[25]
Alin George Raducu et al. Design and Implementation of a Hybrid Power Plant
Controller. Technical report.
[26]
Anca Daniela Hansen et al. Frequency control modelling - basics. eng. 2016.
[27]
Qian Long et al. “Interfacing Energy Management with Supervisory Control
for Hybrid Power Plants.” eng. In: 20th International Workshop on Large-scale
Integration of Wind Power Into Power Systems As Well As on Transmission
Networks for Offshore Wind Power Plants (wiw 2021) 2021 (2022), pages 347–
351. doi: 10.1049/icp.2021.2634.
[28]
Anca Daniela Hansen. Introduction to wind power models for frequency control
studies. eng. 2016.
[29]
Jonny Esteban Villa Londono et al. “Modelling and Control of a Grid-Connected
RES-Hydrogen Hybrid Microgrid.” In: Energies 14.6 (March 2021), page 1540.
issn: 1996-1073. doi: 10.3390/en14061540.
[30]
G. Comodi et al. “Alkaline electrolysis for green hydrogen production: techno-
economic analysis of temperature influence and control.” English. In: Proceed-
ings of ECOS 2023. THE 36TH INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE ON EF-
FICIENCY, COST, OPTIMIZATION, SIMULATION AND ENVIRONMEN-
TAL IMPACT OF ENERGY SYSTEMS ; Conference date: 25-06-2023 Through
30-06-2023. Spain, 2023.
[31]
A Bechmann et al. The Hydrogen Wind Turbine: Design of a wind turbine
optimised for hydrogen production. Technical report.
==PAGE:70==
