==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Creating Machine Learning Models
for People with Type-1 Diabetes
Using Sport Metrics
Josephine Mellin, S163313
Kongens Lyngby 2023
==PAGE:2==
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Technical University of Denmark
Matematiktorvet
Building 303B
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Engaging in exercise presents not only benefits but also challenges for individuals with
Type-1 Diabetes, as they may experience both hypo- and hyperglycemia depending on
the level of adrenaline produced while participating in sports. This study investigates
how sports metrics and glucose values can be integrated in machine learning models
to predict the evolution of glucose levels. Data from three individuals with Type-1
Diabetes are used to build models, not intended for production, that address three
distinct issues. The first model uses Artificial Neural Networks to predict the subse-
quent glucose value, comparing this to models of related work. A second model applies
Support Vector Machine and Extreme Gradient Boosting to predict the conducted
sports grouping. Knowing the sports grouping provides the person with insights on
how to estimate the insulin need in connection to sports performances. And a third,
to explore if one can predict the glucose level from pulse, as the pulse rises accordingly
to the level of adrenaline, again using Support Vector Machine and Extreme Gradient
Boosting. The findings suggest that the first model outperforms those of the related
work. For the second model, Extreme Gradient Boosting slightly outperforms the
Support Vector Machine. However, for the final model, neither Extreme Gradient
Boosting nor the Support Vector Machine performs well. This indicates a lack of
correlation between pulse and glucose levels.
==PAGE:4==
Preface
This Master’s thesis was prepared at the department of Applied Mathematics and
Computer Science and Engineering at the Technical University of Denmark in fulfill-
ment of the requirements for acquiring an MSc degree in Computer Science.
Kongens Lyngby, June 6, 2023
Josephine Mellin, S163313
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
As a part of my Master of Science in Computer Science and Engineering, there are
multiple people to whom I would like to express my sincere gratitude.
First and foremost, I would like to thank my supervisors, Birger Andersen, and Hen-
rik Tange, for their persistent support and constructive feedback throughout this
process, while always making room for sessions of supervision. Their guidance and
advice have kept me inspired and helped me to try to remain calm in this last step
of my academic endeavor.
As this thesis would not have been possible without it, I give a great and sincere
thanks to the data participants, who provided me with the data to use as input for
the machine learning models.
Also, the other people who showed interest in par-
ticipating, although their data was not used in the end due to different points of
impediments. Furthermore, Isabelle Steineck who provided inspiration for the scope
of this paper, through an interview conducted in the early phase of the writing.
I would like to give a special thanks to Florian, Nav, and Sarah for being there to
both help and spar with me, in moments of doubt, who have helped enrich the quality
of the report.
A big thanks to my father, who is always there to read through my reports and cor-
rect grammatical errors and weird phrasings.
Lastly, I would like to express my gratitude to Raphaël, who has been a big emotional
support and showed immense patience with me throughout this process, as well as
reading the report iteratively and provided great feedback.
Thank you all for your contributions!
==PAGE:6==
Nomenclature
T1D Type-1 Diabetes
POC Proof-of-concept
RQ(s) Research Question(s)
MARS Multivariate Adaptive Regression Spline (Model)
AR Auto-Regressive (Model)
CGM Continous Glucose Monitor
ANN Artificial Neural Network
ML Machine Learning
SVM Support Vector Machine
SVC Supoort Vector Classification
SVR Support Vector Regression
XGB Extreme Gradient Boosting
Adam Adaptive Moment Estimation
RBF Radial Basis Function
MSE Mean Squared Error
MAE Mean Absolute Error
EDA Exploratory Data Analysis
ReLU Rectified Linear Unit
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
ii
Acknowledgements
iii
Nomenclature
iv
Contents
v
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Motivation & Idea
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Goal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.3
Model Selection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.4
Research Questions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2
Related Work
5
3
Methodology
7
3.1
Delimitations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
4
Background
11
4.1
Diabetes Mellitus . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
4.2
Development of Diabetic Devices . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
4.3
Physical Activity and Diabetes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
4.4
Adrenaline, Heart Rate, and Wearables . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
4.5
Data Preprocessing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
4.6
Machine Learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
4.6.1
Support Vector Machine . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
4.6.2
eXtreme Gradient Boosting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4.7
Deep Learning
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.7.1
Adaptive Moment Estimation Optimizer . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4.8
Performance Evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
5
Data Preparation
25
==PAGE:8==
Contents
vi
5.1
Data Facilitation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
5.2
Data Collection & Preprocessing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
6
Implementation
35
6.1
Libraries . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
6.2
Model 1: Glucose Prediction using ANN . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
6.2.1
Loading & EDA
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
6.2.2
Data Split & Segmentation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
6.2.3
Model Creation & Training . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
6.3
Model 2: Activity Type Prediction using SVC/XGB . . . . . . . . . .
39
6.3.1
Loading & EDA
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
6.3.2
Preprocessing & Segmentation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
6.3.3
SVC/XGB Model Creation & Training . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
6.4
Model 3: Glucose Prediction via Pulse using SVR/XGB . . . . . . . .
44
6.4.1
Data Preparation & EDA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
6.4.2
Model Creation & Training . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
7
Results & Discussion
47
7.1
Results & Discussing of Model 1
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
7.2
Results & Discussion of Model 2
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
7.3
Results & Discussion of Model 3
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
8
Conclusion
56
9
Future Work
58
A
Appendix
59
A.1 Interview (Isabelle) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
A.2 Interview (DN) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
A.3 Interview (SS) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
A.4 Self-Reflection (JM)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
A.5 Pulse Patterns (Model 1)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
A.6 Model 1 Results (JM)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
A.7 Model 1 Results (SS) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
A.8 Model 1 Results (DN) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
71
A.9 Model 2 Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
72
Bibliography
75
==PAGE:9==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
Diabetes Mellitus Type-1 (T1D), also known as insulin-dependent diabetes, is an
autoimmune metabolic disease, known for the failure of pancreatic β-cells.
As a
consequence, this leads to chronic hyperglycemia and demands lifelong insulin ad-
ministration (Association, 2019). Adopting a healthy lifestyle, conducting regular
exercise, and managing stress, can also contribute to higher glycemic control, better
insulin sensitivity, and an overall improvement in the quality of life of the individual
(Tyler et al., 2022). The ideal extent of exercise for people with T1D remains a sub-
ject of debate, particularly in regard to both the type and intensity of the exercise
(Church et al., 2004). However, different types of physical activity can have different
influences on the glucose level. Physical activities can be classified into three distinct
categories: Anaerob, aerob, and combined. The increased volatility prevents the in-
dividual from predicting the blood sugar and creates the need for strategies to secure
glucose management, both during and after exercise (Tyler et al., 2022) (Colberg
et al., 2016). Thus, in the context of exercise, it is essential to obtain a thorough
understanding of the physiological responses associated with each sport. (Colberg
et al., 2016).
Machine learning (ML), a branch of artificial intelligence, has demonstrated its power
and potential in various fields such as healthcare, as well as personalized medicine
and disease management (Shameer et al., 2016). ML algorithms can analyze, identify
patterns, and make predictions using large volumes of data, enabling the development
of both more precise and customized solutions (Rajkomar et al., 2018). This Mas-
ter’s thesis aims to investigate the use of ML to create individualized models. These
models will use personal data from diabetic devices and wearables to ease glycemic
control and management in everyday life, especially in relation to sports and three
distinct groupings: Anaerob, aerob, and combined.
==PAGE:10==
1.1 Motivation & Idea
2
1.1
Motivation & Idea
The motivation for this study is deeply rooted in personal experiences and challenges
in managing both hyperglycemia and hypoglycemia while engaging in physical activi-
ties as a person with T1D. Possessing firsthand knowledge of the complexities related
to glucose regulation during exercise has developed a profound interest in finding ways
of balancing these. To ascertain if these challenges reflect a broader phenomenon a
preliminary exploration was conducted via a semi-structured with Dr. Isabelle Stei-
neck, an endocrinologist (see Appendix A.1).
Isabelle wrote her Ph.D. on diabetic devices, at Steno Diabetes Center, a hospital in
Herlev. Steno was established in ’91, as a collaboration between Hvidovre and Niels
Steensens Hospital (Tecza). She has since been involved in multiple clinical studies
related to sports performance and diabetes. In the interview, she confirms that the
impact on blood glucose levels during physical activities can vary depending on the
type of activity performed. She emphasizes that aerob exercises, such as walking,
cycling, or running at a moderate pace, are often reported to enhance insulin sensi-
tivity both during and after the activity. She states that hormonal factors, such as
adrenaline, influence glucose levels by establishing a higher baseline whilst reducing
insulin sensitivity, particularly during the morning hours, before 9:00 AM.
Additionally, for the other sports that ”Anaerob training is classically when you use
weights.”, but also in sprinting and short intense exercises. Combined sport, is seen
as a combination of the former two. She highlights, that if an element of competi-
tion appears in the sport, or if you get stressed, this will be defined as the group
called ’Combined’. She highlights that ”(...) the higher adrenaline, the higher pulse.”.
However, also adding that these groupings are categorized based on estimations, and
numerous factors that come into play when performing sports and exercising.
==PAGE:11==
1.2 Goal
3
1.2
Goal
The goal of the paper is to explore the challenges mentioned above and to investigate
the potential of ML to accommodate them. Three models will be developed to study
the different relations between physical activity and glucose. To this extent, the paper
will function as a proof-of-concept (POC) to validate the feasibility of the models in
the field of T1D and exercise. Note, that the models will exclusively be trained and
tested on real-world data, and not to be transitioned into production nor utilized by
any end-users.
• Model 1: As described in the previous sections, the glucose level is highly in-
fluenced by exercise, requiring meticulously continuous monitoring of the blood
sugar during and after exercising. A model will be estimated to forecast the
glucose level in exactly this time window. The data used will be glucose values
and dates.
• Model 2: As both pointed out the glucose trend is partly dependent on the
type of sports practiced.
As Isabelle states, a higher level of adrenaline is
more likely for some sports. Therefore, the second model will predict the type
of sport conducted using multi-label classification. This is a means of giving
the individual a way to estimate how to adjust current and later insulin needs
according to the glucose trends of the sports groupings. The data needed will
be pulse values, with their matching sports type [aerob, anaerob, or combined]
• Model 3: Finally, the last model will use regression in an attempt to predict
blood sugar from pulse during physical activity. As mentioned during the in-
terview, the baseline of the glucose level increases while the insulin sensitivity
decreases when conducting sports that produce high levels of adrenaline. More-
over, a higher level of adrenaline implies a higher level of pulse. Thus, the data
used are glucose and pulse values.
Sports metrics are involved in all the models. The first will be trained on glucose
levels only relevant to exercise. The second model will use pulse data according to
the sports type conducted. The last model will be trained on glucose values and pulse
values relevant to the physical engagement. Further clarification of data and model
requirements are mentioned within the final part of this chapter (section 1.3-1.4) and
two succeeding ones (chapter 2-3).
==PAGE:12==
1.3 Model Selection
4
1.3
Model Selection
The models are selected based on their performance, strengths and weaknesses, and
suitability for the respective objectives mentioned in the earlier section.
• Model 1: The Artificial Neural Network (ANN) is used to forecast blood sugar
due to its ability to model complex, non-linear associations of input and output
variables. ANN is powerful in its interpretation of patterns (Mahanta, 2017),
that might not be observed by other models and gives one the possibility of
tuning and optimizing it by adjusting its many hyperparameters to improve its
performance (Pramoditha, 2022)
• Model 2: For the second model, consisting of a multi-label classification prob-
lem, two different algorithms will be used: Extreme Gradient Boosting (XGB)
and Support Vector Classification (SVC) to handle the multi-label prediction.
XGB offers a high performance and fast training time and works well with
classification tasks (Kumar, 2019b). SVC, a subset of Support Vector Machine
(SVM) excels in high-dimensional data while being less vulnerable to overfitting
(Kumar, 2019a).
• Model 3: For the third model, a prediction of a continuous variable, a com-
bination of algorithms will be tried out. XGB, which also bodes powerful for
tasks of regression (Kumar, 2019b). Additionally, Support Vector Regression
(SVR) another subset of SVM will be incorporated. SVR is shown to be both
robust and can eﬀiciently work well with both non-linear and linear problems,
and handles noise well (Kumar, 2019a).
The schematics of the models will be described in further detail in the ’Background’
section.
1.4
Research Questions
The following research questions (RQs) are outlined.
Keeping the information re-
trieved from the empirical data, the in-depth knowledge to be introduced and gathered
from the ’Background’, and lastly the findings from the later ’Results & Discussion’
sections will be applied to answer the RQs, one for each model to be developed.
• RQ1: Comparing the performance metrics of the related work, how does the
ANN approach perform? And what might be the reasons for these results?
• RQ2: How does SVC/XGB approach perform individually and comparatively,
and which reasons lie beneath?
• RQ3: Evaluating the results of the XGB/SVR approach, is it possible to predict
blood sugar from pulse when performing sports - why, why not?
==PAGE:13==
CHAPTER 2
Related Work
This section presents literature relevant to the intersection of T1D, ML, and physi-
cal activity. For the purpose of the study, the section will focus exclusively on the
Multivariate Adaptive Regression Spline (MARS) and Auto-Regressive (AR) models
and their prediction results during exercise. The values serve as an evaluation tool
for this thesis. This will be described more in detail in Chapter 3 (Methodology).
The article by Tyler et al., 2022 describes physical exercise as not only having fa-
vorable effects. It additionally increases the risk of hypoglycemia both during and
up to four hours following exercise, because of an increased muscle uptake during
aerobic activity, making the body more insulin-sensitive. This issue cannot be re-
solved by continuous glucose monitoring (CGM) as the devices are not designed to
forecast future glucose levels, only to display values in real time. People with T1D
must often use a trial-and-error method to determine the correct insulin dose and re-
quirement while participating in sports. Furthermore, it is suggested and shown that
intra-personalized parameters might contribute to uncertainty in the glucose levels,
whether these are anticipated or not, hence necessitating the relevance of utilizing
personalized models.
Despite the fact that ML is a thriving field of study and interest, the predictability of
glucose levels in relation to individual physical activity shows room for improvement.
In the article, several tailored ML models have been constructed to facilitate the issue
at hand: MARS and AR. The models were utilized in predicting instances of hypo-
glycemia both under and after exercise. First, using the non-personalized approach.
The data used to train and test the various models came from a prior study involving
20 adults with T1D. The study had a standardized test setting for all the individuals,
including similar food intake and type of exercise. However, they varied in the way
insulin was administered. For the main part of the test subjects it was concluded
that the glucose level showed to decrease, whilst performing sport, but additionally
also the four subsequent hours hereafter. Despite identical conditions, including all
the parameters mentioned earlier for the data, it was still shown that a significant
intra-personalized variation affected the glucose values.
==PAGE:14==
2 Related Work
6
The participants of the study were categorized into groups of physiological states in re-
lation to sports performance, ranked between ’poor’ to ’superior’. The more superior
a test subject was ranked, the more likely he or she was to experience hypoglycemia
both during exercise and after. For the predicted values and evaluation of these dur-
ing exercise, the MARS model showed an MAE of 1.1111 mmol/L (20.0 mg/dL)1.
The AR model showed an MAE of 23.8mg/dL (1.32 mmol/L). For the personalized
model on the other hand, where only the MARS model was made, the evaluation
showed an MAE value decrease going from 20.4 to 14.3mg/dL (0.794 mmol/L) (Tyler
et al., 2022).
Note, although the related work exists in the same intersection of topics as this thesis,
the thesis will not only be focusing on aerob sports but also the anaerob and combined
types, as stated before.
1The following link has been used for conversion https://www.omnicalculator.com/health/
blood-sugar
==PAGE:15==
CHAPTER 3
Methodology
The following chapter outlines the methodology used to address the RQs previously
mentioned and provides an analytical, critical, and comprehensive evaluation of the
final findings.
To answer the first RQ, a comparison of the result of the first model of type ANN
will be compared to the results of the MARS and AR models in the aforementioned
’Related Work’. Note that, for the MARS model, there exist results of comparison for
both the personalized and non-personalized models. All the models created in this
paper will be personalized models. The personalized and non-personalized models
of ’Related Work’, and their MAEs will be compared to the MAE values of the
ANN model, enabling an evaluation of its performance and possible strengths and
weaknesses.
Additionally, to create similar frames for the data, the blood sugar
values to be given as input will, as mentioned, be ones from during sports, but
also the four hours after.
In answering the RQ2 the interest lies in investigating
how variables impact other variables, establishing cause-effect relationships.
And
in this way be able to distinguish if the model of type XGB and SVC are able to
determine if sports categories can be predicted from pulse rates. The third model
addresses the last RQ by investigating how the correlation between glucose and pulse
can be used to predict the evolution of blood sugar during physical activity.
To
avoid drawing conclusions without solid statistical reasoning the RQs be answered
using performance and evaluation metrics described under ’Performance Evaluation’.
These metrics allow for a comprehensive analysis of the results, contributing to a
more nuanced understanding of the performance of the models.
==PAGE:16==
3 Methodology
8
Data
Data, both qualitative and quantitative, form a significant part of this thesis. The
qualitative data or empirical research consist of different semi-structured interviews
(transcriptions can be found under Appendix A.1, A.2, A.3). The semi-structured
approach allows for flexibility of the interview course offering places for follow-up
questions when necessary. One of the interviews is used in the earlier section ’Idea
& Motivation’, as the basis of investigation for the research topic. The rest, used to
clarify the sports type and intensity of the three data participants (whose profiles are
described in the section below) for the classification of their data used for model 2.
Note, that the JM participant is the writer of the thesis, whereby the sports clarifi-
cation in the Appendix should be seen rather as a self-reflectional work, consisting of
the same questions as for the rest of the participants. The quantitative data, being
real-world data of three participants, is crucial to construct the three models. To this
extent, a large volume of data is required. Note, that a significant part of this thesis is
centered around data collection and preprocessing, corresponding to the importance
of data when creating ML models. As previously mentioned, the different models will
require the following data entries:
• Model 1: Glucose values and dates
• Model 2: Pulse values, Activity Types[Aerob, anaerob, combined]
• Model 3: Pulse values, Glucose values
With the data entries outlined, this leads to the following requirements for the data
participant profiles. The test subject must be a type-1 diabetes patient and actively
participates in a different range of sports relevant to the three groupings. Moreover,
the subject must possess a smartphone, a CGM device for consistent glucose readings,
and lastly, a smartwatch able to monitor pulse rates. Data collection, facilitation, and
preprocessing will be mentioned in graver detail under Chapter 5 ’Data Preparation’.
Regarding the integrity of the data, it remains unaltered, free from unethical manip-
ulations or manipulations not stated in Chapter 5, and accurately represents reality.
==PAGE:17==
3 Methodology
9
Data Participants
For the reasons mentioned above, a narrow window of potential data participants of
given. To tackle this, a lot of time was spent getting in contact with people with
exactly that profile by the use of social media and the spread of word.
It was not without impediments but ultimately three profiles were found.
• JM, who as mentioned is the writer of this thesis, practice climbing, kickbox-
ing, fitness, HIIT, running, biking, and walking. Describes herself as having
struggles with both hyper- and hypoglycemia during physical activities, and
in general not being perfectly regulated. Uses Dexcom G6, and has an Apple
Watch.
• DN, a male often performing running, cycling, walking, fitness, and climbing.
Wears a Fitbit, has a closed-loop system, and describes himself as very well-
regulated.
• SS, a female doing climbing, fitness, running, biking, and walking. Also strug-
gling with fluctuating glucose levels. Uses Dexcom G6, and has an Apple Watch.
Ethical Considerations
In relation to the data collection and preparation, multiple ethical consideration has
been made. All of the data participants have consented to participate, and all of
the points of identification within their data have been removed to protect their
identity. Furthermore, their names are not mentioned throughout the thesis. They
have although given permission to share the cleaned data for academic use in other
works.
Limitations
It is essential to acknowledge potential limitations which might affect the findings.
One significant point is the constraints of the devices from where data is collected.
The wearables, to which the pulse data will be exported may vary in their precision
and accuracy, similar in regard to the CGM devices. This will be described further
in the ’Background’ chapter. Only the participants SS and JM use the same devices,
where it would have been optimal to ensure the same equipment for all of the data
participants. These discrepancies can possibly affect the performance of the models
and may mislead the results. Additionally, the qualitative data gathered through the
semi-structured interviews could also present certain challenges. As the participants’
responses are subjective and non of them are medical experts, potential misclassi-
fications of data points may occur. The subjective interpretation of their exercise
experiences might unintentionally introduce bias into the classification of physical
activity categories, thereby affecting the prediction results of the models.
==PAGE:18==
3.1 Delimitations
10
3.1
Delimitations
The scope of this research is also restricted by several delimitations. Primarily, it is
important to emphasize that this thesis is not a regulatory, nor clinical study. Both
due to this and to time and resource constraints, the research only makes use of
the three data participants and their data, as stated above. In this way, the result
will not be able to conclude the feasibility of a broader population. Since the report
seeks to investigate the topic at hand as a POC, the models will not be put into
production. Thereby, they are built without the intent of being utilized by any end-
user. The results obtained should in this sense suggest their potential performance
in a controlled scenario rather than prepared for and guarantee of their eﬀicacy in
a real-world context. To this end, the research does not delve into issues related to
data security and privacy, as these are out of scope, when data is cleaned from fragile
information and when not in production. Of the security concepts, only data integrity
is mentioned (earlier in this section).
==PAGE:19==
CHAPTER 4
Background
This section provides an in-depth description of the main topic of this thesis.
4.1
Diabetes Mellitus
T1D is a chronic metabolic disease characterized by its consistent state of hyper-
glycemia (continuous high blood sugar values). This imbalance results from the ei-
ther diminished or inappropriate distribution of insulin. The consequences of insulin
dysregulation are far-reaching. Short-term effects will often involve polyuria, weight
loss, blurred vision, etc. Whilst the long-term includes blindness, neuropathy, and
even more severe conditions such as ketoacidosis (Association, 2021). Insulin has a
significant role in the metabolism of the body as it is serving as the link between
glucose and the β-cells of the pancreas. It transports glucose into the bloodstream
where it is transferred into energy, making the body able to operate. Insulin prevents
the glucose level from increasing and will store excess glucose in the liver in people
without T1D. This is also known as glycogen, and will be released in cases of low
glucose levels. For non-diabetic individuals, insulin is administered when their blood
sugar levels exceed a short level or a certain threshold, whilst for individuals with di-
abetes insulin is administered exogenous via manual injections or pump distribution
(Andersen, 2021b).
The glucose level, often referred to as the blood sugar (level), measured in units of
millimoles per liter (mmol/L), describes the concentration of sugar in the blood. It is
essential as it provides energy to cells, derived from the carbohydrates in meals. Once
the carbohydrates are converted into sugar molecules in the small intestine, they are
then absorbed into the blood vessels, leading to an increase in blood sugar levels
(Andersen, 2023a). Typically, the glucose level will be affected by the carbohydrate
intake 2-3 hours after. However, this timeframe may vary depending on the macro-
nutrient profile of the food (Andersen, 2023b). Throughout the day the glucose level
fluctuates due to multiple factors such as food consumption, physical exercise, and
hormonal balance. A person with T1D will experience both hyper- and hypoglycemia.
Hypoglycemia, identified by a blood sugar level below 3.9 mmol/L, poses particular
risks.
Examples include damaging the brain, causing disorientation, and needing
external assistance. Thus, making managing blood glucose levels is a crucial aspect
of living with T1D.(Andersen, 2021c).
Cases of hyperglycemia occur when blood
==PAGE:20==
4.2 Development of Diabetic Devices
12
sugar exceeds a normal threshold. Typically, hyperglycemia happens when taking
too little insulin in relation to the number of carbohydrates consumed.
However,
fever and stress also generate a need for more insulin and can cause hyperglycemia.
It is important to note that these values are guidelines and may vary from person to
person according to the diabetes management of the individual(Andersen, 2021a).
4.2
Development of Diabetic Devices
Over the years, insulin delivery devices, such as pens and pumps, have developed sig-
nificantly. A milestone in this development was the development of the insulin pump
in the late 70s, originally invented in 1963. The insulin pump sought to treat T1D
and mimic pancreatic insulin distribution. Since then, the engineering and innovation
behind the pump concept have experienced extraordinary improvement. By the 90s a
new generation of tiny, portable, and eﬀicient external pumps was introduced to the
world. These ”smart pumps” consisted of alarms as well as an interface allowing the
device to estimate the amount of bolus insulin needed for food intake. An example
of such insulin pump was introduced by Medtronic in 2003. The pumps consist of
a reservoir, infusion set, and tubing to provide, and besides bolus amounts provides
a steady, round-the-clock basal insulin supply in small, continuous doses. The so-
called patch pumps have since been developed. These are infusion set-free, compact,
lightweight, and stick to the skin. An example of this is the OmniPod, the first tube-
less insulin pump giving its users total flexibility to do daily tasks (Kesavadev et al.,
2020).
Similar to the development of devices for insulin, there has been an equal evolu-
tion of glucose measurements, resulting in a slow but steady replacement of the self-
monitoring method (SMBG), requiring sample frequencies ranging from four to 10
times per day (Didyuk et al., 2020). Since 1999, when the first advanced alternative
was introduced, a substantial improvement in blood sugar measuring has been seen.
An example is the CGM technique, where the CGM of Abbott FreeStyle Libre was the
first to be introduced in 2018, consisting of a sensor to be scanned by either a phone
or a dedicated device. More recently, with the Dexcom G5/G6, the need for scanning
was scrapped, allowing automated monitoring on the phone of the user(Didyuk et al.,
2020). However, even though CGM offers numerous advantages, assistance, and con-
venience to its user while performing sports, it also comes with some dangers, such
as accuracy (Riddell and Perkins, 2009).
==PAGE:21==
4.3 Physical Activity and Diabetes
13
Figure 4.1: Omnipod & Decom CGM Devices (Cornejo, 2022)
4.3
Physical Activity and Diabetes
Engaging in physical activity has multiple benefits in health for people with T1D,
from improving the lipid profile and cardiorespiratory fitness to reaching glycemic
goals and lowering the average glucose level (HbA1c) and Body Mass Index (BMI)
and cases of ketoacidosis. In spite of this, managing hypo- and hyperglycemia can
be challenging for those with T1D, incorporating regular exercise in their life as lack
of knowledge in this regard may hinder individuals from embarking on sports per-
formance. As mentioned, physical exercise and activity can broadly be grouped into
three distinct categories: Aerob, anaerob, and combined. Each of which, influences
glucose levels differently, as stated, depending on how the response of the body and
their intensity level. Aerobic exercises, e.g. running, cycling, or swimming, use glu-
cose for the muscles giving the body energy to operate and leading to a decrease
in blood sugar levels. This may require the individual to adjust insulin dosages or
intake of carbohydrates to hinder cases of hypoglycemia, both during and after ex-
ercise. Due to the increased effort level, the glucose concentration is often lower in
persons with T1D who routinely exercise compared to those who do not regularly
exercise. Lastly, anaerob exercises, consist of high-intensity, short-duration activities
like weightlifting and sprinting. These activities can result in an increase in the blood
sugar level, due to the stress they cause, linked to an adrenaline release. However,
the impact of anaerobic exercise on glucose levels can be unpredictable. Some may
experience hypoglycemia during and several hours after conducting the sport. Com-
bined exercises, e.g., HIIT as well as team, and competitive sports, involve a mix of
both aerob and anaerob. Here, blood glucose trends can vary widely depending on
==PAGE:22==
4.4 Adrenaline, Heart Rate, and Wearables
14
the intensity and duration of the physical activity, as well as the proportion of the
two types, and individual physiological factors. During such activities, glucose levels
may increase, decrease, or even remain stable (Riddell et al., 2017) (Colberg et al.,
2016) (Appendix A.1).
Figure 4.2: Glucose Trends of Activity Types (Riddell et al., 2017)
4.4
Adrenaline, Heart Rate, and Wearables
Wearables, providing fitness monitoring, have gained popularity among researchers
due to their potential to measure health metrics. They do, however, tend to under-
state physiological measurements relative to high-standard tools such as electrocar-
diograms (ECG). Apple Watches have been found to be more accurate than their
counterparts, such as Fitbit watches.
They have shown a higher accuracy whilst
the user is either resting or performing low-intensity exercise. Recent research has
revealed that the evaluation of heart rate, measured from wearables, can be biased
due (Nelson and Allen, 2019). In a comparative study the wearables, specifically Ap-
ple Watch 3, and Fitbit Charge 2 were held up against the high-standard method of
measuring heart rate, an ambulatory ECG device. To avoid noise in the results, the
POC study was conducted with a single subject. The study’s results revealed that
the Apple Watch 3 had the lowest mean absolute percentage error (MAPE) at 5.86%,
although having the highest accuracy when the test subject was either walking, 4.64%,
or running, 3.01%. The MAPE for the Fitbit Charge 2 was 5.96%, and it achieved
==PAGE:23==
4.5 Data Preprocessing
15
the highest level of accuracy while the user was seated (6.93%) or doing activities of
daily living (8.29%). In conclusion, Apple Watch and Fitbit both turned out to be
overall accurate when worn and used by users in daily life conditions, although both
still showed a slight tendency to underestimate heart rate (Nelson and Allen, 2019).
Complementing this perspective, another study examined how emotional and physical
stress, as an effect of adrenaline, impacts the heart (Torpy, Burke, and Glass, 2007).
The heart rate/pulse, blood pressure, adrenal gland hormone release, oxygen demand,
and threshold for abnormal cardiac rhythms can all increase as a response to stress.
Furthermore, adrenaline plays in how the body responds to hyper- and hypoglycemia.
In cases of hypoglycemia, the adrenaline kickstarts the stored depot of glycogen from
the liver. Furthermore, the cardiovascular system is highly influenced by adrenaline,
as adrenaline increases the heart volume and its ability to retract and release. If
hypoglycemia becomes repetitive it can lead to a decreased effect of the adrenaline
emergency function by not as easily using the stored glycogen. Hyperglycemia, on
the other hand, is also relevant in relation to adrenaline as it releases glucagon in the
body, while also decreasing the effect of the insulin (Torpy, Burke, and Glass, 2007).
4.5
Data Preprocessing
In ML data preprocessing is a crucial step to boost model performance by making
input data consistent and accurate as it often contains several missing values and
anomalies (Fan et al., 2021).
Data cleaning improves the data quality by handling issues of two categories: incon-
sistent input and data duplication. The former, related to missing values, incorrect
spellings, and alike, can be divided into three subcategories: Missing Completely at
Random (MCAR), Missing at Random (MAR), and Missing Not at Random (MNAR).
Only the first of the three is appropriate, while cases of MNAR require parameter
estimation. As this is not used in the thesis it will not be described in further detail
(Roy et al., 2019).
Data reduction reduces the dimensions of a data frame decreasing computational
costs. This entails row-wise and column-wise reduction. While the former, randomly
selects a subset of the data while discarding the rest, the latter reduces the number of
variables, by selecting a subset of the variables and discarding the rest. Data reduc-
tion can be done using domain knowledge, using feature selection, a way to identify
the most important features for a given task. Unlike feature selection, feature extrac-
tion creates new features from linear or nonlinear combinations of variables, which
can also be applied.
==PAGE:24==
4.6 Machine Learning
16
Data scaling validates predictive modeling, especially when input variables have dif-
ferent scales, and normalizes the values of a dataset. It works by transforming the
values of a dataset so that they are within a specific range. This can help improve
the accuracy of predictive models, as well as make the data easier to interpret.
Data transformation converts the values of a dataset into a different format, e.g.
converting categorical variables to numerical variables or vice versa. Common data
transformation techniques include e.g. label encoding.
Data partitioning splits datasets into training and test sets to ensure that the model
is trained and tested on different data. This helps refrain from overfitting data and
improves the accuracy of the model.
One must consider the size of the dataset,
number of classes, and the distribution of the data. One also needs to ensure that
the training and test sets are balanced, as this can help reduce bias and improve the
accuracy of the model (Fan et al., 2021).
4.6
Machine Learning
ML is a subfield of artificial intelligence that develops statistical models using algo-
rithms to help computers make predictions autonomously. In other words, the model
is expected to learn from data, in the form of vectors and matrices, to recognize pat-
terns, and make decisions on its own. A model selection distinguishes which algorithm
will be appropriate to use. The approaches associated with ML include supervised
learning, unsupervised learning, semi-supervised learning, and reinforcement learning.
As supervised learning is the only approach used in this paper, it will be the only one
to be presented (Choi et al., 2020).
Supervised learning seeks to enable an algorithm to generate predictions based on
future data, using patterns that have been identified in a training dataset.
The
model derives an algorithm from feature-target pairings, hereafter to be informed
whether or not the prediction has been made correctly. The features, denoted as x,
are mapped to targets, denoted Y , by acquiring knowledge of the mapping function,
f, such that future values using the algorithm Y = f(x). In other words, learning
the mapping function allows for the mapping of features to the target (x). The goal
is to minimize a loss function, denoted L, which describes the discrepancy of the
relation of predicted output F(x), and actual output y, which is measured differently
depending on the ML task.
Supervised learning can be further branched into two subcategories: Classification
and regression. In classification, the model seeks to predict different labels of input
data. In this case, the labels are discrete and either binary or multi-label, meaning
that the data can be categorized into two or more classes. The picture below shows
an example of a binary classification task, one class marked with a minus, whilst the
other with a plus. In this example, the dataset is thereby two-dimensional and has
==PAGE:25==
4.6 Machine Learning
17
two values, associated x1 and x2. For multi-label datasets the plan with a dimension
corresponding to the number of labels (Choi et al., 2020).
When predicting continuous values, the regression approach is used, looking for the
relationship between predictor variables and the continuous outcome (Raschka, 2019).
Forecasting also focuses on the prediction of continuous values, however, it differs from
regression by predicting future values from time-dependent variables using historical
data, while regression predicts continuous target variables from the input feature
(Montaño Moreno, Palmer Pol, and Muñoz Gracia, 2011).
Figure 4.3: Branches of Artificial Intelligence (Choi et al., 2020)
==PAGE:26==
4.6 Machine Learning
18
4.6.1
Support Vector Machine
One approach of supervised ML is the SVM. SVM is used both in classification
(SVC) and regression (SVR). Although SVC and SVR consist of many similarities,
their mathematical derivations, and formulations remain different.
For SVC data points are classified into two or more classes or labels, while SVR is
used when wanting to predict continuous target variables. SVM is both applicable for
linear and non-linear problems, however as this research is only relevant to non-linear
problems, this will be the only one to be specified. In cases of non-linear problems
when using classification predictions, the objective of the optimization problem is to
maximize the margin and at the same time to minimize the error of classification,
stated like such:
Minimize:w,w0,{ξi}N
i=1
1
2wT w + C
N
∑
i=1
ξi
Subject to:
yi(wT ϕ(xi) + w0) ≥1 −ξi,
i = 1, . . . , N,
ξi ≥0,
(4.1)
In this regard, the ϕ(xi) presents the function which maps input data to a space of
high-dimensional size, while the C denotes the regularization parameter and lastly
the ξi is the slack variable used for incorrect classifications.
In relevance to SVR and non-linear problems, the objective of the optimization prob-
lem is to minimize model complexity as well as the ϵ-intensitive error, giving the
following expression:
Minimize:w,w0,ξ,ξ∗
1
2wT w + C
N
∑
i=1
(ξi + ξ∗
i )
Subject to:
yi −wT ϕ(xi) −w0 ≤ϵ + ξi,
i = 1, . . . , N,
wT ϕ(xi) + w0 −yi ≤ϵ + ξ∗
i ,
i = 1, . . . , N,
ξi, ξ∗
i ≥0,
i = 1, . . . , N
(4.2)
Again, the ϕ(xi), C, and ξi, represent the same as in the former expression, with the
additional ξ∗
i as denoting the slack, while ϵ represent the error tolerance, as aforemen-
tioned.
SVM, in general, makes use of hyperplanes, which acts as a decision boundary, al-
though different for the two categories. However, in cases of non-linear problems, a
kernel trick is used, as the correlation of input features and target variables is not
able to be denoted via a linear function. To this extent, a kernel trick is applied
for the SVM to modify the features into a higher-dimension space, consisting of a
hyperplane. For SVC, a hyperplane is used to separate data points, correlated to the
classes/labels for the problem at hand, in the space. The optimal hyperplane is the
==PAGE:27==
4.6 Machine Learning
19
one that maximizes the margin of the data points closest to each other of each class
while minimizing cases of incorrect classifications. For SVR, hyperplanes correspond
to a function that approximates the correlation of the input features and the contin-
uous target value.
In this case, the goal is finding a hyperplane that minimizes the difference between
actual and target values, while accounting for an ϵ-tube that distinguishes the error
tolerance, denoted as ϵ.
In general, SVM further makes use of support vectors relevant to how the final model
predicts. For SVC, support vectors are data points nearest to the hyperplane, and
responsible for the position of a point. The points remain on the margin within the
hyperplane and other data points from each class. For SVR the support vectors func-
tion as the data points remaining outside the ϵ-tube or on its actual boundaries.
For SVC the kernel trick can be expressed as such:
Maximize
N
∑
i=1
αi −1
2
N
∑
i=1
N
∑
j=1
αiαjyiyjK(xi, xj)
Subject to
0 ≤αi ≤C,
N
∑
i=1
αiyi = 0
(4.3)
While for SVR it is formulated as follows:
Minimize:
1
2
N
∑
i=1
N
∑
j=1
(αi −α∗
i )(αj −α∗
j)K(xi, xj) −ϵ
N
∑
i=1
(αi + αj) +
N
∑
i=1
yi(αi −α∗
i )
Subject to:
0 ≤αi, α∗
i ≤C,
∑N
i=1(αi −α∗
i ) = 0
(4.4)
For both the kernel trick of SVC and SVR, the function K(xi, xj) derives the product
of the transformed data points in the now higher-dimensional space.
The kernel
function often mentioned and used includes Radial Basis Function (RBF), polynomial,
and Sigmoid, where the RBF works as the default (Rad, Parand, and Chakraverty,
2023).
==PAGE:28==
4.6 Machine Learning
20
4.6.2
eXtreme Gradient Boosting
Another algorithm widely used in both classification and regression, is XGB, also
known as XGBoost. XGB includes a variety of hyperparameters able to be tuned,
an important feature as this may have an impact on how the model is trained and
later will perform (Xiong et al., 2022).
The XGB is also powerful in accounting
for missing values, should any inconsistencies appear in the dataset. However, it is
highly sensitive to outliers. In short, XGB is an ensembled method based on Gradient
Boosting Decision Tree (Keany, 2020). In cases of regression, a tree consists of both
leaf and internal nodes, where the former holds the predicted value of a feature, while
the latter corresponds to how the tree is split into different branches. The predictions
made are summed as scores by the K-number of trees involved, using the following
formula:
ˆyi =
K
∑
k=1
fk(xi) , fk ∈F
(4.5)
Here with ˆyi being the predicted value, ft denoting a decision tree, while the ft(xi)
represent the predicted value from the tree, using the xi With the attempt to not
overfit a model and boost its generalization, the term Ωis introduced, where the loss
function described, using the predicted and true value, is now able to be rewritten,
where T expresses the number of leaf nodes, and wj the weight of the jth leaf node.
L =
n
∑
i=1
(yi, ˆyi) ⇔
(4.6)
Obj =
n
∑
i=1
(yi, ˆyi) +
n
∑
i=1
Ω(ft) ⇔
(4.7)
Ω(ft) = γT + 1
2λ
T
∑
j=1
w2
j
(4.8)
Hereto, XGBoost employs a technique called forward addition”, in which for every
time a model adds a decision tree, it will master a new function and coeﬀicient used
in fitting the residuals as the final step in the prediction. As an example of this step,
called t, the predicted value for ith sample xi together with the object function with
respect to step t, forms the following formula (Xiong et al., 2022):
ˆyt
i = ˆyt−1
i
+ ft(xi)
(4.9)
Obj(t) =
n
∑
i=1
L(yi, ˆyt−1 + ft(xi)) + Ω(ft))
(4.10)
As a result, the Taylor expression is used to simplify the objective function, and the fi-
nal expression is shown below. It is also evident how XGB manages the customization
==PAGE:29==
4.7 Deep Learning
21
of these with ease, along with the parameters that the algorithm offers for tweaking
(Xiong et al., 2022).
Obj(t) = −1
2
T
∑
j=1
G2
j
Hj + λ + γT + C
(4.11)
4.7
Deep Learning
Deep learning, a subset of ML applies ”threshold logic” to simulate the thinking pro-
cess of a human brain, due to its ability to process complex information. The neurons
function as building blocks of the brain and process this information to other cells of
the brain. Neurons are structured similarly to antennas, getting inputs identified for
their strength or weakness. This determination is used to decide how essential the
input is to the output of the neuron. A weighing is done of the input signal, using
the connection of the mapped graph, which is then summed, and used for the next
signal passed throughout the axons of the cells to make its way to the final neurons.
Here, the artificial neurons are given the input x1, x2, x3, ..., xn to be multiplied with
the respective weights denoted w1, w2, w3, ..., wn given the following full expression,
sometimes including a value for bias:
Z =
n
∑
i=0
wixi
(4.12)
The result is passed to the expression seeking a desired result y = f(z).
The structure of the brain involves six levels of layers, where information is passed
from one point to another. This is what deep learning tries to further imitate, via an
artificial neural network (ANN). An ANN is built of an input layer, with input nodes,
a hidden layer responsible for making complex decisions using non-linear activation
functions, and an output layer, with belonging nodes. In a simple ANN structure,
this inhibits one input and output layer, and between zero to three hidden layers. All
of the layers work in coordination with one another. The traversing of the layers is
known as feed-forward (Indrakumari, Poongodi, and Singh, 2021).
A neural network of multiple layers is able to compute non-linear problems, and one
must consider the appropriate number of hidden layers to add. In some cases, the use
of only a single hidden layer will be enough to solve complex functions. However, the
number of needed layers depends on the complexity of the problem at hand to which
no definitive number of hidden layers exist. However, one can identify this by ex-
perimenting, using intuition or gathering inspiration from other ANNs, etc(Brownlee,
2019b). For the non-linear type of ANN three distinctions exist: Sigmoid neurons,
tanh neurons, and Rectified Linear Units (ReLU) neurons (Indrakumari, Poongodi,
and Singh, 2021). As this thesis only uses the latter, this is the only one described. In
short, ReLu uses the input value and returns a max value between 0 and the value of
==PAGE:30==
4.7 Deep Learning
22
the input itself; if negative or zero, it returns 0. ReLu offers the ability to learn non-
linear functions whilst simplifying computational complexity (MLCheetSheet, 2017).
f(x) = max(0, x)
(4.13)
The backpropagation describes when the ANN goes through training by adjusting
the weights of the network with respect to the previous learning. This is done over a
number of iterations, defined as epochs, whilst the gradient vector is responsible for
the tuning and adjustments of the weight. The objective is then to get the gradient
values to 0 to minimize the error, using the cost function, which effect is based on an
error rate (Indrakumari, Poongodi, and Singh, 2021).
4.7.1
Adaptive Moment Estimation Optimizer
The Adam is an optimizer technique, used for deep learning algorithms such as ANN,
created to address the limitations of traditional gradient descent methods, as men-
tioned above. Adam strengthens stochastic optimization by combining momentum-
based and adaptive learning rate approaches. Adaptive learning rate methods adjust
the rate for every parameter of the model during the process of optimization. There-
fore, the algorithm takes larger steps for infrequent features and smaller steps for
frequent features. This results in faster convergence and better performance in com-
plex optimization problems. Besides retaining an exponentially decaying average of
past squared gradients (vt), Adam also maintains an exponentially decaying average
of past gradients (mt), which is equivalent to the momentum approach.
mt = β1mt−1 + (1 −β1)gt
(4.14)
vt = β2vt−1 + (1 −β2)g2
t
(4.15)
The two vectors mt and vt represent estimates of the first moment (the mean) and
the second moment (the uncentered variance) of the gradients, respectively. Since
mt and vt are initialized as zero vectors, they have a bias towards zero, particularly
during the initial steps and when the decay rates are small (i.e., 1 and 2 are near 1).
To address these biases, calculate bias-corrected estimates for the first and second
moments are done:
ˆmt =
mt
1 −βt
1
(4.16)
ˆvt =
vt
1 −βt
2
(4.17)
Subsequently, these bias-corrected are employed to estimate updates of the parame-
ters, similar to the other optimization approaches. This results in the Adam update
rule:
θt+1 = θt −
η
√ˆvt + ϵ ˆmt
(4.18)
==PAGE:31==
4.8 Performance Evaluation
23
By executing these steps, the Adam update rule guarantees quicker convergence and
enhanced performance in stochastic optimization tasks, outperforming traditional
gradient descent and other optimization methods (Andrychowicz et al., 2016) (Ruder,
2016).
4.8
Performance Evaluation
Performance evaluation is an essential step in the development of ML, as it provides
a quantitative means to detect the performance of the model. This requires a division
of data, where one part will be used to train a model, whilst the other to test it. The
performance of a model is determined by comparing the accuracy of the measures
from the train data (the actual values) against the test data, of which the predicted
values are generated. Provided that accuracy for each iteration of the model training
is increased on both the test and training data, the model is reckoned to be learning.
If this is not the case, the model is then considered not to learn and to underfit. If
a model instead is deemed to be overfitting, it means the accuracy is too high on
the training set compared to the testing dataset, thus being biased to characteristics
exclusive to the training portion of the data (Choi et al., 2020).
The Mean Squared Error (MSE) is used to evaluate the performance for continuous
values, in both regression and forecasting exercises. The MSE is defined as (Indra-
gandhi et al., 2021):
MSE = 1
n
n
∑
i=1
(yi −ˆyi)2
(4.19)
Equally, the MAE is often used, when measuring the accuracy of a continuous problem.
It is defined as (Indragandhi et al., 2021):
MAE = 1
n
n
∑
i=1
|yi −ˆyi|
(4.20)
The measurer of precision-recall is used for classifications. It looks at the true pos-
itives, false positives, true negatives, and false negatives to determine its accuracy
performance. These are also at play in a confusion matrix:
False Positive Rate =
FP
FP + TN
(4.21)
True Negative Rate =
TN
TN + FP
(4.22)
These values are further used to determine precision, accuracy, and recall:
Accuracy =
TP + TN
TP + TN + FP + FN
(4.23)
==PAGE:32==
4.8 Performance Evaluation
24
Precision =
TP
TP + FP
(4.24)
Recall =
TP
TP + FN
(4.25)
The harmonic mean of the precision and recall values are used in the F1−score, which
derives a value demonstrating and summarizing the performance of the classification
model (Indragandhi et al., 2021) (Denes-Fazakas et al., 2020).
F1 = 2 · Precision · Recall
Precision + Recall
(4.26)
==PAGE:33==
CHAPTER 5
Data Preparation
This section describes the steps taken to collect, prepare and preprocess the data.
Note, that the following ’Implementation’ section will incorporate additional steps of
data preprocessing as well.
5.1
Data Facilitation
Data collection has been a significant challenge in this research as it provides the
raw material for the implementation and analysis of the models. As a result, data
facilitation has equally been a substantial task of the thesis. While the sample sizes
are relatively limited, the specificity of the data requirements constrains the number
of suitable participants. Upon determining the scope of the study, the facilitation was
carried out by looking for data participants through T1D Facebook groups, asking
for recommendations from Steno Hospital, and using word-of-mouth in the T1D com-
munity. Throughout this process, there has been close contact with seven different
people. However, scheduling of meetings proved to be an obstacle due to various fac-
tors. These included insuﬀicient data volumes, lack of needed wearables and diabetic
devices, and the prevalence of inconsistent data. Consequently, it was not until late
in the process that all the participants were found.
5.2
Data Collection & Preprocessing
The data collection process involved several attempts to acquire the needed data:
Glucose levels, pulse or heart rate, and physical activity metrics. All of these proved
unsuccessful before discovering a third-party export application that enabled a suc-
cessful export of the desired data.
The iPhone application, Health Auto Export,
allows export data from the Apple Health application, which was released by Ap-
ple Inc. in 2014 (O’Boyle, 2021). The application allows for accessing health data,
such as physical activity records, dates for these, heart rate/pulse, glucose, etc. The
program gathers data from the user’s Apple Watch and synchronizes it with Apple
Health. For the data participants SS and JM, identical equipment — the Dexcom
G6, iPhone, and Apple Watch is used, enabling identical methods of data collection
for the two. For DN, a different setup consisting of a CGM incorporated in his pump
==PAGE:34==
5.2 Data Collection & Preprocessing
26
and a Fitbit watch was used. However, data collection was not necessary as the sub-
ject had already extracted the data for personal use, leaving only data cleaning and
preprocessing to be executed. This is described later in this section collectively for all
the test subjects. Even though the Health Auto Export application made it possible
to export all the necessary data points relevant to the different models, the process
showed to be a tedious matter.
Figure 5.1: Health Metrics of Health Auto Export Application
==PAGE:35==
5.2 Data Collection & Preprocessing
27
The ’Export’ tab of the application offers a range of different export metrics and
configurations to be selected. As demonstrated in the figure, one can choose the data
range, the time interval ranging from ’Seconds’ to ’Years’, as well as options to ’Select
Health Metrics’. The health metrics involve glucose and pulse values, whilst ’Select
Workouts’ involves a range of sports types).
For JM and SS and relevant to the first model the glucose readings are posted every
fifth minute via the Dexcom sensor to the iPhone, synchronized to the Apple Watch,
and saved in the Apple Health application.
Using the ’Minutes’ interval option, the glucose readings are exported as a JSON
file.
To refrain the application from crashing, which was the case when increas-
ing the range, this strategy was only exported in one-month increments.
An ini-
tial attempt was made to merge the JSON files using the pandas library.
How-
ever, this approach resulted in a skewed output, leading to a decision of convert-
ing the files into multiple .xls files.
The conversion was done using the follow-
ing online tool: https://products.aspose.app/cells/conversion/json-to-xlsx.
While merging the .xls files data reduction (introduced in section 4.5) was conducted
Figure 5.2: Conversion Site
as multiple rows and columns were irrelevant to the scope. Here, leaving the glucose
value (referred to as ’qty’ for SS and JM) and the timestamp (date). The outcome
yielded a streamlined data frame structure, as represented in the following table,
saved as a .csv file.
==PAGE:36==
5.2 Data Collection & Preprocessing
28
Table 5.1: Data Structure From Glucose Export
Data
Metrics
Name
Units
Data
Workouts
Blood_glucose
mmol/L
qty
date
19,48311463
2022-09-01 00:03:00 +0200
20,31572637
2022-09-01 00:08:00 +0200
19,03905504
2022-09-01 00:13:00 +0200
17,20730922
2022-09-01 00:18:00 +0200
15,98614534
2022-09-01 00:23:00 +0200
15,4865783
2022-09-01 00:28:00 +0200
As mentioned before, all the models are linked to exercise. Therefore, exporting activ-
ity data via the application becomes an important step of data preparation. The first
model requires the construction of a data frame of glucose values captured during pe-
riods of physical activity, necessitating an overview of sports activities and their time
range. Additionally, a sports overview is needed to link to distinguish the different
sports activities and corresponds them to the corresponding pulse data. Finally, for
the third model, the overview was required as a reference guide. It helped to iden-
tify the intervals of physical activity, enabling the correlation of appropriate blood
glucose levels with their corresponding pulse patterns during these periods of exercise.
Getting the overview of sports activities is done by exporting a JSON file containing
the workout metrics on an hourly basis for each month in order to construct the
overview of engaged sports performances for JM and SS (see figures below).
==PAGE:37==
5.2 Data Collection & Preprocessing
29
Figure 5.3: Sports Metrics of Health Auto Export
Using the site mentioned before, the files are converted from JSON to .xls and merged
manually, leaving the following structure:
==PAGE:38==
5.2 Data Collection & Preprocessing
30
data
metrics
workouts
totalSwimmingStrokeCount
start
totalEnergy
end
flightsClimbed
activeEnergy
stepCadence
avgHeartRate
qty
units
units
qty
units
qty
units
qty
qty
units
units
qty
(a) Part 1
data
workouts
temperature
isIndoor
maxHeartRate
elevation
heartRateData
heartRateRecovery
stepCount
units
qty
qty
units
units
ascent
descent
qty
units
date
date
qty
units
units
qty
(b) Part 2
data
workouts
name
swimCadence
humidity
route
distance
intensity
speed
units
qty
qty
units
timestamp
lat
lon
altitude
units
qty
units
qty
qty
units
(c) Part 3
Table 5.2: Sport Metric Data Frame Structure (Split into 3)
==PAGE:39==
5.2 Data Collection & Preprocessing
31
The columns ’start’, ’end’, and ’name’ are kept, whilst the rest are deemed irrelevant,
again using the data reduction approach.
For the second model the overview is again used as a reference point. As the ’start’
column, signifies the precise date and time of a given sporting activity, this identified
which days to export the pulse data from, again utilizing the Health Auto Export.
Given that the pulse is registered approximately every third second by the Apple
Watch, it was essential to set the time interval for the JSON export to ’seconds’ in this
matter. Considering the limitations of the application, which is prone to crashing
with larger data sets, the export was made over shorter time spans of 1-3 days at a
time. The resulting data was then manually converted, using the site as before, and
then converted to .xls files and merged into a single cohesive data set.
For the data participant, DN, a substantial .csv file was provided consisting of both
pump and blood glucose data. This necessitated an extensive data reduction both
in terms of rows and columns. A notable characteristic of the DN data included the
instances of missing values at various intervals within the blood glucose data. The
dataset also included non-numeric values, due to the calibration of the CGM. Leading
to the following data structure:
Table 5.3: Data Frame Structure Glucose DN
Date
Time
Sensor Glucose
(mmol/L)
29.12.2022
20:15:45
8,4
29.12.2022
20:10:45
8,5
29.12.2022
20:05:45
8,5
DN had further provided a .zip file with a variety of JSON files, some containing pulse
data, while others containing activity data. The activity data, being of nine big JSON
files consisted of the following structure:
1
[{
2
"activityName" : "Outdoor Bike",
3
"activityTypeId" : 1071,
4
"activityLevel" : [{}],
5
"averageHeartRate" : 133,
6
"calories" : 157,
7
"duration" : 819000,
8
"activeDuration" : 819000,
9
"heartRateZones" : [{},{},{},{}],
10
"startTime" : "02/15/20 14:52:37",
11
"originalStartTime" : "02/15/20 14:52:37",
12
"originalDuration" : 819000,
13 }
Listing 5.1: JSON file for DN exercise file
==PAGE:40==
5.2 Data Collection & Preprocessing
32
In this case, the interest remains only in ’activityName’, ’startTime’, and ’original-
Duration’ (here, given in milliseconds). Using pandas the files were merged dropping
the columns out of scope, without it looking skewed. The same method was used
to merge the nearly 200 JSON files consisting of pulse data, keeping two columns:
dateTime value.bpm.
After collecting the data from the different data participants, the first steps of pre-
processing the data could begin. The approach and logic remain consistent across the
data participants, with only minor variations present. This common methodology
will be described in a collective manner.
For the data of the first, a .csv file containing an overview of sports activities serves
as a look-up reference. This file is used to identify the specific intervals of each sports
activity. These identified intervals are then cross-referenced with the blood sugar file.
Consequently, a refined .csv file is made, adding exclusively blood sugar readings
taken during the timeframe for the data participant was conducting sport, but also
four after as the ’Related Work’ article describes the sports effect to last.
1 df_overview = pd.read_csv("SportsOversigt_JM.csv")
2 df_overview = df_overview[['start', 'end', 'name']]
3 df_overview["start"] = df_overview["start"].apply(lambda x: str(x).replace("
+0100", ""))
4 df_overview["start"] = pd.to_datetime(df_overview["start"], format='%Y-%m-%d
%H:%M:%S', utc=True)
5 df_overview["end"] = df_overview["end"].apply(lambda x: str(x).replace("
+0100", ""))
6 df_overview["end"] = pd.to_datetime(df_overview["end"], format='%Y-%m-%d %H
:%M:%S', utc=True)
7 df_overview.to_csv("SportsOversigt_JM_Filtered.csv", index= False)
8
9 df_filtered = pd.DataFrame()
10 data =[]
11 for index, row in df_overview.iterrows():
12
print(type(dfbloodsugar['date']))
13
print(type((row['start'])))
14
mask = (dfbloodsugar['date'] > row['start'] - datetime.timedelta(minutes
= 2) ) & (dfbloodsugar['date'] <= row['end'] + datetime.timedelta(
minutes=240))
15
df_temp = dfbloodsugar.loc[mask]
16
df_filtered = df_filtered.append(df_temp)
17
18 df_filtered["date"] = pd.to_datetime(df_filtered['date'], format='%Y-%m-%d %
H:%M:%S', utc = True)
19 df_filtered.to_csv("FirstModelJM_BSSport.csv", index = False)
Listing 5.2: Data Cleaning for Model 1
For the data for the second model, both heart rate and overview of activity are used.
In the code below, the overview file is again used as a look-up, as we are interested in
the pulse data between the start and end date for each sports activity in the overview.
The look-up is made using the mask(). Moreover, including tolerance of time, using
==PAGE:41==
5.2 Data Collection & Preprocessing
33
the timedelta. This accounts for the fact that the pulse might not be measured
at the exact same time as mentioned in the overview. Each time the condition is
met, a row is appended to the data frame, incorporating the relevant activity type
— anaerobic, aerobic, or combined — corresponding to the specific type of sports
performance executed. In this regard, knowledge from both the ’Background’ section
and the empiric data (see A.1-4) in making the sports distinguishment. Once the
process is completed, the data frame is saved as a .csv file.
1 df_pulse = pd.read_csv("SamledePuls_JM.csv")
2 df_pulse = df_pulse[['date', 'pulse']]
3 df_pulse['date'] = pd.to_datetime(df_pulse['date'], utc = True)
4
5 df_filteredpulse = pd.DataFrame()
6 data =[]
7 for index, row in df_overview.iterrows():
8
mask = (df_pulse['date'] > row['start'] - datetime.timedelta(seconds =
5)) & (df_pulse['date'] <= row['end'] + datetime.timedelta(seconds =
5))
9
df_temp = df_pulse.loc[mask]
10
11
duration = (row['end'] - row['start']).total_seconds() / 60
# calculate
duration in minutes
12
13
if 6 <= row['start'].hour < 9:
# If activity is between 6-9 AM
14
df_temp['Activity type'] = 'anaerob'
15
elif row['name'] == 'Running':
16
if duration > 30:
17
df_temp['Activity type'] = 'aerob'
18
else:
19
df_temp['Activity type'] = 'anaerob'
20
else:
21
df_temp['Activity type'] = row['name']
22
23
df_filteredpulse = df_filteredpulse.append(df_temp)
24
25 df_filteredpulse.loc[df_filteredpulse['Activity type'].isin(['Walking', '
Running', 'aerob']), 'Activity type'] = 'aerobic'
26 df_filteredpulse.loc[df_filteredpulse['Activity type'].isin(['High Intensity
Interval Training', 'Functional Strength Training', 'Cycling', 'Yoga'])
, 'Activity type'] = 'anaerob'
27 df_filteredpulse.loc[df_filteredpulse['Activity type'].isin(['Climbing', '
Kickboxing']), 'Activity type'] = 'combined'
28
29 df_filteredpulse["date"] = df_filteredpulse["date"].apply(lambda x: str(x).
replace("+02:00", ""))
30 df_filteredpulse["date"] = pd.to_datetime(df_filteredpulse['date'], format='
%Y-%m-%d %H:%M:%S', utc = True)
31 df_filteredpulse.to_csv("SecondModelJM_PulseSport.csv", index = False)
Listing 5.3: Data Cleaning for Model 2
==PAGE:42==
5.2 Data Collection & Preprocessing
34
As the objective for the data of the last model the pulse and glucose data needed to be
linked, during periods of sports activity. A look-up is done using the file, previously
generated for the second model, containing both pulse and activity. Following this,
the data of the glucose data frame is examined, pairing each glucose measurement
with the corresponding pulse reading, again using a time tolerance to connect an
adjacent glucose measurement to a pulse reading. If there exist more than 30 pulse
readings before one glucose value is met, the additional pulse readings beyond the
30th are discarded. Doing this, ensures a more balanced and consistent relationship
between the readings, making the data frame more suitable for the model to come.
The choice of ’30’ as the cut-off point was made based on an examination of the initial
dataset, where it was deemed a reasonable threshold.
1 df_filtered = pd.read_csv("SecondModelJM_PulseSport.csv")
2 df_filtered = df_filtered[['date', 'pulse', 'Activity type']]
3 df_filtered["date"] = pd.to_datetime(df_filtered['date'], format='%Y-%m-%d %
H:%M:%S', utc = True)
4 df_filtered = df_filtered.drop('Activity type', axis=1)
5
6 df_new = pd.DataFrame(columns = ["date","qty","pulse"])
7 df_new["date"] = pd.to_datetime(df_new['date'], format='%Y-%m-%d %H:%M:%S',
utc = True)
8 dates =[]
9 flag = False
10 df_gluc_it = df_gluc_clean.iterrows()
11 for index, row in df_gluc_it:
12
if index - 1 == len(df_gluc_clean) - 2:
13
break
14
15
next_date = df_gluc_clean.at[index+1, 'date']
16
mask = (df_filtered['date'] > row['date'] - datetime.timedelta(seconds =
5)) & (df_filtered['date'] <= next_date + datetime.timedelta(
seconds = 5))
17
18
if not any(mask):
19
continue
20
df_new = df_new.append(row)
21
22
df_temp = df_filtered.loc[mask]
23
if len(df_temp) >= 30:
24
df_temp = df_temp[:30]
25
26
df_new = df_new.append(df_temp)
27
df_new = df_new.append(df_gluc_clean.iloc[index+1])
28
df_new = df_new.drop_duplicates()
29
30 df_new.to_csv("ThirdModelJM_BSPulse.csv", index = False)
Listing 5.4: Data Cleaning for Model 3
==PAGE:43==
CHAPTER 6
Implementation
The following section describes the implementation process and components. Note
that the code may have minor variations between the three different data participants
but the logic remains similar. References are stated in the code snippets.
6.1
Libraries
In the code of the three models, multiple libraries are used. These involve:
• Pandas: A data manipulation library used to manage and structure data. To
this extent simplifying the task of data preparation. Having previous experience
with this library, it was chosen over other alternatives.
• Matplotlib: An extensive plotting library giving ways to create a variety of
plots. This library is chosen specifically in relation to the Exploratory Data
Analysis (EDA) of each model, making one able to print visually pleasing graphs
from the data. Relevant is the Seaborn library used as a visualization library
to enhance plots based on Matplotlib.
• TensorFlow: A ML framework and library created by Google enabling ways
to create and train deep learning models and offer flexibility, for example by
allowing for the use of Keras, which can be built on top of TensorFlow when
creating neural networks and its layers. Furthermore, TensorFlow is highly used
and often mentioned in articles, such as (Indrakumari, Poongodi, and Singh,
2021) given a lot of praise.
• NumPy: A library used for numerical operations. Enabling work with large
multi-dimensional arrays and matrices, with a range of mathematical operations
to call on them. Again, a choice due to prior knowledge and use of the library.
• Scikit-Learn: A comprehensive library with a wide range of algorithms that
work well with both NumPy, SciPy, and Pandas, making it convenient as the
other libraries were employed. Further, it offers tools for handling preprocessing
and evaluation.
• XGBoost: A library giving a methodical and effective implementation of the
XGB algorithm. This library was chosen due to other coding examples using it.
==PAGE:44==
6.2 Model 1: Glucose Prediction using ANN
36
• SciPy: Is used for scientific computation and utilization of functions for opti-
mization, and know for its popularity and integration with NumPy and Pandas.
6.2
Model 1: Glucose Prediction using ANN
As outlined in the introductory section of the thesis, and to address the first RQ, the
first model is built. It incorporates the ANN model to forecast the subsequent blood
sugar value during participation in any of the three types of sports.
6.2.1
Loading & EDA
Data preparation is necessary to transform a dataset such that certain items are
displayed as features and others as labels and cannot feed a model an unprepared
dataset. Rather, one must prepare the input so that the model can make sense of it.
1 df = pd.read_csv('filtered.csv')
2 df = df[['date','qty']]
3 df['date'] = pd.to_datetime(df['date'])
Listing 6.1: Code of Model 1
The provided dataset consists of historical data of glucose values, presented as a
pandas data frame.
The relevant columns, df[['date', 'qty']], are detected,
where the qty represent the glucose value.
By converting the column date to a
to DateTime object, it is enabled for modifications, operations, and analysis of the
date information.
As an EDA is carried out to gain an overview of the data distribution and trends. The
following graphs are created for the visualization section to illustrate the patterns of
the glucose measurements as shown below. Here, the seaborn library is used to set
the visual theme for the graph, while the matplotlib generates the figures themselves.
These figures illustrate the initial 1000 entries, providing a visualization of the glucose
level over time (see Appendix A.5).
1 sns.set_theme(style='whitegrid', palette='Dark2')
2 plt.figure(figsize=(10,6), dpi=100)
3 a=1000
4 plt.plot(df['date'][:a], df['qty'][:a])
5 plt.xlabel('date')
6 plt.ylabel('Glucose Level')
Listing 6.2: Code of Model 1
The objective is then for the model to learn the patterns of the glucose stream of each
data participant to predict the subsequent value.
==PAGE:45==
6.2 Model 1: Glucose Prediction using ANN
37
6.2.2
Data Split & Segmentation
The data is split as described in 4.5.
95% of data is used for training while the
remaining is used for testing. In the def segmented_dataset, preparation of the
data is done for the neural network. This is accomplished by segmenting the dataset.
The function takes a time series of glucose values, creating a sequence of windows
of them, containing 21 consecutive data points. This means that for window = 21
the 21 values are added to a matrix with the first value dropped for the following
row and so on. This will serve as a matrix of features. The label matrix consists of
the final value plus one of the feature matrices. Once transformed into this format,
the dataset is ready to be used in the model.
The value of the window size was
determined by tweaking the hyperparameter multiple times, before deciding on the
final value. Besides the window size as a parameter, the function also takes bacthes,
being the number of windows for each batch. To this extent, it is important to keep
in mind that if the batch size is too large, underfitting may result. The buffer size
is utilized when the model selects values from the training dataset.
Rather than
selecting 32 random values from the whole xtrain dataset, the model has a buffer of
1000 values from which it selects 32 randomly.
1 def segmented_dataset(Glevel, Window, batches, shuffle_buffer):
2
data_gen = tf.data.Dataset.from_tensor_slices(Glevel)
3
data_gen = data_gen.window(Window + 1, shift=1, drop_remainder=True)
4
data_gen = data_gen.flat_map(lambda window: window.batch(Window + 1))
5
data_gen = data_gen.shuffle(shuffle_buffer).map(lambda window: (window
[:-1], window[-1]))
6
data_gen = data_gen.batch(batches).prefetch(1)
7
return data_gen
8
9 window = 21
#Length of the window segment
10 batches = 32
#Data batches
11 buffer = 1000
#Shuffle buffer
12
13 #Creating the segmented training set
14 train_dataset = segmented_dataset(x_train, window, batches, buffer)
15
16
(Brownlee, 2022) (Moroney, 2019)
Listing 6.3: Code of Model 1
==PAGE:46==
6.2 Model 1: Glucose Prediction using ANN
38
6.2.3
Model Creation & Training
The model architecture uses tensorflow to define the model using the .Sequetial-
class, meaning the layers stated, will automatically be stacked on top of each other. It
consists of one input layer with 2056 neurons, three hidden layers with 1028, 512, and
256 neurons respectively, and one output layer with a single neuron. The numbers
of the neurons are the values passed to Dense. Each neuron will receive input from
the preceding layer of the neuron, and in this way be fully connected. The number of
layers was chosen using an experimental approach and then to see how the metrics
evolved for each epoch. In particular, for less number of layers, the output increased,
e.g., with an MSE = 142.44 and MAE = 11.01. A higher number of layers gave simi-
larly poorer outputs, e.g., MSE = 0.819, MAE = 0.662. For the final choice of layers
and for each epoch, the input for each neuron is the weighted sum of the outputs
which is then passed through the graph using an activation function to compute the
neuron output. The activation function used for this is ReLU, which helps the model
learn the complex pattern of the model.
1 #Model Architecture
2 model = tf.keras.models.Sequential([
3
tf.keras.layers.Dense(2056, input_shape=[window], activation="relu"),
4
tf.keras.layers.Dense(1028, activation="relu"),
5
tf.keras.layers.Dense(512, activation="relu"),
6
tf.keras.layers.Dense(256, activation="relu"),
7
tf.keras.layers.Dense(1)
8 ])
9
10 #Model compilation
11 model.compile(loss="mse", optimizer='adam',metrics=["mae"])
12 epochs = 30
#Training iterations
13
14 #Model training
15 history = model.fit(train_dataset ,epochs=epochs,verbose=1)
16
17
(Brownlee, 2022) (Moroney, 2019)
Listing 6.4: Code of Model 1
==PAGE:47==
6.3 Model 2: Activity Type Prediction using SVC/XGB
39
Once the mode is compiled under the ’Model Architecture’ section, using the Adam
optimizer, an algorithm adjusts the weights of the neurons to minimize the value of
the loss function. The MSE is used as the loss function, whilst the MAE acts as a
metric to track the development of the training. The model is trained by calling .fit
on the model instance and passing it to the training dataset, epoch, and verbose. As
the number of epochs is achieved in the subsequent section, the MAE and MSE for
each the number of epochs to determine how the model is progressing in its training.
1 epochs = 30
#Training iterations
2
3 #Model trianing
4 history = model.fit(train_dataset ,epochs=epochs,verbose=1)
5
6 #Get the loss function and performance metric values
7 mean_absolute_error=history.history['mae']
8 mse=history.history['loss']
9 iteration=range(len(mse))
#Number of iterations
10
11
(Brownlee, 2022) (Moroney, 2019)
Listing 6.5: Code of Model 1
6.3
Model 2: Activity Type Prediction using SVC/XGB
To answer RQ2, and to predict which sport is conducted, the SVC model is created.
The dataset relevant to this model consists of a workout type (aerob, anaerob and
combined) as well as the pulse.
6.3.1
Loading & EDA
The data is read using pandas, like in the former model, feeding it the relevant data.
A .csv file is read, containing the two columns of relevance. To ensure that there are
no empty rows, the function df.isna.any() in run, which should return false.
An EDA is conducted showing, how the data distribution is of the three test persons,
one being a bar plot showing the number of samples per ’Activity Type’. Another,
showing a pie chart of the percentage of samples for each activity type. Lastly, a plot
showing the pulse pattern for the first 100 samples of a test person for each of the
types. Thus, giving a graphic representation of how the pulse pattern changes over
the course of one.
==PAGE:48==
6.3 Model 2: Activity Type Prediction using SVC/XGB
40
Figure 6.1: Pie Chart of Data Distribution for JM
Figure 6.2: Pie Chart of Data Distribution for SS
==PAGE:49==
6.3 Model 2: Activity Type Prediction using SVC/XGB
41
Figure 6.3: Pie Chart of Data Distribution for DN
As seen, the proportion between the different sports categories is not equal, which is
preferable
This pattern demonstrates that while doing the combined sports type, the heart rate
increases significantly, with more beats per minute than during the other workout
types.
It is overall positive that the patterns are different between the different
workout types. Occasionally, though, patterns might seem identical yet are simpler
to differentiate than they appear.
==PAGE:50==
6.3 Model 2: Activity Type Prediction using SVC/XGB
42
6.3.2
Preprocessing & Segmentation
The data is split into a training set and a testing chunk of respectively 80% and 20%
using the train_test_split() function from sklearn.
1 #Encoding categorical column
2 Act_Lab = 'EncodedActivity'
3 enc = preprocessing.LabelEncoder()
4 df[Act_Lab] = enc.fit_transform(df['activityName'].values.ravel())
5
6 #Data Normalization
7 df['pulse'] = df['pulse'] / df['pulse'].max()
8 df = df.round({'pulse': 4})
9
10 Time_window = 70
11 Time_step = 10
12
13 def window_labels_creation(d_frame, window, step, column_label):
14
windows = []
15
labels = []
16
17
for i in range(0, len(d_frame) - window, step):
18
xs = d_frame['pulse'].values[i: i + window]
19
label = stats.mode(d_frame[column_label][i: i + window])[0][0]
20
windows.append([xs])
21
labels.append(label)
22
23
reshaped_windows = np.asarray(windows, dtype= np.float32).reshape(-1,
window)
24
labels = np.asarray(labels)
25
26
return reshaped_windows , labels
27
28 X, Y = window_labels_creation(df,
29
Time_window ,
30
Time_step,
31
Act_Lab)
32
33 X_train, X_test, y_train, y_test = train_test_split(X,Y, test_size=0.2,
stratify=Y, shuffle=True, random_state=66)
34
35
(Chugh, 2023) (Brownlee, 2016)
Listing 6.6: Code of Model 2
As the column of ’Activity type’ column is of strings, it is converted into numerical
values using LabelEndcoder() from the sklearn.preprocessing library, as a step
of data transformation (see section 4.5). This is necessary as the model does not
allow for utilizing string, and therefore a numeric conversion of the workout types is
required. The different workout types are instead assigned a numeric value between
0 and 2, replacing the strings with the numerical values. Further, as a step of nor-
malization, the pulse data is ranged by dividing the full column of heart rate by its
==PAGE:51==
6.3 Model 2: Activity Type Prediction using SVC/XGB
43
greatest value. Therefore, it brings the whole column to a range of 0-1 values. This
allows the ML algorithm to converge the final answer in a more stable manner and
to prevent features with larger scales from dominating the model.
The function, window_labels_creation(), is defined to generate time windows from
the pulse data. When establishing the window, a collection of the heart rate samples
is done with a size of 70, meaning that for each 70 heart rate reading, an appropriate
workout type is assigned. A second variable called the time_step = 10 exists which
is the shift in starting position for each subsequent window, e.g., a window from po-
sition 0 to 69 (total 70 data points), where the next window starts from position 10
to 79.
In the window label creation function, both windows and labels are present. Within
the for loop, the heart rate is measured between i
window+, meaning the window
size. Hereto, the values are appended to the list of windows, and correspondingly for
the labels to the labels list. Then, it is converted into numpy arrays for both lists.
6.3.3
SVC/XGB Model Creation & Training
The data is applied to both the XGB and SVC models. Here, the SVC model is
configured with the RBF kernel. The models, and their instances, are both trained
via the .fit() method which is fed the training features X_train, and corresponding
labels y_train. The model will in this sense learn to classify the data into different
activity categories using the pulse data.
1 ##SVM
2 svm_model = svm.SVC(kernel='rbf')
3 svm_model.fit(X_train,y_train)
4 svm_pred = svm_model.predict(X_test)
5
6 ##XGB
7 xgbmodel = XGBClassifier()
8 xgbmodel.fit(X_train, y_train)
9 xgb_pred = xgbmodel.predict(X_test)
10
11
(Brownlee, 2019a) (Brownlee, 2016)
Listing 6.7: Code of Model 2
==PAGE:52==
6.4 Model 3: Glucose Prediction via Pulse using SVR/XGB
44
Once the model has been trained, it will be used to conduct predictions on the
test data via the .predict() function. The predictions of the models are hereafter
compared to the actual labels, and their performance is evaluated via precision, recall,
F1-score, accuracy, and the confusion matrix.
6.4
Model 3: Glucose Prediction via Pulse using
SVR/XGB
This section describes how a regression model using XGB and SVR schematics is used
to predict glucose levels from pulse data during sports.
6.4.1
Data Preparation & EDA
Using pandas the .csv file is loaded containing the values of the glucose levels named
qty or similar and the pulse named heartrate.
1 df = pd.read_csv('ThirdModelJM_BSPulse.csv')
2 df['heart rate'] = df['pulse']
3 df = df[['pulse', 'qty']]
4
5 X, Y = [], []
6 k=0
7
8 for i in range(len(df)):
9
if df['qty'].iloc[i]==df['qty'].iloc[i]:
10
if len(df['pulse'][k:i+1]) < 30:
11
X.append(np.hstack((np.zeros((1,30-len(df['pulse'][k:i+1]))), df['
pulse'][k:i+1].to_numpy().reshape(1,-1))))
12
else:
13
X.append(df['pulse'][i-29:i+1].to_numpy().reshape(1,-1))
14
Y.append(df['qty'].iloc[i])
15
k = i+1
16
17 X = np.vstack(X)
18 X = np.squeeze(X)[:,:29]
19 Y = np.array(Y)
20
21 from sklearn.impute import SimpleImputer
22 imp = SimpleImputer(missing_values=np.nan, strategy='mean')
23 imp.fit(X)
24 X = imp.transform(X)
25
26
(Kumar, 2022)
Listing 6.8: Code of Model 3
In conducting the preprocessing of the data, two list empty lists are created, called X
and Y, whereas k = 0 is used for keeping track of the indexing when looping through
the entire data frame. Next, a check is conducted using the qty.ilc, and only if it is
==PAGE:53==
6.4 Model 3: Glucose Prediction via Pulse using SVR/XGB
45
true, the succeeding code is executed. The reasoning for this is that not every row of
the data frame has a blood sugar value, since this number is retrieved from the watch
around every fifth minute, but the pulse value exists roughly for every fifth second.
The pulse data is structured aligning the values as a sequence or window with a size
of 30 or less, and then pairing it with a corresponding glucose value. Further, the
code handles any cases of missing values in the pulse data by replacing the blank
value with the average of the respective feature via the SimpleImputer class from
sklearn.impute. For all the rows without a value, a zero is instead added, then
stacked to the X-list, which simply holds the lengths of 30 minus the number of miss-
ing entries. Should there be 30, then we simply take the last 30 values and append
them to X, whilst the blood sugar values, qty are appended to the Y-list. Lastly, the
two lists are converted into numpy array, in order to use them for the models.
As EDA, using the seaborn and matplotlib libraries, the pulse/glucose patterns are
identified. As shown from the pictures, a sequence for 30 values is shown, where the
x-axe represents blood sugar, while the y-axe represents heart rate.
Hereafter the data is split into 85%/15%, with the first division for training and the
other for testing.
6.4.2
Model Creation & Training
As described before, both the SVR and XGB algorithms are used. The XGB model
requires certain hyperparameters. max_depth determines the maximum depth of each
tree of XGB before reaching its prediction, which is relevant in terms of its ability to
learn complexity.
1 xtrain, xtest, ytrain, ytest = train_test_split(X,Y, test_size=0.15,
random_state=7)
2
3 ##XGB
4 xgbmodel = XGBRegressor(max_depth=6,
5
learning_rate=0.1,
6
n_estimators=150,
7
objective='reg:squarederror')
8
9 xgbmodel.fit(xtrain, ytrain)
10 xgb_pred = xgbmodel.predict(xtest)
11
12 ##SVM
13 svm_model = SVR(kernel='rbf', degree=5)
14 svm_model.fit(xtrain, ytrain)
15 svm_pred = svm_model.predict(xtest)
16
(Brownlee, 2019a) (Brownlee, 2016)
Listing 6.9: Code of Model 3
The learning_rate is briefly described the step size for how fast or slow, the model
is learning from the data. When given a smaller size it will potentially result in bet-
ter performance but longer computation. n_estimators govern the amount of trees
==PAGE:54==
6.4 Model 3: Glucose Prediction via Pulse using SVR/XGB
46
built. The more trees, the more complex patterns can be built. If an excess amount
of trees are built so may lead to overfitting. The objective parameter distinguishes
both the task and objective of the learning. In the code the reg:squarederror is
used meaning that the objective is to minimize the MSE.
After creating the model with the specific and relevant parameters both the XGB
and SVR model fits on the training data to learn the relationship between pulse and
glucose. The models are then used to predict the glucose values from the test data,
xtest. Both models use the MSE and MAE to evaluate their performance.
==PAGE:55==
CHAPTER 7
Results & Discussion
In this section, an examination of the results of the generated model is presented. In
this course, an in-depth discussion will be conducted guided by the RQs mentioned
in the initial part of the report. Note that when running the results they can change
marginally.
7.1
Results & Discussing of Model 1
When running the prediction for the first model, we are given the following results
shown below in the tables. The tables hold examples of the predicted values versus
the actual values. Larger versions of the tables can be found in Appendix (A.6-8).
Table 7.1: Predicted & Actual Values (JM)
Date
Predicted Glucose
True_Glucose
2022-11-25 21:05:00+00:00
6.883383
6.993939
2022-11-25 21:10:00+00:00
6.985489
6.771909
2022-11-25 21:15:00+00:00
6.728616
6.660894
2022-11-25 21:20:00+00:00
6.606241
6.660894
2022-11-25 21:25:00+00:00
6.643804
6.660894
2022-11-25 21:30:00+00:00
6.661416
6.771909
Table 7.2: Predicted & Actual Values (SS)
Date
Predicted Glucose
True_Glucose
2022-06-30 02:09:00+00:00
6.874394
8.326117
2022-06-30 02:14:00+00:00
7.531997
9.491774
2022-06-30 02:19:00+00:00
8.761513
10.268878
2022-06-30 02:24:00+00:00
9.562050
10.879460
2022-06-30 02:29:00+00:00
10.102388
12.100624
2022-06-30 02:34:00+00:00
11.269240
13.377295
==PAGE:56==
7.1 Results & Discussing of Model 1
48
Table 7.3: Predicted & Actual Values (DN)
Date
Predicted Glucose
True_Glucose
2022-12-21 17:44:03+00:00
5.122235
5.6
2022-12-21 17:49:03+00:00
5.313915
8.8
2022-12-21 17:54:03+00:00
8.599045
9.0
2022-12-21 17:59:03+00:00
8.689567
8.8
2022-12-21 18:04:03+00:00
8.288113
8.4
2022-12-21 18:09:03+00:00
7.770564
7.9
Further, the predicted values against the actual values are presented like such, when
plotted visually:
Figure 7.1: Visual Presentation of Predicted Vs. Actual Values (JM)
Figure 7.2: Visual Presentation of Predicted Vs. Actual Values (SS)
==PAGE:57==
7.1 Results & Discussing of Model 1
49
Figure 7.3: Visual Presentation of Predicted Vs. Actual Values (DN)
With the overall MSE and MAE:
Table 7.4: Comparison of Model Performance Metrics
Mean Squared Error
Mean Absolute Error
JM
0.4721
0.4562
SS
1.7377
0.9626
DN
0.8505
0.7767
Here, the result from the models of the ’Related Work’ is structured like so:
Table 7.5: Model Result of Related Work
MAE
Non-personalized Model
MAE
Personalized Model
MARS
1.111
0.794
AR
1.322
-
==PAGE:58==
7.1 Results & Discussing of Model 1
50
In line with the RQ1, the results of MAE and MSE show how accurate the predictions
of the model are. The MSE (0.4721) and MAE for JM (0.4562) are both low, showing
good precision. The rates of SS meanwhile show a greater MSE (1.7377) and MAE
(0.9626), suggesting a larger deviation between the actual and predicted values, while
the rates of DN, fall between JM and SS. The differences in the error rates between
the participants could be a result of multiple factors. One explanation could be that
the JM has more data and of higher quality, which makes it more suited for ANN.
Given that JM and SS have the same CGM, one would expect similar data quality
and aligning results. Meanwhile, DN with CGM, could in theory end up with a higher
or lower accuracy but instead places intermediate of SS and JM. There does exist a
difference in the number of rows between JM, SS, and DN. With the number of rows
for SS at 6174, JM at 10397, and DN at 10701, this could account for the highest
error rate, and worst result of the SS data.
Comparing the models of the thesis to the results of the MARS and AR requires a
note of caution, as the MAE for the MARS model, regarding the personalized one.
The MAEs of MARS and AR of the non-personalized type show considerably higher
MAEs than those of JM, DN, and SS. Thus, suggesting that these models from the
related work may be less precise in their forecasts. However, the MAE for SS is higher
than the one for the personalized MARS model. Here, the MAE for DN and JM are
slightly to considerably higher than the personalized again. While the related work
uses the same settings and requirements for their test subjects, one could believe that
this would yield more promising results than the models in this thesis. Albeit this is
not the case. As for reasons for the slightly higher MAE of SS in comparison to the
MARS (personalized) model, this might again be due to the data amount. Despite
the error rates of SS and DN being close to those in related work (non-personalized),
they nonetheless demonstrate greater accuracy. However, it is crucial to discuss the
tolerance of error in glucose estimations. Although the normal range of blood sug-
ars might allow for minor deviations for cases of low blood sugar deviations in both
greater and lower sizes could be dangerous, as pointed out in section 4.1. Especially,
if a person with T1D would only rely on predicted values.
Another explanation for the differences in performances of the models in the the-
sis could be the accuracy of the CGM, and these might not always be on point, as
described in the ’Background’-section regarding the diabetic devices.
==PAGE:59==
7.2 Results & Discussion of Model 2
51
7.2
Results & Discussion of Model 2
The evaluation of the second model applies the precision, recall, and F1-score perfor-
mance metrics for the SVC and XGB algorithms used, here mainly focusing on the
F1 metric. See Appendix A.9 for confusion matrices.
Table 7.6: Model 2 SVC JM
precision
recall
f1-score
support
Combined
0.42
0.20
0.27
92
Anaerob
0.56
0.33
0.42
127
Aerob
0.55
0.85
0.67
186
accuracy
0.54
405
macro avg
0.51
0.46
0.45
405
weighted avg
0.52
0.54
0.50
405
Table 7.7: Model 2 XGB JM
precision
recall
f1-score
support
Combined
0.60
0.47
0.52
92
Anaerob
0.57
0.63
0.60
127
Aerob
0.72
0.74
0.73
186
accuracy
0.64
405
macro avg
0.63
0.61
0.62
405
weighted avg
0.64
0.64
0.64
405
Table 7.8: Model 2 SVC SS
precision
recall
f1-score
support
Aerob
0.71
0.98
0.82
444
Combined
0.00
0.00
0.00
96
Anaerobic
0.82
0.40
0.54
146
accuracy
0.72
686
macro avg
0.51
0.46
0.45
686
weighted avg
0.63
0.72
0.65
686
==PAGE:60==
7.2 Results & Discussion of Model 2
52
Table 7.9: Model 2 XGB SS
precision
recall
f1-score
support
Aerob
0.72
0.95
0.82
444
Combined
0.33
0.04
0.07
96
Anaerobic
0.76
0.47
0.58
146
accuracy
0.72
686
macro avg
0.61
0.49
0.49
686
weighted avg
0.68
0.72
0.66
686
Table 7.10: Model 2 SVC DN
precision
recall
f1-score
support
Aerob
0.85
0.99
0.91
1323
Anaerob
0.88
0.65
0.75
425
Combined
0.00
0.00
0.00
111
accuracy
0.85
1859
macro avg
0.58
0.55
0.55
1859
weighted avg
0.80
0.85
0.82
1859
Table 7.11: Model 2 XGB DN
precision
recall
f1-score
support
Aerob
0.86
0.98
0.91
1323
Anaerob
0.85
0.67
0.75
425
Combined
0.33
0.07
0.12
111
accuracy
0.85
1859
macro avg
0.68
0.57
0.59
1859
weighted avg
0.83
0.85
0.83
1859
For the SVC model, the SVC model correctly classified 54% of all cases in JM data.
The ’Combined’ class has 42% in precision and a relatively low F1 score at 0.27,
suggesting a generally poor performance when predicting the ’Combined’ label. The
’Anaerob’ class showcases better performance with an F1 of 0.42, amongst others.
The ’Aerob’ class, however, outperforms the other two with an F1 at 0.67.
==PAGE:61==
7.2 Results & Discussion of Model 2
53
As for the SS data, the results maintain a similar overall accuracy of 72%. Here, the
’Aerob’ class achieves the F1 metric of 0.82. However, the ’Combined’ class shows
weak performance with all parameters at 0.00, indicating ineﬀicacy in predicting this
class. To investigate reasons for this result, and to consider errors in the data, as a
reason for the label to be unconsidered, a check for the probability amongst the label
is called: svm_model.predict_proba(X_test)). The output shows that the model
never chooses the type due to a higher probability of the other labels. Regarding DN
data, the SVC displays an overall accuracy of 85%. The ’Aerob’ class demonstrates
good performance.
The ’Anaerob’ show a smaller drop with an F1 score of 0.75,
whilst a considerable drop for the Combined with 0.00 for every parameter.
For the XGB, the JM data scores an overall accuracy of 64%, meaning a 10% improve-
ment over the SVC model. The metrics for the ’Combined’, ’Anaerob’, and ’Aerob’
classes all show noticeable improvements compared to the SVC model. For the data
of SS, the accuracy score meets the SVC at 72%, however with better performance
in each of the classes in general. Lastly, the DN data for the XGB model maintains
an accuracy of 85%, similar to SVC, with mixed results for the individual classes.
From a comparative perspective, the XGB model outperforms the SVC both in the
overall accuracy but also in the majority of the evaluation metrics. Multiple factors
could be contributing to this result. One of which could be a class imbalance. As
revealed during the EDA of model 2 in the ’Implementation’-section, the data showed
not to be equally distributed, e.g. ’Combined’. This could lead the poor prediction
performance in minority classes. Thirdly, improperly tuned hyperparameters could
also hinder the performance of the model.
As explained in section 4.4, the accuracy and nature of activities could also impact the
results. As the precision of wearables may not meet the standards of ECGs and other
standardized tools, use of it could possibly lead to less accurate pulse measurements
and prediction outcomes. In relation to the physical activities, with emphasis on the
’Combined’ class. As this type incorporates both anaerobic and aerobic elements,
potentially misclassifying them. However, it is worth noting that the model is on the
right track if it avoids misclassifying ’Aerobic’ as ’Anaerobic’ and vice versa, as shown
in the confusion matrices (see Appendix). Another point, relevant in this regard, is
the risk of potential subjective biases in the qualitative data, as the participants were
asked to describe their physical activities. This could lead to categorization issues
should the subject classification be incorrect.
==PAGE:62==
7.3 Results & Discussion of Model 3
54
7.3
Results & Discussion of Model 3
As a result of the two different algorithms used to answer RQ3, the SVR, and XGB
are used to predict the blood sugar from pulse, relevant to sports activities. For this
and to measure their performance the metrics used are, again, the MSE and MAE.
Table 7.12: Model 3 Results JM
Mean Squared Error of SVM:
16.415753020929667
Mean Absolute Error of SVM:
2.9565542388932733
Mean Squared Error of XGB:
16.200601830470315
Mean Absolute Error of XGB:
3.1281129108314625
Table 7.13: Model 3 Results SS
Mean Squared Error of SVM:
17.08456459258316
Mean Absolute Error of SVM:
3.1916796515815027
Mean Squared Error of XGB:
18.69328877103637
Mean Absolute Error of XGB:
3.4237143722958625
Table 7.14: Model 3 Results DN
Mean Squared Error of SVM:
5.324212834163995
Mean Absolute Error of SVM:
1.7947273335719636
Mean Squared Error of XGB:
6.212940632672126
Mean Absolute Error of XGB:
1.9731445268845895
Considering the JM data, the MSE/MAE SVR rates show 16.416 and 2.957, whereas
for the XGB model the MSE, yielded slightly lower, yet slightly higher for the MAE
(3.128). As a comparison, the performances of the two models only indicate a low
to moderate correlation between blood sugar and pulse. For SS, the SVR performed
slightly better with an MSE of 17.085 and an MAE of 3.192, whereas for the XGB the
values demonstrated an MSE/MAE rate of 18.693/3.424. This result indicates that
the model responds better to the SS data and that it seems more suitable, albeit not
showing great prediction results as well. For the DN data both models demonstrated
considerably better performance than JM and SS. For the SVR model, the MSE
shows a value of 5.324, whilst the MAE 1.795. Further for the XGB a slightly higher
MSE of 6.213 were shown, and an MAE of 1.973. This could indicate a stronger
correlation between pulse and glucose for this specific dataset.
==PAGE:63==
7.3 Results & Discussion of Model 3
55
While SVR generally yielded better outcomes, the gap in performance between SVR
and XGB remains insignificant. Although possible hyperparameter tuning could fur-
ther enhance the predictive performance of the models, this would likely result in
marginal improvements. As for the result lies an indication that a large error exists,
emphasizing that pulse alone is not enough to make highly accurate predictions. Here,
other factors, not captured in the dataset could influence not only the pulse but also
the glucose level. Examples could possibly include food consumption, exercise regu-
larity, intra-personal parameters, and physiological differences. The result suggests
that one cannot predict blood sugar from pulse data relevant to sports performance.
At least not with a high degree of confidence.
==PAGE:64==
CHAPTER 8
Conclusion
ML models for people with T1D using sport metrics are both complex and promising.
With respect to the first RQ ”Comparing the performance metrics of the related work,
how does the ANN approach perform? And what might be the reasons for these re-
sults?”. The ANN showed noticeable results when compared with the models from
the related work. The MAE and MSE metrics for the models of the thesis demon-
strated varied, although close, results in terms of prediction precision. To this extent,
for all the data participants, their MAE computed showed slightly to considerably
lower than for the models of comparison, indicating a superior approach when using
the ANN model. Still, the variation of the metrics emphasized the importance of
considering an error tolerance, when predicting values such as glucose levels. This, as
when a larger deviation occurs could have potential consequences, which should not
be underestimated.
Concerning the second model and RQ ”How does SVC/XGB approach perform indi-
vidually and comparatively, and which reasons lie beneath?” the performance result of
the two models demonstrated that the XGB outperforms the SVC for the majority of
the metrics. Causes for this could include class imbalance without the data distribu-
tion, as also shown via the EDA, improper hyperparameter settings, and inaccurate
pulse readings on the wearables due to a potential lack of precision. Additionally, the
empirical data could consist of subjective bias leading to incorrect categorization of
the activities. In this way, it might lead to a potentially poor prediction performance
and cases of misclassifications.
Finally, in response to the third model and RQ ”Evaluating the results of the XG-
B/SVR approach, is it possible to predict blood sugar from pulse when performing
sports - why, why not?” the results showed that the SVR is just barely superior to
the XGB across the different datasets. Meanwhile, both algorithms only showed a
low to moderate correlation between glucose levels and pulse. At least not directly.
From the margin of error, pulse data alone remain inadequate for predictions of blood
sugar values. Explanations for this could be elements such as food intake, exercise
regularity, and intra-personal parameters, both affecting the blood sugar and pulse.
Thereby, concluding that it is not feasible to predict glucose from pulse via the XGB
and SVR algorithm on the data provided.
==PAGE:65==
8 Conclusion
57
The field of ML offers tremendous potential as a tool within the medical field to ease
the management of conditions such as T1D. With its ability to distinguish patterns
in datasets and apply these to untapped areas, ML can possibly facilitate solutions to
the challenges that individuals with T1D meet. The means of an ML model is data.
As stated before, the data collection process was not without challenges, starting with
the facilitation, which took a significant amount of time throughout the line of work.
The process has been turbulent, as it has been diﬀicult to find data and further find
data that could be suitable and as some sort of standard for the models. However,
the models depend on the quality and quantity of data, and in cases of inaccurate
and inadequate data, the model may do more harm than good, particularly in a field
such as this. However, especially in this technical area, tools keep evolving, and the
level of advancement increases, leading to a hope of feasible solutions, on how one
can create ML models for people with T1D using sports metrics with a high degree
of confidence.
==PAGE:66==
CHAPTER 9
Future Work
Whilst the work in the thesis has conducted an in-depth investigation of ML with
relevance to physical exercise and T1D, it has also paved the way for ideas for future
work. As a means of the specific data requirements and thereby a narrow window
for potential data participants, future work would benefit from an expansion of data
collection. This could further lead to a wider range of the participant pool diversify-
ing it in terms of age, activity levels, BMI, etc. Exploring alternative ML algorithms
might demonstrate value, potentially leading to improvements in prediction accuracy.
And as a point investigation, further delve into a classification model again, this time
only predicting between ’Aerob’ and ’Anaerob’ to see if better results would yield. To
enhance the quality of data it could be of interest to collaborate with Steno Hospital,
with the possibility of being provided standardized tools, such as ECGs and sports
areas, to facilitate the frame for a uniform data collection. Upon the results and find-
ings, doing a comprehensive testing of the models to potentially putting the individual
models in production, keeping it learning from subsequent data. Considering these
additional ideas, future works could build upon the existing findings, contributing to
a better understanding of the links between T1D and exercise.
==PAGE:67==
APPENDIX A
Appendix
A.1
Interview (Isabelle)
Spørgsmål: Hvad er din arbejds- og uddannelsesmæssige baggrund?
Svar: ”Jeg hedder Isabelle og jeg er læge. Jeg har lavet PhD på Steno Diabetescenter,
som handlede om tekniske hjælpemidler til personer med diabetes. Derudover har jeg
lavet to kliniske forsøg ift. træning og type-1 diabetes. Det ene af disse drejede sig
om at undersøge, om man kunne bruge andre hormoner til at forebygge lave blodsukre
- her specifikt ift. konditionstræning. Herudover også at se, om hormonet glucagon
bliver påvirket af konditionstræning. Og formålet med dette forsøg var at min kollega,
var igang med at lave en kunstig bugspytkirtel, som indholdt både glukagon og insulin,
så vi forsøgte at undersøge om man kunne bruge informationen for det kliniske forsøg,
for at se, om man kunne bruge glucagonen til at forebygge lave blodsukre og under
langvarigt konditionstræning. Det andet studie var et lidt mere praktisk studie, hvor
vi kiggede på om den minimum mængde sport, på omkring 150 minutters kondition-
stræning om ugen og styrketræning minimum to gange om ugen, som man anbefaler
nationalt. Så jeg tog den her anbefalede mængde af træning og fordelte den på to ses-
sioner om ugen, og på fem sessioner om ugen. Og hertil kiggede jeg på kontinuerlige
blodsukre, og tiden for lave, høje og normale blodsukker værdier for at se om forskel
på det i mængden af hypoglykæmiske tilfælde, men ikke kun under træningen, men
under hele tidsløbet af dagene. Og her fandt jeg ikke nogen statistisk forskel, ift. om
man træner fem gange om ugen eller to gange. Men dét som jeg havde forestillet mig
var, at hvis man træner lidt hver dag, så ville man se en mere stabilt insulinfølsomhed,
og at dette så måske kunne forebygge tilfælde af lave blodsukre. Men dette kunne så
ikke vises i dette studie, men det var også kun et lille studie med 25 testpersoner.
Der skal ret mange mennesker til for at kunne bevise en hypotese. Men i forbindelse
med at jeg lavede det her PhD projekt, så fik jeg også et grant til at tage til Portland,
Oregan og snakke med folk, som lige som dig, læser studier i computer relaterede
engineering. Jeg var der i to måneder, fordi de lavede et klinisk studie med en kunstig
bugspytkirtel, som indeholdt både insulin og glukagon. Og der sad jeg på kontor med
ingenørerne, fordi jeg ikke måtte være klinisk aktiv i forsøget, men til gengæld så
havde de nogle møder hver uge med både klinikere, ingeniører og matematikere, hvor
så her diskuterede den her algoritme ift. hvordan man skulle dosere insulinen, og
algoritmen til dette. Den algoritme som jeg kiggede på, det var til, når man skulle
==PAGE:68==
A.1 Interview (Isabelle)
60
lave en bolus efter træning, ift. hvordan den så skulle se ud. Men her havde vi så ikke
heart rate med. Hertil skal du være opmærksom på at heart rate er påvirket af andre
ting end træning, som andre hormoner. Og det er ikke sikkert at det er en indikation
på om det er konditionstræning eller styrketræning. For det er i virkeligheden det,
du skal specificerer - om det aerob eller anaerob træning. Fordi det er hovedsageligt
anerob træning som giver den her hormon respons, som gør at blodsukkeret bliver højt.”
Spørgsmål: Hvordan påvirker sport blodsukkeret generelt?
Svar: ”Jamen det kommer an på hvilken sport det er, og hvilket type sport, man ud-
fører. Hvis man tager konditionstræning generelt så en person som ikke har diabetes
træner denne type sport, så for han eller hun, så sker der det, at insulinen i kroppen
den mindskes og glugakonen stiger. Og derfor holdes deres blodsukker helt stabilt, når
han eller hun træner. Og for en person som ikke har diabetes, så opstår der et signal
inde i cellerne, som gør at der udskilles nogle glu4 receptoner i cellelaget, som er dét
som insulinen får. Så når insulin påvirkerne cellerne, så hjælper det til at “dørerne
åbnes”, som er dét, som man plejer at sige. Konditionstræning gør også at disse døre
åbnes. Der er en artikel, som forklarer fysiologien rigtig godt ift dette koncept. Men
den artikel forklarer rigtig fint, hvordan fysiologien fungerer som person, der ikke har
diabetes og en person som har diabetes. Generelt, så kan man sige meget simpelt at
konditionstræning og insulinfølsomhed både under træning og efter træning, og det
er tit sådan at det tager omkring 40 minutter, og så bliver man lav medmindre man
spiser kulhydrater. Og det er hvis man løber, specielt om eftermiddagen. Til gengæld
hvis man løber inden morgenmaden, så har man typisk så meget hormon i kroppen,
cortisol, som gør at man skal vågne om morgenen, som også påvirker blodsukkeret.
Det er derfor mange ikke oplever det her fald om morgenen. Altså hvis de kondition-
stræner inden morgenmaden.”
Spørgsmål: Er der ofte et specifik timeslot for hvornår dette gør sig gældende?
Svar: ”Det findes der ingen evidens for, men min egen erfaring både som læge og
som type-1 diabetiker siger mig er indtil kl 9 ca. Men det kommer meget an på, hvad
tid man vågner.”
Spørgsmål: Påvirker sport blodsukkeret på samme vis hos folk uden diabetes, som
folk med diabetes?
Svar: ”Jamen forskelle fra personer med og uden diabetes, det er at folk med diabetes
kan ikke selv nedregulerer insulinen, fordi man giver insulinen via pumpe eller pen.
Derudover så har personer med diabetes en nedsat glukagon respons, og det gælder
ikke kun ift. sport, men faktisk hele tiden. Og det er faktisk ret spændende. Og en
anden ting som sker hos folk med diabetes er, som jeg også så i mine egne studier, det
er at insulinen som man har taget, som man har taget inden træner, der “opfører” sig
faktisk bedre efter selve træningen, hvilket er meget besværet, fordi så virker insulinen
==PAGE:69==
A.1 Interview (Isabelle)
61
faktisk bedre, mens man træner, pga ens blood flow der forstærkes. I mine studier,
der fik vi folk til at cykle på motionscykler, hvor både glukagon og insulin var givet.
Og der kunne man ser hvordan stigningen og faldet skete, hvilket jeg synes, var ret
sjovt. Men det er simpelthen sådan at sporten påvirker ift optagelsen.”
Spørgsmål: Ift de grupperinger, man laver indenfor sport, kan du forklarer lidt om
dem?
Svar: ”Så der findes anaerob og aerob træning, som er nemmest at definere. Det er
dem, som man plejer at inddele i. Og der sporten bruger ilt eller ikke gør ved selve
træningen, eller om det er en kombination af de to. Typisk er konditionstræning eller
aerob træning er sådan noget som at gå, cykle, løber i moderat tempo, og her falder
blodsukkeret. Anaerob træning er klassisk set, når man bruger vægte. Og hvis man
så tager noget som f.eks. tennis og sport hvor et element af konkurrence indgår, hvor
man bliver stresset, fordi man skal vinde noget, hvilket også giver en hormonrespons
[Ift kombineret sport]. Og så har man også sport hvor der er kombination af styrke
og sprint [igen ift kombineret sport]. Ved sprint kan blodsukkeret nogle gange gå op i
stedet [og blive anaerob].”
Spørgsmål: Er disse grupperinger et skøn?
Svar: ”Ja, det er skøn.”
Spørgsmål: Kan du give nogle eksempler på de sidste to grupperinger?
Svar: ”Løb er kondition, Fitness er kombineret, klatring er kombineret, hvis jeg
skulle gætte. Hvis man f.eks. bliver bange under klatring eller stresset, så kan det
give forskellige effekter. F.eks. hvis du får meget hjertebanken, når du bliver stresset
eller får angst, som kan påvirke udviklingen af stresshormon og dermed blodsukkeret.
Kickboxing og boxing er kombineret.”
Spørgsmål: Hvad er det så hvad der påvirker blodsukkeret under sport?
Svar: ”Det er mange hormoner som påvirker blodsukkeret under sport.
Det er
adrenalin, cortisol, glucagon og insulin. Så alle disse hormoner påvirker blodsukkeret,
det er ikke kun insulin og glukagon. Det er jo dét, som oftes tænkes. Men man prøver
jo at gøre det simpelt for patienter. Men ja, kortisol og adrenalin gør også. Det er
rigtig mange ting.”
Spørgsmål: Hvordan er adrenalin og puls relateret til hinanden?
Svar: “Jamen, altså - højere adrenalin, højere pulse. Altså adrenalin er et stress
hormon og de hænger jo sammen.”
==PAGE:70==
A.2 Interview (DN)
62
A.2
Interview (DN)
Spørgsmål: Fortæl mig om de forskellige typer sport som du typer ind på dit ur. Der
er dem, der hedder walk, outdoor biking, bike, run, sport og aerobic works og elliptical
Svar: ”Okay, ja. Så den der hedder walk er bare for de gåture, jeg går på sådan helt
generelt.”
Spørgsmål:Og det er generelt bare i et normalt og roligt tempo?
Svar: ”Ja. Og outdoor biking er også bare, når jeg skal fra a til b, da jeg sjældent
tager bussen”
Spørgsmål: Det er igen i et normalt tempo?
Svar: ”Ja.”
Spørgsmål: Men hvordan fungerer det så med typen ‘Bike’?
Svar: ”Jamen det er mens, jeg er i fitness world og det er sådan cross-biking, og
sådan en slags ræs. Ofte er det i sådan nogle fitness klasser eller hold.”
Spørgsmål: Og ift. run er det så i hurtigt eller moderat tempo?
Svar: ”Det er i et relativt hurtigt tempo altid.”
Spørgsmål: Okay. Kan du fortælle mig om de sidste så, sport, aerobic og elliptical?
Svar: ”Yes, så sport er faktisk klatring, underligt nok. aerobic er veksling mellem
cardio og styrke.”
Spørgsmål: Okay, så a la HIIT?
Svar: ”Ja, lige præcis. Og elliptical er sådan min egen private HIIT exercise, hvor
jeg igen skifter mellem body weight træning og cardio.”
==PAGE:71==
A.3 Interview (SS)
63
A.3
Interview (SS)
Spørgsmål: Fortæl mig om de forskellige typer sport som du typer ind på dit ur.
Her har du har nogle sportsgrene, som er typet ind - her vil jeg gerne lige forhøre mig
om, hvad de går ud på.
Svar: ”Okay, selvfølgelig.”
Spørgsmål: Så f.eks. så har du ‘walking, running, cycling, mixed cardio, elliptical,
functional training, yoga, climbing, kickboxing, og HIIT. Så lad os starte med walk
og running. Hvordan forløber de sportsgrene?
Svar: ”Jamen det er bare sådan helt normal cykling og løb, tænker jeg.”
Spørgsmål: Kan du sige mere om hvordan tempoet er?
Svar: ”Det er meget stille og roligt. Især med løb. Jeg er ikke den store løber. Så
derfor løber jeg sjældent langt. Så når jeg er på løbebåndet, så får jeg ligesom det
meste ud af det og løber til. Hvis det er længere distancer, sådan mere en 5 kilometer,
så skifter jeg meget i mellem tempoet og tager det med ro. Og cykling er bare ganske
normal cykling.”
Spørgsmål: Okay. Og hvordan er så mixed cardio?
Svar: ”Jamen det er bare, hvad skal man sige, lidt veksling mellem gå og løb. Ikke
noget voldsomt.”
Spørgsmål: Kan du forklare mig om functional og yoga - yoga måske være roligt,
eller hvordan?
Svar: ”Nej, det yoga, jeg går til slår mig faktisk nærmest halvt ihjel fordi det er meget
med at svede og bruge kroppen som redskab. Det er sådan noget sweat yoga af en art.
Functional training er krops og frivægtstræning for mig.”
Spørgsmål: Okay. Og så med hensyn til climbing og kickboxing og HIIT, hvordan
er det i intensity. Her tænker jeg på, om du bliver nervøs og meget “kampklar” af
det, sådan og om der er sådan skift imellem intensiteten?
Svar: ”Kickbox er sådan på hold og der er man jo meget op og kører og sådan halv-
konkurrerende. Klatring, som du så, da jeg støtte på mig, er jo meget skiftende. Nogle
gange står man jo lidt bare og venter eller tager nogle nemme ruter, og andre gange
ender man med at kaste sig efter de holds, der er.”
==PAGE:72==
A.4 Self-Reflection (JM)
64
Spørgsmål: Ja, det kender jeg godt til. Og HIIT ville du sige er det er sådan helt
klassisk HIIT?
Svar: ”Ja, det vil jeg sige.”
A.4
Self-Reflection (JM)
Note, that the same questions have been answered but only in writing. Spørgsmål:
Fortæl mig om de forskellige typer sport som du bruger på dit ur.
Svar: ”Jeg træner mange forskellige typer af sports. Ift. aerob, hører gang og løb
inde. Men ift til løb, tager jeg sjældent lange ture, og løber korte men meget hurtige
ture på en 2km af gangen.
Er det længere ture, så skal jeg op over 5km, før jeg
begynder at blive træt og skifte i mit tempo.”
Spørgsmål: Hvad med ift anaerob?
Svar: ”For anaerob træner med sjældent med vægte, men kun kropsvægt. Det er dog
sjældent, jeg træner den slags sport. Grunden for at sætte cykling som anaerob, er
da jeg altid kører meget stærkt på cykel.”
Svar: ”Det er meget stille og roligt. Især med løb. Jeg er ikke den store løber. Så
derfor løber jeg sjældent langt. Så når jeg er på løbebåndet, så får jeg ligesom det
meste ud af det og løber til. Hvis det er længere distancer, sådan mere en 5 kilometer,
så skifter jeg meget i mellem tempoet og tager det med ro. Og cykling er bare ganske
normal cykling. For functional træning drejer det sig om kropsvægt igen. For HIIT
derimod, så synes jeg sjældent at det HIIT, jeg har foretaget har været meget cardio
orienteret. Men mest et skift af forskellige øvelser. For yoga, som jeg meget sjældent
har praktiseret, så har det været flow yoga, som efter min bedømmelse hurtigt komme
til at føle som kropsvægt træning ift hvordan kroppen bruges. ”
Spørgsmål: Hvad omhandler combined?
Svar: ”Jeg træner en del kombineret sport. Og det er ofte meget længe tid af gangen.
Jeg har lavet meget rebklatring, og det er tit en lang affære. Det er faktisk den sport,
som har været det største problem for mig ift blodsukkersvingninger. Mit blodsukker
er meget tit blevet højt, og jeg er nemt blevet stresset, fordi man klatrer 10 meter op,
og hvis man falder kan det godt gøre ondt. I forbindelse med kickboksning, vil jeg
også sige dette er en kombineret sport, fordi pulsen kører op mens jeg bokser mod min
kæreste og andre.”
==PAGE:73==
A.5 Pulse Patterns (Model 1)
65
A.5
Pulse Patterns (Model 1)
Figure A.1: Glucose Pattern while exercising JM
Figure A.2: Glucose Pattern while exercising SS
==PAGE:74==
A.6 Model 1 Results (JM)
66
Figure A.3: Glucose Pattern while exercising DN
A.6
Model 1 Results (JM)
Note that the printed results may vary slightly from each time running the code.
==PAGE:75==
A.6 Model 1 Results (JM)
67
Date
Predicted Glucose
True_Glucose
2022-11-27 09:30:00+00:00
6.301844
6.938431
2022-11-27 09:35:00+00:00
7.138791
6.605386
2022-11-27 09:40:00+00:00
6.854380
5.939297
2022-11-27 09:45:00+00:00
5.924377
5.994805
2022-11-27 09:50:00+00:00
6.069866
5.495237
2022-11-27 09:55:00+00:00
5.544708
5.273208
2022-11-27 10:00:00+00:00
5.315650
5.328715
2022-11-27 10:05:00+00:00
5.491423
7.771043
2022-11-27 10:10:00+00:00
8.581333
7.660028
2022-11-27 10:15:00+00:00
8.285322
7.715535
2022-11-27 10:20:00+00:00
8.018725
7.660028
2022-11-27 10:25:00+00:00
7.864310
7.882058
2022-11-27 10:30:00+00:00
8.190592
8.381625
2022-11-27 10:35:00+00:00
8.814884
8.770177
2022-11-27 10:40:00+00:00
9.274899
8.936699
2022-11-27 10:45:00+00:00
9.324439
8.215102
2022-11-27 10:50:00+00:00
8.329937
7.549013
2022-11-27 10:55:00+00:00
7.505749
6.993939
2022-11-27 11:00:00+00:00
6.914934
6.494372
2022-11-27 11:05:00+00:00
6.406057
5.828282
2022-11-27 11:10:00+00:00
5.732324
5.162193
2022-11-27 11:15:00+00:00
5.095629
4.218566
2022-11-27 11:20:00+00:00
4.108786
3.496969
2022-11-27 11:25:00+00:00
3.484237
2.886387
2022-11-27 11:30:00+00:00
2.982280
3.163925
2022-11-27 11:35:00+00:00
3.239847
4.218566
2022-11-27 11:40:00+00:00
4.705798
4.607118
2022-11-27 11:45:00+00:00
5.091246
6.216834
2022-11-27 11:50:00+00:00
6.878117
6.882924
2022-11-27 11:55:00+00:00
7.507763
7.104953
2022-11-27 12:00:00+00:00
7.543825
6.771909
2022-11-27 12:05:00+00:00
7.001979
5.772775
2022-11-27 12:10:00+00:00
5.892036
5.994805
2022-11-27 12:15:00+00:00
6.169318
6.161327
2022-11-27 12:20:00+00:00
6.548861
7.437998
2022-11-27 12:25:00+00:00
8.151901
7.993073
2022-11-27 12:30:00+00:00
8.688551
8.159595
2022-11-27 12:35:00+00:00
8.648343
7.271476
2022-11-27 12:40:00+00:00
7.375850
6.383357
2022-11-27 12:45:00+00:00
6.301844
6.938431
2022-11-27 12:50:00+00:00
7.138791
6.605386
2022-11-27 12:55:00+00:00
6.854380
5.939297
2022-11-27 13:00:00+00:00
5.924377
5.994805
==PAGE:76==
A.6 Model 1 Results (JM)
68
==PAGE:77==
A.7 Model 1 Results (SS)
69
A.7
Model 1 Results (SS)
Date
Predicted Glucose
True_Glucose
2022-06-30 09:04:00+00:00
4.069461
4.329581
2022-06-30 09:09:00+00:00
3.818074
4.107551
2022-06-30 09:14:00+00:00
3.702550
4.107551
2022-06-30 09:19:00+00:00
3.757594
4.107551
2022-06-30 09:24:00+00:00
3.844612
3.996536
2022-06-30 09:29:00+00:00
3.801467
3.996536
2022-06-30 09:34:00+00:00
3.858033
3.830014
2022-06-30 09:39:00+00:00
3.722103
3.718999
2022-06-30 09:44:00+00:00
3.598763
3.552477
2022-06-30 09:49:00+00:00
3.403771
3.441462
2022-06-30 09:54:00+00:00
3.251153
3.441462
2022-06-30 09:59:00+00:00
3.259145
3.330447
2022-06-30 10:04:00+00:00
3.172507
3.441462
2022-06-30 10:09:00+00:00
3.279604
3.496969
2022-06-30 10:14:00+00:00
3.391330
3.552477
2022-06-30 10:19:00+00:00
3.467996
3.718999
2022-06-30 10:24:00+00:00
3.669055
7.215968
2022-06-30 10:29:00+00:00
7.388004
6.438864
2022-06-30 10:34:00+00:00
6.493431
5.384223
2022-06-30 10:39:00+00:00
4.887175
4.496103
2022-06-30 10:44:00+00:00
3.831607
4.274074
2022-06-30 10:49:00+00:00
3.843140
4.385088
2022-06-30 10:54:00+00:00
4.142528
5.384223
2022-06-30 10:59:00+00:00
5.430606
6.660894
2022-06-30 11:04:00+00:00
6.837592
7.549013
2022-06-30 11:09:00+00:00
7.646403
7.882058
2022-06-30 11:14:00+00:00
7.944986
7.549013
2022-06-30 11:19:00+00:00
7.440540
6.605386
2022-06-30 11:24:00+00:00
6.143757
5.384223
2022-06-30 11:29:00+00:00
4.739451
4.662626
2022-06-30 11:34:00+00:00
4.232503
4.329581
2022-06-30 11:39:00+00:00
3.953073
4.107551
2022-06-30 11:44:00+00:00
3.719620
4.107551
2022-06-30 11:49:00+00:00
3.746078
4.107551
2022-06-30 11:54:00+00:00
3.831681
3.996536
2022-06-30 11:59:00+00:00
3.829840
3.996536
2022-06-30 12:04:00+00:00
3.850235
3.830014
2022-06-30 12:09:00+00:00
3.722103
3.718999
2022-06-30 12:14:00+00:00
3.598763
3.552477
2022-06-30 12:19:00+00:00
3.403771
3.441462
2022-06-30 12:24:00+00:00
3.251153
3.441462
==PAGE:78==
A.7 Model 1 Results (SS)
70
==PAGE:79==
A.8 Model 1 Results (DN)
71
A.8
Model 1 Results (DN)
Date
Predicted Glucose
True_Glucose
2022-12-21 17:44:03+00:00
5.793153
5.6
2022-12-21 17:49:03+00:00
6.007875
8.8
2022-12-21 17:54:03+00:00
9.524032
9.0
2022-12-21 17:59:03+00:00
9.788911
8.8
2022-12-21 18:04:03+00:00
9.322846
8.4
2022-12-21 18:09:03+00:00
8.670146
7.9
2022-12-21 18:14:03+00:00
8.013773
7.2
2022-12-21 18:19:03+00:00
7.252235
6.8
2022-12-21 18:24:03+00:00
6.854295
6.5
2022-12-21 18:29:03+00:00
6.566172
6.3
2022-12-21 18:34:03+00:00
6.416701
5.9
2022-12-21 18:39:03+00:00
5.988725
5.8
2022-12-21 18:44:03+00:00
5.937706
6.1
2022-12-21 18:49:03+00:00
6.368612
6.3
2022-12-21 18:54:03+00:00
6.632303
6.6
2022-12-21 18:59:03+00:00
6.978062
6.9
2022-12-21 19:04:03+00:00
7.296808
7.1
2022-12-21 19:09:03+00:00
7.502999
6.9
2022-12-21 19:14:03+00:00
7.197891
6.7
2022-12-21 19:19:03+00:00
6.908907
6.2
2022-12-21 19:24:03+00:00
6.327367
5.6
2022-12-21 19:29:03+00:00
5.633387
5.2
2022-12-21 19:34:03+00:00
5.136522
5.0
2022-12-21 19:39:03+00:00
4.980287
4.9
2022-12-21 19:44:03+00:00
4.954207
4.9
2022-12-21 19:49:03+00:00
5.034555
4.9
2022-12-21 19:54:03+00:00
5.086842
4.8
2022-12-21 19:59:03+00:00
5.007513
4.6
2022-12-21 20:04:03+00:00
4.799414
4.4
2022-12-21 20:09:03+00:00
4.586981
4.4
2022-12-21 20:14:03+00:00
4.619828
4.6
2022-12-21 20:19:03+00:00
4.876286
4.9
2022-12-21 20:24:03+00:00
5.231724
5.1
2022-12-21 20:29:03+00:00
5.438046
5.1
2022-12-21 20:34:03+00:00
5.394770
4.9
2022-12-21 20:39:03+00:00
5.116278
4.7
2022-12-21 20:44:03+00:00
4.863598
4.6
2022-12-21 20:49:03+00:00
4.765473
4.5
2022-12-21 20:54:03+00:00
4.685007
4.6
2022-12-21 20:59:03+00:00
4.829488
4.6
2022-12-21 21:04:03+00:00
4.856586
4.7
2022-12-21 21:09:03+00:00
4.978047
4.8
2022-12-21 21:14:03+00:00
5.099864
5.0
==PAGE:80==
A.9 Model 2 Results
72
A.9
Model 2 Results
Figure A.4: SVM Confusion Matrix (JM)
Figure A.5: XGM Confusion Matrix (JM)
==PAGE:81==
A.9 Model 2 Results
73
Figure A.6: SVM Confusion Matrix (SS)
Figure A.7: XGB Confusion Matrix (SS)
==PAGE:82==
A.9 Model 2 Results
74
Figure A.8: SVM Confusion Matrix (DN)
Figure A.9: XGB Confusion Matrix (DN)
==PAGE:83==
Bibliography
Andersen, Nina Bjerglund (2021a). Højt blodsukker og type 1-diabetes - videncenter-
fordiabetes.dk. [Accessed 20-Nov-2022]. url: https://videncenterfordiabetes.
dk/viden-om-diabetes/type-1-diabetes/behandling/blodsukker/hoejt-
blodsukker#forebyggelse-fb.
— (2021b). Insulin og type 1-diabetes - videncenterfordiabetes.dk. [Accessed 20-Nov-
2022]. url: https://videncenterfordiabetes.dk/viden-om-diabetes/type-
1-diabetes/behandling/insulin.
— (2021c). Lavt blodsukker og type 1-diabetes - videncenterfordiabetes.dk. [Accessed
20-Nov-2022]. url: https://videncenterfordiabetes.dk/viden-om-diabetes/
type-1-diabetes/behandling/blodsukker/lavt-blodsukker#unawareness-
f4.
— (2023a). Blodsukker og type 1-diabetes - videncenterfordiabetes.dk. [Accessed May-
2023]. url: https://videncenterfordiabetes.dk/viden-om-diabetes/type-
1-diabetes/behandling/blodsukker.
— (2023b). Inddeling af kulhydrater - videncenterfordiabetes.dk. [Accessed May-2023].
url: https://videncenterfordiabetes.dk/livet-med-diabetes/hverdagen/
mad-og-drikke/inddeling-af-kulhydrater#hvad-er-glykaemisk-indeks-
gi--1d.
Andrychowicz, Marcin et al. (2016). Learning to learn by gradient descent by gradient
descent. doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.1606.04474. url: https://arxiv.org/abs/
1606.04474.
Association, American Diabetes (Dec. 2019). “2. Classification and Diagnosis of Dia-
betes: Standards of Medical Care in Diabetes—2020.” In: Diabetes Care 43.Supple-
ment_1, S14–S31. doi: 10.2337/dc20-s002. url: https://doi.org/10.2337/
dc20-s002.
— (Dec. 2021). “Professional Practice Committee: Standards of Medical Care in
Diabetes-2022.” In: Diabetes Care 45.Supplement_1, S3–S3. doi: 10.2337/dc22-
sppc. url: https://doi.org/10.2337/dc22-sppc.
Brownlee, Jason (2016). How to Develop Your First XGBoost Model in Python -
Machine Learning Mastery
. [Accessed Oct-2022]. url: https://machinelearningmastery.com/develop-
first-xgboost-model-python-scikit-learn/.
— (2019a). [Accessed Oct-2022]. url: https://machinelearningmastery.com/get-
your-hands-dirty-with-scikit-learn-now/.
==PAGE:84==
Bibliography
76
Brownlee, Jason (2019b). How to Configure the Number of Layers and Nodes in a
Neural Network - Machine Learning Mastery. [Accessed 03-Jun-2023]. url: https:
//machinelearningmastery.com/how-to-configure-the-number-of-layers-
and-nodes-in-a-neural-network/.
— (2022). Your First Deep Learning Project in Python with Keras
Step-by-Step - Machine Learning Mastery. [Accessed Oct-2022]. url: https://
machinelearningmastery.com/tutorial- first- neural- network- python-
keras/.
Choi, Rene Y et al. (Feb. 2020). “Introduction to machine learning, neural networks,
and deep learning.” en. In: Transl. Vis. Sci. Technol. 9.2, p. 14.
Chugh, Aakarsha (2023). Label Encoding in Python - Geeksforgeeks.org. [Accessed
05-Jun-2023]. url: https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/ml-label-encoding-of-
datasets-in-python/.
Church, Timothy S. et al. (Jan. 2004). “Exercise Capacity and Body Composition
as Predictors of Mortality Among Men With Diabetes.” In: Diabetes Care 27.1,
pp. 83–88. doi: 10.2337/diacare.27.1.83. url: https://doi.org/10.2337/
diacare.27.1.83.
Colberg, Sheri R. et al. (Oct. 2016). “Physical Activity/Exercise and Diabetes: A
Position Statement of the American Diabetes Association.” In: Diabetes Care 39.11,
pp. 2065–2079. doi: 10.2337/dc16-1728. url: https://doi.org/10.2337/dc16-
1728.
Cornejo, Corinna (2022). 10 Best Lancing Devices for 2023 - Healthline. [Accessed
31-May-2023]. url: https://www.healthline.com/diabetesmine/ten-top-
diabetes-lancing-devices#takeaway.
Denes-Fazakas, Lehel et al. (Nov. 2020). “Detection of physical activity using machine
learning methods.” In: 2020 IEEE 20th International Symposium on Computa-
tional Intelligence and Informatics (CINTI). IEEE. doi: 10.1109/cinti51262.
2020.9305845. url: https://doi.org/10.1109/cinti51262.2020.9305845.
Didyuk, Olesya et al. (Jan. 2020). “Continuous Glucose Monitoring Devices: Past,
Present, and Future Focus on the History and Evolution of Technological Innova-
tion.” In: Journal of Diabetes Science and Technology 15.3, pp. 676–683. doi: 10.
1177/1932296819899394. url: https://doi.org/10.1177/1932296819899394.
Fan, Cheng et al. (Mar. 2021). “A Review on Data Preprocessing Techniques Toward
Eﬀicient and Reliable Knowledge Discovery From Building Operational Data.”
In: Frontiers in Energy Research 9. doi: 10.3389/fenrg.2021.652801. url:
https://doi.org/10.3389/fenrg.2021.652801.
Indragandhi, V. et al. (Nov. 2021). “Bimodal Insulin Delivery System Using Internet
of Things and Machine Learning Approach.” In: 2021 Innovations in Power and
Advanced Computing Technologies (i-PACT). IEEE. doi: 10.1109/i-pact52855.
2021.9696619. url: https://doi.org/10.1109/i-pact52855.2021.9696619.
Indrakumari, R., T. Poongodi, and Kiran Singh (2021). “Introduction to Deep Learn-
ing.” In: pp. 1–22. doi: 10.1007/978-3-030-66519-7_1. url: https://doi.
org/10.1007/978-3-030-66519-7_1.
==PAGE:85==
Bibliography
77
Keany, Eoghan (2020). What makes “XGBoost” so Extreme? - Medium.com. [Ac-
cessed May-2023]. url: https://medium.com/analytics-vidhya/what-makes-
xgboost-so-extreme-e1544a4433bb.
Kesavadev, Jothydev et al. (May 2020). “Evolution of Insulin Delivery Devices: From
Syringes, Pens, and Pumps to DIY Artificial Pancreas.” In: Diabetes Therapy 11.6,
pp. 1251–1269. doi: 10.1007/s13300-020-00831-z. url: https://doi.org/10.
1007/s13300-020-00831-z.
Kumar, Ajitesh (2022). Sklearn SimpleImputer Example – Impute Missing Data - Vi-
talflux. [Accessed Oct-2022]. url: https://vitalflux.com/imputing-missing-
data-sklearn-simpleimputer/.
Kumar, Naresh (2019a). Advantages and Disadvantages of SVM (Support Vector Ma-
chine) in Machine Learning - The Professionals Point. [Accessed 17-May-2023].
url: http://theprofessionalspoint.blogspot.com/2019/03/advantages-
and-disadvantages-of-svm.html.
— (2019b). Advantages of XGBoost Algorithm in Machine Learning - The Profes-
sionals Point. [Accessed 17-May-2023]. url: http://theprofessionalspoint.
blogspot.com/2019/03/advantages-of-xgboost-algorithm-in.html.
Mahanta, Jahnavi (2017). Introduction to Neural Networks, Advantages and Appli-
cations - Medium. [Accessed 17-May-2023]. url: https://towardsdatascience.
com/introduction- to- neural- networks- advantages- and- applications-
96851bd1a207.
MLCheetSheet (2017). Activation Functions - ML-Cheatsheet. [Accessed 25-May-2023].
url: https://ml- cheatsheet.readthedocs.io/en/latest/activation_
functions.html.
Montaño Moreno, Juan J, Alfonso Palmer Pol, and Pilar Muñoz Gracia (Apr. 2011).
“Artificial neural networks applied to forecasting time series.” en. In: Psicothema
23.2, pp. 322–329. url: https://www.psicothema.com/pdf/3889.pdf.
Moroney, Laurence (2019). Sequences, Time Series and Prediction. [Accessed Oct-
2022]. url: https://www.coursera.org/learn/tensorflow-sequences-time-
series-and-prediction?specialization=tensorflow-in-practice.
Nelson, Benjamin W and Nicholas B Allen (Mar. 2019). “Accuracy of Consumer
Wearable Heart Rate Measurement During an Ecologically Valid 24-Hour Period:
Intraindividual Validation Study.” In: JMIR mHealth and uHealth 7.3, e10828. doi:
10.2196/10828. url: https://doi.org/10.2196/10828.
O’Boyle, Britta (2021). Apple Health app and HealthKit: What are they and how do
they work? - Pocket-lint.com. [Accessed 20-May-2023]. url: https://www.pocket-
lint.com/apps/news/apple/131130-apple-healthkit-and-health-app-how-
they-work-and-the-medical-records-you-need/.
Pramoditha, Rukshan (2022). Classification of Neural Network Hyperparameters -
Medium. [Accessed 17-May-2023]. url: https : / / towardsdatascience . com /
classification-of-neural-network-hyperparameters-c7991b6937c3.
Rad, J.A., K. Parand, and S. Chakraverty (2023). Learning with Fractional Orthog-
onal Kernel Classifiers in Support Vector Machines: Theory, Algorithms and Ap-
==PAGE:86==
Bibliography
78
plications. Industrial and Applied Mathematics. Springer Nature Singapore. isbn:
9789811965524. url: https://books.google.dk/books?id=569NzwEACAAJ.
Rajkomar, Alvin et al. (May 2018). “Scalable and accurate deep learning with elec-
tronic health records.” In: npj Digital Medicine 1.1. doi: 10.1038/s41746-018-
0029-1. url: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41746-018-0029-1.
Raschka Sebastian, Mirjalili Vahid (2019). 1.2.1.2 Regression for Predicting Continu-
ous Outcomes. url: https://app.knovel.com/hotlink/khtml/id:kt012E3XL3/
python-machine-learning/regression-predicting.
Riddell, Michael and Bruce A. Perkins (July 2009). “Exercise and Glucose Metabolism
in Persons with Diabetes Mellitus: Perspectives on the Role for Continuous Glu-
cose Monitoring.” In: Journal of Diabetes Science and Technology 3.4, pp. 914–
923. doi: 10.1177/193229680900300439. url: https://doi.org/10.1177/
193229680900300439.
Riddell, Michael C et al. (May 2017). “Exercise management in type 1 diabetes: a
consensus statement.” In: The Lancet Diabetes &amp Endocrinology 5.5, pp. 377–
390. doi: 10.1016/s2213-8587(17)30014-1. url: https://doi.org/10.1016/
s2213-8587(17)30014-1.
Roy, Swarup et al. (2019). “Pre-Processing: A Data Preparation Step.” In: Encyclo-
pedia of Bioinformatics and Computational Biology. Elsevier, pp. 463–471. doi:
10.1016/b978-0-12-809633-8.20457-3. url: https://doi.org/10.1016/
b978-0-12-809633-8.20457-3.
Ruder, Sebastian (2016). “An overview of gradient descent optimization algorithms.”
In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1609.04747. url: https://arxiv.org/pdf/1609.04747.
pdf.
Shameer, Khader et al. (Feb. 2016). “Translational bioinformatics in the era of real-
time biomedical, health care and wellness data streams.” In: Briefings in Bioin-
formatics 18.1, pp. 105–124. doi: 10.1093/bib/bbv118. url: https://doi.org/
10.1093/bib/bbv118.
Torpy, Janet M., Alison E. Burke, and Richard M. Glass (July 2007). “Acute Emo-
tional Stress and the Heart.” In: JAMA 298.3, p. 360. doi: 10.1001/jama.286.3.
374. url: https://doi.org/10.1001/jama.286.3.374.
Tyler, Nichole S et al. (2022). “Quantifying the impact of physical activity on future
glucose trends using machine learning.” In: Iscience 25.3, p. 103888. url: https:
//www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2589004222001584.
Xiong, Xiong et al. (May 2022). “A Short-Term Wind Power Forecast Method via
XGBoost Hyper-Parameters Optimization.” In: Frontiers in Energy Research 10.
doi: 10.3389/fenrg.2022.905155. url: https://doi.org/10.3389/fenrg.
2022.905155.
