==PAGE:1==
DTU Wind
Overcurrent in high temperature 
superconducting tapes for a power cable 
application
Olfert Joakim Holte 
DTU Wind-M-0588 
May 2023
==PAGE:2==
DTU Wind-M-0588 
May 2023
Project period: 
August 2022 - May 2023
ECTS: 35
Education: Master of Science
Supervisor(s):
Asger Bech Abrahamsen
DTU Wind and Energy Systems
Dag Willén
NKT Cable Group A/S
Remarks:
This report is submitted as partial 
fulfillment of the requirements for 
graduation in the above education at the 
Technical University of Denmark.
Technical University of Denmark 
Department of Wind and Energy 
Systems Frederiksborgvej 399
DK-4000 Roskilde
www.wind.dtu.dk
Author: Olfert Joakim Holte
Title:
Overcurrent in high temperature superconducting 
tapes for a power cable application
DTU Wind and Energy Systems is a department of the 
Technical University of Denmark with a unique 
integration of research, education, innovation and 
public/private sector consulting in the field of wind and 
energy. Our activities develop new opportunities and 
technology for the global and Danish exploitation of 
wind and energy. Research focuses on key technical-
scientific fields, which are central for the development, 
innovation and use of wind energy and provides the 
basis for advanced education.
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
As energy demands rise the sustainable use of resources is becoming a more crucial
part of the world. Therefore, the need for new, more energy-efficient, and low-resource-
consuming technologies is rising. One of these technologies is the use of special materials
called superconductors. Especially the high-temperature superconductors are becoming
more attractive in several applications. One such application is power cable technology
for electricity grid appliances.
In this project, a measurement device is designed to test and measure characteristic pa-
rameters of a superconductor type called coated conductor tape at different temperatures
near its critical temperature. The measurement device is used to investigate how the
coated conductor tape behaves in overcurrent at different temperatures in an existing
cryostat. The test device developed in this thesis is designed to have a uniform tem-
perature profile over the sample and to measure the potential drop and current over two
segments of the same tape using a 4-point probe. An initial experiment in liquid nitrogen
assessed and tested the measurement devices connected to the superconductors. The
measurement device temperature is estimated using a 3D numerical model in COMSOL
Multiphysics 6.0 to ensure the sample are at a uniform temperature.
According to experimental findings, when the characteristic current is exceeded by a spe-
cific size, a rapid self-enhancing growth in temperature is observed. Results also indicate
that a simple 1D model can estimate the behavior of the coated conductor tapes transi-
tioning to a normal conducting state quite well.
Due to the degradation of the coated conductor tape used, the results could not be repli-
cated. Future work should therefore include new experiments to investigate the specific
amount further and investigate whether the 1D model and a numerical 3D model could
estimate the overcurrent at which the rapid self-enhancing temperature runaway starts.
ii
Overcurrent in high temperature superconducting tapes for power cable applications
==PAGE:4==
Resumé
I takt med at energibehovet stiger, bliver bæredygtig udnyttelse af ressourcerne en mere
afgørende faktor for verden. Derfor stiger behovet for nye, mere energieffektive og ressourcebe-
sparende teknologier. En af disse teknologier er brugen af særlige materialer kaldet su-
perledere. Især høj temperatur superledere bliver mere og mere attraktive i flere anven-
delser. En af disse anvendelser er i strømkabel teknologi til elnettet.
I dette projekt er der konstrueret en måleanordning til at teste og måle de karakteristiske
parametre for et høj temperature superleder bånd, ved forskellige temperaturer tæt på
den kritiske temperatur. Måleapparatet anvendes til at undersøge, hvordan det belagte
superleder bånd opfører sig i overstrøm ved forskellige temperaturer i en eksisterende
kryostat.
Måleudviklingen er konstrueret til at have en ensartet temperaturprofil over
en bånd prøve og at måle det elektriske potentiale og strøm over to segmenter af det
samme bånd ved hjælp af en 4-punkts sonde. Ved et indledende forsøg i flydende nitro-
gen blev måleudstyrets forbindelse til superleder båndet afprøvet og vurderet funktionelt.
Måleanordningens temperatur er vurderet ved hjælp af en numerisk 3D-model i COMSOL
Multiphysics 6.0 for at sikre, at prøven har en ensartet temperatur.
Ifølge de eksperimentelle resultater observeres der en hurtig selvforstærkende temper-
aturvækst, når den karakteristiske strøm overskrides ved en bestemt størrelse. Resul-
taterne viser også, at en simpel 1D-model tilfredsstillende estimerer det elektriske og ter-
miske forløb af de superledende bånd ved overgangen til en normal ledende tilstand.
På grund af nedbrydning af den superledende egenskab I bånd prøve brugt, kunne resul-
taterne ikke reproduceres. Det fremtidige arbejde bør derfor omfatte nye eksperimenter
for at undersøge mængden over den kritiske strøm yderligere, undersøgelse af om en
1D-model og en numerisk 3D-model kan estimere overstrømmen hvor den hurtige selv-
forstærkende temperaturvækst starter.
Overcurrent in high temperature superconducting tapes for power cable applications
iii
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
Olfert Joakim Holte, MSc Civil Engineering, DTU
I would like to give thanks and acknowledge some good souls that have helped this project
and me on the way.
Asger Bech Abrahamsen, senior researcher, Structural Integrity and Load assessment
(SIL) Section, DTU Wind Energy
Thank you for your continuing and weekly inputs, and critical thinking. You’ve been more
then helpful. I would like to acknowledge that you have an ever positive mind, even when
you are being critical. The curios questions, reminders of fundamental physics when the
thinking pauses you can give a student. Thank you so much.
Dag Willén, principal R&D engineer, PM HTS Cable Technology, NKT Cables Group A/S
Thank you for the providing insight directly from the industry. You have greeted and en-
couraged me with intoxicating enthusiasm, about this project and challenge the industry
is facing. Thank you for being sharp, and talking straight to the point all the time, keeping
me on my toes. I really appriciate it thank you.
Lars Lorentzen, research technician, DTU Wind Materials and Components Division
(WMC) , DTU Wind Energy
Thank you for being available to help find around in the lab, manufacturing parts for the
setup that we developed through this project. Thank you for your helpfulness, being cu-
rious and asking into how the project is going.
Kaveh Rashvand, postdoc, DTU Wind Materials and Components Division (WMC) , DTU
Wind Energy
Thank you for the help 3d printing the first prototype, and the hallway talks
Jean-Claude Grivel, senior researcher, Institut for Energikonvertering og -lagring, DTU
Back in 2012, I worked and studied the MgB2 superconducting under your guidance. This
was were my curiosity grew for superconductors. I have never forgotten your words, that
I had to return, there was plenty of work for me in the field. This is my return. Thank you
alot for initial spark into the field.
Jørn Otto Bindslev Hansen, Emeritus, DTU Physics
My last thanks goes to you. It’s been many years ago that you installed a deep belief
in my that I could figure out solid state physics, coming from bachelor in mechanics. I
wouldn’t say I have figured anything out, but I have continued and returned to finish my
master after 5 years of break form studies. Thank you for installing this faith in me.
iv
Overcurrent in high temperature superconducting tapes for power cable applications
==PAGE:6==
Contents
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Scope of project
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
The high temperature superconducting power cable
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Theory
4
2.1
Superconductive characteristics
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2
Electrical model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
2.3
Heat transfer and generation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
3
Experiments setup and method
15
3.1
IV curve measurements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
3.2
The Qualification Cryogenic Cryostat Overcurrent device
. . . . . . . . . . 24
3.3
1D analytical heat model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
3.4
COMSOL modeling
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
4
Results
41
4.1
IV curve analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
4.2
Determination of Ic(B, T) curve . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
4.3
Data analysis - fitting parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46
4.4
Practical temperature dependence of the critical current Ic(T, sf) . . . . . . 51
4.5
1D Analytical Model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53
5
Discussion
58
5.1
Achievements and successes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 58
5.2
Tape degradation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 60
5.3
Transition temperatures during cool-down and warm-up . . . . . . . . . . . 61
5.4
Qualification Cryo Cooler overcurrent setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 62
5.5
Relation of single tape IV curves to large-scale superconducting power ca-
bles
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 64
6
Conclusions
69
6.1
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 70
Bibliography
71
A Resistance during cool down
74
B 344-Wire data sheet from AmSc
75
C Experimental equipment
77
C.1 Hotplate . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 77
C.2 Cryo greases . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 78
C.3 Cold head . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 79
C.4 Wire bending . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 81
C.5 Heater block input and temperatures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 82
C.6 Joule heating in current leads from feedthroughs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 83
Overcurrent in high temperature superconducting tapes for power cable applications
v
==PAGE:7==
D Superconducting current leads for the cold plate
84
E
Aluminium press
85
F
Qualification Cryogenic Cooler Over current setup drawings
86
G Matlab 1D model code
96
H The cold plate drawings
100
I
Cabel model coefficients
102
J
Critical current data from Deutsche Nanoschicht GmbH
105
vi
Overcurrent in high temperature superconducting tapes for power cable applications
==PAGE:8==
1
Introduction
In today’s world, energy storage, production, and transmission of electricity are all based
on wires with resistance and, thereby, an electrical loss. But it does not have to be like
that. A superconductor is a material that does not have resistance and, therefore, no loss.
However, the downside is that since the discovery of superconductivity, these materials
only become superconducting once cooled below temperatures in the order of −250Co.
Luckily today, this temperature can be much higher. Before finishing this work, another
step was taken toward producing a superconductor working at room temperature and
ambient pressure [1]. It’s a promising step towards a future where it’s not needed to cool
superconductors to the temperature of liquid nitrogen 77 K. The superconductors that
work at 77 K and above are termed high-temperature superconductors (HTS) [2]. Some
HTS are produced in layers of different materials to bind the superconductive material to a
copper tape. These are coated conductor tapes because of the coating procedure of the
layers. These HTS are now starting to be adopted in commercial usage. As of 2023, a
High Temperature Superconducting power cable based on parallel connections of coated
conductor tapes wound around a tube of flowing liquid nitrogen is planned to be installed
in Munich. It will be installed as a part of the commercial electrical grid. In electrical grids
[3], currents can, for a short time, go above the designed current for a cable. These sharp
peaks are called fault currents. They often happen due to faults in the grid, such as short
circuits, ground faults, or equipment failure. So, they are inevitable. The severity of fault
current is often limited by fault current limiters. Still, it persists in an operating electricity
grid, and the current is higher than what a cable is designed for. Therefore, it’s essen-
tial to investigate the dynamics of a large-scale high-temperature superconductive power
cable during fault currents. In superconducting tapes, this can have potentially damaging
effects on the tape’s superconductive ability [4], and so far, replacing such a tape re-
quires replacing the whole cable. Therefore, knowledge about how the HTS tapes react
to fault currents is an important part of the design to make it last [5]. This project explores
the behavior of HTS tapes with Direct Current (DC) scenarios and compares laboratory
scale experiments to numerical models to validate the models. Finally, the models are
compared with DC measurements of the superconducting properties of a High Tempera-
ture Superconducting power cable constructed and tested by the Danish company NKT
Cables Group A/S.
1.1
Scope of project
This project aims to investigate High Temperature Superconductor (HTS) coated con-
ductor tape behavior during fault currents. A DC overcurrent measurement device for
measuring the electrical transport properties of coated conductors was developed and
constructed, such the temperature could be set between 70K and 93K. The setup was de-
signed and built into an already existing vacuum chamber with a cold plate cooled directly
by a cryocooler cold head and a helium compressor. The experiments were done with
12 cm long pieces of American Superconductor (AmSc) 344 high temperature supercon-
ducting coated conductor tapes, with a width of 4 mm and a thickness of 20 micrometers
[6].
Research questions:
How is the critical current dependent on the temperature just below the critical tempera-
ture?
Overcurrent in high temperature superconducting tapes for power cable applications
1
==PAGE:9==
Can analytic and finite element models correctly describe the behavior of HTS tapes in
an over-current situation to a satisfying degree and if not, what are the limitations?
Learning objectives:
Describe:
• Describe the superconducting state and its critical surface.
• The analytic behavior of a superconductor in an over-current state.
Explain:
• The experimental methods used for IV-curve measurements using DC currents.
• The advantages and challenges of replacing a normal cable with a superconducting
cable.
• How the heating of a superconductor is expected to happen in an overcurrent situ-
ation.
Formulate:
• The equations of heat flow and generation of a superconductor in an overcurrent
situation.
• Implement a heating model in Finite element code, like COMSOL.
Estimate:
• The Power Law parameters from the measured IV curve of the superconductor.
• Temperature, voltage, and current changes during overcurrent situations using the
COMSOL models.
• The limit of overcurrent in DC situations of the superconducting tape.
Compare:
• Compare models with measurements regarding temperature, current, and voltage
development in superconducting tape for relevant overcurrent scenarios.
Discuss:
• The difference between the model and experiments suggests improvements in the
methods.
• How the single tape model and measurements can be transferred to a large-scale
superconducting power cable application.
1.2
The high temperature superconducting power cable
The High Temperature Superconducting (HTS) power cable is a power cable based on the
so-called high temperature superconductors. High temperature means that liquid nitrogen
( NL2) can cool the superconductors enough to be superconductive. An explanation of
a superconductor is in the next chapter. There are different types of high temperature
superconductors, and also different ways of making a cable using them. More regarding
superconductors will be explained in the next chapter. All HTS power cables have the
same layers, designed in different ways and sequences. A principle layout of a High
Temperature Superconducting power cable is shown in Figure 1.1.
2
Overcurrent in high temperature superconducting tapes for power cable applications
==PAGE:10==
Figure 1.1: Sketch of a High-temperature superconductor (HTS) power cable [7] with a
phase inside and shield outside This is one design of a power cable with 1 phase pr
cable. To the left is the helical pattern of the HTS conductor and shield sketched. All high-
temperature superconductive power cables share the same fundamental layers shown
to the right: Former + cooling with LN2, electric insulation between the HTS shield and
conductor/phase, and thermal insulation (usually a vacuum) to the other shell of the cable.
At the core of the cable sketch on Figure 1.1 the coolant NL2 flow at rates of 700 kg/hour
around 4 bars [8]. The tube that the coolant flows in and the superconductors are wound
around in a helical pattern. In between the phase(s) (light turquoise) and shield (light
blue) is the electric insulating layer (yellow), the so-called dielectric materials. Usually,
the coolant is flowing in a tube in the center of the cable, also named the former, where
the phase of the HTS conductor is wound in a helical pattern. Outside the outer super-
conducting shield, a vacuum is established to provide the thermal insulation of the cable.
The high-temperature superconductors are sketched as tapes, the so-called coated con-
ductor tapes that are used in this thesis.
The HTS power cables have advantages compared to conventional power cables, and
some challenges. The advantages are in general [8]:
• High current and power rating.
• Compact and about 1/3 of the weight of a similar power conventional power cable
• Low losses
• No thermal or magnetic interaction with the surroundings
Despite the advantages mentioned, challenges such as cooling, the power needed cool
the cables, the manufacturing of the cable degrading the superconductive ability, raising
the losses, and the fact that these cables are not repairable. If an HTS power cable is
damaged, a replacement is required. However, the advantages are beginning to outweigh
the challenges. The HTS power cable technology is becoming more mature, and the
advantages are more and more outweighing the challenges.
Overcurrent in high temperature superconducting tapes for power cable applications
3
==PAGE:11==
2
Theory
Materials phases can be described as disordered or ordered (e.g. crystalline, ferromag-
netic, superconducting, ...). When an ordered state is observed it’s because the ordered
state requires less energy. This ordered or disordered state is described by the order
parameter ψ. In a disordered state ψ = 0 and in an ordered state ψ ̸= 0 in Landau theory
of phase transition. A materials phase depends highly on what temperature the material
is at. Some materials have at low temperatures an ordered state which is observed by the
material having no electrical resistance and the repulsion of an external magnetic field.
These materials are termed superconductors.
2.1
Superconductive characteristics
Superconductivity was first discovered in 1911 by the Dutch physicist Heike Kamerligh
Onnes, in the material mercury. During the cooling of a material, superconducting ma-
terials enter into an ordered state then, with negligible resistance and repulsion of an
external field. The temperature where the phase transition to superconductivity happens
is defined as the critical temperature Tc, shown at Figure 2.1. Two physical phenomena
Figure 2.1: A superconductor changes from a normal resistive state to a superconducting
state at a critical temperature Tc, where the resistance drops to zero. This is here shown
by data recorded during one of the cooldowns of the AmSc 344C coated conductor tape,
used in this project. More details can be found in Figure A.1.
are observed in the superconducting phase. All types of superconductors known to date,
share these same two characteristics:
1. Has zero resistance below a critical temperature Tc, as shown in Figure 2.1.
2. Exhibits the Meissner effect. Superconducting materials repel any external mag-
netic field completely below the same critical temperature.
4
Overcurrent in high temperature superconducting tapes for power cable applications
==PAGE:12==
A superconductor exhibits perfect diamagnetism below its critical temperature, known as
the Meissner state.
B = µ0 · (H + M) = 0 ⇒H = −M
where H is the H-field applied and M is the magnetization. Hence below Tc the suscep-
tibility is χ = dM
dH = −1.
2.1.1
Cooper pairs & Flux lines in a superconductor
The superconducting state is a quantum condensate of electron pairs called cooper pairs,
that act like bosons. The two electrons in the electron pair are moving in opposite direc-
tions. This is described by the Bardeen-Cooper-Schriefer (BCS) theory [9]. The electron
pair is coupled through the lattice distortions their movement creates, resulting in the
pairs ”traveling” freely inside the superconducting material. This electron pair is termed
a cooper pair after Leon Cooper in BCS theory [9]. The quantum coupling dynamic be-
hind the pairing depends on the type of superconductor. Because the dynamics are not
fully understood for all types of superconducting materials, especially type II working at
higher temperatures. The image from BCS theory is usually used to describe the principle
dynamics of cooper pairs in so-called low-temperature superconductors made of metal
alloys. Whereas the coupling mechanism in the so-called high temperature supercon-
ductors can not be described by the BCS theory. This work’s theory of superconductors
is limited to an intuitive argument for the characteristic penetration depth of an external
magnetic field in a superconductor. This is used to distinguish the type I and Type II
superconductors and to derive the relation between current and voltage in type II super-
conductors also holding so-called flux lines.
Let’s imagine a thin superconductor tape, and look at one Cooper pair of electrons moving
in opposite directions, around their center of mass.
Figure 2.2: Sketch of Cooper pair, named after Leon Cooper, in superconducting tape.
Each electron moves in opposite directions around its center of mass. If the cooper pair
starts to move more in one direction, the effective velocity is finite V ̸= 0.
Conversation of momentum P , with no external magnetic field B = 0 states
P = mV = 0 ⇒V = 0
(2.1)
where m is the mass of the Cooper pair. The pair’s mass center does not move, so there
is no current flowing. When an external magnetic field is applied, B > 0 :
P = mV + qA = 0 ⇒V = −q
mA
(2.2)
Overcurrent in high temperature superconducting tapes for power cable applications
5
==PAGE:13==
Where A is the vector potential related to the external magnetic field B by B = ∇× A
and q is the charge of the Cooper pair. Then the mass center move, hence there is
a current flowing. Now as a Cooper pair in a tape with an external magnetic field, the
pair would have an effective velocity given by the magnetic vector potential. This is the
argument to show what characteristic length scale the external magnetic field penetrates
into a superconductor. If the velocity of the pair is non-zero then the current density is:
J = nqV
where n is the number of cooper pairs, q is the charge of each pair, V is the mass center
velocity and J is the current density of cooper pairs. Inserting Equation 2.1.1 , the current
density can be expressed by the external vector potential.
J = −nq2
m A = −1
α2 A
with
α =
( m
nq2
)1/2
with α being a simplification constant. Taking the curl on both sides and remembering that
the relation between the magnetic vector potential and then magnetic field B = ∇× A is
the curl of the magnetic vector potential is the magnetic field.
∇× J = −1
α2 B
then using Amperes law with no change in the electric potential field, and assuming the
magnetic vector potential and thereby also the B-field to be uniform, the characteristic
length is associated with the constant α by the Helmholtz equation:
∇2B = −1
α2 B
(2.3)
the solution to this equation is an exponential decay, with the characteristic length scale
called the London penetration length, λ. If α = λ, and changing to describing the decay of
the H-field, H = B/µ0, then the London penetration depth is given by, this is the London
penetration depth given by
λ =
(
m
µ0q2ns
)1/2
similar to
α =
( m
nq2
)1/2
(2.4)
with ns being the number of cooper pairs and q being the charge of the superconducting
pairs with a mass m. µ0 is the vacuum permeability.
A corresponding characteristic length scale of changes in the density of Cooper pairs
can be found for the superconducting condensate |ψ|2: the coherence length ξ is the
decay of the superconducting condensate near the sample edge or regions on the non-
superconducting phase.
ξ =
(
¯h2
2m|αT |
)1/2
(2.5)
¯h is planks constant h/2π and m is the mass of the superconducting electron pair, αT
is a 2’nd order parameter in the Taylor expansion of the energy dependent on the order
parameter ψ in Landau theory of phase transition.
The two characteristic lengths describe the difference between the two types of super-
conductors. For type I superconductors ξ >> λ. For type I superconductors because
6
Overcurrent in high temperature superconducting tapes for power cable applications
==PAGE:14==
the coherence length is so large the superconductive condensate breaks down almost
immediately at the external critical field Bc. In type II it’s reversed: ξ << λ. Meaning
that so-called fluxlines can penetrate the superconductor, with a normal conducting tube
region at the center holding a magnetic field and supercurrents rotating around the cen-
ter line screening the magnetic field from the superconducting phase, see Figure 2.3.
When the first flux lines are created in the superconductor after the Meissner phase is
suppressed, the lower critical magnetic field Bc1 is reached. At higher fields, the flux lines
start to overlap. When the field is pushed higher and fluxlines overlap a lot, leaving almost
none of the superconductive condensate left the upper critical external magnetic field, Bc2
is reached.
Figure 2.3 shows over what length scale around a flux line the magnetic field is decaying,
inside the superconducting material, seen as the red line. While the concentration of the
super condensate is shown by the blue line.
Figure 2.3: Illustration of the field and order parameter around a vortex line penetrating
a type II superconductor with the order parameter |ψ|2 to note the density of supercon-
ducting condensate, and the two characteristic lengths; The coherence length ξ of density
changes in the condensate and the penetrations depth λ. The black arrow shows that all
of the condensate rotates around a fluxline. [8]
Figure 2.3 shows the coherence length ξ and the London penetration depth λ are the two
decay constants of the superconducting condensate and the magnetic field penetrating
the superconductor. In figure Figure 2.3 is also indicated by the black arrow that the
cooper pairs rotate around the fluxline, and the density of pairs |ψ|2 are reduced a lot
around the fluxline center by the coherence length. Integrating over the magnetic field of
the fluxline leaves a flux quantization due to the minimizing of the energy, defined as a
flux line:
B0 =
∫
B dr = h
2e
(2.6)
e is the charge of an electron and h is Planck’s constant. This is not an accurate description
of the dynamics of the superconducting state but is sufficient to lay the foundation for the
behavior of type II high temperature superconductors. The dynamic that makes type II
high temperature superconductors become superconductive at high temperatures, is yet
to be discovered by research.
Overcurrent in high temperature superconducting tapes for power cable applications
7
==PAGE:15==
2.1.2
Pinning of the flux lines
In type II superconductors a fluxline will be exposed to a force F if the superconductor is
also carrying a transport current J given as
F = J × B0
If the flux line starts moving then work is being performed on the system and dissipation
will arise. It is however possible to prevent flux lines from moving by introducing so-called
pinning sites in the superconductor. As long as the transport current J is causing a force
smaller than the pinning force then the flux line will not move and dissipation has been
suppressed. This can be written as
F = J × B0 < Fpin
Pinning sites can be introduced by doping the superconductive material in the manu-
facturing process with nanoparticles with a radius similar to the coherence length. The
nanoparticle is a deficiency in the lattice, thereby taking less energy for a flux line to
penetrate there, compared to a perfect superconducting lattice. The high temperature
superconductor YBa2Cu3O6+x unit cell is shown in Figure 2.4a, and is deposited in a thin
layer on top of a buffer stack and substrate to a tape of metal in the production of coated
conductor tapes. This process is needed because the unit cells of the YBCO grains must
be aligned in order to allow a supercurrent to pass between the grain on the tape. In the
formula unit one can change the oxygen content x and the disordering of the oxygen will
be able to act as pinning centers for the flux lines in YBCO.
(a)
The
perovskite
lat-
tice
structure
of
the
Y Ba2Cu3O6+x
super-
conductor YBCO(123), with
x being between 0 - 1 of
an oxygen atom pr unitcell.
Is the amount of adjustable
oxygen per unit cell. Figure
credit [10].
(b) Rare Earth Barium Copper Oxide (REBCO) coated conduc-
tor tape with layer architecture illustrated. The typical width is
4 −5 mm. The layers can be deposited in different ways, de-
pending on the manufacturer. Common for all is the structure
with multiple layers. A cross-section of the tape used in this
project can be seen on page 75. Figure credit [11]
Figure 2.4: (a) Unit cell structure of Y Ba2Cu3O6+x high temperature ceramics. (b) The
architecture of coated conductor tape holding an aligned thin-film layer of YBCO on top of
a metal substrate. More details on the wire used in this work can be found in the appendix,
Appendix B.
8
Overcurrent in high temperature superconducting tapes for power cable applications
==PAGE:16==
In Figure 2.4b the many layers of buffer stack, substrate, silver, and copper layers are
referred to as the matrix of the coated conductor tape. The x is the oxygen filling of chains
like the sequence Cu −O −Cu −O... in the copper ribbons. When x = 0 there are no
oxygen atoms in the copper ribbons. When x = 1 the ribbon is full. The superconducting
state is seen for x = [0.42, 1] [12]. It’s the copper plans consisting of CuO2 unit cells that
are the important building blocks in which the high temperature superconductivity takes
place. The layers in between the copper planes act as charge reservoirs to supply the
copper oxide planes, so Cooper pairs can form. The unitcell is 11.6Å along the c-plane
and 3.8Å long the ab-direction [12]. The London penetration depth is ΛAB = 150nm in
the ab-direction, so that would be the nanoparticles’ approximate size for fluxpinng. The
relative proportion of nanoparticle vs superconducting lattice is often a trade secret so,
hard to come by.
For the flux lines to move, they need to overcome the potential U which they are held
in place by the lattice. Adding the nanoparticle raises the potential for the fluxlines. The
rate at which a fluxline can escape from a pining energy well depends on the Boltzmann
temperature distribution:
R = v0e
−U
kbT
where T is the temperature, kb is the Boltzman constant and v0 is the frequency of each at-
tempt. When applied magnetic field and current are low, single flux jumps can be thermally
activated - known as single particle Thermally Activated Flux Flow (TAFF). If a current is
applied, it will tilt the ”pinning landscape” as shown in Figure 2.5.
dU
dx = F = J × B0
Meaning that more flux lines start to move, dissipating more energy into the supercon-
ducting lattice.
Figure 2.5: Flux pinning and tilting of the pinning potential by a current for type II super-
conductors. a) At no current, the ”pining landscape” is not tilted. b) At current densities
lower than the critical current density, the ”landscape” is titled to the right. Making it more
likely a flux line will move. c) At current similar to or over critical current densities the flux
lines are moving.
When a fluxline moves with a velocity v, given by the rate R and length of a jump, an
electric field is generated as a consequence to have the sum of forces equal zero. The
electric field is then given by the Lorentz force:
F = q (E + v × B) = 0 ⇒E ∼−v × B0
(2.7)
Now the velocity is the product of the jump length l and the rate of jumps R, v = l · R.
Overcurrent in high temperature superconducting tapes for power cable applications
9
==PAGE:17==
Thus the electric field across the superconductor is expected to be
E ∼v · B = v · R · B = B0lv0e
−U
kbT
(2.8)
here the minus sign is neglected for simplicity without loss of generality at the end.
2.1.3
Power law and collective movement of the flux lines
Presented above is the picture of single fluxlines moving. This picture isn’t corresponding
to the collective movement of the fluxline that is observed. This is due to the fluxlines
interacting. The pinning potential in a collective movement of fluxline has a logarithmic
dependence on the current density:
U = UC ln
(Jc
J
)
(2.9)
with UC as a critical pining potential, J as the current density, and Jc as the critical current
density. Inserting this into Equation 2.8 yields the power law observed in superconductors
E = v × B0 = B0 · l · v0 · e
−
UC ln
(Jc
J
)
kb · T
= E0
( J
Jc
) UC
kb · T = E0
( J
Jc
)n
(2.10)
Where all the complex dependencies of the lattice on the collective pinning potential and
the Boltzmann distribution are in the power-law critical exponent :
n =
UC
kb · T
(2.11)
The notation is a simplification since the exponent clearly depends on temperature and
magnetic field. The flux quantum B0, the length of each flux jump l and frequency of
attempts v0, is in the constant
E0 = B0 · l · v0
determined to be
E0 = 10−6 V
cm = 1µV
cm = 10−4 V
m = 100µV
m
by international standard [13]. The heat dissipated when the current equal the critical
current I = Ic ≈100A for a 1m long tape, is:
Pc = Ic · U = Ic · E0 · L
(Ic
Ic
)n
= 100A · 10−4 · V
m · 1m = 0.01W
(2.12)
which with a Carnot efficiency of a cooling machine ηcarnot = 0.01, it cost 1W to cool 1
m superconducting tape with a current of 100 A already. Even a little above the critical
current there is not a far too several kW in cooling power, due to the power law’s n value
of between 30 to 35. For a tape with any length L, with a current density J near the critical
current density Jc(T, B), an electric potential following the power law is observed:
U = E · L = LE0
(
J
Jc(T, B)
)n
= LE0
(
I
Ic(T, B)
)n
(2.13)
The minus sign is neglected in the relation between the electric field E and potential drop
U. This is on the scale of µV pr centimeter of tape. Here the temperature and magnetic
field dependence of n is not noted, as in conventional notation.
10
Overcurrent in high temperature superconducting tapes for power cable applications
==PAGE:18==
2.1.4
The critical surface
The critical surface is the limit where the superconducting phase breaks down. This de-
pendence both on the temperature and the external magnetic field, is seen in Figure 2.6.
Figure 2.6: Illustration of the critical surface of a type II superconductor, indicated by the
vortex state. The thicker green line represents the line of critical current density dependent
only on temperature under its own field. The irreversibility line Birr is shown where the
critical current density is reaching zero and the flux lines are no longer pinned.
To describe the temperature and field dependence of the critical current density one ex-
pression is given by [14]
Jc(T, B) = Jc(T = 0, B = 0)e−T/T ∗· B−α
(2.14)
where T ∗is a scaling parameter for the temperature dependence, and α is a power law
on the external B-field dependence. This rather simple form is shown to hold in fields
0.5 −19 Tesla and T ≤30K and at 77K between 0.1 −1 Tesla, which is then expected
in this work, and not at temperatures close to Tc. It is noted that T ∗can vary significantly
between different manufacturers. This work focuses on temperature dependence in self-
field (sf). It is not expected that the expression written out will fit well for the data recorded
in this project, being closer to Tc and low fields. Another expression for Jc(T, sf) will be
introduced later in the discussion based on the results of this thesis.
2.1.5
Overcurrent, thermal runaway, and quench.
Going past the critical surface I > Ic means that the superconductor can no longer pin
the fluxlines, which will start to move and dissipate energy in the superconductor. If the
superconductor is heating up then the superconducting condensate will deplete and the
material is likely to return to the normal state [8]. Perhaps burning the tape, or boiling all
the coolant. This is why the temperature must be kept constant during experiments or
applications. Let’s define the overcurrent Iover for a coated conductor tape as the current
for which the temperature starts to raise enough, to lower the critical current density. This
Overcurrent in high temperature superconducting tapes for power cable applications
11
==PAGE:19==
disregards what overcurrent normally means: ”higher than designed”, where designed
would be the engineering current density Je , some percentage of the critical current den-
sity Jc so for example Je = 0.8 · Jc. This is done to ensure during operation below the
critical current density Jc, to stay well below the power law regime, due to moving flux
lines dissipating heat for type II superconductors.
Current sharing is when current flows in both the superconductive layer and the rest of
the layers of the tape. This happens with currents higher than Ic.
Thermal runaway is when the temperature starts to raise so quickly that only shutting off
the current flow will stop further temperature increase. This happens when the temper-
ature change lowers the critical current density, pushing the current into the rest of the
tape, and causing even more joule heating. The superconducting layer is returning to be
an insulator more than a normal conductor. This cause all of the current to flow mainly in
the copper stabilizer.
A quench is a thermal runaway happening in an application using a coolant, and the wire
is dissipating a lot of energy that is vaporizing the coolant.
2.2
Electrical model
The theory considers the electric connections that might happen in a tape in a real appli-
cation. This means that the coated conductor tapes have been under mechanical stress
and some segments more than others. Therefore it’s totally dependent on the handling
process, and how the superconductive ability is maintained in the tapes. It’s not unlikely
that some segments have weakened, meaning lower n-value and critical current. It can
also happen, that a small segment is not superconducting at all, making the current run
through a normal conducting part. This could be done by bending the wire with a smaller
radius than the minimum bend radius of 15 mm, for the wire used in this project. This
means that pieces of superconductor will be in series and (always) in parallel with the
resistance of the matrix material. The major part of matrix material is copper as seen
in Figure 2.4b. Through this work, it’s assumed to have the properties of copper. More
details on the coated conductor tape used can be found in appendix Appendix B. The
series connection is highly relevant as tapes in applications are not ideal superconduc-
tors. Due to the bending and stretching in wounding the wire either for a coil or around
a core in a cable as seen on Figure 1.1, it’s expected to have segments with different
superconductive parameters. This is illustrated by the electrical diagram on Figure 2.7.
Figure 2.7: An electric diagram of a 4-point measurement on a tape segment to show
the parallel and series connections of superconductive parts and resistance parts of a
single tape. A good superconductor (sc) is with a high n value and high Ic, where both
are significantly lower for a weak sc - all at the same temperature.
12
Overcurrent in high temperature superconducting tapes for power cable applications
==PAGE:20==
Obeying Kirchoff’s laws of nodes and closed loops current and electrical potential for a
simple segment of tape is seen with a superconductor and normal conductor in parallel
connection, the potential drop U2 and length L2 is the same: Figure 2.7,
I = Isc2 + I2 = Isc2 + U2
R2
= Ic2 ·
(
U2
E0 · L2
) 1
n2 + U2 · A
ρel · L2
(2.15)
ρel is the average electrical resistivity of copper and layers, Ic is the critical current, and
A is the cross-section area of the matrix of the tape segment. When a segment with
no superconductor is in a tape, a series connection is shown as the last segment on
Figure 2.7:
U34 = U3 + U4 = E0 · L3 ·
( I
Ic3
)n3
+ I · ρel · L4
A
for I < Ic3
(2.16)
U34 is potential over the good sc3 segment and the normal conductor with length L4. Due
to the superconductor, for current below Isc3 the current will flow mainly in the super-
conductor, but all the same current must go through the matrix material for the normal
conducting part L4. This means that for a single tape if there is a segment with only nor-
mal conducting layers, Ohms Law will show as a straight line on the measured IV curve.
If the current is then ramped up to and past Ic3, the current start to flow in both supercon-
ductor and matrix material. When current sharing happens, it’s Equation 2.15 that gives
the potential drop for U3, not only the power law. How the then dissipated heat rises the
temperature of the superconductor is dependent on the heat transfer.
2.3
Heat transfer and generation
For any element with a temperature, the heat in and out together with the stored and
generated heat, is illustrated in Figure 2.8.
Figure 2.8: An element with temperature T(x, y, z) in a control volume is defined by
dashed lines. u is the heat flux and subscript notes a direction. Drawing inspired by
[15].
For any element, there must be an energy balance.
˙Ein −˙Eout + ˙Eg = ˙Est
(2.17)
Overcurrent in high temperature superconducting tapes for power cable applications
13
==PAGE:21==
where ˙Ein is the energy flowing into the elements, ˙Eout is the energy flowing out, ˙Eg is the
energy generated inside the element and ˙Est is the stored energy in the element. Using
Figure 2.8, where the heat flux stored in a control volume is
˙Est = ρcp
∂T
∂t dx dy dz
where T is the temperature, ∂
∂t is the derivative with respect to time, ρ is the density of the
material, and cp is the specific heat. Energy generation is considered to be joule heating
˙Eg = J · E = J2ρel dx dy dz
with ρel the electrical resistivity of the material, E the electric field, J current density vector,
and ˙Eq the volumetric heat generation. This combined with Fourier’s law of heat flux u:
u = −k∇T
(2.18)
gives for an isotropic material with constant thermal conductivity κ, the heat equation is
1
α · κ
∂T
∂t =
˙Eg
κ +
(∂2T
∂x2 + ∂2T
∂y2 + ∂2T
∂z2
)
(2.19)
where ˙Eg is the heat generated per volume, α =
1
ρcp is the thermal diffusivity, and T is the
temperature of the control volume.
When an object is in a vacuum closed by a surface with a big temperature difference,
radiation from surface to surface should be considered. For a large and isothermal enclo-
sure with constant surface temperatures on Tsur and with an object inside with constant
surface temperature Ts. Radiation heat flux from and to a real surface in a steady state
condition is:
˙Erad = σϵsT 4
sur −σϵsT 4
s for Ts < Tsur
(2.20)
when radiation is diffuse to and from the surfaces. ˙Erad is the total radiation heat flux to-
wards the object in the closure. σ = 5.670367×10−8 W m−2 K−4 is the Stefan-Boltzmann
constant. ϵ is the emissivity of a real surface, that depends on temperature, material,
surface structure, and treatment to mention a few. As the temperatures of the object
and surroundings are getting closer to each other, the heat radiation is lowered. At the
same temperature, there is no heat flux. This only applies in the case of different surface
temperatures, and there is no heat radiation from two surfaces of the same temperature.
14
Overcurrent in high temperature superconducting tapes for power cable applications
==PAGE:22==
3
Experiments setup and method
The facilities at DTU Wind and Energy Systems on the DTU Risø Campus already had
equipment for cooling down superconductors, consisting of a vacuum chamber with a CH-
110LT cold head termed Qualification Cryogenic Cryostat (QCC). The QCC consists of a
steel chamber, connected to a vacuum pump and a cryocooler cold head. The cryocooling
head has an aluminum plate called the cold plate attached, inside the steel chamber. The
setup had previously been used to do several experiments with an MgB2 superconductive
coil[16]. But did not reach the required temperature below 39 K. All equipment is seen on
Figure 3.1.
Figure 3.1: From the left is the vacuum pump with sensors and tubes. The vacuum pump
connects to the bottom of the Qualification Cryogenic Cryostat (QCC), here in the middle
made out of steel, in an aluminum frame. The top round disk is the lid, of the chamber.
To the right is the measurement equipment.
When referring to a cryogenic (cryo) temperature the temperature is below −153Co or 120
K [17]. It’s called cryogenic because the boiling points of the so-called permanent gases
(such as helium, hydrogen, Neon, nitrogen, and oxygen) lie below 120 K, and common
refrigerants boiling points are above 120 K. The rack had been used before, and holding a
vacuum has already been documented by DTU Wind and Energy System [16] and it was
not done for this project. After removing the MgB2 coil from the cryostat, the inside had
an aluminum plate, seen on Figure 3.2.
Overcurrent in high temperature superconducting tapes for power cable applications
15
==PAGE:23==
Figure 3.2: Inside of cryostat. A race-track-shaped aluminum cold plate is attached on
top of the CH-110 cold head and current leads for performing transport measurements
are seen to the right. The Length is 30 cm, the width is 20 cm and the thickness is 1 cm.
More details for the cold plate are seen on Appendix H given by [18].
The aluminum plate in the middle, with the holes in a ring, is termed the cold plate. The
holes in a ring are where a cryocooler cold head is attached to the cold plate. A picture
of the bottom outside the chamber is shown later in Figure 3.4b.
On the backside of the cold plate, there is a thin rectangular aluminum plate, covering
more than just the cold plate. This is holding Multi Layer Insulation (MLI), which is a
stack of thin plastic sheets with a thin layer of reflective aluminum on the surface. The
MLI is used to reflect radiation heat away from the cold object inside a cryostat. The
MLI is used in an attempt to minimize the heat radiation reaching the cold plate from
the cryostat chamber walls. Right off the cold plate the two connection terminals are
placed and made of copper bars. Two superconducting current leads are attached to the
feedthrough copper rods on the right. On Figure 3.2 the grey signal cable is taped to the
surface of the cold plate as an attempt to avoid thermal gradients influencing the signals.
The cable on the left connected to a set of female header connector pins, soldered on a
prototyping PCB board, for connecting measurement pins. The other end is connected to
a D-sup vacuum feedthrough right over the cold plate on Figure 3.2.
To measure the temperature of the cold plate and copper bars, holding the terminals to
the cold plate, two thermometers have been inserted on the back side of the cold plate.
Figure 3.3 show the mounting of the PCB circuit board, the thermometers, the wires, and
the copper bars.
16
Overcurrent in high temperature superconducting tapes for power cable applications
==PAGE:24==
Figure 3.3: Back side of the cold plate in the cryostat. Underneath the square of alu-
minum tape to the left bottom, are a Cernox thermometer inserted. Right in the middle
of the bottom copper bar, a PT1000 thermometer is inserted to measure the current lead
temperature.
A Cernox thermometer is inserted into the cold plate beneath the square of aluminum tape
on Figure 3.3 to the bottom left. A Pt1000 thermometer is inserted in the copper bar lowest
on the figure. The copper bars are wrapped in Kapton tape to ensure electrical insula-
tion and good thermal contact to cool the copper bars. In mounting both thermometers
lakeshore cryogenic vacuum grease [19] is used. Cryogenic vacuum grease is grease
specially produced to cryogenic temperatures, to ensure good thermal contact between
surfaces.
Overcurrent in high temperature superconducting tapes for power cable applications
17
==PAGE:25==
3.0.1
Vacuum pump and cold head
The cryostat is connected to a turbo pump backed up by a membrane pump, as shown
on Figure 3.4a. The heat flow caused by convection in gas is removed by evacuating the
cryostat to a pressure of P = 10−6 mbar using the turbo pump. Therefore only radiation
and conduction that is being considered in the heat transfer equations, simplifying both
experiment and model work. This pumps the chamber down to around 1 · 10−6 mbar
= 10−4 Pa and lower after a day of running.
(a) Vacuum pump controls, sensors, vacuum tube
to the chamber, next to cryostat.
(b) Cryostat cold head CH110-LT from SHI
cryogenics [20] with input and output He gas
lines and vacuum valve.
Figure 3.4: Close-up of vacuum pump connected to cryostat and closeup on the cold
head, vacuum valve, and feedthrough terminals underneath the cryostat. The warm and
cold gas line is marked on the figure by a red and blue arrow.
On top of the vacuum pump, with the black wire is a Pirani pressure sensor that is con-
nected to the control in the bottom, measuring pressure below 10−6 mbar. Dual trans
pressure sensor from Wensel measured pressures from atmospheric to ≈10−3 mbar.
On Figure 3.4b the cold head is located beneath the chamber. It’s run by a Sumitomo
cryogenics F-70 Helium compressor [20] standing a few meters away from the setup,
connected by 25 bar Helium gas lines to the cold head. The cold head is a Closed Cy-
cle Refrigerator cold head. The cold helium gas is cycled around by the compressor,
expanded in the cold head, displaced by a piston, and then compressed again by the
compressor.
18
Overcurrent in high temperature superconducting tapes for power cable applications
==PAGE:26==
3.0.2
Cooling down and warming up process
When a pressure under 1·10−6 mbar, is obtained inside the cryostat, then the cooling was
started by turning on the F-70 He compressor. A cool down and warming up showing the
temperatures of the two thermometers in the cold plate and copper bar are shown in Fig-
ure 3.2. The coldest temperature at the cryostat’s cold plate reached thermal equilibrium
was 75 K, which is enough to make an Amsc 344 with a Tc = 93 K to be superconductive.
Figure 3.5: Temperatures of the cold plate (red) and copper bar (blue) during cool down
(blue arrow) and warming up (red arrow). Locations on an empty cold plate as shown in
Figure 3.2. Inset shows the low-temperature region of the cooling process.
From Figure 3.5 it is shown that the cool-down takes a little more than an hour and the
warm-up takes more than a full day (around 28 hours). The temperature can not be
controlled by the cold head which is either cooling or warming depending on whether
the He compressor is turned on or off. It is however essential to be able to control the
temperature when measuring the electrical properties of a coated conductor tape and the
construction of a device for controlling the temperature will be presented in the following
chapters.
3.1
IV curve measurements
The electrical characterization of a superconductor is often done by measuring the volt-
age drop U across a piece of superconducting wire as the applied current I is ramped
up. By plotting the voltage drop as a function of the applied current one can determine if
the superconductor is behaving as a resistor as expected for T > Tc or as the power law
introduced when T < TC and if pinning is present in the superconductor. The relation be-
tween voltage drop and applied current is often called the IV curve of a superconductor. In
Overcurrent in high temperature superconducting tapes for power cable applications
19
==PAGE:27==
order to be able to measure the very low resistance of a superconductor one is often using
the 4-wire measuring principle, where two wires are passing the current to the supercon-
ductor and another two wires are connected directly onto the superconductor in between
the current wires. The two voltage probe wires are connected to a voltmeter, whereby
the voltage drop across the superconductor can be measured without including the resis-
tance of the current wires. The current measurement here is built in the current supply. It’s
normal in the application of superconductors to have several probes overlapping and on
different segments on the tapes for quench protection. The maximal measurable length is
Lfull = 6 cm of coated conductor tape. A second set of 2 wires measures over the center
segment, with the length Lc = 1 cm, of the coated conductor. This makes it possible to
measure the properties of two segments of the tape, the center segment and the long
segment, as seen on Figure 3.6.
Figure 3.6: Picture of 2 sets of 4 wires probes, where the current is passed through
the two copper blocks on each side of the coated conductor tape, and the thin wires
are connected to two nano voltmeters. Both are soldered onto a coated conductor tape
(AmSc 344C) segment. The dark green and red wires measure the voltage drop across
the center segment of Lc = 1 cm length. The black and yellow wires is providing the
voltage drop across the long piece of Lfull = 6 cm. An ampere meter inside the power
supply connected to the two copper blocks is used to measure the current passing through
the superconductor.
On Figure 3.6 both 2-wire probe signals are measured using the same power supply..
Each 2-wire probe on the figure is a 4-point measurement, over different lengths and
segments of the wire, because the current is set and read out from the HP Agilent 6681A
power supply connected to the copper blocks seen in Figure 3.6. The center segment 4-
wire probe was necessary in order to study a tape in overcurrent at different temperatures.
As seen on Figure 2.6, the critical current can be lowered by an external magnetic field.
This was done by mounting a Nd2Fe14B permanent magnet of size 20 x 15 x 5 mm over
the center segment of the coated conductor so that it was big enough to fully cover the tape
at the center segment with a relatively uniform magnetic field. It was assumed that this
lowering of the critical current on the center segment could be seen on the long segment
measurement but measured separately by the center 4-point probe. And through the two
measurements, the effects on the rest of the tape could be extracted, by using the theory
20
Overcurrent in high temperature superconducting tapes for power cable applications
==PAGE:28==
of two superconductors in a series connection. If the tape was damaged outside the center
segment, this would also show in the comparison of the 2 4-probes measurements.
3.1.1
IV curve and critical current Ic Standard
The potential and current reading produces an IV curve. Here seen on Figure 3.7, as it
would be following the power law Equation 2.1.3.
Figure 3.7: IV curve measurement and properties on a superconductor. The critical cur-
rent is defined as the current in the superconductor resulting in a voltage drop per length
of tape is 1µV
cm . Figure inspired by Danish standard DS_IEC 63075_2019 [13].
As described by Danish standard DS_IEC 63075_2019 [13], measuring the critical current
on cables and tapes is done with a DC power supply, and
.. shall be cooled by the liquid croygen and maintained at a stable temper-
ature on the range of 64 K and 80 K. The test results shall be adjusted to a
temperature of 77.3 K ... [13]
noted with the type of cryogen, and length over which is measured. Most often liquid
nitrogen is used, since this is the reference temperature of 77.3 K. The critical current is
defined as the current resulting in an electric field of E = 100 µV
m = 1 µV
cm.
3.1.2
Initial IV experiments in Qualification Cryogenic Cryostat
The initial experiments were based on the assumption that a piece of Kapton tape could
hold the coated conductor tape onto the cold plate and make the temperature small
enough to observe the superconducting transition. This initial attempt is shown on Fig-
ure 3.8a.
Overcurrent in high temperature superconducting tapes for power cable applications
21
==PAGE:29==
(a) First experiment with an AmSc 344 tape,
glued to the cold plate using Kapton tape (yel-
low). Didn’t go superconducting when cold.
(b) The second experiment was with an AmSc
344C tape, glued to the cold plate by Kapton
tape and covered with Multi Layer Insulation
(MLI). The segment covered by the Multi Layer
Insulation (MLI) did go superconducting when
cold.
Figure 3.8: The first versions of the initial experiment. Using Multi Layer Insulation (MLI),
showed that radiation plays a large role in obtaining a temperature low enough for the
tape to turn superconducting.
The superconducting tape used throughout this work is an old American Superconduc-
tor (AmSc) Y Ba2Cu3O(6+x) type 344C coated conductor tape of 4.78 mm width and a
thickness of 20 µm. The foil used on Figure 3.8b is Multi layer Insulation (MLI) and is
commonly used in cryogenics, superconducting coils, and aerospace to shield off heat
radiation [21][22]. The initial experiments indicated that the connection to the cold plate
had to be pressed down onto the cold plate to make a good thermal connection and that
radiation toward the cold plate gave a more significant contribution than first anticipated.
Heat radiation is the dominating part of heat flux at low currents and low temperatures in
a vacuum for this cryostat.
Estimating the temperature of the cold plate
To estimate the cold plate temperature in Figure 3.9, the energy balance between heat
radiation to the cold plate and work of the cold head. The stainless steel the chamber
is made of is industrial stainless steel, not polished or cleaned, but slightly oxidized, this
gives an emissivity ϵsteel of around 0.3 approximately [15]. The emissivity of the anodized
aluminum like the aluminum the cold head is made of is assumed to be a round 0.8 [15].
22
Overcurrent in high temperature superconducting tapes for power cable applications
==PAGE:30==
Figure 3.9: Heat radiation inside the stainless steel chamber in thermal equilibrium. Heat
radiation hits the cold plate, from the side and top, due to the MLI, on the backside. The
chamber is basically a cylinder of 55 cm in height, and 2 circles at the top and bottom 46
cm in diameter.
In thermal equilibrium, the cold plate has a temperature of 75 K, found by experiments
seen in Figure 3.5. The cold head workload as a function of temperature is shown in
Figure C.6, and is equal to the total radiation heat towards the cold plate described by
QCH110−LT (Tcp) =
(
Ass · ˙Qrad,in −Acp · ˙Qrad,out
)
for Tcp < Tss
(3.1)
where Acp is the surface area and Tcp is the surface temperature of the cold plate, Tss
is the surface temperature, and Ass is the surface area of the steel chamber walls. See
Figure 3.9 for details on the parameters. Equation 3.1.2 apply as long as the cold head is
running and the temperature of the cold plate Tcp is lower than the steel chamber surface
Tss. Assuming that MLI totally shields the backside of the cold plate from any radiation on
the surface area only the top and sides surface area are used. The surface area of the
cold plate contributing to the radiation is:
Acp = Acp,top + Acp,sides = π · (0.1 m)2 + (0.2 m) · (0.1 m)
(3.2)
+ ((π · 0.1 m) + ·0.1 m) · 2 · 0.01 m = 0.06 m2
(3.3)
the area of the chamber on Figure 3.9 with is cylinder wall and two circles at the bottom
and top is
Ass = 0.46 m · 0.55 m · π + 2 ·
(0.46 m
2
)2
· π = 1.13 m2
(3.4)
Then the workload required by the cold head is
QCH110−LT (Tcp) = σ
(
ϵss · Ass · (Tss)4 −ϵcp · Acp · (Tcp)4)
(3.5)
= 141.3 W −0.086 W ≃141.2 W for Tcp < Tss
(3.6)
Looking at the cooling power specification of the cold head ( Figure C.6) it is seen that
the expected temperature of the cold plate is about 60 K [20]. So heat conduction can’t be
Overcurrent in high temperature superconducting tapes for power cable applications
23
==PAGE:31==
neglected. When counting in the 30 W of thermal conduction from the current leads found
by Kristine Kriger in 2018 [23]. The current leads are the copper bars seen at the bottom
of Figure 3.8. If the contribution from the current leads is included, the model explains
quite well the steady state temperature of the cold plate in a vacuum.
The intention is to design a device for measuring the IV curve of a 12cm long piece of
coated conductor tape mounted on the cold plate with a current rating up to Imax = 200 A
in order to investigate the overcurrent regime, where the current is higher than the critical
current of the tape. Secondly, this device should be able to keep the superconductor at
a controlled temperature. From the initial experiments on cooling down the cold plate, it
can be concluded, that the less radiation heat that reaches the cold plate the lower a base
temperature will be possible.
The heat flow from the current leads cannot be neglected. This is without any joule heat-
ing in the feedthroughs and current leads (if they are not superconducting). This means
the final IV measurement device needs to be covered by a radiation shield that can be
mounted onto the cold plate, in order to achieve a temperature below 75 K. In order to keep
it cold it also needs a good thermal contact to the cold plate. To control the temperature
of the coated conductor tape, a block of aluminum material, with heater cartridges inside,
had to be designed. The temperature controller LakeShore 340, needed an impedance
of 25 Ωand could provide power output to the heater of 100 W, with a 50 V max potential.
To match this two heaters were used in parallel [24]. The setup will have to be placed as
close to the cooling head and far away from current leads as possible. Two more current
leads from the terminal and to the Ic measurement device will have to be made to provide
power for the heaters.
3.2
The Qualification Cryogenic Cryostat Overcurrent device
The overcurrent IV measuring device designed had to hold the tape at a constant temper-
ature and ensure a good (superconducting) electrical connection to the current leads while
being electrically isolated from the sample and measurements. The electrical insulation
was secured by placing an Al2O3 alumina plate underneath the tape and Kapton tape on
the aluminum press plate that pressed the whole overcurrent device down towards the
cold plate also making a good thermal connection using cryogenic vacuum grease.
Figure 3.10: Qualification Cryogenic Cooler Cryostat device cross-section when mounted
onto the cold plate and showing cold head beneath.
24
Overcurrent in high temperature superconducting tapes for power cable applications
==PAGE:32==
As it’s seen on the diagram Figure 3.10, the coated conductor tape has bends at the
ends, where it is soldered to the copper block acting as current leads. This is to ensure
optimal contact to the cooling surface, and to avoid thermal stresses during cool down
doesn’t damage the superconductor. Around the whole cross-section is a radiation shield
consisting of aluminum 5058 as all other aluminum parts are made of in the cryostat. A
NdFeB permanent magnet was used to suppress the critical current in the centerpiece of
the coated conductor, in order to force the centerpiece into the overcurrent regime before
the rest of the tape is entering overcurrent. The NdFeB permanent magnet used was
20 mm x 15 mm x 5 mm with the magnetization direction perpendicular to the largest
surface, bought here at [25]. Several were ordered, and 6 were measured with a Gauss
meter showing an average field strength at the middle of 141 mT, and at the edge 182 mT.
Cooling to cryogenic temperature the magnets lose around 12% of their room temperature
strength [26] at 73K the magnetic flux density at the surface of the magnet is estimated
to be 125 mT. To glue on the PT1000 thermometers, super glue was used - not specified
whether it would work during cryogenic temperatures. The epoxy glue used in the previous
LN2 test experiment had not been blended properly and did not hold on to the tape surface.
Figure 3.11: Illustration of the overcurrent device mounted inside the cryostat and con-
nected to the power supply and temperature controller outside the cryostat.
First, it needs to be tested that the superconducting tapes could be soldered into a groove
on a copper block, to ensure optimal electrical contact. The tapes are put into the groove
on the copper blocks to ensure good surface-to-surface thermal contact, between the
copper blocks and alumina plate.
3.2.1
Data acquisition
During an IV measurement, the current was ramped up and the potential was measured
along with all thermometers as output was written to a file using a LabView program.
To adapt the temperature controller to the overcurrent device and the heater cartridges,
then the PID parameters of the LakeShore 240 controller were set at default values to
Overcurrent in high temperature superconducting tapes for power cable applications
25
==PAGE:33==
P = 30, I = 50, D = 1 as the manual recommends [27]. When the temperature had
reached the set temperature within 0.1 K, the IV measurement was started.
(a) Measurement procedure measuring critical
current Ic and n-value at temperature Tq that is
reached before the measurement is started.
(b) Measurement procedure measuring the
overcurrent at temperature Tq.
Figure 3.12: The measurements procedures used to measure power law parameters (a)
and the overcurrent (b). The red line marks an eventual non-zero starting current of the
measurement.
The measurement procedures are seen in Figure 3.12, for both cases of IV curves. When
measuring IV curves, it’s important to ramp up the current in small steps, so a thermal
runaway does not happen. Ramping up with a shorter wait time of 4 s and bigger steps
higher than 2 A, several thermal runaways were observed, at currents higher than Ic. An
example of a thermal runaway is shown later in Figure 4.10. All critical current experiments
were limited by measuring the voltage drop across the superconductor and comparing
this to a threshold value Uthreshold = 10 µV
cm at each measurement and then rapid ramping
down, to avoid a large temperature increase due to the dissipated heat in the current
leads [23]. As soon as this threshold potential was reached, the program started to step
the current down. Due to the joule heating in current leads, stepping down happened in
steps of 10 A when measuring the critical current Ic and n-value. Then the step size up
and step size down depended on which measurement was done as shown in Figure 3.12.
At each step, the program would wait a sample wait time of 4 s, while writing data to a file.
This would repeat until the voltage threshold was met and then the step-down process
started. If the threshold potential Uthreshold was not met, a current limit was met and the
program terminated, and new settings had to be set to reach threshold voltage. Ramping
down, the number of current steps and size was estimated to get as close to zero current
in the last step. This was done to limit the joule heating in the current leads and to prevent
unnecessary heating.
Data was acquired 4 times at 7 different temperatures of the heater block Tq = [70, 74, 77,
80, 85, 87, 90] K. These were selected to have a few points to build a Jc(T) formula on,
and 77K was included as a reference with the liquid nitrogen experiment prior to the finish
of the setup. Data was acquired 4 times at each temperature. 2 Ic and n measurements
(with and without the permanent magnet) and 2 overcurrent measurements. In total 28
26
Overcurrent in high temperature superconducting tapes for power cable applications
==PAGE:34==
experiments were planned. First, the experiments were done with a magnet suppressing
the critical current with about 125 mT applied magnetic field on the coated conductor tape,
over 2 cm, centered at the middle as shown on Figure 3.10. When the 14 experiments
were done ( 7 to identify power law parameters and then 7 to measure the overcurrent),
the magnet was removed. Then the experiments were done again, expecting that the
critical current returning to the initial value.
3.2.2
Data analysis and fitting procedure
All data were analyzed using OriginPro 2022 [28]. To identify the critical current and n-
value for each measurement, the electrical potential was divided by the length of coated
conductor between the voltage wires of the 4-point measurement, and was fitted to the
power law Equation 2.1.3. Before fitting could be done, all data points had to be adjusted
for a thermoelectric effect, causing much data to show a negative initial potential. For
a parallel connection relevant in overcurrent situations the potential is always the same,
yielding:
I = Ic ·
(
U
E0 · L
) 1
n
+ U · Azy
ρel,m · L
(3.7)
Where I is the measured current, U measured Potential, Ic critical current is a fitting
parameter, L length of the segment, n power law n-value is a fitting parameter, Azy is
the cross-section area of the tape without the thin layer of superconducting substrate and
ρel,m is the average electric resistivity of the matrix - fitted in an experiment at 90 K to be
ρel,m = 7.710−10 Ωm. Due to the high non-linearity of the power law, and the difference in
proportionality of the power law and Ohm’s law, in a superconductive state, each fit had
to be separated. Fitting the power law was done on as large a range of data points as
possible showing the power law, using Equation 2.1.3:
U
L = E0 ·
(
I
Ic(T, B)+
)n
+ Uoff
(3.8)
where the fitting parameter Uoff is the electrical potential per cm offset caused by f. ex.
thermo-electric effects. In the experiments the current I is the external control parameter
that varies to produce the IV-curve. To fit Ohm’s law on as large a range of data points as
possible following Ohms law the relation:
U
L = I · ρel,m
Azy
+ Uoff
(3.9)
This is how the resistivity ρel,m of the matrix layers and copper is approximated. Without
dividing the measured potential by the length of the segment, the length of the normal con-
ductor could be approximated. For data with an ohmic contribution and a superconductor
in a series connection, the current is the same for both, yielding the relation:
U = I · ρel,m · Lm
Azy
+ E0 · Lsc ·
( I
Ic
)n
+ Uoff
(3.10)
Here the two lengths are not the same. The full-length L is known: Lsc = L−Lm, so Lm is
chosen to be the fitting parameter because the term is giving the largest contribution at low
currents. The critical current Ic is also a fitting parameter, and so is n power law exponent.
In reality, the superconductor is always in a parallel connection with the matrix material,
a normal conductor. However, if the superconductor parameters are high and the current
is below the critical current. Then the normal conductor’s contribution from the parallel
connection is negligible, compared to the normal conductor in a series connection. For a
Overcurrent in high temperature superconducting tapes for power cable applications
27
==PAGE:35==
combination of series and parallel, the data had to be separated into a range of data where
either a normal or superconductive conductive behavior could be seen. This is best done
on a log-log plot as shown in the next section. This is due to the nonlinearity of the power
law values higher than 1. An example of fitting to a power law and normal resistance on
separate parts of the data is shown on Figure 3.15. All data recorded was done with the
same tape segment, at 7 different temperatures just below the critical temperature Tc = 93
K and down to Tq = 70 K. First experiments with a permanent magnet as illustrated on
Figure 3.10. This was done to enter an overcurrent state at lower currents, below Tc,
and without experiencing a quench. The same experiments were done again without an
external field from a permanent magnet.
3.2.3
An initial experiment in liquid nitrogen
To solder the superconducting tape onto copper blocks. The copper blocks were placed
on a steel plate and heated using a magnetic stirrer heating device until the soldering
melted on them, see Figure 3.13a. Lead-based soldering was used to ensure good con-
tact between the coated conductor tape and copper. The magnetic stirrer heating device
used was set to about half power and after 5-7 minutes the copper was warm enough to
melt the solder. Both copper blocks and the tape were pre-soldered, as described in the
solder instruction of the coated conductor [6], with a little amount of solder, before the tape
was placed in the soldered groove and more solder was added. As soon as the solder
was added, very light pressure was applied on the tape, to push it in the melted solder.
Then the steel plate was moved carefully from the magnetic stirrer heating device to cool
down.
28
Overcurrent in high temperature superconducting tapes for power cable applications
==PAGE:36==
(a) Soldering a coated conductor tape in the
grooves of the two copper blocks acting as
current leads by placing them on a steel plate
heated by a magnetic stirrer heating device
(grey surface).
(b) Coated conductor tape soldered be-
tween two copper blocks prepared for ca-
ble connection and with voltage wires sol-
dered across the tape. A Pt-1000 thermome-
ter(white block) laying beside the tape, was
glued to the center part of the tape to mea-
sure temperature increases during the over-
current operation of the tape.
Figure 3.13: (a) Illustration of procedure for soldering a coated conductor tape between
two copper blocks for current supply. (b) Tape mounted between the copper blocks and
instrumented with voltage probes and a thermometer glued to the center segment.
When it was cooled down 4-point probes were soldered onto the the coated conductor.
To measure the temperature of the coated conductor tape, a PT1000 thermometer was
glued to the surface of the tape, in the middle, using a cryogenic black epoxy. An initial
experiment was done in liquid nitrogen to confirm the soldiering of the superconducting
tape to the copper block would endure cryogenic temperature. And to investigate if it
could be done without damaging the superconductor between the two copper blocks.
Overcurrent in high temperature superconducting tapes for power cable applications
29
==PAGE:37==
Figure 3.14: The concept design test to be investigated in liquid nitrogen
Copper blocks with soldered tape, 4-probe wires, and glued thermometer were mounted
on a glass fiber composite plate. The white tape cable on Figure 3.14 was the cable to the
HP 34420A nano volt meter (appendix Figure C.2), used in all experiments to measure the
potential of the 4-point voltage probe wires. The results can be seen here on Figure 3.15
30
Overcurrent in high temperature superconducting tapes for power cable applications
==PAGE:38==
Figure 3.15: IV curves showing the average electric potential drop across the short and
long segment of the American Superconductor tape AmSc of type 344C shown in Fig-
ure 3.13b when immersed into liquid nitrogen. This show data from the liquid nitrogen
experiment with both a good piece n ∼30 and Ic = 90 A and a bad piece with n ∼3
and Ic = 56 A. Even an ohmic contribution to the electric field for the long segment is
seen by the slope of 1, as in Figure 2.7. The ohmic and weak superconducting parts can
be caused by mechanical deformations of the tape during manufacturing or during the
mounting shown in Figure 3.13 and Figure 3.14. At around 110 A measurements deviate
from the power law with n ∼30 to what seems a higher n-value. The measurements of
the center segment that floats around 0.01 µV/cm represent the noise floor.
It’s expected that any tape produced could not be perfect, so weak areas are allowed,
however, an ohmic-resistant contribution is not expected. This is seen here on the bottom
left, along the red dashed line. The tape has been laying on the shelf for 12 years at DTU
Wind and Energy Systems, some degradation is expected, but not fully. The handling of
the tapes during the preparations of a sample has to be done with great care. The terms
good and weak superconductors are relative, to what power law exponent (slope of blue
dashed line) is to be expected, as for the critical current. The difference is here a factor
of 10 on the power law n-value and a factor of 2 on the critical current. The 3 lines shown
in Figure 3.15 , show illustratively how the fit to each contribution and set of parameters
are separated in the data range on a log-log plot of the IV curve. Up to 33 A, a normal
conducting contribution is seen along the red dashed line, on the long segment. Because
it’s ohmic on a log-log plot one would expect a straight line with a slope of one:
U = R · I ⇒log (U) = 1 · log (I) + log(R)
(3.11)
This show that the power law exponent is 1 on an ohmic part of the tape. Compared to the
noise floor of the center segment it can be distinguished from each other, in a log-log plot.
Overcurrent in high temperature superconducting tapes for power cable applications
31
==PAGE:39==
In a linear plot, the normal conductor is shown as a linear line from origo, very different
from the power law. Then in the range of 33 A to 85 A weak superconductive parameters
are observed, with an Ic,weak = 51 A, and n ∼3. Where in the range of 90 A to 110
A a good superconductor is observed with Ic,good = 90 A and n ∼30. This experiment
confirms that the soldering of the superconductive tape in the copper blocks groove is
working and that the thermometer can be glued to the center of the tape. It also shows
that the handling of the tapes must be very careful in order not to degrade them. The origin
of the tape degradation is however not clear, but illustrates that the coated conductor can
be damaged.
Figure 3.16: Temperatures for an AmSc 344C 4mm coated conductor tape, tested in LN2.
Temperature goes up and then down at very similar currents. This is due to the nonlinear
dynamics of boiling and bubble formation on the tape surface in LN2. Then as it stabilizes
while and the current is ramped down again, the temperature drops
In Figure 3.16, the red line shows temperatures during ramping up. As soon as the tem-
perature hits the boiling point of Liquid nitrogen, bubbles of nitrogen gas start to form
on the surface of the tape. This is seen by the last 4 red points to the right, where the
electric field is fluctuating due to the fluctuating cooling properties of the boiling liquid ni-
trogen. As soon as the ramping down begins (blue points) there is a sharp decrease and
then a little flat line of blue points at higher currents than during ramping up. Bubbles
formation is also a challenge for superconducting cables, during over-currents. The ex-
periment thereby showed the challenge of avoiding boiling with the use of liquid nitrogen
as a coolant to study the overcurrent situation.
Further, the experiment showed the necessity for a sample holder during the initial treat-
ment and preparation, seen in Figure 3.17.
32
Overcurrent in high temperature superconducting tapes for power cable applications
==PAGE:40==
Figure 3.17: During the experiment in Liquid nitrogen, it was learned that a sample holder
was necessary to, insure the distance between copper blocks to avoid damage to the
superconducting tape while soldering and moving samples.
The sample holder was used both during soldering, cool down to room temperature, and
to store a sample until it was ready to be mounted on setup. During the heating and
soldering process, the copper would always oxidize and become dark. This oxidation
was removed each time carefully using fine sandpaper of size 1000.
3.2.4
The Overcurrent measurement device in the cryostat chamber
To transport the current from the terminals shown on Figure 3.2, two new copper bars with
superconducting tape on the sides were designed with 2 superconducting tapes on each
side of the copper bar and to each with cable shoes, see Figure D.1 and Figure D.2. The
overcurrent measurement device is shown partially assembled in Figure 3.18a where the
copper bars supplying the overcurrent measurement device are just showing at the top of
the aluminum plate in the middle. Figure 3.18b shows the device covered by MLI and an
aluminum radiation shield.
Overcurrent in high temperature superconducting tapes for power cable applications
33
==PAGE:41==
(a) The overcurrent measurement device shown
is installed on the cold plate and connected to
current leads lying on the cold plate and covered
by an aluminum plate. Yellow tape is Kapton
tape for electrical insulation.
(b) Final setup with an aluminum radiation shield
and Multi Layer Insulation (MLI) overcurrent
leads minimizing heat flow into the supercon-
ducting current leads as much as possible.
Figure 3.18: Final installation of overcurrent measuring device on the cold plate inside the
cryostat on the cold plate. a) Shows the overcurrent device, with superconducting current
leads under an aluminum plate, mounted on the cold plate. b) Shows the overcurrent
measurement device with the aluminum radiation shield.
34
Overcurrent in high temperature superconducting tapes for power cable applications
==PAGE:42==
Figure 3.19: The final overcurrent measuring device is shown from the side. Notice the
air gap between the cold plate and the heater block. In between the plate to the left and
the cold plate are the superconducting current leads soldered on and into the copper bar.
The standard for critical measurement [13] says that measurements must be performed
in liquid nitrogen - however liquid nitrogen is dangerous and hard to model due to high
non-linearity around the boiling point. Therefore this design was chosen, with conduction
through solid materials, and temperature controlled with existing equipment. If the setup
succeeds in securing enough thermal conductivity, a thermal runaway is to be expected
at lower currents than in liquid nitrogen. In liquid nitrogen (LN2) there is cooling from all
sides, and as the coolant becomes warmer it has a natural tendency to be transported
around due to convection. The setup here only conducts heat through one side of the
tape. A liquid nitrogen experiment can be potentially very dangerous if a quench happens
- boiling of the nitrogen. The worst that can happen in this setup, is that the tape burns
over, and some equipment is damaged at the most extreme but it cannot evolve gasses
that strangle researchers and burn skin frozen if an accident happens. In many industrial
applications, such as superconducting coils for generators, thermal conduction cooling
using cryocoolers in close-cycle systems is preferred over liquid nitrogen. Even in high
temperature superconductive power cables as seen in Figure 1.1, the heat is conducted
through the former and cooling tube where the LN2 is flowing.
3.2.5
Thermal expansion considerations
Assuming that the major material used in the overcurrent measuring device is in the linear
thermal expansion regime then the expansions are compared in Table 3.2.5.
Material
Thermal expansion coefficient
αL in
[ µm
mK
]
Relative thermal expansion
∆L
L0 = αL∆T
Cu
16
−
(
16 µm
m·K
)
· 223K = −0.004
Al
21 −24
−
(
24 µm
m·K
)
· 223K = −0.005
Al2O3
8, 1
−
(
8.1 µm
m·K
)
· 223K = −0.002
Ni
13
−
(
13 µm
m·K
)
· 223K = −0.003
Table 3.1: Thermal relative expansions for the main materials in overcurrent measurement
device [29]. Calculations are based on a temperature difference from room temperature
to the lowest experimental temperature: ∆T = 70K −293K = −223K.
The temperature change cause relative thermal expansions in a range of 0.002 −0.005 of
contraction. The biggest contraction difference is that of Al2O3 and Al, using the cryogenic
Overcurrent in high temperature superconducting tapes for power cable applications
35
==PAGE:43==
grease in between the layers freezes them together, so the tension is not in the coated
conductor tape.
3.3
1D analytical heat model
On Figure 3.20 is a sketch of, (a) a tape mounted in the overcurrent measurements device
and, (b) a zoom-in on the center segment. Here a dashed line surrounds the center
segment, enlarged on Figure 3.20b.
(a) A sketch of the coated conductor mounted in the over-
current measurement device and the dashed square, the
control volume for modeling.
s
(b) Control Volume (CV) in a dashed
line box
Figure 3.20: Sketch of the coated conductor tape mounted in the overcurrent measure-
ment device with a control volume illustrated by a dashed box also shown enlarged to the
right..
Where w = 4.8 mm is the width of the tape, H = 0.02 mm is the height of the tape. l = 10
mm is the length of the center segment. The depth D = 16 mm from the tape and to the
cold backside. The density is mainly that of copper and so is the specific heat, ρ = 8800 kg
m3
and cp = 252
J
kg K at 100 K from [15]. The following assumptions are made to formulate a
simple thermal model describing the temperature of the coated conductor as the applied
current is ramped up into the overcurrent regime:
1. Constant and uniform material properties.
2. Isothermal inside control volume because of its small size.
3. Heat is only flowing downward.
4. Radiation can be neglected.
5. There is a constant temperature on the backside of the aluminum block Tq
6. Uniform temperature distribution in the xy-plane of the tape.
7. The superconductor and normal conductor are in an electrically parallel connection
8. The electrical field in the superconductor film is described by a power law relation
as in Equation 2.1.3 and illustrated in Figure 2.7.
This reduces the problem to a 1D problem in the z-direction. From the energy balance of
the control volume comes
˙P −˙Q = Est
36
Overcurrent in high temperature superconducting tapes for power cable applications
==PAGE:44==
where ˙P is the joule heating, ˙Q is the heat flow towards the cold plate from the tape and
Est is the heat stored in the tape. The power dissipated has two contributions, one from
the current in the matrix
˙
Pm and from the superconductor
˙
Psc:
˙P =
˙
Psc + ˙
Pm = UIsc + UIm
where U is the potential over the center segment. U is found by solving Equation 3.7,
with a numerical solver - since it’s a nonlinear equation. The energy out of CV is
Eout = κ · w · l
D (T(t) −Tq) = κ · Axy
D (T −Tq)
with the average thermal conductivity κ, T(t) is the time-dependent temperature of the
tape and Axy is the area of the tape in the xy plane. The energy stored in the center tape
segment is
Est = w · l · H · ρcu · cp
dT(t)
dt
= Axy · H
α
· dT(t)
dt
where α =
1
cp·ρcu is the diffusivity of copper. By combining the equations above one
obtains a first-order differential equation
˙P −κ · Axy
D (T(t) −Tq) = Axy · H
α
· dT(t)
dt
⇔
˙P · D
Axy · κ −(T(t) −Tq) = D · H
α · κ · dT(t)
dt
with the initial condition T(0) = Tq, so that everything in the model starts with the same
temperature. Simplify the equation by setting
ζ =
˙P · D
Axy · κ + Tq
and
β = D · H
α · κ
so it is the simplest form is
ζ −T(t) = βT ′(t)
with the solution in the form of
T(t) = C1 + C2 · eτ·t
and derivative:
T ′(t) = C2 · τ · eτ·t
Inserting this into the simplified equation gives
ζ −
(
C1 + C2 · eτ·t)
= β
(
C2 · τ · eτ·t)
⇔(ζ −C1) −(1 + β · τ) C2 · eτ·t = 0
two equations because of the linear independence of constants and the exponential func-
tion:
ζ −C1 = 0 ⇒C1 = ζ =
˙P · D
Axy · κ + Tq
1 + β · τ = 0 ⇒τ = −1
β
= −α · κ
D · H
From the initial condition, C2 is determined:
T(0) = Tq ↔C1 + C2 = Tq ↔C2 = Tq −C1 = Tq −ζ = −
˙P · D
Axy · κ
Overcurrent in high temperature superconducting tapes for power cable applications
37
==PAGE:45==
The solution is then:
T(t) =
˙P · D
Axy · κ + Tq + −
˙P · D
Axy · κ · e
−α · κ
D · H
·t = Tq +
˙P · D
Axy · κ
(
1 −e
−α · κ
D · H
·t
)
(3.12)
which can be seen from the last expression to satisfy the initial condition. From calculat-
ing what half-life of the model, with the value given in the beginning and using the fitted
average conductivity from Figure 4.13,
T1
2
= ln
( 1
2
)
τ
= ln
(1
2
)
·




−
5,23
W
m·K
8800 kg
m3 ·251
J
kg·K
0.016m · 0.0002m








−1
≃1 s
(3.13)
So this is telling that the wait time between each measurement should be about 4 s.
It’s about
( 1
2
)4 ≈5% change of the steady state temperature. This means that using a
steady-state model to calculate the temperature is quite close to the actual result.
Tss = T(t →∞) = Tq +
˙P · D
Axy · κ
(3.14)
This is the full derivation using lumped capacitance, equivalent to assuming everything
happens on the surface of the tape, of this analytical 1D model.
Solving the model with Matlab [30], a code structure with the flow seen in Figure 3.21 was
used. To model the superconductor the temperature dependence of the critical current of
the coated conductor in self-field Ic(T, sf) was used as obtained from the literature and
later modeled by the measurements.
Figure 3.21: Illustration of the code flow. First parameters Tq = Ti and material properties
are defined, then the current is ramped up toImax = 2Ic + 30A to go simulate the overcur-
rent regime even at temperatures close to Tc where the critical current is smaller than 1
A.
The code starts by setting the initial temperature Tq, and determining parameters, building
an array for the total current for the for loop. The array is a linear set of numbers from 0.1
A to 2Ic + 30A in 100 steps. For each current step, an iterative process is calculating the
potential until the change in the potential is less than 1%. Then it takes the temperature as
a new initial temperature and calculates the new properties and sets a new total current.
This way the potential, and current in the matrix and superconductor are calculated at
each total current step. The full code for the calculation can be seen in Appendix G.
38
Overcurrent in high temperature superconducting tapes for power cable applications
==PAGE:46==
3.4
COMSOL modeling
For 3D model, the cold plate and the overcurrent measuring device was built in COMSOL
Multiphysics 6.0 [31]. The cold plate specifications were taken from [18], and can be seen
in Appendix H. The overcurrent setup has a little offset from the center of the cold head,
beneath the cold plate. This is from the alignment of threaded holes in the cold plate
with the bolts over the copper blocks to fasten the setup to the cold plate. The modules
”Heat Transfer in Solids” and ”Electrical Currents” and the multi physics module ”Electro-
magnetic Heating” was used in a stationary study to estimate the surface temperatures
of the overcurrent measurement device and the cold plate. The model is built floating in
a vacuum, with a boundary condition on all surfaces: radiation to ambient. The surface
emissivity had to be ϵ = 3, to approximate the observed temperature of the cold plate.
This emissivity is a nonphysical size since an emissivity can only be between 0-1, where
1 is the black body approximation. The model’s estimate of the surface temperatures is
seen on Figure 3.22.
Figure 3.22: A 3-dimensional plot of the surface temperature of the cold plate and the
overcurrent measurement device when the cooling by the cold head is modeled using
a finite element method. The model shows a rough 20 K temperature gradient from the
front of the old plate to the tape in between the copper blocks. The scale on the right is in
Kelvin.
Figure 3.22 is showing a difference of 20 K and an average temperature of about 75 K. As
seen the temperature seems to be somewhat uniform across the tape laying in between
the 2 copper blocks on top. This points to the tape must lay in the transverse direction on
the cold plate: to have as uniform temperature as possible.
The model is very different from the real case but gives a good indication of how the
surface temperature distributes over the cold plate and tape sample. When the model
estimated approximately the same temperature as observed, then the heating elements
Overcurrent in high temperature superconducting tapes for power cable applications
39
==PAGE:47==
were added to the model. A good thermal connection between the heater block and the
cold plate would mean the heat flows into the cold plate. This would cause a higher
temperature at the end of the cold plate with the current leads. This is an unwanted
situation. Adding heating elements with 25 W input will raise the temperature of the cold
plate by an additional 20 K, shown in Figure 3.23.
Figure 3.23: The figure shows a model estimate of surface temperature with a heating
input of 25 W, 12.5 W from each element. The scale on the right is in Kelvin.
Figure 3.23 shows that if the heater block is mounted directly on the cold plate, the temper-
ature changes by almost 20 K. Compared to the case for no heating input, the temperature
has raised about 20 K. Therefore, the thermal connection between the heater block and
the cold plate needs to be weaker. So that the heating from the elements doesn’t also
heat the cold plate. This is why the alumina plate is introduced between the heater block
and cold plate, as shown Figure 3.19 .
40
Overcurrent in high temperature superconducting tapes for power cable applications
==PAGE:48==
4
Results
4.1
IV curve analysis
For all experiments, a few IV curves were measured to determine the critical current of
the coated conductor tape. The initial experiments at each temperature setting were done
with larger current steps than described in Figure 3.12 to find the range of the critical
current and minimize the joule heating in the setup. Figure 4.1 shows a typical IV-curve
measurement, power law fit, and fitting parameters.
Figure 4.1: Example of an IV curve of the AmSc 344 coated conductor mounted on the
overcurrent measurement device cooled to Tq = 85 K as on Figure 3.7. A power law fit,
and the fitting parameters are inserted.
Due to the nonlinearity of the power law and dependence of the critical current on the cur-
rent, the fits had to be separated as explained in subsection 3.2.2 and discussed shortly
section 4.3, when comparing the data to the model. Looking at the residual plots, negli-
gible small systematic derivations were seen around the critical current.
4.2
Determination of Ic(B, T) curve
IV measurements are presented here on a log scale of the current and potential axis. If
a power law is associated with the data, it would be a straight line on a log scale (Equa-
tion 2.1.3), as shown by the guide-to-the-eye line. A linear relation, such as a normal
conductor, is shown as a linear line with a slope of 1. The raw data are shown in 5
graphs, going from the lowest temperatures to just below Tc = 93 K. The temperature
Tq is that of the heater block and is assumed to be the same as the temperature of the
coated conductor initially for each experiment.
Overcurrent in high temperature superconducting tapes for power cable applications
41
==PAGE:49==
Figure 4.2: Measured electrical potential over the long segment of AmSc 344-tape with
and without an external magnetic field of about 125 mT applied by a NdFeB permanent
magnet at temperatures Tq = 70 K, 74 K, 77 K, and 80 K. Guides to the eye lines have
been added to illustrate a power law dependence as a straight line. A linear dependence
with a slope of 1 is seen at low currents indicating a resistive segment in series with a
superconducting segment as shown in Figure 2.7.
Data in circles need a higher current to show a power law relation, compared to those in
stars. Confirming a lowering of the Ic with an external magnetic field, just as others have
seen [14] [8], even though it’s only the center segment that is suppressed by the magnetic
field. This indicates that it’s the lowest power law that sets the agenda for a supercon-
ducting tape. This data also show that the long segment of the tape has a little bit of the
tape that is normal conducting, shown by the tendency to follow an ohmic contribution -
the dashed line. That’s well above the power law contribution below Ic. Experiments with
an MgB2 coil have shown similar behavior in a [18]. Data on the center segment of the
tape is shown for 70K ≤Tq ≤80 in Figure 4.3.
42
Overcurrent in high temperature superconducting tapes for power cable applications
==PAGE:50==
Figure 4.3: Measured electrical potential over the center segment of AmSc 344-tape with
and without an external magnetic field of about 125 mT applied by a NdFeB permanent
magnet at cooling temperatures Tq = 70 K, 74 K, 77 K, and 80 K. No resistive segment
in series with the superconductor, as shown on Figure 2.7. Data shows a random potential
around U ≃0, 1 µV
cm representing the noise floor.
Figure 4.3 shows a random potential around U ≃0, 1 µV
cm and below representing the noise
floor of the electrical measurement system. Above the noise floor then the potential follows
a power law since the data falls on a straight line. Indicating that the normal conductive
part of the superconductor is outside the center segment.
Results from 85 K to 90 K, were closest to the critical surface. The tape was therefore
ramped up to overcurrent and through a controlled quench with no thermal runaway,
meaning that the tape was fully ohmic. Thermal runaway was seen at lower tempera-
tures and is shown later in the report.
Overcurrent in high temperature superconducting tapes for power cable applications
43
==PAGE:51==
Figure 4.4: Measured electrical potential over the long segment of AmSc 344-tape at
different temperatures with and without an external magnetic field of about 125 mT applied
by a NdFeB permanent magnet for cooling temperatures 80 K ≤Tq ≤95 K as well for
measurement at room temperature with Tq = 293 K. The ohmic behavior is seen by the
small slope compared to the power law behavior.
Figure 4.4 shows data for the long segment, with an ohmic contribution, ramped up to
show a power law relation, and then through current sharing, and up to a full ohmic be-
havior of the metal substrate of the coated conductor. The data at Tq = 87 K shows
here the shortest current range with a power law - the yellow data points. The black data
points show an IV measurement at room temperature. Comparing the room temperature
measurements with Tq = 90 K measurements, a decrease in the resistivity is observed,
following the well-known temperature dependence of copper’s resistivity [32].
44
Overcurrent in high temperature superconducting tapes for power cable applications
==PAGE:52==
Figure 4.5: Measured electrical potential over center segment of AmSc 344-tape with
and without an external magnetic field of about 125 mT applied by a NdFeB permanent
magnet, for cooling temperatures 85 K ≤Tq ≤90 K as well as room temperature with
Tq = 293 K (Black).
Both data for the long segment,Figure 4.4, and center segment, Figure 4.5, are an extra
set of data at Tq = 85 K. This shows that it’s hard to replicate the data, very small tem-
perature variations in between experiments has a great influence on the critical current,
thereby also on when the tape enters overcurrent, or eventually quench. On Figure 4.6
are the temperatures shown during each of the experiments.
Overcurrent in high temperature superconducting tapes for power cable applications
45
==PAGE:53==
Figure 4.6: The measured temperature at the center of AmSc 344-tape with and without
an external magnetic field applied by a permanent magnet mounted above the tape, seen
on Figure 3.10.
For cooling temperatures of 85K ≤Tq ≤90, the tape was ramped up into a normal con-
ducting state. The tape had a raise of almost 10 K, in each transition from superconducting
to normal conductive.
Figure 4.6 show that temperatures vary by most with 2 K for experiments with 70K ≤Tq ≤
80 K, with the coldest experiment being the worst. It should be noted that the maximal
currents are not the same as those presented in Figure 4.2 and Figure 4.3. This is due to
an error firstly on the thermometer on the tape and then on the control thermometer making
it impossible to control the temperature. After a warm-up, the issues were fixed and the
setup was assembled and cooled down. The tests were done again but showed a much
lower Ic, than in the prior experiments. This is discussed later in subsection 5.2.2. The
IV curve measurements from before the degradation are used in order to be comparable
with the measurements using a permanent magnet to reach overcurrent at lower currents
than without the permanent magnet.
4.3
Data analysis - fitting parameters
Using the fittings with a superconductor and normal conductor in series connection Equa-
tion 3.10 then the length of the Ohmic segment was found to be about 0.18 mm of the
tape outside the center segment. This is not a lot, but it’s evident from the graphs on Fig-
ure 4.2 and Figure 4.4. It diminishes the benefits of a superconductor, by giving normal
conductors joule heating - even at this small scale.
46
Overcurrent in high temperature superconducting tapes for power cable applications
==PAGE:54==
Using the fitting procedure explained in subsection 3.2.2, the superconductor parameters
were estimated. The critical currents are shown as a function of the average temperature
of the center segment in Figure 4.7 and n-values on Figure 4.8. In Figure 4.7 the estimated
critical currents show a smooth decay from 74 K up to 86 K, where the critical seems to
drop quite fast, a few Kelvin before Tc.
Figure 4.7: Estimated critical currents as a function of the average temperature of the
center segment during sampling by power law fitted to data shown in Figure 4.3 and
Figure 4.5. The external magnetic field of about 125 mT is applied by a NdFeB permanent
magnet. Error bars are smaller than markers.
Figure 4.7 shows that applying an external magnetic field of about 125 mT applied by a
NdFeB permanent magnet lowers the critical current by some Amps. The average temper-
atures are not the same for each measurement as shown in Figure 4.6. The estimated
critical currents will later be fitted with a practical temperature dependence expression
used for the modeling.
The estimated n-values is shown in Figure 4.8 as a function of the average temperatures
of the center segment, for measurements in self-field and with and without an external
magnetic field.
Overcurrent in high temperature superconducting tapes for power cable applications
47
==PAGE:55==
Figure 4.8: The fitted power law exponents as a function of temperature on the data in
section 4.2. The highest exponent at nearly 200 is discussed subsection 5.1.1. The n(T,B)
shows the n values when a magnetic field is applied to the tape by a permanent magnet.
The n(T,sf) is the n-value when the permanent magnet is removed and only the self-field
(sf) of the tape is present. Error bars are smaller than markers.
On Figure 4.8 it seems like the power law exponents lay on a straight line with an external
magnetic field. But without the external field, it looks more like an exponential relation -
if data are trustworthy. The red data point up on the left at the top in Figure 4.8, seems
unreal high, and is most likely a due to the temperature change during the experiment.
Looking at Figure 4.6, the temperature also change during the experiment, and that falsely
raises the power law fitting parameter as in the discussion.
4.3.1
Overcurrent and thermal runaway
For all cooling temperatures, it was attempted to determine at what current a thermal run-
away would happen. In experiments with temperatures lower than 85 K, this could be
observed, where the tape went through current sharing into a normal conducting state.
For many of these attempts, the power supply had to be turned off manually, to avoid
damage to the sample and equipment. The quench happens much faster than the wait
time of the equipment’s set sampling time, hence only a few data points were captured
before the power was cut. If the quench happened slower than the sampling wait time of
2s, data points were collected. Often it happens faster than the wait time. Going past the
overcurrent Iover, meaning that the temperature is rising. As just shown in Figure 4.12 ,
an increase in temperature causes the critical current to decrease. When that happens
in a current controlled situation, as here and in cables, the heat dissipated grows with the
48
Overcurrent in high temperature superconducting tapes for power cable applications
==PAGE:56==
power law - immensely fast. Defining and measuring this ”point of no return”, here termed
overcurrent Iover, is of critical importance to avoid thermal runaways that potentially ruin
the tape in applications. This phenomenon is illustrated in the next two figures. In Fig-
ure 4.9 the measurement of the Iover is shown in a linear plot, to show how the potential
raise as a step down in current is taken. This happens because the temperature is raising
slightly, shown by the subplot to be around 0.1 K.
Figure 4.9: The center tape segment enters the overcurrent regime. The potential across
the tape at Tq = 74 K with the applied magnetic field as the applied current is ramped
up until a voltage drop of 50 µV
cm is reached and then the current is ramped down again in
smaller steps. The reason that the voltage drop is higher going back is that the tape has
heated a little, lowering the critical current, compared to the initial temperature.
Figure 4.9 shows what the beginning of a thermal runaway looks like, what happens right
before a quench happens. On the IV measurement, the tape is ramped approximately 6
A over the critical current. Then the temperature starts to rise. This is showing that the
tape is not at thermal equilibrium. The influence of just a small raise in temperature is
discussed more later on subsection 5.1.1.
Overcurrent in high temperature superconducting tapes for power cable applications
49
==PAGE:57==
Figure 4.10: Potential and temperature (inset) of the center segment of the tape with a
magnetic field applied by a permanent magnet( please confirm) at Tq = 77 K. The thermal
runaway is clearly observed as the current reach 80.2 A.
On Figure 4.10, 5 data points were captured of a quench. This was done with a wait time
of 2 s, and steps of 10 A, to overshoot the overcurrent and show that even when stepping
down a thermal runaway is continuing. The temperature is within a couple of seconds, 50
K higher, and fast climbing. No more data was acquired. The power was cut off at 135 K.
On Figure 4.11 the results of the experiments measuring the overcurrent and aiming to
find the current at which a thermal runaway/quench is about to happen but avoided.
50
Overcurrent in high temperature superconducting tapes for power cable applications
==PAGE:58==
Figure 4.11: The critical currents Ic(T, B) and Ic(T, sf) and overcurrent Iover(T, B) as a
function of temperature. Iover(T, sf) was not measured due to time limitations.
From Figure 4.11, it’s seen that about 7 A, over Ic, the tape shows signs of going into
a thermal runaway, but is still able to be avoided. This could be called an irreversible
overcurrent. Once the current goes above this the tape starts a thermal runaway that can
only be stopped by turning the current down fast.
4.4
Practical temperature dependence of the critical current
Ic(T, sf)
The relation of critical current described in Equation 2.14 presented by [14][33], did not
fit the data near the transition temperature. A practical temperature dependence inspired
by the data [34] on page 105, is therefore proposed to describe the temperature depen-
dence of the critical current in self-field Ic(T, sf). Looking at the characteristics of the
Ic(T) near Tc: it has to go to zero at Tc here put into a function Θ(T) and otherwise de-
cay percentage-wise as the temperature rise towards Tc, the function δ(T). So that the
practical temperature dependence of the critical current near Tc can be described by the
function
Ic(T, sf) = Ic(77K, sf) · δ(T) · Θ(T)
(4.1)
The rule of thumb is a 10% decrease in Ic per Kelvin near Tc. The percent growth function
is formulated as Equation 2.14 by [14] but moved on the temperature axis to fit the data
δ(T) = e
−T −t1
T ∗
Overcurrent in high temperature superconducting tapes for power cable applications
51
==PAGE:59==
where the fitting parameters k and t1 are in units of K. Here a Galilean translation of (T) →
(T −t1) is done on the expression in Equation 2.14 for the temperature dependence. The
expression applies for T ≤30 K, but the measured temperatures are for 70 K ≤T ≤
93 K, as shown in Figure 4.16, hence the Galilean translation. δ(t) can’t account for the
fluxline lattice meltdown Near Tc. The meltdown is modeled by a smooth transition to
zero, described by the logistic function
Θ(T) = 1 −
1
1 + e−T −Tc·t3
t4
with the scaling parameters the transverse t3 and steepness t4. This combination was
inspired by the data presented in [34] and fitting on Figure J.1. For T < Tc the smooth step
function Θ(T) = 1, and therefore δ(T) describes the behavior. For T ∼Tc the smooth
step function Θ(T) = 0 modeling the meltdown of the flux line lattice. A simple linear
decreasing function could not have been used before Tc. A linear relation would fail before
the critical temperature in reproducing the flat tail. The product δ(t) · Θ(t) · Ic(77 T, sf)
does not. The practical temperature dependence on the critical current in self-field can
be written as:
Ic(T, sf) = Ic(77 K, sf)·δ(T)·Θ(T) = Ic(77 K, sf)·e
−T −t1
T ∗
·
(
1 −
1
1 + e−T −TC ·t3
t4
)
(4.2)
and shows good agreement with results, as Figure 4.12 show. This practical temper-
ature dependence of the critical current should help the modeling of the transition from
the superconducting to the normal state as described by Equation 4.2). The practical
temperature dependence of the critical current Ic(T, sf) is used as input for the modeling.
The practical temperature dependence of the critical current describe in Equation 4.2
is fitted to the data in Figure 4.7 without a external magnetic field. The fit and fitting
parameters are shown here in Figure 4.12
52
Overcurrent in high temperature superconducting tapes for power cable applications
==PAGE:60==
Figure 4.12: Fitted temperature dependence of the critical current Ic(T, sf) in self-field
(sf) of the center segment on AmSc 344, 4mm tape wide tape, as found from section 4.2
Figure 4.5 and Figure 4.3. Error bars are smaller then markers.
The formula suggested in the fit is inspired by [34], based on the percentage decay in
the critical current suggested by [14]. Here applied at 77 K and below. For temperatures
above 77 K, the logistic function model the melting of the flux line lattice as the supercon-
ductor goes toward the critical temperature. The fitting parameter T ∗is associated with
the halving temperature for temperatures below 77 K by:
T1/2 = ln(1/2)
−1
T ∗
∼6 K
Meaning that for temperatures below 77 K, for every 6 K, the temperature is raised, and the
critical current is halved. The fitting function Ic(T, sf) is used as an input to the model, to
describe the temperature dependence of the critical current at self-field and temperatures
near and up to the critical temperature Tc = 93 K. This was not done for the tape with an
external magnetic field from a permanent magnet since it’s not the field dependence that
is attempted to model in this work.
4.5
1D Analytical Model
4.5.1
Average thermal conduction - model input
To fit the model to the experiments, a good approximation was needed for the average
thermal conduction. This was extracted from the experiments with a cold and fully normal
conductive tape T = 90 K.
Overcurrent in high temperature superconducting tapes for power cable applications
53
==PAGE:61==
Average thermal conducting for model
From the fully ohmic experiments at Tq = 90K, the average thermal conduction could
be extracted and used in the 1D analytical model to estimate the overcurrent and the
transition from superconductive to ohmic tape.
Figure 4.13: The dissipated heat calculated from the applied current in measurements at
Tq = 90K plotted vs the tape temperature. Average thermal conduction ¯κ fitted to the 1D
model as the only fitting parameter. Fit is done for both data over the center segment and
full tape.
On Figure 4.13 it’s seen 2 different average thermal conductivity. For the full tape, a
slightly lower thermal conducting was found than for the center segment. This could be
due to the uneven pressure on the tape as a whole. Showing that the center segment is
suspected to have the best thermal connection to the alumina plate compared to the long
tape segment.
4.5.2
Measurements compared with 1D analytical model
The data used to compare with the model are under self field and at Tq = 85 K, the lowest
temperature of data recording the transition of the tape going from superconducting to
normal conduction state.
54
Overcurrent in high temperature superconducting tapes for power cable applications
==PAGE:62==
Figure 4.14: The detailed plot of data vs model with no external magnetic field, for the
center segment in Figure 3.6. The model data is split into total current Itot - red circles, Isc
superconductive current - green squares, and matrix current Im - red triangles. The 1D
thermal and current sharing model shown on top of the measured IV curve of the center
segment of coated conductor at Tq = 85 K and no magnetic field applied going in the
overcurrent regime and finally in a normal conducting state at I = 28 A.
On Figure 4.14 the advantage of the model is its ability to display the current distribution
within the tape. Isc is the current in the HTS layer, green squares. Im is the current in
the matrix, red triangles. As the tape is ramped up to Ic the current is flowing inside the
superconductor, seen by the green squares lay ontop of the red circles, Isc = Itot. Then
around 17 A current sharing happens, and the current in the HTS layer is decreasing at
18 A as the temperature is increasing. Following the green squares show that less and
less current flows in the superconductor, while more current flows in the matrix. This
gives an understanding of the current distribution above the critical current. The power
law exponent is held constant in the model, which shows from Figure 4.8 it is not the
case. The power law exponent of the model, n = 30, is over 2 times larger than that
of the estimated for the experiment n = 13.8. This shows to have little effect on the
model, as the temperature tendencies predicted by the model are within a range of 1
K. A zoom-in of Figure 4.14 is shown in Figure 4.15 on log scales over the transition
from superconductive state to normal conductive. Figure 4.15 shows a change of slope
happens at the overcurrent on this tape.
Overcurrent in high temperature superconducting tapes for power cable applications
55
==PAGE:63==
Figure 4.15: A zoom-in of Figure 4.14 around the overcurrent at cooling temperature
Tq = 85 K for both measurement and 1D model. Both measurement and 1D model show
first a higher n-value (dark dashed line), and then a bend to a lower n-value (blue dotted
line) before the tape is fully normal conducting. The model shows that the current is
running in the superconductor by the green dots and red circles lying on top of each other
up to the overcurrent regime Itot ∼18 A. Going higher in current the data and model seem
to follow a lower n-value for Itot ∼Ic +2 A until the tape is fully normal conducting around
23 A.
Figure 4.15 displays a single tape measurement and models the same tendencies as the
cable in Figure 5.5 by first following a higher n-value, then when the current goes past
the overcurrent, a lower n-value is followed. The transition happens approximately at
Ic + 2A = Iover = 18 A for both the model and tape measurement. This is lower than the
overcurrent Iover = Ic + 7A for lower temperatures. The model also shows that it is at
this transition from the higher n-value to the lower n-value, that the current flowing in the
superconductor (green squares) begins to lower. The superconductivity starts to deplete.
Meaning that more current flows into the matrix material, as shown by the growing dis-
tance between the green squares and red circles on the x-axis. The model indicates that
the lower n-value in the overcurrent regime is caused by the superconductivity depleting
and thereby more current flowing into the matrix material. Figure 4.16 show the model’s
estimated temperature compared with the experiment with no external field at Tq = 85 K.
56
Overcurrent in high temperature superconducting tapes for power cable applications
==PAGE:64==
Figure 4.16: The temperature of center segment vs 1D model with Tq = 85 K and fitted
average thermal conductivity κ. Black points are data for Tq = 85 K and no external field.
The red points are from the 1D model’s estimate of the temperature.
On Figure 4.16 is the temperature of the center segment given by the model and what is
measured. The temperature development is overestimated by the model. For low currents
and currents in the normal conducting regime, the model shows the same tendencies as
the data but shows a different initial temperature. The temperature difference is most
likely because the experiment was not in thermal equilibrium when the measurements
were started. Making the model underestimate the temperature.
Overcurrent in high temperature superconducting tapes for power cable applications
57
==PAGE:65==
5
Discussion
5.1
Achievements and successes
During this project, a temperature-controlled overcurrent measurement device was suc-
cessfully designed, constructed, and used to measure several IV curves over two seg-
ments of a 6 cm long superconductive tape sample. The temperatures of the overcurrent
measurement device when cold and no heat input were more than to observe the super-
conducting transition of the tape. The thermal resistivity between the cold plate of the
cryostat and the overcurrent measurement device had to be decreased in order to allow
the device to reach Tc = 93 K using two electrical heaters with a max heat input of 100 W.
The 1D model estimated the electrical behavior of a transition from superconductive to
normal conducting state satisfactory. The same was seen for the temperature develop-
ment tendencies when compared with experiments. The model quite accurately estimated
the transition from superconductive to an ohmic state of the superconductive tape for tem-
peratures 85 K and above with simple assumptions. The model struggled to estimate the
thermal runaways at lower temperatures, due to degradation of the wire. Overcurrents
were successfully measured with an external magnetic field from a permanent magnet
and it was possible to capture the thermal runaway just before they happened.
5.1.1
High critical exponents in power law
For the low-temperature IV measurement is very high as shown in Figure 4.8 . The expo-
nents were found by fitting the power law on the IV curves. The assumption that the critical
current is not changing with a temperature increase of just a few Kelvin is most likely not
correct. The fitted model doesn’t account for the higher temperature and thereby hence
the lower critical current - which means that during ramping up at 77K there is according
to Figure 4.12 a large drop of the critical current of about 40 A from 74 K to 76 K. That
means it’s 20 A per Kelvin that is lost in critical current per Kelvin when the temperature
increases. If the temperature is not constant, this makes it look like there is a really high
power-law exponent. Writing the power law with a change in the critical current
U = E0 · l ·
(
I
Ic(T, B) −δIc(T, B)
)n
(5.1)
The power law exponent n is then interpreted as much higher than it actually is. Espe-
cially when δIc(δT, B)
δT
∼20 A
K . A change in temperature of δT ∼1 K change means
20 A change in critical current. As the temperature increases the exponent appears to
decrease. To prove a point it decreases to half underestimating the temperature change
influence on the potential drop. An example to show what the impact is at 80A, with
δT ∼1K, and just 2A over Ic:
∆U
E0 · l =
(
82A
Ic(78 K, sf)
)n78 K
−
(
82A
Ic(77 K, sf)
)n77 K
=
(82A
60A
)17
−
(82A
80A
)30
≃200 µV
cm
with
Ic(78 K, sf) = Ic(77 K, B) −δ(Ic(78 K, B)) = 80 A −20 A = 60 A
This little example shows the potential over the superconductor is 200 times greater during
a temperature change of 1 K at the same current. This example is calculated to illustrate
58
Overcurrent in high temperature superconducting tapes for power cable applications
==PAGE:66==
in order to do a truly correct fit with the power law, the temperature has to be constant.
Otherwise, the exponent becomes overestimated in the fitting. The exponent is n = 30
as from the LN2 experiment made initially in figure Figure 3.15 and fitted to the blue line.
This is not an unreal parameter, and the exponents in LN2 are expected to be within the
range of 15−45 depending on quality and strain during handling. A changing temperature
could explain why there is a much higher n-value for the experiment with no magnet at
70K and similar low temperatures. This underlines why having a constant temperature
during experiments is important. And why others choose to solder the tapes on a copper
bar, to make sure the temperature is constant. The purpose of this design is to simulate
the conduction in applications of HTS tapes, like that of a power cable. The same effect
should be expected in applications of high temperature superconducting power cables.
5.1.2
Thermal runaway
For a thermal runaway to happen, the temperatures have to increase very little or the
current can be ramped up to fast as shown in Figure 4.9 and Figure 4.10. Looking at
the figures it should be noted that a different step size is used. The thermal runaway
happens when the current is 20 A higher than the critical current. The experiment was
done with a wait time of 2s, which is too short to ensure thermal equilibrium. The example
above where a current of Ic + 2 A shows a rise in the electric potential by a factor of 200.
In the experiment on Figure 4.10 the current was Ic + 10 A but ramping up with large
steps and a wait time of 2 s, showed no significant temperature change until the thermal
runaway happened. This illustrates the need for time studies of the overcurrent situation,
and at what current they occur. When the temperature of the HTS layer does change, the
change is much more dramatic, causing thermal runaway. It’s amplified by an amount of
the current being forced into the tape matrix causing the temperature to raise further, again
further lowering the Ic, and so it continues in a self-enhancing effect until stable in a fully
normal resistive state. This underlines that time studies need to be done to understand
how an HTS tape behaves in an overcurrent situation with no thermal equilibrium.
5.1.3
1D model
The model shows good agreement with the experiments and shows very nicely the cur-
rent distribution between the matrix and HTS layer. The model deviates a little from the
electrical potential observed in the experiment as shown in Figure 4.14. This could be
explained by the assumption of a temperature-independent exponent in the power law.
Leaving out the apparently minor aspect of the temperature dependence of the power
law seems to be justified since the model shows good agreement with the experiments.
The model underestimates the observed temperature compared seen in Figure 4.16. It
underestimates the temperature, most likely due to different initial temperatures. The
temperature growth around 20 A and to 25 A seems overestimated by the model when
compared to measurement in Figure 4.16. The assumption that of power law exponent is
constant as used in the 1D model covered in section 3.3 course an overestimation of the
temperature growth for the center segment. In spite of the underestimation of the tem-
perature, the model could estimate the transition from a superconductive state to a fully
normal conducting state with similar tendencies found in experiments. Where the most
important is the lowering of the n-value in overcurrent, as shown in Figure 4.15. Since the
superconductor is on the side of the tape facing the cooling surface of the alumina plate,
there could be a thermal gradient within the tape that is not captured with the uniform
temperature assumption. The model further assumes that the heat only flows downward.
This is confirmed by the 3D heat model in Figure 3.22 that the thermal gradient along the
tape is smaller than the downward thermal gradient.
Overcurrent in high temperature superconducting tapes for power cable applications
59
==PAGE:67==
5.2
Tape degradation
5.2.1
Mechanical strain
In an attempt to move the strain from thermal expansions and contractions during cool-
down and warm-up, the tape was bent in a curve over the max bending diameter for
the AmSc 344 tape of 25mm Appendix B. The bend was done 4 times in an attempt to
ensure the tape would still have good thermal contact to the alumina plate, after cool-
down. Despite being very careful in handling the tapes an ohmic segment of a length of
175µm was found in the measurements of the long segment. This was found by fitting
with Equation 3.10, to the first part of the IV curves using the resistivity of the matrix from
the IV curve at Tq = 90K very close to Tc.
5.2.2
Tape degrades during cooling and heating cycles
Using the same tape over several cooling and heating cycles cause strain in the super-
conducting lattice which could break the thin film little by little. This could be resulting in
either ohmic elements or cause sections with a lower critical current and power law ex-
ponent in the tape [35]. This happened after the 3rd cooling for the sample tape used for
these experiments, as demonstrated in Figure 5.1.
Figure 5.1: The measured electric potential over the long segment of the AmSc 344-tape
after cooling to Tq = 70 K, and heating to room temperature in 3 thermal cycles. The IV
curve after the 2nd and 3rd cooldowns were expected to be the same, but the shift reveals
a degradation of the tape.
On Figure 5.1 the difference between 1st cooling experiment and 2nd cooling, is expected
due to the suppression of the critical current by the external magnetic field. However, if
the properties of the superconductor were the same there should not be a difference
60
Overcurrent in high temperature superconducting tapes for power cable applications
==PAGE:68==
between the measurement in the 2nd cooling and 3rd cooling. Some small variation is
expected, but this difference in 30 A shows a possible degrading of the tape. This shows
a high need for improvement of the coated conductor tapes sensitivity towards strains,
whether it’s from thermal expansion or mechanical, in order to have replicable data. The
overcurrent measurement device had to be removed from the cryostat and assembled
between 2nd and 3rd cooling. So it’s possible the careful handling of the tape has done
some damage to the tape resulting in the degradation or most likely a combination of both.
5.3
Transition temperatures during cool-down and warm-up
Two different transition temperatures was observed in the overcurrent measurement de-
vice on the same tape. Temperatures of Tc would be lower for heating up and higher when
cooling as shown in Figure 5.2.
Figure 5.2: The transition temperatures shown here are different whether is a cooldown
or warm-up. During warm-up, there are large temperature gradients and this might cause
the measurement of a higher critical temperature than given by AmSc.
The difference in the transition temperatures between cool-down and warm-up is due to
the thermal gradient caused by the thermal resistance through the cold plate, alumina
plate, aluminum heater block, and the cold head in the setup. The thermometer on top
of the tape is further away from the cold head, as seen in Figure 3.10. However, it is not
the goal of the overcurrent measurement device to document the transition temperatures.
This could be done at a low current and using the temperature control of the aluminum
block.
Overcurrent in high temperature superconducting tapes for power cable applications
61
==PAGE:69==
During the second cool-down the PT1000 thermometer glued to the tape surface detached
and was not measuring the correct temperature of the tape. This is most likely why the
transition temperature of the second experiment is not the same as for the first and third
warm-ups. It was also during the 2nd round of cooling down, that the thermometer in the
alu heater lost connection on and off. Temperature regulation was no longer possible.
After disassembly it showed to be because the copper wires used, had scraped off the
lamination on the inside of the surface of the alu heater, causing the thermometer to
short circuit. If the setup was changed such that the temperature was very slow, then the
difference between Tc of warming and cooling can be reduced.
5.4
Qualification Cryo Cooler overcurrent setup
5.4.1
Overcurrent measurements
Finding that overcurrent is at Ic + 7A for the tape experiencing an external magnetic field
of 125 T in a vacuum is very different from that of the initial experiment in LN2 that could go
higher than Ic + 10A, if it hasn’t been for the boiling effects. With a good coolant flow, and
efforts to minimize bubbles forming on the surface of the superconductive tape, it could be
concluded that a tape’s overcurrent really depends on how well it is cooled. This is very
different in a vacuum compared to a liquid coolant. In a vacuum, only heat conduction
through solids is happening, and the surrounding material has no chance of being moved
so new cold material can come and cool the tape. This is possible in liquid coolants.
The challenges are present with a liquid coolant in various industrial applications, such
as superconductive generators or SQIUDs. Applications do then often have conductive
cooling and hence why this design is chosen. Even for applications such as power cables,
shown in Figure 1.1 the cooling of tapes happens by conduction in solid materials and not
directly in a coolant.
5.4.2
The temperature during experiments
In order to fit the data to the power law, the temperature needs to be constant. As shown
in Figure 4.6, it’s almost the case for the experiments at lower temperatures 70 to 80 K.
However the rest do not have a constant temperature. Temperature changes are up to
almost 10K, at worst. It’s, therefore, a norm within research with superconducting tapes
to solder the tapes on a copper bar, adding a lot of mass that makes an energy reservoir
for the dissipated heat to be led away from the superconducting layer. In applications
where a liquid coolant can’t be used, solid conducting is used like in a superconductive
magnet for wind turbines. That is similar to this experiment - simulating a tape in an
application. In this measurement device it is easier to change the tape, and with little risk
of it melting apart - most HTS are soldered together in the layers. It could be changed into
such a setup, but the equipment for keeping the superconductor on the copper bar while
soldering and cooling off had to be made first. Which was not within the time range of this
project nor similar to industrial applications. The purpose of this project is to investigate
tapes in overcurrent regimes in an environment similar to applications. This is why the
tape was not soldered to a copper bar. Heating up a tape while soldering can damage and
destroy some or the whole of the superconductor, leaving it worse than it was. Soldering a
part of a tape and measuring another part, it’s potentially less damaging to the measured
part of the tape. Thereby raising the reproducibility of the procedure and results for each
new tape. Adding a copper bar means adding more mass to heat to the temperature
desired - here it’s easier to change the temperature of the tape. That’s the reason for the
10x12cm aluminum plate, which works as a cooling block for the coated conductor tape.
From the IV curves and temperature graphs, there is a temperature change within the
uncertainty of the temperature measurements. Even though the PT1000 sensor has a
62
Overcurrent in high temperature superconducting tapes for power cable applications
==PAGE:70==
sensitivity of 15mK, it’s the way it’s been attached to the superconductor, using quick
glue, with unknown thermal conductance at cryogenic temperatures. This should be in-
vestigated by having a much longer wait time to secure a thermal equilibrium.
5.4.3
The stabilization time of the tape and current leads joule heating
above 50A
During experiments, it was observed that a much smaller wait time at each current step
was necessary to prevent the current leads to heat up. That meant a waiting time of 4s
seconds was used for the test without a magnet suppressing the critical current [14], to
prevent dissipated heat from the current leads to flow into the tape. From experiments,
there was no significant change in the copper bars’ temperature up to 50 A. At higher
currents a shorter and shorter sampling time was used, to avoid the setup changing tem-
perature and equipment being damaged.
This is seen in previous work [23] with this setup and has not been fixed since. The un-
derlying assumption is that the big copper bars underneath the cold plate, transport the
heat from the current leads so well that it keeps the current leads superconducting. The
leads are Bi2223, with Tc = 110 K. A temperature above, was observed many times dur-
ing the experiments. To fix this it could be considered to use a different material, that
when below 130K has a much lower thermal conductivity or use a liquid nitrogen bath or
container for the current rods outside the chamber to cool it down so heat doesn’t flow
into the setup, causing the tape to heat up. This is a significant problem over 50A, and at
a 100A almost a total of 90 W, as shown in appendix Figure C.10, goes into the cold-plate
just from the current leads and its terminals. That’s almost a doubling of the heat flow
into the cold plate, at thermal equilibrium with a temperature of 90 K. The current leads
joule heating combined with the radiation and thermal conduction from the current leads,
mean a much higher temperature at a thermal equilibrium. Using the cold head perfor-
mance curve Figure C.6[36], with a current at 100A, and the heat estimation done earlier
Qrad + Qcon + QJH ≈185W + 20W + 90W = 295W = Qcool, resulting in a steady state
temperature at room temperature. That’s why on industry applications a separate cold
head is used for the current leads. If the cold head was operated at 60 Hz, then it would
be a stable temperature at 160 K, much too high.
Therefore a piece of separate cooling equipment is needed to achieve thermal equilib-
rium. Another suggestion could be to have the cold head connected much closer to the
copper bars, to better cool them, and make a complete radiation shield covering all of the
cold plate. And with the shield is covered in MLI, to minimize the radiation heat flux. It
must be made with some thought since the lid is quite small and the cold plate of Ø20cm
barely fit through. Using this setup without improvements, a thermal equilibrium can not
be reached for currents around 50 A.
5.4.4
The direction of the superconducting layer in on the tape
The direction of the HTS layer is on the unmarked side of the superconducting tape, given
by [6]. This means that the superconductor is the closest possible to the cooling surface.
Giving the best cooling possible for the tape. Turning it the other way could cause the
tape to quench at a lower current due to smaller cooling - however minimal. Having the
HTS layer as close to the cooling surface as possible is giving the best cooling of the HTS
layer.
5.4.5
Cryo grease properties
The use of cryo grease Apiezon grease type N, κ = 0.11 W/(m • K) at 100 K [19], is
an effort to better any thermal connection. During the test of the aluminum heater, the
Overcurrent in high temperature superconducting tapes for power cable applications
63
==PAGE:71==
proof of concept trial it was observed that the aluminum block’s temperature changed
initially when the heat input was turned on. But then stayed at a similar temperature for
any input from the heater cartridges. Both the FEM model and experiment showed good
agreement, indicating that the cryo grease really improved the thermal contact, causing
most of the dissipated heat from the heater block to flow into the cold plate, thereby cooling
the current leads less, leading to a higher overall temperature of the cold plate. The
thermal resistance was raised by the alumina plate between the cold plate and heat block
so the cold plate temperature stayed stable while heating the sample to 90 K.
5.5
Relation of single tape IV curves to large-scale
superconducting power cables
In a high temperature superconducting power cable, there are two shells of coated con-
ductor tapes, shown on Figure 1.1. A diagram showing the parallel connection of the
tapes of the inner phase is shown in Figure 5.3 for N number of tapes.
Figure 5.3: Electrical diagram of a cable phase, with N numbers of tapes in parallel con-
nection. The normal conducting part is neglected. ni is the n-value and Ic,i is the critical
current for tape i.
The sketch of the cable on Figure 1.1 shows the phase consisting of around 20 tapes,
and the outer shield with wider and usually more tapes than the phase. The tapes are
wounded up as close as possible to each other. There might or might not be an electri-
cal contact between the tapes. Figure 5.3 sketches the parallel connections between N
tapes. Figure 5.4 shows normalized data for a high temperature superconductive power
cable with a power law guideline.
64
Overcurrent in high temperature superconducting tapes for power cable applications
==PAGE:72==
Figure 5.4: Measurement of the normalized voltage drop across a high temperature su-
perconducting test cable sample provided by NKT Cables Group A/S submerged in liquid
nitrogen LN2. The cable parameters such as the number of tapes, critical current, and
detail of the geometry are confidential and can not be shown
Comparing the low n-value of 5 to that from the experiments and literature, the cable
was a lower n-value than expected. Only experiments close to Tc on Figure 4.8 show
n-values in similar size. This could indicate that some tapes have a low n value and the
superconductive lattice is degraded, potentially by mechanical stress, magnetic fields,
and temperature increase.
5.5.1
Cable model
To try and clarify whether the parallel connection of the superconducting tapes is the
reason for the low observed n value or not, a Simple model is built with parallel connections
between the superconducting tapes, where the normal conducting part of the tapes is
neglected. The normal conductor parts are neglected since the purpose is to only look
at the change of the n-value. If this is the cause for the low n-value, the same should be
seen in a model for a random distribution of the n-values and critical currents. For N = 20
tapes in parallel connections, the total current is
Itot = Σ20
ni=1
( U
U0
)1/ni
· Ic,i
(5.2)
where ni is the n-value, U/U0 is the norm potential, and Ic,i is the critical current for tape
i. The critical current Ic,i, and ni for each tape are given in the two tables Table I.2 and
Table I.3.
Overcurrent in high temperature superconducting tapes for power cable applications
65
==PAGE:73==
Three models are calculated to compare with the measured voltage drop of the high tem-
perature superconducting power cable segment shown in Figure 1.1. One model where
the n-values are similar to that of a perfect superconductor. The values of the power law
exponent are selected from a normal distribution with a mean value of µn = 30 and with a
standard deviation σn = 10. Then two models with very low n-values: One with value the
mean value of n-value of µn = 8 and a standard deviation σn = 3, and one more with a
much lower n-value of µn = 5 and with a standard deviation σn = 2. All models are based
on equation Equation 5.2 and solved numerically for the electric potential.
Figure 5.5: Normalized IV curves for data, and two models. All fits are made on the model
U/U0 = (I/Ic)n. where Ic is the critical current of the cable segment.
From Figure 5.5 normalized IV curves are shown for both the data presented before and
with two models. For the models, the parallel connections lower the observed n-value
slightly. Though not significant enough to explain the observed n-value of 4.9. It’s not the
parallel connection of the tapes that cause the low observed n-value. In a real application,
there are segments with a low n-value. After the wounding of the cable, these segments
might have an even lower n-value. That’s why the models with on average low n-values
show more agreement with the observed value of the cable segment. Looking at the
Figure 5.5 when the current is below Ic, the cable seems to follow the model with a low
n-value (µn = 8) than when the current is above Ic where it seems to follow the model
with a lower n-value µn = 5. As seen earlier in A zoom in Figure 4.14 on log scales
over the transition from superconductive state to normal conductive state in Figure 4.15
shows exactly how this change of slope happens at a current a little above Ic on a tape
in Figure 4.15. Figure 4.15 display a single tape measurement and models the same
66
Overcurrent in high temperature superconducting tapes for power cable applications
==PAGE:74==
tendencies as the cable in Figure 5.5 by first following a higher n-value, then when the
current goes past the overcurrent, a lower n-value follows. The transition happens at Itot ∼
Ic for the cable and for Itot ≃Ic + 2A = Iover for both the model and tape measurement.
This is lower than the overcurrent Iover = Ic + 7A for lower temperatures. The model also
shows that it is at this transition the n-value and the current flowing in the superconductor
(green squares) are reduced. Meaning that more current must flow in the matrix material,
as shown by the growing distance between the green squares and red circles on the x-
axis. The model indicates that the lower n-value in the overcurrent regime is caused by
the superconductivity depleting causing the current flow into the matrix material. This
leads to ohmic (resistive) losses and causes a temperature increase which can lead to
thermal runaway. The cable measurement was stopped due to a rising electrical potential
over the cable while waiting for the potential to stabilize - indicating the start of a thermal
runaway. Leaving the two different n-values before and after Ic unexplained.
Another option is that there are small pieces of the tapes that are normal conductors,
sketched on Figure 5.6. To make it possible for the current to flow across the tapes,
regular copper has been added as shunt material in the cable.
Figure 5.6: Sketch of current sharing among tapes in the cable. The X marks segments
that are normal conductors. Does the current flow from one tape to another in order to
move around normal conducting segments, like the red arrows?
The Figure 5.6 assumes there is a good enough electrical contact in between tapes for the
current to flow across tapes. If a tape was a normal conductor at any point the calculation
had to be iterated because that one tape would have to obey the relation;
U/U0 = E0 · lsc
U0
· (Ii/Ic)n + Ii · ρ · lm
A · U0
increasing the potential significantly. This would be leveraged among the other supercon-
ducting segments and is not modeled in this project. As seen on the long segment of the
tape measurements in Figure 3.15, Figure 4.4 and Figure 4.2 leaves a linear contribution
on the IV-curve for a single tape. This is not seen in the measurements for the cable.
To clarify this the designed overcurrent measurement device could be mounted with two
tapes, one being a good tape with no normal conducting defects and a so-called bad tape
with a normal conducting segment as the sample used in this work. Using the same tape,
Overcurrent in high temperature superconducting tapes for power cable applications
67
==PAGE:75==
and adding another good tape would clarify how an ohmic segment on a tape affects the
potential measured over tapes in a parallel connection.
68
Overcurrent in high temperature superconducting tapes for power cable applications
==PAGE:76==
6
Conclusions
This work documents the design, testing, and use of an overcurrent measurement device
that could control the temperature of a sample of a superconductive tape AmSc 344C,
with the superconductor YBCO, near the critical temperature Tc = 93 A and below. The
measurement device was designed for an existing cryostat, with some limitations on sam-
pling time and current due to a lack of cooling on the current leads and feedthroughs. In
the setup, the industry-standard [13] was followed using a 4-point probe measurement
technique. A 3D numerical model predicted that a thermal resistance had to introduce
between the overcurrent measurement device and the cold plate, so the heat delivered
was not conducted into the cold plate. This was confirmed in an initial experiment.
By measuring IV curves at 7 different temperatures, the critical current and critical expo-
nent were estimated by fitting to a power law. The estimated critical currents in self-field
for the AmSc 344C sample tape used were found to follow the expression
Ic(T, sf) = Ic(77 K, sf) · e
−T −t1
T ∗
·
(
1 −
1
1 + e−T −TC ·t3
t4
)
(6.1)
quite well in the temperature range from 70 K to 90 K. Formular (6.1) is inspired by [14],
data from Deutsche Nanoschicht GmbH [34] and a smooth function to model the melting
for the fluxline lattice. The experiments done with an external magnetic field brought the
tape into the overcurrent, current sharing, and into a normal conductive state at lower
currents than without an external field applied. In the highest 3 out of the 7 temperatures,
it succeeds to bring the wire past the overcurrent and onto a normal conductive state. For
the lowest 4 temperatures, thermal runaways were observed instead. Overcurrent was
defined as the current for which the superconductivity started to deplete. This indicated
a positive thermal gradient within the tape. This was found to be about Iover ≈Ic + 7 A
for this overcurrent measurement device in a vacuum, with an external magnetic field of
125 mT and temperatures below 80 K. The same depletion of superconductivity could be
seen by the reduced n value, at Ic+2 A in self-field for 85 K. This was confirmed by the 1D
model with the necessary inputs for Ic(T, sf) and of the average thermal conductivity κ.
The advantage of the model used was that it showed the current flowing in the matrix and
in the superconductive material and showed in overcurrent the depletion of the supercon-
ductivity in the tape was causing the reduction of the n-value. The overcurrent findings
were close to the critical current and confirmed that conduction cooling in a vacuum is
lower than for a tape submerged in LN2. The overcurrent could be specific to this mea-
surement device’s average thermal conductivity and applied field strength. Due to the
lack of cooling on the feedthroughs in the cryostat, no thermal equilibrium was reached
for currents above 50 A.
The thermal part of the 1D model showed agreement with temperature development de-
spite a 1 K difference in initial temperatures. The cause for the good agreements of the
model and measurements is the inputs for Ic(T, sf) and the average thermal conductivity
κ for the overcurrent measurement device.
A direct current overcurrent experiment was conducted with NKT Cables Group A/S on
a cable segment. The experiment showed a low n-value to be ∼5. The reason behind
the low n-value was shown by a simple model of 20 tapes in parallel connection to be
Overcurrent in high temperature superconducting tapes for power cable applications
69
==PAGE:77==
the average low n-value of the individual tapes. A reduction of the n-value happened at
Ic as seen in the measurements and 1D model of a single tape. The reduction of the
n-value could be explained by the superconductivity depleting and more current flowing
into the matrix material of the tape. Measurements with a good tape and a bad tape with a
normal conducting segment in parallel connection in the overcurrent measurement device
would clarify what dynamic is behind current sharing between tapes in a high temperature
superconductive power cable.
6.1
Future work
Going forward with this project the next step is measuring superconducting parameters,
overcurrents, and transitions to normal conductive state again due to the degradation of
the tape. If degradation of this type of coated conductor can not be hindered, a newer
coated conductor should be used or the design should be revised so fewer thermal cy-
cles are needed. The stabilization time to thermal equilibrium and ways of cooling the
feedthroughs should be investigated. As well as consideration for a device capable of
measuring overcurrents with an alternating current. A numerical 3D model should be
developed, using the practical temperature dependence of critical current, to predict the
temperature development in a coated conductor tape in an overcurrent state and possible
thermal runaway for relevant scenarios.
70
Overcurrent in high temperature superconducting tapes for power cable applications
==PAGE:78==
Bibliography
[1]
N. Dasenbrock-Gammon, E. Snider, R. McBride, et al., “Evidence of near-ambient
superconductivity in a n-doped lutetium hydride,” eng, Nature, vol. 615, no. 7951,
pp. 244–250, 2023, ISSN: 14764687, 00280836. DOI: 10.1038/s41586-023-05742-0.
[2]
J. BEDNORZ and K. MULLER, “POSSIBLE HIGH-TC SUPERCONDUCTIVITY IN
THE BA-LA-CU-O SYSTEM,” eng, Zeitschrift Fur Physik B-condensed Matter, vol. 64,
no. 2, pp. 189–193, 1986, Publisher: SPRINGER, ISSN: 14346036, 14346028,
07223277, 1431584x. DOI: 10.1007/BF01303701.
[3]
J. Østergaard, J. Okholm, K. Lomholt, and O. Tønnesen, “Energy losses of super-
conducting power transmission cables in the grid,” eng, Ieee Transactions on Ap-
plied Superconductivity, vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 2375–2378, 2001, Publisher: IEEE-INST
ELECTRICAL ELECTRONICS ENGINEERS INC, ISSN: 23787074, 10518223, 15582515.
DOI: 10.1109/77.920339.
[4]
O. Tønnesen, K. H. Jensen, C. Træholt, et al., “Overcurrent experiments on HTS
tape and cable conductor,” eng, Ieee Transactions on Applied Superconductivity,
vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 1781–1784, 2001, Publisher: IEEE-INST ELECTRICAL ELEC-
TRONICS ENGINEERS INC, ISSN: 23787074, 10518223, 15582515. DOI: 10 .
1109/77.920130.
[5]
Z. Wang, Z. Lv, P. Yu, Z. Li, and B. Wang, “Research Status of High Temperature Su-
perconducting Power Cable,” eng, in 2022 Ieee International Conference on Elec-
trical Engineering, Big Data and Algorithms, Eebda 2022, Institute of Electrical and
Electronics Engineers Inc., 2022, pp. 182–186, ISBN: 166541605X, 1665416068,
9781665416054, 9781665416061. DOI: 10.1109/EEBDA53927.2022.9745003.
[6]
A. Superconductor, Amperium® HTS Wire. [Online]. Available: https://www.amsc.
com/gridtec/amperium-hts-wire/ (visited on 03/28/2023).
[7]
J. S. Juul, E. T. Mølgaard, J. Jensen, et al., “Ac losses in bi2sr2ca2cu3o10+x tapes
and a 3.15-m-long single-phase cable,” eng, Ieee Transactions on Applied Super-
conductivity, vol. 21, no. 6, pp. 3599–3603, 2011, ISSN: 10518223, 15582515,
23787074. DOI: 10.1109/TASC.2011.2166153.
[8]
K. Fossheim and A. Sudbø, Superconductivity: Physics and Applications, eng. Wi-
ley Blackwell, 2005, Pages: 427 Publication Title: Superconductivity: Physics and
Applications, ISBN: 0-470-02078-4 0-470-02643-X 0-470-02644-8 0-470-84452-3
1-280-23856-9 978-0-470-02078-4 978-0-470-02643-4 978-0-470-02644-1 978-0-
470-84452-6 978-1-280-23856-7. DOI: 10.1002/0470020784.
[9]
Schrieffer, “Theory of superconductivity,” und, Nuovo Cimento, vol. 7, no. 2, pp. 377–
385, 1958, ISSN: 18276121, 00296341. DOI: 10.1007/BF02751487.
[10]
J.P.Hague, Electron-phonon interactions and superconductivity. [Online]. Available:
http://physics.open.ac.uk/~jphague/res_corr.html.
[11]
G. Nielsen, N. Zangenberg, D. Hazelton, et al., “Dipole magnet from high tc super-
conductor,” Physics Procedia, vol. 36, pp. 824–829, Dec. 2012. DOI: 10.1016/j.
phpro.2012.06.049.
[12]
R. Kleiner and W. Buckel, Superconductivity : an introduction, eng. Wiley-VCH,
2015, Publication Title: Superconductivity: an Introduction, ISBN: 3-527-41162-3 3-
527-68651-7 3-527-68652-5 3-527-68654-1 978-3-527-41162-7 978-3-527-68651-
3 978-3-527-68652-0 978-3-527-68654-4.
[13]
DS, Ds/iec 63075:2019 - superledende vekselstrømskalder smat tilbehør til mærke-
spændinger fra 6kV til 500kV - prøvningsmetoder og krav, 2019.
Overcurrent in high temperature superconducting tapes for power cable applications
71
==PAGE:79==
[14]
C. Senatore, C. Barth, M. Bonura, M. Kulich, and G. Mondonico, “Field and temper-
ature scaling of the critical current density in commercial rebco coated conductors,”
eng, Superconductor Science and Technology, vol. 29, no. 1, p. 014 002, 2015,
ISSN: 13616668, 09532048. DOI: 10.1088/0953-2048/29/1/014002.
[15]
F. P. Incropera, Introduction to heat transfer, eng. Wiley, 2007, ISBN: 0471457272,
9780471457275.
[16]
INNWIND.EU, Final assessment of superconducting (SC) and Pseudo Direct Drive
(PDD) generator performance indicators (PI’s). [Online]. Available: http://www.
innwind.eu/publications/deliverable-reports (visited on 03/29/2023).
[17]
T. E. o. E. Britannica, “”cryogenics”,” Encyclopedia Britannica, vol. Accessed 23
March 2023, pp. 824–829, May 2017. [Online]. Available: https://www.britannica.
com/science/cryogenics.
[18]
N. Magnusson, S. Hellesø, R. Mikkonen, et al., “Testing of an mgb<sub>2</sub>
coil for a wind turbine generator pole,” eng, Physica C: Superconductivity and Its
Applications, vol. 587, p. 1 353 901, 2021, ISSN: 18732143, 09214534. DOI: 10.
1016/j.physc.2021.1353901.
[19]
I. Lake Shore Cryotronics, Apiezon® Grease—types N and H. [Online]. Available:
https://www.lakeshore.com/products/categories/overview/temperature-products/
cryogenic-accessories/grease (visited on 03/28/2023).
[20]
S. cryogenics group, CH-110LT 40K Cryocooler Series. [Online]. Available: https:
/ / www . shicryogenics . com / product / ch - 110lt - 40k - cryocooler - series/ (visited on
03/24/2023).
[21]
M. Kanda, K. Matsumoto, and S. Yamaguchi, “Heat transfer through multi-layer in-
sulation (mli),” eng, Physica C: Superconductivity and Its Applications, vol. 583,
p. 1 353 799, 2021, ISSN: 18732143, 09214534. DOI: 10.1016/j.physc.2020.1353799.
[22]
R. G. 2023, Coolcat 2 NW Spacered Superinsulation Composed Of 10 Layers Of
Polyester Foil. [Online]. Available: https://www.datasheets.com/en/part-details/
pl100045-ruag-space-56387429 (visited on 03/28/2023).
[23]
K. Krieger, Investigation of superconducting current leads for superconducting wind
turbine generator coils, Jun. 2018.
[24]
RS, Varmeelement, 300 W, Længde: 4tommer, 120 V ac. [Online]. Available: https:
//dk.rs-online.com/web/p/varmelegemer/8606839.
[25]
W. GmbH, Block magnet 30 x 10 x 5 mm, holds approx. 6,5 kg. [Online]. Available:
https://www.supermagnete.dk/block- magnets- neodymium/block- magnet- 30mm-
10mm-5mm_Q-30-10-05-N?group=lp-n42.
[26]
Temperature and Neodymium Magnets. [Online]. Available: https://www.kjmagnetics.
com/blog.asp?p=temperature-and-neodymium-magnets (visited on 03/24/2023).
[27]
I. Lake Shore Cryotronics, Operating Manual for Model 340 Cryogenic Tempera-
ture Controller. [Online]. Available: https://www.lakeshore.com/products/categories/
downloads / discontinued - products / discontinued - products / model - 340 - cryogenic -
temperature-controller (visited on 03/24/2023).
[28]
OriginPro 2022, Northampton, MA, USA.
[29]
E. ToolBox, Thermal Expansion - Linear Expansion Coefficients, 2003. [Online].
Available: https://www.engineeringtoolbox.com/linear-expansion-coefficients-d_95.
html (visited on 01/13/2023).
[30]
MATLAB, version 9.13.0 (R2022b). Natick, Massachusetts: The MathWorks Inc.,
2022.
[31]
COMSOL Multiphysics® v.6.0, Stockholm, Sweden. [Online]. Available: www.comsol.
com.
72
Overcurrent in high temperature superconducting tapes for power cable applications
==PAGE:80==
[32]
C. develtopment Association Inc., “Electrical Resistivity vs. Temperature,” Cryo-
genic Properties of Copper, vol. 104/5, [Online]. Available: https://www.copper.
org / resources / properties / cryogenic / images / Electrical - Resistivity . gif (visited on
03/10/2023).
[33]
C. M. Friend, C. Wellstood, D. Vazquez, and E. Maher, “Variable-temperature critical
current measurements on ybacuo coated conductors,” eng, Superconductor Sci-
ence and Technology, vol. 16, no. 1, pp. 65–70, 2003, ISSN: 13616668, 09532048.
DOI: 10.1088/0953-2048/16/1/312.
[34]
D. M. Bäcker, Produktion supraleitender Drähte für die Energietechnik, 2016. [On-
line]. Available: www.d-nano.com.
[35]
P. Richens, H. Jones, M. Van Cleemput, and D. Hampshire, “Strain dependence
of critical currents in commercial high temperature superconductors,” IEEE Trans-
actions on Applied Superconductivity, vol. 7, no. 2, pp. 1315–1318, 1997. DOI:
10.1109/77.620767.
[36]
S. cryogenics group, CH-110LT 40K Cryocooler Capacity Map. [Online]. Available:
https://www.shicryogenics.com/wp-content/uploads/2020/09/CH-110LT_Capacity_
Map.pdf (visited on 03/27/2023).
Overcurrent in high temperature superconducting tapes for power cable applications
73
==PAGE:81==
A
Resistance during cool down
Figure A.1: Show here the AmSc344 superconducting wire with a width of 4.78 mm, and a
length of 1 cm - channel 2 - between two shortest probes, separated by 1cm in the middle
of the superconductor. The tape has a critical temperature of Tc = 93K, however, it is
measured a bit higher. Most likely this is due to the thermometer being on the top side of
the sc tape, lacking a bit behind during the cooling process.
74
Overcurrent in high temperature superconducting tapes for power cable applications
==PAGE:82==
B
344-Wire data sheet from AmSc
Overcurrent in high temperature superconducting tapes for power cable applications
75
==PAGE:83==
344 Superconductors
Type 348C: Copper stabilized YBCO second generation HTS wire
Type 348C HTS Wire Fact Sheet
• HTS wire laminated 
on both sides with 
hardened copper for 
stabilization and
strength
• Solder fillets at edges
provide hermeticity, 
corrosion protection, 
and enhanced 
electrical stability
• Robust product with
excellent mechanical
strength and bend 
tolerance
• Optimized for use 
in power dense coils 
and magnets, particulary
with high “C” axis
strength
344 superconductors are American Superconductor’s
new YBCO second generation HTS wires. 
Mechanical Properties:
Average thickness: 
0.18 - 0.22 mm
Minimum width: 
4.70 mm
Maximum width:
4.95 mm
Minimum double bend diameter (RT):
30 mmi
Maximum rated tensile stress (RT): 
150 MPai
Maximum rated wire tension (RT):
9 kg
Maximum rated tensile strain (77K): 
0.3%i
Electrical Properties:
Average engineering
Minimum amperage (Ic)ii
current density (Je)iii
70 A
7,200 A/cm2
80 A
8,200 A/cm2
90 A
9,300 A/cm2
100 A
Contact factory
Spliced wire available in long lengths
Contact factory
Insulation options: Contact factory
Certificate of Conformance provided. 
Certificate of Analysis optionally available. Contact factory. 
Leaders and tailers optionally available. Contact factory.
i With 95% Ic retention
ii 77K, self-field, 1µV/cm 
iii Je is a calculated value based on average thickness and width
American Superconductor Corporation
64 Jackson Road
Devens, MA  01434 USA
htswire@amsc.com
tel
+1 978 842 3519
fax
+1 978 842 3364
www.amsc.com
© 2010 American Superconductor.  All rights reserved. American Superconductor and design, AMSC, POWERED BY AMSC, 
Revolutionizing the Way the World Uses Electricity are trademarks of American Superconductor Corporation.  Printed in USA.
WFS_348C_0410_A4
1.2 T HTS coil using Type 348C superconductors.
==PAGE:84==
C
Experimental equipment
C.1
Hotplate
Figure C.1: The Cenco hotplate magnetic stirrer used as a heater
Picture of the HP 34480A nano volt meter.
Figure C.2
Overcurrent in high temperature superconducting tapes for power cable applications
77
==PAGE:85==
C.2
Cryo greases
C.2.1
Cryo grease with Copper
Figure C.3: Cryo grease with copper particle to raise it’s thermal conductivity [19].
C.2.2
Cryo grease
Figure C.4: Apiezon grease type N [19]
78
Overcurrent in high temperature superconducting tapes for power cable applications
==PAGE:86==
C.3
Cold head
The cooling head shown in Figure 3.4is located beneath the chamber, while the helium
compressor driving it stands a few meters away seen here in Figure C.5.
Figure C.5: The Sumitomo cryogencis F-70 compressor that drives the cooling head,
mounted beneath cryostat.
Overcurrent in high temperature superconducting tapes for power cable applications
79
==PAGE:87==
Figure C.6: Workload curve of the CH-110LT operating at 50 Hz cooling head. To have the
cooling head at approximately 60 K, heat flux needs to be around that of Equation 3.1.2.
This capacity map is found here [36].
80
Overcurrent in high temperature superconducting tapes for power cable applications
==PAGE:88==
C.4
Wire bending
Figure C.7: Wood piece with an rounding of 30 mm and a rod of Q19mm used to pres the
wire gently down, not the whole way.
Figure C.8: Showing the tape used after bend and before soldered.
Overcurrent in high temperature superconducting tapes for power cable applications
81
==PAGE:89==
C.5
Heater block input and temperatures
Figure C.9: An initial test of the temperatures the heater block could provide. With a
setpoint on the lake shore 340 controller and the reading of heater block Tset. Twire is the
measured temperature on the wire after around 3 minutes. Pheat was the power input to
the heating elements at a temperature of 2 K of the set point.
82
Overcurrent in high temperature superconducting tapes for power cable applications
==PAGE:90==
C.6
Joule heating in current leads from feedthroughs
Figure C.10: Voltmeter on the cryostat, showing 0.48 V over one the current lead, with
power supply down to the right show 93.4A
The joule heating in one current lead at 93 A and 70 K
P = 0.48V · 93.4A = 44.8W
in each of the current leads, in total almost 90W.
Overcurrent in high temperature superconducting tapes for power cable applications
83
==PAGE:91==
D
Superconducting current leads for the
cold plate
Figure D.1: Two clamps are used to hold the superconducting wires on the sides of the
copper bars, and the cable clamps are fastened on the steel sheet, to make sure the
position is right on the cold plate.
Figure D.2: Here are the finished superconducting current leads with the heater block on
paper with the measurements from the cryostat that it needs to fit with.
Pictures of superconducting currents lead, with soldered Bi2223 superconductors on sides
and as wires. Superconducting tape used is Bismuth 2223, with a Tc = 110 [8].
84
Overcurrent in high temperature superconducting tapes for power cable applications
==PAGE:92==
E
Aluminium press
Figure E.1: Aluminum press with magnet
Figure E.2: Aluminum press without magnet
Overcurrent in high temperature superconducting tapes for power cable applications
85
==PAGE:93==
F
Qualification Cryogenic Cooler Over
current setup drawings
The following pages are the construction drawings used for the overcurrent measurement
device including aluminum terminals for the feed-through rods.
86
Overcurrent in high temperature superconducting tapes for power cable applications
==PAGE:94==
' 
r 
._fflu_ 
i 
• 
1 I • 
C 
li 
y r 	
'_ 
JE N b 1 
 4 
 
I• 
I 
Le 
lim 
e 
le 
KM 
,,,„: 
w 
II. in.= 
EirriffiffirdWirtiaid 
ug ffli 
_ti 
, 
N• 
 
u._
I. 
 
F 
9FiRESTIffin 
tw~A~riair."~P~ENZEINI~I 
• 
. 
. rm 
. 
E E 
I 
UR I1 tRUR 
Ruuuuiu 
 
. 
au . 
, 
, 
om .i 
I RU 
RUUURIR. 
je RR 
. 
OME. RRill 
E 
wl 
ii.
EEEZEIZE 
E- 
 
a - 
m 
urin 
• 
L a 
w 
N 
. 
. 9! . 
rff,ou 
hm.. . 
.10111~ElEilliffrimiEmør 
lf2ffilitoffEEE 
/91,ffirdEr"PrWill 
!Efffit:i. 
NFE,IZILPAEFffliffir"1116" 
AllEvidEEEZEpArAEMME"ArdEata~ E 
; •~9' 
EESPIEWAISINEEWJEEEEEMZEE8 
effifflEEMENI~WArAgEEMIKIEMINENEEErl 
•mffiVAET~F~E~AmmmIEPIGIUrffirtirmawig 
NIEEE1111 
'ffilli~ 
111. 
I 
. 1 
 
• 
1 
 11 
rill 
1111•%P 
1
1
1
111
3 
 
I 
.. 
.• 
EN- 
 EI' • 
1• 
_. 
E om 
I 
- - 
UR 
1E'REE 
I MIE eil 
Eg' III 
RU 
e 
Ige-01 uURRI 
11 il 
I•il 
i 
 
N 
*,;, 
I 
UR 
I 
%
R. 
 
I 
1 
il 
e 
IIIII 
Il 
N 
N 
.. 
I 
N 
N 
• 
E 
I 
E 
1 
I 
• 
IRU 
E 
IN 
III 
N 
1 
N 
RUIR 
A 
I
iR 
IN I 1 
N N 
I 
==PAGE:95==
4. 
J 
gin 
NI 
___I _L_ --1-- 
_I 
ii 
I 
--- 
A 
.««kAliert27 
_5 
Ø II 
`
cr - 
ie 
E 
I 	
 
x 
(0 
I_ 
, 
L 
Pi
---- -------- -, 
• 
) k 	
 
54i-, 
1 - 
, , 
, 
1 . 
• 
, 
. 
rtI 
T 
.. 
E
---
-i---  
L 
ii 
 
i , 	
1 
5io 
-< 
-.- 
3o. 
VY 1 . 11, 
I 
1 
N 
J 
I 
I 
1 
==PAGE:96==
, 
iffr, a u E 	
 irk
lailia"M ill iii 01 mil 
-MON 
ird
i6 ern IE 
 
	
 111101111•1111111111111111111111IN 
Imilirgiomm.mem el meimemem-m.....1 
1111:110111emm. " 	
111111111:11= 
0.0 IIVEEIEE 
 INI EINE EEEEEEE 
EEE ER E mumme 
iiirr9
or "Iiirri ,I Nu . d.i. 
. . • IEEE =El imm_mmummeeemmmemeem 
viril Nid • iiigh.
E.
mmbemplim 
m mil•111"1" 'MENE INERIONOLE 
N ' • NO"•' iiiiiimer 
NOONOrmi
 
impm•• 1 miumm .0 
w liellimdramilLele ram" 
EE EEMWEEEEEEEER EMU EEEEEEEEEEEE 
NO "*""10"" "`MEffilmOMONNEVRO 
EM= EEE MEM 
mem ømmommummeummigimmummummmmumemim 
m 	
mumme. 
~EU E•EEEEEEEEEEEEEIE 
EEEE 	
EEEEEEIWEEEE•E•EEMMEMEMEEEVE 
• 
MIM 
EMEE E EM EEE EIENEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEMEE 
IlEffl 
immmeemmemm..~.~ 
miE malm mmmommummumemummmme 
EMME EEEENEEEEE IEEEEMEMEEREEEEMEEEEOE 
E Ell mmIP Mffimm~ EEEEEEEEEmEEEEEEmENONE 
E Will 
EraMIN m~mummmimmummeom 
NEN._ EINEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEE 	
MIE 
=h  MB laMM E ECEEWIE EEEE 	
11012101 
_110 EEEMWEEE REEEEEETEEE =MW 
E ENEEWEEEMEEEE 
mmemememmammmmem Tue miem =Em 
EMEWEEEEE ~IEEE 
EEEMEEEEWLEEEWEEUEEEEE 
emmemmimm mmmmm 
1,11111111111111111111111111200111 
EE EEEENEEEEEEEEEEEEEE _um 
IEEEEEEEEEE. 
Ell EMBEEEINEEEEEEEEEEEEEREE ElOWEEEEEEEE 
mm :::::::::::::::"11::::::m m:::.
 
Iii 
EE MMEWEEEEEREEE111.•EREEEEEE EEEE 
EIIIEEEEEEEEEEEEEE ELWEREWEI•ENWIEE 
ERI EEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEREEEEEEEEEEE=E 
E 	
EEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEMEE 
EEEEEEEEEEEEEEIMIREMEEEEEEMEEE 
E EN1101 	
EEEEEEEEEE 	
EEEEEEEEEEEEEE 
Em 	
 Em 	
memeimmemmil reommm 	
ENE E 
E EIFEE 	
MIME IEEE 	
EEEEE•~er 
la•Ei 	
"IEEE•EEEEEEE 	E 	
EN= Eill 
~E IEEE= EEE 1E 	
EEEE E 
EEEEEEEEEEE EEE EEE ~EM 	 EEE 
==PAGE:97==
gr 
L 
_L 
a rk 
.
11 
T 
J
li‘i! 
• 
EFfil- 
N 
-
i. 
:_'..-- 
, 
i 
 
1 
i. 
-1 
I 
Lal 
I
. 
_, 
h.- 
_ I 
- , 
I 
- - el 
i 
111i I_ 
. 
PI 
!Kil!
- ;-1 
,,,,, 
imei 
I 
-_ ... Al•Il 
r 
, 
E 
• 
f. 
— 
-1±- 
1111111 
i
• 
ME 
i 
1- I 
IN 
nta 
w, 
2re-21 
1 
i 
ard11 
. 
, 
eil
iii 
91 
., 
, 
,, 
di 
' 
_111ffill" 
Eillffinliii, 
IIIEMM 
MØN% 
N 
i i 
 
, 
==PAGE:98==
I 
i 
I 
1 I 
I 
N 
111 
0 
N 
11 
1 
il 
N 
I 
00 
E 
UNNUNU.UU 
U. 
"EL 
Eli 
EuE 
0121 
le. 
EU 
E  
N 
I 
 
UN 
i 
doll 
ii J 
o
U 
illo 
NN 
N I 
e 
III I 
I I 
1111110.10.111111.1111011111 
I 
I 
mei 
n.= 
e il 
EEE 
en 
EMIN 
Ir 
 ENE•
E 
IN I 
I
Kim men..10.11011~1 
MIM IIIIIII 
in 
1 
111.1..... 
 
°VI 
E 
lille 
d 
i
l,: 
 
. . 
NUUUU 
,1  
KW 
~lim, 
:NN 
i 
Emb mim 
I 
ED 
al. 
e 
N 
.. 
JE 
mini 
 
d 
11111 
E 
II .•E 
IC 
ih 
om 
MIE 
N 
REM 
LEM 
III 
1•1 
E 
I 
Se 
re 
MERE 
Namillirn! 
11113 b' 
UM 
IR 
MIN 
E 
ENE •Il MW 
emui 
Lem e 
1 N INI 
..‘ ww4F_L2 rar 
L EL-R r.. E 
"EI 
'N I 
N 
å 
N 
Eg 
ii 
,,iird 
• IBM= 
NI 
III 
I
N 
EL 
N 
NIN 
NU 
iTegri NNUUU UUUNUNUNUUUUUU•UIUUU NNUN 
e 
EI 
•NUNUUUUUU 
C 
e 
==PAGE:99==
i 
1 
1 
, 
1 
r` 
--F- 
_l_ 
)1 ? 
G\ 	
0 
-1-  
_„. 
% 
1 111111~ 
P 
1. 
'•;• "' 
ffleill 
.- 
!I 
. . 
--.- lilla
, 
I
-C 
L 
NI 
i 
N 
''... 
, 
I 
P3
PI 
 
____ .I 
I 
e 
kl 
, 
, 
il 
J 
Effl 
111 
II
, 
W
Il 
li 
! 
1- 
 e 
 
1 
1 il 
J 	
, 
114111 
t• 
1 
Rul 
- 
r 
Il II 
I 
1111 
 
I
l 
l 
I 
Ill 
 
,i 
u) 
mieffl 
-- 
RRI 
RU 
1E ' 
1.!
ma 
. , 
.. 
EI, k 
k NM 
__1 
I 
,--' 
r
c
ei
ii 
 
I 
==PAGE:100==
_L 
11111 1: får 911"IIIE"!7 • 
ill
I e)r? 
  	
e:"Tairmilm 
El Enom.:~_ EEE 
me 
t
i 
 
i 11 
IV= 	
 
IIII ran. II iniffl 
le I( .MagirEEIENINEE 
Irm mime= eedlealli 
g ra.11111 milei
II 
 
rm «oml le 	
 
ra =pir - IIIIIIIIIIIII 
III irdpilirlitem 
n 1 •
IEEE ILESIES 
~IN IEEE 
et« 
IESESEE 	
SE 
IL 
Emeiribmir-- 	
• 
~mem Eni••••••irom r. 
 	
• 
111-1114112111ffllidEE'rj 	
• om 
1111=111p061 rimp e 
ie.. ...„" 	
..,... 
e el. 
EE 
I
ngi
nnffilliblat
el 1.11111111~».01111 
..r. ....,...,Enra. ji, Elemir. 
111%.•111~..0...tme 
ffliiie 
1111111110111111~~1011111111111 	
~LIM 
illeffiNPENPEral. Vel =WIPP 
............. • im..01 	
EffirESIESEEEEIEE 
EEL EEPOIEEEE INSEEEEEEEffleeleiffimmi EM 
RENOWIEEWMIE EEEETOIS~ 
RESSEENNEEEEEE MS« ESNitel 
EffiffilEISSEEINII 11~ Elleen=ffleiN 
SE 
EE 
~EMIRER! SES= 	
~E 
PEWIEENNEINIZTE E 	
MEE 
INEMEINEEEEE EM= E 
=E E emme =E 	 =EI 
=mil 
iii lidirealmiliii imil"~ 	
ffiffiN 
Nim _ffile11111:11111111~ffilIM 
Iffillmffillell 111~1111111ell iii E .eir 
ILD.... 
:op 111'1111 	
le 	
 
.... 	
.... 
„II.. . .. .. .. 15::...Emal... 
LIE1111111 • 
 
m i 
i.. ==:1111 
• • 
Li 	
-1 
==PAGE:101==
. 
1 
# 
i, 
. 
g 
,i 
L -1  
i 
J 
@ 
•  
I 
'.. 
c2 
.l, 
5 
1 
3
13  
- 
, 
_ 
.% 
. 
ih 
1 
I 
Il 
1 
h 
61 
I- 
_I 
N.I 
1 
i ill! 
==PAGE:102==
3"Y") 
e 
,)(  
, 
„,•,„g5 
	
„ 	
7 	
 
274 
- 	
 
.&? 
iS' 	
jr2= 
7 g" 
1/k o ,W1--1- 
c./ 
/4..e27r)te- 
3s  
< 
4. 2,5 
5 
5 
• 
arK1 
5  
0 
==PAGE:103==
G
Matlab 1D model code
This is the code used, pictured in the flow diagram Figure 3.21.
1
% Copper stabilizer:
2
rho_cu_el = 7.71269*10^(-10);
% [ohm *m] 90 K degress celcius ,
3
a_cu = 4.29 * 10^(-3); % [1/K] thermal coefficient dp = p * a *
dT
4
T_cu_cp = 90; %K, ref at 90 'K.
5
c_p_cu = 252; % [J / (kg * K)] @
100K, heatbook
6
d_cu = 8800; % [kg /m^3] from the book intro to heat transfer.
7
k_cu = 540; % [W/(K*m)] @ 300K @heatbook , from the NIST data @79
K
8
9
% Dimensions
10
dy = 0.00480; %[m], 4,80 mm width
11
dz = 0.000020; %[m], 20 ym (micro meter) height
12
dx = 0.01; %[m],
length of sc and matrix/copper.
CH2 = 0,01
and CH1 = 0,06.
13
A_xy = dx*dy; %[m^2] cross area of cu wire towards baseplate)
14
A_yz = dy*dz; %[m^2] cross area of cu wire
current direction )
15
16
% Superconductor
17
I_c = 80; % [A] Amps pr 4mm sc. Assuming we have 4mm of sc. tape
. @ 77K - given by the AmSc
18
T_c = 90; % [K] %93K AmSc wire!!
19
E_0 = 0.0001; % [V/m] 100 my volt pr m, 1 my volt/cm is the size
for a superpower superconductor?
20
n = 35; % GUESS?!
21
% Dimensions of SC
22
dy_sc = dy; % [m], 4 mm in width
23
dz_sc = 0.0000016; % [m], 1,6 ym (micrometer)
24
A_sc = dy_sc*dz_sc;
25
%copper cross-section
26
A_cu = (A_yz-A_sc);% [m^2] cross area of the matrix in tape
current direction
27
28
% Alu block
29
H_alu = 0.016; % [m] with no heating in.
30
k_alu = 58; % [W/(K*m)] @ 84K, NIST data.
31
32
33
% AlO2 place
34
H_al2o3 = 0.001; %[m] heigth of al2O3 plate
35
k_al2o3 =
133;
% [W/(m*K] @ 100 K
36
37
% Height of it all
38
D = H_al2o3 + H_alu;
39
96
Overcurrent in high temperature superconducting tapes for power cable applications
==PAGE:104==
40
41
%% Setting matrices for speed
42
N_U = 100; % Matrix length
43
T_new=zeros(N_U,1); % N_U is number of columns in U
44
I_SS = zeros(N_U,1);
45
E_g = zeros(N_U,1);
46
I_sc_new = zeros(N_U,1);
47
I_m = zeros(N_U,1);
48
Ux=zeros(N_U,1);
49
Uxg=zeros(N_U,1);
50
Uw = zeros(N_U,1); %Uw = zeros(N_U,r_resolution);
51
f_m = 1; % scaling factor so Matlab solver can find solutions
with accuracy.
52
53
%% Input data from experiments:
54
% Average thermal conductivity from the experiment:
55
kappa_bar = 4.69; % Ch2: 5,23425 and Ch1: 4.69 for no magnet
56
57
% Temperature dependence on the Critical current into S.S.
calculation.
58
% Fitting parameters of I_c(T,sf) temperature dependences:
59
t0 = 10.39;
60
t1 = 70.96;
61
t2 = 1.89;
62
t3 = 0.939;
63
t4 = 1.36;
64
65
%Raising the precisions of the numeric solver VPA.
66
digitsOld=digits;
67
digits(60); %above 50 it takes a lot more time.
68
69
% initiating For loop with same T_q's as experiments.
70
for T_q = [70 74 77 80 85 87 90]
71
T_i = T_q;
72
T=T_i;
73
74
% making a current ramping up - practical IV-curve.
75
fI_c = a^(T_q - t1) * I_c .* (1 - 1 ./ (exp(-(T_q - T_c*t3) / t4
) + 1)); % of T_q because T_i changes for every IV simulation
.
76
77
% Current matrix and step depending on the initial experiment
temperature.
78
I_SS_ramp = linspace(0.1,2*fI_c+30,N_U); % 186;
79
80
dT_cu = T_i -
T_cu_cp;
81
dp_cu = rho_cu_el * a_cu * dT_cu;
82
83
% Ramping up loop
84
for m = 1:N_U
Overcurrent in high temperature superconducting tapes for power cable applications
97
==PAGE:105==
85
% Change in the critical current as a function of temperature in
ramping up
86
% loop.
87
f_Ic(m) = exp(-(T - t1) / t0) * I_c * t2 .* (1 - 1 ./ (
exp(-(T - T_c*t3) / t4) + 1)); %(1-1./(1+exp(-(T-T1)/
T0)))*c;
%
88
89
% initialize for symbols to solve for the potential in
the parallel
90
% connection of sc and normal conductor.
91
syms UU
92
% equation to solve
93
eqn =
f_Ic(m) .* ((f_m*UU)./(dx*E_0)).^(1/n) + (f_m * UU)
./ (((rho_cu_el+dp_cu) * dx) / A_cu) == I_SS_ramp(m);
94
95
% solving the equation numerically:
96
Ux = vpasolve(eqn, UU, [10^(-100) 10^(250)]); %
97
%Us = vpasolve(eqn(nn),UU, [0 inf],'Random ',true);
98
99
% rescaling solutions from numerical solver
100
Uw(m) = Ux/f_m; %Uw(l,m) = Ux/f_m;
101
102
% current in SC
103
I_sc_new(m) = f_Ic(m) .* (Uw(m)./(dx*E_0)).^(1/n); %
I_sc_new(l,m) = f_Ic(l) .* (Uw(l,m)./(dx*E_0)).^(1/n);
104
105
% change in resistance in the copper matrix
106
dT_cu = T -
T_cu_cp;
107
dp_cu = rho_cu_el * a_cu .* dT_cu;
108
109
% Current in copper
110
I_m(m) = I_SS_ramp(m)-I_sc_new(m);
%I_m(l,m) = I_TD_ramp
(m)-I_sc_new(l,m);
%Uw(l,:) ./ ((rho_cu_el+dp_cu) *
dx / A_cu);
111
112
%total current
113
I_SS(m) = I_sc_new(m) +
Uw(m) ./ ((rho_cu_el+dp_cu) * dx
/ A_cu);
114
115
% Energy dissipated over center segment:
116
E_g(m) = ((rho_cu_el+dp_cu) * dx .* I_m(m).^2 / A_cu + Uw(m)
.* I_sc_new(m));
117
118
% calculating the new steady -state temperature of the tape.
119
T_new(m) = E_g(m) * D ./(A_xy * kappa_bar) + T_q;
120
% for loop parameter to update critical current function.
121
T=T_new(m);
122
123
124
T_i = T; % T_i changes for each step up in the current -
98
Overcurrent in high temperature superconducting tapes for power cable applications
==PAGE:106==
125
end
126
T_heat_SS(:) = T_new(:) ;
Overcurrent in high temperature superconducting tapes for power cable applications
99
==PAGE:107==
H
The cold plate drawings
100
Overcurrent in high temperature superconducting tapes for power cable applications
==PAGE:108==
A-A ( 1:1,5 )
A
A
1
1
2
2
3
3
4
4
5
5
6
6
A
A
B
B
C
C
D
D
Designer
Date
17401-85
Project No.
Title
DWG.
Materiel
04-07-2017
Ove Rasmussen
Project
Koldhoved
Koblingsflange
Al.6061-T1
 
1:1,5
 
DTU  Vindenergi
Pcs
Scale
0,00
50,00
64,64
90,00
100,00
120,00
150,00
180,00
200,00
210,00
235,36
250,00
300,00
0,00
10,00
50,00
64,64
100,00
135,36
150,00
190,00
200,00
7,00
P10,00
P5,50
12,00
R100,00
R100,00
50,00
0,00
13,69
46,75
79,81
93,50
0,00
13,69
46,75
79,81
93,50
10 Stk. 10
12 Stk. M5
8 Stk. Unders nket hul for M5 skrue
==PAGE:109==
I
Cabel model coefficients
Critical currents and n-values for the cable models used in the discussion.
Values found in with a normal distribution with µn = 5 and a standard deviation of σn = 2
for the n-values, for the critical currents µIc = 80 A and a standard deviation of σIc = 10
A.
Tape
Critical current Ic,i [A]
n-value ni
1
57,41153
2,01682
2
66,50113
2,15525
3
66,92312
2,19546
4
75,66408
2,82187
5
77,95034
2,87684
6
78,75856
3,4703
7
79,36945
3,5154
8
83,18765
3,7688
9
83,42624
4,60789
10
85,37667
4,61516
11
87,14743
4,64525
12
87,25404
5,06511
13
88,62173
5,17186
14
94,09034
5,97639
15
94,17192
6,10505
16
94,89698
6,49615
17
98,33885
6,77722
18
107,69437
7,20122
19
110,34923
8,08842
20
115,78397
9,70091
Table I.1: Values used in the model with a low n-value of the mean µn = 5.
Values found in with a normal distribution with µn = 8 and a standard deviation of σn = 3
for the n-values, for the critical currents µIc = 80 A and a standard deviation of σIc = 10
A.
102
Overcurrent in high temperature superconducting tapes for power cable applications
==PAGE:110==
Tape
Critical current Ic,i [A]
n-value ni
1
57,41153
4,55993
2
66,50113
4,89673
3
66,92312
5,09258
4
75,66408
5,93651
5
77,95034
6,10986
6
78,75856
6,14422
7
79,36945
6,50693
8
83,18765
6,55331
9
83,42624
7,67998
10
85,37667
7,85936
11
87,14743
7,86803
12
87,25404
8,03406
13
88,62173
8,62615
14
94,09034
8,99564
15
94,17192
9,53605
16
94,89698
9,94234
17
98,33885
12,01866
18
107,69437
15,09567
19
110,34923
16,04908
20
115,78397
16,84728
Table I.2: Values used in the model with a low n-value of the mean µn = 8.
Values found in with a normal distribution with µn = 30 and a standard deviation of σn = 10
for the n-values, for the critical currents µIc = 80 A and a standard deviation of σIc = 10
A.
Overcurrent in high temperature superconducting tapes for power cable applications
103
==PAGE:111==
Tape
Critical current Ic,i [A]
n-value ni
1
57,41153
5,55716
2
66,50113
17,88484
3
66,92312
22,92513
4
75,66408
23,5293
5
77,95034
24,3113
6
78,75856
26,90501
7
79,36945
27,12717
8
83,18765
27,45072
9
83,42624
31,96559
10
85,37667
37,93871
11
87,14743
38,25191
12
87,25404
39,88894
13
88,62173
41,71497
14
94,09034
42,17239
15
94,17192
42,26885
16
94,89698
43,88396
17
98,33885
45,34693
18
107,69437
48,70299
19
110,34923
49,3838
20
115,78397
51,30235
Table I.3: Values used in the model with a low n-value.
104
Overcurrent in high temperature superconducting tapes for power cable applications
==PAGE:112==
J
Critical current data from Deutsche
Nanoschicht GmbH
Data presented by Deutsche Nanoschicht GmbH [34] via a graph are read out, and fitted
with the proposed formula for critical current as a function of temperature.
Figure J.1: Critical current for sample N431840-3mm at 0 T accordingly to experiments
done by deutshe nanoschicht GmbH [34]
Overcurrent in high temperature superconducting tapes for power cable applications
105
==PAGE:113==
Technical
University of
Denmark
DTU Risø Campus, Frederiksborgvej 399, bygn 101.
4000 Roskilde
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.wind.dtu.dk
