==PAGE:1==
Associations between indoor climate in classrooms and
children's well-being and concentration ability
Master Thesis
Stine Pagaard Haahr
June, 2023
DTU Sustain
Department of of Environmental and Resource Engineering
==PAGE:2==
Associations between indoor climate in classrooms and children’s well-being and
concentration ability
Master Thesis
June, 2023
By
Stine Pagaard Haahr
Supervisor:
Jørn Toftum, Professor - DTU Sustain
Study line:
MSc in Architectural Engineering
Credits:
30 ECTS
Project period:
24.10.22–02.06.23
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Stine Pagaard Haahr, 2023
Published by:
DTU, Department of of Environmental and Resource Engineering, Bygn-
ingstorvet, Building 115, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.sustain.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Preface
This thesis has been prepared at the Section for Indoor Climate, Department of Envi-
ronmental and Resource Engineering, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in
partial fulfillment for the degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng. The thesis
accounts for 30 ECTS credits and was carried out between the 24th of October 2022 and
the 2nd of June 2023.
I would like to express my biggest gratitude towards my supervisor Professor Jørn Toftum,
DTU, for sharing his expertise on the subject and for his guidance, support, and positive
encouragement.
Also thank you to Product Expert Henning Grønbæk at Exhausto for sharing knowledge
and helping with the ventilation units. I would like to thank Lærke Viuff Petersen for proof-
reading the thesis.
Finally, I would like to thank the teachers and pupils at Skt. Klemensskolen for their par-
ticipation in the project. Their cooperation and enthusiasm made this thesis possible.
Stine Pagaard Haahr - s152100
Signature
Date
ii
Associations between indoor climate in classrooms and children’s well-being and concentration ability
01-06-2023
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
The majority of Danish schools are found to have inadequate indoor environment. The
air quality is one of the environmental factors where the classrooms are particularly chal-
lenged, as the recommended limit of CO2 concentration is exceeded during more than
half of the school hours. Studies reveal associations between the indoor environment
and well-being and learning. This places high demands on school buildings to create
the best prerequisites for well-being and learning. In addition, great socio-economical
benefits are associated with an improved indoor environment.
This project investigates the effect of installing ventilation units in classrooms at SKt. Kle-
mensskolen in Odense, Denmark. Two classrooms are equipped with decentralized ven-
tilation units DEX3090, whereas two similar classrooms are included in the project as
reference rooms.
The indoor environmental parameters CO2 concentration, temperature, relative humidity,
and sound are measured in four classrooms during a period from September to April.
The well-being and concentration performance of the pupils were evaluated through a
questionnaire, a graphic Baddeley test, and a d2 test. Associations between relevant
indoor environmental parameters and well-being and concentration performance were
analyzed using univariate analysis.
The data from the indoor environmental measurements revealed a great improvement in
the air quality in the classrooms where a decentralized ventilation unit was installed. The
CO2 concentration peak levels decreased from over 4000 ppm to just above 1000 ppm.
The temperature and relative humidity were generally found acceptable in the classrooms
regardless of the installation of a ventilation unit.
The subjective evaluation of well-being by the pupils generally followed theory and pre-
vious studies. With increasing CO2 concentration the pupils perceived the air quality as
more uncomfortable. In addition, the pupils’ perception of draught was less uncomfort-
able with increasing temperatures. Finally, a polynomial regression revealed a preferred
temperature of 23.5°C.
Unexpectedly, the pupils did not perceive their concentration as worse with increasing
CO2 concentrations. Their perceived concentration was more related to symptoms like ir-
ritated eyes, feeling tired, and having a headache. However, a linear correlational analysis
did reveal associations between CO2 concentration and the concentration performance
of the pupils. By lowering the CO2 concentration from 2400 ppm to 900 ppm, the analysis
showed an improvement in concentration performance of 1.5% points and 5.8% points
from the Baddeley and d2 test, respectively.
Finally, the calculation of the socio-economic benefit of improving the indoor environment
at Skt. Klemensskole showed a great profit. By lowering the sick leave of pupils and
teachers an economic profit of 12 M Danish kroner was expected. Although associated
with high uncertainty, a profit of 7.18. M Danish kroner was also expected by increasing
the performance of pupils.
Associations between indoor climate in classrooms and children’s well-being and concentration ability
iii
==PAGE:5==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Objective
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Theory
3
2.1
Indoor Environmental Quality . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Ventilation Principles in Classrooms
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.3
IEQ in Danish Schools . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.4
IEQ and Performance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
2.5
Regulations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
3
Method
15
3.1
Skt. Klemensskolen . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
3.2
Intervention at Skt. Klemensskolen . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
3.3
Measurements of Indoor Environment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
3.4
Measurements of Well-being and Concentration Performance . . . . . . . . 20
3.5
Data Processing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
3.6
Socio-Economic Benefit . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
4
Results
27
4.1
Indoor Environment in Classrooms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
4.2
Well-being of Pupils
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
4.3
Concentration Performance of Pupils . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
4.4
Socio-economic Benefits
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
5
Discussion
49
5.1
Discussion of findings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49
5.2
Sources of error in the collection of data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51
5.3
Sources of error in the analysis of results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 52
5.4
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 52
6
Conclusion
53
Bibliography
55
A Questionnaire
58
B Socio-Economic Benefit
61
iv
Associations between indoor climate in classrooms and children’s well-being and concentration ability
==PAGE:6==
1
Introduction
The indoor environmental quality in the majority of Danish classrooms is found to be in-
adequate (Clausen et al., 2017) (Toftum et al., 2022). For example, measurements in
709 Danish classrooms in 2021 revealed that the carbon dioxide (CO2) concentration
exceeded the recommended maximum level of 1000 ppm during 53% of school hours
(Toftum et al., 2022). Attention has been drawn to this issue, as studies reveal asso-
ciations between the indoor environment and pupil well-being and performance (Sund-
hedsstyrelsen, 2018; Wargocki and Wyon, 2013; Haverinen-Shaughnessy et al., 2011;
Wargocki et al., 2019).
Children must attend school regardless of the quality of the indoor environment and the
expectations for learning outcome is demanding. Denmark is one of the countries in the
world where children spend the most hours in school (OECD, 2019). Primary and lower
secondary school is mandatory for 10 years and the school year is 200 days (Børne- og
undervisningsministeriet, 2022). According to a report by OECD from 2019, pupils world-
wide spend an average of 7,590 compulsory hours of education during their primary and
lower secondary education (OECD, 2019). In Denmark, this number is 10,960 hours,
only topped by Australia with 11,000 hours. Hence, during 10 years of compulsory ed-
ucation, Danish pupils spend approximately 20% of their waking hours in school every
year (Clausen et al., 2017). This means that more than a half million children in Denmark
are affected by the indoor environmental conditions in Danish school buildings (Danmarks
statistik, 2022).
The demand for sufficient ventilation of classrooms in school buildings is crucial as it reg-
ulates the indoor environment. However, the high demands on school buildings are not
reflected in the actual conditions of the buildings. As a part of a study initiated by Realda-
nia in collaboration with the Technical University of Denmark and Alexandria Institute, the
Danish school buildings were investigated (Clausen et al., 2017). At that time 50% of all
Danish school buildings were built in the 1960s and 1970s. Since the first requirements
regarding ventilation in the Danish Building Code came in 1995, classrooms before this
time were neither designed nor built to comply with these ventilation regulations. Only
10% of the school buildings are built after 1995, hence designed to comply with ventila-
tion regulations from the beginning. The rest of the school buildings must upgrade the
ventilation to comply with the standards. It was found, that 52% of 250 classrooms had
balanced mechanical ventilation, 30% had manual natural ventilation, 11% had automatic
natural ventilation and 7% had mechanical ventilation with exhaust only.
Hence, drawing attention to and improving school building characteristics, ventilation con-
ditions, and thereby indoor environmental conditions can affect the learning outcome of
the pupils. In addition, it may ultimately result in socio-economic benefits for citizens as
well as at societal levels (Madsen et al., 2019).
Skt. Klemensskolen in Odense is one of the schools in Denmark, that has upgraded the
ventilation to improve the indoor air quality in classrooms. This will be the case study of
the project as an intervention study.
Associations between indoor climate in classrooms and children’s well-being and concentration ability
1
==PAGE:7==
1.1
Objective
The scope of the project was to explore the effect of upgrading the ventilation in class-
rooms at Skt. Klemensskolen in Odense, Denmark. Associations were explored between
children’s well-being and concentration performance and the indoor environment in class-
rooms that were either retrofitted with decentralized ventilation systems or not (controls).
The effect of upgrading the classroom ventilation was investigated and documented by
measurements of the indoor environment as well as tests of the well-being and concen-
tration of the pupils. Finally, the project discussed the economic benefits of investing in
upgrading the indoor environment in schools.
2
Associations between indoor climate in classrooms and children’s well-being and concentration ability
==PAGE:8==
2
Theory
2.1
Indoor Environmental Quality
The indoor environmental quality (IEQ) covers the parameters air quality, thermal com-
fort, sound, and lighting (Sundhedsstyrelsen, 2018). Danish standards and building codes
stipulate specific regulations on these parameters for different rooms, as physical symp-
toms are related to a poor indoor environment. These are called Building-Related Symp-
toms (BRS) and can give symptoms like headache, fatigue, and irritation of the mucous
membranes in the eyes, nose, throat, and respiratory tracts (Allermann et al., 2003).
The installation of a ventilation unit affects the sound, thermal conditions, and air quality in
the room. Therefore, the following section covers relevant theory about these parameters.
2.1.1
Indoor Air Quality
Indoor air quality refers to the pollutants in the air, and how they affect the occupants of
a room. It is not a constant and steady condition, as it changes with the building oper-
ation, the activity of the occupants, and the outdoor climate. The pollution sources can
be building materials, furniture, equipment, human metabolism, and outdoor air (Bienfait
et al., 1992). In general, children are more vulnerable to poor air quality than adults, as
they breathe more air relative to their body weight, and they react differently to the inhala-
tion of the pollutants (Sundhedsstyrelsen, 2018). Hence, acceptable air quality should be
highly prioritized in rooms where children stay over longer periods of time.
The definition of acceptable indoor air quality can be divided into two categories, health,
and comfort (Bienfait et al., 1992). The first category is that there is no known health risk
of breathing the air, such as respiratory deceases, infections, asthma, or hay fever. The
second category is that the majority of those exposed to the air do not express dissatis-
faction with the air. As for the health effects, the risk depends on the concentration of a
pollutant in the air and the duration of the exposure. The effects can both be acute, but
also long-term. The comfort effects depend on the olfactory and chemical senses and
can occur as an annoyance of odor, or irritation of eyes, nose, and throat. The pollutants
in a room can be total volatile organic compounds (TVOC), human bio-effluents, tobacco
smoke, and combustion products.
Total volatile organic compounds (TVOC) are organic compounds, which may be per-
ceived by the olfactory and chemical senses (Bienfait et al., 1992). The pollutant sources
are humans from metabolic processes, natural materials, and finally from man-made
Associations between indoor climate in classrooms and children’s well-being and concentration ability
3
==PAGE:9==
building materials, furniture and equipment. When measuring or detecting TVOC, hun-
dreds of different organic compounds in extremely varying concentrations can be regis-
tered, making it difficult to make analysis, risk assessments, and guidelines for specific
compounds.
Carbon dioxide (CO2) is a bio-effluent from the human metabolic process. In Denmark,
the outside concentration is approximately 400 ppm. Inside, the CO2 concentration rarely
reaches health problem levels and is not perceived by occupants. However, the produc-
tion of CO2 is proportional to other human bio effluents, which can cause annoyance for
the occupants (Bienfait et al., 1992). Since these bio effluents can be difficult to mea-
sure compared to the CO2 concentration the air quality is often expressed by the CO2
concentration.
Hence, the CO2 concentration is often used as an air quality metric in rooms where oc-
cupants are the main source of pollutants (human bio-effluents). The concentration of
carbon dioxide in a room is defined by the differential Equation 2.1, and describes how
the concentration changes over time (Clausen, 2021). The solution to the differential
equation is given in Equation 2.2.
V dC(t) = Gdt + CvQvdt −C(t)Qvdt −C(t)QrEdt −C(t)Qsdt
(2.1)
C(t) = C0e−(Qv+Qs+EQr) t
V +
CvQv + G
Qv + Qs + EQr
(1 −e−(Qv+Qs+EQr) t
V )
(2.2)
Where:
C(t)
Concentration of pollutant in a room at time t
[ppm]
C0
Start concentration of pollutant in a room
[ppm]
Cv
Concentration of pollutant in supply air
[ppm]
Qv
Volume flow rate from ventilation
[m3/s]
Qs
Absorption rate
[m3/s]
Qr
Volume flow rate from recirculated air
[m3/s]
G
Production rate of pollutant
[m3/s]
V
Volume
[m3]
Two cases can be considered, which simplifies the solution above. Both cases assume,
that there is no filtration, the outside air is clean, and that there is no absorption. The
first case is with CO2 build-up, where it is also assumed, that the room air is clean at t=0.
This case describes how fast or slow the CO2 concentration increases depending on the
air change rate, n, and the CO2 production rate, G. The primary CO2 source is humans,
hence, the number of people in a room is an important factor for the CO2 build-up.
Build-up Equation (Clausen, 2021):
C(t) = G
nV (1 −e−nt)
(2.3)
The other case is CO2 decay, where it is also assumed, that there is no CO2 production.
This case describes how fast or slow the CO2 concentration decreases depending on the
air change rate, n.
4
Associations between indoor climate in classrooms and children’s well-being and concentration ability
==PAGE:10==
Decay Equation:
C(t) = C0e−nt
(2.4)
(a) CO2 build-up
(b) CO2 decay
Figure 2.1: Illustration of CO2 build-up and decay
Hence, the change of CO2 concentration in a room can be described simply by the ex-
pression below.
Figure 2.2: Simplified expression of how the CO2 concentration can be changed
This implies, that two strategies can be used to lower the CO2 concentration and obtain
better air quality. One can either lower the number of people in the room if occupants are
the main source of CO2 in a room. The other strategy is to increase ventilation, as the
air exchange rate will then increase. The different ventilation principles will be described
later in Section 2.2.
2.1.2
Thermal conditions
The thermal sensation of a person mainly relates to the thermal balance of the body as a
whole. In order for the body to be in thermal balance, the internal heat production should
equal the loss of heat to the environment (Danish Standards Assosiations, 2006). If not,
the human thermoregulatory system will attempt to modify skin temperature and sweat
secretion to restore balance. The balance depends on the environmental parameters; air
temperature, mean radiant temperature, air velocity, and air humidity, and the personal
parameters; occupant activity, and clothing insulation (Toftum, 2004).
The air temperature is the temperature of the air around the human body and is commonly
measured in Celsius or Kelvin.
The mean radiant temperature is a value used to quantify the radiant heat exchange
between a human and the surrounding surfaces in order to account for the surface tem-
peratures when evaluating thermal comfort.
The air velocity is characterized by a magnitude and direction and affects the convective
heat loss.
Associations between indoor climate in classrooms and children’s well-being and concentration ability
5
==PAGE:11==
The air humidity describes the amount of water vapor contained in the air. Absolute air
humidity describes the actual amount of water vapor in the air as opposed to relative
air humidity, which describes the amount in relation to the maximum possible amount
contained in the air. The amount of water vapor contained in the air depends on the air
pressure and temperature. Higher air temperatures can contain more water vapor.
The occupant activity level is evaluated by the metabolic rate and is measured in met
(Toftum, 2004). It depends on the activity, the size of the person, and the surrounding en-
vironmental conditions. The metabolic rate is assumed to be 1.2 met for sedentary activity
such as school and office work (Jakobsen and Kolarik, 2018). The clothing insulation is
measured in clo and is assumed to be approximately 1.0 clo during the heating season
and 0.5 clo during the cooling season.
A widely used index, the Predicted Mean Vote (PMV), describes the thermal sensation
based on these six parameters. It predicts a mean value of how a large group of people
experiences thermal comfort on a range of 1 to 7 on a thermal sensation scale.
However, thermal comfort is subjective, and some people are more or less sensitive,
and people prefer different thermal conditions. The Predicted Percentage of Dissatisfied
(PPD) is an index that takes subjective perception into account. It predicts how many
percentages of a large group of people would be dissatisfied with thermal conditions.
Thermal discomfort can occur and is defined as unwanted local cooling or heating of the
body. Common factors are draught, radiant temperature asymmetry, vertical air temper-
ature difference, and cold or warm floors (Danish Standards Assosiations, 2006). Un-
dressed areas such as the neck, ankles, face, arms, and legs are the most exposed and
sensitive body areas.
Draught is the most common cause of complaint and is defined as unwanted local cooling
of the body by air movement (Toftum, 2004). Discomfort caused by draught depends on
the parameters air temperature, air velocity, and local turbulence. The risk of draught
decreases with increasing temperatures. Draught can be expressed by the draught rate,
which describes the predicted percentage of people bothered by draught (Jakobsen and
Kolarik, 2018).
The humidity in a room is affected by the air change rate. Depending on the outside
humidity, a higher air change rate can either result in a decreasing or increasing relative
humidity. Low humidity can cause dryness and irritation of the mucous membranes and
the skin. On the other hand, high humidity, condensation, or ingress of moisture create
the optimal environment for the growth of mold and other fungi, which can cause allergies
and malodours (Bienfait et al., 1992).
2.1.3
Sound
Sound is wave motion in gasses, liquids, and solids (Jacobsen et al., 2011). It is divided
into infra, audible, and ultrasound depending on the frequency. The frequency, f, is the
number of fluctuations of the sound wave in 1 s and is measured in hertz (Hz). The speed
of sound is the distance that sound travels in 1 second. With an air temperature of 20 °C,
the speed of sound is 343 m/s (Jacobsen et al., 2011). The frequency and the speed of
sound define the length of a sound wave, λ = c
f .
Sound pressure level (SPL, Lp) is a highly used value to express sound and is measured
or calculated with a logarithmic scale in decibels (dB). It is given by Equation 2.5, where
p0 is the reference sound pressure for air, p0 = 2 × 10−5Nm−2 = 20µPa, and p is the
sound pressure measured in the sound field (Maekawa et al., 2011).
6
Associations between indoor climate in classrooms and children’s well-being and concentration ability
==PAGE:12==
Lp = 10 · log10(
(p2
p2
0
)
= 20 · log10
( p
p0
)
[dB]
(2.5)
However, the sound pressure level is often weighted due to the subjective sensitivity of
the human ear, as it perceives frequencies differently (Jacobsen et al., 2011). The most
common weighting is A-weighting (dB(A)). This is calculated by subtracting a frequency-
depended value from the measured sound level at the given frequency. The result is
thereby an A-weighted sound pressure level LA.
The reverberation time,T, defines how long it takes for the sound pressure level to de-
crease by 60 dB after a source emission is interrupted (Jacobsen et al., 2011). It depends
on the volume of the room, V, and the absorption area, A. It is given by Sabine’s Equation
2.6 (Jacobsen et al., 2011).
T60 = 0.16 V
A
(2.6)
The absorption area, A, describes the materials and other objects in a room. It is given
by Equation 2.7, where S is the surface area and α is the absorption coefficient of a given
material.
A = ΣSiαi(m2)
(2.7)
Ventilation systems relate to the audible sound at frequencies from 20Hz to 20kHz. Ven-
tilation can cause noise in a room to an extent that might disturb or even prevent the
intended use of a room. This must be taken into account when designing a ventilation
system.
2.2
Ventilation Principles in Classrooms
Ventilation is defined as the supply to and removal of air from a room, building, etc (Bien-
fait et al., 1992). It is a crucial tool in order to regulate the indoor air quality and thermal
environment. Ventilation can be divided into two possible principles - natural and mechan-
ical ventilation. These will be covered in the following section along with the method of
determining the required ventilation rate.
2.2.1
Natural ventilation
Natural ventilation is the movement of air without any mechanical help (Etheridge, 2012).
In old school buildings, the most common way to ventilate naturally is by opening the win-
dow to let outdoor air enter the room. This can be done either manually or automatically.
Natural ventilation has the advantage of being a sustainable ventilation solution as high
energy use is avoided. This is of high priority in new buildings in Denmark. However,
it also has the disadvantage of creating an unpredictable environment, as temperature,
flow rate, and direction depend on outdoor conditions like temperature difference between
interior and exterior, wind speed, and wind direction (Etheridge, 2012). These uncertain
factors can cause discomfort, as covered in Section 2.1.
In classrooms, the area per person is often relatively low, and the pollution load can get
extreme during school hours resulting in high ventilation demands. These demands can
be challenging to meet with natural ventilation.
Associations between indoor climate in classrooms and children’s well-being and concentration ability
7
==PAGE:13==
A report from Realdania in cooperation with Incentive and Technical University of Den-
mark described how the air quality varied noticeably from summer to winter when manual
window opening was the main ventilation type (Madsen et al., 2019). It was found, that
the average CO2 concentration of a room increased when the outside temperature de-
creased. This implies that one is less inclined to open windows when it is cold outside,
which is at the expense of the air quality. This makes manual window opening an un-
certain strategy for ensuring acceptable air quality. Initiatives have tried to accommodate
this by installing devices in rooms, that react when the air quality is poor and a window
should be opened.
2.2.2
Mechanical ventilation
Mechanical ventilation is the movement of air with mechanical help and has been used for
approximately 150 years (Etheridge, 2012). The most common way of mechanical venti-
lation in occupied buildings is balanced ventilation, where there is both supply and return
of fresh air to the room (Branche Fællesskab Arbejdsmiljø, 2022). Mechanical ventila-
tion can either be decentralized or centralized. Decentralized ventilation is characterized
by having a ventilation unit in every room as opposed to the centralized ventilation with
one unit supplying several areas (Exhausto, 2022a). Decentralized ventilation requires
less ducting and does not have to be installed in all rooms at the same time. There-
fore, decentralized ventilation can be recommendable for renovations of existing schools
for economic and practical reasons. The advantage with central ventilation is that it re-
quires less monitoring and service compared to decentralized (Branche Fællesskab Ar-
bejdsmiljø, 2022). However, the ducting is more demanding and causes more pressure
loss in the ducts.
The study from Realdania with DTU and Alexandria Institute also showed the advantage
of balanced mechanical ventilation (Clausen et al., 2017). The CO2 concentration ex-
ceeded the upper limit of 1000 ppm in 31% of the time of use in classrooms with balanced
mechanical ventilation, as opposed to classrooms with manual natural ventilation, where
this percentage was 66%. As covered in Section 2.1, the air quality increased the more
advanced the ventilation system became.
2.2.3
Determination of required ventilation rate
When designing a ventilation system, load calculations are necessary, as it determines
the air flow rate, q (Toftum, 2021). The ventilation rate required to obtain satisfying air
quality can be determined either by the perceived air quality or the criteria for individual
substances.
If the perceived air quality is the determining factor for a ventilation system, Equation 2.8
is used. The ventilation rate variables qp and aB can be found in standards like (Danish
Standards Association, 2019b), and n and AR are room and use specific variables.
8
Associations between indoor climate in classrooms and children’s well-being and concentration ability
==PAGE:14==
qtot = n · qp + AR · qB
(2.8)
where:
qtot
Total ventilation rate for the breathing zone
l/s
n
design value for the number of persons in the room
-
qp
Ventilation rate for the occupancy per person
l/(s · person)
AR
floor area
m2
qB
Ventilation rate for emissions from building
l/(s ·m2)
If the criteria for individual substances is the determining factor, Equation 2.9 is used.
CO2 is often one the substances investigated, as it represents the pollutant emission
from people (bio effluents) (Danish Standards Association, 2019b).
qh =
Gh
ch,i −ch,o
· 1
εv
(2.9)
where:
Qh
the ventilation rate required for dilution
m3/s
Gh
generation rate of substance
mg/s
ch,i
guideline value of the substance
mg/m3
ch,o
concentration of the substance of the supply air
mg/m3
ϵv
ventilation effectiveness
-
2.3
IEQ in Danish Schools
To increase the focus on indoor environmental quality in general at schools, the asso-
ciation Realdania initiated an investigation of the indoor environment in Danish primary
schools, with the lead of the Technical University of Denmark and Alexandra Institute
(Clausen et al., 2017). The measurements were conducted from September 2015 to De-
cember 2016 in 245 classrooms distributed over 60 schools in Denmark.
In general, the measurements revealed high temperatures in the classrooms which was
unexpected, as they were completed during the heating season. Although high, the tem-
peratures were primarily within the comfort range of 20-26 °C. The temperature during
the school hours was only less than 20°C 2% of the time and exceeded 26°C 2 % of the
time. In the classrooms equipped with automatic natural ventilation, the measurements
showed a tendency to lower temperatures than other ventilation types. This could be due
to a higher frequency of window and door opening letting cold air into the room. It could
be assumed that pupils and teachers are less likely to remember to open these themself
during the heating season. Classrooms with balanced mechanical ventilation generally
had more school hours above 24 °C than other ventilation types and less variation in
temperature.
The relative humidity in the classrooms where within the recommended range of 25-60%
during 97 % of the time of use. During 3% of the time the relative humidity was lower than
25%, which occurred in rooms with balanced mechanical ventilation. The air change rate
was higher in these rooms which could explain the lower humidity.
Associations between indoor climate in classrooms and children’s well-being and concentration ability
9
==PAGE:15==
The results of the indoor air quality were the measurements, which stood out the most.
The study showed, that 91% of the investigated classrooms had CO2 concentrations ex-
ceeding the upper limit of 1000ppm at least once during at least one continuous 20 min
period during a school day. In addition, through 47% of the time of use, the investigated
classrooms exceeded the same upper limit. These results clearly show a general prob-
lem, that Danish primary schools have insufficient air quality.
It was also found that the condition of the air quality was associated with the structural
characteristics of the building and the conditions of the room. The most significant char-
acteristics were the ventilation principle, the temperature, the volume per pupil, and the
dimensions of the room (room height and width/depth ratio), which are described in Fig-
ure 2.3. The ventilation conditions were especially highlighted as an essential explanation
for the air quality problem. Hence, renovation and improvements in this regard are effi-
cient tools to increase air quality. The temperature condition of the room was a significant
characteristic as well, as the CO2 concentration and temperature are related and sea-
sonal. During high temperatures, people are more inclined to open windows and thereby
increase the air change rate and improve the air quality.
Figure 2.3: Building characteristics and room conditions associated with CO2 concentra-
tion. Figure inspired by (Clausen et al., 2017).
The poor environmental conditions at Danish schools also led Realdania to develop a
Handbook primarily aimed at the municipalities (Smith Innovation and Jensen, 2021).
The Handbook should inspire the development of a strategic plan for improving the indoor
environment at schools. Hence, a great focus has come to the indoor environment, so
that the pupils get the best prerequisites for well-being and learning.
2.4
IEQ and Performance
The following section introduces a literature study on the effect of the indoor environment
on pupil well-being and performance. The research field within environmental conditions
and performance is comprehensive, and several studies have addressed the issue. For
instance, the search string ”Performance AND classroom AND Air Quality” at DTU Findit
resulted in 699 published articles. In this literature study, only schools and classrooms
were in the search field, making studies on offices, residential, and high schools sorted
out. In addition, only studies from countries with similar climate zones as Denmark were
in the search field, as studies show that children’s thermal comfort relates to the local
thermal conditions. Since the scope of the project relates to the installation of a ventilation
unit, only highly relevant environmental parameters like ventilation rates, air quality, and
thermal conditions were included in the review, and parameters like acoustics and lighting
were filtered as well.
10
Associations between indoor climate in classrooms and children’s well-being and concentration ability
==PAGE:16==
(Haverinen-Shaughnessy et al., 2011) published a study in 2011 on the association be-
tween substandard classroom ventilation rates and students’ academic achievements.
The study involved one hundred elementary schools in the United States, where fifth-
graders were tested. The main finding of the study was a linear association between the
ventilation rates in the range of 0.9-7.1 l/s per person and students’ academic achieve-
ments. When the ventilation rate increased by 1 l/s per person, the proportion of students
passing the standardized math test was expected to increase by 2.9 % and 2.7% for the
reading tests. However, ventilation rates outside the mentioned range could not be ex-
pected to show the same linear relationship.
(Wargocki and Wyon, 2013) published a paper in 2012 on how both thermal and air qual-
ity conditions affect the performance of schoolwork by children. The paper emphasized
how indoor environmental quality is lacking priority, and that saving energy should have
a lower priority than the education of children. Through seven independent field interven-
tion experiments on five different schools with mechanical ventilation, the temperatures,
ventilation rates, and concentration of airborne particles were regulated. Children aged
10 to 12 years old performed school tests under different environmental conditions so
that associations could be investigated. The general conclusion from the paper was, that
the children’s performance of schoolwork could improve by as much as 30% if the in-
door environmental quality (both temperature and air quality) was higher prioritized and
improved.
(Petersen et al., 2016) investigated the effect of increased classroom ventilation rate on
the performance of schoolwork. Four classrooms in two schools in Denmark were in-
cluded, and four different performance tests were used to evaluate the concentration and
logical thinking of the pupils. The results suggested a significant improvement in per-
formance. By increasing the outdoor air supply rate from 1.7 to 6.6 l/s per person, the
improvement in addition, number comparison, grammatical reasoning, and reading and
comprehension were found to be 6.3%, 4.8%, 3.2%, and 7.4%, respectively. The in-
creased supply rate corresponded to a CO2 concentration decrease from 1500ppm to
900ppm.
(Wargocki et al., 2019) also published a meta-analysis in 2019 constructing a relationship
between room temperature and children’s performance in school. Data from 18 studies
were included and the results clearly validated a relationship. It showed that decreasing
the classroom temperatures from 30°C to 20°C expects to increase the performance of
psychological tests and school tasks by 20% on average. This improvement is larger
in magnitude for school children than for adult office workers. The study also showed
a temperature of 22°C for optimal performance, which is a lower temperature, than for
optimal performance of office work.
(Wargocki et al., 2020) also published a paper in 2020 where a relationship was found
between classroom air quality and children’s performance in schools. This was based
on the results of studies published in archival journals. By systematically examining the
relationship between air quality and learning outcomes, the results indicated and high-
lighted three relationships. First, that decreasing the CO2 concentration from 2100ppm to
900ppm improves the performance of psychological tests and school tasks by 12% and
2% with respect to performance speed and errors. Secondly, that decreasing the CO2
concentration from 2400 ppm to 900 ppm improves the performance progress with 5%.
And finally, that decreasing the CO2 concentration from 4100 ppm to 1000 ppm increases
daily attendance by 2.5%.
(Woo et al., 2022) published a study in 2022 on a possible relationship between indoor
Associations between indoor climate in classrooms and children’s well-being and concentration ability
11
==PAGE:17==
conditions and student performance.
Seven indoor conditions were measured in ten
schools in Australia, along with student attention and concentration performance. The
d2 test of attention was used for this purpose. Through correlation analysis, a low to
moderate correlation was found between student reaction time and air temperature, rela-
tive humidity, air velocity, MRT, PM 2.5, and PM 10. The same parameters were found to
have a low to moderate correlation with student accuracy. However, analysis with non-
environmental variables such as student age and school terms showed that RH and CO2
concentration were identified as the important predictors of student performance.
The current knowledge within the field suggests a clear association between air quality,
air temperature, and children’s performance and learning in school. On the foundation of
these findings, similar associations were investigated in this project.
2.5
Regulations
The Danish Building Code stipulates requirements concerning indoor environmental con-
ditions when construction is carried out on school buildings. In addition, relevant Danish
standards stipulate recommendations to the school building owner for both newly built,
renovation, and building extensions. The requirements and recommendations are given
to provide healthy prerequisites for learning and development in schools.
The Institute of Technology published an industry guidance in 2021 with this in focus,
based on the building code and standards (Vorre et al., 2021). The purpose of this guid-
ance was to provide arguments for the importance of the indoor environment and design
guidance for the actors involved in school construction. The following section reviews the
requirements and recommendations in relation to school construction.
Some of the recommendations in the standards depend on an indoor environmental qual-
ity category (Danish Standards Association, 2019a). This refers to the level of expecta-
tion the occupant has for the indoor environment. Category I is for occupants with special
needs e.g. elderly, and persons with disabilities, Category II is the ”medium level” and
lower levels (III and IIII) may decrease indoor comfort. A classroom in new buildings or
renovations should be in category II.
Indoor Environment Classification
Standard
BR18
Thermal Comfort
Operative temperature [C]
Summer season ∼0.5 clo
23-26
<26 1
Winter season ∼1.0 clo
20-24
<26 1
Relative Humidity [%]
25-60
-
Draught rate [%]
20
20 1
Summer [m/s]
0.19
-
Winter [m/s]
0.16
-
Air Quality
CO2 concentration [ppm]
<1000
<1000
Ventilation rate [l/s pr person)
>9.4
>=0.35 2
Acoustic
Noise from technical installations [dB]
<=30
<=30 1
1 A recommendation and not a requirement from the Building Code
2 If ventilation is demand-controlled, the ventilation should not be
less than 0.35 l/s pr. m2 floor area
12
Associations between indoor climate in classrooms and children’s well-being and concentration ability
==PAGE:18==
The Danish standard DS/EN 16798 provides recommendations for temperature in class-
rooms during heating and cooling seasons (Danish Standards Association, 2019b). In the
heating season, the temperature should range from 20-24°C and in the cooling season
from 23-26°C. The same standard recommends a relative humidity comfort range of 25%-
60%. A relevant matter in relation to thermal comfort was the international energy crisis in
2022 and 2023, which Denmark was also affected by. The government decided to lower
the temperatures in all public buildings, including school buildings, to 19°C instead of the
usual 21-22 °C. This initiative should apply from October 1st, 2022.
The Building Regulation, BR18, states specific requirements when it comes to ventilation
of rooms in daycare centers and teaching rooms (BR18, 2022), where people are the
main source of pollution. The ventilation must ensure, that the CO2 concentration, does
not exceed 1000ppm for the dimensioning conditions. In addition, if the ventilation sys-
tem is demand-controlled based on the use of the room, the ventilation rate should be a
minimum of 0.35 l/s pr. m2 during the time of use. In addition, the Danish Building Code
recommends a maximum noise level from technical installations of 30 dB (BR18, 2023).
Associations between indoor climate in classrooms and children’s well-being and concentration ability
13
==PAGE:19==
14
Associations between indoor climate in classrooms and children’s well-being and concentration ability
==PAGE:20==
3
Method
The following chapter presents the method of the intervention study. The school, which
was investigated, is introduced, and the method of measurements, tests, and data pro-
cessing are explained.
3.1
Skt. Klemensskolen
Skt. Klemensskolen is a part of the experimental project as a case study. The school
is located in the southern part of Odense in Denmark surrounded by green areas. The
building is from 1967, underwent an expansion in 1997, and was renovated in 2009. 430
pupils are distributed from kindergarten to ninth grade (Skt. Klemensskolen, 2022). Each
grade level has two classes except the fifth and seventh grades with three classes each.
Figure 3.1: Skt. Klemensskolen and location of investigated classrooms
Four classrooms were involved in the experimental project, 7A, 7B, 9A, and 9B. They
were located in a two-storey building on the second floor with window facades pointing
either east or west. The location of the rooms can be seen in Figure 3.2. The classrooms
located by the gable underwent an intervention with the installation of ventilation units,
whereas the rooms next to these are reference rooms with no intervention.
The rooms will be referred to as IR1 and IR2 (Intervention Rooms) and RR1 and RR2
(Reference Rooms). IR1 and RR1 are the ones toward the west with the garden, whereas
IR2 and RR2 are the ones toward the east with the parking lot and street.
Table 3.1: Key information about the investigated classrooms
Classroom
Grade
Number of pupils
Reference Room 1
(RR1)
9
17
Intervention Room 1
(IR1)
9
16
Reference Room 2
(RR2)
7
19
Intervention Room 2
(IR2)
7
25
Associations between indoor climate in classrooms and children’s well-being and concentration ability
15
==PAGE:21==
The rooms were comparable in pairs, as their window orientation, size and placement,
and room dimensions were similar. The room area, room volume, and window area can
be seen in Table 3.2.
Figure 3.2: Floor plan of the second floor with investigated classrooms
IR1 and RR1 had a room area of 51 m2 and a volume of 158 m3. The window area was
14.3 m2 and was located at a height of 1 m from the floor. IR2 and RR2 had a room area
of 67 m2 and a volume of 207 m3. The window area was 18.3 m2 and was located at a
height of 1 m from the floor. The room height was 3.15 m in the four classrooms. IR2 was
the room with the smallest room area per person and volume per person, whereas RR2
had the largest.
Table 3.2: Summary of classroom and window sizes
Classroom
Room Area
Room Volume
Window area
[m2]
[m2/pers]
[m3]
[m3/pers]
[m2]
IR1
51
3.2
158
9.9
14.3
RR1
51
3.0
158
9.3
14.3
IR2
67
2.7
207
8.3
18.3
RR2
67
3.5
207
10.9
18.3
16
Associations between indoor climate in classrooms and children’s well-being and concentration ability
==PAGE:22==
All classrooms had brick walls, linoleum floors, and black curtains. IR1, RR1, and RR2
had wooden slats as the ceiling, whereas IR2 had a perforated gypsum ceiling. The tables
and chairs were made of wood and were placed in rows towards the teacher’s desk and
the large screen in the front. All classrooms had a couch and a cabinet in the back of the
classroom.
(a) Intervention Room 1
(b) Intervention Room 2
Figure 3.3: Pictures of intervention rooms 1 and 2
The heating principle of the classrooms was water-based radiators, which were mounted
on the exterior wall below the windows. Prior to the intervention, the cooling and ventilation
principle was natural ventilation by manual window opening. In addition, venting shafts
were found in the ceiling, but the conditions and usage of these remain unknown.
3.2
Intervention at Skt. Klemensskolen
In collaboration with the company Exhausto, a ventilation unit was installed in both IR1
and IR2. The model was a DEX3090, which is a balanced decentralized ventilation unit
especially recommended for classrooms. The air intake to the ventilation unit and exhaust
went through the gable and no ducting was needed for the installation of the units.
The dimension of the unit was 500 mm high, 2,206 mm wide, and 1,121 mm deep with
a size of 1.24 m3 (Exhausto, 2022b). The weight of it was 175 kg. Illustrations of the
DEX3090 can be seen in Figure 3.3 and 3.4.
The ventilation unit can supply an airflow volume in the range of 150 to 900 m3/h with
leakage of classification L2. It has a counterflow heat exchanger with a heat recovery
efficiency of approximately 82%. It is equipped with an electrical heating coil of 2.5 kW,
which regulates the air supply temperature. The filter for the air supply and exhaust is
an F7 filter (55%) and M5 filter (60%) respectively. The unit is insulated with 50 mm
Puresound insulation, resulting in an A-weighted sound pressure level between 30 and
38 dB(A) in the airflow range of 550 to 800 m3/h. The ventilation units have built-in PIR
sensors and CO2 sensors.
Associations between indoor climate in classrooms and children’s well-being and concentration ability
17
==PAGE:23==
Figure 3.4: Illustration of Ventilation Unit DEX3090 (Exhausto, 2022b)
It is recommended to place the ventilation unit directly under the ceiling with no obstacles
in front in order to optimally distribute fresh air to the room. A negative pressure is created
between the air supply and ceiling, and the fresh air is mixed in the room with low air
velocity. In order to obtain thermal comfort and avoid draught, the mounting of the unit is
important. In the case of a rectangular room, it is recommended to place the unit centrally
on the width of the room. The technical recommendations on throw length and mounting
can be seen in Figure 3.5. Here it is illustrated, how obstacles reduce the effect of the
unit and create more uncomfortable areas.
Figure 3.5: Technical recommendation and illustration of throw length and mounting (Ex-
hausto, 2022b)
18
Associations between indoor climate in classrooms and children’s well-being and concentration ability
==PAGE:24==
3.2.1
Regulation of ventilation system
The regulation of the ventilation units in the two classrooms (IR1 and IR2) was divided into
three periods; weekdays 7-16, weekdays 16-07, and weekends. During all periods a PIR
(passive infrared) sensor could be activated by movement in the classroom after which
the ventilation unit would run at medium fan speed. The medium fan speed ensured, that
the ventilation unit adjusted the airflow to keep the CO2 concentration below 900 ppm.
If the PIR sensor was activated, the ventilation would run for half an hour after the last
registered movement.
During weekdays 7-16, the ventilation rate ran at a minimum operation of 30% or the
necessary rate to keep the CO2 concentration below 1200 ppm. If the PIR sensor was
activated, it would run as described above. During weekdays 16-7 and weekends the
ventilation units were deactivated but could be activated by the PIR sensors as described
above.
The CO2 set point of 900 ppm when the room was occupied was set below the recommen-
dation of 1000 ppm. This was to prevent the concentration from reaching and exceeding
the recommendation.
3.3
Measurements of Indoor Environment
As a part of the intervention study, indoor environment measurements were performed in
all four rooms both before and after the installation of ventilation units.
A Roomalyzer Premium Datalogger measured the indoor environment parameters CO2
concentration, sound, temperature, humidity, TVOC, lighting, color temperature of light-
ing, and presence in all classrooms (Anderberg Klima A/S, 2023). The roomalyzer had
a SIM card storing data on a server continuously via NarrowBand IoT. The roomalyzers
were installed to automatically calibrate between every 2,000th measurement. As the
sensor measured every five minute, the devices were calibrated approximately once a
week. In this project, the roomalyzers were the primary source of CO2 concentration,
temperature, humidity, and sound data.
In addition, a HOBO logger was used to measure the CO2 concentration, temperature,
and humidity. The measurement stations logged data locally and were read out approxi-
mately every other month. The data could be downloaded and processed as well. In this
project, the data from the HOBO logger was used as a backup, when the data from the
roomalyzer was insufficient.
The measurement devices were mounted together and placed at a childproof height on the
top of the cabinet at the back of the classrooms. This was to ensure minimum interference
from the pupils in the classroom. An example can be seen in Figure 3.6. The roomalyzer
in IR2 was replaced between phases 1 and 2 as the first roomalyzer was unstable and
showed strange fluctuations.
Associations between indoor climate in classrooms and children’s well-being and concentration ability
19
==PAGE:25==
Figure 3.6: Illustration of measurement devices on the top of a cabinet
Finally, a sound measurement of the noise caused by the ventilation unit was conducted.
On May 9th, 2023 measurements were conducted in intervention room 2. A Lutron SL-
4023SD sound level meter was used for this purpose (Lutron Instruments, 2023). The
sound meter was placed in the middle of the room approximately 3.5 m from the ventilation
unit at a height of 1.1 m. The microphone pointed towards the ventilation unit. The room
was unoccupied apart from the person taking the measurements. Exhausto was allowed
to overrule and control the regulation of the fan speed. Noise levels (dB(A)) was registered
at a fan speed of 0% (background noise), 25%, 50%, 75%, and 100%.
3.4
Measurements of Well-being and Concentration
Performance
Measurements of pupil well-being and concentration performance were performed after
the ventilation units were installed. Where the indoor environment measurements con-
stantly tracked the indoor environment, the pupil tests contributed with momentary mea-
surements of pupil well-being and performance, as the tests were taken weeks apart. It
was attempted to take the tests on Thursday afternoons. This was to ensure that the
pupils were exposed to the indoor environment in the classroom throughout the week and
day, and that they were more concentrated than e.g., Friday afternoon.
The pupil tests were divided into three. One concerned the well-being of the pupils and
was a questionnaire that included discomforts such as temperature, air quality, and noise
and symptoms such as concentration, and headache. The two other tests concerned the
ability to concentrate and were a graphic Baddeley test and a d2 test. Each pupil was
given an anonymous student ID to make it possible to track individual responses through
repeated rounds of testing.
20
Associations between indoor climate in classrooms and children’s well-being and concentration ability
==PAGE:26==
3.4.1
Test Days and Subjects
Test days were planned with the teachers approximately one week in advance. The tests
were carried out during the school day on Thursday afternoons and lasted 15-30 minutes.
The dates and the respective phase of the test day can be seen in Table 3.3.
It was desired to collect data from test days during all seasons and ventilation conditions
of the classrooms. However, this was not possible due to the planning and execution of
the tests as well as the distance to the school from DTU, Lyngby. Hence, tests were not
executed prior to the installation of ventilation units.
Table 3.3: Information about the test days
Test Day 1
Test Day 2
Test Day 3
Test Day 4
Date
11.03.2022
11.17.2022
03.09.2023
04.20.2023
Phase
2
2
3
(4)
The pupils were instructed on the test procedure on the first test day, and repetition was
available during the other test days, if necessary. The number of test subjects on test days
and in classes differed due to pupil presence and the number of pupils in the classes in
general. The number of test subjects and gender distribution can be seen in Table 3.4.
The gender distribution in IR1 and RR1 was relatively even with only one to three more
girls than boys. However, in IR2 and RR2, an overweight of girls occurred with two to four
times as many girls as boys. In addition, one pupil identified as ”other” in IR2 and RR2.
Table 3.4: Number of participating test subjects in each classroom and gender distribution.
Test Day 1
Test Day 2
Test Day 3
Test Day 4
Intervention Room 1
15
16
12
16
(7-8-0)
(8-8-0)
(6-6-0)
(5-11-0)
Reference Room 1
15
15
15
15
(7-8-0)
(6-9-0)
(8-7-0)
(6-9-0)
Intervention Room 2
21
23
22
24
(7-14-0)
(4-17-1)
(6-16-0)
(8-15-1)
Reference Room 2
16
19
17
-
(3-12-1)
(5-13-1)
(4-12-1)
-
* The gender distribution given as (Boy - Girl - Other)
3.4.2
Questionnaire
The questionnaire concerning the well being of the pupils was divided into questions about
discomfort and symptoms. There were five different answers to choose from, illustrated
as emoticons. An example can be seen in Figure 3.7 and the entire questionnaire can be
found in Appendix A. The output of the questionnaire was a set of data with each pupil’s
response to the questions. The smileys were translated into numbers from 1 to 5.
Associations between indoor climate in classrooms and children’s well-being and concentration ability
21
==PAGE:27==
Figure 3.7: Example of question concerning discomfort in relation to air quality. Trans-
lated: What do you think of the classroom at the moment? The air is bad (left). The air is
fresh (right).
3.4.3
Baddeley test
The Baddeley test was one of the two concentration tests that the pupils were presented
with on test days. This test assesses the concentration of the test subject and has proven
to be sensitive to environmental stresses (Baddeley, 1968). Since the overall purpose
of the project was to investigate a possible relationship between indoor environment and
concentration, this test was highly appropriate to use. In addition, the test was easy to
convert to online use and relatively short, which was also an advantage. The original
Baddeley test was a grammatical-logical test, where the test subjects should categorize
statements on the order of two letters. Since the test subjects were pupils in 7th and 9th
grade, the test was adapted to children. A graphical-logical test was developed, where
the pupil were presented with two geometrical figures and a statement about the figures.
Figure 3.8: Illustration of the Baddeley test. Translated: The triangle is not larger than the
circle. True or false?
The purpose of the test is for the pupil to respond to whether the statement is true or
false. 24 questions are presented to the pupil, hence a maximum score of 24 is possible.
The output of this test is a data set where the 24 questions are divided into four sections,
giving six questions per section. The number of correct answers for each section is given,
thereby with a maximum score of 6 per section. The final Baddeley test score (B) was
calculated by multiplying the number of correct answers from the four sections. To eval-
uate the concentration, the Baddeley score of the pupils was normalized in a range of
0%-100% related to the maximum possible score (24). Equation 3.1 was used for this.
BN =
B
Bmax
· 100 = B
24 · 100
(3.1)
22
Associations between indoor climate in classrooms and children’s well-being and concentration ability
==PAGE:28==
3.4.4
d2 test
The d2 test was an attention and concentration test, which the pupils were also presented
with on test days. The test was chosen, as it was short, easy to adapt to online use, and
does not depend on the intelligence of the test person. The setup of the test is where
the test subject is presented with a string of letters and marks where he or she should
identify and cancel the letter d with two marks ” either above or below or one above and
one below the letter. Other letters and number of marks are in the string as a distraction,
such as the letter p or 1, 3, or 4 marks. A complete test includes 14 strings of different
combinations with 20 seconds to finish each string. An example of a string can be seen
in Figure 3.9.
Figure 3.9: Illustration of the d2 test
The purpose of the test is for the pupil to identify and mark as many ’d2’ marks as pos-
sible in the string and also avoid identifying and canceling wrong marks. To evaluate the
concentration of the pupil, the Concentration Performance Test Score (CP) was derived
from the test.
The Concentration Performance is given by Equation 3.2, and is the number of correctly
marked characters subtracted from the number of incorrectly marked. This value does
not reward arbitrarily identified marks, as these are subtracted from the test score. The
CP provides high reliability and is thereby used as an evaluation of concentration.
CP = (TN −E) −E2
(3.2)
where
CP = Concentration Performance
TN-E = Total correctly identified marks
E2 = Errors of commission
The output of the test is scores for each string the pupil has processed. To get the final
score of the CP, the results of the 14 strings are multiplied. It applies, that the higher
CP, the higher concentration. A negative test score is possible and can be a result of
low concentration, misunderstanding of the test, or lack of cooperation. To evaluate the
concentration performance, the CP score of the pupils was normalized in a range of 0%-
100% related to the minimum and maximum scores in the data set of the test day in the
given classroom. Equation 3.3 was used for this (Zach, 2021).
CPN =
CP −CPmin
CPmax −CPmin · 100
(3.3)
where
CPN = Normalized value in the dataset
CP = Value in the dataset
CPmin = Minimum value in the dataset
CPmax = Maximum value in the dataset
Associations between indoor climate in classrooms and children’s well-being and concentration ability
23
==PAGE:29==
3.5
Data Processing
The collected indoor environmental data were processed and analyzed in an Excel sheet.
The data was divided into four phases, each five weeks long apart from phase 4 with a
duration of three weeks. Vacations were avoided, as the classrooms were unoccupied.
Figure 3.10: Measurement period divided into four phases
Phase 1 represents the indoor environment before the installation of the ventilation units
in two of the classrooms. It ran from September 12th 2022 to October 10th 2022.
Phase 2 represents the indoor environment after the installation of the ventilation units in
IR1 and IR2. It ran from November 7th 2022 to December 11th 2022.
Due to continuous monitoring, it was found that the ventilation unit in IR1 did not improve
the indoor air quality as much as assumed. After contact with Excauso, it was found that
the ventilation unit was not correctly regulated, thus the reason for the issue was found.
This led to a modification of the regulation of the ventilation units.
Phase 3 represents the indoor environment after the regulation of the ventilation unit in
IR1. It ran from January 30rd 2023 to March 5th 2023 where one week was omitted due
to vacation. This was from February 13th to 19th.
Finally, phase 4 ran from March 13th 2023 to April 2nd 2023. It represents the indoor
environment in the four classrooms in the spring with higher outdoor temperatures. As
this phase was in the early spring of 2023, it was used to both compare the seasonal
impact in rooms with ventilation units and compare the fall (phase 1) with no ventilation
units with spring (phase 4) with ventilation units.
In addition, the measurement data were filtered for school hours only. School hours were
defined based on class schedules and patterns of the CO2 concentration fluctuations as
this would indicate human occupation in the classroom.
To analyze associations between the indoor environment and well-being and concentra-
tion, the indoor environmental data was also used to determine the specific conditions
during each test in the classrooms. The start time of the first test (questionnaire) and the
end time of the last test (d2 test) in a room were noted. Since the pupils were affected
by the indoor environment prior to the test, the measurements fifteen minutes prior to the
test were considered as well. An average of each environmental parameter in the test
period was calculated.
Another Excel sheet contained all data of the well-being and concentration tests of the
pupils and the indoor environmental conditions during the tests. Associations between
24
Associations between indoor climate in classrooms and children’s well-being and concentration ability
==PAGE:30==
relevant indoor environmental parameters and the answers of the pupils were analyzed.
Correlation matrices, polynomial and linear trendlines, and respective R2 values were
included with the use of Excel commands and functions.
3.5.1
Discarded Data
It was aspired to retain as much data as possible, as this would provide a more thor-
ough and representative image of the indoor environment and concentration performance.
However, when collecting data it was necessary to discard some data if the circumstances
during the data collection were not representative. Discarding data was done carefully
since it affects the final results of the data analysis. As for the d2 test, it was necessary
to leave out some of the results. When investigating the output of the d2 test, some par-
ticipants were missing results from one or more of the test rows. This could either be
due to a participant leaving the test before finishing, a technical issue with the computer,
or an error in the data processing. If the complete test score was calculated in these
cases, it would be inaccurate, as there would not be results from 14 rows. Instead, these
participants were not included in the analysis.
In addition, observations during the tests made it possible to evaluate the external con-
ditions under which the pupils took the tests. The test should be taken under acceptable
conditions with no distractions, no sudden sound bursts, and sincere seriousness towards
the test. If the circumstances during the test were assessed to be unacceptable and the
analysis of the collected data supported these observations, the data were discarded as
well. Supporting data analysis could be that the overall results were noticeably lower on a
test day than on previous test days. This was the case in Reference Room 2 on Test Day
4. Only 8 pupils submitted results and from observations during the test, it was found that
with a substitute teacher, the motivation and seriousness towards the tests were lacking.
The results supported these observations, hence the data from Reference Room 2 on
Test Day 4 was discarded.
3.6
Socio-Economic Benefit
The following section presents the reasoning behind evaluating the socio-economic ben-
efit of installing a ventilation system at Skt. Klemensskolen. This is based on work by
Incentive, DTU, and Realdania (Madsen et al., 2019). The socio-economic benefit is di-
vided into the potential due to increased pupil learning and reduced sick leave caused by
the improved classroom environment.
The reasoning behind the potential due to increased learning is illustrated in Figure 3.11.
It is based on literature research indicating, that improved air quality leads to higher per-
formance, increased learning, higher education, and thereby adults with higher salaries.
Figure 3.11: Reasoning behind socio-economical potential due to increased learning
The reasoning behind the potential due to reduced sick leave of students and teachers
is illustrated in Figure 3.12. By improving the air quality, the sick leave of teachers and
pupils are reduced. By lowering the sick leave of teachers, the payroll cost reduces, as
no substitute is paid. In addition, when lowering the sick leave of students, parents can
stay at work instead of having days off to take care of their children, which increases the
labor supply.
Associations between indoor climate in classrooms and children’s well-being and concentration ability
25
==PAGE:31==
Figure 3.12: Reasoning behind socio-economical potential due to reduced absence
Realdania published an Excel calculation model in 2020 which was used for the purpose
of evaluating the socio-economical benefits of installing a ventilation unit at Skt. Kle-
mensskolen (Incentive, DTU, 2023). Assumptions and default values were defined in
the model, which was not changed. One of them was the relationship between the CO2
concentration and performance, which was calculated and defined based on the meta-
analysis of (Wargocki et al., 2020).
As case-specific input, the model needed information concerning the life span of the ven-
tilation unit, the thermal conditions and air quality at the school, and school-specific data.
Input about the thermal conditions and air quality was given from the current conditions
as well as the expected improvements. The input was based on quality categories on
temperature and CO2 concentration, which can be seen in Table 3.5.
Table 3.5: Quality Categories based on (Danish Standards Assosiations, 2018).
Category
CO2 concentration
Temperature range
[ppm]
[°C]
I
950
21-23
II
1200
20-21 & 23-24
III
1350
19-20 & 24-25
IV
1750
18-19 & 25-26
Out of category
>1750
<18 & >26
The distribution of school hours within each quality category was needed and calculated
from the indoor environment measurements. The current conditions (before the installa-
tion of a ventilation unit) were represented by the data from RR1 and RR2 during phases
1, 2, 3, and 4. The distribution of the occupied time within the categories of all the class-
rooms and phases was calculated. The expected improvements (with the installation of
a ventilation unit) were represented by the data from IR1 and IR2 during phases 3 and 4.
Phase 2 in IR1 and IR2 was omitted, as the results of the indoor environment measure-
ments showed, that the unit was not regulated optimally. The same calculation method
was applied here. It was assumed that these measurement periods were representative
of the entire school year.
One of the school-specific inputs was the percentage of school hours spent in the im-
proved classrooms, which was assumed to be 80%. The other school-specific input was
the total number of students and teachers at the school, which was provided directly by
the school on one of the school visits.
The output of the calculation model was an estimated socio-economic gain of lowering
sick leave and improving learning. It provided the net present value over a period of 20
years with a discount rate of 4% (2019 prices). The economic gain accrued to the citizens,
municipality, and state.
26
Associations between indoor climate in classrooms and children’s well-being and concentration ability
==PAGE:32==
4
Results
The following chapter presents the results of the investigation on Skt. Klemensskolen in
Odense. It is divided into four sections; the indoor environment conditions, the well-being
of the pupils, their concentration performance, and finally the socio-economic benefits.
4.1
Indoor Environment in Classrooms
The following section presents the results of the indoor environment measurements from
the roomalyzer. The data from the HOBO logger measurements were used as a backup.
The phases of each classroom will be compared, as well as a comparison between the
classrooms.
4.1.1
Air Quality
To evaluate the air quality in the four classrooms the measurements of the CO2 concen-
tration were analyzed.
Figure 4.1 and 4.2 show the CO2 development in IR1 and IR2 throughout a week during
each phase. The specific week is chosen as being representative of the entire phase and
to highlight a general pattern of that phase.
In general, it can be seen from the graphs, that there were momentarily peaks during each
weekday, indicating CO2 build-up and thereby use of the room. The peak levels differed
between the weeks and were highest during a week in Phase 1 and Phase 2, where the
ventilation unit was either not installed or not correctly regulated. As the recommended
maximum CO2 concentration is 1000ppm, the weeks in Phase 1 and 2 had completely
unacceptable air quality with concentrations up to 4000ppm. The lowest peak levels were
during a week in phases 3 and 4, where the ventilation unit was installed and the regu-
lation was modified. In these weeks the maximum peak levels decreased to around the
recommended 1000ppm, as intended. It can also be seen from the graphs, that the CO2
decay is noticeably longer during phase 1 with no ventilation and reaches a steady state
condition quicker in phases 3 and 4 with a correctly regulated ventilation unit.
Finally, the steady-state minimum condition can be highlighted, as this clearly illustrates
the outdoor CO2 concentration at approximately 400ppm, when no other CO2 sources
were in the classrooms.
When comparing IR1 and IR2 it is seen, that the momentary peaks were generally higher
in IR1 than in IR2. The difference between phases 2 and 3 was also greater in IR1, which
could be because of the misregulated ventilation unit.
Associations between indoor climate in classrooms and children’s well-being and concentration ability
27
==PAGE:33==
Figure 4.1: The CO2 concentration in IR1 during an arbitrary week in each phase
Figure 4.2: The CO2 concentration in IR2 during an arbitrary week in each phase
The classrooms were also investigated focusing on the school hours, which were defined
as weekdays from 08-14:30. Figure 4.3 and Figure 4.4 shows the cumulative distribution
of CO2 in IR1 and RR1, and IR2 and RR2, respectively. Table 4.1 provides key numbers
of CO2 concentration for the classrooms during all phases.
In IR1 with a ventilation unit, the difference was primarily seen between phases 1 and 2,
and phases 3 and 4. Phases 3 and 4 differed by having 58% and 62% of the occupied
time below 1000 ppm, whereas phases 1 and 2 only had 26% and 30%, respectively.
The maximum CO2 concentrations were also noticeably higher during phases 1 and 2
than in phases 3 and 4. The results emphasized the impact of a ventilation unit. They
also emphasized the importance of correct regulation of the unit, as phase 2 with a wrong
regulation of the ventilation unit, did not improve the CO2 conditions remarkably compared
to phase 1.
In RR1 the CO2 concentration was in an acceptable range below 1000ppm for 26% of the
time during phase 1. This was higher than phases 2, 3, and 4, with 9%, 11%, and 9% of
acceptable hours, respectively. However, the maximum CO2 concentration was notice-
ably high during all phases, with a maximum of 4529, 4926, 4713, and 4471 ppm during
phases 1, 2, 3, and 4, respectively. The explanation for the lower CO2 concentrations
28
Associations between indoor climate in classrooms and children’s well-being and concentration ability
==PAGE:34==
during phase 1 could be because of the higher outside temperature during this phase. As
described in Chapter 2.1 the users of a room tend to be more inclined to open windows
and thereby change the air in the room, if the outside temperature is higher.
When comparing IR1 and RR1, phase 1 looked relatively similar in the percentage of
acceptable time. This indicated, that the air exchange in the rooms was of comparable
magnitude before the installation of a ventilation unit in IR1. As previously mentioned,
the volume per person in IR1 and RR1 was 9.9 m3 and 9.3 m3, respectively, which was
also relatively similar and made the rooms more comparable. During phases 3 and 4,
it became clear, how a ventilation unit improved the air quality. Where the air quality in
RR1 decreased during the winter season, it improved in IR1 with a ventilation unit. It
was expected that the difference between phases 3 and 4 was insignificant in IR1, as the
CO2 concentration would not be affected by the seasonal change due to the ventilation
unit. However, the small difference between phases 3 and 4 in RR1 was not expected, as
the CO2 concentration was expected to decrease when outdoor temperatures increased.
The mean room temperature in RR1 during phases 3 and 4 was 21.6°C and 21.5°C,
which could be the explanation for the small difference in CO2 concentration. The thermal
conditions will be elaborated on later.
(a) Intervention Room 1
(b) Reference Room 1
Figure 4.3: Cumulative frequency curve of CO2 concentration during school hours
In IR2 the primary change of CO2 concentration was from phase 1 to the three other
phases. Although all phases had acceptable concentrations during 52% to 63% of the
time, the greatest difference was seen in the concentrations just above the recommended
1000 ppm. Where the maximum concentrations during phases 2, 3, and 4 were 1622
ppm, 1462 ppm, and 1236 ppm respectively, this value was 3245 ppm during phase 1.
This indicates a great impact from the ventilation unit in IR2, as the high concentrations
were avoided. As expected, the difference between phases 3 and 4 was insignificant in
IR2, as in IR1. In addition, the minimum CO2 concentration of 129 ppm in IR2 during
phase 1 could be highlighted. As the outdoor CO2 concentration is approximately 400
ppm in Denmark, this minimum concentration is unrealistically low. The reason for this
could be found in the unstable Roomalyzer, which was replaced before the next phase.
Especially since this issue only occurred in one of the phases in one classroom. The
replaced Roomalyzer was elaborated in Chapter 3.3.
The tendency in RR2 during each phase looked relatively similar to RR1, where the CO2
concentration was within an acceptable range for a longer period of time during phase
1 compared to phases 2, 3, and 4. However, the percentage of time with acceptable
CO2 concentration was generally higher during all phases with 66%, 26%, 24%, and 31%
during phases 1, 2, 3, and 4, respectively. The maximum concentrations were between
2832 ppm and 3929 ppm in all phases, which was lower than for RR1.
Associations between indoor climate in classrooms and children’s well-being and concentration ability
29
==PAGE:35==
In RR2, a greater difference in the CO2 concentration tendency could be seen between
phases 3 and 4, compared to RR1. In this case, the period of time with acceptable air
quality increased by 7% points from phase 3 to 4. The reason for the difference between
the two reference rooms could be found in the orientation of the room. As the window
facade in RR2 faced east, the morning sun could have made the rooms warmer, making
it more necessary to open windows and thereby both lower the temperature and CO2 con-
centration. For instance, when looking at phases 3 and 4, the mean room temperature
in RR2 increased from 21°C to 22.4°C, whereas the mean room temperature in RR1 de-
creased from 21.6°C to 21.5°C. Another reason could be found in the volume per person.
RR2 had the highest volume per person at 10.9 m3, whereas RR1 had 9.3 m3 per person.
As described in 2.3 increased volume per student resulted in lower CO2 concentrations.
(a) Intervention Room 2
(b) Reference Room 2
Figure 4.4: Cumulative frequency curve of CO2 concentration during school hours
Table 4.1: Key numbers related to the CO2 concentration in IR1, RR1, IR2, and RR2
CO2 concentration [ppm]
Min
Lower quartile
Mean
Upper quartile
Max
Intervention Room 1
Phase 1
435
923
1609
2136
4885
Phase 2
494
987
1352
1602
4145
Phase 3
444
871
944
1046
1272
Phase 4
454
857
941
1039
1348
Reference Room 1
Phase 1
459
988
1624
2135
4529
Phase 2
455
1411
1973
2477
4926
Phase 3
455
1329
1900
2370
4713
Phase 4
537
1484
1977
2425
4471
Intervention Room 2
Phase 1
129
598
1046
1353
3245
Phase 2
403
812
966
1127
1622
Phase 3
459
781
909
1042
1462
Phase 4
453
853
939
1059
1236
Reference Room 2
Phase 1
413
694
984
1132
3252
Phase 2
390
982
1461
1861
3454
Phase 3
425
1023
1456
1793
3928
Phase 4
455
935
1346
1720
2832
30
Associations between indoor climate in classrooms and children’s well-being and concentration ability
==PAGE:36==
4.1.2
Thermal Conditions
To evaluate the thermal conditions in the four classrooms the measurements of the room
temperature and relative humidity were analyzed.
The distribution of the air temperature in IR1 and RR1 during school hours in each phase
can be seen in Figure 4.5 and 4.6, respectively. Key numbers related to the temperature
can be seen in Table 4.2. In general, the temperature was mostly in the range of 20°C
to 24°C, which is recommended for the heating season. The temperature only exceeded
24°C for 25% and 9% of phase 1 in IR1 and RR1, respectively. Phase 1 was also par-
tially before the heating season, where temperatures up to 26°C are acceptable (Danish
Standards Association, 2019a). The maximum temperatures were 25.2°C and 25°C in
these cases. In addition, the temperature ranged between 24-26 degrees for 2% of the
time in phase 2 and 3% of the time in phase 3 with maximum temperatures of 24.5°C and
24.2°C, respectively.
Although the new governmental requirement applied from October 1st during phase 1, it
was not until phase 2, that IR1 had just 1% of occupied time below 20°C, where the mini-
mum temperature was 17.6°C. RR1 had only 9% and 5% of occupied time in phase 3 and
4, respectively, where the temperature decreased below 20°. The minimum temperatures
during these phases were 17.9°C and 18.9°C, respectively.
Figure 4.5: Temperature in Intervention Room 1 during each phase
Figure 4.6: Temperature in Reference Room 1 during each phase
The room temperatures in IR2 and RR2 during all phases can be seen in Figure 4.7 and
4.8. Key numbers related to the room temperature can be seen in Table 4.2. Contrary
to IR1 and RR1, warmer temperatures occurred during phase 1 in these classrooms.
28% and 41% of phase 1 had temperatures in the range of 24-26°C in IR2 and RR2,
respectively. In addition, temperatures exceeded 26°C for 2% and 18% of the time in
phase 1 in IR2 and RR2, respectively. The maximum temperatures during phase 1 were
Associations between indoor climate in classrooms and children’s well-being and concentration ability
31
==PAGE:37==
found to be 26.8°C in IR1 and 33.2°C in RR2. Measurements of such high value could
be caused by direct sunlight on the measurement station.
During phase 2, temperatures decreased and measurements below 20°C were measured
in 14% and 2% of school hours in IR1 and RR2, respectively. During phase 3, 15%
and 11% percent of the time was below 20°C in IR2 and RR2, respectively. In addition,
2% of occupied time in phase 3 in RR2 had temperatures below 18°C with a minimum
measurement of 14.8°C. This value was noticeably low, but when investigating the first
quartile, it did not differ as much as the minimum value. In addition, when looking at
the data, the occurrences of temperatures below 15°C only occurred momentarily, after
which the temperatures increased again. Hence, it is assumed, that the temperature
decrease could be caused by window opening and thereby letting cold outside air enter
the classroom.
As expected, the air temperatures rose during phase 4, with 4% and 5% of occupied time
within the range of 24°C and 26°C in IR2 and RR2, respectively. In addition, temperatures
in the range of 22°C to 24°C were noticeably higher than in phase 3 for both rooms. The
temperature conditions in IR2 did not change as much between phases 2 and 3, as in
RR2, which can be seen from the figures and the table.
Figure 4.7: Temperature in Intervention Room 2 during each phase
Figure 4.8: Temperature in Reference Room 2 during each phase
Generally, the temperatures in all classrooms were as expected and were relatively ac-
ceptable. The temperature measurements below 20°C occurring mostly in phases 2 and
3 were also acceptable due to the new governmental requirement with a heating set point
of 19°C instead of 20°C.
32
Associations between indoor climate in classrooms and children’s well-being and concentration ability
==PAGE:38==
Table 4.2: Key numbers related to the air temperature in IR1, RR1, IR2, and RR2
Temperature [°C]
Min
Lower quartile
Mean
Upper quartile
Max
Intervention Room 1
Phase 1
19.7
22.1
22.9
23.9
25.2
Phase 2
17.6
21.6
22.2
22.9
24.5
Phase 3
19.6
21.5
21.9
22.2
23.4
Phase 4
20.1
22.5
22.8
23.4
24.2
Reference Room 1
Phase 1
20.1
22.4
23.0
23.6
25.0
Phase 2
19.5
22.1
22.4
22.9
23.9
Phase 3
17.9
20.9
21.6
22.5
23.7
Phase 4
18.9
21.0
21.5
22.3
23.4
Intervention Room 2
Phase 1
18.9
22.0
23.1
24.2
26.8
Phase 2
18.4
20.2
20.8
21.4
22.8
Phase 3
18.4
20.2
20.9
21.5
23.0
Phase 4
19.2
21.2
21.9
22.6
25.4
Reference Room 2
Phase 1
19.2
23.1
24.4
25.4
33.2
Phase 2
17.7
21.4
22.2
23.0
25.8
Phase 3
14.8
20.5
21.0
21.6
23.2
Phase 4
19.6
21.7
22.4
23.1
25.1
The relative humidity was also monitored in the four classrooms. It was expected that the
relative humidity would decrease in the two intervention rooms as the ventilation would in-
crease the air change rate. It was also expected that the relative humidity would decrease
during winter in the reference rooms as the relative humidity drops when cold outside air
is supplied to the room (Branche Fællesskab Arbejdsmiljø, 2023b). Table 4.3 provides
the percentage of school hours where the relative humidity was within, below, and above
the recommended range of 25-60%.
As expected, the relative humidity decreased from phase 1 to phase 3 in all classrooms.
This could be related to both the ventilation unit in IR1 and IR2 and the supply of cold
outside air in RR1 and RR2. IR1 and RR1 went from having relative humidity above the
recommended limit of 60% for 44.3% and 27.7% of school hours to 0% and 1.3%. How-
ever, the fluctuations differed between the classrooms from phase 3 and forward. Where
IR1 continued to have 0% of school hours above 60% during phase 4, this percentage
increased to 5.2% in RR1. As the outside air temperature increased during spring, it was
expected that this would occur. The same tendencies prevailed in IR2 and RR2.
From the CO2 concentration and relative humidity, it was seen, that the improvement of the
air quality was not at the expense of the humidity in the classrooms. The measurements
during phases 3 and 4 did not reveal long periods of unacceptable dry air during school
hours in IR1 and IR2 with decentralized ventilation units, which could have been a possible
issue.
Associations between indoor climate in classrooms and children’s well-being and concentration ability
33
==PAGE:39==
Table 4.3: Distribution of school hours within relative humidity ranges
School hours within Relative Humidity range
[%]
<25
25-60
>60
Intervention Room 1
Phase 1
0.0
55.7
44.3
Phase 2
0.0
84.6
15.4
Phase 3
8.0
92.0
0.0
Phase 4
1.2
98.8
0.0
Reference Room 1
Phase 1
0.0
72.3
27.7
Phase 2
0.0
84.1
15.9
Phase 3
0.5
98.2
1.3
Phase 4
0.0
94.8
5.2
Intervention Room 2
Phase 1
0.0
78.7
21.3
Phase 2
0.0
80.6
19.4
Phase 3
0.0
100.0
0.0
Phase 4
1.5
98.4
0.1
Reference Room 2
Phase 1
0.0
92.5
7.5
Phase 2
0.0
95.7
4.3
Phase 3
0.0
100.0
0.0
Phase 4
2.2
93.9
3.9
4.1.3
Acoustics
The sound pressure levels in the classrooms were monitored with the roomalyzer. Table
4.4 presents the key numbers related to the acoustics in each room during all phases.
Based on the values in the table, it was clear that there were only small differences in the
rooms compared to both phases and classrooms. The mean SPL was between 46 dB
and 56 dB in all cases. This corresponds to noise at a library (40 dB-50 dB) (Branche
Fællesskab Arbejdsmiljø, 2023a). These measurements fit with the primary use of the
room (teaching, reading, or single assignments). The third quartile value was between
53 dB and 65 dB corresponding to a conversation (60 dB-70 dB), which is to be expected
with active teaching and learning with the involvement of pupils. The maximum SPL was
between 83 dB and 105 dB, which is relatively high and corresponds to play in daycare
(80 dB-90 dB) and in a gym hall (90 dB-100 dB). These noise levels are not recommended
for teaching. However, it was not unexpected as the noise level can easily reach these
levels for instance during a break when pupils were still present in the classrooms. The
maximum SPL generally decreased along with the phases, e.g. in IR1 from 105 dB in
phase 1 to 92 dB in phase 4. In addition, the sound pressure level measurements did
not show, that the installation of the ventilation unit increased the sound pressure level
in the classrooms. As seen in Table 4.4 the mean sound pressure level in IR1 and IR2
decreased from phase 1 without a ventilation unit and to the other phases with a ventilation
unit. This indicates, that the noise from the ventilation unit did not drown out the pupils
and teachers.
34
Associations between indoor climate in classrooms and children’s well-being and concentration ability
==PAGE:40==
Table 4.4: Sound Pressure Level key numbers in the classrooms during each phase.
Sound Pressure Level [dB]
Min
Lower quartile
Mean
Upper quartile
Max
Intervention Room 1
Phase 1
39
44
56
65
105
Phase 2
39
44
55
63
90
Phase 3
0
40
46
62
93
Phase 4
38
47
55
62
92
Reference Room 1
Phase 1
40
48
56
63
109
Phase 2
38
46
54
61
89
Phase 3
0
43
49
53
84
Phase 4
37
43
48
53
78
Intervention Room 2
Phase 1
39
43
53
59
108
Phase 2
38
44
53
61
88
Phase 3
0
41
51
58
85
Phase 4
37
44
51
57
85
Reference Room 2
Phase 1
36
45
51
55
94
Phase 2
39
45
52
56
82
Phase 3
31
44
50
54
83
Phase 4
40
45
51
55
84
However, teachers and pupils complained of noise from the ventilation unit during one of
the test days. Hence, this was investigated as well. The noise level of the ventilation unit
in IR1 at different fan speeds can be seen in Table 4.5. At a fan speed of 50% or below,
the noise level was acceptable and corresponded to less than whisper (Høreforeningen,
2023). However, at a fan speed of 75% and 100%, the noise level increased to 36 dB(A)
and 40 dB(A), respectively. Noise at this level is clearly heard and can be disturbing as
background noise in a classroom.
Table 4.5: Noise level of ventilation unit in IR2 at different fan speed
Fan speed
Noise level
[%]
[db(A)]
0
25*
25
26
50
28
75
36**
100
40**
* Background noise
**Clearly heard during measurements in the classroom
Associations between indoor climate in classrooms and children’s well-being and concentration ability
35
==PAGE:41==
4.1.4
Indoor environment on test days
The indoor environment measurement data was used to calculate the specific conditions
during the test days in the classrooms. The average of each environmental parameter in
the test period can be seen in Table 4.6.
The lowest average temperature on test days was in IR2 on Test Day 2 at 19.7°C and the
highest average temperature was in IR2 on test day 4 at 23.7°C. The lowest and highest
average CO2 concentration was 922 ppm on test day 4 in IR1 and 2951 ppm on test day 2
in RR1, respectively. The average SPL was between 42.7dB and 62.7dB, which covered
a wide range, but was higher than the noise caused by the running ventilation.
Although the measurements on the test days were scattered in a wide range, the extremes
were yet left out. Apart from IR2 on test day 2, all temperatures were within the recom-
mended comfort range of 20-26°C. In addition, it was only in IR1 and IR2 on test days 3
and 4, that the CO2 concentration was below the recommended maximum of 1000ppm.
Table 4.6: Average of indoor environmental parameter measurements on test days
Temperature
Relative humidity
CO2 concentration
SPL
[°C]
[%]
[ppm]
[dB]
Test Day 1
IR1
22.9
57.0
1509
56.0
RR1
23.0
59.8
2355
49.3
IR2
21.4
58.1
1274
52.8
RR2
23.3
56.5
2186
46.5
Test Day 2
IR1
21.8
46.1
1751
62.7
RR1
22.6
52.6
2951
54.0
IR2
19.7
43.4
1082
58.6
RR2
21.7
45.5
1754
52.0
Test Day 3
IR1
22.2
23.9
971
-
RR1
22.5
30.7
1229
54.0
IR2
21.4
24.2
937
-
RR2
20.7
33.2
1391
54.0
Test Day 4
IR1
23.4
34.7
922
58.2
RR1
23.1
40.3
1184
50.0
IR2
23.7
34.1
989
42.7
RR2
-
-
-
-
4.2
Well-being of Pupils
The following section analyses the subjective evaluations of the indoor environment by
the pupils from the questionnaire. Correlations between the answers concerning well-
being and relevant indoor environmental parameters were investigated. An overview can
be seen in the correlation matrix in Figure 4.9. Some numbers were highlighted (bold),
due to either high correlation or high relevance for the investigation. These corrections
were investigated further and scatter plots were made along with regression lines.
36
Associations between indoor climate in classrooms and children’s well-being and concentration ability
==PAGE:42==
Figure 4.9: Correlation matrix between indoor environmental parameters and well-being
4.2.1
Subjective evaluations on discomfort
Firstly, a correlation between the perceived air quality and the CO2 concentration was
investigated, which can be seen in Figure 4.10. As expected, a negative correlation can
be read from the graph, as the perceived air quality decreased as the CO2 concentration
increased. The correlation of -0.10 in the correlation matrix showed this as well. This
indicated, that the pupils did notice high concentrations of CO2 and that it affected their
comfort negatively.
Figure 4.10: Relation between CO2 concentration and the perception of air given on a
comfort scale (1 = uncomfortable, 5 = neutral)
Figure 4.11 illustrates the relation between temperature perception and the actual tem-
perature. The pupils answered questions about whether they felt neutral or too warm or
too cold during the test. These answers and a polynomial trendline were plotted. The
Associations between indoor climate in classrooms and children’s well-being and concentration ability
37
==PAGE:43==
results showed that the polynomial peak was at 23.5 °C, meaning the analyzed optimal
temperature with the most satisfied pupils. This temperature was within the recommended
temperature range during the heating season of 20°C to 24°C. The results also showed,
that when the temperature moved away from 23.5 °C, the pupils began to feel more un-
comfortable.
Figure 4.11: Relation between air temperature and the perception of temperature given
on a comfort Scale (1 = uncomfortable, 5 = neutral)
Figure 4.12 illustrates the relation between the perception of draught and the air temper-
ature of the room. The correlation matrix revealed a positive correlation between these
parameters with a correlation of 0.12. The positive slope of the regression line means
that the discomfort from draught decreased when the air temperature increased. This
relation follows the general theory unfolded in Section 2.1, that draught is not considered
as uncomfortable when the air temperature is high.
Figure 4.12: Relation between the air temperature and the perception of draught given
on a comfort scale (1 = uncomfortable, 5 = neutral)
38
Associations between indoor climate in classrooms and children’s well-being and concentration ability
==PAGE:44==
4.2.2
Subjective evaluations of symptoms
Interestingly, the correlation matrix demonstrated a positive correlation between the CO2
concentration and the pupils’ subjective perception of their own concentration perfor-
mance. As seen in Figure 4.13, the pupils seemed to experience their concentration
better when the CO2 concentration increased. This was unexpected, as previous stud-
ies show a negative correlation between air quality and concentration performance, as
elaborated in Section 2.4.
Figure 4.13: Relation between CO2 concentration and the perception of own concentra-
tion given on a comfort Scale (1 = difficult, 5 = neutral)
When looking at the correlation matrix, the parameters which had a high correlation with
the perceived concentration were irritated eyes (0.44), feeling tired (0.45), and having a
headache (0.41). These symptoms can be caused by a number of things but one of them
is actually poor air quality, as elaborated in Section 2.1.
Associations between indoor climate in classrooms and children’s well-being and concentration ability
39
==PAGE:45==
4.3
Concentration Performance of Pupils
The following section covers an objective evaluation of the concentration performance of
the pupils, whereas the previous section covered the pupils’ subjective perception thereof.
The objective evaluation is based on the Baddeley test and the d2 test. Data from Refer-
ence Room 2 on test day 4 was not included.
4.3.1
Results
A total of 253 complete Baddeley tests were collected. Figure 4.14 demonstrates the dis-
tribution of the Baddeley test results in four classrooms across four test days. The results
of the test did not follow the presumption, that test scores would tend to increase over
time due to learning experience from repeated use of the test. Instead, pupils demon-
strated a small decline between test days 1-2 and 3-4 in IR1, RR1, and IR2. Between
test days 2-3, these classrooms had increasing scores. On the contrary, reference room
2 had increasing scores between test days 1-2 but decreased between test days 2 and 3.
Figure 4.14: Results of Normalized Baddeley score on test days. The Baddeley score is
normalized from 0%-100% in relation to the maximum possible score (24)
A total of 231 complete d2 tests were collected. Figure 4.15 demonstrates the distribution
of the CP score in four classrooms across four test days. As for the Baddeley test scores,
the CP scores did not follow the presumption of improvement throughout the tests. IR1
had only minor differences on the test days, whereas the other classrooms differed more
between the test days. IR2 can be highlighted, as improvements did actually occur from
test day 2 and forward. However, the pupils did score higher on test day 1 than test day
2 and 3. RR2 can also be highlighted due to noticeably low CP scores on test day 2. The
explanation could be found in surrounding external factors, but as the classroom was not
observed during test day 2, this is difficult to assume.
40
Associations between indoor climate in classrooms and children’s well-being and concentration ability
==PAGE:46==
Figure 4.15: Results of Normalized CP score on test days. The CP score is normalized
from 0%-100% in relation to the maximum score on the given test day in the given class-
room.
Figure 4.16 provides an overview of all the performance results and illustrates the average
score of the Baddeley test and CP score from the d2 test in all classrooms combined. Only
pupils present on all test days were included in order to track improvements. As previously
shown, the results of the Baddeley test and d2 test on the test days did not improve as
much as expected. the Baddeley test results increased by 0.8% points on test day 2, after
which they decreased by 3.2% points and 2.6% points on test days 3 and 4, respectively.
The CP score decreased by 4.8% points on test day 2, afterward increased by 4.9% points
on test day 3, and finally decreased 3.2% points on test day 4. It was expected, that the
score would increase from test day 1 to test day 2, as the pupils would be familiar with
the test and thereby have a higher learning effect. The reason for these results could
be found in sources of error, which will be elaborated on in Chapter 5. Another reason
could be found in the indoor environment on test days. Hence, this was investigated in
the following.
Figure 4.16: Average score of Baddeley test and d2 test on test days
Associations between indoor climate in classrooms and children’s well-being and concentration ability
41
==PAGE:47==
4.3.2
Correlation between concentration performance and IAQ
The following section evaluates the concentration performance of the pupils based on the
Baddeley test and d2 test. Correlations between the scores and the indoor environmental
conditions from the four test days were investigated. An overview can be seen in the
correlation matrix in Figure 4.17. Some numbers were highlighted (bold), due to either
high correlation or high relevance for the investigation. Scatter plots and linear regression
lines were used to analyze the correlations.
Figure 4.17: Correlation between indoor environmental parameters and concentration
performance parameters
Figure 4.18 illustrates the relationship between the normalized baddeley score and the
CO2 concentration. The blue dots represent the average score of all the Baddeley tests
taken with the same CO2 concentration in the room. The standard deviation is illustrated
as well, which shows how dispersed the data was in relation to the mean (Brockhoff et al.,
2018). The yellow dotted line in the graph is a linear trendline created based on the data
to evaluate a possible relationship between the two variables.
Figure 4.18: Relation between normalized Baddeley Score and CO2 concentration
42
Associations between indoor climate in classrooms and children’s well-being and concentration ability
==PAGE:48==
As expected, a negative linear relationship was found between the two variables, as the
Baddeley score decreased when the CO2 concentration increased. The standard devia-
tion indicated a scattering in the results. However, as the Baddeley score was normalized
in relation to the maximum possible score (24), the results were more clustered around
the mean and the standard deviation was relatively low. The specific correlation is given
by Equation 4.1, and the impact of a CO2 change can be predicted and compared with
previous studies. With Equation 4.1 it was calculated, that by lowering the CO2 concen-
tration from 2400ppm to 900ppm the performance related to the Baddeley test could be
improved by 1.5% points.
f(x) = −0.001x + 82.886
(4.1)
f(2400) = 80.49%
f(900) = 81.99%
Figure 4.19 illustrates the relationship between the normalized CP score from the d2 test
and the CO2 concentration. As in Figure 4.18, the blue dots represent the average score,
the yellow dotted line is a linear trendline, and the standard deviation is illustrated as well.
Figure 4.19: Relation between normalized CP and CO2 concentration
As expected, the concentration decreased as the CO2 concentration increased, meaning
a negative linear relationship was found. Compared to the Baddeley test results, the CP
results were more dispersed in relation to the mean. Since the CP score was normalized
in relation to the minimum and maximum score in the data set, the results would naturally
disperse wider than the Baddeley test results. Hence, the standard deviation was higher.
From the trendline Equation 4.2 was deduced, and the impact of a CO2 decrease could be
predicted. By lowering the CO2 concentration from 2400ppm to 900ppm the concentration
performance related to the d2 test could be improved by 5.8% points.
f(x) = −0.004x + 63.236
(4.2)
f(2400) = 54.0%
f(900) = 59.8%
Associations between indoor climate in classrooms and children’s well-being and concentration ability
43
==PAGE:49==
A relatively high negative correlation of -0.19 was also found between the sound pressure
level and the normalized CP score in the correlation matrix. Figure 4.20 illustrates the
relationship between the normalized CP score and the sound pressure level.
Figure 4.20: Relation between normalized CP Score and sound
Although the answers are widely scattered, a clear negative correlation is shown in the
graph. When the sound pressure level increases, the pupils’ concentration performance
related to the d2 test tends to be worse. However, the scope of the project was to in-
vestigate an effect of increasing the airflow by installing a ventilation unit. The measured
sound pressure levels on test days exceed the maximum measured SPL of 40 dB(A) from
the ventilation unit. In addition, the results of the SPL measurements did not reveal that
the mean SPL increased in the classrooms with installed ventilation units. Hence, it is not
assumed, that the correlation between the normalized CP score and sound pressure level
is related to the installation of the ventilation unit, but a more general observation between
sound and concentration performance. This will not be covered more in this project.
44
Associations between indoor climate in classrooms and children’s well-being and concentration ability
==PAGE:50==
4.4
Socio-economic Benefits
The following section covers the results of the socio-economic benefit calculations. The
input for the model is presented, as well as the results of the calculations. Appendix B
presents a sheet with input and results provided by the calculation model.
4.4.1
Input
The distribution of school hours within each quality category was calculated based on the
indoor environment measurements. The distribution of the air quality and temperature
conditions can be seen in Table 4.7 and Table 4.8, respectively. The current conditions
were represented as an average of the conditions in RR1 and RR2 during phases 1, 2, 3,
and 4. The improved conditions were represented as an average of the conditions in IR1
and IR2 during phases 3 and 4. It was assumed, that these measurements were represen-
tative of the entire school year. As the results of the indoor environmental measurements
also showed in Section 2.1, increased air exchange due to the installed ventilation units
improved the environmental conditions. As expected, a longer period of occupied hours
was within the higher quality categories. The results were used as case-specific input in
the calculation model.
Table 4.7: Distribution of occupied hours within CO2 quality category
Occupied hours within category (CO2) [%]
Current
Improved
I
23.1
45.0
II
12.8
53.5
III
6.8
1.4
IV
20.2
0.1
Out of category
37.1
0.0
Table 4.8: Distribution of occupied hours within temperature quality category
Occupied hours within category (temperature) [%]
Current
Improved
I
55.5
64.8
II
30.1
28.1
III
8.7
6.8
IV
2.9
0.3
Out of category
2.7
0.0
Associations between indoor climate in classrooms and children’s well-being and concentration ability
45
==PAGE:51==
The ventilation- and school-specific input can be seen in Table 4.9 and was based on
assumptions and dialog with Skt. Klemensskolen. A part of classes in the school are
held in classrooms where indoor environment improvement is either not implemented, or
where the benefit from the improvements is low. It was assumed that 80% of the occupied
hours are held in improved classrooms.
Table 4.9: Case-specific input for the calculation model
Case-specific Input
Number
Life span of ventilation unit
20 years
School hours in improved classrooms
80%
Number of pupils
426
Number of teachers
35
4.4.2
Results
The calculation model available from Realdania (Incentive, DTU, 2023) provided an esti-
mated socio-economic potential in relation to lowered sick leave and increased learning
at Skt. Klemensskolen. The estimation was the potential gain over a period of 20 years.
By lowering the sick leave of pupils and teachers, the citizens, state, and municipality
can gain a profit of up to 12 million Danish kroner. In addition, these stakeholders can
profit up to 7.18 million Danish kroner from increased learning. However, this is with great
uncertainty and will be discussed in Chapter 5.
Figure 4.21: Socio-economic benefits of improving the air quality at Skt. Klemensskolen.
Figure inspired by (Incentive, DTU, 2023).
The investment in improving the indoor environment in classrooms is long-term, as the
short-term economic benefits are difficult to assess. Table 4.10 presents the socio-economic
profit by the yearly effect over a period of 20 years. The economic profit from the reduced
sick leave of pupils constitutes the largest part of the total economic gain. The need for
a working adult to be absent from work is reduced and the yearly effect is calculated to
be 814,000 Danish kroner. Increased pupil learning due to improved performance consti-
tutes the second largest part of the total economic gain with 23,000 DDK. Although this
economic gain is associated with great uncertainty, it is expected, that a generally higher
learning of pupils will lead to higher educated pupils with higher salaries, which will have
great socio-economic potential.
46
Associations between indoor climate in classrooms and children’s well-being and concentration ability
==PAGE:52==
Table 4.10: Socio-economic gain on time horizon based on 2019 prices
1 year effect
(DDK)
Net present value*
(mio. DDK)
Sick leave
Pupils
814,000
12.00
Teachers
22,000
0.31
Total
836,000
12.31
Increased pupil
learning
Due to improved performance
23,000
5.44
Due to reduced sick days
7,000
1.74
Total
30,000
7.18
*Profit from increased performance is based on the pupils’ total working hours on
the labor market being 50 years, which extends beyond the life of the unit in years
The possible economic gain from improving the indoor environment at Skt. Klemensskolen
accrues to both the state, the municipalities, and not least the citizens. Table 4.11 presents
the distribution of the economic gain divided by these stakeholders. The greatest gain ac-
crues to the citizens. In the shorter term, adults do not have to stay at home to take care
of sick children, and in the long term, the pupils increase their education level and thereby
their salary. However, the state and particularly the municipalities also gain a great socio-
economic profit. Hence, this shows a great reward for the state and the municipalities to
invest in improving the indoor environment in Danish schools in general.
Table 4.11: Socio-economic gain divided by stakeholders based on 2019 prices
1 year effect
(DDK)
Net present value*
(mio. DDK)
Sick leave
State
101,407
1.49
Municipality
208,381
3.07
Citizens
526,212
8
Total
836,000
12.31
Increased pupil learning
State
3,639
0.87
Municipality
7,478
1.79
Citizens
18,883
4.52
Total
30,000
7.18
* Profit from increased performance is based on the pupils’ total working hours on
the labor market being 50 years, which extends beyond the life of the unit in years
Associations between indoor climate in classrooms and children’s well-being and concentration ability
47
==PAGE:53==
48
Associations between indoor climate in classrooms and children’s well-being and concentration ability
==PAGE:54==
5
Discussion
The purpose of the project was to investigate the effect of installing ventilation units in
classrooms, the association between the indoor environment and the pupils’ well-being
and concentration performance, and finally the socio-economic benefit of improving the
indoor environment. Measurements of indoor environmental parameters were included
as well as a questionnaire concerning the well-being of the pupils and finally two concen-
tration tests. The following section discusses the findings of the analysis and compares
these with other relevant studies. Factors, which could be sources of errors in the collec-
tion of data and interpretation of results, will be discussed as well.
5.1
Discussion of findings
The analysis of the indoor environmental measurements clearly showed the effect of a
ventilation unit and having the correct regulation of it. The air quality, evaluated by the
CO2 concentration, improved noticeably in classrooms, where a decentralized ventilation
unit was installed.
The findings of the analysis were compared with the results of the mass experiment in
2021 (Toftum et al., 2022). Conditions without a ventilation unit (no improvements) were
represented by the reference rooms during phases 1, 2, 3, and 4. Conditions with a venti-
lation unit (with improvements) were represented by the intervention rooms during phases
3 and 4. Table 5.1 provides the distribution of school hours within six CO2 concentration
ranges for the conditions without improvements, with improvements, and finally, an aver-
age of 709 Danish classrooms from the Danish mass experiment in 2021 (Toftum et al.,
2022).
Table 5.1: CO2 conditions in mass experiment 2021 (Toftum et al., 2022) and at Skt.
Klemensskolen.
School hours within CO2 concentration range
CO2
Mass experiment
No improvements
With improvements
[ppm]
[%]
[%]
[%]
500-1000
47
25
60
1001-1500
18
25
40
1501-2000
17
23
0
2001-3000
11
22
0
3001-4000
7
4
0
>4000
0
0
0
The air quality in the classrooms at Skt. Klemensskolen before the improvements was
much worse than the average air quality from the mass experiment with 22% points less
school hours within the recommended maximum of 1000ppm. Conversely, the air quality
in the improved classrooms was better than in the classrooms from the mass experiment.
More than half of the school hours had acceptable air quality, and the CO2 concentration
did not exceed 1500ppm during school hours. This happened in 35% of school hours in
the mass experiment classrooms. The evaluation of the air quality in Danish classrooms
Associations between indoor climate in classrooms and children’s well-being and concentration ability
49
==PAGE:55==
from the mass experiment was an average of 709 classrooms in 234 schools. These
schools all had different building typologies, ventilation strategies, volume per pupil, etc.
Hence, it coheres, that the classrooms at Skt. Klemensskolen performed worse than the
Danish average before the improvement, and that the air quality was better than average
after the improvement. The comparison also verifies that Skt. Klemensskolen was an
ideal candidate for indoor environmental improvements.
The analysis of the pupil concentration performance illustrated a negative correlation be-
tween the air quality, measured by the CO2 concentration, and the test scores. The publi-
cation of (Wargocki et al., 2020) on findings between classroom air quality and children’s
performance in schools found this correlation as well. One of the findings was that reduc-
ing the CO2 concentration from 2400 ppm to 900 ppm would improve pupil performance
by 5%.
The analysis conducted in this study showed a performance improvement of 1.5% points
and 5.8% points from the Baddeley and d2 test, respectively. An important matter when
comparing such results is how the performance score and improvement were evaluated
in the different analyses. The Baddeley score was normalized in relation to the minimum
and maximum possible score whereas the d2 score was normalized in relation to the
minimum and maximum score in the data set on the given test day. Not only did it cause
a higher standard deviation for the d2 score, but it could also affect the magnitude of
the correlation. Wargocki et al., 2020 used previously published studies to evaluate the
performance. These studies reported school performance based on psychological tests,
school tasks, language-based tasks, national learning tests, etc. The results were either
given as absolute or relative values and the fractional change was calculated differently.
Hence, the different methodologies of evaluating school performance and relationships
could also affect the magnitude of the correlation. However, when comparing the corre-
lation based on the Baddeley test and d2 test with the meta-analysis of (Wargocki et al.,
2020), the d2 test stands out. With only a 0.8% point difference, the relationship found
corresponds to the previous meta-study very well.
The effect of using different methodologies for evaluating school performance was also
clear in the relationship used in the socio-economic calculation model. Here an optimal
performance at 100% was assumed at a CO2 concentration of 900 ppm (Madsen et al.,
2019). The performance was divided into CO2 quality categories and with concentrations
above 1750 ppm, the performance was assumed to decrease to 85%. This was a notice-
ably greater difference than found in this study. However, the method used to evaluate
correlations, and not least the magnitude of these, has great significance, as mentioned
before. Hence, this could be explanatory for the difference in this case as well.
In general, the analysis illustrated correlations between relevant indoor environmental
parameters and the well-being and concentration performance of the pupils. Although the
tendencies in the analysis followed relevant theory and previous studies, the correlation
coefficients R2, which were highlighted in the Figures 4.10, 4.11, 4.12, 4.13, 4.18, 4.19,
and 4.20 were far from 1. This means that the dispersion of the data was great and did
not fit the tendency line perfectly. As the data relied on the answers of pupils, the low R2
value indicated a great difference in human preferences when it came to well-being and
great dispersion when it came to performance level.
The calculation of the socio-economic gain supported the great potential of improving the
environmental conditions at schools. Not only does it have a short-term physical effect
on teachers and pupils, but it is possible to have great economic profit in the long term
50
Associations between indoor climate in classrooms and children’s well-being and concentration ability
==PAGE:56==
as well. However, the socio-economic calculation came with uncertainty, as many pre-
requisites were necessary to make. The calculation model was partially based on a large
study, where Danish or Scandinavian studies were highly relevant, as the school system
is more different in other countries and thus less comparable. The calculation relied on
this study, where the association between an improved indoor environment and improved
learning as well as improved learning and higher salaries became prerequisites. In ad-
dition, the calculation model was based on Danish statistics on salaries, length of work
days, times when a sick day of a child results in absence from the labor market for an
adult, etc. Several other factors than the improved indoor environment could influence
these parameters, making long-term socio-economic predictions difficult and highly un-
certain. This was also informed and highlighted in the calculation model (Incentive, DTU,
2023) and the associated article (Madsen et al., 2019).
5.2
Sources of error in the collection of data
Factors, which could interfere with the results were considered during the collection of
data. For instance, the measurement devices were placed on top of a cabinet at a child-
proof height to ensure minimum interference. However, when visiting the school it was
found, that one of the devices had changed position during the measurements, and laid
under a couch. In other cases, it was discovered that objects were placed in front of the
devices. This was expected to interfere with the measurements, but when exploring the
data no noticeable fluctuations were discovered and the data was generally used.
The roomalyzers were regularly monitored online to ensure that they had enough battery
and that they stored data continuously. In March it was found, that the sensor in IR1
needed to be restarted and had not logged any data since March 3rd, 2023. Hence on
March 9th, 2023, the roomalyzer was restarted and all batteries were renewed as well.
In this case, the data from the measurement station was used as a backup to ensure
data during the entire phase. When investigating the difference between the data from
the roomalyzer and the measurement station it was discovered, that the measurement
station measured insignificantly lower values than the roomalyzer, hence it was possible
to use this data without any changes.
The greatest source of error within the data collection was the definition of school hours
and thereby the filtration of the data. The definition of school hours was set to be 08.00
to 14.30 based on the class schedule at the school and examination of the CO2 mea-
surements. All classes began at 08.00 making it a natural start time. However, the end
of the day differed between classes, days, and times of the year. In addition, it was dis-
covered on the visits to the school, that the classes often had group work, where they left
the classrooms. The examination of the CO2 measurements revealed this as well. The
concentrations often decreased noticeably around 14.30, had a minor peak around 15.00,
after which the CO2 concentration decay began. The end of the school hours was set to
be 14.30 since the pupils most often left the classrooms at this time. Although the pupils
came back briefly around 15.00, this was only to officially end the class, and no significant
learning nor concentration was expected from the pupils at this time. It is expected, that
the inclusion of data when the children were not in the classrooms affected the results,
as the CO2 concentration would decrease when the main source (the pupils) were not
present. Hence, the air quality conditions were probably worse before the installation of
a ventilation unit than this analysis shows. However, for the sake of the project, it was
necessary to define specific school hours, which was done with great consideration of the
sources of errors mentioned above.
The results of the well-being and performance tests were evaluated with great care, as
Associations between indoor climate in classrooms and children’s well-being and concentration ability
51
==PAGE:57==
the well-being and performance of the pupils could have been affected by other factors
than the intervention. For instance, during test 2 in IR1, the average SPL was 62.7 dB
corresponding to conversation whereas RR2 had an average SPL of 46.5 dB during test
1, corresponding to a library. It is expected that noise would have an impact on the well-
being and concentration of the pupils, but this would not be from the ventilation unit, as
the measured maximum SPL from the units were 40 dB(A), but from general noise in the
classroom.
Other exterior parameters could have affected the results of the tests. One pupil high-
lighted, that she had a diagnosis of ADHD, which might have affected her results more
than the indoor environment. Other pupils had difficulties comprehending the tasks al-
though carefully explained, resulting in compromised motivation for the task. Finally, tech-
nical errors on the web page occurred for some of the pupils, and they had to restart the
test. This challenged their patience and motivation for the test as well.
5.3
Sources of error in the analysis of results
Factors, which could interfere with the results were also considered during the analysis of
the collected data. The experimental study only involved four classrooms with 77 pupils
in total. This small sample size made the results sensitive to many of the sources of error,
which are described above. For instance, this was the case on test day 4 in reference
room 2. The observations during the tests clearly showed, that with a teaching substitute,
the motivation and seriousness toward the tests were lacking. In addition, the results sup-
ported these observations, e.g. the Baddeley test results were noticeably bad on test day
4 in Reference Room 2. With the small sample size, the influence of these test results
was extensive. The correlation between the CO2 concentration and the normalized Bad-
deley score went from negative (following previous studies) to positive. This meant, that
increasing CO2 concentration now improved the concentration performance according to
the data which included the results from Reference Room 2 on test day 4. With a larger
test sample, a test day as described above, would probably not have influenced the re-
sults and analysis as extensively as in this case. However, due to the sources of errors
clearly observed during the test and the extensive influence of the following analysis, it
was reasonable to discard data from Reference Room 2 on test day 4.
5.4
Future work
In this project, only uni-variate analyses were conducted based on indoor environment
measurements, subjective evaluations, and concentration performance tests. However,
it is highly realistic that co-founding factors were explanatory for the concentration perfor-
mance, as previous studies also suggest this (Woo et al., 2022). With the large amount
of data collected in this project, a multivariable regression analysis could be conducted in
a more comprehensive analysis.
In addition, the data was collected over a period from September to April. It would have
been preferable with available data for an entire year both with and without ventilation units
in the classrooms, as it would provide a more complete documentation of the full effect of
the ventilation units. The comparison with mass experiment 2021 and calculation of the
socio-economic benefit would have been more representative then.
Finally, the analysis of the socio-economic benefit was based on the frequency of sick days
of pupils and teachers affected by the improvement of the indoor environment, among
others. For future work, the number of sick days of pupils and teachers could be tracked
before and after the indoor environment improvement in order to confirm or deny the
assumptions made in the calculation model.
52
Associations between indoor climate in classrooms and children’s well-being and concentration ability
==PAGE:58==
6
Conclusion
In this project, the effect of installing a ventilation unit in classrooms was investigated. Skt.
Klemensskolen located in Odense, Denmark was used as a case study. Four classrooms
that were either retrofitted with decentralized ventilation systems or not (references) were
included in the project. The indoor environmental conditions were evaluated and associa-
tions between indoor environmental parameters and pupils’ well-being and concentration
performance were investigated. Improving the indoor environment has a socio-economic
benefit for the citizens, municipalities, and the state, which was also in the scope of the
project.
The indoor environmental parameters CO2 concentration, temperature, relative humidity,
and sound were monitored in all classrooms. Data from the period of September 2022
to April 2023 was collected and divided into four phases representing different ventilation
conditions and seasons. The well-being of the pupils was evaluated through a question-
naire concerning discomfort and symptoms. The concentration performance of the pupils
was evaluated using the graphic Baddeley test and the d2 test. The questionnaire con-
cerning well-being and the two concentration performance tests were conducted during
classes on Thursday afternoon. Four rounds of testing were conducted.
The analysis of the results revealed poor air quality in all classrooms prior to the instal-
lation of ventilation units. With CO2 concentrations reaching 4000 ppm in some of the
classrooms, the currently recommended limit of 1000 ppm was exceeded noticeably. By
installing decentralized ventilation units in two of the classrooms, the air quality improved.
The percentage of school hours with acceptable air quality increased from around 30% to
around 60% in intervention room 1. The greatest impact in intervention room 2 was seen
in the maximum CO2 concentrations which decreased from around 3000 ppm to around
1400 ppm. Room temperature and relative humidity were generally found acceptable in
the classrooms regardless of the intervention. Complaints of ventilation noise from teach-
ers were verified through sound measurements, as the noise level reached 40 dB(A) at a
fan speed of 100%.
Correlational analysis revealed relationships between the CO2 concentration and the
pupils’ perception of the air. In addition, relationships were found between the room tem-
perature and the annoyance from draught and the experienced temperature. According
to the analysis, a temperature of 23.5°C was preferred, which aligned with the comfort
range.
Linear correlational analysis also revealed a relationship between the CO2 concentration
and the concentration performance evaluated by the graphic Baddeley test and d2 test.
By lowering the CO2 concentration from 2400 ppm to 900 ppm, the results of the two tests
reported an improvement of concentration performance of 1.5% points and 5.8% points,
respectively.
The calculated socio-economic benefit of improving the indoor environment at Skt. Kle-
mensskole showed a great profit. 12 M Danish kroner could be gained by lowering the
sick leave of pupils and teachers. in addition, a profit of 7.18 M Danish kroner was also
expected by increasing the performance of pupils.
The findings of the project were aligned with theory and previous studies investigating the
effect of ventilation on pupil well-being and performance. Although it was not possible to
Associations between indoor climate in classrooms and children’s well-being and concentration ability
53
==PAGE:59==
obtain a statistical significance of the findings, the tendency confirms the previous studies
and supplements the current knowledge. A more comprehensive analysis and similar
experiments are desirable to expand the knowledge within this field.
54
Associations between indoor climate in classrooms and children’s well-being and concentration ability
==PAGE:60==
Bibliography
Allermann, L., Meyer, H. W., Poulsen, O. M., Nielsen, J. B., & Gyntelberg, F. (2003). In-
flammatory potential of dust from schools and building related symptoms. Occupa-
tional and Environmental Medicine, 60(9), E5. https://doi.org/10.1136/oem.60.9.e5
Anderberg Klima A/S. (2023). Roomalyzer [Accessed 18. May 2023]. https://anderbergklima.
dk/k/maaleinstrumenter/dataloggere/roomalyzer
Baddeley, A. (1968). A 3 min reasoning test based on grammatical transformation. Psy-
chonomic Science, 10(10), 341–. https://doi.org/10.3758/BF03331551
Bienfait, D., Fitzner, K., Lindvall, T., Seppänen, O., Woolliscroft, M., Fanger, P. O., Jan-
tunen, M., Skåret, E., & Schlatter, J. (1992). Report no. 11 guidelines for ventilation
requirements in buildings. Commission of the European Communities.
Børne- og undervisningsministeriet. (2022). Undervisningstidens samlede længde [Ac-
cessed 4. Nov. 2022]. https://www.uvm.dk/folkeskolen/fag-timetal-og-overgange/
undervisningens-samlede-laengde
BR18. (2023). Lydforhold - - Vejledning til undervisningsbygninger [Accessed 29. May.
2023]. https://bygningsreglementet.dk/Tekniske-bestemmelser/17/Vejledninger/
Undervisningsbygninger
BR18. (2022). Ventilation - Ventilation af daginstitutioner og undervisningsrum [Accessed
3. Nov. 2022]. https://bygningsreglementet.dk/Tekniske-bestemmelser/22/Krav/447
Branche Fællesskab Arbejdsmiljø. (2023a). Forstå dB-skalaen på 2 minutter [Accessed 5.
Apr. 2023]. https://www.arbejdsmiljoweb.dk/stoej-lys-luft/stoej-paa-arbejdspladsen/
fakta-om-stoej/forstaa-db-skalaen
Branche Fællesskab Arbejdsmiljø. (2022). Mekanisk ventilation og arbejdsmiljø [Accessed
16. Nov. 2022]. https://www.indeklimaportalen.dk/luftkvalitet/ventilation/ventilationstyper/
mekanisk_ventilation
Branche Fællesskab Arbejdsmiljø. (2023b). Værd at vide om luftfugtighed [Accessed 22.
May 2023]. https://www.indeklimaportalen.dk/luftkvalitet/luftfugtighed/toer_luft
Brockhoff, P. B., Møller, J. K., Andersen, E. W., Bacher, P., & Christiansen, L. E. (2018).
Introduction to statistics at dtu.
Clausen, G. (2021). Indoor air quality brush up.
Clausen, G., Toftum, J., Bekö, G., Dam-Krogh, E. P., Fangel, A. B., & Andersen, K. (2017).
Indeklima i skoler.
Danish Standards Association. (2019a). Energy performance of buildings – Ventilation for
buildings – Part 1: Indoor environmental input parameters for design and assess-
ment of energy performance of buildings addressing indoor air quality, thermal
environment, lighting and acoustics - Module M1-6.
Danish Standards Association. (2019b). Energy performance of buildings – Ventilation for
buildings – Part 2: Interpretation of the requirements in EN 16798-1 – Indoor envi-
ronmental input parameters for design and assessment of energy performance of
buildings addressing indoor air quality, thermal environment, lighting and acous-
tics.
Associations between indoor climate in classrooms and children’s well-being and concentration ability
55
==PAGE:61==
Danish Standards Assosiations. (2006). DS/EN ISO 7730: Ergonomics of the thermal
environment - Analytical determination and interpretation of thermal comfort using
calculation of the PMV and PPD indices and local thermal comfort criteria.
Danish Standards Assosiations. (2018). Energy performance of buildings - Overall energy
performance assessment procedures - Part 2: Guideline for using indoor environ-
mental input parameters for the design and assessment of energy performance of
buildings.
Danmarks statistik. (2022). Grundskole [Accessed 10. Nov. 2022]. https://www.dst.dk/
da/Statistik/emner/uddannelse-og-forskning/fuldtidsuddannelser/grundskole
Etheridge, D. (2012). Natural ventilation of buildings - theory, measurements and design.
Department of Architecture; Built Environment, University of Nottingham, UK.
Exhausto. (2022a). Decentral ventilation til skoler og andre institutioner [Accessed 31.
Oct. 2022]. https://www.exhausto.dk/projektering/Learning-s---s-Skoleventilation/
Design-s-af-s-system/Decentral-s-ventilation
Exhausto. (2022b). Dex3000 leistungsstarke lüftungstechnik für alle fälle [Accessed 03.
Apr. 2023]. https://www.exhausto.de/Produkte/Decentralised/DEX3000
Haverinen-Shaughnessy, U., Moschandreas, D. J., & Shaughnessy, R. J. (2011). Asso-
ciation between substandard classroom ventilation rates and students’ academic
achievement. Indoor Air, 21(2), 121–131. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1600-0668.
2010.00686.x
Høreforeningen. (2023). Lydniveauer [Accessed 16. May 2023]. https://hoereforeningen.
dk/viden-om/stoej/lydniveauer
Incentive, DTU. (2023). Samfundsøkonomiske gevinster ved forbedret indeklima i skolen.
En model for beregning af gevinster ved reduceret CO2 og temperatur [Calcu-
lation model, Excel]. https : / / realdania . dk / publikationer / faglige - publikationer /
samfundsoekonomiske-gevinster-ved-forbedret-indeklima
Jacobsen, F., Poulsen, T., Rindel, J. H., Gade, A. C., & Ohlrich, M. (2011). Fundamentals
of acoustics and noise control. Department of Electrical Engineering, Technical
University of Denmark.
Jakobsen, A., & Kolarik, J. (2018). Endrin fm-lærebog for maskinmester- og ingeniørstud-
erende. Technical University of Denmark.
Lutron Instruments. (2023). Sound -level meter LUTRON SL-4023SD [Accessed 23. May
2023]. https://www.lutroninstruments.eu/sound--noise/sound-level-meter-lutron-sl-
4023sd
Madsen, M., Hauberg, D. S., Kolstrup, K., & Toftum, J. (2019). Samfundsøkonomiske
gevinster ved forbedret indeklima.
Maekawa, Z., Rindel, J. H., & Lord, P. (2011). Environmental and architectural acoustics
second edition. Spon Press.
OECD. (2019). Education at a glance 2019 [Accessed 23. May 2023]. https://doi.org/10.
1787/f8d7880d-en
Petersen, S., Jensen, K. L., Pedersen, A. L., & Rasmussen, H. S. (2016). The effect
of increased classroom ventilation rate indicated by reduced co2 concentration
56
Associations between indoor climate in classrooms and children’s well-being and concentration ability
==PAGE:62==
on the performance of schoolwork by children. Indoor Air, 26(3), 366–379. https:
//doi.org/10.1111/ina.12210
Skt. Klemensskolen. (2022). Skolen | Skt. klemensskolen [Accessed 26. Oct. 2022]. https:
//skt-klemensskolen.aula.dk/skolen
Smith Innovation & Jensen, A. (2021). Indeklima i skoler. En håndbog til at arbejde strate-
gisk med at forbedre skolernes indeklima.
Sundhedsstyrelsen. (2018). Forebyggelsespakke - indeklima i skoler.
Toftum, J. (2021). Load calculations - lecture note 11221 ventilation and climatic systems.
Toftum, J. (2004). Thermal comfort indices (A. Hedge, E. Salas, H. Hendrick, & N. Brookhuis
K.and Stanton, Eds.). Handbook of Human Factors and Ergonomics Methods.
Toftum, J., Clausen, G., & Christensen, L. (2022). Indeklima og trivsel i undervisningsmiljøer:
Resultatrapport for masseeksperiment 2021.
Vorre, M. H., Noyé, P., Maagaard, S. E., Johannsen, K. B., Østergaard, T., Sørensen,
M. K., & Andersen, M. D. A. (2021). Branchevejledning for indeklima i skoler.
Wargocki, P., Porras-Salazar, J. A., & Contreras-Espinoza, S. (2019). The relationship
between classroom temperature and children’s performance in school. Building
and Environment, 157, 197–204. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.buildenv.2019.04.046
Wargocki, P., Porras-Salazar, J. A., Contreras-Espinoza, S., & Bahnfleth, W. (2020). The
relationships between classroom air quality and children’s performance in school.
Building and Environment, 173. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.buildenv.2020.106749
Wargocki, P., & Wyon, D. P. (2013). Providing better thermal and air quality conditions in
school classrooms would be cost-effective. Building and Environment, 59, 581–
589. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.buildenv.2012.10.007
Woo, J., Rajagopalan, P., & Andamon, M. M. (2022). An evaluation of measured indoor
conditions and student performance using d2 test of attention. Building and Envi-
ronment, 214. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.buildenv.2022.108940
Zach. (2021). How to Normalize Data Between 0 and 1 - Statology [Accessed 24. May
2023]. https://www.statology.org/normalize-data-between-0-and-1
Associations between indoor climate in classrooms and children’s well-being and concentration ability
57
==PAGE:63==
A
Questionnaire
Appendix A includes the questionnaire concerning well-being that the pupils filled out on
test days. The questionnaire is in Danish since the intervention study took place in a
Danish School.
The pupils had access to the questionnaire through the following link:
https://ie.byg.dtu.dk/klemens
58
Associations between indoor climate in classrooms and children’s well-being and concentration ability
==PAGE:64==
Associations between indoor climate in classrooms and children’s well-being and concentration ability
59
==PAGE:65==
60
Associations between indoor climate in classrooms and children’s well-being and concentration ability
==PAGE:66==
B
Socio-Economic Benefit
The following Appendix presents the input for the socio-economic calculation model along
with detailed results provided by the calculation model.
Associations between indoor climate in classrooms and children’s well-being and concentration ability
61
==PAGE:67==
Resultat beregninger
Input som bruges i effektberegningerne
Fordeling af tid i hver indeklimakategori i skolerne
Kategori
CO2-koncentration 
I dag
CO2-koncentration 
Med forbedret udluftning
Temperaturniveau 
I dag
Med forbedret 
temperaturregulering
I
23%
45%
55%
65%
II
13%
54%
30%
28%
III
7%
1%
9%
7%
IV
20%
0%
3%
0%
Højere CO2-koncentration end kategori IV
37%
0%
3%
0%
Samlet fordeling af indeklima
100%
100%
100%
100%
Effekt af indeklimaforbedring 
Kategori
CO2-koncentration 
Præstation (%)
CO2-koncentration 
Tilstedeværelse (%)
Temperaturniveau 
Præstation (%)
lærere 
Tilstedeværelse (%)
I
100%
100%
92%
100.0%
II
96%
98%
87%
99.2%
III
91%
97%
85%
99.0%
IV
86%
96%
83%
98.9%
Højere CO2-koncentration end kategori IV
85%
95%
82%
98.8%
Antal skoledage pr. år
Antal skoledage pr. år
200
Antal elever og antal lærere på skolen, stk.
Antal elever på skolen
426
Antal lærere på skolen
35
Gennemsnitlig tilstedeværelse for lærere i lokaler, der får ændret indeklima, %
Andel af ugentlig arbejdstid, lærerne er til stede i lokaler, der får ændret indeklima, %
50%
Forbedringsandel, %
Andel af alle elevtimer, der gennemføres i lokaler, der får ændret indeklima
80%
Associations between indoor climate in classrooms and children’s well-being and concentration ability
==PAGE:68==
Sygefraværsinput
Andel af sygedage, som medfører fravær fra arbejdsmarkedet for en voksen 
31%
Løninput
Løn for voksen pr. arbejdsdag (kr.)
1,928
Løn for lærere pr. arbejdsdag (kr.)
2,011
Antal arbejdsdage pr. år
216
Højere løn pr. år pr. ekstra års skolegang, %
2%
Lønindkomst pr. forælder/år
416,531
Samlet præstationsgevinst pr. elev/år
8,331
Indlæringsinput
Andel af læring ved lektier lavet hjemme, i udeskole, osv., %
10%
Andel af præstationsforbedring, som kan omsættes til øget timeantal, %
100%
Effektberegninger
Sygedage
For elever
Ændring i antal elevsygedage pr. år som følge af indeklimaforbedring
I dag
Med forbedret udluftning
Tilstedeværelse (%)
96.9%
98.9%
Antal sygedage pr. elev pr. år
6.2
2.232
Ændring i antal sygedage pr. elev pr. år
Dage
Ændring i antal sygedage pr. elev pr. år (ikke korrigeret for at nogle timer gennemføres i lokaler uden indeklimaforbedring)
4.0
Ændring i antal sygedage pr. elev pr. år (korrigeret for at nogle timer gennemføres i lokaler uden indeklimaforbedring)
3.2
For lærere
Ændring i antal læresygedage pr. år som følge af indeklimaforbedring
Associations between indoor climate in classrooms and children’s well-being and concentration ability
==PAGE:69==
I dag
Med forbedret udluftning
Tilstedeværelse (%)
99.2%
99.6%
Antal sygedage pr. lærer pr. år
1.7
0.8862
Ændring i antal sygedage pr. lærer pr. år
Dage
Ændring i antal sygedage pr. lærer pr. år (ikke korrigeret for at nogle timer gennemføres i lokaler uden indeklimaforbedring)
0.8
Ændring i antal sygedage pr. lærer pr. år (korrigeret for at nogle timer gennemføres i lokaler uden indeklimaforbedring)
0.6
0.3
Samlet ændring i antallet af sygedage pr. år
Dage
Ændring i antal elevsygedage pr. år
1,368
Ændring i antal lærersygedage pr. år
11.05055071
Antal sygedage pr. år, hvor eleverne skal passes af en voksen
Antal dage pr. år, hvor forældre passer en syg elev
422
Gevinster ved reduceret sygefravær pr. år, kr./år
Samlet gevinst ved reduceret sygefravær for eleverne, kr./år
813,939
Samlet gevinst ved reduceret sygefravær for lærere, kr./år
22,224
Procentvis reduktion i antal sygedage pr. elev pr. år
Procentvis reduktion i antallet af sygedage pr. elev pr. år
64%
Note: Et positivt tal betyder, at sygefraværet er reduceret i forhold til i dag.
Procentvis øget tilstedeværelse for eleverne pr. år
Procentvis øget tilstedeværelse pr. år
1.86%
Præstation/indlæring
Ændring i præstation som følge af justering af CO2-koncentrationen
I dag
Med forbedret udluftning
Præstation (%)
90.4%
97.7%
Procentvis øget præstation (ikke korrigeret for at nogle timer gennemføres i lokaler uden indeklimaforbedring)
8.10%
Procentvis øget præstation (korrigeret for at nogle timer gennemføres i lokaler uden indeklimaforbedring)
6.48%
Ændring i antal sygedage pr. lærer pr. år (korrigeret for at nogle timer gennemføres i lokaler uden indeklimaforbedring, og 
for andelen af den ugentlige arbejdstid lærere er tilstede i lokaler, der får ændret indeklima)
Associations between indoor climate in classrooms and children’s well-being and concentration ability
==PAGE:70==
Procentvis øget indlæring
5.83%
Ændring i præstation som følge af justering af temperaturniveauet
I dag
Med forbedret udluftning
Præstation (%)
89.3%
90.1%
Procentvis øget præstation (ikke korrigeret for at nogle timer gennemføres i lokaler uden indeklimaforbedring)
0.89%
Procentvis øget præstation (korrigeret for at nogle timer gennemføres i lokaler uden indeklimaforbedring)
0.71%
Procentvis øget indlæring
0.64%
Indeklimaparameter med størst betydning for præstation/indlæring
5.83%
Gevinster ved øget indlæring, kr./elevårgang
Samlet gevinst ved øget indlæring som følge af forbedret præstation
23,005
Samlet gevinst ved øget indlæring som følge af reduceret antal sygedage
7,352
Nøgletal
Arbejdsudbudseffekt ved én dags reduceret sygefravær for eleverne
595
Associations between indoor climate in classrooms and children’s well-being and concentration ability
==PAGE:71==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Bygningstorvet, Building 115
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.sustain.dtu.dk
