==PAGE:1==
Prediction of dyslexia using eye tracking
Automated detection of reading pattern differences for normal readers
compared to people with dyslexia
Master Thesis
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
==PAGE:2==
Prediction of dyslexia using eye tracking
Automated detection of reading pattern differences for normal readers compared to peo­
ple with dyslexia
Master Thesis
June, 2023
By
Cecilie Elisabeth Sejer Jürgens
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Tobii, 2023
Published by:
DTU, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science,
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 321, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
==PAGE:3==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over five months at the Department of Applied Mathematics
and Computer Science, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment
for the degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng in Human­Centered Artificial
Intelligence.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of statistics, machine
learning and deep learning.
Cecilie Elisabeth Sejer Jürgens ­ s173673
Signature
Date
Prediction of dyslexia using eye tracking
ii
04/06/2023
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
Dyslexia is the most common learning disorder in the world. People with undiagnosed
dyslexia, can’t get the helping aids they need, which affects their learning ability. It is
crucial to correctly diagnose dyslexia as early as possible, to provide the best prerequisites
for their future. Today, one has to be selected by the teacher/professor, in order to get
a dyslexia test. This is a very subjective and biased selection. Therefore a new efficient
and objective method have to be introduced. It is proven that through eye movements
during reading, dyslexic readers can be differentiated from normal readers. These eye
movements can be recorded using eye tracking. High qualitative eye trackers are very
expensive, which is why webcam eye tracking is getting more popular. However, it is still
unknown, how well webcam eye tracking performs on tasks, that the high qualitative eye
tracking can solve.
This thesis examines the use of two different eye tracking data, to predict dyslexia; desk­
top eye tracking and webcam eye tracking. The data collected was based on 26 respon­
dents, both normal and dyslexic readers, all having Danish as their native language. The
pre­processing included extracting features and the x­coordinates of the gaze, to analyse
the data in two different ways. Using different machine learning models and neural net­
works, it was possible to achieve a good prediction of the two classes. The best result
was 95.88% accuracy using the Support Vector Machine with feature selection for both
the desktop­ and the webcam eye tracking data. This shows that highly accurate pre­
dictions of dyslexia can be obtained using low resolution eye tracking, which is a good
foundation for establishing a new screening tool for diagnosing dyslexia.
Prediction of dyslexia using eye tracking
iii
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
I would like to give a special thanks to my supervisor Per Bækgaard, Associate Professor,
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science, Technical University of Den­
mark. His guidance and feedback throughout the past five months have been very helpful
for completing this thesis. I would like to thank all the people helping me from iMotions.
It has been great to learn, how to collect data using eye trackers and how to use their
software to create a study. It is much appreciated, that I had the opportunity to borrow
their equipment and got the help to process the webcam recordings into eye tracking data.
This made the best foundation for the data collection. A big thanks to all the respondents,
who wanted to use their time to come into the office and participate in the recordings of
the study. Lastly, I would like to thank my family, friends and fellow students. Their help
and support have been very valuable in the process of making this thesis.
Prediction of dyslexia using eye tracking
iv
==PAGE:6==
Abbrevations
1D
One Dimensional
ANN
Artificial Neural Network
ANOVA
Analysis of Variance
BL
Baseline
CNN
Convolutional Neural Network
CV
Cross Validation
DL
Deep Learning
dva
dynamic visual acuity
EM
Eye Movements
ET
Eye Tracking
FC
Fully Connected
FN
False Negative
FNN
Feed­Forwaed Neural Network
FP
False Positive
fps
frames per second
FS
Feature Selection
GD
Gradient Descent
HMM
Hidden Markov Models
HPT
Hyper­parameter Tuning
HR
High Risk
KNN
K­Nearest Neighbors
LASSO
Least Absolute Shrinkage and Selection Operator
LOGO
Leave One Group Out
LR
Logistic Regression
LR
Low Risk
ML
Machine Learning
NN
Neural Network
PCA
Principal Component Analysis
PCCR
Pupil Center Corneal Reflections
PSO
Particle Swarm Optimization
RBF
Radial basis function
ReLU
Rectified linear unit
Prediction of dyslexia using eye tracking
v
==PAGE:7==
RF
Random Forest
RFE
Recursive Feature Elimination
RNN
Recurrent Neural Network
SGD
Stochastic Gradient Descent
SGKF
Stratified Group K­Fold
SVM easilyeas
Support Vector Machine
TN
True Negative
TP
True Positive
XGB or XGBoost
Extreme Gradient Boost
Prediction of dyslexia using eye tracking
vi
==PAGE:8==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
Abbrevations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
v
1
Introduction
1
2
Background
3
2.1
Dyslexia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Eye movements in reading
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.3
Eye tracking . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3
Related work
11
3.1
Literature search . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.2
Machine learning methods for predicting dyslexia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
3.3
Neural network methods for predicting dyslexia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
3.4
Low resolution eye tracking for predicting dyslexia
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
3.5
Summary of literature
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
4
Problem statement
17
5
Methods
19
5.1
Data collection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
5.2
Data pre­processing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
5.3
Feature selection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
5.4
Model training . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
5.5
Models
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
5.6
Evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
6
Results
40
6.1
Data exploration
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
6.2
Baseline model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 44
6.3
Results using aggregated data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
Prediction of dyslexia using eye tracking
vii
==PAGE:9==
6.4
Results using X gaze signal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 61
6.5
Summary of results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 66
7
Discussion
68
7.1
Prediction of dyslexia
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 68
7.2
Limitations of the data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 70
7.3
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 71
8
Conclusion
73
Bibliography
74
A Appendix
79
A.1 Additional results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 79
A.2 Questionare . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 86
Prediction of dyslexia using eye tracking
viii
==PAGE:10==
1
Introduction
Dyslexia is the most common learning disability. 9­12 % of the world population are diag­
nosed with dyslexia, but it is estimated to be up to 20% [1]. If identified and treated early on
in the education, promising results is seen for their reading skills. Unfortunately, many are
not diagnosed before later in their lives. For one having undiagnosed dyslexia, complet­
ing an education can feel very difficult, even if the intelligence level is normal. This makes
the individual less confident about own abilities, also socially. Potentially, this can lead
to the individual having to give up on the dream education or dream job. The reason for
many individuals not being diagnosed correctly is due to the current testing methods. The
teacher/professional have to select one, if they suspect them showing signs of dyslexia,
before one can be tested [2]. This is a very inefficient method, which only detect indi­
viduals having clear signs of dyslexia. A more objective and effective screening method
needs to be introduced.
An objective solution to identifying dyslexia could be using eye tracking. Biosensors in
general have shown great success of measuring different biosignals, where abnormal­
ity in these measurements can be a sign of a disease. Through research it has been
proven, that differences between dyslexia and normal readers can be identified in eye
movements during reading [3]. Eye tracking is the recording of the position of the gaze
measured through a camera and an infrared light. Using a high quality eye tracker this
position can be found with high accuracy. Analysing the eye tracking data with different
machine learning algorithms, would make it possible to identify the differences in the read­
ing patterns, and make the prediction automated and fast. However, most biosensors are
expensive, including eye trackers. This makes the testing limited to the ones, who can
afford such equipment. An alternative solution to regular eye tracking is using webcam
eye tracking. This have started to become more popular, as it is way cheaper and more
accessible. Using this type of eye tracker, one have to compromise on the quality and
accuracy of the recordings. The algorithms converting the videos are improved and show
good results for the correct conditions [4]. Yet, it is still unknown if it is possible to use
webcam eye tracking for tasks that higher quality eye trackers can solve.
This study will examine the use of different eye tracking data to predict dyslexia. This
Prediction of dyslexia using eye tracking
1
==PAGE:11==
will be based on the differences found in the reading patterns of a normal reader and a
dyslexic reader. Eye tracking data will be collected using both a desktop eye tracker and
a webcam eye tracker. The data will be processed into different data types and analysed
using different machine learning algorithms. The results will be compared and discussed
in order to conclude, if it is possible to predict dyslexia from both desktop­ and webcam
eye tracking data. If this is the case, this could be the beginning of making a new, cheap
and fast screening tool for diagnosing dyslexia.
Prediction of dyslexia using eye tracking
2
==PAGE:12==
2
Background
This chapter introduces the underlying theory, necessary to understand and produce the
results of the project. This includes an introduction to dyslexia, an overview of the eye
movement during reading, how that affects the pattern for a dyslexic reader and how eye
tracking can be used to record those eye movements.
2.1
Dyslexia
Dyslexia is a learning disorder, which primarily affect the skill of reading and understand­
ing, what has been read. This can lead to poor spelling and writing skills [5]. Though, it
also affects the way information is processed resulting in memory difficulties [6]. Around
9­12% of the world populations is estimated to be dyslexic, with 2­4% having severe symp­
toms [6]. This means that it is the most common learning disability. Though up to 20%
of the world population show some degree of symptoms for dyslexia, as younger student
are tested more frequently than previously [1]. The intelligence level is not affected by
having dyslexia [7]. Instead people with dyslexia are likely to think more visual and cre­
atively. If diagnosed with dyslexia there is a higher risk of also being diagnosed with other
disorders, like attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), developmental language
disorder (DLD) or dyscalculia [6]. More males are identified as dyslexic than females, but
this is proven to be a referral bias among teachers and professionals, as these are the
one to determine if a student needs to be tested. In addition, as more males are diag­
nosed with ADHD, and there is a correlation between having ADHD and other learning
disorders, this could influence the choice of having more males being tested for dyslexia.
In reality this distribution is estimated to be more or less equal [8]. There are two different
types of dyslexia. Acquired dyslexia refers to the types, who once where able to read
normally, but as a result of a brain damage lost this ability [7]. Developmental dyslexia
refers to the types who from birth had difficulties in the process of learning to read. This
project will only concern developmental dyslexia.
Many parameters can influence why one develop dyslexia. Neuroimaging techniques
have shown correlations between both functional and structural differences in the brain
[9]. Some people show less activation in parts of the left hemisphere of the brain involved
with reading. This is for example found as an interactive role of cerebellum and cerebral
Prediction of dyslexia using eye tracking
3
==PAGE:13==
cortex as well as other brains structures in reading. Genetics show to have the highest
impact of being dyslexic, but minimizing the environmental risks reduces the difficulties
quite a lot [9]. There is a higher risk of having dyslexia if other relatives in the family
have also been diagnosed with dyslexia. Though, back in time this wasn’t something
that was tested, therefore many elderly or adults might be dyslexic, but have never had it
confirmed.
Dyslexia cannot be cured, but a lot can help in improving the reading skills. Today, when
a child is diagnosed with dyslexia, they get the option to use helping aid for reading and
spelling. Most helping aids are technological helping with reading and spelling (refereed
to as LST in Denmark) [10]. These technologies reads text out load and recommends,
which words to write and how to spell them. This helps the dyslexic to ease the reading
tasks in school and finish their education in the same manner as normal readers. If the
dyslexic is not diagnosed, they will not be offered the use of the helping aids, which will
affect their confidence and well­being, as they struggle to perform well in school. On
the other hand, using the helping aids makes the child very visible of having dyslexia for
the other children. If not diagnosed correctly this can have a negative effect, as it can
make them more exposed for bullying. Therefore it is essential to use the correct testing
methods in order to make the true diagnose.
2.1.1
Current testing methods
Already from 3rd grade the first test and diagnosis of dyslexia can me made [11]. This
is a huge benefit if it is already identified this early in the school time of the children, as
they can have the correct treatment and help throughout their learning process. The test
described in this project is based on the Danish testing system. The test involve reading,
sound and spelling tasks. The evaluation is based on the number of correct answers and
time spend on finishing the test. The result of the test categorizes the child in either the
red, yellow or green group. Red is severe dyslexia, yellow is showing some symptoms
of dyslexia and green is normal reader. If any test person is categorized as ”red” reader,
the diagnose is made. If it is categorized as ”yellow” reader, more tests are needed in
order to confirm one or the other. This method has been used for many years. Based on
the result a specialist has to subjectively evaluate what symptoms led to categorize one
into the red/yellow category, and if more test are needed. This can influence the outcome
and lead to misdiagnosing in some cases. This is why more objective and less extensive
methods of diagnosing dyslexia is needed.
Prediction of dyslexia using eye tracking
4
==PAGE:14==
Optimally, dyslexia should be identified in individuals as early as possible, but this is not
the case for many people with dyslexia. Though, children with unidentified dyslexia still
manage to learn how to read, spell and write, but in a slower manner. Therefore the
signs of dyslexia changes over the ages and test are different depending on if it is aiming
children or adults. In table 2.1 an overview of general signs of children vs adults with
dyslexia is showed.
Signs of dyslexia for children
Signs of dyslexia for adults
• Slow reading progress.
• Confuse visually similar words.
• Difficult to blend letters together.
• Spell erratically.
• Unusual pronunciation of words.
• Difficult to scan/skim a text.
• Difficulty in syllable division.
• Read/write slowly.
• Difficulty knowing beginning and
• Get confused when given several
endings of words
instructions at once.
• Poor comprehension when reading.
• Re­read paragraphs to understand.
• Hesitant and laboured reading.
• Difficult to concentrate if there are
• Missing out or adds word when
distractions.
reading.
• Difficulty organising thoughts on
• Fails to recognise familiar words.
paper.
• Looses the point of a story being
• Often forget conversations or
read.
important dates.
Table 2.1: Signs of dyslexia for children [12] and for adults [13].
Most of these signs are currently detected through the behavior. Yet, a reading pattern can
also show signs of dyslexia, which can be analysed through the eye movements during
reading. This is a valuable insight in order of diagnosing dyslexia more objectively.
2.2
Eye movements in reading
When reading a text, the eyes slide over the words one by one, line by line, in order to
read them. This pattern can be explained with various eye movements (EM). The station­
ary point, where the reader is focusing their eyes on a word, is called a fixation. Fixations
last for around 200­300 ms [14]. The first word in a sentence generally have the largest
fixation, whereas the last fixation point tend to be the smallest. Competent readers make
around 4­5 fixations per second [15]. The rapidly sliding movements between each fixa­
tion is called a saccade. Saccades are fast movements and last for 20­200 ms. This is the
Prediction of dyslexia using eye tracking
5
==PAGE:15==
fastest motor movements humans can make [15]. These generally span between 7­10
letters, depending on the difficulty of the text. Figure 2.1 illustrates the EM during reading.
Fixations are visualized as circles, whereby the diameter of the circle describes the du­
ration of a fixation. Saccades are represented as connecting lines between the fixations,
where an arrow shows in which direction the movement is. 15­25% of the saccades are
backwards, also called regressions, however this number increases when the difficulty of
the text increases [14]. The reason for relying this much on saccades when reading, is
because of the limited visual acuity shown in figure 2.2. Only the center of our vision is
highly accurate. As little as about 2 degrees of the visual angle is 100% accurate [15].
Figure 2.1: Eye movements illustrated during reading. Fixations are shown as orange circles where the
duration of the fixation in shown by the diameter. Saccades are shown as blue arrows connecting the fixations.
(Inspiration from source: [16])
Figure 2.2: The limited visual acuity shown during reading. The center of the focus is the fixation point.
(Inspiration from source: [17])
These EM are characteristic for reading and abnormal patterns in these movements can
be a sign of various types of diseases or disorders. One disorder which is proven to be
identified through abnormal EM is dyslexia.
2.2.1
Eye movements in reading for normal readers vs. dyslexia
The reading pattern of a normal reader generally includes similar sizes and duration of the
EM that form a consistently pattern resembling a staircase, see figure 2.3a. Saccades are
longer and duration of fixations are shorter, which indicates that more words are skipped
and the meaning behind the words are quickly understood [3]. Not all normal readers
are fast readers, but this doesn’t mean they are dyslexic. This sub category of normal
readers have a slightly deviating reading pattern from the normal, see figure 2.3b. As
Prediction of dyslexia using eye tracking
6
==PAGE:16==
they read slower the saccades are smaller and the duration of the fixations are longer
[3]. Though, the pattern of the EM is similar to normal readers, only with smaller steps
on the staircase. The pattern for dyslexic readers are a bit more randomized and slower,
see figure 2.3c. The EM are erratic and scattered all over the line. Saccades are shorter
and duration of fixations are longer. Yet, the biggest difference is the number and size of
regressions. They vary a lot in size, appear more frequently in clusters of two or more and
are often bigger than the preceding saccade [3]. As the age of the readers and the practise
of the reading increases, the EM patterns of dyslexic readers become more similar to
slow readers. Reading, as other skills, is developed and improved through training. For
instance highly educated dyslexic readers tend to have a more normal reading pattern,
due to the amount of reading required. These eye movements during reading can be
tracked and recorded using eye tracking.
(a) Eye movements of normal reader during reading.
(b) Eye Movements of slow reader during reading.
(c) Eye movements of dyslexia during reading.
Figure 2.3: The eye movements during reading shown for the three different types of readers. The X­axis
show the time and the y­axis show the x­coordinates of the gaze point. Inspiration from source: [3])
2.3
Eye tracking
Eye tracking (ET) is a process of measuring the position and movement of the point of
gaze of the eyes. These measurements are recorded using an eye tracker. The eye
tracker works by directing a camera with a infrared light illumination towards the center
of the eyes, the pupil [18]. This will show as reflections in both the pupil and the cornea,
also called pupil center corneal reflections (PCCR), and this reflection is tracked by the
infrared cameras. The system will use the images of these reflections and processes it
using the vector between the pupil center and the corneal reflections, to provide a gaze
Prediction of dyslexia using eye tracking
7
==PAGE:17==
point in x­ and y­coordinates, according to the visual field. The importance of using the
infrared light, is due to the high accuracy of the gaze direction [19]. This is due to the
infrared light creating great contrast between the pupil and the iris, so the pupil and cornea
are easily detected. There are two general types of infrared eye­tracking techniques; the
bright pupil system and the dark pupil system [20]. The differences between these two are
mainly the position of the infrared light source. The bright pupil system uses the infrared
light source on the same axis as the camera, which causes the light to reflect the retina
through the pupil. This is similar to the ”red eye” effect seen in photographs. This method
generally works best in dimly lit rooms, with consistent illumination and with pale blue
eyed respondents. The dark pupil system uses the infrared light source off­axis from the
camera, which causes the light to enter the eye, reflect off of the retina and exit the eye
off­axis away from the camera. This makes the pupil appear darker than the rest of the
eye [21]. This method is more robust to varying light conditions and dark eyed or small
pupil sized respondents. Figure 2.4 illustrates the differences in the two methods.
Figure 2.4: The bright pupil system, the the dark pupil system and the respectively resulting images. (Inspi­
ration from source: [20])
Comparing the two methods bright­pupil tracking creates greater contrast between iris and
pupil, allowing the eye tracking to be more robust. This method also reduces interference
caused by features that are obscuring, like eyelashes, and allows eye tracking in both
bright and dark light conditions. This is why this will be the preferred type of eye tracking.
Eye trackers can be either screen­based or glasses. A screen­based eye tracker, also
Prediction of dyslexia using eye tracking
8
==PAGE:18==
called desktop eye trackers, is a rectangular black box mounted at the bottom of a display
or laptop screen. This means that the eye tracker is not attached to the respondent and
record gaze points from a distance. The respondent sits in front of this screen, when the
eye tracker is recording, which requires the observed material to be shown on a screen
[18]. Eye tracking glasses on the other hand records gaze points from a close range. This
type of eye tracking is mounted into light weighted glass frames, that the respondent have
to wear. The gaze of the respondent is recorded while they move freely around and their
field of view is constantly changing [18]. Examples of the two types of eye trackers can
be seen in figure 2.5.
(a) Desktop eye tracker (Source: [22]).
(b) Eye tracking glasses (Source: [23]).
Figure 2.5: Two different types of eye trackers.
There are pros and cons using both eye trackers, so the eye tracker has to be thorough
selected for each study. As a rule of thumb, if the study can be made while sitting still, the
desktop eye tracker is preferred, as this is a more accurate method since the only thing
moving is their eyes [18]. However, some studies needs to be done out in the ”real world”,
which makes the eye tracking glasses the best option. The precision of the eye tracker
also depends on the sampling frequency. The range of sampling frequencies of different
eye trackers vary a lot, but the prices matches the performance [24]. This means that eye
trackers are not something everyone can afford, which limit the usage of eye tracking.
2.3.1
Eye tracking using webcam
Eye tracking can also be done using a web camera. This makes it possible to do a more
versatile setup, but one have to compromise on the quality of the results. The webcam
eye tracking works in the same way as the desktop eye tracker, but without the infrared
light. The eyes of the respondent are recorded like a normal video, with the recommended
distance to the webcam. Then the recording is processed by an algorithm, which uses
image analysis to detect the pupil of the eyes, in order to match it with the field of view
Prediction of dyslexia using eye tracking
9
==PAGE:19==
of the screen and identify the coordinates of the gaze [25]. Comparing the accuracy of
webcam eye tracking with desktop eye tracking the dynamic visual acuity (dva) can be
used, which is the ability to resolve fine spatial detail in dynamic objects during head
fixation, or in static objects during head or body rotation. Webcam eye tracking have a
dva of 5 on average, whereas the desktop eye tracker have a dva of 0.6 [4]. Though the
uncertainty of the webcam eye tracking is highly affected by the environment condition
like the light, the movement of the respondent, if the respondent is wearing glasses and
so on. But even with the perfect condition, the accuracy of the webcam eye tracking is
still 3.0 dva, which is far from the desktop eye tracking [4]. This shows that high prices
also follows with high quality, but webcam eye tracking can open up for more use cases.
Prediction of dyslexia using eye tracking
10
==PAGE:20==
3
Related work
This chapter explains the procedure of how the related work was identified followed by an
examination of the different methods and results performed in the studies. The literature
will be summarised and compared in order to find the untouched space within the research
area.
3.1
Literature search
The literature search was done using DTU Findit primarily, but also using Google Scholar.
The search was made to fit different areas of the project; dyslexia, eye tracking, machine
learning and deep learning. Those words were put into a string to make a broad search
of literature, containing some of these words: ”dyslexia eye movement OR dyslexia eye
tracking OR dyslexia machine learning OR dyslexia deep learning”. The word ”dyslexia”
was put in every part of the string, as searching for only machine learning or deep learning
would provide a lot of irrelevant hits. This gave a result of 1295 hits. To decrease the
number of hits, only articles was selected, English written texts and the year range was
narrowed down to 2015­2023. This reduced the hits to 600. As only the hits including
prediction of dyslexia and reading data is wanted, the words ”prediction” and ”reading”
was added in every part of the string, which made a reduction to 80. Next the filtering
was done based on the titles and this resulted in 55 articles. The abstract of those articles
was skimmed. The aim was to find literature based on eye tracking data, where either a
machine learning or deep learning model was applied to make this prediction. As most
of the hits was using high quality eye trackers, a new search was done adding the word
”webcam” to the search. This showed no good hits in DTU Findit, as why it was also done
in Google Scholar. These hits was also filtered by title and abstract. This led to a total of
37 articles. Lastly, the related work was read in multiple of the newest studies. Many of
the same studies, which was already discovered, were mentioned. Though, some new
studies came across, which was selected using the snowball effect. By selecting those
mentioned most often in the related work, and also the newest research, 10 papers was
selected. The pipeline of the literature search can be seen in figure 3.1.
Prediction of dyslexia using eye tracking
11
==PAGE:21==
Figure 3.1: The pipeline of the literature search.
3.2
Machine learning methods for predicting dyslexia
From the 10 literature selected they all have used different methodologies to predict
dyslexia, but they all used eye tracking data. The earliest study found is Rello et al. 2015
[26]. This study uses 97 Spanish students or former students. 48 dyslexic; 22 females
and 26 males, and 49 controls; 28 females and 21 males, all in the age range 11­54 years
old. The Tobii 1750 eye tracker and a 17­inch TFT monitor with a resolution of 1024x768,
was used for the data collection. The text the respondents should read consisted of 12
different text with 12 different typefaces. Texts and fonts were counterbalanced to avoid
sequence effects. All texts had the same length (60 words), font size 14 pt and was black
text on white background. Questions, used as control, was presented in the end of each
text. The data was trained on a support vector machine (SVM) binary classifier and eval­
Prediction of dyslexia using eye tracking
12
==PAGE:22==
uated on a 10­fold cross validation (CV). The final accuracy for the model performance
was 80.18%.
A bigger study is shown in the Benfatto et al. 2016 [27]. So far this is the study having
the highest number of respondents in the data collection, which is why this data has been
used in many other studies. The respondents consisted of 185 Swedish student from
3rd grade (9­10 years). The label used in the classification was high risk (HR) versus
low risk (LR) of having dyslexia. 97 HR; (21 females and 76 males), and 88 LR (19
females and 69 males) participated. The Ober­2TM eye tracker at 100 Hz was used for
eye tracking. The text was made for the level of the respondents age, consisting of 8
lines and as a black text on white background. The respondents were instructed to read
silently and answer three questions afterwards. For building the model Python was used
as a coding language. Again the SVM was considered, but with a lot more features from
the eye tracker (168). As this large number of features was introduced, the study used
recursive feature elimination (RFE) for reduction. The SVM classifier was evaluated using
10­fold stratified CV repeated 100 times. This resulted in 95.6% accuracy as the highest
performance evaluation.
Another study using SVM as classifier is Szalma et al. 2020 [28]. Though, this study used
SVM­RFE with C­optimization and nested CV. This was performed using young adults,
who were native Hungarian speakers; 24 dyslexic with the average age of 24.79 years
old (12 females and 12 males), and 24 controls with the average age of 23.04 years old
(12 females and 12 males). For data collection an iView XTM Hi­Speed 1250 eye tracker
was used. The sentences of the text were showed using 13 pt Courier New font, with
a 56 cm distance between each sentence, on a 23.5 inches display with a 1920x1080
resolution. The best performing combination was found using C­optimization with regular
CV with an accuracy of 90.1%, though this was more prone to overfitting without nesting.
Using nested CV resulted 75.75% accuracy.
The previous studies have been using SVM setups, as this is a good algorithm choice for
small data sets. However, Asvestopoulou et al. 2019 [29] compare the performance of this
algorithm with other ML algorithms. The study consisted of 69 Greek children; 32 dyslexic
and 36 controls, all in the age range of 8.5­12.5 years old. They were instructed to read
two passages silently at their own pace, with the aim of understanding the text to answer 5
questions afterwards. The text was written by a teacher in Greek, where the first passage
consisted of 181 words and the second passage was simpler and consisted of 143 words.
Prediction of dyslexia using eye tracking
13
==PAGE:23==
The eye tracker used was a custom made developed by Medotics AG, which contained
two cameras with infrared light recording at 60Hz with resolution of 1600x1200. The
images extracted was then used to detect pupil and corneal reflection coordinates. The
results was calculated with their own DysLexML algorithm containing SVM, Naïve Bayes
and k­means clustering. First the algorithm evaluates the features and finds the dominant
ones using LASSO regularization 5­folds CV and then the various ML models are applied.
The evaluation of the model was done using Leave­One­Out CV. This resulted in the best
accuracy at 97.10% with the Linear SVM model using LASSO (λ1SE).
Another study testing different ML algorithm was Vajs et al. 2022 [30]. This study used
data from 30 Serbian 7­13 year old children. 15 of the children was dyslexic and 15 was
controls, where the gender distribution was 19 females and 11 males. The eye tracker
used was the SMI RED­m 120Hz and this was used in combination with the iMotions
software to collect data. The respondents were instructed to read 13 segments of a stan­
dardized elementary school text. The text was displayed on a computer screen and the
respondents were instructed to pres the space bar, whenever they had finished reading
each segment. The text segments had different color configurations; either black text with
a colored background or a transparent colored overlay over a white background with black
letters. The 6 colors were: red, orange, yellow, turquoise, blue and purple each used for
both background and overlay. The ordering of the colors was randomly selected. The data
consisted of images of the reading patterns colored depending on the speed of the eye
movements. Features was calculated from the data and divided into three feature groups;
Conventional features, Proposed features and all features. These were trained using 4
different ML algorithms: Logistic regression (LR), SVM, k­nearest neighbour (KNN) and
Random Forest (RF). Leave­One­Out respondent­wise CV with 30­folds was used. The
result showed that the Proposed features and the All features using LR had the best per­
formance with and accuracy of 94%.
As it is proven that SVM generally is the best performing model for such data Prabha et
al 2022 [31] uses this model in combination with Particle Swarm Optimization (PSO) on
the Swedish data set. Features were analysed and selected using Principal component
analysis (PCA) before training the model. PSO was applied in order to optimize the weight
of the features, which is used to create a combination of linear and quadratic kernels for
the SVM model. The hybrid SVM model was trained using a 10­fold CV and this resulted
in an accuracy of 95% performing almost the same as the original Swedish study.
Prediction of dyslexia using eye tracking
14
==PAGE:24==
3.3
Neural network methods for predicting dyslexia
Other than using various ML algorithms, newer studies have been using neural networks
(NN) like Convolutional Neural Network’s (CNN). One example is the Nerusil et al 2021
[32], which also uses the Swedish data set. This time features were not calculated from
the data like saccades and fixations, but instead the pattern of the raw data is analysed.
Three different CNN’s was trained; 2­layers, 3­layers and 4­layers all with a kernel size
1 x 3, ReLU activation function, max pooling 1 x 2 with a stride 1 x 2. In the training
Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD) was used to minimize the categorical cross­entropy
loss function. The best performing model was the 3­layers CNN with an accuracy of 96.6%
which is better than the original Swedish study.
The same authors as in [30] also did a CNN on the same data set used in their previ­
ous study [33]. The model used was a CNN of VGG16 structure using Leave­One­Out
respondent­wise CV with 30­folds. The best performed model resulted in a 87% accuracy.
3.4
Low resolution eye tracking for predicting dyslexia
Some studies also used eye trackers with low sample frequencies or webcam to predict
dyslexia. Vajs et al. 2023 [34] used 60 Hz and 30 Hz as sampling frequencies. The same
approach and ML model used as in the former study [30] was produced in this study. This
resulted in an accuracy of 88.9% for 60 HZ and 87.8% for 30 Hz.
Also Asvestopoulou et al. 2019 [29] used same procedure as earlier described, but with
noise added to the data. The noise in the data was small displacements of the fixation
points following a Gaussian distribution. The best performing model was again linear SVM
with LASSO regularization, which resulted in an accuracy of 84.21%.
Another study uses a laptop build­in webcam as eye tracker in combination with an imple­
mented algorithm, to extract simple features (number of fixation and reading time), that
don’t require good accuracy in the gaze [35]. Those features are then split by a threshold,
in order to predict if one is dyslexia or not. The text used consisted of five consecutive
passages of Norwegian text on a simple web­type page. Each passage contained 77
words. Only 4 Norwegian university students participated, all diagnosed with dyslexia. 3
out of 4 where correctly classified, where the one being miss­classified had a mild form
of dyslexia.
Other studies have been using webcam­based eye tracking in general, and good result
Prediction of dyslexia using eye tracking
15
==PAGE:25==
have been seen in the accuracy of the gaze position [36] [37]. One study even use the
webcam­based eye tracker to analyse the behaviour of the reading patterns of neurodiver­
gent students [38]. However, those studies have not made the application on prediction
of dyslexia.
3.5
Summary of literature
To get an overview of all the studies described in the sections above, see table 3.1.
Study
Subjects
Apparatus
Text
Model
Code
Accuracy
Rello et al.
97 Spanish student
Tobii 1750
12 texts w.
SVM
­
80.18%
2015
(48 D, 49 C)
different fonts
Benfatto et al.
185 Swedish 3rd grade
Ober­2TM
1 text w.
SVM­RFE
Python
95.6%
2016
students (97 HR, 88 LR)
8 lines
Shrestha et al.
4 Norwegian university
Laptop
5 passages w.
Threshold
­
3/4
2018
students (all D)
Webcam
77 words in each
Asvestopoulou
69 Greek children
ET by Medotics
2 passages
DysLexML
­
97% &
et al. 2019
(48 D, 49 C)
w/wo noise
of text
w. LASSO
84.21%
Szalma et al.
48 Hungarian young
iView XTM
13 sentences
SVM­RFE
Matlab,
90.1% &
2020
adults (24 D, 24 C)
Hi­Speed 1250
with 13 pt font
Python
75.75%
Nerusil et al.
185 Swedish 3rd grade
Ober­2TM
1 text w.
CNN w. SGD
Matlab
96.6%
2021
students (97 HR, 88 LR)
8 lines
optimization
Vajs et al.
30 Serbian children
SMI RED­m
13 segments
CNN of VGG16
Python
87%
2022
(15 D, 15 C)
120 Hz
from school text
structure
Vajs et al.
30 Serbian children
SMI RED­m
13 segments
ML algorithms
Python
94%
2022
(15 D, 15 C)
120 Hz
from school text
(LR, SVM, KNN, RF)
Prabha et al.
185 Swedish 3rd grade
Ober­2TM
1 text w.
PCA & SVM w.
R
95%
2022
students (97 HR, 88 LR)
8 lines
PSO optimization
Vajs et al.
30 Serbian children
SMI RED­m
13 segments
ML algorithms
Python
88.9% &
2023
(15 D, 15 C)
60 & 30 Hz
from school text
(LR, SVM, KNN, RF)
87.8%
Table 3.1: Overview of the literature selected as related work. To save space: D = dyslexia, C = controls.
The remaining abbreviations are defined in the Abbreviation section in the beginning of the thesis.
Prediction of dyslexia using eye tracking
16
==PAGE:26==
4
Problem statement
From the related work it is seen that it is possible to predict dyslexia using eye tracking
data with high accuracy. Especially the SVM algorithm on feature data and CNN on the
raw signal data provided the best results. Both showed accuracy around 97%. How­
ever, most of the literature was based on high quality eye tracking (ET). This ensure high
accuracy of the gaze position. Only a few studies used lower resolution ET. This was
done with low frequency sampling (30 Hz), adding Gaussian noise or with recording with
a laptop webcam. The studies that used high quality ET and added noise to the data
both performed descent, with the best result of 89% accuracy. Though, this was only a
way to mimic webcam ET. Only one study did webcam ET, but this study had too little
participants and the prediction was based on 2 features and a threshold. This leaves
the webcam ET for prediction of dyslexia very untouched, as why this will be the main
focus of this project. This is very interesting, as if it is possible to produce good results,
the method of using ET as a screening tool can be broaden out and implemented in the
schools, without them having to buy expensive equipment. Another benefit is that the
chance of finding all dyslexia in primary school would increase, as the subjective opinion
of teachers/professors would be discarded. Table 4.1 provide an overview of what the
related work have covered versus what this thesis will cover.
This leads to the main problem statement of this project:
• Is it possible to use webcam eye tracking to predict dyslexic readers from normal
readers?
To answer this the following problems also has to be answered:
• Is it possible to predict dyslexia using eye tracking data with a limited use of respon­
dents?
• What features are the best for predicting dyslexia?
• What models are optimal to use for predicting dyslexia?
• What type of prepossessing of the data is optimal to use for predicting dyslexia?
In order to answer these question both desktop ET data and webcam ET data will be
Prediction of dyslexia using eye tracking
17
==PAGE:27==
collected parallel to make the best condition for comparison. This will be done on a limited
number of respondent due to the time. The data sets will be processed in two different
ways; aggregated to have feature based data and raw signals. Both types of data will be
possessed to remove the duration of the readings. A feature analysis will be performed on
the aggregated data to identify the most important features for predicting dyslexia. Both
desktop and webcam ET data sets will be trained on ML and NN models. The results will
be compared internally and with the the results found in the related work.
Study
Desk. ET
Web. ET
FS
Agg. data
Signal data
ML model
NN model
Rello et al. 2015
X
X
X
Benfatto et al. 2016
X
X
X
X
Shrestha et al. 2018
X
X
Asvestopoulou et al. 2019
X
X
X
X
X
Szalma et al. 2020
X
X
X
X
Nerusil et al. 2021
X
X
X
Vajs et al. 2022
X
X
X
Vajs et al. 2022
X
X
X
Prabha et al. 2022
X
X
X
X
Vajs et al. 2023
X
X
X
This thesis
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
Table 4.1: Overview of methods and type of data used in related work compared with this thesis. The studies
marked in Web. ET are either using webcam ET or low resolution ET.
Prediction of dyslexia using eye tracking
18
==PAGE:28==
5
Methods
The following chapter describes the methods applied in the analysis of this project. The
pipline of the analysis can be seen in figure 5.1.
Figure 5.1: Pipeline of the analysis.
All the steps of the analysis will be elaborated. This includes a description of the setup
for the data collection, how the data is pre­processed, feature selection methods, model
training explaining the different cross validation methods, all the different models used
and the evaluation methods.
5.1
Data collection
The data collection was made in collaboration with iMotions [39]. The location of the
experiment took place in their office in Copenhagen and the equipment was borrowed from
the company. The experiment consisted of two parts. Firstly, a questionnaire filled out by
the respondent, to receive an understanding of the respondent and what types of errors
that could occur during their recording. The questionnaire can be seen in appendix A.2.
Secondly, the recording of the respondent’s gaze and face while reading a text followed
by control questions. Prior to every experiment the respondent had to approve, that they
would be recorded and that these recordings anonymously would be used for this project
(GDPR rules). A total of 26 respondent participated in this study; 15 normal readers
(labeled as controls) and 11 dyslexic readers, all with danish as their native language.
The dyslexic respondents participating has been diagnosed through the danish dyslexia
test. The 11 dyslexic respondents were in the age range 14­51 years with 6 females and
5 males. The 15 control respondents were in the age range 13­28 years with 10 females
and 5 males. The average age of the dyslexic was 23.82 years with a standard deviation
of 9.84. For the controls the average age was 22.60 years with a standard deviation of
3.84. Preferable the respondents should have been 3rd grade students, as this is the
earliest age for detecting dyslexia. Though, it was too comprehensive to get 3rd grade
students in to get tested with the short amount of time. Every respondent received a
Prediction of dyslexia using eye tracking
19
==PAGE:29==
test number (controls: C01­C15, dyslexic: D01­D11), which will be the reference of each
respondent throughout this project.
5.1.1
Setup
The setup for the second part of the experiment consisted of a text displayed on a com­
puter screen, where the respondent had to sit in front and read the text, while being
recorded by eye trackers. The recordings was performed using two eye trackers; the
Smart Eye Aurora desktop eye tracker [40] and a Logitech webcam [41]. The desktop
eye tracker had a sampling frequency of 120 Hz. The webcam eye tracker initially had a
resolution of 640x480 with frame rate of 30 frames per second (fps), but was later changed
to 800x600 with 24 fps, due to some problems with the recordings. The webcam recording
was subsequently processed with the webcam ET algorithm from iMotions [4]. The study
was recorded in the iMotions software [39]. As two eye trackers was used the recordings
also needed two different calibrations. The desktop eye tracker had 9 calibrations points
in the beginning of the recording. The webcam eye tracker needed 9 calibrations points
both in the beginning and in the end of the recording. This was necessary to align the
data with the position of the eyes, to get the best recordings from each respondent. The
text used for the study was a danish article from Politiken called ”Altædende piratfisk er
en myte uden kød på” by Michael Rothenborg, published the 6th of September 2010 [42].
This text has been used in the FSA reading test for danish 10th grade students back in
2014. This text was chosen as it has already been used for testing reading skills in schools
and because the level fitted the age group of the respondents. The text was written with
black text on white background and the font Arial was chosen as it is a ordinary font. The
text was distributed on 14 slides (called stimuli), with 5­7 lines per slide, 2 cm margin in
both sides and line space 3 in between each line. The monitor used for displaying was 27
inches with the resolution 1920×1080. Each respondent was positioned with a distance
of 60­70 cm from the screen, with the head centered in the webcam frame (see figure
5.2). This is the preferred distance for both eye trackers [4] [40]. The room used for the
recordings had dark walls all around and rolled down curtains, so no external light would
interfere. The light source used in the study were consistent for all recordings; the light
in the ceiling of the room and a desktop lamp on a table next to the respondent. The
respondents was told to not move their head if possible, so only their eyes would move
during reading. When the respondent was finished reading one stimuli, they would give a
thumbs up to the examiner, so the examiner could change to next stimuli. The recordings
Prediction of dyslexia using eye tracking
20
==PAGE:30==
was on average 10­12 minutes long. After end recording, the respondent had to answer
5 questions used as control, to check that they had actually read and understood the text.
These questions was selected from the same FSA reading test. This resulted in a data
set consisting of 26 recordings and as each respondent read 14 stimuli with text this gives
26 · 14 = 364 recorded readings.
Figure 5.2: The scene of the setup for the second part of the data collection.
5.2
Data pre­processing
From the study made in iMotions, the raw data was exported as well as a saccade table
and a fixation table. These contained various of different calculations like saccade direc­
tion, fixation duration etc. The saccade and fixation tables consisted of observations per
event, which means that the number of observations per respondent per stimuli varies
a lot. These table consisted mainly of numerical data, but contained also columns of
categorical data, to describe the respondent or the stimuli. The calculations of the sac­
cades and the fixations from the raw signal can be done using three methods; I­VT filter,
Duration dispersion filter or Hidden Markov Models (HMM). In this project the HMM was
selected, as it is more robust towards noisy ET data, as seen using webcam ET [43]. The
robustness is due to the fact that the algorithm adapt the calculations to each respondent
independent from the other respondents. HMM is a statistical model for time series data,
Prediction of dyslexia using eye tracking
21
==PAGE:31==
assumed to be a Markov process with unobserved hidden states. For this type of data the
raw signal is assumed to be a Markov process, where each data point is either belonging
to the saccade state or the fixation state. Transitioning between the states are given by
an unknown probability, which based on the data needs to be learned by the algorithm.
More information about, how HMM was used to create the saccades and fixation tables,
using the iMotions software, can be read from this source [43].
Besides the data exported from iMotions, the answers from the questionnaires was also
considered. This data consist of one observation per respondent. It mainly consist of
categorical data with a few numerical columns, like Age and Number of correct answers.
The data used for the analysis was pre­processed in two different ways; an aggregated
data table and the raw gaze signal from the x­coordinates.
5.2.1
Aggregated data table
The aggregated data table consisted of different features calculated from the saccade
and fixation tables, so all columns have one observation per stimuli per respondent, which
means 14 · 26 = 364 rows. The saccade and fixation tables was aggregated by summing
and averaging different columns, that was meaningful to use. The rows, where the sac­
cedes and fixations were not labeled ”whole”, were excluded from the calculations. As
the time/duration parameter is known for not predicting the dyslexic from the controls cor­
rectly, because some controls are slow readers, all time dependent features was made
independent of time. This was done by calculating them ”per minute”.As for example
Fixation Count of the total duration was changed to Fixation Count per Minute.
With the questionnaire table, some of the useful features was selected. For these fea­
tures every observation was repeated 14 times to match the number of stimuli. Some of
these features were categorical and therefore these were transformed using binarization,
integers and one­out­of­k coding. The binarized features is Group, Gender, Job/Study,
Eye Makeup and Dyslexia in Family. Gaze Calibration is changed into integers, so poor
is 1, good is 2 and excellent is 3. The features transformed using one­out­of­k coding
is Eye Color, Finished Education, Vision Correction, Vision Error, Vision Error Eye and
School Level Confirmed Dyslexia. This resulted in 21 extra columns added and deleting
the former feature columns. After the numeric transformation of the features the data ta­
ble consisted of 49 features total. As some of the features are irrelevant for the prediction
of dyslexia, but used for comparing the result of the analysis, those were removed from
Prediction of dyslexia using eye tracking
22
==PAGE:32==
the training data table. The final data table used for training in the analysis contained 22
features and with the size 22 x 364. The 22 features are show in table 5.1. Group will be
the target, Respondent will be used to differentiate the respondents, Stimulus Label will
be used to differentiate the stimuli and the remaining features will be used for training.
Feature name
Data type
Description
Group
Binary
Group of respondent; 1 if dyslexia, 0 if control.
Respondent
Nominal
Respondent Id.
Stimulus Label
Nominal
Name of the stimulus.
Dyslexia in Family
Binary
1 if any family members diagnosed with
dyslexia, 0 otherwise.
Saccade Count per Minute
Continuous
Average number of saccedes per minute.
Saccade Forward Count
Continuous
Average number of forward saccades per
per Minute
minute labeled by being in the direction
between 315­360 or 0­40 degrees.
Saccade Backward Count
Continuous
Average number of backwards saccades per
per Minute
minute labeled by being in the direction
between 135­225 degrees.
Average Saccade Duration
Continuous
The average duration of the saccades.
Sum Saccade Duration
Continuous
The sum of duration of the saccades.
Average Saccade Amplitude
Continuous
The average amplitude of the saccade, i.e.
the average angular distance that the eyes
travelled from start point to end point.
Sum Saccade Amplitude
Continuous
The sum of amplitude of the saccades, i.e.
the sum of angular distance that the eyes
travelled from start point to end point.
Average Saccade Peak
Continuous
The average peak velocity of the saccades,
Velocity
i.e. the average of maximal speed of the eyes
during saccades.
Sum Saccade Peak
Continuous
The sum of peak velocity of the saccades,
Velocity
i.e. the sum of maximal speed of the eyes
during saccades.
Average Saccade Peak
Continuous
The average peak acceleration of the saccades,
Acceleration
i.e. the average of maximal increase in speed
of the eyes during saccades.
Sum Saccade Peak
Continuous
The sum of peak acceleration of the saccades,
Acceleration
i.e. the sum of maximal increase in speed of
the eyes during saccades.
Average Saccade Peak
Continuous
The average peak deceleration of the saccades,
Deceleration
i.e. the average of maximal decrease in speed
Prediction of dyslexia using eye tracking
23
==PAGE:33==
of the eyes during saccades.
Sum Saccade Peak
Continuous
The sum of peak deceleration of the saccades,
Deceleration
i.e. the sum of maximal decrease in speed
of the eyes during saccades.
Fixation Count per minute
Continuous
Average number of fixations per minute.
Average Fixation Duration
Continuous
The average duration of the fixations.
Sum Fixation Duration
Continuous
The sum of duration of the fixations.
Average Fixation Dispersion
Continuous
The average dispersion of the fixations, i.e. the
average of how much the fixation’s gaze points
are spread out.
Sum Fixation Dispersion
Continuous
The sum dispersion of the fixations, i.e. the
sum of how much the fixation’s gaze points
are spread out.
Table 5.1: An overview of the features used for the analysis.
5.2.2
X gaze signal
The X gaze signal consists of all raw signals of the x­coordinates per respondent. The y­
coordinates are not used, as these are very inaccurate for the webcam ET data and would
potentially lead to overfitting. The signal was filtered using ∆X, which takes the difference
between each point. An example of the raw X gaze signal and the filtered X gaze signal
is shown in figure 5.3. As all the respondent read the text in their own pace, the length of
each signal was different. To correct this the median length of the signals was found and
used as the common length. For the desktop ET data the median length was 3554 and for
the webcam ET data it was 656. Signals longer than this were cut short. Signals shorter
than this would be padded in the end with the mean value of the current signal. As the
data set is small a data augmentation technique would be applied for the training set, in
an attempt to improve the result and avoid overfitting. This was done by slicing the data
into multiple pieces, all having the length 1000 for desktop ET data and 200 for webcam
ET data. This means that if one signal had the length 6430 in the desktop ET data, the
first 6000 observations would be sliced into 6 pieces and the last 430 observations would
be discarded.
Prediction of dyslexia using eye tracking
24
==PAGE:34==
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
3500
Observations
250
500
750
1000
1250
1500
1750
X-corrdinates
(a) X gaze signal from desktop ET.
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
3500
Observations
−300
−200
−100
0
100
200
300
400
500
Delta x-corrdinates
(b) ∆x gaze signal from dekstop ET.
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
Observations
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
1600
X-corrdinates
(c) X gaze signal from webcam ET.
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
Observations
−800
−600
−400
−200
0
200
Delta x-corrdinates
(d) ∆x gaze signal from webcam ET.
Figure 5.3: Desktop and webcam ET data from respondent C07 stimulus ”Part 2”. The signals are shown
for the full duration of the reading.
5.3
Feature selection
Feature selection (FS) is a method to reduce the dimensionality of the data, in order to
select the most important features for prediction. This can be done for the aggregated
data. It reduces the training time and complexity of the calculations, but also improves
the performance [44]. Feature selection can be done in various ways, both for supervised
and unsupervised learning. For supervised learning all these methods can be divided
into three categories; filter methods, wrapper methods and embedded methods. Filter
methods are statistical methods, independently of any machine learning algorithm. The
features are chosen from their statistical score based on the relation to the target of the
data (see figure 5.4a). The advantage of these methods is, that they are fast to run and
independent of any model, therefore overfitting is avoided [45]. Though, the disadvantage
is that the best subset of features, according to the problem, might not be found, as it
scores each features independently. This can result in discarding features that on its own
Prediction of dyslexia using eye tracking
25
==PAGE:35==
doesn’t provide good predictions of the target, but in combination with other features adds
a lot of value. Examples of filter methods are Pearson’s Correlation, Linear Discriminant
analysis (LDA), Analysis of Variance (ANOVA) and Chi­Square.
Wrapper methods refers to methods that select the features based on the score of a model
(see figure 5.4b). The advantage of these FS methods is that they tend to find the best
performing subset of features for a specific model, however this can also lead to overfitting
[45]. Popular wrapper methods are Backward selection, Forward selection and Recursive
Feature Elimination (RFE).
Embedded methods are trying to combine the best from filter and wrapper methods; the
speed of the filter methods and finding the best subset for a particular model like the wrab­
ber methods. This is done by having the method embedded into the learning algorithm.
Using embedded methods weights are added according to their importance (regulariza­
tion), where the features with the weight equal to zero are discarded [45]. Examples of
embedded methods are LASSO (L1 penalty), Ridge (L2 penalty) and tree­based algo­
rithms like Random Forest (RF).
Figure 5.4 shows the process of all different types of feature selection methods.
(a) Filter feature selection.
(b) Wrapper feature selection.
(c) Embedded feature selection.
Figure 5.4: Illustrations of the different feature selection methods. (Inspiration from source [44])
Prediction of dyslexia using eye tracking
26
==PAGE:36==
The feature selection for this project is done by choosing one method from each category
and find the highest rated features based on the results. As this is a classification problem
with numerical features and a categorical target this has been taken into account when
selecting the methods. The methods chosen for this project is ANOVA, Recursive feature
elimination (RFE) and Random Forest (RF).
5.3.1
ANOVA
The ANOVA method is a statistical hypothesis test that can be used for selecting the
features based on the difference in means (the variance). This means that features that
are independent from the target, with a low variance, are removed [46]. This FS method
is used when the input features are continuous, but the target is categorical, which is why
it is the filter method selected for this project.
5.3.2
Recursive feature elimination
Recursive feature elimination is an effective way of selecting features based on their ability
to predict the target, using a specific machine learning algorithm [47]. RFE works by
having all features initially and one by one removing the features, until the optimal subset
of features is found. The elimination of features is based on the fit of the ML model to
the data and comparing the performance of the prediction. This can be implemented with
various ML algorithms like LR, SVM, Decision trees etc., but in this project RFE is selected
using LR.
5.3.3
Random Forest
Random forest is an ML algorithm, that also can be used as FS. RF works by building
a lot of decision trees with a random selection of features. Each tree tries to predict
the target based on splits, where each split aims to be as ”pure” (correctly classified) as
possible [48]. The more ”pure” the nodes are the higher importance the features will get.
The ”pureness” calculation of each node is called impurity measure. For classification
problems this impurity measure is based on either the Gini impurity or the Entropy. This
is calculated for each feature in each node and averaged over all the trees. The features
are ranked based on the feature importance score, which is used as feature selection.
5.4
Model training
Training a model can be done in many ways. The decision, of which methods to use, is
very important, to make sure that it fits the type data optimally. In this project the mod­
els are trained using a nested cross validation, where the inner loop is used for hyper­
Prediction of dyslexia using eye tracking
27
==PAGE:37==
parameter tuning and the outer loop is used for training the model. The overview of the
pipeline for model training is shown in figure 5.5.
Figure 5.5: Pipeline of the model training done in this project.
5.4.1
Cross­validation
The purpose of cross validation is to train a model while avoid overfitting. Different ap­
proaches for CV have been tested. The data contains only 364 instances, so it is a small
data set for ML and NN. The data can be split up into groups of 26 (per respondent) con­
taining 14 observations each. This is important to keep in mind, as the data needs to be
trained as a grouped data set. In the case, where this was not considered, data from the
same respondent could end up being in the training data and the test data at the same
time, which would result in data leakage. To avoid this only the grouped CV methods
are considered. The following CV methods were tested: Group K­fold, Group­Shuffle­
Split, Stratified Group K­fold and Leave­One­Group­Out. All CV methods are used based
on the implementation from Scikit Learn [49]. Group K­fold splits the data up based on
the groups given in the number of splits provided. Depending on the number of folds,
this can make the train data vary in size. Group­Shuffle­Split are similar to the previous
method, however this method shuffle the data within the CV and splits it accordingly. This
Prediction of dyslexia using eye tracking
28
==PAGE:38==
means that the order of the data is different for every fold, but the groups in the test data
risk of being used more than once. Stratified Group K­fold accounts for the imbalance in
the data and make the splits based on preserve the distribution of the classes, while still
keeping the data grouped. Leave­One­Group­Out splits the data based on only having
one group as test data per fold. This method maximizes the size of the training data,
which is good for small data set. As the data set used in this project is small in size and
have a small imbalance in the distribution of controls and dyslexia, the Stratified Group
K­fold and Leave­One­Group­Out CV methods are chosen for the training of the models.
Figure 5.6 shows how the two methods split the data.
(a) Leave one group out cross validation.
(b) Stratified group K­fold cross validation (with 13 folds).
Figure 5.6: Illustrations of the different splits in the CV methods used in this project. The grey squares are
used for train data and the colored squares show the test data in the current iteration. The blue squares are
the control groups and the orange squares are the dyslexia groups. (Inspiration from source [49])
5.4.2
Hyper­parameter tuning
Hyper­parameter tuning (HPT) is a great tool, done before training the model, to find the
optimal hyper­parameters for the model. This is important, as training with the right hyper­
parameters increase the performance. The HPT for the ML models was done using three
methods; Grid search, Random search and Bayesian optimization. All three methods
was tested in order to compare the optimal choice of each method. Grid search uses a
”grid”, with predefined options of each hyper­parameter and tries each combination to find
the optimal selection [50]. The advantage of this method is that it is easy to implement.
However, it can be very inefficient and miss the global optimum, as the grid is predefined.
The random search uses random values of the hyper­parameters to find the optimal se­
lection [50]. The advantage is that this method don’t need a predefined grid, but again
the global optimum can be missed. The last method is the Bayesian optimization, which
selects the optimal hyper­parameter values based on the previous choice. This is done
using an optimization function to minimize the loss [50]. The method have better success
of finding the global optimum, however it can be time consuming to converge. For the
Prediction of dyslexia using eye tracking
29
==PAGE:39==
neural networks the HPT was done manually. It was chosen as many hyper­parameters
are to be tuned and the time testing ”bad” hyper­parameters would be too long. Though,
using this method the probability of finding the optimal combination of hyper­parameters
is low, but a decent combination would be found.
5.5
Models
The type of problem faced in this project is a classification problem, as we aim to predict
if the reading data correspond to either a normal reader or one with dyslexia. As the
outcome is known in advance, this turns the problem into a supervised learning. The
outcome/target consist of 1 if the respondent is dyslexia or 0 if not, whereas this problem
is a binary classification problem. Within supervised learning and binary classification
there exist many different types of learning algorithms. The focus was to select models
that; performs good with small data sets, are effective and simple. Both classical ML
models and NN have been considered. The following models was selected to solve the
classification problem in the best way.
5.5.1
Support Vector Machine
Support Vector Machine (SVM) has been selected, as this has proven to be a good algo­
rithm choice for classification on small data sets [51]. From the related work section it was
also seen, that SVM often was the best performing algorithm for this type of data. The
way SVM works for binary classification is by finding a hyperplane in an N­dimensional
space, that optimally separates the two classes y ∈(−1, 1), by finding the plane that has
the maximum margin (the maximum distance between points from each class) [52], see
figure 5.7.
Prediction of dyslexia using eye tracking
30
==PAGE:40==
Figure 5.7: Illustration of a linear SVM problem with two classes. Blue dots are observations in one class
and green dots are observations in the other class. The red line is the optimal hyperplane. The dotted blue
and green line span out the margin. (Inspiration from source [51]).
The hyperplane works as a decision boundary for classifying the data. In general the
larger the margin around the hyperplane the lower the generalization error of the classifier
[53]. The position and orientation of the hyperplane is decided based on the data that
lies close to the hyperplane, also called support vectors. The difference from logistic
regression is, that the decision boundary only is based on these support vectors and not
on the entire data, which will help speed up the process [51].
The equation for the hyperplane is:
w · x + b = 0
(5.1)
where w is the normal vector to the hyperplane and b is an offset [51]. This plane is
centered in the margin, which is spanned out by the positive class boundary and the
negative class boundary. These are described by the following constrains [51]:
w · x + b ≤−1 ⇒y = −1
w · x + b ≥1 ⇒y = 1
(5.2)
Any data on or above the positive class boundary is belonging to class 1 and any data on
or below the negative class boundary is belonging to class ­1.
This can be rewritten to [51]:
yi(w · x + b) ≥1
for all 1 ≤i ≤n
(5.3)
Prediction of dyslexia using eye tracking
31
==PAGE:41==
Which leads to the following optimization problem:
minimize
||w||2
2
subject to
yi(w · x + b) ≥1
∀i ∈1, ..., n
(5.4)
If it is possible to separate the data strictly using the margin and hyperplane, this is called
the hard margin. Nonetheless, in many cases this is not the optimal solution. Instead
the soft margin is introduced, where data points are allowed to be miss­classified during
training, in order to avoid overfitting and achieve better results [51]. The regularization
parameter deciding the trade­off between maximizing the margin and minimizing the loss
is called C. For large values of C, the problem becomes similar to the hard margin case.
The optimization for the soft margin problem is formulated as:
minimize
||w||2
2 + C
n
∑
i=1
ζi
subject to
yi(w · x + b) ≥1 −ζ1
ζi ≥0
∀i ∈1, ..., n
(5.5)
In figure 5.7 a linear decision boundary is seen, however this is not always the best so­
lution to separate the data. Instead a kernel trick can be introduced to make non­linear
classifiers [51]. Non­linear kernels that can be used for the SVM is Polynomial, Radial
basis function (RBF), Sigmoid etc.
The SVM model used is from the Python library scikit learn [53]. C, gamma and kernel
are the three hyper­parameters that will be tuned. gamma is only used, when the kernel =
rbf, though as this is the default choice in scikit learn this parameter will also be included
for optimization. The C parameter provides the penalty of the miss­classified data points.
The gamma parameter is providing the weight to the curvature of the boundary. The kernel
parameter is choosing, which kernel is used for the decision boundary.
5.5.2
Extreme Gradient Boost
Extreme gradient boost (XGBoost) was chosen for this project, as it has shown great
success for classification problems. This is a newer model, as it is an improved gradient
boosting method. It is designed to be both computationally efficient and highly effective,
which is why it is called ”Extreme” [54]. As Gradient boosting, XGBoost also use decision
trees as the base estimator. It is an ensemble method as the prediction is based on
many tree build. One thing the XGBoost method differentiates from the gradient boosting
method, is by adding a regularization term. The evaluation of the splits in the trees is
Prediction of dyslexia using eye tracking
32
==PAGE:42==
determined by the Similarity Score and Gain. The node with the highest gain is chosen
as the best split for the tree. The similarity score is given by [55]:
Similarity Score =
(∑n
i=1 Residuali)2
∑n
i=1[Previous Probabilityi · (1 −Previous Probabilityi)] + λ
(5.6)
where
Residuali = yi −ˆyi
(5.7)
yi is true labels and ˆyi is predicted labels. PreviousProbability is the probability of an
event and λ is the regularization parameter, that reduces the sensitivity of individual pre­
dictions and prevents overfitting.
The Gain is given by [55]:
Gain = LeftSimilarity + RightSimilarity −RootSimilarity
(5.8)
The tree is pruned using γ, where Gain−γ > 0 indicates to keep the tree and Gain−γ < 0
indicates to prune the tree. The output value of the XGBoost is almost the same as in
Gradient boosting, but again the regularization parameter is added to the denominator.
This means that the formula is like the similarity score, but without the squared numerator:
Output V alue =
(∑n
i=1 Residuali)
∑n
i=1[Previous Probabilityi · (1 −Previous Probabilityi)] + λ
(5.9)
.
The XGBoost model used in this project is from the Python library xgboost [56]. Many
hyper­parameters are possible to tune with this algorithm, but the following six parameters
was chosen; learning_rate, max_depth, colsample_bytree, gamma, reg_lambda and
reg_alpha. learning_rate also called η specifies how fast the model fits the residual
errors, by using additional learners [57]. max_depth controls how deep the tree can grow.
colsample_bytree is used to decide the fraction of features, that can be used to train each
tree. gamma, reg_lambda and reg_alpha specifies values for the different regularizations
done in XGBoost; minimum loss reduction to make a new split, L1­regularization and
L2­regularization for the weights of the leafs.
Prediction of dyslexia using eye tracking
33
==PAGE:43==
5.5.3
Feed­Forward Neural Network
Artificial neural networks (ANN) are models that are build inspired by the function and
connectivity of the neurons in the brain. The Feed­Forward Neural Network (FNN) is the
simplest version of neural networks. The data is only processed in one direction, namely
forward [58]. The calculations done in the neurons in each hidden layer is having the
inputs weighted and summed, followed by adding a bias value before passing it on to the
activation function, see figure 5.8.
Figure 5.8: One artificial neuron. (Inspiration from source [58]).
The calculation can be seen in equation 5.10.
y = φ
(
b +
n
∑
i=1
wi · xi
)
(5.10)
where y is the output, b is the bias, wi are the weights specific to the neuron, xi are the
inputs and φ is the activation function. Popular choices of activation functions for NN are
Sigmoid and Rectified linear unit (ReLU). The activation functions helps transforming the
data into range. This transformed data helps decide the result of the output [59]. Figure
5.8 shows how one neuron in a hidden layer looks like. FNN contains multiple neurons in
each hidden layer. An example of the structure of an FNN containing one hidden layer is
seen in figure 5.9.
Prediction of dyslexia using eye tracking
34
==PAGE:44==
Figure 5.9: Example of the structure of an FNN with one hidden layer. (Inspiration from source [59]).
The input layer receives the input data in the neurons and passes this on to the first hidden
layer. The number of neurons in the input layer is equal to the number of features in the
data set. The final layer is the output layer and it contains the prediction of the data. The
number of neurons in the output layer is equal to the number of classes in the data set
for a classification problem. The number of hidden layers and neurons in each layers is
determined through trial and error [59]. When training an FNN as a supervised learning
problem, the aim is to update the weights, so the predictions becomes more accurate to
the true labels. This evaluation is done calculating the error, also called the loss function.
The loss function for binary­class predictions is called binary cross­entropy. The equation
for the binary cross­entropy is given as [60]:
Loss = −1
N
N
∑
i=1
yi · log(p(yi)) + (1 −yi) · log(1 −p(yi))
(5.11)
where yi is the true labels, p(yi) is the probabilities of the labels and N being the total data
points. For good predictions the loss function returns low values, which is why the aim
is to minimize the loss function. To improve the result of the FNN, back­propagation is
used. This is done with an optimization algorithm like Gradient descent (GD), Stochastic
gradient descent (SGD), ADAM etc., where the goal is to find the local minima, which
results in the smallest error [59]. The implementation of the FNN in this project is done
with library Keras from Python [61].
Prediction of dyslexia using eye tracking
35
==PAGE:45==
5.5.4
Convolutional Neural Network
Convolutional neural networks (CNN) is another type of NN that specializes in processing
data, that has a grid­like topology, as for example images [62]. The possibilities with CNNs
are more or less endless, as this enables machines to solve various of new problems, in
the manner of a human, as it combines deep learning and computer vision [63]. This is
the reason why this algorithm is becoming very popular. The way CNN work is by taking
the input and assigning weights and biases to different aspects of the input to differentiate
items in the image. In the first layers the simple patterns are detected such as lines,
curves etc., whereas in the further layers more complex patterns are detected such as
objects, faces etc.[62]. Typically CNNs consist of three types of layers; convolutional,
pooling and fully connected layers. The convolutional layer is the core of the CNN. This
is where the kernel, used as a filter, slides over the image, to get convolved feature as
output (see figure 5.10a). The pooling layer acts as a summary version of the output of the
convolutional layer. By reducing the dimensions, it decreases the computational power
that is required to process the data. Also this layer works as a noise suppressant. Two
types of pooling can be used; Max pooling and Average pooling, but Max pooling is the
most common. Max pooling works by taking the maximum value of the ones covered in
the kernel, see figure 5.10b. The fully connected layer connects every neuron in one layer
to every neuron in another layer, which is used in the last step of classifying the data to
form the output.
(a) Convolution operation with a 3 x 3 kernel.
(b) Max pooling operation with 2 x 2 kernel and stride = 2.
Figure 5.10: Illustrations of simple operations in CNN layers. (Inspiration from source [63])
In order to avoid overfitting in CNN, multiple actions can be done. This includes adding
batch normalization, dropout, parameter tuning and data augmentation. CNN is a very
complex and detailed algorithm and many choices can be made in order to optimize the
algorithm, though in this project only the basic architecture has been described. The
overall architecture of a CNN is seen in figure 5.11.
Prediction of dyslexia using eye tracking
36
==PAGE:46==
Figure 5.11: Example of the structure of a CNN. (Inspiration from source [62]).
Many different high dimensional data can be handle as input in CNN, however in this
project only one dimensional CNN will be considered. Reducing the complexity of the
CNN will improve the performance, as data is limited. One dimensional CNN have proven
great success for text and time series data, especially within biometric signals [64]. The
implementation of the CNN in this project is done with library Keras from Python [61].
5.6
Evaluation
The evaluation performed in this project is using different calculations from the classifi­
cation metrics. The confusion matrix is a way to illustrate the number of correctly and
wrongly classified predictions, relative to the true labels [65]. This is described as True
positive (TP) and True negative (TN) for the correctly classified predictions and False
positive (FP) and False negative (FN) for the wrongly classified predictions, see figure
5.12.
Figure 5.12: Confusion matrix. Green squares are the correctly classified and red squares are the wrongly
classified for the two classes. (Inspiration from source [65])
Prediction of dyslexia using eye tracking
37
==PAGE:47==
The aim is to have the prediction equal to the target, but in most incidents this is not
the case. To easier understand, how well the prediction was, different metrics can be
calculated based on the confusion matrix. Accuracy is usually the first chosen metric for
evaluation classification problems. This metrics shows, how well the model is to correctly
classify each class. The calculation of the accuracy is given as [66]:
Accuracy =
TP + TN
TP + TN + FP + FN
(5.12)
Other than measuring how well the model is to correctly predicting each class, it can also
be important to measure how well the model is to correctly predict the positive class (class
1), based on all the predictions of this class. This ratio is called precision and is calculated
as [66]:
Precision =
TP
TP + FP
(5.13)
Another important ration is the one measuring the correctly predicted positives compared
to the all the true positives. This ratio is called Recall or Sensitivity and is calculated as
[66]:
Recall =
TP
TP + FN
(5.14)
The last measure that is important for evaluation of the model is called F1­score. This is
considering both the precision and the recall calculation and tries to balance these two.
The F1­score is calculated as [66]:
F1 score = 2 · (Recall · Precision)
(Recall + Precision)
(5.15)
In this project accuracy is mainly used to compare the performance of the different models,
as this is the metrics primary used in the related work. Though, it can be argued that the
recall also is important to use, as this concerns the FN highly and we aim to predict all
true dyslexia as dyslexia. However, having high recall can result in some predictions being
FP, which means that normal readers are predicted dyslexia. As dyslexia is not a deadly
disease, arguments of not using recall can be due to negative consequences it brings
being miss­classified. In the society many still view people with dyslexia as being less
intelligent, even if that is proven to be untrue [7]. Some children bully other with dyslexia,
Prediction of dyslexia using eye tracking
38
==PAGE:48==
which is also a parameter to consider, when evaluating the performance of the model.
Therefore the main evaluation metric to compare in this project is the accuracy, but the
remaining are also considered.
Prediction of dyslexia using eye tracking
39
==PAGE:49==
6
Results
This chapter highlights the results obtained in this project. First the data will be explored in
order to get a greater insight in the data set and what it is based upon. This is followed by
the results of the feature selection, the models using the aggregated data and the model
using the signal data. The chapter will end with a summary of the obtained results.
6.1
Data exploration
The essential part of this data collection is that the desktop and webcam ET recordings
run parallel. This makes it very easy to compare the results of both techniques and their
performance, throughout the entire project. An example of a recording of one stimulus
shown for both desktop and webcam ET in the iMotions software is seen in figure 6.1. It is
seen, that the difference in accuracy and precision between the two gaze recordings are
very different. The position of the gaze points are more as expected in the desktop eye
tracking, as the gaze is following a normal reading pattern on top of the written lines. In
the webcam eye tracking the gaze is less accurate and more random. However, it seems
like the x­coordinates are looking more correct, compared with the y­coordinates. The
fixations are not always on top of the lines and less fixations are detected (31 fixations),
compared to the desktop eye tracker (73 fixations). Even though the quality of the webcam
recordings are much more poor than the desktop recordings, it will be interesting to see, if
the information in the eye movements, separating dyslexic from normal readers, still can
be identified.
Prediction of dyslexia using eye tracking
40
==PAGE:50==
(a) Gaze pattern of desktop eye tracking.
(b) Gaze pattern of webcam eye tracking.
Figure 6.1: Eye tracking data of the gaze while reading from respondent C01, stimulus ”Part 9”, shown in
iMotions software.
6.1.1
Respondents
To understand the results of the analysis better, it is essential to examine the quality of
the data in advance. This is done by getting an overview of the type of respondents used
for the data collection. This is important, as they have different prerequisites for this test,
which can have an effect on the results. From the questionnaire the respondents was
asked about their daily occupation, their finished school level etc. Figure 6.2 summarizes
Prediction of dyslexia using eye tracking
41
==PAGE:51==
some of the information provided by the respondents. The distribution of the respondents
are a bit different for controls and dyslexic (see figure 6.2a). It is seen, that most of the
respondents are females and student, both for dyslexic and controls. This could be due
to many of the respondent being teenagers/young adults, where most still attend school.
Looking at the dyslexia in family plot, this distribution is not surprising. Most of the re­
spondent having family members being dyslexia also is dyslexic themselves. Figure 6.2b
show that the educational level also is a bit different between controls and dyslexic among
the respondents. Generally, more dyslexic have lower educational levels than controls.
However, as the age of the respondents differ a lot, this could also be the explanation for,
why some only have finished lower level educations. Looking at the reading scale, this
was a subjective decision for each respondent to see, how much they believe they read
in their daily life, where 1 is almost no reading and 5 is a lot of reading. This was used to
get an indication of, if the respondents practise their reading skills, but as it is subjective,
this can vary a lot from person to person. The result shows, that the controls follow more
or less a normal distribution, wheras the dyslexic are more split in either reading less
or reading more. This could indicate that either the dyslexic respondents don’t practise
their reading, otherwise they use more time on practising than controls, as it is harder for
them. Many of the dyslexic respondent was diagnosed late in their education. Only one
was diagnosed in 4th grade, whereas the remaining was mainly diagnosed in either 8th
grade or in the first year of high school. The late diagnose and lack of helping aid during
their education, can affect the level of dyslexia in the respondents. It is very interesting
to see, if there would show a difference in hte reading patterns between the dyslexic that
still practise their reading skills and those who don’t.
Prediction of dyslexia using eye tracking
42
==PAGE:52==
Female
Male
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
Percent
Gender
Student
Worker
Occupational status
No
Y
es
Dyslexia in family
Control
Dyslexia
(a) The distribution of the gender, occupational status and dyslexia in family of the respondents.
Primary school
Vocational
High school
Bachelor
Master
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
0.30
0.35
Percent
Finished education
Scale 1
Scale 2
Scale 3
Scale 4
Scale 5
Reading scale (subjective)
Control
Dyslexia
(b) The distribution of the finished education and subjective reading scale of the respondents.
Figure 6.2: Five bar plots showing the distribution of the respondents based on their answers from the
questionnaire. The blue bars shows the controls and the orange shows the dyslexic respondent. Each plot
sum to 1 except the left in figure b) as some respondent didn’t had finished any education.
As many factors can play a role in poor recordings, it is important to address what kind
of limitations the respondent brings that potentially could affect the recordings negatively.
Most of the respondent had light eye colors (73%), which is a good condition for eye
tracking. The remaining 27% of the respondent had dark brown eyes, which can challenge
the eye tracker to distinguish the pupil from the iris. The use of vision correction can also
affect the quality of the data, especially when using glasses. 15% used vision correction
during the reading. Half of them used contact lenses, which doesn’t make that big of
a difference, and the other half used glasses, which can cause poor results. 27% of
the respondent reported to have a structural defect on either or both of the eyes and 2
of these also was cross­eyed, which also can lead to poor recordings. Lastly, 35% of
Prediction of dyslexia using eye tracking
43
==PAGE:53==
the respondent was wearing mascara during the recording, which can also lead to less
accurate results if the eyelashes are long. Those are all considerations that have to be
kept in mind during the analysis, if results are being poor.
Due to the small data size an outlier analysis would be too tricky to produce, as outliers
could be a sign of severe dyslexia. As no of the data was corrupted all 364 recordings
was used for the analysis.
6.2
Baseline model
The baseline model is used to compare the results of all the models to the minimum
performing model. Two types of baseline models can be used for this type of data. The first
model is the simplest one, where the distribution of the groups determines the accuracy.
This means that if all respondents were predicted to be controls, the accuracy would be
15 / 26 · 100 = 57.69%. The second method is to only use the duration of the readings as
prediction. It is known from the background (Section 2.2.1), that longer reading duration
can be a sign of dyslexia, therefore it is a good estimation for the prediction of dyslexia,
without using an eye tracker. A simple model will be applied to the stimulus durations,
where the mean of the data will be the threshold, acting as the decision boundary. Reading
durations longer than this threshold is classified as dyslexic and reading durations shorter
than this threshold is classified as control. In figure 6.3 it is shown, how the duration of
reading is split based on the decision boundary, shown as the red dotted line. The blue
shows the true controls and the orange shows the true dyslexic. As the text per stimuli
vary in size, the duration have been divided with the number of lines per text. This means
that the duration is shown in milliseconds per line. Figure 6.3a shows the distribution of
the stimulus duration for both control and dyslexic. Figure 6.3b shows the duration per
line of all text read by the respondent (364 observations). The observations are plotted in
respondent Id order, so all the controls are plotted first and then all the dyslexic are plotted
afterwards. This is only done in this plot to make the visualisation easier to comprehend
between the two groups, but the data table is not ordered in this way during the analysis.
Prediction of dyslexia using eye tracking
44
==PAGE:54==
0
5000
10000
15000
20000
Duration in ms
0.00000
0.00005
0.00010
0.00015
0.00020
0.00025
0.00030
Density
Control
Dyslexia
(a) Density plot of the reading durations.
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
Observations
2000
4000
6000
8000
10000
12000
14000
16000
Duration in ms
Control
Dyslexia
(b) Scatter plot of the reading durations.
Figure 6.3: Reading duration in milliseconds of an average read line per text of all respondents. Blue graph/­
dots shows the true control distribution/observations and orange graph/dots shows the true dyslexic distribu­
tion/observations. The red dotted line illustrates the decision boundary of the baseline model. Observations
right/above for the boundary is classified as dyslexia and observations left/below for the boundary is classified
as control.
From figure 6.3 it is seen, that many of the observations in each class is correctly clas­
sified, but still some from both are miss­classified. It is also seen that with this method,
more observations from the control class are correctly classified, compared to the dyslexia
class. The duration model shows an accuracy of 76.92%, which is quite high for a base­
line model. However, this is a good measure of a baseline, as this is the simplest way to
distinguish these groups while making a reading test. Therefore the models, based on the
ET data, needs to perform even better than these, to prove that the use of eye trackers is
an improved way of predicting dyslexia.
6.3
Results using aggregated data
For the aggregated data three models are trained; SVM, XGBoost and FNN. This is done
for both desktop ET and webcam ET data. Additionally, a feature selection is made to find
the optimal features to use for prediction of dyslexia. The result of the feature selection
and the result of the three models will be shown in the following subsections.
6.3.1
Feature selection
The feature selection (FS) analysis was done independently of the training of the models.
This was because of the aim to identify the most important features for the general clas­
sification problem of predicting dyslexia and not for optimizing each model performance.
Otherwise, this step should be performed within the inner loop of the nested CV. An ad­
Prediction of dyslexia using eye tracking
45
==PAGE:55==
vantage of during it this way, is that the comparison of the models using FS is based on
the same subset of features. Though, during the FS before the CV will introduce some
bias, as the FS is done on the whole data set. This has to be kept in mind when reviewing
the performance of the results. As mentioned earlier three feature selection methods is
used and the result of each method will be compared, in order of finding the optimal subset
of features. The three methods is ANOVA, Recursive Feature Elimination (RFE) with CV
using Logistic regression (LR) as estimator and Random forest (RF). The estimator for
RFE could have been SVM and the embedded method could have been using XGBoost,
as these are the models that will be trained in this project. Thus, this was not chosen in
order to make the FS and the obtained results less biased towards the trained models
and instead more general in identifying good features for dyslexia prediction. In the end
the three results will be compared and the features selected the most will make the final
selection. This procedure will be performed for both desktop ET data and webcam ET
data, as the best feature subset can differ.
Starting with ANOVA this is the simplest statistical method. The result of the ANOVA
analysis on the desktop ET data is seen in figure 6.4.
0
25
50
75
100
125
150
175
200
Score
Average Saccade Peak Acceleration
Average Fixation Dispersion
Average Fixation Duration
Average Saccade Peak Velocity
Sum Fixation Dispersion
Sum Fixation Duration
Sum Saccade Amplitude
Average Saccade Peak Deceleration
Average Saccade Amplitude
Saccade Backward Count per Minute
Sum Saccade Peak Velocity
Sum Saccade Peak Acceleration
Saccade Count per Minute
Average Saccade Duration
Sum Saccade Peak Deceleration
Saccade Forward Count per Minute
Fixation Count per Minute
Sum Saccade Duration
Dyslexia in F
amily
Figure 6.4: The result of the ANOVA feature selection on desktop ET data. The x­axis shows the score from
the ANOVA test. The y­axis shows each feature ordered by the score, where the highest scored feature is
in the top.
Prediction of dyslexia using eye tracking
46
==PAGE:56==
Each feature has been assigned with a score based on the ANOVA test, which is shown
as a barplot. Each bar represents a feature and the length of the bar represents the score.
The higher the score the higher the importance of the feature for the prediction of dyslexia.
This method doesn’t provide the optimal set of features, as the features are evaluated
independently. However, it is seen that Dyslexia in Family is significantly higher than the
other features. Based on the plot one could argue that the 3 highest scored features
could be selected or 11 highest scored features, depending on the preferred minimum
score value.
Next, the RFE using CV method was applied using LR as estimator. Leave­One­Group­
Out CV was used. Figure 6.5 shows the average accuracy of the model performance
from each iteration in the CV.
Average Saccade Peak Velocity
Fixation Count per Minute
Sum Saccade Amplitude
Average Fixation Duration
Saccade Backward Count per Minute
Saccade Forward Count per Minute
Saccade Count per Minute
Sum Fixation Duration
Sum Saccade Duration
Average Saccade Peak Deceleration
Average Saccade Peak Acceleration
Sum Saccade Peak Velocity
Sum Saccade Peak Acceleration
Average Saccade Duration
Dyslexia in F
amily
Sum Saccade Peak Deceleration
Average Saccade Amplitude
Sum Fixation Dispersion
Average Fixation Dispersion
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
Accuracy
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
Number of features selected
Figure 6.5: The result of the RFE with CV feature selection on desktop ET data. Each data point is the
accuracy of the LR model with the current feature and all the ones left for it. The red point shows the highest
accuracy. The bottom x­axis show the features in the order they recursively were removed. The top x­axis
show the number of features selected. The y­axis shows the accuracy.
The figure shows a lineplot, where each point is the accuracy score evaluated based on
the performance of the LR model, with the specific number of features selected. The top
Prediction of dyslexia using eye tracking
47
==PAGE:57==
x­axis shows the number of features selected. The bottom x­axis shows the names of
the selected features, which is the current feature and all the features positioned left from
it. For example looking at 3 selected features, then it is Fixation Count per Minute, Sum
Saccade Amplitude and Saccade Backward Count per Minute, that are the 3 selected
features. It is seen that the accuracy varies a lot depending on the number of features
selected. The optimal number of features based on the RFE method is 10, but the 9 and
11 are almost as high.
Lastly, the RF algorithm was used as FS method. The model was trained using Leave­
One­Group­Out CV with default hyper­parameters. The result of the FS using RF with the
desktop ET data is seen in figure 6.6.
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.10
0.12
0.14
0.16
Feature importances
Average Fixation Duration
Sum Saccade Amplitude
Average Fixation Dispersion
Average Saccade Duration
Average Saccade Peak Deceleration
Average Saccade Peak Acceleration
Sum Fixation Dispersion
Average Saccade Peak Velocity
Sum Saccade Peak Velocity
Sum Fixation Duration
Sum Saccade Peak Acceleration
Saccade Backward Count per Minute
Fixation Count per Minute
Sum Saccade Peak Deceleration
Average Saccade Amplitude
Saccade Count per Minute
Saccade Forward Count per Minute
Sum Saccade Duration
Dyslexia in F
amily
Figure 6.6: The result of the RF feature selection on desktop ET data. The x­axis shows the feature impor­
tance based on the result from the RF model. The standard errors of each feature importance is shown as
a black error bars. The red dotted line show the boundary, where the features above this line is the selected
features. The y­axis shows each feature ordered by the importance, where the highest scored feature is in
the top.
This figure shows a barplot, like figure 6.4, but with the average feature importance from
all result of each CV iterations as a measure. The standard error (SE) of the feature
importance of each feature is shown as an error bar. The red dotted line illustrates the
boundary for the optimal features using RF. All the features positioned above the boundary
Prediction of dyslexia using eye tracking
48
==PAGE:58==
are the ones selected, which means that 7 features are estimated to be optimal selection.
All the results of the three methods is summarized in table 6.1. The features that are
selected from the methods are assigned 1, whereas the ones that are not selected are
assigned with 0. The Final Score column shows the total number of selections, where
3 is the maximum score, showing that all methods have selected this feature. RFE and
RF is assigning respectively 10 and 7 features, as this is the optimal number of features
detected in the methods. In the ANOVA test no optimal number of features could be ex­
tracted, so the 10 highest scoring features are assigned. The table show that 4 features
has been selected of all methods, 3 features have been selected of two of the methods,
9 of the features have been selected by one of the methods and 3 of the features have
not been selected of any. The optimal number of features for RFE and RF was 10 and
7, so this is around this number of features that must be selected. As all the features
scoring 3 and 2 in the Final Score column equals 7 features, these will be the ones se­
lected. Though, due to some problems occurring when making the analysis with these
7 features, an 8th feature was added to the selection, which is the one feature next in
line. This means that the following will be the features selected for the desktop ET data
analysis: Fixation Count per Minute, Saccade Forward Count per Minute, Saccade Count
per Minute, Sum Saccade Duration, Dyslexia in Family, Sum Saccade Peak Deceleration,
Average Saccade Amplitude, Sum Fixation Duration.
Prediction of dyslexia using eye tracking
49
==PAGE:59==
Feature
ANOVA
RFECV
RF
Final Score
Fixation Count per Minute
1
1
1
3
Saccade Forward Count per Minute
1
1
1
3
Saccade Count per Minute
1
1
1
3
Sum Saccade Duration
1
1
1
3
Dyslexia in Family
1
0
1
2
Sum Saccade Peak Deceleration
1
0
1
2
Average Saccade Amplitude
1
0
1
2
Sum Fixation Duration
0
1
0
1
Average Saccade Peak Deceleration
0
1
0
1
Average Saccade Peak Velocity
0
1
0
1
Sum Saccade Amplitude
0
1
0
1
Average Saccade Duration
1
0
0
1
Saccade Backward Count per Minute
0
1
0
1
Sum Saccade Peak Velocity
1
0
0
1
Sum Saccade Peak Acceleration
1
0
0
1
Average Fixation Duration
0
1
0
1
Sum Fixation Dispersion
0
0
0
0
Average Saccade Peak Acceleration
0
0
0
0
Average Fixation Dispersion
0
0
0
0
Table 6.1: Summary table of the results of the feature selection methods for desktop ET data. The selected
features are marked with bold.
The same process was performed using the webcam ET data. The results of the individual
FS methods can be seen in appendix A.1.1. The summary of the results is shown in table
6.2. The table shows that 6 features has been selected of all methods, 3 features have
been selected of two of the methods, 7 of the features have been selected by one of
the methods and 3 of the features have not been selected of any. The optimal number
of features for RFE and RF was 14 and 6, which is a large range of optimal selections.
Though, all the features scoring 3 and 2 in the Final Score column equals 9 features,
so these will be the ones selected. This is only one more feature selected than for the
desktop ET data. The selected features for the webcam ET data analysis is: Dyslexia in
Family, Sum Saccade Duration, Saccade Count per Minute, Fixation Count per Minute,
Sum Fixation Duration, Saccade Forward Count per Minute, Average Saccade Duration,
Average Saccade Peak Deceleration, Saccade Backward Count per Minute.
Prediction of dyslexia using eye tracking
50
==PAGE:60==
Feature
ANOVA
RFECV
RF
Final Score
Dyslexia in Family
1
1
1
3
Sum Saccade Duration
1
1
1
3
Saccade Count per Minute
1
1
1
3
Fixation Count per Minute
1
1
1
3
Sum Fixation Duration
1
1
1
3
Saccade Forward Count per Minute
1
1
1
3
Average Saccade Duration
1
1
0
2
Average Saccade Peak Deceleration
1
1
0
2
Saccade Backward Count per Minute
1
1
0
2
Sum Fixation Dispersion
1
0
0
1
Average Fixation Duration
0
1
0
1
Average Saccade Peak Acceleration
0
1
0
1
Sum Saccade Amplitude
0
1
0
1
Average Saccade Peak Velocity
0
1
0
1
Sum Saccade Peak Acceleration
0
0
1
1
Sum Saccade Peak Velocity
0
1
0
1
Sum Saccade Peak Deceleration
0
0
0
0
Average Fixation Dispersion
0
0
0
0
Average Saccade Amplitude
0
0
0
0
Table 6.2: Summary table of the results of the feature selection methods for webcam ET data. The selected
features are marked with bold.
The 4 features selected by all methods for the desktop ET data was also selected for
the webcam ET data, so these must be highly valuable for predicting dyslexia. These
are: Fixation Count per Minute, Saccade Forward Count per Minute, Saccade Count
per Minute, Sum Saccade Duration. This is not surprising, as the number and length of
saccades and fixations varies a lot between dyslexic or normal readers. In total the two
data sets have 6 features selected in common, which is expected, as the data sets are
from the same recordings, but from different apparatus. Though, what is also interesting
is to see the difference in the selections. As the desktop ET data is more detailed, some
of the difference in the selection features could be due to the more details in the data.
Whereas for the webcam ET data the difference in the selection could be due to the
features showing better results with less noise. However, it should be mentioned that all
of the features that were different was scored below most of the common features for both
Prediction of dyslexia using eye tracking
51
==PAGE:61==
data sets.
6.3.2
Support Vector Machine
The SVM model was trained on both desktop and webcam ET data. The hyper­parameter
tuning was done in the inner loop of the nested CV with the parameters C, gamma and
kernel. Both Grid Search, Random Search and Baysian was implemented to find the
optimal hyper­parameters. This resulted in the following choices of hyper­parameters for
the model for both desktop and webcam ET data:
C = 0.1, gamma = 0.1, kernel = linear
but other choices for gamma also gave the optimal result. The model was trained four
times; using Leave­One­Group­Out CV and Stratified Group k­Fold CV with and without
FS. The results of the model performance for desktop ET data using the SVM model is
seen in table 6.3.
Desktop Data
Accuracy
Precision
Recall
F1­score
LOGO CV
93.41% ± 4.00
96.43%
87.66%
91.84%
LOGO CV w. FS
95.88% ± 3.77
100%
90.26%
94.88%
SGKF CV
94.23% ± 2.66
96.50%
89.61%
92.93%
SGKF CV w. FS
95.88% ± 2.60
99.29%
90.91%
94.92%
Table 6.3: Performance metric of the SVM model with desktop ET data.
As earlier mentioned the accuracy will be the preferred metric to compare the different
results to, which is why the standard error (SE) has been added to the result. However,
the other metrics are also calculated to evaluate the reliability of the accuracy result. From
the table it is seen, that 95.88 ± 2.60 is the highest accuracy on the test data, which is
using SGKF CV with FS. Though, almost the same result is seen using LOGO CV with
FS. Here it shows that FS made a difference in the result of the model performance. The
other metrics also show good results, which indicates that the model is classifying both
groups highly correct. This is a very good result and way above the baseline model. The
evaluation of the results are based on the prediction on the test data set. The SE values
across the different CV methods vary a lot, because the test data sets vary in size using
the different CV methods. Generally, the SE is smaller using the SGKF compared to
LOGO CV. Therefore the SE value of the accuracy can only be compared with the results
using the same CV method.
Prediction of dyslexia using eye tracking
52
==PAGE:62==
The result of the best performing SVM model for the webcam data is seen in table 6.4.
Webcam Data
Accuracy
Precision
Recall
F1­score
LOGO CV
95.88% ± 3.77
100%
90.26%
94.88%
LOGO CV w. FS
94.23% ± 3.85
96.50%
89.61%
92.93%
SGKF CV
95.60% ± 2.59
99.29%
90.26%
94.56%
SGKF CV w. FS
93.41% ± 2.72
94.52%
89.61%
92.00%
Table 6.4: Performance metric of the SVM model webcam ET data.
For the webcam ET data it is seen that the best performance is the same accuracy as for
the desktop ET data. Thus, the best performance is without using FS, where LOGO and
SGKF CV are performing almost the same.
To see how the models predict the individual respondent, a plot showing the probability
for each respondent and each stimuli is shown in figure 6.7. Both of the figures are made
based on their best performing model. As a disclaimer, it should be mentioned that the
probabilities are calculated using the predict_proba() function from scikit learn. This
calculates the probabilities during CV, which means that the results can be slightly dif­
ferent than those obtained by the predict() function. Also, it will produce meaningless
results on very small data sets. This can be the reason for, why some probabilities of one
respondents are leaning more to the other class, but still correctly classified. The average
of all probabilities per respondent can be seen in appendix A.1.3.
Prediction of dyslexia using eye tracking
53
==PAGE:63==
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Probability
C13
C10
C04
C14
C07
D08
D05
C02
C09
C08
C15
C01
D11
D04
C05
D01
D02
C12
D03
D07
D06
D10
C03
D09
C11
C06
Respondent Id
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
14
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Count of incorrect prediction
(a) Probability prediction for desktop ET data.
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Probability
C13
C10
C04
C14
C07
D08
D05
C02
C09
C08
C15
C01
D11
D04
C05
D01
D02
C12
D03
D07
D06
D10
C03
D09
C11
C06
Respondent Id
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
14
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Count of incorrect prediction
(b) Probability prediction for webcam ET data.
Figure 6.7: Probability prediction for each respondent and each text using the SVM model. The x­axis shows
the probability of being dyslexia. The left sided y­axis shows all the respondent, in green if all observations
are correctly classified and in red if not. The right sided y­axis shows the count of how many observations
was miss­classified. The blue dots are the true control and the orange dots are the true dyslexic.
The performance of the best models from both data sets was the same, which is seen in
the plot, as the same amount of observations was miss­classified (total of 15 wrong pre­
dictions). It is the same predictions that are wrong for both of them; all observations from
respondent D01 and one observation from respondent D02. As all the observations from
respondent D01 are wrong, this could imply that the reading pattern is more likely to be
as a normal reader. Looking at the answers from the questionnaire, this respondent is 23
years old and got diagnosed at 13 years old, which means that the reading skills can have
developed over the years. Also, the respondent is currently studying at a university and
the reading scale of, how much they consider themselves reading in their daily lives, was
set to 4/5. This indicates that the respondent practises the reading skills very often. All
this information can confirm the reason for this result. Looking at the difference between
the desktop ET data and webcam ET data results, they are very similar, but in general
it is seen that there are higher variance in the probabilities of figure 6.7a than in figure
Prediction of dyslexia using eye tracking
54
==PAGE:64==
6.7b per respondent. This is seen for both the control and dyslexic respondents. Only
respondent C09 has higher variance in figure 6.7b. The bigger variance in the desktop ET
data could be explained by the higher amount of details in the data, whereas the signal
for the webcam ET data is more smooth and less noisy. Overall, this shows that the same
well performing results can be obtained using both desktop and webcam ET data with the
SVM model.
6.3.3
Extreme Gradient Boost
Next the aggregated data was trained using the XGBoost algortihm. The following hyper­
parameters was tuned using Grid Search, Random Search and Baysian: learning_rate,
max_depth, colsample_bytree, gamma, reg_lambda and reg_alpha. This resulted in the
following choices of optimal hyper­parameters for the desktop ET data:
learning_rate = 0.3, max_depth = 15, colsample_bytree = 0.4,
gamma = 0, reg_alpha = 0.01, reg_lambda = 5
and for the webcam ET data:
learning_rate = 0.3, max_depth = 12, colsample_bytree = 0.4,
gamma = 0.2, reg_alpha = 0.1, reg_lambda = 1
Though, other values of max_depth would also give the optimal result. The same CV
methods with and without FS was trained with the XGBoost model. The results of the
model performance for desktop ET data is seen in table 6.5.
Desktop Data
Accuracy
Precision
Recall
F1­score
LOGO CV
85.16% ± 5.53
89.06%
74.03%
80.85%
LOGO CV w. FS
88.46% ± 5.64
90.00%
81.82%
85.71%
SGKF CV
85.71% ± 3.44
89.84%
74.68%
81.56%
SGKF CV w. FS
87.09% ± 3.71
87.41%
81.17%
84.18%
Table 6.5: Performance metric of the XGBoost model with desktop ET data.
From the table it is seen, that the performance still is better than both baseline models,
but not as good as the SVM model. The best accuracy is using LOGO CV with FS, but the
result of the SGKF CV with FS is almost as good. Again, the other metrics calculations is
also performing well for all models, so the performance is reliable.
The performance of the model using the webcam ET data is seen in table 6.6.
Prediction of dyslexia using eye tracking
55
==PAGE:65==
Webcam Data
Accuracy
Precision
Recall
F1­score
LOGO CV
92.31% ± 4.13
92.00%
89.61%
90.79%
LOGO CV w. FS
93.68% ± 3.85
95.17%
89.61%
92.31%
SGKF CV
90.66% ± 3.30
88.46%
89.61%
89.03%
SGKF CV w. FS
94.78% ± 2.59
98.56%
88.96%
93.52%
Table 6.6: Performance metric of the XGBoost model with webcam ET data
It is interesting to see, that using the XGBoost model, the accuracy of the webcam ET
data is higher compared to the desktop ET data. Still, it is not as good as the results from
the SVM model, but it is very close. The best performance is seen with FS and SGKF CV.
The probability plot of both desktop and webcam ET data predictions for all respondents
using the XGBoost model is seen in figure 6.8.
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Probability
C13
C10
C04
C14
C07
D08
D05
C02
C09
C08
C15
C01
D11
D04
C05
D01
D02
C12
D03
D07
D06
D10
C03
D09
C11
C06
Respondent Id
0
4
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
14
14
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
9
0
Count of incorrect prediction
(a) Probability prediction for desktop ET data.
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Probability
C13
C10
C04
C14
C07
D08
D05
C02
C09
C08
C15
C01
D11
D04
C05
D01
D02
C12
D03
D07
D06
D10
C03
D09
C11
C06
Respondent Id
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
2
0
0
1
0
14
2
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Count of incorrect prediction
(b) Probability prediction for webcam ET data.
Figure 6.8: Probability prediction for each respondent and each text using the XGBoost model. The x­
axis shows the probability of being dyslexia. The left sided y­axis shows all the respondent, in green if all
observations are correctly classified and in red if not. The right sided y­axis shows the count of how many
observations was miss­classified. The blue dots are the true control and the orange dots are the true dyslexic.
Prediction of dyslexia using eye tracking
56
==PAGE:66==
The figures shows, like the probability plot for the SVM, D01 and D02 are miss­classified,
where D01 has all predictions wrong for both. Though, the remaining miss­classifications
are different. In figure 6.8a more controls are wrong. Looking at the ones with highest
number of miss­classified this is C11, D02 and C10 with respectively 9, 14 and 4 incorrect
classifications. Looking at the control respondents, that are miss­classified, are quite in­
teresting. Both are university students, which means that they are practising their reading
skills daily, even though they put their reading scale at 3. C10 has dyslexia in the family,
which could be the reason for some variation in the reading pattern. Yet, C11 doesn’t
have any dyslexia in the family. To be certain of, if the model is prediction wrongly or
if the respondent could show some signs of dyslexia, a dyslexia test should have been
done beforehand. Another interesting result is that D02 is predicted as control for all ob­
servations. This respondent just recently was diagnosed with dyslexia. Even though D02
is studying the reading scale was put to 1, which indicates that the reading skills are not
practised at all. This could be a case of a mild dyslexia, but it could also be due to bad
recordings, as for example the eyes were dark brown and movements occurred during the
recordings. Considering the webcam results using XGBoost, those are very promising,
as they are similar to the results seen with the SVM.
6.3.4
Feed­Forward Neural Network
Finally, the FNN model is trained on the aggregated data for both desktop and webcam
ET data. The network has been trained with 1, 2 and 3 hidden layers, which gave more
or less the same result, as why the simplest model with 1 hidden layer was chosen. The
structure of the chosen network can be seen in figure 6.9.
Prediction of dyslexia using eye tracking
57
==PAGE:67==
Figure 6.9: Structure of the FNN used in this project with one hidden layer. The input layer has size n, which
is either n=19 with all features, n=8 for FS with desktop ET data or n=9 for FS with webcam ET data. The
hidden layer has 10 units. The output layer has one unit, which is binary with 0 as control and 1 as dyslexic.
Sigmoid was used as activation function in the output layer. Binary cross­entropy was
used as the loss function, because it is the optimal choices for a binary classification
problem. Hyper­parameter tuning was done by trial and error. The learning rate of the
ADAM optimizer was set to 0.001, the batch size was set to 70 and the network is trained
using 100 epochs. The result of this network with the desktop ET data is seen in table
6.7.
Desktop Data
Accuracy
Precision
Recall
F1­score
LOGO CV
94.23% ± 3.79
89.61%
96.50%
92.93%
LOGO CV w. FS
94.51% ± 3.83
90.91%
95.89%
93.33%
SGKF CV
93.41% ± 2.77
90.91%
93.33%
92.11%
SGKF CV w. FS
94.51% ± 2.64
90.91%
95.89%
93.33%
Table 6.7: Performance metric of the FNN with desktop ET data.
It is seen that the performance of FNN is also very good, almost at the level of the SVM
model. The highest accuracy is seen using FS both using LOGO and SGKF CV. They also
show the same result in precision, recall and F1­score. As the SGKF CV has a smaller
SE and the computational power is less, training only 13 folds, one could argue that this
result is better. To see how the performance of the network has evolved over the 100
epochs, an average plot of the accuracy and loss per CV fold is shown of the SGKF CV
with FS in figure 6.10.
Prediction of dyslexia using eye tracking
58
==PAGE:68==
0
20
40
60
80
100
Epochs
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
Accuracy
T
raining Accuracy
Validation Accuracy
(a) The average accuracy of the model performance.
0
20
40
60
80
100
Epochs
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
Loss
T
raining Loss
Validation Loss
(b) The average loss of the model performance.
Figure 6.10: The average performance of the FNN model using SGKF CV with FS on desktop ET data
for 100 epochs. The purple line show the performance on the training data and the green line show the
performance on the test data.
In the figure 6.10a the green line is less smooth than the purple line, as data from only
2 respondent is used for the test data. As expected, the test data is performing slightly
worse than the training data, which show that the model is not overfitting. It seems like
the model converges, as the test accuracy is stable around 93%, already after 40 epochs.
Also the loss in the learning curve looks good and stable around 0.27.
Next the webcam ET data is examined using the same model. The results is seen in table
6.8.
Webcam Data
Accuracy
Precision
Recall
F1­score
LOGO CV
91.48% ± 4.40
90.26%
89.68%
89.97%
LOGO CV w. FS
90.66% ± 4.77
90.26%
87.97%
89.10%
SGKF CV
92.58% ± 3.14
91.56%
90.97%
91.26%
SGKF CV w. FS
94.23% ± 2.63
90.26%
95.85%
92.98%
Table 6.8: Performance metric of the FNN with webcam ET data.
Prediction of dyslexia using eye tracking
59
==PAGE:69==
0
20
40
60
80
100
Epochs
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
Accuracy
T
raining Accuracy
Validation Accuracy
(a) The average accuracy of the model performance.
0
20
40
60
80
100
Epochs
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
Loss
T
raining Loss
Validation Loss
(b) The average loss of the model performance.
Figure 6.11: The average performance of the FNN model using SGKF CV with FS on webcam ET data
for 100 epochs. The purple line show the performance on the training data and the green line show the
performance on the test data.
Also using FNN good result are seen with webcam ET data. The best result is seen using
SGKF CV with FS. Without FS the accuracy is also good and for the LOGO CV it is better.
Looking at the accuracy and loss plot in figure 6.11 for all 100 epochs it is very similar to
figure 6.10, which means that the model seem to converge and not overfit. However, the
test accuracy is first stable after 80 epochs around 94%. The loss in the learning curve
is stable around 0.3, but increasing a tiny bit close towards the 100 epochs. This could
indicate that training it for more than 100 epochs could lead to overfitting.
Each individual prediction for the two best performing models for desktop and webcam
ET data is seen in figure 6.12
Prediction of dyslexia using eye tracking
60
==PAGE:70==
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Probability
C13
C10
C04
C14
C07
D08
D05
C02
C09
C08
C15
C01
D11
D04
C05
D01
D02
C12
D03
D07
D06
D10
C03
D09
C11
C06
Respondent Id
0
2
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
14
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
3
0
Count of incorrect prediction
(a) Probability prediction for desktop ET data.
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Probability
C13
C10
C04
C14
C07
D08
D05
C02
C09
C08
C15
C01
D11
D04
C05
D01
D02
C12
D03
D07
D06
D10
C03
D09
C11
C06
Respondent Id
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
2
4
0
0
1
0
14
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Count of incorrect prediction
(b) Probability prediction for webcam ET data.
Figure 6.12: Probability prediction for each respondent and each text using the FNN model. The x­axis shows
the probability of being dyslexia. The left sided y­axis shows all the respondent, in green if all observations
are correctly classified and in red if not. The right sided y­axis shows the count of how many observations
was miss­classified. The blue dots are the true control and the orange dots are the true dyslexic
Like the other probability plots figure 6.12 also have D01 as miss­classified for all observa­
tions. It is seen that C08, C11, C10, D04 and C15 also have a some miss­classifications,
but only a very few. Some of these are also miss­classified and with big variance in the
other probability plots, so this is not too surprising.
Overall, the results seen using the aggregated data is very promising for the usage of the
webcam ET data. It was not expected that the webcam ET data would perform just as
good as the desktop ET data, but it could be due to the loss of details when aggregating
the data.
6.4
Results using X gaze signal
Using the raw signal as training data, all the details of the recording will be analysed in
order to predict dyslexia. As the signal of the webcam ET data is more smooth and with
Prediction of dyslexia using eye tracking
61
==PAGE:71==
less details, it will be interesting to see, how the performance will differentiate from the
desktop ET data.
6.4.1
Convolutional Neural Network
The model used on the signal data is a one dimensional CNN. The network has been
trained using 1, 2 and 3 layers. As 2 and 3 layers performed almost equally, 2 layers was
preferred to keep the model less complex. The structure of the chosen network can be
seen in figure 6.13.
Figure 6.13: Structure of the 1D CNN used in this project with 2 convolutional layers, one max pool layer,
a flatten layer and 2 fully connected layers. The input layer has size n, which is either n=3554 or n=656 or
with data augmentation n=1000 or n=200 for respectively desktop and webcam ET data. The output layer
has one unit, which is binary with 0 as control and 1 as dyslexic.
Sigmoid was used as activation function in the output layer. Binary cross­entropy was
used as the loss function, because it is the optimal choices for a binary classification
problem. Hyper­parameter tuning was done by trial and error. For the optimizer SGD
was used, as the ADAM optimizer was too greedy and lead to overfitting. The learning
rate was set to 0.01, the batch size was set to 42 and the network is trained using 100
epochs. Batch normalization was added in between the two convolutional layers and
dropout was added between the two FC layers. This was done in an attempt, to try to avoid
overfitting as much as possible. Another attempt to avoid overfitting was by implementing
data augmentation. Slicing the data into smaller signal lengths, made the data set bigger,
which is essential for the training set. However, as the signals of dyslexia readers typically
are longer, this would result in a higher imbalance of the data. Due to the bigger training
set and the bigger imbalance in the data, the training is only performed using SGKF CV.
The result of this CNN with the desktop ET data is seen in table 6.9.
Prediction of dyslexia using eye tracking
62
==PAGE:72==
Desktop Data
Accuracy
Precision
Recall
F1­score
SGKF CV (5)
65.11% ± 1.32
55.19%
59.44%
57.24%
SGKF CV (5) w. aug.
65.64% ± 0.50
67.65%
70.10%
68.85%
SGKF CV (13)
65.93% ± 2.49
61.04%
59.49%
60.26%
SGKF CV (13) w. aug.
61.56% ± 2.90
66.53%
65.52%
66.02%
Table 6.9: Performance metric of the CNN with desktop ET data.
Using 1D CNN on this data set doesn’t provide good results. Seen from table 6.9 all
performances scored higher accuracy than baseline model 1, but worse than the baseline
model 2. This means that better results of predicting dyslexia are found using reading
duration. Comparing the different methods used it is seen, that the best result is using
SGKF CV with 13 folds without data augmentation, but almost the same results are found
using SGKF CV with 5 folds with and without data augmentation. This indicates, that
using desktop ET data, data augmentations doesn’t have any significant improvement in
the result.
Looking at figure 6.14 it is seen that the accuracy and the loss over 100 epochs doesn’t
converge to as good results, as seen with the aggregated data using FNN. The accuracy
of the training data converges to 100%, which shows that it learns the trends in the data.
Though, the accuracy of the test data seems to not perform as good and is stable more
or less around 65% after 50 epochs. The loss of the training seems to learn something,
but in a slower pace than seen for the FNN. Yet, loss for the test data is only decreasing
initially and then increasing slowly back to 0.7. This learning curve show signs of over­
fitting, which can explain the bad performance of the prediction. Many attempt of hyper­
parameter tuning have been applied in order of avoiding the overfitting, but this result of
the loss function, was the least overfitting of them all. As an example using the ADAM
optimizer, the loss function of the test data would increase throughout all 100 epochs, but
the accuracy would remain on the same level (see appendix A.1.2).
Prediction of dyslexia using eye tracking
63
==PAGE:73==
0
20
40
60
80
100
Epochs
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
Accuracy
T
raining Accuracy
Validation Accuracy
(a) The average accuracy of the model performance.
0
20
40
60
80
100
Epochs
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
Loss
T
raining Loss
Validation Loss
(b) The average loss of the model performance.
Figure 6.14: The average performance of the CNN model using SGKF CV with 13 folds on desktop ET data
for 100 epochs. The purple line shows the performance on the training data and the green line shows the
performance on the test data.
The webcam ET data is examined using the same model. The results is seen in table
6.10.
Webcam Data
Accuracy
Precision
Recall
F1­score
SGKF CV (5)
56.04% ± 1.79
25.97%
46.51%
33.33%
SGKF CV (5) w. aug.
60.53% ± 0.56
61.63%
62.67%
62.14%
SGKF CV (13)
55.77% ± 2.86
33.12%
46.79%
38.78%
SGKF CV (13) w. aug.
58.69% ± 3.39
57.81%
61.38%
59.54%
Table 6.10: Performance metric of the CNN with webcam ET data.
The results of the CNN with the webcam ET data is performing even worse, than with the
desktop ET data. Only the ones using data augmentation are performing slightly better
than baseline model 1. The best result is seen using SGKF CV with 5 folds and with data
augmentation.
Other than the accuracy being lower than with the desktop ET data, the loss in the learning
curve is also showing poorer results. In figure 6.15 it is seen that the curve of the accuracy
and the loss of the training data is learning slow. For the accuracy it doesn’t reach much
over 80% and it never converges. The same is seen for the training loss, where it never
converges and never reaches 0. The curves are looking like linear curves after a few
epochs. The accuracy curve for the test data seems to stable around 60% after around
Prediction of dyslexia using eye tracking
64
==PAGE:74==
60 epochs. This converges more than the training accuracy, but the performance is not
high, which means that the pattern in the data probably is unidentified. The loss of the test
data decreases in the beginning, but seems to increase towards the end. This shows that
the model doesn’t seem to learn the pattern in the data, but also it is overfitting. Increasing
the learning rate or the number of epochs have been tested, but in both cases it leads to
increased overfitting of the learning curve (see appendix A.1.2).
0
20
40
60
80
100
Epochs
0.50
0.55
0.60
0.65
0.70
0.75
0.80
Accuracy
T
raining Accuracy
Validation Accuracy
(a) The average accuracy of the model performance.
0
20
40
60
80
100
Epochs
0.45
0.50
0.55
0.60
0.65
0.70
0.75
Loss
T
raining Loss
Validation Loss
(b) The average loss of the model performance.
Figure 6.15: The average performance of the CNN model using SGKF CV with 5 folds on webcam ET data
for 100 epochs. The purple line shows the performance on the training data and the green line shows the
performance on the test data.
The prediction of each respondent using the CNN model on desktop and webcam ET data
is seen in figure 6.16. Even though the best performing model with webcam ET data was
using data augmentation, the result of figure 6.16b is without data augmentation. Intro­
ducing data augmentation will increase the observation per respondent with an unknown
number, therefore it is difficult to compare the two results.
Both figures show are big variance between all observations per respondent. Also most
of the observations per respondent have an average, which lies in the middle (see figure
A.10 in appendix for simplicity). It shows how the model is predicting only a little better
than random. The CNN on the desktop ET data had a higher accuracy, than the webcam
ET data, which is seen as three respondent have all observations correctly classified,
wheres there are zero of the respondents for the webcam ET data.
Prediction of dyslexia using eye tracking
65
==PAGE:75==
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
Probability
C13
C10
C04
C14
C07
D08
D05
C02
C09
C08
C15
C01
D11
D04
C05
D01
D02
C12
D03
D07
D06
D10
C03
D09
C11
C06
Respondent Id
0
6
9
4
9
0
2
4
1
7
2
0
8
13
2
7
2
4
2
2
7
14
7
3
9
0
Count of incorrect prediction
(a) Probability prediction for desktop ET data.
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
Probability
C13
C10
C04
C14
C07
D08
D05
C02
C09
C08
C15
C01
D11
D04
C05
D01
D02
C12
D03
D07
D06
D10
C03
D09
C11
C06
Respondent Id
4
1
6
3
5
7
14
7
5
3
3
6
13
12
1
9
7
3
9
7
6
14
2
5
6
3
Count of incorrect prediction
(b) Probability prediction for webcam ET data.
Figure 6.16: Probability prediction for each respondent and each text using the CNN model. The x­axis
shows the probability of being dyslexia. The left sided y­axis shows all the respondent, in green if all ob­
servations are correctly classified and in red if not. The right sided y­axis shows the count of how many
observations was miss­classified. The blue dots are the true control and the orange dots are the true dyslexic
Overall, it seems like using the signal data for prediction show better performance using
the desktop ET data than the webcam ET data. This could be due to the desktop ET data
containing more details/variations in the data. However, the performance of both ET data
sets were not on the level of the results seen using the aggregated data.
6.5
Summary of results
To summarise all the results seen from the previous sections, table 6.11 show all the best
results from each model and both type of ET data. Generally, the performance of the
different models are really good and this proves, that ET data can be used for dyslexia
prediction. The best performing model is the SVM both for desktop and webcam ET
data, with an accuracy of 95.88%, nevertheless the FNN performed almost on the same
level. The difference between using SGKF CV and LOGO CV are not significant, so both
methods are good. Most of the best results are seen with FS, which proves that removing
Prediction of dyslexia using eye tracking
66
==PAGE:76==
irrelevant features can improve the performance. The interesting thing is that the webcam
ET data actually performs as good, and sometimes better than the ET desktop data using
aggregated data. Though, a bigger difference between the two ET data appeared when
training on the signal data. The desktop ET data performed better using the CNN model.
Unfortunately this model didn’t perform much better than the baseline model due to the
small data and the complexity of the model. Overall this shows that webcam ET data can
be used for predicting dyslexia preferred using aggregated data, where it performs just as
good as desktop ET data.
Model
CV type
FS/aug.
Accuracy
BL 1
­
­
57.69%
BL 2
­
­
76.92%
Desktop ET
SVM
SGKF
Yes
95.88% ± 2.60
XGB
LOGO
Yes
88.46% ± 5.64
FNN
SGKF
Yes
94.51% ± 2.64
CNN
SGKF (13)
No
65.93% ± 2.49
Webcam ET
SVM
LOGO
No
95.88% ± 3.77
XGB
SGKF
Yes
94.78% ± 2.59
FNN
SGKF
Yes
94.23% ± 2.63
CNN
SGKF (5)
Yes
58.69% ± 3.39
Table 6.11: Summary of the best results.
Prediction of dyslexia using eye tracking
67
==PAGE:77==
7
Discussion
This chapter discusses the results and the limitations of the study and what can be done
as future work.
7.1
Prediction of dyslexia
The results show a high accuracy, for the prediction of dyslexia, with most of the models
using aggregated data. This was expected to happen using the desktop ET data, based
on the related work, but fortunately this was also the case using webcam ET data. The
best result had 95.88% accuracy for both ET data set using the SVM model, but nearly as
good results was found using FNN. Possibly the model could perform even better if the
time parameter was not removed from the data, as seen in the related work, but this was
done in order of distinguishing slow readers from dyslexic readers. The highest accuracy
found using signal data was 65.93% for desktop ET data and 58.69% for webcam ET
data. This is just above the result of baseline model 1 and worse than baseline model
2. It means that using CNN on signal data performs almost randomly and is worse at
predicting dyslexia than without using an eye tracker. It should be mentioned however,
that good results have been seen using 1D CNN on this type of data from the related
work[32].
The con using aggregated data is that it requires a lot of pre­possessing. Opposite, the
advantage of the signal data is that it doesn’t need much pre­processing, but the mod­
els have to be more complex. One has to decide if it is worth spending more time pre­
processing the data or training a more complex model. In the case of a small dataset,
where overfitting is easily occurring, simple models with lot of pre­processing is preferred
in order to achieve the best performance. The reason why the aggregated data performs
better than signal data is due to multiple things. First of all it is known, that the impor­
tant differences in gaze pattern while reading is shown in the saccades and the fixations.
Those are categorized in the aggregated data and the remaining gaze is discarded. The
desktop and webcam ET data performs equally good using aggregated data, probably
because the small details in the data are eliminated when aggregating. Secondly, the
variations in the data could be less clear in the raw signals and especially for the webcam
ET data. Signal data is generally providing more information about the gaze, but it also
Prediction of dyslexia using eye tracking
68
==PAGE:78==
contains a lot of irrelevant noise.
Comparing the result with the all the literature from the related work shows, that this result
is almost as good as the very best results. It is the third best accuracy. Asvestopoulou et
al. 2019 and Nerusil et al. 2021 achieved better results with respectively 97% and 96.6%
accuracy. Asvestopoulou et al. used the SVM model with aggregated data and Nerusil et
al. used 1D CNN with signal data to obtain the results. However, comparing the webcam
ET result with the low resolution results, this was the very best seen. The best result from
the related work was 87.8% accuracy from Vajs et al. 2023 using LR on aggregated data
with 30 Hz sample frequency. It is a big improvement of the result seen in this project
using actual webcam ET data.
The feature selection analysis showed that the optimal number of features was 8­9 and
that the four common features were: Fixation Count per Minute, Saccade Forward Count
per Minute, Saccade Count per Minute and Sum Saccade Duration. This is not surpris­
ing, as these features are showing much variation between normal and dyslexic readers,
based on the background theory from section 2.2.1. Though, it should be kept in mind,
that the results of the accuracy of the different models contain some bias, due to the fea­
ture selection being outside of the CV. The accuracy of the models containing all features
performed almost as good as with FS, so it is assumed that it would not be much bias
added.
Comparing all the probability plots for individual predictions shows that often it is the
same respondents, that are miss­classified. The reason for miss­classification appearing
among control respondent could be because some show signs of dyslexia, but haven’t
been tested. Dyslexic respondents could be miss­classified if they often practise their
reading skill, so it becomes similar to a normal reading pattern. Both classes could also
be miss­classified, if much noise is added to the recording. The questionnaire answers
helped cover some of the uncertainty of why one might be miss­classified. As the size of
the data is small it is also hard to identify outliers. Reasons for outliers could be because
of bad recordings, as noise could be introduced due to multiple factors. Though, as the
comparison of observations was limited, confirming outliers would be difficult. As an ex­
ample the respondents using glasses was removed from the data at one point, as this
typically makes the quality of the recordings poorer. Nevertheless, this had no influence
of the performance of the models, whereas it is more important to include more data for
the analysis.
Prediction of dyslexia using eye tracking
69
==PAGE:79==
7.2
Limitations of the data
The primary limitation of this study is the small number of respondents participating (only
26 respondents). Due to the time limit, it was difficult to collect data from a lot of respon­
dents. Optimally, the size of respondents should have been 500­1000 compared to other
ML tasks. To compensate for this, each respondent had to read 14 slides of text, so the
data size would increase to 364 recordings. Doing this also lead to some more limitations,
that needed to be carefully handled. As the same respondent was providing 14 obser­
vations the data had to be grouped per respondent. Not doing this would lead to data
leakage, as recordings from the same respondent could be in both the training and test
data set. Most of the literature in related work also had a small data set with the same
issues, but the most popular data set had 185 respondents with only one recording per
respondent (the Swedish data set [27]). This data set has shown great success, as why
many other literatures have used it.
Another reason for the great success of this particular data set, is that the respondents
all are 3rd grade student, which is the optimal age for initially detection of dyslexia. In
this age group all readers are more or less on the same level and have spend the same
amount of time practising their reading skills. The signs of dyslexia are also more visible
in the reading patterns compared to adult readers (see table 2.1, in section 2.1.1). Un­
fortunately, the age range of the respondent used in this project was large (13­51) with
the mean age around 23­24 years for both controls and dyslexic. The consequence of
this is, that their reading skills and their level of practising differ a lot. This can influence
the results, as some have had more time practising, which can be seen in their reading
patterns. It can potentially lead to the models finding an incorrect trend in reading patterns
for differentiating dyslexic from normal readers.
These respondents from the literature was also confirmed either high risk or low risk of
being dyslexia. In this project only the dyslexic respondent was confirmed to be dyslexic
with a dyslexia test. The control respondent haven’t had any confirmation about them
not being dyslexic, which introduces some uncertainty in the analysis. Also, some of the
dyslexic respondents was diagnosed many years ago. As they have received helping aids
and practised their reading since, this can show as a more normal reading pattern. Ideally,
all respondents participating in the study should be tested right before the beginning of
the project, in order to verify the labels, and be the same age group still attending primary
school.
Prediction of dyslexia using eye tracking
70
==PAGE:80==
Looking at the data collection another factor could have been improved. The stimuli used
for the recordings was slides of black text on a white background. This was chosen, as
this usually is how text are displayed. However, when using the webcam recordings the
bright white light from the screen showed as a reflection on top of the pupil. This made
the webcam ET less accurate, especially seen in the y­coordinates, which is why only
the x­coordinates were used. To improve this the background of the stimuli should have
been grey, as this is proven to be better for the webcam ET algorithm [4]. This would
also improve the experience for the respondents, as the calibration was using a grey
background and the transition between the grey calibration to the white background was
disturbing for the eyes.
7.3
Future work
This project shows a great hope of developing a screening tool for diagnosing dyslexia
using webcam ET. This is major as if implemented in the primary schools, this would
potentially improve the identification of the children with dyslexia. This would also be a
cheap and fast solution, as it only requires a webcam, computer, display and an observer,
that controls that the test is done correctly. The test would only consist of calibration,
reading a text and follow up questions, which can be as fast as 10 minutes total. This
is much more efficient, compared to the test done currently. The setting of the testing
would also be more ”normal”, as the children are used to read from a screen. This would
eliminate the selection part of the children, who needs to be tested, which both is a relief
for the teacher and the child. Though, it should be mentioned that this is only a tool used
for screening. If one is predicted to be dyslexia using this method, there is still a need for
further tests to make the diagnosis.
To confirm the results seen in this project, in the future a study using a bigger, ungrouped
data set needs to be made. It should be considered to introduce a third label, like what
is seen in the current tests; Normal reader, Signs of dyslexia, High risk of dyslexia. This
could potentially increase the accuracy of the model, for those who a not severe dyslexia,
but also makes it easier to compare the results with the current testing methods. Other
than confirming the result on a large data set, the next step is to make real time predictions.
This would provide results of the screening test immediately and speed up the process
even more. There is already seen promising results in very recent literature [34].
Other than the models used in this project it could be interesting make results using Recur­
Prediction of dyslexia using eye tracking
71
==PAGE:81==
rent Neural Network (RNN), which is a neural network used for time series data. Using
signal data it could be interesting to see, if the RNN model would shows better perfor­
mance, than with the CNN. Another interesting thing that could be tried out is different
signal interpolation methods. This could be interesting to compare the different interpola­
tion methods and see, if that could increase the performance.
The screening method has huge potential for the detection of dyslexia, but also for the
detection of other diseases. It is known that from the reading patterns or in general eye
movements, various of other diseases can also be detected like Parkinson’s and Dementia
[67] [68]. The differences in the patterns would differ depending on the specific disease
that is predicted, but training different models with great accuracy should be possible. This
introduces a huge opportunity, as a tool for early detection of various diseases, which can
help provide the right treatment in time.
Prediction of dyslexia using eye tracking
72
==PAGE:82==
8
Conclusion
The aim of the project was to identify, if ET data could be used for predicting dyslexia. The
best results for both data sets was 95.88% accuracy, which was achieved using the SVM
model with FS on aggregated data. Similar results was also seen using the FNN model.
The optimal number of selected features were 8­9, where the 4 common features selected
for both data sets were: Fixation Count per Minute, Saccade Forward Count per Minute,
Saccade Count per Minute and Sum Saccade Duration. The best performance using the
signal data was 65.93% and 58.69% on the desktop and webcam ET data, respectively.
This was only slightly better than baseline model 1, but worse than baseline model 2.
The result using the aggregated data is the third best of the desktop ET data and the top
performing of the webcam ET data, compared to the literature in the related work. This
confirms that good results can be accomplished both with high quality and low quality eye
trackers. The primary limitation of the study was the small size of the data sets. It would
be interesting to see, if the same results could be recreated using a larger size data. The
future of using ET data as a screening tool for predicting dyslexia is bright, especially with
the good results seen using webcam ET.
Prediction of dyslexia using eye tracking
73
==PAGE:83==
Bibliography
[1]
Steven Zauderer. 33 Dyslexia Statistics Facts: How Many People Have Dyslexia?
2022. URL: https://www.crossrivertherapy.com/research/dyslexia-statistics.
[2]
Børne­ og undervisningsministeriet. Vejledning til Ordblindetesten. 2023. URL: https:
//www.uvm.dk/-/media/filer/uvm/udd/folke/pdf23/marts/230308-vejledning-til-
ordblindetesten.pdf.
[3]
“Do eye movements hold the key to dyslexia?” In: Neuropsychologia 19.1 (1981),
pp. 57–64. DOI: 10.1016/0028-3932(81)90044-0.
[4]
iMotions. Webcam Based Eye Tracking ­ Whitepaper (v2). 2022. URL: https://
storage.pardot.com/271012/1680530749oL4p9Plp/WebcamET%5C_accuracy%5C_
whitepaper%5C_V2%5C_%5C_April%5C_2022%5C_.pdf.
[5]
Sir Jim Rose. What is dyslexia? 2009. URL: https://dyslexiahistory.web.ox.ac.uk/
what-dyslexia.
[6]
What is dyslexia? 2020. URL: https://eda-info.eu/what-is-dyslexia/.
[7]
What are reading disorders? 2020. URL: https://www.nichd.nih.gov/health/topics/
reading/conditioninfo/disorders.
[8]
Robin L. Peterson and Bruce F. Pennington. Developmental Dyslexia. 2012. DOI:
10.1016/S0140-6736(12)60198-6.
[9]
V. Molfese et al. “Developmental Dyslexia and Dysgraphia”. In: Encyclopedia of Lan­
guage Linguistics (Second Edition). Ed. by Keith Brown. Second Edition. Oxford:
Elsevier, 2006, pp. 485–491. DOI: 10.1016/B0-08-044854-2/04166-3.
[10]
Ordblindeforeningen. Hjælpemidler til ordblinde. 2023. URL: https://www.ordblindeforeningen.
dk/viden-om/hjaelpemidler/.
[11]
Ordblindeforeningen. Ordblindetesten. 2023. URL: https://www.ordblindeforeningen.
dk/viden-om/ordblindetest/.
[12]
British Dyslexia Association. Signs of dyslexia (Primary school age). 2023. URL:
https://www.bdadyslexia.org.uk/advice/children/is- my- child- dyslexic/signs- of-
dyslexia-primary-age.
[13]
British Dyslexia Association. Signs of dyslexia (adult). 2023. URL: https://www.
bdadyslexia.org.uk/advice/adults/am-i-dyslexic/signs-of-dyslexia.
Prediction of dyslexia using eye tracking
74
==PAGE:84==
[14]
Bryn Farnsworth. How We Read ­ What Eye Tracking Can Tell Us. 2021. URL:
https://imotions.com/blog/insights/research-insights/reading-eye-tracking/.
[15]
Jukka Hyönä and Johanna K. Kaakinen. “Eye Movements During Reading”. In: Eye
Movement Research: An Introduction to its Scientific Foundations and Applications.
Ed. by Christoph Klein and Ulrich Ettinger. Cham: Springer International Publishing,
2019, pp. 239–274. DOI: 10.1007/978-3-030-20085-5_7.
[16]
Joakim Lustig. “Identifying dyslectic gaze pattern”. PhD thesis. KTH Royal Institute
of Technology, 2016.
[17]
Wikipedia. Eye movement in reading. 2023. URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/
Eye_movement_in_reading.
[18]
Bryn Farnsworth. What is Eye Tracking and How Does it Work? 2019. URL: https:
//imotions.com/blog/learning/best-practice/eye-tracking-work/.
[19]
Bryn Farnsworth. Eye Tracking: The Complete Pocket Guide. 2023. URL: https:
//imotions.com/blog/learning/best-practice/eye-tracking/.
[20]
Tobii. Dark and Bright pupil tracking. 2022. URL: https://connect.tobii.com/s/article/
What-is-dark-and-bright-pupil-tracking?language=en%5C_US.
[21]
Massimo Gneo et al. “A free geometry model­independent neural eye­gaze tracking
system”. In: (2012). DOI: 10.1186/1743-0003-9-82.
[22]
Smart Eye. Aurora. 2023. URL: https://smarteye.se/aurora/setup/.
[23]
Neurospec. Eye Tracking Glasses ETV. 2023. URL: https://www.neurospec.com/
Products/Details/1086/eye-tracking-glasses-etv.
[24]
Bryn Farnsworth. Eye Tracker Prices – An Overview of 15+ products. 2023. URL:
https://imotions.com/blog/learning/product-news/eye-tracker-prices/.
[25]
Ole Baunbæk Jensen. Webcam­Based Eye Tracking vs. an Eye Tracker [Pros Cons].
2022. URL: https://imotions.com/blog/learning/best-practice/webcam-eye-tracking-
vs-an-eye-tracker/.
[26]
Miguel Ballesteros Luz Rello. “Detecting Readers with Dyslexia Using Machine
Learning with Eye Tracking Measures”. In: (2015). DOI: 10.1145/2745555.2746644.
[27]
Mattias Nilsson Benfatto et al. “Screening for Dyslexia Using Eye Tracking during
Reading”. In: (2016). DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0165508.
[28]
János Szalma and Béla Weiss. “Data­Driven Classification of Dyslexia Using Eye­
Movement Correlates of Natural Reading”. In: (2020). DOI: 10.1145/3379156.3391379.
[29]
Thomais Asvestopoulou et al. “Towards a Robust and Accurate Screening Tool for
Dyslexia with Data Augmentation using GANs”. In: 2019 IEEE 19th International
Prediction of dyslexia using eye tracking
75
==PAGE:85==
Conference on Bioinformatics and Bioengineering (BIBE). 2019, pp. 775–782. DOI:
10.1109/BIBE.2019.00145.
[30]
Ivan Vajs et al. “Spatiotemporal Eye­Tracking Feature Set for Improved Recognition
of Dyslexic Reading Patterns in Children”. In: (2022). DOI: 10.3390/s22134900.
[31]
A. Jothi Prabha and R. Bhargavi. “Prediction of Dyslexia from Eye Movements Using
Machine Learning”. In: (2022). DOI: 10.1080/03772063.2019.1622461.
[32]
Boris Nerušil et al. “Eye tracking based dyslexia detection using a holistic approach”.
In: (2021). DOI: 10.1038/s41598-021-95275-1.
[33]
Ivan Vajs et al. “Dyslexia detection in children using eye tracking data based on
VGG16 network”. In: (2022). DOI: 10.23919/EUSIPCO55093.2022.9909817.
[34]
Ivan Vajs et al. “Accessible Dyslexia Detection with Real­Time Reading Feedback
through Robust Interpretable Eye­Tracking Features”. In: (2023). DOI: 10.3390/
brainsci13030405.
[35]
Suraj Shrestha and Pietro Murano. “An algorithm for automatically detecting dyslexia
on the fly”. In: (2018). DOI: 10.5121/ijcsit.2018.10301.
[36]
Marko Arsenovic et al. “Deep neural network ensemble architecture for eye move­
ments classification”. In: (2018). DOI: 10.1109/INFOTEH.2018.8345537.
[37]
Ildar Rakhmatulin and Andrew T. Duchowski. “Deep Neural Networks for Low­Cost
Eye Tracking”. In: (2020). DOI: 10.1016/j.procs.2020.09.04.
[38]
Aaron Y. Wong et al. Using a Webcam Based Eye­Tracker to Understand Students’
Thought Patterns and Reading Behaviors in Neurodivergent Classrooms. 2023.
DOI: 10.1145/3576050.3576115.
[39]
iMotions. iMotions. 2023. URL: https://imotions.com/.
[40]
iMotions. Smart Eye Aurora. 2023. URL: https://imotions.com/products/hardware/
smart-eye-aurora/.
[41]
Logitech. C920 HD PRO WEBCAM. 2023. URL: https://www.logitech.com/da-
dk/products/webcams/c920-pro-hd-webcam.960-001055.html.
[42]
Michael Rothenborg. “Altædende piratfisk er en myte uden kød på”. In: (2010). URL:
https://politiken.dk/viden/art4978408/Alt%5C%C3%5C%A6dende-piratfisk-er-en-
myte-uden-k%5C%C3%5C%B8d-p%5C%C3%5C%A5.
[43]
iMotions. Fixation and saccade classification with Hidden Markov Models. 2022.
URL: https://help.imotions.com/docs/fixation-and-saccade-classification-with-hidden-
markov-models.
Prediction of dyslexia using eye tracking
76
==PAGE:86==
[44]
Saurav Kaushik. Introduction to Feature Selection methods with an example (or
how to select the right variables?) 2016. URL: https://www.analyticsvidhya.com/
blog/2016/12/introduction-to-feature-selection-methods-with-an-example-or-how-to-
select-the-right-variables/.
[45]
Michał Oleszak. Feature Selection Methods and How to Choose Them. 2023. URL:
https://neptune.ai/blog/feature-selection-methods/.
[46]
Sampath Kumar Gajawada. ANOVA for Feature Selection in Machine Learning.
2019. URL: https://towardsdatascience.com/anova-for-feature-selection-in-machine-
learning-d9305e228476.
[47]
Jason Brownlee. Recursive Feature Elimination (RFE) for Feature Selection in Python.
2020. URL: https://machinelearningmastery.com/rfe-feature-selection-in-python/.
[48]
Akash Dubey. Feature Selection Using Random forest. 2018. URL: https://towardsdatascience.
com/feature-selection-using-random-forest-26d7b747597f.
[49]
scikit learn. 3.1. Cross­validation: evaluating estimator performance. 2023. URL:
https://scikit-learn.org/stable/modules/cross_validation.html.
[50]
Jeremy Jordan. Hyperparameter tuning for machine learning models. 2017. URL:
https://www.jeremyjordan.me/hyperparameter-tuning/.
[51]
Anshul Saini. Support Vector Machine(SVM): A Complete guide for beginners. 2021.
URL: https://www.analyticsvidhya.com/blog/2021/10/support-vector-machinessvm-
a-complete-guide-for-beginners/.
[52]
Rohith Gandhi. Support Vector Machine — Introduction to Machine Learning Al­
gorithms. 2018. URL: https : / / towardsdatascience . com / support - vector - machine -
introduction-to-machine-learning-algorithms-934a444fca47.
[53]
scikit learn. 1.4. Support Vector Machines. 2023. URL: https://scikit- learn.org/
stable/modules/svm.html.
[54]
Tianqi Chen and Carlos Guestrin. XGBoost: A Scalable Tree Boosting System.
2016. DOI: 10.1145/2939672.2939785.
[55]
Saul Dobilas. XGBoost: Extreme Gradient Boosting — How to Improve on Regular
Gradient Boosting? 2021. URL: https://towardsdatascience.com/xgboost-extreme-
gradient-boosting-how-to-improve-on-regular-gradient-boosting-5c6acf66c70a.
[56]
dmlc XGBoost. Python API Reference. 2023. URL: https://xgboost.readthedocs.io/
en/stable/python/python_api.html.
Prediction of dyslexia using eye tracking
77
==PAGE:87==
[57]
Bex Tuychiev. Beginner’s Guide to XGBoost for Classification Problems. 2021.
URL: https://towardsdatascience.com/beginners-guide-to-xgboost-for-classification-
problems-50f75aac5390.
[58]
Pranshu Sharma. Basic Introduction to Feed­Forward Network in Deep Learning.
2022. URL: https://www.analyticsvidhya.com/blog/2022/03/basic-introduction-to-
feed-forward-network-in-deep-learning/.
[59]
Kaivan Kamali. Deep Learning (Part 1) ­ Feedforward neural networks (FNN). 2023.
URL: https://training.galaxyproject.org/training-material/topics/statistics/tutorials/
FNN/tutorial.html.
[60]
Daniel Godoy. Understanding binary cross­entropy / log loss: a visual explanation.
2018. URL: https://towardsdatascience.com/understanding-binary-cross-entropy-log-
loss-a-visual-explanation-a3ac6025181a.
[61]
Keras. Keras API reference. 2023. URL: https://keras.io/api/.
[62]
Mayank Mishra. Convolutional Neural Networks, Explained. 2020. URL: https://
towardsdatascience.com/convolutional-neural-networks-explained-9cc5188c4939.
[63]
Sumit Saha. A Comprehensive Guide to Convolutional Neural Networks — the
ELI5 way. 2018. URL: https : / / saturncloud . io / blog / a - comprehensive - guide - to -
convolutional-neural-networks-the-eli5-way/.
[64]
Serkan Kiranyaz et al. “1D convolutional neural networks and applications: A sur­
vey”. In: (2021). DOI: 10.1016/j.ymssp.2020.107398.
[65]
Adam Shafi. How to Learn the Definitions of Precision and Recall (For Good). 2022.
URL: https://towardsdatascience.com/precision-and-recall-88a3776c8007#:~:text=
Precision.
[66]
Salma Ghoneim. Accuracy, Recall, Precision, F­Score Specificity, which to optimize
on? 2019. URL: https://towardsdatascience.com/accuracy-recall-precision-f-score-
specificity-which-to-optimize-on-867d3f11124.
[67]
Lena Stock et al. “Natural Reading in Parkinson’s Disease With and Without Mild
Cognitive Impairment”. In: (2020). DOI: 10.3389/fnagi.2020.00120.
[68]
Gerardo Fernández et al. “Patients with mild Alzheimer’s disease produced shorter
outgoing saccades when reading sentences”. In: (2015). DOI: 10.1016/j.psychres.
2015.06.028.
Prediction of dyslexia using eye tracking
78
==PAGE:88==
A
Appendix
A.1
Additional results
A.1.1
Feature selection for webcam ET data
0
25
50
75
100
125
150
175
200
Score
Sum Saccade Peak Acceleration
Average Saccade Amplitude
Sum Saccade Peak Velocity
Sum Saccade Peak Deceleration
Average Fixation Dispersion
Average Saccade Peak Velocity
Sum Saccade Amplitude
Average Saccade Peak Acceleration
Average Fixation Duration
Average Saccade Duration
Average Saccade Peak Deceleration
Sum Fixation Dispersion
Sum Saccade Duration
Saccade Backward Count per Minute
Sum Fixation Duration
Fixation Count per Minute
Saccade Count per Minute
Dyslexia in F
amily
Saccade Forward Count per Minute
Figure A.1: The result of the ANOVA feature selection on webcam ET data. The x­axis shows the score
from the ANOVA test. The y­axis shows each feature ordered by the score, where the highest scored feature
is in the top.
Prediction of dyslexia using eye tracking
79
==PAGE:89==
Saccade Count per Minute
Fixation Count per Minute
Saccade Forward Count per Minute
Average Saccade Peak Velocity
Saccade Backward Count per Minute
Sum Saccade Amplitude
Average Fixation Duration
Sum Saccade Peak Velocity
Sum Saccade Duration
Average Saccade Peak Deceleration
Dyslexia in F
amily
Average Saccade Peak Acceleration
Average Saccade Duration
Sum Fixation Duration
Sum Fixation Dispersion
Average Saccade Amplitude
Sum Saccade Peak Deceleration
Sum Saccade Peak Acceleration
Average Fixation Dispersion
0.80
0.85
0.90
0.95
Accuracy
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
Number of features selected
Figure A.2: The result of the RFE with CV feature selection on webcam ET data. Each data point is the
accuracy of the LR model with the current feature and all the ones left for it. The red point shows the highest
accuracy. The bottom x­axis shows the features in the order they recursively were removed. The top x­axis
shows the number of features selected. The y­axis show the accuracy.
Prediction of dyslexia using eye tracking
80
==PAGE:90==
0.000
0.025
0.050
0.075
0.100
0.125
0.150
0.175
0.200
Feature importances
Average Saccade Amplitude
Sum Saccade Peak Deceleration
Average Saccade Peak Velocity
Average Fixation Duration
Average Fixation Dispersion
Sum Saccade Peak Velocity
Average Saccade Duration
Sum Saccade Peak Acceleration
Sum Saccade Amplitude
Average Saccade Peak Acceleration
Average Saccade Peak Deceleration
Sum Fixation Dispersion
Saccade Backward Count per Minute
Sum Saccade Duration
Sum Fixation Duration
Fixation Count per Minute
Dyslexia in F
amily
Saccade Count per Minute
Saccade Forward Count per Minute
Figure A.3: The result of the RF feature selection on webcam ET data. The x­axis shows the feature
importance based on the result from the RF model. The standard errors of each feature importance is shown
as a black error bars. The red dotted line shows the boundary, where the features above this line is the
selected features. The y­axis shows each feature ordered by the importance, where the highest scored
feature is in the top.
A.1.2
CNN learning curves with other hyper­parameters
0
20
40
60
80
100
Epochs
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
Accuracy
T
raining Accuracy
Validation Accuracy
(a) The average accuracy of the model performance.
0
20
40
60
80
100
Epochs
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
Loss
T
raining Loss
Validation Loss
(b) The average loss of the model performance.
Figure A.4: The average performance of the CNN model using SGKF CV with 13 folds and ADAM optimizer
with learning rate = 0.001 on desktop ET data for 100 epochs. The purple line shows the performance on
the training data and the green line shows the performance on the test data.
Prediction of dyslexia using eye tracking
81
==PAGE:91==
0
20
40
60
80
100
Epochs
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
Accuracy
T
raining Accuracy
Validation Accuracy
(a) The average accuracy of the model performance.
0
20
40
60
80
100
Epochs
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
1.25
1.50
1.75
2.00
Loss
T
raining Loss
Validation Loss
(b) The average loss of the model performance.
Figure A.5: The average performance of the CNN model using SGKF CV with 5 folds and data aug. and
SGD optimizer with learning rate = 0.1 on webcam ET data for 100 epochs. The purple line shows the
performance on the training data and the green line shows the performance on the test data.
0
100
200
300
400
500
Epochs
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
Accuracy
T
raining Accuracy
Validation Accuracy
(a) The average accuracy of the model performance.
0
100
200
300
400
500
Epochs
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
1.25
1.50
Loss
T
raining Loss
Validation Loss
(b) The average loss of the model performance.
Figure A.6: The average performance of the CNN model using SGKF CV with 5 folds and data aug. and
SGD optimizer with learning rate = 0.01 on webcam ET data for 500 epochs. The purple line shows the
performance on the training data and the green line shows the performance on the test data.
Prediction of dyslexia using eye tracking
82
==PAGE:92==
A.1.3
Average probability plots
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Probability
C13
C10
C04
C14
C07
D08
D05
C02
C09
C08
C15
C01
D11
D04
C05
D01
D02
C12
D03
D07
D06
D10
C03
D09
C11
C06
Respondent Id
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
14
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Count of incorrect prediction
(a) Average probability prediction for desktop ET data.
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Probability
C13
C10
C04
C14
C07
D08
D05
C02
C09
C08
C15
C01
D11
D04
C05
D01
D02
C12
D03
D07
D06
D10
C03
D09
C11
C06
Respondent Id
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
14
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Count of incorrect prediction
(b) Average probability prediction for webcam ET data.
Figure A.7: Average probability prediction for each respondent using the SVM model. The x­axis shows the
probability of being dyslexia. The left sided y­axis shows all the respondent, in green if all observations are
correctly classified and in red if not. The right sided y­axis shows the count of how many observations was
miss­classified. The blue dots are the true control and the orange dots are the true dyslexic.
Prediction of dyslexia using eye tracking
83
==PAGE:93==
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Probability
C13
C10
C04
C14
C07
D08
D05
C02
C09
C08
C15
C01
D11
D04
C05
D01
D02
C12
D03
D07
D06
D10
C03
D09
C11
C06
Respondent Id
0
4
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
14
14
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
9
0
Count of incorrect prediction
(a) Average probability prediction for desktop ET data.
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Probability
C13
C10
C04
C14
C07
D08
D05
C02
C09
C08
C15
C01
D11
D04
C05
D01
D02
C12
D03
D07
D06
D10
C03
D09
C11
C06
Respondent Id
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
2
0
0
1
0
14
2
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Count of incorrect prediction
(b) Average probability prediction for webcam ET data.
Figure A.8: Average probability prediction for each respondent using the XGBoost model. The x­axis shows
the probability of being dyslexia. The left sided y­axis shows all the respondent, in green if all observations
are correctly classified and in red if not. The right sided y­axis shows the count of how many observations
was miss­classified. The blue dots are the true control and the orange dots are the true dyslexic.
Prediction of dyslexia using eye tracking
84
==PAGE:94==
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Probability
C13
C10
C04
C14
C07
D08
D05
C02
C09
C08
C15
C01
D11
D04
C05
D01
D02
C12
D03
D07
D06
D10
C03
D09
C11
C06
Respondent Id
0
2
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
14
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
3
0
Count of incorrect prediction
(a) Average probability prediction for desktop ET data.
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Probability
C13
C10
C04
C14
C07
D08
D05
C02
C09
C08
C15
C01
D11
D04
C05
D01
D02
C12
D03
D07
D06
D10
C03
D09
C11
C06
Respondent Id
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
2
4
0
0
1
0
14
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Count of incorrect prediction
(b) Average probability prediction for webcam ET data.
Figure A.9: Average probability prediction for each respondent using the FNN model. The x­axis shows the
probability of being dyslexia. The left sided y­axis shows all the respondent, in green if all observations are
correctly classified and in red if not. The right sided y­axis shows the count of how many observations was
miss­classified. The blue dots are the true control and the orange dots are the true dyslexic.
Prediction of dyslexia using eye tracking
85
==PAGE:95==
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
Probability
C13
C10
C04
C14
C07
D08
D05
C02
C09
C08
C15
C01
D11
D04
C05
D01
D02
C12
D03
D07
D06
D10
C03
D09
C11
C06
Respondent Id
0
6
9
4
9
0
2
4
1
7
2
0
8
13
2
7
2
4
2
2
7
14
7
3
9
0
Count of incorrect prediction
(a) Average probability prediction for desktop ET data.
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
Probability
C13
C10
C04
C14
C07
D08
D05
C02
C09
C08
C15
C01
D11
D04
C05
D01
D02
C12
D03
D07
D06
D10
C03
D09
C11
C06
Respondent Id
4
1
6
3
5
7
14
7
5
3
3
6
13
12
1
9
7
3
9
7
6
14
2
5
6
3
Count of incorrect prediction
(b) Average probability prediction for webcam ET data.
Figure A.10: Average probability prediction for each respondent using the CNN model. The x­axis shows
the probability of being dyslexia. The left sided y­axis shows all the respondent, in green if all observations
are correctly classified and in red if not. The right sided y­axis shows the count of how many observations
was miss­classified. The blue dots are the true control and the orange dots are the true dyslexic.
A.2
Questionare
The questionaire used for this study is appended in the following pages. The questions
are in danish as the study was done with danish speaking participants.
Prediction of dyslexia using eye tracking
86
==PAGE:96==
1.
2.
Markér kun ét felt.
Kvinde
Mand
Andet
3.
4.
Spørgsmål vedrørende eye-tracking
eksperiment - Kandidat projekt
Dette spørgeskema er til brug af sammenligning med det resultat/data eye-tracking 
eksperimentet viser.
*Skal udfyldes
Testperson nummer *
Hvilket køn identificere du dig mest med? *
Hvor gammel er du? *
Hvor høj er du? *
==PAGE:97==
5.
Markér kun ét felt.
Grøn
Blå
Grå
Lysebrun
Mørkebrun
Eksempler på øjenfarver:
6.
Hvilken øjenfarve har du? *
Hvad laver du til hverdag (job, studie, andet)? *
==PAGE:98==
7.
Markér kun ét felt.
Jeg læser intet
1
2
3
4
5
Jeg læser meget hver dag
8.
Markér kun ét felt.
Folkeskolen
Erhvervsuddannelse
Gymnasiet/HF
Bachelor
Kandidat
9.
Markér kun ét felt.
Ordblind
Normal læser
Hvor meget læser du i din hverdag (på en skala fra 1-5) *
Hvilken uddannelse er den seneste du har færdiggjort? *
Hvilken testperson er du i det her studie? *
==PAGE:99==
10.
11.
Markér kun ét felt.
Ja, briller
Ja, kontaktlinser
Nej
12.
13.
Markér kun ét felt.
Ja, jeg har en bygningsfejl
Ja, jeg er skeløjet
Ja, jeg er vindøjet
Nej
14.
Markér kun ét felt.
Mit højre øje
Mit venstre øje
Begge
Hvis du er ordblind, hvornår blev du så diagnosticeret (hvor gammel var du ca.)?
Benytter du noget til at korrigere for dit syn under testen? *
Hvis ja, er du så nærsynet eller langsynet og hvilken styrke bruger du?
Har du noget anderledes ved et/begge dine øjne? *
Hvis ja, hvilket øje er anderledes?
==PAGE:100==
15.
Markér kun ét felt.
Ja, jeg har øjenmakeup på (mascara, øjenskygge etc.)
Ja, jeg bruge falske øjenvipper eller har meget lange øjenvipper
Nej
Dette indhold er hverken oprettet eller godkendt af Google.
Har du makeup på under testen? *
 Analyse
==PAGE:101==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 321
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
