==PAGE:1==
Danmarks Tekniske Universitet
Multiplexed gene activation by Cas12a in
chinese hamster ovary cells
Thesis for Master of Science in Engineering (Biotechnology)
30 ECTS
Author
Christian Oscar Wistrøm ­ s183492
Stud. MSc.Eng. Biotechnology
Supervisors
Lise Marie Grav ­ DTU Bioengineering
Johan Blatt Rojek ­ DTU Bioengineering
June 2, 2023
==PAGE:2==
Abstract
Clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats (CRISPR) mediated
genome editing is a well­established technology, and new uses are continuously
being developed. CRISPR­mediated transcriptional regulation is an up­and­coming
technology for tight control of cellular phenotypes, achieved by fusing an effector
molecule to a nuclease­dead CRISPR enzyme. CRISPR activation is one such
tool, where the fused effector molecule is an activator that enables the transcrip­
tional activation of endogenous genes. These tools have been demonstrated to
work in Human embryonic kidney 293 (HEK293) cells, while only a little has been
published for Chinese hamster ovary (CHO) cells. CHO cells are the workhorse of
the biopharmaceutical industry due to their high productivity, flexibility to be cul­
tured under varying conditions, and ability to produce human­like glycosylation.
In this study, a panel of different CRISPRa systems demonstrated to function in
HEK293 cells were cloned with a single crRNA for gene targeting, and these were
screened in transiently transfected CHO­S wildtype cells. Endogenous gene acti­
vation was assessed by measuring the transcript levels in a multiplexed RT­qPCR.
No activation of the three gene targets, Mgat3, Clgn, or Papss2, was detected in
any of the experiments. A positive control from an in­house published study was
tested, but no activation of Mgat3 was measured either. More research is needed
to narrow down the problems with the applied methodology.
Multiplexed gene activation by Cas12a in chinese hamster ovary cells
i
==PAGE:3==
Resume
CRISPR­medieret genom redigering er en vel etableret teknologi og nye anven­
delser bliver kontinuerligt udviklet. CRISPR­medieret transkriptionel regulering er
en kommende teknologi for streng kontrol af den cellulære fænotype. Dette er
muligt ved at fusionere et effektormolekyle til en nuklease­deaktiveret CRISPR
enzym. CRISPR aktivering er et af disse slags værktøjer, hvor det fusionerede
effektormolekyle er en aktivator, der muliggør transcriptionel aktivering af et en­
dogent gen. Disse værktøjer er blevet demonstreret i HEK293 celler, men der
er begrænset information omkring deres brug i CHO celler. CHO celler er den
biofarmaceutiske branches arbejdshest grundet deres høje produktivitet, fleksi­
bilitet til at blive kultiveret under varierende forhold og deres evne til at producere
menneskelignende glykosyleringer. I dette studie er et udvalg af CRISPRa syste­
mer der er blevet demonstreret i HEK293 celler blevet klonet med et enkelt crRNA
for gen­mål, som så blev testet i midlertidigt transfekterede CHO­S vildtype celler.
Aktiveringen af det endogene gen blev bedømt, ved at måle transkript niveauerne
med et multiplekseret RT­qPCR eksperiment. Over alle eksperimenterne blev in­
gen aktivering identificeret for de tre gener: Mgat3, Clgn og Papss2. Fra et andet
internt studie blev en positiv kontrol testet, men heller ikke her blev en aktivering
af Mgat3 identificeret. Mere forskning er nødvendigt for at indsnævre sig til mulige
problemer med den brugte metode.
Multiplexed gene activation by Cas12a in chinese hamster ovary cells
ii
==PAGE:4==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank my supervisors, Johan Rojek and Lise Grav. I appreciate
being given the oppertunity to this project, even though the outcome was less
satisfying than what you could hope for. They have been great at supporting and
assisting me with the project and its outcomes.
I would also like to thank the people at the CLED, Bioprocess group, and NBF for
accommodating me again during my studies. It is always a pleasure and fun time
to work beside you and hear about what you are working on.
Multiplexed gene activation by Cas12a in chinese hamster ovary cells
iii
==PAGE:5==
• ­RT No reverse­transcriptase
• cDNA Complementary DNA
• CHO Chinese hamster ovary
• cPCR Colony PCR
• CRISPR Clustered regularly inter­
spaced short palindromic repeats
• CRISPRa CRISPR activation
• CRISPRi CRISPR inhibition
• crRNA CRISPR RNA
• Cas CRISPR­associated
• CT Cycle threshold
• DB DNA bricks
• dCas DNase­dead Cas
• DR Direct repeats
• DSB Double­stranded break
• DuP Dual­plasmid
• DuT Dual­transcript
• gRNA Guide RNA
• HEK293 Human embryonic kid­
ney 293
• HR Homologous recombination
• KO Knockout
• MM Mastermix
• mRNA Messenger RNA
• NHEJ Non­homologous end join­
ing
• NLS
Nuclear
localization
se­
quences
• NTC Non­targeting control
• O/N Overnight
• PAM Protospacer adjacent motif
• PCR Polymerase chain reaction
• PTM Post­translational modifica­
tions
• RQ Relative quantity
• RT­qPCR Real­time quantitative
PCR
• SiT Single­transcript
• TD­PCR Touch­down PCR
• tracrRNA Trans­acting crRNA
• TRIPLEX Triple helix
• WT Wild type
Multiplexed gene activation by Cas12a in chinese hamster ovary cells
iv
==PAGE:6==
Contents
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Project aim . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Theory
3
2.1
Chinese hamster ovary cells
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
CRISPR genome engineering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.3
crRNA transcription and maturation strategies . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.4
Transcriptional regulation with CRISPR
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3
Experimental strategy
10
3.1
Gene targets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.2
Plasmid design and cloning strategy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.3
Transfection of CHO­S WT cultures utilizing FreeStyle Max . . . .
14
3.4
RT­qPCR . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
4
Methods and materials
18
4.1
crRNA design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
4.2
Plasmid construction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
4.3
CHO Cell cultivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4.4
Relative gene expression analysis by RNA extraction, cDNA syn­
thesis and quantification by RT­PCR . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
5
Results
24
5.1
Mgat3 overexpression by SiT and DuT configurated AsCas12a­
based CRISPRa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
5.2
Testing published CRISPRa systems from HEK293 cells in CHO cells 26
5.3
Clgn overexpression by SiT and DuT configurated AsCas12a­based
CRISPRa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
5.4
Papss2 overexpression by SiT and DuT configurated AsCas12a­
based CRISPRa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
5.5
Verification of applied methods using previously published in­house
Cas9­based CRISPRa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
Multiplexed gene activation by Cas12a in chinese hamster ovary cells
v
==PAGE:7==
6
Discussion
38
Bibliography
47
A Appendix
51
B Raw data for Mgat3 targeting CRISPRa systems
52
C Raw data for ­RT and non­targeting controls from RT­qPCR
54
Multiplexed gene activation by Cas12a in chinese hamster ovary cells
vi
==PAGE:8==
1
Introduction
Chinese hamster ovary (CHO) cells have become the backbone of the biophar­
maceutical industry, producing a significant majority of therapeutic proteins from
mammalian cells. Their success can be attributed to various factors, including
their ability to produce bioactive proteins with human­like post­translational mod­
ifications (PTMs), high titers and cell densities, adaptability to varying culture
conditions, reduced biosafety concerns compared to human cell lines, a well­
established toolbox for genetic modifications enabling the generation of efficient
cell lines, and a wealth of knowledge and experience in using CHO cells for recom­
binant protein production, as CHO cell lines have been used for several decades.
Over the past three decades, CHO cells have optimized extensively, resulting in
higher protein titers, improved product diversity, and enhanced stability. How­
ever, precise control over the cellular metabolism is essential to fully harness the
potential of CHO cells and overcome the existing limitations. This control can
be achieved through clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats
(CRISPR) genome engineering. CRISPR­Cas9 is the most well­characterized
CRISPR system, requiring a guide RNA (gRNA) to direct the Cas9 protein to the
target site, where it introduces a double­stranded break (DSB) in the DNA. The
DSB activates the cell’s endogenous DNA repair mechanisms, allowing for gene
knockouts (KO) and DNA insertions by exploiting specific DNA­repair pathways.
Other Cas proteins exist, e.g., Cas12a. While similar in overall functionality, it rec­
ognizes widely different targets and can process its own CRISPR RNA (crRNA),
whereas Cas9 is dependent on endogenous processes and, in its native form, a
trans­acting crRNA (tracrRNA). Mutationally deactivating the endonuclease do­
main of the Cas proteins will disable their ability to introduce DSBs in the DNA.
Functionally the Cas protein will stay bound for some time, before disassociating
from the DNA. While still bound to the DNA, Cas­fused effector domains can in­
duce epigenetic modifications by recruitment of chromatin remodeling associated
proteins. Other domains, e.g., activation domains can recruit RNA polymerase
and the preinitiation complex, which will transcribe nearby genes, increase the
transcript­levels. Currently, most demonstrated CRISPR systems utilize only a
single crRNA or a few individually transcribed crRNAs. While this has been a ro­
bust method to transcribe the guides, other approaches exist which can decrease
Multiplexed gene activation by Cas12a in chinese hamster ovary cells
1
==PAGE:9==
the complexity of the cloning, reduce vector size and utilize other processes to
mature the crRNA than endogenous processes, which can be limited in their pro­
cessivity depending on how many guides are transcribed. Coupling a multiplexed
approach with, e.g., Cas12a is meaningful, as there would be no need to ex­
press a crRNA liberation and maturation system, and also not being dependent
on endogenous processes, as Cas12a can liberate and mature the crRNA itself.
Coupling this enables repression and activation of multiple genes without mutat­
ing the genome. These are called CRISPRa and CRISPRi. Maturation of these
capabilities will enable new complex circuits to be assembled in cells, giving the
cells new functions.
1.1
Project aim
This study aimed to lay the foundation for a multiplex Cas12a­based CRISPRa
system for CHO cells. This would have be done by first doing an initial screen­
ing of a panel of different CRISPRa described in the literature, and these sys­
tems have been demonstrated to work in Human embryonic kidney (HEK293)
cells. This screening would target a single gene, Mgat3, for gene activation. Best
performers would be characterized in a multiplex setting, with Mgat3, Clgn, and
Papss2 as gene targets. With this, a multiplex Cas12a­based CRISPRa would be
demonstrated to work in CHO cells.
1.2
Results
After an initial screening of the panel with different single­targets (Mgat3, Clgn,
and Papss2), no activation of the gene targets was measured across all the tested
CRISPRa systems. Due to this, no testing of the multiplex capabilities was per­
formed.
Multiplexed gene activation by Cas12a in chinese hamster ovary cells
2
==PAGE:10==
2
Theory
2.1
Chinese hamster ovary cells
CHO cells are the most widely used mammalian cells in the biopharmaceutical
industry (G. Walsh 2014; G. Walsh and E. Walsh 2022), producing 89% of ther­
apeutic proteins produced in mammalian cells (G. Walsh and E. Walsh 2022).
CHO cells are the workhorse of the industry and, as an production platform, have
been heavily optimized over the last 30 years, achieving higher titers, producing
a broader product portfolio, and being a more robust and stable platform (Marx,
Eisenhut, et al. 2022). This is all attributable to the adaptability of CHO cells.
Kalkan et al. 2023 list six different reasons for why CHO cells have achieved
this status in the bioindustry: 1) the ability to produce bioactive and human­like
PTMs reducing potential immunogenic responses in patients (Butler and Spear­
man 2014; Chiang et al. 2016; Reusch and Tejada 2015; Tian et al. 2019), 2) high
attainable titers and cell densities while being tolerant to variabilities in media, oxy­
gen%, pH and temperature (Dumont et al. 2016), 3) ability to grow CHO cells in
large­scale suspended cultures in chemically defined serum­free media (Dumont
et al. 2016), 4) more resistant to human viruses compared to human cell lines,
thus reduced biosafety concerns for therapeutics produced in CHO cell (Berting,
Farcet, and Kreil 2010), 5) CHO cells have a well­established toolbox for genetical
modifications and 6) the vast knowledge and experience from using CHO cells for
recombinant protein production for more than thirty years (Dumont et al. 2016).
This applies to working with CHO cells in the lab, to a production environment, and
lastly, to the regulatory agencies like FDA and EMA (Kalkan et al. 2023; Dumont
et al. 2016). Today’s CHO cell lines are derived from ovarian primary fibroblast­
like cells from the Chinese Hamster (Cricetulus griseus) and were initially used
to study mammalian genetics and cell physiology (F. M. Wurm and M. J. Wurm
2017). Since its first isolation, much optimization has been done, resulting in the
cell lines (CHO­K1, CHO­DXB11, CHO­S, and CHO­DG 44) present today (F. M.
Wurm and M. J. Wurm 2017). Even though the CHO platform is the basis of a
multi­billion­dollar industry, several disadvantages and challenges to the platform
still exist. Production challenges and deviations occur, which are highly problem­
atic for the industry due to increased costs and potentially for patients regarding
supply problems and, worst case, immunogenic reactions (Marx, Eisenhut, et al.
Multiplexed gene activation by Cas12a in chinese hamster ovary cells
3
==PAGE:11==
2022). While CHO can produce human­like PTMs, some human­recognized epi­
topes, such as galactose­α1,3­galactose and N­glycolylneuraminic acid, can also
be generated. The proteins responsible for those PTMs are both not present in hu­
mans, although the measured levels of those glycosylations on proteins from CHO
cells are low (<0.2% and <2%, respectively) (Butler and Spearman 2014). Lastly,
what seems to power CHO cells’ adaptability, is their relatively high genome in­
stability, with diverging genomic structures being detectable in just days. In turn,
this means the term clonality can not be applied to a CHO cell culture derived
from a single cell, but rather a genomic sequence composition, or a cloud, is a
term that can be used for a CHO cell culture centered around the original CHO
cell (F. M. Wurm and M. J. Wurm 2017). CHO cells can arguably be described
as quasi­species, describing a replicating population where a significant portion
of its offspring carry at least one mutation (F. M. Wurm 2013).
2.2
CRISPR genome engineering
In order to fully harness the potential of CHO cells, it is necessary to control
the inner workings of the cells.
Precise genome engineering is facilitated by
CRISPR. With CRISPR, it is possible to insert recombinant DNA, KO endoge­
nous genes, or even entirely delete the endogenous sequences. CRISPR and
CRISPR­associated (Cas) proteins are systems for targeted genome engineer­
ing powered by programmable endonucleases. These systems are derived from
the adaptive immune systems of prokaryotes, where short nucleotide sequences
from previous infections are stored in arrays, functioning as memory, and used
to combat future infections (McCarty et al. 2020). These arrays consist of repeat
sequences, flanking hundreds of acquired foreign sequences (Charpentier et al.
2015; McCarty et al. 2020).
Other genome engineering tools exist, but what separates CRISPR from those
is the programmability of CRISPR. Whereas the utilization of zinc finger nucle­
ases and transcription activator­like effector nucleases requires complex protein
engineering, CRISPR only requires a short crRNA, complimentary to the target
sequence, adjacent to a protospacer adjacent motif (PAM) (Paul and Montoya
2020). Cas9, the most well­characterized of the Cas proteins, requires the cr­
RNA to be matured by endogenous processes and a tracrRNA. This tracrRNA
duplexes with the pre­crRNA forming a gRNA which gets stabilized by Cas9 com­
plexing with the duplex. Endogenous RNA III and an exonuclease then process
the duplexed pre­crRNA and release the Cas9:gRNA complex, see Figure 2.2.
Multiplexed gene activation by Cas12a in chinese hamster ovary cells
4
==PAGE:12==
Figure 2.1: Visual representation of the differences between Cas12a and Cas9.
Cas12a introduced staggered DSBs, while Cas9 leavs blunt ends. Cas12a intro­
duces the DSB away from the PAM sequence, while Cas9 cleaves neat it. crRNA
and tracrRNA forms a gRNA which can complex with Cas9, but sketched here is
a fused gRNA sequence. Cas12a recognizes a four nucleotide PAM sequence,
while for Cas9 it is three. Inspiration from Creutzburg et al. 2020; Chen et al. 2018;
Sergeeva et al. 2019.
This complex will scan for PAMs and confirm the target sequence by interrogating
the double­stranded DNA with the gRNA (Sternberg et al. 2014). If the target is
confirmed, Cas9 introduces a DSB in the DNA (Paul and Montoya 2020). The
presence of a DSB will activate the endogenous DNA repair system, where two
repair pathways exist, depending on the host organism. For mammalian cells
DSBs can be repaired by either non­homologous end joining (NHEJ) or homolo­
gous recombination (HR), with NHEJ being the preferred pathway for blunt­end
DSBs. Some Cas proteins (e.g., Cas12a) leave staggered DSBs, which will fa­
vor the HR pathway (Paul and Montoya 2020). Each pathway has its use, NHEJ
being a quicker pathway, but small insertion and deletions at the DSB can occur,
after several cycles of DSB introduction and repair. HR is more laborious and
principally error­free as a complimentary strand is used as a template for repair
(Kalkan et al. 2023). With the possibility of mutations occurring during several
cycles of NHEJ, gene knock­outs can be performed by introducing an early stop
codon or frameshifts. At the same time, HR can be used for DNA insertion events
using homology arms.
There has been much development of the CRISPR­Cas9 system since it was first
developed. For instance, the gRNA duplex has been engineered to a single RNA
transcript. Other CRISPR­Cas systems have been adapted from prokaryotes, no­
tably Cas12a, which offers some significant simplifications of the CRISPR system.
Cas12a only uses a crRNA and can process them from the transcript without en­
Multiplexed gene activation by Cas12a in chinese hamster ovary cells
5
==PAGE:13==
Figure 2.2: crRNA processing after complexing with Cas9. RNase III and unspe­
cific exo­ and endonucleases digests the crRNA, liberating the sequence from the
transcript. Inspiration from Charpentier et al. 2015.
dogenous processes. Cas12a also scans for a different PAM sequence as Cas9
identifies the PAM sequence 5’­NGG­3’, while Cas12a identifies 5’­TTT(A/C/G)­3’
or simplified to 5’­TTTV­3’ (Paul and Montoya 2020). With both Cas9 and Cas12a,
it is possible to target both GC and AT­rich loci, thus expanding the available tool­
box for genome engineering capabilities. The differences in PAM, sequence tar­
geting, and DSB introduction between Cas9 and Cas12a are visualized in Fig­
ure 2.1.
2.3
crRNA transcription and maturation strategies
The first generation of CRISPR­Cas­based genome engineering consisted of a
plasmid encoding a Cas9 protein and a single crRNA cassette, see Figure 2.3a.
Nowadays, multiplex strategies are established, enabling higher genome editing
efficiencies or several targets to be engineered simultaneously. McCarty et al.
2020 describe six different strategies for CRISPR multiplex strategies.
The first and most straightforward approach is described above, but just adding
more individual cassettes. Other strategies are more complex but more robust.
For Cas9, which requires endogenous crRNA­maturation proteins, four different
strategies exist. The first one (Figure 2.3b) also involves RNase III processing
using tracrRNA but with multiple crRNAs in a cassette, flanked with direct repeats
(DR). Flanking the crRNA with tRNA, ribozyme, or a Csy4 site achieves the same
effect, (Figure 2.3d­f). In common, they all utilize processes not performed by
the Cas­enzyme to release crRNA. Cas12a can directly process crRNA from the
transcript by cleaving four nucleotides upstream of a hairpin structure formed by
the DR (Fonfara et al. 2016). Further processing occurs by unspecific processes
at both ends of the pre­crRNA for it to be matured (Fonfara et al. 2016). This is
a practical approach, as the others rely on certain non­Cas processes and their
processivity, which can be a limiting factor for larger arrays (McCarty et al. 2020).
Multiplexed gene activation by Cas12a in chinese hamster ovary cells
6
==PAGE:14==
Figure 2.3: Overview of crRNA maturation strategies. A) Individual cassettes with
single gRNA can directly be utilized by Cas9, B) crRNA array is processed by a
separately transcribed tracrRNA and RNase III, C) Cas12a can process crRNA
directly from the crRNA array transcript, D) self­cleaving ribozyme sequences lib­
erate gRNA, E) Csy4 digests the gRNA array transcript, liberating gRNAs from
the 3’ end of the transcript and, F) gRNA is liberated from the array by RNase P/Z
processing the flanking tRNA sequences. Inspiration from McCarty et al. 2020.
Described so far is the dual transcript approach, transcribing the Cas protein and
the crRNA array on separate transcripts. Another approach is to transcribe all
elements on the same transcript, allowing for orthologue approaches to a higher
degree, enabling tight control of the CRISPR system, and adding the possibil­
ity to make it conditional and inducible (Campa et al. 2019). Placing an array of
crRNAs downstream of the Cas protein and adding a triple helix (TRIPLEX) struc­
ture between the two elements will protect the Cas protein part of the transcript
from RNases that, over time, degrade non­protected RNA (Wilusz et al. 2012).
This configuration is called a single­transcript (SiT) design and is an alternative to
the dual­transcript (DuT) design, see Figure 3.2 for an overview. However, this
also means there is a fixed ratio between Cas12a and crRNA, which might lead
to not enough crRNA for the expressed Cas­enzymes. This can be compensated
by including several copies of crRNA for each target but to the detriment of the
cloning process. As the mean transcript length of mammalian cells is 13.5 kb, this
should be fine before several hundred crRNAs are on the transcript, well above
what is currently achievable of around a few dozen crRNAs (Campa et al. 2019).
Multiplexed gene activation by Cas12a in chinese hamster ovary cells
7
==PAGE:15==
2.4
Transcriptional regulation with CRISPR
With the maturation of these multiplex­approaches, new applications emerge, as
McCarty et al. 2020 described. Creating biological digital circuits composed of
different logic gates would be possible. This will allow altering the cellular phe­
notype depending on several inputs, enabling a programmable behavior. Rapid
strain development will also become more accessible as multiple gene KO and
multiple gene insertion events are possible. Lastly, powered by both described
technologies, metabolic engineering will become possible as genes can be KOed
due to a biological CRISPR circuit becoming active due to a shift in input signals.
A quick overview of these technologies can be seen in Figure 2.4 (McCarty et
al. 2020). The orthogonality of multiplex CRISPR and transcriptional regulation
powers all this.
Figure 2.4: Overview of a few technologies enabled by multiplex and orthogonal
transcriptional regulation by CRISPR. Digital biological circuits can be made with
logic gates comprised of CRISPRa/i. Visualized are three NOR gates powered by
six different guides for CRISPRi. Rapid strain development will become possible,
as multiple gene editing events can be performed due to a multiplex orthogonal
approach. Lastly, metabolic engineering is possible to a larger degree, enabled
by the previously described technologies. Inspiration from McCarty et al. 2020.
As described above, CRISPR can easily be used for genome editing, but CRISPR
can also be used for gene activation and inhibition, also known as CRISPRa and
CRISPRi. Mutationally deactivating the DNase domain of the Cas protein results
in a DNase­dead Cas (dCas) protein, which can still scan for PAMs and locate tar­
get sequences (Gilbert et al. 2013). Fusing effector domains to a dCas enables
CRISPR to perform epigenetic modifications, recruiting chromatin remodeling pro­
teins or RNA polymerase and transcription factors, see Figure 2.5 (Gilbert et al.
2013; McCarty et al. 2020).
Many domains exist today, but this report will focus on VPR and [ACTIV]. The
VPR domain is a three­component activator composed of VP64, p65, and Rta
Multiplexed gene activation by Cas12a in chinese hamster ovary cells
8
==PAGE:16==
Figure 2.5: Visual representation of the three different CRISPR technologies:
Gene editing, Activation and Repression. Inspiration from McCarty et al. 2020.
domains (Chavez et al. 2015). The [ACTIV] domain is a two­component activator
composed of HSF1 and p65 domains (Campa et al. 2019). Both activator domains
recruit basal transcription factors and forms the RNA polymrerase II preinitiation
complex, thus increase the transcription of downstream genes or activate silent
genes (Karottki et al. 2020; McCarty et al. 2020; Shamie et al. 2021; Danino et al.
2015).
Not much CRISPRa research in CHO cells has been published at the time of writ­
ing this report, and none of the published work has been done with Cas12a. How­
ever, a few papers have been published on Cas9: 1) Marx, Grünwald­Gruber, et
al. 2018 demonstrated a controllable activation system using dCas9­TET in CHO
cells, 2) Karottki et al. 2020 activated dormant glycosyltransferases, 3) Kleinjan
et al. 2017 showed a drug­tunable synthetic gene control system with dCas9, 4)
(Minami and Shah 2021) demonstrated a transient light­tunable gene expression
system and 5) (Eisenhut et al. 2018) demonstrated an activation system for artifi­
cially repressed genes.
For HEK293 cells, more research has been published on both Cas9, but also on
Cas12a. Campa et al. 2019 demonstrated a SiT design with a dCas12a with fused
activator domain and a crRNA on the same transcript for multiplex CRISPRa, and
two other studies enhanced two different Cas12a for multiplex CRISPRa (Klein­
stiver et al. 2019; Guo et al. 2022).
Multiplexed gene activation by Cas12a in chinese hamster ovary cells
9
==PAGE:17==
3
Experimental strategy
The overall objective of this study was to establish a multiplex CRISPRa system for
CHO­S cells. Many different configurations could be tested with a panel of several
Cas12a and activator domains, leading to a substantial experimental burden; thus,
planning of tested CRISPRa configurations was needed. First, all configurations
would be tested in a single­plex study targeting Mgat3. Best activators would be
chosen for multiplex study, targeting Mgat3, Clgn, and Papss2.
The panel of CRISPRa systems to be tested were: dAsCas12a, an enhanced
version called denAsCas12a (Kleinstiver et al. 2019), an alternative cas12a called
dLbCas12a (Guo et al. 2022), a hyper efficient version called hyperdAsCas12a
(Guo et al. 2022) and the panel of activator domains were: VPR (Chavez et al.
2015), mini­VPR (Guo et al. 2022) and [ACTIV] (Campa et al. 2019).
These have been demonstrated to induce rather large fold­changes of activated
genes. The denAsCas12a with fused VPR activator domain has been shown
to increase transcript levels of endogenous human genes in HEK293 cells, with
several thousand­fold to the reference strain and significantly higher than the non­
enhanced version, dAsCas12a with VPR activator domain (Kleinstiver et al. 2019).
Guo et al. 2022 demonstrated the alternative Cas12a from Lachnospiraceae bac­
terium, thus the name LbCas12a, as compared to the AsCas12a from Acidaminococ­
cus sp.. LbCas12a fused with a miniVPR activator domain has been demon­
strated to efficiently activate endogenous genes in HEK293T cells and mouse
P19 cells, with fold changes of around 2­200 depending on the gene and single/­
multiplex approach. The original SiT design demonstration by Campa et al. 2019.
showed better multiplexing activity compared to a DuT designs and achieved ac­
tivation in single­plex designs of around 10­15­fold change with the dAsCas12a
fused with either a VPR or [ACTIV] activator domain.
All Cas12a and activator domain combinations would be tested in a SiT­ and DuT
configurations situated on a single plasmid. For further validation of the SiT config­
uration functionality, the original SiT configuration demonstrated by Campa et al.
2019 (dAsCas12a_[ACTIV]) was also planned to be tested. Initial testing would be
performed as single­plex, with a single crRNA in the crRNA array. Best activators
would then be tested in multiplex, with multiple crRNAs in the crRNA array.
Multiplexed gene activation by Cas12a in chinese hamster ovary cells
10
==PAGE:18==
CRISPRa system
DR sequence (5’­ to ­3’)
Campa et al. 2019
AAUUUCUACUCUUGUAGAU
Guo et al. 2022
AAUUUCUACUAAGUGUAGAU
Kleinstiver et al. 2019.
UAAUUUCUACUCUUGUAGAU
Table 3.1: Nucleotide sequences of the DRs for the different CRISRPa systems.
All but Campa et al.’s are 20 nulceotides long, while Campa et al.’s are at 19
nucleotides.
For the crRNA array, the DR sequences were not standardized. The original DRs
of the used plasmids were used as is to simplify the cloning; thus, dAsCas12a and
denAsCas12a did not have the same DRs as dLbCas12a and hyperdAsCas12a,
as they should be since different Cas12a­enzymes do recognize slightly differ­
ent DRs as Zetsche et al. 2015 describes. Additionally, the Campa et al. 2019
CRISPRa system had a different DR sequence as well. The sequences can be
seen in Table 3.1. Campa et al. 2019’s DR were one nucleotide shorter than
the rest, at only 19 nucleotides. Functionally, the DRs chosen for this project
should efficiently form the hairpin structure needed for Cas12a to recognize the
sequence. As the DRs have been demonstrated to work in HEK293 cells, they
will also likely function in CHO cells.
Current literature suggests the target sequence needs to be around 18­23 bases
long (Guo et al. 2022). Campa et al. 2019 demonstrated that 20 bases showed
better activation than 15 bases, and Creutzburg et al. 2020 demonstrated no dif­
ference in cleaving activity between 19 and 24 bases.
crRNA
Sequence 5’­3’
Mgat3
CCATGACTCTTGCCCCTGCT
Clgn 1
TGACCTATGGACCGCGGCAC
Clgn 2
TTCTGTGACAGGGGGGTCTT
Papss2 1
AGGCCACCCGTCTTGCTGCT
Papss2 2
TCCTAGACCTGAGCTGGCGG
NTC
CGATCGCCCAGCATCTCGTC
Table 3.2: Sequences of each crRNA
Mgat3 targeting sequences were characterized in a previous in­house study, see
Figure 3.1, and Mgat3 crRNA 3 was chosen for this study (shown as PL1217,
see Table 3.3 for plasmid elements), as it had the highest activation of Mgat3 and
was significantly higher than the CHO­S control and the reference non­targeting
control (NTC) (shown as PL1222). The Mgat3 sequence and flanking DRs were
to be cloned into the other plasmids containing the CRISPRa systems based on
Multiplexed gene activation by Cas12a in chinese hamster ovary cells
11
==PAGE:19==
dAsCas12a and denAsCas12a. Supposedly, this should be functional as PL1217
is based on denAsCas12a. For Clgn and Papss2 crRNAs, two of the highest­
ranking sequences generated by CHOPCHOP would be used in this study, but
no specific screening for the best crRNA sequence will be performed, as the used
Cas12a will likely impact the performance as well. While the generated crRNAs,
in theory, should work, it is not guaranteed; thus, two target sequences were used
for both Clgn and Papss2. Sequences can be seen in Table 3.2.
Figure 3.1: Previous in­house study of Mgat3 targeting sequences characterized
with denAsCas12a_VPR. PL1215 to PL1221 were crRNA one to seven, PL1222
was the NTC control, and CHO­S was the no­plasmid transfection control. PL1223
and PL1224 were the Cas9 configurations of Mgat3 targeting and NTC, respec­
tively. PL1217 had the highest activation of Mgat3 compared and was significantly
higher than PL1222. CRISPRa system on PL1217 and PL1222 were based de­
nAsCas12a with a fused VPR activator domain, see Table 3.1.
3.1
Gene targets
Three gene targets were chosen for gene activation for this study: Mgat3, Clgn,
and Papss2. All three have been shown to be silenced, based on in­house tran­
scriptomic data, which will make it easier to detect activation of the gene targets,
as the background is supposedly zero or close to zero. Choosing silenced genes
is also beneficial to demonstrate the CRISPRa system’s ability to awaken silenced
genes, which would indicate that the chromatin structure of the gene would not be
a limiting factor of the system and that it could be changed from the native state by
the CRISPR system itself. It has been described in the literature that the chromatin
structure can interfere with Cas9 in HEK293 cells performing gene editing (Daer et
al. 2017). While this was not a study in chromatin interference of Cas12a, it could
be an activation­limiting factor. Nevertheless, Karottki et al. 2020 demonstrated
Multiplexed gene activation by Cas12a in chinese hamster ovary cells
12
==PAGE:20==
that the silenced gene Mgat3 could be activated using a Cas9­based CRISPRa
system in CHO cells. Clgn and Papss2 have also been overexpressed using this
system, but this has not been published (Zaragoza 2022). Mgat3 is a glycosyl­
transferase responsible for transferring N­acetylglucosamine residues to glycan
structures. Clgn is a chaperone, and Papss2 is involved in sulfur metabolism.
GnbI, a signal transducer, was chosen as endogenous control, as this gene has
been shown to have highly stable expression levels, which is critical for a nor­
malization of the qPCR data on amounts of RNA added to the sample and thus
compare relative expression levels between samples (Brown et al. 2014; Livak
and Schmittgen 2001).
3.2
Plasmid design and cloning strategy
All tested configurations were situated on one plasmid, both SiT and DuT designs,
leading to relatively large constructs. By having all elements on one plasmid,
transfection was simplified, and all transfected cells would be subject to equal
DNA ratios of Cas12a_activator domain and crRNA array in the case of a DuT
configuration. The process was complicated only during the initial construction of
the plasmids, as the crRNA exchange could be done relatively quickly with, e.g.,
Golden Gate cloning. The design was based upon an in­house backbone compat­
ible with amplification in E. coli. Promoters used were 100RPU­1 & ­2 (Brown et al.
2014) (SiT only used 100RPU­2) and BHGpA as terminators. Several nuclear lo­
calization sequences (NLS) were situated downstream of the Cas12a sequences
and between elements in the VPR and [ACTIV] domains. See Figure 3.2 for an
overview of the designs. Construction of SiT configurations would entail replac­
ing the terminator of the cas12a_activator domain and the promoter of the crRNA
array with a Triplex element.
USER cloning was the preferred method for constructing most plasmids due to its
versatility, but some crRNA array exchanges were performed with Golden Gate
cloning. From the previous in­house study in AsCas12a­based CRISPRa, several
plasmids could be used for this study: PL1217, PL1222 and PL1225 to PL1230,
see Table 3.3. With those, SiT configurations could be cloned by USER cloning.
Expanding the current configurations from single­plex to multiplex would require
the assembly of a new crRNA array composed of crRNA sequences flanked by
DR sequences.
Multiplexed gene activation by Cas12a in chinese hamster ovary cells
13
==PAGE:21==
Figure 3.2:
Basal structure of all plasmids.
dCas12a symbolizes both de­
nAsCas12a, dAsCas12a, dLbCas12a and hyperdLbCas12a.
VPR comprises
VP64, p65, and Rta, while [ACTIV] comprises p65 and HSF. A U6 promoter was
used to transcribe the crRNA array for dLbCas12a and hyperdLbCas12a, and no
SiT configurations were tested for those. All backbones of the plasmids consisted
of an ampicillin resistance gene and ori.
Cas protein
Activator
domain
Transcript
design
Gene
Target
Plasmid
number
denAsCas12a
VPR
DuT
Mgat3
PL1217
NTC
PL1222
dAsCas12a
Mgat3
PL1225
NTC
PL1228
denAsCas12a
[ACTIV]
Mgat3
PL1226
NTC
PL1229
dAsCas12a
Mgat3
PL1227
NTC
PL1230
Table 3.3: Overview of in­house plasmids to be used as templates in this study.
3.3
Transfection of CHO­S WT cultures utilizing
FreeStyle Max
CHO­S WT cultures were transiently transfected using FreeStyle Max Reagent.
These were performed in biological triplicates to add robustness to the study. For
each configuration transfected into the cells, an NTC configuration was also trans­
fected into the cells as a reference to assess if the measured activation of the
target gene was attributable to only the guided CRISPRa system and not random
effects of having a non­guided CRISPRa system expressed in the cell. A CHO­S
WT control was also used to measure the native expression level of the targeted
genes. Transient transfections were used with a cultivation duration of two days
after the transfection to allow the CRISPRa system to be expressed and to induce
Multiplexed gene activation by Cas12a in chinese hamster ovary cells
14
==PAGE:22==
their functions. While transient transfections increase the variabilities in the study,
e.g., no control of copy numbers in each cell, this will be normalized in the RT­
qPCR experiment. By transfecting each culture with the same amount of DNA,
it was assumed that the distribution of plasmids in the culture and cells would be
similar between cultures.
It was assumed that the activation efficiency of the target gene would follow an s­
curve in response to the expression level of AsCas12a. With little to no AsCas12a
in the cell, no activation would occur, while increasing levels would translate to in­
creased levels of target gene messenger RNA (mRNA) until a saturation point was
reached, where no more AsCas12a would lead to more target mRNA. With this
assumption, the distribution and copy number of the plasmids in each cell would
only directly affect the conclusion of the results if the saturation point was not
reached. The AsCas12a measurement would, however, only be used to assess
if the transfection was successful and non­activation in those cases are true neg­
atives as the WT reference could not be used to relatively quantify the AsCas12a
mRNA by the real­time quantitative PCR (RT­qPCR) method.
3.4
RT­qPCR
Transfected cultures were harvested and quenched before the RNA was extracted
from the samples. DNA was degraded as part of the extraction to reduce the ge­
nomic background noise, which could be measured by the RT­qPCR method.
cDNA was synthesized from the extracted RNA using a reverse transcriptase 18­
nucleotide long T­primer, which targets polyA tails, resulting in an mRNA­specific
synthesis. Only one cycle was performed; thus, equal amounts of cDNA and
mRNA should be present in the sample. RT­qPCR was used to compare the tar­
geted gene’s relative expression between samples. To do the comparative study,
it was necessary to normalize the quantification of the targeted gene to the amount
of cDNA added to the sample. To do this, a stable endogenous reference point
was needed, GnbI. Each sample was measured in triplicates, so a mean value and
95%­confidence interval could be calculated. Combining this with the biological
triplicates added robustness to the methodology. The activation was assessed
by first normalizing the targeted gene’s quantification to the WT sample, where
the gene was silenced. This was done for all actively guided CRISPRa systems
and their NTC counterparts. Activation was then determined by comparing the
actively guided CRISPRa with the NTC control. AsCas12a was also quantified in
the RT­qPCR runs but with another objective. As no Cas12a exists in the WT ref­
Multiplexed gene activation by Cas12a in chinese hamster ovary cells
15
==PAGE:23==
erence cells, it was not possible to do an accurate relative expression calculation.
Doing so would be the equivalent of dividing by zero or a number close to zero
due to background noise. However, the relative expression of AsCas12a could
be used to determine if the transfection with the CRISPRa system was success­
ful. The relative expression analysis was thus performed the same way as for the
targeted gene, but not in order to quantify the AsCas12a in the samples but to
visually show which samples have AsCas12a present or not in the final plots.
RT­qPCR relies on probes with bound label and quencher, which can bind to the
target cDNA. A few different probes would be used in this study to quantify the
total of five genes: GnbI, AsCas12a, Mgat3, Clgn, and Papss2. Different fluores­
cent labels would be needed in order to quantify several genes in the multiplex
RT­qPCR run. Thus, the GnbI­probe would always be labeled with ABY, the As­
Cas12a­probe was always labeled with VIC, and the target genes’ probe was
labeled with FAM. The GnbI, AsCas12a, and Mgat3 probes were made in­house,
while a commercial probe for Mgat3, Clgn, and Papss2 were acquired. To rela­
tivize the labels, a passive reference dye was used called Mustang Purple. The
quencher MGT was also bound to the probe, eliminating fluorescing of the label.
Two primers were present for each probe, enabling the amplification of a specific
fragment of each gene to be quantified, while the probe can bind to a specific
site between the two primer binding sites. During each qPCR cycle, amplification
would occur of the specific fragments in the cDNA enabled by the complimentary
primers for each probe. Probes would bind to the denatured cDNA before the Taq­
Man polymerase reached the binding site, which would mean, at some point, a
collision would occur between the probe and the TaqMan polymerase. During this
collision, the TaqMan polymerase will degrade the probe with an endonuclease
domain, and the label and quencher would be released, removing the quenchers
eliminating effect on the fluorescence of the label. Over several cycles, the fluo­
rescence of each label will increase exponentially, in proportion to the fragments
amplified from the genes of interest in the cDNA, which can be measured. During
data analysis, a cycle threshold (CT) was determined, which is the cycle number
used to quantify how much of the gene of interest was initially present in the sam­
ple. This is a relative quantification, as CT is meaningless by itself, and this is
where the endogenous reference gene is relevant. A standard can also be used
instead of a relative expression level is not sufficient for the experimental aim.
The threshold was automatically calculated by the relative expression tool pro­
vided by Thermo Scientific, along with the relative expression described by Livak
Multiplexed gene activation by Cas12a in chinese hamster ovary cells
16
==PAGE:24==
and Schmittgen 2001 and the statistical calculations. Relative quantification was
exported to Excel, where the data was LN­transformed and plotted.
Multiplexed gene activation by Cas12a in chinese hamster ovary cells
17
==PAGE:25==
4
Methods and materials
4.1
crRNA design
CHOPCHOP (Labun et al. 2019) was used to generate crRNA sequences for
Cas12a for specific gene targets. A few default settings were changed to increase
potential efficiency of the sequences; see Table 4.1.
Setting
Input
Target
Mgat3, Clgn or Papss2
Genome annotation
Chinese Hamster Ovary CHO­K1
(GCF_3668045.3CriGri­PICRH­1.0)
Using
CRISPR/Cpf1 or CasX
For
Activation
Target specific region of gene:
Promoter: 500 to 0
sgRNA length without PAM
20
5’­PAM:
Non­standard: TTTV
Self­complementarity (Thyme et al.):
Check both boxes and Custom backbone:
TAATTTCTACTCTTGTAGAT
Table 4.1: Overview of changes in CHOPCHOP.
Criteria for the generated crRNA sequences were: 1) no high GC­content, espe­
cially in the last 3­5 nucleotides of the 3’­ end as Cas12a is highly sensitive to GC
in this area, 2) MM0­1 had to be zero and the rest of the MMx values close to zero,
in order to reduce off­targeting. A collection of crRNA sequences was then col­
lected and kept in the generated order. The two first crRNAs were chosen while
the rest functioned as backups.
4.2
Plasmid construction
4.2.1
TD­PCR
DNA bricks (DB) were amplified by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) utilizing Phu­
sion U Hot­start master mix (MM) (Thermo Scientific, #F533) following the in­
cluded protocols two­step thermocycler method, or an adapted touch­down PCR
(TD­PCR) as described by Korbie and Mattick 2008 for the tree­step thermocycler
method. In some cases, additives such as DMSO were used to increase primer
specificity along with slight changes to the annealing temperature, described by
the protocol for Phusion U Hot Start DNA Polymerase (Thermo Scientific, #F555)
Multiplexed gene activation by Cas12a in chinese hamster ovary cells
18
==PAGE:26==
along with some trial and error. Primers were designed by hand in Benchling,
ordered through IDT, and resuspended in milliQ water for a concentration of 100
µM. The annealing temperature was calculated using Thermo Scientifics Tm cal­
culator tool. See thermocycler program in Table A.1. After amplification, DBs
were digested with DpnI in FastDigest green buffer (Thermo Scientific, #FD1704)
according to the protocol if the DB size was approximately the same as the tem­
plate. PCR reactions were loaded on either 1% or 2% agarose gel, depending on
amplicon size, stained with SYBR safe (Invitrogen, #S33102) and were run with
100 bp or 1 kb ladders (Thermo Scientific, #SM0243 or #SM0313) in 1x TAE buffer
(Thermo Scientific, #B49). Correct amplicons were cut out of the gels and purified
using Nucleospin Gel and PCR Clean­up kit (Macherey­Nagel, #740609). Purity
and eluate concentration was assessed on a NanoDrop 2000 (Thermo Scientific).
4.2.2
Oligo annealing
Ordered oligos were annealed to form short DBs. 5 µl 100 µM of each oligo was
added to 35 µl milliQ water and 5 µl NEB 4 buffer (NEB, #B7004) in a PCR tube.
The mixture was incubated on a thermocycler with the program seen in Table 4.2.
Temperature [C°]
Time [min]
Cycles
Notes
95
5
1
70
5
10
­5°C per cycle
4
Hold
Table 4.2: Thermocycler program for oligo annealing.
4.2.3
USER cloning
Purified DBs and annealed oligos were mixed in equal ratios with rCutSmart buffer
and USER enzyme (NEB, #B6004, and #M5509) according to the manufacturer’s
protocol. An adapted thermocycler program optimized the cloning; see Table 4.3.
After the program, the mixture was always stored on ice or in the freezer. A control
was added to assess the ability of the backbone to self­ligate and thus increase
the colony count on the transformation plate.
4.2.4
Golden­gate
Miniprepped plasmid was mixed with annealed oligos, BsaI­HFv2, T4 DNA lig­
ase and T4 DNA ligase buffer (NEB, #R3733, Thermo Scientific #EL0011 and
#46300018). The mixture was incubated on a thermocycler with a program rec­
ommended by NEB, using only 30 cycles overnight (O/N); see Table 4.4. The
mixture was briefly heated to 60°C the next day before transformation. A control
Multiplexed gene activation by Cas12a in chinese hamster ovary cells
19
==PAGE:27==
Temperature [C°]
Time [min]
Cycles
Notes
3
30
1
28
3
10
­1°C per cycle
16
5
1
10
10
4
Hold
Table 4.3: Optimized thermocycler program for USER cloning.
was added to assess the ability of the backbone to self­ligate and thus increase
the colony count on the transformation plate.
Temperature [C°]
Time [min]
Cycles
37
5
30
16
5
60
5
1
4
Hold
Table 4.4: Thermocycler program for Golden­Gate cloning.
4.2.5
Site­directed mutagenesis
An alternative PCR was performed, with the first annealing temperature reduced
by 5­10°C, but otherwise, as described in section 4.2.1. Part of the PCR reaction
mixture was mixed with KLD enzyme mix and reaction buffer (NEB, #M0554) ac­
cording to the manufacturer’s protocol and incubated on a thermocycler with the
program seen in Table 4.5. A control was added which was not treated with the
KDM enzyme mix, in order to assess the colony count due to the template, as the
KLD enzyme mix includes DpnI.
Temperature [C°]
Time [min]
20
10
37
30
4
Hold
Table 4.5: Thermocycler program for KLD­based SDM
4.2.6
Transformation, assembly verification and plasmid
purification
Mach1 competent E. coli cells (Invitrogen, #C869601) thawed on ice. 10 µl was
aliquoted in pre­cooled 1.5 ml Eppendorf tubes on ice. 1 µl assembled plasmid
mixture was added and incubated for 30 minutes on ice. Cells were heat­shocked
at 42°C for 30 seconds on a pre­heated ThermoMixer and then placed on ice for
Multiplexed gene activation by Cas12a in chinese hamster ovary cells
20
==PAGE:28==
at least 1 minute. 900 µl SOC media was added to the cells and incubated at 37°C
on a pre­heated ThermoMixer for 30 minutes with shaking at 800 rpm. The culture
was then briefly centrifuged to pellet the cells, removing 850 µl supernatant, and
cells were resuspended in the rest of the media before being plated on LB plates
with ampicillin no older than one month. Plates were incubated O/N at 37°C or for
two days at ambient temperature. Comparing assembly plates with control plates,
if there were not at least a five to ten­fold difference between them, colony PCR
(cPCR) was to be performed in order to pick the colonies most likely to harbor the
correct assemblies. Colonies were picked and resuspended in 20 µl 1:1 SOC and
50% glycerol while on ice. 1 µl was used for cPCR, while the rest was reserved
for inoculation. Otherwise, cPCR was skipped and inoculation was performed
directly by suspending the colony in 5 ml 2xYT with ampicillin and incubated O/N
at 37°C with shaking at 250 rpm. cPCR was performed either with OneTaq Hot
Start Quick­Load MM (NEB, #M0488) for quick loading on a 2% gel or Phusion U if
the amplicon was to be sequenced. PCR reactions were mixed and performed as
described by the manufacturer, with increased initial denaturation time to ensure
complete cell lysis and DNA release. Sometimes the PCR was performed as TD­
PCR, see Table A.2 for the thermocycler programs used.
In the case of OneTaq, reactions were loaded on a gel to confirm amplicon sizes.
If correct, several suspended cultures, thought to harbor the correct assemblies,
were inoculated in 5 ml 2xYT with ampicillin and incubated O/N at 37°C with shak­
ing at 250 rpm. In the case of Phusion U, reactions were only partially loaded on
a gel to confirm amplicon size and assess if the reaction was clear of secondary
bands. If that was the case, 5 µl PCR reaction was treated with 2 µl ExoZAP
(Ampliqon, #A620603) according to the manual and was then sent for Sanger se­
quencing using Eurofins Mix2Seq kit. Suspended cultures with correct assemblies
and no mutations were then inoculated in 5 ml 2xYT with ampicillin and incubated
O/N at 37°C with shaking at 250 rpm. 500 µl O/N culture was transferred to cry­
otubes with 500 µl 50% glycerol and stored at ­80°C, while the rest of the O/N cul­
ture was miniprepped. Eluate purity and concentration was assessed with a Nan­
oDrop 2000, and non­sequenced plasmids were sent for sequencing with Eurofins
Mix2Seq kit. Cultures with confirmed plasmids were inoculated in 50 ml 2xYT with
ampicillin and incubated O/N at 37°C with shaking at 250 rpm. The O/N cultures
were midiprepped with NucleoBond Xtra Midi EF (Macherey­Nagel, #740420) or
GenElute HP Endotoxin­Free Plasmid Maxiprep Kit (Merch, #NA0410), depend­
ing on kit availability, according to the manual. For the GenElute maxiprep, DNA
Multiplexed gene activation by Cas12a in chinese hamster ovary cells
21
==PAGE:29==
precipitation was also performed. Eluate purity and concentration were measured
with the NanoDrop 2000.
4.3
CHO Cell cultivation
CHO­S wild type (WT) cells (Thermo Scientific, #A11364) were cultivated in ei­
ther 30 ml or 50 ml liquid CD CHO media, supplemented with 8 mM L­glutamine
(Thermo Scientific, #10743029 and #A2916801), in either a 125 ml or 250 ml
vented polycarbonate shake flasks (Corning, #431143 and #431144) at 37°C in
a humidified atmosphere with 8% CO2, while placed on orbital shaking plates,
with an amplitude at 25 mm at 130 rpm. Cultures were passaged every other day
to 2e5 or 3e5 viable cells per ml, using a Nucelocounter 250 to count Solution
18 (Chemometec, #910­3018) stained cells and assess culture viability. Tran­
siently transfected cultures were cultivated in 1 ml cultures in 12­well plates (Fal­
con, #351143) under the same conditions but were not passaged. Cells to be
transfected were centrifuged at 200 rpm for five minutes at ambient temperature
and resuspended in fresh pre­warmed media for a final cell density of 1e6 viable
cells per ml. The culture was aliquoted in 12­well cultivation plates, with 1 ml
culture in each well. Cultures were transfected with 1.25 µg DNA and 1.25 µg
FreeStyleMax transfection agent (Thermo Scientific, #16447100), diluted in Op­
tiPRO (Thermo Scientific, #12309019) for a total volume of 40 µl. Two days after
transfection, 300 µl culture was centrifuged, the supernatant discarded, and the
cell pellet was resuspended in 300 µl QIAzol (Qiagen, #79306), while working in
a fume hood.
4.4
Relative gene expression analysis by RNA
extraction, cDNA synthesis and quantification
by RT­PCR
RNA was extracted from the QIAzol resuspended cultures using the Direct­zol­
96 RNA kit (Zymo Research, #R2054) where genomic DNA would be degraded
as part of the process. Extracted RNA sample concentration and purity was as­
sessed with a NanoDrop 2000. The RevertAid First Strand complementary DNA
(cDNA) Synthesis Kit (Thermo Scientific, #K1622) was used to synthesize first­
strand cDNA from 500 ng extracted RNA, using the Oligo(dT)18 primer. Two
controls were made, to assess residual genomic DNA in the cDNA samples and
blank sample to control for unspecific activity from the reverse­transcriptase and
Multiplexed gene activation by Cas12a in chinese hamster ovary cells
22
==PAGE:30==
following RT­qPCR run. For the residual genomic DNA control, some but equal
amount of all RNA samples was added, for a total volume of either 11 µl or 22 µl
depending on the experiment without reverse­transcriptase added. Total reaction
volumes were thus eighter 20 µl or 40 µl. RT­qPCR was performed using TaqMan
Multiplex 2x MM (Thermo, #4461882) with either 2.5 to 4 ng cDNA depending on
the experiment, with three probes added: AsCas12a­VIC, Gnb1­ABY and then
one of the three target genes (Mgat3, Clgn or Papss2)­FAM. Mustang Purple was
used as a passive dye reference. QuantStudio 5 (Thermo Scientific) was used to
perform the RT­qPCR with the program as described in table m1.
Temperature [C°]
Time [sec]
Cycles
95
20
1
95
1
40
60
20
Table 4.6: Quant Studio 5 program used for RT­qPCR.
Samples were placed as triplicates in a MicroAmp Optical 96­well plates with
optical adhesive film (Applied Biosystems, #N8010560 and #4311971), briefly
vortexed to remove air bubbles and spun down to collect all reaction volume in
the bottom of the wells. Plate design and settings for the RT­qPCR runs were
planned before handed, thus the optical plate was just inserted in the QuantStu­
dio 5, and program loaded up and briefly check for errors before pressing run.
Relative expression was calculated using Thermo Scientifics Relative Quantifica­
tion tool, which uses the Livak method (Livak and Schmittgen 2001). The target
gene and AsCas12a were normalized using the endogenous standard GnbI. Rel­
ative expression was normalized to the reference samples WT. Relative quantifi­
cation data and 95% confidence intervals were exported to an Excel sheet and
LN­transformed. A no­transcript control sample along with a no­reverse transcrip­
tase control was used to assess unspecific amplification occurred leading to faulty
readings and if residual genomic DNA were present, respectively.
Multiplexed gene activation by Cas12a in chinese hamster ovary cells
23
==PAGE:31==
5
Results
With the aim to first do an initial screening of a panel of CRISPRa systems with a
single crRNA in the array, the best activators would be identified. The best activa­
tors would then be tested with more crRNAs in the array. Transiently transfected
cultures were harvested, RNA extracted, and cDNA synthesized, as described in
section 4.4. RT­qPCR was performed, and CT data acquired from the RT­qPCR
experiments and calculated to relative quantity (RQ) data. These values were
normalized to the endogenous control GnbI and the WT reference samples. RQ
data was finally LN­transformed, meaning the value zero would correspond to
no change between the sample and WT references samples. Values of, e.g.,
two or five on the y­axis, were thus two or five times higher than the WT on an
LN­transformed basis. The targeted genes’ activation efficiency was assessed
by comparing the relative expression levels of the targeted gene between active
CRISPRa, and their corresponding NTCs. A 95% confidence interval was calcu­
lated for each sample, based on the biological and technical replicates, and used
to assess if the fold change was significantly different. Activation was expected
to be apparent, thus reducing the need to do a statistical analysis to determine if
the fold­changes were significantly different.
5.1
Mgat3 overexpression by SiT and DuT
configurated AsCas12a­based CRISPRa
The first gene target to be assessed was Mgat3. This gene target already had
some plasmids constructed but not tested in a previous study.
Mgat3 activation was assessed by two serial experiments of transient transfec­
tions, testing SiT and DuT configurations. Three AsCas12a and activator domain
configurations were tested in a SiT configuration, while all four were tested in a
DuT configuration. The left­out SiT configuration, denAsCas12a_VPR, was not
constructed in time. An overview of the tested CRISPRa systems and their plas­
mid can be found in Table 5.1.
Multiplexed gene activation by Cas12a in chinese hamster ovary cells
24
==PAGE:32==
Cas protein
Activator
domain
Transcript
design
crRNA
denAsCas12a
VPR
DuT
mgat3
NTC
dAsCas12a
mgat3
NTC
denAsCas12a
[ACTIV]
mgat3
NTC
dAsCas12a
mgat3
NTC
Table 5.1: Overview of plasmids tested in this section with descriptions of which Cas and
fused activator proteins were used, transcript design and gene target.
dAsCas12a
VPR Mgat3
dAsCas12a
VPR NTC
denAsCas12a
[ACTIV] Mgat3
denAsCas12a
[ACTIV] NTC
dAsCas12a
[ACTIV] Mgat3
dAsCas12a
[ACTIV] NTC
0
2
4
6
8
Biogroup
Relative Quantification
(LN­transformed)
AsCas12a
mgat3
Figure 5.1: Relative expression of SiT plasmids from LN transformed RQ data. Each
colored region corresponds to a different AsCas12a and fused activator domain. For
each region, the left sample had a gene target, and the right sample was an NTC. Yellow
is dAsCas12a_VPR, blue is dAsCas12a_[ACTIV] and green is denAsCas12a_[ACTIV].
All AsCas12a relative expressions were measured between six to eight times higher than
WT samples. Mgat3 values were approximately zero, with error bars covering the zero
point, meaning they were not measurably different than WT.
Relative expression fold changes of AsCas12a, and Mgat3 can be seen in Fig­
ure 5.1 (SiT) and Figure 5.2 (DuT). There was no measurable activation of Mgat3,
as the relative expression values were around zero for all configurations, both ac­
tively guided CRISPRa systems and NTC, with error bars covering the zero point.
AsCas12a relative expression values were measured to be higher than zero for
all configurations, with some variability in DuT configurations but generally higher
for DuT than SiT. However, this did not yield a higher activation of Mgat3, as none
Multiplexed gene activation by Cas12a in chinese hamster ovary cells
25
==PAGE:33==
could be measured.
denAsCas12a
VPR Mgat3
denAsCas12a
VPR NTC
dAsCas12a
VPR Mgat3
dAsCas12a
VPR NTC
denAsCas12a
[ACTIV] Mgat3
denAsCas12a
[ACTIV] NTC
dAsCas12a
[ACTIV] Mgat3
dAsCas12a
[ACTIV] NTC
0
5
10
Biogroup
Relative Quantification
(LN­transformed)
AsCas12a
mgat3
Figure 5.2: Relative expression of DuT plasmids from LN transformed RQ data. Each
colored region corresponds to a different AsCas12a and fused activator domain. For each
region, the left sample had a gene target, the right sample being an NTC. Yellow is de­
nAsCas12a_VPR, blue is dAsCas12a_VPR, green is dAsCas12a_[ACTIV] and purple is
denAsCas12a_[ACTIV]. All AsCas12a values were measured between eight to ten times
higher than the WT sample, except for denAsCas12a_[ACTIV], which had lower values
between two and four. Mgat3 values were approximately zero, with error bars covering
the zero point, meaning they were not measurably different than WT.
As mentioned, there were some variabilities in AsCas12a expression values, as
denAsCas12a_[ACTIV] had lower values than the rest of the DuT configurations,
see Figure 5.2. This configuration had relative expression values of around two
to four, while the other DuT configurations were between eight to ten. Compar­
ing DuT and SiT expression values reveal that SiT had slightly lower AsCas12a
expression values, as those top out at six to eight. Notably, a decrease in mea­
sured AsCas12a for the denAsCas12a_[ACTIV] SiT configuration was not seen
as it was for the DuT configurations.
5.2
Testing published CRISPRa systems from
HEK293 cells in CHO cells
As none of the in­house plasmids appeared functional, three different plasmids
described in the literature were acquired from Addgene. These systems were
tested in HEK293 cells, but the rationale was that there could be a 1:1 transfer
between HEK293 cells and CHO cells. One from Campa et al. 2019 and two from
Multiplexed gene activation by Cas12a in chinese hamster ovary cells
26
==PAGE:34==
Guo et al. 2022; see Table 5.2 for an overview. The Guo et al. 2022 plasmids were
based on LbCas12a, and the plasmid from Campa et al. 2019 on AsCas12a. The
crRNA was exchanged for all plasmids, but the Campa et al. 2019 plasmid was
not finalized in time for the experiments.
Cas protein
Activator
domain
Transcript
design
Author
crRNA
dAsCas12a
[ACTIV]
SiT
Campa
et al. 2019
Mgat3
NTC
dLbCas12a
miniVPR
DuT
Guo
et al.
2022
Mgat3
NTC
hyperdLbCas12a
Mgat3
NTC
Table 5.2: Overview of plasmids tested in this section with descriptions of which Cas and
fused activator proteins were used, transcript design and gene target. Additionally, the
authors for the destination plasmid are also listed. Plasmids described by Campa et al.
were not constructed in time to be tested.
Only a little information could be derived from the RT­qPCR experiment, partly
because the sequence of LbCas12a differs enough from AsCas12a that the probe
for AsCas12a could not bind to it. Additionally, no activation was measured of
Mgat3; see Figure 5.3.
AsCas12a was measured around zero, with error bars covering the zero point,
and Mgat3 was measured to around 0.9±0.2 for dLbCas12a miniVPR Mgat3, sig­
nificantly higher than its NTC counterpart at 0.1±0.5. For the hyper efficient dLb­
Cas12a, approximately the same Mgat3 expression level, at around 0.7±0.2 and
1±0. See Figure 5.3 for a visualization of the values.
Multiplexed gene activation by Cas12a in chinese hamster ovary cells
27
==PAGE:35==
dLbCas12a
miniVPR Mgat3
dLbCas12a
miniVPR NTC
hyperdLbCas12a
miniVPR Mgat3
hyperdLbCas12a
miniVPR NTC
­1
0
1
2
Biogroup
Relative Quantification
(LN­transformed)
AsCas12a
mgat3
Figure 5.3: Relative expression of DuT plasmids from LN transformed RQ data. Each
colored region corresponds to a different AsCas12a and fused activator domain. Each
colored region corresponds to a different AsCas12a and fused activator domain. For
each region, the left sample had a gene target, the right sample being an NTC. Yellow is
dLbCas12a_miniVPR, and blue is hyperdLbCas12a_miniVPR. All data hovering around
the zero point, as the AsCas12a probe is not functional with dLbCas12a and no Mgat3
activation is measured, although some values are near one with error bars not covering
the zero point.
5.3
Clgn overexpression by SiT and DuT
configurated AsCas12a­based CRISPRa
As no Mgat3 activation was observed for the previous experiments, two other
gene targets were explored, with the first being Clgn. This was done to eliminate
the possibility that the non­activation seen of Mgat3 was related to that gene. Two
individual crRNAs were developed in single cassette arrays for this experiment.
Over two rounds of transient transfections, performed in serial, Clgn activation was
assessed. All AsCas12a and fused activator domain configurations were tested
in both SiT and DuT configuration, but some were left out due to time constraints:
dAsCas12a_VPR DuT and denAsCas12a_VPR SiT were not tested with Clgn
crRNA 2. See Table 5.3 for a complete overview of tested plasmids.
As seen in Figure 5.4, AsCas12a expression values are stable and high at around
seven to ten times higher than WT, but with no Clgn activation measured. Notably,
one NTC CRISPRa, denAsCas12a VPR NTC, was measured slightly higher than
the rest at 0.9±0.6, along with a Clgn targeting plasmid, dAsCas12a [ACTIV] Clgn
1, at 0.7±0.5.
Multiplexed gene activation by Cas12a in chinese hamster ovary cells
28
==PAGE:36==
Cas protein
Activator
domain
Transcript
design
crRNA
denAsCas12a
VPR
SiT / DuT
Clgn 1
Clgn 2
NTC
dAsCas12a
Clgn 1
Clgn 2
NTC
denAsCas12a
[ACTIV]
Clgn 1
Clgn 2
NTC
dAsCas12a
Clgn 1
Clgn 2
NTC
Table 5.3: Overview of plasmids tested in this section with descriptions of which Cas and
fused activator proteins were used, transcript design and gene target. All configurations
were tested in both SiT and DuT configurations.
denAsCas12a
VPR Clgn 1
denAsCas12a
VPR NTC
dAsCas12a
VPR Clgn 1
dAsCas12a
VPR Clgn 2
dAsCas12a
VPR NTC
denAsCas12a
[ACTIV] Clgn 1
denAsCas12a
[ACTIV] Clgn 2
denAsCas12a
[ACTIV] NTC
dAsCas12a
[ACTIV] Clgn 1
dAsCas12a
[ACTIV] Clgn 2
dAsCas12a
[ACTIV] NTC
0
5
10
Biogroup
Relative Quantification
(LN­transformed)
AsCas12a
Clgn
Figure 5.4: Relative expression of SiT plasmids from LN transformed RQ data. Each
colored region corresponds to a different AsCas12a and fused activator domain. For
each region, the left sample had a gene target, the right sample being an NTC. Yellow is
denAsCas12a_VPR, blue is dAsCas12a_VPR, green is dAsCas12a_[ACTIV] and purple
is denAsCas12a_[ACTIV]. All AsCas12a relative expressions were measured between
seven to ten times higher than WT samples. Clgn values were approximately zero, with
error bars covering the zero point for most samples, meaning not measurably different
than WT. denAsCas12a VPR NTC and dAsCas12a [ACTIV] Clgn 2 did have values near
one with error bars not covering the zero point.
For the DuT configurations, no activation of Clgn was measured, as seen in Fig­
Multiplexed gene activation by Cas12a in chinese hamster ovary cells
29
==PAGE:37==
ure 5.5. Some values were slightly negative, with error bars not crossing the zero
point. AsCas12a relative expression was also quite variable between samples, as
denAsCas12a VPR NTC, dAsCas12a [ACTIV] Clgn 1, and dAsCas12a [ACTIV]
Clgn 2 had significantly negative values, and dAsCas12a [ACTIV] NTC were pos­
itive but lower than the rest of the, what could be called normal relative expression
levels of around five to six.
denAsCas12a
VPR Clgn 1
denAsCas12a
VPR Clgn 2
denAsCas12a
VPR NTC
dAsCas12a
VPR Clgn 1
dAsCas12a
VPR NTC
denAsCas12a
[ACTIV] Clgn 1
denAsCas12a
[ACTIV] Clgn 2
denAsCas12a
[ACTIV] NTC
dAsCas12a
[ACTIV] Clgn 1
dAsCas12a
[ACTIV] Clgn 2
dAsCas12a
[ACTIV] NTC
­5
0
5
Biogroup
Relative Quantification
(LN­transformed)
AsCas12a
Clgn
Figure 5.5: Relative expression of DuT plasmids from LN transformed RQ data. Each
colored region corresponds to a different AsCas12a and fused activator domain. For each
region, the left sample had a gene target, the right sample being an NTC. Yellow is de­
nAsCas12a_VPR, blue is dAsCas12a_VPR, green is dAsCas12a_[ACTIV] and purple is
denAsCas12a_[ACTIV]. All AsCas12a values were measured between five to six times
higher than the WT sample, except for some samples, which were either negative (de­
nAsCas12a VPR NTC, dAsCas12a [ACTIV] Clgn 1, and dAsCas12a [ACTIV] Clgn 2) or
significantly lower with higher standard deviation (dAsCas12a [ACTIV] NTC). Clgn values
were approximately zero with error bars covering the zero point, meaning not measurably
different than WT, with denAsCas12a VPR Clgn 2 being closer to negative one.
5.4
Papss2 overexpression by SiT and DuT
configurated AsCas12a­based CRISPRa
An additional gene was targeted for activation, Papss2, generating two individual
crRNA single cassette arrays for this experiment. Over two rounds of transient
transfections, performed in serial, Papss2 activation was assessed. All AsCas12a
and fused activator domain configurations were tested in both SiT and DuT con­
figurations, but some were left out due to time constraints. dAsCas12a_VPR DuT
Papss2 crRNA 2 was not tested as the construction was not performed in time.
Multiplexed gene activation by Cas12a in chinese hamster ovary cells
30
==PAGE:38==
See Table 5.4 for a complete overview of tested plasmids.
Cas protein
Activator
domain
Transcript
design
crRNA
denAsCas12a
VPR
SiT / DuT
Papss2 1
Papss2 2
NTC
dAsCas12a
Papss2 1
Papss2 2
NTC
denAsCas12a
[ACTIV]
Papss2 1
Papss2 2
NTC
dAsCas12a
Papss2 1
Papss2 2
NTC
Table 5.4: Overview of plasmids tested in this section with descriptions of which Cas and
fused activator proteins were used, transcript design and gene target. All configurations
were tested in both SiT and DuT configurations.
Figure 5.6 shows no significant activation of Papss2 was measured as all values
were approximately zero, with error bars covering the zero point. Some samples;
denAsCas12a VPR NTC, dAsCas12a VPR Papss2 crRNA 2, and denAsCas12a
[ACTIV] Papss2 crRNA 2, were above zero, even when accounting for the error
bars at 0.9±0.4, 1.1±0.6, and 0.7±0.2, respectively. AsCas12a expression levels
were approximately seven to ten.
For DuT plasmids, the expression of AsCas12a was lower than for the SiT plas­
mids, at values of around five to six for most and eight for denAsCas12a [ACTIV]
Papss2 crRNA 1 and denAsCas12a [ACTIV] Papss2 crRNA 2. denAsCas12a
VPR NTC had a negative relative expression value with large error bars, along
with large error bars for dAsCas12a [ACTIV] Papss2 crRNA 1, and dAsCas12a
[ACTIV] Papss2 crRNA 2 seemingly had no expression of AsCas12a. All this vari­
ation for the AsCas12a expression values did not influence the Papss2 activation,
as none was observed, as seen in Figure 5.7. All values were approximately zero,
with error bars covering the zero point.
Multiplexed gene activation by Cas12a in chinese hamster ovary cells
31
==PAGE:39==
denAsCas12a
VPR Papss2 1
denAsCas12a
VPR Papss2 2
denAsCas12a
VPR NTC
dAsCas12a
VPR Papss2 1
dAsCas12a
VPR Papss2 2
dAsCas12a
VPR NTC
denAsCas12a
[ACTIV] Papss2 1
denAsCas12a
[ACTIV] Papss2 2
denAsCas12a
[ACTIV] NTC
dAsCas12a
[ACTIV] Papss2 1
dAsCas12a
[ACTIV] Papss2 2
dAsCas12a
[ACTIV] NTC
0
5
10
Biogroup
Relative Quantification
(LN­transformed)
AsCas12a
Papss2
Figure 5.6: Relative expression of SiT plasmids from LN transformed RQ data. Each
colored region corresponds to a different AsCas12a and fused activator domain. For
each region, the left sample had a gene target, the right sample being an NTC. Yellow is
denAsCas12a_VPR, blue is dAsCas12a_VPR, green is dAsCas12a_[ACTIV] and purple
is denAsCas12a_[ACTIV]. All AsCas12a relative expressions were measured between
seven to ten times higher than WT samples. Papss2 values were approximately zero
with error bars covering the zero point for most samples, meaning not measurably dif­
ferent than WT, except for denAsCas12a VPR NTC, dAsCas12a VPR Papss2 2, and
denAsCas12a [ACTIV] Papss2 2, which were around one.
Multiplexed gene activation by Cas12a in chinese hamster ovary cells
32
==PAGE:40==
denAsCas12a
VPR Papss2 1
denAsCas12a
VPR Papss2 2
denAsCas12a
VPR NTC
dAsCas12a
VPR Papss2 1
dAsCas12a
VPR NTC
denAsCas12a
[ACTIV] Papss2 1
denAsCas12a
[ACTIV] Papss2 2
denAsCas12a
[ACTIV] NTC
dAsCas12a
[ACTIV] Papss2 1
dAsCas12a
[ACTIV] Papss2 2
dAsCas12a
[ACTIV] NTC
­5
0
5
10
Biogroup
Relative Quantification
(LN­transformed)
AsCas12a
Papss2
Figure 5.7: Relative expression of DuT plasmids from LN transformed RQ data. Each
colored region corresponds to a different AsCas12a and fused activator domain. For
each region, the left sample had a gene target, the right sample being an NTC. Yellow
is denAsCas12a_VPR, blue is dAsCas12a_VPR, green is dAsCas12a_[ACTIV] and pur­
ple is denAsCas12a_[ACTIV]. All AsCas12a values were measured between five and six
times higher than the WT sample, except for denAsCas12a [ACTIV] Papss2 1 and de­
nAsCas12a [ACTIV] Papss2 2, which were around eight, and denAsCas12a VPR NTC,
which was negative. Additionally, dAsCas12a [ACTIV] Papss2 1 had wide error bars,
along with denAsCas12a VPR NTC. Papss2 values were approximately zero with error
bars covering the zero point, meaning not measurably different than WT, with PL1336
being closer to a negative one.
5.5
Verification of applied methods using
previously published in­house Cas9­based
CRISPRa
As none of the previously described experiments could show any activation of
either Mgat3, Clgn, or Papss2, a different experiment was set up to validate the
methods used. Three plasmids from a plasmid collection constructed and char­
acterized by Karottki et al. 2020 were used, see Table 5.5. These forms a dual
plasmid (DuP) configuration, with a fused dCas and VPR on one plasmid and a
gRNA on another. Results of this can be seen in Figure 5.8. No activation occurs
for denAsCas12a VPR Mgat3 and NTC, as described in above sections, but also
not for the Cas9 system, which should have some Mgat3 activation, as described
by Karottki et al. 2020. No AsCas12a was measured for the Cas9 system, as the
Multiplexed gene activation by Cas12a in chinese hamster ovary cells
33
==PAGE:41==
probe cannot bind to the Cas9 transcript.
Cas protein
Activator
domain
Transcript
design
crRNA
dCas9
VPR
DuP
Mgat3
NTC
denAsCas12a
VPR
DuT
Mgat3
NTC
Table 5.5: Overview of plasmids tested in this section with descriptions of which Cas and
fused activator proteins were used, transcript design and gene target. None of the plas­
mids were constructed during this project. The dCas9 system is based on two plasmids
(DuP), a dCas9_VPR plasmid, and a gRNA plasmid.
A new Mgat3 probe was ordered and used in a new experiment. This experiment
used identical plasmids as described in Table 5.5. The experiment with hyper
efficient dLbCas12a also used this probe; see Table 5.2 for the plasmids and
Figure 5.3 for those results.
denAsCas12a
VPR Mgat3
denAsCas12a
VPR NTC
dCas9
VPR Mgat3
dCas9
VPR NTC
0
5
10
Biogroup
Relative Quantification
(LN­transformed)
AsCas12a
mgat3
Figure 5.8: Relative expression of control plasmids from LN transformed RQ data. Each
colored region corresponds to a different Cas and fused activator domain. Yellow is de­
nAsCas12a_VPR in a DuT configuration, and blue is dCas_VPR in a DuP configuration.
No activation of Mgat3 was measured. AsCas12a was not measured for samples in the
blue region, as those are Cas9­based CRISPRa systems.
Figure 5.9 and Figure 5.3 can thus be looked at to see if the new probe made
a difference. Notably, the plasmids from Karottki et al. 2020, also had no mea­
surable activation of Mgat3 in this experiment. This was also seen for the other
tested plasmids with this probe, as seen in Figure 5.9. AsCas12a was measured
Multiplexed gene activation by Cas12a in chinese hamster ovary cells
34
==PAGE:42==
to around six or seven, as seen in Figure 5.9, and of course, not in Figure 5.3, as
described in the previous section.
denAsCas12a
VPR Mgat3
denAsCas12a
VPR NTC
dCas9
VPR Mgat3
dCas9
VPR NTC
0
5
2.5
7.5
Biogroup
Relative Quantification
(LN­transformed)
AsCas12a
mgat3
Figure 5.9: Relative expression of control plasmids from LN transformed RQ data. Each
colored region corresponds to a different Cas and fused activator domain. Yellow is de­
nAsCas12a_VPR in a DuT configuration, and blue is dCas_VPR in a DuP configuration.
No activation of mgat was measured. AsCas12a was not measured for samples in the
blue region, as those are Cas9­based CRISPRa systems.
5.5.1
Assessing background noise from non­degraded
genomic DNA
All results described above were collected through five different experiments, with
some samples being retested with a new Mgat3 probe. One had to look at the con­
trols for each RT­qPCR run to assess if the data was valid. As most experiments
had more samples than a 96­well plate could contain, the samples were split over
several plates, while the WT reference samples were measured on all plates so
that measurements could be compared across plates. A no reverse­transcriptase
(­RT) control and non­targeting control was also added to all plates, originating
from first­strand cDNA synthesis. These controls would be assessed in this sec­
tion. An overview of experiments can be found in Table 5.6.
With the ­RT control, all samples for an experiment were in equal volumes added,
but no cDNA was synthesized. This control was made to assess residual genomic
DNA in the extracted RNA samples, which had been treated with DNase during
the extraction process. This control was not normalized to contain equal amounts
of RNA from all samples nor the same amount as all other cDNA samples. Thus, a
valid comparison of RQ between the samples and this control could not be made.
Multiplexed gene activation by Cas12a in chinese hamster ovary cells
35
==PAGE:43==
Experiment
number
Gene
Target
Transcript
design
Notes
EXPT1998
Mgat3
SiT
AsCas12a tested
EXPT2007
Mgat3
DuT / DuP
AsCas12a and Cas9 tested
EXPT2044
Clgn / Papss2
SiT
AsCas12a tested
EXPT2045
Mgat3
DuT / DuP
hyperdLbCas12a and Cas9 tested
EXPT2063
Clgn / Papss2
DuT
AsCas12a tested
Retesting
EXPT2007
Mgat3
DuT / DuP
New Mgat3 probe tested on
select samples from EXPT2063
Table 5.6: Overview of experiments performed in this study.
Looking at the figures in appendix C, the first seven plots show the technical repli­
cates of the ­RT control. In one experiment, EXPT1998, RT was accidentally
added and thus left out of the analysis, and the control was not remade due to
time constraints. Looking at the other plots of ­RT across different experiments,
residual plasmid, and genomic DNA appears to be present in all ­RT samples. Es­
pecially AsCas12a, which was highly quantified in all samples ­RT, with CT values
around 13­15. A lot of AsCas12a was present, suggesting a high plasmid back­
ground. The CT values varied for the endogenous standard GnbI. For EXPT2045,
the CT value was at 15 cycles, while it was at 35 for EXPT2007, 28 for EXPT2063,
and 15 for EXPT2044. Notably, for the target genes, some did not get a CT value
as the quantification never reached the threshold, while others crossed quite late
at around 28 to 35 cycles. Samples with Mgat3 probes crossed the threshold be­
fore the other target genes, at around 20 cycles for some samples. This would
suggest an imbalance of GnbI and the target genes.
Non­targeting controls were used to assess if the used reagents from cDNA syn­
thesis to RT­qPCR had measurable activity, which could influence the measured
data from the actual samples. Looking at the plots in appendix C at the last eight
plots, most non­targeting controls did not show any significant activity, while for
EXPT2007, AsCas12a crossed the threshold at cycle 34 and GnbI at cycle 38.
The rerun of EXPT2007 had similar results, although GnbI crossed the thresh­
old a few cycles earlier. EXPT2045 also had AsCas12a cross the threshold at
cycle 28. For EXPT2063, there were some variabilities between the technical
replicates, but the threshold for AsCas12a was still late at around 31­34.
Multiplexed gene activation by Cas12a in chinese hamster ovary cells
36
==PAGE:44==
5.5.2
A closer look at the raw data from the retesting of some
samples with a new Mgat3 probe
With the potential of residual genomic DNA contamination in the samples, con­
cealing the gene target activation, a closer look at some samples may rule this
out. Looking at the plots in appendix B at Figure B.1, it can be seen, AsCas12a
and GnbI have CT values at around 31 to 32, while Mgat3 had no CT value. Some
genomic and plasmid DNA was present in the samples, but at insignificant levels
compared to RQ for the samples; WT, PL1217, and the Cas9­based CRISPRa
system, as seen in: Figure B.4 , Figure B.3 and Figure B.2. Here we see signifi­
cantly reduced CT values at around 18 for GnbI across all samples, with AsCas12a
at around the same value for the PL1217 plasmid (denAsCas12a VPR Mgat3) and
much higher for the WT and Cas9­based system, as no AsCas12a was present in
those samples. Mgat3 had decreased CT values for all those samples compared
to the ­RT sample. However, CT values are more or less identical, minding the
variability between replicates was relatively high, indicating no activation of the
gene target.
Multiplexed gene activation by Cas12a in chinese hamster ovary cells
37
==PAGE:45==
6
Discussion
This study aimed to develop a CRISPRa system based on Cas12a for CHO cells.
First, an initial screening was performed to identify the best activators in a panel
of different Cas12a and activator domains in a single­plex configuration, with one
crRNA sequence in the array. All configurations of Cas12a and activator domain
had been demonstrated to work in HEK293 cells; thus, they would likely work in
other mammalian cell lines, such as CHO cells. Best activators would be further
characterized with three gene targets to assess the multiplex abilities of the best
single­plex activators. With this, the foundation of a Cas12a­based CRISPRa
system for CHO cells would be established and enabling further development of
the system.
The initial screening focused on Mgat3 as a gene target; however, no gene acti­
vation was measured. Both a commercial probe was used to quantify the relative
expression of the gene, along with a probe developed in­house, which had been
demonstrated to work. Testing LbCas12a enzymes with Mgat3 as a gene target,
no activation was measured either. No activation of the gene target was measured
when exchanging the crRNA array targeting Mgat3 with one that either targeted
Clgn or Papss2 with a single crRNA. Commercial probes were used in the quan­
tification of both genes. An in­house study of CRISPRa utilizing a Cas9­based
system which had been demonstrated to work in CHO cells by Karottki et al. 2020
was tested twice in this study with the same Mgat3 targeting gRNA sequence.
Both tests with this system had no measurable activation of Mgat3, in contrast
to what Karottki et al. 2020 demonstrated, but this will be discussed later in this
section. For all transient transfections, the endogenous control gene GnbI was
measured successfully, along with AsCas12a in most cases. For those samples
with LbCas12a and Cas9, no AsCas12a was measured, in­line with expectations.
Mgat3 was the default gene target, as a functional crRNA was identified in a previ­
ous in­house study, see chapter 3. The two other gene targets, Clgn and Papss2,
were tested with two individual crRNAs per gene target. While a few configura­
tions were not tested due to time limitations, including those would likely not have
changed the overall outcome of this study. Measuring the controls for the RT­
qPCR, it was found that there was contamination with residual genomic DNA in
the RNA samples. Especially plasmid DNA, as AsCas12a had a relatively lower
Multiplexed gene activation by Cas12a in chinese hamster ovary cells
38
==PAGE:46==
CT than expected. Curiously, the endogenous control GnbI had a significantly
lower GnbI than any gene targets but higher than AsCas12a. However, it was
also shown that for at least some samples, this background was insignificant.
The RT­qPCR analysis was performed as a multiplex analysis, quantifying three
genes: GnbI, AsCas12a, and the gene target (Mgat3, Clgn, or Papss2). The rel­
ative quantification of GnbI, AsCas12a, and the target gene could be compared
between samples for each RT­qPCR run and overall experiment. In essence, only
GnbI and the gene target were quantified to compare the relative expression be­
tween samples. At the same time, AsCas12a was used as a control for the trans­
fection and to add context to the measurements for GnbI and the gene target. If
the gene target was not significantly different from the WT reference sample, the
quantification of AsCas12a could be used to assess whether this gene target’s
non­activation was valid. In cases where AsCas12a did not have a high relative
quantification, the transfection was probably unsuccessful, and the non­activation
would not be attributable to the CRISPRa system. In those cases where a high As­
Cas12a quantification was measured, the non­activation of the target gene could
be due to the CRISPRa system. The same logic can be applied to cases where
activation of the target gene was measured. If no AsCas12a were measured,
then the activation would not be attributable to the CRISPRa system. As for most
cases, AsCas12a had a high quantification, and the lack of activation could be
attributed to the CRISPRa system and not inherent flaws in the downstream pro­
cesses of the harvested cultures. GnbI were quantifiable between samples, so
the lack of activation was likely due to the employed CRISPRa systems.
To validate the activation results for the actively guided CRISPRa systems, the
activation when transfecting with the control non­guided CRISPRa system was
quantified. As there was no relative difference between actively guided CRISPRa
and non­guided CRISPRa, the non­activation of the target gene is not attributable
to the downstream processes nor the transfection method.
A commercial probe was acquired to quantify Mgat3 in the samples, as the non­
activation could be due to faulty probes. Although the probes had been previously
used in other projects, and Mgat3 was quantifiably in those projects, the probe
could have been subjected to incorrect storage since then or just expired. A com­
mercial probe would have the manufacturer’s guarantee to be functional, thus,
a new probe was acquired. As this did not change the outcome of the results,
this was likely not the reason why no measurable change was detected between
Multiplexed gene activation by Cas12a in chinese hamster ovary cells
39
==PAGE:47==
samples. The new probe was also tested on CRISPRa systems that had been
demonstrated to work in CHO cells, both a Cas9­based CRISPRa system, but
also the PL1217, which was described in chapter 3 and tested in several experi­
ments discussed under results as denAsCas12a VPR DuT Mgat3.
With residual genomic DNA present in the RNA samples, measured values were
elevated over the transcriptomic levels. This was primarily true for AsCas12a,
which had relatively low CT values compared to the other genes. Practically, this
makes sense, as the probability of AsCas12a having a higher copy number than
the other genes was relatively high due to no control over the number of plasmids
transfected into the CHO cells. Interestingly the measured CT for the gene targets
were relatively high, above 30, compared to the lower CT values for GnbI. While
the ­RT samples were a mix of many different samples, all subject to potentially
different degradation levels, one would think that the genomic genes would have
approximately the same copy number, which in theory, would lead to similar CT
values. A CT value difference of one would mean a two­fold change, and a value
difference of two would be a four­fold change. Thus, such large difference be­
tween GnbI and the gene targets were interesting. However, the CT values of
the ­RT samples were not indicative of the quantity of genomic DNA in the sam­
ple, as the NanoDrop measured concentrations of the extracted RNA samples
were not used to add equal amounts of RNA to the control nor the total amount
of RNA. These ­RT samples have significantly higher amounts of RNA than the
rest. The residual genomic DNA, however, might be acceptable depending on
the context. AsCas12a is not quantified to assess the relative expression but to
validate the successful transfection. Thus, residual plasmid DNA would not be
a problem. Quantifying the relative expression of the housekeeping gene GnbI
and the target gene was more problematic as residual genomic DNA would skew
the quantification upwards. Differences in relative quantification could be small,
and with the technical­ and biological replicates’ variability, the sample compari­
son could be invalidated. One aspect that could save the experiments would be a
strong activation of the gene target by the CRISPRa system, which was a wanted
characteristic of such a system.
Taking a closer look at some of the raw data from the retesting of EXPT2007 with
a new Mgat3 probe to assess if residual genomic DNA skewed the results. As
described in the results section, the ­RT sample did show some residual genomic
and plasmid DNA in the control, but this was insignificant compared to the lev­
els measured in the other samples. The background noise by the residual DNA
Multiplexed gene activation by Cas12a in chinese hamster ovary cells
40
==PAGE:48==
was thus relatively low, and this experiment should have a higher sensitivity for
measuring the activation of the gene target Mgat3 than the other experiments.
Clearly, AsCas12a was significantly higher expressed in the PL1217 sample than
the background; measured in the WT sample, along with the residual plasmid
DNA as measured by the ­RT sample. Assessing the GnbI expression levels be­
tween all samples reveals that a comparison between all samples for Mgat3 could
be made visually, as CT values for GnbI were more or less identical. Looking at
the Mgat3 levels reveals they shared approximately the same CT values between
all the samples. There was no reason to look at the NTC plasmids then, as no ac­
tivation had occurred with the actively guided CRISPRa systems. Non­targeting
controls all had low to no CT values, indicating there might be minor contami­
nation of reagents with, e.g., AsCas12a. However, this was insignificant as the
residual genomic DNA likely affected the measured CT values more significantly.
The measured fluorescence could also be due to non­specific activity; however,
this does not seem likely, as the measured CT values for the non­targeting control
differ significantly between experiments.
Summing up, the non­activation of the targeted genes can not be attributed to the
study’s methodology, as GnbI can be measured in all samples, and AsCas12a can
be measured in the expected samples. However, residual genomic DNA might
conceal minor activation of the targeted genes, but as shown for the previously
tested CRISPRa systems in CHO, had no gene activation, even when dissecting
the raw data.
With a relatively comprehensive portfolio of Crispr systems tested with several
individual gene targets, some configurations were expected to be functional in
CHO cells. All configurations were based on published literature demonstrating
substantial fold­increases of relative expression. While some crRNA sequences
tested in this study had not been characterized before, the crRNA targeting Mgat3
had been demonstrated to work in CHO cells with one of the CRISPRa config­
urations tested in this study. However, this demonstration only showed a two­
fold increase in relative expression, quite negligible compared to the Cas9­based
CRISPRa system, which had a sixty­fold increase in relative expression. Never­
theless, the thought was that this would carry over to this study and still be signifi­
cantly different from the reference samples: WT and NTC, as it was in that study.
For the other gene targets, Clgn and Papss2, the two highest­ranking crRNA se­
quences, were chosen as guides for this study, and choosing more crRNAs would
have increased the experimental burden. Looking back at the experiment testing
Multiplexed gene activation by Cas12a in chinese hamster ovary cells
41
==PAGE:49==
different Mgat3 sequences, PL1217 had the third crRNA sequence demonstrat­
ing that even picking the two highest­ranking crRNA sequences is not a guarantee
that they will be functional.
While all this work was based on systems demonstrated to be functional, the
demonstration was performed in HEK293 cells. While CHO­ and HEK293 cells
are different cell lines originating from different species, mammalian cells are in­
trinsically similar, and many techniques can be transferred between the cell lines.
It was thus assumed that the demonstrated CRISPRa systems could be trans­
ferred to CHO cells without alteration.
The Cas9­based CRISPRa system functioned as a positive control for the study’s
methodology. While many controls were employed to ensure the methodology
was functional, including a positive control is always beneficial. This system was
demonstrated by Karottki et al. 2020, and the plasmids were acquired from the
plasmid bank. While the employed plasmids were not identical, the Cas9, VPR
regions, and the crRNA targeting the gene Mgat3 were identical in sequence.
Differences in the sequence were mainly in the backbone of the plasmids, thus
should not affect the functionality of the CRISPRa system. Karottki et al. 2020
demonstrated a fold­change of around sixty from NTC and WT reference sam­
ples, but this finding could not be replicated in this study. This contrast brings to
question the differences between this study, and the published study by Karottki
et al. 2020, as this Cas9­based CRISPRa system is either functional or not. As
Karottki et al. 2020 demonstrated the activation in several ways, e.g., the pres­
ence of specific glycosylation patterns only performed by Mgat3, there must be
some inherent flaw in the employed methodology in this study. There were some
differences between the two studies, among which cell lines were transfected.
While this study transfected CHO­S WT cells, Karottki et al. 2020 demonstrated
the CRISPRa system in a multi­KO cell line cultivated at slightly different cultiva­
tion settings. Additionally, a different cDNA synthesis kit was used.
This study aimed to lay the groundwork for a functional CRISPRa system for CHO
cells to advance the development of improved cell lines and cell factories. Many
pathways and functions in higher­order organisms, such as mammalian cell lines,
are performed by multiple proteins and molecules, usually functioning in com­
plexes. Research into how these complexes are assembled and function requires
the ability to control, e.g., the expression of all the components such that the in­
dividual components function can be identified, what happens if the component
Multiplexed gene activation by Cas12a in chinese hamster ovary cells
42
==PAGE:50==
is not present, and how the complex can be enhanced. To control the expres­
sion of proteins, CRISPRa is one such tool; activating silenced genes and paring
CRISPRa and CRISPRi will enable full functionality to do this kind of research. For
production environments, these CRISPRa/i functionalities will enable researchers
to implement new stress­response circuits along tailor­produced PTMs for thera­
peutic compounds, which gene knockouts can not necessarily accomplish. With
the emergence of Cas12a­based CRISPR­mediated gene regulation, much is
continually discovered as researchers attempt to perfect the technology. Single­
plex Cas9­based gene editing has been perfected over the years, and the same
will likely happen with Cas12a­based gene regulation. Currently, there is only
a limited set of articles on using CRISPRa in CHO cells, signifying the current
state of the technology. Although more studies have been published in HEK293
cells, it is necessary to demonstrate the functionality in CHO cells. However, this
study reveals that this process might be more complex than initially thought. This
study screened many different CRISPRa systems in transient transfected CHO
cells to identify systems with some activation functionality which could be the ba­
sis for further development of CRISPRa systems in CHO cells. Nevertheless, a
more in­depth approach is needed to identify current problems with the employed
CRISPRa systems. The following steps involve a deeper look into the transcrip­
tion of the crRNA array and the Cas12a­mediated maturation of the individual
crRNA sequences to elucidate any problems here.
With this study, the adoption of Cas12a­based CRISPRa systems demonstrated
in HEK293 cells may not necessarily be transferred to CHO cells as is. More in­
depth is needed to elucidate some inherent problems with the employed method­
ology or CRISPRa systems. The most likely cause for why the CRISPRa systems
were not working is that the transcription of the crRNA array, especially for DuT
configuration, was not guaranteed, nor was the maturation process of the crRNA
sequences and the formation of the final Cas12a:crRNA complex. For SiT con­
figurations, at least the transcription was much more likely to have ensued, as
AsCas12a was demonstrated to be present in the transcriptome. The maturation
process of crRNA by Cas12a was also a likely cause for the non­activation of the
targeted genes, as Cas12a is highly sensitive to G/C­rich crRNA, especially at the
3’­end. Additionally, the DR sequences and their ability to form hairpin structures
are vital for Cas12a recognition and processing. The hairpin structure location in
relation to the crRNA sequence is also critical for the Cas12a to process the pre­
crRNA sequence. Lastly, it has been shown that pre­crRNA may form alternative
Multiplexed gene activation by Cas12a in chinese hamster ovary cells
43
==PAGE:51==
structures, especially on longer transcripts, which Cas12as may not recognize
(Creutzburg et al. 2020). To determine if the lack of activation by the CRISPRa
systems was due to either the absence of the crRNA array in the transcriptome or
the inability of the Cas12a to process pre­crRNA to mature crRNA and form the ac­
tive Cas12a:crRNA complex, further analysis is needed. RNA sequencing could
be such an analysis, where pre­ and mature crRNA can be sequenced to rule out
if this is processed incorrectly. However, as this study focused on screening a
panel of CRISPRa systems, this was not prioritized, as it was assumed that the
demonstrated systems and crRNA array sequences, such as DRs, would work
in CHO cells as they did in HEK293 cells. Additionally, it was thought that the
Cas9 system would function in the CHO cells, as demonstrated by Karottki et al.
2020. The downside to the positive control used in this study was that Cas9 was
not quantified; thus, it can not be ruled out that the transfection was unsuccessful.
Additionally, the system was a DuP configuration, and both plasmids needed to be
transfected into the cell before the system was functional. Assessing the transfec­
tion success based on AsCas12a quantification, it was likely that the DuP system
was successfully transfected into the cells at least one of the two times it was per­
formed, but there is no confirmation of this. Thus, the Karottki CRISPRa system’s
non­activation of the gene target Mgat3 in this study was likely a false­negative.
The panel of CRISPRa systems could have been tested in parallel in HEK293
cells to rule out if the non­activation described were due to inherent flaws in
the study or some CRISPRa­critical differences between CHO cells and HEK293
cells. With more time available for the study, this would have been the next step
in the problem­solving process.
In principle, there was no control for the translation of Cas12a, and fused activator
domain in this study, the only evidence of its presence was from the transcriptome.
It is unlikely that the proteins were not translated, but this could have been shown
by, e.g., western blotting. With this analysis, the expression level could also be
assessed to determine if the CRISPRa system was highly or weakly transcribed,
which was impossible with the current methodology, as the relative expression of
AsCas12a could only be used to assess the transfection. The concern was that
the CRISPRa system might not have been sufficiently expressed to activate the
gene target efficiently. One critical factor was that plasmid­based expression uti­
lized in this study is less efficient than if the system was genomically integrated,
and this potentially low expression could be a flaw. For the Cas12a molecules,
much is involved in identifying and activating a targeted gene. It was assumed
Multiplexed gene activation by Cas12a in chinese hamster ovary cells
44
==PAGE:52==
that the gene activation levels would follow an s­curve with the level of expressed
CRISPRa system. With the current methodology, it was impossible to determine if
the AsCas12a expression level would reach the minimum of this response curve,
as the measured AsCas12a values are relative to the WT samples. In principle,
only one Cas molecule would be needed to activate a gene, but many more are
likely needed to activate a gene target efficiently. For one, the CHO cell genome
consists of several gigabases (Xu et al. 2011), requiring many Cas molecules
to scan the entire genome to identify the correct PAM adjacent to the target se­
quence. When a Cas12a molecule identifies a PAM sequence, it will interrogate
the adjacent sequence and verify that it is the target sequence. If this is not the
case, the Cas12a molecule will dissociate and scan for new PAMs, while if correct,
attempting to cleave the DNA strand (Strohkendl et al. 2021). Since dCas12a has
no endonuclease activity, what exactly happens when the target sequence has
been confirmed is unknown. However, at some point, the Cas12a molecule will
likely disassociate from the target. Some time will go by before a new Cas12a
molecule again identifies the correct PAM sequence at interrogating the target
sequence. Activation efficiency would likely depend on the association and dis­
sociation constant of the system, with the association constant being a first­order
reaction dependent on the amount of Cas12a molecules in the nucleus. Having
only a handful of Cas molecules in the nucleus is likely insufficient for adequate
activation, while many molecules will saturate the target sequence and increase
the efficiency. Protein quantification would be needed to establish if enough Cas
was expressed. This quantification can also be performed for the targeted genes.
While the target genes mRNA was seemingly not present in the transcriptome,
western blotting could reveal the presence of the protein encoded by the target
gene, thus enabling the assessment of the RT­qPCR’s inability to quantify the
cDNA for some reason. Likewise, the detection of glycosylation performed by
Mgat3 could be used to assess the activation of Mgat3, along with expression
levels. The other gene targets do not have the same easy­to­detect experiments,
but fusing the gene targets with a probe, e.g., red fluorescent protein, could estab­
lish an easy­to­detect method to validate the functionality of the CRISPRa system
and assess the expression level of the targeted gene. Although cumbersome to
generate these cell lines, it would enable an alternative way to assess CRISPRa
systems functionality and the targeted gene’s expression levels, which was im­
possible with RT­qPCR, where only the relative transcription level was assessed.
A detrimental mutation in the plasmid could also cause a lack of activation, and this
Multiplexed gene activation by Cas12a in chinese hamster ovary cells
45
==PAGE:53==
must be considered, as none of the constructed plasmids were fully sequenced.
While not a likely factor for the poor results gained in this study, it is a risk, mainly
due to USER cloning being used to construct many of the plasmids, requiring to­
tal PCR amplification of the construct. Considering that the plasmids are around
eight to ten kilobases, and the used polymerase Phusion U has an error rate 26x
lower than Taq, around 13% of the plasmids will have a mutation as per Thermo
Scientific PCR fidelity calculator tool. Some plasmids were also constructed from
other USER­cloned plasmids, compounding the mutation rate for the final con­
structs. While this was likely not the show­stopper, this study came about as the
Cas9­based CRISPRa positive control did not function either. A more appropriate
cloning method could have been used to construct many plasmids, e.g., doing a
crRNA array exchange by Golden­Gate. This could have saved time, which ul­
timately did become a limiting factor for the project. Likewise, much effort went
into troubleshooting PCRs where other cloning methods could have been used
instead, freeing up time for additional experimental work.
Lastly, it was uncertain if the CRISPRa systems could awaken the silenced genes
due to, e.g., tight chromatin structure.
In vitro studies for Cas9 and Cas12a
(Strohkendl et al. 2021) demonstrated that the chromatin and nucleosome struc­
tures can interfere with the Cas enzyme activities. A likely explanation is the DNA’s
low flexibility in these structures, not allowing the Cas enzymes to either scan for
the PAM sequences nor interrogate the adjacent sequence to confirm the target.
This interference would be detrimental to the CRISPR function of the system.
While this is likely not an explanation for why the positive control was not working,
it could be a factor in theory.
This study aimed to identify the best activators of published CRISPRa systems,
demonstrated in HEK293 cells in CHO cells, testing them with single gene targets.
After identifying the best activators, a multiplex approach would be tested to lay
the foundation for creating a similar system for these cell lines. Functionally, this
study was an initial screening study, and many of the limitations described are
inherent to this type of study. Further study of CRISPRa systems in CHO would
explain why these CRISPRa systems tested in this study were non­functional and
how to overcome the problems.
Multiplexed gene activation by Cas12a in chinese hamster ovary cells
46
==PAGE:54==
Bibliography
Berting, Andreas, Maria R. Farcet, and Thomas R. Kreil (2010). “Virus susceptibil­
ity of Chinese hamster ovary (CHO) cells and detection of viral contaminations
by adventitious agent testing”. In: Biotechnol. Bioeng. 106.4, pp. 598–607. doi:
10.1002/bit.22723.
Brown, Adam J. et al. (2014). “Synthetic promoters for CHO cell engineering”. In:
Biotechnol. Bioeng. 111.8, pp. 1638–1647. doi: 10.1002/bit.25227.
Butler, Michael and Maureen Spearman (2014). “The choice of mammalian cell
host and possibilities for glycosylation engineering”. In: Curr. Opin. Biotechnol.
30, pp. 107–112. doi: 10.1016/j.copbio.2014.06.010.
Campa, Carlo C. et al. (2019). “Multiplexed genome engineering by Cas12a and
CRISPR arrays encoded on single transcripts”. In: Nat. Methods 16.9, pp. 887–
893. doi: 10.1038/s41592-019-0508-6.
Charpentier, Emmanuelle et al. (2015). “Biogenesis pathways of RNA guides in
archaeal and bacterial CRISPR­Cas adaptive immunity”. In: FEMS Microbiol.
Rev. 023, pp. 428–441. doi: 10.1093/femsre/fuv023.
Chavez, Alejandro et al. (2015). “Highly Efficient Cas9­Mediated Transcriptional
Programming”. In: Nat Meth 12.4, pp. 326–328. doi: 10.1038/nmeth.3312.
Chen, Janice S. et al. (2018). “CRISPR­Cas12a target binding unleashes indis­
criminate single­stranded DNase activity”. In: Science (80­. ). 360.6387, pp. 436–
439. doi: 10.1126/science.aar6245.
Chiang, Austin WT et al. (2016). “Modulating carbohydrate–protein interactions
through glycoengineering of monoclonal antibodies to impact cancer physiol­
ogy”. In: Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol. 40, pp. 104–111. doi: 10.1016/j.sbi.2016.08.008.
Creutzburg, Sjoerd C.A. et al. (2020). “Good guide, bad guide: Spacer sequence­
dependent cleavage efficiency of Cas12a”. In: Nucleic Acids Res. 48.6, pp. 3228–
3243. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkz1240.
Daer, René M et al. (2017). “The Impact of Chromatin Dynamics on Cas9­Mediated
Genome Editing in Human Cells Graphical Abstract HHS Public Access Author
manuscript”. In: 6.3, pp. 428–438. doi: 10.1021/acssynbio.5b00299.
Danino, Yehuda M. et al. (2015). “The core promoter: At the heart of gene expres­
sion”. In: Biochim. Biophys. Acta ­ Gene Regul. Mech. 1849.8, pp. 1116–1131.
doi: 10.1016/j.bbagrm.2015.04.003.
Multiplexed gene activation by Cas12a in chinese hamster ovary cells
47
==PAGE:55==
Dumont, Jennifer et al. (2016). “Human cell lines for biopharmaceutical manufac­
turing: history, status, and future perspectives”. In: Crit. Rev. Biotechnol. 36.6,
pp. 1110–1122. doi: 10.3109/07388551.2015.1084266.
Eisenhut, Peter et al. (2018). “A CRISPR/Cas9 based engineering strategy for
overexpression of multiple genes in Chinese hamster ovary cells”. In: Metab.
Eng. 48, pp. 72–81. doi: 10.1016/j.ymben.2018.05.017.
Fonfara, Ines et al. (2016). “The CRISPR­associated DNA­cleaving enzyme Cpf1
also processes precursor CRISPR RNA”. In: Nature 532.7600, pp. 517–521.
doi: 10.1038/nature17945.
Gilbert, Luke A. et al. (2013). “XCRISPR­mediated modular RNA­guided regula­
tion of transcription in eukaryotes”. In: Cell 154.2, p. 442. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.
2013.06.044.
Guo, Lucie Y. et al. (2022). “Multiplexed genome regulation in vivo with hyper­
efficient Cas12a”. In: Nat. Cell Biol. 24.4, pp. 590–600. doi: 10.1038/s41556-022-
00870-7.
Kalkan, Ali Kerem et al. (2023). “Improving recombinant protein production in CHO
cells using the CRISPR­Cas system”. In: Biotechnol. Adv. 64. doi: 10.1016/j.
biotechadv.2023.108115.
Karottki, Karen Julie la Cour et al. (2020). “Awakening dormant glycosyltrans­
ferases in CHO cells with CRISPRa”. In: Biotechnol. Bioeng. 117.2, pp. 593–
598. doi: 10.1002/bit.27199.
Kleinjan, Dirk A. et al. (2017). “Drug­tunable multidimensional synthetic gene con­
trol using inducible degron­tagged dCas9 effectors”. In: Nat. Commun. 8.1,
pp. 1–9. doi: 10.1038/s41467-017-01222-y.
Kleinstiver, Benjamin P. et al. (2019). “Engineered CRISPR–Cas12a variants with
increased activities and improved targeting ranges for gene, epigenetic and
base editing”. In: Nat. Biotechnol. 37.3, pp. 276–282. doi: 10.1038/s41587-018-
0011-0.
Korbie, Darren J. and John S. Mattick (2008). “Touchdown PCR for increased
specificity and sensitivity in PCR amplification”. In: Nat. Protoc. 3.9, pp. 1452–
1456. doi: 10.1038/nprot.2008.133.
Labun, Kornel et al. (2019). “CHOPCHOP v3: Expanding the CRISPR web toolbox
beyond genome editing”. In: Nucleic Acids Res. 47.W1, W171–W174. doi: 10.
1093/nar/gkz365.
Multiplexed gene activation by Cas12a in chinese hamster ovary cells
48
==PAGE:56==
Livak, Kenneth J. and Thomas D. Schmittgen (2001). “Analysis of relative gene
expression data using real­time quantitative PCR and the 2­∆∆CT method”. In:
Methods 25.4, pp. 402–408. doi: 10.1006/meth.2001.1262.
Marx, Nicolas, Peter Eisenhut, et al. (2022). “How to train your cell ­ Towards
controlling phenotypes by harnessing the epigenome of Chinese hamster ovary
production cell lines”. In: Biotechnol. Adv. 56. doi: 10.1016/j.biotechadv.2022.
107924.
Marx, Nicolas, Clemens Grünwald­Gruber, et al. (2018). “CRISPR­Based Tar­
geted Epigenetic Editing Enables Gene Expression Modulation of the Silenced
Beta­Galactoside Alpha­2,6­Sialyltransferase 1 in CHO Cells”. In: Biotechnol.
J. 13.10. doi: 10.1002/biot.201700217.
McCarty, Nicholas S. et al. (2020). “Multiplexed CRISPR technologies for gene
editing and transcriptional regulation”. In: Nat. Commun. 11.1, pp. 1–13. doi:
10.1038/s41467-020-15053-x.
Minami, Shiaki A. and Priya S. Shah (2021). “Transient light­activated gene ex­
pression in Chinese hamster ovary cells”. In: BMC Biotechnol. 21.1, p. 13. doi:
10.1186/s12896-021-00670-1.
Paul, Bijoya and Guillermo Montoya (2020). “CRISPR­Cas12a: Functional overview
and applications”. In: Biomed. J. 43.1, pp. 8–17. doi: 10.1016/j.bj.2019.10.005.
Reusch, Dietmar and Max L. Tejada (2015). “Fc glycans of therapeutic antibodies
as critical quality attributes”. In: Glycobiology 25.12, pp. 1325–1334. doi: 10.
1093/glycob/cwv065.
Sergeeva, Daria et al. (2019). “CRISPR Toolbox for Mammalian Cell Engineering”.
In: Cell Cult. Eng., pp. 185–206. doi: 10.1002/9783527811410.ch8.
Shamie, Isaac et al. (2021). “A Chinese hamster transcription start site atlas that
enables targeted editing of CHO cells”. In: NAR Genomics Bioinforma. 3.3,
pp. 1–12. doi: 10.1093/nargab/lqab061.
Sternberg, Samuel H et al. (2014). “HHS Public Access Author manuscript Nature.
Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 September 06. Published in final
edited form as: Nature. 2014 March 6; 507(7490): 62–67. doi:10.1038/nature13011.
DNA interrogation by the CRISPR RNA­guided endonucleas”. In: Nature 507.7490,
pp. 62–67. doi: 10.1038/nature13011.DNA.
Strohkendl, Isabel et al. (2021). “Inhibition of CRISPR­Cas12a DNA targeting by
nucleosomes and chromatin”. In: Sci. Adv. 7.11. doi: 10.1126/sciadv.abd6030.
Multiplexed gene activation by Cas12a in chinese hamster ovary cells
49
==PAGE:57==
Tian, Weihua et al. (2019). “The glycosylation design space for recombinant lyso­
somal replacement enzymes produced in CHO cells”. In: Nat. Commun. 10.1,
pp. 1–13. doi: 10.1038/s41467-019-09809-3.
Walsh, Gary (2014). “Biopharma Benchmarks 2014”. In: Nat. Biotechnol. 32.10,
pp. 992–1000.
Walsh, Gary and Eithne Walsh (2022). “Biopharmaceutical benchmarks 2022”. In:
Nat. Biotechnol. 40.12, pp. 1722–1760. doi: 10.1038/s41587-022-01582-x.
Wilusz, Jeremy E. et al. (2012). “A triple helix stabilizes the 3′ ends of long non­
coding RNAs that lack poly(A) tails”. In: Genes Dev. 26.21, pp. 2392–2407. doi:
10.1101/gad.204438.112.
Wurm, Florian M. (2013). “CHO quasispecies­Implications for manufacturing pro­
cesses”. In: Processes 1.3, pp. 296–311. doi: 10.3390/pr1030296.
Wurm, Florian M. and Maria João Wurm (2017). “Cloning of CHO Cells, productiv­
ity and genetic stability­a discussion”. In: Processes 5.2. doi: 10.3390/pr5020020.
Xu, Xun et al. (2011). “The genomic sequence of the Chinese hamster ovary
(CHO)­K1 cell line”. In: Nat. Biotechnol. 29.8, pp. 735–741. doi: 10.1038/nbt.
1932.
Zaragoza, Jose Manuel Camacho (2022). “Data­Driven Cell Engineering of Chi­
nese Hamster Ovary Cells through Machine Learning”. In:
Zetsche, Bernd et al. (2015). “Cpf1 Is a Single RNA­Guided Endonuclease of a
Class 2 CRISPR­Cas System”. In: Cell 163.3, pp. 759–771. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.
2015.09.038.
Multiplexed gene activation by Cas12a in chinese hamster ovary cells
50
==PAGE:58==
A
Appendix
Step
Temperature
Time (min:sec)
Cycles
Denaturation
98°C
00:30
1
Denaturation
98°C
00:10
10
Annealing
X+10°C
00:30
Elongation
72°C
15­30 s/kb
Denaturation
98°C
00:10
25
Annealing
X
00:30
Elongation
72°C
15­30 s/kb
Elongation
72°C
05:00
1
Temp. storage
4°C
Hold
1
Table A.1: TD­PCR thermocycler program. If non­TD­PCR was used, first 10
cycles were removed. X is the annealing temperature as calculated by Thermo
Scientifics Tm calculator tool.
Step
OneTaq
PhusionU
Cycles
Temp.
Time
(min:sec)
Temp.
Time
(min:sec)
Denaturation
94°C
05:00
98°C
05:00
1
Denaturation
94°C
00:15
00:10
10
Annealing
Y+10°C
00:30
00:30
Elongation
68°C
30 s/kb
72°C
15­30 s/kb
Denaturation
94°C
00:15
00:10
25
Annealing
Y
00:30
00:30
Elongation
68°C
30 s/kb
72°C
15­30 s/kb
Elongation
68°C
08:00
72°C
05:00
1
Storage
4°C
Hold
4°C
Hold
1
Table A.2: Thermocycler programs for cPCR depending on polymerases. The first
ten cycles were touch­down, decreasing the temperature addition by 1°C for each
cycle. Y is the annealing temperature as calculated using NEBs Tm calculator
tool, while X was for Thermo Scientifics.
Multiplexed gene activation by Cas12a in chinese hamster ovary cells
51
==PAGE:59==
B
Raw data for Mgat3 targeting
CRISPRa systems
Figure B.1: Shown are ­RT raw data from retesting EXPT2007 with new Mgat3
probe.
Figure B.2: Shown are Cas9 based CRISPRa raw data from retesting EXPT2007
with new Mgat3 probe.
Multiplexed gene activation by Cas12a in chinese hamster ovary cells
52
==PAGE:60==
Figure B.3:
Shown are Cas12a based CRISPRa raw data from retesting
EXPT2007 with new Mgat3 probe.
Figure B.4: Shown are WT raw data from retesting EXPT2007 with new Mgat3
probe.
Multiplexed gene activation by Cas12a in chinese hamster ovary cells
53
==PAGE:61==
C
Raw data for ­RT and
non­targeting controls from
RT­qPCR
Figure C.1: ­RT control for experiment EXPT2007.
Figure C.2: Rerun of ­RT control for experiment EXPT2007 with new Mgat3 probe.
Multiplexed gene activation by Cas12a in chinese hamster ovary cells
54
==PAGE:62==
Figure C.3: ­RT control for experiment EXPT2044.
Figure C.4: ­RT control for experiment EXPT2044.
Figure C.5: ­RT control for experiment EXPT2045.
Multiplexed gene activation by Cas12a in chinese hamster ovary cells
55
==PAGE:63==
Figure C.6: ­RT control for experiment EXPT2063.
Figure C.7: ­RT control for experiment EXPT2063.
Figure C.8: Non­targeting control for experiment EXPT1998.
Multiplexed gene activation by Cas12a in chinese hamster ovary cells
56
==PAGE:64==
Figure C.9: Non­targeting control for experiment EXPT2007.
Figure C.10: Rerun of non­targeting control for experiment EXPT2007 with new
Mgat3 probe.
Figure C.11: Non­targeting control for experiment EXPT2044.
Multiplexed gene activation by Cas12a in chinese hamster ovary cells
57
==PAGE:65==
Figure C.12: Non­targeting control for experiment EXPT2044.
Figure C.13: Non­targeting control for experiment EXPT2045.
Figure C.14: Non­targeting control for experiment EXPT2063.
Multiplexed gene activation by Cas12a in chinese hamster ovary cells
58
==PAGE:66==
Figure C.15: Non­targeting control for experiment EXPT2063.
Multiplexed gene activation by Cas12a in chinese hamster ovary cells
59
