==PAGE:1==
Master Thesis
Utilization of Sewage Sludge Ash
in Compressed Earth Blocks
An experimental study of mechanical and physical properties
Sophie Stride Geyti, s164641
DTU Sustain
Department of Environmental and Resource Engineering
==PAGE:2==
Utilization of Sewage Sludge Ash in Compressed Earth Blocks
Master’s Thesis, June 2023
Author:
Sophie Stride Geyti, s164641
Education:
Architectural Engineering, MSc
Department of Civil and Mechanical Engineering, DTU
Supervisors:
Gunvor Marie Kirkelund, Associate Professor, DTU Sustain
Ida Maria Gieysztor Bertelsen, Postdoc, DTU Sustain
Date
Sophie Stride Geyti, s164641
==PAGE:3==
Preface
The current study presents the Master Thesis conducted by Sophie Stride Geyti in collaboration
with the Department of Environmental and Resource Engineering at the Technical University of
Denmark. The project was conducted in relation with the European project, AshCycle - Integra-
tion of Underutilized Ashes into Material Cycles by Industry-Urban Symbiosis, by examining the
possibilities of utilizing sewage sludge ash in compressed earth blocks.
The thesis was carried out in the period from 02.01.2023 to the 02.06.23, and constitutes for 30
ECTS, as part of the fulfillment for the degree of Master of Science in Architectural Engineer-
ing. The project was supervised by Associate Professor Gunvor Marie Kirkelund and Postdoc Ida
Maria Gieysztor Bertelsen.
Sophie Stride Geyti
Kongens Lyngby, June 2023
ii
==PAGE:4==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank my supervisors Gunvor Marie Kirkelund and Ida M. G. Bertelsen for their
valuable supervision throughout the project.
Additional thanks and gratitude must also be given to Salóme Grimsdóttir (Master student), for
joining and assisting me in the lab when characterising the soil properties, the laboraticians Ebba
Cedergren, Ditte Juul Valentin and Ditte Marie Højgaard Jensen for the help and guidance in the
lab, and Christian Rasmussen, Troels V. Kristensen and Klaus Bræmer for the supervision and
help in the test hall.
Last but not least, I must thank my partner Kasper Schumacher for being by my side throughout
my education. For ups and downs and non the least the unconditional support you have been given
me all these years.
iii
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
There is a growing interest in finding sustainable building materials, to mitigate the depletion
of natural resources and climate change. Currently, both sewage sludge ash (SSA) and soil are
deposited on landfill, not utilizing its full potential. SSA contains valuable nutrients and metals,
that can be extracted, which leaves a residue similar to silica sand, that could be utilized in different
building materials (Ottosen et al. (2015). Furthermore, research indicate that SSA can stabilize
soil due to a pozzolanic reaction between the SSA and clay, improving the properties of earth
building materials (Aparna, 2022).
This study investigates whether SSA can be utilized in combination with clay loam, focusing on
whether it can improve the mechanical and physical performance of unstabilized compressed earth
blocks (CEB).
Four different clay loams were characterized to find the one suitable for production of CEB. The
following tests were conducted: Loss on ignition, density of solid particles, particle size distri-
bution, Atterberg limits, linear shrinkage and XRD to identify the clay minerals. The SSA was
characterized by particle size distribution, digestion and leaching.
A red clay loam from Egernsund-Wienerberger was found suitable when mixed with additional
sand. To examine the potential of the SSA, the loam was combined with the following binders:
5% SSA, 5%SSA + 5% CaO, 5% CaO, 5% CaO + 5% inert quartz (Qz). The clay loam itself was
included as reference. The SSA was used in its raw format, thus nutrients and heavy metals had
not been removed. Cylindrical specimens of Ø60, H60 was cured at two different temperatures,
23°C, and 40°C for 14 days, with 7 days of drying afterwards at 23°C, 65%RH.
The mechanical performance of the different soil mixes was determined by testing the optimal
moisture content, the compressive strength and hygrothermal performance in terms of sorption
isotherms. The adsorption and desorption of the specimens were conducted in a climate chamber
at 33%RH, 75%RH and 94%RH. To be able to consider the environmental aspect of using SSA in
CEB, leaching of the different soils was also examined.
The findings of this thesis indicated that the SSA did not impair the mechanical properties. The
iv
==PAGE:6==
reference soil and the 5% SSA reached the highest compressive strengths and the SSA reduced the
shrinkage. The soil might have been of too good quality, and the curing time too short, to see the
effect of SSA as a stabilizing agent. The results therefore mainly indicates that SSA can be used
as a filler or light aggregate, with the option of substituting sand in CEB. The leaching was found
to be limited.
v
==PAGE:7==
Contents
1
Introduction
1
2
Theory
3
2.1
Building with earth . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Sewage sludge ash
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3
Materials and methods
20
3.1
Characterization of soil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.2
Characterization of SSA
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
3.3
Production and testing of specimens . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
4
Results
48
4.1
Characterization of soil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
4.2
Characterization of SSA
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
4.3
Production and testing of specimens . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
5
Discussion
81
5.1
Suitability of the soil and SSA based on the characterization
. . . . . . . . . . .
81
5.2
Performance of test specimens . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
88
5.3
Environmental aspects of using SSA in CEB . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
94
6
Conclusion
98
7
Perspectives
100
8
References
101
9
Appendix
107
==PAGE:8==
1
|
Introduction
The construction sector has been identified as one of the sectors which contributes the most to
climate change. Focus has therefore recently moved towards finding sustainable building materials
to reduce the energy demand, carbon emission and depletion of natural resources (Reddy, 2022;
Fabbri et al., 2022). One way to mitigate the challenges in relation with the construction industry,
is to use low-embodied carbon materials and to utilize waste (Reddy, 2022).
In 2020 in Denmark alone, the construction industry accounted for 40% of the total waste gener-
ated, which corresponds to 5 million tonnes waste, when soil is not included. Including soil, the
waste from construction was 11 million tonnes. 24% of the contaminated soil were deposited as
well as 14% of the uncontaminated soil, because the demand was too small. The waste generation
from sludge from wastewater treatment was 115,000 tonnes, where 82% was utilized as fertilizer
in agriculture, 13% was incinerated and 4% was deposited (Kiilerich et al., 2020).
At the moment sewage sludge ash (SSA) contains valuable nutrients for agriculture such as phos-
phourus, but the phosphorous is currently bound to the ash, and thereby not accessible for plants.
Research is examining a way to extract the phosphourus, leaving a residue of SSA which is similar
to silica sand. If SSA could be utilized in its full potential, it would benefit the environment, as the
extraction of nutrients would benefit the agriculture and the silica sand residue could be used in
other applications, e.g. as a construction material. By utilizing SSA, it would no longer be neces-
sary to deposit the waste product, and it could reduce the depletion of natural resources (Ottosen
et al., 2015).
Additionally, there have been a long tradition, also within Europe, of building with earth (Reddy,
2022). By building residential houses and dwellings with unfired clay bricks, the carbon emission
would significantly be lowered compared to masonry and other conventional building materials
(Malkanthi et al., 2020). But the durability and strength of earth building materials are much
lower. A way to comprehend these problems is to stabilize the soil by using mechanical and
chemical stabilization (Malkanthi et al., 2020). Research have shown promising results within
stabilization of soft cohesive subgrade soil by using SSA and by utilizing SSA as a fill material
within earth construction (Dhir et al., 2017a; Aparna, 2022; Lin et al., 2007; Kadhim et al., 2022).
1
==PAGE:9==
Aim and scope
The objective of this thesis is therefore to examine whether it is possible to work out a sustainable
construction material, focusing on compressed earth blocks (CEB), by combining clayey soil with
sewage sludge ash (SSA), and examine whether the material properties are enhanced when SSA
is used for soil stabilization.
The thesis will not consider other types of earth building materials, such as rammed earth, adobe,
cob, and wattle and daub, or earth building materials with the addition of fibers, and will neither
go into the regulations of using CEB as construction elements for load-bearing walls.
Sustainability Development Goals
The subject of this thesis target SDG 12 listed by the United Nations Department of Economic and
Social Affairs.
Figure 1.1: SDG 12 (United Nations, n.d.)
Goal number 12 strives to ensure sustainable consumption and production patterns, where the
thesis relates to the two targets 12.2 and 12.5 by looking into utilizing SSA as a filler and stabilizing
agent for possible substitution of sand, cement and lime.
12.2
"By 2030, achieve the sustainable management and effi-
cient use of natural resources."
12.5
"By 2030, substantially reduce waste generation through
prevention, reduction, recycling and reuse."
(United Nations, n.d.)
2
==PAGE:10==
2
|
Theory
2.1
Building with earth
Our ancestors used soil for building construction because of local availability, cost, and the fact that
the technology were not developed to process materials as known today, thus earth as a construc-
tion material can be considered less energy intensive compared to conventional building materials
(Reddy, 2022).
Today, modern earth structures can be grouped into two broad categories of 1) unstabilized earth
structures and 2) stabilized earth structures. The natural soil contains clay, which acts as a binder
of the soil, but the clay can also cause swelling and shrinkage in unstabilized earth structures due
to moisture movement. To prevent this, the soil can be stabilized mechanically by adding inert
materials, such as sand, gravel, and aggregates, so the content of clay comes to an optimum level.
Mechanical stabilization is used in both categories of modern earth structures, where the earth-
building material is densified through compaction. Stabilized earth structures also use inorganic
stabilizer such as cement and lime, which can increase the strength and durability of the building
material (Reddy, 2022).
2.1.1
Compressed earth blocks
There exists different techniques of building with earth, e.g. adobe, cob, wattle and daub, rammed
earth and compressed earth blocks (CEB). This thesis considers the technique of CEB.
CEB are unfired bricks or blocks produced by compacting humid earth manually or by using a
hydraulic press. CEB can both be used when it is unstabilized or when it is stabilized by adding
a low content of binder to the earth. The most common stabilizers are currently cement and lime.
A masonry wall can then be built by using a mortar of the material with or without the binder that
stabilizes the CEB (Fabbri et al., 2022).
When building with CEB, the embodied energy can be reduced compared to conventional building
materials. This is indicated in figure 2.1 from Reddy (2022).
3
==PAGE:11==
Figure 2.1: A comparison of the embodied energy of a buildings life cycle when built with different
materials (Reddy, 2022).
From figure 2.1 it is illustrated that the embodied energy of using CEB (Building C) is much lower
than the embodied energy of using reinforced concrete with clay brick masonry (Building E).
Furthermore, it is possible to reduce the carbon emission when building with CEB instead of
conventional building materials. The embodied carbon of a residential building with RC frame
and infill masonry or a monolithic RC construction is 400-600 kgCO2eq/m2, while the embodied
carbon of a building with cement stabilized CEB, geopolymer or lime-pozzolana binder bricks is
150-200 kgCO2eq/m2 (Reddy, 2022). Hence there are some environmental gains when using CEB
as a construction material in e.g. dwellings and residential buildings.
2.1.2
Clay minerals and soil composition
Clay minerals is the soils natural binder (Minke, 2012). The clay can make the soil shrink and
swell depending on the clay minerals, but its internal friction and cohesion also make the soil
gain strength (Reddy, 2022). The binding force and compressive strength depends on the type of
clay minerals that are present in the soil, and the quantity of cations (Minke, 2012). Additionally,
does the clay contain silica and alumina, that can react with the binders added to the soil creating
hydration products (Lin et al., 2007; Reddy, 2022).
4
==PAGE:12==
It is mainly smectites such as montmorillonite and vermiculites, that has a tendency to swell,
whereas it depends on the type of kaolinite, whether it can swell. Illite do not swell (Brindley,
1981; Lugwisha, 2011).
Figure 2.2: Structure and spacing of the three most common clay minerals (Minke, 2012)
The figure above shows the structure of the three most common clay minerals as presented in
Minke (2012). Each layer consists of a aluminum hydroxide (the dark layer) and a layer of silicon
oxide (the white layer). The kaolinite is double layered, with a low ion-binding capacity and a
d-spacing of 7Å, where montmorillonite consists of three layers, where one aluminum hydroxide
is always covered by two silicon oxide layers, which gives a higher ion binding capacity. The d-
spacing of montmorillonite is between 14-20Å, and the d-spacing of illite is 10Å (Minke, 2012).
The d-spacing of montmorillonite can change because of its swelling properties (Brindley, 1981).
When clay work as the binder of the soil, silt and sand work as the filler (Minke, 2012).
Standards and codes suggest the following soil composition and soil properties when working with
stabilized CEB (Reddy, 2022):
Table 2.1: Earth and soil composition and soil properties specified in different standards/codes on stabilized
CEB (Reddy, 2022)
Composition parameter
Stabilized CEB
Clay
2-30%
Sand (0.075-0.425mm)
>60%
Gravel
0-10%
Liquid limit
≤45%
Plasticity index
≤12%
pH
6-8.5
5
==PAGE:13==
The clay content can indicate what type of stabilizer and the amount that is suitable for the soil.
A clay rich on montmorillonite favour lime stabilization, whereas a clay rich on kaolinite favours
cement stabilization. The more clay, the more stabilizing agent can be used (Reddy, 2022; Minke,
2012). Stabilization of CEB is further explained in section 2.1.4.4.
2.1.3
Hygrothermal performance
Next to sustainability, the hygrothermal performance of earth-based materials is an argument for
building with earth. Earth-based materials have a high potential of enhancing the thermal comfort
of dwellings, regulating the indoor climate, which creates a healthier and more comfortable living
environment as well as reducing the energy used to create a comfortable temperature (McGregor
et al., 2014; Fabbri et al., 2022).
The hygroscopicity of earth-based materials is based on the porous network, which enables water
vapour to enter and leave the material. The porous network is created as clay, silt, and sand does
not connect perfectly, leaving pores inside the material. Clay itself is a porous medium, giving the
earth-based building material a sort of double-porosity, enhancing the hygrothermal performance
of the material compared to other conventional materials (Fabbri et al., 2022). Because the hy-
grothermal performance depends on the materials ability to relase and absorb water, it depends
on the type and content of clay and whether it is stabilized or not (Fabbri et al., 2022). Another
quality of earth-based building materials is that they are faster at reaching equilibrium moisture
content than other building materials (Liuzzi et al., 2013).
El Fgaier et al. (2016) and Wiehle et al. (2022) found one disadvantage of the high hygroscopicity
of earth-based materials. When the relative humidity (RH) is increased, the strength of the earth
is reduced.
One way to examine the hygrothermal performance of materials is by looking at sorption isotherms,
that show the materials equilibrium moisture content at steady state, thus the materials ability to
absorp and release water vapour at a constant temperature.
El Fgaier et al. (2016) tested the sorption capacity of three types of unfired clay bricks. The unfired
clay bricks reached a moisture content of 3.5% at 95% RH. The sorption isotherms can be seen in
figure 2.3.
6
==PAGE:14==
Figure 2.3: Sorption isotherms of unfired clay bricks from El Fgaier et al. (2016)
El Fgaier et al. (2016) attribute the difference in sorption capacity to the type of clay mineral and
the specific surface area of the soil, as the Brick B contained montmorillonite.
Minke (2012) presents in figure 2.4 different sorption isotherms for loams and clays.
7
==PAGE:15==
Figure 2.4: Equilibrium moisture content for different loams and clays (Minke, 2012)
The sorption isotherms support the conclusion by El Fgaier et al. (2016) as the water content of
bentonite (7), which contained 70% montmorillonite reached the highest water content, and the
non-expansive clay kaolinite (6) reached the lowest water content. Furthermore, Minke (2012)
shows in figure 2.4, that the loam brick reached a higher water content than different types of
loam. Of the different types of loams, the silty loam (2) reached a higher water content than the
sandy loam (3), the clayey loam (1), and the granular clayey loam (4).
8
==PAGE:16==
Figure 2.5: Sorption isotherm for concrete, w/c
= 0.66, degree of hydration = 96%, 237 kg ce-
ment pr. m3 (Gottfredsen & Nielsen, 2015)
Figure 2.6: Sorption isotherm for fired bricks,
𝜌= 1860 kg/m3 (Gottfredsen & Nielsen, 2015)
Figure 2.5 and 2.6 show the sorption isotherm of the two conventional building materials, concrete
and fired bricks. The sorption isotherm of concrete highly depends on the amount of cement used,
the degree of hydration and the w/c ratio, thus figure 2.5 is an example of what a sorption isotherm
of concrete can look like. With this example, the concrete reached a higher moisture content than
the loams in El Fgaier et al. (2016) and Minke (2012), while the fired bricks only reached a
moisture content of 0.7% at 98% RH, which is much lower compared to both the concrete and the
loams. All materials show the hysteresis phenomenon, which indicates that it is easier for water
vapour to enter the material than to leave it (El Fgaier et al., 2016).
2.1.4
Production method of CEB
The production method can have a large influence on the final product. Care must therefore be
taken on the preparation, mixing, soil composition, compaction, curing conditions, and stabiliza-
tion of the soil.
9
==PAGE:17==
2.1.4.1
Soil preparation and mixing
Houben & Guillaud (1994) give the following guideline on how to prepare excavated soil to pro-
duce CEB:
Grinding and
pulverization
Grinding or pulverization is a necessary process to be able to obtain a uniform
mixing of mineral components, water and stabilizer. Before grinding or pulver-
ization, lumps greater than 200mm must be broken up. Stones and gravel are
left intact, while soil with clay is broken up so it only contains grains <5mm.
The soil must be dry as wet soil can only be handled by some mechanized sys-
tems.
Screening
Large elements and organic matter must be removed. Grains with a diameter
between 10-20mm are allowed.
Mixing
Mixing can be performed either manually or mechanically. A uniform mixture
must be obtained, regardless of whether a stabilizer is used or not.
Manually: Turn over the heap of soil at least 4 times.
Mechanical mixer: 3 to 4 minutes is sufficient.
Water is added to the dry soil by a sprinkler or mist sprayer.
It is not recommended to use a conventional concrete mixer, because of the
formation of lumps and crumbs in the soil.
Minke (2012) suggests a mixing time of 10 minutes, as it was discovered that the binding force
of silty mud mortar increased by 57%, compared to when mixed for one minute. But there is also
an optimum mixing time. It was found that when mixing for 20 minutes the binding force was
reduced with 11%. The binding force can be examined by dropping a ball of mixed soil at its
plastic limit from a height of 2m. The ball with less binding force will deform more and have
more cracks after the drop (Minke, 2012).
2.1.4.2
Modifying the soil composition
If the soil is too rich in clay, the soil composition can be modified by adding sand or gravel, which
have been wetted before being mixed into the soil. The addition of sand or gravel can increase the
strength. By thinning the loam, the shrinkage is also reduced (Minke, 2012).
10
==PAGE:18==
2.1.4.3
Moulding and compaction
Moulding and compacting the soil is done to increase the density and friction, which improves the
mechanical strength of the soil. The degree of compaction depends on the grading, particle mor-
phology, organic content, moisture content and compaction effort of the soil (Dhir et al., 2017a).
Before moulding, uncompacted soil has a density between 1000 and 1400 kg/m3 (Houben & Guil-
laud, 1994). To achieve the desired density (minimum 1700 kg/m3 or in the region of the Proctor
value), the compression ratio should be 2, which is the ratio of the height of the mould before
compression to that after compression. When compressing the specimen, the density will not be
uniformly distributed. The density is higher at the moving compaction plate than at the static plate
(Fabbri et al., 2022). This rises a variability of the quality, thus the thickness of the final product
should not be greater than 9-10 cm when low pressure is used (Houben & Guillaud, 1994).
The hold-back time between mixing and moulding can have a large influence on the quality of
the final product. For cement stabilization, the hold-back time should be as little as possible,
as a delay of one to two hours can result in a premature settlement. Whereas, when using lime
stabilization, the quality of the blocks may be enhanced by a longer hold-back time, as the lime is
slow at reacting with the air (Houben & Guillaud, 1994).
The optimal moisture content (OMC) can be determined by the Proctor method, but according to
Boussaa et al. (2023) and Abbou et al. (2020), the Proctor method is inappropriate for determining
the OMC when working with CEB, as the compaction when using Proctor is very different from
the compaction method used for manufacturing CEB (Abbou et al., 2020). It is, therefore more
suitable to determine the water content by applying static compression using a hydraulic press
(Boussaa et al., 2023). Boussaa et al. (2023) compacted moulds with 10 MPa, and Abbou et
al. (2020) compacted the specimens with 3 MPa at a speed of 1.27mm/min. Before compaction,
Abbou et al. (2020) mixed the soil and binder with water in a kneader for 15 minutes to make
the mixture homogeneous. Afterwards, the mixture was sealed for 24 hours, for the water to
homogeneously redistribute. Furthermore, Abbou et al. (2020) found that the OMC increased,
and the dry density decreased, when the lime content increased. When using 2-6% lime, the OMC
was in the range of 16-20% water.
11
==PAGE:19==
2.1.4.4
Stabilization of CEB
Stabilization can be added to increase the strength and durability of the CEB. The pozzolanic
reaction from the lime and clay produces cementitious products, which contributes to the strength
development. The most common stabilizers in earth construction is cement and lime, but other
pozzolanic additives such as fly ash, silica fume, ground blast furnace slag, rice husk ash and
volcanic ash have also been used in combination with lime to improve the strength (Reddy, 2022).
The type of clay determine which stabilizer is useful. Non-expansive clays such as kaolinite
benefit from cement stabilization, while expansive clays such as montmorillonite benefit from lime
stabilization, as the lime will reduce the shrinkage and swelling behaviour (Reddy, 2022; Minke,
2012). In addition, litterature have shown that cement stabilization does not have an optimum,
thus adding more cement will increase the strength, but if using too much lime, the lime will work
as a lubricant between the soil particles and reduce the strength (Reddy, 2022). Therefore, Reddy
(2022) found in literature that the optimum lime content is between 8-12.5% depending on the
clay content and type. Higher content of clay requires more lime, and the expansive clay minerals
such as montmorillonite can absorb more lime than the non-expansive clay minerals. If the clay
content is very high, it is suggested to thin the soil beforehand to reduce the needed lime, as it
would be a more economical and viable solution (Reddy, 2022).
A study by Abbou et al. (2020) used 2%, 4%, and 6% lime for stabilizing a soil mixture of clay
and crushed sand. This resulted in a compressive strength of 5.6 MPa, when using 6% lime. The
clay content of the soil was 30%.
A study by Malkanthi et al. (2020) tested a soil with a low clay and silt content, which was
stabilized with lime (5%, 10%, and 15%), cement (8%, and 10%) and a combination of lime and
cement adding up to 10% binder (3/7%, 5/5%, 7/3%). The study found that the most optimal
percentage was combining 5% lime and 5% cement.
2.1.4.5
Curing conditions
When working with lime as a stabilizer, the stabilized CEB must be cured to facilitate the poz-
zoloanic reaction between the lime and clay minerals. The reaction is slow at ambient tempera-
tures, thus the curing condition influences the final strength. Curing at higher temperatures will
increase the strength. Curing can furthermore be done either as moist curing or steam curing
(Reddy, 2022). When using cement as a stabilizer, the curing time is 28 days, but when only using
12
==PAGE:20==
lime, the curing time may be longer. The same accounts for SSA (Lin et al., 2007). After curing,
the stabilized CEB should dry before being used in construction (Reddy, 2022).
2.2
Sewage sludge ash
Sewage sludge ash is a residue from wastewater treatment that contains heavy metals, pathogens,
and bacteria. It also contains valuable nutrients and organic matter such as phosphorous and nitro-
gen. Particularly phosphorous are of special interest within agriculture, as the nutrient is important
for plants and agriculture. Phosphorous appears on the EU’s list of critical raw materials (European
Commission, 2020; European Commission, n.d.), by which SSA is of interest as it contains 5-10%
phosphorous, which is as high as in mined materials. The phosphorous in SSA is bound to iron or
aluminum when phosphor is deposited during wastewater treatment, but ferrous phosphate is not
very soluble and therefore not plant available, thus the SSA cannot be used directly as a fertilizer
or soil improver in agriculture at the moment. Research is looking into extracting the phosphorus
by electrodialytic separation or via Ash2Phos. Electrodialytic separation is at TRL level 4, while
Ash2Phos is at TRL level 5-6. After extracting the phosphorus, the SSA becomes like silica sand.
Until the processes are commercialized, SSA is deposited, waiting to be utilized. Research shows
that SSA potentially can be utilized within construction materials, either as a filler/aggregate or as
supplementary cementitious material due to its pozzolanic reactivity (Ottosen et al., 2013; Payá et
al., 2019).
2.2.1
Soil improvement by using SSA
Research shows that basic soil properties, such as compaction, shear strength, and bearing capacity
are improved when using SSA or hydrated lime as stabilizers in soil. The soil improvement can be
a result of a pozzolanic reaction from the sewage sludge ash and lime, where the calcium in both
products produces calcium silicate hydrates or aluminum silicate hydrates. The mechanism used
for generating the hydrates is similar to the hydration process of Portland cement, and the more
calcium oxide the stabilizer contains, the quicker the pozzolanic reaction can be. The pozzolanic
reaction can be described as:
CaO + H2O −→Ca(OH)2
(2.1)
Ca(OH)2 + SiO2 −→C-S-H gel
(2.2)
Ca(OH)2 + Al2O3 −→C-A-H gel
(2.3)
13
==PAGE:21==
(Lin et al., 2007; Taki et al., 2020)
Another reason for soil improvement according to Lin et al. (2007), can be due to flocculation-
agglomeration (Lin et al., 2007), where the calcium oxide from the cement and hydrated lime
reacts with the clayey soil, as OH−ions enter the soil/water solution, which makes the soil particles
flocculate and change to a coarser structure (Dhir et al., 2017a).
One way to examine the indication of hydration and strength development when using SSA in
combination with lime or cement is to examine the pH (Dhir et al., 2017a). In alkaline conditions,
the pH will elevate, which makes the silica and alumina in the soil react with the Ca2+ ions from the
lime and form calcium silicate hydrates and aluminum silicate hydrates. Over time the hydrates
crystallize and bind the soil particles. Dhir et al. (2017a) show that when only SSA is applied, the
pH is not elevated, indicating that there is no significant reaction taking place between the soil and
the SSA. When SSA/lime or SSA/cement is added, the pH is increased. As the calcium ions are
used in the hydration reaction over time, the alkalinity (the pH) will dissipate. This indicates that
bond formation and strengthening of the soil are occurring (Dhir et al., 2017a).
The hydration products can also be examined by XRD, SEM, or TGA. Contrary to Dhir et al.
(2017a), Kadhim et al. (2022) observed C-S-H gel and CH from a SEM analysis of a soil mixed
with 20% SSA, indicating that the SSA had reacted with the soil.
2.2.2
SSA in research
SSA is still undergoing research to figure out how and where to utilize the SSA. So far, it has been
used as supplementary cementitious material in concrete, and as a substitution for fine aggregates
in ceramics and fired bricks or for soil stabilization of earth-based materials for geotechnical ap-
plications (Lynn et al., 2018; Aparna, 2022). But at the moment the variety of the SSA is very
high, thus the specific SSA must be tested and evaluated before application (Ottosen et al., 2015).
Both Kadhim et al. (2022) and Lin et al. (2007) examine SSA in relation with geotechnical appli-
cations focusing on soft cohesive subgrade soil, while Taki et al. (2020) also focus on geotechnical
applications but by using sewage sludge mixed with lime as a construction material. Lynn et al.
(2018) has a broader view and focus on the leaching behaviour of SSA used within different ap-
plications such as ceramics, concrete, road pavements, geotechnical applications, and lightweight
aggregates.
14
==PAGE:22==
Kadhim et al. (2022) tested the geotechnical properties of soft clayey soil mixed with 10%, 15%,
and 20% SSA by weight of dry soil. The specimens were tested after 3, 14, and 28 days of curing.
The conclusion was that SSA can improve the geotechnical properties of soft clayey soil, where
the swelling behaviour was reduced and the unconfined compressive strength, and triaxial shear
strength were enhanced. The optimum mix was 10% SSA, but all mixes with SSA reached higher
compressives strengths than untreated soil. Kadhim et al. (2022) highlights that by using SSA as a
stabilizer for soft clayey soil, it is possible to reduce the environmental risk, compared to disposing
SSA on landfills and open areas (Kadhim et al., 2022).
Lin et al. (2007) examined the geotechnical properties when using 0%, 2%, 4%, 8%, and 16% SSA
and hydrated lime as stabilizers for soft cohesive subgrade soil. The samples were cured for 3h, 3,
7, 14, 28, 56, and 90 days. Lin et al. (2007) concluded that SSA and hydrated lime improves the
geotechnical properties of the soft cohesive subgrade soil, as the unconfined compressive strength
was 3 to 7 times better than untreated soil and the swelling behaviour was also reduced effectively.
According to Lin et al. (2007) it is the pozzolanic reaction or flocculation-agglomeration from
the SSA and hydrated lime, that causes an increase of compaction, shear strength, and bearing
capacity. The soil with 16% SSA/hydrated lime reached the highest compressive strength, but 8%
of SSA/hydrated lime could effectively improve the swelling behaviour and change the soil from
a poor subgrade soil to a good subgrade soil.
Lynn et al. (2018) focused on the environmental considerations of using SSA within construction
materials, such as cement clinker, lighweight aggregates, mortar and concrete, SSA blocks, road
pavements, geotechnical applictaions and ceramics. The paper focus on the leaching behaviour
of the different materials when mixed with SSA. Lynn et al. (2018) found that SSA contains
potentially harmful heavy metals, but most samples could be classified as non-hazardous. Within
geotechnical applications it was found that the leaching was depending on the seepage rate, when
used as landfill liner material. When using SSA as a filler in Controlled Low-Strength Materials,
and combining it with blastfurnace slag, the leaching was below stringent soil quality standards. In
ceramics, the leaching of SSA-tiles was below drinking water parameters, because of the binding
effects of clay and high temperatures.
Taki et al. (2020) examine the potential use of lime-treated sewage sludge as a construction mate-
rial for subbase of flexible pavements and whether it can enhance geotechnical properties. Sewage
sludge samples with 0%, 2%, 4%, 6%, and 8% of lime by weight, were cured for 7, 14, and 28
15
==PAGE:23==
days. The highest compressive strength was achieved by 6% lime for all three curing conditions,
and the compressive strength increased with time. Increasing from 665 kPa after 7 days of cur-
ing to 1102 kPa after 28 days of curing. The compressive strength of samples with lime were all
greater than the one without lime. The study concludes that lime treating can be used to stabilize
sewage sludge, making it possible to use as a construction material for subbase of flexible pave-
ments. XRD, SEM, and TGA were performed, which confirmed formation of compounds, that had
improved the enginnering properties. Taki et al. (2020) suggest that lime-treated sewage sludge
can be used instead of sand or other granular fill in embankments, slope repair, and bearing stratum
for high load foundations and can help both sludge management and engineering applications.
Aparna (2022) made a review of different researches that uses SSA for soil stabilization. Studies
have shown that clay bricks with 10% SSA show higher compressive strength than standard clay
bricks.
The above researches show that studies regarding earth building materials and SSA mainly con-
sider SSA and soil improvement in relation to geotechnical applications. It has been difficult to
find research papers which examine SSA in relation to CEB. Research have been done on other
types of binders in relation with CEB, e.g. Boussaa et al. (2023) have tested CEB with the use of
woodbased ash, Lima et al. (2012) with the use of sugarcane bagasse ash, Elahi et al. (2020) with
saw dust ash and cement, and Malkanthi et al. (2020) have tested CEB using lime and cement to
stabilize the soil. The same has Narayanaswamy et al. (2020), who also included alkali activators.
Studies concerning unstabilized CEB was also found, e.g. Wiehle et al. (2022) who examined
ustabilized CEB in relation to relative humidity.
2.2.2.1
SSA influence on compressive strength
The main reason for utilizing SSA in earth construction is to enhance the shear and compresive
strength of soil, thus it is the compressive strength test that determines the optimal content of SSA
(Aparna, 2022). The compressive strength depends on the initial soil properties, curing time, con-
tent of ash added, water content and compaction time. Studies have shown that increasing curing
time and content of ash increases the strength. Some studies also show an optimum of the amount
of ash added, where an increase of ash decrease the strength (Aparna, 2022). Aparna (2022) gives
four explanations for the increase in strength when adding SSA: 1) The soil permeability is re-
duced because of a chemical reaction between the SSA and soil, which plugs the voids in the soil.
2) The SSA is shaped as angular glassy spheres that may increase the bonding between the soil
16
==PAGE:24==
grains and the SSA. 3) The calcium oxide from the SSA reacts with the silica and alumina of the
soil, which creates hydration products. 4) The cohesion and internal friction is enhanced due to the
cementing property of the SSA and its capacity to modify absorbed water films (Aparna, 2022).
The study by Kadhim et al. (2022) supports the findings by Aparna (2022). The soils with SSA
reached higher strengths than the unstabilized soil. The strength increased with the curing time,
and 10% of SSA was found as the optimum amount of SSA, as an increase in SSA reduced
the compressive strength with increasing curing time, except for the test with 20% SSA which
reached the highest compressive strength after 28 days of curing. Kadhim et al. (2022) reached a
compressive strength of 190 kPa when using 10% SSA both when cured at 3, 14 and 28 days.
The study by Lin et al. (2007) reached also a compressive strength of 190 kPa after 90 days of
curing, when using 16% SSA and hydrated lime. The 28 days compressive strength were about
130 kPa.
Aparna (2022) found that the optimum amount of SSA for soil stabilization ranges from 7-10% of
the dry weight of the soil.
2.2.2.2
SSA influence on Atterberg limits
Various studies have shown that the plasticity index and liquid limit is reduced when soil is stabi-
lized with SSA. The same accounts for soil stabilized with lime. A combination of SSA and lime
would reduce the plasticity index further. The reason for the reduction in plasticity is explained
by the pozzolanic reaction, cation exchange and agglomoration of clay particles, which produces
C-S-H. This decreases the water absorption, which increases the workability, and making the soil
more brittle (Aparna, 2022). This is supported by Kadhim et al. (2022) and Lin et al. (2007).
Kadhim et al. (2022) found that the liquid limit and plastic limit increased slightly after 3 days of
curing, because of the high water absorption affinity of the SSA. But after 28 days of curing, the
liquid limit and the plastic limit decreased with increasing content of SSA, due to the hydration
products. The study also showed that the soil became more brittle and lacked plastic behaviour
when more than 10% SSA was added to the soil. Lin et al. (2007) also found the plasticity index
to decrease when adding SSA and hydrated lime. Aparna (2022) do also mention that contradic-
tory results have been found, which showed that the plastic limit and liquid limit increased with
increasing content of SSA, due to the water absorption affinity.
17
==PAGE:25==
2.2.2.3
SSA influence on compaction and optimal moisture content
Kadhim et al. (2022) found that the dry density decreased with increasing SSA content, while the
OMC increased. Lin et al. (2007) found that utilizing SSA/hydrated lime as a soil stabilizer had
little effect in compacting the soil, as the OMC and dry density was the same for all contents of
SSA/hydrated lime. According to Aparna (2022) multiple studies found that the OMC increases
with increasing content of SSA, and that the dry density reduces. This is explained by the SSA
having a lower specific gravity than the soil, and that cemented products are instantly created,
which decreases the dry density. Studies have also shown the opposite, thus the optimal moisture
content decreases with increasing content of SSA, which increases the dry density. Samples with
this behaviour is more suitable for sub-grade materials. The reason for the decrease in OMC
is according to Aparna (2022) attributed to that the specific surface of SSA is smaller than the
soils, leading to a denser and better compaction, which increases the dry density. One study also
reported that when the moisture content increased, the soil particles got lubricated which increased
the workability and the packing of the soil particles (Aparna, 2022).
2.2.2.4
SSA in combination with quicklime
Research indicate that when combining SSA with hydrated lime, the soil and mechanical proper-
ties becomes even better than when only using SSA (Kadhim et al., 2022). The study by Lin et al.
(2007) indicate that the admixture of SSA/hydrated lime can stabilize soft subgrade soil. Taki et
al. (2020) found that the pH and electrical conductivity decreased after 28 days of curing, when
the sewage sludge was mixed with quicklime. Taki et al. (2020) attribute the decrease to cemen-
tation. The combination of sewage sludge and lime resulted in higher compressive strengths than
the sample without lime.
2.2.2.5
Leaching behavior
The utilization of SSA as a construction material, depends on whether there is a risk of leaching
heavy metals. The suitability of the soil at end-of-life is largely depending on the purity of the
material (Schroeder, 2016). In this context it is necessary to understand whether the use of SSA
can lead to any damage of the environment.
Dhir et al. (2017b) states that the rate at which harmful heavy metals are able to leach out of the
SSA is depending on its permeability. The permeability of SSA equals the permeability of "clean
sands and sand gravel mixtures" and "very fine sand, silts and clay-silt laminates" according to
18
==PAGE:26==
the british standard BS 8004. Since permeability is depending on the pore size, which is related
to the particle size, it is assumed that the grading of SSA can be compared with the grading of
soil categories. This may leave the material more susceptible to percolation-controlled leaching,
especially when used in unbound applications (Dhir et al., 2017b).
When SSA is used as a soil stabilizing agent in soft clayey soil, it is sometimes combined with
cement or hydrated lime. Research indicates that cement, lime, and cohesive soil particles can
restrict leaching of heavy metals from SSA (Dhir et al., 2017b). Taki et al. (2020) showed that
when sewage sludge is lime treated, it reduces the leaching of the metal ions from the sewage
sludge. Ottosen et al. (2015) found that when SSA is treated with electrodialytic separation
(EDS) to extract phosphorous from the SSA, some concentrations of heavy metals increased,
while other reduced. But it was expected that the heavy metals left in the EDS treated SSA were
very immobile. Ottosen et al. (2015) also state that the content of heavy metals in general are
limited and heavy metal such as Cu, Cr, and Zn were all below the limit values for using residual
products in agricultural purposes. When Ottosen et al. (2015) compared the heavy metals from
the SSA with the heavy metals from coal ash, which is currently used in concrete, the content of
Ni and Cr were higher in the coal ash than in the SSA.
The leaching behaviour also depends on the pH. The solubility of heavy metals is typically low
when the pH is neutral, while the risk of leaching increases with an increase of an alkaline or
acidic environment. The average pH of SSA is 9 (Dhir et al., 2017b).
At the moment there is a great variability in SSA, thus it is necessary to evaluate the material
before use. It is expected that the variability will decrease, when the material is accepted as a
construction material in the industry (Dhir et al., 2017b).
2.2.2.6
Expected benefits of using SSA in earth
Based on the litterature it is expected that the SSA will enhance the mechanical properties of
the soil by increasing the compressive strength and reducing shrinkage compared to unstabilized
soil. Research give contradictory results on whether the OMC and dry density is decreased or
increased by the addition of SSA. It is also expected that the performance is further enhanced
when combining SSA with lime.
Additionally, there is an environmental gain in terms of reducing land filling, energy consumption
and resource depletion if the SSA can be utilized within construction materials (Aparna, 2022).
19
==PAGE:27==
3
|
Materials and methods
Four soil types were characterized to find which soil was most suitable for producing compressed
earth blocks (CEB). The four soil types are listed in table 3.1.
Table 3.1: Soil types
Soil type
Abbreviation
Origin
Internal DTU number
Yellow clay
Y
Egernsund-Wienerberger
#0249
Yellow clay with 15% sand
YS
Egernsund-Wienerberger
#0250
Red clay
R
Egernsund-Wienerberger
#0251
Red clay with 6% sand
RS
Egernsund-Wienerberger
#0252
The most suitable soil was afterward combined with different binders, to see the effect of stabi-
lization. The following binders were used.
Table 3.2: Binders for stabilization
Binder
Abbreviation
Origin
Internal DTU number
Sewage sludge ash
SSA
Amager forbrænding
#0013
Quartz
Qz
Unknown
#0156
Quicklime
CaO
Unknown
#0234
The sewage sludge ash used for the project was raw, thus heavy metals and nutrients were not
removed before testing. Furthermore, the sewage sludge ash was crushed in a mill at 1000rpm for
10 sec to increase the reactivity. The other binders were not pre-treated.
By combining the most suitable soil for CEB with different binders for stabilization, the following
5-6 mixes have been examined.
20
==PAGE:28==
Table 3.3: Soil mixes
Abbreviation
Soil
Binder [wt%]
Water content [wt%]
RS-RAW*
RS
None
-
RS-REF
RS+15% 0-4mm sand
None
14%
RS-SSA
RS+15% 0-4mm sand
5% SSA
12%
RS-CaO
RS+15% 0-4mm sand
5% CaO
18%
RS-CaO-SSA
RS+15% 0-4mm sand
5% CaO + 5%SSA
18%
RS-CaO-Qz
RS+15% 0-4mm sand
5%CaO + 5% Qz
18%
* RS-RAW was only used during pre-tests.
An overview of the process and experiments is presented in figure 3.1.
Figure 3.1: Overview of process and experiments
The characterization was performed to decide which clay loam was most suitable for the produc-
tion of CEB. Two pre-tests were performed, to evaluate the production method of the CEB. The
21
==PAGE:29==
conclusions based on the pre-tests influenced the soil preparation and compaction of specimens.
After production and curing the specimens were tested.
3.1
Characterization of soil
The soils listed in table 3.1 have been examined in the following sections. Additionally, RS-REF
from table 3.3 have been examined for linear shrinkage and Atterberg limits.
The following laboratory tests were conducted to characterize the soils.
• Loss on ignition
• Density of solid particles
• Determination of water content
• Particle size distribution
• Atterberg limits
• Linear shrinkage
• Clay mineralogy (X-ray Diffraction)
3.1.1
Loss on ignition
The purpose of determining the loss on ignition (LOI) was to find the amount of organic matter
present in the soils. The loss on ignition can describe whether the soils are suitable as an earth
construction material, as well as whether it is necessary to remove the organic matter before the
determination of particle size distribution.
Loss on ignition was performed in accordance with DS/EN 15935:2021.
The soils were dried at 105°C before test execution, and ground with a mortar. The test is very
sensible, and even fingerprints can influence the results. Therefore the crucibles were cleaned by
heating at 550°C for 30 minutes. The weight of the crucibles (𝑚𝑐) could be determined when they
were cooled down. 2.5 g of soil was added to each crucible, and three samples were produced for
each soil type. The soils were then heated at 550°C for one hour to determine the organic matter.
In addition to the standard, the soils were heated at 950°C for one hour, to determine the content
of calcite in the soils. The crucibles were weighed after each heating to four significant digits, and
the difference in weight described the loss on ignition.
22
==PAGE:30==
Figure 3.2: Samples after being in the muffle oven at 550°C (left), and 950°C (center). The muffle oven is
shown in the figure to the right.
The loss on ignition in percentage can be calculated by formula 3.1.
𝑤𝐿𝑂𝐼= 𝑚𝑐−𝑚𝑑
𝑚𝑐−𝑚𝑎
· 100
(3.1)
where
𝑚𝑐
is the mass of the crucible with the dry sample (before oven) [g]
𝑚𝑑
is the mass of the crucible with the ignited sample (after oven) [g]
𝑚𝑎
is the mass of the empty crucible [g]
thus it can also be explained and calculated as
𝑤𝐿𝑂𝐼= 𝑚(𝑏𝑒𝑓𝑜𝑟𝑒𝑖𝑔𝑛𝑖𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛) −𝑚(𝑎𝑓𝑡𝑒𝑟𝑖𝑔𝑛𝑖𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛)
𝑚(𝑏𝑒𝑓𝑜𝑟𝑒𝑖𝑔𝑛𝑖𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛)
(3.2)
3.1.2
Density of solid particles
The particle density of the soils was determined by the pycnometer method. The pycnometer
method is based on the fluid displacement method, by determining the volume of the soil. The
density is calculated by knowing the mass and the volume of the soil (DS/CEN ISO/TS 17892-
3:2004).
23
==PAGE:31==
The test was performed in accordance with DS/CEN ISO/TS 17892-3:2004, except that no water
bath was used. The temperature was kept constant in the room, and the temperature of the control
liquid was taken before and after the air had been removed. The test was performed on natural soil
and the dry mass of the soil was determined by taking a sample for water determination.
Before test execution, the soils were sieved through a 4mm sieve, to separate the soils into a
granular material. 75 g of soil was divided into three 100 ml pycnometers. The average of the
samples described the particle density of the soils.
Figure 3.3: 100ml pycnometers filled with control liquid and soil
The particle density can be calculated by formula 3.3.
𝜌𝑠=
𝑚4
(𝑚1 −𝑚0) −(𝑚3 −𝑚2) · 𝜌𝑤
(3.3)
where,
𝜌𝑠
is the particle density of the soil [Mg/m3].
𝑚0
is the dry mass of the pycnometer [g].
𝑚1
is the mass of the pycnometer filled with control liquid [g].
𝑚2
is the dry mass of the pycnometer with the dry specimen [g].
𝑚3
is the mass of the pycnometer filled with the saturated specimen and the control liquid [g].
𝑚4
is the dry mass of the test specimen [g].
𝜌𝑤
is the density of the control liquid depending on the temperature [Mg/m3].
24
==PAGE:32==
3.1.3
Determination of water content
The water content was performed in accordance with DS/CEN ISO/TS 17892-1:2004.
3x25 g of each soil type was dried at 105°C for three days. The water content was determined by
the following formula
𝑤= 𝑚1 −𝑚2
𝑚2 −𝑚𝑐
· 100 = 𝑚𝑤
𝑚𝑑
· 100
(3.4)
where,
𝑤
is the water (moisture) content [%]
𝑚1
is the mass of the container and moist test specimen [g]
𝑚2
is the mass of the container and dried test specimen [g]
𝑚𝑐
is the mass of container [g]
𝑚𝑤
is the mass of water [g]
𝑚𝑑
is the mass of dried test specimen [g]
The water content was determined as the average of three samples of each soil.
3.1.4
Particle size distribution
The particle size distribution was performed in accordance with DS/CEN ISO/TS 17892-4:2004.
The complete curve for grain size distribution was created by conducting both sieving and sedi-
mentation tests using a hydrometer. Organic content and carbonate content were not removed as
the soils could be defined as low-organic soil, since the content of organic matter was less than 2%
to 6% of dry mass (DS/EN ISO 14688-2:2018, table 3). The loss on ignition from section 3.1.1
was determined to be 2.8%, which also included the loss of mass due to the loss of clay minerals
when heated at 550°C.
3.1.4.1
Sieving
The sieving was executed on an amount of approximately 500 g of dry soil, which was wet sieved
through a 63µm sieve. The soil had before sieving been dried at 50°C for four days and soaked in a
dispersing agent of 0.007M Natrium pyrophosphate to remove interstitial clay. The mass retained
on the sieve was dried, and the mass which passed was thrown away to make the wet sieving
process faster and easier to execute.
25
==PAGE:33==
Figure 3.4: Wetsieving through 63µm sieve (left). Soil >63µm (right).
The dried soil >63µm, was sieved through a sieving tower consisting of 4mm, 2mm, 1mm, 0.5mm,
0.25mm, 0.125mm, and 0.063mm sieves and a pan. The sieving was performed on a shaking table
for a minimum of 10 minutes. The mass retained on each sieve was weighed by weighing the
sieve before and after the shaking table. The mass retained was calculated as the mass of the sieve
without soil subtracted from the mass of the sieve with soil.
Figure 3.5: Sieving tower on shaking table
26
==PAGE:34==
Figure 3.6: Soil retained on the different sieves from the sieving tower
The fraction passing each sieve was calculated by formula 3.5
𝑓𝑛= 𝑚1 + 𝑚2 + .. + 𝑚𝑛
𝑚
· 100%
(3.5)
where,
𝑓𝑛
is the fraction passing the sieve [%]
𝑚1
is the mass passing the smallest mesh size [g]
𝑚2, 𝑚𝑛
is the mass of soil passing the consecutive sieves, up to the 4mm sieve [g]
𝑚
is the total dry mass of the specimen [g]
27
==PAGE:35==
3.1.4.2
Hydrometer method
The sedimentation test was performed by using a hydrometer on a soil specimen of approximately
50 g of natural moist soil which was prepared with a dispersing agent solution of 0.07M Natrium
pyrophosphate.
Figure 3.7: Hydrometer setup for YS and RS
In connection with the sedimentation test, the water content was determined on a separate natural
moist soil specimen of approximately 25 g, which was dried at 105°C, until there was no change
of weight in a successive period of minimum one hour. The results were compared with the water
content determined in section 3.1.3, which was determined two weeks before the hydrometer test.
Since the test was performed on natural moist soil, the water content determined was used to
calculate the total dry mass of the soil specimen.
The total dry mass was calculated by formula 3.6.
𝑚= 𝑚𝑤·
100
100 + 𝑤
(3.6)
where,
𝑚
is the total dry mass [g]
𝑚𝑤
is the wet mass of soil [g]
𝑤
is the water content [%]
28
==PAGE:36==
The equivalent particle diameter was calculated by using formula 3.7
𝑑𝑖= 0.005531 ·
√︄
𝜂· 𝐻𝑟
(𝜌𝑠−1) · 𝑡
(3.7)
where,
𝑑𝑖
is the equivalent particle diameter [mm]
𝜂
is the dynamic viscosity of water [MPa · s], which is determined by interpolation from
table 5 in DS/CEN ISO/TS 17892-4:2004, as it changes with the temperature.
𝐻𝑟
is the effective depth of hydrometer [mm], which is calculated in table A.17 by formula A.1.
𝜌𝑠
is the particle density determined by the pycnometer method [Mg/m3]
𝑡
is the time [min]
The fraction smaller than the equivalent diameter was calculated by using formula 3.8
𝐾=
100 · 𝜌𝑠
𝑚(𝜌𝑠−1) 𝑅𝑑
(3.8)
where,
𝐾
is the fraction smaller than the equivalent diameter [%]
𝜌𝑠
is the particle density determined by the pycnometer method [Mg/m3]
𝑚
is the dry mass of the specimen [g]
𝑅𝑑
is the modified hydrometer reading, calculated by 𝑅𝑑= 𝑅′
ℎ−𝑅′
0,
where 𝑅′
ℎand 𝑅′
0 are the observed hydrometer readings in the soil specimen and
the reference solution, respectively.
The measurements and calculations can be seen in appendix A.4.2.
3.1.5
Atterberg limits
The Atterberg limit tests were performed to be able to describe the critical states of the soil, which
can be described by the liquid limit and the plastic limit. The liquid limit describes the moisture
content at which the soil passes from a liquid state to a plastic state, whereas the plastic limit
describes the moisture content, at which the soil is too dry to be plastic and goes from a ductile
behavior to a brittle behavior (Aparna, 2022; Fabbri et al., 2022).
29
==PAGE:37==
The Atterberg limits were determined according to DS/CEN ISO/TS 17892-12:2004 by using the
fall-cone method for the liquid limit and the cord test for the plastic limit.
3.1.5.1
Fall-cone method
The fall-cone method was executed with the 60g/60°fall-cone which requires an initial penetration
of about 7 mm, and four measurements within the range of 7mm to 15mm.
Figure 3.8: Falling cone
The soil was prepared by soaking approximately 500 g of dry material in distilled water, and wet
sieving it through a 2mm sieve and a 500µm sieve. The soil retained was dried at 50 °C.
30
==PAGE:38==
Figure 3.9: Wet sieving (left) and excess water after centrifugation of the yellow clay, Y (right, top), and
the red clay, R (right, bottom)
During the wet sieving process too much water was added, thus the soil samples passing the sieve
were centrifuged at 3000 rpm for 25-30 minutes to remove the excess water. The excess water for
the yellow clays (Y, YS) was very clear, while the excess water from the red clays (R, RS) was
less clear. This indicate that a minimal fraction of <2µm was lost for the yellow clays, and some
of the fraction <2µm was lost for the red clays during the pre-treating process. This may have
influenced the final results. After removing the excess water, the soil samples were left to dry at
room temperature overnight to get the correct consistency for the fall-cone method.
When testing, each measurement of the falling cone, was done twice for double determination of
the liquid limit at different water contents. About 20 g was taken from the final measurement of
the double determination and placed in an oven at 105 °C to determine the corresponding water
content of the measured penetration.
The liquid limit corresponds to a cone penetration of 10mm.
3.1.5.2
Plasticity (cord test)
The plasticity test was performed on approximately 20 g of soil from the first or second fall-cone
measurement, to ensure a consistency that was able to form into a ball by the palms of the hands,
after the fall-cone test.
The ball was divided into two subsections to make a double determination. Each was further
divided into four, where each was rolled to a cord of 3mm until it crumbled. When the cord
31
==PAGE:39==
crumbled, the plastic limit had been reached. The crumbles were put into the oven at 105°C, to
determine the water content at the plastic limit.
Figure 3.10: The different steps in testing the plasticity.
The plasticity index, 𝐼𝑝, can be calculated by subtracting the plastic limit from the liquid limit.
𝐼𝑝= 𝑤𝐿−𝑤𝑝
(3.9)
where,
𝑤𝐿
is the liquid limit [%]
𝑤𝑝
is the plastic limit [%]
3.1.6
Linear shrinkage
The linear shrinkage was determined to quantify how much the different soil types shrink. The
test performed was based on the British Standard BS 1377-2:1990, section 6.5.
For the test execution, the soil sample must have passed a 425µm sieve, and have a moisture
content about the liquid limit of the soil (BS 3177-2:1990, section 6.5.4.1-2).
A small sample was collected from the soil at the falling cone test when the soil reached the liquid
limit (10 mm penetration). The soil was put in a brass mould with a palette knife, and air pockets
were tried to be removed when applying the soil in the mould.
The moulds with the soil samples were set aside in a fume cupboard for a minimum of four
days for them to dry at room temperature. To reduce the risk of cracks by too fast drying, the
moulds with the samples were weighed twice, with a minimum of 1h apart, to ensure that the
samples had stabilized, before moving the moulds to a higher temperature. After drying at room
temperature, the moulds were transferred to a 60°C oven, and after stabilizing at 60°C, the samples
32
==PAGE:40==
were transferred to a 105°C oven to finish drying. When the drying had stabilized at 105°C, the
length of the samples was measured.
Figure 3.11: Samples before drying (left). Samples after drying at 105°C (right).
The linear shrinkage of the soil was calculated as a percentage of the original length of the speci-
men, by using formula 3.10.
Percentage of linear shrinkage = (1 −𝐿𝐷
𝐿0
) · 100
(3.10)
where,
𝐿𝐷
is the length of the oven-dried specimen [mm]
𝐿0
is the original length [mm]
3.1.7
Clay mineralogy
X-Ray diffraction (XRD) can help in analyzing which clay minerals are present in the loams. By
identifying the clay minerals, it can indicate whether the loam may tend to swell or not (Brindley,
1981).
X-Ray diffraction was performed on the soil samples without sand, Y and R. The mineral content
was assumed to be the same for the soils with sand, YS and RS, as the soils are similar to Y, and
R, just with 15% and 6% sand added, respectively.
The XRD was executed on glass plates with soil < 2µm where the content of CaCO3 had been
33
==PAGE:41==
removed. The production of glass plates had been produced by following the guide by Schnell
(2016) which was provided by the laboratory technicians at DTU.
Briefly described, the following steps were performed to prepare the soil for the glass plates.
About 200 g of soil was dried at 40°C and ground with a mortar. The soil was mixed with acetic
acid to remove CaCO3. When it stopped bubbling, the acetic acid was washed away by using a
centrifuge at 3000rpm for 10 min. It was washed until it stopped smelling of acetic acid. The
clays were then dried at 60°C for three days. The soil was ground with a mortar to homogenize
the soil and 20 g was weighed and put into a plastic bottle. The 20 g soil was mixed with 0.002M
Na-pyro-phosphate and placed in a machine that rotated the samples for 18h. The samples were
then placed in ultrasound for 15 min. After the ultrasound, the samples were wet sieved through
a 63µm sieve by using 0.002M Na-pyro-phosphate. After wet sieving, the samples were poured
into Andreasen’s cylinders to rest for 16h and 30 min. The cylinders were emptied so only the
fraction <2µm was retained in the plastic bottles. The plastic bottles were centrifuged and excess
water was thrown out. Left was a clay paste that was set to dry at room temperature in a fume
cupboard. The dried clay paste was then grounded very fine, and 0.03 g of soil was mixed with
1.5 ml distilled water. The mixtures were applied to four glass plates, two for each soil type. Only
one glass plate was analyzed by XRD, the other one was made in case the first one was damaged
during testing.
Figure 3.12: Andreasen’s cylinders with fraction <2µm (left), glass plates (center), X-ray diffractometer
(right)
The XRD measurements were performed at four different conditions. The glass plates were
1. saturated with water
34
==PAGE:42==
2. saturated with ethylene glycol for a minimum of 2 days at 60°C
3. ignited at 350°C for 2 hours
4. ignited at 550°C for 2 hours
Before each measurement, the samples were cooled down at room temperature.
The measurements were conducted by using the following programs:
Water saturated sample: 3-65°, 21min, 15mm, 2°, 8.7.
Ethylene glycolate sample: 3-40°, 13min, 10mm, 2°.
Ignited samples: 3-40°, 13 min, 10mm, 2°.
The different pre-treatments and measurements helped analyze the mineral content of the clays,
as XRD measures the d-spacing and intensity of the clay minerals in the range of 2-40°. The
minerals can then be identified based on their reflections under the different conditions (Brindley,
1981; Lugwisha, 2011).
3.2
Characterization of SSA
The sewage sludge ash (SSA) selected for this project was #0013 Avedøre-Krüger-4 from Amager
forbrænding. The SSA was milled at 1000rpm for 10 sec to increase the reactivity of the ash
(Ottosen et al., 2015). No metals or nutrients were removed from the ash.
Figure 3.13: SSA milled by a vibrating cup mill at 1000rpm for 10 sec
35
==PAGE:43==
The following laboratory tests were conducted to characterize the SSA.
• Particle size distribution
• Leaching, pH, and conductivity
• Digestion
3.2.1
Particle size distribution
The particle size distribution of the SSA and Qz was done by laser diffractometer, using the wet
method with ethanol. The ethanol makes the curves smoother by limiting the agglomeration of
particles. The particle size distribution was conducted with the help of the laboratory technicians.
Before testing, the ash was dried at 105°C. When performing the particle size distribution, the
particles should be smaller than 250µm, thus the ash is usually sieved through a 250µm sieve
before testing. Since this ash was milled at 1000rpm for 10 sec, it was concluded that the particle
size would be small enough to skip the sieving process.
0.5 g of ash was mixed with 18 ml ethanol in a 20 ml plastic vial. The mixture of ethanol and
ash was added to the laser diffractometer until the laser obscuration reached 16%. For each test
sample, three measurements were made, and the average was calculated.
3.2.2
Leaching, pH and conductivity
Leaching was performed on the SSA, to figure out if there could be an environmental risk of
using the material in construction materials. The pH and conductivity can give an indication of
how easily heavy metal leaches, while the leaching test states how much there is leached. The
tests were conducted by supervision of the laboratory technicians at DTU and were performed in
accordance with the guide by Ottosen (2023).
Before testing, the ash was heated to 105°C for a minimum of 24h. Three samples were prepared.
10 g of ash and 100 ml of distilled water were added to a 250 ml plastic container. The samples
were placed on a shaking table for 24h. After shaking for 24h, the samples rested for 15 minutes.
After resting the liquid was filtered through a Whatman 42 filter paper with 0.45µm pore size, using
a vacuum pump, and 15 ml were transferred to a plastic vial. Afterward, the pH and conductivity
were measured on the three samples. The content of heavy metals were measured on the IC and
ICP.
36
==PAGE:44==
Figure 3.14: Preparation of plastic vials for IC and ICP (left). Electrodes to measure the pH and conduc-
tivity (right).
3.2.3
Digestion
Digestion of the SSA was examined to find the total amount of heavy metals present in the ash.
The test was performed by supervision of the laboratory technicians at DTU and followed the
American standard EPA3051A. Three samples were produced. Before testing, the milled SSA
was heated at 105°C for a minimum of 24h. 0.5 g was measured and placed in a centrifuge tube.
10 ml of nitric acid was added. The test samples were placed in the Microwave Digestion System,
Multiwave GO, for 20 min. Afterward, they were cooled for 10 min at room temperature. After
heating in the microwave, the test samples were vacuum filtered through a 0.45µm filter. The acid
mixture was diluted by adding distilled water up to 50 ml mark in a volumetric flask. After diluting
the mixture, 20 ml was transferred to a plastic vial. The amount of heavy metals was measured on
the IC and ICP.
The unit used for digestion is mg/kg dry matter. The ICP listed the heavy metals in mg/l, thus
formula 3.11 was used to change the unit from mg/l to mg/kg dry matter.
𝑚𝑔/𝑘𝑔=
𝐴· 0.100𝐿· 𝐶
𝐵· 10−3𝑘𝑔/𝑔𝑎𝑠ℎ
(3.11)
where,
A
is the concentration of heavy metal [mg/l]
B
is the ash weighed [g]
C
is the dilution factor [-]
37
==PAGE:45==
3.3
Production and testing of specimens
To test the mechanical and physical properties of the different soil mixes, cylinder specimens of
Ø60mm and H60mm, were produced by compacting the specimens in cylinder steel moulds using
an EME-052-instron-6022 compression machine. The same machine was used for de-moulding
the specimens.
The following specimens were produced for the different tests:
• 12 specimens of raw soil (RS) to test the production method.
• 32 specimens (min 5 of each soil mix) to test the optimal moisture content (OMC).
• 65 specimens (13 of each soil mix) to test the compression strength, leaching, pH, and
sorption capacity.
3.3.1
Pre-tests
Pre-tests were made before producing the final test specimens to find a suitable production method.
It was examined whether 1) a pre-treatment of the soil was needed, 2) at what pressure the speci-
mens could be produced, and 3) at what moisture content the specimens should have by examining
the OMC.
Houben & Guillaud (1994) described the necessity of grinding/pulverizing and screening the soil
before mixing. This was not done, because the soil was ordered as a commercial product in-
tended for the production of fired bricks, thus it was expected that it already had undergone a
pre-treatment.
3.3.1.1
Production method
Samples were compacted at different setups to find the optimal pressure and production method
before producing the final test specimens.
The first series was created with the red clay with sand (RS) at its natural state (RS-RAW) to see
if it was possible to get nicely compacted cylinders with limited air gaps without pre-treating the
soil. About 350 g of soil was added to an oiled steel cylinder with a diameter of Ø60mm and a
height of 120mm.
The following compression setups were tested:
38
==PAGE:46==
1. 6 kN, 50 mm/min, absolute ramp
2. 8 kN, 50 mm/min, absolute ramp
3. 8 kN, 50 mm/min, cyclic 3.5
4. 4 kN, 50 mm/min, absolute ramp
5. 9.5 kN, 50 mm/min, absolute ramp
The pressure added was in the range of 1-4 MPa, which according to Houben & Guillaud (1994)
corresponded to a very low or low pressure.
Table 3.4: Moulding pressure
Force applied
Pressure
Category
4 kN
1.41 MPa
Very low pressure
6 kN
2.12 MPa
Low pressure
8 kN
2.83 MPa
Low pressure
9.5 kN
3.36 MPa
Low pressure
The specimens were weighed and the height was measured. The bulk density was calculated by
using formula 3.12, to see which setup resulted in the highest density.
𝜌= 𝑚
𝑉
(3.12)
where,
𝜌
is the bulk density [Mg/m3]
𝑚
is the mass of compacted soil [g]
𝑉
is the volume of the specimen [m3]
3.3.1.2
Optimal moisture content
The optimal moisture content was examined for six different soil mixes: RS-RAW, RS-REF, RS-
SSA, RS-CaO, RS-CaO-SSA, and RS-CaO-Qz. The OMC was found by producing test specimens
with a minimum of five different water contents by using the EME-052-Instron-6022, which also
were used for the final production of test specimens. 350g ± 1g of soil was used for each specimen,
39
==PAGE:47==
and two specimens were produced at each water content to calculate an average. The soil was
mixed with water by hand in a plastic container and sealed overnight. The different soil mixes
were tested in the range of 12-22% water, depending on how the soil mixture behaved. At first,
three mixes with different water contents were produced, and afterward, it was figured out whether
the water content should be increased or decreased to find the optimum. After the production of
specimens at each water content, the actual water content was calculated by drying 3x20 g of soil
mix at 105°C for a minimum of 24h. This water content is later referred to as the "true" water
content.
The bulk and dry density were calculated by formula 3.13 and 3.14 from the Proctor method
(DS/EN 13286-2:2011).
𝜌= 𝑚
𝑉
(3.13)
𝜌𝑑= 100 · 𝜌
100 + 𝑤
(3.14)
where,
𝜌
is the bulk density [Mg/m3]
𝑚
is the mass of compacted soil [g]
𝑉
is the volume of the specimen [m3]
𝜌𝑑
is the dry density [Mg/m3]
𝑤
is the water content [%]
3.3.2
Production of final test specimens
The pre-examinations of the production method and water content resulted in the following pro-
duction method for the final test specimens.
Figure 3.15: Production method of test specimens
40
==PAGE:48==
Five different soil mixes were used to produce the test specimens, see table 3.3. The water content
was based on the soil mixes OMC, except for RS-REF, due to a calculation error.
The binder content [wt%] was calculated based on the dry soil weight. The water content [wt%]
was calculated based on the total dry weight, thus the weight of soil and binder. The specific mix
recipes used for the production of test specimens can be seen in appendix C, table C.2.
Figure 3.15 illustrate the production method.
First, the soil was broken down by hand and dried at 50°C until equilibrium. This took approxi-
mately 3 days. The soil and sand were then added to a container with a lid, and water correspond-
ing to the OMC was poured over the soil. The soil, sand, and water were left to rest at night with
the lid on. This step made mixing easier, as the soil had time to redistribute the water. It was
experienced that a minimum amount of water was evaporated.
Figure 3.16: Soil mixer, MADO Cutter MKT 661 (left). Compression machine, EME-52-Instron-6022
(right)
The soil, sand, and water were then mixed with the binder in the MADO Cutter MKT 661 for
10 minutes to get a homogeneous soil mix. Approximately 350 g of the soil mix was added to
an oiled cylindrical steel mould with a diameter of Ø60, and the soil was compressed using the
EME-052-Instron-6022 machine, compressing at 8 kN with a displacement-controlled speed of
100mm/min. The height of the specimens was 60mm ± 2mm, which resulted in an aspect ratio of
1. After producing the test specimens, a sample of the soil of 20 g was placed in a 105°C oven,
to measure the water content. The test specimens were wrapped in plastic to prevent water from
41
==PAGE:49==
evaporating and put into a plastic bag, which was sealed.
Figure 3.17: Moist RS-SSA specimens (top). Specimens wrapped in plastic (bottom).
8 specimens were placed in the climate chamber at 23°C, and 5 of the specimens were furthermore
put in a foil bag, and placed in a water bath at 40°C, for curing in 14 days. Since the bags could
not hold tight, the specimens were transferred to an oven at 40°C, and sealed in a new plastic and
foil bag. After curing the plastic was removed from the specimens, and left to dry in a climate
chamber of 23°C, and 65%RH for 7 days. After drying the specimens were ready for testing.
Compression tests were performed on specimens from both curing conditions. pH, leaching, and
sorption isotherms were performed on specimens that had cured at 23°C.
Figure 3.18: Dry specimens. From the left: RS-REF, RS-SSA, RS-CaO, RS-CaO-SSA, RS-CaO-Qz.
42
==PAGE:50==
After compression the specimens were weighed and the height and the bulk and dry density were
calculated by formula 3.13 and 3.14 presented in section 3.3.1.2
3.3.3
Compression test
The compression test was executed in accordance with DS/EN ISO 17892-7:2018, except that the
specimens were having an aspect ratio of 1:1 instead of 2:1 which is standard when executing the
unconfined compression test on cylindrical specimens. The EME-051-instron-6025 was used to
compress the test specimens at a displacement-controlled rate of 0.5mm/min. The displacement
and force applied were monitored, resulting in a force-displacement curve. Before compressing
the specimen, the mass and height of the specimen were measured to calculate the bulk and dry
density. The specimen was placed between a fixed steel plate and a plate on a ball joint, which
could move to correct an uneven surface. The compression test was stopped manually when cracks
started to develop and the force applied had dropped. Five specimens of each soil mix and curing
condition were tested. The water content was measured by drying one specimen from each soil
mix at 105 °C after failure.
Figure 3.19: Test setup for the unconfined compression test.
43
==PAGE:51==
The compressive strength was calculated by formula 3.15
𝜎= 𝐹
𝐴
(3.15)
where,
𝜎
is the compression strength [MPa]
F
is the maximum load at failure [N]
A
is the cross-sectional area of the specimen [mm2]
The strain was calculated by formula 3.16
𝜀= Δ𝐻
𝐻𝑖
(3.16)
where,
𝜀
is strain [mm]
Δ𝐻
is the difference in height after compression [mm]
𝐻𝑖
is the initial height of the specimen [mm]
The stiffness was calculated by Young’s modulus of elasticity using formula 3.17
𝐸𝑠= 𝜎
𝜀= 𝜎2 −𝜎1
𝜀2 −𝜀1
(3.17)
3.3.4
Leaching
Leaching was performed on test specimens containing SSA, which was cured at 23°C, to see the
risk of leaching heavy metals when the soil was mixed with the SSA. The procedure was similar
to the method for the ash in section 3.2.2.
The test specimens were crushed with a mortar and dried at 105°C for 24h. 10 g were mixed with
100 ml distilled water in a 250 ml plastic bottle. Three samples were made and placed on a shaking
table for 24h. After shaking, the samples rested for 15 minutes. The liquid was afterward filtered
through a Whatman 42 filter paper with 0.45µm pore size, using a vacuum pump, and 15 ml were
44
==PAGE:52==
transferred to a plastic vial. The pH and conductivity were measured by a pH and conductivity
electrode. The content of heavy metals was determined by using IC and ICP.
3.3.5
pH
The pH was measured on the test specimens cured at 23°C, to see if the pH could explain why
mold was growing on the test specimens RS-REF and RS-SSA.
One test specimen cured at 23°C, of each soil mix, was crushed by using a mortar and sieved
through a 500µm sieve. 20 g of the crushed soil was mixed in a 250 ml plastic bottle with 100
ml distilled water without CO2, by using a volumetric pipette. Three samples were made. The
samples were placed on a shaking table for one hour. After shaking, the pH was measured directly
from the 250 ml plastic bottles using a pH electrode.
Figure 3.20: Measuring the pH of specimens cured at 23°C.
3.3.6
Hygroscopic sorption properties
The hygroscopic sorption properties were tested to examine how the different soil mixes performed
compared to similar and other conventional materials.
The hygroscopic sorption properties were determined by using the climatic chamber method from
DS/ISO 12571:2021. The test deviated from the standard by only using three relative humidities
between 30-95% instead of four. The number of different relative humidities was reduced due to
limited time, thus by using three relative humidities there was time to examine both sorption and
45
==PAGE:53==
desorption to see if the hysteresis phenomenon occurred.
The following three relative humidities were used: 33%, 75%, and 94%, as these are similar to
the ones able to maintain when using the desiccator method, thus it might be easier to relate the
results.
Test specimens cured at 23°C were crushed by a mortar into smaller pieces and sieved through a
4 mm sieve. By crushing the samples, the surface area was increased and the samples should be
faster at reaching equilibrium at each relative humidity. The soils were dried at 50°C for 48h until
the mass had reached equilibrium, to ensure that the specimens were dry before the beginning of
the experiment. 20 g ± 1g of soil was put in a petri dish and placed in the chamber. Three samples
for each soil mix were tested, and the average was calculated.
Figure 3.21: The samples tested. From the top: RS-REF, RS-SSA, RS-CaO, RS-CaO-SSA, RS-CaO-Qz
(left). Climate chamber used for testing the sorption capacity of the soil mixes (right).
The specimens were weighed every day until the mass change had reached equilibrium. The
mass must be constant through three measurements with a minimum of 24h apart, that do not
deviate with more than 0.1%. During weighing the climatic chamber was stopped for the fan
not to interfere with the balance, thus it was necessary to shortly open the climate chamber after
weighing to start the fan again. The temperature and relative humidity were monitored by using
an EasyLog data logger.
46
==PAGE:54==
The moisture content, u, was calculated by formula 3.18.
𝑢= 𝑚−𝑚0
𝑚0
(3.18)
where,
𝑢
is the moisture content mass by mass [kg/kg]
𝑚
is the mass of the test specimen [kg]
𝑚0
is the mass of the dried test specimen [kg]
47
==PAGE:55==
4
|
Results
4.1
Characterization of soil
4.1.1
Loss on ignition, density of solid particles, and water content
The results from the loss on ignition, density of solid particles, and water content are collected in
table 4.1.
Table 4.1: Soil properties
Y
YS
R
RS
Soil property
avg
std
avg
std
avg
std
avg
std
LOI - 550°C
[%]
2.8
0.1
2.7
0.2
2.7
0.1
2.8
0.2
LOI - 950°C
[%]
11.2
0.0
9.2
0.1
4.2
0.1
4.3
0.1
Particle density, 𝜌𝑠
[Mg/m3]
2.7
0.0
2.8
0.1
2.7
0.0
2.8
0.0
Water content
[%]
21.9
0.1
22.9
0.2
22.0
0.3
26.2
0.9
The measurements can be found in appendix A.
4.1.1.1
Loss on ignition
For all four soil types, the loss on ignition at 550°C was about 2.7-2.8%. The largest loss on
ignition was found for the yellow clay without sand (Y) and the red clay with sand (RS). The loss
on ignition at 950°C was largest for the yellow clays, (Y, YS), with a loss on ignition of 11% and
9%, respectively, while the loss on ignition for the red clays, (R, RS), both were about 4%.
The organic matter should be less than 2% to 6% according to DS/EN ISO 14688-2:2018, table
3, to be considered low-organic soil. According to Houben & Guillaud (1994), the organic matter
should not exceed 2% to 4%, to be sure that it does not influence the characteristics of the soil. The
content of organic matter is defined by the loss on ignition at 550°C, which for all soil types was
at the lower end of the allowed amount of organic matter. In addition, does the 2.8% also account
for some clay minerals which disappear when heated at 550°C. Table 4.5 in section 4.1.5 presents
which clay minerals disappear at high temperatures. Based on these reflections, the organic matter
48
==PAGE:56==
was not removed before executing the consecutive tests.
The loss on ignition at 950°C describes the total mass loss including organic matter, clay minerals,
and carbonate (Fabbri et al., 2022). This corresponds with what was expected, as the loss on
ignition at 950°C was greatest for the yellow clays (Y, YS), which color depends on the content of
calcite (Andersen et al., 1989).
4.1.1.2
Density of solid particles
The particle density was found to be roughly the same for all soil types, although the particle
density was found to be greater for the soils with sand compared to the ones without sand.
The particle density used in the old standard for particle size distribution was normally 2.65 Mg/m3
(DS 405.8, 1978). Clayey and silty soils have a particle density between 2.6 and 2.9 (Das, 2007),
which the results fell within.
The results are used for the determination of the particle size distribution in section 4.1.2.
The measurements can be seen in appendix A.2.
4.1.1.3
Water content
The water content was greatest in the red clay with sand (RS), with a water content of 26.2%. The
lowest water content was found in the soil types without sand (Y, R). The standard deviation was
greatest for the red clays (R, RS).
The water content was also determined in combination with other tests, thus these results were
mainly used to get an insight into the material and worked as a reference.
4.1.2
Particle size distribution
The sieving and sedimentation test’s particle size distribution was plotted on the same semi-
logarithmic plot, shown in figure 4.1.
49
==PAGE:57==
Figure 4.1: Particle size distribution with recommendation for compressed earth blocks
There was a discontinuity between the sieving and the sedimentation curve. The two curves were
joined together to achieve a continuous, smooth curve, dictated by the sieving. The particle size
distribution for the four soil types was plotted together with the recommended zone from Houben
& Guillaud (1994). The zone suggests where the particle size distribution should lay, for the soils
to be suitable for the production of CEB. The zones provided by Houben & Guillaud (1994) are
not rigid, thus the soils can be suitable even though they lie outside the zone, but the soils are more
likely to be suitable if they fall within the zone (Houben & Guillaud, 1994).
The particle size distribution curves show that all four soil types contain about 20% clay. The
particle size distribution curves for the yellow clays, (Y, YS), deviate more from each other, than
the red clays (R, RS). This corresponds with the fact that the yellow clay with sand, YS, is the
yellow clay, Y, with 15% sand added, while the red clay with sand, RS, is the red clay, R, with
only 6% sand added, thus the red clays are more alike.
When looking at the curves they are relatively smooth, except for some discontinuities. At the
yellow clay, Y, two points lie next to each other near the 60% particles passing. This is because
50
==PAGE:58==
two measurements by the hydrometer were taken too quickly, not letting the sediment settle. For
the red clay, R, there is a point that drops in percentage near the 40% passing, which is due to a
wrong reading of the reference solution. For the red clay with sand, RS, there is a relatively large
and steep discontinuity between the sieving curve and the sedimentation curve. The joint is not as
smooth as the curves from the other soil types, making it slightly less well-graded.
From figure 4.1 it is noticed that all four soil types fall outside of the recommended zone by
Houben & Guillaud (1994). The red clay with sand, RS, is the one closest to the recommended
zone, thus it was examined whether the soil would become more suitable if it was modified with
sand. In figure 4.2 the red clay with sand, RS, was theoretically modified with 15% 0-2mm and
15% 0-4mm extra sand, respectively. A counterpoint for this action could be that the amount of
clay (binder) would be reduced. When looking at figure 4.2 the clay content seems to be reduced
from 20% to about 15%.
Figure 4.2: Modified particle size distribution with recommendation for compressed earth blocks
In the figure above, it can be seen that the curves lie better within the recommended zone when
51
==PAGE:59==
modified. The coarser particle sizes still fall outside of the recommended zone, and the curve is
somewhat steep, thus it would not help adding more sand, but coarser material is needed, although
coarse aggregates are nor wanted. It would most likely be better to mix the soil with another soil
that can counterbalance the content of fines (Houben & Guillaud, 1994).
4.1.3
Atterberg limits
The measurements for cone penetration and the calculation of the water content corresponding
to each measurement can be seen in the appendix in table A.24 and A.26. No post-sinking was
observed on any of the clays. The results are shown in figure 4.3, where the cone penetration is
plotted on a logarithmic scale.
Figure 4.3: Liquid limit
The liquid limit is determined as the water content at a cone penetration of 10mm. This was
calculated based on the regression lines from the legend in figure 4.3, where y = liquid limit [%]
and x = cone penetration [mm].
52
==PAGE:60==
The Atterberg limits for the four soil types, and the modified version of the red clay with sand, are
listed in table 4.2.
Table 4.2: Atterberg limits
Y
YS
R
RS
RS - mod
Liquid Limit, 𝑤𝐿
[%]
43
38
39
39
37
Plastic Limit, 𝑤𝑃
[%]
17
16
18
18
18
Plasticity Index, 𝐼𝑃
[%]
25
22
22
21
19
When looking at the Atterberg limits, the four soil types, as well as the modified soil, can be clas-
sified as fat clays, as the plasticity indexes are between 10-25% and the liquid limits are between
30-50% (Byggeriets Udviklingsråd, 1993). The plasticity index describes the range of moisture
contents over which the soil remains plastic (Dhir et. al., 2017a) and can indicate how workable
the soil is. A low plasticity index usually results in better workability in engineering applications
according to Lin et al. (2007). The results showed that the modified version, RS-mod, had the
lowest plasticity index.
Based on the liquid limit and the plasticity index, the soil type of the clays is determined by
using the plasticity chart from DS/EN ISO 14688-2:2018, figure 1. The plasticity chart has been
replicated by the use of the key corresponding to figure 1 in DS/EN ISO 14688-2:2018.
53
==PAGE:61==
Figure 4.4: Plasticity chart
The soil types can be classified as Cl = Clay, Si = Silt, and
plasticity as L = low, M = medium, H = high, V = very high, O = organic. The U-line and A-line
are described by the following equations:
U-line:
𝐼𝑝= 0.9(𝑤𝐿−8)
(4.1)
A-line:
𝐼𝑝= 0.73(𝑤𝐿−20)
(4.2)
According to the plasticity chart in figure 4.4 all four clays and the modified version of the red
clay with sand can be classified as a clay loam of medium plasticity.
54
==PAGE:62==
Figure 4.5: Plasticity chart - CEB
When comparing the results from the Atterberg limits (the plasticity index and the liquid limit)
with the plasticity chart for CEB from Houben & Guillaud (1994) in figure 4.5, all four clays and
the modified soil fitted into the hatched area. This indicated that the soils were suitable for the
production of unfired clay bricks, such as CEB.
4.1.4
Linear shrinkage
Table 4.3 presents the results from the linear shrinkage test, and table 4.4 lists the number of days
the specimens were drying at different temperatures.
Table 4.3: Linear shrinkage
Y
YS
R
RS
RS - mod
𝐿𝐷
[mm]
123
126
121
125
124
𝐿0
[mm]
140
140
140
140
140
Linear shrinkage
[%]
12
9
13
11
11
55
==PAGE:63==
Table 4.4: Days of drying at different temperatures
Y
YS
R
RS
RS - mod
Room temp.
6
5
6
5
5
60 °C
1
3
1
3
1
105 °C
7
4
7
4
2
During testing, it was prominent that the greatest shrinkage occurred during the first day at room
temperature. No cracks in the specimens were observed, but some of the specimens ended with a
curve, thus the length was measured on the top and the bottom of the specimen, and the average
was calculated. The complete measurements can be seen in appendix A.6.
When comparing the clays without sand, Y and R, the latter had the greatest percentage of shrink-
age. Furthermore, the clays with sand (YS, RS), had a smaller percentage of shrinkage than the
ones without sand (Y, R). The linear shrinkage of the modified soil (RS-mod) was similar to the
natural red clay with sand (RS). The modified soil was expected to shrink less than the red clay
with sand since the content of sand was increased. But since only the fraction <500µm was used
for the linear shrinkage test, most of the sand may have been washed away. The lack of difference
between the original red clay with sand, and the modified version may be also attributed to the fact
that the linear shrinkage was based on one sample and not the average of three.
The British Standard (BS 1377-2:1990) states that the soil used for linear shrinkage should be at
the liquid limit. The results can therefore be influenced if deviating from the liquid limit. The cone
penetration used for the different soil types was as follows: Y = 11mm, YS = 10mm, R = 9.5mm,
RS = 10mm, RS - mod = 10mm. The difference between the yellow and red clay without sand
may therefore be too large because the yellow clay was used when the water content was above
the liquid limit and the red clay when it was below the liquid limit. Additionally, the shrinkage
of the yellow clay may also be too large compared to the other soil types, due to the difference
in measuring the linear shrinkage at 11mm and 10mm cone penetration. Despite this error, the
results are still thought of indicating that the yellow clays tend to shrink less than the red clays.
56
==PAGE:64==
4.1.5
Clay mineralogy
The clay minerals that were present in the yellow and red clay, (Y, R), were identified by comparing
the results from the XRD with the criteria listed in table 4.5.
Table 4.5: D-spacing of clay minerals
Clay mineral
Air-dried
Ethylene glycol
350°C
550°C
Smectite
Sm
17Å
10Å
Montmorillonite
Sm
15-16Å, 3Å
Shifted
Illite
I
10Å, 3.3Å, 4.5Å
10Å, 3.3Å, 4.5Å
10Å, 3.3Å, 4.5Å
Kaolinite
K
7Å, 3.5Å
7Å, 3.58-4Å
Disappears
Chlorite
Cl
14-14.4Å
7Å, 3.54Å
Disappears
Disappears
The table lists the D-spacing of some clay minerals in different conditions and was based on
observations by Lugwisha (2011) and Brindley (1981).
The XRD also indicated quartz, Q, but Q is not a clay mineral and was therefore not included in
the table.
The results from the XRD measurements of the yellow and red clay without sand, are plotted
together with the abbreviations of the clay minerals in figure 4.6.
57
==PAGE:65==
Figure 4.6: XRD of clay minerals
The following clay minerals was found to be present in the two loams:
Table 4.6: Clay minerals identified
Abbreviation
Clay mineral
D-spacing
Sm
Smectite
16.5Å
I
Ilitte
10Å
Ch
Chlorite
7.2Å, 3.7Å
K
Kaolinite
7.2Å, 3.7Å
The clay minerals were identified by comparing the results from the different treatments.
Smectite was identified as the air-dried peak shifted from 14Å to 16-17Å when the sample was
treated with ethylene glycol, and the peak collapsed when heated to 350°C and 550°C.
Illite was identified, since there was a peak at 10Å, and the peak was present throughout all treat-
58
==PAGE:66==
ments.
Kaolinite and chlorite were identified since there was a peak of about 7Å and 3.5Å, which col-
lapsed when heated. Kaolinite and chlorite can be distinguished when looking at the peaks when
heated. If the peak collapses when heated at 350°C, the clay mineral can be identified as chlorite.
If the peak only disappears at 550°C the clay mineral can be identified as kaolinite. In the figure
it was noticed that the peak only collapsed when heated at 550°C at 7Å and 3.7Å, thus it was
identified as kaolinite instead of chlorite.
At 14Å there could be a peak within the air-dried peak, which could indicate chlorite, as the peak
collapsed both at 350°C and 550°C.
The clay mineral content seemed to be the same for the two soil types, as the intensity was about
the same. The only difference was the intensity of quartz, which was higher in the red clay, R
compared to the yellow clay, Y. From the XRD it looked like the clays contained smectites, which
could be montmorillonite or vermiculites, which tend to swell. Swelling/shrinking is an undesired
behavior in earthen construction materials, as it can cause cracks due to a volume change. To be
more certain about the clay mineral content, it is usually a good idea to support the analysis with
e.g. an infrared analysis (Lugwisha, 2011). This has not been executed in this thesis.
4.2
Characterization of SSA
4.2.1
Particle size distribution
The average of the particle size distribution of the SSA is plotted on a semi-logarithmic plot in
figure 4.7 together with the particle size distribution from the quartz, Qz. The particle size dis-
tribution of the Qz was provided by Ebba Schnell, the laboratory technician at DTU. The laser
obscuration used for the results was 16%, as the deviation between the three measurements was
smaller than when using a laser obscuration of 10%. The results used to produce the graph are
listed in appendix B. The average standard deviation of the SSA and Qz was 0.04 and 0.03, re-
spectively.
59
==PAGE:67==
Figure 4.7: Particle size distribution of SSA and Qz
The particle sizes from the SSA were distributed from 2µm to 250µm, thus the distribution corre-
sponded to silts and fine sand. The particle sizes from the Qz were distributed from 2µm to 158µm.
The 10th, 50th, and 90th percentiles from the particle size distribution of the two binders and their
specific surface area are listed in table 4.7.
Table 4.7: Results from laser diffraction of the SSA and Qz
Binder
Specific Surface Area
d(0.1)
d(0.5)
d(0.9)
[m2/g]
[µm]
[µm]
[µm]
SSA
0.435
5.5
24.5
93.0
Qz
0.408
5.9
27.3
69.9
The particle size distributions of the SSA and the Qz were very similar, both in their specific
surface area and in the distribution of particle size, except at the 90th percentile. This together
with the graph of the particle size distribution in figure 4.7 indicated that the SSA was slightly
coarser than the Qz.
60
==PAGE:68==
The similarity between the SSA and Qz increased the opportunity of comparing their reactivity, as
they most likely will work in the same way, when considered as a filler.
4.2.2
Leaching, pH, conductivity, and digestion
The SSA was also examined for leaching, pH, conductivity, and the total concentrations of heavy
metals in the ash through digestion. Results from the IC and ICP are listed in table 4.8 together
with the limit values for category 1 and 2 from the residual product act BEK nr 1672 (Restpro-
duktbekendtgørelsen, 2016), and the limit values from BEK nr 1001 (2018) regarding the use of
waste for agricultural purposes. The residual product act, BEK nr 1672 is in general more strict
with the concentration of heavy metals in the residual product compared to BEK nr. 1001, except
for Cr.
Table 4.8: Leaching [mg/l] and digestion [mg/kg dry matter] of the SSA
Cd
Cr
Cu
P
Pb
Zn
Chloride
Nitrate
Sulfate
Leaching
<0.02
<0.02
<0.02
<2
<0.02
<0.02
<14.0
<14.6
>149.6
Std
0
0
0
0
0
0
0.8
3.3
4
BEK nr 1672
0.002
0.01
0.045
-
0.01
0.1
150
-
250
Digestion
9
117
1276
114000
293
4690
-
-
-
Std
0.5
4
34
4484
16
113
-
-
-
BEK nr 1672
0.5
500
500
-
40
500
-
-
-
BEK nr 1001
0.8
100
1000
-
120
4000
-
-
-
4.2.2.1
pH and conductivity
The pH of the SSA was found to be slightly alkaline with a pH of 9, which matches the average pH
of 9 for SSA across research (Dhir et al., 2017b). The standard deviation of the pH was 0.1. The
conductivity was found to be 1.57 mS/cm, with a standard deviation of 0.03. A high or low pH
would indicate that the heavy metals easily leaches (Dhir et al., 2017b). Since the pH is relatively
close to neutral, it is not expected that the SSA easily leaches heavy metals.
4.2.2.2
Leaching
All results from the IC and ICP are below the minimum standard value for the standard curve,
except for sulfate, which is above the maximum standard value, hence the IC and ICP was not
61
==PAGE:69==
able to detect the amount of heavy metals leached from the SSA. The results did though indicate
that leaching of Cd, Cr, Cu, P, Pb, Zn, Chloride and Nitrate was limited. Since the content of
sulfate (953 mg/l) was above standard value, it is expected that the sulfate exceeds the limit value
from the residual product act, BEK nr 1672. When the limit value is exceeded the SSA can only
be used for purposes within category 3, which covers paved roads with max 10% seepage rate,
paved pathways with solid surfaces such as asphalt, concrete or flags, and foundations and floors
as long as it does not cause any problems with the indoor climate (Restproduktbekendtgørelsen,
2016).
4.2.2.3
Digestion
The SSA was examined for the concentration of heavy metals and phosphorous through digestion.
The results from the ICP were converted from mg/l to mg/kg dry matter by using formula 3.11,
with a dilution factor of 1.
The results from the ICP were all within the standard curve, except for phosphorous, which was
above. Although the result of phosphorous is not completely reliable as it was not within the
standard curve, 114000 mg/kg dry ash, corresponds to a phosphorous content of 11%, which
sounds reasonable, as the content in SSA in general is between 5-10% according to Ottosen et al.
(2013).
When comparing concentrations of heavy metals with the limit values from the two acts, it is
noticed that Cd, Cu, Pb, and Zn, exceeded both acts, while Cr exceeded BEK nr 1001. The results
indicate, that in its raw format, the SSA can be used within category 3 from the residual product
act, BEK nr 1672, but not within agriculture.
4.3
Production and testing of specimens
4.3.1
Pre-tests
4.3.1.1
Production method
The pre-production showed that a compression force of 8 kN resulted in the highest bulk density
and fewest air gaps. The bulk densities were in the range of 1949-1962 kg/m3 for the different test
setups. The height of the specimens was 63mm, when using 350 g of moist soil. This corresponded
to a compaction ratio of 2, and the height was within the recommendation for static compression
to limit the variability of the density throughout the specimen (Fabbri et al., 2022; Houben &
62
==PAGE:70==
Guillaud, 1994).
Figure 4.8 shows test specimens compacted with 4 kN, 6 kN, and 8 kN at a rate of 50mm/min.
The figure show that by increasing the compaction force, the specimen became more uniform.
Figure 4.8: From left: RS-RAW compressed with 4kN, 6kN, and 8kN.
The pre-production of test specimens furthermore showed that the natural water content was too
high. The high water content resulted in uneven surfaces, shrinkage, and large air gaps. Figure 4.9
shows a comparison of the natural red clay (RS-RAW) and the modified version with additional
sand (RS-REF).
Figure 4.9: RS-RAW vs. RS REF with natural water content (top). RS-RAW (wc 14%wt) vs. RS-REF
(wc 12%wt) (bottom)
63
==PAGE:71==
The top figure shows the specimens at their natural water content, while the bottom shows the
specimens at their optimal moisture content. Both sets are compacted with 8 kN.
A rate of 50mm/min was found to be very slow, thus it was increased to 100mm/min for the final
specimens. The compaction was not increased further, as the maximum force of the machine was
10 kN. When having too moist soil, and compressing with 9.5 kN, the machine would exceed its
max, and close down.
The final specimens were compacted at their optimal moisture content with 8 kN at a rate of
100mm/min.
4.3.1.2
Optimal moisture content
The specimens from the OMC can be seen in figure 4.10, while figure 4.11 presents the water
content as a function of the density for the different soil mixes. Both a theoretical density and the
true density are plotted in figure 4.11. The theoretical density relates to the water content added
to the soil, and the true density relates to the actual measured water content in each mix. The
corresponding regression lines for the graphs are listed in appendix C.
64
==PAGE:72==
Figure 4.10: Specimens from the optimal moisture content. The percentage shows the amount of water
added.
65
==PAGE:73==
Figure 4.11: Optimal moisture content of the different mixes
66
==PAGE:74==
Compared to the pre-tests with the raw soil (RS-RAW) at its natural moisture content, the test
specimens from the OMC showed a higher bulk density. The test showed that an increase in
density was achieved when the water content was reduced compared to the soil’s natural moist
condition. This indicated that the specimens were better compacted.
In table 4.9 the OMC and the corresponding densities were found by finding the optimum of the
regression lines based on the results from the test specimens.
Table 4.9: Maximum densities and corresponding OMC
Mix
RS-RAW
RS-REF
RS-CaO
RS-SSA
RS-CaO-SSA
RS-CaO-Qz
Bulk density
2144
2173
2041
2118
2046
2056
Bulk OMC
14
13
20
15
19
18
Dry density
1895
1932
1718
1862
1736
1798
Theoretical
Dry OMC
12
12
18
12
17
17
Bulk density
2147
2161
2049
2117
2046
2060
Bulk OMC
14
13
17
15
17
16
Dry density
1892
1919
1771
1866
1745
1747
True
Dry OMC
13
12
15
12
16
14
From table 4.9 it can be seen that the mix with no binders (RS-REF) resulted in the greatest
dry density. It is thereby expected to have a good compaction and a high compressive strength
compared to the other specimens. The lowest dry density was theoretically achieved by the mix
with quicklime as the only binder (RS-CaO), while the actual (true) lowest density was achieved
by the mix containing both quicklime and SSA as a binder (RS-CaO-SSA). It is noticeable that
the dry density of the specimen with SSA as the only binder (RS-SSA) also resulted in a greater
dry density compared to the once mixed with quicklime. But the dry density were still lower than
the reference mix with no binder (RS-REF).
From figure 4.11 it is noticed that the soil mix containing quicklime in general decreased the true
water content. When comparing RS-CaO-Qz and RS-CaO-SSA, it was not as prominent for the
one with SSA. For the mixes without quicklime as a binder, there was almost no difference in
the theoretical and true water content. This indicated that a reaction had occurred between the
quicklime and the water during the production time, as well as the SSA had not.
67
==PAGE:75==
The OMC, which gave the theoretical highest dry density were chosen as the water content for
the production of the test specimens, except for RS-REF which were produced at a higher water
content due to a calculation mistake.
4.3.1.3
Linear shrinkage of specimens
To evaluate whether it should be the raw soil (RS-RAW) or the modified soil with extra sand
(RS-REF) that should be mixed with binder and used for further testing, the linear shrinkage was
examined from the two soil mixes at the different water contents from the determination of OMC.
The shrinkage was measured after 11 days of drying in a climate chamber at 23°C and 65%RH.
The shrinkage is compared in figure 4.12.
Figure 4.12: Linear shrinkage at different water contents after 11 days of drying at 23°C and 65%RH
All measurements can be found in appendix C.
From figure 4.12 it is clear that the shrinkage increased with the moisture content. It is also clear
that the raw soil with no extra sand shrunk more than the modified soil, which had 15% extra
0-4mm sand added. These results comply with what was expected, but they differ from the linear
shrinkage based on the British Standard which showed that the two soils shrunk equally.
RS-REF was found better for the production of CEB when taking shrinkage into account.
68
==PAGE:76==
4.3.2
Compression tests
All specimens had the same type of fracture. The fractures either developed vertically from the
top or the bottom of the specimens, as seen in figure 4.13. Whether fractures developed from the
bottom or the top may depend on which end of the specimen was compacted by the moving piston
(Fabbri et al., 2022).
Figure 4.13: Compression test of RS-SSA, cured at 23°C
The fractures furthermore developed around the specimen, making an outer layer slip, as can be
seen in figure 4.14. When lightly hitting the specimen, the soil fell off, leaving the specimen in
a shape of an hourglass. The hourglass shape is similar to concrete cylinder specimens under
uniaxial compression when the height = the diameter (Kim & Yi, 2002).
Figure 4.14: RS-REF, cured at 23°C (left). RS-SSA, cured at 23°C (right).
69
==PAGE:77==
The results from the compression test can be expressed as stress-strain curves. The stress-strain
curves for specimens cured at 23°C and 40°C are illustrated in figure 4.15 and 4.16, respectively.
Average values were used. The stress-displacement curves from the compression tests can be seen
in appendix C, and the compressive strength for each specimen can be seen in table C.3 in the
appendix.
Figure 4.15: Stress-strain curve for specimens cured at 23°C
Figure 4.16: Stress-strain curve for specimens cured at 40°C
70
==PAGE:78==
The compressive strength, 𝜎, modulus of elasticity, 𝐸𝑠, and dry density, 𝜌𝑑at compression time
are listed in table 4.10.
Table 4.10: Mechanical and physical properties of specimens
RS-REF
RS-SSA
RS-CaO
RS-CaO-SSA
RS-CaO-Qz
23C
40C
23C
40C
23C
40C
23C
40C
23C
40C
𝜎[MPa]
3.62
3.64
3.69
3.72
2.19
3.28
2.28
3.11
2.11
3.57
Std
0.30
0.17
0.29
0.14
0.25
0.14
0.23
0.06
0.31
0.23
𝐸𝑠[GPa]
0.158
0.158
0.187
0.187
0.207
0.266
0.227
0.263
0.168
0.288
𝜌𝑑[kg/m3]
1924
1919
1937
1934
1777
1784
1742
1752
1770
1789
Std
11.57
7.22
6.10
5.97
13.19
11.50
11.99
5.90
16.49
5.86
4.3.2.1
Compressive strength
The stress-strain curves in figure 4.15 show that the specimens without quicklime reached the
highest compressive strength and that there was a clear difference between the specimens, whether
they contained quicklime or not. The reference soil (RS-REF) and the soil with SSA (RS-SSA)
reached the same compressive strength.
When looking at 4.16 there was a less distinct difference between specimens with and without
quicklime. RS-REF and RS-SSA still reached the highest compressive strength. Of the specimens
containing quicklime, the one with quartz reached the highest compressive strength. There is a
clear difference between the compressive strength when looking at the curing temperature and
the specimens with quicklime. The specimens cured at 40°C got a higher compressive strength
than the ones cured at 23°C. There was no clear difference between RS-REF and RS-SSA when
looking at the different curing temperatures.
It was expected that the reference soil (RS-REF) should perform worse than the other mixes, as
the silica and alumina in the clay should react with the binders, creating C-S-H and C-A-H, which
would increase the density of the soil and thereby the strength. The hypothesis was additionally,
that the combination of CaO and SSA, would increase the reactivity of the SSA, increasing the
strength of RS-CaO-SSA compared to RS-SSA. Furthermore, to check if the SSA had reacted with
the CaO, RS-CaO-Qz was included in the test, as the quartz is inert, and should not react with CaO
or the clay minerals, expecting it to have a lower compressive strength than RS-CaO-SSA.
71
==PAGE:79==
It can be concluded that when quicklime was used, curing temperature had a significant influence
on the compressive strength, which may also enhance the durability of the specimens (Minke,
2012), although this was not examined.
Figure 4.17 shows the relationship between the compressive strength and the measured (true) dry
density of all specimens tested.
Figure 4.17: Relationship between the compressive strength, 𝜎and the measured dry density.
The graph shows that the specimens without quicklime both reached a high dry density and a
high compressive strength, compared to the specimens with quicklime. The specimens containing
quicklime all ended with a lower dry density. Among the specimens with quicklime, it is clear that
the curing condition of 40°C increased the strength, while the dry density stayed the same. Among
the specimens without quicklime, the dry density and compressive strength were the same for the
two curing conditions. The specimens RS-SSA reached a higher dry density than the reference
specimens (RS-REF). RS-CaO-SSA got the lowest dry density among the different soil mixes.
72
==PAGE:80==
When comparing the specimens without quicklime, the specimens with SSA showed a tendency of
better compaction, as a higher dry density, in general, was achieved compared to the reference soil,
but the water content for RS-REF and RS-SSA were 14% and 12%, respectively, thus the RS-SSA
contained less water from the beginning. This could be an explanation for the dry density being
slightly different between RS-REF and RS-SSA. If the water content had been the same in the two
mixes, the dry density would maybe be the same, thus it is difficult to state whether it is due to
the SSA or the lower initial water content, that made the soil compact better. The specimens with
quicklime and SSA did not indicate that the SSA increased the density since this soil mix achieved
the lowest dry density.
4.3.2.2
Young’s modulus of elasticity
The stiffness of the specimens was calculated based on Young’s modulus of elasticity using the
secant of the stress-strain curves in figure 4.15 and 4.16.
From the calculation of Young’s modulus of elasticity, it can be seen that the reference soil (RS-
REF) and the soil with SSA (RS-SSA) had the same stiffness despite the different curing condi-
tions. For the specimens with quicklime, Young’s modulus of elasticity was lower for the speci-
mens cured at 23°C than the ones cured at 40°C. This is also visible in figure 4.15 and 4.16 when
looking at the slope of the curves. The steeper the curve is, the stiffer the soil mix. Compared to
conventional construction materials such as concrete, steel, and fired bricks, which have a mod-
ulus of elasticity of 30 GPa, 210 GPa, and 1-30 GPa, respectively, it must be concluded that the
soil mixes are very elastic compared to conventional building materials (Gottfredsen & Nielsen,
2015).
4.3.2.3
Water content in specimens
The added (theoretical) and measured (true) water content in the specimens, as well as the water
content at the compression test, are listed in table 4.11.
73
==PAGE:81==
Table 4.11: Water content in specimens, [%]
RS-REF
RS-SSA
RS-CaO
RS-CaO-SSA
RS-CaO-Qz
Theoretical
14
12
18
18
18
True (Avg)
14
12
17
17
17
True (Std)
0.1
0.2
0.1
0.1
0.1
Testing (23C)
3
3
3
4
4
Testing (40C)
3
3
4
4
3
The theoretical water content determines the water content added to the soil mixes during mixing,
while the true water content is the measured water content after the production of cylinders, which
is the water content expected to be in the cylinders when the curing begins.
In the reference soil (RS-REF) and the soil containing SSA (RS-SSA), the true water content was
similar to the theoretical water content. For the specimens with quicklime (RS-CaO, RS-CaO-
SSA, RS-CaO-Qz) all of the measured water contents were lower than the initial water content,
which was added during mixing. This indicates that a reaction between the CaO and the water
had occurred during production time, which reduced the water content in the specimens. This was
also noticeable when looking at the initial density of the specimens produced for curing at 40°and
23°C. As the specimens for 40°C were produced first, these specimens reached a higher initial
density than the specimens produced for 23°C, as the production time of the 40°C specimens took
more than one hour, thus the CaO in the specimens for 23°C had already reacted with the water
before the production of 23°C specimens. The calculation of all initial densities can be seen in
appendix C.
The table also shows the water content in the specimens when they were tested. The water content
was measured to be between 3% and 4% and was based on one specimen from each curing condi-
tion. Even though the specimens began with different water contents, the water content was found
to be approximately the same after drying.
4.3.2.4
Linear shrinkage and change in density
The height and mass of the specimens were measured after 14 days of curing at their respective
temperatures, and after 21 days when the specimens had dried in the climate chamber for 7 days.
Figure 4.18 shows the average linear shrinkage and the change (increase) of the specimens’ dry
74
==PAGE:82==
density in percentage when cured at 23°C and 40°C.
Figure 4.18: Linear shrinkage and change in density of specimens cured at 23°C and 40°C
From the graphs above it is clear that the reference soil (RS-REF) had the greatest shrinkage in
percentage, independently of the curing temperature. In comparison, the specimens with SSA
had the smallest shrinkage in percentage. This may be related to that the SSA can work as a filler,
similar to sand, which can reduce shrinkage (Payá et al., 2019; Minke, 2012). It is interesting to see
that the specimens containing quicklime, which were cured at 40°C, experienced a slight increase
in height during the time of curing, and then began to shrink when they were set to dry. The
same happened for RS-CaO-SSA at 23°C but was less prominent. The expansion can be caused
by hydration products or the formation of gypsum, which could be analyzed by XRD or SEM.
The expansion may be so little, that an XRD and SEM cannot confirm the reaction products. The
linear shrinkage of the specimens was found to be less than 2% for the reference soil (RS-REF),
and less than 1% for the other mixes.
The large shrinkage of the reference (RS-REF), cannot be explained by the water content, as
75
==PAGE:83==
the water content when testing was about the same, and the water content during mixing and
production was lower for the reference than the other soil mixes. One explanation can be, that the
clay content is higher in the reference, as the binder reduces the relative clay content by reducing
the amount of raw soil present in the specimen (Minke, 2012).
The change in dry density was found to be between 1% and 2% for both curing conditions. The
dry density remained the same during the first 14 days, with a change of up to 0.5%, while curing,
as the specimens were sealed in plastic films and plastic bags, which prevented the specimens
from drying while curing. After curing the specimens were set to dry, which increased the dry
density. At the curing condition of 23°C, the RS-REF, RS-CaO, and RS-CaO-SSA had the greatest
increase of dry density, while RS-REF, RS-CaO-Qz, and RS-CaO had the greatest increase of dry
density when cured at 40°C. For both curing conditions, the dry density of RS-SSA changed the
least. When compared with the linear shrinkage, it is also the RS-SSA that had the lowest percent
shrinkage, thus the soil mix seemed to be relatively stable from production.
4.3.3
pH of test specimens
Mold was noticed on the specimens without quicklime (RS-REF and RS-SSA) after curing. It was
therefore interesting to check the pH of the test specimens, to see if that could explain why the
mold only was on those two soil mixes. The pH was measured on specimens cured at 23°C.
Table 4.12: The pH value in the test specimens
RS-REF
RS-SSA
RS-CaO
RS-CaO-SSA
RS-CaO-Qz
pH (Avg)
9
8
13
13
13
pH (Std)
0.1
0.1
0.0
0.0
0.0
The measured pH from the test specimens showed a difference in pH of the specimens which had
mold growth and the ones that did not. The specimens with mold had a neutral pH, while the
specimens without mold had a very alkaline pH. The alkalinity came from the quicklime.
A study by Nascimento et al. (2020) found that the activity of a fungi from the Caatinga soil in
Brazil, was highest at a pH of 9 and a temperature of 40°C. This may explain why mold growth
only were detected on the specimens with a pH close to neutral.
76
==PAGE:84==
4.3.4
Leaching, pH, and conductivity of test specimens with SSA
The two types of test specimens containing SSA were examined for leaching. The results from the
pH and conductivity can be seen in table 4.13.
Table 4.13: pH and conductivity of test specimens with SSA
RS-SSA
RS-CaO-SSA
Avg
Std
Avg
Std
pH
[-]
8
0.4
12
0.1
Conductivity
[mS/cm]
0.26
0.01
4.12
0.21
The pH of RS-SSA was about neutral with a pH of 8, while the RS-CaO-SSA was alkaline with
a pH of 12 due to the quicklime. When the pH is neutral or alkaline, the risk of leaching is
limited (Ottosen et al., 2013). The conductivity was found to be very low for the RS-SSA, where
the conductivity was measured at 0.26 mS/cm, while it was found to be higher in the RS-CaO-
SSA, with a conductivity of 4.12 mS/cm. This indicates that the soil mixed with quicklime might
increase the amount of soluble salts (Fabbri et al., 2022).
The results from the IC and ICP are listed in table 4.14 together with the limit values for Category
1 and 2 from the residual product act BEK nr 1672 (Restproduktbekendtgørelsen, 2016). The
residual product act does not restrict the concentration of phosphorous and nitrate. The complete
measurements from the IC and ICP can be seen in appendix C.
Table 4.14: Leaching of test specimens [mg/l]
Cd
Cr
Cu
P
Pb
Zn
Chloride Nitrate Sulfate
RS-SSA (avg)
< 0.02 < 0.02 < 0.02 2.9 < 0.02 < 0.02
< 14.1
< 14.6
69.22
RS-SSA (std)
0
0
0
0.1
0
0
0.3
2.8
1.3
RS-CaO-SSA (avg) < 0.02 < 0.02
0.06
< 2 < 0.02 < 0.02
< 14.1
< 14.6 < 14.68
RS-CaO-SSA (std)
0
0
0
0
0
0
0.2
0.2
0.5
BEK nr 1672
0.002
0.01
0.045
-
0.01
0.1
150
-
250
All results from the IC and ICP were below the minimum standard value for the standard curve,
except for phosphorous and sulfate from the test specimen with SSA (RS-SSA), thus the IC and
ICP were not able to detect the concentrations of leaching from the other heavy metals. The results
77
==PAGE:85==
did though indicate that leaching of Cd, Cr, Cu, Pb, Zn, chloride, and nitrate from RS-SSA was
limited. In addition, the concentration of sulfate was within the limit values stated by the residual
product act, BEK nr 1672. From the RS-CaO-SSA, only Cu was detected by the ICP, as the
results for the other heavy metals and anions were below standard curve values. The RS-CaO-
SSA exceeded the limit value for the leaching of Cu. Since one of the heavy metals exceeded the
limit values, the soil can be used for purposes within Category 3 according to the residual product
act, BEK nr 1672.
4.3.5
Sorption isotherms
The samples were measured at three different relative humidities, 33%, 75%, and 94% during
adsorption and desorption. It took 28 days to execute the test. The samples were fast at stabilizing,
which may be because the samples were crushed instead of solid, which increased the surface area
of the samples.
The RH and temperature were monitored by using an EasyLog datalogger, but due to technical
issues, the data could not be extracted. Figure 4.19 is a graph of the readings from the datalogger,
which were placed within the climate chamber. The reading of the RH was performed once a day
when the mass of the samples was measured.
Figure 4.19: Monitoring of the relative humidity in the climate chamber
The RH seemed to be relatively stable, except on day 24, where the climate chamber suddenly
increased from 79%RH to 88%RH. The samples had stabilized except for one, thus it was decided
to change the relative humidity to 33%, in case the climate chamber would continue increasing
78
==PAGE:86==
when it was set to 75%. The relative humidities measured by the datalogger, had in general
been approximately 2% RH higher than the one the climate chamber was set to, thus a relative
humidity set to 33%RH was measured by the datalogger to be closer to 35%RH, 95%RH were
closer to 97%RH, and the 75%RH was approximately 75%RH during adsorption, but 78%RH
during desorption.
The temperature was not monitored, as it was intended that the datalogger would provide the data,
and monitoring the temperature at each weighing would have required that the climate chamber
were opened more than desired.
Figure 4.20 reports the sorption isotherms for the different soil mixes.
Figure 4.20: Sorption isotherms of specimens
From the sorption isotherms, it can be seen that the hysteresis phenomenon occurred. The phe-
nomenon was greater for the soil mixes with quicklime. The greatest difference between RS-CaO
at 33%RH was 1% moisture content, on the contrary, was the greatest difference between the
moisture content of RS-REF at 75% 0.4%. The hysteresis phenomenon is associated with the ink-
bottle mechanism, which indicates that it was easier for water vapor to enter the porous network
than leaving it, and this was more prominent for the samples with quicklime. If the soil has a
79
==PAGE:87==
compact structure it may be more difficult for the water vapor to leave (El Fgaier et al., 2016).
The moisture content in the samples reached 3.5-4% at 94%RH. The samples from RS-CaO and
RS-CaO-Qz reached the highest change in moisture content, and their behavior was shown to be
very similar. The RS-REF and RS-SSA had the lowest change in moisture content but were also
behaving in the same way. In between were the samples from RS-CaO-SSA. The results indicated
that the CaO increased the ability to absorb and release moisture, while the SSA reduced this
ability of the loam.
80
==PAGE:88==
5
|
Discussion
5.1
Suitability of the soil and SSA based on the characterization
5.1.1
Particle size distribution and Atterberg limits
The soil characterization was performed to figure out the behavior and suitability of the loams for
the production of CEB. The liquid limit, plasticity index, and particle size distribution indicated
that the red clay loam with sand would be the most suitable, compared to the other loams, as its
particle size distribution was closest to the recommended zone from Houben & Guillaud (1994).
The loam still did not completely comply with the zone. A theoretical modification of the soil,
using 0-4mm sand and 0-2mm sand showed that the red clay loam with sand would fit better within
the recommended zone from Houben & Guillaud (1994).
It can also be discussed whether the SSA itself could have modified the soil. The particle size
distribution of the SSA and Qz were very similar and was within silts and fine sand, and could
therefore also help with modifying the soil. The particle size distribution of the SSA and Qz are
plotted together with the particle size distribution of the different loams in figure 5.1.
81
==PAGE:89==
Figure 5.1: Particle size distribution for soils, sand, SSA, and Qz with recommendation for CEB
The option of using the SSA to modify the particle size distribution of the red clay loam is sup-
ported by Lynn et al. (2018) who found that SSA predominantly consists of silt and fine sand
particles, which results in a particle density curve similar to filler or fine aggregate, which also is
the case for the SSA examined in this thesis.
The two soils, the natural red clay loam and the modified red clay loam are compared with soils
used in research, to see if the soil properties are similar, to evaluate whether the soil is suitable
for producing CEB, although it has been difficult to find research combining SSA and CEB. Lin
et al. (2007) and Kadhim et al. (2022) both examine SSA in relation to soil improvement of soft
cohesive subgrade soil used for geotechnical applications. Lin et al. (2007) combine the SSA
with lime. Boussaa et al. (2023) have examined the use of a wood biomass ash as a stabilizer in
compressed earth blocks, and Malkanthi et al. (2020) have stabilized compressed earth blocks by
using lime and cement. The comparison can be seen in figure 5.2 and 5.3.
82
==PAGE:90==
Figure 5.2: Comparison of clay, silt and sand fractions.
Figure 5.2 lists the fraction of clay, silt and sand used in the four different researches. The clay
content in the soil is important as it is the binder of the soil. When modifying the red clay loam,
the clay content reduced to about 15%. This is in between the clay content of Malkanthi et al.
(2020) and Boussaa et al. (2023) who both produced CEB in relation with their research. This
could indicate that the clay content in the modified red clay loam is sufficient for production of
CEB. The clay content in Kadhim et al. (2022) and Lin et al. (2007) are higher, which is expected,
as they work with soft cohesive subgrade soil. In addition, the modified red clay loam can be
characterized as a sandy loam, where the loam in Boussaa et al. (2023) is silty. A silty loam can
reach higher compressive strengths than a sandy loam (Minke, 2012).
When comparing the distribution of clay, silt, and sand fraction, and the liquid limit, and plasticity
index of the natural red clay loam and the modified red clay loam with table 2.1 from section 2.1.2,
it is only the plasticity index that fall outside of the recommendation of the properties of stabilized
CEB in standards and codes.
83
==PAGE:91==
Figure 5.3: Comparison of PL, LL, and PI.
When looking further into the Atterberg limits, the liquid limit of the red clay loams are similar
to the liquid limit of Malkanthi et al. (2020) and Bousaa et al. (2022), and the plasticity index
is higher than the plasticity index of Malkanthi et al. (2020) and Bousaa et al. (2023). A low
PI should increase workability, which both Malkanthi et al. (2020) and Bousaa et al. (2023)
have. The red clay loams could therefore potentially benefit from a lower plasticity index. This
could be achieved by reducing the difference between the PL and the LL, either by increasing
the clay content, or reducing the content of sand, by maybe increasing the content of silt. The
comparison of the soil properties is done in relation to soils that are intended to be stabilized.
Thus the comparison of Atterberg limits is rather to see what soil properties the red clay loam
should have to produce stabilized CEB, rather than unstabilized CEB, as the objective of the thesis
is to examine the effect of the SSA when used as a stabilizer.
5.1.2
Linear shrinkage
The linear shrinkage of the red clay loam and the modified version was found to be 11%. Fur-
thermore, the results of the clay mineralogy by XRD, showed that the red clay loam contains
smectites, which could be montmorillonite. Montmorillonite has a tendency to swell, which can
84
==PAGE:92==
increase the risk of cracks when CEB dries. This risk should be reduced in the modified version
since the addition of sand would reduce the clay content, and thereby the shrinkage ratio (Minke,
2012).
The linear shrinkage of the two loams seems high in comparison with figure 5.4 from Minke
(2012). In figure 5.4, the linear shrinkage is 5% for a loam with 50% clay and 50% silt. The
shrinkage reduces when additional sand is added.
Figure 5.4: Linear shrinkage of two soils with
50% clay and 50% silt as a function of increased
sand content (Minke, 2012)
Figure 5.5: Linear shrinkage as a function of the
addition of normal or coarse sand (Minke, 2012)
Figure 5.5 from Minke (2012) indicates that the addition of coarse sand (1-2mm) reduces the
shrinkage more than when adding a normal sand (0-2mm). This indicates, that if wishing to
reduce the shrinkage of the specimen, it is better to modify the soil with the 0-4mm sand, than the
one with 0-2mm sand.
85
==PAGE:93==
Figure 5.6: Comparison of linear shrinkage
In Minke (2012) it is also evident that the type of clay minerals influences the linear shrinkage.
In figure 5.6 is shown the linear shrinkage of two clay minerals from Minke (2012), which are
compared with the linear shrinkage of the red clay loam and the modified version. The bentonite
from Minke (2012) consists of 71% montmorillonite and 16% illite. Both the kaolinite and the
bentonite are thinned with sand with 0-2mm grains. The bentonite clay with the swelling clay
minerals reaches a linear shrinkage of 18%, while the one with kaolinite reaches a shrinkage of
6%. The linear shrinkage of the two red clays, are in between, indicating that there are some
swelling clay minerals in the loam, which was supported by the XRD.
5.1.3
Stabilization
Cement and bitumen are useful stabilizers when having loam with less clay, and lime is preferable
when having clayey loams. But it also depends on the type of clay minerals present in the loam.
Cement is most effective with kaolinite and lime with montmorillonite (Minke, 2012). When look-
ing at the soil properties of the red clay loam and the modified version, the presence of swelling
clay minerals may favor the addition of lime as a stabilizing agent, but the relatively low clay
content may favor cement as a stabilizing agent. When looking at the Atterberg limits, figure 5.7
from Minke (2012), it indicates that lime is useful for stabilizing the red clay loam. The red dot
is the placement of the red clay loam in the chart. Only one dot has been added, as the Atterberg
limits of the natural red clay loam and the modified version are very similar.
86
==PAGE:94==
Figure 5.7: Suitable stabilizer based on Atterberg limits (Minke, 2012)
SSA or other ashes are not included as a stabilizing agent in Minke (2012). But since SSA can
have a pozzolanic reaction similar to lime, the SSA might be suitable to stabilize the CEB made
of the red clay loam.
In figure 5.8, Minke (2012) shows the compressive strength as a function of the percentage of lime
added to different types of loams. When modifying the red clay loam, it becomes a sandy loam.
87
==PAGE:95==
Figure 5.8: Compressive strength as a function of lime content.
The figure shows an optimum of 4% added lime for clayey loam, while the silty and sandy loam
show an optimum at 6%. Houben & Guillaud (1994) suggest a minimum of 5% slaked lime, for
stabilizing a sandy loam. Kadhim et al. (2022) found an optimum of 10% SSA for soft cohesive
subgrade soil, Lin et al. (2007) found that 8% sewage sludge and lime would improve the basic
properties of the soft subgrade soil, and Aparna (2022) suggest an amount of 7-10% SSA after
reviewing different research papers. Malkanthi et al. (2020) found an optimum of 10% lime when
stabilizing CEB. Based on the above literature and research, the addition of 5-10% stabilizers
seems applicable to improve the compressive strength of the tested CEB.
5.2
Performance of test specimens
The objective was to figure out how the SSA would influence the performance of the CEB. The
test specimens with the different addition of stabilizing agents, were tested for OMC, compressive
strength, and sorption capacity.
5.2.1
SSA impact on optimal moisture content
The OMC was noticed to increase when adding quicklime, but not when adding SSA, and the dry
density increased when adding SSA and decreased when adding CaO. Multiple studies have shown
88
==PAGE:96==
that the OMC should increase and the dry density decrease with the increase of SSA (Aparna,
2022). But other studies have also shown the opposite, as is the case in this project. This was a
surprise during mixing, as it was expected that the addition of SSA would require more water than
the reference soil.
5.2.2
SSA impact on compression strength
The tests reached a compressive strength between 2.19 MPa and 3.69 MPa, where the lowest
compressive strength was achieved by RS-CaO when cured at 23°C, and the highest was achieved
by RS-SSA when cured at 40°C, closely followed by RS-REF. This contradict with what was
expected.
The study by Lin et al. (2007), Malkanthi et al. (2020), and Kadhim et al. (2022), indicated that
when using SSA/lime, lime, or SSA for stabilization, the compressive strength would increase.
Based on the literature, the hypothesis was that the reference soil would perform worse, as it was
not stabilized.
The results may have been influenced by the preparation method, the particle density and packing
(Minke, 2012), thus the red clay loam, may have been of a too good quality, where stabiliza-
tion was unnecessary. Similar to Wiehle et al. (2022), who reached relatively high compressive
strengths of 2.38-4.7 MPa without stabilization. The general compressive strength of loam for
buildings is 1.96-4.90 MPa (Minke, 2012), which corresponds to the results from the different soil
mixes, thus the SSA did not increase the strength compared to the general compressive strength
that is possible to achieve.
5.2.2.1
Influence of curing
Although the RS-SSA reached the highest compressive strength, the tests did not show a clear
indication that the mechanical performance was enhanced by the use of SSA as a binder. When
comparing RS-CaO-SSA and RS-CaO-Qz, when cured at 23 °C, the RS-CaO-SSA reached the
highest compressive strength. But when the soils had cured at 40°C, RS-CaO-Qz had reached the
highest compressive strength. From this, it is hard to state whether the SSA influenced the com-
pressive strength, when mixed with quicklime, as contradictory conclusions are made depending
on the curing condition. It may be because of the short curing time of 14 days, as the SSA is
slow at reacting. There might not be sufficient evidence to say that there is a significant difference
89
==PAGE:97==
between the results, as average values have been used based on a relatively small sample of five
test specimens.
The study by Kadhim et al. (2022) did not show a large difference in the compressive strength
between the 14 days of curing and 28 days of curing when using 10% SSA, whereas Lin et al.
(2007) showed an increase in the compressive strength even after the 28 days of curing. The test
with SSA/Lime of 8% increased from 80 kPa after 14 days of curing to 140 kPa after 100 days of
curing.
A longer curing time would maybe indicate differences between the specimen’s compressive
strength, making it easier to see if the SSA had reacted and whether it can improve the mechanical
performance of CEB.
5.2.2.2
Reactivity of the SSA
The hypothesis was that the SSA would create C-S-H and C-A-H, which could reduce the porosity
and increase the density and thus the strength of the specimens (Aparna, 2022). But as the SSA
itself contains both calcium oxide (C), silicate (S), and aluminum oxide (A) (Dhir et al., 2017a),
it can be hard to tell whether the SSA reacts with itself or the soil minerals, and which of the
constituents are more reactive. When stabilizing with lime, the alkaline condition favour the silica
and alumina in the soil to react with the Ca+ ions from the lime, to form calcium silicate hydrates
and aluminum silicate hydrates (Dhir et al., 2017a). The pH of the soil is about neutral, while the
SSA increases the pH slightly, making the soil more alkaline. This may increase the reactivity of
the soil and the SSA.
It requires further testing to know the mineralogy after curing, and the content of hydrates and
reactants that have occurred to exactly know whether the SSA has reacted with the soil, and if the
CaO has increased or helped the reactivity of the SSA. The compression test did not indicate a
reaction between the SSA and the soil, or an increased reactivity when mixed with quicklime, thus
it is difficult to state whether the SSA can be used for stabilization and enhancing the mechanical
and physical properties of the soil. On the other hand it can be stated that the SSA did not impair
the material properties, as the compressive strength remained the same as the reference, and it
reduced the shrinkage of the specimens, thus the SSA can maybe be considered to be used as
a substitution for sand, which is also considered as a scarce resource and a way to reduce the
depletion of natural resources (UNEP, 2014).
90
==PAGE:98==
5.2.3
SSA impact on the hygrothermal performance
The sorption capacity of earth building materials should be high compared to other construction
materials. A high sorption capacity enables the material to balance the indoor climate by absorbing
and releasing moisture when the relative humidity changes (El Fgaier et al., 2016).
The results of the hygrothermal performance of the samples of the different specimens, showed
that the specimens with quicklime reached a higher moisture content at 94% RH, than the ref-
erence soil (RS-REF) and the soil with SSA alone (RS-SSA). It also showed that the difference
between adsorption and desorption were greater in the specimens with quicklime, than the once
without. The samples with quicklime might therefore be better at regulating the indoor climate.
It furthermore indicated that the SSA could have a negative influence on the hygrothermal perfor-
mance, as the moisture content of RS-CaO-SSA was lower than the moisture content of RS-CaO
and RS-CaO-Qz.
For the sake of clarity only the samples containing SSA are presented in the following graphs,
when comparing the results with sorption isotherms from litterature and research.
In figure 5.9 the two samples containing SSA are compared with different loams from Minke
(2012).
91
==PAGE:99==
Figure 5.9: Comparison of sorption isotherms of different loams with the sorption isotherms of the samples
containing SSA.
The figure shows that the samples containing SSA fall between the equilibrium moisture contents
of a silty loam and a sandy loam, which sounds reasonable as the soil was thinned with extra sand.
However, the samples do not reach a moisture content as high as the loam brick. The sorption
isotherms can depend on the clay minerals, where a higher moisture content is reached when the
loam contains montmorillionite (Minke, 2012). This is illustrated both by El Fgaier et al. (2016) in
figure 2.3, where brick B contained montmorillonite and by Minke (2012) that illustrates in figure
2.4 that the bentonite clay containing 70% montmorillonite reached a higher moisture content than
the non-swelling clay kaolinite. Minke (2012) does not mention what type of clay minerals the
loam brick contains, thus it is difficult to know why this brick reaches a higher moisture content
than both the bricks from El Fgaier et al. (2016) with a maximum moisture content of 3.5%, and
the samples of RS-SSA and RS-CaO-SSA.
92
==PAGE:100==
In figure 5.10 the two samples with SSA are compared with conventional materials such as con-
crete and fired bricks, and an unfired clay brick from the study by El Fgaier et al. (2016). The
sorption isotherms of the three materials are also presented in figure 2.3, 2.5, and 2.6 in section
2.1.3.
Figure 5.10: Comparison of sorption isotherms of different building materials with the sorption isotherms
of the samples containing SSA.
From the figure it is noticed that the moisture content of fired bricks is very low compared to
the CEB samples. The hysteresis phenomenon for the fired brick is greatest at the high relative
humidities, but the difference is not greater than 0.2%. The sorption isotherm of the concrete
is more similar to the CEB samples, but it reaches a higher moisture content at 95%RH. The
hysteresis phenomenon is also greater for the concrete example than the CEB samples. When
comparing the CEB samples with the unstabilized unfired clay brick by El Fgaier et al. (2016), it
is noticed that they reaches the same moisture content of 3.5%. The CEB samples differ from the
unstabilized unfired clay brick by El Fgaier et al. (2016), by having a higher moisture content at
93
==PAGE:101==
the relative humidities lower than 75% RH.
The sorption isotherms conducted in this thesis showed an increase of moisture content for stabi-
lized specimens, which contradict with results obtained by McGregor et al. (2014), where sorption
isotherms for CEB specimens stabilized with 4% or 8% cement or lime, all showed a lower mois-
ture content at all relative humidities compared to unstabilized CEB. The CEB in McGregor et al.
(2014) consisted of 50% brick clay and 50% fine sand.
It must be taken into account, that the sorption isotherms may have been executed on different
types of samples. The samples used in this thesis were crushed to a size smaller than 4mm, while
the samples from El Fgaier et al. (2016) were done on solid bricks. The type of samples used in
Gottfredsen & Nielsen (2015) is unknown. It might not have an influence since the results used
for the sorption isotherms are obtained when the samples have reached equilibrium at the different
relative humidities. Only the time to obtain equilibrium may be affected by the type of sample, as
it may increase the time for samples of larger bricks.
The samples used in this project were fast at reaching equilibrium, which may be attributed to the
fact that the specimens were crushed, which increased the surface area of the sample.
From the comparison it can thus be concluded that the equilibrium moisture content of the soil
mixes tested corresponds to sorption isotherms of similar earth materials. Both from El Fgaier
et al. (2016) and Minke (2012). Compared to other conventional building materials, the samples
from the CEB performed better than fired bricks, but performed similar to a concrete with a w/c
ratio of 0.66, and degree of hydration of 96%. Between the results obtained in this thesis, it seems
as the SSA reduces the equilibrium moisture content when mixed with CaO, while it did not
change the hygrothermal performance, when compared to the reference specimen, as the sorption
isotherms of the RS-SSA and RS-REF were similar.
5.3
Environmental aspects of using SSA in CEB
When mixing or creating a new building material, it is important to consider the end-of-life sce-
nario. It is therefore important to examine if mixing clean earth material with SSA, will cause any
harm to the environment. In this context, pH, conductivity, and leaching were examined to evalu-
ate the risk at the end-of-life of the CEB when it is mixed with SSA, and the total concentration
of heavy metals in dry matter of the raw SSA was examined through digestion.
94
==PAGE:102==
Clayey soil can be considered as a pure material, which can go back to its natural state when water
is added. Since SSA contains pathogens, bacteria and heavy metals, it must be examined how
this will effect the product. The digestion of the raw SSA showed that all limit values from the
act regarding the use of waste for agricultural purposes were exceeded. The residual product act
allows the raw SSA to be used for category 3 purposes. On the contrary, the leaching of heavy
metals and anions from the raw SSA and the test specimens containing SSA was found to be
limited. Only the CEB test specimen containing quicklime and SSA exceeded the limit values
from the residual product act, BEK nr 1672, when looking at Cu, while the raw SSA most likely
exceed the limit value for sulfate. The concentrations of the other heavy metals and anions were
not detected by the IC and ICP.
When the limit values for heavy metals and anions are exceeded for Category 1 and 2, the residual
product act states that the soil and SSA can be used for Category 3 purposes at the end-of-life.
Since heavy metals are not very volatile, the risk of using SSA in construction materials such as
CEB would most likely be limited, but since the limit values from BEK nr 1672 are exceeded, the
CEB should not be used for agricultural purposes at the end-of-life.
Table 5.1: pH and conductivity
SSA
RS-SSA
RS-CaO-SSA
Avg
Std
Avg
Std
Avg
Std
pH
[-]
9
0.1
8
0.4
12
0.1
Conductivity
[mS/cm]
1.57
0.03
0.26
0.01
4.12
0.21
Table 5.2: Leaching of test specimens [mg/l]
Cd
Cr
Cu
P
Pb
Zn
Chloride Nitrate Sulfate
SSA (avg)
< 0.02 < 0.02 < 0.02 < 2 < 0.02 < 0.02
< 14.1
< 14.6 > 149.6
RS-SSA (avg)
< 0.02 < 0.02 < 0.02 2.9 < 0.02 < 0.02
< 14.1
< 14.6
69.2
RS-CaO-SSA (avg) < 0.02 < 0.02
0.06
< 2 < 0.02 < 0.02
< 14.1
< 14.6
< 14.7
BEK nr 1672
0.002
0.01
0.045
-
0.01
0.1
150
-
250
When looking at the conductivity and pH of the SSA and test specimens containing SSA, which
are summarized in table 5.1, it can be seen that the soil neutralizes the SSA slightly, as it has a
95
==PAGE:103==
lower pH, closer to neutral, than the raw SSA, while when mixing with quicklime, the quicklime
increases the pH, making the soil very alkaline. When looking at the conductivity, it is lowest
for the RS-SSA, and highest for the soil with quicklime. When looking at both the pH and the
conductivity it is highest for the RS-CaO-SSA, thus when mixing with quicklime, the risk of
leaching will increase. RS-CaO-SSA is the only one of the three materials, where leaching of Cu
exceeds the limit value. The raw SSA was the only one exceeding the limit value for sulfate.
When comparing with a similar SSA from Avedøre in Ottosen et al. (2015), the conductivity
was 1.69 mS/cm and the pH was 10.3. Ottosen et al. (2015) also examined another SSA from
Lundtofte which had a pH of 10.0 and a conductivity of 32.4 mS/cm. The SSA were both alkaline,
but otherwise had different characteristics, thus not all SSA are behaving in the same way. The
content of phosphorous was approximately the same for the two ashes in the study by Ottosen et
al. (2015), with a content of 7-10%. The conductivity of the SSA used for this project is similar
to the Avedøre sewage sludge ash in Ottosen et al. (2015), while the conductivity of RS-SSA is
much lower than the raw ashes, and even the RS-CaO-SSA, which showed the largest conductivity
of what was examined in this project, is much lower than the conductivity of the Lundtofte sewage
sludge ash in Ottosen et al. (2015).
It is interesting to compare the concentration of sulfate in RS-SSA and RS-CaO-SSA. There is a
reduction of the concentration in RS-CaO-SSA compared to the concentration in RS-SSA. This
could indicate that a reaction between the quicklime and the sulfate from the SSA had occurred.
When quicklime reacts with SSA, gypsum can be formed. This may cause an expansion of the
product, which the change in density in section 4.3.2.4 might indicate, but since the concentrations
are limited, this is maybe not noticeable neither visually nor by the use of XRD.
In table 5.3 the concentration of dry matter related heavy metals are compared with concentrations
from sewage sludge ash used in Ottosen et al. (2015) and with the average concentrations of heavy
metals in sewage sludge ash across research represented by Lynn et al. (2018).
96
==PAGE:104==
Table 5.3: Concentration of heavy metals and phosphorous compared to literature [mg/kg dry matter]
Cd
Cr
Cu
Pb
Zn
SSA
9
117 1276 293 4690
Lundtofte (Ottosen et al., 2015) 2.5 43
540
85 1700
Avedøre (Ottosen et al., 2015)
4.7 79
690 112 2000
Average from Lynn et al. (2018) 17 477 1673 321 2964
BEK nr 1672
0.5 500 500
40
500
BEK nr 1001
0.8 100 1000 120 4000
Both ashes from Ottosen et al. (2015) are untreated, and the concentration of heavy metals were
considered very low for both ashes compared to sewage sludge ashes from other countries (Ottosen
et al., 2015). The concentration of heavy metals in the SSA used for this project were higher than
the concentrations in the sewage sludge ashes examined in Ottosen et al. (2015). The sewage
sludge ashes in Ottosen et al. only exceeds the limit values of Cu in the residual product act, BEK
nr 1672. Lynn et al. (2018) have made an analysis of the concentration of heavy metals in SSA
across litterature. The average values are all greater than the SSA used for this project, except for
Zn. The concentrations from Lynn et al. (2018) are also greater than the concentrations in the
sewage sludge ashes used in Ottosen et al. (2015).
Lynn et al. (2018) concludes that SSA in Europe generally can be classified as non-hazardous, and
that it can be used within e.g. geotechnical applications such as landfill liner, as long as the seepage
rate is reduced. SSA is also suggested to be used as a filler in Controlled Low-Strength Materials.
The leaching from the test specimens examined in this project were also limited, and indicates that
SSA can be used within earth construction materials. The combination of quicklime and SSA may
even reduce the leaching (Taki et al., 2020). Additionally, if pre-tretreating the raw SSA when
removing the phosphorous, Ottosen et al. (2015) presented that electrodialytic sepearation also
can reduce the concentrations of heavy metals. Some concentrations were increased during the
process, but these were assumed to be quite immobile (Ottosen et al., 2015). The electrodialytic
separation could be a way to have a cleaner SSA, with a reduced risk of leaching heavy metals.
97
==PAGE:105==
6
|
Conclusion
The current project seeks to evaluate the possibility of utilizing SSA in compressed earth blocks,
by looking into the SSA influence on the mechanical and physical performance of the compressed
earth blocks. The SSA was evaluated in comparison with specimens stabilized by quicklime alone,
and specimens with quicklime in combination with SSA or quartz. Based on the results from the
conducted experiments the following conclusions can be drawn:
The SSA did not impair the mechanical and physical performance of the CEB. The unstabilized
specimen, and the specimen with 5% SSA reached the highest compressive strength at both 23°C
curing and 40°C curing. The curing temperature showed no influence on the compressive strengths
on these two types, but curing at 40°C increased the strength of specimens stabilized with quick-
lime. Compressive strengths of 3.6-3.7 MPa was reached for the non-stabilized specimen and the
specimen with 5% SSA. The limited difference between the compressive strength of the reference
soil (unstabilized CEB) and the specimen with 5% SSA can maybe be attributed to the slow reac-
tivity of SSA, as a curing time of 14 days is relatively short. Another explaination can be that the
soil could compact sufficiently without the need for stabilization, since the specimens with quick-
lime neither resulted in higher compressive strengths. Further tests must be conducted to confirm
potential reaction products between the SSA and clay minerals.
Based on the compressive strength, the SSA did not show clear evidence on working as a stabilizer,
but results indicated that SSA can reduce shrinkage of clayey soil. With a particle size distribution
similar to fine sand and the ability to reduce shrinkage, the SSA shows a possibility of being
utilized as a substitution for sand by working as a filler or light aggregate in CEB.
When looking at the hygrothermal performance of the different soil mixes, the SSA seemed to
reduce the hygrothermal performance, as the samples with 5% quicklime and 5% SSA reached a
lower moisture content compared to the specimen with 5% quicklime, and the specimen with 5%
quicklime and 5% quartz.
With respect to environmental concerns, the results from leaching showed limited concentrations
of heavy metals and salts, although the specimen with 5% SSA exceeded the limit value of sulfate
from the residual product act BEK 1672, stating that specimens with SSA can be used for purposes
98
==PAGE:106==
within Category 3 at end-of-life.
Overall does the results from the thesis and research indicate that using SSA in earth construction
can help resolving three different problems:
1. The energy and carbon emissions related to construction of residential buildings can be
reduced when building with earth.
2. The depletion of non-renewable ressources such as sand, can be reduced if SSA is used as a
filler in construction materials.
3. Waste generation can be reduced, when utilizing SSA. In addition, when valuable nutrients
can be extracted commercially from the SSA, leaving a residue similar to silica sand, the
full potential of the SSA can be utilized.
99
==PAGE:107==
7
|
Perspectives
The results did not give a clear indication on whether the SSA had reacted with the clay and
lime or not. It would therefore be an idea to perform an XRD, SEM and TGA to be able to
evaluate reaction products, if they have taken place. SSA is very slow at reacting, thus it would
further be an idea to increase the curing time, to see if it would influence the compression strength.
Additionally, since the reference soil performed almost as good as the soil with SSA, and better
than the specimens stabilized with quicklime, it could be an idea to make the same tests on a
different soil, to see if the influence from the SSA is more clear.
In relation with the production method, research write that binders and soil should be mixed when
dry and then wetted when mixing in a kneader, which is the opposite of what was done in this
project. The method could increase the strength according to Minke (2012), but when soaking
the water over night, letting it redistribute in the dry soil, the soil was easier to work with. There
could be done more examinations on how to prepare the soil, as it should have a large influence
in the final product. Thus maybe examine and test the optimum amount of binder, the optimum
holding-time after adding the binder, and maybe also test if increasing the moisture content by
10% of the OMC, would increase the strength, as Minke (2012) states.
Earth-based materials can be used for load-bearing walls in single-storey residential houses, but
due to its low strength and durability issues, it may be more relevant to use for non load-bearing
walls. In this relation it would be interesting to further examine the materials quality in relation
with indoor climate. E.g. by performing a Moisture Buffering Value test, or testing its thermal
conductivity and heat capacity.
Research argue that building with earth and utilizing the SSA, would result in a sustainable use
of materials. In this relation it could be good to perform an LCA, to see if the material is more
environmentally friendly than conventional building materials, as the LCA can include e.g. the
influence from transportation, energy during manufacturing and occupancy, toxicity, and resource
depletion when analysing the material from cradle-to-gate. The analysis could then be compared
with using other binders for stabilization or other conventional building materials.
100
==PAGE:108==
8
|
References
Abbou, M., Semcha, A., Kazi-Aoul, F. (2020). Stabilization of compressed earth block clayey ma-
terials from Adrar (Algeria) by lime and crushed sand. In: Journal of Building Materials and
Structures 7(1), 42–50. Available from: https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.3744137. Accessed
07-03-23
Andersen, S., Madsen, J. K., Stilling, E. B., Kristiansen, H., & Madsen, P. (1989). Noget om ler:
5 artikler om sammensætning og brænding af ler til tegl. Skov og naturstyrelsen. Miljømin-
isteriet.
Aparna, R. P. (2022). Sewage sludge ash for soil stabilization: A review. Materials Today: Pro-
ceedings, 61, 392-399. Available from: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.matpr.2021.10.349. Ac-
cessed 07-03-23
BEK nr 1001 af 27/06/2018. (2018). Bekendtgørelse om anvendelse af affald til jordbrugsformål.
Avaialble from: https://www.retsinformation.dk/eli/lta/2018/1001. Accessed: 30-05-2023.
BEK nr 1672 af 15/12/2016. (2016). Restproduktbekendtgørelesn: Bekendtgørelse om anvendelse
af restprodukter, jord og sorteret bygge- og anlægsaffald. Available from: https://www.retsinfo
rmation.dk/eli/lta/2016/1672. Accessed: 30-05-2023.
Boussaa, N. (2023). Mechanical, thermal and durability investigation of compressed earth bricks
stabilized with wood biomass ash. In: Construction and Building Materials, 364. Available
from: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.conbuildmat.2022.129874. Accessed 18-01-2023.
Brindley, G. W. (1981). Clays, clay minerals. In: Frye, K. (Eds.). (1983), The Encyclopedia
of Mineralogy (pp. 69-80). Boston, MA: Springer. ISBN 978-0-387-30720-6. Accessed:
26-05-2023
British Standards Institution. (1990). Methods of test for soils for civil engineering purposes -
Part 2: Classification tests. (BS 1377-2:1990).
Byggeriets Udviklingsråd. (1993). Lerjord som byggemateriale: En vejledning. Boligministeriet
Bygge- og Boligstyrelsen.
101
==PAGE:109==
Danish Standards Association. (2004). Geotechnical investigation and testing - Laboratory testing
of soil - Part 1: Determination of water content. (DS/CEN ISO/TS 17892-1:2004).
Danish Standards Association. (2018). Geotechnical investigation and testing - Identification and
classification of soil - Part 2: Principles for classification (ISO 14688-2:2017). (DS/EN ISO
14688-2:2018).
Danish Standards Association. (2004). Geotechnical investigation and testing - Laboratory testing
of soil - Part 3: Determination of particle density - Pycnometer method. (DS/CEN ISO/TS
17892-3:2004).
Danish Standards Association. (2004). Geotechnical investigation and testing - Laboratory testing
of soil - Part 4: Determination of particle size distribution. (DS/CEN ISO/TS 17892-4:2004).
Danish Standards Association. (2016). Geotechnical investigation and testing - Laboratory testing
of soil - Part 4: Determination of particle size distribution. (DS/CEN ISO/TS 17892-4:2016).
Danish Standards Association. (2018). Geotechnical investigation and testing - Laboratory testing
of soil - Part 7: Unconfined compression test (ISO 17892-7:2017). (DS/EN ISO 17892-
7:2018)
Danish Standards Association. (2004). Geotechnical investigation and testing - Laboratory testing
of soil - Part 12: Determination of Atterberg limits. (DS/CEN ISO/TS 17892-12:2004).
Danish Standards Association. (2021). Hygrothermal performance of building materials and
products - Determination of hygroscopic sorption properties. (DS/ISO 12571:2021).
Danish Standards Association. (2021). Soil, waste, treated biowaste and sludge - Determination
of loss on ignition (DS/EN 15935:2021).
Danish Standards Association. (1978). Testing of sand, gravel and stone materials - Hydrometer
analysis. (DS 405.8).
Danish Standards Association. (2011). Unbound and hydraulically bound mixtures - Part 2: Test
methods for laboratory reference density and water content - Proctor compaction. (DS/EN
13286-2:2011).
Das, B., M. (2007). Principles of Geotechnical Engineering, Thomson Engineering
Dhir, R. K., Ghataora, G. S., & Lynn, C. J. (2017a). Geotechnical Applications. In: Dhir, R. K.,
102
==PAGE:110==
Ghataora, G. S., Lynn, C. J. (2017), Sustainable Construction Materials: Sewage Sludge Ash
(pp. 185-207). Woodhead Publishing. Available from: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-08-
100987-1.00004-4
Dhir, R. K., Ghataora, G. S., & Lynn, C. J. (2017b). Sewage Sludge Ash Characteristics. In:
Ravindra, K. D., Gurmel, S. G., Ciarán, J. L. (2017), Sustainable Construction Materials:
Sewage Sludge Ash (pp. 69-110). Woodhead Publishing. Available from: https://doi.org/10.10
16/B978-0-08-100987-1.00004-4
Elahi, T. E., Shahriar, A. R., Alam, Md. K., Abedin, Md. Z. (2020). Effectiveness of saw dust ash
and cement for fabrication of compressed stabilized earth blocks. In: Construction and Build-
ing Materials, 259. Available from: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.conbuildmat.2020.120568. Ac-
cessed: 16-01-2023.
El Fgaier, F., Lafhaj, Z., Chapiseau, C. Antczak, E. (2016). Effect of sorption capacity on thermo-
mechanical properties of unfired clay bricks. In: Journal of Building Engineering, 6, 86-92.
Available from: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jobe.2016.02.011. Accessed: 06-04-2023.
European Commission. (2020). Critical Raw Materials Resilience: Charting a Path towards
greater Security and Sustainability. Available from: https://ec.europa.eu/docsroom/documents/42849.
Accessed 03-05-2023.
European Commission. (n.d.). Sewage Sludge Ash. Available from: https://environment.ec.europa.eu/topics/
waste-and-recycling/sewage-sludge_en. Accessed 03-05-2023.
Fabbri, A., Morel, J., Aubert, J., Bui, Q., Gallipoli, D., & Reddy, B. V. V. (2022). Testing and
Characterisation of Earth-based Building Materials and Elements: State-of-the-Art Report
of the RILEM TC 274-TCE. Springer. Available from: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-
83297-1. Accessed 19-03-2023.
Gottfredsen, F. R. & Nielsen, A. (2015). Bygningsmaterialer: Grundlæggende egenskaber. Poly-
teknisk Forlag.
Houben, H., & Guillaud, H. (1994). Earth construction: A comprehensive guide. Practical Action
Publishing.
Kadhim, Y. M., Al-Adhamii, R. A. J., & Fattah, M. Y. (2022). Geotechnical properties of clayey
soil improved by sewage sludge ash. In: Journal of the Air & Waste Management Association,
103
==PAGE:111==
72(1), 34-47. Available from: DOI: 10.1080/10962247.2020.1862939. Accessed 11-03-2023
Kiilerich, O., Sander, J., Olesen, S. G., Djurhuus, T. H., Buhl-Hansen, S., Andersen, N. H., Larsen,
J. D, Thorndahl, M. H. (2020). Affaldsstatistik 2020, Miljøprojekt nr 2217. Miljøstyrelsen.
ISBN: 978-87-7038-463-6
Kim, J. K. & Yi, S. T. (2002). Application of size effect to compressive strength of concrete
members. In: Sadhana - Academy Proceedings in Engineering Sciences, 27(4), 467-484.
Available from: DOI: 10.1007/BF02706995. Accessed 27-05-2023.
Lima, S. A., Varum, H., Sales, A., Neto, V. F. (2012). Analysis of the mechanical properties
of compressed earth block masonry using the sugarcane bagasse ash. In: Construction and
Building Materials, 35, 829-837. Available from: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.conbuildmat.201
2.04.127. Accessed: 16-01-2023.
Lin, D., Lin, K., Hung, M., & Luo, H. (2007). Sludge ash/hydrated lime on the geotechnical
properties of soft soil. In: Journal of Hazardous Materials, 145, 58-64. Available from:
doi:10.1016/j.jhazmat.2006.10.087. Accessed: 11-03-2023
Liuzzi, S., Hall, M. R., Stefanizzi, P., Casey, S. P. (2013). Hygrothermal behaviour and relative
humidity buffering of unfired and hydrated lime-stabilised clay composites in a Mediterranean
climate. In: Building and Environment, 61, 82-92. Available from: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
buildenv.2012.12.006. Accessed: 11-04-2023
Lugwisha, EHJ. (2011). Identification of clay minerals of the eastern southern region of Lake
Victoria by ethylene glycol and heat: X-ray Diffraction and infrared spectroscopy studies. In:
Tanzania Journal of Science, 37, 167-178. Accessed: 19-02-2023
Lynn, C. J., Dhir, R. K., Ghataora, G. S. (2018). Environmental impacts of sewage sludge ash in
construction: Leaching assessment. In: Resources, Conservation & Recycling, 136, 306-314.
Available from: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.resconrec.2018.04.029. Accessed 08-05-2023.
Malkanthi, S. N., Balthazaar, N., & Perera, A.A.D.A.J. (2020). Lime stabilization for compressed
stabilized earth blocks with reduced clay and silt. In: Case Studies in Construction Materials,
12. Available from: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cscm.2019.e00326, Accessed 07-03-2023
McGregor, F., Heath, A., Fodde, E., Shea, A. (2014). Conditions affecting the moisture buffering
measurement performed on compressed earth blocks. In: Building and Environment, 75,
104
==PAGE:112==
11-18. Available from: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.buildenv.2014.01.009. Accessed: 20-05-
2023.
Minke, G. (2012). Building with Earth: Design and Technology of a Sustainable Architecture,
Birkhäuser Verlag.
Narayanaswamy, A. H., Walker, P., Reddy, B. V. V., Heath, A. (2020). Mechanical and thermal
properties, and comparative life-cycle impacts of stabilised earth building products. In: Con-
struction and Building Materials, 243. Available from: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.conbuildmat.
2020.118096. Accessed: 19-01-2023.
Nascimento, T. P., Conniff, A. E. S., Moura, J. A. S., Batista, J. M. S., Costa, R. M. P. B., Porto, C.
S., Takaki, G. M. C., Porto, T. S., Porto, A. L. F. (2020). Protease from Mucor subtilissimus
UCP 1262: Evaluation of several specific protease activities and purification of a fibrinolytic
enzyme.
In: An Acad Bras Cienc, 92(4), Available from: https://doi.org/10.1590/0001-
3765202020200882. Accessed: 31-05-2023.
Ottosen, L., M. (2023). Water content, pH, conductivity, leaching and water solubility of the ash.
In: AshCycle: Ash Characterization procedure (pp. 30-32).
Ottosen, L., M, Kirkelund, G., M., Jensen, P., E. (2015). Udvinding af fosfor fra slamaske med
elektrokemisk teknik: Miljøprojekt nr. 1702,201. Miljøstyrelsen. ISBN: 978-87-93352-10-0.
Ottosen, L. M., Kirkelund, G. M., & Jensen, P. E. (2013). Extracting phosphorous from incinerated
sewage sludge ash rich in iron or aluminum. In: Chemosphere, 91(7), 963-969. Available
from: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.chemosphere.2013.01.101. Accessed: 26-4-2023.
Payá, J., Monzó, J., Borrachero, M. V., Soriano, L. (2019). Sewage sludge ash. In: Brito, J.,
Agrela, F. (2019), New Trends in Eco-efficient and Recycled Concrete (pp. 121-152). Wood-
head Publishing. Available from: https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-08-102480-5.00005-1. Ac-
cessed: 18-01-2023.
Reddy, B. V. V. (2022). Compressed Earth Block & Rammed Earth Structures. Springer Singa-
pore. Available from: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-16-7877-6. Accessed 30-05-2023.
Schnell, E. (2016). Vejledninger. Arktisk Teknologi og Bæredygtige Løsninger, DTU.
Schroeder, H. Sustainable Building with Earth. Springer. DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-19491-2. Ac-
cessed: 01-16-2023.
105
==PAGE:113==
Taki, K., Choudhary, S., Gupta, S., Kumar, M. (2020). Enhancement of geotechnical properties
of municipal sewage sludge for sustainable utilization as engineering construction material.
Journal of Cleaner Production, 251 Available from: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2019.119723.
Accessed: 12-03-2023
UNEP Global Environmental Alert Service (GEAS) (2014). Sand, rarer than one thinks. Available
from: https://wedocs.unep.org/handle/20.500.11822/8665. Accessed 22-05-23.
United nations. (n.d). Goal 12: Ensure sustainable consumption and production patterns. Avail-
able from: https://sdgs.un.org/goals/goal12. Accessed: 29-05-2023.
Wiehle, P., Simon, S., Baier, J., Dennin, L. (2022). Influence of relative humidity on the strength
and stiffness of unstabilised earth blocks and earth masonry mortar. In: Construction and
Building Materials, 342. Available from: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.conbuildmat.2022.128026.
Accessed: 28-04-2023.
106
==PAGE:114==
9
|
Appendix
The appendix is divided into three main sections:
A Characterization of soil
B Characterization of SSA
C Production and testing of specimens
The sections cover measurements and calculations of the experiments.
In the appendix the following abbreviation may also have been used: Y = #0249, YS = #0250, R
= #0251, RS = #0252, SSA = #0013.
107
==PAGE:115==
A
|
Characterization of soil
The following pages contains:
• A.1 Loss on ignition
• A.2 Density of solid particles
• A.3 Determination of water content
• A.4 Particle size distribution
• A.5 Atterberg limits
• A.6 Linear shrinkage
108
==PAGE:116==
A.1
Loss on ignition
Table A.1: Loss on ignition
Soil
Test
𝑚𝑒𝑚𝑝𝑡𝑦𝑐𝑟𝑢𝑐𝑖𝑏𝑙𝑒
𝑚𝑖𝑛𝑖𝑡𝑖𝑎𝑙
𝑚550𝐶
𝑚950𝐶
LOI - 550°C
LOI - 950 °C
[g]
[g]
[g]
[g]
[%]
[%]
#0249
1
22.4367
2.5328
2.4635
2.2493
2.74
11.19
#0249
2
19.6678
2.5046
2.4303
2.2257
2.97
11.14
#0249
3
19.9945
2.5373
2.4671
2.2548
2.77
11.13
Avg
2.82
11.15
Std
0.13
0.03
#0250
1
20.5472
2.5049
2.4364
2.2767
2.73
9.11
#0250
2
19.0875
2.5494
2.4858
2.3148
2.49
9.20
#0250
3
16.8566
2.5272
2.4539
2.293
2.90
9.27
Avg
2.71
9.19
Std
0.20
0.08
#0251
1
18.3061
2.5397
2.4708
2.4357
2.71
4.09
#0251
2
17.3135
2.5623
2.4902
2.4536
2.81
4.24
#0251
3
18.6208
2.5311
2.4633
2.4269
2.68
4.12
Avg
2.74
4.15
Std
0.07
0.08
#0252
1
19.7703
2.5406
2.4744
2.4358
2.61
4.13
#0252
2
21.5855
2.5215
2.4499
2.4109
2.84
4.39
#0252
3
16.9455
2.519
2.4462
2.4113
2.89
4.28
Avg
2.78
4.26
Std
0.15
0.13
The loss on ignition is calculated using formula 3.2.
109
==PAGE:117==
A.2
Density of solid particles
Table A.2: Density of solid particles
Soil
Test
Moist mass
𝑚0
𝑚1
𝑚2
𝑚3
𝑚4
𝜌𝑤
𝜌𝑠
[g]
[g]
[g]
[g]
[g]
[g]
[𝑀𝑔/𝑚3]
[𝑀𝑔/𝑚3]
#0249
1
25.02
47.885
149.68
68.759
162.9
20.874
0.99802
2.722
#0249
2
25.06
47.948
147.894
68.855
161.167
20.907
0.99802
2.733
#0249
3
25.004
47.03
147.996
67.890
161.315
20.860
0.99802
2.761
Average
2.739
#0250
1
25.424
47.339
149.742
68.305
163.032
20.966
0.99802
2.726
#0250
2
25.265
48.036
149.93
68.871
163.538
20.835
0.99802
2.877
#0250
3
25.342
47.729
148.772
68.627
162.007
20.898
0.99802
2.722
Average
2.775
#0251
1
25.06
41.41
141.321
62.347
154.605
20.937
0.99802
2.730
#0251
2
25
40.803
140.859
61.690
154.022
20.887
0.99802
2.699
#0251
3
25.1
47.414
146.595
68.384
159.867
20.970
0.99802
2.719
Average
2.716
#0252
1
25.123
41.41
141.321
61.511
154.238
20.101
0.99802
2.792
#0252
2
25.227
40.803
140.859
60.987
153.750
20.184
0.99802
2.762
#0252
3
25.259
47.414
146.595
67.624
159.460
20.210
0.99802
2.746
Average
2.767
The density of solid particles is calculated using formula 3.3. The temperature of the control liquid
was determined to 21°C, which according to table 1 (DS/CEN ISO/TS 17892-3:2004) corresponds
to a density of 0.99802 Mg/m3.
110
==PAGE:118==
Table A.3: Water content for determination of dry mass
Soil
Test
𝑚1
𝑚2
𝑚𝑐
𝑤
[g]
[g]
[g]
[%]
#0249
1
65.355
61.820
44.024
19.9
#0249
2
60.960
57.430
39.658
19.9
Average
19.9
#0250
1
60.468
56.865
39.845
21.2
#0250
2
60.151
56.640
40.202
21.4
Average
21.3
#0251
1
60.043
56.670
39.856
20.1
#0251
2
59.816
56.583
39.853
19.3
Average
19.7
#0252
1
61.200
56.932
39.865
25.0
#0252
2
60.744
56.524
39.617
25.0
Average
25.0
The dry mass of the pycnometer with the dry specimen in table A.2 is calculated by 𝑚2 =
𝑚1
100%+𝑤+
𝑚0. Thus the dry mass of the specimen in table A.2 is calculated as 𝑚4 = 𝑚2 −𝑚0.
111
==PAGE:119==
A.3
Determination of water content
Table A.4: Water content - dried at 105 °C
Soil
Test
𝑚1
𝑚2
𝑚𝑐
𝑚𝑤
𝑚𝑑
𝑤
[g]
[g]
[g]
[g]
[g]
[%]
#0249 - Y
#1
81.61
77.59
59.23
4.02
18.36
21.895
#0249 - Y
#2
74.66
69.53
46.06
5.13
23.47
21.858
#0249 - Y
#3
86.71
82.19
61.46
4.52
20.73
21.804
Average
21.852
#0250 - YS
#1
87.48
82.2
59.13
5.28
23.07
22.887
#0250 - YS
#2
80.04
73.66
45.63
6.38
28.03
22.761
#0250 - YS
#3
70.91
66.09
45.19
4.82
20.9
23.062
Average
22.903
#0251 - R
#1
65.73
62.06
45.60
3.67
16.46
22.296
#0251 - R
#2
73.33
68.22
44.68
5.11
23.54
21.708
#0251 - R
#3
68.97
64.74
45.40
4.23
19.34
21.872
Average
21.959
#0252 - RS
#1
68.71
63.56
43.49
5.15
20.07
25.660
#0252 - RS
#2
68.80
63.73
44.08
5.07
19.65
25.802
#0252 - RS
#3
88.12
81.78
58.54
6.34
23.24
27.281
Average
26.247
A.4
Particle size distribution
A.4.1
Sieving
Before the sieving tower could be performed, the fines (<63µm) was washed out.
112
==PAGE:120==
Table A.5: Washing out the fines
#0249
#0250
#0251
#0252
[g]
[g]
[g]
[g]
Initial dry material
471.40
421.2
433.2
442.5
Container, no material
91.12
107.528
104.935
104.933
63µm sieve, no material
269
269
269
269.2
63µm sieve + material >63µm
269.30
269.1
269.1
269.3
Container + dry material >63µm
207.05
252.623
287.66
300.795
Final dry mass >63µm
115.93
145.095
182.725
195.862
The final dry mass was added to a sieving tower and shaken for a minimum of 10 minutes. The
particle size distribution for the coarse fraction of the soil is listed in the tables below.
Table A.6: 0249 - Y >63µm
Size
Sieve
Sieve + material
Material
Cum
𝑓𝑛
100 −𝑓𝑛
[mm]
[g]
[g]
[g]
[g]
[%]
[%]
4
437.82
437.93
0.11
0.11
0.023
99.98
2
385.87
388.69
2.82
2.93
0.622
99.38
1
325.7
337.56
11.86
14.79
3.137
96.86
0.5
306
327
21
35.79
7.592
92.41
0.25
271.99
301.12
29.13
64.92
13.772
86.23
0.125
257.07
285.15
28.08
93
19.728
80.27
0.063
232.38
238.95
22.14
115.14
24.425
75.57
Pan
243.15
243.77
0.62
115.76
24.557
75.44
Washed
355.47
Sum
471.23
Initial dry mass = 471.4 g
Final dry mass >63µm = 115.93 g
Deviation = 0.036 %
113
==PAGE:121==
Table A.7: 0250 - YS >63µm
Size
Sieve
Sieve + material
Material
Cum
𝑓𝑛
100 −𝑓𝑛
[mm]
[g]
[g]
[g]
[g]
[%]
[%]
4
437.8
437.95
0.15
0.15
0.04
99.96
2
385.81
386.8
0.99
1.14
0.27
99.73
1
325.67
333.45
7.78
8.92
2.12
97.88
0.5
305.37
330.07
24.7
33.62
7.98
92.02
0.25
271.76
329.28
57.52
91.14
21.64
78.36
0.125
257.04
287.81
30.77
121.91
28.94
71.06
0.063
232.4
254.13
21.73
143.64
34.10
65.90
Pan
243.16
244.58
1.42
145.06
34.44
65.56
Washed
276.11
Sum
421.17
Initial dry mass = 421.2 g
Final dry mass >63µm = 145.095 g
Deviation = 0.008 %
Table A.8: 0251 - R >63µm
Size
Sieve
Sieve + material
Material
Cum
𝑓𝑛
100 −𝑓𝑛
[mm]
[g]
[g]
[g]
[g]
[%]
[%]
4
437.8
437.97
0.17
0.17
0.04
99.96
2
385.85
388.67
2.82
2.99
0.69
99.31
1
325.7
341.46
15.76
18.75
4.33
95.67
0.5
305.58
327.58
22
40.75
9.41
90.59
0.25
271.83
311.32
39.49
80.24
18.52
81.48
0.125
257.05
310.19
53.14
133.38
30.79
69.21
0.08
272.4
302.37
29.97
163.35
37.71
62.29
0.063
232.36
246.46
14.1
177.45
40.96
59.04
Pan
243.86
248.21
4.35
181.8
41.97
58.03
Washed
250.48
Sum
432.28
Initial dry mass = 433.2 g
Final dry mass >63µm = 182.725 g
114
==PAGE:122==
Deviation = 0.214 %
Table A.9: 0252 - RS >63µm
Size
Sieve
Sieve + material
Material
Cum
𝑓𝑛
100 −𝑓𝑛
[mm]
[g]
[g]
[g]
[g]
[%]
[%]
4
437.8
437.98
0.18
0.18
0.04
99.96
2
385.81
387.4
1.59
1.77
0.40
99.60
1
325.69
338.72
13.03
14.8
3.34
96.66
0.5
305.44
332.29
26.85
41.65
9.41
90.59
0.25
271.61
322.82
51.21
92.86
20.99
79.01
0.125
257.08
310.15
53.07
145.93
32.98
67.02
0.063
232.5
277.96
45.46
191.39
43.25
56.75
Pan
243.16
247.59
4.43
195.82
44.25
55.75
Washed
246.64
Sum
442.46
Initial dry mass = 433.2 g
Final dry mass >63µm = 182.725 g
Deviation = 0.214 %
Table A.10: 0-4mm sand
Size
Sieve
Sieve + material
Material
Cum
𝑓𝑛
100 −𝑓𝑛
[mm]
[g]
[g]
[g]
[g]
[%]
[%]
4
437.82
442.88
5.06
5.06
0.86
99.14
2
385.81
412.97
27.16
32.22
5.47
94.53
1
325.69
380.88
55.19
87.41
14.84
85.16
0.5
305.4
417.52
112.12
199.53
33.87
66.13
0.25
271.65
531
259.35
458.88
77.89
22.11
0.125
257.05
376.07
119.02
577.9
98.09
1.91
0.063
232.41
242.27
9.86
587.76
99.76
0.24
Pan
243.15
244.44
1.29
589.05
99.98
0.02
Sum
589.05
Initial dry mass = 589.17 g
Final dry mass >63µm = 589.17 g
115
==PAGE:123==
Deviation = 0.020 %
Table A.11: 0-2mm sand
Size
100 −𝑓𝑛
[mm]
[%]
4
99.96
2
99.77
1
98.00
0.5
90.19
0.25
69.16
0.125
41.37
0.063
0.18
The particle size distribution for the 0-2mm sand was provided by Ida Maria Geiysztor Bertelsen.
Table A.12: Particle size distribution for the theoretical addition of 15% 0-4mm sand
Size
100 −𝑓𝑛
Amount passing sieve
Amount retained
[mm]
[%]
[g]
[g]
8
100
66.38
0.00
4
99.14
65.80
0.57
2
94.53
62.75
3.06
1
85.16
56.53
6.22
0.5
66.13
43.90
12.63
0.25
22.11
14.68
29.22
0.125
1.91
1.27
13.41
0.063
0.24
0.16
1.11
Pan
0.16
Sum
66.22
Dry mass of soil = 442.5 g
15% sand = 66.38 g
Soil + sand = 508.88 g
116
==PAGE:124==
Table A.13: Particle size distribution for the theoretical addition of 15% 0-2mm sand
Size
100 −𝑓𝑛
Amount passing sieve
Amount retained
[mm]
[%]
[g]
[g]
8
100
66.38
0
4
99.96
66.35
0.02
2
99.77
66.22
0.13
1
98.00
65.05
1.17
0.5
90.19
59.86
5.19
0.25
69.16
45.91
13.95
0.125
41.37
27.46
18.45
0.063
0.18
0.12
27.34
Pan
0.12
Sum
66.26
Dry mass of soil = 442.5 g
15% sand = 66.38 g
Soil + sand = 508.88 g
Table A.14: 0252 - RS modified with 15% 0-4mm sand (theoretically)
Size
Sieve
Sieve + material
Material
Sand added
Cum
𝑓𝑛
100 −𝑓𝑛
[mm]
[g]
[g]
[g]
[g]
[g]
[%]
[%]
4
437.8
437.98
0.18
0.57
0.75
0.17
99.83
2
385.81
387.4
1.59
3.06
5.40
1.22
98.78
1
325.69
338.72
13.03
6.22
24.65
5.57
94.43
0.5
305.44
332.29
26.85
12.63
64.13
14.49
85.51
0.25
271.61
322.82
51.21
29.22
144.56
32.67
67.33
0.125
257.08
310.15
53.07
13.41
211.04
47.69
52.31
0.063
232.5
277.96
45.46
1.11
257.61
58.22
41.78
Pan
243.16
247.59
4.43
0.16
262.20
59.25
40.75
Washed
246.64
Sum
442.46
66.38
Initial dry mass = 442.5 g
Final dry mass >63µm = 195.86 g
117
==PAGE:125==
Dry mass sand = 66.38 g
Soil + sand = 508.88 g
Deviation = 0.008 %
Table A.15: 0252 - RS modified with 15% 0-2mm sand (theoretically)
Size
Sieve
Sieve + material
Material
Sand added
Cum
𝑓𝑛
100 −𝑓𝑛
[mm]
[g]
[g]
[g]
[g]
[g]
[%]
[%]
4
437.8
437.98
0.18
0.02
0.20
0.05
99.95
2
385.81
387.4
1.59
0.13
1.92
0.43
99.57
1
325.69
338.72
13.03
1.17
16.13
3.64
96.36
0.5
305.44
332.29
26.85
5.19
48.16
10.88
89.12
0.25
271.61
322.82
51.21
13.95
113.33
25.61
74.39
0.125
257.08
310.15
53.07
18.45
184.85
41.77
58.23
0.063
232.5
277.96
45.46
27.34
257.65
58.23
41.77
Pan
243.16
247.59
4.43
0.12
262.20
59.25
40.75
Washed
246.64
Sum
442.46
66.38
Initial dry mass = 442.5 g
Final dry mass >63µm = 195.86 g
Dry mass sand = 66.38 g
Soil + sand = 508.88 g
Deviation = 0.008 %
A.4.2
Sedimentation - Hydrometer method
A.4.2.1
Calibration of hydrometer
The hydrometer is calibrated according to Annex A in DS/CEN ISO/TS 17892-4:2004.
The effective depth, 𝐻𝑟, is calculated by formula A.1
𝐻𝑟= 𝐻+ 0.5(ℎ−𝑉ℎ
900 𝐿)
[mm]
(A.1)
where,
H is the length from neck of bulb to graduation 𝑅ℎ[mm].
118
==PAGE:126==
Table A.16: Properties for calibrating hydrometer
Volume of bulb
𝑉ℎ
98.5
ml
Length of bulb
h
170
mm
Distance from 100ml and 1000 ml scale mark
L (#0250, #0252)
300
mm
Distance from 100ml and 1000 ml scale mark,
L (#0249)
315
mm
Distance from 100ml and 1000 ml scale mark
L (#0251)
280
mm
Distance from neck of bulb to lowest calibration mark
N
9
mm
𝑉ℎis determined by weighing the hydrometer.
L is determined by pouring 100ml water in and measure the distance from top of the water to the
1000ml scale mark.
119
==PAGE:127==
Table A.17: Calculation of the effective depth, 𝐻𝑟
Mark
𝑑𝑛
H
𝐻𝑟(#0250, #0252)
𝐻𝑟(#0249)
𝐻𝑟(#0251)
[-]
[mm]
[mm]
[mm]
[mm]
[mm]
60
0
9
77.583
76.763
78.678
55
9.5
18.5
87.083
86.263
88.178
50
19
28
96.583
95.763
97.678
45
28.5
37.5
106.083
105.263
107.178
40
38
47
115.583
114.763
116.678
35
48
57
125.583
124.763
126.678
34
50
59
127.583
126.763
128.678
33
52
61
129.583
128.763
130.678
32
54
63
131.583
130.763
132.678
31
56
65
133.583
132.763
134.678
30
58
67
135.583
134.763
136.678
29
60
69
137.583
136.763
138.678
28
62
71
139.583
138.763
140.678
27
64
73
141.583
140.763
142.678
26
66
75
143.583
142.763
144.678
25
68
77
145.583
144.763
146.678
24
70
79
147.583
146.763
148.678
23
72
81
149.583
148.763
150.678
22
74
83
151.583
150.763
152.678
21
76
85
153.583
152.763
154.678
20
78
87
155.583
154.763
156.678
19
80.1
89.1
157.683
156.863
158.778
18
82.2
91.2
159.783
158.963
160.878
17
84.3
93.3
161.883
161.063
162.978
16
86.4
95.4
163.983
163.163
165.078
15
88.5
97.5
166.083
165.263
167.178
14
90.6
99.6
168.183
167.363
169.278
13
92.7
101.7
170.283
169.463
171.378
12
94.8
103.8
172.383
171.563
173.478
11
96.9
105.9
174.483
173.663
175.578
10
99
108
176.583
175.763
177.678
5
110
119
187.583
186.763
188.678
0
121
130
198.583
197.763
199.678
120
==PAGE:128==
A.4.2.2
Measurements
Table A.18: Calculation of dry mass <63µm
#0249
#0251
#0250
#0252
Wet mass, 𝑚𝑤
[g]
50.46
50.2
50.61
50.79
Water content, w
[%]
20.71
21.70
22.59
26.22
Dry mass, m
[g]
41.80
41.25
41.28
40.24
The water content, w, is determined according to DS/CEN ISO/TS 17892-1:2004, and is presented
in table A.19.
Table A.19: Water content - Particle size distribution
Soil
𝑚1
𝑚2
𝑚𝑐
𝑚𝑤
𝑚𝑑
𝑤
[g]
[g]
[g]
[g]
[g]
[%]
#0249
73.036
67.712
41.50
5.32
25.713
20.71
#0251
70.922
65.452
40.25
5.47
25.202
21.70
#0250
71.55
66.818
45.87
4.732
20.948
22.59
#0252
80.96
75.827
56.25
5.133
19.577
26.22
Table A.20: Hydrometer measurements and calculations - #0249
t
𝑅0 𝑅0,𝑐𝑜𝑟
T
CT
𝑅′
ℎ
𝑅ℎ
T
𝑅𝑑
K
𝐾𝑜𝑙𝑑𝐾𝑚𝑜𝑑
𝑑𝑖
𝜂
𝐻𝑟
[min]
[-]
[-]
[°C]
[-]
[-]
[-]
[°C] [-]
[%]
[%]
[%]
[mm]
[𝑚𝑃𝑎· 𝑠]
[mm]
2.58
1
1.0002 21.5 0.0002 30 30.9 21.5 29 109.2 68.0 51.40 0.0298
0.9687
134.763
6.38
2
2.0002 21.5 0.0002 28 28.9 21.5 26
97.9
61.0 46.09 0.0194
0.9687
138.763
10.75
1
1.0002 21.5 0.0002 27 27.9 21.5 26
97.9
61.0 46.09 0.0150
0.9687
140.763
18.42
1
1.0002 21.5 0.0002 25 25.9 21.5 24
90.4
56.3 42.54 0.0116
0.9687
144.763
30.28
1
1.0002 21.5 0.0002 23 23.9 21.5 22
82.9
51.6 39.00 0.0092
0.9687
148.763
46.75
2
2.0002
21
0.0002 22 22.9
21
20
75.3
46.9 35.45 0.0075
0.9798
150.763
81.07
1
1.0002
21
0.0002 20 20.9
21
19
71.6
44.6 33.68 0.0057
0.9798
154.763
121.50
1
1.0002
21
0.0002 18 18.9
21
17
64.0
39.9 30.13 0.0047
0.9798
158.963
242.20
2
2.0002
21
0.0002 16 16.9
21
14
52.7
32.8 24.82 0.0034
0.9798
163.163
482.92
2
2.0002
21
0.0002 14 14.9
21
12
45.2
28.1 21.27 0.0024
0.9798
167.363
1441.50
2
2.0002
21
0.0002 11 11.9
21
9
33.9
21.1 15.95 0.0014
0.9798
173.663
121
==PAGE:129==
Table A.21: Hydrometer measurements and calculations - #0250
t
𝑅0
𝑅0,𝑐𝑜𝑟
T
CT
𝑅′
ℎ
𝑅ℎ
T
𝑅𝑑
K
𝐾𝑜𝑙𝑑𝐾𝑚𝑜𝑑
𝑑𝑖
𝜂
𝐻𝑟
[min]
[-]
[-]
[°C]
[-]
[-]
[-]
[°C]
[-]
[%]
[%]
[%]
[mm]
[𝑚𝑃𝑎· 𝑠]
[mm]
2.50
2
2.0002
0.0002
25 25.9
23.0 87.01 54.2 57.34 0.0313
0.9798
145.583
4.67
2
2.0002
0.0002
24 24.9
22.0 83.23 51.8 54.84 0.0231
0.9798
147.583
6.08
2
2.0002
0.0002
23 23.9
21.0 79.44 49.5 52.35 0.0203
0.9798
149.583
8.25
2
2.0002
0.0002
23 23.9
21.0 79.44 49.5 52.35 0.0175
0.9798
149.583
9.08
2
2.0002
21
0.0002
22 22.9
21
20.0 75.66 47.1 49.86 0.0168
0.9798
151.583
22.17
2
2.0002
21
0.0002
20 20.9
18.0 68.09 42.4 44.87 0.0109
0.9798
155.583
30.67
2
2.0002
21
0.0002
20 20.9
21
18.0 68.09 42.4 44.87 0.0092
0.9798
155.583
60.93
2
2.0002
21
0.0002
18 18.9
21
16.0 60.53 37.7 39.89 0.0066
0.9798
159.783
120.00
2
2.0002
21
0.0002
16 16.9
21
14.0 52.96 33.0 34.90 0.0048
0.9798
163.983
241.58
2
2.00024 21.2 0.00024 14 14.9 21.5 12.0 45.40 28.3 29.91 0.0034
0.9754
168.183
481.17
2
2.0002
21
0.0002
12 12.9 21.5 10.0 37.83 23.6 24.93 0.0025
0.9798
172.383
1440.83
2
2.0003
21.5
0.0003
10 10.9 21.5
8.0
30.26 18.8 19.94 0.0014
0.9687
176.583
Table A.22: Hydrometer measurements and calculations - #0251
t
𝑅0 𝑅0,𝑐𝑜𝑟
T
CT
𝑅′
ℎ
𝑅ℎ
T
𝑅𝑑
K
𝐾𝑜𝑙𝑑𝐾𝑚𝑜𝑑
𝑑𝑖
𝜂
𝐻𝑟
[min]
[-]
[-]
[°C]
[-]
[-]
[-]
[°C] [-]
[%]
[%]
[%]
[mm]
[𝑚𝑃𝑎· 𝑠]
[mm]
3.67
1
1.0002
21
0.0002 21 21.9
21
20 76.7 47.7 45.27 0.0271
0.9798
154.678
7.83
2
2.0002
21
0.0002 19 19.9
21
17 65.2 40.6 38.48 0.0188
0.9798
158.778
11.92
1
1.0002
21
0.0002 19 19.9
21
18 69.0 43.0 40.74 0.0152
0.9798
158.778
19.50
1
1.0002
21
0.0002 17 17.9
21
16 61.3 38.2 36.22 0.0121
0.9798
162.978
31.17
1
1.0002
21
0.0002 16 16.9
21
15 57.5 35.8 33.95 0.0096
0.9798
165.078
47.75
2
2.0002
21
0.0002 16 16.9
21
14 53.7 33.4 31.69 0.0078
0.9798
165.078
82.03
1
1.0002
21
0.0002 15 15.9
21
14 53.7 33.4 31.69 0.0060
0.9798
167.178
122.37
1
1.0002
21
0.0002 14 14.9
21
13 49.8 31.0 29.42 0.0049
0.9798
169.278
243.40
2
2.0002
21
0.0002 13 13.9
21
11 42.2 26.3 24.90 0.0035
0.9798
171.378
483.60
2
2.0002
21
0.0002 12 12.9
21
10 38.3 23.9 22.63 0.0025
0.9798
173.478
1442.50
2
2.0002
21
0.0002 11 11.9
21
9
34.5 21.5 20.37 0.0015
0.9798
175.578
122
==PAGE:130==
Table A.23: Hydrometer measurements and calculations - #0252
t
𝑅0
𝑅0,𝑐𝑜𝑟
T
CT
𝑅′
ℎ
𝑅ℎ
T
𝑅𝑑
K
𝐾𝑜𝑙𝑑𝐾𝑚𝑜𝑑
𝑑𝑖
𝜂
𝐻𝑟
[min]
[-]
[-]
[°C]
[-]
[-]
[-]
[°C]
[-]
[%]
[%]
[%]
[mm] [𝑚𝑃𝑎· 𝑠]
[mm]
2.33
1
1.0002
0.0002 19 19.9
18.0 69.86 43.5 39.65 0.034
0.9798
157.683
4.50
1.5 1.5002
0.0002 18 18.9
16.5 64.04 39.9 36.34 0.024
0.9798
159.783
6.17
1.5 1.5002
0.0002 18 18.9
16.5 64.04 39.9 36.34 0.021
0.9798
159.783
11.25
2
2.0002
21
0.0002 17 17.9
21
15.0 58.22 36.2 33.04 0.016
0.9798
161.883
15.18
2
2.0002
21
0.0002 17 17.9
15.0 58.22 36.2 33.04 0.013
0.9798
161.883
29.42
2
2.0002
21
0.0002 16 16.9
21
14.0 54.34 33.8 30.84 0.010
0.9798
163.983
61.63
2
2.0002
21
0.0002 15 15.9
21
13.0 50.46 31.4 28.63 0.007
0.9798
166.083
120.25
2
2.0002
21
0.0002 14 14.9
21
12.0 46.57 29.0 26.43 0.005
0.9798
168.183
241.17
2
2.0002
21
0.0002 13 13.9 21.5 11.0 42.69 26.6 24.23 0.003
0.9687
170.283
480.83
2
2.0002
21
0.0002 12 12.9 21.5 10.0 38.81 24.2 22.02 0.002
0.9687
172.383
1441.08
2
2.0002
21
0.0002 10 10.9 21.5
8.0
31.05 19.3 17.62 0.001
0.9687
176.583
𝑅0,𝑐𝑜𝑟takes into account a temperature correction, thus 𝑅0,𝑐𝑜𝑟= 𝑅0 + 𝐶𝑇.
𝑅ℎis the true hydrometer reading, which is calculated by 𝑅ℎ= 𝑅′
ℎ+ 𝐶𝑚, where 𝐶𝑚is a meniscus
correction.
𝐾𝑜𝑙𝑑refers to the fraction smaller than equivalent diameter calculated by using the the old standard
DS 405.8 (1978), which uses a correction factor for particle densities greater than 2.65 𝑀𝑔/𝑚3.
This has been used for joining the sedimentation curve from #0249 with the sieving curve, as the
sedimentation curve for K by using the standard from 2004 or 2016, ended with a fraction greater
than 100%.
𝐾𝑚𝑜𝑑is the modified fraction, which is joined together with the curve from the sieving.
123
==PAGE:131==
A.5
Atterberg limits
A.5.1
Fall-cone measurements
Table A.24: Cone penetration [mm]
Test
#0249
#0250
#0251
#0252
#0252-mod
0.1
6
6
6
6
5
0.2
6
6
6
6
5
1.1
7
7
7
8
7
1.2
7
7
7
8
7
2.1
8
8
9
10
10
2.2.
8
8
9
10
10
3.1
11
9
10
11
12
3.2
11
9
10
11
12
4.1
14
11
15
12.5
15
4.2
14
11
15
12.5
15
Table A.25: Measurements for determination of water content
Test
#0249
#0250
#0251
#0252
#0252-mod
[g]
[g]
[g]
[g]
𝑚𝑐
1
41.956
42.378
42.049
40.064
41.737
𝑚𝑐
2
39.834
39.99
41.709
39.902
41.925
𝑚𝑐
3
39.845
39.747
41.915
41.649
41.669
𝑚𝑐
4
39.624
41.012
41.755
40.226
40.154
𝑚𝑐
5
39.643
41.924
39.112
39.728
41.712
𝑚1
1
64.501
67
63.503
64.297
64.305
𝑚1
2
65.122
71.914
68.313
65.809
58.884
𝑚1
3
62.326
67.163
67.661
65.358
60.535
𝑚1
4
62.931
65.437
67.921
69.952
59.939
𝑚1
5
66.905
65.477
60.208
65.318
67.729
𝑚2
1
58.684
61.276
58.078
58.206
59.392
𝑚2
2
58.392
64.316
61.28
58.849
54.774
𝑚2
3
56.004
60.154
60.584
58.813
55.518
𝑚2
4
55.828
59.048
60.366
61.518
54.397
𝑚2
5
58.034
58.706
53.922
57.766
60.01
124
==PAGE:132==
The water content is calculated by using formula 3.4, with the measurements from table A.25. The
results for each of the five measurements are shown in table A.26.
Table A.26: Water content - Fall-cone test
Test
#0249
#0250
#0251
#0252
#0252 - mod
[%]
[%]
[%]
[%]
𝑤
1
34.7740
30.2889
33.8449
33.5740
27.8278
𝑤
2
36.2647
31.2341
35.9358
36.7340
31.9869
𝑤
3
39.1237
34.3461
37.9078
38.1321
36.2264
𝑤
4
43.8349
35.4236
40.5943
39.6111
38.9103
𝑤
5
48.2355
40.3468
42.4443
41.8672
42.1849
A.5.2
Plasticity measurements
Table A.27: Measurements for determination of plastic limit
Test
#0249
#0250
#0251
#0251
#0252 - mod
𝑚𝑐
1
41.74
42.05
41.72
41.63
41.71
𝑚𝑐
2
40.04
39.74
40.30
41.75
41.70
𝑚1
1
53.57
55.91
50.67
53.73
53.55
𝑚1
2
52.70
51.94
50.65
50.85
51.78
𝑚2
1
51.84
53.92
49.32
51.82
51.74
𝑚2
2
50.83
50.28
49.10
49.58
50.30
𝑤
1
17.11
16.71
17.72
18.72
18.04
𝑤
2
17.32
15.69
17.65
16.24
17.18
Difference in 𝑤
[%]
-0.012
0.065
0.004
0.153
0.050
Plastic limit, 𝑤𝑃
[%]
17.22
16.20
17.68
17.48
17.61
The plastic limit is calculated as the average water content of the two measurements of 𝑤.
125
==PAGE:133==
A.6
Linear shrinkage
Table A.28: Linear shrinkage
#0249 - G
#0250 - GS
#0251 - R
#0252 - RS
#0252 - mod
𝐿0
139.75
139.57
139.92
139.83
140
𝐿𝐷,𝑡𝑜𝑝
123.45
126.56
121.8
124.58
124.2
𝐿𝐷,𝑏𝑜𝑡𝑡𝑜𝑚
123.4
126.69
120.49
125.11
124.02
𝐿𝐷,3𝑟𝑑𝑚𝑒𝑎𝑠𝑢𝑟𝑒
125.87
124.77
124.48
𝐿𝐷,𝑎𝑣𝑔
123.425
126.37
121.145
124.82
124.23
Δ𝐿[mm]
16.33
13.20
18.775
15.01
15.77
Linear shrinkage [%]
11.68
9.46
13.42
10.73
11.26
where 𝐿0 is the original length [mm], 𝐿𝐷is the length of oven dry specimen [mm].
126
==PAGE:134==
B
|
Characterization of SSA
The following pages contains:
• Particle size distribution of SSA and Qz (Laserdiffraction with ethanol)
• pH and conductivity of SSA
127
==PAGE:135==
Sample:
Start amount:
g
Date:
27-03-2023
>250µm:
g
made of:
Ebbas
<250µm:
g
Solvent:
Ethanol
Particle size
Test
Test
Test
Calc.
Calc.
Calc.
Calc.
[µm]
1
2
3
avg
std
1
2
3
avg
0.01
0
0.011
0
0
0
0
0.000
0
0
0
0
0
0.013
0
0
0
0
0.000
0
0
0
0
0
0.015
0
0
0
0
0.000
0
0
0
0
0
0.017
0
0
0
0
0.000
0
0
0
0
0
0.020
0
0
0
0
0.000
0
0
0
0
0
0.023
0
0
0
0
0.000
0
0
0
0
0
0.026
0
0
0
0
0.000
0
0
0
0
0
0.030
0
0
0
0
0.000
0
0
0
0
0
0.035
0
0
0
0
0.000
0
0
0
0
0
0.040
0
0
0
0
0.000
0
0
0
0
0
0.046
0
0
0
0
0.000
0
0
0
0
0
0.052
0
0
0
0
0.000
0
0
0
0
0
0.060
0
0
0
0
0.000
0
0
0
0
0
0.069
0
0
0
0
0.000
0
0
0
0
0
0.079
0
0
0
0
0.000
0
0
0
0
0
0.091
0
0
0
0
0.000
0
0
0
0
0
0.105
0
0
0
0
0.000
0
0
0
0
0
0.120
0
0
0
0
0.000
0
0
0
0
0
0.138
0
0
0
0
0.000
0
0
0
0
0
0.158
0
0
0
0
0.000
0
0
0
0
0
0.182
0
0
0
0
0.000
0
0
0
0
0
0.209
0
0
0
0
0.000
0
0
0
0
0
0.240
0
0
0
0
0.000
0
0
0
0
0
0.275
0
0
0
0
0.000
0
0
0
0
0
0.316
0
0
0
0
0.000
0
0
0
0
0
0.363
0
0
0
0
0.000
0
0
0
0
0
0.417
0
0
0
0
0.000
0
0
0
0
0
0.479
0
0
0
0
0.000
0
0
0
0
0
0.550
0
0
0
0
0.000
0
0
0
0
0
0.631
0
0
0
0
0.000
0
0
0
0
0
0.724
0
0
0
0
0.000
0
0
0
0
0
0.832
0
0
0
0
0.000
0
0
0
0
0
0.955
0
0
0
0
0.000
0
0
0
0
0
1.096
0
0
0
0
0.000
0
0
0
0
0
sum((X-µ)^2)
#0013 Avedøre-kruger-4 (knust 
1000rpm I 10 sec)
Laserdiffraction <250µm with ethanol
Page 1 of 3
==PAGE:136==
1.259
0
0
0
0
0.000
0
0
0
0
0
1.445
0
0
0
0
0.000
0
0
0
0
0
1.660
0
0
0
0
0.000
0
0
0
0
0
1.905
0
0
0
0
0.000
0
0
0
0
0
2.188
0.306 0.321 0.336 0.321
0.000 0.015
0.306
0.321
0.336
0.321
2.512
0.600 0.628 0.653 0.627
0.001 0.026
0.906
0.949
0.988
0.948
2.884
0.902 0.943 0.979 0.941
0.003 0.038
1.808
1.891
1.967
1.889
3.311
1.204 1.258 1.305 1.255
0.005 0.050
3.012
3.149
3.272
3.144
3.802
1.482 1.547 1.604 1.544
0.007 0.061
4.494
4.696
4.876
4.688
4.365
1.735 1.808 1.875 1.806
0.010 0.070
6.229
6.504
6.750
6.494
5.012
1.967 2.048 2.122 2.046
0.012 0.078
8.196
8.552
8.873
8.540
5.754
2.189 2.275 2.357 2.273
0.014 0.084
10.384
10.826
11.230
10.813
6.607
2.416 2.506 2.596 2.506
0.016 0.090
12.801
13.333
13.825
13.320
7.586
2.655 2.749 2.845 2.749
0.018 0.095
15.456
16.082
16.670
16.069
8.710
2.913 3.012 3.114 3.013
0.020 0.100
18.369
19.093
19.784
19.082
10.000
3.184 3.287 3.395 3.289
0.022 0.105
21.553
22.381
23.179
22.371
11.482
3.468 3.577 3.689 3.578
0.024 0.111
25.021
25.958
26.868
25.949
13.183
3.745 3.861 3.975 3.860
0.027 0.115
28.766
29.818
30.843
29.809
15.136
4.012 4.136 4.251 4.133
0.029 0.120
32.777
33.954
35.095
33.942
17.378
4.249 4.381 4.495 4.375
0.030 0.123
37.026
38.335
39.589
38.317
19.953
4.451 4.588 4.698 4.579
0.031 0.124
41.477
42.923
44.287
42.896
22.909
4.603 4.743 4.845 4.730
0.030 0.122
46.080
47.666
49.132
47.626
26.303
4.701 4.837 4.928 4.822
0.026 0.114
50.781
52.504
54.060
52.448
30.200
4.740 4.865 4.940 4.848
0.020 0.101
55.521
57.368
59.001
57.297
34.674
4.719 4.823 4.878 4.807
0.013 0.080
60.240
62.191
63.878
62.103
39.811
4.641 4.713 4.741 4.698
0.005 0.051
64.882
66.904
68.620
66.802
45.709
4.510 4.539 4.534 4.528
0.000 0.015
69.392
71.442
73.154
71.329
52.481
4.329 4.306 4.262 4.299
0.002 0.034
73.721
75.749
77.416
75.628
60.256
4.103 4.023 3.935 4.020
0.014 0.084
77.823
79.772
81.351
79.649
69.183
3.832 3.694 3.560 3.696
0.037 0.136
81.655
83.466
84.912
83.344
79.433
3.522 3.330 3.154 3.335
0.068 0.184
85.177
86.796
88.066
86.680
91.201
3.171 2.933 2.724 2.943
0.100 0.223
88.348
89.729
90.790
89.622
104.713
2.788 2.520 2.293 2.534
0.123 0.248
91.136
92.249
93.083
92.156
120.226
2.376 2.094 1.869 2.113
0.129 0.254
93.512
94.343
94.951
94.269
138.038
1.957 1.682 1.476 1.705
0.117 0.241
95.470
96.025
96.428
95.974
158.489
1.539 1.290 1.121 1.317
0.088 0.210
97.009
97.316
97.549
97.291
181.970
1.154 0.949 0.825 0.976
0.055 0.166
98.162
98.265
98.374
98.267
208.930
0.808 0.662 0.584 0.685
0.026 0.114
98.970
98.927
98.958
98.952
239.883
0.529 0.445 0.405 0.460
0.008 0.063
99.500
99.373
99.364
99.412
275.423
0.316 0.290 0.277 0.293
0.001 0.020
99.815
99.662
99.641
99.705
316.228
0.165 0.190 0.194 0.187
0.001 0.016
99.981
99.852
99.835
99.892
363.078
0.019 0.124 0.138 0.092
0.008 0.065 100.000
99.976
99.973
99.984
416.869
0.000 0.024 0.027 0.016
0.000 0.015 100.000 100.000 100.000 100.000
478.630
0
0
0
0
0.000
0
100
100
100
100
549.541
0
0
0
0
0.000
0
100
100
100
100
630.957
0
0
0
0
0.000
0
100
100
100
100
724.436
0
0
0
0
0.000
0
100
100
100
100
Page 2 of 3
==PAGE:137==
831.764
0
0
0
0
0.000
0
100
100
100
100
954.993
0
0
0
0
0.000
0
100
100
100
100
1096.478
0
0
0
0
0.000
0
100
100
100
100
1258.925
0
0
0
0
0.000
0
100
100
100
100
1445.440
0
0
0
0
0.000
0
100
100
100
100
1659.587
0
0
0
0
0.000
0
100
100
100
100
1905.461
0
0
0
0
0.000
0
100
100
100
100
2187.762
0
0
0
0
0.000
0
100
100
100
100
2511.886
0
0
0
0
0.000
0
100
100
100
100
2884.032
0
0
0
0
0.000
0
100
100
100
100
3311.311
0
0
0
0
0.000
0
100
100
100
100
3801.894
0
0
0
0
0.000
0
100
100
100
100
4365.158
0
0
0
0
0.000
0
100
100
100
100
5011.872
0
0
0
0
0.000
0
100
100
100
100
5754.399
0
0
0
0
0.000
0
100
100
100
100
6606.934
0
0
0
0
0.000
0
100
100
100
100
7585.776
0
0
0
0
0.000
0
100
100
100
100
8709.636
0
0
0
0
0.000
0
100
100
100
100
10000
0
0
0
0
0.000
0
100
100
100
100
avg(std)
0.040
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
0.01
0.1
1
10
100
1000
10000
%
d(µm)
#0013 - milled 1000rpm i 10 sec
#0013 A
#0013 B
#0013 C
Page 3 of 3
==PAGE:138==
Result Analysis Report
Vol. Weighted Mean D[4,3]:
%
m²/g
um
Surface Weighted Mean D[3,2]:
0.435
39.556
d(0.9):
Accessory Name:
Span :
3.567
um
Specific Surface Area:
16.23
Operator notes:
Uniformity:
%Vol
Obscuration:
24.526
92.973
Average of 3 measurements from 230327 Sopfie
d(0.1):
um
1.13
13.809
um
5.485
d(0.5):
Volume
  Particle Size Distribution
 0.01 
 0.1 
 1 
 10 
 100 
 1000  3000 
Particle Size (µm)
0 
 10 
 20 
 30 
 40 
 50 
 60 
 70 
 80 
 90 
 100 
Volume (%)
#0013 Avedøre-kruger-4 B_Averaged Result, 27 March 2023 13:48:14
Hydro 2000SM (A)
Result units:
um
Concentration:
0.0294
Weighted Residual:
0.741
%
Size (µm)
0.010
0.011
0.013
0.015
0.017
0.020
0.023
0.026
0.030
0.035
0.040
0.046
0.052
0.060
0.069
0.079
0.091
0.105
Volume In %
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Size (µm)
0.105
0.120
0.138
0.158
0.182
0.209
0.240
0.275
0.316
0.363
0.417
0.479
0.550
0.631
0.724
0.832
0.955
1.096
Volume In %
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Size (µm)
1.096
1.259
1.445
1.660
1.905
2.188
2.512
2.884
3.311
3.802
4.365
5.012
5.754
6.607
7.586
8.710
10.000
11.482
Volume In %
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.32
0.63
0.94
1.26
1.54
1.81
2.05
2.27
2.51
2.75
3.01
3.29
3.58
Size (µm)
11.482
13.183
15.136
17.378
19.953
22.909
26.303
30.200
34.674
39.811
45.709
52.481
60.256
69.183
79.433
91.201
104.713
120.226
Volume In %
3.86
4.13
4.37
4.58
4.73
4.82
4.85
4.81
4.70
4.53
4.30
4.02
3.70
3.34
2.94
2.53
2.11
Size (µm)
120.226
138.038
158.489
181.970
208.930
239.883
275.423
316.228
363.078
416.869
478.630
549.541
630.957
724.436
831.764
954.993
1096.478
1258.925
Volume In %
1.71
1.32
0.98
0.69
0.46
0.29
0.19
0.09
0.02
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Size (µm)
1258.925
1445.440
1659.587
1905.461
2187.762
2511.886
2884.032
3311.311
3801.894
4365.158
5011.872
5754.399
6606.934
7585.776
8709.636
10000.000
Volume In %
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
27 March 2023 13:48:14
Averaged
123-ABC
AshCycle_ethanol
Measured by:
ebbas
Sample bulk lot ref:
Denmark
Sample Name:
Analysed:
Measured:
Sample Source & type:
27 March 2023 13:48:16
#0013 Avedøre-kruger-4 B_Averaged 
SOP Name:
Result Source:
Sensitivity:
Dispersant Name:
Ethanol
Off
Size range:
Flyash dry
Particle RI:
1.360
Result Emulation:
Absorption:
0.020
to
0
Enhanced
Analysis model:
2000.000
Dispersant RI:
1.500
General purpose
Particle Name:
um
Tel := +[44] (0) 1684-892456 Fax +[44] (0) 1684-892789
Malvern, UK
Malvern Instruments Ltd.
Serial Number : MAL1017217
Mastersizer 2000 Ver. 6.01
27/03/2023 13:51:39
Record Number: 8
File name: 230327 Sopfie
==PAGE:139==
Sample:
#0156 Qz
Start amount:
20 g
Date:
31-03-2023
>250µm:
0 g
made of:
Ebbas
<250µm:
20 g
Solvent:
Ethanol
Calc.
Calc.
Calc.
Calc.
A
B
C
Avg
um((X-µ)^2
std
A
B
C
Avg
0.010
0
0
0
0
0.011
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0.013
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0.015
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0.017
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0.020
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0.023
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0.026
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0.030
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0.035
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0.040
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0.046
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0.052
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0.060
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0.069
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0.079
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0.091
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0.105
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0.120
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0.138
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0.158
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0.182
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0.209
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0.240
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0.275
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0.316
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0.363
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0.417
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0.479
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0.550
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0.631
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0.724
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0.832
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0.955
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1.096
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1.259
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1.445
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
1.660
0.010
0.011
0.012
0.011
0.000
0.001
0.010
0.012
0.012
0.011
1.905
0.125
0.136
0.142
0.134
0.000
0.008
0.135
0.153
0.153
0.145
2.188
0.339
0.357
0.369
0.355
0.000
0.015
0.474
0.522
0.522
0.500
2.512
0.581
0.608
0.628
0.605
0.001
0.024
1.054
1.150
1.150
1.106
Laserdiffraction <250µm with ethanol
Page 1 of 3
==PAGE:140==
2.884
0.835
0.873
0.899
0.869
0.002
0.032
1.890
2.049
2.049
1.975
3.311
1.086
1.133
1.165
1.128
0.003
0.040
2.976
3.213
3.213
3.103
3.802
1.309
1.364
1.401
1.358
0.004
0.046
4.285
4.614
4.614
4.460
4.365
1.495
1.558
1.598
1.550
0.005
0.052
5.779
6.212
6.212
6.011
5.012
1.648
1.721
1.764
1.711
0.007
0.058
7.428
7.976
7.976
7.722
5.754
1.782
1.865
1.911
1.853
0.008
0.065
9.210
9.887
9.887
9.574
6.607
1.916
2.010
2.060
1.995
0.011
0.073
11.126
11.946
11.946
11.570
7.586
2.061
2.170
2.225
2.152
0.014
0.083
13.187
14.171
14.171
13.722
8.710
2.239
2.363
2.425
2.342
0.018
0.095
15.426
16.597
16.597
16.064
10.000
2.459
2.601
2.672
2.578
0.023
0.108
17.885
19.269
19.269
18.641
11.482
2.746
2.904
2.987
2.879
0.030
0.122
20.631
22.256
22.256
21.521
13.183
3.099
3.270
3.365
3.245
0.037
0.135
23.730
25.622
25.622
24.765
15.136
3.531
3.712
3.818
3.687
0.042
0.145
27.261
29.440
29.440
28.452
17.378
4.024
4.206
4.320
4.183
0.045
0.149
31.285
33.759
33.759
32.636
19.953
4.570
4.743
4.858
4.724
0.042
0.145
35.855
38.618
38.618
37.360
22.909
5.128
5.278
5.386
5.264
0.034
0.130
40.983
44.004
44.004
42.623
26.303
5.661
5.774
5.864
5.766
0.021
0.102
46.644
49.868
49.868
48.390
30.200
6.110
6.172
6.234
6.172
0.008
0.062
52.754
56.102
56.102
54.562
34.674
6.426
6.425
6.447
6.433
0.000
0.013
59.180
62.549
62.549
60.994
39.811
6.556
6.482
6.459
6.499
0.005
0.051
65.736
69.008
69.008
67.493
45.709
6.462
6.315
6.242
6.340
0.025
0.112
72.198
75.250
75.250
73.833
52.481
6.129
5.915
5.797
5.947
0.057
0.168
78.327
81.047
81.047
79.780
60.256
5.569
5.304
5.148
5.340
0.090
0.213
83.896
86.196
86.196
85.121
69.183
4.816
4.523
4.345
4.562
0.113
0.238
88.712
90.541
90.541
89.682
79.433
3.941
3.647
3.463
3.684
0.116
0.241
92.653
94.004
94.004
93.366
91.201
3.010
2.743
2.569
2.774
0.099
0.222
95.664
96.573
96.573
96.140
104.713
2.122
1.901
1.751
1.924
0.070
0.187
97.785
98.324
98.324
98.064
120.226
1.317
1.159
1.043
1.173
0.038
0.137
99.102
99.367
99.367
99.237
138.038
0.711
0.605
0.516
0.610
0.019
0.098
99.813
99.883
99.883
99.848
158.489
0.187
0.152
0.117
0.152
0.002
0.035
100.000
100.000
100.000
100.000
181.970
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
100.000
100.000
100.000
100.000
208.930
0
0
0
0
0
0
100
100
100
100
239.883
0
0
0
0
0
0
100
100
100
100
275.423
0
0
0
0
0
0
100
100
100
100
316.228
0
0
0
0
0
0
100
100
100
100
363.078
0
0
0
0
0
0
100
100
100
100
416.869
0
0
0
0
0
0
100
100
100
100
478.630
0
0
0
0
0
0
100
100
100
100
549.541
0
0
0
0
0
0
100
100
100
100
630.957
0
0
0
0
0
0
100
100
100
100
724.436
0
0
0
0
0
0
100
100
100
100
831.764
0
0
0
0
0
0
100
100
100
100
954.993
0
0
0
0
0
0
100
100
100
100
1096.478
0
0
0
0
0
0
100
100
100
100
1258.925
0
0
0
0
0
0
100
100
100
100
1445.440
0
0
0
0
0
0
100
100
100
100
1659.587
0
0
0
0
0
0
100
100
100
100
1905.461
0
0
0
0
0
0
100
100
100
100
2187.762
0
0
0
0
0
0
100
100
100
100
Page 2 of 3
==PAGE:141==
2511.886
0
0
0
0
0
0
100
100
100
100
2884.032
0
0
0
0
0
0
100
100
100
100
3311.311
0
0
0
0
0
0
100
100
100
100
3801.894
0
0
0
0
0
0
100
100
100
100
4365.158
0
0
0
0
0
0
100
100
100
100
5011.872
0
0
0
0
0
0
100
100
100
100
5754.399
0
0
0
0
0
0
100
100
100
100
6606.934
0
0
0
0
0
0
100
100
100
100
7585.776
0
0
0
0
0
0
100
100
100
100
8709.636
0
0
0
0
0
0
100
100
100
100
10000.000
0
0
0
0
0
0
100
100
100
100
avg(std)
0.034
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
0.010
0.100
1.000
10.000
100.000
1000.000
10000.000
%
d(µm)
#0156 Qz (<250µm with ethanol)
#0156 QZ A
#0156 Qz B
#0156 Qz C
#0156 Qz Avg
Page 3 of 3
==PAGE:142==
Result Analysis Report
Vol. Weighted Mean D[4,3]:
%
m²/g
um
Surface Weighted Mean D[3,2]:
0.408
33.510
d(0.9):
Accessory Name:
Span :
2.345
um
Specific Surface Area:
15.82
Operator notes:
Uniformity:
%Vol
Obscuration:
27.289
69.923
Average of 3 measurements from 230331 #0156 og #0238
d(0.1):
um
0.726
14.702
um
5.932
d(0.5):
Volume
  Particle Size Distribution
 0.01 
 0.1 
 1 
 10 
 100 
 1000  3000 
Particle Size (µm)
0 
 10 
 20 
 30 
 40 
 50 
 60 
 70 
 80 
 90 
 100 
Volume (%)
#0156 QZ_Averaged Result, 31 March 2023 10:38:40
Hydro 2000SM (A)
Result units:
um
Concentration:
0.0305
Weighted Residual:
0.332
%
Size (µm)
0.010
0.011
0.013
0.015
0.017
0.020
0.023
0.026
0.030
0.035
0.040
0.046
0.052
0.060
0.069
0.079
0.091
0.105
Volume In %
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Size (µm)
0.105
0.120
0.138
0.158
0.182
0.209
0.240
0.275
0.316
0.363
0.417
0.479
0.550
0.631
0.724
0.832
0.955
1.096
Volume In %
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Size (µm)
1.096
1.259
1.445
1.660
1.905
2.188
2.512
2.884
3.311
3.802
4.365
5.012
5.754
6.607
7.586
8.710
10.000
11.482
Volume In %
0.00
0.00
0.01
0.13
0.35
0.61
0.87
1.13
1.36
1.55
1.71
1.85
2.00
2.15
2.34
2.58
2.88
Size (µm)
11.482
13.183
15.136
17.378
19.953
22.909
26.303
30.200
34.674
39.811
45.709
52.481
60.256
69.183
79.433
91.201
104.713
120.226
Volume In %
3.24
3.69
4.18
4.72
5.26
5.77
6.17
6.43
6.50
6.34
5.95
5.34
4.56
3.68
2.77
1.92
1.17
Size (µm)
120.226
138.038
158.489
181.970
208.930
239.883
275.423
316.228
363.078
416.869
478.630
549.541
630.957
724.436
831.764
954.993
1096.478
1258.925
Volume In %
0.61
0.15
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Size (µm)
1258.925
1445.440
1659.587
1905.461
2187.762
2511.886
2884.032
3311.311
3801.894
4365.158
5011.872
5754.399
6606.934
7585.776
8709.636
10000.000
Volume In %
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
31 March 2023 10:38:40
Averaged
123-ABC
AshCycle_ethanol
Measured by:
ebbas
Sample bulk lot ref:
Denmark
Sample Name:
Analysed:
Measured:
Sample Source & type:
31 March 2023 10:38:41
#0156 QZ_Averaged Result
SOP Name:
Result Source:
Sensitivity:
Dispersant Name:
Ethanol
Off
Size range:
Flyash dry
Particle RI:
1.360
Result Emulation:
Absorption:
0.020
to
0
Enhanced
Analysis model:
2000.000
Dispersant RI:
1.500
General purpose
Particle Name:
um
Tel := +[44] (0) 1684-892456 Fax +[44] (0) 1684-892789
Malvern, UK
Malvern Instruments Ltd.
Serial Number : MAL1017217
Mastersizer 2000 Ver. 6.01
31/03/2023 10:47:49
Record Number: 4
File name: 230331 #0156 og #0238
==PAGE:143==
pH and conductivity of SSA
Table B.1: pH and conductivity of SSA
Sample
1
2
3
Avg
Std
Mass
[g]
10.00
10.00
10.01
10.00
0.0058
pH
[-]
8.89
9.11
9.15
9.05
0.1400
Temp
[oC]
21.7
21.7
21.8
21.73
0.0577
Conductivity @25C
[mS/cm]
1.601
1.555
1.554
1.57
0.0269
The results from the IC and ICP regarding leaching and digestion of the SSA is collected together
with the IC and ICP results from the specimens, see table C.7 and C.8.
136
==PAGE:144==
C
|
Production and testing of specimens
The following pages contains:
• Pre-tests - Finding a good production method
• Optimal water content - production of cylinders
• Regression lines for OMC
• Linear shrinkage of OMC specimens
• Production of test specimens - soil mix recipe
• Final test specimens - production of cylinders
• Compression tests
• Leaching, pH, and conductivity of test specimens with SSA, including digestion and leach-
ing of SSA
• Sorption isotherms (data and calculation)
137
==PAGE:145==
Pre-tests - Finding a good production method
RS-RAW (#0252)
Test nr
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Setup
50mm/min, 
6kN, abs 
ramp
50mm/min, 
8kN, abs 
ramp
50mm/min, 
8kN, abs ramp
50mm/min, 
8kN, abs ramp
50mm/min, 
8kN, cyc 3.5
50mm/min, 
4kN, abs 
ramp
50mm/min, 
9.5kN, abs 
ramp
Wet mass
[g]
350
350
350.13
350.06
350.13
350.34
350.15
Mass after 
compression
[g]
348.5
349.55
349.17
349.41
349.37
349.4
349.37
Height 1
[mm]
63.3
63.06
62.97
63.01
63.2
63.87
62.93
Height 2
[mm]
62.64
63.77
62.97
63.31
63.04
64.23
62.95
Height 3
[mm]
63.49
63.03
62.99
63.05
63.22
63.04
Height average
[mm]
62.97
63.44
62.99
63.10
63.10
63.77
62.97
Height std
[-]
0.5
0.4
0.0
0.2
0.1
0.5
0.1
Density, d = m/v
[kg/m3]
1957.39
1948.74
1960.53
1958.35
1958.33
1937.72
1962.17
Notes
(Large lumps) Small lumps
Large lumps
RS-REF (#0252+15% 0-4mm sand)
Test nr
1
2
3
Setup
50mm/min, 
6kN, abs 
ramp
50mm/min, 
8kN, abs 
ramp
100mm/min, 
8 kN, abs 
ramp
Wet mass
[g]
350.23
350.36
350.31
Mass after 
compression
[g]
349.73
349.9
349.83
Height 1
[mm]
61.17
60.75
60.48
Height 2
[mm]
60.71
60.66
60.77
Height 3
[mm]
60.55
60.53
60.52
Height average
[mm]
60.81
60.65
60.59
Height, std
[-]
0.32
0.11
0.16
Density, d = m/v
[kg/m3]
2034.07
2040.54
2042.04
Page 1 of 1
==PAGE:146==
Optimel water content - prodution of cylinders
Area of cylinders
Ø60
2827.433388 mm2
#0252 - RS
100mm/m 8kN
Theoretical wc
[%]
10
10
12
12
14
14
16
16
18
18
Real wc
[%]
10.193
10.193
12.054
12.054
14.202
14.202
16.737
16.737
18.741
18.741
Specimen
1
2
1
2
1
2
1
2
1
2
Mass
[g]
350.38
350.51
350.82
350.72
350.27
350.19
350.5
350.61
350.45
350.56
Mass after compression
[g]
350.18
349.34
350.67
350.55
350.05
350.02
350.07
350.37
349.94
350.21
Height 1
[mm]
60.79
60.35
57.9
57.82
57.53
57.65
59.02
59.09
60.41
60.31
Height 2
[mm]
60.9
60.55
58.02
57.65
58.45
57.81
58.89
59.05
60.09
60.37
Height 3
[mm]
60.81
60.34
57.89
57.57
57.7
57.63
58.99
59.17
60.27
60.36
Height average
[mm]
60.83
60.41
57.94
57.68
57.89
57.70
58.97
59.10
60.26
60.35
Bulk density, ρ = m/v
[kg/m3]
2035.90
2045.14
2140.68
2149.47
2138.50
2145.60
2099.69
2096.63
2053.98
2052.50
Dry density, ρd
[kg/m3]
1847.58
1855.97
1910.41
1918.25
1872.56
1878.78
1798.66
1796.03
1729.79
1728.54
Dry density, theoretical
[kg/m3]
1850.82
1859.22
1911.33
1919.17
1875.88
1882.11
1810.08
1807.44
1740.66
1739.41
#0252 - RS + 15% sand
100mm/m 8kN
Theoretical wc
[%]
8.7
8.7
10.4
10.4
12.2
12.2
13.9
13.9
15.7
15.7
Real wc
[%]
8.914
8.914
11.287
11.287
12.608
12.608
13.928
13.928
15.501
15.501
Specimen
1
2
1
2
1
2
1
2
1
2
Mass
[g]
350.52
350.4
350.23
350.54
350.39
350.19
350.2
350.65
350.77
350.59
Mass after compression
[g]
350.24
350.16
349.62
350.38
350.21
350.02
350.01
350.35
350.39
350.36
Height 1
[mm]
61.64
61.55
58.78
58.58
56.98
56.97
57.65
57.36
58.61
58.88
Height 2
[mm]
61.81
61.39
58.97
58.45
56.78
56.71
57.49
57.59
58.7
58.76
Height 3
[mm]
61.79
61.4
58.76
58.6
56.82
56.73
57.4
57.36
58.61
58.7
Height average
[mm]
61.75
61.45
58.84
58.54
56.86
56.80
57.51
57.44
58.64
58.78
Bulk density, ρ = m/v
[kg/m3]
2006.13
2015.47
2101.63
2116.75
2178.36
2179.35
2152.38
2157.35
2113.32
2108.11
Dry density, ρd
[kg/m3]
1841.95
1850.52
1888.48
1902.07
1934.46
1935.34
1889.25
1893.61
1829.70
1825.19
Dry density, theoretical
[kg/m3]
1845.57
1854.16
1903.65
1917.35
1941.50
1942.38
1889.71
1894.07
1826.55
1822.05
#0252 - RS
Calculation of water content
Dry density = (100*ρ)/(100+w)
Theoretical wc
10
10
10
Bulk density = mass after compression/volume
Container
46.648
39.69
43.473
Container + wet
59.988
61.053
62.007
Container + dry
58.762
59.05
60.305 Average
Water content
10.121
10.346
10.112
10.193
#0252 - RS
Calculation of water content
Theoretical wc
12
12
12
Container
41.849
41.459
39.698
Container + wet
61.949
60.44
61.531
Container + dry
59.747
58.424
59.196 Average
Water content
12.303
11.883
11.976
12.054
#0252 - RS
Calculation of water content
Theoretical wc
14
14
14
Container
41.952
42.05
39.554
Container + wet
60.517
60.85
60.179
Container + dry
58.184
58.524
57.628 Average
Water content
14.373
14.119
14.114
14.202
#0252 - RS
Calculation of water content
Theoretical wc
16
16
16
Container
39.643
41.903
41.736
Container + wet
61.04
60.526
62.092
Container + dry
57.922
57.872
59.204 Average
Water content
17.058
16.620
16.533
16.737
#0252 - RS
Calculation of water content
Theoretical wc
18
18
18
Container
39.825
40.528
39.87
Container + wet
62.22
61.911
62.767
Container + dry
58.688
58.488
59.202 Average
Water content
18.724
19.059
18.441
18.741
#0252 - RS + 15% sand
Calculation of water content
Theoretical wc
10
10
10
Container
39.753
40.122
40.041
==PAGE:147==
Container + wet
61.697
61.685
60.36
Container + dry
59.893
59.941
58.685 Average
Water content
8.957
8.800
8.984
8.914
#0252 - RS + 15% sand
Calculation of water content
Theoretical wc
12
12
12
Container
39.694
40.038
41.678
Container + wet
60.101
61.275
60.49
Container + dry
58.005
59.097
58.628 Average
Water content
11.447
11.428
10.985
11.287
#0252 - RS + 15% sand
Calculation of water content
Theoretical wc
14
14
14
Container
39.638
41.586
39.74
Container + wet
61.076
60.701
61.294
Container + dry
58.685
58.539
58.896 Average
Water content
12.553
12.753
12.518
12.608
#0252 - RS + 15% sand
Calculation of water content
Theoretical wc
16
16
16
Container
40.019
41.713
39.685
Container + wet
60.913
60.332
63.195
Container + dry
58.338
58.098
60.291 Average
Water content
14.056
13.634
14.093
13.928
#0252 - RS + 15% sand
Calculation of water content
Theoretical wc
18
18
18
Container
41.701
39.748
41.925
Container + wet
60.11
60.52
60.964
Container + dry
57.637
57.736
58.408 Average
Water content
15.518
15.477
15.507
15.501
==PAGE:148==
Optimal water content - prodution of cylinders
Area of cylinders
Ø60
2827.433388 mm2
RS + 15% sand + 5% CaO
100mm/mi 8kN
Theoretical wc
[%]
18
18
20
20
22
22
24
24
16
16
Real wc
[%]
14.571
14.571
17.885
17.885
19.393
19.393
20.597
20.597
12.672
12.672
Specimen
1
2
1
2
1
2
1
2
1
2
Mass
[g]
350.75
350.01
350.67
350.51
350.5
350.55
350.01
350.8
350.8
350.76
Mass after compression
[g]
350.25
349.68
350.38
350.19
350.09
350.16
348.86
349.86
350.21
350.36
Height 1
[mm]
61.16
61.21
60.63
60.57
61.27
61.19
62.41
62.66
62.39
62.44
Height 2
[mm]
61.28
61.23
60.55
60.49
61.23
61.22
62.37
62.55
62.48
62.45
Height 3
[mm]
61.16
61.26
60.58
60.53
61.22
61.21
62.39
62.57
62.33
62.37
Height average
[mm]
61.20
61.23
60.59
60.53
61.24
61.21
62.39
62.59
62.40
62.42
Bulk density, ρ = m/v
[kg/m3]
2024.11
2019.72
2045.36
2046.17
2021.86
2023.37
1977.62
1976.85
1984.96
1985.17
Dry density, ρd
[kg/m3]
1766.69
1762.85
1735.05
1735.73
1693.45
1694.71
1639.86
1639.22
1761.71
1761.90
Dry density, theoretical
[kg/m3]
1715.35
1711.62
1704.47
1705.14
1657.27
1658.50
1594.86
1594.23
1711.17
1711.36
RS + 15% sand + 5% SSA
100mm/mi 8kN
Theoretical wc
[%]
18
18
20
20
22
22
14
14
16
16
Real wc
[%]
17.987
17.987
18.677
18.677
21.222
21.222
14.155
14.155
15.381
15.381
Specimen
1
2
1
2
1
2
1
2
1
2
Mass
[g]
350.61
350.44
350.36
350.56
350.97
350.73
351.36
351.08
350
350.37
Mass after compression
[g]
350.01
350.09
350.14
350.11
350.39
350.18
351.36
350.92
349.77
350.05
Height 1
[mm]
60.04
60.02
61.02
60.72
61.99
61.5
58.19
58.02
58.1
58.1
Height 2
[mm]
60.16
60.04
61.19
60.54
61.75
61.87
58.27
58.08
58.19
58.15
Height 3
[mm]
60.08
60.08
61.17
60.53
61.77
62.01
58.15
58.17
58.09
58.01
Height average
[mm]
60.09
60.05
61.13
60.60
61.84
61.79
58.20
58.09
58.13
58.09
Bulk density, ρ = m/v
[kg/m3]
2059.97
2062.05
2025.90
2043.45
2004.07
2004.28
2135.07
2136.56
2128.21
2131.38
Dry density, ρd
[kg/m3]
1745.93
1747.69
1707.07
1721.85
1653.22
1653.39
1870.33
1871.63
1844.51
1847.26
Dry density, theoretical
[kg/m3]
1745.74
1747.50
1688.25
1702.87
1642.68
1642.85
1872.87
1874.17
1834.66
1837.40
RS + 15% sand + 5% SSA
100mm/min 
Theoretical wc
[%]
10
10
12
12
Real wc
[%]
9.777
9.777
11.828
11.828
Specimen
1
2
1
2
Mass
[g]
350.57
350.17
350.11
350.61
Mass after compression
[g]
350.44
349.96
349.94
350.47
Height 1
[mm]
61.52
61.28
58.81
59.93
Height 2
[mm]
61.51
61.21
58.76
58.82
Height 3
[mm]
61.5
61.22
58.78
58.92
Height average
[mm]
61.51
61.24
58.78
59.22
Bulk density, ρ = m/v
[kg/m3]
2015.00
2021.22
2105.46
2092.98
Dry density, ρd
[kg/m3]
1835.54
1841.21
1882.77
1871.61
Dry density, theoretical
[kg/m3]
1831.82
1837.48
1879.88
1868.73
RS + 15% sand + 5% SSA + 5% CaO
100mm/mi 8kN
Theoretical wc
[%]
16
16
18
18
20
20
14
14
22
22
Real wc
[%]
14.936
14.936
16.843
16.843
19.230
19.230
12.501
12.501
19.971
19.971
Specimen
1
2
1
2
1
2
1
2
1
2
Mass
[g]
350.78
350.49
350.16
350.52
350.26
350.66
350.59
350.57
350.79
350.25
Mass after compression
[g]
350.34
350.32
349.79
350.29
349.85
350.35
349.96
350.49
350.2
349.89
Height 1
[mm]
61.41
61.37
60.43
60.51
61.14
61.26
63.94
64.02
61.82
61.6
Height 2
[mm]
61.4
61.27
60.39
60.51
61.18
61.22
63.9
63.95
62.06
61.6
Height 3
[mm]
61.41
61.24
60.47
60.53
61.12
61.18
63.95
63.92
61.8
61.6
Height average
[mm]
61.41
61.29
60.43
60.52
61.15
61.22
63.93
63.96
61.89
61.60
Bulk density, ρ = m/v
[kg/m3]
2017.82
2021.43
2047.21
2047.20
2023.56
2024.03
1936.07
1937.99
2001.15
2008.90
Dry density, ρd
[kg/m3]
1739.50
1742.61
1734.92
1734.92
1686.30
1686.69
1698.31
1699.99
1640.29
1646.64
Dry density, theoretical
[kg/m3]
1739.50
1742.61
1734.92
1734.92
1686.30
1686.69
1698.31
1699.99
1640.29
1646.64
RS + 15% sand + 5% Qz + 5% CaO
100mm/mi 8kN
Theoretical wc
[%]
16
16
18
18
20
20
14
14
22
22
Real wc
[%]
12.790
12.790
14.799
14.799
17.024
17.024
11.342
11.342
19.179
19.179
Specimen
1
2
1
2
1
2
1
2
1
2
Mass
[g]
350.1
350.77
350.14
350.06
350.93
350.87
350.01
351.71
351.06
350.16
Mass after compression
[g]
353.72
358.06
350.01
349.89
350.1
350.56
349.48
351.33
350.04
349.5
Height 1
[mm]
61.77
63.1
59.86
60.01
60.58
60.99
62.81
63.2
61.92
61.96
Height 2
[mm]
61.8
62.97
59.86
59.94
60.59
60.76
62.76
63.09
61.96
61.97
Height 3
[mm]
61.76
62.93
59.88
59.92
60.6
60.75
62.77
63.08
61.88
61.94
Side 1 af 4
==PAGE:149==
Height average
[mm]
61.78
63.00
59.87
59.96
60.59
60.83
62.78
63.12
61.92
61.96
Bulk density, ρ = m/v
[kg/m3]
2025.08
2010.12
2067.77
2063.96
2043.61
2038.11
1968.83
1968.49
1999.38
1995.11
Dry density, ρd
[kg/m3]
1745.76
1732.87
1752.35
1749.12
1703.01
1698.43
1727.05
1726.74
1638.83
1635.34
Dry density, theoretical
[kg/m3]
1795.44
1782.18
1801.20
1797.88
1746.33
1741.63
1768.28
1767.97
1677.63
1674.05
RS + sand + 5% CaO
Calculation of water content
Dry density = (100*ρ)/(100+w)
Theoretical wc
18
18
18
Bulk density = mass after compression/volume
Container
41.7
40.121
41.988
Container + wet
61.739
61.471
63.601
Container + dry
59.205
58.712
60.881 Average
Water content
14.476
14.841
14.397
14.571
RS + sand + 5% CaO
Calculation of water content
Theoretical wc
20
20
20
Container
41.742
40.223
39.831
Container + wet
60.038
61.955
62.693
Container + dry
57.269
58.656
59.218 Average
Water content
17.833
17.897
17.924
17.885
RS + sand + 5% CaO
Calculation of water content
Theoretical wc
22
22
22
Container
41.903
39.694
39.225
Container + wet
61.27
63.207
62.362
Container + dry
58.148
59.37
58.593 Average
Water content
19.218
19.501
19.460
19.393
RS + sand + 5% CaO
Calculation of water content
Theoretical wc
24
24
24
Container
39.638
41.713
42.32
Container + wet
63.251
61.423
62.463
Container + dry
59.113
58.09
59.079 Average
Water content
21.248
20.352
20.192
20.597
RS + sand + 5% CaO
Calculation of water content
Theoretical wc
16
16
16
Container
41.83
41.825
40.167
Container + wet
61.229
61.246
60.178
Container + dry
59.048
59.013
57.977 Average
Water content
12.667
12.992
12.358
12.672
RS + 15% sand + 5% SSA
Calculation of water content
Theoretical wc
18
18
18
Container
43.986
39.646
39.809
Container + wet
64.335
60.298
63.033
Container + dry
61.258
57.069
59.555 Average
Water content
17.815
18.533
17.614
17.987
RS + 15% sand + 5% SSA
Calculation of water content
Theoretical wc
20
20
20
Container
41.818
41.121
41.766
Container + wet
62.316
64.144
62.955
Container + dry
59.337
60.357
59.521 Average
Water content
17.004
19.687
19.341
18.677
RS + 15% sand + 5% SSA
Calculation of water content
Theoretical wc
22
22
22
Container
39.99
38.936
39.611
Container + wet
63.336
62.359
62.312
Container + dry
59.303
58.200
58.342 Average
Water content
20.882
21.589
21.195
21.222
RS + 15% sand + 5% SSA
Calculation of water content
Theoretical wc
14
14
14
Container
41.831
40.216
39.696
Container + wet
60.347
61.572
60.945
Container + dry
58.073
58.926
58.283 Average
Water content
14.001
14.142
14.322
14.155
RS + 15% sand + 5% SSA
Calculation of water content
Side 2 af 4
==PAGE:150==
Theoretical wc
16
16
16
Container
41.71
39.822
41.738
Container + wet
62.47
62.213
63.159
Container + dry
59.729
59.241
60.264 Average
Water content
15.212
15.305
15.627
15.381
RS + 15% sand + 5% SSA
Calculation of water content
Theoretical wc
10
10
10
Container
41.199
41.914
41.851
Container + wet
59.38
60.746
59.789
Container + dry
57.733
59.052
58.235 Average
Water content
9.961
9.884
9.485
9.777
RS + 15% sand + 5% SSA
Calculation of water content
Theoretical wc
12
12
12
Container
39.803
41.735
38.939
Container + wet
57.514
60.439
65.801
Container + dry
55.603
58.461
63.017 Average
Water content
12.095
11.826
11.562
11.828
RS + 15% sand + 5% SSA + 5% CaO
Calculation of water content
Theoretical wc
16
16
16
Container
41.904
41.700
41.825
Container + wet
62.190
62.560
63.229
Container + dry
59.588
59.853
60.408 Average
Water content
14.714
14.912
15.181
14.936
RS + 15% sand + 5% SSA + 5% CaO
Calculation of water content
Theoretical wc
18
18
18
Container
40.122
41.991
42.320
Container + wet
62.442
63.729
63.982
Container + dry
59.237
60.603
60.840 Average
Water content
16.767
16.796
16.965
16.843
RS + 15% sand + 5% SSA + 5% CaO
Calculation of water content
Theoretical wc
20
20
20
Container
40.17
39.225
39.640
Container + wet
61.745
64.107
62.473
Container + dry
58.281
60.079
58.787 Average
Water content
19.123
19.315
19.251
19.230
RS + 15% sand + 5% SSA + 5% CaO
Calculation of water content
Theoretical wc
14
14
14
Container
41.757
42.447
40.04
Container + wet
61.631
60.969
62.732
Container + dry
59.421
58.944
60.172 Average
Water content
12.511
12.275
12.716
12.501
RS + 15% sand + 5% SSA + 5% CaO
Calculation of water content
Theoretical wc
22
22
22
Container
41.459
40.038
39.554
Container + wet
61.128
60.08
63.774
Container + dry
57.814
56.777
59.751 Average
Water content
20.263
19.732
19.919
19.971
RS + 15% sand + 5% Qz + 5% CaO
Calculation of water content
Theoretical wc
16
16
16
Container
41.126
39.993
41.739
Container + wet
60.571
60.669
64.214
Container + dry
58.365
58.345
61.644 Average
Water content
12.797
12.663
12.911
12.790
RS + 15% sand + 5% Qz + 5% CaO
Calculation of water content
Theoretical wc
18
18
18
Container
39.695
41.818
41.709
Container + wet
60.676
61.887
63.460
Container + dry
57.957
59.294
60.677 Average
Water content
14.889
14.837
14.672
14.799
Side 3 af 4
==PAGE:151==
RS + 15% sand + 5% Qz + 5% CaO
Calculation of water content
Theoretical wc
20
20
20
Container
40.21
39.61
39.824
Container + wet
60.977
61.035
61.402
Container + dry
57.975
57.933
58.229 Average
Water content
16.901
16.930
17.240
17.024
RS + 15% sand + 5% Qz + 5% CaO
Calculation of water content
Theoretical wc
14
14
14
Container
42.05
43.405
46.645
Container + wet
62.343
62.23
62.284
Container + dry
60.309
60.295
60.68 Average
Water content
11.140
11.456
11.429
11.342
RS + 15% sand + 5% Qz + 5% CaO
Calculation of water content
Theoretical wc
22
22
22
Container
39.803
39.869
40.169
Container + wet
60.531
60.482
64.157
Container + dry
57.169
57.148
60.347 Average
Water content
19.360
19.295
18.882
19.179
Side 4 af 4
==PAGE:152==
Regression lines for OMC
Table C.1 shows the regression lines used to produce figure 4.11 in section 3.3.1.2. x is the water
content, and y is the density.
Table C.1: Regression lines for OMC
RS-RAW
Theoretical
𝑦𝑏𝑢𝑙𝑘= −6.0683𝑥2 + 168.84𝑥+ 970.01
𝑦𝑑𝑟𝑦= −5.2123𝑥2 + 129.12𝑥+ 1095.2
True
𝑦𝑏𝑢𝑙𝑘= −5.3917𝑥2 + 154.67𝑥+ 1037.8
𝑦𝑑𝑟𝑦= −4.6036𝑥2 + 116.26𝑥+ 1157.6
RS-REF
Theoretical
𝑦𝑏𝑢𝑙𝑘= −8.8591𝑥2 + 230.04𝑥+ 679.55
𝑦𝑑𝑟𝑦= −7.8643𝑥2 + 187.77𝑥+ 811.53
True
𝑦𝑏𝑢𝑙𝑘= −8.5743𝑥2 + 225.72𝑥+ 675.21
𝑦𝑑𝑟𝑦= −7.6015𝑥2 + 183.75𝑥+ 808.24
RS-CaO
Theoretical
𝑦𝑏𝑢𝑙𝑘= −3.7759𝑥2 + 150.29𝑥+ 545.32
𝑦𝑑𝑟𝑦= −3.0242𝑥2 + 106.52𝑥+ 779.96
True
𝑦𝑏𝑢𝑙𝑘= −4.2819𝑥2 + 142.66𝑥+ 860.65
𝑦𝑑𝑟𝑦= −3.5244𝑥2 + 102.76𝑥+ 1022.3
RS-SSA
Theoretical
𝑦𝑏𝑢𝑙𝑘= −2.9709𝑥2 + 90.681𝑥+ 1426.2
𝑦𝑑𝑟𝑦= −2.433𝑥2 + 58.926𝑥+ 1505.2
True
𝑦𝑏𝑢𝑙𝑘= −3.3009𝑥2 + 97.631𝑥+ 1394.9
𝑦𝑑𝑟𝑦= −2.7266𝑥2 + 65.193𝑥+ 1476.3
RS-CaO-SSA
Theoretical
𝑦𝑏𝑢𝑙𝑘= −4.5306𝑥2 + 170.11𝑥+ 448.72
𝑦𝑑𝑟𝑦= −3.7886𝑥2 + 128.09𝑥+ 653.16
True
𝑦𝑏𝑢𝑙𝑘= −5.0886𝑥2 + 174.44𝑥+ 551.03
𝑦𝑑𝑟𝑦= −4.9134𝑥+ 152.98𝑥+ 553.77
RS-CaO-Qz
Theoretical
𝑦𝑏𝑢𝑙𝑘= −4.6142𝑥2 + 170.13𝑥+ 487.57
𝑦𝑑𝑟𝑦= −4.3562𝑥2 + 145.35𝑥+ 585.16
True
𝑦𝑏𝑢𝑙𝑘= −5.084𝑥2 + 158.42𝑥+ 826.01
𝑦𝑑𝑟𝑦= −3.785𝑥2 + 103.99𝑥+ 1033.1
145
==PAGE:153==
Linear shrinkage of OMC specimens
Test spec. 1 Test spec. 2
Avg
Std
Test spec. 
1
Test spec. 
2
Avg
Std
22-02-2023
Avg
60.83
60.41
60.62
0.30
0.00
22-02-2023
Avg
61.75
61.45
61.60 0.21
0.00
23-02-2023
H1
60.47
60.1
23-02-2023
H1
61.88
61.23
H2
60.44
60.01
H2
61.5
61.21
Avg
60.46
60.06
60.26
0.28
0.61
Avg
61.69
61.22
61.46 0.33
0.23
06-03-2023
H1
60.55
60
06-03-2023
H1
61.65
61.28
H2
60.7
60.05
H2
61.45
61.55
Avg
60.63
60.03
60.33
0.42
0.49
Avg
61.55
61.42
61.48 0.10
0.19
Test spec. 1 Test spec. 2
Avg
Std
Test spec. 
1
Test spec. 
2
Avg
Std
22-02-2023
Avg
57.94
57.68
57.81
0.18
0.00
21-02-2023
Avg
58.84
58.54
58.69 0.21
0.00
23-02-2023
H1
57.35
57.12
23-02-2023
H1
58.64
58.39
H2
57.35
57.22
H2
58.67
58.22
Avg
57.35
57.17
57.26
0.13
0.95
Avg
58.66
58.31
58.48 0.25
0.36
06-03-2023
H1
57.36
57.11
06-03-2023
H1
58.57
58.23
H2
57.55
57.22
H2
58.64
58.34
Avg
57.46
57.17
57.31
0.21
0.86
Avg
58.61
58.29
58.45 0.23
0.42
Test spec. 1 Test spec. 2
Avg
Std
Test spec. 
1
Test spec. 
2
Avg
Std
21-02-2023
Avg
57.89
57.70
57.80
0.14
0.00
21-02-2023
Avg
56.86
56.80
56.83 0.04
0.00
23-02-2023
H1
56.68
56.8
23-02-2023
H1
56.28
56.35
H2
56.65
56.84
H2
56.3
56.21
Avg
56.67
56.82
56.74
0.08
1.82
Avg
56.29
56.28
56.29 0.01
0.96
06-03-2023
H1
56.7
56.87
06-03-2023
H1
56.55
56.32
H2
56.8
56.72
H2
56.41
56.41
Avg
56.75
56.80
56.77
0.12
1.77
Avg
56.48
56.37
56.42 0.08
0.72
Test spec. 1 Test spec. 2
Avg
Std
est spec.
1
est spec.
2
Avg
Std
21-02-2023
Avg
58.97
59.10
59.04
0.10
0.00
21-02-2023
Avg
57.51
57.44
57.48 0.05
0.00
23-02-2023
H1
57.56
57.63
23-02-2023
H1
56.53
56.48
H2
57.52
57.79
H2
56.55
56.5
Avg
57.54
57.71
57.63
0.05
2.39
Avg
56.54
56.49
56.52 0.04
1.67
06-03-2023
H1
57.65
57.7
06-03-2023
H1
56.84
56.58
H2
57.66
57.71
H2
56.57
56.48
Avg
57.66
57.71
57.68
0.04
2.30
Avg
56.71
56.53
56.62 0.12
1.49
Test spec. 1 Test spec. 2
Avg
Std
1
2
Avg
Std
21-02-2023
Avg
60.26
60.35
60.30
0.06
0.00
22-02-2023
Avg
58.64
58.78
58.71 0.10
0.00
23-02-2023
H1
58.37
58.63
23-02-2023
H1
57.43
57.53
H2
58.45
58.54
H2
57.46
57.43
Avg
58.41
58.59
58.50
0.18
2.99
Avg
57.45
57.48
57.46 0.02
2.12
06-03-2023
H1
58.54
58.55
06-03-2023
H1
57.47
57.47
H2
58.48
59.13
H2
57.54
57.44
Avg
58.51
58.84
58.68
0.01
2.70
Avg
57.51
57.46
57.48 0.04
2.10
Date
Height [mm]
Lin. 
Shrinkage 
[%]
Lin. 
Shrinkage 
[%]
Lin. 
Shrinkage 
[%]
WC 14%
Date
Height [mm]
Lin. 
Shrinkage 
[%]
WC 16%
Date
Lin. 
Shrinkage 
[%]
Date
RS-RAW
RS-REF
WC 9%
Date
Height [mm]
Height [mm]
WC 12%
Date
Height [mm]
Date
Height [mm]
Lin. 
Shrinkage 
[%]
WC 10%
Height [mm]
Height [mm]
Height [mm]
Lin. 
Shrinkage 
[%]
WC 10%
WC 12%
WC 14%
WC 16%
WC 18%
Height [mm]
Date
Lin. 
Shrinkage 
[%]
Date
Lin. 
Shrinkage 
[%]
Date
Lin. 
Shrinkage 
[%]
Side 1 af 1
==PAGE:154==
Production of test specimens - soil mix recipe
Table C.2: Soil mix recipes for production of test specimens
RS-REF
RS-CaO
RS-SSA
RS-CaO-SSA
RS-CaO-Qz
Water content
14%
18%
12%
18%
18%
Number of specimens
13
13
13
13
13
Soil [g]
3770
3510
3700
3350
3350
Sand [g]
565.5
526.5
555
502.5
502.5
Quicklime [g]
-
201.8
-
192.6
192.6
SSA [g]
-
-
212.8
192.6
-
Qz [g]
-
-
-
-
192.6
Total dry weight [g]
4335.5
4238.3
4467.8
4237.8
4237.8
Water [g]
607.0
762.9
536.1
762.8
762.8
Total wet weight [g]
4942.5
5001.2
5003.9
5000.5
5000.5
Wet weight pr specimen [g]
380.2
384.7
384.9
384.7
384.7
147
==PAGE:155==
Final test specimens - prodution of cylinders
Area of cylinders
Ø60
2827.43 mm2
Setup:
100mm/min, 8 kN
24-mar
RS-REF
Curing at 40C
Theoretical wc
[%]
14
14
14
14
14
Real wc
[%]
13.964
13.964
13.964
13.964
13.964
Specimen
1
2
3
4
5
Mass
[g]
350.56
350.55
350.6
350.4
350.22
Mass after compression
[g]
350.2
350.32
350.2
350.25
349.89
Height 1
[mm]
57.71
57.74
57.67
57.72
57.67
Height 2
[mm]
57.77
57.7
57.78
57.7
57.6
Height 3
[mm]
57.67
57.69
57.67
57.7
57.72
Height average
[mm]
57.72
57.71
57.71
57.71
57.66
Bulk density, ρ = m/v
[kg/m3]
2145.96
2146.95
2146.34
2146.64
2146.05
Dry density, ρd
[kg/m3]
1883.02
1883.88
1883.34
1883.61
1883.09
Dry density, theoretical
[kg/m3]
1882.42
1883.29
1882.75
1883.02
1882.50
RS-REF
Curing at 23C
Theoretical wc
[%]
14
14
14
14
14
14
14
14
Real wc
[%]
13.964
13.964
13.964
13.964
13.964
13.964
13.964
13.964
Specimen
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Mass
[g]
350.86
350.88
350.38
350.63
350.8
350.57
350.71
350.35
Mass after compression
[g]
350.27
350.58
349.92
350.4
350.47
349.22
350.2
350.13
Height 1
[mm]
57.8
57.8
57.72
57.75
57.75
57.53
57.64
57.65
Height 2
[mm]
57.72
57.77
57.7
57.82
57.83
57.51
57.63
57.64
Height 3
[mm]
57.83
57.86
57.7
57.72
57.81
57.58
57.6
57.63
Height average
[mm]
57.78
57.81
57.71
57.76
57.80
57.54
57.62
57.64
Bulk density, ρ = m/v
[kg/m3]
2143.92
2144.82
2144.62
2145.46
2144.65
2146.53
2149.44
2148.39
Dry density, ρd
[kg/m3]
1881.22
1882.02
1881.84
1882.57
1881.86
1883.51
1886.07
1885.15
Dry density, theoretical
[kg/m3]
1880.63
1881.43
1881.25
1881.98
1881.27
1882.92
1885.47
1884.55
RS-REF
Calculation of water content
Theoretical wc
14
14
14
Container
41.71
41.613
42.409
Container + wet
60.404
60.194
61.209
Container + dry
58.119
57.922
58.895 Average
Std
Water content
13.925
13.931
14.036
13.964
0.062
23-mar
RS-CaO
Curing at 40C
Theoretical wc
[%]
18
18
18
18
18
Real wc
[%]
16.765
16.765
16.765
16.765
16.765
Specimen
1
2
3
4
5
Mass
[g]
350.57
350.43
350.86
350.36
350.77
Mass after compression
[g]
349.32
350.19
350
349.25
350.27
Height 1
[mm]
60.24
60.48
60.3
60.47
60.66
Height 2
[mm]
60.22
60.47
60.36
60.47
60.69
Height 3
[mm]
60.24
60.47
60.46
60.62
60.61
Height average
[mm]
60.23
60.47
60.37
60.52
60.65
Bulk density, ρ = m/v
[kg/m3]
2051.13
2048.08
2050.36
2041.01
2042.47
Dry density, ρd
[kg/m3]
1756.64
1754.03
1755.98
1747.97
1749.22
Dry density, theoretical
[kg/m3]
1738.25
1735.66
1737.59
1729.67
1730.91
RS-CaO
Curing at 23C
Theoretical wc
[%]
18
18
18
18
18
18
18
18
Real wc
[%]
16.765
16.765
16.765
16.765
16.765
16.765
16.765
16.765
Specimen
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Mass
[g]
350.24
350.24
350.77
350.3
350.84
350.79
350.25
350.34
Mass after compression
[g]
349.51
349.91
350.17
349.62
351.18
350.52
348.87
350.12
Height 1
[mm]
60.86
60.78
60.92
60.9
61.08
60.98
60.67
60.81
Height 2
[mm]
60.91
60.79
61.02
60.81
61.02
60.98
60.66
60.96
Height 3
[mm]
60.82
60.76
60.92
60.82
61.04
60.95
60.66
60.86
Height average
[mm]
60.86
60.78
60.95
60.84
61.05
60.97
60.66
60.88
Bulk density, ρ = m/v
[kg/m3]
2031.01
2036.23
2031.84
2032.31
2034.58
2033.31
2033.97
2034.11
Dry density, ρd
[kg/m3]
1739.40
1743.88
1740.12
1740.52
1742.47
1741.38
1741.94
1742.06
Dry density, theoretical
[kg/m3]
1721.19
1725.62
1721.90
1722.30
1724.22
1723.15
1723.71
1723.82
RS-CaO
Calculation of water content
Theoretical wc
18
18
18
Container
41.671
40.156
41.928
Container + wet
60.904
61.707
66.349
Container + dry
58.153
58.608
62.835 Average
Std
Water content
16.691
16.795
16.808
16.765
0.064
23-mar
RS-SSA
Curing at 40C
Theoretical wc
[%]
12
12
12
12
12
Real wc
[%]
12.310
12.310
12.310
12.310
12.310
Specimen
1
2
3
4
5
Mass
[g]
350.79
350.34
350.25
350.51
350.23
Side 1 af 3
==PAGE:156==
Mass after compression
[g]
350.62
350.15
349.95
350.33
350.17
Height 1
[mm]
57.69
57.49
57.33
57.43
57.36
Height 2
[mm]
57.73
57.47
57.39
57.49
57.35
Height 3
[mm]
57.71
57.46
57.32
57.41
57.41
Height average
[mm]
57.71
57.47
57.35
57.44
57.37
Bulk density, ρ = m/v
[kg/m3]
2148.79
2154.74
2158.27
2156.98
2158.62
Dry density, ρd
[kg/m3]
1913.27
1918.57
1921.71
1920.56
1922.02
Dry density, theoretical
[kg/m3]
1918.56
1923.88
1927.03
1925.87
1927.34
RS-SSA
100mm/ Curing at 23C
Theoretical wc
[%]
12
12
12
12
12
12
12
12
Real wc
[%]
12.310
12.310
12.310
12.310
12.310
12.310
12.310
12.310
Specimen
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Mass
[g]
350.77
350.38
350.5
350.3
350.69
350.7
350.77
350.33
Mass after compression
[g]
350.56
350.17
350.19
349.98
350.52
350.42
350.59
349.85
Height 1
[mm]
57.44
57.57
57.52
57.48
57.5
57.54
57.48
57.34
Height 2
[mm]
57.48
57.51
57.49
57.39
57.62
57.47
57.43
57.35
Height 3
[mm]
57.47
57.48
57.55
57.43
57.49
57.51
57.44
57.31
Height average
[mm]
57.46
57.52
57.52
57.43
57.54
57.51
57.45
57.33
Bulk density, ρ = m/v
[kg/m3]
2157.64
2153.12
2153.24
2155.20
2154.64
2155.15
2158.33
2158.15
Dry density, ρd
[kg/m3]
1921.15
1917.12
1917.23
1918.97
1918.48
1918.94
1921.76
1921.61
Dry density, theoretical
[kg/m3]
1926.47
1922.43
1922.54
1924.28
1923.79
1924.24
1927.08
1926.92
RS-SSA
Calculation of water content
Theoretical wc
12
12
12
Container
41.74
39.61
39.218
Container + wet
60.301
61.678
64.54
Container + dry
58.231
59.297
61.77 Average
Std
Water content
12.552
12.094
12.283
12.310
0.230
22-mar
RS-CaO-SSA
Curing at 40C
Theoretical wc
[%]
18
18
18
18
18
Real wc
[%]
16.904
16.904
16.904
16.904
16.904
Specimen
1
2
3
4
5
Mass
[g]
350.9
350.54
350.51
350.4
350.6
Mass after compression
[g]
350.08
349.11
350.17
349.91
350.65
Height 1
[mm]
61.24
61.1
61.55
61.31
61.65
Height 2
[mm]
61.21
61.1
61.36
61.33
61.65
Height 3
[mm]
61.19
61.13
61.39
61.29
61.66
Height average
[mm]
61.21
61.11
61.43
61.31
61.65
Bulk density, ρ = m/v
[kg/m3]
2022.69
2020.49
2015.96
2018.52
2011.52
Dry density, ρd
[kg/m3]
1730.22
1728.34
1724.47
1726.65
1720.67
Dry density, theoretical
[kg/m3]
1714.14
1712.28
1708.44
1710.61
1704.68
RS-CaO-SSA
Curing at 23C
Theoretical wc
[%]
18
18
18
18
18
18
18
18
Real wc
[%]
16.904
16.904
16.904
16.904
16.904
16.904
16.904
16.904
Specimen
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Mass
[g]
350.52
350.9
350.48
350.8
350.89
350.58
350.2
350.87
Mass after compression
[g]
349.91
350.78
350.2
350.42
350.6
363.86
348.19
350.73
Height 1
[mm]
62.3
62.24
62.43
62.06
62
64.49
61.43
62.17
Height 2
[mm]
62.28
62.28
62.47
62.1
62.02
64.42
61.42
62.21
Height 3
[mm]
62.3
62.24
62.32
62.11
62.01
64.44
61.43
62.24
Height average
[mm]
62.29
62.25
62.41
62.09
62.01
64.45
61.43
62.21
Bulk density, ρ = m/v
[kg/m3]
1986.65
1992.87
1984.69
1996.07
1999.67
1996.73
2004.78
1994.08
Dry density, ρd
[kg/m3]
1699.40
1704.72
1697.72
1707.45
1710.53
1708.01
1714.90
1705.75
Dry density, theoretical
[kg/m3]
1683.61
1688.88
1681.94
1691.58
1694.63
1692.14
1698.97
1689.90
RS-CaO-SSA
Calculation of water content
Theoretical wc
18
18
18
Container
41.914
38.938
39.831
Container + wet
60.281
60.746
62.955
Container + dry
57.623
57.575
59.633 Average
Std
Water content
16.920
17.015
16.776
16.904
0.120
22-mar
RS-CaO-Qz
Curing at 40C
Theoretical wc
[%]
18
18
18
18
18
Real wc
[%]
16.741
16.741
16.741
16.741
16.741
Specimen
1
2
3
4
5
Mass
[g]
350.64
351.5
350.72
350.97
350.32
Mass after compression
[g]
365.92
361.7
351.03
350.01
350.44
Height 1
[mm]
63.21
62.41
60.74
60.56
60.54
Height 2
[mm]
63.16
62.42
60.8
60.56
60.51
Height 3
[mm]
63.18
62.41
60.77
60.64
60.55
Height average
[mm]
63.18
62.41
60.77
60.59
60.53
Bulk density, ρ = m/v
[kg/m3]
2048.29
2049.65
2042.97
2043.20
2047.51
Dry density, ρd
[kg/m3]
1754.56
1755.72
1750.01
1750.20
1753.89
Dry density, theoretical
[kg/m3]
1735.84
1736.99
1731.33
1731.53
1735.18
RS-CaO-Qz
Curing at 23C
Side 2 af 3
==PAGE:157==
Theoretical wc
[%]
18
18
18
18
18
18
18
18
Real wc
[%]
16.741
16.741
16.741
16.741
16.741
16.741
16.741
16.741
Specimen
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Mass
[g]
350.5
350.74
350.58
350.48
350.84
350.81
350.25
350.71
Mass after compression
[g]
350.54
350.21
350.11
349.95
349.86
350.79
349.76
350.87
Height 1
[mm]
60.95
60.83
60.8
60.61
60.8
60.9
60.76
60.97
Height 2
[mm]
60.92
60.88
61.15
60.59
61.15
60.79
60.92
60.91
Height 3
[mm]
60.94
60.77
60.88
60.62
60.77
60.92
60.84
60.92
Height average
[mm]
60.94
60.83
60.94
60.61
60.91
60.87
60.84
60.93
Bulk density, ρ = m/v
[kg/m3]
2034.54
2036.30
2031.82
2042.18
2031.59
2038.22
2033.24
2036.57
Dry density, ρd
[kg/m3]
1742.78
1744.29
1740.45
1749.32
1740.26
1745.94
1741.67
1744.52
Dry density, theoretical
[kg/m3]
1724.19
1725.68
1721.88
1730.66
1721.69
1727.31
1723.08
1725.91
RS-CaO-Qz
Calculation of water content
Theoretical wc
18
18
18
Container
39.224
40.123
42.053
Container + wet
62.102
62.806
61.648
Container + dry
58.804
59.575
58.834 Average
Std
Water content
16.844
16.610
16.769
16.741
0.119
NB: In generel there is a tendency that the theoretical dry density is lower for the 23C specimens than for the 40C specimens. This is most likely due to 
production time. The 40C specimens was produced first, the 23C afterwards. There has most likely been more than one hour between the mixing of the soil 
and binder until production of 23C specimens. The water content have been taken after the production of all 13 specimens, thus it mainly represents the 
water content of the 23C specimens, due to the production time.
Side 3 af 3
==PAGE:158==
Final test specimens - Measurements after curing
5/4 - Put to dry at 23C 65%RH
RS-CaO-SSA
Curing at 40C
Average
Std
Theoretical wc
[%]
18
18
18
18
18
Real wc
[%]
16.904
16.904
16.904
16.904
16.904
Specimen
1
2
3
4
5
Mass after curing
[g]
348.88
347.73
348.57
348.35
349.03
348.512
0.51
Height 1
[mm]
61.31
61.06
61.39
61.31
61.6
Height 2
[mm]
61.28
61.22
61.49
61.28
61.61
Height 3
[mm]
61.23
61.15
61.43
61.72
61.85
Height average
[mm]
61.27
61.14
61.44
61.44
61.69
61.40
0.20
Diameter 1
[mm]
60.07
60.08
60.09
60.07
60.06
Diameter 2
[mm]
60.05
60.00
60.06
60.08
60.00
Diameter average
[mm]
60.06
60.04
60.08
60.08
60.03
60.06
0.02
Bulk density, ρ = m/v
[kg/m3]
2013.78
2011.41
2006.64
2005.38
2001.15
2007.67
5.00
Dry density, ρd
[kg/m3]
1722.60
1720.57
1716.49
1715.41
1711.79
1717.37
4.28
Dry density, theoretical
[kg/m3]
1706.59
1704.58
1700.54
1699.47
1695.89
1701.42
4.24
Mass
[g]
335.49
336.73
337.8
337.98
336.73
336.95
1.00
Mass
[g]
326.66
328.84
329.7
329.99
327.59
328.56
1.41
Mass
[g]
317.88
319.87
320.27
320.27
318.57
319.37
1.09
Mass
[g]
315.54
316.69
317.68
317.36
316.36
316.73
0.84
Mass
[g]
314
314.55
315.41
315.54
314.57
314.81
0.65
Water content when testing[%]
3.559
3.559
3.559
3.559
3.559
Mass when testing
[g]
312.66
312.81
313.56
313.51
312.79
313.066
0.43
Height 1
[mm]
60.96
60.76
61.04
60.94
61.26
60.992
0.18
Height 2
[mm]
61.07
60.75
61.03
60.98
61.27
61.02
0.19
Height 3
[mm]
61.12
60.74
61.1
60.99
61.25
61.04
0.19
Height average
[mm]
61.05
60.75
61.06
60.97
61.26
61.02
0.18
Diameter 1
[mm]
59.85
59.90
59.80
59.88
59.86
Diameter 2
[mm]
59.81
59.82
59.82
59.85
59.85
Diameter average
[mm]
59.83
59.86
59.81
59.87
59.86
59.84
0.02
Bulk density, ρ = m/v
[kg/m3]
1811.32
1821.13
1816.33
1818.62
1805.86
1814.65
6.11
Dry density, ρd
[kg/m3]
1749.06
1758.54
1753.91
1756.12
1743.79
1752.29
5.90
Mass difference before testing
0.38%
0.50%
0.53%
0.58%
0.51%
Max compression
[MPa]
3.1895
3.0498
3.0403
3.1371
3.1287
3.11
0.06
RS-CaO-SSA
Curing at 23C
Average
Std
Date
Theoretical wc
[%]
18
18
18
18
18
18
18
18
Real wc
[%]
16.904
16.904
16.904
16.904
16.904
16.904
16.904
16.904
Specimen
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Mass after curing
[g]
348.96
349.92
349.4
349.52
349.78
363.14
347.53
350.17
351.0525
4.95
05-apr
Height 1
[mm]
62.25
62.25
62.63
62.06
62.03
64.42
61.44
62.35
Height 2
[mm]
62.31
62.22
62.49
62.1
61.96
64.47
61.41
62.34
Height 3
[mm]
62.37
62.24
62.36
62.06
62.07
64.4
61.44
62.17
Height average
[mm]
62.31
62.24
62.49
62.07
62.02
64.43
61.43
62.29
62.41
0.88
Diameter 1
[mm]
60.11
60.06
60.06
60.07
60.02
60.02
60.06
60.10
Diameter 2
[mm]
60.04
60.02
60.03
59.94
60.05
60.03
59.99
60.09
Diameter average
[mm]
60.08
60.04
60.05
60.01
60.04
60.03
60.03
60.10
60.04
0.03
Bulk density, ρ = m/v
[kg/m3]
1980.73
1988.52
1977.41
1991.47
1994.67
1993.40
2000.87
1988.34
1989.43
7.56
Dry density, ρd
[kg/m3]
1694.33
1700.99
1691.49
1703.52
1706.25
1705.16
1711.56
1700.84
1701.77
6.47
Dry density, theoretical
[kg/m3]
1678.59
1685.19
1675.77
1687.69
1690.40
1689.32
1695.65
1685.04
1685.96
6.41
Mass
[g]
340.32
344.9
344.06
342.44
340.61
351.38
339.65
390.26
349.20
17.01
06-apr
Mass
[g]
333.52
340.75
339.47
336.98
333.43
342.59
332.94
331.94
336.45
4.07
07-apr
Mass
[g]
323.01
332.32
330.39
326.01
321.3
331.11
321.97
319.84
325.74
4.93
09-apr
Mass
[g]
319.16
327.51
325.97
320.97
318.01
328.14
317.78
316.69
321.78
4.70
10-apr
Mass
[g]
316.58
323.92
322.14
317.76
315.25
326.23
315.13
314.3
318.91
4.55
11-apr
Water content when testing[%]
3.634
3.634
3.634
3.634
3.634
3.634
3.634
3.634
Mass when testing
[g]
314.66
319.8
318.02
314.62
312.87
324.58
312.7
312.75
316.25
4.25
12-apr
Height 1
[mm]
61.98
61.94
62.01
61.88
61.67
64.07
61.07
61.75
62.04625
0.87
Height 2
[mm]
61.99
62.18
62.14
61.77
61.66
64.02
61.08
61.8
62.08
Height 3
[mm]
61.94
61.97
61.99
61.74
61.69
64.04
61.05
61.66
62.01
Height average
[mm]
61.97
62.03
62.05
61.80
61.67
64.04
61.07
61.74
62.05
0.87
Diameter 1
[mm]
59.88
59.88
59.95
59.93
59.80
59.91
59.90
59.83
Diameter 2
[mm]
59.86
59.90
59.90
59.94
59.93
59.95
59.91
59.95
Diameter average
[mm]
59.87
59.89
59.93
59.94
59.87
59.93
59.91
59.89
59.90
0.03
Bulk density, ρ = m/v
[kg/m3]
1795.84
1823.41
1812.77
1800.65
1794.21
1792.48
1811.05
1791.69
1802.76
11.64
Dry density, ρd
[kg/m3]
1732.87
1759.47
1749.21
1737.51
1731.30
1729.63
1747.55
1728.86
1739.55
11.24
Mass difference before testing
0.55%
1.17%
1.18%
0.90%
0.68%
0.45%
0.70%
0.44%
Max compression
[MPa]
2.3277
2.063
2.0337
2.3654
2.5861
2.28
0.23
RS-CaO-SSA
Calculation of water content
23C
40C
Container
91.121
156.627
Container + wet
403.89
468.804
Container + dry
392.93
458.075
Water content [%]
3.634
3.559
Side 1 af 5
==PAGE:159==
5/4 - Put to dry at 23C 65%RH
RS-CaO-Qz
Curing at 40C
Average
Std
Theoretical wc
[%]
18
18
18
18
18
Real wc
[%]
16.741
16.741
16.741
16.741
16.741
Specimen
1
2
3
4
5
Mass after curing
[g]
364.55
360.5
349.89
348.53
349.29
354.552
7.43
Height 1
[mm]
63.14
62.45
61
60.47
60.7
Height 2
[mm]
63.1
62.37
60.73
60.53
60.42
Height 3
[mm]
63.15
62.42
60.67
60.48
60.47
Height average
[mm]
63.13
62.41
60.80
60.49
60.53
61.47
1.22
Diameter 1
[mm]
60.04
60.00
60.07
60.05
59.99
Diameter 2
[mm]
60.08
60.00
60.05
60.08
60.04
Diameter average
[mm]
60.06
60.00
60.06
60.07
60.02
60.04
0.03
Bulk density, ρ = m/v
[kg/m3]
2042.34
2042.85
2035.33
2037.70
2040.91
2039.83
3.21
Dry density, ρd
[kg/m3]
1749.47
1749.90
1743.46
1745.49
1748.24
1747.31
2.75
Dry density, theoretical
[kg/m3]
1730.80
1731.22
1724.86
1726.86
1729.58
1728.67
2.72
Mass
[g]
352.26
359.51
338.79
331.49
333
343.01
12.33
Mass
[g]
343.59
340.82
329.88
328.29
323.69
333.25
8.54
Mass
[g]
334.13
331.89
321.01
318.8
315.51
324.27
8.25
Mass
[g]
331.18
328.24
318.12
316.26
313.59
321.48
7.76
Mass
[g]
329.24
326.05
316.29
314.4
312.47
319.69
7.47
Water content when testing[%]
3.137
3.137
3.137
3.137
3.137
Mass when testing
[g]
327.3
324.28
314.91
312.76
311.43
318.136
7.18
Height 1
[mm]
62.63
61.94
60.28
60.02
59.95
Height 2
[mm]
62.62
61.85
60.3
60.05
59.98
Height 3
[mm]
62.59
62.02
60.25
59.99
60.02
Height average
[mm]
62.61
61.94
60.28
60.02
59.98
60.97
1.22
Diameter 1
[mm]
59.73
59.75
59.79
59.74
59.75
Diameter 2
[mm]
59.70
59.72
59.73
59.80
59.78
Diameter average
[mm]
59.72
59.74
59.76
59.77
59.77
59.75
0.02
Bulk density, ρ = m/v
[kg/m3]
1848.79
1851.74
1847.76
1842.99
1836.27
1845.51
6.05
Dry density, ρd
[kg/m3]
1792.56
1795.42
1791.56
1786.94
1780.43
1789.38
5.86
Mass difference before testing
0.53%
0.49%
0.39%
0.47%
0.30%
Max compression
[MPa]
3.61
3.34
3.46
3.49
3.94
3.57
0.23
RS-CaO-Qz
Curing at 23C
Average
Std
Date
Theoretical wc
[%]
18
18
18
18
18
18
18
18
Real wc
[%]
16.741
16.741
16.741
16.741
16.741
16.741
16.741
16.741
Specimen
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Mass after curing
[g]
349.66
349.3
349.3
349.2
349.13
350.05
349.08
349.08
349.35
0.34
05-apr
Height 1
[mm]
60.94
60.77
60.8
60.66
60.74
60.8
60.8
60.88
Height 2
[mm]
60.87
60.71
60.76
60.56
60.74
60.78
60.72
61.1
Height 3
[mm]
60.89
60.73
60.83
60.57
60.72
60.83
60.72
60.9
Height average
[mm]
60.90
60.74
60.80
60.60
60.73
60.80
60.75
60.96
60.78
0.11
Diameter 1
[mm]
60.04
60.07
60.01
60.06
60.02
60.08
60.03
60.07
Diameter 2
[mm]
59.99
60.03
59.94
60.02
59.96
60.03
59.99
60.04
Diameter average
[mm]
60.02
60.05
59.98
60.04
59.99
60.06
60.01
60.06
60.02
0.03
Bulk density, ρ = m/v
[kg/m3]
2030.66
2034.02
2032.01
2038.14
2033.14
2036.15
2032.40
2025.29
2032.73
3.84
Dry density, ρd
[kg/m3]
1739.45
1742.34
1740.62
1745.86
1741.58
1744.16
1740.95
1734.86
1741.23
3.29
Dry density, theoretical
[kg/m3]
1720.89
1723.75
1722.04
1727.23
1723.00
1725.55
1722.38
1716.35
1722.65
3.25
Mass
[g]
343
344.46
343.87
341.75
336.66
340.58
341.09
340.01
341.43
2.49
06-apr
Mass
[g]
337.43
340.4
338.57
334.63
326.33
331.85
333.85
330.02
334.14
4.68
07-apr
Mass
[g]
326.52
331.97
329.47
322.94
315.01
319.14
320.89
330.02
324.50
5.97
09-apr
Mass
[g]
321.15
326.66
324.42
318.45
312.7
315.71
317.08
315.73
318.99
4.75
10-apr
Mass
[g]
317.76
322.62
320.37
315.46
311.16
313.72
314.6
313.79
316.19
3.81
11-apr
Water content when testing[%]
3.976
3.976
3.976
3.976
3.976
3.976
3.976
3.976
Mass when testing
[g]
314.44
318.06
315.87
312.21
309.8
311.82
312.17
311.77
313.2675
2.67
12-apr
Height 1
[mm]
60.6
60.4
60.49
60.17
60.3
60.44
60.33
60.46
Height 2
[mm]
60.51
60.36
60.39
60.17
60.39
60.46
60.3
60.41
Height 3
[mm]
60.53
60.39
60.45
60.15
60.26
60.5
60.4
60.41
Height average
[mm]
60.55
60.38
60.44
60.16
60.32
60.47
60.34
60.43
60.39
0.12
Diameter 1
[mm]
59.76
59.82
59.82
59.85
59.76
59.80
59.80
59.78
Diameter 2
[mm]
59.87
59.81
59.81
59.78
59.78
59.94
59.86
59.86
Diameter average
[mm]
59.82
59.82
59.82
59.82
59.77
59.87
59.83
59.82
59.82
0.03
Bulk density, ρ = m/v
[kg/m3]
1836.77
1862.94
1848.28
1835.37
1816.57
1823.88
1829.66
1824.79
1834.78
14.91
Dry density, ρd
[kg/m3]
1766.53
1791.70
1777.60
1765.18
1747.10
1754.13
1759.69
1755.01
1764.62
14.34
Mass difference before testing
0.95%
1.30%
1.29%
0.93%
0.39%
0.54%
0.69%
0.58%
Max compression
[MPa]
2.07
1.76
1.92
2.25
2.57
2.11
0.31
RS-CaO-Qz
Calculation of water content
23C
40C
Container
91.248
91.145
Container + wet
405.07
402.005
Container + dry
393.07
392.551
Water content [%]
3.976
3.137
6/4 - Put to dry at 23C 65%RH
RS-CaO
Curing at 40C
Average
Std
Theoretical wc
[%]
18
18
18
18
18
Side 2 af 5
==PAGE:160==
Real wc
[%]
16.765
16.765
16.765
16.765
16.765
Specimen
1
2
3
4
5
Mass after curing
[g]
347.99
348.61
348.62
348.02
349.01
348.45
0.44
Height 1
[mm]
60.25
60.47
60.49
60.55
60.77
Height 2
[mm]
60.19
60.5
60.35
60.59
60.71
Height 3
[mm]
60.24
60.49
60.32
60.52
60.66
Height average
[mm]
60.23
60.49
60.39
60.55
60.71
60.47
0.18
Diameter 1
[mm]
60.10
60.08
60.08
0.11
60.08
Diameter 2
[mm]
60.10
60.11
60.08
60.06
60.05
Diameter average
[mm]
60.10
60.10
60.08
30.09
60.07
54.09
13.42
Bulk density, ρ = m/v
[kg/m3]
2043.55
2038.39
2041.83
2032.70
2033.11
2037.92
4.94
Dry density, ρd
[kg/m3]
1750.15
1745.73
1748.67
1740.86
1741.21
1745.32
4.23
Dry density, theoretical
[kg/m3]
1731.82
1727.45
1730.36
1722.63
1722.98
1727.05
4.18
Mass
[g]
335.56
339.76
339.5
338.95
338.3
338.41
1.69
Mass
[g]
321.12
327.94
327.39
326.9
323.97
325.46
2.87
Mass
[g]
316.97
323.45
323.09
322.43
319.03
320.99
2.85
Mass
[g]
314.5
320.4
320.29
319.42
316.48
318.22
2.61
Mass
[g]
312.88
317.7
317.72
316.63
314.79
315.94
2.09
Water content when testing [%]
3.838
3.838
3.838
3.838
3.838
Mass when testing
[g]
311.66
315.7
315.75
314.41
313.22
314.148
1.74
Height 1
[mm]
59.9
59.91
59.81
60.09
60.2
Height 2
[mm]
59.68
59.97
59.83
59.97
60.17
Height 3
[mm]
59.79
60.03
59.84
60.09
60.42
Height average
[mm]
59.79
59.97
59.83
60.05
60.26
59.98
0.19
Diameter 1
[mm]
59.66
59.68
59.74
59.80
59.78
Diameter 2
[mm]
59.70
59.67
59.74
59.75
59.71
Diameter average
[mm]
59.68
59.68
59.74
59.78
59.75
59.72
0.04
Bulk density, ρ = m/v
[kg/m3]
1843.57
1861.86
1866.62
1851.79
1838.25
1852.42
11.94
Dry density, ρd
[kg/m3]
1775.44
1793.06
1797.64
1783.35
1770.31
1783.96
11.50
Mass difference before testing
0.35%
0.57%
0.56%
0.64%
0.45%
Max compressive strength [MPa]
3.48
3.15
3.27
3.14
3.36
3.28
0.14
RS-CaO
Curing at 23C
Average
Std
Date
Theoretical wc
[%]
18
18
18
18
18
18
18
18
Real wc
[%]
16.765
16.765
16.765
16.765
16.765
16.765
16.765
16.765
Specimen
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Mass after curing
[g]
348.28
348.66
349.08
348.54
350.04
349.43
347.8
349.21
348.88
0.71
06-apr
Height 1
[mm]
60.95
60.7
60.83
60.81
60.96
60.94
60.62
60.82
Height 2
[mm]
60.71
60.73
60.85
60.76
60.98
60.9
60.63
60.77
Height 3
[mm]
60.9
60.75
60.87
60.85
60.99
60.94
60.6
60.8
Height average
[mm]
60.85
60.73
60.85
60.81
60.98
60.93
60.62
60.80
60.82
0.11
Diameter 1
[mm]
60.07
60.03
60.04
60.06
60.08
60.07
60.04
60.10
Diameter 2
[mm]
60.06
60.01
60.07
60.07
60.06
60.05
60.04
60.08
Diameter average
[mm]
60.07
60.02
60.06
60.07
60.07
60.06
60.04
60.09
60.06
0.02
Bulk density, ρ = m/v
[kg/m3]
2024.19
2030.63
2028.95
2027.26
2030.31
2028.43
2029.29
2031.49
2028.82
2.29
Dry density, ρd
[kg/m3]
1733.57
1739.08
1737.64
1736.19
1738.80
1737.20
1737.94
1739.82
1737.53
1.97
Dry density, theoretical
[kg/m3]
1715.42
1720.87
1719.45
1718.02
1720.60
1719.01
1719.74
1721.60
1719.34
1.94
Mass
[g]
337.39
342.64
342.82
341.15
339.81
336.71
339.53
338.89
339.87
2.24
07-apr
Mass
[g]
323.16
333.46
332.14
328.64
325.12
321.41
326.43
323.09
326.68
4.39
09-apr
Mass
[g]
318.36
327.96
326.82
323.38
320.21
317.02
321.05
318.17
321.62
4.08
10-apr
Mass
[g]
315.38
323.85
323.1
319.62
316.8
314.53
317.34
315.31
318.24
3.59
11-apr
Mass
[g]
313.44
320.5
319.61
316.38
314.92
313.02
314.54
313.37
315.72
2.89
12-apr
Water content when testing [%]
3.434
3.434
3.434
3.434
3.434
3.434
3.434
3.434
Mass when testing
[g]
312.05
316.96
316.54
313.74
313.1
311.81
312.43
311.94
313.5713
2.07
13-apr
Height 1
[mm]
60.49
60.44
60.57
60.45
60.75
60.66
60.33
60.51
Height 2
[mm]
60.52
60.37
60.51
60.36
60.65
60.75
60.21
60.37
Height 3
[mm]
60.39
60.42
60.65
60.4
60.62
60.62
60.25
60.41
Height average
[mm]
60.47
60.41
60.58
60.40
60.67
60.68
60.26
60.43
60.49
0.14
Diameter 1
[mm]
59.80
59.79
59.84
59.77
59.80
59.77
59.74
59.81
Diameter 2
[mm]
59.76
59.83
59.77
59.93
59.76
59.75
59.77
59.73
Diameter average
[mm]
59.78
59.81
59.81
59.85
59.78
59.76
59.76
59.77
59.79
0.03
Bulk density, ρ = m/v
[kg/m3]
1825.22
1855.68
1848.12
1837.03
1825.13
1817.51
1833.61
1825.69
1833.50
12.95
Dry density, ρd
[kg/m3]
1764.63
1794.08
1786.77
1776.05
1764.54
1757.17
1772.74
1765.08
1772.63
12.52
Mass difference before testing
0.40%
1.01%
0.88%
0.76%
0.52%
0.35%
0.60%
0.41%
Max compressive strength [MPa]
2.43
1.96
1.98
2.08
2.49
2.19
0.25
RS-CaO
Calculation of water content
23C
40C
Container
157.68
159.131
Container + wet
470.59
471.71
Container + dry
460.2
460.158
Water content [%]
3.434
3.838
6/4 - Put to dry at 23C 65%RH
RS-SSA
Curing at 40C
Average
Std
Theoretical wc
[%]
12
12
12
12
12
Real wc
[%]
12.310
12.310
12.310
12.310
12.310
Specimen
1
2
3
4
5
Mass after curing
[g]
349.43
348.78
348.9
348.94
348.76
348.962
0.27
Height 1
[mm]
57.59
57.35
57.23
57.35
57.28
Height 2
[mm]
57.54
57.36
57.22
57.24
57.26
Side 3 af 5
==PAGE:161==
Height 3
[mm]
57.55
57.3
57.25
57.51
57.23
Height average
[mm]
57.56
57.34
57.23
57.37
57.26
57.35
0.13
Diameter 1
[mm]
59.91
59.96
59.89
59.93
59.91
Diameter 2
[mm]
59.88
59.96
59.92
59.92
59.84
Diameter average
[mm]
59.90
59.96
59.91
59.93
59.88
59.91
0.03
Bulk density, ρ = m/v
[kg/m3]
2147.07
2151.43
2156.05
2151.29
2154.31
2152.03
3.42
Dry density, ρd
[kg/m3]
1911.74
1915.62
1919.74
1915.50
1918.19
1916.16
3.05
Dry density, theoretical
[kg/m3]
1917.03
1920.92
1925.05
1920.79
1923.49
1921.46
3.06
Mass
[g]
338.99
339.84
340.3
339.53
335.9
338.91
1.75
Mass
[g]
329.39
331.04
331.04
330.46
326.75
329.74
1.80
Mass
[g]
326.89
328.18
328.06
327.61
324.55
327.06
1.49
Mass
[g]
324.78
326
326
325.58
323.19
325.11
1.18
Mass
[g]
323.66
324.29
324.16
323.97
322.06
323.63
0.91
Water content when testing[%]
3.036
3.036
3.036
3.036
3.036
Mass when testing
[g]
322.64
323.14
322.67
322.71
321.29
322.49
0.70
Height 1
[mm]
57.55
57.23
57.11
57.15
57.15
Height 2
[mm]
57.49
57.25
57.15
57.17
57.11
Height 3
[mm]
57.49
57.21
57.07
57.17
57.14
Height average
[mm]
57.51
57.23
57.11
57.16
57.13
57.23
0.16
Diameter 1
[mm]
59.41
59.44
59.47
59.37
59.42
Diameter 2
[mm]
59.40
59.38
59.46
59.40
59.51
Diameter average
[mm]
59.41
59.41
59.47
59.39
59.47
59.43
0.04
Bulk density, ρ = m/v
[kg/m3]
1984.19
1996.98
1998.27
1996.65
1988.91
1993.00
6.15
Dry density, ρd
[kg/m3]
1925.71
1938.13
1939.38
1937.81
1930.30
1934.27
5.97
Mass difference before testing
0.29%
0.33%
0.43%
0.36%
0.22%
Max compressive strength
[MPa]
3.71
3.55
3.68
3.75
3.93
3.72
0.14
RS-SSA
Curing at 23C
Average
Std
Date
Theoretical wc
[%]
12
12
12
12
12
12
12
12
Real wc
[%]
12.310
12.310
12.310
12.310
12.310
12.310
12.310
12.310
Specimen
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Mass after curing
[g]
349.7
349.11
349.24
349.08
349.51
349.52
349.65
349
349.3513
0.28
06-apr
Height 1
[mm]
57.4
57.56
57.47
57.4
57.5
57.48
57.47
57.29
Height 2
[mm]
57.4
57.44
57.45
57.36
57.54
57.43
57.35
57.27
Height 3
[mm]
57.31
57.44
57.4
57.37
57.53
57.32
57.29
57.37
Height average
[mm]
57.37
57.48
57.44
57.38
57.52
57.41
57.37
57.31
57.41
0.07
Diameter 1
[mm]
60.05
60.01
59.98
59.99
60.07
60.01
60.03
60.01
Diameter 2
[mm]
60.01
60.02
60.01
60.03
60.03
60.04
59.99
59.98
Diameter average
[mm]
60.03
60.02
60.00
60.01
60.05
60.03
60.01
60.00
60.02
0.02
Bulk density, ρ = m/v
[kg/m3]
2155.85
2148.09
2150.39
2151.78
2148.93
2153.24
2155.54
2153.79
2152.20
2.90
Dry density, ρd
[kg/m3]
1919.56
1912.65
1914.70
1915.93
1913.40
1917.23
1919.28
1917.72
1916.31
2.59
Dry density, theoretical
[kg/m3]
1924.87
1917.94
1919.99
1921.23
1918.69
1922.53
1924.59
1923.02
1921.61
2.59
Mass
[g]
340.99
343.02
343.43
341.43
338.51
338.95
341.89
339.89
341.01
1.80
07-apr
Mass
[g]
331.61
335.32
335.92
332.79
328.84
328.51
332.03
329.16
331.77
2.85
09-apr
Mass
[g]
328.67
332.05
332.72
329.47
326.08
325.62
328.71
326.35
328.71
2.67
10-apr
Mass
[g]
326.15
329.3
329.95
326.82
324.44
324.03
326.47
324.08
326.41
2.27
11-apr
Mass
[g]
324.14
326.91
327.39
324.66
323.15
322.64
324.89
322.8
324.57
1.80
12-apr
Water content when testing[%]
3.072
3.072
3.072
3.072
3.072
3.072
3.072
3.072
Mass when testing
[g]
322.63
324.5
324.71
322.71
322.05
321.52
323.01
321.54
322.8338
1.22
13-apr
Height 1
[mm]
57.15
57.34
57.38
57.15
57.31
57.2
57.15
57.08
Height 2
[mm]
57.23
57.36
57.31
57.18
57.25
57.25
57.07
57.08
Height 3
[mm]
57.09
57.33
57.22
57.33
57.33
57.13
57.15
57.06
Height average
[mm]
57.16
57.34
57.30
57.22
57.30
57.19
57.12
57.07
57.21
0.10
Diameter 1
[mm]
59.43
59.37
59.46
59.41
59.55
59.36
59.34
59.25
Diameter 2
[mm]
59.32
59.39
59.50
59.40
59.46
59.44
59.39
59.38
Diameter average
[mm]
59.38
59.38
59.48
59.41
59.51
59.40
59.37
59.32
59.40
0.06
Bulk density, ρ = m/v
[kg/m3]
1996.39
2001.43
2004.12
1994.68
1987.93
1988.25
1999.91
1992.55
1995.66
5.96
Dry density, ρd
[kg/m3]
1936.89
1941.77
1944.38
1935.22
1928.68
1928.98
1940.30
1933.16
1936.17
5.78
Mass difference before testing
0.43%
0.69%
0.77%
0.56%
0.31%
0.32%
0.54%
0.36%
Max compressive strength
[MPa]
3.96
3.36
3.41
3.77
3.95
3.69
0.29
RS-SSA
Calculation of water content
23C
40C
Container
154.55
157.226
Container + wet
475.06
478.848
Container + dry
465.51
469.370
Water content [%]
3.072
3.036
7/4 - Put to dry at 23C 65%RH
RS-REF
Curing at 40C
Average
Std
Theoretical wc
[%]
14
12
12
12
12
Real wc
[%]
13.964
13.964
13.964
13.964
13.964
Specimen
1
2
3
4
5
Mass after curing
[g]
349.04
349.35
348.93
349.34
348.77
349.086
0.26
Height 1
[mm]
57.51
57.57
57.66
57.54
57.45
Height 2
[mm]
57.51
57.64
57.57
57.56
57.47
Height 3
[mm]
57.55
57.6
57.6
57.6
57.48
Height average
[mm]
57.52
57.60
57.61
57.57
57.47
57.55
0.06
Diameter 1
[mm]
59.90
59.92
59.88
59.84
Diameter 2
[mm]
59.87
59.84
59.76
60.01
59.85
Side 4 af 5
==PAGE:162==
Diameter average
[mm]
59.89
59.88
59.82
59.90
59.85
59.87
0.03
Bulk density, ρ = m/v
[kg/m3]
2146.04
2144.97
2142.14
2146.27
2146.50
2145.19
1.80
Dry density, ρd
[kg/m3]
1883.09
1882.14
1879.66
1883.29
1883.49
1882.33
1.58
Dry density, theoretical
[kg/m3]
1882.50
1915.15
1912.63
1916.31
1916.52
1908.62
14.69
Mass
[g]
330.14
334.96
335.23
333.19
329.01
332.51
2.82
Mass
[g]
324.6
329.69
330.24
327.91
323.9
327.27
2.90
Mass
[g]
321.37
325.74
326.51
324.27
320.66
323.71
2.60
Mass
[g]
318.82
322.46
323.64
321.76
318.45
321.03
2.29
Mass
[g]
317.31
319.52
320.81
319.02
316.65
318.66
1.68
Water content when testin [%]
3.215
3.215
3.215
3.215
3.215
Mass when testing
[g]
316.92
318.68
319.53
317.98
316
317.822
1.40
Height 1
[mm]
56.7
56.78
56.73
56.75
56.68
Height 2
[mm]
56.68
56.73
56.73
56.75
56.71
Height 3
[mm]
56.75
56.9
56.84
56.68
56.69
Height average
[mm]
56.71
56.80
56.77
56.73
56.69
56.74
0.04
Diameter 1
[mm]
58.43
58.48
58.46
58.48
58.54
Diameter 2
[mm]
58.41
58.36
58.47
58.47
58.44
Diameter average
[mm]
58.42
58.42
58.47
58.48
58.49
58.45
0.03
Bulk density, ρ = m/v
[kg/m3]
1976.50
1984.21
1990.79
1982.53
1971.35
1981.08
7.45
Dry density, ρd
[kg/m3]
1914.93
1922.40
1928.77
1920.77
1909.93
1919.36
7.22
Mass difference before testing
0.11%
0.24%
0.37%
0.30%
0.19%
Max compression
[MPa]
3.81
3.57
3.40
3.61
3.80
3.64
0.15
RS-REF
Curing at 23C
Average
Std
Date
Theoretical wc
[%]
12
12
12
12
12
12
12
12
Real wc
[%]
13.964
13.964
13.964
13.964
13.964
13.964
13.964
13.964
Specimen
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Mass after curing
[g]
349.3
349.71
349.02
349.53
349.58
348.34
349.36
349.4
349.28
0.43
07-apr
Height 1
[mm]
57.58
57.69
57.55
57.67
57.64
57.44
57.56
57.63
Height 2
[mm]
57.61
57.58
57.57
57.6
57.6
57.33
57.7
57.55
Height 3
[mm]
57.56
57.58
57.6
57.6
57.67
57.37
57.67
57.48
Height average
[mm]
57.58
57.62
57.57
57.62
57.64
57.38
57.64
57.55
57.58
0.09
Diameter 1
[mm]
59.98
59.90
59.92
59.95
59.96
59.90
59.89
59.93
Diameter 2
[mm]
59.91
59.89
59.83
59.89
59.92
59.92
59.90
59.94
Diameter average
[mm]
59.95
59.90
59.88
59.92
59.94
59.91
59.90
59.94
59.91
0.02
Bulk density, ρ = m/v
[kg/m3]
2145.41
2146.68
2144.06
2145.33
2145.14
2147.09
2143.54
2147.14
2145.55
1.35
Dry density, ρd
[kg/m3]
1882.53
1883.65
1881.34
1882.46
1882.29
1884.01
1880.89
1884.05
1882.65
1.18
Dry density, theoretical
[kg/m3]
1915.54
1916.68
1914.34
1915.47
1915.30
1917.05
1913.88
1917.09
1915.67
1.20
Mass
[g]
335.91
340.5
338.74
335.69
328.66
330.89
334.34
330.14
334.36
4.20
09-apr
Mass
[g]
329.69
335.22
333.24
330.21
323.51
324.46
328.09
323.22
328.46
4.49
10-apr
Mass
[g]
325.1
330.62
330.62
325.75
320.48
320.63
323.9
320.59
324.71
4.20
11-apr
Mass
[g]
321.76
327.12
325.22
322.75
318.63
318.33
321.11
318.97
321.74
3.19
12-apr
Mass
[g]
319.21
323.01
321.35
319.42
316.89
316.59
318.7
317.16
319.04
2.25
13-apr
Water content when testin [%]
3.162
3.162
3.162
3.162
3.162
3.162
3.162
3.162
Mass when testing
[g]
318.36
321.23
319.65
318.11
316.29
315.97
317.65
316.53
317.9738
1.80
14-apr
Height 1
[mm]
56.87
56.77
56.71
56.86
56.71
56.48
56.63
56.77
Height 2
[mm]
56.77
56.86
56.67
56.84
56.82
56.54
56.55
56.65
Height 3
[mm]
56.69
56.77
56.75
56.89
56.81
56.51
56.55
56.56
Height average
[mm]
56.78
56.80
56.71
56.86
56.78
56.51
56.58
56.66
56.71
0.12
Diameter 1
[mm]
58.55
58.42
58.37
58.47
58.47
58.45
58.51
58.40
Diameter 2
[mm]
58.40
58.50
58.42
58.50
58.50
58.44
58.35
58.52
Diameter average
[mm]
58.48
58.46
58.40
58.49
58.49
58.45
58.43
58.46
58.45
0.03
Bulk density, ρ = m/v
[kg/m3]
1983.15
2000.21
1993.53
1978.58
1970.14
1977.55
1985.73
1975.81
1983.09
9.86
Dry density, ρd
[kg/m3]
1922.37
1938.91
1932.43
1917.93
1909.76
1916.94
1924.87
1915.26
1922.31
9.56
Mass difference before testing
0.24%
0.51%
0.49%
0.37%
0.17%
0.18%
0.30%
0.18%
Max compression
[MPa]
3.73
3.30
3.38
3.64
4.05
3.62
0.27
RS-REF
Calculation of water content
23C
40C
Container
149.85
156.958
Container + wet
465.78
472.79
Container + dry
456.1
462.951
Water content [%]
3.162
3.215
Side 5 af 5
==PAGE:163==
Compression tests
156
==PAGE:164==
157
==PAGE:165==
158
==PAGE:166==
159
==PAGE:167==
160
==PAGE:168==
161
==PAGE:169==
Table C.3: Compressive strength, [MPa]
RS-REF
RS-SSA
RS-CaO
RS-CaO-SSA
RS-CaO-Qz
Specimen
23C
40C
23C
40C
23C
40C
23C
40C
23C
40C
1
3.73
3.81
3.96
3.71
2.43
3.48
2.33
3.19
2.07
3.61
2
3.3
3.57
3.36
3.55
1.96
3.15
2.06
3.05
1.76
3.34
3
3.38
3.4
3.41
3.68
1.98
3.27
2.03
3.04
1.92
3.46
4
3.64
3.61
3.77
3.75
2.08
3.14
2.37
3.14
2.25
3.49
5
4.05
3.8
3.95
3.93
2.49
3.36
2.59
3.13
2.57
3.94
Avg
3.62
3.64
3.69
3.72
2.19
3.28
2.28
3.11
2.11
3.57
Std
0.30
0.17
0.29
0.14
0.25
0.14
0.23
0.06
0.31
0.23
Var
0.089
0.029
0.084
0.019
0.064
0.021
0.054
0.004
0.098
0.052
Table C.4: Calculation of Young’s Modulus of Elasticity
RS-REF
RS-SSA
RS-CaO
RS-CaO-SSA
RS-CaO-Qz
23C
40C
23C
40C
23C
40C
23C
40C
23C
40C
𝜀1
mm
mm
0.00138 0.00141 0.00133 0.00152 0.00010 0.00121 0.00086 0.00094 0.00126 0.00112
𝜀2
mm
mm
0.0109
0.0109
0.00923 0.00959 0.00533 0.00685 0.00481 0.00654 0.00667 0.00631
𝜎1 [MPa]
0.4869
0.4918
0.5062
0.4825
0.4963
0.5005
0.4975
0.5005
0.4863
0.4995
𝜎2 [MPa]
1.986
1.993
1.98
1.99
1.393
1.999
1.394
1.974
1.396
1.993
𝐸𝑠[MPa]
157.50
158.12
186.78
186.87
206.70
265.60
226.89
263.06
168.00
287.71
𝐸𝑠[GPa]
0.158
0.158
0.187
0.187
0.207
0.266
0.227
0.263
0.168
0.288
pH of test specimens cured at 23°C
Table C.5: pH of test specimens cured at 23°C
Mass [g]
Temp. [°C]
pH [-]
Soil
A
B
C
A
B
C
A
B
C
Avg
Std
RS-REF
20.00
20.00
20.00
22.5
22.5
22.5
8.83
8.66
8.62
8.70
0.11
RS-SSA
20.00
20.00
20.00
22.6
22.6
22.6
8.08
8.01
7.95
8.01
0.07
RS-CaO
20.00
20.00
20.00
22.40
22.40
22.40
12.62
12.56
12.56
12.58
0.03
RS-CaO-SSA
20.00
20.00
20.00
22.80
22.80
22.90
12.61
12.59
12.57
12.59
0.02
RS-CaO-Qz
20.00
20.00
20.00
22.40
22.40
22.50
12.56
12.55
12.58
12.56
0.02
162
==PAGE:170==
Leaching, pH, and conductivity of test specimens with SSA
Including leaching and digestion of SSA.
Table C.6: pH and conductivity of test specimens with SSA
RS-SSA
RS-CaO-SSA
Sample
A
B
C
Avg
Std
A
B
C
Avg
Std
Mass
[g]
10.00 10.00 10.00
10.01 10.01 10.00
Temp.
[°C]
22.6
22.6
22.6
22.5
22.5
22.5
pH
[-]
8.76
8.22
8.05
8.34 0.37 12.43 12.43 12.52 12.46 0.05
Conductivity [mS/cm] 0.271 0.256 0.259 0.26 0.01
3.89
4.16
4.3
4.12
0.21
Table C.7: Anion summary report - IC (Leaching)
No.
Name
Amount
Amount
Amount
mg/L
mg/L
mg/L
ECD_1
ECD_1
ECD_1
Chloride
Nitrate
Sulfate
1
M
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
2
st.1
14.0527
14.5717
14.6768
3
st.2
28.6618
29.0114
29.299
4
st.3
59.9797
59.8432
59.7923
5
st.4
90.5083
90.2823
90.1817
6
st.5
120.8135
120.7078
120.6652
7
st.6
149.398
149.5454
149.598
8
M
n.a.
1.0765
0.8105
9
Kontrol
80.9788
77.7288
77.595
A
L/S 10 #0013
8.0744
8.5968
950.1095
B
L/S 10 #0013
6.7622
1.9373
951.0394
C
L/S 10 #0013
6.6566
5.5851
957.5304
A
RS-CaO-SSA
4.3771
1.6942
5.4254
B
RS-CaO-SSA
4.2407
1.4120
4.6764
C
RS-CaO-SSA
3.9747
1.4127
4.4605
A
RS-SSA
5.3702
6.0379
67.8103
B
RS-SSA
4.7687
1.3346
69.6622
C
RS-SSA
5.0490
1.2448
70.1919
163
==PAGE:171==
Table C.8: Leaching and digestion - ICP [mg/l]
Tube
Sample Labels
Cd 226.502 Cr 206.550 Cu 324.754 P 213.618 Pb 220.353 Zn 206.200
1 : 1
Standard 1
0
0
0
0
0
0
1 : 2
Standard 2
0.02
0.02
0.02
0,020000 e
0.02
1 : 3
Standard 3
0.04
0.04
0.04
0,040000 e
0.04
1 : 4
Standard 4
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
1 : 5
Standard 5
0.5
0.5
0.5
0.5
0.5
1 : 6
Standard 6
1
1
1
1
1
1 : 7
Standard 7
2.5
2.5
2.5
2.5
2.5
1 : 8
Standard 8
5
5
5
5
5
1 : 9
Standard 9
10
10
10
10
10
1 : 10 Standard 10
2
1 : 11 Standard 11
4
1 : 12 Standard 12
8
1 : 13 Standard 13
10
1 : 14 Standard 14
20
1 : 15 Standard 15
40
1 : 16 Standard 16
50
1 : 17 Standard 17
100
01:18 VKI 1
0.9776
0.0724
1.9388
0.0285
2.0015
1.9794
01:19 VKI 2
0.0007
1.8986
0.0020
Under 0
0.0072
0.0063
01:20 Kontrol multi 0.5
0.4892
0.4833
0.4855
0.0415
0.4952
0.4936
01:21 Kontrol P 8
0.0014
0.0029
0.0028
7.7971
0.0040
0.0023
2 : 54 Digestion #0013 A
0.0486
0.5936
6.5674
585.0150
1.5537
23.8919
2 : 55 Digestion #0013 B
0.0481
0.5630
6.2414
582.8993
1.4020
22.8169
2 : 56 Digestion #0013 C
0.0444
0.5976
6.3263
545.1642
1.4376
23.6426
Leaching L/S-10 #0013 A
0.00157
0.00538
0.00635
0.15907
0.01583
0.01327
Leaching L/S-10 #0013 B
0.00166
0.00704
0.00740
0.11798
0.01284
0.00282
Leaching L/S-10 #0013 C
0.00114
0.00334
0.00801
0.11326
0.01603
0.00486
Leaching RS-CaO-SSA A
0.00149
0.00679
0.06158
0.00928
0.01267
0.00786
Leaching RS-CaO-SSA B
0.00117
0.00622
0.06583
0.00000
0.01038
0.00454
Leaching RS-CaO-SSA C
0.00084
0.00591
0.06058
0.00000
0.01404
0.00509
Leaching RS-SSA A
0.00128
0.00591
0.02006
2.93013
0.01312
0.02203
Leaching RS-SSA B
0.00193
0.00429
0.01652
2.84349
0.01045
0.00873
Leaching RS-SSA C
0.00083
0.00493
0.02089
2.81246
0.01274
0.00615
164
==PAGE:172==
Sorption isotherms
RS-REF
RS-SSA
RS-CaO
RS-CaO-
SSA
RS-CaO-
Qz
Glass
221.037
209.074
220.578
227.522
218.914
Glass+wet
317.428
298.385
301.614
311.055
301.491
Wet mass
96.391
89.311
81.036
83.533
82.577
Glass+dry
314.533
296.473
299.624
309.634
299.627
Dry  mass
93.496
87.399
79.046
82.112
80.713
Mass change [%]
3.00
2.14
2.46
1.70
2.26
Glass+dry
314.47
296.419
299.586
309.584
299.798
Dry  mass
93.43
87.35
79.01
82.06
80.88
Mass change [%]
0.07
0.06
0.05
0.06
-0.21
Put into chamber at 33% RH 18-04-2023.
RS-REF
RH
Date
1
2
3
1
2
3 Avg
Std
Glass
18-apr
46.5869
60.75
49.4823
Glass+material
18-apr
66.588
80.7556
69.4865
20.0011
20.0056
20.0042
20.0036
0.0023
33% (35.3%)
21-apr
66.767
80.928
69.669
20.1801
20.178
20.1867
20.1816
0.0045
33% (34.6%)
22-apr
66.776
80.943
69.673
20.1891
20.193
20.1907
20.1909
0.0020
33% (34.7%)
23-apr
66.765
80.93
69.668
20.1781
20.18
20.1857
20.1813
0.0040
33% (34.6%)
24-apr
66.776
80.94
69.678
20.1891
20.19
20.1957
20.1916
0.0036
75% (74.6%)
25-apr
66.999
81.153
69.9
20.4121
20.403
20.4177
20.4109
0.0074
75% (75.3%)
26-apr
67.019
81.169
69.912
20.4321
20.419
20.4297
20.4269
0.0070
75% (75.1%)
27-apr
67.014
81.168
69.91
20.4271
20.418
20.4277
20.4243
0.0054
75% (76.3%)
28-apr
67.013
81.163
69.92
20.4261
20.413
20.4377
20.4256
0.0124
75% (75.7%)
29-apr
67.01
81.159
69.911
20.4231
20.409
20.4287
20.4203
0.0102
94% (95.4%)
01-maj
67.347
81.419
70.202
20.7601
20.669
20.7197
20.7163
0.0456
94% (96.7%)
02-maj
67.345
81.414
70.221
20.7581
20.664
20.7387
20.7203
0.0497
94% (96.8%)
03-maj
67.35
81.429
70.21
20.7631
20.679
20.7277
20.7233
0.0422
94% (96.9%)
04-maj
67.352
81.431
70.211
20.7651
20.681
20.7287
20.7249
0.0422
94% (97.6%)
08-maj
67.347
81.433
70.204
20.7601
20.683
20.7217
20.7216
0.0386
75% (78.2%)
10-maj
67.096
81.231
69.986
20.5091
20.481
20.5037
20.4979
0.0149
75% (78.4%)
11-maj
67.092
81.21
69.989
20.5051
20.46
20.5067
20.4906
0.0265
75% (78.1%)
12-maj
67.073
81.2
69.97
20.4861
20.45
20.4877
20.4746
0.0213
75% (79.1%)
13-maj
67.09
81.22
69.987
20.5031
20.47
20.5047
20.4926
0.0196
75% (88.4%)
14-maj
67.084
81.179
69.976
20.4971
20.429
20.4937
20.4733
0.0384
33% (34.8%)
15-maj
66.803
80.958
69.705
20.2161
20.208
20.2227
20.2156
0.0074
33% (35.6%)
16-maj
66.799
80.956
69.702
20.2121
20.206
20.2197
20.2126
0.0069
33% (34.5%)
17-maj
66.794
80.948
69.695
20.2071
20.198
20.2127
20.2059
0.0074
33% (35.1%)
18-maj
66.785
80.939
69.687
20.1981
20.189
20.2047
20.1973
0.0079
RS-REF
RH
Date
1
2
3 Avg
Std
1
2
3 Avg
Std
33% (35.3%)
21-apr
-0.04
-0.21
-0.15
-0.1333
0.0862
0.0089
0.0086
0.0091
0.0089
0.0003
33% (34.6%)
22-apr
0.04
0.07
0.02
0.0467
0.0275
0.0094
0.0094
0.0093
0.0094
0.0000
33% (34.7%)
23-apr
-0.05
-0.06
-0.02
-0.0483
0.0208
0.0088
0.0087
0.0091
0.0089
0.0002
33% (34.6%)
24-apr
0.05
0.05
0.05
0.0517
0.0029
0.0094
0.0092
0.0096
0.0094
0.0002
75% (74.6%)
25-apr
1.11
1.06
1.11
1.0966
0.0275
0.0205
0.0199
0.0207
0.0204
0.0004
75% (75.3%)
26-apr
0.10
0.08
0.06
0.0800
0.0200
0.0215
0.0207
0.0213
0.0212
0.0005
75% (75.1%)
27-apr
-0.02
0.00
-0.01
-0.0133
0.0104
0.0213
0.0206
0.0212
0.0210
0.0004
75% (76.3%)
28-apr
0.00
-0.02
0.05
0.0067
0.0388
0.0212
0.0204
0.0217
0.0211
0.0007
75% (75.7%)
29-apr
-0.01
-0.02
-0.04
-0.0267
0.0161
0.0211
0.0202
0.0212
0.0208
0.0006
Check if they are ready to get into the climate chamber. The mass must 
not deviate with more than 0.1% of the mass, and the soil has been dried 
at 50C.
Mass of material [g]
Mass change [%]
Moisture content, u [kg/kg]
Measurement [g]
Page 1 of 6
==PAGE:173==
94% (95.4%)
01-maj
1.68
1.30
1.45
1.4799
0.1937
0.0379
0.0332
0.0358
0.0356
0.0024
94% (96.7%)
02-maj
-0.01
-0.02
0.09
0.0200
0.0654
0.0378
0.0329
0.0367
0.0358
0.0026
94% (96.8%)
03-maj
0.02
0.07
-0.05
0.0150
0.0656
0.0381
0.0337
0.0362
0.0360
0.0022
94% (96.9%)
04-maj
0.01
0.01
0.00
0.0083
0.0029
0.0382
0.0338
0.0362
0.0361
0.0022
94% (97.6%)
08-maj
-0.02
0.01
-0.03
-0.0167
0.0236
0.0379
0.0339
0.0359
0.0359
0.0020
75% (78.2%)
10-maj
-1.25
-1.01
-1.09
-1.1183
0.1249
0.0254
0.0238
0.0250
0.0247
0.0008
75% (78.4%)
11-maj
-0.02
-0.10
0.01
-0.0367
0.0617
0.0252
0.0227
0.0251
0.0243
0.0014
75% (78.1%)
12-maj
-0.09
-0.05
-0.09
-0.0800
0.0260
0.0242
0.0222
0.0242
0.0235
0.0012
75% (79.1%)
13-maj
0.08
0.10
0.08
0.0900
0.0087
0.0251
0.0232
0.0250
0.0244
0.0011
75% (88.4%)
14-maj
-0.03
-0.20
-0.05
-0.0967
0.0946
0.0248
0.0212
0.0245
0.0235
0.0020
33% (34.8%)
15-maj
-1.40
-1.10
-1.35
-1.2883
0.1607
0.0107
0.0101
0.0109
0.0106
0.0004
33% (35.6%)
16-maj
-0.02
-0.01
-0.01
-0.0150
0.0050
0.0105
0.0100
0.0108
0.0104
0.0004
33% (34.5%)
17-maj
-0.02
-0.04
-0.03
-0.0333
0.0076
0.0103
0.0096
0.0104
0.0101
0.0004
33% (35.1%)
18-maj
-0.04
-0.04
-0.04
-0.0433
0.0029
0.0098
0.0092
0.0100
0.0097
0.0005
RS-SSA
RH
Date
1
2
3
1
2
3 Avg
Std
Glass
18-apr
52.9943
61.0011
52.4506
Glass+material
18-apr
72.9842
81.0183
72.4693
19.9899
20.0172
20.0187
20.0086
0.0162
33% (35.3%)
21-apr
73.16
81.194
72.64
20.1657
20.1929
20.1894
20.1827
0.0148
33% (34.6%)
22-apr
73.162
81.198
72.648
20.1677
20.1969
20.1974
20.1873
0.0170
33% (34.7%)
23-apr
73.158
81.197
72.643
20.1637
20.1959
20.1924
20.1840
0.0177
33% (34.6%)
24-apr
73.17
81.205
72.654
20.1757
20.2039
20.2034
20.1943
0.0161
75% (74.6%)
25-apr
73.388
81.423
72.873
20.3937
20.4219
20.4224
20.4127
0.0164
75% (75.3%)
26-apr
73.403
81.439
72.894
20.4087
20.4379
20.4434
20.4300
0.0187
75% (75.1%)
27-apr
73.399
81.436
72.889
20.4047
20.4349
20.4384
20.4260
0.0185
75% (76.3%)
28-apr
73.402
81.437
72.884
20.4077
20.4359
20.4334
20.4257
0.0156
75% (75.7%)
29-apr
73.398
81.433
72.886
20.4037
20.4319
20.4354
20.4237
0.0174
94% (95.4%)
01-maj
73.744
81.763
73.24
20.7497
20.7619
20.7894
20.7670
0.0203
94% (96.7%)
02-maj
73.744
81.76
73.239
20.7497
20.7589
20.7884
20.7657
0.0202
94% (96.8%)
03-maj
73.745
81.764
73.234
20.7507
20.7629
20.7834
20.7657
0.0165
94% (96.9%)
04-maj
73.748
81.769
73.229
20.7537
20.7679
20.7784
20.7667
0.0124
94% (97.6%)
08-maj
73.746
81.772
73.213
20.7517
20.7709
20.7624
20.7617
0.0096
75% (78.2%)
10-maj
73.481
81.517
72.967
20.4867
20.5159
20.5164
20.5063
0.0170
75% (78.4%)
11-maj
73.478
81.514
72.968
20.4837
20.5129
20.5174
20.5047
0.0183
75% (78.1%)
12-maj
73.461
81.497
72.948
20.4667
20.4959
20.4974
20.4867
0.0173
75% (79.1%)
13-maj
73.478
81.513
72.965
20.4837
20.5119
20.5144
20.5033
0.0170
75% (88.4%)
14-maj
73.492
81.524
72.966
20.4977
20.5229
20.5154
20.5120
0.0129
33% (34.8%)
15-maj
73.198
81.235
72.685
20.2037
20.2339
20.2344
20.2240
0.0176
33% (35.6%)
16-maj
73.195
81.232
72.682
20.2007
20.2309
20.2314
20.2210
0.0176
33% (34.5%)
17-maj
73.187
81.224
72.673
20.1927
20.2229
20.2224
20.2127
0.0173
33% (35.1%)
18-maj
73.18
81.216
72.666
20.1857
20.2149
20.2154
20.2053
0.0170
RS-SSA
RH
Date
1
2
3 Avg
Std
1
2
3 Avg
Std
Glass
18-apr
Glass+material
18-apr
33% (35.3%)
21-apr
-0.14
-0.18
-0.25
-0.1933
0.0530
0.0088
0.0088
0.0085
0.0087
0.0001
33% (34.6%)
22-apr
0.01
0.02
0.04
0.0233
0.0153
0.0089
0.0090
0.0089
0.0089
0.0000
33% (34.7%)
23-apr
-0.02
0.00
-0.02
-0.0167
0.0104
0.0087
0.0089
0.0087
0.0088
0.0001
33% (34.6%)
24-apr
0.06
0.04
0.05
0.0517
0.0104
0.0093
0.0093
0.0092
0.0093
0.0001
75% (74.6%)
25-apr
1.09
1.09
1.09
1.0916
0.0029
0.0202
0.0202
0.0202
0.0202
0.0000
75% (75.3%)
26-apr
0.07
0.08
0.10
0.0867
0.0161
0.0210
0.0210
0.0212
0.0211
0.0001
75% (75.1%)
27-apr
-0.02
-0.01
-0.02
-0.0200
0.0050
0.0208
0.0209
0.0210
0.0209
0.0001
75% (76.3%)
28-apr
0.01
0.00
-0.02
-0.0017
0.0208
0.0209
0.0209
0.0207
0.0208
0.0001
Moisture content, u [kg/kg]
Mass of material [g]
Measurement [g]
Mass change [%]
Page 2 of 6
==PAGE:174==
75% (75.7%)
29-apr
-0.02
-0.02
0.01
-0.0100
0.0173
0.0207
0.0207
0.0208
0.0207
0.0001
94% (95.4%)
01-maj
1.73
1.65
1.77
1.7166
0.0611
0.0380
0.0372
0.0385
0.0379
0.0007
94% (96.7%)
02-maj
0.00
-0.01
0.00
-0.0067
0.0076
0.0380
0.0371
0.0384
0.0378
0.0007
94% (96.8%)
03-maj
0.00
0.02
-0.02
0.0000
0.0229
0.0381
0.0373
0.0382
0.0378
0.0005
94% (96.9%)
04-maj
0.01
0.02
-0.02
0.0050
0.0265
0.0382
0.0375
0.0379
0.0379
0.0004
94% (97.6%)
08-maj
-0.01
0.01
-0.08
-0.0250
0.0492
0.0381
0.0377
0.0372
0.0376
0.0005
75% (78.2%)
10-maj
-1.32
-1.27
-1.23
-1.2766
0.0475
0.0249
0.0249
0.0249
0.0249
0.0000
75% (78.4%)
11-maj
-0.01
-0.01
0.00
-0.0083
0.0115
0.0247
0.0248
0.0249
0.0248
0.0001
75% (78.1%)
12-maj
-0.08
-0.08
-0.10
-0.0900
0.0087
0.0239
0.0239
0.0239
0.0239
0.0000
75% (79.1%)
13-maj
0.08
0.08
0.08
0.0833
0.0029
0.0247
0.0247
0.0248
0.0247
0.0000
75% (88.4%)
14-maj
0.07
0.05
0.00
0.0433
0.0340
0.0254
0.0253
0.0248
0.0252
0.0003
33% (34.8%)
15-maj
-1.47
-1.44
-1.40
-1.4399
0.0328
0.0107
0.0108
0.0108
0.0108
0.0001
33% (35.6%)
16-maj
-0.01
-0.01
-0.01
-0.0150
0.0000
0.0105
0.0107
0.0106
0.0106
0.0001
33% (34.5%)
17-maj
-0.04
-0.04
-0.04
-0.0417
0.0029
0.0101
0.0103
0.0102
0.0102
0.0001
33% (35.1%)
18-maj
-0.03
-0.04
-0.03
-0.0367
0.0029
0.0098
0.0099
0.0098
0.0098
0.0000
RS-CaO
RH
Date
1
2
3
1
2
3 Avg
Std
Glass
18-apr
46.5645
61.1429
49.1726
Glass+material
18-apr
66.5507
81.1442
69.1509
19.9862
20.0013
19.9783
19.9886
0.0117
33% (35.3%)
21-apr
66.713
81.314
69.319
20.1485
20.1711
20.1464
20.1553
0.0137
33% (34.6%)
22-apr
66.719
81.327
69.265
20.1545
20.1841
20.0924
20.1437
0.0468
33% (34.7%)
23-apr
66.716
81.315
69.263
20.1515
20.1721
20.0904
20.1380
0.0425
33% (34.6%)
24-apr
66.728
81.329
69.277
20.1635
20.1861
20.1044
20.1513
0.0422
75% (74.6%)
25-apr
66.946
81.566
69.523
20.3815
20.4231
20.3504
20.3850
0.0365
75% (75.3%)
26-apr
66.991
81.621
69.575
20.4265
20.4781
20.4024
20.4357
0.0387
75% (75.1%)
27-apr
67.009
81.638
69.592
20.4445
20.4951
20.4194
20.4530
0.0386
75% (76.3%)
28-apr
67.031
81.658
69.611
20.4665
20.5151
20.4384
20.4733
0.0388
75% (75.7%)
29-apr
67.034
81.661
69.612
20.4695
20.5181
20.4394
20.4757
0.0397
94% (95.4%)
01-maj
67.24
81.937
69.898
20.6755
20.7941
20.7254
20.7317
0.0595
94% (96.7%)
02-maj
67.243
81.941
69.915
20.6785
20.7981
20.7424
20.7397
0.0598
94% (96.8%)
03-maj
67.253
81.96
69.932
20.6885
20.8171
20.7594
20.7550
0.0644
94% (96.9%)
04-maj
67.395
81.939
69.939
20.8305
20.7961
20.7664
20.7977
0.0321
94% (97.6%)
08-maj
67.422
81.945
69.947
20.8575
20.8021
20.7744
20.8113
0.0423
75% (78.2%)
10-maj
67.189
81.741
69.722
20.6245
20.5981
20.5494
20.5907
0.0381
75% (78.4%)
11-maj
67.176
81.758
69.724
20.6115
20.6151
20.5514
20.5927
0.0358
75% (78.1%)
12-maj
67.153
81.743
69.703
20.5885
20.6001
20.5304
20.5730
0.0373
75% (79.1%)
13-maj
67.176
81.759
69.72
20.6115
20.6161
20.5474
20.5917
0.0384
75% (88.4%)
14-maj
67.169
81.768
69.726
20.6045
20.6251
20.5534
20.5943
0.0369
33% (34.8%)
15-maj
66.946
81.536
69.486
20.3815
20.3931
20.3134
20.3627
0.0431
33% (35.6%)
16-maj
66.943
81.532
69.482
20.3785
20.3891
20.3094
20.3590
0.0433
33% (34.5%)
17-maj
66.936
81.524
69.473
20.3715
20.3811
20.3004
20.3510
0.0441
33% (35.1%)
18-maj
66.922
81.517
69.466
20.3575
20.3741
20.2934
20.3417
0.0426
RS-CaO
RH
Date
1
2
3 Avg
Std
1
2
3 Avg
Std
Glass
18-apr
Glass+material
18-apr
33% (35.3%)
21-apr
-0.18
-0.04
-0.08
-0.1017
0.0715
0.0081
0.0085
0.0084
0.0083
0.0002
33% (34.6%)
22-apr
0.03
0.06
-0.27
-0.0583
0.1841
0.0084
0.0091
0.0057
0.0078
0.0018
33% (34.7%)
23-apr
-0.01
-0.06
-0.01
-0.0283
0.0275
0.0083
0.0085
0.0056
0.0075
0.0016
33% (34.6%)
24-apr
0.06
0.07
0.07
0.0667
0.0058
0.0089
0.0092
0.0063
0.0081
0.0016
75% (74.6%)
25-apr
1.09
1.18
1.23
1.1683
0.0715
0.0198
0.0211
0.0186
0.0198
0.0012
75% (75.3%)
26-apr
0.22
0.27
0.26
0.2533
0.0257
0.0220
0.0238
0.0212
0.0224
0.0013
75% (75.1%)
27-apr
0.09
0.08
0.08
0.0867
0.0029
0.0229
0.0247
0.0221
0.0232
0.0013
Moisture content, u [kg/kg]
Mass of material [g]
Measurement [g]
Mass change [%]
Page 3 of 6
==PAGE:175==
75% (76.3%)
28-apr
0.11
0.10
0.09
0.1017
0.0076
0.0240
0.0257
0.0230
0.0242
0.0013
75% (75.7%)
29-apr
0.01
0.01
0.00
0.0117
0.0058
0.0242
0.0258
0.0231
0.0244
0.0014
94% (95.4%)
01-maj
1.03
1.38
1.43
1.2799
0.2179
0.0345
0.0396
0.0374
0.0372
0.0026
94% (96.7%)
02-maj
0.01
0.02
0.08
0.0400
0.0390
0.0346
0.0398
0.0382
0.0376
0.0027
94% (96.8%)
03-maj
0.05
0.09
0.08
0.0767
0.0236
0.0351
0.0408
0.0391
0.0383
0.0029
94% (96.9%)
04-maj
0.71
-0.10
0.03
0.2133
0.4358
0.0422
0.0397
0.0394
0.0405
0.0015
94% (97.6%)
08-maj
0.13
0.03
0.04
0.0683
0.0579
0.0436
0.0400
0.0398
0.0412
0.0021
75% (78.2%)
10-maj
-1.16
-1.02
-1.12
-1.1033
0.0749
0.0319
0.0298
0.0286
0.0301
0.0017
75% (78.4%)
11-maj
-0.06
0.08
0.01
0.0100
0.0750
0.0313
0.0307
0.0287
0.0302
0.0014
75% (78.1%)
12-maj
-0.11
-0.07
-0.10
-0.0983
0.0208
0.0301
0.0299
0.0276
0.0292
0.0014
75% (79.1%)
13-maj
0.11
0.08
0.08
0.0933
0.0189
0.0313
0.0307
0.0285
0.0302
0.0015
75% (88.4%)
14-maj
-0.03
0.04
0.03
0.0133
0.0425
0.0309
0.0312
0.0288
0.0303
0.0013
33% (34.8%)
15-maj
-1.11
-1.16
-1.20
-1.1583
0.0425
0.0198
0.0196
0.0168
0.0187
0.0017
33% (35.6%)
16-maj
-0.01
-0.02
-0.02
-0.0183
0.0029
0.0196
0.0194
0.0166
0.0185
0.0017
33% (34.5%)
17-maj
-0.03
-0.04
-0.04
-0.0400
0.0050
0.0193
0.0190
0.0161
0.0181
0.0017
33% (35.1%)
18-maj
-0.07
-0.03
-0.03
-0.0467
0.0202
0.0186
0.0186
0.0158
0.0177
0.0016
RS-CaO-Qz
RH
Date
1
2
3
1
2
3 Avg
Std
Glass
18-apr
47.114
54.7525
48.2394
Glass+material
18-apr
67.1288
74.7437
68.2295
20.0148
19.9912
19.9901
19.9987
0.0140
33% (35.3%)
21-apr
67.298
74.905
68.39
20.184
20.1525
20.1506
20.1624
0.0188
33% (34.6%)
22-apr
67.307
74.913
68.393
20.193
20.1605
20.1536
20.1690
0.0210
33% (34.7%)
23-apr
67.306
74.912
68.389
20.192
20.1595
20.1496
20.1670
0.0222
33% (34.6%)
24-apr
67.317
74.923
68.404
20.203
20.1705
20.1646
20.1794
0.0207
75% (74.6%)
25-apr
67.553
75.151
68.634
20.439
20.3985
20.3946
20.4107
0.0246
75% (75.3%)
26-apr
67.605
75.204
68.68
20.491
20.4515
20.4406
20.4610
0.0265
75% (75.1%)
27-apr
67.622
75.221
68.695
20.508
20.4685
20.4556
20.4774
0.0273
75% (76.3%)
28-apr
67.636
75.245
68.704
20.522
20.4925
20.4646
20.4930
0.0287
75% (75.7%)
29-apr
67.639
75.238
68.708
20.525
20.4855
20.4686
20.4930
0.0289
94% (95.4%)
01-maj
67.948
75.549
69.011
20.834
20.7965
20.7716
20.8007
0.0314
94% (96.7%)
02-maj
67.957
75.552
69.019
20.843
20.7995
20.7796
20.8074
0.0324
94% (96.8%)
03-maj
67.962
75.558
69.023
20.848
20.8055
20.7836
20.8124
0.0327
94% (96.9%)
04-maj
67.966
75.563
69.027
20.852
20.8105
20.7876
20.8167
0.0326
94% (97.6%)
08-maj
67.971
75.566
69.032
20.857
20.8135
20.7926
20.8210
0.0329
75% (78.2%)
10-maj
67.755
75.351
68.816
20.641
20.5985
20.5766
20.6054
0.0327
75% (78.4%)
11-maj
67.754
75.348
68.813
20.64
20.5955
20.5736
20.6030
0.0338
75% (78.1%)
12-maj
67.734
75.328
68.795
20.62
20.5755
20.5556
20.5837
0.0330
75% (79.1%)
13-maj
67.75
75.346
68.812
20.636
20.5935
20.5726
20.6007
0.0323
75% (88.4%)
14-maj
67.808
75.388
68.871
20.694
20.6355
20.6316
20.6537
0.0350
33% (34.8%)
15-maj
67.524
75.115
68.582
20.41
20.3625
20.3426
20.3717
0.0346
33% (35.6%)
16-maj
67.52
75.113
68.578
20.406
20.3605
20.3386
20.3684
0.0344
33% (34.5%)
17-maj
67.512
75.105
68.569
20.398
20.3525
20.3296
20.3600
0.0348
33% (35.1%)
18-maj
67.504
75.098
68.561
20.39
20.3455
20.3216
20.3524
0.0347
RS-CaO-Qz
RH
Date
1
2
3 Avg
Std
1
2
3 Avg
Std
Glass
18-apr
Glass+material
18-apr
33% (35%)
19-apr
0.77
0.75
0.64
0.7183
0.0711
0.0077
0.0075
0.0064
0.0072
0.0007
33% (34.8%)
20-apr
-0.04
0.03
0.07
0.0217
0.0579
0.0073
0.0078
0.0071
0.0074
0.0003
33% (34.4%)
21-apr
0.22
0.15
0.20
0.1900
0.0361
0.0095
0.0093
0.0091
0.0093
0.0002
33% (35.3%)
21-apr
-0.10
-0.12
-0.11
-0.1117
0.0076
0.0085
0.0081
0.0080
0.0082
0.0002
33% (34.6%)
22-apr
0.04
0.04
0.01
0.0333
0.0161
0.0089
0.0085
0.0082
0.0085
0.0004
33% (34.7%)
23-apr
0.00
0.00
-0.02
-0.0100
0.0087
0.0089
0.0084
0.0080
0.0084
0.0004
Mass change [%]
Moisture content, u [kg/kg]
Measurement [g]
Mass of material [g]
Page 4 of 6
==PAGE:176==
33% (34.6%)
24-apr
0.05
0.05
0.07
0.0617
0.0115
0.0094
0.0090
0.0087
0.0090
0.0003
75% (74.6%)
25-apr
1.18
1.14
1.15
1.1566
0.0208
0.0212
0.0204
0.0202
0.0206
0.0005
75% (75.3%)
26-apr
0.26
0.26
0.23
0.2517
0.0189
0.0238
0.0230
0.0225
0.0231
0.0006
75% (75.1%)
27-apr
0.08
0.08
0.07
0.0817
0.0058
0.0246
0.0239
0.0233
0.0239
0.0007
75% (76.3%)
28-apr
0.07
0.12
0.04
0.0783
0.0382
0.0253
0.0251
0.0237
0.0247
0.0009
75% (75.7%)
29-apr
0.01
-0.03
0.02
0.0000
0.0304
0.0255
0.0247
0.0239
0.0247
0.0008
94% (95.4%)
01-maj
1.54
1.55
1.51
1.5382
0.0208
0.0409
0.0403
0.0391
0.0401
0.0009
94% (96.7%)
02-maj
0.04
0.01
0.04
0.0333
0.0161
0.0414
0.0404
0.0395
0.0404
0.0009
94% (96.8%)
03-maj
0.02
0.03
0.02
0.0250
0.0050
0.0416
0.0407
0.0397
0.0407
0.0010
94% (96.9%)
04-maj
0.02
0.02
0.02
0.0217
0.0029
0.0418
0.0410
0.0399
0.0409
0.0010
94% (97.6%)
08-maj
0.02
0.01
0.02
0.0217
0.0058
0.0421
0.0411
0.0401
0.0411
0.0010
75% (78.2%)
10-maj
-1.08
-1.07
-1.08
-1.0783
0.0029
0.0313
0.0304
0.0293
0.0303
0.0010
75% (78.4%)
11-maj
0.00
-0.01
-0.01
-0.0117
0.0058
0.0312
0.0302
0.0292
0.0302
0.0010
75% (78.1%)
12-maj
-0.10
-0.10
-0.09
-0.0967
0.0058
0.0302
0.0292
0.0283
0.0293
0.0010
75% (79.1%)
13-maj
0.08
0.09
0.08
0.0850
0.0050
0.0310
0.0301
0.0291
0.0301
0.0009
75% (88.4%)
14-maj
0.29
0.21
0.29
0.2650
0.0477
0.0339
0.0322
0.0321
0.0328
0.0010
33% (34.8%)
15-maj
-1.42
-1.36
-1.44
-1.4099
0.0409
0.0197
0.0186
0.0176
0.0187
0.0011
33% (35.6%)
16-maj
-0.02
-0.01
-0.02
-0.0167
0.0058
0.0195
0.0185
0.0174
0.0185
0.0011
33% (34.5%)
17-maj
-0.04
-0.04
-0.04
-0.0417
0.0029
0.0191
0.0181
0.0170
0.0181
0.0011
33% (35.1%)
18-maj
-0.04
-0.03
-0.04
-0.0383
0.0029
0.0187
0.0177
0.0166
0.0177
0.0011
RS-CaO-SSA
RH
Date
1
2
3
1
2
3 Avg
Std
Glass
18-apr
50.2229
49.0509
56.2243
Glass+material
18-apr
70.2172
69.0606
76.2138
19.9943
20.0097
19.9895
19.9978
0.0106
33% (35.3%)
21-apr
70.378
69.217
76.365
20.1551
20.1661
20.1407
20.1540
0.0127
33% (34.6%)
22-apr
70.382
69.222
76.371
20.1591
20.1711
20.1467
20.1590
0.0122
33% (34.7%)
23-apr
70.377
69.219
76.365
20.1541
20.1681
20.1407
20.1543
0.0137
33% (34.6%)
24-apr
70.39
69.232
76.379
20.1671
20.1811
20.1547
20.1676
0.0132
75% (74.6%)
25-apr
70.602
69.444
76.59
20.3791
20.3931
20.3657
20.3793
0.0137
75% (75.3%)
26-apr
70.64
69.478
76.625
20.4171
20.4271
20.4007
20.4150
0.0133
75% (75.1%)
27-apr
70.65
69.49
76.634
20.4271
20.4391
20.4097
20.4253
0.0148
75% (76.3%)
28-apr
70.662
69.504
76.648
20.4391
20.4531
20.4237
20.4386
0.0147
75% (75.7%)
29-apr
70.664
69.501
76.649
20.4411
20.4501
20.4247
20.4386
0.0129
94% (95.4%)
01-maj
70.952
69.782
76.932
20.7291
20.7311
20.7077
20.7226
0.0130
94% (96.7%)
02-maj
70.961
69.794
76.943
20.7381
20.7431
20.7187
20.7333
0.0129
94% (96.8%)
03-maj
70.967
69.798
76.948
20.7441
20.7471
20.7237
20.7383
0.0127
94% (96.9%)
04-maj
70.974
69.802
76.956
20.7511
20.7511
20.7317
20.7446
0.0112
94% (97.6%)
08-maj
70.98
69.802
76.953
20.7571
20.7511
20.7287
20.7456
0.0150
75% (78.2%)
10-maj
70.769
69.605
76.75
20.5461
20.5541
20.5257
20.5420
0.0146
75% (78.4%)
11-maj
70.766
69.61
76.749
20.5431
20.5591
20.5247
20.5423
0.0172
75% (78.1%)
12-maj
70.748
69.581
76.729
20.5251
20.5301
20.5047
20.5200
0.0135
75% (79.1%)
13-maj
70.765
69.599
76.745
20.5421
20.5481
20.5207
20.5370
0.0144
75% (88.4%)
14-maj
70.806
69.624
76.804
20.5831
20.5731
20.5797
20.5786
0.0051
33% (34.8%)
15-maj
70.537
69.37
76.519
20.3141
20.3191
20.2947
20.3093
0.0129
33% (35.6%)
16-maj
70.533
69.367
76.518
20.3101
20.3161
20.2937
20.3066
0.0116
33% (34.5%)
17-maj
70.524
69.357
76.508
20.3011
20.3061
20.2837
20.2970
0.0118
33% (35.1%)
18-maj
70.515
69.349
76.499
20.2921
20.2981
20.2747
20.2883
0.0122
RS-CaO-SSA
RH
Date
1
2
3 Avg
Std
1
2
3 Avg
Std
Glass
18-apr
Glass+material
18-apr
33% (35%)
19-apr
0.77
0.73
0.72
0.7406
0.0251
0.0077
0.0073
0.0072
0.0074
0.0003
Mass change [%]
Moisture content, u [kg/kg]
Measurement [g]
Mass of material [g]
Page 5 of 6
==PAGE:177==
33% (34.8%)
20-apr
-0.19
-0.02
-0.03
-0.0817
0.0983
0.0057
0.0071
0.0069
0.0066
0.0007
33% (34.4%)
21-apr
0.34
0.16
0.22
0.2433
0.0938
0.0092
0.0087
0.0092
0.0090
0.0003
33% (35.3%)
21-apr
-0.11
-0.09
-0.16
-0.1217
0.0355
0.0080
0.0078
0.0076
0.0078
0.0002
33% (34.6%)
22-apr
0.02
0.02
0.03
0.0250
0.0050
0.0082
0.0081
0.0079
0.0081
0.0002
33% (34.7%)
23-apr
-0.02
-0.01
-0.03
-0.0233
0.0076
0.0080
0.0079
0.0076
0.0078
0.0002
33% (34.6%)
24-apr
0.06
0.06
0.07
0.0667
0.0029
0.0086
0.0086
0.0083
0.0085
0.0002
75% (74.6%)
25-apr
1.06
1.06
1.05
1.0583
0.0029
0.0192
0.0192
0.0188
0.0191
0.0002
75% (75.3%)
26-apr
0.19
0.17
0.17
0.1783
0.0104
0.0211
0.0209
0.0206
0.0209
0.0003
75% (75.1%)
27-apr
0.05
0.06
0.04
0.0517
0.0076
0.0216
0.0215
0.0210
0.0214
0.0003
75% (76.3%)
28-apr
0.06
0.07
0.07
0.0667
0.0058
0.0222
0.0222
0.0217
0.0220
0.0003
75% (75.7%)
29-apr
0.01
-0.01
0.00
0.0000
0.0132
0.0223
0.0220
0.0218
0.0220
0.0003
94% (95.4%)
01-maj
1.44
1.40
1.41
1.4199
0.0180
0.0368
0.0361
0.0359
0.0362
0.0004
94% (96.7%)
02-maj
0.04
0.06
0.05
0.0533
0.0076
0.0372
0.0367
0.0365
0.0368
0.0004
94% (96.8%)
03-maj
0.03
0.02
0.02
0.0250
0.0050
0.0375
0.0369
0.0367
0.0370
0.0004
94% (96.9%)
04-maj
0.03
0.02
0.04
0.0317
0.0104
0.0379
0.0371
0.0371
0.0373
0.0004
94% (97.6%)
08-maj
0.03
0.00
-0.01
0.0050
0.0229
0.0382
0.0371
0.0370
0.0374
0.0007
75% (78.2%)
10-maj
-1.05
-0.98
-1.01
-1.0183
0.0351
0.0276
0.0272
0.0268
0.0272
0.0004
75% (78.4%)
11-maj
-0.01
0.02
0.00
0.0017
0.0208
0.0274
0.0275
0.0268
0.0272
0.0004
75% (78.1%)
12-maj
-0.09
-0.14
-0.10
-0.1117
0.0293
0.0265
0.0260
0.0258
0.0261
0.0004
75% (79.1%)
13-maj
0.08
0.09
0.08
0.0850
0.0050
0.0274
0.0269
0.0266
0.0270
0.0004
75% (88.4%)
14-maj
0.20
0.12
0.29
0.2083
0.0850
0.0294
0.0282
0.0295
0.0290
0.0008
33% (34.8%)
15-maj
-1.34
-1.27
-1.42
-1.3466
0.0775
0.0160
0.0155
0.0153
0.0156
0.0004
33% (35.6%)
16-maj
-0.02
-0.01
0.00
-0.0133
0.0076
0.0158
0.0153
0.0152
0.0154
0.0003
33% (34.5%)
17-maj
-0.04
-0.05
-0.05
-0.0483
0.0029
0.0153
0.0148
0.0147
0.0150
0.0003
33% (35.1%)
18-maj
-0.04
-0.04
-0.04
-0.0433
0.0029
0.0149
0.0144
0.0143
0.0145
0.0003
Page 6 of 6
