==PAGE:1==
Regulation of PD-1 and CTLA-4 expression in human γδ
T cells and characterisation of a novel mouse γδ T cell
lymphoma line
Master Thesis Project
Author
Ilektra Amirali
Supervisor
Associate Professor, PhD, Vasileios Bekiaris
Academic Year 2022-2023
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Regulation of PD-1 and CTLA-4 expression in human γδ T cells and characterisation of
a novel mouse γδ T cell lymphoma line
Master Thesis
28 February 2023
By
Ilektra Amirali
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the customary biblio-
graphic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Published by:
DTU, Department of Health Technology, Orsteds Plads, Building 345C, 2800 Kgs.
Lyngby, Denmark www.healthtech.dtu.dk
==PAGE:4==
Ilektra Amirali - 200170
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over six months at the Department of Health Technology, at the
Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment for the degree Master of Science in Biomed-
ical Engineering, MSc Eng. It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of statistics.
Ilektra Amirali - s200170
Signature
26/02/2023
Date
I
==PAGE:5==
Ilektra Amirali - 200170
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank my supervisor and Associate Professor, Vasileios Bekiaris for giving me the op-
portunity to become part of such an amazing team and challenge myself with this project.
I would also like to thank deeply PhD student, Elisa Catafal Tardos, for her guidance on every detail
during this project by providing me with her vast knowledge and assistance.
Special thanks to my husband Stavros Panoutsopoulos, for his unconditional understanding and sup-
port during my thesis and to my best friend, Panagiota Kaminieri, for her inexhaustible patience.
And to all the people who believe in me, thank you!
II
==PAGE:6==
Ilektra Amirali - 200170
Abstract
Cancer is a significant global health problem. γδ T cells play a crucial role in cancer immunity by
providing protection against infection and mounting strong anti-tumor responses. Immune checkpoint
receptors (ICRs), such as PD-1 and CTLA-4, which inhibit T cell function, are induced in many
cancers, and current immunotherapy treatments mainly target these receptors to restore the function
of these cells.
However, the role of ICRs in γδ T cells remains poorly understood due to limited
information on their expression and inhibitory capacity in different γδ T cell subsets. The first part of
the study focuses on the regulation of ICR expression in human γδ T cells through various cell culture
techniques and flow cytometry analysis. This study examined the expression of CTLA-4 and PD-1
in Vδ1 and Vδ2 T cells. Utilizing PMA+Ionomycin stimulation the surface expression of CTLA-4
increased, with Vδ2 cells showing higher expression of the receptor compared to Vδ1 cells, while PD-1
showed similar results for both subsets. The study also found that intracellular CTLA-4 expression
Vδ2 cells decreases upon activation and stimulation. These results highlight the potential impact of
stimulation parameters on receptor expression. However, somatic mutations can transform γδ T cells,
leading to γδ T cell lymphomas (γδ TCL), which are rare, aggressive, and poorly prognosed. Due to its
rarity, γδ TCL is poorly understood, and no mouse models exist to study it. The second part involves
the characterization of primary cell lines from a transplantable mouse model of γδ T cell lymphoma
found through a collaboration, using standard cell culture techniques and flow cytometry analysis. It
was found that TCRγδ expression was present in C15 early in cells’ recovery but was lost at later
stages. The clones did not express CD44 and CD27, and did not show any expression of Vγ1, Vγ4,
or Vγ6. All clones expressed Tbet, but not RORγt. The clones expressed IFNγ and GrA, but not
IL-17A or TNFα, both before and after PMA+Ionomycin stimulation. These results could improve
existing treatments and even assist in the development of new ones for γδ TCL lymphoma.
III
==PAGE:7==
Ilektra Amirali - 200170
Contents
Contents
Table of Contents
IV
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Cancer immune responses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Inhibitory checkpoint receptors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.3
T and innate cells in cancer immunity
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.4
T cell exhaustion in cancer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.5
Cancer immunotherapies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.6
PD-1 and CTLA4: Immune Checkpoint Receptors
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.7
γδ T cells: Role and importance in cancer research . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
1.7.1
Subsets of γδ T cells . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
1.8
Pro-tumor role of γδ T cells in cancer research
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
1.8.1
γδ TCL and leukemia: Pathophysiology, types and development . . . . . . . . .
13
1.9
Purpose of this study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2
Materials and Methods
16
2.1
CTLA-4 and PD-1 expression in human γδ T cells
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.1.1
Subjects . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.1.2
Cell cultures and conditions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.1.3
Flow cytometry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.1.4
Gating strategy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.1.5
Statistics
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2.2
Characterization of γδ TCL cell lines . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2.2.1
Mice . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
2.2.2
Cell cultures and conditions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
2.2.3
Flow cytometry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
2.2.4
Gating strategy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3
Results
23
3.1
CTLA-4 and PD-1 expression in human γδ T cells
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.2
Characterization of γδ TCL cell lines . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
4
Discussion
60
5
Conclusion
63
List of Figures
I
References
VIII
IV
==PAGE:8==
Ilektra Amirali - 200170
1
Introduction
1.1
Cancer immune responses
Cancer development and progression are significantly influenced by immune responses. Different
cancer cells mechanisms allow them to remain undetected by the host immune system and unharmed
by the host immune cells. Producing inhibitory cytokines is an example of said mechanisms, where
cytokines can be excreted by cancer cells. These cytokines, such as transforming growth factor beta
(TGF-β) and interleukin 10 (IL-10), possess the ability to suppress activation and function of immune
cells (like T cells and dendritic cells [DCs]) [1]. Another example of a cancer cell mechanism is the
recruitment of suppressive cells, such as regulatory T cells (Tregs) and myeloid-derived suppressor
cells (MDSCs), by attracting them into the tumor microenvironment. Cancer cells will then restrain
the immune cellsâ activity and impede immune response against them [2]. Additionally, expression of
ligands on the surface of cancer cells allows them to bind to immune checkpoint receptors (ICRs), such
as programmed cell death protein 1 (PD-1) found expressed on the surface of T cells, and inhibit the
activation and function of T cells [3].
1.2
Inhibitory checkpoint receptors
As a class of receptors expressed on the surface of immune cells, ICRs significantly contribute dur-
ing immune response regulation. Co-inhibitory receptors, such as cytotoxic T-lymphocyte-associated
protein 4 (CTLA-4), PD-1 and lymphocyte activation gene-3 (LAG-3), and co-stimulatory receptors,
such as OX40, 4-1BB, and CD28, are the two major types of immune checkpoint receptors [4]. These
receptors regulate immune cell activity and immune responses against cancer by binding to the corre-
sponding ligands expressed on the surface of cancer cells and other immune cells [4]. More specifically,
ligands such as PD-L1 (also known as B7-H1), are bound by co-inhibitory receptors, hindering acti-
vation, proliferation and cytotoxicity of T cells, while ligands such as CD80, CD86 and OX40L are
bound by co-stimulatory receptors, intensifying the activation and proliferation of T cells [4].
1
==PAGE:9==
Ilektra Amirali - 200170
1.3
T and innate cells in cancer immunity
1.3
T and innate cells in cancer immunity
The immune response to cancer is greatly dependent on T cells and innate cells. T cells, specifically
CD8+ T cells (CTLs), are in charge of targeting and eliminating cancer cells directly, by recognizing
cancer-specific antigens [5]. Cancer cells can be directly eliminated by activated CTLs, which release
cytotoxic molecules, such as perforin and granzymes [6]. CD4+ helper T cells can recognize and target
cancer cells through the presentation of cancer-specific antigens by antigen-presenting cells, and can
also produce various cytokines, such as interferon gamma (IFN-γ) and interleukin-2 (IL-2), that can
enhance other immune cell’s activity, such as CTLs and natural killer cells (NKs) [7]. Tregs function
in immune response should also be mentioned, since they inhibit the function of other T cells and
hinder the activation of DCs [8]. Tregs also assist in immune evasion of cancer by obstructing the
activation, proliferation and cytotoxicity of T cells and other immune cells [8]. During the initiation
and modulation of T cell-mediated immune responses to cancer, innate cells, such as NKs and DCs,
are instrumental [9]. These innate cells utilize pattern recognition receptors, such as Toll-like receptors
(TLRs) and RIG-I-like receptors (RLRs), to distinguish and react to cancer cells. Furthermore, by
releasing cytotoxic molecules and activating programmed cell death pathways, innate cells can also
present direct anti-tumor effects [10].
1.4
T cell exhaustion in cancer
Immune responses during cancer can cause chronic stimulation and eventually lead to exhaustion
of T cells. After chronic exposure to cancer-associated antigens, T cells get activated and start to
proliferate (Figure 1, B), which can potentially result to T cell exhaustion (Figure 1, C) [4].
T
cell exhaustion is a phenomenon in which T cells exhibit decreased ability in producing cytokines,
reduced cytotoxicity, and elevated expression of ICRs, such as PD-1 and CTLA-4 [11]. This exhaustion
associates with advanced and metastatic cancer by exhibiting elevated numbers of cancer-associated
antigens and accumulation of exhausted T cells [12].
T cell exhaustion is directly affected by ICR expression. After PD-1 binds to its corresponding
ligand (PD-L1), this causes suppression of T cell activation, proliferation, and cytotoxicity [4]. PD-1
2
==PAGE:10==
Ilektra Amirali - 200170
1.5
Cancer immunotherapies
upregulation is a commonly presented feature of T cells in cancer and chronic viral infections, and
is associated with poor clinical outcomes [13]. The upregulation of other inhibitory receptors, such
as TIM-3, LAG-3, and CTLA-4, is another indicator of T cell exhaustion.
These receptors may
additionally suppress T cell activation, proliferation and cytotoxicity, and their upregulation is also
associated with poor clinical outcomes [14].
Moreover, downregulation of activation markers (e.g.
CD137) and the production of pro-inflammatory cytokines (e.g.
IFN-γ), may also indicate T cell
exhaustion [14]. The loss of function in T cells may also be caused by these changes [14].
With the ultimate purpose of developing novel strategies to enhance the efficiency of these treat-
ments, researchers have been focusing their efforts in improving their understanding of the mechanisms
of T cell exhaustion in the context of checkpoint inhibitors. The simultaneous blockade of numerous
co-inhibitory receptors, such as PD-1 and CTLA-4, can enhance the efficacy of checkpoint inhibitors
by restoring T cell function and increasing the proportion of responding patients [15].
Figure 1: Chronic activation and exhaustion. A) ICR inhibitory signals help to regulate T cell re-
sponses. B) T cells are exposed to multiple activation signals, which can overcome the inhibitory signals
and lead to constant T cell activation. C) Presence of immunosuppressive factors in the microenvi-
ronment can disrupt the balance and lead to chronic T cell exhaustion. APC: antigen-presenting cell;
ICR: immune checkpoint receptor; ICR-L: immune checkpoint receptor ligand [4].
1.5
Cancer immunotherapies
T cell exhaustion during cancer immune responses can be reversed with several treatment options.
Namely, the use of checkpoint inhibitors, such as anti-PD-1, anti-PD-L1 and anti-CTLA-4 antibodies,
3
==PAGE:11==
Ilektra Amirali - 200170
1.5
Cancer immunotherapies
is an example of treatment option. These drugs halt the binding of inhibitory molecules such as PD-
1, PD-L1, and CTLA-4 to their ligands, resulting in elevated proliferation, cytokine production and
cytotoxicity of T cells. These drugs have indicated significant clinical benefits in various cancer types,
such as melanoma, lung cancer, and glioblastoma (GBM) [16].
Figure 2: PD-1 immune checkpoint receptor. To prevent T cells from attacking the tumor cells,
tumor cells produce PD-L1, which binds with PD-1 on T cells (left). T cells can kill the tumor cells
by preventing PD-L1 from binding to PD-1 with a PD-1 or PD-L1 inhibitor (right) [17].
Melanoma, lung cancer and GBM can be treated by checkpoint inhibitors, such as anti-PD-1 and
anti-PD-L1 antibodies. These drugs focus on binding to PD-1 and PD-L1 proteins, expressed on the
surface of T cells and cancer cells respectively. By doing so, they impede the interaction between these
proteins, allowing them to restore T cell function and improve immune response against cancer cells
(Figure 2). Significant clinical benefits have been observed on the use of anti-PD-1 and anti-PD-L1
antibodies, including improved progression-free and overall survival in a significant subset of patients
with melanoma [18], non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) [19], and a subset of patients with GBM [[20].
Promising results have also been observed by investigating CTLA-4 treatment, such as anti-CTLA-4
antibody, in preclinical models and clinical trials (Figure 3). Ipilimumab, an anti-CTLA-4 antibody,
is an example of CTLA-4 treatment, which boosted overall survival compared to a control group [21].
Regarding lung cancer, improved response rates and overall survival were observed by administering a
4
==PAGE:12==
Ilektra Amirali - 200170
1.6
PD-1 and CTLA4: Immune Checkpoint Receptors
Figure 3: CTLA-4 immune checkpoint receptor. To prevent T cells from attacking the tumor cells,
tumor cells produce B7-1/B7-2, which binds with CTLA-4 on T cells (left). T cells can kill the tumor
cells by preventing B7-1/B7-2 from binding to CTLA-4 with a CTLA-4 inhibitor (right) [17].
combination of anti-CTLA-4 antibody with anti-PD-1/PD-L1 antibody [22]. Anti-CTLA-4 antibody
alone or in combined with other therapies has shown promising results in preclinical models and is
currently being tested in clinical trials [23].
1.6
PD-1 and CTLA4: Immune Checkpoint Receptors
Partial focus of this project is on the different subsets of γδ T cells and their expressed ICRs,
PD-1 and CTLA-4. The responses of γδ T cells are regulated by these ICRs through both activation
and suppression.
Approximately 90% of CTLA-4 receptors are found in vesicles inside the cell [24]. CTLA-4 is
continuously internalized from the cell’s surface through a process called endocytosis (Figure 4). Endo-
cytosis happens rapidly and 80% of the surface CTLA-4 is internalized within 5 minutes [24]. CTLA-4
is transported from the Golgi complex during synthesis, to the plasma membrane through the help
of enzymes ADP-ribosylation factor 1 (ARF1) and phospholipase D40. Once it reaches the surface,
5
==PAGE:13==
Ilektra Amirali - 200170
1.6
PD-1 and CTLA4: Immune Checkpoint Receptors
CTLA-4 is internalized rapidly into clathrin-coated pits through a cytoplasmic YVKM motif (amino
acids 164â167) that interacts with the AP2 complex [25]. Some of the internalized CTLA-4 is recycled
to the surface, some is degraded in lysosomes and some is present in non-lysosomal perinuclear vesi-
cles [25]. Overall, CTLA-4 undergoes endocytosis and trafficking without binding to its ligands [25].
CTLA-4 inhibits T cell function by competing with the activating receptor CD28, thereby effectively
blocking the cell’s activation [4]. CD28, a T cell co-receptor necessary for cell activation, competes with
CTLA-4 on binding to antigen-presenting cell’s (APCs) ligands B7-1 (CD80) and B7-2 (CD86) [26].
Due to high affinity to the B7 ligands, CTLA-4 effectively interferes with CD28 binding and binds itself
to those ligands. The interaction between CD28 and CD80/86 is crucial for T cell co-stimulation and
its interruption by CTLA-4 leads to the suppression of T cell-mediated immune responses [4]. When
CTLA-4 binds to its ligand, it performs transendocytosis (TE), where it captures CD80/86 ligands
from the opposing cell and destroys the ligands through T cell-mediated internalization and lysosomal
degradation [27]. After lysosomal degradation of B7 ligand takes place, CTLA-4 returns to the cell’s
surface and resumes the transendocytosis cycle [27]. Earlier studies in CTLA-4-deficient mice have
provided important insights into the role of CTLA-4 in maintaining immune system homeostasis [28]
[29] [30]. Same studies have also shown that absence of CTLA-4 leads to uncontrolled proliferation of
T cells and other lymphocytes [28] [29] [30]. Additionally, lack of CTLA-4 results in damage of various
tissues in the body, which emphasizes the importance of this receptor in regulating T cell activity [28]
[29] [30]. The above-mentioned findings confirm that the inhibition of T cells through the CTLA-4 re-
ceptor is critical for the function of the immune system and that maintaining a balance between T cell
activation and inhibition is essential for maintaining an overall healthy immune system. However, our
understanding of how CTLA-4 may control unconventional T cell responses in either mice or humans
is very limited [4].
6
==PAGE:14==
Ilektra Amirali - 200170
1.6
PD-1 and CTLA4: Immune Checkpoint Receptors
Figure 4: CTLA-4 intracellular trafficking [25].
The intracellular signaling pathway of PD-1 is activated when the PD-1 receptor binds to its
ligands, PD-L1 and PD-L2 [4]. After PD-1 binds to its ligands, it undergoes a conformational change
that allows it to recruit intracellular signaling molecules called phosphatases, such as SHP-2 and SHP-1,
to its intracellular domain [31] [32]. This recruitment results to the dephosphorylation of downstream
signaling molecules, such as lymphocyte-specific protein tyrosine kinase (Lck) and serine/threonine
kinase P13K [33]. This dephosphorylation leads to inhibition of T cell activation, proliferation and
suppression of T cell migration to the tumor microenvironment [33]. Additionally, PD-1 has been
shown to interact with other signaling molecules such as the protein phosphatase 2A (PP2A), which
also contributes to the inhibition of T cell activation and proliferation [34]. PD-1, and its ligand,
PD-L1, are crucial to the inhibition of chronically activated T cells, fighting against specific pathogens
in numerous types of chronic infections and malignancies [35]. Blocking PD-1 or PD-L1 allows the
immune system to improve in recognizing tumor cells meant for elimination, since these tumor cells
can no longer suppress T cells (Figure 2) [17]. In clinical trials with cancer patients, treatment with
monoclonal antibodies (mAb) specific for either PD-1 or PD-L1 reactivates exhausted T cells which
7
==PAGE:15==
Ilektra Amirali - 200170
1.7
γδ T cells: Role and importance in cancer research
allows them to proliferate, produce cytokines and re-induce their cytotoxic capabilities, both ex vivo
and in vivo [35]. Although unconventional T cells express PD-1, there is still much to explore in terms
of their role in different subset populations [4].
1.7
γδ T cells: Role and importance in cancer research
T cells have the capacity to directly attack tumor cells, which has substantially encouraged sci-
entists. Conventional adaptive T cells (helper CD4+ T cells, cytotoxic CD8+ T cells, memory T cells,
and regulatory CD4+ T cells) and unconventional T cells (natural killer T cells, mucosal-associated
invariant T cells, and γδ T cells) are the two main categories of T cells [36]. Conventional adaptive T
cells bind to a major histocompatibility complex (MHC) through their T cell receptor (TCR) by recog-
nizing fragments by pathogen-derived peptides and present them on their surface for identification [37].
Immediately after activation is achieved, these cells start expressing immune checkpoint/inhibitory re-
ceptors (ICRs) to control overactivation and attempt to keep T cells in a dormant, "off" state until
they are needed [4]. This stops T cells from harming healthy cells. However, ICRs can be exploited
by cancer cells to deactivate T cells and prevent their own death, leading to chronically unresponsive
T cells [4].
Nevertheless, our immune system has a variety of unconventional non-MHC-restricted T cells.
These cells do not require an MHC complex in order to detect non-peptide antigens, but they either
interact directly or through non-polymorphic antigen-presenting molecules [4]. They can be either
alpha beta (αβ) or gamma delta (γδ) T cells and have invariant TCRs [4]. These T cells can express
both protective and pathogenic immunological responses, and they are multifunctional innate-like
lymphocytes, essential for tumor immune surveillance [4]. Unconventional T cells have achieved wider
recognition for their unique roles in terms of their immune responses against cancer. These cells express
well-defined activation and effector mechanisms, as well as different patterns of tissue distribution
compared to conventional αβ T cells [38]. In addition, unconventional T cells appear to be involved
in the recognition and response to cancer in a various ways, such as by recognizing stress-induced
antigens, producing a variety of cytokines, and being less susceptible to exhaustion [38]. Targeting
unconventional T cells with specific therapies has shown promising results in preclinical models and
8
==PAGE:16==
Ilektra Amirali - 200170
1.7
γδ T cells: Role and importance in cancer research
is currently being tested in clinical trials [38]. The fact that unconventional T cells can be found in
different types of cancer emphasizes the importance of studying them and provides us with further
insight regarding their immune response towards cancer and possible development of state-of-the-art
cancer immunotherapies [39].
Recently, there is increased interest in the role of γδ T cells in cancer research. γδ T cells are
characterized by their expression of a γδ TCR on their surface, instead of the typical αβ TCR. One
of the main characteristics of γδ T cells is that they can recognize cancer cells directly through the
recognition of stress-induced proteins/ligands, such as heat shock proteins and MHC class I-related
molecules, rather than through the presentation of antigens by antigen-presenting cells. This allows
γδ T cells to rapidly respond to cancer cells, as well as to be less dependent on the presence of a
functional immune system [40]. Additionally, γδ T cells play an important role in the early detection
and elimination of cancer cells, as well as in the regulation of the immune response to cancer. γδ T
cells also have cytotoxic properties and produce various cytokines, such as IL-17, TNF-, and IFN-γ
[40]. These have shown to regulate the activity of other immune cells, such as DCs and macrophages
(MPs) [40]. γδ T cells are able to recognize and respond to cancer cells through the expression of
specific receptors known as Vγ9Vδ2 TCRs when binding to antigens known as phosphoantigens, which
can be found in cancer cells but not in healthy cells [41]. Moreover, γδ T cells have a unique ability to
infiltrate the tumor microenvironment and reach the tumor site, making them an attractive target for
cancer immunotherapy [41].
1.7.1
Subsets of γδ T cells
The three primary T cell subsets in humans are Vδ1, Vδ2 and Vδ3, illustrated in Figure 5. The
different types of ligands can be recognized by unique Vγ and Vδ chain combinations [42]. This allows
specific functions of γδ T cells to take place in various resident tissues, accordingly [42]. Vδ2 shows a
tendency to pair with Vγ9 chain, while the other two subsets show no preference and can be paired
with several Vγ chains, most frequently being Vγ2, Vγ3, Vγ4, Vγ5, Vγ8, Vγ9, and Vγ11 [42]. Taking
into consideration that most of γδ T cells in peripheral blood are Vγ9Vδ2+ cells (50 −90% of T cells),
this subset has received the substantial attention for its potential role in cancer and immunotherapy
9
==PAGE:17==
Ilektra Amirali - 200170
1.7
γδ T cells: Role and importance in cancer research
[43]. As far as human T cells are concerned, Vδ1 and Vδ2 subsets have been the subject in most of
the cases, even though other T cell subsets exist with varied tissue distributions. Vδ3 cells (Figure 5,
right panel), which are here referred to as Vδneg cells, are a minor Vδ1−Vδ2−subgroup of these cells
and are present in the stomach, liver, and blood (≈0.2% of lymphocytes) [44]. In this project, I focus
on Vδ1 and Vδ2 subsets which, out of the three aforementioned subsets, are the most well-studied.
Figure 5:
Human γδ T cell subsets together with main cytokines, receptors and primary tissue
distributions. CD45 and CD27 receptors characterize cell’s subtype to naive (CD45RA+ CD27+),
memory (CD45−CD27+), activated effector memory (CD45−CD27−) and terminally differentiated
(CD45RA+ CD27−) cell [43]. All γδ T cell subsets can be found in epithelial tissues of skin, lungs,
intestine, reproductive tract, liver, spleen and thymus, with Vδ1 primary found in skin, Vδ2 in blood
and Vδ3 in liver [43].
The most prevalent subset of γδ T cells in blood, Vδ2 cells, are distributed in the peripheral
blood and lymphoid tissues [45] but can also be found in skin, lungs, intestine and liver [43]. Vδ2 cells
express DNAX accessory molecule-1 (DNAM-1) and natural Killer group 2 member D (NKG2D) which
interact with CD155 and MHC class I polypeptide-related sequence A/B (MICA/MICB)/unique long
16 (UL-16)-binding proteins (ULBPs), respectively (Figure 6) [42]. Vδ2 cells recognize transformed
cells through their TCR binding to butyrophilin receptors BTN3A1 and BTN2A1 of hematological and
epithelial tumors, inducing a cytotoxic response (Figure 6) [46]. While various malignancies progress
and during their development, they come against Vγ9Vδ2 cells which have the ability to elicit strong
inhibitory effects on them. According to Liang Rong et al., Vδ2 cells that infiltrated the tumor cells,
had substantial cytolytic activity and released pro-inflammatory cytokines, such as IFN-γ and tumor
10
==PAGE:18==
Ilektra Amirali - 200170
1.7
γδ T cells: Role and importance in cancer research
necrosis factor alpha (TNF-α), promoting a Th1 response (Figure 5, middle panel) [47]. Vδ2 cells
induce a strong response when stimulated with microbial phosphoantigens (PAgs), such as isopentenyl
pyrophosphate (IPP), which is a metabolite produced by the mevalonate or microbial deoxyxylulose
phosphate pathway [48][43]. Cancer cells often present an abnormal mevalonate pathway, which causes
an accumulation of IPP in the cells [49] [43]. This can be detected by Vγ9Vδ2 cells, which mediates
their activation and triggers anti-tumor functions. This process is mediated by IPP when it binds
to the intracellular domain of the butyrophilin molecule BTN3A1, expressed on cancer cells. This
interaction with BTN2A1 results in activating Vγ9Vδ2 cells through their TCR [49] [43].
Another subset of γδ T cells are Vδ1 T cells. They are mostly found on mucosal surfaces, but
also in dermis, spleen, liver, gut epithelia, lung and peripheral blood (≈30% of total γδ T cells in the
peripheral blood) (Figure 5, left panel) [50]. Vδ1 cells express natural killer receptors NKp30, NKp44
and NKG2D which interact with B7-H6, MILL5 and MICA, respectively (Figure 6 [42], although
some Vδ1 TCR ligands are still unknown. Vδ1 T cells recognize transformed cells through their TCR
binding to MICA and MICB ligands that are induced upon stress, damage or transformation leading to
the induce of a cytotoxic response [51][52]. However, this is a low-affinity interaction compared to the
interaction between NKG2D and MICA [51]. They also produce pro-inflammatory cytokines like IFN-γ
and TNF-α (Figure 5, left panel). These cytokines can promote the activation and cytotoxicity of other
immune cells, such as NK cells and cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTLs), and enhance the immune response
against cancer [43]. Vδ1 and Vδ2 cells have the ability to recognize MICA/B and ULBP ligands on
cancer cells through their NKG2D receptor [53], which facilitates their activation and triggers the
release of perforin and granzyme B [54]. Overall, this interaction allows T cells to detect cancer cells
and promote their anti-tumor function [55].
All in all, in order for many malignancies to be detected, it requires γδ T cell’s ability to quickly
respond to specific ligand types. As a result, γδ T cells serve as a crucial, functional connection between
the innate and adaptive immune system, making them significant effector cells in the immune response
against cancer [43].
11
==PAGE:19==
Ilektra Amirali - 200170
1.8
Pro-tumor role of γδ T cells in cancer research
Figure 6: Major interactions between the receptors of γδ T cell subsets and tumor cell [42].
1.8
Pro-tumor role of γδ T cells in cancer research
In the previous section, it was established how important γδ T cells are for cancer immunity.
However, γδ T cells can be transformed due to alterations in their DNA, also known as somatic
mutation, which can eventually lead to γδ T cell malignancy. These malignancies, known as γδ T cell
lymphomas (γδ TCL), are characterized as an aggressive but rare disease with a poor diagnosis [56]. At
this moment, there are no murine models available to further investigate and understand this disease.
During this project and through a transplantable mouse model of γδ TCL, I am characterizing some
of the primary cell lines used in the model to further understand how the cell functions and behaves.
12
==PAGE:20==
Ilektra Amirali - 200170
1.8
Pro-tumor role of γδ T cells in cancer research
1.8.1
γδ TCL and leukemia: Pathophysiology, types and development
Leukemia, which means "white blood" in Greek, is characterized by an extreme amount of white
blood cells found in the bloodstream, compared to the amount of red blood cells [57]. This over-
production of white blood cells results in leukemic cells and, after infiltration occurs, can lead to
the enlargement of various organs, such as the lymph nodes, liver, and spleen [57]. These malignant
neoplastic cells arise from precursor cells in the bone marrow that have been replaced by rapidly
reproducing and immature neoplastic cells [57].
In mature γδ T cells, coexistence of disorders that modulate the immune system and other inflam-
matory disorders, in some patients affected from γδ T cell lymphomas (TCLs), is an indication that
the activation signals and chronic inflammation are in charge of the transformation process of the cells
[43]. While these diseases will follow the infection steps from the beginning, immunosuppressive or
inflammatory surroundings might sped up their processes, such as preserving injured cells by collecting
reactive oxygen species [43].
Several types of TCLs have been discovered throughout the years with γδ T cells being mainly
held accountable for hepatosplenic T cell lymphoma (HSTL), primary cutaneous T cell lymphoma
(PCGDTL) and monomorphic epitheliotropic intestinal T cell lymphoma (MEITL), whereas enteropathy-
associated T cell lymphoma (EATL), T cell large granular lymphocytic leukaemia (T-LGLL) and
T-ALL are unlikely to consist of γδ T cells [43].
Found primarily in younger adults, with a higher occurrence in males (around 70%), HSTL is
an aggressive disease with a quick median survival of 13 months. γδ T cells largely contribute to the
initiation of the disease, which mainly manifests in the liver and spleen and, to a lesser extent, in the
bone marrow. Out of all HSTL cases, 20% of it comes from patients with preexisting diseases that
dysregulate the immune system [58]. Similarly, treatments that suppress the immune system, like TNF-
α inhibitor medication, have been linked to the creation of HSTL. This treatment seems to increase
the chances of HSTL formation when used simultaneously, although the need for patients with more
intensive care, more pressing diseases, persistent stimulation to antigens and increased inflammation
contributes to the complication of this finding [43].
13
==PAGE:21==
Ilektra Amirali - 200170
1.8
Pro-tumor role of γδ T cells in cancer research
Among the cutaneous T cell lymphomas (CTCLs), PCGDTL is a unique case, with malignant γδ
T cells being able to form in or close to the skin [59]. With a median survival of 15-31 months and
making up for <1% of all main CTCLs, PCGDTL shows slightly greater influence to males compared
to females [43].
The EATL and MEITL intestinal T cell lymphomas are additional rare and aggressive diseases,
with EATL being predominantly of the γδ T cell subtype and strongly associating with celiac disease,
while MEITL having its greater percentage of cases emerging from γδ T cells (various reports range
between 25-80% of cases that express γδ TCR) and no association with celiac disease [43]. Because of
EATL’s link to celiac disease, it is subsequently connected to intestine inflammation and autoimmu-
nity. Commonality of additional pre-existing conditions, playing a role in immune dysregulation, were
revealed by a larger study. Finally, both diseases are predominant in males with a female-to-male ratio
of 1:2 [43].
T and Natural Killer (NK) cell lineages can also give birth to LGLL, a rare lymphoproliferative
disorder that, in comparison to the aforementioned diseases, has a slow-growing development (indolent)
[43]. It is considered a highly symptomatic disease due to the associated cytopenia and autoimmune
incidents, with non sex-specific biases in T cell lineage (T-LGLL) found so far [43]. T-LGLL is highly
associated with simultaneously existing autoimmune diseases (arthritis being the most common) and,
at the same time, γδ subset T-LGLL is presented clinically and follows an indolent course [43].
Occurring most commonly in young adults and children, T-ALL stems from immature T cell
malignant transformation in the thymus or bone marrow. The γδ TCR is expressed in approximately
10-15% of all cases, with escalated white blood cell counts and splenomegaly outlined in adult γδ
T-ALL patients. Similarly to the diseases mentioned above, there is a male predominance association
according to different reports [60] [61].
Promotion of γδ T cell oncogenesis occurs in the therapy in which the range of clonal T cell
diversity is reduced, a fact that fits into the notion of narrowed clonal repertoires promoting malignant
T cell clones outgrowth (homeostasis concept) [43].
14
==PAGE:22==
Ilektra Amirali - 200170
1.9
Purpose of this study
1.9
Purpose of this study
One of the objectives of the project was to investigate the expression of PD-1 and CTLA-4 in hu-
man γδ T cells. These molecules play a crucial role in regulating the immune responses by suppressing
immune activation and preventing overactivation of cells. High expression of PD-1 and CTLA-4 on T
cells has been associated with impaired immune function and decreased ability to fight cancer. Thus,
understanding how these molecules are expressed on γδ T cells, can provide insight into how these cells
contribute to the overall immune response against cancer, and may help in the development of more
effective cancer immunotherapies.
Another objective of this project was to characterize a primary γδ TCL murine cell line. At the
Institute of Animal Breeding and Genetics of University of Veterinary Medicine in Vienna, Heidi A.
Neubauer and her collaborators isolated and transplanted γδ T cells from STAT5BN642H transgenic
mice [62] into immunocompetent recipient mice, which resulted in the development of a γδ TCL disease
phenotype [63]. A polyclonal cell line called M2 was then generated from a recipient mouse with γδ
TCL using outgrowth cultures of lymph node cells in the presence of IL-2. To further refine this model
and better recapitulate the clonal nature of human HSTL disease, they generated single-cell clones
from the M2 cell line. From the expanded clonal cell lines, four clones (referred to as C2, C6, C14 and
C15) were selected based on having clear Flag-tagged STAT5BN642H protein expression and robust
STAT5 activity (tyrosine-phosphorylated STAT5 (pY-STAT5) protein) as determined by Western blot
analysis. Through our collaboration with the above-mentioned institute, I characterized clones C2,
C6 and C15 in terms of cytokine, transcription factor and surface marker expression. Being able to
characterize a primary γδ TCL murine cell line is crucial for the improvement of existing treatments
and the development of new treatments for γδ TCL, a rare and aggressive subtype of T-cell lymphoma.
15
==PAGE:23==
Ilektra Amirali - 200170
2
Materials and Methods
2.1
CTLA-4 and PD-1 expression in human γδ T cells
2.1.1
Subjects
Human peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) were obtained from healthy donors, purified,
and collected in 1.8 mL cryotubes containing fetal bovine serum (FBS) and 10% of dimethyl sulfoxide
(DMSO) and cryopreserved at ≈−196◦C in liquid nitrogen tanks.
2.1.2
Cell cultures and conditions
Cells were seeded at day 0 at 4x106/well into anti-CD3 coated 24-flat bottom plates (1 ug/ml,
eBioscience) and cultured in culture medium at 37◦C in an incubator. On day 2, depending on the
experiment, cells were activated with 750 ng/ml PMA, 50 ng/ml Ionomycin and 3 mM of GolgiStop
for 3.5 h at 37◦C in an incubator. Culture medium added in cultures included: 1X Gibco RPMI 1640,
20% Gibco FBS, 1 mM Gibco Sodium pyruvate, 1% Gibco MEM Non-essential amino acids, 20 mM
Gibco HEPES buffer, 2 mM Gibco L-Glutamine, 100 µg/mL Biowest Penicillin/Streptomycin, 55 mM
β-mercaptoethanol.
2.1.3
Flow cytometry
Cells were harvested for flow cytometric analysis, centrifuged (5 min at 400 g), and washed in cold
PBS before the staining procedure. Cells were stained with a surface or intracellular antibody (Ab)
cocktail depending on the type of experiment. For surface staining, cells were washed in FACS buffer,
whereas during intracellular staining, cells were incubated in 100 µL BD Cytofix for 20 min at room
temperature and later washed in 100 µL BD Perm wash buffer. Cells were finally kept in 200 µL FACS
buffer (PBS+3% FBS) at 4◦C. Flow cytometry was performed on BD LSR Fortessa™Flow Cytometer
using BD FACSDiva™software and analyzed in FlowJo 10.7.2 version software.
16
==PAGE:24==
Ilektra Amirali - 200170
2.1
CTLA-4 and PD-1 expression in human γδ T cells
For Ab cocktail, the following fluorochrome labeled antibodies (Abs) mixed in FACS (PBS+3%
FBS) for surface staining or BD Perm wash for intracellular staining were used: Live-Dead(L-D) -
viability dye/Alexa Fluor (AF)-700 mix, TCRγδ - BV421, CD4 - BV510, CD3 - FITC, Vδ2 - PECF594,
Vδ1 - PECy7, PD-1 - PE, CD27 - PECy7, CD3 - PECF594, CTLA-4 - APC-Cy7. Fluorescence Minus
One (FMO) controls are samples stained with all the fluorophores from a selected panel, minus one of
them. They are used to identify and gate positive populations in multicolor experiments by establishing
the top limit for background signal on the deleted label. CTLA-4 Fluorescence Minus One (CTLA-4
FMO) and PD-1 Fluorescence Minus One (PD-1 FMO) were used as controls for CTLA-4 and PD-1
populations during staining, respectively.
2.1.4
Gating strategy
During all PBMCs experiments, a similar gating strategy and consensus gating were performed.
Lymphocytes were separated from debris and other cell-types (Figure 7, A). Single cells were separated
from doublets by applying area (A) against height (H) using forward scatter (FSC) and side scatter
(SSC), which depict the size and granularity of cells, respectively (Figure 7, B, C). Live cells were
separated from dead cells (Figure 7, D). Further gating was applied to distinguish between lymphocytes
and the γδ T-cell subsets of interest. As CD3 marker is part of a protein complex and is expressed
on T-cell as part of TCR, CD3+ cells were separated from CD3−cells (Figure 7, E). γδ T cells are
usually CD4−cells, so further gating was applied on CD4−cell population (Figure 7, F). γδ T cells
were further subdivided in Vδ1/Vδ2/Vδneg cell subsets of interest (Figure 7, H). Figure 7 is provided
as an example of the gating strategy that was followed throughout the analysis.
17
==PAGE:25==
Ilektra Amirali - 200170
2.2
Characterization of γδ TCL cell lines
Figure 7: General gating strategy. A) Lymphocytes, B/C) Doublet exclusion, D) Live cells, E) CD3+
cells, F) CD4−cells, G) γδ T cells, H) Vδ1/Vδ2/Vδneg cells.
2.1.5
Statistics
The statistical significance was calculated by one-way ANOVA using Tukey’s multiple comparison
test and p values less than 0.05 were considered significant (p<0.05).
Median is presented for all
conditions and all data present individual data points from different donors. Statistical analysis was
performed in GraphPad Prism 8.4.2 software. Frequencies of cell subsets/expression markers from
FlowJo gating were used for qualitative analysis.
2.2
Characterization of γδ TCL cell lines
To characterize the γδ T cell lines, different experiments were conducted using cell line clone 2
(C2) of passage 7 (P7), clone 6 (C6) of passage 7 (P7), clone 15 (C15) of passage 10 (P10) and murine
lymph nodes as controls. Initially, C15 P10 was cultured in full media while the rest of the clones
followed after safe handling was ensured according to protocol. All clones were handled in a similar
manner throughout the experiments. Full media added in cell line cultures included: 1X Gibco RPMI
18
==PAGE:26==
Ilektra Amirali - 200170
2.2
Characterization of γδ TCL cell lines
1640, 20% Gibco FBS, 1 mM Gibco Sodium pyruvate, 1% Gibco MEM Non-essential amino acids, 20
mM Gibco HEPES buffer, 2 mM Gibco L-Glutamine, 100 µg/mL Biowest Penicillin/Streptomycin,
10ng/ml IL-2, 55 mM β-mercaptoethanol.
2.2.1
Mice
Mice were obtained from DTU - Denmark’s Technical University and maintained in specific
pathogen-free conditions.
C57BL/6 mice were used as controls during the experiments.
Inguinal,
brachial, axillary and superficial cervical lymph nodes were extracted from RORγtCRE-STOPRFP
animals (Figure 8). Extracted fat-free LNs were placed in culture media for preparation. Tissues
were crushed through a 70µm strainer, washed and re-suspended in RPMI culture media, and filtered
through a 40µm strainer. Approximately 5x106 cells/ml of the initial cell density were used.
Figure 8: Lymphatic system scheme [64].
2.2.2
Cell cultures and conditions
Clone cells were thawed at 37◦C (1-2 min), transferred into falcon tubes with PBS, mixed, and
centrifuged (3 min at 150 g). After checking for visible pellets, the supernatant was removed, and cells
were gently resuspended in 5 ml of full media and transferred into T25 flasks.
19
==PAGE:27==
Ilektra Amirali - 200170
2.2
Characterization of γδ TCL cell lines
The first two weeks were crucial for the cell’s survival. Debris and suspension cells were removed
when they overpopulated the flask, as they negatively affected the health of the already adherent cells.
If no adherent cells were present, media was collected and centrifuged at 110 g for 1 min; pellet was
resuspended in fresh media and placed back in the same flask. After full recovery of the cells was
achieved, they were split accordingly (1:15/1:10/1:5/1:2, depending on the clone and density) and
plated until they were ready for harvesting. During the recovery phase, clones were regularly split
every 72-96 h. When clones were fully recovered, they required a more frequent split of (every 48 h)
whereas, when no splitting was needed, an additional 3 ml of full media or appropriate amount of IL-2
and β-mercaptoethanol mix was added.
Cell lines were cultured and kept in incubation for 48/72/96 hours at 37◦C. Cell line and lymph
node cells were stimulated for 3.5 h with a master mix of 50 ng/ml PMA, 0.75 ug/ml Ionomycin, and
3 mM BD GolgiStop and kept at 37◦C. After stimulation, adherent cells were initially harvested either
by trypsinizing for 3 min at 37◦C or by scraping them out of the plates.
2.2.3
Flow cytometry
Cells were harvested for flow cytometric analysis, centrifuged (5 min at 400 g), and washed in
cold PBS before the staining procedure.
Cells were stained with a surface/transcription factor or
cytokine antibody (Ab) cocktail. Surface staining was first applied, followed by cell fixation in order
to further stain for TFs and /or cytokines. For surface/transcription factor staining, cells were fixated
using the eBioscience™Foxp3 kit in 100 µL Foxp3 fix for 1 h at 4◦C, and later washed in Foxp3 wash
buffer, whereas during cytokine staining, cells were fixated using the BD Perm/Wash™kit in 100 µL
BD Cytofix for 20 min at room temperature and later washed in 100 µL BD Perm wash buffer. Cells
were finally kept in 200 µL FACS buffer (PBS+3% FBS) at 4◦C. Flow cytometry was performed on BD
LSR Fortessa™Flow Cytometer using BD FACSDiva™software and analyzed in FlowJo 10.7.2 version
software.
For surface/TF and cytokine Ab cocktails, the following fluorochrome labeled antibodies (Abs)
were used, mixed in FACS (PBS+3% FBS) or BD Perm wash/ Foxp3 wash buffer respectively.
20
==PAGE:28==
Ilektra Amirali - 200170
2.2
Characterization of γδ TCL cell lines
Surface/TF staining panel: Live-Dead(L-D) - viability dye/Alexa Fluor (AF)-700 mix, TCRγδ -
BV421, CD3 - FITC, CD44 - BV510(V500), CD27 - BV650, Vγ1 - BV605, Vγ4 - PerCP-Cy5.5, Vγ6
- APC(AF647), Tbet - PE-Cy7, RORγt - PE-CF475.
Cytokine staining panel: Live-Dead(L-D) - viability dye/Alexa Fluor (AF)-700 mix, TCRγδ -
BV421, CD3 - FITC, GrA - PE, GrB - PerCP-e710, IL-17A - BV786, TNFα - 650, IFNγ - PE-Cy7.
GrA Fluorescence Minus One (GrA FMO) and GrB Fluorescence Minus One (GrB FMO) were used
as controls for GrA and GrB populations during staining, respectively.
2.2.4
Gating strategy
During all cell line experiments, a similar gating strategy and consensus gating were applied to
all clones. Lymphocytes were separated from debris for the clone sample (Figure 9, A: C15) and other
cell-types for the LN sample (Figure 9, A: LN). FSC voltage in Diva software was set low as the clone
cells were large in size, compared to the LN sample. Single cells were separated from doublets by
applying area (A) against height (H) using forward scatter (FSC) and side scatter (SSC), which depict
the size and granularity of cells, respectively (Figure 9, B, C) . Live cells were separated from dead
cells (Figure 9, D). Clones used during the experiments: 1st experiment - C15 P14; 2nd experiment -
C15 P20, C6 P9; 3rd experiment - C15 P27, C6 P15, C2 P14. Figure 9 is provided as an example of
the gating strategy that was followed throughout the analysis.
21
==PAGE:29==
Ilektra Amirali - 200170
2.2
Characterization of γδ TCL cell lines
Figure 9: General gating strategy for lymph node (LN) and cell lines. A) Lymphocytes, B/C) Doublet
exclusion, D) Live cells.
22
==PAGE:30==
Ilektra Amirali - 200170
3
Results
Two types of experiments were conducted during this project.
On one hand, PBMC experi-
ments focused on investigating the conditions that regulate the surface and intracellular expression
of common ICRs, CTLA-4 and PD-1, in human γδ T cell subsets. The function of these inhibitory
co-receptors in γδ T cells is not well understood.
There is limited knowledge about their expres-
sion pattern and inhibitory potential among different γδ T cell sub-populations.
The circulating-
expression pattern of CTLA-4 receptor intracellularly and on the surface, as well as the fact that it
internalizes so rapidly renders the particular investigation challenging. PD-1 is highly expressed on
active T cells and mediates T cell inhibitory signaling. Even thought PD-1 is extensively used in
clinical research and several cancer therapies are based on its expression and function, its role and
relevance in γδ T cells is not extensively explored. During these experiments I looked into CTLA-4
expression both intracellularly and extracellularly, and PD-1 expression extracellularly, utilizing dif-
ferent stimulating parameters and their combinations; with (w/) or without (w/o) aCD3 activation,
PMA/Ionomycin/GolgiStop/PMA+Ionomycin/PMA+Ionomycin+GolgiStop stimulation).
On the other hand, cell-line experiments focused on the characterization of 3 different cell-line
clones, C2/C6/C15, derived from γδ T cell lymphomas (γδ TCL). As mentioned in the introduction,
our collaborators isolated and transplanted γδ T cells from STAT5BN642H transgenic mice [62] into
immunocompetent recipient mice, which resulted in a γδ TCL disease phenotype [63]. A polyclonal cell
line called M2 was then generated from a recipient mouse with γδ TCL. To further refine this model
and better recapitulate the clonal nature of human HSTL disease, they generated single-cell clones
from the M2 cell line. From these expanded clonal cell lines, C2, C6 and C15 were selected for further
analysis. In vivo, these cells express γδ T-cell receptors (γδ TCR) but it has been observed that when
they are extracted from mice and cultured they stopped expressing γδ TCR. In fact, when cultured,
these clones exhibit another uncommon behaviour by attaching to the plate/flask which comes in
contrast with what it has been shown so far, that T cells when cultured float around or attach lightly
in the case of anti-CD3 plate/flask coating. Cell line experiments aimed to the characterization of
C2, C6 and C15 by staining intracellularly for cytokines and extracellularly for other surface markers
and transcription factor expression. Conducting these experiments will help us investigate further into
23
==PAGE:31==
Ilektra Amirali - 200170
3.1
CTLA-4 and PD-1 expression in human γδ T cells
what receptors, cytokines and transcription factors these cells express and further understand their
behaviour and functions.
3.1
CTLA-4 and PD-1 expression in human γδ T cells
Different agents were applied during the experiments for the activation and stimulation of T cells.
Humanized anti-CD3 monoclonal antibody (aCD3) binds to CD3 on the surface of the T cell and
activates the cell by mimicking TCR stimulation [65]. This allows the expression of ICRs of interest,
PD-1 and CTLA-4.
Phorbol-12-myristate-13-acetate (PMA) is a protein kinase C activator, which can activate T cells
by binding to activating protein kinase C (PKC) enzymes and activating them [66]. PKC enzymes
are involved in a variety of cellular processes, including cell proliferation, differentiation, and gene
expression [67]. Activation of PKC enzymes by PMA leads to the phosphorylation of downstream
target proteins, which results T cell activation. PMA stimulates T cells to produce cytokines and
proliferate [67].
Ionomycin is a calcium ionophore, which can increase intracellular calcium levels by transporting
calcium ions across the membranes of cells [68]. This level increase of intracellular calcium activates a
variety of intracellular signaling pathways, including the activation of the nuclear factor of activated T
cells (NFAT) and the mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathways [68]. These pathways play
a key role in the activation and proliferation of T cells [68].
PMA and Ionomycin are both agents that are used to activate and stimulate immune cells, specif-
ically T cells, which are the target cells for CTLA-4 and PD-1. Stimulating T cells with PMA and
Ionomycin leads to ICR upregulation, which allows us to study the function and expression of CTLA-4
and PD-1 on the surface of activated T cells. Also, stimulation with these compounds bypasses the
T cell membrane receptor complex and leads to activation of several intracellular signaling pathways,
resulting in T cell activation and stimulation production of a variety of cytokines. PMA and Ionomycin
are mimicking TCRγδ stimulation which then secrets the cytokines of interest. Using GolgiStop, the
intracellular protein transport blocks and cytokines accumulate inside the Golgi complex where they
24
==PAGE:32==
Ilektra Amirali - 200170
3.1
CTLA-4 and PD-1 expression in human γδ T cells
are stained in order to determine which cytokines are secreted.
Optimal CTLA-4 expression after a 3.5-hour PMA/Ionomycin stimulation. Previous
laboratory work has shown that treating activated γδ T cells with PMA and Ionomycin upregulates
CTLA-4 on the surface of the cell, increasing the surface expression of the receptor.
In order to
establish the optimum duration of stimulation for the maximal expression of CTLA-4 subsequent to
aCD3 activation, I conducted an in vitro time-line experiment in which γδ T cells were stimulated
for 1, 3.5, and 6 hours, and were subsequently scrutinized under various stimulating combinations,
PMA/Ionomycin/PMA+Ionomycin.
25
==PAGE:33==
Ilektra Amirali - 200170
3.1
CTLA-4 and PD-1 expression in human γδ T cells
Figure 10: Intracellular CTLA-4% in Vδ1 and Vδ2 cells after 3.5 hours of aCD3 activation w/ PMA
stimulation on different time points. A, B) Total surface CTLA-4 expression in Vδ1 (left panels) and
Vδ2 (right panels) γδ T cells from 5 healthy donors. The statistical significance was determined by one-
way ANOVA with Tukey’s multiple comparison test, P<0.05. Median is presented for all conditions
and all data show individual data points from 5 donors over one experiment. C) FACS plots of donor
buffy coat (BC) chosen as average representation.
26
==PAGE:34==
Ilektra Amirali - 200170
3.1
CTLA-4 and PD-1 expression in human γδ T cells
Figure 11:
Intracellular CTLA-4% in Vδ1 and Vδ2 cells after 3.5 hours of aCD3 activation w/
Ionomycin stimulation on different time points. A, B) Total surface CTLA-4 expression in Vδ1 (left
panels) and Vδ2 (right panels) γδ T cells from 5 healthy donors.
The statistical significance was
determined by one-way ANOVA with Tukey’s multiple comparison test, P<0.05. Median is presented
for all conditions and all data show individual data points from 5 donors over one experiment. C)
FACS plots of donor buffy coat (BC) chosen as average representation.
27
==PAGE:35==
Ilektra Amirali - 200170
3.1
CTLA-4 and PD-1 expression in human γδ T cells
Figure 12:
Intracellular CTLA-4% in Vδ1 and Vδ2 cells after 3.5 hours of aCD3 activation w/
PMA+Ionomycin stimulation on different time points. A, B) Total surface CTLA-4 expression in Vδ1
(left panels) and Vδ2 (right panels) γδ T cells from 5 healthy donors. The statistical significance was
determined by one-way ANOVA with Tukey’s multiple comparison test, P<0.05. Median is presented
for all conditions and all data show individual data points from 5 donors over one experiment. C)
FACS plots of donor buffy coat (BC) chosen as average representation.
28
==PAGE:36==
Ilektra Amirali - 200170
3.1
CTLA-4 and PD-1 expression in human γδ T cells
The intracellular staining results revealed a similar expression pattern for both Vδ1 and Vδ2 cells,
with Vδ2 presenting double CTLA-4 expression levels compared to Vδ1 population. Regarding CTLA-
4 expression at different times, PMA treatment alone showed a non-significant increase in Vδ1 CTLA-4
intracellular expression after 3,5 hours of PMA treatment, which was again decreased after 6 hours of
treatment (Figure 10, B). In Vδ2 cells, 1 hour of PMA treatment resulted in a non-significant increase
of intracellular CTLA-4 expression which was also downregulated after 3.5 and 6 hours of treatment
(Figure 10, B). Ionomycin stimulation revealed a decrease in intracellular CTLA-4 expression in both
Vδ1 and Vδ2 populations for all different treatment times (Figure 11, B). Combination treatment with
both PMA and Ionomycin also revealed similar non-significant results for both the subset populations,
with a decrease in intracellular CTLA-4 expression (Figure 12, B).
The surface staining exhibited a more clear separation between the control and the stimulated
samples in both subset populations, with Vδ2 presenting higher CTLA-4 expression levels compared
to Vδ1 population.
Surface Vδ1 CTLA-4% demonstrated a significant increase after 3,5 hours of
stimulation with PMA compared to only 1 hour of stimulation with the same stimulant (Figure 13.
No significant increase was observed at 6 hours of stimulation in this subset. Vδ2 demonstrated a
gradual but non-significant increase in surface CTLA-4 expression at 3.5 hours of treatment followed
by a decrease of the same expression at 6 hours of treatment (Figure 13, B). Ionomycin stimulation
revealed a slight increase after 1 hour of treatment followed by a decrease in surface CTLA-4 expression
in both Vδ1 and Vδ2 populations (Figure 14, B). The utilization of PMA/Ionomycin as a stimulus in the
case of Vδ1 cells resulted in a significant elevation of surface CTLA-4 expression at the 3.5-hour mark,
however, upon continued stimulation for an additional 2.5 hours, the surface CTLA-4 expression levels
remained constant (Figure 15, B). Regarding the Vδ2 subset, the stimulus combination in question
exhibits notable variations in relation to the different stimulation times, with maximum enhancement
in the surface expression of CTLA-4 being observed solely at the 3.5-hour mark of stimulation (Figure
15, B).
Considering the CTLA-4 expression both on the surface and intracellularly, I concluded that 3.5
hours of stimulation with the combination of both stimulants as treatment would suffice to increase
CTLA-4 expression and upregulate the receptor to the cells’ membrane with higher expression of
CTLA-4 in Vδ2 cells. CTLA-4 gating was applied according to CTLA-4 FMO samples (Figure 16).
29
==PAGE:37==
Ilektra Amirali - 200170
3.1
CTLA-4 and PD-1 expression in human γδ T cells
Figure 13: Surface CTLA-4% in Vδ1 and Vδ2 cells after 3.5 hours of aCD3 activation w/ PMA
stimulation on different time points. A, B) Total surface CTLA-4 expression in Vδ1 (left panels) and
Vδ2 (right panels) γδ T cells from 5 healthy donors. The statistical significance was determined by one-
way ANOVA with Tukey’s multiple comparison test, P<0.05. Median is presented for all conditions
and all data show individual data points from 5 donors over one experiment. C) FACS plots of donor
buffy coat (BC) chosen as average representation.
30
==PAGE:38==
Ilektra Amirali - 200170
3.1
CTLA-4 and PD-1 expression in human γδ T cells
Figure 14: Surface CTLA-4% in Vδ1 and Vδ2 cells after 3.5 hours of aCD3 activation w/ Ionomycin
stimulation on different time points. A, B) Total surface CTLA-4 expression in Vδ1 (left panels) and
Vδ2 (right panels) γδ T cells from 5 healthy donors. The statistical significance was determined by one-
way ANOVA with Tukey’s multiple comparison test, P<0.05. Median is presented for all conditions
and all data show individual data points from 5 donors over one experiment. C) FACS plots of donor
buffy coat (BC) chosen as average representation.
31
==PAGE:39==
Ilektra Amirali - 200170
3.1
CTLA-4 and PD-1 expression in human γδ T cells
Figure 15:
Surface CTLA-4% in Vδ1 and Vδ2 cells after 3.5 hours of aCD3 activation w/
PMA+Ionomycin stimulation on different time points.
A, B) Total surface CTLA-4 expression in
Vδ1 (left panels) and Vδ2 (right panels) γδ T cells from 5 healthy donors. The statistical significance
was determined by one-way ANOVA with Tukey’s multiple comparison test, P<0.05. Median is pre-
sented for all conditions and all data show individual data points from 5 donors over one experiment.
C) FACS plots of donor buffy coat (BC) chosen as average representation.
32
==PAGE:40==
Ilektra Amirali - 200170
3.1
CTLA-4 and PD-1 expression in human γδ T cells
Figure 16: Surface and intracellular CTLA-4 FMO gating in Vδ1 and Vδ2 cells.
High CTLA-4 percentages in Vδ2 cells in response to PMA+Ionomycin stimulation.
After establishing an optimal stimulation time of γδ T cell subsets regarding CTLA-4 expression
using PMA+Ionomycin, I explored different stimulating combinations for the same cell subsets regard-
ing CTLA-4 and PD-1 expression. In order to establish the best stimulant combination treatment,
I conducted a two-day in vitro experiment in which γδ T cells were subsequent to aCD3 activa-
tion and IL-7 stimulation as well as stimulated for 3.5 hours with various stimulating combinations,
PMA/Ionomycin/GolgiStop/PMA+Ionomycin/PMA+Ionomycin-GolgiStop. IL-7 stimulation of γδ T
cells was used to promote the survival and expansion of cells, while GolgiStop was only used for de-
taining cytokines inside the Golgi complex for staining purposes. Expression of CTLA-4, IFNγ, IL-17
and TNFα was examined intracellularly, using cytokine expression as a control to verify that my ex-
periment worked as planned. Surface expression of CTLA-4 and PD-1 receptors was also investigated
to determine which stimulant combination upregulates these ICRs more effectively.
When examining the cells intracellularly, no visible patterns in CTLA-4 expression for any of
the different stimulations was observed after aCD3 activation in both Vδ1 and Vδ2 (Figure 17,
18).
However, Vδ2 cells showed double CTLA-4% in comparison to Vδ1.
To confirm the effec-
tiveness of the stimulation, I evaluated the cytokine expression in both subsets.
Stimulation with
PMA+Ionomycin+GolgiStop revealed the highest expression pattern for all cytokines evaluated. No-
tably, an increase in the expression of IFNγ and TNFα was observed, with highest percentages secreted
33
==PAGE:41==
Ilektra Amirali - 200170
3.1
CTLA-4 and PD-1 expression in human γδ T cells
Figure 17:
Intracellular CTLA-4% in Vδ1 cells after 3.5 hours of aCD3 activation.
Cells were
stimulated for 3.5 hours w/ different stimulation combinations.
A, B) Total intracellular CTLA-4
expression in Vδ1 T cells from 2 healthy donors. Median is presented for all conditions and all data
show individual data points from 2 donors over one experiment. C) FACS plots of donor buffy coat
(BC) chosen as average representation.
34
==PAGE:42==
Ilektra Amirali - 200170
3.1
CTLA-4 and PD-1 expression in human γδ T cells
Figure 18:
Intracellular CTLA-4% in Vδ2 cells after 3.5 hours of aCD3 activation.
Cells were
stimulated for 3.5 hours w/ different stimulation combinations.
A, B) Total intracellular CTLA-4
expression in Vδ2 T cells from 2 healthy donors. Median is presented for all conditions and all data
show individual data points from 2 donors over one experiment. C) FACS plots of donor buffy coat
(BC) chosen as average representation.
35
==PAGE:43==
Ilektra Amirali - 200170
3.1
CTLA-4 and PD-1 expression in human γδ T cells
Figure 19: Intracellular CTLA-4 FMO gating in Vδ1 and Vδ2 cells.
by Vδ2 cells (Figure 21, 25). This confirmed that the stimulation was effective throughout the experi-
mental setup. However, IL-17A exhibited very low numbers in all Vδ subsets (Figure 22, 23).
Surface expression patterns of CTLA-4 revealed great increase of CTLA-4 for both Vδ subsets
when cells were stimulated with the combinations PMA+Ionomycin and PMA+Ionomycin-GolgiStop,
with higher CTLA-4 expression being displayed by Vδ2 cells (Figure 27). No visible expression pattern
in surface PD-1% in any of the different subsets under the different stimulants was observed after aCD3
activation (Figure 28, 29).
Even though stimulation during the above experiment proved to be effective due to the secretion
and increased expression of intracellular cytokines, intracellular expression of CTLA-4 and surface
expression of PD-1 was inconclusive in terms of the different stimulation parameters. However, surface
CTLA-4 expression provided a clear indication of a high expression pattern for CTLA-4 receptor when
the combination of PMA+Ionomycin was used. Moreover, throughout the experiment, I observed a
high differential expression in CTLA-4% by Vδ2 versus Vδ1, with Vδ2 exhibiting a 2-fold increase in
ICRs and cytokines expression compared to Vδ1. CTLA-4 gating was applied according to CTLA-4
36
==PAGE:44==
Ilektra Amirali - 200170
3.1
CTLA-4 and PD-1 expression in human γδ T cells
Figure 20: Intracellular IFNγ% in Vδ1 cells after 3.5 hours of aCD3 activation. Cells were stimulated
for 3.5 hours w/ different stimulation combinations. A, B) Total intracellular IFNγ expression in Vδ1
T cells from 2 healthy donors. Median is presented for all conditions and all data show individual data
points from 2 donors over one experiment. C) FACS plots of donor buffy coat (BC) chosen as average
representation.
37
==PAGE:45==
Ilektra Amirali - 200170
3.1
CTLA-4 and PD-1 expression in human γδ T cells
Figure 21: Intracellular IFNγ% in Vδ2 cells after 3.5 hours of aCD3 activation. Cells were stimulated
for 3.5 hours w/ different stimulation combinations. A, B) Total intracellular IFNγ expression in Vδ2
T cells from 2 healthy donors. Median is presented for all conditions and all data show individual data
points from 2 donors over one experiment. C) FACS plots of donor buffy coat (BC) chosen as average
representation.
38
==PAGE:46==
Ilektra Amirali - 200170
3.1
CTLA-4 and PD-1 expression in human γδ T cells
Figure 22: Intracellular IL-17% in Vδ1 cells after 3.5 hours of aCD3 activation. Cells were stimulated
for 3.5 hours w/ different stimulation combinations. A, B) Total intracellular IL-17 expression in Vδ1
T cells from 2 healthy donors. Median is presented for all conditions and all data show individual data
points from 2 donors over one experiment. C) FACS plots of donor buffy coat (BC) chosen as average
representation.
39
==PAGE:47==
Ilektra Amirali - 200170
3.1
CTLA-4 and PD-1 expression in human γδ T cells
Figure 23: Intracellular IL-17% in Vδ2 cells after 3.5 hours of aCD3 activation. Cells were stimulated
for 3.5 hours w/ different stimulation combinations. A, B) Total intracellular IL-17 expression in Vδ2
T cells from 2 healthy donors. Median is presented for all conditions and all data show individual data
points from 2 donors over one experiment. C) FACS plots of donor buffy coat (BC) chosen as average
representation.
40
==PAGE:48==
Ilektra Amirali - 200170
3.1
CTLA-4 and PD-1 expression in human γδ T cells
Figure 24: Intracellular TNFα% in Vδ1 γδ T cells after 3.5 hours of aCD3 activation. Cells were
stimulated for 3.5 hours w/ different stimulation combinations. A, B) Total intracellular TNFα ex-
pression in Vδ1 T cells from 2 healthy donors. Median is presented for all conditions and all data show
individual data points from 2 donors over one experiment. C) FACS plots of donor buffy coat (BC)
chosen as average representation.
41
==PAGE:49==
Ilektra Amirali - 200170
3.1
CTLA-4 and PD-1 expression in human γδ T cells
Figure 25: Intracellular TNFα% in Vδ2 cells after 3.5 hours of aCD3 activation. Cells were stimulated
for 3.5 hours w/ different stimulation combinations. A, B) Total intracellular TNFα expression in Vδ2
T cells from 2 healthy donors. Median is presented for all conditions and all data show individual data
points from 2 donors over one experiment. C) FACS plots of donor buffy coat (BC) chosen as average
representation.
42
==PAGE:50==
Ilektra Amirali - 200170
3.1
CTLA-4 and PD-1 expression in human γδ T cells
Figure 26: Surface CTLA-4% in Vδ1 cells after 3.5 hours of aCD3 activation. Cells were stimulated
for 3.5 hours w/ different stimulation combinations. A, B) Total surface CTLA-4 expression in Vδ1 T
cells from 2 healthy donors. Median is presented for all conditions and all data show individual data
points from 2 donors over one experiment. C) FACS plots of donor buffy coat (BC) chosen as average
representation.
43
==PAGE:51==
Ilektra Amirali - 200170
3.1
CTLA-4 and PD-1 expression in human γδ T cells
Figure 27: Surface CTLA-4% in Vδ2 cells after 3.5 hours of aCD3 activation. Cells were stimulated
for 3.5 hours w/ different stimulation combinations. A, B) Total surface CTLA-4 expression in Vδ2 T
cells from 2 healthy donors. Median is presented for all conditions and all data show individual data
points from 2 donors over one experiment. C) FACS plots of donor buffy coat (BC) chosen as average
representation.
44
==PAGE:52==
Ilektra Amirali - 200170
3.1
CTLA-4 and PD-1 expression in human γδ T cells
Figure 28: Surface PD-1% in Vδ1 cells after 3.5 hours of aCD3 activation. Cells were stimulated
for 3.5 hours w/ different stimulation combinations. A, B) Total surface PD-1 expression in Vδ1 T
cells from 2 healthy donors. Median is presented for all conditions and all data show individual data
points from 2 donors over one experiment. C) FACS plots of donor buffy coat (BC) chosen as average
representation.
45
==PAGE:53==
Ilektra Amirali - 200170
3.1
CTLA-4 and PD-1 expression in human γδ T cells
Figure 29: Surface PD-1% in Vδ2 cells after 3.5 hours of aCD3 activation. Cells were stimulated
for 3.5 hours w/ different stimulation combinations. A, B) Total surface PD-1 expression in Vδ2 T
cells from 2 healthy donors. Median is presented for all conditions and all data show individual data
points from 2 donors over one experiment. C) FACS plots of donor buffy coat (BC) chosen as average
representation.
46
==PAGE:54==
Ilektra Amirali - 200170
3.1
CTLA-4 and PD-1 expression in human γδ T cells
Figure 30: Surface CTLA-4 and PD-1 FMO gating in Vδ1 and Vδ2 cells.
FMO samples (Figure 30).
Combination of aCD3 activation and PMA+Ionomycin stimulation facilitates upreg-
ulation of CTLA-4 and PD-1. According to previous experiments, the combination of PMA and
Ionomycin has been shown to increase the expression levels of CTLA-4, resulting in upregulation of the
receptor. To investigate the extent that stimulation with PMA and Ionomycin upregulates CTLA-4, I
conducted a two-day in vitro experiment where γδ T cells were tested under two different conditions,
with aCD3 activation or with the combination of aCD3 activation and PMA+Ionomycin stimulation.
Based on my previous results, I hypothesized that aCD3 activation and PMA+Ionomycin stimulation
are necessary for CTLA-4 and PD-1 expression and upregulation.
Intracellular CTLA-4 expression displayed a slight but non-significant increase only after aCD3
activation in Vδ1, but was significantly increased with PMA+Ionomycin stimulation (Figure 31). A
significant increase of intracellular CTLA-4% in Vδ2 after activation with aCD3 was observed followed
by downregulation of intracellular CTLA-4% after stimulation with PMA and Ionomycin (Figure 31).
Interestingly, the two subsets showed a completely opposite pattern of CTLA-4 expression after stim-
ulation, suggesting a functional difference between the two subsets or that the said outcome may also
be a result of the smaller population of Vδ1 cells.
47
==PAGE:55==
Ilektra Amirali - 200170
3.1
CTLA-4 and PD-1 expression in human γδ T cells
Figure 31:
Intracellular CTLA-4% in Vδ1 and Vδ2 cells after aCD3 activation w/ or w/o
PMA+Ionomycin stimulation. A, B) Total intracellular CTLA-4 expression in Vδ1 (left panels) and
Vδ2 (right panels) γδ T cells from 10 healthy donors. The statistical significance was determined by
one-way ANOVA with Tukey’s multiple comparison test, P<0.05. Median is presented for all condi-
tions and all data show individual data points from 10 donors over one experiment. C) FACS plots of
donor buffy coat (BC) chosen as average representation.
48
==PAGE:56==
Ilektra Amirali - 200170
3.1
CTLA-4 and PD-1 expression in human γδ T cells
Figure 32: Intracellular CTLA-4 FMO gating in Vδ1 and Vδ2 cells.
Vδ1 CTLA-4 surface expression exhibited a slight but non-significant decrease after aCD3 activa-
tion which changed drastically after stimulation and revealed a 3-fold increase (Figure 33). CTLA-4
surface expression remained at the initial low levels after aCD3 activation but showed significant in-
crease after stimulation with PMA and Ionomycin in the Vδ2 population (Figure 33). This observation
and in combination with the decrease in the intracellular Vδ2 CTLA-4 expression upon stimulation
gives rise to the unexpected but interesting hypothesis, that upon stimulation intracellular CTLA-4
expression significantly decreases due the upregulation caused by PMA+Ionomycin stimulation. Fur-
ther surface flow cytometry analysis showed a notable increase in Vδ1 and Vδ2 PD-1 expression after
activation and stimulation suggesting that PD-1 surface expression greatly depends upon activation
and stimulation (Figure 34).
Similarly to all previous experiments, Vδ2 ICR percentages appeared in higher percentages than
in Vδ1. During this experiment, an interesting pattern in ICR expression was observed indicating that
upon stimulation intracellular CTLA-4 expression significantly decreases due the upregulation caused
by PMA+Ionomycin stimulation, which should be further investigated. CTLA-4 gating was applied
according to CTLA-4 FMO samples (Figure 35).
49
==PAGE:57==
Ilektra Amirali - 200170
3.1
CTLA-4 and PD-1 expression in human γδ T cells
Figure 33: Surface CTLA-4% in Vδ1 and Vδ2 cells after aCD3 activation w/ or w/o PMA+Ionomycin
stimulation. A, B) Total surface CTLA-4 expression in Vδ1 (left panels) and Vδ2 (right panels) γδ
T cells from 10 healthy donors. The statistical significance was determined by one-way ANOVA with
Tukey’s multiple comparison test, P<0.05. Median is presented for all conditions and all data show
individual data points from 10 donors over one experiment. C) FACS plots of donor buffy coat (BC)
chosen as average representation.
50
==PAGE:58==
Ilektra Amirali - 200170
3.1
CTLA-4 and PD-1 expression in human γδ T cells
Figure 34: Surface PD-1% in Vδ1 and Vδ2 cells after aCD3 activation w/ or w/o PMA+Ionomycin
stimulation. A, B) Total surface PD-1 expression in Vδ1 (left panels) and Vδ2 (right panels) γδ T cells
from 10 healthy donors. The statistical significance was determined by one-way ANOVA with Tukey’s
multiple comparison test, P<0.05. Median is presented for all conditions and all data show individual
data points from 10 donors over one experiment. C) Buffy coat (BC) from donor 2 FACS plots are
chosen as average representation.
51
==PAGE:59==
Ilektra Amirali - 200170
3.1
CTLA-4 and PD-1 expression in human γδ T cells
Figure 35: Surface CTLA-4 and PD-1 FMO gating in Vδ1 and Vδ2 cells.
52
==PAGE:60==
Ilektra Amirali - 200170
3.2
Characterization of γδ TCL cell lines
3.2
Characterization of γδ TCL cell lines
Murine γδ T cells express different TCRs based on the cytokines they encountered [69]. IFNγ-
producing γδ T cells express surface TCRγ chains such as Vγ1, Vγ5 and Vγ7, whereas IL-17-producing
γδ T cells express Vγ4 and Vγ6 [43]. They can be further subdivided according to their transcription
factor-expressing pattern, such as retinoic acid receptor-related orphan receptor gamma (RORγt) and
T-box 21 (T-bet). RORγt+ cells are predisposed in producing IL-17 whereas T-bet+ cells produce
IFNγ [43].
During the experiments, mouse LN controls were only obtained and used as an antibody staining
control. However, it was not possible to make conclusions about the cell lines based solely on the LN
samples due to differences in fluorescence and population frequencies. To overcome this limitation, an
unstained control was obtained which allowed for determination of background fluorescence and setting
of negative gates for analysis. Since all clones showed similar expression of cytokines and transcription
factors, only one clone will be displayed throughout the analysis.
Fully recovered clones lose TCRγδ expression. To characterize the γδ TCL cell lines and
investigate whether cells are expressing TCRγδ, I stained the cells with TCRγδ Ab and checked for
its presence by looking at their percentages using flow cytometry analysis. In early stages of recovery
(P14), C15 showed expression of TCRγδ (14.8% out of 97,7% live cells) (Figure 36, A). In later stages
of recovery (P20), C15 no longer expressed TCRγδ (Figure 36, B), presenting a differential expression
pattern of TCRγδ by C6 P9 versus C15 P14, still in early stages of recovery. Moreover, C15 CD3+
cells increased from 0.77% at P14 to 5.12% at P20 which could indicate that previous TCRγδ+CD3+
cells stopped expressing TCRγδ (Figure 36). After staining fully recovered clones C2 P14, C6 P15 and
C15 P27, all clones presented similar expression pattern, being TCRγδ−CD3−(Figure 37).
Clones do not show expression of known γδ T cell markers. To further investigate whether
cell lines expressed any of the mouse cell surface markers, I hypothesized that clones express CD44
and CD27 markers, based on their presence in mouse γδ T cells. For this purpose, I applied anti-
CD44 and anti-CD27 on all clones in order to identify possible subsets in the cell-lines. LN sample
showed that the staining procedure was successful, revealing three known LN categories of γδ T cells
53
==PAGE:61==
Ilektra Amirali - 200170
3.2
Characterization of γδ TCL cell lines
Figure 36: Gating on γδ T+, γδ T−and CD3 cells in different passages of clones 6 and 15. A) TCRγδ
expression of C15 P14. B) TCRγδ and CD3 expression in C6 P9 and C15 20.
Figure 37: Gating on γδ T cells on LN. unstained control is used to make conclusions on whether
C15 P27 unstimulated cells express TCRγδ and CD3. LN unstimulated control is used for staining
verification and C15 as an example for all clones.
(CD44high CD27−: γδ T17 cells, CD44low CD27+: γδ T1 cells, CD44−CD27+: γδ T1 cells) (Figure
38, LN). C15 when compared to cell-line unstained control revealed that clones do not express any of
the above-mentioned surface markers, verifying that these γδ TCL clones do not express the expected
markers in vitro (Figure 38, Unstained control, C15).
54
==PAGE:62==
Ilektra Amirali - 200170
3.2
Characterization of γδ TCL cell lines
Figure 38: Gating on γδ T-cell subsets on unstimulated C15 P27, comparing to unstained control.
LN unstimulated control is used for staining verification and C15 as an example for all clones.
Tbet expression in cell-lines. As mentioned above and from literature, I know that murine
γδ T17 cells express CD44high CD27−RORγt+ whereas γδ T1 cells express CD44low CD27+ Tbet+.
Moreover, Vγ6 is expressed in γδ T17 cells while Vγ4 can be found in both γδ T cell populations.
Thus, I can safely conclude from analysis that CD44high CD27−are γδ T17 cells, and CD44low CD27+
are γδ T1 cells (Figure 39). Therefore, I investigated whether clones could also express any of those
transcription factors. To test my hypothesis, I stained with anti-RORγt and Tbet. Clone analysis
revealed the expression of Tbet for C2 P14, C6 P15 and C15 P27. Using Tbet and RORγt FMOs,
and comparing it to unstained control, I confirmed my hypothesis that all clones express a significant
percentage of Tbet (99.7%) but not of RORγt transcription factor (Figure 40).
55
==PAGE:63==
Ilektra Amirali - 200170
3.2
Characterization of γδ TCL cell lines
Figure 39: Gating on Transcription factors on the different unstimulated LN subsets.
Figure 40: Gating on Transcription factors on unstimulated C15 P27, comparing to unstained control.
Gating is based on RORγt and Tbet FMOs.
No indication of Vγ1, Vγ4 and Vγ6 in clones. To further investigate if the clones express
Vγ1, Vγ4 and Vγ6 on their surface, I stained with equivalent antibodies and used an unstained control
to form a gating baseline for the cell-line clones. Staining revealed that C2 P14, C6 P15 and C15 P27
did not show any expression of Vγ1 (Figure 41), Vγ4 and Vγ6 (Figure 42), while LN staining verified
that the staining was successful for all three antibodies used(Figure 41, 42).
56
==PAGE:64==
Ilektra Amirali - 200170
3.2
Characterization of γδ TCL cell lines
Figure 41: Gating on Vγ1 and Vγ6 on LN unstimulated control, clone unstained control and C15
P27.
Figure 42: Gating on Vγ4 and Vγ6 on LN unstimulated control, clone unstained control and C15
P27.
IFNγ and GrA expression among all clones before PMA+Ionomycin stimulation.
Cell lines were also examined for cytokine expression, in particular for IFNγ, IL-17A and TNFα
expression, as well as for granzyme expression, GrA and GrB, before and after stimulation with PMA
and Ionomycin. Taking into consideration the cytokine expression patterns of the unstained control
(Figure 44), clones revealed IFNγ and GrA expression before stimulation but no IL-17A or TNFα
expression was observed (Figure 45). Upon stimulation, cell lines expressed similar to the previous
cytokine expression patterns, with IFNγ% exhibiting a slight increase after PMA+Ionomycin. Due to
57
==PAGE:65==
Ilektra Amirali - 200170
3.2
Characterization of γδ TCL cell lines
unsuccessful GrB FMO usage, I was unable to make an assumption whether clones were GrB+ w/ or
w/o stimulation. Staining procedure was successful and verified using LN unstimulated and stimulated
control samples (Figure 43).
Figure 43:
Gating on LN control sample for IFNγ, IL-17A, TNFα, GrA and GrB. Upper line:
unstimulated LN control sample, Bottom line: stimulated LN control sample.
Figure 44: Gating on unstained control sample for IFNγ, IL-17A, TNFα, GrA and GrB. GrA FMO
sample on the right panel.
58
==PAGE:66==
Ilektra Amirali - 200170
3.2
Characterization of γδ TCL cell lines
Figure 45: Gating on C15 P27 sample for IFNγ, IL-17A, TNFα, GrA and GrB. Upper line: unstim-
ulated C15 sample, Bottom line: stimulated C15 sample.
The presence of TCRγδ expression was checked in clones using flow cytometry analysis and staining
with TCRγδ Ab.
The early stages of recovery (P14) showed expression of TCRγδ in C15 which
was lost in later stages of recovery (P20). Upon staining fully recovered clones, all clones presented
TCRγδ−CD3−expression pattern.
Further investigation into the expression of mouse cell surface
markers showed that clones do not express CD44 and CD27 markers which are present in mouse γδ T
cells. Transcription factor analysis showed expression of Tbet in all clones but not of RORγt. Staining
with antibodies for Vγ1, Vγ4 and Vγ6 showed no expression in the clones.
Analysis of cytokine
expression in the clones before PMA+Ionomycin stimulation showed expression of IFNγ and GrA but
no expression of IL-17A or TNFα. No further cytokine expression was observed after stimulation.
59
==PAGE:67==
Ilektra Amirali - 200170
4
Discussion
Throughout this project, the necessity of aCD3 activation and PMA+Ionomycin stimulation for
high expression of both CTLA-4 and PD-1 in γδ T cells has been exhibited. The PMA+Ionomycin
combination was successful in boosting the surface expression of the CTLA-4 receptor in cells, with
Vδ2 cells exhibiting a two-fold increase in expression compared to Vδ1 cells. Interestingly, intracellular
expression of CTLA-4 showed a decrease after activation and stimulation, which could indicate that
upon stimulation intracellular CTLA-4 expression significantly decreases due to the upregulation caused
by PMA+Ionomycin stimulation. The research highlights the significant difference in the expression of
CTLA-4 and PD-1 between Vδ2 and Vδ1 T cells and the potential impact that stimulation conditions
have on these receptors’ expression.
The study of PD-1 and CTLA-4 molecules is critical in understanding the regulation of the immune
responses and preventing over-stimulation. High expression of these molecules on T cells has been
linked to weakened immune function and reduced cancer-fighting ability. Investigating the expression
of PD-1 and CTLA-4 on γδ T cells can shed light on their role in the overall immune response against
cancer, and potentially lead to the development of more effective cancer immunotherapies.
A study investigated the effect of PMA and Ionomycin in different concentrations and time-points.
Lombardi et al., investigated the effects of PMA and Ionomycin on the expression of CTLA-4 on CD4+
T cells found in peripheral blood and the human T cell clone HA100-115 (HC3). The results showed
that 50 ng/ml of PMA and 1 mg/ml of Ionomycin used for stimulation induced rapid and sustained
upregulation of CTLA-4 expression. CD4+ T cells showed upregulation of CTLA-4 after 2 hours,
which peaked at 4 hours and was sustained for 48 hours. The HC3 cells showed noticeable CTLA-4
expression after 1 hour of activation and continued to increase up to 48 hours. The results were based
on a number of independent experiments, but the study exhibited limitations due to the early death
of the cells, which prevented them from being further investigated at additional time-points [70].
Another study tested the possibility that CD80 may inhibit responses via CTLA-4 under conditions
of 5ng/ml PMA and 1 mM Ionomycin stimulation for 4 hours, and CD28 co-stimulation predominated
using PMA alone. The results showed that CTLA-4 expression was only detected under conditions
60
==PAGE:68==
Ilektra Amirali - 200170
of PMA+Ionomycin stimulation and not in unstimulated cells or cells treated with PMA alone. The
level of CTLA-4 expression was low and in line with other studies, supporting the possibility that
CD80-mediated inhibition under PMA+Ionomycin may be due to CTLA-4 expression; PMA alone did
not promote its surface expression, allowing co-stimulation to predominate [71].
A research found out that ex vivo-expanded human γδ T cells weakly express PD-1 in CD3+/TCRγδ+
cells. They examined the expression levels of perforin, granzyme B, and IFN-γ in γδ T cells stimulated
with PMA+Ionomycin for 4 hours, and the results showed positive expression of these molecules in ex
vivo expanded γδ T cells but PD-1 was weakly expressed [72].
Moreover, researchers tested the trafficking of CTLA-4 in T cell blasts after stimulation with
PMA+Ionomycin or anti-CD3/anti-CD28. The stimulation led to an increase in the cycling pool of
CTLA-4, without showing any extended surface time. The data showed that CTLA-4 was efficiently
internalized and its pool was mostly vesicular, even after T cell activation.
These results provide
evidence that endocytosis of CTLA-4 continues in activated human T cells, despite an increase in
trafficking. Cells were stimulated with 50 ng/ml PMA and 1 µM Ionomycin for 3 hours. Furthermore,
they suggested that stimulation of T cell blasts leads to an increase in mobility but not stability of
CTLA-4 at the surface of the cell [73].
Studies also tested different stimulating parameters and their effect on the expression of PD-1
and CTLA-4 receptors in γδ T cells.
During expansion with nitrogen-containing bisphosphonates
(N-BPs), expression of PD-1 was increased temporarily in activated Vδ2 T cells [74]. Significantly
increased expression of CTLA-4 has been found in Vδ2 cells during expansion with zoledronic acid
(ZOL), which may result in decreased cytotoxicity and increased apoptosis in some of the expanded
cells [75]. Cytokine stimulation has also proven to increase and upregulate the expression of PD-1 and
CTLA-4 receptors in γδ T cells. Vδ2 cells stimulated with TGFβ have been shown rising in expression
of PD-1, CTLA-4, and CD80/CD86 [76].
Therapeutic monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) have also been used to block the inhibitory signaling
of these receptors which appears to improve immune responses against cancers that are hard to treat,
such as melanoma, non-small cell lung cancer, and renal cell carcinoma [77].
Recent studies have
demonstrated that blocking PD-1 receptors using mAbs has improved the anti-tumor immunity of Vδ2
61
==PAGE:69==
Ilektra Amirali - 200170
cells, in both preclinical models and clinical trials [78] [79] [80]. One study found a correlation between
the presence of Vδ2 cells and positive outcomes in patients treated with ipilimumab, a mAb targeting
CTLA-4 receptors, despite a lack of direct evidence for the effectiveness of immune checkpoint blockade
in targeting γδ T cells [81].
γδ T cells demonstrated a protective effect in various mouse cancer models [82] [83]. Substantial
research has linked the presence of higher levels of γδ T cells to improved survival outcomes for leukemia
patients who underwent bone marrow transplants with depleted αβ T cells [84]. Intratumoral γδ T cells
have been found to be strongly correlated with a positive outcome for tumor patients in comparison to
other immune subsets [85] [86]. All in all, γδ T cells are crucial in the development of new treatments
of cancer and have proven critical for cancer research and immunotherapy.
During the second part of this project, primary cell lines used in a mouse γδTCL model were
characterized.
The results showed TCRγδ expression in early recovery stages.
All fully recovered
clones expressed TCR γδ−CD3−. Analysis of mouse cell surface markers showed that the clones did
not express CD44 and CD27, common in mouse γδ T cells. The clones expressed Tbet but not RORγt
and showed no expression of Vγ1, Vγ4, and Vγ6. Before stimulation with PMA+Ionomycin, the clones
expressed IFNγ and GrA but not IL-17A or TNFα. No further cytokine expression was observed after
stimulation with PMA+Ionomycin.
Due to the fact that currently there are no mouse models to
further investigate these malignant cells, it is hard to conclude and verify which surface markers and
cytokines these cell lines express and at which stage they express them. Moreover, cell lines proved
to need more time in culture to fully recover than expected which denied me the opportunity to run
further experiments and test for additional expression patterns. Further analysis is required to fully
characterize and understand the behaviour of these malignant cells.
These results confirm the need of creating a mouse model of γδ T cell lymphoma in order to
understand this aggressive malignancy. A transplantable mouse model of γδ T cell lymphoma can be
used to investigate the molecular mechanisms of the disease, test new therapeutic approaches, and
evaluate potential treatments before they are tested in humans. This can provide insights into the
disease and lead to the development of more effective therapies for patients.
62
==PAGE:70==
Ilektra Amirali - 200170
5
Conclusion
As far as ICR research is concerned, this study focused on the expression of CTLA-4 and PD-1
receptors in Vδ1 and Vδ2 T cells under different stimulations. It was found that the intracellular
CTLA-4 expression in Vδ2 cells significantly decreased upon PMA+Ionomycin stimulation and aCD3
activation. The same combination of stimulation effectively increased the expression of surface CTLA-
4, with Vδ2 cells showing a 2-fold increase in expression compared to Vδ1 cells. Moreover, surface PD-1
expression achieved highest percentages equally in both subsets under the same conditions. Overall,
the study provides evidence of the differential expression of CTLA-4 between Vδ1 and Vδ2 T cells
and highlights the potential impact the stimulation parameters have on the expression of the receptor.
Furthermore, it points out the necessity for aCD3 activation and PMA+Ionomycin stimulation in terms
of achieving increased PD-1 expression. Further investigation in the expression patterns of these ICRs
using different activating and stimulating parameters could shed more light into this research and,
eventually, improve current or develop new cancer treatments.
In terms of γδ TCL cell lines analysis, this study focused on characterizing the different murine cell
line clones by staining for different expression markers, transcription factors and cytokines. Early in
the cells’ recovery (P14), TCRγδ expression was present in C15 but was absent at later recovery stages
(P20). Fully recovered clones appeared TCRγδ−CD3−. Further examination of cell surface markers
revealed that the clones did not express CD44 and CD27, which are commonly found in mouse γδ
T cells. Tbet expression was present in all clones compared to RORγt, which was absent. Staining
for Vγ1, Vγ4, and Vγ6 showed no expression of those chains in the clones. Before PMA+Ionomycin
stimulation, the clones expressed IFNγ and GrA but not IL-17A or TNFα. No additional cytokine
expression was observed after stimulation. Further investigation in the expression markers and be-
haviour of these cells could potentially help us understand the disease and provide improved therapies
for patients.
63
==PAGE:71==
List of Figures
1
Chronic activation and exhaustion. A) ICR inhibitory signals help to regulate T cell
responses. B) T cells are exposed to multiple activation signals, which can overcome the
inhibitory signals and lead to constant T cell activation. C) Presence of immunosuppres-
sive factors in the microenvironment can disrupt the balance and lead to chronic T cell
exhaustion. APC: antigen-presenting cell; ICR: immune checkpoint receptor; ICR-L:
immune checkpoint receptor ligand [4]. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
PD-1 immune checkpoint receptor. To prevent T cells from attacking the tumor cells,
tumor cells produce PD-L1, which binds with PD-1 on T cells (left). T cells can kill the
tumor cells by preventing PD-L1 from binding to PD-1 with a PD-1 or PD-L1 inhibitor
(right) [17]. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
3
CTLA-4 immune checkpoint receptor. To prevent T cells from attacking the tumor cells,
tumor cells produce B7-1/B7-2, which binds with CTLA-4 on T cells (left). T cells can
kill the tumor cells by preventing B7-1/B7-2 from binding to CTLA-4 with a CTLA-4
inhibitor (right) [17]. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
4
CTLA-4 intracellular trafficking [25]. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
5
Human γδ T cell subsets together with main cytokines, receptors and primary tissue
distributions. CD45 and CD27 receptors characterize cell’s subtype to naive (CD45RA+
CD27+), memory (CD45−CD27+), activated effector memory (CD45−CD27−) and
terminally differentiated (CD45RA+ CD27−) cell [43].
All γδ T cell subsets can be
found in epithelial tissues of skin, lungs, intestine, reproductive tract, liver, spleen and
thymus, with Vδ1 primary found in skin, Vδ2 in blood and Vδ3 in liver [43]. . . . . . .
10
6
Major interactions between the receptors of γδ T cell subsets and tumor cell [42]. . . .
12
7
General gating strategy. A) Lymphocytes, B/C) Doublet exclusion, D) Live cells, E)
CD3+ cells, F) CD4−cells, G) γδ T cells, H) Vδ1/Vδ2/Vδneg cells. . . . . . . . . . . .
18
8
Lymphatic system scheme [64]. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
9
General gating strategy for lymph node (LN) and cell lines. A) Lymphocytes, B/C)
Doublet exclusion, D) Live cells.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
I
==PAGE:72==
Ilektra Amirali - 200170
List of Figures
10
Intracellular CTLA-4% in Vδ1 and Vδ2 cells after 3.5 hours of aCD3 activation w/
PMA stimulation on different time points. A, B) Total surface CTLA-4 expression in
Vδ1 (left panels) and Vδ2 (right panels) γδ T cells from 5 healthy donors. The statistical
significance was determined by one-way ANOVA with Tukey’s multiple comparison test,
P<0.05. Median is presented for all conditions and all data show individual data points
from 5 donors over one experiment. C) FACS plots of donor buffy coat (BC) chosen as
average representation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
11
Intracellular CTLA-4% in Vδ1 and Vδ2 cells after 3.5 hours of aCD3 activation w/ Ion-
omycin stimulation on different time points. A, B) Total surface CTLA-4 expression in
Vδ1 (left panels) and Vδ2 (right panels) γδ T cells from 5 healthy donors. The statistical
significance was determined by one-way ANOVA with Tukey’s multiple comparison test,
P<0.05. Median is presented for all conditions and all data show individual data points
from 5 donors over one experiment. C) FACS plots of donor buffy coat (BC) chosen as
average representation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
12
Intracellular CTLA-4% in Vδ1 and Vδ2 cells after 3.5 hours of aCD3 activation w/
PMA+Ionomycin stimulation on different time points. A, B) Total surface CTLA-4
expression in Vδ1 (left panels) and Vδ2 (right panels) γδ T cells from 5 healthy donors.
The statistical significance was determined by one-way ANOVA with Tukey’s multiple
comparison test, P<0.05.
Median is presented for all conditions and all data show
individual data points from 5 donors over one experiment. C) FACS plots of donor
buffy coat (BC) chosen as average representation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
13
Surface CTLA-4% in Vδ1 and Vδ2 cells after 3.5 hours of aCD3 activation w/ PMA
stimulation on different time points. A, B) Total surface CTLA-4 expression in Vδ1
(left panels) and Vδ2 (right panels) γδ T cells from 5 healthy donors. The statistical
significance was determined by one-way ANOVA with Tukey’s multiple comparison test,
P<0.05. Median is presented for all conditions and all data show individual data points
from 5 donors over one experiment. C) FACS plots of donor buffy coat (BC) chosen as
average representation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
II
==PAGE:73==
Ilektra Amirali - 200170
List of Figures
14
Surface CTLA-4% in Vδ1 and Vδ2 cells after 3.5 hours of aCD3 activation w/ Ionomycin
stimulation on different time points. A, B) Total surface CTLA-4 expression in Vδ1
(left panels) and Vδ2 (right panels) γδ T cells from 5 healthy donors. The statistical
significance was determined by one-way ANOVA with Tukey’s multiple comparison test,
P<0.05. Median is presented for all conditions and all data show individual data points
from 5 donors over one experiment. C) FACS plots of donor buffy coat (BC) chosen as
average representation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
15
Surface CTLA-4% in Vδ1 and Vδ2 cells after 3.5 hours of aCD3 activation w/ PMA+Ionomycin
stimulation on different time points. A, B) Total surface CTLA-4 expression in Vδ1 (left
panels) and Vδ2 (right panels) γδ T cells from 5 healthy donors. The statistical sig-
nificance was determined by one-way ANOVA with Tukey’s multiple comparison test,
P<0.05. Median is presented for all conditions and all data show individual data points
from 5 donors over one experiment. C) FACS plots of donor buffy coat (BC) chosen as
average representation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
16
Surface and intracellular CTLA-4 FMO gating in Vδ1 and Vδ2 cells. . . . . . . . . . .
33
17
Intracellular CTLA-4% in Vδ1 cells after 3.5 hours of aCD3 activation.
Cells were
stimulated for 3.5 hours w/ different stimulation combinations. A, B) Total intracellular
CTLA-4 expression in Vδ1 T cells from 2 healthy donors. Median is presented for all
conditions and all data show individual data points from 2 donors over one experiment.
C) FACS plots of donor buffy coat (BC) chosen as average representation. . . . . . . .
34
18
Intracellular CTLA-4% in Vδ2 cells after 3.5 hours of aCD3 activation.
Cells were
stimulated for 3.5 hours w/ different stimulation combinations. A, B) Total intracellular
CTLA-4 expression in Vδ2 T cells from 2 healthy donors. Median is presented for all
conditions and all data show individual data points from 2 donors over one experiment.
C) FACS plots of donor buffy coat (BC) chosen as average representation. . . . . . . .
35
19
Intracellular CTLA-4 FMO gating in Vδ1 and Vδ2 cells. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
III
==PAGE:74==
Ilektra Amirali - 200170
List of Figures
20
Intracellular IFNγ% in Vδ1 cells after 3.5 hours of aCD3 activation. Cells were stimu-
lated for 3.5 hours w/ different stimulation combinations. A, B) Total intracellular IFNγ
expression in Vδ1 T cells from 2 healthy donors. Median is presented for all conditions
and all data show individual data points from 2 donors over one experiment. C) FACS
plots of donor buffy coat (BC) chosen as average representation. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
21
Intracellular IFNγ% in Vδ2 cells after 3.5 hours of aCD3 activation. Cells were stimu-
lated for 3.5 hours w/ different stimulation combinations. A, B) Total intracellular IFNγ
expression in Vδ2 T cells from 2 healthy donors. Median is presented for all conditions
and all data show individual data points from 2 donors over one experiment. C) FACS
plots of donor buffy coat (BC) chosen as average representation. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
22
Intracellular IL-17% in Vδ1 cells after 3.5 hours of aCD3 activation. Cells were stimu-
lated for 3.5 hours w/ different stimulation combinations. A, B) Total intracellular IL-17
expression in Vδ1 T cells from 2 healthy donors. Median is presented for all conditions
and all data show individual data points from 2 donors over one experiment. C) FACS
plots of donor buffy coat (BC) chosen as average representation. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
23
Intracellular IL-17% in Vδ2 cells after 3.5 hours of aCD3 activation. Cells were stimu-
lated for 3.5 hours w/ different stimulation combinations. A, B) Total intracellular IL-17
expression in Vδ2 T cells from 2 healthy donors. Median is presented for all conditions
and all data show individual data points from 2 donors over one experiment. C) FACS
plots of donor buffy coat (BC) chosen as average representation. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
24
Intracellular TNFα% in Vδ1 γδ T cells after 3.5 hours of aCD3 activation. Cells were
stimulated for 3.5 hours w/ different stimulation combinations. A, B) Total intracellular
TNFα expression in Vδ1 T cells from 2 healthy donors. Median is presented for all
conditions and all data show individual data points from 2 donors over one experiment.
C) FACS plots of donor buffy coat (BC) chosen as average representation. . . . . . . .
41
25
Intracellular TNFα% in Vδ2 cells after 3.5 hours of aCD3 activation. Cells were stim-
ulated for 3.5 hours w/ different stimulation combinations. A, B) Total intracellular
TNFα expression in Vδ2 T cells from 2 healthy donors. Median is presented for all
conditions and all data show individual data points from 2 donors over one experiment.
C) FACS plots of donor buffy coat (BC) chosen as average representation. . . . . . . .
42
IV
==PAGE:75==
Ilektra Amirali - 200170
List of Figures
26
Surface CTLA-4% in Vδ1 cells after 3.5 hours of aCD3 activation. Cells were stimu-
lated for 3.5 hours w/ different stimulation combinations. A, B) Total surface CTLA-4
expression in Vδ1 T cells from 2 healthy donors. Median is presented for all conditions
and all data show individual data points from 2 donors over one experiment. C) FACS
plots of donor buffy coat (BC) chosen as average representation. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
27
Surface CTLA-4% in Vδ2 cells after 3.5 hours of aCD3 activation. Cells were stimu-
lated for 3.5 hours w/ different stimulation combinations. A, B) Total surface CTLA-4
expression in Vδ2 T cells from 2 healthy donors. Median is presented for all conditions
and all data show individual data points from 2 donors over one experiment. C) FACS
plots of donor buffy coat (BC) chosen as average representation. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
28
Surface PD-1% in Vδ1 cells after 3.5 hours of aCD3 activation. Cells were stimulated for
3.5 hours w/ different stimulation combinations. A, B) Total surface PD-1 expression
in Vδ1 T cells from 2 healthy donors. Median is presented for all conditions and all
data show individual data points from 2 donors over one experiment. C) FACS plots of
donor buffy coat (BC) chosen as average representation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
29
Surface PD-1% in Vδ2 cells after 3.5 hours of aCD3 activation. Cells were stimulated for
3.5 hours w/ different stimulation combinations. A, B) Total surface PD-1 expression
in Vδ2 T cells from 2 healthy donors. Median is presented for all conditions and all
data show individual data points from 2 donors over one experiment. C) FACS plots of
donor buffy coat (BC) chosen as average representation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
30
Surface CTLA-4 and PD-1 FMO gating in Vδ1 and Vδ2 cells. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
31
Intracellular CTLA-4% in Vδ1 and Vδ2 cells after aCD3 activation w/ or w/o PMA+Ionomycin
stimulation. A, B) Total intracellular CTLA-4 expression in Vδ1 (left panels) and Vδ2
(right panels) γδ T cells from 10 healthy donors. The statistical significance was deter-
mined by one-way ANOVA with Tukey’s multiple comparison test, P<0.05. Median is
presented for all conditions and all data show individual data points from 10 donors over
one experiment. C) FACS plots of donor buffy coat (BC) chosen as average representation. 48
32
Intracellular CTLA-4 FMO gating in Vδ1 and Vδ2 cells. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
V
==PAGE:76==
Ilektra Amirali - 200170
List of Figures
33
Surface CTLA-4% in Vδ1 and Vδ2 cells after aCD3 activation w/ or w/o PMA+Ionomycin
stimulation. A, B) Total surface CTLA-4 expression in Vδ1 (left panels) and Vδ2 (right
panels) γδ T cells from 10 healthy donors. The statistical significance was determined
by one-way ANOVA with Tukey’s multiple comparison test, P<0.05. Median is pre-
sented for all conditions and all data show individual data points from 10 donors over
one experiment. C) FACS plots of donor buffy coat (BC) chosen as average representation. 50
34
Surface PD-1% in Vδ1 and Vδ2 cells after aCD3 activation w/ or w/o PMA+Ionomycin
stimulation. A, B) Total surface PD-1 expression in Vδ1 (left panels) and Vδ2 (right
panels) γδ T cells from 10 healthy donors. The statistical significance was determined
by one-way ANOVA with Tukey’s multiple comparison test, P<0.05. Median is pre-
sented for all conditions and all data show individual data points from 10 donors over
one experiment. C) Buffy coat (BC) from donor 2 FACS plots are chosen as average
representation.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
35
Surface CTLA-4 and PD-1 FMO gating in Vδ1 and Vδ2 cells. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
36
Gating on γδ T+, γδ T−and CD3 cells in different passages of clones 6 and 15. A)
TCRγδ expression of C15 P14. B) TCRγδ and CD3 expression in C6 P9 and C15 20.
54
37
Gating on γδ T cells on LN. unstained control is used to make conclusions on whether
C15 P27 unstimulated cells express TCRγδ and CD3. LN unstimulated control is used
for staining verification and C15 as an example for all clones.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
38
Gating on γδ T-cell subsets on unstimulated C15 P27, comparing to unstained control.
LN unstimulated control is used for staining verification and C15 as an example for all
clones. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
39
Gating on Transcription factors on the different unstimulated LN subsets. . . . . . . .
56
40
Gating on Transcription factors on unstimulated C15 P27, comparing to unstained con-
trol. Gating is based on RORγt and Tbet FMOs. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
41
Gating on Vγ1 and Vγ6 on LN unstimulated control, clone unstained control and C15
P27. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
42
Gating on Vγ4 and Vγ6 on LN unstimulated control, clone unstained control and C15
P27. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
VI
==PAGE:77==
Ilektra Amirali - 200170
List of Figures
43
Gating on LN control sample for IFNγ, IL-17A, TNFα, GrA and GrB. Upper line:
unstimulated LN control sample, Bottom line: stimulated LN control sample. . . . . .
58
44
Gating on unstained control sample for IFNγ, IL-17A, TNFα, GrA and GrB. GrA FMO
sample on the right panel. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
45
Gating on C15 P27 sample for IFNγ, IL-17A, TNFα, GrA and GrB. Upper line: un-
stimulated C15 sample, Bottom line: stimulated C15 sample.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
VII
==PAGE:78==
Ilektra Amirali - 200170
References
References
[1] D. Vijayan, A. Young, M. W. Teng, and M. J. Smyth, “Erratum: Targeting immunosuppressive
adenosine in cancer,” Nature Reviews Cancer 2017 17:12, vol. 17, pp. 765–765, 12 2017.
[2] T. F. Gajewski, Y. Meng, and H. Harlin, “Immune suppression in the tumor microenvironment,”
Journal of immunotherapy (Hagerstown, Md. : 1997), vol. 29, pp. 233–240, 5 2006.
[3] U. Harjes, “Controlling nerves,” Nature Reviews Cancer 2017 17:12, vol. 17, pp. 708–708, 12 2017.
[4] E. Catafal-Tardos, M. V. Baglioni, and V. Bekiaris, “Inhibiting the unconventionals: Importance
of immune checkpoint receptors in γδ T, MAIT, and nkt cells,” Cancers, vol. 13, p. 4647, 9 2021.
[5] K. Pilipow, A. Darwich, and A. Losurdo, “T-cell-based breast cancer immunotherapy,” Seminars
in Cancer Biology, vol. 72, pp. 90–101, 7 2021.
[6] H. Raskov, A. Orhan, J. P. Christensen, and I. Gögenur, “Cytotoxic CD8+ T cells in cancer and
cancer immunotherapy,” British Journal of Cancer 2020 124:2, vol. 124, pp. 359–367, 9 2020.
[7] R. E. Tay, E. K. Richardson, and H. C. Toh, “Revisiting the role of CD4+ T cells in cancer
immunotherapyânew insights into old paradigms,” Cancer Gene Therapy 2020 28:1, vol. 28, pp. 5–
17, 5 2020.
[8] G. Plitas and A. Y. Rudensky, “Regulatory T Cells in Cancer,” https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-
cancerbio-030419-033428, vol. 4, pp. 459–477, 3 2020.
[9] S. R. Woo, L. Corrales, and T. F. Gajewski, “Innate Immune Recognition of Cancer,” https://doi-
org.proxy.findit.cvt.dk/10.1146/annurev-immunol-032414-112043, vol. 33, pp. 445–474, 4 2015.
[10] K. Maruyama, Z. Selmani, H. Ishii, and K. Yamaguchi, “Innate immunity and cancer therapy,”
International Immunopharmacology, vol. 11, pp. 350–357, 3 2011.
[11] Y. Jiang, Y. Li, and B. Zhu, “T-cell exhaustion in the tumor microenvironment,” Cell Death and
Disease, vol. 6, 2015.
VIII
==PAGE:79==
Ilektra Amirali - 200170
References
[12] K. Saleki and N. Rezaei, “T-Cell Exhaustion in Cancers,” Handbook of Cancer and Immunology,
pp. 1–29, 2023.
[13] J. Lee, E. Ahn, H. T. Kissick, and R. Ahmed, “Reinvigorating Exhausted T Cells by Blockade of
the PD-1 Pathway,” Forum on immunopathological diseases and therapeutics, vol. 6, no. 1-2, p. 7,
2015.
[14] E. J. Wherry, “T cell exhaustion,” Nature Immunology 2011 12:6, vol. 12, pp. 492–499, 5 2011.
[15] A. Schnell, L. Bod, A. Madi, and V. K. Kuchroo, “The yin and yang of co-inhibitory receptors:
toward anti-tumor immunity without autoimmunity,” Cell Research 2020 30:4, vol. 30, pp. 285–
299, 1 2020.
[16] M. A. Postow, M. K. Callahan, J. D. Wolchok, and M. Sloan, “Immune Checkpoint Blockade in
Cancer Therapy,” 2015.
[17] J. Eno, “Immunotherapy Through the Years,” AdvancedPractitioner.com, vol. 8, no. 7.
[18] P.
Specenier,
“Pembrolizumab
use
for
the
treatment
of
advanced
melanoma,”
http://dx.doi.org.proxy.findit.cvt.dk/10.1080/14712598.2017.1309388,
vol.
17,
pp.
765–780,
6 2017.
[19] E. B. Garon, N. A. Rizvi, R. Hui, N. Leighl, A. S. Balmanoukian, J. Paul Eder, A. Patnaik,
C. Aggarwal, M. Gubens, L. Horn, M.-J. Ahn, E. Felip, J.-S. Lee, M. D. Hellmann, O. Hamid, J. W.
Goldman, J.-C. Soria, M. Dolled-Filhart, R. Z. Rutledge, J. Zhang, J. K. Lunceford, R. Rangwala,
G. M. Lubiniecki, C. Roach, K. Emancipator, and L. Gandhi, “Pembrolizumab for the Treatment
of Non-Small-Cell Lung Cancer A bs tr ac t,” n engl j med, vol. 21, pp. 2018–2046, 2015.
[20] M. Romani, M. P. Pistillo, R. Carosio, A. Morabito, and B. Banelli, “Immune Checkpoints and
Innovative Therapies in Glioblastoma,” Immune Checkpoints and Innovative Therapies in Glioblas-
toma. Front. Oncol, vol. 8, p. 464, 2018.
[21] “Nivolumab
and
Ipilimumab
in
Advanced
Melanoma,”
https://doi-
org.proxy.findit.cvt.dk/10.1056/NEJMc1714339, vol. 377, pp. 2503–2504, 12 2017.
IX
==PAGE:80==
Ilektra Amirali - 200170
References
[22] S. Puri and M. Shafique, “Combination checkpoint inhibitors for treatment of non-small-cell lung
cancer: an update on dual anti-CTLA-4 and anti-PD-1/PD-L1 therapies,” Drugs in context, vol. 9,
1 2020.
[23] L. Rong, N. Li, and Z. Zhang, “Emerging therapies for glioblastoma: current state and future
directions,” Journal of Experimental & Clinical Cancer Research 2022 41:1, vol. 41, pp. 1–18, 4
2022.
[24] B. Rowshanravan, N. Halliday, and D. M. Sansom, “Review Series THERAPEUTIC ANTIBOD-
IES CTLA-4: a moving target in immunotherapy,” vol. 131, no. 1, 2018.
[25] L. S. Walker and D. M. Sansom, “The emerging role of CTLA4 as a cell-extrinsic regulator of T
cell responses,” Nature Reviews Immunology 2011 11:12, vol. 11, pp. 852–863, 11 2011.
[26] S. C. Wei, C. R. Duffy, and J. P. Allison, “Fundamental mechanisms of immune checkpoint
blockade therapy,” Cancer Discovery, vol. 8, pp. 1069–1086, 9 2018.
[27] A. Kennedy, E. Waters, B. Rowshanravan, C. Hinze, C. Williams, D. Janman, T. A. Fox, C. Booth,
A. M. Pesenacker, N. Halliday, B. Soskic, S. Kaur, O. S. Qureshi, E. C. Morris, S. Ikemizu,
C. Paluch, J. Huo, S. J. Davis, E. Boucrot, L. S. Walker, and D. M. Sansom, “Differences in CD80
and CD86 transendocytosis reveal CD86 as a key target for CTLA-4 immune regulation,” Nature
Immunology 2022 23:9, vol. 23, pp. 1365–1378, 8 2022.
[28] C. A. Chambers, T. J. Sullivan, and J. P. Allison, “Lymphoproliferation in CTLA-4-deficient mice
is mediated by costimulation-dependent activation of CD4+ T cells,” Immunity, vol. 7, pp. 885–
895, 12 1997.
[29]
[30] E. A. Tivol, F. Borriello, A. N. Schweitzer, W. P. Lynch, J. A. Bluestone, and A. H. Sharpe, “Loss
of CTLA-4 leads to massive lymphoproliferation and fatal multiorgan tissue destruction, revealing
a critical negative regulatory role of CTLA-4,” Immunity, vol. 3, pp. 541–547, 11 1995.
[31] T. Okazaki, A. Maeda, H. Nishimura, T. Kurosaki, and T. Honjo, “PD-1 immunoreceptor inhibits
B cell receptor-mediated signaling by recruiting src homology 2-domain-containing tyrosine phos-
X
==PAGE:81==
Ilektra Amirali - 200170
References
phatase 2 to phosphotyrosine,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United
States of America, vol. 98, pp. 13866–13871, 11 2001.
[32] J. M. Chemnitz, R. V. Parry, K. E. Nichols, C. H. June, and J. L. Riley, “SHP-1 and SHP-
2 Associate with Immunoreceptor Tyrosine-Based Switch Motif of Programmed Death 1 upon
Primary Human T Cell Stimulation, but Only Receptor Ligation Prevents T Cell Activation 1,”
The Journal of Immunology, vol. 173, pp. 945–954, 2004.
[33] E. Hui, J. Cheung, J. Zhu, X. Su, M. J. Taylor, H. A. Wallweber, D. K. Sasmal, J. Huang, J. M.
Kim, I. Mellman, and R. D. Vale, “T cell costimulatory receptor CD28 is a primary target for
PD-1-mediated inhibition,” Science, vol. 355, pp. 1428–1433, 3 2017.
[34] W. S. Ho, H. Wang, D. Maggio, J. S. Kovach, Q. Zhang, Q. Song, F. M. Marincola, J. D.
Heiss, M. R. Gilbert, R. Lu, and Z. Zhuang, “Pharmacologic inhibition of protein phosphatase-
2A achieves durable immune-mediated antitumor activity when combined with PD-1 blockade,”
Nature Communications 2018 9:1, vol. 9, pp. 1–15, 5 2018.
[35] R. Ikebuchi, S. Konnai, T. Okagawa, K. Yokoyama, C. Nakajima, Y. Suzuki, S. Murata, and
K. Ohashi, “Blockade of bovine PD-1 increases T cell function and inhibits bovine leukemia virus
expression in B cells in vitro,” 2013.
[36] N. Sobhani, D. R. Tardiel-Cyril, A. Davtyan, D. Generali, R. Roudi, and Y. Li, “CTLA-4 in
regulatory T cells for cancer immunotherapy,” 3 2021.
[37] Immunobiology 5 : the immune system in health and disease. New York: Garland Pub., fifth
edition. ed., 2001 - 2001.
[38] D. I. Godfrey, J. Le Nours, D. M. Andrews, A. P. Uldrich, and J. Rossjohn, “Unconventional T
Cell Targets for Cancer Immunotherapy,” Immunity, vol. 48, pp. 453–473, 3 2018.
[39] M. Lawrence, R. Wiesheu, and S. B. Coffelt, “The duplexity of unconventional T cells in cancer,”
International Journal of Biochemistry and Cell Biology, vol. 146, 5 2022.
[40] L. S. Lamb, “γδ T Cells in Cancer,” Innate Immune Regulation and Cancer Immunotherapy,
pp. 23–38, 2012.
XI
==PAGE:82==
Ilektra Amirali - 200170
References
[41] J. Saura-Esteller, M. de Jong, L. A. King, E. Ensing, B. Winograd, T. D. de Gruijl, P. W. Parren,
and H. J. van der Vliet, “Gamma Delta T-Cell Based Cancer Immunotherapy: Past-Present-
Future,” Frontiers in Immunology, vol. 13, p. 2649, 6 2022.
[42] V. Pistoia, N. Tumino, P. Vacca, I. Veneziani, A. Moretta, F. Locatelli, and L. Moretta, “Human γδ
T-Cells: From surface receptors to the therapy of high-risk leukemias,” Frontiers in Immunology,
vol. 9, p. 984, 5 2018.
[43] S. Schönefeldt, T. Wais, M. Herling, S. Mustjoki, V. Bekiaris, R. Moriggl, and H. A. Neubauer,
“The Diverse Roles of γδ T Cells in Cancer: From Rapid Immunity to Aggressive Lymphoma,”
Cancers, vol. 13, 12 2021.
[44] M. Yazdanifar, G. Barbarito, A. Bertaina, and I. Airoldi, “γδ T Cells: The Ideal Tool for Cancer
Immunotherapy,” 5 2020.
[45] S. Biradar, M. T. Lotze, and R. B. Mailliard, “The unknown unknowns: Recovering gamma-delta
t cells for control of human immunodeficiency virus (HIV),” 12 2020.
[46] L. Gay, S. Mezouar, C. Cano, P. Frohna, L. Madakamutil, J. L. Mège, and D. Olive, “Role of
Vγ9vδ2 T lymphocytes in infectious diseases,” 7 2022.
[47] L. Rong, K. Li, R. Li, H. M. Liu, R. Sun, and X. Y. Liu, “Analysis of tumor-infiltrating gamma
delta T cells in rectal cancer,” World Journal of Gastroenterology, vol. 22, pp. 3573–3580, 4 2016.
[48] C. Harly, Y. Guillaume, S. Nedellec, C. M. Peigné, H. Mönkkönen, J. Mönkkönen, J. Li, J. Kuball,
E. J. Adams, S. Netzer, J. Déchanet-Merville, A. Léger, T. Herrmann, R. Breathnach, D. Olive,
M. Bonneville, and E. Scotet, “Key implication of CD277/butyrophilin-3 (BTN3A) in cellular
stress sensing by a major human γδ T-cell subset,” Blood, vol. 120, pp. 2269–2279, 9 2012.
[49] M. Rigau, S. Ostrouska, T. S. Fulford, D. N. Johnson, K. Woods, Z. Ruan, H. E. McWilliam,
C. Hudson, C. Tutuka, A. K. Wheatley, S. J. Kent, J. A. Villadangos, B. Pal, C. Kurts, J. Sim-
monds, M. Pelzing, A. D. Nash, A. Hammet, A. M. Verhagen, G. Vairo, E. Maraskovsky,
C. Panousis, N. A. Gherardin, J. Cebon, D. I. Godfrey, A. Behren, and A. P. Uldrich, “Buty-
rophilin 2A1 is essential for phosphoantigen reactivity by γδ T cells,” Science (New York, N.Y.),
vol. 367, 2 2020.
XII
==PAGE:83==
Ilektra Amirali - 200170
References
[50] J. Maher, B. Silva-Santos, S. Meraviglia, K. Li, R. Ma, D. Yuan, Y. Guo, and R. Yan, “Immune
Effects of γδ T Cells in Colorectal Cancer: A Review,” Review. Front. Immunol, vol. 11, p. 1600,
2020.
[51] B. Xu, J. C. Pizarro, M. A. Holmes, C. McBeth, V. Groh, T. Spies, and R. K. Strong, “Crystal
structure of a αδ T-cell receptor specific for the human MHC class I homolog MICA,” Proceedings
of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, vol. 108, pp. 2414–2419, 2
2011.
[52] G. M. Siegers and L. S. Lamb, “Cytotoxic and Regulatory Properties of Circulating Vδ1+ γδ T
Cells: A New Player on the Cell Therapy Field?,” Molecular Therapy, vol. 22, pp. 1416–1422, 8
2014.
[53] C. Chauvin, N. Joalland, J. Perroteau, U. Jarry, L. Lafrance, C. Willem, C. Retiere, L. Oliver,
C. Gratas, L. Gautreau-Rolland, X. Saulquin, F. M. Vallette, H. Vie, E. Scotet, and C. Pecqueur,
“NKG2D controls natural reactivity of Vg9Vd2 T lymphocytes against mesenchymal glioblastoma
cells,” Clinical Cancer Research, vol. 25, pp. 7218–7228, 12 2019.
[54] S. Nedellec, C. Sabourin, M. Bonneville, and E. Scotet, “NKG2D costimulates human V gamma
9V delta 2 T cell antitumor cytotoxicity through protein kinase C theta-dependent modulation of
early TCR-induced calcium and transduction signals,” Journal of immunology (Baltimore, Md. :
1950), vol. 185, pp. 55–63, 7 2010.
[55] K. O’Neill, I. Pastar, M. Tomic-Canic, and N. Strbo, “Perforins Expression by Cutaneous Gamma
Delta T Cells,” Frontiers in immunology, vol. 11, 8 2020.
[56] H. Sindhu, R. Chen, H. Chen, J. Wong, R. Chaudhry, Y. Xu, and J. C. Wang, “Gamma-delta
(γδ) T-cell lymphoma-another case unclassifiable by World Health Organization classification: a
case report,”
[57] T. Norris and R. Tuan, Porth’s Essentials of Pathophysiology. Wolters Kluwer, 2019.
[58] B. Pro, P. Allen, and A. Behdad, “Hepatosplenic T-cell lymphoma: a rare but challenging entity,”
Blood, vol. 136, pp. 2018–2026, 10 2020.
XIII
==PAGE:84==
Ilektra Amirali - 200170
References
[59] J. Guitart, D. D. Weisenburger, A. Subtil, E. Kim, G. Wood, M. Duvic, E. Olsen, J. Junkins-
Hopkins, S. Rosen, U. Sundram, D. Ivan, M. A. Selim, L. Pincus, J. M. Deonizio, M. Kwasny, and
Y. H. Kim, “Cutaneous γδ T-cell Lymphomas,” American Journal of Surgical Pathology, vol. 36,
pp. 1656–1665, 11 2012.
[60] “Gammadelta and alphabeta T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia: comparison of their clinical
and immunophenotypic features - DTU Findit.”
[61] C. H. Pui, D. Pei, C. Cheng, S. L. Tomchuck, S. N. Evans, H. Inaba, S. Jeha, S. C. Raimondi,
J. K. Choi, P. G. Thomas, and M. H. Dallas, “Treatment response and outcome of children with T-
cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia expressing the gamma-delta T-cell receptor,” OncoImmunology,
vol. 8, no. 8, 2019.
[62] H. Pham, M. HengstschlĂ¤ger, and R. Moriggl, “A haunted beast: Targeting stat5b n642h in
t-cell neoplasia,” Molecular Cellular Oncology, vol. 5, pp. 00–00, 02 2018.
[63] E. de Araujo, F. Erdogan, H. Neubauer, D. Meneksedag, P. Manaswiyoungkul, M. Eram, H.-
S. Seo, A. Qadree, J. Israelian, A. Orlova, T. Suske, H. Pham, A. Boersma, S. Tangermann,
L. Kenner, T. RĂźlicke, A. Dong, M. Ravichandran, P. Brown, and P. Gunning, “Structural and
functional consequences of the stat5bn642h driver mutation,” Nature Communications, vol. 10,
p. 2517, 06 2019.
[64] T. B. Dunn, “Normal and pathologic anatomy of the reticular tissue in laboratory mice, with
a classification and discussion of neoplasms.,” Journal of the National Cancer Institute, vol. 14,
pp. 1281–1434, 1954.
[65] A. Trickett and Y. L. Kwan, “T cell stimulation and expansion using anti-CD3/CD28 beads,”
Journal of Immunological Methods, vol. 275, pp. 251–255, 4 2003.
[66] K. Jørgensen, M. Skrede, V. Cruciani, S. O. Mikalsen, A. Slipicevic, and V. A. Flørenes, “Phor-
bol ester phorbol-12-myristate-13-acetate promotes anchorage-independent growth and survival
of melanomas through MEK-independent activation of ERK1/2,” Biochemical and biophysical
research communications, vol. 329, pp. 266–274, 4 2005.
XIV
==PAGE:85==
Ilektra Amirali - 200170
References
[67] P. S. Lim, C. R. Sutton, and S. Rao, “Protein kinase C in the immune system: From signalling
to chromatin regulation,” Immunology, vol. 146, pp. 508–522, 12 2015.
[68] M. Lomora, F. Itel, I. A. Dinu, and C. G. Palivan, “Selective ion-permeable membranes by insertion
of biopores into polymersomes,” Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics, vol. 17, pp. 15538–15546,
6 2015.
[69] G. Qu, S. Wang, Z. Zhou, D. Jiang, A. Liao, and J. Luo, “Comparing Mouse and Human Tissue-
Resident γδ T Cells,” 6 2022.
[70] G. Lombardi, C. B. Jago, J. Yates, N. Olsen, S. Câmara, R. I. Lechler, and G. Lombardi, “Dif-
ferential expression of CTLA-4 among T cell subsets,” Clin Exp Immunol, vol. 136, pp. 463–471,
2004.
[71] G. Boulougouris, J. D. McLeod, Y. I. Patel, C. N. Ellwood, L. S. K. Walker, and D. M. Sansom,
“Positive and Negative Regulation of Human T Cell Activation Mediated by the CTLA-4/CD28
Ligand CD80,” The Journal of Immunology, vol. 161, pp. 3919–3924, 10 1998.
[72] M. Tomogane, Y. Sano, D. Shimizu, T. Shimizu, M. Miyashita, Y. Toda, S. Hosogi, Y. Tanaka,
S. Kimura, and E. Ashihara, “Human Vγ9Vδ2 T cells exert anti-tumor activity independently
of PD-L1 expression in tumor cells,” Biochemical and Biophysical Research Communications,
vol. 573, pp. 132–139, 10 2021.
[73] O. S. Qureshi, S. Kaur, T. Z. Hou, L. E. Jeffery, N. S. Poulter, Z. Briggs, R. Kenefeck, A. K. Willox,
S. J. Royle, J. Z. Rappoport, and D. M. Sansom, “Constitutive clathrin-mediated endocytosis of
CTLA-4 persists during T cell activation,” Journal of Biological Chemistry, vol. 287, pp. 9429–
9440, 3 2012.
[74] N. A. Zumwalde, A. Sharma, X. Xu, S. Ma, C. L. Schneider, J. C. Romero-Masters, A. W. Hudson,
A. Gendron-Fitzpatrick, S. C. Kenney, and J. E. Gumperz, “Adoptively transferred Vγ9Vδ2 T
cells show potent antitumor effects in a preclinical B cell lymphomagenesis model,” JCI Insight,
vol. 2, 7 2017.
XV
==PAGE:86==
Ilektra Amirali - 200170
References
[75] Q. Guo, P. Zhao, Z. Zhang, J. Zhang, Z. Zhang, Y. Hua, B. Han, N. Li, X. Zhao, and L. Hou,
“TIM-3 blockade combined with bispecific antibody MT110 enhances the anti-tumor effect of γδ
T cells,” Cancer Immunology, Immunotherapy, vol. 69, pp. 2571–2587, 12 2020.
[76] L. Kouakanou, C. Peters, Q. Sun, S. Floess, J. Bhat, J. Huehn, and D. Kabelitz, “Vitamin C
supports conversion of human γδ T cells into FOXP3-expressing regulatory cells by epigenetic
regulation,” Scientific Reports 2020 10:1, vol. 10, pp. 1–13, 4 2020.
[77] M. Sanz, B. T. Mann, A. Chitrakar, and N. Soriano-Sarabia, “Human Vδ2 T Cells and Their
Versatility for Immunotherapeutic Approaches,” Cells, vol. 11, 11 2022.
[78] M. G. Han, B. S. Jang, M. H. Kang, D. Na, and I. A. Kim, “PI3Kγδ inhibitor plus radiation
enhances the antitumour immune effect of PD-1 blockade in syngenic murine breast cancer and
humanised patient-derived xenograft model,” European Journal of Cancer, vol. 157, pp. 450–463,
11 2021.
[79] M. H. Nada, H. Wang, A. J. Hussein, Y. Tanaka, and C. T. Morita, “PD-1 checkpoint blockade
enhances adoptive immunotherapy by human Vγ2Vδ2 T cells against human prostate cancer,”
OncoImmunology, vol. 10, no. 1, 2021.
[80] T. Hoeres, E. Holzmann, M. Smetak, J. Birkmann, and M. Wilhelm, “PD-1 signaling modulates
interferon-γ production by Gamma Delta (γδ) T-Cells in response to leukemia,” OncoImmunology,
vol. 8, 3 2019.
[81] K. Wistuba-Hamprecht, A. Martens, K. Haehnel, M. Geukes Foppen, J. Yuan, M. A. Pos-
tow, P. Wong, E. Romano, A. Khammari, B. Dreno, M. Capone, P. A. Ascierto, I. Demuth,
E. Steinhagen-Thiessen, A. Larbi, B. Schilling, D. Schadendorf, J. D. Wolchok, C. U. Blank,
G. Pawelec, C. Garbe, and B. Weide, “Proportions of blood-borne Vδ1+ and Vδ2+ T-cells are
associated with overall survival of melanoma patients treated with ipilimumab,” European Journal
of Cancer, vol. 64, pp. 116–126, 9 2016.
[82] T. Lança, M. F. Costa, N. Gonçalves-Sousa, M. Rei, A. R. Grosso, C. Penido, and B. Silva-Santos,
“Protective Role of the Inflammatory CCR2/CCL2 Chemokine Pathway through Recruitment of
XVI
==PAGE:87==
Ilektra Amirali - 200170
References
Type 1 Cytotoxic γδ T Lymphocytes to Tumor Beds,” The Journal of Immunology, vol. 190,
pp. 6673–6680, 6 2013.
[83] Z. Liu, I.-E. A. Eltoum, B. Guo, B. H. Beck, G. A. Cloud, and R. D. Lopez, “Protective Immuno-
surveillance and Therapeutic Antitumor Activity of γδ T Cells Demonstrated in a Mouse Model
of Prostate Cancer,” The Journal of Immunology, vol. 180, pp. 6044–6053, 5 2008.
[84] L. S. LAMB, P. J. HENSLEE-DOWNEY, R. S. PARRISH, K. GODDER, J. THOMPSON,
C. LEE, and A. P. GEE, “Increased frequency of TCR gamma delta + T cells in disease-free
survivors following T cell-depleted, partially mismatched, related donor bone marrow transplan-
tation for leukemia.,” Journal of Hematotherapy, vol. 5, pp. 503–509, 10 1996.
[85] M. Tosolini, F. Pont, M. Poupot, F. Vergez, M. L. Nicolau-Travers, D. Vermijlen, J. E. Sarry,
F. Dieli, and J. J. Fournié, “Assessment of tumor-infiltrating TCRVγ9Vδ2 γδ lymphocyte abun-
dance by deconvolution of human cancers microarrays,” OncoImmunology, vol. 6, 3 2017.
[86] S. Meraviglia, E. Lo Presti, M. Tosolini, C. La Mendola, V. Orlando, M. Todaro, V. Catalano,
G. Stassi, G. Cicero, S. Vieni, J. J. Fourniè, and F. Dieli, “Distinctive features of tumor-infiltrating
γδ T lymphocytes in human colorectal cancer,” https://doi.org/10.1080/2162402X.2017.1347742,
vol. 6, 10 2017.
XVII
