==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Biomedical Engineering
Whole-Head Segmentation from Magnetic
Resonance Images using Deep Learning
Master’s Thesis
Esra Gizem Güngör (s181848)
Copenhagen 2023
==PAGE:2==
Supervisors
Axel Thielscher
Professor, Head of Section, Senior Researcher
Magnetic Resonance, Department of Health Technology
Technical University of Denmark
Neurophysics and Neuroimaging, Danish Research Centre for Magnetic Resonance
Hvidovre Hospital, University of Copenhagen
Oula Puonti
Research Fellow, Ph.D.
Neurophysics and Neuroimaging, Danish Research Centre for Magnetic Resonance
Hvidovre Hospital, University of Copenhagen
Magnetic Resonance, Department of Health Technology
Technical University of Denmark
DTU Health Tech
Department of Health Technology
Technical University of Denmark
Ørsteds Plads
Building 345C
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
healthtech-info@dtu.dk
www.healthtech.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Transcranial Brain Stimulation (TBS) is a widely used non-invasive technique for
brain function modulation and mapping. Typically, traditional TBS protocols are
applied with the predefined electrode or coil positions in a one-size-fits-all approach.
This inflexible approach may lead to significant variability in the effectiveness. There-
fore, there is a growing need for individualised optimisation based on structural mag-
netic resonance (MR) images. Existing methods are limited to the segmentation of
solely cerebral tissues, and only a handful of techniques are available for whole-head
segmentation. In this master’s thesis, an existing state-of-the-art automated approach
for brain segmentation from MR images is extended and further developed for fast,
robust and accurate whole-head segmentation.
The proposed model relies on the 3D U-Net architecture. Convolutional neural
networks (CNNs) often face challenges in generalizing to unseen domains and their
performance can be significantly affected by variations in image resolution and con-
trast.
Thus, the main focus of this thesis is to evaluate and expand the domain
randomisation approach to achieve accurate segmentation, even in images acquired
from different scanners and imaging protocols with varying tissue contrasts.
Multiple models are trained with different generative processes for synthesising
the training data, and the models are compared quantitatively using Dice scores and
qualitatively through visual inspections and local accuracy maps.
The generative
process simulates known imperfections and artefacts in MR images. However, tissue
contrast and artefacts are far more variable for extra-cerebral structures compared
to cerebral tissue, making whole-head segmentation particularly challenging.
The
final model’s performance is evaluated on six different MRI contrast and two publicly
available data sets to show its generalisation ability.
The final segmentation model obtained Dice scores of 0.899 on T1-weighted scans
and 0.849 on T2-weighted scans for cerebral tissues (excluding fine cerebrospinal
fluid (CSF) volumes). It also achieved Dice scores of 0.761 on T1-weighted scans and
0.771 on T2-weighted scans for extra-cerebral structures. It demonstrated comparable
performance to a state-of-the-art brain segmentation method for cerebral tissues and
outperformed a state-of-the-art Bayesian segmentation in predicting extra-cerebral
tissues.
The proposed model with further improvement could potentially help in
individually tailored TBS protocols.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This master’s thesis was prepared in fulfillment of the requirements for acquiring
a Master’s degree in Biomedical Engineering at the Department of Health Technol-
ogy at Technical University of Denmark (DTU) in collaboration with Danish Research
Centre for Magnetic Resonance (DRCMR) at Hvidovre Hospital, University of Copen-
hagen.
The thesis was completed during a time period from January 2023 to June 2023 and
the project covers a workload of 30 ECTS points.
Copenhagen, June 5, 2023
Esra Gizem Güngör (s181848)
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
First of all, I would like to express my gratitude to my supervisor Axel Thielscher
for his valuable insights and continuous motivation throughout my master’s thesis. I
would also like to extend my sincere thanks to my second supervisor Oula Puonti for
his patience, precious input and continuous willingness to help. I am truly grateful
for your excellent guidance.
A special thanks to Björn Sigurðsson for his invaluable feedback on my thesis
and for the inspiring conversations and discussions. My thanks should also go to the
Danish Research Center for Magnetic Resonance (DRCMR) at Hvidovre Hospital
for providing a fun work environment and for their kind hospitality. The resources
provided by DRCMR have greatly contributed to my research.
Last but not least, I would like to thank my family for their support and encour-
agement throughout my journey. I am deeply grateful to my sister and my boyfriend
for their emotional support. Their love and belief in me have been my motivation.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
List of Abbreviations
AI
Air Internal
BG
Basal Ganglia
BV
Blood Vessel
CB
Cortical Bone
CC
Corpus Callosum
CGM
Cerebellum Cortex
CHARM Complete Head Anatomy Reconstruction Method
CNN
Convolutional Neural Network
CSF
Cerebrospinal Fluid
CT
Computed Tomography
CWM Cerebellum White Matter
DR
Domain Randomisation
E
Eyes
EEG
Electroencephalography
ELU
Exponential Linear Unit
F
Fat
F-CSF Fine CSF Volumes
GM
Cerebral Cortex/Gray Matter
GMM Gaussian Mixture Model
H+A
Hippocampus and Amygdala
HCP
Human Connectome Project
==PAGE:10==
viii
Acknowledgements
Inf-Lat-Vent Inferior Lateral Ventricle
MEG
Magnetoencephalography
MNI
Montreal Neurological Institute
MR
Magnetic Resonance
MRI
Magnetic Resonance Imaging
MU
Mucosa
ReLU Rectified Linear Unit
SB
Cancellous Bone/Spongy Bone
SC
Spinal Cord
SK
Skin
SLIC
Simple Linear Iterative Clustering
T1w
T1-weighted
T2w
T2-weighted
TBS
Transcranial Brain Stimulation
tES
Transcranial Electric Stimulation
TMS
Transcranial Magnetic Stimulation
V
Ventricle
WM
Cerebral White Matter
==PAGE:11==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
List of Abbreviations
vii
Contents
ix
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Related Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Contributions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Background
5
2.1
Magnetic Resonance Imaging . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
3
Theory
7
3.1
Convolutional Neural Networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.1.1
Data augmentation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3.2
U-Net Architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3.3
Domain Randomisation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.4
Simple Linear Iterative Clustering (SLIC) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
4
Methods
13
4.1
Dataset
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
4.2
Computational Setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
4.3
Neural Network Features . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
4.3.1
Generative model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
4.3.2
Segmentation Network . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
4.4
Experiments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
4.4.1
Experiment 1: Baseline Model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4.4.1.1
Experiment 1.1: Optimised Baseline Model . . . . . .
20
4.4.2
Experiment 2: 10-label Background Model
. . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.4.2.1
Experiment 2.1: 20-label background around the head
22
==PAGE:12==
x
Contents
4.4.3
Experiment 3: Noisy Darker Background Model
. . . . . . . .
23
4.5
Performance evaluation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
5
Results
27
5.1
Experiment 1: Baseline Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
5.1.1
Experiment 1.1: Optimised Baseline Model . . . . . . . . . . .
29
5.2
Experiment 2: 10-label Background Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
5.2.1
Experiment 2.1: 20-label background around the head . . . . .
32
5.3
Experiment 3: Noisy Darker Background Model . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
5.4
4-fold Cross-Validation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
5.5
Refinement of Generation Label Maps . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
5.6
Performance of the Final Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
5.6.1
Prediction on neck-cropped dataset . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
5.6.2
Prediction on HCP dataset
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
5.6.3
Prediction on OpenNeuro dataset . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
6
Discussion
47
6.1
Limitations of Proposed Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
6.2
Future Work
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
7
Conclusion
53
List of Figures
54
List of Tables
57
A
Synthetic Training Images
59
A.1 Experiment 1: Baseline Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
A.2 Experiment 1.1: Optimised Baseline Model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
A.3 Experiment 2: 10-label Background Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
A.4 Experiment 2.1: 20-label background around the head . . . . . . . . .
61
A.5 Experiment 3: Noisy Darker Background Model . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
B
Predicted Segmentations
63
C
Spinal Cord
65
Bibliography
67
==PAGE:13==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
Transcranial Brain Stimulation (TBS) is a widely used non-invasive technique for
brain function modulation and mapping. TBS can be performed through electrical
or magnetic stimulation and has shown promising results in both experimental and
clinical fields, particularly in treating several brain disorders such as depression. Typ-
ically, traditional TBS protocols are applied with the predefined electrode positions
in transcranial electric stimulation (tES) or coil positions in transcranial magnetic
stimulation (TMS) in a one-size-fits-all approach [1]. However, the electric field dis-
tribution in the head largely depends on anatomical features.
The TBS protocol
remains the same for all individuals throughout the stimulation period, disregarding
variations in neurobiology both within and between individuals. This inflexible ap-
proach may lead to significant variability in the effectiveness of TBS protocols and
the absence of consistency in the results poses an obstacle to its clinical application
[2][3]. Therefore, there is a growing need for individualized optimization of the stim-
ulation protocol for a given cortical target based on structural magnetic resonance
(MR) images.
Manual segmentation of MR scans is extremely time-consuming and impractical
for large-scale clinical applications due to the time and expertise required since a
skilled radiologist manually labels each voxel in a 3D MR scan with one of several
possible neuroanatomical labels which may require a week or more to complete for a
single scan [4]. In addition, the annotation process carried out by multiple experts
could be prone to annotator-dependent variability, potentially resulting in a decrease
in accuracy. Thus, automated segmentation methods are needed. In recent years,
the field of medical image analysis has undergone significant improvements, partic-
ularly thanks to the advances in deep learning techniques. However, the focus of
these automated segmentation methods has primarily been on segmenting a specific
MR contrast. Therefore, such methods may not be capable of accommodating the
extensive variations in brain MR imaging data acquired in the clinical environment
[4]. Nonetheless, existing methods are limited to the segmentation of solely cerebral
tissues, and only a handful of techniques are available that facilitate an accurate
segmentation of the whole head.
==PAGE:14==
2
1 Introduction
1.1
Related Work
The main challenge in automated segmentation from magnetic resonance imaging
(MRI) is contrast variability, particularly for extra-cerebral structures that exhibit
significant variability.
Traditional techniques addressed this issue by employing a
combination of probabilistic atlases and unsupervised clustering methods [1]. How-
ever, these approaches have been largely replaced by deep learning methods due to
their fast and superior performance.
Most deep learning approaches for segmentation rely on supervised learning, where
real MRI scans and manual segmentations are utilized. They often employ U-Net
architectures [5]. Nevertheless, this approach encounters limitations in terms of gen-
eralization to unseen scans, particularly across different contrasts.
SynthSeg [6] proposes a novel approach for automated brain MRI segmentation
using a convolutional neural network (CNN) that is robust against changes in con-
trast and resolution of MR scans. They address the challenges associated with CNNs,
which are prone to fail against changes in contrast and resolution, making it diﬀicult
to use them for unseen domains. To overcome this, SynthSeg uses a domain randomi-
sation strategy where the contrast and resolution of synthetic training data are fully
randomised. The authors demonstrate that their approach achieves state-of-the-art
segmentation results across multiple MRI contrasts and resolutions while also being
computationally eﬀicient. The drawback of SynthSeg is that it is only capable of
segmenting cerebral tissues and does not cover the whole head. As a result, it may
not be suitable for some applications such as the individualized optimization of TBS
protocols which requires the segmentation of extra-cerebral tissues.
Complete Head Anatomy Reconstruction Method (CHARM) [1] presents an ap-
proach for accurate and robust whole-head segmentation from MR images for individ-
ualized head modelling. The authors also note that individualized head models are
essential in neuroimaging research for a range of applications. However, the creation
of such models requires accurate segmentation of the whole head, which can be chal-
lenging due to the complexity of the head structure, the variability in the appearance
of different tissues, and the presence of image artefacts. For instance, the segmenta-
tion of the neck could be a challenging task because of the greater variability of tissue
locations and lower signal intensity present in MR scans [1].
To address these challenges, CHARM proposes an automated segmentation method
for fifteen different head tissues including eyes, skin and bones from MR scans. The
method utilizes parametric Bayesian modelling to learn the underlying structure of
the head and uses this information to segment head regions and it is based on their
previous work about the whole-brain segmentation [7].
In this work, an unsuper-
vised approach is proposed that enables learning intensity models from the input
images. The method relies on a Gaussian mixture model-based clustering algorithm
that groups voxels with similar intensities, allowing it to be independent of specific
image contrast properties. The proposed method CHARM can automatically adjust
to the differences and variations in the input scans, making it feasible to apply the
method to clinical scans that could be obtained using different scanners, sequences
==PAGE:15==
1.2 Contributions
3
or settings [1].
Despite the promising results of CHARM, it is crucial to improve the computa-
tional eﬀiciency of the segmentation process as the current method requires around
35 minutes to segment a single scan, and this duration may vary based on the com-
putational power.
1.2
Contributions
In the master’s thesis, an existing state-of-the-art automated approach for brain seg-
mentation from MR images [6] is further developed for fast, robust and accurate
whole-head segmentation, including extra-cerebral structures along with the cerebral
tissues.
The main goal of this thesis is to evaluate and expand the domain ran-
domisation approach to achieve accurate segmentation, even in images acquired from
different scanners and imaging protocols with varying tissue contrasts.
The deep learning model trained on the synthetic data produced by the domain
randomisation approach relies on the well-established U-Net architecture. U-Net has
been shown to achieve precise segmentation performance for small anatomical targets
and can be flexibly adapted to the domain due to its scalable network architecture
[8].
The thesis is organized as follows: Initially, an overview of the challenges as-
sociated with MRI will be provided.
This will be followed by the theory behind
convolutional neural networks and domain randomisation. Then, the experimental
methodology and corresponding results will be presented. Finally, the thesis will be
concluded with a comprehensive discussion of the findings and future work.
==PAGE:16==
4
==PAGE:17==
CHAPTER 2
Background
2.1
Magnetic Resonance Imaging
MRI is a medical imaging technique that utilizes the natural magnetic properties of
the human body to generate high-resolution images of various anatomical structures.
By using the magnetic properties of hydrogen nuclei (protons), which are abundant
in both water and fat molecules, MRI is able to capture detailed images from any
region of interest within the body [9].
MRI is widely recognized for its remarkable capability not only to provide fine
anatomical structures of the brain but also to display exceptional contrast for soft
tissues. Moreover, MRI can be used for several scan sequences that have been specif-
ically designed to highlight various biological properties of the brain. This capability
is significant in medical institutions where the primary focus is on studying and diag-
nosing different brain disorders [4].
However, MR scans exhibit a wide array of non-standardized parameters such as
variations in scanners, resolutions, and the presence of artefacts. Moreover, imaging
protocols can have a significant range of sequences and modalities, each targeting
distinct tissue characteristics. Thus, the diversity in intensity distributions, especially
for extra-cerebral structures as seen in Figure 2.1, poses a considerable obstacle to
the supervised CNNs, as their performance is hindered by the extensive variability
present in MRI data [6].
Segmentation of the skull from MR scans poses a considerable challenge due to the
weak magnetic resonance signals emitted by bone. The skull and cerebrospinal fluid
(CSF) appear similar on T1-weighted (T1w) MR images widely utilized for structural
MRI. Consequently, the accurate segmentation of the skull and CSF from MRI data
remains a complex and demanding task [10].
Accurate and detailed anatomical models of the whole head, including precise
segmentations of both hard and soft tissues, play a crucial role in numerous compu-
tational life science applications. These applications cover various areas, including
tES, TMS, transcranial focused ultrasound (TFUS), and the modelling of functional
neuroimaging techniques such as electroencephalography or magnetoencephalography
(EEG/MEG) [11].
For instance, precise head models are essential for accurately computing and
mapping between neural current sources and scalp potentials as well as extracra-
nial magnetic fields in the EEG/MEG inverse problems. In order to achieve accurate
==PAGE:18==
6
2 Background
(a) Fat-suppressed T1w scan
(b) T2w scan
(c) mDixon in-phase
Figure 2.1: Illustrative example of an MR scan from three different sequences. Note
that the intensity distributions display considerable diversity, particu-
larly for extra-cerebral structures.
calculations, it is crucial to segment bone structures in the head model due to the
significantly lower conductivity of the skull compared to soft tissue [10]. Thus, inac-
curate segmentation has a direct impact on the accuracy of electrical field simulations
and the eﬀiciency of the applied application.
==PAGE:19==
CHAPTER 3
Theory
3.1
Convolutional Neural Networks
Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have emerged as a significant advancement
in the history of deep learning. A notable advantage of CNNs over fully connected
networks lies in their computational eﬀiciency, making the execution of multiple ex-
periments and the fine-tuning of hyperparameters feasible. CNNs offer a specialised
way to effectively process data with a grid-structured topology. They are also scalable
even when dealing with huge datasets [12].
In CNNs, convolution kernels are applied as they traverse the input data, enabling
the learning of specific features, such as edges and corners, for each region of interest.
The subsequent layers of the network combine the extracted features to detect more
complex and higher-order features. These features are stored in feature maps at each
layer. Each kernel produces a specific feature map consisting of the local features.
The same operation is applied across different regions of the input data. This weight-
sharing technique helps diminish the number of learnable parameters, thus reducing
the computational demands. This reduction in computational demands facilitates to
obtain more sophisticated features by applying a greater number of kernels per layer.
Each kernel is responsible for detecting one feature but the different kernels have
different weights and thus detect distinct local features. A complete convolutional
layer consists of multiple feature maps [13].
Once a feature is detected within an image, its precise location becomes less crit-
ical, as its relative position with respect to other features holds greater significance.
To diminish the precision of positions, one approach is to reduce the spatial resolution
of the feature map. This can be accomplished through a down-sampling layer. Conse-
quently, the output becomes less sensitive to shifts and distortions. By progressively
reducing the spatial resolution while simultaneously increasing the number of feature
maps, a considerable level of invariance to geometric transformations of the input can
be achieved [13].
CNNs have demonstrated significant potential in achieving accurate segmenta-
tions in MR scans. Nevertheless, their performance can significantly decrease when
applied to images acquired from different scanners or imaging protocols, in contrast
to the training data. This limitation prevents their practical applicability [14] and is
commonly referred to as the domain gap problem.
==PAGE:20==
8
3 Theory
3.1.1
Data augmentation
Data augmentation plays a crucial role in giving desired invariance and robustness
properties to the network. It is especially significant when only a limited number of
training samples are available, which is often the case in biomedical tasks. In biomedi-
cal images, it is essential to establish scale, translation, and rotation invariance, along
with the ability to handle deformations effectively. Among various augmentation tech-
niques, the elastic deformation of the training samples is key for effectively training
a segmentation network in the case of annotated data scarcity [15].
3.2
U-Net Architecture
The U-Net architecture [15] consists of two main components: a contracting path
and a symmetric expanding path. The contracting path focuses on capturing con-
textual information, while the expanding path is responsible for precise localization.
Notably, the network is fast, with the ability to segment a 512x512 image in less than
one second on a modern GPU. In biomedical image processing, achieving accurate
segmentation requires pixel-level class labelling to enable localization. However, ob-
taining a large number of training images is often challenging in biomedical tasks. The
U-Net architecture addresses this limitation by effectively utilizing a limited number
of training images, resulting in more precise segmentations [15].
The contracting path (left side in Figure 3.1) is similar to the common architec-
ture of a CNN. It is composed of a series of repeated operations, consisting of two
3x3 convolutions followed by rectified linear unit (ReLU) activations and 2x2 max
pooling with a stride of 2 for downsampling. At each downsampling step, the number
of feature channels is doubled. On the other hand, the expansive path (right side) in
the architecture involves a sequence of operations. It begins with an upsampling of
the feature map with a 2x2 up-convolution that also reduces the number of feature
channels by half. The upsampled feature map is then concatenated with the corre-
sponding feature map from the contracting path. Subsequently, two 3x3 convolutions
are applied, each followed by a ReLU activation [15].
To achieve localization, the architecture combines high-resolution features from
the contracting path with the upsampled output as indicated by yellow arrows in
Figure 3.1. These skip connections allow a successive convolution layer to learn and
generate a more precise output based on contextual information.
The expansive
path has a symmetric structure to the contracting path, displaying a U-shaped form
which optimises the localization capabilities of the network. At the final layer, a 1x1
convolutional operation is employed to map each 64-component feature vector into
the desired number of classes. [15].
==PAGE:21==
3.3 Domain Randomisation
9
Figure 3.1: Illustration of the U-Net architecture. The dark purple boxes represent
the concatenated feature maps.
3.3
Domain Randomisation
Domain randomisation (DR) is a modern learning strategy that employs physics-
based generative models to overcome domain gaps in a given semantic space [6]. In
[16], this strategy is successfully applied to train a deep neural network on only
synthetic training images without using any real images for the purpose of robotic
control. It suggests that training models with a diverse set of synthetic data can
result in generalisation to the real world without requiring additional training to deal
with the reality gap. DR fully randomises the generation parameters to significantly
increase the distribution of synthetic data so that the synthetic training images are
not matched only to a specific domain. If the generation parameters are pushed to the
extreme, the synthetic data might contain highly unrealistic samples. Nevertheless,
such samples can cover the scope of the real data, thus bridging domain gaps and
improving generalisation [6][16].
SynthSeg [6] utilizes DR with a generative model inspired by Bayesian segmen-
tation for brain segmentation. In this thesis, we extend this strategy to cover the
extra-cerebral tissues for whole-head segmentation from MRI scans of a wide range
of contrasts and resolutions. It is crucial to highlight that the deep learning model is
==PAGE:22==
10
3 Theory
trained on MRI scans that are generated on the fly and the models never encounter
any real MRI scans. All generation parameters are randomised for the sake of DR and
this process enables the network to be exposed to varying combinations of contrast,
morphology, resolution, artefacts, and noise as in [6].
In generating synthetic MRI scans, a training label map is randomly selected from
the available training data, which can be obtained through various means including
manual annotation or automated segmentation models.
To ensure the robustness
of the trained model to anatomical variability, it is ideal for the training data to
comprise a diverse population. Automated segmentation models are preferred over
manual annotation as they enable obtaining segmentations from a larger and more
varied dataset in a quicker and more eﬀicient way [6].
The selected label map undergoes a random spatial transform consisting of an
aﬀine and non-linear transform. The aﬀine transformation consists of rotations, shear-
ings, and translations for all three spatial coordinates.
The parameters of those
transformations are sampled from uniform distributions, which can be controlled by
defining the bounds of their uniform distributions. The non-linear transformation
involves a diffeomorphic deformation as described in [6], which is also controllable
through the standard deviation of the normal distribution from which the first tensor
for the deformation field is sampled.
When a deformed training label map is obtained, a synthetic training MRI scan
is generated by sampling a Gaussian Mixture Model (GMM) independently at each
voxel location, conditioned on the training segmentation. Labels with similar tissue
types are grouped into generation classes to ensure that intensities of similar regions
are sampled from the same Gaussian distribution. Each generation class has its own
Gaussian in the mixture, with the mean and standard deviation sampled from uniform
prior distributions with default bounds of [25, 225] and [5, 25], respectively. This
generates a wide range of contrasts, often unrealistic, but making the segmentation
network contrast-agnostic [6]. In order to enhance the model’s robustness to bias
field artefacts, one of the well-known MRI artefacts, it is also simulated during the
synthetic MRI scan generation process.
To ensure robustness against various resolutions, the model should not only han-
dle contrast variations but also be capable of accommodating different slice spacing
and slice thickness and this is achieved through simulations. Firstly, one acquisition
direction (axial, coronal, or sagittal) is randomly chosen. The parameters for these
slice spacing and slice thickness simulations are sampled from a uniform distribution.
Slice thickness is modelled by applying a Gaussian blur to the synthetic MRI scan,
mimicking the real slice excitation profile. Slice spacing, on the other hand, is sim-
ulated by downsampling the scan to the chosen lower resolution, thus capturing the
effects of varying inter-slice distances [6].
The synthetic MRI scan generation process is illustrated in Figure 3.2. Initially,
a label map in Figure 3.2(a) is randomly selected from the available training data.
Spatial augmentation techniques are then applied, resulting in a deformed label map
shown in Figure 3.2(b). Subsequently, the generation of the synthetic image in Fig-
ure 3.2(c) is obtained by sampling from GMMs with randomised parameters while
==PAGE:23==
3.4 Simple Linear Iterative Clustering (SLIC)
11
incorporating various simulations such as bias field artefact, as well as the modelling
of slice thickness and slice spacing effects. Finally, the training inputs are now ready,
comprising the generated MRI scan and the deformed label map serving as the ground
truth seen in Figure 3.2(d) in each training batch. It is important to note that the
generative process ensures perfect alignment between the synthetic scan and its cor-
responding ground truth [6].
(a) Selected Label Map
(b) Deformed Label Map
(c) Generated MRI Scan
(d) Training Inputs
Figure 3.2: Illustrated process of the generative model: (a) Random selection of an
input label map from the training set, which is (b) spatially augmented
in 3D. (c) Generation of a synthetic image by sampling from GMMs
with randomised parameters. The resulting image is also corrupted with
a bias field. (d) The training inputs consist of the generated MRI scan
and the deformed label map.
3.4
Simple Linear Iterative Clustering (SLIC)
Supervoxel generation is a method to group voxel clusters of volumetric data to form
coherent and enlarged 3D regions known as supervoxels. Supervoxels are utilized for
numerous computer vision algorithms, such as multiclass object segmentation, due
to their ability to reduce complexity. The supervoxel generation includes various ap-
==PAGE:24==
12
3 Theory
proaches, each offering different advantages and limitations that may be more suitable
for specific applications [17].
While there is no universally ideal approach applicable to all scenarios, several
desirable properties can generally be identified. First, supervoxels should accurately
adhere to image boundaries. Moreover, when employed as a preprocessing step to
enhance computational eﬀiciency, supervoxel generation should be eﬀicient in terms
of computation time and memory usage [17].
Simple linear iterative clustering (SLIC) algorithm [17] is a modified version of k-
means clustering that is designed for superpixel generation. It is simple and only one
parameter, the desired number of approximately equally sized superpixels, should be
given. Moreover, it can be extended to supervoxel generation easily. To optimize the
algorithm’s eﬀiciency, the number of distance calculations is significantly reduced by
limiting the search space to a region proportional to the size of the superpixels. This
key feature enables faster optimization compared to conventional k-means clustering,
where each pixel needs to be compared with all cluster centers [17].
In SLIC, a weighted distance measure is calculated based on both colour infor-
mation and spatial proximity. By combining these two factors, SLIC achieves co-
hesive and compact supervoxel segmentation.
SLIC demonstrates state-of-the-art
performance in adherence to image boundaries, surpassing existing methods for seg-
mentation. Moreover, it exhibits superior speed and memory eﬀiciency compared to
alternative approaches [17]. SLIC is freely available1.
Figure 3.3: Image segmented using SLIC into 100 superpixels (left) and 300 super-
pixels (right).
1https://scikit-image.org/docs/dev/api/skimage.segmentation.html#skimage.segmentation.slic
==PAGE:25==
CHAPTER 4
Methods
4.1
Dataset
The dataset used in this master’s thesis includes a library of head models for 20
individuals, which were segmented from computed tomography (CT), T1-weighted
(T1w), and T2-weighted (T2w) MRI scans as described in [11]. Notably, this dataset
provides the first detailed semi-automated segmentation of various extra-cerebral tis-
sues, including the neck region, for multiple subjects. It is also used for training the
CHARM approach [1]. The research protocol for this study was approved by the
Ethical Committee of the Capital Region of Denmark. All data analyses conducted
in this thesis and the handling of the datasets were performed on the DRCMR server
to ensure the privacy and protection of personal data.
The subject group in this dataset is well-balanced in terms of gender and ancestry,
with 10 male and 10 female participants representing both Asian and Caucasian
populations. The age range of the subjects spans from 20 to 50, as summarised in
Table 4.1. It is important to note that the dataset includes a wide range of head
and neck sizes, contributing to accounting for population variability.
This aspect
is particularly significant for ensuring the robustness of the trained model against
morphological variability.
Asian
Caucasian
Sex
Male
5
5
Female
5
5
Age
20-29
5
4
30-39
5
2
40-49
0
4
Table 4.1: The data set demographics [11].
The training dataset contains label maps derived from the 20 subjects previously
mentioned. Principally, the training dataset does not include any real MRI scans, as
all training scans are generated on the fly during the training process. The library
in [11] encompasses sixteen distinct tissue classes including bone, air, arteries, veins,
==PAGE:26==
14
4 Methods
muscles, eyes, grey matter (GM), white matter (WM), and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF).
The tissues are segmented semi-automatically using the open-source software iSEG
[18]. However, the labels corresponding to cerebral tissues are replaced with the labels
obtained through the popular neuroimaging software Freesurfer [19] to enhance the
accuracy and specificity of the label maps. As a result, the final segmentations used in
this thesis have a total of 58 labels, each representing a distinct anatomical structure.
A comprehensive list of these labels can be found in Table 4.2.
Neutral
Left/Right
Background
Cerebral White Matter (WM)
3rd Ventricle
Cerebral Cortex (GM)
4th Ventricle
Lateral Ventricle
Brain Stem
Inferior Lateral Ventricle (Inf-Lat-Vent)
Cerebro-spinal Fluid (CSF)
Cerebellum White Matter (CWM)
WM hypointensities
Cerebellum Cortex (CGM)
Optic Chiasm
Thalamus
Corpus Callosum (CC) Posterior
Caudate
CC Mid-Posterior
Putamen
CC Central
Pallidum
CC Mid-Anterior
Hippocampus
CC Anterior
Amygdala
Air Internal
Accumbens Area
Artery
Ventral DC
Eyes
Vessel
Other Tissues
Choroid Plexus
Rectus Muscles
Mucosa
Skin
Spinal Cord
Vein
Bone Cortical
Bone Cancellous
Cortical CSF
Fat
Optic Nerve
Table 4.2: List of 58 labels used for image synthesis and prediction.
The test sets employed for evaluation purposes consist of six different MR con-
trasts, including T1w scans, fat-suppressed T1w scans, T2w scans, fat-suppressed
T2w scans, mDixon water contrast images, and mDixon in-phase images. These test
sets provide a comprehensive range of imaging variations for evaluating the perfor-
mance of the proposed method as shown in Figure 4.9. All MRI scans were conducted
==PAGE:27==
4.2 Computational Setup
15
using a 3T Philips Achieva scanner equipped with a 32-channel head coil. The specific
scanning protocols and parameters are as follows [1]:
• T1w scan: 3D Turbo Field Echo, Relaxation Time (TR) = 6 ms, Echo Time
(TE) = 2.7 ms, Flip Angle (FA) = 8°, voxel size = 0.85 mm3.
• T2w scan: 3D Turbo Spin Echo, TR = 2500 ms, TE = 272 ms, FA = 90°,
voxel size = 0.85 mm3.
• mDixon scan: TR = 4.1 ms, TE1 = 1.34 ms, TE2 = 2.4 ms, FA = 9°, voxel
size = 1.1 mm3.
4.2
Computational Setup
The computational setup in this thesis is a computer equipped with an NVIDIA
GeForce RTX 3090 Graphics Processing Unit (GPU) with 24 GB of memory using
the CUDA toolkit version 10.1 and cuDNN version 7.6.5 on the DRCMR cluster. The
SynthSeg GitHub repository 1 is used to train my own model. The generative model
and segmentation network are integrated into a single model and implemented on the
GPU using the Keras library with TensorFlow backend in Python 3.8 [6]. Training
the model requires approximately three days on the GPU for 100 epochs with 1000
steps per epoch.
4.3
Neural Network Features
4.3.1
Generative model
During each training step, the generative model employed in this thesis selects a
single label map from the training data set randomly, which serves as the basis for
image generation. Subsequently, 3D spatial augmentations are applied to enhance the
diversity of the generated images. The suggested hyperparameter values, as provided
in the SynthSeg paper [6], are utilized, allowing for the customization of the uniform
distribution range from which the corresponding parameters are sampled. A summary
of the spatial deformation parameters can be found in Table 4.3.
1https://github.com/BBillot/SynthSeg
==PAGE:28==
16
4 Methods
Spatial Deformation Parameters
Value
Distribution
scalings (sx, sy, sz)
0.15
U(1-Bsc, 1+Bsc)
rotations (θx, θy, θz)
15°
U(-Br, Br)
shearings (shx, shy, shz)
0.012
U(1-Bsh, 1+Bsh )
translations (tx, ty, tz)
False
U(1-Bt, 1+Bt)
standard deviation for nonlinear transform (σnonlin)
3.0
U(0, Bnonlin)
flipping
True
left/right
standard deviation for bias field (σB)
0.5 / 0.7
U(0, BB)
Table 4.3: Values of the hyperparameters controlling the spatial deformation and
the generative model.
To further enhance the variability of the training data, the generative model per-
forms random cropping of the training examples, thereby reducing their size to fit
within the constraints of the GPU during training. For this purpose, a specific size
of [160, 160, 192] is chosen, representing the maximum dimensions achievable within
the available GPU memory. No translation is performed separately, as this aspect
is already accounted for through the process of random cropping. Additionally, to
augment the training data even further, the generative model introduces random left-
/right flipping of segmentations and simulates the bias field effect as well. The impact
of the bias field on the generated images can be adjusted by manipulating the stan-
dard deviation of the bias field corruption (σB). Increasing the standard deviation
results in a greater degree of bias introduced into the synthetic images.
A synthetic MRI training scan is generated by employing a voxel-wise GMM sam-
pling approach, with each voxel’s intensity conditioned on the deformed segmentation.
Labels belonging to the same generation class share a common Gaussian distribution
from which their intensity values are sampled. The mean and standard deviation
of each Gaussian are obtained by sampling from uniform prior distributions, with
default boundaries of [25, 225] and [5, 25] for all generation classes. The specific gen-
eration classes are outlined in Table 4.4. Additionally, it is possible to define different
boundaries for individual generation classes. For instance, the first generation class,
representing the background label, may have narrower and lower bounds to generate
a darker background in the synthetic MRI scans. However, even when boundaries are
specified, half of the cases still reset to the default boundaries, resulting in images of
random contrast. Some example synthetic MR scans can be seen in Appendix A.
4.3.2
Segmentation Network
The segmentation network is trained using the synthetic image generated by the gen-
erative model and its corresponding deformed label map as the segmentation target.
The training process involves computing a sum-of-squared differences (SSD) loss for
the first epoch and the average soft Dice loss for the remaining epochs. This choice is
motivated by the improved behaviour of the SSD gradient compared to the Dice loss
==PAGE:29==
4.3 Neural Network Features
17
Generation Class No
Generation Label
0
Background
1
Left WM, Left CWM, Left Pallidum, Left Ventral DC
2
Left GM, Left CGM
3
Left Thalamus, Left Caudate, Left Putamen, Left Ac-
cumbens area
4
Left Hippocampus, Left Amygdala
5
Left Lateral Ventricle, Left Inf-Lat-Vent, Left Vessel,
Left Choroid Plexus
6
Right WM, Right CWM, Right Pallidum, Right Ven-
tral DC
7
Right GM, Right CGM
8
Right Thalamus, Right Caudate, Right Putamen,
Right Accumbens area
9
Right Hippocampus, Right Amygdala
10
Right Lateral Ventricle, Right Inf-Lat-Vent, Right
Vessel, Right Choroid Plexus
11
Brain Stem, WM hypointensities, Optic Chiasm, CC
Posterior, CC Mid-Posterior, CC Central, CC Mid-
Anterior, CC Anterior
12
3rd Ventricle, 4th Ventricle, CSF, Cortical CSF
13
Air Internal
14
Artery
15
Eyes
16
Other Tissues
17
Rectus Muscles
18
Mucosa
19
Skin
20
Spinal Cord
21
Vein
22
Bone Cortical
23
Bone Cancellous
24
Fat
25
Optic Nerve
Table 4.4: List of generation classes. Labels belonging to the same generation class
share a common Gaussian distribution from which their intensity values
are sampled. .
==PAGE:30==
18
4 Methods
gradient. However, the Dice loss ultimately leads to enhanced segmentation accuracy.
Therefore, the SSD loss is only used for initialization purposes. The soft Dice loss,
defined in Equation 4.1, measures the similarity between the predicted segmentation
and the ground truth.
Loss(PS, GT) = 1 −
K′
∑
k=1
2 × ∑
x,y,z PSk(x, y, z)GTk(x, y, z)
∑
x,y,z PSk(x, y, z)2 + GTk(x, y, z)2
(4.1)
where PSk is the soft predicted segmentation for label k ϵ and GTk is its cor-
responding ground truth in one-hot encoding. This loss is then used to update the
network weights through backpropagation. In this thesis, the same 3D UNet archi-
tecture in [6] and [20] is employed for the segmentation network. The architecture
consists of five levels, each containing a batch normalisation layer and either a max-
pooling operation for down-sampling or an upsampling operation. At each level, two
convolution layers with 3 × 3 × 3 kernels are applied. The Exponential Linear Unit
(ELU) activation function is utilized for all convolutional layers, except for the last
layer which employs softmax activation. The number of feature maps starts at 24
in the first layer and doubles after each max-pooling operation, halving after each
upsampling operation. The specific parameters of the architecture are summarised in
Table 4.5. The Adam optimiser [21] is used with a learning rate of 10-4 and a batch
size of 1. The network is trained for 100,000 steps and weights are saved every 1000
steps for further analysis and evaluation.
Architecture Parameters
Value
Number of resolution levels
5
Number of convolution per level
2
Size of the convolution kernel
3
Number of feature maps
24
Activation
ELU
Feature multiplier
2
Table 4.5: Values of the hyperparameters controlling the U-Net segmentation net-
work.
4.4
Experiments
The experimental procedure starts with a baseline model and progresses iteratively
based on the outcomes of previous experiments. From the dataset, a subset of 15
subjects is selected and maintained for the training of all models. Specifically, 15
corresponding generation label maps are used to generate training images using the
generative model. To evaluate the performance of the preliminary models (Experi-
ments 1-3), we use the T1w data from the same 15 subjects due to the limited size of
the data set. While this might sound counter-intuitive, and the results would typically
==PAGE:31==
4.4 Experiments
19
be considered overly biased, we emphasize that the network only utilizes segmenta-
tions of real MRI scans during training, without direct exposure to the real scans
themselves. Moreover, the generative label maps undergo substantial deformation
through spatial augmentation. As a result of domain randomisation, the synthetic
images generated from these deformed segmentations exhibit significant dissimilarity.
Consequently, we do not expect the performance to be biased towards the training
set. After the preliminary model testing, the final model is validated using a standard
cross-validation setup in Section 5.4. Evaluation of the trained models is performed
using dice scores for general performance and supported by visual assessments of lo-
cal accuracy maps that highlight spatial errors and show specific weaknesses of the
experiment. The overview of the synthetic training images of all preliminary models
is presented in Appendix A.
4.4.1
Experiment 1: Baseline Model
Initially, the generation label maps undergo a cropping process to achieve a common
minimum size with a margin of 3 pixels. This involves individual cropping of each
label map to its respective minimum size, followed by padding all the cropped maps
to match the maximum size among the cropped maps.
The purpose behind this
process is to ensure compatibility with the GPU during training; however, this goal
was not fully realized.
As a result, a random cropping strategy is implemented,
selecting dimensions of [160, 160, 192], which represent the maximum feasible size
given the limitations of the available GPU. The standard deviation (σB) of the bias
field corruption is set to 0.5, while additional spatial deformation parameters can be
found in Table 4.3. To provide insight into the nature of the generation label maps,
a representative slice is presented in Figure 4.1. The segmentation network is then
fed with the synthetic training images and the corresponding target label maps, as
exemplified in Figure 4.2.
Figure 4.1: An example slice from generation label maps of baseline model.
==PAGE:32==
20
4 Methods
(a) Training image
(b) Target outline
(c) Target label map
Figure 4.2: Representative sample of (a) a synthetic training image, and (b) con-
tours of (c) the corresponding target label map for baseline model.
4.4.1.1
Experiment 1.1: Optimised Baseline Model
Following a careful visual inspection of the generation label maps for the baseline
model, it was observed that the skin label needed adjustment, particularly as a layer
positioned on the outer surface of the head. For instance, an observation made in
Figure 4.1 reveals the absence of a skin label in the region of the nose tip and the
outermost label is assigned to fat, contradicting the anatomical reality. To address
this issue, all skin labels were reassigned to the other tissues label, and subsequently,
the skin label was defined as a layer of thickness of 2.55 mm (equivalent to 3 pixels)
on the outer surface of the head. Figure 4.3 presents an illustrative slice after the
adjustment, with the expected skin label at the nose tip. Furthermore, to address the
presence of some noises in the background, as indicated by the results of the baseline
model, the standard deviation (σB) of the bias field corruption is increased to 0.7.
Figure 4.3: Representative slice after the skin layer adjustment.
==PAGE:33==
4.4 Experiments
21
4.4.2
Experiment 2: 10-label Background Model
In an effort to simulate the background noise, a modified generation label map, as
shown in Figure 4.4, is created by subdividing the large background label into 10
smaller regions using the SLIC algorithm.
Each of these 10 background labels is
assigned to a distinct generation class, ensuring that they are sampled from different
Gaussian distributions.
This approach contributes to a more diverse background
representation as seen in Figure 4.5(a). The segmentation network is then trained
using synthetic training images generated based on the modified generation label map,
along with the corresponding target label maps. Notably, all 10 background labels are
combined into a single background label during the training process as demonstrated
in Figure 4.5(c).
Figure 4.4: An example slice from generation label maps of 10-label background
model.
(a) Training image
(b) Target outline
(c) Target label map
Figure 4.5: Representative sample of (a) a synthetic training image, and (b) con-
tours of (c) the corresponding target label map for 10-label background
model.
==PAGE:34==
22
4 Methods
4.4.2.1
Experiment 2.1: 20-label background around the head
In order to enhance the precision of skin label segmentation, an alternative approach
is employed to replicate the background noise.
Through a visual examination of
test MRI scans, it is observed that noise predominantly occurs in the surroundings
of the head. Consequently, our focus is directed towards this specific noise, which
has the potential to introduce erroneous skin label segmentation. As a result, the
background region around the head is subdivided into 20 smaller background labels
using SLIC algorithm as seen in Figure 4.6 for the generative model.
The newly
created 20 background labels are assigned to distinct generation classes, facilitating a
more targeted simulation of the noise. During the training process, all 20 background
labels are combined into a single background label, following a similar approach as
employed in the previous experiment. Figure 4.7 illustrates an exemplary training
image and target segmentation pair of the model.
Figure 4.6: An example slice from generation label maps of 20-label background
around the head.
(a) Training Image
(b) Target outline
(c) Target label map
Figure 4.7: Representative sample of (a) a synthetic training image, and (b) con-
tours of (c) the corresponding target label map for 20-label background
around the head.
==PAGE:35==
4.4 Experiments
23
4.4.3
Experiment 3: Noisy Darker Background Model
As an alternative method, an adjustment is made to the mean and standard deviation
of the Gaussian distribution used for sampling the intensity values of the background.
Considering that real MRI scans typically have a dark background, the strategy is
to set a lower mean value for the Gaussian associated with the generation class of
the background label in the generative model. Consequently, the background region
appears darker compared to the head tissues, resulting in a more distinct boundary
between the background and the skin label. This enhanced contrast helps the accurate
delineation of the skin layer and mitigates the issue of over-segmentation, leading to
improved predictions for the skin label.
The mean and standard deviation are obtained by sampling from uniform prior
distributions. Specifically, the boundaries of the uniform distribution for the mean
are set to a tighter and lower range of [0, 40] instead of the default range of [25, 225]
in order to generate a darker background. Similarly, the boundaries of the uniform
distribution for the standard deviation are set to a wider range of [0, 50] instead of
the default range of [5, 25] to generate a noisy background. The default ranges for the
mean and standard deviation are used for all labels other than the background. An
example demonstrating this effect is presented in Figure 4.8(a), where the presence
of a noisy background can be seen with careful observation.
However, it should
be noted that even when boundaries are specified, half of the cases still utilize the
default boundaries for the background, resulting in images with random contrast.
The same generation label map as the optimised baseline model is utilized, as shown
in Figure 4.3.
(a) Training Image
(b) Target outline
(c) Target label map
Figure 4.8: Representative sample of (a) a synthetic training image, and (b) con-
tours of (c) the corresponding target label map for noisy darker back-
ground model.
==PAGE:36==
24
4 Methods
4.5
Performance evaluation
The performance of the models will be assessed using various evaluation methods,
including local accuracy maps, scatter plots, boxplots, and visual inspection of the
predicted segmentations.
The local accuracy maps are derived by computing the
differences between the predicted segmentation and the ground truth in the subject
space for each label individually. These difference maps are then transformed into
Montreal Neurological Institute (MNI) space to make unbiased and common obser-
vations. Then, the local accuracy maps are averaged across multiple subjects. By
examining the local accuracy maps, any accumulated incorrect segmentations in spe-
cific head regions of the head can be identified. This allows for a focused analysis of
those regions in the MRI scan to determine the underlying reasons for the erroneous
segmentation, such as the presence of background noise. The local accuracy maps dis-
play a blue colour to represent negative values, indicating under-segmentation (false
negatives) of the specific label, while a red colour is used for positive values, indicating
over-segmentation (false positives) at the corresponding location.
The Dice score [22], a widely-used metric in medical image segmentation evalua-
tion, will be utilized. It quantifies the similarity between two segmentations at the
voxel level for each label. The Dice score is calculated using Equation 4.2,
DS = 2(GT ∩PS)
|GT| + |PS|
(4.2)
where |GT| and |PS| denote the total number of voxels in the ground truth and pre-
dicted segmentation, respectively, for a given label. The Dice score represents the
percentage overlap between the ground truth and predicted segmentation, ranging
from 0 (no overlap) to 1 (perfect overlap). To account for the size of the segmented
region, the Dice score will be compared to the volume of the corresponding label and
presented in a scatter plot. Since smaller regions are inherently more challenging to
achieve perfect overlap, a lower Dice score is expected. Conversely, larger regions
should yield relatively higher Dice scores, as achieving a satisfactory overlap is com-
paratively easier. Additionally, boxplots will be used to display the Dice scores for
each tissue, helping choose the best-performing model among the experiments. It is
important to mention that including all 58 labels in a single plot may lead to con-
fusion and visual clutter. Therefore, we combine the left and right tissue labels, as
well as similar tissue types shown in Table 4.6, as they exhibited similar performance
trends in the model. This allows for a more comprehensible representation of the re-
sults. Moreover, a visual inspection of all predicted segmentations will be conducted
to identify any evident incorrect segmentation and examples of systemic errors will
be highlighted.
It is worth noting that the preliminary experiments were conducted using only
the T1w scans. However, after the final model is selected, its performance will be
evaluated on multiple contrasts to demonstrate its ability to handle diverse data. The
Dice scores will be shown in a boxplot again to compare the performance of the final
model across different contrasts. An illustrative slice from the six test set contrasts
==PAGE:37==
4.5 Performance evaluation
25
is provided in Figure 4.9 and it shows the varying tissue contrasts, such as fat and
CSF.
Furthermore, the limitations of the final segmentation model will be examined
by evaluating its performance on the neck-cropped dataset. It assesses whether it
gives the same performance for cropped images. Additionally, two publicly available
datasets, Human Connectome Project (HCP) [23] and OpenNeuro Dataset ds004101
[24], will be utilized as well and any encountered errors will be highlighted. Lastly, a
comparison will be made between the prediction time of the final model and CHARM
[1] to assess the computational eﬀiciency of the proposed approach.
(a) T1w scan
(b) T2w scan
(c) mDixon in-phase scan
(d) fat-suppressed T1w scan
(e) fat-suppressed T2w scan
(f) mDixon water scan
Figure 4.9: An illustrative sagittal slice demonstrating the six distinct MR contrasts
utilized in the performance evaluation of the final model.
==PAGE:38==
26
4 Methods
Group Name
Segmentation Label
White Matter (WM)
Left WM, Left Ventral DC, Right WM, Right Ven-
tral DC, Brain Stem, WM hypointensities, Optic Chi-
asm, CC Posterior, CC Mid-Posterior, CC Central,
CC Mid-Anterior, CC Anterior
Cerebellum
White
Matter
(CWM)
Left CWM, Right CWM
Gray Matter (GM)
Left GM, Right GM
Cerebellum
Gray
Matter
(CGM)
Left CGM, Right CGM
Ventricle (V)
Left Lateral Ventricle, Left Choroid Plexus, Right Lat-
eral Ventricle, Right Choroid Plexus
Fine CSF Volumes (F-CSF)
Cortical CSF, Left Inf-Lat-Vent, Right Inf-Lat-Vent,
3rd Ventricle, 4th Ventricle, CSF
Basal Ganglia (BG)
Left Thalamus, Left Caudate, Left Putamen, Left Ac-
cumbens area, Left Pallidum, Right Thalamus, Right
Caudate, Right Putamen, Right Accumbens area,
Right Pallidum
Hippocampus and Amygdala
(H+A)
Left Hippocampus, Left Amygdala, Right Hippocam-
pus, Right Amygdala
Blood Vessel (BV)
Artery, Vein
Other Tissues (OT)
Other Tissues, Rectus Muscles
Table 4.6: List of tissue assignments that combine the left and right tissue labels,
along with similar tissue types.
==PAGE:39==
CHAPTER 5
Results
5.1
Experiment 1: Baseline Model
The performance of the trained baseline model is evaluated on 15 real T1w scans, and
the predicted segmentations are investigated by a visual inspection. An illustrative
example is provided in Figure 5.1(d), which clearly demonstrates one of the system-
atic over-segmentation primarily localized around the frontal and occipital regions of
the head. This observation is further supported by the local accuracy map for the
background label displayed in Figure 5.4(a). Notably, the indicated blue colour in
the map signifies the underestimation of the background label, which consequently
shows the over-segmentation of head tissues. To gain insights into the underlying
causes of this issue, the corresponding T1w scan is examined. By adjusting the inten-
sity values, as shown in Figure 5.1(b), it is possible to identify the presence of noise,
particularly concentrated around the forehead. The correlation between the location
of over-segmentation and the accumulation of noise became apparent.
Further analysis is performed by calculating the dice score for each label group
and comparing these scores to their respective volumes as seen in Figure 5.2. Brain
tissues consistently exhibit a dice score of approximately 0.9, indicating a high level
of accuracy in segmentation.
In contrast, non-brain tissues demonstrate variable
dice scores ranging from approximately 0.65 to 0.8, representing comparatively lower
performance. Among the different label groups for brain tissues, the fine CSF volumes
have the lowest dice score. Despite having a relatively large volume, the thin and
scattered nature of the CSF volumes leads to a challenge in achieving precise overlap
between predictions and ground truth, resulting in a low dice score.
==PAGE:40==
28
5 Results
(a) T1w scan
(b) Adjusted intensity
(c) Ground Truth
(d) Predicted segmentation
Figure 5.1: (a) An example slice from T1w scan. (b) The intensity is adjusted
to make background noise visible. (c) The corresponding ground truth
and (d) the predicted segmentation from the baseline model. Note that
the noise and over-segmentation are concentrated around the forehead.
Figure 5.2: Mean Dice scores obtained on T1w scans by the baseline model vs.
volume of the label groups.
==PAGE:41==
5.1 Experiment 1: Baseline Model
29
5.1.1
Experiment 1.1: Optimised Baseline Model
In order to investigate the potential sources of incorrect segmentation, an examination
of the generation label map was conducted, focusing specifically on the skin label.
It was discovered that an error existed in the original generation label map and the
adjustment of the skin layer was needed as elaborated in Section 4.4.1.1. Additionally,
to address the presence of noise in the background, the standard deviation of the bias
field was increased.
Figure 5.3 shows that the issue of overestimation in the forehead region appears
to have been resolved for certain subjects. However, Figure 5.4(b) demonstrates that
incorrect segmentation persists around the forehead, indicating the need for further
refinements. Notably, slight improvements can be observed in the dice scores of the
cerebellum white matter and cerebellum gray matter label groups compared to the
baseline model as shown in Figure 5.5.
Figure 5.3: Representative slice of a predicted segmentation obtained by the opti-
mised baseline model.
==PAGE:42==
30
5 Results
(a) Baseline Model
(b) Optimised Baseline Model
Figure 5.4: Local accuracy maps of the background label overlaid on the MNI tem-
plate. The blue colour signifies the false negative of the background
label, which consequently shows the over-segmentation of head tissues.
Figure 5.5: Mean Dice scores obtained on T1w scans by the optimised baseline
model vs. volume of the label groups.
5.2
Experiment 2: 10-label Background Model
In order to achieve more precise results, it is crucial to accurately predict the skin
label. Therefore, an approach focusing on enhancing the diversity of the background
is explored. The predicted segmentations show favourable results after a visual in-
==PAGE:43==
5.2 Experiment 2: 10-label Background Model
31
spection, as illustrated in Figure 5.7(a). The dice scores obtained for the brain tissues
are close to those achieved by the optimised baseline model. However, a comparative
analysis of the dice scores between the optimised baseline model and the proposed
approach shows a decrease in the scores for the skin, cancellous bone, and fat labels,
as seen in Figure 5.6(a). Consequently, an examination of the local accuracy maps
for these labels is conducted, as shown in Figure 5.8. The red colour in Figure 5.8(a)
signifies a systematic overestimation of the skin label. As a result, the fat and cancel-
lous bone tissues beneath the skin are also overly segmented as seen in Figure 5.8(b)
and Figure 5.8(c) respectively.
(a) 10-label Background
(b) 20-label background around the head model
Figure 5.6: Mean Dice scores obtained on T1w scans by (a) the 10-label background
and (b) 20-label background around the head model vs. volume of the
label groups.
==PAGE:44==
32
5 Results
5.2.1
Experiment 2.1: 20-label background around the head
In order to address this issue, the diverse background is limited to around the head,
and the number of background generation labels is increased from 10 to 20, resulting in
a greater variety of background within the limited region. An instance of the predicted
segmentation is presented in Figure 5.7(b), showing a thinner skin layer compared to
the previous experiment. This is demonstrated by the corresponding local accuracy
map as well in Figure 5.8(d), which confirms a more accurate estimation of the skin
layer. As a result, the segmentations of the fat and cancellous bone tissues are also
improved. Furthermore, it is clearly seen in Figure 5.6(b) that the dice scores for the
skin, fat, and cancellous bone tissues show improvement and are higher compared to
the scores obtained in the previous experiment. Nevertheless, it is important to note
that the blue colour in Figure 5.8(d) shows an additional observation, indicating that
the predicted skin layer appears to be thinner than the ground truth. Moreover, in
the frontal region, the red colour beneath the blue layer represents a slight inward
shift of the predicted skin layer. These findings suggest that further enhancements
are still required.
(a) 10-label background model
(b) 20-label background around the head
Figure 5.7: Representative slice of predicted segmentations obtained by (a) 10-label
background and (b) 20-label background around the head model.
==PAGE:45==
5.3 Experiment 3: Noisy Darker Background Model
33
(a) Skin
(b) Fat
(c) Cancellous Bone
(d) Skin
(e) Fat
(f) Cancellous Bone
Figure 5.8: The comparison of the local accuracy maps of skin, fat and cancellous
bone for 10-label background (top) and 20-label background around the
head model (bottom). Note that the red colour signifies a systematic
overestimation of the skin label.
5.3
Experiment 3: Noisy Darker Background Model
An alternative method for simulating a noisy background involves modifying the
parameters of the generative model while using the generation label maps from the
optimised baseline model without any modification. It is known that real MRI scans
generally have a dark and noisy background. In order to mimic this characteristic, we
adjusted the boundaries for the mean and standard deviation of the Gaussian used
to sample the intensity values of the background in the generative model.
The results from the model as seen in Figure 5.11 show promising segmentation
outcomes, particularly for the skin label. Figure 5.9 indicates that the skin layer
is predicted with significantly improved accuracy when using a darker and noisier
background. This improvement is attributed to a more distinct boundary between
the background and the skin label. Consequently, the dice score for the skin label
surpasses that of all previous models. Similar improvements are observed for the dice
==PAGE:46==
34
5 Results
scores of the fat and cancellous bone labels.
The local accuracy map for the skin label in Figure 5.10(a) has lighter shades
of blue and red, as well as a more scattered pattern, indicating a more precise seg-
mentation compared to previous models. However, it is important to note that the
local accuracy map for the fat label in Figure 5.10(b) reveals a systematic error in
fat segmentation. The presence of a blue layer with a red colour beneath it indicates
an inward shift in the parietal region and vice versa for the frontal region. Similarly,
the local accuracy map for the cancellous bone label in Figure 5.10(c) demonstrates
over-segmentation in the frontal region, despite relatively accurate predictions for the
skin label in these regions. Therefore, further improvements are required to address
the observed systematic errors in fat and cancellous bone segmentation.
Figure 5.9: Mean Dice scores obtained on T1w scans by the noisy darker back-
ground model vs. volume of the label groups. Note that the dice score
of the skin is significantly increased compared to previous models.
(a) Skin
(b) Fat
(c) Cancellous Bone
Figure 5.10: Local accuracy maps of skin, fat and cancellous bone for the noisy
darker background model.
==PAGE:47==
5.3 Experiment 3: Noisy Darker Background Model
35
Figure 5.11: Representative slice of a predicted segmentation obtained by the noisy
darker background model.
The results of preliminary experiments conducted in this thesis are summarised in
Figure 5.12 and Figure B.1. Figure 5.12 presents a comparative analysis of the dice
scores for tissue labels, both brain and non-brain, across the different experiments.
The optimised baseline model has slightly better performance than the baseline model
as expected for the brain tissues. Additionally, the 20-label background model around
the head has slightly higher dice scores compared to the 10-label background model.
Notably, the noisy and darker background model demonstrates comparable or slightly
improved performance when compared to other models for the brain tissues again.
Overall, the performances of the models in segmenting cerebral tissues are rela-
tively similar. However, for extra-cerebral tissues, the models show varying perfor-
mance, particularly for labels such as skin, cortical bone, cancellous bone, and fat.
Especially, the dice score for the skin label is significantly higher in the noisy and
darker background model. Throughout the experiments, improvements in segmenta-
tion accuracy are generally observed for cortical bone and fat labels. Consequently,
the noisy and darker background model, which is the final experiment, has the highest
dice scores for almost all extra-cerebral tissues.
By examining the predicted segmentations and the ground truth in Figure B.1,
it is clear that the noisy and darker background model has the most favourable
results when compared to the ground truth. Therefore, this model is selected as the
final segmentation model, considering its superior performance compared to previous
models.
==PAGE:48==
36
5 Results
(a) Brain Tissues
(b) Non-brain Tissues
Figure 5.12: Dice scores of the preliminary experiments for the brain (top) and non-
brain (bottom) tissues. Each box represents the distribution of data,
where the horizontal line is the median, the edges are the first and
third quartiles, and outliers are marked with circles.
5.4
4-fold Cross-Validation
A 4-fold cross-validation is employed on a training set comprising 20 subjects to assess
the performance of the selected final segmentation model. This involves dividing the
dataset into four groups, with one group containing 5 subjects is used as the test
set, while the remaining three groups containing 15 subjects served as the training
set. The dice score is computed on the unseen test set. Each sample is utilized as
the test set once, enabling an estimation of the model’s performance on previously
unseen data. After the dice score calculation, it was realized that one subject had
an incorrect orientation for a subset of the test contrasts. Therefore, this subject
was excluded from the analysis, and the dice scores were calculated for the remaining
==PAGE:49==
5.4 4-fold Cross-Validation
37
19 subjects across various contrasts to evaluate the general performance as shown in
Figure 5.13.
We note that the Dice scores obtained using cross-validation are similar to those
in the preliminary experiments where the performance was evaluated using the T1w
scans from the training subjects as presented in Table 5.1.
This shows that the
domain randomisation approach seems to be unbiased towards the specific MRI data,
which is reasonable as only a spatially distorted version of the label maps is used for
training.
(a) Brain Tissues
(b) Non-brain Tissues
Figure 5.13: Dice scores obtained by cross-validation on every test contrast for the
brain (top) and non-brain (bottom) tissues.
==PAGE:50==
38
5 Results
Brain
Tissues
Unseen
test set
Seen
test set
Non-
brain
Tissues
Unseen
test set
Seen
test set
WM
0.912±0.005
0.907±0.006
BV
0.561±0.032
0.589±0.034
CWM
0.840±0.025
0.847±0.007
AI
0.757±0.027
0.772±0.025
GM
0.856±0.013
0.853±0.009
E
0.945±0.018
0.945±0.019
CGM
0.902±0.017
0.909±0.007
OT
0.821±0.022
0.822±0.019
V
0.887±0.035
0.889±0.031
MU
0.667±0.027
0.702±0.032
F-CSF
0.665±0.035
0.693±0.026
SK
0.858±0.037
0.880±0.016
BG
0.911±0.006
0.912±0.005
CB
0.742±0.029
0.744±0.020
H+A
0.881±0.010
0.892±0.008
SB
0.640±0.051
0.673±0.050
SC
0.894±0.037
0.913±0.033
F
0.721±0.077
0.753±0.052
Table 5.1: Mean and standard deviation of dice scores for each label on seen and
unseen T1w test set. Table shows the merged labels in Table 4.6, spinal
cord (SC), air internal (AI), eyes (E), mucosa (MU), skin (SK), cortical
bone (CB), cancellous bone (SB) and fat (F) .
5.5
Refinement of Generation Label Maps
An alternative approach was explored involving the 20-label background around the
head in the generation label maps, similar to the second experiment in Section 5.2.1.
Each of these labels was assigned to a distinct generation class. The boundaries of
the means of these 20 Gaussian distributions used for sampling the intensity values
of the background in the generative model were set within a low value range of
[0, 50], following a similar approach as the third experiment.
An example of the
predicted segmentation for this model can be observed in Figure 5.14(a), showing
poor performance in distinguishing the background.
After examining the synthetic training images for this method, it was noted that
they lacked a large representation of the background region. This was primarily due
to the initial preprocessing step of cropping the generation label maps to a common
minimum size, which resulted in a limited representation of the background region.
Consequently, the training images predominantly contained head tissues, leading the
model to prioritize the prediction of head tissues over background labels, particularly
in the corners of the images.
To address this limitation, the model was retrained with the original size of the
generation label maps, which have a larger background region. This allowed the new
model to be exposed to training images containing a more substantial representation
of the background, helping the learning of accurate background label predictions. An
example of the improved model is seen in Figure 5.14(b), illustrating the elimination
of false background segmentation in the corners.
However, despite this refinement, the model’s overall performance remained un-
==PAGE:51==
5.6 Performance of the Final Model
39
satisfactory.
Consequently, it was decided not to proceed with this method and
instead continue with the approach employed in the third experiment as described in
Section 5.3.
(a)
Trained with cropped generation la-
bel maps
(b) Trained with generation label maps in
original size
Figure 5.14: The comparison of predicted segmentations obtained from models
trained with different sizes of the generation label maps. Note that in-
correct background segmentation in the corners is solved for the model
trained with original generation label maps.
5.6
Performance of the Final Model
In order to enhance the final model’s performance, all available label maps from
20 subjects were used and a longer training duration of 300,000 steps was utilized
with the original size of the generation label maps. The evaluation of the proposed
model involves the prediction of six different contrasts obtained from 20 subjects. An
example of predicted segmentation on the T1w scan is shown in Figure B.2.
In Figure 5.15(a), it can be observed that there are accumulated false positives
around the nose region due to background noise. The presence of a blue rim and a
red rim in Figure 5.15(b) indicates an inward shift in the segmentation of fat. This
shift is expected to occur in T1w scans due to fat shift. However, it is worth noting
that mDixon sets do not display fat shift. Thus, Figure 5.16(b) shows the higher
dice score of fat segmentation in mDixon sets compared to T1w and T2w scans. In
Figure 5.15(e), the presence of blue and red rims is still apparent.
Figure 4.9(c)
indicates a decrease in the signal coming from the fat at the top of the head, leading
to more challenging predictions.
Moreover, the dice score of cancellous bone in mDixon in-phase contrast is clearly
higher than in mDixon water contrast. Figure 4.9(c) exhibits a clear contrast between
the cancellous bone and its surrounding tissue cortical bone, whereas Figure 4.9(f)
==PAGE:52==
40
5 Results
shows a weaker signal from the cancellous bone. Particularly in the frontal region,
distinguishing the border of the cancellous bone is challenging.
A comprehensive
discussion of the detailed performance on all tissues is presented in Chapter 6.
In terms of computational eﬀiciency, the final model requires approximately 20
minutes on CPU to segment a single scan, which is faster than the CHARM [1] method.
However, it is important to note that the actual duration may vary depending on the
computational power available.
(a) Skin
(b) Fat
(c) Cancellous Bone
(d) Skin
(e) Fat
(f) Cancellous Bone
(g) Skin
(h) Fat
(i) Cancellous Bone
Figure 5.15: The comparison of the local accuracy maps on T1w scan (top), mDixon
in-phase scan (middle) and mDixon water scan (bottom).
==PAGE:53==
5.6 Performance of the Final Model
41
(a) Brain Tissues
(b) Non-brain Tissues
Figure 5.16: Dice scores obtained by the final model on every test contrast for the
brain (top) and non-brain (bottom) tissues.
5.6.1
Prediction on neck-cropped dataset
In order to control the limitations of the model, a neck-cropped data set is utilized,
and a visual inspection is conducted on the predicted segmentations. The expecta-
tion was that the model’s performance would remain unaffected after the cropping
process, considering that random cropping was applied to the synthetic training im-
==PAGE:54==
42
5 Results
ages during training.
In general, this approach yielded highly satisfactory results
across all scans. An example slice from the neck-cropped datasets of T1w and T2w
scans is presented in Figure 5.17 and Figure 5.18, respectively. Notably, there is a
slight over-segmentation observed around the nose region in Figure 5.17(c), which has
been discussed in the previous section. To further challenge the model’s robustness,
a cropping of the cerebellum was also performed. Although some noisy and inaccu-
rate labels are observed below the cerebellum, the overall results remain promising
as shown in Figure 5.19.
(a) T1w scan
(b) Ground Truth
(c) Predicted Outline
(d) Predicted segmentation
Figure 5.17: (a) An example slice from T1w neck-cropped dataset. (b) The corre-
sponding ground truth and (c) contours of (d) the predicted segmen-
tation obtained from the final model.
==PAGE:55==
5.6 Performance of the Final Model
43
(a) T2w scan
(b) Predicted Outline
(c) Predicted segmentation
Figure 5.18: (a) An example slice from T2w neck-cropped dataset. (b) The con-
tours of (c) the predicted segmentation obtained from the final model.
(a) Cropped Cerebellum
(b) Predicted Outline
(c) Predicted segmentation
Figure 5.19: (a) An example slice from cropped cerebellum MR data.
(b) The
contours of (c) the predicted segmentation obtained from the final
model.
5.6.2
Prediction on HCP dataset
The model’s performance is assessed using the publicly available HCP dataset. In
Figure 5.20, example T1w and T2w segmentations are presented, demonstrating sat-
isfactory segmentation of cerebral tissues. However, the model encounters challenges
with the segmentation of extra-cerebral tissues, particularly in regions such as around
the ears, eyes, and nose, which are affected by data anonymisation. It tends to classify
the blurred region as Other Tissue label, resulting in significant over-segmentation.
Notably, the model learns cerebral and most extra-cerebral tissue labels well and it
tends to assign Other Tissue labels instead of any cerebral tissue in cases where it
encounters unfamiliar structures.
Another notable observation is the erroneous segmentation around the cerebellum
for certain subjects as seen in Figure 5.21(c). This is encountered for the first time
with cerebral tissues, which have high dice scores (generally above 85%). It is realized
that incorrect segmentation occurs in cases with larger heads and smaller background
regions.
To address this, image padding was applied to increase the background
region. However, this approach did not yield improved results. Section 5.6.1 already
==PAGE:56==
44
5 Results
demonstrated that cropping the images should not pose a significant problem in
segmentation performance.
(a) T2w scan
(b) Predicted outline on T2w scan
(c) T1w scan
(d) Predicted outline on T1w scan
Figure 5.20: (a) An example axial slice of T2w scan from HCP dataset. (b) The
contours of predicted segmentation on T2w scan.
(c) An example
sagittal slice of T1w scan from HCP dataset. (d) The contours of pre-
dicted segmentation on T1w scan. Note that inaccurate segmentation
is observed, particularly in regions affected by data anonymisation.
(a) T1w scan
(b) Predicted Outline
(c) Predicted segmentation
Figure 5.21: (a) Another example slice of T1w scan. (b) The contours of (c) the
predicted segmentation.
Note that the segmentation of cerebellum
GM is unexpectedly noisy.
==PAGE:57==
5.6 Performance of the Final Model
45
5.6.3
Prediction on OpenNeuro dataset
The model is evaluated on an additional set of publicly available T1w scans. It demon-
strates relatively good performance for both cerebral and extra-cerebral tissues, even
in cases where the eyes and nose are absent due to data anonymisation. Figure 5.22
illustrates one such favourable example from three orientations. However, a limita-
tion of the model is encountered for this dataset. Notably, an eye movement artefact
becomes apparent when adjusting the intensity to enhance its visibility, as shown in
Figure 5.23(b). This artefact poses a challenge for the model since it is unfamiliar
and not simulated during training, leading to the assignment of Other Tissue label
again to the unknown region, as seen in Figure 5.23(c).
(a) Sagittal
(b) Coronal
(c) Axial
Figure 5.22: Representative slices in three different orientations from a predicted
segmentation on T1w OpenNeuro dataset.
Note that the model
demonstrates relatively good performance even in cases where the eyes
and nose are absent.
(a) T1w scan
(b) Intensity adjusted
(c) Predicted Segmentation
Figure 5.23: (a) Another example slice from T1w scan. (b) The intensity is ad-
justed to make eye artefact visible. (c) The predicted segmentation.
Note that the model is prone to eye artefact which is not simulated
during the training.
==PAGE:58==
46
==PAGE:59==
CHAPTER 6
Discussion
This master’s thesis aimed to extend an existing state-of-the-art automated approach
for brain segmentation from MR images. The focus was on achieving fast, robust,
and accurate segmentation of the whole head, encompassing both cerebral tissues
and extra-cerebral structures. The primary objective was to evaluate the domain
randomisation approach during the training process. The purpose of this approach
was to achieve accurate segmentation performance, particularly in images acquired
from diverse scanners and imaging protocols that show variations in tissue contrasts.
The proposed domain randomisation strategy involves training a segmentation
network using synthetic MRI scans that are generated on the fly with fully randomised
contrast and resolution through a generative model. This deliberate randomisation
generates highly unrealistic data, as shown in Appendix A. The augmentation of
data beyond realism has been shown to enhance generalisation. By employing this
strategy, the network is forced to learn domain-independent features. Importantly,
this approach only requires anatomical segmentations and does not rely on any real
images, unlike supervised methods that need paired images and labels for each new
domain [6]. Consequently, during training, the network is provided with only 20 label
maps. The diversity within these label maps contributes to the robustness of our
model against various anatomical and population variabilities.
The experimental procedure starts with a baseline model that utilizes the provided
training label maps in their original form and employs the values for the generative
model and the segmentation networks suggested by the SynthSeg model [6]. The
first experiment highlights the need to update our label maps to ensure the skin
layer in the whole head, while also revealing the model’s susceptibility to background
noise. Therefore, further investigation of background noise is needed in the follow-
ing experiments. The optimised baseline model resolves some unexpected incorrect
segmentations and demonstrates a slightly improved performance for cerebral tissues.
However, it still exhibits a systematic over-segmentation issue that is particularly
pronounced in the frontal region of the head, as indicated by the local accuracy map
in Figure 5.4(b). Consequently, we explore two alternative approaches. The first
involves modifying the training label maps provided to the generative model, while
the second includes adjusting the parameters of the generative model.
In order to simulate background noise with a wide range of variations, we di-
vided the background into 10 distinct labels. The performance of all experiments on
cerebral tissues remained consistent since our focus was primarily on the background
==PAGE:60==
48
6 Discussion
noise. However, there were notable variations in the dice scores of non-cerebral tis-
sues, particularly for the skin, fat, and cancellous bone labels. These labels showed
decreased dice scores when the background was divided into 10 labels.
Given the large volume of the skin, fat, and cancellous bone, we decided to pri-
oritize the investigation of these labels due to their relatively low dice scores.
It
was expected that larger volumes would yield higher dice scores, as there would be
a greater potential for overlap in terms of percentage. This is because a high dice
score can still be achieved even with some degree of displacement, which is unlikely
for smaller regions. However, it is important to note that while the skin may have a
large volume, it is thin, and fat is scattered throughout the head. Therefore, obtaining
accurate predictions for these labels, despite their large volumes, is still challenging.
Thus, it is necessary to conduct a local investigation into the specific regions of in-
correct segmentation in order to gain insights and understand the underlying reasons
for the errors.
In the local accuracy map of the skin in Figure 5.8(a), it can be observed that the
red rim representing false positive is thicker than the blue rim indicating false negative.
This suggests that the predicted skin label is thicker than expected, leading to also
a shifted segmentation of fat and cancellous bone, which also contain fat-containing
cells beneath the skin, as shown in Figure 5.8(b) and Figure 5.8(c) respectively.
The first experiment revealed that the accumulated noise predominantly occurs
around the head, indicating that the 10-label background segmentation was insuﬀi-
cient to simulate this noise accurately. To address this limitation, a new approach
was proposed where the background was divided into smaller regions within a more
limited area around the head. Each of these smaller regions was assigned intensity
values sampled from different Gaussian distributions, resulting in a more diverse back-
ground within this specific region around the head. The local accuracy maps obtained
using the 20-label background model’s segmentations in Figure 5.8 demonstrated a
scattering of blue and red colours, indicating that this approach reduced the model’s
susceptibility to background noise and resolved most of the incorrect segmentations.
However, a new issue emerged as there were only blue colours observed for the skin
in certain locations of the head, indicating an under-segmentation problem where the
predicted skin was thinner than expected.
These two experiments highlight the challenges in finding the optimal modification
to the label maps. While the second modification makes the model less prone to
background noise, it introduced a new issue of under-segmentation. This suggests
that finding a balance between accurately simulating noise and achieving precise
segmentations is a complex task that requires further investigation.
An alternative approach is to update the GMM priors for the generative model to
enhance the realism of the background, considering its typical appearance in clinical
settings, characterized by noise and darkness. In this approach, the boundaries of the
GMM parameters for the background label are adjusted to achieve a more accurate
representation of the background. Specifically, lower mean and wider standard devi-
ation ranges are used, such as µ ϵ [0, 40] and σ ϵ [0, 50], instead of the default ranges
µ ϵ [25, 225] and σ ϵ [5, 25].
==PAGE:61==
6 Discussion
49
The application of this updated GMM prior results in significant improvements in
the local accuracy maps and dice scores for both cerebral and extra-cerebral tissues.
However, we observe a noticeable shift in the segmentation of fat in Figure 5.10(b).
This outcome is expected, considering that the evaluation is performed on a T1w scan
where the fat layer is known to be shifted from top to bottom.
The cross-validation analysis reveals that the use of the same subjects for both
training and testing is not a concern thanks to the domain randomisation method.
It is needed in this thesis due to the limited availability of data in the medical do-
main. Domain randomisation proves advantageous as it allows the model to solely
rely on label maps without exposure to real data during training.
Moreover, the
implementation of spatial augmentations effectively prevents any leakage of anatom-
ical information. During the cross-validation analysis, the model is trained using a
dataset consisting of 15 subjects, followed by evaluation on a separate set of 5 sub-
jects that were not previously encountered. This evaluation allowed for an assessment
of the model’s performance on unseen data, providing valuable insights into its gen-
eralisation capabilities. Consequently, the model’s performance remains consistent
regardless of whether it is tested on seen or unseen data, showcasing the effectiveness
of domain randomisation in mitigating the impact of data scarcity.
The selected final segmentation model is tested on six different contrasts, each
characterized by distinct tissue border appearances. The evaluation revealed consis-
tently high dice scores across all tested contrasts, indicating the effectiveness of the
domain randomisation approach and its ability to yield good generalisation capabil-
ity to the model. The proposed model demonstrates generally better performance on
T1w scans compared to T2w scans. Notably, fat suppression adversely affects the
model’s performance within its specific domain.
To evaluate the performance of the final model, its dice scores can be compared to
those of existing models in the literature, such as SynthSeg [6] for cerebral tissues and
CHARM [1] for extra-cerebral tissues. SynthSeg achieves dice scores of 0.88 on T1w
scans and 0.86 on T2w scans. Similarly, our proposed model achieves dice scores of
0.899 on T1w scans and 0.849 on T2w scans for cerebral tissues, excluding the Fine
CSF Volume. It is appropriate to disregard this label for dice score comparison since
it is also excluded when calculating the dice score for the SynthSeg model. The Fine
CSF Volume has thin structures that pose challenges for accurate prediction and
achieving a substantial overlap necessary for high dice scores. Similarly, the blood
vessel exhibits relatively low dice scores and represents the lowest dice score among
the extra-cerebral tissues. CHARM also shows poor performance for blood vessels,
consisting of veins and arteries.
The segmentation of the Spinal Cord yields promising results with a dice score of
approximately 0.85. However, it exhibits limited robustness and significant variation
in dice scores when applied to fat-suppressed T1w and fat-suppressed T2w datasets.
Through careful examination of the MR scans, we discovered that the ground truth
of these datasets presents a cropped neck region. Consequently, the ground truth
does not encompass the entire spinal cord in the MR scans. However, the model
successfully predicts the presence of this region, which appears in the MR test scan
==PAGE:62==
50
6 Discussion
but is absent in the ground truth as shown in Figure C.1. As a result, the model
tends to produce an over-segmentation, which in turn leads to a lower dice score.
However, it is important to note that this lower dice score does not accurately reflect
the model’s performance.
Among the extra-cerebral tissues, the Eyes show the highest dice scores, which is
consistent with CHARM. This is most likely because of the distinct spherical shape of
the eyes, which facilitates their accurate prediction. On the other hand, the Mucosa
achieves a relatively lower dice score of 0.7 due to its thin and complex character-
istics in the nasal cavity. Nevertheless, this score surpasses the dice score of 0.62
achieved by CHARM. Accurate segmentation of the Air Internal region holds sig-
nificance for the volume conductor model, as air is non-conductive. Our proposed
model achieves a good score of 0.8 in this regard, outperforming CHARM with a dice
score of 0.71. While both our model and CHARM exhibit similar performances on
cortical bone, our model demonstrates better performance in segmenting cancellous
bone when compared to CHARM.
Based on these findings, it can be deduced that our proposed model displays
comparable performance to SynthSeg in segmenting cerebral tissues. Moreover, our
model is able to effectively predict extra-cerebral tissues, surpassing the performance
of CHARM in this regard. In terms of computational eﬀiciency, our proposed model
requires approximately 20 minutes to segment a single scan, which is around 43%
faster than CHARM. It is worth noting that the prediction time on a GPU is expected
to be significantly lower than 20 minutes.
The mDixon datasets demonstrate superior performance in terms of dice scores
for skin, cortical bone, cancellous bone, and fat segmentation. This outcome is ex-
pected due to the absence of a fat shift in the mDixon sets, which facilitates accurate
segmentation of fat and bone structures, as well as the skin. Notably, the bone labels
in the ground truth are derived from CT scans, which provide precise bone place.
Consequently, the predicted segmentations on the mDixon datasets exhibit enhanced
alignment with the ground truth, surpassing the performance of other T1w and T2w
scans.
Additionally, the local accuracy maps for skin segmentation in the mDixon in-
phase and water datasets do not show over-segmentation around the nose, unlike the
T1w scan in Figure 5.15. Further examination of the MRI test scans indicates that the
mDixon datasets have a less noisy background. Considering the model’s susceptibility
to background noise, its performance is notably improved on the mDixon datasets,
yielding the second-highest dice score for skin segmentation.
6.1
Limitations of Proposed Model
To assess the limitations of the proposed model, it is tested on challenging datasets.
The performance on the neck-cropped dataset yielded promising results due to the
model’s training with randomly cropped images. Consequently, the model demon-
strates potential applicability for segmenting cropped images. However, an identi-
==PAGE:63==
6.2 Future Work
51
fied limitation is data anonymisation.
The model struggles to handle the blurry
regions within the images, resulting in significant over-segmentation. Additionally,
the segmentation of the cerebellum exhibits some noise, potentially influenced by the
anonymisation process applied to the ears. Since the model was not trained using
anonymised images, it may lead to noisy cerebellum segmentation when applied to
such data. Further testing of the model on additional subjects from the dataset is
necessary to find the reason for unexpected cerebellum segmentation. A comparative
analysis of MRI scans with both accurate and inaccurate segmentations should be
conducted to explore potential contributing factors.
An additional limitation observed in the proposed model is the presence of eye
movement artefacts, which exhibit characteristics similar to background noise but rep-
resent in a more systematic way. Nevertheless, it is worth noting that the model has
promising predicted segmentations in scenarios where the nose and eyes are absent.
In addition, an assessment of the model’s cross-modality performance was con-
ducted to evaluate its potential application in other medical imaging domains. Since
the remarkable performance achieved by SynthSeg [6] in cardiac cross-modality seg-
mentation highlights its potential applicability to various other medical imaging chal-
lenges. Specifically, a test was conducted on a CT scan, resulting in unfavourable
outcomes as opposed to the SynthSeg model. This might be due to the different
scales of MR intensities and Houndsfield units. Consequently, it can be concluded
that our proposed model lacks cross-modality generalisability, indicating its limited
suitability for diverse imaging modalities.
6.2
Future Work
In general, the proposed model exhibits susceptibility to artefacts that were not en-
countered during the model training, such as eye movement artefacts. Additionally,
it is prone to data anonymisation. While the model is designed to be resilient against
background noise, the eye movement artefact demonstrates a more systematic way
within the background, in contrast to the simulated background noise that is predom-
inantly characterized by scattered and white noise patterns in this thesis.
To enhance the model’s robustness against various artefacts and anonymised MRI
scans, the generative model can be augmented with additional unseen artefacts and
anonymised data. One potential approach is to incorporate the MONAI framework,
an open-source tool designed for deep learning in healthcare imaging [25]. This frame-
work offers several artefacts commonly encountered in MRI scans, including Gibbs
noise and k-space spike artefacts, thus providing a means to generate more diverse
synthetic training images.
The proposed model showcases promising performance on the anonymised dataset
without nose and eyes. However, to achieve complete segmentation, the development
of a post-processing step that imitates the presence of nose and eyes may be beneficial.
This post-processing step would contribute to refining the segmentation results and
improving the overall completeness of the output.
==PAGE:64==
52
6 Discussion
In the updated version of the SynthSeg paper [6], more rigorous spatial augmen-
tation parameters are employed. These augmentations now have a wider range of
boundaries, resulting in the generation of more deformed images. Furthermore, the
default GMM priors have been modified. Specifically, the mean (µ) values have been
adjusted to the range [0, 250], and the standard deviation (σ) values now fall within
the range [0, 35], as opposed to the previous ranges of µ ϵ [25, 225] and σ ϵ [5, 25].
Importantly, the intensities are restricted to be sampled always as a positive value.
These updated GMM priors could be tried to enhance the accuracy of segmenting
head tissues. However, optimal priors for the background should be examined sepa-
rately, which should ideally display darker and noisier characteristics, as proposed in
this thesis. By incorporating such priors, the accuracy of the proposed method can
be further improved.
In this thesis, the motivation is focused on enhancing the generative model. Nonethe-
less, there is also room for improvement in the segmentation model. By using more
powerful computational resources, it becomes possible to explore the implementation
of a deeper U-net model with increased resolution levels. This extension allows to
learn more sophisticated features, thereby potentially improving the overall accuracy
of the model. Additionally, the number of feature maps derived from each layer could
be increased to capture more features, further enhancing its performance. While the
U-net architecture is widely utilized for medical image segmentation, it is possible
to explore alternative architectures in an attempt to enhance segmentation accuracy.
By replacing the U-net architecture with different models, there is an opportunity to
investigate and potentially improve the precision of segmentation results.
==PAGE:65==
CHAPTER 7
Conclusion
The primary focus of this thesis was on evaluating the domain randomisation approach
to improve segmentation performance in images acquired from different scanners and
imaging protocols with varying tissue contrasts.
The preliminary experiments involved modifying the training label maps and ad-
justing the parameters of the generative model to address challenges such as back-
ground noise.
The final segmentation model demonstrated consistently high dice
scores across different MRI contrasts, indicating the effectiveness of the domain ran-
domisation approach and its generalisation capability.
The final segmentation model obtained Dice scores of 0.899 on T1-weighted scans
and 0.849 on T2-weighted scans for cerebral tissues (excluding fine cerebrospinal
fluid (CSF) volumes). It also achieved Dice scores of 0.761 on T1-weighted scans and
0.771 on T2-weighted scans for extra-cerebral structures. It demonstrated comparable
performance to state-of-the-art brain segmentation, SynthSeg, for cerebral tissues and
outperformed a state-of-the-art Bayesian segmentation, CHARM, in predicting extra-
cerebral tissues. In terms of computational eﬀiciency, the proposed model exhibited
faster segmentation times compared to CHARM, requiring approximately 20 minutes
to segment a single scan on a CPU. It is worth noting that the prediction time on a
GPU is expected to be significantly lower than 20 minutes.
In conclusion, the proposed model demonstrated generalisation capability, and
comparable performance to existing models, highlighting its potential for individually
tailored TBS protocols and other applications in the medical domain.
==PAGE:66==
List of Figures
2.1
Illustrative example of an MR scan from three different sequences. Note
that the intensity distributions display considerable diversity, particularly
for extra-cerebral structures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3.1
Illustration of the U-Net architecture. The dark purple boxes represent the
concatenated feature maps . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.2
Illustrated process of the generative model: (a) Random selection of an
input label map from the training set, which is (b) spatially augmented
in 3D. (c) Generation of a synthetic image by sampling from GMMs with
randomised parameters. The resulting image is also corrupted with a bias
field. (d) The training inputs consist of the generated MRI scan and the
deformed label map
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.3
Image segmented using SLIC into 100 superpixels (left) and 300 superpixels
(right) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
4.1
An example slice from generation label maps of baseline model . . . . . .
19
4.2
Representative sample of (a) a synthetic training image, and (b) contours
of (c) the corresponding target label map for baseline model
. . . . . . .
20
4.3
Representative slice after the skin layer adjustment . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4.4
An example slice from generation label maps of 10-label background model 21
4.5
Representative sample of (a) a synthetic training image, and (b) contours
of (c) the corresponding target label map for 10-label background model
21
4.6
An example slice from generation label maps of 20-label background around
the head . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4.7
Representative sample of (a) a synthetic training image, and (b) contours
of (c) the corresponding target label map for 20-label background around
the head . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4.8
Representative sample of (a) a synthetic training image, and (b) contours
of (c) the corresponding target label map for noisy darker background model 23
4.9
An illustrative sagittal slice demonstrating the six distinct MR contrasts
utilized in the performance evaluation of the final model . . . . . . . . . .
25
==PAGE:67==
List of Figures
55
5.1
(a) An example slice from T1w scan. (b) The intensity is adjusted to make
background noise visible. (c) The corresponding ground truth and (d) the
predicted segmentation from the baseline model. Note that the noise and
over-segmentation are concentrated around the forehead . . . . . . . . . .
28
5.2
Mean Dice scores obtained on T1w scans by the baseline model vs. volume
of the label groups . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
5.3
Representative slice of a predicted segmentation obtained by the optimised
baseline model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
5.4
Local accuracy maps of the background label overlaid on the MNI template.
The blue colour signifies the false negative of the background label, which
consequently shows the over-segmentation of head tissues
. . . . . . . . .
30
5.5
Mean Dice scores obtained on T1w scans by the optimised baseline model
vs. volume of the label groups . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
5.6
Mean Dice scores obtained on T1w scans by (a) the 10-label background
and (b) 20-label background around the head model vs. volume of the
label groups . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
5.7
Representative slice of predicted segmentations obtained by (a) 10-label
background and (b) 20-label background around the head model . . . . .
32
5.8
The comparison of the local accuracy maps of skin, fat and cancellous bone
for 10-label background (top) and 20-label background around the head
model (bottom). Note that the red colour signifies a systematic overestima-
tion of the skin label . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
5.9
Mean Dice scores obtained on T1w scans by the noisy darker background
model vs. volume of the label groups. Note that the dice score of the skin
is significantly increased compared to previous models . . . . . . . . . . .
34
5.10 Local accuracy maps of skin, fat and cancellous bone for the noisy darker
background model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
5.11 Representative slice of a predicted segmentation obtained by the noisy
darker background model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
5.12 Dice scores of the preliminary experiments for the brain (top) and non-brain
(bottom) tissues. Each box represents the distribution of data, where the
horizontal line is the median, the edges are the first and third quartiles, and
outliers are marked with circles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
5.13 Dice scores obtained by cross-validation on every test contrast for the brain
(top) and non-brain (bottom) tissues . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
5.14 The comparison of predicted segmentations obtained from models trained
with different sizes of the generation label maps. Note that incorrect back-
ground segmentation in the corners is solved for the model trained with
original generation label maps . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
5.15 The comparison of the local accuracy maps on T1w scan (top), mDixon
in-phase scan (middle) and mDixon water scan (bottom) . . . . . . . . . .
40
5.16 Dice scores obtained by the final model on every test contrast for the brain
(top) and non-brain (bottom) tissues . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
==PAGE:68==
56
List of Figures
5.17 (a) An example slice from T1w neck-cropped dataset. (b) The correspond-
ing ground truth and (c) contours of (d) the predicted segmentation ob-
tained from the final model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
5.18 (a) An example slice from T2w neck-cropped dataset. (b) The contours of
(c) the predicted segmentation obtained from the final model . . . . . . .
43
5.19 (a) An example slice from cropped cerebellum MR data. (b) The contours
of (c) the predicted segmentation obtained from the final model
. . . . .
43
5.20 (a) An example axial slice of T2w scan from HCP dataset. (b) The con-
tours of predicted segmentation on T2w scan.
(c) An example sagittal
slice of T1w scan from HCP dataset. (d) The contours of predicted seg-
mentation on T1w scan. Note that inaccurate segmentation is observed,
particularly in regions affected by data anonymisation . . . . . . . . . . .
44
5.21 (a) Another example slice of T1w scan. (b) The contours of (c) the pre-
dicted segmentation.
Note that the segmentation of cerebellum GM is
unexpectedly noisy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
5.22 Representative slices in three different orientations from a predicted seg-
mentation on T1w OpenNeuro dataset. Note that the model demonstrates
relatively good performance even in cases where the eyes and nose are absent 45
5.23 (a) Another example slice from T1w scan. (b) The intensity is adjusted to
make eye artefact visible. (c) The predicted segmentation. Note that the
model is prone to eye artefact which is not simulated during the training .
45
A.1 Representative generated synthetic scans from the baseline model . . . . .
59
A.2 Representative generated synthetic scans from the optimised baseline model 60
A.3 Representative generated synthetic scans from the 10-label background model 60
A.4 Representative generated synthetic scans from the 20-label background
around the head model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
A.5 Representative generated synthetic scans from the noisy darker background
model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
B.1
(a-e) Representative predicted segmentations of preliminary experiments
and (f) the ground truth
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
B.2 An example of a predicted segmentation from the final model . . . . . . .
64
C.1 An example showcasing (a) a partial ground truth representation of the
spinal cord overlaid on the fat-suppressed T1w scan and (b) the corre-
sponding predicted segmentation obtained from the fat-suppressed T1w
scan. Note that the segmentation model successfully predicts the entire
spinal cord which appears in the MR test scan but is partially absent in
the ground truth . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
==PAGE:69==
List of Tables
4.1
The data set demographics [11] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
4.2
List of 58 labels used for image synthesis and prediction . . . . . . . . . .
14
4.3
Values of the hyperparameters controlling the spatial deformation and the
generative model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
4.4
List of generation classes. Labels belonging to the same generation class
share a common Gaussian distribution from which their intensity values are
sampled.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4.5
Values of the hyperparameters controlling the U-Net segmentation network 18
4.6
List of tissue assignments that combine the left and right tissue labels, along
with similar tissue types . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
5.1
Mean and standard deviation of dice scores for each label on seen and
unseen T1w test set. Table shows the merged labels in Table 4.6, spinal
cord (SC), air internal (AI), eyes (E), mucosa (MU), skin (SK), cortical
bone (CB), cancellous bone (SB) and fat (F)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
==PAGE:70==
58
==PAGE:71==
APPENDIX A
Synthetic Training
Images
A.1
Experiment 1: Baseline Model
Figure A.1: Representative generated synthetic scans from the baseline model.
==PAGE:72==
60
A Synthetic Training Images
A.2
Experiment 1.1: Optimised Baseline Model
Figure A.2: Representative generated synthetic scans from the optimised baseline
model.
A.3
Experiment 2: 10-label Background Model
Figure A.3: Representative generated synthetic scans from the 10-label background
model.
==PAGE:73==
A.4 Experiment 2.1: 20-label background around the head
61
A.4
Experiment 2.1: 20-label background around the
head
Figure A.4: Representative generated synthetic scans from the 20-label background
around the head model.
A.5
Experiment 3: Noisy Darker Background Model
Figure A.5: Representative generated synthetic scans from the noisy darker back-
ground model.
==PAGE:74==
62
==PAGE:75==
APPENDIX B
Predicted
Segmentations
(a) Baseline Model
(b) Optimised Baseline Model (c) 10-label Background Model
(d) 20-label Background Model (e) Noisy Darker Background
(f) Ground Truth
Figure B.1: (a-e) Representative predicted segmentations of preliminary experi-
ments and (f) the ground truth .
==PAGE:76==
64
B Predicted Segmentations
Figure B.2: An example of a predicted segmentation from the final model.
==PAGE:77==
APPENDIX C
Spinal Cord
(a) Ground Truth
(b) Predicted Segmentation
Figure C.1: An example showcasing (a) a partial ground truth representation of
the spinal cord overlaid on the fat-suppressed T1w scan and (b) the
corresponding predicted segmentation obtained from the fat-suppressed
T1w scan. Note that the segmentation model successfully predicts the
entire spinal cord which appears in the MR test scan but is partially
absent in the ground truth.
==PAGE:78==
66
==PAGE:79==
Bibliography
[1]
O. Puonti, K. Van Leemput, G. B. Saturnino, H. R. Siebner, K. H. Madsen, and
A. Thielscher, “Accurate and robust whole-head segmentation from magnetic
resonance images for individualized head modeling,” NeuroImage, volume 219,
page 117 044, October 2020, issn: 1053-8119. doi: 10.1016/J.NEUROIMAGE.
2020.117044.
[2]
A. Karabanov, A. Thielscher, and H. R. Siebner, “Transcranial brain stimu-
lation: Closing the loop between brain and stimulation,” Current Opinion in
Neurology, volume 29, number 4, pages 397–404, August 2016, issn: 14736551.
doi: 10.1097/WCO.0000000000000342.
[3]
T. Chew, K. A. Ho, and C. K. Loo, “Inter- and Intra-individual Variability
in Response to Transcranial Direct Current Stimulation (tDCS) at Varying
Current Intensities,” Brain Stimulation, volume 8, number 6, pages 1130–1137,
November 2015, issn: 1935-861X. doi: 10.1016/J.BRS.2015.07.031.
[4]
O. Puonti, “Computational Analysis of Brain Images: Towards a Useful Tool in
Clinical Practice,” Ph.D. dissertation, Technical University of Denmark, 2016.
[5]
F. Isensee, P. F. Jaeger, S. A. Kohl, J. Petersen, and K. H. Maier-Hein, “nnU-
Net: a self-configuring method for deep learning-based biomedical image seg-
mentation,” Nature Methods 2020 18:2, volume 18, number 2, pages 203–211,
December 2020, issn: 1548-7105. doi: 10.1038/s41592-020-01008-z.
[6]
B. Billot, D. N. Greve, O. Puonti, et al., “SynthSeg: Segmentation of brain
MRI scans of any contrast and resolution without retraining,” Medical Image
Analysis, Jul. 2021. doi: 10.1016/j.media.2023.102789.
[7]
O. Puonti, J. E. Iglesias, and K. Van Leemput, “Fast and sequence-adaptive
whole-brain segmentation using parametric Bayesian modeling,” NeuroImage,
volume 143, pages 235–249, December 2016, issn: 1053-8119. doi: 10.1016/J.
NEUROIMAGE.2016.09.011.
[8]
X. X. Yin, L. Sun, Y. Fu, R. Lu, and Y. Zhang, “U-Net-Based Medical Image
Segmentation,” Journal of Healthcare Engineering, volume 2022, 2022, issn:
20402309. doi: 10.1155/2022/4189781.
[9]
A. Berger, “Magnetic resonance imaging,” BMJ, volume 324, number 7328,
page 35, January 2002, issn: 0959-8138. doi: 10.1136/BMJ.324.7328.35.
==PAGE:80==
68
Bibliography
[10]
B. Dogdas, D. W. Shattuck, and R. M. Leahy, “Segmentation of skull and scalp
in 3-D human MRI using mathematical morphology,” Human brain mapping,
volume 26, number 4, pages 273–285, December 2005, issn: 1065-9471. doi:
10.1002/HBM.20159.
[11]
S. Farcito, O. Puonti, H. Montanaro, et al., “Accurate anatomical head seg-
mentations: A data set for biomedical simulations,” Proceedings of the Annual
International Conference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology So-
ciety, EMBS, pages 6118–6123, Jul. 2019, issn: 1557170X. doi: 10.1109/EMBC.
2019.8857041.
[12]
Goodfellow Ian, Bengio Yoshua, and Courville Aaron, Deep Learning. MIT
Press, 2016. [Online]. Available: https://www.deeplearningbook.org/.
[13]
Y. LeCun, L. Bottou, Y. Bengio, and P. Haffner, “Gradient-based learning ap-
plied to document recognition,” Proceedings of the IEEE, volume 86, number 11,
pages 2278–2323, 1998, issn: 00189219. doi: 10.1109/5.726791.
[14]
N. Karani, K. Chaitanya, C. Baumgartner, and E. Konukoglu, “A Lifelong
Learning Approach to Brain MR Segmentation Across Scanners and Protocols,”
Medical Image Computing and Computer Assisted Intervention, volume 11070,
pages 476–484, 2018.
[15]
O. Ronneberger, P. Fischer, and T. Brox, “U-net: Convolutional networks for
biomedical image segmentation,” Medical Image Computing and Computer-
Assisted Intervention, volume 9351, pages 234–241, 2015, issn: 16113349.
[16]
J. Tobin, R. Fong, A. Ray, J. Schneider, W. Zaremba, and P. Abbeel, “Domain
randomization for transferring deep neural networks from simulation to the
real world,” IEEE International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems,
volume 2017-September, pages 23–30, December 2017, issn: 21530866. doi: 10.
1109/IROS.2017.8202133.
[17]
R. Achanta, A. Shaji, K. Smith, A. Lucchi, P. Fua, and S. Süsstrunk, “SLIC
superpixels compared to state-of-the-art superpixel methods,” IEEE Transac-
tions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, volume 34, number 11,
pages 2274–2281, 2012, issn: 01628828. doi: 10.1109/TPAMI.2012.120.
[18]
B. Lloyd, “The Medical Image Segmentation Tool Set (iSEG),” May 2022.
doi: 10.5281/ZENODO.6563519. [Online]. Available: https://github.com/
ITISFoundation/osparc-iseg.
[19]
B. Fischl, “FreeSurfer,” NeuroImage, volume 62, number 2, pages 774–781, Au-
gust 2012, issn: 1095-9572. doi: 10.1016/J.NEUROIMAGE.2012.01.021.
[20]
B. Billot, D. N. Greve, K. Van Leemput, B. Fischl, J. E. Iglesias, and A. V.
Dalca, “A Learning Strategy for Contrast-agnostic MRI Segmentation,” page 2020,
March 2020.
[21]
D. P. Kingma and J. L. Ba, “Adam: A Method for Stochastic Optimization,” 3rd
International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2015 - Conference
Track Proceedings, December 2014.
==PAGE:81==
Bibliography
69
[22]
L. R. Dice, “Measures of the Amount of Ecologic Association Between Species,”
Ecology, volume 26, number 3, pages 297–302, Jul. 1945. doi: 10.2307/1932409.
[23]
D. C. Van Essen, S. M. Smith, D. M. Barch, T. E. Behrens, E. Yacoub, and K.
Ugurbil, “The WU-Minn Human Connectome Project: an overview,” NeuroIm-
age, volume 80, pages 62–79, October 2013, issn: 1095-9572. doi: 10.1016/J.
NEUROIMAGE.2013.05.041.
[24]
Dobrushina Olga R, Dobrunina Larisa A, Kremneva Elena I, and Pechenkova
Ekaterina V, Resting-state fMRI data acquired before and after a course of
infra-low frequency neurofeedback - OpenNeuro [Dataset], 2022. doi: 10.18112/
openneuro.ds004101.v1.0.1.
[25]
M. J. Cardoso, W. Li, R. Brown, et al., “MONAI: An open-source framework
for deep learning in healthcare,” November 2022. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2211.
02701.
==PAGE:82==
