==PAGE:1==
Glow Discharge Optical Emission Spectroscopy for
Elemental Characterization of Doped TiO2 Thin Films
made by Pulsed Laser Deposition
Jacob Wilder Ng
Master Thesis
DTU Electro
Department of Electrical and Photonics Engineering
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Glow Discharge Optical Emission Spectroscopy for Elemental Characterization of
Doped TiO2 Thin Films made by Pulsed Laser Deposition
Master Thesis
June, 2023
By
Jacob Wilder Ng
Supervisors:
Turid Reenaas
Marisa Di Sabatino
Stela Canulescu
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Electrical and Photonics Engineering, Ørsteds
Plads, Building 343, 2800 Kongens Lyngby Denmark
https://electro.dtu.dk/
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over six months at the Norwegian University of Science
and Technology, NTNU, in partial fulfilment for the degree Master of Science in Innovative
Sustainable Energy Engineering, MSc.
Jacob Wilder Ng ­ s213179
Signature
Date
ii Glow Discharge Optical Emission Spectroscopy for Elemental Characterization of Doped TiO2 Thin Films
made by Pulsed Laser Deposition
08/06/2023
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Glow discharge optical emission spectroscopy has been used to characterize thin film
samples fabricated by pulsed laser deposition. The principal samples are (Cr+N)
co-doped TiO2 films deposited by natural spread combinatorial PLD. (Cr+N) co-
doped TiO2 is relevant as a possible intermediate band material which could be
used to create more efficient photovoltaic cells. The light absorption properties of
the material depend on the doping concentrations of Cr and N, and GDOES is one
available technique to analyze these concentrations.
Numerous preliminary PLD films (based on either TiO2 or CrN) were first exam-
ined qualitatively to become familiar with GDOES and its application to this family
of samples. Comparison between samples deposited under different PLD conditions
confirms previous findings that a low substrate temperature and deposition in N2
background are keys to adequately incorporating N into the final film, during both
CrN and TiO2 depositions. Issues stemming from atmospheric contamination dur-
ing GDOES measurement were mitigated by employing a low-power measurement
method to assess vacuum conditions before proceeding to a normal measurement.
A variety of samples of known composition (containing Ti, O, Cr, N, and/or Si)
were used to developed GDOES calibration curves for these elements. The curves
are formed by a relation between known elemental concentrations, sputtering rates
determined by crater depth measurement, and measured elemental emission signal
intensities.
An attempt to artificially reduce sputtering rates for additional data
points was inconclusive. For each element, the data points were fit with a regression
line, optionally including some correction factors.
The combinatorial PLD samples were measured with GDOES at four positions,
following the direction of increasing doping concentration. The qualitative results
are consistent with the trends observed in the preliminary PLD films and display
the efficacy of a N2-O2 gas cycling routine and a TiOxNy capping scheme adopted
in the PLD method. After applying the calibration curves for quantitative results,
the Cr concentration is found to range from 5.9 - 17.3 at%, surpassing the values
expected according to a PLD simulation. The N concentration is strongly dependent
on the decision to apply a correction factor for possible Cr interference. The con-
centration range is 1.6 - 8.8 at% (without correction factor) or 7.0 - 19.0 at% (with
correction factor). Work is needed to improve the calibration curves for more reliable
quantification.
i
==PAGE:6==
This page left intentionally blank
==PAGE:7==
Sammendrag
Glimutladnings optisk emisjonsspektroskopi (GD-OES) har blitt brukt for å karak-
terisere tynnfilmprøver fremstilt ved hjelp av pulset laser deponering (PLD). De vik-
tigste prøvene som er analysert er (Cr+N) ko-dopet TiO2-filmer deponert ved hjelp av
kombinatorisk PLD. (Cr+N) ko-dopet TiO2 er et mulig mellombåndsmateriale som
kan brukes til å lage mer effektive solceller. Materialets lysabsorpsjonsegenskaper
avhenger av dopekonsentrasjonene av Cr og N, og GDOES er en mulig teknikk for å
analysere disse konsentrasjonene.
Flere PLD-filmer (basert på enten TiO2 eller CrN) ble først undersøkt kvali-
tativt for å bli kjent med GDOES-teknikken og dens anvendelse på denne typen
prøver.
Ved å sammenlige prøver deponert under ulike PLD-forhold ble tidligere
funn bekreftet:
en lav substrattemperatur og deponering i N2-bakgrunnsgass er
nøkkelen til tilstrekkelig inkorporering av N i den endelige filmen, under både CrN-
og TiO2-deponering. Problemer som stammet fra atmosfærisk forurensning under
GDOES-målingene ble dempet ved å bruke en laveffekt-målemetode for å evaluere
vakuumkvaliteten før man gikk videre med en normal måling.
En rekke prøver med kjent sammensetning (inneholdende Ti, O, Cr, N og/eller
Si) ble brukt til å lage GDOES-kalibreringskurver for disse grunnstoffene.
Kur-
vene ble laget på bakgrunn av relasjonen mellom kjente konsentrasjoner av ulike
grunnstoff, sputterhastigheter bestemt ved kraterdybdemåling og målte emisjonssig-
nalintensiteter for ulike grunnstoff.
Et forsøk på kunstig reduksjon av sputtring-
shastighet for å få ytterligere datapunkter gav ikke entydige resultater. For hvert
grunnstoff ble datapunktene tilpasset med en regresjonslinje, eventuelt inkludert noen
korreksjonsfaktorer.
De kombinatoriske PLD-prøvene ble målt med GDOES for 4 ulike punkter på
prøven, langs en akse med økende dopingkonsentrasjon. De kvalitative resultatene
stemmer overens med trendene som er observert i de foreløpige PLD-filmene og
viser at en N2-O2-gasssyklusrutine og et TiOxNy-beskyttelseslag tatt i bruk i PLD-
metoden, fungerer. Etter å ha brukt kalibreringskurvene for å få kvantitative resul-
tater, er Cr-konsentrasjonen funnet å variere fra 5,9 - 17,3 at%, og dette overgår verdi-
ene sammenlignet med en simulering av forventet mengde doping. N-konsentrasjonen
er sterkt avhengig av et valg om å bruke en korreksjonsfaktor for en mulig Cr-
interferens. Målt mengde N er 1,6 - 8,8 at% (uten korreksjonsfaktor) eller 7,0 - 19,0
at% (med korreksjonsfaktor). Mer arbeid er nødvendig for å forbedre kalibreringskur-
vene for å få en mer pålitelig kvantifisering av sammensetning av prøvene.
iii
==PAGE:8==
This page left intentionally blank
==PAGE:9==
Preface
I would like to thank a number of individuals for their support throughout this
project:
First is my supervisor Professor Turid Reenaas, for welcoming me into her group, for
her patience in training and explaining previous work, and for continuous feedback
on research, analysis and documentation.
Marisa Di Sabatino for additional supervision, GDOES advice and administering the
N5T study program in Innovative Sustainable Energy Engineering.
Stela Canulescu for additional supervision. Thank you also to all my professors at
DTU, where I completed the first year of my Master degree program.
Thomas Brakstad, a PhD student in the group, was involved in depositing the sam-
ples studied here. Data from his prior ellipsometry measurements were extremely
valuable.
Patrick Chapon, a GDOES researcher with HORIBA, offered many suggestions re-
garding the process and results in this project, shared additional training resources,
and provided additional reference samples for calibration.
Sergey Khromov provided training for the GDOES instrument and stylus profilome-
ter used in this work and was very responsive to questions about the interpretation
of results.
Jakob Vinje (and the NTNU NanoLab) provided training for the 3D optical profiler
used in this work. Øystein Gjervan Hagemo and the NTNU Finmekanisk verksted
provided a titanium sample for calibration. Astrid Salvesen and the NTNU Glass-
blåserverksted provided a quartz sample for calibration. Hogne Lysne was also in-
volved in the fabrication and prior analysis of the PLD samples.
And thank you to my fellow students Joseba Ormaetxea Orobengoa, Sarah Nyeki,
Vilma Kristiansson, Harry Malhi, Andrés Greciano, and Ahmad Chehaimi for cinna-
mon rolls and cabin trips.
Jacob Ng
NTNU Trondheim
June 2023
v
==PAGE:10==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
v
Contents
vii
1
Introduction
1
2
Theory
5
2.1
Intermediate band solar cells . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Glow discharge optical emission spectroscopy . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.2.1
Sputtering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.2.2
Optical emission
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.2.3
Spectroscopy
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.2.4
Further considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.3
Calibration for quantitative GDOES
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
2.3.1
Calibration curves
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
2.3.2
Emission yield . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
2.3.3
Sputtering rate . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
2.3.4
Errors and uncertainty . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
2.3.5
Curve fitting and application
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
2.4
Pulsed laser deposition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3
Methods and Experimental Details
29
3.1
Samples . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.1.1
Fabricated samples . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.1.2
Reference samples for calibration
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
3.2
GDOES measurements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
3.2.1
Equipment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
3.2.2
Measurement procedure
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
3.2.3
Low-power plasma surface cleaning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
3.2.4
Calibration curve formation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
3.3
Stylus profilometer measurements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
3.4
Optical profiler measurements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
vi
==PAGE:11==
CONTENTS
vii
4
Results and Discussion
51
4.1
Nitrogen signal consistency . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
4.2
Calibration measurements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
4.2.1
GDOES profiles and craters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
4.2.2
Calibration measurement summary tables
. . . . . . . . . . .
74
4.2.3
Reduced sputtering measurements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
76
4.3
Calibration curves . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
80
4.4
PLD plume films - qualitative . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
91
4.5
PLD CCS films - qualitative . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
99
4.6
PLD CCS films - quantitative . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 106
4.7
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 114
5
Conclusions
117
References
119
Appendix A - Spectrometer detection wavelengths
125
==PAGE:12==
==PAGE:13==
Chapter1
Introduction
The following chapter is adapted from the author’s previous specialization project [1]
The alarming impacts of climate change are increasingly apparent just from a scan
of global headlines from year to year. Threatening forecasts of sea level rise, displaced
populations, failing crops, and jeopardized health are shifting from dystopian science
fiction to an uncomfortable reality [2]. Nations of the world have every reason to
act, not only to avoid the impending harms, but also because a green transition
promises new jobs, wealth creation, and sustainable development around the globe
[3].
The burning of fossil fuels in the energy sector contributes to 60% of total
greenhouse gas emissions, marking this as a crucial opportunity for transformation
[4]. Thankfully, decarbonization of the energy sector is relatively straightforward, due
to the abundance of alternative sources and ever-improving technologies to harness
them.
The theoretical potential of renewable energy sources is undeniably staggering,
with solar power alone easily capable of meeting the energy needs for all human
civilization, as illustrated in Figure 1.1 [5, 6]. Efforts now focus on transitioning
the power sector to renewable sources in a feasible manner. An upward trend in
electrification will only enhance the relevance of this endeavour and further high-
light challenges [8]. Technology for generating electricity from renewable sources has
reached a cost parity with fossil fuels, but limitations remain when targeting sus-
tainable terawatt-scale deployment [9]. These considerations include materials and
production, capital costs, temporal and geographic variability, competing uses, and
end-of-life treatment.
Solar photovoltaics (PV) are a clean energy technology whose installed capacity
has exploded within the past decade, with a 2021 cumulative capacity of 940 GW
[10]. The foundation of this technology is silicon, a semiconductor element which is
able to convert incident light into electrical power. Silicon has enjoyed an extensive
1
==PAGE:14==
2
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
Figure 1.1: A visual comparison of global power demand with the absolute maxi-
mum production available from various renewable sources [7].
record of development, thanks in part to its ubiquity in the transistors which enable
the modern age of digital computing. Silicon-based solar cells are driving the current
wave of installations, as manufacturing expertise and economies of scale have steadily
reduced costs, and the power conversion efficiency (PCE) has gradually inched higher.
After decades of research, however, the performance of silicon solar cells may be
reaching a plateau. Production costs have dropped to $0.25/W [11] and the record
PCE is around 27% [12] (although commercially available modules rarely exceed
23%). These metrics are admirable, but may be insufficient when contemplating a
society predominantly powered by renewable energy. It is worth considering alter-
native materials and technologies to harness energy from sunlight. Silicon solar cells
fall into a class termed “first-generation PV”, because they first demonstrated the
potential of photovoltaics to contribute meaning-fully in the power sector and other
applications [13].
One of the limitations of silicon is its requirement for extreme
purity.
demanding energy-intensive processing steps.
It is also a relatively poor
absorber of light, so thicker layers of material are necessary, with associated costs
[14].
“Second-generation PV” arose with the aim of developing materials to overcome
these shortcomings of silicon. Examples include CdTe, CIGS, and amorphous-Si.
These materials are superior light absorbers, with a “thin-film” being sufficient for
a PV device. Here, “thin” means a few microns, compared to the hundreds of mi-
crons for a typical silicon cell. These thin-film PV technologies have the potential for
high-throughput production methods with cheap costs [13]. Nevertheless, they are
not without their own challenges. For the most part, they have not quite reached
a stage of commercialization. Some rely on scarce or toxic elements, such as cad-
==PAGE:15==
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
3
mium or indium. Their PCEs also remain lower than silicon, with records around
23%. Relatively young compared to silicon, these second-generation materials clearly
have room to develop, and the “low-cost and low-efficiency” option will certainly be
appropriate for some applications.
Finally, the more recent “third-generation PV” attempts to tackle the aforemen-
tioned issues by focusing on improving efficiency. The “Shockley–Queisser” limit is
commonly-cited detailed balance model which calculates a maximum PV efficiency
around 33% for un-concentrated sunlight on Earth. [15]. The most advanced silicon
cells are already approaching this ceiling [5]. The Shockley–Queisser limit, however,
is dependent on a several of physical and device assumptions. For example, a valid
assumption for 1st- and 2nd-generation PV devices is that the semiconductor’s single
badgap doesn’t allow light to be captured with full efficiency over the entire solar
spectrum. A device with multiple bandgaps, however, could absorb light more ef-
ficiently and surpass the Shockley–Queisser limit. In one approach, multi-junction
solar cells stack different semiconductors optimized to capture different regions of
the solar spectrum. Alternatively, a semiconductor could be modified to have split
the bandgap into multiple steps within a single material. Such a device is termed
an intermediate band solar cell (IBSC) [13]. Though still in its infancy, the IBSC
concept is worth exploring, as the introduction of just a single intermediate band
could raise the theoretical efficiency to nearly 50%.
Such intermediate band materials have been the subject of research within Pro-
fessor Reenaas’ solar cell group at the NTNU Department of Physics. Current ef-
forts are focused on titanium dioxide (TiO2) as the semiconductor material, with
the intermediate band formed by doping with chromium and nitrogen. Samples are
fabricated by pulsed laser deposition (PLD) and feature a continuous compositional
spread (CCS) of dopant concentrations. The optimal concentration of chromium and
nitrogen are not yet known, so this approach is an efficient way to investigate the re-
lation between various material properties and the doping level. An essential aspect
of this characterization, therefore, is determining the concentration of chromium and
nitrogen at various points along the sample. Various tools are available for this sort
of elemental quantification, but not all are well-suited for these particular samples.
For instance, secondary ion mass spectroscopy (SIMS) can be used to characterize
ppm level concentrations of trace elements. But the chromium and nitrogen levels
expected in these films is in the range 1-10 at%. Spectroscopic techniques based on
electrons, such as energy dispersive x-ray spectroscopy (EDX), have limited detection
capabilities for light elements such as nitrogen.
Glow discharge optical emission spectroscopy (GDOES) is a tool readily-available
at NTNU which boasts high sensitivity for all elements, detection levels ranging from
trace to major, fast measurements, and simple operation [16].
==PAGE:16==
4
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
The thesis work this semester builds on previous specialization project work [1].
The aim is to perform quantitative analysis of PLD (Cr+N) co-doped TiO2 films. The
report first summarizes the working principle of intermediate band solar cells, includ-
ing the specific material combination pursued in this group. The rest of the chapter is
devoted to the basic theory of glow discharge optical emission spectroscopy, followed
by an assortment of additional details regarding the technique, and an overview of
the equations and calibration process required for quantitative compositional analy-
sis. A introduction to pulsed laser deposition is provided, relevant to the fabricated
samples investigated.
Next, a synopsis of the all the PLD and calibration samples is given. The specific
instrumental setup is described, along with the basics of operation. Sample mounting,
polychromator calibration, and acquisition settings are mentioned. The specifics of
calibration curve formation in software are mentioned. Sections follow concerning
stylus profilometery and 3D optical profilometry, two complementary technique which
can be used to inform the GDOES parameters.
The results chapter first presents a method to predict and avoid atmospheric
nitrogen contamination in GDOES measurements. All calibration measurements are
presented (both GDOES profiles and crater profiles). An idea related to reducing
sputtering rates in calibration samples is considered. The calibration measurements
are used to develop calibration curves, with corrections applied to some.
Quantitative results are presented for some preliminary PLD films and then for
the PLD CCS films. Finally, the calibration curves are applied to the PLD CCS
films for quantitative analysis. The chapter finishes with various recommendations
for future work.
A conclusion reiterates the work and findings, and numerous suggestions for fur-
ther work are suggested.
==PAGE:17==
Chapter2
Theory
The following chapter includes sections adapted from the author’s previous special-
ization project [1]
This Theory chapter begins with a description of the intermediate band concept
for solar cells. This is included to provide context for the project work; the informa-
tion is not directly required to understand the report.
Next, the glow discharge optical emission spectroscopy technique is explained.
The basic theory is divided into three main stages: sputtering, optical emission, and
spectroscopic detection. This foundation is followed by some details related to crater
shape and its impact on depth resolution, as well as warnings about a number of
interference effects important for interpreting the results.
The qualitative processes of GDOES are then developed into a quantitative method
- composition depth profiling. The section covers considerations in the selection of
calibration samples, conditions for valid calibration curves, required methods to de-
termine sputtering rate, measurement uncertainty, and finally curve-fitting by regres-
sion.
The chapter concludes with an overview of pulsed laser deposition, including
details relevant to the fabricated samples analyzed in this work.
2.1
Intermediate band solar cells
Solar cell materials are classified as semiconductors, which means that their electron
energy band structure features a gap, below which the bands are filled with electrons
and above which the bands are filled with holes (or absent of electrons). The size
of this bandgap Eg determines the photon energy threshold required in order to
excite an electron from the lower valence band (VB) to the upper conduction band
(CB). A smaller bandgap (less than 1 eV, for example) allows the material to absorb
lower energy light from the solar spectrum, such as infrared, in addition to visible and
5
==PAGE:18==
6
CHAPTER 2. THEORY
ultraviolet. More photo-absorption equates to a larger photo-current. However, when
power is extracted from the PV device, the voltage is determined by the potential
difference between charges in the CB and VB, that is, the size of the bandgap. Clearly
a trade-off exists between current and voltage, both of which depend on the bandgap,
and the product of which determines the power output. The optimization calculation
was first reported in 1961 by Shockley and Queisser, concluding that the maximum
theoretical efficiency for a solar cell is around 30%, achieved at a bandgap of 1.1 eV,
which conveniently matches silicon [15]. This precise value has since been updated
(33.16% for Eg = 1.34 eV) [17], but the fact remains that the best-performing silicon
cells are already approaching this limit, with a record power conversion efficiency
(PCE) of 26.7% [12].
One of the assumptions inherent in the Shockley-Queisser limit is a single bandgap.
Stacking multiple bandgaps could allow more efficient photo-absorption over the solar
spectrum while maintaining a larger device voltage. This gives rise to the concepts
of multi-junction solar cells and intermediate band solar cells (IBSCs). In the case
of IBSCs, the most common arrangement seeks to produce an intermediate band
(IB) within a large bandgap, effectively splitting the gap into two, and offering three
pathways for the optical excitation of charges: from VB to IB, from IB to CB, and
from VB to CB. These routes are illustrated in Figure 2.1, where transitions be-
tween band combinations can be either generation (G) or recombination (R). Such a
material would be sandwiched between the n-type and p-type semiconductors which
typically comprise a solar cell. In this configuration, the intermediate band material
acts as a more efficient absorbing layer, and the n- and p-type layers allow excited
charge carriers to be extracted for electrical power.
Figure 2.1: A band diagram schematic of a semiconductor with an intermediate
band (IB) located within the bandgap. Various electronic transitions (generation
(G), recombination (R)) are possible between the VB, IB, and CB. The IB splits the
total Eg into two smaller gaps. Also shown are the quasi-Fermi energy levels for each
band. Adapted from [18].
==PAGE:19==
CHAPTER 2. THEORY
7
With the same Shockley-Queisser trade-offs in mind, the total bandgap Eg and the
placement of the intermediate band are important for maximizing potential efficiency.
A large Eg is suited to absorption of shorter wavelengths. The subgap sizes EV I and
EIC should allow absorption of longer wavelength photons, but it is also important
to match the current into and out of the IB, which depends on the solar spectrum
(assuming AM1.5, for instance). One paper reports a theoretical max PCE of 46.8%
for Eg ≈2.4 eV and EIC ≈0.9 eV [18], approximately 1.5x larger than the Shockley-
Queisser case for a single bandgap.
The IBSC concept clearly has advantages, but implementation still remains a
challenge. In particular, finding appropriate materials and methods to form the IB
remain a topic of investigation. Proposed approaches include using quantum dots
and highly mismatched alloys [18, 19]. Another suggestion is uncompensated n-p
co-doping of wide-bandgap oxide semiconductors. In this regard, titanium dioxide
(TiO2) is a possible choice of host material. TiO2 is already an attractive material
for photo-energy applications thanks to its low cost, chemically inertness, photo-
stability, and good charge transport properties [20, 21]. However, its bandgap of >3
eV puts its absorption edge in the UV range, whereas the visible range would often
be preferable.
Experiments and simulations have tested doping to decrease the bandgap, and
n-p co-doping has emerged as a promising tactic, since it improves the solubility of
dopants at substitutional sites. Further, non-compensated doping, where n-type and
p-type dopant charges don’t completely cancel each other, prompts the formation
of an intermediate band, enabling absorption over a wider range of photon energies.
DFT calculations, and subsequent experiments, have suggested chromium and nitro-
gen as a possible n-p co-dopant pair in anatase TiO2 [20, 22]. Figure 2.2 presents
DFT results of the density of states around the bandgap of TiO2 when co-doped with
Cr and N.
The dotted line marks the density of states for undoped TiO2, where the VB
maximum lies at 0 eV and states at the CB minimum don’t appear until 3.2 eV. In
the doped case, the VB maximum increases slightly, and, notably, some states are
introduced within the bandgap.
Normally, when doping is discussed in the context of solar materials, it might be on
the scale of parts-per-million (ppm), such as a concentration of 1018 cm-3 phosphorous
atoms in the case of n-doped silicon (where the intrinsic density is around 5x1022
cm-3). However, the doping levels proposed in (Cr+N) co-doping would be at the
percentage level [22]. This shifts the detection regime required for quantification,
motivating an investigation into the suitability of glow discharge optical emission
spectroscopy for this task.
The (Cr+N) co-doped TiO2 is the approach currently being explored by Professor
Reenaas’ group in the Physics department at NTNU, with thin film samples being
==PAGE:20==
8
CHAPTER 2. THEORY
Figure 2.2: Density of states (DOS) for anatase TiO2 co-doped with Cr and N
(uncompensated such that net doping is n-type) according to DFT calculations. The
dotted line shows the DOS for undoped TiO2, where the VB maximum ends at 0 eV
and the CB minimum doesn’t appear until 3.2 eV. The solid line shows a decreased
bandgap in the doped case. Adapted from [22].
fabricated by pulsed laser deposition (PLD). The optimal Cr and N doping concen-
tration is not known, so combinatorial PLD is used to fabricate TiO2-based films
with a gradient in composition across a 2” silicon wafer substrate, allowing a com-
parative study of material properties at different doping levels. This PLD process
will be elaborated in Section 2.4.
==PAGE:21==
CHAPTER 2. THEORY
9
2.2
Glow discharge optical emission spectroscopy
One of the most fundamental properties to determine after deposition of a sample
or discovery of a material is its elemental composition. This information might be
somewhat known beforehand or may be completely unknown. The desired output
could be a breakdown of bulk composition by atomic mass, or a spatial map of
elemental distribution, or the concentration of some dopant or trace material. Some
common tools for this purpose include energy-dispersive spectroscopy (EDS), X-
ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS), or secondary-ion mass spectrometry (SIMS).
Another, more recently developed, technique is called glow discharge optical emission
spectroscopy (GDOES).
GDOES is a relatively quick method for elemental depth profiling of a sample;
the technique is especially well-developed for the analysis of bulk metals, but is
continually expanding to the application of diverse thin films as well. The instrument
combines plasma sputtering with a spectrometer to identify elemental signals based
on characteristic optical emissions from the sputtered sample atoms. The following
overview of the technique is largely based on the practical textbook by Nelis and
Payling [23] as well as the user manual for HORIBA’s GD Profiler 2 [24].
The
instrument is pictured in Figure 2.3.
Figure 2.3: A photograph of the GD Profiler 2 by HORIBA Scientific. It is an
RF-GDOES instrument, shown here with the sample compartment cover open [24].
The diagram in Figure 2.4 sketches out the major components of the sample
compartment and plasma system. The sample to be analyzed, which must have a
solid, flat surface, is placed up against the chamber wall.
A simple vacuum and
O-ring seal the surface, and an electrode/cooling block is held in place against the
backside of the sample. With the ambient atmosphere evacuated, the chamber is
then filled with argon gas (typically to a pressure between 500-900 Pa). The glow
discharge is formed by biasing the anode (a copper tube which extends nearly to
==PAGE:22==
10
CHAPTER 2. THEORY
the sample surface) and the sample (which becomes the cathode via its contact with
the rear electrode). The rear electrode block also contains a water cooling circuit to
prevent the sample from heating too much during exposure to the plasma [25].
Figure 2.4: A schematic (top-down) view of the sample compartment and compo-
nents of the plasma system (not typically accessible to the user). Adapted from [23].
2.2.1
Sputtering
The diameter of the anode determines the size of the area on the sample surface to be
analyzed. 4 mm is common, so the technique is not well-suited for profiling precise
points on the sample. Most instruments now employ radio frequency (RF) biasing (at
13.56 MHz), as this allows non-conductive samples to be analyzed while avoiding any
issues of charge build-up. With a sufficient voltage (>150 V), the argon gas ionizes
into Ar+ and e−, and these particles are alternately accelerated toward and away
from the sample. In an effort to control experimental variables, the plasma is usually
held at a constant pressure and supplied with a constant power (P = IV ). In this
mode, the product of voltage and current is fixed, but the ratio between them can
change. This value (representing an impedance, Z = V
I ) is automatically adjusted
to facilitate impedance matching with the plasma, as this minimizes power reflected
back to the source [24].
The argon ions bombard the sample surface with an energy of around 50 eV,
sufficient to break chemical bonds at the surface and sputter off material [26]. The
process is fast, with erosion rates up to 100 nm/s [25]. This makes GDOES attractive
for thicker layers on the order of µm [27]. Ideally, the surface sputtering will be
uniform across the area and erode a flat-bottomed crater with time (as illustrated
==PAGE:23==
CHAPTER 2. THEORY
11
in Figure 2.5). The actual sputtering rate varies with the elemental composition
(according to sputtering yield and preferential sputtering), crystallinity, and surface
morphology like roughness [24].
Obviously, this is a destructive process, which limits some applications, or requires
that this be the final stage in the case of multiple characterization methods.
Figure 2.5: From top to bottom: Progressing stages of crater formation with longer
sputtering times. Adapted from [23].
Compared to the density of argon atoms in the plasma, the sputtered atoms are
very sparse, so it is mostly assumed that the plasma conditions are not significantly
altered by the introduction of sputtered material. Further, the chamber experiences
a constant combination of vacuum pumping and argon flow to maintain the set pres-
sure. This continually flushes out sputtered material, minimizing potential residual
signal from layers previously sputtered. With that said, however, some amount of
sample material does re-deposit around the edge of the crater, and on the inner
walls of the anode, as illustrated in Figure 2.6 [23]. This contamination can alter
measurement of subsequent samples. Thus, a cleaning step is performed in between
measurements, as will be described in the next chapter.
Figure 2.6:
Various pathways of sputtered sample atoms during the sputtering
process. Most exit into the argon plasma, where they contribute to the total optical
signal. Some, however, re-deposit around the edge of the crater, at the sample-anode
gap, or along the inner walls of the anode [23].
==PAGE:24==
12
CHAPTER 2. THEORY
2.2.2
Optical emission
Once the sputtered sample atoms eject into the plasma, they are subject to energizing
collisions with the free electrons and argon ions forming the plasma. These sample
atoms’ electrons are excited to available shells at a higher-energy. They then de-excite
(electrons drop back down to fill the vacancy in the lower shell) by radiative emission
[23]. Due to the the conservation of energy and the quantized nature of electronic
energy levels, the photons produced are limited to a set of particular wavelengths
according to the electronic transition which created them. This process is illustrated
in Figure 2.7.
Figure 2.7: A plasma chamber schematic with Ar+ ions (light blue), attracted to the
biased sample, knocking off atoms from the sample surface (dark blue). These sput-
tered atoms enter the plasma, are excited (red) by collisions with electrons (black),
and de-excite by emitting photons of characteristic wavelengths [24].
Each element has a unique set of transition energies between its electronic shells,
meaning that every element has a characteristic spectrum of emission lines, some of
which fall in the visible range (along with some in UV and IR). The precise photon
wavelength produced for a given de-excitation can be calculated from the following
equation, where h is Planck’s constant, c is the speed of light, and ∆E is the difference
between the higher E2 and lower E1 energy electron shells [24]:
λphoton = hc
∆E =
hc
E2 −E1
(2.1)
These characteristic transitions and resulting spectrum are illustrated in Figure
2.8 for the case of a hydrogen atom. As an example, the electronic transition from
==PAGE:25==
CHAPTER 2. THEORY
13
the n = 2 state at −3.4 eV to the ground state (n = 1) at −13.6 eV corresponds to
an emitted photon with an energy of 10.2 eV and a wavelength of 121 nm.
Figure 2.8: Diagram of possible electronic de-excitation transitions for a hydrogen
atom [28].
Not all of the sputtered atoms will exist as neutral species in the plasma. Some
may have an electron completely stripped away, and these ionized particles will have
a different structure of energy levels, producing a different spectrum. In practice,
emission from ions ionized two or more times rarely appear in the captured spectrum.
Spectral line names have a ‘I’ appended after the elemental symbol for the case of
a neutral atom, and a ‘II’ appended for a singly-ionized atom [24]. Elements will
also vary in intensity amongst their spectral lines depending on how likely different
electronic transitions are. A key point is that the intensity (the number of photons)
at a given wavelength is proportional to the concentration of a given element in the
plasma, which is proportional to the concentration of that element in the sample.
This is the link that makes compositional quantification possible in GDOES.
Capturing a full emission spectrum can provide a fingerprint to identify the atom
that produced it. Often, it can be sufficient to record the signal at one particular
wavelength to determine the presence of an element, especially if no other elements
emit strongly near that line.
Both the sputtering process and the optical emission depend on plasma param-
eters such as pressure and power. The plasma in the chamber is not uniform, and
although models exist, it is complex and the various interactions are not all well
understood [23, 16]. Nevertheless, plasma-based techniques remain a powerful tool
for materials science and characterization.
==PAGE:26==
14
CHAPTER 2. THEORY
2.2.3
Spectroscopy
A common polychromator spectrometer arrangement, the Paschen-Runge configu-
ration, is depicted in Figure 2.9. The optical emissions from all the species in the
plasma pass through a window at the end of the chamber (a), then through an en-
trance slit (b) into the spectrometer. The light from the glow discharge chamber
is diffracted from a concave grating (c), which splits the light into its component
wavelengths. The curvature of the grating defines a Rowland circle, with the focal
point of each diffracted wavelength tracing out the circumference of this circle.
Figure 2.9: A Paschen-Runge spectrometer setup with a Rowland circle geometry.
Light from the plasma chamber passes through a window and entrance slit and is
incident on a curved diffraction grating. This splits different wavelengths to different
angles, where an optical mask allows selected signals to pass to PMT detectors. Only
the 1st-order diffraction range is shown here. Adapted from [29].
The grating is usually designed to disperse light in the UV-Vis range. The grating
actually diffracts to multiple orders, so a 1st-order spectrum is created over a range of
angles, along with a 2nd-order spectrum which partially overlaps the 1st-order (with
higher orders possible as well). An optical mask (d) lies around the edge of the cir-
cle, with slits positioned to accept wavelengths of interest. The slit positions (i.e.
the wavelengths available for analysis) are chosen by the instrument manufacturer.
Behind each slit is a photomultiplier tube (PMT) (e) to record the intensity of light
at the given wavelength. Where multiple diffraction orders are concurrent on a de-
tector, it must be designed to accept one wavelength and filter out the others. These
PMTs must perform over a wide range of signal intensities, as relevant compositions
may vary from ppm doping levels up to percentage levels for alloys. Additionally,
==PAGE:27==
CHAPTER 2. THEORY
15
consecutive sample layers might feature an elemental signal which alternates between
these extremes. Due to the rapid sputtering rate of GDOES, the response from the
data acquisition system must be appropriately fast and stable [24].
The raw data collected by instrument allows plotting of intensity (in volts) for
selected wavelengths vs. sputtering time (in seconds). Using a one-to-one mapping
between a wavelength and an element, software can show (qualitatively), which ele-
ments are present, along with trends in their composition, as a function of time.
2.2.4
Further considerations
The preceding discussion has presented the basics of glow discharge optical emission
spectroscopy. In practice, there are some other details to be aware of regarding the
processes of sputtering, emission, detection, and analyzing GDOES results.
Depth resolution and crater optimization
Returning to the sputtering step, the applied plasma power has a roughly linear
effect on sputtering rate and signal intensity. The plasma pressure, on the other
hand, influences the shape of the crater, which in turn limits the possible depth
resolution [27, 30]. As illustrated in Figure 2.10, the formation of a convex crater (a)
indicates that the plasma pressure is too high, whereas a concave crater (c) results
from too low pressure. The flat-bottomed crater (b) is optimal and provides the best
depth resolution. This is not particularly crucial for a bulk sample, but consider a
layered material, such as a film of TiO2 on a silicon substrate. Near the interface,
when the sputtering has nearly eroded the TiO2 layer, a convex crater shape as in
Figure 2.10 (a) would produce a period of time where the silicon substrate signal
is generated from the center of the crater, while the edges are still sputtering in
TiO2. The measurement will show an extended region where TiO2 and Si appear to
overlap, even if this interface is supposed to be sharp in reality. The same issue results
from a concave crater as in Figure 2.10 (c). This can be particularly problematic if
researchers are trying to quantify diffusion across the interface, or use the GDOES
profile as a means of measuring layer thickness.
The plasma parameters which produce a flat crater will depend on the material
being sputtered. If enough sample material is available, an optimization procedure
can be performed, whereby various craters are produced by adjusting the plasma
pressure. These craters can then be profiled with a stylus profilometer or optical pro-
filer to see which has the flattest bottom [30, 32]. Alternatively, the depth resolution
of an interface can be checked in the GDOES profile itself, noting that a steeper slope
at a signal onset indicates better resolution between layers [23]. If multiple layers
exist, each with their own ideal plasma parameters, a compromise is required. Non-
uniformity of crater shape can also be augmented or reduced at interfaces, according
==PAGE:28==
16
CHAPTER 2. THEORY
Figure 2.10: Three GDOES crater profiles, where (a) is convex and indicates too
high plasma pressure, (b) is the desired flat-bottomed crater, and (c) is concave
and indicates too low plasma pressure. Each crater also shows a rim of redeposited
material. Adapted from [31].
to differences in the erosion rate between the two layers. For example, if a convex
crater reaches a substrate with a lower erosion rate, the edges will start to catch up
with the center of the crater.
Shimizu et al. have also reported that depth resolution degrades deeper in the
sample. This is due to an edge effect where the periphery of the crater sputters
slightly faster, even if the rest is uniformly level. This effect builds over time, such
that the best resolutions are achieved at the surface of the sample [27].
Surface (and interface) roughness also influences the achievable depth resolution.
Sputter-induced roughening does not seem to be a major issue [25, 27]. Similarly,
because of the relatively low energy of sputtering particles, their penetration depth
is small (< 1 nm), so sputtering is not expected to cause layer mixing [24, 33, 27].
Optical interference effects
Shifting now to details in the emission and detection processes, the detected intensity
can be influenced by the reflectivity of the sample. Assuming isotropic emission from
atoms in the plasma, only some fraction of photons pass through the window to
the spectrometer. A reflective sample surface, however, can potentially double the
intensity of recorded light [25, 34]. According to the dielectric function of the sample,
the extent of reflection may vary for different spectral lines.
This effect can lead to a more interesting phenomenon when a thin film is de-
posited on top of a reflective substrate. If the film is optically transparent in some
range of wavelengths, it is possible to observe phase-based optical interference caused
by reflection at both the film surface and at the substrate interface. This process is
illustrated in Figure 2.11. The signal intensity received at the detector will be the
summation of both components, where constructive or destructive interference will
modify the amplitude according to the film thickness (hlayer) and index of refraction
n(λ) at the particular wavelength of interest.
Since the sample is continually being sputtered in GDOES, the layer thickness
is changing with time, changing the phase shift in a sinusoidal manner and result-
ing in alternating constructive and destructive interference. The detector records
==PAGE:29==
CHAPTER 2. THEORY
17
Figure 2.11: The interference effect of optical signals caused by double reflection -
at the surface of a transparent layer, and at the interface with a reflective substrate.
Light from the plasma incident on the sample surface (Ips) is split into two compo-
nents which experience different path lengths before reaching the detector (Isd). The
corresponding phase difference ∆ϕ enables either constructive or destructive inter-
ference.
this as oscillations in the emission intensity. This effect ceases, of course, when the
transparent layer is completely sputtered through to the substrate [34, 35].
This effect will be relevant for the PLD samples studied in this work. They have
been deposited on a substrate of single-side polished silicon, which is quite reflective.
And the deposited film, TiO2, is transparent in much of the visible range used for
GDOES signal detection.
Another factor which can alter detected signal intensity is self-absorption. As
emission and absorption are inverse processes, the emission wavelengths of an ele-
ment will match its absorption edges, so it’s possible that particle i1 in the plasma
radiatively emits a photon only to have it be absorbed by another particle i2 before
it reaches the detector. The concentration of sample atoms in the plasma is already
small, so trace elements in the sample will not suffer much from this effect. Elements
which comprise a major part of the sample composition will be more subject to this
signal distortion. Different spectral lines for a given element will also experience self-
absorption to different degrees. The issue is more pronounced in resonant emission
lines, which have their low-energy transition state at or near the ground state. When
possible, it is desirable to use lines with minimal self-absorption to avoid adding
complexity to the calibration process described in the following section [24, 33].
Spectral interference is one more aspect to be aware of in optical-emission-based
==PAGE:30==
18
CHAPTER 2. THEORY
techniques. Each element selected for analysis is associated with a detector checking
at a characteristic wavelength. Interference care arise from overlapping emission lines
from other elements or from changes to the background signal due to scattered light
inside the spectrometer.
Metals, for example, have a rich emission spectrum, of
varying intensity [23]. For example, the a common line used for titanium detection
is Ti 365.355 nm. Niobium happens to have a low-intensity emission line at 365.1
nm [36]. Depending on the spectrometer and experimental setup, the presence of
niobium in a sample could alter the detected titanium intensity, or even suggest the
presence of titanium when in fact there is none. A suspected interference can often
be investigated by checking a different emission line for the given element (using a
monochromator, for instance).
Another common complication regarding emission is the hydrogen effect. Hydro-
gen is frequently present on the sample surface in the form of adsorbed humidity,
and the presence of hydrogen in the plasma can have a strong interfering impact,
strengthening the emission of some lines and weakening others [23, 37]. Addition-
ally, hydrogen can alter sputtering rate and crater shape [38, 39]. The mechanisms
for this are varied, but include increased plasma collisions as a light element and
alterations to the electrical properties of the plasma [40, 41]. This is one reason to
address sample surface contamination before measurement. Attempts to correct the
hydrogen effect can also be implemented in software.
==PAGE:31==
CHAPTER 2. THEORY
19
2.3
Calibration for quantitative GDOES
It is quite clear how to use GDOES to qualitatively detect the presence of different
elements in a sample. Even more powerful, though, the application of the technique
extends to quantitative analysis, called compositional depth profiling (CDP).
In it’s simplest form, the recorded GDOES signal intensity Ii for a given emission
line from element i is given by:
Ii = ki ci qM
(2.2)
where ki is an emission yield term, ci is the elemental concentration (typically in
mass percent), and qM is the sputtering rate (in mass per area per time) of the
material. The product of ci and qM gives the concentration of the element in the
plasma, and the emission yield relates the number of atoms in the plasma to the
number of photons which reach the detector.
Since quantitative GDOES seeks to determine elemental concentration, Equation
2.2 is inverted to make ciqM the subject of the equation. In reality, some other terms
are also included. There is an instrument detection efficiency, typically assumed to be
constant. A background term bi is also added to account for the PMT dark current,
instrument noise, scattered light, argon emission, and interfering signals from nearby
emission lines.
The more complete equation is
ci qM = IiKi Ri Si + bi
(2.3)
The emission yield ki has been inverted and split into a few components: Ki for
the constant part of the emission yield (based on the instrument and measurement
conditions), Ri for the variable part of the emission yield (subject to change for
different samples), and Si is a correction term for self-absorption [42].
This relation exists for each element i in the sample. For a given element, if Ki,
Ri, Si, and bi are constant (or nearly constant at the operating point), then ciqM
forms a linear dependence on Ii.
Knowing that the sum of all elemental concentrations must equal 1,
X
i
ci = 1
(2.4)
a set of equations arises which can relate intensity to concentration and sputtering
rate.
==PAGE:32==
20
CHAPTER 2. THEORY
2.3.1
Calibration curves
Developing a usable Ii vs. ciqM relation relies on determining the slope of Equa-
tion 2.3, comprised from Ki, Ri, and Si. GDOES is a comparative technique, so as
opposed to using theoretical or empirical models to compute these terms, they are
derived through a calibration procedure. This is typically done with certified refer-
ence materials (CRMs) of a known composition. For each element of interest in the
sample, a calibration curve must be developed by plotting intensity Ii vs. elemental
concentration ciqM. Thus, several CRMs will be required for each element present,
with a concentration range near the expected sample concentration, as well as above
and below. After following a consistent experimental method, the measured values
of Ii will ideally form a linear trend with ciqM.
An example iron calibration curve is shown in Figure 2.12. Each data point is a
measurement on different aluminum-based CRMs with a small, known concentration
of iron. The samples are all of the same aluminum matrix, so the sputtering rate is
the same and can be omitted from the x-axis. The y-axis is the intensity detected
for the Fe 371.999 nm emission line. The nine points form a clear linear trend. In
GDOES measurements of unknown samples, now, the calibration curve can be used
to determine iron concentration based on the measured iron emission intensities.
Some horizontal error bars are also visible in the plot. This will be explained later
in the section.
Figure 2.12: An example calibration curve for low concentrations of iron in alu-
minum samples.
Each labeled data point is a GDOES measurement on a CRM,
plotting detected signal intensity against known iron concentration CFe.
==PAGE:33==
CHAPTER 2. THEORY
21
The more reference samples available, the greater the quality and reliability of the
analysis. A greater number of samples are especially required if the calibration curve
appears non-linear. As more elements are introduced in the sample, more references
are needed (although one reference might be usable in calibration curves for multiple
elements if its composition is similar to the sample of interest). As is apparent from
Equation 2.4, calibration is required for all the major elements of a sample in order
to achieve accurate results. Omitting calibration for a major element will skew all
the remaining concentration calculations. This process can be expensive and time-
consuming, depending on the complexity of the sample and the accuracy required
[23].
Bulk materials represent the simplest case for the application of the calibration
procedure.
Besides some deviation at the surface, it is assumed that the sample
is more-or-less homogeneous with depth. Thus the sputtering rate, qM, is constant
throughout analysis, so calibration curves can be a function of the form Ii(ci) (as in
Figure 2.12).
The situation is more complex with surface analysis, thin films, and layered ma-
terials. Here, the sputtering rate is subject to vary between different layers. To take
this into account, intensity is taken as a function of concentration multiplied with
sputtering rate. This raises another point about the selection of reference materials
- not only should ci cover an appropriate range, but the sputtering rate qM should
also be reasonably similar.
For example, consider a sample of bulk Zn with around 10% Ni. It would not
necessarily be appropriate to form a Ni calibration curve using a reference sample of
stainless steel with 10% Ni, because the overall sputtering rate in steel is much lower
than in Zn. Put another way, the intensity of reference sample signals should also be
matched appropriately to that of the sample of interest [24].
The sputtering rate is the same for all elements in a given sample. Although
preferential sputtering is a factor in the topmost layers of a sample, the composition
in the GDOES crater quickly (within milliseconds) reaches an equilibrium such that
the sample material sputtered into the plasma is representative of the composition
of the sample bulk [33, 42].
The sputtering rate must be disentangled from the elemental concentration at
the end of the process.
As an extension of Equation 2.4, and an approximated
combination with Equation 2.3
X
i
ciqM = qM =
X
i
Ii ∗constants
(2.5)
Thus, summing all the elemental intensities gives the sputtering rate (which may
vary in different material layers), allowing concentrations to be isolated at any given
measurement timestep.
==PAGE:34==
22
CHAPTER 2. THEORY
2.3.2
Emission yield
One of the key assumptions in forming a calibration curve is that the various samples
are being measured with comparable experimental conditions. This is to fulfill the
requirement that the emission yield terms Ki and Ri are constant. The likelihood
of optical emission (at a given wavelength) by an atom (of a given element) in the
plasma depends on the concentration of ions and electrons in the plasma as well as
the collision energy of these particles. A change to the argon pressure influences
the shape and distribution of regions in the plasma, and also induces a change in
electrical parameters [33]. The emission yield is expected to increase with increasing
excitation current, as this creates more electrons for collision in the plasma and
generates more metastable argon atoms. The emission yield is expected to decrease
with increasing voltage, since the electron collision cross-section decreases at higher
energies [23]. The user-set plasma parameters (pressure and power) should be the
same for all measurements: on calibration samples and on the analyte samples of
interest for quantification.
Even when plasma power is held constant, however, the plasma impedance (the
ratio of voltage and current) is subject to change. This can vary according to the
secondary electron yield of atoms at the sample surface, meaning that sputtering
through layers of different sample material can potentially alter emission yields [23].
Or, the emission yield for a given element may be different in calibration samples
of different matrices. This variation can be monitored to a degree by tracking the
excitation voltage which the matching box converges to. Subsequent corrections in
software are available based on this parameter. This tactic is more difficult to apply
for non-conductive samples and RF biasing [43, 42].
As mentioned previously, the presence of hydrogen can also serve to modify emis-
sion yields in an inconsistent way for different emission lines. When self-absorption
is present, the Si term must be accounted for. This can be accomplished by using a
2nd-order curve to fit the calibration points.
2.3.3
Sputtering rate
Besides converting signal intensity to elemental concentration on the y-axis, the cal-
ibration procedure also enables conversion between sputtering time and depth on
the x-axis. Equation 2.5 showed how to calculate the sputtering rate qM for a sam-
ple based on all elemental signal intensities. Integrating qM over the measurement
time results in the total sputtered mass per anode area. Dividing by density allows
conversion to depth [24].
The density for a material being characterized by GDOES is likely not known
beforehand. It can be determined by measurements of mass and volume (using, for
instance, a balance and the Archimedes method) [23]. It is also possible, and typically
==PAGE:35==
CHAPTER 2. THEORY
23
easier, to estimate the density according to the elemental concentrations calculated
in the calibration process.
For the calibration samples, the sputtering rate should be input along with ele-
mental concentrations as a known quantity. A few methods exist to experimentally
determine sputtering rate. A very sensitive balance can be used to measure the sam-
ple mass difference before and after sputtering. This is difficult in practice due to
the extremely small amount of material sputtered. Assuming a cylindrical crater
geometry with a known anode diameter, the change in mass can be converted to
sputtering rate. Another method, likely the most common, directly measures the
crater depth h by stylus or optical profilometry, and then computes erosion rate (di-
viding depth by measurement time t) and sputtering rate using the material density
(ρM, either measured or estimated), as in Equation 2.6 below with any necessary
unit conversions.
qM = ρM ∗h/t
(2.6)
A recent innovation by HORIBA is their “differential interferometry profiler” (DiP),
a laser built into the GDOES instrument which allows in-situ depth measurement.
The beam is split and directed to spots inside and outside the crater. As the crater
deepens, the phase difference between the two beams changes, and this can be con-
verted to crater depth for use in Equation 2.6 [24].
As a way to minimize sensitivity to plasma and instrument parameters, relative
sputtering rates (RSR) are often employed instead of absolute sputtering rates. This
modifies ciqM to become ciqM/qRef or ciqRSR, where qM is the sputtering rate of the
sample matrix compared to qRef, the sputtering rate of a reference such as pure iron.
This is potentially useful during calibration, as it allows reference samples sputtered
under different conditions to be incorporated into a single calibration curve [44, 34].
2.3.4
Errors and uncertainty
The accuracy of a quantified GDOES analysis is dependent on a number of factors.
When forming the calibration curves, there are three primary sources of uncertainty
associated with each data point: uncertainty in the CRM composition and sputtering
rate, uncertainty in the measured intensity value, and uncertainty related to the
detection limit for the particular emission line being used [23].
The first uncertainty pertains to the placement of the data point on the x-axis,
ciqM. The CRMs may come with a manufacturer certificate specifying an uncertainty
range in the composition. If this is not provided, the uncertainty for each element
in a sample is simply estimated based on the concentration of that element (i.e. a
major element will have a larger absolute uncertainty than a trace element). The
uncertainty in sputtering rate is also factored here. This is typically estimated from
==PAGE:36==
24
CHAPTER 2. THEORY
the standard deviation in crater depth calculated from multiple different profilometer
line scans. Any uncertainty in density would be included here as well.
The second uncertainty relates to fluctuation in the measured intensity, Ii, on
the y-axis. To determine the intensity of a particular elemental signal, the GDOES
profile is typically averaged over a time range where the measurement appears stable.
In addition to obtaining this average value of the signal, one can also compute the
standard deviation of the signal intensity. This uncertainty is mapped onto the x-axis
to easily aggregate with the other uncertainty sources.
The third uncertainty is not linked to the particular CRM or measurement, but
rather acknowledges that very weak signals may become indistinguishable from back-
ground noise, depending on the detector response.
These uncertainty sources are independent, so the total standard deviation for a
calibration data point is taken as the square-root of the sum of each term squared.
The largest single source of uncertainty will dominate the total term. It is reported
that the sputtering rate calculation by crater depth measurement is often the primary
source of error, with a typical relative standard deviation (RSD) in the range 5-10%
[34].
2.3.5
Curve fitting and application
When all calibration samples have been measured and their composition and sputter-
ing rates have been documented, the final step is to fit a function to the data. Most
commonly, this means performing a method-of-least-squares regression to achieve a
linear fit. With an uncertainty estimate for each calibration data point, a weighted
regression is possible. The smaller absolute uncertainty associated with lower concen-
tration, lower intensity data points often results in a curve that appears to favor this
lower range, possibly at the expense of missing higher concentration points. Depend-
ing on the anticipated analyte sample concentration, a weighted regression can be
chosen to emphasize lower concentrations or an unweighted regression can be chosen
to emphasize higher concentrations [45].
Additional fitting parameters can be included, intended to correct various inter-
ferences or differences in measurement conditions. Higher order curves can also be
used to fit non-linear data. Care must be taken when deciding to apply these curve
alterations; they can often improve the data fit, but there should be a specific reason
to justify their use [33, 24]. Ideally, the set of calibration curves will be validated
against additional CRMs which were not used in the calibration. This provides an
opportunity to evaluate the accuracy of the calibration and tune it for improvement.
==PAGE:37==
CHAPTER 2. THEORY
25
To summarize the process of compositional depth profiling:
• Select and acquire reference materials appropriate to the elements and concen-
trations in the analyte sample(s) of interest
• With known elemental concentrations and (relative) sputtering rates, record
GDOES measurements (using the same experimental conditions) on each cali-
bration sample to generate data points Ii vs. ciqRSR
• Develop a calibration curve for all relevant elements by regression
• Record a GDOES measurement on the sample of interest, using the same ex-
perimental conditions as the calibration measurements
• Convert measured intensities Ii into ciqRSR according to the calibration curves
• Sum ciqRSR for all i to get overall relative sputtering rate qRSR
• For each element i, divide ciqRSR by qRSR to acquire elemental composition ci
• Multiply by the absolute reference sputtering rate qRef to get absolute sputtered
rate qM
• Integrate qM over time to get sputtered mass
• Divide by density and anode area to convert to depth
• Result: profile of elemental concentrations (at% or wt%) vs. depth
==PAGE:38==
26
CHAPTER 2. THEORY
2.4
Pulsed laser deposition
Before moving on to the Methods and a description of various fabricated samples, it
will be useful to take a brief look at the pulsed laser deposition (PLD) process. PLD
is a thin film deposition technique in which short, energetic laser pulses are fired at
a material, called a target. Material from the target surface is ablated and ejected in
a highly-directional plasma plume. A substrate is mounted opposite the target such
that the plume material will be incident and deposit in a thin layer on the surface.
Consecutive pulses of the target builds up the cumulative deposited layer thickness
on the substrate [46]. This simplified description is illustrated in Figure 2.13.
Figure 2.13: Diagram of PLD process. A bulk target (of material XZ2) is ablated
by a pulsed laser beam.
A plasma plume results, ejecting a variety of energetic
species. The vacuum chamber may have some background gas pressure influencing
the plume spread and reactions (here Z2). Some particles of the plume reach the
substrate and adsorb on its surface. These steps are repeated to create a thin film of
desired thickness. Figure taken from [47].
Of course, a variety of factors influence this process. The shape and spread of
plume material reaching the substrate surface area is not completely uniform; the
highest-energy particles are found at the plume center, and this region will also be
thickest in the layer transferred to the substrate. If a flat film of homogenous thick-
ness is desired, the substrate can be shifted to some optimal position relative to the
plume and rotated during deposition. The entire process takes place in a vacuum
chamber in order to minimize external contamination and facilitate transfer of mate-
rial from the target to the substrate. Some controlled flow of background gas (either
inert or reactive) is also a possibility, though, which can affect the film growth process
and resulting structure and composition. Additional parameters to tune the deposi-
tion include substrate temperature, laser fluence and frequency, and target-substrate
distance. The benefits of this technique include the ability for stoichiometric transfer
of material from target to substrate, and precise growth control [47, 48].
==PAGE:39==
CHAPTER 2. THEORY
27
An extension of PLD is the use of multiple targets during deposition, termed
combinatorial PLD. Besides allowing for new material combinations, one version
called natural spread combinatorial PLD (nc-PLD) also takes advantage of the non-
uniform plume shapes to deposit a film with a spatial gradient in composition. This
process is depicted in Figure 2.14: A target (of material α) is positioned toward
the left side of the substrate. After laser excitation, the resulting plume ablation is
skewed toward the left side of the substrate, depositing more material in a distribution
around the plume center (marked ×1). A second target (of material β) is positioned
at the right side of the substrate, with its material deposition distribution similarly
shifted (around plume center ×2). A layer formed by pulsing both targets at their
respective locations will have a concentration gradient from majority α near ×1, to
majority β near ×2, with some ratio of αaβb in between. Many cycles of this process
creates a thin film, layer by layer, with an equivalent gradient. Various parameters
can be adjusted to control the final film composition and thickness profile. Regarding
the investigation of (Cr+N) co-doped TiO2, the main benefit of using nc-PLD is the
ability to fabricate samples with a continuous compositional spread (CCS). A single
CCS sample allows study of the effects of a range of doping concentration on the
film’s optical and crystallographic properties [48].
Figure 2.14: Schematic of natural spread combinatorial PLD. Materials from mul-
tiple different targets are deposited at different locations on the substrate. ×1 and ×2
mark the plume center positions of two different targets. The distribution of material
from each plume results in a continuous compositional spread between the locations
of the two plumes. This overall gradient is preserved as new layers are deposited with
each successive cycle to build up to the desired film thickness (as in the side-view
shown bottom-center) [48]. Figure adapted from [47].
==PAGE:40==
28
CHAPTER 2. THEORY
==PAGE:41==
Chapter3
Methods and Experimental Details
The following chapter includes sections adapted from the author’s previous special-
ization project [1]
This chapter begins with information about the fabricated PLD samples which
are the materials of interest for GDOES analysis. In order to perform the calibration
procedure for quantitative results, samples of known composition are required. The
reference samples used in this work are described and key elemental concentrations
are provided. Next, the project-specific context of the GDOES instrument and mea-
surement procedures are provided. Besides outlining the process for a typical GDOES
measurement, some additional details are given regarding a useful pre-measurement
surface cleaning function. The important process of developing calibration curves
in the Quantum GDOES software is elaborated. Finally, two sections discuss the
method of GDOES crater profiling by means of stylus profilometer and 3D optical
profiler. Associated data processing steps are also described.
3.1
Samples
3.1.1
Fabricated samples
The PLD samples described in this section were synthesized by Hogne Lysne and
Thomas Brakstad as part of their PhD work.
A complete description of the PLD method will not be given here, but an overview
of the deposition parameters for each film may be useful. More details can be found,
for example, in the 2022 publication by Lysne and Brakstad et al. [48].
As mentioned in Section 2.1, the group seeks to realize an IB material by co-
doping TiO2 with Cr and N. As a recap of Section 2.4, PLD is an accessible method
for material prototyping, and a doping effect can be achieved by using multiple
targets for a deposition (combinatorial PLD). Natural spread combinatorial PLD
(nc-PLD) involves sequentially ablating two target materials, depositing different
material distributions centered at two different locations on the wafer. The fabricated
film features a continuous compositional spread (CCS), with a greater concentration
29
==PAGE:42==
30
CHAPTER 3. METHODS AND EXPERIMENTAL DETAILS
of one material at one position, a greater concentration of the second material at
the other position, and a gradient in concentration in between. This is well-suited
to study different doping concentration levels [49]. The two targets in this case are
TiO2 and CrN, ablated separately to control the amount of doping.
For the CCS films, it would be most convenient to deposit in the same chamber
environment for the whole process. However, previous studies by the group (such as
ellipsometry and Raman spectroscopy [49, 50]) found significant formation of CrxOy
phases when ablating CrN in an O2 background gas, with minimal nitrogen transfer
to the film. Deposition purely in N2 was also problematic when ablating from the
TiO2 target, as the film’s crystalline quality degraded and there was evidence of
TiOxNy [47, 51]. An O2 background gas is best suited for TiO2 formation and a N2
background gas is best suited for Cr and N doping. In response, a gas cycling scheme
was developed, adding time and complexity to the deposition method, but intended
to result in more stoichiometric material transfer to the sample and higher-quality
films. All PLD samples in this work were deposited on 2” (50.8 mm) diameter p-type
silicon <001> wafers [52].
3.1.1.1
PLD plume films
One prior achievement of the group was the development of a simulation tool to ac-
curately predict the transfer of target material to the substrate, dependent on various
PLD parameters [48]. This involved several depositions using either a TiO2 or CrN
target onto a non-rotating substrate, followed by mapping the resulting film thickness
by variable angle spectroscopic ellipsometry (VASE, or simply ellipsometry). These
films were also useful to study the influence of deposition parameters such as back-
ground gas (O2 or N2), gas pressure, substrate temperature, and substrate position.
A non-rastering laser system was used, so the plume position relative to the substrate
was fixed throughout deposition.
The samples created in these depositions reflect the non-uniform transfer of ma-
terial from the PLD ablation plume onto the substrate. The deposited film captures
variations in the plume such as material distribution and kinetic energy of adatoms
(both greater at the plume’s center). As such, these samples are termed PLD “plume”
films.
This title distinguishes them from combinatorial PLD films or films made
with substrate rotation, both of which achieve a more uniform thickness across the
wafer. Two PLD plume film examples are pictured in Figure 3.1, with visible GDOES
craters.
Many of these samples had already been characterized in an assortment of other
ways (Raman spectroscopy, X-ray diffraction (XRD), atomic force microscopy, in
addition to ellipsometry) so they were available for GDOES measurement, despite
its inherently destructive outcome. Most of the 2” wafers had been cut into smaller
pieces subject to a size limit for XRD measurements.
==PAGE:43==
CHAPTER 3. METHODS AND EXPERIMENTAL DETAILS
31
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.1:
(a) Sample P-TiO2-O-700, one of several PLD samples created to
study the TiO2 plume distribution.
(b) Sample P-CrN-N-cy-O-700, a CrN-based
plume film. The circular marks are sites where GDOES measurement has sputtered
through to the underlying silicon substrate. The wafers were previously cleaved into
chips small enough for XRD measurement. x- and y-axes are overlaid to show the
coordinate orientation used during deposition.
For the PLD plume films, which utilized only one material target at a time,
gas cycling was still included for some samples, to get a sense of how O2 exposure
might affect the films deposited in N2. The details of the cycling procedure are as
follows: the single target would be ablated by some number of laser pulses in a N2
environment (equating to a few angstoms of film thickness), followed by 20 seconds
of waiting for stabilization. Then, the chamber atmosphere would be flushed out,
and O2 introduced for a period of 30 seconds without any deposition. After flushing
out the O2, N2 would be reintroduced for the next round of pulsed deposition, with
a 20 second waiting time for stabilization. This sequence would then be repeated
for the total number of desired pulses. The substrate temperature was also varied
(either 700°C or 550°C) for different sample depositions, as this can influence the
TiO2 phase and crystalline quality, as well as the incorporation of nitrogen into the
film [49].
A summary of the PLD plume film samples and their deposition parameters
follows in Table 3.1. The naming convention uses: P for plume, TiO2 or CrN to denote
the target material, O or N to denote background gas, N-cy-O to indicate deposition
in N2 followed by a pause in O2, and finally 700 or 550 for the substrate temperature
in °C. No sample rotation took place during deposition, and the substrate shift in each
case was at its default position relative to the target location: x=0.33 cm, y=1.63
cm.
==PAGE:44==
32
CHAPTER 3. METHODS AND EXPERIMENTAL DETAILS
Table 3.1: A summary of the PLD parameters used for deposition of various plume
and flat film samples. T is the substrate temperature. When O2 is indicated, the
gas pressure is 1.3 x 10-2 Torr. When N2 is indicated, the gas pressure is 1.6 x 10-2
Torr. N2 / O2 means that deposition took place in N2, but periodic waiting stages
in O2 also took place. Pulses is the total number of laser pulses on the PLD target,
corresponding to the film thickness.
Sample
T [°C]
Gas
Pulses
P-CrN-O-700
700
O2
40,000
P-CrN-N-cy-O-700
700
N2 / O2
30,800
P-CrN-N-550
550
N2
40,000
P-TiO2-O-700
700
O2
15,000
P-TiO2-O-550
550
O2
5,000
P-TiO2-N-cy-O-700
700
N2 / O2
5,000
P-TiO2-N-cy-O-550
550
N2 / O2
5,000
3.1.1.2
PLD flat films
While the PLD plume samples were fabricated to improve the PLD simulation and
study deposition parameters, future samples would ideally have a flat, uniform film
thickness. This was investigated by rotating the sample during deposition and adjust-
ing the substrate position relative to the deposition plume. Two such films were used
in this GDOES work, one with the substrate at a default position, and another with
an optimized shift. Visual inspection of the thickness fringes in Figure 3.2 already al-
lows a qualitative comparison of film thickness uniformity, and ellipsometry was used
to quantify the results. The rainbow-colored sample in (a) was used in some earlier
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.2: Two samples with a thin film of TiO2 deposited by PLD on a 2” silicon
wafer with sample rotation. The film in (b) has a more uniform thickness thanks
to optimized substrate positioning. It will be discussed again later as a calibration
sample. The (b) wafer was cleaved in half before any measurements.
==PAGE:45==
CHAPTER 3. METHODS AND EXPERIMENTAL DETAILS
33
GDOES experiments and will not feature further in this work. The green sample in
(b) (named F-TiO2-O-700-opt, for optimized flat film) was included as a calibration
sample assuming a nominal stoichiometry of TiO2 and anatase phase. To fabricate
this sample, the substrate was rotated at 29 °/s while pulsing the TiO2 PLD target
36,000 times in an O2 background. The substrate temperature was 700°C, and the
substrate shift was (0.00, 2.80) cm.
3.1.1.3
PLD CCS films
The samples described so far have been fabricated using a single target material.
These final samples employ the CCS approach explained in Section 2.4, with ablation
from both TiO2 and CrN targets, taking place at two positions on the substrate.
Position 1 is used to describe the arrangement where PLD target ablation takes place
with a substrate shift of -1.3 cm (the left side of the wafer). Only TiO2 ablation in
O2 takes place at position 1. The position 1 plume center is denoted ×1. Position
2 refers to ablation with a substrate shift of +1.3 cm (the right side of the wafer).
Various nc-PLD steps take place in this arrangement, such as CrN ablation in N2,
TiO2 ablation in O2, and also TiO2 ablation in N2. The position 2 plume center is
denoted ×2. The positions were chosen according to the simulation results for a level
thickness across the center line. Note that although deposition is centered at ×1 for
position 1, material is deposited across the entire wafer to some degree, consistent
with the distribution observed in the PLD plume films. Likewise for deposition in
position 2.
The desired Cr and N concentrations were only up to 10 at%, so TiO2 ablation
was also required at position 2 in order to deposit sufficient host material and obtain
an even film thickness between ×1 and ×2. This was done by alternately rotating
the substrate at 0°and 180°, allowing ablation from the TiO2 target for the substrate
oriented in both positions 1 and 2.
An example CCS film is pictured below in Figure 3.3 (although this particular sample
did not receive GDOES measurement).
The first of these CCS films was deposited purely in O2. Figure 3.4 displays the
simulated thickness (along a central rectangle of the wafer) resulting from a single
loop of nc-PLD steps. (a) is a top-down color thickness map, with the plume centers
marked (×1 and ×2). The overlaid red contour lines are simulated Cr (or N) doping
levels, at 3, 5, 7 and 9 at% from left to right. (b) is a side-view of how the layer
thickness is built up from different nc-PLD steps at positions 1 and 2. For this CCS
film, 400 loops result in the total pulse numbers listed in Table 3.2.
As mentioned previously, though, CrN ablation in O2 was found to introduce
undesirable CrxOy phases. The gas cycling scheme allows ablation of CrN in a purely
N2 environment. However, it was discovered that the just-deposited layer of Cr and
N was altered merely by exposure to the O2 gas used in the subsequent TiO2 ablation
==PAGE:46==
34
CHAPTER 3. METHODS AND EXPERIMENTAL DETAILS
Figure 3.3:
A PLD sample fabricated with a continuous compositional spread
(CCS). The thickness fringes indicate that the horizontal center line has a mostly
uniform thickness. The vaguely ∞-shaped fringe roughly outlines the positions of
plume centers ×1 on the left and ×2 on the right. The dashed red rectangle marks
the region where PLD simulation was used to optimize film thickness uniformity and
tailor the doping concentration range.
stage. A “capping” step was therefore included to address this, where the TiO2 target
was additionally ablated in N2 at position 2 to protect the underlying layer of Cr
and N with a thin layer of TiOxNy before cycling back to O2 for the majority of the
TiO2 ablation (at both positions 1 and 2).
A reference CCS film was fabricated where the CrN ablation was omitted, allowing
independent study of the effect of the TiO2 capping layer. The design of the nc-
PLD steps is given in Figure 3.5, showing (a) the simulated thickness map and (b)
the sequence of deposition layers within a single loop. No red doping contours are
included, because there is no CrN ablation.
And finally, a CCS film was fabricated including pulses from both the TiO2 and
CrN targets, plus the gas cycling and capping layer. The corresponding simulated
thickness map and constituent nc-PLD steps are presented in Figure 3.6, with the
doping contours included again in (a) for 3, 5, 7 and 9 at% Cr and N levels.
A comparison of these three CCS samples is given in Table 3.2, with the total
number of pulses from each target in each background gas at each position.
The goal of this thesis work is to quantify the Cr and N doping concentrations at
different locations on the CCS films. GDOES quantification requires comparison to
calibration samples, which will be presented in the following section.
==PAGE:47==
CHAPTER 3. METHODS AND EXPERIMENTAL DETAILS
35
Table 3.2: A summary of the PLD parameters used for deposition of various CCS
samples. T is the substrate temperature. Pulses in O2 took place at 1.3 x 10-2 Torr.
Pulses in N2 took place at 1.6 x 10-2 Torr. Pos. 1 denotes a deposition plume centered
at -1.3 cm on the substrate, and Pos. 2 denotes a deposition plume center at +1.3
cm.
Sample
T [°C]
Pulses in O2
Pulses in N2
TiO2
TiO2
CrN
TiO2
CrN
Pos. 1
Pos. 2
Pos. 2
Pos. 2
Pos. 2
CCS-O-700
700
10,400
8,800
18,000
0
0
CCS-Cap-NoCr
550
10,400
4,800
0
4,000
0†
CCS-Cap1
550
10,400
4,800
0
4,000
36,000
† As a placeholder for the CrN ablation step, this sample featured a 9-second wait
in each loop.
Figure 3.4: (a) Simulated thickness map for CCS-O-700, for
1
400 of the pulses listed
in Table 3.2, where ×1 and ×2 indicated the positions of the plume centers at -1.3
cm and +1.3 cm, respectively. The simulated Cr and N concentration is plotted as
red contour lines, that from left-to-right represent 3 (near ×1), 5, 7, and 9 at% (near
×2), respectively. GDOES measurements will take place outside the bounded region
shown here. (b) Simulated (cumulative) material spread along the dashed center line
in a). Material from the TiO2 target in blue, and material from the CrN target in
orange. Figure taken from [49].
==PAGE:48==
36
CHAPTER 3. METHODS AND EXPERIMENTAL DETAILS
Figure 3.5: (a) Simulated thickness map for CCS-Cap-NoCr, for
1
400 of the pulses listed
in Table 3.2, where ×1 and ×2 indicated the position of the plume centers at -1.3 cm and
+1.3 cm, respectively. GDOES measurements will take place outside the bounded region
shown here. (b) Simulated (cumulative) material spread along the dashed center line in a).
Material from the TiO2 target deposited in an O2 atmosphere in blue, and in N2 atmosphere
in green (the capping). Figure taken from [51].
Figure 3.6: (a) Simulated thickness map for CCS-Cap1, for
1
400 of the pulses listed in
Table 3.2, where ×1 and ×2 indicated the position of the plume centers at -1.3 cm and
+1.3 cm, respectively. The simulated Cr and N concentration is plotted as red contour
lines, that from left-to-right represent 3 (near ×1), 5, 7, and 9 at% (near ×2), respectively.
GDOES measurements will take place outside the bounded region shown here. (b) Simulated
(cumulative) material spread along the dashed center line in a). Blue layers: material from
the TiO2 target deposited in an O2 atmosphere. Green layer: material from the TiO2 target
deposited in an N2 atmosphere (capping). Orange: material from the CrN target deposited
in an N2 atmosphere. Figure taken from [51].
==PAGE:49==
CHAPTER 3. METHODS AND EXPERIMENTAL DETAILS
37
3.1.2
Reference samples for calibration
As noted in Section 2.3, any attempt at quantitative GDOES analysis requires com-
parison against samples of known composition (preferably CRMs). Purchasing these
CRMs can become expensive [23], and they are not always available with the de-
sired elemental concentrations, especially for non-metallic materials [53]. A limited
selection of CRMs with relevant elements were already available in the lab. Some
others were borrowed from Horiba’s GDOES lab in France. Other samples included
were nominally pure, or have an expected composition, which were not confirmed by
other characterization methods, but included nevertheless with admission of some
possible uncertainty range. All calibration samples are listed below along with some
relevant details. Table 3.3 follows with relevant elemental concentrations (in weight
percentage). Most samples are pictured in Figure 3.7.
• 1045 aluminum - CRM, sourced from Pechiney. Included for silicon content.
Metallic disk.
• 1766 low-alloy steel - CRM, sourced from NIST. Contains no elements of in-
terest in relevant concentrations, but serves as the NTNU GDOES lab reference
sputtering material as mentioned in Section 2.3.3. Metallic disk.
• AlN - Borrowed from Horiba. Ceramic sheet.
• C276 Hastelloy - Obtained from NTNU Finmekanisk verksted. Included for
chromium content. Metallic disk. The elemental concentrations for this alloy
are specified within a range of a few percent. When defining the sample in
the Quantum software, elemental concentrations were set at the middle of their
range, with the accuracy field set to encompass the max and min possible
values.
• CE650 aluminum-titanium-oxide - CRM, sourced from Swerea Kimab. In-
cluded for titanium and oxygen content. Ceramic disk.
• Chromium - Borrowed from Horiba. Metallic disk.
• CrN PLD target - A packed-powder puck of CrN for PLD target ablation.
Originally sourced from Stanford Advanced Materials [54], but no longer listed
on their website. Contact with a sales representative instructed that the prod-
uct density is in the range 85-90% of solid CrN. This density range introduces
uncertainty in the calculated sputtering rate, which must be factored when
inputting software values. There was some question, following receival of the
target, if the composition might actually be Cr2N, a material which was listed
on the site. The representative assured that the composition was CrN as or-
dered. Despite this, some of the results will be interesting to consider in the
context of Cr2N. In this case, the relative concentrations of Cr and N are shifted
and a different material density is used.
==PAGE:50==
38
CHAPTER 3. METHODS AND EXPERIMENTAL DETAILS
• JK49 high-alloy nitrogen steel - CRM, sourced from Swerea Kimab. Used
for diagnostic checks prior to all GDOES measurement sessions at the NTNU
lab. Included for chromium and nitrogen content. Metallic disk.
• Quartz (SiO2) - Obtained as scrap from NTNU Glassblåserverkstede. Thin
rectangular slide.
• Silicon - 2" silicon wafer used as deposition substrate in PLD lab. Addition-
ally, some of these silicon wafers were also used for a number of tests where a
deposited film was not required, so there was no need to waste a crater spot
on the limited PLD samples. The wafers were sourced from University Wafers.
They are ID#444, <001>-oriented, p-type (B-doped), 0-100 Ω-cm resistivity,
320-350 µm thick, single-side polished, and test grade quality [52].
• Titanium - Obtained as scrap from NTNU Finmekanisk verksted. Grade 2
purity. Metallic plate.
• TiN - Borrowed from Horiba. TiN coating on Co-Cr alloy. Metallic disk.
• TiO2 PLD flat film (F-TiO2-O-700-opt) - As described in the previous
section, this sample is a PLD product of TiO2 ablation in an O2 environment
while rotating the substrate. The decision to include it as a reference sample
for calibration is motivated by the need for more oxygen-containing samples.
Its titanium and oxygen content have not been directly confirmed by another
method. However, Raman spectroscopy found clear evidence of anatase peaks
[50]. Additionally, the model resulting from ellipsometry measurement places
the absorption edge around 3.4 eV , which is in agreement with reported values
for the bandgap of anatase TiO2. Nevertheless, without being able to confirm
the sample’s elemental concentration by a more direct method, a generous
uncertainty range of 10% of concentration was set in the software. The material
density was input as 3.78 g/cm3, in line with anatase.
Additionally, some other samples were considered for use as calibration samples,
but were ultimately not used. These include a TiO2 PLD target which failed to
adequately form a vacuum seal, and a strontium titanate (SrTiO3) substrate and
aluminum oxide (Al2O3) substrate which both fractured during measurement, likely
due to thermal stress [55].
==PAGE:51==
CHAPTER 3. METHODS AND EXPERIMENTAL DETAILS
39
Table 3.3: All calibration samples, along with their weight percentage of selected
elements. Some other major elements are also listed, including the concentration of
the primary constituent. The sample source is also listed, although only a few were
CRMs.
Sample
Concentration [wt%]
Other
Source
Ti
O
Cr
N
Si
major
1045
0.255
-
-
-
8.02
Al (90.5%)
[56]
1766
-
-
-
0.02
0.01
Fe (99.8%)
[57]
AlN
-
-
-
34.2
-
Al (65.8%)
Horiba
C276
-
-
16.0
-
0.08
Ni (54.6%), Mo, Fe
Metal lab [58]
CE650
22.0
34.0
-
0.27
-
Al (38.0%), C
[59]
Cr
-
-
100.0
-
-
-
Horiba
CrN
-
-
78.8† 21.2 †
-
-
[54]
JK49
-
-
5.0
1.89
0.5
Fe (75.6%), V, Mo
[59]
Quartz
-
53.3
-
-
46.7
-
Glass lab
Si
-
-
-
-
100.0
-
[52]
Ti
100.0
-
-
-
-
-
Metal lab
TiN
77.4
-
-
22.6
-
-
Horiba
TiO2
60.0 ‡ 40.0‡
-
-
-
-
PLD lab
† For the Cr2N version, Cr is 88.1% and N is 11.9%.
‡ Assuming a stoichiometric 1:2 atomic ratio of Ti:O in the fabricated film.
newpage
==PAGE:52==
40
CHAPTER 3. METHODS AND EXPERIMENTAL DETAILS
(a) 1045
(b) 1766
(c) AlN
(d) C276
(e) CE650
(f) Chromium
(g) CrN
(h) JK49
(i) Quartz
(j) Silicon
(k) Titanium
(l) TiN
Figure 3.7: Photographs of all samples used for calibration (except the TiO2 PLD
film, already pictured in Figure 3.2 (b)). Prior GDOES measurement craters are
visible on most of the samples.
newpage
==PAGE:53==
CHAPTER 3. METHODS AND EXPERIMENTAL DETAILS
41
3.2
GDOES measurements
3.2.1
Equipment
The equipment used in this project is a GD-Profiler 2 by HORIBA Jobin Yvon (pic-
tured in Figure 2.3). It is maintained by the Department of Materials Science and
Engineering at NTNU. The plasma gas is argon, and the anode is copper with a 4mm
diameter. The system is also equipped with HORIBA’s differential interferometry
profiling, DiP, which employs a laser (at λ = 635 nm) for in-situ crater depth mea-
surement. The anode and DiP opening are visible in the sample mounting surface in
Figure 3.8 (a).
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.8: (a) An image of the GDOES chamber sample mounting pad. At the
center is the anode tube and a small hole for the interferometry laser. These are
surrounded by an O-ring and white ceramic material. (b) A schematic cross section
of the sample mounting pad, showing the copper anode tube extending back and
comprising the plasma chamber. Adapted from [60].
The plasma source operates in RF mode, with a matching box that automatically
adjusts two variable capacitors to minimize reflected power.
A pulsed mode was
introduced for this instrument somewhat recently, which decreases the average power
but maintains high instantaneous power for sputtering. This has proven advantageous
for fragile or heat-sensitive samples [61]. It has also been reported that this can
improve depth resolution and enhance elemental sensitivity [26]. On our instrument,
use of the pulsed mode is incompatible with the automatic matching box, requiring
the capacitors to be manually set to their optimal value before starting. Additionally,
the corresponding synchronized acquisition setting (recording data only during the
pulses of plasma power) is not available with our hardware, resulting in profiles which
==PAGE:54==
42
CHAPTER 3. METHODS AND EXPERIMENTAL DETAILS
appear messy with high-frequency spikes.
Two oil rotary pumps are used to generate the vacuum seal and flush the plasma
during operation. A water cooling circuit is built into the cathode block that con-
tacts the back of the sample and holds it against the anode. The chiller is set to
15°C. The transfer optics systems is comprised of two MgF2 lenses which allow light
from the plasma chamber to the spectrometer. Over time, the window out of the
plasma chamber can become dirtied with sputtered material, causing a gradual de-
cline in recorded intensities [23]. Cleaning the window is possible as part of periodic
technician maintenance, but this was not performed during this semester work.
The spectrometer utilizes the Paschen-Runge setup. The entrance slit is 20 µm
and makes an incident angle of about 52° with the grating. The concave polychro-
mator diffraction grating has 2400 lines/mm, diffracting into three orders around the
Rowland circle. This covers a spectral range from about 120-600 nm. The exit slits
on the optical mask are pre-determined by HORIBA, with widths between 35-50
µm. Slits intended to collect emissions in the range 250-500 nm are positioned to use
the 1st-order diffraction. Shorter wavelengths are collected at their 2nd-order diffrac-
tion angles. The zero-order diffraction (a lower-intensity reflection of all incident
light) is directed to a separate parabolic grating which is used to focus longer wave-
lengths. 47 channels are available for simultaneous measurement. The detectors are
termed High Dynamic Detectors (HDD), and are essentially photomultiplier tubes
(PMTs) with automatic adjustment capability of their supplied voltage to accom-
modate potentially large swings in intensity. Due to the spatial overlap of 1st- and
2nd-order diffraction angles for some wavelengths, some detectors employ a filter to
block out unintended contributions to the signal from emission lines at 1
2 or 2 times
the wavelength. The spectrometer also includes a monochromator (making use of
the zero-order spectrum) mounted with a Czerny-Turner configuration. This can be
calibrated to any wavelength for simultaneous measurement with the polychromator.
It can also record the full optical spectrum of a bulk sample over the course of a
two-minute measurement. Nitrogen is used for continuous flushing of the optical sys-
tem. Atmospheric O2 and H2O absorb in the UV range, which would weaken some
spectral lines before they reach the detector.
The instrument is controlled and data is recorded via HORIBA’s Quantum soft-
ware (v2.12) [45]. For each measurement, a “method” is selected, specifying which
elements to check for (which spectral lines), the plasma parameters (power, pres-
sure), flushing time, background acquisition time, pre-integration time (used to reach
steady-state in bulk materials), an option for pulsed source operation, an option for
soft plasma cleaning, and if an associated calibration function exists.
The instrument was operated in constant pressure/constant power mode, leaving
the plasma impedance (voltage and current) as a free parameter. The plasma and
acquisition settings were adjusted over the course of the work. However, the applied
==PAGE:55==
CHAPTER 3. METHODS AND EXPERIMENTAL DETAILS
43
power was typically 25 or 40 W, the pressure was typically 700 Pa, the longest
acquisition time was 600 seconds, averaging was usually 0.05 s/pt (20 points per
second), background acquisition was 5 seconds, flushing consisted of one 40-second
cycle, and no pre-integration was used. The spectral lines analyzed for the elements
of interest are: 365.355 nm for Ti (I), 130.223 nm for O (I), 425.439 nm for Cr (I),
149.267 nm for N (I), and 288.162 nm for Si (I). The parenthetical (I) after each
element indicates that the emission line comes from the neutral state (not ionized)
atom. A complete table listing the polychromator spectral lines paired with each
element is included in Appendix Table A.1.
3.2.2
Measurement procedure
After turning on all the equipment, the first steps before a measurement session
always begin with calibration. A pure aluminum sample is used to center the poly-
chromator (according to the Al 396.157 nm line). The anode inner wall is cleaned
with a reaming tool (pictured in Figure 3.9 (a)), and the mounting surface is cleaned
with dry, lint-free tissue paper. This attempts to remove contamination from previous
measurements.
The sample mounting procedure involves placing the the point of interest up
against the anode and starting the pumps to hold the sample in place. To achieve a
sufficient seal, samples must be flat and rigid and large enough to cover the O-ring
surrounding the anode (approximately 13 mm diameter). The sample forms the final
wall of the plasma chamber. The rear electrode block is placed up against the back
of the sample (which must also be flat and parallel with the front surface) and held in
place by a Teflon-coated piston arm (as in Figure 3.9 (b)). After closing the chamber
cover, the evacuated plasma tube is filled with argon gas to the specified pressure.
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.9: (a) Two reaming tools used to clean out the inside of the anode. (b)
A sample mounting arrangement in the GDOES chamber, where the RF power and
cooling block contacts the sample backside and is held in place by a piston arm.
==PAGE:56==
44
CHAPTER 3. METHODS AND EXPERIMENTAL DETAILS
Measurements typically begin with a flushing cycle of alternating low and high
pressure intended to clean the sample surface to a degree. This is followed by a
period of background measurement, where detector (HDD) signals are recorded with
no source excitation. The background signal for each channel is subtracted from
the subsequent measurement. For bulk samples, a pre-integration time is included,
where the sample is sputtered (according to the specified plasma power and pressure
parameters) for a few seconds to stabilize the plasma, remove any surface contam-
ination or oxides, and reach a representative steady state. The measurement then
proceeds with the same plasma parameters for a specified period of time or until
the operator stops the process. The number of data points collected depends on the
setting of how long to average the signal (in milliseconds/point). This is a trade-off
between recording a smooth signal and capturing sufficient details in the profile. The
polychromator centering uses a particular method which runs automatically and no-
tifies the user of the offset since the previous calibration. This value is recorded for
diagnostic use if necessary.
Next, the polychromator is profiled using a standard steel sample (JK49) [59].
The aluminum sample is removed by releasing the piston arm and venting the vac-
uum. A circular mark is clearly visible on the sample surface where the sputtering
took place. The anode and mounting surface are cleaned as before, and the steel sam-
ple is mounted. Again, the polychromator profiling uses a special method different
from a typical measurement. For diagnostic purposes, the maximum and minimum
signal intensities for a selected set of elements is recorded. Over the course of the
semester, the primary iron signal ranged between 11.4 V to 9.4 V, generally trending
downward with time. This may be due to gradual contamination of the spectrometer
window. Finally, a simple check is performed by running a surface analysis on the
steel sample just to see that the signals are stable and reasonably close to expected
values.
In the previous specialization project work [1], 3D printed wafer alignment tem-
plates were used to position the 2” PLD samples over the anode in a systematic
manor. The measurement naming convention carries over from this template, with
pt. 01 corresponding to wafer center, pts. 02-09 forming a ring 8.45 mm radial from
the center, and pts. 10-21 forming an outer ring 16.9 mm radial from the center. A
schematic map of all labeled crater points possible using these templates is illustrated
in Figure 3.10.
Many of the PLD samples were already cleaved into smaller pieces for other
characterization work.
This limited the use of the alignment templates and also
constrained which positions were possible to measure. The identifying number for
such measurements is typically based on the nearest position to the 21 points shown
in Figure 3.10.
==PAGE:57==
CHAPTER 3. METHODS AND EXPERIMENTAL DETAILS
45
Figure 3.10: Labeled crater points, as positioned by template 1 for point 01, tem-
plate 2 for points 02-09, and template 3 for points 10-21. Note the wafer flat oriented
at the top.
The calibration samples have a variety of shapes and dimensions, so no templates
were designed for systematic placement. Measurement locations were estimated by
eye to avoid overlapping previous craters. The calibration measurements presented
in the next chapter are simply numbered chronologically (i.e. pt. 01 was measured
before pt. 02, etc.) without regard to position on the sample. As bulk materials, the
composition is expected to be uniform around each sample after sputtering past the
surface.
3.2.3
Low-power plasma surface cleaning
The Quantum software includes an option for surface cleaning prior to surface analy-
sis. This generates a low-power “soft” plasma in which bombarding argon ions are too
weak to sputter the sample atoms, but, in combination with the gas flow, can help
dislodge surface contaminants for a cleaner subsequent analysis [62]. The plasma set-
tings available for surface cleaning are the same as in a normal measurement: power
(typically 5 W or less, either pulsed or continuous), pressure, and application time.
The spectrometer is active during surface cleaning and the results are displayed (en-
abling a visual check that the sample surface is not being sputtered) but not saved.
After surface cleaning, the normal measurement immediately proceeds according to
the parameters set in the method.
For the sake of recording potentially useful information, an alternative to this
==PAGE:58==
46
CHAPTER 3. METHODS AND EXPERIMENTAL DETAILS
built-in function is the creation of a separate method which specifies a low bias power.
This allows the surface cleaning measurement results to be saved. Some experiments
in this work made use of this dedicated-method plasma cleaning measurement. The
cleaning method parameters were typically identical to the associated normal method,
with the exception that the power was reduced to 5 W. In contrast to the built-
in plasma cleaning, the minimum input power for a user-created method is 5 W.
Pulsed mode was also used to ensure the sample surface was not being unintentionally
sputtered. Analysis time was typically 60 seconds.
3.2.4
Calibration curve formation
A database of calibration samples is maintained within the Quantum software, where
data must be entered for each samples’ elemental composition (in weight fraction
(wt%), ppm, or atomic percentage (at%)), density, and relative sputtering rate. An
accuracy field is optionally included if the concentration uncertainty for elements in
a sample are known [45].
As detailed in Section 2.3.3, relative sputtering rates (RSR) are preferable to ease
transfer of results between methods and experimental setups. When the RSR for a
sample is already known, it can simply be entered in the software. If the RSR is
determined experimentally (in the course of calibration measurements, for example),
then the erosion rate (µm/min) is entered (as determined by profilometry or another
method). This is converted to a sputtering rate (g/m2/s) by multiplying by density as
in Equation 2.6. Using the same plasma conditions, a measurement must be made on
the chosen reference (1766 low-alloy steel in our lab). The calculation then proceeds
from crater depth to erosion rate to sputtering rate for the reference. An accuracy
field is also available alongside the RSR input for each sample, to address variations
stemming from different crater measurements. This value input here is calculated
from the standard deviation of depths from multiple line scans of the same crater.
Both the compositional and sputtering rate accuracies factor into weighting of points
for the regression construction of calibration curves, explained in Section 2.3.5.
When all reference samples are entered into the database, they must be assigned
within the settings for the GDOES method, and then measured using the parameters
of that method. As a note, the calibration sample details are not fixed at this point.
For example, there is no issue if a sample is initially defined in the database without
knowing the RSR. This can be added later, after a measurement has been made on
the sample. Ideally, the samples are measured within a single session to minimize
changes in the experimental conditions. In this work, various samples were considered
for calibration, and experiments were done over the course of the semester, so the
best measurements were chosen after seeing each profile.
A time range is selected for averaging elemental intensities within each measure-
==PAGE:59==
CHAPTER 3. METHODS AND EXPERIMENTAL DETAILS
47
ment profile where all signals are stable. This was typically the last 30-120 seconds
of the measurement. The standard deviation of signal intensity is also automatically
assigned as one of the uncertainty components described in Section 2.3.4 Along with
the sample sputtering rate qM, the resulting signal intensity for each emission line
Ii is paired with the previously defined elemental concentrations for that sample ci.
That is to say, one data point is created for the Equation 2.3.
Once all samples specified within a method have been measured, computation
of the calibration curves can proceed. For each element i which is included in the
composition of at least one calibration sample, all Ii = ciqM data points are plotted
together.
A linear regression fits a curve amongst all measurement points, with
stronger weighting for points with smaller uncertainty in elemental concentration
and sputtering rate.
When calibration curves for all relevant elements have been generated, modified,
and accepted, the method becomes calibrated. All measurements taken using this
method (including previously stored measurements) can now apply a “CDP” button
to the qualitative results to follow the conversion process explained in Section 2.3 to
transform signal voltage to elemental concentration, and sputtering time to sputtering
depth.
3.3
Stylus profilometer measurements
As noted in Section 2.3.3, a direct measurement of crater depth is a common method
to determine a sample’s sputtering rate, qM, a necessary component in the quantifi-
cation equations.
For many of the GDOES measurements taken, and for all measurements on cal-
ibration samples, a contact stylus profilometer was used to acquire line scans across
the resulting crater. A MarSurf M 400 unit is available in the same lab as the GDOES
instrument. It is connected to an SD 26 drive unit and BFW-250 probe system. The
specified measurement speed is 0.2 mm/s, the measuring range is ±25 µm, and the
profile resolution is 0.8 nm [63]. A scan length of 8 to 12 mm was chosen to cover the
entire 4 mm diameter crater plus sufficient margins on either side for leveling. Since
the instrument only reveals the profile of a linear slice across the crater, multiple
measurements (at least 5) were typically made of a single crater from various angles,
all passing through the center. Most samples presented a mostly flat surface with
varying degrees of roughness.
Data processing
The MarSurf outputs data as a text file, with some metadata at the top and calculated
parameters at the bottom, and the middle lines populated by raw measurement
results. All results were copied to a spreadsheet for uniform data processing. This
==PAGE:60==
48
CHAPTER 3. METHODS AND EXPERIMENTAL DETAILS
involved leveling the profile (a linear leveling according to values averaged over a
range at the start and end), vertically shifting the area surrounding the crater to a
height of zero, and centering the crater for easy comparison between measurements.
For samples with rougher, less-polished surfaces, some averaging across points
was used to smooth out the profile. Some measurements included anomalous fea-
tures, such as spikes from dust particles, trenches from scratches, overlap with other
craters, or curvature from non-uniformity of the original sample surface. After visual
examination of each profile, such atypical measurements were excluded from further
analysis.
All GDOES tests were performed with the 4 mm anode, so all craters have this
same diameter. The depth of each crater was calculated by considering the range -1.9
to +1.9 mm around the centered crater scan. Not all scans cross exactly through the
crater center, so some measurements show a crater spanning slightly less than 4 mm.
The 2D line scan represents a 3D surface by sweeping around a circle. Thus, the
edges of the scan sweep a larger area than the center; to evenly average the depth at
all points in the 2D scan would not accurately represent the average depth over the
3D crater. Rather, the scan is averaged over smaller segments, which are weighted
according to their radial distance before summing. The difference in these calculation
methods is negligible for a perfectly flat crater, but the error grows for craters which
are deeper at the center (convex) or edges (concave) [23].
The average crater depth was used to compute a sputtering rate for each sample,
following Equation 2.6. The relative standard deviation in depth measurements was
used as input for the RSR accuracy field.
3.4
Optical profiler measurements
In addition to the stylus profilometer, many craters were also examined using a 3D
optical profiler, specifically a Bruker ContourGT-K maintained by NTNU’s NanoLab.
Optical profilometry uses the wave properties of light, especially phase, to extract
data of surface topology. A coherent light source is split into two paths - one to a
reference, and one to the sample. The reflections from each of these paths recombine
at a detector, where interference is possible due to differences in the path length.
The reference path has a fixed length, so any interference is a result of features or
variations in the sample surface height. A mode exists which uses monochromated
light, but this work employs white-light interferometry (WLI, or vertical scanning in-
terferometery, VSI). The 3D optical profiler also incorporates a microscopic objective
lens such that very small sample areas can be imaged. When the sample surface is in
focus (i.e. the stage height is adjusted to match the lens focal length), the detector
shows interference fringes which follow the contours of the sample. Different eleva-
tions of the sample will be in focus at different stage heights, allowing the software
==PAGE:61==
CHAPTER 3. METHODS AND EXPERIMENTAL DETAILS
49
to map the surface profile according to the positions of maximal fringe contrast [64].
The instrument can provide nm resolution for height differences up to several µm.
With a 4 mm diameter, the GDOES craters are rather large features. With the
weakest objective lens (2.5x), the instrument’s field of view is approximately 2.0 x 1.5
mm. However, the software has a built-in stitching functionality, allowing multiple
profiles to be combined into one larger image. Approximately 20% overlap is specified
between frames, so a 9 x 1.5 mm image is an aggregation of 1 row x 6 columns. As
with the stylus profiles, scans across the crater in at least two directions (horizontal
and vertical) were usually performed with the optical profiler. Many of the craters
failed to measure properly just at the sharp crater rim (i.e. no height was recorded).
This doesn’t affect the depth calculation within the however.
Data processing
The Bruker software has a built-in planar leveling function which was applied before
exporting the data. For convenient comparison with the stylus profilometer results,
line scans were taken from the optical profiles in the software Gwyddion [65]. The
scan results were transferred into the same spreadsheet as mentioned before. The
optical scan data received a similar treatment of edge-zeroing, crater centering, and
radially-weighted depth calculation.
==PAGE:62==
50
CHAPTER 3. METHODS AND EXPERIMENTAL DETAILS
==PAGE:63==
Chapter4
Results and Discussion
The main results of this work were 1) the calibration procedure intended for com-
positional quantification of PLD-fabricated thin film samples, and 2) the GDOES
measurements of various PLD-fabricated thin film samples. Some other findings re-
lated to these results are additionally presented, such as a low-power measurement
for prediction of atmospheric nitrogen signals, and attempts to generate additional
calibration data points from the limited number of calibration samples.
4.1
Nitrogen signal consistency
One of the primary motivations for using GDOES for elemental characterization
of these samples was the purported sensitivity to nitrogen. However, a recurring
challenge was the inconsistency of nitrogen signals between repeated measurements
on same sample which are expected to have the same composition. For instance, using
the same plasma parameters, measurements at two spots on the same silicon wafer
(points 07 and 08, presented in Figure 4.1) detected average nitrogen signal intensities
of 7.8 mV and 19.1 mV, respectively, more than a factor of 2 difference. Both signals
are low compared to the primary 0.26 V silicon intensity, but nevertheless, such
uncertainty is problematic given that small quantities of nitrogen (0-10 at%) are of
interest for the doped CCS samples.
For samples like silicon, where no nitrogen content is expected in the bulk, possible
sources of nitrogen include contamination in the argon gas source or supply line,
leakage from the spectrometer chamber, or atmospheric leakage through the O-ring
seal due to insufficient sample placement or surface roughness. Spectral interference
is another hypothetical possibility; for the N 149.267 nm line collected at its 2nd-order
diffraction angle, possible interferences include Cu 148.864 nm and Cr 144.843 nm,
plus the 1st-order angle from Cu 296.116 nm, Cr 298.647 nm, and Fe 298.357 nm
[36]. The nitrogen signal is effectively absent in some measurements (as expected),
so the issue does not appear to be systematic, nor necessarily related to the sample
51
==PAGE:64==
52
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
itself. This also rules out contamination from the argon supply and optical chamber,
as these would presumably be constant from one measurement to the next (when all
instrument settings are otherwise the same). The anode is made of copper, but it
is not expected to be sputtered to any significant degree, and such a contribution
would also seem to be somewhat stable across measurements. Further, the detector
for the Cu 324.759 nm line is typically recording a negligibly small signal for copper.
Metallic contamination (Cr or Fe) from prior samples is possible, but this effect would
be confined to the surface and should be identifiable by the dedicated detectors for
these elements.
Figure 4.1: A comparison of two GDOES profiles of the same silicon wafer, where
the nitrogen intensity differs.
The explanation which seems most likely for variable nitrogen levels between
measurements is sample placement and the sealing of the plasma chamber.
The
pressure regime typical of GDOES is in the hundreds of Pascals, and the instrument’s
pressure sensor is appropriate for this scale. Thus, when mounting a sample and
sealing it against the anode, no granularity is available to distinguish between a
pressure of 0.1 Pa and 0.01 Pa. Either the chamber is at vacuum level (0 Pa) or
it is not. This enables the possibility that two apparently identical measurements
are actually experiencing slightly different levels of atmospheric leakage. Avoiding
any leakage altogether would be preferable, but finding a way to assess leakage prior
to sample sputtering could be a satisfactory alternative. While the current vacuum
system is not suited for such a determination, the spectrometer could be applied for
this purpose.
==PAGE:65==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
53
Low-power measurement for atmospheric leakage prediction
As mentioned in Section 3.2.3, a 5 W GDOES method was created to emulate the
“soft” plasma surface cleaning recommended in the literature. As the plasma and
spectrometer are active in this low-power method, it seemed possible that the detec-
tor signals recorded might, in addition to showing contaminating surface elements,
give an indication of atmospheric leakage.
The gas pressure in this method was
set identical to that used in the full-power method (700 Pa), so a similar degree of
atmospheric influx might be expected compared with the full-power measurements.
Crucially, the low-power measurement is performed with the intention of not sput-
tering the sample surface.
Thus, if the low-power measurement were to suggest
unacceptable atmospheric nitrogen levels stemming from sample placement, there
would still be a chance to reposition the sample before proceeding to a destructive
full-power measurement. Any effect related to the surface cleaning outcome of this
treatment is incidental.
This approach was tested initially with measurements on a silicon wafer to see if
there was any correlation between the nitrogen intensity during the low-power mea-
surement and the nitrogen intensity during the subsequent full-power measurement
(without adjusting the sample mounting at all in between). As expected, the nitro-
gen signals in the low-power method were extremely small, ranging from 0.5 to 5.0
mV. They did, however, seem to form a rough linear correlation with the nitrogen
intensity recorded in the following full-power measurement, giving reason to pursue
the method further.
A low-power measurement taken on one of the PLD flat films (F-TiO2-O-700-
opt) revealed a non-zero titanium signal when using the 5 W power (shown in the
left plot of Figure 4.2). To avoid any risk of sputtering the sample surface, the low-
power method was adjusted to use the pulsed mode (with software default values:
frequency = 33 Hz, and duty cycle = 0.0625 for an effective applied power of 0.3125
W). The resulting plot (shown in the right plot Figure 4.2) has signal intensities at
the magnitude of detector background levels, affirming that the sample surface is
effectively free of sputtering.
After this point, all GDOES measurements (both for calibration samples and for
PLD samples) were preceded by a pulsed low-power measurement to infer adequate
sample placement. As a way to compare between different samples, the nitrogen
signal for a given measurement was normalized by the total light entering the spec-
trometer - a recorded parameter Fi, the total intensity of luminous flux [45].
In Figure 4.3, the full-power N
Fi is plotted against the low-power N
Fi recorded in
each GDOES measurement. On a log scale, an upward trend is visible. Across all
sample types, the data points form a loose distribution. Within a particular sample
type, comparisons to previous measurements provide a simple predictive power. For
example, in one measurement on F-TiO2-O-700-opt, the low-power relative nitrogen
==PAGE:66==
54
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Figure 4.2: A comparison of two low-power GDOES profiles at the same spot on
a TiO2 PLD film. In the left, using an applied power of 5 W, the titanium signal is
large enough to indicate sample sputtering. In the right, using a pulsed power (5 W
peak), no sputtering is evident.
was 6 × 10−4 and the resulting full-power value was 15 × 10−4. In another measure-
ment, the low-power relative nitrogen was 4 × 10−4, suggesting that the sample seal
was at least as good as before. In this instance, the corresponding full-power level
was indeed smaller, at 9 × 10−4. Of course, some of the samples actually contain
nitrogen (green triangles in Figure 4.3), so a larger full-power nitrogen level is found
relative to their low-power prediction, which only takes into account the contribution
from atmospheric nitrogen.
Once a sample has been measured once in this way, future low-power measure-
ments become a useful diagnostic.
If the relative nitrogen value is smaller than
previous, the full-power measurement can proceed with some confidence of minimal
atmospheric contamination. If the relative nitrogen is larger, however, the sample
can be repositioned until the low-power measurement records a satisfactory nitrogen
signal.
==PAGE:67==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
55
Figure 4.3: The relative nitrogen levels (nitrogen intensity divided by total flux
intensity) from a low-power measurement (5 W pulsed, absent of sample sputtering)
approximately forecasts nitrogen levels in a full-power measurement.
newpage
==PAGE:68==
56
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
4.2
Calibration measurements
In this section, the GDOES profiles for all calibration samples are presented. Multiple
measurements were typically taken, the first to get a sense of what to expect from
the particular sample, and subsequent ones to acquire a stable profile suitable for
the calibration curves. Only the final measurement used for calibration is presented
here. Only minimal comments will be included, as the profiles generally reflect the
expected composition. Although the instrument records signals for over 40 elements,
only relevant elements will be shown. Some strong metal emission signals are scaled
down to better see in relation to weaker signals. Ti (color-coded pink), O (orange),
Cr (dark blue), N (green), Si (gray), H (light blue), and C (black) are included in all
plots, although the signals are not always strong enough to be visible. Table 4.1 at
the end summarizes the measurement time range selected for calibration curve input
and the average signal intensities for Ti, O, Cr, N, and Si.
Additionally, each GDOES crater was measured by stylus profilometer and/or
optical profiler for the purpose of calculating sputtering rates.
As mentioned in
Section 3.3, multiple measurements were made on each crater (a minimum of 5), but
a single representative plot will be given here, paired with its corresponding GDOES
profile. The crater shapes vary in quality because the plasma parameters are not
optimized for each sample, but rather must be fixed according to the values chosen
for the fabricated PLD samples. Since these calibration samples are mostly bulk
materials, the crater shape is not so important. In any case, the repeated scans
generally display a similar crater shape and depth. Table 4.2 lists - for all samples
- the average crater depth, relative sputtering rate, and relative standard deviation
from multiple measurements.
==PAGE:69==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
57
4.2.1
GDOES profiles and craters
1045 aluminum
The GDOES profile for the 1045 aluminum CRM is plotted in Figure 4.4; it is
dominated by the aluminum signal, as expected. It appears to have a slight positive
slope even at three minutes of measurement, suggesting that the crater shape has
not quite reached an equilibrium yet. However, the silicon signal, which is why this
sample was included for calibration, seems stable.
A representative crater profile for the 1045 CRM is plotted in Figure 4.5. Its
shape is convex, with rounded edges, suggesting that the applied pressure (700 Pa) is
higher than ideal for this material. Recall that the plasma conditions are chosen for
the TiO2 PLD samples, and the optimal parameters for different calibration samples
might not be similar. The surface roughness reflects the course mechanical polishing
of the sample, observable by visual inspection.
Figure 4.4:
GDOES calibration profile of 1045.
Relevant elemental signals are
labeled in the plot. Power: 25 W. Pressure: 700 Pa.
==PAGE:70==
58
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Figure 4.5: Representative stylus profilometer scan of 1045 crater.
Power: 25 W. Pressure: 700 Pa. Time: 180 s. Average depth: 6.63 µm.
newpage
==PAGE:71==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
59
1766 steel
The GDOES profile for the 1766 steel CRM is plotted in Figure 4.6. This sample is
nearly pure iron, with a signal that quickly stabilizes.
A representative crater profile for the 1766 CRM is plotted in Figure 4.7. The
crater shape is relatively flat, although preferential sputtering of different grain ori-
entations is apparent.
Figure 4.6:
GDOES calibration profile of 1766.
Relevant elemental signals are
labeled in the plot. Power: 25 W. Pressure: 700 Pa.
Figure 4.7: Representative stylus profilometer scan of 1766 crater.
Power: 25 W. Pressure: 700 Pa. Time: 120 s. Average depth: 4.98 µm.
==PAGE:72==
60
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
AlN
The GDOES profile for the AlN calibration sample is plotted in Figure 4.8. The
expected elemental signals from aluminum and nitrogen appear acceptable. As a
reminder, although the stoichiometric composition of the sample is equal parts alu-
minum and nitrogen, the associated signals will not necessarily be of equal intensity,
for the variety of reasons described in Section 2.2.2.
A representative crater profile for the AlN calibration sample is plotted in Figure
4.9. It is severely concave, likely caused by the insulating nature of the sample. At
the high frequency (13.56 MHz) of RF excitation, the capacitance in non-conductive
samples increases the impedance, such that the bias at the sputtering surface of the
sample can be much less than the voltage applied by the backside electrode [66, 67].
The poor voltage transfer coefficient results in lower incident ion energy, favoring
material removal at the edges of the anode [30]
Figure 4.8: GDOES calibration profile of AlN. Relevant elemental signals are la-
beled in the plot. Power: 25 W. Pressure: 700 Pa.
==PAGE:73==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
61
Figure 4.9: Representative stylus profilometer scan of AlN crater.
Power: 25 W. Pressure: 700 Pa. Time: 480 s. Average depth: 5.83 µm.
newpage
==PAGE:74==
62
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Hastelloy C276
The GDOES profile for the C276 calibration sample is plotted in Figure 4.10; it
displays strong signals from the expected metals of the alloy. The instrument also
recorded a weak signal from the aluminum emission line (not plotted), which is not
a part of the sample’s composition. It is most likely spectral interference from one
of the other metals.
A representative crater profile for the C276 calibration sample is plotted in Figure
4.11. The crater shape is mostly level, with just slight convexity. The sharp, tooth-
like roughness stems from the surface polishing pattern.
Figure 4.10: GDOES calibration profile of C276. Relevant elemental signals are
labeled in the plot. Power: 25 W. Pressure: 700 Pa.
Figure 4.11: Representative stylus profilometer scan of C276 crater.
Power: 25 W. Pressure: 700 Pa. Time: 240 s. Average depth: 17.92 µm.
==PAGE:75==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
63
CE650 aluminum-titanium-oxide
The GDOES profile for the CE650 CRM is plotted in Figure 4.12. The elemental
profile is stable after 60 seconds, with the expected elements present.
Due to the small size of the sample and the material hardness resisting the efficacy
of polishing, measurements on this sample typically overlapped somewhat with pre-
vious craters. This made it challenging to obtain clean line scans across the current
crater with the stylus profilometer. The 3D optical profiler was more useful for these
measurements, as a larger area is mapped and line scans can be taken afterward,
avoiding regions influenced by previous craters. A representative optical profiler line
scan for a crater on the CE650 calibration sample is plotted in Figure 4.13.
Figure 4.12: GDOES calibration profile of CE650. Relevant elemental signals are
labeled in the plot. Power: 25 W. Pressure: 700 Pa.
Figure 4.13: Representative 3D optical profiler line scan of CE650 crater.
Power: 25 W. Pressure: 700 Pa. Time: 180 s. Average depth: 2.93 µm.
==PAGE:76==
64
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Chromium
The GDOES profile for the chromium calibration sample is plotted in Figure 4.14.
It is as expected.
A representative crater profile for the chromium calibration sample is plotted in
Figure 4.15. It appears fine, although roughness is evident both inside and outside
the crater.
Figure 4.14: GDOES calibration profile of chromium. Relevant elemental signals are
labeled in the plot. Power: 25 W. Pressure: 700 Pa.
Figure 4.15: Representative stylus profilometer scan of chromium crater.
Power: 25 W. Pressure: 700 Pa. Time: 300 s. Average depth: 17.42 µm.
==PAGE:77==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
65
CrN PLD target
The GDOES profile for the CrN PLD target is plotted in Figure 4.16.
Previous
measurements, however, were prone to issues such as high nitrogen signal or unstable
chromium signal. In one previous measurement, the sample actually fractured into
pieces, possibly because the PLD target is not solid chromium nitride, but rather a
disc of packed powder. The presented measurement at pt. 12 was taken on one of
these fragments using a small-sample holder accessory.
A representative crater profile for the CrN PLD target is plotted in Figure 4.17. It
is quite convex, and there was a large standard deviation in measured crater depths
from different scans. The additional uncertainty regarding the sample density results
in a large error range in the relative sputtering rate.
Figure 4.16: GDOES calibration profile of CrN PLD target. Relevant elemental
signals are labeled in the plot. Power: 25 W. Pressure: 700 Pa.
Figure 4.17: Representative stylus profilometer scan of CrN PLD target crater.
Power: 25 W. Pressure: 700 Pa. Time: 360 s. Average depth: 18.97 µm.
==PAGE:78==
66
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
JK49 high-alloy nitrogen steel
The GDOES profile for the JK49 steel CRM is plotted in Figure 4.18. The various
elemental signals have stabilized after about 60 seconds.
A representative optical profile line scan for a crater on the JK49 CRM is plotted
in Figure 4.19. The crater profile is nicely shaped, with just slight curvature at the
edges.
Figure 4.18: GDOES calibration profile of JK49. Relevant elemental signals are
labeled in the plot. Power: 25 W. Pressure: 700 Pa.
Figure 4.19: Representative 3D optical profiler line scan of JK49 crater.
Power: 25 W. Pressure: 700 Pa. Time: 180 s. Average depth: 7.52 µm.
==PAGE:79==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
67
Quartz (SiO2)
The GDOES profile for the quartz calibration sample is plotted in Figure 4.20. The
measured signals on this sample are extremely weak compared with the metal-based
samples. This is due to its insulating nature. Due to the unquantified voltage drop
across the sample, the realized plasma power may be near the lower limit required
to achieve sputtering [62, 55]. A long sputtering time of 10 minutes was necessary in
order to erode a deep enough crater to measure.
A representative crater profile for the quartz calibration sample is plotted in
Figure 4.21.
Similar to the aluminum nitride sample, the quartz crater is quite
concave. It is also extremely shallow. The resulting erosion rate, significantly less
than all other samples, is in line with the value reported in [68]. Pulsed mode is
often recommended for glass samples, as sputtering at normal power levels can cause
melting of the surface, which may have occurred here [55, 44].
Figure 4.20: GDOES calibration profile of quartz. Relevant elemental signals are
labeled in the plot. Power: 25 W. Pressure: 700 Pa.
==PAGE:80==
68
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Figure 4.21: Representative stylus profilometer scan of quartz crater.
Power: 25 W. Pressure: 700 Pa. Time: 600 s. Average depth: 1.52 µm.
newpage
==PAGE:81==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
69
Silicon
The GDOES profile for the silicon calibration sample is plotted in Figure 4.22. It is
as expected.
A representative crater profile for the silicon calibration sample is plotted in Figure
4.23. It has rounded edges, and some curvature is evident across the entire wafer
surface.
Figure 4.22: GDOES calibration profile of silicon. Relevant elemental signals are
labeled in the plot. Power: 25 W. Pressure: 700 Pa.
Figure 4.23: Representative stylus profilometer scan of silicon crater.
Power: 25 W. Pressure: 700 Pa. Time: 120 s. Average depth: 2.46 µm.
==PAGE:82==
70
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Titanium
The GDOES profile for the titanium calibration sample is plotted in Figure 4.24.
The titanium emission intensity is strong and stable, as expected. Not plotted here
is a weak, but persistent, tin emission line (Sn 317.510 nm), assumed to be a prod-
uct of spectral interference from the titanium.
This explanation is supported by
the appearance of a small tin signal in profiles of the diverse other titanium-based
samples.
A representative crater profile for the titanium calibration sample is plotted in
Figure 4.25.
The sample surface was not polished beforehand, and the existing
roughness is evident both inside and outside the crater.
Figure 4.24: GDOES calibration profile of titanium. Relevant elemental signals are
labeled in the plot. Power: 25 W. Pressure: 700 Pa.
Figure 4.25: Representative stylus profilometer scan of titanium crater.
Power: 25 W. Pressure: 700 Pa. Time: 480 s. Average depth: 12.11 µm.
==PAGE:83==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
71
TiN
The GDOES profile for the TiN calibration sample is plotted in Figure 4.26. The tin
nitride sample used here is not a bulk material, but a coating on cobalt-chromium.
The elemental signals are still slanting slightly even once the bulk substrate is reached
(at around 320 seconds, not plotted here). Some chromium diffusion to the surface
is noticeable. The Sn 317.510 nm signal appears again in the recorded data, but is
omitted from the plot here.
The TiN measurement at pt. 02 is used for calibration, but sputtering proceeded
into the substrate in this instance. For the purpose of sputtering rate determination,
another measurement was taken (pt.
03) which terminated in the TiN layer.
A
representative crater profile for the TiN calibration sample at pt. 02 is plotted in
Figure 4.27. The sides are rather rounded (convex).
Figure 4.26:
GDOES calibration profile of TiN. Relevant elemental signals are
labeled in the plot. Power: 25 W. Pressure: 700 Pa.
Figure 4.27: Representative stylus profilometer scan of TiN crater.
Power: 25 W. Pressure: 700 Pa. Time: 240 s. Average depth: 3.21 µm.
==PAGE:84==
72
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
TiO2 PLD flat film
The GDOES profile for the F-TiO2-O-700-opt PLD sample is plotted in Figure 4.28
Nominally, this sample is stoichiometric TiO2 deposited by PLD on a silicon sub-
strate.
In reality, some hydrogen and carbon contamination appear in the film.
Additionally, the raw data recorded shows oscillations in the titanium signal. This
is due to the optical interference effect of a transparent thin film on a reflective sub-
strate, as explained in Section 2.2.4. These oscillations have been smoothed out in
the software to better display the actual trend in the elemental signal. The signal
from the silicon substrate appears quite sharply at 16 seconds, and the titanium and
oxygen lines also drop steeply; this suggests that the plasma parameters are appro-
priate to form a flat-bottomed crater in this material and resolve a clean interface
between the layers. The titanium signal decays for some time into the silicon sub-
strate however, possibly due to diffusion into the heated substrate during deposition.
A weak tin emission line was also detected in the TiO2 layer (but not plotted), caused
by spectral interference as in the previous sample.
Figure 4.28: GDOES calibration profile of TiO2 PLD film (F-TiO2-O-700-opt).
Relevant elemental signals are labeled in the plot. Power: 25 W. Pressure: 700 Pa.
The PLD films in the work were all less than 1 µm thick, making it challenging
to clearly profile the crater shape using the stylus profilometer. Even using the 3D
optical profiler, the substrate typically presented some slight curvature (possibly due
to stress of the deposited film) and the films don’t have a completely uniform thickness
over the 4 mm diameter of measurement, and this tended to obscure the form and
depth of the GDOES crater within the layer. So, rather than try to sputter partially
into the thin TiO2 layer and then measure the crater to calculate sputtering rate, an
alternative method is to sputter completely into the substrate, note the time required,
and rely on a film thickness determination from another source - ellipsometry, in this
==PAGE:85==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
73
case. Prior ellipsometry measurements performed by Brakstad on this sample found
a film thickness ranging from 193 nm at the center to 206 nm at the edge. At the
particular GDOES spot measured here (marked in Figure 4.29 (a) below), the average
thickness is 201 nm.
Since multiple crater depth scans are not available to take a standard deviation,
an alternative method is required to estimate sputtering rate uncertainty. One pos-
sibility would be to measure at other positions on the wafer and calculate additional
sputtering rates according to the times required to sputter through the layer. This
option was avoided to save space on the wafer for other tests. According to the el-
lipsometry thickness map, the minimum and maximum values covered by the crater
area are 198.3 and 203.7 nm, a relative error span of 2.7% around the average value.
This value is perhaps unrealistically small compared to the relative standard devi-
ations calculated for the other samples, especially given the non-certified nature of
the TiO2 sample. Lacking a more suitable estimate, the software default of 5% will
be used [45].
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.29: (a) A film thickness color map based on ellipsometry measurements
and model for F-TiO2-O-700-opt. (b) A photograph of the sample with multiple
erosion craters from measurements. The red-circled crater is the position used for
calibration.
==PAGE:86==
74
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
4.2.2
Calibration measurement summary tables
Based on the GDOES measurements presented in the previous section, average signal
intensities for titanium, oxygen, chromium, nitrogen, and silicon are calculated for
each calibration sample. The results are summarized in Table 4.1 below.
Based on the crater profiles presented in the previous section, average crater
depths are calculated for each calibration sample. This is converted to relative sput-
tering rate. The relative standard deviation of measurements per crater is also cal-
culated. The results are summarized in Table 4.2 below.
Table 4.1: A summary of the relevant measured elemental signal intensities in each
of the samples used for calibration. The time range is the period of the measurement
used to average signals for the calibration curve. This is typically the final 30-120
seconds of the measurement, once all signals have stabilized. The next columns list
the average intensity measured in the selected time range for Ti, O, Cr, N and/or Si,
as is relevant for the particular sample.
Sample
Time range
Average intensity [V]
[s]
Ti
O
Cr
N
Si
1045
150-180
0.022
-
-
-
0.0539
1766
NA
-
-
-
-
-
AlN
360-480
-
-
-
0.2940
-
C276
180-240
-
-
10.28
-
0.0023
CE650
120-180
0.528
0.206
-
0.0052
-
Cr
180-300
-
-
25.31
-
-
CrN
240-360
-
-
19.41
0.3739
-
JK49
120-180
-
-
2.89
0.0611
0.0052
Quartz
300-600
-
0.012
-
-
0.0039
Si
60-120
-
-
-
-
0.2420
Ti
300-480
3.986
-
-
-
-
TiN
210-240
1.764
-
-
0.3611
-
TiO2
2.8-15.3
0.942
0.327
-
-
-
==PAGE:87==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
75
Table 4.2:
A summary of the crater depths, sputtering rates, and uncertainty
determined in each of the samples used for calibration. The crater depth is averaged
from multiple profilometer scans. Based on the duration of the measurement (sputter
time), the erosion rate is calculated. The sputter rate is the product of erosion rate
and density. The relative sputtering rate (RSR) is the given sample’s SR divided by
that of the reference sample, 1766 steel. The relative standard deviation (RSD) is
the SD of multiple depth measurements normalized by the average crater depth.
Sample
Crater
Sputter
Erosion
Density
Sputter
RSR
RSD
depth
time
rate
rate
[µm]
[second]
[nm/s]
[g/cm3]
[g/m2/s]
[%]
1045
6.63
180
36.8
2.685
0.099
0.297
9.1
1766
4.98
120
41.5
7.863
0.326
1.000
5.2
AlN
5.83
480
12.2
3.26
0.040
0.119
13.9
C276
17.92
240
74.7
8.89
0.664
1.994
5.8
CE650
2.93
180
16.3
3.719
0.051
0.152
4.1
Cr
17.42
300
58.1
7.15
0.415
1.247
8.0
CrN
18.97
360
52.7
5.16 α
0.272
0.817
7.0β
JK49
7.52
180
41.8
7.544
0.315
0.946
5.2
Quartz
1.52
600
2.5
2.65
0.007
0.020
6.1
Si
2.46
120
20.5
2.328
0.048
0.143
3.1
Ti
12.11
480
25.2
4.5
0.113
0.341
6.8
TiN
3.21
240
13.4
5.3
0.072
0.217
9.4
TiO2
0.20γ
16.3
12.4
3.78
0.047
0.141
5.0
α Assumes a nominal density of 5.9 g/cm3. Based on the modified density range of
85-90%, the density is set at 5.9 ∗87.5% = 5.16, with a relative uncertainty of 3%.
β The RSD based on multiple scans is 6.4%. The value of 7.0% in the table accounts
for an additional 3% density uncertainty, treated as a multiplicative error source.
γ As opposed to basing the sputtering rate on crater depth, the entire film depth is
used, based on ellipsometry characterization.
==PAGE:88==
76
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
4.2.3
Reduced sputtering measurements
Throughout the calibration process, one of the concerns was that the small number
of reference samples available for each element might be insufficient to form a reliable
calibration curve. Of course, a line can be defined from just two points, and one of
those points could be the origin, but it is recommended to use at least six CRMs for
a linear curve, and more if the curve appears non-linear [23].
Since additional reference samples were not immediately available, this motivated
the question of if each sample could be used to generate multiple data points for a
calibration curve. In the typical multi-matrix calibration performed for compositional
depth profiling, each different sample measurement will involve a change in all three
of Ii, ci, and qM. For a single sample, though, a means of adjusting qM would cause
a shift in Ii, despite ci remaining the same. Several studies have noted a dependence
of sputtering rate qM on sample thickness [55, 69, 30], mostly related to a voltage
drop from the sample’s rear to the sputtering sample.
As an experimental means of artificially adjusting sample thickness, a silicon
wafer was inserted behind the rear of the JK49 steel disk, held in place between the
sample and the cathode block. Using the same measurement conditions as before
(i.e. Figure 4.18), this new GDOES measurement recorded a reduction in the major
signal intensities to approximately 96% of their original values. This experiment was
repeated with the silicon wafer buffer replaced by a quartz slide - thicker and more
insulating. In this instance, the signal intensities reduced to 84% of original.
As the method to reduce the sputtering rate seemed to work as intended, it was
repeated with some of the other available calibration samples. As an example, Figure
4.30 compares the C276 GDOES profile as normal (left) and with the quartz slide
inserted (right).
The inclusion of the insulating quartz sample causes the signal
intensities to reduce to approximately 85%.
A comparison of stylus profilometer crater scans for both C276 pt. 02 and pt. 03 is
shown in Figure 4.31. In the course of an identical GDOES measurement duration,
pt.
03 (the quartz-buffered measurement) was sputtered to an average depth of
14.39 µm, which is 80% of pt. 02’s depth of 17.92 µm. This effective thickening of
the sample has the intended effect of decreasing both sputtering rate and intensity
(while leaving elemental concentration unchanged, of course).
This method was used for an additional measurement on C276, CE6501, JK49,
silicon, titanium, and the TiO2 PLD flat film. The results for these measurements
appear qualitatively similar to their normal counterparts (the measurements of Sec-
tion 4.2.1), so rather than plot all GDOES and crater profiles, Table 4.3 merely
summarizes the signal intensity and sputtering rate ratios compared to the normal
calibration measurement. The measurements are termed “reduced”, and an asterisk *
1The reduced measurement on CE650 used a silicon wafer as the buffer, as the plasma failed to
ignite when using the quartz slide
==PAGE:89==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
77
Figure 4.30: A comparison of two GDOES profiles of the same sample C276.
Power: 25 W. Pressure: 700 Pa. The measurement at pt. 03 differs from pt. 02 by
the inclusion of a quartz slide at the backside of the sample. The signal intensities
drop by 15%, due to the reduced effective plasma power.
Figure 4.31: Representative stylus profilometer scans of C276 pt. 02 (the same as
in Figure 4.11), and pt. 03 where the sputtering rate has been artificially slowed by
inserting a quartz slide between the sample backside and the electrode. For both
measurements: Power (nominal applied) = 25 W. Pressure = 700 Pa. Time = 240
s. Average depth pt. 02: 17.92 µm. Average depth pt. 03: 14.39 µm.
==PAGE:90==
78
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
appears after the sample name to distinguish the measurement from its normal coun-
terpart. These reduced calibration measurements will also appear in the calibration
curves in the following section, for a visual comparison. As in the normal calibration
measurements, the sputtering rate was determined by averaging the crater depth
from multiple stylus profilometer scans. In the case of the TiO2 PLD sample, it was
estimated again according to the film thickness (201 nm, by ellipsometry) and time
required to sputter through to the substrate (22.0 s in this case).
Table 4.3: The ratio of selected signal intensities between reduced measurements
and normal measurements on the same sample.
The reduced versions (identified
by an *) involved a quartz slide inserted at the backside of the sample, effectively
increasing sample thickness and resistance. SR is sputtering rate.
Sample
Intensity ratio [%]
SR ratio
Ti
O
Cr
N
Si
[%]
C276*
-
-
90.0
-
-
80.3
CE650*
89.3
83.9
85.8
-
92.7
JK49*
-
-
82.2
84.0
75.8
85.7
Si*
-
-
-
-
70.9
71.0
Ti*
96.9
-
-
-
-
87.5
TiO2*
79.8
56.6
-
-
-
73.9
The decision to reduce sputtering rate by this artificial sample thickening was
based on the supposition that it more closely resembled the differences already in-
herent in different calibration samples (such as dimension and conductivity). A direct
change to the applied power seemed like too blatant of a change to the plasma con-
ditions, invalidating the assumptions that make multi-matrix calibration possible.
Subsequent consideration reveals that this choice may have been misguided. As
explained in Section 2.3.2, the emission yield is the key to relating detected intensity
to elemental concentration in the plasma, and the emission yield depends on condi-
tions in the plasma. Emission yield increases with excitation current and decreases
with excitation voltage [23, 33]. The modeled dependencies in each case are not quite
proportional [42], but the inverse relationships with current and voltage can balance
each other enough to minimize the change to emission yield when both parameters
are scaled together. Indeed, Ref. [42] actually develops a calibration curve from
just three samples, using each sample to produce multiple data points by explicitly
adjusting the power up and down. Such an approach was not found repeated in any
other literature reviewed for this thesis, but a Horiba researcher mentioned in passing
that it was a valid possibility [70].
In contrast, the backside insertion of the quartz sample may be influencing emis-
==PAGE:91==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
79
sion yield in an unacceptable manor.
Recall that the plasma impedance has an
influence on emission yield when the ratio of voltage and current changes.
The mechanism by which the quartz insertion causes a reduction in intensity and
sputtering rate is complex.
The inclusion of an insulating layer no doubt causes
some voltage drop such that bias apparent at the sputtering surface is less than the
applied voltage [67, 66], decreasing the effective plasma power. This much is evident
from the decreased sputtering rates. At a first approximation, the applied current
is unchanged, because the applied voltage is unchanged. Decreasing the effective
voltage while maintaining current would decrease the plasma impedance, increasing
emission yield.
However, the resulting mismatch between source impedance and
plasma impedance would increase the reflected power, causing a feedback loop in
the matching box to seek equilibrium. The final operating point achieved by these
interactions is not so clear. Although the instrument can output a measurement of
applied voltage, the reported value is only valid for conductive samples [24], which
no longer applies due to the quartz layer. Similarly, it is difficult to determine the
current in RF operation mode [66, 42].
Lacking confidence in the validity of this reduced method, these data points will
not ultimately be used in the calculation of calibration curves (unless otherwise
noted). They are, nevertheless, included in the plots in the following section, as
they generally lie consistent with the curve and this may prove useful in future work.
Considering the difficulty of obtaining appropriate oxygen- and nitrogen-containing
CRMs, further study of this topic is recommended to maximize the utility of each
calibration sample.
==PAGE:92==
80
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
4.3
Calibration curves
Based on the emission line intensities (Table 4.1) and relative sputtering rates (Table
4.2) from all calibration sample measurements, the Quantum software was used to
develop calibration curves for titanium, oxygen, chromium, nitrogen, and silicon.
These are shown in Figures 4.32-4.38.
Each measurement data point is plotted as intensity (Ii) vs elemental concen-
tration multiplied by relative sputtering rate (ci qRSR). The error bars account for
uncertainty in sputtering rate, composition, and variation in intensity (transformed
onto the horizontal axis), as explained in Section 3.2.4. The primary contribution to
these error bars stems from the differences in crater depth from repeated profilome-
ter scans. While the relative error may be similar amongst the various calibration
samples, the absolute error will be lower for small concentration or small sputtering
rate. For many of these low-concentration points, the error bars are not even visible
on the plot. Two calibration curves are calculated for each element: one weighted
and one unweighted, favoring lower concentrations and higher concentrations, respec-
tively [23]. As mentioned in the previous section, the data points from measurements
with reduced sputtering rates are also plotted (labeled with a *), but were not used
for calculation unless otherwise noted.
A zero-concentration data point was included for the calculation of each line. This
was provided by the silicon measurement (see Figure 4.22) for the Ti, O, Cr, and N
curves. The titanium measurement (see Figure 4.24) was used for the Si curve. This
acknowledges that even though there is 0% titanium in the silicon bulk, the titanium
emission detector might still record some small non-zero signal due to background
or spectral interference. The zero-concentration point additionally encourages the
curve to pass through the origin. This data point is not plotted on the figures below.
The calibration curve figures also have a highlighted range of ci qRSR marking the
concentration expected (desired) in the (Cr+N) co-doped TiO2 CCS films (assuming
a relative sputtering rate qRSR similar to F-TiO2-O-700-opt).
The quality of each curve is assessed qualitatively. Metrics such as correlation
coefficient R2 are calculated in the software, but are not so appropriate for the multi-
matrix calibration performed for CDP [70].
==PAGE:93==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
81
Titanium
The titanium calibration curve (shown in Figure 4.32) is formed by measurements
on pure titanium, titanium nitride, the TiO2 PLD film, and CE650 (as well as 1045,
effectively acting as another zero-concentration point). The unweighted curve fits all
data points very well. The slope of the weighted curve is skewed upward by the com-
paratively small error in the CE650 calibration sample. The expected concentration
for the CCS samples is just below that of stoichiometric TiO2, as some sites will be
substituted by the Cr or N dopants.
Figure 4.32: Calibration curves formed from the Ii vs ci qRSR data points from
titanium-containing reference samples. Both a weighted and unweighted regression
line are plotted. Reduced measurements (as explained in Section 4.2.3) are plotted
alongside, but were not used in the regression line calculation. A shaded range of
ci qRSR marks the desired concentration in the CCS films.
==PAGE:94==
82
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Oxygen
The oxygen calibration curve (shown in Figure 4.33) is formed by measurements
on TiO2, CE650, and quartz.
The three samples do not form a clear line.
The
weighted curve passes through the origin, due to the negligible error of the silicon
zero-concentration point.
The unweighted curve is pulled by the quartz to cross
the x-axis at a positive value. This is problematic, as a detector reading of 0 V
intensity will be interpreted as a non-zero concentration of oxygen in the sample.
As was noted in the quartz calibration (accompanying Figure 4.20), the signals were
extremely weak. The sample might be so insulating that the plasma conditions and
emission yield are incomparable to the other samples.
Ignoring the quartz data point is of little help, as the TiO2 and CE650 points also
fail to generate a linear curve to the origin. Either the TiO2 intensity is too high, or
the CE650 intensity is too low, or the TiO2 sputtering rate is too low, or the CE650
sputtering rate is too high. Both the TiO2 and CE650 data points fall well on the
titanium curve in Figure 4.32, suggesting that the sputtering rates are reasonable.
Figure 4.33: Calibration curves formed from the Ii vs ci qRSR data points from
oxygen-containing reference samples. Both a weighted and unweighted regression
line are plotted. Reduced measurements (as explained in Section 4.2.3) are plotted
alongside, but were not used in the regression line calculation. A shaded range of
ci qRSR marks the desired concentration in the CCS films.
There was a noticeable hydrogen signal throughout the TiO2 film in Figure 4.28.
One of the reported influences of the hydrogen effect is an enhancement of the O
131.223 nm line [23, 43]. Applying a negative correction to the oxygen calibration
signals could be used to bring the TiO2 and CE650 data points in line. This is a
manual process, where a correction factor in the software must be adjusted until the
==PAGE:95==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
83
results are satisfactory. The outcome is plotted in Figure 4.34, where the quartz
sample has been omitted from the regression calculation. The TiO2 data point has
significantly decreased in intensity, and the curve slope has decreased slightly com-
pared to the weighted curve in Figure 4.33. The curve intersects the positive Y-axis
because the silicon zero-concentration point recorded a non-zero oxygen signal.
There is a danger, of course, in this type of correction, especially applied to
so few points. Although the hydrogen effect on oxygen signals is a valid physical
phenomenon, there is little guidance on what a reasonable correction factor may be.
This hydrogen-corrected calibration curve will be used going forward, but this caveat
should be kept in mind when interpreting quantified results.
As with titanium, the expected oxygen content in the CCS films is just below
that of stoichiometric TiO2.
Figure 4.34: A re-plotting of the data points in Figure 4.33 after application of a
negative hydrogen correction factor to the O 131.223 nm signal intensities. Only a
weighted curve is presented. The reduced measurements are plotted alongside, but
were not used in the regression line calculation. The quartz sample was also omitted
in this instance.
This raises the question of if the hydrogen effect has also altered the titanium
signal in the calibration sample F-TiO2-O-700-opt. It is reported that hydrogen can
decrease the intensity of the Ti 365.355 nm line [43, 38]. The TiO2 data point in
Figure 4.32 already lies precisely on the unweighted curve, though, and application
of a positive correction factor merely shifts the point out of line. This is perhaps
another reason to be skeptical of the correction applied to the oxygen curve. Further
research should consider the relative effects of hydrogen on these titanium and oxygen
emission lines.
==PAGE:96==
84
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Chromium
The chromium calibration curve (shown Figure 4.35) is formed by measurements on
pure chromium, the CrN PLD target, C276, and JK49. The Cr 425.439 nm emission
line is classified as a resonant line and is known to suffer from self-absorption. For
this reason, a 2nd-order curve has been applied, with a very good fit to the data [23].
The weighted and unweighted curves differ only slightly. The weighted curve crosses
closer to the origin, so this will be preferred. The reduced measurements of JK49*
and C276*, although not used for regression calculation, happen to fit quite well on
the curve.
As mentioned in Section 3.1.2, some results were additionally calculated as if the
CrN PLD target were actually Cr2N. This would have no impact on the measured
intensity, but the increased concentration of chromium shifts the point right on the
x-axis. The higher density of Cr2N compared to CrN also means that the measured
crater depth would correspond to a higher sputtering rate.
Figure 4.35: Calibration curves formed from the Ii vs ci qRSR data points from
chromium-containing reference samples. Both a weighted and unweighted regression
line are plotted.
A 2nd-order curve is used to account for self-absorption effects.
Reduced measurements (as explained in Section 4.2.3) are plotted alongside, but
were not used in the regression line calculation. A shaded range (far left) of ci qRSR
marks the desired concentration in the CCS films.
Both of the regression curves plotted in Figure 4.35 are calculated without either
the CrN or Cr2N data points (that is, only the Cr, C276, JK49, and silicon zero-
concentration points were used). The Cr2N clearly fits better with the regression line.
When the curve is calculated with the inclusion of CrN (not shown), it overshoots
the C276 and Cr points. When the curve is calculated with the inclusion of Cr2N
==PAGE:97==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
85
(not shown), it remains nearly indistinguishable from the one in Figure 4.35.
The expected concentration of chromium in the CCS samples is up to 10 at%.
After factoring by the relative sputtering rate of TiO2, this lies at the far left range
of the concentrations sampled, below even JK49. Despite the apparently good fit
of the overall curve, more reference samples should be included in this very low-
concentration range.
==PAGE:98==
86
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Nitrogen
The nitrogen calibration curve (shown Figure 4.36) is formed by measurements on
the CrN PLD target, TiN, AlN, JK49 and CE650. Once, again, a Cr2N version of
the PLD target is included. Although Cr2N has a larger sputtering rate than CrN,
the decreased nitrogen content in the former results in a leftward shift on the x-axis.
The data points are disparate. There is no clear best choice for a regression curve.
Two separate curves are plotted, based on a different selection of the data points.
The first, “Weighted, partial”, forms a line from the origin through the AlN and TiN
points. The JK49 and reduced JK49* points also form a line to the origin which
happens to cross the Cr2N point as well. The unweighted version of this curve fits
slightly better than the weighted, so it is labeled “Unweighted, partial”.
Figure 4.36: Calibration curves formed from the Ii vs ci qRSR data points from
nitrogen-containing reference samples. A weighted regression line is built from TiN,
AlN, and CE650.
An unweighted regression line is built from JK49, JK49* and
CE650. Reduced measurements (as explained in Section 4.2.3) are plotted alongside,
but were not used in the regression line calculation. A shaded range (far left) of
ci qRSR marks the desired concentration in the CCS films.
Unlike with the oxygen calibration curve, there are no hydrogen effects present
to distort the recorded intensities. Nor is there reason to suspect the N 149.267 nm
emission line of self-absorption. One remaining possibility is spectral interference.
The appendix in [23] calculates a possible chromium emission interference for the
N 149.267 nm line.
Chromium is present in both JK49 and CrxN, making this
a potential culprit.
As with the hydrogen effect, the Quantum software enables
modification of the regression equation by adding a variable, in this case a dependence
==PAGE:99==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
87
on the measured chromium signal of the same sample.
Re-computing the nitrogen calibration curve with the inclusion of this chromium
correction factor yields an impressive improvement in the fit across all samples. The
updated curve is plotted in Figure 4.37. TiN, AlN, and CE650 contain no chromium,
so their data points are left untouched.
The JK49 and CrxN points are shifted
leftward. The chromium correction factor is negative, meaning that the intensity
recorded for these two samples actually results from an effectively smaller nitrogen
concentration ci qRSR. Put another way, the chromium interference serves to reduce
the recorded intensity of the N 149.267 nm line. This seems strange, as spectral
interference more often results in a stronger intensity at the wavelength of detection,
caused by additional emissions from the offending interference element. A weaken-
ing of some elemental signals is observed in the case of hydrogen, so there is some
precedent for intensity suppression. The mechanism by which this could occur in the
N 149.267 nm line due to the presence of chromium is not clear.
Figure 4.37: A re-plotting of the data points in Figure 4.36 after application of a
negative chromium interference correction factor to the N 149.267 nm signal intensi-
ties. The JK49, JK49*, Cr2N and CrN data points have all been shift left compared
to Figure 4.36. Only an unweighted curve is presented. The reduced measurements
are plotted alongside, but were not used in the regression line calculation.
The (unweighted) regression line in Figure 4.37 is calculated using TiN, AlN,
Jk49, and CE650. As in the chromium calibration curve, the Cr2N point fits the
line more closely than the CrN. Indeed, when Cr2N is included in the fitting process
(curve not shown), the chromium calibration factor is able to shift it into line with
TiN, AlN, and JK49. The same cannot be said of CrN, which remains displaced to
the right of the curve (not shown).
==PAGE:100==
88
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
The inclusion of interference corrections in the regression equation must be used
cautiously. An improvement may be apparent simply because the additional cor-
rection parameter grants an extra degree of freedom [45]. The application in this
instance seems justified, however.
An issue arises, though, when considering a sample containing chromium, but
without nitrogen. Because the software assumes a suppression of the nitrogen signal
in proportion to the chromium signal, it will wrongly attempt to correct a zero-
intensity nitrogen signal up to a non-zero value. This is especially relevant in the
CCS samples, where nitrogen levels are already low and chromium seemed to be in-
corporated more readily into the films. In the quantified results section, two versions
will be presented: one which applies only the slope and intercept of the nitrogen cal-
ibration curve in Figure 4.37 (i.e. the chromium correction is used on the calibration
samples, but not for the PLD samples), and another which additionally applies the
chromium correction factor to the PLD samples.
The upper range of nitrogen expected in the CCS films is 10 at%, falling leftward
of the JK49 data point. Like in the chromium calibration, more low-concentration
samples would ideally be included. Future work could employ a different nitrogen
emission line free of spectral interference.
==PAGE:101==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
89
Silicon
The silicon calibration curve (shown Figure 4.38) is formed by measurements on pure
silicon, 1045, JK49, C276, and quartz. The metallic calibration samples contain only
a small amount of silicon and so are clustered near the origin. The quartz sample, as
noted before, produced very weak signals. The weighted and unweighted regression
lines are quite similar and both pass well through the silicon data point, at the
concentration range of interest. The unweighted curve fits slightly better and also
passes closer to the origin.
Figure 4.38: Calibration curves formed from the Ii vs ci qRSR data points from
silicon-containing reference samples.
Both a weighted and unweighted regression
line are plotted. Reduced measurements (as explained in Section 4.2.3) are plotted
alongside, but were not used in the regression line calculation. A shaded range of
ci qRSR is the expected concentration in the silicon substrate of the CCS films.
The reduced Si* measurement lies nicely on the curve. The reduced JK49* and
C276* points are omitted from the graph as they effectively overlap with the normal
JK49 and C276 data points. This silicon calibration curve is of least consequence,
and it is included only because the PLD substrate is silicon. It is expected that only
concentrations of 0% and 100% will appear in the quantified GDOES results.
==PAGE:102==
90
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Calibration curve summary and validation
As a recap, the calibration curves which will be used for PLD film quantifica-
tion are: unweighted titanium, weighted hydrogen-corrected oxygen, weighted 2nd-
order chromium, unweighted silicon, and two versions of the unweighted chromium-
corrected nitrogen curve - one based solely on the curve in Figure 4.37, and one which
additionally applies a chromium-correction to the PLD sample nitrogen levels.
Ideally, this set of curves would be validated against additional CRMs to refine the
curves and get an estimate of expected accuracy. Any available CRMs were already
used for calibration in this work, so the only alternative is to use some of these
calibration samples to check curve quality. The options within this set of calibration
samples is limited even further, because calibration curves were only calculated for
a selection of elements. Besides the five elemental curves shown here, aluminum and
iron were the only other elements with sufficient data points to generate a curve.
The CE650 sample is one option whose elemental composition is covered by the
available calibration curves (with the exception of 0.4 wt% tungsten). Applying the
calibration to the data from Figure 4.12 yields (in wt%): 36.2% Al, 31.2% O, 27.6%
Ti, 3.8% C, and 0.1% N. Compared to the specified concentrations in Table 3.3,
the largest discrepancy is for titanium, which has a nominal concentration of 22.0%.
The calculated density is 3.654 g/cm3, a 17% increase compared to the input value of
3.113 g/cm3. The calculated sputtered depth is 2.592 µm, a 12% reduction compared
to the profilometer measurement of 2.932 µm.
The density estimation is simply based on a concentration-weighted sum of ele-
mental densities (with a correction for oxides and nitrides). This method lacks the
detail to take into account differing densities of different crystalline phases. Addi-
tionally, any errors in the calculated elemental concentration will translate into errors
in the density. The depth calculated in the quantification process is, in turn, based
on the estimated density at each timestep in the profile. The uncertainties in density
and sputtering depth are related, then, to any inaccuracy in the quantified elemental
concentrations.
The TiO2 PLD film is also an interesting calibration sample to check.
This
quantification fares somewhat better; applying the calibration curves to the data
in Figure 4.28 yields (in wt%): 57.3% Ti and 40.0% O, with the balance made
up of contaminating signals such as C, Si, and N. The calculated density is 4.144
g/cm3, 9.6% higher than the input value of 3.780 g/cm3. This density more closely
matches that of rutile TiO2. Again, though, the model is based purely on elemental
concentrations and cannot factor crystal phase.
The calculated film thickness is
approximately 180 nm, a 10% decrease compared to the ellipsometry value of 200
nm.
The estimated error of this calibration is larger than ideal. The quantitative re-
sults presented at the end of the chapter should be interpreted with this in mind.
==PAGE:103==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
91
The inclusion of more CRMs, and perhaps a more thorough application of software
corrections, could help to improve the performance. The mediocre quality of the cali-
bration curves, however, does not diminish the use of GDOES for qualitative analysis
and comparison.
4.4
PLD plume films - qualitative
Before applying any of the calibration curves for quantitative results, the qualitative
GDOES measurements will be presented for the fabricated PLD films. In the fol-
lowing results, only Ti, O, Cr, N, Si, H, and C are plotted, using the same colors
as in the calibration GDOES profiles. The GDOES profile for each sample contains
an inset photograph of the wafer and the marked crater. The measurement position
naming (with exception of P-CrN-O-700) is based on the closest point in the wafer
alignment template (see Figure 3.10). Typically, measurements were made at pt.
21, the upper left near the wafer flat, in order to leave the plume center intact for
other measurements. Some samples, however, received additional measurement at
other locations. As a reminder, all the PLD samples are deposited on a 2” (50.8 mm)
diameter silicon wafer, and the GDOES crater has a diameter of 4 mm. All measure-
ments extend completely through the deposited layer and into the silicon substrate.
All three samples deposited using the CrN target are plotted with the same Y-axis
range, for easier signal comparison. Likewise for the four samples deposited using
the TiO2 target.
==PAGE:104==
92
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
P-CrN-O-700
The qualitative GDOES profile of P-CrN-O-700 is shown in Figure 4.39, along with
a photograph of the wafer and measurement position. The measured position pre-
sented for this sample is near the plume center, where the film is thickest. While
some nitrogen is present, it is apparent that merely ablating CrN in O2 results in
noticeable oxygen incorporation into the film. This finding aligns with the previous
suspicion which prompted the N2-O2 gas cycling idea. The chromium signal has an
oscillatory appearance, suggesting an optical interference effect as described in Sec-
tion 2.2.4. The chromium emission line used for detection is 425.439 nm (or 2.91
eV), which should be absorbed by non-transparent CrN to nullify the interference
effect. The optical response has clearly been altered by the presence of Cr2O3. Some
aluminum signal (Al 396.157 nm) was also recorded in the film (not plotted). This
could possibly be attributed to spectral interference from chromium (which has a
weak line at 396.369 nm) [36], however the aluminum did not appear in the GDOES
profiles for any of the following chromium-containing samples.
Figure 4.39: GDOES profile of CrN-ablated plume film, deposited in O2 atmosphere
at 700°C.
==PAGE:105==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
93
P-CrN-N-cy-O-700
The qualitative GDOES profile of P-CrN-N-cy-O-700 is shown in Figure 4.40, along
with a photograph of the wafer and measurement position. The measured position on
this sample is, once again, near the plume center. Although ablation and deposition
took place only in N2, the cycling periods to O2 have still introduced oxygen into
the film. The rising shape of the chromium signal appears similar to the first crest
in the previous sample, so the optical interference effect could be involved here as
well. Without seeing more oscillations though (due to the thinness of the film), it is
difficult to say conclusively.
It is strange that the nitrogen signal would be weaker for this sample compared
to the previous one. Possibly, the combination of elevated substrate temperature
(700°C) and the addition of waiting periods during the gas cycling provided more
opportunity for desorption of deposited nitrogen from the film back into the chamber.
In any case, observing the undesired effect of mere O2 atmosphere exposure prompted
the TiO2-in-N2 capping idea.
Figure 4.40: GDOES profile of CrN-ablated plume film, deposited in N2 atmosphere
at 700°C, with periodic intervals of cycling to O2 without deposition.
==PAGE:106==
94
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
P-CrN-N-550
To conclude the series of PLD films deposited using the CrN target, this final sample
GDOES measurement is plotted in Figure 4.41, along with a photograph of the wafer
and measurement position. The GDOES profile displays the desired strong nitrogen
signal. Note that, unlike the previous two samples, the nitrogen signal here is not
scaled by 5. The nitrogen intensity plateaus around 0.326 V. The chromium signal
is also higher than the preceding cases, averaging 14.32 V.
Consider the GDOES profile from the CrN PLD target which was used to deposit
this film: the nitrogen signal intensity was 0.374 V and the chromium intensity was
19.41 V (see Figure 4.16 and Table 4.1). Thus, the nitrogen signal in this plume film
is 87% of the target, and the chromium signal is 74%. That both signals are lower
could stem from differences in the material densities, or from the silicon substrate
having a higher resistance (and lower sputtering rate) than the CrN PLD target. The
material transfer from the target is apparently not quite stoichiometric though. The
relative nitrogen signal may be higher than the relative chromium signal because the
deposition took place in a background gas of N2, which was somewhat incorporated
into the film. Additionally, it is also expected that the lower substrate temperature
of 550°C is more suited for nitrogen retention in the film [49].
The oxygen signal is not completely absent though. It is possible that the CrN
PLD target surface was oxidized to a degree in a previous N2-cycle-O2 deposition,
and this could explain the transfer source.
Figure 4.41: GDOES profile of CrN-ablated plume film, deposited in N2 atmosphere
at 550°C.
==PAGE:107==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
95
P-TiO2-O-700
Shifting now to the TiO2 PLD plume films, the first is a deposition solely in O2
background gas, at a high substrate temperature of 700°C. The qualitative GDOES
profile of P-TiO2-O-700 is shown in Figure 4.42, along with a photograph of the
wafer and measurement position. The titanium signal oscillations are the result of
optical interference. The spectrometer uses the 365.355 nm (3.38 eV) emission line for
titanium, which is slightly beyond the absorption edge determined for these samples
by ellipsometry. Thus, plasma emissions directed back toward the sample reflect both
at the film surface and also transmit through to reflect from the silicon substrate,
satisfying the conditions for interference as explained in Section 2.2.4. The O, H,
and C lines are at shorter wavelengths, so these are absorbed by the film without
generating any oscillations at the detector. This effect can be removed in the software,
but it is left unaltered for these qualitative results (in part because the smoothing
algorithm fails with some of the thinner films presented later).
The decaying shapes of the hydrogen and carbon signals have the appearance of
surface contamination. However, a slight bump is visible in the hydrogen intensity
at the silicon interface. This could be contamination on the silicon wafer prior to
deposition, or it could result from minor hydrogen incorporation during film depo-
sition, which subsequently concentrated at the interface. In any case, the presence
of hydrogen in the plasma can have a variety of complicating effects, as presented in
Section 2.2.4.
Figure 4.42: GDOES profile of TiO2-ablated plume film, deposited in O2 atmo-
sphere at 700°C.
==PAGE:108==
96
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
P-TiO2-O-550
This sample is similar to the previous, with the difference being the substrate heating
temperature has been dropped to 550°C, and fewer pulses were used resulting in a
thinner film. The qualitative GDOES profile is shown in Figure 4.43, along with
a photograph of the wafer and measurement position.
The titanium and oxygen
intensities are slightly weaker than in the previous sample, and the hydrogen and
carbon signals are more apparent.
Figure 4.43: GDOES profile of TiO2-ablated plume film, deposited in O2 atmo-
sphere at 550°C.
==PAGE:109==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
97
P-TiO2-N-cy-O-700
This sample tested the effect of TiO2 ablation in a N2 environment, with additional
cycles to O2. The qualitative GDOES profile is shown in Figure 4.44, along with a
photograph of the wafer and measurement position. Compared to P-TiO2-O-700, a
higher titanium signal intensity is recorded for this film, as well as a smaller oxygen
signal, and a non-zero nitrogen signal.
Figure 4.44: GDOES profile of TiO2-ablated plume film, deposited in N2 atmo-
sphere at 700°C, with periodic intervals of cycling to O2 without deposition.
==PAGE:110==
98
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
P-TiO2-N-cy-O-550
This sample is comparable to the previous, but was deposited on a lower-temperature
substrate. The qualitative GDOES profile of P-TiO2-N-cy-O-550 is shown in Figure
4.45, along with a photograph of the wafer and measurement position. The magnitude
of the titanium intensity is similar as the previous sample. The oxygen signal is
slightly higher, and the nitrogen signal is 3x larger, clearly demonstrating that lower
temperatures are more favorable for nitrogen incorporation.
Figure 4.45: GDOES profile of TiO2-ablated plume film, deposited in N2 atmo-
sphere at 550°C, with periodic intervals of cycling to O2 without deposition.
==PAGE:111==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
99
4.5
PLD CCS films - qualitative
In this next section, GDOES profiles of three CCS films, made using combinatorial
PLD, are presented. These wafers were already partitioned for other experiments,
so the central, flattest section containing the plume centers and wafer center were
not available for measurement. In order to get a sense of the elemental gradient,
GDOES measurements were taken laterally across the wafer, starting at the left-
side (where doping concentrations are lowest) and moving toward the right (where
higher doping concentrations are expected). In order to form a sufficient chamber
seal with the O-ring, a margin (approximately 6 mm) around each measurement
position is required. This prevented measurement closer to the cleaved center line
and limited four measurements side-by-side. A photo of each wafer is included with
its four measurement positions. The thickness fringes indicate that the film thickness
is similar in each measurement.
CCS-O-700
This sample (photographed in Figure 4.46) represents the simplest approach to create
a continuous compositional spread using combinatorial PLD. The entire deposition
took place in an O2 background gas, with an elevated substrate temperature. With
regard to the plume films, the profiles here are expected to be most similar to P-
TiO2-O-700 at pt. 01, with increasing influences in accordance with P-CrN-O-700
moving toward pt. 04.
The four measurement positions are plotted together in Figure 4.47 using identical
axes for time and intensity, and identical scaling factors for chromium and nitrogen.
The familiar optical interference oscillations are observable for all the titanium sig-
nals, as well as for chromium. Beginning at pt. 01, this position is expected to
have the least amount of Cr and N doping. A noticeable chromium signal is already
present at this position, as well as a very small nitrogen signal. The oxygen signal
takes some seconds to level out, which differs from the flat profile seen at the other
positions. In pt. 02, the chromium signal has increased, the titanium signal has
reduced slightly, and the other signals are largely the same. For pts. 03 and 04, the
chromium intensity continues to increase, as does the nitrogen, although it is difficult
to see. The remaining signals are mostly unchanged. A decaying hydrogen signal is
also present at the surface in each position. The diminutive nitrogen signals are as
expected, considering the results from P-CrN-O-700. An O2 background and 700°C
substrate temperature are not conducive to nitrogen deposition. SIMS measurement
of this sample found noticeable concentration gradients in chromium and nitrogen
at the surface compared to the bottom of the film [49]. This is not apparent in the
GDOES depth profile, although the oscillations slightly obscure any possible trend.
Figure 4.48 is a more concise comparison of the Ti, O, Cr, and N signals at each
==PAGE:112==
100
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
position, averaged between time 2-16 s, where the GDOES profiles are stable in the
film. The trends are as noted above: slightly stronger titanium and weaker oxygen at
pt. 01, and steadily increasing chromium and nitrogen signals. The rising nitrogen
intensity is more apparent here, when plotted on it’s own axis.
Figure 4.46: A photograph of the combinatorial PLD sample CCS-O-700. The
center segment was taken for other experiments. Four (labeled) measurement posi-
tions are visible, spanning from left (where minimal Cr and N doping is expected) to
right (where maximum Cr and N doping is expected). The film is deposited on a 2”
diameter silicon wafer substrate. The GDOES crater spots are 4 mm in diameter.
==PAGE:113==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
101
Figure 4.47: Qualitative GDOES profiles of the four positions measured on CCS-
O-700. The chromium and nitrogen signals have been scaled by 1
2 and 5, respectively.
Figure 4.48: A comparison of average signal intensities at each position between
2-16 seconds.
The intensity values are un-scaled, but nitrogen is plotted on the
secondary Y-axis in mV.
==PAGE:114==
102
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
CCS-Cap-NoCr
As a reminder, this sample was fabricated as a test of the capping idea, where some
rounds of TiO2 ablation would take in a N2 environment (at deposition position 2).
In order to isolate the effects of this capping, no CrN ablation took place. Therefore,
this sample is akin to P-TiO2-O-550 on the left, and P-TiO2-N-cy-O-550 on the right.
Figure 4.49 provides a photograph of the sample and the four GDOES measurement
positions. The vertical cleavage of this sample forced the GDOES measurements
slightly closer together on each side.
The results from the four measurement positions are plotted together in Figure
4.50 using identical axes for time and intensity, and an identical scaling factor for
nitrogen.
The titanium and oxygen signals are largely unchanged at each point,
except for a slightly lower oxygen intensity at pt. 01. The nitrogen profiles at pts.
01 and 02 are nearly the same, but the signal intensity rises at pts. 03 and 04, the
side where the capping depositions took place. Obviously there is no chromium to
analyze.
Figure 4.49: A photograph of the PLD sample CCS-Cap-NoCr. The center segment
was taken for other experiments, and the wafer was further cleaved vertically. Four
(labeled) measurement positions are visible, spanning from left (the side of the TiO2
ablation purely in O2) to right (where the TiOxNy capping is thickest). The film is
deposited on a 2” diameter silicon wafer substrate. The GDOES crater spots are 4
mm in diameter.
There is no need for a comparative plot since the nitrogen signal is the only
varying quantity of interest. It roughly doubles in intensity at pt. 04 compared to
pt. 01, going from 10.7 to 23.2 mV. Interestingly, the magnitude of the nitrogen
signal achieved here by capping (23.2 mV) surpassed the magnitude displayed in
the previous sample (9.4 mV) based on deposition from the CrN target. Besides
reiterating the benefits of low substrate temperature and N2 background gas for
nitrogen retention in the film, this also highlights the importance of accounting for
==PAGE:115==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
103
this nitrogen contribution when targeting specific doping levels in future capped
samples.
Figure 4.50: Qualitative GDOES profiles of the four positions measured on CCS-
Cap-NoCr. The nitrogen signal has been scaled up by a factor of 5 for better visibility.
==PAGE:116==
104
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
CCS-Cap1
CCS-Cap1 is the culmination of this batch of PLD samples, designed based on the
PLD simulation work, and including both Cr and N doping and TiOxNy capping. A
photograph is provided in Figure 4.51.
The measurements from the four positions are plotted together in Figure 4.52
using identical axes for time and intensity, and identical scaling factors for chromium
and nitrogen. The results match with the findings from the previous samples. While
the titanium and oxygen signals don’t change much from pt.
01 to pt.
04, the
chromium and nitrogen profiles steadily intensify, as expected.
The titanium oscillations, which have appeared in many profiles so far, seem to
dampen in magnitude. This is related to the changing optical properties of the film
with Cr and N inclusion.
As the absorption edge creeps lower in energy due to
sub-bandgap energy levels, the film is no longer completely transparent to the Ti
365.355 nm (3.38 eV) emission line, weakening the effect of optical interference. The
Cr 425.439 nm (2.91 eV) line remains in the transparent range.
The trend in average signal intensities across the four positions is shown in Figure
4.53. The rise in intensity across the measured positions is linear for both chromium
and nitrogen. Comparing pts. 01 and 04, the chromium intensity increases 276%,
from 1.24 V to 3.41 V. The nitrogen intensity increases 462%, from 14.5 mV to 66.9
mV.
Figure 4.51: A photograph of the combinatorial PLD sample CCS-Cap1. The cen-
ter segment was taken for other experiments. Four (labeled) measurement positions
are visible, spanning from left (where minimal Cr and N doping is expected) to the
right (where maximum Cr and N doping is expected). A mysterious “scratch” is
visible spanning the gap on the left side, but does not overlap any GDOES measure-
ments. The film is deposited on a 2” diameter silicon wafer substrate. The GDOES
crater spots are 4 mm in diameter.
==PAGE:117==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
105
Figure 4.52: Qualitative GDOES profiles of the four positions measured on CCS-
Cap1. The chromium and nitrogen signals have been scaled by 1
2 and 5, respectively.
Figure 4.53: A comparison of average signal intensities at each position between
2-15 seconds.
The intensity values are un-scaled, but nitrogen is plotted on the
secondary Y-axis in mV.
==PAGE:118==
106
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
4.6
PLD CCS films - quantitative
Now, the calibration curves developed in Section 4.3 are applied to the PLD CCS
film GDOES profiles to give quantified elemental concentrations. As in the previous
section, all four measurement locations on each sample will be plotted together for
comparison, using at% on the y-axis. Any optical interference oscillations present
in the qualitative profiles of the CCS samples were smoothed out in software before
quantification. For CCS-O-700 and CCS-Cap1, two versions of the quantified results
will be presented. The first uses the nitrogen calibration curve as in Figure 4.37 but
does not apply the chromium-interference correction factor to the measured signals.
The second uses the nitrogen curve and additionally attempts to correct (increase)
the nitrogen intensity in accordance with the chromium intensity.
Average concentration percentages are included with the data labels, based on a
selected range between the sample surface and the onset of the silicon signal. These
do not always sum precisely to 100% because of non-zero concentration contributions
from other unplotted elements.
Prior elemental characterization of these films includes results from SIMS (for
Cr and N) and EDX (for Cr). These measurements, however, took place along the
center-line of the wafers, which was not available for GDOES measurement [51]. The
SIMS and EDX results can be extrapolated to a degree, and this forms a basis for
comparison, along with the PLD simulation results for doping concentration across
the samples.
Given the uncertainty of the calibration, there is no need to plot quantified profiles
for all of the PLD plume films.
CCS-O-700
The first set of quantified results for the four GDOES measurements on CCS-O-700
are plotted together in Figure 4.54 (referring to the positions shown in Figure 4.46).
The nitrogen concentrations here are calculated using the measured intensity and the
calibration curve in Figure 4.37. As was seen in the qualitative profiles (see Figure
4.47), the nitrogen incorporation into this film was minimal, even at pt. 04 closer to
the 2nd plume center. The chromium content is more in agreement with the simulated
concentrations. The TiO2 is closest to stoichiometric at pt. 01. Moving further right
on the wafer sees the titanium concentration drop to around 20 at% at pts. 02-04.
The oxygen concentration jumps up at pt. 02, then decreases at pt. 03 and 04 as
the chromium content increases.
The film thickness at these points is calculated by the calibration to be be-
tween 190-230 nm. The titanium and oxygen signals decay into the silicon substrate
for another 300 nm. This may be due to diffusion during deposition on the high-
temperature substrate, or it could simply be an effect of a non-flat crater shape at the
==PAGE:119==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
107
layer interface. The calculated density for the film at these four positions is 4.0-4.3
g/cm3. For pure TiO2, this falls in the range of rutile rather than anatase. Recall
though, in the calibration curve validation based on F-TiO2-O-700-opt (Section 4.3),
a density consistent with rutile was also reported, even though the film is anatase
according to other methods. The doping of chromium would also have the effect of
increasing density.
Figure 4.54: Composition depth profiles of four measurement positions on CCS-O-
700. The calibration curves used were Ti, O, Cr, N (without any intensity correction),
and Si.
The CCS-O-700 profiles in Figure 4.55 relies on the same measurements as in
4.54, but the calibration was applied after the raw nitrogen intensities had been
scaled up proportional to the chromium signal. The effect is quite noticeable, as the
nitrogen concentrations are much larger than in Figure 4.54 and nearly coincident
==PAGE:120==
108
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
with the chromium profiles. Both values roughly double at pt. 04 compared to pt.
01. The trends in titanium and oxygen content are similar to that mentioned above.
The addition of nitrogen content here takes place at the expense of oxygen. The
calculated densities and layer thicknesses are similar to the previous calibration.
The difference in nitrogen concentration between Figures 4.54 and 4.55 highlights
the impact caused by changes in the set of calibration curves. The results in the
first plot (without chromium-corrected nitrogen levels) are more in agreement with
the SIMS measurements taken on this sample [49]. One of the purposes of exploring
GDOES, however, was to consider if it might give more reliable results for nitrogen
at higher concentrations.
Figure 4.55: A comparable CDP of CCS-O-700 to Figure 4.54, but using a nitrogen
calibration that includes a correction to nitrogen concentration according to interfer-
ence from the chromium signal.
==PAGE:121==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
109
CCS-Cap-NoCr
Figure 4.56 displays the quantified GDOES profiles for four measurements along
sample CCS-Cap-NoCr (referring to the positions shown in Figure 4.49). This sample
contains no chromium, so there is no difference in results when using the nitrogen
calibration curve with/without the chromium correction factor. The quantitative
results do not contain so much more information than the qualitative ones in Figure
4.50.
The main finding is simply that the capping processes introduces a small
concentration of nitrogen into the film, more so on the the plume center ×2 side of
the wafer.
Figure 4.56: Composition depth profiles of four measurement positions on CCS-
Cap-NoCr. The calibration curves used were Ti, O, Cr, N (without any intensity
correction), and Si.
As in CCS-O-700 above, pt. 01 displays a lower oxygen concentration and higher
==PAGE:122==
110
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
titanium concentration compared to pts. 02-04. Indeed, the film at pt. 01 is the
closest to stoichiometric TiO2, with the other pts. displaying an abundance of oxygen.
The slight upward slope in the oxygen profiles could be due to a hydrogen effect, where
the software is suppressing the oxygen signal intensity near the surface (in accordance
with a decaying hydrogen signal, see Figure 4.50). Since the sum of all elemental
concentrations must equal 100%, a slope in the oxygen line forces a mirrored slope
in the titanium line.
The calculated density is in a slightly decreased range compared with the previous
sample: 4.0-4.2 g/cm3. This makes sense given the absence of chromium. The film
depth calculated at these four positions is around 190-200 nm.
==PAGE:123==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
111
CCS-Cap1
First, the CCS-Cap1 profiles are quantified without any chromium-interference cor-
rections to nitrogen. The results at the four measurement positions are presented in
Figure 4.57 (referring to the positions shown in Figure 4.51).
Both the chromium and nitrogen concentrations increase moving from pt. 01
across to pt. 04. The relative concentrations are more consistent with deposition
from a Cr2N target. If the capping-based nitrogen levels in Figure 4.57 are similar
to Figure 4.56, then the nitrogen contributed from the PLD target is even less. That
is not to say a CrN stoichiometry is impossible for the PLD target, as prior results
demonstrated that chromium is more readily incorporated into the samples than
nitrogen anyway.
According to unpublished supplementary data for [51], the expected chromium
and nitrogen concentrations at pt. 01 are in the range 3.5-4.5 at%, pt. 02 is between
5.5-6.5 at%, pt. 03 is 7.8-9.2 at%, and pt. 04 is pt. 04 spans 10.0-11.2 at%. The
doping concentrations of chromium in these GDOES measurements are higher than
expected from the simulation. The maximum value of 17.3% at pt. 04 is, however, in
the range of the chromium concentrations determined by SIMS on this sample [51].
The chromium levels observed here are perhaps more consistent with deposition from
a Cr2N PLD target. The nitrogen concentrations conform more closely to (but fall
somewhat below) the simulated values.
Similar to the case for CCS-O-700 above, pt. 01 here displays an initial dip and
rise, whereas the signal is stable in pts. 02-4. The onset of the silicon signal in pt.
01 is more gradual than in any of the other CDP plots. This has the appearance
of poor lateral resolution due to a non-uniform crater shape, although it’s unclear
why this point should suffer more than the others. Also in keeping with CCS-O-700,
the titanium concentration, after dropping from its pt. 01 level, does not change so
much at pts. 02-04. The increasing doping levels has a greater impact on oxygen,
correlating with a decrease in concentration. The ratio of titanium to oxygen con-
centration at pts. 03 and 04 is slightly closer to stoichiometric compared to those
pts. in CCS-O-700 or CCS-Cap-NoCr.
The density in the film calculated according to the calibration curves rises from
4.4 g/cm3 at pt. 01 to 4.7 g/cm3 at pt. 04, in agreement with increasing chromium
content. The film thickness is calculated to be 190-210 nm, which is somewhat thinner
than the simulated values at these measurement positions [51].
==PAGE:124==
112
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Figure 4.57: Composition depth profiles of four measurement positions on CCS-
Cap1. The calibration curves used were Ti, O, Cr, N (without any intensity correc-
tion), and Si.
Figure 4.58 presents the compositional depth profiles of CCS-Cap1 pts. 01-04
when the chromium-based nitrogen correction factor is applied in the calibration. As
expected, the nitrogen concentration at each point strongly increases, and the other
elements decrease somewhat in concentration compared to Figure 4.57. The doping
levels in this case are much larger (nearly double) the simulated values. This version
of the quantification is consistent with deposition from a stoichiometric CrN PLD
target, factoring in a small boost to nitrogen levels due to the capping procedure. The
trends in oxygen and nitrogen across the four measurements are otherwise the same
as commented above. The density and film thicknesses are also not substantially
different.
In all three CCS samples, pt. 01 demonstrates some differences from pts. 02-04.
==PAGE:125==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
113
Figure 4.58: A comparable CDP of CCS-Cap1 to Figure 4.57, but using a nitrogen
calibration that includes a correction to nitrogen concentration according to interfer-
ence from the chromium signal.
Whereas the latter points display a relatively steady oxygen concentration in the
film, the profile at pt. 01 seems to dip at the surface before rising slightly. According
to the trend in pts. 02-4, as chromium and nitrogen doping concentrations increase,
oxygen content decreases and titanium remains largely unchanged. Comparing pt. 01
and pt. 02, however, the oxygen concentration actually increases, and the titanium
concentration noticeably falls. Despite less chromium at pt. 01, the density calculated
for this region of the film is consistently higher than at pt. 02.
These differences may be related to the crystallinity of the film. In Ref. [51], TEM
bright-field and selected-area electron diffraction measurements were taken along the
center line of the wafer and found significantly higher crystalline quality near plume
==PAGE:126==
114
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
center ×1. This may be related to the higher kinetic energy of ablated atoms de-
positing at this position. Although pt. 01 here is vertically displaced from ×1, it may
still benefit to a degree from the proximity. Without having TEM measurements at
the particular GDOES points presented here, it is difficult to do more than speculate.
A final note simply reiterates the major difference in results based on the ap-
plication/omission of correcting nitrogen intensity based on a possible chromium
interference. The quantified nitrogen concentrations change by more than a factor of
2. Given the relatively large errors found when validating the calibration curves, it
may be more appropriate to treat these CDP results as another form of qualitative
results, offering useful comparative information, but lacking the rigor to confidently
state elemental concentrations.
4.7
Future work
This project has made some progress in attempting to use GDOES for quantitative
elemental analysis of CCS PLD films. Of course, for every answer found, two more
questions seem to arise.
Some avenues for future investigation include adjustments to the instrumental
setup and measurement method. Diagnostic checks on a reference sample have re-
vealed a steady decrease in detected optical intensity of the years.
Cleaning the
spectrometer window may be an overdue task. The issues with atmospheric leakage
(and resulting uncertainty in the true nitrogen signal) is suspected to be related to
sample sealing. It is possible that the O-ring may be somewhat dried out or worn.
Replacing this component could improve the vacuum integrity.
A smaller measurement area would be preferable for these samples, both to min-
imize the destructive consequences and to obtain results over a tighter range of con-
centration gradient. Smaller anodes (2 mm diameter, for example) are available, but
sharing a lab with other users makes it inconvenient to repeatedly switch from the
common 4 mm anode. It is conceivable that some sort of removable mask might be
developed to employ the 4 mm anode but restrict the sputtering area to a smaller
spot on the sample.
Another experimental modification project would be the creation of an apparatus
designed to seal the entire sample in a redundant vacuum or argon environment dur-
ing measurement, eliminating contributions from atmospheric gases. Such a device
is already manufactured by Horiba, but is too small for the 2” wafers.
The monochromator could be used to record different emission lines for oxygen
or nitrogen, lines which are not subject to interferences from hydrogen or chromium.
More sophisticated curve-fitting can also be included, provided the modifications have
a theoretical grounding. Any changes to the instrument or measurement method will
==PAGE:127==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
115
require a re-calibration to be performed [45].
Perhaps the most effective way to improve the quality of the calibration curves is
simply the inclusion of more CRMs. The nitrogen and chromium curves, in particular,
are primarily built from samples with a ci qM quite far from the range of interest.
This may or may not be a reasonable investment, depending on how seriously the
group intends to continue pursuing GDOES quantification of such PLD films.
Before resorting to the acquisition of additional CRMs, the validity of the variable
power calibration method performed in Ref. [42] could be investigated, as it would
potentially allow a three-fold (or greater) increase in the number of calibration data
points, while using the same reference samples currently available.
Similarly, some of the non-CRM calibration samples used in this work had rather
large uncertainties associated with them. Pairing with other elemental characteriza-
tion techniques such as EDX could aid to decrease the elemental uncertainty from
reference samples such as F-TiO2-O-700-opt, which was not a CRM but included any-
ways in the calibration because of its extremely relevant nominal composition. Of
course, this complicates the process by introducing potential shortcomings of EDX
and somewhat negates the desired convenience of using GDOES in the first place.
The GDOES results cast suspicion on the stated composition of the CrN PLD
target. Checking the target density could provide additional information. This could
be done, for example, by weighing the target on a sensitive balance, and then deter-
mining the sample volume by the Archimedes principle (immersion in water). The
sub-nominal density range provided with the PLD target somewhat complicates the
interpretation, but Cr2N is expected to have a larger density than that of CrN. Ra-
man spectroscopy or X-ray diffraction would also be useful tools to determine the
chemical phases present in the target.
==PAGE:128==
116
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
==PAGE:129==
Chapter5
Conclusions
This Master thesis project has explored the use of glow discharge optical emission
spectroscopy for qualitative and quantitative elemental analysis of PLD-fabricated
thin films composed of TiO2 doped with Cr and N, as well as additional related sam-
ples. The continuous compositional spread (Cr+N) co-doped TiO2 samples were the
result of previous work by the Reenaas research group, developed as a stepping stone
in pursuit of an intermediate band material. Such a material is the key component
in creating an intermediate band solar cell, a 3rd-generation photovoltaic technology
with a large potential efficiency.
GDOES was selected as a tool to characterize the elemental composition of these
samples, in particular the Cr and N doping levels. The technique employs a plasma
to sputter the sample surface and simultaneously excite sputtered atoms, resulting
in characteristic optical emissions that can be linked to the presence of particular
elements in the sample. Quantitative analysis is possible, but requires a calibration
procedure and comparison to measurements on samples of a known composition.
A variety of these calibration samples were obtained and used to generate cal-
ibration curves for the elements: Ti, O, Cr, N, and Si.
The calibration process
involved taking a GDOES measurement on the sample to record signal intensities
and determining the sample sputtering rate by measuring the resultant crater depth
by profilometry. Some experiments were performed aiming to use a single sample for
multiple data points, but the method needs further study. After all this data was col-
lected, a regression line was calculated for each of the elements of interest. Correction
factors and higher-order terms were used to improve the fit of some curves.
In response to fluctuating nitrogen signals, a non-destructive method was devel-
oped to indicate a sufficient sample seal to minimize contamination from atmospheric
gas. Before analyzing the combinatorial PLD samples, qualitative GDOES measure-
ments were made on a variety of PLD plume films - experimental depositions using
only TiO2 or CrN. The findings are in agreement with prior characterization work.
TiO2 deposition in a N2 background gas can result in nitrogen incorporation into the
117
==PAGE:130==
118
CHAPTER 5. CONCLUSIONS
film, cycling between N2 and O2 during deposition of CrN results in undesired oxide
phases, and a lower substrate temperature (550°C) is more conducive to nitrogen
incorporation.
Four positions were measured on each CCS film to compare the elemental signals
along the concentration gradient. The qualitative results confirm the expected trends:
increasing chromium and nitrogen content moving from the left side of the sample
to the right, and a similar dependence on deposition parameters as was seen for the
plume films.
Two slightly different versions of the calibration curves were applied for composi-
tional depth profiling of the CCS films. The outcome largely follows from the quali-
tative results. The inclusion or omission of a chromium-interference correction factor
to the nitrogen signal, however, has a significant impact. In the sample CCS-Cap1,
the average chromium and nitrogen concentrations at the rightmost measurement
position are 15.1 and 19.0%, respectively, when applying the correction. Without
the correction, the values are 17.3 and 8.8%. Neither set of values quite matches the
results from a PLD simulation.
The qualitative results are useful as a confirmation and complement to other
characterization performed on these samples. The quantitative results have a large
potential error and improvements to the calibration curve are needed.
A variety
of directions for future work can be pursued; some tasks relate to modifying the ex-
perimental method for better, more consistent measurements, and other efforts could
improve the calibration curves by including more data points (from additional CRMs
or more measurements of existing references) and by tightening the uncertainties in
the calibration standards used.
==PAGE:131==
References
[1]
Jacob Ng. “GDOES for Qualitative Analysis of PLD Thin Films”. NTNU spe-
cialization project - unpublished. Dec. 2022.
[2]
Jeff Tollefson. The hard truths of climate change — by the numbers. Sept.
2019. url: https://www.nature.com/immersive/d41586- 019- 02711-
4/index.html.
[3]
Tim Montague. A trillion $$ wealth creation opportunity: Jigar Shah interview
roundup part I of II. Jan. 2021. url: https://cesnrg.com/blog/jigarshah_
wealth_creation_p1/.
[4]
COP21: Climate change in figures. url: https://www.oecd.org/environment/
cop21-climate-change-in-figures.htm.
[5]
Godfrey Boyle. Renewable energy: power for a sustainable future. Oxford Uni-
versity Press in association with the Open University, 2012.
[6]
Varun Sivaram. Taming the Sun. MIT Press, 2019.
[7]
The Solar Spark - The Science - Renewable Energy. url: http : / / www .
solarspark.chem.ed.ac.uk/science/renewable-energy.
[8]
Saul Griffith. Electrify: An optimists playbook for our clean energy future. MIT
PRESS, 2022.
[9]
Nancy M Haegel et al. “Terawatt-scale photovoltaics: Trajectories and chal-
lenges”. In: Science 356.6334 (2017), pp. 141–143.
[10]
Madhumitha Jaganmohan. Global cumulative installed solar PV capacity 2021.
Nov. 2022. url: https://www.statista.com/statistics/280220/global-
cumulative-installed-solar-pv-capacity/.
[11]
Brittany L Smith et al. Photovoltaic (PV) Module Technologies: 2020 Bench-
mark Costs and Technology Evolution Framework Results. Tech. rep. National
Renewable Energy Lab (NREL), Golden, CO (United States), 2021.
[12]
Kunta Yoshikawa et al. “Silicon heterojunction solar cell with interdigitated
back contacts for a photoconversion efficiency over 26%”. In: Nature Energy
2.5 (2017), p. 17032. issn: 2058-7546. doi: 10.1038/nenergy.2017.32. url:
https://doi.org/10.1038/nenergy.2017.32.
[13]
Martin A. Green. Third generation photovoltaics : advanced solar energy con-
version. Springer, 2006, p. 160. isbn: 9783540265627.
119
==PAGE:132==
120
REFERENCES
[14]
Stuart Bowden and Christiana Honsberg. Refining silicon. url: https://www.
pveducation.org/pvcdrom/manufacturing-si-cells/refining-silicon.
[15]
William Shockley and Hans J Queisser. “Detailed balance limit of efficiency of
p-n junction solar cells”. In: Journal of applied physics 32.3 (1961), pp. 510–519.
[16]
Marcus Wilke et al. “Glow discharge optical emission spectroscopy for accurate
and well resolved analysis of coatings and thin films”. In: Thin Solid Films.
Vol. 520. 5. Dec. 2011, pp. 1660–1667. doi: 10.1016/j.tsf.2011.07.058.
[17]
Sven Rühle. “Tabulated values of the Shockley–Queisser limit for single junction
solar cells”. In: Solar Energy 130 (2016), pp. 139–147. issn: 0038-092X. doi:
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.solener.2016.02.015. url: https://www.
sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0038092X16001110.
[18]
Y. Okada et al. “Intermediate band solar cells: Recent progress and future
directions”. In: Applied Physics Reviews 2.2 (June 2015). issn: 19319401. doi:
10.1063/1.4916561.
[19]
Stephen P. Bremner, Michael Y. Levy, and Christiana B. Honsberg. “Limit-
ing efficiency of an intermediate band solar cell under a terrestrial spectrum”.
In: Applied Physics Letters 92.17 (2008). issn: 00036951. doi: 10.1063/1.
2907493.
[20]
Tianhao Wu et al. “The Main Progress of Perovskite Solar Cells in 2020–2021”.
In: Nano-Micro Letters 13.1 (Dec. 2021). issn: 21505551. doi: 10 . 1007 /
s40820-021-00672-w.
[21]
Akira Fujishima, Xintong Zhang, and Donald A Tryk. “TiO2 photocatalysis and
related surface phenomena”. In: Surface Science Reports 63.12 (2008), pp. 515–
582. issn: 0167-5729. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.surfrep.2008.
10.001. url: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0167572908000757.
[22]
Wenguang Zhu et al. “Band gap narrowing of titanium oxide semiconductors
by noncompensated anion-cation codoping for enhanced visible-light photoac-
tivity”. In: Physical Review Letters 103.22 (Nov. 2009). issn: 00319007. doi:
10.1103/PhysRevLett.103.226401.
[23]
Thomas Nelis and Richard Payling. Glow discharge optical emission spectroscopy:
A practical guide. eng. RSC analytical spectroscopy monographs. Cambridge,
U.K.: Royal Society of Chemistry, 2003. isbn: 1-84755-098-3.
[24]
HORIBA Jobin Yvon. GD-PROFILER 2 User Manual. Tech. rep. Oct. 2016.
doi: Reference:1131088561. url: http://www.horiba.com/scientific.
[25]
Volker Hoffmann et al. “Present possibilities of thin-layer analysis by GDOES”.
In: Surface and Interface Analysis 35.7 (July 2003), pp. 575–582. issn: 01422421.
doi: 10.1002/sia.1575.
[26]
Ramón Escobar Galindo et al. “Towards nanometric resolution in multilayer
depth profiling: A comparative study of RBS, SIMS, XPS and GDOES”. In: An-
alytical and Bioanalytical Chemistry 396.8 (2010), pp. 2725–2740. issn: 16182650.
doi: 10.1007/s00216-009-3339-y.
==PAGE:133==
REFERENCES
121
[27]
K. Shimizu et al. “Radiofrequency GDOES: A powerful technique for depth
profiling analysis of thin films”. In: Surface and Interface Analysis 35.7 (July
2003), pp. 564–574. issn: 01422421. doi: 10.1002/sia.1572.
[28]
Yedidyah Langsam. Brooklyn College - C.I.S. 1110 - Assignment #3. 2009.
url: http://eilat.sci.brooklyn.cuny.edu/cis1_5/old%20hws/hw2d_c.
htm.
[29]
S. J. Lötter, W. Purcell, and J. T. Nel. “Glow discharge optical emission spec-
troscopy: A general overview with regard to nuclear materials”. In: Journal of
the Southern African Institute of Mining and Metallurgy 115.10 (Oct. 2015),
pp. 967–972. issn: 22256253. doi: 10.17159/2411-9717/2015/v115n10a11.
[30]
Vasile-Dan Hodoroaba et al. “Depth profiling of electrically non-conductive
layered samples by RF-GDOES and HFM plasma SNMS”. In: Applied surface
science 179.1-4 (2001), pp. 30–37.
[31]
Thomas Nelis and Jozsef Pallosi. “Glow discharge as a tool for surface and
interface analysis”. In: Applied Spectroscopy Reviews 41.3 (2006), pp. 227–258.
issn: 05704928. doi: 10.1080/05704920600620345.
[32]
K. Shimizu et al. “Influence of interracial depth on depth resolution during
GDOES depth profiling analysis of thin alumina films”. In: Surface and Inter-
face Analysis 31.9 (Sept. 2001), pp. 869–873. issn: 01422421. doi: 10.1002/
sia.1120.
[33]
Arne Bengtson and Thomas Nelis. “The concept of constant emission yield
in GDOES”. In: Analytical and Bioanalytical Chemistry 385.3 (June 2006),
pp. 568–585. issn: 16182642. doi: 10.1007/s00216-006-0412-7.
[34]
Michael R. Winchester and Richard Payling. “Radio-frequency glow discharge
spectrometry: A critical review”. In: Spectrochimica Acta - Part B Atomic Spec-
troscopy 59.5 (May 2004), pp. 607–666. issn: 05848547. doi: 10.1016/j.sab.
2004.02.013.
[35]
D. Ifezue. “Optical interference during rf-gdoes depth profiling of anodized
aluminum-tantalum alloy films”. In: Journal of Materials Engineering and Per-
formance 22.8 (Aug. 2013), pp. 2366–2376. issn: 10599495. doi: 10.1007/
s11665-013-0516-0.
[36]
Alexander Kramida. Atomic Spectra Database Lines form. Nov. 2019. url:
https://physics.nist.gov/PhysRefData/ASD/lines_form.html.
[37]
E Marin et al. “Chemical and electrochemical characterization of TiO2/Al2O3
atomic layer depositions on AZ-31 magnesium alloy”. In: Journal of Coatings
Technology and Research 9.3 (2012), pp. 347–355.
[38]
Zdenek Weiss and Petr Vlcak. “Analysis of shallow depth profiles of titanium
nitride and N-implanted titanium by GD-OES: the ‘hydrogen effect’after the
discharge startup and a correction thereof”. In: Journal of Analytical Atomic
Spectrometry 32.12 (2017), pp. 2476–2484.
[39]
Beatriz Fernández et al. “Investigations of the effect of hydrogen, nitrogen or
oxygen on the in-depth profile analysis by radiofrequency argon glow discharge-
optical emission spectrometry”. In: Journal of Analytical Atomic Spectrometry
18.2 (2003), pp. 151–156.
==PAGE:134==
122
REFERENCES
[40]
Petr Smid et al. “The effect of hydrogen and nitrogen on emission spectra of
iron and titanium atomic lines in analytical glow discharges”. In: Journal of
Analytical Atomic Spectrometry 23.9 (2008), pp. 1223–1233.
[41]
Vasile Dan Hodoroaba et al. “Investigations of the effect of hydrogen in an argon
glow discharge”. In: Journal of analytical atomic spectrometry 15.9 (Sept. 2000),
pp. 1075–1080. issn: 02679477. doi: 10.1039/b002367l.
[42]
Richard Payling et al. “New aspects of quantification in rf GDOES”. In: Surface
and Interface Analysis: An International Journal devoted to the development
and application of techniques for the analysis of surfaces, interfaces and thin
films 35.7 (2003), pp. 583–589.
[43]
Richard Payling, Johann Michler, and Max Aeberhard. “Quantitative analy-
sis of conductive coatings by radiofrequency-powered glow discharge optical
emission spectrometry: hydrogen, dc bias voltage and density corrections”. In:
Surface and Interface Analysis: An International Journal devoted to the de-
velopment and application of techniques for the analysis of surfaces, interfaces
and thin films 33.6 (2002), pp. 472–477.
[44]
Richard Payling et al. “Theory of relative sputtering rates in GDOES”. In:
Surface and Interface Analysis 35.4 (Apr. 2003), pp. 334–339. issn: 01422421.
doi: 10.1002/sia.1536.
[45]
HORIBA Jobin Yvon. Quantum V2.08 User Guide. Tech. rep. Sept. 2010. doi:
Reference:31088534. url: http://www.horiba.com/scientific.
[46]
David P. Norton. “Pulsed Laser Deposition of Complex Materials: Progress
Toward Applications”. In: Pulsed laser deposition of thin films: applications-led
growth of functional materials. Ed. by Robert Eason. John Wiley & Sons, 2007.
Chap. 1, pp. 1–30. doi: doi.org/10.1002/9780470052129.ch1.
[47]
Marcus Grand Michaelsen. “Pulsed laser deposited TiO2: X-ray diffraction and
Raman spectroscopy studies”. MA thesis. Norwegian University of Science and
Technology, July 2022.
[48]
Hogne Lysne et al. “Improved methods for design of PLD and combinatorial
PLD films”. In: Journal of Applied Physics 132.12 (Sept. 2022). issn: 10897550.
doi: 10.1063/5.0105298.
[49]
T. Brakstad et al. “nc-PLD of (Cr+N) co-doped TiO2 for intermediate band
solar cells. PART 1: Challenges in N incorporation”. Draft of forthcoming pub-
lication. 2023.
[50]
Herman Solstrand. “Characterization of TiO2 based thin films using Raman
spectroscopy”. MA thesis. Norwegian University of Science and Technology,
Dec. 2021.
[51]
T. Brakstad et al. “nc-PLD of (Cr+N) co-doped TiO2 for intermediate band
solar cells. PART 2: Optical properties and microstructre”. Draft of forthcoming
publication. 2023.
[52]
Silicon Wafers & other semiconductor substrates in stock. Oct. 2018. url:
https://order.universitywafer.com/default.aspx?cat=Silicon&amp;
diam=50.8mm.
==PAGE:135==
REFERENCES
123
[53]
R Escobar Galindo et al. “Calibration of nitrogen content for GDOES depth
profiling of complex nitride coatings”. In: Journal of Analytical Atomic Spec-
trometry 22.12 (2007), pp. 1512–1516.
[54]
Chromium products. CrN PLD target no longer listed online. 2023. url: https:
//www.samaterials.com/165-chromium.html.
[55]
Deborah Alberts et al. “Analytical performance of pulsed radiofrequency glow
discharge optical emission spectrometry for bulk and in-depth profile analysis
of conductors and insulators”. In: Journal of Analytical Atomic Spectrometry
26.4 (2011), pp. 776–783.
[56]
Certified Reference Materials - 4xxx AlSi - 1045. 2020. url: https://reference-
materials.ch/en/A~1045.
[57]
Low-Alloy Steel 1766. 2021. url: https://shop.nist.gov/ccrz__ProductDetails?
sku=1766&cclcl=en_US.
[58]
HASTELLOY C-276 TECHNICAL DATA. The supplier for the particular
C276 sample used is not known. 2015. url: https://www.hightempmetals.
com/techdata/hitempHastC276data.php.
[59]
Jernkontoret - Certified Reference Materials 2018-2019. The CE650 sample
listed in the most recent catalogue differs slightly from the one found in the
NTNU GDOES lab. 2018. url: https://www.swerim.se/file/thecrmcatalogue2018pdf-
0.
[60]
Instrument introduction. url: https://www.horiba.com/sgp/scientific/
technologies/glow-discharge-optical-emission-spectroscopy/instrument-
introduction/.
[61]
Shiva Mohajernia et al. “Depth elemental characterization of 1D self-aligned
TiO 2 nanotubes using calibrated radio frequency glow discharge optical emis-
sion spectroscopy (GDOES)”. In: Applied Surface Science 442 (June 2018),
pp. 412–416. issn: 01694332. doi: 10.1016/j.apsusc.2018.02.185.
[62]
I. S. Molchan et al. “The concept of plasma cleaning in glow discharge spec-
trometry”. In: Journal of Analytical Atomic Spectrometry 24.6 (2009), pp. 734–
741. issn: 13645544. doi: 10.1039/b818343k.
[63]
Mahr GmbH. MarSurf M 400. Nov. 2015. url: https://metrology.mahr.
com/fileadmin/assets/files/MarSurf--M%5C%20400--3760426--FL--
EN--2015-11-19.pdf.
[64]
Peter de Groot. “Principles of interference microscopy for the measurement of
surface topography”. In: Advances in Optics and Photonics 7.1 (Mar. 2015),
p. 1. issn: 19438206. doi: 10.1364/aop.7.000001.
[65]
Petr Klapetek, David Necas, and Christopher Anderson. Gwyddion user guide.
url: http://gwyddion.net/documentation/user-guide-en/.
[66]
L Therese et al. “Improved voltage transfer coefficients for nonconductive ma-
terials in radiofrequency glow discharge optical emission spectrometry”. In: An-
alytical and bioanalytical chemistry 386 (2006), pp. 163–168.
==PAGE:136==
124
REFERENCES
[67]
L Wilken, V Hoffmann, and K Wetzig. “Radio frequency glow discharge source
with integrated voltage and current probes used for sputtering rate and emis-
sion yield measurements at insulating samples”. In: Analytical and bioanalytical
chemistry 383 (2005), pp. 424–433.
[68]
Philippe Le Coustumer et al. “Surface characterization and depth profile anal-
ysis of glasses by rf GDOES”. In: Surface and Interface Analysis: An Interna-
tional Journal devoted to the development and application of techniques for the
analysis of surfaces, interfaces and thin films 35.7 (2003), pp. 623–629.
[69]
Beatriz Fernández et al. “In-depth profile analysis of thin films deposited on
non-conducting glasses by radiofrequency glow-discharge–optical emission spec-
trometry”. In: Analytical and bioanalytical chemistry 384 (2006), pp. 876–886.
[70]
Patrick Chapon. Horiba GDOES advice for NTNU project. Dec. 2022.
==PAGE:137==
Appendix A - Spectrometer detection
wavelengths
Table A.1: The wavelengths chosen for analysis of elements in the polychromator.
‘I’ after the element name indicates the spectral line comes from the ground state
(not ionized) atom, whereas ‘II’ denotes an emission line from a singly-ionized atom.
Element
Wavelength [nm]
Element
Wavelength [nm]
Ag I
328.073
Li I
670.800
Al I
396.157
Mg I
285.217
Au I
242.799
Mn I
403.455
Ba II
455.410
Mo I
386.416
Bi I
306.776
N I
149.267
C I
156.149
Na I
589.600
Ca II
393.372
Ni I
341.481
Cd I
228.806
O I
130.223
Cl I
134.730
P I
178.291
Co I
345.356
Pb I
405.788
Cr I
425.439
Pt I
265.949
Cu I
324.759
S I
180.738
F I
685.611
Si I
288.162
Fe I
371.999
Sn I
317.510
Ga I
417.211
Sr I
421.558
Ge I
275.949
Ti I
365.355
H I
121.574
V I
411.185
Hf I
286.641
Zn I
481.060
In I
451.138
Zr II
339.203
K I
766.500
125
==PAGE:138==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Ørsteds Plads, Building 343
2800 Kongens Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
https://electro.dtu.dk/
