==PAGE:1==
Mechanized Ghost Code and
Weakest Precondition Reasoning
A rigorous examination of the use of ghost code
in program verification
Master Thesis
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Mechanized Ghost Code and Weakest Precondition Reasoning
A rigorous examination of the use of ghost code in program verification
Master Thesis
June, 2023
By
Simon Tobias Lund
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title,
etc.
Cover photo:
Theodor Kittelsen, 1904.
Photo by Lathion, Jacques for the National
Museum of Norway under Creative Commons.
https://www.nasjonalmuseet.no/samlingen/objekt/NG.M.00863
Published by:
DTU, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science,
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 324, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:4==
Preface
This thesis has been prepared over five months at the Section for Software Systems En-
gineering and Section for Algorithms, Logic and Graphs, Department of Applied Mathe-
matics and Computer Science, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial
fulfilment for the degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge of procedural and functional program-
ming, first-order logic, lattice theory, and formal methods in computer science.
Simon Tobias Lund - s184459
Signature
Date
ii
Mechanized Ghost Code and Weakest Precondition Reasoning
23/06/2023
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
When performing deductive program verification, it is sometimes helpful to add “ghost
code” to a program to ease verification. This technique has been used for decades, for
example to keep track of old values of variables or other auxiliary data that is necessary for
specification. A necessary property of well-formed ghost code is that it can be removed
without invalidating the verification. Despite the prevalence of ghost code in practical
verification, its theoretical foundation remains limited. In this project, I have formalized
a theory of ghost code in Isabelle/HOL. I define two procedural programming languages
with ghost annotations, and define their semantics by backward predicate transformers
(the well-known weakest precondition). For both languages I give type checkers designed
to ensure the well-formedness of ghost code. It is shown that for verified and well-typed
programs we can remove the ghost code to obtain programs that are still verified. I have
also considered three types of verification different from the standard correctness logic,
notable among which is incorrectness logic. For all verifications, I show how to ensure
that the verification result is preserved by the removal of ghost code.
Mechanized Ghost Code and Weakest Precondition Reasoning
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
I wish to extend heartfelt gratitude to my supervisors Jørgen Villadsen, Cristoph Matheja,
and Frederik Krogsdal Jacobsen. They have all provided great support, guidance, and
feedback during the last five months.
In particular, I want to thank Jørgen Villadsen for his collaboration and guidance over
the last two and a half years.
I also thank Asta Halkjær From for much helpful advice on Isabelle/HOL over the last
couple of years.
A last thank you goes to all my friends and family, especially my girlfriend Liv who also
helped with this thesis.
iv
Mechanized Ghost Code and Weakest Precondition Reasoning
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
On Ghost Code . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Related Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.3
Contributions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.4
Formal Verification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.5
Structure
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2
Preliminaries
6
2.1
Programming Languages . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.2
On Program Verification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.3
On Proofs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.4
Scope
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3
PL0
13
3.1
Language and Semantics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.2
Weakest Precondition
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.3
Ghost Labelling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.4
Type Checking . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.5
Haskell Verifier . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4
PL1
25
4.1
Language
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.2
Weakest Precondition
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.3
Fixed Point by Transfinite Recursion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4.4
Type Checking . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.5
Some Examples . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
4.6
Comparison with PL0
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
5
New Analyses
43
5.1
Possible Correctness . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
5.2
Captured Properties . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
5.3
Incorrectness
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
6
Conclusion
57
6.1
Future Work
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
Bibliography
61
A Terminology and Notation
65
A.1 Terminology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
A.2 Notation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
B Code Snippets
67
B.1
A Conjunctivity Proof . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
Mechanized Ghost Code and Weakest Precondition Reasoning
v
==PAGE:8==
B.2
Old Version of Termination Proofs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
68
vi
Mechanized Ghost Code and Weakest Precondition Reasoning
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
In many computer systems, the presence of bugs can have catastrophic effects. In 1994 an
error in floating point division caused Intel to withdraw Pentium processors at a cost of
over $475 million (around $974 million in 2023 dollars) [Coe+95]. There are multiple cases
of flaws in software causing serious security vulnerabilities [Whe14; AWM06]. One way to
improve the quality of computer systems is to verify their properties using formal methods.
This is a category of techniques used to check properties of computer systems, for example
adherence to specification [NN19]. I will focus on formal methods for software systems.
For these methods, there is often a trade-off between the expressiveness (what kind of
properties can be expressed) and the computational complexity (how hard it is to verify
the properties). For example, the parity analysis of Nielson and Nielson [NN19] is linear in
the program size, but can only check if the variables must be even or odd at each point in
the program. On the other side of the spectrum, we have proof assistants like Isabelle/HOL
[NPW02]. One can either define functional programs directly in the Isabelle language, or
model arbitrary other programming languages. Programs can then be proven correct in
the powerful higher-order logic framework. This process is undecidable, and requires the
programmer to do much of the work related to finding valid proofs.
In this project, I focus on program verification [Hoa69] using weakest precondition reason-
ing [Dij75]. This is a technique for showing that certain desirable properties must hold at
the end of a procedure (specified by a postcondition), given that it is executed from the
acceptable starting states (specified by a precondition). These conditions are expressed
using logical formulas, and the expressiveness of the logical language will determine what
properties can be verified. “Weakest precondition reasoning” means that I will reason
backward; taking a given postcondition and a program, I derive the weakest precondition
(i.e. the one satisfied by most initial states) collecting all states that lead to the postcon-
dition. The weakest precondition makes it possible to express the validity of the given
precondition and postcondition for the program as a formula of the logical language. This
formula can then be verified by an external theorem prover, for example Z3 [MB08] or
Isabelle. This abstracts away from the undecidable part of the verification; we just assume
that the conditions we generate will be solved by some external tool. If the tool fails to
verify the condition, we will fail to verify the program, and may prompt the user for hints
or a specification that is easier to verify.
When verifying programs like this, it is often beneficial to use “ghost code” [FGP14;
BM19]. This is code that is not supposed to be part of the production code (or sometimes
even part of the specification code), but is useful for guiding verification. One example is
using a ghost variable to save the old value of a variable, so we can reason about how its
value has changed at a point later in the program. In the following example, we save the
old value of the regular variable x in the ghost variable y so that we can assert that the
loop has not decreased the value of x. This might be useful if we need the fact that after
the loop, x has the value of the least square larger than the value of x before the loop.
y ←x
while ¬IsSquare(x) do
invariant : y ≤x
x ←x + 1
end while
assert y ≤x
Mechanized Ghost Code and Weakest Precondition Reasoning
1
==PAGE:10==
A desired property of ghost code is that it must not change the meaning of the program.
Since ghost code is supposed to be removed before the program is actually put to use, the
verification will no longer be valid if the ghost code affects the behaviour of the program.
In the rest of this chapter, I assume that the reader is familiar with program verification.
For some, it might be beneficial to start with Section 2.2. In short, the goal of program
verification is to derive valid “Hoare triples”: {p}s{q}, where p and q are predicates and
s is a program. If assuming that we p holds at the start of the program leads to q holding
at the end, we can conclude {p}s{q}. I consider the weakest precondition technique for
checking this, which consists of deriving the weakest (satisfied by the most states) p for
given s and q such that {p}s{q}.
1.1
On Ghost Code
On a high level, the goal of the project can be seen as developing a theory of what code
can be removed from a verified program to end up with a program that is still valid.
The code which can be removed is what is referred to as ghost code. In a single verified
program there can be many layers of ghost code with different purposes. For example,
when verifying a program it might be necessary or useful to add verification-specific code
to guide the proof search of the verifying theorem prover. We want the property that
when this code is removed the program is still valid with regards to specification. The
specification code itself is another layer of ghost code. We also want the property that
when all the specification-specific code is removed there will not be divide-by-zero errors or
issues of non-termination. Furthermore, we want to ensure that a program still fulfills the
specification, even after the specification code has been removed. I refer to the program
obtained by deleting all the ghost code from a given program, as that program’s ghost
erasure.
Often the division between verification ghost code and specification ghost code is not
totally clear. Take for example the following procedure:
procedure IsSquare(x)
returns: s
requires: x ≥0
ensures: s = 0 ∨(s = 1 ∧∃y. y ∗y = x)
…
end procedure
When verifying this procedure we would use x ≥0 as precondition and s = 0 ∨(s =
1 ∧∃y. y ∗y = x) as postcondition. It might be hard, however, to verify this program
since many theorem provers have trouble proving formulas with existential quantifiers. It
would also be hard to use the guarantee we get from the postcondition of this procedure
in the verification of other programs. All we get is that there exists a square root, but
we get no way of actually referring to that square root. It would probably make sense to
rewrite the procedure to:
procedure IsSquare(x)
returns: s, y
requires: x ≥0
ensures: s = 0 ∨(s = 1 ∧y ∗y = x)
…
end procedure
Now the procedure returns the square root as a variable we can use when verifying the
2
Mechanized Ghost Code and Weakest Precondition Reasoning
==PAGE:11==
procedures that call IsSquare. Since y is not used in production code, y can be considered
a ghost variable. It is, however, neither purely associated with verification code nor with
specification code.
Part of the reason for introducing y was to avoid the problem of
verifying formulas with existential quantifiers. After it has been introduced, however, it
is used in a formula that defines the specification of the program.
Filliâtre, Gondelman, and Paskevich [FGP14] define a typing scheme for ensuring that
erasure of ghost code is valid. In the following, I give a simplified account of their findings.
They provide the functional language GhostML (a version of ML) with side effects and
ghost annotations, and define semantics to evaluate GhostML terms to other terms: t1 →∗
t2. They also give a ghost erasure operator E. They then show that if t1 is well-typed
and t1 →∗t2, then E t1 →∗E t2. This constitutes a semantic proof that, when ignoring
the ghost variables, the evaluation of the program with ghost code will be functionally the
same as the evaluation of the ghost erasure.
Since we are partitioning our program into two levels, one of which should not affect
the other, it looks much like a well-known problem: that of showing non-interference.
In language-level data security, for example, one wishes to prove that high-security vari-
ables never affect the values of low-security variables [VIS96]. Non-interference is also the
approach taken in Filliâtre, Gondelman, and Paskevich [FGP14].
Non-interference is, however, not a practical condition on ghost code in PL0. Take, for
example, the following program which asserts that any square is larger than any negative
number, using a ghost variable y:
ghost assume y < 0
x ←x ∗x
ghost assert y < x
This should be a perfectly fine use of ghost code. The ghost assumption will not affect the
properties of x, and ghost assertions should always be allowed. However, it does not fulfill
the property of non-interference. With the ghost code, the program can end up both in
the error state and the magic state, both of which are unreachable for the ghost erasure.
Even if we ignore the magic and error states we still do not have non-interference. Consider
the following program:
x ←x ∗x
ghost
choice
y ←x
x ←0
assert x ≤y
else
skip
end choice
end ghost
This should also be an acceptable use of ghost code. Any execution might go through the
ghost branch which does nothing (skip), and if the program is verified the ghost erasure
will therefore also be verified. We do not have non-interference, however, since there are
executions of the program which lead to x obtaining a value it would not get in the ghost
erasure.
Mechanized Ghost Code and Weakest Precondition Reasoning
3
==PAGE:12==
Another way of verifying ghost code is then to check that program verification is preserved
in the ghost erasure. This means that we do not consider the operational semantics of the
programming language, but rather focus on the predicate transformer used for verification.
We must then show that for well-typed ghost code, verification would still theoretically
succeed for the ghost erasure. The practical verification might not succeed, however, as
some of the point of ghost code is to aid verification.
1.2
Related Work
Filliâtre, Gondelman, and Paskevich [FGP14] is probably the closest existing work. As
mentioned, they consider ghost code in an ML-like language with side effects.
Their
language is, however, very different from the languages I consider. I use procedural lan-
guages with non-determinism, while theirs is a deterministic functional language. They
also approach the problem from the perspective of operational semantics, while I focus
on verification by predicate transformers. Another similarity is that they have formalized
their theory.
My theory of ghost code is formalized in Isabelle, while theirs is in the
verification tool Why3.
Multiple verification-centric languages and tools support annotating pieces of programs as
ghost code. SPARK [AE] is a programming language based on Ada, which is designed to
support a variety of formal analyses. It allows ghost annotations, which will be verified by
GNATprove and removed by GNAT when compiled. Stainless [EPF] is a verification tool
for Scala which also supports ghost annotations, whose correctness is checked by the tool.
The same is the case for the language WhyML and the associated Why3 [Bob+] platform.
Dafny [Com] also allows a wide array of ghost annotations, which will be checked for
non-interference and termination [FGP14].
In Chapter 5, I extend to other types of predicate transformers, and this work is especially
based on O’Hearn [OHe20] and Zhang and Kaminski [ZK22]. The first paper gives an
account of how to define an incorrectness logic by analogy to Hoare’s correctness logic.
The second paper examines the same issue from the point-of-view of quantity transform-
ers (similar to predicate transformers).
These papers are examined in more detail in
Chapter 5.
The perhaps two most well-known treatments of program language semantics and program
verification in proof assistants are Nipkow and Klein [NK14] in Isabelle and Pierce et al.
[Pie+23] in Coq. These are accompanied by large formalizations concerning the semantics
of programming languages, program analysis, program verification, and more. Early in
the project, I considered basing my theory off the theories developed for Nipkow and Klein
[NK14]. In the end, however, I decided I would rather develop a theory from scratch, based
purely on the weakest precondition.
As far as I know, this is the first formal treatment of ghost code in the verification of
procedural languages with non-determinism. It is definitely the first theory of ghost code in
Isabelle. My work is also unique in being based purely on predicate transformer reasoning.
1.3
Contributions
I have developed type checkers to verify that ghost code can safely be removed with-
out invalidating the results of the verification. These type checkers are implemented in
Isabelle/HOL, and all the theory about their correctness has been formally verified.
In Chapter 3, I define a type checker for the minimal programming language PL0 (see
Section 2.1). I prove that if a program is well-typed, then it fulfills the property of well-
formedness: verification of the original program implies verification of the ghost erasure.
4
Mechanized Ghost Code and Weakest Precondition Reasoning
==PAGE:13==
In Chapter 4, I define a type checker for the more realistic PL1 language. This type checker
is more usable in practice, since I have removed the troublesome assume statement from
the language. As with PL0, I have proven that well-typedness implies well-formedness.
In Chapter 5, I consider the typing of ghost code for other types of analyses than correct-
ness logic. I define three analyses based on predicate transformers: possible correctness,
captured properties, and incorrectness. I show that possible correctness can be translated
to correctness, and argue that we can therefore use the results about ghost code from
Chapter 4. Captured properties is based on the same weakest precondition transformer
used in Chapter 4, but requires a new type checker to ensure well-formedness of ghost code.
Incorrectness is based on a forward predicate transformer, and also requires a new type
checker. For both captured property and incorrectness, I have shown that well-typedness
implies well-formedness.
All three chapters are accompanied by an Isabelle formalization. The Isabelle files, along
with the Haskell project described in Section 3.5 and the examples of Section 4.5, can be
found at:
https://github.com/Barrikad/ghost-code-program-verification
1.4
Formal Verification
Everything presented as a lemma, theorem, or corollary in this document has been proven
in Isabelle/HOL. As the details of each proof can be viewed in Isabelle, the proofs given
in this report only describe the most important ideas behind each proof.
In the files related to the main theory of ghost code for correctness verification (pexp.thy,
pl0.thy, regular_interpretations.thy, wp0.thy, pl1.thy, fixed_points.thy, and wp1.thy) I have
avoided using calls to SMT provers, as they can be somewhat unreliable (a call which
previously succeeded might suddenly fail, and the line has to be reloaded). In the other
Isabelle files I have, however, not adhered to this, rather opting for faster development.
1.5
Structure
The rest of the report is structured as follows. In Chapter 2, I go through some theory
and background information. In Chapter 3, I examine ghost code for verifying programs
in the very minimal programming language PL0. In Chapter 4, I examine ghost code for
verifying programs in the richer PL1. See Section 2.1 for an introduction to PL0 and PL1.
In Chapter 5, I examine extending the use of ghost code to other types of analyses, like
incorrectness logic. Chapter 6 contains reflections and future work.
Information about terminology and notation can be found in the appendix.
Mechanized Ghost Code and Weakest Precondition Reasoning
5
==PAGE:14==
2
Preliminaries
2.1
Programming Languages
I have formalized reasoning with ghost code for two programming languages: PL0 and
PL1. They are based on the languages from the Program Verification course at DTU
(https://kurser.dtu.dk/course/02245), where they are part of a family of languages with
gradually more features. PL0 has four atomic statements, sequential composition, and
non-deterministic choice.
PL1 has all the features of PL0, plus loops and conditional
choice. PL2 has procedures. This continues up to PL5. One of the reasons for doing it
like this is that, for whatever theory one is trying to develop, one can start with a small
version for PL0, then gradually expand it to the richer languages. I have done something
like this for a theory of ghost code, though PL2 and onward is left as future work.
Chapter 3 is based on the programming language PL0, which has assume statements
(assume that some formula is true), assert statements (check that some formula is true),
variable declarations (assign an arbitrary value to a variable), variable assignment (assign
the value of an expression to a variable), sequential composition (run one program then
another), and non-deterministic choice (either run one program or another). All variables
are assumed to be integers. Following is an example program:
x ←y
choice
assume x > 0
assert y > 0
else
var x
end choice
This program starts by assigning to x the value of y (of which we know nothing about),
then chooses non-deterministically between two branches. In one branch, x is assumed to
be greater than 0, and then it is asserted that y must also be greater than 0. In the other
branch, x is given an arbitrary value.
In the semantics, we have that a state which does not pass an assertion leads to an error
state and a state which does not pass an assumption leads to a magic state. Verification
of a program should ensure that we cannot end up in an error state and ignore executions
that end in the magic state.
Chapters 4 and 5 are based on PL1. In my theory, PL1 is not actually a strict superset of
PL0, because I have removed the assume statement. What is added is an if-else statement
(run one branch if a formula is true and another otherwise) and a while statement (run a
program until a formula is not true). Following is an example program:
x ←0
while (x = 0) do
invariant : x = 0 ∨x = 1
choice
if y = 0 then
x ←1
else
skip
6
Mechanized Ghost Code and Weakest Precondition Reasoning
==PAGE:15==
end if
else
var y
end choice
end while
This program starts by assigning 0 to x. It then enters a loop that is terminated once x
has a different value from 0. For each iteration of the loop a non-deterministic choice is
taken. In one branch, it is checked whether the value of y is 0, in which case x is assigned
1. In the other branch, y is assigned an arbitrary value. The formula after invariant is
an invariant that is used for verification purposes. In broad terms, it must be checked
that the invariant holds before every iteration of the loop. If an unsuitable invariant is
provided by the programmer, verification will (most likely) not succeed.
2.2
On Program Verification
In the following section I assume that the reader is somewhat familiar with formal methods
for software verification, but might need a refresher on the aspects relevant to this project.
The style of program verification I consider here is founded on the seminal paper Hoare
[Hoa69], which itself builds on Floyd [Flo67]. In Hoare [Hoa69], C. A. R. Hoare provides
a logical framework for proving the correctness of programs with regards to pre- and
postconditions. The idea is that we write {p}s{q} (in the original paper p{s}q is used) if
all executions of s starting from p must end in q. By this, we want to connect verification
to operational semantics, which are hopefully simple enough to reflect reality. There are
variants of this logic, which differ on whether or not to accept diverging states in the
precondition (partial versus total correctness). More about this is explained later in the
section.
Consider the program x ←x+1. If we assume that x is less than 0 before the program, it
is sound to conclude that x will be less than 1 after the program. Therefore {x < 0}x ←
x + 1{x < 1} holds.
We can use sound derivation rules when trying to show {p}s{q}. Consider the following
sequential composition rule:
{p}s1{r}
{r}s2{q}
{p}s1; s2{q}
This rule expresses that if we can verify that some property, r, holds after s1, and that r
is suﬀicient to verify s2, then we have also verified s1; s2.
I note that verifying {p}s{q} is an undecidable problem when we use a logical language
for which the validity problem is undecidable. Consider p = ⊤, s = assert ⊤(a program
that does nothing), and q = (∃x y z. x > 0 ∧y > 0 ∧z > 0 ∧x3 + y3 = z3). In this case
we have {p}s{q} if and only if Fermat’s Last Theorem (which took 358 years to prove) is
false.
The weakest precondition predicate transformer is often used to prove the completeness
of such proof systems [NN07], though I will consider it as a verification tool of its own
right. By predicate transformer I mean a function that takes a predicate as an input and
then returns another predicate which has been “transformed” by the statements in a given
program.
Mechanized Ghost Code and Weakest Precondition Reasoning
7
==PAGE:16==
The weakest precondition (wp) is a predicate transformer that fulfills the following prop-
erties: (1) {wp s q}s{q} and (2) if {p}s{q} then p −→wp s q. The first property requires
that the weakest precondition is a valid precondition for the given program and postcon-
dition. The second property requires that all other valid preconditions are stricter than
the weakest precondition.
Though it is often fundamentally defined by these properties, it is also possible to give a
characterization of wp by recursion over the input program [Dij75]. An example of a case
in the recursive definition is wp (s1; s2) q = wp s1 (wp s2 q). This defines that we use the
weakest precondition of s2 as postcondition for the weakest precondition of s1 to get the
weakest precondition of the sequential composition s1; s2. Complete recursive definitions
of weakest preconditions can be seen in Section 3.2 and Section 4.2.
When we have a recursive characterization of wp we can use a different approach for
verifying programs than Hoare-style derivation rules. To verify {p}s{q} we can compute
wp s q and show p −→wp s q. There exists approaches that ensures that wp s q is also
a formula in the logical language, and that computing it is decidable (at least if we use
an under-approximation of wp). The undecidable part of the problem is then isolated in
proving the formula p −→wp s q, for which we can use a generic theorem prover.
The following is an example of deriving the weakest precondition for a given program and
postcondition.
(4) y < x −→(2 ∗x > 0 ∧2 ∗x > y)
assume y < x
(3) 2 ∗x > 0 ∧2 ∗x > y
x ←2 ∗x
(2) x > 0 ∧x > y
assert x > y
(1) x > 0
In the above, the postcondition was x > 0 and the derived weakest precondition is y <
x −→(2 ∗x > 0 ∧2 ∗x > y).
For the while statement I differentiate between the weakest precondition for practical
verification and the theoretical weakest precondition. As is explained in-depth in Chapter
4, the theoretical weakest precondition of a while loop is characterized by a fixed point
which can be very hard to compute (if we try to do so by repeated function application we
will require transfinitely many iterations). Instead we assume that practical verification
is done by a practical weakest precondition, which under-approximates the theoretical
weakest precondition. If p −→wp s q holds for the practical weakest precondition then it
will also do so for the theoretical version, since the former was an under-approximation. To
find such an under-approximation we rely on loop invariants. These are predicates shown
to be preserved by the iterations of the loop. If this can be shown, then we know that the
invariant holding before the loop means that it must also hold after. The corresponding
derivation rule is:
{p ∧b}s{p}
{p}while(b)s{p ∧¬b}
In the above rule p is the invariant. When deriving the practical weakest precondition we
rely on the programmer to provide a suitable invariant, i.e. one that satisfies {p ∧b}s{p}.
If p satisfies this, we simply set p to be the weakest precondition. More details on this can
be found in Section 4.2.
8
Mechanized Ghost Code and Weakest Precondition Reasoning
==PAGE:17==
The weakest precondition is an example of a backward predicate transformer.
This is
because we start from the postcondition (or just “post” in a more general setting, see
Chapter 5) and then transform it by the program statements, starting with the last and
ending with the first. A forward transformer starts with the precondition (or “pre”) and
then transforms it by the program statements, starting from the beginning. The forward
transformer corresponding to weakest precondition (in that it is also used to show the
correctness of programs) is the “strongest postcondition” [GC10].
One of the reasons for defining the family of languages described in Section 2.1 is that PL0
can mimic more complicated languages, at least with regards to verification. For many
more complicated programming language features, like if statements, while statements,
and procedures, we can define PL0 constructs that generate the exact same verification
conditions. Consider the following program:
if b then
s1
else
s2
end if
The weakest precondition of this program with regards to postcondition q is (b −→
wp s1 q) ∧(¬b −→wp s2 q). This is the exact same formula generated by the weak-
est precondition of the following program:
choice
assume b
s1
else
assume ¬b
s2
end choice
For the practical weakest precondition of while statement we can define a PL0 program
that both checks the validity of the given invariant and sets the precondition to the in-
variant if it is valid. If it is not valid then the weakest precondition becomes ⊥. Consider
the following while loop:
while b do
invariant : p
s
end while
The while loop above has the same practical weakest precondition as the following PL0
program:
assert p
havoc
choice
assume b
assume p
s
assert p
assume ⊥
else
skip
Mechanized Ghost Code and Weakest Precondition Reasoning
9
==PAGE:18==
end choice
assume ¬b
assume p
In the PL0 program, havoc is an abbreviation for performing variable declaration on all
the variables in the program. Using framing results would allow us to only havoc the
variables changed by s.
These encodings allow us to only define wp for PL0, since the other languages can be
verified by translation.
When we introduce while loops to the language, we also introduce the possibility of pro-
grams not terminating. We then have to decide whether {p}s{q} is valid if all executions
of s starting from p terminate in q, or if no executions of s starting from p terminate in
¬q. The first notion is called total correctness while the second is partial correctness. To
verify the total correctness of a program we need to check that all executions starting from
the precondition will not diverge in addition to checking the assertions and postcondition.
This problem is of course also undecidable: it corresponds to the well-known halting prob-
lem [Luc21]. One way of checking termination is to make sure that the practical weakest
precondition only returns states that are guaranteed to terminate. To do this we can add
a variant to the loop constructs, which should also be specified by the programmer:
while b do
invariant : p
variant : f
s
end while
The variant should be a function from states to a well-founded domain. The variant must
be shown to decrease for each iteration of the loop. In practice, these functions are just
expressions over the program variables.
That f evaluates into a well-founded domain
means that for any given f i (or i[f] if we consider f represented by an expression) there
can be no infinite chain f i > e > g > . . . . That f is decreased by each iteration of a loop
therefore proves termination.
If one simply ignores the problem of termination, the weakest precondition will corre-
spond to partial correctness. In this setting, the following program will verify for any
postcondition, including ⊥.
while ⊤do
invariant : ⊤
skip
end while
2.3
On Proofs
I assume that the reader is familiar with mathematical proofs, but I will briefly cover some
of the techniques I use frequently.
When I write that a proof is performed by induction on a term a it means that we perform
case-analysis on the grammar of terms of that type, and assume that the property holds
for any sub-terms. This is often called structural induction.
Example: We want to show P for a natural number n, by induction on n. We either have
n = 0, in which case we must show P 0, or n = x + 1 for some x, in which case we can
10
Mechanized Ghost Code and Weakest Precondition Reasoning
==PAGE:19==
assume P x and must show P (x + 1). I call these sub-proofs the different “cases” of the
induction proof.
When I write that a proof is performed on a function, it means that we perform case-
analysis on the rules of the function and assume the property for any recursive function
calls. This is often called computational induction.
Example: We have a function over the natural numbers defined by f 0 = 0 and f (n+1) =
f n+f (n/2)+1 and we want to show P (f x) by induction on f. We know that f x is either
0, in which case we must show P 0, or f (x −1) + f ((x −1)/2) + 1, in which case we can
assume P (f (x−1)) and P (f ((x−1)/2)) and must show P (f (x−1)+f ((x−1)/2)+1).
When I write that a proof is performed by induction with an arbitrary x it means that
instead of showing some P we try to show ∀x. P, and get a correspondingly stronger
inductive hypothesis.
In Section 4.3 I use transfinite induction on ordinals. The ordinals are a generalization of
numbers which allow enumeration beyond N. The idea is that we can define an ω such
that ω > n for all n ∈N. We can then continue counting: ω, ω + 1, ω + 2, . . . . For any
set of “all ordinals so far”: X, we can add a new δ where δ > x for all x ∈X. Since there
is no bound on the cardinality of the ordinals, we can define a surjective function from
the ordinals to any set. This is useful because we can perform induction on the ordinals.
If we want to show the property P δ by transfinite induction on the ordinal δ, we must
show three cases. First, we must show the zero case: P 0. Second, we must show the step
case: If P δ then P (δ + 1). Last, we must show the limit case: If δ is a limit ordinal
(there exists no γ such that γ + 1 = δ) and for all γ < δ we have P γ, then we have P δ.
2.4
Scope
I have consistently not argued for properties about ghost code on the basis of the opera-
tional program semantics. Rather, I have shown properties of the program directly with
regards to the weakest precondition. There are several reasons for this. First, what I want
to show about ghost code is not that it does not affect the program at all, but rather that
the verification we performed on the program with ghost code is still valid after it has been
removed. As that verification is based on using the weakest precondition, it makes sense
to focus on this when checking the ghost code. Second, the theory I end up with may be
more general than one I would obtain by focusing on the semantics. For example, if one
switches from correctness logic to incorrectness logic, the proofs using weakest precondi-
tion are quite easy to adapt, see Chapter 5. In many cases, two predicate transformers can
have a similar structure, even if the semantic interpretations of the analyses they perform
are very different. This means that many of the proofs for one predicate transformer are
structurally similar to corresponding proofs for another. It seems likely that the changes
necessary to a semantics-based version of my theory would be far more pervasive.
Despite the arguments above, I have still included formal descriptions of the semantics of
PL0. This is partly to give a non-ambiguous description of the meaning of the different
language constructs, so that the results can be correctly interpreted. Another reason is
that proving the correctness of the weakest precondition with regards to the semantics
was a good introduction to working with the weakest precondition in Isabelle.
As already mentioned, I have considered two different programming languages, with an
obvious extension of the theory being to add more. Another approach would be to start
with a large language with all the features we want, and then develop a single theory for
this language. I have not done this, as it seems far less agile, and could also obscure which
Mechanized Ghost Code and Weakest Precondition Reasoning
11
==PAGE:20==
part of the theory is necessary for which part of the language. When comparing the PL0
theory to the PL1 theory it is possible to see exactly which new results were necessary
when adding while loops, for example.
I have not considered the validity of removing specification code. To show that the re-
maining program still fulfills specification, it is necessary to argue that any execution path
in the production code is also possible in the program with ghost code, which is what
they do in Filliâtre, Gondelman, and Paskevich [FGP14]. However, this is not possible
in my weakest precondition approach. I only consider how programs act with regards to
verification, and this requires that we have properties to verify. If we remove all assertions
from the program, for example, then the program will verify even if we also removed code
that was necessary to make those assertions hold. Because of this, I assume that there
is still some specification code left after the ghost code has been removed. It is only the
properties expressed by this specification code which are guaranteed to be preserved in
the ghost erasure.
I only consider the case where a programmer is verifying the regular code with regards to
partial correctness. This is to limit the size of the theory, since partial correctness is the
easiest type of analysis to perform.
As is explained in Chapter 4, it is necessary to have total correctness of ghost code to
get partial correctness regular code. I have therefore assumed that the programmer has
some way of checking termination of ghost code, but I have not considered any practical
techniques for this. This makes my results general enough to apply to any specific method
used, as long as the method is sound.
12
Mechanized Ghost Code and Weakest Precondition Reasoning
==PAGE:21==
3
PL0
This chapter details my starting point in the analysis of ghost code for program verifica-
tion. I show how one can derive well-typedness of ghost code in a minimal programming
language and that the typing implies that the program is well-formed. The language is
in fact so minimal that it contains no statements for control flow or loops. It is possible,
however, to mimic more complicated features like this using the assume statement and
non-deterministic choice, such that if the encoded PL0 program verifies then the original
program is also verified.
3.1
Language and Semantics
This section defines the language and semantics of PL0 programs. The first subsection
describes arithmetic and logical expressions used in the program statements. These remain
identical when extending the language to PL1. After that comes the definition of programs
and their semantics.
3.1.1
Arithmetic Expressions and Logical Formulas
We assume an infinite set of program variables Var. It is necessary for this set to be
infinite, as otherwise substitution in formulas with quantifiers cannot be guaranteed to
work. In my Isabelle theory this is simply the set of all strings. An interpretation is a
total function from variables to integers. I will also refer to interpretations as “states”,
since they are what I use to model program states.
We use arithmetic expression with constant numbers, free variables, +, −, ∗, and /. All
numbers are interpreted as unbounded integers, and the operators are given the same
semantics as the corresponding operators in Isabelle/HOL. In particular, this means that
x/0 = 0 for all x. Except this, the operators have the same semantics as is standard for
integer arithmetic (1 + 1 = 2, 3/2 = 1, and so on).
I define the value of an arithmetic expression a under the interpretation i as i[a]. i[a]
has the value one gets if one replaces each variable with its integer value in i, and then
computes the resulting expression according to the semantics of the arithmetic operators.
Logical formulas are based on =, < (which take arithmetic expressions as arguments), ∀,
¬, and ∧(which take other formulas as arguments). The other common comparators and
operators can be defined from these, but when performing induction on logical formulas
it is suﬀicient to consider these cases.
I write the truth value of a formula p under interpretation i as i |= p. The interpretation
of the comparators and propositional operators are as usual. For the quantifier we define
i |= ∀x. p if and only if ∀v ∈Z. i[x 7→v] |= p. Details on interpretations and semantics
of arithmetic expressions and first-order logic can be found in Ebbinghaus., Flum, and
Thomas [EFT96] and Ben-Ari [Ben12].
In the context of the object-level logic, a predicate can be considered as a set of interpre-
tations. The interpretations in this set is said to fulfill the predicate. A logical formula,
p, can be expressed as the predicate { i | i |= p }. I will sometimes implicitly translate a
formula into its predicate form in the definitions and proofs. The translation from predi-
cate to formula is not always possible, however. For PL0, I mostly work with syntactically
represented predicates (i.e. formulas), but in PL1 only the predicates inside assertions
and the guards of control flow statements need to be represented as formulas.
Mechanized Ghost Code and Weakest Precondition Reasoning
13
==PAGE:22==
We define the substitution of the variable x by the arithmetic expression a in the arithmetic
expression b and formula p as b[x/a] and p[x/a], respectively.
This is defined mostly
straight-forward, but for (∀y. p)[x/a], we need to consider multiple cases. If x = y then
we do nothing. If x ̸= y and y is not in the free variables of a, then we simply return
∀y. p[x/a]. If x ̸= y and y is in the free variables of a, then we need to rename y to some
fresh (with regards to x, y, p, and a) variable z to avoid free variables in a becoming
bound. This is also done by substitution, so we return ∀z. p[y/z][x/a].
The following lemma is useful in multiple proofs about arithmetic expressions and for-
mulas as it enables us to use the induction hypothesis on expressions obtained through
substitution.
Lemma 3.1.1. If we count the number of nodes in an a logical formula (and treat each
comparator expression as a single node) then the size of p[x/a] is the same as that of p.
Proof. Induction on the rules of the substitution function.
Because of the pattern matching and nested substitutions in the ∀case above, induction
proofs involving substitution become quite complicated. One possible approach is to do
induction on the size of a formula. Lemma 3.1.1 then yields the induction hypothesis for
all substitutions in the ∀case. This is in some cases easier than induction on the rules of
the substitution function, as the latter yields induction hypotheses which are conditional
on the guards of the if statements in the function.
Another useful lemma follows. In the literature it is often referred to as “the substitution
lemma”. It gives a way treat variable substitution semantically instead of syntactically,
which is often easier.
Lemma 3.1.2. i |= p[x/a] if and only if i[x 7→i[a]] |= p.
Proof. We start by strong induction on the size of p with arbitrary i, x, a, and p (all these
have to be arbitrary to be able to handle the nested substitutions in the ∀-case). Then we
do case analysis on p.
It is sometimes also useful to reason about the set of variables a statement depends on.
The set of free variables consists of all those variables mentioned in an expression, but not
bound by a quantifier. In arithmetic expressions all variables are free. I have defined a
function fv for extracting the free variables from an arithmetic of logical expression, but
will not give its exact definition here. A useful result (Lemma 3.3.2 and Lemma 3.3.3) is
that two variables can disagree on every variable except those in fv e, and must still give
the same value for e.
Definition 3.1.3. fv e is the set of all variables that occur in e without being bound by
a quantifier.
14
Mechanized Ghost Code and Weakest Precondition Reasoning
==PAGE:23==
3.1.2
Programs
The syntax of PL0 programs is defined by the following grammar:
s = assert p
| assume p
| var x
| x ←a
| s1; s2
| s2 [] s2
| ghost s′
The assert statement is used for a formula we want to verify as true at a certain point in
the program. If the formula is not true at that point, the program enters an error state.
assume is used for a formulas we assume being true at a certain point. If the formula is
not true at that point, the program enters a “magic” state where we will be able to verify
any property.
var assigns a random value to the given variable.
←assigns the value of a given expression to a given variable.
; represents sequential composition of two programs.
[] represents the non-deterministic choice between two programs.
As mentioned in 2.4, I do not use the operational semantics of the programming languages
to prove the desired properties of ghost-code, but rather rely on the weakest precondition
predicate transformer. Despite this, I have defined big-step semantics of the language, in
part to make its meaning unambiguous. For PL0 I have also proven the correctness of the
weakest precondition with regards to this semantics.
We define the state space as all interpretations of the program variables {i | i : Var 7→Z},
an error state, and a magic state. The magic state is where you end up if you execute
a program with an interpretation that does not pass an assumption. To distinguish the
type of states from the type of variable interpretations I will use c to represent states and i
and j to represent variable interpretations. Note that this separation is only necessary for
the big-step semantics; in the weakest precondition I only consider states representable by
variable interpretations.
The big-step semantics (sem) for a given program can be defined as a function from an
interpretation to the set of states the program can terminate in when starting from this
interpretation. We define sem i s as the least set satisfying the following rules:
i|=b
i∈sem i (assert b)
i̸|=b
error∈sem i (assert b)
Mechanized Ghost Code and Weakest Precondition Reasoning
15
==PAGE:24==
i|=b
i∈sem i (assume b)
i̸|=b
magic∈sem i (assume b)
i[x7→v]∈sem i (var x)
i[x7→i[a]]∈sem i (x←a)
sem i s1⊆sem i (s1 [] s2)
sem i s2⊆sem i (s1 [] s2)
error∈sem i s1
error∈sem i (s1; s2)
magic∈sem i s1
magic∈sem i (s1; s2)
j∈sem i s1
sem j s2⊆sem i (s1; s2)
3.2
Weakest Precondition
The following weakest precondition function is an alternative way to define the behaviour
of the programming language, specifically with regards to correctness verification. As is
shown in Section 3.2.1 there is an exact correspondence between correctness with regards
to the big-step semantics and correctness with regards to the weakest precondition. The
weakest precondition (wp) takes a program (s) and a predicate (q), and returns the weakest
(largest) predicate such that all states in the returned predicate are guaranteed to lead to
a state in the input predicate. The given predicate is called a postcondition and what is
returned is the weakest precondition.
wp s q =

























p ∧q
if s = assert p
p −→q
if s = assume p
∀x. q
if s = var x
q[x/a]
if s = x ←a
wp s1 q ∧wp s2 q
if s = s1[]s2
wp s1 (wp s2 q)
if s = s1; s2
wp s′ q
if s = ghost s′
The idea behind each case is as follows:
assert p will map any state that does not fulfill p to the error state. These states must
therefore be filtered out from the precondition.
16
Mechanized Ghost Code and Weakest Precondition Reasoning
==PAGE:25==
assume p will map any state that does not fulfill p to the magic state, where all postcon-
ditions hold. We can therefore add all states that do not fulfill p to the precondition.
var x will give a random value to x. The precondition should therefore be all states that
satisfy the postcondition for all values of x.
After x ←a, x will have the value of a. For the postcondition to be valid for x after this
assignment, it must have been valid for a before the assignment.
s1[]s2 picks either s1 or s2 to execute. As we do not know which, both paths should lead
to the postcondition.
s1; s2 first executes s1 then s2.
If the weakest precondition of s2 contains all states
guaranteed to lead to the postcondition through s2, then the weakest precondition of
s1; s2 should be the weakest precondition of s1 with the weakest precondition of s2 as
postcondition.
When verifying programs, ghost annotations should just be ignored.
3.2.1
Correctness
I have proven the correctness of the weakest precondition given above with regards to the
semantics. This consists of showing that p −→wp s a holds if and only if p and q are valid
pre- and postconditions for s with regards to the semantics. I did this as an introductory
exercise to explore techniques when working with the weakest precondition in Isabelle.
Therefore, I have not done the same for PL1, which would require much more work.
The first step is to define what makes preconditions and postconditions valid for a given
program. Below we define the well-known “Hoare triple” [Hoa69]. {p}s{q} is valid if all
executions of s starting in p must terminate in q. We require that no error states are
generated, but magic states will simply be ignored.
Definition 3.2.1. We write {p}s{q} if for all interpretations i such that i |= p we have:
(1) error /∈sem i s and (2) for all j ∈sem i s we have j |= q.
We show that Hoare triples can be composed:
Lemma 3.2.2. If we have {p}s1{q} and {q}s2{r} then {p}s1; s2{r}.
Proof. Follows from Definition 3.2.1.
Next, we show that the weakest precondition is always a valid precondition with regards
to the semantics:
Lemma 3.2.3. For all programs s and postconditions q we have {wp s q}s{q}.
Proof. We do induction on s with arbitrary q. For the ;-case use Lemma 3.2.2.
Then, we show that if a state could be in some valid precondition, it is in the weakest
precondition:
Lemma 3.2.4. If error /∈sem i s and for all j ∈sem i s we have j |= q, then i |= wp s q.
Proof. We do induction on s with arbitrary q and i.
The last lemma shows that there is a one-to-one correspondence between verifying a pro-
gram using the weakest precondition and checking that a Hoare triple is valid with regards
to the big-step semantics.
Mechanized Ghost Code and Weakest Precondition Reasoning
17
==PAGE:26==
Lemma 3.2.5. {p}s{q} if and only if for all i we have that i |= p implies i |= wp s q.
Proof. Lemma 3.2.3 + Lemma 3.2.4.
3.3
Ghost Labelling
When typing ghost code, it is useful to separate between designated regular variables and
designated ghost variables. I do this by a ghost labelling function g, which returns true for
a given variable if that variable is designated as a ghost variable. This means that when
an analysis depends on the ghost labelling g and we have g x, x should be treated as a
ghost variable. Following are some useful definitions and lemmas regarding ghost labeling.
We define the function regular g e to hold if e is an expression (arithmetic or logical)
with no free ghost variables according to g. In a strictly typed setting (like Isabelle) this
needs to be split into two functions: One for arithmetic and one for logical expressions.
We can just define regular as:
Definition 3.3.1. regular g e holds exactly when we have ¬g x for all x ∈fv e.
The ghost labelling is useful because we can use it to show that changes to the ghost part
of an interpretation will not affect regular expressions, as examined in the next section.
3.3.1
Regular Interpretations
It is sometimes useful to ignore the part of an interpretation that concerns ghost code, for
example to show that a state is then identical before and after running ghost code. To do
this we define the regular part of an interpretation i with regards to ghost labelling g as
i ↓g:
i ↓g ≡{(x, i x) | ¬g x}
I define that two interpretations, i and j, are agreeing if i ↓g = j ↓g. If this is true then
they may only differ on the values of ghost variables. i ↓g describes i restricted to a
subset of the domain dictated by g. In the literature i ↓g is often called a projection of i.
I will refer to i ↓g as a regular interpretation, since it describes how i interprets regular
variables.
The main point of restricting interpretations to their regular parts, is to show that if two
interpretations agree on in their regular parts then they will agree on the value of regular
expressions:
Lemma 3.3.2. If i ↓g = j ↓g and regular g a then i[a] = j[a].
Proof. Induction on a.
Lemma 3.3.3. If i ↓g = j ↓g and regular g p then i |= p ←→j |= p.
Proof. Induction on p + Lemma 3.3.2.
For a predicate p expressed as a set of interpretations we have regular g p if {j | ∃i ∈
p. i ↓g = j ↓g} ⊆p. This means that a regular predicate p must be closed over insertion
of agreeing interpretations.
Definition 3.3.4. For a set of interpretations p, we have regular g p if and only if
{j | ∃i ∈p. i ↓g = j ↓g} ⊆p
18
Mechanized Ghost Code and Weakest Precondition Reasoning
==PAGE:27==
We can show that if a predicate expressed syntactically is regular then the set-based
predicate is also regular. The other direction is not possible as not all set-based predicates
have a syntactic representation.
Lemma 3.3.5. If regular g p then regular g { i | i |= p }
Proof. Follows from Lemma 3.3.3.
I use regular interpretations most explicitly in PL0, but they do show up in many of the
Isabelle proofs for the PL1 theory as well.
3.4
Type Checking
We want a method for checking the well-typedness of ghost code in PL0, such that it
allows us to conclude that if a program is verified with regards to certain (regular) pre-
and postconditions, then its ghost erasure (which, to reiterate, is the program you obtain
after deleting all the ghost code) will also be verified with regards to those pre- and
postconditions.
To express this formally we need a function for returning the ghost erasure of a program.
erase-ghost s returns the program obtain by replacing all the ghost code in s with
assert ⊤, which is a statement that does nothing (no-op).
We can then say that a program is well-formed (with regards to p and q) if showing
p −→wp s q implies p −→wp (erase-ghost s) q. The well-formedness of a program
depends on which pre- and postconditions we use. On one hand, p = ⊥will make any
program well-formed. On the other hand, references to ghost variables in q can make even
a program that does nothing except assign to a ghost variable inside ghost code not be
well-formed. In the different type checkers I consider, it is often the case that any regular
pre- and postcondition will make any well-typed program well-formed.
3.4.1
Complexity
Before defining the type checker it can be useful to explore what the most diﬀicult parts
will be and what limits there must be to the best possible solution.
We soon see that the most complicated part will be ghost assumptions. Assumptions only
ever make verification easier, and it is thus tricky to see whether the verification is still
valid when they are removed. In fact, the computational complexity of this problem is at
least as high as the validity problem of the logical language supported in assertions. This
can easily be seen by the fact that the following program is well-formed if and only if p is
valid:
ghost assume ⊥
assert p
Furthermore, it is not practical to out-right forbid ghost assumptions, and whether a ghost
assumption should be allowed or not is not always trivial just from the form of the program
(as it is with the program above).
As an example of a meaningful program with ghost assumptions, consider the following
program for calculating the square root of x and saving it in r.
Mechanized Ghost Code and Weakest Precondition Reasoning
19
==PAGE:28==
r ←x ∗x
assert r = x2
We can imagine that for verification purposes we need the fact that for any arbitrary y ≤0
we will have y ≤r at the end of the program. This can be shown by adding ghost code:
ghost assume y ≤0
r ←x ∗x
assert r = x2
ghost assert y ≤r
This demonstrates that ghost assumptions have practical uses, and one should not com-
pletely disallow them.
Now for a somewhat more abstract example. We can image a program, which first assumes
that some arbitrary ghost variable is less than 0, does something with the variable (the
first · · · ), then uses the y to save the value of x ∗x at that specific point in the program,
then does something with x (the second · · · ), and at last asserts that some predicate p
holds for x:
ghost assume y < 0
· · ·
ghost y ←x ∗x
· · ·
assert p(x)
Depending on the content of · · · , this could be a meaningful and well-formed program. If
we, however, shuffled around the same commands we can obtain:
ghost y ←x ∗x
ghost assume y < 0
assert p(x)
This program is not well-formed, as the two ghost commands lead to a contradiction which
means we can show anything. I.e. the following program verifies:
ghost y ←x ∗x
ghost assume y < 0
assert ⊥
The point of this example is to show that even though the statements in the programs
before and after shuffling are the same, one is a meaningful and well-formed program while
the other is not. It is therefore not suﬀicient to do an analysis where each statement is
checked to be in some way well-typed separately.
3.4.2
Disallowing Ghost Assumptions
One option for getting around the problem of ghost assumptions is to just disallow them
completely. This is obviously not a practical solution for PL0, because nearly all interesting
PL0 programs use the assume statement. It could, however, be okay for more expressive
languages. The reason is that in these languages the assume statement is most often used
to avoid having to verify parts of the program. Since using assume in regular code could
invalidate the result of the verification, we could just accept that using assume in ghost
code might do the same.
Partly because of this, and partly to consider methods for the other language features in
isolation, my first analysis was based on considering any program with assume in ghost
code as ill-typed. In my Isabelle file this analysis is based on the type checkers gc_check
20
Mechanized Ghost Code and Weakest Precondition Reasoning
==PAGE:29==
and rc_check, while the analysis accepting ghost assumptions described in the next section
is based on gc_check’ and rc_check’.
I will not detail the results about type checking ghost code in PL0 without ghost assump-
tions here, as all the interesting findings are subsumed my theory of ghost code in PL1.
Instead, I will briefly note the end result:
We define that a program with ghost code, s, is well-typed with regards to ghost code if
it makes no references to ghost variables in regular code and satisfies the following for at
least one path through the ghost code (i.e. at the top level and in at least one branch
of every non-deterministic choice): there are no assumptions and we only assign to ghost
variables. If s is well typed then showing p −→wp s q, where p and q are regular, implies
p −→wp (erase-ghost s) q.
3.4.3
Typing Rules
I have chosen to make a type checker that is based on generating and checking first-
order logic verification conditions. This is similar to how verification using the weakest
precondition is done in practice. This means that when verifying a program with ghost
code it is necessary to both verify the condition generated by the weakest precondition
and the conditions generated by the ghost code type checker using, for example, a theorem
prover like Z3. This offloads the undecidability onto whatever method is used to check
that these conditions are valid.
The central observation my type checker is based on is that we can guarantee that the
program s has not weakened a condition q with regards to the possible assignments to
regular variables if {i ↓g | i ̸|= wp s q} ⊇{i ↓g | i ̸|= q}.
This means that for
every interpretation that does not satisfy q there exists an agreeing interpretation that
does not satisfy the weakest precondition of q.
Interestingly, this is not the same as
{i ↓g | i |= wp s q} ⊆{i ↓g | i |= q}. Consider the following program:
assume x > 0
ghost assume y > 0
assert x > 0
This program should clearly be well-formed if x is a regular variable and y is a ghost
variable. Despite this the ghost code in this program will not fulfill the condition {i ↓
g | i |= wp (assume y > 0)} (x > 0) ⊆{i ↓g | i |= x > 0}, since {i ↓g | i |=
wp (assume y > 0) (x > 0)} will include states where x ≤0 and y ≤0. It does, however,
fulfill {i ↓g | i ̸|= wp (assume y > 0) (x > 0)} ⊇{i ↓g | i ̸|= q}, since for any i ≤0 there
is a state i such that i x = i and i ̸|= y > 0 −→x > 0.
The strategy for checking the well-typedness of ghost code then seems clear: calculate the
weakest precondition of the program and for every block of ghost code, s, take the weakest
precondition so far, q, and check {i ↓g | i ̸|= wp s q} ⊇{i ↓g | i ̸|= q}. There is, however, a
problem with this if the same ghost variables are used in different ghost blocks. Consider
the following program where ghost code is split into two ghost blocks:
ghost
assume y > 0
end ghost
ghost
assert y > 0
end ghost
Mechanized Ghost Code and Weakest Precondition Reasoning
21
==PAGE:30==
For the topmost ghost block we will generate the condition {i ↓g | i ̸|= wp (assume y >
0) (y > 0)} ⊇{i ↓g | i ̸|= y > 0}. This condition is not fulfilled since {i ↓g | i ̸|= y > 0}
contains all possible regular interpretations, while {i ↓g | i ̸|= wp (assume y > 0) (y > 0)}
is empty.
The solution to this is to ignore ghost assertions when calculating the well-typedness
conditions. Since ghost assertions will be removed along with the rest of the ghost code
it should be fine that they are made easier to verify by other ghost code. To do this we
define weakest preconditions that ignore ghost assertions: gwp and rwp. gwp is meant
to be used in ghost code while rwp should be used in regular code. They are defined in
the exact same way as wp, except for the cases shown below:
gwp s q =
{
q
if s = assert p
. . .
. . .
rwp s q =
{
. . .
. . .
gwp s′ q
if s = ghost s′
The last missing piece is to be able to express {i ↓g | i ̸|= wp s q} ⊇{i ↓g | i ̸|= q} with a
logical formula that can be checked by a theorem prover. It turns out that it is useful to
define a new logical operator that quantify all variables designated as ghosts by the ghost
labelling:
Definition 3.4.1.
A
gp is the formula obtained by universally quantifying all x ∈fv p
such that g x. We can define it by
A
gp =
A
{x | x∈fv p ∧g x} p where
A
s for finite set
s is recursively defined by
A
{}p = p and
A
{x}∪sp =
A
s−{x}∀x. p.
E
gp is defined similarly, such that it existentially binds all free ghost variables in p.
A central observation is that the truth value of
A
g p (and
E
g p) does not depend on
the values of any ghost variables. Another observation is that
A
g (and
E
g) is purely
syntactic sugar. For any concrete formula it can be encoded using ∀(or ∃).
It is possible to show:
Lemma 3.4.2. {i ↓g | i ̸|= p} ⊇{i ↓g | i ̸|= q} if and only if
(
A
g p
)
−→q is valid.
Proof. The following is just an outline. See the Isabelle proof in regular_interpretations.thy
for details.
By definition we have that, for any r, {i ↓g | i |= r} contains some regular interpre-
tation if and only if there exists an agreeing full interpretation (i.e.
a way to assign
values to the ghost variables) i such that i |= r.
From these things it follows that
{i ↓g | i ̸|= p} ⊇{i ↓g | i ̸|= q} if and only if
(
E
g¬q
)
−→
(
E
g¬p
)
is valid. By the
duality of the universal and existential quantifiers, we have that
(
E
g¬q
)
−→
(
E
g¬p
)
is
valid if and only if
(
A
g p
)
−→
(
A
g q
)
is valid. Since no free variables in
A
g p can be
been bound by the
A
g quantifiers in
A
g q,
(
A
g p
)
−→
(
A
g q
)
is valid if and only if
(
A
g p
)
−→q is valid.
With this, it is now possible to define the type checker.
In addition to checking the
property described above for all ghost code, we should additionally check that regular
code only references regular variables.
If we have references to ghost variables in, for
22
Mechanized Ghost Code and Weakest Precondition Reasoning
==PAGE:31==
example, regular assertions, then the check on blocks of ghost code cannot guarantee that
the program is well-formed.
rc-check g s q =

























regular g p
if s = assert p
regular g p
if s = assume p
¬g x
if s = var x
¬g x ∧regular g a
if s = x ←a
rc-check g s1 q ∧rc-check g s2 q
if s = s1[]s2
rc-check g s1 (rwp s2 q) ∧rc-check g s2 q
if s = s1; s2
(
A
ggwp s q
)
−→q
if s = ghost s′
If a program and postcondition passes rc-check we get the following guarantee about
the program’s ghost erasure:
Lemma 3.4.3. If rc-check g s q, {i ↓g | i ̸|= p} ⊇{i ↓g | i ̸|= q}, and q is regular,
then {i ↓g | i ̸|= rwp s p} ⊇{i ↓g | i ̸|= rwp (erase-ghost s) q}.
Proof. We do induction on s with arbitrary p and q.
From this lemma we can derive the well-formedness of a program given that it type checks:
Corollary 3.4.3.1. If rc-check g s q and p and q are regular, then p −→wp s q implies
p −→wp (erase-ghost s) q.
Proof. From assumption we have p −→wp s q. It is easy to show that wp s q −→rwp s q.
From Lemma 3.4.3 we have rwp s q −→rwp (erase-ghost s) q. Since there is no ghost
code in erase-ghost s we have rwp (erase-ghost s) q −→wp (erase-ghost s) q.
From these facts it follows that p −→wp (erase-ghost s) q.
3.4.4
Evaluating the Type Checker
For rc-check to actually be useful it is necessary to argue two things. First, it must
be easier to check that ghost code is well-formed than to just remove all the ghost code
and try to verify the obtained ghost erasure.
Second, it must be easier to check the
generated well-typedness conditions than to just try to show well-formedness directly:
(p −→wp s q) −→(p −→wp (erase-ghost s) q). I would argue that both these criteria
are met, though only barely.
The first thing to observe is that the worst case complexity for the well-typedness con-
ditions is the same as the validity problem for the logical language used in formulas.
Consider again the program:
ghost assume ⊥
assert p
rc-check will generate the following well-typedness condition (
A
g⊥−→p) −→p, which
of course is valid if and only if p is valid. This shows that the conditions given by rc-
check can be as diﬀicult to verify as any arbitrary formula. It can be, however, that
when using certain theorem provers the verification of well-typedness conditions is easier
than trying to directly verify ghost erasures. Consider the following program:
assert ∃x y. x > 1 ∧y > 1 ∧x ∗y = 61190113
Mechanized Ghost Code and Weakest Precondition Reasoning
23
==PAGE:32==
It is unlikely that a theorem prover is able to find the two prime numbers, 7727 and 7919,
that make the assertion valid. Inserting the following ghost code could help, however:
ghost
i ←7727
j ←7919
assert i > 1 ∧j > 1 ∧i ∗j = 61190113
end ghost
assert ∃x y. x > 1 ∧y > 1 ∧x ∗y = 61190113
The reason the above is likely to verify is that many theorem provers look for examples
that can make the formula inside the existential quantifier satisfied among the terms used
in the program. In Isabelle, for example, none of the built in proof methods are able to
show ∃x y. x > 1 ∧y > 1 ∧x ∗y = 61190113, but many of them are able to show both
7727 > 1 ∧7919 > 1 ∧7727 ∗7919 = 61190113 and (7727 > 1 ∧7919 > 1 ∧7727 ∗7919 =
61190113) −→(∃x y. x > 1 ∧y > 1 ∧x ∗y = 61190113), which are the verification
conditions generated by the program above. In addition to the verification conditions we
need to check the typing condition for the ghost block. The program above would generate
the typing condition (∃x y. x > 1 ∧y > 1 ∧x ∗y = 61190113) −→(∃x y. x > 1 ∧y >
1 ∧x ∗y = 61190113), since the ghost assertion is ignored. This formulas is also easy to
verify. These examples are included in the last part of the wp0.thy Isabelle file.
What remains to argue is that it is easier to check the well-typedness conditions, than to
verify well-formedness directly. To do the latter with the program above we would have
to check the formula ((7727 > 1∧7919 > 1∧7727∗7919 = 61190113)∧(∃x y. x > 1∧y >
1 ∧x ∗y = 61190113)) −→(∃x y. x > 1 ∧y > 1 ∧x ∗y = 61190113), which is of course
also quite easy. In general, I have not found examples where the well-formedness check is
much harder to perform than the well-typedness check. Instead, we have that the well-
formedness condition is often a very large formula, where the well-typedness conditions
are often much smaller, though this is offset by the fact that we generate multiple well-
typedness conditions for each program. There is also the added benefit with the type
checker that you can locate which block of ghost code makes the typing fail, while the
well-formedness check either fails or succeeds for the entire program.
3.5
Haskell Verifier
I have made a small Haskell project for verifying PL0 programs and for generating and
checking well-typedness conditions for ghost code. The generated conditions are checked
by the SMT based theorem prover SBV: https://hackage.haskell.org/package/sbv.
The core functionality in the project is based on the code export functionality in Isabelle,
though I have reworked it substantially to something more readable for humans.
The project includes a parser based on the Parsec package (https://hackage.haskell.org/
package/parsec), the capability to generate and check verification conditions, and the
typing check of rc-check.
24
Mechanized Ghost Code and Weakest Precondition Reasoning
==PAGE:33==
4
PL1
In this chapter, I extend the theory of ghost code to a more realistic programming lan-
guage by adding if and while statements. These common features make the language
actually usable for small realistic programs. In addition to adding these features, I have
removed the assume statement. As described in the previous chapter, this statement
makes the problem very complex and puts a hard limit on the usability of even the most
eﬀicient typing systems. I wanted to examine the use of ghost code with the new language
constructs, without the theory related to the assume statement overshadowing the new
issues specific to if and while.
4.1
Language
We use the same notion of arithmetic expressions and logical formulas as in Section 3.1.1,
and the notions of ghost labelings, regular interpretations, and regular predicates from
Section 3.3. A program in PL1 is defined from the following grammar:
s →assert p
| var x
| x ←a
| s1; s2
| s1 [] s2
| if (b) s1 else s2
| while (b) (I: p) s′
| ghost s′
| {s′}
The formula after I in the while statement is an invariant. The invariant does not affect
the semantics, but does affect the practical weakest precondition (see wpax in the next
section).
There is some redundancy in the language at this point as s1[]s2 can be modelled by
var x; if (x ≥0){s1} else {s2} for a fresh x. I have still opted to include both statements,
as it is useful to exploit that both branches of s1[]s2 will be verified. This means that only
one branch of g {s1[]s2} needs to well-typed, so one may assign to regular variables in the
other.
I note that this language is Turing-complete, though it at first glance might not seem so
because of the lack of data storage structures. However, since we use unbounded integers,
unlimited amounts of information can be stored within each variable.
4.2
Weakest Precondition
Before we can define the weakest precondition of this new language we need two auxiliary
functions, lfp and gfp. Both functions take a monotone function over a complete lattice
as input and return a point mapped to itself by that function. lfp returns the least such
point and gfp the greatest. The Knaster-Tarski theorem guarantees that such points exist,
Mechanized Ghost Code and Weakest Precondition Reasoning
25
==PAGE:34==
and in fact the fixed points form a complete lattice [Tar55]. More about their properties
and how they are obtained is described in Section 4.3.
Definition 4.2.1. For a monotone function f over a complete lattice, we define lfp f to
be the least point in the lattice such that lfp f = f (lfp f).
gfp f is the greatest point such that gfp f = f (gfp f).
When working with PL1 it makes sense to differentiate between three types of weakest
preconditions: wppc, wptc, and wpax. Their purposes and the difference between them
follow.
The goal of this chapter is to derive a theory of how we can guarantee that partial correct-
ness of programs with ghost code implies the partial correctness of the program’s ghost
erasure. To express this we need weakest precondition for partial correctness: wppc (of-
ten called weakest liberal precondition, or wlp, in the literature). wppc s q should return
the weakest predicate such that all states are guaranteed to either lead to q or diverge.
The reason I focus on partial correctness is that it is the predicate transformer that is the
easiest to approximate when performing practical verification.
The weakest precondition for partial correctness is not suﬀicient to show the well-formedness
of PL1 programs, however. Consider the following program:
ghost
while ⊤do
skip
end while
end ghost
assert ⊥
When including the ghost code, wppc returns ⊤for this program since all states are
guaranteed to diverge. When the ghost code is removed, however, the weakest precondition
becomes ⊥, which cannot be verified. This means that validating the program with ghost
code has not validated the ghost erasure. To avoid this, we must require total correctness
of ghost code to obtain partial correctness of regular code. To express this we require
weakest precondition for total correctness: wptc. wptc s q should return all the states
guaranteed to lead to q and not diverge.
Both wppc and wptc represent theoretically weakest preconditions, which are built on
fixed points that can be very hard to find in practice. For actual verification we also
introduce the practical weakest precondition for approximate correctness: wpax. wpax
is identical to the two theoretical weakest preconditions for all cases except while, where
we use the invariant supplied by the programmer to under-approximate wppc.
When writing about general principles I simply use wp. Such statements will be true
regardless of which version of the weakest precondition you replace wp with.
The precise definitions of wptc, wppc, and wpax follow.
As already mentioned, we
need to switch to wptc in the ghost case of wppc to obtain actual partial correctness of
the regular code. Note that the somewhat non-standard ternary logical “if p then q else
r”-operator I use can be defined as follows:
if b then p else q ≡(p −→q) ∧(¬p −→r)
26
Mechanized Ghost Code and Weakest Precondition Reasoning
==PAGE:35==
For clarity in the definitions of the weakest preconditions, we define the following abbre-
viations:
Φtc b s q x ≡if b then wptc s x else q
Φpc b s q x ≡if b then wppc s x else q
I will refer to Φtc b s q and Φpc b s q as predicate transformers, like I do with wptc s and
wppc s.
We then define wptc as
wptc s q =































p ∧q
if s = assert p
∀x. p
if s = var x
q[x/a]
if s = x ←a
wptc s1 q ∧wptc s2 q
if s = s1[]s2
wptc s1 (wptc s2 q)
if s = s1; s2
if b then wptc s1 q else wptc s2 q
if s = if (b) {s1} else {s2}
lfp (Φtc b s q)
if s = while (b) (I: p) {s}
wptc s′ q
if s = ghost s′
wppc is defined almost identically. The only real changes are to the while statements,
where we use the greatest fixed point, and the ghost statements, where we switch from
wppc to wptc:
wppc s q =





. . .
. . .
gfp (Φpc b s q)
if s = while (b) (I: p) {s}
wptc s′ q
if s = ghost s′
It is worth, at this point, to explain why the least and greatest fixed points of Φtc b s q and
Φpc b s q correctly capture the weakest precondition of a while statement with regards to
total and partial correctness.
I will start with explaining why any weakest precondition needs to be a fixed point of such
a function. If the weakest precondition of while (b) (I: p) {s} returns a set, X, that is
not a fixed point of the appropriate Φ function, then Φ will either add or remove states
to/from X. If a state is added, it fulfills b and leads to a state in X when executing s, or it
does not fulfill b while fulfilling q. In both cases the state fulfills the requirements imposed
by the program and postcondition, and should therefore be in the weakest precondition.
This means X cannot have been the weakest precondition. If a state was removed, it
either fulfills b and does not lead to a state in X when executing s, or fulfills neither b nor
q. In the case of the latter, it obviously does not adhere to the requirements imposed by
the postcondition, and therefore should not have been in any permissible precondition. In
the case of the former, it leads to a state outside the weakest precondition of the while
statement, before executing the while statement again. Both these things imply that the
state does not lead to the postcondition when executing the loop, and should therefore
not have been in the weakest precondition in the first place.
It remains to be argued that the least fixed point corresponds to total correctness and the
greatest corresponds to partial correctness. This is much harder to show, but is extensively
examined in Apt and Plotkin [AP86]. Here they show that the different fixed points only
Mechanized Ghost Code and Weakest Precondition Reasoning
27
==PAGE:36==
disagree on states which lead to infinite executions paths. This gives rise to a category of
weakest preconditions with different interpretations, for example correctness under weak
or strong fairness. The most permissive function in this category will be the one that
accepts all states which lead to infinite execution paths, i.e.
weakest precondition for
partial correctness, and the strictest will be the one which does not allow any states which
may lead to infinite execution paths, i.e. weakest precondition for total correctness.
wpax only differs from wppc in the while case. For wpax to work, the user (programmer)
must have provided a suitable invariant. Leaving this task to the user circumvents the
undecidability of calculating the greatest fixed point, thereby making wpax implementable
in practice (though verifying the predicate it outputs is still undecidable).
A suitable
invariant, p, for while (b) (I: p) {s} is one that has the following properties: (1) if both p
and b hold, then p must also hold after the execution of s and (2) if p holds and b does not,
then the desired postcondition must also hold. If these conditions hold then the weakest
precondition of the while statement should just be the invariant p.
These conditions imposed on the invariant can also be checked when calculating the weak-
est precondition. In this case we set the weakest precondition to ⊥if the conditions do
not hold and p if they do. To do this in a formula an easy way, we can define the operator
A
which universally quantifies all free variables in a provided formula. It corresponds to
A
λx. ⊤from the previous chapter. It can be defined as follows:
Definition 4.2.2.
A
p =
A
fv pp, where
A
s for finite set s is recursively defined as
A
{}p = p and
A
{x}∪sp =
A
s−{x}∀x. p.
The cases not included in the following definition are defined identically to the correspond-
ing cases in wptc and wppc.
wpax s q =





. . .
. . .
p ∧
(
A
p −→(if b then wpax s p else q)
)
if s = while (b) (I: p) {s}
wpax s′ q
if s = ghost s′
Note that it is known to be sound to only quantify over the variables actually changed
by the loop body in the while case [Ern22].
This, however, requires showing certain
“framing” lemmas that I have left as future work.
4.2.1
Correctness
I have not proven the correctness of my weakest precondition functions with regards to
the semantics for PL1, like I did for PL0 in Section 3.2.1. I will, however, briefly mention
some important aspects relating the weakest precondition and program semantics.
As mentioned in Section 2.2, one can perform program verification with regards to partial
correctness (we never terminate in an erroneous state) or total correctness (we always
terminate in a valid state). The semantics obtained from Section 3.1 describe which states
an execution of a program could terminate in. Non-terminating executions would simply
be ignored by these semantics. They are therefore only really usable for reasoning about
partial correctness. To be able to reason about total correctness one could add a new
nontermination state which is only “reached” by infinite execution paths. To correctly
model this one would have to inductively define entire execution paths of a program, not
just the set of end-states as we did in the previous chapter. This includes regarding a state
as a configuration containing both the current value of the variables and the position in
the program.
28
Mechanized Ghost Code and Weakest Precondition Reasoning
==PAGE:37==
With the new nontermination end state, we would define that {p}s{q} is a valid Hoare
triple (with regards to total correctness) if for all i |= p we have error /∈sem i s,
nontermination /∈sem i s, and for all j ∈sem i s we have j |= q. For partial correct-
ness we just remove the nontermination /∈sem i s requirement.
The proof of correctness would then be to show that {p}s{q} is valid for partial correctness
if and only if p −→wppc s q, and valid for total correctness if and only if p −→wptc s q.
The diﬀicult part is showing that wppc accepts all states which lead to infinite execution
paths, while wptc permits no such states. As previously mentioned, relevant proofs exist
in Hesselink [Hes88], specifically Section 4.
4.2.2
Lattice of Predicates
As mentioned in 4.2.1, lfp and gfp are defined for monotone functions over complete
lattices. The definition of the weakest preconditions is therefore not complete before we
have argued that using them for Φtc b s q (i.e. λx. (b −→wptc s x) ∧(¬b −→q)) and
Φpc b s q (i.e. λx. (b −→wppc s x) ∧(¬b −→q)) is appropriate.
We can define a complete lattice of predicates by the following: p ≤q if and only if p ⊆q.
p ⊔q = p ∪q. p ⊓q = p ∩q. ⊥= ⊥. ⊤= ⊤. Note that it is here necessary to consider
predicates as sets of interpretations. For syntactic predicates, it is not obvious that any
infinite set of formulas has a least upper bound that can be expressed as a formula.
The following defines some important terminology about lattice points:
Definition 4.2.3. A fixed point x of a function f over a lattice, is a point in the lattice
such that x = f x.
A prefixed point is one that satisfies f x ≤x and a postfixed point is one that satisfies
x ≤f x.
We also define the two following properties of functions over lattices:
Definition 4.2.4. A function f is monotone if for any i ≤j we have f i ≤f j.
A function f is (Scott) continuous if for any directed set of lattice points X we have
f (⊔X) = ⊔{f x | x ∈X}.
From this definition, we have that a function is monotone if it preserves the order of its
arguments and continuous if it preserves suprema. I note that a directed set X is a non-
empty set where any two elements have an upper bound in X. It is relatively easy to show
that any continuous function is also monotone.
As will be explained in Section 4.3, it is beneficial to have a constructive definition of
fixed points. Among other things, it then becomes possible to show properties of the fixed
points by induction. We can make a constructive definition of the least fixed point of a
continuous function by countable iteration starting from ⊥. This gives the chain ⊥, f ⊥,
f (f ⊥), …. If f is continuous we know that ⊔{fi ⊥| i ∈N} is the least fixed point. This
does not really help us, however, since our weakest preconditions are not continuous:
Lemma 4.2.5. λq. wp s q is not continuous.
Proof. For an arbitrary interpretation i and variable x consider the set of postconditions
{{i[x 7→i] | i ≤n} | for n ∈Z} and the program s = var x. This set is directed, and its
supremum will be preserved by wp (var x). All the elements of the set will, however, be
mapped to ⊥.
Mechanized Ghost Code and Weakest Precondition Reasoning
29
==PAGE:38==
Though they are not continuous, all notions of the weakest precondition described in this
chapter are monotone:
Lemma 4.2.6. λq. wp s q is monotone for all s. So are Φpc b s q and Φtc b s q for all
b, s, and q.
Proof. We need to show that if p −→q then wp s p −→wp s q. This can be shown by
induction on s with arbitrary p and q. That Φpc b s q and Φtc b s q are monotone directly
follows.
This shows that the least and greatest fixed points used in the definitions of wptc and
wppc are defined. In particular, we get the following characterizations:
Lemma 4.2.7. lfp (Φtc b s q) = ∩{x | Φtc b s q x ⊆x} and gfp (Φpc b s q) = ∪{x | x ⊆
Φpc b s q x}
Proof. Lemma 4.2.6 + Tarski [Tar55].
When trying to prove properties about the weakest preconditions, we quickly run into the
problem that some very central results are hard to obtain using the characterizations of
fixed points given above. One example is conjuctivity. As in Back and Wright [BW98], we
call a predicate transformer T conjunctive if (T p) ⊓(T q) = T (p ⊓q). This is a property
which is central to many of my proofs. All versions of the weakest precondition we give
are conjunctive, but it turns out to be hard to show for wptc without a constructive
characterization of the least fixed point. The following section details how I obtained such
a characterization, despite the predicate transformers not being continuous.
4.3
Fixed Point by Transfinite Recursion
Kleene’s Fixed Point Theorem states that for a continuous function f one can obtain the
least fixed point as ⊔{fn ⊥
|
n ∈N} [Bar91]. Properties of this fixed point can be
proven by induction on n, which can be useful. For functions that are monotone but not
continuous, this definition does not work, and the usual way to get the least fixed point is
⊔
{x | f x ≤x} [Tar55] (the infimum of all prefixed points). This definition does not
give rise to an inductive proof pattern, which makes some properties hard to show. For
example, the conjunctivity of wptc: wptc s p ∩wptc s q ⊆wptc s (p ∩q).
In Cousot and Cousot [CC03] they show that one can use the constructive “repeated
function application” approach to obtain the least fixed point of monotone functions, as
in Kleene’s Fixed Point Theorem for continuous functions, but that it is not guaranteed
that this fixed point will be reached by countably many iterations.
The trick then is
to iterate using the ordinal numbers rather than the natural numbers. Ordinals are a
generalization of numbers which allows enumerating the elements of arbitrarily large sets.
For a monotone function, f, we have that subsequent elements, fi ⊥and fi+1 ⊥, of an
iteration sequence will satisfy fi ⊥≤fi+1 ⊥. This means that the sequence will always
either introduce new points or reach a fixed point.
By iterating over the ordinals we
will at some point “exhaust” the lattice, ensuring that we reach a fixed point (we cannot
introduce new points forever). A detailed explanation can be found in Section 4.3.2.
4.3.1
Existing Theories
There are multiple existing theories in Isabelle that examine fixed points of monotone
functions over complete lattices. Unfortunately, none of them have been constructed in a
way that allows them to be used for our purposes (specifically for showing the conjunctivity
30
Mechanized Ghost Code and Weakest Precondition Reasoning
==PAGE:39==
of wptc). In this section I will go through them, and discuss the reason why none of them
work for this task.
First is the theory HOL/Inductive.thy, included in in the Isabelle/HOL distribution. The
least and greatest fixed points are defined as the infimum of all prefixed points and the
supremum of all postfixed points, respectively.
In addition to this non-constructive definition they show the admissibility of the following
induction principle for a monotone function f: To show P (lfp f) (the property P of the
least fixed point of f) we need to prove two cases. First, for any point x ≤lfp f such
that P x, we must have P (f x). Second, for any set of points X such that ∀x ∈X. P x,
we must have P (⊔X). The first proof corresponds to the successor case of transfinite
induction over the ordinals, and the second proof corresponds to the limit case. The base
case (or zero case) is captured by the second proof by considering X = {}.
This induction principle does not work for showing the conjunctivity of wptc. The proof
of this requires us to show that lfp (Φtc b s p) ∩lfp (Φtc b s q) ⊆lfp (Φtc b s (p ∩q)).
When applying the induction we must pick one of the three fixed points to apply it to.
All three possible applications lead to an invalid proof obligation. For example, if we
pick lfp (Φtc b s (p ∩q)) we must show that for any X, if ∀x ∈X. lfp (Φtc b s p) ∩
lfp (Φtc b s q) ⊆x then (Φtc b s p) ∩lfp (Φtc b s q) ⊆∪X. This includes showing
lfp (Φtc b s p) ∩lfp (Φtc b s q) ⊆∪{} unconditionally.
Another relevant theory is HOL/Complete_Partial_Order.thy, which also comes shipped
with Isabelle. Here they do define fixed points constructively. They start by defining the
transfinite iteration of a monotone function f by the function iterates. This function
is inductively defined by the following rules: If x ∈iterates f then f x ∈iterates f,
and if X is a totally ordered subset of the lattice such that ∀x ∈X. x ∈iterates f then
⊔X ∈iterates f. They go on to show that the supremum of iterates f is the least
fixed point.
This theory is closer to the one I end up developing, but still does not work. iterates f is
built in approximately the same way I build my function-iteration function. The problem
is that the iterates f set hides away the number of iterations corresponding to each
element; it simply lumps together all iterations into a single set. This means that when
trying to apply the associated induction principle to lfp (Φtc b s p) ∩lfp (Φtc b s q) ⊆
lfp (Φtc b s (p∩q)), we end up with the same problem as in the previous theory. We have
to pick one of the three fixed points to apply the induction to, and none of the possible
applications lead to a provable proof state. To get an induction principle that works, it is
necessary to make the number of iterations performed explicit. That way one can perform
induction on the δ in (Φtc b s p)δ ∩(Φtc b s q)δ ⊆(Φtc b s (p ∩q))δ instead of picking just
one of the fixed points.
The theory HOL/Nat.thy shipped with Isabelle shows properties of fixed points found
by iterations of monotone functions, but cannot guarantee that such fixed points will be
found since they iterate over the natural numbers.
The session Complete Non-Orders and Fixed Points [YD19] in the Archive of Formal
Proofs derives fixed points for domains with relaxed conditions compared to complete
lattices. For example, they relax the requirements of reflexivity and transitivity. One of
the problems with using this theory is that they only show how to find the least fixed
point constructively for continuous functions.
Mechanized Ghost Code and Weakest Precondition Reasoning
31
==PAGE:40==
4.3.2
A New Theory
Because of the issues described in the previous section I have developed a new theory
for deriving the least fixed point. I build on the theory of well-orders in HOL/Cardinals,
described in Blanchette, Popescu, and Traytel [BPT14]. This is a theory which defines
ordinals and cardinals up to an arbitrarily large limit. It is necessary to have such a limit,
as defining the set of all ordinals is unsound and all types in Isabelle have an associated
universal set. The “class” concept usually used to capture all ordinals is not representable
in Isabelle. In the Isabelle theory of ordinals this is circumvented by assuming a fixed
well-ordered relation over a domain to represent the ordinals. The theory then supplies
mechanisms for working with the cardinality of sets, generating well-ordered relations over
arbitrary sets (this is very useful when instantiating our fixed point theory in a specific
context), and performing transfinite induction and recursion.
In the Isabelle formalization of this section we work in an Isabelle locale [Bal10] with two
fixed types. The first is the domain (and codomain) of the monotone functions we are
investigating. This type is assumed to be a complete lattice. The second type represents
the set of ordinals we are considering (as described above we can only consider a portion
of the ordinals at a time in Isabelle). We assume that there is no surjective function from
the type of the complete lattice to the set of ordinals (the cardinality of the former must
be lower than that of the latter). It is also necessary for the set of ordinals to be infinite.
This locale can be generalized to all infinite and complete lattices, by generating the set
of ordinals from the power set of the lattice.
In this section we simply assume that we are working with all the ordinals, and use the
following arbitrary complete lattice:
Definition 4.3.1. L is a complete lattice.
We define the iteration of a function f by the ordinal δ starting from s. Our definition is
very similar to that of iterates from HOL/Complete_Partial_Order.thy, with the main
difference being that we make the number of iterations explicit. s represents the starting
point in the lattice, from which we begin the iterations. If s is larger than the least fixed
point, we are not guaranteed to arrive at the least fixed point, just the least fixed point
larger than s.
fn s =





s
for δ = 0
f (fδ−1 s)
for successor ordinal δ
⊔{fγ s | γ < δ}
for limit ordinal δ
(4.1)
We start with a property that is fairly easy to show: All prefixed points above (inclusively)
the start of the iteration chain will be above the entire chain. This is central to showing
that the fixed point we obtain in the end is indeed the least fixed point.
Lemma 4.3.2. For a monotone function f : L →L and a prefixed point p such that
s ≤p, we have fδ s ≤p.
Proof. Transfinite induction on δ.
Next, we show that the iteration chain is always increasing, as long as the first step is
increasing. The reasoning here isn’t hard: If s ≤f s then f s ≤f (f s) (and so on)
by the monotonicity of f. For a limit ordinal δ, we can just pick some γ < δ and use that
32
Mechanized Ghost Code and Weakest Precondition Reasoning
==PAGE:41==
since fγ s ≤fδ s (as fδ s is the supremum of all the previous iterations) we must have
fγ+1 s ≤fδ+1 s, which implies fδ s ≤fδ+1 s.
Lemma 4.3.3. (Monotone Chain)
For a monotone function f : L →L and s ≤f s we have fδ s ≤fδ+1 s for all δ.
Proof. Transfinite induction on δ.
From the above it is not hard to show that iteration over the ordinals will at some point
exhaust the state space of the lattice, forcing us to arrive at a fixed point.
Lemma 4.3.4. (Fixed Point)
For a monotone function f : L →L and s ≤f s there will be some ordinal δ such that
fδ s = fδ+1 s.
Proof. We assume the opposite. Then we have that for all δ and γ, δ < γ −→fδ s < f γ s
from Lemma 4.3.3.
This means we can construct a surjective function from L to the
ordinals, which is a contradiction.
Finally, we can show that we can reach the least fixed point by starting the iteration from
⊥, and that all iterations after reaching this point will also give the least fixed point.
Corollary 4.3.4.1. For a monotone function f : L →L, there exists an ordinal δ such
that for all γ ≥δ, fγ ⊥is the least fixed point of f.
Proof. Lemma 4.3.2 + Lemma 4.3.4.
This theory finally allows us to prove the property which guided the design. The following
corollary is important for many of the proofs about the weakest precondition. The trick
that makes the proof work is to perform induction on the ordinals underlying the fixed
points, instead of on the fixed points directly.
Corollary 4.3.4.2. (Weakest Precondition is Conjunctive)
wppc s p ∩wppc s q = wppc s (p ∩q) and wptc s p ∩wptc s q = wptc s (p ∩q).
Proof. Only wptc s p∩wptc s q ⊆wptc s (p∩q) is hard. We do induction on s with ar-
bitrary p and q. The while case can be shown by showing (Φtc b s q)δ {}∩(Φtc b s p)δ {} ⊆
(Φtc b s (p ∩q))δ {} for all ordinals δ. This is done by transfinite induction on δ. For the
limit case the trick is that for each function f = (Φtc b s p or Φtc b s q or Φtc b s (p∩q)),
though the entire ∪{fγ {} |
γ < δ} can only be reached by infinite applications of f,
each element in ∪{fγ {} | γ < δ} will be also be in some specific fγ {} for which the
induction hypothesis can be applied.
I was only able to obtain these results when making the ordinals underlying the transfi-
nite induction for least fixed points explicit. This is not as elegant as one might hope, as
it requires introducing a new construct and performing a locale instantiation [Bal10] in
any Isabelle theory where you want access to this type of induction. A question there-
fore presents itself: Could one engineer an induction rule which allows the derivation of
Corollary 4.3.4.2 while still hiding the ordinals? It turns out this is not trivial.
The step case is easily enough expressed without explicit references to ordinals. One just
has to show that if x ⊓y ≤z then (f x) ⊓(g y) ≤h z. This can be generalized to a
property P over n fixed points as P x1 x2 ... xn =⇒P (f1 x1) (f2 x2) ... (fn xn).
Mechanized Ghost Code and Weakest Precondition Reasoning
33
==PAGE:42==
Figure 4.1: Lattice showing that the limit case of fn ⊥⊓gn ⊥⊑hn ⊥for ordinal n does
not follow directly from the induction hypothesis.
This alone is not enough to show the limit-case, however.
We consider the first limit
ordinal: ω. One can construct a lattice where f, g, and h lead to three different chains
from ⊥which are completely disconnected for the first ω iterations. It would then be the
case that (fi ⊥) ⊓(gi ⊥) = ⊥for all i < ω, so both the property of the paragraph above
and the induction hypothesis would be fulfilled. We can then let ⊔{fi ⊥| i < ω} = ⊤f,
⊔{gi ⊥| i < ω} = ⊤g, and ⊔{hi ⊥| i < ω} = ⊤h, and introduce a ⊤> ⊤f, ⊤g, ⊤h
to make the lattice complete. We can then introduce a new element in the lattice x, such
that x < ⊤f, ⊤g and x is otherwise disconnected from everything except ⊥and ⊤. See
Figure 4.1 for a visualization of this lattice. We then have that ⊤f ⊓⊤g = x ̸≤⊤h. As
a side-note: one can make f, g, and h monotone by mapping every element not on the
relevant chain to ⊤. The point of this example is to show that the conjunctive property
does not follow trivially from either the truth of the step case or the induction hypothesis
of the limit case.
One can then ask: What makes the proof of Corollary 4.3.4.2 work? In the proof we
instantiate L with the power set of the set of all interpretations. This means that each
element in this L will itself be a set. For the proof we then need to consider the actual
elements of these sets. This means that we need to use the internal structure of the points
of L, not just how they relate to each other in the lattice. We need the property that
fδ s for limit ordinal δ can be totally described by the internal structure of each fγ for
γ < δ, which is not the case for all complete lattices.
In fact, the set operations are
powerful enough that the limit case of fδ {} ∩gδ {} ⊆hδ {} for any monotone f, g, and
h follows from the induction hypothesis. See Figure B.1 in the appendix for the proof.
There probably is some general lattice theoretical property stronger than completeness
which would apply to sets and be suﬀicient for showing this. One which might work is:
For any monotone chain {x0, x1, . . . } (i.e. one where x0 ≤x1 ≤. . . ) and point y such that
x0 ≤y < ⊔{x0, x1, . . . }, there must be an xi ∈{x0, x1, . . . } such that y ≤xi. This would
mean that there are no points disconnected from all points in {x0, x1, . . . } but connected
to ⊔{x0, x1, . . . }, invalidating the counterexample given above. I have, however, neither
proven that this is necessary nor suﬀicient.
34
Mechanized Ghost Code and Weakest Precondition Reasoning
==PAGE:43==
4.4
Type Checking
We now have the machinery necessary to start developing the theory of well-formedness
for programs with ghost code in PL1. The goal of the development is to obtain a type
checking function which validates a program only if removing the ghost code does not
strengthen the weakest precondition (with regards to regular interpretations). If this is
the case, then any (regular) property validated for the program with ghost code will still
be valid once that code is removed.
4.4.1
From Partial to Total Correctness
You need total correctness of ghost code to obtain partial correctness of regular code. This
is obvious from the fact that when working with partial correctness, if you have a loop
which never terminates you can verify any postcondition. If you have such a ghost-loop
then the program is no longer necessarily valid after the loop has been removed. This
is exactly the same problem as with assuming ⊥in ghost code for PL0. For any type
checking of ghost code to be valid, we then need the guaranteed termination of all ghost
code as a side condition. This again means that the problem becomes undecidable, as
deciding whether a program terminates or not (the halting problem) is well-known to
have no general solution [Luc21]. However, unlike for PL0 we can isolate the undecidable
part into a termination check performed independently of the rest of the type checking.
The goal then becomes to find a type checker such that if we have verified a program with
regards to partial correctness, and we have shown that all the ghost code terminates, then
the ghost erasure of the program is also verified.
To be able to separate the termination check from the type checker, we need to show that
if one performs an analysis for partial correctness and an analysis of termination, then
one has also done the first analysis for total correctness. A property which captures this
formally in our context can be seen in Lemma 4.4.1 on the next page.
Preliminary Proof
In my first version of the theory, I used a notion of termination that was stricter than
necessary. This means that certain practical termination checking schemes might not give
strong enough guarantees to qualify, even though they correctly determine termination.
As I want to leave the termination part as general as possible, this was a problem I needed
to fix in the final version of my theory. Since the final version is deeply influenced by
the flawed version, I will first present the latter. I also think this section more intuitively
captures the rationale behind the approach than the corrected version.
Since these proofs are not included in the formalization, I have included selected parts of
the theory in Appendix Section B.2.
We define a function t-states, which should, given a program s, return those states that
will always terminate when executing s. So as to avoid a circular definition I have based
this on wppc, though it requires one to calculate least fixed points when encountering
while statements. Using loop variants (a function from states to a well-founded ordering,
shown to decrease with each iteration of the loop) in the verification will make it so
wpax s q ⊆t-states s for all q. Proofs relevant to showing this can be found in Chapter
6 of Dijkstra [Dij76].
In the definition of t-states I use t-states (while (b) (I: p) {s}) = lfp (λx. b −→
wppc s x ∧t-states s). For an intuitive explanation of why this makes sense, we can
consider the iterative technique for finding the least fixed point. Starting pessimistically
with {} we want to add all those states which do not satisfy b, as they are guaranteed to
terminate the loop immediately. Then we want to add all the states which lead to this set
Mechanized Ghost Code and Weakest Precondition Reasoning
35
==PAGE:44==
with regards to wppc and also terminate when executing s. This step is then repeated
until a fixed point is achieved. The obtained fixed point will contain all the states which
terminate the loop, and also terminate when executing all the code in the loop body.
In the following definition of the function t-states I use logical notation, though I have
defined it using set operations in Isabelle. The translation between the two is trivial.
t-states s =































⊤
if s = assert p
⊤
if s = var x
⊤
if s = x ←a
t-states s1 ∧t-states s2
if s = s1[]s2
wppc s1 (t-states s2) ∧t-states s1
if s = s1; s2
if b then t-states s1 else t-states s2
if s = if (b) {s1} else {s2}
lfp (λx. b −→wppc s′ x ∧t-states s′)
if s = while (b) (I: p) {s′}
t-states s′
if s = ghost s′
The following is the most central lemma regarding termination. Note that we have set
it up so that lfp (λx. b −→wppc s x ∧t-states s) −→lfp (λx. b −→wptc s x) in
the while case because of the induction hypothesis. This explains why we use λx. b −→
wppc s x ∧t-states s as the predicate transformer in the least fixed point from a proof-
technical perspective.
Lemma 4.4.1. t-states s ∩wppc s q ⊆wptc s q.
Proof. We do induction on s with arbitrary q. For the while-case there are two important
sub-proofs. We define Φt ≡(λx. {i | i |= b −→i ∈(wppc s x ∩t-states s)}). We can
show by transfinite induction on the ordinal n that Φn
t {}∩gfp (Φtc b s q) ⊆(Φtc b s q)n {}.
One can also show that lfp Φt ⊆gfp Φt and that by the induction hypothesis of the
while case gfp Φt ∩gfp (Φpc b s q) ⊆gfp (Φtc b s q). Combining these facts gives
lfp Φt ∩gfp (Φpc b s q) ⊆lfp (Φtc b s q).
We now define gt-states s which should return all the states guaranteed to terminate
when executing the ghost parts of s.
That is, we might loop forever when executing
s, but we will not do so inside of ghost code.
I will not give the exact definition of
gt-states here, but it should be obvious how one would construct it by analogy to
t-states. I will just mention that the way we check the termination of ghost code is by
setting gt-states (ghost s) = t-states s.
The following lemma is the point of the section, but much easier to prove than Lemma 4.4.1.
It shows how one can combine the termination analysis of the ghost code with the practical,
partial correctness verification of the entire code, to obtain theoretical partial correctness
of the code, including total correctness in the ghost code.
Lemma 4.4.2. gt-states s ∩wpax s q ⊆wppc s q.
Proof. We do induction on s with arbitrary q. The ghost case follows from Lemma 4.4.1.
For the while case one can show that p ∩gfp (λx. {i
|
i |= b −→i ∈(wppc s x ∩
gt-states s)}) is a postfixed point of Φpc b s q, where p is the invariant of the loop.
36
Mechanized Ghost Code and Weakest Precondition Reasoning
==PAGE:45==
Using this approach it was possible to finish the rest of the theory, i.e. show how one can
verify the well-formedness of ghost code in PL1. After doing this, however, I discovered
some properties of t-states that made me rework the entire termination section.
First, I observed that t-states s ⊆wptc s ⊤if s is without assertions. We can show
this by introducing a function erase-assert that simply replaces all assertions in a given
program with assert ⊤. We can then show that t-states s ⊆wptc (erase-assert s) ⊤.
See the last part of Section B.2 in Appendix for the proof. This means we can more easily
represent the terminating states of a program using existing machinery, as erase-assert
is much less complex than t-states. For this to work wptc (erase-assert s) ⊤has to
correctly represent the states which terminate when executing s, but this should be fairly
obvious from the interpretation of wptc given in Section 4.2.1. A possible reason not to
use wptc (erase-assert s) ⊤instead of t-states s could be if the former was harder
to calculate. I would argue that this is not the case, as the main issue with both is the
ability to calculate the least fixed point of a predicate transformer.
Secondly, when trying to show that t-states s ⊇wptc (erase-assert s) ⊤, I dis-
covered an outright mistake in the definition of t-states.
This proof does not work,
since t-states is defined using wppc, and wppc does not ignore assertions. This means
that t-states is much stricter than necessary, and leaves out the states which termi-
nate, but do not pass assertions.
Indeed, you can encode wptc s q for any q and s
as t-states (s; assert q; assert ⊤) (the final assert ⊤is necessary, as the very last
statement will be ignored by t-states).
Final Proof
What follows is a description of the most important parts of the new termination theory.
To reiterate a bit from the last section, we have defined a function erase-assert from
programs to programs which replaces all instances of assert p with assert ⊤. We have
also defined that an interpretation i terminates for s if i ∈wptc (erase-assert s) ⊤.
The following lemma shows that if you have total correctness with regards to any post
condition (including ⊤), even when ignoring assertions, and you have partial correctness
with regards to another post condition, then you also have total correctness with regards
to that second post condition. It corresponds to Lemma 4.4.1.
Lemma 4.4.3. wptc (erase-assert s) t ∩wppc s q ⊆wptc s q
Proof. Induction on s with arbitrary t and q. The proof follows the same outline as that
of Lemma 4.4.1.
The following lemma shows that the practical weakest precondition implies the actual
weakest precondition (for partial correctness), if you additionally do a termination check
for all the ghost code. It corresponds to Lemma 4.4.2.
Lemma 4.4.4. wppc (erase-assert s) t ∩wpax s q ⊆wppc s q
Proof. Induction on s with arbitrary t and q. The proof follows the same outline as that
of Lemma 4.4.2. For the ghost case use Lemma 4.4.3.
4.4.2
Type Checking
In this section I show how to check the well-formedness of ghost code.
We assume a
function erase-ghost which replaces all blocks of ghost code in a given program with
assert ⊤. As mentioned previously, I refer to erase-ghost s as the ghost erasure of s.
Mechanized Ghost Code and Weakest Precondition Reasoning
37
==PAGE:46==
We can define a very permissive gc-check, especially compared to what we had for PL0.
The only requirement is that we only assign to ghost variables, and even this needs only
be true for a single branch in each non-deterministic choice.
gc-check g s =































⊤
if s = assert p
⊤
if s = var x
g x
if s = x ←a
gc-check g s1 ∨gc-check g s2
if s = s1[]s2
gc-check g s1 ∧gc-check g s2
if s = s1; s2
gc-check g s1 ∧gc-check g s2
if s = if (b) {s1} else {s2}
gc-check g s′
if s = while (b) (I: p) {s′}
gc-check g s′
if s = ghost s′
For rc-check we need to check that no expressions base their value on ghost variables,
except potentially the invariants of loops. It is actually allowed to assign to, or perform
variable declarations on, ghost variables in regular code, as this will not affect the weakest
precondition of the ghost erasure. There is, however, no reason I can see to ever do this,
as such statements might as well be marked as ghost code.
rc-check g s =































regular g p
if s = assert p
⊤
if s = var x
regular g a
if s = x ←a
rc-check g s1 ∧rc-check g s2
if s = s1[]s2
rc-check g s1 ∧rc-check g s2
if s = s1; s2
regular g b ∧rc-check g s1 ∧rc-check g s2
if s = if (b) {s1} else {s2}
regular g b ∧rc-check g s′
if s = while (b) (I: p) {s′}
gc-check g s′
if s = ghost s′
Note that even in regular code, the invariant can make references to ghost variables. This
is because the verification of the ghost erasure does not depend on the invariant.
When trying to verify the scheme above we quickly run into a problem. It is hard to
show wp s q −→wp (erase-ghost s) q by induction, because q will be transformed
differently by the two programs. The induction hypothesis is therefore not strong enough.
To strengthen it, one can either show that for q −→Q, where Q is regular, we have
wp s q −→wp (erase-ghost s) Q, or one can show that {i ↓g | i ∈wp s q} ⊆{i ↓
g | i ∈wp (erase-ghost s) q}. The first approach corresponds to letting the conditions
diverge, but showing that one still implies the other. The second approach corresponds to
showing that the postconditions do not diverge if one ignores all the ghost variables. I have
found it easiest to use the first approach for Lemma 4.4.7 and the second for Lemma 4.4.5.
The following lemma shows that for well-formed ghost code, the regular part of the weakest
precondition will imply the regular part of the postcondition.
Lemma 4.4.5. If gc-check g s then {i ↓g | i ∈wptc s q} ⊆{i ↓g | i ∈q}.
38
Mechanized Ghost Code and Weakest Precondition Reasoning
==PAGE:47==
Proof. We do induction on s with arbitrary q. For the while case one can show that
{ i | ∃j ∈q. i ↓g = j ↓g} (the closure of q over agreeing interpretations) is a prefixed
point of Φtc b s q.
To activate the induction hypotheses in the proof of Lemma 4.4.7 we need that a regular
postcondition of regular code gives a regular weakest precondition:
Lemma 4.4.6. If rc-check g s and regular-s g q then
regular-s g (wppc (erase-ghost s) q).
Proof. Induction on s with arbitrary q. In the while case it helps to show that {j | ∃i ∈
gfp (Φpc b (erase-ghost s) q). i ↓g = j ↓g} (the closure of the greatest fixed point over
agreeing interpretations) is a postfixed point of Φpc b (erase-ghost s) q.
We can now show how the weakest precondition of a program with ghost code implies the
weakest precondition of its ghost erasure.
Lemma 4.4.7. If rc-check g s, regular-s g Q and q ⊆Q, then wppc s q ⊆
wppc (erase-ghost s) Q.
Proof. We do an induction proof on s with arbitrary q and Q. Lemma 4.4.6 is useful for
both the sequential composition case and while case. For the ghost case use Lemma 4.4.5.
For the while case one can show that { i | ∃j ∈gfp (Φpc b s q). i ↓g = j ↓g } is a
postfixed point of Φpc b (erase-ghost s) Q.
From this foundation, we can derive two useful properties for practical verification.
The following lemma simply corresponds to Lemma 4.4.7, but for practical weakest pre-
condition. It shows how one can combine the termination analysis with the ghost code
check to translate a verification from the practical weakest precondition to the theoretical
weakest precondition of the ghost erasure.
Lemma 4.4.8. If rc-check g s, regular-s g Q, and q ⊆Q then
wppc (erase-assert s) ⊤∩wpax s q ⊆wppc (erase-ghost s) q.
Proof. Follows from Lemma 4.4.4 and Lemma 4.4.7.
The following corollary shows the well-formedness of programs passing rc-check, even
in the presence of ghost pre- and postconditions. The condition {i ↓g | i ∈gp} = {i ↓
g | ⊤} means that all possible interpretations of the regular variables must be accepted
by the ghost precondition.
Intuitively, this corresponds to there being no information
about regular variables in gp. For example, for a regular variable x and ghost variable y,
gp = (x > 0) and gp = ⊥would fail this requirement while gp = (x > y) would pass.
Corollary 4.4.8.1. We assume rc-check g s, regular-p g p, regular-p g q, and
{i ↓g | i ∈gp} = {i ↓g | ⊤}. Furthermore, we assume that p ∧gp ⊆wpax s (q ∧gq) ∩
wppc (erase-assert s) ⊤. We then have p ⊆wppc (erase-ghost s) q.
Proof. Follows from Lemma 4.4.6 and Lemma 4.4.8.
That ghost pre- and postconditions are allowed is a powerful result, as it allows us to
do compositional reasoning. If we have (p ∧gp) −→wpax s1 (q ∧gq) and (q ∧gq) −→
wpax s2 (r ∧gr) (and have done the necessary termination checks for ghost code), then
Mechanized Ghost Code and Weakest Precondition Reasoning
39
==PAGE:48==
we know that we must also have (p ∧gp) −→wppc (s1; s2) (r ∧gr). The corollary above
additionally gives us p −→wppc (erase-ghost s1; erase-ghost s2) r.
This means
that parts of the program can be analysed separately, and the combined result will still
be valid. Additionally, if we introduced procedures in the language the corollary above
would allow us to add requirements to, and get guarantees from, the ghost code used in
the procedures. This means that a ghost variable’s life-cycle needs not be limited to a
single program, but can span multiple procedures.
4.5
Some Examples
In this section I demonstrate the practicality of the theory above by some examples I
used ghost code to verify.
I have not included either the termination analyses or the
type checks, but both of these are fairly easy to manually verify for the given examples.
For the verification I have used a MicroViper verifier developed by Benjamin Bogø, Emil
Kristensen, and me for an assignment for the course Program Verification at DTU (https:
//kurser.dtu.dk/course/02245). The MicroViper language is a subset of the Viper program
verification language [MSS16]. The verifier works by generating verification conditions
using weakest precondition and checking them using Z3 [MB08]. The reason I have not just
used Viper is that the MicroViper verifier has fewer restrictions on instantiating existential
quantifiers, and it is therefore easier to use ghost code to witness regular assertions.
Consider the following program for calculating the remainder of dividing y by x. I use
x ≥0 ∧y ≥0 as precondition.
z ←y
while z ≥x do
invariant : ∃q. q ∗x + z = y
z ←z −x
end while
assert ∃q. q ∗x + z = y
Verification of the above program fails, since the prover is not able to instantiate the
existential quantifier with the right term. In particular, when checking that the invariant
is preserved, it needs to take the element guaranteed to exist by the invariant at the start
of the iteration and add 1. Inserting the ghost variable g makes verification succeed:
z ←y
ghost g ←0
while z ≥x do
invariant : ∃q. q ∗x + z = y
invariant : g ∗x + z = y
z ←z −x
ghost g ←g + 1
end while
assert ∃q. q ∗x + z = y
As a second example, consider the following binary search for the integer square root of
x. Unlike the previous example I was able to verify this without introducing new ghost
code. I use x ≥0 as precondition.
a ←0
b ←x + 1
while a + 1 ̸= b do
invariant : a ∗a ≤x ∧b ∗b ≥x
m ←(a + b)/2
40
Mechanized Ghost Code and Weakest Precondition Reasoning
==PAGE:49==
if m ∗m ≤x then
a ←m
else
b ←m
end if
end while
assert a + 1 = b
assert a ∗a ≤x
assert b ∗b ≥x
In addition to the partial correctness shown by the assertions above, we can add ghost
code to show total correctness. The ghost variant below is used as a measure that can be
shown to decrease for each loop iteration.
a ←0
b ←x + 1
while a + 1 ̸= b do
invariant : a ∗a ≤x ∧b ∗b ≥x
invariant : a < b
ghost variant ←b −a
m ←(a + b)/2
if m ∗m ≤x then
a ←m
else
b ←m
end if
ghost assert variant > b −a
end while
assert a + 1 = b
assert a ∗a ≤x
assert b ∗b ≥x
As a last example, I consider using a ghost loop to show a property by induction. In the
following I assume a mathematical function defined by f 0 = 0 and f x = x + f (x −1)
for x > 0. I have not considered ghost code in user-defined mathematical functions in my
theory yet, but since they do not have side effects it should be acceptable to use them in
nearly any context. I was not able to verify the following program when using x ≥0 as
precondition.
assert f x = (x ∗(x + 1))/2
However, we can introduce a ghost variable i, and show that this property is an invariant
for i in a loop that increments it up to the value of x. At the end of the loop we will
therefore know that i = x and f i = (i ∗(i + 1))/2.
ghost
i ←0
while i < x do
invariant : 0 ≤i ∧i ≤x
invariant : f i = (i ∗(i + 1))/2
i ←i + 1
end while
end ghost
assert f x = (x ∗(x + 1))/2
Mechanized Ghost Code and Weakest Precondition Reasoning
41
==PAGE:50==
4.6
Comparison with PL0
My theory of ghost code in PL1 is in many ways superior to that of PL0. First, the
programming language is more realistic, which is a good property in this context as the
entire point of putting ghost code in your program is to aid practical verification. For
well-formed programs the ghost code should, by definition, not have any effects on the
theoretical properties of the programs.
Second, even though the problem of deciding
the well-formedness of ghost code is undecidable for both PL0 and PL1, we are able to
nicely separate out the undecidability in PL1 into a disconnected termination analysis.
The remaining type checking has a computational complexity that is linear to the size of
the program. Lastly, the entire theory of ghost code in PL0 seems largely pointless in
retrospect:
Earlier in the project, I had the impression that since many more complex language
features can be modelled in PL0, a theory of ghost code in PL0 would give useful results
for those features as well. This has been true in the sense that I use much of the associated
machinery, like regular interpretations, extensively in PL1, but I have not been able to
leverage the ghost code theory itself.
One of the problems with trying to build the theory of ghost code in PL1 on the theory for
PL0 is that the encoding only works for the practical weakest precondition. The encoding
turns
while (b) (I: p) {s}
into
assert p; havoc; assume p; {assume b; s; assert p; assume ⊥} [] {assume ¬b}
where havoc is an abbreviation for performing variable declaration on all the variables
used in the program.
Computing the weakest precondition of this encoding produces
functionally the same formula as wpax.
The problem is that in the theory for PL1,
we show the preservation of verification by using the theoretical weakest preconditions
wppc and wptc. The validity of the ghost erasure is only apparent with regards to these
theoretical constructs: the practical wpax can becomes invalid when the ghost code is
removed. Since we do not have anything like wppc and wptc in PL0, it is not at all clear
how one would show that the use of ghost code in the encoding is well-formed.
Because the theory for PL0 does not really make sense as a foundation for more compli-
cated features, the remaining justification might be that it is useful to have a theory of
ghost assumptions. The assume statement is a language feature I removed in PL1, so the
only description of how it should be treated exists in the PL0 theory. The issue is that my
solution to the problem of ghost assumptions is only marginally useful. The typing obli-
gations generated by ghost code (i.e. {i ↓g | i ̸|= q} ⊆{i ↓g | i ̸|= wp s q} for ghost code
s) are in many cases easier to verify than verifying well-formedness directly (i.e. proving
the formula wp s q −→wp (erase-ghost s) q). This is, however, not always the case,
and in the worst case the complexity is the same. I would also question whether checking
the well-formedness of ghost assume statements even make sense. In practical languages
(i.e. not PL0) the assume statement is used to avoid having to verify something, by just
assuming that it is true. It can also be used to avoid verifying a part of the program by
inserting assume ⊥, which will make it possible to show anything from that point on. In
both cases, there are no guarantees that the program fulfills specification even though the
verification succeeds. It therefore seems incongruous to require that assumptions in ghost
code must not invalidate the verification. It might be better to just accept that ghost
assumptions might void the verification in the same way regular assumptions might.
42
Mechanized Ghost Code and Weakest Precondition Reasoning
==PAGE:51==
5
New Analyses
In this chapter I will describe some work on further extensions to the theory.
I have
adapted the work from the previous chapter into the context of new types of analyses,
including incorrectness verification.
One of the advantages of having a theory formalized in a proof assistant is that one
can explore how changes to definitions affect the obtained results. For example, if one
formalizes a chapter from a textbook, one can easily see which proofs are broken if an
assumption is removed, and perhaps identify alternative assumptions or proofs which
would make the new theory go through. I will explore such alterations of my ghost code
theory in this section, especially in the context of incorrectness logic (explained below).
The goal is to discover what other kinds of results we can infer from our theory without
much added labour.
The verification of the preceding chapters was concerned with showing the correctness of
programs. It should succeed if a program, when executed from an acceptable starting
state, always ends up in an acceptable end state. In this section, I will explore alternative
forms of verification, for example one for showing the incorrectness of programs. That
is, show that some bug is definitely present in a program.
The weakest precondition
approach used up to this point is unsuitable for this task, because even though it gives a
guarantee of the correctness of program when it succeeds, it does not give a guarantee of
its incorrectness when it fails.
Incorrectness logic is a relatively new field, compared to correctness logic (or Hoare logic)
which has existed at least since 1969 [Hoa69]. I will mainly be basing my development
on two papers: O’Hearn [OHe20] by Peter W. O’Hearn concerns the relationship between
correctness triples (or Hoare triples), {p}s{q}, and incorrectness triples, [p]s[q]. The idea
is that {p}s{q} is valid if every execution of s starting in p will end in q, while [p]s[q] is
valid if every state in q can be reached by the execution of s from a state in p. They
introduce a set of rules for reasoning about incorrectness triples, and for reasoning about
their connection to correctness triples.
Though this paper briefly mentions predicate
transformers, the main focus is deduction rules for the triples.
This makes it a good
introduction to the semantics of incorrectness logic, but it lacks some of the machinery
necessary to extend my theory of ghost code (which is based on predicate transformers) to
the realm of incorrectness. Zhang and Kaminski [ZK22] by Linpeng Zhang and Benjamin
Lucien Kaminski investigates a number of quantity transformers. Where a predicate can
be expressed as a mapping of states to boolean values, a quantity is a mapping from
states to real number (plus −∞and +∞in the case of Zhang and Kaminski [ZK22]).
Quantity transformers can be used to reason about probabilistic programs, but in Zhang
and Kaminski [ZK22] they just consider non-deterministic programs. In the paper they
show different uses of multiple quantity transformers, and argue what type of analyses
they correspond to (for example partial correctness, total correctness, and incorrectness).
Though I will not consider quantities, the paper is still relevant as much of the machinery
works analogously for predicates.
For correctness verification we considered preconditions and postconditions, but I will here
generalize the terminology. As in O’Hearn [OHe20] and Zhang and Kaminski [ZK22] I will
call a predicate a “pre” if it contains states which a program could/should be executed
Mechanized Ghost Code and Weakest Precondition Reasoning
43
==PAGE:52==
from and a “post” if it contains states a program could/should end up in. As these sets
are not necessarily conditions, pre- and postcondition would be misnomers.
As in the previous chapters, I will base the verifications on predicate transformers. The
goal of the development for all versions is to show that if verification succeeds for a
program containing ghost code, then it will also succeed for its ghost erasure. Following
is an overview of all the different verifications and predicate transformers I investigate.
I do not give further results about correctness verification in this chapter, but include
them in the following list for completeness. Not all are suitable candidates for showing the
incorrectness of programs, and I will discuss what they represent and what they might be
useful for later in the chapter.
Total correctness. p ⊆wptc s q holds if every state in p leads to (and terminate
in) a state in q when executing s. wptc s q should give the weakest (largest) pre
guaranteed to terminate in q.
Partial correctness. p ⊆wppc s q holds if every state in p either leads to a state
in q or diverges when executing s. wppc s q should give the weakest pre guaranteed
to either lead to q or diverge.
Partial possible correctness. p ⊇sppc s q holds if p contains all states that
could lead to q or diverge when executing s. sppc s q should give the strongest
(smallest) pre guaranteed to contain all states that could either lead to q or diverge.
sppc can be defined by inverting the lattice operators used in wptc. I have shown
that wptc s q = sppc s q.
Total possible correctness. p ⊇sptc s q holds if p contains all states that could
lead to q. sptc s q should give the strongest pre guaranteed to contain all states
that could lead to q. sptc can be defined by inverting the lattice operators used in
wppc. We have wppc s q = sptc s q.
Captured partial property. p ⊃wppc s q holds if p captures all states guaranteed
to either lead to q or diverge.
Captured total property. p ⊃wptc s q holds if p captures all states guaranteed
to lead to q. I have defined a practical wpxa to over-approximate wptc, as wpax
is not suitable for this analysis.
Incorrectness. wpst p s ⊇q holds if every state in q can be reached by executing
s from a state in p. If this holds I say that q is triggered. wpst p s returns the
weakest post such that all states can be reached by executing s from p. This is the
only forward transformer I consider.
5.1
Possible Correctness
The content of this section is formalized in last section of wp1.thy.
The first new predicate transformers I consider are the ones obtained by simply inverting
the rules of wptc and wppc (i.e. changing ∧to ∨, ∀to ∃, etc.). I call these transformers
sppc for strongest pre for partial possible correctness and sptc for strongest pre for total
possible correctness. They are defined as follows.
First we define the same handy abbreviations we used in Section 4.2.
Ψpc b s q = if b then sppc s x else q
Ψtc b s q = if b then stpc s x else q
44
Mechanized Ghost Code and Weakest Precondition Reasoning
==PAGE:53==
Then we can define sppc. Note that q is not negated in the first case since we can absorbe
the negation of the post into the post itself. Also note that the dual of an if-then-else
statement is also an if-then-else statement: if b then c else d = ¬( if b then ¬c else ¬d).
sppc s q =































¬p ∨q
if s = assert p
∃x. q
if s = var x
q[x/a]
if s = x ←a
sppc s1 q ∨sppc s2 q
if s = s1[]s2
sppc s1 (sppc s2 q)
if s = s1; s2
if b then sppc s1 q else sppc s2 q
if s = if (b) {s1} else {s2}
gfp (Ψpc b s q)
if s = while (b) (I: p) {s}
sppc s′ q
if s = ghost s′
The only differences in sptc are in the while and ghost cases:
sptc s q =





. . .
. . .
lfp (Ψtc b s q)
if s = while (b) (I: p) {s}
sppc s′ q
if s = ghost s′
The reason I call this analysis “possible correctness” is that the transformers return all
states that could end up in the post.
If the post is a correctness property, it means
that these are all the states that could possibly be correct. Showing p ⊇sppc s q or
p ⊇sptc s q then means the pre p also fulfills this property. I briefly note that sptc
corresponds to wp of Zhang and Kaminski [ZK22]. Instead of interpreting this as the
strongest pre containing all states that could lead to the post, they interpret it as the
weakest pre guaranteed to lead to the post assuming an angelic execution environment
(all non-determinism is resolved in favour of leading to the post). Under this interpretation
they refer to sptc s q ⊆p as “partial incorrectness”.
The difference between sptc and sppc is that the former captures all start states that
could lead to the post while the latter captures all start states that could lead to the
post or diverge. Because we always require total correctness of ghost code when using the
weakest precondition, we get the opposite for the strongest pre. To show that we have
captured all states that could lead to the post (but not necessarily all those that diverge
in regular code) we must have captured all those states that diverge in ghost code. This
is not as intuitive as for correctness verification, but is actually necessary for the analysis
to be sound. Consider the program consisting of just a single non-terminating ghost loop:
g {while(⊤)(I : ⊤){skip}}. For any post, the strongest pre guaranteed to capture all
the states leading to the post would be ⊥, since all starting states will diverge. However,
once the loop is removed ⊥is no longer guaranteed to contain all the states that can lead
to the post (the actual strongest pre will now just equal the post). When we use sppc
in the ghost code we are guaranteed to include the states that might be overshadowed
by divergence in ghost code. When switching from sptc to sppc in the ghost code, the
strongest pre of the mentioned program will be ⊤.
If used for a post representing a bug, this analysis will show that the pre captures all
states that could lead to the bug. This is likely not very useful for showing incorrectness
because of two main reasons. First, the analysis does not show that the bug must exist,
just that if it does then the pre will capture it. Second, the analysis will fail, even for
Mechanized Ghost Code and Weakest Precondition Reasoning
45
==PAGE:54==
definitely present bugs, if not all states that could lead to the bug are in the pre. The
analysis could be useful in the specific situation where you for some separate reason know
that the bug can be present in the program for given start states, and is specific enough
that it is not too hard to capture all those start states.
As is quite natural since we defined sppc and sptc by inverting the rules of wppc and
wptc, we can show the following:
Lemma 5.1.1. wppc s q = sptc s q and wptc s q = sppc s q
Proof. Start by showing the monotonicity of sppc s′ q and sptc s′ q for any s′, by
induction on s. The lemma can then be shown by induction on s′ with arbitrary q. For
the while case use transfinite induction on the iterations of the functions used in the fixed
points.
Because of this correspondence between the strongest pre and the weakest precondition, I
have not developed a theory of ghost code for possible correctness. In practice, one could
just use the weakest precondition to preform the analysis and inherit the properties about
ghost code. I leave as future work whether there is a computational difference between
calculating sppc s q and wptc s q
There is, however, a type of analysis one could use the weakest precondition for, which I
have not yet shown is preserved in the ghost erasure. That analysis is the subject of the
next section.
5.2
Captured Properties
The content of this section is formalized in wp1_flipped.thy.
If one reverses the comparison between the given pre and the weakest precondition in the
correctness analysis, one obtains the analysis I call “captured properties”. p ⊇wptc s q
means that whatever states are guaranteed to terminate in q are contained in p. In this
sense, the property expressed by the post has been “captured” by the given pre. This
does not necessarily mean that there exists any states that fulfill the property, but if they
do then they will be contained in the pre. In Zhang and Kaminski [ZK22] this analysis
is briefly mentioned as “necessary liberal preconditions”, and they consider it to neither
represent a form of correctness logic or incorrectness logic.
Just to illustrate how this analysis works, consider the program s =
if x ≥0 then
r ←1
else
choice
r ←0
else
r ←1
end choice
end if
If we use r = 1 as post we get wptc s (r = 1) = (x ≥0). If we then use x ≥−3 as the
pre we get (wptc s (r = 1)) −→x ≥−3, which means that the analysis succeeds. This
shows that x ≥−3 subsumes all states that are guaranteed to lead to r = 1.
46
Mechanized Ghost Code and Weakest Precondition Reasoning
==PAGE:55==
To show that ghost code is well-formed with regards to this analysis, it is necessary to show
that the ghost code has not strengthened the weakest precondition. This is the opposite
problem of showing the well-formedness of ghost code for correctness verification. If the
ghost code may have strengthened the weakest precondition, then showing p ⊇wppc s q
does not necessarily imply p ⊇wppc (erase-ghost s) q.
In this context the problem of checking the well-formedness of ghost assertions becomes
the exact same as for ghost assumptions in PL0. Consider the program s =
ghost assert ⊥
assert p
Here wppc s ⊤⊆⊥implies wppc (erase-ghost s) ⊤⊆⊥if and only if p is unsatisfi-
able. This is of course the same as the validity problem for the logical language used in
assertions (here first-order logic with integer arithmetic), because a formula p is valid if
and only if ¬p is unsatisfiable. Because of the complexity of this problem, I have com-
pletely disallowed ghost assertions in the captured property analysis. Ghost assumptions
can, however, be used indiscriminately in this analysis, as they will only ever weaken the
weakest precondition.
As future work, it might therefore be worthwhile to have both assertions and assumptions
in PL1, suitable for different types of analyses. By just disallowing assumptions in gc-
check for correctness, the issues from PL0 would not need to resurface. Programmers
would then still be allowed to use ghost assumptions by the language during development,
while keeping in mind that this might void the guarantees obtained from the analysis.
Another change from correctness is that we can no longer just verify one branch of a non-
deterministic choice. Similar to assertions, placing code in a branch of a non-deterministic
choice is a pure strengthening of the weakest precondition, since whatever code is in the
other branch must also lead to the postcondition. We assume that gx is a ghost variable
and x is a regular variable in the program s =
x ←0
ghost
choice
gx ←0
else
x ←1
end choice
end ghost
The uppermost branch should be well-typed while the lowermost should not be so. If we
use the post x = 0 we get wptc s (x = 0) = ⊥since no starting states are guaranteed
to lead to a state where x = 0. This means that the analysis will succeed with any pre.
However, once we remove the ghost code all states are guaranteed to lead to a state where
x = 0. Therefore the only acceptable pre is ⊤, and the analysis was not preserved in the
ghost erasure.
For the same reason we need to make sure that no variable declarations on regular variables
can occur in ghost code.
Keeping the above considerations in mind we can define type checkers for ghost code,
suited for captured property analysis:
Mechanized Ghost Code and Weakest Precondition Reasoning
47
==PAGE:56==
gc-check g s =































⊥
if s = assert p
g x
if s = var x
g x
if s = x ←a
gc-check g s1 ∧gc-check g s2
if s = s1[]s2
gc-check g s1 ∧gc-check g s2
if s = s1; s2
gc-check g s1 ∧gc-check g s2
if s = if (b) {s1} else {s2}
gc-check g s′
if s = while (b) (I: p) {s′}
gc-check g s′
if s = ghost s′
There is no need to change rc-check from the one given in Section 4.4.2, except to have
it call the new gc-check in the ghost case.
With this we can show the first lemma about well-typed ghost code:
Lemma 5.2.1. If gc-check g s, p ⊇q and q is regular, then wptc s p ⊇q ∩
wptc (erase-assert s) t.
Proof. We do induction on s with arbitrary p, q and t. The while case can be solved by
transfinite induction.
In the lemma above we need to intersect q with the states that are guaranteed to terminate
when executing s. This is of course because wptc will remove states that diverge, meaning
that the pre is strengthened even by well-typed ghost code. That such an intersection
was not necessary in the corresponding correctness result (Lemma 4.4.5) indicates that it
would have been more appropriate to switch from wptc to wppc in ghost code instead
of the other way around. Doing this would, however, require changing the definitions of
the predicate transformers, which would mean that all the results I have used from the
previous chapter would have to be reproven.
The following lemma corresponds to Lemma 4.4.7. The reason I do not switch to wppc in
regular code here (like I did in the previous chapter) is that for captured property wptc
is actually the precondition it is the easiest to approximate. An approximate weakest
precondition for correctness should under-approximate. This means that whatever states
are returned by the approximating predicate transformer are guaranteed to also be in the
weakest precondition. For captured property the situation is turned on its head. We must
over-approximate the weakest precondition to make sure that if the pre subsumes the
approximating predicate transformer it also subsumes the weakest precondition. It turns
out that it is easier to under-approximate wppc and over-approximate wptc than to do
it the other way around. In fact, if you have done the latter then you have also done the
former.
Lemma 5.2.2. If rc-check g s, p ⊇q and q is regular then
wptc s p ⊇wptc (erase-ghost s) q ∩wppc (erase-assert s) t.
Proof. Similar to Lemma 5.2.1.
Like for correctness logic, it would be nice to have a practical predicate transformer where
the programmer supplies an invariant to approximate the fixed points. Using wpax for
this purpose would not work since it is an under-approximation of wppc. Thus, if you
48
Mechanized Ghost Code and Weakest Precondition Reasoning
==PAGE:57==
have shown p ⊇wpax s q it does not necessarily imply p ⊇wppc s q. I therefore defined
an over-approximating wpxa. wpxa is defined in the same way as wpax for all the cases
except while:
wpxa s q =





. . .
. . .
(
A
(if b then wpxa s′ p else q) −→p
)
−→p
if s = while (b) (I: p) {s′}
. . .
. . .
A
(if b then wpxa s p else q) −→p has no free variables and is therefore either true for all
interpretations or false for all interpretations. If it is false then the expression in the while
case evaluates to ⊤, which is definitely an over-approximation (independently of what we
are approximating). If it is valid then the while case just evaluates to the invariant. Since
the invariant has then been shown to be a prefixed point we can show the following:
Lemma 5.2.3. wpxa s q ⊇wptc s q.
Proof. The proof is mostly the same as the proof of Lemma 4.4.4. For the while case use
the fact that if the invariant is a prefixed point of Φtc b s q, then it must be greater than
the least fixed point.
We can then show that well-typed ghost code does not strengthen the weakest precondi-
tion:
Lemma 5.2.4. If rc-check g s, p ⊇q and q is regular then
wpxa s p ⊇wptc (erase-assert s) q ∩wppc (erase-assert s) t.
Proof. Lemma 5.2.2 + Lemma 5.2.3.
Like in Lemma 5.2.1 and Lemma 5.2.2 we must intersect the ghost erasure with the states
that are guaranteed to terminate when executing ghost code.
The following corollary follows directly from the previous lemma, and shows how the
well-typedness of ghost code means that the captured property analysis is preserved:
Corollary 5.2.4.1. We assume that rc-check g s and that p and q are regular. Fur-
thermore, we assume that we have p ⊇wpxa s q and p ⊇wppc (erase-assert s) ⊤. It
then follows that p ⊇wptc (erase-ghost s) q.
Proof. Lemma 5.2.4.
The condition p ⊇wppc (erase-assert s) ⊤in the lemma above requires that we know
that we have captured all the states that can make ghost code diverge in p. This can
be viewed as the dual of the ghost termination check we imposed for the correctness
verification. There we had to show that the precondition is a subset of the states which
are guaranteed to make the ghost code terminate.
If the ghost code is guaranteed to
terminate, this will trivially hold. For the new analysis we have to show that the pre
contains all states which could lead to non-termination in ghost code.
This condition
will also trivially hold if the ghost code is guaranteed to terminate. We therefore assume
that the programmer is somehow able to correctly discern exactly which states which will
diverge in ghost code.
Mechanized Ghost Code and Weakest Precondition Reasoning
49
==PAGE:58==
5.3
Incorrectness
The content of this section is formalized in wp1_incorrectness.thy.
Another type of analysis is that of incorrectness logic, described in O’Hearn [OHe20].
The goal of incorrectness logic is to show that a property (represented by a predicate)
is positively present in a program, by showing that all states in the predicate can be
reached by executing the program from the pre. If this analysis succeeds, I conclude that
the property represented by the post is triggered by the pre and program. In O’Hearn
[OHe20] this is represented by [p]s[q], where p is the pre, s is the program, and q is the
post. Consider the program
choice
skip
else
y ←1
choice
skip
else
y ←y ∗2
end choice
end choice
If the pre of the program contains all states where x = 0 and y = 0 and the post contains
all states where x = 0 and y = 2, then the incorrectness analysis would succeed. This is
because for each state in the post there is a path from a corresponding state in the pre
that leads to it (namely the one where the second branch of each choice is taken). If the
post represents error states, then we have then shown that a bug exists in the program.
This analysis might be a more useful way of showing the presence of errors than the other
analyses I have described, as it existentially quantifies over the paths to error states, but
universally quantifies over the error states. This means that each error state is identified
as present in the system if it is possible to reach it, but it is not necessary that all paths
lead to error states. The latter is what one would get if one simply used a set of error
states as the post in the classical weakest precondition verification. But even though each
error state only requires that some path leads to it, it is required that there is a path to
every state in the set of error states. This means that whatever bug the set of error states
describes is completely present in the system. If one, for example, disjunctively combined
two bugs, one which is present and one which is not, then the analysis would fail. This
would be because even though it is possible to show the presence of one of the bugs, the
larger, combined bug is not totally present. This is useful as it gives a stronger guarantee
when verification succeeds (you know exactly which bug you have found).
How assertions should be treated in incorrectness verification is a bit ambiguous, and dif-
ferent choices here correspond to meaningfully different analyses. For example, one might
wish to have the assertions represent bugs that should be present at specific points in
the program, in addition to the bug that should be present at the end. Using this inter-
pretation the following program would try to identify two different bugs in two different
branches of an if statement.
. . .
if b then
. . .
assert p
. . .
50
Mechanized Ghost Code and Weakest Precondition Reasoning
==PAGE:59==
else
. . .
assert q
. . .
end if
Another interpretation would be to leave the semantics of assertions unchanged, in which
case the analysis succeeds if the bug at the end of the program can be triggered without
failing any assertions on the way.
In O’Hearn [OHe20] they solve the dilemma of assertions by splitting the post into two
predicates, an er predicate which must be triggered by executions terminating by failing
an assertion (in their language they actually use a nullary error statement instead) and
an ok predicate which should be triggered by successful termination of the program. My
analysis mainly corresponds to showing that a given post is a valid ok predicate, though I
later give assert-check for verifying the triggering of predicates at specific locations in
the program.
5.3.1
Weakest Post
As noted in O’Hearn [OHe20], it is not generally possible to construct a backward predicate
transformer to verify this notion of incorrectness. A backward transformer must return
the strongest pre such that all states in the given post are guaranteed to be reachable by
execution s. It might be, however, that it is impossible to reach some of the states in
the given post by executing s. If this is the case, then it is not clearly defined what the
transformer should return. Consider the following program:
x ←0
There is no state that you could possibly execute this program from and reach a state
where x = 1. If such a state is in the post, then no pre can be returned by the backwards
transformer.
Even when there exists a valid pre, there does not necessarily have to exist a unique
strongest pre. Consider the same program. If the post only contains a single state, i
where i x = 0, then any singleton pre containing i[x 7→v] for some v will be valid. ⊥will
not be a valid pre, however, and none of the singleton pres are stronger than any of the
others.
Making a forward transformer is, however, possible. It should return the weakest post
such that all states can be reached from the given pre. Following is my definition of wpst
(weakest post):
wpst p s =































p ∧r
if s = assert r
∃x. p
if s = var x
∃x′. p[x/x′] ∧x = a[x/x′]
if s = x ←a and x′ is fresh
wpst p s1 ∨wpst p s2
if s = s1[]s2
wpst (wpst p s1) s2
if s = s1; s2
wpst (p ∧b) s1 ∨wpst (p ∧¬b) s2
if s = if (b) {s1} else {s2}
(∪n. (λx. x ∨wpst (x ∧b) s)n p) ∧¬b
if s = while (b) (I: p) {s}
wpst p s′
if s = ghost s′
In the ←case above we use ∃x′. p[x/x′] ∧x = a[x/x′]. This represents saving everything
we know about x before the assignment in the variable x′, then asserting that the new
Mechanized Ghost Code and Weakest Precondition Reasoning
51
==PAGE:60==
value of x is a applied to the old value of x (i.e. x′). When considering predicates as sets
of states this is considerably easier to express: {i[x 7→i[a]] | i ∈p}.
(∪n. (λx. x ∨wpst (x ∧b) s)n p) ∧¬b in the while case represents all those states that
can be reached by running the loop a finite number of times. λx. x ∨wpst (x ∧b) s will
take a predicate and add all those states that will be reached by a single execution of
the loop body. The reason we use x ∧b in the pre of wpst is that only those states will
trigger an execution of the loop body. ∪n. (λx. x ∨wpst (x ∧b) s)n
p will collect all
those states reached by applying this function a finite number of times to the given pre.
By intersecting with the states that fulfill ¬b at the end, we only include those states that
actually exit the loop within finite time.
I have not conclusively proven that this definition semantically corresponds to the logic of
O’Hearn [OHe20]. This is, however, strongly indicated by the fact that I have shown that
all the relevant derivation rules for [p]s[ok : q] (given in Section 4 of O’Hearn [OHe20])
also apply to wpst p s ⊇q. The rules follow, and their proofs can be found in the last
section of wp1_incorrectness.thy. Most rules follow trivially from the definition of wpst.
An incorrectness logic based on wpst:
wpst p s ⊇⊥
p′ ⊇p
q ⊇q′
wpst p s ⊇q
wpst p′ s ⊇q′
wpst p1 s ⊇q1
wpst p2 s ⊇q2
wpst (p1 ∪p2) s ⊇(q1 ∪q2)
wpst p s1 ⊇r
wpst r s2 ⊇q
wpst p (s1;s2) ⊇r
wpst p s1 ⊇q
wpst p (s1[]s2) ⊇q
wpst p s2 ⊇q
wpst p (s1[]s2) ⊇q
wpst p (x←a) ⊇{i[x7→i[a]] | i∈p}
wpst p (var x) ⊇{i | ∃v. i(x7→v)∈p}
wpst p (assert r) ⊇p ∩r
wpst (p ∩b) s1 q
wpst (p ∩b) (if(b){s1}else{s2}) ⊇q
52
Mechanized Ghost Code and Weakest Precondition Reasoning
==PAGE:61==
wpst (p ∩b) s2 ⊇q
wpst (p ∩b) (if(b){s1}else{s2}) ⊇q
wpst p (while(b){s}) ⊇(p ∩b)
wpst p (if(b){s};while(b){s}) ⊇q
wpst p (while(b){s}) ⊇q
∀n≥0. wpst (p n
∩
b) s ⊇p (n+1)
wpst (p 0) (while(b){s}) ⊇(∪n. p n)
∩
b
The last of the rules above gives a way to prove properties of while loops by induc-
tion. This requires finding a suitable function, p, from the natural numbers to the set of
predicates.
wpst p s will in general be hard to calculate, as the while case requires one to calculate
the infinite iteration of a function. A practical version could probably be defined, like we
did with wpax and wpxa. This function, wpsx, should (like wpax and unlike wpxa) be
an under-approximation of wpst. If this is the case then showing wpsx p s ⊇q means
that one has also shown wpst p s ⊇q. I leave its exact definition as future work.
5.3.2
Weakest Post — Ghost Erasure
The goal of this section is to show that if a program is well-typed with regards to ghost
code, and one verifies it with regards to some pre and post, then the ghost erasure will
also be verified with regards to that pre and post.
The requirements on ghost code for incorrectness are different from both those of cor-
rectness and captured property. Like in the captured property analysis we require both
branches of a non-deterministic choice to be well-typed, but additionally we require that
no ghost variables are assigned to in regular code. The reason for this is that, unlike for
the weakest precondition, the weakest post does not preserve regularity over assignment
to ghost variables.
The type checkers can then be defined as:
gc-check g s =































⊤
if s = assert p
g x
if s = var x
g x
if s = x ←a
gc-check g s1 ∧gc-check g s2
if s = s1[]s2
gc-check g s1 ∧gc-check g s2
if s = s1; s2
gc-check g s1 ∧gc-check g s2
if s = if (b) {s1} else {s2}
gc-check g s′
if s = while (b) (I: p) {s′}
gc-check g s′
if s = ghost s′
Mechanized Ghost Code and Weakest Precondition Reasoning
53
==PAGE:62==
rc-check g s =































regular g p
if s = assert p
⊤
if s = var x
¬g a ∧regular g a
if s = x ←a
rc-check g s1 ∧rc-check g s2
if s = s1[]s2
rc-check g s1 ∧rc-check g s2
if s = s1; s2
regular g b ∧rc-check g s1 ∧rc-check g s2
if s = if (b) {s1} else {s2}
regular g b ∧rc-check g s′
if s = while (b) (I: p) {s′}
gc-check g s′
if s = ghost s′
The following lemma shows that if ghost code is well-typed then it does not weaken the
regular part of a predicate.
Lemma 5.3.1. If gc-check g s, p ⊆q, and q is regular, then wpst p s ⊆q.
Proof. Induction on s with arbitrary p and q.
We need to show that regularity is preserved by wpst for well-typed regular code. The
purpose of this is to enable the induction hypothesis of Lemma 5.3.3.
Lemma 5.3.2. If rc-check g s and p is regular, then wpst p s is also regular.
Proof. Induction on s with arbitrary p.
We can then show that the ghost erasure is weaker than the program with ghost code:
Lemma 5.3.3. If rc-check g s, p ⊆q, and q is regular then
wpst p s ⊆wpst q (erase-ghost s).
Proof. Induction on s with arbitrary p and q. Use Lemma 5.3.2 in all the recursive cases
and Lemma 5.3.1 in the ghost case.
From the above lemma it directly follows that incorrectness verification is preserved to the
ghost erasure if the program is well-typed:
Corollary 5.3.3.1. If rc-check g s, and p and q are regular, then wpst p s ⊇q implies
that wpst p (erase-ghost s) ⊇q.
Proof. Lemma 5.3.3
5.3.3
Triggering Assertions
When used for checking incorrectness wpst will only identify bugs present after the exe-
cution of the program. A different (and maybe more meaningful) analysis would be one
that treats assertions not as obstacles to be passed on the way to triggering the error at
the end, but rather as local errors which must also be present in the program. We can
derive such an analysis using the weakest postcondition defined above. The new analy-
sis (assert-check below) goes through the program and checks that each assertion is
subsumed by the weakest post up to that point. assert-check can be defined as follows:
54
Mechanized Ghost Code and Weakest Precondition Reasoning
==PAGE:63==
assert-check p s =































p −→r
if s = assert r
⊤
if s = var x
⊤
if s = x ←a
assert-check p s1 ∧assert-check p s2
if s = s1[]s2
assert-check p s1 ∧assert-check (wpst p s1) s2
if s = s1; s2
assert-check (p ∧b) s1 ∧assert-check (p ∧¬b) s2
if s = if (b) {s1} else {s2}
assert-check ((∪n. (λx. x ∨wpst (x ∧b) s)n p) ∧b) s
if s = while (b) (I: p) {s′}
assert-check p s′
if s = ghost s′
Note that in a realistic implementation the check can be performed in parallel with calcu-
lating the weakest post. Note also that because of this new interpretation of assert, the
no-op statement we replace ghost code with in ghost-erase needs to be changed. This
is because assert ⊤will now make assert-check require that all states can be reached
at that point in the program. I have chosen to use x ←x instead of assert ⊤.
The while case of assert-check deserves some justification. From the interpretation of
assertions given above, we must check that every state in the predicate of an assertion is
reachable from the pre. To use the weakest possible interpretation of this we gather up
all that states that can be reached by executing the while loop in ∪n. (λx. x ∨wpst (x ∧
b) s)n p. We then intersect with the states satisfying the guard of the loop: b. This should
give all the states which the loop could ever be executed from, given that the program as
a whole starts in p. We then check that the assertions in s are valid with regards to this
set. Doing this means that we will accept a bug as present in the loop, even if the different
error states take different numbers of iterations to reach.
There is a potential issue with this analysis: if an error represented by one assertion
can only be triggered by failing to pass a previous assertion, then the second will be
overshadowed by the first and the verification will fail. Consider the program s =
choice
x ←1
else
x ←2
end choice
assert x = 1
assert x = 2
If we imagine that x represents different error codes, and that there was more practical
code in between the given lines, then the two assertions could represent two different bugs.
With the definitions of wpst and assert-check given above, this program would not
fulfill assert-check ⊤s, despite both bugs clearly being present in the program if one
removed the assertions (as one would with the production code).
This might be considered undesirable behaviour, as it really means we are combining two
operations into the same assert statement: one for halting the program in an error state
(thereby acting as an obstacle to triggering later predicates) and one for checking the local
presence of a property. There are (at least) two ways to fix this. One can remake the
theory, for example by adding a new trigger statement that does nothing in the semantics,
but is verified by assert-check (which should probably be renamed to trigger-check
in this case). If one keeps the theory fixed (as I have done), then the programmer can
Mechanized Ghost Code and Weakest Precondition Reasoning
55
==PAGE:64==
avoid assertions overshadowing each other by placing every assertion in one branch of a
non-deterministic choice and keeping the other empty. The program above would then
become s =
choice
x ←1
else
x ←2
end choice
choice
assert x = 1
else
skip
end choice
choice
assert x = 2
else
skip
end choice
We would then have assert-check ⊤s.
I would argue that my assert-check can in many cases be more useful than the er post
used in O’Hearn [OHe20]. If assert-check passes you have identified the location of
the different bugs in the program, while if er is triggered it may be because of multiple
assertions at different points in the program, and you do not necessarily know which part
of er is triggered at which point. It could be that er consists of multiple bugs, none of
which are triggered at any specific point in the program. If these bugs are separated and
reworded to something that makes assert-check pass, then you have a more precise
image of what goes wrong.
5.3.4
Triggering Assertions — Ghost Erasure
The goal of this section is to show that if a program is well-typed with regards to ghost
code, then any regular assertion which is shown to be triggered must also be triggered in
the ghost erasure.
We use the definitions of gc-check and rc-check given above. It is then pretty straight-
forward to show:
Lemma 5.3.4. If rc-check g s, p ⊆q, and q is regular, then assert-check p s implies
assert-check q (erase-ghost s).
Proof. Induction on s with arbitrary p and q
56
Mechanized Ghost Code and Weakest Precondition Reasoning
==PAGE:65==
6
Conclusion
The goal of the project was to examine the soundness of using ghost code for program
verification. I have given type checkers for PL0 and PL1 which guarantee that verifying
a well-typed program with ghost code implies that the program’s ghost erasure is also
verified.
I have defined and proven correct such type checkers for correctness verification of programs
of the minimal programming language PL0, and the more realistic PL1. In addition, I
considered three alternative types of verification: possible correctness, captured properties,
and incorrectness. For all the analyses for PL1 programs, I could prove that simple type
checkers guarantee the well-formedness of ghost code.
In retrospect, the type checker for PL0 is of limited usefulness. It is not decidable and
did not form a foundation to build upon for PL1. To use the type checker for PL0 to
check ghost code in PL1, we would have to use the encoding of PL1 programs to PL0
for practical verification. However, it turns out that we do not want the ghost erasure
operation to necessarily preserve practical verification, but rather preserve the theoretical
verification we are approximating. Requiring the PL0 encoding of the ghost erasure to be
valid would be much too strict.
The type checker of Chapter 4 is of greater practical value than that of Chapter 3, because
I didn’t consider the well-typedness of ghost assumptions. Like for PL0, checking that
ghost code is well-formed in PL1 programs is undecidable. In PL0 this is because of ghost
assumptions, while in PL1 it is because we must require termination of ghost statements.
For PL1 we can, however, isolate the undecidable problem in a separate termination
analysis. The remaining type checking is linear in the program size.
Formalizing the development in Isabelle turned out to be of great help when extending
to the new types of analysis. Many of the proofs could be copied over from the theory of
correctness, and the automation highlighted which parts needed to be changed in the new
context.
Though considering ghost code purely through the lens of weakest precondition reasoning
has had major advantages, like the ease of extending the results to new analyses, it has one
important drawback. With the framework I have developed, there is no way of checking
that specification is still satisfied after the specification code has been removed. To reason
about this requires building the theory on operational semantics.
6.1
Future Work
In the grammar of PL0 and PL1, we allow nested ghost annotations. For example, the
following program is well-typed:
ghost ghost z ←y
ghost y ←x
x ←0
Right now this nesting is treated as meaningless, and there is no difference between using
multiple ghost wrappings and a single ghost wrapping. We could, however, change this
to reflect the layers of ghost code mentioned in Section 1.1.
You could, for example,
put specification related code in a single wrapper and verification related code in two
Mechanized Ghost Code and Weakest Precondition Reasoning
57
==PAGE:66==
wrappers. This would allow placing verification code in blocks of specification code, but
not vice versa. The problem of well-formedness would then be to check that the layers of
ghost code could be removed one at a time (starting with the code most deeply nested
in ghost wrappers) without changing the meaning of the remaining code in each step.
Thus one would check that verification code does not affect specification code and that
specification code does not affect production code in the same process.
The precision of the practical weakest precondition (wpax) could be improved by us-
ing the technique called framing [Ern22].
In the current wpax we define the weak-
est precondition of the loop as p ∧
(
A
p −→(if b then wpax s p else q)
)
.
If
A
p −→
(if b then wpax s p else q) holds, then the loop invariant is valid, and the weakest pre-
condition becomes just p.
To validate the loop invariant we must in particular show
¬b ∧p −→q for all interpretations. This means that after the loop we forget all informa-
tion that has not been saved in p. It would be sound to conclude that the loop doesn’t
change the values of any variables not assigned to in the loop, and that it is therefore suﬀi-
cient to consider those interpretations that agree on the values of the unchanged variables
before the loop. A framing rule would allow such a preservation of properties before and
after an operation. In wpax we could change the
A
operator to only quantify over the
loop targets. Consider the following loop:
y ←0
x ←0
while x < 100 do
invariant : x ≥0
x ←x + 1
end while
assert y = 0
With the current definition of wpax, the weakest precondition of the program above would
become 0 ≥0 ∧(∀x y. x ≥0 −→(if x < 100 then x + 1 ≥0 else y = 0)). This evaluates
to ⊥, since we cannot show that ¬x < 100 ∧x ≥0 −→y = 0 for all y. With framing, we
would instead get 0 ≥0 ∧(∀x. x ≥0 −→(if x < 100 then x + 1 ≥0 else 0 = 0)), which is
valid.
An obvious extension is to add more language features. Especially procedures would be
an interesting next addition. The language should allow the labelling of parameters and
return values as ghosts, and have ghost pre- and postconditions for each procedure. As
indicated by Corollary 4.4.8.1, a single ghost assumption at the start of a procedure can
be added without reintroducing the issues of Chapter 3.
Another relevant feature would be data structures. A common use of ghost code is to add
ghost fields to otherwise regular data structures, for example to keep track of information
that is necessary for specification. This probably has interesting implications on typing.
When formalizing the new analyses of Chapter 5 in Isabelle, there were many proofs that
were just slight variations of proofs I had already done for correctness. This indicates that
I could probably have extracted one general theory, and then limited the other proofs to
that which is actually unique for each analysis.
It would also be interesting to consider probabilistic extensions to the language. A coin-flip
statement is not encodable in PL0, and would require generalizing the predicate trans-
formers to (for example) quantity transformers.
58
Mechanized Ghost Code and Weakest Precondition Reasoning
==PAGE:67==
One could also add a practical analysis for total correctness using variants. This would
allow us to extend the results of Chapter 4 to the total correctness of regular code.
Another issue is deciding when it is valid to conclude that specification is still satisfied
after the specification code has been removed, like they do in Filliâtre, Gondelman, and
Paskevich [FGP14]. This would, however, require switching from the weakest precondition
perspective to operational semantics.
Mechanized Ghost Code and Weakest Precondition Reasoning
59
==PAGE:68==
60
Mechanized Ghost Code and Weakest Precondition Reasoning
==PAGE:69==
Bibliography
[Coe+95]
T. Coe et al. “Computational Aspects of the Pentium Affair”. English. In:
IEEE Computational Science & Engineering 2.1 (Sept. 1995), pp. 18–30. issn:
1070-9924. doi: 10.1109/99.372929.
[Whe14]
David A. Wheeler. “Preventing Heartbleed”. In: Computer 47.8 (2014), pp. 80–
83. doi: 10.1109/MC.2014.217. url: https://doi.org/10.1109/MC.2014.217.
[AWM06]
Omar Hussain Alhazmi, Sung-Whan Woo, and Yashwant K. Malaiya. “Se-
curity vulnerability categories in major software systems”. In: Proceedings of
the Third IASTED International Conference on Communication, Network,
and Information Security, October 9-11, 2006, Cambridge, MA, USA. Ed. by
Sanguthevar Rajasekaran. IASTED/ACTA Press, 2006, pp. 138–143.
[NN19]
Flemming Nielson and Hanne Riis Nielson. Formal Methods. en. 1st ed. Basel,
Switzerland: Springer International Publishing, July 2019.
[NPW02]
Tobias Nipkow, Lawrence C. Paulson, and Markus Wenzel. Isabelle/HOL - A
Proof Assistant for Higher-Order Logic. Vol. 2283. Lecture Notes in Computer
Science. Springer, 2002. isbn: 3-540-43376-7. doi: 10.1007/3-540-45949-9.
url: https://doi.org/10.1007/3-540-45949-9.
[Hoa69]
C. A. R. Hoare. “An Axiomatic Basis for Computer Programming”. In: Com-
mun. ACM 12.10 (1969), pp. 576–580. doi: 10.1145/363235.363259. url:
https://doi.org/10.1145/363235.363259.
[Dij75]
Edsger W. Dijkstra. “Guarded Commands, Nondeterminacy and Formal Deriva-
tion of Programs”. In: Commun. ACM 18.8 (1975), pp. 453–457. doi: 10.1145/
360933.360975. url: https://doi.org/10.1145/360933.360975.
[MB08]
Leonardo Mendonça de Moura and Nikolaj S. Bjørner. “Z3: An Eﬀicient SMT
Solver”. In: Tools and Algorithms for the Construction and Analysis of Sys-
tems, 14th International Conference, TACAS 2008, Held as Part of the Joint
European Conferences on Theory and Practice of Software, ETAPS 2008,
Budapest, Hungary, March 29-April 6, 2008. Proceedings. Ed. by C. R. Ra-
makrishnan and Jakob Rehof. Vol. 4963. Lecture Notes in Computer Science.
Springer, 2008, pp. 337–340. doi: 10.1007/978- 3- 540- 78800- 3\_24. url:
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-540-78800-3%5C_24.
[FGP14]
Jean-Christophe Filliâtre, Léon Gondelman, and Andrei Paskevich. “The Spirit
of Ghost Code”. In: Computer Aided Verification - 26th International Confer-
ence, CAV 2014, Held as Part of the Vienna Summer of Logic, VSL 2014, Vi-
enna, Austria, July 18-22, 2014. Proceedings. Ed. by Armin Biere and Roderick
Bloem. Vol. 8559. Lecture Notes in Computer Science. Springer, 2014, pp. 1–
16. doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-08867-9\_1. url: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-
319-08867-9%5C_1.
[BM19]
Benedikt F. H. Becker and Claude Marché. “Ghost Code in Action: Automated
Verification of a Symbolic Interpreter”. In: Verified Software. Theories, Tools,
and Experiments - 11th International Conference, VSTTE 2019, New York
City, NY, USA, July 13-14, 2019, Revised Selected Papers. Ed. by Supratik
Chakraborty and Jorge A. Navas. Vol. 12031. Lecture Notes in Computer
Science. Springer, 2019, pp. 107–123. doi: 10.1007/978-3-030-41600-3\_8.
url: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-41600-3%5C_8.
Mechanized Ghost Code and Weakest Precondition Reasoning
61
==PAGE:70==
[VIS96]
Dennis M. Volpano, Cynthia E. Irvine, and Geoffrey Smith. “A Sound Type
System for Secure Flow Analysis”. In: J. Comput. Secur. 4.2/3 (1996), pp. 167–
188. doi: 10.3233/JCS-1996-42-304. url: https://doi.org/10.3233/JCS-1996-
42-304.
[AE]
AdaCore and Capgemini Engineering. SPARK User’s Guide. English. Ver-
sion 24.0w. url: https://docs.adacore.com/spark2014-docs/html/ug/index.
html.
[EPF]
Lausanne EPFL. Stainless documentation. English. Version 0.9. url: https:
//epfl-lara.github.io/stainless/index.html.
[Bob+]
François Bobot et al. The Why3 Platform. English. Version 1.5. University
Paris-Saclay, CNRS, Inria. url: https://why3.lri.fr/doc/index.html#the-why3-
platform.
[Com]
The Dafny-Lang Community. Dafny Reference Manual. English. Version Tue
Feb 14 2023 03:36:54 GMT+0100. url: https://dafny.org/dafny/DafnyRef/
DafnyRef.
[OHe20]
Peter W. O’Hearn. “Incorrectness logic”. In: Proc. ACM Program. Lang. 4.POPL
(2020), 10:1–10:32. doi: 10.1145/3371078. url: https://doi.org/10.1145/
3371078.
[ZK22]
Linpeng Zhang and Benjamin Lucien Kaminski. “Quantitative strongest post:
a calculus for reasoning about the flow of quantitative information”. In: Proc.
ACM Program. Lang. 6.OOPSLA1 (2022), pp. 1–29. doi: 10.1145/3527331.
url: https://doi.org/10.1145/3527331.
[NK14]
Tobias Nipkow and Gerwin Klein. Concrete Semantics - With Isabelle/HOL.
Springer, 2014. isbn: 978-3-319-10541-3. doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-10542-0.
url: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-10542-0.
[Pie+23]
Benjamin C. Pierce et al. Programming Language Foundations. Ed. by Ben-
jamin C. Pierce. Vol. 2. Software Foundations. Version 6.3, http://softwarefoundations.
cis.upenn.edu. Electronic textbook, 2023.
[Flo67]
Robert W. Floyd. “Assigning Meanings to Programs”. In: Proceedings of Sym-
posium on Applied Mathematics 19 (1967), pp. 19–32. url: http://laser.cs.
umass.edu/courses/cs521-621.Spr06/papers/Floyd.pdf.
[NN07]
Hanne Riis Nielson and Flemming Nielson. Semantics with Applications: An
Appetizer. Undergraduate Topics in Computer Science. Springer, 2007. isbn:
978-1-84628-691-9. doi: 10.1007/978-1-84628-692-6. url: https://doi.org/10.
1007/978-1-84628-692-6.
[GC10]
Mike Gordon and Hélène Collavizza. “Forward with Hoare”. In: Reflections on
the Work of C. A. R. Hoare. Ed. by A. W. Roscoe, Clifford B. Jones, and
Kenneth R. Wood. Springer, 2010, pp. 101–121. doi: 10.1007/978-1-84882-
912-1\_5. url: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-84882-912-1%5C_5.
[Luc21]
Salvador Lucas. “The origins of the halting problem”. In: J. Log. Algebraic
Methods Program. 121 (2021), p. 100687. doi: 10.1016/j.jlamp.2021.100687.
url: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jlamp.2021.100687.
[EFT96]
H.-D. Ebbinghaus., J. Flum, and W. Thomas. Mathematical Logic. Undergrad-
uate Texts in Mathematics. Springer New York, 1996. isbn: 9780387942582.
url: https://books.google.dk/books?id=VYLA8m7cqYcC.
[Ben12]
Mordechai Ben-Ari. Mathematical Logic for Computer Science, 3rd Edition.
Springer, 2012. isbn: 978-1-4471-4128-0. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4471-4129-7.
url: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4471-4129-7.
[Tar55]
Alfred Tarski. “A lattice-theoretical fixpoint theorem and its applications”. In:
Pacific J. Math. 5.2 (1955), pp. 285–309.
62
Mechanized Ghost Code and Weakest Precondition Reasoning
==PAGE:71==
[AP86]
Krzysztof R. Apt and Gordon D. Plotkin. “Countable nondeterminism and
random assignment”. In: J. ACM 33.4 (1986), pp. 724–767. doi: 10.1145/
6490.6494. url: https://doi.org/10.1145/6490.6494.
[Ern22]
Gidon Ernst. “Loop Verification with Invariants and Contracts”. In: Verifica-
tion, Model Checking, and Abstract Interpretation - 23rd International Confer-
ence, VMCAI 2022, Philadelphia, PA, USA, January 16-18, 2022, Proceedings.
Ed. by Bernd Finkbeiner and Thomas Wies. Vol. 13182. Lecture Notes in Com-
puter Science. Springer, 2022, pp. 69–92. doi: 10.1007/978-3-030-94583-1\_4.
url: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-94583-1%5C_4.
[Hes88]
Wim H. Hesselink. “Interpretations of Recursion under Unbounded Nondeter-
minacy”. In: Theor. Comput. Sci. 59 (1988), pp. 211–234. doi: 10.1016/0304-
3975(88)90142-9. url: https://doi.org/10.1016/0304-3975(88)90142-9.
[BW98]
Ralph-Johan Back and Joakim von Wright. Refinement Calculus - A System-
atic Introduction. Graduate Texts in Computer Science. Springer, 1998. isbn:
978-0-387-98417-9. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4612-1674-2. url: https://doi.org/10.
1007/978-1-4612-1674-2.
[Bar91]
Andrei Baranga. “The contraction principle as a particular case of Kleene’s
fixed point theorem”. In: Discret. Math. 98.1 (1991), pp. 75–79.
[CC03]
Patrick Cousot and Radhia Cousot. “Constructive Versions of Tarski’s Fixed
Point Theorems”. In: Pacific J. Math. 82 (Jan. 2003). doi: 10.2140/pjm.1979.
82.43.
[YD19]
Akihisa Yamada and Jérémy Dubut. “Complete Non-Orders and Fixed Points”.
In: 10th International Conference on Interactive Theorem Proving, ITP 2019,
September 9-12, 2019, Portland, OR, USA. Ed. by John Harrison, John O’Leary,
and Andrew Tolmach. Vol. 141. LIPIcs. Schloss Dagstuhl - Leibniz-Zentrum
für Informatik, 2019, 30:1–30:16. doi: 10.4230/LIPIcs.ITP.2019.30. url: https:
//doi.org/10.4230/LIPIcs.ITP.2019.30.
[BPT14]
Jasmin Christian Blanchette, Andrei Popescu, and Dmitriy Traytel. “Cardi-
nals in Isabelle/HOL”. In: Interactive Theorem Proving - 5th International
Conference, ITP 2014, Held as Part of the Vienna Summer of Logic, VSL
2014, Vienna, Austria, July 14-17, 2014. Proceedings. Ed. by Gerwin Klein
and Ruben Gamboa. Vol. 8558. Lecture Notes in Computer Science. Springer,
2014, pp. 111–127. doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-08970-6\_8. url: https://doi.org/
10.1007/978-3-319-08970-6%5C_8.
[Bal10]
Clemens Ballarin. “Tutorial to Locales and Locale Interpretation”. In: Con-
tribuciones científicas en honor de Mirian Andrés Gómez (Jan. 2010), pp. 123–
140.
[Dij76]
Edsger W. Dijkstra. A Discipline of Programming. Prentice-Hall, 1976. isbn:
013215871X. url: https://www.worldcat.org/oclc/01958445.
[MSS16]
Peter Müller, Malte Schwerhoff, and Alexander J. Summers. “Viper: A Verifi-
cation Infrastructure for Permission-Based Reasoning”. In: Verification, Model
Checking, and Abstract Interpretation - 17th International Conference, VM-
CAI 2016, St. Petersburg, FL, USA, January 17-19, 2016. Proceedings. Ed. by
Barbara Jobstmann and K. Rustan M. Leino. Vol. 9583. Lecture Notes in Com-
puter Science. Springer, 2016, pp. 41–62. doi: 10.1007/978-3-662-49122-5\_2.
url: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-662-49122-5%5C_2.
Mechanized Ghost Code and Weakest Precondition Reasoning
63
==PAGE:72==
64
Mechanized Ghost Code and Weakest Precondition Reasoning
==PAGE:73==
A
Terminology and Notation
A.1
Terminology
ghost code Code which is supposed to be able to be removed without changing the meaning of
the program.
regular code Code which is not supposed to be removed. I have used this term as it is consis-
tent with [FGP14], though I note that “regular” is an overloaded term in computer
science. In particular, when I write about regular expressions, I do not mean the
concept from automata theory.
well-formed A program is well-formed if (among other things) the code annotated as ghost
code actually is ghost code according to the above definition.
well-typed A program is well-typed if it adheres to a given typing system.
I differentiate
between a program being well-formed if it fulfills the property of the ghost code
being removable and well-typed if it passes the checks of some typing function.
Ideally, the latter implies the former.
ghost erasure For a program s I will refer to the program obtained by deleting all the ghost code
in s as the ghost erasure of s. This corresponds to the function erase-ghost.
weakest precondition The set of states which will lead to states fulfilling a given postcondition when
executing a given program.
predicate transformer A function which takes a predicate and a program and returns a new predicate. For
example, the weakest precondition.
continuous By continuity I mean Scott continuity.
This is a lattice-theoretical property of
functions. In particular, I do not mean the continuity property from calculus.
PL0 The most minimal programming language I consider. More complex language fea-
tures can often be encoded to PL0 for verification purposes.
PL1 A slightly more realistic programming language than PL0, with while and if state-
ments.
wp A function taking a program and a postcondition, and returning the associated
weakest precondition. For PL0 this is a unique function, while for PL1 I investigate
a family of related functions.
wptc weakest precondition for total correctness. An instance of wp returning the largest
set of states guaranteed to terminate in the postcondition when executing the pro-
gram. This is often denoted just wp in the literature.
wppc weakest precondition for partial correctness. A version of wp returning the largest
set of states guaranteed to either not terminate or terminate in the postcondition
when executing the program. This is often denoted wlp (weakest liberal precondi-
tion) in the literature.
lead to When writing about a given program, I say that one state leads to another state,
if the second is a state the program can terminate in when starting execution from
the first.
Mechanized Ghost Code and Weakest Precondition Reasoning
65
==PAGE:74==
diverge I write that a state diverges for a given program, if there is a way to execute the
program from that state such that it never terminates.
A.2
Notation
I use this font for defined functions (i.e. the ones which are defined from unambiguous
descriptions). For variable functions I use the letters f, g, and so on . I use x, y, and
z for variables, a for arithmetic expressions, p, q, and r for first-order logic predicates,
and e for expressions of either type. I use b for predicates which are expected to not
contain quantifiers (though I do not strictly require any logical formulas to be free from
quantifiers). For programs I use s, s′, s1, s2, and so on. For interpretations I use i, j, and
so on.
Functions are applied by currying in the style of functional programming.
Therefore,
wp s q is the function wp (weakest precondition) applied to the program s and postcon-
dition q.
In programs I use ←for variable assignments, so x ←a means that the variable x is
assigned the value of the expression a. I use ; for the sequential composition of program
statements. In listings I use line breaks as a shorthand for ;.
For variable substitutions in formulas I use p[x/a] for “we replace x with a in the formula
p”. For interpretations of expressions I use i[a] for “the value of a under the interpretation
i”. More about these are covered in Section 3.1.1.
For function update I use f[x 7→v] for the function agreeing with f, except that x in the
domain of f now maps to v in the codomain.
From Chapter 4 and onward I investigate a number of different predicate transformers, as
opposed to Chapter 3 where I just use wp. To obtain a homogeneous style and properly
differentiate between all of them I have given each function a four-letter abbreviatory name.
In particular, this means that weakest precondition for partial correctness becomes wppc
and weakest precondition for total correctness becomes wptc, as opposed to the more
commonly used wlp and wp.
When using programming language constructs inside mathematical expressions I use a
slightly different syntax from the pseudo code. In particular, I write the non-deterministic
choice between s1 and s2 inline as s1 [] s2, while in pseudo code I would write:
choice
s1
else
s2
end choice
66
Mechanized Ghost Code and Weakest Precondition Reasoning
==PAGE:75==
B
Code Snippets
B.1
A Conjunctivity Proof
Figure B.1: The Isabelle proof that the limit case of fn {} ∩gn {} ⊆hn {} follows from
the induction hypothesis
Mechanized Ghost Code and Weakest Precondition Reasoning
67
==PAGE:76==
B.2
Old Version of Termination Proofs
I here present the Isabelle formalization associated with Section 4.4.1.
We start by defining t-states and showing that termination + partial correctness implies
total correctness.
We then define gt-states and show that practical verification + termination of ghost
code implies partial correctness.
68
Mechanized Ghost Code and Weakest Precondition Reasoning
==PAGE:77==
Mechanized Ghost Code and Weakest Precondition Reasoning
69
==PAGE:78==
Finally, I show that t-states s implies wptc ⊤(erase-assert s).
70
Mechanized Ghost Code and Weakest Precondition Reasoning
==PAGE:79==
Mechanized Ghost Code and Weakest Precondition Reasoning
71
==PAGE:80==
When performing deductive program verification, it is sometimes helpful to add “ghost code” to a
program to ease verification. This technique has been used for decades, for example to keep track of
old values of variables or other auxiliary data that is necessary for specification. A necessary property
of well-formed ghost code is that it can be removed without invalidating the verification. Despite
the prevalence of ghost code in practical verification, its theoretical foundation remains limited.
In this project, I have formalized a theory of ghost code in Isabelle/HOL. I define two procedural
programming languages with ghost annotations, and define their semantics by backward predicate
transformers (the well-known weakest precondition). For both languages I give type checkers designed
to ensure the well-formedness of ghost code. It is shown that for verified and well-typed programs
we can remove the ghost code to obtain programs that are still verified.
I have also considered
three types of verification different from the standard correctness logic, notable among which is
incorrectness logic. For all verifications, I show how to ensure that the verification result is preserved
by the removal of ghost code.
Technical
University of
Denmark
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 324
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.compute.dtu.dk
