==PAGE:1==
Comparison of Enzyme Immobilization Strategies
PE-based support in enzymatic membrane reactor (MBR) and encapsulation
in Metal Organic Framework (MOF) structures
Master Thesis (30 ECTS)
Markus DeMartini
Supervisors: Andrei Popkov, Ziran Su, Magdalena Malankowska, Manuel Pinelo
DTU Chemical Engineering
Department of Chemical and Biochemical Engineering
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Comparison of Enzyme Immobilization Strategies
PE-based support in enzymatic membrane reactor (MBR) and encapsulation in Metal Organic
Framework (MOF) structures
Master Thesis
June, 2023
By
Markus DeMartini
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the customary
bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Chemical and Biochemical Engineering, Søltofts Plads,
Building 227, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
kt.dtu.dk
ISSN:
[0000-0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000-00-0000-000-0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000-0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000-00-0000-000-0] (printed version)
==PAGE:4==
Approval
Markus DeMartini - s210440
Signature
Date
ii
Comparison of Enzyme Immobilization Strategies
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
The increasingly present climate crisis has demonstrated that the world must reduce carbon
emissions and pivot away from fossil fuels. The capture of emitted carbon requires signficant
amounts of energy, and once it is captured, it must be stored or used. Enzymes, nature’s
catalysts, can address both of these problems. Carbonic anhydrase (CA) can lower this activation
energy and capture carbon dioxide, converting it into bicarbonate. Alcohol dehydrogenase
(ADH) can be used to produce methanol from formaldehyde as part of a three-enzyme cascade
that uses carbon dioxide as its feedstock. Industrial conditions require robustness, and in this
work, both alcohol dehydrogenase and carbonic anhydrase are immobilized and characterized.
Polysulfone ultrafiltration membranes are modified with polydopamine and various polyelectrolytes
to immobilize ADH via physical adsorption, allowing product filtration and membrane re-use. Both
carbonic anhydrase and ADH are encapsulated within metal-organic frameworks in a simple
aqueous synthesis at room temperature. These are green technologies compared to the methods
that they aim to replace, namely carbon capture with MEA and synthesis of methanol from fossil
fuels. Membranes modified with polydopamine and 25 kDa polyethylenimine and immobilized with
ADH showed high levels of specific activity on formaldehyde at pH 6.0 (12.4 mU/cm2), retention
of 68 % of their activity after incubation for 30 minutes at 65 ◦C and no drop in their activity after
storage for 34 days at −4 ◦C. They additionally maintained 77 % of their initial water permeability.
Carbonic anhydrase encapsulated in ZIF-8 retained significant activity on carbon dioxide after a
preparation imparting excessive energy through grinding and vortexing the the biocatalytic MOF.
Comparison of Enzyme Immobilization Strategies
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
Markus DeMartini, MSc Sustainable Energy, DTU
Andrei Popkov, PhD Student, DTU Kemiteknik
Supervisor
Ziran Su, Postdoc, DTU Kemiteknik
Supervisor
Magdalena Malankowska, Postdoc, DTU Kemiteknik
Supervisor
Manuel Pinelo, Professor, DTU Kemiteknik
Supervisor
Andrei - Thank you for the time you spent training me in the lab teaching me new techniques
and making me a better experimentalist. Your feedback data processing and knowledge of
polyelectrolytes and alcohol dehydrogenase was incredibly valuable.
Ziran - Thank you for helping me out with the carbonic anhydrase assays and for making me
understand enzymes much better. It was a great to work with you on the tensile tests and PRO
system as well.
Magdalena - Thank you for giving me excellent feedback on my rough drafts, knowledge of MOFs
and ZIF-8, and advice to not jump into the specifics too quickly.
Manuel - Thank you for taking me on by pure luck last year and keeping me around for a bit longer.
I really enjoyed the membranes class and it has been great to get involved.
iv
Comparison of Enzyme Immobilization Strategies
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.2
Enzymes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.2.1
Alcohol Dehydrogenase
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.2.2
Carbonic Anhydrase
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
1.3
Enzyme Immobilization
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
1.3.1
Metal-Organic Frameworks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
1.3.2
Biocatalytic Membranes
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
1.3.3
Immobilization of Alcohol Dehydrogenase
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
1.3.4
Immobilization of Carbonic Anhydrase
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2
Materials and Methods
17
2.1
Free ADH
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
2.1.1
pH Activity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
2.1.2
Thermal Stability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
2.1.3
Storage Stability
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
2.1.4
Lifetime Activity
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
2.1.5
NADH Degradation in Formaldehyde and Buffer
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
2.1.6
NADH Standard Curve . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
2.2
Immobilized ADH
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
2.2.1
Immobilization of ADH on Membranes
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
2.2.2
Immobilized ADH Activity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
2.2.3
Immobilization of ADH in ZIF-8 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
2.2.4
Water Permability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
2.3
Membrane Characterization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
2.3.1
Bradford Assay . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
2.3.2
Water Contact Angle . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
2.3.3
Zeta Potential
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
2.4
Free CA and MOFs
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
Comparison of Enzyme Immobilization Strategies
v
==PAGE:8==
2.4.1
Activity of CA and CA@ZIF-8 on CO2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
2.4.2
Synthesis of ZIF-8 and Enzyme@ZIF-8 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3
Results and Discussion
29
3.1
ADH and Biocatalytic Membranes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.1.1
Membrane Characterization
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
3.2
CA and Metal-Organic Frameworks
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
4
Conclusion
41
Bibliography
43
vi
Comparison of Enzyme Immobilization Strategies
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
At a site used for bread-making 13000 years ago, evidence remains of the brewing of cereals
into beer by the humans in what is modern-day Israel [1]. This is some of the oldest evidence
that we have of enzymes being used by humans for an industrial purpose. 12810 years later,
the French chemists Jean-François Persoz and Anselme Payen discovered diastase (what we
now call amylase), revealing the reality of enzymes to humans. This specific family of enzymes
has been used by our ancestors for generations, hydrolyzing starches into sugars to prepare
grains for fermentation [2]. Over the years since, this discovery of the proteins known as enzymes
has modernized the old industries of milk & cheese, alcohol, and other edible fermentations and
contributed to the chemical, pharmaceutical, cosmetic, textile, and consumer industries [3]. While
enzymes continue to be widely used in vivo (e.g. in the fungus Aspergillus oryzae to saccharify
various vegetables and grains into billions of USD in products [4][5]), the isolation of enzymes from
their host organisms has let humans harness their full potential to optimize existing processes
and address unsolved problems in enviromentally friendly ways.
The aformentioned amylases cleave sugars off of starch chains, breaking the chains down into
digestible units, but many more types of enzymes and enzymatic reactions are known. These
proteins catalyze a wide range of chemical reactions that enable life to exist, and their discovery
in 1833 allowed humans to exploit them for industrial use. Over 4800 different chemical reactions
are known to be catalyzed by enzymes and each reaction may be catalyzed by many enzymes [6].
Life as we know it is built on carbon-based molecules and most living organisms evolved in funda-
mentally similar environments, so different enzymes with the same purposes often appear across
a range of organisms. Additionally, different locations within an organism may express different
enzymes of the same functional family. Both of these cases are evident in the two enzymes used
in this thesis, carbonic anhydrase (CA) and alcohol dehydrogenase (ADH). As will be subsequently
described, at least six different families of carbonic anhydrase have convergently evolved across
the various biological kingdoms due to the centrality of carbon dioxide regulation to life, and just
within Saccharomyces cerevisiae there are five different types of alcohol dehydrogenase.
These two enzymes, carbonic anhydrase and alcohol dehydrogenase, have evolved over very
long timescales to optimally address biological needs, and modern biochemical engineering has
adapted them to address industrial ones as well. Given the very pressing nature of the changing
climate on the stability of humanity, an enzyme that regulates carbon dioxide would be particularly
relevant toward the development of carbon fixation technologies. Likewise, one that reduces
Comparison of Enzyme Immobilization Strategies
1
==PAGE:10==
aldehydes into alcohols could accelerate the green production of alternative fuels.
Anthropogenic CO2 emissions have climbed drastically since the industrial revolution due to the
advent of energy-consuming machines powered by coal and other fossil fuels and the repurposing
of land to feed and manage a growing population. Europe emitted 9 Mt CO2 in 1750, 177 Mt CO2
in 1850, and 5300 Mt CO2 in 2021 due to fossil fuels alone. Land use change in Europe caused
emissions of 979 Mt CO2 in 1850 and 252 Mt CO2 in 2021, showing an early and rapid transfor-
mation of forests, meadows and other ”unused” lands into cities, factories, and farms, limiting
the ability of nature to sequester the carbon emitted by the fossil fuels. Across the world, the
combined total of CO2 emissions due to fossil fuel and land use change reached 41 000 Mt CO2
in 2021 [7][8].
This disturbance of the Earth’s ecosphere has applied a forcing function to the natural equilibria
previously existing for millenia. Atmospheric CO2 levels now are at their highest point within the
last 3 million years [9]. Over all of the ice ages and warmer interglacial periods, natural variance,
ecological, and geological events have not had such a large impact on the amount of CO2 in
the atmosphere as the growth and technological advancement of humanity. The effect of the
industrial revolution is clear. In 1749 the atmospheric CO2 concentration was 277 ppm, in 1851 it
was 281 ppm, and in 2023 it reached a record 420 ppm [10].
The large increase in CO2 emissions and atmospheric (and oceanic) CO2 concentrations has
caused global surface temperatures to rise 1.1 ◦C since 1850 and has led to global and unequally
distributed changes in air temperature, soil moisture, precipitation, and sea level rise. Heat waves
and increased air temperatures are accompanied by heavier rains, droughts, fires, and flooding
[11]. The absorption of CO2 from the atmosphere into the ocean does buffer against some of
this human-induced change, but this protection comes at the cost of oceanic acidification by the
conversion of that aqueous CO2 into bicarbonate and carbonate, and rising temperatures decrease
the solubility of CO2 in water as well [12]. Oceanic ecosystems are affected by acidification and
this has lead to declines in coral reefs, while kelp forests and other ecosystems will be more
affected as global temperatures rise further [11].
All of this is to say that there is a pressing need to reduce our use of fossil fuels, alter existing
industries to reduce their CO2 emissions, and sequester as much of the anthropogenically emitted
CO2 as we can.
Sequestration of CO2 from flue gas or from the atmosphere is a significant challenge. Its popularity
has resurged in recent years in response to political and economic factors such as the recent and
alarming IPCC reports, governments setting prices on carbon, and legislation such as the recently
passed Inflation Reduction Act in the United States which directed billions of US dollars towards
2
Comparison of Enzyme Immobilization Strategies
==PAGE:11==
new and existing climate techologies [11][13][14]. However, even with all of the global support it
is barely economically feasible in its current state due to the large amount of energy neded to
capture the CO2.
Typical CO2 capture (CCS) methods absorb the CO2 in a solvent solution or adsorb it in a
solid sorbent. The captured CO2 is then desorbed and concentrated for downstream use or
sequestration. Conventional carbon capture for a power plant will use a 30% monoethanolamine
(MEA) solution, a relatively weak base which binds to the CO2 to form carbamates and more slowly
some bicarbonate and carbonate [15]. The exothermic binding reaction uses 3.80 GJ t–1 CO2
to 4.20 GJ t–1 CO2, which mean that the carbamate solution must be heated to about 120 ◦C
to release the bound CO2 and regenerate the MEA, though this number can range from 70 ◦C
to 200 ◦C depending on the specific process [16]. In the current case, the energy necessary
for desorption can be reduced by increasing the production of bicarbonate and carbonate ions
in the absorption step by mixing in other amines such as methyldiethanolamine (MDEA) and
2-amino-2methyl-1-propanol (AMP), the first which oxidizes the carbonic acid portion of the
aqueous CO2, and the second which produces a sterically hindered carbamate that preferentially
reverts to AMP and produces bicarbonate ions [15]. While additional solvents like these help
increase bicarbonate concentrations and reduce the desorption temperature, the process still
requires significant energy to heat the solvent. Capture and release methods are improving but all
of them fundamentally need a large amount of energy to release the CO2.
Here, biology has an advantage. Unlike MEA and other traditional solvents, enzymes are very
effective at lowering the activation energy needed for a reaction, so in the case of CO2, carbonic
anhydrase can not only capture CO2 and convert it into bicarbonate efficiently and quickly, it
can also run the reverse reaction under mild conditions and at room temperature and release the
captured bicarbonate as CO2 into a purified stream. The carbonic anhydrase can eliminate or
greatly reduce the need to heat the solvent, solving the fundamental technological and economic
issue with carbon capture. There are other considerations – cost of the purified enzymes, their
lifetime and total turnover number, the captured fraction of CO2, and their stability under these
industrial conditions, and these issues may hinder technological adaptation of the method, but
the upside is significant and worth investigation. Carbonic anhydrase has been immobilized
on polypropylene hollow fiber membranes using a polyelectrolyte surface modification to bind
the enzyme [17]. Beads, alginates, silicates, and foams have also been used as immobilization
substrates [18]. Metal-organic frameworks have received more attention lately due to their stability
in harsh conditions and have been used to immobilize carbonic anhydrase as well [19][20][21].
Bioengineering has been used to increase the thermal stability, pH stability, and half life of a
variety of carbonic anhydrases to enable their use in industrial conditions [22].
Comparison of Enzyme Immobilization Strategies
3
==PAGE:12==
Carbonic anhydrase-assisted CO2 capture could help carbon capture become economically
viable, but the market for the end product of purified CO2 is not large enough to use all of the CO2
captured, if it could capture all yearly CO2 emissions. Each year, approximately 35 000 Mt CO2
are emitted [8]. The existing market for gaseous and liquid CO2 is approximately 100 Mt per year,
while the most produced chemical in the world (sulfuric acid) only has a market twice that size, and
of the top 50 chemicals in the world about 2500 Mt are cumulatively produced [12]. There is no
market nor demand large enough to use all of the CO2 that needs to be captured. A large portion
of it could be sequestered in empty oil fields and rock formations at the expense of governments,
but there would still be mega tonnes of CO2 to replace fossil fuel-based feedstocks. Here, a
significant amount of research and development has been applied to transform captured CO2
into other chemicals [23] [24].
One of the more significant chemicals of interest is methanol, 90 % of which is produced from
natural gas [25]. Its primary use is as a feedstock for other chemicals, but it can also be used as
a more clean alternative fuel than existing options and provide a fuel for industries that cannot
easily electrify, such as oceanic container shipping and aviation [26][27].
The production of methanol from CO2 requires a lot of energy (228 kJ mol–1) because CO2 is a
very stable linear molecule with a standard free energy of −400 kJ mol–1 [28]. A catalyst would
be useful to reduce the energetic demands of the methanol synthesis. One particularly popular
biochemical example of this is the three enzyme cascade from CO2 to methanol. Formate
dehydrogenase reduces CO2 to formate, which is then reduced to formaldehyde via formaldehyde
dehydrogenase, and finally, alcohol dehydrogenase converts the formaldehyde into methanol.
Each step uses the hydrogen from one NADH molecule, and the resulting NAD+ are converted
back into NADH using glutamic dehydrognase [29]. The methanol can then be used for further
chemical synthesis or for use as an alternative fuel. This cascade has been demonstrated with
the enzymes immobilized in silica sol gels, nanoparticles, metal-organic frameworks, membranes,
and with other immobilization methods [29][30][31][32].
CO2 + NADH + H+ −−−−−⇀
↽−−−−−
FormDH HCOOH
(1.1)
HCOOH + NADH + H+ −−−−⇀
↽−−−−
FaldDH CH2O
(1.2)
CH2O + NADH + H+ −−⇀
↽−−
ADH CH3OH
(1.3)
4
Comparison of Enzyme Immobilization Strategies
==PAGE:13==
1.1
Objectives
In this thesis, two of the previously mentioned enzymes will be characterized for activity and
stability under various conditions. Alcohol dehydrogenase will be used to convert formaldehyde
into methanol, and carbonic anhydrase will act on CO2 to produce bicarbonate. They will then be
immobilized using two very different methods. Alcohol dehydrogenase will be physically adsorbed
onto ultrafiltration membranes modified with polydopamine and polyelectrolytes deposited using
the layer-by-layer technique. Both ADH and carbonic anhydrase will be immobilized within
dodecahedral metal-organic frameworks. The immobilized enzymes will also be characterized for
their activity and stability, and the water permeability, water contact angle, and zeta potential of
the modified membranes will be determined.
1.2
Enzymes
Enzyme
Size (kDa)
Isoelectric Point
Source
Alcohol dehydrogenase
141
5.4-5.8
Saccharomyces cerevisiae
Carbonic anhydrase
30
5.9
bovine erythrocytes
Table 1.1: The enzymes used in this thesis. [33][34][35]
1.2.1
Alcohol Dehydrogenase
Alcohol dehydrogenase (EC 1.1.1.1) is known for converting acetaldehyde to ethanol (in yeast)
and for the reverse reaction in the human liver [36] [37]. It is also an incredibly important industrial
enzyme given the large global demand for beer. In 2022, brewers yeast, or S. cerevisiae, was
a 5.8 billion USD market worldwide [38]. The enzyme is produced by S. cerevisiae to convert
acetaldehyde into ethanol, the final step in its process of alcohol fermentation. Ethanol production
is the primary industrial use of ADH in vivo, but the enzyme is not too selective and will catalyze the
reversible redox reaction on many primary and secondary alcohols and their respective aldehydes
like in reactions 1.4 and 1.5. This makes it useful for converting formaldehyde into methanol in
the last step of the previously mentioned three enzyme cascade, like in reaction 1.6. Some basic
properties are given in Table 1.1.
RCH2OH + NADH + H+ −−⇀
↽−−RCHO
(1.4)
R2CHOH + NADH + H+ −−⇀
↽−−R2CHO
(1.5)
CH2O + NADH + H+ −−⇀
↽−−CH3OH
(1.6)
Comparison of Enzyme Immobilization Strategies
5
==PAGE:14==
Yeast Alchol Dehydrogenases
The ADH used in this project comes from S. cerevisiae, where the five zinc-based ADH
isozymes it expresses have functions varying from reducing acetaldehyde into ethanol (yADH
I—fermentation, yADH III—respiration, yADH IV—respiration, yADH V—paralog to yADH
I), oxidizing ethanol into acetaldehyde when glucose is absent (yADH II—respiration), and
producing fusel alcohols from decomposed amino acids (which add complexity to alcohol
such as whiskey or rum) [39] [40] [41] [42] [43] [44]. Under ordinary fermentative growth on
glucose, S. cerevisiae produces yADH I in large numbers [40]. Mitochondrial yADH III and
yADH IV may be expressed when yADH I is not present [45]. In terms of genetic similarity,
yADH I and yADH II are 94% homologous, while yADH III is only 80% homologous to yADH I
and yADH II and yADH IV is completely different to the other three [42] [43].
Structurally, yADH I-III are tetramers, each mer containing two zinc ions: one for catalytic
function and a second for structural purposes [46]. In contrast, yADH IV is a homodimer with
lower pH stability and stronger substrate specificity, targeting only the low molecular weight
ethanol and n-propanol and their aldehydes [43]. yADH I has a calculated size of 147 kDa
while yADH IV’s is 60 kDa to 80 kDa[47][43]. As yADH I is the primary isozyme expressed in
S. cerevisiae, the enzyme preparation used in this thesis primarily consists of yADH I.
It shows its highest activity with ethanol and that decreases as the alcohol size increases
and also with secondary alcohols; additionally it show a similar affinity towards the smaller
alcohols ethanol (M = 46 g mol–1), propan-1-ol (M = 60 g mol–1), butan-1-ol (74 g mol–1),
and 2-butanol (74 g mol–1) [36]. Due to numerous side reactions, it oxidizes methanol poorly
(0.065% to 7.2% its activity on ethanol) and although most types of ADH do show similar
low levels of activity towards methanol, their affinity for it varies significantly (KM, yADH = 37
×KM, human ADH & 10 ×KM, horse ADH) [48].
When oxidizing alcohols, yeast ADH follows a random association mechanism, while it follows
an ordered mechanism when reducing aldehydes [49]. Additionally, with a KM for NAD+ and
NADH typically an order of magnitude less than the KM of its substrates, it shows much
greater affinity towards its cofactors than towards alcohols and aldehydes [49].
NAD+ and NADH are competitive inhibitors for yADH II, and presumably as well for yADH I,
given the isozyme’s similarity [50].
Yeast alcohol dehydrogenase I (yADH I) has an optimum activity on formaldehyde around pH 6
to pH 7 and 25 ◦C. It is not particularly stable, which is why it’s immobilization is a focus in the
6
Comparison of Enzyme Immobilization Strategies
==PAGE:15==
three enzyme cascade. In the conversion of formaldehyde using dead end batch filtration, free
enzyme lost all of its activity after processing 80 mL of feed solution, while ADH immobilized by
fouling a 50 kDa polysulfone membrane retained over 60% of its activity after 100 mL of feed [51].
Higher temperatures will reduce the free enzyme activity and ultimately lead to unfolding at 56 ◦C
[52][53]. It oxidizes methanol several hundred times slower than it reduces formaldehyde and its
specificity towards methanol is 16 times lower as well, a very useful property in the directionality
of the three enzyme cascade
 KM,MeOH = 6mM, KM,Fald = 100mM

.
1.2.2
Carbonic Anhydrase
Carbonic anhydrase (EC 4.2.1.1) primarly catalyzes the conversion between CO2 and bicarbonate,
as in reaction 1.7, but shows catalytic function in other hydrolytic reactions with similar small
molecules as well [54]. It has long been a pharmacological drug target because of its involvement
in a number of regulatory processes. The many carbonic anhydrase inhibitors developed to
regulate its activity have been used to treat altitude sickness, glaucoma, seizures, and act as
diuretics [55]. There are no other signficant industrial uses of isolated CA outside of the increasing
interest in its use in carbon sequestration.
CO2 + H2O −−⇀
↽−−HCO3
– + H
(1.7)
Both human carbonic anhydrases (HCAs) and bovine carbonic anhydrase (BCA), commonly used
in research, are not stable enough for industrial use on their own. The enzymes will denature when
subjected to the high temperatures and shear stresses asked of it. HCA II has a denaturation
temperature of 62◦C,too low for use with MEA, and a half-life of about 5 days, too short for
economical use [56][57]. Used in a CO2 absorption-desorption process, circulation of the enzyme-
containing solvent will gradually deactivate the enzyme due to the hydrodynamic shear forces
along the pipe and vessel walls and when it trickles down porous packing in the absorber [58][12].
The enzyme’s stability must be improved to make it viable to use industrially. Characterization of
CAs present in extremophiles, protein engineering, and immobilization methods all have been
used to good effect [59][60][22].
Carbonic anhydrase from the deep sea bacterium Persephonella marina works under high pres-
sures and in temperatures up to 133 ◦C and was shown to retain 91 % of its initial activity after incu-
bation at 70 ◦C for 144 h [59]. This stands in stark contrast to the CA from Acetobacterium woodii,
which loses 96 % of its activity after 144 h at only 50 ◦C [59].
Bioengineering of carbonic anhydrase has been used primarily to increase its thermostability and
halostability. A rationally designed carbonic anhydrase has been shown to have a half-life at 60 ◦C
of 203 days compared to the wild type’s 77 days. The CA retained 100 % of its CO2 hydrolysis
Comparison of Enzyme Immobilization Strategies
7
==PAGE:16==
activity after a 1 h incubation at 90 ◦C, while the wild type retained only 30 % activity, and bovine
CA retained only 20 % of its activity at 60 ◦C [61].
Both of these methods can result in highly stable carbonic anhydrases, but this may not be enough
to protect against the stresses experienced by the enzyme when in use such as in the trickle bed
reactors commonly used to strip CO2 from flue gas. Protection from the shear stresses and the
turbulent porous packing of trickle bed reactors can be improved by immobilizing the enzymes,
which can protect them physically from their environment and help stabilize their structures. When
continously shook at 200 rpm and 45° at room temperature in 100 mM pH 7.6 Tris-HCl buffer,
free ADH had a half life of 3.7 days, while enzyme that was immobilized in cross-linked enzyme
aggregates within the pores of mesoporous silica showed 75% activity retention after 160 days, a
dramatically improved resistance to mechanical stress [62].
Immobilization can offer protection from industrial carbon capture conditions. Depending on the
technique, it can increase thermal stability and protect the enzyme from denaturation by shear
force, which is why it is being investigated for use with carbonic anhydrase.
1.3
Enzyme Immobilization
Due to the high cost of isolated enzymes, their activity, stability, and general preservation are
fundamental to an industrial biocatalytic process. If there is downstream separation needed
for their reuse some enzymes will be lost to filtration and hydrodynamic shear forces. Isolated
enzymes also lose activity at high reaction temperatures or biologically atyptical pH values, and
they may also lose activity over time. To improve the prospects of isolated enzymes in industrial
processes, immobilization techniques were developed in the 1950s. Further development since
then has improved enzyme performance and led to a number of new techniques [65].
Two general categories of enzyme immobilization techniques exist: carrier-bound and carrier-free
[66]. Both can improve the catalytic and non-catalytic functions of the enzymes, but there are key
differences.
In carrier-free immobilization, the enzyme is either cross-linked into an aggregate or encapsulated
in a larger structure such as a polymer network, metal-organic framework, or sol gel, resulting in
an ex novo solid [66][65]. Methods such as co-polymerization, nano-flowers, and aggregation
do not protect the enzyme well and result in poor mechanical resistance, which limits their use
to conditions of low mechanical stress [65]. Sol gel methods typically have small pores and are
hydrophobic, resulting in reduced activity, but methods that increase the pore size show better
results [65][67]. Metal-organic frameworks (MOFs) are becoming increasingly popular due to their
high environmental resistance, ease of preparation, and pore size tunability [68].
8
Comparison of Enzyme Immobilization Strategies
==PAGE:17==
Carbonic Anhydrases
Regulation of CO2, HCO3 – , and H+ levels in photosynthesis and respiration is very important
to large number of organisms; it protects the cells from damage by excessive CO2, and it
regulates the pH balance through HCO3 – and H+ concentrations [63][54]. The necessity of
this functionality has led to at least six families of carbonic anhydrases which are : α, β, γ, δ,
ζ, and η and these families are present in the many types of organisms listed in Table 1.2.
Most families contain Zn2+ at the active site, but may be substituted with Cd2+ in the ζ family
and Fe2+ in the γ-CAs. The active site is composed of a hydrophobic region to bind CO2
and a hydrophilic region to bind CO3 – and H+. As may be expected with so many families
of CA, the enzymes vary greatly in construction and may be monomers, dimers, tetramers, or
otherwise a higher order structure [54].
α
β
γ
δ
ζ
η
vertebrates
✓
protozoa
✓
✓
algae
✓
green plants
✓
flowering plants
✓
bacteria
✓
✓
✓
cyanobactera
✓
fungi
✓
Archaea
✓
✓
diatoms
✓
✓
Table 1.2: The numerous families of carbonic an-
hydrase and where they are present in nature.
Human carbonic anhydrase II (HCA II), found
in hemoglobin, is one of the fastest known
enzymes with a turnover rate of 10 × 106 s–1;
the more common HCA I (also in hemoglobin)
is comparable at 10 × 105 s–1, and HCA
III in red muscle fibers is much slower at
10 × 103 s–1. The near-diffusion limited rate
of HCA II is limited by the proton transfer from
the Zn2+ coordinated H2O molecule to His-
64, a proton shuttle to the reaction medium
[64].
Most CA inhibitors bind to the metal ion but
others may bind to the coordinated H2O, occlude the active site, or be located out of the
active site [54].
The half-life of HCA II is driven by dissociation of the metal ion. At pH 7 and 25 ◦C it has a
half-life of 5 d with a dissocation constant KD of 4 pM [57].
In carrier-bound enzyme immobilization, the enzyme is covalently or non-covalently bound to
a substrate. The various immobilization methods can leverage a number of substrates: beads,
fibers, capsules, films, or membranes, each one lending different benefits and drawbacks [66]. In
general, the methods tend to increase the reusability of the enzyme and offer some other benefit
such as increased temperature stability or increased activity in acidic or basic conditions [65].
Separation of the enzyme from the product is very simple if the substrate is held stationary, or
Comparison of Enzyme Immobilization Strategies
9
==PAGE:18==
if the enzymes are attached to magnetic microspheres [65][62]. Membranes offer the particular
advantage of being both stationary and also selectively filtering out the product, and they can be
used in a membrane bioreactor for a one-pot synthesis [65][66][69].
Figure 1.1: Illustration of some of the more common enzyme immobilizations: covalent bonding, affinity
immobilization, physical adsorption, and entrapment. [70]
Covalent bonding, cross-linking, affinity, physical adsorption, and entrapment, as shown in Figure
1.1, have all been used to immobilize enzymes, either reversibly or irreversibly depending on the
method [71].
Covalent bonding between a cross-linking agent and the side chain amino acids of an enzyme
stabilizes the enzyme and controls the protein orientation and location of the active site [72]. The
cross-linking agent can be attached to a substrate such as a membrane, or to another enzyme,
forming a cross-linked enzyme aggregate [65]. By covalently bonding a support to the enzyme, its
conformation is affected, possibly lowering its activity, which makes the choice of cross-linking
agent and bonding sites important in retaining high activity and improving stability [72].
Affinity immobilization anchors substrate to the enzyme with an affinity pair. A ligand such as an
antibody can be added to the support, an affinity tag can be added to the enzyme, or both ligand
and tag can be added (e.g. in the case of the affinity pair biotin-avidin) [72]. Random orientation
of the immobilized enzyme can be an issue, and packing density is a limitation [73].
Physical adsorption of an enzyme involves adsorption of it onto or into a carrier through electrostatic
interactions by van der Waals forces, hydrophobic interactions, and hydrogen bonds. The forces
involved do not affect the enzyme’s conformation, which should therefore not reduce its activity
[74]. Random orientation of adsorbed enzymes and a limited enzyme density may also lead to
reduced activity [74].
Entrapment involves surrounding the enzyme in a polymer network, within a gel or fiber, meso-
porous silica, or in a metal-organic framework [72]. Enzyme leaching may be prevented by using
covalent bonds, forming cross-linked enzyme aggregates within the substrate, or tuning the pore
size to be smaller than the enzyme [67][72][68].
10
Comparison of Enzyme Immobilization Strategies
==PAGE:19==
When immobilized, enzymes may show reduced activity and affinity towards substrates due to
difficulty in accessing active sites, steric hindrance of the active site and conformal changes to
the enzyme, as well as enzyme leakage from the carrier [67].
1.3.1
Metal-Organic Frameworks
Metal-organic framework-based immobilization methods are relatively new yet show much poten-
tial due to their variable structures, tunability, and mild formation conditions. Enzymes may be
co-precipitated inside a MOF structure, encapsulated within an exposed MOF cavity, or bound to
the surface of a MOF [75].
Binding of an enzyme to a MOF surface can be either through electrostatic interactions or covalent
bonding. Because the enzyme is on the MOF surface and pore size is not a strong consideration,
a wide range of MOFs can be used. With covalent bonds, functional group requirements limit the
usable range of MOFs. Additionally, the MOF can be prepared separately from the immobilization
[68].
Encapsulation of an enzyme within an exposed MOF cavity lends protection and increased stability
to the enzyme. The pore size can be tuned to select substrates, and the MOF can also be prepared
separately from the immobilization [68]. However, the enzyme is still exposed to proteolytic agents,
and the physical adsorption mechanism limits the avaiable range of MOFs [75].
Enzymes and MOFs can be co-precipitated in a one-pot synthesis, completely encapsulating the
enzyme within the MOF, lending significant resistance to the environment. This method shows
high resistance to protelytic agents, temperature, and solvents and increases the enzyme stability
[68]. As the pore size is smaller than the enzyme encapsulated within the structure, the enzyme
can be prevented from leaching out of the MOF [68].
Zeolitic Imidazole Frameworks and ZIF-8
Zeolite imidazolate networks (ZIFs) are a type of MOF most commonly used for enzyme@MOF
co-precipitation because of their mild formation conditions and ease of preparation. Structurally
composed of transition metal nodes bonded to the nitrogens of the imidazolate linkers (IM), its
dense phase constists of Metal(IM)2 units [76]. The M – IM – M bond angle is approximately 145◦
for Zn(IM)2, which creates open-framework structure [76]. The type of ZIF produced can be
changed by altering the metal to linker ratio and the size can be tuned by altering the reaction and
aging temperatures and times [75].
ZIF-8 is one such structure composed of Zn(II) coordinated to four nitrogen atoms of the neigh-
boring IM molecules. The Zn(II) forms tetrahedral structures and the IM bridges between them,
creating a sodalite topology with a favorably large surface area and pore size [77][78]. Solvothermal
synthesis with methanol as the solvent is the preferred synthesis method because of the small
Comparison of Enzyme Immobilization Strategies
11
==PAGE:20==
pore size, narrow pore size distribution, and methanol’s lower toxicity than the previously used
dimethylformamide [79]. Enzyme@ZIF-8 can be synthesized in water instead of methanol because
the enzyme acts as a nucleation point, greatly accelerating formation of the MOF around it [75].
Once synthesized, both ZIF-8 and enzyme@ZIF-8 show high thermal and chemical stability and
strong resistance to hydrolysis due to its hydrophobic pores and highly stable Zn – N bonds [76].
However, in acidic conditions, ZIF-8 degrades: within just a few minutes in a pH 5 buffer it will
lose crystalinity and open up [77]. This is very useful for use as a drug delivery vehicle but possibly
detrimental to an industrial use where reaction conditions or cleanings are acidic. There is also
some evidence of degradation simply in water over several hour-long time scales [80][81]. Addition
of 0.06wt% methylimidazole to a ZIF-8 solution slows this dissolution down [81].
ZIF-8 may be synthesized into different morphologies, affecting the performance of the MOF.
Standard rhombic dodecahedron formation leads to a reduction in CA’s Vmax and KM compared
to free CA, while when formed into a cruciate flower-like shape, the kinetic parameters are
similar the free enzyme. It additionally shows improved thermostability, recyclability, resistance to
denaturants, and a greater ability to convert CO2 to bicarbonate [19]. Synthesis of various ZIF-8
shapes through variation of Zn(II) concentration shows the highest CA activity recovery with the
flower-like shapes formed at higher Zn(II) concentrations [19].
1.3.2
Biocatalytic Membranes
When enzymes are immobilized onto filtration membranes, the resulting biocatalytic membranes
offer both improved stability and the added benefit of quick and selective product removal. A
membrane bioreactor can reduce costs by combining the catalytic and separation processes
together and increasing the half-life of the enzyme. Enzymes may be immobilized on the selective
surface of a membrane via physical adsorption or covalent bonding, or encapsulated within it
via physical adsorption or intentional fouling [51][69]. Their immobilization can affect membrane
pore sizes, surface charge and membrane hydrophobicity, enzyme activity and stability, and
water permeability through the membrane[69]. However, their industrial adoption has been slow
because of a number of downsides. If covalently bound, inactivated enzyme cannot be easily
replaced, so the membrane may not be able to be reused, while enzyme leakage is possible when
physical adsorption is used [72][69]. Additionally, the catalytic and separation parameters must
be co-optimized, which possibly limits overall performance of the process [69].
Recent research has aimed to address some of these shortcomings. Inspired by the adhesion of
mussels to rocks in turbulent ocean water, polydopamine-based coatings use the same functional
groups—catechols—to adhere to membranes and a wide range of other substrates by reacting
with the thiol- and amino- groups of the substrate via Michael addition and the Schiff-base
reaction [82]. PDA deposition on membranes can increase their wettability but may reduce water
12
Comparison of Enzyme Immobilization Strategies
==PAGE:21==
permeability through pore blockage [82]. The addition of a poylelectrolyte such as the cationic
poylethyleneimine (PEI) can reduce the deposition time and increase water permeability [83]. The
amino groups in PEI react with the catechol groups of the polydopamine and beneficially alter
the membrane surface charge to increase hydrophilicity [83]. PEI also reduces the PDA grain
size, likely preventing pore blockage [84]. Low molecular weight PEI (e.g. 600 kDa) deposited
at 2 mg mL–1 in a 1:1 mass ratio with PDA will grow to over 60 nm thick after 30 hours, while
molecular weights above 1800 kDa lead to films below 10 nm in thickness [84]. Lower PDA and
PEI concentrations lead to thicker films as well.
Polydopamine
Two of the types of melanin which influence human skin and hair color are brown and
black eumelanin, which form a sort of coating [85]. Polydopamine is like eumelanin in
that it also forms coatings, aggregates of monomers, dimers, and small oligomers of very
similar molecules [86]. The oxidation of dopamine in the presence of oxygen results in 5,6-
indolequinone and its intermediate 5,6-dihydroxyindole, the primary two molecules make up
polydopamine [87]. It has a typical degree of polymerization (DP) less than 15 [88].
In less than 1 hour, these two monomers will create polymer chains and sheets, which will
precipitate, and growth of these grains will occur up to a critical size over approximately 16
hours [87]. In pH 7.0 phosphate buffer, that critical size is around 1200 nm [87]. The addition
of other polymers affect PDA’s growth. For example, a 0.1 wt% PVA solution reduces the
critical size to around 80 nm [87].
Deposition pH and buffer affect the PDA film formation. At acidic pHs films do generally
not form, but copper (II) or persulfate anions can be used as oxidizers instead of oxygen,
and the films will form then at pH 4 [86]. In pH 8.5 Tris buffer at 0.1 g mol–1 PDA, the film
thickness grows to 45 nm, while in a solution of 1 mg mL–1 PDA in pH 8.5 phosphate buffer
the thickness reaches 100 nm [89]. In a solution of 0.1 M 5,6-dihydroxyindole and 0.1 M pH
7.0 phosphate buffer it forms 55 nm films [87].
PDA may also be electrodeposited, though this restricts the substrate choice to conductive
ones. This method produces the same maximum thickness of 45 nm as in pH 8.5 Tris buffer,
showing that there is a physical limitation to the layer thickness. Layers can be stacked on
each other and when done so each would reach the same maximum thickness of 45 nm [89].
Expanding on this technique, a membrane may be modified with a deposition of a PDA/PE solution
and an enzyme physically adsorbed onto the charged surface, resulting in a biocatalytic membrane
with favorable water permeability, pore size tunability, and control over surface charge [90]. The
Comparison of Enzyme Immobilization Strategies
13
==PAGE:22==
enzyme loading possible with physical adsorption is lower than with other methods, but it is more
effective at higher enzyme concentrations because the inital enzymes adsorbed will aid in the
immobilization of other enzymes through enzyme-enzyme interactions and form clusters, even
though random orientation of the enzymes mean that some of their active sites are blocked [91].
This technique may be expanded with polyelectrolyte layer-by-layer (LbL) deposition, whereby
subsequent alternately charged polyelectrolyte layers are deposited. High polyelectrolyte concen-
trations ensures that some ionic groups are exposed on the new surface, reversing the surface
charge and allowing the next polyelectrolyte to be adsorbed. This process can be repeated to
construct an arbitrary number of layers [92].
These techniques have been used to immobilize laccase, glucose oxidase, lipase, pepsin, dex-
tranase, alcohol dehydrogenase, and other enzymes onto modified membranes [90][93]. Laccase,
glucose oxidase, lipase, pepsin, and dextranase were all immobilized on membranes coated
in polydopamine and either PEI for immobilization via physical adsorption, glutaraldehyde for
covalent bonding, or dodecanethiol for hydrophobic adsorption. Laccase, glucose oxidase, lipase,
and pepsin had the highest specific activity when PEI was used, while covalently bonded and
hydrophobically adsorbed enzymes were two-thirds to one quarter as active. With dextranase
though physical adsorption led to one-sixth the specific activity of both of the other methods [90].
1.3.3
Immobilization of Alcohol Dehydrogenase
Alcohol dehydrogenase has been previously immobilized on polysulfone ultrafiltration membranes
using PDA/polyelectrolyte co-deposition [93]. Single and multilayer cation and anionic polylec-
trolytes were deposited and enzymes were physically adsorbed onto the selective layer surface
of the membrane. Two layer coatings with co-deposited highly branched PEI as the initial poly-
electrolyte more than doubled the water permeability compared to pristine membranes and those
with linear poly(allylamine hydrochloride) (PAH) as the initial polyelectrolyte. Membranes with
enzyme directly adsorbed onto the poyldopamine modification achieved 10% conversion of
formaldehyde, but addition of the positively charged PAH co-deposited with the PDA resulted
in 35% conversion and a similar permeate flux. A pH optimum of 6.5 was observed for free
and immobilized enzyme except for membranes with a conjugated PMAA layer, which shifted
the optimum toward pH 7.5 due to the acidic microenviroment it created for ADH. After three
conversion runs of a PDA/PAH/ADH-modified membrane with a PMAA layer conjugated on top,
75% of the initial activity was retained [93].
Through a sol-gel process ADH was immobilzed in sodium alginate-silica beads. Alginate-ADH,
alginate-silica gel-ADH, and alginate-SiO2-ADH beads were compared. The immobilized enzymes
showed somewhat reduced activity and affinity towards formaldehyde and NADH, but increased
14
Comparison of Enzyme Immobilization Strategies
==PAGE:23==
the pH, temperature and storage stability, and lifetime turnover count of the enzyme. Increased
porosity with the inclusion of SiO2 led to higher activities because the path to the active site was
made more accessible [67].
ADH immobilized by intentional membrane fouling retained over 60% of its activity after processing
100mL of feed solution, while free enzyme lost all of its activity after 80mL. The immobilized
enzyme took over twice as long to process the solution though, likely because of pore blockage
on the membrane decreasing the water permeability, and steric hindrance of the fouled enzymes
due to aggregation and proximity of one another [69].
Another study used physical adsorption and covalent bonding via glutaraldehyde (GA) to immobilize
ADH on silicon carbide ceramic macroporous membranes and evaluate its activity on formaldehyde.
The membrane was also modified with PEI and (3-aminopropyl)triethoxysilane (APTES) prior to
glutaraldehyde addition. ADH immobilized by physical adsorption lost over 90% of its activity
after 8 converion cycles, while PEI-GA modified membrane still had over 10% of its activity after
17 cycles [94].
1.3.4
Immobilization of Carbonic Anhydrase
In a one-pot synthesis, three CA/ZIF-8 MOFs were produced with diameters of 100 nm, 400 nm,
and 1000 nm and enzyme loads of 50 mg g–1 to 250 mg g–1. The medium MOFs showed CA
activity of 60% to 70% free CA, while the other two preparations showed markedly lower activity
with the small MOFs having only 10 % the activity of free CA. The activity of the large MOFs
approached that of the medium at higher CA concentrations, but equal performance at lower CA
loading is preferred in industrial settings due to the high cost of the enzymes. Additionally, the
medium MOFs had higher surface area than the large ones, allowing increased CO2 adsorption.
The small MOFs aggregated due to their high surface energy and therefore showed their poor per-
formance. As with other CA/ZIF-8 preparations, storage stability and recyclability were improved
compared to the free enzyme [20].
Magnetic CA@(Fe3O4@ZIF-8) composite MOFs for CO2 absorption were formed in MDEA solution
at 40 ◦C. CA was physically adsorbed into the Fe3O4@ZIF-8 composites. The magnetism
introduced by Fe3O4 allowed straight-forward recyclability of the spherical MOFs. Activity 95 %
that of free enzyme was achieved with enzyme loading of 20 mg g–1 in one of the MOFs. In general,
increased enzyme loading reduced the activity due to aggregation of enzymes and the resulting
conformal changes after an initial layer of them attached to the MOF. After 9 d, the relative activity
decreased to 50 % initial activity, while for free enzyme it was only 20 % the initial activity. After
four reuse cycles, the enzyme activity dropped by 45 % due to CA interactions with MDEA and
the strong mechanical forces in the reactor. The best-performing MOFs had a particle size of
Comparison of Enzyme Immobilization Strategies
15
==PAGE:24==
400 nm, in line with the results of the previously mentioned study [21].
Bovine CA immobilized on nonporous silica nanoparticles had broader pH activity and maintained
more of its activity after thermal incubation than free CA. Free CA’s pH 8 optimum shifted to pH 9
when immobilized, and at pH and 10.5 its the immobilized enzyme’s activity doubled compared to
free CA. Incubated at 50 ◦C for 17 days, free CA lost 90% of its activity, while the best immobilized
CA lost only 35%. The immobilized enzyme was also protected against loss of activity from
sulfates, nitrates, and chloride ions, all commonly found in flue gases [95].
16
Comparison of Enzyme Immobilization Strategies
==PAGE:25==
2
Materials and Methods
A complete list of experiments is given in Table 2.1 and of characterization methods in Table 2.2.
Experimental factors and assay conditions are listed and detailed descriptions of each experiment
follow in the remainder of this section. In some cases, all possible combinations of factors were
not tested and this is reflected only in the results in chapter 3 so to limit the complexity of this
table.
Alcohol dehyrogenase from Saccharomyces cerevisiae with an isoelectric point of 5.4 to 5.8 and
molecular weight of 141 kDa to 152 kDa was obtained from Sigma (Sigma-Aldrich A3263, EC
1.1.1.1). Carbonic anhydrase from bovine erythrocytes with a molecular weight of 30 kDa was
obtained from Sigma as well (Sigma-Aldrich C3943, EC 4.2.1.1). NADH also came from Sigma
(Sigma-Aldrich N8129). Polysulfone ultrafiltration membranes with a 50 kDa molecular weight
cutoff was purchased from Alva-Laval (Alva-Laval GR51PP).
The following chemicals were purchased from Sigma as well: citric acid, 2-morpholinoethanesulfonic
acid (MES) monohydrate (Millipore 1.06126, CAS 145224-94-8), 3-(N-Morpholino)propane sulfonic
acid, 37 wt% formaldehyde, dopamine hydrochloride (Sigma-Aldrich H502), 1.3 kDa branched
aqueous polyethyleneimine (Sigma-Aldrich 482595, 50 wt% in H2O), 25 kDa branched polyethyleneimine
(Sigma-Aldrich 408727), 750 kDa branched aqueous polyethyleneimine (Sigma-Aldrich P3143,
50 wt% in H2O), 200 kDa to 300 kDa branched aqueous poly(diallyldimethylammonium chloride)
(Sigma-Aldrich 409022, 20 wt% in H2O), Bradford reagent (Sigma-Aldrich B6916), 2-methylimidazole
(Sigma-Aldrich M50850), zinc nitrate hexahydrate (Sigma-Aldrich 228737), Tris, 99.5% methanol
(Supelco 8.22283), phenol red powder (Sigma-Aldrich P3532), sodium hydroxide tablets, sodium
chloride crystals, and 1 M hydrogen chloride.
Ultrapure water with a resistance of 18.2 M was obtained from a Milli-Q water purification system.
Comparison of Enzyme Immobilization Strategies
17
==PAGE:26==
Table 2.1: List of Experiments
Experiment
Factors
Assay Conditions
pH
T (◦C)
Free ADH
pH Activity
pH
5.0, 5.5, 6.0, 6.5, 7.0, 7.5, 8.0
variable
RT
Thermal Stability
Tincubation
45, 65 ◦C
6.5
RT
Storage Stability
pH
5.0, 5.5, 6.0, 6.5, Milli-Q Water
6.5
RT
Lifetime
[E]
0.05, 0.1, 0.2, 0.3, 0.4 mg L–1
variable
RT
pH
6.0, 6.5
NADH Degradation
pH
(5.5, 6.0, 6.5, 8.0)
5.5, 6.0, 6.5, 8.0
RT
NADH Standard Curve
[NADH]
0 to 400 µM NADH
6.5
RT
Immobilized ADH
pH Activity
pH
5.0, 5.5, 6.0, 6.5, 7.0, 7.5, 8.0
variable
RT
PE
1.3, 25, and 750 kDa PEI
275 kDa PDADMAC
Thermal Stability
Tincubation
65 ◦C
6.5
RT
Storage Stability
PE
25 kDa PEI
Lifetime
PE
1.3, 25, and 750 kDa PEI
6.5
RT
275 kDa PDADMAC
Water Permeability
PE
1.3, 25, and 750 kDa PEI
—
RT
275 kDa PDADMAC
Free CA
CA Activity on CO2
[E]
0.02, 0.04, 0.08, 0.16, 0.32, 2.0 µg mL–1
8.3
0 ◦C
Metal-Organic Frameworks
ZIF-8 and CA@ZIF-8 Activity on CO2
[(CA@)ZIF-8]
stock, 1:3, 1:9, 1:27, 1:81
8.3
0 ◦C
ADH@ZIF-8 pH Activity
pH
5.0, 5.5, 6.0, 6.5, 8.0
variable
RT
Table 2.2: List of the properties of the membranes that were characterized.
Property
Factors
Assay Conditions
pH
T (◦C)
Bradford Assay
PE
1.3, 25, and 750 kDa PEI
—
RT
275 kDa PDADMAC
Bradford Standard Curve
[E]
0 to 20 mg mL–1
—
25
Water Contact Angle
PE
1.3, 25, and 750 kDa PEI
—
RT
275 kDa PDADMAC
Zeta Potential
PE
1.3, 25, and 750 kDa PEI
—
RT
275 kDa PDADMAC
18
Comparison of Enzyme Immobilization Strategies
==PAGE:27==
2.1
Free ADH
The activity of ADH on formaldehyde was tested at various pH (pH activity), after incubation
at high temperature (thermal stability), after refrigerated storage for a period of time (storage
stability), and at low ADH concentrations to determine the total turnover number of the enzyme
(lifetime). As shown in Figure 2.1, a standard 300 µL assay ran in a microplate well containing
200 µM NADH, 30 mM formaldehyde, 40 mM buffer, and 2 mg L–1 ADH in Milli-Q water. The
assays were prepared in the wells with the exception of the enzyme, which was added right before
the measurements were taken. NADH has a maximum spectral absorbance at 340 nm and a
second peak at 260 nm which is shared with NAD+. Because of the shared peak at 260 nm, NADH
concentration was measured at 340 nm. Spectrophotometric measurements of the absorbance
of NADH at 340 nm were taken for 5 min in 10 s intervals. Initial catalytic rates were taken as
the slopes of linear regressions of the initial linear sections of the time-absorbance curves and
converted to units of activity using a separately prepared NADH standard curve, where one
unit of ADH activity is defined as 1 µmolNADH transformed/min at 25 ◦C. Relative activity was
determined by normalizing the initial rates to that with the highest activity or that which was not
incubated.
2.1.1
pH Activity
The pH activity of ADH was tested in duplicates using the previously mentioned standard assay at
pH 5.0 and pH 5.5 (citrate buffer) pH 6.0 and pH 6.5 (MES buffer), and pH 7.0, pH 7.5, and pH 8.0
(MOPS buffer).
2.1.2
Thermal Stability
The thermal stability of ADH was tested by incubating 20 mg mL–1 ADH for a number of incubation
times (5 min, 10 min, 15 min, 20 min, 30 min, 45 min, 60 min) at 45 ◦C and 65 ◦C. The enzymes
solutions were incubated in Eppendorf tubes in a thermomixer at 100 RPM. After the enzyme
Figure 2.1: Standard continuous assay used to determine ADH activity. The assay was modified when
testing at various pH, temperature, and concentrations. [70]
Comparison of Enzyme Immobilization Strategies
19
==PAGE:28==
was incubated for the specified time, it was placed in a second thermomixer and cooled until the
last tube had cooled for 10 min at 4 ◦C. Both these incubated enzyme solutions and a separately
prepared enzyme solution that was not incubated were then tested for their activity using the
standard assay.
2.1.3
Storage Stability
The storage stability of ADH was tesed by preparing 20 mg mL–1 solutions of ADH in Milli-Q water
in duplicates and storing them at 4 ◦C. The activity of the solution was determined in the standard
assay on the initial day of preparation and 8 days, 23 days, 34 days, and 41 days later.
2.1.4
Lifetime Activity
The lifetime of ADH was determined by running a modified standard assay in duplicates where
the ADH concentration was set at 0.05 mg mL–1, 0.1 mg mL–1, 0.2 mg mL–1, 0.3 mg mL–1, and
0.4 mg mL–1 and absorbance measurments were taken every 2 h in 2 min increments.
2.1.5
NADH Degradation in Formaldehyde and Buffer
Figure 2.2: Procedure used to measure the degradation
of NADH in formaldehyde at pH (5.5, 6.0, 6,5, 8.0) and
room temperature. [70]
NADH is known to be unstable in formalde-
hyde and in acidic solutions, so a series
of solutions with 400 µM NADH, 30 mM
formaldehyde, and 40 mM buffer were pre-
pared with pH 5.5 and pH 6.0 citrate buffers,
pH 6.5 MES buffer, and pH 8.0 MOPS buffer.
300 µL of each was added to a microplate
and the absorbance of NADH was mea-
sured at five points over a 3 h period at
340 nm, as show in Figure 2.2
2.1.6
NADH Standard Curve
Figure 2.3: Procedure used to create the [NADH] vs.
absorbance standard curve.
A standard curve was created by the
method in Figure 2.3 to determine accu-
rate NADH concentrations due to the small
NADH concentrations used in these exper-
iments. Two separately prepared NADH
solutions were diluted in 50 µM increments
from 50 µM to 400 µM NADH in 40 mM pH
6.5 MES buffer. 300 µL of each solution
was added to microplate wells and the ab-
sorbance measured. The absorbance of
20
Comparison of Enzyme Immobilization Strategies
==PAGE:29==
40 mM pH 6.5 MES buffer was measured as well to establish a blank.
2.2
Immobilized ADH
2.2.1
Immobilization of ADH on Membranes
As described in Figure 2.4, ADH was immobilized by physical adsorption on 50 kDa molecular
weight cutoff polysulfone ultrafiltration membranes. As purchased from the manufacturer, the
selective surface of the membrane has a protective coating which was removed before use by
immersing it in a 0.1 wt% NaOH solution and agitating on a rocker for 30 min at 50 RPM. The
solution was replaced with fresh water and agitated twice more for 30 min each time. Afterwards,
the membranes were stored in fresh water at 4 ◦C for up to 1 week before use.
Prior to immobilization of the ADH, the selective surface of the membrane was modified with a
solution containing polydopamine and a chosen polyelectrolyte, which provided the electrostatic
attraction needed for immobilization of the enzyme. For a single membrane (4.9 cm2 circular area),
a typical immobilization solution included 4 mg of dopamine hydrochloride (dpa · HCl) dissolved
in 2 mL of a PE/NaCl solution (5 mg mL–1 PE + 1 M NaCl in 50 mM pH 8.5 Tris · HCl buffer). The
membrane would be clamped onto a HDPE frame with a circular shape, the polydopamine · PE
solution added, and the membrane rocked for 16 h at 50 RPM. After 16 h, the remaining modifi-
cation solution was removed and the membrane was rinsed twice for 5 min with 1 mL to 2 mL of
water on the rocker at 50 RPM. 1 mL of 20 mg L–1 ADH in 50 mM pH 7.5 MOPS was added and
the membrane rocked for 5 min at 50 RPM. This was followed by two rinses in 40 mM pH 6.5 MES
buffer for 2 min at 50 RPM as well. The membrane was removed from its frame, cut into a 2.5 cm
circle, and placed in a bag with 10 mL of 40 mM pH 6.5 MES buffer and stored at 4 ◦C until use.
Figure 2.4: Procedure for membrane modification and subsequent alcohol dehydrogenase immobilization.
All values are for one sample. [70]
Comparison of Enzyme Immobilization Strategies
21
==PAGE:30==
2.2.2
Immobilized ADH Activity
The conversion of formaldehyde into methanol by the immobilized ADH was tested in a stirred
filtration cell (Advantec UHP-25 K, USA) as described in Figure 2.5. A 25 mm diameter membrane
was placed in the cell and 5.6 mL of substrate solution (400 µMNADH, 30 mM formaldehyde,
40 mM buffer) was added. Two 300 µL samples were removed and placed in microplate wells for
later measurement. The cell was then fully assembled, 2 atm pressure applied via a nitrogen line,
and stirred at 100 RPM. The time from the first drop to 3 mL of permeate collected was recorded.
Each milliliter of permeate was collected in a separate Eppendorf tube to observe any loss in
activity. Then the test was stopped. Two 300 µL samples were collected from each Eppendorf
tube and two 150 µL samples were collected the limited amount of retentate. To each of the
retentate samples, 150 mL of water was added. The absorbance of each collected sample was
measured at 340 nm. From the data, the percent of formaldehyde converted, specific activity
(µU cm–2), and flow rate were calculated.
Activity of the immobilized ADH was tested at a primarly at a number of acidic pH values because
that was where the biggest drop in activity was seen with free ADH. To characterize thermal stability
of the immobilized ADH, the membrane was incubated in 65 celsius water. For the 25 kDa PEI
modification, a number of incubation times were tested up to 1 hour. The other three modifications
were incubated for one time point only, 30 minutes. In the lifetime conversion tests, 10 mL of
substrate solution was used in a run, and each membrane was run twice.
Figure 2.5: Assay used to determine the activity of ADH immobilized on a polysulfone ultrafiltration
membrane. [70]
2.2.3
Immobilization of ADH in ZIF-8
The immobilization of ADH in ZIF-8, forming ADH@ZIF-8, follows the same procedure as that for
CA@ZIF-8. The procedure is described in detail further down in subsection 2.4.2. The activity of
ADH@ZIF-8 was tested using the standard assay described in section 2.1.
22
Comparison of Enzyme Immobilization Strategies
==PAGE:31==
2.2.4
Water Permability
The water permability of each membrane was determined by filtering water through the membrane
at two different pressures, calculating the flow rate at each pressure, and then finding the flow rate
per unit pressure. Via dead-end filtration in a filtration cell (Amicon 6028), ultrapure water passed
through each membrane at 3 bar and then 1 bar pressure of N2. Continuous measurement of
the permeate mass was taken, and a linear regression line was fit to the mass-time plot. Curved
data sets indicated a membrane that was initial uncompacted, and only the compacted region
was of interest as that will be the long-term water permeability value, so the initial uncompacted
sections of the plots were discarded. The slopes of the regression lines indicate the flow rate in
L m–2 h–1, and with these values taken at two different pressures, a second line was fit and the
water permeability in L m–2 h–1 bar–1 was found.
2.3
Membrane Characterization
2.3.1
Bradford Assay
The Bradford assay, described in Figure 2.6 was used to determine the amount of enzyme
immobilized on each modified membrane. The Bradford reagent contains Coomassie brilliant
blue G-250, which changes from brown to blue when bound with protein. In it, 150 µL of an
enzyme solution and 150 µL of the Bradford reagent were mixed, held at 25 ◦C for 5 min, and the
absorbance of each well was measured at 595 nm. The absorbances were converted into enzyme
concentrations using a standard curve created at the same time that the assays were run.
Figure 2.6: Method for the Bradford assay which was used to determine the amount of enzyme immobilized
on each membrane. [70]
Bradford Standard Curve
A standard curve was created each time the Bradford assay was run following the same procedure
as in Figure 2.7. In a microplate, stock ADH was diluted to 0 mg L–1 to 20 mg L–1 in the immobi-
lization buffer 50 mM pH 7.5 MOPS. Bradford reagent was added and after five minutes at 25 ◦C,
the spectrophotometer took a measurement at 595 nm. The resulting [ADH]-absorbance plot
Comparison of Enzyme Immobilization Strategies
23
==PAGE:32==
was then used on immobilization solution Bradford assays to determine the amount of enzyme
immobilized on the membrane.
Figure 2.7: Bradford standard curve procedure. [70]
2.3.2
Water Contact Angle
Modified membranes without immobilized ADH were used to determine changes in the hydrophilic-
ity of each membrane compared to the pristine membrane. Prepared membrane samples had
4 µL drops of Milli-Q water deposited on them and a machine vision system measured the rate
of change of the water drop’s contact angle over time. Immediately after drop placement, initial
water contact angles were recorded for comparison. As shown in Figure 2.8, an angle below 90◦
indicated a hydrophilic surface, and hydrophilicity increases as the angle approaches 0◦.
Figure 2.8: Shape of water droplets on hydrophilic and hydrophobic surfaces. A hydrophilic surface has a
water contact angle (θ < 90°), while a hydrophobic surface has (θ >= 90)
2.3.3
Zeta Potential
The zeta potential for each membrane was determined on 1 cm by 2 cm samples using an elec-
trokinetic analyzer (Anton Paar SurPASS 3). Each membrane was characterized from pH 4 to pH
10, which allowed for most of the isolectric points to be determined as well.
24
Comparison of Enzyme Immobilization Strategies
==PAGE:33==
2.4
Free CA and MOFs
2.4.1
Activity of CA and CA@ZIF-8 on CO2
The activity of carbonic anydrase on carbon dioxide was prepared using the method described by
Kim et al. and laid out in Figure 2.9 [96]. A 100 mL to 250 mL flask of Milli-Q water was placed on
ice until it reached (0.5 ± 0.5) celsius and then CO2 was trickled in so that gentle bubbles could
be seen escaping the water. After 30 min, the CO2 was turned off and the flask sealed for use
immediate use in assays. While the water was becoming saturated with CO2, the remaining
solutions were also placed on ice: reaction buffer, reference buffers, the CA or CA@ZIF-8 or
ZIF-8, and the solvent — either Milli-Q water (for CA) or aqueous 0.13 wt% methylimidazole (for
CA@ZIF-8 and ZIF-8). Once all solutions were cooled down to (0.5 ± 0.5) celsius, the assays
began. Each continuous assay occured in a plastic cuvette on a spectrophotometer (Shimadzu
UV-1280). Water, buffer with phenol red, and carbonic anhydrase, CA@ZIF-8, or ZIF-8 were added
to the cuvette and, and as the reaction ran, the absorbance of the solution would drop. Phenol
red changes color with pH, and at 570 nm the color of the solution changed from red to yellow
once the reaction reached equilibrium. Two reference buffers prepared at pH 6.5 and pH 7.5
provided absorbance values for those two pH. The Wilbur-Anderson unit defined in Equation 2.1
could then be calculated and the activities of each run compared. It compares the time it takes for
an uncatalyzed reaction to drop from pH 7.5 to pH 6.5 (t0) with the time a catalyzed reaction takes
(t). Each reaction was complete when the absorbance no longer changed. This value changed
depending on the concentration of enzyme or ZIF-8, so prior to the WAU calculation, each run
was normalized to a set of blanks without CO2 or catalyst.
WAU =
t0 – t
t
(2.1)
While a rubber-sealed serum flask would have prevented the loss of CO2 from the water each time
the flask was opened, a lack of a method to pipette 10 µL through a metal syringe tip prohibited it.
Through trial and error, this meant that only about 15 runs could be made on a single flask of CO2
saturated water before the experimental error became too large.
Comparison of Enzyme Immobilization Strategies
25
==PAGE:34==
Figure 2.9: Assay used to determine carbonic anhydrase activity on CO2 at 0 ◦C. [70]
2.4.2
Synthesis of ZIF-8 and Enzyme@ZIF-8
The syntheses of ZIF-8 and enzyme@ZIF-8 are laid out in Figure 2.10. To prepare ZIF-8, methylim-
idazole and zinc nitrate hexahydrate were mixed in methanol in a 4 mol methylimidazole to 1 mol
zinc nitrate hexahydrate ratio. After 30 minutes of stirring at room temperature, the solution
was dispensed into 50 mL Falcon tubes and centrifuged. The supernatant was saved and the
precipitated was washed and centrifuged twice in water. Then the supernatant was moved to a
petri dish, covered in Parafilm with holes added to allow drying, and dried for 24 hours at room
temperature. The resulting white cake-like MOFs were then pulverized with a mortar and pestle
until reaching a very fine and slippery consistency. When running assays, it was resolubilized in a
fresh solution of water and 0.13 wt% methylimidazole and placed on ice just prior to the assay.
Enzyme@ZIF-8 was prepared by adding the enzyme to an aqueous methylimidazole solution and
then adding aqeuous zinc nitrate hexahydrate to that. The enzyme acts as a nucleation point and
the reaction proceeds quickly, so the solution is only aspirated for 10 seconds to thoroughly mix
it and then it is aged for 15 h. The entire synthesis occured in water and at room temperature. As
with ZIF-8, it is centrifuged and washed twice in water. It is also prepared for assays in the same
manner.
26
Comparison of Enzyme Immobilization Strategies
==PAGE:35==
Figure 2.10: Procedure for ZIF-8 and Enzyme@ZIF-8 synthesis. In the case of ZIF-8, the enzyme is not
added, the solvent is methanol instead of water, and the mixing time is altered. [70]
Comparison of Enzyme Immobilization Strategies
27
==PAGE:36==
28
Comparison of Enzyme Immobilization Strategies
==PAGE:37==
3
Results and Discussion
3.1
ADH and Biocatalytic Membranes
In general, immobilization of ADH on modified membranes led to increases in stability and a
narrower pH optimum. The addition of polydopamine and cationic polyelectrolytes increased
the surface hydrophilicity, altered water permeability of the membrane decreased to a varying
degree and made the negatively charged pristine membrane become positively charged, enabling
physical adsorption of yeast ADH I, which has an isoelectric point of pH 5.4 to pH 5.8.
Table 3.1: The effect of polyelectrolyte choice on ADH activity and stability, water permeability, and other
membrane properties. The activity and stability values presented are the peak values obtained. Paremeters
of each experiment or characterization are explained in Chapter 2.
Polyelectrolyte
1.3 kDa
25 kDa
750 kDa
275 kDa
Property
Pristine
PEI
PEI
PEI
PDADMAC
Water Permeability
Lm-2h-1bar-1
47±14
23±12
36±16
25±5
0.52±0.70
Water Contact Angle
◦
81±4.8
69±2.4
79±1.0
—
58 ±1.0
Zeta Potential, pH 7.5
mV
-24.2±1.5
1.97±0.62
15.7±0.12
5.8±0.57
7.8±1.0
Isoelectric Point
pH
pH < 4
7.79
9.18
9.34
8.15
Enzyme Immobilized
µg
—
2.9±1.1
5.2±1.1
4.4±3.6
0.037±0.82
Total Turnover
—
57000±21000
39000±8000
38000±31000
—
pH Activity
mU/cm2
—
10.0±0.9
12.4±0.4
9.6±0.1
0.72±0.01
Thermal Stability
mU/cm2
—
3.8±0.7
9.4±0.7
5.7±0.9
0.66±0.17
Storage Stability
mU/cm2
—
—
9.9 ±0.2
—
—
pH Activity and NADH Degradation
In Figure 3.1, initial experiments with free ADH reducing formaldehyde showed that its relative
activity peaks at pH 6.0 or pH 6.5, drops to about 45% at pH 8.0, and to 45% as well at pH 5.5.
It loses all activity at pH 5.0. This optimum is in agreement with the previously cited literature,
where it has been shown to be between pH 6.0 and pH 7.0. ADH on membranes modified with a
PDA/PEI co-deposition has a distinct peak of specific activity at pH 6.0, dropping 20% to 30%
by pH 6.5, and only 10% to 20% of the activity remains at pH 5.5 and pH 8.0. Three different
molecular weights of branched PEI were tested: 1.3 kDa PEI, 25 kDa PEI, and 750 kDa PEI. 25
kDa PEI performed about 20% better than the other two molecular weights, which both performed
the same. The decrease in activity away from the optimum pH can be explained by changes to
Comparison of Enzyme Immobilization Strategies
29
==PAGE:38==
the surface charge of the enzyme and steric hindrance caused by this and the immobilization,
restricting movement of the enzyme.
Changing the polyelectrolyte to polydiallyldimethylammonium chloride (PDADMAC), and the
activity of the ADH drops to 10% of the peak specific activity of 25 kDa PEI, which was the worst
performance of all of the polyelectrolytes tested. It also slowed the conversion rate down greatly,
exhibiting in Figure 3.9 a water permeability 100 times worse than pristine membrane and 70
times worse than 25 kDa PEI. A conversion test that took five minutes with PEI would take two
to four hours with PDADMAC. In this time, the NADH degraded significantly, making accurate
spectrophotmetric measurements a challenge. Degradation of the NADH was more significant at
lower pH. As shown in Figure 3.2 and Figure 3.3, in 40 mM pH 5.5 citrate buffer, it degraded at
a rate of 0.25 µmol NADH/min, while in pH 6.0 MES buffer the rate was five times slower and in
pH 8.0 MOPS buffer it was 20 times slower. This tended to reduce the absorbance at 340 nm of
collected permeate solutions as both NAD+ and other NADH derivatives were being formed.
Figure 3.1: pH activity of free ADH and immobilized ADH in the reduction of formaldehyde, measured
by the absorption of NADH at 340 nm and 25 °C. Reaction conditions for free ADH were as follows: 2
mg/mL ADH and 40 mM buffer, with 200 µM NADH and 30 mM formaldehyde added to start the reaction.
Reactions conditions for immobilized ADH were a varying mass of immobilized enzyme and 40 mM buffer,
with 400 µM NADH and 30 mM formaldehyde added to the stirred filtration cell before 2 atm pressure was
added to the feed side of the membrane. Standard deviations are shown.
30
Comparison of Enzyme Immobilization Strategies
==PAGE:39==
Figure 3.2: Time curves of degradation of NADH in aque-
ous solutions of varying pH as measured by spectropho-
tometry at 340 nm. Solutions consisted of 400 µM NADH,
30 mM formaldehyde, and 40 mM buffers of different pH:
pH 5.5 citrate buffer, pH 6.0 MES buffer, pH pH 6.5 MES
buffer, and pH 8.0 MOPS buffer. Standard deviations are
shown.
Figure 3.3: Rates of degradation of NADH
in the previously mentioned solutions.
ADH@ZIF-8
When ADH was immobilized on ZIF-8, it’s activity as given in Figure 3.1 peaked at pH 5.5, dropped
by about 40 % at pH 5.0, and was almost non-existant at pH 6.0 and above. At first glance
it appears that there was a pH shift in the reaction, but knowing that ZIF-8 degrades in pH
5.0 solution, and having also ran a blank that showed degradation in the pH 5.5 solution, it is
hypothesized that the ZIF-8 has degraded in these acidic conditions, opening up its pores to
allow formaldehyde and NADH to react with the ADH trapped inside. The degradation of the MOF
increases the pH in solution by methylimidazole taking protons from surrounding water molecules
[81]. The shift towards higher pH then increases the activity of the ADH. The lack of activity at
higher pH is explained by the larger enzyme losing its ability to bend (being sterically hindered) in
the ZIF-8 or the pores prevented the NADH and formaldehyde from entering the MOF. ADH has
been previously immobilized in ZIF-8 and shown activity when used in a three enzyme cascade at
pH 7.0, so differences in the preparation procedures will need to be evaluated and the resulting
ADH@ZIF-8 characterized (for example with XRD, SEM, pore size, and surface area analysis) to
better understand the biocatalytic MOF [31].
Comparison of Enzyme Immobilization Strategies
31
==PAGE:40==
Thermal Stability
Yeast ADH, previously mentioned to unfold at 56 ◦C, was tested for activity after incubation for
up to one hour at 45 ◦C and 65 ◦C in 40 mM pH 6.5 MES buffer. At 45 ◦C, the enzyme showed
no decrease in activity after an hour of incubation, but at 65 ◦C its activity after 30 minutes was
90% lower than unincubated enzyme, and by 60 minutes no activity was left, showing how fast
the unfolding occurs. 65 ◦C was therefore chosen for incubation thermal stability tests with
immobilized ADH. 25 kDa PEI again peformed best by retaining 65% of its initial specific activity
after 30 minutes at 65 ◦C. This value is likely closer to 50% because experimental design choices
led to unintended drops in the incubation temperature for brief periods of time, which is why there
is a hump in the 25 kDa curve. 750 kDa PEI retained 37% of its initial activity, and 1.3 kDa PEI
retained about 27%, while PDADMAC only had 5% after 30 minutes. The maintained specific
activity of PEI modified membranes after incubation at 65 ◦C shows not only that the membrane
maintained a good level of water permeability, it also protected the enzyme from denaturation,
which is likely due to hydrophobic interactions around the enzyme increasing in strength with
temperature, and immobilization lending some additional structural support through electrostatic
interactions and van der Walls forces.
Figure 3.4: Thermal stability of free ADH was determined at 45 °C and 65 °C in 40 mM pH 6.5 MES buffer.
Incubation times ranged from 0 min to 60 min. After incubation, free ADH activity was assessed in the
standard assay at pH 6.5. Thermal stability of ADH immobilized on membranes was determined at 65 °C in
ultrapure water. The same incubation times were used with the 25 kDa PEI modification, and the other
three modifications were tested only with a 30 min incubation. Standard deviations are shown.
32
Comparison of Enzyme Immobilization Strategies
==PAGE:41==
Storage Stability
Storage stability was also improved with immobilization of ADH, as seen in Figure 3.5. Free ADH
lost 35% of its activity after storage in 4 ◦C ultrapure water for 34 days and 70% after 41 days,
which was the best-performing medium. Storage in pH 6.0 and pH 6.5 buffers showed similar
if slightly more degraded activity, while there was a noticeable degradation in activity stored in
pH 5.0 and pH 5.5 mediums. After just eight days of storage, only 15% of its activity remained
and this dissapeared in subsequent testing days. While a small amount of storage buffer was
unavoidably present in the activity assays, and this may have hindered the activity, ADH does
degrade in increasingly acidic conditions, reacting with the additional protons and denaturing over
a period of time. At pH 4, denaturation takes on the order of 10 minutes, while at pH 5 the rate is
about one-fifth that [97]. ADH Immobilized on 25 kDa PEI and incubated in the same mediums
as the free ADH showed dramatically improved activity. After 34 days of storage, biocatalytic
membranes stored in 40 mM pH 6.5 MES buffer retained 100% of its activity. Membranes in pH
6.0 buffer and in ultrapure water both increased in activity by about 20 %. Only one membrane
was tested in each storage medium so some of the increase in activity may be explained by
variability in the PDA/PEI modification, absorbed enzyme density, and random rotation of each
enzyme. Membranes in pH 5.0 and pH 5.5 buffer lost only 25% of their activity, about 15 times
better than free ADH after that amount of time. Immobilization protected the enzyme well from
attack by the increased H+ concentration.
Figure 3.5: Storage stability of free ADH was determined by storing the ADH in various buffers and ultrapure
water at 4 °C a running the standard assay on the ADH every so often. The stability of immobilized ADH
was tested at pH 6.5 only after 34 days and on only one sample. Standard deviations are shown.
Comparison of Enzyme Immobilization Strategies
33
==PAGE:42==
Lifetime
Figure 3.6: Total amount of NADH converted by ADH at
pH 6.0 and pH 6.5 for the enzyme concentrations listed
in the figure. 400 µM NADH was used which was double
the concentration of the standard assay.
The initial set of experiments with free ADH
over pH showed that the pH optimum was
between pH 6.0 and pH 6.5. Lifetime as-
says were ran to help determine where the
optimum lay. A series of modified standard
assays at a higher NADH concentration and
a series of lower free ADH concentrations
showed that ADH converted more NADH
at pH 6.5, as is shown in Figure 3.6. This
result led to all of the following experiments
to be ran at pH 6.5 unless the pH activity
was being studied. As shown in Figure 3.8,
a standard curve was created from two in-
dependently created NADH solutions to de-
termine the precise absorbance of NADH
over concentration.
Figure 3.7: Total turnover of free and immobilized ADH.
Free ADH activity was determined by lowering the en-
zyme concentration and increasing the amount of NADH,
guaranteeing that the enzyme would use up all of the
available substrate in the time period over which the ex-
periment was ran. 20 mL of feed solution, twice that of a
normal run, were used for the immobilized assays.
Figure 3.8: Linear standard curve created
from two separately prepared NADH solu-
tions in 40 mM pH 6.5 MES buffer. Both
solutions were diluted in 50 µM increments
from 0 µM to 400 µM.
Absorbance was
measured at 340 nm. 95 % confidence in-
tervals are shown.
The total turnover number of free ADH, as given in Figure 3.7, expressed as number of molecules
of NADH converted per protein, seems to be comparable to the literature, though there are few
studies with formaldehyde as the substrate so only comparisons to other substrates can be made.
34
Comparison of Enzyme Immobilization Strategies
==PAGE:43==
Regardless, the number is not often reported. ADH’s total turnover on ethanol has been reported
as 27 000 at pH 7.9 and 26 ◦C and on 2-butanone as 64 000 [98][99].
The total turnover number for the immobilized enzymes was determined using 20 mL of substrate
solution and multiple conversion runs to process all of it. The Bradford assay results of Figure
3.13 were used to calculate the amount of enzyme immobilized on the membrane, though these
assays varied a lot, so care should be taken in interpreting these results. They show that the
free ADH has a total turnover number two to three times larger than when immobilized, which
indicates that some inactivation may be occuring. Some of it may come from handling of the
membrane during experiments, and some due to enzymes leaching out of the membrane during
the conversion run. Additionally, some enzymes are oriented to obscure their active sites or may
be slowed through steric hindrance. Lastly, there may be been some more activity left in the
enzyme after the experiment was ran, so it may be worth it to increase the amount of substrate
further to better understand these results.
Water Permeability
Figure 3.9: Water permeability of pristine GR51PP polysulfone ultrafil-
tration membrane and samples modified with polydopamine and various
polyelectrolytes. Standard deviations are shown.
Of the water permeability mea-
surements given in Figure
3.9, pristine membrane had
the largest water permeabil-
ity at (47 ± 14) L m–2 h–1 bar–1.
The 25 kDa PEI modifica-
tion did not reduce it much
((36 ± 16) L m–2 h–1 bar–1), but
1.3 kDa PEI and 750 kDa
PEI modifications had half
of the water permeability of
the pristine membrane ((23 ± 12) L m–2 h–1 bar–1
and (25 ± 5) L m–2 h–1 bar–1, respectively). The PDADMAC modification had very little flow and
showed significant pore blockage ((0.52 ± 0.70) L m–2 h–1 bar–1). These results are reflected in the
coloration of each modified membrane. When deposited, polydopamine adds a dark brown color
to the membrane surface, but polyelectrolyte co-deposition limits its concentration, changing the
shade of brown. All of the PEI membranes were lighter shades of brown, while the PDADMAC
membrane was a very dark brown. This implies that the PEI, through its amine groups and
branched structure, only allowed a limited amount of polydopamine to be deposited and therefore
did not reduce the membrane pore size much. On the other hand, the highly charged linear
PDADMAC appeared to react strongly with the polydopamine, coating the membrane well, given
the low water permeability.
Comparison of Enzyme Immobilization Strategies
35
==PAGE:44==
3.1.1
Membrane Characterization
Water Contact Angle
Figure 3.10: Intial water contact angle of pristine GR51PP polysulfone
ultrafiltration membrane and samples modified with polydopamine and
various polyelectrolytes.
The water contact angle
measurements in Figure 3.10
showed that pristine mem-
branes were only slightly hy-
drophilic (initial water con-
tact angle of 81.1◦±4.8◦).
The addition of the PDA/PE
modification increased the
hydrophilicity of the selec-
tive surface the most for
PDADMAC (58.0◦±1.6◦), fol-
lowed by 1.3 kDa PEI (68.7◦±2.4◦) and then 25 kDa PEI (79.0◦±1.0◦). 750 kDa PEI was not
tested but based in its similar performance to 1.3 kDa PEI, it would likely have a similar initial
water contact angle. The very low water contact angle for the PDADMAC modification seems
counterintuitive given its very low water permeability, but it may be explained by increased capillary
action through the decrease in membrane pore size, which then can only wick the water into the
surface at their phenomenologically limited rate.
Zeta Potential and Isoelectric Point
Figure 3.11: Isoelectric points of pristine GR51PP polysulfone ultrafiltra-
tion membrane and samples modified with polydopamine and various
polyelectrolytes.
Zeta potentials from pH 4 to
pH 10 of the pristine mem-
brane
and
modified
mem-
branes are shown in Figure
3.12 and the isoelectric points
in Figure 3.11. The zeta po-
tential of pristine membrane re-
mained between –18 mV and
–25 mV from pH 4 to pH 10.
Modification with any of the
cationic polyelectrolytes led to
a positive zeta potential from pH 4 to pH 8 or pH 9, at which point the sign would flip and the zeta
potential was negative to pH 10. This shifted the isolectric point of the membrane from a pH < 4
to pH 7.78 for the 1.3 kDa PEI modification, pH 9.17 for 25 kDa PEI, pH 9.34 for 750 kDa PEI, and
pH 8.15 for 275 kDa PDADMAC. As previously mentioned, yeast ADH I has an isolectric point
of 5.4 to 5.8. At pH 6.5, where most of the assays were ran, the pristine membrane has a zeta
36
Comparison of Enzyme Immobilization Strategies
==PAGE:45==
potential of -22 mV, 1.3 kDa PEI has one of 4.4 mV, for 25 kDA PEI it is 16.4 mV, for 750 kDa PEI
it is 6.6 mV, and it is 12.6 mV for 275 kDa PDADMAC.
At the immobilization pH of 7.5, the zeta potential for all modified membranes is positive as well,
as stated in Table 3.1. The 25 kDa PEI modification has the largest charge at 15.7±0.12 mV,
followed by 275 kDa PDADMAC at 7.8±1.0 mV, 750 kDa PEI at 5.8±0.57 mV, and 1.3 kDa PEI at
1.97±0.62 mV. Enzymes will adsorb into the membrane if they are electrically attracted to it, so
oppositely charged enzymes and membranes are desired. As ADH is negatively charged at pH
7.5, a positively charged membrane will shift the net charge in the positive direction. The Bradford
assay results in 3.13 show that the 25 kDa PEI membrane immobilized the most enzymes, followed
by 750 kDa PEI, 1.3 kDa PEI, and finally 275 kDA PDADMAC. Except for the PDADMAC, the amount
of enzyme immobilized correlated directly to the strength of the positive charge on the membrane.
These results show that control of the surface charge is very important in immobilization through
physical adsorption, and it can be tuned through the choice or concentration of the polylectrolyte.
Figure 3.12: Zeta potential of pristine GR51PP polysulfone ultrafiltration membrane and samples modified
with polydopamine and various polyelectrolytes.
Bradford Assays
Bradford assays of the immobilization solutions showed that on a typical 2.5 cm diameter mem-
brane sample, the 25 kDa PEI modification immobilized the most substrate ((5.2 ± 1.1) µg) fol-
lowed by 750 kDa PEI ((4.4 ± 3.6) µg), 1.3 kDa PEI ((2.9 ± 1.1) µg), and lastly 275 kDa PDADMAC
((0.0370 ± 0.0082) µg). The PDADMAC modification allowed almost no enzyme to adsorb. The
assay was inherently highly variable, which is why the error bars are quite large. The Bradford
Comparison of Enzyme Immobilization Strategies
37
==PAGE:46==
reagent is temperature sensitive and needs insulation while out of the fridge. Bubbles covering
the microplate well’s surface would form after adding reagent to the solutions of interest, which
had to be removed, adding variance to the assay duration. The reagent would change color over
time, and if the assay was longer or shorter than typical, the absorbance changed.
Figure 3.13: Amount of enzyme immobilized on each modified mem-
brane, as ascertained by the Bradford assay.
Regardless of the challenges
of the assay, these results do
line up with the other results.
As shown in Table 3.1, activity
and stability of ADH peaked
when using 25 kDa PEI, de-
creased similarly for the other
two PEI solutions, and went to
almost zero with PDADMAC.
These results, the Bradord as-
says, and the zeta potentials
all scale with each other, showing that while these assays are imprecise they are accurate.
3.2
CA and Metal-Organic Frameworks
CA, CA@ZIF-8, and ZIF-8 Activity and Stability
Metal-organic frameworks are a relatively uncharted area for the lab, so the synthesis CA@ZIF-8
took a few tries before the process worked and active CA@ZIF-8 was produced. After synthesis,
the enzyme was dried for 24 hours and then ground into a fine powder—as fine as was possible
to achieve. Then the powder was re-solubilized in water, or in later experiments, in 0.13 wt%
methylimidazole aqueous solution because the literature showed that that slowed the degradation
of ZIF-8 in water [80][81]. The process was also a testament to the robustness of ZIF-8. It
withstood excessive input of energy through grinding in a mortar and pestle, and significant
mechanical stress and shear forces when it was re-solubilized and vortexing and other vigorous
mixing methods were used. Free or otherwise immmobilize enzymes would not have survived
such stresses if they were not completely encapsulated in a robust structure like ZIF-8. The course
of the remaining experiments did not allow time for either storage or thermal stability tests, but
the CA@ZIF-8 preparations showed the strength of the immobilization in its own way.
As shown in Figure 3.14, both free CA and CA@ZIF-8 showed similar degrees of activity when
comparing their stock activities to that of their identical dilutions. At 0 ◦C, 2 µg mL–1 of CA had
26.1±9.6 WAU of activity, which was right on the edge of recordable in the continuous assay in
the cuvette, as it was so fast. ZIF-8 did not have any signficant activity, even though some activity
38
Comparison of Enzyme Immobilization Strategies
==PAGE:47==
was suggested by the literature [75]. The lack of signficant activity is more apparent in the reaction
plots in Figure 3.15, where runs all follow the uncatalyzed curve except for the stock concentration
ZIF-8 run, which actually slowed down after 30 seconds, likely due to mass transfer limitation and
the settling of the high concentration of ZIF-8 powder. This behaviour was repeatedly seen. One
other reason for the lack of activity is that the ZIF-8 was prepared about one week before this set
of experiments, and though stored as dried flakes, they were at room temperature and not in a
dessicator, so the humidity in the air likely degraded them and decreased their activity.
Owing to these potential issues, other experiments will need to be ran to compare free CA with
CA@ZIF-8 and show the benefits of the immobilization, but in the literature MOFs have been
boiled in water for over an hour and survived, so between its thermal and mechanical robustness,
ZIF-8 should provide significant protection that would be useful in a separating CO2 from flue gas
[75]. Additionally, the MOFs should be measured for pore size and specific surface area to better
understand the characteristics of enzyme@ZIF-8 produced and how different pore sizes affect the
uptake of CO2 in the MOF.
Figure 3.14: Activity of carbonic anhydrase, CA@ZIF-8, and ZIF-8 on 10 µL CO2 saturated water at 0 ◦C.
The activities are given in terms of the Wilbur-Anderson Unit, which is defined in Equation 2.1. Standard
deviations are shown.
Comparison of Enzyme Immobilization Strategies
39
==PAGE:48==
Figure 3.15: Reaction plots of carbonic anhydrase, CA@ZIF-8, and ZIF-8 on 10 µL CO2 saturated water
at 0 ◦C. As the reaction progresses, the phenol red changes color from red to yellow and the measured
absorbance drops, indicating a shift in pH due to the formation of bicarbonate. 95 % confidence intervals
are shown.
40
Comparison of Enzyme Immobilization Strategies
==PAGE:49==
4
Conclusion
Biology provides some very useful catalysts for addressing climate change. An enzyme such as
carbonic anhydrase can reduce the carbon concentration in the atmosphere, capture flue gas from
a power plant or industrial process, and produce bicarbonate to speed the formation of carbonates
for the long-term geological storage of CO2. Alcohol dehydrogenase can be repurposed to produce
methanol from formaldehyde, itself produced from CO2 feedstocks. Methanol has use both as
an alternate fuel and a precursor chemical in industry, and replacing its current production from
fossil fuels with one from CO2 would have an impact. However, both of these enzymes will not
survive long in industrial conditions. Specific isozymes can be found in nature that are more stable
stable, and genetic modification can improve stability as well, but neither technique addresses
mechanical and shear forces that an enzyme in these conditions is subject to, nor do they address
issues such as product filtration, and enzyme reuse and replacement. Immobilization of the
enzymes on a substrate or creation of a ex novo solid can improve many of these characteristics,
though it can have drawbacks as well, and in a commercial situation, combination of these three
techniques would yield the largest gains.
The focus of this thesis, the immobilization of alcohol dehydrogenase and carbonic anhydrase,
has shown the merits of this technique, as enzyme stability was improved, product filtration
was simplified, and simple immobilization techniques allow tunability. The immobilization of
ADH via physical adsorption on the modified membranes improved thermal and storage stability
significantly by protecting the enzyme through hydrophobic interactions with the aqueous medium.
The amount of ADH immobilized on the surface can adjusted by changing the polydopamine and
polyelectrolyte concentrations to increase the positive zeta potential of the surface at the deposition
pH 7.5. Likewise, the PDA and PE concentrations affect the membrane’s water permeability
by clogging pores, so these two properties need to be considered together. Interestingly, the
polyelectrolyte that increased the zeta potential the most also had the highest water permeability,
so there may not be a trade-off to be made here.
ADH@ZIF-8 has been previously demonstrated in the literature as part of a three enzyme cascade,
so its isolated performance was unknown. Assays shows a near complete lack of activity at pH 6
and above, while below that there was significant activity. This was explained by the spontaneous
dissolution of ZIF-8 in acidic solutions and the associated basic pH shift. Given these results, its
activity and stability is still unknown, and further experiments are needed to both characterize the
ADH@ZIF-8 produced and likely alter its synthesis conditions to allow its catalysis of formaldehyde.
Comparison of Enzyme Immobilization Strategies
41
==PAGE:50==
It is worth noting that ADH is over four times larger than carbonic anhydrase, which would imply
that there could be significant steric hindrance of ADH in the MOF.
Carbonic anhydrase and CA@ZIF-8 both showed signicant activity, though the amount of CA@ZIF-
8 used in the assays was larger than the amount of CA used, so its likely that the activity of CA
decreased when in ZIF-8. This can be investigated with further experiments. The robustness of
CA@ZIF-8 was shown by its preparation that required signficant grinding of the MOF and vortexing
to solubilize it. The old and likely degraded ZIF-8 did not show any activity as was suggested by
the literature, and further experiments would be useful in determining its activity.
42
Comparison of Enzyme Immobilization Strategies
==PAGE:51==
Bibliography
[1]
Li Liu et al. “Fermented beverage and food storage in 13,000 y-old stone mortars at Raqefet
Cave, Israel: Investigating Natufian ritual feasting”. In: Journal of Archaeological Science:
Reports 21 (Oct. 2018), pp. 783–793.
[2]
E F Armstrong. Enzymes: A Discovery and its Consequences. en. http://dx.doi.org/10.
1038/131535a0. Accessed: 2023-3-22.
[3]
Jung-Min Choi, Sang-Soo Han, and Hak-Sung Kim. “Industrial applications of enzyme
biocatalysis: Current status and future aspects”. en. In: Biotechnol. Adv. 33.7 (Nov. 2015),
pp. 1443–1454.
[4]
K Gomi. “ASPERGILLUS | Aspergillus oryzae”. In: Encyclopedia of Food Microbiology
(Second Edition). Ed. by Carl A Batt and Mary Lou Tortorello. Oxford: Academic Press, Jan.
2014, pp. 92–96.
[5]
Soy Sauce Market Size, Share and Trends Analysis Report. en. https://www.grandviewresearch.
com/industry-analysis/soy-sauce-market. Accessed: 2023-3-22.
[6]
Ida Schomburg et al. “BRENDA in 2013: integrated reactions, kinetic data, enzyme function
data, improved disease classification: new options and contents in BRENDA”. en. In: Nucleic
Acids Res. 41.Database issue (Jan. 2013), pp. D764–72.
[7]
Pierre Friedlingstein et al. “Global carbon budget 2022”. In: Earth System Science Data
Discussions 2022 (2022), pp. 1–159.
[8]
Hannah Ritchie, Max Roser, and Pablo Rosado. “CO₂ and greenhouse gas emissions”. In:
Our world in data (2020).
[9]
M Willeit et al. “Mid-Pleistocene transition in glacial cycles explained by declining CO2 and
regolith removal”. en. In: Sci Adv 5.4 (Apr. 2019), eaav7337.
[10]
US Department of Commerce, NOAA, and Global Monitoring Laboratory. “Global Monitoring
Laboratory - carbon cycle greenhouse gases”. en. In: (Oct. 2005).
[11]
Hans-Otto Pörtner. Climate Change 2022: Impacts, Adaptation and Vulnerability : Working
Group II Contribution to the Sixth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on
Climate Change. en. Cambridge University Press, 2022.
[12]
Berend Smit et al. Introduction To Carbon Capture And Sequestration. en. World Scientific,
Jan. 2014.
[13]
Clean energy tax provisions in the Inflation Reduction Act. en. https://www.whitehouse.
gov/cleanenergy/clean-energy-tax-provisions/. Accessed: 2023-5-24. Feb. 2023.
Comparison of Enzyme Immobilization Strategies
43
==PAGE:52==
[14]
May. Live carbon prices today. en. https://carboncredits.com/carbon-prices-today/.
Accessed: 2023-5-24. Aug. 2021.
[15]
Yacheng Liu et al. “Studies of CO2 absorption/regeneration performances of novel aqueous
monothanlamine (MEA)-based solutions”. In: J. Clean. Prod. 112 (Jan. 2016), pp. 4012–
4021.
[16]
Slyvester Yew Wang Chai, Lock Hei Ngu, and Bing Shen How. “Review of carbon capture
absorbents for CO 2 utilization”. en. In: Greenh. Gases Sci. Technol. 12.3 (June 2022),
pp. 394–427.
[17]
Joel K J Yong et al. “In situ layer-by-layer assembled carbonic anhydrase-coated hollow
fiber membrane contactor for rapid CO2 absorption”. In: J. Memb. Sci. 514 (Sept. 2016),
pp. 556–565.
[18]
Raju R Yadav et al. “Carbonic anhydrase mediated carbon dioxide sequestration: promises,
challenges and future prospects”. en. In: J. Basic Microbiol. 54.6 (June 2014), pp. 472–481.
[19]
Sizhu Ren et al. “Immobilized carbonic anhydrase on mesoporous cruciate flower-like metal
organic framework for promoting CO2 sequestration”. en. In: Int. J. Biol. Macromol. 117
(Oct. 2018), pp. 189–198.
[20]
Mine Du et al. “One-pot synthesis of efficient carbonic anhydrase-zeolitic imidazolate
framework-8 composite for enhancing CO2 absorption”. In: Journal of CO2 Utilization 40
(Sept. 2020), p. 101211.
[21]
Qin Ying et al. “Core-shell magnetic ZIF-8@ Fe3O4-carbonic anhydrase biocatalyst for
promoting CO2 absorption into MDEA solution”. In: Journal of CO2 Utilization 49 (2021),
p. 101565.
[22]
Mirfath Sultana Mesbahuddin, Aravindhan Ganesan, and Subha Kalyaanamoorthy. “Engi-
neering stable carbonic anhydrases for CO2 capture: a critical review”. en. In: Protein Eng.
Des. Sel. 34 (Feb. 2021).
[23]
A Saravanan et al. “A comprehensive review on different approaches for CO2 utilization
and conversion pathways”. In: Chem. Eng. Sci. 236 (June 2021), p. 116515.
[24]
Mark Peplow. “The race to upcycle CO2 into fuels, concrete and more”. en. In: Nature
603.7903 (Mar. 2022), pp. 780–783.
[25]
Matthias Blug et al. “Methanol Generation Economics”. In: Methanol: The Basic Chemical
and Energy Feedstock of the Future: Asinger’s Vision Today. Ed. by Martin Bertau et al.
Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2014, pp. 603–618.
[26]
F Dalena et al. Chapter 1—Methanol Production and Applications: An Overview. Methanol;
Basile, A.; Dalena, F. 2018.
[27]
Nicolas Meunier et al. “Alternative production of methanol from industrial CO2”. In: Renew-
able Energy 146 (Feb. 2020), pp. 1192–1203.
44
Comparison of Enzyme Immobilization Strategies
==PAGE:53==
[28]
Ibram Ganesh. “Conversion of carbon dioxide into methanol – a potential liquid fuel: Funda-
mental challenges and opportunities (a review)”. en. In: Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev.
31 (Mar. 2014), pp. 221–257.
[29]
Robyn Obert and Bakul C Dave. “Enzymatic conversion of carbon dioxide to methanol:
Enhanced methanol production in silica Sol−Gel matrices”. en. In: J. Am. Chem. Soc. 121.51
(Dec. 1999), pp. 12192–12193.
[30]
Caterina G C Marques Netto, Leandro H Andrade, and Henrique E Toma. “Carbon diox-
ide/methanol conversion cycle based on cascade enzymatic reactions supported on su-
perparamagnetic nanoparticles”. en. In: An. Acad. Bras. Cienc. 90.1 (Oct. 2017), pp. 593–
606.
[31]
Dailian Zhu et al. “Ordered Coimmobilization of a Multienzyme Cascade System with a
Metal Organic Framework in a Membrane: Reduction of CO2 to Methanol”. en. In: ACS
Appl. Mater. Interfaces 11.37 (Sept. 2019), pp. 33581–33588.
[32]
Jianquan Luo et al. “Cascade catalysis in membranes with enzyme immobilization for
multi-enzymatic conversion of CO2 to methanol”. en. In: N. Biotechnol. 32.3 (May 2015),
pp. 319–327.
[33]
Alcohol Dehydrogenase. en. https://www.sigmaaldrich.com/DK/en/product/sigma/
a3263. Accessed: 2023-6-26.
[34]
Carbonic Anhydrase. en. https://www.sigmaaldrich.com/DK/en/product/sigma/
c3934. Accessed: 2023-6-26.
[35]
Y J Yao et al. “Determination of isoelectric points of acidic and basic proteins by capillary
electrophoresis”. In: J. Chromatogr. A 680.2 (Oct. 1994), pp. 431–435.
[36]
Vladimir Leskovac, Svetlana Trivić, and Draginja Pericin. “The three zinc-containing alcohol
dehydrogenases from baker’s yeast, Saccharomyces cerevisiae”. en. In: FEMS Yeast Res.
2.4 (Dec. 2002), pp. 481–494.
[37]
“The Genetics of Alcohol Metabolism”. In: 13.1 (), pp. 5–7.
[38]
Brewer’s yeast market size, share & trends analysis report by product (dry, fresh, instant dry,
liquid), by form (powder, tablet), by application (food, feed), by region, and segment forecasts,
2023 - 2030. en. https://www.grandviewresearch.com/industry-analysis/brewers-
yeast-market. Accessed: 2023-6-25.
[39]
Lucie A Hazelwood et al. “The Ehrlich pathway for fusel alcohol production: a century of
research on Saccharomyces cerevisiae metabolism”. en. In: Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 74.8
(Apr. 2008), pp. 2259–2266.
[40]
J L Bennetzen and B D Hall. “The primary structure of the Saccharomyces cerevisiae gene
for alcohol dehydrogenase”. en. In: J. Biol. Chem. 257.6 (Mar. 1982), pp. 3018–3025.
Comparison of Enzyme Immobilization Strategies
45
==PAGE:54==
[41]
D W Russell et al. “Nucleotide sequence of the yeast alcohol dehydrogenase II gene”. en.
In: J. Biol. Chem. 258.4 (Feb. 1983), pp. 2674–2682.
[42]
E T Young and D Pilgrim. “Isolation and DNA sequence of ADH3, a nuclear gene encoding
the mitochondrial isozyme of alcohol dehydrogenase in Saccharomyces cerevisiae”. en. In:
Mol. Cell. Biol. 5.11 (Nov. 1985), pp. 3024–3034.
[43]
C Drewke and M Ciriacy. “Overexpression, purification and properties of alcohol dehydro-
genase IV from Saccharomyces cerevisiae”. en. In: Biochim. Biophys. Acta 950.1 (May
1988), pp. 54–60.
[44]
Michael G Smith, Shelley G Des Etages, and Michael Snyder. “Microbial synergy via an
ethanol-triggered pathway”. en. In: Mol. Cell. Biol. 24.9 (May 2004), pp. 3874–3884.
[45]
C Drewke, J Thielen, and M Ciriacy. “Ethanol formation in adh0 mutants reveals the existence
of a novel acetaldehyde-reducing activity in Saccharomyces cerevisiae”. en. In: J. Bacteriol.
172.7 (July 1990), pp. 3909–3917.
[46]
E Magonet et al. “Importance of the structural zinc atom for the stability of yeast alcohol
dehydrogenase”. en. In: Biochem. J 287 ( Pt 2).Pt 2 (Oct. 1992), pp. 361–365.
[47]
A J Ganzhorn et al. “Kinetic characterization of yeast alcohol dehydrogenases. Amino acid
residue 294 and substrate specificity”. en. In: J. Biol. Chem. 262.8 (Mar. 1987), pp. 3754–
3761.
[48]
J C Mani, R Pietruszko, and H Theorell. “Methanol activity of alcohol dehydrogenases from
human liver, horse liver, and yeast”. en. In: Arch. Biochem. Biophys. 140.1 (Sept. 1970),
pp. 52–59.
[49]
F M Dickinson and G P Monger. “A study of the kinetics and mechanism of yeast alcohol
dehydrogenase with a variety of substrates”. en. In: Biochem. J 131.2 (Feb. 1973), pp. 261–
270.
[50]
A J Ganzhorn et al. “Kinetic characterization of yeast alcohol dehydrogenases. Amino acid
residue 294 and substrate specificity”. en. In: J. Biol. Chem. 262.8 (Mar. 1987), pp. 3754–
3761.
[51]
Jianquan Luo et al. “Fouling-induced enzyme immobilization for membrane reactors”. en.
In: Bioresour. Technol. 147 (Nov. 2013), pp. 260–268.
[52]
B He, J H Bai, and H M Zhou. “Comparison of inactivation and unfolding of yeast alcohol
dehydrogenase during thermal denaturation”. en. In: Int. J. Biochem. Cell Biol. 29.7 (July
1997), pp. 1021–1028.
[53]
Saber Ghannadi et al. “Immobilization of alcohol dehydrogenase on Titania nanoparticles to
enhance enzyme stability and remove substrate inhibition in the reaction of formaldehyde
to methanol”. en. In: Ind. Eng. Chem. Res. 58.23 (June 2019), pp. 9844–9854.
46
Comparison of Enzyme Immobilization Strategies
==PAGE:55==
[54]
Claudiu T Supuran. “Structure and function of carbonic anhydrases”. en. In: Biochem. J
473.14 (July 2016), pp. 2023–2032.
[55]
Alessio Nocentini and Claudiu T Supuran. “Chapter 1 - Carbonic anhydrases: an overview”.
In: Carbonic Anhydrases. Ed. by Claudiu T Supuran and Alessio Nocentini. Academic Press,
Jan. 2019, pp. 3–16.
[56]
Daumantas Matulis. Carbonic Anhydrase as Drug Target: Thermodynamics and Structure
of Inhibitor Binding. en. Springer, May 2019.
[57]
Laura L Kiefer, Steven A Paterno, and Carol A Fierke. “Hydrogen bond network in the metal
binding site of carbonic anhydrase enhances zinc affinity and catalytic efficiency”. In: J. Am.
Chem. Soc. 117.26 (July 1995), pp. 6831–6837.
[58]
C B Elias and J B Joshi. “Role of hydrodynamic shear on activity and structure of proteins”.
en. In: Adv. Biochem. Eng. Biotechnol. 59 (1998), pp. 47–71.
[59]
Franziska Steger et al. “Comparison of Carbonic Anhydrases for CO2 Sequestration”. en.
In: Int. J. Mol. Sci. 23.2 (Jan. 2022).
[60]
Sachin Talekar et al. “Carbonic anhydrase for CO2 capture, conversion and utilization”. en.
In: Curr. Opin. Biotechnol. 74 (Jan. 2022), pp. 230–240.
[61]
Ricardo Parra-Cruz et al. “Engineering of Thermovibrio ammonificans carbonic anhydrase
mutants with increased thermostability”. In: Journal of CO2 Utilization 37 (Apr. 2020), pp. 1–
8.
[62]
Han Sol Kim et al. “Precipitation-Based Nanoscale Enzyme Reactor with Improved Loading,
Stability, and Mass Transfer for Enzymatic CO2 Conversion and Utilization”. In: ACS Catal.
8.7 (July 2018), pp. 6526–6536.
[63]
J V Moroney, S G Bartlett, and G Samuelsson. “Carbonic anhydrases in plants and algae”.
en. In: Plant Cell Environ. 24.2 (Feb. 2001), pp. 141–153.
[64]
Sven Lindskog. “Structure and Mechanism of Carbonic Anhydrase”. In: Silverman 1991
(1991), p. 1995.
[65]
Juan M Bolivar, John M Woodley, and Roberto Fernandez-Lafuente. “Is enzyme immobi-
lization a mature discipline? Some critical considerations to capitalize on the benefits of
immobilization”. en. In: Chem. Soc. Rev. 51.15 (Aug. 2022), pp. 6251–6290.
[66]
L Cao. “2.34 - Immobilized Enzymes”. In: Comprehensive Biotechnology (Second Edition).
Ed. by Murray Moo-Young. Burlington: Academic Press, Jan. 2011, pp. 461–476.
[67]
Song-Wei Xu et al. “Preparation and catalytic properties of novel Alginate−Silica−Dehy-
drogenase hybrid biocomposite beads”. en. In: Ind. Eng. Chem. Res. 45.2 (Jan. 2006),
pp. 511–517.
[68]
Weibin Liang et al. “Metal–Organic Framework-Based Enzyme Biocomposites”. In: Chem.
Rev. 121.3 (Feb. 2021), pp. 1077–1129.
Comparison of Enzyme Immobilization Strategies
47
==PAGE:56==
[69]
Jianquan Luo et al. “Biocatalytic membrane: Go far beyond enzyme immobilization”. en. In:
Eng. Life Sci. 20.11 (Nov. 2020), pp. 441–450.
[70]
BioRender. Created with BioRender. com. 2021.
[71]
N S Punekar. ENZYMES: Catalysis, Kinetics and Mechanisms. Springer Nature Singapore.
[72]
Sumitra Datta, L Rene Christena, and Yamuna Rani Sriramulu Rajaram. “Enzyme immo-
bilization: an overview on techniques and support materials”. en. In: 3 Biotech 3.1 (Feb.
2013), pp. 1–9.
[73]
Meryam Sardar and Kainat Mirza. “Chapter 12 - Affinity immobilization and affinity layers”.
In: Biocatalyst Immobilization. Ed. by María Luján Ferreira. Academic Press, Jan. 2023,
pp. 269–290.
[74]
Fanzhi Kong and Yim Fun Hu. “Biomolecule immobilization techniques for bioactive paper
fabrication”. en. In: Anal. Bioanal. Chem. 403.1 (Apr. 2012), pp. 7–13.
[75]
Xizhen Lian et al. “Enzyme–MOF (metal–organic framework) composites”. en. In: Chem.
Soc. Rev. 46.11 (June 2017), pp. 3386–3401.
[76]
Kyo Sung Park et al. “Exceptional chemical and thermal stability of zeolitic imidazolate
frameworks”. en. In: Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 103.27 (July 2006), pp. 10186–10191.
[77]
Chun-Yi Sun et al. “Zeolitic Imidazolate framework-8 as efficient pH-sensitive drug delivery
vehicle”. en. In: Dalton Trans. 41.23 (June 2012), pp. 6906–6909.
[78]
Xiao-Chun Huang et al. “Ligand-directed strategy for zeolite-type metal-organic frameworks:
zinc(II) imidazolates with unusual zeolitic topologies”. en. In: Angew. Chem. Int. Ed Engl.
45.10 (Feb. 2006), pp. 1557–1559.
[79]
Marta García-Palacín et al. “Sized-Controlled ZIF-8 Nanoparticle Synthesis from Recycled
Mother Liquors: Environmental Impact Assessment”. en. In: ACS Sustain Chem Eng 8.7
(Feb. 2020), pp. 2973–2980.
[80]
Huifeng Zhang, Man Zhao, and Y S Lin. “Stability of ZIF-8 in water under ambient conditions”.
In: Microporous Mesoporous Mater. 279 (May 2019), pp. 201–210.
[81]
Huifeng Zhang et al. “Stability of ZIF-8 membranes and crystalline powders in water at
room temperature”. In: J. Memb. Sci. 485 (July 2015), pp. 103–111.
[82]
Hao-Cheng Yang et al. “Surface engineering of polymer membranes via mussel-inspired
chemistry”. In: J. Memb. Sci. 483 (June 2015), pp. 42–59.
[83]
Hao-Cheng Yang et al. “Mussel-inspired modification of a polymer membrane for ultra-high
water permeability and oil-in-water emulsion separation”. en. In: J. Mater. Chem. A Mater.
Energy Sustain. 2.26 (June 2014), pp. 10225–10230.
[84]
Yan Lv et al. “Co-deposition Kinetics of Polydopamine/Polyethyleneimine Coatings: Effects
of Solution Composition and Substrate Surface”. en. In: Langmuir 34.44 (Nov. 2018),
pp. 13123–13131.
48
Comparison of Enzyme Immobilization Strategies
==PAGE:57==
[85]
G Hunt et al. “Eumelanin and phaeomelanin contents of human epidermis and cultured
melanocytes”. en. In: Pigment Cell Res. 8.4 (Aug. 1995), pp. 202–208.
[86]
Vincent Ball et al. “Deposition mechanism and properties of thin polydopamine films for
high added value applications in surface science at the nanoscale”. en. In: Bionanoscience
2.1 (Mar. 2012), pp. 16–34.
[87]
Rebecca A Zangmeister, Todd A Morris, and Michael J Tarlov. “Characterization of poly-
dopamine thin films deposited at short times by autoxidation of dopamine”. en. In: Langmuir
29.27 (July 2013), pp. 8619–8628.
[88]
Hidekazu Okuda et al. “Degree of polymerization of 5,6-dihydroxyindole-derived eumelanin
from chemical degradation study”. en. In: Pigment Cell Melanoma Res. 27.4 (July 2014),
pp. 664–667.
[89]
Falk Bernsmann et al. “Dopamine-melanin film deposition depends on the used oxidant
and buffer solution”. en. In: Langmuir 27.6 (Mar. 2011), pp. 2819–2825.
[90]
Huiru Zhang et al. “Biocatalytic Membrane Based on Polydopamine Coating: A Platform for
Studying Immobilization Mechanisms”. en. In: Langmuir 34.8 (Feb. 2018), pp. 2585–2594.
[91]
Sadika Guedidi et al. “Effect of enzyme location on activity and stability of trypsin and urease
immobilized on porous membranes by using layer-by-layer self-assembly of polyelectrolyte”.
In: J. Memb. Sci. 365.1 (Dec. 2010), pp. 59–67.
[92]
G Decher, J D Hong, and J Schmitt. “Buildup of ultrathin multilayer films by a self-assembly
process: III. Consecutively alternating adsorption of anionic and cationic polyelectrolytes
on charged surfaces”. In: Thin Solid Films 210-211 (Apr. 1992), pp. 831–835.
[93]
Andrei Popkov et al. “Engineering polyelectrolyte multilayer coatings as a strategy to
optimize enzyme immobilization on a membrane support”. In: Biochem. Eng. J. 193 (Apr.
2023), p. 108838.
[94]
Birgitte Zeuner et al. “Immobilization of alcohol dehydrogenase on ceramic silicon carbide
membranes for enzymatic CH3 OH production”. en. In: J. Chem. Technol. Biotechnol. 93.10
(Oct. 2018), pp. 2952–2961.
[95]
Shihan Zhang, Yongqi Lu, and Xinhuai Ye. “Catalytic behavior of carbonic anhydrase
enzyme immobilized onto nonporous silica nanoparticles for enhancing CO2 absorption
into a carbonate solution”. In: Int. J. Greenhouse Gas Control 13 (Mar. 2013), pp. 17–25.
[96]
Joo Hyun Kim and Byung Hoon Jo. “A Colorimetric CO2 Hydration Assay for Facile, Accurate,
and Precise Determination of Carbonic Anhydrase Activity”. en. In: Catalysts 12.11 (Nov.
2022), p. 1391.
[97]
J Van Eys, M M Ciotti, and N O Kaplan. “Yeast alcohol dehydrogenase. II. Properties of the
catalytically active site”. en. In: Biochim. Biophys. Acta 23.3 (Mar. 1957), pp. 581–587.
Comparison of Enzyme Immobilization Strategies
49
==PAGE:58==
[98]
E Racker. “[79] Alcohol dehydrogenase from baker’s yeast: RCH2OH + DPN+   RCHO +
DPNH + H+”. In: Methods in Enzymology. Vol. 1. Academic Press, Jan. 1955, pp. 500–503.
[99]
Selin Kara et al. “Bioreductions catalyzed by an alcohol dehydrogenase in non-aqueous
media”. en. In: ChemCatChem 6.4 (Apr. 2014), pp. 973–976.
50
Comparison of Enzyme Immobilization Strategies
