==PAGE:1==
Spatial Transcriptomics Profiling of Semaglutide and Enalapril
Treatment in the Nephrotoxic Serum Nephritis CD1 Mouse Model
Master’s Thesis
DTU Bioengineering
Department of Biotechnology and Biomedicine
==PAGE:2==
Spatial Transcriptomics Profiling of Semaglutide and Enalapril Treatment in the
Nephrotoxic Serum Nephritis CD1 Mouse Model
Master’s Thesis
July 1st, 2023
By
Regitze Dalsgaard Zdravkovic, s211019
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the customary
bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Biotechnology and Biomedicine, Søltofts Plads, Building
221, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.bioengineering.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over the past five months at Novo Nordisk A/S in the Pathology
and Imaging department in collaboration with the Department of BioEngineering and the
Department of Health Technology at the Technical University of Denmark (DTU). The thesis
serves to fulfill the last part of the degree, Master of Science in Engineering (Biotechnology).
Spatial Transcriptomics Profiling of Semaglutide and Enalapril Treatment in the Nephrotoxic Serum Nephritis
CD1 Mouse Model
ii
==PAGE:4==
Acknowledgements
Peter Helding Kvist
Director, Safety Pharmacology & Early Toxicology, Novo Nordisk A/S
I want to thank Peter for making the project opportunity available and for guiding me during
my project.
Henning Hvid
Principal Scientist, Pathology and Imaging, Novo Nordisk A/S
I want to thank Henning for his scientific help and expertise. Henning was central in teaching
me many of the data analytics methods and tools used in this thesis.
Charles Pyke
Scientific Director, Pathology and Imaging, Novo Nordisk A/S
I want to thank Charles for his scientific input in relation to the mouse model used and the
biological context of the project.
Heidi Solvang Nielsen
Principal Laboratory Technician, Histological Sciences, Novo Nordisk A/S
I want to thank Heidi for assisting me with setting up and carrying out my experiments.
Peter Heegaard
Professor, Department of Health Technology, Technical University of Denmark
I want to thank Peter for his valuable guidance during my MSc project.
Spatial Transcriptomics Profiling of Semaglutide and Enalapril Treatment in the Nephrotoxic Serum Nephritis
CD1 Mouse Model
iii
==PAGE:5==
Abbreviations
A1c
Hemoglobin A1C
ACE
Angiotensin-Converting Enzyme
ACR
Albumin Creatinine Ratio
ADA
American Diabetes Association
AI
Artificial Intelligence
ANOVA
Analysis of Variance
ARB
Angiotensin Receptor Blockers
cDNA
Complementary DNA
CKD
Chronic Kidney Disease
CVD
Cardiovascular Disease
DNA
Deoxyribonucleic Acid
ECM
Extracellular Matrix
eGFR
Estimated Glomerular Filtration Rate
ESRD
End-Stage Renal Disease
FDA
The U.S. Food and Drug Administration
FFPE
Formalin-Fixed Paraffin-Embedded
FiH
First-in-Human
GBM
Glomerular Basement Membrane
GFR
Glomerular Filtration Rate
GLP-1
Glucagon-Like Peptide-1
GLP-1 RA
Glucagon-Like Peptide-1 Receptor-Agonist
GN
Glomerulonephritis
GTEx
Genotype-Tissue Expression
GWAS
Genome-Wide Association Studies
IDF
International Diabetes Federation
IHC
Immunohistochemistry
ISH
In Situ Hybridization
KDIGO
Kidney Disease Improving Global Outcomes
ME
Mesangial Expansion
MoA
Mechanism of Action
mRNA
Messenger Ribonucleic Acid
Spatial Transcriptomics Profiling of Semaglutide and Enalapril Treatment in the Nephrotoxic Serum Nephritis
CD1 Mouse Model
iv
==PAGE:6==
NGAL
Neutrophil Gelatinase-Associated Lipocalin
nt
Nucleotide
NTN
Nephrotoxic Serum Nephritis
NTS
Nephrotoxic Serum
PC
Principal Components
PCA
Principal Components Analysis
qPCR
Quantitative Polymerase Chain Reaction
RAAS
Renin-Angiontensin-Aldosterone System
RNA
Ribonucleic Acid
RNASeq
RNA Sequencing
ROI
Region of Interest
SEM
Standard Error of Mean
SGLT2
Sodium-Glucose Transport Protein 2
SoC
Standard of Care
ST
Spatial Transcriptomics
T1D
Type 1 Diabetes
T2D
Type 2 Diabetes
UACR
Urinary Albumin to Creatinine Ratio
UMAP
Uniform Manifold Approximation and Projection
Spatial Transcriptomics Profiling of Semaglutide and Enalapril Treatment in the Nephrotoxic Serum Nephritis
CD1 Mouse Model
v
==PAGE:7==
Abstract
It is estimated that in 2021, there were around 537 million adults living with diabetes, and
that this number could be as large as 630 million by 2030 [1]. The mortality associated with
diabetes and the complications of diabetes were estimated at around 6.7 million people in
2021 [1]. Thus, there is an unmet need for therapeutics that not only treat the hyperglycemia
related to diabetes, but also help to decrease the risk of comorbidities such as kidney disease.
One of the classes of drugs used to treat type 2 diabetes that has shown an ability to also
affect complications is GLP-1 receptor agonists (GLP-1 RA). One drug within this class is
Semaglutide that beyond its effect in lowering blood glucose levels has shown a reduction in
the risk of major adverse cardiovascular events. Additionally, there are some early clinical
data that suggest a favorable effect on kidney complications. [2, 3, 4]
The aim of the present thesis was to further investigate the underpinnings of the improvements
in renal function seen with semaglutide treatment. This was done using an established rodent
model of kidney disease (nephrotoxic serum nephritis mouse model), and by applying spatial
transcriptomics to elucidate the differential genetic transcription patterns in the preclinical
mouse kidney sections.
Spatial transcriptomics data from kidney tissue sections was analyzed using Partek Flow.
A group of spots covering the glomeruli was identified via graph-based clustering, and
characterized via the upregulated genes specific to those spots.
Pathway analysis data
showed that mainly metabolic pathways were upregulated and immune pathways were
downregulated in the Semaglutide-treated mice compared to Vehicle control.
Further analysis showed that renin, which is part of the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system
(RAAS), known to be of importance in kidney complications, was highly upregulated in the
Semaglutide-treated group in both the glomeruli and smooth muscle cells. The same trends
were seen for the ACE inhibitor, Enalapril (anti-hypertensive drug known to be associated
with favorable kidney effects), which was included as a positive control [5, 6]. The effect of
Enalapril on renin is likely secondary to its ACE blocking activity. It could be speculated that
at least a similar downstream pharmacological effect is seen with Semaglutide, explaining
the increase in renin observed in the Semaglutide-treated mice.
Therefore, the parallel
observations between Semaglutide and Enalapril are early supporting data that these effects
may be of clinical translational significance for semaglutide as well. Interestingly, the Vehicle
versus Healthy control showed the opposite pathway pattern indicating that the Semaglutide
and Enalapril treated mice were reverting to a more normal and healthy-like gene pattern state.
No significant differences were observed in the groupwise comparisons for renal fibrosis, a
histological marker for chronic kidney disease [7].
Nine genes were chosen for further interrogation to validate the ST data results using in situ
hybridization. Ren1 showed a strong upregulation in the Semaglutide and Enalapril-treated
groups in ST. However, only a statistically significant correlation between the ST and ISH
data was observed in the Enalapril group.
The present thesis lends support to the hypothesis that there may be a beneficial effect of
Spatial Transcriptomics Profiling of Semaglutide and Enalapril Treatment in the Nephrotoxic Serum Nephritis
CD1 Mouse Model
vi
==PAGE:8==
Semaglutide on the kidneys due to similarities in observations to the positive control drug,
Enalapril. One strength of the preclinical model is that it is not diabetic, which suggests that
the effects observed on the kidneys could be primary and not secondary to improvements
in glucose-related parameters. Obviously, the study conclusions would need to be further
elucidated, not only in further preclinical studies, but also in clinical trials in patients with
diabetes and kidney disease.
Spatial Transcriptomics Profiling of Semaglutide and Enalapril Treatment in the Nephrotoxic Serum Nephritis
CD1 Mouse Model
vii
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
vi
1
Introduction
2
2
Background
4
2.1
Diabetes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2
GLP-1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.3
Chronic Kidney Disease . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.4
Kidney Structure and Function
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.5
Animal Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.6
Transcriptomics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.7
Aim/Hypotheses
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3
Materials and Methods
14
3.1
Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.2
Animal Model and Experimental Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.3
Immunohistochemistry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.4
Spatial Transcriptomics Experimental Protocol
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.5
Spatial Transcriptomics Data Analysis Workflow
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.6
In Situ Hybridization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.7
Statistical Analyses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4
Results
26
4.1
14-Day NTN Model Shows No Signs of Renal Fibrosis . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4.2
Spatial Transcriptomics
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.3
Unbiased Clustering Leads to the Identification of a Glomeruli Cluster
. . . . .
28
4.4
Smooth Muscle Cell Spots . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
4.5
ISH
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
4.6
Conclusions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
5
Discussion
44
5.1
ST Technical Considerations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
5.2
Future Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
A Appendices
55
A.1 Supplemental Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
Spatial Transcriptomics Profiling of Semaglutide and Enalapril Treatment in the Nephrotoxic Serum Nephritis
CD1 Mouse Model
1
==PAGE:10==
1
Introduction
The health and socioeconomic impact of Diabetes mellitus is of significantly growing concern.
The International Diabetes Federation (IDF) published its most recent report in 2021, where
it is estimated that there are around 537 million adults living with diabetes globally, and that
this may increase to 643 million in 2030 [1]. The mortality associated with diabetes and its
complications was estimated at 6.7 million in 2021, and the associated health care costs
were just below 1 billion US dollars [1]. The majority of diabetes cases are type 2 diabetes
(around 90-95%) where there is a relative deficiency of insulin action [8]. This thesis will
focus on a specific therapeutic class, GLP-1 receptor agonists (GLP-1 RAs), and its effects
on the kidneys, which is one of the major organs associated with diabetic complications.
Given that GLP-1 RAs are only approved for type 2 diabetes, this type of diabetes will be the
focus of the thesis.
An important aspect of diabetes mellitus and type 2 diabetes is the complications that are
associated with long term elevated glucose levels. These secondary conditions affect a large
number of organs and systems such as the kidneys, eyes (retinopathy), nerves (neuropathy),
cardiovascular system and feet.
These complications are an important contributor to the
mortality of 6.7 million people in 2021 [1].
This report will focus on one complication of
diabetes, chronic kidney disease, which is caused by damage to the blood vessels in the
kidneys, specifically [9]. [8, 10]
As a consequence of the complications, the increase in incidence and prevalence of diabetes
outlined above have also impacted the incidence and prevalence of diabetes caused
CKD known as diabetic kidney disease (DKD) [11, 12, 13]. A study from 2017 found that
approximately 850 million people globally are affected by kidney disease [14]. Diabetes is
a major driver of kidney disease and DKD accounts for 50% of CKD and end-stage renal
disease (ESRD) [12]. DKD is estimated to affect 20-40% of diabetic patients [13].
Given the risk of complications, the aim of type 2 diabetes treatment (and treatment for other
types of diabetes as well), goes beyond safe and effective lowering of blood glucose levels.
There is a growing interest in therapeutic interventions that also reduce the risk of the patients
developing long term complications, including kidney disease.
While, lifestyle changes has been shown to impact type 2 diabetes, it is often insufficient in
controlling blood glucose levels to an extent where long term complications can be adequately
prevented [15, 16, 17]. Approved therapies for glycemic control include metformin, SGLT2
inhibitors, GLP-1 RAs, DPP-4 inhibitors, thiazolidinediones, sulfonylureas and insulin [18].
The choice of intervention often depends on underlying risk factors and patient acceptance
of the side effects of a treatment [18].
Out of the above, only two drug classes, SGLT2
inhibitors and GLP-1 RAs have shown early clinical data preventing the progression of
CKD/DKD [18, 19]. Sodium-Glucose Transport Protein 2 (SGLT2) inhibitors or flozins block
sodium-glucose transport in the kidneys and reabsorption of glucose [20, 21]. GLP-1 RAs
bind to the GLP-1 receptor and have a number of beneficial effects. GLP-1 RAs lower blood
glucose, and additionally have positive cardiorenal and metabolic effects [18, 22]. GLP-1
Spatial Transcriptomics Profiling of Semaglutide and Enalapril Treatment in the Nephrotoxic Serum Nephritis
CD1 Mouse Model
2
==PAGE:11==
RAs have specifically demonstrated the ability to slow progression of DKD [22].
Despite the positive effects in humans, the underlying mechanisms for the effects beyond
glycemic control of GLP-1 RAs in potentially reducing kidney complications is not well
understood.
The aim of this investigation was to further investigate the mechanistic effects of GLP-1, and
specifically semaglutide, on CKD. The investigation was carried out in an immune-induced
kidney disease model, the Nephrotoxic Serum Nephritis (NTN) mouse model. The model is
independent of diabetes and the associated metabolic damage, making it easier to ascribe
direct non-metabolic effects of semaglutide on the kidneys. [23, 24]
Semaglutide was chosen due to the clinical data beneficial effects on renal outcomes in
T2D patients. The effects in this thesis were investigated using spatial transcriptomics, as
differential mRNA levels is an unbiased approach towards investing possible downstream
efficacy markers.
The Semaglutide-treated group were compared to a healthy group
(non-NTN), a Vehicle group and an Enalapril-treated group. Enalapril is known to have a
beneficial effect on the kidneys in humans. [6, 25].
Spatial Transcriptomics Profiling of Semaglutide and Enalapril Treatment in the Nephrotoxic Serum Nephritis
CD1 Mouse Model
3
==PAGE:12==
2
Background
2.1
Diabetes
Diabetes mellitus is a chronic metabolic disease caused by a lack of insulin or a relative
inability of the body to use the insulin that is produced.
Insulin along with glucagon are
the main glucose-regulating hormones.
Insulin lowers glucose levels whereas glucagon
increases glucose levels. Insulin is produced by the beta cells in the pancreas and stimulates
the transport of glucose from the bloodstream into the cells in the body [1]. After glucose
is brought out of circulation and into cells, it is used as energy consumption or stored as
glycogen or triglycerides. In healthy people, blood glucose levels are intricately maintained
within a tight normal range. In diabetics, however glucose is insufficiently cleared, and this
leads to hyperglycemia or elevated blood glucose levels. [19]
High blood glucose levels is a condition known as hyperglycemia. Over time having elevated
blood glucose is associated with complications in a number of different tissues in the body
including cardiovascular disease (CVD), neuropathy, nephropathy, damage to the eyes and
lower limbs. Appropriate management of diabetes can delay the onset or in some cases
prevent patients from developing some or all of these comorbidities. [1, 9, 19, 26, 27]
There are several types of diabetes. The main forms are Type 1 Diabetes (T1D), Type 2
Diabetes (T2D), gestational diabetes (glucose impairment during pregnancy) and monogenic
diabetes. T1D is an autoimmune disease, where the immune system attacks the beta cells
in the pancreas that produce insulin, and thereby insufficient insulin is produced. T2D is a
multi-factorial disease with a genetic component and is often associated with obesity [8]. It
accounts for 90-95% of diabetic diagnoses worldwide [8]. In early stages of the disease,
T2D is caused by insulin resistance, which means that cells do not respond appropriately
to the release of insulin. The high blood glucose leads to a vicious cycle causing further
increase in insulin production, but still insufficient relative to normal glucose levels. With time
and disease progression, this can lead to a beta cell failure. Diabetes may also occur during
pregnancy (gestational diabetes) or can be due to mutations in a single gene (monogenic
diabetes). This contrasts with T1D and T2D where multiple genes and environmental factors
affect the pathogenesis. [1, 8, 19]
As semaglutide, the therapeutic agent being investigated in this thesis, is not approved for
type 1 diabetes (as it does not lower blood glucose without functioning beta cells), the focus
will be on describing type 2 diabetes in the remaining part of the thesis.
2.1.1
T2D Management and Standard of Care
The standard of care for diabetes is to control blood glucose levels. This aims at targeting
the multifactorial nature of the disease and involves lifestyle changes through nutrition
and exercise as well as medication.
If intervention is started early during the disease,
lifestyle changes can in some instances lead to reversal of the insulin sensitivity. However,
pharmacologic intervention is most often required in combination with lifestyle changes. [15,
16, 17, 19, 26, 28]
There are different approved drugs available for the treatment of T2D. These include
Spatial Transcriptomics Profiling of Semaglutide and Enalapril Treatment in the Nephrotoxic Serum Nephritis
CD1 Mouse Model
4
==PAGE:13==
metformin, DDP-4 inhibitors, SGLT2 inhibitors, and GLP-1 agonists (semaglutide class),
which will be described in more detail in Section 2.2. [19]
Metformin mainly works by increasing insulin sensitivity, decreases hepatic gluconeogenesis
and decreases glucose absorption in the intestines [29, 30]. Dipeptidyl Peptidase-4 (DPP-4)
inhibitors target the DPP-4 enzyme, which inhibits the degradation of incretin hormones [31].
Sodium-Glucose Transport Protein 2 (SGLT2) inhibitors are designed to inhibit the
sodium-glucose transport protein 2 in the nephrons of the kidneys. This leads to inhibition
of the reabsorption of glucose in the nephron during filtration, leading to glucose excretion
in the urine. SGLT2 inhibitors have also been shown to have favorable cardiovascular and
renal outcomes. [19, 20, 21]
Some patients may also need therapeutics that target the complications of elevated blood
glucose such as elevated blood pressure or hypertension. The preferred therapeutic drug
classes to treat this in diabetic patients are ”angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors,
angiotensin receptor blockers (ARBs), diuretics, beta blockers” and in some cases calcium
channel blockers. An example of an ACE inhibitor is Enalapril, which was therefore used
as a positive control in this study. Moreover, depending on lipid blood levels, some patients
may require therapeutic agents to help manage this.
The most common drug class for
cholesterol-lowering, or lipid lowering, is statins. [19]
2.2
GLP-1
Glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1) receptor agonists (GLP-1 RA) target the GLP-1 receptor,
which is a part of the incretin system.
This has become a more and more prominent
target for Type 2 Diabetes within recent years, also in part due to its cardiovascular and
weight reducing effects [2, 3, 4, 32]. The incretin system consists of hormones including
GLP-1 that are produced within the intestinal mucosa in response to consumption of food. [33]
GLP-1 has many effects within the body including effects on glucose metabolism, the
cardiac system, the brain, and inflammation. Some of the metabolic outcomes observed in
response to administration of GLP-1 include slower gastric emptying, increase in satiety and
improvements in (glucose-dependent) insulin sensitivity. Likely as a result of these effects
and others, GLP-1 causes a decrease in body weight. GLP-1 has also been shown to reduce
the risk of cardiovascular complications in Type 2 diabetics. On top of this GLP-1 has been
shown to have renal and neuro-protective properties. [34, 33]
Long acting GLP-1 analogs or GLP-1 receptor agonists (GLP-1 RAs), liraglutide and
semaglutide, were developed utilizing reversible, non-covalent albumin binding, thereby
prolonging their half-lives. The backbone is based upon the human GLP-1 peptide, which
has a linker and fatty acid chain attached. Liraglutide can be dosed once-daily, whereas
semaglutide is dosed once-weekly. [35, 36]
Today, there are seven FDA-approved GLP-1 RAs on the market outlined in Figure 2.1. These
are all approved for glycemic control in T2D patients. [37]
Spatial Transcriptomics Profiling of Semaglutide and Enalapril Treatment in the Nephrotoxic Serum Nephritis
CD1 Mouse Model
5
==PAGE:14==
Figure 2.1: FDA-Approved GLP-1 RA Analogs [2, 37, 38]
As this thesis is focused on the use of a specific semaglutide, the next section will focus on
the therapeutic effects of semaglutide observed in clinical studies.
2.2.1
Effects of Semaglutide in Patients with Type 2 Diabetes
A large number of clinical trials have been run using semaglutide and the effects observed
span from glycemic control to weight loss, and reduced cardiovascular complications. There
are also preclinical a favorable effect on the kidneys and clinical data indicating a slowing
of kidney decline [2, 3, 4, 32].
Moreover, clinical trials directly investigating the effect of
Semaglutide on CKD are underway [39].
Of relevance to this thesis, where a non-diabetic kidney preclinical model was used, then it
appears from clinical data that the effect of semaglutide on kidney complications is at least
partially independent of effects on glucose and body weight. Heerspink et. al found that
almost 60% of improvements in urine albumin-to-creatinine ratios (UACR) was independent
of the improvements in A1c and body weight [3].
As discussed in Section 2.2, semaglutide is currently approved for T2D and weight loss, but
this additional renal effect is of interest to further explore, which was the objective of this thesis.
2.3
Chronic Kidney Disease
Chronic Kidney Disease (CKD) or diabetic nephropathy is a common comorbidity in diabetic
patients. CKD impacts 20-40% of diabetic patients. The main underlying risk factors for CKD
include diabetes, hypertension, obesity and smoking. In Type 2 diabetics, CKD may present
with impaired renal function at diagnosis. If renal function is not managed or worsens, it can
progress into end-stage renal disease (ESRD). As with many other diseases, early diagnosis
and management of risk factors and disease can help to prevent or mitigate the progression
of CKD. [13, 28, 40]
Spatial Transcriptomics Profiling of Semaglutide and Enalapril Treatment in the Nephrotoxic Serum Nephritis
CD1 Mouse Model
6
==PAGE:15==
Early stage kidney disease includes stages 1 to 3, and late state kidney disease includes
stage 4 and 5.
CKD is diagnosed according the guidelines set forth by the National
Kidney Foundation (NKF) and the Kidney Disease: Improving Global Outcomes (KDIGO)
organization. Below, in Figure 2.2, the KDIGO CKD risk matrix is shown. The risk of CKD is
determined via a dual evaluation of glomerular filtration rate (GFR) and albuminuria. Lower
GFR indicates a lower ability for the kidneys to filter the blood, and thus a higher risk profile.
Albuminuria is a measurement of the amount of albumin in the urine. Albumin is a protein
found in the blood, but when the kidney arteries and glomeruli become damaged it leaks into
the urine, and hence a higher urinary albumin measurement means a higher risk profile. [40,
41]
Figure 2.2: KDIGO Chronic Kidney Disease Classification Scheme [40, 41]
The exact cause and underlying biology of diabetic nephropathy is not fully understood.
Current evidence suggests that the main driver of pathogenesis is hyperglycemia as
described above. Therefore, proper management of blood glucose is central in preventing
downstream kidney defects. [28, 40]
2.4
Kidney Structure and Function
The main functions of the kidneys is to filter the blood by removal of biochemical metabolic
by-products and maintaining proper fluid and electrolyte balance, while retaining plasma
proteins in circulation. The kidneys also participate in the production of hormones for blood
pressure regulation, red blood cell production and bone health [42, 43]. Regarding blood
pressure regulation, the kidneys are a part of the RAAS system described in Section 2.4.1 [43].
Anatomically, the human kidneys are surrounded by the renal capsule, which is composed of
connective tissue as seen in Figure 2.3. The functional tissue of the kidneys consists of the
medulla (centrally located), and cortex (towards the capsule). Arterial blood is filtered in the
functional unit of the kidneys (the nephron), and the blood leaves again through the renal vein
to enter circulation. The filtered product (urine) is passed through the renal pelvis, into the
bladder. [44]
Spatial Transcriptomics Profiling of Semaglutide and Enalapril Treatment in the Nephrotoxic Serum Nephritis
CD1 Mouse Model
7
==PAGE:16==
Figure 2.3: Kidney Location and Structure Overview [42]
The nephron, seen in Figure 2.4a, is the functional unit of the kidney. Humans have around
two million nephrons in each kidney [45]. The nephron consists of various segments including
the renal corpuscle, proximal convoluted tubules, the Loop of Henle, distal convoluted tubules
and the collecting duct. [44]
Within the nephron, there is a specialized compartment called the glomerulus seen in Figure
2.4b, that is located at the beginning of each nephron. This is where the filtration of the blood
takes place, whereas the up-concentration of the urine takes place in the tubules. [44]
(a) A. Nephron (BYJU)
(b) B. Juxtaglomerular Complex [46]
Figure 2.4: Kidney Compartments
Spatial Transcriptomics Profiling of Semaglutide and Enalapril Treatment in the Nephrotoxic Serum Nephritis
CD1 Mouse Model
8
==PAGE:17==
2.4.1
RAAS System
Renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system (RAAS) is an endocrine system that is involved in
regulating blood pressure. The system includes multiple organs and tissues including the
liver, kidneys, lungs, blood vessels and adrenal glands (Figure 2.5). [43]
RAAS regulates blood pressure through renin.
If blood pressure falls, renin is released.
Renin converts angiotensinogen (Agt) to to angiotensin I. Angiotensin I is then converted into
angiotensin II by angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE). Angiotensin II is the active molecule,
which causes vasoconstriction of the blood vessels leading to increased blood pressure. In
the adrenal glands it induces the release of aldosterone, which leads to retention of sodium,
which osmotically increases the water volume, elevating blood pressure. [43]
Enalapril, which is the drug used as a positive control in this thesis, is an ACE inhibitor, that
has shown to have favorable effects on the kidneys by blocking RAAS [5, 6].
Figure 2.5: Renin-Angiotensin Aldosterone System [47]
2.5
Animal Model
Animal models have an essential role in research and inform clinical trial hypotheses. When
appropriately validated and selected these may reflect human diseases and can be used to
test interventions prior to clinical testing. Various animal models have been developed for
CKD [23]. The animal model used in this thesis is the Nephrotoxic Serum Nephritis (NTN)
CD1 mouse model.
Within diabetes and CKD animals models, the Nephrotoxic Serum Nephritis (NTN) mouse
model has been shown to be a good proxy for CKD [24, 48].
2.5.1
CKD Animal Model: NTN Model
The nephrotoxic nephritis (NTN) murine model is a well-described and characterized model
for acute glomerulonephritis (GN). Two versions of the model exist, a non-accelerated model
and an accelerated model. The disease model is immune-mediated and induced via the use
of nephrotoxic serum (NTS).
The accelerated model is first immunized using IgG suspended in complete Freund’s
Spatial Transcriptomics Profiling of Semaglutide and Enalapril Treatment in the Nephrotoxic Serum Nephritis
CD1 Mouse Model
9
==PAGE:18==
adjuvant.
The mice are then injected with NTS, which is composed of anti-glomerular
basement membrane (anti-GBM) sheep or rabbit serum. These anti-GBM antibodies target
the glomerular basement membrane (GBM), causing inflammation and proteinuria, and
thereby impair glomerular function. [48, 24]
In the non-accelerated model used in this thesis, the mice are only treated using the NTS
serum [48].
The non-accelerated NTN model has been characterized and described in the literature.
Ougaard et el.
describe that the non-accelerated NTN murine model develops hallmark
features of CKD including albuminuria, decrease in glomerular filtration rate (GFR) and renal
fibrosis. The model develops features resembling human CKD 3 weeks post-NTS induction
[24].
Moreover, different stages of disease and disease characteristics are reached depending on
how long the disease is left to progress [48, 24]. Ougaard et. al showed that the NTN mice
develop classic kidney disease characteristics 21 days after induction, which is fast compared
to standard diabetic nephropathy models that usually require 15-18 weeks to develop mild
characteristics of CKD [24].
Ougaard et.
al specifically demonstrated that NTN mice had lower GFR, albuminuria,
mesangial expansion and fibrosis when compared to healthy mice [24]. These are all classic
hallmarks of CKD.
Beyond the kidney disease characteristics of the model, it is relevant to note that this model
possesses normal metabolic characteristics i.e., is not diabetic. The model is inflammatory,
but is not obese or diabetic, and therefore it makes it optimal for assessment of kidney effects
of Semaglutide independent of improvements in glycemic control and weight loss. [48, 24]
2.5.2
GLP-1 Analog, Semaglutide, Improves Kidney Function in NTN Mice
In the experiments leading up to this thesis, it was shown that NNC0113-0217 (Semaglutide)
improves kidney function and renal endpoints in the 14-Day NTN mouse model.
More
specifically, it was shown that semaglutide was able to significantly increase the GFR
and decrease the UACR. NTN is as stated an inflammation CKD model, and interestingly
semaglutide also significantly decreased renal inflammation as measured by CD45 staining
and mesangial expansion. Mesangial expansion is a key characteristic in the pathogensis
of diabetic nephropathy, and involves abnormally high mesangial cell expansion and
accumulation of proteins in the glomerulus [49].
Spatial Transcriptomics Profiling of Semaglutide and Enalapril Treatment in the Nephrotoxic Serum Nephritis
CD1 Mouse Model
10
==PAGE:19==
Figure 2.6: (A) Data are shown as mean ± SD. *p<0,05, NTN vehicle vs treatments by an unpaired
Kruskal-Wallis multiple comparisons test. (B) Representative images of mesangial scoring
of each group.
These mesangial expansion results are summarized in Figure 2.6, where a significant
reduction is seen with Semaglutide treatment compared to Vehicle.
As semaglutide has
shown efficacy in the mouse model previously, this study builds upon those by using
spatial transcriptomics to elucidate patterns in gene expression that could be causing the
improvements in renal outcomes.
2.6
Transcriptomics
2.6.1
Central Dogma of Molecular Biology
The central dogma of molecular biology describes the flow of information from DNA to RNA to
protein. DNA is transcribed into RNA via the process of transcription. RNA is translated into
protein via the process of translation. DNA can be thought of as the overarching instructions
or recipe for any protein in the body. [50, 51, 52]
2.6.2
RNA Transcriptomics
Transcriptomics is an analytical method that allows one to characterize the messenger RNA
(mRNA) of a given sample. Hence, elucidating what DNA is being transcribed and what
proteins may be produced. Transcriptomics has been around since the 1970s through various
technologies such as in situ hybridization [53]. Transcriptomics aims to quantify the mRNA
Spatial Transcriptomics Profiling of Semaglutide and Enalapril Treatment in the Nephrotoxic Serum Nephritis
CD1 Mouse Model
11
==PAGE:20==
expression of a sample. The transcriptome is the full set of RNA transcripts in a sample. By
characterizing which RNA transcripts are present, we can deduce which genes are being
transcribed, which may lead to protein production, and thus which proteins might be present
[50, 54]. A sample can in principle be from a cell, cluster of cells, tissue, organ or entire
organism. The transcriptome of a cell, tissue and organism are everchanging depending on
external stimuli and internal signaling. [51, 53]
RNA transcriptomics allows for characterization of gene expression. Thus, it can be used to
characterize how gene expression patterns vary between a healthy person and a person with a
certain disease, such as diabetes, which might help elucidate new disease pathways that can
help diagnose patients, be associated with complications, or finding novel ways of intervening
into a disease pathogenesis. Similar to in humans, it can be applied in pre-clinical models to
elucidate pathways by comparing gene expression patterns between animal models, such as
a healthy mouse versus a mouse with diabetic nephritis. Moreover, it can be used to compare
the animal model disease state to the human disease state to prove that the animal model is
representative of the human disease state in terms of gene expression. [55]
2.6.3
RNA Spatial Transcriptomics
The location of various cells within a tissue and organ is vital for the function of the cells
individually and in the system they are a part of. RNA spatial transcriptomics (RNA ST) is
a newer technology that allows for the analysis of the RNA transcripts and map where the
specific transcription activity is occurring in a tissue. ST allows scientists to analyze intact
tissue sections and get the transcriptomics data in the relevant morphological context. [53,
56, 57, 58]
In a similar manner to transcriptomics, RNA spatial transcriptomics can be used to
characterize disease. ST has the added benefit of knowing, down to 55 µm resolution, what
cells are expressing certain genes and where they are positioned in relation to other cells in
a tissue or organ. The current resolution captures 1 to 10 cells depending on cell size [59].
Hence, it can provide a more detailed account of the disease state. It can therefore elucidate
underlying molecular mechanisms, specific pathways and even cell types involved in the
disease. This method was named Method of the Year 2020 by Nature, and allows for spatial
resolution of transcriptomics data [60]. [53, 57, 58]
2.7
Aim/Hypotheses
GLP-1 has been shown to be renal-protective by direct effects on the kidneys as well as
through indirect effects such as glycemic control and weight loss [61].
Semaglutide has
been shown to reduce the urinary albumin-creatinine ratio (UACR) independent of blood
glucose and weight [3]. The direct effects of GLP-1 RAs include lowering of oxidative stress,
inflammation and glomerular hypertension, and an increase in natriuresis (NA+ excretion)
[3]. The indirect effects include, as previously mentioned, control of blood glucose, decrease
in systolic blood pressure, weight and dyslipidemia [3, 62, 63]. The more direct effects of
GLP-1 RAs on the kidneys are currently being explored in the clinic [62].
Although, improvements in basic and important kidney parameters have been observed,
there is a lack of understanding about the underlying gene signature changes that contribute
to these changes.
The aim of this investigation was to investigate the molecular mechanism behind the observed
Spatial Transcriptomics Profiling of Semaglutide and Enalapril Treatment in the Nephrotoxic Serum Nephritis
CD1 Mouse Model
12
==PAGE:21==
treatment effect of a GLP-1 RA (Semaglutide) on kidney parameters in a preclinical disease
model.
Semaglutide was chosen as the intervention agent as a model example of a GLP-1 RA.
We chose to look at the differential expression of mRNA in kidney tissue as this was
considered the most unbiased approach towards hypothesis generation on mechanism of
action (MoA) elucidation. Accordingly, the effect of semaglutide in the NTN mouse model
was studied through spatial transcriptomics characterization and in situ hybridization. These
methods enabled detection of changes in gene expression between healthy, disease and
treated groups.
To further understand the mechanistic effects, the semaglutide-treated
group was compared to healthy, vehicle (buffer) and angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE)
inhibitor-treated groups, which is a non-GLP-1 RA used for CKD treatment in patients [6, 25].
Spatial Transcriptomics Profiling of Semaglutide and Enalapril Treatment in the Nephrotoxic Serum Nephritis
CD1 Mouse Model
13
==PAGE:22==
3
Materials and Methods
3.1
Background
This thesis builds on an already completed preclinical study performed in NTN mice, as
described in Sections 3.2 and 3.4. These sections are only included to provide background
information on the context of this thesis. The work performed for this thesis is around the
specific bioinformatics data analysis done on material from this preclinical study to further
investigate the mechanistic effects of GLP-1, and specifically semaglutide, on CKD. This is
described in Section 3.5 and onwards.
3.2
Animal Model and Experimental Design
The nephrotoxic serum nephritis (NTN) mouse model of glomerulonephritis and chronic
kidney disease (CKD) was used, where nephrotoxic serum (NTS) was used to induce
kidney damage.
Kidney damage was induced in female CD1 mice at 8-10 weeks of
age.
100 µl NTS was injected in the tail vein on days 0 and 1.
Semaglutide treatment
(0.062 mg/kg) was administrated subcutaneously once daily starting 4 days prior to the
NTN induction. The treatment groups were compared to a vehicle group administrated with
buffer. Active compound or vehicle buffer was administrated once daily for a period of 18 days.
44 female CD1 mice were block randomized into four groups: semaglutide-treated (N=12),
angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor, enalapril (positive control), treated (N=10), vehicle
(N=12) and healthy control (N=10) based on body weight.
Figure 3.1: Experimental Design and Treatment Groups
After termination of the mice, the organs were removed and tissue was fixed using formalin
and preserved in paraffin blocks.
3.2.1
Previous Results in 14-Day NTN Model Treated with Semaglutide
The spatial transcriptomics analysis done in this thesis builds on in vivo data observed in
the model previously. These showed an increase in GFR on day 12, significantly reduced
albumin-creatinine ratio (ACR) and neutrophil gelatinase-associated lipocalin (NGAL) on
days 7-8, significant reduction in CD45 staining (inflammatory reduction) on day 14, and
lastly a significant reduction in mesangial expansion (renal lesions) when comparing the
Semaglutide-treated group with the Vehicle group.
Based on these results, we wanted to further understand the molecular mechanisms in kidney
tissues when comparing Semaglutide treatment to a Vehicle group. This is described from
Section 3.5 and onwards.
Spatial Transcriptomics Profiling of Semaglutide and Enalapril Treatment in the Nephrotoxic Serum Nephritis
CD1 Mouse Model
14
==PAGE:23==
3.3
Immunohistochemistry
Collagen III staining was performed on the mouse kidneys to quantify renal fibrosis in
the model.
Paraffin-embedded tissue was sectioned at 3µm.
The sections underwent
deparaffinization and hydration steps: xylen twice for 10 minutes, 99% alcohol twice for
5 minutes, 96% alcohol for 3 minutes, 70% alc for 3 minutes, and were then stored in tap water.
Rinses between reagents in the following protocol were done using TBS-Tw20 0.05%. The
slides were treated using a primary antibody (Go anti-hu Col III, Southern Bio) which binds
to the collagen III in the tissue. The slides were then treated with the secondary antibody
(Do-a-GoBiotin, Trichem). The slides were then incubated for 30 minutes using Vectastain
ABComplex. The slides were then treated with purple chrome, which binds to the ABComplex,
followed by nuclear staining with Hematoxylin.
3.3.1
Quantification of Fibrosis
In order to quantify the staining from the collagen III protocol, and thereby the fibrosis,
digital whole-slide images were generated on an Olympus VS200 slidescanner at 40X
magnification.
Analysis of the digital image was performed using Visiopharm Integrator
System (VIS) software (VIS; Visiopharm, Hoersholm, Denmark).
The first step was running a pre-developed automated app that detects and marks the tissue
as previously described [64]. Once the tissue was marked, groupings were created for the
sections based on which treatment group the animals belonged to.
In order to get a quantitative staining output from the sections, a threshold app for color
detection was defined.
The app was built to detect and quantify the areas with purple
staining.
The app was instructed to quantify total staining for the whole kidney section
and staining within the cortex region, as well as the area of these two regions.
Thus,
the positive stained tissue fraction, known as the areal fraction, could be calculated (areal
fraction) The areal fractions were calculated for the whole kidney section and the cortex region.
The areal fraction was calculated using the formula below.
Arealfractionpositivestaining = Areapositivestaining/Arearegion
3.4
Spatial Transcriptomics Experimental Protocol
The most current guidelines can be found on 10x Genomics’ support website. The guidelines
used were a Tissue Preparation Guide (CG000408), Deparaffinization + H&E Staining +
Decrosslinking (CG000409), and Library Construction (CG000407). The appropriate reagent
kits from 10x Genomics were used in accordance with the guidelines described.
3.4.1
Tissue Preparation
The first step of the protocol was to expose the FFPE tissue by cutting in a microtome.
After tissue exposure, RNA quality was assessed using the DV200 calculation method.
DV200 is the fraction or percentage of RNA fragments from a sample that are longer than 200
nucleotides. The length of RNA fragments in a sample serves as a good proxy for RNA quality.
A DV200 cut-off of 50% i.e. DV200>50 was applied. The next step was tissue sectioning. [65]
Spatial Transcriptomics Profiling of Semaglutide and Enalapril Treatment in the Nephrotoxic Serum Nephritis
CD1 Mouse Model
15
==PAGE:24==
A Visium Spatial Gene Expression Slide (PN-2000233) includes 4 capture areas.
These
capture areas are 6.5x6.5mm and have approximately 5,000 individual spots that capture
gene expression. The capture areas lie within a fiducial frame of 8x8mm that serve to mark
the capture areas. The fiducial frame was drawn up using permanent marker on the back
of the Visium slide for easier identification. Prior to sectioning, the paraffin tissue blocks are
placed in an ice bath for 10-30 minutes, which allows for proper hydration of the tissue. The
FFPE tissue was sectioned at 5µm thickness. The sections were lifted and transferred using
clean paint brushes. The paraffin around the embedded tissue in the section was trimmed
such that the section was smaller than 6.5x6.5mm. The tissue sections were then placed in
a Milli-Q water bath at 42◦C to allow for the tissue to expand and de-wrinkle or remove folds.
The tissue sections were then placed on the slides by submerging the slide under water and
aligning the section with the unique capture areas. The first section was placed at the top of
the slide, after which the slide was pulled out to check for bubbles. This procedure was then
repeated for the three remaining sections and capture areas. The slides were then placed in
a drying rack and incubated at 42◦C for three hours, followed by drying at room temperature
overnight. [65]
3.4.2
Deparaffinization, H&E Staining and Decrosslinking
After overnight drying, the next steps involved deparaffinization of the slides followed by
H&E staining and decrosslinking. First the slides, were placed in a thermal cycler at 60◦C
for 2 hours. While the slides were in the thermal cycler, the required buffers - xylene, 100%
ethanol, 96% ethanol, 85% ethanol, 70% ethanol and Milli-Q water - were prepared for
the deparaffinization protocol. After 2 hours, the slides were removed and placed at room
temperature to cool down. The following steps were carried out in a fume hood due to the
use of xylene. The slides were placed in xylene jar 1 for 10 minutes, followed by a transfer
to xylene jar 2 for another 10 minutes. The slides were then transferred to a 100% ethanol
jar for 3 minutes. This was repeated a total of 3 times in separate jars. The slides were then
transferred to a 96% ethanol for 3 minutes, and this was repeated twice. The slides were
then transferred to a 96 %ethanol jar for 3 minutes, followed by 3 minutes in a 70% ethanol
jar, and lastly a 20 second immersion in Milli-Q water. After completing these steps, the H&E
protocol was started immediately after without letting the slides dry. [66]
The slides were removed from the Milli-Q water and placed on a flat work surface. 1mL of
Hematoxylin was added to each slide ensuring uniform coverage of all tissue sections. The
Hematoxylin was left on to incubate for 3 minutes, and then discarded by draining the slides
at an angle. The slides were then placed in a beaker of water for 20 seconds, followed by a
second beaker of water for 10 seconds. The excess liquid was then removed from the back
of the slides using a wipe. The slides were then placed back on a clean, flat working surface,
and 1mL of bluing buffer was added in a similar manner. The bluing buffer was left on for 1
minute, and then discarded by draining the slide at an angle. The slides were then immersed
in a beaker of water 5 times, and left in for 20 seconds. The slide were then removed from
the water and excess liquid was wiped from the back of the slide. The slides were placed on
a flat, clean surface, and 150-200 µL of 85% glycerol was added uniformly using a wide-bore
pipette tip. Cover slips were the applied starting at one edge and slowly lowered onto the
slide to avoid bubble formation. [66]
After H&E staining and placement of coverslips, digital images of the tissue sections were
generated in an Olympus VS200 slide scanner. After imaging was complete, the coverslips
were removed right away by horizontal immersion, while keeping the slide upright, into an
Spatial Transcriptomics Profiling of Semaglutide and Enalapril Treatment in the Nephrotoxic Serum Nephritis
CD1 Mouse Model
16
==PAGE:25==
800mL beaker of water. The slides were submersed until the coverslip separated from the
slide, and then gently immersed 15 times to remove any excess glycerol. The slides were
then incubated in a thermocycler with the lid open at 37◦C for 3 minutes. The slides were
then stored at 4◦C overnight before proceeding with the decrosslinking protocol. [66]
For the decrosslinking protocol, TE Buffer (pH=9.0) and 0.1N HCl were prepared according
to guidelines. The slides were added to the Visium Cassette, which creates separate leak
proof wells for each tissue section. The reagents were always added along the side of the
wells, and removed from the corner of the wells. The thermal cycler was prepared to run the
appropriate program of 70◦C for 60 minutes, followed by a holding temperature of 22◦C. 100µ
L of 0.1N HCl was added to each well and incubated for 1 minute at room temperature. The
HCl was then removed from the corners of the wells, and this HCl wash was repeated 2 more
times, so 3 times in total. After removal of the HCl, 150µ L of TE Buffer was added, and the
Visium Slide Seal was applied onto the Visium Cassette. The cassettes were then placed in
the thermal cycler, the lid was closed and the decrosslinking step was initiated at 70◦C. Once
the 60 minutes had passed, the cassettes were removed, and placed on a flat, clean work
surface. [66]
3.4.3
Spatial Gene Expression Detection
As mentioned above, the Visium slides had 4 capture areas with approximately 5,000 gene
expression spots. Each of these spots has primers that included 4 components that enabled
the construction of a sequencing library: TruSeq Read 1, 16nt (nucleotide) Spatial Barcode,
12nt unique molecular identifier (UMI) and a 30nt poly(dT) sequence as seen in Figure 3.2.
The TruSeq Read 1 sequencing primer is what is bound to the slide as shown in Figure 3.5.
The 16nt Spatial Barcode is shared between all the primers in a specific spot, and is thus
unique to each of the 5,000 spots. The 12nt UMI is unique to the specific gene probe type.
The 30nt poly(dT) sequence is what enabled the capturing of the ligation product in the probe
release step. The next sections will describe the five steps to get the transcriptomics data,
namely (1) probe hybridization, (2) probe ligation, (3) probe release and expansion, (4) library
construction and (5) sequencing. [59]
Figure 3.2: Visium Spatial Gene Expression Slide and Primer Structure [59]
Probe Hybridization
The mouse transcriptome probe panel was used for the experiments. The probe panel had
a specific probe pairs for each of the 20,000 unique genes targeted. As seen in Figure 3.4,
the probe pairs hybridized adjacently to the complementary mRNA target strands in the tissue
Spatial Transcriptomics Profiling of Semaglutide and Enalapril Treatment in the Nephrotoxic Serum Nephritis
CD1 Mouse Model
17
==PAGE:26==
section. The right probe carries a polyA tail that enabled it to be captured on the slide as seen
in Figure 3.5. [59]
Figure 3.3: Visium Spatial Gene Expression Probe Hybridization [59]
Probe Ligation
Post-hybridization, a ligase was added. The ligase linked the probe pairs together to form one
long single-stranded product as seen in Figure 3.4. [59]
Figure 3.4: Visium Spatial Gene Expression Probe Ligation [59]
Probe Release and Expansion
After the probe ligation step, RNase was added to digest the target RNA strand. The tissue
was then permeabilized, which facilitated the release of the ligated probe pairs from the tissue
section. Once the ligated probes were released, they were captured via the poly(D) tail on
the primers attached to the Visium slide. After capture, the extension reaction added a spatial
barcode, a UMI and a partial Read 1 sequence to each of the ligated probe pairs as seen in
Figure 3.5. The extended probes were then released via denaturation of the top strand, and
eluded. [59]
Spatial Transcriptomics Profiling of Semaglutide and Enalapril Treatment in the Nephrotoxic Serum Nephritis
CD1 Mouse Model
18
==PAGE:27==
Figure 3.5: Visium Spatial Gene Expression Probe Release and Expansion [59]
Library Preparation and Construction
After the release of the ligated, extended, barcoded probes, the samples were eluded and
added to test tubes. Here the samples were indexed using sample index PCR. [59]
Figure 3.6: Visium Spatial Gene Expression Library Construction [59]
Sequencing
Sequencing was completed using an Illumina sequencer . [59]
Spatial Transcriptomics Profiling of Semaglutide and Enalapril Treatment in the Nephrotoxic Serum Nephritis
CD1 Mouse Model
19
==PAGE:28==
Figure 3.7: Visium Spatial Gene Expression Library Sequencing [59]
3.5
Spatial Transcriptomics Data Analysis Workflow
From the original NTN characterization study (N = 44, as described in Section 3.2), 16 animals
were selected for the spatial transcriptomics protocol, and therefore for the bioinformatics
analysis (healthy control (N = 3), vehicle-treated NTN (N = 4), enalapril-treated NTN (N =
4), and semaglutide-treated NTN mice (N = 5)). These 16 animals were chosen based on
glomerular filtration rate (GFR) measured in vivo and DV200 values in the fixed kidney tissue.
To increase the homogeneity of the samples, animals that had GFR rates closest to the
average for the respective treatment groups were selected.
The output data for the spatial transcriptomics protocol is a library of mRNA expression linked
to specific barcoded spots on the kidney tissue section, as well as a H&E stained image
on the specific tissue section. The barcoding of the reads from a specific spot means that
the transcriptomics data can be linked back to a specific location in the tissue section. The
transcriptomics data and tissue section images were uploaded to Partek Flow. Then, using
the online software the transcriptomics data was annotated onto the tissue slide. For each of
these spots, there is therefore a list of genes and corresponding mRNA expression values.
An overview of the 16 animals by treatment group and sample attributes can be found in
3.1. There were in total 19,454 features, which signifies unique mRNA sequences (or genes)
expressed. In addition, the number of spots for each of the samples as well as the median
number of genes detected in each spot is shown. Moreover, which Visium slide the tissue
section was placed on and the day the experimental protocol and sequencing was carried out
on is included.
Out of the data from the 16 animals, three animals were excluded (N = 2 Healthy, N = 1
Enalapril) giving a total sample size of 13 animals for further analysis. These three animals
had sections with substantial areas of limited genes expressed as seen in Figure 4.3.
The three animals excluded are marked with an asterisk (*) in Table 3.1. The limited gene
expression detected could suggest an artefact / experimental error from the tissue processing.
When analyzing the data, we initially excluded genes with very low detection values across
all spots to reduce noise. The cut-off level applied was mRNA expression <= 1.0 in at least
99.0% of the spots. This excluded no spots (37,389 total spots) and yielded a reduction in the
number of genes from 19,454 to 9,953.
3.5.1
Normalization of ST Data
To normalize expression levels and variances between spots and samples, the raw ST data
were normalized with the algorithm single cell transform (SCTransform) in Partek. This was
originally developed for single-cell RNAseq data but has previously also been used for Visium
Spatial transcriptomics data, even though Visium ST data does not have single-cell resolution.
[67, 68, 69, 70]
Spatial Transcriptomics Profiling of Semaglutide and Enalapril Treatment in the Nephrotoxic Serum Nephritis
CD1 Mouse Model
20
==PAGE:29==
Sample Attributes
Sample Name
# Spots
Median Genes
Treatment
Visium Slide
Lab Day
Sequencing Day
1 Vehicle
2805
3901
Vehicle
A
P
1st run
2 Semaglutide
2440
4052
Semaglutide
A
P
1st run
3 Enalapril
3478
2977
Enalapril
A
P
2nd run
4 Healthy Control*
3282
2457
Healthy Control
A
P
2nd run
5 Vehicle
2662
3473
Vehicle
B
P
1st run
6 Semaglutide
3265
4453
Semaglutide
B
P
1st run
7 Enalapril*
2513
1022
Enalapril
B
P
2nd run
8 Healthy Control*
2631
513
Healthy Control
B
P
2nd run
9 Vehicle
3208
5151
Vehicle
C
Q
1st run
10 Semaglutide
2900
5113
Semaglutide
C
Q
1st run
11 Semaglutide
2905
5869
Semaglutide
C
Q
1st run
12 Enalapril
2661
5174
Enalapril
C
Q
1st run
13 Vehicle
2770
4856
Vehicle
D
Q
1st run
14 Semaglutide
2648
4677
Semaglutide
D
Q
1st run
15 Healthy Control
2910
5334
Healthy Control
D
Q
1st run
16 Enalapril
2738
5234
Enalapril
D
Q
1st run
Table 3.1: Sample naming and attributes: Sample Name refers to the specific sample being analyzed.
# Spots refers to the amount of spots covering the tissue section on the Visium slide. Median
Genes refers to the median number of unique genes detected in each spot on the Visium
slide.
Treatment refers to which treatment group the animal sampled from belongs to.
Visium Slide refers to which slide the tissue sample was placed on. Lab Day refers to
what day the experimental protocol was carried out. Sequencing Day refers to whether the
library generated from each sample was sequenced on. * Indicates exclusion from data
analysis
3.5.2
Batch Effect Removal
After normalization of the data, there can potentially still be systematic differences present
between samples (so-called batch effects).
This was explored on Uniform Manifold
Approximation and Projection (UMAP) plots. If clusters of spots are unique for individual
samples, it suggests the presence of batch-effects in the data set. To eliminate such batch
effects, a Seurat3 integration step was used on normalized data. Seurat3 identifies data
points in the same biological state and uses these as anchor points to serve to correct for
technical differences in the data [69, 70]. This was visualized using box plots as well as
UMAP plots. In the box plots, we looked for whether the count spread was similar. The three
animals excluded all had a low count and spread compared to the other samples. Hence for
the Seurat3, we looked to see whether this spread could become more similar to the other
samples.
On the UMAPs, we wanted to see an overlap of the spots from the different animals and groups
as it is still the same tissue type, and we therefore expect to see a high level of similarity in
gene expression. The analysis indicated that the removal of the sample effect was necessary
for optimal integration of the data set.
Spatial Transcriptomics Profiling of Semaglutide and Enalapril Treatment in the Nephrotoxic Serum Nephritis
CD1 Mouse Model
21
==PAGE:30==
3.5.3
Principal Components Analysis and Graph-Based Clustering
After this, a principal components analysis (PCA) was run to reduce the number of dimensions
of the data. A PCA helps convert the original variables, in this case genes, into less new
variables or principal components (PCs).
The PCA was run with feature contribution
by variance, which is standard for single cell sequencing data, which is how our data
was treated in Partek. Hence, features with higher variance contribute more in the PCA.
Moreover, the number of output PCs was set to 100, which is standard for this type of analysis.
After a variance-based reduction in the number of variables in the data, graph-based clustering
was applied. This is an unbiased algorithm for grouping the spots from all the samples based
on gene expression similarities. This was done on the combined data set from all the treatment
groups as well as within treatment groups. The clustering yielded 13 independent clusters.
3.5.4
Characteristics of the Graph-Based Clusters
For each of these clusters, gene (biomarker) lists were generated. The lists were filtered
using a p-value < 0.05, and then arranged based on highest to lowest fold change. A linear
fold change was used, and fold change was relative to the level of the gene detected in
the other clusters. The gene lists were analyzed by looking up existing knowledge about
a gene (including known expression pattern and function) in the PanglaoDB database and
KPMP kidney biomarker list [71, 72]. The list of marker genes was then used to annotate
the different clusters to cell-types and/or biological functions. One cluster was selected for
further analysis, namely Cluster 10. As further detailed in Section 4.3 this cluster stood out
because it had a strong upregulation of genes linked to podocytes, glomerular endothelial
cells and the glomerulus.
Moreover, an analysis independent of the clustering method was applied. A separate filtration
was done based on three well-known and studied biomarkers for podocytes. Podocytes are
cells that sit on the small arteries (capillaries) in the glomerulus. The genes (biomarkers)
used to filter here were Nphs1, Nphs2 and Podxl [72]. The minimum cut off used to isolate
and filter out spots was a fold change of 1.5 for each of these three genes.
Another cluster-independent analysis was done of cells with high Acta-2 expression. Acta-2
is a known marker for smooth muscle cells, which is where the GLP-1 receptors are located
in the kidneys. This was chosen over Glp-1r, the gene for the receptor, as the expression
of Acta-2 is more readily detected in ST. Hence, another independent filtering of the spots
using a linear fold change upregulation of 1.5 for the Acta-2 gene.
In each of these subsets of spots, i.e., Cluster 10 spots, spots with high expression of
podocyte markers (PODhigh), and spots with high expression of Acta-2 (Acta-2 high), an
ANOVA followed by relevant pairwise comparisons of treatment group was performed.
The statistical analysis was performed on normalized but not batch-corrected data.
The
ANOVAs were run on the following pairs: Semaglutide vs. Vehicle, Enalapril vs. Vehicle
and Vehicle vs. Healthy. Semaglutide versus Vehicle was run to understand the treatment
effect of Semaglutide compared to the Vehicle-treated, which is a mouse with kidney
disease receiving no treatment. Enalapril versus Vehicle was run as a positive control for
the Semaglutide comparison, as ACE inhibitors are established therapeutics for diabetic
complications. Lastly, Vehicle versus Healthy was completed to explore the effects of the
model.
Spatial Transcriptomics Profiling of Semaglutide and Enalapril Treatment in the Nephrotoxic Serum Nephritis
CD1 Mouse Model
22
==PAGE:31==
A mixed model approach was used to conduct statistical analyses of the gene expression
data.
A mixed model approach means that the samples were treated using a spot level
analysis in contrast to a pseudobulk method where the expression data from all spots in a
sample are added together to form one ”bulk” sample. When using a mixed model approach,
sample ID (sample name) has to be included as a random factor in the statistical test [73].
ANOVAs were thus run on the Treatment with Sample ID (sample name) as a random effect
factor.
For RNA-seq data sets, it is standard to perform an adjustment for the thousands of pairwise
comparisons which are made within the statistical analyses i.e., the thousands of genes
where expression levels are being compared. A common method is the Benjamini-Hochberg
correction, which uses false discovery rates (FDR). [74, 75]
In the data set used in this thesis, few genes had an FDR < 0.05. Since the aim of this project
was to explore hypotheses for the effects of treatments, we chose to use the unadjusted
p-values for identification of genes with significantly altered expression. A consequence of
this wider inclusion is the potential inclusion of more false-positive differences (discussed
further below). Thus, unadjusted p-values < 0.05 were considered statistically significant.
3.6
In Situ Hybridization
Nine relevant genes were differentially expressed in the ST data set and selected for further
evaluation. The expression of these genes was evaluated using in situ hybridization (ISH)
and quantified using VIS.
The first five genes were identified upregulated in the statistical analysis results from the
Semaglutide-treated group compared to the Vehicle group.
Moreover, these five genes
proved interesting in terms of kidney disease when looking at genome-wide association
studies (GWAS), literature, and the expression patterns (GTEx Portal) [76, 77, 78]. These
genes were Ren1, Slc13a3, Ndrg1, Dpep1 and Ctgf (Ccn2).
Based on previous knowledge and work with the NTN model, four additional genes known
or suspected to be implicated in disease regulation, and therefore with possible MoA
implications, were also included. These genes were Agt (Ang-2), Acta-2, Agtr1a and Glp-1r.
ISH experiments were done on kidney sections from 24 animals out of the original 44 outlined
in Section 3.2. These included the 16 animals that were used in the spatial transcriptomics
experiments, and an additional 8 animals were used to yield N = 6 animals from each
treatment group.
The 8 additional animals were chosen based the same criteria as the
original 16 animals were selected for ST, i.e., a GFR rate close to the treatment group
average. DV200 was not used for selection of extra animals used in ISH.
Paraffin-embedded kidney tissue blocks were used for this protocol. The tissue was sectioned
at 5µ m thickness, and kidney sections from four different animals, each in separate treatment
groups, were placed on each slide. The tissue was deparaffinized using xylene and hydrated
using a gradually increasing concentration of water in ethanol, starting at 100% ethanol. ISH
was carried out using the Roche’s Ventana BenchMark ULTRA system [79]. This system is
a fully automated ISH slide staining machine. The reagents used were standard reagents
Spatial Transcriptomics Profiling of Semaglutide and Enalapril Treatment in the Nephrotoxic Serum Nephritis
CD1 Mouse Model
23
==PAGE:32==
purchased from Ventana (Roche), and the ISH probes used were purchased from Biotechne’s
ACD Biologics. The hybridization and amplification settings used were according to supplier
standards.
The experiments were split over 3 separate runs to accommodate the Benchmark Ultra’s 30
slide slots. Each probe was run on all sections from all 24 animals. The system includes two
channels for detection of probe hybridization, C1 and C2. In single channel runs where only
C1 probes are used, the chromogen is red. In duplex runs, the C1 chromogen is teal and the
C2 chromogen is red.
In the first run, only C1 probes were used. The first run included the Ren1 (Lot number
19312A) and Ctgf (Ccn2, Lot number 18031A) probes, as well as positive and negative
controls, Ppib (Lot number 22321A) and Dap-b (Lot number 21285A), respectively.
The
second run included both channels, which allowed for two unique gene probes to be used on
a single set of slides. The probe pairs were Glp-1r (C1, Lot number 20329A) and Acta-2 (C2,
Lot number 19235A), Agtr-1a (C1, Lot number 18172A) and Agt (C2, Lot number 23089A),
and Dap-b (C1, Lot number 22305A) and Ppib (C2, Lot number 20031A). The third run was
run using C1 probes. The run included the remainder of the genes, Dpep1 (Lot number
23089A), Scl13a3 (Lot number 23111A) and Ndrg1 (Lot number 23089A), as well as the
same positive and negative controls.
3.6.1
Quantification of ISH
In order to quantify the staining from the ISH protocol, digital whole-slide images were
generated during an EFI scanning at 40X magnification on an Olympus VS200 slidescanner.
Analysis of the digital image was performed using Visiopharm Integrator System (VIS)
software (VIS; Visiopharm, Hoersholm, Denmark).
The same app for marking the tissue
described in Section 3.3.1 was used here, and the sections were then labelled based on
treatment group.
In order to detect and mark the glomeruli in each of the sections, an image analysis app
based on artificial intelligence (UNet classifier) was trained in VIS. This was done by creating
a training set where the glomeruli were marked manually.
The app was then trained on
this data set and adjusted to ensure accurate performance. Once the app was trained and
performing well, the app was run across all the tissue sections to localize and mark the
glomeruli.
In order to get a quantitative staining output from the sections, a threshold app for color
detection was defined. The app was built to detect and quantify the areas with red and teal
colors produced in the in ISH protocol. The app was instructed to quantify total staining for
the whole kidney section, staining within the cortex region, and staining within the marked
glomeruli. The app also quantified the area of the three aforementioned regions, and hence,
the fractions in all regions with positive staining could be calculated (areal fraction) The areal
fractions were calculated for the following regions: whole kidney section, cortex, and glomeruli
using the formula shown in Section 3.3.1.
3.7
Statistical Analyses
Statistical analysis of ST data was performed in Partek flow, as described above. Statistical
analyses of quantitative ISH data were carried out in GraphPad Prism (v9.0.1, GraphPad
Software, CA, USA). Data were assumed to be normally distributed and were presented as the
Spatial Transcriptomics Profiling of Semaglutide and Enalapril Treatment in the Nephrotoxic Serum Nephritis
CD1 Mouse Model
24
==PAGE:33==
mean the standard error of mean (SEM). The normally distributed data were analyzed using
one-way ANOVA with multiple comparisons (pairwise) using a Dunnett correction for multiple
comparisons. Data for correlation analysis was assumed to follow a Gaussian distribution.
Correlations were analyzed using Pearson correlation coefficients using a two-tailed test with
a 95% CI. The statistical significance threshold used was p-value < 0.05.
Spatial Transcriptomics Profiling of Semaglutide and Enalapril Treatment in the Nephrotoxic Serum Nephritis
CD1 Mouse Model
25
==PAGE:34==
4
Results
4.1
14-Day NTN Model Shows No Signs of Renal Fibrosis
As described in Section 2.5.2, it has previously been shown in the NTN mouse model that
there an increase in mesangial expansion as part of the kidney pathogenesis, and that this
could be reduced with semaglutide. However, no data had been generated to characterize
the level of fibrosis at this time point, so the first experiment in this thesis was a fibrosis staining.
Renal fibrosis is the development of scar tissue from the accumulation of extracellular matrix
components. It is a consequence of long-standing kidney disease, is progressive and is seen
as a histological biomarker for chronic kidney disease. [7]
Hence, to get an understanding of the level of renal fibrosis in the 14- day non-accelerated
NTN model, collagen III immunohistochemistry was performed. Collagen type III is known to
be a major part of fibrosis observed in the kidneys upon damage [80].
Representative images from each of the treatment groups can be seen below in Figure 4.1. In
Figure 4.1A-D, full kidney section images are presented, and in E-H representative glomeruli
closeups are shown.
Figure 4.1: Renal Collagen III IHC Staining.
Representative images from each of the treatment
groups.
(A) Healthy full kidney section.
(B) Vehicle-treated full kidney section.
(C) Semaglutide-treated full kidney section.
(D) Enalapril-treated full kidney section.
(E) High magnification healthy glomerulus.
(F) High magnification Vehicle-treated
glomerulus.
(G) High magnification Semaglutide-treated glomerulus.
(H) High
magnification Enalapril-treated glomerulus.
Spatial Transcriptomics Profiling of Semaglutide and Enalapril Treatment in the Nephrotoxic Serum Nephritis
CD1 Mouse Model
26
==PAGE:35==
Figure 4.2 shows the composite areal fraction data split by treatment group. The level of
fibrosis in the Vehicle-treated animals was minimal suggesting that this model is an earlier
stage kidney disease model, where fibrosis is not well discernible yet. This should also be
taken into consideration when evaluating a treatment effect, which the model may not be well
suited for at the 14-day time point.
Nevertheless, while there appears to be no significant difference for the whole kidney fibrosis
comparisons, there are some outlier animals with high kidney fibrosis in the Vehicle control and
Enalapril treated group. For the cortex region, there were no significant differences across the
groups, although it appears as if the Vehicle and Semaglutide-treated groups have a higher
fraction.
Figure 4.2: Renal Collagen III Areal Fraction Split by Treatment Type. (A) Collagen III areal fraction
in whole kidney sections. (B) Collagen III areal fraction in the cortex region.
4.2
Spatial Transcriptomics
When analyzing the spatial transcriptomics (ST) data, the sequenced data is mapped back
to a specific spot on the Visium slide and the corresponding part of the tissue section that is
covered by that spot via barcoding. This means that the transcribed genes can be physically
localized on the tissue sections allowing for a potentially more meaningful functional
interpretation.
Each spot represents a unique set of transcriptome data, which are the
mRNA sequences found in the cells covered by the spot. Hence, in order to understand any
differences in the data, the spots and transcripts detected need to be analyzed and compared.
As seen in Table 3.1, there was some variation in the number of spots covering each of the
different sections, ranging from 2,440 spots for Sample 2 to 3,478 spots for Sample 3. The
number of spots covering each sample is also a function of the size of the tissue section, and
therefore variation is expected. The variation is also reflected in the median number of genes
seen in column 3.
Spatial Transcriptomics Profiling of Semaglutide and Enalapril Treatment in the Nephrotoxic Serum Nephritis
CD1 Mouse Model
27
==PAGE:36==
To look into the number of expressed genes in more detail, it was mapped across the sections
for each spot as seen in Figure A.1. As expected, the number of expressed genes per spot has
high variation, from a minimum of 5 genes in Sample 9 to a maximum of 9,745 in Sample 11.
When looking at Figure 4.3 where the data legend has been standardized from 0 to 10,000,
it is apparent that some of the samples have spots with very low mRNA (gene) detection.
As this could be related to poor quality of the sample or methodology issues. Three animals
stood out, Animals 4, 7 and 8, and were therefore excluded from further analysis in the ST
analysis flow.
Figure 4.3: Expressed Genes per Spot
4.3
Unbiased Clustering Leads to the Identification of a
Glomeruli Cluster
In order to start to organize and interrogate the data (post-normalization, batch effect
control, and principal components analysis (PCA)), an unbiased graph-based clustering was
completed. This yielded 13 clusters. Here, the first step was to filter the individual lists. This
was done using a significance threshold of p-value < 0.05, and by ranking the genes based
on highest to lowest fold change. The fold change used here is the expression in a given
cluster compared to the rest of the kidney tissue.
The analysis of the genes (biomarkers) included associating the name and function, as well
as its prior association or mapping to certain cell types using the PanglaoDB database and
KPMP kidney biomarker list [71, 72]. This provided insights into which substructures and cell
types were mapped in each of the clusters. The majority of the clusters included cell types
from multiple compartments. One cluster stood out because the upregulated genes were
markers of the same tissue compartment. As seen in Figure 4.4, this cluster had a strong
upregulation of genes linked to podocytes, glomerular endothelial cells and the glomerulus.
The upregulation of these genes indicated that this cluster was composed of the spots that
covered cells in the renal corpuscle.
The cluster was known as Cluster 10.
Cluster 10
included 1,677 spots and 9,953 expressed genes. A summary of the cluster characteristics
can be seen in Figure 4.6.
Spatial Transcriptomics Profiling of Semaglutide and Enalapril Treatment in the Nephrotoxic Serum Nephritis
CD1 Mouse Model
28
==PAGE:37==
As a control and to ascertain that the unsupervised grouping of spots in the unbiased
graph-based cluster made sense biologically, the cluster was mapped back onto the tissue
sections. A representative mapping is shown in Figure 4.5, where we saw that Cluster 10
was indeed composed of spots that covered the glomeruli.
Spatial Transcriptomics Profiling of Semaglutide and Enalapril Treatment in the Nephrotoxic Serum Nephritis
CD1 Mouse Model
29
==PAGE:38==
Feature # Gene ID
Protein Name
P-value
Fold Change
Protein Function
KPMP List
Substructure
Panglao DB
1
Nphs1
Nephrosis 1 
(Nephrin)
0
162.6
Transmembrane protein, cell 
adhesion molecule. Primary 
expression is in the kidneys.  
Located in podocytes.
Podocyte
Renal 
corpuscle 
Podocytes
2
Sema3g
Semaphorin 3G
0
159.7
Involved in endothelial cell 
migration.
N/A
N/A
Endothelial 
cells, podocytes
3
Nphs2
Nephrosis 2 
(Podocin)
0
150.0
Regulation of glomerular 
permeability, linker for the plasma 
membrane and cytoskeleton.
Podocyte
Renal corpusclePodocytes
4
Cdkn1c
Cyclin Dependent 
Kinase Inhibitor 1C
0
135.0
Negative regulator of cell 
proliferation.
N/A
N/A
Fibroblasts, 
podocytes
5
Podxl
Podocalyxin-like
0
125.5
Anti-adhesive molecule, maintains 
charge repulsion between adjacent 
foot processes in the podocytes for 
filtration.
Podocyte
Renal 
corpuscle 
EC, podocytes
6
Synpo
Synaptopodin
0
120.6
Actin-associated protein, affects cell 
shape and motility, associated with 
renal podocytes
N/A
N/A
Podocytes, 
endothelial 
cells
7
Clic3
Chloride 
Intracellular 
Channel Protein 3 
0
118.9
Chloride ion channel, known to 
located in the cell nuclueus.
N/A
N/A
Podocytes
8
Myom2
Myomesin 2
0
82.1
Titin-associated protein. Titin, along 
with associated proteins connects 
structures of the sarcomeres.
N/A
N/A
Podocytes, 
others
9
Aplp1
Amyloid Beta 
Precursor Like 
Protein 1
0
68.8
Membrane-associated glycoprotein. N/A
N/A
Many cell types
10
Ptpro
Protein Tyrosine 
Phosphatase 
Receptor Type O 
(Glomerular 
Epithelial Protein 
0
53.2
On the apical surface of podocytes. 
Affect glomerular pressure and 
filtraton rate.
N/A
N/A
Macrophages, 
podocytes, 
other
11
Sfrp2
Secreted Frizzled 
Related Protein 2
0
52.5
Soluble Wnt pathway signaling 
modulator. Affects cell growth and 
differentiation in various cell types.
Fibroblasts
12
Rab3b
RAB3B, Member 
RAS Oncogene 
Family
0
37.8
Enables GDP binding activity; 
GTPase activity; and myosin V 
binding activity. 
N/A
N/A
Neurons, 
podocytes
13
Ddn
Dendrin
0
35.7
Podocyte-specific protein. Involved 
in transcription factor binding to 
DNA. Involved in  podocyte 
apoptosis.
N/A
N/A
Neurons
14
Ehd3
EH Domain 
Containing 3
0
32.0
ATP- and membrane-binding 
protein that controls reorganization 
of membrane and tubular 
structures via ATP hydrolysis.
Glomerular 
Capillary 
Endothelial Cell
Glomerulus
Endothelial 
cells
15
Nes
Nestin
0
30.5
Intermediate filament protein 
family member. Plays a role in 
N/A
N/A
Endothelial 
cells, podocytes
16
C1qtnf1
C1q And TNF Relate
0
22.0
Integral plasma membrane 
component; enables collagen 
binding activity.
N/A
N/A
Fibroblasts, 
smooth muscle 
cells
17
Npr3
Natriuretic Peptide 
Receptor 3	
0
22.0
Regulate blood volume and 
pressure, pulmonary hypertension, 
and cardiac function as well as 
some metabolic and growth 
N/A
N/A
Endothelial 
cells, podocytes
18
Clic5
Chloride 
Intracellular 
Channel Protein 5
0
21.9
Chloride ion channels. Associates 
with actin-based cytoskeletal 
structures and may play a role in 
glomerular podocyte and 
endothelial cell maintenance.
Podocyte
Renal 
corpuscle
Endothelial 
cells, podocytes
19
Ptn
Pleiotrophin
0
21.7
Roles in cell growth and survival, 
cell migration, angiogenesis and 
tumorigenesis.
N/A
N/A
Many cell types
20
Tm4sf1
Transmembrane 4 
L Six Family 
Member 1
0
18.2
Tetraspanin family, cell-surface 
proteins that act in signal 
transduction.
Afferent / Efferent 
Arteriole 
Endothelial Cell, 
Descending Vasa 
Recta Endothelial 
Cell
Vessels
Many cell types
Figure 4.4: Cluster 10 Top 20 Highest Upregulated Significant Genes. Upregulated fold change is
compared to the expression across the rest of the kidney section. [71, 72, 81]
Spatial Transcriptomics Profiling of Semaglutide and Enalapril Treatment in the Nephrotoxic Serum Nephritis
CD1 Mouse Model
30
==PAGE:39==
Figure 4.5: Representative Image of Cluster 10 Spots Mapped on Sample 14 (Semaglutide) Tissue
Section. (A) Cluster 10 spots in blue mapped onto the full section. Non-Cluster 10 spots
are marked in grey.
(B) High magnification of four specific spots with yellow arrows
indicating location of glomeruli. (C) High magnification of spots, non-transparent.
Given the importance of the glomerulus for kidney function, and that this is where the kidney
insult was initiated by the NTS, this was of particular interest. Therefore, we also applied
a few selected marker genes for identification of spots covering glomeruli. This served to
further validate the results of the unbiased graph-based clustering. The marker genes chosen
were Nphs1, Nphs2 and Podxl, as they showed the highest relative change in Cluster 10
(see Figure 4.4), and these are also validated markers of podocytes, which are a type of cell
that sit on the capillaries in the glomerulus as seen in Figure 2.4b [72].
As spots cover 1-10 cells, selection based on these marker genes was seen as sufficiently
robust for selection of spots that cover the glomerulus. The inclusion criteria for a spot was at
least a 1.5 fold change in all three markers. This was done independent of the graph-based
clustering. This group of spots was named PODhigh, and included 1,691 spots and the same
amount of expressed genes as Cluster 10. The inclusion criteria and characteristics of this
grouping can be seen in Figure 4.6 as well.
Figure 4.6: Spot Groupings
A representative image of the PODhigh spots mapped onto a tissue section can be seen in
Spatial Transcriptomics Profiling of Semaglutide and Enalapril Treatment in the Nephrotoxic Serum Nephritis
CD1 Mouse Model
31
==PAGE:40==
Figure 4.7. As expected, these spots also mapped to glomeruli locations.
Figure 4.7: Representative Image of PODhigh Spots Mapped on Sample 14 (Semaglutide) Tissue
Section. (A) PODhigh spots in blue mapped onto the full section. Non-PODhigh spots are
marked in grey. (B) High magnification of four specific spots with yellow arrows indicating
location of glomeruli. (C) High magnification of spots, non-transparent.
When looking at the mapping of the spots on the representative image shown in Figure 4.8,
we observe that the mapping of the spots was similar for the two classifications of spots,
Cluster 10 and PODhigh. The number of spots included in the PODhigh grouping is different
from Cluster 10 (14 more in PODhigh), which indicates that there is a near complete overlap
between spots in the two groups. However, this independent marker-based selection served
to validate that the unbiased-clustering based on gene expression patterns did indeed work
well.
Figure 4.8: Cluster 10 and PODhigh Spots Comparison on Sample 14 Tissue Section (Semaglutide).
Spatial Transcriptomics Profiling of Semaglutide and Enalapril Treatment in the Nephrotoxic Serum Nephritis
CD1 Mouse Model
32
==PAGE:41==
4.3.1
Renin is Highly Upregulated in the Semaglutide and Enalapril Treatment
Groups in the Glomeruli Cluster
After confirming the biological relevance of Cluster 10, statistical analyses with pairwise
comparisons of groups were performed within this compartment.
The comparisons were
done for Semaglutide versus Vehicle, Enalapril versus Vehicle and Vehicle versus Healthy.
The top 20 statistically significant and largest fold change genes for each of the comparisons
are displayed in Figure 4.9.
Ren1 (renin) showed to be highly upregulated in both the
Semaglutide and Enalapril groups compared to the Vehicle group. In the Vehicle comparison,
Gdpd3 stood out with a high fold change.
Overall, the majority of other changes were
somewhat low and around 1.5 fold. In order to explore whether any of these genes were
related in mechanism or function, a pathway enrichment analysis was performed.
Spatial Transcriptomics Profiling of Semaglutide and Enalapril Treatment in the Nephrotoxic Serum Nephritis
CD1 Mouse Model
33
==PAGE:42==
Figure 4.9: Pairwise ANOVA Comparisons in Cluster 10. * Marks genes used for in situ hybridization.
Spatial Transcriptomics Profiling of Semaglutide and Enalapril Treatment in the Nephrotoxic Serum Nephritis
CD1 Mouse Model
34
==PAGE:43==
4.3.2
Pathway Enrichment Indicates NTN as an Immune-Mediated Model
The pathway enrichment data was chosen based on enrichment score and p-value. A higher
enrichment score indicates an overrepresentation of the given pathway in the gene input
list. [82] The pathway enrichment was split by up- and downregulated genes for each of
the pairwise comparisons as seen in Figure 4.10.
Figure 4.10: Pathway Enrichment of Cluster 10 Spots
For the upregulated pathways the highest enrichment scores for Semaglutide versus Vehicle
and Enalapril versus Vehicle were within metabolic pathways whereas for the Vehicle versus
Healthy upregulated gene pathway it was systemic lupus (or immune related) pathways.
For the downregulated pathways, the Semaglutide vs.
Vehicle and Enalapril vs Vehicle
results were similar to the upregulated Vehicle versus Healthy pathways.
Most of the
downregulated pathways were related to the immune system. Interestingly, when looking at
the Vehicle versus Healthy, metabolic pathways were downregulated in the Vehicle group,
which is the opposite for the two active treatment groups.
The results in the PODhigh pairwise statistical analyses and pathway enrichment showed
similar results to the Cluster 10 analysis, and can be seen in the Appendix in Figure A.5 and
Figure A.6.
4.3.3
Semaglutide and Enalapril versus Vehicle Comparison Indicates
Uniquely Regulated Genes
Although, some upregulated genes such as Ren1, Hao2, Pck1 and Dpep1 overlapped,
many genes were uniquely regulated when comparing the Semaglutide and Enalapril-treated
groups. Figure 4.11 illustrates the overlapping and non-overlapping significantly regulated
genes separated by up- and down-regulation in Cluster 10. For the upregulated genes, we
observed that 62 genes were upregulated for both treatment groups compared to Vehicle,
while this was 15 genes for the downregulated genes.
Moreover, there were 84 genes
Spatial Transcriptomics Profiling of Semaglutide and Enalapril Treatment in the Nephrotoxic Serum Nephritis
CD1 Mouse Model
35
==PAGE:44==
uniquely upregulated in the Semaglutide group, and 12 uniquely downregulated.
Thus,
altough Ren1 is upregulated in both groups, there is an indication that there are differences
in the genetic response to the two treatments.
Figure 4.11: Venn Diagrams of Up- and Downregulated Genes in Cluster 10 for the Semaglutide and
Enalapril vs. Vehicle Analysis
4.4
Smooth Muscle Cell Spots
From the literature, it is known that GLP-1 receptors are located on smooth muscle cells in
the kidneys [83] As semaglutide is a GLP-1 analog, it was interesting and relevant to look at
the subset of spots that cover the locations of the GLP-1 receptors.
A known marker for smooth muscle cells is actin alpha 2 (Acta-2) [72, 84]. The Acta-2 spots
were chosen based on similar criteria as the PODhigh group, using fold change of the chosen
marker. The ACTA2high group included 3,996 spots and 9,953 genes.
In Figure A.4, a high level overview of where the spots map on the sections can be seen.
Figure 4.12 shows that the spots do indeed localize to areas with smooth muscle cells present
in the juxtaglomerular apparatus that sits adjacent to the glomerulus (see Figure 2.4b).
Spatial Transcriptomics Profiling of Semaglutide and Enalapril Treatment in the Nephrotoxic Serum Nephritis
CD1 Mouse Model
36
==PAGE:45==
Figure 4.12: Representative Image of ACTA2high Spots Mapped on Sample 14 (Semaglutide) Tissue
Section. (A) ACTA2high spots in blue mapped onto the full section. Non-ACTA2high
spots are marked in grey. (B) High magnification of four specific spots with yellow arrows
indicating location of glomeruli.
4.4.1
Renin is Highly Upregulated in the Semaglutide and Enalapril Treatment
Groups in the Smooth Muscle Cell Spots
When it had been established that this selection led to a filtration of relevant spots, the next
step was to look at gene expression differences between the treatment groups. The statistical
analysis was performed in the same way as for Cluster 10.
The results for Semaglutide vs.
Vehicle and Enalapril vs.
Vehicle were similar to what
was seen for these pairwise comparisons in the Cluster 10 analysis in the glomeruli. For
example Semaglutide had upregulation of Ren1, Ccns (Ctgf), Acta2, Ndrg1, Slc13a3 and
Fbp1 across both sets of spots i.e., the Cluster 10 and the ACTA2high spots. Moreover, for
the downregulated genes, Akr1c21 and Pla2g7 are present in both analyses. Similarly, for
the Enalapril vs. Vehicle analysis, Ren1, Ptp4a3, and Hao2 are the top upregulated genes,
and the downregulated gene analyses both include C3, Ctss, and Vcam1. This is biologically
plausible as the smooth muscle cells sit in the juxtaglomerular compartment.
However,
nothing in terms of the GLP-1 receptor stood out in the ACTA2high ANOVA gene lists seen
in Figure 4.13 when comparing to the Cluster 10 ANOVA results.
Spatial Transcriptomics Profiling of Semaglutide and Enalapril Treatment in the Nephrotoxic Serum Nephritis
CD1 Mouse Model
37
==PAGE:46==
Figure 4.13: Pairwise ANOVA Comparisons in ACTA2high Spots
Spatial Transcriptomics Profiling of Semaglutide and Enalapril Treatment in the Nephrotoxic Serum Nephritis
CD1 Mouse Model
38
==PAGE:47==
4.4.2
Pathway Enrichment in ACTA2high Spots Similar to Cluster 10
The pathway enrichment analyses for ACTA2high spots were closely related the Cluster
10 pathway enrichment data across all pairwise comparisons as seen in Figure 4.14 with
metabolic pathways being prominent.
Figure 4.14: Pathway Enrichment of ACTA2high Spots
4.5
ISH
In Situ Hybridization (ISH) was performed as a supplementary validation analysis to the ST
data analysis. Additional genes were included based on function and implications from the
literature as shown in Figure 4.15. Thus, the genes were chosen due to their differential
expression profile in the ST data, and importantly also due to their relevance from an
MoA perspective. Genes of interest were mapped to kidney-related traits in genome wide
association studies (GWAS) and known to be implicated in kidney disease based on the
literature.
Figure 4.15: In Situ Hybridization Genes Table [43, 72, 76, 77, 78, 86, 87, 88, 89, 85]
Spatial Transcriptomics Profiling of Semaglutide and Enalapril Treatment in the Nephrotoxic Serum Nephritis
CD1 Mouse Model
39
==PAGE:48==
As described in Section 3.6.1, an AI algorithm was built to detect glomeruli. As shown in
Figure 4.16, which is a representative image, the app was able to detect and mark glomeruli
in the tissue sections.
Figure 4.16: Representative Image of AI App Glomeruli Detection on a Renin-Stained Section (Renin
stained in red color).
(A) Glomeruli are marked in red.
(B) High magnification of a
representative glomeruli
4.5.1
Renin is Highly Upregulated in Enalapril Group
While renin was a key differentially expressed gene in the ST data set for Semaglutide vs.
Vehicle and Enalapril vs. Vehicle pairwise comparisons, then in the ISH data, renin showed
significant upregulation in the Enalapril group and not in the Semaglutide group compared to
Vehicle. The renin fold change for Enalapril vs. Vehicle was 2.87 in the glomeruli via ISH,
but 0.73 for Semaglutide vs. Vehicle (see Figure 4.19). In Figure 4.17, representative section
images of renin stained slides are shown.
Spatial Transcriptomics Profiling of Semaglutide and Enalapril Treatment in the Nephrotoxic Serum Nephritis
CD1 Mouse Model
40
==PAGE:49==
Figure 4.17: Representative Ren1 ISH Staining Sections from Each Treatment Group. (A) Healthy
full kidney section. (B) Vehicle-treated full kidney section. (C) Semaglutide-treated full
kidney section. (D) Enalapril-treated full kidney section. (E) High magnification Healthy
F) High magnification Vehicle-treated. (G) High magnification Semaglutide-treated. (H)
High magnification Enalapril-treated.
4.5.2
Correlation Between ISH and Spatial Transcriptomics Outcomes
ISH was performed to validate the spatial transcriptomics data. As spatial transcriptomics is
rather nascent, it was of interest to see whether the data correlated with the more validated
ISH method. Accordingly, the representative images of results from the two methods are
shown in Figure 4.18.
Spatial Transcriptomics Profiling of Semaglutide and Enalapril Treatment in the Nephrotoxic Serum Nephritis
CD1 Mouse Model
41
==PAGE:50==
Figure 4.18: Representative ISH Images and ST Data for Sample 14 (Semaglutide).
(A-E)
Representative ISH Staining.
(F-J) High magnification of ISH image.
(K-O) ST
representative images with darker spots indicating higher detection of the specific mRNA.
(P-T) High magnification of ST section)
In the ST analysis, the differences have been found by calculations at spot level. ISH fold
change data is in principle calculated as a pseudobulk data because the areal fraction
combines the data from all glomeruli in a tissue section. Thus, for the correlation analysis,
the ST data presented has been calculated using a pseudobulk approach where the data
from all spots in a sample is combined into a ”bulk” sample. [73]
This correlation is comparing the ST to ISH data for the glomeruli compartment i.e., Cluster
10 for the ST data and the AI app selected glomeruli in the ISH data. Overall, the correlation
between the two methods varied, and the highest correlation coefficient, which was also
statistically significant was observed for Renin (Figure 4.19).
Figure 4.19: ST and ISH Data Correlation for Glomeruli Data
4.6
Conclusions
In conclusion, there was no substantial fibrosis in the 14-day NTN model, and therefore
possibly as a consequence no significant differences observed in the groupwise comparisons
for renal fibrosis. Given that the Vehicle-treated group did not show more fibrosis than the
Spatial Transcriptomics Profiling of Semaglutide and Enalapril Treatment in the Nephrotoxic Serum Nephritis
CD1 Mouse Model
42
==PAGE:51==
other groups, it logically follows that no treatment effect was observed.
A cluster of spots covering the glomeruli was found using unbiased graph-based clustering,
and validated via histological analysis and spot selection using three known glomeruli-marker
genes.
Statistical analysis comparing gene expression showed that Semaglutide and
Enalapril had upregulated Ren1 compared to Vehicle supporting that Semaglutide may have
an effect on the kidneys that is similar to Enalapril.
When looking at pathway analyses, the Semaglutide and Enalapril groups had strong
enrichment of metabolic pathways, and downregulation of immune-related pathways.
Interestingly, the Vehicle vs. Healthy group saw the opposite trend, so an upregulation of
immune-related pathways and a downregulation of metabolic pathways. Similar results were
observed in the ACTA2high spots group.
Nine genes were chosen for further interrogation to validate the ST data results. Ren1 showed
a strong upregulation in the Enalapril-treated group, and a statistically significant correlation
between the ST and ISH data.
Spatial Transcriptomics Profiling of Semaglutide and Enalapril Treatment in the Nephrotoxic Serum Nephritis
CD1 Mouse Model
43
==PAGE:52==
5
Discussion
Type 2 diabetes and its complications has a significant impact on global health. Treatments
are therefore now more and more focused on going beyond the treatment of high blood
glucose to ideally also having an impact on its complications.
One class of drugs has
attracted significant attention in this regard, being the GLP-1 RA with encouraging data on
glucose control as well as weight, cardiovascular and kidney complications [2, 3, 4, 32].
Therefore, we undertook the present study with the aim of further elucidating the molecular
understanding of one GLP-1 RA’s (semaglutide) effects in a preclinical kidney model.
This was done using spatial transcriptomics data that combine transcriptomics data with
histological mapping.
The selected model is the Nephrotoxic Serum Nephritis (NTN) CD1 mouse model [23, 24].
This model is an immune-induced and mediated kidney disease model, where the mice do
not have diabetes [23]. The advantage of this is that any effects of the intervention on the
kidneys can more clearly be ascribed as a primary direct effect on the kidneys, rather than
through an indirect effect on glycemic control improvement.
The results of the spatial transcriptomics data analysis, indicate that renin is involved in the
therapeutic effect of both Enalapril and Semaglutide in the kidneys. With Enalapril, it is known
that it inhibits ACE, which is one of the fundamental enzymes in the RAAS pathway [6, 43].
The gene expression profile observed in the ST and ISH data is a characteristic of lowering
blood pressure in the efferent arteriole [90]. The upregulation of renin observed in the ST
and ISH data is hypothesized to be compensatory.
GLP-1 has not been directly implicated in the RAAS pathway [91].
The upregulation of
renin for both Semaglutide and Enalapril might be an indirect effect of a lowering of local
blood pressure in the kidneys [91].
Nevertheless, GLP-1 receptors are expressed in the
juxtaglomerular apparatus where blood pressure is regulated in the arterioles, which may
help explain the observed effect of Semaglutide despite not directly inhibition of ACE [83, 92].
This downstream activation of RAAS and renin recruitment has previously been described in
literature, and is cooperated by the results described in this thesis [92, 91].
While the upregulation of renin was similar between treatment groups, there were also
genes found to be uniquely or differently regulated when comparing the groups to Vehicle.
When looking at the Semaglutide specifically, 84 genes were uniquely upregulated (such as
Cldn16) and 12 genes were uniquely downregulated (such as Akr1c21) when comparing to
Enalapril vs. Vehicle. In order to understand more about the MoA of Semaglutide compared
to Enalapril, it would make sense to interrogate these unique gene signatures in more detail in
clinical samples. Some of the upregulated genes that overlap between the two treatments are
likely related to the metabolic pathway upregulation (such as Glyat) and/or the RAAS pathway
(such as Ren1). Some of the downregulated genes that overlap between the two treatments
Spatial Transcriptomics Profiling of Semaglutide and Enalapril Treatment in the Nephrotoxic Serum Nephritis
CD1 Mouse Model
44
==PAGE:53==
on the other hand are likely related to the immune-mediated nature of the model (such as Pigr).
The pathway data described an upregulation in metabolic pathways for the Semaglutide-
(metabolic pathways, glyoxylate dicarboxylate metabolism, pyruvate metabolism) and
Enalapril-treated (metabolic pathways, fatty acid degradation) mice. On the other hand there
was an upregulation in inflammation-driven pathways for the Vehicle-treated group compared
to the Healthy.
In agreement with the model characteristics, inflammation-driven disease
model, there was an upregulation of inflammation-driven pathways for the Vehicle-treated
group compared to the Healthy.
Supporting a treatment effect of both Semaglutide
and Enalapril, it was observed that immune/inflammation pathways were downregulated
compared to Vehicle.
Thus, even though only few genes had significant and high fold
changes, the pathway analysis indicates that there was some treatment effect.
From a general perspective, the ST and ISH data seem to somewhat correlate, and some
even have significant correlation coefficients. Some of the genes investigated are known
to be mainly cortex or medulla expressed whereas some are expressed ubiquitously in the
mouse kidney as seen in 4.15. Other genes such as Ccn2 are not kidney specific by nature.
However, even though some genes like Ren1 and Ndrg1 are known to be expressed in the
cortex, we compared expression in the glomeruli, and therefore this may help to explain
some of the inconsistencies.
Possible sources of error for the ISH data to consider when looking at the correlation data
are the AI app built for detection of glomeruli and the color threshold detection app. The app
was trained on a data set, and then corrected to ensure that the glomeruli were captured
adequately.
However, not all sections could be checked thoroughly.
Moreover, the app
detection method might not overlap with the positioning of the spots, as the spots are more
rigid in nature. With the color detection app, a threshold was set that did not pick up noise,
but the app might have been too lenient for certain stainings and too finicky for others.
A possible source of error from the ST perspective is the use of unadjusted p-values for
significance.
As discussed previously using FDR is standard when conducting statistical
comparisons with 1000s of comparisons, and thus we could have identified false positives.
No significant effects were observed in the model when looking at collagen III as a proxy for
renal fibrosis. This is likely due to a lack of therapeutic window, in that there was only limited
fibrosis development in the control group. As mentioned in Section 3.2, the model used in
this study is a two-week treatment effect model. From prior studies, a significant difference
in fibrosis has been observed at the 21-day mark [24].
Although the pathology was not very advanced yet at day 14, the 14-day model is a good time
point for investigating primary or early effects of Semaglutide on gene expression. It provides
insights before the gene expression profile influences more predominantly by pathological
alterations in the kidneys.
5.1
ST Technical Considerations
Three samples were excluded from the ST data analysis due to low expression detection
(Animals 4, 7 and 8). Two of these samples were healthy control, meaning that the Healthy
Spatial Transcriptomics Profiling of Semaglutide and Enalapril Treatment in the Nephrotoxic Serum Nephritis
CD1 Mouse Model
45
==PAGE:54==
group analyzed is of a more limited nature , which should be taken into consideration.
As mentioned the samples excluded had low counts across the spots in the section. The
lower number of genes detected could indicate something about the quality of the tissue
sections or that something may have gone wrong with the protocol. It could also be related to
sample section quality or age, or that the spots covered few cells, and thus could be sampling
a lot of extracellular matrix or other low mRNA areas. Possible protocol issues are numerous
but examples include artifacts on the tissue section, not monitoring tissue adhesion to the
slide and not placing the tissue within the fiducial frame.
The Visium Spatial capture technology developed by 10X Genomics is not yet down to single
cell level. The spots are 55µ m, and the average mouse cell is smaller than that. Hence,
although we have worked under the assumption that a spot covers one cell in Partek, it will in
reality cover multiple cells. This means that a spot can cover multiple cell types, and at borders
between different compartments, a spot can cover cell types from both compartments. This
also means that although we defined Cluster 10 to cover the glomeruli, the spots also covered
other cells. [93]
5.2
Future Considerations
The duration of this project was a limiting factor, and therefore there are areas that would
benefit from additional investigations.
In terms of the ST data, it follows that there should be additional review and analyses of the
up- and downregulated genes, and how these may be biologically connected. This includes
investigating the hypothesis that at least part of the treatment effect currently observed with
Semaglutide in the kidneys is related to the RAAS system. As an extension of that, there
should be more work done to characterize the up- and down-regulated pathways described.
Lastly, as mentioned in Section 3.5.4, 13 clusters were found and characterized, and one
was selected as it was the most biologically compelling for the given model. A more detailed
analysis of the remaining 12 clusters may be warranted.
Further studies should look into characterizing the gene expression in a later stage disease
model. Part of this could be a time course ST analysis, which would allow for the evaluation
of changes in gene expression with longer term disease development and Semaglutide
treatment. After 14-days, the model did not display characteristics of fibrosis, hence there
is a likelihood that the disease-state may not have progressed enough to truly be chronic
kidney disease-like. Moreover, further study of the up- and downregulated pathways could
help elucidate more about the Semaglutide kidney mode of action.
This thesis, and the use of this model was ultimately to elucidate mechanisms in a model that
can be translated back into human pathology and disease. Thus, a natural extension to this
project is to compare the changes observed in the ST data and pathology to human diabetic
nephritis and DKD. This could be done through clinical observations and via ST analysis of
patient biopsies.
In conclusion, significant changes in gene expression were observed with Semaglutide
treatment.
The upregulated genes showed an enrichment in metabolic pathways, while
Spatial Transcriptomics Profiling of Semaglutide and Enalapril Treatment in the Nephrotoxic Serum Nephritis
CD1 Mouse Model
46
==PAGE:55==
the downregulated genes showed a tendency towards immune-related pathways. Notably,
the Vehicle versus Healthy group saw the opposite trend (upregulation of immune-related
pathways and a downregulation of metabolic pathways), indicating that a treatment effect
was observed.
Spatial Transcriptomics Profiling of Semaglutide and Enalapril Treatment in the Nephrotoxic Serum Nephritis
CD1 Mouse Model
47
==PAGE:56==
References
[1]
Home et al. IDF Diabetes Atlas 2021 | IDF Diabetes Atlas. en-GB. URL: https : / /
diabetesatlas.org/atlas/tenth-edition/ (visited on 01/12/2023).
[2]
John P. H. Wilding et al. “Once-Weekly Semaglutide in Adults with Overweight
or Obesity”. eng. In: The New England Journal of Medicine 384.11 (Mar. 2021),
pp. 989–1002.
[3]
Hiddo J.L. Heerspink et al. “Effects of Semaglutide on Albuminuria and Kidney Function
in People With Overweight or Obesity With or Without Type 2 Diabetes: Exploratory
Analysis From the STEP 1, 2, and 3 Trials”. In: Diabetes Care 46.4 (Feb. 2023),
pp. 801–810. URL: https://doi.org/10.2337/dc22-1889 (visited on 06/21/2023).
[4]
Steven P. Marso et al. “Semaglutide and Cardiovascular Outcomes in Patients with
Type 2 Diabetes”. In: New England Journal of Medicine 375.19 (Nov. 2016). Publisher:
Massachusetts Medical Society _eprint: https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa1607141,
pp. 1834–1844. URL: https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa1607141 (visited on 06/21/2023).
[5]
S. Björck et al. “Renal protective effect of enalapril in diabetic nephropathy.” In: BMJ :
British Medical Journal 304.6823 (Feb. 1992), pp. 339–343. URL: https://www.ncbi.
nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1881212/ (visited on 06/27/2023).
[6]
Arjumand Faruqi and Ashish Jain. “Enalapril”. eng. In: StatPearls. Treasure Island (FL):
StatPearls Publishing, 2023. URL: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK557708/
(visited on 06/20/2023).
[7]
Min Hyun Cho. “Renal fibrosis”. In: Korean Journal of Pediatrics 53.7 (July 2010),
pp. 735–740. URL: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3004484/ (visited
on 06/26/2023).
[8]
Nuha A. ElSayed et al. “2. Classification and Diagnosis of Diabetes: Standards of Care
in Diabetes—2023”. In: Diabetes Care 46.Supplement_1 (Dec. 2022), S19–S40. URL:
https://doi.org/10.2337/dc23-S002 (visited on 06/20/2023).
[9]
Make the Connection. en-us. May 2021. URL: https://www.cdc.gov/diabetes/managing/
diabetes-kidney-disease.html (visited on 06/20/2023).
[10]
Prevent Diabetes Complications. en-us. Nov. 2022. URL: https://www.cdc.gov/diabetes/
managing/problems.html (visited on 06/20/2023).
[11]
Xiling Lin et al. “Global, regional, and national burden and trend of diabetes in 195
countries and territories: an analysis from 1990 to 2025”. en. In: Scientific Reports 10.1
(Sept. 2020). Number: 1 Publisher: Nature Publishing Group, p. 14790. URL: https:
//www.nature.com/articles/s41598-020-71908-9 (visited on 06/20/2023).
[12]
Katherine R. Tuttle et al. “Diabetic kidney disease: a report from an ADA Consensus
Conference”. eng. In: Diabetes Care 37.10 (Oct. 2014), pp. 2864–2883.
[13]
American Diabetes Association Professional Practice Committee. 11. Chronic Kidney
Disease and Risk Management: Standards of Care in Diabetes—2023 | Diabetes Care
| American Diabetes Association. URL: https://diabetesjournals.org/care/article/46/
Supplement _ 1 / S191 / 148040 / 11 - Chronic - Kidney - Disease - and - Risk - Management ?
searchresult=1 (visited on 01/26/2023).
Spatial Transcriptomics Profiling of Semaglutide and Enalapril Treatment in the Nephrotoxic Serum Nephritis
CD1 Mouse Model
48
==PAGE:57==
[14]
Kitty J. Jager et al. “A single number for advocacy and communication—worldwide more
than 850 million individuals have kidney diseases”. en. In: Kidney International 96.5
(Nov. 2019), pp. 1048–1050. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0085253819307860 (visited on 04/11/2023).
[15]
“Reduction in the Incidence of Type 2 Diabetes with Lifestyle Intervention or Metformin”.
In: New England Journal of Medicine 346.6 (Feb. 2002). Publisher: Massachusetts
Medical Society _eprint: https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa012512, pp. 393–403. URL:
https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa012512 (visited on 06/20/2023).
[16]
Jaana Lindström et al. “Sustained reduction in the incidence of type 2 diabetes by
lifestyle intervention: follow-up of the Finnish Diabetes Prevention Study”. eng. In:
Lancet (London, England) 368.9548 (Nov. 2006), pp. 1673–1679.
[17]
Guangwei Li et al. “Cardiovascular mortality, all-cause mortality, and diabetes incidence
after lifestyle intervention for people with impaired glucose tolerance in the Da Qing
Diabetes Prevention Study: a 23-year follow-up study”. eng. In: The Lancet. Diabetes &
Endocrinology 2.6 (June 2014), pp. 474–480.
[18]
Nuha A. ElSayed et al. “9. Pharmacologic Approaches to Glycemic Treatment:
Standards of Care in Diabetes—2023”. In: Diabetes Care 46.Supplement_1 (Dec.
2022), S140–S157. URL: https://doi.org/10.2337/dc23-S009 (visited on 06/20/2023).
[19]
Amit Sapra and Priyanka Bhandari. “Diabetes Mellitus”. eng. In: StatPearls. Treasure
Island (FL): StatPearls Publishing, 2022. URL: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/
NBK551501/ (visited on 01/23/2023).
[20]
Center for Drug Evaluation and Research. “Sodium-glucose Cotransporter-2 (SGLT2)
Inhibitors”. en. In: FDA (Dec. 2018). URL: https://www.fda.gov/drugs/postmarket-drug-
safety-information-patients-and-providers/sodium-glucose-cotransporter-2-sglt2-inhibitors
(visited on 01/26/2023).
[21]
Inderbir S. Padda, Arun U. Mahtani, and Mayur Parmar. “Sodium-Glucose Transport
Protein 2 (SGLT2) Inhibitors”. eng. In: StatPearls. Treasure Island (FL): StatPearls
Publishing, 2022. URL: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK576405/ (visited on
01/26/2023).
[22]
Antonio Granata et al. “GLP-1 receptor agonists and renal outcomes in patients with
diabetes mellitus type 2 and diabetic kidney disease: state of the art”. In: Clinical Kidney
Journal 15.9 (Sept. 2022), pp. 1657–1665. URL: https://doi.org/10.1093/ckj/sfac069
(visited on 06/20/2023).
[23]
Charles E. Alpers and Kelly L. Hudkins. “Mouse Models of Diabetic Nephropathy”. In:
Current opinion in nephrology and hypertension 20.3 (May 2011), pp. 278–284. URL:
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3658822/ (visited on 05/29/2023).
[24]
M. K. E. Ougaard et al. “Murine Nephrotoxic Nephritis as a Model of Chronic Kidney
Disease”. In: International Journal of Nephrology 2018 (Mar. 2018), p. 8424502. URL:
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5859794/ (visited on 01/11/2023).
[25]
Yaru Zhang et al. “ACE Inhibitor Benefit to Kidney and Cardiovascular Outcomes
for Patients with Non-Dialysis Chronic Kidney Disease Stages 3–5: A Network
Meta-Analysis of Randomised Clinical Trials”. In: Drugs 80.8 (2020), pp. 797–811.
URL: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7242277/ (visited on 06/20/2023).
[26]
Nuha A. ElSayed et al. “3. Prevention or Delay of Type 2 Diabetes and Associated
Comorbidities: Standards of Care in Diabetes—2023”. In: Diabetes Care 46.Supplement_1
(Dec. 2022), S41–S48. URL: https://doi.org/10.2337/dc23-S003 (visited on 01/26/2023).
Spatial Transcriptomics Profiling of Semaglutide and Enalapril Treatment in the Nephrotoxic Serum Nephritis
CD1 Mouse Model
49
==PAGE:58==
[27]
Diabetes and Your Heart. en-us. June 2022. URL: https://www.cdc.gov/diabetes/library/
features/diabetes-and-heart.html (visited on 06/20/2023).
[28]
Hans-Joachim Anders et al. “CKD in diabetes: diabetic kidney disease versus
nondiabetic kidney disease”. en. In: Nature Reviews Nephrology 14.6 (June 2018),
pp. 361–377. URL: https://www.nature.com/articles/s41581-018-0001-y (visited on
01/18/2023).
[29]
Center for Drug Evaluation and Research. “FDA Drug Safety Podcast: FDA revises
warnings regarding use of the diabetes medicine metformin in certain patients with
reduced kidney function”. en. In: FDA (Jan. 2022). URL: https://www.fda.gov/drugs/fda-
drug-safety-podcasts/fda-drug-safety-podcast-fda-revises-warnings-regarding-use-diabetes-
medicine-metformin-certain (visited on 01/27/2023).
[30]
Center for Drug Evaluation and Research. “Metformin Information”. en. In: FDA (Nov.
2018). URL: https://www.fda.gov/drugs/postmarket-drug-safety-information-patients-
and-providers/metformin-information (visited on 01/27/2023).
[31]
Srinivasa Venkata Siva Kumar Kasina and Krishna M. Baradhi. “Dipeptidyl Peptidase
IV (DPP IV) Inhibitors”. eng. In: StatPearls. Treasure Island (FL): StatPearls Publishing,
2022. URL: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK542331/ (visited on 01/26/2023).
[32]
Beatriz Aviles Bueno et al. “Semaglutide in type 2 diabetes with chronic kidney disease
at high risk progression—real-world clinical practice”. In: Clinical Kidney Journal 15.8
(Apr. 2022), pp. 1593–1600. URL: https : / / www . ncbi . nlm . nih . gov / pmc / articles /
PMC9308087/ (visited on 06/29/2023).
[33]
Deborah Hinnen. “Glucagon-Like Peptide 1 Receptor Agonists for Type 2 Diabetes”.
In: Diabetes Spectrum : A Publication of the American Diabetes Association 30.3 (Aug.
2017), pp. 202–210. URL: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5556578/
(visited on 01/26/2023).
[34]
T.D. Müller et al. “Glucagon-like peptide 1 (GLP-1)”. In: Molecular Metabolism 30 (Sept.
2019), pp. 72–130. URL: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6812410/
(visited on 11/09/2022).
[35]
Lotte Bjerre Knudsen and Jesper Lau. “The Discovery and Development of Liraglutide
and Semaglutide”. In: Frontiers in Endocrinology 10 (Apr. 2019), p. 155. URL: https:
//www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6474072/ (visited on 04/18/2023).
[36]
Jesper Lau et al. “Discovery of the Once-Weekly Glucagon-Like Peptide-1 (GLP-1)
Analogue Semaglutide”. In: Journal of Medicinal Chemistry 58.18 (Sept. 2015).
Publisher: American Chemical Society, pp. 7370–7380. URL: https://doi.org/10.1021/
acs.jmedchem.5b00726 (visited on 04/18/2023).
[37]
Wafa Latif, Katerina J. Lambrinos, and Rolando Rodriguez. “Compare And Contrast the
Glucagon-like Peptide-1 Receptor Agonists (GLP1RAs)”. eng. In: StatPearls. Treasure
Island (FL): StatPearls Publishing, 2023. URL: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/
NBK572151/ (visited on 06/21/2023).
[38]
https://www.facebook.com/Drugscom. FDA Approves Bydureon (exenatide extended-release)
for Use with Basal Insulin in Patients with Type 2 Diabetes with Inadequate Glycemic
Control. en. URL: https://www.drugs.com/newdrugs/fda-approves-bydureon-exenatide-
extended-release-basal-insulin-patients-type-2-diabetes-inadequate-4720.html (visited on
06/21/2023).
Spatial Transcriptomics Profiling of Semaglutide and Enalapril Treatment in the Nephrotoxic Serum Nephritis
CD1 Mouse Model
50
==PAGE:59==
[39]
A Research Study to Find Out How Semaglutide Works in the Kidneys Compared to
Placebo, in People With Type 2 Diabetes and Chronic Kidney Disease (the REMODEL
Trial) - Full Text View - ClinicalTrials.gov. en. URL: https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/
NCT04865770 (visited on 06/29/2023).
[40]
Paola Romagnani et al. “Chronic kidney disease”. en. In: Nature Reviews Disease
Primers 3.1 (Nov. 2017). Number: 1 Publisher: Nature Publishing Group, pp. 1–24. URL:
https://www.nature.com/articles/nrdp201788 (visited on 06/21/2023).
[41]
CKD Evaluation and Management – KDIGO. URL: https://kdigo.org/guidelines/ckd-
evaluation-and-management/ (visited on 06/21/2023).
[42]
Kidneys: Anatomy, Function, Health & Conditions. en. URL: https://my.clevelandclinic.
org/health/body/21824-kidney (visited on 06/23/2023).
[43]
Renin-Angiotensin-Aldosterone System (RAAS): What It Is. en. URL: https : / / my .
clevelandclinic . org / health / articles / 24175 - renin - angiotensin - aldosterone - system - raas
(visited on 06/22/2023).
[44]
Donna E. Hansel et al., eds. The Kidney: A Comprehensive Guide to Pathologic
Diagnosis and Management. en. New York, NY: Springer, 2016. ISBN: 978-1-4939-3285-6
978-1-4939-3286-3. URL: https://link.springer.com/10.1007/978-1-4939-3286-3 (visited
on 04/17/2023).
[45]
Piper M. Treuting and Jolanta Kowalewska. “16 - Urinary System”. en. In: Comparative
Anatomy and Histology. Ed. by Piper M. Treuting and Suzanne M. Dintzis. San
Diego: Academic Press, Jan. 2012, pp. 229–251. ISBN: 978-0-12-381361-9. URL:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/B9780123813619000160 (visited on
04/17/2023).
[46]
Histology Of The Urinary System Lab. URL: https://medcell.org/tbl/histology_of_the_
urinary_system/reading.php (visited on 06/21/2023).
[47]
FIGURE 3 | Representation of Renin-Angiotensin-Aldosterone System... en. URL: https:
//www.researchgate.net/figure/Representation-of-Renin-Angiotensin-Aldosterone-System-
RAAS-Regulation-mechanism-of_fig2_357836725 (visited on 06/22/2023).
[48]
John M. Hoppe and Volker Vielhauer. “Induction and Analysis of Nephrotoxic Serum
Nephritis in Mice”. en. In: Innate DNA and RNA Recognition: Methods and Protocols.
Ed. by Hans-Joachim Anders and Adriana Migliorini. Methods in Molecular Biology. New
York, NY: Springer, 2014, pp. 159–174. ISBN: 978-1-4939-0882-0. URL: https://doi.
org/10.1007/978-1-4939-0882-0_15 (visited on 05/31/2023).
[49]
Haryana Y. Thomas and Ashlee N. Ford Versypt. “Pathophysiology of mesangial
expansion in diabetic nephropathy: mesangial structure, glomerular biomechanics, and
biochemical signaling and regulation”. eng. In: Journal of Biological Engineering 16.1
(Aug. 2022), p. 19.
[50]
Bruce Alberts et al. “From DNA to RNA”. en. In: Molecular Biology of the Cell. 4th
edition (2002). Publisher: Garland Science. URL: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/
NBK26887/ (visited on 01/04/2023).
[51]
Joanna Janus and Emma Johnson. What is transcriptomics. en. URL: https://www.
phgfoundation.org/explainer/transcriptomics (visited on 01/10/2023).
[52]
David Wang and Aisha Farhana. Biochemistry, RNA Structure. URL: https://www.ncbi.
nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK558999/ (visited on 01/10/2023).
[53]
Lambda Moses and Lior Pachter. “Museum of spatial transcriptomics”. en. In: Nature
Methods 19.5 (May 2022), pp. 534–546. URL: https://www.nature.com/articles/s41592-
022-01409-2 (visited on 01/18/2023).
Spatial Transcriptomics Profiling of Semaglutide and Enalapril Treatment in the Nephrotoxic Serum Nephritis
CD1 Mouse Model
51
==PAGE:60==
[54]
Zhong Wang, Mark Gerstein, and Michael Snyder. “RNA-Seq: a revolutionary tool for
transcriptomics”. In: Nature reviews. Genetics 10.1 (Jan. 2009), pp. 57–63. URL: https:
//www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2949280/ (visited on 01/04/2023).
[55]
Rohan Lowe et al. “Transcriptomics technologies”. In: PLoS Computational Biology 13.5
(May 2017), e1005457. URL: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5436640/
(visited on 01/28/2023).
[56]
Spatial Transcriptomics - 10x Genomics. URL: https://www.10xgenomics.com/spatial-
transcriptomics (visited on 01/04/2023).
[57]
Eryn E. Dixon et al. “Spatially Resolved Transcriptomic Analysis of Acute Kidney Injury
in a Female Murine Model”. en-US. In: Journal of the American Society of Nephrology
33.2 (Feb. 2022), p. 279. URL: https://journals.lww.com/jasn/Fulltext/2022/02000/
Spatially_Resolved_Transcriptomic_Analysis_of.5.aspx (visited on 01/25/2023).
[58]
Ludvig Larsson, Jonas Frisén, and Joakim Lundeberg. “Spatially resolved transcriptomics
adds a new dimension to genomics”. en. In: Nature Methods 18.1 (Jan. 2021),
pp. 15–18. URL: https://www.nature.com/articles/s41592- 020- 01038- 7 (visited on
01/18/2023).
[59]
Visium Spatial Gene Expression Reagent Kits for FFPE User Guide - Official 10x
Genomics Support. en. URL: https://www.10xgenomics.com/support/spatial- gene-
expression-ffpe/documentation/workflows/ffpe-v-1/steps/library-construction/visium-
spatial-gene-expression-reagent-kits-for-ffpe-user-guide (visited on 06/22/2023).
[60]
Vivien Marx. “Method of the Year: spatially resolved transcriptomics”. en. In: Nature
Methods 18.1 (Jan. 2021). Number: 1 Publisher: Nature Publishing Group, pp. 9–14.
URL: https://www.nature.com/articles/s41592-020-01033-y (visited on 05/23/2023).
[61]
Ji Hee Yu et al. “GLP-1 receptor agonists in diabetic kidney disease: current evidence
and future directions”. In: Kidney Research and Clinical Practice 41.2 (Mar. 2022),
pp. 136–149. URL: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC8995488/ (visited
on 06/18/2023).
[62]
Erin D. Michos et al. “Glucagon-like peptide-1 receptor agonists in diabetic kidney
disease: A review of their kidney and heart protection”. en. In: American Journal of
Preventive Cardiology 14 (June 2023), p. 100502. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.
com/science/article/pii/S2666667723000430 (visited on 06/23/2023).
[63]
Niels B. Dalsgaard, Tina Vilsbøll, and Filip K. Knop. “Effects of glucagon￿like peptide￿1
receptor agonists on cardiovascular risk factors: A narrative review of head￿to￿head
comparisons”. In: Diabetes, Obesity & Metabolism 20.3 (Mar. 2018), pp. 508–519. URL:
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5836903/ (visited on 06/27/2023).
[64]
Christoffer Soendergaard et al. “Objective Quantification of Immune Cell Infiltrates and
Epidermal Proliferation in Psoriatic Skin: A Comparison of Digital Image Analysis and
Manual Counting”. eng. In: Applied immunohistochemistry & molecular morphology:
AIMM 24.6 (July 2016), pp. 453–458.
[65]
Visium Spatial Gene Expression for FFPE – Tissue Preparation Guide - Official 10x
Genomics Support. en. URL: https://www.10xgenomics.com/support/spatial- gene-
expression-ffpe/documentation/workflows/ffpe-v-1/steps/tissue-prep/visium-spatial-gene-
expression-for-ffpe-tissue-preparation-guide (visited on 06/22/2023).
Spatial Transcriptomics Profiling of Semaglutide and Enalapril Treatment in the Nephrotoxic Serum Nephritis
CD1 Mouse Model
52
==PAGE:61==
[66]
Visium Spatial Gene Expression for FFPE – Deparaffinization, H&E Staining, Imaging
& Decrosslinking - Official 10x Genomics Support. en. URL: https://www.10xgenomics.
com/support/spatial- gene- expression- ffpe/documentation/workflows/ffpe- v- 1/steps/
tissue-staining/visium-spatial-gene-expression-for-ffpe-deparaffinization-hand-e-staining-
imaging-and-decrosslinking (visited on 06/22/2023).
[67]
Christoph Hafemeister and Rahul Satija. “Normalization and variance stabilization
of single-cell RNA-seq data using regularized negative binomial regression”. en. In:
Genome Biology 20.1 (Dec. 2019). Number: 1 Publisher: BioMed Central, pp. 1–15.
URL: https://genomebiology.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/s13059-019-1874-1
(visited on 06/18/2023).
[68]
Tools for Single Cell Genomics. en. URL: https : / / satijalab . org / seurat/ (visited on
06/18/2023).
[69]
Seurat: Spatial Transcriptomics. URL: https://nbisweden.github.io/workshop-scRNAseq/
labs/compiled/seurat/seurat_07_spatial.html (visited on 06/21/2023).
[70]
Lukas Heumos et al. “Best practices for single-cell analysis across modalities”. en. In:
Nature Reviews Genetics (Mar. 2023). URL: https://www.nature.com/articles/s41576-
023-00586-w (visited on 06/21/2023).
[71]
PanglaoDB - A Single Cell Sequencing Resource For Gene Expression Data. URL:
https://panglaodb.se/ (visited on 06/21/2023).
[72]
Welcome to the Kidney Precision Medicine Project. URL: https : / / www . kpmp . org/
(visited on 06/21/2023).
[73]
Sini Junttila, Johannes Smolander, and Laura L Elo. “Benchmarking methods
for detecting differential states between conditions from multi-subject single-cell
RNA-seq data”. In: Briefings in Bioinformatics 23.5 (Sept. 2022), bbac286. URL:
https://doi.org/10.1093/bib/bbac286 (visited on 06/28/2023).
[74]
Keegan Korthauer et al. “A practical guide to methods controlling false discoveries in
computational biology”. en. In: Genome Biology 20.1 (Dec. 2019). Number: 1 Publisher:
BioMed Central, pp. 1–21. URL: https://genomebiology.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.
1186/s13059-019-1716-1 (visited on 06/27/2023).
[75]
Yoav Benjamini and Yosef Hochberg. “Controlling the False Discovery Rate: A Practical
and Powerful Approach to Multiple Testing”. en. In: Journal of the Royal Statistical
Society: Series B (Methodological) 57.1 (1995). _eprint: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1111/j
pp. 289–300. URL: https : / / onlinelibrary . wiley . com / doi / abs / 10 . 1111 / j . 2517 -
6161.1995.tb02031.x (visited on 06/27/2023).
[76]
GTEx Portal. URL: https://gtexportal.org/home/ (visited on 06/24/2023).
[77]
GWAS Catalog. URL: https://www.ebi.ac.uk/gwas/home (visited on 06/24/2023).
[78]
GeneCards License Expired. URL: http://suite.genecards.org/gc_closed (visited on
06/21/2023).
[79]
BenchMark ULTRA. en. URL: https : / / diagnostics . roche . com / global / en / products /
instruments/benchmark-ultra-ins-2099.html (visited on 06/22/2023).
[80]
Pedro Magalhães et al. “Association of kidney fibrosis with urinary peptides: a
path towards non-invasive liquid biopsies?” en. In: Scientific Reports 7.1 (Dec.
2017). Number: 1 Publisher: Nature Publishing Group, p. 16915. URL: https :
//www.nature.com/articles/s41598-017-17083-w (visited on 06/21/2023).
[81]
Home - Gene - NCBI. URL: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/gene/ (visited on 06/21/2023).
Spatial Transcriptomics Profiling of Semaglutide and Enalapril Treatment in the Nephrotoxic Serum Nephritis
CD1 Mouse Model
53
==PAGE:62==
[82]
Gene Set Enrichment - Flow Documentation - Partek® Documentation. URL: https :
//documentation.partek.com/display/FLOWDOC/Gene+Set+Enrichment (visited on
06/24/2023).
[83]
Elisa P. Jensen et al. “Activation of GLP-1 receptors on vascular smooth muscle
cells reduces the autoregulatory response in afferent arterioles and increases
renal blood flow”. In: American Journal of Physiology-Renal Physiology 308.8
(Apr. 2015). Publisher: American Physiological Society, F867–F877. URL: https :
//journals.physiology.org/doi/full/10.1152/ajprenal.00527.2014 (visited on 06/24/2023).
[84]
Shi-Min Yuan. “α-Smooth Muscle Actin and ACTA2 Gene Expressions in Vasculopathies”.
In: Brazilian Journal of Cardiovascular Surgery 30.6 (2015), pp. 644–649. URL: https:
//www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4762557/ (visited on 06/24/2023).
[85]
Bruce L. Riser et al. “Urinary CCN2 (CTGF) as a possible predictor of diabetic
nephropathy: preliminary report”. eng. In: Kidney International 64.2 (Aug. 2003),
pp. 451–458.
[86]
Shanika Nanayakkara et al. “An integrative study of the genetic, social and
environmental determinants of chronic kidney disease characterized by tubulointerstitial
damages in the North Central Region of Sri Lanka”. eng. In: Journal of Occupational
Health 56.1 (2014), pp. 28–38.
[87]
Georg W. Otto et al. “Conserved properties of genetic architecture of renal and fat
transcriptomes in rat models of insulin resistance”. In: Disease Models & Mechanisms
12.7 (July 2019), p. dmm038539. URL: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/
PMC6679378/ (visited on 06/29/2023).
[88]
Yuting Guan et al. “A single genetic locus controls both expression of DPEP1/CHMP1A
and kidney disease development via ferroptosis”. In: Nature Communications 12 (Aug.
2021), p. 5078. URL: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC8382756/ (visited
on 06/29/2023).
[89]
Frans A. van Nieuwenhoven et al. “Imbalance of growth factor signalling in diabetic
kidney disease: is connective tissue growth factor (CTGF, CCN2) the perfect
intervention point?” In: Nephrology Dialysis Transplantation 20.1 (Jan. 2005), pp. 6–10.
URL: https://doi.org/10.1093/ndt/gfh570 (visited on 06/29/2023).
[90]
S. Ito. “Kidney and hypertension: role of the juxtaglomerular apparatus”. eng. In: The
Tohoku Journal of Experimental Medicine 181.4 (Apr. 1997), pp. 411–429.
[91]
Katrine Dahl Bjørnholm et al. “Activation of the renal GLP-1R leads to expression
of Ren1 in the renal vascular tree”. en. In: Endocrinology, Diabetes & Metabolism
4.3 (2021). _eprint: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1002/edm2.234, e00234.
URL: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/edm2.234 (visited on 06/27/2023).
[92]
Lisa M. Harrison-Bernard. “The renal renin-angiotensin system”. en. In: Advances in
Physiology Education 33.4 (Dec. 2009), pp. 270–274. URL: https://www.physiology.
org/doi/10.1152/advan.00049.2009 (visited on 06/28/2023).
[93]
Boxiang Liu, Yanjun Li, and Liang Zhang. “Analysis and Visualization of Spatial
Transcriptomic Data”. In: Frontiers in Genetics 12 (2022). URL: https://www.frontiersin.
org/articles/10.3389/fgene.2021.785290 (visited on 06/08/2023).
Spatial Transcriptomics Profiling of Semaglutide and Enalapril Treatment in the Nephrotoxic Serum Nephritis
CD1 Mouse Model
54
==PAGE:63==
A
Appendices
A.1
Supplemental Data
Figure A.1: Expressed Genes per Spot
Figure A.2: Cluster 10 Mapped onto the Tissue Sections
Spatial Transcriptomics Profiling of Semaglutide and Enalapril Treatment in the Nephrotoxic Serum Nephritis
CD1 Mouse Model
55
==PAGE:64==
Figure A.3: PODhigh Spots Mapped onto the Tissue Sections
Figure A.4: ACTA2high Spots Mapped onto the Tissue Sections
Spatial Transcriptomics Profiling of Semaglutide and Enalapril Treatment in the Nephrotoxic Serum Nephritis
CD1 Mouse Model
56
==PAGE:65==
Figure A.5: Pairwise ANOVA PODhigh Spots
Spatial Transcriptomics Profiling of Semaglutide and Enalapril Treatment in the Nephrotoxic Serum Nephritis
CD1 Mouse Model
57
==PAGE:66==
Figure A.6: Pathway Enrichment PODhigh Spots
Spatial Transcriptomics Profiling of Semaglutide and Enalapril Treatment in the Nephrotoxic Serum Nephritis
CD1 Mouse Model
58
==PAGE:67==
Spatial Transcriptomics Profiling of Semaglutide and Enalapril Treatment in the Nephrotoxic Serum Nephritis
CD1 Mouse Model
59
==PAGE:68==
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Biotechnology and Biomedicine
Søltofts Plads, Building 221
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.bioengineering.dtu.dk
