==PAGE:1==
Characterization of the ecosystem internal N
cycle with litter fall analysis
Data gathering and analysis in a Danish beech
forest
Master Thesis
DTU Sustain
Department of Environmental and Resource Technology
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Characterization of the ecosystem internal N cycle with litter fall analysis
Data gathering and analysis in a Danish beech forest
Master Thesis
July, 2023
By
Francesco Maria D’Antiga
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Environmental and Resource Technology, Bygn-
ingstorvet, Building 115, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
https://sustain.dtu.dk/
ISSN:
[0000-0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000-00-0000-000-0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000-0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000-00-0000-000-0] (printed version)
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over six months at DTU Sustain, at the Technical University
of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment for the degree Master of Science in Engineering,
MSc Eng.
Francesco Maria D’Antiga - s212354
Signature
Date
ii
Characterization of the ecosystem internal N cycle with litter fall analysis
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
The study aimed to analyze nitrogen (N) saturation in Lille Bøgeskov forest through litter
data collected over the past 20 years. However, the initial objectives faced challenges
and the focus shifted towards improving data collection and methodology.
Quality assessment revealed issues with litter collecting trap’s data, with unreliable and
unknown values. Comparing traps was limited due to lack of overlapping data. Defining
litter year period classes based on collection frequency needs improvement. Despite
difficulties, the study provides insights into forestry and data manipulation and underlines
the need for standardized practices in litter studies. Nitrogen fluxes were evaluated and
their relation with mast years was put to the test. A statistical analysis was performed to
try and harmonize the the data. Further investigations are required to validate past data
and improve methodology for future research.
Characterization of the ecosystem internal N cycle with litter fall analysis
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
Francesco Maria D’Antiga, MSc Environmental Engineering, DTU
Francesco Maria D’Antiga s212354
[Andreas Ibrom ], [PhD, Prof. Apl.], [Technical University of Denmark
Department of Environmental and Resource Engineering]
For the immense understanding, disponibility, help and inspiring discussions
[Family and friends]
Without you I would be here
iv
Characterization of the ecosystem internal N cycle with litter fall analysis
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
2
Theory
3
2.1
Ecology concepts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.1.1
Ecosystems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.1.2
Nitrogen . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.1.3
Forest ecosystem
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.1.4
N cycling in forests . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
3
Material and Methods
13
3.1
Logistical and technical setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
3.1.1
Site characterization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
3.1.2
Instrumentation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
3.2
Litter related methodologies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
3.2.1
Traps and ancillary data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
3.2.2
Collection and Sampling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
3.2.3
Litter Period Class definition
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
3.2.4
Mast years
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
3.3
Data gathering and processing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
3.3.1
Fluxes, budgets and ratios assessment
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
3.3.2
Statistical analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
3.4
Ecosystem definitions, hypothesis and intrinsic uncertainties
. . . . . . . . 19
4
Results
21
4.1
Litter data reconstruction
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
4.1.1
Fraction identification
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
4.1.2
Seasonality analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
4.1.3
Mast year influence
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
4.1.4
Collection methodologies comparison . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
4.2
Hypothesis testing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
4.2.1
Mast years influence and N-Saturation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
5
Discussion
33
5.1
Definitions and starting conditions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
5.2
Traps related evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
5.3
Methodology evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
6
Conclusions
37
Bibliography
39
A Appendix 1
43
A.0.1
Data quality evaluation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
Characterization of the ecosystem internal N cycle with litter fall analysis
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Characterization of the ecosystem internal N cycle with litter fall analysis
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
The importance of understanding nature has its roots embedded in humanity’s history,
an intrinsic part of survival instincts, which, for the western tradition, had its first more
conscious form of studying in Ancient Greece and kept evolving across the centuries
until it became what nowadays is referred to as Ecology [1]. One of the main topics
of Ecology since 1992 has been sustainability, which led in 2015 of the creation of the
17 Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), an ensemble of different call for action at
a global scale which aim to improve life on the planet for all humans while addressing
climate change and other ecological world scale issues [2]. Forest ecosystems are a
core part of Chapter 15, as stated in commas .1 , .2 and .b [3], and this project aims to
add more knowledge about them, to better protect, restore and use such environments
more sustainably. One of the main topics in ecosystem’s disruption is eutrophication,
a phenomena which occurs when an ecosystem has become excessively enriched with
nutrients, and due to Nitrogen (N) being one of the most commonly recognized limiting
nutrient in nature, together with phosphorous, status that human actions have changed in
the last few centuries. Due to the level of complexity the nitrogen cycle possesses, many
of its interactions in ecosystems are still not fully studied.
N saturation is a well known consequence of long time eutrophication, in which a saturated
system is no longer capable of balancing its nitrogen inputs and outputs.
Within forestry terrestrial ecology studies a lot of importance has been historically given
to deposition of nutrients from air and to losses to the surrounding environment; but it has
been recognized that the main input for nutrients turnover is given by the internal nutrient
cycling, the litter which falls from forest vegetation. This project, conducted under the DTU
Sustain department, started as an overall analysis of the N concentrations in one of the
Integrated Carbon Observatory Systems (ICOS) sites managed by the department, the
forest located in Lille Bøgeskov, Sorø, Denmark, which is mostly dominated by European
beech. This required gathering and reorganizing many different data sets collected in
the over 20 years of activity in the site, although the fragmentation, inconsistency and
incongruence of the methodologies and study objectives made the harmonization of all
those information far more challenging and time consuming than expected. The aim at
the start was to have a holistic understanding of all the N fluxes in the forest to then
discuss N saturation hypothesis, but after analyzing the litter time series more and more
uncertainties and questions arose, leading to the adjustment of the project’s title, aims
and problem formulation. In such conditions the following master thesis’ objectives were
devised: to reach a better understanding of tree litter time series reconstruction under
different collection methodologies, to grasp the state of the art of N internal fluxes time
series in Lille Bøgeskov forest, gathering all available data in a cohesive data base, and to
test different hypothesis connected with N internal cycling in forest ecosystem. Therefore
the problem this master project has its ambition to answer is: ”In a site specific forest, is it
possible to use a long, fragmented time series of tree litter to increase the understanding
of N cycling within it?”
The greatest effort in the study was pointed towards the internal nitrogen cycling from
trees, using innovative methodologies, testing new approaches to the subject of forest
litter study and adopting new measures for litter studies, to be able to investigate how, and
if, a more rigorous analysis of such a site , that have been continuously collecting litter
Characterization of the ecosystem internal N cycle with litter fall analysis
1
==PAGE:10==
from the late nineties, components and time dependencies could lead to new insights in
characterizing N saturation in forest ecosystems
2
Characterization of the ecosystem internal N cycle with litter fall analysis
==PAGE:11==
2
Theory
This chapter is going to provide the necessary information to comprehend decision mak-
ing, project construction and critical analysis presented in the following parts of the the-
sis. The first section focuses on biological processes, starting from broader concepts,
like defining what an ecosystem is, to the more project specific topics, mast reproduction
in beech trees for example. In section two the different aspects of modeling and data
analysis are explained, with every subsection focusing on a different aspect of the matter.
Lastly ?? provides knowledge about common environmental practices within modeling
and data analysis, as well as presenting the different approaches found in published lit-
erature regarding leaves and litter statistical analysis.
2.1
Ecology concepts
Ecology, which comes from greek oikos (’house’ or ’dwelling place’) and logos (’the study
of’), has different possible definition, some express it as the subject that studies relation-
ship of organisms in and with the environment [4][5], while one of the main exponents of
the Hubbard Brook project linked the different scientific aspects of it, including transfor-
mations and fluxes of matter and energy [6]. In addition to this, the study of ecology is
made more challenging by the differences in disciplines that are involved while studying
biotic and abiotic processes, as can be seen in Figure 2.1 , and the dimensions of the
focus of study, which can range from microorganisms to the cosmos.
Figure 2.1: Ecological studies range from those focused on more abiotic relationships to
those focused on more biotic relationships [6].
As a direct consequence of the vast and broad interdisciplinarity of the subject has been
the spontaneous generation of many different sub-branches of the field, to better specify
which ecological aspects were brought in the foreground; one of the cons of this is to
create yet an other level of complexity while conducting research within ecology, as the
number of new discoveries in all of the sub-branches grow steady and fast. In order to
comply to the time limitation of the master thesis, the chosen approach, within the variety
presented in the scientific community, was to adopt the following ecosystem ecology def-
Characterization of the ecosystem internal N cycle with litter fall analysis
3
==PAGE:12==
inition, as it is the branch which focuses on ecosystems and their structure, function and
dynamics [1]:
“Ecosystem ecology is the scientific discipline, which investigates the pro-
cesses influencing the distribution and fluxes of energy and matter as well
as their interactions and transformations” [1]
Within this section the concepts that are going to be presented are: what is an ecosystem
and how to identify one, Nitrogen in the environment ( N cycle, main biological reactions
and global trends), flows and particles interactions and exchanges in forest ecosystems,
the concept of critical loads in an ecosystem and the consequences of exceeding them
(ecosystem saturation) and focusing into N critical loads and N saturation afterwards,
the Nitrogen cycling withing forests following the literature and international standards,
finishing with a more in depth analysis of the dominant tree specie in the forest in which
this study was conducted.
2.1.1
Ecosystems
The word ecosystem sprouted and developed around the first few decades of the 20th
century, going from the Sir Arthur Tansley first definition of it as ”an integrated system of
living organisms (biotic part) and an inorganic, non-living environment (abiotic part)” to
the latest ones in which the focus is about defining the boundaries of such system and
the meaning for which it is studied [1].
Ecosystem boundaries Those limits to the ecosystem are most commonly structured
based on convenience, not to force the investigator to analyze the whole spectrum of
relationships and exchanges between the studied ecosystem and the ones surrounding
it [6]. Thus the many sub-branches of ecology have developed their own ways and indi-
cators to keep their studies from straying too far from each other and generating major
comparability issues. But for such a reason in many cases the ecosystem boundaries
have been arbitrarily chosen or just set to the available data. This led to the need for hav-
ing defining in a clear way in each and every study how the boundaries were designed,
as stated in one of the most rigorous analysis on ecological boundaries [7]. In that study
four different classes for boundary traits are presented: (1) origin and maintenance, (2)
spatial structure, (3) function, and (4) temporal dynamics. The first class includes the
differences between nature originated boundaries (tangible boundaries), like river banks
or edges of cliffs, and scientific study convenience (investigative boundaries); in practice
most boundaries are a mixture of the two, as most of theoretical concepts are originated
from physical structures and tangible limits often need a rigorous way to be accurately
identified. Within tangible boundaries more in depth classification can be achieved by
examining how it came into existence, as some are only present when specific forces are
in action, like wind effects on superficial water bodies (contemporary boundaries), or from
forces that operated in the past (relict boundaries). Boundary origins can keep being di-
vided based on degree of human interaction (natural or anthropogenic boundaries) or on
their originating processes ( exogenous or endogenous boundary origins). Repartitioning
by spatial structure is achieved by the use of 11 attributes, it has to be noted that they are
not all completely independent from each other and if 8 of them have been directly stated,
as shown in Figure 2.2, the remaining 3 require to be in relation to a case specific situation
to be evaluated (A summary of them and their explanation is in Appendix ..... table .....)
4
Characterization of the ecosystem internal N cycle with litter fall analysis
==PAGE:13==
Figure 2.2: Some attributes of boundary spatial structure. (a) A boundary (heavy line)
defined using a fine grain size; (b) the same boundary defined using a medium grain
size; (c) the same boundary defined using a coarse grain size; (d) a boundary of small
extent; (e) a boundary of large extent; (f) an infinitesimally thin boundary; (g) a boundary
with finite thickness (the gray area is the boundary zone, which belongs to neither of the
adjacent patches); (h) a boundary between two adjoining patches; (i) a boundary formed
by a distinct structure (heavy line) between two patches; (j) a boundary between two
overlapping patches; (k) a boundary between two disjunct patches; (l) a sharp boundary;
(m) a gradual boundary; (n) a boundary between two highly contrasting patches; (o) a
boundary between two slightly contrasting patches; (p) a perforated boundary; and (q) a
convoluted boundary [7].
The focus of the third class, Boundary function, is on identifying if there are specific ecolog-
ical phenomena that happen, or are modified, by reaching the boundary. These separates
them into: transmissive (or permeable), reflective or neutral. In the generic transmissive
situation only some the fraction of materials, energy, or organisms are allowed through,
with the extreme cases being the impermeable boundary, and its more specific one the
absorptive boundary (0% transmission allowed), or the rare amplification one (transmis-
sion above 100 %); to be defined as reflective at least some sort of fraction has to be
returned to its point of origin after interacting with the boundary; when neither of these
occur it is defined as neutral. It is not uncommon for tangible boundaries to be a mixture
of the three, depending on which materials, energy, or organisms are taken into consid-
eration. As fourth and final class there are the Temporal dynamics, in which the time
dependency of the position, structure and function of the boundary as well as its age and
history are taken into consideration. As just presented this last category re-evaluates the
other in a non static time dimension, thus evaluating if and how the boundary evolves,
degenerates or disappears. To bring to a proper closure this discussion on ecosystem
boundaries it is crucial to remember that the exchanges across them should never be
the more relevant ones while studying the ecosystem they encircle, as that would totally
nullify the importance that the ecosystem should have in its study; so it is good practice
to refer it to some unit, homogeneous at the spatial and temporal scale of investigation
[1] and include as many relevant ecological phenomena as allowed.
Characterization of the ecosystem internal N cycle with litter fall analysis
5
==PAGE:14==
structure, function and dynamics As previously stated the capability of establishing effec-
tive boundaries is connected to how the enclosed ecosystem has been defined, therefore
it is crucial to examine how its structures, function and dynamics are identified.
An ecosystem structure can be described through its trophic point of view, which is the
description of the different nutritional processes included in the system; they are divided
into autotrophic, in which the nutritional sources come from fixing light energy and sim-
ple inorganic substances and generate complex organic substances, and heterotrophic,
those that consume complex substances for their metabolism. The resulting structure
is a three agent system, the primary producers that build-up complex sources of nutri-
tion (green plants), the macroconsumers that break-down complex biological structures
(mainly animals) and finally the microconsumers or decomposer that convert the results
of the macro’s metabolic activity back to the original simple components. All of them per-
form different processes in order to survive and maintain the structure, which are called
ecosystem functions. As such they describe the flows of energy (unidirectional) and mat-
ter (cyclical) in the ecosystem. As it was the case for boundaries, the last element that
has to be included is the variation of structure and functions through time, this is also the
reason why ecosystem dynamics are the main focus of control and management stud-
ies[1]. In that regard, a special attention is needed when evaluating the developmental
stage of the ecosystem and its history, as this is one of the most relevant aspects in quali-
tative and comparative studies [6]. In the vast literature of ecosystem studies some major
approaches to the topic have been defined by Likens [6]: empirical or natural history, bal-
ance or budgetary, experimental, comparative and modeling or simulating.
One final consideration about generic ecosystems is remaining, the relevance and inclu-
sion of Man, and Man’s correlated effects, within the ecosystem context, as the debate
about considering it a core part of the system or an external force is a source of debate. It
is without a doubt that anthropogenic activities can have drastic effects on ecosystems [8],
but depending on all the previous presented points it could have no relevant impacts or
actually be the most important one [1]. In the next sections and in Chapter 3 the choices
of boundaries, the details for structure, function and dynamics of the ecosystem under
study an the chosen approach are going to be presented, then commented in Chapter 5.
IMPROVE with: Energy Flow and Ecosystems, The problem of boundaries in defin-
ing ecosystems: A potential landmine for uniting geomorphology and ecology, Be-
yond identity crisis: The challenge of recontextualizing ecosystem delimitation
Terrestrial ecosystems can be defined as the one whose major components are plants,
organic matter in the soil and the fluxes between them; inputs of different origin are still
included, like atmospheric deposition, but it mustn’t out scale the previous three as this
would move them to more fertile, eutrophic and even saturated states [1]. The main fac-
tors that affect terrestrial ecosystems are climate, organisms, topography, parent material
(the bedrock over which the ecosystem is located) and time, this is going to be further ex-
panded in the Forest ecosystem section. The last concept relevant for this study related to
ecosystem are the three cornerstones of ecosystem analysis, ecosystem stoichiometry,
the law of the minimum factor for growth and the concept of mass balance. When talking
about the ratios and subdivision of chemical elements in the environment, whichever the
scale, that is regarded as ecosystem stoichiometry for the purposes of this project. The
Liebig’s “Law of the Minimum” principle states ”Crop yield is proportional to the amount of
the most limiting essential nutrient, whichever nutrient that may be. And although each
nutrient is needed by the plant in different amounts, it is the relative amount of each nutri-
ent available (usually expressed as a percentage of ideal) that may be limiting[9]”, which
was further expanded to be applied to all kinds of growth and the minimum to be related to
6
Characterization of the ecosystem internal N cycle with litter fall analysis
==PAGE:15==
non nutrient factors, like climate, temperature and water availability. Mass balances are
a very common application in physical systems of conservation of mass in engineering
and environmental analyses. It consists in accounting for the quantities of every material
entering and leaving the system[10].
2.1.2
Nitrogen
Diatomic nitrogen (N2) is the most common molecule in earth’s atmosphere (approx 78
vol.%) while historically its reactive compounds, generally referred to as reactive nitrogen
(Nr), have been scarce [11]. Nr has very important for all biological activity as it essential
in the creation of enzymes, nucleic acids and other structural elements, an even though
there are a number of species of Bacteria and Archaea capable of fixing N2, their num-
bers are limited, so even after many evolutionary adaptations to use nitrogen efficiently,
plenty of ecosystems in the world have been limited by nitrogen for millennia [1] [12]. In
terrestrial ecosystem Nr is so introduced by biological nitrogen fixation (BNF) and light-
ning strikes, which divide the triple bond of the diatomic molecule in different means, to
than persist in the global biomes until returned to the atmosphere with denitrification. A
more focused and extensive representation will be presented in section 2.1.4.
From the start of the industrial era such tendency started to shift as, next to the two main
natural processes, new artificial ones appeared. The introduction of fossil fuel combus-
tion, the cultivation of organisms capable of BNF and the Haber-Bosch process and their
application across the last century and half brought a new, abrupt and massive increase
in available N worldwide [12], Figure ?? displays the inputs comparison across different
studies and years.
2.1.3
Forest ecosystem
Forest ecosystems are of major importance for both antropocentric activities and non, as
they provide humans with construction material, are home to many natural pharmaceu-
ticals ingredients and edible food; they account for more than 40 % of the annual global
solar energy capture, their low albedo is relevant for maintaining balance in the planet’s
climate, they play a major role in the Carbon, water and nutrients’ cycles, they are a de-
termining factor on regulating rainfall and hydrological landscape conditions, as well as
soil structural support [13]. Nonetheless, the loss on forest coverage in the last 300 years
have reduced by one third, Figure 2.3, or even more, as one of the most recent FAO report
has indicated that only 31 % of total land area was occupied by forests in 2020 [14].
Characterization of the ecosystem internal N cycle with litter fall analysis
7
==PAGE:16==
Figure 2.3: Long term changes in global land use [15].
As previously stated, to define an ecosystem is crucial to set its boundaries, which is also
the case for forests. Temporal dynamics have either to be constantly taken into account
or proven to be non influential, as forests have many of their processes and functions
that are dependant on the day-night cycle, seasons’ changes and return period of various
reoccurring events. The most classic ways of inspecting origin and maintenance include
parent material soil characterization and evolution [16], forest background (determine if it
has been planted for specific purposes or if it is classified as virgin, ancient or primeval),
age of stands [17], history of tree thinning and cutting practices [18]. Its spacial structure
is highly dependant on the scale of study, but even continental or regional studies are
based on the phenology of the considered tree, or mixed trees estimate. This can be
called bottom-up approach, as starting from energy, water and nutrient balance of single
tree parts (mostly leaves and roots), the more complex and spatially extensive analysis
can be reconstructed by up scaling those opening results with other abiotic and biotic
factors. Most function based boundaries are included in such approach, as permeabil-
ity of nutrients and water through different soils horizons and interactions between solar
radiation and canopy are essential to characterize a forest ecosystem.
Forest nutrient pools are conceptually divided into three major categories: vegetation
(overstorey and understorey), detritus (O horizons and woody debris), and soils. For
each major category, mass is estimated by component within that category (for exam-
ple, foliage, branch, bole and roots for trees; horizons or depths in O horizons and soils)
and nutrient content is estimated by multiplying estimated mass by nutrient concentra-
tions obtained from subsamples from each component. Methods of estimating mass vary
considerably between major categories.[19]
8
Characterization of the ecosystem internal N cycle with litter fall analysis
==PAGE:17==
Energy balance
The most important autotrophic process performed by plants is photosynthesis, by which
atmospheric CO2 is reduced into glucose thanks to cell organs, chloroplasts, that absorb
sunlight and convert ADP (adenosine diphosphate) to ATP (adenosine triphosphate). It
is import when quantifying photosynthesis to specify if it is gross photosynthesis (Ag) or
net photosynthesis (An); as the first one is determined by the fixing rate of Rubisco, the
enzyme that drives both carbon fixation and respiration, where An is the result of Ag −Rd,
in which Rd is function mostly regulated by leaf nitrogen content and temperature called
dark respiration. Up scaling this relationships from leaf to a full ecosystem all conversions
of carbon dioxide to organic carbon are therefore called Gross Primary Production (GPP),
divided almost half and half into autotrophic respiration (Ra) and Net Primary Production
(NPP), except for old forest stands in which respiration seem to take up a major share of
GPP. NPP measures the organic carbon used to generate new foliage, branches, stems,
roots, and plant reproductive organs, and when those parts are shed or killed they become
nutrisment for microconsumers (mostly bacteria and fungi), which release CO2 back into
the atmosphere by heterotrophic respiration (Rh); the difference between NPP and Rh is
called Net Ecosystem Exchange (NEE), the net carbon dioxide flux in an ecosystem. The
last part is to describe the net exchange of carbon between the forest and the atmosphere,
denominated Net Ecosystem Production (NEP), which is defined by the equation:
NEP = NPP −Rh −(V OC −DOC −PIC −DIC) −TH
(2.1)
Where VOC are Volatile Organic Compounds, DOC Dissolved Organic Carbon, PIC Par-
ticulate Carbon by Erosion and DIC Dissolved Inorganic Carbon, all together they rep-
resent the remaining carbon transfers over the ecosystem boundary not directly related
to human activities, which are represented by TH, Thinning and Harvesting. The biggest
loss source among them is VOC and contribution from PIC and DIC can be ignored in
most cases. The carbon stocks are divided by physical boundaries chosen by proximity
and function, so they are classified as amount in leaves, branches and stems (CLBS), in
soil organic matter (CSOM), inside roots (CR) and in litter layers (CLITT). Lastly, besides
growth, respiration and thinning/harvesting there are three other important biological pro-
cesses involved: senescence, decay and leaching; all of this, minus PIC, can be seen in
part (a) in Figure 2.4 as Net Ecosystem Carbon Balance (NECB) [1] [20] [21].
Characterization of the ecosystem internal N cycle with litter fall analysis
9
==PAGE:18==
Figure 2.4: Flux terms and boundaries of the carbon (a) and nitrogen (b) budgets [21].
2.1.4
N cycling in forests
Most researchers have relied upon regression equations (usually based on stem diame-
ter, sometimes including diameter and height) for estimating components of tree biomass
(foliage, branch, stem, bark, roots) from selected harvesting, weighing and dimensional
analyses of trees with a range of sizes. From non-destructive measurements of inde-
pendent variables within a certain area (diameter, height), standlevel estimates of tree
biomass are made. Alternative methods have been used such as stand level biomass
estimates using measurements from a single “average tree” and scaled up to an aerial
basis (e.g., Ovington, 1956; 1962). Tree nutrient contents are calculated from the es-
timated unit area biomass of each component multiplied by nutrient concentrations in
representative samples. New foliage is often differentiated from total foliage in coniferous
forests in order to facilitate calculations of uptake and translocation (see below) and sam-
pling needs to account for within crown variation, such as with tree height, to overcome
biasing. An alternative method is to sample and chemically analyze individual trees and
develop regressions relating tree dimensions to nutrient content by component (Ranger
et al., 1995, 1997). The error estimate in the first case would be a combination of the
biomass error estimate and the nutrient concentration variance; however, the error in the
second case is the variance of the nutrient content regression.
The importance of the understorey as a component of vegetation mass and nutrient pools
varies greatly from virtually zero to as much as 15% of vegetation mass and 30% of
vegetation nutrient content (data from Johnson and Lindberg, 1992). Biomass may be
estimated by regression techniques for woody understorey and by harvesting methods
for ground vegetation using quadrats which provide an estimate of within plot spatial vari-
ance. Sub-sampling would be undertaken for nutrient analysis; often understorey species
10
Characterization of the ecosystem internal N cycle with litter fall analysis
==PAGE:19==
will have greatly different nutrient concentrations in tissues than the overstorey that can
modify cycling patterns. .in cases where the understory is a significant component of
productivity, litterfall estimated by traditional methods may not adequately account for un-
derstorey litterfall (for example estimation of tree fern frond loss in tropical forests or ferns
in red alder stands). This can result in a flawed comparison of estimations of litterfall and
uptake between forest types where overstorey litterfall is adequately estimated in one but
another includes only overstorey litterfall.[19]
Nitrogen is mainly inserted into the system by atmospheric deposition, which is divided
into water-soluble organic WSON (a minor fraction of Nr, 5 %,), inorganic wet deposition
and inorganic dry deposition[21]. Measuring these last two offer significant, yet different,
difficulties.
Nutrient inputs by precipitations end up in interacting with different forest boundaries, be-
cause it can be intercepted (I) by the canopy, fall to the ground as throughfall (TF) and
run down stems as stemflow (SF)[21]; sometimes there are also other factors, like the
climate and morphological dependent Fog water deposition (FD), a term which can be
relevant in coastal and montane forests. Wet deposition (WD) is still the easiest to calcu-
late, due to largely depending on meteorological factors and ion concentration. To take
into account variations of ion concentration related to precipitation intensity, evaluation of
volume-weighted mean (VWM) is preferred to just WD, Eq. 2.2. In alternative, to obtain
a more site specific and direct measurement, automated or bulk collectors can be placed
along elevational or other gradients[22].
V WM of N =
∑
([concNi] ∗precipi)/
∑
precipi
(2.2)
Dry deposition happens when gases and particles are carried by winds and end up ab-
sorbed by the vegetation, making canopy structure, leaf area, particle size and wind in-
tensity the main variables of this input term [1].
Atmospheric inputs
Deposition of particles from the atmosphere is one of the main inputs of nutrients onto
forest canopies, especially for carbon and nitrogen. It can be divided into dry and wet
deposition, [21]
Internal cycling
USE Bray1964, super good and early published paper about litter leaf material contributed
60-76y0 of litter for the species listed, branches 12-15%, bark <1-14% and fruit <1-17%.
Trees with loose dehiscent bark produced considerably more bark litter. The variation
of fruit litter reflects the widely varying fruit size and production of tree species and the
usually short period over which litter is sampled. Miller and Hurst (1957) noted great
annual variation in seed production by a pure Nothofagus truncata forest, and observed
that hot dry summers favored flowering. The occurrence of “mast years” in true beech
(B’agw) forests is well known.
Non-leaf litter data in Table IV range from 2.8% in an angiosperm stand of Bonnevie and
Gjems (1957) to 55% in an Angio- sperm forest of Stoate (1958). These variations em-
phasize that stem litter sampling requires larger areas and longer time spans than leaf
litter sampling if accurate comparisons of the two are to be made [23]
Litter above ground and bellow ground
Above-ground litter can be categorized into two main types: woody and non-woody litter.
1. Woody litter: This category includes various parts of the tree that are composed of
woody material.
It consists of the following subfractions: - Twigs and stems: Small
Characterization of the ecosystem internal N cycle with litter fall analysis
11
==PAGE:20==
branches and main stems that have fallen to the ground. - Branches: Larger woody
branches that have become litter. - Bark: The outer protective layer of the tree trunk and
branches. Fruits’ subfraction: Refers to the woody parts of fruits that have been shed and
become litter.
2. Non-woody litter: This category includes parts of the tree that are not composed of
woody material. It consists of the following subfractions: - Leaves: Fallen leaves from
the tree. - Flowers: Flowers that have dropped from the tree. - Bud scales: Protective
coverings of buds that have fallen to the ground. - Fruits’ subfraction: Refers to the non-
woody parts of fruits that have become litter.
These two categories of litter play important roles in nutrient cycling and ecosystem pro-
cesses within the forest environment.
All the above from [24]
12
Characterization of the ecosystem internal N cycle with litter fall analysis
==PAGE:21==
3
Material and Methods
This project has been a jointed literature research and data gathering study, in order to fill
gaps and evaluate data from the field. Secondly data gathering was achieved by coupling
novel direct measurements from samples examined during the thesis activities and the
review of the historical DTU Sutain database.
3.1
Logistical and technical setup
3.1.1
Site characterization
This project is a single site focused analysis of a forest site, the one in Lille Bøgeskov
(translatable as “Small Beech-forest”), Sorø, Denmark, and the data gathering station
settled at the center of the forest, whose fetch around the tower ranges between 425 and
1630 m [25]. The forest is supposedly never been under cultivation and that its dominant
tree has always been beech since 2500 B.C. [26]. The majority of its published qualities
and traits are shown in Table 3.1, more precisely soils classification in Alfisols or Mollisols
is saturation driven (above or bellow 50%) [27], forest edge is set at the end of the tree
line, which is circumscribed by roads and properties for agriculture, Figure A.1 and Figure
A.2 in Appendix. Besides European Beech and various conifers, other contribution to the
ecosystem flora is given in April by flowers, Anemone nemorosa L. and Mercurialis peren-
nis L. mainly, and after bud-break and penetrating light becomes scarce only patches of
grasses cover the forest floor [28].
ADD MORE INFO FROM PRESENT STUDY
Characterization of the ecosystem internal N cycle with litter fall analysis
13
==PAGE:22==
Site trait
Value
Related data period
Coordinates
55°29’13” N, 11°38’45” E
-
Climate
maritime, cool summers and
mildly windy in winter
-
Temperature (Average annual)
9°C
1996-2010
Precipitation (Average annual)
640 mm
1996-2010
Soils classification
Alfisols or Mollisols
2000
Soil organic layer (SOL) depth
10-40 cm
2000
Soil Carbon pool (down to 1 m depth)
9.3±2.8 kg m−2
2013
C/N ratio in upper SOL
20
2000
C/N ratio in lower SOL
10
2000
Parent material
25-50 % Lime
2000
PH upper soil horizon
4-5
2000
GWT depth winter
0.2 m
2001
GWT depth summer
2 m
2001
Tree species coverage
80% European beech (Fagus sylvatica L.)
20% conifers:
Norway spruce (Picea abies (L.) Karst.)
European larch (Larix decidua Mill.)
2020
Forest management
Beech thinning by 20 % every 10th yr
2020
Tree height (average)
28 m
2018
Roughness length
1.8±0.7 m
2001
Displacement height
20.6±4 m
2001
Terrain conformation
Flat
2020
DBH (Average)
4.7-38.8 cm
1944-2010
Stand density
1767-288 stems ha−1
1944-2010
Wood increment
11 m3ha−1yr−1
2020 (1933)
Peak canopy LAI
4-5
2020
Table 3.1: Lille Bøgeskov, Sorø, traits with the Related data period column presented in
databases (PROFOUND and NitroEurope. FLUXNET, ICOS) and publications. Most of
them are measured continuously until today.
3.1.2
Instrumentation
In the station are, and have been, installed many different kind of instrumentation in the
more than 20 years of studies conducted there. Some have been permanently installed,
like the 45 m mast tower on which all the Eddy Covariance system and various other
meteorological setups are located [27] [29], and others used only in certain moments of
the year, as the use of an LAI 2200 canopy analyser for leaf area index evaluation from
forest floor, or that have been previously been adopted for past projects, for instance the
automatic dynamic PTFE chambers [30] or the set of portable gas exchange system, soil
CO2 flux chamber (LI-6400; LICOR Bio-science, Lincoln, NE, USA) and permanent soil
collars used by Wu et al. [31]. Due to the vast amount of researches conducted and tools
used in the site, and for the fact that their data isn’t the main focus of this study, all further
specifications can be found in Appendix Table.
Litter has been collected since 1998 using 6 different litter traps, which were denominated:
• FIRS: the first installed litter traps, called open litterfall collectors, 40 cm radius, 20
in number, placed in 4 randomly defined transects at 2 m distance from each other.
They were operating from 1998 to 2000 and litter from them was collected monthly
[26].
• OLDF: installed at the start of the millennia, 30 cm radius, 25 in number, arranged
on a grid pattern at 10 m distance from each other [26].
• FORC: litter traps involved in the FORCAST project (going from Fall 2000 to 2002),
14
Characterization of the ecosystem internal N cycle with litter fall analysis
==PAGE:23==
0.39 cm radius, 25 in number, placed within the EC tower’s fetch area with the
specification of 9 anchor sampling points for data harmonization between different
FORCAST study locations; cone shaped, with tripod legs (0-5 –1 m long) made of
PVC tubing , and the cone grid made of HD polyethylene net with a 2mm mesh
size[32][33].
• OLD: implemented in 2003, 40 cm radius, 25 in number, located southwest of the
tower [31]. Their use was terminated in Fall 2016.
• NEW: introduced in 2016, 25 cm radius, 25 in number, placed in the same arrange-
ment as the OLD litter traps, still in use.
• ICOS: traps that abide, mostly, by the ICOS standards [34], made out of plastic and
inox frame, 25 cm radius, 20 in number divided by CP (5 each), located following
the Class 1 Stations indicated cross pattern for forest with no additional plot, see
Figure A.3 and A.4 in Appendix, started operating from 2020 and are still in use.
Other tools used during the study were: paper bags for municipal green waste, used for
storaging, air drying and mixing; aluminum plates; two hot air-flow ovens; scientific elec-
tronic scale (0.01 g of measurement precision); one coffee grinder for coarse shredding
and mixing, plastic bottles and vials for samples collection and shipment.
3.2
Litter related methodologies
3.2.1
Traps and ancillary data
As previously stated, 6 types of traps were utilized in the past 25 years, all of which had
differences not only in their spatial and physical properties, but also in degree of precision,
specificity and accuracy in both the actual methodologies and their recording, an overview
is given in Table 3.2. The data quality evaluation was determined based on data origin
transparency, minimum achievable time specificity/collection frequency ratio, collected
numbers of different fractions and their degree of identification and number of data on
nutrients presented, all of that has been reflected in the ”Data quality evaluation” column.
Trap
Operational period
(yr)
Collection frequency
Collected fractions
(number)
Minimum achievable
data specificity
Data source
Data quality
evaluation
FIRS
1998-2000
monthly
undefined
annual average
Pilegaard et al., 2003 [26];
Beier et al., 2001
poor
OLDF
2000-unkown
monthly
undefined
not definible
Pilegaard et al., 2003[26];
not definible
FORC
2000-2002
biweekly during
Fall season
1
annual average
FORCAST final report, 2003 [32][33];
sufficient
OLD
2003-2016
bimonthly/yearly
2
annual average (Note)
Wu et al., 2013 [31];
internal DTU SUSTAIN
database
mostly sufficient
NEW
2016-2023
3 to 6 times
per yr
5
single collection date
internal DTU SUSTAIN
database
good
ICOS
2020-2023
4 to 8 times
per yr
6
Single fraction per
single trap per
single collection date
internal DTU SUSTAIN
database
very good
Table 3.2: Litter traps general methodology summary
3.2.2
Collection and Sampling
The litter analysis procedure followed in this study is a novel method based on DTU SUS-
TAIN department’s practices and on different ICOS protocols [34], using them as refer-
ences, starting points, inspiration and validation sources. Explained afterwards are the
two resulting methods, one to obtain DW measurement and the other for preparing sam-
ples to analyze and storage, described step by step. This study applied the first method-
ology for the NEW litter traps from years 2021 and 2022, plus one ICOS litter sample from
January 2023; while the second one was used to create samples of all the available years
Characterization of the ecosystem internal N cycle with litter fall analysis
15
==PAGE:24==
from NEW and ICOS traps (7 and 3 respectively) plus 2016 from OLD traps.
Collection and DW measurements:
1. Collection frequency should be at least satisfying ICOS regulations for Class 1 sta-
tions [34].
2. The content of each trap is collected in the same date, in labeled paper bags stating
trap ID and date of collection.
3. All filled bags are then left to air dry in a storage room for two weeks minimum,
before being sent to the next phase. The content of each bag is divided by hand
into all possible fractions; this master thesis divided beech litter into 8 of them:
• LEAF: non-woody fraction, leaves
• SEED: fruit non-woody fraction, seeds
• TWIG woody fraction, twigs, branches and bark under 2 cm of diameter
• CUPU: fruit woody fraction, cupules
• BUDS: non-woody fraction, bud scales/bud shells
• FLWR: non-woody fraction, flowers
• OTHE: mixed fraction, remaining litter
• branches: woody fraction, twigs, branches and bark over 2 cm of diameter
4. Each fraction is weighted, respecting the ICOS standards for precision [34], be-
fore oven drying and the data entry is registered in the excel data register. Every
anomalies have to be commented and empty cells, or not appearing fractions, are
considered as a 0 entry, if not differently stated in the notes
5. Successively each fraction is placed in a labeled aluminum container and oven dried
at 70 °C for two hours. At the end they are all weighted again, registered and divided
into single labeled paper bags stating: fraction name, trap kind, date of collection,
trap ID, DW.
Samples generation, beware that its intended use is correctly applicable:
1. Collect all bags belonging to a single trap kind and single collection year, than con-
front every data in the excel register and the bags in order to identify missing data
or missing bags.
2. Starting from the first trap (by ID), check if the trap kind is NEW, skip to the next step.
If instead is ICOS, there are additional steps for CP’s spatial distribution evaluation
needed:
(a) Considering a single CP, gather all the bags related to a single fraction for which
is desired to conduct a CP’s spatial analysis.
(b) Calculate the total CP’s fraction’s DW of that fraction and ratios for each trap
contribution.
(c) Using the final sample amount, determine each trap contribution, rounding up
those fractions whose amounts would be smaller than 3%. 1
1It is extremely important to not use more the 60% of the total CP’s fraction’s DW, otherwise it will affect
the representativeness of other samples. In such case either lower the final samples amounts or decide
which sample to prioritize
16
Characterization of the ecosystem internal N cycle with litter fall analysis
==PAGE:25==
(d) Mix each single bag by vigorously shaking it while closed.
(e) Weight and collect the calculated amounts from each bag in a sample bag and
set it aside for step 12.
(f) Repeat from step 2b until each valid fraction has been considered.
(g) Repeat from step 2b until each CP has been considered.
(h) Set aside all the CP’s fraction samples for step ?? and until then consider only
the remaining litter.
3. Separate each fraction from all traps in different big labeled bags to obtain collec-
tion’s date DWs.
4. Examine the OTHE fraction and control if it needs to be scanned once more and then
take a reference picture, label it and upload that. Do so for any of the remaining frac-
tions if they show anomalies (unexpected excessive or scarce amounts, unidentified
bodies, fungi or other damages to the samples).
5. If one or more fractions need to have a single collection’s date sample, follow the
additional steps, otherwise go to step 6:
(a) For each fraction of interest, determine the ratio between the collection date’s
sample amount and the interested fraction’s collection date’s DW. If it exceed
60%, than the representativeness of annual data could be jeopardize and to
control that it is needed to evaluate the relevance of the considered collection
date’s DW on the yearly DW, see step8. In the case it was bellow 10 %, it is
not; otherwise an evaluation of which sample to prioritize is needed.
(b) Mix each single bag by vigorously shaking it while closed.
(c) Weight and collect the calculated amounts from each bag in a sample bag and
set it aside for step 12, until then consider only the remaining litter.
6. Calculate the yearly DW value per fraction and the ratio of contribution from each
collection date.
7. Increase the yearly sample amount by 20 to 50 %, to allow fractioning.
8. Using the yearly sample amount, calculate the amounts of DW needed from each
collection date based on the contribution ratios to then assemble each yearly sam-
ple.
9. Mix each single bag/container by vigorously shaking it while closed.
10. If the yearly sample accounts for less than 20 % or above 80 % of the yearly DW,
it is not necessary to collect each collection date contribution and it is favorable to
mix all the fractions together. Otherwise, create the yearly sample by proportions.
11. Coarse fractions, usually the woody ones, are broken down to shreds or into tiny
pieces. In this study various gardening tools and a grinder were used to reduce the
size of TWIG and CUPU. Than put them in a labeled container.
12. Using a grinder, mix and make into powder each fraction, thoroughly cleaning the
device between each sample. Using a clean brush transfer the powder into a con-
tainer.
13. If the amounts allow it, divide the powder in four and collect only two quarters.
Characterization of the ecosystem internal N cycle with litter fall analysis
17
==PAGE:26==
14. Store the final powder in labeled containers.
During this study instead of taking single collection date’s values for leaves, a Period
variable was created, which sectioned the year The prepared samples were subsequently
sent to the lab of Institut for Geovidenskab og Naturforvaltning, Københavns Universitet,
where they were ball-milled and analyzed.
3.2.3
Litter Period Class definition
To better study the tree’s phenology and it’s seasonality, definition of year in this study
isn’t the usual calendar year, but instead it based on the forest’s Leafed period [27], set-
ting the beginning of the year around bud-break (typically end of January-February). In
such way year 2022 goes from late February-early March 2022 until January 2023. Us-
ing this new early definition, the Litter Period Class time frame was defined, a collection
date’s aggregation based on time distance from main litter fall events calculated through
derivative relative LAI transmission (d rtrans): start of fall season (increase of d rtrans
from summer average), time at peak d rtrans during fall season, end of fall season ( d
rtrans back to steady state after litter loss) and bud-break (initial d rtrans increase during
spring), see Table 3.3 for additional information.
Period class
Associated phenological
period
d LAI rtrans based
starting point
d LAI rtrans based
ending point
1
Pre senescence litter
d LAI rtrans decrease
after bud-break
d LAI rtrans increase
after summer steady state
2
Start of Fall litter
d LAI rtrans increase
after summer steady state
peak d LAI rtrans
during fall period
3
End of Fall litter
peak d LAI rtrans
during fall period
d LAI rtrans steady state
after fall period
4
Late winter litter
d LAI rtrans steady state
after fall period
d LAI rtrans increase
after bud-break
Table 3.3: Period Classification based Leaf Area Index (LAI) relative transmission deriva-
tive
3.2.4
Mast years
The identification of mast years was conducted internally based on relevance of SEED
fraction and using an analysis of sales of beech tree seeds in Denmark from the Danish
Agricultural Agency (LBST) statistics [35], curated by Iben M. Thomsen, Forest & Land-
scape, University of Copenhagen, received via personal communication, similarly to how
was done in Pilegaard et al.,2011 [25]. The provided table can be found in Appendix,
Table A.2. Mast years are a reproduction process that certain tree species adopt, which
consists in producing a significantly higher amount of fruits, seeds, or nuts compared to
the usual years. These years are characterized by a massive production of reproduc-
tive fractions, and it takes place at a synchronized time for all individual of that same
species within a particular geographical area. During mast years, trees invest a consid-
erable amount of resources into reproduction, leading to an abundance of fruits, seeds,
or nuts. Frequency and timing related to masting has still to be fully understood in the
changing environment, some tree species might have mast years every few years, while
others might exhibit this behavior more irregularly. Different studies hint towards temper-
ature and precipitation patterns as source that can influence timing and frequency of mast
years. Mast years have significant ecological implications, as they affect various aspects
of forest ecosystems like animals that feed on seeds[13][36].
18
Characterization of the ecosystem internal N cycle with litter fall analysis
==PAGE:27==
3.3
Data gathering and processing
Similarly to what was said in Section 3.1.2, the vast amount of studies and projects con-
ducted at the Lille Bøgeskov influenced the quality of data records too. Thus every major
article and project revolving around N in the forest was taken into consideration, as well
as data in the department research files. List of all sources and their considered data
is in Table A.3 in Appendix. Data quality was evaluated in terms of completeness and
consistency.
3.3.1
Fluxes, budgets and ratios assessment
The study focused on litter internal cycling only, for
Litter
Mass fluxes were either collected or found in data bases or papers; when unavailable they
were either approximated with ratios, if in sufficient conditions to make such statement.
Most of the subdivision of seeds and cupules was done in such a way, using fruits total
DW collected at each date.
SE from seeds and fruit for ICOS
For CPs the
3.3.2
Statistical analysis
For determining the amounts of DW a simple approach has been first used, assuming all
distributions to be normal. So for each single or aggregated data group across OLD, NEW
and ICOS, Shapiro test was used to determine whether they would be normally distributed
or not. In order to not have biases towards how to group them a preventive Kruskal-Wallis
test was performed, as it is a classic non-parametric alternative to one-way ANOVA test.
For those data aggregation that resulted non normal, Log transform (with the +1 addition
due to the many values close or equal to zero) was applied and then the group was re
tested.
Levene’s test and Fligner-Killeen test for non-parametric test of homogeneity of group
variances
Median and Median Absolute Deviation (MAD) in situations in which even the transforma-
tion wasn’t able to achieve a satisfactory result in the Shapiro test. For the standard error
transformation the MAD value was added with the highest between the value of it’s 95 %
confidence ranges, and then divided by the number of observations (as it would be for a
regular SE).
3.4
Ecosystem definitions, hypothesis and intrinsic
uncertainties
Because the structure and function of ecosystems change with time, ecosystems have a
history of biotic-abiotic interactions. Ecosystem development is the change in structure
and function of abiotic and biotic components that occurs with time (Bormann and Likens
1979). Successional changes in vegetational communities are one aspect of ecosys-
tem development; soil formation is another. It is of utmost importance for quantitative,
and particularly for comparative studies, to identify the current developmental stage of an
ecosystem and how it has changed with time (see p. 19 ff.). Different approaches have
been used to study ecosystem-level questions and include: an empirical or natural history
approach, a balance or budgetary approach, an experimental approach, a comparative
approach and a modeling or simulation approach. These various approaches to the study
of ecosystems will be discussed on pp.19 to 25).[6]
Characterization of the ecosystem internal N cycle with litter fall analysis
19
==PAGE:28==
n internal cycling
The hypothesis on nitrogen saturation asked if a possible indicator for N saturation could
be discovered by observing the N internal cycle of a forest ecosystem. It has been shown
that major fractions (leaves, total litter and fruits) are not increasing their N fluxes, but in
2019 the amounts released in Sorøhave made a
20
Characterization of the ecosystem internal N cycle with litter fall analysis
==PAGE:29==
4
Results
4.1
Litter data reconstruction
Examining and evaluating the state of the art of the data, their methodology and compat-
ibility with future studies was the first step conducted in this project. Through researching
published papers, inspecting data bases and reviewing DTU SUSTAIN department data
collection the following findings were condensed in a single collection.
Values from FIRS traps, first installed litter traps, were very inconsistent with the two
sources providing different elements of the same data ( the total N fluxes for litter 100
kg N ha−1yr−1 [30] and the dried matter and carbon, 470 g DW m–2yr–1 and 235 g C
m–2yr–1 [26]). No further information were provided in the literature, so the data was
considered valid for all the years they were referred to [26]. No specifications on which
fractions were considered and which discarded, they are assumed as total litter.
OLDF was only mentioned in Pilegaard et al.(2003)[26] and no data is connected to them,
therefore they have been discarted.
The traps installed during the FORCAST project have reported values for years 2000 to
2002, on which detailed information on LEAF litter (DW, C%, N%, Lignin %) and decompo-
sition were presented [32][33]. Woody litter was briefly mentioned and no other fractions
were mentioned. Frequency of sampling was stated only for 2000, in number of 3.
The appointed OLD litter traps have been the most long-lived, spanning for 13 years.
Only fraction measured consistently throughout their service was yearly total litter C, N
and their 13 and 15 isotopes concentration in fallen leaves. Two years had more data on
DW, the 2006 mast year and 2007 experiment on dry weighting.
NEW litter traps started in 2016, but first records are only of late 2016 early 2017, they
are the first ones in which the collection dates were all reported with the DW connected to
them. Fractions changed and improved across the last 7 years, starting from 5 (Leaves,
branches, fruits, mixed fraction under < 2cm, total dry weight) and ending up with 8, adding
bud shells and the subdivision of fruits into seeds and cupules.
The most recently introduced traps, installed based on ICOS norms, started collecting
material from 2020 and has recorded DW per trap, CP and date of collection divided in:
twigs < 2cm, leaves, fruits, flowers [34]. In addition to these at Sorøan ”other” and dis-
carded branches fractions are collected and reported.
The gathered information showed a heterogeneity far larger then expected. Most of the
leaf samples from NEW had not been previously analyzed and neither the traps of the
past where related to the ones present today.
4.1.1
Fraction identification
Besides including fractions required by ICOS, it has been decided to include some more,
as while sorting the OLD and NEW litter unlisted fractions appeared worth investigating.
• Fruits were divided in cupules and seeds, as their volume during data reviewing
and bags double checking was oscillating between 6.69 and 1016.47 g DW yr−1
for seeds and 12.15 to 1359.5 for cupules.
• Bud scales were one of the most relevant fractions during Pre senescence litter,
accounting for half or more the total mass collected that day more than 50 % of the
time it has been registered, Table 4.1.
• Mixed fractions <2cm was introduced to have a safe residual fraction, as in some
dates the mix of various easily degradable fractions, like flowers and bud shells,
Characterization of the ecosystem internal N cycle with litter fall analysis
21
==PAGE:30==
were too intertwined to allow a systematic separation of them, allowing for the pos-
sibility of reviewing the discarded small parts.
To then be able to compare the 8 final fractions, all available litter collected from 2016 to
2022 was sorted, divided and re-weighted.
Collection date
Ratio Buds/Total
18/05/2018
0.565017555
24/08/2018
0.175133921
12/08/2019
0.584716035
22/06/2020
0.497389075
15/07/2021
0.628217857
22/03/2022
0.020112233
05/05/2022
0.511550182
30/08/2022
0.277732946
Table 4.1: Ratio of Buds shells over total during collection dates
In order to harmonize the data a first overview of the different traps was necessary The
completed series had its biggest issues tackling the discontinuity in OLD traps, as
4.1.2
Seasonality analysis
Seasonality was present in many forms, starting from the changes between single col-
lection dates. Starting with single fractions mass, leaves are the most relevant during
Fall, being from 3 to 10 times higher than the others. Twigs appear to always contribute
to the overall picture, being the most relevant one only when no other fraction it’s do-
ing so. Bud shells are the leading mass fraction between May and September. Fruits
and its subfractions are present only in small quantities, a flux of less then 0.2 g DW
m−2, if not during a mast year, in which their relevance increases, see 29/11/22 in Figure
[fig:New seas trends].The remaining woody fractions, cupules, are present even after
the end of litterfall.
22
Characterization of the ecosystem internal N cycle with litter fall analysis
==PAGE:31==
Figure 4.1: Fractions divided by date of collection from NEW litter traps, years 2021-2022.
The variability for each fraction is either always present, Leaves and Twigs , or empha-
sized during specific periods of the year. In 30/08/2022 the mixed fraction <2cm is the
preponderant one, closely followed by bud shells. To be taken into account is that regard-
less of the different trends across every date, no other fraction came closer to litter, which
was the only fraction to go above 10 g DW m−2.
Utilizing the subdivision in Litter Periods these litter fractions tendencies become more
evident, establishing the following relationship between class, fractions and masses:
• Pre Scenescence litter never has high mass fluxes, litter generated by random
weather, like twigs, and the ones connected to bud breakes and reproduction, like
flowers, are more predominant. Because it is a period during which not many leaves
fall, the collection frequency lowers, leading to late collection of material near the
start of fall.
• Start of fall litter were the one contributing the most for total annual litter, averaging
400 g DW m−2. It is entirely dominated by leaf litter, with the exception of fruits
during mast years.
• For End of fall litter it is less clear, as it has presented very different behaviours,
sometimes being the most impactfull of the hole year like in 2021 in Figure 4.1.
• Late winter litter is almost a non period, in between the middle of winter and start
of spring. Its main purpose is to not have late litter belonging to the year prior be
mix with the current one. It is mostly characterized by low masses and high woody
fractions contribution.
Characterization of the ecosystem internal N cycle with litter fall analysis
23
==PAGE:32==
Figure 4.2: Fractions divided by Litter Periods from NEW litter traps, years 2021-2022.
24
Characterization of the ecosystem internal N cycle with litter fall analysis
==PAGE:33==
Figure 4.3: Fractions divided by Litter Periods from ICOS litter traps, years 2020-2021-
2022.
Such pattern appeared in both trap types during the extensive examination of years 2020,2021
and 2022; with the only note to be the presence of high fruit fractions in 2022.
Characterization of the ecosystem internal N cycle with litter fall analysis
25
==PAGE:34==
4.1.3
Mast year influence
Identification of mast years by use of site data was nearly impossible, due to the low
amount of data collected in regard to that. Counting a mention to a mast year in 2009
[37], a total of 3 mast years were ever registered in the forest, the biggest mast year ever
registered in Denmark[empty citation] in 2019, in which the mass flux of fruit fraction was
491.06 g m−2, and one in 2006, amounting for 236.64 g m−2.
Figure 4.4: Mast years DM fluxes for Seeds, Fruits, Leaves and Total litter. The lines
indicate the time at which NEW and ICOS traps, respectively, were installed.
Nontheless the amount of information still provided insights on various behaviour of the
four main fractions interested in masting seasons. Examining Figure 4.4 Seed production
followed the class definition, also showing signs of a possible not yet identified mast year
in 2022. Fruits showed a less abrupt decline in mass from mast years to normal ones;
total litter instead displayed a slow and steady increase until the mast year in 2019, after
which it dropped back to values it had 6 years prior.
In a completely different spectrum is the leaf fraction instead, seemingly not being affected
by the masting seasonality but decreasing its mass flux until the year after the extraordi-
nary mast event. And it is the same for its N concentration, which has been decreasing
in the past decades, while showing increases during reported mast years until 2019, in
which it was bellow 1%, visible in Figure 4.6.
26
Characterization of the ecosystem internal N cycle with litter fall analysis
==PAGE:35==
Figure 4.5: Mast years N concentration for Seeds and Leaves. The lines indicate the time
at which NEW and ICOS traps, respectively, were installed.
Seeds’ concentration appears to be less influenced by the mast year, at the same time it
still shows a slight decline after 2019.
Combining all of that together the result are nitrogen fluxes per square meter that are
declining for both leaves and total mass. They appear to not have any easily identifiable
pattern regarding mast years, as both of them have increased or decreased independently
of the years’ class.
Figure 4.6: Mast years N fluxes for Leaves and Total mass. The lines indicate the time at
which NEW and ICOS traps, respectively, were installed.
4.1.4
Collection methodologies comparison
The first step was to test if the pre-treatment of the samples, for such a reason using data
from a study in 2007 in conjuncture with the data collected for this thesis, the following
table has been created, stating times from collection until oven drying and final ratios
Characterization of the ecosystem internal N cycle with litter fall analysis
27
==PAGE:36==
of reduction from before and after drying. The result was more related to the period of
collection and the times of air drying rather than traps equiparance. It is still apparent that
litter from old traps had a more intense decrease during desiccating.
Litter Year
Trap type
Date of collection
N air drying days
Ratio Oven/air dried
2007
OLD
27/10/2007
27
0.669029
2007
OLD
01/11/2007
22
0.889076
2007
OLD
06/11/2007
17
0.869194
2007
OLD
19/12/2007
19
0.748119
2021
NEW
15/07/2021
570
2021
NEW
19/10/2021
474
0.945826
2021
NEW
24/11/2021
438
0.920712
2022
NEW
22/03/2022
320
0.951099
2022
NEW
30/08/2022
159
0.935734
2022
NEW
05/05/2022
276
0.934125
2022
NEW
29/11/2022
68
0.927063
2022
NEW
11/01/2023
25
0.919039
Table 4.2: Oven and air drying for trap comapreson
In the three periods of overlap between traps, the following conclusions were applied:
• FIRS-FORC in 2000 had only concentrations in common to be compared with, as
their mass fraction were different (Total and Leaves respectively), rendering it im-
possible to establish a direct relationship
• OLD-NEW in 2016 only late winter litter was collected with NEW traps, nevertheless
the two traps showed values for N and C concentration with a degree of similarity
from 70 to 90% .
• For NEW-ICOS parallel collection started in 2020 and is still ongoing. Thanks to
sharing multiple collection dates it was possible to study how to project data from
ICOS to collection in the past. In Figure 4.7 all fractions in common between the
two trap type are presented divided by litter period, it appears that for almost the
hole spectrum of interactions ICOS litter traps register on average higher amounts
of litter.
28
Characterization of the ecosystem internal N cycle with litter fall analysis
==PAGE:37==
Figure 4.7: Mast years N fluxes for Leaves and Total mass. The lines indicate the time at
which NEW and ICOS traps, respectively, were installed.
In order to better understand how and if there is a possibility for re-evaluating data from
past methodologies, a statistical analysis was performed and the results for analysing the
spatial differences between collection points in ICOS traps, the comparability between
different years for OLD traps and the distribution discrepancies sussisting between ICOS
traps and NEW ones are presented in the following tables. As can be seen in Tables 4.3
and 4.4 the effects of the transformation resulted less effective, also other attempts, with
Box cox and using median and MAD, resulted in less precise measurements, thus this
way of evaluating normality was discarded.
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
Total DM
0.392676
0.384615
0.155832
0.812719
0.07617
0.02585
Table 4.3: OLD Traps annual total Shapiro p-values results
Log transformed
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
Total DM
0.392676
0.384615
0.155832
0.812719
0.001383
0.00406
Table 4.4: Log transformed OLD Traps annual total Shapiro p-values results
Far better results were achieved while addressing spatial equality between CPs in ICOS
traps using Kruskal-Wallis, as visible in Table 4.5. This leads to accepting that the ICOS
traps, by how they were positioned, have a high likelihood that data from each of the be
considered
Characterization of the ecosystem internal N cycle with litter fall analysis
29
==PAGE:38==
Fractions
% H0 confirmed a=0.05
% H0 confirmed a=0.1
% Missing
Leaves
82.3529412
70.5882353
0
Flowers
100
100
94.1176471
Fruits
94.1176471
76.4705882
0
Twigs
88.2352941
88.2352941
0
Branches
100
100
76.4705882
Other
93.75
68.75
5.88235294
Table 4.5: Kruskal-Wallis test summary table ICOS CPs’ distribution
To conclude the Kruskal-Wallis conducted to check whether ICOS and NEW traps over
data collected at the same date could be considered part of the same distribution, proving
that they can be safely considered equals, which proved the already showned disparity in
Figure 4.7 as only 22.8% of the cases could be considered statistically similarly distributed.
15/07/2021
19/10/2021
24/11/2021
22/03/2022
30/08/2022
29/11/2022
11/01/2023
Twigs
0.0062086240
0.7493494000
0.1007901000
0.0001552895
0.0571118200
0.0412748492
0.1059394000
Leaves
0.0000000709
0.4726326000
0.0000000028
0.0000002233
0.0000000028
0.0005693796
0.0000029434
Fruits
0.0086263170
0.5695239000
0.0718174600
0.0549517100
0.0015711110
0.2674336871
0.0000566677
Other
0.0006481233
0.8227696000
0.0006800843
0.0564730100
0.0008719143
0.1737340822
0.0047874530
Total_DM
0.0000000028
0.0000001113
0.0000000028
0.0000001238
0.0000000028
0.0021444800
0.0000000801
Table 4.6: Kruskal-Wallis p-values of distribution study ICOS and NEW traps
4.2
Hypothesis testing
4.2.1
Mast years influence and N-Saturation
The hypothesis on nitrogen saturation asked if a possible indicator for N saturation could
be discovered by observing the N internal cycle of a forest ecosystem. It has been shown
that major fractions (leaves, total litter and fruits) are not increasing their N fluxes, with
the exception of 2019 the amounts released in Sorøhave shown that in such extreme
scenario Seeds can largely surpass the historically dominant fraction, Leaves. With a N
concentration of 3.80 it a flux of 0.00786 kg N m−2yr−1.
30
Characterization of the ecosystem internal N cycle with litter fall analysis
==PAGE:39==
Figure 4.8: Nitrogen fluxes stacked per fraction across all reliable data at Lille Bøgeskov,
Sorø,
Characterization of the ecosystem internal N cycle with litter fall analysis
31
==PAGE:40==
32
Characterization of the ecosystem internal N cycle with litter fall analysis
==PAGE:41==
5
Discussion
5.1
Definitions and starting conditions
The starting aim of this study and the constant challenges it posed were the vast, deep
and broad ramification that it kept spreading, it felt more than necessary to describe and
define what boundaries are at the start of this thesis for such a reason. The staring point
was to use litter data collected during the years and gather the rest of the N fluxes to
perform a holistic analysis of how far or near N saturation Lille Bøgeskov is. What instead
it turned into was a profound immersion into forestry and data manipulation, analyzing
what a good litter study should aim to do. As such many of the initial objective have
been downscaled, the targets became less and less ambitious, but at the same time
more focused and precise, looking for the details in what is commonly seen as a standard
and not so complex aspect of ecosystem analysis. For the beginning the data collection
condition was poor and disjointed. Data was scattered across different papers and server
folders, and the work that should have been preliminary acquired the focus of this thesis.
To ensure that a strong methodology was applied, the first step had been to quality assess
the amount of data necessary for the time series to be reconstructed. What resulted
from that was a huge gap in data gathering beginning in 2010 and culminating with the
missed trap collection in 2015. There were bags of litter that needed to be investigated
dating 2016, plus two full years of missed drying and recording of NEW litter traps. The
methodology initially proposed had flaws, and still has to be proven that even more of
these problems aren’t going to arise. The research about oven drying was conducted
to test whether drying the litter at 70° for only 2 hours, instead of the 24-48 commonly
referred to, was exactly for investigating so. The result was indeed ambiguous, as the
ratio of mass loss was far lower than what achieved in 2007, but it is also true that the
litter dried in this project has either been sitting in a litter bag for more than 40 days, or
that it was collected in a period (winter) in which the majority of the litter has already lost
most of its water content.
A more in depth test of litter dried mostly by air should be conducted, so that all the
past data can be validated, otherwise it should be considered to switch towards the new
ICOS methods [34]. The decision to create a robust collection and analysis methodology
was supported by the fact that multiple studies disregard certain part of litter collection or
never specify if they are debating about total litter or just the leaf fraction, see Table A.3
in Appendix.
5.2
Traps related evaluation
There wer many big issues with traps, their definition, positioning and miss quoting from
papers. Pilegaard et al. (2003)[26] quotes Beier et al (2001) [30] for amounts of DW, C and
N, but they are not presented in the paper. Values from FIRS traps have been assumed to
be totals by the way in which they are presented[26], but it wouldn’t be surprising if instead
they were all, or partially, only related to leaf litter. No indication on collection date, their
frequency or the methodology for sorting and drying, all this paired with the fact that it is
a value provided for more than one year, not defining how many of those were included
in the calculations, making this data highly unreliable. Nonetheless FIRS data was still
considered for 1998,1999 and 2000 in order to establish a baseline for the data series,
even if roughly so. OLDF are totally unknown, as per the date of publishing of the only
source mentioning them, 2003[26], FORC traps have already been installed and the OLD
Characterization of the ecosystem internal N cycle with litter fall analysis
33
==PAGE:42==
litter traps don’t match the radius size described[33]. Litter data quality from OLD is totally
related to the NitroEurope project timing, as informations gathered during the years 2003-
2008 have recorded data per single trap (allowing for some statistical inference) and a
study on collected litter drying processes in 2007; while after 2009 data becomes just
a single entry, often times unlabeled. Finally their collection had been neglected in the
years 2015 and 2016, with the 2015 litter sitting in the traps for more than an entire season
cycle. This compromises the quality of the data, as the more the litter stays in the trap,
the more natural decomposition and weathering creates bias in the final sample. In Sor
øleaf litter after 360 days loses 20-30 % of its mass [32] and n concentration diminishes
by 50 % or more. More so the data collected in 2016 also can be considered skewed by
this, as the late collection in June 2016 have most probably contaminated 2015 samples
and deprived 2016 of some of its fraction (possibly flowers or bud shells).
Regarding NEW traps, even if the increase in quality from the past ones was significant,
are still for most of the years devoid of data per single trap, or no weight loss during
drying or no errors. Only the last two years at this date (2021 and 2022) have fixed all the
aforementioned issues. Lastly there are the ICOS litter traps which have all data per trap,
CP and date of collection, because it has to be reported. The use standardized forms
and practices[34], which allows for great studies on spatial variability and seasonality, are
much needed, as this study proves. The mayor problems with ICOS and NEW litter traps
at Sorøis their diamenter, which is far bellow the minimum stated by ICOS, 25 cm radius
instead of 39.
5.3
Methodology evaluation
First two predominant flaws of the presented methodology has to be the decision at priori
of what periods should be assigned to which date, as it has to be put in relation not only
with Period class, but with the time latency from the last collection, as one trap in January
could still have fractions belonging to November is it wasn’t gathered before. In second
instance the decision of drying all fractions for all periods were a gigantic task, that took
an entire month to perform; instruction and common practises should be designed to help
the technicians and scientists in their job and not to over complicate it. Thus a better solu-
tion should be estimate, maybe by grasping more firmly the ratios of dryness achievable
through air drying. For the comparison between traps, not having analyzed NEW data
that overlaps with ICOS was very detrimental to the possibility to confront them, as only
for 2021 and 2020 a good evaluation of variability between traps types over Litter periods
could have been performed. For such reason it was only possible to confront dry weights,
which is still relevant thanks to the fact that both traps have the same diameter and so it
wasn’t necessary to calculate fluxes of litter mass for them to be confronted. The choice
of not digging deeper into comparing 2016 NEW and OLD litter traps it comes from the
really bad collection predicament of that year. Lastly the overlap in 2000 from FIRS and
FORC was one most amousing, as their ratio, 398.6 to 470, could confirm the hypothesis
that one is the litter fraction of the other[32][26]. The division between litter year period
class is yet to be proven efficient, as it is mostly dependant on frequency of collection. In
fact in this study determining in which period a specific sampling date would fall wasn’t
consistent throughout all years. The only fixed ones were those collected in Period 1, Pre
senescence litter, as it was fairly easy to track. Start of Lìtterfall and the more intensive
collections at that point made very obvious when it ended; its starting point is more com-
plex to pin point, but it is fairly safe to state that associating bud-break to it assures that
at least one of the most, if not the most, predominant fraction of such period would be
present.
On a different note Start of Fall litter could be contaminated by summer litter if collected
34
Characterization of the ecosystem internal N cycle with litter fall analysis
==PAGE:43==
too early; but usually the amounts that are collected during the start of autumn render
such discrepancy safely ignorable. The major flaw of Period 2 is connected with its end,
as the peak derivative relative LAI transmission isn’t a data readily available in the time
of collection; a more practical approach should be constructed, due to when the litter is
collected greatly affects the Periods definition for such a year. Directly connected to this
is the problems of how can Periods 3 and 4 be told apart, as most of the times End of Fall
litter can be collected as late as January. So late winter litter could most definitely be ag-
gregated to Late winter ones, but in this study it has been decided to first investigate each
possible litter season; besides some date of collection in early March had fractions clearly
belonging to the year past (fruits), giving a reason for Period 4 to be kept in consideration.
Characterization of the ecosystem internal N cycle with litter fall analysis
35
==PAGE:44==
36
Characterization of the ecosystem internal N cycle with litter fall analysis
==PAGE:45==
6
Conclusions
The study initially aimed to analyze nitrogen (N) saturation in Lille Bøgeskov forest, but it
faced various challenges and complexities that required defining clear boundaries at the
outset. The starting point was to use litter data collected over the years and gather addi-
tional N flux data to perform a holistic analysis of N saturation levels. However, the study
evolved into a deeper exploration of forestry practices and data manipulation, leading to
a downsizing of objectives to achieve more focused and precise results.
The data collection condition was initially poor and disjointed, with scattered information
across papers and server folders. This prompted the study to focus on acquiring and
organizing the data, which proved to be a significant task. Quality assessment revealed
a substantial gap in data gathering from 2010 to 2015 and several lack of consistency.
The methodology initially proposed had flaws, and the study explored the effects of using
shorter drying times for litter samples compared to conventional methods. The results
were ambiguous, and further investigation is needed to validate past data and consider
adopting new ICOS methods. Traps used in the study posed several issues related to their
definition, positioning, and quoting from previous papers. Data from FIRS traps were as-
sumed to be totals, but uncertainties surround their collection dates and methodology,
making the data unreliable. OLD litter traps lacked comprehensive data, with information
available only for specific years. The quality of OLD data was compromised by missed
collections and extended trap exposure, affecting sample integrity. NEW traps showed
improvements in data quality, but issues persisted for most years, particularly with in-
complete or missing data. Only the last two years (2021 and 2022) have resolved these
problems. ICOS litter traps provided reliable data with standardized forms and practices,
making them valuable for studying spatial variability and seasonality. However, their di-
ameter at Sorø was smaller than the minimum ICOS requirement, potentially affecting the
results. The study’s methodology evaluation identified flaws in defining litter year period
classes and the decision to dry all fractions for all periods, which was time-consuming. A
better estimation method for drying could be explored. Comparing traps was limited by
the lack of overlapping data, hindering a comprehensive evaluation of variability between
trap types. A more practical approach should be devised to determine the end of Period
2 based on available data. Periods 3 and 4 need to be distinguished more effectively,
considering the collection timing for late winter and start of fall litter. In conclusion, the
study navigated through challenges and refined its objectives to investigate N saturation
in Lille Bøgeskov forest. Data collection and methodology were critically evaluated, shed-
ding light on the complexities of litter studies in ecosystem analysis. Further research is
required to validate past data and improve methodology for future studies. Despite down-
scaled objectives, the study offers valuable insights into forestry practices and highlights
the need for standardized approaches in litter research.
Characterization of the ecosystem internal N cycle with litter fall analysis
37
==PAGE:46==
38
Characterization of the ecosystem internal N cycle with litter fall analysis
==PAGE:47==
Bibliography
[1]
Göran I. Ågren and Folke O. Andersson. Terrestrial Ecosystem Ecology. Cambridge
University Press, Dec. 2011. ISBN: 9781107011076. DOI: 10.1017/CBO9780511894572.
URL: https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/identifier/9780511894572/type/book.
[2]
THE 17 GOALS | Sustainable Development. URL: https://sdgs.un.org/goals.
[3]
Sustainabledevelopment Un Org. “TRANSFORMING OUR WORLD: THE 2030 AGENDA
FOR SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT UNITED NATIONS UNITED NATIONS TRANS-
FORMING OUR WORLD: THE 2030 AGENDA FOR SUSTAINABLE DEVELOP-
MENT”. In: ().
[4]
PD Sharma and PD Sharma. Ecology and environment. Rastogi Publications, 2012.
[5]
F. Steiner. “Landscape Architecture”. In: International Encyclopedia of the Social
Behavioral Sciences (Jan. 2001), pp. 8270–8275. DOI: 10.1016/B0- 08- 043076-
7/04404-1.
[6]
Gene E Likens. “The ecosystem approach: its use and abuse”. In: Excellence in
ecology 3 (1992), pp. VII–XXIV.
[7]
David L Strayer et al. “A Classification of Ecological Boundaries”. In: BioScience
53 (8 Aug. 2003), pp. 723–729. ISSN: 0006-3568. DOI: 10.1641/0006-3568(2003)
053[0723:ACOEB]2.0.CO;2. URL: https://doi.org/10.1641/0006-3568(2003)053[0723:
ACOEB]2.0.CO%202.
[8]
H.-O Pörtner et al. IPCC, 2022: Climate Change 2022: Impacts, Adaptation and
Vulnerability. Contribution of Working Group II to the Sixth Assessment Report of the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. Cambridge University Press, 2022.
DOI: 10.1017/9781009325844. URL: https://report.ipcc.ch/ar6/wg2/IPCC_AR6_
WGII_FullReport.pdf.
[9]
LIEBIG’S LAW OF MINIMUMS. URL: https://earthwiseagriculture.net/grower- s-
toolbox/law-of-minimums/.
[10]
Mass balance. URL: https://www.chemeurope.com/en/encyclopedia/Mass_balance.
html.
[11]
Jes Fenger. Air Pollution: From A Local To A Global Perspective. Ed. by Jens Chris-
tian Tjell and Jes Fenger. 1st ed. Polyteknisk Boghandel og Forlag, 2009. URL:
https://www.polyteknisk.dk/home/polyteknisk_forlag/about/9788750209676.
[12]
J N Galloway et al. “Nitrogen cycles: past, present, and future”. In: ().
[13]
David A Perry, Ram Oren, and Stephen C Hart. Forest ecosystems. JHU press,
2008.
[14]
FAO. Global Forest Resources Assessment 2020 Main report. 2020. DOI: 10.4060/
ca9825en. URL: https://doi.org/10.4060/ca9825en.
[15]
Hannah Ritchie and Max Roser. “Forests and Deforestation”. In: Our World in Data
(2021). https://ourworldindata.org/forests-and-deforestation.
[16]
Laurent Augusto et al. “Soil parent material—A major driver of plant nutrient lim-
itations in terrestrial ecosystems”. In: Global Change Biology 23 (9 Sept. 2017),
pp. 3808–3824. ISSN: 13652486. DOI: 10.1111/GCB.13691.
[17]
I. Yesilonis et al. “Historical land use and stand age effects on forest soil properties in
the Mid-Atlantic US”. In: Forest Ecology and Management 370 (June 2016), pp. 83–
92. ISSN: 0378-1127. DOI: 10.1016/J.FORECO.2016.03.046.
[18]
Juan A. Blanco et al. “Sustainability of forest management practices: Evaluation
through a simulation model of nutrient cycling”. In: Forest Ecology and Management
Characterization of the ecosystem internal N cycle with litter fall analysis
39
==PAGE:48==
213 (1-3 July 2005), pp. 209–228. ISSN: 0378-1127. DOI: 10.1016/J.FORECO.2005.
03.042.
[19]
Dale W. Johnson and John Turner. “Tamm Review: Nutrient cycling in forests: A
historical look and newer developments”. In: Forest Ecology and Management 444
(July 2019), pp. 344–373. ISSN: 0378-1127. DOI: 10.1016/J.FORECO.2019.04.052.
[20]
Richard H. Waring and Steven W. Running. “Forest ecosystems: Analysis at multiple
scales”. In: Forest Ecosystems: Analysis at Multiple Scales (July 2007), pp. 1–420.
DOI: 10.1016/B978-0-12-370605-8.X5001-4. URL: http://www.sciencedirect.com:
5070/book/9780123706058/forest-ecosystems.
[21]
Chris R. Flechard et al. “Carbon-nitrogen interactions in European forests and semi-
natural vegetation - Part 1: Fluxes and budgets of carbon, nitrogen and greenhouse
gases from ecosystem monitoring and modelling”. In: Biogeosciences 17 (6 Mar.
2020), pp. 1583–1620. ISSN: 17264189. DOI: 10.5194/bg-17-1583-2020.
[22]
Alexandra G. Ponette-González, Holly A. Ewing, and Kathleen C. Weathers. “Inter-
actions between Precipitation and Vegetation Canopies”. In: (2016), pp. 215–253.
DOI: 10.1017/CBO9781107110632.009. URL: https://www.cambridge.org/core/
product/9AFB25CF31A1389F9C73CB7E31230F32.
[23]
J. Roger Bray and Eville Gorham. “Litter Production in Forests of the World”. In:
Advances in Ecological Research 2 (C Jan. 1964), pp. 101–157. ISSN: 0065-2504.
DOI: 10.1016/S0065-2504(08)60331-1.
[24]
Bert Gielen et al. “Ancillary vegetation measurements at ICOS ecosystem stations”.
In: International Agrophysics 32.4 (2018), pp. 645–664. ISSN: 0236-8722. DOI: 10.
1515/intag-2017-0048. URL: https://doi.org/10.1515/intag-2017-0048.
[25]
Kim Pilegaard et al. “Increasing net CO 2 uptake by a Danish beech forest during
the period from 1996 to 2009”. In: Agricultural and Forest Meteorology 151 (2011),
pp. 934–946. DOI: 10.1016/j.agrformet.2011.02.013.
[26]
K Pilegaard et al. “Field measurements of atmosphere-biosphere interactions in a
Danish beech forest”. In: Boreal Environment Research 8 (Dec. 2003), pp. 315–
333. ISSN: 1239-6095.
[27]
Kim Pilegaard and Andreas Ibrom. “Net carbon ecosystem exchange during 24
years in the Sorø Beech Forest–relations to phenology and climate”. In: Tellus,
Series B: Chemical and Physical Meteorology 72 (1 Jan. 2020), pp. 1–17. ISSN:
16000889. DOI: 10.1080/16000889.2020.1822063.
[28]
K. Pilegaard et al. “Two years of continuous CO2 eddy-flux measurements over a
Danish beech forest”. In: Agricultural and Forest Meteorology 107 (1 Mar. 2001),
pp. 29–41. ISSN: 0168-1923. DOI: 10.1016/S0168-1923(00)00227-6.
[29]
Anastasia Gorlenko. Multicriteria quality assessment of CO2 flux measurements
and their impact on longterm CO2 budgets in forests. 2022.
[30]
C Beier et al. FLUXES OF NO −3 , NH + 4 , NO, NO 2 , AND N 2 O IN AN OLD
DANISH BEECH FOREST. 2001.
[31]
J. Wu et al. “Synthesis on the carbon budget and cycling in a Danish, temperate
deciduous forest”. In: Agricultural and Forest Meteorology 181 (Nov. 2013), pp. 94–
107. ISSN: 0168-1923. DOI: 10.1016/J.AGRFORMET.2013.07.012.
[32]
Ernst-Detlef Schulze and Reiner Zimmermann. Forest Carbon-Nitrogen Trajectories
Third Annual and Final Report to the EEC. 2003. URL: www.bgc-jena.mpg.de/public/
carboeur/forcast/index_for.html.
[33]
Ernst-Detlef Schulze. FORCAST: First Annual Management Report to the EEC.
Max-Planck-Institute for Biogeochemistry, 2001.
[34]
INSTRUCTIONS FOR ANCILLARY VEGETATION MEASUREMENTS in FOREST
version 20211109. ICOS, Nov. 2021.
40
Characterization of the ecosystem internal N cycle with litter fall analysis
==PAGE:49==
[35]
Landbrug og Fiskeri Ministeriet for F. Statistik. URL: https://lbst.dk/virksomer/
skovbrug/herkomstkontrol-og-kaaring/statistik#c14981.
[36]
Anita Nussbaumer et al. “Contrasting Resource Dynamics in Mast Years for Euro-
pean Beech and Oak—A Continental Scale Analysis”. In: Frontiers in Forests and
Global Change 4 (2021). ISSN: 2624-893X. DOI: 10.3389/ffgc.2021.689836. URL:
https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/ffgc.2021.689836.
[37]
J. Wu et al. “Synthesis on the carbon budget and cycling in a Danish, temperate
deciduous forest”. In: Agricultural and Forest Meteorology 181 (Nov. 2013), pp. 94–
107. ISSN: 0168-1923. DOI: 10.1016/J.AGRFORMET.2013.07.012.
Characterization of the ecosystem internal N cycle with litter fall analysis
41
==PAGE:50==
42
Characterization of the ecosystem internal N cycle with litter fall analysis
==PAGE:51==
A
Appendix 1
A.0.1
Data quality evaluation
The data quality evaluation was determined based on data origin transparency, Minimum
achievable time specificity/collection frequency ratio, Collected fractions score, Major nu-
trient data score. Description and tables for that are in Appendix
Attribute name
Attribute explenation
Grain size
Dimension of the fondamental
unit of the Spatial structure
Extent
Absolute physical size of the
Spatial structure
Dimensionality
Dimension of the boundary
itself, in 3D it is thickness
Geometry of adjacent patches
How the area of contact between
two different patches defined
by boundaries are addressed
Iterative dependencies
How much and If the boundary has
conditions that depend of interactions
between the divided patches or not
Sharpness
How much and If the change
between the divided patches
in the boundary is gradual or not
Contrast
How much and If the change
between the divided patches across
the boundary is gradual or not
Integrity
How much and If the boundary is
spatially continuos, or considered as such, or not
Convolution degree
How complex is the overall
spatial definition of the boundary
Contributors numerosity
Number of single ecological
property that contributes to define the boundary
Originating effects congruency
How much and If the ecological
properties that contributes to define
the boundary have a congruent effect or not
Table A.1: Eleven attributes of the Second Ecological boundaries class, Spatial structure
Characterization of the ecosystem internal N cycle with litter fall analysis
43
==PAGE:52==
Figure A.1: Flux foot print for 2018 [27]. The red dot depicts the tower location. Footprint
contour lines are shown in steps of 10% from 50% to 90%. The background shows land
use: beech forest (light green), coniferous forest (green), clear-cut (dark green), agricul-
ture (pale yellow), built-up area (blue), and woodland patches (grey).
44
Characterization of the ecosystem internal N cycle with litter fall analysis
==PAGE:53==
Figure A.2: Google earth capture of Lille Bøgeskov, Sorø, forest, based on A.1, Figure 1
[25] and Figure 1 [31]. The red line indicates the undisputed forest area, while the section
in yellow is including a section included in the quoted papers but that appear to have non
forest landmarks in them
Characterization of the ecosystem internal N cycle with litter fall analysis
45
==PAGE:54==
Figure A.3: The basic sampling design for ancillary measurements in forest and cropland
stations. a) – At Class 1 stations, four Continuous Plots (CP) located around the EC flux
tower in a cross-like design. At Class 2 stations, two CP are located at the two positions
in the cross-like design that are deemed most representative for the target area. b) –
At Class 1 stations, an optional fifth plot is installed further upwind from the EC tower in
case of a predominant wind direction. The default distances (X) between the tower and
the center of a plot vary per ecosystem type: X is set to 15 m for croplands and 35 m for
forests The range of the distance where the plot can be relocated is set between 10 m
(Y1) and 35 m (Y2) for croplands and 30 m (Y1) and 100 m (Y2) for forests[24].
Figure A.4: Spatial sampling design for forest stations for litter traps placement inside a
CP plot, N is the true North, not magnetic one [34].
46
Characterization of the ecosystem internal N cycle with litter fall analysis
==PAGE:55==
Year
Percent fruit score
Official LBST (kg yr^-1)
Mast classification
2002
49.4%
40346.90
L
2003
0.8%
1031.30
N
2006
35.4%
24976.70
L
2007
3.5%
0.00
N
2008
0.8%
0.00
N
2009
49.8%
21651.29
L
2010
2.1%
0.00
N
2013
22.5%
966.40
M
2014
26.9%
3077.90
M
2015
20.2%
2585.00
M
2016
9.3%
-
N
2017
29.3%
2893.40
M
2018
8.5%
0.00
N
2019
64.2%
16551.60
L
2020
6.5%
0.00
N
2021
7.0%
0.00
N
2022
43.6%
NA
Table A.2: Mast year data and classification form Iben Margrete Thomsen on beech trees
in Denmark
Non leaf litter inclusion
Litter fraction analysis
Non Leaf fraction
Time frame
Title
No
No
-
1992
Prescott2011
No
No
-
2013-2014
Pastorelli2021
No
No
-
1984
Taylor1989
Unspecified
No
-
2008
Talbot2012
No
No
-
1970-1995 (papers reviewd)
Aerts1997
Unspecified
No
-
1978-1994 (papers reviewd)
Couteauxe1995
Yes
Yes
Minimal
-
Robertson2000
No
No
-
-
Hattenschwiler2005
Yes
Yes
Mentioned
-
Krishna2017
Unspecified
No
-
1971(paper published date)
Jacks1971
No
No
-
2015
Bradford2017
No
No
-
1981
McClaugherty1985
No
No
-
1980-2005
Knorr2005
No
No
-
1993
Cornelissen1999
No
No
-
1993
Cornelissen1996
Unspecified
No
-
-
Jian2016
Yes
Yes
Mentioned
-
Chapin2012
Yes
Yes
Mentioned
-
Beare1995
No
No
-
-
Thornton2005
No
No
-
1992-1998
Trofymow2011
No
No
-
-
Bonanomi2023
No
No
-
-
Aerts1999
No
No
-
-
Cornwell2008
No
No
-
-
Aerts1997
Unspecified
No
-
-
Wardle1992
Yes
Yes
Analyzed
-
Berg2014
Yes
Yes
Analyzed
1876-1961
Bray1964
Yes
Yes
Analyzed
-
Johnson2019
No
No
-
2011-2012
Vigulu2019
Yes
Yes
Analyzed
2011-
Wang2017
Yes
Yes
Analyzed
2010-2011
Kamruzzaman2013
Yes
Yes
Analyzed
2009-2010
Carnol2013
Yes
Yes
reviewed
1964-2016
You2017
Table A.3: Final results of literature study on litter fractions
Characterization of the ecosystem internal N cycle with litter fall analysis
47
==PAGE:56==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Bygningstorvet, Building 115
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
https://sustain.dtu.dk/
