==PAGE:1==
Informative Path Planning for Multi-Drone
System in Search and Rescue Operations.
Master Thesis
DTU Elektro
Department of Electrical and Photonics Engineering
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Informative Path Planning for Multi-Drone System in Search and Rescue
Operations.
By
(s210299) Filippo Bentivoglio
Advisor(s)
Matteo Fumagalli, Associate Professor (DTU)
Jeppe Heini Mikkelsen, PhD Student (DTU)
Education
Master Thesis
Programme
Autonomou Systems
Period
13 February 2023 to 13 July 2023
ECTS
30
Copyright:
Filippo Bentivoglio 2023
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include
the customary bibliographic citation, including author attribution,
report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Christian Andersen, 2018
Published by:
DTU, Department of Electrical and Photonics Engineering ,
Brovej, Building 326, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
https://electro.dtu.dk/
Remark
This report is submitted as partial fulfillment of the requirements
for graduation in the above education at the Technical University
of Denmark.
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
Search and rescue (SAR) operations play a critical role in saving lives and
minimizing the impact of disasters and emergencies.
Traditional SAR efforts
often rely on ground-based teams, which can be limited in their capabilities,
especially
in
challenging
and
hazardous
environments.
However,
the
emergence of unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) has revolutionized the field of
SAR, offering unique advantages and capabilities that significantly enhance the
effectiveness and efficiency of rescue missions.
Typically, UAVs can be
deployed for mapping and exploration tasks in order to reduce the mission’s
searching time.
This master’s thesis aims to develop an informative path-planning algorithm to
efficiently control a swarm of UAVs, each equipped with an RGB camera, to
autonomously explore, gather information and detect lost targets in an open
environment.
The algorithm exploits the concept of entropy, from information
theory, which is a measure of the information encompassed in a system
enabling each UAV to autonomously make decisions on which area to explore
and replan its route at runtime.
The approach was tested using state-of-the-art simulation and deployed on real
hardware, showing promising results. This means that, with further improvements
and optimizations, it could become a useful tool for autonomously deploying UAVs
in SAR operations in order to increase their efficiency and success rate. Note that
the method developed during this thesis has a strong focus on the Mohamed Bin
Zayed International Robotics Challenge 2023 [1] as a building block for future
development and deployment.
ii
Informative Path Planning for Multi-Drone System in Search and Rescue Operations.
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
First and foremost, I am grateful to my family for their love and encouragement
throughout my academic journey. Living and studying abroad for the past two-
and-a-half years has been an enriching experience, nostalgic from time to time,
but your love eased the distance from home. Thanks to ev releryative and friend,
for the kindness and warmth showed at every come back. My deepest gratitude
and appreciation to my mum and grandmother, for the strength and faith with
which they have faced the last few years.
I am thankful to my thesis advisors, Matteo and Jeppe, for their guidance,
support, and invaluable expertise throughout this journey. It has been an honour
and pleasure to collaborate together in the past year-and-a-half.
Finally, I would like to thank all the people met during this experience, thanks to the
B1 community. Special thanks to Sarah, Alex, and Krishna for making everyday
life much easier and funnier.
iii
Informative Path Planning for Multi-Drone System in Search and Rescue Operations.
==PAGE:6==
iv
Informative Path Planning for Multi-Drone System in Search and Rescue Operations.
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
1
Introduction
2
1.1
Background and Project Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Thesis Objective . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.3
Thesis Outline
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Thesis Background
5
2.1
Literature review . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Mathematical tools . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2.1
Bayes Filter . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2.2
Pinhole camera model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.2.3
Unscented transformation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.2.4
Entropy in information theory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3
Model Description
15
3.1
Problem description
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.2
Methodology
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.2.1
Objective definition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.2.2
Discretization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.3
Bayes filter loop
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.3.1
Prediction step . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.3.2
Control action step . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.3.3
Update step . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3.4
State Machine
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4
Deployment and Results
37
4.1
Simulation setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
4.2
Simulation results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
4.2.1
Simulation: one drone, two targets . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
4.2.2
Simulation: two drones, five targets
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
4.3
Hardware setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
4.4
Experiments analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
5
Conclusion and Future work
51
Bibliography
53
v
Informative Path Planning for Multi-Drone System in Search and Rescue Operations.
==PAGE:8==
A Appendix
55
vi
Informative Path Planning for Multi-Drone System in Search and Rescue Operations.
==PAGE:9==
List of Figures
2.1
Pinhole camera model.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.2
2D-3D pixel to world coordinate transformation..
. . . . . . . . . .
10
2.3
Unscented transformation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.4
Entropy H of a binary event x.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.1
Bi-variate Normal Distribution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.2
Ellipses and eigenvalues of a normal distribution. . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.3
Drone’s future state poses generation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.4
Drone’s filed of view and target’s particles . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.5
Camera distance factor
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.6
Target distribution distance factor . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.7
Process of updating prior distributions, given that the observation
is null. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
3.8
Chi-Squared distributions for different degrees of freedom k.
. . .
32
3.9
Drone State Machine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
4.1
Gazebo Garden simulation environment. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
4.2
Boat detection by custom YOLO v8 model.
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
4.3
Single UAV trajectory on the xy plane. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
4.4
Drone’s current state entropy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
4.5
Entropy for several target distributions and single UAV, evaluated
according to (3.28). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
4.6
Number of particles for several target distributions and single UAV.
42
4.7
Multiple UAV trajectories on the xy plane. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
4.8
Drones’ current state entropy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
4.9
Entropy for several target distributions and multiple UAVs,
evaluated according to (3.28). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
4.10 Number of particles for several target distributions and multiple UAVs. 44
4.11 Drone used for deployment. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
4.12 Experiment set-up. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
4.13 Drone x position during the experiment. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
4.14 Drone y position during the experiment. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
4.15 Drone z position during the experiment. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
4.16 Drone xy trajectory during the experiment. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
4.17 Drone yaw orientation during the experiment. . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
A.1 Critical points of the Chi squared distribution. . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
1
Informative Path Planning for Multi-Drone System in Search and Rescue Operations.
==PAGE:10==
1
Introduction
1.1
Background and Project Motivation
In recent years, as the level of technology and automation has increased, mobile
robots have been deployed in various domains, such as ground, aerial, and
marine, accomplishing different tasks. Of particular interest is the adoption of
unmanned autonomous vehicles in Search and Rescue (SAR) operations [2].
UAVs can prove extremely helpful in expediting the emergency response, given
that, in every SAR operation, time plays a crucial role in saving lives and
reducing damage. Autonomous robots can be employed for searching, mapping,
inspection,
and exploration tasks in adverse environments where human
intervention can compromise the safety of the SAR personnel themselves. They
could also act as mobile repeaters when wireless communication is lost due to
damage to the infrastructure or the remote location in which the rescue mission
may occur.
This thesis is a continuation of the work in which the author has participated
during the academic year 2022-2023. Over this period, the author was part of
the working group within the Automation and Control department at DTU and
participated in the Mohamed Bin Zayed International Robotics Challenge
(MBZIRC) 2023-24 which will be held in the United Arab Emirates (UAE) in
February 2024. The challenge requires deploying a swarm of Unmanned Aerial
Vehicles (UAVs) and one Unmanned Surface Vehicle (USV) in order to detect
vessels sailing in the open sea and execute aerial pick-and-place operations
from the vessels to the shore. The subproblem this thesis aims to tackle is the
exploration and searching phase: specifically, how to efficiently control the team
of UAVs to search for the lost vessels. Despite the thesis having a strong focus
on the competition itself, the method was developed by adopting a generalistic
approach in order to make it applicable to different SAR mission scenarios.
The approach developed falls within the definition of Informative Path Planning
2
Informative Path Planning for Multi-Drone System in Search and Rescue Operations.
==PAGE:11==
(IPP), which in its general form, aims at finding a path that maximizes the
information gain.
This could be extremely advantageous in SAR missions
because often the priority is to find possible survivors in the shortest time, and
having drones that can autonomously gather information might prove to be of
vital importance. Additionally, considering that a UAV, equipped with a camera,
provides a bird’s eye view which has a much wider overview of the environment
compared to the SAR ground personnel.
1.2
Thesis Objective
This thesis focuses on developing a path-planning algorithm tailored for a
system of multi-UAVs deployed in Search and Rescue operations in order to
autonomously explore an unknown environment while searching for lost targets.
The aim is to provide each UAV with a path planning algorithm that enables
them to efficiently search a given area while collecting relevant information for
the search mission. Furthermore, the UAVs should be able to replan their route
based on the information collected from the environment, prioritizing the most
interesting areas.
In order to succeed in this thesis, the following goals have been defined:
• Gain an understanding of the tools and algorithms already used for similar
robotic applications.
• Design and implement a strategy to address the issues.
• Validate the effectiveness and correctness through simulated and real tests.
• Highlight current limitations and reflect upon possible improvements.
1.3
Thesis Outline
The thesis report is divided into 4 chapters and it is based on the goals specified
in the preceding section. The report begins with the literature study and a brief
review of the mathematical tools adopted for a reader to fully comprehend the
algorithm
developed.
This
is
followed
by
the
model
description
and
implementation, along with a detailed mathematical formulation.
Finally, the
algorithm is deployed both in simulation and on real hardware, and the main
results obtained are analyzed and discussed, along with recommendations for
further research. The following is a brief introduction to each chapter:
• Chapter 2 provides an overview of related literature to the search and
exploration task in robotics and of essential theory and mathematical tools.
• Chapter 3 describes the methodology and development of the informative
path planning algorithm for a multi-UAV system.
• Chapter 4 evaluates the algorithm’s performances extracted by simulation
runs and deployment on real hardware.
3
Informative Path Planning for Multi-Drone System in Search and Rescue Operations.
==PAGE:12==
• Chapter 5 highlights the findings and experiences gathered during the
thesis, concluding the report.
4
Informative Path Planning for Multi-Drone System in Search and Rescue Operations.
==PAGE:13==
2
Thesis Background
This chapter provides a literature review of the methodologies applied in robotic
searching and exploration tasks.
The reader is briefed about various
approaches to controlling single or multi-UAVs to explore and navigate through
unknown areas.
Furthermore, this chapter also introduces the essential
concepts and mathematical tools explored in this thesis, which form the core
foundations of the algorithm developed and implemented in this thesis.
2.1
Literature review
Nowadays, in SAR operations, the most common tasks in which robots are
deployed involve mapping and exploration of a given area to quickly acquire
relevant data and information.
Therefore, to fully exploit the use of task, the
navigation and exploration stack should soon become fully autonomous, which
is a common and well-known robotic concept.
In the literature, various
approaches to address this issue can be found, ranging from Coverage Path
Planning (CPP) algorithms to Informative Path Planning.
CPP algorithms [3] aim to define a path that covers every point of a given area or
volume, which is usually decomposed into sub-regions, called cells.
CPP
algorithms are usually classified based on the decomposition technique they
employ,
such as grid-based or graph-based methods,
and whether the
decomposition is exact or approximate. Additionally, they can be categorized
according to whether the path planning is done offline or at runtime. The two
main issues are the curse of dimensionality, as the number of cells and
resolution increase, and the fact that CPP problems are classified as NP-hard
problems, i.e. they can be solved in polynomial time. Instead, IPP algorithms
adopt a different approach, such as [4], [5]. These methods, which are typically
online algorithms, are designated to determine safe and feasible paths for the
robot allowing their sensors to collect as much information as possible during
5
Informative Path Planning for Multi-Drone System in Search and Rescue Operations.
==PAGE:14==
navigation. One of the key advantages of these methods is that they do not rely
on prior information and can adapt to new and fast-changing situations based on
the sensor measurements they receive.
However, because runtime methods
need to be computationally fast, their efficiency is typically lower than that of
offline algorithms.
Both Hollinger [4] and Zacchini [5] make use of the Rapidly-exploring Information
Gathering (RIG) approach which is a sample-based technique.
Unlike
graph-based
algorithms,
which
usually
discretize
the
environment,
and,
therefore, are computationally expensive, RIG algorithms operate in continuous
space and use iterative sampling techniques, such as RRT (Rapidly-exploring
Random Tree), to efficiently explore non-convex environments. These methods
work by iteratively generating branches and nodes, starting from an initial root,
and drawing random samples from the sample space.
Then, each node or
branch is associated with a value, calculated through a utility function which,
usually, includes both a penalty factor, that resembles the cost required to reach
that particular node, and a gain factor, that is related to the information gained
along the path connecting the root to that node. The objective, then, becomes
finding the branch or node that minimizes the cost or maximizes the information
and moving the robot toward that position. For instance, in [6], Bircher deploys a
UAV for 3D exploration, where the utility function is associated with the amount
of unmapped space that can be explored.
Finally, it is worth briefly introducing the reader to a series of papers published
by Bourgault F. which were deeply inspiring for this thesis. In [7], [8], and [9], the
authors developed a Bayesian search strategy for lost targets for a single and a
team of UAVs. The main contribution of their study is the decentralized Bayesian
data fusion technique, called DDF, which enables a system of multiple UAVs to
maintain and update the target state probability distribution. They considered the
multiple UAVs and their sensors as a single unit; therefore, the probability of
detecting the target is a combination of the probability of detection for each
single UAV. Then, they control the entire system with two objective functions:
the first one attempts to maximize the probability of detection in the next time
step, and the second, tends to fly the UAVs toward the estimated target location
when the UAVs are in a region of low probability density. Although this series of
papers has been of great inspiration for this thesis, from the results showed, it is
reasonable to deduce that the main limitation of the proposed method is that the
system of UAVs tends to explore and navigate the environment closely as a
group, and they only split when one target is found and assigned to one of the
UAV for tracking. Instead, an optimal planner would control the drone such that
they are able to spread across the environment increasing the probability of
detection, and thus, reducing the mission time, which, as highlighted at the
beginning of this paragraph, plays a critical role in search and rescue missions.
6
Informative Path Planning for Multi-Drone System in Search and Rescue Operations.
==PAGE:15==
2.2
Mathematical tools
Before diving into the methodology and how it is applied in this thesis, it is
essential to understand the mathematical framework adopted and the theoretical
foundations of it, as they are the core elements of the implemented algorithm.
Therefore, this section starts by outlining the standard Bayes algorithm and its
fundamentals.
Furthermore, it introduces the reader to the pinhole camera
model,
and to the Unscented Transformation as a mathematical tool to
approximate non-linear transformation. Finally, a description of entropy is given,
a concept adopted from information theory
2.2.1
Bayes Filter
Sebastian Thrun, Wolfram Burgard, and Dieter Fox [10] comprehensively
defined robotics and what a robot is as: ”robotics is the science of perceiving
and manipulating the physical world through computer-controlled devices”. To
accomplish this, robots must cope with uncertainty from the physical world, as
well as from their sensors, software, and algorithm approximations.
In
probabilistic robotics, the key concept is to represent uncertainty using the
probability theory,
enabling the system and architecture to handle noisy
measurements and inaccurate model representations.
The cost to pay is in
terms of computational complexity and the need for approximation, given that
the physical world is described by continuous variables, that, in most cases, are
computationally intractable.
In probability theory and statistics, the Bayes filter is used for Bayesian
inference.
The objective is to determine or infer the state of a variable, or a
group of variables, under uncertainty, by merging and fusing prior knowledge
together with new measurements. The central component of the Bayes filter is
Bayes’ rule, which specifies the relationship between conditional probabilities
and allows the estimation of the posterior belief, meaning that the previous
assumption regarding the state of interest is updated in light of new data
collected by the measurement. Mathematically, it follows equation (2.1), where x
is the variable that must be inferred from y, which is usually a measurement of
the system or data related to it.
p(x|y) = p(y|x) · p(x)
p(y)
(2.1)
The prior probability p(x) represents the current estimate of a state or variable in
the system, whereas p(y) is the probability associated with the measurement,
which usually provides indirect information about the prior. Indirect because, in
most cases, the state or variable of interest is not directly measurable, so, the
best that can be done is to estimate it.
p(x|y) and p(y|x) are conditional
probabilities, that is, they measure the probability of an event occurring given
that another event has already occurred.
Bayes’ rule allows to estimate the
7
Informative Path Planning for Multi-Drone System in Search and Rescue Operations.
==PAGE:16==
posterior probability p(x|y) starting from its inverse p(y|x). The latter is usually
referred to as generative model, indicating how state x causes measurement y.
In other words, it resembles the expectation of observing measurement y in state
x.
The Bayes filter is the most general algorithm for calculating and updating
beliefs. It is recursive, meaning that the estimation of the current state relies on
the estimation of the previous state.
(2.2) and (2.3) describe the two crucial
processes of the filter: prediction and update, respectively. With respect to (2.1),
a third variable u is included in (2.2) and (2.3). It corresponds to the control input
to the system, and p(xt|xt−1, u1:t1) describes the motion model, i.e. the likelihood
that a given control action ut will cause a transition from state xt−1 to xt. The
prediction equation measures the prior probability of state xt, whereas the
update equation incorporates the newly acquired measurement yt to update the
belief throughout p(yt|xt), called the measurement model. The denominator in
(2.3) is a normalization factor so that the probability sums to 1. Given that the
state is typically a continuous variable, in these two equations, the probability is
calculated as an integral over dxt−1 and dxt.
However, in most cases, the
integrals are intractable; therefore, they are approximated to the discrete case,
as described in 3.2.2. Furthermore, it is worth noting that these equations utilize
all past states, measurements, and control actions up to time t. Again, as the
complexity
of
the
system
increases,
the
computation
quickly
becomes
intractable. Usually, it is simplified by defining the state as complete, meaning
that, the state xt is the best predictor of the future. Therefore, no other variables
apart from xt may influence the future states. The temporal processes that follow
this rule are known as Markov chains.
p(xt|u1:t, y1:t−1) =
Z
p(xt|xt−1, u1:t) · p(xt−1|u1:t, y1:t−1) dxt−1
(2.2)
p(xt|u1:t, y1:t) =
p(yt|xt) · p(xt|u1:t, y1:t)
R
p(yt|xt) · p(xt|u1:t, y1:t) dxt
(2.3)
subsection 2.2.1 describes in more detail how the Bayes filter is adopted in the
multi-UAV search strategy.
2.2.2
Pinhole camera model
In order to perceive the environment and optimize the search strategy, the
drones are equipped with an RGB-monocular camera. Therefore, it is essential
to understand the mechanism and mathematical relationship between points or
objects in the environment (3D coordinates) and their reprojections into the
image plane (2D coordinates). Typically, and in most cases, this relationship is
described by the pinhole camera model [11] which is an approximated
representation since it does not consider the presence of lenses or geometric
distortions.
However, some of these effects, such as distortions, can be
mathematically compensated, or their effects are negligible and therefore not
8
Informative Path Planning for Multi-Drone System in Search and Rescue Operations.
==PAGE:17==
Figure 2.1: Pinhole camera model.
considered. The geometric relationships of the pinhole model are illustrated in
Figure 2.1. A detailed description can be found in various computer vision or
photogrammetry books, while here, only the main concepts and equations are
represented. In Figure 2.1, the elements of interest are P(xw, yw, zw), which is a
point defined in the world coordinate system (WCS), that is, a point in the
environment, and P(x, y), which is its projection onto the image plane. The most
common projection method used in computer vision is the true 3D perspective,
in which a point is projected onto the image plane by dividing it by its z
component. The process is described by equations (2.4) and (2.5), where K is
the calibration matrix and describes the camera’s intrinsic parameters, namely,
focal length, image centre coordinates, and scaling factor.
Instead, R and t
represent the homogeneous transformation from the inertial world coordinate
system to the camera system. The product of K and [R | t] is defined as the
projective matrix P.
pw and pc represent the 3D coordinates of the point of
interest and its projection onto the image plane, respectively, which are the pixel
coordinates.
Therefore, the projective matrix P describes the transformation
from the world (WCS) to the image coordinate system (PCS) P : R³ →R².
K =


fx
s
cx
0
fy
cy
0
0
1


(2.4)
pc = K [R | t] pw = P pw
(2.5)
However, in this project, the useful function is the inverse projection, precisely,
from 2D pixel coordinates to 3D world coordinates, which is an indefinite
problem in computer vision because it lacks a dimension.
From the pinhole
camera model geometry, it is known that the projection lies on a ray passing
through the camera focal point and pixel coordinates; however, the distance is
unknown. There are methods in the literature to overcome these issues, such as
stereo vision which estimates the depth of a 3D point from two different
9
Informative Path Planning for Multi-Drone System in Search and Rescue Operations.
==PAGE:18==
Figure 2.2: 2D-3D pixel to world coordinate transformation..
perspectives.
However, owing to the nature of the search strategy and its
application, the 2D to 3D projection in this thesis is solved differently.
The
search strategy developed in this thesis is inspired by the MBZIRC Grand
Maritime Competition, where the objective is, basically, to find vessels sailing
over the sea and perform pick-and-place tasks by deploying a team of UAVs
together with an Unmanned Surface Vehicle (USV). Therefore, the targets to
look for will always lie on the ground, hence, the z component, that is, the
altitude, of the target state is always 0. This implies that in order to solve the
projection from 2D pixel coordinates to 3D coordinates, the intersection between
the ray, going from the camera focal point and the pixel coordinates, and the
two-dimensional x −y plane described by the equation z = 0. Consequently, the
intersection identifies the x and y coordinates in the 3D coordinate system. The
transformation is mathematically described by the system of equations (2.6),
where the variable to be calculated is ⃗p I
v , which is the 3D point expressed in the
inertial frame.
⃗p I
c is the camera pose in the inertial frame, ⃗p I
c is the pixel
coordinate in the camera frame, RI
c is the rotation matrix from the inertial frame
to the camera, and ⃗a T is the normal vector on the x −y plane, z = 0.
The
variable t is a scaling factor. The unknowns in the system are t and ⃗p I
v .
(
⃗p I
v = ⃗p I
c + t RI
c ⃗p c
d
⃗a T ⃗p I
v = 0
(2.6)
To solve this system, both sides of the first equation are multiplied by ⃗a T. The left
side of (2.7) is always zero because it is the cross product of two perpendicular
vectors, as depicted in the second equation. This allows to express t as (2.8),
and, finally, to write ⃗p I
v as a function h(⃗p c
d, ⃗p I
c , θ I
c ) of the other known variables,
where θ I
c ) is the tuple of rotation angles that defines RI
c.
⃗a T ⃗p I
v = ⃗a T ⃗p I
c + t⃗a T RI
c ⃗p c
d
(2.7)
10
Informative Path Planning for Multi-Drone System in Search and Rescue Operations.
==PAGE:19==
t = −⃗a T ⃗p I
c
⃗a T RI
c ⃗p c
d
RI
c ⃗p c
d
(2.8)
⃗p I
v = h(⃗p c
d, ⃗p I
c , θ I
c ) = ⃗p I
c −
⃗a T ⃗p I
c
⃗a T RI
c ⃗p c
d
RI
c ⃗p c
d
(2.9)
Furthermore, together with the projection of the pixel onto the surface, it is useful
to estimate the uncertainty related to the transformation, that is converting the
pose uncertainty of the UAV/camera into the uncertainty of the 3D point position.
During navigation, any robotic system accumulates uncertainty relative to its
position and orientation due to the inaccuracies of its sensor, such as the inertial
measurement system (IMU), GPS, or encoders.
A mathematical tool to
propagate the uncertainty through a nonlinear transformation, such as the
pinhole camera model projection, is to multiply the robot’s covariance matrix, a
6x6 square matrix, by the Jacobian of the transformation function.
J =


∂hx,x
∂x
∂hx,y
∂y
∂hx,z
∂z
∂hx,φ
∂φ
∂hx,θ
∂θ
∂hx.ψ
∂ψ
∂hy,x
∂x
∂hy,y
∂y
∂hy,z
∂z
∂hy,φ
∂φ
∂hy,θ
∂θ
∂hy,ψ
∂ψ
∂hz,x
∂x
∂hz,y
∂y
∂hz,z
∂z
∂hz,φ
∂φ
∂hz,θ
∂θ
∂hz,ψ
∂ψ


(2.10)
Even though the Jacobian method is widely used in Kalman Filters, experimental
results carried out during this thesis showed inconsistent outcomes, causing the
re-projected covariance to increase too much becoming numerically intractable.
For this reason, a second approach for the approximation of non-linearity has
been adopted, namely the unscented transformation, which is briefly reviewed in
the next section.
2.2.3
Unscented transformation
The unscented transform (UT) is a mathematical function used in the Unscented
Kalman Filter to estimate the result of applying a given non-linear transformation
to a random variable. It was ideated by Julier and Uhlmann [12], based on the
intuition that it is easier to approximate a Gaussian distribution than it is to
approximate an arbitrary nonlinear function or transformation. This is because
when a nonlinear transformation to a probability distribution occurs, it is
generally nontrivial to determine the first two moments (mean and covariance) of
the transformed distributions,
and thus,
they can only be approximated.
Uhlmann’s intuition aims to find a parameterization that captures the mean and
covariance of the distribution while propagating information through a nonlinear
equation.
This is accomplished by generating a set of discrete points, called
sigma points, with the same first and second moments of the continuous
distribution and applying a nonlinear function to these points. Then, the mean
and covariance of the transformed set of points represent the desired transform
estimate.
The set of sigma points is selected according to a deterministic
algorithm: in this thesis, the Van der Merwe’s[13] method is applied. Given a
11
Informative Path Planning for Multi-Drone System in Search and Rescue Operations.
==PAGE:20==
n-dimensional random variable x, with mean x and covariance Σxx, then, the
2 n + 1 sigma points Xi are determined as follows:
X0 = x
Xi = x +
p
(n + λ) Σxx

i
Xi+n = x −
p
(n + λ) Σxx

i
W m
0 =
λ
n + λ
W c
0 =
λ
n + λ + (1 −α2 + β)
W m
i
= W c
i =
1
2(n + λ)
i = 1, .., 2n
(2.11)
where λ ∈R is a scaling parameter to regulate the dispersion of the sigma points,
p
(n + λ)Σxx

i is the i-th column of the matrix square root of (n + λ)Pxx, W m
i
and W c
i are the weights is associated with the sigma points. Then, each sigma
point is transformed according to the non-linear function h, in our case is (2.9), and
the weighted mean and covariance are calculated according to (2.13) and (2.14).
The square root of a matrix can be calculated in different ways; in this thesis, the
Cholesky decomposition method is adopted.
Yi = h(Xi)
(2.12)
y =
2n
X
i=o
W m
i Yi
(2.13)
Σyy =
2n
X
i=o
W c
i {Yi −y}{Yi −y}T
(2.14)
The main advantage of the unscented transformation is that, unlike the Extended
Kalman Filter (EKF), it does not linearise the system, thereby providing better
estimates and not requiring the function to be differentiable, which is usually a
condition for linearization.
In this thesis, as described in the previous section, the unscented transformation
is utilized in order to estimate the 2D-3D transformation. Figure 2.3 shows the
transformation described previously. For this example, the dispersion factor λ is
set to 0.3, the drone position mean to (0, 0, 20), the camera rotated of 30° around
the y-axis, and the diagonal elements of the 6x6 drone covariance matrix were,
hypothetically, set to Σd = (1, 1, 1, 0.1, 0.1, 0.1). The sigma points, represented by
the green dots, are originated according to the pixel to reproject and the current
drone state. Each sigma point is then reprojected down to the sea-level surface
through the pinhole camera model, represented by the dashed blue line. Finally
12
Informative Path Planning for Multi-Drone System in Search and Rescue Operations.
==PAGE:21==
Figure 2.3: Representation of the unscented transformation: the sigma points (green
dots) are reprojected (blue dashed lines) to the ground level through the pinhole camera
model. From the pixel reprojections (red crosses), it is possible to compute the weighted
mean (black cross) and weighted covariance (orange ellipse) of the transformation.
from the pixel reprojections (red crosses), the weighted mean and covariance of
the transformation can be computed. The weighted mean and covariance are
calculated according to (2.13) and (2.13), and they are represented by the black
cross and orange ellipse respectively.
2.2.4
Entropy in information theory
The last mathematical concept introduced in this chapter,
for a better
understanding of the method described in chapter 3, is the entropy of a random
variable, usually referred to as the Shannon entropy H. In information theory, it
measures the level of uncertainty associated with a probability distribution; in
other words, it quantifies the amount of information required to describe an event
drawn from the distribution. Given a discrete random variable x, the Shannon
13
Informative Path Planning for Multi-Drone System in Search and Rescue Operations.
==PAGE:22==
Figure 2.4: Entropy H of a binary event x.
entropy is calculated as:
H(x) = −
X
x∈X
p(x) log p(x)
(2.15)
where p(x) is the likelihood of an event x. In the case of a binary event, that is, the
outcome is either 0 or 1, such as a coin toss, the entropy function is represented
by a bell, Figure 2.4, centered around p(x) = 0.5, meaning that the maximum
value of H is associated with the highest uncertainty of the coin toss outcome.
Instead, when the outcome is certain, then the entropy is zero. If it is known that
the toss will give either head or tails with 100% probability, then at each coin toss
there is no uncertainty and the entropy is zero since the toss does not bring any
new information as the outcome of the toss is always certain. For the general
case of a n-dimensional normally distributed variable x ∼N(µ, Σ2), the entropy
is calculated using (2.16), where |Σ| represents the determinant of the covariance
matrix Σ.
H(x) = −
Z
x∈X
p(x) log p(x) dx = n
2 log(2 π) + 1
2log(|Σ|) + n
(2.16)
14
Informative Path Planning for Multi-Drone System in Search and Rescue Operations.
==PAGE:23==
3
Model Description
The previous chapter provided a summary of mathematical theory and tools on
which the method developed in this thesis is built. Instead, this chapter gives an
extensive description of how the different mathematical components are used
and integrated together.
The chapter begins with a comprehensive problem
description providing the reader with an understanding of the scenario. Then,
the objective of the thesis is exhaustively analyzed and mathematically
formulated. Finally, the UAV’s behavioral state machine is briefly summarized.
3.1
Problem description
The problem that this thesis aims to tackle is how to efficiently control a swarm of
UAVs to explore an unknown open environment and autonomously search and
detect target objects.
Note that an open environment refers to one without
obstacles because, in this scenario, inspired by the MBZIRC competition, the
drones will fly over the sea. Furthermore, the multi-agent system should explore
the environment in a distributed manner, meaning that the search strategy
should be equally split among the UAVs to reduce the execution time and
address computational issues that may arise, as discussed later in this chapter.
The problem is presented as follows: given a certain number of lost targets, and
the number of available UAVs for exploration, the objective is to develop an
online path-planning algorithm that enables each UAV to efficiently navigate the
environment while searching for the targets. Within the scope of the MBZRIC
competition, the lost targets are vessels, and there could be up to ten vessels in
the search area. Therefore, in this thesis, the words ”target” and ”vessel” are
mutually interchanged; however, it should be noted that they refer to the same
concept: vessels are the target objects.
It is important to note that the development of this thesis is based on two
15
Informative Path Planning for Multi-Drone System in Search and Rescue Operations.
==PAGE:24==
assumptions.
The first assumption is that even though the positions of the
targets are not known beforehand, a prior distribution is provided for each of
them. In terms of real-world SAR missions and MBZIRC competition, this is a
fair and realistic hypothesis. For instance, during a shipwreck, an assessment of
where to focus the search effort could be estimated based on the radar or
satellite data, or the location of the last communication signal, combined with
information about the wind and tide directions. Similarly, regarding the MBZIRC
competition,
prior expectations of the vessels’ location are estimated by
combining radar data and video footage from a UAV acting as a bird’s eye view.
The second assumption is that within the scope of this thesis, the targets are
considered static.
Although this assumption is unrealistic in most real-world
cases, it is necessary to simplify the problem’s complexity. In reality, lost targets
at sea are in a highly dynamic environment, without considering the fact that in
the MBZIRC competition, the vessels sail in an unknown direction and velocity.
3.2
Methodology
This section presents the core of the algorithm developed, starting from its
mathematical formulation to the analysis of each step involved.
3.2.1
Objective definition
As specified in the previous section, each drone is assigned to a limited number
of distributions and is only responsible for searching the designated vessels.
Therefore, the planned route is affected only by a restricted number of target
distributions.
However, the developed algorithm can also handle unexpected
observations, as discussed in subsection 3.3.3.
The distribution of the target
among the available UAVs is necessary to reduce the search phase time of the
mission and steeply decrease the computational time to make the algorithm
suitable for online computation.
Hence, the objective is for each UAV to plan a route that allows it to search the
areas where the targets are more likely to be. Therefore, the goal is approached
in a probabilistic manner, which is why the reader has been introduced to the
topics of Bayes filter and Shannon’s entropy in chapter 2. Each drone plans its
route based on its beliefs about the target vessels’ location and where they
would be in the future. These beliefs are updated at runtime throughout the two
steps of the Bayes filter, namely, the prediction and update steps, which allow
the revision of the beliefs based on the actual observations received by the
drone’s camera sensor.
Alongside the Bayes filter, the concept of entropy is
used to predict which area will provide the UAV with more information about the
state of the random variable that it is trying to infer. In simpler terms, measuring
the entropy of the system helps the drone heading towards the position where it
is most likely to observe the target.
To express the objective function in
mathematical language, it is first necessary to introduce the mathematical
16
Informative Path Planning for Multi-Drone System in Search and Rescue Operations.
==PAGE:25==
Notation
Description
x
Drone state
xp
l
Pixel projection l for drone state x
Σp
l
Covariance associated with the pixel projection xp
l
Xp
Set of pixel projections for drone state x
ud
Drone control action
uz
Target control action
wi,j
Importance weight of particle j of target distribution zi
y
Camera sensor measurement
z
Target state
zp
i,j
Particle j of target distribution zi
Z
Set of all target distributions assigned
Zp
i
Set of particles of target distribution zi
p(·)
Probability measure
p(z)
Probability of target state
p(y | x)
Measurement probability given drone state
p(y | x, z)
Measurement probability given drone state and target state
N(µ, Σ)
Normal distribution with mean µ and covariance Σ
Table 3.1: Mathematical notations
notation used throughout this thesis (see Table 3.1).
In this thesis, it is often referred to drone state and target state. The drone state
represents the drone’s pose, that is its translation and rotation coordinates with
respect to an inertial frame; while the target state is simply composed of the x and
y coordinates of the searched vessel on the sea surface. Now, we can define the
objective function. Given the current robot state x, the entropy H(x) is defined as:
H(x) = −
Z
y∈Y
p(y | x) log(p(y | x)) dy
(3.1)
In order to include the target state z in (3.1), the chain probability rule is applied:
p(y | x) =
Z
z∈Z
p(y | x, z)p(z) dz
(3.2)
By combining (3.1) and (3.2), the entropy of the system, given the drone state x
and target state z, is redefined as:
H(x) = −
Z
y∈y
Z
z∈Z
p(y | x, z) p(z) log(p(y | x, z) p(z)) dz dy
(3.3)
Previously, it is stated that the objective function should drive the drone in a way
that is able to gather as much information as possible. Since, Shannon’s entropy
H(x) is defined as the expected amount of information in an event of a random
17
Informative Path Planning for Multi-Drone System in Search and Rescue Operations.
==PAGE:26==
variable, the objective becomes finding the control action ud, and therefore, the
drone state x∗in the next time step, that maximizes H(x), see (3.4). To simplify,
the control action ud is not included in the objective function.
x∗= arg max
x∈X H(x)
(3.4)
3.2.2
Discretization
Before proceeding to model the camera sensor measurement probability,
analyzing (3.3), it can be deduced that the equation, as it is, is computationally
intractable because it requires the calculus of two integrals: the internal integral,
over the target space Z, requires the computation of the probability over every
target distribution assigned, whereas the external integral over the entire
observation state space Y . This certainly results in an infeasible operation, even
when considering a single Gaussian distribution because its domain extends to
plus and minus infinity. Therefore, it is necessary to approximate the integrals
through discretization.
Hence, to simplify the calculation, two discretization
procedures are introduced: one pertains to the target distributions, while the
second relates to the drone state space and its sensor state space.
Target state space discretization
First, consider the discretization related to the target distributions. As mentioned
in section 3.1, one of the assumptions made in this thesis is to have knowledge of
the target prior distributions beforehand. Each target distribution is characterized
by a bivariate normal distribution zi ∼N(µi, Σ2
i ) where µi represents its mean and
Σi its covariance, which offers an estimate of the target’s location, specifically its
x −y geographical coordinate. An example of the bivariate normal distribution
can be seen in Figure 3.1, which includes the covariance ellipse and an indefinite
number of particles (black dots) drawn from the distributions. To approximate
(3.2), zi is represented by a set of particles Pi that are sampled from the distribution
according to its mean and covariance. The size of the set |Pi| is proportional to
the uncertainty of each distribution. In other words, it is possible to say that the
larger the covariance ellipse of a distribution, which is a representation of the
uncertainty, the higher the number of particles required to accurately approximate
the distribution.
Given a normal distribution N(µ, Σ2), it is possible to determine the area of its
associated ellipse from its covariance matrix Σ.
Precisely, it is necessary to
calculate the eigenvectors and eigenvalues of the matrix Σ, which are defined in
(3.5).
Assuming that x ̸= ∅, then, x and λ represent the eigenvectors and
eigenvalues of Σ, respectively.
The eigenvectors of a covariance matrix
correspond to the directions along which the data varies the most, while, the
eigenvalues describe the magnitude of the variation along each direction.
Σ x = λ x
(3.5)
18
Informative Path Planning for Multi-Drone System in Search and Rescue Operations.
==PAGE:27==
Figure 3.1: Bi-variate Normal Distribution with its covariance ellipse represented (green
line) and random samples (black dots) drawn from the distribution
In case a of bi-variate normal distribution, the covariance matrix is a 2x2 matrix,
therefore, there are two eigenvectors and two eigenvalues. Since the distribution
should be accurately approximated, the three-sigma rule [14] and the ellipse
associated with 2.58 times the standard deviation, which statistically contains
99% of the data, are considered. In Figure 3.2, the ellipse and eigenvalues of
the same distribution are plotted: in 3.2a, the confidence interval of 68% is
chosen, which corresponds to one standard deviation, while, in 3.2b, the
confidence interval is 99%, which is associated with 2.58 times the standard
deviation. Since for a bivariate normal distribution, the two eigenvalues λ1, λ2
represent the variance of the distribution along the directions defined by the
eigenvectors x1, x2, the area of the ellipse associated with a confidence interval
of 99% is defined as:
Ae = π (2.58 · λ1) (2.58 · λ2) = π · 2.582 · λ1 · λ2
(3.6)
After having defined dp, a density parameter that represents the number of
particles per squared meters, the set of particles Zp
i for the distribution zi has
dimension:
|Pi| = dP · Ae
(3.7)
Finally, as in the particle filter [15], each particle zp
i,j of the distribution zi is
associated with a weight wp
i,j, called importance weight, which represents the
likelihood of target zi being in zp
i,j. In the beginning, the weights are initialized to
19
Informative Path Planning for Multi-Drone System in Search and Rescue Operations.
==PAGE:28==
(a) Ellipse and eigenvalues associated
with one standard deviation.
(b) Ellipse and eigenvalues associated
with 2.58 standard deviations.
Figure 3.2: Ellipses and eigenvalues of a normal distribution.
the same value, precisely wp
i,j =
1
|Pi|.
Then during the search phase, these
weights are updated according to the observation received. In subsection 3.3.3,
the update procedure will be thoroughly described. However, for the present, it
is sufficient to understand that the methodology shares similarities with the
particle filter approach. The main difference is that, in this thesis, the number of
particles decreases over time, as opposed to in the standard particle filter where
it remains constant.
Drone state space discretization
In relation to the discretization of the drone’s state space, a few considerations
have been taken into account. Taking another look at (3.3), to find the optimal
drone state x which maximizes the entropy H, it would require evaluating the
equation over the entire state space X, which is inevitably infeasible. Therefore,
it is necessary to reduce the number of candidates for which the entropy must be
evaluated. Looking at similar methodologies in the literature, the most common
approach seems to adopt Rapidly exploring Random Tree (RRT) to randomly
generate points in space.
An enhancement could be added to the standard
RRT, forcing the tree to grow towards the area of higher probability density,
given the target distributions. Nevertheless, RTT was discarded for the following
two reasons.
First, the RRT approach may result inefficient, as most of the
generated points would be far distant from the target distributions, thereby
providing an insignificant contribution to the objective function.
Second, the
enhanced RTT version, although it is regarded as a promising approach, it also
requires more computation.
Consequently, in this thesis, it was decided to
20
Informative Path Planning for Multi-Drone System in Search and Rescue Operations.
==PAGE:29==
Figure 3.3: Three different drone states: the current drone state is represented by the
red dot, while the three drone states lie on the green arc centered around the current
state. For each drone state, the image field of view is projected down to the surface
(blue dashed lines) and a preselected group of pixels is projected too through the pinhole
camera model.
proceed with a simpler and faster solution.
The adopted approach consists of simply generating a limited number of drone
poses that lie in the circle centered on the current drone pose, with a predefined
radius.
This means that the entropy is evaluated only in a few poses in the
neighborhood of the drone, and the one that provides the maximum entropy is
chosen as the next waypoint to reach. In Figure 3.3, as a simplified example,
three different poses are generated that lie in the green arc surrounding the
current drone pose (red dot). In this simulation, the drone altitude is set to 20 m,
and the camera is mounted with 45 degrees rotation around the y-axis of the
drone body frame. Therefore, the camera field of view, reprojected onto the sea
surface, assumes a trapezoidal shape, represented by the dotted blue line. The
yellow dots, instead, are pixel coordinates that are reprojected onto the surface,
through the method described in subsection 2.2.2.
The final step is another required discretization: to evaluate the entropy for a
given drone state, it is necessary to estimate the amount of information gathered
by the sensor in that specific state. Given that each UAV is equipped with an
RGB camera, this means calculating the probability of detecting the vessels
within the camera view.
Ideally, the likelihood should be computed over the
entire sensor state space, that is every pixel the camera view is composed of.
However, once again, it is not computationally feasible. Consequently, only a
finite number of pixels are selected, which are equally spaced before being
projected on the surface, and the entropy is calculated for a given drone state
21
Informative Path Planning for Multi-Drone System in Search and Rescue Operations.
==PAGE:30==
only in those pixel re-projections. To mathematically formulate this discretization
step, the pixel reprojection, for a given drone state x, is represented as xp
l and
the set of all pixel reprojections as Xp. The deterministic method of generating
the drone state is the reason why in (3.4) the drone control action ud is not
included because there is no stochastic process in it. One of the main limitations
that could arise with this method is the chance for the drone to end up in a local
minimum, which is typical of potential field path planning, and not being able to
further explore the environment.
Later, subsection 3.3.2 explains how this
problem is addressed.
Finally,
in conclusion to this section,
the results from the target state
discretization and the drone/sensor state discretization can be combined
together in order to convert (3.3) from continuous to discrete form. Given drone
state x, and its respective set of pixel reprojection xp
l ∈Xp; given the set Z of
target distributions assigned, and the set of all particles zp
i,j
∈Zp
i for each
distribution zi, then the entropy in x is computed as:
H(x) = −
Xp
X
xp
l
Z
X
zi
Zp
i
X
zp
i,j
p
 y | xp
l , zp
i,j) p(zp
i,j) log(p
 y | xp
j, zp
i,j) p(zp
i,j))
(3.8)
Looking at the above equation, despite the absence of exponential terms and all
the discretizations applied, it is possible to notice that the complexity could
quickly become intractable since it is necessary to calculate the likelihood in
every pixel reprojection given by every target’s particle of each assigned target.
Here it becomes clearer to the reader why, in section 3.1, the need to equally
split the target distributions among the UAVs is stated.
3.3
Bayes filter loop
In subsection 2.2.1, the core elements of the standard Bayes filter are described.
This section, instead, illustrates how the Bayes filter is used in this thesis, the
mathematical calculations involved in each step, specifically, the prediction and
update step, together with the control action determination, which is an
intermediate step that happens in between the other two. Finally, the termination
step is described which constitutes the decision maker for terminating or not the
search phase.
3.3.1
Prediction step
As previously stated, the objective of the prediction step is to anticipate the state
of the desired variable by utilizing previous beliefs and the applied control action,
see (3.9) where k represents the time step. Note that the mathematical symbols
used in this section, which are expressed in Table 3.1, have different meanings
with respect to those adopted in subsection 2.2.1.
22
Informative Path Planning for Multi-Drone System in Search and Rescue Operations.
==PAGE:31==
p(zi,k | y1:k−1) =
Z
p(zi,k | zi,k−1, uzi
k ) p(zk−1 | y1:k−1) dzk−1
(3.9)
Typically, the continuous form is converted into a discrete form. For example, in
the Kalman Filter, the state transition probability is represented by a linear
function with the addition of Gaussian noise (3.10). Applied to our case, given
the assumption that the targets are static, the state transition matrix Ak is the
identity matrix I2, whereas the control variable uzi
k
is 0.
Therefore, in the
prediction step, it is only necessary to add process noise εk to the target state zi,
that is, to every particle zp
i,j that approximates the target zi. The type of noise
added is called random walk noise, which is a zero-mean Gaussian noise, where
the standard deviation of the noise covariance is chosen to be proportional to a
hypothetical maximum velocity attributed to the target state such that the
magnitude of the noise added is limited; however, it also has a physical
meaning.
zi,k = Ak zi,k−1 + Bk uzi
k + εk
(3.10)
Therefore, the prediction equation can be rewritten as 3.11, where I2 is the identity
matrix of dimension two and Q is the covariance of the process noise εk:
zi,k = I2 zi,k−1 + εk
εk ∼N(0, Q)
(3.11)
3.3.2
Control action step
The control step is a fundamental part of the algorithm because it is the decision
maker that plans the route of the UAV to gather more information about the
target states. The goal is to define the Next Best View, which represents the
next drone state that maximizes the objective function. The previous sections
described how the drone states, where the objective function should be
evaluated, are generated together with the discretization of the camera sensor.
This section, instead, focuses on mathematically formulating the sensor’s
measurement model that allows us to evaluate the entropy given a certain drone
state x and its associated set of pixels reprojections Xp.
To implement the sensor measurement model p(y | x, z) it is necessary to
answer the following questions: what is the probability of receiving a certain
observation y, in the future, given that the current drone state and target state
are x and z, respectively? What does the drone expect to see when moving in a
certain direction? Is there a direction that is better than the others in terms of the
amount of information that the drone can collect?
To start, consider the situation depicted in Figure 3.4. To simplify the analysis,
the case where only a single drone state and only one target distribution are
considered is discussed.
However, the same approach can be extended to
multiple drone states and target distributions. The drone is represented by a red
23
Informative Path Planning for Multi-Drone System in Search and Rescue Operations.
==PAGE:32==
dot, and its associated camera field of view is projected down to the sea surface.
Instead, the target state distribution is defined by the yellow particles. The goal
is to estimate the contribution of the target particles over the field of view; to
achieve this, two factors must be considered.
First, the sensor accuracy
decreases as the distance between the camera sensor and the framed object
increases. Second, the influence of a target particle on a certain point in space
decreases over distance.
Figure 3.4: Initial configuration to model the camera observation model. The camera field
of view is projected down to the sea surface (blue dashed line). The orange dots represent
the target’s particles, and the black cross is their weighted mean. The objective is to
determine what is the probability of observing the target given the current configuration.
Camera distance factor
The first factor to be analyzed is called the camera distance factor. As previously
mentioned, it takes into consideration that the accuracy of the camera’s
detection decreases as the distance between the camera and the target/point in
3D space increases.
For example, consider a vision algorithm for object
classification, the further the object is detected, the higher the chance that it is
misclassified, because the accuracy of the camera degrades over distance.
Therefore, the camera sensor model should include the camera distance factor
ξ(x, xp
l ) which decreases the probability of correct detection as the distance
increases, where x indicates the drone state, including the camera position in
the world frame, and xp
l represents a pixel reprojection onto the 3D world. To
simplify the analysis, the camera is assumed to be coincident with the origin of
the drone’s body fixed frame. As a result, the state x is mutually used to indicate
both the positions of the drone and the camera.
The equations and
transformations necessary to estimate the distance are described by the
24
Informative Path Planning for Multi-Drone System in Search and Rescue Operations.
==PAGE:33==
(a) Distance functions with β = 0.02 and
dmax = 200[m].
(b) Camera distance factor for the selected
pixels in the camera view.
Figure 3.5:
Camera distance factor.
On the left, the camera distance function is
shown: the accuracy of detection decreases as the distance between the camera and the
reprojection increases. On the right, it is displayed the camera distance factor for each
projected pixel. Pixels that are reprojected closer to the camera have a higher weight
associated, indicating that their observation is trusted more.
well-known pinhole camera model as described in subsection 2.2.2. The camera
distance factor is then calculated according to (3.12); it exponentially decreases
as the distance between the camera and the pixel increases.
β denotes the
slope of the reduction over depth/distance, dmax is the maximum distance at
which targets can be recognized, and dist(x, xp
l ) is the Euclidean distance
between the camera and the pixel projection on the surface. Note that the fixed
parameters β
and dmax
can potentially be approximated experimentally.
Figure 3.5a shows an example of how the camera distance factor function looks
like, with β and dmax set to 0.02 and 200 [m] respectively. Instead, Figure 3.5b
illustrates how the camera distance factor varies among the pixel re-projections
for a given camera pose:
the wider the orange dot, the higher the camera
distance factor for that pixel.
In other words, this means that the sensor
measurement model gives more importance to those pixels that are reprojected
closer to the drone state x because the accuracy of the measurement is higher
and, therefore, the likelihood of misdetection is smaller.
dist(x, xp
l ) = ||x −xp
l ||2
ξ(x, xp
l ) =
1
1 + exp (β · dist(x, xp
l ) −dmax)
(3.12)
Target distribution distance factor
The second factor to be considered in the camera sensor model p(y | x, z), called
the target distribution distance factor, is adopted to evaluate the distance of a point
in space with respect to one of the target distributions. Given the set of particle Zp
i
25
Informative Path Planning for Multi-Drone System in Search and Rescue Operations.
==PAGE:34==
of the target distribution zi and the set of pixel projections Xp for the drone state
x, the key idea is to compute the distance between the predicted field of view
and the target distribution. Thus, the predicted field of view that is closer to the
target distribution will entail a higher entropy; therefore, it will be preferred over the
others. In this case, unlike the camera distance factor, the adopted distance metric
is not the Euclidean distance, but the Mahalanobis distance, which is a measure of
the distance between a point p and a normal distribution ND, taking into account
the correlation of the data. The distribution D is represented by mean µD and
covariance ΣD. The underlying principle is to measure the standard deviation of
point p from the mean of D.
dMH(p, ND) =
q
(p −µD)⊤Σ−1
D (p −µD)
(3.13)
Regarding its application in the sensor measurement model, the distance to
measure is between the distribution associated with a pixel reprojection and
each particle of the target distribution.
In subsections 2.2.2 and 2.2.3, it is
described how a single pixel is projected from the image plane to the sea
surface, and how the unscented transformation also allows the transformation of
the drone state covariance into the uncertainty of the pixel projections.
In
particular, the unscented transformation permits the approximation of the
observation (the pixel projection) as a bivariate Gaussian because the
transformed pixel is composed of mean and covariance.
Consequently, it is
possible to calculate the Mahalanobis distance between the observation and
each target distribution particle. Consider the case of a single pixel, as shown in
Figure 3.6, where the target distribution is the same as that adopted in
Figure 3.4. The black cross and ellipse represent the mean xp
l and covariance
Σp
l , respectively, of the pixel projected onto the surface. It is now possible to
measure the Mahalanobis distance between a given target particle zp
i,j with
respect to the pixel distribution N(xp
l , Σp
l ), as shown in (3.14).
dMH(xp
l , Σp
l ; zp
i,j) =
q
(xp
l −zp
i,j)⊤Σp
l
−1 (xp
l −zp
i,j)
(3.14)
Once dMH is computed, the target distribution distance factor Ψ(xp
l , Σp
l ; zp
i,j) is
expressed via (3.15), which exponentially decreases as the distance dMH
increases similarly to the camera distance factor.
Ψ(xp
l , Σp
l ; zp
i,j) = exp(−dMH(xp
l , Σp
l ; zp
i,j)2
2
)
(3.15)
Looking again at Figure 3.6, the size of each yellow particle is defined by (3.15);
therefore, it represents the target distribution distance factor for that specific
particle. The closer the particle is to the pixel distribution in terms of standard
deviations, the greater the size of the dot. Comparing the particle distribution in
Figure 3.4 with Figure 3.6, it can be observed that there are particles for which
the factor Ψ is extremely low because they are not even plotted. Translated into
probabilistic terms, this means that, given that the true target is located in one of
26
Informative Path Planning for Multi-Drone System in Search and Rescue Operations.
==PAGE:35==
Figure 3.6: Target distribution distance factor between the target’s particles (orange
dots) and a single pixel projection observation (black cross). The black cross and ellipse
represent the normal distribution generated by the unscented transformation. The bigger
the orange dot, the close,r, in terms of standard deviation, to the normal distribution
associated with the pixel projection.
these non-plotted particles, it is very unlikely that the target will be observed in
the pixel projection represented by the black cross.
Combining the two factors
Once the two factors are defined, it is necessary to integrate them into (3.8) to
evaluate the expected entropy value for a given drone state x. It is fair to assume
that the two factors are independent of each other because one takes into account
a loss in accuracy when the observation is far in space and the other measures the
probability of observing the target in a given observation distribution. Therefore,
the sensor model p (y | x, z) is formulated as the product of the two. Lastly, the
Shannon’s entropy H(x) can be expressed in its discrete form as a function of the
newly defined sensor model (3.16).
H(x) = −
Xp
X
xp
l
Z
X
zi
Zp
i
X
zp
i,j
p(y | xp
l , zp
i,j) p(zp
i,j) log(p(y | xp
j, zp
i,j) p(zp
i,j))
= −
Xp
X
xp
l
Z
X
zi
Zp
i
X
zp
i,j
ξ(x, xp
l ) Ψ(xp
l , Σp
l ; zp
i,j) p(zp
i,j) log(ξ(x, xp
l ) Ψ(xp
l , Σp
l ; zp
i,j) p(zp
i,j))
(3.16)
EX-OR rule of probability
Finally, the last step required to calculate the entropy of a given drone state x
27
Informative Path Planning for Multi-Drone System in Search and Rescue Operations.
==PAGE:36==
involves applying the EX-OR rule of probability when a UAV has multiple targets
to search for. Consider the example of having two events A and B: the EX-OR
rule P(A⊕B), known as non-mutually exclusive events, calculates the probability
of either A or B being true, but not both, which means that the two events cannot
occur simultaneously. The extension to multiple events can be found at Inclusion-
Exclusion Principle.
P(A ⊕B) = P(A ∪B) −P(A ∩B)
(3.17)
This rule becomes necessary when multiple targets are assigned to the same
agent. In this case, during the control action step, the algorithm evaluates the
likelihood of observing the target distribution particles across each defined pixel
projection for each prior distribution. Summing up the contributions of each prior
with respect to a single pixel projection would imply calculating the likelihood of
observing multiple targets, our case vessels, over the same space defined by
the pixel projection. However, this is physically unfeasible because the targets
represent distinct entities and cannot occupy the same space simultaneously.
Therefore, for each pixel reprojection, it is necessary to calculate the EX-OR
probability of the different prior contributions, which defines the probability of
observing one of the targets but not the others.
3.3.3
Update step
The final stage of the Bayes filter is the update step: when a measurement
becomes available, the prior distribution can be updated using the newly
received observation to form the posteriors. In this thesis, the measurements
can be classified as either empty or non-empty.
An empty measurement
indicates that the last image frame that the UAV has received does not contain a
target. On the other hand, a non-empty measurement implies that a vessel is
detected within the image view. Both cases provide valuable information that
can be utilized to update the priors.
Empty measurement
First, consider the simpler scenario in which the observation received is empty
y = ∅, indicating the absence of any target or object of interest in the camera’s
image view.
The objective is to calculate equation (3.18), where p(z)k−1
represents the prior of the variables z and p(z) represents the posterior.
To
achieve this, it is necessary to distinguish between particles falling within the
camera’s field of view and those that do not. It should be noted that each particle
zp
i,j from a target distribution zi has an associated weight wp
i,j that reflects the
probability of the vessel being in correspondence with that particle.
p(z) = p (y = ∅| z) p(z)k−1
p(y = ∅)
(3.18)
28
Informative Path Planning for Multi-Drone System in Search and Rescue Operations.
==PAGE:37==
When a particle does not fall within the projected field of view, its weight is not
updated, as the received measurement provides no new information in its
regard. Conversely, if a particle falls within the camera’s field of view (as shown
by the green particles in Figure 3.7b), then its weight is reduced (3.20) since the
measurement received is empty. In this way, as the UAV exploration proceeds
and a larger area is covered, the update step narrows down the area where the
target is likely to be found because the weights of the observed particles
decrease, implying that there must be other particles whose weights increase
since the weights are normalized at every iteration, that is, the sum of the
weights is 1. Specifically, the probability p(z | y = ∅) is decreased by the true
negative probability pTN (3.19), which defines the probability of not observing the
target when it is absent.
Note that in 3.20, w(k) indicates the weight at time
instant k, η is the normalization function, and fov(x) is the reprojected
field-of-view boundaries for the current drone state x.
p (y = 0 | z) = 1 −pTN
(3.19)
wp
i,j(k) =
(
wp
i,j(k −1)
if zp
i,j /∈fov(x),
p(y=0|z) wp
i,j(k−1)
η
=
(1−pT N) wp
i,j(k−1)
η
if zp
i,j ∈fov(x),
(3.20)
Figure 3.7 shows the process of updating the prior when the observation y is
null. In this series of pictures, it is assumed to be in a situation where some of
the distribution’s particles fall within the projected field of view of the drone. In
a situation where no particles are inside the field of view and the observation
is null, nothing must be done in the update step. Figure 3.7a shows the initial
situation: the target’s particles are represented with the yellow dots and the black
cross is their weighted mean. On the right, in Figure 3.7b, the particles are split
between particles that fall within the drone’s field of view (green) and particles
that do not (yellow). Subsequently, the particle weights are updated according
to (3.20). Careful examination of Figure 3.7c shows that the size of the green
particles decreases, while the yellow ones become wider. This means that the
received null observation increases the drone’s confidence regarding the target
not being located within the field of view; instead, the likelihood of being detected
is higher among the particles outside the field view. Finally, the final step requires
updating the weighted mean ezp
i of the particle set (3.21), Figure 3.7d, which shifts
from the black cross to the new magenta cross.
ezp
i =
P|Zp
i |
j
wp
i,j(k) zp
i,j
P|Zp
i |
j
wp
i,j(k)
(3.21)
Non-empty measurement
The second scenario occurs when the UAV receives a non-null observation,
indicating the detection of a vessel. In order to appropriately update its target
beliefs, it is necessary to solve the assignment problem. In the general case, the
29
Informative Path Planning for Multi-Drone System in Search and Rescue Operations.
==PAGE:38==
(a) Initialization update step.
(b) Select particle inside/outside fov.
(c) Update particles’ weights.
(d) Update distribution weighted mean.
Figure 3.7: Process of updating prior distributions, given that the observation is null.
assignment problem can be formulated as follows: given a certain number of
observations and prior distributions, the objective is to find at least one match
between each observation and priors.
Starting from the assumption that the
targets are fairly spread in the environment, it is plausible to state that, in most
cases, a single measurement will not contain multiple targets.
However, the
algorithm developed in this thesis can handle this situation. To identify possible
matches,
it is necessary to evaluate a specific cost function for every
hypothetical combination of observations and priors.
The distance metric
adopted is the Parson’s chi-squared test, also called Chi-Squared Goodness of
Fit Test, of a statistical model, which, describes how well the model in question
fits a set of observations.
Measures of goodness of fit typically measure the
discrepancy between the observed values and the values expected under the
model in question.
In probability theory and statistics, the Chi-Squared
distribution with k degrees of freedom is the distribution of the sum of squares of
the k independent standard normal random variable.
Mathematically, given
30
Informative Path Planning for Multi-Drone System in Search and Rescue Operations.
==PAGE:39==
Z1, .., Zk are independent standard normal random variables, and the sum of
their squares is
Q =
k
X
i=1
Z2
i
(3.22)
When the above equation is verified, it is said that Q is distributed according to
the chi-squared distribution with k degrees of freedom, and it is denoted as:
Q ∼X 2
k
or
Q ∼X 2(k)
(3.23)
The Chi-Squared distribution becomes particularly relevant when the underlying
distribution is multinormal, as in our case, because subsection 2.2.3 describes
how the pixel projection throughout the pinhole camera model can be
approximated by a multivariate normal distribution. In the literature, it has been
demonstrated that when the underlying distribution is multinormal, the square of
the Mahalanobis distance of a Gaussian distribution is expected to follow the
Chi-Squared distribution. This relationship between the Mahalanobis distance
and the Chi-Squared distribution is valuable in various statistical techniques and
hypothesis testing.
For instance, in outlier detection, observations with large
Mahalanobis distances from the mean are considered as potential outliers based
on their deviation from the expected distribution.
Therefore, the Mahalanobis
distance serves as a distance metric to verify whether the Chi-squared test is
satisfied for a given pair of observation and prior.
To gain a better
understanding, consider the example illustrated in Figure 3.8. Suppose we have
k = 2, and a number of samples are drawn from a bivariate normal distribution:
the objective is to find the Chi-Squared value, or the squared Mahalanobis
distance, which includes 95% of the samples. By examining the Chi-Squared
distribution for k = 2 plot, this value corresponds to the area under the curve until
the curve intersects with fk(x) = 0.025. Specifically, the Chi-Squared value is
5.991 and its square root is 2.448, indicating that 95% of the samples have a
Mahalanobis distance less than 2.448. Conversely, it can be interpreted that a
generic point is considered an outlier with respect to the normal distribution if the
Mahalanobis
distance
from
the
distribution
is
greater
than
2.448.
A
non-exhaustive list of Chi-squared values relative to different orders k and
intervals can be found in Figure A.1.
Therefore, in the assignment problem, the Chi-Squared probability and the
Mahalanobis distance are utilized to determine whether a given observation
belongs to any of the priors.
For each prior, the Mahalanobis distance is
calculated against every observation. To be deemed as a suitable candidate, the
value has to be lower than a defined threshold X0 which establishes the
containment probability within which a given observation is considered to belong
to a certain distribution. In this case, as described in the above example, the X0
is
set
as
5.991
corresponding
to
a
Mahalanobis
distance
of
2.448.
Mathematically, considering a target distribution zi with its sets of particles Zp
i ,
an observation y described by the normal distribution N† ∼(µy Σy), the target zi
31
Informative Path Planning for Multi-Drone System in Search and Rescue Operations.
==PAGE:40==
Figure 3.8: Chi-Squared distributions for different degrees of freedom k.
is said to match the observation y, if the Mahalanobis distance between the
particles weighted mean of the target ezp
i (3.21) and the distribution y is below
than the threshold X0, see (3.24).
dMH(µy, Σy ; ezp
i ) =
q
(µy −ezp
i )⊤Σ−1
y (µy −ezp
i ) < X0
(3.24)
Similarly to the case of empty measurement, when an association is found, the
particles’ weights wp
i,j need to be updated according to (3.25), where p(y) indicates
that the measurement is not null.
p(z) = p (y | z) p(¯z)
p(y)
(3.25)
In contrast to the null case, the weights are not updated based on a fixed
quantity, such as pTN. Rather, the updating factor is specific to each particle,
and precisely it is determined by the probability density function of the
measurement distribution Ny evaluated for the given particle (3.26) (3.27). If an
observation matches multiple priors,
then all their particles are updated
accordingly. Once again, the index k represents the time index.
p
 y | zp
i,j

=
1
2π
p
|Σy|
exp−1
2 (zp
i,j−µy)T Σ−1
y (zp
i,j−µy)
(3.26)
wp
i,j(k) = p
 y | zp
i,j

wp
i,j(k −1)
η
(3.27)
It might happen that a non-null observation is not associated with any priors,
because the Mahalanobis distance is not below the threshold Xo for any of the
targets.
In this case, then, it is necessary to consider the observation as a
32
Informative Path Planning for Multi-Drone System in Search and Rescue Operations.
==PAGE:41==
possible new target, which will be called a hypothesis. This step is needed to
make the algorithm more robust to misclassifications or misassociations. When
a hypothesis is generated, a counter is initialized.
For each new non-null
observation received by the UAV, the assignment problem is solved taking into
account both the prior distributions and the new hypothesis. If there is a match
with the priors, then the update procedure follows the previously outlined
method.
Conversely, if the measurement matches the hypothesis, then the
counter of the latter is incremented by one and the measurement and hypothesis
distributions are merged together.
When the counter reaches a certain
threshold, then the hypothesis becomes a new prior and it is included in the
search strategy. Instead, if the UAV has terminated the search phase related to
the priors, without finding the target vessel, and there are one or more
hypotheses that did not make it to become new priors, then the UAV executes a
double check considering the hypothesis as possible new targets.
In other
words, the hypothesis generation and counter are a way to incorporate miss
classification or new targets which were not included during the initialization.
The counter is employed only when multiple, not necessarily consecutive,
observations are linked to the same distribution, to simulate a level of certainty.
For instance,
if a hypothesis is counted only once,
then,
it is likely a
misclassification. Instead, when a hypothesis is counted multiple times, then the
UAV becomes more certain that it is a new target. Previously, it was mentioned
that when a new measurement is associated with an existing hypothesis, then
they are fused together. Here, the process adopted is covariance intersection,
which is used in Kalman filters for combining two or more estimates of state
variables when the correlation between them is unknown. Precisely, the method
adopted is described in [16], which finds the maximum possible common
information shared by the estimates to be fused. For a detailed mathematical
analysis, the reader is invited to refer to the relative paper, but, basically, given
two distributions described by mean and covariance, the covariance intersection
method finds the maximum intersection between the two covariance ellipse and
transforms it into a new distribution.
This is applicable because both the
hypothesis and the observation are approximated by normal distributions until
the hypothesis is not converted into a new prior. Therefore, instead of evaluating
the Chi-squared test based on the particles’ weighted mean, its standard mean
is employed. Subsequently, when a hypothesis is ’elevated’ to the status of a
new prior, then, it is approximated by discrete particles, as described in
subsection 3.2.2.
Termination step
Finally, the last part of the algorithm is the so-called termination step. In this
phase, two important processes happen. First, as in the standard particle filter
method, a resampling algorithm is run. The resampling step, often, becomes
necessary in particle filters because they may suffer from the degeneracy
problem, i.e. after some time, particles that do not match the measurements will
acquire extremely low weights, and only a few particles have weights that are
significant. When that is the case, the particle filter has degenerated. In order to
33
Informative Path Planning for Multi-Drone System in Search and Rescue Operations.
==PAGE:42==
overcome the issue, particles are resampled such that particles with low weights
are discarded and replaced by new particles which are duplicates of the particles
with higher probability. Then, the duplicates are dispersed by the noise added in
the prediction step. There are various resampling techniques [17], in this thesis,
residual resampling is employed. The resampling step is essential because, as
explained in subsubsection 3.3.3,
during the search phase when a null
measurement is received, there might be certain particles whose weights
decrease.
Consequently,
it becomes necessary to guarantee that the
distribution is represented exclusively by particles with significant weights. The
only difference with respect to the standard particle filter algorithm lies in the fact
that, here, the number of particles is reduced every time the resampling step is
executed, whereas in the generic case, the number of particles remains
constant.
The reduction in the number of particles is done for two reasons:
firstly, to reduce the computational time, and second, because, as the searching
phase
progresses
and
certain
areas,
where
the
particles
were
initially
distributed, are explored without the target being found, the remaining area,
where the target may be located, reduces. Therefore, the number of particles
necessary to represent reduces too.
Furthermore, this method facilitates the
implementation of the second process of the termination step, which, is a
decision on whether the UAV should stop searching for one of the given targets.
Essentially, the criterion is given by measuring the entropy value of a given set
of particles and their weights (3.28).
If the entropy value falls below a
pre-defined threshold, the distribution in question is removed from the priors,
and, it does not contribute anymore to the search strategy.
As previously
explained, measuring the entropy of a distribution means evaluating the amount
of information it carries.
Hence, when the amount of information is minimal,
indicating that the probability of the target being present is low, it is concluded it
is not worth continuing the search. Note that the fact of reducing the number of
particles allows to indefinitely reduce to zero the entropy (3.28),
which,
otherwise, in the case of a fixed number of particles, would assume the same
value at every resampling step.
H(Zp
i ) = −
|Zp
i |
X
i
wp
i log(wp
i )
(3.28)
3.4
State Machine
To conclude this chapter, this section describes the state machine that controls
each drone’s behavior. This explanation also helps in understanding the timing
and sequence of the algorithm implemented. The state machine is presented in
Figure 3.9 with the three different colours highlighting the steps of the Bayes filter
loop. The orange boxes include the prediction step and path generation. The gray
ones involve sending the desired control input to the flight controller and then the
UAV waits for a new observation. Finally, the green boxes handle the update
procedure. Note that in the flowchart, the drone state, highlighted in red, could be
set to either exploring or inspecting. The former refers to when the UAV is actually
34
Informative Path Planning for Multi-Drone System in Search and Rescue Operations.
==PAGE:43==
searching for the target vessels, while the latter corresponds to when a target is
found and the UAV executes a circular trajectory around it, which is defined as
inspection phase. The idea behind the inspection phase is to be able to capture
pictures of the target from different perspectives, which are then fed into an image
classification model used to distinguish between target vessels or not.
Below follows a brief analysis of the state machine flowchart, from top to bottom.
• If the state is set to EXPLORING:
• Calculate entropy (3.1) for the current drone state.
If the value is
below a defined threshold, indicating that the drone currently is in an
area of low probability density, then the UAV is driven toward the
closest distribution. Otherwise, the next setpoint to reach is generated
according to the method described in subsection 3.3.2.
• Else, if the state is set to INSPECTING, the next waypoint is generated in
order to execute a circular trajectory around the estimated target position.
Note that, during this phase, the target is constantly in the drone’s field of
view.
• The generated waypoint is sent to the flight controller, which calculates the
low-level control for the UAV’s motors.
• Then, the algorithm waits until the next observation is received.
• If there is any boat in the field of view,
the update step follows
subsubsection 3.3.3, and the state machine immediately starts again.
• Else, if a boat is detected, the first step is to solve the assignment probability.
• If the observation is assigned to one or multiple UAV’s prior
distributions,
the
distributions
are
updated
according
to
subsubsection 3.3.3.
• Else, the new observation is inserted in the hypothesis buffer. Only
when multiple observations are assigned to the same hypothesis, it
does become a new prior.
• If the assignment returns a positive match and the vessel has not been
already inspected, the drone state is set as INSPECTING. Otherwise, it
remains unchanged as EXPLORING.
35
Informative Path Planning for Multi-Drone System in Search and Rescue Operations.
==PAGE:44==
Figure 3.9: Drone State Machine.
36
Informative Path Planning for Multi-Drone System in Search and Rescue Operations.
==PAGE:45==
4
Deployment and Results
The method developed is deployed both in simulation and on real hardware to
gather results and validate the algorithm itself.
In this chapter, first, an
introduction to the simulation tools and setup is given, followed by an analysis of
the main results. Second, the steps taken towards deployment on real hardware
are described, together with some of the challenges encountered.
4.1
Simulation setup
Simulation modeling is commonly used in the development of robotic systems,
allowing to solve real-world issues in a safe and efficient manner. It facilitates
the analysis of algorithm outcomes by simulating various scenarios within a
physics simulation environment.
Consequently, the interaction between the
robot and its surroundings can be evaluated prior to real-world deployment.
Additionally, the simulation environment provides access to a simulated camera,
with the option to incorporate pixel noise and distortion coefficients. It is also
crucial to seamlessly transfer the algorithm to physical hardware without
requiring significant modifications to its structure. Therefore, the PX4 autopilot
software is utilized for actual drone control. This software offers both Software In
the Loop (SITL) and Hardware In the Loop (HITL) modes, enabling the solution
to be tested in simulation before implementing it on an actual drone.
SITL
simulates the entire system on a computer, eliminating the need for hardware.
Consequently, it is typically employed as the initial step in the development
process, especially when hardware is not initially available. In a later stage, HITL
runs the autopilot on the physical flight controller hardware while simulating the
physics and control algorithms on the computer. Both methods necessitate a
simulation environment that accurately replicates a three-dimensional world and
its associated physics. Gazebo is one of the most popular software options that
provides such an environment. It enables the precise simulation of the physics
37
Informative Path Planning for Multi-Drone System in Search and Rescue Operations.
==PAGE:46==
Figure 4.1: Gazebo Garden simulation environment.
of any robotic system and its interactions with the environment.
To connect
different
components
of
the
system,
such
as
the
autopilot,
simulation
environment, and core algorithm, ROS (Robot Operating System) is employed.
ROS is an open-source robotics middleware that offers a collection of software
libraries and tools for building robotic applications.
Online resources already
provide bridges between ROS and Gazebo, as well as ROS and PX4, ensuring
smooth integration of these three elements with ample support.
Although MBZIRC’s organizers had already provided a simulator for the
competition, a decision was made to develop a separate environment for two
reasons. Firstly, the original environment was not directly compatible with the
Gazebo version (Gazebo Garden) used in this thesis.
Secondly, the original
environment was computationally demanding due to a comprehensive set of
rendering details and meshes.
As a result, a simplified environment was
constructed, featuring a blue ground symbolizing the sea floor and randomly
placed boats throughout the environment, as illustrated in Figure 4.1. The choice
to use Gazebo Garden was motivated by the fact that the PX4 stack offers the
CAD model of the Holybro X500 (quadcopter) for use in simulation, which
matches the drone version available for actual deployment, displayed in the left
corner on Figure 4.1.
Initially, a YOLO model was employed for boat detection in order to recognize
vessels or boats. It is important to note that the development of the YOLO model
was conducted by another research group within the university and is not a part
of this study. The YOLO model demonstrated the ability to identify vessels in the
sea, as shown in Figure 4.2. However, due to its computational requirements,
the model was unsuitable for real-time applications. It took nearly one second
per
frame,
resulting
in
a
low
processing
frequency
that
hindered
the
effectiveness of the Bayes filter loop. As a result, for the simulation tests, an
RGB-based filter was adopted to remove the sea floor. Despite its simplicity, this
approach yielded valuable results and enabled the Bayes filter loop to operate at
a significantly higher frequency.
38
Informative Path Planning for Multi-Drone System in Search and Rescue Operations.
==PAGE:47==
Figure 4.2: Boat detection by custom YOLO v8 model.
4.2
Simulation results
Before initiating the simulation, there are several parameters that can be
adjusted, as indicated inTable 4.1. These parameters have an impact on the
overall efficiency of the algorithm.
The parameters dp and maxP specifically
affect the normal distribution approximation within a discrete set of particles. On
the other hand, Nx, ψx, and rx determine the number of different positions in
space evaluated in Equation (3.8) to maximize entropy. Ideally, for both cases,
higher values are preferable to enhance efficiency. However, a balance must be
found between accuracy and computational complexity. The chosen values for
the simulation are provided in the respective table.
Parameter
Value
Description
Nx
10 [unit]
Number of drone future states
ψx
60 [deg]
Span angle for drone’s future state cone.
rx
10 [m]
Radius of drone future states cone.
dP
0.6 [ unit
m² ]
Density distribution particles per squared meter.
maxP
600 [unit]
Maximum number of particles for each distribution.
Table 4.1: Simulation paramters.
Due to computational constraints, the simulation tests were conducted with a
maximum of two UAVs and five targets. In Figure 4.7, the trajectories followed
by the two UAVs are depicted. To gain a more comprehensive understanding of
the results, we will initially examine the scenario involving a single UAV and two
targets. The analysis of this case can be extended to scenarios with multiple
39
Informative Path Planning for Multi-Drone System in Search and Rescue Operations.
==PAGE:48==
drones. Therefore, the primary focus will be on the behavior of the state when
unexpected observations are encountered during the exploration process.
4.2.1
Simulation: one drone, two targets
Figure 4.3: Single UAV trajectory on the xy plane.
Figure 4.3 shows the trajectory of the UAV on the xy plane. In this case, as
mentioned before, the UAV has two targets assigned, represented by the cyan
and purple crosses and ellipses respectively. The two ellipses are plotted for
aesthetic purposes only. It is important to remember the distribution covariance
is used only to estimate the number of particles necessary for approximating the
continuous distribution, see subsection 3.2.2.
In the plot, they assist in
understanding where are the areas that the UAV will tend to explore. The black
crosses, instead, represent the ground truth locations of the two vessels, which
are the variables we are trying to estimate. The small black triangles, plotted
along the UAV trajectory, represent the UAV position at the defined time steps.
Upon examining the picture, it is possible to notice how the UAV, is initially
’attracted’ by the cyan distribution. This is due to the target distribution distance
factor, described in subsubsection 3.3.2, which naturally provides higher values
for closer distributions.
After approximately 170 seconds, the cyan vessel is
detected: at this point, the drone starts heading towards the target and when it
reaches a certain distance, precisely 25 meters from the vessel, it begins the
inspection phase. In this phase, the drone executes a circular pattern around the
vessel.
It can be noted that the circular trajectory is not perfectly centered
around the true vessel position, revealing that there is a small error between the
estimated target location and the ground truth (black cross). Once the inspection
phase is completed, the UAV can finally proceed toward the second and last
target distribution.
We can see, how initially, for both distributions, the UAV
attempts to align with the eigenvector related to the maximum variance
(maximum eigenvalue) of the data. In other words, it tries to follow the direction
that provides more information.
40
Informative Path Planning for Multi-Drone System in Search and Rescue Operations.
==PAGE:49==
Alongside the xy trajectory, the series of plots below help to understand the
algorithm and the behaviour of the drone.
Figure 4.4 represents the entropy
(3.8) evaluated in correspondence of the current drone state. This evaluation
happens at the beginning of each cycle of the Bayes filter: it is the criterion for
switching the drone between the two different objection functions. If the value
falls below a certain threshold, the objective function guiding the drone becomes
the distance to the closest distribution. Otherwise, the drone follows the path
which maximizes the entropy, as described in subsection 3.3.2.
Figure 4.5
displays the entropy relative to the target distributions, evaluated according to
(3.28). The last image, Figure 4.6, illustrates how the number of particles of each
distribution varies throughout the exploration.
Now, let’s try to analyze these
three plots in conjunction with the xy trajectory. Combining the xy trajectory with
the plot regarding the entropy in the current drone state, we can observe that the
entropy value tends to increase as the drone approaches the target distribution,
indicating a higher probability of collecting useful measurements.
However,
there are also sudden drops in the entropy value when the UAV is ’inside’ the
target distribution. This can occur due to two reasons: either the resampling step
has decreased the number of particles or the UAV has been searching for the
vessel for a while without success. Therefore, many particle weights significantly
reduce, causing a drop in the overall amount of information remaining in the
distribution. Additionally, the erratic behavior of the entropy value in 4.4 is also
influenced by an additional factor: the Bayes filter loop runs at a lower frequency
than the position controller.
This prevents having a smooth and continuous
interpolation between the sampled value.
Figure 4.4: Drone’s current state entropy.
Switching the focus to figure 4.5 and 4.6, it can be noticed that at the beginning
both distributions contain the same amount of potential information, as indicated
by the entropy curves in Figure 4.5 and by the number of particles that, initially,
assume the same values in 4.6. As the drone starts exploring and focusing on
what is referred to as target1, the cyan entropy curve and the corresponding
cyan bar are the first to decrease.
The decrease in the number of particles
indicates that a resampling step has occurred, therefore, the potential area
where the target can be found is reduced too.
Similarly, the decrease in the
41
Informative Path Planning for Multi-Drone System in Search and Rescue Operations.
==PAGE:50==
Figure 4.5: Entropy for several target distributions and single UAV, evaluated according
to (3.28).
Figure 4.6: Number of particles for several target distributions and single UAV.
entropy value for target1 indicates a reduction in the information remaining in the
distribution. This, as already explained, is related both to the number of particles
and to their associated weight values, which indicates the likelihood of the target
being there. Referring back to Figure 4.4, when the inspection phase of target1
starts, at around 210 seconds, the entropy value for the current drone state
remains constant for about 30 seconds as it is not updated during this phase.
Once the designated vessel is fully inspected, the entropy value falls down to
zero, meaning that there is no information left to be gathered. The UAV then
proceeds to search for the second target, and a similar pattern can be observed
for each of the quantities represented.
4.2.2
Simulation: two drones, five targets
This section analyzes the simulation run with two drones and five different targets.
The main focus is on the behaviour of the state machine when encountering two
unexpected events, since the analysis of the other parameters, such as entropy
and the number of particles per distribution, is analogous to the case of the single
42
Informative Path Planning for Multi-Drone System in Search and Rescue Operations.
==PAGE:51==
Figure 4.7: Multiple UAV trajectories on the xy plane.
drone. Indeed, comparing the respective plots between the simulation for a single
UAV and two UAVs, similar behaviour is observed for each parameter. Therefore,
the analysis conducted for the single UAV case can be replicated for the two UAVs
case. In Figure 4.7, the blue trajectory refers to the first drone, drone1, while the
yellow trajectory to the second one, drone2. Initially, they both have two target
distributions assigned represented in green and red for drone1, and cyan and
purple for drone1.
Figure 4.8: Drones’ current state entropy.
During the exploration drone1 detects a third vessel, represented by the orange
cross, which was not originally assigned. To highlight the fact that is not initially
assigned, the covariance ellipse is not plotted.
On the other hand, drone2 is
wrongly assigned to a prior, specifically to the cyan distribution: indeed, the true
mean (black cross) is not plotted indicating that the vessel is not located there.
This case demonstrates that the UAV is capable of handling situations where of
43
Informative Path Planning for Multi-Drone System in Search and Rescue Operations.
==PAGE:52==
Figure 4.9:
Entropy for several target distributions and multiple UAVs, evaluated
according to (3.28).
Figure 4.10: Number of particles for several target distributions and multiple UAVs.
false positive, that is the UAV is mistakenly informed about the presence of a
vessel in an area where it does not exist. After some time, drone2 autonomously
decides that is not worth searching for the cyan target anymore due to the low
probability of detection. This decision is made during the termination step, as
described in subsubsection 3.3.3.
Figure 4.9 and Figure 4.10 show that at
approximately 180 seconds the entropy of the cyan distribution and its number of
particles are both very low, below 1 and 10 respectively. These conditions lead
the UAV to decide to disregard the assigned distribution considering it as initial
misdetection.
Regarding the unexpected event for drone1, at around 300 seconds, it detects a
vessel that was not originally assigned and does not belong to any of the priors.
This means that it does not satisfy the Chi-squared test described in
subsubsection 3.3.3. As a result, this observation is inserted into the hypothesis
buffer and is only considered when every originally assigned distribution is
visited and the inspection phase is terminated. In Figure 4.10 and Figure 4.9, the
orange values are plotted only after 480 seconds, which corresponds to the
44
Informative Path Planning for Multi-Drone System in Search and Rescue Operations.
==PAGE:53==
Figure 4.11: Drone used for deployment.
moment when drone1 finishes inspecting the second target, represented in red.
At that point, the unassigned observation from hypothesis is transformed into a
new prior, and the exploration and inspection phases are autonomously carried
out similar to the other distributions. It is true this behavior results in a longer
distance traveled by the UAV. Indeed, the path would have been shorter if the
new observation was immediately considered as a new target.
However, the
important point to emphasize is not the optimization of the path length, but rather
the capability of each drone to autonomously handle unexpected events that
were not initially considered. Each drone is able to update its search plan and
make decisions without requiring human intervention. This capability is one of
the positive aspects of adopting an informative path-planning approach for
exploring an unknown environment and tracking an unknown number of targets.
It allows the drones to handle unexpected events for which planning beforehand
is not possible.
4.3
Hardware setup
The real-life experiments were carried out using a Holybro X500 V2 quadrotor,
which is the same model used in the simulation.
This ensured a seamless
transition from simulation to real-world experiments. However, it is important to
note that the algorithm employed is not influenced by the specific dynamics of
the vehicle. Figure 4.11 illustrates the UAV used in the experiments, along with
its associated equipment, which is listed below:
1. Here3 GPS: a GPS module that provides the flight controller with an external
absolute position estimate, enabling autonomous navigation.
45
Informative Path Planning for Multi-Drone System in Search and Rescue Operations.
==PAGE:54==
Figure 4.12: Experiment set-up.
2. Lattepanda 3 Delta: an onboard computer responsible for executing the
algorithm and facilitating communication with the ground station.
3. Ubiquity airMAX Bullet M2: an antenna used to establish a direct network
communication between the vehicle and the ground station.
4. Intel Realsense Depth Camera D455: a camera module that delivers a live
image stream at a rate of 15 frames per second to the onboard computer.
5. Holybro Pixhawk 6c: a flight controller unit responsible for the low-level
control of the vehicle, including motor control and sensor fusion.
In chapter 3, it is explained how the complexity of the algorithm can quickly
escalate, rendering it unsuitable for real-time applications. To address this, a
series of approximations were applied. During the flight tests, the Lattepanda 3
Delta,
equipped
with
an
Intel
Celeron
N5105
processor,
demonstrated
satisfactory performance. It was able to generate waypoints at a high frequency
without overloading its CPU. It should be noted that for autonomous flight
(referred to as offboard control), the Holybro Pixhawk flight controller requires a
continuous stream of setpoints from the external controller (offboard computer)
at a minimum rate of 2Hz.
As previously mentioned, the algorithm was
developed within the ROS2 middleware, while the flight controller utilizes the
uORB middleware.
To facilitate seamless integration and communication
between PX4 and ROS2, the Lattepanda also includes a bridge called the
uXRCE-DDS bridge. This bridge ensures fast and reliable integration between
the two middleware systems.
Compared to the simulation, during the real-world experiments, the targets were
represented by blue boxes instead of actual vessels, as can be seen in
Figure 4.12: within one of the two orange circles there is the drone, while in the
other the blue box. It is important to highlight that the computer vision detection
of the targets is not part of this work, therefore, the author tried to keep it as
simple as possible.
In contrast to the simulation, in the real-world experiments, the targets were
represented by blue boxes instead of vessels, as depicted in Figure 4.12. In the
figure, the drone is located within one of the two orange circles, while the blue
box is positioned within the other circle.
It is crucial to emphasize that the
46
Informative Path Planning for Multi-Drone System in Search and Rescue Operations.
==PAGE:55==
computer vision detection of the targets is not a focus of this work. Therefore,
the author aimed to maintain simplicity in representing the targets.
4.4
Experiments analysis
The analysis of the results obtained from the real-world experiments does not
involve a study of the different parameters discussed in the previous sections. The
similarities between the simulation and real experiments are evident, rendering a
repetition of those parameters unnecessary. Instead, the focus is placed on the
main challenges and limitations encountered.
For the specific experiment being discussed, only one target box was used,
positioned approximately 25 meters away from the initial position of the drone.
Referring to Figure 4.11,it is worth noting the mounting position of the onboard
computer. Initially, it was mounted on the top part of the frame, above the flight
controller, as indicated by the visible orange supports. However, during the initial
flight tests, it was observed that this position caused interference with the GPS
system, resulting in vertical and horizontal drift in the absolute position.
This
localization inaccuracy made autonomous flight extremely challenging. Another
issue related to localization is altitude estimation, which significantly impacts the
algorithm’s performance.
Additionally, another issue related to localization is
altitude estimation which greatly impacts the performance of the algorithm. The
pixel reprojection process described in subsection 2.2.3 is primarily influenced
by two factors: altitude (z) and camera orientation.
Even small changes or
estimation errors in these factors can lead to high reprojection errors.
This
phenomenon can be observed by examining Figures 4.13, 4.14, and 4.15,
specifically the plots for x, y, and z estimations.
After the takeoff phase
(highlighted in purple), the offboard phase begins.
During this phase, until
approximately 1 minute and 40 seconds, the x and y estimations remain
relatively stable.
However, the z estimation exhibits significant oscillations,
indicating difficulties in maintaining the assigned altitude. It is important to note
that the coordinate system adopted by PX4 is NED (North-East-Down).
One
potential solution to address the altitude estimation issue is the integration of a
range sensor, which would provide additional information and improve altitude
estimation accuracy.
A second issue encountered pertains to the pose estimation at the beginning of
the mission. Referring to the plots depicting the x, y, and z positions along with
Figure 4.17, it is evident that the initial drone pose does not align with
x = 0, y = 0, z = 0, yaw = 0 as it did in the simulation. Specifically, the initial
drone yaw is approximately 110 degrees. The pose provided by the PX4 flight
controller represents the pose relative to a predefined origin coordinate system,
which is established each time the flight controller boots. However, even before
takeoff, drift can occur, causing the initial position of the UAV to deviate
significantly from the origin. Initially, this issue was not considered, as it was not
experienced during the simulation tests. Consequently, in conjunction with the
fact that the target boxes were positioned relative to the drone, the initial
experiments exhibited unexpected behaviors such as significant variations in
47
Informative Path Planning for Multi-Drone System in Search and Rescue Operations.
==PAGE:56==
Figure 4.13: Drone x position during the experiment.
Figure 4.14: Drone y position during the experiment.
Figure 4.15: Drone z position during the experiment.
48
Informative Path Planning for Multi-Drone System in Search and Rescue Operations.
==PAGE:57==
Figure 4.16: Drone xy trajectory during the experiment.
Figure 4.17: Drone yaw orientation during the experiment.
altitude or the drone inspecting areas far away from the intended locations of the
boxes.
A solution to this issue was implemented by applying a rigid-body
transformation (translation plus rotation) to the positions of the target boxes,
ensuring that they were defined relative to the initial drone pose. Although this
fix resulted in several successful tests and mission competitions, the author
acknowledges that a more stable and reliable solution needs to be explored.
However, due to time constraints, further investigation could not be pursued. It is
worth noting that in some runs, a high drift was observed, particularly in the yaw
orientation of the drone, leading to the computation of incorrect rotation matrices.
Once again, integrating an external sensor such as optical flow could potentially
address these issues.
An optical flow sensor could provide more accurate
position and orientation estimates, mitigating the positional and orientational drift
caused by inaccurate GPS signals or the double integration required by the
Inertial Measurement System (IMU) and the single integration of the gyroscope.
To provide a comprehensive overview, Figure 4.16displays the trajectory of the
drone on the xy plane. When combined with the yaw plot in Figure 4.17, two
49
Informative Path Planning for Multi-Drone System in Search and Rescue Operations.
==PAGE:58==
distinct phases can be observed:
exploration and inspection.
During the
exploration phase, which lasts until approximately 2 minutes into the flight, the
drone is ”attracted” to the target box, but noticeable yaw oscillations occur,
indicating that the drone is scanning the area.
Subsequently, the inspection
phase begins, characterized by constant changes in yaw as the drone orbits the
target box, ensuring that the camera remains pointed towards the center of the
circular trajectory. A recording of the experiment is available at the following link:
https://youtu.be/FHz13AB17WQ. Although the experiment is relatively simple
and small in scale, it is valuable in demonstrating the effectiveness of the
algorithm.
Furthermore, it encompasses all the necessary steps in the
development process, starting from algorithm generation, progressing through
simulation validation, and culminating in deployment in a real-world scenario.
50
Informative Path Planning for Multi-Drone System in Search and Rescue Operations.
==PAGE:59==
5
Conclusion and Future work
The objective of this thesis was to develop an informative path-planning
algorithm for a multi-drone system in search and rescue (SAR) operations. The
problem was inspired by the MBZIRC competition: precisely, the goal was to
enable each UAV to autonomously explore, gather information about lost
targets, and perform inspection tasks.
Each UAV, equipped with an RGB
camera, was assigned a subset of targets and tasked with independently
navigating the environment while considering and searching for the assigned
targets.
This approach aimed to reduce the overall mission time and
computational complexity.
The problem was addressed from a probabilistic perspective, utilizing the
concept of entropy. Given prior information about potential target locations, the
developed algorithm estimates the direction that maximizes the entropy of the
system for each drone. This allows the drones to gather as much information as
possible about the targets.
The problem was first formulated mathematically,
enabling complexity and feasibility analysis. This analysis highlighted the need
for a series of approximations to ensure computational feasibility and real-time
applicability.
The approximations involved discretizing integral terms and
adapting the algorithm for real-time planning,
considering measurements
collected during exploration.
This was made possible through the developed
Bayes Filter, which predicts the expected measurement in the next time step,
generates beliefs, and updates these beliefs when actual observations are
received.
The algorithm introduced an innovative observation model using
unscented transformation to associate a group of pixels in the camera’s
two-dimensional image view with a multivariate Gaussian distribution in the
three-dimensional space, allowing for the assignment of pixel observations to
prior distributions.
The developed method was validated through simulation experiments using
ROS2 and the Gazebo simulation environment.
Due to computational
limitations, simulations were conducted with a maximum of two drones and five
51
Informative Path Planning for Multi-Drone System in Search and Rescue Operations.
==PAGE:60==
lost targets. Additionally, real hardware tests were conducted on a smaller scale,
involving one drone with one assigned target. Both simulation and real-world
tests demonstrated successful results, aligning with the expected behavior. The
simulation analysis also revealed how the developed algorithm enables each
drone to autonomously determine when to terminate the search mission and
handle unexpected events, such as the observation of new targets.
The
algorithm demonstrated the capability to autonomously integrate newly observed
targets into the ongoing search strategy and adapt the planned route in
real-time.
In terms of future work and improvements, several observations can be made:
• Test the algorithm in larger-scale real-life scenarios involving more targets.
Integration of object detection algorithms could enhance the observation
step and overcome limitations arising from using a simple color-based
filtering technique.
• Integrate external sensors such as range sensors and optical flow sensors
to improve altitude estimation, which strongly affects pixel projections.
• Conduct scalability tests. In chapter 3 it is put in evidence the need for
approximations to achieve an algorithm suitable for real-time applications.
However, the number of operations required grows linearly with the target
distribution particles’ number. When more targets are assigned to a single
drone, the computational load can quickly become challenging.
One
potential solution is to consider only one distribution at a time, removing
the EX-OR step, or to consider only distributions or particles that are
sufficiently close to the drone.
• Implement and integrate more advanced methods to generate the drone’s
future states for evaluating the entropy, as discussed in subsection 3.3.2. An
interesting solution could be developing a Rapidly exploring Random Tree
(RRT) that directs the tree growth toward areas of higher probability density
or entropy.
In conclusion, this thesis successfully followed the research and development
goals, achieving the expected results.
The work accomplished in this thesis
involved every intermediate step from literature research to deploying it in
real-world scenarios, passing through designing and implementing a solution
and validating it in simulation experiments.
52
Informative Path Planning for Multi-Drone System in Search and Rescue Operations.
==PAGE:61==
Bibliography
[1]
ASPIRE UAE - Sole Proprietorship L.L.C. MBZIRC Grand Maritime
Challenge. URL: https://www.mbzirc.com/.
[2]
Robin R. Murphy et al. “Search and Rescue Robotics”. In: Springer
Handbook of Robotics. Ed. by Bruno Siciliano and Oussama Khatib.
Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2008, pp. 1151–1173.
ISBN: 978-3-540-30301-5. DOI: 10 . 1007 / 978 - 3 - 540 - 30301 - 5 _ 51. URL:
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-540-30301-5_51.
[3]
Enric Galceran and Marc Carreras. “A survey on coverage path planning
for robotics”. In: Robotics and Autonomous Systems 61.12 (2013),
pp.
1258–1276.
ISSN:
0921-8890.
DOI:
https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . robot . 2013 . 09 . 004. URL:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S092188901300167X.
[4]
Geoffrey A Hollinger and Gaurav S Sukhatme. Sampling-based Motion
Planning for Robotic Information Gathering.
[5]
Leonardo Zacchini, Alessandro Ridolfi, and Benedetto Allotta. “Informed
expansion for informative path planning via online distribution learning”. In:
Robotics and Autonomous Systems 166 (2023), p. 104449. ISSN:
0921-8890. DOI: https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . robot . 2023 . 104449. URL:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S092188902300088X.
[6]
Andreas Bircher et al. “Receding Horizon ”Next-Best-View” Planner for 3D
Exploration”. In: 2016 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and
Automation
(ICRA).
2016,
pp.
1462–1468.
DOI:
10.1109/ICRA.2016.7487281.
[7]
Frédéric Bourgault, Tomonari Furukawa, and Hugh F. Durrant-Whyte.
“Optimal Search for a Lost Target in a Bayesian World”. In: Field and
Service Robotics: Recent Advances in Reserch and Applications. Ed. by
Shin’ichi Yuta et al. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2006,
pp. 209–222. ISBN: 978-3-540-32854-4. DOI: 10.1007/10991459_21. URL:
https://doi.org/10.1007/10991459_21.
[8]
F.
Bourgault,
T.
Furukawa,
and
H.F.
Durrant-Whyte.
“Coordinated
decentralized search for a lost target in a Bayesian world”. In: Proceedings
2003 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and
Systems (IROS 2003) (Cat. No.03CH37453). Vol. 1. Oct. 2003, 48–53
vol.1. DOI: 10.1109/IROS.2003.1250604.
[9]
T.
Furukawa
et al.
“Recursive
Bayesian
search-and-tracking
using
coordinated uavs for lost targets”. In: Proceedings 2006 IEEE International
53
Informative Path Planning for Multi-Drone System in Search and Rescue Operations.
==PAGE:62==
Conference on Robotics and Automation, 2006. ICRA 2006. May 2006,
pp. 2521–2526. DOI: 10.1109/ROBOT.2006.1642081.
[10]
Josh Bongard. “Probabilistic Robotics. Sebastian Thrun, Wolfram Burgard,
and Dieter Fox. (2005, MIT Press.) 647 pages”. In: Artificial Life 14.2 (Apr.
2008), pp. 227–229. ISSN: 1064-5462. DOI: 10.1162/artl.2008.14.2.227.
[11]
Richard Szeliski. Computer vision algorithms and applications. 2011. URL:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-1-84882-935-0.
[12]
Simon J. Julier and Jeffrey K. Uhlmann. “New extension of the Kalman
filter to nonlinear systems”. In: vol. 3068. SPIE, July 1997, p. 182. ISBN:
0819424838. DOI: 10.1117/12.280797.
[13]
E.A. Wan and R. Van Der Merwe. “The unscented Kalman filter for nonlinear
estimation”. In: Proceedings of the IEEE 2000 Adaptive Systems for Signal
Processing, Communications, and Control Symposium (Cat. No.00EX373).
Oct. 2000, pp. 153–158. DOI: 10.1109/ASSPCC.2000.882463.
[14]
Wikipedia
contributors.
68–95–99.7
rule
—
Wikipedia,
The
Free
Encyclopedia.
[Online;
accessed
26-June-2023].
2023.
URL:
https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=68%5C%E2%5C%80%5C%
9395%5C%E2%5C%80%5C%9399.7_rule&oldid=1161574443.
[15]
N J Gordon, D J Salmond, and A F M Smith. “Novel approach to
nonlinear/non-Gaussian Bayesian state estimation”. In: ().
[16]
Benjamin Noack, Joris Sijs, and Uwe D. Hanebeck. “Inverse covariance
intersection: New insights and properties”. In: 2017 20th International
Conference on Information Fusion (Fusion). July 2017, pp. 1–8. DOI:
10.23919/ICIF.2017.8009694.
[17]
Jeroen D. Hol, Thomas B. Schon, and Fredrik Gustafsson. “On Resampling
Algorithms for Particle Filters”. In: 2006 IEEE Nonlinear Statistical Signal
Processing Workshop. Sept. 2006, pp. 79–82. DOI: 10.1109/NSSPW.2006.
4378824.
54
Informative Path Planning for Multi-Drone System in Search and Rescue Operations.
==PAGE:63==
A
Appendix
Figure A.1: Critical points of the Chi squared distribution.
55
Informative Path Planning for Multi-Drone System in Search and Rescue Operations.
==PAGE:64==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Brovej, Building 326
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
https://electro.dtu.dk/
