==PAGE:1==
Solid oxide electrolysis cells operated at in-
termediate temperatures
Asger Jung Laursen
Master Thesis
DTU Energy
Department of Energy
==PAGE:2==
Solid oxide electrolysis cells operated at intermediate temperatures
Master Thesis
June, 2023
By
Asger Jung Laursen
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Energy, Building 310, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.energy.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
As the world faces the challenges for a total renewable energy transition, electrolysis for
hydrogen production will play a key role in both energy storage and conversion. Out
of the three main electrolysis technologies: proton exchange membrane, Alkaline and
Solid Oxide Electrolysis Cells (SOEC), SOEC can achieve the highest efficiency. The
major challenges for using SOEC at the scale the energy transition requires, are it’s high
temperatures and shorter lifetime compared to the other main electrolysis technologies.
Therefore this work focuses on operating state-of-the-art (SOA) SOEC at intermediate
temperatures and the cells degradation at these temperatures.
Three different SOA cells were tested, where one was infiltrated with CGO at the fuel
electrode to improve it’s efficiency and durability. The three tested cells were all 5.3 cm
x 5.3 cm, with 4 cm x 4 cm active areas. The two non infiltrated cells underwent 100
h durability tests, preceded and followed by Electrochemical Impedance Spectroscopy
(EIS) tests and the infiltrated cell underwent a 1000 h durability test preceded and followed
by EIS tests. The EIS data for each cell before and after the their durability tests was then
fitted using a Complex Nonlinear Least-Square (CNLS) model, to further understand how
much individual cell processes contributed to the cell’s resistance and how this changed
after the durability tests.
The infiltrated cell experienced at degradation rate of 63 mV per 1000 h during it’s dura-
bility test, at 650 oC and 0.75 A/cm2 electrolysis. It’s degradation was further studied
using a scanning electron microscope (SEM). The infiltrated cell proved to be a signifi-
cant improvement on it’s non infiltrated counterpart, with CNLS fitting showing 80 % less
resistance from the fuel electrode reaction for the infiltrated cell compared to the non in-
filtrated cell.
ii
Solid oxide electrolysis cells operated at intermediate temperatures
==PAGE:4==
Acknowledgements
Ming Chen, Professor, Department of Energy Conversion and Storage, DTU
I would like to thank my supervisor Ming Chen for all the time and energy he has spend
teaching me. not just during this thesis but also for two great special courses during my
master degree.
Miao Yu, Ph.d. Student, Department of Energy Conversion and Storage, DTU
I would also like to thank co-supervisor Miao Yu for help guidance and patience and above
all for going above and beyond during both this thesis and two preceding special courses.
I would also like to thank parents for their love and support, which has been vital for me
to make it this far.
Lastly I would like to thank those of my friends who have spend there time keeping my
company in the library whole writing this thesis. So thank you to my study buddies Ben-
jamin, Frederikke, Julia and Brandon.
Solid oxide electrolysis cells operated at intermediate temperatures
iii
==PAGE:5==
Contents
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Operating principle of SOEC
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Low temperature SOEC . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.3
Objective of this work
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2
Materials and experimental setup
7
2.1
Cell configuration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2
Infiltration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.3
Cell testing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.4
Characterization
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3
Results and discussion
15
3.1
Initial performance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
3.2
Long term durability testing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
3.3
SEM analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
4
Conclusion and outlook
34
Bibliography
35
A Apendix
37
iv
Solid oxide electrolysis cells operated at intermediate temperatures
==PAGE:6==
1
Introduction
Electrolysis is the core technology in power-2-X (P2X), which in turn is a core technol-
ogy for replacing fossil fuels in the energy and chemical sectors. The simple process of
producing hydrogen (H2) from water (H2O) using renewable energy allows for the elec-
trification of a myriad of industries, from ammonia to steel production, that account for
a significant share of the world’s greenhouse gas emissions. Hydrogen is also a con-
venient way to store energy from intermittent renewable electricity production, that can
compliment the use of other storage technologies such as pumped hydro and batteries.
The worlds annual usage of hydrogen is already at around 120 million metric tons [1]
and is expected to rise to 660 million metric tons by 2050 [2]. These many uses of elec-
trolysis make it prudent to study the various electrolysis technologies, which each have
their advantages and disadvantages, but one that combines high energy efficiency with
Earth-abundant materials for mass production is Solid Oxide Electrolysis Cells (SOEC)
[3].
Comparing SOEC to the other main electrolysis technologies, alkaline electrolysis has
been commercial for a long time but is much less efficient [4, 5] and proton exchange
membrane (PEM) electrolysis is closer to SOEC in efficiency (while still worse) [4, 5] but
uses more expensive and rare materials (often platinum) [6]. Because SOEC operate at
higher temperatures than the other main electrolysis technologies, it can use some of its
waste heat splitting water and thereby contribute to the electrolysis rather than just being
wasted energy. Despite these high temperatures contributing to the efficiency of SOEC,
high temperatures are also an obstacle to the rapid scaling up of the technology needed
for industrial use [7, 5]. Therefore this paper focuses on the usage of state of the art SOEC
used at temperatures lower than usual to study how the change in operating temperature
affects the cells.
1.1
Operating principle of SOEC
The entire reaction for water electrolysis is
H2O →H2 + 1
2O2
(1.1)
In a SOEC all the reactants and products are in gas form.
Expressed as half cell reactions, the fuel electrode reaction is
H2O + 2e−→H2 + O2−
(1.2)
this is known as the hydrogen evolution reaction (HER). The air electrode reaction is
O2−→2e−+ 1
2O2
(1.3)
this is known as the oxygen evolution reaction (OER)
The equilibrium potential of the reaction is given by the Nernst equation [9]:
Solid oxide electrolysis cells operated at intermediate temperatures
1
==PAGE:7==
Figure 1.1: An illustration of the working principles of Solid Oxide Cells (SOC), figure
A shows a Solid Oxide Fuel Cell (SOFC) and figure B a SOEC. The fuel cells reaction
produces electrical energy while the electrolysis cell consumes it. The figure is taken
from [8].
E = E0 −RT
2F ln
pH2p1/2
O2
pH2O
(1.4)
where px is the partial pressure of gas x, T is temperature, R is the gas constant, F is
the Faraday constant and Eo is the reversible potential of water electrolysis at standard
conditions (1 atm and 25 OC), this is 1.23 V [10].
As illustrated by the Nernst equation, the open circuit voltage (OCV) will be lower when
the amounts of products and reactants approach each other, while it will be higher when
the gas is mostly reactants. For example the OCV is higher when the air electrode is
supplied with pure oxygen instead of natural air.
1.1.1
State of the art SOEC
A state-of-the-art (SOA) SOEC cell is considered, for this purpose the cell described by
Hauch et al. [3] is used. The cell is fuel electrode supported, meaning that it’s thickest part
(providing structural integrity) is the fuel electrode. The fuel electrode is made from Nickel
and Yttria stabilised Zirconia (YSZ), with an electrolyte layer made from YSZ. Between the
electrolyte and Air electrode is a barrier layer made from Cerium Gadolinium Oxide (CGO)
also known as Gadolinium doped Cerium. The air electrode is Lanthanum strontium cobalt
oxide and CGO. This cell is normally operated in the 750 OC to 850 OC range [11].
The SOEC process necessitates the conduction of oxygen ions. One way for a material to
have high oxygen ion conductivity is for it to contain oxygen vacancies. These vacancies
are places in a lattice structure that would normally contain an oxygen atom but either due
to defect or substitution the oxygen atom is missing from this place in the lattice [12]. In
Kröger–Vink notation the absorption of oxygen into a martial through oxygen vacancies
can be written as
O2 + 2 VO + 4 e−→2 O×
O
(1.5)
For SOEC materials oxygen vacancies are created by substitution, one of the materials
where this can be achieved is in a perovskite, which has the lattice structure illustrated in
figure 1.2.
2
Solid oxide electrolysis cells operated at intermediate temperatures
==PAGE:8==
Figure 1.2: Figure showing a typical perovskite structure. Figure from [13].
Figure 1.3: An illustration of oxygen vacancies created in a perovskite structure by partial
substitution. Figure from [12].
When one of the component elements in the perovskite (or other structures) is partially
substituted by an element that binds a different amount of oxygen, this introduces oxygen
vacancies, as illustrated in figure 1.3. Perovskite materials such as Lanthanum strontium
cobalt oxide (LSC) ((La0.6Sr0.4)0.99CoO3−δ) and (LSCF) (La0.6Sr0.4Co0.2Fe0.8O3−δ) are
used for air electrodes. There are two important non-perovskite materials used in SOEC,
these are Yttria Stabilised Zirconia (YSZ) and Cerium Gadolinium Oxide (CGO), that both
also create oxygen vacancies through substitution. YSZ consists of Zirconia (ZrO2) which
is partially substituted by Yttria (Y2O3) and CGO (which has the same lattice structure)
consists of Cerium (CeO2) substituted by Gadolinium (Gd2O3). Both of these materials
have high oxygen ion conductivity due to oxygen vacancies and can be used as electrolyte
materials. Both YSZ and CGO have a fluorite structure as illustrated by figure 1.4.
Some of the perovskite materials used in the air electrode contain the elements Sr and/or
La, which can react with the Zirconia (from YSZ) in the electrolyte to form SrZrO3 and/or
La2Zr2O7 [7, 15, 16], which are electrically insulating, creating ”dead zones” effectively
Solid oxide electrolysis cells operated at intermediate temperatures
3
==PAGE:9==
Figure 1.4: An illustration of fluorite lattice structure, here using CGO as an example but
YSZ has the same structure. Figure from [14]
decreasing the active area of the cell. To mitigate this issue, an inter-diffusion (barrier)
layer is employed. In this work, all cells utilize a CGO barrier layer
Each electrode is porous to allow for gas transport of the reactants and/or products, each
also contains a catalyst (in this case Ni) for the reaction taking place at that electrode and
is electrically conductive to supply or absorb the electrons required or generated from the
relevant reaction. The electrolyte between the two electrodes then conducts the oxygen
ions between them without conducting electrons. The place where the electrode catalyst
(conducting electrons) meets the electrolyte (conducting ions) and the gas pore is called
the triple phase boundary (TPB) and is the place where the reaction takes place [17]. The
area where the reactions can take place can be increased by using mixed ion electron
conductors (MIEC) in the electrodes, as the name implies these are materials that can
conduct both electrons and ions. Figure 1.5 depicts how oxygen from the gas can be
absorbed into the electrolyte. This is also a good depiction of the TPB, even though this
particular case is for fuel cell applications.
1.2
Low temperature SOEC
When scaling up the use of SOECs for industrial use it would be desirable for for SOA
SOEC to be able to operate at lower temperatures than the normal operating range [11].
However as shown in figure 1.6, the oxygen ion conduction of YSZ falls with temperature,
while this may increase the overpotential slightly thereby reducing efficiency. This is only
a minor efficiency loss as cells operated at about the thermo neutral voltage, use the extra
heat from inefficiency to split water (a part of the total reaction) and remaining at the de-
sired temperature. A simple way to illustrate ion conduction dependency on temperature
is with an Arrhenius relations:
σT = A exp
(
−Ea
kT
)
(1.6)
4
Solid oxide electrolysis cells operated at intermediate temperatures
==PAGE:10==
Figure 1.5: Figure illustrating Oxygen ion incorporation into electrolyte and the TPB. Fig-
ure from [18].
where σ is the ion conduction, Ea is the activation energy, T is temperature, k is the rate
constant and A is the pre factor [11]. This relationship is rather crude however and for the
fitting in figure 1.6 use more complex models [19].
While this higher cell resistance leads to faster overall degradation of the cell, the lower
temperature also has effects that reduce this effect as nickel migration (another for of
degradation) is temperature dependent [9, 20]. Operating at lower temperatures generally
reduces strain caused by thermal expansion, leading to less stringent requirements for
materials. This allows for the use of more cost-effective options in balance of plant and
interconnect components [11]. The degradation of steel interconnects should also be
reduced the rate of scale formation falls with temperature. A direct advantage of operating
at lower temperatures is that it reduces heat exchange with surroundings leading to higher
total efficiency of the system.
1.3
Objective of this work
SOECs and SOFCs have been studied for their high efficiencies, but still lack behind
other electrolysis technologies when it comes to durability [4]. Furthermore much of the
published data on SOECs is from high temperature tests, even though operating at lower
temperatures may be an important part of increasing durability and scaling up for industrial
use. Therefore, the objective of this work is to explore various cell configurations in the
intermediate temperature range and investigate their electrochemical performance during
durability testing. Additionally, the physical changes of the cells after durability testing will
be examined using a scanning electron microscope (SEM).
In chapter 2 the experimental process is explained, with sections on the electrochemical
setup used and the cells tested. Then the analysis techniques used are explained, these
being SEM and Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS).
Chapter 3 discusses the experimental results, starting with an analysis of the initial per-
formance using EIS. This is followed by a discussion and comparison of the long-term
durability testing. Finally, SEM analysis is conducted to examine the compression of the
samples.
In chapter 4 the work and results are concluded and a perspective is given on the potential
implications and future directions of the research.
Solid oxide electrolysis cells operated at intermediate temperatures
5
==PAGE:11==
Figure 1.6: Figure showing the ion conductivity of YSZ, the relevant 8 mol % data is
labeled as ”Tos”. Figure from [19].
6
Solid oxide electrolysis cells operated at intermediate temperatures
==PAGE:12==
2
Materials and experimental setup
2.1
Cell configuration
The cells tested are fuel electrode supported, meaning they have a thicker fuel electrode
where most of it serves mainly as support and electrical conductivity. The fuel electrodes
are both nickel and yttria-stabilised zirconia (Ni/YSZ), for the support part of the electrode
3 mol % YSZ (3YSZ) is used, as it is more robust but has lower ion conductivity [19],
therefore the support material can be denoted as Ni/3YSZ. For the active part of the fuel
electrode and for the electrolyte 8 mol % YSZ (8YSZ) is used for its higher oxygen ion
conduction, the fuel cell uses Ni/8YSZ, while the electrolyte is 8YSZ. For the rest of this
thesis both of these will be denoted as YSZ. To illustrated the cell configuration a SEM
image of cell A overlaid with labels of the cell layers shown and reactions happening, is
shown in figure 2.1. All cells used have a total area of 5.3 cm x 5.3 cm but have an air
electrode side contact layer of 4 cm x 4 cm, meaning the active area is 16 cm2.
Figure 2.1: A SEM Image of Cell A overlaid with materials and reactions.
Table 2.1: Cell configurations
Support layer
Fuel electrode
Electrolyte
Barrier layer
Air electrode
Contact layer
Cell A
Ni/YSZ
Ni/YSZ
YSZ
CGO
LSC/CGO
LSM
Cell A infiltrated
CGO@Ni/YSZ
Ni/YSZ/CGO
YSZ
CGO
LSC/CGO
LSM
Cell B
Ni/YSZ
Ni/YSZ
YSZ
CGO
LSCF/CGO
LSM
2.1.1
Cell type A
Ni/YSZ-YSZ-CGO(PVD)-LSC/CGO-LSM(contact layer)
Cell type A is made up of a Ni/YSZ fuel electrode with a YSZ electrolyte. Between the
electrolyte and the air electrode is a barrier layer of Cerium Gadolinium Oxide (CGO) cre-
ated through Physical Vapour Deposition (PVD). The air electrode is a mixture of LSC and
Solid oxide electrolysis cells operated at intermediate temperatures
7
==PAGE:13==
CGO. Onto the air electrode a 4 cm X 4 cm contact layer is applied, made of Lanthanum
Strontium Manganese Oxide (LSM) ((La0.75Sr0.25)0.95MnO3−δ). The fuel electrode includ-
ing the support layer is about 320 µm thick, the electrolyte is about 10 µm thick, the barrier
layer about 2µm, the air electrode about 15 µm and the contact layer is also about 15 µm
thick. For measurements of the layer thicknesses see the appendix.
2.1.2
Cell type B
Ni/YSZ-YSZ-CGO(Screen printed)-LSCF/CGO-LSM(contact layer)
Cell type B is made up of a Ni/YSZ fuel electrode with a YSZ electrolyte. Between the
electrolyte and the air electrode is a barrier layer of Cerium Gadolinium Oxide (CGO) that
has been screen printed. The air electrode is a mixture of LSCF and CGO. Onto the air
electrode a 4 cm X 4 cm contact layer of LSM is applied. Because of the barrier layer being
screen printed rather than PVD, it is thicker to compensate for being less dense, meaning
the barrier layer thickness is about 5 µm, the rest of the layer thickness are equivalent to
those of cell A.
2.2
Infiltration
It has been reported that infiltrating the fuel electrode with CGO can potentially improve
the durability of the whole cell or decrease degradation, by increasing the ionic conduc-
tivity and catalytic area. To investigate this, cells were tested both with and without CGO
infiltration into the fuel electrode.
The infiltrated fuel electrodes consist of YSZ, nickel and CGO, this allows for the transport
of both oxygen ions and electrons. As described in section 1.1, using a MIEC for the
electrode increases the active area of the electrode. While this reduces the resistance
from the catalytic reaction, the infiltrated material does take up some space, reducing the
size of the pores, therefore it may increase the resistance from gas diffusion [21].
The CGO used is a 1 mol solution made from 20 mol% Gd(NO3)3 and 80 mol% Ce(NO3)3,
mixed using the sulfactant PEL62. As illustrated in figure 2.2, an excessive amount of the
CGO mixture was spread over the fuel electrode, with the excess being wiped of after
about a minute. The cell is then placed in a pre-heated 200 oC furnace, which is heated
up to 300 oC where it is held for 12 min before being cooled to 200 oC again and the cell
is removed. The process is repeated three times. The end result was that the cell had a
CGO load of 150 mg/cm2.
2.3
Cell testing
All cells are tested and reduced in the same alumina test house. To achieve the desired
temperature, the test house is placed mostly inside an oven as illustrated in figure 2.3.
The cell being reduced or tested is placed on the cell holder as shown in figure 2.4, with
the fuel electrode faced down, such that the fuel gas or gases are distributed across the
surface of the fuel electrode and likewise the air electrode is supplied with air/oxygen. A
gold frame is used for sealing on the fuel electrode side, where a nickel (Ni) plate is used
as a current collector and Ni mesh is used as a gas distributor. On the air electrode side
the current collector and gas distributor are combined in a gold mesh.
The fuel gas inlet has separate inlets for hydrogen and oxygen, for the use of steam as a
fuel gas these are mixed to produce water before the gas reaches the cell. The fuel gas
inlet also contains a thermocouple and an oxygen sensor. After the gas has passed the
cell it moves to the fuel gas outlet, which also contains a thermocouple and an oxygen
sensor.
8
Solid oxide electrolysis cells operated at intermediate temperatures
==PAGE:14==
Figure 2.2: Illustration of infiltration process. Figure from [22].
The air electrode gas inlet has one inlet used for either air or pure oxygen, this leads to the
air electrode, where it is distributed over the electrode before being led to the air outlet,
which is open. The air electrode inlet contains a thermocouple and additional weight is
placed on top of it to ensure a good contact between the cell and the other components.
2.4
Characterization
2.4.1
Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM)
A scanning electron microscope (SEM) was used to inspect the micro structure of Cell
A and observe any changes resulting from infiltration and durability testing. SEM uses a
beam of electrons to inspect a given sample, creating an image from the electrons that
come out of the sample in response [10, 23]. Because electrons have characteristic wave-
length of less than 1 Å, they can come close to atomic detail [10]. The interaction between
the primary electron beam and the sample, as shown in figure 2.5, results in various kinds
of electrons and photons being released form the sample, that can give information on
morphology, sample size, crystallography and chemical composition [10, 23]. Energy-
dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) is a technique used to detect characteristic X-rays
emitted from the sample, providing information about its chemical composition [23].
Secondary electrons (SE) are low-energy electrons from inelastic scattering in the energy
range 5 to 50 eV. They come from the part of the sample directly impacted by the primary
beam (approximately the top 15 nm) and give information on the topography of the sample
surface with edges looking brighter [10, 23].
2.4.2
Electrochemical Impedance Spectroscopy (EIS)
The fundamental electrical relationship is given by Ohm’s law [24]:
Solid oxide electrolysis cells operated at intermediate temperatures
9
==PAGE:15==
Figure 2.3: An illustration of gas flow through the test housing. Figure adapted from PhD
thesis by Søren Jensen [8], the setup used did not include an inlet for carbon containing
gasses.
10
Solid oxide electrolysis cells operated at intermediate temperatures
==PAGE:16==
Figure 2.4: An illustration of the cell placement in relation to gas diffusion layers and
current collectors. Figure adapted from PhD thesis by Søren Jensen [8], The setup used
had replaced the glass seal with a gold seal.
Figure 2.5: An illustration of the interaction between the primary electron beam and the
sample as well as the origin of electrons and photons produced in a sample during SEM
analysis. Figure from [23]
Solid oxide electrolysis cells operated at intermediate temperatures
11
==PAGE:17==
V = I · R
(2.1)
where V is voltage, I is current and R is resistance. Voltage and current can be further
expressed as sine or cosine waves, here voltage can be expressed as
V(t) = ∆V · cos(ωt)
(2.2)
where ∆V is the amplitude of the wave and ω = 2π f, where f it self is the wave frequency
and t is time. Likewise current is expressed as
I(t) = ∆I · cos(ωt −φ)
(2.3)
where φ is the phase shift between the two. Using these wave forms of voltage and
current we can express impedance as [24]:
Z = V(t)
I(t) = Z0
cos(ωt)
cos(ωt −φ)
(2.4)
where Z0 is amplitude of the impedance. Impedance can thus be compared to resistance
but for alternating current, therefore impedance spectroscopy is carried out by applying
an alternating current and varying the frequency. Given the above equation and Euler’s
formula, impedance can be expressed as a sum of it’s real and imaginary parts:
Z = ZRe + jZIm
(2.5)
Where j is the imaginary number. For analysis of electrochemical cells this data can be
displayed in varies way for different purposes, the most basic plot is the Nyquist plot,
with the real impedance on it’s x-axis and (negative) imaginary impedance on it’s y-axis.
The Nyquist plot clearly shows the actual resistance of the cell and thereby indicates
it’s efficiency. A Nyquist plot also provides a clear distinction between 2 different kinds
of cell resistance, the first x-axis intercept (high frequency) is called the ohmic or series
resistance (Rs), while the second x-axis intercept (low frequency) is the Area Specific
Resistance (ASR). The difference is the polarisation resistance (Rp) of the cell, so that
Rs + Rp = ASR. However the Nyquist plot does not include any information on the speed
of any of the reactions making up the cell processes. On the other hand, the Bode plot
displays frequency on the x-axis, thereby including the element of reaction speed.
When further resolution in time is required, the impedance spectrum can be related to
Distribution of Relaxation Times (DRT) as
Z(ω) = R0 + ZPol = R0 +
∫∞
0
γ(τ)
1 + jωτ dτ
(2.6)
where γ(τ) is DRT, R0 is the series resistance and ZPol is the polarisation resistance
[25]. Plotting DRT as a function of frequency is a good way to deconvolut electrochemical
impedance data, in the relevant case it is often possible to spot a distinct peak for each 5
processes involved in the cell reaction and separate them by speed of reaction.
12
Solid oxide electrolysis cells operated at intermediate temperatures
==PAGE:18==
Figure 2.6: The equivalent circuit model used for fitting the measured impedance data in
CNLS fitting. Figure from [21, 26].
Table 2.2: Impedance of circuit elements used in this CNLS fitting model [25, 28, 24]. For
the constant phase element (Q) 0 ≤n ≤1, where n = 1 would be an ideal resistor-capacitor
element (RC).
Element
Symbol
Impedance
Resistance
R
R
Inductance
L
jω
Constant phase element
Q
1/Y0(jω)n
Gerischer
G
1/Y0(k+jω)1/2
These same processes can also be quantified through Complex Nonlinear Least-Square
(CNLS) analysis where impedance data is fitted to a given model, in order to find the
contribution of reach element to the whole impedance. The model used is shown in figure
2.6 and table 2.2 gives an overview of the circuit elements and their impedance. When
fitting the model elements are named as L-R0-R1Q1-R2Q2-G-R4Q4-R5Q5.
Part of the analysis is to estimate of close the fit is to the experimental data, this done by
calculating the relative residual as [27]:
Relative error of fit = Zmeasured −Zfit
Zmeasured
(2.7)
this is done for both the imaginary and real impedance parts and displayed as a function
of frequency to give an idea of the quality of the fit.
The electrochemical processes are described either by a Gerischer element or an RQ
element, it is worth just describing the idea behind both. An RQ element is represented
by as semi-circle on the Nyquist plot, but the shape of the semi-circle is dependent on
the n value (between 0 and 1) of the RQ element with a low n value leading to a flatter
semi circle and a value of 1 meaning the RQ element is an RC element with C being a
perfect capacitor. The Gerischer element has it’s imaginary part shifted towards the low
frequency part of the plot.
A short explanation of each of the processes fitted for is shown in figure 2.3.
Table 2.3: A short description of the equivalent circuits elements and their electrochemical
processes and approximate frequency range.
Circuit element
Electrochemical process
Frequency
RQ(ion)
Oxygen ion transport
∼10 kHz
RQ(Ni/YSZ TPB)
HER at the fuel electrode
1-4 kHz
G(LSCF/CGO)
OER at the air electrode
∼100 Hz
RQ(DIFF)
Gas diffusion
∼40 Hz
RQ(CONV)
Gas conversion
∼2 Hz
Solid oxide electrolysis cells operated at intermediate temperatures
13
==PAGE:19==
It should be noted that not all resistance elements behave linearly under current, the
relationship between current and some of these processes is described in figure 2.7 [29].
Figure 2.7: Change in resistance elements under current. Figure from [29]. Notice that
negative current is considered electrolysis and positive current is considered fuel cell
mode here.
14
Solid oxide electrolysis cells operated at intermediate temperatures
==PAGE:20==
3
Results and discussion
3.1
Initial performance
In all 3 cells were tested; cell A, cell A infiltrated and cell B. In each case the initial perfor-
mance was tested through a series of EIS tests. While the test were all carried out at a set
temperature of 650 oC, the actual temperature may vary slightly, particularly is a current
is applied as that can further heat the tested cell.
As shown in chapter 1.2, reducing the operating temperature of the cell, leads to a de-
crease of the oxygen ion conductivity of the electrolyte and an increase of the resistance.
The large difference temperature makes can be seen in figure 3.1, showing the initial per-
formance of cell A at 750 oC, 700 oC and 650 oC. The Nyquist plots clearly show how at
intermediate temperatures, the cell resistance rises dramatically and this serves as the
base line results for this work. The Bode plots clearly show how some of the cell pro-
cesses happen at lower frequencies, meaning that they are happening slower at lower
temperatures. From the DRT plots is can be seen that the low frequency peak at about 7
Hz, which is associated with gas diffusion in the fuel electrode [25], is barely affected by
the temperature change, but as seen in figure 3.2 it is affected by the gas composition,
which makes sense as it mean gas diffusion in the fuel electrode is affected by the gas
composition of the fuel gas. The DRT peak in the frequency range 1000 Hz to 5000 Hz
is associated with the charge transfer reaction and the minor peak at 10 kHz to 20 kHz is
associated with ionic transport [25]. As ionic transport is strongly impacted by tempera-
ture, the change seen in figure 3.1, where the peak is larger and at lower frequency, fits
with the process is slower and has higher resistance.
Solid oxide electrolysis cells operated at intermediate temperatures
15
==PAGE:21==
Figure 3.1: Nyquist, Bode and DRT plots
of Cell A at different temperatures, all
with a fuel gas composition of 50 %
steam and 50 % hydrogen.
Figure 3.2: Nyquist, Bode and DRT plots
of Cell A at different fuel gas composition,
all at 650 oC.
EIS measurements were also carried out for a few different gas compositions, as shown
in figure 3.2. While this also affects the total resistance of the cell, it notably affects if
differently than temperature variations as shown by the Bode and DRT plots. To gain
more insight into the exact resistance contributions of specific processes in the tested cells
CNLS fittings are done at the same conditions for the 3 tested cells. When comparing the
cell A in figure 3.3 and cell B in figure 3.4, it would appear that cell B has a lower ASR but
in the next section the idea of cell activation will be discussed and it will be necessary to
question if this effect is interfering with the compression.
From figure 3.5 it is clear that the infiltrated cell behaves very differently from the non
infiltrated cells and that the reduction in resistance from the fuel electrode reaction, means
that other process become more prominent relatively. It is critical how this affects the
degradation of the cell as will be discussed in the next two sections.
The initial performance of the 3 tested cells, as analysed through CNLS fitting, is com-
pared in figure 3.6. As can be expected the series resistance for cell A and it’s infiltrated
counterpart are very similar, as the CGO should have a very minor influence this. It should
be noted that cell B has a slightly higher series resistance, this is from it’s thicker barrier
layer as this means the ions have further to travel [25, 7]. The stand out difference is seen
16
Solid oxide electrolysis cells operated at intermediate temperatures
==PAGE:22==
Figure 3.3: CNLS fitting of cell A at
50/50 H20/H2 and 650 oC before
durability testing.
Figure 3.4: CNLS fitting of cell B at 50/50
H20/H2 and 650 oC before durability testing.
Solid oxide electrolysis cells operated at intermediate temperatures
17
==PAGE:23==
Figure 3.5: CNLS fitting of cell A infiltrated at 50/50 H20/H2 and 650 oC before durability
testing.
18
Solid oxide electrolysis cells operated at intermediate temperatures
==PAGE:24==
for the fuel electrode reaction, where the infiltration clearly has had a significant effect and
the infiltrated cell has a much lower resistance contribution from the fuel electrode reaction
that either of the non infiltrated cells.
Figure 3.6: A column graph that compares the simulated resistances for the 3 tested cells
before their respective durability tests. R s is the series resistance, R ion is the resistance
from ion transport, R FE is the resistance form the fuel electrode reaction, R AE is the
resistance from the air electrode reaction, R DIFF is the resistance from gas diffusion and
R CONV is the resistance from gas conversion.
Solid oxide electrolysis cells operated at intermediate temperatures
19
==PAGE:25==
3.2
Long term durability testing
As seen in figure 3.7, current increase time was not constant across the tests. This is
because a EIS measurement was carried out at each current step (which corresponds
to a voltage step) and this uses a resource shared between different test setups in the
lab and therefore some times has a queue. This queue time has varied wildly and lead
to the difference in time to increase the current. Figure 3.7 also illustrates how cell A
experiences ”healing” after reaching the durability test current and the voltage actually
decreases slightly for a constant current, meaning the resistance is decreasing. This
effect is called cell activation. The same effect is present for cell B but to a lesser degree
but for cell A infiltrated this effect is not present. The difference in the healing effect
seems to stem from the difference in current increase time, presumably the ”slower” cells
experienced the same effect while the current increased and had longer time to heal
before reaching the durability test current.
Figure 3.7: Voltage over time while the current is increased for durability testing.
Figures 3.8 and 3.9 demonstrate an interesting case where the polarisation resistance
initially increases with the current, but as the current is increased further, the polarisation
resistance decreases again. For cell A polarisation resistance starts at 0.54 Ωcm2 for
0 A/cm2 and rises to 0.97 Ωcm2 for 0.375 A/cm2, before decreasing to 0.77 Ωcm2 for
0.75 A/cm2. For cell B the polarisation starts 0.39 Ωcm2 for 0 A/cm2 before rising to 0.74
Ωcm2 for 0.50 A/cm2 and then decreasing to 0.59 Ωcm2 for 0.75 A/cm2. As shown in
figure 2.7, the way various resistance contributions change with applied current can be
complex, however in this case it may also be worth noting the direct effect of applying
current to an electrolysis cell is to convert some of the steam into hydrogen (and on the
other side of the cell oxygen). As observed with figure 3.2 fuel gas composition influences
the polarisation resistance. So when applying current at a gas composition of 90 % steam
and 10 % hydrogen, the fuel gas composition will change towards 50/50, which is where
polarisation resistance from gas composition is lowest [9].
When comparing the low frequency, about 7 Hz, changes in the DRT plots for figures 3.8
and 3.9, to those of figure 3.2 where the gas composition was drastically changed, it is
clear that the change in gas composition due to the added current is much less drastic,
20
Solid oxide electrolysis cells operated at intermediate temperatures
==PAGE:26==
Figure 3.8: Nyquist, Bode and DRT plots
for Cell A at 90 % steam and 10 %
hydrogen, 650 oC and with varying
electrolysis current.
Figure 3.9: Nyquist, Bode and DRT plots
for Cell B at 90 % steam and 10 %
hydrogen, 650 oC and with varying
electrolysis current.
while there still is a change. At around 100 Hz there is a (some times visible) a peak
associated with the air electrode surface kinetics and reaction [25]. While this peak is
clearly affected by the change in current the changes do not seem consistent between
Cells A & B and little about the effect of current on the air electrode can be concluded form
this. The peak in the 700 Hz to 8000 Hz range, that as previously mentioned is associated
with charge transfer and ionic transport, is clearly highly affected by the applied current,
even at very low current densities. Given that charge transfer is essentially a current, it
stands to reason that adding current increases this resistance element and slows down
the process as the DRT plots clearly show.
Again the infiltrated cell behaves very differently from the non infiltrated cells, not just by
lower total resistance but also in how the impedance profile changes under current. As
shown by figure 3.10 the polarisation resistance actually decreases slightly, from 0.34 Ω
cm2 to 0.28 Ωcm2, when the current is increased and the Bode plots show that it is low
and intermediate frequency processes that decrease their resistance contribution, while
a high frequency process increases it. From the DRT plots a peak in the 500 Hz to 2000
Solid oxide electrolysis cells operated at intermediate temperatures
21
==PAGE:27==
Figure 3.10: Nyquist, Bode and DRT plots for Cell A infiltrated at 90 % steam and 10 %
hydrogen, 650 oC and with varying electrolysis current.
Hz range is seen to increase and slow when the current is increased, as in the case of the
non infiltrated cells above this peak is associated with charge transfer and ionic transport.
Again charge transfer is clearly affected by the applied current, but this effect is much
lower for the infiltrated cell than the non infiltrated cells. That the charge transfer effect is
so much smaller for the infiltrated cell, seem to be a major reason for it’s lower ASR and
should also lead to less degradation during use, relative to the non infiltrated cells. The
DRT peaks in the 20 Hz to 50 Hz range, again associated with the air electrode surface
kinetics and reaction, for the infiltrated cell generally decrease in size and speed up (move
to higher frequency) when the current is increased.
As discussed above the Infiltrated cell has a significantly lower ASR and this translates to
a lower voltage during the durability test, the non infiltrated cells were operating at around
1700 mV, while the infiltrated cell was operated at around 1400 mV for the same current
density. As shown in figure 3.11, the infiltrated cell remains at a lower operating voltage
than the non infiltrated cells, even after the infiltrated cell has been operated for over 1000
hours. This really shows the advantage of infiltrated cell as, remembering that they are
22
Solid oxide electrolysis cells operated at intermediate temperatures
==PAGE:28==
Figure 3.11: Voltage over time for all durability tests.
all operated at 0.75 A/cm2, the infiltrated cell uses less energy for the same hydrogen
production. The lower voltage for the same current should also mean less degradation.
The degradation rate during the durability test for the infiltrated cell comes out to 63 mV
per 1000 h. The degradation rate for cell B is 16 mV per 100 h, but this is affected by
cell activation so the real result is slightly higher and the rate can not be calculated for
cell A , as it would be meaning less due to the cell activation effect. The infiltrated cell
degradation can be compared to a similar cell tested at 800 oC and 1 A/cm2 electrolysis
for 4400 h by Sun et al. [26]. They reported a degradation rate of 25 mV but at a higher
temperature.
Comparing Cells A & B over the duration of their durability tests, the issue with cell acti-
vation is still there. But looking at figure 3.12, after cell activation is accounted for, cell B
actually seems to degrade faster than cell A. The small voltage drop at (almost) regular in-
tervals are when the EIS measurements are carried out. As mentioned earlier, these EIS
measurements require time on (lab wide) shared resources and during the wait for these
time slots the program running the test in question is paused, this is why tests planed
to take 100 hours took longer and why the EIS tests are not equally spaced in time as
planed. This explains both why the cell A test was completed faster than the cell B test
and why it increased in current faster as shown in figure 3.7, at that time the labs shared
resources were in less use and wait times were shorter.
To explain the changing voltage of the cells during their durability tests, the evolution
of their series and polarisation resistances are plotted in figures 3.13 , 3.14 and 3.15.
The cell activation issue is evident in cell A again and this makes it hard to conclude
based on this data, A longer duration test of cell A would be interesting to further study it
degradation pattern but this was not possible for this work. For cell B the initial increase
is in polarisation resistance, while it has a small but steady increase in series resistance
through out the durability test. In total the largest resistance increase for cell B comes
from polarisation resistance as is in line with the expected result.
The infiltrated cell is the only one where series resistance starts out higher than polari-
sation resistance, however the series resistance only increases slightly during the more
than 1000 hours of the durability test and by the end of the test the polarisation resistance
is larger. For the infiltrated cell clearly main degradation effects are related to polarisation
Solid oxide electrolysis cells operated at intermediate temperatures
23
==PAGE:29==
Figure 3.12: Voltage over time for short durability tests.
Figure 3.13: Evolution of series and
polarisation resistance during
electrolysis for cell A.
Figure 3.14: Evolution of series and polari-
sation resistance during electrolysis for
cell B.
24
Solid oxide electrolysis cells operated at intermediate temperatures
==PAGE:30==
Figure 3.15: Evolution of series and polarisation resistance during electrolysis for cell A
infiltrated.
resistance and that is where the rest of this work will focus.
Figure 3.16 again shows how the main change to cell A during the durability test was
from cell activation, this fits well with the main improvement coming from the DRT peak
previously mentioned to concern charge transfer and ion transport. For cell B, figure
3.17 shows minor changes during the durability test but not much new information can
be ascertained from this, therefore any conclusion about cell B degradation will be based
on the CNLS fitting data. For the infiltrated cell described by figure 3.18, the Nyquist plot
clearly confirms that the main resistance increase comes from polarisation resistance.
The Bode plot suggests that the processes that increase in their resistance contribution
are at low and intermediate frequencies but for a more exact insight into it’s degradation
pattern CNLS data is used.
Figure 3.19 shows the CNLS fitting of cell A after the durability test, the fitting is not perfect
and there are some uncertainties in the high frequency area. Figure 3.20 also shows that
the CNLS fit for cell B has minor uncertainties but figure 3.21 shows a very good fit for the
cell A infiltrated data.
Figure 3.22 shows that the largest difference between the 3 cells in their post durability
test performance comes from the fuel electrode reaction, where the infiltration can still
be seen to make a large difference. Again however the infiltrated cell does have larger
resistance from air electrode reaction and surface kinetics relatively, as was also the case.
The CNLS fitting data for each cell is shown in table 3.1 to allow for comparison. As
pointed out earlier the cell A fit is a bit uncertain at high frequencies, that means it is un-
likely that the resistance from ion conduction actually fell for cell A even with cell activation
being a factor. Similarly with the resistance from gas diffusion, as the value is very small,
the seeming reduction in resistance is likely from uncertainty and not a real effect.
Solid oxide electrolysis cells operated at intermediate temperatures
25
==PAGE:31==
Figure 3.16: Nyquist, Bode and DRT
plots for Cell A at 90 % steam and 10 %
hydrogen, 650 oC and 0.75 A/cm2
electrolysis over the time span of the
durability test.
Figure 3.17: Nyquist, Bode and DRT
plots for Cell B at 90 % steam and 10 %
hydrogen, 650 oC and 0.75 A/cm2
electrolysis over the time span of the
durability test.
26
Solid oxide electrolysis cells operated at intermediate temperatures
==PAGE:32==
Figure 3.18: Nyquist, Bode and DRT plots for Cell A infiltrated at 90 % steam and 10 %
hydrogen, 650 oC and 0.75 A/cm2 electrolysis over the time span of the durability test.
Solid oxide electrolysis cells operated at intermediate temperatures
27
==PAGE:33==
Figure 3.19: CNLS fitting of cell A at
50/50 H20/H2 and 650 oC after
100 h durability testing.
Figure 3.20: CNLS fitting of cell B at 50/50
H20/H2 and 650 oC after 100 h durability test-
ing.
28
Solid oxide electrolysis cells operated at intermediate temperatures
==PAGE:34==
Figure 3.21: CNLS fitting of cell A infiltrated at 50/50 H20/H2 and 650 oC after 1000 h
durability testing.
Figure 3.22: A column graph that compares the simulated resistances for the 3 tested
cells after their respective durability tests.
Solid oxide electrolysis cells operated at intermediate temperatures
29
==PAGE:35==
While not much can be concluded about cell A’s degradation, the data suggests that most
cell B’s degradation was from the fuel electrode reaction, which is exactly the process that
benefits most from infiltration. This supports the idea that CGO infiltration helps both the
lowering resistance and degradation rates.
The infiltrated cell after being operated for more than 1000 hours, sees resistance in-
crease from each source, with the fuel electrode reaction harboring the largest rise. The
resistance increase from ion transport is also notable for it’s large increase as this sug-
gests that ”dead areas” might have formed where a minor crack or formation of SrZrO3
from interaction between the air electrode material and electrolyte [16, 7]. However no
evidence for either was found when searching for it with SEM and EDS.
Table 3.1: Table showing CNLS fitting data for each cell at 50/50 H20/H2 and 650 oC
before and after their durability tests. Each data point has units of Ωcm2.
Cell
Rs
Rion
RNi/YSZ TPB
Rair electrode
RDIFF
RConv
A before
0.32
0.096
0.450
0.0258
0.0487
0.029
A after
0.35
0.040
0.584
0.0258
0.0192
0.043
B before
0.41
0.019
0.336
0.0128
0.0092
0.028
B after
0.45
0.024
0.4112
0.0128
0.0092
0.032
A inf before
0.32
0.0056
0.0832
0.0912
0.0224
0.051
A inf after
0.35
0.0437
0.1328
0.1056
0.0768
0.086
30
Solid oxide electrolysis cells operated at intermediate temperatures
==PAGE:36==
3.3
SEM analysis
During this project the Zeiss Ultra SEM used was broken for a significant amount of time,
leading to some of the pictures taken being less focused then those taken while it was
working.
Figure 3.23: A SEM picture of the cross
section of cell A (reference cell).
Figure 3.24: A SEM picture of the cross sec-
tion of the active area of cell A (reference
cell).
Figures 3.23 and 3.24 are included to show what a cross section of the cell looks like and
show the relative size of the layers, versions with layer measurements can be found in
the appendix.
Figure 3.25: A SEM picture of the fuel
electrode of cell A (reference cell) at
20 000 x magnification.
Figure 3.26: A SEM picture of the barrier
layer and air electrode of cell A (reference
cell) at 20 000 x magnification.
Figure 3.25 shows a close up of the fuel electrode of a reference cell A, to show the
cell when it has been reduced (meaning the pore size is accurate to when it is used) but
before any degradation. The picture clearly shows both the nickel and YSZ mix of the fuel
electrode. Figure 3.26 shows the corresponding barrier layer and air electrode, showing
that the PVD barrier layer is completely dense, which should prevent the formation of
SrZrO3. It also gives an idea of pore size for the air electrode.
The fuel electrode of the infiltrated cell, as shown in figure 3.27, has CGO in addition to
Solid oxide electrolysis cells operated at intermediate temperatures
31
==PAGE:37==
Figure 3.27: A SEM picture of the fuel
electrode of cell A infiltrated (reference
cell) at 20 000 x magnification.
Figure 3.28: A SEM picture of the barrier
layer and air electrode of cell A infiltrated (ref-
erence cell) at 20 000 x magnification.
Figure 3.29: A SEM picture of the fuel
electrode of a non reduced cell A at
20 000 x magnification.
Figure 3.30: A SEM picture of the fuel elec-
trode of cell A after the 100 h durability test at
10 000 x magnification. At this point the SEM
was broken and no better pictures could be
produced.
nickel and YSZ this can be observed easier through and EDS image as shown in figure A.7
in the appendix. Figure 3.28 showing the air electrode of the infiltrated cell is included to
point out that infiltration is only done at the fuel electrode and this air electrode is equivalent
to the previous one.
Figure 3.29 shows the fuel electrode before being reduced and how the pore size is much
lower before the nickle oxide has been reduced to nickel. Figure 3.30 show the fuel
electrode of cell A after the 100 h durability test and is included to show the low quality of
images from that last session before the SEM was closed for repair. The images of cell A
after durability testing are of too low quality to be useful.
32
Solid oxide electrolysis cells operated at intermediate temperatures
==PAGE:38==
Figure 3.31: A SEM picture of the fuel
electrode of cell A infiltrated after the
1000 h durability test at 32 000 x
magnification. Red circles are used to
point out possible points of degradation.
Figure 3.32: A SEM picture of the barrier
layer and air electrode of cell A infiltrated af-
ter the 1000 h durability test at 10 000 x mag-
nification.
As the CNLS fitting shows most cell degradation occurs in the fuel electrode, some minor
degradation can be observed in figure 3.31, where micro structure changes leading to
leading to loss of contact between nickel and nickel particles or nickel and YSZ can be
seen. These micro fractures effectively reduce the electron and ion pathways and the
TPB area and appears to be the main source of fuel electrode degradation. Figure 3.32
shows the air electrode of the infiltrated cell after the durability test where no signs of
degradation. the barrier layer region was also closely studied at higher magnification and
with EDS, but no degradation or SrZrO3 particles were found.
Solid oxide electrolysis cells operated at intermediate temperatures
33
==PAGE:39==
4
Conclusion and outlook
While the SOEC technology has great potential to revolutionise several industries reliant
on energy conversion and storage, from simple energy storage to the chemical production
and steel industries. Scaling up SOEC usage for these industries would benefit from
operating at lower temperatures than the current SOA cells are designed for. Therefore
three SOA SOECs where tested at 650 oC in order to better understand the intermediate
temperature range. Each cell underwent a series of EIS measurements both before and
after a durability test in order to better understand their degradation pattern. The durability
tests were carried out at 0.75 A/cm2 of electrolysis for periods of either 100 hours or
1000 hours. The 100 h durability tests proved to be to short for useful results, any future
research in this area should use tests of at least 1000 h.
A method for decreasing cell resistance and degradation is to infiltrate the fuel electrode
with CGO. To examine whether this method might be a step towards operating SOECs at
intermediate temperatures, a cell was infiltrated with 150 mg/cm2 of CGO. The infiltrated
cell was compared to two different non infiltrated cells to have a baseline. CGO is a MIEC
and CGO infiltration works by effectively increasing the TPB in the fuel electrode by creat-
ing a larger area where the fuel gas can meet both an electron and ion conductor. CNLS
fitting of initial pre durability test data showed a that infiltrated may have reduced resis-
tance from the fuel electrode by as much as 80 %. During durability testing the infiltrated
cell was operating at around 1400 mV while the non infiltrated cells were at around 1700
mV, for the same current density. These are substantial improvement achieved by adding
a step to the cell production procedure. The degradation rate for the infiltrated cell was
63 mV per 1000 h, which is still higher than that for a comparable cell at high temperature
but it would seem that CGO infiltration is an important step towards reducing degradation
rate at intermediate temperatures.
SOECs are challenged at intermediate temperatures because of lower ion conductivity at
these temperatures compared to high temperature SOECs, it seems that a way to mit-
igate this disadvantage is to add another production step to cell fabrication. Of course
this comes with other problems for scaling up as the simpler a cell is to fabricate, the
cheaper and easier it is to scale up it’s production. This is a fundamental trade off with
respect to industrial SOECs, but the infiltration option could be made more favourable
through more study of infiltration such as varying the infiltration loading. Since CGO in-
filtration significantly reduces what is currently the reaction which contributes most to the
total cell resistance, the other resistance factor become relatively more important, so any
improvements there would be more important if infiltration becomes more widely adopted.
34
Solid oxide electrolysis cells operated at intermediate temperatures
==PAGE:40==
Bibliography
[1]
N. Sönnichsen. Hydrogen consumption worldwide by country 2020. Feb. 2022.
URL: https://www.statista.com/statistics/1292403/global-hydrogen-consumption-by-
country/.
[2]
five-charts-on-hydrogens-role-in-a-net-zero-future. https : / / www . mckinsey . com /
capabilities / sustainability / our - insights / five - charts - on - hydrogens - role - in - a - net -
zero-future. Accessed: 2023-05-30.
[3]
Anne Hauch et al. “Recent advances in solid oxide cell technology for electrolysis”.
In: Science 370.6513 (2020), eaba6118.
[4]
Christopher Graves et al. “Sustainable hydrocarbon fuels by recycling CO2 and
H2O with renewable or nuclear energy”. In: Renewable and Sustainable Energy
Reviews 15.1 (2011), pp. 1–23.
[5]
Allan Schrøder Pedersen Ander Smidt. “Electrolysis. In Encyclopedia of Environ-
mental Management.” In: (4), pp. 1–11.
[6]
Peter CK Vesborg and Thomas F Jaramillo. “Addressing the terawatt challenge:
scalability in the supply of chemical elements for renewable energy”. In: Rsc Ad-
vances 2.21 (2012), pp. 7933–7947.
[7]
Trine Klemensø et al. “High performance metal-supported solid oxide fuel cells
with Gd-doped ceria barrier layers”. In: Journal of Power Sources 196.22 (2011),
pp. 9459–9466.
[8]
Søren Højgaard Jensen. “”Solid Oxide Electrolyser Cell”, PhD thesis, Technical Uni-
versity of Denmark”. In: (2007).
[9]
Meng Ni, Michael KH Leung, and Dennis YC Leung. “Parametric study of solid ox-
ide fuel cell performance”. In: Energy Conversion and Management 48.5 (2007),
pp. 1525–1535.
[10]
Ib Chorkendorff and Johannes W Niemantsverdriet. Concepts of modern catalysis
and kinetics. John Wiley & Sons, 2017.
[11]
Zhan Gao et al. “A perspective on low-temperature solid oxide fuel cells”. In: Energy
& Environmental Science 9.5 (2016), pp. 1602–1644.
[12]
Qianqian Ji et al. “The role of oxygen vacancies of ABO 3 perovskite oxides in
the oxygen reduction reaction”. In: Energy & Environmental Science 13.5 (2020),
pp. 1408–1428.
[13]
Md Saif Hasan et al. “Recent Criterion on Stability Enhancement of Perovskite Solar
Cells”. In: Processes 10.7 (2022), p. 1408.
[14]
Hyun Joon Jung and Sung-Yoon Chung. “Absence of distinctively high grain-boundary
impedance in polycrystalline cubic bismuth oxide”. In: Journal of the Korean Ce-
ramic Society 54.5 (2017), pp. 413–421.
[15]
Per Hjalmarsson et al. “Influence of the oxygen electrode and inter-diffusion barrier
on the degradation of solid oxide electrolysis cells”. In: Journal of power sources
223 (2013), pp. 349–357.
[16]
Steffen Sønderby et al. “Strontium diffusion in magnetron sputtered gadolinia-doped
ceria thin film barrier coatings for solid oxide fuel cells”. In: Advanced Energy Ma-
terials 3.7 (2013), pp. 923–929.
[17]
Sebastian Dierickx et al. “Advanced impedance modelling of Ni/8YSZ cermet an-
odes”. In: Electrochimica Acta 265 (2018), pp. 736–750.
[18]
Monika Backhaus-Ricoult. “SOFC–A playground for solid state chemistry”. In: Solid
State Sciences 10.6 (2008), pp. 670–688.
Solid oxide electrolysis cells operated at intermediate temperatures
35
==PAGE:41==
[19]
Christoph Ahamer et al. “Revisiting the temperature dependent ionic conductivity of
yttria stabilized zirconia (YSZ)”. In: Journal of The Electrochemical Society 164.7
(2017), F790.
[20]
Ruth Knibbe et al. “Durability of solid oxide cells”. In: (2011).
[21]
Simona Ovtar et al. “Boosting the performance and durability of Ni/YSZ cathode
for hydrogen production at high current densities via decoration with nano-sized
electrocatalysts”. In: Nanoscale 11.10 (2019), pp. 4394–4406.
[22]
Dong Ding et al. “Enhancing SOFC cathode performance by surface modification
through infiltration”. In: Energy & Environmental Science 7.2 (2014), pp. 552–575.
[23]
Microscopy Training. https://myscope.training/. Accessed: 2023-04-19.
[24]
Thomas F Fuller and John N Harb. Electrochemical engineering. John Wiley &
Sons, 2018.
[25]
Sebastian Dierickx, André Weber, and Ellen Ivers-Tiffée. “How the distribution of
relaxation times enhances complex equivalent circuit models for fuel cells”. In: Elec-
trochimica Acta 355 (2020), p. 136764.
[26]
X Sun et al. “Degradation in solid oxide electrolysis cells during long term testing”.
In: Fuel Cells 19.6 (2019), pp. 740–747.
[27]
Rasmus Barfod et al. “Detailed characterization of anode-supported SOFCs by
impedance spectroscopy”. In: Journal of the Electrochemical Society 154.4 (2007),
B371.
[28]
Andre Leonide, Yannick Apel, and Ellen Ivers-Tiffee. “SOFC modeling and parame-
ter identification by means of impedance spectroscopy”. In: ECS Transactions 19.20
(2009), p. 81.
[29]
Christopher R Graves, Sune Dalgaard Ebbesen, and Johan Hjelm. “Determination
of overpotential characteristics of reversible solid oxide cells via impedance spec-
troscopy and correlation with cell degradation”. In: Transactions 19 (2009), pp. 81–
109.
36
Solid oxide electrolysis cells operated at intermediate temperatures
==PAGE:42==
A
Apendix
Figure A.1: SEM picture of the cross
section of cell A measuring the width of
the fuel electrode.
Figure A.2: SEM picture of the cross section
of cell A active area measuring the width of
various layers.
Figure A.3: SEM picture of the cross
section of cell A active area measuring
the width of the electrolyte.
Figure A.4: SEM picture of the cross section
of cell A active area measuring the width of
barrier layer.
Solid oxide electrolysis cells operated at intermediate temperatures
37
==PAGE:43==
Figure A.5: SEM picture of the cross
section of cell A active area measuring
the width of air electrode.
Figure A.6: SEM picture of the cross section
of cell A active area measuring the width of
contact layer.
Figure A.7: EDS image of infiltrated cell A fuel electrode after durability test.
38
Solid oxide electrolysis cells operated at intermediate temperatures
==PAGE:44==
Solid oxide electrolysis cells operated at intermediate temperatures
39
==PAGE:45==
As the world faces the challenges for a total renewable energy transition, electrolysis for hydrogen
production will play a key role in both energy storage and conversion. Out of the three main electrol-
ysis technologies: proton exchange membrane, Alkaline and Solid Oxide Electrolysis Cells (SOEC),
SOEC can achieve the highest efficiency. The major challenges for using SOEC at the scale the
energy transition requires, are it’s high temperatures and shorter lifetime compared to the other main
electrolysis technologies. Therefore this work focuses on operating state-of-the-art (SOA) SOEC at
intermediate temperatures and the cells degradation at these temperatures.
Three different SOA cells were tested, where one was infiltrated with CGO at the fuel electrode to
improve it’s efficiency and durability. The three tested cells were all 5.3 cm x 5.3 cm, with 4 cm x 4 cm
active areas. The two non infiltrated cells underwent 100 h durability tests, preceded and followed
by Electrochemical Impedance Spectroscopy (EIS) tests and the infiltrated cell underwent a 1000
h durability test preceded and followed by EIS tests. The EIS data for each cell before and after
the their durability tests was then fitted using a Complex Nonlinear Least-Square (CNLS) model, to
further understand how much individual cell processes contributed to the cell’s resistance and how
this changed after the durability tests.
The infiltrated cell experienced at degradation rate of 63 mV per 1000 h during it’s durability test, at
650 oC and 0.75 A/cm2 electrolysis. It’s degradation was further studied using a scanning electron
microscope (SEM). The infiltrated cell proved to be a significant improvement on it’s non infiltrated
counterpart, with CNLS fitting showing 80 % less resistance from the fuel electrode reaction for the
infiltrated cell compared to the non infiltrated cell.
Technical
University of
Denmark
Building 310
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.energy.dtu.dk
