==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
A privacy-preserving place detection method
for wearable self-tracking devices
Metode for anonym stedsidentificering for mobile
self-tracking enheder
Erik Thomsen (s184200)
Mathias Fager (s175182)
Kongens Lyngby 2023
==PAGE:2==
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Technical University of Denmark
Matematiktorvet
Building 303B
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
As there is a an increasing problem with mental health this project aims to improve
the treatments methods making them more data-driven. Previous research regarding
a self-tracking device called the OneButton Tracker (OBT) has shown to improve the
therapeutic process, by providing temporal symptom data in the treatment. Based
on this research we introduce a new prototype expanding the capabilities of the OBT.
The expansion revolves around an algorithm for detecting a place when given a list
of anonymous WiFi identifiers. An instrument collect the data for the algorithm and
graph provide simple presentation for analysis.
This project provides a full system utilizing self-tracking to improve on the previ-
ous OBT and by extent, improve the therapeutic process. We present an algorithm
which successfully can process anonymized WiFi data into place data. The instru-
ment can successfully gather WiFi data and create anonymous places such that the
wearer’s physical location is never compromised. The data can then be fed into a vi-
sualization tool that can display different graphs, this helps the treatment of mental
disorders become more data-driven.
==PAGE:4==
Preface
This thesis was prepared at the department of Applied Mathematics and Computer
Science at the Technical University of Denmark in fulfillment of the requirements for
acquiring a Master’s degree in Computer Science and Engineering.
Kongens Lyngby, July 21, 2023
Erik Thomsen (s184200)
Mathias Fager (s175182)
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
We would like to thank Jakob Eg Larsen for providing and supervising the project.
We would also like to thank the usability participants providing useful feedback to
our UI design.
==PAGE:6==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
ii
Acknowledgements
iii
Contents
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Contributions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Holistic overview
3
3
The Instrument
5
3.1
Conceive . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
3.2
Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3.3
Implement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.4
Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4
Algorithms
22
4.1
Conceive . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4.2
Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.3
Implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.4
Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
5
Visualization tool
36
5.1
Conceive . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
5.2
Design and Implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
6
The Finished Product
50
6.1
User Guide
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
7
Usability evaluation
53
8
Discussion
59
8.1
Future Works . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
==PAGE:7==
Contents
v
9
Conclusion
66
A
67
A.1 net.py - Scan function . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
A.2 Calendar-view selectors demo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
Bibliography
69
==PAGE:8==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
Poor mental health is an increasing problem with 17.4% of danish citizens scoring
low on the mental health scale, which is an increase of 4.2% in just 4 years [32].
Furthermore there is evidence that upwards of 25% of adults in developed countries
experiences mental disorders each year [20].
With a such astonishing number of
affected people it is surprisingly tricky to treat mental disorders, as every person
experiences a mental disorder differently.
The goal of this project is to help better the therapeutic process when treating
mental disorders.
When treating mental disorders, Cognitive Behavioral Therapy
(CBT) is often applied as treatment, which is a type of talking therapy. The ther-
apy works based on the concept that a person’s feelings, thoughts and behavior are
connected meaning that if any of these are negative, it can lead the patient into a
downward spiral where one negative conscience will have a negative outcome of the
other two consciences [31].
Our supervisor who presented this project to us, has previously done research
which lays the foundation of this project.
This research revolves around using a
self-tracking instrument to gather information for the therapeutic process to make
it more data-driven. An instrument called the OneButton Tracker (OBT) is used
for low-effort, in-the-moment self-tracking among these studies [3][4]. This OBT is
a small device with only a button, pressing the button records a timestamp. The
patient and the therapist, together, decides what the patient should be tracking, a
feeling, phenomena or symptom. The patient self-tracks with the OBT and in the
next session the therapist can analyse this data together with the patient [4].
A case study our supervisor was involved in, with a 35 year old combat veteran
showed that his self-tracking course, unearthed details about his triggers and together
with their therapist they could denote the cause of his symptoms [21]. Another case
study about distinguishing between rumination and intrusive memories in PTSD,
showed great promise applying self-tracking to investigate phenomena in PTSD pa-
tients’ lives. Both studies also touches on the phenomenon called Recall Bias where
humans have a hard time remembering details about past events, experiences or out-
right leave out details, and how this form of self-tracking may be able to reduce or
even eliminate recall bias.
The papers [21], [3] and [4] all show great potential and use of self-tracking and
the OneButton Tracker.
This project will further develop and build on the self-tracking concept by in-
==PAGE:9==
1.1 Contributions
2
troducing a new prototype able to gather more data than the previous OneButton
Tracker prototype. As hinted by the title, anonymous place data will be collected on
top of the self-tracking data to add context about the patient’s whereabouts while
they are self-tracking with the prototype.
It is important to distinguish between location and place data at this point. Lo-
cation is the specific position in the world described with coordinates or any other
unambiguous understanding. Place is an understanding of a persons whereabouts,
though not with coordinates, but rather through context. E.g. if someone says ”I
am home”, people will have an understanding of where that person is, in context, but
only those who know where that person lives, can translate this into a location.
Place data is anonymous without the context the patient has, thus their privacy is
preserved when adding this extra data. The data can be analysed with the therapist to
discover relations between places and phenomena, similar to how the OBT prototype
helps uncover temporal relation to phenomena.
For this project the prototype will use a WiFi module to collect raw data, apply
an algorithm to transform this data into place data and provide a visualization of
this data. Another part of the project will be an exploratory process looking into
improving the other parts of the process within self-tracking and the pipeline from
gathering the data to visualizing it.
1.1
Contributions
This paper documents the research and design processes behind creating a privacy-
preserving place detection algorithm for wearable devices capable as well as a tool to
visually present the data in order to help treatment of people with mental disorders.
First, based on a micro controller with a WiFi module, the module collects surround-
ing WiFi information and safely handles the data.
Second, an algorithm has been constructed that based on WiFi information can out-
put a privacy-preserving place identifier.
Third, the data is presentable in a tool that is easy to understand, this has been
verified by conducting tests on participants where various features and intuition re-
garding the tool has been tested with usability tests.
Fourth, the project has continued the work of previous research and expands on the
shortcomings and limitation as well as ideas and considerations to further develop
the final product
==PAGE:10==
CHAPTER 2
Holistic overview
The project is split into 3 large components, each having their own responsibilities.
Together these form the product for this thesis. These each have their own chapter
with a deep dive into that specific component, to understand the design and imple-
mentation process.
The 3 components:
• Instrument
• Algorithm
• Visualization
The instrument component is the tool the patients will be using to track their
symptoms, called observation data, and collect information about a patient’s place in
the form of nearby WiFi’s. The component also ensures the WiFi data is anonymized.
The data is passed along to the algorithm component. The instrument component is
further explained in chapter 3.
The algorithm component is responsible for receiving the anonymized WiFi data
and transforming this into place data. The observation data is not processed in this
component and is passed to the visualization component with the place data. The
algorithm component is described in chapter 4.
The visualization component receives the data and visualizes it in a meaningful
and simple way to ease analysis of the data for the end user.
The visualization
component is described in chapter 5.
Figure 2.1: System overview: Shows the flow of data through the entire system
g
==PAGE:11==
2 Holistic overview
4
This split into components is both a conceptual split to help understand the overall
workings of the system, but also a choice made to improve readability, by inspecting
the three components separately.
==PAGE:12==
CHAPTER 3
The Instrument
This chapter describes the instrument, which is used to collect the data. In other
words the instrument is both the required hardware and the software used when
collecting the data. To understand what this means, the following is an analysis of
what the data is, how it is collected and how it is transferred to the next component.
3.1
Conceive
The data consists of two different types; The observation data and the scan data.
Observation data strongly resembles the data collected in the other OBT project. An
observation contains a timestamp, which describes when a patient has experienced a
symptom. A symptom is whatever the patient and therapist have decided that the
patient should be tracking, which could be a feeling or sensation related to a psychotic
episode. As in the earlier OBT project, a button will be the input method for tracking
symptoms. Thus the flow is as follows; The patient experiences a symptom, they
press the button and the instrument saves an observation with the current timestamp.
An observation might also contain information about the button-press duration and
other relevant information. The information was formerly used in the OBT project
to determined whether a press was a single- or double-click, short or long, which
enabled multiple input methods for the patient and logging observations for multiple
symptoms. The scan data is a list of scans consisting of data regarding observed
WiFis. To elaborate on this; One scan, is generated by scanning the area for WiFi
signals, thereby acquiring a list of the WiFis, and saving this list together with a
timestamp.
As eluded to the scan data has to be anonymized, though one might question
why. A WiFi signal is not directly giving away a position, though indirectly it could
be. Imagine a person acquiring the scan data and they happen to know the position
of a WiFi in this data, or that a WiFi SSID (WiFi name) provides enough context
to find a position. In this case they would be able to extract part of the patient’s
previous locations, worst case identify the patient based on this.
Thus the need
for anonymizing the data. Another aspect is GDPR and regulations, which can be
diﬀicult to handle, might become easier to handle or even irrelevant, when the data is
anonymized. To recap, a scan will be anonymized by the instrument. Further details
regarding anonymizing the data considered in the design phase in section 3.2.3.2.
==PAGE:13==
3.2 Design
6
As in the earlier OBT projects [4], transferring the data from the instrument to
the visualization tool was achieved using USB. One project uses a wristband with
a button and Bluetooth capabilities to transfer the data over a Bluetooth link to a
phone [21]. The prototype for this project has USB and WiFi capabilities. Transfer
via USB is simplest, as the prototype mounts as an external USB drive, and will
be employed to extract data off the instrument.
We also consider an alternative
design in section 3.2.4. Note that we distinguish between prototype and instrument,
where prototype is used to mention the physical capabilities of the instrument, and
instrument is the more abstract description of the tool used to collect data.
From the analysis above we can extract requirement for the instrument:
• A method of recording observations through a button press
• A method for gathering and hiding scan data
3.2
Design
This chapter will delve into the details of how the data will be collected, handled and
prepared before it goes into the next component in the process.
3.2.1
GPS Solution
WiFi is not the only option for tracking places, Global Positioning System (GPS) is
capable of having a precision of just 5 meters [10], however directly using GPS would
mean tracking the users location, which ruins the idea of having the place tracking be
anonymous. Its strengths are that it is very accurate especially under an open sky[22],
even in remote locations where a WiFi solutions falls short due to lack of WiFi. In
order for GPS to be a viable solution, it needs to have some of its precision removed
or else the instrument would contain all GPS coordinates of the patient. Should the
device fall into the hands of an attacker (An attacker is a term often used in cyber
security to describe a malicious person trying to obtain sensitive information or in
other ways commit cybercrime) then the instrument works more like a stalking device
rather than a self-tracking one. GPS use latitude and longitude to decribe a position.
These numbers are given in degrees with more decimals resulting in higher accuracy,
which means removing decimals removes precision. This function could now make
GPS a viable option for place tracking. Using just two or three decimals would make
the accuracy 1,11 kilometers for two decimals and 111 meters for three [1]. Using
three decimals would essentially split the entire world up into chunks that is 111
meters on either side (in this case we ignore the earth’s curvature, e.g. pretending
the earth is flat).
As long as the patient is within the same chunk when they scan, the same value
should be the result and then these values can be anonymized using the designs in
section 3.2.3. As mentioned in the introduction in chapter 1 this paper will focus on
==PAGE:14==
3.2 Design
7
a WiFi solution. The reason behind was as GPS, while accurate, consumes a lot of
power and may loose accuracy in urban areas[24] or in cities where a direct line to a
satellite is obstructed[22].
3.2.2
Understanding the scan
Another thing to consider is: ’When do we collect scan data?’. Two models were
considered; One which collects scan data when the button is pressed, meaning it is
collected together with an observation. The other model was to collect it continually
throughout a day, such that the movement of the patient in its entirety is mapped.
The key difference is whether the scan data is partial or complete. If data is collected
only when saving an observation, the data is only showing a part of the full picture,
which we consider partial. Contrary, collecting the data continually will provide a
full picture. One might say, more data is always better, but there could be some
drawbacks; Collecting scan data continually could drain the battery and use up the
memory faster, compared to only collecting it when the instrument is already working
to save an observation.
Collection complete scan data however, enables calculating how long the patient
has spent at a given place.
This is assuming the interval between scans is small
enough to ensure high enough accuracy in the scan data. Say a person collects 2
scans 5 minutes apart and 2 other scans 40 minutes apart, all at the same place.
The probability the person was at this place between the scans is a lot higher when
considering the 2 scans with a 5-minute interval between them, whereas the 40-minute
interval leaves plenty of room to visit a new place and come back again.
Imagine a person was generating a lot of observations at work and a few when
visiting their parents. Analysing the partial scan data, one would assume work was
more interesting to look into, since there are more observations at this place. Though
when looking at the complete scan data, the person spent a lot of time at work
and only a small amount of time at their parents house. Considering observations per
time spent at the places, reveals that the parents place is actually the more interesting
place to investigate further. To elaborate on the interesting-term regarding a place; It
is an indicator of where to focus the therapeutic effort. We say a place is interesting
if the observations per time spent is high. Thus the more interesting a place is, the
more the therapist wants to focus their effort here.
From the design analysis above, it almost seem like gathering the complete data is
a must, as the context gained regarding the persons self-tracking is much greater. We
also saw that partial data can point the analyser in the wrong direction, which is not
an attractive quality. Thus we will aim to gather complete scan data. The interval
between scans should be as small as possible, though the algorithm component might
have an influence on this interval as well.
==PAGE:15==
3.2 Design
8
3.2.3
Anonymization
The aim of the anonymization is to hide the data in a scan, to prevent attackers
from extracting it and ensure privacy of the patients. There a multiple ways to this,
depending on the requirements for how the data will be used once hidden. These
requirement should be decided in the design of the algorithm component. Imagine
the algorithm needs to observe the original data to work, in this case the data must
be hidden while passed to the algorithm, however should be obtainable again in the
original form. In this case one could use encryption, which scrambles the data and
enables unscrambling as well. In another scenario, the algorithm has no need for the
original data, thus hashing is a better option, since it scrambles the data with no way
of unscrambling it again.
3.2.3.1
Encryption
When considering encryption, there is an obvious split in the road, either symmetric
or asymmetric encryption. Let us consider both solutions. For these designs, multiple
instruments for one algorithm component to illustrate security risks.
Symmetric encryption works by using one key to encrypt and decrypt information.
This allows two parts to exchange information without others being able to read it.
Compared to asymmetric encryption, symmetric encryption a faster operation and
symmetric keys are much smaller compare to those use in asymmetric encryption[26].
Symmetric encryption would entail that both the instrument and the algorithm holds
a key. Now imagine multiple instruments, each holding the same key, and the algo-
rithm also having a copy of the key. An attacker would be able to read all data from
all instruments, if they could extract a key from just one of the instruments, which
is a severe security risk. Alternatively each instrument holds a separate key and the
algorithm component holds a copy of all keys for all instruments. This is a better
solution, since an attacker having obtained a key from an instrument, will only be
able to read the data of this instrument. Though in case the attacker breaches the
algorithm component and obtain all keys, the scenario is the same as before. Another
concern is storing all of these keys in the algorithm component.
A solution with asymmetric encryption might be more appropriate for this sce-
nario.
Asymmetric encryption works by using two separate keys, a public and a
private key. Encrypting data with one key will make it so only the opposite key is
able to decrypt the data. As the naming suggests, one of the keys is public, meaning
known by all, while the other is private. Imagine the instruments having the public
key to encrypt the generated data with, then only the algorithm component, holding
the private key, could read the data. In this case, obtaining a public key would not
give access to any data.
There is still the case of an attacker obtaining the private key, which would result
in the attacker having access to all the data as before. Observing in a more realistic
scenario, the instruments would be with the patients, thus allowing the least amount
of control regarding the surrounding environment. The algorithm however could be
==PAGE:16==
3.2 Design
9
integrated in a server or together with the vizualization component, allowing further
protection of the stored key. The algorithm could also be locally integrated on the
instrument preventing further protection, however in this case there is a direct link
from the instrument to the algorithm, eliminating the need of hiding the data while
in transfer.
3.2.3.2
Hashing
A hashing algorithm is essentially a one-way function, such that the input to the
function can never be extracted, calculated or otherwise obtained from the outputted
hash value returned by the function[11]. For a given input, a hash function always re-
turns the same output. Hashing is a well established security measure widely used in
cyber security. For a hash function to be considered secure, it must fulfill three prop-
erties: pre-image resistance, second pre-image resistance and collision resistance[27].
Pre-image resistance defines the one-way feature of a hashing function; It states that
it should be computationally hard to find the input to a given hashed output. Second
pre-image resistance and collision resistance are both properties related to collisions,
which is when two different inputs resulting in the same hash value. Collisions are
bound to happen, since hash function convert strings of arbitrary length to a string
of fixed length. Second pre-image resistance states that given an input and its hash
value it should be computationally hard to find another input resulting in the same
hash value. Collision resistance states that it should be computationally hard to find
two different inputs resulting in the same hash value. Thus if a hash function is col-
lision resistant, it is also second pre-image resistant, as it is easier to find a collision
between the output of two arbitrary inputs rather than looking for a specific collision
for one input. This might seem counter intuitive, but it boils down to collision resis-
tance essentially being the birthday problem[5]. This is really interesting, though we
will not go into further detail. The point is that there is good reason to trust secure
hash functions.
A known attack used to crack hashed passwords is called a Rainbow Table Attack,
which utilizes a table of precomputed hashed passwords to obtain the original pass-
word. The reason for mentioning this is that information about WiFis are available
online, such as WiFi Map[33], perfect to exploit a modified version of this rainbow
table, with the goal of obtaining the original WiFi data given as input to the hash
function. To guard against attackers using the theory behind a rainbow attack using
public WiFi data, a salt could be implemented as an extra security measure. A salt is
a concept of adding a user specific string to the input before passing it to the hashing
algorithm, thereby making a precomputed rainbow table attack unusable. In our case
it could be as simple as a unique value stored on each instrument, given as salt before
hashing a scan.
The choice is between using asymmetric encryption or hashing to hide the data.
Looking at the two options, hashing is simpler to implement and the security threats
are smaller compared to encryption. Using encryption would also entail keeping the
keys safe, which might require further design work. Thus going forward, we will be
==PAGE:17==
3.2 Design
10
using hashing in our solution and designing the algorithm component with this in
mind.
3.2.4
Data transfer to algorithm
As mentioned transferring the data through USB is the simplest solution, though this
limits the data transfer to happen when the patient has a therapy session. Thus there
is no data redundancy and in case of data loss caused by a damaged instrument, a
lost instrument or various other risks, there is no way of recovering the data. This
could be partially mitigated by having the therapist save the current data each time
the patient shows up for a session, though one would still loose a couple of days worth
of self-tracking. The patient could also back up the data themselves, however this
works against having a simple, low-effort self-tracking experience. An alternative is
utilizing the WiFi to offload the data to a server, either as a backup to ensure data
redundancy or a replacement of the USB transfer method. This methods could have
other advantages as well. The data would be available for the therapist before the
session, giving them room to prepare and pre-analyse the data, before meeting with
the patient. Setting up a whole server, transferring data and integrating it in the
visualization component is a bit out of scope for this project however. Instead, we
focus on how to enable this data upload to an arbitrary server and how this will affect
usability. Thus in the product of this project, the process of extracting data from the
instrument is still done via USB. To upload the collected data, the instrument must be
connected to a WiFi. This WiFi could be either a free WiFi, the patients home WiFi
or the WiFi at the therapists oﬀice. There are a lot of available data online about
free WiFi, which could be used to connect the instrument to the internet without
any setup from the patient or the therapist. However there are some of challenges
in this design; If there are no free WiFi accessible in the area, data would never be
uploaded. Another challenge is that all of these have different login information, some
with password, some without, all needed to be stored on the instrument. Thus the
free WiFi design, will not be considered. Connecting to the therapist WiFi would
mean the instrument could be setup before being handed to the patient, however
unless the patient pass by the oﬀice outside going to sessions, this is not a viable
design either. Having the patient setup the instrument to use their home WiFi would
reduce usability, as the patient would have a setup phase at home. On the other hand
it would be advantageous as people normally spend a lot of time at home.
Moving on with the last design, we wish to make the setup as easy as possible for
the patients. Going forward we assume both patients and therapists are less proficient
in use of modern technology and computers, to ensure good usability. This has to be
considered when designing a method for the patient to submit their WiFi credentials
to the instrument.
The simplest method is again do this via a USB link by having the patient change a
file on the instrument which contains the WiFi credentials. A drawback of this method
is the usability, as patients are not accustomed to submitting WiFi credentials in a
==PAGE:18==
3.3 Implement
11
file. A more user friendly method is to take advantage of the prototypes ability to
host a website. On this website, a simple user interface could help the patients input
their credentials and the instrument would use these credentials to connect to the
internet. Ideally the flow looks something like this:
• Patient is a home.
• Patient changes instrument state to website-state (state for hosting website).
• Patient opens website on phone or computer.
• Patient input their credentials, if there is a typo, the patient will be informed.
• Patient begins self-tracking.
We will focus on implementing input method using a website hosted on the instru-
ment.
3.3
Implement
The instrument used in this project is a micro controller unit (MCU) from Adafruit
called Feather equipped with a ESP32-S2 WiFi module [17]. It has plenty of flash
storage and RAM so these resources should not be a limiting factor during develop-
ment. These MCU’s are mass produced and cheap at around $24.95, which makes
them perfect for prototyping as breaking a MCU is not a big deal and easily replaced.
A major driving factor for using a mass produced well-rounded MCU like the Feather
is that they come with support for add on components which means the prototyping
is not only limited to what the MCU has access to as part of the circuit board. The
MCU comes with a STEMMA QT connection, which is a connection that a RTC
module can connect to, should further development wish to tackle the hassle of the
MCU losing the clock every time is shuts off or drifts too much as discussed in section
3.3.8. In addition the MCU also comes with a plethora of pins as input/output, these
pins are for example used to connect the button to the MCU. Alongside the MCU is
a 400 mAh battery to give the MCU power while it’s not connected to an outlet, to
enable testing the device as a patient would. To further personify a patient the MCU
had a button attached that would function as the button on the end product, thus
enabling the prototyping to have all the features desired for the project available. The
picture 3.1 shows the setup with the button connected to the MCU and the battery
is taped to the backside.
3.3.1
Prototype workflow
When first handed the prototype, we had a great deal of startup trouble as the
drive which the prototype presented itself as, was read-only. Meaning we could not
change the program running or upload new code. The reason behind is a feature of
==PAGE:19==
3.3 Implement
12
Figure 3.1: The instrument (bottom left) with battery taped to the underside and
button (top left)
CirciutPython making one able to write code directly on the drive [28], however this
prevent the prototype from writing to its own drive. In our case, the prototype has
to be able to write to its own drive, to be able to save data. If write to own drive
is enable, write from a computer is disabled. Our first solution was to use REPL,
which is a way to write and execute code on the fly, similar to a python console. Here
we would use the command ”import storage; storage.erase_filesystem()” to erase the
filesystem thereby returning to a state where a pc can write to the drive. The current
implementation is a switch on the board which can change the value of a pin. boot.py
sets the drive state based on this pin. Just change the pin and press reset, then we
can transfer an updated program to the prototype.
3.3.2
Previous work and additions
Before starting this project, some work had already been done in regards to prototyp-
ing the instrument. We were handed some base code we continued to work on, which
==PAGE:20==
3.3 Implement
13
parts has been left untouched, parts have had minor changed and lastly some parts
has been entirely rewritten or added as new files. Figure 3.2 shows a dependency
diagram of the code on the instrument with the added color coding of what has been
unchanged, added or modified during development. While code.py was part of the
project to begin with, it had undergone major rework to such extent that it might as
well be new.
The modified files range from heavily modified to minor changes, where the heavier
modified files are util.py and net.py, where new methods and functionality has been
added. Part of the changes has been to add return types to the various methods as
this increases clarity of the responsiblity of the method and helps the next developer
looking at it to understand what is going on.
As code.py is the brains of the operation and has undergone major rework section
3.3.3 goes into detail what has changed and why. Every integrated library that is
available to the instrument has to be separately uploaded to it, this include a hashing
and httpserver library and these has been added to the instrument as needed but is
otherwise not taken into consideration. Furthermore parts of the already established
program has been deactivated during development because they were not necessary
for the exploratory work this project focused on, among these are the BME- and BNO
modules and the haptic feedback files, as the prototype was not equipped with the
corresponding hardware.
Figure 3.2: Dependency Diagram showing the dependency between the modules of
the firmware as well as which files has been modified
==PAGE:21==
3.3 Implement
14
3.3.3
Code.py refactoring
Previously code.py was one big for-loop, looping through everything whenever the
instrument was activated, whether by time or pin alarm. This was written a new
almost from scratch, as the existing code was hard to comprehend. A conceptual split
was present in the code, however not obvious. The refactoring focuses on emphasizing
this split, which can be described as 3 states:
• Awoken by pin alarm
• Awoken by time alarm
• Connected to a host machine
Create hotspot and host website
After the refactoring of code.py, a main method contains a while loop (This is
necessary because how light sleep works) and inside this loop it is determined, which
state the instrument is in. This is depicted in the state diagram of the main loop as
can be seen in figure 3.3
The new setup is such that whenever the prototype wakes up, it will resume the
program from where it fell asleep because that is how light sleep works. We are not
using deep sleep, so we do not have to consider saving all variable that are initializes
before calling the sleep method.
alarm.wake_alarm is an attribute coupled with
the alarm library in CircuitPython and it returns the reason the device has been
awoken. It can either be of the class PinAlarm, None or WakeAlarm and is used
to determine whether the instrument should collect a scan or handle a button press
and an observation has to be recorded. If the reason returns None then it is either
because it is the first loop after a reset or more commonly the instrument has been
plugged into a computer, resulting in starting up the server. Adding new features
to the instrument should with this approach be streamlined, such that whether the
feature’s path is PinAlarm, WakeAlarm or None then there is an associated method
for each state.
3.3.4
Button press
The button-press functionality, which handles the ”Awoken by pin alarm”-state, is
greatly inspired from the code we were handed by our supervisor. Instead of using the
outer while loop to observe button-press changes, the implementation is contained in
its own loop, to improve readability.
A button-press is handled as follows:
• A pin (D11) called the WakePin is used to wake up the instrument.
• The instrument state changes and the button-press implementation is invoked.
• The pin D11 is overridden as a button to observe changes, like the release of
the button.
==PAGE:22==
3.3 Implement
15
Figure 3.3: State diagram of the main loop depicting the different states the instru-
ment can be in
• Loop runs until button is released.
• Observation is saved on instrument and the button is de-initialized.
• The instrument redefines D11 as WakePin, sets alarms and call light sleep func-
tion.
A limitation in CirciutPython prevents the use of the pin for multiple inputs, like
wake up and button, resulting in the solution of redefining the pin. Our supervisor
showed us a hardware solution in which the button was wired to two pins, as a
different remedy.
As shown in 3.3, 3 states of the instrument is shown.
As seen
we are not able to be in two states at the same time, we are not able to register a
button-press and collect a scan at the same time.
==PAGE:23==
3.3 Implement
16
3.3.5
Sleep
In CircuitPython, there are two different sleep methods, a light sleep and a deep
sleep. Light sleep, as mentioned earlier, wakes up the prototype and resumes after
the statement from which the light sleep call was made. It also keeps all variables
in memory. Contrary deep sleep will forget all variables and restart code.py from
the beginning. The advantage of deep sleep is the low power consumption. Light
sleep with the ESP32-S2 module does not save any power and is equal to using a
time.sleep() call[13]. However we use it as it provides the wake up functionality. We
would have liked to use deep sleep, unfortunately when we attempted to use it, the
wake up on button-press was a slow, meaning the button-press information was not
accurate enough. Thus we use light sleep.
3.3.6
WiFi scanning
In section 3.3.3 a TimeAlarm state is introduced. This is due to the need for pe-
riodically scanning for WiFis as described in section 3.2.2.
TimeAlarm works by
inputting the wake up timestamp and giving this alarm object as input together with
the PinAlarm, as arguments for the light sleep call. In this state, TimeAlarm, the
instrument scans for WiFis, in which the flow is as follows:
• Instrument wakes up on TimeAlarm.
• Scan for WiFis.
• Update RTC if possible (section 3.3.8).
• Sort WiFis by RSSI and extract identifiers.
• Hash WiFi identifiers (section 3.3.7).
• Pass data to algorithm component.
• Set alarms and call light sleep function.
As seen in figure 3.2, net.py has been modified. This module contained a function
for collecting WiFi data using the WiFi chip on the prototype. The builtin WiFi
module in CirciutPython was used to control the WiFi chip [7].
An class called AccessPoint was implemented to contain the necessary information
about the WiFi, the SSID, the MAC address and the signal strength (RSSI). The
function was modified to return the WiFi data for one scan in the form of AccessPoint
objects (AccessPoints).
Inside the function (appendix A.1), depending on the input, we may collect one
or multiple lists of AccessPoints and afterwards reducing these lists to one list of
distinct WiFis observed. We consider a WiFi’s MAC address to be unique and use
this assumption to make a distinct list. Collecting multiple list is a way of ensuring
a more complete list of distinct WiFis, since we have observed that one scan may
==PAGE:24==
3.3 Implement
17
occasionally miss a WiFi. One loop in this function takes 1.3 seconds due to the call
to the builtin WiFi module, telling it to scan nearby WiFis. It should be noted that
the WiFi chip used is a 2.4GHz chip, meaning it is not able to see WiFi signals using
a 5Ghz frequency, meaning we will never be able to gather complete WiFi data. This
is a hardware limitation of this project, and in real world use of WiFi to place data
methods, this should and can be fixed by swapping out the hardware.
Based on the later tests discussed in the Results section 3.4.1, we have decided only
to run the function with a single loop, though we did see improvements by scanning
multiple times, compared to the increased time the instrument is unavailable for
logging observations, it is not worth it.
As described the function return a list of AccessPoints.
These are sorted by
RSSI, before the MAC addresses are extracted and hashed. The reason is to convey
the signal strength relation between the observed WiFis implicitly to the algorithm
component by the ordering. The identifier of a WiFi was chosen as the MAC address,
though as this is an algorithm specific decision, this is described in the algorithm
design 4.2.2.
3.3.7
Hashing
To implement the hashing a scan, which is a list of WiFi identifiers, the builtin hashing
module (hashLib) in CircuitPython was employed, which is a subset of the hashing
module in CPython [14]. The hash function employed is SHA-256.
The scan is generated by the WiFi scanner module, as mentioned in 3.3.6, thus
depending on the implementation of the WiFi scanner module, our hashing module
wrapper (hashWrapper) can make assumptions about the inputted list of WiFi iden-
tifiers. The assumptions are that the list is sorted by the signal strength of the WiFis
and are distinct by their MAC, meaning a WiFi only exists once. Sorting by their
signal strength means by keeping this ordering through the hashWrapper into the
returned list, which is passed onto the algorithm, the algorithm can use this implicit
knowledge given by the order.
The scan is generated by the WiFi scanner module as mentioned in 3.3.6, which
promises the list of identifiers is sorted by the signal strength of the WiFis and all
values in the list are unique.
To preserve the RSSI relation, our hashing module
wrapper hashWrapper must preserve the ordering of the inputted list. Ensuring the
identifiers are unique, ensures the outputted hashed values are unique.
This is implemented in hashWrapper.py. The list of identifiers is looped and every
value is hashed separately. A feature of hashLib is that the object that handles the
hashing itself saves previously inputted strings. This is great for some application,
but not for hashing string separately. As a result, we had to make a copy of the object
before inputting any identifier, to ensure a clean slate before hashing. The salt as
mentioned in section 3.2.3.2, is generated randomly at first boot up of an instrument,
saved in salt.py and is passed to the hashWrapper with the list of identifier from
code.py. Salt is added to every separate identifier before hashing.
==PAGE:25==
3.3 Implement
18
3.3.8
Connecting to WiFi
When hosting a website, there are a few different things that has to be taken into
consideration, such as the server that runs the website, the back-end and which
framework so make the website with. For the website framework, as this is purely
bare-bones and only for inputting 2 sets of strings, the most eﬀicient way would just
be pure HTML/CSS/JS. This means no need for huge UI libraries and no need for
configurations and setup that frameworks such as Vue/Angular/React needs. Should
the patient need more functionality and control over the instrument, a different frame-
work could ease development and increase user experience, though it is not necessary
here. In regards to the server and the backend, CircuitPython has a library that can
handle this, which we will be using.
Coming back to the ideal flow mentioned in the design phase, there are 3 stages to
consider: ”Patient changes instrument state”, ”Patient opens website” and ”Patient
input their credentials”.
Changing to the website-state is implemented by the instrument detecting whether
is it connected via USB or not. As mentioned earlier, this code is only reached if the
alarm.wake_alarm has the value None. When the device is connected via USB and
it does not have WiFi credentials saved or is unable to connect via these credentials,
the instrument will begin flashing indicating it has opened its own WiFi hotspot and
a server. The patient connects to the hotspot and types the IP address into a browser,
which leads them to the user interface in which they input their credentials. As of
now we were unable to set a static IP address for the server, though it seems to have
a default value. As a backup in case this default value changes, the current IP of
the server is written to a file called ”ip_address.txt”. Before starting the server, the
instrument scans for available WiFis, using the SSIDs as input for a dropdown menu in
the UI. The reason behind is to reduce user errors when inputting credentials. As soon
as the patient submits the credentials, the server will save them on the instrument
in ”secrets.py” for further use and begin collecting data. In case the instrument is
unable to connect with the credentials, it will start flashing indicating it has started
a new hotspot and server.
The above solution works and is error resistant, however it became a more compli-
cated process than originally planned. Luckily the patient only has to complete this
process once. As a manual backup, the therapist is able to help the patient set this
up, by accessing ”secrets.py” together with the patient and inputting credentials for
their home WiFi.
Once the instrument has access to a WiFi it will then use Network Time Protocol
(NTP) to update its builtin Real Time Clock (RTC). NTP is a service that computers,
mobiles and other smart devices can connect to through the internet and ask for the
time. This update feature was already existing from the original code we were handed
from our supervisor, as the RTC on the prototype does not have an external battery.
This result in the clock resetting to a default value when the prototype resets.
As mentioned earlier the idea behind using the WiFi module to connect to the
internet was to enable uploading of data from the instrument. The RTC update could
==PAGE:26==
3.4 Results
19
Figure 3.4: The website hosted by the instrument with a drop down button to select
SSID, a password input and a submit button to write the changes to secrets.py
be seen as simulating this data transfer.
3.4
Results
In this section we present results of the tests we have conducted on the instrument.
The tests mainly focus on the consistency of the WiFi module but also a quick test
of the battery drift.
3.4.1
Scan data
Scanning for WiFis In this test we wish to look into how few times we should repeat-
edly scan for WiFis and still get a complete or almost complete list of nearby WiFis
for our scan data. Of course only out of the 2.4GHz WiFis.
The data for the tests were gathered by calling the WiFi scan function described
in 3.3.6. For every timestamp the function was called with different input, which
determines how many data loops the function runs. Data was collected in two rounds.
The first round had, for every timestamp, data for 1 loop, for 3 loops and for 5 loops.
An important note is that the scan used in the 1-loop data, is not collected as part
of the 3-loop data, thus the data does not necessarily overlap. The second round
has 1-,3-,5- and 10-loop data. The data is collected almost at the same time, with
the only difference being the time it takes to complete a single loop, which is around
1.3 seconds. This is solely the time it takes for the builtin WiFi module to scan for
networks.
Our assumption was that we would get a more complete scan, the more loops we
did. Ideally we would like to see that all the 1-loop data was contained in the 3-loop
data.
Data from the two data collection rounds is shown in table 3.1, where the WiFis
column is the total number of WiFis observed in that file (not to confuse with distinct
WiFis). The Lines column is the number of lines in the file.
==PAGE:27==
3.4 Results
20
Files
WiFis
Lines
20230221-20230222_1loop.csv
3018
941
20230221-20230222_3loop.csv
3574
941
20230221-20230222_5loop.csv
3911
941
27022023-01032023_1loop.csv
3427
812
27022023-01032023_3loop.csv
4318
812
27022023-01032023_5loop.csv
4646
812
27022023-01032023_10loop.csv
5123
812
Table 3.1: Data from scanning WiFis with different scanning amounts
To compare two files, we assume one of them contains all the data of the other,
like in the ideal case with 1-loop data and 3-loop data. Then we test this assumption
line by line, matching the lines on the timestamp. If we have a line from the 1-loop
data, we test whether all the WiFis in this line is also in the matching line from the
3-loop data, if false, this is an error line. The comparison between the files is shown in
table 3.2. In the table we also show the reverse errors, which is the same assumption,
just reverse.
Datasets
Set
Superset
Errors
%
Reverse errors
%
1. round
1 loop
3 loop
117
12.43
311
33.05
1 loop
5 loop
76
8.08
397
42.19
3 loop
5 loop
145
15.41
274
29.12
2. round
1 loop
3 loop
119
14.66
453
55.79
1 loop
5 loop
79
9.73
477
58.74
1 loop
10 loop
60
7.39
538
66.26
3 loop
5 loop
184
22.66
254
31.28
3 loop
10 loop
122
15.02
312
38.42
5 loop
10 loop
151
18.60
276
33.99
Table 3.2: Comparison of WiFi data sets shows how many error lines there are
between the set and the superSet.
As seen in the comparison data, the ideal assumption did not hold in any cases.
We do see a decrease in errors in both rounds when looking at 1-loop-to-3-loop errors
of 117 and 119 compared to 1-loop-to-5-loop errors of 76 and 79. The same tendency
is seen when comparing 3-loop-to-10-loop and 3-loop-to-10-loop. What this suggests
is that by looping more times, we could increase the completeness of a scan. This is
also supported by the reverse error being higher, the greater the difference in loops.
While showing that more than one loop may be beneficial, it also points to a negligible
==PAGE:28==
3.4 Results
21
gain when going from 3 to 5 and 10 loops. In round 1 the 1-loop-to-3-loop comparison
has and error percentage of 12.43%, while 1-loop-to-5-loop has 8.08%. Round 2. data
shows similar small gain from increasing the loops.
As mentioned, one loops takes 1.3 seconds, which is a fairly long time. This could
affect the data if some hotspots move around will a scan is in process, e.g. in the 2.
round the 1-loop data is collected 11.7 seconds before the 10-loop data starts to be
collected. This could be a factor during transport, as the data collected could vary a
fair amount while driving in a bus or the like. We also see some different error counts
between the two rounds, such as the 1-loop-to-3-loop, which is not self explanatory.
The only correlation looking more in-depth in the data files is that a greater amount
of time was spent at DTU in the 2. round. This could be explained as there are a lot
more access points at DTU and thus a higher change of a WiFi flickering, meaning
it might shows up in one loop and does not show up in the next one. The data in its
whole does suggest there is some WiFi flickering, as we would not expect this amount
of changes in access points in a rather small time interval.
3.4.2
RTC drift
This test was aimed at confirming a suspicion we had regarding the RTC (the onboard
clock) not being able to tell the time properly. Data collected in table 3.3, show the
RTC timestamps held up against the real time updated through an NTP.
RTC
NTP clock
Start
20230301T105411Z
20230301T105412Z
End
20230308T075852Z
20230308T062539Z
Table 3.3: Start time and end time of the RTC compared to real time (NTP)
Calculating the time between the timestamps and using this to calculate minutes_drifted
test_duration
will result in roughly 0.8 min/hour, meaning the RTC drifts 0.8 minutes in one hour.
This is 19.2 min/day, thus roughly 20 minutes a day. This is not viable, when we are
dependent on the timestamp both for observation data and scan data.
==PAGE:29==
CHAPTER 4
Algorithms
4.1
Conceive
As described in the holistic overview, the algorithm component takes anonymous
WiFi data as input and outputs place data. Through the instrument design phase,
hashing was picked as the method for anonymizing the data, meaning the algorithm
should not depend on the original data, and rather determine the place based on the
hashed WiFi identifiers. This hashed data can be described as a nominal data type,
only enabling testing whether two hashed values are equal.
Place data was described as understanding of a persons whereabouts through
context. We do not expect the algorithm to try to determine whether a person is a
home, or at work, instead it should generate an arbitrary label, a placeId, to a place.
The a single instance of place data is thus described as a timestamp and a placeId.
The patient and therapist will then, based on when this placeId is seen, be able to
connect it to a context like ’home’ or ’work’.
A paper, Inferring Stop-Location from WiFi [34], has conducted research in using
WiFi to infer stop-locations and determine whether the person is stationary or moving.
A stop-location is similar to place data, though rather than a timestamp, it has a
duration of time spent at the stop. The paper presents 2 algorithm for generating the
stop-location data and the stationary status, ”a greedy approach to select the most
important routers and one which uses a density-based clustering algorithm to detect
router fingerprints” [34].
Having implemented and tested these algorithm, the authors have some great
insights into what works and shortcomings, which are valuable to consider when
designing our own algorithm:
• The greedy algorithm is not able merge locations. Thus if an important router
is physically moved or has its name changed, which may lower the quality of
the generated data. The clustering algorithm does not experience this problem
due the fingerprint, which usually holds multiple routers observed together in
the original data.
• The researchers observed that a non-stationary access point could decrease the
accuracy of their data, like one on a bus or train.
==PAGE:30==
4.2 Design
23
4.2
Design
Based on insights extracted from ’Inferring Stop-Location from WiFi’, we have come
up with a design suggestion for the algorithm together with our supervisor.
The
general idea is a dynamic algorithm which builds places up gradually. Imagine a scan
(anonymous as covered in previous chapter) at a location the patient has never visited
before. This scan likely contains a couple of identifiers, which the algorithm relates
to a generated placeId, place1. Now, the patient moves a bit and new identifiers
show up with some of the existing ones. The algorithm relates the new identifiers to
the placeId, place1. The algorithm has similarities to the fingerprint algorithm from
the paper [34], as there are a bunch of identifiers pointing to one placeId, though
the difference is its mutability, the ability to change which identifiers relate to an
arbitrary placeId. As the algorithm is dynamic, merge cases may arise. A merge case
is if identifiers for two different placeIds are seen together in one scan. Since a single
scan denotes by its nature that these are in the same location, these two placeIds
should be merged into one placeId. The resulting place data is the timestamp of the
scan combined with the placeId determined by the algorithm.
From this description a case analysis can be extracted:
• A scan consisting of only new identifiers (new: not seen before), the algorithm
generates a new placeId.
• A scan consisting of only old identifiers (old: has been seen before), the algo-
rithm does not change anything and just chooses the corresponding placeId
• A scan consisting of some new and some old identifiers, the algorithm adds the
identifiers to the placeId.
• A scan consisting of some old identifiers related to two or more different placeIds
results in the algorithm merging the placeIds into a newly generated placeId.
This is done by relating all identifiers from the scan and all identifiers already
related to the placeIds, to a newly generated placeId. In case there are some
new identifiers here as well, these are also related to the new placeId.
The analysis allows us to determine whether the algorithm is able to handle the
edge cases found in the previously mentioned paper and come up with design additions
to overcome these challenges such as:
An access point’s identifier has been changed - As multiple identifiers relate to one
place, this case will not affect the algorithm’s performance. Even if multiple identifiers
change names, assuming they all relate to place1, as long as they are observed in scans
with some identifiers still related to place1 it is able to handle it.
An access point was physically moved - As this could merge to places, which are
not geographically close to each other, this a less optimal case for the algorithm. This
could be the home access point, in which case the data might make contextual sense,
as a person is still home. On the other hand, it might as well be a temporary access
point for events, such that the algorithm merge multiple event-placeIds together.
==PAGE:31==
4.2 Design
24
An access point is non-stationary - An access point placed on a bus or a train
is a bad case for the algorithm as this could merge multiple places which are not
geographically close to each other. Imagine the bus driving past the patients school
and gym, thereby merging these two very different places with one another.
A possible solution to the two last cases is a cutoff logic, to control how likely the
algorithm is to merge places. The general idea is to introduce a minimum number
of identifiers belonging to a place before we consider this place present in a scan.
In the case where an access point is physically moved into a existing place, and we
assume the cutoff is higher than one, the algorithm would not merge the places, as
the fingerprint of one of the places, is not large enough. The same goes for the case
with a non-stationary access point.
4.2.1
Cutoff
There are a few different ways to design a cutoff which we will cover, though at first
we analyse the logic behind a cutoff.
4.2.1.1
Logic
As covered a cutoff is used to determine whether a place is present in a scan. Example:
place1 is present in a scan, if the number of identifiers related to place1 is greater-
than-or-equal to the cutoff. As covered, merging a place to another only happens if
both places are present in the scan, however some new edge cases arise, as this state
of a place being present is introduced. The following cases may all be considered to
include an arbitrary number of new identifiers besides the described scan content.
Case 1: 2 places are in a scan and only 1 is present.
Since only one place is present, we should add some identifiers to this place, the
question is which identifiers to add. There are identifiers related to the present place,
the non-present place and new identifiers.
As one place is being considered non-
present, the same should be the case for the identifiers related to this place. Thus
the new identifiers should be added to the present place.
Case 2: 1 place is in a scan
Notice it was not specified whether the place was present or not. The consideration
is whether it should matter when only one place is in the scan. If the place is present,
we essentially have the case which we ended up with in case 1. Thus is has to be
considered when only one place is in the scan otherwise the choices of the algorithm
would be contradictory depending on the path taken to get to this case. Meaning if
the place is present, the new identifier are added to the place otherwise no place is
present in the scan, hence we generate a new place.
4.2.1.2
Constant or Dynamic Cutoff
Designing the cutoff, which is a number, seems at first glance as just picking a value.
Though it is a bit more complicated. Picking a value could be described as a constant
==PAGE:32==
4.2 Design
25
cutoff, as it lacks volatility. The opposite is a dynamic value changing based on given
arguments or parameters.
To choose the base for the dynamic value, we look closer at how the dynamic cutoff
should work. Imagine a place, place1, with only one related identifier. Now, a scan
misses this identifier while being at the same geographic location, thus generating a
new place, place2, which receives all identifiers in the area. Assuming the cutoff is
greater than one, since a cutoff of one is equal to not having a cutoff, place1 cannot
be merged to place2. At least not before gathering more identifiers, but as these have
been related to place2, there is no way to merge these places. Unless the cutoff is one,
which is not feasible in all cases, though as the cutoff should be dynamic, it could be
one in some cases.
Contrary, having a place, place3 with a large fingerprint (30 identifiers), could
indicate that the algorithm has been building this place up for a while or the place
is crowded with identifiers. Scanning in or around this location could easily return
a couple of identifiers related to place3. To not casually merge place3 with another
place, the cutoff should be larger than what is required for a fingerprint of 3, maybe
5 or 7 in this case.
An idea is to make the cutoff proportional to the fingerprint size, meaning the
more identifiers related to a place, the higher the cutoff. This could be a percentage of
identifiers or a logarithmic function with the number of identifiers as input. Compared
to constant cutoff this probably takes up more memory, as the number of identifiers
related to each place has to be stored and updated.
Whether we choose a constant cutoff or a dynamic, all cutoffs need to handle the
case above, where a place only has a single identifier related. This could be solved by
always merging when this specific case arises.
A constant cutoff seems a bit dull compared to the dynamic cutoff just discussed,
nevertheless this was our choice. We are very conscious about the space and processing
power our algorithm consumes since the algorithm is executed on the instrument, as
covered in section 4.2.4. Furthermore the concept of a constant cutoff was also easier
to grasp early on. We wish to compare multiple versions of cutoffs.
4.2.2
WiFi identifier: SSID or MAC
The general approach is the instrument collects scan data, hashes the WiFi identifier
and sends the data to the algorithm. We need to determine which WiFi identifier
should be used, as this can affect the algorithm components performance. We are
able to compare two hashed identifiers and check whether they equal. If they are
equal, it tells us the identifiers have the same value. Meaning if these where seen in
two different scans we would know that this identifier has been seen before.
==PAGE:33==
4.2 Design
26
Figure 4.1: Example of WiFi access points and observation spots. The observation
spots are numeric from 1 through 4.
Another design aspect is what identifier is used as input for the hash function.
The two obvious choices to consider are either to use the MAC address of the WiFi
access point or the SSID, in other words the name of the WiFi. If we consider the
example in figure 4.1, which could be a workplace, home or university, we see that
there are four different access points and four observation spots. The tables in figure
4.2 depict the results of hashing the MAC addresses and the SSIDs. Here we see that
hashing the MAC will classify different places at e.g. DTU differently and only if
two scans are using the same access points, will it classify them as the same. Thus
resulting in a highly detailed data in terms of mapping to a place. On the other
hand we see that hashing SSIDs to classify the place results in all of the observation
spots will be classified as one place, which is good in terms of getting some context
i.e. ’the wearer was at work’, but at the same time places like DTU is very big and
one might want something more detailed than just ’the wearer was at DTU’. Another
thing to consider when using SSIDs is that there is a possibility for false positives.
Looking at the example imagine that the two red networks are two access points to
the same network e.g. ’DTU Secure’ and the blue network is a completely different
WiFi with the same SSID, then mapping the observations to a place will result in
the third observation also being mapped to Place1. This is an illustration of false
positives that can occur as names of WiFis are not unique.
==PAGE:34==
4.2 Design
27
Figure 4.2: Table overview of inferring places based on MAC and SSID differences.
To avoid losing data and because of the high accuracy using the MAC address is
desirable, moreover the strength of using SSID, which was a single SSID can encapsu-
late a large area, will eventually happen if MAC addresses are used anyways, as the
algorithm dynamically build the places. As a solution the MAC address should be
the source of place data what is being sent to the algorithm to be further processed.
4.2.3
Scanning interval
The scanning interval is an important part of the instrument as it is a trade-off
between spending the instrument’s resources and having a high accuracy. From the
instruments point of view, we would like a scan interval as often as possible, as
covered in section 3.2.2. Scanning too often however could generate problems, such
as a patient walking down a street and by walking slow, causes the algorithm to relate
all identifiers on the street to a single place. Using the walking speed as a pointer for
how often to scan, helps determining an interval where data does not loose accuracy
as the patient walk too fast and avoiding merge problems because they walk too slow.
The average indoor coverage of a home WiFi router is around 50 meters [35] [15]
and the average walking speed of a slow walking elderly is just over 3 km/h [9] [8].
With this knowledge, let us calculate how far the patient can walk in 5 minutes.
3000m/h
60
· 5 = 250meters/5min
(4.1)
In this scenario the patient is able to walk 250 meters in 5 minutes and without
trouble pass by a single WiFi router’s coverage.
Now, in the real world a WiFi
routers coverage does not stop as soon as another router’s begins, they can overlap.
To simulate the scanning interval, let us set up an example based on walking
slowly down a street. The houses are spread apart by 10 meters and the routers
are in the center of the house. A different example where the houses are spread as
far apart as possible, while still having realistically overlapping WiFis take care of
both examples where the WiFis are as spread out as much as possible and as close
as possible. As seen on figure 4.3, the slow walking patient can easily walk clear
==PAGE:35==
4.2 Design
28
of chaining the WiFi together in either case. As a matter of fact, for the WiFis to
chain together the patient would have to walk are mere 50 meters per 5 minutes or
80 meters per 5 minutes for both the examples.
Figure 4.3: Simulation of chaining WiFis together based on different housing dis-
tances and a walking speed of 3 km/h
Realistically the WiFi range might be bigger, especially with higher quality routers,
but on the other hand the vast majority of people are able to walk faster than 3 km/h.
This example does not take into account the cut-off implemented to increase certainty
whenever new WiFis are added into a place. On the other hand this scenario does
not take into account if houses have multiple router and more than average coverage.
Furthermore problems arise if the patient is walking alongside apartment complexes
as opposed to single family homes, as an apartment complexes routers are scattered
all throughout the building.
However with a 5 minute interval scan, it leaves plenty of wiggle room and has
therefore been chosen as the desired scanning interval.
4.2.4
Where to run algorithm
Where to physically place the algorithm component has to be considered as the choice
has significant implications for the implementation later in the process. Earlier in the
instrument design phase, we discussed running the algorithm on a server though
also concluded this would not be feasible for in this project. There are two potential
places to place the algorithm, either on the instrument- or visualization-component, as
==PAGE:36==
4.3 Implementation
29
implementing it any other place would require changing the action-flow of the patient
or therapist. One could imagine the algorithm implemented as an excel macro or
an executable file, which would complicate the therapists workflow, before they can
analyse the data.
Having the algorithm on the instrument-component would entail that the al-
gorithm executes just after a scan has been completed, processing it immediately.
The visualization-component design implies the instrument collects all scans, the full
dataset is transferred to the visualization-component, in which the algorithm is exe-
cuted as a pre-processing step before the processed data is presented to the therapist.
An advantage of running the algorithm on the instrument is the output is simply
just a list of timestamps and placeIds e.g.
20230715T123025Z:place1
20230715T123525Z:place1
20230715T124025Z:place2
On the other hand if the algorithm is run on the entire dataset, then the algorithm
is not confined to the instrument but could run on any machine and in these case the
vusualization component. The dataset, however, would larger as each line would be
timestamp and a list of all the hash values generated from the scan e.g.
20230715T123025Z;7cf3b719,3bdedf0f,7025d6ed
20230715T123525Z;7cf3b719,3bdedf0f,b6eb0885
20230715T124025Z;df9be5bc,806998f8
Thus running on the instrument will reduce memory used, assuming the internal
variables the algorithm require are smaller than the full dataset, which is very likely.
This is supported by inspecting the lowest average of WiFis collected pr. observation
in table 3.1, 3018
941 resulting in 3.2 WiFis on average per scan. While it may reduce
memory, it also locks which algorithm is applied, as the original data is not saved and
reduces the modularity of the solution.
Due to the aspect of rabid prototyping and as the data for the algorithm is right
on the instrument, we have chosen to place the algorithm on the instrument. A better
and permanent solution would be either to have a server to offload the data to, before
the therapist fetches it, to be used for the visualization tool. On could also simply
process the data in the visualization tool.
4.3
Implementation
The algorithm designed in the previous section has been implemented, as mentioned,
on the instrument. It is implemented such that it is executed directly after every scan.
We have made two different implementations which have the same logical functionality,
==PAGE:37==
4.3 Implementation
30
but different data structures. During design and implementation of the algorithm,
processing power and memory usage was a concern. Our supervisor had mentioned
a memory constraint in the previous prototype, thus we were extra attentive to this
specific issue. This resulted in a second implementation of the algorithm with the
aim of reducing memory.
A constant cutoff of 2 was implemented in both algorithms, meaning 2 identifiers
related to each place needs to be seen in one scan before the place can be consid-
ered present. This was our first idea for a cutoff, which was based on tackling the
non-stationary-access-point case and the physically-moved-access-point case, both de-
scribed in the design section. In the design, a case where a place only has a single
identifier related, was discussed as this place would never be able to merge with oth-
ers. This case has not been handled in the two implementations of the algorithm.
This was mainly due to time-constraints of the project and our concern of using more
memory.
The structure of the two algorithm is identical, only the inner variables and in-
teracting with these variables differ.
Both algorithms are implemented with two
dictionaries and a place counter as internal variables.
In the first iteration these
variables were global variables, although this was later changed to arguments for the
algorithm. This enables the main code in code.py to save the variables, to prevent
loss of data in case the instrument’s battery dies or it fails somehow. Since these
values hold which identifiers are related to which place, resetting them would mean
resetting all place context collected so far, which is a very undesirable scenario.
From the design we have 4 different actions, creating a place, adding identifiers
to a place, merging two or more place and lastly, do nothing, as all identifiers are
already belonging to a place.
The general structure is as follows:
1. Extract placeTuples from observed identifiers. PlaceTuples represents places,
which have related identifier observed in the scan.
2. Determine based on placeTuples whether we should:
• Create new place
• Add to existing place
• Merge multiple places together
3. Return the placeId
In case 2, each of the paths handles the cutoff inside, except ”Create new place”
naturally. While writing, in hindsight, we see that it may be possible to handle cutoff
while extracting placeTuples, though it is not implemented as such.
The two algorithms: The equal algorithm and the centroid algorithm.
As de-
scribed, the difference between them is how the data is stored. In the equal algorithm,
the internal values are:
==PAGE:38==
4.3 Implementation
31
• apToPlaceIdDict - Dictionary with identifiers as keys and placeIds as values.
• placeIdToApDict - Dictionary with placeIds as keys and a list of related identi-
fiers as values.
• placeCount - Integer used to generate new unique placeIds.
Creating a place, the equal algorithm relates all identifier to the generated place in
the apToPlaceIdDict and relates the place to the identifiers by adding the full list of
identifiers in placeIdToApDict. Adding and merging is done by updating these in the
same manner. The reason the dictionaries are mirrored in terms of data is to sacrifice
memory for reduced processing, by avoiding looping through all identifiers.
The internal values of the centroid algorithm are:
• centroidToPlaceDict - Dictionary with centroids as keys and placeIds as values.
• hashToCentroidDict - Dictionary with identifiers as keys and centroids as values.
• placeCount - Integer used to generate new unique placeIds.
In the centroid algorithm, similar to the greedy algorithm in the paper [34], the
algorithm picks out a centroid from the identifiers from a place and use this as a
bridge between a sparse dictionary, centroidToPlaceDict, and one with all distinct
identifiers seen, hashToCentroidDict.
Creating a place in the centroid algorithm
is handled by selecting the first identifier in the scan as the centriod. Remember,
because of the ordering, this is one of the identifiers which WiFi had the strongest
signal strength. In the centroidToPlaceDict, the centroid is related to a place and
in hashToCentroidDict the identifiers are related to the centroid. When adding to a
place, we simply relate the new identifier(s) to the centroid. Merging places is done
by updating all centroids for the places, to a new placeId.
The idea behind implementing the centroid algorithm was to save memory, as
the equal algorithm, two dictionaries holds all identifiers twice in total, while the
centroid algorithm holds all identifiers once in the hashToCentroidDict and a some
(the appointed centroids) in the centroidToPlaceDict. The exact amount of identifiers
in centroidToPlaceDict must be the same as the number of placeIds generated by the
algorithm, as this is the only time a centroid is added. The only case in which the
second dictionary could be as large, is if only one new identifier is spotted in each
scan.
When merging places we realised that the previous place data already saved on
the instrument, does not reflect the current merge. To mitigate this, a third output
file was added to supply the mappings of the merge from old places to the new place.
==PAGE:39==
4.4 Results
32
4.4
Results
This section will describe some of the tests that was conducted on the algorithm. Unit
tests have been developed but the important results are which of the two algorithms
uses the least amount of battery, if there even is a discrepancy.
4.4.1
Memory
We ran a test on the memory use of our algorithms to see which algorithm implemen-
tation was best memory wise. The test was conducted by running the instrument
with one of the algorithm implementations and logging the memory allocated. Un-
fortunately the memory usage was very fluctuating, at one moment seeming like the
memory just filled up, before it suddenly dropped again, thus probably a garbage
collector making it very hard to read any useful data out of it.
4.4.2
Battery tests
We ran some experiments on the battery with different configurations. These tests
were to test the battery itself, to test effects of sleep mode, number of scans and to
test performance of the algorithm implementations. The results are seen in table 4.1.
All tests were started with a full battery.
Person
Algorithm
Sleep
Interval
Scans
Time
Mathias
Equal
Light
5 min
1
15 hours, 5 minutes
Mathias
Equal
Light
5 min
1
15 hours, 20 minutes
Erik
Equal
Light
5 min
1
13 hours
Erik
Equal
Light
5 min
1
12 hours, 55 minutes
Mathias
Centroid
Light
5 min
1
15 hours, 25 minutes
Mathias
Centroid
Light
5 min
1
14 hours, 55 minutes
Erik
Centroid
Light
5 min
1
13 hours, 15 minutes
Erik
Centroid
Light
5 min
1
12 hours, 30 minutes
Erik
None
Light
5 min
1
12 hours, 30 minutes
Erik
Equal
Psuedo
5 min
1
6 hours, 50 minutes
Erik
None
Deep
1 min
3
1 day, 20 hours, 19 minutes
Erik
None
Deep
1 min
9
16 hours, 56 minutes
Table 4.1: Timings of different test runs to illuminate which configurations has an
effect on battery life and to what degree.
In the table we see the Person column. This column was added as we noticed
Mathias’ seeming to stay alive longer compared to Eriks’, around 2 hours longer. We
ran the tests again and got similar results. It may be the battery performing slightly
worse.
==PAGE:40==
4.4 Results
33
Next we can splits the result on algorithm type. The data shows deep sleep saves
a lot more power, as expected, whereas light sleep performs decent and pseudo sleep
performs worse of them all. Pseudo sleep is a simulated sleep used when the prototype
is connected to a computer, however even after unplugging the prototype, based on
the result, it will still use pseudo sleep until a reset occurs.
Looking at the interval in details, only two tests have different interval from the
rest. This interval indicates how often the instrument wakes up. From this data
we are not able to determine whether the 1 minute interval has negatively impacted
the resulting time, though we would assume waking up every minute would burn the
battery faster because of the missing time in between scans.
An interesting configuration is the number of loops when calling the scan function
every interval. Here we see that the 9-loop test is performing significantly worse than
the 3-loop test. As the rest of the configuration in these two tests are the same, it
points to the loop times being the deciding factor.
4.4.3
Unit tests
Testing the algorithms with unit tests is an important part of development as it
ensures that new code does not break old functionality. Therefore as part of the code
there is a test suite that simulates different input and the code will then expect a
specific output. A builtin assert statement in Python was employed to conduct the
tests. If the output differs from the expected result then the code will fail and tell the
developer so. An important part of testing code is the general functionality but more
importantly are the edge cases. During writing the tests we encountered multiple
edge cases the algorithm did not take care of and these tests firstly helped us discover
these edge cases and secondly makes sure any future version of the software will also
handle these edge cases.
4.4.4
Practical test of algorithm
A practical test on the algorithm was performed, the different features of the algo-
rithm was tested. To recall these were that it can generate new places based on new
identifiers, denote old places from already known identifiers and merge places when
both places are present in the scan.
The test results are tables that show the timestamp, placeId and hashed identifiers
of each scan. The results has been manipulated such that they are easier to read,
the manipulations are that a hashed value is only six characters instead of the 64
characters the algorithm works with, secondly some unnecessary values have been
removed and lastly the ordering of the values within each scan has been changed.
Using only six characters for each hash value increases the chance that two different
input generates the same output, like a hash collision, thus we confirmed this was not
the case with the substrings.
==PAGE:41==
4.4 Results
34
In table 4.2 the wearer started the device and on the first scan it created the first
place, followed by the hash values that belongs to that place. three consecutive scans,
with differing hash values, all denotes to the same place. This proofs the algorithm
just needs a subset of the belonging identifiers to denote the place, as long as no other
identifiers belonging to a different place is present. Then the wearer switched place,
as seen by the changing hash values, note how the hash values from place two and
three does not show up any other place. Afterwards the wearer is back at place one
with the same hash values, thus the algorithm outputs the place_00001
20230316T150749Z
Place_00001
6d411b
d6c260
a48bba
57908a
ea0f76
20230316T151253Z
Place_00001
6d411b
d6c260
a48bba
58057c
5b3a62
20230316T152302Z
Place_00001
6d411b
d6c260
a48bba
5b3a62
ea0f76
20230316T153311Z
Place_00002
16e4df
839e3c
7f0fb1
91c092
95c1cf
20230316T153816Z
Place_00003
764728
1b1883
3ed026
259bee
f43c7b
20230316T154321Z
Place_00001
6d411b
d6c260
a48bba
ea0f76
2c1283
20230316T154826Z
Place_00001
6d411b
d6c260
a48bba
ea0f76
2c1283
Table 4.2: Table showing a snippet of data gathered from the algorithm proving it
can recognize previous places
The table 4.3 show the test where the algorithm merges two places together.
The hash values 3c15ee and 874ceb are present in place_00009 and place_00012.
5 minutes later it creates place_00011 that has multiple hash values in common with
place_00012. Lastly another 5 minutes later it sees identifier from both places and
creates place_00012. Coincidentally this also proves the cut-off works as 3c15ee is
present in all three scans. If the cutoff did not work the algorithm would have merged
the places on the second scan.
20230316T200715Z
Place_00009
f09a73
3c15ee
c8f1bf
874ceb
d1a8c9
20230316T201724Z
Place_00011
49c839
3c15ee
d3bc78
6f2eb9
353f99
20230316T202229Z
Place_00012
49c839
3c15ee
d3bc78
874ceb
353f99
Table 4.3: Table showing a snippet of data gathered from the algorithm proving it
can merge places together
In general the generated place data matches very well when compared to the
location data recorded.
As an example Place_00001 is DTU which is where the
instrument started collecting scans.
Place_00001 is seen again later in the data,
which correspond to the location data. We do see periods where the algorithm is
generating a lot of new places, some of which are seen again and some are not. These
periods corresponds matches well with movement periods in the location data.
This dataset has an average of 5 identifiers per scan and an average of 87% identi-
fiers in a scan matching identifiers in the previous scan. This points to a high amount
of data redundancy and further supports the decision of placing the algorithm on the
instrument.
==PAGE:42==
4.4 Results
35
The highest number of identifiers observed were 57 identifier in one scan.
In
this example the location data indicates a stroll through Birkerød city for 1,5 hours,
possibly some shopping and such.
The algorithm has merged this into one place.
Unfortunately the location data is not precise enough to indicate how big a distance
was covered, thus the algorithm may be correct in this case. This does however give
an indication of the number of identifiers it is possible to collect when walking around
in a city.
As mentioned the location data is unfortunately not as precise as we would like,
thus we do not know the exact location at any given moment. The reason is that the
data is extracted from Google timeline combined with contextual knowledge of the
dates in term of plans and no extra data was logged. The period is from 16-03-2023 to
23-03-2023, which is 8 days. Ideally we had a lot more data over a longer period, such
that the data became more robust (more identifiers gradually added to a place) to be
able to discern pattern in the day to day life of the person. Due to the shortcomings
of the location data, we had a hard time presenting the data in a meaningful way.
==PAGE:43==
CHAPTER 5
Visualization tool
This chapter will go into detail about visualising and showing the gathered data from
the instrument. At this point in the process, the instrument has gathered data and
the algorithm has done the desired data transformation and now the goal is to present
the data in such a way that it is easy and intuitive to read and understand.
5.1
Conceive
The end goal of the data visualisation is to help therapists diagnose and treat patients,
keeping this is in mind it is very important to present the data in such a way that
therapists can easily identify problematic places.
While problematic places show
where the patient experience situation it may not always be the only important data,
places where the patient is that does not generate bad situation is also important for
treating patients. As such the presentation tool should accommodate this and also
present non-problematic places as these places may contain help in treatment. As
every patient will come with their own data, the presentation tool needs to have a
streamlined process of switching between patients.
As for the medium to show the data there are two routes, either a dedicated
program that every therapists needs to have installed on their computer or a website
they can access through their web browser. During rapid prototyping changes are
bound to happen and therefore a medium that can easily be updated from version to
version is preferable, without hassle is the better option. This is especially important
when usability tests with actual therapists is going to take place. Therefore the best
medium is a website as it can be updated on the fly and the next time the therapists
access the site, the updates has taken place.
Speaking of usability testing with therapists, as this is a exploratory development
process of the OneButton, such tests have been deemed out of scope and will not take
place as part of the project. To test if the design of the website makes sense, a usability
test with ordinary people will take place in order to test if the content is readable and
the features implemented makes sense. In other words, instead of spending precious
time with fine tuning details in order to please therapists, the project will focus on a
broader vision and try to see what are possible ways to display the data.
The non-functional requirements for the presentation layer are then:
• A website for a fast changing environment
==PAGE:44==
5.2 Design and Implementation
37
• Easy process to switch between patients
• Easily identify problematic places
• Show non-problematic places.
5.2
Design and Implementation
The section may stick out a bit as we have decided to merge the design and im-
plementation sections into one section. As with a lot of software, it is an iterative
process where the first iteration is never as good as the 10th iteration. Creating these
graphs is no different, especially since we have no prior knowledge of Observable and
Vega-Lite which had the consequence that designing the graph smelted together with
implementing the graphs as this worked towards both getting experience and see the
possibilities of the tools.
Hopefully this will also make it easier to follow for the
reader.
Designing the visualization component consists of receiving the output from the
algorithm, manipulate the data and then show it in graphs so the therapist get an
overview of the data and analyse it with minimal effort.
5.2.1
Calendar view
Our supervisor has already designed multiple views for displaying statistics and infor-
mation about observations. One of these are a view designed to assimilate a calendar
like one in Microsoft Outlook, shown in figure 5.1 [6]. This calendar is able to show the
time and date of the observations, through overlaying them as dots on the calendar.
==PAGE:45==
5.2 Design and Implementation
38
Figure 5.1:
Jakob’s Calendar view as implemented from his private observable
notebook
Source: [6]
Using this chart as inspiration, we wanted to create a calendar chart like this, and
come up with an intuitive way to show the place data in the chart as well. We decided
to make the background color depict the place for the current time. A first draft was
created which showed dates on the x-axis and hours on the y-axis. The place data
was shown with vertical bars where the color of the bar changed color depending on
the place for the timestamp given by the coordinate. Since we collect a lot of data it
overlapped when presented in the chart, thus the place depictions weren’t accurate.
5.2.1.1
Filtering
To depict the data accurately we decided to split the hour-axis (y-axis) into 15 minute
bins. This was done for two reasons: First, to visually make it easier to distinguish
between places seen in one hour interval. Second, to have an interval to use as basis
for filtering scans, to reduce the data. 15-minutes where to chosen as it is an intuitive
way to split up one hour and dividing the calendar into too small time bins might
cause the calendar to be diﬀicult to read as the time bins clutter the information.
Having an interval filter in the visualization component will also make it robust to
changes in scan interval on the instrument.
==PAGE:46==
5.2 Design and Implementation
39
To elaborate, imagine having three scans within a 15 minute interval. These scans
may each potentially point to their own place. Even though this is possible, it is not
very likely. The more likely scenario is two scans pointing to one place, and the last
scan points to a different place, as the person just happen to have moved to a new
place. Two design were considered:
• Majority rule - The place seen most times in the interval is shown as the the
place.
• Time-spent-majority rule - The place which the patient has spent the most time
at, is shown as the the place.
Majority rule seems as a solid choice, however in a case with 3 scans and 3 separate
places, the rule will choose an arbitrary one. This could be handled by adding more
complexity to the rule. Another case with 3 scans where 2 points to a transport place
and the third point to a place, in which the patient a significant amount of time, the
majority rule will show the transport place. In this case the time-spent-majority rule
will shows to most seen place. We chose to go with the time-spent-majority rule as
we believe it will result in less noise in the visualized data. This is implemented in
our notebook Obt-place-data-funtions in the function filterScansPerInterval.
5.2.1.2
Selection
As data collection with the patient can return a lot of data spanning many weeks, we
believe it is important for the therapist to be able to filter and select specific data.
This way the therapist can focus on the data they want to see. This selection could
be to focus on a single day or an interval of days selected out of the entire dataset. A
similar selector could be applied on the hours. This can help the therapist to target
specific weeks or only see the observation and places the patient has been during set
hours of the day. Vega-Lite has a selector component that can pick out an interval as
depicted on figure 5.2 [30], such an interval could be used to pick intervals between
to times of day or between dates.
This is the same type of selector as showed at the top of the graph in 5.1. We
want to implement the same functionality both on the x-axis and the y-axis. Another
selection we have considered in the design is to highlight a place, to simplify distin-
guishing occurrences of this place, from the rest of the place data. Having the two
selector bars and a place picker would enable the therapist to interact with the chart
and slice the data to suit their preferences.
The implementation of the selector bars themselves was not as straightforward as it
seemed at first. As there are two datasets, scans and observations,which the selectors
has to filter, it became quite a challenge. At one point we considered merging the
datasets into one dataset, as we knew the selection would work. We did however get it
implemented as intended without merging the two datasets. We also implemented a
histogram on the selector bars showing the number of distinct places. A color selector
==PAGE:47==
5.2 Design and Implementation
40
Figure 5.2: Vega-Lite’s widget for selecting an interval between two values
was also implemented, such that by clicking a legend, the place is highlighted in the
chart. An illustration of these selectors in use can be seen in appendix A.2.
5.2.1.3
Place mapping
As described in the algorithm section, a place mapping file is created to map the
merges that has happened in the data. The visualization uses this place mapping
information when processing the file containing the scans, to remap all the places
that has been merged. Imagine place1 and place2 has been merge into place3. In
the scan file, there are still scans representing place1 and place2, due to the merge
happening after these were saved. The mapping is used to change these pre-merge
places to place3.
5.2.1.4
Final chart
The final chart is seen in figure 5.3. We have the colored background representing the
places and the black dots representing the observations. There are places lacking color
or rather having a white color, which is not actually a place. When the background
is white it displays that there were no scans in this period, most likely due to the
instrument being turned off. In reality, we would not have observations here either,
this is only due to the mock data. In the legends the placeId NoData is shown, which
represent scans where the algorithm did not return a place, either due to the scan
returning zero identifiers or no places were present in the scan.
==PAGE:48==
5.2 Design and Implementation
41
Figure 5.3: Calendar overview as implemented in observable with places as the
colors in the background and observations as the black dots
5.2.2
Observations per period charts
While the calendar view gives a good overview of all the places and observations, these
next graphs are able to focus and identify places with a high amount of observations
per hour. The idea is the frequency of experienced symptoms compared to the amount
spent at the place is the places that are interesting to look at.
5.2.2.1
Pre-processing
Before getting into the design of the graphs themselves, we have to understand how
the data is calculated and collected behind the scenes. The term observations per hour
is a great way of analysing a place, though it requires a fair amount of pre-processing.
==PAGE:49==
5.2 Design and Implementation
42
For every place, the number of hours spent at this place must be calculated. To
calculate this we look at the place data. Comparing a line of place data with the next
line after it, we can calculated the duration between the two timestamps. To ensure
the places are close enough together temporally, we use the 15 minute interval again.
If the two lines’ timestamps are closer than 15 minutes apart, the time between them
is added to the total time spent of the place for the first line. Looking at the calendar
chart, we are presented with a lot of missing data holes. To depict time spent, we
must consider these missing data spots as well. We represent missing data as any
other place, though it only exists in the visualization component. Back to the 15
minute limit; If the two lines’ timestamps are further than 15 minutes apart from
each other, we do not consider them close enough and instead add the time between
them to the missing data place. After computing all time spent between the scans,
the data before the first scan and after the last one is added to missing data as well.
Another aspect is how to count observations for a place. Imagine we have an
observation with a timestamp and a number of scans.
To determine which scan
is used as to extract the place from we considered two different designs. The first
design is choosing the scan which timestamp is closest to that of the observation’s
timestamp.
The second to choose the latest scan which timestamp is still earlier
than the observation’s timestamp.
Both choices use the 15-minutes to determine
whether the chosen scan is close enough to the observation. We implemented the
second option, due to not wanting to assign a place forward in time, in case a scan
was before the observation, as it seemed incorrect.
Observations per period chart as seen on figure 5.4 displays all the places where
an observation has been recorded on the Y-axis and hours spent at the place in
logarithmic fashion on the X-axis. With these established the color of the circle is
determined by how many presses per hour has been recorded at the place. This works
such that the red circles are places where the presses per hour rate is high and these
are the bad places for the patient. The math works such that usually the place the
patient is the most is home, but the amount of button presses is not proportional
to the time spent there, resulting in a low observations per hour rate. On the other
hand places with a fewer button presses but a lot of less hour spent would have a
higher ratio. As an example this could be if the patient is grocery shopping. Let’s say
the patient click twice during shopping and the average shopping time is 30 minutes,
this calculates to 4 presses per hour and as such would show up red.
During conceive and design, it was important to figure out the best way to present
the most important information in a meaningful way, such that the therapist can easily
identify what is going on with the patient.
Different versions of the diagram to give an overview of where the patients are
when they press the button have been generated in order to find the design that best
conveys information. In fig 5.5(a) the colors defines the frequency of button presses
per hour and the size of the circles are how many button presses has been recorded
at the place. In fig 5.5(b) he color defines the button presses per hour and the circle
sizes are all the same size. In fig 5.5(c) the color is defined by the total button presses
recorded at the location and the size is button presses per hour.
==PAGE:50==
5.2 Design and Implementation
43
Figure 5.4: Observations to period chart showing places and their observations per
hour in colors ranging from green to red
A different approach to the graphs was to not let the Y-axis be reserved to dif-
ferentiate between the different placeIds but used display numerical information as
well. By having time spent on the X-axis and observations on the Y-axis, places with
similar values for both time spent and observations will cluster together. This has
the flaw that if two different places has the same amount of hours and observations,
the two circles would lie on top of each other and therefore the chart would lose this
data, as only one circle can be visible. For this reason the design for the chart had to
be reevaluated as not being able to identify places is a loss of important information.
As a lot of information is lost on chart 5.4 in the Y-axis to only display the different
places and grouping the bad places together can help find the right outliers, we con-
tinued to refine the chart with overlaying data. Offsetting the data when overlaying,
makes the hidden places visible and it helps with identifying clustering in places with
the small downside that the places are moved a little bit. In fig 5.6 it is visible how
the legend to the right shows 20 different places, whereas the chart itself only shows
13 different locations.
To solve the problem in chart 5.6(b) were to spread the data points apart in the
situation they overlap, simply offset them from each other like shown in figure 5.7.
This does make the points not be directly on top of their correct position, but it does
==PAGE:51==
5.2 Design and Implementation
44
((a)) Color frequency and size per time spent
((b)) Color frequency and all same size
((c)) Color as total presses
Figure 5.5: Different variations of the observation to period chart testing differing
configurations for circle size and circle colors
make a good job at clustering the places with similar data and makes all the data
points available.
Part of the diﬀiculty designing a good chart is that the different charts can help
identify different symptoms, as well as patient data can vary compared to what is
being treated. This creates a situation where there is no one size fits all for the chart,
which is why we have created different charts that can identify different symptoms.
For instance chart 5.6(a) leaves no ambiguity of how to read the different places,
as they are all located independently on the Y-axis. This chart is very good when
the therapist want to analyse the different places by themselves, however at first eye
glance it might not show the correlation between places, one feature that chart 5.7
helps with by having the places directly next to each other
5.2.3
Statistics table
During a consultation with the supervisor he showed us a mock-up of a data table
containing all the data. This is a different way to look at the data, it is not visual
==PAGE:52==
5.2 Design and Implementation
45
((a))
((b))
Figure 5.6: Picture to show the data from observations to period chart (left) losing
data because of overlaying data points on the scatter plot chart (right)
but it displays all the raw data. Through the scatter plot the therapist can identify
problematic places and then in the statistics table be presented with a lot more data
than a simple tool-tip can show. Figure 5.8 shows the idea from Jakob and figure 5.9
shows the table implemented in Observable. A limitation in Observable prevented
the idea of having the place name inside the bar graph showing the percentage of
time spent at the place. It is for this reason the placeId is shifted to its own column
to the left. Moreover as the project currently stands, it is not able to collect multiple
symptoms hence why that column is in the mock-up but not implemented. Otherwise
the table is fitted with placeId, observation count, a bar graph, hours spent at place
and observations per hour and day.
5.2.4
20 cap
We had at one point only shown 20 places based the research showing that ”top 20
WiFi access points per person can be eﬀiciently converted into geolocations(using
Google APIs or crowd-sourced data) and used as a stable location channel.” [29].
However this was only implemented in one graph, data was missing in one graph while
it still showed up in another presented confusing data. If it were to be implemented,
it should be in all graphs presented. We decided not to implement this, as it would
remove data, which we felt was useful. [29]
5.2.5
Tools and architecture
The previous project’s data visualization tool was done in a framework called Observ-
able [23], granting a good starting platform to continue the work of implementing the
place data visualization. Observable is a framework with a Notebook as the object
in which the code is written. The programming language is JavaScript. A JavaScript
==PAGE:53==
5.2 Design and Implementation
46
Figure 5.7: Scatter plot with random offset to fix issue where data points with the
same values would lie ontop of each other
API called Vega-lite was used in Observable to make the graphs shown earlier. A
fork of the original project was created and work began however by the end almost
no original code is left. Figure 5.10 shows the structure of the visualization tool done
in Observable, where the only remains of the original project are parts of obt-core.
The structure works such that the visuals that is shown to therapist and patient
is Showcase Notebook in relation to Thesis, as this is where the graphs are, herein
lies the calendar view, statistics charts with pie and bar charts, the scatter-plot and
a statistics table. obt-place-calendar-view and obt-place-statistics-view are notebooks
that sets up the graphical aspects of the plots. The functionality of these notebooks
are scarce as their sole purpose is to define what elements are part of the plots as
well as the definitions or the X and Y axis. Obt-place-data-functions are functions
that help the data be correctly sorted and filtered before being put into the plots.
In here many of the statistical numbers are calculated such that they are ready and
presentable to the plots. This could be a sorting algorithm that sorts the place data
by time spent at each place. Lastly the obt-core module, this is where the observation
data and place data are being input and processed, as the input files are CSV files
there is a need to translate them into JavaScript Objects.
==PAGE:54==
5.2 Design and Implementation
47
Figure 5.8: Jakob’s statistics table mock up providing the raw data from the algo-
rithm
5.2.6
Shortcomings of observable and Vega-Lite
Observable is a very strong tool that is perfect for rapid prototyping, as is has the
strength, primarily thanks to Vega-Lite, it is incredibly fast and easy to create com-
plex graphs. The community support is also very strong and it is super easy to import
and implement other peoples work. This creates a very strong basis for exactly what
this project needs, however a combination between Observable not being fully devel-
oped and the developers of this project now having any prior experience with either
Observable or Vega-Lite has created some shortcomings and quick-fix solutions.
Color codings - throughout the presentation layer every place gets associated
with a color, the problem is that the color palette that is easily available only support
up to a total of 20 colors. During testing, the dataset amassed more than 20 places
meaning the color palette is not big enough to handle all the places. This can be solved
by manually making a list of colors used, however a strength of using the selected
color palette is that the contrast between the colors is easily identifiable making it
easy to distinguish the colors.
Not designed for UX - in order for the two selectors next to the calendar view
to align properly, a hidden, white box is being used in the upper left corner as seen
in figure 5.11. This is because observableUI does not provide tools for UX which can
decrease usability. We ran into a problem with the calendar view where the tooltip
was skewed compared to the calendar itself meaning you could hold the mouse over
a place and the tooltip would show the place information of the place to the left of
the mouse. We have no idea what causes this or how to fix it.
Documentation and error messaging - the documentation for Vega-Lite is
very diﬀicult to work with, meaning in order to get things to work requires a lot of
==PAGE:55==
5.2 Design and Implementation
48
Figure 5.9: Implemented statistics table in observable based on the mock up pro-
vided by Jakob during a meeting
Figure 5.10: Observable class diagram showing the overview of how the different
components interact with each other
trial and error before the right combination of keywords are found in order to render
the desired image.
Furthermore whenever code does not work observable does a terrible job at telling
the developer what went wrong, having the effect that the developer has to guess what
went wrong. Moreover Observable use an older version of JavaScript which means it
is missing features.
==PAGE:56==
5.2 Design and Implementation
49
Last but not least whenever a function has to be tested, it required to have a
return statement in order for the developers to see the outcome of the functions
Figure 5.11: Hidden white box to properly align the two selectors with the calendar
==PAGE:57==
CHAPTER 6
The Finished Product
The end result of this project is a system consisting of different components that
can independently be removed and redone. This enabled the future work to continue
with some parts of the project, while leaving other parts behind. While the algorithm
is located on the device itself, it is programatically decoupled from the rest of the
firmware and easily extracted elsewhere. The firmware itself is written such that once
the firmware has been installed on the instrument, then the only setup the patient has
to do is to connect the instrument to a WiFi. Thereafter, as long as the instrument
has battery, it will scan every 5th minute and record observations when the button
is pressed.
6.1
User Guide
This is the manual of how to use this prototype of the OneButton Tracker and the
system surrounding it. It is split up into the different features that comes with the
instrument and visualization tool. This is provided to help gain an insight into the
finished product and how the patient and therapist interact with this prototype.
6.1.1
Connect instrument to WiFi
Upon retrieving the instrument it needs some information before it can connect to
your WiFi. You need a computer that can connect to WiFis e.g. if your computer is
connected to the internet through a cable, it will not work. In order to connect the
instrument to WiFi do the following:
1. Connect the instrument to a computer with USB
2. Disconnect from your current WiFi
3. Connect to the WiFi canned ”OBT hotspot”
4. Open your internet browser
5. In the URL field type ”192.168.4.1”
If this does not work, open ”ip_address.txt” on the device and see the IP
address there
==PAGE:58==
6.1 User Guide
51
6. Choose your WiFi name from the drop down and input your WiFi password
7. Click the submit button and when the instrument has rebooted you are all set!
6.1.2
Tracking symptoms
Tracking symptoms is as simple as pressing the button on the instrument when you
experience the desired symptom to track
6.1.3
Record places
The instruments records places automatically and you do not have to do anything!
6.1.4
How to manage data
When a patient comes into oﬀice and you wish to look at the data on their OneButton
Tracker, do the following:
1. Take the OBT and plug it into your computer with a USB cable
2. It should then pop up as a media device, open its storage and select observa-
tions.csv, placeMapping.csv and scans.csv then drag them into your desktop on
your computer
3. Open your browser and go to ObservableHQ
4. Click on the upload button and upload the corresponding file to the correct
upload field
6.1.5
Onboarding to Observable
Below the different graphs are described and what to look out for is pointed out.
6.1.5.1
Calendar
This is the overview of all the places and all the observations the patient has undergone.
The background color indicate the place where the patient has been and the black
dots are their observations. Here you can look for patterns between an extended
period of time, for instance if observations happen at the same time of day or if there
is a pattern where a specific place consistently trigger a symptom. The top bar and
the left bar are selectors that can help you narrow down specific patterns. On the top
one, the date selector, you can select an interval between 2 dates and only focus on
these, this can help if there is a certain week you want to look at. On the left bar, the
time selector, you can select an interval between two time of day. This can be useful
if you want to extract the period of when the patient eats lunch every day. Last but
==PAGE:59==
6.1 User Guide
52
not least you can click on a place in the right view and the graph will highlight this
place in the graph. By holding down shift you can select multiple places.
6.1.5.2
Observation to Period
This graph shows you the places the patient has been on the Y-axis and the places
with a high observations per hour are colored red. This graph can help you identify
places where the patient has a high amount of symptoms compared to the duration
they have spent there.
Right above the graph is there a button that can toggle
whether the X-axis (time spent at place) is logarithmic or not. This can help when
a single WiFi has a significantly higher time spent than other, for instance the home
WiFi. The graph comes in two options, one with a bar graph and one with a pie
chart. Whether you like pie or bar chart, it will show the percentage of amount spent
at each place compared to the total hours recorded.
6.1.5.3
Scatterplot
This plot will group places together that has similar observations per hour and each
place has its own color. This plot can have situations where multiple places are on
top of each other, if this is the case there is a button you can press to add an offset
to the places which makes them all visible. The problematic places on this graph are
the bigger ones, the size of the dot indicates the observations per hour. Once again
the graph has the ability to show the X-axis as raw values or show them logarithmic
as well as you can select a place to highlight and select multiple when holding shift
down. The plot also has a pie chart of the time spent at different places compared to
total hours recorded.
6.1.5.4
Statistic table
This table shows all the data, that the other graphs show visually. From left to right
the columns show:
• PlaceId
• Observation count
• Percentage of time spent
• Hours spent at place
• Observations per hour
• Observations per day
When a place piques your interest you can go down to this table and get the
numbers as they come from the instrument.
==PAGE:60==
CHAPTER 7
Usability evaluation
Testing the graphs gives us an idea of whether the visualizations we have produced
are usable and can convey the data as they should. The general idea behind these
usability tests is to gather insights regarding the design of the graphs. The test was
writting in a Google Form, in which the participants answered the questions given.
When running a test with a participant, we were sitting besides them, observing their
process, listening to them and stepping in case they got stuck.
The test subjects have been family and friends in our near vicinity and thus the
majority of tested people have been younger and some engineering students. This may
skew the results as younger people and especially engineering students are experienced
at looking at graphs and understanding the mathematics and statistics behind the
graphs. Nevertheless the tests have been designed to be open ended and not just
following a guide, such that we can test if our design choices are sound. The broader
questions we wanted answers to were:
1. Are people able to identify interesting places in the calendar view
2. Are the interactive elements of the UI intuitive and can participants figure out
how to use them
3. Does the calendar view do a good job at conveying what information it presents
4. Are people able to identify problematic places by using graph 2/3 or 4?
5. Do people prefer graph 2/3 or do they prefer graph 4
Besides these broader questions we asked questions towards the features implemented
in the different graphs, for example if they can highlight specific places in the calendar
view.
Identifying interesting places on calendar
The graph in question is seen in figure 5.3.
The participants were asked to identify interesting places. The vast majority said
place25 is a problematic place that has to be looked into. While place25 does not
have a high observations per hour, at only 1.36, it does however have a fair amount
==PAGE:61==
7 Usability evaluation
54
of observation in a very short time 3 weeks in a row. This does seem like a pattern
that would be worth investigating meaning the graph does its job at conveying prob-
lematic places. The table 7.1 shows the answers and the amount they occurred. The
participants did not show any consistency except for place25. A lot of participants
found the calendar view to be a very big mouthful and hard to comprehend due to
the sheer amount of data presented.
PlaceId
1
11
12
25
28
44
48
58
Amount
1
1
1
7
2
1
1
1
Table 7.1: Question 1 answers from the usability tests showing place_00025 to be
a place of interest
Interactability of calendar
The graph in question is seen in figure 5.3.
The rest of the questions for graph 1, the calendar, asked the participants about the
interactability. The questions were
• Can you extract 25/3?
• Can you extract between 25/3-13/4
• Can you extract between the times 10-22
• Can you highlight place_00019
• Can you highlight 2 places at once?
In regards to the extraction, 87.5% were able to correctly extract using the selectors.
However some participants were tested using a trackpad on a laptop and this gen-
erated some trouble. At first the participants had to ”play” around with the graph
before they figured it out. Some took several minutes selecting a single date, as they
were ’clicking’, but not ’dragging’ which is how the selector works. As soon as they
were asked to select an interval, ’dragging’ was immediately intuitive.
Once they
figured it out, all the extraction tasks were easily done, however the learning point is
that maybe a tooltip or some text to help the user understand what is available to
them will help.
Every participant could highlight a place and 75% were able to select multiple. These
are promising result showing that the graph does work more or less as intended.
We also saw that participants where using the tool-tip very intuitively.
Some
where confused as they stumpled upon a known issue where the tooltip is shifted half
a day compared to the data presented.
==PAGE:62==
7 Usability evaluation
55
Bonus question: What does the graph show?
The graph in question is seen in figure 5.3.
As a bonus question the participants were asked to describe what the graph showed,
we wanted to make sure the participants understood what they were looking at and
everyone was able to identify that it is displays where the patient had been as well
as when they had their symptoms.
Identify interesting places Observation to period
The graph in question is seen in figure 5.4.
Once again the participants were asked to identify interesting places, to ensure the
intuitive design worked and display problematic places for easy identification. As can
be seen on table 7.2, Place7, place15 and place31 were identified as problematic places
by the majority, these had respectively 3.54, 3.55 and 3.54 observations per hour and
colored in red. The red color seem to help outline the problematic places as these 3
are the only red colored places.
PlaceId
3
4
6
7
12
15
31
32
44
54
Amount
1
1
1
5
1
5
5
1
1
1
Table 7.2: Observation to period answers showing place_00007, place_00015 and
place_00031 to be places of interest
Readability of observation to period
The graph in question is seen in figure 5.4.
After identifying problematic places we asked the participants to read the data avail-
able on the chart. This included the participants having to hover the mouse over a
place and read the tool-tip which provides more information. The participants was
asked to identify the place the patient has been the most and everyone answered
place 12.
Then they were asked to find the place the patient had been 41.48 hours, this question
only had 7 answers but they were all correct. As the tooltip provides this data, it
goes to show that the tooltip was intuitive to the participants. The next question
was if they could figure out how many percent of the data was missing data. The idea
was for the participant to look at the pie/bar chart and find the data there, again
using the tooltip. We wanted to test if a pie chart or bar chart best conveys this
data and both the charts were used. Everyone could identify the correct place, so
we asked them if they prefer the pie chart and bar chart. This question had more
split answers with 62.5% on the pie chart and 37.5% on the bar chart. Having this
==PAGE:63==
7 Usability evaluation
56
as a user setting would be easy and might be the best solution as this has no clear
cut answer. Regarding the readability on the x-axis (hours spent), the participants
were asked if they liked the data be shown based in logarithmic fashion or without
manipulating it first. 87.5% said logarithmic which indicated on one hand the home
WiFi causes trouble but it also makes the data easier to read, as the places with fewer
hours are not all being placed to the left.
Identify interesting places observations per hour
scatterplot
The graph in question is seen in figure 5.7.
This time the answers were not all numerical placeIds, but the general trend was
that the bigger circles were the troublemakers. More specifically the few numerical
placeIds listed were 15 and 31, these are the same placeIds that were identified as
problematic last time. As placeId circles are able to overlap in this chart, we see
increased confusion from the participant.
As a bonus question they were asked to identify less interesting places and here places
like place_00012 was deemed not interesting because of the low observations per hour.
This is also the home WiFi which explains the the lower observations per hour, it
does have a small circle which also makes it seem less significant.
Readability and interactability of observations per hour
scatterplot
The graph in question is seen in figure 5.7.
Once again the participants were tasked to read data and interact with the chart.
They were asked to identify the place the patient has been the most and everyone
said place_00012. Then they were asked to highlight place_00007, leading into high-
lighting two places that laid ontop of each other. The participants did show some
struggle to figure out what the random-offset button did and how to use it.
Statistics table
The graph in question is seen in figure 5.9.
The statistics table does not have any complex UI elements nor does it have any
interactive components. For this reason a thorough test does not make much sense,
the participants were asked a few question regarding the readability of the table,
however all participants answered the correct answers. The questions were
• At which place has the patient registered the most observations?
==PAGE:64==
7 Usability evaluation
57
• How many hours has the patient been at the place they have been the most?
Participants did not show much hesitation is answering respectively 12 and 962.49.
Place as an axis or color
The graphs in question is seen in figures 5.4 and 5.7.
One of the big question we were interested in testing is whether to continue the
work on the scatter plot or the observation to period plot. The scatter plot is able
to show places with similar values in clusters and in general show more information
as one of the axis is not being reserved to the placeIds. This makes the plot more
complex but can also mean unrelated places can show a pattern. On the other hand
the observation to period plots are very simple and the participants only had to
identify the places in red in order to find the problematic places.
37.5% preferred the scatter plot and 62.5% preferred the observation to period
plot. As our assumption is that there is no one-size-fits-all plot, these data does not
surprise, where the plot that is very simple is slightly preferred. The participants who
preferred the scatter plot all seemed to understand the possibility that it can convey
much more data and as a result thought it would suits therapists much better.
Suggestions for improvements
One of the last questions in the usability test was if the participant had any improve-
ments and that they did. We got some very valuable feedback in from this question
and here we will discuss them. Guide, tutorial, labels and legends was one of the more
requested additions, especially for the calendar graph as it is quite the mouthful at
first eye glance. We specifically did not give much help because we wanted to test
how intuitive the design is and meanwhile there was not a lot of help to get, most
participants managed to find the answers anyways.
Therapist can rename places, this is a very good suggestion, one that we wanted to
implement but due to time constrains did not get around to.
Button to remove ”home” outlier, the ability to remove places that are not interesting
is a good suggestion and should also be implemented.
Date input fields instead of using the drag selector, having input field for the dates
would help solve the diﬀiculty of using the current date- and time selectors.
Colorblind mode for Observation to period, while a very good suggestion as the col-
ors can be diﬀicult to see for colorblind people, we deemed this out of scope for the
project.
More sizes for the circles on observations per hour scatterplot, could be looked into,
however currently it is the chart itself that infer the circle sizes and scaling.
==PAGE:65==
7 Usability evaluation
58
Besides these we also got feedback on a few bugs, one being the add random offset’s
tooltip changes to the new random value, showing false data and another being some
confusion of the 20 color cap, we have considered this and decided not to do anything
about it.
Takeaways
All in all we are very happy with the usability tests, it showed some things that
needed work but overall it proved that our design choices have not been diﬀicult to
understand. Letting the user choose between different graphs and preferences is key
in regards to the choice between scatter plot or observation to period as well as if
they want a bar or pie chart.
==PAGE:66==
CHAPTER 8
Discussion
Usability tests
The usability tests laid the foundation showing what parts of observable needs more
work and what parts can stand on their own. The results from the usability test gives
an measure of the overall level the graphs work as intended. We made the test without
a guide purposefully to see how well the design would speak for itself. An expected
the feedback did reflect this, as the most requested change was a guide or introduction
for the graphs. Specifically the calendar view provides so much data at first eye glance
that new users are overwhelmed. Participant where able to shift through the data and
provide what we would consider correct answers. It does however suggest that the
calendar view could be made simpler to look at. We suspected that the selectors were
not as intuitive as intended, which was confirmed. However the result suggest that
clever wording also helps participant picture how to use the selector, as ’dragging’
over the selector was intuitive, when having to select an interval.
The test revealed that the simpler design seen in observations-to-period was pre-
ferred to the scatterplot as it was more explicit and intuitive.
This seems to be
correlated with the observations-to-period chart showing the reader which places to
focus on.
Both with the choice between graphs and the bar-vs-pie choice, we see participants
wanting different things. Having a way to control which was shown, depending on
the preference of the user may be a way to go. Contrary having only one choice for
all enables people using the tool to communicate more effectively about the tool.
Lastly the feedback from the usability tests has to be taken with a small grain
of salt as the majority of participants were younger people, some still studying, with
backgrounds in tech.
The usability test where designed to reveal or confirm what works well and what
does not work well, in our graphs and they succeeded in doing so. However the test
were designed by us and are thus based on our knowledge of the graphs and their
shortcomings. Meaning we might have forced a perspective in the test depending on
the outcome of the test. The test was designed with a small introduction to help
the participants get started. We were sitting besides the participant during the test
and observing. To ensure the tester did not get stuck, we did hint or ask them to
read to description again, when necessary. A different design could be leaving the
participant in a room by themselves with the test, however we believe that we would
not have gotten the same amount and same quality of data by just having them sit
==PAGE:67==
8 Discussion
60
alone. Another test we had considered initially was a design test to determine the
design first and then implement it. Having a design to aim for might have made the
implementation phase a lot easier, however as we lack experience in user experience
engineering, designing the design test did not seems feasible to obtain a high quality
result from it. We do believe the usability test was the right choice as we ended up
with concrete result evaluating our graphs and insights into improvements.
The Finished Product
The finished product as a whole system has been completed and implemented such
that the components work together properly. Below we discuss each of the compo-
nents regarding what went well and what changes we might want to have made, in
hindsight.
Data visualization
Vega-Lite is excellent at making highly customizable visualization and providing vari-
ous function for data manipulation. However in our case Vega-Lite presented a steep
learning curve, and with lacking documentation, hindered our process in the project.
In hindsight we might have looked for alternatives with better documentation. Ob-
servable by itself is not diﬀicult to understand and use, however it lacks debugging
tools, which we are very comfortable with. This combined with Vega-Lite struggles
has made the development of the visualization tool diﬀicult. When we has climbed
the learning curve, at least partially, we did see benefits of the tools as prototyping
graph became a lot faster. Our supervisor also knew of the challenges and was very
helpful when we were stuck with a problem. In the end we ended up with a structure
in our notebooks such that further developing the graphs should be fairly simple,
however the saying ”One man’s software is another man’s nightmare”, might apply
here.
Another aspect is the place mapping functionality, which transforms the whole
dataset to reflect the current merged places. A case to consider here, is that a patient
and therapist earlier talked about a problematic place, maybe the therapist even
wrote it in their notes. The next time the patient comes in for a session, the place
does not exist anymore. The reason behind is obvious for us, as the place has been
merged, but this would undoubtedly cause confusion. This is a complicated case, as
this is a case of the data being correct, but still causing confusion. A way to solve
it is to present a table with merged place to inform the therapist that the place is
there, it is just presented differently. Imagine the same case, though this time the
therapist has noted the color of the place. The next time the therapists uploads the
patient data, some places may potentially have changed color due to this merge and
the specific place is once again gone. There is no clear solution to this case, other
than doing the same as before just with colors, though this does give an insight into
how the data is used. We have considered how the data is presented, however not
how the volatility of the data may affect interpretation of it. A preventive measure
could be to inform the therapist how the data may act and change over time.
In the other OBT projects we saw that the information of a button-press was
utilized to infer different inputs, such as 1 single press, a double press and so on. We
did not prioritize this functionality in the visualization mainly due to time constraints
==PAGE:68==
8 Discussion
61
of the project, additionally as adding more symptoms means adding more colors, the
calendar graph would be too cluttered in our opinion. The calendar graph was the
only view that was conceptualized at this point, thus this was the only basis for the
decision. However considering the value of being able to compare symptoms to places,
we should possibly have prioritized differently.
Algorithm
As mentioned, the algorithm was tested and it was confirmed it works correctly by
analysing the data. However the location data was not precise enough to extract
and compare it one-to-one with the place data.
Due to time constraint we were
not able collect more complete data. In hindsight, we should have prioritized the
data collection almost from the start of the project to be able to properly test the
algorithm.
We are satisfies with the algorithm itself, at it turned out very well in our opinion.
Implementing the algorithm on the instrument, was at the time a good choice as
we were not familiar with Observable. It also allowed quickly making changes to to
implementation and employing a test driven approach. However later in the project
we realised the algorithm should not be on the instrument.
Instrument
The instrument did its job as the medium for running the firmware, we only had some
startup issues, though none of them was at the fault of the instrument.
The RTC on the instrument worked very poorly throughout the project as it reset
each time the instrument was reset. A simple solution would have been to slap an
RTC module on the instrument, though we did not have one of these available. This
gave us further incentive to look into a way of connecting to a WiFi and thus presented
an alternative way of offloading the data from the instrument. We implemented a
website that would allow the patient to input their WiFi credentials. The flow for
the patient to connect to the website is not desirable, having to disconnect from your
own WiFi to connect to a WiFi the OBT transmits, that ultimately does not provide
internet access. Having the instrument host the website based on being connected to
a computer and whether it can connect to WiFi or not means the user has no real
control over whether it hosts or not. To fix this the button could be incorporated
such that the instrument hosts if the button has been held down for an extended
duration. This also eliminates the requirement to plug it into a computer first. A
better solution would be for the OBT to connect to a phone with a mobile application
similar to how SmartWatches are connected to a phone. As we can assume the phone
to have internet access, the application could solve this specific RTC problem but
could also function as a hub for user settings and control.
As mentioned the instrument is not able to handle a scan and a button-press at
the same time. Normally as things run very fast, this might not have been a problem,
were it not for the 1.3 seconds it takes for one scan to complete. We became aware
of this problem and attempted to find a solution through multithreading, however
CircuitPython does not support it[12]. Instead it suggests a scheduling scheme where
the tasks themselves relinquish control, which is not applicable in the case. We then
attempted to shorten the scan time of the internal call, however this was not possible
==PAGE:69==
8.1 Future Works
62
either.
System
We present a system that builds on top of the previous project’s self-tracking capa-
bilities. The previous OBT works showed a prototype able the collect observations
and have displayed statistics to help analyse this data. Our project uses the same
methodology for collecting observations and provides a method for collecting WiFi
data, an algorithm to process the WiFi data and new statistical visualization tools
for analysing the data, while also being able to use previous visualization.
The data gathered and transported throughout the system has been completely
anonymized as the data is hashed immediately leaving no room to obtain the original
data. A salt was added to the hash to increase the security of the hash. The visualiza-
tion is capable of presenting the place history of a person overlaid with observations.
It also provides statistical tools to help identify place with high observation per time
spent.
The exploratory work in this project includes researching the capabilities and
limitations of the instrument leading to a website simulating the patient gaining
control over the instrument.
Based on all this we believe we present a project that can help in the therapeutic
process. Providing the therapists with an extra level of data and means of showing
this data, we believe they have a better tool to help patient with. In previous OBT
project, we have seen that people are eager to self-track and very diligent, thus even
though our project adds more complexity we strongly believe patients will continue
to self-track with enthusiasm.
8.1
Future Works
This chapter will discuss what comes next for the project up until the mass produced
finished product that will be available for users.
8.1.1
Instrument
Moving from prototyping to a marketable product a few modifications would need to
take place. A quick and easy solution for the RTC would be to use an add-on to the
MCU such as a DS3231 from Adafruit [16] and put a button cell into it. This would
take care of the subpar RTC on the instrument and make sure the clock is always
correct. Currently the secrets.py file is stored in plain text on the instrument meaning
an attacker could gain access and read the patient’s WiFi credentials. A quick and
easy solution to this is a Crypto-auth chip like an textitATECC608 Breakout from
Adafruit [2]. This chip can be stored with an encryption key and can be used to
encrypt and decrypt data stored on the instrument.
Further down the road the
software should be rewritten in the language C, as it is much more eﬀicient than
CircuitPython [25] [18] and would make the battery last longer. Now that the software
==PAGE:70==
8.1 Future Works
63
is taken cared of and is the best it can be, the next step would be the physical
instrument itself.
The MCU is not suitable for the end product as it is big and
has unused components, as the instrument is a wearable it is desirable that it is as
small at possible. For this reason the instrument should have its own custom PCB
designed with the components needed for function. These components would be as
follows though not limited to:
• WiFi module
• Button
• Battery
• RTC
• BlueTooth module
• Crypto-auth chip
As more features are implemented into the project the list of components needed for
the end product will grow, but as the project stands right now, these are the needed
components. A custom PCB loaded with the C firmware makes the instrument as
small and eﬀicient as possible at the cost of price. This report will not go into pricing
details, as it is too early in the process to guestimate prices, however without a doubt
the instrument will be more expensive to produce.
Lastly the housing to the instrument is also a vital part of the end product as
it has to protect the vulnerable electronics from the environment. A plastic housing
with a rubber case around would make the instrument durable and also waterproof, as
it is a wearable meant to be used outside, the instrument has to be able to withstand
bad weather, which includes being waterproof. A tight seal also negates dust particles
to get in the instrument, but once again comes at the downside of an increased price
per unit.
8.1.2
Algorithm
The algorithm lies a very strong foundation to continue with, it will successfully create
places, add new values to places and merge already established places together, should
they be next to each other. Furthermore it will ensure places are only merged if the
degree of certainty that they are close to each other is very high, thanks to the cut-off.
Even with the robust features implemented in the algorithm, there are still room for
improvements. First are foremost the most important next step for the algorithm is
to thoroughly test it. The tests should be conducted with WiFi data and location
data, to provide a backing evidence. The data should be real world data, e.g. where
the instrument is used as a wearable for an extended period. The result could be held
against the algorithms presented in Inferring stop-locations from WiFi. The cutoff
==PAGE:71==
8.1 Future Works
64
design should also be tested against other cutoff designs, by comparing the quality of
the data.
A solution to avoid having mobile hotspot merge far away places together, without
having an aggressive cutoff, would be desirable to implement. The current solution
with having at least four independent WiFis split into the two places ensures that the
merge only happens if there is high certainty that the places are near each other, but
it generates the problem where a given merge requires at least four WiFis present.
For instance if there are two places both consisting of two WiFis and the places
physical location are next to each other, such that they should be merged, then
the patient has to be standing perfectly in-between the two WiFis in order to scan
all four WiFis with a single scan before a merge is completed. A different solution
could be to look at the first six characters of the MAC address, as these denote the
manufacturer of the network device [19]. Lists and services exists to lookup a MAC
address and get information about the Organizationally Unique Identifier (OUI), who
is the manufacturer. This approach does not rule out manufacturers that both make
network devices for routers and mobile hotspots, but it can function as the first filter.
Afterwards if a MAC address keeps appearing with different places, it could be ruled
out as a hotspot and placed in a blacklist, after each scan the blacklist could be
subtracted from the scan and the remaining WiFis would not contain the known
hotspots. Ruling out hotspots could be done by looking at how many different places
the WiFi has been seen, we can expect the same WiFis to always show up during
searches, so if a rogue hotspot is associated with many different places, that does not
seem to be near each other, then we can denote the WiFi as a hotspot.
8.1.3
Visualization tool/Observable
During usability tests multiple people noted that the ability to deselect places and
remove them from view would be helpful. Deselecting unimportant places, such as
the home place which usually consists of a very high amount of time spent, as well as
other places could help the therapist easier narrow problematic places down. They can
clutter the data and and the home place specifically was the reason the logarithmic
option was implemented, then simply just removing the problematic place in regards
to conveying data (not a problematic place for the patient) could solve the same issue.
One aspect of the visualization tool that probably severely needs a touch up is the
UI as a whole. Part of creating a good UI is first of all to have talented UX artists
with a sense for the requirements for the end-user. Otherwise it is an iterative process
where the end user, in this case therapists, are tested and watched to see how they
interact with the design. As this project has not tested the design with a usability
test with therapists, there are no foundation to figure out if the design choices made
makes somewhat sense or have all been terrible ideas in regards to the point of the
system. The developers are not particularly experienced in creating excellent UX and
limitations to the framework has meant workarounds have been necessary and these
does usually not increase the UX. Part of the project did however consist of having
==PAGE:72==
8.1 Future Works
65
usability tests on ordinary people, e.g. not therapists, chapter 7 goes into detail about
these tests.
==PAGE:73==
CHAPTER 9
Conclusion
In this project we have designed an algorithm for detecting places based on anonymous
WiFi data, a method of collecting the data and a tool to visualize it.
The goal is to make Cognitive Behavioral Therapy more data-driven, albeit this
research can be applied to any wearable devices that wishes to focus on privacy while
obtaining contextual information about the wearer’s whereabouts.
Building on past research, we designed the algorithm to be mutable depending on
the input and robust such that it can handle mobile WiFis. Analysing the results, we
found that the algorithm was able to correctly infer the place based on surrounding
WiFis, when compared to location data. The instrument is able collect WiFi data
and anonymize it, before forwarding it to the algorithm thus keeping the data private.
Although not the most thorough tests, the test do however provide basic evidence that
the algorithm works based on the requirements. Furthermore the usability tests shows
the design of the visualization tool work as intended by presenting the data in a simple
easy-to-understand manner and the interactive elements improve usability. The place
data and the observations data is presented in graphs that shows their relation to each
other, highlighting problematic places and provide a basis for deducing patterns that
can help treat people with mental disorders.
Future work includes subjecting the algorithm to more testing, comparing differ-
ent cutoff designs from the project. Furthermore to go from prototype to product, we
have made suggestions and considerations in this direction. Lastly, the visualization
may benefit from input from someone with more experience in user interfaces.
==PAGE:74==
APPENDIX A
A.1
net.py - Scan function
1 def scan(loopTimes: int) -> list[AccessPoint]:
2
tempAccesspoints = []
3
for i in range(0,loopTimes):
4
networks = wifi.radio.start_scanning_networks()
5
tempAccesspoints.extend(list(map(lambda network: AccessPoint(str(
network.ssid, 'utf-8'), b2hex(network.bssid), network.rssi),
networks)))
6
wifi.radio.stop_scanning_networks()
7
accesspoints = []
8
[accesspoints.append(ac) for ac in tempAccesspoints if not any(x.MAC ==
ac.MAC for x in accesspoints)]
9
accesspoints.sort(key=lambda ac: ac.MAC)
10
11
return accesspoints
A.2
Calendar-view selectors demo
==PAGE:75==
A.2 Calendar-view selectors demo
68
Figure A.1: Demonstration of using the selectors in the calendar view.
==PAGE:76==
Bibliography
[1]
Accuracy of Decimal Places in Latitude and Longitude Degrees | Garmin Cus-
tomer Support. Garmin.com, 2023. url: https://support.garmin.com/en-
US/?faq=hRMBoCTy5a7HqVkxukhHd8 (visited on July 14, 2023).
[2]
Adafruit ATECC608 Breakout. Adafruit Learning System. url: https://learn.
adafruit.com/adafruit-atecc608-breakout/overview (visited on July 16,
2023).
[3]
Ida Marie T.P. Arendt et al. “Distinguishing between rumination and intru-
sive memories in PTSD using a wearable self-tracking instrument: A proof-of-
concept case study.” eng. In: Cognitive Behaviour Therapist 14 (2021). issn:
1754470x, 17544696. doi: 10.1017/S1754470X2100012X.
[4]
Tom H. van de Belt et al. “Barriers to and Facilitators of Using a One Button
Tracker and Web-Based Data Analytics Tool for Personal Science: Exploratory
Study.” eng. In: Jmir Formative Research 6.3 (2022). Edited by Amaryllis
Mavragani, e32704. issn: 2561326x. doi: 10.2196/32704.
[5]
Mario Cortina Borja and John Haigh. “The Birthday Problem.” In: Significance
4.3 (August 2007), pages 124–127. issn: 1740-9705. doi: 10.1111/j.1740-
9713.2007.00246.x. eprint: https://academic.oup.com/jrssig/article-
pdf/4/3/124/49109395/sign\_4\_3\_124.pdf. url: https://doi.org/10.
1111/j.1740-9713.2007.00246.x.
[6]
Thomas Blomseth Christiansen Jakob Eg Larsen. One Button Tracker Datavi-
sualisering. Observable, October 2021. (Visited on July 20, 2023).
[7]
MicroPython & CircuitPython contributors. wifi — Adafruit CircuitPython
8.1.0-beta.1 documentation. docs.circuitpython.org. url: https://docs.circuitpython.
org/en/latest/shared- bindings/wifi/index.html (visited on July 16,
2023).
[8]
Emily Cronkleton. What Is the Average Walking Speed of an Adult? Health-
line, March 2019. url: https://www.healthline.com/health/exercise-
fitness/average-walking-speed#what-is-a-brisk-pace.
[9]
Jenna Fletcher. Average walking speed: Comparisons by age, sex, and walk-
ing for health. www.medicalnewstoday.com, November 2022. url: https://
www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/average-walking-speed#average-
speed-by-age.
==PAGE:77==
Bibliography
70
[10]
GPS.gov. GPS.gov: GPS Accuracy. Gps.gov, 2019. url: https://www.gps.
gov/systems/gps/performance/accuracy/.
[11]
Paul Greenamyer. Hashing vs encryption: What’s the difference? March 2022.
url: https://cybernews.com/security/hashing-vs-encryption/.
[12]
Dan Halbert. Cooperative Multitasking in CircuitPython with asyncio. Adafruit
Learning System, November 2021. url: https : / / learn . adafruit . com /
cooperative-multitasking-in-circuitpython-with-asyncio/overview
(visited on July 21, 2023).
[13]
Dan Halbert. Power consumption, ESP32-S2, CircuitPython. Adafruit Learning
System, December 2020. url: https://learn.adafruit.com/deep-sleep-
with-circuitpython/power-consumption (visited on July 17, 2023).
[14]
hashlib — Secure hashes and message digests. Python documentation. url:
https://docs.python.org/3.11/library/hashlib.html#module-hashlib
(visited on July 11, 2023).
[15]
https://www.facebook.com/lifewire. How Far Will Your Wi-Fi Reach? Lifewire,
2019. url: https://www.lifewire.com/range-of-typical-wifi-network-
816564.
[16]
Adafruit Industries. Adafruit DS3231 Precision RTC - STEMMA QT. url:
https://www.adafruit.com/product/5188.
[17]
Adafruit Industries. Adafruit ESP32-S2 feather with 4MB Flash 2MB PSRAM.
url: https://www.adafruit.com/product/5303.
[18]
InterviewBit. Difference Between C and Python. url: https://www.interviewbit.
com/blog/difference-between-c-and-python/.
[19]
ipchecktool.com - what your browser knows about you. www.ipchecktool.com.
url: https://www.ipchecktool.com/tool/macfinder (visited on July 12,
2023).
[20]
Lauren Jett. Mental Illnesses are Common, but Care is Lacking. url: https:
//hcp.hms.harvard.edu/news/mental- illnesses- are- common- care-
lacking.
[21]
Jakob Eg Larsen, Kasper Eskelund, and Thomas Blomseth Christiansen. “Ac-
tive Self-Tracking of Subjective Experience with a One-Button Wearable: A
Case Study in Military PTSD.” eng. In: Proceedings of the 2nd Computing and
Mental Health Workshop at Acm Chi 2017 (2017).
[22]
Navigation National Coordination Oﬀice for Space-Based Positioning and Tim-
ing. GPS Accuracy. Gps.gov, March 2022. url: https : / / www . gps . gov /
systems/gps/performance/accuracy/ (visited on July 17, 2023).
[23]
Observable - Explore, analyze, and explain data. As a team. observablehq.com.
url: https://observablehq.com/.
==PAGE:78==
Bibliography
71
[24]
Jeongyeup Paek, Joongheon Kim, and Ramesh Govindan. “Energy-Eﬀicient
Rate-Adaptive GPS-Based Positioning for Smartphones.” In: Proceedings of the
8th International Conference on Mobile Systems, Applications, and Services.
MobiSys ’10. San Francisco, California, USA: Association for Computing Ma-
chinery, 2010, pages 299–314. isbn: 9781605589855. doi: 10.1145/1814433.
1814463. url: https://doi-org.proxy.findit.cvt.dk/10.1145/1814433.
1814463.
[25]
Priya Pedamkar. C vs Python. url: https://www.educba.com/c-vs-python/.
[26]
NICOLAS POGGI. Types of Encryption: Symmetric or Asymmetric? RSA or
AES? | Prey Blog. preyproject.com, June 2021. url: https://preyproject.
com/blog/types-of-encryption-symmetric-or-asymmetric-rsa-or-aes.
[27]
Tutorials Point. Cryptography Hash functions. Tutorialspoint.com, 2012. url:
https://www.tutorialspoint.com/cryptography/cryptography_hash_
functions.htm (visited on July 11, 2023).
[28]
Kattni Rembor. CircuitPython Essentials. Adafruit Learning System, April
2018. url: https://learn.adafruit.com/circuitpython- essentials/
circuitpython-storage (visited on July 17, 2023).
[29]
Piotr Sapiezynski et al. “Tracking human mobility using WiFi signals.” In: PLoS
ONE 10 (7 July 2015). issn: 19326203. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0130824.
[30]
Selection Parameters. Vega-Lite. url: https://vega.github.io/vega-lite/
docs/selection.html (visited on July 16, 2023).
[31]
National Health Service. Overview - Cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT). url:
https : / / www . nhs . uk / mental - health / talking - therapies - medicine -
treatments/talking-therapies-and-counselling/cognitive-behavioural-
therapy-cbt/overview/.
[32]
Sundhedsstyrelsen. Tal og fakta om mental sundhed. url: https://www.sst.
dk/da/Viden/Forebyggelse/Mental-sundhed/Fremme-af-mental-sundhed/
Tal-og-fakta.
[33]
WiFi Map. url: https://www.wifimap.io/.
[34]
David Kofoed Wind et al. “Inferring Stop-Locations from WiFi.” eng. In: P
L O S One 11.2 (2016). Edited by Ye Wu, e0149105. issn: 19326203. doi:
10.1371/journal.pone.0149105.
[35]
Sam Woolfe. How to improve wireless network signal range and strength. Com-
paritech, November 2021. url: https://www.comparitech.com/internet-
providers/improve-wifi-signal/.
