==PAGE:1==
Technical University of Denmark and the Norwegian
University of Science and Technology
Climatic change assessment of
electrodialytic treatment of
sewage sludge ash
Master Thesis
Karl Otto Saunte
Supervisors: Thomas Højlund Christensen, Gunvor Marie
Kirkelund, Thomas Eilkaer and Sigrun Jahren.
July 23, 2023
==PAGE:2==
Approval
This thesis was written from the end of January 2023 to the 23rd of July 2023
under the Nordic 5 Tech collaboration, between the Technical University of
Denmark at the department of Environmental and Resource Engineering, and
the Norwegian University of Science and Technology at the department of En-
ergy and Process Engineering. This thesis is written and submitted to fulﬁl the
requirements of obtaining a Nordic Master in Residual Resources Engineering
and Industrial ecology in the joint cooperation between the two universities.
Karl Otto Saunte- s174524, Karlosa
———————————————————
1
23/07-2023
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Sewage sludge is a major waste which needs to be disposed of in a hygienic
way. One disposal method is to incinerate it, which produces an ash contain-
ing 5-10% phosphorous. Phosphorous is a critical resource, which is primarily
mined in Morocco with a ﬁnite depletion horizon. Technologies that can extract
phosphorous from waste products to recover the important critical element, is
needed.
A two-chamber cell was developed at the Danish Technical University for
the electrodialytic separation of sewage sludge ash. In collaboration with one
of the original inventors Gunvor M. Kirkelund, and the company Clean Matter
that acquired the patent of invention, a material ﬂow analysis was made. The
analysis used experimental data together with considerations from the company
to estimate and keep track of the ﬂows and energy usage. With the estimated
ﬂows, an inventory was made, along with a climatic assessment of the upcoming
technology.
It was found that the largest savings in CO2-eq.
was when producing a
liquid phosphoric acid without the use of nitric acid for adjustment of the pH
in the catholyte liquid. The largest impact on global warming was the use of
electricity in the process, while the major savings in greenhouse gas of a substi-
tuted product, was the formation of a calcium-phosphate salt. A large savings
of emissions was also seen for the production of hydrated lime, but whether or
not this product would be marketable is not known.
This thesis is an early screening for the technology under development. Re-
search that will improve the precision of the climatic assessment should focus
on the quality of the products. If the company Clean Matter wants the lowest
production carbon footprint as possible, they should focus on avoiding the use of
chemicals and use electricity from low-carbon sources. To get both the catholyte
and the anolyte ﬂow to become agricultural products that comply with Danish
regulations on heavy metals, a calcium-phosphate salt is recommended.
2
==PAGE:4==
Acknowledgements
I would like to express my deep gratitude to my supervisors Thomas Højlund
Christensen, Gunvor Marie Kirkelund, Thomas Eilkaer and Sigrun Jahren for
their support, fruitfull discussions and counselling during the process.
Your
guidance throughout this project has been invaluable.
Furthermore, I would like to thank you Nicolas Bygballe from Clean Matter,
who has been a major support and resource during the project process especially
when the theory behind chemistry and the new technology needed more in dept
explanations.
The years studying at the Technical University of Denmark and the Nor-
wegian University of Science and Technology has been an excellent experience
and has taught me both scientiﬁc methods such as material ﬂow analysis and
environmental modelling. I am thankful to have been a part of both universities.
3
==PAGE:5==
Contents
1
Introduction
5
1.1
Sludge disposal methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.1.1
SSA ash in Denmark . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
1.2
Sewage sludge ash composition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
1.3
Plant availability of P in SSA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
1.4
Heavy metal content limits for land application . . . . . . . . . .
10
2
Electrodialytic separation (EDS) of sewage sludge ash
11
2.1
EDS experiments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.2
Clean Matter . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3
Hydrogen production and electrolysis
15
4
Elemental tracking of EDS of SSA
18
4.1
The production of H2 gas and OH– in the catholyte . . . . . . .
22
4.2
From tracking of elements to an MFA of the whole technology . .
24
4.3
Modelling of environmental impacts
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4.3.1
Products and processes used and substituted
. . . . . . .
26
5
Results
29
6
Discussion
40
7
Conclusion
43
References
45
8
Appendix
52
8.1
Distribution of elements after electrodialytic separation of sewage
sludge ash . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
8.2
Limits on heavy metals in soil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
8.3
GWP for the 4 scenarios . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
8.4
Sensitivity analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
4
==PAGE:6==
1
Introduction
Resources are important for society to uphold the current state of life and level
of technology. It must be the goal of society to create a sustainable development
of using resources, which ” meets the needs of the present without compromis-
ing the ability of future generation to meet their own needs” (Keeble, 1988).
One such resource important to human society for sustainable development is
phosphorous.
Phosphorous is the 12th most abundant element on earth, with the major-
ity (> 95% in the US) being used in farming. It is a macro-nutrient in living
organisms, and phosphate is a necessity for organisms to survive, as it is e.g
a component in ATP and DNA, which are crucial to organisms (Britannica,
2023). Although abundant on Earth, phosphorous is a critical resource accord-
ing to the European Commission. A resource is deemed critical in the European
Union, when it scores across a certain threshold in supply risk and economic
importance (Blengini, Latunussa, and Eynard, 2020). The resource being crit-
ical is phosphate rock. Globally mining of phosphate rock, P2O5, was 220 Mt
with reserves being 71 Gt. Around 50 Gt of the total phosphate rock reserves
are located in Morocco (U.S. Geological Survey, 2022). This means that there
is a geopolitical risk regarding the resource.
A secondary source for phosphorous is sewage sludge and sewage sludge
ash (SSA). Primary phosphorous minerals contain approximately 5-40% P2O5,
while SSA has a content of about 10.0-25.7% P2O5, which makes it an excellent
source for phosphorous extraction (Semerci, Kunt, and Calli, 2019). Currently
the end-of-life recycling input rate in the EU is 17% for phosphorus, so the
reuse of phosphorous from secondary sources such as sludge has a great upside
potential (Smol, 2019).
In Europe the generation of sewage sludge in dry mass is 11 million tons an-
nually (Kr¨uger, Grabner, and Adam, 2014). Therefore there is a great recovery
potential of phosphorous from these large waste streams.
1.1
Sludge disposal methods
The disposal of sewage sludge depends on the geographical scope, whether its a
small-scale or a large-scale facility, and what systems you have in place to handle
the product of the sludge. Within the EU the management of sludge vary. Some
5
==PAGE:7==
countries, such as Switzerland are primarily incinerating their sludge, while
other countries are applying the sludge on land to use it in agriculture after it has
been treated, to compost it, or to landﬁll it. It should be mentioned landﬁlling
of sludge has decreased since the implementation of the Landﬁlling Directive
(1999/31/EC) (Dhir, Ghataora, and Lynn, 2017). This is most probable due
to the fact that the directive prohibits landﬁlling of liquid or untreated waste
(European Union, 1999).
Figure 1: Sewage sludge disposal management in Europe. Eurostat 2015 (Dhir,
Ghataora, and Lynn, 2017).
Landﬁlling of sludge is a loss of organic and inorganic material, that has the
potential to become a resource, so it is important to manage sludge in a way
where the resource is recovered without contamination of the environment.
Six methods for sewage disposal are relevant when looking at the practices of
managing sludge in Denmark and the path of phosphorous (Rye Ottosen et al.,
2022):
Spread on land: The default is to spread sludge directly on land as is the
6
==PAGE:8==
case with 70% of the sludge in Denmark today.
Phosphates are chemically
precipitated by iron or aluminium at the wastewater treatment plant to avoid
eutrophication of local waters. The phosphate precipitates ends in the sewage
sludge.
The sludge is stabilised, which can happen by anaerobic or aerobic
stabilisation or by chemical stabilisation or to raise pH above 12 by calcium
hydroxide. Around 50-70% of the sewage sludge is stabilised by anaerobic di-
gestion in Denmark. When the hygienic standards for pathogens are meet, the
sludge’s quality is determined for pollutants, and may be applied on land, if
levels of environmental contaminants are acceptable.
Composting: Sludge can be combined with other organic wastes, such as gar-
den waste and hay, and composted under stable conditions for the duration of
4-16 weeks depending on composting conditions. The temperature within the
compost will reach levels of 60-75 ◦C, where the criteria for hygienic treatment
is a temperature above 50 ◦C for at least 2 weeks during the composting. The
nutrients from the sludge are largely retained in the compost. The combination
of nutrients from the sludge and added carbon from the garden waste, is good
for soil improvement.
Pyrolisis: Pyrolisis is the heating of material to certain temperatures under
anaerobic conditions with sewage sludge being treated at temperatures of 500-
800 ◦C. This yields two products: A gas and a solid biochar. From 1000 kg
of sludge 134 kg of char can be expected with a content of 28% carbon. The
biochar will contain phosphorous (P) and potassium (K) but around 96% of the
nitrogen in the sludge will be lost during the process. The gas can be incin-
erated for energy generation and the char can be used as a fertiliser with slow
release of P and is good for soil improvement, or it can be upgraded to activated
charcoal.
CO-combustion: If sludge does not meet the standards for application on land
after stabilisation it can be co-combusted at incineration plants. In Denmark
this is possible at waste incineration plants, coal ﬁred combined heat and power
plants, or for extra combustion fuel at a cement factory. In all of these processes,
phosphorous is lost since sludge is used for energy generation but phosphorous
may be regained from the ashes. The key challenge with CO-combustion is,
that these facilities only can handle sludge as additional inputs- they are built
primarily for incineration of other types of fuels.
Struvite formation and biofertilizer: Struvite is a phosphate mineral that is
7
==PAGE:9==
formed by the precipitation of magnesium and ammonium in combination with
anaerobic treatment of sludge. The internal wastewater being drained from the
sludge before the sludge enters a biogas facility, and the water from the treated
sludge in the biogas facility is used to form the struvite mineral. 35-45 % of the
phosphorous from the sewage may be bound as struvite to create a phosphorous
product that is bioavailable. The sludge now containing less P, may be treated
as according to one of the other listed treatment methods.
Mono-incineration: Designated sludge incineration plants for sewage sludge
receives the sludge, and dries the sludge, so that the total solid content is at min-
imum 35-40%. The incineration happens in a ﬂuidised bed incinerator, which
is heated sand that is made airborne by the blowing of hot air from below, so
that it appears as a ”ﬂuid”. The temperature is around 800-900 ◦C and the
incineration of the sludge is fast. Pathogens, microplastics and other organic
contaminants are destroyed in the process. The ﬂy ash is collected at an elec-
trostatic ﬁltration system and the gases are treated further by bagﬁlters and
scrubbers. Nitrogen will be converted into N2 and NOx and half of the sulfur
will be lost as SO2. Hg will exit with the smoke and be captured thereafter, but
the other heavy metals will remain in the ash. During the incineration process
heat recovery is possible and practised. Phosphorous remains in the ash and
can be recovered.
This is the production process for the creation of sewage
sludge ash. In Denmark there are three mono-incineration plants at Lundtofte
renseanlæg, Avedøre renseanlæg and Lynetten renseanlæg (Rye Ottosen et al.,
2022).
1.1.1
SSA ash in Denmark
Sewage sludge ash from mono-inceration facilities in Denmark has been stored
since the 1970s. This is primarily due to conserve the phosphorous contained
in the SSA. In 2020 it was estimated that 350,000 tons SSA were stored in
Denmark. Annually there is created approximately 8,000 tons new SSA, which
is added to the deposits (Rye Ottosen et al., 2022).
1.2
Sewage sludge ash composition
Kr¨uger, Grabner, and Adam, 2014 performed a complete survey of the com-
position of the German Sewage Sludge ash. In Germany, there are 26 mono-
8
==PAGE:10==
inicineration plants for sewage sludge. 24 of these facilities participated in the
survey, which means that the survey covered the facilities that generates 97%
of the SSA that is produced in Germany. Of the 24 incineration facilities, 15 of
them only incinerated municipal sewage sludge, three of the facilities only incin-
erated industrial sludge, while eight facilities did a mixture of the two. Samples
were taken at 1 kg from each plant, with the majority of the sampling covering
the whole year in 12 samples total for each facility. In total 252 samples were
obtained. Most of the facilities used ﬂuidized bed incineration, the exact num-
ber is undisclosed, probably > 75% of samples, and a few used multiple hearth
ﬁring, grate ﬁring and ﬂuidized bed gasiﬁcation. Mean, median, min, max and
LQQ were recorded for a total of 57 elements.
Table 1: Values for the mass of macro elements from the elemental analysis of
German sewage sludge ash survey (Kr¨uger, Grabner, and Adam, 2014). Note:
Phosphorous values are from ash from municipal sewage sludge.
Element
Ca
Si
Fe
P
Al
S
Mg
K
Na
Ti
min
[%]
6.1
2.4
1.8
3.6
0.7
0.3
0.3
<0.006
0.2
0.1
max
[%]
37.8
23.7
20.3
13.1
20.2
6.9
3.9
1.7
2.6
1.5
mean
[%]
13.8
12.1
9.9
9.0
5.2
1.5
1.4
0.9
0.7
0.4
median
[%]
10.5
12.1
9.5
9.1
4.8
1.0
1.3
0.9
0.6
0.4
The content of heavy metals was investigated, and compared to other studies.
The median values found in the German study are displayed in table 2. For a
screening of dilute sources for rare earth elements in sediments of stormwater,
coal ash, MSW ﬂy ash and SSA, see (Lima et al., 2022).
1.3
Plant availability of P in SSA
After incineration at high temperatures, phosphorous is bound in more insolu-
ble forms, which means it is not ready for uptake in plants. There are di↵erent
bonding with P in the SSA ash, but a known form of phosphorous that is present
9
==PAGE:11==
Table 2: Values for the median content of heavy metals in the German sewage
ash, from the German sewage sludge ash survey (Kr¨uger, Grabner, and Adam,
2014).
Element
Cr
Ni
Cu
Zn
Cd
Hg
Pb
Median [mg/kg DM]
65.0
30.5
320
1031
1.1
0.2
47.5
in SSA, is in the mineral apatite. Although phosphorous is not plant-available
it is acid digestible due to Ca-P bonding (Raymond et al., 2019).
To determine whether phosphorous is plant-available the P-solubility can
be tested by dissolving the P-compound in 2 % citric acid and neutral ammo-
nium nitrate. In a study Adam, 2013 tested the P-solubility of pure mineral
phosphate phases that were observed in SSA. From least to most soluble in the
two solution tests, AlPO4 and Ca5(PO4)3Cl were insoluble and therefore not
plant-available, while Ca3(PO4)2 was medium plant-available and the detected
mineral Mg3(PO4)2 was readily plant-available (Adam, 2013). The study in-
vestigated thermochemical treatment of SSA, phosphorous can also be made
plant available by acid leaching, or as investigated in this thesis, electrodialytic
separation, which is an electrochemical treatment. Therefore the ash must be
treated in order to have available phosphorous.
1.4
Heavy metal content limits for land application
There is a limit to the amount of heavy metals that may be applied in agri-
culture. In Denmark the legislation deﬁning the limits for heavy metals from
substances applied on farming on land, has limits on the content of heavy met-
als in relation to dry matter (DM) and total P. The heavy metals limited by
regulation in relation to both total kg-P and DM are Cd, Hg, Pb and Ni. Cr,
Cu and Zn only have limits in relation to DM (Retsinformation, 2018). The
limits on heavy metals can be seen in the appendix, in table ??.
10
==PAGE:12==
2
Electrodialytic separation (EDS) of sewage sludge
ash
Electrodialytic separation of sewage sludge ash is the migration of suspended
ionic species in an aqueous solution, driven by an electric ﬁeld that separate
species across a cation exchange membrane.
The invented two-chamber cell
technology patented by Lisbeth M. Ottosen, Jensen, Gunvor M. Kirkelund, and
Ebbers, 2015, builds upon experiences from electrodialysis conducted in a three-
compartment cell that led to the two-chamber patent in 2015. The inventors of
the two-chamber electrodialytic separation patented from the Danish Technical
University (DTU), have great experience working with contaminated matrices
and heavy metal removal by electrodialysis (Lisbeth M Ottosen, Hansen, et al.,
1996; Lisbeth M Ottosen, Gunvor Marie Kirkelund, and Villumsen, 2006).
The electrodialytic separation serves two functions: To extract phosphorous
from the sewage sludge ash and the removal of the heavy metal contaminants.
This is solved by the design of the two-chamber cell.
The ﬁrst experiments made on removing environmental contaminants from
polluted material was done in a three chamber cell by electrodialytic separation.
The electrochemical cell is divided into two chambers by a cation exchange
membrane, see ﬁgure 2. Ash is suspended in an aqueous solution in the anolyte,
i.e. the anode chamber with the positively charged anode. Here mixing occurs
to keep the ash suspended and the pH < 2, which is done by the production
of acid at the anode. The second chamber is the catholyte chamber, which is
in contact with the negatively charged cathode. A saline solution of NaNO3
was added to the catholyte to keep an electric current, thus it is acting as an
electrolyte. The cation exchange membrane seperating the two chambers, is
facilitating the passage of positively charged ions, although there are some neg-
atively charged ions passing the membrane, possibly due to di↵usion. In the
newer designs, the cell remains cylinder-shaped with an internal diameter of
both compartments around 8 cm, the anolyte suspension has a length of 10 cm,
and the catholyte suspension has a length of 5 cm (Lisbeth M. Ottosen, Jensen,
and Gunvor M. Kirkelund, 2016).
The suspension of ash in the anolyte results in electromigration of heavy
metals across the cation exchange membrane into the cathode chamber. The
negatively charged ions, mostly phosphoric acid HPO4
2–, remain in the anode
11
==PAGE:13==
Figure 2: Principle of electrodialytic separation of sewage sludge ash suspended
in a two compartment cell as patented by Lisbeth M. Ottosen, Jensen, Gunvor
M. Kirkelund, and Ebbers, 2015. The left chamber is the anolyte chamber and
the right chamber the catholyte suspension.
chamber in the suspension. The use of a direct current of electrons starting
from the cathode, makes the dissolution in the catholyte increase in alkalinity,
while acidity increases in the anolyte. This can be observed in the following
reactions with electrons and water:
Cathode reactions:
4 H2O(aq) + 4 e−(aq) −! 2H2(g) + 4 OH−(aq)
(1)
Anode reactions:
2 H2O(aq) −! O2(g) + 4 H+(aq) + 4 e−
(2)
12
==PAGE:14==
2.1
EDS experiments
The main goal of electrodialytic separation is to extract phosphorous from the
sewage sludge ash to use the phosphorous acid in a fertiliser product in which
the levels of heavy metals are not exceeded and phosphorous is plant available.
The extraction of P from the ash into the anolyte is dependent on time and the
initial pH of the ash suspension (Lisbeth M. Ottosen, Jensen, and Gunvor M.
Kirkelund, 2016). The pH is decreasing in the anolyte through the test periods,
which is due to the formation of H+ at the anode, which increases release of
ions from the ash. At the same time the pH is increasing in the catholyte at
the cathode due to the formation of OH–.
Throughout the electrodialytic separation there is an up-concentration of
phosphoric acid in the anolyte. The duration of the electrodialysis has to be
timed correctly, since phosphoric acid di↵uses into the catholyte at a certain
point. There is no net re-deposition of P in the ash during electrodialytic separa-
tion (Lisbeth M. Ottosen, Jensen, and Gunvor M. Kirkelund, 2016). Regarding
the extraction of heavy metals from the ash and into the catholyte, the con-
centration of Pb increases continuously in the catholyte throughout 14 days of
experiment, while the mobilisation of Zn and Cu from the ash stagnated around
day 10 of the EDS experiments lasting 14 days (Lisbeth M. Ottosen, Jensen,
and Gunvor M. Kirkelund, 2016). This could indicate that there is a certain
degree of mobilisation for some heavy metals whereafter no further mobilisation
is happening.
All the experiments of electrodialytic separation of sewage sludge ash, had
durations spanning 3 to 16 days. The maximum phosphorous extraction ob-
served in the literature from an ash with iron precipitation was around 96%
during EDS (Guedes et al., 2016). This high yield was obtained using electro-
dialytic separation in combination with sulphuric acid but the idea of adding
sulphuric acid to the anolyte to lower pH has been disregarded, since there is a
formation of gypsum which decreases the quality of the EDS treated ash. There-
fore only electrolysis will be the source of H+ to the ash suspension. The highest
extraction of P from SSA suspended in water with no sulphuric acid, was re-
ported in Lisbeth M. Ottosen, Jensen, and Gunvor M. Kirkelund, 2016. 86% of
the total phosphorous from the SSA was seen in the anolyte peaking after 7 days.
13
==PAGE:15==
2.2
Clean Matter
The company Clean Matter is working on upscaling the technology on electro-
dialytic separation of sewage sludge ash to handle larger amounts of SSA. The
current design is a 70 L catholyte and a 10 L anolyte chamber. The current elec-
tricity estimate for the overall process is 1440 kWh with a possible future target
of 1000 kWh, and the electrodialytic treatment is expected to take two days.
The process of EDS is going to be continuous, which means that catholyte can
be ﬁltrated so that there will not be a liquid waste product from the catholyte.
A concentration of 0.01 M NaNO3 is kept in the catholyte during electrodia-
lytic separation. Currently two options are considered regarding the pH of the
catholyte: To keep pH around 2 by adding nitric acid, or let the cathode in-
crease alkalinity to around pH = 14 (Eilkaer and Bygballe, 2023).
Regarding the use of NaNO3, it is assumed that there is produced 260 kg
catholyte per ton ash, where 10% of the mass of the precipitate is water, which
gives 26% kg of water lost per ton. The required concentration of NaNO3 is
0.01 M and the molar weight is 85 g/mol.
0.01mol/L · 26L = 0.26mol.
(3)
0.26mol · 85g/mol = 22gNaNO3
(4)
When phosphoric acid is produced in the anolyte, water will have to be
evaporated to concentrate the acid, assumed to be by distillation, since phos-
phoric acid has a higher evaporation point than water, so only water evaporates
(Chemical Book, 2023). From the cathode a deposition of heavy metals is as-
sumed extracted separately from the catholyte liquid. The catholyte precipitate,
mainly Ca(OH)2 and remaining ash is dried and the evaporated water returned
to the system.
A second scenario is where the calcium hydroxide is used from the catholyte
to precipitate the phosphorous from the phosphorous acid. Here it is assumed
that the salt is dried as well.
This requires roughly the same stochiometric
amount of Ca and P. An example of a such reaction between calcium hydroxide
and phosphoric acid is:
H3PO4 + Ca(OH)2 −! CaHPO4 + 2H2O
(5)
14
==PAGE:16==
(Rey et al., 2011).
For a complex Ca-P salt, see (Nutriman.net, 2021).
Clean Matter has received funding from the European Union for the further
development of the technology of electrodialytic separation of sewage sludge ash
(Eilkaer and Bygballe, 2023). The aim is for Clean Matter to have a working
electrodialytic separation technology at a prototype level in about two years.
The current technological readiness level can be classiﬁed as level 6: ”Technol-
ogy demonstrated in a relevant environment” (Nwaka, 2021).
Regarding the use of the treated ash, Clean Matter is located next to a
company that uses cementitious material. Therefore it was assumed in this as-
signment, that the ash could be sold as cement mortar, further supported by
research (Lisbeth M. Ottosen, Gunvor M. Kirkelund, and Jensen, 2015).
3
Hydrogen production and electrolysis
Electrodialytic separation is an electrochemical process that uses an ion-exchange
membrane to select for the passing of charged ions by the use of an electrical
ﬁeld, that separate ionic species from uncharged components in an aqueous
solution (Mahendra Kumar et al., 2013). During electrodialytic separation of
suspended material, hydrogen gas is produced at the cathode and oxygen gas at
the anode (Magro et al., 2019). This means that the cell is performing electro-
dialytic separation as well as electrolysis. Electrolysis is deﬁned as ”the passing
of an electric current through an electrolytic conductor resulting in a splitting
of water” (Bowen, 1943). Here the main goal is to produce H2 and O2 gas,
where the main goal of electrodialytic separation is to separate charged ions by
the means of an electric ﬁeld. There are three types of electrolysis processes:
Alkaline water electrolysis, proton exchange membrane water electrolysis, and
solid oxide electrolysis (Sang, Cao, and Jiao, 2022), where electrolysis happen-
ing during electrodialytic separation is an alkaline water electrolysis.
The production of gas is dependent on several factors. The most important
factor is the theoretical minimum decomposition voltage required for the split-
ting of water, which is 1.23 V. This means that the di↵erence in voltage must
15
==PAGE:17==
be greater than 1.23 V for the splitting of water. In a classical setup for alkaline
electrolysis, where NaOH or KOH is used, the reaction would be as follows,
using sodium hydroxide:
4 NaOH −! 4 Na+ + 4 OH−
(6)
4 OH−−! 2 H2O + O2 + 4 e−
(7)
4 Na+ + 4 H2O + 4 e−−! 4 NaOH + 2 H2
(8)
(Bowen, 1943; Milewski, Guandalini, and Campanari, 2014)
Water in itself is a bad conductor, so an electrolyte is necessary to carry the
current (Bowen, 1943). From the equation it is observed that the charges are
carried by the electrolytes Na+ and OH–. The important thing to notice is that
the electrolytes are not being consumed in the process. During electrodialytic
separation, the current is mainly carried by Ca2+ followed by other metal ions
(Gunvor M. Kirkelund et al., 2019), where a deposition of heavy metals in solid
state and an increasing concentration of calcium is observed in the catholyte
chamber. This means that electrical energy is used to change the state of metals
to solid form and to produce gas.
The key challenge is modelling the energy use and what it is used for. How many
ionic species are made and transported across the cation exchange membrane
and what is the production of acid, base, and gas?
The total electrical energy applied to a cell is the product of current and voltage
across time. There will be a loss of energy due to ohmic resistance, which has
the relationship
I = V
R
(9)
where I is the current, V is the voltage and R is the resistance. To have the
most eﬃcient use of energy, the aim is to reduce resistance. The loss of con-
ductivity is seen as a drop in voltage across the cell. The loss of voltage across
the cell is caused by: Resistance of the electrolyte solution; temperature of the
solution; the membrane used to separate the anode and the cathode compart-
ments; the electrodes; and the over-voltage at the electrodes (Bowen, 1943). All
of these factors are important to considered, when aiming to minimise energy
16
==PAGE:18==
use.
During electrodialytic treatment the voltage that is needed will vary depend-
ing on conductivity but the current will remain constant. This is reﬂected in
Ohm’s law: In order to keep the electric current constant, voltage must be ad-
justed according to resistance, an increase in resistance means a higher voltage
has to be applied. A study on the conductivity during electrodialytic separa-
tion on sewage sludge ash further investigated this subject (Lisbeth M. Ottosen,
Gunvor M. Kirkelund, and Jensen, 2021).
The company Clean Matter expect to use around 2 days for electrodialytic
separation with the aim of recovering 80-90% of the phosphorous bound in the
sewage sludge ash and expect an electricity demand of 1440 kWh per ton SSA.
At a larger scale a current of 3 A is used and a voltage of around 15 V can be
expected (Eilkaer and Bygballe, 2023).
Hydrogen gas production at the cathode is dependent on how much of the
energy is used for the over-voltage, transportation of ions and the reduction of
metals to solid form at the cathode. In a three chamber cell, the production of
hydrogen gas at the cathode was investigated during electrodialytic separation.
The material treated was e✏uent from a waste water treatment plant, sewage
sludge and mine waste (Almeida et al., 2020). It was found that hydrogen gas
was produced with a purity of around 60% (w/w) and that this gas could be
used in a fuel cell to save around 4-7% of the electricity used in the elctrodi-
alytic separation process. The other gas species was investigated, that were
mixed with hydrogen gas, but note that the experiments were not conducted on
SSA. The reactions proposed were:
4 H2 + CO2 −! CH4 + H2O
(10)
CH3COO−+ H+ −! CH4 + CO2
(11)
4 HCOO−+ 4 H+ −! CH4 + 3 CO2 + 2 H2O
(12)
(Almeida et al., 2020)
In SSA the LOI is a proxy for carbon content, with values 0.3-3% for Den-
mark (Lisbeth M. Ottosen, Jensen, and Gunvor M. Kirkelund, 2016; Lisbeth
M. Ottosen, Gunvor M. Kirkelund, and Jensen, 2021). This carbon could react
from the SSA and create CO2 or CH4 during EDS at the cathode.
17
==PAGE:19==
4
Elemental tracking of EDS of SSA
The experiments on the electrodialytic treatment of sewage sludge ash in a two
chamber cell by Kirkelund, Ottosen et al. is the foundation for the tracking
the distribution of elements throughout the cell. After EDS, it is of interest to
know how much of each is element is detected in the remaining undissolved ash,
the anolyte and the catholyte chamber. The elemental tracking analysis builds
upon four scientiﬁc papers and one scientiﬁc report with the participation of one
or more of the original authors in these papers, that invented the two-chamber
patented electrodialytic separation cell, patent No. WO2015032903, (Lisbeth
M. Ottosen, Jensen, Gunvor M. Kirkelund, and Ebbers, 2015) and one scientiﬁc
paper looking into phosphorous recovery from SSA by bioleaching (Semerci,
Kunt, and Calli, 2019). A list of the selected papers used for the tracking of the
elemental distribution in the cell can be seen in table 3. The goal of tracking the
elements in the SSA is to determine the distribution of elements in the anolyte,
catholyte and the elements remaining in the undissolved ash. The major ele-
ments in SSA in average are Ca (13.8%), Si (12.1%) Fe(9.9%), P (9.0%) and Al
(5.2%) (Kr¨uger, Grabner, and Adam, 2014).
All of the papers investigated used SSA obtained from urban waste water
treatment plants. Papers 1-5 used sewage sludge ash from Spildevandscenter
Avedøre, Lynettefælleskabet and from Lundtofteværket, which are all located
in close proximity to Copenhagen, Denmark. In the 5th paper the three ashes in-
vestigated, were ashes from Spildevandscenter Avedøre and Lynettefælleskabet
and an additional ash obtained from a municipal sewage sludge ash in Ger-
many (Lisbeth M. Ottosen, Gunvor M. Kirkelund, and Jensen, 2021). The SSA
used as an input for the modelling of bioleaching in the 6th paper by Sermci et
al. was obtained from the Amberli Advanced Biological Wastewater Treatment
Plant, located outside Istanbul, Turkey. Here the ash was from incineration of
dried sewage in a porcelain dish in the lab, at 850 ◦C (Semerci, Kunt, and Calli,
2019).
To track the elements from sewage sludge ash in the electrodialytic separa-
tion, results from the listed papers in table 3 on the distribution of elements
in the anolyte, catholyte and remaining ash, were used to set up an elemental
balance. For some papers there were only the distribution of elements at the
end of the experiments but some of the results displayed the distribution of ele-
18
==PAGE:20==
Table 3: Papers that measured the release of elements from sewage sludge ash,
and the migration of elements from the ash suspension into the catholyte after
electrodialytic separation.
No.
Year
Paper and authors
1
2015
”Electrodialytic separation of heavy metals from particulate material”
- Lisbeth M. Ottosen et al.
2
2015
”Udvinding af fosfor fra slamaske med elektrokemisk teknik”
- Lisbeth M. Ottosen, Gunvor M. Kirkelund, and Pernille E. Jensen
3
2016
”Phosphorous recovery from sewage sludge ash suspended in water
in a two-compartment electrodialytic cell”
- Lisbeth M. Ottosen, Pernille E. Jensen, and Gunvor M. Kirkelund
4
2016
”Valorisation of ferric sewage sludge ashes: Potential as a phosphorus source”
- Paula Guedes et. al.
5
2021
”Recovery of Phosphorous from Sewage Sludge Ash Prior to Utilization as
Secondary Resource in Concrete and Bricks”
- Lisbeth M. Ottosen, Gunvor M. Kirkelund, and Pernille E. Jensen
6
2019
”Phosphorous recovery from sewage sludge ash with bioleaching and electrodialysis”
- Neslihan Semerci, Busra Kunt, and Baris Calli
ments in the cell across time. Since the main goal of electrodialytic separation is
the extraction of phosphorous (Guedes et al., 2016), while also removing heavy
metals, the distribution of elements is selected to be at the time with the high-
est concentration of phosphorous in the anolyte. Here the average extraction
eﬃciency of phosphorous across experiments was 80%, which is also what Clean
Matter expect to obtain from their process.
Papers no. 1 and 4 (Lisbeth M. Ottosen, Jensen, Gunvor M. Kirkelund, and
Ebbers, 2015; Guedes et al., 2016) used sulphuric acid to extract phosphorous
at the start of the electrodialytic separation followed by acidiﬁcation with H+
by electrolysis in the ash suspension, anolyte chamber. Sulphuric acid wash-
ing reduced the strength of mortar from sewage sludge ash and formed gypsum
(Donatello et al., 2010) and the gypsum would increase the volume of ash sig-
19
==PAGE:21==
niﬁcantly, which can be an issue regarding storage volume (Lisbeth M. Ottosen,
Gunvor M. Kirkelund, and Jensen, 2013). Since Clean Matter is acidifying the
ash suspension by acid formation at the anode and gypsum formation is un-
wanted, the use of results from experiments where H2SO4 was added to the
ash suspension is undesired, although these result were used in the case of few
samples on distributions of elements. Results used on distribution for major
elements where electrodialytic separation was initiated by sulphuric acid, was
for the distribution of aluminium and iron. There was one measurement on
the distribution of aluminium and iron in anolyte, catholyte and undissolved
ash, where the ash was suspended in water (Lisbeth M. Ottosen, Gunvor M.
Kirkelund, and Jensen, 2015) and four experiments with ash suspended in 0.08M
and 0.19M H2SO4 on fresh SSA and stored SSA. These four results from the
dissolution of ash in sulphuric acid in addition to the one with ash suspended in
water, were combined to rely on 5 measurements of the distribution of Al and
Fe in the anolyte, catholyte and treated SSA, instead of only one experiment
with one type of SSA and one sample. The distribution on phosphorous in the
cell were based on 6 measurements, none of which used sulphuric acid in the
electrodialytic separation.
Regarding the distribution of heavy metals in the anolyte, catholyte and re-
maining in the ash, Zn, Pb and Cu relied on measurements from 6 experiments
with SSA only suspended in water, with no addition of H2SO4. Cd and Ni relied
on 5 experiments, where 4 of these results was obtained from (Guedes et al.,
2016), that added sulphuric acid to the anolyte chamber.
The migration of calcium into the catholyte from the anolyte across the cation
exchange membrane was not measured in the electrodialytic separation exper-
iments. Although, in (Lisbeth M. Ottosen, Gunvor M. Kirkelund, and Jensen,
2021), the content of Ca was measured before and after EDS, and mass loss of
SSA into the anolyte and catholyte was also observed. Therefore the release of
calcium could be inferred. The electromigration of Ca2+ from the anolyte to
the catholyte was approximated by using results from Semerci et al. on elec-
tromigration of calcium in a three chamber electrodialytic cell (Semerci, Kunt,
and Calli, 2019).
Semerci et al.
investigated the extraction of phosphorous
from SSA by using sulphur oxidizing bacteria. The bacteria yielded sulphuric
acid, that were used to leach phosphorous from SSA in an incubator to obtain a
leaching solution. This leaching solution was then ﬁltered, and the solution was
20
==PAGE:22==
treated by electrodialytic separation in a three compartment cell. Here 98.3%
of the measured Ca2+ in the leaching solution went into the cathode compart-
ment from the middle chamber. Combined with the measurements on release of
calcium in the two chamber electrodialytic separation experiments by Ottosen
et al. with a 91% release, the distribution of Ca in the anolyte, catholyte and
remaining ash could be found.
There were no measurements on the content of silicon in SSA in the two-
chamber experiments, although, Ottosen, Kirkelund et al. expected no extrac-
tion of silicon from the ash, since silicon is present in quartz and insoluble during
EDS (Lisbeth M. Ottosen, Gunvor M. Kirkelund, and Jensen, 2021; Kappel et
al., 2018). It was assumed that 12.1% of SSA consists of Si, which is the average
value taken from the German survey (Kr¨uger, Grabner, and Adam, 2014).
The release of sulphate measured as the mass of sulfur was known from
Lisbeth M. Ottosen, Gunvor M. Kirkelund, and Jensen, 2021 and migration of
sulphate across a cation exchange membrane was measured by Semerci, Kunt,
and Calli, 2019, where all sulphate was observed to migrate into the anolyte
compartment.
The extraction of Mg from SSA was measured by Ottosen et al. (Lisbeth M.
Ottosen, Gunvor M. Kirkelund, and Jensen, 2021) but its distribution in the
catholyte vs. anolyte in a two chamber electrodialytic cell is unknown. There-
fore the migration of Mg into the catholyte was approximated by using the
results obtained from bioleaching experiments Semerci, Kunt, and Calli, 2019.
The release of K and Na was measured by Lisbeth M. Ottosen, Gunvor M.
Kirkelund, and Jensen, 2021, but no tracking into the anolyte and catholyte is
known, and is therefore not included in the elemental tracking analysis. Based
on the German survey on the SSA composition, the mean content of potassium
is 0.9% of the mass, while sodium accounts for around 0.7% of the mass (Kr¨uger,
Grabner, and Adam, 2014). The release and content of titanium was unknown
and therefore also its distribution into the catholyte, anolyte and remaining in
the ash. It could be of interest to measure its dissolution and electromigration
in the future, since on average it accounts for 0.4% of mass of the SSA (Kr¨uger,
Grabner, and Adam, 2014) and is a critical element according to deﬁnition by
the European Comission (Blengini, Latunussa, and Eynard, 2020).
After the distribution of investigated elements was calculated based on re-
sults from the 6 scientiﬁc papers, the total mass of each element that is extracted
21
==PAGE:23==
to either the anolyte or catholyte or remains in the ash was calculated. To get
a mass of each element in each compartment an input value is needed, and
the concentrations of elements vary in the SSA. To get an average that resem-
bles the input into the experiments on the electrodialytic separation of SSA
in the two chamber cell, made by the authors Kirkelund, Ottosen et al., the
composition of the SSA was based on the most recent publication with three
SSAs (Lisbeth M. Ottosen, Gunvor M. Kirkelund, and Jensen, 2021). These
three ashes were sampled from Spildevandscenter Avedøre Lynettefælleskabet
and a municipal sewage sludge ash located in Germany. An additional factor
for choosing the average of these three ashes, is that the release of Ca is based
on the measurements of this paper. In addition it has a good quantiﬁcation on
macro elements in the SSA, wheres the other papers by same authors focused on
contaminants in the SSA, i.e. heavy metal concentrations. Elements that were
measured in the SSA in the paper, Lisbeth M. Ottosen, Gunvor M. Kirkelund,
and Jensen, 2021, were used from the averages from the German sewage sludge
survey (Kr¨uger, Grabner, and Adam, 2014).
Table 4: Mean mass used for elemental balance with measurements from (Lis-
beth M. Ottosen, Gunvor M. Kirkelund, and Jensen, 2021), on three SSAs
and papers used to estimate release from ash and migration into anolyte and
catholyte through EDS. The mass of N and K is not included in the analysis.
Element
Ca
Si
Fe
P
Al
S
Mg
K, Na
Heavy metals
Sum
Mean mass
[%]
12.7
12.1
6.8
8.1
1.8
0.7
1.3
0.8
0.4
44.7
Paper used
(No.) for distribution
5,6
5
2,4
2,3,5
2,4
5
6
-
2,3,4,5
-
4.1
The production of H2 gas and OH– in the catholyte
During the electrodialytic separation of sewage sludge ash, there is a splitting of
water by an electric current, where water is reduced at the cathode to hydrogen
gas and hydroxide, and water is oxidised at the anode into oxygen gas and H+
ions (Magro et al., 2019).
In a well formed theoretical model, if all the facts of resistance is known so that
the amount of charges e– delivered is known, a mole of electrons could be used
22
==PAGE:24==
to calculate the hydrogen gas produced at the cathode across the duration of
the separation process. Since the technology is not ﬁnalised, and the resistance
of the system vary by means of distance, electrolytes etc., this approach is too
uncertain. Instead, to approximate the production of hydrogen gas the mea-
surement of acid or base production was used as a proxy.
Guedes et al. investigated the extraction of phosphorous from ferric sewage
sludge ashes in a two chamber electrodialytic cell (Guedes et al., 2016). Sul-
phuric acid was used to initiate the experiments at concentration of 0.08 M and
0.019 M. The duration of all the experiments were 7 days, and initial and ﬁnal
pH was noted in the anode compartment. Voltage was recorded at the start and
at the end of the test run, and the current was constant at 50 mA. The cell had
an internal diameter of 8 cm and the anolyte compartment was 10 cm and the
catholyte compartment was 5 cm in length which gives.
The change in pH is known, and the volume of the anolyte compartment is
approximately 0,5 L and the energy used to create H+ in the anolyte is inferred
by the average of the experiments to be 42 Wh to create around 0.02 mol H+.
From this the amount of moles hydroxide is assumed equivalent in the catholyte
to the production of hydrogen ions in the anolyte. For the overall process, the
assumed electricity use is 1440 kWh for the electrodialytic separation process.
This means roughly 550 moles of OH– has to be neutralised EDS is undergone
under acidic conditions. HNO3 is used for neutralisation. This results in 36 kg
of concentrated HNO3 per ton of SSA, to keep pH around 2 in the catholyte
chamber. Since the production of acid per unit of electrical energy is known,
the production of hydrogen gas can be calculated, although measurements are
more reliable due to the complexity of the system.
Almeida et al. investigated the production of hydrogen gas and the critical
raw materials recovery from secondary resources, in a 3 compartment cell by
electrodialytic separation (Almeida et al., 2020). 4 experiments were conducted:
The electrodialytic separation of e✏uent from a wastewater treatments plant,
separation of sewage sludge, separation of mining residue from a tungsten mine,
and separation of mining residue in combination with sewage sludge. These
experiments had a current of 50 mA for 2 hours and 100 mA for 1 hour, and the
voltage was monitored during the experiment. During the electrodialytic treat-
ment of the di↵erent samples, gas from the cathode compartment was collected
and analysed. Initial and ﬁnal pH and conductivity was reported as well. The
23
==PAGE:25==
hydrogen purity (w/w %) of the gas was subsequently determined.
To determine the hydrogen production the same scientiﬁc paper that was
used to estimate acid production by the change in pH in the anolyte across time
(Guedes et al., 2016), was not chosen as the basis for the production of gas at
the cathode. This is due to the uncertainties due to how much of the electrical
energy is used for hydrogen formation, since there is energy lost as heat, energy
used for transportation of ions, and energy used to reduce the oxidation states
of metals (Magro et al., 2019; Lisbeth M. Ottosen, Gunvor M. Kirkelund, and
Jensen, 2015).
The e↵ect across the experiments were calculated in average, so that it was
possible to deduce how much H2 is produced per unit of energy applied. These
measurements from the experiments form the basis for the estimation of hydro-
gen gas at cathode during electrodialytic separation.
4.2
From tracking of elements to an MFA of the whole
technology
A material ﬂow analysis is a systematic assessment of the ﬂows and stocks of
materials within a system deﬁned in time and space (Brunner and Rechberger,
2016). This means that for the ﬂows going in and out of the deﬁned system,
in this case, the technology of electrodialytic separation of sewage sludge ash,
matter is conserved, input = output.
This implies, there is no spontaneous
creation or loss of material within the system. The continuous electrodialytic
separation process has no build-up of material within the system, i.e. no increase
or decrease in stocks. The functional unit driving the system is the treatment
of 1 ton of SSA ash by electrodialytic separation. Time is not deﬁned, since
the driving unit is mass without stocks, the model is a stationary MFA model
(Brunner and Rechberger, 2016).
Of the six papers examined in the elemental analysis of electrodialytic sepa-
ration, three papers had measurements on the loss of mass from the suspended
ash, at the end of the experiments (Lisbeth M. Ottosen, Jensen, and Gunvor M.
Kirkelund, 2016; Guedes et al., 2016; Lisbeth M. Ottosen, Gunvor M. Kirkelund,
and Jensen, 2021). An average of the mass loss of ash was used to determine
how much ash remained after electrodialytic separation. A short (3 days, n=1)
and a long experiment (16 days, n=1) was included in the average, but most of
24
==PAGE:26==
the results from the mass loss from the ash were around 7 to 10 days of EDS.
The electrodialytic separated ash remaining undissolved was assumed to contain
10% (w/w) water (Gunvor M. Kirkelund, 2023). The ash was assumed dried to
contain 3% water, in order to comply with the standards for water content in
cement used in mortar.
In total, the ash loss during EDS published in the listed papers was 47% in
average, although it should be noted that duration of experiments varied. This
meant that 53% of the ash remained at the end of the experiments, and in the
the material ﬂow analysis, this value was assumed to be 55%, thus 550 kg dry
ash is undissolved.
The output of anolyte and catholyte at the end of EDS,
was ﬁrstly modelled by assuming the total mass of the anolyte and catholyte
to be equivalent to the distribution of mass of elements, as deduced from ex-
periments. This yielded around 20% of the SSA treated ended in the anolyte
and around 30% in the catholyte. When accounting for the phosphoric acid
being produced in the anolyte chamber, the total mass of anolyte is too low,
since phosphoric acid accounts for around 200 kg of the output in an average
SSA composition. The total output of catholyte, mainly consisted of Ca(OH)2.
Complexes with elements bound to oxygen and hydrogen, were approximated
by typical known chemical species, and this resulted in 20% catholyte and 30%
anolyte, the opposite of before. Since it is diﬃcult to track the dissolution of
oxygen- and hydrogen in the binding from the SSA, it was approximated that
half of the dissolved SSA ash went into the anolyte and the other half into the
catholyte. This results in a total output of 250 kg of anolyte and catholyte per
ton SSA with a 10% water content. Due to a shortage of mass in the account-
ing, it was assumed that 10 kg of water ended in the anolyte and 10 kg in the
catholyte, so that each of the output became 260 kg per ton SSA.
It should be noted, that going from experimental stages to a continuous
extraction of SSA from electrodialytic separation, there are some signiﬁcant dif-
ferences. First of all, the liquid to solid ratio that is used in the experiments
is not included in the precipitation of the calcium-phosphate salt. When phos-
phoric acid is the product in the anolyte, the mass of liquid is 4 times the mass
of ash and the whole liquid has to be evaporated, not ﬁltration is possible.
25
==PAGE:27==
4.3
Modelling of environmental impacts
In an environmental assessment a list of materials going in and out of a system
and activities related to that system, is required in order to make a comprehen-
sive overview of what environmental burdens or savings may be. The scope of
the assessment in this thesis is the electrodialytic separation of 1 ton of SSA.
This technology requires energy and has material inputs and outputs. If an
output is to have an environmental savings, i.e. an avoided emission from the
production of new virgin material, substituted by the output, it has to be a mar-
ketable product. If there is no recipient for a material, substance or product,
it is considered a waste, and will be an environmental burden. To determine
whether or not the material outputs from the system is a burden or not, the
ﬂows were ﬁrst quantiﬁed in the elemental analysis and the life cycle index,
which displays what the contents of the ﬂows are.
The database Ecoinvent version 3.7.1, 2020, was used to determine the impacts
related to each substance that was produced or utilised withing the assessed
technology and the energy generated and provided. The program EASETECH,
developed by the Danish Technical University, was used as the modelling soft-
ware, where the background information on the substances was imported from
Ecoinvent into the program. In the Ecoinvent database, the data on activities
and products were imported under the assumption, that there was ”allocation
at the point of substitution” (Ecoinvent, 2023). It was aimed to have processes
and products that were as close as possible to Denmark, or resembles Danish
conditions.
4.3.1
Products and processes used and substituted
4 scenarios were constructed. There are two products for phosphorous: Phos-
phorous acid and a calcium-phosphate salt.
In the scenarios the pH of the
catholyte could or could not be adjusted bt HNO3. The scenarios were nitric
acid were added to the catholyte are denoted with ”HNO3”.
This gives 4 scenarios: ”P-acid”, ”P-acid-HNO3”, ”P-salt” and ”P-salt-HNO3”
In Ecoinvent:
26
==PAGE:28==
- NaNO3: The production impact related to sodium nitrate, was based on
the external process ”sodium nitrate production, RER” imported into EASETECH
from Ecoinvent. RER means, it’s data taken from EUROPE.
- Water use: Water use was modelled by the external process ”process wa-
ter from groundwater, RER, 2005, ELCD”, which is an external process in
EASETECH.
- HNO3: Nitric acid was imported from Ecoinvent as the background process
”nitric acid, without water, in 50% solution state, nitric acid production, RER
w/o RU”. Without water means that the water included in the product is not
to be accounted as part of the product and its weight subtracted.
- Cathode gas, H2: It was assumed that the cathode gas produced was only
produced as pure hydrogen, that could be used in a fuel cell. With 2.5 kg H2
gas produced per ton SSA, this was converted into 50 kWh electricity to use
within the EDS system, to reduce electricity consumption. The heating value
of hydrogen gas was 141.8 MJ/kg and the conversion eﬃciency into electrical
energy in the fuel cell was 50% (Almeida et al., 2020).
- O2: Oxygen gas was not assumed to have any climate impacts or beneﬁts to
the system, and is not included in this assessment.
- Cathode deposited metals: The two largest metals deposited on the cath-
ode was zinc and copper. Zinc is a companion metal when mining copper, and
copper is the carrier metal in sulﬁde ores (Sohn et al., 2014). The deposit of
metals on the cathode is not ﬁnished product such as ingot, so it is assumed to
resemble a copper concentrate in sulﬁde ores as a product the deposit can sub-
stitute. The deposited Cu substitutes copper concentrate, which in Ecoinvent
is: ”Copper concentrate, sulﬁde ore, copper mine operation and beneﬁciation,
RoW (globally). The deposited zinc substitutes a copper concentrate product
for the process:”Copper concentrate, sulﬁde ore, primary zinc production from
concentrate, RoW”.
- Electrodialytical treated ash: The dried ash, that is remains un-extracted
is assumed to be used as cement in mortar substitute.
This is done as the
Ecoinvent product ”cement mortar, market for cement mortar, RoW”. That
it includes the ”market for cement mortar” for the whole world (RoW), means
that it is both the production of the average cement mortar and the transporta-
tion and handling of the product.
- Catholyte precipitate, Ca(OH)2: The catholyte precipitate mostly con-
27
==PAGE:29==
sists of calcium hydroxide, which is the product the catholyte precipitate will
be used as.
In Ecoinvent, this hydrated lime is categorized as: ”Lime, hy-
drated, packed, market for lime, RER”. Only the hydrated lime contained in
the catholyte is used as product for substitution. Impurities, such as nitrate are
not the core value of the product, thus seen as impurities.
- Phosphorous acid: The product obtained from the anolyte is H3PO4 in an
85% solution. In Ecoinvent the product that it substitutes is: ”phosphoric acid,
industrial grade, without water, in 85% solution state, market for phosphoric
acid, GLO” (global).
- Calcium-phosphate salt: The exact composition of the precipitated salt
from phosphoric acid and calcium hydroxide is unknown. In Ecoinvent the Ca-
P product from EDS of SSA substitutes the equivalent of P2O5, that is the
P-content in Ca-P product is related to the P2O5. The Ecoinvent product is
the ”inorganic phosphorous fertilizer, as P2O5, nutrient supply from tripple su-
perphosphate, monocalcium phosphate, RER.
- Electricity: Electricity used and substituted has a carbon intensity of 202 g
per kWh, which is at the level of the current emissions intensity for electricity
used in Denmark (Energinet, 2023). The most recent emissions intensities from
Ecoinvent was in 2018 for the Danish electrical grid market, with an emission
intensity of 291 g per kWh. To get an emission intensity from the background
system that had a more updated intensity, electricity from a biogas engine was
assumed. Since it is a climatic assessment, other impact categories are sensitive
to the choice of electricity, but the carbon intensity per kWh is what is included
in the climatic impact assessment. The Ecoinvent process is called: ”Electricity,
high voltage, heat and power co-generation, biogas, gas engine, SE.”
- Drying: Drying, or the evaporation of water, uses electrical energy, with
around 700 kWh per m3 water (Suezwaterhandbook.com, 2023).
- Distillation: Distillation is using the background electrical energy, with a
multiple e↵ect distillation that uses 15 kWh/m3 water (Manish Kumar, Culp,
and Shen, 2016).
28
==PAGE:30==
5
Results
The result of the elemental analysis from the distribution of elements into the
anolyte, catholyte and ash, can be seen in table 5 and in ﬁgure 3. For a 100%
stacked column chart see appendix.
Table 5: Distribution of elements in the anolyte, catholyte and treated ash
after electrodialytic separation.
[kg/ton]
Anolyte
Catholyte
SSA-EDS
SUM
Ca
1.84
113.36
11.47
126.67
Si
0.00
0.00
121.00
121.00
P
64.40
8.45
7.65
80.50
Fe
8.67
1.08
57.98
67.73
Al
8.91
4.00
4.63
17.53
Mg
0.00
9.33
3.93
13.27
Figure 3: Distribution of elements [%] after EDS with standard deviation bars,
based on results from the 6 papers, see table 3.
29
==PAGE:31==
Figure 4: Distribution heavy metals after EDS, with bars showing standard
deviation based on the results on distributions from 6 papers, see table 3.
The tracking of Ca, Si, P, Fe, Al and Mg accounted for around 43% of the
weight of SSA, when using the average input based on (Lisbeth M. Ottosen,
Gunvor M. Kirkelund, and Jensen, 2021). Of the total mass of SSA, 9% of the
elements ended in the anolyte, 13.5% in the catholyte and 20.5% remained in
the ash. When looking at the distribution of elements analysed, 21% of the
mass of the elements was extracted to the anolyte, 31% was extracted into the
catholyte and 48% of the analysed elements remained in the ash. This is without
including oxygen and hydrogen.
From the elemental analysis 4 scenarios were made regarding the overall
material ﬂow and energy use. A scenario is named after its phosphorous product
and whether nitric acid was used in the catholyte. If nitric acid was used, it is
included in the name, if not it is omitted. The four scenarios are named ”P-
acid”, ”P-acid-HNO3”, ”P-salt” and ”P-salt-HNO3”. The material ﬂow analyses
can be seen in the following 4 pages.
30
==PAGE:32==
Figure 5: The material ﬂow analysis of the scenario ”P-acid-HNO3”, where nitric acid is used in the catholyte and the
phosphorous product is H3PO4. Units are in kg.
31
==PAGE:33==
Figure 6:
The material ﬂow analysis of the scenario ”P-salt-HNO3”, where nitric acid is used in the catholyte and the
phosphorous product is a calcium phosphate salt. Units are in kg.
32
==PAGE:34==
Figure 7: The material ﬂow analysis of the scenario ”P-acid”, where there is no use of nitric acid in the catholyte and the
phosphorous product is H3PO4. Units are in kg.
33
==PAGE:35==
Figure 8: The material ﬂow analysis of the scenario ”P-salt”, where there is no use of nitric acid in the catholyte and the
phosphorous product is a calcium phosphate salt. Units are in kg.
34
==PAGE:36==
Table 6: The inventory of the scenario ”P-acid-HNO3” from the material ﬂow
analysis, where nitric acid is used in the catholyte and the phosphorous product
is H3PO4.
Flows
Inventory
Composition
NaNO3
0.02 kg
0.02 kg NaNO3
SSA
1000 kg
3 kg H20, 997 kg SSA
HNO3
72 kg
36 kg HNO3, 36 kg H2O
Cathode gas
2.5 kg H2
2.5 kg H2
Anode gas
20 kg O2
20 kg H20
Heavy metals cathode deposition.
0.9 kg
550 g Zn, 250 g Cu, 100 g H20
Heavy metals residue
0.8 kg
550g Zn, 250g Cu
EDS-SSA
611 kg
550 kg SSA, 61 kg H20
Treated ash
567 kg
550 kg SSA, 121 kg Si, 58 kg Fe, 12 kg Ca, 17 kg H20
Cathode precipitate, 10% H20
304 kg
210 kg Ca(OH)2, 35 NO3, 9 kg Mg, 8 kg P, 26kg H20
Cathode precipitate, Ca(OH)2, NO3
271 kg
210 kg Ca(OH)2, 35 NO3, 9 kg Mg, 8 kg P
Anolyte
4260 kg
200 kg H3PO4, 20 kg SO4, 9 kg Al
P-acid
271 kg
230 kg H3PO4 (85%), 20 kg SO4, 9 kg Al
Water use
60 kg
60 kg H2O
Drying of water
60 kWh
-
Distillation
50 kWh
-
Overall electricity, EDS process
1440 kWh
-
Table 7: The inventory of the scenario ”P-salt-HNO3”, from the material ﬂow
analysis, where nitric acid is used in the catholyte and the phosphorous product
is a calcium phosphate salt.
Flows
Inventory
Composition
NaNO3
0.02 kg
0.02 kg
SSA
1000 kg
3 kg H20, 997 kg SSA
HNO3
72 kg
36 kg HNO3, 36 kg H2O
Cathode gas
2.5 kg H2
2.5 kg H2
Anode gas
20 kg O2
20 kg H20
Heavy metals cathode deposition.
0.9 kg
550g Zn, 250g Cu, 100g H20
Heavy metals residue
0.8 kg
550g Zn, 250g Cu
EDS-SSA
611 kg
550 kg SSA, 61 kg H20
Treated ash
567 kg
550 kg SSA, 121 kg Si, 58 kg Fe, 12 kg Ca, 17 kg H20
Cathode precipitate, 10% H20
305 kg
210 kg Ca(OH)2,, 36 kg NO3, 9 kg Mg, 8 kg P, 35kg H20
Anolyte
260 kg
200 kg H3PO4, 20 kg SO4, 9 kg Al, 2 kg Ca, 25 kg H20
Ca, P-mixture (4%) water
565 kg
235 kg H3PO4, 215 kg Ca(OH)2, 35kg NO3, 20 kg SO4, 13 kg Al, 9 kg Mg, 20 kg H20
P-salt
545 kg
450 kg P-Ca salt,35 kg NO3, 20 kg SO4, 13 kg Al, 9 kg Mg
Water use
60 kg
60 kg H2O
Drying of water
40 kWh
-
Overall electricity, EDS process
1440 kWh
-
35
==PAGE:37==
Table 8: The inventory of the scenario ”P-acid”, from the material ﬂow anal-
ysis, where there is no use of nitric acid in the catholyte and the phosphorous
product is H3PO4.
Flows
Inventory
Composition
NaNO3
0.02 kg
0.02 kg NaNO3
SSA
1000 kg
3 kg H20, 997 kg SSA
Cathode gas
2.5 kg H2
2.5 kg H2
Anode gas
20 kg O2
20 kg H20
Heavy metals cathode deposition.
0.9 kg
550g Zn, 250g Cu, 100g H20
Heavy metals residue
0.8 kg
550g Zn, 250g Cu
EDS-SSA
611 kg
550 kg SSA, 61 kg H20
Treated ash
567 kg
550 kg SSA, 121 kg Si, 58 kg Fe, 12 kg Ca, 17 kg H20
Cathode precipitate, 10% H20
260 kg
210 kg Ca(OH)2, 9 kg Mg, 8 kg P, 25kg H20
Cathode precipitate, Ca(OH)2
235 kg
210 kg Ca(OH)2, 9 kg Mg, 8 kg P
Anolyte
4260 kg
200 kg H3PO4, 20 kg SO4, 9 kg Al
P-acid
271 kg
230 kg H3PO4 (85%), 20 kg SO4, 9 kg Al
Water use
100 kg
100 kg H20
Drying of water
50 kWh
-
Distillation
60 kWh
-
Overall electricity, EDS process
1440 kWh
-
Table 9: The inventory of the scenario ”P-salt”, from the material ﬂow analysis,
where there is no use of nitric acid in the catholyte and the phosphorous product
is a calcium phosphate salt.
Flows
Inventory
Composition
NaNO3
0.02 kg
0.02 kg NaNO3
SSA
1000 kg
3 kg H20, 997 kg SSA
Cathode gas
2.5 kg H2
2.5 kg H2
Anode gas
20 kg O2
20 kg H20
Heavy metals cathode deposition.
0.9 kg
550g Zn, 250g Cu, 100g H20
Heavy metals residue
0.8 kg
550g Zn, 250g Cu
EDS-SSA
611 kg
550 kg SSA, 61 kg H20
Treated ash
567 kg
550 kg SSA, 121 kg Si, 58 kg Fe, 12 kg Ca, 17 kg H20
Cathode precipitate, 10% H20
260 kg
210 kg Ca(OH)2, 9 kg Mg, 8 kg P, 25kg H20
Cathode precipitate, Ca(OH)2
235 kg
210 kg Ca(OH)2, 9 kg Mg, 8 kg P
Anolyte
4260 kg
200 kg H3PO4, 20 kg SO4, 9 kg Al
P-acid
271 kg
230 kg H3PO4 (85%), 20 kg SO4, 9 kg Al
Water use
100 kg
100 kg H20
Drying of water
50 kWh
-
Distillation
60 kWh
-
Overall electricity, EDS process
1440 kWh
-
36
==PAGE:38==
Figure 9: The total impact in kg CO2 –eq for each of the four scenarios dis-
cussed in this thesis. Negative values indicate a savings in greenhouse gas emis-
sion and positive values indicates an emission CO2 –eq related to the material
or process.
The total climatic impact for the 4 scenarios can be seen in ﬁgure 9. A full
inventory with the exact numbers from the climatic assesment can be seen in
the appendix in ﬁgure: 15, 16, 17 and 18.
From the total climatic assessment 4 the four scenarios, two with phosphoric
acid H3PO4 and two scenarios with a Ca-P salt, the scenario that had the lowest
impact from treating 1000 kg of SSA, was scenario ”H3PO4 with a total saving
37
==PAGE:39==
of 307 kg CO2-eq., see ﬁgure 9. From the results of the assessment it can further
be concluded, that the largest savings is found at the substitution the P-Ca-salt
with savings of 431 kg CO2-eq. The highest contribution emission of CO2-eq.
across the scenarios was the use of electricity, that resulted in an emission of
291 kg CO2-eq. per ton ash treated. Of minor importance was electricity used
for drying with an impact of around 10 kg of CO2-eq. and water use, the use
of the electrolyte NaNO3 and the substitution of copper concentrate.
For all the scenarios the content of heavy metals was tracked into the catholyte,
anolyte and salt. For the contents of the hydrated lime, the values for heavy
metals were exceeded when relating it to the DM content.
Table 10: P-acid,HNO3 scenario for the heavy metal content per kg DM or
per kg-total P
[mg/kg]
P-acid, DM
Ca(OH)2, DM
P-acid, P
Cd
1.7
2.2
6.3
Pb
59.7
78.2
222.4
Ni
5.5
28.8
20.6
Zn
693.5
2250.1
2584.5
Cu
491.9
1111.9
1833.3
Table 11: P-acid scenario for the heavy metal content per kg DM or per kg-
total P
[mg/kg]
P-acid. kg DM
Ca(OH)2. kg DM
P-acid. kg P
Cd
1.7
2.5
6.3
Pb
59.7
89.9
222.4
Ni
5.5
33.1
20.6
Zn
693.5
2585.2
2584.5
Cu
491.9
1277.5
1833.3
38
==PAGE:40==
Table 12: P-Salt,HNO3 scenario for the heavy metal content per kg DM or
per kg-total P
[mg/kg]
P.Ca salt DM
P.Ca salt. P
Cd
1.8
13.7
Pb
65.0
486.5
Ni
16.7
124.9
Zn
1420.1
10623.7
Cu
767.5
5741.5
Table 13: P-salt scenario for the heavy metal content per kg DM or per kg-
total P
[mg/kg]
P,Ca salt DM
P,Ca salt, P
Cd
2,0
13,7
Pb
69,5
486,5
Ni
17,8
124,9
Zn
1517,6
10623,7
Cu
820,2
5741,5
A sensitivity analysis was made in EASETECH, by changing the parameters
by 0.1. To see the detailed results, see appendix ﬁgures 19, 20, 21, 22. The most
sensitive in relation to GWP was Ca-P salt, followed by the overall consumption
of electricity, P-acid (1.68), slaked lime (0.67) and cement mortar (0.58). This
means that a 10% change in the input gives the largest impact to the carbon
footprint for these parameters.
For the sensitivity analysis in the scenario of the P-salt produced without nitric
acid, the overall electricity use returned a sensitivity of -1.0. In this scenario,
the total impact of GHG was -289.9 kg CO2-eq and the emissions from the use
of electricity for the overall process was 291.0 kgCO2-eq. This means that if
electricity is changed by -10% it would make the same change of a factor -1.0
to the overall impact, also changing the value of the total impact by -10%, that
is a factor 1 of the same magnitude. Therefore reducing the impact with -10%
from electricity use, means a total reduction for the scenario on -10% as well.
Therefore a factor of +/- 1 indicates an overall reduction or increase by the
39
==PAGE:41==
same change that was used as a sensitivity input.
6
Discussion
The foundation for this assignment is the tracking of elements in the anolyte,
catholyte and treated ash mass ﬂows to create an inventory. This inventory
reveals what is consumed of mass and energy and what is produced of products,
which may substitute raw material and avoid emissions from new extraction of
resources.
With a mass of 13%, the most abundant element is calcium, which is esti-
mated to cross the cation exchange membrane into the catholyte. The disso-
lution of calcium is known from the average dissolution rate, which was found
to be more than 90% (Lisbeth M. Ottosen, Gunvor M. Kirkelund, and Jensen,
2021). There were no measurements in a two compartment cell with electrodi-
alytic separation of SSA. The estimation of the migration of Ca2+ across the
cation exchange membrane was used from a study on a ﬂuid from treated SSA
by sulphuric acid producing bacteria across a 3-chamber cell setup (Semerci,
Kunt, and Calli, 2019). The separation eﬃciency of Ca2+ into the catholyte
was 98% and the authors did their testing to resemble experiments made in
(Lisbeth M. Ottosen, Jensen, and Gunvor M. Kirkelund, 2014), which was the
original 3-cell design used by the inventors of the 2 chamber cell. From the
estimation building on these results is most likely that Calcium ions migrate
into the catholyte. There has been no past research into the catholyte prod-
uct consisting of Calcium and its composition, although the catholyte product
containing calcium has been approximated in this thesis by the help of Clean
Matter and Gunvor M. Kirkelund from DTU.
The variation of the content of calcium and phosphorous can inﬂuence the
mass of product being made. A phosphorous content of an average of 8.1 % as
used in this thesis, gave a substitution beneﬁt of 278 kg CO2-eq saved. If the
input is changed to the lowest min value in the German survey of SSA (Kr¨uger,
Grabner, and Adam, 2014) at 3.6%, the substitution will give a reduction of
-124 CO2-eq, while for the max P-content of 13.1 % a reduction in GWP will
be -453 kg CO2-eq per ton ash treated. Calcium had an average mass of 12.7%
with a substitution value for hydrated lime of 184 kg CO2-eq. At a min concen-
tration of Ca in SSA at 6.1% the carbon savings is 93 kg CO2-eq. and at the
40
==PAGE:42==
max concentration from the German survey of 37.8 % the substitution of a lime
product would be 573 kg CO2-eq. saved. These variations in composition works
ﬁne when creating two separate products, but if there is a shortage of calcium
or phosphorous, there is a risk of not being able to precipitate the P-Ca salt,
and production has to be changed. Therefore, the variation in composition has
a great impact on GWP analysed theoretically, but technically a variation in
elements may make production diﬃcult, or even uneconomic.
The use of cement for mortar production is the default use for the remain-
ing ash. 1000 kg of SSA ash was used as cement for mortar production, this
would give a calculated CO2 saving of 258 kg per ton ash. Although technically,
the amount of calcium is high, which may lower the quaility of the material,
and thus its value for substitution. If 1000 kg of SSA was used as a replace-
ment of 1000 kg of ﬂy ash brick, this would in ecoinvent create a savings of
528 kg CO2-eq. To relate this to output of 567 of treated SSA ash: Ash used
for cement-mortar gives a reduction of 258 CO2-eq., while ash for ﬂy ash brick
production gives a saving 301 kg CO2-eq. Therefore potential other uses of the
treated ash, and the untreated ash, should not be forgotten, as this also has po-
tential for substitution in building material. Although the phosphorous would
be lost, if untreated ash was used in building materials without being treated.
Regarding the use of HNO3, the experiments by Kirkelund uses nitric acid to
keep the heavy metals suspended in the catholyte. Clean matter is considering
to let pH remain high in the catholyte, in order to save the cost of adding HNO3,
which is included as scenarios in this thesis. The resistivity measured in voltage
use in relation to pH was investigated in electrodialytic separation of sewage
sludge ash (Lisbeth M. Ottosen, Gunvor M. Kirkelund, and Jensen, 2021). The
pH was lowered across time to counter the production OH with the addition
of HNO3 in the catholyte chamber. It was found, that at the start of the ex-
periment pH was high and there was a high use of voltage. At the end of the
experiment, even though that pH spiked several times during the experiment,
voltage use stabilised at a low level even when high pH was observed. The au-
thors thought that this stabilisation was due to the electricity being carried by
ions that had migrated into the catholyte. Therefore, there is some indication
that voltage use may stabilise independent of pH if there is enough electrolytes.
The amperage is constant so voltage is important for overall electrical use of
the whole separation process. Whether the saved cost of not using HNO3 in
41
==PAGE:43==
the catholyte, means an increased energy use in a continuous operation has to
be tested. If it does, it would mean that the overall result in GWP has to be
recalculated for the scenarios. Another issue that may arise from keeping the
catholyte alkaline is that there can be precipitation of heavy metals and possible
calcium (Lisbeth M. Ottosen, Gunvor M. Kirkelund, and Jensen, 2015) but this
may be solved by ﬁltration.
A process that may increase the emissions of greenhouse gas drastically of
the electrodialytic separation, is the production of methane and carbon dioxide
at the cathode (Almeida et al., 2020). If it is assumed that there is 2% carbon
in SSA that half of it reaches the catholyte and this becomes gas, this is 10 kg
of C to CO2 = 37 kg CO2. If the carbon reacts and become methane, this is 13
kg CH4, which is 364 kg CO2-eq. In addition, hydrogen gas has a GWP around
12 times CO2 (Sand et al., 2023). If the gas is not used in a fuel cell, this could
have a potential impact of 30 kg CO2-eq per ton ash treated. Therefore further
investigations has to be made into the gas created at the cathode, in order to
make estimate potential impacts and uses for the gas. In addition, at the anode
there may be some production of Cl-gas besides O2 Magro et al., 2019, which
could pose a potential health hazard.
From the results it is evident, that the use of electricity is the largest net
carbon burden with an emission of 290 kg CO2-eq per ton SSA. If it is assumed
that in the scenarios where there is no use of HNO3 in the catholyte but there
is a higher resistance, and this gives an increase in energy of 10%. This result in
an increase of 29 kg of CO2-eq. An increase of 29 kg for the two scenarios with-
out the use of nitric acid, means that all the scenarios are almost equal in total
GWP at around -270 to -250 kg CO2-eq. Therefore an increase of resistance in
the catholyte, followed by an increase in electrical energy required, could skew
the results to an equal or worse impact than using HNO3.
As a rule, the larger the climate beneﬁt is when substituting something,
the larger the carbon footprint is of the production of the thing being replaced.
The electricity grid and heavy industry is changing, although the heavy industry
often relies on heavy and energy intensive solid fuels, and will therefore most
probably become de-carbonised slower than the electrical grid. In Denmark the
use of renewable sources has changed the composition of the electrical grid to a
lower carbon intensity. In the year 2000, the carbon intensity was 500 g CO2-
eq/kWh. Today it is below 200 gCO2-eq/kWh (Energinet, 2023). Energinet
42
==PAGE:44==
estimates a carbon intensity of 3.5 gCO2-eq/kWh for the Danish electrical grid
by 2032 (Energinet, 2023). In comparison windmills on land emits 11 gCO2-
eq/kWh across their lifetime with the current production practices IPCC, 2015.
If the electricity used for the overall EDS process emitted 11 gCO2-eq/kWh
instead of 200 g, this would result in a reduction from 290 kg of CO2-eq, to 16
kg CO2-eq. Therefore, the use of electricity low carbon sources, could reduce
the overall impact signiﬁcantly, and increase the total savings of the system.
The production of hydrate lime has a big reduction in global warming poten-
tial as a substitution for new hydrated lime. As it was calculated, the catholyte
product would exceed heavy metals limits for Danish regulations, which could
mean the product is not marketable. Regarding the nitrogen content, if it is
assumed that hydrated lime is spread on ﬁelds, it could pose a risk of adding
too large amount of nitrogen to the soil. A ﬁeld with neutral pH requires 500
kg of hydrated lime per hectare per annum (PCC Group Product Portal, 2023).
The elemental N contained in 210 kg of Ca(OH)2 is 8 kg from the nitric acid,
which means that there would be 20 kg of N added per hectare, when adding
hydrated lime. For most crops this is more then below half of the required ni-
trogen per hectare, so it will not add an excess amount of nitrogen to the land
(Finch, Samuel, and Lane, 2014). If the heavy metals is deemed problematic
in the lime, and the 271 kg hydrated lime mix is landﬁlled, under the same
conditions for buildings landﬁlls for heavy metals, this will give an impact of
78 kg CO2-eq. If the cathode precipitated Cu and Zn is landﬁlled at the same
conditions, this will emit 0.26 kg CO2-eq as opposed to the copper concentrate
substitution, that gives a climate savings of 1.6 kg CO2-eq. The metals of Al,
Mg and Fe are not assumed to have any agricultural risk, although extraction of
these from the anolyte and catholyte could provide some beneﬁt, if the metals
could be separated from the hydrated lime ore phosphoric acid.
7
Conclusion
An emerging technology for the electrodialytic separation of sewage sludge ash
for the recovery of the critical resource phosphorous, was assessed. In collabo-
ration with one of the inventors of the original patent of the technology, Gunvor
M. Kirkelund from the Danish Technical University, and the company Clean
43
==PAGE:45==
Matter that is upscaling the technology, it was estimated how this technology
could operate on a larger scale by a material ﬂow analysis, which was used to
estimate the climatic impact.
In order to track the ﬂows of elements through electrodialytic separation of
SSA, results from experiments were used from three scientiﬁc papers, one re-
port and one patent application-description made by one, or more authors of the
original 2-chamber cell invention. One additional paper was used to estimate
the ﬂow of calcium across ionic membranes in an similar electrodialytic cell. It
was found, that 80% of the total phosphorous was extracted into the anolyte,
90% of the calcium from the ash migrated into the catholyte and that more
than 80% of the iron remained in the ash. More than 60% of Cd, Pb and Ni
remained in the ash, while 50% of Cu and Zn was extracted into the catholyte.
Of the heavy metals in the catholyte, around half of the Cu and Zn deposited
on the cathode under acidic conditions, with around 200 g Cu and 600 g Zn
deposited per ton SSA treated.
To go from experimental data and tracking of single elements to a larger
technological scale, Clean Matter shared their developments for a setup with a
10 L anolyte and a 70 L catholyte chamber. With the collaboration of Clean
Matter and Gunvor M. Kirkelund, a material ﬂow analysis was established with
a functional unit of an input of 1000 kg sewage sludge ash being treated by
electrodialytic separation. Four scenarios were analysed for the electrodialytic
separation of sewage sludge ash: One scenario produced phosphorous acid (85%
w/w) and calcium hydroxide without consuming HNO3, and one scenario used
HNO3 and also produced H3PO4 and Ca(OH)2. The last two scenarios pro-
duced a Ca-P-Salt, one of these scenarios used HNO3 and the other did not.
From these four scenarios inventories of the inputs and outputs were made.
It was assumed that an average P content of 8.1 %, and a Ca-content of 12.7 %
was present in the SSA. When the product was phosphoric acid, an anolyte liq-
uid with a total mass of 270 kg, containing 230 kgH3PO4 (85%) was produced,
and from the catholyte about 235 kg precipitate with 210 kg Ca(OH)2. If HNO3
had been use in the catholyte, this weight was kg 270 kg of catholyte product
due to the extra nitrate. Chemically precipitating phosphoric acid by calcium
hydroxide from the catholyte, yielded a 545 kg salt while using HNO3, and 510
kg salt was produced without HNO3.
For the produced salt, 450 kg, was a
calcium phosphate salt, with the largest impurities being sulfate compounds,
44
==PAGE:46==
or nitrate compounds if nitric acid was used. For all four scenarios 567 kg of
treated ash was produced per ton ash. 2.5 kg of hydrogen gas was generated
at the cathode, that was assumed used in a fuel cell for electricity production.
Per ton treated ash, 20 gram of NaNO3 was consumed, 60-100 kg of water, and
around 1500 kWh of electricity was consumed. A mixture of 800 g of heavy
metals residue on the cathode was extracted, with 600 g of Zn and 200 g of Cu.
The phosphorous containing fertiliser products were within the requirements
of total heavy metal concentration per kg total-P, although no conclusion was
reached on Hg concentrations.
The lime catholyte produced were exceeding
heavy metal concentrations per kg dry matter for application on land. There-
fore further processing may be needed in order to comply with regulations for
the use of calcium hydroxide.
Overall it is recommended that further mea-
surement on the ﬂows in the ﬁnished technology is conducted, since an early
technological assessment of material ﬂows and energy is uncertain, due to the
stage of development for the technology.
From the estimated mass ﬂows of treating 1000 kg of SSA, an climatic im-
pact assessment was made. The scenario with the lowest climatic impact was
production of phosphoric acid and hydrated lime, with no addition of nitric
acid to the catholyte. The total impact in this scenario was a CO2 reduction
of 307 kg, which is due to the avoided production of H3PO4, Ca(OH)2 and ce-
ment mortar. The scenario with relatively highest GWP, was when producing a
calcium-phosphate salt, with the use of nitric acid in the catholyte. The impact
was 255 kg of CO2-eq saved per ton SSA treated, due to the value of substi-
tution of avoided new production of material. This means that all scenarios
resulted in savings of GHG emissions, due to the replacement of products that
emit more GHG in the process, than what it is replaced by from electrodialytic
separation of sewage sludge ash.
In order to improve the accuracy of results from the climatic assessment on
electrodialytic separation of sewage sludge ash, future work should focus the
composition of extracted products, and the production of acid, base and gas. If
the outputs are proven to have a high quality, they can substitute high quality
products, and when it is known what Ca-P salt is precipitated this is a more
speciﬁed marketable product. If there is a high production of gas containing
carbon, this may mean an increase of GHG emissions. Further measurements is
important on these factors, although the ﬂow of phosphorous is well established.
45
==PAGE:47==
References
Adam, Christian (2013). “Heavy metal removal from sewage sludge ash by ther-
mochemical treatment with polyvinylchloride”. In: Environmental Science
and Technology 47.1, pp. 563–567. issn: 15205851, 0013936x. doi: 10.1021/
es300610e.
Almeida, Joana et al. (2020). “Electrodialytic hydrogen production and critical
raw materials recovery from secondary resources”. In: Water (Switzerland)
12.5. issn: 20734441. doi: 10.3390/W12051262.
Blengini, Gian Andrea, Cynthia EL Latunussa, and Umberto Eynard (2020).
Study on the Eu’s list of critical raw materials - Critical raw materials fact-
sheets. September, pp. 4–23. isbn: 978-92-79-72119-9. doi: 10.2873/11619.
url: https://op.europa.eu/en/publication-detail/-/publication/
7345e3e8-98fc-11e7-b92d-01aa75ed71a1.
Bowen, C.E. (1943). “The production of hydrogen and oxygen by the electrolysis
of water”. In: Journal of the Institution of Electrical Engineers - Part I:
General 90.35, pp. 474–485. doi: 10.1049/ji-1.1943.0092.
Britannica (2023). Phosphorus, Deﬁnition, Uses,
Facts. url: https://www.
britannica.com/science/phosphorus- chemical- element (visited on
07/20/2023).
Brunner, P H and H Rechberger (2016). Practical Handbook of Material Flow
Analysis. Advanced Methods in Resource & Waste Management. CRC Press.
isbn: 9780203507209. url: https://books.google.dk/books?id=LSiVFMTgvLgC.
Chemical Book (2023). Phosphorous acid — 13598-36-2. url: https://www.
chemicalbook.com/ChemicalProductProperty_EN_CB6700409.htm (vis-
ited on 07/14/2023).
Dhir, Ravindra K., Gurmel S. Ghataora, and Ciar´an J. Lynn (2017). Sewage
Sludge Ash Production, pp. 25–67. isbn: 9780081009871. doi: 10.1016/
b978-0-08-100987-1.00003-2.
Donatello, S. et al. (2010). “E↵ect of milling and acid washing on the pozzolanic
activity of incinerator sewage sludge ash”. In: Cement and Concrete Com-
posites 32.1, pp. 54–61. issn: 09589465. doi: 10.1016/j.cemconcomp.2009.
09.002. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cemconcomp.2009.09.002.
Ecoinvent (2023). System Models. url: https://ecoinvent.org/the-ecoinvent-
database/system-models/ (visited on 07/19/2023).
46
==PAGE:48==
Eilkaer, Thomas and Nicolas Bygballe (2023). Personal communication , corre-
spondance on email and meetings. Clean Matter, Fuglebjerg, Denmark.
Energinet (2023). Større produktion af el i 2022 – men mindre udledning af CO2.
url: https://energinet.dk/om-nyheder/nyheder/2023/07/04/storre-
produktion-af-el-i-2022-men-mindre-udledning-af-co2/ (visited on
07/19/2023).
European Union (1999). “Council Directive 1999/31/EC on the landﬁll”. In:
Oﬃcial Journal of the European Communities 10, pp. L182/1–19. issn: 0144-
557X. doi: 10.1039/ap9842100196.
Finch, H J S, A M Samuel, and G P F Lane (2014). “4 - Fertilisers and
manures”. In: Lockhart
Wiseman’s Crop Husbandry Including Grassland
(Ninth Edition). Ed. by H J S Finch, A M Samuel, and G P F Lane.
Ninth Edition. Woodhead Publishing Series in Food Science, Technology
and Nutrition. Woodhead Publishing, pp. 63–91. isbn: 978-1-78242-371-3.
doi: https://doi.org/10.1533/9781782423928.1.63. url: https://
www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/B9781782423713500047.
Guedes, Paula et al. (2016). “Valorisation of ferric sewage sludge ashes: Potential
as a phosphorus source”. In: Waste Management 52, pp. 193–201. issn:
18792456. doi: 10.1016/j.wasman.2016.03.040. url: http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/j.wasman.2016.03.040.
IPCC (2015). “AR5 SYNTHESIS REPORT (LONG) Climate Change 2014”.
In: pp. 1–167. url: https://www.ipcc.ch/.
Kappel, Annemette et al. (2018). “Utilisation of Electrodialytically Treated
Sewage Sludge Ash in Mortar”. In: Waste and Biomass Valorization 9.12,
pp. 2503–2515. issn: 1877265X. doi: 10.1007/s12649-018-0215-z. url:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s12649-018-0215-z.
Keeble, Brian R. (1988). “The Brundtland Report: ’Our Common Future’”. In:
Medicine and War 4.1, pp. 17–25. issn: 07488009. doi: 10.1080/07488008808408783.
url: http://www.un-documents.net/our-common-future.pdf.
Kirkelund, Gunvor M. (2023). “Personal communication, correspondance on
email and meetings.” In.
Kirkelund, Gunvor M. et al. (2019). “Comparison of two- and three-compartment
cells for electrodialytic removal of heavy metals from contaminated mate-
rial suspensions”. In: Journal of Hazardous Materials 367.September 2017,
47
==PAGE:49==
pp. 68–76. issn: 18733336. doi: 10.1016/j.jhazmat.2018.12.063. url:
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhazmat.2018.12.063.
Kr¨uger, Oliver, Angela Grabner, and Christian Adam (Oct. 2014). “Complete
survey of German sewage sludge ash”. In: Environmental Science and Tech-
nology 48.20, pp. 11811–11818. issn: 15205851. doi: 10.1021/ES502766X/
SUPPL_FILE/ES502766X_SI_001.PDF. url: https://pubs.acs.org/doi/
full/10.1021/es502766x.
Kumar, Mahendra et al. (2013). “Recent developments in ion-exchange mem-
branes and their applications in electrochemical processes for in situ ion
substitutions, separation and water splitting”. In: Separation and Puriﬁca-
tion Reviews 42.3, pp. 187–261. issn: 15422119. doi: 10.1080/15422119.
2012.690360.
Kumar, Manish, Tyler Culp, and Yuexiao Shen (2016). “Water desalination: His-
tory, advances, and challenges”. In: Bridge 46.4, pp. 21–29. issn: 07376278.
Lima, Ana T. et al. (2022). “Screening dilute sources of rare earth elements for
their circular recovery”. In: Journal of Geochemical Exploration 238.March,
p. 107000. issn: 03756742. doi: 10.1016/j.gexplo.2022.107000. url:
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gexplo.2022.107000.
Magro, C. et al. (2019). “Exploring hydrogen production for self-energy genera-
tion in electroremediation: A proof of concept”. In: Applied Energy 255.Septem-
ber, p. 113839. issn: 03062619. doi: 10.1016/j.apenergy.2019.113839.
url: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apenergy.2019.113839.
Milewski, Jaroslaw, Giulio Guandalini, and Stefano Campanari (2014). “Model-
ing an alkaline electrolysis cell through reduced-order and loss-estimate ap-
proaches”. In: Journal of Power Sources 269, pp. 203–211. issn: 03787753.
doi: 10.1016/j.jpowsour.2014.06.138. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.
1016/j.jpowsour.2014.06.138.
Nutriman.net (2021). Calcium phosphate from sewage sludge ash by ”Ash2Phos”
process (ID: 448) — NUTRIMAN. url: https://nutriman.net/farmer-
platform/product/id_448 (visited on 07/23/2023).
Nwaka, Solomon (2021). Social and Technological Innovation in Africa. isbn:
9789811601552. doi: 10.1007/978-981-16-0155-2.
Ottosen, Lisbeth M, Henrik K Hansen, et al. (1996). “Elektrokinetisk Rensning
af Tungmetalforurenet Jord”. In: Vintermøde Om Grundvandsforurening,
pp. 353–364.
48
==PAGE:50==
Ottosen, Lisbeth M, Gunvor Marie Kirkelund, and Arne Villumsen (2006).
“Electrodialytic removal of Cd and Cu from sediment from Sisimiut Har-
bour”. In: Greenlandic Environment, pp. 71–77.
Ottosen, Lisbeth M., Pernille E. Jensen, and Gunvor M. Kirkelund (2014).
“Electrodialytic Separation of Phosphorus and Heavy Metals from Two
Types of Sewage Sludge Ash”. In: Separation Science and Technology (Philadel-
phia) 49.12, pp. 1910–1920. issn: 15205754. doi: 10.1080/01496395.2014.
904347. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/01496395.2014.904347.
Ottosen, Lisbeth M., Pernille E. Jensen, and Gunvor M. Kirkelund (2016).
“Phosphorous recovery from sewage sludge ash suspended in water in a
two-compartment electrodialytic cell”. In: Waste Management 51, pp. 142–
148. issn: 18792456. doi: 10.1016/j.wasman.2016.02.015. url: http:
//dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.wasman.2016.02.015.
Ottosen, Lisbeth M., Pernille E. Jensen, Gunvor M. Kirkelund, and Benjamin
Ebbers (2015). “Electrodialytic separation of heavy metals from particulate
material. (Patent No. WO2015032903)”. In: 12, p. 2015.
Ottosen, Lisbeth M., Gunvor M. Kirkelund, and Pernille E. Jensen (2013).
“Extracting phosphorous from incinerated sewage sludge ash rich in iron
or aluminum”. In: Chemosphere 91.7, pp. 963–969. issn: 18791298. doi:
10.1016/j.chemosphere.2013.01.101. url: http://dx.doi.org/
10.1016/j.chemosphere.2013.01.101.
Ottosen, Lisbeth M., Gunvor M. Kirkelund, and Pernille E. Jensen (2015).
Miljøstyrelsen- Udvinding af fosfor fra slamaske med elektrokemisk teknik.
1702, p. 71. isbn: 9788793352100. url: https://www2.mst.dk/Udgiv/
publikationer/2015/04/978-87-93352-10-0.pdf.
Ottosen, Lisbeth M., Gunvor M. Kirkelund, and Pernille E. Jensen (2021). Re-
covery of Phosphorous from Sewage Sludge Ash Prior to Utilization as Sec-
ondary Resource in Concrete and Bricks. Vol. 35. Rscc. Springer Interna-
tional Publishing, pp. 305–315. isbn: 9783030765439. doi: 10.1007/978-3-
030-76543-9_28. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-76543-
9_28.
PCC Group Product Portal (2023). Liming a Field: How Much Lime Per Hectare?
url: https://www.products.pcc.eu/en/blog/liming-a-field-how-
much-lime-per-hectare/ (visited on 07/20/2023).
49
==PAGE:51==
Raymond, Nelly Sophie et al. (2019). “Biotic strategies to increase plant avail-
ability of sewage sludge ash phosphorus”. In: Journal of Plant Nutrition
and Soil Science 182.2, pp. 175–186. issn: 15222624. doi: 10.1002/jpln.
201800154.
Retsinformation (2018). Bekendtgørelse om anvendelse af a↵ald til jordbrugs-
form, BEK nr 1001 af 27/06/2018˚al. url: https://www.retsinformation.
dk/eli/lta/2018/1001 (visited on 07/21/2023).
Rey, C. et al. (Jan. 2011). “Bioactive Ceramics: Physical Chemistry”. In: Com-
prehensive Biomaterials 1, pp. 187–221. doi: 10.1016/B978-0-08-055294-
1.00178-1.
Rye Ottosen, Anita et al. (2022). Alternativ udnyttelse af spildevandsslam. Miljopro-
jekt Nr. 2203. isbn: 978-87-7038-415-5.
Sand, Maria et al. (2023). “A multi-model assessment of the Global Warming
Potential of hydrogen”. In: Communications Earth Environment 4.1, p. 203.
issn: 2662-4435. doi: 10.1038/s43247-023-00857-8. url: https://doi.
org/10.1038/s43247-023-00857-8.
Sang, Tongzhou, Xuejie Cao, and Lifang Jiao (2022). PEM water electrolysis for
hydrogen production: fundamentals, advances, and prospects. doi: 10.1007/
s43979-022-00022-8. url: https://doi.org/10.1007/s43979-022-
00022-8.
Semerci, Neslihan, Busra Kunt, and Baris Calli (2019). “Phosphorus recovery
from sewage sludge ash with bioleaching and electrodialysis”. In: Inter-
national Biodeterioration and Biodegradation 144.March, p. 104739. issn:
09648305. doi: 10.1016/j.ibiod.2019.104739. url: https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.ibiod.2019.104739.
Smol, Marzena (2019). Phosphorus extraction and sludge dissolution. Elsevier
Inc., pp. 657–677. isbn: 9780128159071. doi: 10.1016/B978-0-12-815907-
1.00028-3. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-815907-
1.00028-3.
Sohn, Hong Yong et al. (2014). Copper Production. Vol. 3, pp. 534–624. isbn:
9780080969886. doi: 10.1016/B978-0-08-096988-6.00027-4.
Suezwaterhandbook.com (2023). Drying sludge unit energy consumption - De-
gremont®. url: https://www.suezwaterhandbook.com/processes-and-
technologies/dewatered- sludge- treatment/drying/drying- unit-
energy-consumption (visited on 07/19/2023).
50
==PAGE:52==
U.S. Geological Survey (2022). Mineral commodity summaries 2022. English.
Tech. rep. Reston, VA, p. 202. doi: 10.3133/mcs2022. url: http://pubs.
er.usgs.gov/publication/mcs2022.
51
==PAGE:53==
8
Appendix
8.1
Distribution of elements after electrodialytic separa-
tion of sewage sludge ash
Figure 10: Distribution of tracked elements from elemental analysis based on
the data from the 6 papers, see table 3
8.2
Limits on heavy metals in soil
Table 14:
Heavy metals limits not to be exceeded by fertiliser or organic
material applied on land in Denmark (Retsinformation, 2018)
mg per kg DM
mg per kg P
Cd
0.8
100
Hg
0.8
200
Pb
120
10,000
Ni
30
2,500
Cr
100
-
Zn
4,000
-
Cu
1,000
-
52
==PAGE:54==
8.3
GWP for the 4 scenarios
Table 15: P-acid-HNO3, GWP per product or process
Name
ReCiPe2016 - GWP
Unit
kg CO2-eq
Sum
-270.4
Electricity for overall EDS process
291.0
HNO3 50%
34.9
Electricity for water evaporation by drying
12.1
Electricity for distillation
12.1
Water use
0.4
NaNO3
0.07
Copper concentrate substitution
-1.6
H2 to Electricity
-10.1
Substitution of mortar
-147.0
Hydrated lime substitution
-183.6
P-acid (85%) substitution
-278.8
Table 16: P-acid, GWP per product or process
Name
ReCiPe2016 - GWP
Unit
kg CO2-eq
Sum
-307.1
Electricity for overall EDS process
291.0
Electricity for distillation
12.1
Electricity for water evaporation by drying
10.1
Water use
0.7
NaNO3
0.07
Copper concentrate substitution
-1.6
H2 to Electricity
-10.1
Substitution of mortar
-147.0
Hydrated lime substitution
-183.6
P-acid (85%) substitution
-278.8
53
==PAGE:55==
Table 17: P-salt-HNO3, GWP per product or process
Name
ReCiPe2016 - GWP
Unit
kg CO2-eq
Sum
-255.0
Electricity for overall EDS process
291.0
HNO3 50%
35.0
Electricity for water evaporation by drying
8.1
Water use
0.4
NaNO3
0.07
Copper concentrate substitution
-1.5
H2 to Electricity
-10.1
Substitution of mortar
-147.0
Calcium-Phosphate substitution
-430.8
Table 18: P-salt, GWP per product or process
Name
ReCiPe2016 - GWP
Unit
kg CO2-eq
Sum
-289.7
Electricity for overall EDS process
291.0
Electricity for water evaporation by drying
8.1
Water use
0.7
NaNO3
0.07
Copper concentrate substitution
-1.6
H2 to Electricity
-10.1
Substitution of mortar
-147.0
Calcium-Phosphate substitution
-430.8
54
==PAGE:56==
8.4
Sensitivity analysis
Table 19: Sensitivity analysis P-acid-HNO3.
Parameter name
ReCiPe2016-GWP
All
-270.433
cement mortar
0.54354874367643491
concenentrate Cu
0.00090896091741968091
concenentrate Zn
0.0048386445139436572
el-distillation
-0.044830012967683276
el overall process
-1.0759203112244511
H2el
0.037358344139742719
HNO3
-0.12916412414502676
lime
0.67895826306611773
P acid
1.0308489968332624
drying of water
-0.044830012967683276
wateruse
-0.001470463661159197
Table 20: Sensitivity analysis P-acid.
Parameter name
ReCiPe2016 - GWP
All
-307.38385186397676
cement mortar
0.47820836457625132
concenentrate Cu
0.00079969408234479872
concenentrate Zn
0.0042569876330304564
el-distillation
-0.039440965386475832
el overall process
-0.946583169275603
H2el
0.032867471155405156
lime
0.59734020982237712
NaNO3
-0.00021733274845124519
P acid
0.90692990948047592
water use
-0.0012936981839301866
55
==PAGE:57==
Table 21: Sensitivity analysis P-salt-HNO3.
Parameter name
ReCiPe2016- GWP
All
-254.99622917868317
Ca-P-salt
1.6893852302975207
cement mortar
0.57645373647473663
concenentrate Cu
0.00096398698966761219
concenentrate Zn
0.0051315631615169634
e overall lprocess
-1.141053660356911
H2el
0.03961991876239318
HNO3
-0.13698337609665434
NaNO3
-0.00026198260881848425
Drying of water
-0.031695935009915431
Water use
-0.0015594816135377238
Table 22: Sensitivity analysis P-salt.
Parameter name
ReCiPe2016 - GWP
All
-289.92647354349521
Ca-P-salt
1.4858486639420394
cement mortar
0.507002783500442
concenentrate Cu
0.000847846160227896
concenentrate ZN
0.0045133141516355488
el overall process
-1.0035798977767252
H2el
0.034846524228352875
NaNO3
-0.00023041903189870234
Drying of matter
-0.027877219382681909
water use
-0.0013715957913937597
56
