==PAGE:1==
M.Sc.Eng. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Sleep Spindle Detection and Characteri-
zation using Deep Learning
Marius Jonika
Kongens Lyngby 2023
==PAGE:2==
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Technical University of Denmark
Matematiktorvet
Building 303B
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Summary
Sleep spindles, which occur during the N2 sleep stage [60], are characterized by signals
in the frequency range of 9-15 Hz and can be observed in an EEG signal. Research
has demonstrated a connection between sleep spindles and memory consolidation, as
well as mental illnesses such as schizophrenia [90, 48, 60].
Accurately identifying
sleep spindles can significantly enhance our understanding of their relationship with
the human body.
The objective of this project was to utilize the DETR (DEtec-
tion TRansformer) model for sleep spindle detection, comparing its performance to
previously proposed methods [37, 31]. Furthermore, the study aimed to analyze the
relationship between sleep spindle characteristics and various human attributes, in-
cluding age, sex, and mental diseases. The findings revealed that the modified DETR
model achieved similar accuracy to the previously suggested methods in sleep spindle
detection. Moreover, the models under investigation were employed to detect anno-
tations in data provided by the Psychiatry Center of Copenhagen. The predicted
spindles were characterized and subjected to further examination.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This Master thesis was prepared at the department of Applied Mathematics and
Computer Science at the Technical University of Denmark in fulfillment of the re-
quirements for acquiring a Master of Science degree in Human-Centered Artificial
Intelligence.
Kongens Lyngby, June 23, 2023
Marius Jonika
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
Conducting the project was diﬀicult and took a lot of effort and time. Even though
the learning curve was steep, I learned a lot along the way. For that and the con-
tinuous support I would like to thank my thesis supervisors, Alexander Neergaard
Zahid and Morten Mørup. Without their assistance this thesis would not have been
completed.
Finally, I must express my gratitude to my family and friends. They provided me
with encouragement throughout my process writing this Master thesis.
Sincere, Thank you
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Summary
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
Contents
vii
1
Introduction
1
2
Neuroscience Theory
5
2.1
Electroencephalography . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Sleep Spindles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2.1
Relationship with age
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.2.2
Relationship with sex
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.2.3
Relationship with mental diseases
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3
Deep Learning Theory
13
3.1
Fundamentals of Neural Networks
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.1.1
Basic building blocks of Neural Networks
. . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.1.2
Training of neural networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.2
Neural Network architectures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.2.1
Convolutional Neural Networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.2.2
Residual Neural Networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.2.2.1
Residual mapping and residual connections . . . . . .
24
3.2.3
Transformers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.2.3.1
Theory of the transformer model . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.2.3.2
Attention . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.2.3.3
Encoder . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3.2.3.4
Decoder . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.2.3.5
Positional encoding
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4
Dataset description and usage
33
4.1
DREAMS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.2
MASS dataset . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
==PAGE:10==
viii
Contents
4.3
MODA dataset . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
4.4
Psychiatry Center of Copenhagen data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
4.5
Data processing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
5
Related Work
45
5.1
A7 algorithm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
5.2
Slim U-Net trained on MODA (SUMO)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
5.2.1
Model architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
5.2.2
Training and Tuning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
5.2.3
Results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
6
Methods
51
6.1
Detection Transformer (DETR) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
6.1.1
Loss function . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
6.1.2
Model architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
6.1.3
Model training . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
6.2
Conditional DETR . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
6.2.1
Changes to architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
6.2.2
Training and results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
6.3
Experiments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
6.3.1
Replicating previous work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
6.3.2
Applying DETR variants to sleep spindle detection . . . . . . .
60
6.3.3
Characterizing detected sleep spindles . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
7
Results and discussion
65
7.1
Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
7.1.1
Replicating SUMO . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
7.1.2
Experiments with DETR variants
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
7.1.3
Validation of different architectures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
70
7.1.4
Spindle characterization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
72
7.2
Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
73
8
Conclusion and Future work
77
8.1
Conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
77
8.2
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
78
9
Appendix
79
Bibliography
85
==PAGE:11==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
The human body is a complex system that is still only partially understood today. It
is a very interconnected network, where the condition of one part or one system of the
body can be indicative of the overall state of a person. For example, the microbiota–
gut–brain axis [14] is a two-way network between the gut and the brain. Imbalances
in gut microbiota have been linked to mental health conditions like anxiety. Sleep
can also be indicative of the human condition. The connection between insomnia and
depression was analyzed in [8]. Huge parts of our lives are spent on sleep as it is essen-
tial for well-being. Consequently, a better understanding of sleep and the processes
that take place during it is of great interest. Sleep spindles are brainwave patterns
that mostly occur during the second stage of Non-REM sleep. The signals oscillate
at around 9 to 15 Hz frequency range and last from about half to two seconds. It
has been shown in previous research [48, 60], that there is a connection between sleep
spindles and memory consolidation, intelligence, and mental diseases. Annotation of
sleep spindles is usually done by qualified sleep technicians. Sleep spindles are visible
in EEG (electroencephalography) recordings and are marked by hand. This is a tiring
and time-consuming process, which can easily lead to human mistakes. Additionally,
the definition of a spindle is not very precise, so deviations in the markings of experts
exist.
The issue was tackled in the scientific publication of the large open-source
dataset MODA (Massive Online Data Annotation) [38]. Three groups were recruited
for the marking of sleep spindles: PSG technologists, researchers and non-experts.
Each annotation could be marked with either ”high”, ”medium” or ”low” confidence.
The markings were combined for each group and were kept if the confidence scores
of the annotations were higher than the group consensus threshold. The value of the
threshold is a parameter that was tuned in the study. The approach is referred to as
”the wisdom of the crowd” effect [85]. It helps to alleviate the problem of disagree-
ment and increases the quality of the annotations. The annotated biosignals came
from another dataset MASS (Montreal Archive of Sleep Studies) [58]. The recent
appearance of large public datasets is a sign of the Age of Big Data [46]. Together
with the availability of larger datasets comes the possibility to train more complex
models. Deep learning is a subdomain of machine learning, which gained great pop-
ularity in research, industry and the general public. The appearance of models such
as ChatGPT shows how much potential the field has and how much interest it gen-
erates. Convolutional neural networks shook up the world in 2010 [35] when they
were used for ImageNet [16] classification. Since then they were applied to many
==PAGE:12==
2
1 Introduction
different domains and this is no different for the task of spindle detection. In [31] the
SUMO (Slim U-Net trained on MODA) model is proposed, which is mainly based on
convolutional layers, which extract features from EEG data in several layers. SUMO
beats previously suggested methods for sleep spindle detection and achieves state-of-
the-art performance (F1 = 0.82). As it is stated in its name SUMO is trained on
the previously mentioned MODA dataset. This is proof that the recent appearance
of such large open-source datasets allows for the development of more sophisticated
models.
In this Master’s thesis project, we are interested in utilizing such datasets and de-
veloping methods, which could potentially help improve the performance of sleep
spindle detection. The previously mentioned ChatGPT model depends on the highly
popular and promising transformer models, which utilize attention modules for cap-
turing dependencies between different elements of sequences [82]. This showed to be
highly successful in sequence-to-sequence tasks such as text processing [17]. However,
transformers were also applied for different tasks such as object detection. DETR
(DEtection TRansformer) [12] is a model which combines a transformer and a pre-
trained Residual network [27] to classify the large-scale image dataset COCO [43].
It showed a unique approach towards the problem and demonstrated state-of-the-art
performance. Interestingly, spindle detection could also be formulated as object de-
tection. From this, the goal of this project is to investigate if it is possible to utilize
DETR for sleep spindle detection. The project follows a structure, where first the
clinical background information (chapter 2) and deep learning background informa-
tion (chapter 3) are presented so that the fundamentals to understand the methods
are provided. Afterwards, the data considered in this project is given in chapter 4,
which includes deeper explanations of MODA and MASS datasets. The methods of
the project are explored in chapter 6. These are trained and evaluated on the golden
standard of MODA. Additionally, the models explored in this project will be applied
to data provided by the Psychiatry Center of Copenhagen. The detected spindles
can then be characterized similarly to how it was done in research [90, 48, 60]. The
results of the conducted experiments are given in chapter 7. The findings and future
work are discussed in the final chapters of the thesis project. The code used in this
project can be found in [49, 50, 51, 52].
Research questions
• Can a detection transformer (DETR) model designed for image data,
be used for 1D EEG data?
The model in [12] was designed to be used with image as input. This means, that
the backbone of the model needs to be redesigned. This makes the data loading
stage more troublesome, but better model performance can be expected since
==PAGE:13==
1 Introduction
3
feature extraction will be performed on the rawest version of the data. This
means that information loss is prevented by not modifying the data type.
• How does the modified transformer model compare with other ap-
proaches of sleep spindle detection?
The redesigned model will be evaluated on a publicly available dataset and
on data from the Psychiatry Center of Copenhagen.
Metrics used in other
recent papers [87, 84] will be used here as well.
• What are the different characteristics of sleep spindles for different
groups of people?
The hypothesis is that people of different ages, sex or mental condition have
differences in sleep spindle characteristics such as spindle density, reduced spin-
dle duration and amplitude [48]. Can the difference be spotted when detecting
spindles in MODA and the data from the Psychiatry Center of Copenhagen?
==PAGE:14==
4
==PAGE:15==
CHAPTER 2
Neuroscience Theory
The objective and the data of this thesis project are very much related to neuroscience.
In this chapter, we will briefly explore what is EEG data, how it is recorded and what
are sleep spindles.
2.1
Electroencephalography
The brain is made out of a huge number of neurons that are interconnected. They
communicate with each other to carry out every conscious and subconscious task.
This is done through electrical and chemical signals. The electrical impulses can be
measured through procedures such as MEG, PET, EEG and others. Here we will
be discussing the in and outs of EEG (Electroencephalography) [73]. An example
of an EEG headset is shown in Figure 2.1. The main component of the device is
its’ electrodes, which are usually placed according to the 10-20 system as shown in
Figure 2.2.
The numbers 10 and 20 refer to percentages of the distance between
anatomical locations on the scalp. Nasion and Inion are used for front-back, while
the two preauricular points are used for left-right. The anatomical locations and the
first electrodes are separated by 10 percent of the total distance both vertically and
horizontally. This is visualised in Figure 2.2. Each of the remaining electrodes is
separated by 20 percent of the total distance for both front-back and left-right. The
naming of the electrode placement follows from the location of the brain that is cov-
ered. These are: Fp (pre-frontal or frontal pole), F (frontal), C (central line of the
brain), T (temporal), P (parietal), and O (occipital) [77]. The letters are followed
by either the letter z, which follows from ’zero’ and indicates the midline location, or
by numbers, where odd numbers represent electrodes in the left hemisphere and even
numbers represent electrodes in the right hemisphere. The numbers increase when
going away from the midline. The 10-20 system is recommended by the International
Federation of Societies for Electroencephalography and Clinical Neurophysiology [45]
and is commonly used in clinical and research settings, which ensures consistency.
Each electrode of the EEG headset measures the fluctuations of voltage that occur as
neurons fire. This way the recorded EEG signal can provide information about the
time and location of brain activity. Because of this, it can be used to study brain
function and to diagnose neurological disorders [22]. It is common to transform the
EEG signals into the frequency domain. Different frequency bands can be derived
==PAGE:16==
6
2 Neuroscience Theory
and used in further analysis. These frequency bands usually have different charac-
teristics. For example, in emotion recognition, the bands represent emotional states
such as meditation, relaxation, concentration and learning [20].
In recent years,
Figure 2.1: An EEG headset [1]
Figure 2.2: Visualisation of the 10-20 electrode placement system [77]
Brain-Computer Interfaces (BCIs) have gained significant attention in both public
and research domains [86, 39, 29]. BCIs enable direct communication between the
brain and external devices, such as computers, prosthetic limbs, drones, and other
electronic devices. For instance, an EEG headset can record brain electrical activity
while attempting to control the cursor in a computer’s operating system. A BCI can
then be developed that responds to this electrical activity and performs the desired
actions. Although the field is still in its infancy, it holds tremendous potential. EEG
==PAGE:17==
2.2 Sleep Spindles
7
offers a non-invasive means to create such technologies, meaning that no surgery is
required to record electrical activity. This is beneficial as it is easier to set up and use.
However, the side effect is the high signal-to-noise ratio because the skull separates
the electrodes from the actual electrical activity. An additional benefit of EEG is
high temporal dimensionality. This is true because the data is usually recorded at
high frequencies.
2.2
Sleep Spindles
Sleep spindles are a type of brainwave pattern that occurs at 9-15 Hz frequency and
last from about half to two seconds. They originate from a brain region referred to
as the thalamus, which is shown in Figure 2.3. Sleep spindles are the most prominent
during the non-rapid eye movement sleep (NREM) or more specifically during the
N2 sleep stage [60, 7]. Sleep spindles are visible in EEG recordings and are usually
Figure 2.3: A visualisation of the brain and location of thalamus
manually annotated by qualified sleep technicians. An example of an annotation can
be seen in Figure 2.4. Research shows that sleep spindles have an important role
Figure 2.4: An annotation of a spindle from MASS dataset[38]
in memory consolidation and learning [48, 60]. Research also shows that there is
a relationship between different sleep characteristics and some physiological traits.
==PAGE:18==
8
2 Neuroscience Theory
These traits can be age, sex or the presence of mental disorders such as schizophrenia
[90, 48, 60].
2.2.1
Relationship with age
A relationship between sleep spindles and age was shown in several research articles
[90, 60, 38]. Figure 2.5 shows the main spindle characteristics and how they change
when people get older. A longitudinal study was conducted [90] where three cohorts
were assembled and the subjects participated for at least four years. The subjects
were kids between the ages of 6 and 18. As it can be seen in Figure 2.5 the frequency
of sleep spindles tends to get higher with age. To be more precise, the frequency is
around 11.5 Hz for kids of age 6 and approaching 13 Hz for kids of age 18. Note, the
variance is fairly high for cohort C6, which consisted of the youngest subjects. It can
also be seen that the spindle density peaked at around age 15 with around 4.8 spindles
per minute. The density was considerably lower for younger subjects. Sleep spindle
duration drops from around 925 milliseconds to around 875 milliseconds for ages 6
and 18, respectively. The age and amplitude relationship is interesting. It seems
that it is similar for subjects of age 6 to 12. However, at around age 12 amplitude
values showcase a sharp decrease. The authors of [60] studied spindle relationships
with age as well. 11630 subjects from ages 4 to 97 were analysed. In Figure 9.1
it is shown that spindle frequency increases from childhood until young adulthood.
Here spindle density seems to peak around age 15 and then drops as people get older.
Additionally, it was found that duration and amplitude also decrease with age. These
findings from [60] are in line with what was shown in [90]. A decrease in density,
duration and amplitude was also shown in [38]. The specific values can be found in
Table 2.1.
2.2.2
Relationship with sex
Different scientific studies showed that males and females tend to have different spin-
dle characteristics. In [67] it was shown that boys and girls have different maturational
trajectories. 904 subjects were analyzed from age 6 to age 22. For example, from child-
hood into early adulthood, females had more constant levels of spindle density and
sigma power, while males underwent more maturational alterations. Similarly it was
shown in [90] that boys have a delayed but significantly larger decline in peak through
amplitude compared to girls. The authors of [60] found that females tend to higher
spindle density values and higher variation in values. Table 2.1 shows comparisons
of spindle characteristics for males and females. Females tend to have higher spindle
density, higher amplitude and longer duration.
==PAGE:19==
2.2 Sleep Spindles
9
Feature
Younger
Older
Female
Male
Density (spm)
4.2(2.4)
2.6(2.2)
4.2(2.4)
2.8(2.3)
Duration (s)
0.79(0.14)
0.75(0.16)
0.79(0.14)
0.76(0.16)
Amplitude (µV)
31(7)
26(7)
32(8)
27(6)
Table 2.1: Characteristics of sleep spindles for two different age groups [38]. Median
and standard deviation values are given
2.2.3
Relationship with mental diseases
Researchers also analyzed the relationship between sleep spindles, memory consolida-
tion and neurodevelopmental disorders affecting cognition such as mental retardation
[74], phenylketonuria [15], autism [41] and schizophrenia [83, 48]. Here we mainly ad-
dress the studies that compared patients with schizophrenia and healthy controls.
In [83] PSG was recorded for 21 chronic, medicated schizophrenia outpatients and
17 healthy volunteers. On the second night of recordings, subjects were trained on
the finger-tapping motor sequence task (MST) at bedtime and tested the following
morning. MST is a procedure, where the participants need to input a repeating five-
number sequence (4-1-3-2-4) on a standard computer keyboard using their left hand.
The subjects were asked to alternate tapping and resting every 30 seconds. The num-
ber of correct sequences per trial was used as the primary metric, which reflects the
participant’s speed and accuracy.
Practice-dependent improvement and overnight
improvements were defined. The former is expressed as a percentage of the increase
in correct sequences from the first three training trials to the average of the last three
training trials. The latter, similar to the former, measures the increase in correct
sequences per trial when the last three training trials are compared to the first three
test trials the following morning. The results of the study showed that the patients
and the control group showed comparable practice-dependant improvement. However,
the overnight improvement differed significantly being much lower for subjects with
schizophrenia. Interestingly, the average sleep spindle amplitude, duration and peak
frequency did not differ significantly between the two groups (less than 3 percent).
The distribution of spindles was also similar, with the most spindles detected at the
central recording. On the other hand, schizophrenia patients exhibited a reduced
number of sleep spindles (36 percent reduction) and reduced density (38 percent re-
duction). Additionally, patients had reduced power in the low-frequency sigma band
(12-14 Hz) compared to the control group. It was found in [83] that spindle number
and spindle density correlated with overnight improvement in the MST task. The con-
trol group showcased no correlation between the number of spindles and a negative
correlation for spindle density. However, this was mostly driven by a single outlier.
In the scientific paper, it was concluded that the observed sleep spindle abnormalities
implicate thalamocortical network dysfunction in schizophrenia.
Additionally, the
abnormalities implicate impaired sleep-dependant memory consolidation.
==PAGE:20==
10
2 Neuroscience Theory
((a)) Spindle density for group with
schizophrenia and healthy control
((b)) PSD for schizophrenia patients and control
group. Darker line indicates control.
Figure 2.6: Sleep spindle characteristic differences for patients with schizophrenia
compared to a healthy control group [83]
A similar study was conducted in [48] where antipsychotic-naïve adults newly di-
agnosed with psychosis, young non-psychotic first-degree relatives of schizophrenia
patients and two samples of healthy controls were matched to the patients and rel-
atives. The patients’ group consisted of 15 people diagnosed with schizophrenia, 4
with major depression, 2 with delusional disorder, 2 with schizoaffective disorder, 2
with bipolar disorder and 1 with NOS. The relative group consisted of 17 children
and 2 siblings.
None of them were taking any antipsychotic drugs.
Additionally,
13 of the relative group were diagnosed with a lifetime history of other disorders.
Spindle characteristics and cognitive performance were evaluated for every group. It
was found that spindle density differs significantly between the healthy control group
and both patients with schizophrenia and the relative group. However, for spindle
amplitude significant differences were only found between people with schizophrenia
and the healthy control group. Additionally, it was found that cognitive performance
correlates with spindle density and amplitude. The study concluded that schizophre-
nia patients and antipsychotic-naïve early course schizophrenia patients and young
non-psychotic relatives of individuals with schizophrenia have reduced sleep spin-
dle activity. These findings indicate that spindle deficit may predate the onset of
schizophrenia and persist during the illness. On top of that, it may be a heritable
trait that contributes to cognitive dysfunction.
==PAGE:21==
2.2 Sleep Spindles
11
Figure 2.5: Spindle characteristics and their relationship with age [90]
==PAGE:22==
12
==PAGE:23==
CHAPTER 3
Deep Learning Theory
In the following section, we will cover the basic building blocks of neural networks,
different architectures, training of models and some relevant practicalities for when
dealing with deep learning.
3.1
Fundamentals of Neural Networks
3.1.1
Basic building blocks of Neural Networks
The human brain, probably the most complex organ, enables us to effortlessly per-
ceive and perform instinctive tasks like seeing and hearing. It has played a vital role
in humanity’s remarkable achievements. Yet, despite extensive studies, we still have
much to learn about its inner workings. This organism consists of billions of neurons
that collaborate to analyze data and accomplish various tasks. According to cognitive
science, when a person sees something, such as a human face, visual data is captured
by the eyes and transmitted through the optic nerve to the brain. Through a contin-
uous process of abstraction, the data is transformed into understandable information.
This abstraction involves recognizing basic elements like lines, circles, and squares,
which gradually form into more understandable features, such as a nose or lips, in
the case of face recognition.
In the second half of the 20th century computer scientists and neuroscientists came
together to create something powerful by mimicking the behaviour of human brains
[53]. The goal for this algorithm was to hopefully solve problems at the same level as
humans do it. What came out as a result was artificial neural networks. However, at
that time it could not be utilized, mainly because of the lack of computing power [72].
Another reason could be the lack of algorithms, but in the 1980s a Renaissance of
the field was in the making and discoveries were made [71, 30] but even then neural
networks were not used in practice. The situation is different nowadays. Besides the
increased computing capabilities, the appearance of big data also drastically helps
with the training of neural networks.
Deep learning algorithms outperform tradi-
tional ML methods and are often found used in industry. It is worth noting that the
field could not be where it is today without the work done in the last century. So-
phisticated models can only be built because of the strongly developed fundamentals,
==PAGE:24==
14
3 Deep Learning Theory
which will be explored here. A network, similar to a brain, consists of small singular
units as shown in Figure 3.1. So the unit receives some input, in Figure 3.1 these are
Figure 3.1: Unit from a neural network [57]
variables x1,x2 and x3. Note, that this is just an example. The unit could receive
any number of inputs. The incoming data is multiplied by weight variables, which
we try to learn through out the model training. The multiplication is summed and
the resulting equation is called the activation of the unit (neuron) and is shown in
Equation 3.1.
Σj wjxj
(3.1)
The above equation is the quintessential part of a neuron. One of the first versions of
an artificial neuron, the Perceptron, was invented by Frank Rosenblatt in 1958 [69].
The behaviour was modelled similarly to the human brain. This means that when
the activation of the neuron exceeds some threshold the neuron will be activated and
will thus ’fire’.
The activation of a neuron is the product of the incoming inputs
and the weight parameters Equation 3.1. The threshold value is closely connected
to a value referred to as bias. This parameter can either be explicitly written out
as a part of the equation Equation 3.2 or it can be a part of the weights. In the
latter case, one of the inputs to the neuron will need to be just the number one.
This input is then multiplied with some weight, which serves the purpose of the bias
parameter, and summed together with other products. The bias parameter can offset
the threshold for which a neuron is activated. However, if no bias parameter is used,
then the threshold for a neuron’s activation will be equal to zero. So if a perceptron
is activated, it means that the value of Equation 3.1 was higher than zero. And if the
value is lower or equal to zero, the opposite is true. This operation can also be viewed
from a different perspective. If the sign of Equation 3.1 is positive, then the neuron
is activated. Similarly, the opposite is true when the sign of Equation 3.1 is negative.
The sign-checking can be viewed as a so-called activation function. This activation
function can also be referred to as the step function.
Building a network out of
neurons, which utilize the step function as its activation can be quite limiting since a
single unit can only output two different values. It was not until the 1980s that other
activation functions were utilized to build artificial neural networks [10]. For example,
the logistic function was used since it was computationally eﬀicient to evaluate and
differentiate. The output of a neuron then becomes a scalar, so it provides the model
with the ability to model more complex relations. There are many more activation
==PAGE:25==
3.1 Fundamentals of Neural Networks
15
function options to choose from. Some of these are shown in Figure 3.2 and more can
be found in [78].
output =
(
0
if w · x + b ≤0
1
if w · x + b > 0
(3.2)
So a unit or a neuron is a single part of the whole complex system that a neural
Figure 3.2: Different activation functions [4]
network is. A neural network can have millions or even billions of these small parts
working together. But a simple model can be created out of less with just a few
layers. See Figure 3.3 for how a basic neural network might look like. In case the
model is made out of perceptron neurons it will be referred to as a MLP (Multi
Layer Perceptron) network. However, sometimes the term is used to describe any
neural network, which is built out of neurons utilizing Equation 3.1 but with any
activation function (not necessarily a threshold/step activation). Let’s say a bunch
of neurons are connected in several different layers and a model is created, which can
look similar to Figure 3.3. We discussed how a single neuron functions but how does
the model work as a whole? The terminology in the image is probably confusing
for someone, who is unfamiliar with deep learning. However, it closely ties into the
nature of ML (machine learning). In this thesis work, we are mostly working with
supervised ML methods. This means that to train a model the data needs to have the
input (information) and the output (results/labels). The complex system learns how
to get the desired output from the given input. Note, this is different from computer
programs, where the developer provides the instructions for how to operate on the
given inputs. It can be said that ML models learn these instructions themselves by
analysing the relationships between the data and the results. After some model is
==PAGE:26==
16
3 Deep Learning Theory
Figure 3.3: Architecture of a neural network[57]
trained the instructions/program can be used to process any other data similar to
training data. To go back to Figure 3.3 the model has an input layer, where the data
is received, the hidden layers and the output layer, where the final computations of
the model are computed. The hidden layers can be of any size, while the first and last
layers of the model are usually a single layer each. Deep learning networks typically
have these three components, even if they are not always explicitly discussed in the
research. For a single neuron, we used Equation 3.1 as the mathematical expression.
In a neural network, the same concept applies, but since a unit is connected to every
unit in the upcoming layer, the inputs x become the output of a neuron from a
previous layer, except for the input layer, where the input is the raw data. A unit is
connected to every unit in the next layer, and each connection has its’ own parameters.
3.1.2
Training of neural networks
In the training process of a neural network, data is fed into the input layer and passes
through the model, where calculations are made at each layer and each neuron until
it reaches the output layer. This process is called forward propagation. If the output
matches the desired result, then the model is performing well. However, this is usu-
ally not the case during training. To improve the model’s performance, its outputs
are compared to the desired results using a loss function, which measures the incor-
rectness of the model’s predictions. The backpropagation algorithm then adjusts the
weights and biases of each unit in the network, starting from the output layer and
working backwards, to reduce the loss.
The definition of correctness depends on the specific task the neural network is de-
signed to perform, and is expressed mathematically through the loss function. There
are many types of loss functions available, ranging from simple ones like the mean
squared error Equation 3.3 for regression problems and cross-entropy for classification
tasks to more complex ones like the dice loss [75] or Wasserstein loss [5]. Some models
==PAGE:27==
3.1 Fundamentals of Neural Networks
17
may require specially-designed loss functions to address unique challenges. For ex-
ample, we will explore some of these more complex loss functions later in this report.
Additional examples of loss functions can be found at [79].
MSE = 1
n
n
X
i=1
(Yi −Ti)2
(3.3)
To evaluate the performance of a neural network, its output is compared to the given
ground truth. In the case of the mean squared error (MSE) loss function, the differ-
ence between the output Yi and the target Ti is squared and averaged over all outputs
to compute the loss value. When the output and target values are very different, the
loss function results in a high value and the opposite is true when they are close. The
loss function is calculated for each forward pass of the network. The output of a
model depends on many different neurons and their weights and biases. By adjusting
these parameters, the loss value can be minimized, which corresponds to improved
prediction capabilities. Minimizing the loss function can be thought of as finding the
lowest point on a complex function, like a valley. The location of the minimum point
corresponds to the selection of the best parameter values to achieve the best possible
prediction accuracy. For example, to better explain the idea we are minimizing a
function that depends on two parameters and resembles the one shown in Figure 3.4.
The goal is to reach the minimum by adjusting the function parameters. To do that
Figure 3.4: Visualisation of a cost function [57]
the direction and the step of the movement need to be known. In other words, the
goal is to find the slope of the function and move in the opposite direction of it in
appropriate step sizes, so that the minimum would be reached. The same concept can
be shown in two dimensions as in Figure 3.5. In the case when the slope is positive,
we have to move left. If it is negative then we have to move to the right. This is
==PAGE:28==
18
3 Deep Learning Theory
Figure 3.5: An example of a 2 dimensional function showing local minima [56]
done continuously in backpropagation in order to reach some minimum. Most of the
time it will be a local minimum. This is because reaching a global minimum can be
very diﬀicult since a function’s plane most of the time will have valleys/local mini-
mums and only of them is the global minimum. The theory that was just described
can be applied to higher dimensional functions. To find the direction of movement
multivariate calculus is utilized. A gradient of a function will give us the value of
the direction of the steepest increase, so following that will increase the value of the
function. On the other hand, the negative of the gradient will provide us with the
direction to decrease the value of the function. This computation of gradients and
adjustment of weights and biases to move towards the minimum is called gradient
descent and is constantly done throughout model training. The process of adjusting
the model parameters to achieve lower loss is referred to as optimization. The are
other functions for optimization besides gradient descent, such as SGD (Stochastic
gradient descent), Adam, Adagrad and many more, which can be found in [80]. SGD
is widely used and a natural question can arise.
What is the difference between
gradient descent and stochastic gradient descent? Gradient descent carries out op-
timization using the full dataset. This can become problematic when working with
big datasets, big models or both. Even though technology has advanced at a rapid
pace, memory limitations still happen and will continue to do so. SGD performs a
similar operation to gradient descent but it instead operates on small subsets of the
data, also referred to as batches. This allows us to train complex models with limited
hardware. The negative side of performing optimization on a subset of the data is
randomness. The parameter updates are made based only on limited information, so
the adjustments can be biased towards the given subset. The choice of a batch size
exhibits a trade-off and is a research topic in itself [33]. A bigger subsample of the
dataset means a better estimate of gradients but better hardware is required. Smaller
batch size leads to more eﬀicient computations but less accurate gradients. This is
especially relevant nowadays because of the arrival of big data. As discussed earlier,
==PAGE:29==
3.1 Fundamentals of Neural Networks
19
big data has played a significant role in the progress of neural networks. During the
training process, a neural network learns the relationship between the given inputs
and the given outputs, essentially creating a set of instructions for achieving the de-
sired outputs. Sometimes the relationship between the input and the output is so
complex that it can only be learnt with the availability of huge datasets. But even
when learning simpler instructions the usage of big datasets can aid the model to learn
relationships that are closer to the true representation. Besides this, bigger datasets
can have a better representation of the real world and thus eliminate bias. When a
model is trained the quality of its’ predictions can only be as good as the data enables
it to be. If the data is flawed and does not accurately represent real-world conditions,
then the model will most likely perform poorly when used in practice. This is because
the model will imitate the bias the given dataset has. However, when working with
these big datasets, it is usually impossible to perform a gradient calculation on all
of it at once. That is why the use of other optimizers is necessary to train modern
neural networks.
There are a few more important details and concepts that need to be understood
to perform neural network training. It was mentioned, that to optimize a loss func-
tion a gradient calculation is needed to know the direction of movement and a step
size is needed to know how much to move in the found direction. The step size is
referred to as the learning rate parameter. In practice, the parameter value is usu-
ally between zero and one. Finding the right value can be a diﬀicult task. A higher
value can make the function step over minimum points and overshoot. This way the
parameters would be adjusted but it would be impossible to reach an optimal value
because we would be moving around the desired point. However, if a low learning
rate is chosen, then the function might be stuck in local minima. This a problem
if there exist some other local minimums, which would produce a smaller loss value.
These could not be reached because there might be some ’hills’ around the current
local minima and the learning rate could be too small to overcome these ’hills’.
Let’s say that we successfully trained a model and achieved a satisfactory loss value.
Then we take our model and try to use it in the real world on some unseen data.
However, the network performs terribly and is not able to make accurate predictions.
This is most likely due to the model over-fitting to the given training data [26]. This
means that while our model was learning the relationship between the input and the
ground truth it also learnt the relationship between some underlying noise, which
might come from measurement noise or some natural ambiguity of the data, and the
wanted output. When the model is utilized on some new unseen data the relationship
between the noise and the output becomes harms the performance of the model. This
is why it is important to have two subsets of data when training a neural network.
One of them is a training subset, from which the model learns the relationships be-
tween the input and the output. The other subset is the validation data. This is used
to estimate the performance of the model on unseen data. It is done after the whole
training subset was utilized for development. A single pass of the training and vali-
==PAGE:30==
20
3 Deep Learning Theory
dation subsets is referred to as an epoch. In practice, when training neural networks
a single epoch is usually not enough for the model to have satisfactory performance.
Ten, hundred or even more might be needed for complex neural networks to learn
optimal parameter values.
3.2
Neural Network architectures
We have learnt how neural networks are built and trained on a fundamental level.
The theory is useful to know for everyone interesting in deep learning.
However,
many problems today are tackled using more sophisticated neural networks. There
is a huge amount of different architectures built on top of the ideas described in the
previous section. But in the following chapter we will cover the one’s that are used
in this master thesis project.
3.2.1
Convolutional Neural Networks
CNN (Convolutional Neural Network) is one of the most popular and iconic archi-
tectures seen in deep learning.
The architecture was and is still mostly used for
computer vision tasks [32]. But it can also be used for time series data processing
[70]. This model is especially eﬀicient for the former use case because of how it is
designed. Fundamentally it works similarly as described in the previous section. The
network is made up of neurons which are interconnected with each other and each
connection has some parameters. Again, these parameters are adjusted with the help
of backpropagation. However, on a higher level CNNs work best on data that is grid
structured and exhibits spatial dependencies [4]. This is true for image data, which
also features translation invariance. This means, that no matter where in the image
the object is located it does not change. This will be better understood when the op-
erations of CNN are described in detail. An example of a CNN is shown in Figure 3.6.
Figure 3.6: An visualisation of a CNN [3]
A typical CNN consists of convolutional layers, pooling layers, activation layers and
fully connected layers. This is also true for Figure 3.6. The latter two we have already
==PAGE:31==
3.2 Neural Network architectures
21
described and they operate in the same fashion in CNN’s. The former two will be
discussed here. A convolutional layer applies the convolution operation and calcu-
lates the output of neurons connected to a localized area called the receptive field.
Whereas, the pooling layer performs a pooling operation, which also downsamples the
received input. Out of these, as the name of the network suggests, the most important
part of the network is the convolutional layer. Because of its design, it works great
for image processing. The structure is able to detect different abstractions of pixels
throughout the network. Remember, it was mentioned previously that a neural net-
work similar to the human brain relies on abstraction. Pixels become lines, and then
these become shapes, which then are abstracted to some more complex ideas, which
sometimes but not always make sense to people. When visualising the pixel patterns
for a convolutional neural network, some interesting things can be seen. Figure 3.7
Figure 3.7: Visualization of fully activated output neurons
shows images, which are fed to a CNN to fully activate its neurons. This shows a
neural network’s ability to make abstractions. More details can be found in [81].
Local receptive fields is another feature unique to CNNs that make them special.
When a convolution operation is performed some part of the input, which is usually
much smaller than the input itself, is connected to a neuron in the next layer. The
size of the local region involved in the calculations is determined by the kernel size,
which is the height and width or just the width if the convolution is one-dimensional.
An example of a kernel and its application is shown in Figure 3.10. The kernel is
moved across the input data with a stride parameter that determines the step size. If
the input data does not neatly fit the convolution operation, padding can be added
using a parameter that specifies the number of filler values to be used. During the
convolution operation, element-wise products are computed between the receptive
field and the kernel. The results are then summed to generate a single value in the
output array. It’s worth noting that the output array is smaller than the input array,
==PAGE:32==
22
3 Deep Learning Theory
as convolutional layers downsample the data during the feature extraction process.
See Figure 3.8 for a visualization of this process. Besides this, the use of local recep-
tive fields reduces the number of computations to perform because the model only
operates on sections of the input. The use of convolutions on a given input produces
((a)) First convolution
((b)) Second convolution
Figure 3.8: Process of a convolutional layer [57]
a so-called feature map or depth slice. The number of produced feature maps for
a convolutional layer is another parameter that is chosen when creating neural net-
works. A number of feature maps might be desired because each of them can capture
a different feature representation of the input. When a convolutional layer produces
a depth slice all of the incoming feature maps are utilized. This is also true when an
image is provided as input because it is common to have images represented using the
RGB channels. Here lies another trick that makes CNNs eﬀicient. In a convolutional
layer, the parameters used to produce a feature map are shared. This is derived from
the assumption that if an extraction of a feature is useful at some coordinates (x1, y1)
then it should still be relevant in the position of (x2, y2). For example, in Figure 3.9
three feature maps are produced from the input. This means that three different
sets of parameters will be used, one per map. This greatly reduces the number of
parameters used in the model [23].
Figure 3.9: Production of feature maps [57]
A concept that was not described yet is called pooling layers, which are a unique
tool used mostly in CNNs. Understanding their basic functionality is essential to
grasp the full capabilities of these networks. In essence, pooling layers concentrate
features and downsample input data. They are typically used after data has been sent
==PAGE:33==
3.2 Neural Network architectures
23
Figure 3.10: Convolution operation [64]
through convolutional layers. The motivation for using pooling layers is to reduce
dimensionality, improve computational eﬀiciency, and enhance model performance.
Pooling layers summarize information in a neighbourhood of pixels or input values,
which reduces the number of parameters in the model and makes it more eﬀicient.
Additionally, pooling can improve generalization and prediction capabilities by in-
creasing the receptive field of neurons, which enables them to ”see” a larger region of
the input. There are several types of pooling layers, including max-pooling, average
pooling, minimum pooling, and adaptive pooling. The size of the affected region for
a pooling layer is determined by a kernel size parameter, and the operation applied
to the affected region depends on the type of pooling layer selected. For example, in
the case of max-pooling, the output will be the largest value found in the receptive
field. For a visualization of this process, refer to Figure 3.11.
Figure 3.11: Max-pooling operation visualised [23]
3.2.2
Residual Neural Networks
RNNs (Residual Neural Networks) are widely known and used models mainly utilized
for the tasks of image classification, object detection and segmentation. The original
paper [27] is one of the most influential and cited papers of deep learning. The authors
addressed several persisting problems regarding deep neural networks. One of the
problems is referred to as vanishing/exploding gradients [9, 24]. This occurs during
backpropagation where the gradients, which are computed recursively by multiplying
the gradients of each layer, become very small (in the case of vanishing gradients)
==PAGE:34==
24
3 Deep Learning Theory
or very large (in the case of exploding gradients). Both cases are a problem. For
the former, weight updates become so small, that they are ineffective and for the
latter the training becomes unstable. Another issue tackled in [27] is referred to as
the degradation problem. What this means is that when building deeper and deeper
networks at some level of deepness the accuracy of the model will get saturated.
However, if the model is made deeper, it will be seen that the performance of the
deep neural networks drops and the issue is not caused by overfitting. The authors
of [27] explore this issue in detail in their paper.
3.2.2.1
Residual mapping and residual connections
Let’s say we have the task of enhancing the quality of a given image.
This task
is also referred to as super-resolution. A neural network is then given a low-quality
image as the input and a higher-quality version of the same image as the label/ground
truth. It can be formulated that the model has to learn the mapping H(x), where
x is the image input. What is H(x) doing? It is basically adding some details to
the given input. We will get those said details if we subtract the high-quality image
from the low-quality image as shown in Figure 3.12. The authors of [27] argue that it
actually might be easier for the model to learn the difference between the two images
F(x) := H(x) −x, also called the residual, than to learn the mapping H(x). This is
especially true if the input to the model is equal to the ground truth. In that case,
the model learns that the residual is zero and the input itself is returned. Then the
Figure 3.12: Residual in super resolution [63]
task of super-resolution is solved in such a way, that the model learns the residuals
F(x) to which the input x is added. This is implemented in practice by utilizing the
so-called shortcut connections or residual connections. This is shown in Figure 3.13,
where the input is sent through some neural network layers and a residual connection.
The layers could either be convolutional or linear. After the input x is processed
by the network layers the output F(x) is added together with the input x, which
arrives from the residual connection. With the help of these layers, very deep neural
networks can be built. The authors explored models with even 1000 layers. A more
”normal” architecture can be seen in Figure 3.14, where the model consists of 34 layers
and for every two layers a residual connection is created. Interestingly, some of the
connections are marked as dotted lines. These indicate special connections, which
are needed to match the dimensionality of the layer output that x is added to. This
==PAGE:35==
3.2 Neural Network architectures
25
can be done by adding padding or manipulating the number of feature maps using
convolutional layers with a kernel size of 1x1. To return to the building block of
residual neural networks as shown in Figure 3.12 different structures were explored in
[28]. Interestingly, the more improved version of the block only had a minor change
and that was the repositioning of the ReLU (Rectified linear unit) activation. Instead
of applying it after the summation of F(x) and x, the activation function was applied
only on F(x) before the addition.
Figure 3.13: Residual block [27]
3.2.3
Transformers
Since the recent rise of deep learning, there have been a handful of scientific papers,
which are highly influential on the field. The researchers behind these papers de-
scribed architectures such as the AlexNet model, Deep Q-Networks, GAN’s, ResNet’s
and Transformers [35, 55, 25, 27, 12]. From the title of this section, it can be under-
stood that the focus will be on the latter. Since their development transformers have
been taking over the world of deep learning. Especially with the rise of the ChatGPT
model, which was developed by OpenAI and released in November of 2022 for public
use. This model is one of the most complex models developed. According to [11] the
GPT-3 model released in 2020 has 175 billion parameters. This network was trained
on a large amount of text data from a large number of sources such as books, websites
and scientific papers using unsupervised learning techniques [11, 61]. Working with
text is a strong suit of the transformer architecture as shown by models like GPT,
BERT and T5 [61, 17, 62]. The model is designed to process input sequences, which
do not need to be text sequences necessarily. The transformer can also accept outputs
from some other models such as CNNs. The computed features are presented to the
transformer as sequences, on which it can operate by design. Naturally, this will be
analysed throughout the report and will be described in detail in the later sections.
In this section, the goal is to understand the fundamentals of the transformed model.
==PAGE:36==
26
3 Deep Learning Theory
3.2.3.1
Theory of the transformer model
The transformer is a fairly complex model, especially when comparing it to the fully
connected neural network described in previous sections. Inspired by other sequence
transduction models, the authors created the model from two main building blocks,
encoder and decoder [82].
The encoder takes the input sequence and encodes it
into a sequence of continuous representations z = z1, ..., zn. The representations are
then decoded by the decoder module, which generates an output sequence of some
symbols one at a time. The model is auto-regressive because at every step previously
generated symbols are used as additional input to the decoder. However, before the
details of the two modules are described, the most important part of the architecture
is addressed - attention.
3.2.3.2
Attention
It was mentioned that the transformer is often used for text processing. At a high
level, when the attention module is provided a sentence, it explores the connection
between some word and the other words in the sentence. As an example, in the English
language ”it” can refer to many different things. However, the attention module is able
to learn what actually ”it” refers to in the given context. Mathematically the model
does not actually work with words (in ML terms referred to as strings). A transformer
is designed, so it operates on numerical representations of words called embeddings.
It is a vector representation of a word in the context of huge text datasets. These
vectors are usually created using unsupervised or self-supervised learning as shown in
[13]. The received word embedding is multiplied by three different learnable matrices
to create the query (Q), key(K) and value(V) vectors.
Note, that this operation
on embeddings only happens in the very first attention layer encountered, which
is located at the start of the encoder. Here we are exploring the scaled dot-product
attention as described in [82]. Let’s first inspect how the calculation of attention works
when using vectors. For example, the score for a word in position 1 is calculated in
the following way. Multiply the Q1 vector with vectors Ki, where i = [1, 2, ..., Slen],
here Slen is the length of the sequence. For every product of Q1 and Ki divide it by
√dk, where dk is the dimension of the key vectors. The result is then passed through
a softmax function, which normalizes the scores, so they add up to one. Then every
vector Vi is multiplied by the respective softmax score and summed up. Finally, we
end up with the attention output for the word at position 1. Note, that there is
also a version of attention called dot-product attention without the scaling of √dk.
However, the division helps with the stabilization of gradients when dk is large [82].
In practice, Q, K and V are matrices for more eﬀicient calculations. The calculation
of attention is written mathematically in Equation 3.4 and shown as a visualisation
in Figure 3.15. It can be hard to understand the operation just by inspecting the
equation and the figure. That is why the process was first inspected when working
in vector form.
==PAGE:37==
3.2 Neural Network architectures
27
Attention(Q, K, V ) = softmax(QKT
√dk
)V
(3.4)
Figure 3.15: Scaled dot-product attention [82]
Scaled dot-product attention is a building block of a more complex structure
referred to as Multi-head attention. The visual representation of it is given in Fig-
ure 3.16. The main advantage of multi-head attention is that it allows the module to
create different representations/features for every head. Consequently, the model is
able to recognize more complex patterns for the given input. So for every head, the
scaled dot-product attention module is utilized. In case we have h different heads, h
different matrices will be output (since matrices are used for calculations). The pro-
cessing of input is done in parallel. These matrices are then concatenated and then
multiplied by a different learnable matrix. The multiplication condenses the features
extracted from the multi-head attention. The mathematical representation of this is
given in Equation 3.5. There W Q
i
∈ℜdmodel×dk, W K
i
∈ℜdmodel×dk, W V
i
∈ℜdmodel×dv
and W O ∈ℜhdv×dmodel. Note, that the input vector is smaller for each head, com-
pared to if multi-head attention was not utilized. More specifically, the input for each
head is of the size dmodel/h. As a result, the computational load is very similar when
using multi-head attention versus when not using it.
MultiHead(Q, K, V ) = Concat(head1, ..., headh)W O
headi = Attention(QW Q
i , KW K
i , V W V
i )
(3.5)
==PAGE:38==
28
3 Deep Learning Theory
Figure 3.16: Multi-head attention [82]
3.2.3.3
Encoder
As mentioned previously a transformer consists of two main building blocks, where
one of them is the encoder. The objective of the encoder is to transform the received
input of symbol representations into a sequence of continuous representations z. In
Figure 3.17 a representation of the encoder part can be seen. A single encoder layer
consists of two sub-layers, the first one is the multi-head self-attention layer (the
naming follows from the fact that the queries, keys and values come from the same
place, either the input or the previous encoder layer) and the second one is a fully
connected neural network.
The output of every sub-layer is then added with the
output of a residual connection, which goes around the respective sub-layer. The
following sum is then normalized. So that’s a single encoder layer, in Figure 3.17
variable N denotes how many of these encoder layers will construct the encoder
module of the transformer.
Figure 3.17: Encoder part of a transformer [82]
==PAGE:39==
3.2 Neural Network architectures
29
3.2.3.4
Decoder
The other part of a transformer model is the decoder. The objective of the decoder is
to process the features returned from the encoder and to also use labels to understand
how the data and the ground truth relate to each other. The visualisation of a decoder
is seen in Figure 3.18. A decoder consists of three sub-layers. The first sub-layer is
the masked self-attention layer, which operates on the embeddings of the given labels
and also on the previous outputs of the decoder module. This is different from a
regular attention layer because it is only allowed to operate on the given position
and the previous positions. This is called masking and together with the offset of
embeddings by a single position it ensures that predictions for a given position can
only depend on the previous predictions. The second sub-layer is a regular attention
module, here the queries (Q) are received from the previous sub-layer (masked self-
attention), while the values (v) and keys (K) are received from the encoder part of
the transformer. The third sub-layer is a fully connected neural network. Similar
to the encoder part, after a pass for every sub-layer the output is summed with the
output of a residual connection, which goes around the respective sub-layer. The sum
is then normalized. Again in Figure 3.18 the variable N denotes how many of these
decoder layers construct the decoder module.
Figure 3.18: Decoder part of a transformer [82]
When the processing of the decoder module is done the output is sent through a
fully connected neural network to transform the received features into a vector. This
==PAGE:40==
30
3 Deep Learning Theory
vector is of the same size as the vocabulary (in case of working with text) or the
number of possible decisions to take for the respective task (could be 0 or 1 in case
of object detection). Then the output of the fully connected network is sent through
a softmax function to produce probabilities. The final output is received by taking
the biggest probability and its respective value (could be a word or a number).
3.2.3.5
Positional encoding
In figures Figure 3.17 and Figure 3.18 the thing that was not addressed was positional
encoding. The goal of this is to allow the model to account for the order of the input
sequence. There are many ways to do it. Learnable encodings is an option, but the
authors of [82] produced the encodings as given in equation Equation 3.6. Here pos
is the position in the sequence and i is the position in the embedding vector. Note,
that the sinusoidal function is used in the case of an even embedding dimension and
the cosinusoidal function is used for the odd dimensions of the embedding. So the
positional encodings result in a vector of size dmodel, which is then added to the
embedding vectors before they are sent to either the encoder or decoder modules.
PE(pos, 2i) = sin(pos/100002i/dmodel)
PE(pos, 2i + 1) = cos(pos/100002i/dmodel)
(3.6)
==PAGE:41==
3.2 Neural Network architectures
31
Figure 3.14: Architecture of a Residual network [27]
==PAGE:42==
32
==PAGE:43==
CHAPTER 4
Dataset description
and usage
4.1
DREAMS
Given in [18] the DREAMS dataset was recorded using a digital 32-channel polygraph.
Eight excerpts of 30 minutes were extracted from whole night PSG recordings and
sleep spindle annotated independently by two experts. Only the first six extracts were
rated by the second expert. The subjects of the PSG recordings had a variety of dis-
eases, including dyssomnia, restless legs syndrome, insomnia, and apnoea/hypopnea
syndrome. Three EEG channels (CZ-A1 or C3-A1, FP1-A1, and O1-A1), two EOG
channels (P8-A1 and P18-A1), one submental EMG channel, and two EMG channels
of the anterior tibialis muscle were recorded. The data was stored using the common
European Data Format (EDF). Recordings were done at frequencies of 200Hz, 100Hz,
or 50Hz. No attempt was made to choose noise-free or decent spindle epochs in order
to accurately reflect reality. More details on each individual recording are given in
Table 4.1. The dataset follows the following format:
• ’excerpt.edf’ contains the PSG recording in EDF (European data format).
• ’excerpt.txt’ contains the name of the channel extracted and then a column of
its respective values in µV . The number of samples depends on the sampling
frequency.
• ’Visual_scoring1_excerpt.txt’ contains the annotations for sleep spindles as
marked by expert 1. Two columns are given, where the first one is the start
of the spindle and the second column provides the duration of spindles, both
values given in seconds.
• ’Visual_scoring2_excerpt.txt’ similar to ’Visual_scoring1_excerpt.txt’ contains
annotations of sleep spindles but here they are scored by expert 2.
• ’Hypnogram_excerpt.txt’ contains a column of integers, which correspond to
sleep stages. They are marked every five seconds according to the Rechtschaffen
and Kales criteria.
==PAGE:44==
34
4 Dataset description and usage
• ’Automatic_detection_excerpt.txt’ contains sleep spindle annotations similar
to ’Visual_scoring1_excerpt.txt’. However, here they are created by algorithms.
Name
Sampling
freq.
Age
Sex
Time
of
the
excerpt
Annotated
channel
Ex1
spin-
dles
Ex2
spin-
dles
excerpt1
100Hz
51
Female
03:15:00
to
03:45:00
C3-A1
52
115
excerpt2
200Hz
40
Male
00:00:00
to
00:30:00
CZ-A1
60
52
excerpt3
50Hz
46
Male
03:30:00
to
04:00:00
C3-A1
5
44
excerpt4
200Hz
31
Male
01:55:00
to
02:25:00
CZ-A1
44
25
excerpt5
200Hz
53
Female
02:15:00
to
02:45:00
CZ-A1
56
86
excerpt6
200Hz
53
Female
03:00:00
to
03:30:00
CZ-A1
72
87
excerpt7
200Hz
41
Female
02:41:40
to
03:11:40
CZ-A1
18
N/A
excerpt8
200Hz
52
Male
05:01:30
to
05:31:30
CZ-A1
48
N/A
Table 4.1: Details for each individual recording of DREAMS
4.2
MASS dataset
The Montreal Archive of Sleep Studies (MASS) is a semi-publicly available dataset,
which was released together with the original publication [58]. It consists of 200 whole-
night polysomnogram (PSG) recordings from 200 subjects.
These were recorded
between 2001 and 2013 in three different laboratories of the Center for Advanced
Research in Sleep Medicine (CARSM), Montreal, Canada.
==PAGE:45==
4.2 MASS dataset
35
The dataset was split into five subsets (SS1 - SS5) according to the research protocols
from which they were gathered. However, SS5 is an exception because it contains
recordings from four research protocols with similar properties. Each subset of the
MASS dataset has varying specifications related to signal acquisition and properties
of PSG recordings as given in Table 4.3 and Table 4.4. For example, it can be seen
that some recordings do not have a notch filter. These tables can also be found in
[58]. Subsets also differ in the amount of EEG, EOG, EMG and ECG channels used.
The electrodes were placed according to the standard 10-20 system. The recordings
were performed at a sampling rate of 256 Hz, providing high temporal resolution
for analyzing brain activity during sleep. EEG montages always include the BASE
16-channel montage with channels C3, C4, Cz, F3, F4, F7, F8, O1, O2, P3, P4, Pz,
T3, T4, T5, and T6. They also might have additional channels, depending on the
subset. Each subset has its own defined inclusion and exclusion criteria and are given
in [58]. Notably, all subjects included in the MASS dataset were healthy controls,
with the exception of 15 individuals in SS1 who were diagnosed with Mild Cognitive
Impairment (MCI) based on neuropsychological evaluation. For SS1, subjects with
apnea/hypopnea index up to 20 are included to allow for testing of tools developed for
this population. Additionally, in SS1 seven subjects with an index of PLMS (periodic
leg movement in sleep) were included to enable validation of PLMS detectors.
Figure 4.1: 30 second excerpt from SS2 of MASS dataset.
1 <Event channel = 'Cz-A1' name = 'SpyndleRMS' scoringType = 'automatic'
groupName = 'spindle' rmsAmp = '12.07' stage = 'Sleep stage 2' frequency
= '12.98' cycle = '2'/>
Listing 4.1: Annotation in MASS dataset
Regarding annotations, we are mostly interested in sleep spindles, which are only
available for the SS2 subset. An excerpt from SS2 is given in Figure 4.1, where the
signal is passed through a 10th-order Butterworth filter of 9-15 Hz and plotted on top
of the non-filtered version of itself. As mentioned section 2.2 sleep spindles occur in
the frequency range of 9-15 Hz, so activity in the filtered signal in Figure 4.1 could be
==PAGE:46==
36
4 Dataset description and usage
Figure 4.2: Age characteristics for MASS
an indication of a sleep spindle. MASS recordings are provided in the European Data
Format (EDF)++ format, which is a substandard of the EDF+ format (this is also a
substandard of the EDF format). As given in [58] a sleep spindle annotation detected
automatically for the ’Cz-A1’ channel during sleep stage 2 of the non-REM cycle with
an RMS (root mean square) amplitude of 12.07µV is given as written in Listing 4.1.
In accordance with EDF+ the biosignals and annotations are saved in separate files,
which share the same name with the suﬀixes ’PSG’ and ’Annotations’, respectively.
Accessibility to MASS varies depending on the type of data needed. Annotations
and basic descriptors are publicly available. However, to access the biosignals and
restricted-access descriptors researchers need to submit a request. The request needs
to prove some aﬀiliation with a hospital, university or research institution. On top of
that, approval from their local ethics review board is required. Notably, access to the
data is generally granted unless there are obvious ethical concerns. Researchers using
the MASS dataset are urged to detail the cohorts and subsets used in their methods
section to aid in comparability and meta-analyses between research. This promotes
transparency and makes research easier to understand and reproduce. Additional
SS1
SS2
SS3
SS4
SS5
Total
Male
34
8
28
14
13
97
Female
19
11
34
26
13
103
Total
53
19
62
40
26
200
Table 4.2: Sex distribution for MASS dataset
information is given in Figure 4.2 (the plot can be viewed as a table in Table 9.1) and
Table 4.2 about the age characteristics and about the sex distribution of the subjects
==PAGE:47==
4.2 MASS dataset
37
of MASS. Spindles tend to have different characteristics based on age and sex as
mentioned in section 2.2, so it is important to know the details of the dataset. For
example, the mean age of the whole cohort (C1) is 40.6 with a standard deviation
of 19.4 for both genders. On top of that, it has 97 male subjects and 103 female
subjects. SS2 has a mean of 23.6 and a standard deviation of 3.7 for both genders. It
is represented by the recordings of 8 males and 11 females.
==PAGE:48==
SS1
SS2
SS3
SS4
SS5
Amplifier
system
Grass Model 15
Grass Model 12
Grass Model 15
Grass Model 12/15
Grass Model 15
Filter
low
cutoff
0.10
Hz
(EOG,
ECG, thermistance,
cannula,
oximetry,
respiratory
belt),
0.30 Hz (EEG) or
10 Hz (EMG)
0.10
Hz
(EOG,
ECG,
thermis-
tance),
0.30
Hz
(EEG)
or
10
Hz
(EMG)
0.10
Hz
(EOG,
ECG),
0.30
Hz
(EEG)
or
10
Hz
(EMG)
0.10
Hz
(EOG,
ECG,
thermis-
tance),
0.30
Hz
(EEG)
or
10
Hz
(EMG)
0.10
Hz
(EOG,
ECG),
0.30
Hz
(EEG)
or
10
Hz
(EMG)
Filters
high
cutoff
30 Hz (EOG, ECG,
thermistance,
can-
nula,
oximetry,
respiratory
belt)
or 100 Hz (EMG,
EEG)
30 Hz (ECG, ther-
mistance) or 100 Hz
(EEG, EOG, EMG)
30 Hz (ECG, EOG)
or 100 Hz (EEG,
EMG)
30 Hz (ECG, ther-
mistance) or 100 Hz
(EEG, EOG, EMG)
30 Hz (ECG, EOG)
or
100
Hz(EEG,
EMG); 60 Hz notch
filter
60Hz
notch
filter
On most recordings
No
Yes
No
On some
Gain
10000
EEG: 20000 EOG:
10000 Chin EMG:
200,
000
Other
EMG:
50,
000
EKG:
variable
2000-5000
10000
EEG: 20000 EOG:
10000 EMG: 20000
EKG: 5000
10000
Acquisition
software
Harmonie 6.2 b FR
Harmonie 5.4
Harmonie 6.2 b FR
Harmonie 6.0a EN-
0
Harmonie 6.2 b FR
Table 4.3: Acquisition characteristics for MASS dataset
==PAGE:49==
SS1
SS2
SS3
SS4
SS5
EEG montage
size
17 or 19 (BASE, Fz,
and
in
some
cases
Fp1, Fp2)
19 (BASE, Fp1, Fp2,
Fpz)
20 (BASE, Fp1, Fp2,
Fz, Oz)
4(C3, C4, O1, O2)
20 (BASE, Fp1, Fp2,
Fz, Oz)
Reference
Most
CLE,
some
LER
CLE
LER
CLE
LER
EOG
2
channels
(left,
right) (256 Hz)
4
channels
(left,
right,
2
channels
(left,
right) (256 Hz)
4 channels (left, right,
up, down) ( 256 Hz)
2
channels
(left,
right) (256 Hz)
EMG
5
bipolar
channels
(anterior
tibialis
right,
anterior
tib-
ialis
left,
3
chin
channels) (256 Hz)
1
bipolar
channel
(chin) (256 Hz)
3
bipolar
channel
(chin) (256 Hz)
1
bipolar
channel
(chin) (256 Hz)
3
bipolar
channel
(chin) (256 Hz)
ECG
1 channel (D −l)
(512 Hz)
1 channel (D-1) (256
Hz)
1 channel (D-l) (512
Hz)
3 channels (D-I, D-II,
D-III) (512 Hz)
1 channel (D-I) (256
Hz)
Respiratory
thermistance
1 channel (32 or 128
Hz)
1 channel (64 Hz)
N/A
1 channel (64 Hz)
N/A
Air flow can-
nula
1 channel (128 Hz)
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
Oximetry
1 channel (256 Hz)
N/A
N/A
1 channel (64 Hz)
N/A
Belt
1 or 2 channels (ab-
dominal
and
some-
times thoracic) (128
Hz)
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
Skin
conduc-
tance
N/A
N/A
N/A
1 channel (finger) (64
Hz)
N/A
Table 4.4: Properties of PSG recordings for MASS
==PAGE:50==
40
4 Dataset description and usage
4.3
MODA dataset
MODA (massive online data annotation) is a large open-source dataset of human-
scored sleep spindles. The authors of [38] utilized crowdsourcing to annotate 5342
spindles, from 180 subjects/recordings. A web-based interface was developed, where
people from around the world were presented with images of 25 seconds long EEG
recordings of the C3 channel. The biosignals from MASS (section 4.2) were used,
where ”blocks” of 115s were randomly extracted from artifact-free stage N2 sleep.
The authors of [38] split the data into two phases based on age with a mean of 24.1
and 62.0, respectively. Three blocks were extracted from 85 subjects of Phase 1 and
65 subjects of Phase 2. Additionally, 10 blocks were extracted in the remaining 15
subjects of each phase. In total almost 24h of EEG data was analyzed. The data
was also passed through a Butterworth band-pass filter of 0.3-30Hz and 10th order.
The recordings were also downsampled to 100Hz. The scorers were first asked to
create a simple profile and note their experience in sleep scoring. Afterwards, they
were presented with instructions on how the interface works and how to score sleep
spindles. The AASM’s (American Academy of sleep medicine’s) spindle criteria were
used to develop these instructions. The scorers needed to draw boxes around each
spindle and rate their confidence in the annotation as ”high”, ”medium” or ”low”.
After completing 10 practice trials with feedback the scoring for MODA would start.
A scorer was presented with a 25s epoch image from some ”set” of 2 blocks at a time.
Note, no scorers viewed the whole dataset.
The annotations were done by three different types of scorers: PSG technologists,
which were presented as experts (exp) in [38], researchers (re), which have experience
in sleep scoring, and non-experts (ne) or ”MTurkers”, which were recruited from Ama-
zon Mechanical Turk. The annotations from each group were aggregated to create
their respective human group consensus. Sleep spindles can be tricky to spot since
other signal features can mimic them. Therefore sleep spindles with only a certain
level of confidence among all scorers had to be kept to create a quality GC (group
consensus). Each annotation was weighted by a confidence score depending on what
the scorer selected (1 for high, 0.75 for medium, 0.5 for low confidence). Then these
scorers were averaged among all scorers and only if the selected GCt (group consensus
threshold) was passed the spindle was accepted as a part of the MODA dataset. This
way either some scorers need to be very confident in their selections or the majority
of them need to be fairly confident. The annotations of experts were considered to
be of the highest quality, so their GC was considered to be the GS (golden standard).
The values of GCts for each GC was selected by maximizing the average individual
performance across scorers of the respective group. The performance is measured
utilizing the ”by-event” F1 score, which is the harmonic mean between precision and
recall. Recall is the percentage of GS spindles correctly detected by a scorer (
T P
T P +F N ),
whereas precision is the percentage of a scorer’s spindles that are part of the gold stan-
dard set (
T P
F P +T P ). Here TP are true positives, FP are false positives and FN are
false negatives. An estimated spindle is considered correctly matched with a spindle
==PAGE:51==
4.3 MODA dataset
41
from GS if their overlap exceeds some pre-defined threshold. 0.2 was the highest
threshold that maximized performance. This can be seen in Figure 4.3 Each expert
was evaluated against a GS without their own annotations to avoid bias. The final
GCt values for experts were 0.2 for Phase 1 and 0.35 for Phase 2. Note, spindles
that were less than 0.3s apart were merged and spindles that were longer than 2.5s
or shorter than 0.3s were filtered out completely from their respective GC. In total,
Figure 4.3: Overlap threshold versus F1 score [38]
47 PSG technologists, 18 researchers and 695 non-experts viewed 10,453, 6,636 and
37,467 epochs respectively in Phase 1. Phase 2 was viewed by 31 PSG technologists
(7,941 epochs viewed). The authors identified the number of scorers needed to iden-
tify quality annotations. Two to four people were needed for experts and researchers
while three to ten were needed for non-experts. Note, the plateau of non-experts
was achieved for around ten people. The authors also evaluated several algorithms
for spindle detection. The algorithms, similar to human scorers, performed worse
on the older population (phase 2). The A7 algorithm achieved the highest F1 score
on the younger cohort, while the A9 algorithm achieved the best score on the older
cohort. However, the former algorithm had the highest F1 score (0.72 against GS)
on the whole cohort. In [38] the relationship between sleep spindle characteristics
and human characteristics (age and sex) was explored. The authors confirmed that
older subjects have a lower spindle density, duration and amplitude than younger
subjects. On top of that, there is a significant difference between males and females
in regard to spindle density and spindle amplitude. Values for both tend to be higher
for females. A 2x2 ANOVA was used to test for statistical differences between groups.
Additional characteristics were calculated for each subset and the whole dataset (C1)
similar to how it was done in the original work [38] and are given in Table 4.5 (here
==PAGE:52==
42
4 Dataset description and usage
the median and standard deviation are given) and as plots in Figure 9.2, Figure 9.3,
Figure 9.4, Figure 9.5, Figure 9.6 and Figure 9.7. Density is given in spindles per
minute, duration is given in seconds and amplitude is given in microvolts. The latter
was the maximum peak-to-peak amplitude of the spindle location in the signal sent
through a band-pass filter of 10-16 Hz.
Because of its open-source nature and high-quality annotations, the described dataset
is a great tool for the development of machine learning models, evaluations and com-
parisons. The dataset can be accessed on GitHub [34], where it contains files of lists
of epochs viewed, lists of events scored and similar information about the collection
of data. Also, the code to reproduce the final annotation files is available. However,
it is not necessary to run it because the output of the code can be accessed from
the repository. The data is separated into three different folders for each type of
scorer. The annotations are available as ’.txt’ files following the naming notation of
the MASS (Montreal Archive of Sleep Studies) dataset.
SS1
SS2
SS3
SS4
SS5
C1
Density(spm)
2.6(2.5)
5.2(2.7)
4.7(3.1)
3.7(2.3)
3.7(2.8)
3.7(2.8)
Duration(s)
0.8(0.2)
0.8(0.2)
0.8(0.2)
0.7(0.2)
0.8(0.2)
0.8(0.2)
Amplitude(µV )
23.3(7.1)
27.4(5.5)
29.4(9.2)
26.0(5.6)
29.8(7.4)
26.6(8.1)
Table 4.5: Characteristics of MODA annotations
4.4
Psychiatry Center of Copenhagen data
For this project, we were also provided with data from the Psychiatry Center of Copen-
hagen (Psykiatrisk Center København). In this dataset, 12 subjects were studied who
were all children. Some of the subjects are first-degree relatives of schizophrenia pa-
tients. Whole night PSG recordings are given, which were recorded using a 21-channel
EEG headset with a sampling frequency of 1000 Hz. Note, details about which sub-
jects were first-degree relatives were not provided. Additionally, no annotations or
other subject information were given. Some of this is to preserve anonymity.
4.5
Data processing
The biosignals from MASS and the annotations from MODA were used for training
and validation of the sleep spindle detection methods. As it was described section 4.3
segments of 115 seconds were extracted from MASS and annotated by experts to
produce the GS. In line with previous studies [38, 31] the EEG data was filtered
with a 10th-order Butterworth filter of 0.3-30 Hz. Additionally, it was downsampled
to 100Hz. The resulting segments were further divided into windows of 30 seconds.
This is due to the high memory load when training DETR models. As described
==PAGE:53==
4.5 Data processing
43
in [12] every self-attention in the encoder has computational complexity as given in
Equation 4.1
O
 d2HW + d(HW)2
(4.1)
Here d is embedding size, H is the height of the features and W is the width of the
features. In our case, the data is one-dimensional, so the height is of size 1. However,
the width is not and often in this project W > d. From Equation 4.1 the dominating
factor will be d(HW)2 and so if the windows of 115 seconds were used as input to
the model, the computational load would be huge. This is why the segments of 115
seconds were further split into windows of 30 seconds. During the cutting of segments,
some spindles were divided in the process. If the remaining divided spindle is less
than 0.3 seconds, then the annotation is removed. Besides cropping, only the data
from the C3 channel was used. The dataset was divided into training, validation
and test subsets on a by-individual basis. Similar to [31] the 10 segment individuals
were assigned to the training subset. Validation and test subsets are 15% of the full
dataset. The processing was carried out using Python together with libraries such as
Numpy, Pandas and MNE.
The data obtained from the Psychiatry Center of Copenhagen underwent a simi-
lar processing approach. Initially, the signals were passed through a band-pass filter
within the frequency range of 0.3-30 Hz, followed by downsampling to 100 Hz. The
resulting filtered signals were divided into 30-second windows to enable their analy-
sis using the developed models. Since no supplementary information regarding the
recordings was provided, the windows were randomly selected from the complete night
recordings. A total of 100 samples were saved for each subject. To accomplish this,
again Python was utilized along with various libraries, including Numpy, Pandas, and
MNE.
==PAGE:54==
44
==PAGE:55==
CHAPTER 5
Related Work
5.1
A7 algorithm
The baseline spindle detection algorithm is defined here. The algorithm is described
in [37] and utilizes thresholding for detection. It was named A7 (algorithm 7) because
6 automatic spindle detectors were evaluated beforehand. The objective of the model
is to identify spindle events, which are distinct series of sigma (11-16 Hz) waves in the
broadband signal (EEGbf; 0.3-30 Hz). Four parameters are extracted to accomplish
the task and are described below. Each is computed for a 0.3s window every 0.1s.
• Absolute sigma power (A7absSigPow) is meant for the detection of a train of
sigma waves and given in Equation 5.1. This is computed from EEGσ, which
is a version of the input data where it was sent through a band pass filter of
11-16 Hz. A7absSigPow is equal to the average of the squared value of each
data sample in a given window. The absolute power is also log 10 transformed
to normalize the distribution. The units are log10(µV 2).
A7absSigPow = log10
N
X
i=1
EEGσ2
i
N
(5.1)
Here N is the number of samples in a given window.
• Relative sigma power (A7relSigPow) is meant for assurance that the increase
of power is only for the sigma band and computed using PSA (power spectral
analysis). It is given in Equation 5.2. The parameter is defined as the ratio
of the power in the sigma band (11-16 Hz) over the broadband (0.3-30 Hz)
excluding the delta band (0.3–4.5 Hz). First, this ratio is log 10 transformed
(logPowRat). Then it is converted into a z score relative to the logPowRat
distribution of a given 30s broadband baseline signal centered on the current
PSA window. The normalization with the z score uses a standard deviation
computed using only the 10th to 90th percentile of the distribution of the log
10 transformed ratio of the baseline to ignore extreme cases.
A7relSigPow = zscore

log10
 PSA11−16 Hz
PSA4.5−30 Hz

(5.2)
• Sigma covariance (A7sigmaCov) is meant for the measurement of covariance be-
tween the sigma band and the broadband signal. The mathematical expression
==PAGE:56==
46
5 Related Work
for it is given in Equation 5.3. The samples are centered (mean is subtracted)
before the calculations.
The covariance between the samples is then log 10
transformed (logCov) and converted into a z score relative to the logCov distri-
bution of a 30s broadband baseline signal around the given window. The units
are the z-score values.
A7sigmaCov = zscore (log10 (cov (EEGbf, EEGσ)))
(5.3)
• Sigma correlation (A7sigmaCorr) is meant for the calculation of correlation
between the sigma band and the broadband. The mathematical expression is
given in Equation 5.4. This parameter is calculated in a similar manner com-
pared to A7sigmaCov. The correlation is defined as their covariance normalized
by the amplitude of both variables. The covariance is divided by the product
of the standard deviations of the sigma band and the broadband.
A7sigmaCor = cov (EEGbf, EEGσ)
sdEEGbf ∗sdEEGσ
(5.4)
Here the values vary between -1 and 1 since they are correlation values.
When each parameter exceeds some static pre-defined thresholds, a spindle is de-
tected. The thresholds found in the oﬀicial implementation are 1.25, 1.3, 1.3 and
0.69 for A7absSigPow, A7relSigPow, A7sigmaCov and A7sigmaCor, respectively.
A7absSigPow and A7sigmaCov determine the length of the detected spindle. The
checked samples are considered part of the event if the thresholds are exceeded for
the two given parameters. The authors remove spindles that are shorter than 0.3s or
longer than 2.5s.
5.2
Slim U-Net trained on MODA (SUMO)
Introduced in [31] the authors developed a Slim U-Net trained on MODA (SUMO).
The deep learning model approximates the expert consensus (golden standard) from
the MODA dataset to identify sleep spindles.
5.2.1
Model architecture
As is stated in the name the model was inspired by the U-net architecture [68], which
was initially used for segmentation of microscopy images. SUMO, visualised in Fig-
ure 5.1, is a model divided into an encoder and decoder parts. The former compress
the temporal features of the given EEG input and generates an increasing number of
feature channels at every level. The decoder does the opposite by reducing the feature
depth and increasing the temporal information. The two modules are symmetric and
have an equal amount of compression and expansion levels. The encoder uses two
convolutional layers per level with a kernel size of five, dilation of two and padding so
==PAGE:57==
5.2 Slim U-Net trained on MODA (SUMO)
47
Figure 5.1: A visualization of the SUMO architecture[68]
that the output of the operation is equal in length to the input of the operation (In
PyTorch setting ”same” is used). Every convolutional layer is followed by a ReLU
activation function and batch normalization. When the encoder features are sent
to the next level (level below) max-pooling of size four is used to reduce the length
(temporal dimension) of the features. The next level of the encoder first doubles the
depth of the received features before sending them through two convolutional layer
blocks (convolutional layer, activation and batch normalization). The decoder also
uses two convolutional layers per level. However, here they have dilation set to one
(no dilation), while the other parameters are the same. Again, every convolutional
layer is followed by ReLU activation and batch normalization. When a decoder layer
receives features from the previous layer (layer below) they are first upsampled by
a factor of four using the nearest-neighbour method. After the increase in length,
the features are sent through a convolutional layer to halve the number of feature
channels.
At every level, the encoder features are sent to the decoder using skip
connections. The outgoing features have the same length and the same number of
channels. This means that the features from the previous decoder level (a level be-
low) are merged with the incoming encoder features. The combination results in the
number of channels doubling. That is why the first convolutional layer of the two in
a decoder level halves the number of feature channels. After the second convolution
of the base (top) level of the decoder, the feature has the same depth as the features
==PAGE:58==
48
5 Related Work
produced by the encoder at the same level. In the case of the optimal setup, it is 16
channels. These decoder features are then sent through a convolutional layer with a
kernel of size one. The depth is changed, so it equals the number of classes for the
given task. For the task of spindle detection, this was equal to two (spindle or no
spindle). Then the feature map of depth two was smoothed using a moving-average
filter. The size of this filter is a hyper-parameters and the optimal value was found to
be equal to 42. Finally, the pointwise maximum is taken between the two smoothed
layers. Then consecutive positive indications are merged to get the final annotations.
Additionally, it can be seen that the input is padded before processing in the encoder
and the output is cropped after the second convolution of the ground (top) decoder.
This is done, so that the results of the max-pooling operations in the encoder levels
and the upscaling operations in the decoder levels would have the same temporal
resolution.
5.2.2
Training and Tuning
The authors utilized the MASS and MODA datasets for training and validation, how-
ever as it is described in section 4.3 the latter depends on the former. The dataset
was split into training and validation parts, where all segments of any individual be-
long only to one of the subsets. The test set has an equal number of younger and
older subjects and was selected in a way, where random subsets were sampled and
the A7 algorithm (described in section 5.1) was used to get the F1 score for each of
them. The final test set was the one that had an F1 score equal to the median among
the sampled subsets. This is because the published results of the A7 algorithm were
obtained on the whole dataset and the authors of [31] were not able to generate an
out-of-sample prediction for SUMO. Additionally, similar to what was done in [38]
the data was downsampled to 100Hz using a 10th-order Butterworth filter (0.3 - 30
Hz) and z-transformed.
The training subset of MODA was divided into training and validation sets for six-
fold cross-validation. Here one fold (24 subjects) is used for validation and five folds
are used for training. The procedure was used for hyperparameter tuning and early
stopping. Six SUMO models were independently initialized and trained. For each
model, the F1 score integrated over overlap thresholds was used as a metric. It is
referred to as
¯
F1. During training, if previous
¯
F1 values were exceeded, the new
model is noted and stored as the best candidate model. The authors tested various
architectures by tuning the hyperparameters such as the number of levels, the width
of max-pooling operations and convolutional filter depth. The authors tested about
100 different configurations and found the F1 score to be stable across folds. The
optimal model consisted of three levels, where for each a max pooling operation with
a kernel size of four is carried out. In the final layer of the model, the optimal width
for the moving-average filter was found to be 0.42s.
==PAGE:59==
5.2 Slim U-Net trained on MODA (SUMO)
49
5.2.3
Results
Spindle density and duration were determined for each individual in the test subset
of GS. To compare the A7 and SUMO models Pearson’s r was calculated between the
characteristics of predicted spindles and the spindles from GS. Fisher’s z transform
was applied to the resulting values. A7-derived spindle densities exhibited r2 = 0.68
for younger individuals and r2 = 0.88 for older participants, while SUMO showed
r2 = 0.84 and r2 = 0.89, both of which were highly correlated with the expert
consensus. Comparing the r-values after being z-transformed, the authors discovered
no statistically significant difference at α = 0.05. In comparison to the density data
shown above, a substantially weaker correlation was discovered in the examination
of spindle duration. SUMO showed r2 = 0.82 and r2 = 0.37, while A7 showed r2 =
0.35 for younger and r2 = 0.07 for older participants. A statistical analysis (based
on Fisher’s z-transform) suggested that for younger individuals (p = 0.02), SUMO-
derived durations correlated more strongly than A7, but not for older individuals
(p = 0.23). SUMO was also evaluated in terms of the achieved F1 score. As mentioned
previously, the authors used a special version of it where the F1 score is integrated
over all possible overlap threshold values. The resulting metric is referred to as ¯
F1.
However, this metric was only used throughout the training. The regular F1 score
was also presented for all different overlap thresholds. Similar to how it was done
in [38] this is visualised in Figure 5.2 where the previously described A7 algorithm
and SUMO are compared. The latter shows better performance for each possible
threshold value. The authors of [31] present the final performance as an F1 score,
where an overlap of 20% is used. This is in line with [38], where 20% was selected to
have the highest threshold while maximizing performance (10% and 20% had similar
performance).
==PAGE:60==
50
5 Related Work
Figure 5.2: F1 scores for SUMO and A7 algorithms in regards to different overlap
thresholds [31]
==PAGE:61==
CHAPTER 6
Methods
In this chapter, the main methods of the Master thesis project are presented. Also,
changes to the algorithms and their training specifics are given.
6.1
Detection Transformer (DETR)
The primary architecture used in this master thesis project is described here. The end-
to-end object detection transformer (DETR) was proposed in [12] and was originally
used for object detection and segmentation. It utilizes a transformer model and a
residual neural network as the main building blocks. Previously two-stage detectors
and one-stage detectors were proposed for such tasks. These methods require several
steps to carry out object detection. In the case of the former, proposal generation is
performed first. This way potential locations of objects are generated and then passed
on to the object classification and refinement part. For one-stage detectors anchors
are used. Anchors are pre-defined bounding boxes of different scales and aspect ratios
that are placed at regular intervals over the image. They represent potential object
locations. Similar to the two-stage detector classification and refinement are carried
out for every potential object location (anchors). The performance of these object
detection models heavily relies on the setup of the initial guesses. The authors of [12]
tackle this problem by creating a neural network, which directly predicts absolute
object locations w.r.t. the input image. This streamlines and simplifies the process,
especially when the model is used for custom data.
6.1.1
Loss function
Modification of the workflow of the neural network requires adjustments to the loss
function. In the case of DETR, the loss function is quite complex. It utilizes several
modules to optimize the model. First of all, the Hungarian matching algorithm [36]
is used to find the optimal matching between the N predictions of the neural network
and the ground truths. It is a combinatorial optimization algorithm that solves the
assignment linear-programming problem in polynomial time. It operates on a cost
matrix, which is manipulated using subtraction and addition. The idea is that if a
number is added to or subtracted from all of the entries of any one row or column
of a cost matrix, then an optimal assignment for the resulting cost matrix is also an
==PAGE:62==
52
6 Methods
optimal assignment for the original cost matrix. As described in [12] DETR outputs
a fixed-size set of N predictions. N is significantly larger than the number of objects
in set y for a given image. The set y is padded with ∅and then used in Equation 6.1
to find the best match between the ground truth and model outputs.
ˆσ = arg min
σ∈SN
N
X
i
Lmatch
 yi, ˆyσ(i)

(6.1)
Here Lmatch
 yi, ˆyσ(i)

is a pair-wise matching cost between ground truth yi and a
prediction with index σ(i). More specifically, Lmatch
 yi, ˆyσ(i)

is defined as
Lmatch
 yi, ˆyσ(i)

= −1{ci̸=∅}ˆpσ(i) (ci) + 1{ci̸=∅}Lbox

bi,ˆbσ(i)

(6.2)
Here i denotes the index of the ground truth set.
For a single object, we have
yi = (ci, bi), where ci is the target class and bi is a vector that defines the target
box center coordinates and the height and width of the object relative to the image
size. ˆpσ(i) (ci) denotes the probability of class ci for prediction with index σ(i). ˆbσ(i)
denotes the predicted bounding box. Then the optimal assignments ˆσ(i) are used to
compute the loss as shown in Equation 6.3. When ci = ∅the log probability term is
down-weighted by a factor of 10 to account for class imbalance.
LHungarian (y, ˆy) =
N
X
i=1
h
−log ˆpˆσ(i) (ci) + 1{ci̸=∅}Lbox

bi,ˆbˆσ(i)
i
(6.3)
In Equation 6.3 a term that wasn’t described is Lbox. This terms calculates the loss
values regarding the bounding boxes and is defined as
Lbox (bi,ˆbσ(i)) = λiouLiou

bi,ˆbσ(i)

+ λL1
bi −ˆbσ(i)

1
(6.4)
Here λiou, λL1 ∈R are hyperparameters. Generalized IoU loss Liou(·) is introduced
because the l1 loss has different scales for small and large boxes. On top of that, L1
loss is sensitive to outliers since it treats all deviations from the truth equally and each
coordinate is evaluated separately, so structural information is ignored. Generalized
IoU was introduced in [65] and is expressed mathematically in Equation 6.5.
Liou

bσ(i),ˆbi

= 1 −


bσ(i) ∩ˆbi

bσ(i) ∪ˆbi

−
B

bσ(i),ˆbi

\bσ(i) ∪ˆbi

B

bσ(i),ˆbi



(6.5)
Here |bσ(i)∩ˆbi|
|bσ(i)∪ˆbi| is the IoU (intersection over union). The nominator is the area of the
intersection of bounding boxes bσ(i) and ˆbi and the denominator is the area of the
union of the same bounding boxes. Min and max operations are used to find the start
==PAGE:63==
6.1 Detection Transformer (DETR)
53
and ending of both. C = B

bσ(i),ˆbi

is the smallest convex hull than contains both
bσ(i) and ˆbi. So the |B(bσ(i),ˆbi)\bσ(i)∪ˆbi|
|B(bσ(i),ˆbi)|
term is the area of the smallest convex hull C,
excluding the union of the two given bounding boxes, divided by C. In contrast to
IoU, generalized IoU is always differentiable and thus can be used as a loss function
in a model. The notion of gIoU is nicely visualised in [2].
6.1.2
Model architecture
As mentioned previously the model utilizes residual neural networks, which were de-
scribed in subsection 3.2.2, and transformers, which were described in subsection 3.2.3.
It also uses fully connected networks, which were mentioned in section 3.1, to utilize
the generated features to predict classes and bounding boxes.
The overall archi-
tecture is shown in Figure 6.1.
Starting from the backbone, which is utilizing a
Figure 6.1: A visualization of the DETR architecture[12]
ResNet model to create some feature representation f ∈RC×H×W of the input
ximg ∈R3×H0×W0.There the authors use C = 2048 and H, W = H0
32 , W0
32 .
Then the extracted features are sent through a convolutional layer with a kernel
of size 1x1. This convolutional layer reduces the number of channels from C to some
smaller dimension d. Then the resulting feature map is z0 ∈Rd×H×W . However,
the transformer expects a sequence as input so z0’s spatial dimensions are collapsed
resulting in a d × HW feature map. This feature map is then joined with positional
encodings and sent to the encoder part of the transformer model. The transformer
model is in its original form and since it was described previously we will not dive into
the details again. The output of the encoder is used in the pipeline of the decoder,
which N object queries that serve as model predictions. N can be tuned but the
highest possible value is 100 since that is the limit set by the authors.
The predictions are made using a three-layer perceptron with ReLU activation func-
tions and hidden dimensions of size d. The fully connected network predicts center
coordinates, height and width of the bounding box, where each element is normal-
ized w.r.t. the input image. A linear layer predicts the class labels using a softmax
==PAGE:64==
54
6 Methods
function. Because N is larger than the number of objects in the image, an additional
class ∅is used to predict no object, which can also be referred to as ”background”.
The authors implemented auxiliary losses[66] into the decoder to improve the model
capabilities. Hungarian loss is computed and predictions using fully connected net-
works are made after every decoder layer. The fully connected networks share their
parameters. The input to each fully connected network is normalized using a shared
layer norm.
6.1.3
Model training
DETR is trained on COCO 2017 detection and segmentation datasets [43], which
contain 118 thousand images for training and 5 thousand for validation. For every
image bounding box and panoptic segmentation annotations are available. Each im-
age contains 7 objects on average, ranging from small to large. Up to 63 objects
appear in a single image from the training set. Scale augmentation is used to re-
size the input images such that the shortest side is from 400 to 800 pixels, while
the longest side is at most 1333 pixels. Random crop augmentation was used to aid
self-attention in learning global relationships. During training an image is cropped
to a rectangular with the probability of 0.5 and then resized to 800 by 1333 pixels.
Additionally, during inference when empty classes are predicted they are overridden
by the second-highest-scoring class and the corresponding confidence is used.
The model is trained using the Adam optimizer [47] with the initial learning rate
of 10−5 for the backbone and 10−4 for the rest of the model.
Both are reduced
by a factor of ten after 200 epochs. Also, gradient clipping was used, with a max-
imal gradient norm of 0.1.
A linear combination of l1 and GIoU losses was used
for bounding box regression with weights λL1 = 5 and λiou = 5. The number of
output queries was N = 100 for every trained model. In the transformer dropout of
0.01 is applied after every multi-head attention and FFN before layer normalization.
Pre-trained ResNet-50 and ResNet-101 models with frozen batch normalization lay-
ers were fine-tuned when trained as a part of DETR. The corresponding models were
named DETR and DETR-R101 respectively. Modifications were made to the last
stage of the backbones where the stride for the first convolution was removed and a
dilation was added. Models with such modification have the suﬀix ”-DC5” (dilated
C5 stage). In exchange for a 16x higher cost in the encoder’s self-attentions and an
overall 2x increase in computational cost, this tweak doubles the resolution, boosting
performance for small objects.
The authors conducted an ablation study where the importance of different compo-
nents was evaluated. For example, without any encoder layers the model performance
dropped significantly, especially for larger objects. Additionally, for a number of de-
coder layers their respective outputs were used for predictions. It was found that the
model performance drops significantly when less than three decoder layers are used.
==PAGE:65==
6.2 Conditional DETR
55
The authors also tried removing the FFN inside the transformers, which reduced the
number of parameters from 41.3 million to 28.7 million. However the performance
decreased by a considerable amount.
Lastly, experiments with outputs positional
encodings were conducted, where in the first experiment they were passed at input
instead of spatial positional encodings. As a result, the models performance dropped
significantly.
In the second experiment fixed sine positional encodings are passed
to input once together with the output encodings. This is also done in the original
transformer paper [82]. This resulted in a slight drop in performance.
6.2
Conditional DETR
Building on top of DETR the authors of [54] address slow convergence, which is one
of the main problems of the architecture. The original DETR model heavily relies
on content embeddings to localize four extremities for box prediction. Two reasons
are given for this.
First of all, the object queries only give the general attention
weight map without exploiting the specific image information. Secondly, the content
queries are used to match the spatial keys and the content keys. This creates a high
dependence on high-quality content embeddings, which are hard to train in a short
time. In [12] spatial embeddings have a minor contribution in the cross-attention part
of the decoder layers but it was shown that removing positional embeddings in keys
and object queries from the second decoder layer and only using content embeddings
slightly reduced the model performance. Following this motivation, the authors of
[54] present conditional DETR, where conditional spatial embeddings are learnt for
each query using the output embeddings from the previous decoder layer. This way a
conditional spatial query is formed for the multi-head cross-attention. It was shown
that using such spatial queries and keys each cross-attention head spatially attends
to some specific extremity or region this way shrinking the spatial range for the
content queries to localize. Consequently, the dependence on the content embeddings
is relaxed and the model training converges faster.
6.2.1
Changes to architecture
The model, similar to [12], has the architecture of a backbone and transformer for
end-to-end object detection without needing NMS (non-maximum suppression) or
anchor generation. Actually, the architecture of conditional DETR is very much like
the architecture of DETR. However, some changes are made to the decoder part of the
model. This can be seen in Figure 6.2. Conditional cross-attention is implemented,
where the query is formed by concatenating the content query cq and spatial query
pq. The former is just the decoder’s self-attention output, whereas the latter is a
transformation of it. Besides using the outputs of the self-attention, which is denoted
as f in [54], reference point s is also used. The 2D coordinates can either be treated as
learnable parameters or they can be predicted from the object queries. s is normalized
and mapped to 256-dimensional sinusoidal positional embedding similar to positional
==PAGE:66==
56
6 Methods
embeddings for keys.
The output from the self-attention part is sent through an
FFN consisting of a learnable linear projection + ReLU activation + learnable linear
projection. The result is referred to as T = FFN(f). Then the conditional spatial
query is formed by mapping the reference point to the embedding space. A diagonal
matrix is used for the projection because of its eﬀiciency and performance. The 256
diagonal elements are denoted as vector λq. Element-wise multiplication is carried
out to get the conditional spatial queries. Mathematically it can be expressed as:
pq = Tps = λq ⊙ps
(6.6)
In the case of multi-head cross-attention, the spatial and content queries are separately
projected to each head with different parameters. The decoder outputs are used for
the prediction of class and box regression. The former works in the same manner as
in [12], where the decoder embeddings f are sent through an FFN to get the class
prediction. Box regression works slightly differently. It is expressed mathematically
below in Equation 6.7.
b = sigmoid

FFN(f) +

s⊤
0
0
⊤
.
(6.7)
The decoder embeddings f are sent through an FFN. The resulting unnormalized
coordinates are then adjusted with respect to the reference point s. As mentioned
previously s is (0, 0) in the original DETR implementation, whereas in [54] it can
either be treated as a learnable parameter for each candidate box or generated from a
given object query. The adjusted coordinates are then normalized using the sigmoid
function.
Besides the mentioned architectural changes the training of the model slightly differs
because of the usage of focal loss [42]. It is defined as Equation 6.8. The hyperpa-
rameter γ is referred to as the focusing parameter. It smoothly adjusts the rate at
which easy examples are down-weighted. When γ = 0 then the focal loss is equal to
cross-entropy loss as shown in Equation 6.9.
FL (pt) = −(1 −pt)γ log (pt)
(6.8)
Focal loss tends to focus on misclassified examples with low probabilities. Conse-
quently, it is helpful in the case of extreme imbalance.
CE(p, y) =
(
−log(p)
if y = 1
−log(1 −p)
otherwise
(6.9)
In practice Equation 6.10 is used, which is also the case for [54].
α ∈[0, 1] is a
weighting factor for the object class (could be 1), where it will be 1 −α for the no
object class (could be -1). For example, it could be equal to the inverse class frequency
or just treated as a tunable hyperparameter. Note, an α cross-entropy loss function
variant also exists and serves a similar purpose. In conditional DETR γ = 2, which
was also mentioned to work best in [42].
FL (pt) = −αt (1 −pt)γ log (pt)
(6.10)
==PAGE:67==
6.2 Conditional DETR
57
((a)) Encoder layer in DETR
((b)) Encoder layer in conditional DETR
Figure 6.2: Comparison of decoder layer in DETR variants
6.2.2
Training and results
Conditional DETR is trained using very similar compared to the original DETR im-
plementation. More precisely, six encoder and decoder layers are used with eight
heads.
Because auxiliary losses are used the FFN parameters for predictions are
shared across the decoder. ResNets pre-trained on ImageNet with frozen batch nor-
malization layers are used as backbones. Adam optimizer is used with the learning
rate of 10−5 for the backbone and 10−4 for the rest of the model. Weight decay is set
to be 10−4. A dropout of 0.1 is used for the transformer training. Additionally, the
learning rate is dropped by a factor of 10 after around 80% of training time. Augmen-
tation is used just as in [12], where images are resized to 800-1333 pixels and then
randomly cropped with a probability of 0.5. Different backbone variants were tried
including the ResNet-50 and ResNet-101. Additionally, dilation was added to one of
the backbone blocks to increase resolution, which especially helps with the detection
of smaller objects. The models were trained on the COCO dataset [43] containing
118 thousand training images and 5 thousand validation images. Conditional DETR
achieves slightly better performance when compared to similar variants of the original
DETR. The biggest improvement is seen for the smaller objects. In the case of the
conditional DETR with ResNet-101 and added dilation average precision increased
==PAGE:68==
58
6 Methods
Figure 6.3: Convergence curves for DETR-DC5-R50 and it’s conditional variant
[54]
by 14.8%, 1.6% and 1.6% for small, medium and large objects respectively. Most
importantly the performance increase occurs after a much smaller training time. The
best-performing conditional DETR variants were trained for 108 epochs and showed
better accuracy than the original DETR variants, which were trained for 500 epochs.
Training of DETR with ResNet-50 and added dilation and its respective conditional
variant is shown in Figure 6.3. It can be seen that the model learns much faster and
achieves better performance. The slight bumps in the accuracy lines are due to a
learning rate drop after around 80% of training time. The authors also conducted
Figure 6.4: Spatial attention weight maps for DETR-R50 [54]
==PAGE:69==
6.3 Experiments
59
an ablation study. For example, the importance of s was shown, where in the case
of s = (0, 0) (as in original DETR) the performance dropped. Additionally, when
forming the conditional spatial query in Equation 6.6 different products of λq and
ps were explored. Lastly, it was shown that the combination of offset regression, fo-
cal loss and conditional spatial query significantly improves the model’s performance,
whereas if they are used separately the improvements are marginal. The effective-
ness of conditional DETR in comparison to the original implementation is visually
shown in Figure 6.4. There the images show the spatial attention weight maps for
conditional DETR-R50 with 50 training epochs in the first row, original DETR-R50
with 50 training epochs in the second row and original DETR-R50 with 500 epochs
in the third row. The conditional DETR variant manages to detect the necessary
extremity regions, which put the object in a bounding box. In contrast, the original
DETR model struggles with this. This is especially true when training for only 50
epochs, where the left and right sides of the bounding box are not highlighted cor-
rectly. When trained for 500 epochs the accuracy is better, however, it is still not as
good as in the first row (conditional DETR).
6.3
Experiments
The experiments carried out for this master’s thesis project are explained in this
section. The MODA dataset’s GS (golden standard) annotations, as presented in
section 4.3, were used for model training and evaluation. In total 5342 sleep spindle
annotations from 180 participants are included in the GS. Three groups carried out
marking of sleep spindles, where the annotations for each group were combined and
preserved if their confidence score exceeded the predetermined GC threshold. Pooled
annotations from experts were considered of the highest quality and were defined as
the golden standard. Such a combination of marking is referred to as the so-called
”wisdom of the crowd” effect [38, 85]. Similar to previous work [31, 38] F1 score was
used as a metric for the evaluation of models performance and for comparison of dif-
ferent techniques. The equation for calculation of the metric is given in Equation 6.11.
To calculate precision (Equation 6.12) and recall (Equation 6.13) TP (true positives),
FP (false positives) and FN (false negatives) are needed. The predicted spindle an-
notations had to overlap the true spindles by more than a pre-defined threshold to
be marked as TP. If not specified differently, the threshold is 20% similar to previ-
ous work [38, 31]. FP is the total predictions made subtracted by TP. FN is the
sleep spindles that were not detected, which is equal to the total number of spindles
subtracted by TP.
F1 = 2 ∗PRECISION ∗RECALL
PRECISION + RECALL
(6.11)
PRECISION =
TP
TP + FP
(6.12)
RECALL =
TP
TP + FN
(6.13)
==PAGE:70==
60
6 Methods
All experiments were done on eight RTX A5000 GPUs, where each of them has 24GB
VRAM. Additionally, the processed data was used (as presented in section 4.5), which
was also standardized (mean subtraction and division by standard deviation) before
being sent to the models. This was not the case when working with A7. The data
was not standardized but its values were multiplied by a factor of 106 since the data
needs to be given in microvolts.
6.3.1
Replicating previous work
The A7 and SUMO models that were detailed in chapter 5 were replicated and tested
on the GS. Starting with the widely known A7 thresholding algorithm (as described
in section 5.1), which serves as a baseline when evaluating models.
Being one of
the earlier solutions for automated spindle detection it is still a considerable option
because no training is needed, only the threshold values which can be easily found.
Two implementations were looked into. The first one can be found in [76] and is the
oﬀicial implementation of the algorithm from the authors of [37]. The code is written
in Matlab. The second implementation can be found in [19]. This is from the authors
of [31] and is instead written in Python. Note, both implementations function in the
same way. However, since Python is the main programming language of this project
the second implementation was selected out of convenience.
The state-of-the-art SUMO model described in section 5.2 was also replicated in
this project. Some of the code from [19] was re-used. However, different from [31] the
signal segments of 115 seconds were further split into windows of 30 seconds. This
is done since 30-second segments are used for training of DETR as described in sec-
tion 4.5. The objective is to keep the training and evaluation pipeline for all of the
models as similar as possible. The model architecture was slightly modified since no
padding was used and consequently, the kernel size of the max-pooling operations was
reduced, resulting in higher temporal resolution in the different levels of the encoder
and decoder parts.
6.3.2
Applying DETR variants to sleep spindle detection
DETR and conditional DETR models presented in chapter 6 are originally used for
object detection in images from the large-scale COCO dataset [43]. On top of that,
the feature extractor part of the model or in other words the backbone is a Residual
network (subsection 3.2.2) pre-trained on another large-scale dataset ImageNet [16].
In this Master’s thesis project, we are tackling the task of sleep spindle detection,
which is also in a way an object detection problem. However, the data type and
the scale of it are very different to what was used originally in [12, 54].
First of
all, we are working with EEG data, which is a type of time series data.
So the
models need to be adjusted to work with one-dimensional instead of two-dimensional
data. More importantly, the backbone needs to be changed as the pre-trained ResNet
==PAGE:71==
6.3 Experiments
61
models are of no use for the objective of the project. Convolutional layers remained
the main building block of the backbone as they are highly capable of extracting
features from time series data [31]. With these ideas in mind the code of DETR and
conditional DETR found in [21, 6] was used and modified accordingly. As the scale of
the dataset is lower compared to the original implementations, the complexity of the
transformer part is greatly reduced. This was mostly done in a fashion to maximize
the performance (F1 score) and encourage generalization. In the end, DETR variants
used a transformer with 4 encoder and 4 decoder layers, 32 channels in the feedforward
layers, embeddings of size 16 and 4 attention heads. For each DETR experiment the
training was conducted for 80 epochs with the batch size of 16 and the learning rate of
0.001 for the whole model except the backbone, for which the learning rate was 0.0001.
Having the learning rate of the backbone smaller by a factor of 10 proved useful as
this was also addressed in [12]. Additionally, the learning rate was reduced by a factor
of 10 at epoch 50 and then again at epoch 70 to help with convergence. Different
to the original implementations of DETR and conditional DETR, gradient clipping
and auxiliary losses were not used. The former provides training stability and the
latter helps with regularization. Both methods did not seem necessary throughout
prototyping.
Figure 6.5: A visualisation of the simple backbone variant used for DETR
The majority of prototyping was carried out using the conditional variant of DETR as
it improves on the original DETR in terms of performance and more importantly in
terms of training speed. A couple of different backbone architectures were evaluated.
First of all, a simple backbone structure was created to set a baseline and test out
the general functionality of the model. Its architecture is drawn in Figure 6.5. It
consists of several convolutional layers stacked together with ReLU activation and
batch normalization after each of them. The same number of feature channels is kept
throughout the backbone. It was found during prototyping that 64 is the optimal
value for feature depth. It is hypothesized that this simple backbone version would
not produce complex enough features, so consequently DETR would not be able to
==PAGE:72==
62
6 Methods
achieve great performance.
Following this hypothesis, a more sophisticated backbone architecture is proposed.
Following from the promising work of [31] a U-Net style backbone was constructed.
It is shown as a flowchart in Figure 6.6. Here two convolutional layers are used per
level with a kernel size of five and a dilation of two for the encoder part. It is similar
for the decoder, except there dilation is set to one. Every convolutional layer is fol-
lowed by ReLU activation and batch normalization. The number of feature channels
is 16, 32 and 64 for levels 0, 1 and 2, respectively. This is similar to the original
SUMO implementation [31].
Figure 6.6: A visualisation of SUMO inspired backbone used for DETR
As mentioned the original implementation of DETR variants use pre-trained back-
bones, so naturally, it is thought that using a previously trained model would be bene-
ficial. Again, the SUMO style architecture is used. After the experiments described in
subsection 6.3.1 the replicated SUMO model is used here as the backbone. Different
from how the pre-trained ResNet backbone was used in [12] the batch normalization
layers were not frozen in our experiments. This is because batch normalization tends
to be frozen when the used model was previously trained on different data. Since this
is not the case all layers are left to be trainable.
An additional experiment was conducted, where the training of the original DETR
structure is presented. The pre-trained SUMO network is used as the backbone. It
==PAGE:73==
6.3 Experiments
63
was mentioned previously that conditional DETR was used for most of the proto-
typing since it showed superior performance and training speed. This experiment
investigates if this statement is true. The same training conditions are used as for
other DETR variants and SUMO.
6.3.3
Characterizing detected sleep spindles
As it was described in chapter 4 in this project we are given a dataset from the
Psychiatry Center of Copenhagen. The explored methods for sleep spindle detection
will be used to find spindle annotations in the given data. Then the resulting spindles
will be characterised similarly to how it was done in chapter 4 for MODA. Density,
duration and amplitude values are extracted and visualised. Since some of the subjects
are first-degree relatives of schizophrenia patients groupings in characteristics are
expected.
This is because first-degree relatives tend to have lower density values
and lower amplitude values in comparison to healthy controls as was described in
chapter 2.
==PAGE:74==
64
==PAGE:75==
CHAPTER 7
Results and discussion
In this chapter the training and evaluation results for the previously described meth-
ods in chapter 6 are given.
7.1
Results
The visualisations for the training and validation losses and F1 scores are presented
here starting with previous work and then presenting the results of DETR training.
7.1.1
Replicating SUMO
As described in subsection 6.3.1 the SUMO model was replicated and trained on
the GS annotations of the MODA dataset. The loss values and the F1 scores are
visualised in Figure 7.1. The loss values for training and validation subsets drop to
around 0.25 at epoch 20 and remain similar for the rest of the training. Likewise, the
F1 score reaches the value of 0.8 at around epoch 10 and remains stable. Following
from these findings it could be said that the model converged. However, the accuracy
of the original implementation (F1 = 0.82) could not be reached.
Figure 7.1: Loss and accuracy curves for training of SUMO
==PAGE:76==
66
7 Results and discussion
7.1.2
Experiments with DETR variants
The different variations of DETR described in subsection 6.3.2 are trained and their
results are presented.
As was mentioned in chapter 6 DETR is trained based on
cross-entropy, L1 and GIoU losses. For each experiment, their unscaled versions are
visualised in separate plots and another plot is created where the scaled variants are
combined.
Additionally, the outputted sleep spindle annotations are queries with
the top 3 highest confidence scores. This was done throughout prototyping to spot
if the model is learning. Other techniques to output predictions were experimented
with.
This was used for the evaluation of each model on all subsets as shown in
Table 7.1. Here the predictions are kept when the confidence score is bigger than
the top score minus the standard deviation of all score values.
As explained in
Figure 7.2: Loss values for Conditional DETR with a backbone of 3 convolutional
layers
subsection 6.3.2 the initial experiment utilized a simple backbone of three stacked
convolutional layers. The loss and accuracy values for the training period can be
seen in Figure 7.2 and Figure 7.4. From the former figure, it seems that the model
continuously improved throughout the majority of the training period without over-
fitting. Towards the mark of 50 epochs, the training slowed down. Similarly, for
the F1 scores the performance improved throughout training and slowly converged
towards the end of training. Following, backbone architecture inspired by the SUMO
[31] was evaluated. The loss values are presented in Figure 7.3, whereas the F1 scores
==PAGE:77==
7.1 Results
67
Figure 7.3: Loss values for Conditional DETR with SUMO as a backbone
are shown in Figure 7.5. Firstly, when no dropout is applied the training loss drops
throughout the whole 80 epochs and the combined validation loss stays at a similar
value from 40 epochs until the end. Interestingly, cross-entropy loss for the validation
subset increases towards the end of training. When dropout is applied the model
loss decreases sharply around 10 epochs later in comparison to the variant without
dropout. Generally, the loss values for the dropout variant are larger throughout
the whole training period. A similar trend is seen in Figure 7.5, where the dropout
version takes longer to achieve an F1 score better than 0.2. However, it seems that
both variations of the model converge.
In the next experiment the configuration
is almost the same as in the previous one. Again, the SUMO inspired backbone is
used, however, in this scenario, a pre-trained version is considered. The pre-trained
model is a result of duplication of SUMO as described in subsection 6.3.1. As can be
seen in Figure 7.6 the training loss of the non-dropout variant of the model achieves
the lowest values. However, the loss for the validation subset is the highest among
the four. Interestingly, the validation losses for the dropout variant of the model are
smaller indicating better generalization. However, this is not represented in Figure 7.7
as the values are similar for all four curves.
==PAGE:78==
68
7 Results and discussion
Figure 7.4: F1 score values for Conditional DETR with a backbone of 3 convolu-
tional layers
Figure 7.5: F1 score values for Conditional DETR with SUMO as a backbone
Figure 7.6:
Loss values for Conditional DETR with a pre-trained SUMO as a
backbone
==PAGE:79==
7.1 Results
69
Figure 7.7: F1 score values for Conditional DETR with a pre-trained SUMO as a
backbone
Lastly, the results of the training of the original DETR variant are presented. The
loss curves are given in Figure 7.8 and the accuracy curves are given in Figure 7.9.
It can be seen that training is much slower and less stable in comparison when con-
ditional DETR is used. Each of the loss metrics and the F1 score is lower than all of
the tested conditional DETR variants.
Figure 7.8: Loss values for original DETR with a pre-trained SUMO as a backbone
==PAGE:80==
70
7 Results and discussion
Figure 7.9:
F1 score values for original DETR with a pre-trained SUMO as a
backbone
7.1.3
Validation of different architectures
Training
Validation
Test
A7
0.7454
0.7291
0.7429
SUMO
0.8058
0.7623
0.7585
C-DETR Simple
0.7376
0.7136
0.7175
C-DETR SUMO
0.7960
0.7332
0.7502
C-DETR SUMO dropout
0.7152
0.6767
0.6930
C-DETR pre-trained
0.8379
0.7627
0.7487
C-DETR pre-trained dropout
0.8024
0.7518
0.7426
DETR SUMO pre-trained
0.2543
0.2509
0.2642
Table 7.1: F1 scores for each evaluated model for the training, validation and test
subsets
The results for every tested model are given in a comparative manner. First of all,
the F1 scores for training, validation and test subsets can be seen in Table 7.1 (condi-
tional DETR is referred to as C-DETR). The TP, FP and FN values for each model
when evaluated on the test subset can be found in Table 9.2. The best-performing
model is SUMO with an F1 score of 0.7585 on the test subset.
The second best
is conditional DETR with non-pre-trained SUMO as the backbone as described in
subsection 6.3.2. Here the achieved F1 score is 0.7502 for the test subset. The worst
performance was displayed by a dropout variation of the same model with an F1
score of 0.6930 on the test subset. Additionally, A7, SUMO and conditional DETR
with SUMO backbone were evaluated on several test samples and their detections are
shown in Figure 7.10, Figure 7.11 and Figure 7.12. Correct annotations from the GS,
predicted annotations and a spectrogram for the 0-25 Hz frequency range are given
in each figure. The spectrogram is useful to spot activity in the frequency range of
sleep spindles. In the case of Figure 7.10, Figure 7.11 and Figure 7.12, it can be seen
==PAGE:81==
7.1 Results
71
that DETR is more confident and outputs more predictions in comparison to A7 and
SUMO. However, duplicated predictions are seen in Figure 7.12. Additional examples
for an older subject are given in Figure 9.8, Figure 9.9 and Figure 9.10.
Figure 7.10: Predictions of the A7 algorithm on a window from SS3 of the test
subset
Figure 7.11: Predictions of the SUMO algorithm on a window from SS3 of the test
subset
==PAGE:82==
72
7 Results and discussion
Figure 7.12: Predictions of the conditional DETR with SUMO as backbone on a
window from SS3 of the test subset
7.1.4
Spindle characterization
Here the results of the experiment described in subsection 6.3.3 are given. A7, SUMO
and DETR with a backbone structure like SUMO were used. The characteristics of de-
tected sleep spindles are shown as KDE (kernel density estimate) plots in Figure 7.13,
Figure 7.14 and Figure 7.15. Since first-degree relatives are expected to have lower
density and amplitude values multimodality is expected in the distributions. The
found characteristics are different for the detections of each model. A7 and SUMO
detected spindles are most likely the most reliable as they were the most conservative
with their predictions as can be seen in Table 9.2. From their respective character-
istic plots Figure 7.13 and Figure 7.14 some multimodality is seen in the amplitude
distributions. Multimodality is also seen Figure 7.15, however, this does not appear
in Figure 7.13 and Figure 7.14.
((a)) Density
((b)) Duration
((c)) Amplitude
Figure 7.13: Characteristics for sleep spindles detected using the A7 algorithm on
samples from the dataset provided by Psychiatry Center of Copenhagen
==PAGE:83==
7.2 Discussion
73
((a)) Density
((b)) Duration
((c)) Amplitude
Figure 7.14: Characteristics for sleep spindles detected using the SUMO model on
samples from the dataset provided by Psychiatry Center of Copenhagen
((a)) Density
((b)) Duration
((c)) Amplitude
Figure 7.15: Characteristics for sleep spindles detected using the DETR model with
SUMO structure as its backonbe on samples from the dataset provided by Psychiatry
Center of Copenhagen
7.2
Discussion
Here we address the described experiments and their performance in comparison to
each other. First of all, the A7 algorithm was replicated with an F1 score of 0.7429
on the test subset. The performance is similar to what was described in [38]. SUMO
was also replicated and was a vital tool in the development of DETR for sleep spindle
detection. The performance as given in the original publication [31] could not be
replicated. The model was trained with segments of 115 and 30 seconds and with
max-pooling of size 4 and size 2. Even though the training results were not shown
here, the original parameters and architecture were tried out, however, still F1 score
was lower (F1 = 0.8 in our case in comparison to F1 = 0.82 in [31]). In contrast to
[31] the model began to over-fit fairly quickly when training. The difference in per-
formance for the replicated model and the original SUMO implementation may be
due to a mistake in the model code, data processing, software differences or hardware
differences. A variation of SUMO, which also served as a backbone to DETR, was
trained and the results are shown in section 7.1. Here weight decay is used to tackle
over-fitting as it became a problem fairly quickly.
Different backbone variations for DETR were presented, where the most simple one
==PAGE:84==
74
7 Results and discussion
was constructed from three convolutional layers with ReLU activation and batch nor-
malization after each of them. The other experiments utilized the SUMO model as
the backbone as it was hypothesised that the backbone of several convolutional lay-
ers would not produce complex enough features for the DETR model. It could be
said that the hypothesis was correct as conditional DETR with SUMO as backbone
outperformed the same model with the simpler backbone as presented in Table 7.1.
However, the simple backbone variation did not perform as badly as expected and
achieved better results than the conditional DETR with dropout and SUMO as its
backbone.
Another hypothesis was that having a pre-trained backbone would be
important and would help DETR to achieve better performance. This is because a
pre-trained backbone was used in the original publication of DETR [12] and condi-
tional DETR [54]. It was also expected, that the pre-trained backbone would be able
to provide higher-quality features to DETR and thus increase performance. Surpris-
ingly, the F1 score for the test subset was lower for the pre-trained variant. However,
the F1 score for the training subset is the highest among the tested DETR variants.
This could be indicative of better model potential if more time is spent on tuning.
Additionally, as seen in Figure 7.6 the training is initially faster when compared to
the training process shown in Figure 7.3. This could be helpful when further proto-
typing and improving the proposed methods.
In general, it was shown that it is possible to use DETR variants for object detection
in 1D data or more particularly time series data. For the case of sleep spindle de-
tection, the performance of DETR is comparable to other available, well-performing
methods such as the A7 algorithm or SUMO. However, DETR is a model of high
complexity as it uses one neural network as its feature extractor and another model
for feature enhancement and prediction. The latter part is a transformer, which is
notorious for requiring large datasets to be trained [59]. Originally, DETR utilizes
COCO [43] and ImageNet [16] datasets, so it could be said that the achieved state-of-
the-art performance is due to this fact. Otherwise, the highly complex model would
be much harder to train and so the performance would likely drop. For the case
of sleep spindle detection, even though recently larger datasets like MASS [58] and
MODA [38] were published it could be not enough since they are still much smaller
than what was used originally in [12]. Additionally, the architecture of DETR and
its complexity may not be suitable for sleep spindle detection. The explored SUMO
model [31] utilizes a simpler structure, where the temporal resolution of the processed
features is emphasized by keeping its size the same throughout the model. It could
be argued that such architectures are more suitable for the task and could generalize
better. More analysis is needed to understand if this is the case. Better performing
DETR variants [89] are available, which showed improved performance in compari-
son to the original DETR [12]. It could be argued that they would also show better
performance for the task of spindle detection. This is further discussed in chapter 8.
It was mentioned that conditional DETR was mostly used for prototyping. An ex-
periment was made, where the original DETR was trained.
Its performance and
==PAGE:85==
7.2 Discussion
75
training speed were compared to the conditional variant. The choice to use condi-
tional DETR was warranted since the original DETR showed worse performance and
less stable training. This was to be expected as it was discussed in the publication of
conditional DETR [54]. The training is eased for the improved DETR variant since
the content queries and spatial queries were separated by design.
The developed models were used for spindle detection in the data from the Psychi-
atry Center of Copenhagen. The resulting annotations were used to extract spindle
characteristics, which could then be used to find multimodality in distributions. This
is because first-degree relatives of schizophrenia patients tend to have lower sleep
spindle density and amplitude in comparison to healthy subjects as was described
in chapter 2. The characteristics of detected spindles from A7, SUMO and DETR
models were presented in subsection 7.1.4. The results of the two former models were
deemed more trustworthy since as seen in Table 9.2 they tend to be more conserva-
tive. The amplitude distributions for both models showed multimodality, which is in
line with our hypothesis. However, it is important to note that the studied sample
is quite small. Additionally, the windows fed to the models were randomly sampled
from the given data, which also adds unreliability.
==PAGE:86==
76
==PAGE:87==
CHAPTER 8
Conclusion and Future
work
8.1
Conclusion
In this Master’s thesis project, previous work for sleep spindle detection was analysed
and the DETR (DEtection TRansformer) was modified to solve the task at hand. In
particular, it was shown that DETR and its variants can be used with 1D EEG/time
series data. This mainly required modification of the feature extractor part, referred
to as the backbone, and modification of some parts of the transformer. It was also
shown that the resulting model is able to successfully detect sleep spindles and com-
pete with the previously suggested models. The golden standard (5342 spindles from
180 subjects) from MODA dataset [38] was used for training and evaluation of mod-
els. Validation and test subsets were each 15% of the dataset. The A7 algorithm
served as the baseline method because of its wide use in research publications [38,
31]. Conditional DETR with the architecture of SUMO [31] as its backbone beat the
benchmark on the test subset by achieving an F1 score of 0.7502 in comparison to the
F1 score of 0.7429 in the case of A7. However, the proposed method did not beat the
state-of-the-art SUMO model, which achieved an F1 score of 0.756 in our evaluations
and an F1 score of 0.82 in the publication [31]. Note, there is room for improve-
ment in the proposed method as described in the following Future work section. In
this Master’s thesis project, the replicated and developed methods were used on the
data from the Psychiatry Center of Copenhagen. The predicted spindles were charac-
terised and their distributions were shown. As the subjects of the dataset contained
first-degree relatives of schizophrenia patients it was expected to see multimodality
in distributions as groups of first-degree relatives and healthy controls should appear.
This is due to the relationship between sleep spindle characteristics and schizophrenia.
Grouping was seen in the amplitude distributions of the detected spindles. However,
no annotations or information about the subjects was given, so the findings cannot
be confirmed or denied.
==PAGE:88==
78
8 Conclusion and Future work
8.2
Future work
In this section, the possible further improvements on the shortcomings of the analysed
methods are given. DETR [12] and its variants are models of high complexity, which
have many tunable hyper-parameters. It is very likely that the proposed DETR imple-
mentations for sleep spindle detection can be further fine-tuned by both, addressing
the backbone and the transformer part of the model. Besides this, DETR is a highly
popular model among the deep learning community. In this project we explored one
variation of DETR [12], conditional DETR [54]. Conditional DETR addressed the
slow convergence of original DETR and improved its accuracy. This was done by
separating the spatial and content queries, which eases the dependence on quality
content queries. However, there are other research articles [89, 88], which improve on
both DETR and conditional DETR. Of particular interest is DINO: DETR with Im-
proved DeNoising Anchor Boxes for End-to-End Object Detection. As written in [89]
the model beats the state-of-the-art, especially for small objects. Most importantly,
this is done with a reduced model size, reduced pre-training detection dataset and
reduced backbone pre-training dataset. This is particularly relevant for this project
as the datasets of MODA and MASS are of a smaller scale in comparison to COCO
and ImageNet. With inspiration from previous DETR variants like DN-DETR [40]
and DAB-DETR [44] the authors presented CDN (Contrastive DeNoising), Mixed
Query Selection and Look Forward Twice techniques. CDN builds on top of the work
from DN-DETR. Here groups of positive and negative queries are given together with
the ground truth. Both, positive and negative queries are noisy versions of the target.
Note, the noise is small so all of these queries are close to each other. This inhibits
confusion and helps the model learn to choose high-quality queries. This is especially
relevant for sleep spindle detection as it was observed that DETR can predict dupli-
cate regions. Mixed Query Selection is also a method that has been seen in previous
work [91]. The idea is to use Top-K features from the last encoder layer to enhance
the quality of queries. In Deformable DETR [91] these top features were used for
the improvement of both the positional and the content queries. In DINO the top
features are only used for the enhancement of the positional information. Again, this
might prove beneficial for sleep spindle detection since only a single class is predicted
(without ”no object”) and so localization of the detected objects is of high importance.
Lastly, [89] proposes the ”Look Forward twice” approach for the improvement of box
predictions. This seems to slightly improve model accuracy, however, the upgrade
is not significant for small objects. Also, since many DETR variants use the code
structure originally given in [21] the transition should not cause too many problems.
The combination of more time spent on fine-tuning the model and usage of advanced
DETR variants would most likely improve the sleep spindle detection performance
shown in this project.
==PAGE:89==
CHAPTER 9
Appendix
Mean
SD
Min
Max
C1/SS1
Total
63.6
5.3
55
76
Men
63.5
5.6
55
76
Women
63.7
4.9
56
72
C1/SS2
Total
23.6
3.7
18
33
Men
24.3
4.2
19
33
Women
23.2
3.5
18
30
C1/SS3
Total
42.5
18.9
20
69
Men
40.4
19.4
20
69
Women
44.2
18.6
20
69
C1/SS4
Total
25.3
4.3
18
35
Men
27.4
4.5
21
35
Women
24.1
3.9
18
33
C1/SS5
Total
25.0
7.4
20
59
Men
23.0
2.2
20
27
Women
26.9
10.0
20
59
Total
40.6
19.4
18
76
C1
Men
42.9
19.8
19
76
Women
38.3
18.9
18
72
Table 9.1: Age characteristics as given in [58]
==PAGE:90==
80
9 Appendix
Figure 9.1:
Spindle frequency and density relationship with age.
Darker colors
indicate higher density [60]
((a)) Density
((b)) Duration
((c)) Amplitude
Figure 9.2: Sleep spindle characteristics for SS1 of MODA
((a)) Density
((b)) Duration
((c)) Amplitude
Figure 9.3: Sleep spindle characteristics for SS2 of MODA
==PAGE:91==
9 Appendix
81
((a)) Density
((b)) Duration
((c)) Amplitude
Figure 9.4: Sleep spindle characteristics for SS2 of MODA
((a)) Density
((b)) Duration
((c)) Amplitude
Figure 9.5: Sleep spindle characteristics for SS4 of MODA
((a)) Density
((b)) Duration
((c)) Amplitude
Figure 9.6: Sleep spindle characteristics for SS5 of MODA
((a)) Density
((b)) Duration
((c)) Amplitude
Figure 9.7: Sleep spindle characteristics for the whole MODA datset (or C1)
==PAGE:92==
82
9 Appendix
TP
FP
FN
F1
A7
487
208
129
0.743
SUMO
501
204
115
0.759
C-DETR Simple
503
283
113
0.718
C-DETR SUMO
530
267
86
0.750
C-DETR SUMO dropout
535
393
81
0.693
C-DETR pre-trained
514
243
102
0.749
C-DETR pre-trained dropout
515
256
101
0.743
DETR SUMO pre-trained
444
2301
172
0.264
Table 9.2: Detailed prediction statistics for the models evaluated on the test subset
of MODA
Figure 9.8: Predictions of the A7 algorithm on a window from SS1 of the test subset
Figure 9.9: Predictions of the SUMO model on a window from SS1 of the test subset
==PAGE:93==
9 Appendix
83
Figure 9.10: Predictions of the conditional DETR with SUMO as backbone on a
window from SS1 of the test subset
==PAGE:94==
84
==PAGE:95==
Bibliography
[1]
url: https://www.researchgate.net/figure/An-OpenBCI-3D-printed-
EEG- cap- with- integrated- HD- tDCS- The- blue- electrodes- are- EEG-
the_fig3_331154618.
[2]
url: https://giou.stanford.edu/.
[3]
A comprehensive guide to Convolutional Neural Networks - the eli5 way. April
2023. url: https://saturncloud.io/blog/a-comprehensive-guide-to-
convolutional-neural-networks-the-eli5-way/.
[4]
Charu C. Aggarwal. Neural Networks and Deep Learning. A Textbook. Cham:
Springer, 2018, page 497. isbn: 978-3-319-94462-3. doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-
94463-0.
[5]
Martin Arjovsky, Soumith Chintala, and Léon Bottou. “Wasserstein generative
adversarial networks.” In: International conference on machine learning. PMLR.
2017, pages 214–223.
[6]
Atten4Vis. Atten4vis/conditionaldetr: This repository is an oﬀicial implemen-
tation of the ICCV 2021 paper “Conditional detr for fast training convergence”.
(https://arxiv.org/abs/2108.06152). url: https://github.com/Atten4Vis/
ConditionalDETR.
[7]
Chi Hung Au and Christopher-James Harvey. “Systematic review: the rela-
tionship between sleep spindle activity with cognitive functions, positive and
negative symptoms in psychosis.” In: Sleep medicine: X 2 (2020), page 100025.
[8]
Chiara Baglioni et al. “Insomnia as a predictor of depression: a meta-analytic
evaluation of longitudinal epidemiological studies.” In: Journal of affective dis-
orders 135.1-3 (2011), pages 10–19.
[9]
Yoshua Bengio, Patrice Simard, and Paolo Frasconi. “Learning long-term de-
pendencies with gradient descent is diﬀicult.” In: IEEE transactions on neural
networks 5.2 (1994), pages 157–166.
[10]
C.M. Bishop. Neural networks for pattern recognition. Oxford University Press,
USA, 1995.
[11]
Tom Brown et al. “Language models are few-shot learners.” In: Advances in
neural information processing systems 33 (2020), pages 1877–1901.
==PAGE:96==
86
Bibliography
[12]
Nicolas Carion et al. “End-to-end object detection with transformers.” In: Com-
puter Vision–ECCV 2020: 16th European Conference, Glasgow, UK, August
23–28, 2020, Proceedings, Part I 16. Springer. 2020, pages 213–229.
[13]
Kenneth Ward Church. “Word2Vec.” In: Natural Language Engineering 23.1
(2017), pages 155–162.
[14]
John F Cryan and Timothy G Dinan. “Mind-altering microorganisms: the im-
pact of the gut microbiota on brain and behaviour.” In: Nature reviews neuro-
science 13.10 (2012), pages 701–712.
[15]
Giulia Fanny De Giorgis et al. “Evolution of daytime quiet sleep components in
early treated phenylketonuric infants.” In: Brain and Development 18.3 (1996),
pages 201–206.
[16]
Jia Deng et al. “Imagenet: A large-scale hierarchical image database.” In: 2009
IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition. Ieee. 2009, pages 248–
255.
[17]
Jacob Devlin et al. “Bert: Pre-training of deep bidirectional transformers for
language understanding.” In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.04805 (2018).
[18]
Stéphanie Devuyst et al. “Automatic sleep spindles detection—overview and
development of a standard proposal assessment method.” In: 2011 Annual in-
ternational conference of the IEEE engineering in medicine and biology society.
IEEE. 2011, pages 1713–1716.
[19]
Dslaborg. Dslaborg/sumo: Sumo: Advanced sleep spindle identification with neu-
ral networks. url: https://github.com/dslaborg/sumo.
[20]
Andrius Dzedzickis, Artūras Kaklauskas, and Vytautas Bucinskas. “Human
emotion recognition: Review of sensors and methods.” In: Sensors 20.3 (2020),
page 592.
[21]
Facebookresearch. Facebookresearch/detr: End-to-end object detection with Trans-
formers. url: https://github.com/facebookresearch/detr.
[22]
LC Fonseca et al. “Dementia, mild cognitive impairment and quantitative EEG
in patients with Parkinson’s disease.” In: Clinical EEG and neuroscience 40.3
(2009), pages 168–172.
[23]
Not given. 0AD. url: https://cs231n.github.io/convolutional-networks/.
[24]
Xavier Glorot and Yoshua Bengio. “Understanding the diﬀiculty of training
deep feedforward neural networks.” In: Proceedings of the thirteenth interna-
tional conference on artificial intelligence and statistics. JMLR Workshop and
Conference Proceedings. 2010, pages 249–256.
[25]
Ian Goodfellow et al. “Generative adversarial networks.” In: Communications
of the ACM 63.11 (2020), pages 139–144.
[26]
Ian J. Goodfellow, Yoshua Bengio, and Aaron Courville. Deep Learning. http:
//www.deeplearningbook.org. Cambridge, MA, USA: MIT Press, 2016.
==PAGE:97==
Bibliography
87
[27]
Kaiming He et al. “Deep residual learning for image recognition.” In: Proceed-
ings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition. 2016,
pages 770–778.
[28]
Kaiming He et al. “Identity mappings in deep residual networks.” In: Computer
Vision–ECCV 2016: 14th European Conference, Amsterdam, The Netherlands,
October 11–14, 2016, Proceedings, Part IV 14. Springer. 2016, pages 630–645.
[29]
Leigh R Hochberg et al. “Reach and grasp by people with tetraplegia using a
neurally controlled robotic arm.” In: Nature 485.7398 (2012).
[30]
John J Hopfield. “Neural networks and physical systems with emergent collec-
tive computational abilities.” In: Proceedings of the national academy of sciences
79.8 (1982), pages 2554–2558.
[31]
Lars Kaulen et al. “Advanced sleep spindle identification with neural networks.”
In: Scientific Reports 12.1 (2022), page 7686.
[32]
Baris Kayalibay, Grady Jensen, and Patrick van der Smagt. “CNN-based seg-
mentation of medical imaging data.” In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1701.03056 (2017).
[33]
Nitish Shirish Keskar et al. “On large-batch training for deep learning: Gener-
alization gap and sharp minima.” In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1609.04836 (2016).
[34]
Klacourse. Klacourse/MODAGC : MODAGroupsConsensus(GC)setofspindles.
url: https://github.com/klacourse/MODA_GC.
[35]
Alex Krizhevsky, Ilya Sutskever, and Geoffrey E Hinton. “Imagenet classifica-
tion with deep convolutional neural networks.” In: Communications of the ACM
60.6 (2017), pages 84–90.
[36]
Harold W Kuhn. “The Hungarian method for the assignment problem.” In:
Naval research logistics quarterly 2.1-2 (1955), pages 83–97.
[37]
Karine Lacourse et al. “A sleep spindle detection algorithm that emulates hu-
man expert spindle scoring.” In: Journal of neuroscience methods 316 (2019),
pages 3–11.
[38]
Karine Lacourse et al. “Massive online data annotation, crowdsourcing to gen-
erate high quality sleep spindle annotations from EEG data.” In: Scientific data
7.1 (2020), page 190.
[39]
Mikhail A Lebedev and Miguel A L Nicolelis. “Brain-Machine Interfaces: From
Basic Science to Neuroprostheses and Neurorehabilitation.” In: Physiological
Reviews 97.2 (2017).
[40]
Feng Li et al. “Dn-detr: Accelerate detr training by introducing query denois-
ing.” In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition. 2022, pages 13619–13627.
[41]
Elyse Limoges et al. “Atypical sleep architecture and the autism phenotype.”
In: Brain 128.5 (2005), pages 1049–1061.
==PAGE:98==
88
Bibliography
[42]
Tsung-Yi Lin et al. “Focal loss for dense object detection.” In: Proceedings of
the IEEE international conference on computer vision. 2017, pages 2980–2988.
[43]
Tsung-Yi Lin et al. “Microsoft coco: Common objects in context.” In: Computer
Vision–ECCV 2014: 13th European Conference, Zurich, Switzerland, September
6-12, 2014, Proceedings, Part V 13. Springer. 2014, pages 740–755.
[44]
Shilong Liu et al. “Dab-detr: Dynamic anchor boxes are better queries for detr.”
In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2201.12329 (2022).
[45]
Ying Liu et al. “A fuzzy psycho-physiological approach to enable the understand-
ing of an engineer’s affect status during CAD activities.” In: Computer-Aided
Design 54 (2014), pages 19–38.
[46]
Steve Lohr. “The age of big data.” In: New York Times 11.2012 (2012).
[47]
Ilya Loshchilov and Frank Hutter. “Decoupled weight decay regularization.” In:
arXiv preprint arXiv:1711.05101 (2017).
[48]
Dara S Manoach et al. “Sleep spindle deficits in antipsychotic-naı̈ve early course
schizophrenia and in non-psychotic first-degree relatives.” In: Frontiers in hu-
man neuroscience 8 (2014), page 762.
[49]
mariux255. Mariux255/backbonesdetrspindle : Arepositoryfortrainingofbackbones..
url: https://github.com/mariux255/backbones_DETR_spindle.
[50]
mariux255. Mariux255/CONDDETR : ConditionaldetrusedforSpindleDetection.
url: https://github.com/mariux255/Cond_DETR.
[51]
mariux255. Mariux255/DETROG : UsingoriginalDETRcodeforSpindleDetection.
url: https://github.com/mariux255/DETR_OG.
[52]
mariux255. Mariux255/massmodapreprocessing : Thepreprocessingofmassandmodadatasets..
url: https://github.com/mariux255/MASS_MODA_preprocessing.
[53]
John McCarthy et al. “A proposal for the dartmouth summer research project
on artificial intelligence, august 31, 1955.” In: AI magazine 27.4 (2006), pages 12–
12.
[54]
Depu Meng et al. “Conditional detr for fast training convergence.” In: Proceed-
ings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision. 2021,
pages 3651–3660.
[55]
Volodymyr Mnih et al. “Playing atari with deep reinforcement learning.” In:
arXiv preprint arXiv:1312.5602 (2013).
[56]
N/a N/a. Maxima and minima. October 2020. url: https://en.wikipedia.
org/wiki/Maxima_and_minima.
[57]
Michael A. Nielsen. Neural Networks and Deep Learning. misc. 2018. url: http:
//neuralnetworksanddeeplearning.com/.
[58]
Christian O’reilly et al. “Montreal Archive of Sleep Studies: an open-access
resource for instrument benchmarking and exploratory research.” In: Journal of
sleep research 23.6 (2014), pages 628–635.
==PAGE:99==
Bibliography
89
[59]
Martin Popel and Ondřej Bojar. “Training tips for the transformer model.” In:
arXiv preprint arXiv:1804.00247 (2018).
[60]
SM Purcell et al. “Characterizing sleep spindles in 11,630 individuals from
the National Sleep Research Resource.” In: Nature communications 8.1 (2017),
page 15930.
[61]
Alec Radford et al. “Language models are unsupervised multitask learners.” In:
OpenAI blog 1.8 (2019), page 9.
[62]
Colin Raffel et al. “Exploring the limits of transfer learning with a unified text-
to-text transformer.” In: The Journal of Machine Learning Research 21.1 (2020),
pages 5485–5551.
[63]
ResNet (actually) explained in under 10 minutes. October 2022. url: https:
//www.youtube.com/watch?v=o_3mboe1jYI&amp;t=360s.
[64]
Anh H. Reynolds. Convolutional Neural Networks (cnns). October 2017. url:
https://anhreynolds.com/blogs/cnn.html.
[65]
Hamid Rezatofighi et al. “Generalized intersection over union: A metric and a
loss for bounding box regression.” In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference
on computer vision and pattern recognition. 2019, pages 658–666.
[66]
Rami Al-Rfou et al. “Character-level language modeling with deeper self-attention.”
In: Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence. Volume 33. 01.
2019, pages 3159–3166.
[67]
Anna Ricci et al. “Sex and pubertal differences in the maturational trajectories
of sleep spindles in the transition from childhood to adolescence: A population-
based study.” In: Eneuro 8.4 (2021).
[68]
Olaf Ronneberger, Philipp Fischer, and Thomas Brox. “U-net: Convolutional
networks for biomedical image segmentation.” In: Medical Image Computing and
Computer-Assisted Intervention–MICCAI 2015: 18th International Conference,
Munich, Germany, October 5-9, 2015, Proceedings, Part III 18. Springer. 2015,
pages 234–241.
[69]
Frank Rosenblatt. “The perceptron: a probabilistic model for information stor-
age and organization in the brain.” In: Psychological review 65.6 (1958), page 386.
[70]
Arunabha M Roy. “An eﬀicient multi-scale CNN model with intrinsic feature
integration for motor imagery EEG subject classification in brain-machine in-
terfaces.” In: Biomedical Signal Processing and Control 74 (2022), page 103496.
[71]
David E Rumelhart, Geoffrey E Hinton, and Ronald J Williams. “Learning rep-
resentations by back-propagating errors.” In: nature 323.6088 (1986), pages 533–
536.
[72]
Jürgen Schmidhuber. “Deep learning in neural networks: An overview.” In: Neu-
ral networks 61 (2015), pages 85–117.
==PAGE:100==
90
Bibliography
[73]
Donald L. Schomer and Fernando H. Lopes da Silva. Niedermeyer’s Electroen-
cephalography: Basic Principles, Clinical Applications, and Related Fields. Ox-
ford University Press, November 2017. isbn: 9780190228484. doi: 10.1093/
med/ 9780190228484 .001. 0001. url: https://doi.org/10.1093/med/
9780190228484.001.0001.
[74]
Masamitsu Shibagaki, Sigehiro Kiyono, and Kazuyoshi Watanabe. “Spindle evo-
lution in normal and mentally retarded children: a review.” In: Sleep 5.1 (1982),
pages 47–57.
[75]
Carole H Sudre et al. “Generalised dice overlap as a deep learning loss function
for highly unbalanced segmentations.” In: Deep Learning in Medical Image Anal-
ysis and Multimodal Learning for Clinical Decision Support: Third International
Workshop, DLMIA 2017, and 7th International Workshop, ML-CDS 2017, Held
in Conjunction with MICCAI 2017, Québec City, QC, Canada, September 14,
Proceedings 3. Springer. 2017, pages 240–248.
[76]
Swarby. Swarby/A7 spindle detector described by Lacourse et al. 2018. url:
https://github.com/swarby/A7_LacourseSpindleDetector.
[77]
TMSi. The 10-20 system for EEG. February 2023. url: https://info.tmsi.
com/blog/the-10-20-system-for-eeg.
[78]
Torch.nn. url: https://pytorch.org/docs/stable/nn.html#non-linear-
activations-weighted-sum-nonlinearity.
[79]
Torch.nn. url: https://pytorch.org/docs/stable/nn.html#loss-functions.
[80]
Torch.nn. url: https://pytorch.org/docs/stable/optim.html.
[81]
Understanding neural networks through deep visualization. url: http://yosinski.
com/deepvis.
[82]
Ashish Vaswani et al. “Attention is all you need.” In: Advances in neural infor-
mation processing systems 30 (2017).
[83]
Erin J Wamsley et al. “Reduced sleep spindles and spindle coherence in schizophre-
nia: mechanisms of impaired memory consolidation?” In: Biological psychiatry
71.2 (2012), pages 154–161.
[84]
Lan Wei et al. “Deep-spindle: An automated sleep spindle detection system for
analysis of infant sleep spindles.” In: Computers in Biology and Medicine 150
(2022), page 106096.
[85]
Peter Welinder et al. “The multidimensional wisdom of crowds.” In: Advances
in neural information processing systems 23 (2010).
[86]
Jonathan R Wolpaw and Eric W Wolpaw. Brain-Computer Interfaces: Princi-
ples and Practice. Oxford University Press, 2012.
[87]
Jiaxin You et al. “SpindleU-Net: An adaptive u-net framework for sleep spindle
detection in single-channel EEG.” In: IEEE Transactions on Neural Systems
and Rehabilitation Engineering 29 (2021), pages 1614–1623.
==PAGE:101==
Bibliography
91
[88]
Gongjie Zhang et al. “Accelerating DETR convergence via semantic-aligned
matching.” In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision
and Pattern Recognition. 2022, pages 949–958.
[89]
Hao Zhang et al. “Dino: Detr with improved denoising anchor boxes for end-to-
end object detection.” In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.03605 (2022).
[90]
Zoey Y Zhang et al. “Longitudinal analysis of sleep spindle maturation from
childhood through late adolescence.” In: Journal of Neuroscience 41.19 (2021),
pages 4253–4261.
[91]
Xizhou Zhu et al. “Deformable detr: Deformable transformers for end-to-end
object detection.” In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.04159 (2020).
==PAGE:102==
