==PAGE:1==
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Master’s Thesis 
 
PhageReTerm: a tool for correcting 
circular permutations in 
bacteriophage genomes 
sequenced with Oxford Nanopore 
 
Author: 
Prince Ravi Leow 
(s220520) 
 
Supervisors: 
Ole Lund (Section for Bioinformatics, DTU) 
Thomas Sicheritz-Pontén (Globe Institute, KU) 
Bent Petersen (Globe Institute, KU) 
Department of Heath Technology 
Technical University of Denmark 
June 2023 
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Preface
This thesis has been prepared between January and June of 2023. The project
work was a collaboration with the Globe Institute, in partial fulfilment for the de-
gree Master of Bioinformatics and Systems Biology, MSc Eng. at the Technical
University of Denmark (DTU).
The author would like to thank his supervisors Ole Lund of DTU, along with Bent
Petersen and Thomas Sicheritz-Pontén of the Globe Institute, for their inspiration
and guidance. In addition, the author would like to thank Andrew Millard of the
University of Leicester, for graciously providing data, and lending his time and
expertise throughout the duration of the project.
It is assumed that the reader has basic knowledge in the areas of microbiol-
ogy, DNA sequencing technology and computer science.
PhageReTerm: a tool for correcting circular permutations in bacteriophages sequenced with
Oxford Nanopore
iii
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
The outcome of this project, is a proposed bioinformatics strategy for detecting ter-
minally redundant circular permutations (TRCP’s) in bacteriophage genomes se-
quenced with Oxford Nanopore. TRCP’s have reportedly caused incorrect nanopore
read assemblies, necessitating tools for their detection and subsequent removal.
Due to early onset lack of available data, nanopore reads containing permuted
genomes were generated by simulating phage DNA packaging mechanisms. The
project yielded the titular proposed k-mer-based and novel mismatch/buffer sys-
tem, which was successfully able to detect the terminal redundancies (TR’s) in
simulated datasets. In addition, a method of flagging non-permuted false positive
genomes via mean Levenshtein distance ( ¯
Lev) of extracted TR’s, was developed.
While usage of
¯
Lev shows promise, its detection limit requires validation with au-
thentic data. In general, the simulated data does not account for sequencing
errors or quality scores, meaning that results stemming from the investigation ul-
timately lack applicability. In general, investigation on authentic data, along with
an increased availability of high quality nanopore reads containing TRCP’s in the
field of bacteriophage research, is required to validate and improve the viability of
the proposed strategy.
iv
PhageReTerm: a tool for correcting circular permutations in bacteriophages sequenced with
Oxford Nanopore
==PAGE:5==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction & Background
1
1.1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Bacteriophage biology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.2.1
”Say Hello To My Little Ph-riend!” . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.2.2
Phage DNA packaging & terminal redundancies
. . . . . .
4
1.3
Oxford Nanopore sequencing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
1.3.1
Pre-existing methods
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2
Materials & Methods
9
2.1
Data access & selection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.1.1
Model organism reference genomes . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.2
Detecting TRP’s on an assembly-level . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.3
Simulating ONT reads with TRP’s
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.3.1
Model-based simulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.3.2
Manual simulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.4
Detecting TRP’s on reads level . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.4.1
Storing duplicated k-mers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.4.2
Determining terminally duplicated regions . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.4.3
Detection of non-permuted genomes . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
2.5
Overview of PhageReTerm & TRCP_Sim
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
2.5.1
Summary of PhageReTerm methods & strategies
. . . . . .
20
2.5.2
Summary of TRCP_Sim methods & strategies
. . . . . . . .
20
3
Results
21
3.1
Model-based simulation of TRP’s . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.2
Simulation with TRCP_Sim
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.3
Detecting TRP’s at assembly level . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.4
Detecting TRP’s at reads level
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.4.1
Detection using k-mers
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.4.2
Detecting TR/non-TR transition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.4.3
Detecting non-permuted genomes and false positives . . .
26
3.4.4
Assessing detection limit
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
PhageReTerm: a tool for correcting circular permutations in bacteriophages sequenced with
Oxford Nanopore
v
==PAGE:6==
4
Discussion
27
4.1
Adoption of ONT sequencing in the phage space . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.2
Detecting TRP’s at assembly level . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4.3
TRP’s and ONT reads simulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4.4
Detecting TRP’s at read level . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.5
Feasibility of
¯
Lev for detecting non-permuted genomes . . . . . . .
30
5
Conclusion
33
6
Future Studies
35
Bibliography
37
A PhageReTerm & TRCP_Sim usage
41
B Omitted tool-specific commands
42
B.1 Simulation with nanosim . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
B.2 Assembly with SPAdes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
B.3 Sequence manipulation with Biopython
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
B.4 ’Self-blast’ with BLAST+ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
B.5 Sequence Alignment Mapping with minimap2 . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
vi
PhageReTerm: a tool for correcting circular permutations in bacteriophages sequenced with
Oxford Nanopore
==PAGE:7==
1
Introduction & Background
1.1
Introduction
Bacteriophages are a type of virus, which only infect bacteria and archaea. Al-
though the humble bacteriophage (or phage for short) may not be the first viral
archetype that comes to mind, research on them has led to numerous impactful
discoveries in molecular biology. Due to phages’ strict affinity to specific bacterial
hosts, phages also have a history in applied target microbial treatment (Clokie
et al., 2011). Over time, this has given rise to an entire field of study, known as
’phage therapy’. While interest in this field has fluctuated over time, with rising
antimicrobial resistance becoming an ever more prevalent problem, interest in
phage therapy has been renewed in the past decade (Hatfull et al., 2022).
The renewed interest in phages has coincided with the rise of a new genera-
tion of DNA sequencing technology - third generation sequencing (TGS). Oxford
Nanopore sequencing technology (ONT or nanopore sequencing) is one of the
forerunners in this generation, and has seen adoption in the field of phage re-
search (Beaulaurier et al., 2020). The previous generation of sequencing plat-
forms (NGS) were characterised by sequencing a high throughput of fragmented
reads, in the so-called shotgun sequencing method. TGS technologies instead
opt for reading the entire length of the input DNA, in the so-called single molecule
or long-read sequencing strategy.
A key advantage of long-read sequencing, is its ability to span the length of entire
phage genomes, have made them of particular interest (Beaulaurier et al., 2020).
This makes it a very attractive tool against infamously troublesome repeat regions,
which traditionally and posed challenges for assembly of NGS reads (Treangen
and Salzberg, 2012), as seen in figure 1.1. As such, the type of repeat region
focused on in this study, is the so-called direct terminal repeat, or ’terminal re-
dundancy’ (TR), as it will be referred to from now on. In the context of a phage
genome, a TR is a region of DNA which appears at the beginning, and the end -
hence being ’terminally redundant’ (detailed subsection 1.2.2).
Some phage genomes have naturally contain TR’s, such as the the ’sticky ends’
used for circularisation in lambda phage. However, some phage genomes acquire
a TR, as an artifact of the phage packaging its DNA content (covered in detail in
section 1.2 Bacteriophage biology). This phenomenon is more pronounced in
PhageReTerm: a tool for correcting circular permutations in bacteriophages sequenced with
Oxford Nanopore
1
==PAGE:8==
Figure 1.1: Example of repeat region causing assembly issues for NGS reads (Treangen
and Salzberg, 2012)
some phages than others, and is called a ’circular permutation’ - owing to the
fact that the order of genes is shifted, between the genomes in a phage popu-
lation. Associate Professor Millard of the University of Leicester, as per private
communication reported that these circular permutations can result in terminal re-
dundancies manifesting in the final nanopore read assembly, and along with being
a key corresponding, was ultimately the catalyst for this project’s inception.
At the time of writing, there is a notable lack of lack of publicly available high qual-
ity ONT read libraries of phages genomes. On the surface, this indicates lack of
ONT sequencing adoption, and thereby lack of relevance or applicability. How-
ever, signs point towards this changing in the near future. Long reads have seen
healthy adoption rates in microbiology (Ciuffreda et al., 2021), along with growing
growing interest and relevance in viromics. While nanopore reads initially bore the
stigma of having producing low-accuracy reads, improvement in sequencing tech-
nology have lead to high reported accuracy, with one study in particular indicated
that nanopore reads are capable of producing finished assemblies (Sereika et al.,
2022). As such, improvements in the technology have resulted in nanopore being
viewed as a viable competitor to the established NGS technologies (Cook et al.,
2023). As further proof, the producers of the most widely adopted NGS platform
Illumina, have recently announced their own foray into long reads (Illumina, n.d.).
All of the points listed above, indicate that interest in long-read technologies is
yet to reach is full potential, and that there is a hunger and growing need for
improvements to accommodate the technology, which will inevitably become more
relevant, as its adoption rate increases in the coming decade.
2
PhageReTerm: a tool for correcting circular permutations in bacteriophages sequenced with
Oxford Nanopore
==PAGE:9==
1.2
Bacteriophage biology
1.2.1
”Say Hello To My Little Ph-riend!”
The bacteriophage’s existence poses a ’chicken and egg’ style question - which
came first, the prophage or the phage?.
That is to say, a when a bacteriophage expresses itself within a host cell, the host
cell had to have been previously infected by the phage’s proginator.
This duality is encapsulated in a phage’s two lifecycles:
1. The lytic cycle
2. The lysogenic cycle
In the lytic cycle, after incorporating its DNA into the host’s genome, the phages
genetic material is expressed, multiple times, with the resulting material formed
into so-called phage particles. In forming the phage particles, the host cells’ re-
sources are plundered in the process. After hundreds of replications, the the host
cell eventually busts, lysing it - and the phage is free to go forth and infect other
hosts.
This lysing event need not happen right away. For some phages, upon infecting
and incorporating their DNA into the host cell’s genome, they enter a so-called
’dormant’ state, where they do not replicate and lyse the cell immediately. This is
the basis of the lysogenic lifecycle. The incorporated genetic material is now called
a ’prophage’, and requires a localised host cell event to induce its expression, such
as the SOS response to DNA damage (Trun and Trempy, 2003). Should such an
event occur, prophage expression will be induced, and marking a shift to the lytic
cycle.
The phage particle’s structure is centred around its core function, of recognising,
and infecting a host cell. As is the case with viruses in general, a phage is com-
posed of a collection of proteins, which houses its own genetic material, along
with the machinery necessary for host cell recognition and infection. While there
are different structures between different phages, a typical one is the T4 phage,
which possesses a structure typical of the phages capable of producing circular
permutations (pictured in figure 1.2a). T4 phage contains a ’head’ known as a
capsid, where its DNA is housed. This head contains complex machinery, which
drives the process of regulating and carrying out the process of packaging DNA
into the head. These processes are essential to understanding the cause of cir-
cular permutations, and will be properly expanded upon in the subsection 1.2.2.
PhageReTerm: a tool for correcting circular permutations in bacteriophages sequenced with
Oxford Nanopore
3
==PAGE:10==
(a) Structure of T4 phage
(b) T4 phage recognises host cell surface
with tail fibers, attaches, penetrates and ad-
ministers its DNA
Figure 1.2: T4 phage structure and overview of host infection mechanism (Trun and
Trempy, 2003)
The rest of the phage’s design, is integral to the infection process - as illustrated
in figure 1.2b. Attached to the capsid head, is a long sheath, housing machinery
to transport the DNA from the head, to the host cell. At the end of the sheath are
’pins’, which penetrate the host cell. In order to infect the host cell the ’tail fibers’
contain binding sites with a strict affinity to a discrete range of host cells. Once
the phage recognises and adheres to the host cell, the tail fibers and pins hold the
phage in place, while the DNA is transported into the host cell, to be incorporated
into the its genome (Sun et al., 2012).
While the details of phage replication, formation and induction are complex and
exciting, they are beyond the scope of this project. The following section details
the of packaging DNA into the into the capsid head - the process which is directly
responsible for circular permutations.
1.2.2
Phage DNA packaging & terminal redundancies
As the lytic cycle is triggered, the components necessary for phage particle con-
struction are synthesised. An essential part of this process, is loading a phages
genetic material, into the phage particle, in a process called ’DNA packaging’.
Prior to packaging the DNA, the phage genome is replicated into a single particle
called a concatamer, which contains multiple copies (usually 2 - 5 depending on
the specific phage species) of the entire phage genome (Black, 1989).
Before the entire phage particle is assembled, the pre-formed capsid head must
4
PhageReTerm: a tool for correcting circular permutations in bacteriophages sequenced with
Oxford Nanopore
==PAGE:11==
initiate the packaging. The method of loading loading DNA into a preformed head
is known as ’headful packaging’. In T4, this is accomplished by a protein complex
situated at the entrance of the head, comprised of two terminases (as seen in
figure 1.3). This complex contains a ’small’ terminase unit, which is responsible
for recognising the concatamer and pulling it towards the ’large’ terminase. The
large terminase houses an ATP-driven motor, which pulls the DNA through the
head entrance (Sun et al., 2012). This process is called ’translocation’, and is
conducted in a directional manner, in which approximately one whole genome (or
’monomer’) is packaged into the capsid head. Once approximately one whole
genome copy has loaded, the protein complex initiates the headful cutting of the
DNA, after which the head dispelled from the machinery, and the process repeats
with the next head (Black, 1989).
Figure 1.3: Overview of headful packaging (Hulo et al., 2011)
Phages have different mechanisms to determine when the capsid head is ’full’,
and packaging can disengage. One method is using a pac-site, which is a recog-
nition site found at the terminating end of a genome, and is used by the terminase,
to determine an entire genome unit length has been loaded. For phages using a
pac site, there is some latency between when the site is recognised, and when the
cut actually happens. The resulting monomer therefore contains one full genome
copy, including an extra region inherited from the following genome copy, as illus-
trated in figure 1.4a. The packaged DNA is known as a monomer, and for phages
using pac sites, contains an additional region which is identical to a region found
at the start of the genome - resulting in a terminal redundancy.
PhageReTerm: a tool for correcting circular permutations in bacteriophages sequenced with
Oxford Nanopore
5
==PAGE:12==
(a) Post-pac-site cutting of concatamer resulting in terminally redundant
monomer
(b) Circularly permuted genome, arising from
post-pac-site headful packaging
Figure 1.4: Overview of headful packaging with pac-site, resulting in terminal redun-
dancies. TR’s highlighted in green and red, dotted lines represent cut sites.
6
PhageReTerm: a tool for correcting circular permutations in bacteriophages sequenced with
Oxford Nanopore
==PAGE:13==
In some phage variants, such as T7, the site at which headful cutting is initiated is
sequence specific (Black, 1989), and therefore the content encapsulated in each
head is virtually identical. While this site-specificity is found in lambda as well, they
employ a different style of mechanism which doesn’t involve a single pac site, and
as such are not the focus of this study (Fujisawa and Morita, 1997).
For some species, the headful cutting is non-site specific. In such case, while the
terminal redundancy will have a length of a certain proportion of its base genome
length, the the actual cut site is imprecise, leading to varied monomer lengths, and
therefore terminal redundancy lengths. While some phages still use a pac site to
recognise when one genome copy has been filled, other phages such as T4 do
not use a recognition site.
Genomes which upon DNA packaging acquire a TR and result in subsequent
genomes, are said to be ’terminally redundant and permuted’ (Black, 1989), hence-
forth abbreviated as TRP. The ’permuted’ component, arises from the first terminal
redundancy causing a shift, resulting in all subsequent have the same genetic con-
tent, albeit in a different order relative to the original base genome. While they are
often referred to as ’circular permutations’, this is a misnomer, as phage genomes
are not necessarily circular as seen in figure 1.4b - hence this revised definition. It
should be clarified that, while terminal redundancies are characteristic of the TRP,
naturally occurring terminal redundancies like those found in T7 and lambda do
not result in permuted genomes. As such, the TR’s found in these genomes are
said to be ’non-permuted’, and therefore do not fall under this category of TRP’s.
In conclusion, while there are different types of terminal redundancies, we are
specifically interested in those which result in a permutation - thus the Terminally
Redundant Permutation moniker.
1.3
Oxford Nanopore sequencing
The application of ONT reads are a major focus of this investigation. ONT reads,
which are classified as third-generation sequencing (TGS), are by nature different
in a number of ways from their next-generation sequencing (NGS) predecessors
(e.g. Illumina), which necessitates special consideration.
The primary difference, is the length of the reads, which are significantly longer
than that of NGS. NGS employs a ’shotgun sequencing’ method where the DNA
molecules are typically short reads <200 bp long, at coverage exceeding well
above 100x, whereas TGS technologies produce long-reads with comparatively
lower coverage. As opposed to NGS sequencing which fragment the sequence,
PhageReTerm: a tool for correcting circular permutations in bacteriophages sequenced with
Oxford Nanopore
7
==PAGE:14==
and use PCR amplification to increase coverage, in TGS sequencing the entire
length of a DNA molecule is read, in a linear fashion. This strategy leads to both
lower total accumulated volume of data, along with a lower coverage.
A consequence of of the lower coverage is that in spite of notable improvements
in basecalling software and flowcell chemistry, its accuracy and quality continue
to lag behind those of more established and adopted NGS reads. Illumina can
approach an accuracy of ∼99.9%. ONT claims that the latest chemistry is capable
of matching this accuracy (Oxford Nanopore Technologies, n.d.). However, the
author experienced significant discrepancies between this notion, and the data
found on read archives - which will be detailed in chapter 2 Materials & Methods.
1.3.1
Pre-existing methods
In recent years, tools have been developed to tackle TR problem for NGS reads,
which would inspire some of the investigated TR-detection strategies in this study.
One such example is PhageTerm, which by using the high coverage of NGS reads
and a statistical model, can successfully identify TR’s in multiple phage species -
including lambda, T4, P1 and T7 (Garneau et al., 2017).
Being able to implement this tool would have been advantageous for our appli-
cation, since it would have killed two birds in one stone, namely - being able to
identify phages that displayed headful packaging, together with their respective
TRP’s. However, at the time of writing, it only works on NGS data, and therefore
not applicable to nanopore sequencing.
8
PhageReTerm: a tool for correcting circular permutations in bacteriophages sequenced with
Oxford Nanopore
==PAGE:15==
2
Materials & Methods
During this project, various strategies for detecting TR’s in phage nanopore reads
were attempted. The final implementations would eventually be worked into two
sister Python-modules:
• PhageReTerm: the titular tool used to detect (and remove) TRP’s
• TRCP_Sim: a tool for generating phage genomes with TRP’s and simulating
nanopore sequencing runs of the generated genomes
2.1
Data access & selection
In general, at the time of investigation there was no access to high quality phage
nanopore reads containing an observable instance of a TRP. A dataset confirmed
to contain TRP’s was promised to us by a third party, but was rendered inacces-
sible due to a data loss incident, before the project’s author could commence
project work. To exacerbate this issue, locating nanopore reads for phages on
read archives with quality scores exceeding 20, was not possible within the given
timeframe.
A consolation dataset of Cyanobacteria-infecting T4-like phage nanopore reads
was graciously provided by Associate Professor Millard of Leicester University.
While its high average quality score made it suitable for initial investigation, corre-
spondence with Millard later revealed that the T4-like reads were not a confirmed
positive dataset.
2.1.1
Model organism reference genomes
Ultimately, the lack of a high-quality positive dataset would would necessitate sim-
ulation of circularly permuted nanopore reads, as detailed in section 2.3. Simula-
tion was conducted on three reference genomes, all obtained from NCBI’s viral
genomes resource (Brister et al., 2014):
• Enterobacteria T4 (NC_004166.2)
• Bacillus subtilis SPP1 (NC_004166.2)
• Enterobacteria T7 (NC_001604.1)
These reference genomes were selected based on variation in duplication length,
and their representation of three styles of headful packaging:
PhageReTerm: a tool for correcting circular permutations in bacteriophages sequenced with
Oxford Nanopore
9
==PAGE:16==
• With pac site recognition
– Site-specific: T7
– Non-site specific: SPP1
• Non-site specific without pac site recognition: T4
T7 was selected due to it possessing a terminally redundant non-permuted genome.
Due to its static TR of 160 bp (Chung and Hinkle, 1990), it would serve as a bench-
mark for assessing the method’s ability to distinguish non-permuted TR’s from
TRP’s.
T4 was selected as a model organism showing a high variability of TR length,
along with no specific site specificity (Bhattacharyya and Rao, 1993). Its duplica-
tion length is ∼2% of its genome unit length (Rao and Black, 2005)
SPP1 was selected due to having a discrete and much smaller TR length variation
window of only 8 bp (Djacem et al., 2017). SPP1’s proportional length of the TR
is ∼4.1% of its single genome length (Dröge and Tavares, 2013).
An additional reference genome Synechococcus phage S-PM2 (NC_006820) was
selected for model-based simulation of nanopore reads, due to its host being
Cyanobacteria-related, as the T4-like reads’ host were.
2.2
Detecting TRP’s on an assembly-level
Initial investigation was conducted on contigs assembled from Millard’s T4-like
reads.
Assembly: SPAdes was used to assemble the reads (Prjibelski et al., 2020). The
resulting largest contig was significantly longer than the others (ca. 180 kb long,
vs <1000 bp). This was deemed an acceptable level of contiguity, and therefore
all subsequent assembly-level analyses were performed on this contig.
Sequence alignment mapping: The strategy of using coverage of raw reads to
a reference assembled contig was investigated. This was based off of Garneau
et al.’s implementation in PhageTerm, a tool which uses read coverage as a basis
for identifying TR’s in NGS reads (Garneau et al., 2017). minimap2 was used to
produce a SAM file of raw reads aligned to the largest assembled contig (Li, 2018).
UGENE was used to visualise the coverage, for the purpose of detecting higher
coverage at the terminal ends of the contig (Okonechnikov et al., 2012).
Pairwise alignment: Due to a large terminal redundancy region having high se-
quence identity, detection via traditional pairwise sequence alignment was inves-
10
PhageReTerm: a tool for correcting circular permutations in bacteriophages sequenced with
Oxford Nanopore
==PAGE:17==
tigated. BLAST+ was used to create an NCBI BLAST database from the largest
assembled contig, and to perform a BLAST search, with the contig as the query in
a so-called ’self-BLAST’ (Camacho et al., 2009) (Sayers et al., 2022).
Feature annotation: Private consultation with Millard, revealed that a circular
permutation could be detected by performing a sequence annotation of assembled
reads against a protein database, and observing terminally redundant proteins.
Feature annotations were performed using Prokka, Pharokka and CheckV. The
first two are classified as feature annotation software. Their main differences lie
in their choice of database. Prokka uses BLAST+ and is regarded as suitable gene
annotation for phages (Seemann, 2014) (Shen and Millard, 2021). On the other
hand, Pharokka uses PHANOTATE - a gene prediction program tailored for phages
(Bouras et al., 2023).
CheckV is a tool designed to viral genome assembly quality. However, a core
part of its functionality is to detect DTR’s (direct terminal repeats), which are a
possible artifacts of metagenomic assembly (Nayfach et al., 2020). Therefore,
the assembly was also run through CheckV.
2.3
Simulating ONT reads with TRP’s
2.3.1
Model-based simulation
Model-based simulation of ONT reads with TRP’s were investigated using nanosim.
By aligning a nanopore reads fastq file to a compatible reference genome, a
model describing parameters, such as mismatch, insertion and deletions rate is
generated. The generated model could then be used to simulate ONT reads of
any reference genome of choice. In addition, user-defined parameters, such as
read length, read quantity, and quality score can be configured (Yang et al., 2017).
The T4-like reads were trained on a S-PM2 a reference genome, due to its host
cells relation to Cyanobacteria (the training read phage’s host cell). The created
model was then used to simulate nanopore reads, based on the same S-PM2
genome with an artificially TR of length of ∼8000 bp artificially inserted.
2.3.2
Manual simulation
A method of creating terminally redundancy phage genomes via headful packing
simulation, was implemented into the Python module TRCP_Sim. The tool uses
Python-based biological data manipulation suite Biopython, along with standard
Python libraries such as numpy for mathematical operations and matplotlib for
visualisation of headful cutting of concatamers. In addition, simulated nanopore
PhageReTerm: a tool for correcting circular permutations in bacteriophages sequenced with
Oxford Nanopore
11
==PAGE:18==
(a) Histogram of nanopore read lengths pro-
duced with TRCP_Sim following Negative expo-
nential distribution
(b) Histogram of read lengths of nanopore read
library following exponentially modified Gaus-
sian distribution
Figure 2.1:
Comparing read length distributions between simulated and authentic
nanopore sequencing runs
sequencing runs of the generated monomers, with read lengths following a nega-
tive exponential distribution (as seen in figure 2.1a), was implemented.
Creation of terminally redundant genomes
The main phenomenon to be simulated, was the terminal redundancy. Given a
reference genome, this redundancy can be artificially generated like so:
1. Select region at start of the reference genome which match its respective
duplication proportion post-pac site
2. Copy and append this region to the end of the genome sequence
Figure 2.2: Creating terminally redundant genome, given a reference genome and
duplication region. Green selection represents region to be copied, red selection repre-
sents the appended region.
Simulating non-site specificity of headful cutting
Headful cutting can be simulated, by joining multiple reference reference genome
substrings in tandem, where the formed superstring represents a concatamer.
The monomers are created, by determining the cut site on the following monomer,
12
PhageReTerm: a tool for correcting circular permutations in bacteriophages sequenced with
Oxford Nanopore
==PAGE:19==
using the duplication length as a selection index. Once this length is determined
the cut is initiated, creating a monomer, as seen in figure 2.3.
Figure 2.3: Generation of monomer substrings with terminal redundancies (TR, green),
by simulating headful cutting of concatamer superstrings
The non-site-specificity of the headful cutting site in SPP1 and T4 can also be ac-
counted for. In general, the base TR length (TRbase) is is dictated by its respective
phage-specific proportion. However, one also has to account for the variation in
TR length, which defines the range which the final TR length can occupy.
SPP1 has a TR length variation window of 8 bp, which can be described as an
lower an upper bound, of 4 bp on either side:
TRmin = TRbase −4
TRmax = TRbase + 4
An expression for the variation in TR length arising from non-site specificity of
headful cutting, will be referred to as TRvar. On the other hand, for T4, the lower
and upper bound cannot be identical. This is because, if TRmin > TR, the cut
site would occur before the pac site, leading to underpackaging, which does not
naturally occur for T4 phages (Alam et al., 2008). Because of this, it is assumed
that the minimum duplication length must be equal to the base duplication length,
and bound by the chosen TRvar:
TRmin = TRbase
PhageReTerm: a tool for correcting circular permutations in bacteriophages sequenced with
Oxford Nanopore
13
==PAGE:20==
TRmax = TRbase + TRvar
It should be noted that the TRvar parameter only refers to model organisms SPP1
and T4, due to T7 having a fixed TRbase length, as opposed to a ’range’.
Generation of terminally redundant genomes based on the calculated TRbase and
TRvar’s, can be conducted easily in a programming environment, as demonstrated
in the following example for SPP1, using numpy’s random number generator:
prop = 0.041
dup_length = np.rint(len(genome) * prop)
trs = np.random.randint(low = dup_length - 4,
high = dup_length + 4)
Given a single computed TR instance, a resulting monomer would have the form:
permuted = genome + genome[0:tr]
Given an array tr_array containing tr items, this operation can be repeated to
produced as many single terminally redundant genomes, as the number of items
in the array:
permuted = [ genome+genome[0:tr] for tr in tr_array ]
A summary of the model-specific parameters used to capture the TRvar in the
headful packaging simulation, can be found in the following table 2.1.
Table 2.1: Model organism-specific properties used in simulation of headful pack-
aging in TRCP_Sim
Model
Packaging style
TR length
TR % whole
TRrange
T7
pac site, site specific
160 bp
0.4%
0
T4
No pac site, non-site specific
3.3 kb (base)
2%
NA
SPP1
pac site, non-site specific
1.8 kb (base)
4.1%
8
2.4
Detecting TRP’s on reads level
A unified strategy for detecting TR’s and TRP’s on a read level basis, was imple-
mented into the Python module PhageReTerm. The core functionality of the module
is to take a nanopore reads file, and given the presence of TRP’s, remove them
and write the updated records to an output file.
The TRP detection is designed to work on a per-read basis - that is, given an input
reads file, the entirety of the TRP detection pipeline is carried on a single read,
14
PhageReTerm: a tool for correcting circular permutations in bacteriophages sequenced with
Oxford Nanopore
==PAGE:21==
before proceeding to the next one. After all TR regions are determined, a check
is conducted to detect the TR type, to prevent incorrect removal of non-permuted
terminal redundancies, such as those found in T7.
In general, the application’s operation can be broken down into the following steps:
1. Determine duplicate k-mer pair positions within sequence
2. Use positions to determine the duplicate regions
3. Determining type of TR (non-permuted TR or TRP)
4. Given TRP, remove TR and write ’trimmed sequence to an output sequences
file
A flowchart of the module’s operation can be seen in figure 2.4, and the mecha-
nisms behind steps 1-3 will be outlined in the following subsections.
2.4.1
Storing duplicated k-mers
The basis of PhageReTerm, is to use k-mers, as a means of diagnosing whether a
subset of the sequence appeared more than once in the sequence (i.e. is dupli-
cated). This forms the basis of the function: kmer_pos().
In short, the functionality of kmer_pos() is to take a sequence, generate k-mers of
user-defined size (e.g. 1000), and log the k-mer along with its respective start and
end positions. The program would employ a sliding window of 1, to log the same
information for the neighbouring k-mer - then increment over the entire length of
the read.
kmer_pos() implements the dict data structure. Given that the start end positions
could then be appended as tuple values, each duplicate k-mer could have a
single key and value pair. The resulting kmer_dict would have the form:
kmer_dict = {'kmer' : 'positions'}
Where kmer is the k-mer string of length k, and the positions are are the start
and end indices of said k-mer, relative to the sequence length.
PhageReTerm: a tool for correcting circular permutations in bacteriophages sequenced with
Oxford Nanopore
15
==PAGE:22==
Figure 2.4: Flowchart showing operations used in PhageReTerm.
16
PhageReTerm: a tool for correcting circular permutations in bacteriophages sequenced with
Oxford Nanopore
==PAGE:23==
The operation of kmer_pos() can be more explicitly expressed with the following
pseudo-code:
INITIALISE K-MER DICTIONARY
kmer_dict = {}
BEGIN MAIN LOOP
# Contruct k-mer and log start, end positions for each increment
for i in sequence
kmer = sequence[i:i + kmer_size]
k_start = i
k_end = i + kmer_size
# Check k-mer against dictionary
# If unique, create empty list, else append start,end positions
if kmer NOT IN kmer_dict
kmer_dict[kmer] = list()
if kmer IN kmer_dict
kmer_dict[kmer] = (k_start, k_end)
END MAIN LOOP
PURGE NON-REDUNDANT entries
if len(kmer_dict.value()) == 1
del kmer_dict[kmer]
Once the TR positions are extracted, they can be used as a selection index to
isolate the TR sequence strings for each read.
In summary, kmer_pos() creates a dictionary containing the start and end posi-
tions of duplicate k-mers, in a single read.
2.4.2
Determining terminally duplicated regions
PhageReTerm uses a a mismatch system to determine the duplication region.
This is done by constructing an array, where all redundant k-mer positions are
represented in as 1’s, and all others as 0’s. Then, the transition from the duplicate
region is detected by detecting the transition between the terminally redundant
region with 1’s, to the non-terminally region populated with 0’s.
Binary array
Given the kmer_dict generated by kmer_pos(), the binary array is generated like
so:
PhageReTerm: a tool for correcting circular permutations in bacteriophages sequenced with
Oxford Nanopore
17
==PAGE:24==
1. Create array 0-populated array corresponding to length of read
2. Fill each corresponding dictionary index with a 1
Assuming there is a terminal redundancy, the expected output, would be a 1-
dimensional array spanning the length of the loaded read, populated with 1’s in
the duplication regions, and 0’s in the non-terminally redundant region.
For example, if a 20 bp sequence had terminal redundancy of 5 bp, the corre-
sponding binary array would take the following form:
111110000000000000000000011111
Mismatch system
The binary array is used as the basis for detecting the transition from the TR to
non-TR region. In addition, it has to account for possible tandem false negatives
erroneously ’ending’ the duplicate region. The selected implementation, is a ’mis-
match’ system working in tandem with a ’buffer.’ In this case, the ’mismatch’ is
defined as a 0 in the array, and a ’match’ is defined as a 1.
The goal of the program is that when the amount of tandem mismatches detected
reaches the defined ’buffer’ amount, then a ’transition’ from the duplicated region,
to the regular sequence has been detected, as seen in figure 2.5. Once this
condition is satisfied, the program terminates, and logs the current index - which
is used to define the region in which the TR resides.
Given the newly populated binary array, and a user-defined buffer size such as 3,
the operation of the program can be defined as follows:
1. Begin iterating over array, with index i
Store from both sides of array simultaneously:
left = i
right = len(array) - i
2. If array[i] = 1, proceed
3. If array[i] = 0,
(a) mismatch += 1
(b) Else mismatch = 0
4. If mismatch = buffer,
18
PhageReTerm: a tool for correcting circular permutations in bacteriophages sequenced with
Oxford Nanopore
==PAGE:25==
(a) Terminate
(b) Output left and right regions:
left_region = [0:left]
right_region = [right:len(array)]
(a) mismatches < 3 encountered, program pro-
ceeds
(b) mismatches > 3 encountered, program termi-
nates
Figure 2.5: Examples of mismatch system behaviour for buffer = 3. Highlighted green
represents matches, highlighted red represents mismatches
2.4.3
Detection of non-permuted genomes
As detailed in subsection 1.2.2 Phage DNA packaging & terminal redundancies,
phages such as T7 contain TR’s which do not result in permuted genomes. A
method has to be implemented, to distinguish these false positives (non-permuted)
from true positives (permuted). This can be done by computing sequence simi-
larly scores or edit distance, between extracted TR strings for all reads. Given that
the TR strings are sufficiently similar, this would indicate a non-permuted genome,
and therefore TR removal would not be performed.
An implementation of edit distance called Levenshtein distance was selected for
calculating sequence similarity. Given a pair of sequences, the higher the similar-
ity between two strings, the closer the Levenshtein distance is to 0, and the higher
it is, the more dissimilar. Each calculated Levenshtein distance is normalised to
the maximum read length, thereby closing all values to 1. Finally the mean of all
Levenshtein distances was computed, and it is this value which is used to deter-
mine the genome type.
The final implementation uses a C-Python module, which was found to have supe-
rior speed, compared to home-made Python implementations Bachmann, 2023.
PhageReTerm: a tool for correcting circular permutations in bacteriophages sequenced with
Oxford Nanopore
19
==PAGE:26==
2.5
Overview of PhageReTerm & TRCP_Sim
For clarity, this subsection summarises the functionality of the two developed mod-
ules, as well as the strategies employed to achieve them.
A general overview is provided in the following table 2.2.
Table 2.2: Overview of functionality of each tool
Tool
Function
PhageReTerm
TRP detection
Sequence error tolerance
Diagnose non-permuted genome
TRCP_Sim
Generate circularly permuted genomes
Simulate sequencing run
2.5.1
Summary of PhageReTerm methods & strategies
The TRP detection and isolation is achieved with the k-mer-based strategy, and
the joint binary array and mismatch system. The mismatch system also doubles
as a buffer for sequence tandem sequence errors, which would cause premature
program termination. Finally, a ¯
Lev between all extracted TR’s is used to diagnose
whether the sample is permuted or non-permuted - with the TRP removal process
proceeding only if the former condition is satisfied.
2.5.2
Summary of TRCP_Sim methods & strategies
The generation of permuted monomers of the three model organisms T4, SPP1
and T7, is achieved by simulating headful packaging. The duplication lengths
are based, on literature-backed parameters, as summarised in 2.1. In addition, a
nanopore sequencing run can be simulated, based on the generated monomers.
The read lengths follow a negative exponential distribution, with a lower and upper
bound of 1000 bp, and the maximum monomer length, respectively.
20
PhageReTerm: a tool for correcting circular permutations in bacteriophages sequenced with
Oxford Nanopore
==PAGE:27==
3
Results
3.1
Model-based simulation of TRP’s
The simulated nanopore reads produced with nanosim did not contain any TR’s or
TRP’s. This was verified using the implemented k-mer-based strategy for detect-
ing duplications. The absence of detected TRP’s was in spite of training nanosim
on reads with an average quality score >20, and invoking the --perfect argument
to eliminate possible errors.
This method also failed to account for the non-site specificity of headful cutting,
and therefore duplication lengths, as the artificially inserted duplication was static.
On the the other hand, reads produced from nanosim yielded read lengths fol-
lowing a negative exponential distribution, which was selected for the eventual
implementation of nanopore read simulations.
3.2
Simulation with TRCP_Sim
Headful packaging (concatamer)
By randomly generating TR lengths within the phage-specific parameters, it is
possible to it is possible to simulate the headful packaging of concatamers, into
discrete monomers. This can be visualised by plotting the positions of pac sites
on a concatamer, along with the cut sites that result arise from the characteristic
duplication length proportions, and chosen TRvar, as seen in figure 3.1.
For SPP1 and T7, the respective regions that arise from the cut sites appear
small relative to the monomer. However for T4, using a with a TRvar of 50,000
bp (roughly a third of its genome), it is possible for T4 to produce TR’s which are
much larger.
The headful packaging simulation also accurately simulate the phenomenon, where
TRP’s arise only in the first monomer, whereas the all subsequent concatamers
do not. This can be demonstrated, by running kmer_pos() on the monomers, and
observing populated dictionaries for the first monomer, and empty monomers for
all subsequent monomers - as is expected.
Sequencing run level
Simulated nanopore reads containing TR’s or TRP’s were successfully generated,
given the following assumptions, and limitations:
PhageReTerm: a tool for correcting circular permutations in bacteriophages sequenced with
Oxford Nanopore
21
==PAGE:28==
(a) Model organism SPP1, TRvar = 8 bp
(b) Model organism T4, TRvar = 50,000 bp
Figure 3.1: Visualisation of concatamers and respective pac site positions (top) and cut
site positions (bottom), generated by TRCP_Sim.
• Each concatamer yields 5 monomers, each representing a single full phage
genome
• Each monomer yields 20,000 reads each
22
PhageReTerm: a tool for correcting circular permutations in bacteriophages sequenced with
Oxford Nanopore
==PAGE:29==
• The reads lengths follow a negative exponential distribution, starting from
length 1000 bp, and bound by the maximum monomer length
While authentic read length tend to follow an exponentially modified Gaussian
distribution, as seen in figure 2.1b, the typical chosen k-mer size exceeds 1000,
meaning all read lengths below this threshold are not processed anyway. Creating
a cutoff, creates a negative exponential distribution as seen in figure 2.1a.
3.3
Detecting TRP’s at assembly level
Sequence alignment mapping
Raw reads were aligned to largest assembled contig, using minimap2 (Li, 2018).
The resulting SAM file imported into UGENE for visualisation of coverage, as seen
in figure 3.2 (Okonechnikov et al., 2012). The coverage was revealed no strong
evidence for a discrete TR region in the assembled contig.
Figure 3.2: Sequence alignment map of T4-like raw reads to assembled contig, visualised
in UGENE
Pairwise alignment
Performing a self-blast on the assembled T4-like contigs using BLAST+ yielded no
detected terminal redundancy regions.
Feature annotation
The T4-like reads were featured annotated using Prokka, Pharokka and CheckV.
Prokka and Pharokka detected terminally redundant protein annotations. How-
ever, upon further inspection, these proteins were annotated as ’hypothetical pro-
teins’, meaning that the observed so-called duplications, couldn’t be confirmed
with utmost certainty.
CheckV identified a single DTR. However, at 120 bp in length, it was much too
small to be considered as a candidate for a valid TR.
PhageReTerm: a tool for correcting circular permutations in bacteriophages sequenced with
Oxford Nanopore
23
==PAGE:30==
Due to the unsuccessful attempts to detect TR’s with local alignments, a sanity
check was performed, to check whether detection of duplication was possible at all.
This was performed by manually inserting a sizable duplication into the contig, and
performing a local alignment with minimap2. Indeed, minimap2 was successfully
able to detect artificially generated duplication, indicating that the T4-like reads in
fact, did not contain any TRP’s.
3.4
Detecting TRP’s at reads level
3.4.1
Detection using k-mers
k-mers were successfully used to detect a terminal redundancies in phage genomes.
The positions along the query sequenced housed in the kmer_dict can be visu-
alised with a dotplot, as seen in figure 3.3.
The chosen k-mer size influences the method’s ability to detect TR’s, as opposed
to spurious repeats. While all k-mer sizes methods can successfully detect TR,
low enough k-mer sizes yield false positives. For SPP1, this is mitigated by in-
creasing the k-mer size of 100, and in the author’s experience a k-mer size gen-
erally between 100-1000 was able to detect duplication without false positives.
3.4.2
Detecting TR/non-TR transition
The implementation of using a ’transition detection’ in a binary array was success-
ful. Given that the contents of the kmer_dict were filled out into a zero-populated
array of the length of the read in question, the mismatch counter was successfully
able to tell a transition from the duplication, to the main ’body’ had occurred, and
extract a region where the duplication lies.
The array populated with duplication positions can be visualised with a so-called
’binary plot’, as seen in figure 3.4.
24
PhageReTerm: a tool for correcting circular permutations in bacteriophages sequenced with
Oxford Nanopore
==PAGE:31==
(a) Dotplot of duplicate k-mer positions, k-mer size 10
(b) Dotplot of duplicate k-mer positions, k-mer size 16
(c) Dotplot of duplicate k-mer positions, k-mer size 100
Figure 3.3: Dotplot of duplication k-mer positions of artificially inserted terminal redun-
dancy in SPP1 reference genome
PhageReTerm: a tool for correcting circular permutations in bacteriophages sequenced with
Oxford Nanopore
25
==PAGE:32==
Figure 3.4: Binary array generated from duplicate k-mer positions, in a circularly permuted
SPP1 genome
3.4.3
Detecting non-permuted genomes and false positives
The obtained Levenshtein distances expressed in order’s of magnitude [10-n] for
TRvar’s in range 10 - 10,000 in T4, are summarised in table 3.1.
The SPP1 control with a static TRvar of 8 bp, yielded
¯
Lev (mean Levenshtein dis-
tance in the order of 10-3.
Table 3.1: Effect of TRvar on
¯
Lev based on 100 generated circularly permuted T4
genomes
TRvar
¯
Lev [10−n]
10
10−6
100
10−4
1000
10−3
10000
10−2
3.4.4
Assessing detection limit
Sequencing runs were generated for all 3 model organisms, using an arbitrarily
selected TRvar of 1500 bp for T4.
The ability for TR’s to be detectable, dependent on the length distributions. If the
length was was lower than the input genome length, or not high enough to cross
into the respective TRvar, no TRP’s were detected. However, for read lengths
which reached this threshold, the duplication were successfully detected, trigger-
ing the program to proceed with the duplication removal process.
26
PhageReTerm: a tool for correcting circular permutations in bacteriophages sequenced with
Oxford Nanopore
==PAGE:33==
4
Discussion
4.1
Adoption of ONT sequencing in the phage
space
The lack of availability of high quality viable datasets, poses possible existential
crises for this project.
In the author’s experience, publicly available phage genome nanopore reads gen-
erally had low quality scores, and were quite rare. One explanation for the lacklus-
tre quality, is that improvements in flowcell chemistry have advanced so rapidly,
many uploaded samples were using older, inferior generations. This could in the-
ory be mitigated, by storing the files in fast5 format. This is the the native raw
output file, which is basecalled, and eventually written to the familiar fastq format.
By storing the raw data, as basecalling software improved, one could retroactively
run it on the archived files, which could in potentially result in read with higher ac-
curacy.
However, the fast5 format is significantly more voluminous than fastq, and one
of the selling points of using ONT is cloud base-calling, which enables real-time
monitoring of sequencing progress. The user-friendly nature of the ONT workflow
thereby discourages the the practice of fast5 archival, making adoption of fast5
file archival less likely.
The high error rate of ONT reads, entails that certain considerations have to be
taken, that wouldn’t be necessary with more established and less-error prone NGS
platforms. For example, the lower accuracy entails that in the case of a terminal
redundancy, there is increased risk that each respective duplications wouldn’t be
matched 1 to 1 reliably.
In general, while ONT reads are well suited to phage genomes due to their long
reads being able to span repeated regions, their error-prone nature continues
to mitigate their effectiveness, and by extension, evidently their adoption rate
amoung phage biologists. However, together with steady basecalling and chem-
istry improvements, the advantages of long reads and ease-of-use that nanopore
offers, proves to be an attractive package, which will no doubt see wider adoption
in the future.
PhageReTerm: a tool for correcting circular permutations in bacteriophages sequenced with
Oxford Nanopore
27
==PAGE:34==
4.2
Detecting TRP’s at assembly level
Results for detecting TRP’s at an assembly level was ultimately inconclusive. This
is due to the T4-like reads received, not being a confirmed true positive dataset,
and general lack of available high-quality datasets in general. Had there been
more available data, investigations would have been made to see whether the
misassembly of genomes with TRP’s were consistent, and could have helped
corroborate Millard’s observations.
However, the concern of assemblers’ inability to account for the variation in dupli-
cation lengths, still lingers. While organisms such as SPP1 have a comparatively
small TRvar, the effect could be more pronounced for larger TRvar’s, such as with
T4. The fact that assembly software has not currently been designed to account
for these TRP’s, in addition to some assembler software having limited support
for nanopore reads (Shen and Millard, 2021), could prove to be a challenge.
While it was eventually verified that aligner software such as minimap2 can detect
TR’s in an assembled contig, this was only on an artificially created duplication,
post-assembly. Based on this evaluation, assembly-based methods for detection
and subsequent removal of TRP’s will have to be further investigated.
4.3
TRP’s and ONT reads simulation
The proposed pipeline for nanosim, could have harnessed its flexible output op-
tions such as quality score and error profiling, to determine which imperfection
types significantly affected detection of TR’s and TRP’s. However, in spite of at-
tempting to use compatible reads libraries and reference genomes, resulting reads
based of an artificially generated circularly permuted genome, did not contain any
TR’s.
The simulation difficulties could stem from the fact that nanopore simulation soft-
ware are not designed to take TRP’s into account. There is also the possibility of
the chosen reference genome not being fully compatible with the training reads
library. Therefore, in spite of simulation with nanosim was not extensively investi-
gated, there is a possibility that a different reads/reference genome pairing would
have resulted in reads with detectable TR’s.
On the other hand, for the chosen three models, the implementation of TRCP_Sim
grants a much finer control over the final output, while also yielding detectable
TR’s.
The ability to account for phage-specific TRvar parameters, makes this
method extendable for a wider range of phages in the future, given that the rel-
evant data is literature-backed. In addition, the headful packaging only yielding
28
PhageReTerm: a tool for correcting circular permutations in bacteriophages sequenced with
Oxford Nanopore
==PAGE:35==
both terminally redundant, and non-terminally redundant monomers, means that
the generated nanopore reads do not over-represent the TRP’s.
However, the method is limited, in that it cannot take quality, or other sequence
imperfections into account. The TR’s being detectable, are a product of them be-
ing directly based on a reference genome, with no imperfections. A method which
combined the biologically accurate headful packaging mechanisms of TRCP_Sim
and the read-specific properties of nanosim, would have been the ideal tool for
creating simulated nanopore reads, with detectable TR’s.
4.4
Detecting TRP’s at read level
A current limitation of the method, is that k-mer pairs are eventually disassoci-
ated. When the k-mer dictionary is constructed, the k-mers are linked, and their
positional origins in the read can be traced. However, this link is purged from the
workflow, upon generation of binary array. This could lead to possible false pos-
itives, upon running the mismatch system, such as a terminal end matching with
a non-terminally redundant region in the middle of the read.
This leads to the largest gap in PhageReTerm’s repertoire - that it does not take read
quality into account. Low quality scores can be an indication of incorrect basecall-
ing. In the case of multiple tandem low quality basecalls, there is a possibility that
the binary array mismatch buffer would be erroneously filled, thus resulting in a
premature program termination.
One solution could be to implement a quality threshold upon running the binary
array mismatch system, in order to evaluate the basis of whether to accept the
entry. However, a low read quality distributed throughout the entire read length
would undermine the credibility of the generated all k-mers, and therefore the
extracted TR strings. In general, lacklustre quality and accuracy could pose a
problem for the chosen k-mer-based strategy, and would have to be thoroughly
investigated.
This method is also limited, by the necessity to have sufficiently long reads, to
detect TR’s. It was revealed when running the full pipeline on the artificially gen-
erated nanopore reads, that TR detection required the read lengths being long
enough to span an entire genome unit length, plus the TR sequence. Read lengths
under this threshold, were simply unable to detect the TR’s. While this would not
affect small to medium sized phages such as SPP1 and T7, it would pose could
pose as a problem for genomes ≥100 kb, such as T4. While read lengths are
increasing, in the author’s experience, it was rare for read lengths to exceed this
PhageReTerm: a tool for correcting circular permutations in bacteriophages sequenced with
Oxford Nanopore
29
==PAGE:36==
threshold.
Finally, this method lies on the assumption that the terminally redundancy region
is solely responsible for the misassembly. The TR across monomers results in a
permutation, which alters the order of genes. While the total genetic contents is
identical between all phages, there is the possibility that the shifted order could
influence the assembly software’s output, which warrants its own investigation.
4.5
Feasibility of
¯
Lev for detecting non-permuted
genomes
The results from the detection limit investigations suggest, phages that with suffi-
ciently high TRvar, could be distinguishable from non-permuted phages.
As seen in table 3.1, T4 required a TRvar of 1,000 and 10,000 to exhibit
¯
Lev values
which respectively equalled and exceeded the SPP1 control ¯
Lev values. While the
TRvar may seem high, 10,000 bp constitutes only 6% of the T4 genome, making the
event of distinguishing a highly permuted genome form a non-permuted genome
quite plausible. However, it should be considered that T4 genomes with TRvar of
only 10, display a
¯
Lev in order 10-6. While non-permuted genomes are supposed
to have identical TR regions, the lower accuracy of nanopore could obfuscate this,
leading to higher reported
¯
Lev values.
This presents two possibilities of erroneous diagnoses:
1. A permuted genome reporting low
¯
Lev values, due to a low TRvar, and be-
ing misdiagnosed as a non-permuted genome, therefore being falsely dis-
carded.
2. A non-permuted genome reporting high
¯
Lev values caused by a low-quality
sequencing run, leading to incorrect removal of non-permuted TR regions.
For the former case, TRvar’s for the permuted genome would have to be suffi-
ciently large, at a consistent rate throughout the phage population. While litera-
ture indicates that in the case of T4 there is no site specificity of headful cutting
(Bhattacharyya and Rao, 1993), the author of this project was not able to find any
data on how this TRvar is distributed throughout packaged monomers in a phage
population. This is to say nothing of other randomly permuted phage genomes,
which were not considered in this study. Due to this, more investigation will have
to be undertaken, to determine see if small duplication lengths for T4 and other
phages with non-pac-site headful packaging, can result in misdiagnosis as a non-
permuted genome.
30
PhageReTerm: a tool for correcting circular permutations in bacteriophages sequenced with
Oxford Nanopore
==PAGE:37==
Ultimately, due to lack of data availability and time constraints, no assemblies of
authentic corrected reads were made. As a result, the extent to which TRvar’s
impact the quality of the final assembly, was not able to be determined. For this
to be possible, high quality nanopore sequencing datasets for highly permuted
genomes exhibiting both high and low TRvar values would have to be made avail-
able, and its effect on assembly experimentally verified.
In summary, preliminary results indicate that ¯
Lev between detected TR’s in a reads
library, could be a viable method to prevent TR removal of non-permuted genomes.
However, it should be considered that this was conducted on simulated data, and
that only 3 model organisms were investigated. Exploration of authentic data, on
a larger range of phages exhibiting headful packaging, is needed to affirm this.
PhageReTerm: a tool for correcting circular permutations in bacteriophages sequenced with
Oxford Nanopore
31
==PAGE:38==
32
PhageReTerm: a tool for correcting circular permutations in bacteriophages sequenced with
Oxford Nanopore
==PAGE:39==
5
Conclusion
The results of this project demonstrate that, given ample read accuracy and suf-
ficiently long reads, a k-mer-based strategy can successfully be used to detect
TRP’s in nanopore reads. The project also yielded the biologically accurate sim-
ulation of headful packaging, to produce permuted monomers with, and without
terminal redundancies.
However, the strategy currently has numerous limitations and possible issues.
Perhaps the most important issue, is the lack of consideration for nanopore read
quality, in both the simulated data, and PhageReTerm’s overall strategy. This could
have a major impact on its ability to accurately detect redundant k-mers and
thereby TRP’s. Another concern is the possibility of false positive TR diagnoses,
due to non-terminally redundant k-mers matching with one of the terminal re-
gions. In addition, while reasonable TRvar values have been suggested based on
literature-backed parameters, the lack of experimental validation with authentic
data means that the viability of
¯
Lev as a threshold and its detection limit, is ulti-
mately inconclusive. Another limitation, is that the methods relies on read lengths
reaching genome-level lengths, which in the author’s experience continues to
lag behind the reported upper limits. Finally, while terminal redundancies have
been the focus of this study, the influence of non-terminally redundant, permuted
monomers on the final assembly has not been considered.
Alas, due to time constraints, along with lack of available positive datasets, much
of this strategy was simply not verifiable in the given timeframe.
In conclusion, the overarching theme of this investigation, is that that the adoption
rate, quality and thereby total volume of nanopore sequencing data in the realm
of phage research, will have to expand significantly, to validate, and even justify
the existence PhageReTerm.
PhageReTerm: a tool for correcting circular permutations in bacteriophages sequenced with
Oxford Nanopore
33
==PAGE:40==
34
PhageReTerm: a tool for correcting circular permutations in bacteriophages sequenced with
Oxford Nanopore
==PAGE:41==
6
Future Studies
Building up on findings in this project, future research could be conducted to im-
prove and address certain limitations of the proposed strategies for detecting and
removing TRP’s.
A current limitation of the k-mer-based strategy, is the possibility of misidentifying
a TR, by one terminal end matching to a non-terminally redundant region. One
solution could be to construct a position-associated k-mer database. Upon the
processing the binary array, an additional step could be taken, to check each
subsequent k-mer string against the database. If the k-mers were located at the
opposite terminal end, this outcome would be accepted. This way, if the position
of the k-mer fell out of the threshold to be located at the terminal end, then it would
be rejected, and not falsely reported as a TR.
An alternative solution could be upon iteration through the binary array, to check
that the left and right indices both matched. In the event of a false positive, the
buffer would be filled before it could be misdiagnosed. However, here lies the risk
of a premature termination, should the two terminating ends not match 1-to-1 due
to lower quality and accuracy. However, more data would be needed to verify the
probability of this occurrence.
In addition, quality scores will have to be considered in future iterations. One way,
could be to implement a parallel system which worked in tandem with the mis-
match system, but instead used quality scores as a threshold. This would provide
an extra sanity check, in the case of the mismatch buffer being prematurely filled
up, due to poor read accuracy.
While the k-mer strategy has been investigated at a reads level, more work on as-
semblies of terminally redundant permuted genomes has to be undertaken. One
investigated method was using a sequence alignment map, and using coverage
to ascertain terminal redundancies. In spite of lack of results in this investiga-
tion, there is a possibility that this approach could work for a dataset confirmed
to contain TRP’s. The same logic applies to the other assembly-level methods.
Given reads of a terminally redundant phage, the pairwise alignment, and feature
annotation methods should be investigated.
One aspect which warrants investigating, is phage packaging mutants. It has been
shown, that mutations in packaging mechanisms, can lead to unexpected phe-
PhageReTerm: a tool for correcting circular permutations in bacteriophages sequenced with
Oxford Nanopore
35
==PAGE:42==
nomena, such as under and overpackaging of phage DNA (Black, 1989). These
effects have not been accounted in any of the investigated strategies, and it is
possible that these affects could have an effect on the final assembly.
36
PhageReTerm: a tool for correcting circular permutations in bacteriophages sequenced with
Oxford Nanopore
==PAGE:43==
Bibliography
Alam, T. I., Draper, B., Kondabagil, K., Rentas, F. J., Ghosh-Kumar, M., Sun, S.,
Rossmann, M. G., & Rao, V. B. (2008). The headful packaging nuclease of
bacteriophage T4. Molecular Microbiology, 69(5), 1180–1190. https://doi.
org/https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2958.2008.06344.x
Bachmann, M. (2023). python-Levenshtein. https://github.com/maxbachmann/
python-Levenshtein
Beaulaurier, J., Luo, E., Eppley, J. M., Uyl, P. D., Dai, X., Burger, A., Turner, D. J.,
Pendelton, M., Juul, S., Harrington, E., & DeLong, E. F. (2020). Assembly-
free single-molecule sequencing recovers complete virus genomes from
natural microbial communities. Genome Research, 30(3), 437–446. https:
//doi.org/10.1101/GR.251686.119/-/DC1
Bhattacharyya, S. P., & Rao, V. B. (1993). A Novel Terminase Activity Associ-
ated with the DNA Packaging Protein gp17 of Bacteriophage T4. Virology,
196(1), 34–44. https://doi.org/10.1006/VIRO.1993.1452
Black, L. W. (1989). DNA PACKAGING IN dsDNA BACTERIOPHAGES. Annual
Review of Microbiology, 43(1), 267–292. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.
mi.43.100189.001411
Bouras, G., Nepal, R., Houtak, G., Psaltis, A. J., Wormald, P. J., & Vreugde, S.
(2023). Pharokka: a fast scalable bacteriophage annotation tool. Bioinfor-
matics, 39(1). https://doi.org/10.1093/BIOINFORMATICS/BTAC776
Brister, J. R., Ako-Adjei, D., Bao, Y., & Blinkova, O. (2014). NCBI Viral Genomes
Resource. Nucleic Acids Research, 43, 571–577. https://doi.org/10.1093/
nar/gku1207
Camacho, C., Coulouris, G., Avagyan, V., Ma, N., Papadopoulos, J., Bealer, K., &
Madden, T. L. (2009). BLAST+: architecture and applications. https://doi.
org/10.1186/1471-2105-10-421
Chung, Y.-B., & Hinkle, D. C. (1990). Bacteriophage T7 DNA Packaging: I. Plas-
mids containing a T7 replication origin and the T7 concatemer junction
are packaged into transducing particles during phage infection. Journal of
Molecular Biology, 216(4), 911–926. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.
1016/S0022-2836(99)80010-2
Ciuffreda, L., Rodríguez-Pérez, H., & Flores, C. (2021). Nanopore sequencing
and its application to the study of microbial communities. Computational
PhageReTerm: a tool for correcting circular permutations in bacteriophages sequenced with
Oxford Nanopore
37
==PAGE:44==
and Structural Biotechnology Journal, 19, 1497–1511. https://doi.org/10.
1016/J.CSBJ.2021.02.020
Clokie, M. R., Millard, A. D., Letarov, A. V., & Heaphy, S. (2011). Phages in nature.
Bacteriophage, 1(1), 31–45. https://doi.org/10.4161/BACT.1.1.14942
Cock, P. J. A., Antao, T., Chang, J. T., Chapman, B. A., Cox, C. J., Dalke, A.,
Friedberg, I., Hamelryck, T., Kauff, F., Wilczynski, B., & de Hoon, M. J. L.
(2009). Biopython: freely available Python tools for computational molec-
ular biology and bioinformatics. Bioinformatics, 25(11), 1422–1423. https:
//doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/btp163
Cook, R., Brown, N., Rihtman, B., Michniewski, S., Redgwell, T., Clokie, M., Stekel,
D. J., Chen, Y., Scanlan, D. J., Hobman, J. L., Nelson, A., Jones, M. A.,
Smith, D., & Millard, A. (2023). The long and short of it: Benchmarking
viromics using Illumina, Nanopore and PacBio sequencing technologies.
bioRxiv, 2023.02.12.527533. https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.02.12.527533
Djacem, K., Tavares, P., & Oliveira, L. (2017). Bacteriophage SPP1 pac Cleavage:
A Precise Cut without Sequence Specificity Requirement. Journal of Molec-
ular Biology, 429(9), 1381–1395. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmb.2017.01.005
Dröge, A., & Tavares, P. (2013). Bacteriophage SPP1 DNA Packaging. https://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK6379/
Fujisawa, H., & Morita, M. (1997). Phage DNA packaging. Genes to Cells, 2(9),
537–545. https://doi.org/10.1046/j.1365-2443.1997.1450343.x
Garneau, J. R., Depardieu, F., Fortier, L. C., Bikard, D., & Monot, M. (2017).
PhageTerm: A tool for fast and accurate determination of phage termini
and packaging mechanism using next-generation sequencing data. Scien-
tific Reports, 7(1). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-017-07910-5
Hatfull, G. F., Dedrick, R. M., & Schooley, R. T. (2022). Phage Therapy for Antibiotic-
Resistant Bacterial Infections. Annual review of medicine, 73, 197–211.
https://doi.org/10.1146/ANNUREV-MED-080219-122208
Hulo, C., De Castro, E., Masson, P., Bougueleret, L., Bairoch, A., Xenarios, I.,
& Le Mercier, P. (2011). ViralZone: a knowledge resource to understand
virus diversity. Nucleic Acids Research, 39(Database issue), D576. https:
//doi.org/10.1093/NAR/GKQ901
Illumina. (n.d.). Long-Read Sequencing Technology | For challenging genomes.
https://emea.illumina.com/science/technology/next-generation-sequencing/
long-read-sequencing.html
Li, H. (2018). Minimap2: pairwise alignment for nucleotide sequences. Bioinfor-
matics, 34(18), 3094–3100. https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/bty191
38
PhageReTerm: a tool for correcting circular permutations in bacteriophages sequenced with
Oxford Nanopore
==PAGE:45==
Nayfach, S., Camargo, A. P., Schulz, F., Eloe-Fadrosh, E., Roux, S., & Kyrpides,
N. C. (2020). CheckV assesses the quality and completeness of metagenome-
assembled viral genomes. Nature Biotechnology 2020 39:5, 39(5), 578–
585. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41587-020-00774-7
Okonechnikov, K., Golosova, O., & Fursov, M. (2012). Genome analysis Unipro
UGENE: a unified bioinformatics toolkit. BIOINFORMATICS APPLICATIONS
NOTE, 28(8), 1166–1167. https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/bts091
Oxford Nanopore Technologies. (n.d.). Accuracy. https://nanoporetech.com/accuracy
Prjibelski, A., Antipov, D., Meleshko, D., Lapidus, A., & Korobeynikov, A. (2020).
Using SPAdes De Novo Assembler. Current Protocols in Bioinformatics,
70(1), e102. https://doi.org/10.1002/CPBI.102
Rao, V. B., & Black, L. W. (2005). DNA Packaging in Bacteriophage T4. Viral
Genome Packaging Machines: Genetics, Structure, and Mechanism, 40–
58. https://doi.org/10.1007/0-387-28521-0{\_}3
Sayers, E. W., Bolton, E. E., Brister, J. R., Canese, K., Chan, J., Comeau, D. C.,
Connor, R., Funk, K., Kelly, C., Kim, S., Madej, T., Marchler-Bauer, A.,
Lanczycki, C., Lathrop, S., Lu, Z., Thibaud-Nissen, F., Murphy, T., Phan,
L., Skripchenko, Y., … Sherry, S. T. (2022). Database resources of the
national center for biotechnology information. Nucleic Acids Research, 50.
https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkab1112
Seemann, T. (2014). Prokka: rapid prokaryotic genome annotation. Bioinformatics,
30(14), 2068–2069. https://doi.org/10.1093/BIOINFORMATICS/BTU153
Sereika, M., Kirkegaard, R. H., Karst, S. M., Michaelsen, T. Y., Sørensen, E. A.,
Wollenberg, R. D., & Albertsen, M. (2022). Oxford Nanopore R10.4 long-
read sequencing enables the generation of near-finished bacterial genomes
from pure cultures and metagenomes without short-read or reference pol-
ishing. Nature Methods, 19(7), 823–826. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41592-
022-01539-7
Shen, A., & Millard, A. (2021). Phage Genome Annotation: Where to Begin and
End. PHAGE: Therapy, Applications, and Research, 2(4), 183–193. https:
//doi.org/10.1089/PHAGE.2021.0015/SUPPL{\_}FILE/SUPPLEMENTARYTABLE2.
XLSX
Sun, S., Gao, S., Kondabagil, K., Xiang, Y., Rossmann, M. G., & Rao, V. B. (2012).
Structure and function of the small terminase component of the DNA pack-
aging machine in T4-like bacteriophages. Proceedings of the National Academy
of Sciences, 109(3), 817–822. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1110224109
PhageReTerm: a tool for correcting circular permutations in bacteriophages sequenced with
Oxford Nanopore
39
==PAGE:46==
Treangen, T. J., & Salzberg, S. L. (2012). Repetitive DNA and next-generation
sequencing: Computational challenges and solutions. https://doi.org/10.
1038/nrg3117
Trun, N., & Trempy, J. (2003). Chapter 7: Bacteriophage. In Fundamental bacterial
genetics (pp. 105–125). Blackwell Publishing.
Yang, C., Chu, J., Warren, R. L., & Birol, I. (2017). NanoSim: nanopore sequence
read simulator based on statistical characterization. GigaScience, 6(4), 1–
6. https://doi.org/10.1093/GIGASCIENCE/GIX010
40
PhageReTerm: a tool for correcting circular permutations in bacteriophages sequenced with
Oxford Nanopore
==PAGE:47==
A
PhageReTerm & TRCP_Sim usage
Simple usage in Python shell or IPython:
# Import modules
import PhageReTerm as reterm
import TRCP_Sim as sim
# Generate simulated ONT reads for SPP1 model organism:
sim.TRCP_Sim(model = "SPP1")
# Run PhageReTerm on simulated data
reterm.phagereterm(input_file = "simulated_reads.fasta",
k_size = 1500,
use_threshold = True,
factor = 4)
In the listed example, TRCP_Sim simulates ONT reads based on the genome of
model organism SPP1, which employs headful packaging with a pac site and
results in both terminal redundancies and circular permutations.
PhageReTerm then runs on these reads with a user-defined k-mer size of 1500,
and using a read length threshold of 4 - meaning that only reads with lengths over
1/4 of the max read length will be processed - thus saving time and computing
resources. It is also possible to change the buffer size used in the mismatch
counter (default: 3), but in the author’s experience this seems to have little impact
on its ability to detect TRP’s.
PhageReTerm: a tool for correcting circular permutations in bacteriophages sequenced with
Oxford Nanopore
41
==PAGE:48==
B
Omitted tool-specific
commands
This appendix entry contains tool-specific commands for methodology detailed in
the Materials & Methods chapter.
B.1
Simulation with nanosim
Training stage Given that one has a nanopore reads and reference genome pair
for training:
read_analysis.py genome -i reads.fastq -rg ref_genome.fasta -o model_dir
Simulation stage stage Use model to simulate a sequencing run based on a
sequencing file Simulate nanopoe reads using an input reference genome to se-
quence:
simulator.py genome -rg to_sequence.fasta -c model_dir -o sim_dir --fastq
B.2
Assembly with SPAdes
Assembly was conducted on raw nanopore reads file (reads.fastq), to produce
the contigs.
spades.py --only-assembler -s reads.fastq -o output_dir
From here, the largest contig was isolated into its own file (contig.fasta), and
used for subsequent attempts to detect terminal redundancies in the nanopore
reads.
B.3
Sequence manipulation with Biopython
Biopython is a Python package for manipulating biological data (Cock et al., 2009),
and was used extensively for exploratory data analysis and final implementations
of PhageReTerm and TRCP_Sim.
Consider we have an assembled contigs.fasta file. While there are dedicated
tools and methods for assessing congiguity, one can quickly get a feel for this by
viewing the lengths of each contig.
First, import the SeqIO module:
42
PhageReTerm: a tool for correcting circular permutations in bacteriophages sequenced with
Oxford Nanopore
==PAGE:49==
from Bio import SeqIO
Biopython can be adapted for various programming styles:
# For loop
lengths = []
for record in SeqIO.parse("contigs.fasta", "fasta"):
lengths.append(len(record))
# List comprehenion
[len(record) for record in SeqIO.parse("contigs.fasta", "fasta")]
By convention, SPAdes places the largest contig (i.e. contig with index 0) as the
first sequence in the file. Biopython can be easily used to extract this sequence
to its own file contig.fasta:
for index, record in enumerate(SeqIO.parse("contigs.fasta", "fasta")):
if index == 0:
SeqIO.write(record, "contig.fasta", "fasta")
B.4
’Self-blast’ with BLAST+
One can perform a ’self-blast’ by creating a database from the contig.fasta file,
and then performing the blast search using contig.fasta as the query, against
the newly created database.
makeblastdb -in contig.fasta -dbtype nucl
blastn -db db_location/ -query contig.fasta -out blast_outfile
B.5
Sequence Alignment Mapping with minimap2
The sequence alignment map can be output as a SAM file (map.sam), by mapping
raw reads (reads.fastq) to an assembled contig file (contig.fasta).
minimap2 -ax map-ont contig.fasta reads.fastq > map.sam
The SAM file can then be viewed for coverage information using a tool of one’s own
choice, such as SAMTools or UGENE.
PhageReTerm: a tool for correcting circular permutations in bacteriophages sequenced with
Oxford Nanopore
43
==PAGE:50==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Anker Engelunds Vej 41, Building 202
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.dtu.dk/sundhedsteknologi
