==PAGE:1==
Exploring the effects of activity patterns and urban
environment on peopleвҖҷs emotional states
Master Thesis
ГһГіrГ°ur Г–rn StefГЎnsson
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Exploring the effects of activity patterns and urban environment on peopleвҖҷs emoВӯ
tional states
Exploring the effects of activity patterns and urban environment on peopleвҖҷs emotional
states
Master Thesis
June, 2023
By
ГһГіrГ°ur Г–rn StefГЎnsson
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cusВӯ
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science,
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 324, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
https://www.compute.dtu.dk/
ISSN:
[0000Вӯ0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000Вӯ00Вӯ0000Вӯ000Вӯ0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000Вӯ0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000Вӯ00Вӯ0000Вӯ000Вӯ0] (printed version)
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over five months at the Section for Indoor Climate, DeВӯ
partment of Civil Engineering, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, under the
supervision of associate professor Carlos M. Lima Azevedo and Ph.D student Antoine
Dubois, in partial fulfilment for the degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of statistics.
ГһГіrГ°ur Г–rn StefГЎnsson Вӯ s212957
Signature
Date
ii
Exploring the effects of activity patterns and urban environment on peopleвҖҷs emotional states
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
The main objective of this thesis is to explore the effects of daily activities, environmental
context and personality traits on individualsвҖҷ stress levels.
In the first part, we aim to examine each day as a whole and model the relationship beВӯ
tween the daily mobility pattern and the stress profile. We use hierarchical clustering on
the mobility patterns and reveal two clusters, working and nonВӯworking days. We also use
hierarchical clustering to reveal two daily stress profiles. Then we use various linear clasВӯ
sifiers to model the relationship between the mobility pattern cluster and the stress profile.
Results show that working days are more likely to produce higher stress in general, while
nonВӯworking days are more likely to result in lower stress in general. Other features, such
as age and personality traits, are also important.
In the second part, we seek to predict the mean stress during smaller segments of the
day. We split each day into segments of both fixed length and varying lengths, where
each segment consists of a complete activity. We fit six models to the data and include
an autoregressive term. We use both a simple linear regression and several models from
the geographically weighted regression (GWR) family, which is a technique that assumes
that the parameters vary spatially. Additionally, we fit a neuralВӯbased generalised addiВӯ
tive model (GAM) on the data. We compare the modelsвҖҷ performances and interpret their
parameter estimations. Our results indicate that the more complex models do not proВӯ
vide a significant improvement over the simple linear regression, and they are prone to
overfitting.
Both parts struggle because of a lack of data but show some interesting signs that the
methods might be interesting to test on a complete dataset. Computational resources
also limited the training of the models in the second part, so they could not realise their
full potential.
Exploring the effects of activity patterns and urban environment on peopleвҖҷs emotional states
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
I want to thank my supervisors for their excellent guidance and help during my work on
this thesis. I also want to thank eMOTIONAL Cities for providing the data. Last but not
least, I want to express my gratitude to my family for their unconditional support and love.
iv
Exploring the effects of activity patterns and urban environment on peopleвҖҷs emotional states
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
2
Literature Review
3
3
Data
9
3.1
Data Gathering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.2
Activities and Trips . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.3
Context Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.4
Datasets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
4
Predicting Stress Profiles from Daily Mobility Sequences
11
4.1
Constructing TravelВӯActivity Sequences
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
4.2
Stress Signals
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
4.3
Clustering TravelВӯActivity Sequences . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
4.4
Clustering Stress Signals
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
4.5
Classifying Stress Clusters
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
4.6
Results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
4.7
Discussion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
5
Predicting Mean Stress of Segmented Sequences
27
5.1
Geographically Weighted Regression
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
5.2
NODEВӯGAM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
5.3
Data Preprocessing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
5.4
Results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
5.5
Discussion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38
6
Conclusions
41
Bibliography
43
A Title
47
A.1 Linear Regression . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
A.2 Mixed MGWR . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 52
A.3 NODEВӯGAM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53
Exploring the effects of activity patterns and urban environment on peopleвҖҷs emotional states
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Exploring the effects of activity patterns and urban environment on peopleвҖҷs emotional states
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
Stress is the bodyвҖҷs response to internal or external stimuli [1]. High stress can have
unwanted consequences, ranging from momentary emotional irregularities to persistent
health issues, physical and psychological. Prolonged periods of high stress can lead to
diseases such as obesity, diabetes and heart diseases by stimulating the production of
certain hormones [2] [3] [4].
With its constant technological leaps, the modern world is fastВӯpaced, and expectations
and responsibilities can cause soaring stress levels. Therefore, understanding what causes
stress will help individuals and urban planners to avoid stressВӯcausing situations and lower
the risk of the health issues mentioned above.
Although it is impossible to understand how people will react to their environment altoВӯ
gether, we can try to understand how specific actions and environments affect their stress.
Transport researchers have proposed various methods to predict traveller profiles and
demand zones from activity patterns. However, more research is needed on how these
activity patterns affect stress levels. The effects of urban context on emotional states
have been the subject of research. For example, green areas have been shown to affect
general wellВӯbeing and stress levels positively [5][6].
This thesis aims to identify the effects of activity patterns and environmental context on
peopleвҖҷs emotional states. We will look at surrounding facilities such as shops, services
and sports amenities, among others, and explore their impacts on stress levels. In addiВӯ
tion, we are interested in exploring how other external factors like weather, and internal
factors, such as age, gender, and personality traits, impact stress levels.
Based on our own experiences, we could assume how activities and environment affect
stress levels. For example, oneвҖҷs intuition might tell us that staying at home positively
influences stress levels. We might expect peopleвҖҷs stress levels to be lower at familiar
places like home or their workplace. Similarly, we might assume that unfamiliar places
and highВӯstake activities induce stress.
However, intuitions are sometimes misleading. Stress levels can have various causes.
A higher stress level can mean that something is engaging. Therefore, some activities
we presume to lower stress might increase it. Additionally, assumptions may not apply to
everyone, as people have different personalities.
One motivation for our experiment is that we expect different sequences of activities and
travels to cause different stress levels. We also expect the environmental context to have
different impacts on stress levels. To systematically test our assumptions, we state the
following research questions:
1. Which mobility pattern profiles are present in the dataset?
2. Are individualsвҖҷ daily stress levels dependent on their mobility patterns?
3. Are a personвҖҷs current stress levels affected by their previous activity or stress levВӯ
els?
4. Do stressВӯaffecting environments and actions have different impacts depending on
location?
Exploring the effects of activity patterns and urban environment on peopleвҖҷs emotional states
1
==PAGE:10==
To answer these questions, we will analyse a dataset collected during a pilot experiment
in Copenhagen in 2022 that describes individualsвҖҷ activities and travels, along with physioВӯ
logical data. The activities and travels were gathered with a smartphone application, and
the physiological data were recorded with a smart wristband. We gather a proxy measure
of the stress levels from the wristband measurements. Chapter 3 details the dataset and
the data collection.
In chapter 4 of this thesis, we seek to answer research questions 1 and 2. We will adopt
a holistic approach by considering the days as a whole and testing methods to model the
relationship between diary patterns and stress level profiles. We identify daily mobility
pattern profiles by clustering the activity sequences. Similarly, we identify daily stress
profiles by clustering the stress signals. Then we use three classification models to predict
the stress profile from the mobility cluster and other variables. In addition to the mobility
clusters, we use the individualsвҖҷ personal information to predict the stress profile.
We look at smaller timeframes in chapter 5 instead of whole days. We consider each day
as a sequence of segments of activities. We split the day into segments of three sizes
and retrieve the mean stress of each segment. We also gather information about the
surroundings at each location. We fit various models to answer research questions 3 and
4, incorporating autoregressive term and geographical information.
To determine if the variables impact the stress levels differently depending on the location,
we use a family of regression models called geographically weighted regression (GWR).
The model assumes spatial variability by weighing each prediction by its neighbouring
observations, where closer observations have a more significant influence. In addition,
we use spatially stationary models, a standard linear regression and a neuralВӯbased genВӯ
eralised additive model (GAM) to compare the performances further and find interesting
patterns.
The information we hope to extract could be helpful in urban planning, as it could help
the authorities to design calmer and more peaceful city zones. The effects of the activity
patterns on peopleвҖҷs stress could also be of interest in behavioural analyses and help
arrange more relaxing trips and activities.
2
Exploring the effects of activity patterns and urban environment on peopleвҖҷs emotional states
==PAGE:11==
2
Literature Review
Analysis of transportation and activity patterns has been subject to much research in reВӯ
cent years and decades. This research often seeks to identify travellersвҖҷ profiles and the
purposes of their trips. For example, the motivation can be to define fare zones or design
subscription plans targeted at specific user groups. Some works analyse travel records
collected by smart transport cards and analyse travel patterns and demand zones. Others
look at peopleвҖҷs activities and try to identify travellersвҖҷ profiles or daily patterns, often usВӯ
ing travelВӯactivity diaries obtained via a smartphone application. Some applications have
been developed to collect such data automatically, like that of Seo, Toru et al. [7], who
used a naive Bayes classifier to infer the purpose of trips. The size of the datasets colВӯ
lected through these applications is often enormous, and the computational cost of their
analysis grows alike. Therefore, statistical methods with high computational costs are not
viable for analysing mobility data.
Cats, Oded, and Ferranti [8] seek to identify the demands of travel zones and travellersвҖҷ
profiles based on their mobility patternsвҖҷ spatial properties in a Stockholm study. They
divide the city into 29 travel demand zones by clustering the stops using kВӯmeans clusterВӯ
ing. They consider both the distances between the stops and the flow of people between
them. The total number of trips toward each of the 29 zones is counted for each particiВӯ
pant. Finally, they obtain three user profiles by clustering the travellers depending on their
journeys: Locals, Commuters, and Explorers. Locals mostly stay in their home zone, and
commuters visit their work and home zones almost equally. Explorers have one central
zone where most of their trips start or end, but they surprisingly pass through many more
zones.
The approaches mentioned earlier have in common that they only consider the spatial and
temporal aspects, like end stations, visited zones and travel duration, to derive collective
information on the travellers. They do not factor in the purposes of the travels or the
pattern of activities between them. Some researchers have devoted their research to
analysing mobility patterns to identify user profiles and behaviour. These studies often
involve clustering mobility patterns. Clustering such sequences involves comparing the
difference, or distance, between them. Determining the similarity of sequences can be
tricky, as each sequence of activities and travels may depend on each other. In such a
case, small changes considerably increase the distances between the sequences when
using the traditional Euclidean and Hamming distances. The Hamming distance is defined
as follows:
d(s, g) =
X
h
Dhsg
(2.1)
where
Dhsg =
 0
if sh = gh
1
otherwise
Sequence alignment methods (SAMs) are popular for comparing mobility sequences.
They originate from bioinformatics, where they have been used to compare sequences
of amino acids, such as DNA and RNA [9][10][11]. The sequence labels are compared
at each position, and the substitution costs are computed. A core task of using SAM conВӯ
sists of defining a cost matrix containing the pairwise substitution costs between states.
Exploring the effects of activity patterns and urban environment on peopleвҖҷs emotional states
3
==PAGE:12==
In DNA sequences, the states at each position are amino acidsНҫ in mobility sequences,
the states are travel or activity labels.
Joh [12] proposed a multidimensional SAM that allows more dimensions of the mobilВӯ
ity sequences to influence the similarity metric. The dimensions include the sequential
information of activities and the interdependency between them. Joh, Arentze and TimВӯ
mermans [13] empirically compare the performances of four selected metrics. The four
metrics are: (1) the Hamming distance (eq. (2.1), (2) the cosine similarity:
SC(A, B) = cos Оё =
A В· B
вҲҘAвҲҘвҲҘBвҲҘ
(2.2)
Here, Оё is the angle between the vectors, (3) unidimensional sequence alignment using the
basic operations substitutions, insertions and deletions and (4) MDSAM. The researchers
test whether the metrics are able to capture specific structural characteristics of activity
patterns, like sequential relationships and interdependency. Their results show that the
MDSAMвҖҷs accuracy is superior to the other metrics in terms of the accuracy of the classiВӯ
fied patterns.
Despite its benefits, using SAMs to analyse real mobility diaries is challenging because
the mobility sequences are hardly ever aligned. They rarely start or end at the same time
and have a different number of entries. This poses a problem as it requires comparing two
elements at different points in time. To solve this problem, some analysts have divided
the sequences into series of segments of equal length. They cut the segmented series
to fit the same timeframe, allowing them to compare series with aligned start and end, as
well as aligned elements.
Song, Ying, et al. [14] use this method to transform mobility and activity patterns into seВӯ
quences of 1Вӯ, 3Вӯ, 5Вӯ and 10Вӯminute segments. They use four metrics (or edit distances)
to apply the alignment method to the sequences, (1) unitВӯcost distance, where all substituВӯ
tions have identical cost, (2) fixedВӯflexible distance, where some activities are considered
as fixed and others as flexible and the edit distance is higher for fixed activities, (3) the
tripВӯactivity weighted distance, where the substitution cost between a trip and an activity
is higher than between two trips or two activities and (4) transitionВӯbased distance, where
the cost of each transition is found by counting the number of such transitions. They also
use two alignment methods, (1) the Hamming distance as defined in eq. (2.1) and (2) optiВӯ
mal matching where the distance between sequence A and sequence B is defined as the
minimum operation cost of transforming A to B. The allowed operations are substitutions,
insertions and deletions.
They use these metrics to cluster the sequences using hierarchical clustering and obtain
four types of userВӯprofiles: homeВӯstayers with mainly home activities, regular workers with
regular working hours, nonВӯregular workers with a nonВӯregular daily pattern, and others
where there are more leisure activities and fewer working hours. They suggest applying
these weighing methods to other data dimensions, such as emotional states or geographic
locations.
SAMs can be used as a similarity metric for clustering mobility sequences. However, as
they are computationally expensive, they have primarily been used on small datasets.
Joh and Timmermans [15] suggest using a heuristic approach, where a small subset of
the sequences is selected to determine their cluster assignments. This method reduced
the computational time on larger datasets, compared to using the whole set, while still
obtaining representative clusters.
4
Exploring the effects of activity patterns and urban environment on peopleвҖҷs emotional states
==PAGE:13==
Another method proposes to use networkВӯbased methods to detect similarities in mobility
patterns, like Zhang and Till in 2017 [16]. This approach emphasises the social aspect of
individualsвҖҷ travels as it can reveal patterns based on the interactions between individuals.
They convert the mobility data from activity sequences into networks where nodes repreВӯ
sent individuals and edges represent the temporal and spatial interconnections between
individuals. Temporal interconnections are defined as the frequency or duration of indiВӯ
viduals doing the same activities concurrently. Spatial interconnections are defined as
the distance between individuals while doing their activities. Then, the researchers apply
a communityВӯdetection algorithm known as the Louvain method [17] on the network to
reveal communities within the data based on the previously defined interactions between
individuals. The communities represent mobility patterns and consider the order of activiВӯ
ties and the interdependencies between them. Their results show that this method shows
great potential to classify mobility data and can be further extended to understand human
interactions and decisionВӯmaking.
Only a few articles have directly investigated the effects of different activities and mobilВӯ
ity patterns on individualsвҖҷ emotional states. One study in three European cities found
that travellers were loyal to their daily routines but did not find a relationship between moВӯ
bility patterns and stress levels [18]. More researchers have focused on the effects of
environmental features on stress levels. Nielsen et al. [6] conducted a survey in CopenВӯ
hagen where participants recorded the distances from their homes to eight different types
of green areas via a questionnaire. The researchers analysed the relationships between
the participantsвҖҷ access to green areas and their body mass index (BMI) and experienced
stress over the past 12 months, which they also obtained via a questionnaire. Their results
show that short distances to green areas are related to less stress and a lower likelihood
of obesity.
Exploring realВӯtime recorded stress levels often involves the analysis of temporal seВӯ
quences containing measured stress over some time. For clustering them, a similarity
metric is needed. Several metrics have been introduced for that task. A straightforward
choice is the Euclidean distance, which is the square root of the sum of squared distances
between corresponding points in the sequences under consideration:
d(A, B) =
v
u
u
t
n
X
i=1
(ai вҲ’bi)2
(2.3)
where ai and bi are the elements of time series A and B respectively, at position i. This
metric is computationally efficient but requires the sequences to be of equal lengths and
does not capture changes that are not aligned between them.
Dynamic Time Warping (DTW) is a similarity measure between time series that can comВӯ
pare sequences of different lengths and measure similarities despite varying speeds and
shifts in start and end times. It accommodates distortions between the sequences by
warping them nonВӯlinearly to find an optimal alignment and allowing manyВӯtoВӯoneВӯpoint
comparisons. The alignment between two sequences of lengths N and M is found dyВӯ
namically by filling out a N Г—M cost matrix, eventually finding an optimal warp path. DTW
has been widely used in comparing time series, such as speech recognition [19][20], as
it captures different talking speeds.
However, DTW is computationally inefficient, as it has a time complexity of O(NM) where
N and M are the lengths of the sequences. Some methods have been developed to
Exploring the effects of activity patterns and urban environment on peopleвҖҷs emotional states
5
==PAGE:14==
speed up the DTW process. Salvador and Chan [21] propose the FastDTW algorithm.
FastDTW approximates the DTW measure with a linear time complexity. This approximaВӯ
tion is achieved by constraining the warp path search area and using a reduced version
of the data. They reduce the data using a multilevel approach where the time series is
shrunk to a lower resolution, and the optimal warp path at that resolution is found. The
warp path is then projected onto a higher resolution and used as an initial guess for the
warp path. This process is repeated until the original resolution is reached. As it is an
approximation, nothing ensures the process converges to the optimal solution. NonetheВӯ
less, it finds a nearly optimal solution within a time complexity of O(N). They provide an
empirical example of comparing the approximated warp path to the optimal one, finding
that the FastDTW significantly improves previous methods.
Intuitively, gradientВӯbased optimisation methods could fasten the sequence clustering.
However, DTW is not differentiable and does not allow gradientВӯbased methods. Cuturi
and Blondel [22] propose a differentiable approximation to DTW called the SoftВӯDTW. This
approximation outperforms PetitjeanвҖҷs DTW barycenter averaging [23] for averaging and
clustering time series. DTW and SoftВӯDTW can be used as similarity metrics for clustering
time series and computing their centroids.
An alternative approach for such clustering consists of using deep learning methods. SeyВӯ
doux et al. [24] used a deep neural network combined with a Gaussian mixture model to
cluster earthquake signals in Greenland. They find patterns that can prove helpful in foreВӯ
casting seismic events such as landslides.
Predicting continuous variables, such as stress levels, has long interested analysts. One
of the bestВӯknown models for that task, yet one of the simplest, is linear regression. As
the name suggests, it models a linear relationship and is therefore limited when modelling
nonВӯlinear functions. Moreover, standard linear regression assumes that the parameters
are global, i.e., not dependent on geographical location. Geographically weighted regresВӯ
sion (GWR) is a technique introduced by Fotheringham et al. [25] that assumes spatial
heterogeneity. The modelвҖҷs parameters are estimated at each location and are influenced
by observations at neighbouring locations. The weights are computed with a kernel funcВӯ
tion that is dependent on a variable called the bandwidth that controls the distance decay.
Choosing the optimal bandwidth is an essential task, and it is selected by comparing speВӯ
cific criteria of models fitted with various bandwidths. The bandwidth is constant across
the area and the variables in normal GWR. The multiscale GWR (MGWR) [26] extends the
GWR by permitting flexible bandwidths for each variable at each location. The bandwidths
are selected through a backfitting algorithm. As the algorithm needs many iterations to
reach convergence, MGWR is computationally demanding. Mixed GWR combines the
local GWR model and a global regression model. It allows some parameter estimates to
vary spatially while keeping others fixed.
Deep neural networks are stateВӯofВӯtheВӯart statistical models that have outperformed huВӯ
man accuracy in various machine learning tasks due to their flexibility and abilities to
model highly nonВӯlinear functions. The main drawback of neural networks is their lack
of interpretability. Due to their complexity, their decisions are hard to explain, which can
be critical in highВӯstake applications. Addressing that problem has gathered much attenВӯ
tion in recent years. Ribeiro et al. proposed the LIME framework to explain classifiersвҖҷ
predictions. Their approach locally approximates the deep learning model with a simВӯ
pler interpretable model. They look at how the modelвҖҷs output behaves concerning an
infinitesimal change in the values of a single input variable.
More recently, attention has turned to make the deep learning models interpretable instead
6
Exploring the effects of activity patterns and urban environment on peopleвҖҷs emotional states
==PAGE:15==
of fitting local, interpretable proxy models to them. Agarwal et al. [27] introduced neural
additive models (NAM), where they encode every input variable separately into a latent
variable through a small neural network. The latent variables are then combined to make
a final prediction. They show empirically that neural networks using the ReLU activation
function fail to approximate very jumpy functions. As a remedy, they propose a new hidden
unit called expВӯcentered (ExU) that adjusts the input by a bias and learns the weights in the
logarithmic space. They evaluate the accuracy of NAMs and show that it is similar to that
of stateВӯofВӯtheВӯart (Generative Additive Models) GAMs. However, the NAMвҖҷs performance
does not come at the cost of interpretability. As each feature remains independent, one
can visualise the mapping between a given feature onto the output variable in a simple
twoВӯdimensional graph. Despite all its advantages, NAMs are computationally expensive
and do not allow pairwise interactions between features.
The model NODE, proposed by Popov et al.
[28], generalises an ensemble of deciВӯ
sion trees but allows gradientВӯbased optimisation thanks to its derivability.
Chang et
al. [29] propose NODEВӯGAM, an interpretable neural networkВӯbased GAM. They extend
the NODE architecture and turn it into a GAM to make it interpretable. NODEВӯGAM is
more computationally efficient than NAM as it requires only one train run, while NAM
requires training and ensembling tens or hundreds of models. NODEВӯGAMs are easily
interpretable as each feature is independent of the others, and each learned relationship
can be visualised and inspected separately. Furthermore, NODEВӯGAM allows feature inВӯ
teractions, also making it a GA2M, where the effects of one feature on another can be
examined.
Exploring the effects of activity patterns and urban environment on peopleвҖҷs emotional states
7
==PAGE:16==
8
Exploring the effects of activity patterns and urban environment on peopleвҖҷs emotional states
==PAGE:17==
3
Data
The data used throughout this thesis was collected during a pilot experiment by the eMoВӯ
tional Cities team [30], conducted in Copenhagen in the spring of 2022. Eleven particВӯ
ipants wore a smart watch that measured their stress levels for two weeks. Moreover,
a mobile application inferred their trips and activities. In addition, we used openВӯsource
data to represent participantsвҖҷ environments.
3.1
Data Gathering
The mobility data were collected using the smartphone application XВӯing [31]. The applicaВӯ
tion continuously collects the GPS locations in the background and infers which activity or
trip the participant is currently carrying out. Some additional information is also collected
through the application via questionnaires. Moreover, the participant answers questionВӯ
naires throughout the day. In the morning, the users are asked to evaluate the quality of
their sleep. During the day, the users are occasionally randomly prompted to assess their
momentary emotional states. In the evening, the user is asked to assess how they felt
during each activity retrospectively. Finally, the user can validate the sequence of trips
and activities inferred by the app or correct any errors.
The emotional state was measured with a smart wristband of type Empatica E4 [32]. The
wristband measures the userвҖҷs blood volume pulse (a proxy measure of the heart rate),
sweating level, skin temperature and wrist speed.
Before the mobility and emotional state data gathering commenced, some information
about the participants was recorded via a screening survey. This included collecting perВӯ
sonal information such as date of birth, height and weight, illnesses and disabilities and
level of education, among many others.
The participants that passed the screening survey filled out a preВӯsurvey where they asВӯ
sessed their attitude towards different modes of transport. Finally, the participantsвҖҷ perВӯ
sonality traits were collected using a selected subset of questions from the HEXACO
personality model of personality structure [33]. The results were aggregated into three
values: honestyВӯhumility, prudence and anxiety. Personality traits were also collected by
other means. The DASS (DepressionВӯAnxiety Stress Scale) [34] was used to evaluate
the anxiety, stress and depression levels of the participants. The pВӯAD8 test was used to
detect cognitive changes that might signal the early stages of dementia. The participantsвҖҷ
environmental mastery Вӯ their general feeling of being in control of their situation Вӯ was
measured using the Ryff measurement scale [35].
3.2
Activities and Trips
Table 3.1 lists the activity and travel types in the dataset.
3.3
Context Data
We extended the pilot experiment dataset with some openВӯsource data for this thesis. This
additional data included information on surrounding points of interest (POIs) and weather.
We used a web service from OpenStreetMap [36] geographic database to collect the
points of interest (POIs) data. For that, we used a code written by Miguel Costa 1. It
1Miguel Costa, email: miguel.nobre.costa@gmail.com
Exploring the effects of activity patterns and urban environment on peopleвҖҷs emotional states
9
==PAGE:18==
Table 3.1: Activity and travel types in the dataset.
ID
Activity Type
Travel Type
0
Home
1
Work
Bike
2
Work related
Bus
3
Education
Personal car
4
Shopping
Walk
5
Errands
Boat
6
Accompany/dropoff/pickup
Train
7
Change mode
Taxi
8
Medical
Unknown
9
Eat out
Other
10
Socialise
Plane
11
Exercise
12
Entertainment
13
Community
14
Second home
15
Other
returns the number of several entities near a given GPS location, such as parks, sports
centres and grocery stores. The API returned information on POIs within a 25, 50, 100
and 250 metres radius. In the analysis here, we used the 100 metres data. In total, the
POIs data consisted of 789 variables. Most of the variables had so many zero elements
that they would have had little to no impact when used as a feature in a model. To enhance
their importance, we combined similar POIs variables to create variables with more nonВӯ
zero values. The columns were combined by taking the sum of each element. After
collecting and combining the POIs data, it consisted of 31 variables.
We collected weather data from an API offered by the weather data provider Visual CrossВӯ
ing. It contained hourly weather data in Copenhagen during the time of the experiment.
The weather data included temperature, precipitation, wind speed and wind direction valВӯ
ues, as well as other meteorological indicators.
3.4
Datasets
This thesis uses a dataset preprocessed by Antoine Dubois [37]. Each row contains inforВӯ
mation on a single activity, its type, start and end times, and location, among other fields.
These variables are accompanied by information on the individual and their personality
traits and answers to the questions asked in XВӯing about the individualвҖҷs day. The dataset
consisted of 997 activity episodes and 1023 travel episodes. We also use the raw files
containing the stress levels, sampled around four times per second. These two datasets
provided the basis for all the analysis in the thesis.
10
Exploring the effects of activity patterns and urban environment on peopleвҖҷs emotional states
==PAGE:19==
4
Predicting Stress Profiles from Daily
Mobility Sequences
In this chapter, we use the data described in chapter 3 to examine the effects of mobility
pattern profiles on stress levels. First, we identify profiles in the data by separately clusterВӯ
ing mobility sequences and stress signals before modelling the relationship between the
two clusterings. We compute the similarities of the mobility sequences using two metrics:
(1) the fixedВӯcost Hamming distance as in eq. (2.1) and (2) a flexible cost metric with difВӯ
ferent pairwise costs. Then we cluster them using hierarchical clustering. We cluster the
stress signals using the dynamic time warping (DTW) technique. We then used the clusВӯ
ters of the travellersвҖҷ mobility patterns to predict the stress cluster they belong to. The data
consists of 203 days where any diary item was recorded and 208 days with at least one
stress measurementвҖ”of those, 188 days contained both diary and stress measurements.
4.1
Constructing TravelВӯActivity Sequences
The data were organised activityВӯwise in chronological order, so each entry contained
information about a single activity. The entries were sliced into 5Вӯ, 10Вӯ and 15Вӯminute
segments. Each segment contained the label of the travel or activity being carried out
in that particular period, as demonstrated in fig. 4.1. When more than one activity was
present in the period, the first one encountered was used. The sequences are of length
24 Г— 60
t , where t is the segment length in minutes. The sequences were stripped only
to include the hours between 8 AMВӯ7 PM each day to keep only the most descriptive
period. Afterwards, sequences whose more than 15% of the values were missing were
dropped. For most sequences, the participants stayed home during the last hours of the
day, inducing little variability of the mobility pattern during these periods. Concerning the
nighttime, most of the values were missing. We, therefore, assumed that participants
stayed at home. Therefore, this period is not interesting for us either.
Figure 4.1: Example of mobility patterns sliced into 5Вӯ, 10Вӯ and 15Вӯminute segments.
Exploring the effects of activity patterns and urban environment on peopleвҖҷs emotional states
11
==PAGE:20==
To simplify the clustering in the following step and to prevent rare activities from having
an unpredictable impact on the model parameters, we grouped similar activities into six
categories: Home, work or education, errands, leisure, travel and others. We assigned
values to the category other. Table 4.1 details the new categories assignments.
Table 4.1: New label assignments for the travels and activities
Old ID
Old Label
New ID
New Label
1
Home
0
Home
14
Second Home
1
Work
1
Work/Education
2
Work Related
3
Education
4
Shopping
2
Errands
5
Errands
6
Accompany/Dropoff/Pickup
7
Change Mode
8
Medical
13
Community
9
Eat Out
3
Leisure
10
Socialise
11
Exercise
12
Entertainment
16
Bike
4
Travel
17
Bus
18
Personal Car
19
Walk
20
Boat
21
Train
22
Taxi
23
NaN
24
Other Travel
25
Plane
15
Other Activity
5
Other
4.2
Stress Signals
The stress signals contained elements representing the stress level of the traveller. The
raw signal was sampled at around 4 Hz. We downВӯsampled the stress signals to 1000 eleВӯ
ments for this analysis to reduce computational requirements. That preserved the signalsвҖҷ
original shape and their gaps. Unlike the construction of the travelВӯactivity patterns, we
did not truncate the stress vectors such that they all fit into the same timeframe. Instead,
we kept their original timeframe. We dropped signals lasting less than eight hours, along
with those containing gaps of more than 10% of their length and those where more than
20% of the values were missing.
12
Exploring the effects of activity patterns and urban environment on peopleвҖҷs emotional states
==PAGE:21==
4.3
Clustering TravelВӯActivity Sequences
Hierarchical clustering was performed on the mobility pattern sequences with 5Вӯ, 10Вӯ and
15Вӯminute segments to group them into clusters of similar daily routines. WardвҖҷs method
[38] was used as a linkage function to produce the input matrix to the clustering.
4.3.1
Similarity metrics
A similarity metric had to be defined to measure the similarities between the sequences.
Two metrics were used: (1) the Hamming distance with a fixed transition cost between
activities and (2) a flexible distance with different costs between activities.
Hamming Distance
The Hamming distance is a measure of the dissimilarity of two sequences. It is defined
as the number of mismatches in the sequences. We recall the formula of the Hamming
distance as in eq. (2.1):
d(s, g) =
X
h
Dhsg
(4.1)
where
Dhsg =
 0
if sh = gh
1
otherwise
One property of the Hamming distance is that the distance between every mismatch is
constant.
Flexible Distance
With the Hamming distance, the exchange cost is constant, regardless of the activity types.
That might cause it to fail to distinguish between two slightly different and very different
observations and cause misclassifications. To address this potential problem, we defined
a distance matrix D, where Di,j is a numerical distance, or exchange cost, between travВӯ
el/activity i and travel/activity j, with Di,j = 0 if i = j. As a distance is symmetrical and
the distance from a point to itself is zero, the distance matrix is symmetric with zeroes
on the diagonal. This approach allows for a flexible comparison between the sequences,
as it factors in the nature of the activities and their different mutual dissimilarities. The
distance between two sequences is then defined as the sum of the weighted distances at
each position:
d (a, b) =
n
X
k=1
Dij,k
(4.2)
where n is the length of sequences a and b, and i and j are the numerical values of the
activities in a and b at position k, respectively. Figure 4.2 shows our defined distance
matrix as a heatmap.
Exploring the effects of activity patterns and urban environment on peopleвҖҷs emotional states
13
==PAGE:22==
Figure 4.2: The distance matrix used with the flexible distance, representing the pairwise
costs of substitution between travels or activities
4.3.2
Choosing the Optimal Number of Clusters
The silhouette score [39] measures the quality of a clustering. The mean intraВӯcluster disВӯ
tance and the mean distance to the other clusters are combined to compute the silhouette
coefficient of each cluster. The silhouette coefficient of cluster i is
s(i) =
b(i) вҲ’a(i)
max{a(i), b(i)}
where a(i) is the mean intraВӯcluster distance within cluster i and b(i) is the distance beВӯ
tween i to its closest cluster. The mean of the coefficients is then used as the silhouette
score
s = 1
N
X
i
s(i)
The silhouette score ranges between Вӯ1 and 1. Scores close to 1 indicate wellВӯseparated
clusters, while negative scores mean the dataset was assigned to the wrong clusters. A
score close to 0 means that the clusters overlap.
For more than two clusters, the silhouette score is usually small, with the highest score
being around 0.1 when using 10Вӯminute segments and the Hamming distance. For two
clusters and 5Вӯminute segments, the silhouette scores for the Hamming distance and the
flexible distance are at their highest at almost 0.5. While the scores are generally low for
both the 10Вӯ and 15Вӯminute segments, the flexible distance reaches a score of around
0.4 with 10Вӯminute segments and k = 2. Figure 4.3 shows the silhouette scores for each
similarity metric and each segment size.
14
Exploring the effects of activity patterns and urban environment on peopleвҖҷs emotional states
==PAGE:23==
(a) 5 minutes
(b) 10 minutes
(c) 15 minutes
Figure 4.3: Silhouette scores of the travelВӯactivity sequence clustering using two distance
methods and three segment sizes. Note the different scales of the yВӯaxes.
4.3.3
Clusters
We only use the 5Вӯminute segments in this part because they returned higher silhouette
scores and more interpretable clusters.
Two Clusters
We clustered the 5Вӯminute segments using k = 2 clusters and the Hamming distance and
flexible distance metrics. The two metrics returned the same clusters. While the clustering
revealed distinct clusters, the number of sequences in each cluster was unbalanced. Only
17 sequences were assigned to cluster 1, while 88 were assigned to cluster 2. Figure 4.4
shows the distribution of travels and activities along the sequences of each cluster using
each metric. The obtained clusters can be interpreted as:
вҖў Cluster 1: Very few working hours. Instead, mostly staying at home during the day,
running some errands early and some leisure later in the day.
вҖў Cluster 2: Mostly work between 8 AM and 4 PM and staying at home after work.
Some leisure (presumably eating) around lunchtime and travels to and from work.
For simplicity, we will refer to cluster 1 as NonВӯWorking Day and cluster 2 as Work Day.
Exploring the effects of activity patterns and urban environment on peopleвҖҷs emotional states
15
==PAGE:24==
(a) Cluster 1 Вӯ NonВӯWorking Day
(b) Cluster 2 Вӯ Work Day
Figure 4.4: Distributions of the travels and activities along the day for each of the k = 2
clusters found using 5Вӯminute segments.
Three Clusters
For the forthcoming classification, we wanted to get a comparison of the classifiers when
using different numbers of clusters. Thus, we performed the same hierarchical clustering,
cutting the dendrogram at a lower threshold to obtain three clusters. As in section 4.3.3,
the difference between the Hamming distance and the flexible distance is so minimal that
they return the same three clusters.
The three clusters obtained using the flexible distance were as follows:
вҖў Cluster 1: This is the same cluster as the nonВӯworking day cluster in the previous
clustering. Mostly staying at home, travelling and leisure while working are rare.
вҖў Cluster 2: Almost exclusively work between 8 AM and 3 PM and homeВӯstaying from
5 PM until the end of the day. Mostly travels in between these hours.
вҖў Cluster 3: Similar to cluster 2, but with some work to the end. Some travel throughВӯ
out the day, leisure around noon and towards the end of the day, and running erВӯ
rands in the later hours.
Figure 4.5 shows the activity distributions of the sequences in the three clusters. We will
refer to cluster 1 as nonВӯworking day, cluster 2 as shorter work day and cluster 3 as longer
work day.
4.4
Clustering Stress Signals
Dynamic Time Warping (DTW) is a technique commonly used to compare time series.
The algorithm finds an optimal alignment between the sequences nonВӯlinearly, allowing
for comparison between time series that vary in speed and length. Then, it can capture
differences in the time series with shifts in time. The main drawback of DTW is that it is not
differentiable, so the optimal alignment can not be found with gradientВӯbased methods. A
smoothed version of DTW, softВӯDTW, remedies this problem by being differentiable and
thus allowing gradientВӯbased methods. It has shown better performance in clustering
time series than DTW [22]. The time series kВӯmeans method uses softВӯDTW as a metric
to measure similarity for clustering the stress signals.
The participantsвҖҷ stress levels in the experiment were measured with a smart wristband.
Here, we split the stress signals into days, which we then clustered with a method called
time series kВӯmeans from the Python package tslearn [40]. It computes the similarities of
the sequences using softВӯDTW and clusters together sequences of similar shapes.
16
Exploring the effects of activity patterns and urban environment on peopleвҖҷs emotional states
==PAGE:25==
(a) Cluster 1 Вӯ NonВӯworking day
(b) Cluster 2 Вӯ Shorter work day
(c) Cluster 3 Вӯ Longer work day
Figure 4.5: Distributions of the travels and activities along the day for each of the k = 3
clusters obtained using the flexible distance and 5Вӯminute segments.
4.4.1
Preprocessing of Stress Signals
The stress data were organised as table rows containing a timestamp and the measured
stress level, bounded between 0 and 1. Many values were missing in the stress data
for various reasons, such as participants forgetting to wear the wristband, taking it off for
a short time, or the watch temporarily disconnecting from the phone. The vectors had
to be aligned to a correct time index to reveal and account for gaps and preserve their
shape. Not treating the gaps would have distorted the vectors as they would have been
compressed at the gaps. A time index containing every second from 7 AM to midnight was
created for sampling the stress at each second. After this sampling, the vectors missing
more than 30% of the points were dropped. Furthermore, the vectors that contained
gaps longer than 10% of the whole vector were dropped. After this filtering process, 130
stress vectors remained. The remaining gaps were filled using linear interpolation from
the Python package Pandas [41]. The time series kВӯmeans algorithm used for clustering
the signals is very computationally expensive for long vectors, so each vector was downВӯ
sampled to a length of 1000 points.
4.4.2
Choosing the Optimal Number of Clusters
As for the travelВӯactivity sequences, the silhouette score was used to determine the optiВӯ
mal number of clusters for the stress signals. Figure 4.6 shows the silhouette scores for
k = 2 to k = 6 clusters. Clustering with k = 2 clusters returned the best silhouette score.
4.4.3
Clusters
The clustering used the time series kВӯmeans Python package [40] with the softDTW [22]
metric and k = 2 clusters. We obtained the following clusters:
вҖў Cluster 1: Stress levels increase at the beginning of the day and stay high until the
Exploring the effects of activity patterns and urban environment on peopleвҖҷs emotional states
17
==PAGE:26==
Figure 4.6: The silhouette scores of the stress clustering.
evening, when they drop steeply. A sharp drop is notable just before the centre.
вҖў Cluster 2: Low to medium stress levels, though smoothly increasing throughout the
day, reaching their peak towards the end of the day.
Of the 130 vectors, 36 were assigned to cluster 1 and 94 to cluster 2. We used tslearnвҖҷs
softDTW barycenter averaging [22] to compute the centroids of each cluster. Figure 4.7
shows the two clustersвҖҷ centroids. The standard deviations at each position are high in
both clusters, and there is much overlapping between them, which conforms well to the
relatively low silhouette score and further endorses that the separation is unclear. Towards
the end, the cluster centroids cross, and cluster 2 briefly shows higher stress levels. For
simplification, we will refer to cluster 1 as high stress and to cluster 2 as low stress.
Figure 4.7: The centroids of the two stress clusters.
4.5
Classifying Stress Clusters
We tried several statistical approaches to model the relationship between the travelВӯactivity
sequence clustering described in section 4.3 and the stress profile clustering described
in section 4.4. The travelВӯactivity cluster labels obtained using the flexible distance with
k = 2 and k = 3 clusters and 5Вӯminute segments were used in this section. The depenВӯ
18
Exploring the effects of activity patterns and urban environment on peopleвҖҷs emotional states
==PAGE:27==
dent variable to be predicted is the stress cluster label from the time series kВӯmeans with
k = 2 clusters. After merging the data from the two clusterings, the data consisted of 61
observations.
Since the mobility patterns describe the day as a whole, some features were not approВӯ
priate to use as inputs since they were inconsistent throughout the day. Features like
start and end times, duration, location and distance to home apply to the activities but
not to trips. In addition, all the columns with missing values were dropped. Finally, the
mean, standard deviation, entropy and peak of the stress were dropped to prevent data
leakage. In the end, the features used as the independent variables in the classification
were age, gender, the traits gathered from a personality test: honestyВӯhumility, anxiety,
prudence and environmental mastery, the weekday (Monday, Tuesday) and finally, the
mobility pattern cluster number as obtained in section 4.3.
We fitted three statistical models: logistic regression, support vector classifier (SVC) and
a decision tree, to compare the performances of different classifiers and see which input
features were important in each. We chose these three because of their simplicity and
interpretability. The relevant parameters were selected with a grid search. All the models
were fitted using the scikitВӯlearn implementation [42].
4.6
Results
We trained each model using shuffled split crossВӯvalidation with 50 splits and a test set
rate of 0.15. We computed the R2 score of each fold on the train and test sets. Figures 4.8
to 4.9 visualise the distributions of the R2 scores from the 50 trials for each model using
two and three stress clusters. Table 4.2 reports the mean R2 scores on the train and test
sets. The classifiers are detailed in sections 4.6.1 to 4.6.4.
Figure 4.8: R2 scores of the classifiers from 50Вӯfold crossВӯvalidation using two mobility
pattern clusters and 5Вӯminute segments.
Exploring the effects of activity patterns and urban environment on peopleвҖҷs emotional states
19
==PAGE:28==
Figure 4.9: R2 scores of the classifiers from 50Вӯfold crossВӯvalidation using three mobility
pattern clusters and 5Вӯminute segments.
Table 4.2: The mean R2 scores of the three classifiers from 50Вӯfold crossВӯvalidation, using
both k = 2 and k = 3 mobility pattern clusters.
2 clusters
3 clusters
Train
Test
Train
Test
5 mins
Logistic Regression
0.77
0.75
0.73
0.71
SVC
0.79
0.79
0.84
0.73
Decision Tree
0.80
0.71
0.84
0.75
10 mins
Logistic Regression
0.72
0.68
0.72
0.68
SVC
0.80
0.70
0.80
0.70
Decision Tree
0.80
0.67
0.80
0.67
15 mins
Logistic Regression
0.73
0.69
0.73
0.69
SVC
0.78
0.70
0.78
0.70
Decision Tree
0.78
0.67
0.78
0.67
4.6.1
Baseline
We chose a baseline model to compare the following models. For all observations in the
test set, the baseline classifier predicted the most common class in the training set. The
R2 score was calculated for each of the 50 crossВӯvalidation splits.
4.6.2
Logistic Regression
Two Mobility Pattern Clusters
When predicting the stress using k = 2 mobility clusters, logistic regression was fitted with
an lbfgs solver [43] and was regularised with an L2 penalty norm and inverse regularisation
strength C = 0.0409. The model parameters were selected with a grid search. After the
50 crossВӯvalidation splits, the model had an average R2 score of 0.7667 on the train set
and 0.7460 on the test set. Figure 4.10 shows the mean coefficients of the model from
the 50 CV splits.
20
Exploring the effects of activity patterns and urban environment on peopleвҖҷs emotional states
==PAGE:29==
Figure 4.10: Mean coefficients of the logistic regression models from the 50Вӯfold crossВӯ
validation using two mobility pattern clusters.
The most influential feature is the personality trait honestyВӯhumility, with a mean coefficient
of 0.19, meaning that an increase in that feature increases the chances that the model
predicts the observation to belong to the lowВӯstress clusters. A higher value of honestyВӯ
humility thus increases the likelihood of lower stress levels. This feature is followed by
anxiety, with a mean coefficient of Вӯ0.15. The effects of the other two personality measures
are smaller, with prudence and environmental mastery having mean coefficients of 0.084
and 0.027, respectively. Expectedly, the anxiety feature is the only personality trait with
a negative coefficient, meaning that an increase in anxiety increases the likelihood of
predicting the highВӯstress cluster.
A consequence of the small data size used in the prediction is that only observations of
Mondays, Tuesdays, Wednesdays and Thursdays were present after filtering out the unusВӯ
able sequences. The mean coefficients of Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday and Thursday
are 0.11, Вӯ0.0065, Вӯ0.13 and 0.019, respectively. Thus, according to the model, stress levВӯ
els seem higher on Tuesdays and Wednesdays, whereas Mondays and Thursdays seem
calmer, though the coefficients of Tuesdays and Thursdays are much smaller than that of
the other two weekdays.
Age has a mean coefficient of 0.068, so higher age means a slightly higher probability of
the model predicting the lowВӯstress cluster. In other words, older individuals are more likely
to express lower stress levels. Gender, however, has the lowest effect on the prediction
with a mean coefficient of 0.0084, so whether the individual in question is male or female
has a minor effect on the prediction.
The labels of the sequences from the clustering have a coefficient of 0.12. The coefficient
has a positive sign, meaning that a sequence assigned to the nonВӯworking day increases
the likelihood of the model predicting the lowВӯstress cluster. On the other hand, for an
observation with a sequence assigned to the workday cluster, the model is more likely to
predict the highВӯstress cluster. This result is intuitiveНҫ work days produce higher stress
than nonВӯworking days, according to the model.
Exploring the effects of activity patterns and urban environment on peopleвҖҷs emotional states
21
==PAGE:30==
Three Mobility Pattern Clusters
As before, a logistic regression model was fitted, now using k = 3 mobility pattern clusВӯ
ters and k = 2 stress clusters. The model used an lgbfs solver, L2 penalty norm and a
regularisation parameter C = 0.019. The mean R2 score of 0.71 was lower than when
predicting with two clusters. Figure 4.11 shows the classifierвҖҷs coefficients.
Figure 4.11: Mean coefficients of the logistic regression models from the 50Вӯfold crossВӯ
validation using three mobility pattern clusters.
There are some notable differences from the logistic regression coefficients with two moВӯ
bility clusters. The most apparent difference from the analysis with two clusters is that
all the coefficients are much smaller in magnitude. Interestingly, shorter work days and
longer work days have opposite signs. The shorter workday coefficient is negative and is
more likely to predict high stress. However, the nonВӯworking and longer workday clusters
have positive coefficients and lean towards lower stress levels. The nonВӯworking clusВӯ
ter has the smallest coefficient in magnitude, even though it is the same cluster as the
nonВӯworking cluster in the previous classification, which had a relatively large influence.
Like before, anxiety is the only personality trait with a negative coefficient. The mean
coefficient of prudence is the largest of all the features, overtaking honestyВӯhumility from
before. Monday and Thursday again have positive mean coefficients, while Tuesday and
WednesdayвҖҷs coefficients are negative, suggesting that people express higher stress levВӯ
els on Tuesdays and Wednesdays.
Gender has a higher coefficient than previously, both in absolute magnitude and relative to
the other features. In contrast, it had the smallest coefficient in the logistic regression with
two mobility clusters. Again, age is among the most influential features, with a positive
coefficient indicating that higher age is more likely to produce lower stress.
4.6.3
Support Vector Classification
Next, a support vector classifier (SVC) was fitted to see if a different model would perform
differently and to find out which features Вӯ if not the same Вӯ would be influential in another
model.
22
Exploring the effects of activity patterns and urban environment on peopleвҖҷs emotional states
==PAGE:31==
Two Mobility Pattern Clusters
When predicting the stress using two mobility pattern clusters, the classifier reached a
mean R2 score of 0.790 on the test set. The model was fitted with a linear kernel and
regularisation parameter C = 0.1. Figure 4.12 shows the modelвҖҷs coefficients.
Figure 4.12: Model parameters associated with features in the Support Vector Classifier
using two mobility pattern clusters.
As in the logistic regression, a mobility pattern assigned to the NonВӯworking day cluster
is more likely to cause lower stress levels. Anxiety has the most influential coefficient
of Вӯ0.33, again being the only personality quantity to increase the likelihood of a more
stressful day. All the coefficients have the same polarity as in the logistic regression
except for the gender, although its small coefficient means that the difference is small.
The relative influence of each feature changes from the logistic regression, with prudence
and environmental mastery, for example, having much higher relative coefficients in the
SVC.
Figure 4.13: Coefficients of the features in the Support Vector Classifier using three moВӯ
bility pattern clusters.
Exploring the effects of activity patterns and urban environment on peopleвҖҷs emotional states
23
==PAGE:32==
Three Mobility Pattern Clusters
The SVC returned a mean R2 score of 0.71 when fitted with three mobility pattern clusters.
It was fitted with a regularisation parameter C = 10, selected with a grid search. A linear
kernel was used to be able to show the coefficients. Figure 4.13 shows the coefficients of
the input features as estimated by the classifier.
4.6.4
Decision Tree
The last model fitted to the data was a decision tree. They work fundamentally differently
from the previous models, as they look for criteria to split the data to maximise the impurity
gain. The intention was to see which features were the most important for achieving a
good split on the data.
Two Mobility Pattern Clusters
The decision tree fitted with two mobility pattern clusters achieved a mean R2 score of
0.706 on the test sets from the 50 validation splits. The model used the Gini criterion as
a classification criterion. It is defined as:
gini(t) = 1 вҲ’
k
X
i=1
(p(ci))2
(4.3)
where k is the number of classes and p(ci) is the probability of predicting class ci at step
t. Figure 4.14 shows the mean feature importances.
Figure 4.14: Mean feature importances of the decision tree with two mobility pattern clusВӯ
ters from 50Вӯfold crossВӯvalidation.
We immediately notice that five features are dominantНҫ the sequence cluster, Wednesday,
age, anxiety and honesty humility. The other features are much less influential. Here, the
features are not polarised since they imply the impurity reduction as per the Gini criterion.
On average, the five most important features reduced the impurity by over 93%.
Three Mobility Pattern Clusters
When fitting the tree using three mobility pattern clusters, it achieved a mean R2 score of
0.74. Figure 4.15 shows the feature importances.
24
Exploring the effects of activity patterns and urban environment on peopleвҖҷs emotional states
==PAGE:33==
Figure 4.15: Mean feature importances of the decision tree with three mobility pattern
clusters from 50Вӯfold crossВӯvalidation.
4.7
Discussion
In this chapter, we have demonstrated a link between complete daily mobility patterns and
stress levels. We revealed distinctive clusters of mobility patterns and stress profiles and
fitted three classifiers that achieved a relatively good accuracy.
The flexible distance designed to remedy the shortcomings of the Hamming distance could
not improve the clustering of the sequences of 5Вӯminute segments when clustering with
k = 2 clusters. The two metrics yielded the same clusters for two and three clusters. HowВӯ
ever, for 10Вӯminute segment sequences, the flexible distance produced more distinctive
clusters with k = 2 than the Hamming distance, supported by a remarkable silhouette
score of almost 0.4. This high score suggests that using flexible distances between the
different pairs of travels and activities is more suitable for capturing the different dynamics
between the activities. With 15Вӯminute segments, both metrics struggled to capture many
differences between the sequences, which is also reflected by the poor silhouette score.
This might indicate that 15Вӯminute segments are too long and that too much information
is lost since each segment can only represent one activity as we designed. When using
k = 3, the clusters were not wholly distinct, as highlighted by the silhouette score falling
below zero.
The hierarchical clustering revealed two daily pattern profiles. They are intuitively interВӯ
pretable, expressing a clear difference between working and nonВӯworking days. The metВӯ
rics only consider the similarities of activities at corresponding locations in time. They do
not consider the day as a whole, like factoring in the duration or order of the activities.
There exist other metrics than those used in this work. Some, used in bioinformatics, are
based on sequence alignment methods (SAMs. They allow more flexible alignment operaВӯ
tions that might change the distances between sequences. An interesting approach could
be to use multiВӯdimensional sequences that contain information about each segmentвҖҷs acВӯ
tivity and contextual information such as weather and location. Methods to compare such
multiВӯdimensional sequences have been described with promising results [12]. The metВӯ
rics used here were chosen due to their simplicity. As shown here, selecting the correct
metric is an essential clustering task. Observing the effect of other metrics on performance
would be interesting.
Exploring the effects of activity patterns and urban environment on peopleвҖҷs emotional states
25
==PAGE:34==
Dividing the stress signals into two clusters returns distinctive centroid signals, but both
clusters have a high variance. Towards the end of the signals, the clustersвҖҷ mean and
standard deviation overlap.
The ability of the models to predict the stress cluster was somewhat hindered by the small
size of the dataset. After merging the data from the stress and travelВӯactivity clustering
and dropping the unusable sequences, the dataset consisted of only 61 rows. In addiВӯ
tion, there was not much variability in the mobility sequences, as supported by only two
clusters giving the best separation. Furthermore, many more sequences were assigned
to one cluster than the other, which underlines the small variance in the daily patterns.
The unbalanced number of sequences in each mobility pattern cluster meant that the perВӯ
formance of the baseline model in the classification was relatively high. Some activity
types were rare, even after grouping the activities into fewer groups. Around 82% of the
episodes were home or work/education, while 7.4% were travels, 3.7% leisure and 3.0%
errands. The homogeneity of the pilot participants explains this unbalanced occurrence
of activities. They have similar daily patterns and provided data for only 14 days.
Despite all these shortcomings, the classifiers achieved rather good performance. The
classification with two mobility pattern clusters gave a slightly better R2 score than with
three clusters. The mean R2 scores for the train and test sets were similar for the logistic
regression and SVC using two mobility pattern clusters. However, the decision tree and
the SVC with three mobility pattern clusters return considerably lower scores on the test
set than on the train set, possibly hinting at some overfitting.
The models used here were selected with interpretability in mind, allowing for an analysis
of which variables are influential in each model, especially to see the effects of the mobility
patterns. The results suggest that the individualsвҖҷ personality traits are a decisive factor in
their stress levels. The effects of the individualsвҖҷ mobility patterns on each particular day
are also a significant factor in their general stress level throughout that same day. The
model supports the trivial and perhaps naive assumption that a working day tends to be
more stressful than a nonВӯworking day with more homeВӯstaying and leisure activities. It
should be noted, though, that the small amount of data implies that some of the results
should be taken cautiously. For example, the coefficients of Monday and Wednesday
were much greater than those of the other weekdays. The lack of data is apparent here,
as only four rows of the 61 in the dataset were on Tuesday and seven on Thursday, while
31 and 19 were on Mondays and Wednesdays, respectively.
Applying the same clustering and classification as used here on a more extensive dataset
with more variability among the participants and their mobility patterns would be interestВӯ
ing, to see if it is possible to identify more or different mobility and stress profiles. Studies
with similar analyses of travelВӯactivity sequences have identified more than two groups of
patterns [16]. Additionally, it would be interesting to see whether the same classification
models would achieve similar or better accuracy than those trained here. In the following
chapters, further measures will be taken to model the relationship between activities and
stress levels.
26
Exploring the effects of activity patterns and urban environment on peopleвҖҷs emotional states
==PAGE:35==
5
Predicting Mean Stress of Segmented
Sequences
In chapter 4, we sought to model the relationship between a whole dayвҖҷs mobility pattern
and the dayвҖҷs complete stress profile. In this chapter, we will look at smaller segments of
the day and try to model the mean stress of each segment. We will use three segment
sizes, two fixed, 15 and 60 minutes, and one variable, where each segment is a complete
activity. We fit six models to each of the three segmentations.
The first model is a simple linear regression. Second, we model the data using geographВӯ
ically weighted regression (GWR) models that assume the parameters vary spatially. We
use a standard GWR model and a multiscale GWR with flexible bandwidths (MGWR).
Then, we combine GWR and MGWR with a standard linear regression to create mixed
models, where only a subset of the variables is considered to vary geographically. Third,
we fit a neuralВӯbased generalised additive model called NODEВӯGAM. Finally, we compare
the models and their performances and interpret their estimated coefficients and results.
5.1
Geographically Weighted Regression
Standard regression assumes that the data is spatially stationary and does not vary over
space. A single model is fitted to the whole data, and the parameters are constant for
the observations, regardless of certain characteristics specific to each observation, such
as its location. This assumption may not always be appropriate since the parameters
might depend on those characteristics and thus vary from one observation to another.
One solution that highlights the geographical correlation between observations is the geВӯ
ographically weighted regression. It assumes spatial heteroscedasticity by fitting a model
at each observation point where the surrounding observations influence the parameters.
Spatially dependent parameters are called local, while those fixed across the space are
called global.
In GWR, an ensemble of local models is calibrated at various locations. The parameters at
each location are influenced by the surrounding observations. They are estimated using
weighted least squares (WLS), where the local parameter estimates are weighed by the
other observations in the data. The basic form of GWR is as follows:
yi = ОІ0(ui, vi) +
m
X
k=1
ОІk(ui, vi)xik + Оөi
(5.1)
where yi is the dependent variable and (ui, vi) are the coordinates at observation point i.
The parameters, ОІi, at each location are estimated with WLS:
ЛҶОІi =
 XT WiX
вҲ’1 XT Wiy
(5.2)
where Wi is an n Г— n matrix specific to regression point i, whose diagonal contains the
weights of observation points 1, ..., n and the offВӯdiagonal elements are zero. The weights
range from 0 to 1 and are computed with a kernel weighting function. In practice, any
function can be used as a kernel. However, generally, a kernel is selected such that an
increase in the distance decreases the weight and that the weight is 1 when the distance is
Exploring the effects of activity patterns and urban environment on peopleвҖҷs emotional states
27
==PAGE:36==
0 (the observation point is the same as the regression point). The choice of kernel affects
how many neighbouring observations are considered when estimating the parameters.
Common choices in GWR are the exponential, biВӯsquare and Gaussian kernels. The
exponential kernel is defined as:
wij = eвҲ’
dij
h
(5.3)
where dij is the geographical distance between observation i and observation j, and h is
a parameter known as the bandwidth. The bandwidth parameter controls how the weights
decay with increasing distance. A larger value of h means that the weights decay more
slowly. Selecting the bandwidth is an essential task for performing GWR.
Another popular choice is the biВӯsquare kernel, whose key characteristic is that it excludes
the observations that are beyond the bandwidth distance by setting their weight to zero:
wij =
(
1
if dij < h
0
otherwise
(5.4)
The user can select the bandwidth manually or use software to search for the optimal
bandwidth for a given dataset. That process consists of fitting the model to the data with
various bandwidth values and selecting the best one according to specific criteria. The
user commonly chooses to maximise the model test accuracy or the Akaike Information
Criterion (AIC) [44]. The AIC quantifies the amount of information lost by a model. It can
be used to compare models. AIC rewards the goodness of fit while penalising a higher
number of parameters to be estimated. Thereby, the AIC considers the risk of overfitting.
The formula for AIC is:
AIC = 2k вҲ’2 ln L

ЛҶОё|y

(5.5)
where k is the number of the modelвҖҷs estimated parameters and L

ЛҶОё|y

is the maximised
value of the modelвҖҷs likelihood function.
The AICc is a version of AIC that is corrected for small sample sizes [45]. The motivation
is that when the sample size is small, the standard AIC is likely to neglect the risk of
overfitting. The criterion is corrected by introducing an additional penalisation for the
number of parameters:
AICc = AIC + 2k(k + 1)
n вҲ’k вҲ’1
(5.6)
where n is the sample size and k is the number of parameters.
5.1.1
Multiscale GWR
In basic GWR, the parameters are estimated with WLS using a preВӯselected kernel and
a bandwidth. The bandwidth is constant for each parameter, meaning that all variables
vary at the same spatial scale.
To offer more flexibility to the geographically weighted regression, an extension to the
basic version was introduced by Fotheringham et al. [26], called multiscale geographВӯ
ically weighted regression (MGWR) (also sometimes known as flexibleВӯbandwidth geoВӯ
graphically weighted regression Вӯ FBGWR). In this version, the bandwidth is allowed to
28
Exploring the effects of activity patterns and urban environment on peopleвҖҷs emotional states
==PAGE:37==
vary across the independent variables instead of being fixed. The GWR from eq. (5.1)
is extended by replacing ОІk with ОІbwk, where bwk is the bandwidth corresponding to the
independent variable k. The form of MGWR then becomes:
yi = ОІ0(ui, vi) +
m
X
k=1
ОІbwk(ui, vi)xik + Оөi
(5.7)
The bandwidths are selected with a backВӯfitting algorithm, an iterative process where each
term is calibrated at a time under the assumption that the other terms are known. The
estimate for each term is obtained by regressing the partial residual on each variable. The
partial residual is defined as the remainder obtained by subtracting the combined effect of
the full model and the estimated current term from the overall residual. This new estimate
is then used when the process moves over to estimate the next term. This process is
repeated in an iterative manner until a particular termination criterion is met, which in this
case is when the change of estimates between iterations is sufficiently small or after a
maximum number of iterations is reached. The bandwidth selection is computationally
intensive, especially for large datasets with many parameters. Choosing suitable values
of initial guesses can speed the process up, but that may require some prior knowledge
or experience.
5.1.2
Mixed GWR
In many cases, few features vary spatially, while others are stationary. Mixed GWR is
a model that allows fixed and spatially dependent terms to be used simultaneously. The
spatially stationary variables are referred to as global variables, while the spatially varying
variables are referred to as local variables. Mixed GWR can be represented mathematiВӯ
cally as:
yi =
ka
X
j=1
ajxij(a) +
kb
X
l=1
bl(ui, vi)xil(b)Оөi
(5.8)
where aj are the global coefficients and bl(ui, vi) are the local coefficients. The global and
local independent variables are represented by xij(a) and xij(b), respectively.
Denoting the matrix of independent global variables as Xa, the matrix of independent local
variables as Xb and the vector of the observed dependent variables as y, the parameters
of the mixed GWR are estimated jointly as per the following instructions laid down by
Fotheringham et al. [46]:
1. For each column of Xa:
(a) Regress the column against Xb using basic GWR.
(b) Compute the residuals from the above regression.
2. Regress y against Xb using basic GWR.
3. Compute the residuals from the regression in step 2.
4. Regress the yВӯresiduals from step 3 against the XaВӯresiduals from step 1a using
linear regression with OLS. The coefficients of this regression give the estimates of
the global coefficients, ЛҶa.
5. Subtract XaЛҶa from y, and regress the result against the Xb using basic GWR. The
coefficients from this regression give the estimates of the local coefficients, ЛҶb.
Exploring the effects of activity patterns and urban environment on peopleвҖҷs emotional states
29
==PAGE:38==
This approach can be quite computationally intensive for big datasets, as it requires fitting
a GWR ka + 2 times, where ka is the number of global features. An extension of this
framework will also be used where MGWR will replace GWR.
It is worth stressing that we will use the acronym MGWR for the multiscale GWR described
in section 5.1.1, not for mixed GWR.
5.2
NODEВӯGAM
Generalised additive models (GAM) [47] are combinations of nonВӯlinear functions of each
feature. Using a link function g, the form of GAM is
g(E(Y )) = f0 +
D
X
j=1
fj(xj)
(5.9)
Each feature is modelled against the dependent variable, and the final prediction is made
by taking a sum of the functions. These models are easily interpretable, as the effects
of each feature can be explained by examining the corresponding function and its plot.
Nonetheless, it may lack the complexity to model highly nonВӯlinear relationships.
Some methods have been proposed for using deep learning to model the GAM functions.
Here, we will use a model called NODEВӯGAM [29]. The model involves training a GAM
using multiВӯlayer oblivious decision trees (ODT). ODTs are trees where all the nodes at
the same depth are restricted to do a split based on the same feature and threshold.
NODEВӯGAM is based on NODE, a deep learning GAM approach that also uses ODTs to
model the relationships between each feature and the output. NODE uses a differentiable
version of ODT where the functions to choose which features to split have been replaced
by a softened weighted sum of features using ОұВӯentmax transformation [48]:
F c (x) = x В· entmaxОұ (F c)
(5.10)
where F c contains the logits for choosing which features to split on. Each layer contains
stacked ODTs, and the outputs from all of them form the input to the next layer. The model
makes its final prediction by averaging the outputs of all trees from all layers.
NODEВӯGAM modifies NODEвҖҷs architecture to turn it into a GAM by introducing differenВӯ
tiable attention and a temperature annealing parameter T. The temperature annealing
parameter decreases linearly from 1 to 0, forcing F c to select only one feature instead of
taking a weighted sum of features like in NODE:
F c (x) = x В· entmaxОұ (F c/T)
(5.11)
This approach prevents feature interactions in the model. To further avoid feature interacВӯ
tions, a gate is introduced between the layers that only allows connections between trees
if they share the same features. Attention weights are added to the feature functions to
decide which tree from the previous layer to attend to. The last linear layer produces the
modelвҖҷs output as a weighted sum of all outputs:
ЛҶy(x) =
L
X
l=1
I
X
i=1
hli(xl)wli
(5.12)
30
Exploring the effects of activity patterns and urban environment on peopleвҖҷs emotional states
==PAGE:39==
With all these modifications to the NODE architecture, NODEВӯGAM preserves the interВӯ
pretability of a GAM, as each learned function can be plotted and analysed.
NODEВӯGAM also comes as a GA2M, an extension to the GAM framework that allows
interactions of two features. The NODEВӯGAM design is extended such that each tree has
two logits instead of one. They allow at most two features to interact within each tree by
letting the logits be F cвҲ’1)mod2+1, c > 2. Furthermore, there are gates between the trees
that only allow interactions between two trees if they both focus on the same two features,
that is, both trees have equal F 1 and F 2.
g(y) = f0 +
D
X
j=1
fj(xj) +
D
X
j=1
X
jвҖІ>j
fjjвҖІ(xj, xjвҖІ)
(5.13)
NODEВӯGA2M is still interpretable, as the feature interactions can be visualised and inВӯ
spected.
5.3
Data Preprocessing
We preprocessed the data similarly to in chapter 4. We broke each day into segments
of 15 and 60 minutes and calculated the mean stress for each segment. As in chapter 4,
we used only the first activity if the segment had more than one to reduce programming
complexities.
Breaking the days down in this manner meant that not all segments had a corresponding
stress measurement or a recorded activity. We dropped the rows where those values
were missing. We define the lag variable, or the autoregressive term, as the mean stress
of the immediately preceding activity or segment. We gathered the lagged mean stress
before dropping any rows to ensure correctness.
The points of interest (POIs) variables are sparse vectors with only a few nonВӯzero eleВӯ
ments. This poses the danger of a column becoming allВӯzeroes in either the test or train
sets. To prevent multicollinearity in trainВӯtest splits, we dropped the columns with less
than 20 nonВӯzero values and introduced checks to ensure that the train and test matrices
contained zero columns.
Since the mean stress was bounded between 0 and 1 while the outputs of the regression
models used here are unbounded, we used the generalised models where the dependent
variable was transformed with a link function. Here we chose a logit function as the link
function, i.e. g(p) = ln
p
1вҲ’p. Note that we also transformed the lag variable with the same
link function. As MGWR recommended, we standardised the data before feeding it to the
regression models.
We only kept the segments containing activities and dropped those containing trips beВӯ
cause they consisted of trajectories rather than single locations.
5.4
Results
In total, we fitted and compared five models, (1) a fully global model, (2) an entirely local
model using standard GWR, (3) an entirely local model using MGWR, (4) a mixed model
using standard GWR and (5) a mixed model using MGWR. This way, we examine the efВӯ
fects of assuming geographical weights and spatial effects. We used the package MGWR
from the PySAL library [49] to define and train the local models. We built additional feaВӯ
tures for fitting the mixed models. table 5.1 shows the R2 scores on the train and test sets
for the models.
Exploring the effects of activity patterns and urban environment on peopleвҖҷs emotional states
31
==PAGE:40==
Table 5.1: Mean crossВӯvalidated R2 scores of the local, global and mixed models using
the three data segmentations.
Train
Test
Full Train
15 mins
0.792
0.771
0.7913
60 mins
0.574
0.506
0.5711
Fully global
Activities
0.320
0.168
0.3153
15 mins
0.802
0.762
0.8038
60 mins
0.659
0.389
0.6571
Fully local (GWR)
Activities
0.339
0.179
0.3567
60 mins
0.572
0.429
0.604
MGWR
Activities
0.374
0.231
0.3991
15 mins
0.800
0.729
0.8030
60 mins
0.604
0.425
0.6217
Mixed GWR
Activities
0.347
0.197
0.346
60 mins
0.668
0.333
N/A
Mixed MGWR
Activities
0.373
0.184
N/A
5.4.1
Fully Global Model
We fitted a standard generalised linear regression to both the activityВӯwise and interВӯ
val data. We did not perform hyperВӯparameter optimisation. We used a 10Вӯfold crossВӯ
validation (CV) and computed the modelвҖҷs R2 score in each fold. Table 5.1 shows the
mean train and test scores from the crossВӯvalidation. The global model overfitted when
using the activityВӯwise data but generalised well on the 15Вӯminute and 60Вӯminute sets.
Figure 5.1 shows the mean coefficients from a 10Вӯfold CV of the 15 most important feature
coefficient estimates of the 15Вӯminute, 60Вӯminute and activityВӯwise models. Appendix A.1
shows a complete table of the mean and standard deviation of the estimated coefficients.
The lag variable is the most important in the 15Вӯ and 60Вӯminute models, while it is only
the sixth most important in the activityВӯwise model. The personality traits anxiety and
prudence are influential in all the models, and higher values of both increase the stress
prediction. Interestingly, gender is very influential, and the models predict higher stress for
males than females. The autoregressive term has a minimum standard deviation, while
the other features have relatively big standard deviations.
5.4.2
Fully Local Models
GWR
We fitted a GWR model with an exponential kernel to the data. The MGWR Python packВӯ
age offers an optimised method for selecting the bandwidth using a golden section search.
The bandwidth is returned as the number of nearest neighbours to consider in the weightВӯ
ing scheme. Table 5.2 shows the mean bandwidths.
The average bandwidth for the activityВӯwise model is close to the size of the whole dataset,
suggesting that the activityВӯwise data is less spatially dependent than the other two. The
other two models have bandwidths of around half of the observations.
As the coefficients are dependent on the location and the observed value of the dependent
variable, it is tricky to determine which coefficients to use for making predictions on the test
set. The approach we used was, for each observation in the test set, to find the closest
observation from the train set and use the same parameters. The MGWR package offers
32
Exploring the effects of activity patterns and urban environment on peopleвҖҷs emotional states
==PAGE:41==
(a) 15 minutes
(b) 60 minutes
(c) ActivityВӯwise
Figure 5.1: 15 largest (absolute value) estimated coefficients of the linear regression
model fitted on the three data segmentations. The error bars denote one standard deВӯ
viation.
a method for predicting unsampled observations for the basic GWR but not for MGWR.
To keep consistency, we used the same prediction method to select the parameters for
the unseen observations for both GWR and MGWR.
For the 15Вӯminute segments data, the model reached a mean R2 score of 0.803 on the
train set and a mean test score of 0.762, returning similar scores to the global model.
The local model had an average R2 score of 0.659 on the 60Вӯminute interval train set,
improving the global model. However, for the test set, the mean score was 0.389, which is
much lower than that of the global model. This suggests that the model overfits the data.
The GWR model also overfitted the activityВӯwise data, just like the global model, with an
average R2 score of 0.339 for the train set and 0.179 for the test set.
We now look at the modelвҖҷs estimated coefficients. Since the parameters differ at each loВӯ
cation, we present them visually on a map. As we have three models and 67 parameters
for each, we will only look at one here and compare the models to demonstrate the inВӯ
terpretation of geographically weighted parameters. We select the feature outdoor_sport,
which holds the number of outdoor sports amenities within 100m of the observation.
All the models estimated a positive coefficient for this feature, meaning they all estimate
that the more outdoor sports amenities, the more it will increase the mean stress. The
coefficients are similar over space in the 15Вӯ and 60Вӯminute models. In the activityВӯwise
model, the coefficients express some variability over the space without showing a strucВӯ
tured pattern.
Exploring the effects of activity patterns and urban environment on peopleвҖҷs emotional states
33
==PAGE:42==
Table 5.2: Mean bandwidths of the GWR models. Here, the bandwidth is the number of
nearest neighbours to use in the weighting. Size is the number of observations in the
training set.
Bandwidth
Size
15 mins.
2048
3893
60 mins.
430
1061
Activities
738
761
(a) 15 minutes
(b) 60 minutes
(c) ActivityВӯwise
Figure 5.2: Spatial effect of the outdoor sports variable coefficient estimated by the GWR
model across the study area using the three dataset segmentations. The dot sizes indicate
the relative number of observations at each location. Note the different scales.
MGWR
Due to the large number of segments, we could not fit the model on the biggest dataset
with 15Вӯminute segments. In the remaining two models, we only allowed a maximum
of 20 iterations in the bandwidth selection in each of the 10 CV folds because of limited
computational resources. Afterwards, we ran the model once on the complete sets without
a limit on iterations in the bandwidth selection. Table 5.1 reports the mean R2 scores of
the MGWR models of the 10 CV folds. The model showed a slight improvement in the
test score compared to the basic GWR model, even though the training score was lower.
MGWR improved over the basic GWR for the activityВӯwise dataset, especially on the test
set. We used the 60Вӯminute dataset to fit the unlimited model, thus using all the 1179
observations instead of 1061. That improved the modelвҖҷs score from 0.572 on average
on the train to 0.604.
Again, we will look at one specific parameter estimate and compare the two MGWR modВӯ
els. We select the variable building_education that holds the number of educational buildВӯ
ings within 100m of the observation point. We first notice that the two models estimate the
coefficient with opposite signs. Furthermore, the coefficients are much larger in magniВӯ
tude in the 60Вӯminute model. The 60Вӯminute model estimates the coefficients as negative.
This implies that more educational buildings decrease the mean stress, while the activityВӯ
wise model estimates it as positive. There are some evident patterns in both models. In
the 60Вӯminute model, the presence of educational buildings decreases the stress closer to
the Copenhagen city centre than in the suburbs. On the contrary, the activityВӯwise model
actually increases stress more inside the city than outside it. The farthest observations
from the city do have a negative coefficient.
34
Exploring the effects of activity patterns and urban environment on peopleвҖҷs emotional states
==PAGE:43==
(a) 60 minutes
(b) ActivityВӯwise
Figure 5.3: Spatial distributions of the educational building variable coefficient estimated
by the MGWR model across the study area using two segmentations of the dataset. The
dot sizes indicate the relative number of observations at each location. Note the different
scales.
5.4.3
Mixed Models
Variable Selection
Determining whether the variables are local or global is a difficult task. Methods exist to
check for spatial variability, for example, the function spatial_variability in the MGWR
package. It performs a Monte Carlo simulation on the dataset to generate pseudoВӯpВӯ
values for hypothesis testing. However, this method is very computationally heavy, so we
selected the variables manually. We assigned all the personality traits to the global group,
along with fixed personal information such as age and gender. We also assigned the
weekday variable to the global group. We assigned the POIs variables to the local group
as we expected them to vary spatially. We also expected the lag variable to be spatially
dependent, so we assigned it to the local group. Finally, we assigned the categorical
variables denoting the activities to the local group. We assigned 29 variables to the global
group and 40 to the local group.
Mixed GWR
We fitted a mixed GWR model according to the prescription described in section 5.1.2 on
the three data segmentations.
The model achieved a mean R2 score of 0.800 on the train set and 0.801 for the test set
when using 15Вӯminute intervals, similar to both the global model and the basic GWR. For
the 60Вӯminute intervals, the average R2 score on the train set was 0.603 and 0.425 on
the test set, an improvement to the basic GWR but a worse test score than the global
model. The model achieved a better test score using activityВӯwise segments than the
global model and the basic GWR but still overfitted the data.
A notable observation in the 60Вӯminute data is that the local coefficient near the Technical
University of Denmark (DTU) in Lyngby usually stands out. This is likely because of the
high number of observations there. At the same time, we notice that the parameters barely
vary spatially in the 15Вӯminute data. Here, we select the POI variable highway and visuВӯ
alise its coefficients. It is interesting and perhaps surprising that in the 60Вӯminute model,
a higher number of highways decreases stress. In the 15Вӯminute model, it increases the
stress, and the coefficient is relatively constant across the space. In the activityВӯwise
Exploring the effects of activity patterns and urban environment on peopleвҖҷs emotional states
35
==PAGE:44==
model, the coefficient is also relatively constant across the area, at around 0. There is an
exception close to Lyngby, where there is a big circle with a much higher coefficient. This
means that highways increase stress more in this place than anywhere else, according
to the model. Figure 5.4 shows the spatial distributions of the coefficient of the highway
variable.
(a) 15 minutes
(b) 60 minutes
(c) ActivityВӯwise
Figure 5.4: Spatial distributions of the highway variable coefficient estimated by the mixed
GWR model across the study area using the segmentations of the datasets. The dot sizes
indicate the relative number of observations at each location. Note the different scales.
Mixed MGWR
We only fitted two mixed MGWR models on the 60Вӯminute and activityВӯwise data. We
look at the coefficients of the variable temperature. Figure 5.5 shows the spatial distriВӯ
bution of the parameters. The two models are not in unison about this parameter. The
60Вӯminute segmentation estimates that the stress decreases with higher temperatures,
and decreases more near central Copenhagen. Conversely, the 15Вӯminute segmentation
estimates the temperature to increase the stress, most in the city centre. Appendix A.2
shows the spatial distributions of the remaining parameters and the global parameter esВӯ
timates for the activityВӯwise segmented data.
(a) 60 minutes
(b) ActivityВӯwise
Figure 5.5: Spatial distributions of the temperature variable coefficient estimated by the
mixed MGWR model across the study area using two segmentations of the dataset. The
dot sizes indicate the relative number of observations at each location. Note the different
scales.
36
Exploring the effects of activity patterns and urban environment on peopleвҖҷs emotional states
==PAGE:45==
5.4.4
NODEВӯGAM
The performance of the NODEВӯGAM, when fitted on the 15Вӯminute segment data, is similar
to the previous models, with a mean R2 score of 0.81 and 0.78 for the train and test sets,
respectively. For the 60Вӯminute segments, the model reached a mean R2 train score of
0.71 but only 0.44 on the test sets. This suggests that there are too few observations in
the dataset compared to the number of features, so the model overfitted. A more severe
overfitting is evident in the activityВӯwise segmentation, which is even smaller than the 60Вӯ
minute set. The mean train R2 is 0.52, while the mean test R2 is only 0.0050. The test
scores of the ten crossВӯvalidation folds ranged from Вӯ0.32 to 0.30, so the model is able to
reach good scores for certain trainВӯtest splits but generalises badly overall. Table 5.3 lists
the mean train and test scores.
(a) Work/Education
(b) Temperature
(c) Green Areas
(d) Autoregressive Term
Figure 5.6: The learned functions by NODEВӯGAM, fitted on the three datasets of four
selected variables. Note that the data are not standardised.
Some notable things emerge when examining the plotted functions. The activityВӯwise
model often disagrees with the other two. One estimates working or studying to increase
stress, while the other estimate it to decrease it. Similarly, the 15Вӯ and 60Вӯminute modВӯ
els estimate the temperature function to be relatively stable, slightly below 0, but in the
activityВӯwise model, the function soars upwards for temperatures higher than 15В°C. AnВӯ
other surprising observation is that contrary to previous research [6][5], a higher number
of green areas does increase the stress level prediction. Finally, the autoregressive term
has an almost linear function, even close to having an identity relation. Like in the previous
Exploring the effects of activity patterns and urban environment on peopleвҖҷs emotional states
37
==PAGE:46==
Table 5.3: The mean R2 scores of the NODEВӯGAM classifier fitted on the three data
segmentations.
Train
Test
15 minutes
0.8137
0.7848
60 minutes
0.7106
0.4395
Activities
0.5196
0.0050
models, it has the highest importance by some distance. It only has a high coefficient in
the 60Вӯminute model, though, while being around 0 in the other two. Figure 5.6 shows the
learned functions of the four features discussed here from one of the ten crossВӯvalidation
folds, and appendix A.3 shows the learned functions of all the variables.
5.4.5
NODEВӯGA2M
We fitted a NODEВӯGA2M model, as described in section 5.2 on the 60Вӯminute segmented
dataset. The model had an R2 score of 0.6741 on the train set and 0.4715 on the test set,
so there is still overfitting like in the previous models. We can visualise the pairwise interВӯ
actions by plotting their interactive functions. We demonstrate two examples of pairwise
interactions here, namely temperatureВӯbuilding_education and humidityВӯprecipitation. FigВӯ
ure 5.7 shows these pairwise feature interactions.
(a) Temperature Вӯ Educational Building
(b) Humidity Вӯ Precipitation
Figure 5.7: Pairwise interactions of selected features.
The former image indicates that a higher number of educational buildings and higher
temperatures increase stress prediction the most. Also, the stress prediction decreases
the most when the temperature is low and few educational buildings in the neighbourhood.
The second one suggests that stress decreases the most when the humidity is between
50 and 90 units, while the amount of precipitation does not have much impact.
5.5
Discussion
In this chapter, we fitted five different regression models and one additive model to the
travel data. These models revealed interesting patterns and information about the efВӯ
fects of activities and urban surroundings on stress. They performed similarly regarding
R2 scores, but differences in architectures and dataset segmentation ensured they still
provided different insights and analysis opportunities.
38
Exploring the effects of activity patterns and urban environment on peopleвҖҷs emotional states
==PAGE:47==
The segment size significantly impacts the parameter estimations and prediction accuВӯ
racies. We tested two sizes of equalВӯlength segments, 15 and 60 minutes, along with
segments of separate activities that varied in duration. The models performed best on
the 15Вӯminute segmentation, reaching R2 scores of around 0.8 for training and testing.
The lag variable dominates that datasetвҖҷs prediction more than the others. This was not
surprising, as we expected smaller windows to be more influenced by the stress of the
previous activity. Furthermore, the local parameters vary less geographically when using
the 15Вӯminute segments. The local and mixed models showed some overfitting for the
other two datasets, while the global model generalised well. Dividing the sequences into
smaller segments also results in more data, which helps to avoid overfitting.
Fitting on the data where each segment represented a whole activity returned the worst
R2 for all the models. We suspect that this is mainly down to two facts. First, this dataset
segmentation has the least number of observations. Second, the segment sizes are very
diverseвҖ”some activities last hours, and others only a few minutes. This misalignment
may affect the models. Although the lag variable is still the most impactful, its relative
influence is less than for the other segmentations. The mean stress of a multipleВӯhour
activity does probably not depend on the mean stress of a preceding activity that lasted
just a few minutes. On the contrary, the mean stress during a short activity will likely
be influenced by a long activity just before. The models fitted on this segmentation also
do not generalise well, as their low test scores demonstrate. They reached much better
scores when fitted on the equally segmented data, so choosing an appropriate segment
size is very important for the model performance. Fitting the models on the full dataset
resulted in slightly higher R2 scores than using only 90% of it, suggesting that more data
improves performance.
The bandwidth selection for the models involving MGWR could not run until convergence
due to a lack of computing resources. The bandwidth selection is a vital task, and it
has been noted that its effects are far more significant on the modelsвҖҷ parameters and
performance than the kernel selection [25, 50]. Our tests are not reliable enough to judge
the actual performance of our models.
Regarding R2, the local models did not provide significant improvements compared to the
global model. One possible reason is that the lag variable is so influential that the other
variables have only a minor impact, regardless of whether they are spatially dependent.
Another reason might be that the variables do not express spatial variability. Despite the
similarity to the global model scores, the local models did reveal interesting patterns for
some variables. The mixed models expressed more structured spatial variability than the
basic models, suggesting that they are better suited to capture the geographical variances
since they do not consider all variables to vary across space.
Although some variables expressed spatial patterns, it is risky to conclude that they are
actually spatially dependent. That is because the variables are sensitive to other factors
that might influence the parameter estimation. This is especially true for a biased dataset
like ours. One influencing factor is that the same person might be the subject of all the
observations at a particular location. The stress levels, and subsequently the local paramВӯ
eter, could be influenced more by the personality of that person rather than the location at
which the activity takes place. Another factor is that some locations might only be home
to specific activities. Knowing that the participants in the study work at DTU in Lyngby,
the observations around Lyngby are most likely recorded while working. That means that
the local parameter estimate might be influenced more by the fact that the participant is
working rather than by the location. Less homogeneity in the data should mitigate this
Exploring the effects of activity patterns and urban environment on peopleвҖҷs emotional states
39
==PAGE:48==
problem.
The NODEВӯGAM returned a similar training and testing R2 to the local and global models
for the 15Вӯminute set. For the 60Вӯminute set, the NODEВӯGAM scored slightly higher on
the train and test sets but still overfitted like the local models. The most interesting case
is the activityВӯwise data, where the NODEВӯGAM showed severe overfitting. It reached a
mean R2 of 0.51 on the train set, significantly improving the global and local regression
models. However, on the test set, it only managed a mean R2 score of 0.005. The most
probable reason is insufficient data for the model to learn. Training the model using the
whole train set improved the R2 score for the activityВӯwise set, so more data is likely to
improve the model even more.
To conclude, we have successfully demonstrated the use of various interesting techniques,
although the quality of their results is questionable in some cases. The GWR and NODEВӯ
GAM models did not significantly outperform the global linear regression model. However,
it should be kept in mind that the data needs to be revised because it is both small and
biased. Consequently, it only allows for a little explaining with machine learning methods.
Moreover, we could not realise the full potential of the geographically weighted models
due to a lack of computational resources. It would be interesting to fit the models on more
extensive and less biased datasets and see if they could improve their performances and
reveal compelling relationships.
40
Exploring the effects of activity patterns and urban environment on peopleвҖҷs emotional states
==PAGE:49==
6
Conclusions
This thesis is exploratory work. Our main objective was to understand the influences of
trips, activities and environment on stress levels using interpretable statistical models.
In chapter 4, we looked at each day as a complete unit to predict its stress levels. Such
aggregation is a simplification of the relation between diary and stress. We were able
to reveal distinct mobility clusters. We obtained three clusters, nonВӯworking days, short
working days and longer working days. We also gathered two different stress clusters, one
with generally higher stress and one with generally lower stress. We used the obtained
mobility clusters as inputs to a classifier to predict which stress profile they belonged to.
Results showed that the mobility pattern was a revealing feature for classifying stress.
Nonetheless, it lacks the flexibility to focus on individual activities or smaller parts of the
day. Also, it does not offer the possibility to incorporate context variables since the location
is not constant for the whole observation.
In chapter 5, we considered the day a sequence of small time segments. This approach
offers more flexibility, as each observation is shorter and related to the preceding one by
an autoregressive term. The segmented data allows us to consider more than one activity
per segment, but we only considered one. Therefore, we could use variables such as
distance from home, duration of the activity, and context variables like POIs and weather
information. We used regression models and a neural GAM to predict the stress within
each segment. Results clearly show that the mean stress of the previous segment heavily
influences the mean stress of each segment. This is true regardless of the segment size,
but it gets more evident as it gets smaller. Using geographically weighted regressions,
we obtained a few interesting spatial patterns. However, since the dataset is small and
biased, we can not ensure that the variables only varied because of their locations.
A recurring theme throughout our analyses was that the small dataset size halted us.
Moreover, the participants all being coworkers biased the sample. Therefore, the sample
was not representative of the whole population and lacked variability. For the same reason,
some features in the dataset had very few occurrences which both caused them to have
little influence and posed the threat of multicollinearity. We needed to combine some
features to create fewer ones with a higher occurrence rate. On the one hand, such a
combination enhances the influence of the new variables. On the other hand, we lose
the detailed information about the individual situation. In a more extensive dataset, this
problem might be mitigated. More data collected over a representative sample of the
Danish population will increase the variability of locations and the number of possible
diaries.
A limitation of our dataset is that we do not have exact details of each activity that might
be important. For example, people spend much time at home and do various things there
that expectedly have different impacts on their emotional states. For instance, cleaning
up after dinner probably causes a different stress level than sitting on the sofa and watchВӯ
ing television. Other factors certainly contribute to stress levels, such as high season at
work, temporary external stressors, mental diseases or personal life difficulties. However,
collecting a dataset containing every single relevant piece of information is simply imposВӯ
sible. Instead, we can focus on a smaller subset of influencing factors and inspect their
contributions towards emotions. Anyhow, variables impacting stress levels might even be
unobservable.
Exploring the effects of activity patterns and urban environment on peopleвҖҷs emotional states
41
==PAGE:50==
Due to time and computing limitations, we had to restrain the scope of methods, models
and data preВӯprocessing for our exploration. With more time, it would be possible to
collect more context data, such as noise and pollution levels. However, as some of the
models overfitted the data, it is not guaranteed that more features would have improved
their accuracy. We did not put much emphasis on travels in our analysis. They must be
treated differently than activities, as they do not occur at a single location.
Further research could focus on measuring the effects of travel modes on stress levels.
The effects of motorised and nonВӯmotorised travel could be explored, as well as comparing
the effects of using public or private transport. The data collection for the main experiment
will take place after the submission of this thesis, so we will not get the chance to explore
the entire dataset. The protocol for the experiment ensures that the participants will be of
diverse backgrounds, resulting in more diversity.
To conclude, we have made early advances in exploring the effects of mobility patterns
and urban context on stress levels. The results are moderately promising but are limited
by the small and homogeneous dataset. Thus, some models struggle to learn and are
prone to overfitting. We are confident that more patterns and intriguing insights can be
uncovered on a more extensive dataset with a representative sample.
42
Exploring the effects of activity patterns and urban environment on peopleвҖҷs emotional states
==PAGE:51==
Bibliography
[1]
Gary R VandenBos. APA dictionary of psychology. American Psychological AssociВӯ
ation, 2007.
[2]
A Janet Tomiyama. вҖңStress and obesityвҖқ. In: Annual review of psychology 70 (2019),
pp. 703вҖ“718.
[3]
Richard S Surwit, Mark S Schneider, and Mark N Feinglos. вҖңStress and diabetes
mellitusвҖқ. In: Diabetes care 15.10 (1992), pp. 1413вҖ“1422.
[4]
Tarani Chandola et al. вҖңWork stress and coronary heart disease: what are the mechВӯ
anisms?вҖқ In: European heart journal 29.5 (2008), pp. 640вҖ“648.
[5]
Gregory N Bratman et al. вҖңNature and mental health: An ecosystem service perВӯ
spectiveвҖқ. In: Science advances 5.7 (2019), eaax0903.
[6]
Thomas Sick Nielsen and Karsten Bruun Hansen. вҖңDo green areas affect health?
Results from a Danish survey on the use of green areas and health indicatorsвҖқ. In:
Health & place 13.4 (2007), pp. 839вҖ“850.
[7]
Toru Seo et al. вҖңInteractive online machine learning approach for activityВӯtravel surВӯ
veyвҖқ. en. In: Transportation Research Part B: Methodological 123 (May 2019), pp. 362вҖ“
373. ISSN: 0191Вӯ2615. DOI: 10 . 1016 / j . trb . 2017 . 11 . 009. URL: https : / / www .
sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0191261517310469 (visited on 06/10/2023).
[8]
Oded Cats and Francesco Ferranti. вҖңUnravelling the spatial properties of individВӯ
ual mobility patterns using longitudinal travel dataвҖқ. In: Journal of Urban Mobility 2
(2022), p. 100035. ISSN: 2667Вӯ0917. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.urbmob.2022.
100035. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2667091722000231.
[9]
Saul B Needleman and Christian D Wunsch. вҖңA general method applicable to the
search for similarities in the amino acid sequence of two proteinsвҖқ. In: Journal of
molecular biology 48.3 (1970), pp. 443вҖ“453.
[10]
Arthur L Delcher et al. вҖңAlignment of whole genomesвҖқ. In: Nucleic acids research
27.11 (1999), pp. 2369вҖ“2376.
[11]
Burkhard Morgenstern, Andreas Dress, and Thomas Werner. вҖңMultiple DNA and
protein sequence alignment based on segmentВӯtoВӯsegment comparison.вҖқ In: ProВӯ
ceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 93.22 (1996), pp. 12098вҖ“12103.
[12]
ChangВӯHyeon Joh et al. вҖңActivity pattern similarity: a multidimensional sequence
alignment methodвҖқ. en. In: Transportation Research Part B: Methodological 36.5
(June 2002), pp. 385вҖ“403. ISSN: 0191Вӯ2615. DOI: 10.1016/S0191-2615(01)00009-1.
URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0191261501000091 (visited
on 02/24/2023).
[13]
ChangВӯHyeon Joh, Theo Arentze, and Harry Timmermans. вҖңPattern Recognition
in Complex Activity Travel Patterns: Comparison of Euclidean Distance, SignalВӯ
Processing Theoretical, and Multidimensional Sequence Alignment MethodsвҖқ. In:
Transportation Research Record 1752.1 (Jan. 2001). Publisher: SAGE Publications
Inc, pp. 16вҖ“22. ISSN: 0361Вӯ1981. DOI: 10.3141/1752-03. URL: https://doi.org/10.
3141/1752-03 (visited on 02/24/2023).
[14]
Ying Song et al. вҖңVisualizing, clustering, and characterizing activityВӯtrip sequences
via weighted sequence alignment and functional data analysisвҖқ. In: Transportation
Research Part C: Emerging Technologies 126 (2021), p. 103007. ISSN: 0968Вӯ090X.
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.trc.2021.103007. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.
com/science/article/pii/S0968090X21000395.
Exploring the effects of activity patterns and urban environment on peopleвҖҷs emotional states
43
==PAGE:52==
[15]
ChangВӯHyeon Joh and Harry Timmermans. вҖңApplying Sequence Alignment MethВӯ
ods to Large ActivityвҖ“Travel Data Sets: Heuristic ApproachвҖқ. In: Transportation ReВӯ
search Record 2231.1 (Jan. 2011). Publisher: SAGE Publications Inc, pp. 10вҖ“17.
ISSN: 0361Вӯ1981. DOI: 10.3141/2231-02. URL: https://doi.org/10.3141/2231-02
(visited on 02/23/2023).
[16]
Wenjia Zhang and JeanВӯClaude Thill. вҖңDetecting and visualizing cohesive activityВӯ
travel patterns: A network analysis approachвҖқ. en. In: Computers, Environment and
Urban Systems 66 (Nov. 2017), pp. 117вҖ“129. ISSN: 0198Вӯ9715. DOI: 10.1016/j.
compenvurbsys.2017.08.004. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0198971517300352 (visited on 01/25/2023).
[17]
Vincent D. Blondel et al. вҖңFast unfolding of communities in large networksвҖқ. en.
In: Journal of Statistical Mechanics: Theory and Experiment 2008.10 (Oct. 2008),
P10008. ISSN: 1742Вӯ5468. DOI: 10.1088/1742-5468/2008/10/P10008. URL: https:
//dx.doi.org/10.1088/1742-5468/2008/10/P10008 (visited on 06/14/2023).
[18]
Jonathan R. Olsen et al. вҖңDayВӯtoВӯday intrapersonal variability in mobility patterns
and association with perceived stress: A crossВӯsectional study using GPS from 122
individuals in three European citiesвҖқ. eng. In: SSM Вӯ population health 19 (Sept.
2022), p. 101172. ISSN: 2352Вӯ8273. DOI: 10.1016/j.ssmph.2022.101172.
[19]
BВӯH Juang. вҖңOn the hidden Markov model and dynamic time warping for speech
recognitionвҖ”A unified viewвҖқ. In: AT&T Bell Laboratories Technical Journal 63.7
(1984), pp. 1213вҖ“1243.
[20]
Talal Bin Amin and Iftekhar Mahmood. вҖңSpeech recognition using dynamic time
warpingвҖқ. In: 2008 2nd international conference on advances in space technologies.
IEEE. 2008, pp. 74вҖ“79.
[21]
Stan Salvador and Philip Chan. вҖңFastDTW: Toward Accurate Dynamic Time WarpВӯ
ing in Linear Time and SpaceвҖқ. en. In: ().
[22]
Marco Cuturi and Mathieu Blondel. вҖңSoftВӯDTW: a Differentiable Loss Function for
TimeВӯSeriesвҖқ. en. In: Proceedings of the 34th International Conference on Machine
Learning. ISSN: 2640Вӯ3498. PMLR, July 2017, pp. 894вҖ“903. URL: https://proceedings.
mlr.press/v70/cuturi17a.html (visited on 02/24/2023).
[23]
FranГ§ois Petitjean, Alain Ketterlin, and Pierre GanГ§arski. вҖңA global averaging method
for dynamic time warping, with applications to clusteringвҖқ. en. In: Pattern RecogniВӯ
tion 44.3 (Mar. 2011), pp. 678вҖ“693. ISSN: 0031Вӯ3203. DOI: 10.1016/j.patcog.2010.
09.013. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S003132031000453X
(visited on 06/14/2023).
[24]
LГ©onard Seydoux et al. вҖңClustering earthquake signals and background noises in
continuous seismic data with unsupervised deep learningвҖқ. en. In: Nature CommuВӯ
nications 11.1 (Aug. 2020). Number: 1 Publisher: Nature Publishing Group, p. 3972.
ISSN: 2041Вӯ1723. DOI: 10.1038/s41467-020-17841-x. URL: https://www.nature.
com/articles/s41467-020-17841-x (visited on 02/24/2023).
[25]
Chris Brunsdon, A. Stewart Fotheringham, and Martin E. Charlton. вҖңGeographically
Weighted Regression: A Method for Exploring Spatial NonstationarityвҖқ. en. In: GeoВӯ
graphical Analysis 28.4 (1996). _eprint: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1111/j.1538Вӯ
4632.1996.tb00936.x, pp. 281вҖ“298. ISSN: 1538Вӯ4632. DOI: 10.1111/j.1538-4632.
1996.tb00936.x. URL: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1111/j.1538-
4632.1996.tb00936.x (visited on 06/14/2023).
[26]
A. Stewart Fotheringham, Wenbai Yang, and Wei Kang. вҖңMultiscale Geographically
Weighted Regression (MGWR)вҖқ. In: Annals of the American Association of GeograВӯ
phers 107.6 (Nov. 2017). Publisher: Taylor & Francis _eprint: https://doi.org/10.1080/24694452.2017.1352
44
Exploring the effects of activity patterns and urban environment on peopleвҖҷs emotional states
==PAGE:53==
pp. 1247вҖ“1265. ISSN: 2469Вӯ4452. DOI: 10 . 1080 / 24694452 . 2017 . 1352480. URL:
https://doi.org/10.1080/24694452.2017.1352480 (visited on 03/28/2023).
[27]
Rishabh Agarwal et al. Neural Additive Models: Interpretable Machine Learning with
Neural Nets. arXiv:2004.13912 [cs, stat]. Oct. 2021. URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/2004.
13912 (visited on 06/13/2023).
[28]
Sergei Popov, Stanislav Morozov, and Artem Babenko. Neural Oblivious Decision
Ensembles for Deep Learning on Tabular Data. arXiv:1909.06312 [cs, stat]. Sept.
2019. URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/1909.06312 (visited on 06/13/2023).
[29]
ChunВӯHao Chang, Rich Caruana, and Anna Goldenberg. NODEВӯGAM: Neural GenВӯ
eralized Additive Model for Interpretable Deep Learning. arXiv:2106.01613 [cs]. Mar.
2022. URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/2106.01613 (visited on 06/13/2023).
[30]
eMOTIONAL Cities. https://emotionalcities-h2020.eu/. Accessed: 2023Вӯ06Вӯ19.
[31]
Mobile Market Monitor. https : / / www . mobilemarketmonitor . com / index . html. AcВӯ
cessed: 2023Вӯ06Вӯ19.
[32]
Empatica. https://www.empatica.com/en-gb/. Accessed: 2023Вӯ06Вӯ19.
[33]
Michael Ashton and Kibeom Lee. вҖңThe HEXACOВӯ60: A Short Measure of the Major
Dimensions of PersonalityвҖқ. en. In: Journal of Personality Assessment 91.4 (July
2009), pp. 340вҖ“345. ISSN: 0022Вӯ3891. DOI: 10 . 1080 / 00223890902935878. URL:
http : / / www . tandfonline . com / doi / abs / 10 . 1080 / 00223890902935878 (visited on
06/07/2023).
[34]
P.F. Lovibond and S.H. Lovibond. вҖңThe structure of negative emotional states: ComВӯ
parison of the Depression Anxiety Stress Scales (DASS) with the Beck Depression
and Anxiety InventoriesвҖқ. en. In: Behaviour Research and Therapy 33.3 (Mar. 1995),
pp. 335вҖ“343. ISSN: 00057967. DOI: 10.1016/0005-7967(94)00075-U. URL: https:
//linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/000579679400075U (visited on 06/07/2023).
[35]
Carol D. Ryff and Corey Lee M. Keyes. вҖңThe structure of psychological wellВӯbeing reВӯ
visitedвҖқ. In: Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 69 (1995). Place: US PubВӯ
lisher: American Psychological Association, pp. 719вҖ“727. ISSN: 1939Вӯ1315. DOI:
10.1037/0022-3514.69.4.719.
[36]
OpenStreetMap contributors. Planet dump retrieved from https://planet.osm.org. https:
//www.openstreetmap.org. 2017.
[37]
Antoine Dubois. DeepВӯClusteringВӯforВӯAutomaticВӯValenceВӯArousalВӯRecognition. https:
/ / github . com / AntoineDubois / Deep - Clustering - for - Automatic - Valence - Arousal -
Recognition. 2023.
[38]
Joe H Ward Jr. вҖңHierarchical grouping to optimize an objective functionвҖқ. In: Journal
of the American statistical association 58.301 (1963), pp. 236вҖ“244.
[39]
Peter J Rousseeuw. вҖңSilhouettes: a graphical aid to the interpretation and validation
of cluster analysisвҖқ. In: Journal of computational and applied mathematics 20 (1987),
pp. 53вҖ“65.
[40]
Romain Tavenard et al. вҖңTslearn, A Machine Learning Toolkit for Time Series DataвҖқ.
In: Journal of Machine Learning Research 21.118 (2020), pp. 1вҖ“6. URL: http://jmlr.
org/papers/v21/20-091.html.
[41]
Wes McKinney. вҖңData Structures for Statistical Computing in PythonвҖқ. In: ProceedВӯ
ings of the 9th Python in Science Conference. Ed. by StГ©fan van der Walt and Jarrod
Millman. 2010, pp. 56вҖ“61. DOI: 10.25080/Majora-92bf1922-00a.
[42]
F. Pedregosa et al. вҖңScikitВӯlearn: Machine Learning in PythonвҖқ. In: Journal of MaВӯ
chine Learning Research 12 (2011), pp. 2825вҖ“2830.
[43]
Dong C Liu and Jorge Nocedal. вҖңOn the limited memory BFGS method for large
scale optimizationвҖқ. In: Mathematical programming 45.1Вӯ3 (1989), pp. 503вҖ“528.
Exploring the effects of activity patterns and urban environment on peopleвҖҷs emotional states
45
==PAGE:54==
[44]
Hirotugu Akaike. вҖңA new look at the statistical model identificationвҖқ. In: IEEE transВӯ
actions on automatic control 19.6 (1974), pp. 716вҖ“723.
[45]
Clifford M Hurvich, Jeffrey S Simonoff, and ChihВӯLing Tsai. вҖңSmoothing parameter
selection in nonparametric regression using an improved Akaike information criteВӯ
rionвҖқ. In: Journal of the Royal Statistical Society Series B: Statistical Methodology
60.2 (1998), pp. 271вҖ“293.
[46]
A Stewart Fotheringham, Chris Brundson, and Martin Charlton. Geographically Weighted
Regression. English. 1st ed. The Atrium, Southern Gate, Chichester, West Sussex
PO19 8SQ, England: John Wiley & Sons Ltd, 2002. ISBN: 0Вӯ471Вӯ49616Вӯ2.
[47]
Trevor J Hastie. вҖңGeneralized additive modelsвҖқ. In: Statistical models in S. RoutВӯ
ledge, 2017, pp. 249вҖ“307.
[48]
Ben Peters, Vlad Niculae, and AndrГ© F. T. Martins. Sparse SequenceВӯtoВӯSequence
Models. arXiv:1905.05702 [cs]. June 2019. DOI: 10.48550/arXiv.1905.05702. URL:
http://arxiv.org/abs/1905.05702 (visited on 06/17/2023).
[49]
Taylor M Oshan et al. вҖңmgwr: A Python implementation of multiscale geographically
weighted regression for investigating process spatial heterogeneity and scaleвҖқ. In:
ISPRS International Journal of GeoВӯInformation 8.6 (2019), p. 269.
[50]
A Stewart Fotheringham, Martin E Charlton, and Chris Brunsdon. вҖңGeographically
weighted regression: a natural evolution of the expansion method for spatial data
analysisвҖқ. In: Environment and planning A 30.11 (1998), pp. 1905вҖ“1927.
46
Exploring the effects of activity patterns and urban environment on peopleвҖҷs emotional states
==PAGE:55==
A
Title
A.1
Linear Regression
Table A.1 shows the mean and standard deviation of the estimated coefficients of the
linear regression model from chapter 5 using 15 minute segments, and the minimum
and maximum values of the variables from the dataset. Table A.2 shows the coefficients
estimated by the model using 60Вӯminute segments, and table A.3 shows the coefficients
estmiated by the model using whole activity segments. All the models used 10Вӯfold crossВӯ
validation. Note that the data are standardised.
Table A.1: Mean values and standard deviations of the estimated parameters by the linear
regression with 15Вӯminutes segmentation using 10Вӯfold CV.
Variable name
Mean coef.
Coef. Std.
Variable min.
Variable max.
mean_stress_lag
0.872
0.003
Вӯ2.971
1.804
personality_a
0.230
0.061
Вӯ2.293
1.611
personality_p
0.219
0.065
Вӯ1.435
2.262
male
0.190
0.046
Вӯ1.228
0.814
age
0.150
0.043
Вӯ1.035
1.879
dass_anxiety
0.077
0.022
Вӯ0.903
1.844
personality_hh
0.046
0.016
Вӯ2.379
1.406
personality_em
Вӯ0.036
0.019
Вӯ3.085
1.512
home
Вӯ0.033
0.015
Вӯ0.077
12.934
work/education
Вӯ0.031
0.018
Вӯ0.858
1.165
amenity_medical
0.031
0.004
Вӯ0.094
18.333
temp
Вӯ0.026
0.007
Вӯ0.332
3.012
hour_13
0.023
0.006
Вӯ0.319
3.132
hour_12
0.023
0.007
Вӯ0.319
3.132
public_transport
Вӯ0.019
0.006
Вӯ0.291
15.424
green_areas
0.019
0.004
Вӯ0.606
12.307
grocery_shops
0.019
0.008
Вӯ0.442
3.944
hour_15
0.018
0.006
Вӯ0.313
3.197
humidity
Вӯ0.018
0.003
Вӯ2.355
2.457
leisure
Вӯ0.017
0.010
Вӯ0.187
5.334
building_cars
0.017
0.005
Вӯ0.583
14.067
friday
Вӯ0.013
0.003
Вӯ0.422
2.370
food_shops
0.013
0.006
Вӯ0.157
11.424
outdoor_sport
0.013
0.003
Вӯ4.034
4.252
windspeed
Вӯ0.013
0.003
Вӯ0.188
16.989
highway
Вӯ0.012
0.008
Вӯ0.698
11.428
hour_20
0.012
0.003
Вӯ0.255
3.919
hour_11
0.012
0.007
Вӯ0.319
3.132
leisure_attractions
0.012
0.006
Вӯ0.345
10.701
tuesday
Вӯ0.012
0.002
Вӯ0.461
2.166
building_accommodation
Вӯ0.012
0.004
Вӯ0.247
13.275
hour_19
0.011
0.006
Вӯ0.277
3.609
saturday
Вӯ0.011
0.003
Вӯ0.317
3.148
cycleway
0.011
0.004
Вӯ0.224
6.909
Exploring the effects of activity patterns and urban environment on peopleвҖҷs emotional states
47
==PAGE:56==
Table A.1 continued from previous page
Variable name
Mean coef.
Coef. Std.
Variable min.
Variable max.
amenity_leisure
Вӯ0.010
0.003
Вӯ0.146
10.962
footway
Вӯ0.010
0.004
Вӯ1.940
8.241
utility_shops
Вӯ0.010
0.004
Вӯ0.371
9.595
amenity_green
Вӯ0.009
0.002
Вӯ0.172
5.801
precip
0.009
0.002
Вӯ2.035
1.977
errands
Вӯ0.009
0.009
Вӯ0.859
1.163
hour_18
0.008
0.007
Вӯ0.309
3.231
dass_stress
Вӯ0.008
0.006
Вӯ1.369
2.160
wednesday
Вӯ0.008
0.003
Вӯ0.434
2.302
sunday
Вӯ0.008
0.003
Вӯ0.259
3.863
barriers
0.008
0.005
Вӯ0.355
5.051
railways
Вӯ0.008
0.002
Вӯ0.350
12.467
sealevelpressure
Вӯ0.007
0.004
Вӯ1.762
1.166
building_industrial
Вӯ0.007
0.005
Вӯ0.282
9.661
amenity_bank
0.006
0.003
Вӯ0.883
5.118
duration
Вӯ0.006
0.003
Вӯ1.247
7.127
hour_17
0.006
0.006
Вӯ0.319
3.132
amenity_sanitary
Вӯ0.006
0.004
Вӯ0.425
6.203
building_other
Вӯ0.006
0.005
Вӯ0.371
22.728
cloudcover
Вӯ0.005
0.003
Вӯ1.785
3.029
indoor_sport
Вӯ0.005
0.003
Вӯ0.317
6.685
building_education
Вӯ0.005
0.005
Вӯ0.447
7.205
amenity_public
Вӯ0.005
0.006
Вӯ0.131
19.220
dass_depression
0.004
0.010
Вӯ0.741
3.611
crafts
Вӯ0.004
0.003
Вӯ0.759
3.942
hour_21
0.004
0.003
Вӯ0.208
4.800
tourism_attraction
0.004
0.003
Вӯ0.163
13.904
amenity_food
0.004
0.004
Вӯ0.135
22.750
hour_14
0.003
0.004
Вӯ0.311
3.214
hour_16
0.003
0.006
Вӯ0.298
3.357
amenity_sights
Вӯ0.002
0.002
Вӯ0.167
16.498
hour_10
Вӯ0.001
0.008
Вӯ0.306
3.266
thursday
0.001
0.003
Вӯ0.419
2.386
Table A.2: Mean values and standard deviations of the estimated parameters by the linear
regression with 15Вӯminutes segmentation using 10Вӯfold CV.
Variable name
Mean coef.
Coef. Std.
Variable min.
Variable max.
mean_stress_lag
0.699
0.008
Вӯ2.971
1.804
personality_a
0.645
0.173
Вӯ2.293
1.611
personality_p
0.645
0.188
Вӯ1.435
2.262
male
0.485
0.127
Вӯ1.228
0.814
age
0.388
0.118
Вӯ1.035
1.879
personality_em
Вӯ0.242
0.082
Вӯ3.085
1.512
dass_anxiety
0.185
0.065
Вӯ0.903
1.844
personality_hh
0.136
0.050
Вӯ2.379
1.406
dass_depression
Вӯ0.118
0.050
Вӯ0.741
3.611
48
Exploring the effects of activity patterns and urban environment on peopleвҖҷs emotional states
==PAGE:57==
Table A.2 continued from previous page
Variable name
Mean coef.
Coef. Std.
Variable min.
Variable max.
amenity_medical
0.103
0.022
Вӯ0.094
18.333
hour_13
0.092
0.013
Вӯ0.319
3.132
highway
Вӯ0.091
0.016
Вӯ0.698
11.428
hour_14
0.084
0.013
Вӯ0.311
3.214
temp
Вӯ0.083
0.012
Вӯ0.332
3.012
food_shops
0.072
0.018
Вӯ0.157
11.424
leisure_attractions
0.069
0.008
Вӯ0.345
10.701
barriers
Вӯ0.060
0.016
Вӯ0.355
5.051
amenity_sanitary
Вӯ0.059
0.014
Вӯ0.425
6.203
outdoor_sport
Вӯ0.057
0.014
Вӯ4.034
4.252
hour_12
0.054
0.017
Вӯ0.319
3.132
cycleway
0.049
0.016
Вӯ0.224
6.909
hour_19
0.048
0.014
Вӯ0.277
3.609
utility_shops
Вӯ0.048
0.019
Вӯ0.371
9.595
work/education
Вӯ0.047
0.045
Вӯ0.858
1.165
hour_16
0.046
0.014
Вӯ0.298
3.357
railways
Вӯ0.043
0.004
Вӯ0.350
12.467
amenity_leisure
Вӯ0.043
0.010
Вӯ0.146
10.962
cloudcover
Вӯ0.042
0.010
Вӯ1.785
3.029
building_cars
0.042
0.005
Вӯ0.583
14.067
footway
Вӯ0.040
0.014
Вӯ1.940
8.241
green_areas
0.036
0.011
Вӯ0.606
12.307
saturday
Вӯ0.033
0.011
Вӯ0.317
3.148
windspeed
Вӯ0.029
0.011
Вӯ0.188
16.989
hour_10
0.028
0.014
Вӯ0.306
3.266
hour_21
0.027
0.009
Вӯ0.208
4.800
friday
Вӯ0.027
0.006
Вӯ0.422
2.370
building_education
0.026
0.016
Вӯ0.447
7.205
humidity
Вӯ0.025
0.013
Вӯ2.355
2.457
wednesday
Вӯ0.025
0.011
Вӯ0.434
2.302
sealevelpressure
Вӯ0.024
0.008
Вӯ1.762
1.166
amenity_food
0.024
0.027
Вӯ0.135
22.750
building_accommodation
Вӯ0.024
0.007
Вӯ0.247
13.275
sunday
Вӯ0.023
0.007
Вӯ0.259
3.863
dass_stress
0.022
0.023
Вӯ1.369
2.160
building_other
0.022
0.009
Вӯ0.371
22.728
hour_20
0.022
0.012
Вӯ0.255
3.919
tourism_attraction
0.021
0.013
Вӯ0.163
13.904
amenity_bank
0.021
0.008
Вӯ0.883
5.118
hour_11
0.021
0.013
Вӯ0.319
3.132
hour_17
0.021
0.014
Вӯ0.319
3.132
public_transport
Вӯ0.019
0.015
Вӯ0.291
15.424
building_industrial
0.019
0.016
Вӯ0.282
9.661
tuesday
Вӯ0.018
0.011
Вӯ0.461
2.166
indoor_sport
Вӯ0.018
0.005
Вӯ0.317
6.685
precip
Вӯ0.017
0.002
Вӯ2.035
1.977
leisure
0.014
0.022
Вӯ0.187
5.334
amenity_green
Вӯ0.013
0.023
Вӯ0.172
5.801
Exploring the effects of activity patterns and urban environment on peopleвҖҷs emotional states
49
==PAGE:58==
Table A.2 continued from previous page
Variable name
Mean coef.
Coef. Std.
Variable min.
Variable max.
grocery_shops
Вӯ0.012
0.022
Вӯ0.442
3.944
hour_15
0.011
0.015
Вӯ0.313
3.197
thursday
0.009
0.010
Вӯ0.419
2.386
home
0.008
0.040
Вӯ0.077
12.934
errands
Вӯ0.007
0.018
Вӯ0.859
1.163
amenity_public
Вӯ0.005
0.012
Вӯ0.131
19.220
duration
Вӯ0.004
0.010
Вӯ1.247
7.127
amenity_sights
Вӯ0.003
0.011
Вӯ0.167
16.498
crafts
0.000
0.016
Вӯ0.759
3.942
hour_18
0.000
0.015
Вӯ0.309
3.231
Table A.3: Mean values and standard deviations of the estimated parameters by the linear
regression with 15Вӯminutes segmentation using 10Вӯfold CV.
Variable name
Mean coef.
Coef. Std.
Variable min.
Variable max.
personality_a
1.618
0.199
Вӯ2.293
1.611
personality_p
1.304
0.165
Вӯ1.435
2.262
male
0.945
0.107
Вӯ1.228
0.814
age
0.865
0.119
Вӯ1.035
1.879
personality_em
Вӯ0.533
0.048
Вӯ3.085
1.512
mean_stress_lag
0.450
0.015
Вӯ2.971
1.804
dass_anxiety
0.423
0.082
Вӯ0.903
1.844
personality_hh
0.394
0.054
Вӯ2.379
1.406
dass_depression
Вӯ0.237
0.042
Вӯ0.741
3.611
grocery_shops
Вӯ0.205
0.021
Вӯ0.442
3.944
highway
0.144
0.031
Вӯ0.698
11.428
cloudcover
Вӯ0.126
0.014
Вӯ1.785
3.029
windspeed
Вӯ0.123
0.024
Вӯ0.188
16.989
food_shops
0.112
0.023
Вӯ0.157
11.424
hour_12
0.109
0.018
Вӯ0.319
3.132
hour_14
0.104
0.013
Вӯ0.311
3.214
friday
Вӯ0.092
0.015
Вӯ0.422
2.370
hour_13
0.088
0.013
Вӯ0.319
3.132
hour_17
0.075
0.018
Вӯ0.319
3.132
green_areas
Вӯ0.073
0.020
Вӯ0.606
12.307
duration
0.071
0.009
Вӯ1.247
7.127
sealevelpressure
Вӯ0.068
0.022
Вӯ1.762
1.166
amenity_bank
0.066
0.029
Вӯ0.883
5.118
saturday
Вӯ0.063
0.015
Вӯ0.317
3.148
leisure_attractions
Вӯ0.062
0.018
Вӯ0.345
10.701
barriers
0.062
0.020
Вӯ0.355
5.051
footway
Вӯ0.061
0.028
Вӯ1.940
8.241
hour_16
Вӯ0.061
0.015
Вӯ0.298
3.357
building_education
Вӯ0.061
0.011
Вӯ0.447
7.205
hour_15
0.060
0.019
Вӯ0.313
3.197
railways
Вӯ0.059
0.015
Вӯ0.350
12.467
amenity_sights
0.059
0.011
Вӯ0.167
16.498
50
Exploring the effects of activity patterns and urban environment on peopleвҖҷs emotional states
==PAGE:59==
Table A.3 continued from previous page
Variable name
Mean coef.
Coef. Std.
Variable min.
Variable max.
wednesday
Вӯ0.057
0.023
Вӯ0.434
2.302
hour_19
Вӯ0.054
0.014
Вӯ0.277
3.609
errands
0.054
0.034
Вӯ0.859
1.163
public_transport
Вӯ0.046
0.028
Вӯ0.291
15.424
amenity_leisure
Вӯ0.045
0.017
Вӯ0.146
10.962
hour_11
0.041
0.011
Вӯ0.319
3.132
utility_shops
Вӯ0.041
0.029
Вӯ0.371
9.595
amenity_medical
Вӯ0.037
0.012
Вӯ0.094
18.333
tuesday
Вӯ0.037
0.010
Вӯ0.461
2.166
crafts
0.036
0.013
Вӯ0.759
3.942
amenity_public
0.034
0.019
Вӯ0.131
19.220
building_other
0.033
0.012
Вӯ0.371
22.728
hour_10
0.031
0.011
Вӯ0.306
3.266
precip
0.029
0.015
Вӯ2.035
1.977
temp
Вӯ0.029
0.027
Вӯ0.332
3.012
humidity
0.026
0.026
Вӯ2.355
2.457
hour_18
0.026
0.018
Вӯ0.309
3.231
leisure
Вӯ0.025
0.026
Вӯ0.187
5.334
sunday
Вӯ0.020
0.009
Вӯ0.259
3.863
building_industrial
Вӯ0.019
0.019
Вӯ0.282
9.661
home
0.017
0.029
Вӯ0.077
12.934
amenity_green
0.016
0.021
Вӯ0.172
5.801
tourism_attraction
Вӯ0.015
0.015
Вӯ0.163
13.904
hour_21
0.014
0.025
Вӯ0.208
4.800
amenity_sanitary
Вӯ0.014
0.020
Вӯ0.425
6.203
work/education
Вӯ0.013
0.032
Вӯ0.858
1.165
amenity_food
Вӯ0.011
0.022
Вӯ0.135
22.750
outdoor_sport
Вӯ0.011
0.021
Вӯ4.034
4.252
cycleway
0.010
0.011
Вӯ0.224
6.909
thursday
0.009
0.013
Вӯ0.419
2.386
building_cars
Вӯ0.006
0.017
Вӯ0.583
14.067
hour_20
0.004
0.013
Вӯ0.255
3.919
dass_stress
Вӯ0.003
0.048
Вӯ1.369
2.160
building_accommodation
Вӯ0.002
0.018
Вӯ0.247
13.275
indoor_sport
Вӯ0.001
0.018
Вӯ0.317
6.685
Exploring the effects of activity patterns and urban environment on peopleвҖҷs emotional states
51
==PAGE:60==
A.2
Mixed MGWR
Figure A.1 shows the mean estimated global parameters from the mixed MGWR fitted on
the activityВӯwise segmented data. The personality traits are most influential on average,
but their standard deviations are very big. Other notable observations include that the
prediction increases with age, decreases with higher DASS stress and environmental
mastery, and that higher stress is predicted for males.
Figure A.1: Mean estimates of the global parameters of the activityВӯwise segmented data
by the mixed MGWR model from a 5Вӯfold crossВӯvalidation. The error bars denote one
standard deviation.
Figure A.2 shows the estimated global parameters from the mixed MGWR fitted on the
60 minute segmented data.
Figure A.2: Mean estimates of the global parameters of the 60 minutes segmented data
by the mixed MGWR model from a 5Вӯfold crossВӯvalidation. The error bars denote one
standard deviation.
52
Exploring the effects of activity patterns and urban environment on peopleвҖҷs emotional states
==PAGE:61==
A.3
NODEВӯGAM
Appendix A.3 shows all the fitted functions by the NODEВӯGAM model described in secВӯ
tion 5.4.4 on the three data segmentations.
Age
Amenity Bank
Amenity Food
Amenity Green
Amenity Leisure
Amenity Medical
Amenity Public
Amenity Sanitary
Amenity Sights
Barriers
Building
AccommodaВӯ
tion
Building Cars
Building Education
Building Industrial
Building Other
Crafts
Cycleway
DASS Anxiety
DASS Depression
DASS Stress
Exploring the effects of activity patterns and urban environment on peopleвҖҷs emotional states
53
==PAGE:62==
Duration
Errands
Food Shops
Walkway
Friday
Green Areas
Grocery Shops
Highway
Home
Hour 10
Hour 11
Hour 12
Hour 13
Hour 14
Hour 15
Hour 16
Hour 17
Hour 18
Hour 19
Hour 20
Hour 21
Humidity
Indoor Sport
Leisure Attractions
54
Exploring the effects of activity patterns and urban environment on peopleвҖҷs emotional states
==PAGE:63==
Male
Mean Stress Lag
Outdoor Sport
Personality A
Environmental Mastery
HonestyВӯHumility
Prudence
Precipitation
Railways
Saturday
Sea Level Pressure
Sunday
Temperature
Thursday
Tourism Attraction
Tuesday
Utility Shops
Wednesday
Windspeed
Work Education
The learned functions by NODEВӯGAM, fitted on the three datasets. Note that the data are
not standardised.
Exploring the effects of activity patterns and urban environment on peopleвҖҷs emotional states
55
==PAGE:64==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 324
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
https://www.compute.dtu.dk/
