==PAGE:1==
Cuffless Blood Pressure Estimation Based on
Continuous Vital Signs
Master Thesis
DTU Health Tech
Department of Health Technology
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Preface
This thesis has been prepared over five months at the Section for health technology, at
the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, and is written as the master thesis in Biomed­
ical Engineering. The project was nominated for 30 ECTS credits. The main supervisor
on the project was researcher Ying Gu. The project was made in collaboration with the
WARD project, where Jelle Reichert, Eske Kvanner Aasvang, and Christian Sylvest Mey­
hoff were external supervisors. The project was made by the students Benjamin Trasborg
(s184038) and Martin Riedel (s184032). The workload throughout the project has been
equally distributed between the students, and a table of contributions can be found in
appendix A.1. Figures without a reference are made by the authors.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of the human biology
and machine learning.
Cuffless Blood Pressure Estimation Based on Continuous Vital Signs
iii
==PAGE:4==
Technical University of Denmark
Master Thesis
Cuffless Blood Pressure Estimation Based on
Continuous Vital Signs
Authors:
Benjamin Trasborg, MSc student, Biomedical Engineering, Technical University of Den­
mark
Martin Riedel, MSc student, Biomedical Engineering, Technical University of Denmark
Supervisor:
Ying Gu, Researcher, Technical University of Denmark
Co­Supervisor:
Jakob Eyvind Bardram, Professor, Technical University of Denmark
Date:
June­23­2023
Benjamin Trasborg (s184038)
Date
Martin Riedel (s184032)
Date
iv
Cuffless Blood Pressure Estimation Based on Continuous Vital Signs
23-06-2023
23-06-2023
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Hypertension is one of the leading causes of death, worldwide, with around 1 billion peo­
ple affected. Hypertension can be a sign of many different diseases, and therefore it is
important to take action in time. Hypotension is of clinical interest, since it can be a sign
of different diseases. Both hyper­ and hypotension can result in major organ damage,
and therefore needs to be monitored to detect abnormalities as early as possible. The
monitoring of blood pressure (BP) is usually done using an uncomfortable inflatable cuff
with a low sampling rate. To avoid the inflatable cuff the BP can be found using machine
learning algorithms that predicts the BP using inputs from electrocardiograph (ECG) or
photoplethysmography (PPG) devices. Previous projects have used machine learning
(ML) algorithms to detect the BP using either the pulse transit time (PTT) or raw ECG and
PPG signal. However, using PTT requires synchronized sampling from the equipment
used to obtain the data, and not all monitoring equipment delivers perfect raw signals.
That is why an investigation of BP estimation based on vital signs and short ECG and
PPG segments has been investigated. This project focuses on classifying three systolic
blood pressure (SBP) states, HIGH, NORMAL and LOW, based on vital signs and raw
ECG and PPG signal segments from hospitalized 24/7 monitored patients. The classifi­
cation of SBP states was made by training two random forests on the vital signs and raw
segment signals. The vital signs used were heart rate (HR), pulse rate (PR), respiration
rate (RR) and peripheral oxygen saturation (SpO2). Features from both the vital signs
and the raw signals were calculated and used as inputs for the model. Calibration fea­
tures from the first three hours of the monitoring period were used in the model. The data
used is from the WARD project conducted at different Danish hospitals with 875 patients
suffering from different conditions. Linear interpolation of the vital sign measurements
was tested but did not improve the performance of the model. The data from the MIMIC
III database was tested, but since it was crucial that the data was obtained at the same
time, this data was not suitable for this project.
The final model was a combination of two random forests, one good at detecting the LOW
SBP states, and one good at detecting the HIGH SBP states. Post processing was added
to the final model to increase the accuracy of the model.
The final model ended up having an overall accuracy of 74.5 % on the test data. The
finding indicates that additional work must focus on further improving the model and the
quality and amount of data.
Cuffless Blood Pressure Estimation Based on Continuous Vital Signs
v
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
From the beginning of this project, several people have been involved in the process.
First, we want to thank our main supervisor, researcher Ying Gu, for her great supervision
throughout the project. Ying Gu has a deep understanding of the field and has experi­
ence with similar projects. Ying has also facilitated contact with relevant people when we
needed to talk to key persons. Our co­supervisor Jakob Eyvind Bardram has also been
very appreciated throughout the project. He has been a great help for support and for
arrangement of this project. Furthermore, we also want to thank Jelle Reichert (CTO in
WARD) and Søren Møller Rasmussen (Ph.D. student at DTU health tech), who are also
associated to the WARD project. Both Jelle and Søren have a deep understanding of the
field of machine learning and data processing which has been extremely valuable and
indispensable for us when we needed new ideas or perspectives to the project. Last but
not least we want to thank doctors Eske Kvanner Aasvang and Christian Sylvest Meyhoff,
who are also founders of the WARD project. They have both been a great help for us
to understand the biological principles and perspective of this project. Furthermore, they
have driven us and the project in a direction most valuable for patients and doctors.
This project could never have been realized without the help and thoughts provided by
these great and highly skilled people, and we are very grateful for all the help.
vi
Cuffless Blood Pressure Estimation Based on Continuous Vital Signs
==PAGE:7==
List of Abbreviations
AI
Artificial Intelligence
ANOVA
Analysis of variance
BPM
Beats pr minute
BrPM
Breaths pr minute
BP
Blood Pressure
COPD
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
DBP
Diastolic Blood Pressure
ECG
Electrocardiogram
ML
Machine learning
MAE
Mean Absolute Error
MRMR
Maximum Relevance ­ Minimum Redundancye
PPG
Photoplethysmogram
PTT
Pulse Transit Time
PCA
Principal component analysis
PR
Pulse rate
RMSE
Root Mean Square Error
RR
Respiration rate
SpO2
Peripheral Oxygen Saturation
SBP
Systolic Blood Pressure
STD
Standard Deviation
WARD 24/7
Wireless Assessment of Respiratory and circulartory Dis­
tress
Cuffless Blood Pressure Estimation Based on Continuous Vital Signs
vii
==PAGE:8==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
v
List of Abbreviations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
vii
1
Introduction
2
1.1
Motivation and Problem statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Aim of project . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Requirements to project . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Background
4
2.1
WARD project . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2
Electrocardiogram . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3
Photoplethysmogram (PPG) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.4
Blood pressure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.5
Normal Ranges for vital signs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
2.6
Machine learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
2.7
Regulatories (DS/EN ISO 81060­3:2023)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
3
State of the art within cuff less BP estimation
26
4
Methodology
35
4.1
Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
4.2
Data Processing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
4.3
Feature selection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
4.4
Training, testing and validating
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 57
5
Results
60
5.1
Select ML Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 60
5.2
Interpolation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 62
5.3
SBP State . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 62
5.4
Select Features . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 63
5.5
Balance data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 66
5.6
Hyper parameter tuning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 66
5.7
Combination model (one model to predict LOW SBP and one to predict
HIGH SBP) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 67
5.8
Post processing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 69
5.9
Test of final model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 69
5.10 MIMIC Vital Signs Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 70
6
Discussion
71
6.1
Performance of model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 71
6.2
Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 71
6.3
Over­fitting
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 72
6.4
Regulatory
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 72
6.5
Compare with other studies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 72
6.6
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 72
viii
Cuffless Blood Pressure Estimation Based on Continuous Vital Signs
==PAGE:9==
6.7
Having data from different data sets
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 73
7
Conclusion
74
Bibliography
75
A Appendix
79
Cuffless Blood Pressure Estimation Based on Continuous Vital Signs
1
==PAGE:10==
1
Introduction
1.1
Motivation and Problem statement
Hypertension, also known as increased BP, is one of the leading causes of death world­
wide. It can lead to extensive cardiovascular damage and organ damage, and approx­
imately 1 billion people worldwide are affected of hypertension. Hypertension can be
caused by many things, such as unhealthy lifestyle, low physical activity or abnormalities
in the cardio vascular system. Hypotension, which is a condition with decreased BP, can
be caused by blood loss or heart failure, and therefore needs medical treatment. Both
hypo­ and hypertension are of clinical interest, therefore it is important to measure the BP
of hospitalized patients, to give the patients the right treatment in time [1].
The BP is most commonly measured using an inflatable cuff. The cuff is placed around
the upper left arm and is then inflated to block the blood flow for a short time, while the
measurement is made. One single BP measurement is not a problem, but when patients
are continuously monitored for several hours or days there are some issues with the in­
flatable cuff. Using the cuff often causes underestimation of systolic BP, false readings
caused by improper cuff size, patient discomfort and low sampling frequency. With the
patient monitoring system ”Wireless Assessment of Respiratory and circulatory Distress”
(WARD), the cuff will inflate every 30 minute during day time, and during night time it will
happen once every hour.
Former studies have shown that it is possible to estimate the BP using ML algorithms,
see section 3. The ML models estimate the BP using input signals from different sensors
around the body.
Besides a BP monitor, the WARD setup has an ECG device and a photoplethysmography
(PPG) device attached to the patients, and these signals could be used as inputs for an ML
model. Estimating BP using an ML method in the WARD setup would solve the problems
with the discomfort and improper cuff size, and increase the frequency of BP estimations.
1.2
Aim of project
The aim of this project is to eliminate the use of the inflatable cuff in the WARD setup
and get the information about the SBP from the ECG and PPG devices. This problem is
attempted to be solved by classifying three intervals of SBP: LOW, NORMAL and HIGH.
From these levels alerts are given to the nurses and doctors when the patients’ SBP level
gets critical. The SBP level should be classified using a machine learning algorithm.
1.3
Requirements to project
Below is a list with the requirements related to the project
• The SBP intervals should follow the values given in table 1.1
• The model must be validated and tested on WARD data
• The model features must be possible to calculate using the features from the WARD
data.
2
Cuffless Blood Pressure Estimation Based on Continuous Vital Signs
==PAGE:11==
Day
Night
Number of measurements
2
1
2
1
Hypotension
SBP <91mmHg 30 minutes apart
SBP <70 mmHg
SBP <91mmHg 60 minutes apart
SBP <70 mmHg
Normal
91 ≤SBP <180
Hypertension
SBP ≥180 mmHg 30 minutes apart
SBP ≥220 mmHg
SBP ≥180 mmHg 60 minutes apart
SBP ≥220 mmHg
Table 1.1: BP table, showing that a hypotension alert must be given if 2 following SBP
measurements are below 91 mmHg or 1 single measurement is below 70 mmHg. For
a hypertension alerts there must be either 2 following SBP measurements above 180
mmHg or 1 single measurement above 220.
Cuffless Blood Pressure Estimation Based on Continuous Vital Signs
3
==PAGE:12==
2
Background
2.1
WARD project
Figure 2.1: Patient connected to WARD ECG and SpO2 device [2] and doctor holding
gateway device
WARD is a Danish company founded in 2016, that has created a clinical wireless monitor­
ing support system for vital signs using artificial intelligence (AI) algorithms in real­time.
The AI­interpretation processes inputs from medical devices applied to the patient and
based on that the system is able to give alarms to the doctors and nurses when vital signs
from the patients get critical. The WARD system’s intended use is in patient settings
where continuous monitoring of patients can be an advantage. The WARD system has
been used for monitoring of postoperative high­risk patients, patients hospitalized with
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), and patients with COVID­19 [2]. The
WARD system has a body­sensor network consisting of three devices, the ECG device
ISANSYS lifetouch (Isansys Lifecare, Oxfordshire), the PPG device Nonin WristOx 3150
(Nonin Medical inc., Minnesota, USA), and the BP device Meditech BlueBP­05 (Med­
itech Ltd., Hungary). Data from all 3 devices are transmitted through Bluetooth to a be­
side gateway with a secured hospital WiFi connection [3]. A patient connected to the ECG
and PPG device can be seen in figure 2.1. Since all the devices are wireless they are
powered by batteries. Transmitting data is a power consuming process, and therefore the
devices are only transmitting 10 continuous seconds of data every minute to extend the
lifetime of the batteries.
4
Cuffless Blood Pressure Estimation Based on Continuous Vital Signs
==PAGE:13==
2.1.1
WARD Devices
Figure 2.2: Data from WARD devices to gateway. Orange and blue signal are called
”Segment data” and black values are ”Vital sign data”. From the ECG device one RR
sample and one HR sample together with 10 seconds raw ECG segment is collected every
minute. From the PPG device one pulse rate sample and one SpO2 sample together with
10 seconds raw PPG segment is collected every minute. From the BP cuff one sample is
collected every 30 minute in the day and every 60 minutes in the night.
Figure 2.2 shows how data from the WARD devices are sent to the gateway.
The ECG device used in the WARD setup is the ISANSYS lifetouch (Isansys Lifecare, Ox­
fordshire), which is a wireless single­lead electrocardiogram chest patch that is able to in­
terpret the raw ECG signal and extract the average HR/minute and an average RR/minute.
The raw ECG signal is sampled at a frequency of 75 Hz but to save battery only 10 sec­
onds raw data from each minute is sent to the gateway [4].
In the WARD setup a wrist­worn pulse oximeter Nonin WristOx 3150 (Nonin Medi­ cal
inc., Minnesota, USA), measures the SpO2 in the finger tip.
The oximeter interprets
the raw PPG signal and extracts the average pulse rate (PR)/min and an average SpO2
(SpO2)/min. The raw PPG signal is also sampled at a frequency of 75 Hz, also sending
only 10 seconds of data every minute to save battery [4].
The Meditech BlueBP­05 (Med­ itech Ltd., Hungary) is a compact, wireless device for
intermittent non­invasive oscillometric measurements of BP. The device is programmed
to start BP measurements every 30 min during daytime and every 60 min during night­
time in the WARD setup. The device sends one BP measurement every 30 or 60 minute
[3].
Cuffless Blood Pressure Estimation Based on Continuous Vital Signs
5
==PAGE:14==
2.2
Electrocardiogram
Figure 2.3: ECG and activation of the heart.[5]
To record and evaluate the electrical activity generated by action potentials of the heart,
an ECG is used. To perform an ECG, electrodes are placed around the chest to monitor
the signals. The electrical signals detected by the electrodes are then acquired by a
machine that shows the graph of the heart activity. A standard ECG signal is shown in
figure 2.3. The p­wave corresponds to the depolarization of the atrium, the QRS­complex
corresponds depolarization of the ventricles, and the T­wave represents the repolarization
of the ventricles. The shapes of the waves and duration between waves can then be used
to detect coronary heart diseases or other complications with the heart.
2.2.1
Heart rate
One of the most important features that can be extracted from the ECG is the HR. The
HR is the number of contractions the heart does every minute. HR is measured in beats
per minute (BPM). The HR of a healthy resting person is approximately 72 BPM [6].
2.2.2
Pan­Tompkins
Pan­Tompkins is a signal processing method often used when analyzing ECG signals.
The algorithm applies a series of different filters and is used for QRS detection. The
series of filters is used to cancel out the noise in the signal and highlight the frequency
content from the heart depolarization and repolarization. The method consists of the steps
shown in figure 2.4.
6
Cuffless Blood Pressure Estimation Based on Continuous Vital Signs
==PAGE:15==
Figure 2.4: Pan­Tompkins steps
Figure 2.5: Pan­Tompkins steps plotted for a WARD patient
Band­pass filter
The band­pass filter is used to remove noise from the ECG signal and thereby increase
the signal­to­noise ratio. Examples of noise that could be removed, would be muscle
signals if the patient is moving, or interference with the 50 Hz signal from the power grid
used in electronic devices in the room. The band­pass filter consists of a low­pass filtration
followed by a high­pass filtration. The low­pass filter removes all the high­frequency noise
and the high­pass filter removes all the low­frequency noise [7]. A band pass filtered signal
can be seen in figure 2.5 at the plot in the middle to the left.
Derivative filter
The derivative filter is used to amplify rapid changes, such as peaks in the signal. Which
will make the QRS detection easier [7]. A derivative filtered signal can be seen in figure
2.5 at the plot in the middle to the right.
Squaring
The squaring is used to make the signal positive to make it easier to combine all the peaks
from each QRS­complex in one spike. Besides making the signal positive, it also makes
Cuffless Blood Pressure Estimation Based on Continuous Vital Signs
7
==PAGE:16==
a non linear amplification by emphasizing the high frequency components, which makes
it easier to distinguish it from the rest of the signal [7]. A squaring filtered signal can be
seen in figure 2.5 at the plot in the bottom to the left.
Moving­window integration
Moving­window integration is used to combine all the peaks from each QRS­complex in
one spike. The filter also removes noise and smooth out the signal, which reduces the
chances of making false detections [7]. A moving­window integration filtered signal can
be seen in figure 2.5 at the plot in the bottom to the right.
Adaptive thresholding
Adaptive threshold is used to find the peak of each spike corresponding to a R­peak. An
adaptive threshold is a threshold that is calculated just for a smaller region of the signal,
which means the threshold will be different for each QRS­complex. Using an adaptive
threshold instead of a fixed threshold allows noise and changes in the signal while it is
still possible to detect the peaks [7]. The peaks found using adaptive thressholding can
be seen in figure 2.5 at the plot in the bottom to the right as the pink circles.
2.3
Photoplethysmogram (PPG)
Photoplethysmogram (PPG) is an optical technique that is used to detect changes within
oxygen in the peripheral blood. Oxygen is a crucial resource for living tissues, and there­
fore the saturation of oxygen in the blood is of clinical interest. To investigate the peripheral
capillary oxygen saturation (SpO2), an oximeter can be used. An oximeter has two dif­
ferent light sources operating at different wavelengths, one wavelength which is highly
absorbed in deoxygenated hemoglobin and one wavelength which is highly absorbed in
oxygenated hemoglobin. This is shown in figure 2.6. The light travels through the tis­
sue, often a finger or the ear lobe, before it arrives at a photodetector on the other side.
The SpO2 level is given as a percentage, and can then be calculated using equation 2.1,
where it is defined as the proportion of oxygen­saturated hemoglobin (HbO2) relative to
the overall quantity of hemoglobin in the blood. The overall quantity of hemoglobin in the
blood is the sum of oxygenated hemoglobin (HbO2) and deoxygenated hemoglobin (Hb)
[8].
SpO2[%] =
HbO2
HbO2 + Hb · 100
(2.1)
Figure 2.6: How SpO2 is measured using red and infrared light to detect the amount of
oxygenated and non­oxygenated hemoglobin [9].
8
Cuffless Blood Pressure Estimation Based on Continuous Vital Signs
==PAGE:17==
2.4
Blood pressure
Figure 2.7: BP decrease as the blood is pumped through the body, why the BP is highest
in the blood vessels right after the blood leaves the heart [10].
BP is a measure of the force that the blood applies on the blood vessels. In arteries,
the BP depends on the rhythmic contraction of the heart. Systolic pressure is when the
ventricles contract and pumps blood from the heart into the arteries, this is when the BP
reaches its maximum value. Diastolic pressure is when the ventricles relax and the BP
reaches its minimum value. The BP decreases as the blood moves through the blood
vessels resulting in a BP around 0 when the blood again reaches the right atrium. This
can be seen in figure 2.7. The standard unit for BP is millimeters of mercury (mmHg) [6].
2.4.1
Regulation of BP in the healthy body
The body has different ways to regulate the BP. The three major mechanisms are barore­
ceptors, chemoreceptor reflexes and the nervous system.
Baroreceptors
The baroreceptors are sensitive to stretch. They are located in the carotid sinuses and
the aortic arch. The baroreceptors can control the peripheral resistance, HR, and stroke
volume if the BP changes.
Cuffless Blood Pressure Estimation Based on Continuous Vital Signs
9
==PAGE:18==
Figure 2.8: Barorecptor response to change in BP [11]
Figure 2.8 shows how the baroreceptors control the BP. If the BP gets too high the barore­
ceptors will register the stretch of the blood vessel wall and will then sent a signal to the
cardio­inhibitory center in the brain. This will decrease the sympathetic impulses to the
heart causing the HR to decline. The baroreceptors will also inhibit the vasomotor center
causing the vasomotor impulses to decline causing the blood vessel diameter to increase.
The combination of decreased HR and increased diameter of the blood vessels will result
in a decreased BP.
If the BP decreases the baroreceptors will register a decreased stretch of the blood vessel
wall, it will cause a stimulation of the vasomotor center in the brain. Then the blood vessel
will constrict, resulting in a decreased diameter in the blood vessels. The baroreceptors
will also stimulate the cardio acceleratory center in the brain which will increase the HR.
The constricted blood vessels and increased HR will increase the BP [6].
Chemoreceptor reflexes
Chemoreceptors are specialized cells which primary function is to measure and react to
the chemical composition in the blood. In the regulation of O2 and CO2, chemoreceptors
play a key role. If the chemoreceptors detect changes in the composition, a signal is sent
to the medulla oblongata which can regulate the RR and the depth of every breath. An
increment in the RR will increase the blood oxygen saturation and decrease the blood
CO2 saturation [6].
Hormonal mechanisms
Adrenal Medulla Mechanism
Increased sympathetic stimulation of the adrenal medulla causes release of epinephrine
and norepinephrine. Epinephrine increases the HR and the stroke volume and causes
10
Cuffless Blood Pressure Estimation Based on Continuous Vital Signs
==PAGE:19==
vasoconstriction. This causes an increase in the BP. Other hormonal mechanisms in­
clude the Renin­Angiotensin­Aldosterone Mechanism, Antidiuretic Hormone, and atrial
natriuretic mechanism but these mechanisms only affect the BP, blood vessel constric­
tion, and blood volume why they are not relevant regarding the vital signs.
BP
HR
SpO2
RR
PR
Baro Receptor
↑
↓
­
­
↓
↓
↑
­
­
↑
Chemo Receptor
↑
↑
↓
↑
↑
Sympathetic Nervous
System
↑
↑
­
↑
↑
Parasympathetic Nervous
System
↓
↓
­
↓
↓
Table 2.1: Table showing how vital signs affect each other to maintain homeostasis. The
green cell indicates which vital sign was changed initially, and the other cells then show
how the other vital signs will react [6].
From table 2.1 it is evident that there is a physiological connection between the five vital
signs, and they all are either direct or indirect linked together. This connection is essential
for making an ML algorithm to predict one of the vital signs. Without a physiological con­
nection, the ML algorithm would not be able to detect a connection which is not present.
2.4.2
Factors that can affect the BP
Many factors can affect BP such as physical activity, emotions, age, sex, BMI, and different
kinds of medication.
Physical activity
Having an active lifestyle can lower BP by keeping the heart and blood vessels in good
shape. During physical activity, the BP will increase to deliver more oxygen to the cells,
but under rest, the BP will be lower compared to not having any physical activity [12].
Age
With increased age follows thickening and reduced elasticity of the arterial walls caused by
atherosclerosis. Because of the thickening, the diameter is decreased, which is leading to
hypertension. This is why older people often will have a higher BP compared to younger
people [6].
Sex
The average SBP for women is lower than for men during early adulthood but around
the 50 years age it will be the other way around where women have higher SBP than
men. DBP is lower for women than for men regardless of age. The mechanisms that are
responsible for the sex difference in BP are not fully understood but sex hormones are a
part of the reason [13].
BMI
It has been proven that there is a strong correlation between BMI and BP. A high BMI
is often a sign of a high amount of fatty tissue in the body. Since the fatty tissue needs
a blood supply, the total blood volume is often increased for people with high BMI. In
general, a high BMI is also a sign of a larger body, and a larger body means the heart
has to pump more to supply the body with oxygen and nutrients. Furthermore, a high BMI
can be an indication of obesity. A side effect of obesity is insulin resistance, which is a
condition that triggers vasoconstriction [14].
Cuffless Blood Pressure Estimation Based on Continuous Vital Signs
11
==PAGE:20==
Medication
Many different kinds of medication have side effect that affects BP. Non­steroidal Anti­
Inflammatory drugs (NSAID) like Ibuprofen and Naproxen can make the body retain fluid
and thereby increase BP because of increased blood volume. Cough and cold medication
contain decongestants that can increase the HR and thereby the BP. Migraine headache
medication often works by constricting blood vessels in the head but it also constricts the
blood vessel in the rest of the body which can increase the BP. There are also different
kind of medication that is used to control BP like ACE inhibitor, angiotensin­2 receptor
blocker, calcium channel blocker, diuretics, and beta blockers [15]
How to measure BP
Figure 2.9: Measurement of BP [16]. Step 1. the cuff is inflated and blocks the artery. Step
2. the cuff is deflated until the first blood flows through the artery and the first Korothoff
sound can be heard. Step 3. The cuff is deflated until blood is flowing without turbulence
and no sound can be heard.
Figure 2.9 shows how an oscillometric BP device works. The rubber cuff is placed on the
left arm where it can block the brachial artery. A stethoscope is placed over the brachial
artery from where it can listen to the blood flow. First, the cuff is inflated until it blocks
the artery completely. This causes complete silence in the stethoscope since no blood
flows through the artery. Then the pressure in the cuff is lowered gradually until a sound
appears in the stethoscope. The first sound that will appear is used to determine the
SBP. The sound is made when the left ventricle contract and a small amount of blood
flows through the constricted artery with turbulent flow. Then the pressure of the cuff
is once again lowered until there is no sound in the stethoscope. This pressure is the
diastolic pressure where the pressure from the cuff is lower than the DBP causing the
12
Cuffless Blood Pressure Estimation Based on Continuous Vital Signs
==PAGE:21==
artery to remain open leading to a nonturbulent flow [6].
2.4.3
Hypertension
Hypertension is a common problem that affects approximately 1 in 4 of the adult popula­
tion. Hypertension is defined as SBP above 140 mmHg or DBP above 90 mmHg. The BP
is determined by the minute volume of the heart and the total peripheral resistance. Often
the cause of hypertension is an increment in the peripheral resistance, and to maintain
sufficient pressure to the vital organs, higher HR is required. Hypertension is often asso­
ciated with several lifestyle habits, such as smoking, stress, unhealthy diet, low physical
activity, and alcohol consumption. Furthermore, heredity has a large impact. The symp­
toms of hypertension are headaches, dizziness, blurred vision, chest pain, shortness of
breath, or nose bleeding but most of the time there are no symptoms. Due to the increased
pressure on the inside of the vessels, there is an increased risk of cardiovascular diseases
like apoplexy, acute myocardial infarction, heart failure, organ damage, or sudden death.
The best treatment for hypertension is a healthy lifestyle and weight loss. In some cases,
ACE inhibitors, angiotensin­2 receptor blocker, calcium channel blocker, and diuretics are
used to decrease the BP [1].
2.4.4
Hypotension
Hypotension is a condition where the SBP is lower than 90 mmHg, and the DBP is lower
than 60 mmHg. The condition is less common, compared to hypertension with around 10­
20% of the adult population. Many people with low BP experience few or no symptoms,
while other people can experience dizziness, pale skin, or being lightheaded. Hypotension
can be treated by increasing fluid and salt intake and in some cases, medications can be
used. Compression stockings can be used to increase the pressure on the legs and
thereby the veins, which increases the BP a bit [1].
2.5
Normal Ranges for vital signs
Table 2.2 summarizes normal ranges for the vital signs used in this project.
Feature
Lower limit
Upper limit
SBP
90 mmHg
140 mmHg
DBP
60 mmHg
90 mmHg
HR
60 BPM
100 BPM
PR
60 BPM
100 BPM
RR
12 BrPM
20 BrPM
SpO2 level
96 %
100 %
Table 2.2: Vital signs, normal ranges [6]. The RR is measured in breaths pr minute
(BrPM).
2.6
Machine learning
2.6.1
Decision tree
A decision tree is a type of supervised learning algorithm that splits data into subsets
based on the value of one or more of the features. The subsets of data are passed
through the decisions, also called decision nodes. In a decision node, an evaluation of
the subset takes place. The subsets pass through nodes until the stop criteria is reached,
and a final prediction can be made [17]. Figure 2.10 shows an example of how a decision
tree can be designed using features from this project. An initial decision is made in the
Cuffless Blood Pressure Estimation Based on Continuous Vital Signs
13
==PAGE:22==
decision node, also called the root node. From here the data can be passed into 2 sub­
trees, which again consist of decision nodes. In the decision nodes, the data is evaluated
against a requirement. Depending on the decision the data can either go to a leaf node
or into another decision node. A leaf node is the final output node. If the data reaches a
leaf node the tree can not segregate further [18].
Figure 2.10: Decision tree example with features used in this project. The root node is
if the mean HR is above 100 BPM. Decision node 1 is if the maximum RR is above 20
breaths per minute. If the RR is above 20 BrPM the SBP is classified as HIGH and if it
is equal to or below it will be classified as NORMAL. Leaf node 2 decides if the minimum
SpO2 value is below 88 %. If the SpO2 is below 88 % the SBP will be classified as LOW.
If it is equal to or above 88 % it will continue to the third decision node that decides if the
STD of the PR is above 100 BPM. If the STD of PR is above 100 BPM the SBP will be
classified as HIGH and if it is equal to or below the SBP will be classified as NORMAL.
14
Cuffless Blood Pressure Estimation Based on Continuous Vital Signs
==PAGE:23==
Figure 2.11: Example of how the splits are calculated in the decision tree
Figure 2.11 shows how each split is calculated. At the top of the figure a table containing
Cuffless Blood Pressure Estimation Based on Continuous Vital Signs
15
==PAGE:24==
three observation with two features and one SBP state is shown. To calculate how the
split should be in the root node each feature is sorted and the mean between each row
is found (seen in the green squares). Then the Gini impurity for each possible split is
calculated using equation 2.2. The information gain for each split is calculated using
equaiton 2.3 and the split with the largest information gain is used as the root node. In
this case it is the split shown in the red square. Since it is a clean split where each split only
contains one classification parameter this tree will only consist of one split. The decision
tree algorithm uses recursive binary splits, which means the dataset will be divided into
subsets or subgroups based on binary decisions (True/False).
The Gini impurity measures the impurity of a node in a decision tree. The Gini impurity is
calculated using following formula:
Gini(D) = 1 −
!
i
p2(i)
(2.2)
Where pi is the probability of class i in the node [19]. The Gini impurity is used to find
the optimal split. Information gain measures the reduction in Gini impurity achieved by
splitting a node based on a particular feature. The information gain is calculated using
the following equation 2.3.
IG(D, f) = Gini(D) −∑(|Dv|/|D|) ∗Gini(Dv)
(2.3)
Where Dv is the subset of data at the node for which feature f has value v, |Dv| is number
of samples in Dv, and |D| is the total number of samples in the node.
2.6.2
Random Forest classifier
A Random Forest classifier, also known as a bagged tree, is an ensemble learning al­
gorithm that is a combination of several decision trees. The multiple decision trees is to
improve the accuracy of the model. The random forest learning algorithm uses bagging
which stands for Bootstrap Aggregating, and is a technique used in machine learning to
improve the accuracy and stability of a machine learning model [20].
16
Cuffless Blood Pressure Estimation Based on Continuous Vital Signs
==PAGE:25==
Figure 2.12: Example of how the random forest is trained with the features from this
project. In the top a table with training data from one patient with five observations at
five different timestamps are shown. From each observations three different features
have been calculated, mean HR, mean SpO2, and mean RR. Bootstrapping is performed
making three new subsets that have been randomly selected using replacement. From
each subset a decision tree is trained using only some of the features. Each tree makes
a prediction and the majority vote will be the final prediction of the random forest.
When data is loaded into the random forest classifier, the training data is split into subsets.
Each subset, is used to train a decision tree. Every decision tree gives a prediction, and
the most frequently predicted class will be the final prediction of the model. In a random
forest, the bagging technique is used to create multiple decision trees, each of which is
trained on a random subset of the data. By combining the results of these trees, the
random forest produces a more robust and accurate model than a single decision tree.
Figure 2.12 shows how a random forest classifier works.
Cuffless Blood Pressure Estimation Based on Continuous Vital Signs
17
==PAGE:26==
Matlab’s bagged tree algorithm is based on the CART (Classification And Regression
Trees) algorithm and includes the following steps:
1. Bootstrap Sampling
• For each tree in the ensemble, one bootstrap sample Db of size N is created
using random selection with replacement from the training set.
2. Decision Tree Training
• Each tree is trained independently on a bootstrap sample using the Gini impu­
rity and the information gain explain in section 2.6.1
3. Ensemble Prediction
• When the bagged tree ensemble is trained, the predictions of multiple trees are
combined to make a final prediction.
• The prediction is made using a voting mechanism where each tree casts a
vote on one of the classes. The class with the most votes will end up as the
classification.
2.6.3
Hyper parameters
Hyper parameters are parameters that are used to control the learning process of the
machine learning model. The hyper parameters are adjusted prior training of the model
and are optimized based on the training and validation set. When training a random forest
it is possible to adjust the hyper parameters, number of trees, maximum number of splits
and misclassification cost [21].
Number of trees
The number of trees needed in a random forest depends on the data, however a rule of
thumb says between 50 and 400 trees. Generally speaking, increasing the number of
trees in the random forest would improve the performance. However, having too many
trees can be a problem due to over­fitting, and therefore the number of trees is a hyper
parameter that needs to be tuned specific to the data [22].
Number of splits
The number of splits in a random forest corresponds to number of branches in each de­
cision tree. Each split creates new branches and further divides the data into subgroups
with smaller number of features. Having many splits can lead to a high level of detailed
detection in the decision making, however, having too many splits can lead to over­fitting.
Having too few splits can lead to under­fitting where the model is not able to predict the
outcome [23].
Misclassification cost
Misclassification cost is a way to specify the importance of predictions in a ML model. The
cost should be increased in the type of predictions that is most undesirable, for instance
on the false negative predictions. The cost then works as a weighted penalty for the ML
model to make a prediction that could result in a false negative prediction [24].
2.6.4
Evaluation metrics in machine learning
Training set
The training set is the part of the data that is used to train the model. This is typically the
largest part of the data, and in this project, the training set is 80% of the patients. From the
training data features are extracted and the model parameters are optimized to minimize
the error between what was predicted and the true value [25].
18
Cuffless Blood Pressure Estimation Based on Continuous Vital Signs
==PAGE:27==
2.6.5
Validation set
The validation set is a smaller part of the data set, and in this project the validation set
is 10% of the patients. The validation set is used to test the model during hyper param­
eter tuning. After each training the validation set is used on the model to check if the
performance has increased or decreased [25].
2.6.6
Test set
The test set is also 10% of the patients, which first will be introduced when the hyper­
parameters have been tuned. It will be used to test the model performance, just like the
validation set. The difference between the validation set and the test set is that the val­
idation set is used to optimize the model, while the test set only will be used when the
model is tuned. The reason for this is that the model must be tested on unseen data, to
avoid any kind of overfitting to the validation set [25].
2.6.7
K­fold cross validation
Figure 2.13: 5­fold cross validation [26]
K­fold cross­validation is a validation method used to test how well a model can predict
unseen data. The training data is split into k blocks. Then k iterations are trained on k­1
blocks as training data and the last block is used as the test set. The average error of the
k iterations is used to evaluate the model. An example of a 5­fold cross­validation can be
seen in figure 2.13 [26].
2.6.8
Confusion matrix
To evaluate the performance of a ML model on a classification problem, a confusion matrix
is often used. A confusion matrix can indicate how many of the observations in the test set
that was correctly classified, and how many were wrongly classified. Figure 2.14 shows
a confusion matrix based on the 3 detection classes in this project. ”True class” is the
class the observation belongs to in the data set, while the ”Predicted class” is which class
the ML model assigned the observation to be. The more observations in the diagonal in
the confusion matrix means more correctly classified observations and therefore a better
model.
Cuffless Blood Pressure Estimation Based on Continuous Vital Signs
19
==PAGE:28==
Figure 2.14: Confusion matrix with the 3 SBP state classes LOW, NORMAL, and HIGH
An observation can either be true positive, true negative, false positive, and false negative.
It is different from class to class if a field in the confusion matrix belongs to a true positive,
true negative, false positive, or false negative classified value [27]. The Different values
can be seen in figure 2.15
2.6.9
True Positive
A true positive prediction is when the model prediction is correctly classified [27]. The
true positive predictions are placed in the diagonal from upper left corner to the bottom
right corner in the confusion matrices seen in figure 2.14 and 2.15. Example from the top
confusion matrix in figure 2.15. If all of the true HIGH observations were predicted to be
in the HIGH class, the model would be able to separate all the HIGH observations from
the 2 other classes. The number of correctly detected HIGH observations would then be
placed in the upper left block in the confusion matrix called ”True HIGH”.
2.6.10
True Negative
A true negative prediction is when the model is able to say that one observation does not
belong to a class. For instance, if the class of interest is HIGH, but the actual class is either
NORMAL or LOW, and the model also was able to predict that it was either NORMAL or
LOW, then it is a true negative observation [27]. Example from the top confusion matrix
in figure 2.15. All the yellow fields are true negative observations where the true class of
the observation is not HIGH and the model did not predict the observation to be HIGH.
2.6.11
False Positive
A false positive observation is an observation that is predicted by the model to belong to
the class of interest but truly the observation is not from the class of interest. That is for
instance if the model predicts an observation to be HIGH, but in fact it is either a NORMAL
or a LOW observation [27]. Example from the top confusion matrix in figure 2.15. The
false positive observations can be seen as the blue fields in the confusion matrix.
2.6.12
False Negative
A false negative observation is an observation that is predicted not to be the class of inter­
est when it actually is in the class of interest [27]. Example from the top confusion matrix
in figure 2.15. The false negative values are the pink fields. If a true HIGH observation is
classified as either a NORMAL or LOW observation, but it actually is a HIGH observation,
it is a false negative observation.
20
Cuffless Blood Pressure Estimation Based on Continuous Vital Signs
==PAGE:29==
Figure 2.15: Precision, Specificity and sensitivity [27]
Figure 2.15 shows three confusion matrices, one for each prediction class in the WARD
project. The first one is for predicting the HIGH class, the middle one is for predicting
NORMAL class, and the last one if for predicting LOW class.
From the confusion matrix many parameters can be calculated, such as precision, sensi­
tivity, specificity, accuracy and F1­score.
2.6.13
Precision
Precision is a measure for the quality of the positive predictions, which means out of the
total number of observations predicted to be in a class, how many are correctly classified
[27].
In the WARD hospital setting the precision for the class with:
1. LOW SBP is how many of the predicted LOW alarms that correctly should raise an
alarm.
2. HIGH SBP is how many of the predicted HIGH alarms that correctly should raise an
alarm.
3. NORMAL SBP is how many of the predicted NORMAL observations that correctly
should not raise an alarm.
Precision for HIGH and LOW SBP is important because it tells how many false alarms
that would be given. False alarms are a big problem because it will make the doctor and
nurses waste time on checking patients that are not in a critical condition.
Precision for NORMAL SBP is important because it tells if the model has classified HIGH
or LOW observations to be NORMAL, and thereby miss an alarm that should have been
Cuffless Blood Pressure Estimation Based on Continuous Vital Signs
21
==PAGE:30==
raised. If the system does not alert the doctors and nurses when the patients status is
critical then the patients will be in risk of having complications or in worst case dying.
The formula for precision can be seen in formula 2.4.
Precision =
True Positives
True Positives + False Positives
(2.4)
2.6.14
Sensitivity
Sensitivity, also called ”Recall”, tells what proportion of the positive class that was correctly
classified [27]. In the WARD hospital setting the sensitivity for the class with:
• LOW SBP is how many of the LOW SBP alarms that should have been detected
that were actually detected.
• HIGH SBP the sensitivity is how many of the HIGH SBP alarms that should have
been detected that were actually detected.
• NORMAL SBP the sensitivity is how many of the NORMAL SBP values that should
have been detected that were actually detected.
Sensitivity for the LOW and HIGH SBP values is very important because it tells how many
of the patient’s critical SBP values caused an alarm. If the true LOW and HIGH SBP
values do not raise an alarm the doctors and nurses do not know if the patients are in a
dangerous condition. If the patients with abnormal SBP do not get treated in time it can be
life­threatening to the patients. The formula for recall/sensitivity can be seen in 2.5 [27].
Sensitivity =
True Positives
True Positives + False Negative
(2.5)
2.6.15
Specificity
Specificity is the proportion of the true negative class that got correctly classified.
• In the WARD hospital setting the specificity for the LOW SBP values is the proportion
of the true NORMAL and HIGH values that was not classified as LOW.
• For the HIGH SBP values the specificity is the proportion of the true NORMAL and
LOW values that was not classified as HIGH.
• For the NORMAL SBP values the specificity is the proportion of the true LOW and
HIGH values that was not classified as NORMAL [27].
The formula for specificity can be seen in 2.6
Specificity =
True Negative
True Negative + False Positives
(2.6)
2.6.16
Accuracy
Accuracy is calculated as the total number of all correctly classified predictions divided by
the total number of data observations in the data set. It is an overall score for all of the
classes combined. The accuracy can be calculated using equation 2.7 [27].
Accuracy =
True Positives + True Negative
True Positives + True Negative + False Positives + False Negative
(2.7)
22
Cuffless Blood Pressure Estimation Based on Continuous Vital Signs
==PAGE:31==
2.6.17
F1­score
An F1­score combines precision and sensitivity into on metric, that can be used to com­
pare the performance of 2 classifiers. The F1 score is often used to measure the perfor­
mance of models with unbalanced data sets, for instance if 95% of the data belongs to
one class, and the remaining 5% is distributed between one or more other classes. The
F1 score can be calculated using equation 2.8 [27].
F1 −score = 2 · Precision · Recall
Precision + Recall
(2.8)
2.6.18
Regression model validation methods
To be able to validate the performance of a regression model different methods can be
used. Below are the evaluation methods used in the state of the art section 3:
ME and SDE
Mean Error (ME) is the average of all errors and SDE is the STD of the error. The formulas
are shown in equation 2.9 and 2.10
ME = 1
n
n
!
i=1
pi −ai
(2.9)
SDE =
"#n
i=1 pi −ai
n −1
(2.10)
Where n is the number of errors, pi is the ith predicted value and ai is the ith true value
[28].
The ME is not always a precise measurement of model performance since positive and
negative errors can cancel each other out [29].
MAE and SDAE
Mean Absolute Error (MAE) is the average of all absolute errors and SDAE is the STD of
the absolute errors. The formulas are shown in equation 2.11 and 2.12
MAE = 1
n
n
!
i=1
|pi −ai|
(2.11)
SDAE =
"#n
i=1 |pi −ai|
n −1
(2.12)
Where n is the number of errors, pi is the ith predicted value and ai is the ith true value
[28][30].
2.6.19
RMSE
Root mean square error (RMSE) is the STD of the residuals and provides information
about how close the data points are to the best­fitted line through the data set. A residual
is the distance from the regression line and to a particular point. The RMSE can be calcu­
lated using equation 2.13, where pi corresponds to the predicted values, a corresponds
to the actual values and n is the number of observations [30] [31].
RMSE =
$#n
i=1(pi −ai)2
n
(2.13)
Cuffless Blood Pressure Estimation Based on Continuous Vital Signs
23
==PAGE:32==
2.6.20
Machine learning feature selection
Principal component analysis
Principal component analysis (PCA) is a statistical technique that is used for reducing the
number of features. It is done by projecting the data points into only a few dimensions,
while as much of the variation in the data is still preserved. When the PCA is used, a
percentage is defined, which corresponds to how much of the variation in the data needs
to be preserved. Making a PCA at 100 % will preserve all the principal components, and
by decreasing the retained variance percentage, the number of principal components will
drop. Using PCA in a ML model can reduce the required computational power, reduce
the storage requirements and reduce the risk of overfitting [32].
Analysis of variance
Analysis of Variance (ANOVA) is a statistical method that can be used to select features
by comparing variances across the means within different features. A p­value for each
feature will be calculated, and by defining a certain threshold a group of the most signifi­
cant features can be chosen. Adjusting the threshold will either increase or decrease the
number of features of interest. Excluding the most redundant features can improve the
ML model by making it more simple and faster to train [33] [34].
Maximum Relevance — Minimum Redundancy
Maximum Relevance — Minimum Redundancy (MRMR) is also a feature selection tech­
nique. The selection is based on the correlation between the feature and the response
variable. If for instance 25 features are kept, these are the features with the highest cor­
relation to the response parameter. By reducing the number of irrelevant features, the
ML model can pay more attention to the important features, which both increases the
performance rate and reduces the required computational power and storage [35].
2.7
Regulatories (DS/EN ISO 81060­3:2023)
Before medical devices can be sold to the marked, there are stated requirements in
standards that the device must comply with. The same applies with any kinds of soft­
ware running on a medical device, or software interpreting data within the medical field.
Since this project aims to make a model that should predict SBP and thereby interpret
patient data, the model must comply with certain standards. The standard ”Non­invasive
sphygmomanometers– Part3:Clinical investigation of continuous automated measurement
type (ISO 81060­3:2023)” is a European standard approved by the European committee
for standardization (CEN) [36]. The standard states requirements for continuous BP es­
timation, but only for regression problems. Since this project is a classification problem,
the standard can not be directly used for this project, but it can be used to evaluate former
studies shown in section 3.
2.7.1
Accuracy
The standard does not have any requirements for classification of SBP but it does have
requirements for the accuracy of a regression problem. According to the standard, the
MAE must be less than or equal to 6 mmHg, and the standard diviation (STD) must be
less than or equal to 8 mmHg. These requirements applies for both the SBP and DBP.
2.7.2
Reference method
DS/EN ISO 81060­3:2023 Section 4.3.1 a) states that ”A continuous non­invasive sphyg­
momanometer shall be clinical investigated by using reference invasive BP monitoring
equipment” [36].
2.7.3
Number of subjects
DS/EN ISO 81060­3:2023 Section 4.3.2.2 states that: ”Number of test subjects shall be
greater than or equal to 30 when comparing the performance of the model with measure­
24
Cuffless Blood Pressure Estimation Based on Continuous Vital Signs
==PAGE:33==
ments from a reference invasive BP monitoring equipment.”
Gender distribution
DS/EN ISO 81060­3:2023 Section 4.3.2.2 states that:
a) ”At least 30% of the subjects shall be male.
b) At least 30% of the subjects shall be female.”[36]
Age distribution
DS/EN ISO 81060­3:2023 Section 4.3.2.3.2 states the following for age distribution (if the
intended use is for subjects greater than 12 years): ”every subject included in the clinical
investigation shall be greater than 12 years, with the following age distribution:
a) ”40% shall be at least 50 years of age.
b) 25% shall be at least 60 years of age.
c) 10% shall be at least 70 years of age.”[36]
Blood Pressure distribution
DS/EN ISO 81060­3:2023 Section 4.3.3 states minimum requirements to how much ref­
erence date must be in certain ranges. These requirements can be seen in table 2.3.
Minimum % of
reference readings
SBP value (mmHg)
5
SBP ≥160
20
SBP ≥140
20
140 >SBP >110
20
110 ≥SBP
5
90 ≥SBP
Table 2.3: SBP distribution of data according to DS/EN ISO 81060­3:2023 [36].
Table 2.3 shows the intervals and distribution of BP measurements from test subjects
for the data included in the analysis of the method for the accuracy of BP determination
according to DS/EN ISO 81060­3:2023 [36].
Cuffless Blood Pressure Estimation Based on Continuous Vital Signs
25
==PAGE:34==
3
State of the art within cuff less BP
estimation
This section will dive into previous work within the field of cuff­less BP estimation based
on signals or vital signs measured from the body. For every previous study the purpose,
data, method and results are described.
3.0.1
Yuriy Kurylyak, Francesco Lamonaca, and Domenico Grimaldi, 2013
­ A Neural Network based method for continuous blood pressure
estimation from a PPG signal
Purpose
The purpose of the article ”A Neural Network based method for continuous BP estima­
tion from a PPG signal”[37] is to establish a new continuous, accurate, and noninvasive
method for BP estimation using a feed forward neural network (FNN) with a PPG signal
as input.
Data Description
The data used in the project consists of PPG signals and the corresponding arterial SBP
and DBP measurements from the MIMIC database. Data from 15000 separate heart
beats was used. The data was recorded with a sampling frequency of 125 Hz.
3.0.2
Method
Figure 3.1: Features used to train the FNN
The features used in this model were the duration of systolic and diastolic width of the raw
PPG signal at different levels between baseline and peak, which can be seen in figure 3.1.
26
Cuffless Blood Pressure Estimation Based on Continuous Vital Signs
==PAGE:35==
The algorithm used in the project is a Feed­forward Neural Network (FNN) with two hidden
layers, 35 neurons on the first hidden layer and 20 on the second hidden layer.
Figure 3.2: FNN model architecture. x1­xN are the 21 input features from figure 3.1. First
hidden layer has 35 neurons. Second hidden layer has 20 neurons. The model predicts
both SBP and DBP.
Results
The results of the project show that a FFN can be used to accurately estimate SBP and
DBP values from a PPG signal. The model achieved a high accuracy in estimating BP
values, with an MAE of less than 6 mmHg for both SBP and DBP, and therefore the method
complies with the requirements stated in the standard [36].
3.0.3
Kwangsub Song et. al. 2020 ­ Cuffless Deep Learning­Based Blood
Pressure Estimation for Smart Wristwatches
Purpose
The article “Cuffless Deep Learning­Based Blood Pressure Estimation for Smart Wrist­
watches” by Kwangsub Song et. al.[38] uses a deep neural network with ECG and PPG
from smart wristwatches to estimate the BP.
Data Description
Data was collected using a smart wristwatch (InBody smart wristwatch, InBody Corp.,
Seoul, South Korea) and the mercury sphygmomanometer (Desk type 0320, Baumanome­
ter, New York, NY, USA). Data was collected from 110 users.
Cuffless Blood Pressure Estimation Based on Continuous Vital Signs
27
==PAGE:36==
Method
Figure 3.3: Features
Figure 3.3 show the features that were extracted from the PPG and the ECG.
Figure 3.4: BP estimation using stacked DNN [38]
Figure 3.4 shows how the BP is estimated in the study. Both the PPG and ECG were
collected from the smartwatch. The signals were then preprocessed using a band­pass
Butterworth filter on the PPG and a low­pass Butterworth filter on the ECG signal to re­
move noise. Then features from the ECG and PPG were extracted and feed into a stacked
DNN together with patient body information. Based on this, the BP was estimated.
Results
ME(mmHg)
SDE(mmHg)
MAE(mmHg)
SDAE(mmHg)
DBP
­1.5
6.0
4.8
3.9
SBP
­3.0
6.0
4.8
4.7
Table 3.1: ME,SDE, MAE and SDAE Comparison in mmHg between measured and cal­
culated DBP and SBP
28
Cuffless Blood Pressure Estimation Based on Continuous Vital Signs
==PAGE:37==
Table 3.1 shows that the MAE from the article are within the requirements from the stan­
dard [36].
3.0.4
Ying Gu et. al. 2022 ­ Personalized Cuffless Blood Pressure
Estimation Based on Continuous Vital Signs for PostOperative
Patients
3.0.5
Purpose
A method for cuffless BP estimation has been examined in the article “Personalized Cuf­
fless Blood Pressure Estimation Based on Continuous Vital Signs for PostOperative Pa­
tients” by Ying Gu et. al.[39]. The project has shown that it to some extent is possible to
estimate BP using a PPG and ECG device. The measurements from the two devices were
fed into a random forest algorithm which evaluated the features and made a prediction.
Data Description
The data used in the study is the same WARD data as described in section 4.1.1.
Method
Based on the HR, RR, SpO2, and PR the BP was estimated using a random forest algo­
rithm with 200 trees.
Figure 3.5: BP estimation using random forest
Figure 3.5 shows how the HR, RR, SpO2, and PR are sampled using the PPG device
and the ECG device. Then the first three hours of the data from each patient is used
for personalized calibration using the mean, STD, and range of each parameter. The
features mean, STD, and range are calculated from PPG and ECG data. All features,
both calibration and normal features from the first day the patient was monitored, is then
used to train a random forest model that predicts the BP value. The model has been
validated on the data from second day from each patient.
Results
MAE(mmHg)
STD(mmHg)
DBP
6.01
4.98
SBP
10.53
8.44
Table 3.2: MAE and STD Comparison in mmHg between measured and calculated DBP
and SBP
Cuffless Blood Pressure Estimation Based on Continuous Vital Signs
29
==PAGE:38==
The results can be seen in table 3.2. According to DS/EN ISO 81060–3:2023 both DBP
and SBP measurements were not within the acceptable accuracy with a MAE of 6 mmHg
± a STD of 8 mmHg [36].
3.0.6
Shrimanti Ghosh et al, 2016 ­ Continuous blood pressure prediction
from pulse transit time using ECG and PPG signals
Purpose
The Article ”Continuous blood pressure prediction from pulse transit time using ECG and
PPG signals” [40] examines pulse transit time (PTT) as a non­invasive method for contin­
uous BP estimation. BP was estimated using PTT where the patient was in five different
positions (recumbent, seated, standing, walking, cycling) according to a preset protocol.
Data Description
The data used in the study came from fourteen healthy subjects (8 females and 6 males).
The data was acquired using the BioRadio (Great Lakes Neurotechnologies, Valley View,
OH) device. From the device, three channels of ECG and one channel of PPG were
captured and wireless streamed using built­in software BioCapture. BP was measured
using the oscillometric device (WatchBP Office, Micro Life, Widnau, Switzerland) as the
reference standard.
3.0.7
Method
Figure 3.6: PTT [41]
The PTT was calculated using the time delay between the ECG and the PPG. The PTT
is defined as the time between the R­peak of the ECG and the systolic peak from the
PPG measured within the same cardiac cycle. This is shown in figure 3.6. The PTT is a
measure of the time it takes the pulse pressure waveform to propagate through a length of
the arterial tree. The PTT was computed using the windowed correlation between ECG
and PPG signals. Continuous BP was estimated using the following linear regression
model:
BP =
a
PTT + b
(3.1)
30
Cuffless Blood Pressure Estimation Based on Continuous Vital Signs
==PAGE:39==
Where a and b are subject­dependent parameters that are calculated using a least square
algorithm during calibration.
Figure 3.7: PTT BP estimation process flow
Figure 3.7 shows how the BP was estimated using the PTT. First BP was measured using
a BP cuff device for calibration. Then the ECG and PPG were measured. The PTT value
was calculated and a calibration is done based on the BP and PTT value to determine the
subject­dependent parameters a and b. Then the BP was estimated using only the PTT.
Results
Recumbent
Seated
Standing
Walking
Cycling
DBP
6.64 ± 5.2
­2.1 ± 7.3
­4.3 ± 3.8
­2.64± 10.4
­3.0 ± 13.1
SBP
4.6 ± 9.6
0.07 ± 5.8
0.7 ± 6.7
4.4± 20.9
­10.2 ±
16.0
Table 3.3: Performance results of different positions on all subjects (mean value ± stan­
dard deviation)
According to DS/EN ISO 81060–3:2023 both in the seated and standing position the PTT
SBP measurement was within the acceptable accuracy of 6 mmHg ± a STD of 8 mmHg
[36].
3.0.8
Monika Simjanoska et. Al. 2018 ­ Noninvasive blood pressure
estimation from ECG using machine learning techniques
Purpose
In the article ”Noninvasive blood pressure estimation from ECG using machine learning
techniques”, the purpose was to estimate the SBP and DBP using machine learning inter­
preting and ECG signal. The ECG signal was filtered and segmented, followed by feature
extraction. The features were used as input for a ML method and a regression module.
The model was then evaluated on test data. [30]
Data Description
In this study, the data consisted of ECG segments and the corresponding BP value. In
total 51 patients of different ages participated in the experiment. In total, 3129 30­seconds
ECG segments were collected. The data was divided into a training set and a test set to
evaluate the performance of the ML model.
Method
The ML method used in this project is a combination of a stacking­based classification
and a regression model. The stacking­based classification is a technique where several
ML algorithms are trained and gathered in a meta­model, which is an algorithm that learns
Cuffless Blood Pressure Estimation Based on Continuous Vital Signs
31
==PAGE:40==
from other learning algorithms. A sketch of a stacking­based classification architecture
can be seen in figure 3.8 [42]. The ML models used in the stacking model is a KNN, J48,
Naive Bayes, SVM, Random Forest, Bagging, and Boosting.
Figure 3.8: Block diagram of a possible stacking based model architecture [42]
Ultimately, a regression was applied, which was used to determine absolute values for
the SBP and DBP.
Results
The results showed that the model achieved a MAE for SBP at 8.64 mmHg ± 10.74
mmHg, and a RMSE for SBP at 10.97 mmHg. For DBP the model achieved a MAE at 18.2
mmHg ± 8.45 mmHg and a RMSE at 19.34 mmHg. To increase the model performance a
calibration was added, which made the model specific to the individual patient. However,
the performance of the model was out of the acceptance range but can be a base for
further investigation within this field.
3.0.9
Thomas, Simi Susan et. al, 2016 ­ BioWatch: A Noninvasive
Wrist­Based Blood Pressure Monitor That Incorporates Training
Techniques for Posture and Subject Variability
Purpose
In the article “BioWatch: A Noninvasive Wrist­Based Blood Pressure Monitor That Incor­
porates Training Techniques for Posture and Subject Variability” by Thomas, Simi Susan
et. al.[43] a solution to measure BP using PTT calculated using PPG and ECG has been
examined.
Data Description
The data were obtained from 11 healthy subjects using a device made in the lab, the Em­
bedded Signal Processing Lab (ESP), in partnership with Texas Instruments (TI) called
BioWatch for the PTT measurements. As a reference device, the arterial BP Colin Con­
tinuous BP Monitor, CBM­7000, was used.
Method
The method is the same as described in section 3.0.6 except the ECG and PPG values
comes from a watch and the reference device is a arterial BP device instead of a cuff­
device.
Results
The average RMSE between the measured true systolic BP and the calculated systolic
BP was between 7.83 mmHg and 9.37 mmHg on the 11 subjects. For the diastolic BP
the RMSE was between 5.77 mmHg to 6.90 mmHg. With these results the study did not
comply with the standard [36].
32
Cuffless Blood Pressure Estimation Based on Continuous Vital Signs
==PAGE:41==
3.0.10
Mohamad Kachuee et. al, 2015 ­ Cuff­less high­accuracy
calibration­free blood pressure estimation using pulse transit time
Purpose
The article “Cuff­less high­accuracy calibration­free blood pressure estimation using pulse
transit time” by Mohamad Kachuee et. al.[44] focuses on making a ML algorithm that can
predict the BP. The input to the model is physiological parameters from the PPG signal.
Data Description
The data used in the project was from the MIMIC II database were thousands of signals
are recorded from patients at different hospitals in the time period from 2001 and 2008.
The data contains PPG, ECG and BP segments sampled at 125 HZ.
Method
Different algorithms were tested, such as a regularized linear regression, an artificial neu­
ral network, and a support vector machine (SVM), to see which one would perform best.
The method follows the structure as seen in figure 3.9
Figure 3.9: Block diagram of BP estimating ML algorithm [44]
Results
The results showed that the SVM had the best performance, with a ME at 6.34 ± 8.45
for the DBP, and 12.38 ±16.17 for the SBP. However, the model did not perform good
enough to comply with the DS/EN ISO 81060–3:2023 [36].
Comparison of state of the art methods
Validation
Author and year
Data
Method
BP
ME ± SDE
MAE ± SDAE
RMSE
SBP
3.80 ± 3.46
Yuriy Kurylyak, Francesco Lamonaca,
and Domenico Grimaldi, 2013 [37]
PPG
FNN
DBP
2.21 ± 2.09
SBP
­3.0 ± 6.0
4.8 ± 4.7
Kwangsub Song et. al. 2020 [38]
PPG and ECG from watch
DNN
DBP
­1.5 ± 6.0
4.8 ± 3.9
SBP
10.5 ± 8.4
Ying Gu et. al. 2022 [39]
PPG and ECG data from WARD
Random forest
DBP
6.0 ± 5.0
SBP
0.1 ± 5.8
5.1
Shrimanti Ghosh et al 2016 [40]
PTT calculated from ECG and
PPG from BioRadio device
Linear regression
DBP
­2.1 ± 7.3
6.3
SBP
8.64 ± 10.74
10.97
Monika Simjanoska et. Al. 2018 [30]
ECG
Stacking based classification
and regression
DBP
18.20 ± 8.45
19.34
SBP
9.4
Thomas S.S 2016 [43]
PTT calculated from ECG
and PPG from watch
Linear regression
DBP
6.9
SBP
12.38 ± 16.17
Mohamad Kachuee, Mohammad Mahdi Kiani,
Hoda Mohammadzade, Mahdi Shabany, 2015 [44]
PTT calculated from ECG and PPG
SVM
DBP
6.34 ± 8.45
Table 3.4: Comparison of state of the art methods. Studies with results in compliance
with DS/EN ISO 810603:2023 standard are marked with green cells, while studies that is
not in compliance with the standard are marked with red cells.
Cuffless Blood Pressure Estimation Based on Continuous Vital Signs
33
==PAGE:42==
Learning from state­of­the­art analysis
To sum up, the examined articles provide deep insights into the field of cuff­less BP esti­
mation using ECG and PPG signals or vital signs. Each study explores different methods,
approaches or features for continuous cuff­less BP estimation, utilizing various devices
and algorithms.
Overall, these studies contribute to the advancement of continuous BP estimation tech­
niques. While some approaches show promising results, further research and improve­
ments are needed to achieve precise and reliable cuff­less BP estimation in clinical sce­
narios. The studies can therefore be used for inspiration for other projects in the field of
BP estimation.
34
Cuffless Blood Pressure Estimation Based on Continuous Vital Signs
==PAGE:43==
4
Methodology
Figure 4.1: Process flow for the data
The data used for the model developed in this project are the four WARD data sets: WARD
Observational Surgery, WARD Observational COPD, WARD RCT medical and WARD
RCT Surgery. Combined these four data sets include 875 patients from where a balanced
training set of 540 (180 LOW, 180 NORMAL, and 180 HIGH) HR, RR, SpO2, PR, and
Cuffless Blood Pressure Estimation Based on Continuous Vital Signs
35
==PAGE:44==
SBP values. These vital signs are recorded once every minute. Besides the vital signs,
10 seconds of continuous data from the ECG and PPG device are also included. These
segments are sampled at 75 Hz.
Figure 4.1 shows how the data have been processed to make the model. First data have
been loaded and combined in Matlab. Then outliers described in table 4.2 have been
removed from the data. Then data have been split in a training, validation and test set
with 80 % of the data in the training set, 10% of the data in the validation set, and 10
% of the data in the test set. The true class for each observation called ”BP state” was
calculated using the criteria from table 1.1. Then 150 different features are calculated.
These 150 features are shown in appendix A.0.2. The training set is balanced to have an
equal amount of LOW, NORMAL and HIGH SBP observations. The 49 vital sign features
are used to train a random forest model with 100 trees, a maximum number of splits of
2000. This model was used to predict the LOW observations. The 101 segment features
are used to train a random forest model with 100 trees, a maximum number of splits of
2000. The models are tested and optimized based on the validation set. This model was
used to predict the HIGH observations. The two models are combined into one model
where the HIGH­model is predicting if a SBP is HIGH and the LOW­model is predicting
if the SBP is LOW. Post processing is applied where the observation before and after
the observation of interest are analysed to adjust the prediction of the model. The post­
processing adjustments can be seen in table 4.4. Finally the model is tested using the
test set with an accuracy of 74.5%.
4.1
Data
In this project five different data sets have been used. Four different data sets from the
WARD project and one data set from the MIMIC III database. The four WARD data sets
will be considered as 1 data set in table 4.1.
Data set
WARD Training
MIMIC III Training
Number of patients with
vital signs
1296
17771
Number of patients with
vital signs and
segments
875
0
Initial data before processing
(LOW/NORMAL/HIGH)
590/ 34491 / 359
94717 / 1182794 / 12876
After features are found
(LOW/NORMAL/HIGH)
367 / 19638 / 180
735 / 10085 / 60
After balance in 3­class distribution
(LOW/NORMAL/HIGH)
180 / 180 / 180
60 / 60 / 60
Table 4.1: WARD and MIMIC data. The table is to give an overview of the data sets
and how the data is distributed within the data sets. The definition for a HIGH, LOW and
NORMAL SBP is defined in table 1.1.
4.1.1
WARD Observational Surgery
The data comes from an observational study including 500 postoperative cancer patients,
who all have been through a major abdominal surgery. The patients were monitored up
to four days after the surgery. All the data were obtained at Rigshospitalet and Bispebjerg
Hospital in Copenhagen, Denmark, as a part of the WARD project.
During the data collection, the patients were monitored with a single lead ECG patch
(Lifetouch Blue), which read the HR and the RR, both with one measurement per minute
36
Cuffless Blood Pressure Estimation Based on Continuous Vital Signs
==PAGE:45==
and a 10 second raw ECG signal sampled at 75 Hz collected for every minute. The SpO2
and pulse Rate were measured once every minute and a 10 second raw PPG signal
sampled at 75 Hz was collected every minute with a pulse oximeter (Nonin WristOx2).
The SBP was measured every 30 minutes during day time, and once every hour during
the night time. The SBP measurements were obtained using a cuff­based blood pressure
monitor, TM­2441, around the upper arm. From the devices, the data were transmitted to
a server (Isansys Patient Status Engine), from where it is accessible [45].
4.1.2
WARD Observational COPD
The WARD observational COPD trial is a study with 200 participants conducted at Bis­
pebjerg Hospital in Copenhagen, Denmark. The patients were monitored with the WARD
setup from admission and up to four days. All patients included were at the age of 18 or
older, and all were suffering from COPD [46]. The data was collected in the same way as
described in section 4.1.1.
4.1.3
WARD RCT Medical
The WARD Randomized Clinical Trial (RCT) is a study with 300 participants conducted at
Rigshospitalet, Bispebjerg Hospital, Odense University Hospital, and Aalborg University
Hospital in Denmark. The patients were monitored with the WARD setup described in
section 4.1.1. All patients included were at the age of 18 or older, and all were defined as
high­risk patients [47]. The data was collected in the same way as described in section
4.1.1.
4.1.4
WARD RCT Surgery
The WARD RCT Surgery data is from a study with 400 participants conducted at Rigshos­
pitalet, Bispebjerg Hospital, Odense University Hospital, Aalborg University Hospital in
Denmark. The patients were monitored with the WARD setup described in section 4.1.1.
All patients included were at the age of 18 or older, and all were undergoing a major
vascular­, urological­, orthopedic­ or abdominal surgery [48]. The data was collected in
the same way as described in section 4.1.1.
4.1.5
All WARD data combined
Figure 4.2 shows boxplots of the distribution of vital signs from the WARD data.
For the HR it can be seen that most of the data are in the normal range from 60 BPM to
100 BPM [6]. The lowest observed HR is 0 BPM and the highest is 283 BPM.
The RR boxplot shows that around 50 % of the data are within the normal range of 12
BrPM to 20 BrPM [6]. The lowest observed value is 0 and the highest observed value is
78 BrPM.
The SpO2 boxplot shows that around 25 % of the data are within the normal range of 96
% to 100 % [6]. The lowest observed value is 2 % and the highest observed value is 100
%.
The PR boxplot shows that around 60 % of the data are within the normal range of 60
BPM to 100 BPM [6]. The lowest observed value is 0 BPM and the highest observed
value is 343 BPM.
The SBP boxplot shows that around 50 % of the data are within the normal range of 90
mmHg to 140 mmHg [6]. The lowest observed value is 0 mmHg and the highest observed
value is 343 mmHg.
Cuffless Blood Pressure Estimation Based on Continuous Vital Signs
37
==PAGE:46==
Figure 4.2: Boxplot of all WARD data without any processing
Figure 4.3 shows a bar­chart of the distribution of vital signs from the WARD data. From
the bar­chart it can be seen that HR, PR, and RR have a large proportion of values in the
normal range and then a small amount of observations in the high and low range. The
SBP bar shows that most of the SBP observations are in the NORMAL range. Figure 4.4
shows that 93 % of the SBP are in the normal range , 4 % are in the low range, under
1 % are very low, 3 % are high and less than 1 % are very high. The number of HIGH,
NORMAL and LOW SBP measurements are higher in figure 4.3 than mentioned in table
4.1. This is because the numbers mentioned in table 4.1 are from the training set, where
segments also are included. Including the segments removed much of the data because
segments and vital signs were not always recorded at the same time.
38
Cuffless Blood Pressure Estimation Based on Continuous Vital Signs
==PAGE:47==
Figure 4.3: Bar chart showing the data distribution of all WARD data from the different
modalities. NORMAL range limits used for HR, PR, RR and SpO2 can be seen in table
2.2. The SBP limits are from table 1.1. In the SBP column 1255 observations are HIGH,
41561 are NORMAL and 1798 are LOW.
Figure 4.4: Pie chart for all WARD SBP. A low SBP is defined as a SBP<91 mmHg, while
very low is when SBP<70 mmHg. High SBP is defined as when SBP>180 mmHg, and
very high is when SBP>220 mmHg. Normal is everything between high and low.
Cuffless Blood Pressure Estimation Based on Continuous Vital Signs
39
==PAGE:48==
4.1.6
MIMIC III
MIMIC III (Medical Information Mart for Intensive Care III) is a freely available database
that contains health­related data of patients who were admitted to the intensive care units
(ICUs) at the Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center (BIDMC) in Boston, Massachusetts,
USA, between 2001 and 2012. The database contains large amounts clinical data of more
than 58,000 patients, including vital signs, laboratory test results, medication orders, pro­
cedures, diagnosis codes, and survival outcomes. The data is organized in tables, and
each patient is assigned a unique identifier that allows the data to be linked across different
tables. The MIMIC III database has been widely used in research studies related to crit­
ical care medicine, such as predicting patient outcomes, evaluating treatment protocols,
and developing machine learning algorithms for clinical decision­making. Of the around
58.000 patients in the database, nearly 18.000 of them had their vital signs recorded, and
therefore it was decided to test the MIMIC III database to train a model for SBP estimation.
4.2
Data Processing
4.2.1
Process Flow
Figure 4.1 shows how the data is processed in Matlab. At first each step in the process
was optimized based on making one model predicting three classes. But after optimizing
the model it was found that the vital sign features were very good at predicting LOW SBP
and the segment features was very good at predicting HIGH SBP why a combination
model was made.
40
Cuffless Blood Pressure Estimation Based on Continuous Vital Signs
==PAGE:49==
WARD Process
Figure 4.5: Flow of how all Matlab scripts used to process WARD data are connected.
Input and output from each function are shown on the arrows.
The data was loaded into Matlab where it was rearranged followed by removal of outliers.
After outliers were removed, the data was split into test, training, and validation set. In­
terpolation of the vital signs was tested but not applied in the final model. Then the SBP
state was found, which is the parameter the model has to predict. After the SBP state
was found, the features were calculated and extracted from the vital signs and segments.
Before training the model, the training set was balanced to have an equal distribution of
HIGH, LOW and NORMAL SBP states. Then the HIGH­model was trained on the segment
features from the training set and the LOW­model was trained on the vital sign features
from training set. Both models were tested on the validation set. The hyper parameters
were optimized to increase the performance of the model. When the model was trained
and optimized, post processing was applied to increase specificity of the model. Finally
the model was tested on the test set to make sure that the model was not over­fitted to
Cuffless Blood Pressure Estimation Based on Continuous Vital Signs
41
==PAGE:50==
the validation set. The main script used to process the WARD data in Matlab can be seen
in appendix A.0.18. Figure 4.5 show how the Matlab scripts used to process WARD data
are linked.
4.2.2
MIMIC Vital Signs Process
The MIMIC Vital Signs data have been processed in the same way as the WARD LOW­
model. The only difference was that the data was not split in test, training and validation
because the WARD test and validation set were used to evaluate how the model performs
on WARD data. The Matlab script ”MIMIC_MAIN.m” that can be seen in appendix A.0.30
was used to process the MIMIC data.
4.2.3
Rearrange data
Figure 4.6: Data rearranged in Matlab
All data are stored in CSV files with data from one patient in each CSV file. The CSV files
are loaded into Matlab and put into a cell array where data from each patient is put in its
cell. By doing this it is more convenient to process each patient individually. The process
can be seen in figure 4.6. The WARD Segment data are stored in PKL files why they
were first processed in Python where each file was converted to a CSV file, this is done
in the Python scrip in Appendix A.0.31. The MIMIC data was in one CSV file but was still
processed in the same way where each patient where put in one cell. The WARD vital
sign data was loaded and rearrange using the Matlab code seen in appendix A.0.19. The
WARD segment data was loaded and rearrange using the Matlab code seen in appendix
A.0.20.
4.2.4
Combine data
The WARD Vital Sign data and the WARD Segments data were not located in the same
files why they had to be combined. The data was combined using Matlabs join function
and the data was combined if the rows had the same patient ID and timestamp. Some of
the patients only had vital sign data or segment data recorded, why the data set became
smaller after the combination of the data. The Matlab code used to combine the segment
and vital sign data can be seen in appendix A.0.24.
42
Cuffless Blood Pressure Estimation Based on Continuous Vital Signs
==PAGE:51==
4.2.5
Remove Outliers
Before the data could be used, outliers had to be removed. Removing the outliers was
done by using the Matlab function ”removeOutliers2”, which can be found in appendix
A.0.21. The function finds the extreme values and replaces them with a ”NaN”. Extreme
values are defined as values outside the range specified in table 4.2. Values outside this
range are coursed by artefacts and are unrealistic to detect from patients. The boundaries
have been empirically defined by doctors from the WARD project. See Appendix A.0.3
for the mail correspondence where these values are defined.
Feature
Lower limit
Upper limit
SBP
0 mmHg
300 mmHg
Heart rate
0 per minute
400 per minute
Pulse rate
0 per minute
400 per minute
Respiration rate
0 per minute
160 per minute
SpO2 level
20 %
100 %
Table 4.2: Physiological signals boundaries Appendix A.0.3
Table 4.3 shows the number of removed outliers from each modality from the WARD vital
signs data.
Feature
Number of removed outliers
SBP
0
Heart rate
0
Pulse rate
0
Respiration rate
0
SpO2 level
13
Table 4.3: Number of removed outliers from WARD data
Figure 4.7 shows two boxplots for the SpO2 values. The left one is the observations
before outliers were removed, and the right one is after they were removed. It can be seen
that the values below 20 % have been removed, which is consistent with the boundaries
defined in table 4.2.
Cuffless Blood Pressure Estimation Based on Continuous Vital Signs
43
==PAGE:52==
Figure 4.7: Boxplot of all WARD SpO2 data before and after removing outliers. Boxplot
to the left shows the data before outliers are removed and the boxplot to the right shows
the data after outliers have been removed.
4.2.6
Split in test, training and validation
After the outliers were removed, the data set was split into a training set, a validation set
and a test set. The training set contains the data that the ML model is trained on, while
the validation set is used to test the model performance for hyper parameter optimization.
Every time a parameter or feature has been optimized, the validation set is used to see if
the performance has increased or decreased. When all the parameters and features were
optimized on the validation set, the test set is applied. The model has at this point never
seen the data from the test set, and therefore this test can be considered representative
of data directly from a patient. If the model was both validated and tested on the validation
set, the model could struggle with over­fitting, because the parameters and features likely
could have been tuned to this specific data. Figure 4.8 shows how the data is split into
different data sets. 80% of the patients goes into the WARD training set, while 10 % goes
into the validation set and last 10 % goes to the test set. Both the validation set and the
test set were not balanced to make the data look as real as possible.
Figure 4.8: Showing how the data is distributed to the training set, the validation set and
the test set
44
Cuffless Blood Pressure Estimation Based on Continuous Vital Signs
==PAGE:53==
4.2.7
Linear Interpolation
During daytime there was 30 minutes between every SBP measurement, and in the night
time the gap was 60 minutes. If the devices are correctly placed on the patients, there will
be one observation recorded every minute, but artefacts or missing values can occur, and
thereby gabs for a longer time duration in these records can occur as well. Interpolation is
a way to generate more data between the original data. The interpolation method tested
in this project was a linear interpolation. To make the linear interpolation on the data,
a Matlab function was made. The function is called ”Interpolation4” and can be found in
appendix A.0.23. The function finds the number of empty cells between two observations.
If there is less than one hour between the two observations, the function makes a linear
line between the two observations, and makes a new data point on the line where there
are empty timestamps. An example on that can be seen in figure 4.9. The upper scatter
plot shows the SBP measurement for the first three hours of monitoring one of the WARD
patients. The lower scatter plot shows how linear interpolation was applied between the
SBP measurements. The original points are the red circles, while all the blue circles are
synthetic points. From these plots it is clear that the interpolation leads to a larger training
set.
Figure 4.9: Non interpolated and interpolated SBP. The upper graph shows the SBP in
mmHg on the Y­axis and the time on the x­axis. The non­interpolated SBP values are
plotted with red circles. The bottom plot shows the same SBP values as on the upper
graph together with linear interpolated data points. One new interpolated sample has
been made for every minute without a SBP sample.
If there is more then one hour between two data points the linear interpolation is not made.
This is because the SBP can change a lot within a few hours, why it would be too imprecise
if two points several hours apart are connected with a straight line.
Cuffless Blood Pressure Estimation Based on Continuous Vital Signs
45
==PAGE:54==
4.2.8
Find SBP state
Figure 4.10: SBP State according to table 1.1
The SBP state was calculated using different ranges. The SBP states used in the final
model is LOW, NORMAL, or HIGH according to the ranges defined in table 1.1. This is
calculated using the function ”BPState 4” function seen in Appendix A.0.22. The func­
tion adds an extra column to the patient data table called ”BPS_State1” with the values
”LOW”, ”NORMAL” or ”HIGH”. The output can be seen in figure 4.10. Tabel 1.1 indi­
cates that there needs at least two continuous observations in the light red area (between
180 and 220 mmHg) to make the observation HIGH, and in the same way there needs
at least two continuous observations in the light red area (between 91 and 70 mmHg)
to make the observation LOW. Looking in the light red area in figure 4.10 both blue and
red observations occur. The blue dot observations corresponds to the observations that
are defined as NORMAL, while the red triangles corresponds to observations classified
as either HIGH or LOW. NORMAL observation occurs in the light red area because the
previous observation either is normal, or if the time span to the previous observation is
46
Cuffless Blood Pressure Estimation Based on Continuous Vital Signs
==PAGE:55==
too long. In the daytime there must be less than 31 minutes between the observations,
and in night time there must be less than 61 minutes.
Another range that was tested was: LOW SBP < 117 mmHg NORMAL SBP < 136 mmHg
HIGH SBP. This range was tested to try to make the classes with HIGH and LOW obser­
vations larger. With these boundaries approximately 1/3 of the data would be in the LOW
class, 1/3 in the NORMAL class, and 1/3 of the data in the HIGH class. This SBP state
was calculated using the function ”BPStatesimple” seen in appendix A.0.22.
The SBP state was also tested as a two class problem where all LOW and HIGH values
were combined in one class called ABNORMAL, where the LOW, NORMAL and HIGH
values were found based on the criteria from table 1.1. This SBP state was calculated
using the function ”table_binary_class2” seen in appendix A.0.22.
4.3
Feature selection
Training a ML algorithm requires features in order to make a classification. The fea­
tures are calculated from the training set, validation set, and test set, and are used to
extract information from the raw data that the model can interpret to make a prediction.
The features are calculated using the three Matlab functions ”Segments_Features.m”,
”Find_features_Personal_segment_plus_vital2.m” and ”pan_tompkin.m”.
The function
”pan_tompkin.m” comes directly from the project described in [49] made by Hooman
Sedghamiz. The Matlab code for the three functions can be seen in appendix A.0.2.
Cuffless Blood Pressure Estimation Based on Continuous Vital Signs
47
==PAGE:56==
4.3.1
Features vital signs
Figure 4.11: How vital sign features are only calculated when at least 9/29 values from
all four modalities are available in the time span 29 minutes before. The orange square
shows the first 29 minutes where at least nine values from each modality are available.
The plot at the top shows the features calculated for the HR. The plot below shows the
RR, followed by the plot of the SpO2 features, and in the bottom is the plot of the PR with
breaths pr minute on the y­axis
The following features have been calculated and tested from the vital sign data:
• Heart rate: mean, STD, maximum, minimum, skewness and range
• SpO2: mean, STD, maximum, minimum, skewness and range
48
Cuffless Blood Pressure Estimation Based on Continuous Vital Signs
==PAGE:57==
• Respiration rate: mean, STD, maximum, minimum, skewness and range
• Pulse rate: mean, STD, maximum, minimum, skewness and range
4.3.2
Mean
The mean has been calculated using Matlab’s ”mean” function that uses formula 4.1 where
missing values has been omitted [50].
µ = 1
N
N
!
i=1
Ai
(4.1)
Where A is a finite­length vector of N scalar observations.
Standard Deviation
The STD has been calculated using Matlabs ”std” function that uses formula 4.2 where
missing values have been omitted [51].
S =
%
&
&
'
1
N −1
N
!
i=1
|Ai −µ|2
(4.2)
Where A is a finite­length vector of N scalar observations. µ is the mean and S is the
STD.
Max, Min and Range
The maximum value is found using Matlab’s ”max” function. The minimum value is found
using Matlab’s ”min” function. The range is found using formula 4.3.
Range = Max −Min
(4.3)
Skewness
Figure 4.12: Skewness [52]
The skewness is found using Matlabs ”skewness” function that applies the equation seen
in equation 4.4. As seen on figure 4.12 skewness measures the asymmetry of the data
around the sample mean. A negative skewness is when the data is spread out more to
the left than to the right of the mean. When the skewness is positive the data is spread
out more to the right of the mean than to the left of the mean. [53]
Skewness =
1
n
#n
i=1(xi −x)3
(
(
1
n
#n
i=1(xi −x)2)3
(4.4)
Cuffless Blood Pressure Estimation Based on Continuous Vital Signs
49
==PAGE:58==
Where x is the sample mean xi is the individual samples, and n is number of samples.
Figure 4.11 shows how the vital signs features are only calculated when there are 29
minutes of continues data from all four modalities (HR, RR, SpO2 and PR). The figure
shows how the features are calculated based on all the data points 29 min before. It can
be seen that data from HR and RR is available more than two hours before the features
are calculated. This is because the PPG device has not been applied to the patient in this
period. Only when at least nine data points from all four modalities are available within
the last 29 minutes the features are calculated. When adding the segment features, at
the timestamp where a SBP measurement is present, the PPG and ECG segment must
contain at least 18 samples. If there is less than 18 samples in the segment, the features
will not be calculated. Figure 4.13 indicates that there needs at least 9 minutes of data
out of 29 in the time span before a SBP for the features to be calculated.
Figure 4.13: data required to calculate features. In the 29 minutes before a SBP measure­
ment there must be at least nine SpO2, PR, RR, and HR values recorded simultaneously.
From the same minute as the SBP there must be one ECG and one PPG segment with at
least 18 samples. In the figure it is marked as the first 9 minutes that contains data. It is
not required that it is the first nine minutes that contains data, nor it is required that the nine
minutes are continues sampled. The nine minutes could as well have been distributed all
over the 29 minutes.
Features segment data
The following features have been extracted from the ECG segment data:
• R­peak amplitude: mean, STD, min, max
• RR­Interval: mean, STD
• RMSSD
• SDNN
• QRS Area: mean, STD, min, max
• QR­slope: mean, STD, min, max
• RS­slope: mean, STD, min, max
• QRS Duration: mean, STD, min, max
50
Cuffless Blood Pressure Estimation Based on Continuous Vital Signs
==PAGE:59==
R­peak amplitude refers to the amplitude of the R­peak, and RR­interval refers to the time
between two R­peaks.
RMSSD stands for ’Root Mean Square of Successive Differences’ and quantifies the
amount of variability in the beat­to­beat intervals when analyzing the HR variability (HRV).
The equation for RMSSD can be seen in equation 4.5 [54].
RMSSD =
"#N−1
i=1 (RRi −RRi+1)2
N −1
(4.5)
Where N is number of samples. RRi is the individual RR interval.
SDNN refers to the STD of the Normal to Normal interbeat interval. The equation for
SDNN can be seen in equation 4.6 [55].
SDNN =
"#N
i=1(RRi −RR)2
N −1
(4.6)
Where N is number of samples. RRi is the individual RR interval. RR is the sample mean
of the RR intervals.
The QRS area corresponds to the area delimited by the Q, R, and S peaks. It can be
seen as the light red area on figure 4.15.
The QR­slope and are the average slopes between the Q­ and R­peak. It can be seen as
the turquoise dashed line in figure 4.15.
The RS­slope is the average slopes between the R­ and S peaks. It can be seen as the
pink dashed line in figure 4.15.
QRS duration is the time between the Q­peak and S­peak. It can be seen as the black
dashed line in figure 4.15.
The following features have been extracted from the PPG segment data:
• Systolic­peak amplitude: mean, STD, min, max
• IBI: mean, STD
• RMSSD
• SDNN
• Systolic­peak Area: mean, STD, min, max
• Onset/systolic­slope: mean, STD, min, max
• Systolic/notch­slope: mean, STD, min, max
• Cycle Duration: mean, STD, min, max
Systolic­peak amplitude refers to the amplitude of the systolic peak.
IBI stands for Inter Beat Interval and refers to the time between two systolic peaks.
RMSSD quantifies the amount of variability in the beat­to­beat intervals. The RMSSD for
the PPG is calculated using equation 4.5, which is the same equation as used for the ECG
but instead of the RR interval the IBI is used.
Cuffless Blood Pressure Estimation Based on Continuous Vital Signs
51
==PAGE:60==
SDNN refers to the STD of the IBIs and is calculated using the same equation as for the
ECG 4.6 but instead of the RR interval the IBI is used.
The systolic peak area corresponds to the area below the systolic peak. It can be seen
as the light red area on figure 4.17.
The onset/systolic slope is the average slope between the onset­ and systolic peak. It
can be seen as the turquoise dashed line in figure 4.17.
The systolic/notch slope is the average slope between the systolic­ and dicrotic notch
peak. It can be seen as the pink dashed line in figure 4.17.
Cycle duration is the time between the onset­peak and dicrotic notch­peak. It can be seen
as the black dashed line in figure 4.17.
Peak detection
The Pan­Tompkins algorithm has been used to detect the R­peak on the ECG signal and
the systolic top peak of the PPG signal. To find the Q peak and S peak the derivative of
the signal is analysed to see when the sign of the derivative signal goes from negative to
positive for the Q peak, and from negative to positive from the S peak. The same applies
for the PPG signal when detecting the onset peak and the dicrotic notch.
Figure 4.14: ECG features from one patient in the WARD segment data.
Figure 4.14 shows how one ECG segment looks when it has been band pass filtered
together with the features that are used in the ML model. In the 9.5 seconds that the
segment lasted, 13 QRS­complexes were found.
52
Cuffless Blood Pressure Estimation Based on Continuous Vital Signs
==PAGE:61==
Figure 4.15: Features from ECG segments
Figure 4.15 shows a close up QRS­complex where the calculated features are marked.
The Q­, R­ and S­peak are found, and the average slope between the Q­ and R­peak and
the average slope between the R­ and S­peak are calculated. Both slopes are marked with
dotted lines. The area under the QRS­complex and the QRS time duration are calculated.
Figure 4.16: Features from 10 seconds PPG segment
Figure 4.16 shows one filtered PPG segment together with the calculated features.
Cuffless Blood Pressure Estimation Based on Continuous Vital Signs
53
==PAGE:62==
Figure 4.17: Features from one PPG segment peak
Figure 4.16 shows a close up of a band pass filtered PPG­wave where the features that
have been calculated are marked. The onset peak, the systolic peak and the dicrotic
notch are found, and the average slope between the onset peak and systolic peak and the
average slope between the systolic peak and dicrotic notch are calculated. Both slopes
are marked with dotted lines. The time duration of a full PPG­wave (from onset peak to
dicrotic notch) are calculated and marked with a black dotted line.
Time before SBP
The features of the final model are calculated using the previous 29 minutes data obser­
vations before the SBP measurement. The vital sign values closest to the SBP value
must be considered as the values with the highest correlation to the SBP value. How­
ever, having too few values to calculate the features can be imprecise if just one of the
values is missing. Therefore, the period that the features are based and calculated on is a
parameter that have been optimized. Hereinafter, this period will be referred to as ”Time
before SBP”.
Accepted number of NaN
It occurs that some of the data from the devices are missing, either due to the devices not
being connected to the patient or errors in the readings. In the perfect data set data from
all the modalities would be present at the same time, which is not the case with the WARD
or the MIMIC data used in this project. Therefore, an accepted amount of missing values
(called ”accepted number of NAN”) in the time before SBP is defined. For instance, if the
time before SBP is defined as 29 minutes, and the accepted number of NAN is defined
as 20 values, it means that at least nine of the rows/minutes must include data from all
modalities.
Number of calibration values
In an attempt to make the ML model more personal, calibration values were added. The
calibration values were all the features explained above combined with the mean, STD,
minimum, maximum, range, and skewness for the SBP, extracted in the time span from the
54
Cuffless Blood Pressure Estimation Based on Continuous Vital Signs
==PAGE:63==
first monitored measurement to the time when the patient have the sixth SBP measured.
These calibration features are for the model to learn how the features for the individual
patient look in the beginning of the monitoring period. Having many calibration values
means a longer delay before the model can start predicting SBP, but the model learns
more about the specific patient.
4.3.3
Balance data
After the features have been extracted and calculated, the data is ready to be used for
training. However, the data set is highly unbalanced with the major part of the observations
in the NORMAL state. Figure 4.18 shows how the data is distributed within the three
classes. The unbalanced data makes the model very good at predicting patients in the
NORMAL state, but almost impossible for the model to predict patients in the HIGH or
LOW state. This is because the model only has a small opportunity to learn how the
features are when the SBP state is either HIGH or LOW. The Matlab function used to
balance the data can be seen in A.0.27.
Figure 4.18: Unbalanced data set
Balanced in 2 classes
In this training set all HIGH and LOW SBP state observations are combined in one class
called ”ABNORMAL”. This is done to make the prediction more simple. This balance of
data with a 2­class problem will result in a training set size of 1094 observations where
547 of them are ABNORMAL, and the remaining 547 are NORMAL. From figure 4.19 it
can be seen how the distribution of HIGH, LOW and NORMAL data will be with the data
balanced this way.
Cuffless Blood Pressure Estimation Based on Continuous Vital Signs
55
==PAGE:64==
Figure 4.19: Pie chart for the distribution of the WARD data set balanced in two equal
sized classes, ABNORMAL (HIGH and LOW) and NORMAL
Balanced in 3 classes
In this data set the data is divided in HIGH, NORMAL and LOW SBP states. All three
classes have equal amount of data. Since the HIGH class is the smallest, this is the one
that determines the class size to be 180 observations per class. The total amount of data
in this data set is 540. All the HIGH observation from the training set is used and then
only 180 observations randomly selected from the LOW and NORMAL observations are
used. The distribution of data can be seen in figure 4.20.
Figure 4.20: Pie chart for the distribution of the WARD data set balanced in three equal
sized classes, HIGH, NORMAL and LOW
Balanced in skew class
In order to keep as much data as possible, this skew distribution is introduced. Here all
the HIGH and LOW observations are included since these states are important to detect.
The number of NORMAL SBP state observations included here corresponds to the largest
of the HIGH/LOW SBP state classes, which here is the LOW SBP state. To sum up, this
training set consists of 180 HIGH SBP state observations and 367 observations of both
LOW and NORMAL SBP states. The 512 NORMAL observations are randomly selected
out of all the NORMAL observations in the training set. The distribution can be seen in
figure 4.21.
56
Cuffless Blood Pressure Estimation Based on Continuous Vital Signs
==PAGE:65==
Figure 4.21: Pie chart for the distribution of the WARD data set in skew class
4.4
Training, testing and validating
4.4.1
Train model
To train the random forest classifier the classification learner app in Matlab was used. In
this app a training set can be selected from the workspace. Then a response variable
can be selected together with the predictors. After selecting the desired classification
algorithm, in this case the random forest, the training can be started. The two Matlab
functions ”trainClassifier_vital.m” and ”trainClassifier_segments” seen in appendix A.0.28
are used to train the two models used in the combined model. The functions are made
by exporting the functions made in the Matlab classification learner app.
4.4.2
Test model
After training the random forest, the classification learner app makes a 5­fold cross­
validation on the training set. To evaluate the model on data that the model has not been
trained on, the validation set and test set is loaded into the classification app. Then the
model predicts the SBP class and compares it with the true class and from this a confusion
matrix with the result is made.
4.4.3
Optimize model hyper parameters
The number of trees, maximum number of splits, and misclassification cost described in
section 2.6.3 are optimized using the Matlab Classification Learner application. The hyper
parameters are applied before training the model. Hyper parameters are optimized based
on the model performance on the training set and the validation set.
Cuffless Blood Pressure Estimation Based on Continuous Vital Signs
57
==PAGE:66==
4.4.4
Combined model
Figure 4.22: Combination model. The flow to the left shows how the combination model
makes its classification if the HIGH­model predicts HIGH and the LOW­model predicts
NORMAL. The Flow in the middle shows how the combination model makes its classifi­
cation if the HIGH­model predicts NORMAL and the LOW­model predicts LOW. The flow
to the right shows how the combination model makes its classification if the HIGH­model
predicts HIGH and the LOW­model predicts LOW.
Making one model that is good at predicting both LOW, NORMAL and HIGH SBP was not
possible. However, it was found that a combination of two models was better than one
model trying to predict all three states. Initially a model (LOW­model) that was very good
at predicting LOW SBP was trained. Then a model (HIGH­model) that was very good at
predicting HIGH SBP was trained. Then these two models were combined to one, so all
the SBP classified as LOW by the LOW­model was defined as LOW. Then all the SBP
classified as HIGH by the HIGH­model was defined as HIGH. Finally, all the remaining
SBP were defined as NORMAL. This way each model (HIGH­model and LOW­model)
only predicts the class that the model is good at predicting. If the LOW­model predicts
one sample to be LOW and the HIGH­model predicts the same observation to be HIGH
then the observation will be classified as HIGH by the combined model. This can be seen
in figure 5.7 and was chosen because it gave the best performance of the combined model
on the validation set. The combination model is made using the Matlab code in the main
script ”WARD_combined_model_MAIN.m” that can be seen in appendix A.0.18. The two
Matlab functions ”trainClassifier_vital.m” and ”trainClassifier_segments” seen in appendix
A.0.28 are used to train the HIGH­model and the LOW­model.
4.4.5
Post processing
In order to increase the performance of the combined model, post­processing has been
applied. The Matlab function ”combi_and_post.m” seen in appendix A.0.29 has been
used to make the post processing.
In this project 6 different post processing adjustments have been applied to the combined
model. Table 4.4 shows the 6 different adjustments
58
Cuffless Blood Pressure Estimation Based on Continuous Vital Signs
==PAGE:67==
Adjustment #
Observation before
Observation of interest
Observation after
New value
1
NORMAL
LOW
NORMAL
NORMAL
2
NORMAL
HIGH
NORMAL
NORMAL
3
LOW
HIGH
NORMAL
4
HIGH
LOW
NORMAL
5
HIGH
LOW
NORMAL
6
LOW
HIGH
NORMAL
Table 4.4: Post processing adjustments. Each line shows one adjustment for a specific
combination of predictions that are applied in the post processing. The adjustment are
only applied if there are less than 300 minutes between the observation before and the
observation after the observation of interest.
Adjustment number:
1. If the model predicts an observation to be LOW, and the observation before and
after are NORMAL then observation should be NORMAL
2. If the model predicts an observation to be HIGH, and the observation before and
after are NORMAL then the observation should be NORMAL
3. If the model predicts an observation to be LOW, and the observation after are HIGH
then the observation should be NORMAL
4. If the model predicts an observation to be HIGH, and the observation after are low
then the observation should be NORMAL
5. If the model predicts an observation to be LOW, and the observation before is HIGH
then the observation should be NORMAL
6. If the model predicts an observation to be HIGH, and the observation before is LOW
then the observation should be NORMAL
These rules are made to increase the precision by decreasing the number of false pos­
itive NORMAL values. Besides increasing the precision it is also considered unrealistic
that the SBP goes from HIGH to LOW or from LOW to HIGH within less than one hour.
Having a single HIGH or a single LOW observation surrounded by NORMAL observations
is considered negligible and that will therefore be made to a NORMAL observation.
4.4.6
Test final model
When the model is optimized and the post processing has been applied, the model is
ready to be tested on the test set to test if the model has been over fitted to the training
and validation set.
Cuffless Blood Pressure Estimation Based on Continuous Vital Signs
59
==PAGE:68==
5
Results
In this section the results from tests of features and hyper parameters described in section
4 are shown. The features are optimized to one model that predicts all three classes, since
it was late in the process that the idea to a combined model was discovered.
The random forest classifier was the best ML model. The best model was made with no
interpolation of the data, and with the SBP state defined as in table 1.1. For the features
the model performed best with 20 accepted NaN values, 29 minutes of data before a SBP
measurement and 6 calibration values. Both the vital signs and segments with and without
calibration values were tested separately, where it turned out that using both the vital signs
and the segments, both with calibration values, gave the best results. The different data
distributions were tested, and it showed that the 3­class distribution was best. Both the
PCA, the ANOVA, and the MRMR analysis showed that the best results were achieved
when all the features were included in the model. The results during hyperparameter
tuning showed that the best results were achieved with 100 trees, a maximum of 2000
splits, and a misclassification cost applied as shown in figure 5.4.
5.1
Select ML Model
Before training, a classification algorithm had to be selected. To make the selection, all
models from the Matlab ”Classification Learner application” were tested. This includes
nearest neighbor classifiers, ensemble classifiers, decision tree classifiers, artificial neu­
ral networks, and support vector machines. From the test of all these classifiers, it was
concluded that it was a random forest classifier that gave the best results and is the clas­
sification method used in the final model. The data set used for this test was the WARD
vital signs plus segments data. With 5 accepted NaN values for the previous 29 minutes
of data before an SBP measurement and six SBP values used for calibration. All 150
features were used.
Figure 5.1 shows the results from the test of the random forest, figure 5.2 shows the
results from the test with a fine gaussian SVM classifier, and figure 5.3 shows the results
from the test with a coarse tree classifier. These three tests were ones with best results.
All results from these tests can be found in appendix A.0.17.
The results table as the one showed in figure 5.1 is to provide information about the test
and show the most common metrics within ML evaluation. The first two rows explain
which settings the test are based on. The third row is a row of headers, where each
header corresponds to the below standing column. After the headers, the 5­fold cross
validation is presented. From the left is the confusion matrix with the true class on the y­
axis and the predicted class on the x­axis, and then each of the columns shows the metrics
mentioned in the header row. In some of the columns there are three rows, corresponding
to the classes (HIGH, LOW, NORMAL), which can be seen on the left side of the confusion
matrix. If only one cell is shown, it is because the metric is an overall metric for all three
classes. In some cases one or more of the values are substituted with #####. This is if
one of the values in the confusion matrix is zero, which then results in a division with zero,
and therefore no value can be calculated.
60
Cuffless Blood Pressure Estimation Based on Continuous Vital Signs
==PAGE:69==
Figure 5.1: Results from test of Random forest classifier
Figure 5.2: Results from test of Fine gaussian SVM classifier
Figure 5.3: Results from test of Coarse Tree classifier
5.1.1
Evaluation parameters of interest
There are several ways to evaluate a confusion matrix. Since this project is within health
care, one alarm too much is better then a missed alarm. Therefore, initially a high Recal­
l/sensitivity is of interest for all prediction classes, also at the cost that many false positive
Cuffless Blood Pressure Estimation Based on Continuous Vital Signs
61
==PAGE:70==
predictions will occur. In the following section a result table as the one used in table 5.1
will be used to evaluate the tests. The first column in the table is used to describe which
test is being tested. The second, third and fourth column corresponds to the sensitivity
for the LOW, NORMAL and HIGH SBP state predictions made on the validation set. The
fifth column is the average sensitivity for all three prediction classes.
5.2
Interpolation
In this section the following tests have been made where the best result is marked with
green:
• No Interpolation
• SBP interpolation
• Interpolation doubling the amount of HIGH SBP
• Interpolation adding 156 HIGH SBP
• Interpolation adding 20 HIGH SBP
The result showed that the model performed best with the uninterpolated data or with only
20 linear interpolated HIGH values. The uninterpolated data has been chosen to have the
best performance because it has the highest sensitivity on the HIGH values.
Interpolation
Sensitivity LOW
validation set
Sensitivity NORMAL
validation set
Sensitivity HIGH
validation set
Sensitivity average
validation set
None
66 %
58 %
27 %
50 %
All SBP
5 %
93 %
0 %
33 %
156 HIGH SBP
69 %
75 %
0 %
48 %
20 HIGH SBP
70 %
62 %
20 %
51 %
Table 5.1: Results from Interpolation of SBP. The first result row with no interpolation is
a test with the data without interpolation, while the second row is results from the test
where linear interpolation has been used between all SBP observations. The third row
is where 156 of the synthetic SBP observations from the previous test have been added
to the data with no interpolation. 156 is the number of true HIGH SBP observations, so
adding extra 156 observations means a double of HIGH observations. The last row is the
same technique as the third test, but here only 20 of the synthetic SBP observations were
added to the original non­interpolated data.
5.3
SBP State
In the following section different ways to determine the SBP state have been tested. Below
is a list of what have been tested, and the one test considered as the best one is marked
with green text color.
• SBP State defined in table 1.1. Here there has to be one SBP measurement above
220 mmHg or two continuous measurements above 180 mmHg before it will be
classified as a HIGH SBP state. To be marked as a LOW SBP measurement there
has to be one measurement below 70 mmHg, or two continuous measurements
below 90 mmHg.
• SBP State simple. This class is based on the unbalanced WARD class, meaning
there are a total of 17745 observations that can be used for training. Instead of bal­
ancing the data using the boundaries defined in table 1.1, the boundaries are moved
62
Cuffless Blood Pressure Estimation Based on Continuous Vital Signs
==PAGE:71==
Test Name
Sensitivity NORMAL
Sensitivity LOW
Sensitivity HIGH
Sensitivity Average
SBP state from table 1.1
57%
71%
20%
49%
SBP state simple
33%
42%
53%
43%
NORMAL / ABNORMAL
53%
67%
60%
NORMAL / LOW
85%
65%
75%
NORMAL / HIGH
79%
20%
50%
LOW / HIGH
81%
67%
74%
Table 5.2: The first test is where the SBP state is defined as in table 1.1, and is marked
as green since the model must be based on the definitions from the doctors in the WARD
project. The second test is where the boundaries are moved in the unbalanced class, so
all three classes are approximately equal in size. The NORMAL/ABNORMAL is where
the HIGH and LOW are combined into one class called ABNORMAL, and tested with an
equal amount of NORMAL observations. NORMAL/LOW is where all HIGH observations
are removed from the data to see if the model can distinguish between these two classes.
NORMAL/HIGH is where the LOW observations are removed, and LOW/HIGH is where
the NORMAL observations are removed. These four tests were to discover what kind of
data the model was good at recognizing and distinguishing from other data.
so the HIGH and LOW class gets larger. Approximately 1/3 of the observations will
be classified as LOW, 1/3 will be NORMAL, and 1/3 will be HIGH.
• SBP State 2 class. Here the data balanced in two classes is used, and the random
forest has to predict if the data is NORMAL or ABNORMAL.
• SBP State only NORMAL and LOW. To make the number of states the model has
to predict smaller, a model is trained only on NORMAL and LOW data, to see if the
model is better to predict when there only are two response classes.
• SBP State only NORMAL and HIGH. In this test, the focus is to see if the model can
distinguish between NORMAL and HIGH SBP states.
• SBP State only LOW and HIGH. In this test, the focus is to see if the model can
distinguish between LOW and HIGH SBP states.
5.4
Select Features
In this section, the features for the ML model have been tested to find the appropriate
features giving the best results. First the number of accepted NaN values in the time
frame before a SBP measurement has been tested. Next, it was tested how many minutes
of data were needed to make the prediction, followed by optimization of the number of
calibration values. Both PCA, ANOVA, and MRMR tests have been used to select the
number of features.
• Accepted NaN: 0, 5, 10, 20, 25
• Time before SBP: 21, 27, 28, 29, 30, 35, 40,
• Number of calibration values: 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7
• Data type: olorgreenVital signs and segments with calibration values
• PCA explained variance: 90, 95, 99, 99.9, 99.99, 99.999, All features
• ANOVA: 50, 100, 140, 145, All features
• MRMR: 25, 50, 100, 140, All features
Cuffless Blood Pressure Estimation Based on Continuous Vital Signs
63
==PAGE:72==
Below follows the sensitivity results from each of the tests.
5.4.1
Accepted NaN values
From table 5.3 below it was showcased that the appropriate number of accepted NaN
values in the time span before a SBP prediction was 20 values.
Number of
accepted NaN
Sensitivity LOW
validation set
Sensitivity NORMAL
validation set
Sensitivity HIGH
validation set
Sencitivity average
validation set
0
70 %
57 %
8 %
45 %
5
66 %
58 %
27 %
50 %
10
58 %
64 %
18 %
47 %
20
65 %
67 %
41 %
58 %
25
64 %
69 %
29 %
54 %
Table 5.3: Results from testing number of accepted NaN values. All results details for test
with 0, 5, 10, 20 and 25 accepted NaN values, in appendix A.0.7 see figure A.24, A.25,
A.26, A.27 and A.28, respectively
5.4.2
Time before SBP
Table 5.4 shows that the model performs best with 29 minutes of data before predicting
the following SBP class.
Time before SBP
(minutes)
Sensitivity LOW
validation set
Sensitivity NORMAL
validation set
Sensitivity HIGH
validation set
Sensitivity average
validation set
21
63 %
71 %
0 %
45 %
27
53 %
75 %
24 %
51 %
28
69 %
65 %
35 %
56 %
29
65 %
67 %
41 %
58 %
30
67 %
60 %
35 %
54 %
35
70 %
70 %
6 %
49 %
40
69 %
64 %
18 %
50 %
Table 5.4: Result from testing the interval before a SBP measurement. For more result
details for test with 21, 27, 28, 29, 30, 35 and 40 minutes before a SBP measurement, in
appendix A.0.6 see figure A.17, A.18, A.19, A.20, A.21, A.22 and A.23, respectively
5.4.3
Number of calibration values
Table 5.5 shows the model performs best using 6 calibration values.
Number of calibration values
Sensitivity LOW
validation set
Sensitivity NORMAL
validation set
Sensitivity HIGH
validation set
Sensitivity average
validation set
1
62 %
47 %
0 %
36 %
2
69 %
69 %
0 %
46 %
3
73 %
64 %
24 %
54 %
4
55 %
74 %
6 %
45 %
5
66 %
63 %
0 %
43 %
6
65 %
67 %
41 %
58 %
7
74 %
63 %
6 %
48 %
Table 5.5: Results from testing the number of calibration values. For more result details
for test with 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6 and 7 calibration values, in appendix A.0.12 see figure A.50,
A.51, A.52, A.53, A.54, A.55 and A.56, respectively
5.4.4
Calibration values
From table 5.6 it was showcased that calibration values from both the vital signs and the
ECG­ and PPG­segment improve the model.
64
Cuffless Blood Pressure Estimation Based on Continuous Vital Signs
==PAGE:73==
Data type
Sensitivity LOW
validation set
Sensitivity NORMAL
validation set
Sensitivity HIGH
validation set
Sensitivity average
validation set
Vital signs and segments without calibration
42 %
41 %
12 %
32 %
Vital signs and calibration
72 %
60 %
6 %
46 %
Segments and calibration
9 %
65 %
71 %
48 %
Vital signs and segments with calibration
65 %
67 %
41 %
58 %
Table 5.6: Results from testing vital signs and/or segments, with or without calibration
values. More detailed results from the tests can be found in appendix A.0.13 in figure
A.57, A.58, A.59 and A.60
5.4.5
PCA
Feature selection using PCA test. From table 5.7 it was showcased that the model per­
forms best using all features.
PCA explained variance
Sensitivity LOW
validation set
Sensitivity NORMAL
validation set
Sensitivity HIGH
validation set
Sensitivity average
validation set
90 %
20 %
48 %
18 %
29 %
95 %
15 %
44 %
18 %
26 %
99 %
13 %
6 %
57 %
25 %
99.9 %
43 %
52 %
12 %
36 %
99.99 %
13 %
54 %
12 %
26 %
99.999 %
36 %
50 %
12 %
33 %
100 %
65 %
67 %
41 %
58 %
Table 5.7: Results from testing with the PCA explained variance at different levels. More
detailed results from the tests with 90%, 95%, 99%, 99,9%, 99,99%, 99,999% and 100%
explained variance can be found in appendix A.0.8 in figure A.29, A.30, A.31, A.32, A.33,
A.34 and A.35, respectively
5.4.6
ANOVA
Feature selection using ANOVA test. From table 5.8 it can be seen that using an ANOVA
test the model performs best using all features.
Number top
ANOVA features
Sensitivity LOW
validation set
Sensitivity NORMAL
validation set
Sensitivity HIGH
validation set
Sensitivity average
validation set
50
60 %
58 %
12 %
43 %
100
49 %
63 %
29 %
47 %
140
71 %
61 %
0 %
44 %
145
72 %
61 %
19 %
51 %
All features
65 %
67 %
41 %
58 %
Table 5.8: Results from tests where different numbers of top features from the ANOVA
are used. For more details for the test with 50, 100, 140, 145 and all features, in appendix
A.0.9 see figure A.36, A.37, A.38, A.39 and A.40, respectively
5.4.7
MRMR
Feature selection using MRMR test. From table 5.9 it can be seen that the model performs
best using all features.
Cuffless Blood Pressure Estimation Based on Continuous Vital Signs
65
==PAGE:74==
Number top
MRMR features
Sensitivity LOW
validation set
Sensitivity NORMAL
validation set
Sensitivity HIGH
validation set
Sensitivity average
validation set
25
67 %
57 %
18 %
47 %
50
75 %
59 %
6 %
47 %
100
63 %
64 %
18 %
48 %
140
70 %
65 %
12 %
49 %
All features
65 %
67 %
41 %
58 %
Table 5.9: Results from tests where different numbers of top features from the MRMR test
are used. For more details for the test with 25, 50, 100, 140 and all features, in appendix
A.0.9 see figure A.41, A.42, A.43, A.44 and A.45, respectively
5.5
Balance data
In the following section, four different data distributions have been tested, which is the 3
class distribution, the 2 class distribution, the skew distribution and the binary distribution,
see section 4.3.3. The sensitivity results can be seen below in table 5.10, and the 3
class distribution is marked with green text color, meaning that the 3 class distribution
was considered as the best distribution.
Data in different distributions
Sensitivity LOW
validation set
Sensitivity NORMAL
validation set
Sensitivity HIGH
validation set
Sensitivity average
validation set
3 class
66 %
58 %
27 %
50 %
2 class
51 %
88 %
0 %
46 %
skew class
54 %
82 %
0 %
45 %
Unbalanced
0 %
97 %
0 %
32 %
Table 5.10: Result from testing the different data distributions. For more result details for
test of the 3 class, 2 class, skew class and the unbalanced class, in appendix A.0.14 see
figure A.62, A.63, A.64 and A.61, respectively.
5.6
Hyper parameter tuning
5.6.1
Number of trees
To find the optimal number of trees for the random forest, below tests were made and the
results for the sensitivity can be found in table 5.11. The test with 100 trees is marked
with green, meaning it was the test with the best results, and therefore will be used for
further optimization.
Number of trees
Sensitivity LOW
validation set
Sensitivity NORMAL
validation set
Sensitivity HIGH
validation set
Sensitivity average
validation set
30 trees
73 %
59 %
29 %
51 %
50 trees
67 %
66 %
0 %
44 %
100 trees
70 %
66%
24 %
53 %
200 trees
70 %
64 %
18 %
51 %
Table 5.11: Sensitivity result from testing number of trees in the random forest. For more
result details for test with 30, 50, 100 and 200 trees, in appendix A.0.11 see figure A.46,
A.47, A.48 and A.49, respectively
5.6.2
Number of splits
Different number of splits have been tested, and as indicated in table 5.12, the best per­
formance is with 2000 splits.
66
Cuffless Blood Pressure Estimation Based on Continuous Vital Signs
==PAGE:75==
Number of splits
Sensitivity LOW
validation set
Sensitivity NORMAL
validation set
Sensitivity HIGH
validation set
Sensitivity average
validation set
250 splits
67 %
64 %
6 %
46 %
539 splits
70 %
66 %
24 %
53 %
1000 splits
70 %
66 %
24 %
53 %
2000 splits
70 %
66 %
29 %
55 %
Table 5.12: Sensitivity results from tests with different numbers of splits. For more result
details for test with 250, 539, 1000 and 2000 splits, in appendix A.0.15 see figure A.65,
A.66, A.67 and A.68, respectively
5.6.3
Misclassification cost
To test the misclassification cost, different costs were applied to the confusion matrix.
In left side of figure 5.4 the placement of the cost can be seen. The second test in the
figure is where a cost at 5 has been added to the class of true HIGH SBP states that
was classified as NORMAL SBP states. In the final model the misclassification cost was
removed because it did not imporve the results of this model.
Figure 5.4: Sensitivity results from tests with different misclassification costs. For more
detailed results, see appendix A.0.16, figure A.69, A.70, A.71 and A.72
5.7
Combination model (one model to predict LOW SBP and
one to predict HIGH SBP)
The following model was made to predict HIGH observations, see figure 5.5. Compared
to previous results it can be seen that the model is rather good at detecting the HIGH
observations with a sensitivity of 76 % on the validation set, but not that good to detect
the LOW observations with a sensitivity on 24 %.
Cuffless Blood Pressure Estimation Based on Continuous Vital Signs
67
==PAGE:76==
Figure 5.5: Results from HIGH­model
Figure 5.6 shows the results from the LOW­model, that is good at detecting LOW obser­
vation with a sensitivity of 72 % on the validation set, but not good at detecting the HIGH
observations with a sensitivity at 0 % on the validation set.
Figure 5.6: Results from LOW­model
Figure 5.7 presents the results from the combined model predicting the SBP of the patients
from the validation set and the test set. On the test set the combined model has a lower
sensitivity on HIGH and LOW SBP compared to the validation set but the overall accuracy
are higher on the test set then on the validation set.
Figure 5.7: combined model
68
Cuffless Blood Pressure Estimation Based on Continuous Vital Signs
==PAGE:77==
5.8
Post processing
Figure 5.8 shows results from the same model as seen results from in figure 5.7 after
it was post processed. The aim of the post processing was to decrease the number of
false positive observations. For the NORMAL observations that were predicted as HIGH
observations, the post processing decreased the number from 268 to 204 on the test
set. For the true NORMAL observations that were predicted as LOW, the post processing
decreased the number from 341 to 274 on the test set. The number of LOW that was
predicted as HIGH has dropped from 10 to 6 on the test set. The number of HIGH and
LOW that was predicted as NORMAL has slightly increased after post processing, which
also was expected.
Figure 5.8: combined model plus post processing
Figure 5.8 shows the combined model where the post processing algorithm described
in section 4.4.5. Compared with the result from figure 5.7 it can be seen that the post
processing algorithm has increased the overall accuracy of the model by 8.6% for the
validation set and by 5.9 % for the test set.
5.9
Test of final model
The test of the final model can be found in figure 5.8. The final model has an overall
accuracy of 74.5% on the test set and 69.5 % on the validation set. The final model has
a low sensitivity of HIGH values at 14 %. The sensitivity is at 52 % for the LOW values
and 76 % for the NORMAL values.
Cuffless Blood Pressure Estimation Based on Continuous Vital Signs
69
==PAGE:78==
5.10
MIMIC Vital Signs Results
Figure 5.9: MIMIC tested on WARD
5.10.1
Summary for test with MIMIC
Figure 5.9 shows results from the best performing model that was created using the MIMIC
data. Despite the large amount of data in the MIMIC database, none of the models ended
up performing good enough to be used in the final model. This project focuses on testing
if vital signs can be used to classify the SBP, which means having the vital signs and the
SBP recorded at the same time is crucial. Since the patients recorded in the MIMIC data is
not wearing all the measuring devices at the same time, it turned out that when balancing
the data in the 3­class distribution, it was only possible to make a data set of 180 SBP
measurements. It was decided not to continue with the MIMIC data, because of the bad
results.
70
Cuffless Blood Pressure Estimation Based on Continuous Vital Signs
==PAGE:79==
6
Discussion
6.1
Performance of model
The performance of the final model leaves room for improvement, because the model
predicts a lot of false positive NORMAL values. These false positive NORMAL SBP’s are
a problem because they would course an alarm that would make the nurses or doctors
check the patient, even though the patient is in the NORMAL SBP state. It is estimated
that it takes around five minutes to check all the vital signs [56]. The 204+274=478 wrong
classified false positive NORMAL values distributed on the 98 patients in the test set would
waste 24 minutes per patient based on the test set.
(204 + 274) · 5 min
98 patients
= 24 minutes per patient
(6.1)
The 12+24=36 false negative HIGH and LOW classifications from the test patients could
be very dangerous to the patients and it would correspond to almost every third of all the
test patients would miss an alarm that should have been raised. Regarding the LOW ob­
servations that were classified as HIGH, or HIGH that were classified as LOW, it can also
lead to a dangerous situation, even though an alarm is raised. The alarm will be raised
on false basis, which can result in deprioritization from the doctors, if they for instance
deprioritize hypotension. In the final model there are 6 observations that were classified
as HIGH, but in fact they were LOW.
6.2
Data
6.2.1
Number of HIGH and LOW SBP
To train a good performing ML model it requires a lot of data so the model learns how
the data in the areas of interest looks. Recent surveys have shown that around 80 % of
successful ML projects use training sets with more than 1 million useful observations [57].
In this project, the training set is below 1000 observations. If the ML model developed
in this project should be successful it would require much more data, especially in the
LOW and HIGH SBP range. The problem could be solved if the inter arterial SBP was
monitored along with the other vital signs and segments, since arterial SBP could have a
higher sampling frequency. Having a SBP measurement every minute would increase the
SBP measurements in the HIGH and LOW SBP area significantly, and thereby make more
data for training purposes. From table 4.1 it can be seen that nearly 50% of the HIGH
SBP observations and 69% of the LOW SBP observation are lost during processing of
the data. This is because the ECG and PPG data has not been sampled at the same time
as the SBP.
6.2.2
Time asynchronous measurements
The data collected from the WARD devices are not synchronized in time when they are
sent to the beside gateway device, because of a delay in the data transfer process. If
the data was time synchronized a simple PTT approach could have been used. A wired
connection between the ECG device, the PPG device, the BP device, and the gateway
device could solve this problem but it would be inconvenient to have wires connected to
the patient that would make it more difficult for the patient to move around.
Cuffless Blood Pressure Estimation Based on Continuous Vital Signs
71
==PAGE:80==
6.3
Over­fitting
Over­fitting is when the model gets very good at predicting data it already knows, but
when it has to make predictions based on unseen data, the performance drops signifi­
cant. Over­fitting can be caused by many factors, some of them also seen in this project.
During interpolation, the new values generated will be placed on a straight line between
two original points. At the 5­fold cross validation the performance of the model became
extremely good at the predictions, but when the model was introduced to the uninterpo­
lated validation set, the performance dropped to an unacceptable level. This is because
the interpolated data makes patterns which the model use to make its predictions. Over­
fitting was also seen when optimizing the number of trees. If too many trees were used,
the performance of the model began to decrease slowly.
Another way over­fitting can be introduced, is if the random forest is trained with too many
splits. This is because the model becomes excessive complex and learns the training data
too well, which results in a model that cannot predict on any data sets different from the
training set.
6.4
Regulatory
Since there is no standard for making a classification model to predict SBP it is difficult
to know what the accuracy of the model must be to state that it is in compliance with the
standards. However, the standard can still be used to select or collect new data because
it states number of patients, age distribution, gender and most importantly the distribution
of the SBP values that should be compared with invasive SBP measurements.
6.5
Compare with other studies
The idea of predicting SBP based on vital signs or raw signals from the body is not new,
and in section 3 many projects and results were presented. Two of the projects that
ended up in a model that complies with the standard are based on pulse transit time. This
approach requires synchronization in the time between the two devices, which is not the
case in the WARD project making a direct comparison impossible.
The project with the best performance is ”Yuriy Kurylyak, Francesco Lamonaca, and
Domenico Grimaldi, 2013 A Neural Network based method for continuous blood pressure
estimation from a PPG signal” explained in section 3.0.1. In this project, all 60 seconds of
raw data from each minute were used and the model is a regression model so it would be
impossible to compare the performance of the model with the model made in this project.
But the model seems a good foundation for future work, it would be interesting to try to
use the same approach and modify it to only use 10 seconds from every minute and down
sample the signal to 75 HZ to make it possible for the model to be used on the WARD
PPG segment data.
6.6
Future work
6.6.1
Add personal features
As described in section 2.4.2, many factors seems to affect SBP. Having information about
sex, age, and BMI, which are highly correlated with SBP, could be useful features for the
ML model. Furthermore, information about if the patient is resting, walking, or lying in
bed would also be useful, since all vital signs will be affected by the activity of the patient.
Finally, many types of medications are known for affecting different systems, such as the
heart, respiration, or the vascular system. If the patients are receiving medications, it will
just be another unknown factor for the ML model. If all these extra features could be used
as input for the ML model, it would most likely affect the results in a positive direction.
72
Cuffless Blood Pressure Estimation Based on Continuous Vital Signs
==PAGE:81==
Unfortunately, these features are being used in an ongoing Ph.D. project in the WARD
research group, and therefore it was not possible to access these features in this project.
6.6.2
Collect more data
The amount of available data after balancing was very small. The problem is the low
amount of data from when the patients are in the critical SBP states. If a ML model
should be able to detect the SBP states, more data in the critical areas is required. Using
the cuff based BP monitor is a time consuming method, so more data could be collected
using inter arterial SBP to increase the sampling frequency of the SBP. Since all other vital
signs and segments are recorded once every minute, also one SBP every minute when
the patients are having either HIGH or lOW SBP could be recorded.
6.7
Having data from different data sets
As described in section 4.1 the data used in the final model comes from four different
WARD data sets. One data set with post observational surgery patients, one with obser­
vational COPD patients, one with high risk patients from a randomized clinical trial and
one with patients undergoing a major surgery. Since the patients are in different condi­
tions, it is most likely that there is a difference in for instance what a patient with a HIGH
SBP state in the different data sets would look like, because the patients have different
diseases and are on different medication and comes from different age distributions. The
good thing about having patients with different conditions and from different hospitals is
that it makes the model more generalized that would work for more types of patients, and
not only for a specific type.
6.7.1
Delay coursed by calibration and post processing
The 6 calibration values used when calculating the features will cause a delay of 3 hours
where both SBP, ECG and PPG must be measured. This is not very convenient in a
hospital setting where patients are monitored for a short period of time but for patients
that should be monitored for several days the delay is not as big a problem. The post
processing will add a delay of 3 ECG and PPG measurements corresponding to 3 minutes
in the beginning of the monitoring and a delay of 1 ECG and PPG measurement during the
following monitoring. This is because both an observation before and after the observation
of interest is needed.
6.7.2
Personal model
A way to improve the model would be to make personal models for every patient like it
was done in Ying Gu et. al. 2022 ­ ”Personalized Cuffless Blood Pressure Estimation
Based on Continuous Vital Signs for PostOperative Patients” described in section 3.0.4.
If a model was trained on each patient each model does not have to be able to account
for the variation from patient to patient. The problem with making personal models is that
it requires a lot of training data from each patient which would cause a large delay in the
measurements. In Ying Gu’s project, this delay is one day, since the personal model is
trained on data from one day.
Cuffless Blood Pressure Estimation Based on Continuous Vital Signs
73
==PAGE:82==
7
Conclusion
A model with a validation accuracy of 69.5 % and a test accuracy of 74.5% was made
in this project. This accuracy is at the moment not good enough to be used in a clinical
setting, but the results looks promising for future work. For future work more data is
required, especially in the HIGH and LOW end, but generally it is a challenge that the
data is not recorded at the same time, which results in a lot of useless data. For further
data collection it is crucial that the devices are connected at the same period of time.
In section 5.7 it is presented that two random forest models using 100 trees, and maximum
of 2000 splits, where one is trained on vital sign features and one is trained on segment
features, in a combination is the best model to solve the classification problem.
It was found that the features calculated from the vital sign data was good at predicting
LOW SBP and features calculated from the segment data was good at predicting HIGH
HIGH SBP.
The work with the available data is a solid foundation for future research within the field
of BP estimation, based on vital signs and segments.
74
Cuffless Blood Pressure Estimation Based on Continuous Vital Signs
==PAGE:83==
Bibliography
[1]
Carol Mattson Porth and Kathryn J. Gaspard. Essentials of Pathophysiology. Lisa
McAllister, 2019. ISBN: 978­1­4511­9080­9.
[2]
Home ­ WARD 24/7. URL: https://www.ward247.org/. (accessed: 04.01.2023).
[3]
Mikkel Elvekjaer et al. “Clinical impact of vital sign abnormalities in patients admitted
with acute exacerbation of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: an observational
study using continuous wireless monitoring”. In: Internal and Emergency Medicine
(2022), pp. 1–10.
[4]
Wearable Sensors­ ECG. URL: https://www.isansys.com. (accessed: 05.01.2023).
[5]
HOW DOES THE ECG or EKG HELP. URL: https://clubafib.com/article/how-does-
the-ecg-or-ekg-help-8. (accessed: 26.05.2023).
[6]
Jennifer Regan, Cinnamon VanPutte, and Andrew Russo. Seeley’s Essentials of
Anatomy and Physiology. McGraw­Hill Higher Education, 2019. ISBN: 978­1­260­
09286­8.
[7]
Jiapu Pan and Willis J. Tompkins. “A Real­Time QRS Detection Algorithm”. In: IEEE
Transactions on Biomedical Engineering BME­32.3 (1985), pp. 230–236. DOI: 10.
1109/TBME.1985.325532.
[8]
Zhang Feng. Measuring heart rate and blood oxygen levels for portable medical and
wearable devices. URL: https://embeddedcomputing.com/application/healthcare/
measuring-heart-rate-and-blood-oxygen-levels-for-portable-medical-and-wearable-
devices. (accessed: 12.06.2023).
[9]
Medinaz. Pulse oximeter: How it works and Interpretation II Pulse oximeter mech­
anism ­ YouTube. URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=N3MCvREORVA.
(accessed: 10.01.2023).
[10]
Circulatory System with the arrows representing the Blood Circulation. URL: https:
//www.researchgate.net/figure/Circulatory-System-with-the-arrows-representing-the-
Blood-Circulation-into-the-Body_fig1_221756719. (accessed: 29.05.2023).
[11]
Frédéric Bousefsaf. Homeostasis. URL: https : / / www . researchgate . net / figure /
Vasoconstriction-et-vasodilatation-des-vaisseaux-Les-barorecepteurs-mesurent-les_
fig4_324436906. (accessed: 02.06.2023).
[12]
Blood Pressure UK. Exercise, physical activity and your blood pressure. URL: https:
//www.bloodpressureuk.org/your-blood-pressure/how-to-lower-your-blood-pressure/
healthy-living/exercise-physical-activity/. (accessed: 30.05.2023).
[13]
Suzanne Oparil and Andrew P. Miller. “Gender and Blood Pressure”. In: The Journal
of Clinical Hypertension 7.5 (2005), pp. 300–309. DOI: https://doi-org.proxy.findit.
cvt.dk/10.1111/j.1524- 6175.2005.04087.x. eprint: https://onlinelibrary- wiley-
com.proxy.findit.cvt.dk/doi/pdf/10.1111/j.1524-6175.2005.04087.x. URL: https:
//onlinelibrary-wiley-com.proxy.findit.cvt.dk/doi/abs/10.1111/j.1524-6175.2005.
04087.x.
[14]
Francesco Landi et al. “Body mass index is strongly associated with hypertension:
Results from the longevity check­up 7+ study”. eng. In: Nutrients 10.12 (2018),
p. 1976. ISSN: 20726643. DOI: 10.3390/nu10121976.
[15]
NHS. Treatment High blood pressure (hypertension). URL: https://www.nhs.uk/
conditions/high-blood-pressure-hypertension/treatment/. (accessed: 30.05.2023).
[16]
OLCreate: HEAT NCD ET 1.0 Non­Communicable Diseases, Emergency Care and
Mental Health Module: 1. Cardiovascular Diseases. URL: https://www.open.edu/
Cuffless Blood Pressure Estimation Based on Continuous Vital Signs
75
==PAGE:84==
openlearncreate / mod / oucontent / view . php ? id = 287 & amp ; printable = 1 & extra =
thumbnailfigure_idm197. (accessed: 10.01.2023).
[17]
Amit Chauhan. Fully Explained Decision Tree Classification with Python. URL: https:
/ / pub . towardsai . net / fully - explained - decision - tree - classification - with - python -
d90d3bd16836. (accessed: 08.05.2023).
[18]
Decision Tree Classification Algorithm. URL: https://www.javatpoint.com/machine-
learning-decision-tree-classification-algorithm. (accessed: 08.05.2023).
[19]
MathWorks. fitctree. URL: https : / / se . mathworks . com / help / stats / fitctree . html.
(accessed: 30.05.2023).
[20]
Jocelyn D’Souza. A Trip to Random Forest… URL: https://medium.com/greyatom/
a-trip-to-random-forest-5c30d8250d6a. (accessed: 08.05.2023).
[21]
Kizito Nyuytiymbiy. Parameters and Hyperparameters in Machine Learning and
Deep Learning. URL: https://towardsdatascience.com/parameters-and-hyperparameters-
aa609601a9ac. (accessed: 29.05.2023).
[22]
Christina Ellis. Number of trees in random forest. URL: https://crunchingthedata.
com/number-of-trees-in-random-forests/. (accessed: 09.05.2023).
[23]
Wei Yi. How Decision Trees Split Nodes, from Loss Function Perspective. URL:
tps://towardsdatascience.com/how-decision-trees-split-nodes-from-loss-function-
perspective-60a2f2124b4e. (accessed: 09.06.2023).
[24]
Misclassification Costs. URL: https://www.ibm.com/docs/en/spss-modeler/saas?
topic=mining-misclassification-costs. (accessed: 29.05.2023).
[25]
Giorgos Myrianthous. Training vs Testing vs Validation Sets. URL: https://towardsdatascience.
com/training-vs-testing-vs-validation-sets-a44bed52a0e1. (accessed: 30.05.2023).
[26]
Rebecca Patro. Cross­Validation: K Fold vs Monte Carlo. URL: https://towardsdatascience.
com/cross-validation-k-fold-vs-monte-carlo-e54df2fc179b. (accessed: 01.06.2023).
[27]
Joydwip Mohajon. Confusion Matrix for Your Multi­Class Machine Learning Model.
URL: https://towardsdatascience.com/confusion-matrix-for-your-multi-class-machine-
learning-model-ff9aa3bf7826. (accessed: 01.06.2023).
[28]
Stephanie Glen. Absolute Error Mean Absolute Error (MAE). URL: https://www.
statisticshowto.com/absolute-error/. (accessed: 30.01.2023).
[29]
Stephanie Glen. Mean Error: Definition. URL: https://www.statisticshowto.com/
mean-error/. (accessed: 30.01.2023).
[30]
Monika Simjanoska et al. “Non­invasive blood pressure estimation from ECG using
machine learning techniques”. In: Sensors 18.4 (2018), p. 1160.
[31]
Stephanie Glen. RMSE: Root Mean Square Error. URL: https://www.statisticshowto.
com/probability-and-statistics/regression-analysis/rmse-root-mean-square-error/. (ac­
cessed: 30.01.2023).
[32]
Zakaria Jaadi. A Step­by­Step Explanation of Principal Component Analysis (PCA).
URL: https://builtin.com/data-science/step-step-explanation-principal-component-
analysis. (accessed: 26.05.2023).
[33]
What is Analysis of Variance (ANOVA)? URL: https://www.tibco.com/reference-
center/what-is-analysis-of-variance-anova. (accessed: 26.05.2023).
[34]
WILL KENTON. Analysis of Variance (ANOVA) Explanation, Formula, and Appli­
cations. URL: https : / / www . investopedia . com / terms / a / anova . asp. (accessed:
29.05.2023).
[35]
Samuele Mazzanti. “MRMR” Explained Exactly How You Wished Someone Ex­
plained to You. URL: https://towardsdatascience.com/mrmr-explained-exactly-how-
you-wished-someone-explained-to-you-9cf4ed27458b. (accessed: 26.05.2023).
[36]
DANSK STANDARD Ikke­invasive blodtryksmålere­Del 3: Klinisk undersøgelse med
kontinuerlig automatiseret måling Non­invasive sphygmomanometers­Part 3: Clini­
76
Cuffless Blood Pressure Estimation Based on Continuous Vital Signs
==PAGE:85==
cal investigation of continuous automated measurement type (ISO 81060­3:2022).
2023. URL: www.ds.dk.
[37]
Yuriy Kurylyak, Francesco Lamonaca, and Domenico Grimaldi. “A Neural Network­
based method for continuous blood pressure estimation from a PPG signal”. In:
2013 IEEE International instrumentation and measurement technology conference
(I2MTC). IEEE. 2013, pp. 280–283.
[38]
Kwangsub Song, Ku Young Chung, and Joon Hyuk Chang. “Cuffless Deep Learning­
Based Blood Pressure Estimation for Smart Wristwatches”. eng. In: Ieee Trans­
actions on Instrumentation and Measurement 69.7 (2020), pp. 4292–4302. ISSN:
15579662, 00189456. DOI: 10.1109/TIM.2019.2947103.
[39]
Ying Gu et al. “Personalized Cuffless Blood Pressure Estimation Based on Contin­
uous Vital Signs for Post­Operative Patients”. In: 44th Annual International Confer­
ence of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine & Biology Society. 2022.
[40]
Shrimanti Ghosh et al. “Continuous blood pressure prediction from pulse transit time
using ECG and PPG signals”. In: 2016 IEEE Healthcare Innovation Point­Of­Care
Technologies Conference (HI­POCT). IEEE. 2016, pp. 188–191.
[41]
Heather Ting Ma. “A Blood Pressure Monitoring Method for Stroke Management”.
In: BioMed Research International 2014 (2014). Ed. by Xiaoling Hu, p. 571623.
ISSN: 2314­6133. DOI: 10.1155/2014/571623. URL: https://doi.org/10.1155/2014/
571623.
[42]
Yash Khandelwal. Ensemble Stacking for Machine Learning and Deep Learning.
URL: https : / / www . analyticsvidhya . com / blog / 2021 / 08 / ensemble - stacking - for -
machine-learning-and-deep-learning/. (accessed: 30.01.2023).
[43]
Simi Susan Thomas et al. “BioWatch: A Noninvasive Wrist­Based Blood Pressure
Monitor That Incorporates Training Techniques for Posture and Subject Variability”.
eng. In: Ieee Journal of Biomedical and Health Informatics 20.5 (2016), pp. 1291–
1300. ISSN: 21682208, 21682194. DOI: 10.1109/JBHI.2015.2458779.
[44]
Mohamad Kachuee et al. “Cuff­less high­accuracy calibration­free blood pressure
estimation using pulse transit time”. In: 2015 IEEE international symposium on cir­
cuits and systems (ISCAS). IEEE. 2015, pp. 1006–1009.
[45]
Søren M. Rasmussen et al. “Forecasting of Continuous Vital Sign Using Multivari­
ate Auto­Regressive Models”. In: 2022 44th Annual International Conference of the
IEEE Engineering in Medicine Biology Society (EMBC). 2022, pp. 385–388. DOI:
10.1109/EMBC48229.2022.9871010.
[46]
Mikkel Elvekjær. WARD­COPD: Wireless Assessment of Respiratory and Circu­
latory Distress in Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease. URL: https : / / www .
ward247.org/projects/ward-medical/ward-copd/. (accessed: 30.05.2023).
[47]
Katja Kjær Grønbæk. WARD Medical Randomized Clinical Trial (RCT). URL: https:
//www.ward247.org/projects/ward-medical/ward-medical-rct/. (accessed: 30.05.2023).
[48]
Camilla Haahr­Raunkjær. WARD Surgical Randomized Clinical Trial (RCT). URL:
https://www.ward247.org/projects/ward-surgery-2/ward-rct/. (accessed: 30.05.2023).
[49]
Hooman Sedghamiz. Matlab Implementation of Pan Tompkins ECG QRS detector.
Mar. 2014. DOI: 10.13140/RG.2.2.14202.59841.
[50]
mean. URL: https://se.mathworks.com/help/matlab/ref/mean.html. (accessed:
08.05.2023).
[51]
std. URL: https : / / se . mathworks . com / help / matlab / ref / std . html. (accessed:
08.05.2023).
[52]
Diva Jain. Skew and Kurtosis: 2 Important Statistics terms you need to know in Data
Science. URL: https://codeburst.io/2-important-statistics-terms-you-need-to-know-
in-data-science-skewness-and-kurtosis-388fef94eeaa. (accessed: 15.05.2023).
Cuffless Blood Pressure Estimation Based on Continuous Vital Signs
77
==PAGE:86==
[53]
skewness. URL: https://se.mathworks.com/help/stats/skewness.html. (accessed:
10.05.2023).
[54]
Anthony B. Ciccone et al. “Reminder: RMSSD and SD1 are identical heart rate
variability metrics”. eng. In: Muscle and Nerve 56.4 (2017), pp. 674–678. ISSN:
10974598, 0148639x. DOI: 10.1002/mus.25573.
[55]
Marcos R. de Sousa et al. “Standard Deviation of normal interbeat intervals as a risk
marker in patients with left ventricular systolic dysfunction: A meta­analysis”. eng.
In: International Journal of Cardiology 141.3 (2010), pp. 313–316. ISSN: 18741754,
01675273. DOI: 10.1016/j.ijcard.2008.11.128.
[56]
Christina Saville and Chiara Dall’ora. “How long do nurses take to measure patients’
vital signs, and does it matter?” mul. In: (2021).
[57]
Hrvoje Smolic. How Much Data Is Needed For Machine Learning? URL: https://
graphite- note.com/how- much- data- is- needed- for- machine- learning. (accessed:
09.05.2023).
78
Cuffless Blood Pressure Estimation Based on Continuous Vital Signs
==PAGE:87==
A
Appendix
A.0.1
Contribution
Section
Contribution
Introduction
The work on introduction is initiated by Martin, whereafter Benjamin took
over and finalized the section. Both Martin and Benjamin made proof
reading on this section
Background
The work on the background section is initiated by Martin, whereafter
Benjamin took over and finalized the section. Both Martin and Benjamin made proof
reading on this section
State of the art analysis
The work on state of the art analysis is initiated by Benjamin, whereafter
Martin took over and finalized the section. Both Martin and Benjamin made proof
reading on this section
Methodology
The work on methodology is initiated by Benjamin, whereafter Martin took
over and finalized the section. Both Martin and Benjamin made proof
reading on this section
Results
The work on Results is initiated by Benjamin, whereafter Martin took
over and finalized the section. Both Martin and Benjamin made proof
reading on this section
Discussion
The work on discussion is initiated by Martin, whereafter Benjamin took
over and finalized the section. Both Martin and Benjamin made proof
reading on this section
Conclusion
The work on conclusion is initiated by Benjamin, whereafter Martin took
over and finalized the section. Both Martin and Benjamin made proof
reading on this section
Matlab data processing
The work on the data processing is equally distributed between
Martin and Benjamin. All code and functions are made in collaboration
Table A.1: Table of contribution
Cuffless Blood Pressure Estimation Based on Continuous Vital Signs
79
==PAGE:88==
A.0.2
Features
The 150 features used in this project can be seen in figure A.3, A.4, and A.5. Figure A.1
explains the number in the end of all the ECG segments features. Figure A.2 explains
the number in the end of all the PPG segments features. Feature 1­54 are the vital signs
features used in the model that predicts the LOW SBP. Feature 55­150 are the segments
features used in the model that predicts the HIGH SBP. All features named ”cali” are the
calibration features calculated from the first 6 observations.
Figure A.1: ECG segments number explanation
80
Cuffless Blood Pressure Estimation Based on Continuous Vital Signs
==PAGE:89==
Figure A.2: PPG segments number explanation
Cuffless Blood Pressure Estimation Based on Continuous Vital Signs
81
==PAGE:90==
Figure A.3: Feature 1 to 50
82
Cuffless Blood Pressure Estimation Based on Continuous Vital Signs
==PAGE:91==
Figure A.4: Feature 51 to 100
Cuffless Blood Pressure Estimation Based on Continuous Vital Signs
83
==PAGE:92==
Figure A.5: Feature 101 to 150
84
Cuffless Blood Pressure Estimation Based on Continuous Vital Signs
==PAGE:93==
A.0.3
Physiological signals boundaries mail
Figure A.6: Mail correspondence with Reseacher Ying Gu about physiological signals
boundaries
Cuffless Blood Pressure Estimation Based on Continuous Vital Signs
85
==PAGE:94==
A.0.4
Results from testing linear interpolation of data
In this appendix the results from test with different ways of interpolation have been tested.
Figure A.7 is where no interpolation is used, while figure A.8 is where linear interpolation
is applied between all SBP measurements. Figure A.9 interpolation has been used to
double the number og SBP measurements (156 SBP extra), and figure A.10 is where
interpolation has generated 20 extra SBP measurements.
Figure A.7: Results from test with no interpolation
Figure A.8: Result from Interpolation of SBP
Figure A.9: Result from Interpolation of 156 high SBP
86
Cuffless Blood Pressure Estimation Based on Continuous Vital Signs
==PAGE:95==
Figure A.10: Result from Interpolation of 20 high SBP
A.0.5
Results from testing different ways to define BP state
In this appendix the results from test of different ways to define the BP state are shown.
Figure A.11 is results from where the BP state is defined according to table 1.1, and
figure A.12 is where the boundaries are moved to increase the sample size in the HIGH
and LOW classes. Figure A.13 is where HIGH and LOW SBP have been combined into
one class called ABNORMAL which then is the class of interest. Figure A.14, A.15 and
A.16 shows results from where the model only has to distinguish between NORMAL/LOW,
NORMAL/HIGH or LOW/HIGH, respectively.
Figure A.11: Results from test where BP state is defined as in table 1.1
Cuffless Blood Pressure Estimation Based on Continuous Vital Signs
87
==PAGE:96==
Figure A.12: Result from test where boundaries are moved to increase the high and low
classes
Figure A.13: Result from test where only 2 prediction classes, abnormal and normal
Figure A.14: Result from test where the model only has to predict normal or low observa­
tions.
88
Cuffless Blood Pressure Estimation Based on Continuous Vital Signs
==PAGE:97==
Figure A.15: Result from test where the model only has to predict normal or high obser­
vations
Figure A.16: Result from test where the model only has to predict normal or low observa­
tions
A.0.6
Optimizing time before SBP in feature calculation
This appendix contains the results from tests where the time before SBP has been opti­
mized. The test with 21, 27, 28, 29, 30 and 35 minutes before SBP can be seen in figure
A.17,A.18, A.19, A.20, A.21 and A.22, respectively.
Figure A.17: Result from testing with features found in the interval 21 min before a SBP
measurement
Cuffless Blood Pressure Estimation Based on Continuous Vital Signs
89
==PAGE:98==
Figure A.18: Result from testing with features found in the interval 27 min before a SBP
measurement
Figure A.19: Result from testing with features found in the interval 28 min before a SBP
measurement
Figure A.20: Result from testing with features found in the interval 29 min before a SBP
measurement
90
Cuffless Blood Pressure Estimation Based on Continuous Vital Signs
==PAGE:99==
Figure A.21: Result from testing with features found in the interval 30 min before a SBP
measurement
Figure A.22: Result from testing with features found in the interval 35 min before a SBP
measurement
Figure A.23: Result from testing with features found in the interval 40 min before a SBP
measurement
A.0.7
Optimizing number of accepted NaN values in feature calculation
In this appendix the results from tests where the accepted number of NaN values are
shown. Figure A.24, A.25, A.26, A.27, A.28 shows the results with 0, 5, 10, 20 and 25
accepted NaN values, respectively.
Cuffless Blood Pressure Estimation Based on Continuous Vital Signs
91
==PAGE:100==
Figure A.24: Result from testing with 0 accepted NaN values
Figure A.25: Results from testing with 5 accepted NaN values
Figure A.26: Result from testing with 10 accepted NaN values
92
Cuffless Blood Pressure Estimation Based on Continuous Vital Signs
==PAGE:101==
Figure A.27: Result from testing with 20 accepted NaN values
Figure A.28: Result from testing with 25 accepted NaN values
A.0.8
PCA
This appendix shows all results where PCA has been used to select features. The tests
with 90%, 95%, 99%, 99,9%, 99,99%, 99,999% and 100% explained variance can be
found in figure A.29, A.30, A.31, A.32, A.33, A.34 and A.35, respectively
Figure A.29: PCA with 90% explained variance
Cuffless Blood Pressure Estimation Based on Continuous Vital Signs
93
==PAGE:102==
Figure A.30: PCA with 95% explained variance
Figure A.31: PCA with 99% explained variance
Figure A.32: PCA with 99.9% explained variance
94
Cuffless Blood Pressure Estimation Based on Continuous Vital Signs
==PAGE:103==
Figure A.33: PCA with 99.99% explained variance
Figure A.34: PCA with 99.999% explained variance
Figure A.35: PCA 100 % explained variance
A.0.9
ANOVA
This appendix shows all results where ANOVA has been used to select features. For
results with test of 50, 100, 140, 145 and all features, see figure A.36, A.37, A.38, A.39
and A.40, respectively
Cuffless Blood Pressure Estimation Based on Continuous Vital Signs
95
==PAGE:104==
Figure A.36: ANOVA top 50 features
Figure A.37: ANOVA top 100 features
Figure A.38: ANOVA top 140 features
96
Cuffless Blood Pressure Estimation Based on Continuous Vital Signs
==PAGE:105==
Figure A.39: ANOVA top 145 features
Figure A.40: ANOVA with all features
A.0.10
MRMR
In this appendix the results from test with different MRMR numbers of top features are
tested. For results from tests with 25, 50, 100, 140 and all features see figure A.41, A.42,
A.43, A.44 and A.45, respectively
Figure A.41: MRMR top 25 features
Cuffless Blood Pressure Estimation Based on Continuous Vital Signs
97
==PAGE:106==
Figure A.42: MRMR top 50 features
Figure A.43: MRMR top 100 features
Figure A.44: MRMR top 140 features
98
Cuffless Blood Pressure Estimation Based on Continuous Vital Signs
==PAGE:107==
Figure A.45: MRMR with all features
A.0.11
Number of trees
This appendix contains all results from tests where number of trees has been tuned. The
results with 30, 50, 100 and 200 trees can be found in figure A.46, A.47, A.48 and A.49,
respectively.
Figure A.46: 30 trees
Figure A.47: 50 trees
Cuffless Blood Pressure Estimation Based on Continuous Vital Signs
99
==PAGE:108==
Figure A.48: 100 trees
Figure A.49: 200 trees
A.0.12
Number of calibration values
This appendix contains all results from tests where number of calibration values have
been tuned. The results with 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6 and 7 calibration values can be found in figure
A.50, A.51, A.52, A.53, A.54, A.55 and A.56, respectively.
Figure A.50: Result from testing with 1 calibration value for each patient
100
Cuffless Blood Pressure Estimation Based on Continuous Vital Signs
==PAGE:109==
Figure A.51: Result from testing with 2 calibration value for each patient
Figure A.52: Result from testing with 3 calibration value for each patient
Figure A.53: Result from testing with 4 calibration value for each patient
Cuffless Blood Pressure Estimation Based on Continuous Vital Signs
101
==PAGE:110==
Figure A.54: Result from testing with 5 calibration value for each patient
Figure A.55: Result from testing with 6 calibration value for each patient
Figure A.56: Result from testing with 7 calibration value for each patient
A.0.13
Calibration / Non calibration
This appendix contains results from where it is tested if the calibration values improve the
results or not. Figure A.57 shows results from test with vital signs and segments, but no
calibration values used. Figure A.58 is from test where vital signs and calibration values
are used. Figure A.59 shows results from where the segments and their calibration values
are used, while figure A.60 shows the results where both the segments and the vital signs
are used, both with their calibration values.
102
Cuffless Blood Pressure Estimation Based on Continuous Vital Signs
==PAGE:111==
Figure A.57: Vital signs and segment, where no calibration values were included
Figure A.58: Test with only vital signs and their calibration values included
Figure A.59: Test with only segments and their calibration values included
Cuffless Blood Pressure Estimation Based on Continuous Vital Signs
103
==PAGE:112==
Figure A.60: Vital signs and segments, both with calibration values
A.0.14
Data distributions
This appendix shows results from test of different data distributions. Figure A.61 shows
the results where the training set was highly unbalanced, while figure A.62, figure A.63
and figure A.64 shpws the results from where the test set was balanced in the 3­class,
2­class and skew distribution, respectively.
Figure A.61: Unbalanced distribution
Figure A.62: 3 class distribution
104
Cuffless Blood Pressure Estimation Based on Continuous Vital Signs
==PAGE:113==
Figure A.63: 2 class distribution
Figure A.64: Skew distribution
A.0.15
Number of splits in random forest
In this appendix the results from test of different number of splits is gathered. Figure
A.65 shows the results from test with 250 splits, and figure A.66 is with 539 splits, which
corresponds to the number of rows in the training set. Figure A.67 and A.68 shows the
results from test with 1000 and 2000 splits, respectively.
Figure A.65: 250 splits
Cuffless Blood Pressure Estimation Based on Continuous Vital Signs
105
==PAGE:114==
Figure A.66: 539 splits
Figure A.67: 1000 splits
Figure A.68: 2000 splits
A.0.16
Misclassification cost
This appendix contains results from tests with the 4 different misclassification costs ap­
plied to the model.
106
Cuffless Blood Pressure Estimation Based on Continuous Vital Signs
==PAGE:115==
Figure A.69: No cost applied
Figure A.70: Cost on true high that has been classified as normal
Figure A.71: Cost on true low that has been classified as normal
Cuffless Blood Pressure Estimation Based on Continuous Vital Signs
107
==PAGE:116==
Figure A.72: Cost both on true high and true low that have been classified as normal
A.0.17
Selection of Machine leaning model
Figure A.73: Screenshot from Matlab Classification learner. Accuracy results from the
test set from testing all models
108
Cuffless Blood Pressure Estimation Based on Continuous Vital Signs
==PAGE:117==
A.0.18
WARD Main
Main script that gathers all functions used in this project. Running this script will generate
the results from the final model
1
%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
2
%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
3
%%%%%%%%%%%%
Combination Model
Main
%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
4
%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
5
%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
6
% Date: 13/05/2023
7
% Martin Riedel (s184032) and Benjamin Trasborg (s184038)
8
9
%% load segment data
10
% define ECG segment data paths
11
ecg_folder_Observational_Surgery = '/Users/benjamintrasborg/Documents/
ECG_segments_PostOperative/';
12
ecg_folder_Observational_COPD = '/Users/benjamintrasborg/Documents/
ECG_segments_COPD/';
13
ecg_folder_RCT_medical = '/Users/benjamintrasborg/Documents/RCT_medical/';
14
ecg_folder_RCT_surgery = '/Users/benjamintrasborg/Documents/RCT_surgery/';
15
16
% define PPG segment data paths
17
ppg_folder_Observational_Surgery = '/Users/benjamintrasborg/Documents/
PPG_segments_PostOperative/';
18
ppg_folder_Observational_COPD = '/Users/benjamintrasborg/Documents/
PPG_segments_COPD/';
19
ppg_folder_RCT_medical = '/Users/benjamintrasborg/Documents/PPG_medical/';
20
ppg_folder_RCT_surgery = '/Users/benjamintrasborg/Documents/PPG_surgery/';
21
22
% load and combine ECG and PPG segment data
23
segments_Observational_Surgery = Read_segment(ecg_folder_Observational_Surgery
,ppg_folder_Observational_Surgery);
24
segments_Observational_COPD = Read_segment(ecg_folder_Observational_COPD ,
ppg_folder_Observational_COPD);
25
segments_RCT_medical = Read_segment(ecg_folder_RCT_medical ,
ppg_folder_RCT_medical);
26
segments_RCT_surgery = Read_segment(ecg_folder_RCT_surgery ,
ppg_folder_RCT_surgery);
27
28
%% Load vital signs data
29
vital_RCT_medical = Read_data2('/Volumes/Department/Sund/Public/WARD/Datasets/
RCT_Medical/');
30
vital_RCT_surgery = Read_data2('/Volumes/Department/Sund/Public/WARD/Datasets/
RCT_Surgery/');
31
vital_Observational_Surgery = Read_data2('/Volumes/Department/Sund/Public/WARD
/Datasets/Observational_Surgery/');
32
vital_Observational_COPD = Read_data2('/Volumes/Department/Sund/Public/WARD/
Datasets/Observational_COPD/');
33
34
%remove empty cells
35
vital_Observational_Surgery=vital_Observational_Surgery(~cellfun(@isempty ,
vital_Observational_Surgery));
36
vital_Observational_COPD=vital_Observational_COPD(~cellfun(@isempty ,
vital_Observational_COPD));
37
vital_RCT_medical=vital_RCT_medical(~cellfun(@isempty ,vital_RCT_medical));
38
vital_RCT_surgery=vital_RCT_surgery(~cellfun(@isempty ,vital_RCT_surgery));
39
40
%% Interpolation of vital signs
41
%[vital_Observational_Surgery_lin_interpol] = Interpolation4(
vital_Observational_Surgery ',7);
42
%[vital_Observational_COPD_lin_interpol] = Interpolation4(
vital_Observational_COPD ',7);
Cuffless Blood Pressure Estimation Based on Continuous Vital Signs
109
==PAGE:118==
43
%[vital_RCT_medical_lin_interpol] = Interpolation4(vital_RCT_medical ',7);
44
%[vital_RCT_surgery_lin_interpol] = Interpolation4(vital_RCT_surgery ',7);
45
46
%% find BP state from vital sign data
47
vital_BP_State_RCT_medical=BPState4(vital_RCT_medical)';
48
vital_BP_State_RCT_surgery=BPState4(vital_RCT_surgery)';
49
vital_BP_State_Observational_Surgery=BPState4(vital_Observational_Surgery)';
50
vital_BP_State_Observational_COPD=BPState4(vital_Observational_COPD)';
51
52
%% combine the segments with the BP state and the other vital signs
53
segments_vital_combined_RCT_medical
= joinSegmentAndBPState(
vital_BP_State_RCT_medical ,segments_RCT_medical);
54
segments_vital_combined_RCT_surgery
= joinSegmentAndBPState(
vital_BP_State_RCT_surgery ,segments_RCT_surgery);
55
segments_vital_combined_Observational_Surgery
= joinSegmentAndBPState(
vital_BP_State_Observational_Surgery ,segments_PostOperative);
56
segments_vital_combined_Observational_COPD
= joinSegmentAndBPState(
vital_BP_State_Observational_COPD ,segments_COPD);
57
58
%% Remove outliers
59
segments_vital_combined_RCT_medical
=removeOutliers2(
segments_vital_combined_RCT_medical);
60
segments_vital_combined_RCT_surgery
=removeOutliers2(
segments_vital_combined_RCT_surgery);
61
segments_vital_combined_Observational_Surgery
=removeOutliers2(
segments_vital_combined_Observational_Surgery);
62
segments_vital_combined_Observational_COPD
=removeOutliers2(
segments_vital_combined_Observational_COPD);
63
64
%% Split data in test, validation and training set
65
%validation set with 10% of patients
66
validation_clean=cell(1,87);
67
validation_clean(1:21)=segments_vital_combined_RCT_surgery(1:21);
68
validation_clean(22:36)=segments_vital_combined_Observational_COPD(1:15);
69
validation_clean(37:76)=segments_vital_combined_Observational_Surgery(1:40);
70
validation_clean(77:87)=segments_vital_combined_RCT_medical(1:11);
71
72
% Test set with 10% of patients
73
test_clean=cell(1,87);
74
test_clean(1:21)=segments_vital_combined_RCT_surgery(22:42);
75
test_clean(22:36)=segments_vital_combined_Observational_COPD(16:30);
76
test_clean(37:76)=segments_vital_combined_Observational_Surgery(41:80);
77
test_clean(77:87)=segments_vital_combined_RCT_medical(12:22);
78
79
% Training set with 80% of patients
80
training=cell(1,703);
81
training(1:169)=segments_vital_combined_RCT_surgery(43:end);
82
training(170:289)=segments_vital_combined_Observational_COPD(31:end);
83
training(290:609)=segments_vital_combined_Observational_Surgery(82:end);
84
training(610:700)=segments_vital_combined_RCT_medical(23:end);
85
86
%% find features for vital and segments
87
% define number of accepted NAN, time berofre SBP, and number of
88
% calibration values
89
nrNaN=20;
90
time_before_SPB=29;
91
number_cali=6;
92
93
% Use function to calculate features
94
features_Personal_segment_plus_vital_training_1=
Find_features_Personal_segment_plus_vital2(training(1:50),nrNaN,
time_before_SPB ,number_cali);
110
Cuffless Blood Pressure Estimation Based on Continuous Vital Signs
==PAGE:119==
95
features_Personal_segment_plus_vital_training_2=
Find_features_Personal_segment_plus_vital2(training(51:100),nrNaN,
time_before_SPB ,number_cali);
96
features_Personal_segment_plus_vital_training_3=
Find_features_Personal_segment_plus_vital2(training(101:150),nrNaN,
time_before_SPB ,number_cali);
97
features_Personal_segment_plus_vital_training_4=
Find_features_Personal_segment_plus_vital2(training(151:200),nrNaN,
time_before_SPB ,number_cali);
98
features_Personal_segment_plus_vital_training_5=
Find_features_Personal_segment_plus_vital2(training(201:250),nrNaN,
time_before_SPB ,number_cali);
99
features_Personal_segment_plus_vital_training_6=
Find_features_Personal_segment_plus_vital2(training(251:300),nrNaN,
time_before_SPB ,number_cali);
100
features_Personal_segment_plus_vital_training_7=
Find_features_Personal_segment_plus_vital2(training(301:350),nrNaN,
time_before_SPB ,number_cali);
101
features_Personal_segment_plus_vital_training_8=
Find_features_Personal_segment_plus_vital2(training(351:400),nrNaN,
time_before_SPB ,number_cali);
102
features_Personal_segment_plus_vital_training_9=
Find_features_Personal_segment_plus_vital2(training(401:450),nrNaN,
time_before_SPB ,number_cali);
103
features_Personal_segment_plus_vital_training_10=
Find_features_Personal_segment_plus_vital2(training(451:500),nrNaN,
time_before_SPB ,number_cali);
104
features_Personal_segment_plus_vital_training_11=
Find_features_Personal_segment_plus_vital2(training(501:550),nrNaN,
time_before_SPB ,number_cali);
105
features_Personal_segment_plus_vital_training_12=
Find_features_Personal_segment_plus_vital2(training(551:600),nrNaN,
time_before_SPB ,number_cali);
106
features_Personal_segment_plus_vital_training_13=
Find_features_Personal_segment_plus_vital2(training(601:650),nrNaN,
time_before_SPB ,number_cali);
107
features_Personal_segment_plus_vital_training_14=
Find_features_Personal_segment_plus_vital2(training(651:end),nrNaN,
time_before_SPB ,number_cali);
108
109
% combine all features in one table
110
features_training_interpol=[features_Personal_segment_plus_vital_training_1
;...
111
features_Personal_segment_plus_vital_training_2;...
112
features_Personal_segment_plus_vital_training_3;...
113
features_Personal_segment_plus_vital_training_4;...
114
features_Personal_segment_plus_vital_training_5;...
115
features_Personal_segment_plus_vital_training_6;...
116
features_Personal_segment_plus_vital_training_7;...
117
features_Personal_segment_plus_vital_training_8;...
118
features_Personal_segment_plus_vital_training_9;...
119
features_Personal_segment_plus_vital_training_10;...
120
features_Personal_segment_plus_vital_training_11;...
121
features_Personal_segment_plus_vital_training_12;...
122
features_Personal_segment_plus_vital_training_13;...
123
features_Personal_segment_plus_vital_training_14];
124
125
% clear all the temporary feature tables
126
clear('features_Personal_segment_plus_vital_training_1',...
127
'features_Personal_segment_plus_vital_training_2',...
128
'features_Personal_segment_plus_vital_training_3',...
129
'features_Personal_segment_plus_vital_training_4',...
Cuffless Blood Pressure Estimation Based on Continuous Vital Signs
111
==PAGE:120==
130
'features_Personal_segment_plus_vital_training_5',...
131
'features_Personal_segment_plus_vital_training_6',...
132
'features_Personal_segment_plus_vital_training_7',...
133
'features_Personal_segment_plus_vital_training_8',...
134
'features_Personal_segment_plus_vital_training_9',...
135
'features_Personal_segment_plus_vital_training_10',...
136
'features_Personal_segment_plus_vital_training_11',...
137
'features_Personal_segment_plus_vital_training_12',...
138
'features_Personal_segment_plus_vital_training_13',...
139
'features_Personal_segment_plus_vital_training_14');
140
141
% find features for validation set
142
features_validation=Find_features_Personal_segment_plus_vital2(
validation_clean ,nrNaN,time_before_SPB ,number_cali);
143
144
% find features for test set
145
features_test=Find_features_Personal_segment_plus_vital2(test_clean ,nrNaN,
time_before_SPB ,number_cali);
146
147
% make new column with simple SBP state
148
[features_training_newBP_clean] = BPStatesimple(features_training_interpol);
149
[features_validation_newBP] = BPStatesimple(features_validation);
150
[features_test_newBP] = BPStatesimple(features_test);
151
152
% Add Binary class
153
test_binary=Table_binary_class2(features_test_newBP);
154
validation_binary=Table_binary_class2(features_validation_newBP);
155
training_binay=Table_binary_class2(features_training_newBP_clean);
156
157
%% Ballance data
158
[ballanced_3_class_training] = Table_ballanced(training_binay ,3); % 33/33/33
HIGH/LOW/NORMAL
159
160
%% Make the two models using the classificaiton learner
161
% HIGG-model: a random forest trained on 100 trees with maximum of 2000 splits
with all segments features
162
% select segmtent feaures
163
training_segments=ballanced_3_class_training(:,60:63);
164
%train vital sign model
165
[segments_model , validationAccuracy_segments] = trainClassifier_segments(
training_segments);
166
167
% LOW-model: a random forest trained on 100 trees with maximum of 2000 splits
with all vital sign features
168
% select vital sign feaures
169
training_vital=[ballanced_3_class_training(:,2:25) ballanced_3_class_training
(:,28:57)];
170
% train vital sign model
171
[Vital_model , validationAccuracy_vital] = trainClassifier_vital(training_vital
)
172
173
%% Combination model
174
% define the test data
175
test_data=test_binary;
176
177
% make prediction using classification model
178
yfit_Vital=Vital_model.predictFcn(test_data);
179
yfit_Segments=segments_model.predictFcn(test_data);
180
181
% empty array for combined predictions
182
combined_pred=zeros(size(yfit_Segments));
183
112
Cuffless Blood Pressure Estimation Based on Continuous Vital Signs
==PAGE:121==
184
% take the HIGh prediction from segments model
185
idx_HIGH=find(yfit_Segments=="HIGH");
186
187
% take the LOW prediction from vital model
188
idx_LOW=find(yfit_Vital=="LOW");
189
190
idx_high_plus_low=[idx_HIGH;idx_LOW];
191
idx_Normal=1:length(yfit_Segments);
192
193
% remove high and low index
194
idx_Normal(idx_high_plus_low)=[];
195
196
combined_pred(idx_LOW)=-1;
197
combined_pred(idx_HIGH)=1;
198
combined_pred(idx_Normal)=0;
199
200
% combine prediction with true values
201
test_data_yfit=[test_data table(combined_pred)
table(yfit_Vital)
table(
yfit_Segments) ];
202
203
%% post processing and confusion matrix
204
combi_and_post(Vital_model ,segments_model ,test_data);
Matlab/Ward_combined_model_MAIN.m
Cuffless Blood Pressure Estimation Based on Continuous Vital Signs
113
==PAGE:122==
A.0.19
Load vital sign data
This function is used to load the vital signs of each patient. The output format will be a
cell array, and is used by the ”Ward_combined_model_MAIN.m”
1
function [patient] = Read_data2(folder)
2
% This function takes a folder path as input and outputs a cell array with
3
% data from one patient in each cell
4
% Date: 13/02/2023
5
% Martin Riedel (s184032) and Benjamin Trasborg (s184038)
6
7
% Get a list of all files in the ECG folder
8
files = dir((folder));
9
10
% Initialize an empty cell array to store the file names
11
file_names = cell(length(files), 1);
12
13
% Loop through each file and store its name in the array
14
for i = 1:length(files)
15
[~, name, ext] = fileparts(files(i).name);
16
file_names{i} = [name, ext];
17
file_names{i} = strrep(file_names{i}, 'ECG_segments', '')
18
end
19
20
% make cell array to store data in
21
patient = cell(length(file_names),1);
22
23
% make a loading bar
24
h=waitbar(0,"processing");
25
26
% load data from all patients
27
for i=1:length(file_names)
28
waitbar(i/length(file_names),h);
29
% combine path and file name
30
path=strcat(folder ,file_names{i},'/vital_signs.csv');
31
% test if the file exsist
32
if ~exist(path)
33
warning('Files do not exist for patient %d', i)
34
continue
35
end
36
% load data
37
data=readtable(path);
38
% make column
with patient ID
39
ECG_patientID = repmat(file_names{i},height(data), 1);
40
% combine data and ID
41
t = [table(ECG_patientID) data];
42
patient{i}=t;
43
end
44
close(h);
45
end
Matlab/Read_data2.m
114
Cuffless Blood Pressure Estimation Based on Continuous Vital Signs
==PAGE:123==
A.0.20
Load segment data
This function is used to load the raw ECG and PPG signals of each patient. The output
format will be a cell array, and is used by the ”Ward_combined_model_MAIN.m”
1
function [t1] = Read_segment(ecg_folder ,ppg_folder)
2
%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
3
% Input:
4
%
ecg_folder: path to the folder with the CSV-files with the ecg segment
data
5
%
ppg_folder: path to the folder with the CSV-files with the ppg segment
data
6
% Output:
7
%
t1: cell array with segments from one patient in each cell
8
%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
9
% date:24-02-2023
10
% Auther: Martin Riedel (s184032) and Benjamin Trasborg (s184038)
11
%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
12
% Get a list of all files in the ECG folder
13
ecg_files = dir((ecg_folder));
14
ppg_files =dir((ppg_folder));
15
16
% Initialize an empty cell array to store the file names
17
ECG_file_names = cell(length(ecg_files), 1);
18
PPG_file_names = cell(length(ppg_files), 1);
19
20
% Loop through each file and store its name in the array
21
for i = 1:length(ecg_files)
22
[~, name, ext] = fileparts(ecg_files(i).name);
23
ECG_file_names{i} = [name, ext];
24
ECG_file_names{i} = strrep(ECG_file_names{i}, 'ECG_segments', '')
25
end
26
27
% Loop through each file and store its name in the array
28
for i = 1:length(ppg_files)
29
[~, name, ext] = fileparts(ppg_files(i).name);
30
PPG_file_names{i} = [name, ext];
31
PPG_file_names{i} = strrep(PPG_file_names{i}, 'PPG_segments', '')
32
end
33
34
% Display the array of file names
35
disp(ECG_file_names);
36
disp(PPG_file_names);
37
38
% Find the strings that are equal in both cell arrays
39
common_strings = {};
40
for i = 1:length(ECG_file_names)
41
for j = 1:length(PPG_file_names)
42
if strcmp(ECG_file_names{i}, PPG_file_names{j})
43
common_strings = [common_strings , ECG_file_names{i}];
44
end
45
end
46
end
47
48
% make empty cell array
49
t1 = cell( length(common_strings),1);
50
% make status bar
51
h=waitbar(0,"processing");
52
% loop through all files
53
for i=1:length(common_strings)
54
55
% Read ECG and PPG data
56
ECG_path=strcat(ecg_folder ,'ECG_segments',common_strings{i});
Cuffless Blood Pressure Estimation Based on Continuous Vital Signs
115
==PAGE:124==
57
PPG_path=strcat(ppg_folder ,'PPG_segments',common_strings{i});
58
% test is the file exsist
59
if ~exist(ECG_path , 'file') || ~exist(PPG_path , 'file')
60
warning('Files do not exist for patient %d', i)
61
continue
62
end
63
% load data
64
PPG_patient=readtable(PPG_path);
65
ECG_patient=readtable(ECG_path);
66
67
% Process ECG data
68
ECG_names = ECG_patient{:,2};
69
ECG_names = strrep(strrep(strrep(ECG_names , '.', ''), '[', ''), ']', '');
70
if iscell(ECG_names)
71
ECG_data = cellfun(@(x) str2double(strsplit(x)), ECG_names , '
UniformOutput', false);
72
else
73
continue
74
end
75
% make the ECG data 750 data points
76
ECG_data = cellfun(@(x) x(1:min(length(x), 750)), ECG_data , 'UniformOutput
', false);
77
ECG_data = cellfun(@(x) padarray(x, [0 750-length(x)], 'post'), ECG_data ,
'UniformOutput', false);
78
ECG_data = cell2mat(ECG_data);
79
% add ECG data to table
80
ECG_tab = table(ECG_patient{:,1}, ECG_data);
81
82
% Process PPG data
83
PPG_names = PPG_patient{:,2};
84
PPG_names = strrep(strrep(strrep(PPG_names , '.', ''), '[', ''), ']', '');
85
if iscell(PPG_names)
86
PPG_data = cellfun(@(x) str2double(strsplit(x)), PPG_names , 'UniformOutput
', false);
87
else
88
continue
89
end
90
% make the PPG data 750 data points
91
PPG_data = cellfun(@(x) x(1:min(length(x), 750)), PPG_data , 'UniformOutput
', false);
92
PPG_data = cellfun(@(x) padarray(x, [0 750-length(x)], 'post'), PPG_data ,
'UniformOutput', false);
93
PPG_data = cell2mat(PPG_data);
94
% add the PPG data to the table
95
PPG_tab = table(PPG_patient{:,1}, PPG_data);
96
97
% test if there are missing values in the time column
98
if sum(ismissing(ECG_tab.Var1))>0
99
continue
100
end
101
if sum(ismissing(PPG_tab.Var1))>0
102
continue
103
end
104
% Combine ECG and PPG data
105
Combined_tab = join(ECG_tab , PPG_tab , 'Keys', 'Var1');
106
107
% Add ECG patient ID
108
%ECG_patientID = ones(height(ECG_patient), 1).*i;
109
ECG_patientID = repmat(common_strings{i},height(ECG_patient), 1);
110
t = [table(ECG_patientID) Combined_tab];
111
t1{i}=t;
112
end
116
Cuffless Blood Pressure Estimation Based on Continuous Vital Signs
==PAGE:125==
113
end
Matlab/Read_segment.m
Cuffless Blood Pressure Estimation Based on Continuous Vital Signs
117
==PAGE:126==
A.0.21
Remove Outliers
This function is used to remove outliers from the data. The output format will be a cell
array, and is used by the ”Ward_combined_model_MAIN.m”
1
function [patients1] = removeOutliers2(patients)
2
%This function takes all the patients as input. Outliers are then removed
3
%using the thresholds defined below.
4
5
%Authors: Martin Riedel s184032 and Benjamin Trasborg (s184038)
6
% Date: 10.2.2023
7
8
%Define thresholds for when an observation is considered as an outlier
9
SBP_upper=300;SBP_lower=0;PR_upper=400;
10
PR_lower=0;HR_upper=400;HR_lower=0;RR_upper=160;
11
RR_lower=0;O2_upper=100;O2_lower=20;
12
h=waitbar(0,"processing");
13
14
%Loop for removing outliers in the SBP Data
15
for ii=1:length(patients)
16
waitbar(ii/length(patients),h);
17
for jj=1:length(patients{1,ii}.SystolicBloodPressure)
18
if patients{1,ii}.SystolicBloodPressure(jj) >SBP_upper || ...
19
patients{1,ii}.SystolicBloodPressure(jj) <SBP_lower
20
patients{1,ii}.SystolicBloodPressure(jj)=NaN;
21
end
22
23
if patients{1,ii}.PulseRate(jj) >PR_upper || ...
24
patients{1,ii}.PulseRate(jj) <PR_lower
25
patients{1,ii}.PulseRate(jj)=NaN;
26
end
27
28
if patients{1,ii}.HeartRate(jj) >HR_upper || ...
29
patients{1,ii}.HeartRate(jj) <HR_lower
30
patients{1,ii}.HeartRate(jj)=NaN;
31
end
32
33
if patients{1,ii}.RespirationRate(jj) >RR_upper || ...
34
patients{1,ii}.RespirationRate(jj) <RR_lower
35
patients{1,ii}.RespirationRate(jj)=NaN;
36
end
37
38
if patients{1,ii}.SpO2(jj) >O2_upper || ...
39
patients{1,ii}.SpO2(jj) <O2_lower
40
patients{1,ii}.SpO2(jj)=NaN;
41
end
42
end
43
%Patients1 is the new tabel containing the filtered data
44
patients1=patients;
45
end
46
close(h);
Matlab/removeOutliers2.m
118
Cuffless Blood Pressure Estimation Based on Continuous Vital Signs
==PAGE:127==
A.0.22
Find SBP state
This function is used to calculate the SBP state for each SBP measurement. The output
format will be a cell array, and is used by the ”Ward_combined_model_MAIN.m”
SBP state according to table 1.1
1
function [p2]=BPState4(patients)
2
% This function caluculates the SBP State
3
% Input:
4
%
patients=cell array with patient data
5
% Output
6
%
p2 = cell array with patient data plus new collumn with SBP state
7
%
%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
8
%Authors: Martin Riedel s184032 and Benjamin Trasborg (s184038)
9
% date: 02-03-2023
10
%
%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
11
% Define time limits for night time
12
nightStart = datetime('22:00:00', 'InputFormat', 'HH:mm:ss');
13
nightEnd = datetime('10:00:00', 'InputFormat', 'HH:mm:ss');
14
nightStart = timeofday(nightStart);
15
nightEnd = timeofday(nightEnd);
16
17
h=waitbar(0,"processing");
18
% Loop through all the patients
19
for i=1:length(patients)
20
waitbar(i/length(patients),h);
21
% Pick patient number i
22
p = patients{i};
23
if isempty(p) % continue loop if there are no patient data
24
continue
25
end
26
% Preallocate memory for BPS values
27
BPSValues = strings(size(p.SystolicBloodPressure));
28
29
% Find SBP values that meet certain criteria using logical indexing
30
lowDay = round(p.SystolicBloodPressure , 5, "significant") < round(91.00 ,5, "
significant") & isbetween(timeofday(p.Timestamp), nightEnd , nightStart);
31
lowNight = round(p.SystolicBloodPressure ,5, "significant") < round(91.00 ,5,
"significant") & ~isbetween(timeofday(p.Timestamp), nightEnd , nightStart);
32
highDay = round(p.SystolicBloodPressure ,5, "significant") >= round(180.00 ,5,
"significant") & isbetween(timeofday(p.Timestamp), nightEnd , nightStart);
33
highNight = round(p.SystolicBloodPressure ,5, "significant") >= round(180.00
,5, "significant") & ~isbetween(timeofday(p.Timestamp), nightEnd ,
nightStart);
34
35
% make all NORMAL
36
BPSValues(:,:)='NORMAL';
37
% make all NaN SBP empty
38
BPSValues(isnan(p.SystolicBloodPressure))='';
39
40
%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%% LOW Day (2*BP < 91)
%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
41
% time point where the BP is low
42
times_lowDay=datetime(p.Timestamp(lowDay));
43
% where the BP is low shiftet one place
44
times1_lowDay=['1800-01-01 00:00:00';times_lowDay(1:end-1)];
45
% find indexes where the time diffrence is less than 30 minutes
46
if ~isempty(times_lowDay(minutes((times_lowDay -times1_lowDay))<31))
Cuffless Blood Pressure Estimation Based on Continuous Vital Signs
119
==PAGE:128==
47
idx_lowDay=ismember(p.Timestamp ,times_lowDay(minutes((times_lowDay -
times1_lowDay))<31),'row');
48
% set the BP state to LOW
49
%new_idx_lowDay=idx_lowDay(p.SystolicBloodPressure((idx_lowDay -1))<91);
50
BPSValues(idx_lowDay)="LOW";
51
end
52
53
%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%% LOW Night (2*BP < 91)
%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
54
% time point where the BP is low
55
times_lowNight=datetime(p.Timestamp(lowNight));
56
% where the BP is low shiftet one place
57
times1_lowNight=['1800-01-01 00:00:00';times_lowNight(1:end-1)];
58
59
if ~isempty(times_lowNight(minutes((times_lowNight -times1_lowNight))<61))
60
% find indexes where the time diffrence is less than 60 minutes
61
idx_lowNight=ismember(p.Timestamp ,times_lowNight(minutes((times_lowNight -
times1_lowNight))<61),'row');
62
% set the BP state to LOW
63
BPSValues(idx_lowNight)="LOW";
64
end
65
66
%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%% High Day (2*BP > 180)
%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
67
% time point where the BP is low
68
times_highDay=datetime(p.Timestamp(highDay));
69
% where the BP is high shiftet one place
70
times1_highDay=['1800-01-01 00:00:00';times_highDay(1:end-1)];
71
% find indexes where the time diffrence is less than 30 minutes
72
if ~isempty(times_highDay(minutes((times_highDay -times1_highDay))<31))
73
idx_highDay=ismember(p.Timestamp ,times_highDay(minutes((times_highDay -
times1_highDay))<31),'row');
74
% set the BP state to high
75
BPSValues(idx_highDay)="HIGH";
76
end
77
78
%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%% High Night (2*BP < 91)
%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
79
% time point where the BP is high
80
times_highNight=datetime(p.Timestamp(highNight));
81
% where the BP is high shiftet one place
82
times1_highNight=['1800-01-01 00:00:00';times_highNight(1:end-1)];
83
if ~isempty(times_highNight(minutes((times_highNight -times1_highNight))<61))
84
% find indexes where the time diffrence is less than 30 minutes
85
idx_highNight=ismember(p.Timestamp ,times_highNight(minutes((times_highNight -
times1_highNight))<61),'row');
86
% set the BP state to high
87
BPSValues(idx_highNight)="HIGH";
88
end
89
%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%% LOW (BP < 70)
%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
90
BPSValues(p.SystolicBloodPressure <70)="LOW";
91
92
%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%% HIGH (BP > 220)
%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
93
BPSValues(p.SystolicBloodPressure >220)="HIGH";
94
% add results to a cell array
95
p2{i} = addvars(p, BPSValues , 'NewVariableNames', 'BPS_State1');
96
end
97
close(h);
98
end
120
Cuffless Blood Pressure Estimation Based on Continuous Vital Signs
==PAGE:129==
Matlab/BPState4.m
SBP state simple
Matlab function to calculate simple SBP state.
1
function [features_Personal_segment_plus_vital_training_newBP_interpol] =
BPStatesimple(features_Personal_segment_plus_vital_training_interpol)
2
% this function find the BP state to ballance the data 33/33/33
3
%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
4
% input:
5
%
features_Personal_segment_plus_vital_training_interpol = patient data
6
%
in a table
7
% Output:
8
%
features_Personal_segment_plus_vital_training_newBP_interpol = input
9
%
table added a new column "HIGHNORMAL" with the SBP state
10
%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
11
%Authors: Martin Riedel s184032 and Benjamin Trasborg (s184038)
12
% Date: 07-05-2023
13
%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
14
HIGHNORMAL=features_Personal_segment_plus_vital_training_interpol.systolicBP;
% make array with SBP values
15
for ii=1:length(HIGHNORMAL) % loop through all SBP values
16
if HIGHNORMAL(ii)<117 % If the SBP are under 117 mmHg it is set to -1 (LOW
)
17
HIGHNORMAL(ii)=-1;
18
elseif HIGHNORMAL(ii)>136 % If the SBP are over 136 mmHg it is set to 1 (
HIGH)
19
HIGHNORMAL(ii)=1;
20
else
% else it is set to 0 (NORMAL)
21
HIGHNORMAL(ii)=0;
22
end
23
end
24
HIGHNORMAL=table(HIGHNORMAL); % put results in a table
25
% Add SBP state table to input table
26
features_Personal_segment_plus_vital_training_newBP_interpol=[
features_Personal_segment_plus_vital_training_interpol HIGHNORMAL];
Matlab/BPStatesimple.m
Cuffless Blood Pressure Estimation Based on Continuous Vital Signs
121
==PAGE:130==
SBP state 2 class
Matlab function to calculate NORMAL/ABNORMAL SBP state
1
function [T_2Classes] = Table_binary_class2(tabelMean)
2
%This function takes the tabel with mean values as input, and returns a new
3
%table wher the "LOW" and "HIGH" blood pressure have been combined into 1
4
%called "ABNORMAL", which means we now only have 2 classes to distinguish
5
%between , the NORMAL and the ABNORMAL.
6
% Author: Benjamin Trasborg (s184038) and Martin (s184032)
7
% Date: 17-2-2023
8
9
% put BP state data in a array
10
BPState_2_class=tabelMean.BPState;
11
12
% make all HIGH and LOW values ABNORMAL
13
BPState_2_class(find(BPState_2_class(:,1)~="NORMAL")) ="ABNORMAL";
14
15
% make a table
16
BPState_2_class=table(BPState_2_class);
17
18
% add the new column to the exsisting data
19
T_2Classes=[tabelMean ,BPState_2_class];
20
end
Matlab/Table_binary_class2.m
122
Cuffless Blood Pressure Estimation Based on Continuous Vital Signs
==PAGE:131==
A.0.23
Interpolation
Matlab function to make linear interpolation of data, and is used by the ”Ward_combined_model_MAIN.m”
1
function [patients_interpoleated] = Interpolation4(patients_filtered ,Column)
2
% This Function takes the cell array with all the patient data as input and
outputs a cell
3
% array where the data has been linear interpolated
4
% Author: Benjamin Trasborg s184038 and Martin (s184032)
5
% Date: 17-02-2023
6
% make process bar
7
h=waitbar(0,"processing");
8
% loop through all the patients
9
for patient_i=1:length(patients_filtered)
10
waitbar(patient_i/length(patients_filtered),h);
11
%define patient i as p
12
p=patients_filtered{1,patient_i};
13
%define p as the first 6 features from patient_filtered
14
p=p(:,1:7);
15
% make a variable containing the timestamp from patient i
16
time1=p(:,2).Timestamp;
17
% make a variable containing the SBP values from patient i
18
SBP=p{:,Column};
19
% find the index og all non Nan SBP values
20
idxSBP=find(~isnan(SBP));
21
% enter loop if there are more than 2 SBP measurements for the patient
22
% i
23
if length(idxSBP)>2
24
% make a variable that contains the time in minutes between two SBP
25
% measurements
26
timeBetween2data=idxSBP(2:end)-idxSBP(1:end-1);
27
% make an array with all the indexes that where there are more than
28
% 61 minutes between two SBP measuremtns
29
timetooLong=find(timeBetween2data >61);
30
% make linear interpolation on all the SBP values that are less
31
% then 61 minutes apart
32
vq = interp1(time1(idxSBP),SBP(idxSBP),time1,'linear');
33
time1idx=(1:length(time1));
34
SBP(time1idx)=vq;
35
% check if there are any SBP measuremtens that are more than 61 min
36
% apart
37
if ~isempty(timetooLong)
38
% loop through all the measuremtens that are more than 61 min
39
% apart from 2 to end-1
40
for i = 1:length(timetooLong)
41
SBP(idxSBP(timetooLong(i)):idxSBP(timetooLong(i)+1))=nan;
42
end
43
end
44
patients_filtered{1,patient_i}.(Column)=SBP;
45
%patients_filtered{1,patient_i}.Timestamp=patients_filtered{1,
patient_i}.Timestamp+minutes(2);
46
end
47
end
48
patients_interpoleated=patients_filtered;
49
close(h)
50
end
Matlab/Interpolation4.m
Cuffless Blood Pressure Estimation Based on Continuous Vital Signs
123
==PAGE:132==
A.0.24
Join WARD Segments and Vital Signs
Matlab function to join WARD Segments and Vital Signs.
1
function [segments_combined]=joinSegmentAndBPState(segments_BP_State ,
finistable)
2
% This Function join the segnemt data and the vital sign data based on the
3
% Timestamp and Paitent ID
4
%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
5
% Inputs:
6
%
segments_BP_State = Segment data
7
%
finistable
= vital sign data
8
%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
9
% Author: Benjamin Trasborg s184038
10
% date 01-05-2023
11
% counter of number of joined rows
12
count=0;
13
% loop through all segment data patients
14
for i = 1:length(segments_BP_State)
15
% skip patient if there are no segment data
16
if isempty(segments_BP_State{i,1})
17
continue
18
end
19
% loop through all vital sign data
20
for ii =1:length(finistable)
21
% skip patient if there are no segment data
22
if isempty(finistable{ii,1})
23
continue
24
end
25
% if Patient ID is the same in Seegmetn data and vital sign data
26
if strcmp(segments_BP_State{i,1}(1,1).ECG_patientID ,finistable{ii
,1}(1,1).ECG_patientID)
27
% increase counter by 1
28
count=count+1;
29
% rename time column in vital sign data
30
renamed_seg=renamevars(finistable{ii,1}, 'Var1', 'Timestamp');
31
% join the data based on patient ID and Timestamp
32
joined_segments=join(segments_BP_State{i,1},renamed_seg , 'Keys', {
'Timestamp','ECG_patientID'});
33
% add data to a cell array
34
segments_combined{count}=joined_segments;
35
end
36
end
37
end
38
end
Matlab/joinSegmentAndBPState.m
124
Cuffless Blood Pressure Estimation Based on Continuous Vital Signs
==PAGE:133==
Figure A.74: Flow of functions to calculate features
Figure A.74 shows the process flow for the functions used to calculate features.
A.0.25
Calculate features
A.0.26
Find_features_Personal_segment_plus_vital2
Matlab function to calculate features
1
function [tab] = Find_features_Personal_segment_plus_vital2(patients ,numer_NaN
,intbeforeSBP ,Number_cali_SBP)
2
% This Function takes all the patient data as input and outputs a table
3
% with all the features
4
% Author: Benjamin Trasborg s184038 and Martin Riedel s184032
5
% Date: 19/01/2023
6
7
% loading bar
8
h=waitbar(0,"processing");
9
% variable to test if it the first version of the table
10
tab1done=0;
11
% defining the table Headers
12
tableHeaders=["Timestamp","meanHeartRate","meanRespirationRate", "meanSpO2","
meanPulseRate",...
13
"sdHeartRate","sdRespirationRate", "sdSpO2", "sdPulseRate",...
14
"minHeartRate", "minRespirationRate", "minSpO2", "minPulseRate",...
15
"maxHeartRate", "maxRespirationRate", "maxSpO2", "maxPulseRate",...
16
"rangeHeartRate", "rangeRespirationRate", "rangeSpO2", "rangePulseRate
",...
17
"skewnessHeartRate", "skewnessRespirationRate", "skewnessSpO2", "
skewnessPulseRate",...
18
"systolicBP","BPState"...
19
"meanHeartRate_cali","meanRespirationRate_cali", "meanSpO2_cali","
meanPulseRate_cali","meanSBP_cali",...
20
"sdHeartRate_cali","sdRespirationRate_cali", "sdSpO2_cali", "
sdPulseRate_cali","sdSBP_cali",...
21
"minHeartRate_cali", "minRespirationRate_cali", "minSpO2_cali", "
minPulseRate_cali","minSBP_cali",...
22
"maxHeartRate_cali", "maxRespirationRate_cali", "maxSpO2_cali", "
maxPulseRate_cali","maxSBP_cali",...
23
"rangeHeartRate_cali", "rangeRespirationRate_cali", "rangeSpO2_cali", "
rangePulseRate_cali","rangeSBP_cali",...
24
"skewnessHeartRate_cali", "skewnessRespirationRate_cali", "
skewnessSpO2_cali", "skewnessPulseRate_cali","skewnessSBP_cali"];
25
Cuffless Blood Pressure Estimation Based on Continuous Vital Signs
125
==PAGE:134==
26
% loop through all the patients
27
for ii=1:length(patients)
28
waitbar(ii/(length(patients)-1),h);
29
30
%patient ii is defined as p
31
p=patients{ii};
32
if isempty(p)
33
continue % skip if patient has no data
34
end
35
36
% the index of the SBP measurements is found
37
SBP_idx=find(~isnan(p.SystolicBloodPressure));
38
39
% find index of SBP that are after first intbeforeSBP minutes
40
SBP_idx=SBP_idx(SBP_idx >intbeforeSBP);
41
42
if length(SBP_idx)<8
% skip if there are less than 8 SBP for the patient
43
continue
44
end
45
46
% All the non calibration SPB is put in to an array
47
systolicBP=p.SystolicBloodPressure(SBP_idx((Number_cali_SBP+1):end));
48
49
% All the non calibration BPState is put in to an array
50
BPState=p.BPS_State1(SBP_idx((Number_cali_SBP+1):end));
51
52
% All the non calibration PPG values are put in a array
53
Var2_PPG_tab=p(SBP_idx((Number_cali_SBP+1):end),13);
54
55
% All the non calibration ECG values are put in a array
56
Var2_ECG_tab=p(SBP_idx((Number_cali_SBP+1):end),12);
57
%% zero arrays is created for the vital signs with the length of the
58
% SBP_idx
59
% mean values
60
meanHeartRate=zeros(length(SBP_idx((Number_cali_SBP+1):end)),1);
61
meanRespirationRate=zeros(size(SBP_idx((Number_cali_SBP+1):end)));
62
meanSpO2=zeros(size(SBP_idx((Number_cali_SBP+1):end)));
63
meanPulseRate=zeros(size(SBP_idx((Number_cali_SBP+1):end)));
64
65
% standard deviation values
66
sdHeartRate=zeros(size(SBP_idx((Number_cali_SBP+1):end)));
67
sdRespirationRate=zeros(size(SBP_idx((Number_cali_SBP+1):end)));
68
sdSpO2=zeros(size(SBP_idx((Number_cali_SBP+1):end)));
69
sdPulseRate=zeros(size(SBP_idx((Number_cali_SBP+1):end)));
70
71
% minimum values
72
minHeartRate=zeros(size(SBP_idx((Number_cali_SBP+1):end)));
73
minRespirationRate=zeros(size(SBP_idx((Number_cali_SBP+1):end)));
74
minSpO2=zeros(size(SBP_idx((Number_cali_SBP+1):end)));
75
minPulseRate=zeros(size(SBP_idx((Number_cali_SBP+1):end)));
76
77
% max values
78
maxHeartRate=zeros(size(SBP_idx((Number_cali_SBP+1):end)));
79
maxRespirationRate=zeros(size(SBP_idx((Number_cali_SBP+1):end)));
80
maxSpO2=zeros(size(SBP_idx((Number_cali_SBP+1):end)));
81
maxPulseRate=zeros(size(SBP_idx((Number_cali_SBP+1):end)));
82
83
% Range values
84
rangeHeartRate=zeros(size(SBP_idx((Number_cali_SBP+1):end)));
85
rangeRespirationRate=zeros(size(SBP_idx((Number_cali_SBP+1):end)));
86
rangeSpO2=zeros(size(SBP_idx((Number_cali_SBP+1):end)));
87
rangePulseRate=zeros(size(SBP_idx((Number_cali_SBP+1):end)));
126
Cuffless Blood Pressure Estimation Based on Continuous Vital Signs
==PAGE:135==
88
89
% skewness values
90
skewnessHeartRate=zeros(size(SBP_idx((Number_cali_SBP+1):end)));
91
skewnessRespirationRate=zeros(size(SBP_idx((Number_cali_SBP+1):end)));
92
skewnessSpO2=zeros(size(SBP_idx((Number_cali_SBP+1):end)));
93
skewnessPulseRate=zeros(size(SBP_idx((Number_cali_SBP+1):end)));
94
95
%% zero arrays is created for ECG Segment features
96
% R peak amplitude
97
R_peak_amplitude_mean=zeros(size(SBP_idx((Number_cali_SBP+1):end)));
98
R_peak_amplitude_sd=zeros(size(SBP_idx((Number_cali_SBP+1):end)));
99
R_peak_amplitude_min=zeros(size(SBP_idx((Number_cali_SBP+1):end)));
100
R_peak_amplitude_max=zeros(size(SBP_idx((Number_cali_SBP+1):end)));
101
102
% IBI features
103
mean_IBI=zeros(size(SBP_idx((Number_cali_SBP+1):end)));
104
sd_IBI=zeros(size(SBP_idx((Number_cali_SBP+1):end)));
105
106
% rmssd features
107
rmssd=(zeros(size(SBP_idx((Number_cali_SBP+1):end))));
108
109
% sdnn features
110
sdnn=(zeros(size(SBP_idx((Number_cali_SBP+1):end))));
111
112
% area features
113
mean_area=(zeros(size(SBP_idx((Number_cali_SBP+1):end))));
114
sd_area=(zeros(size(SBP_idx((Number_cali_SBP+1):end))));
115
min_area=(zeros(size(SBP_idx((Number_cali_SBP+1):end))));
116
max_area=(zeros(size(SBP_idx((Number_cali_SBP+1):end))));
117
118
% QR-slope features
119
mean_QR_slope=(zeros(size(SBP_idx((Number_cali_SBP+1):end))));
120
sd_QR_slope=(zeros(size(SBP_idx((Number_cali_SBP+1):end))));
121
min_QR_slope=(zeros(size(SBP_idx((Number_cali_SBP+1):end))));
122
max_QR_slope=(zeros(size(SBP_idx((Number_cali_SBP+1):end))));
123
124
% RS-slope features
125
mean_RS_slope=(zeros(size(SBP_idx((Number_cali_SBP+1):end))));
126
sd_RS_slope=(zeros(size(SBP_idx((Number_cali_SBP+1):end))));
127
min_RS_slope=(zeros(size(SBP_idx((Number_cali_SBP+1):end))));
128
max_RS_slope=(zeros(size(SBP_idx((Number_cali_SBP+1):end))));
129
130
% QRS-duration features
131
mean_QRS_duration=(zeros(size(SBP_idx((Number_cali_SBP+1):end))));
132
sd_QRS_duration=(zeros(size(SBP_idx((Number_cali_SBP+1):end))));
133
min_QRS_duration=(zeros(size(SBP_idx((Number_cali_SBP+1):end))));
134
max_QRS_duration=(zeros(size(SBP_idx((Number_cali_SBP+1):end))));
135
136
%% zero arrays is created for PPG segment features
137
% R peak amplitude features
138
PPG_R_peak_amplitude_mean=zeros(size(SBP_idx((Number_cali_SBP+1):end)));
139
PPG_R_peak_amplitude_sd=zeros(size(SBP_idx((Number_cali_SBP+1):end)));
140
PPG_R_peak_amplitude_min=zeros(size(SBP_idx((Number_cali_SBP+1):end)));
141
PPG_R_peak_amplitude_max=zeros(size(SBP_idx((Number_cali_SBP+1):end)));
142
143
% IBI features
144
PPG_mean_IBI=zeros(size(SBP_idx((Number_cali_SBP+1):end)));
145
PPG_sd_IBI=zeros(size(SBP_idx((Number_cali_SBP+1):end)));
146
147
% rmssd features
148
PPG_rmssd=(zeros(size(SBP_idx((Number_cali_SBP+1):end))));
149
Cuffless Blood Pressure Estimation Based on Continuous Vital Signs
127
==PAGE:136==
150
% sdnn features
151
PPG_sdnn=(zeros(size(SBP_idx((Number_cali_SBP+1):end))));
152
153
% area features
154
PPG_mean_area=(zeros(size(SBP_idx((Number_cali_SBP+1):end))));
155
PPG_sd_area=(zeros(size(SBP_idx((Number_cali_SBP+1):end))));
156
PPG_min_area=(zeros(size(SBP_idx((Number_cali_SBP+1):end))));
157
PPG_max_area=(zeros(size(SBP_idx((Number_cali_SBP+1):end))));
158
159
% QR slope features
160
PPG_mean_QR_slope=(zeros(size(SBP_idx((Number_cali_SBP+1):end))));
161
PPG_sd_QR_slope=(zeros(size(SBP_idx((Number_cali_SBP+1):end))));
162
PPG_min_QR_slope=(zeros(size(SBP_idx((Number_cali_SBP+1):end))));
163
PPG_max_QR_slope=(zeros(size(SBP_idx((Number_cali_SBP+1):end))));
164
165
% RS-slope features
166
PPG_mean_RS_slope=(zeros(size(SBP_idx((Number_cali_SBP+1):end))));
167
PPG_sd_RS_slope=(zeros(size(SBP_idx((Number_cali_SBP+1):end))));
168
PPG_min_RS_slope=(zeros(size(SBP_idx((Number_cali_SBP+1):end))));
169
PPG_max_RS_slope=(zeros(size(SBP_idx((Number_cali_SBP+1):end))));
170
171
% QRS duration features
172
PPG_mean_QRS_duration=(zeros(size(SBP_idx((Number_cali_SBP+1):end))));
173
PPG_sd_QRS_duration=(zeros(size(SBP_idx((Number_cali_SBP+1):end))));
174
PPG_min_QRS_duration=(zeros(size(SBP_idx((Number_cali_SBP+1):end))));
175
PPG_max_QRS_duration=(zeros(size(SBP_idx((Number_cali_SBP+1):end))));
176
177
% array with timestaps for all non calibration SBP
178
SBP_Timestamp=p.Timestamp(SBP_idx((Number_cali_SBP+1):end));
179
180
%% Calibration features for the vital signs are found
181
% features are found from all the data in the time span from timestamp
182
% 1 to the timestamp at the Number_cali_SBP value
183
184
% mean values
185
meanHeartRate_cali=repmat(mean(p.HeartRate(1:(SBP_idx(Number_cali_SBP))),'
omitnan'),length(SBP_idx((Number_cali_SBP+1):end)),1);
186
meanRespirationRate_cali=repmat(mean(p.RespirationRate(1:(SBP_idx(
Number_cali_SBP))),'omitnan'),length(SBP_idx((Number_cali_SBP+1):end))
,1);
187
meanSpO2_cali=repmat(mean(p.SpO2(1:(SBP_idx(Number_cali_SBP))),'omitnan'),
length(SBP_idx((Number_cali_SBP+1):end)),1);
188
meanPulseRate_cali=repmat(mean(p.PulseRate(1:(SBP_idx(Number_cali_SBP))),'
omitnan'),length(SBP_idx((Number_cali_SBP+1):end)),1);
189
meanSBP_cali=repmat(mean(p.SystolicBloodPressure(1:(SBP_idx(
Number_cali_SBP))),'omitnan'),length(SBP_idx((Number_cali_SBP+1):end))
,1);
190
191
% standard deviation values
192
sdHeartRate_cali=repmat(std(p.HeartRate(1:(SBP_idx(Number_cali_SBP))),'
omitnan'),length(SBP_idx((Number_cali_SBP+1):end)),1);
193
sdRespirationRate_cali=repmat(std(p.RespirationRate(1:(SBP_idx(
Number_cali_SBP))),'omitnan'),length(SBP_idx((Number_cali_SBP+1):end))
,1);
194
sdSpO2_cali=repmat(std(p.SpO2(1:(SBP_idx(Number_cali_SBP))),'omitnan'),
length(SBP_idx((Number_cali_SBP+1):end)),1);
195
sdPulseRate_cali=repmat(std(p.PulseRate(1:(SBP_idx(Number_cali_SBP))),'
omitnan'),length(SBP_idx((Number_cali_SBP+1):end)),1);
196
sdSBP_cali=repmat(std(p.SystolicBloodPressure(1:(SBP_idx(Number_cali_SBP))
),'omitnan'),length(SBP_idx((Number_cali_SBP+1):end)),1);
197
198
% minimum values
128
Cuffless Blood Pressure Estimation Based on Continuous Vital Signs
==PAGE:137==
199
minHeartRate_cali=repmat(min(p.HeartRate(1:(SBP_idx(Number_cali_SBP)))),
length(SBP_idx((Number_cali_SBP+1):end)),1);
200
minRespirationRate_cali=repmat(min(p.RespirationRate(1:SBP_idx(
Number_cali_SBP))),length(SBP_idx((Number_cali_SBP+1):end)),1);
201
minSpO2_cali=repmat(min(p.SpO2(1:(SBP_idx(Number_cali_SBP)))),length(
SBP_idx((Number_cali_SBP+1):end)),1);
202
minPulseRate_cali=repmat(min(p.PulseRate(1:(SBP_idx(Number_cali_SBP)))),
length(SBP_idx((Number_cali_SBP+1):end)),1);
203
minSBP_cali=repmat(min(p.SystolicBloodPressure(1:(SBP_idx(Number_cali_SBP)
))),length(SBP_idx((Number_cali_SBP+1):end)),1);
204
205
% max values
206
maxHeartRate_cali=repmat(max(p.HeartRate(1:(SBP_idx(Number_cali_SBP)))),
length(SBP_idx((Number_cali_SBP+1):end)),1);
207
maxRespirationRate_cali=repmat(max(p.RespirationRate(1:(SBP_idx(
Number_cali_SBP)))),length(SBP_idx((Number_cali_SBP+1):end)),1);
208
maxSpO2_cali=repmat(max(p.SpO2(1:(SBP_idx(Number_cali_SBP)))),length(
SBP_idx((Number_cali_SBP+1):end)),1);
209
maxPulseRate_cali=repmat(max(p.PulseRate(1:(SBP_idx(Number_cali_SBP)))),
length(SBP_idx((Number_cali_SBP+1):end)),1);
210
maxSBP_cali=repmat(max(p.SystolicBloodPressure(1:(SBP_idx(Number_cali_SBP)
))),length(SBP_idx((Number_cali_SBP+1):end)),1);
211
212
% range values
213
rangeHeartRate_cali=maxHeartRate_cali -minHeartRate_cali;
214
rangeRespirationRate_cali=maxRespirationRate_cali -minRespirationRate_cali;
215
rangeSpO2_cali=maxSpO2_cali -minSpO2_cali;
216
rangePulseRate_cali=maxPulseRate_cali -minPulseRate_cali;
217
rangeSBP_cali=maxSBP_cali -minSBP_cali;
218
219
% skewness values
220
skewnessHeartRate_cali=repmat(skewness(p.HeartRate(1:(SBP_idx(
Number_cali_SBP)))),length(SBP_idx((Number_cali_SBP+1):end)),1);
221
skewnessRespirationRate_cali=repmat(skewness(p.RespirationRate(1:(SBP_idx(
Number_cali_SBP)))),length(SBP_idx((Number_cali_SBP+1):end)),1);
222
skewnessSpO2_cali=repmat(skewness(p.SpO2(1:(SBP_idx(Number_cali_SBP)))),
length(SBP_idx((Number_cali_SBP+1):end)),1);
223
skewnessPulseRate_cali=repmat(skewness(p.PulseRate(1:(SBP_idx(
Number_cali_SBP)))),length(SBP_idx((Number_cali_SBP+1):end)),1);
224
skewnessSBP_cali=repmat(skewness(p.SystolicBloodPressure(1:(SBP_idx(
Number_cali_SBP)))),length(SBP_idx((Number_cali_SBP+1):end)),1);
225
226
%counter to take mean of cali ECG segments
227
count=0;
228
229
% array to sum up the sum of the cali segments
230
cali_segments_sum=[0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0];
231
232
% calibration values for ECG segment data
233
% loop through all the SBP used for calibration
234
for i =1:SBP_idx(Number_cali_SBP)
235
ecg_signal = table2array(p(i,12));
236
%remove 0 values
237
ecg_signal=nonzeros(ecg_signal);
238
%remove NaN values
239
ecg_signal(isnan(ecg_signal))=[];
240
241
% if the ECG segments data is not empty and have more than 18
242
% values
243
if
(sum(ecg_signal)>0) && (length(ecg_signal)>18)
244
% use function Segment_Features to find the features from
245
% the ECG signal
Cuffless Blood Pressure Estimation Based on Continuous Vital Signs
129
==PAGE:138==
246
[R_peak_amplitude_mean_cali ,R_peak_amplitude_sd_cali ,
R_peak_amplitude_min_cali ,R_peak_amplitude_max_cali ,...
247
mean_IBI_cali ,sd_IBI_cali ,rmssd_cali ,sdnn_cali ,mean_area_cali ,
sd_area_cali ,min_area_cali ,max_area_cali ,...
248
mean_QR_slope_cali ,sd_QR_slope_cali ,min_QR_slope_cali ,
max_QR_slope_cali ,mean_RS_slope_cali ,sd_RS_slope_cali ,...
249
min_RS_slope_cali ,max_RS_slope_cali ,mean_QRS_duration_cali ,
sd_QRS_duration_cali ,min_QRS_duration_cali ,
max_QRS_duration_cali]...
250
= Segment_Features((ecg_signal));
251
% put all the ECG cali segments in an array
252
cali_segment=[R_peak_amplitude_mean_cali R_peak_amplitude_sd_cali
R_peak_amplitude_min_cali R_peak_amplitude_max_cali...
253
mean_IBI_cali sd_IBI_cali rmssd_cali sdnn_cali mean_area_cali
sd_area_cali min_area_cali max_area_cali ...
254
mean_QR_slope_cali sd_QR_slope_cali min_QR_slope_cali
max_QR_slope_cali mean_RS_slope_cali sd_RS_slope_cali ...
255
min_RS_slope_cali max_RS_slope_cali mean_QRS_duration_cali
sd_QRS_duration_cali min_QRS_duration_cali
max_QRS_duration_cali];
256
% make all NaN values equal 0
257
cali_segment(isnan(cali_segment))=0;
258
% add the segment values to the cali_segments_sum
259
cali_segments_sum=cali_segments_sum+cali_segment;
260
% increase the counter
261
count=count+1;
262
end
263
end
264
% take mean of calibration segments
265
cali_segments_mean=cali_segments_sum/count;
266
cali_segments_tab=repmat(cali_segments_mean ,length(SBP_idx((
Number_cali_SBP+1):end)),1);
267
268
% counter of number of PPG segments in calibration time span
269
PPG_count=0;
270
% empty array for PPG calibration segments
271
PPG_cali_segments_sum=[0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0];
272
% calibration values for PPG segment data
273
% loop through all the SBP idx values in the calibration time span
274
for i =1:SBP_idx(Number_cali_SBP)
275
% array with PPG signal
276
PPG_signal = table2array(p(i,12));
277
% remove 0 values
278
PPG_signal=nonzeros(PPG_signal);
279
% remove NaN values
280
PPG_signal(isnan(PPG_signal))=[];
281
282
% test if PPG signal is not empty and have more than 18 values
283
if
(sum(PPG_signal)>0) && (length(PPG_signal)>18)
284
285
% calculate PPG features using the function Segment_Features
286
[PPG_R_peak_amplitude_mean_cali ,PPG_R_peak_amplitude_sd_cali ,
PPG_R_peak_amplitude_min_cali ,PPG_R_peak_amplitude_max_cali
,...
287
PPG_mean_IBI_cali ,PPG_sd_IBI_cali ,PPG_rmssd_cali ,PPG_sdnn_cali
,PPG_mean_area_cali ,PPG_sd_area_cali ,PPG_min_area_cali ,
PPG_max_area_cali ,...
288
PPG_mean_QR_slope_cali ,PPG_sd_QR_slope_cali ,
PPG_min_QR_slope_cali ,PPG_max_QR_slope_cali ,
PPG_mean_RS_slope_cali ,PPG_sd_RS_slope_cali ,...
289
PPG_min_RS_slope_cali ,PPG_max_RS_slope_cali ,
PPG_mean_QRS_duration_cali ,PPG_sd_QRS_duration_cali ,
130
Cuffless Blood Pressure Estimation Based on Continuous Vital Signs
==PAGE:139==
PPG_min_QRS_duration_cali ,PPG_max_QRS_duration_cali]...
290
= Segment_Features((PPG_signal));
291
292
% put features in a array
293
PPG_cali_segment=[PPG_R_peak_amplitude_mean_cali
PPG_R_peak_amplitude_sd_cali PPG_R_peak_amplitude_min_cali
PPG_R_peak_amplitude_max_cali...
294
PPG_mean_IBI_cali PPG_sd_IBI_cali PPG_rmssd_cali PPG_sdnn_cali
PPG_mean_area_cali PPG_sd_area_cali PPG_min_area_cali
PPG_max_area_cali ...
295
PPG_mean_QR_slope_cali PPG_sd_QR_slope_cali
PPG_min_QR_slope_cali PPG_max_QR_slope_cali
PPG_mean_RS_slope_cali PPG_sd_RS_slope_cali ...
296
PPG_min_RS_slope_cali PPG_max_RS_slope_cali
PPG_mean_QRS_duration_cali PPG_sd_QRS_duration_cali
PPG_min_QRS_duration_cali PPG_max_QRS_duration_cali];
297
298
% make NaN value equal o
299
PPG_cali_segment(isnan(PPG_cali_segment))=0;
300
301
% sum calibration segment calibration values
302
PPG_cali_segments_sum=PPG_cali_segments_sum+PPG_cali_segment;
303
304
% increase counter by one
305
PPG_count=PPG_count+1;
306
end
307
end
308
309
% Take average of the PPG calibration segment values
310
PPG_cali_segments_mean=PPG_cali_segments_sum/count;
311
312
% copy PPG calibration segment feautures to make array with size of all
non calibration values
313
PPG_cali_segments_tab=repmat(PPG_cali_segments_mean ,length(SBP_idx((
Number_cali_SBP+1):end)),1);
314
315
% looping through all non calibration SBP index places
316
for i=(Number_cali_SBP+1):length(SBP_idx)
317
% put ECG segment in an array
318
ecg_signal = table2array(p(SBP_idx(i),12));
319
% remove 0 values
320
ecg_signal=nonzeros(ecg_signal);
321
% remove NaN values
322
ecg_signal(isnan(ecg_signal))=[];
323
% put PPG segment in an array
324
PPG_signal = table2array(p(SBP_idx(i),13));
325
% reomve 0 values
326
PPG_signal=nonzeros(PPG_signal);
327
% remove NaN values
328
PPG_signal(isnan(PPG_signal))=[];
329
330
% test if there are more than number_NaN NaN values for one of the
331
% modalities and if both ECG and PPG has more than 18 values
332
if sum(isnan(p.HeartRate((SBP_idx(i)-intbeforeSBP):(SBP_idx(i)))))<=
numer_NaN ...
333
&& sum(isnan(p.RespirationRate((SBP_idx(i)-intbeforeSBP):(
SBP_idx(i)))))<=numer_NaN ...
334
&&
sum(isnan(p.SpO2((SBP_idx(i)-intbeforeSBP):(SBP_idx(i)))))
<=numer_NaN ...
335
&& sum(isnan(p.PulseRate((SBP_idx(i)-intbeforeSBP):(SBP_idx(i)
))))<=numer_NaN...
336
&& (sum(ecg_signal)>0)...
Cuffless Blood Pressure Estimation Based on Continuous Vital Signs
131
==PAGE:140==
337
&& (length(ecg_signal)>18)...
338
&& (sum(PPG_signal)>0)...
339
&& (length(PPG_signal)>18)
340
341
% calculate non-calibration ECG segment features
342
[R_peak_amplitude_mean(i-Number_cali_SBP),R_peak_amplitude_sd(i-
Number_cali_SBP),...
343
R_peak_amplitude_min(i-Number_cali_SBP),R_peak_amplitude_max(i
-Number_cali_SBP),...
344
mean_IBI(i-Number_cali_SBP),sd_IBI(i-Number_cali_SBP),rmssd(i-
Number_cali_SBP),...
345
sdnn(i-Number_cali_SBP),mean_area(i-Number_cali_SBP),sd_area(i
-Number_cali_SBP),...
346
min_area(i-Number_cali_SBP),max_area(i-Number_cali_SBP),
mean_QR_slope(i-Number_cali_SBP),...
347
sd_QR_slope(i-Number_cali_SBP),min_QR_slope(i-Number_cali_SBP)
,...
348
max_QR_slope(i-Number_cali_SBP),mean_RS_slope(i-
Number_cali_SBP),...
349
sd_RS_slope(i-Number_cali_SBP),min_RS_slope(i-Number_cali_SBP)
,...
350
max_RS_slope(i-Number_cali_SBP),mean_QRS_duration(i-
Number_cali_SBP),...
351
sd_QRS_duration(i-Number_cali_SBP),min_QRS_duration(i-
Number_cali_SBP),...
352
max_QRS_duration(i-Number_cali_SBP)] = Segment_Features((
ecg_signal));
353
354
% calculate non-calibration PPG segment features
355
[PPG_R_peak_amplitude_mean(i-Number_cali_SBP),
PPG_R_peak_amplitude_sd(i-Number_cali_SBP),...
356
PPG_R_peak_amplitude_min(i-Number_cali_SBP),
PPG_R_peak_amplitude_max(i-Number_cali_SBP),...
357
PPG_mean_IBI(i-Number_cali_SBP),PPG_sd_IBI(i-Number_cali_SBP),
PPG_rmssd(i-Number_cali_SBP),...
358
PPG_sdnn(i-Number_cali_SBP),PPG_mean_area(i-Number_cali_SBP),
PPG_sd_area(i-Number_cali_SBP),...
359
PPG_min_area(i-Number_cali_SBP),PPG_max_area(i-Number_cali_SBP
),PPG_mean_QR_slope(i-Number_cali_SBP),...
360
PPG_sd_QR_slope(i-Number_cali_SBP),PPG_min_QR_slope(i-
Number_cali_SBP),...
361
PPG_max_QR_slope(i-Number_cali_SBP),PPG_mean_RS_slope(i-
Number_cali_SBP),...
362
PPG_sd_RS_slope(i-Number_cali_SBP),PPG_min_RS_slope(i-
Number_cali_SBP),...
363
PPG_max_RS_slope(i-Number_cali_SBP),PPG_mean_QRS_duration(i-
Number_cali_SBP),...
364
PPG_sd_QRS_duration(i-Number_cali_SBP),PPG_min_QRS_duration(i-
Number_cali_SBP),...
365
PPG_max_QRS_duration(i-Number_cali_SBP)] = Segment_Features((
PPG_signal));
366
367
% mean values
368
meanHeartRate(i-Number_cali_SBP)=mean(p.HeartRate((SBP_idx(i)-
intbeforeSBP):(SBP_idx(i))),'omitnan');
369
meanRespirationRate(i-Number_cali_SBP)=mean(p.RespirationRate((
SBP_idx(i)-intbeforeSBP):(SBP_idx(i))),'omitnan');
370
meanSpO2(i-Number_cali_SBP)=mean(p.SpO2((SBP_idx(i)-intbeforeSBP)
:(SBP_idx(i))),'omitnan');
371
meanPulseRate(i-Number_cali_SBP)=mean(p.PulseRate((SBP_idx(i)-
intbeforeSBP):(SBP_idx(i))),'omitnan');
372
% standard deviation values
132
Cuffless Blood Pressure Estimation Based on Continuous Vital Signs
==PAGE:141==
373
sdHeartRate(i-Number_cali_SBP)=std(p.HeartRate((SBP_idx(i)-
intbeforeSBP):(SBP_idx(i))),'omitnan');
374
sdRespirationRate(i-Number_cali_SBP)=std(p.RespirationRate((
SBP_idx(i)-intbeforeSBP):(SBP_idx(i))),'omitnan');
375
sdSpO2(i-Number_cali_SBP)=std(p.SpO2((SBP_idx(i)-intbeforeSBP):(
SBP_idx(i))),'omitnan');
376
sdPulseRate(i-Number_cali_SBP)=std(p.PulseRate((SBP_idx(i)-
intbeforeSBP):(SBP_idx(i))),'omitnan');
377
% minimum values
378
minHeartRate(i-Number_cali_SBP)=min(p.HeartRate((SBP_idx(i)-
intbeforeSBP):(SBP_idx(i))));
379
minRespirationRate(i-Number_cali_SBP)=min(p.RespirationRate((
SBP_idx(i)-intbeforeSBP):(SBP_idx(i))));
380
minSpO2(i-Number_cali_SBP)=min(p.SpO2((SBP_idx(i)-intbeforeSBP):(
SBP_idx(i))));
381
minPulseRate(i-Number_cali_SBP)=min(p.PulseRate((SBP_idx(i)-
intbeforeSBP):(SBP_idx(i))));
382
% max values
383
maxHeartRate(i-Number_cali_SBP)=max(p.HeartRate((SBP_idx(i)-
intbeforeSBP):(SBP_idx(i))));
384
maxRespirationRate(i-Number_cali_SBP)=max(p.RespirationRate((
SBP_idx(i)-intbeforeSBP):(SBP_idx(i))));
385
maxSpO2(i-Number_cali_SBP)=max(p.SpO2((SBP_idx(i)-intbeforeSBP):(
SBP_idx(i))));
386
maxPulseRate(i-Number_cali_SBP)=max(p.PulseRate((SBP_idx(i)-
intbeforeSBP):(SBP_idx(i))));
387
% range values
388
rangeHeartRate(i-Number_cali_SBP)=maxHeartRate(i-Number_cali_SBP)-
minHeartRate(i-Number_cali_SBP);
389
rangeRespirationRate(i-Number_cali_SBP)=maxRespirationRate(i-
Number_cali_SBP)-minRespirationRate(i-Number_cali_SBP);
390
rangeSpO2(i-Number_cali_SBP)=maxSpO2(i-Number_cali_SBP)-minSpO2(i-
Number_cali_SBP);
391
rangePulseRate(i-Number_cali_SBP)=maxPulseRate(i-Number_cali_SBP)-
minPulseRate(i-Number_cali_SBP);
392
% skewness values
393
skewnessHeartRate(i-Number_cali_SBP)=skewness(p.HeartRate((SBP_idx
(i)-intbeforeSBP):(SBP_idx(i))));
394
skewnessRespirationRate(i-Number_cali_SBP)=skewness(p.
RespirationRate((SBP_idx(i)-intbeforeSBP):(SBP_idx(i))));
395
skewnessSpO2(i-Number_cali_SBP)=skewness(p.SpO2((SBP_idx(i)-
intbeforeSBP):(SBP_idx(i))));
396
skewnessPulseRate(i-Number_cali_SBP)=skewness(p.PulseRate((SBP_idx
(i)-intbeforeSBP):(SBP_idx(i))));
397
398
end
399
end
400
401
402
% put ECG segment features in a array
403
ECG_segments_feature=[R_peak_amplitude_mean R_peak_amplitude_sd...
404
R_peak_amplitude_min R_peak_amplitude_max mean_IBI sd_IBI rmssd...
405
sdnn mean_area sd_area min_area max_area mean_QR_slope sd_QR_slope...
406
min_QR_slope max_QR_slope mean_RS_slope sd_RS_slope min_RS_slope...
407
max_RS_slope mean_QRS_duration sd_QRS_duration min_QRS_duration
max_QRS_duration];
408
409
% put PPG segment features in a array
410
PPG_segments_feature=[PPG_R_peak_amplitude_mean PPG_R_peak_amplitude_sd...
411
PPG_R_peak_amplitude_min PPG_R_peak_amplitude_max PPG_mean_IBI
PPG_sd_IBI PPG_rmssd...
412
PPG_sdnn PPG_mean_area PPG_sd_area PPG_min_area PPG_max_area
Cuffless Blood Pressure Estimation Based on Continuous Vital Signs
133
==PAGE:142==
PPG_mean_QR_slope PPG_sd_QR_slope...
413
PPG_min_QR_slope PPG_max_QR_slope PPG_mean_RS_slope PPG_sd_RS_slope
PPG_min_RS_slope...
414
PPG_max_RS_slope PPG_mean_QRS_duration PPG_sd_QRS_duration
PPG_min_QRS_duration PPG_max_QRS_duration];
415
416
% Making a Table with vitral sign features
417
tab1=table(SBP_Timestamp ,meanHeartRate ,meanRespirationRate ,meanSpO2 ,
meanPulseRate ,...
418
sdHeartRate ,sdRespirationRate ,sdSpO2 ,sdPulseRate ,...
419
minHeartRate ,minRespirationRate ,minSpO2 ,minPulseRate ,...
420
maxHeartRate ,maxRespirationRate ,maxSpO2 ,maxPulseRate ,...
421
rangeHeartRate ,rangeRespirationRate , rangeSpO2 , rangePulseRate ,...
422
skewnessHeartRate , skewnessRespirationRate , skewnessSpO2 ,
skewnessPulseRate ,...
423
systolicBP ,BPState ,...
424
meanHeartRate_cali ,meanRespirationRate_cali ,meanSpO2_cali ,
meanPulseRate_cali ,meanSBP_cali ,...
425
sdHeartRate_cali ,sdRespirationRate_cali ,sdSpO2_cali ,sdPulseRate_cali ,
sdSBP_cali ,...
426
minHeartRate_cali ,minRespirationRate_cali ,minSpO2_cali ,
minPulseRate_cali ,minSBP_cali ,...
427
maxHeartRate_cali ,maxRespirationRate_cali ,maxSpO2_cali ,
maxPulseRate_cali ,maxSBP_cali ,...
428
rangeHeartRate_cali ,rangeRespirationRate_cali , rangeSpO2_cali ,
rangePulseRate_cali ,rangeSBP_cali ,...
429
skewnessHeartRate_cali , skewnessRespirationRate_cali ,
skewnessSpO2_cali , skewnessPulseRate_cali ,skewnessSBP_cali ,...
430
'VariableNames',tableHeaders);
431
432
% combine all features in one table
433
tab1=[tab1 table(Var2_ECG_tab) table(Var2_PPG_tab) table(
ECG_segments_feature)...
434
table(PPG_segments_feature) table(cali_segments_tab) table(
PPG_cali_segments_tab)];
435
436
% test if it is the first tab1
437
if tab1done==0
438
tab=[tab1];
439
tab1done=1;
440
441
else
442
% add the table to the combined table
443
tab=vertcat(tab,tab1);
444
end
445
end
446
447
% remove 0 lines
448
tab(sum((tab.meanHeartRate==0),2)>0,:)=[];
449
450
close(h)
451
end
Matlab/Find_features_Personal_segment_plus_vital2.m
Segment_Features
Matlab function to calculate segment features, and is used by the ”Ward_combined_model_MAIN.m”
1
function [R_peak_amplitude_mean ,R_peak_amplitude_sd ,R_peak_amplitude_min ,
R_peak_amplitude_max ,mean_IBI ,sd_IBI ,rmssd,sdnn,mean_area ,sd_area ,min_area
,max_area ,mean_QR_slope ,sd_QR_slope ,min_QR_slope ,max_QR_slope ,
mean_RS_slope ,sd_RS_slope ,min_RS_slope ,max_RS_slope ,mean_QRS_duration ,
134
Cuffless Blood Pressure Estimation Based on Continuous Vital Signs
==PAGE:143==
sd_QRS_duration ,min_QRS_duration ,max_QRS_duration] = Segment_Features(
ecg_signal)
2
% This function calculates the segment features from a ECG or PPG signal
3
% date: 14-02-2023
4
% Benjamin Trasborg s184038 and Martin Riedel s184032
5
6
% remove 0 from the end of the signal
7
ecg_signal=nonzeros(ecg_signal);
8
9
% Define the sampling rate and time vector
10
fs = 75; % Hz
11
t = (0:length(ecg_signal)-1)/fs;
12
13
% use the pan tomphkins function to find the R-peak
14
[qrs_amp_raw ,R_peak_idx ,delay,signal_filt]=pan_tompkin(ecg_signal ,fs,0);
15
16
% calculate mean, standard deviation , minumum and maximum value of the
17
% R-peak amplitude
18
R_peak_amplitude_mean=mean(qrs_amp_raw);
19
R_peak_amplitude_sd=std(qrs_amp_raw);
20
R_peak_amplitude_min=min(qrs_amp_raw);
21
R_peak_amplitude_max=max(qrs_amp_raw);
22
23
% define S and Q peak as 0
24
S_peak_idx=0;
25
Q_peak_idx=0;
26
27
% make x-axis to filteren signal
28
x=1:length(signal_filt);
29
30
% use derivative function to find the derivative of the filtered signal
31
dy_S = derivative(x,signal_filt ,'S');
32
dy_Q = derivative(x,signal_filt ,'Q');
33
34
% find index of postive derivative
35
dy_positive_idx=(find(dy_S >0));
36
37
% find index of negative derivative
38
dy_negative_idx=(find(dy_Q <0));
39
40
% loop through R-peaks indexes
41
for i =1:length(R_peak_idx)
42
43
% skip there are no positive values
44
if isempty(dy_positive_idx(min(find(dy_positive_idx >R_peak_idx(i)))))
45
continue
46
% skip there are no negative values
47
elseif isempty(dy_negative_idx(max(find(dy_negative_idx <R_peak_idx(i)))))
48
continue
49
else
50
% define S peak as the first positive derivative after the R-peak
51
S_peak_idx(i)=dy_positive_idx(min(find(dy_positive_idx >R_peak_idx(i)))
);
52
% define Q peak as the last negative derivative before the R-peak
53
Q_peak_idx(i)=dy_negative_idx(max(find(dy_negative_idx <R_peak_idx(i)))
);
54
end
55
end
56
57
58
% calculate HRV
59
% inter beat interval
Cuffless Blood Pressure Estimation Based on Continuous Vital Signs
135
==PAGE:144==
60
ibi=diff(R_peak_idx)/75;
61
62
% Calculate mean and standard deviation of IBI data
63
mean_IBI = mean(ibi);
64
sd_IBI = std(ibi);
65
66
% Calculate RMSSD and SDNN
67
rmssd = sqrt(mean(diff(ibi).^2));
68
sdnn = std(ibi);
69
70
%loop through all S_peaks
71
if S_peak_idx==0
72
area=0;
73
% QR-slope
74
QR_slope=0;
75
76
% RS_slope
77
RS_slope=0;
78
79
% QRS duration
80
QRS_duration=0;
81
82
else
83
for i=1:length(S_peak_idx)
84
if sum(Q_peak_idx(i):S_peak_idx(i))>0
85
86
% calculate area under R-peak
87
area(i)=trapz(signal_filt(Q_peak_idx(i):S_peak_idx(i)));
88
89
% QR-slope
90
QR_slope(i,[1 2])=polyfit(Q_peak_idx(i):R_peak_idx(i),signal_filt(
Q_peak_idx(i):R_peak_idx(i))',1);
91
92
% RS_slope
93
RS_slope(i,[1 2])=polyfit(R_peak_idx(i):S_peak_idx(i),signal_filt(
R_peak_idx(i):S_peak_idx(i))',1);
94
95
% QRS duration
96
QRS_duration(i)=(S_peak_idx(i)-Q_peak_idx(i))/fs;
97
98
else
99
area=0;
100
% QR-slope
101
QR_slope=0;
102
103
% RS_slope
104
RS_slope=0;
105
106
% QRS duration
107
QRS_duration=0;
108
109
end
110
end
111
end
112
113
114
% area features
115
mean_area=mean(area);
116
sd_area=std(area);
117
min_area=min(area);
118
max_area=max(area);
119
136
Cuffless Blood Pressure Estimation Based on Continuous Vital Signs
==PAGE:145==
120
% QR slope features
121
mean_QR_slope=mean(QR_slope(:,1));
122
sd_QR_slope=std(QR_slope(:,1));
123
min_QR_slope=min(QR_slope(:,1));
124
max_QR_slope=max(QR_slope(:,1));
125
126
% QR slope features
127
mean_RS_slope=mean(RS_slope(:,1));
128
sd_RS_slope=std(RS_slope(:,1));
129
min_RS_slope=min(RS_slope(:,1));
130
max_RS_slope=max(RS_slope(:,1));
131
132
mean_QRS_duration=mean(QRS_duration);
133
sd_QRS_duration=std(QRS_duration);
134
min_QRS_duration=min(QRS_duration);
135
max_QRS_duration=max(QRS_duration);
136
137
%QR_slope
138
%Q_peak_idx
139
%QR_slope_line=[signal_filt(Q_peak_idx) signal_filt(Q_peak_idx)+3*QR_slope
(:,1)];
140
%RS_slope_line=[signal_filt(R_peak_idx) signal_filt(R_peak_idx)+3*RS_slope
(:,1)];
141
%QRS_duration_line=[signal_filt(Q_peak_idx)-0.1 signal_filt(Q_peak_idx)-0.1];
142
%
143
%
144
%x_QR_slope=[Q_peak_idx ' R_peak_idx ']
145
%
146
%x_RS_slope=[R_peak_idx ' S_peak_idx ']
147
%
148
%x_QRS_duration=[Q_peak_idx ' (Q_peak_idx+QRS_duration*75)']
149
150
151
%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
PPG figure %%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
152
% figure
153
% plot((1:length(signal_filt))/fs,signal_filt)
154
% hold on
155
% scatter(S_peak_idx/fs,signal_filt(S_peak_idx),100,'r','o','filled ')
156
% scatter(Q_peak_idx/fs,signal_filt(Q_peak_idx),100,'g','o','filled ')
157
% scatter(R_peak_idx/fs,signal_filt(R_peak_idx),100,'b','o','filled ')
158
% %
159
% for i =1:height(x_QR_slope)
160
%
plot(x_QR_slope(i,:)/fs,QR_slope_line(i,:),'c+--','LineWidth ',3)
161
%
plot(x_RS_slope(i,:)/fs,RS_slope_line(i,:),'m+--','LineWidth ',3)
162
%
plot(x_QRS_duration(i,:)/fs,QRS_duration_line(i,:),'k+--','LineWidth ',2)
163
%
164
%
% Calculate the x values for the area plot
165
%
x = (Q_peak_idx(i):S_peak_idx(i))/fs;
166
%
167
%
% Calculate the y values for the area plot
168
%
y = signal_filt(Q_peak_idx(i):S_peak_idx(i))';
169
%
170
%
x2=[Q_peak_idx(i) S_peak_idx(i)]/fs;
171
%
y2=[signal_filt(Q_peak_idx(i)) signal_filt(S_peak_idx(i))];
172
%
173
%
% Create a vector for the x-values of the area plot
174
%
areaX = [x, fliplr(x2)];
175
%
176
%
% Create a vector for the y-values of the area plot
177
%
areaY = [y, fliplr(y2)];
178
%
179
%
% Plot the area between the curves
Cuffless Blood Pressure Estimation Based on Continuous Vital Signs
137
==PAGE:146==
180
%
fill(areaX, areaY, 'r', 'FaceAlpha ', 0.1);
181
% end
182
% legend('PPG filtered signal ','Dicrotic notch','Onset','Systolic -peak','Onset
to systolic slope','Systolic to notch slope','Onset to notch duration ','
Onset to notch Area ')
183
% title('PPG Segment Features ')
184
% xlabel('Time (s)')
185
% ylabel('Amplitude (mV)')
186
187
188
%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
ECG figure %%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
189
% figure
190
% plot((1:length(signal_filt))/fs,signal_filt)
191
% hold on
192
% scatter(S_peak_idx/fs,signal_filt(S_peak_idx),100,'r','o','filled ')
193
% scatter(Q_peak_idx/fs,signal_filt(Q_peak_idx),100,'g','o','filled ')
194
% scatter(R_peak_idx/fs,signal_filt(R_peak_idx),100,'b','o','filled ')
195
% %
196
% for i =1:height(x_QR_slope)
197
%
plot(x_QR_slope(i,:)/fs,QR_slope_line(i,:),'c+--','LineWidth ',3)
198
%
plot(x_RS_slope(i,:)/fs,RS_slope_line(i,:),'m+--','LineWidth ',3)
199
%
plot(x_QRS_duration(i,:)/fs,QRS_duration_line(i,:),'k+--','LineWidth ',2)
200
%
201
%
% Calculate the x values for the area plot
202
%
x = (Q_peak_idx(i):S_peak_idx(i))/fs;
203
%
204
%
% Calculate the y values for the area plot
205
%
y = signal_filt(Q_peak_idx(i):S_peak_idx(i))';
206
%
207
%
x2=[Q_peak_idx(i) S_peak_idx(i)]/fs;
208
%
y2=[signal_filt(Q_peak_idx(i)) signal_filt(S_peak_idx(i))];
209
%
210
%
% Create a vector for the x-values of the area plot%
211
%
areaX = [x, fliplr(x2)];
212
213
% Create a vector for the y-values of the area plot
214
%
areaY = [y, fliplr(y2)];
215
216
% Plot the area between the curves
217
%
fill(areaX, areaY, 'r', 'FaceAlpha ', 0.1);
218
%end
219
%legend('ECG filtered signal ','S-peak','Q-peak','R-peak','QR-slope','RS-slope
','QRS-duration ','QRS-area ')
220
%title('ECG Segment Features ')
221
%xlabel('Time (s)')
222
%ylabel('Amplitude (mV)')
223
224
% function to calculate the derivative
225
function [dy,x] = derivative(x,y,Q_or_S)
226
% number of subintervals
227
N = length(x)-1;
228
% preallocates vector to store derivative
229
dy = zeros(size(x));
230
% approximates derivative at lower bound using forward difference
231
dy(1) = (y(2)-y(1))/(x(2)-x(1));
232
% approximates derivative at upper bound using backward difference
233
dy(N+1) = (y(N+1)-y(N))/(x(N+1)-x(N));
234
% approximates derivatives at all other nodes using central
differences
235
if Q_or_S=='S'
236
for i = 2:N
237
dy(i) = (y(i+1)-y(i-0))/(x(i+1)-x(i-0));
138
Cuffless Blood Pressure Estimation Based on Continuous Vital Signs
==PAGE:147==
238
end
239
else
240
for i = 2:N
241
dy(i) = (y(i)-y(i-1))/(x(i)-x(i-1));
242
end
243
end
244
end
245
end
Matlab/Segment_Features.m
Pan tompkins
Matlab function to find R­peaks. Made by Hooman Sedghamiz [49].
1
function [qrs_amp_raw ,qrs_i_raw ,delay,ecg_h]=pan_tompkin(ecg,fs,gr)
2
%% function [qrs_amp_raw ,qrs_i_raw ,delay]=pan_tompkin(ecg,fs)
3
% Complete implementation of Pan-Tompkins algorithm
4
%% Inputs
5
% ecg : raw ecg vector signal 1d signal
6
% fs : sampling frequency e.g. 200Hz, 400Hz and etc
7
% gr : flag to plot or not plot (set it 1 to have a plot or set it zero not
8
% to see any plots
9
%% Outputs
10
% qrs_amp_raw : amplitude of R waves amplitudes
11
% qrs_i_raw : index of R waves
12
% delay : number of samples which the signal is delayed due to the
13
% filtering
14
%% Method
15
% See Ref and supporting documents on researchgate.
16
% https://www.researchgate.net/publication/313673153
_Matlab_Implementation_of_Pan_Tompkins_ECG_QRS_detector
17
%% References :
18
%[1] Sedghamiz. H, "Matlab Implementation of Pan Tompkins ECG QRS
19
%detector.",2014. (See researchgate)
20
%[2] PAN.J, TOMPKINS. W.J,"A Real-Time QRS Detection Algorithm" IEEE
21
%TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING , VOL. BME-32, NO. 3, MARCH 1985.
22
%% ============== Licensce ========================================== %%
23
% THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS
24
% "AS IS" AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES , INCLUDING , BUT NOT
25
% LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS
26
% FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT
27
% OWNER OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT , INDIRECT , INCIDENTAL ,
28
% SPECIAL , EXEMPLARY , OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING , BUT NOT LIMITED
29
% TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR
30
% PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF
31
% LIABILITY , WHETHER IN CONTRACT , STRICT LIABILITY , OR TORT (INCLUDING
32
% NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS
33
% SOFTWARE , EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
34
% Author :
35
% Hooman Sedghamiz , Feb, 2018
36
% MSc. Biomedical Engineering , Linkoping University
37
% Email : Hooman.sedghamiz@gmail.com
38
%% ============ Update History ================== %%
39
% Feb 2018 :
40
%
1- Cleaned up the code and added more comments
41
%
2- Added to BioSigKit Toolbox
42
%% ================= Now Part of BioSigKit ==================== %%
43
if ~isvector(ecg)
44
error('ecg must be a row or column vector');
45
end
46
if nargin < 3
47
gr = 1;
% on default the function always plots
48
end
Cuffless Blood Pressure Estimation Based on Continuous Vital Signs
139
==PAGE:148==
49
ecg = ecg(:); % vectorize
50
%% ======================= Initialize =============================== %
51
delay = 0;
52
skip = 0;
%
becomes one when a T wave is detected
53
m_selected_RR = 0;
54
mean_RR = 0;
55
ser_back = 0;
56
ax = zeros(1,6);
57
%% ============ Noise cancelation(Filtering)( 5-15 Hz) =============== %%
58
if fs == 200
59
% ------------------ remove the mean of Signal -----------------------%
60
ecg = ecg - mean(ecg);
61
%% ==== Low Pass Filter
H(z) = ((1 - z^(-6))^2)/(1 - z^(-1))^2 ==== %%
62
%%It has come to my attention the original filter doesnt achieve 12 Hz
63
%
b = [1 0 0 0 0 0 -2 0 0 0 0 0 1];
64
%
a = [1 -2 1];
65
%
ecg_l = filter(b,a,ecg);
66
%
delay = 6;
67
%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
68
Wn = 12*2/fs;
69
N = 3;
%
order of 3 less processing
70
[a,b] = butter(N,Wn,'low');
%
bandpass filtering
71
ecg_l = filtfilt(a,b,ecg);
72
ecg_l = ecg_l/ max(abs(ecg_l));
73
%% ======================= start figure ============================= %%
74
if gr
75
figure;
76
ax(1) = subplot(321);plot(ecg);axis tight;title('Raw signal');
77
ax(2)=subplot(322);plot(ecg_l);axis tight;title('Low pass filtered');
78
end
79
%% ==== High Pass filter H(z) = (-1+32z^(-16)+z^(-32))/(1+z^(-1)) ==== %%
80
%%It has come to my attention the original filter doesn achieve 5 Hz
81
%
b = zeros(1,33);
82
%
b(1) = -1; b(17) = 32; b(33) = 1;
83
%
a = [1 1];
84
%
ecg_h = filter(b,a,ecg_l);
% Without Delay
85
%
delay = delay + 16;
86
%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
87
Wn = 5*2/fs;
88
N = 3;
%
order of 3 less processing
89
[a,b] = butter(N,Wn,'high');
%
bandpass filtering
90
ecg_h = filtfilt(a,b,ecg_l);
91
ecg_h = ecg_h/ max(abs(ecg_h));
92
if gr
93
ax(3)=subplot(323);plot(ecg_h);axis tight;title('High Pass Filtered');
94
end
95
else
96
%%
bandpass filter for Noise cancelation of other sampling frequencies(
Filtering)
97
f1=5;
%
cuttoff low frequency to get rid of baseline wander
98
f2=15;
%
cuttoff frequency to discard high frequency noise
99
Wn=[f1 f2]*2/fs;
%
cutt off based on fs
100
N = 3;
%
order of 3 less processing
140
Cuffless Blood Pressure Estimation Based on Continuous Vital Signs
==PAGE:149==
101
[a,b] = butter(N,Wn);
%
bandpass filtering
102
ecg_h = filtfilt(a,b,ecg);
103
ecg_h = ecg_h/ max( abs(ecg_h));
104
if gr
105
ax(1) = subplot(3,2,[1 2]);plot(ecg);axis tight;title('Raw Signal');xlabel('
Sample');ylabel('Amplitude (mV)');
106
ax(3)=subplot(323);plot(ecg_h);axis tight;title('Band Pass Filtered');xlabel
('Sample');ylabel('Amplitude');
107
end
108
end
109
%% ==================== derivative filter ========================== %%
110
% ------ H(z) = (1/8T)(-z^(-2) - 2z^(-1) + 2z + z^(2)) --------- %
111
if fs ~= 200
112
int_c = (5-1)/(fs*1/40);
113
b = interp1(1:5,[1 2 0 -2 -1].*(1/8)*fs,1:int_c:5);
114
else
115
b = [1 2 0 -2 -1].*(1/8)*fs;
116
end
117
ecg_d = filtfilt(b,1,ecg_h);
118
ecg_d = ecg_d/max(ecg_d);
119
if gr
120
ax(4)=subplot(324);plot(ecg_d);
121
axis tight;
122
title('Derivative filter');xlabel('Sample');ylabel('Amplitude');
123
end
124
%% ========== Squaring nonlinearly enhance the dominant peaks ========== %%
125
ecg_s = ecg_d.^2;
126
if gr
127
ax(5)=subplot(325);
128
plot(ecg_s);
129
axis tight;
130
title('Squared');xlabel('Sample');ylabel('Amplitude');
131
end
132
%% ============
Moving average ================== %%
133
%-------Y(nt) = (1/N)[x(nT-(N - 1)T)+ x(nT - (N - 2)T)+...+x(nT)]---------%
134
ecg_m = conv(ecg_s ,ones(1 ,round(0.150*fs))/round(0.150*fs));
135
delay = delay + round(0.150*fs)/2;
136
if gr
137
ax(6)=subplot(326);plot(ecg_m);
138
axis tight;
139
title('Moving Average');xlabel('Sample');ylabel('Amplitude');
140
axis tight;
141
end
142
%% ===================== Fiducial Marks ============================== %%
143
% Note : a minimum distance of 40 samples is considered between each R wave
144
% since in physiological point of view no RR wave can occur in less than
145
% 200 msec distance
146
[pks,locs] = findpeaks(ecg_m,'MINPEAKDISTANCE',round(0.2*fs));
147
%% =================== Initialize Some Other Parameters =============== %%
148
LLp = length(pks);
149
% ---------------- Stores QRS wrt Sig and Filtered Sig ------------------%
150
qrs_c = zeros(1,LLp);
% amplitude of R
151
qrs_i = zeros(1,LLp);
% index
152
qrs_i_raw = zeros(1,LLp);
% amplitude of R
153
qrs_amp_raw= zeros(1,LLp);
% Index
154
% ------------------- Noise Buffers ---------------------------------%
155
nois_c = zeros(1,LLp);
156
nois_i = zeros(1,LLp);
157
% ------------------- Buffers for Signal and Noise ----------------- %
158
SIGL_buf = zeros(1,LLp);
159
NOISL_buf = zeros(1,LLp);
Cuffless Blood Pressure Estimation Based on Continuous Vital Signs
141
==PAGE:150==
160
SIGL_buf1 = zeros(1,LLp);
161
NOISL_buf1 = zeros(1,LLp);
162
THRS_buf1 = zeros(1,LLp);
163
THRS_buf = zeros(1,LLp);
164
%% initialize the training phase (2 seconds of the signal) to determine the
THR_SIG and THR_NOISE
165
if length(ecg_m)>=2*fs
166
THR_SIG = max(ecg_m(1:2*fs))*1/3;
167
THR_NOISE = mean(ecg_m(1:2*fs))*1/2;
% 0.25 of the max amplitude
168
else
169
THR_SIG = max(ecg_m(1:end))*1/3;
170
THR_NOISE = mean(ecg_m(1:end))*1/2;
171
end
172
% 0.5 of the mean signal is considered to
be noise
173
SIG_LEV= THR_SIG;
174
NOISE_LEV = THR_NOISE;
175
%% Initialize bandpath filter threshold(2 seconds of the bandpass signal)
176
177
if length(ecg_h)>=(2*fs)
178
THR_SIG1 = max(ecg_h(1:2*fs))*1/3;
%
0.25 of the max amplitude
179
THR_NOISE1 = mean(ecg_h(1:2*fs))*1/2;
180
else
181
THR_SIG1 = max(ecg_h(1:end))*1/3;
% 0.25 of the max amplitude
182
THR_NOISE1 = mean(ecg_h(1:end))*1/2;
183
end
184
SIG_LEV1 = THR_SIG1;
%
Signal level in Bandpassed filter
185
NOISE_LEV1 = THR_NOISE1;
%
Noise level in Bandpassed filter
186
%% ============ Thresholding and desicion rule ============= %%
187
Beat_C = 0;
%
Raw Beats
188
Beat_C1 = 0;
%
Filtered Beats
189
Noise_Count = 0;
%
Noise Counter
190
for i = 1 : LLp
191
%% ===== locate the corresponding peak in the filtered signal === %%
192
if locs(i)-round(0.150*fs)>= 1 && locs(i)<= length(ecg_h)
193
[y_i,x_i] = max(ecg_h(locs(i)-round(0.150*fs):locs(i)));
194
else
195
if i == 1
196
[y_i,x_i] = max(ecg_h(1:locs(i)));
197
ser_back = 1;
198
elseif locs(i)>= length(ecg_h)
199
[y_i,x_i] = max(ecg_h(locs(i)-round(0.150*fs):end));
200
end
201
end
202
%% ================= update the heart_rate ==================== %%
203
if Beat_C >= 9
204
diffRR = diff(qrs_i(Beat_C -8:Beat_C));
% calculate RR interval
205
mean_RR = mean(diffRR);
%
calculate the mean of 8 previous R waves interval
206
comp =qrs_i(Beat_C)-qrs_i(Beat_C -1);
% latest RR
207
208
if comp <= 0.92*mean_RR || comp >= 1.16*mean_RR
209
% ------ lower down thresholds to detect better in MVI -------- %
142
Cuffless Blood Pressure Estimation Based on Continuous Vital Signs
==PAGE:151==
210
THR_SIG = 0.5*(THR_SIG);
211
THR_SIG1 = 0.5*(THR_SIG1);
212
else
213
m_selected_RR = mean_RR;
%
The latest regular beats mean
214
end
215
216
end
217
218
%% == calculate the mean last 8 R waves to ensure that QRS is not ==== %%
219
if m_selected_RR
220
test_m = m_selected_RR;
%if
the regular RR availabe use it
221
elseif mean_RR && m_selected_RR == 0
222
test_m = mean_RR;
223
else
224
test_m = 0;
225
end
226
227
if test_m
228
if (locs(i) - qrs_i(Beat_C)) >= round(1.66*test_m)
% it shows a QRS is missed
229
[pks_temp ,locs_temp] = max(ecg_m(qrs_i(Beat_C)+ round(0.200*fs):
locs(i)-round(0.200*fs))); % search back and locate the max
in this interval
230
locs_temp = qrs_i(Beat_C)+ round(0.200*fs) + locs_temp -1;
% location
231
232
if pks_temp > THR_NOISE
233
Beat_C = Beat_C + 1;
234
qrs_c(Beat_C) = pks_temp;
235
qrs_i(Beat_C) = locs_temp;
236
% ------------- Locate in Filtered Sig ------------- %
237
if locs_temp <= length(ecg_h)
238
[y_i_t,x_i_t] = max(ecg_h(locs_temp -round(0.150*fs):
locs_temp));
239
else
240
[y_i_t,x_i_t] = max(ecg_h(locs_temp -round(0.150*fs):end));
241
end
242
% ----------- Band pass Sig Threshold ------------------%
243
if y_i_t > THR_NOISE1
244
Beat_C1 = Beat_C1 + 1;
245
qrs_i_raw(Beat_C1) = locs_temp -round(0.150*fs)+ (x_i_t - 1);
% save index of bandpass
246
qrs_amp_raw(Beat_C1) = y_i_t;
% save amplitude of bandpass
247
SIG_LEV1 = 0.25*y_i_t + 0.75*SIG_LEV1;
% when found with the second thres
248
end
249
250
not_nois = 1;
251
SIG_LEV = 0.25*pks_temp + 0.75*SIG_LEV ;
% when found with the second threshold
252
end
253
else
254
not_nois = 0;
255
end
256
end
257
258
%% ===================
find noise and QRS peaks ================== %%
259
if pks(i) >= THR_SIG
260
% ------ if No QRS in 360ms of the previous QRS See if T wave ------%
Cuffless Blood Pressure Estimation Based on Continuous Vital Signs
143
==PAGE:152==
261
if Beat_C >= 3
262
if (locs(i)-qrs_i(Beat_C)) <= round(0.3600*fs)
263
Slope1 = mean(diff(ecg_m(locs(i)-round(0.075*fs):locs(i))));
% mean slope of the waveform at that position
264
Slope2 = mean(diff(ecg_m(qrs_i(Beat_C)-round(0.075*fs):qrs_i(
Beat_C)))); % mean slope of previous R wave
265
if abs(Slope1) <= abs(0.5*(Slope2))
% slope less then 0.5 of
previous R
266
Noise_Count = Noise_Count + 1;
267
nois_c(Noise_Count) = pks(i);
268
nois_i(Noise_Count) = locs(i);
269
skip = 1;
% T
wave identification
270
% ----- adjust noise levels ------ %
271
NOISE_LEV1 = 0.125*y_i + 0.875*NOISE_LEV1;
272
NOISE_LEV = 0.125*pks(i) + 0.875*NOISE_LEV;
273
else
274
skip = 0;
275
end
276
277
end
278
end
279
%---------- skip is 1 when a T wave is detected -------------- %
280
if skip == 0
281
Beat_C = Beat_C + 1;
282
qrs_c(Beat_C) = pks(i);
283
qrs_i(Beat_C) = locs(i);
284
285
%--------------- bandpass filter check threshold --------------- %
286
if y_i >= THR_SIG1
287
Beat_C1 = Beat_C1 + 1;
288
if ser_back
289
qrs_i_raw(Beat_C1) = x_i;
%
save index of bandpass
290
else
291
qrs_i_raw(Beat_C1)= locs(i)-round(0.150*fs)+ (x_i - 1);
%
save index of bandpass
292
end
293
qrs_amp_raw(Beat_C1) =
y_i;
%
save amplitude of bandpass
294
SIG_LEV1 = 0.125*y_i + 0.875*SIG_LEV1;
%
adjust threshold for bandpass filtered sig
295
end
296
SIG_LEV = 0.125*pks(i) + 0.875*SIG_LEV ;
%
adjust Signal level
297
end
298
299
elseif (THR_NOISE <= pks(i)) && (pks(i) < THR_SIG)
300
NOISE_LEV1 = 0.125*y_i + 0.875*NOISE_LEV1;
%
adjust Noise level in filtered sig
301
NOISE_LEV = 0.125*pks(i) + 0.875*NOISE_LEV;
%
adjust Noise level in MVI
302
elseif pks(i) < THR_NOISE
303
Noise_Count = Noise_Count + 1;
304
nois_c(Noise_Count) = pks(i);
305
nois_i(Noise_Count) = locs(i);
306
NOISE_LEV1 = 0.125*y_i + 0.875*NOISE_LEV1;
%
noise level in filtered signal
307
NOISE_LEV = 0.125*pks(i) + 0.875*NOISE_LEV;
%
adjust Noise level in MVI
308
end
144
Cuffless Blood Pressure Estimation Based on Continuous Vital Signs
==PAGE:153==
309
310
%% ================== adjust the threshold with SNR ============= %%
311
if NOISE_LEV ~= 0 || SIG_LEV ~= 0
312
THR_SIG = NOISE_LEV + 0.25*(abs(SIG_LEV - NOISE_LEV));
313
THR_NOISE = 0.5*(THR_SIG);
314
end
315
316
%------ adjust the threshold with SNR for bandpassed signal -------- %
317
if NOISE_LEV1 ~= 0 || SIG_LEV1 ~= 0
318
THR_SIG1 = NOISE_LEV1 + 0.25*(abs(SIG_LEV1 - NOISE_LEV1));
319
THR_NOISE1 = 0.5*(THR_SIG1);
320
end
321
322
323
%--------- take a track of thresholds of smoothed signal -------------%
324
SIGL_buf(i) = SIG_LEV;
325
NOISL_buf(i) = NOISE_LEV;
326
THRS_buf(i) = THR_SIG;
327
%-------- take a track of thresholds of filtered signal ----------- %
328
SIGL_buf1(i) = SIG_LEV1;
329
NOISL_buf1(i) = NOISE_LEV1;
330
THRS_buf1(i) = THR_SIG1;
331
% ----------------------- reset parameters -------------------------- %
332
skip = 0;
333
not_nois = 0;
334
ser_back = 0;
335
end
336
%% ======================= Adjust Lengths ============================ %%
337
qrs_i_raw = qrs_i_raw(1:Beat_C1);
338
qrs_amp_raw = qrs_amp_raw(1:Beat_C1);
339
qrs_c = qrs_c(1:Beat_C);
340
qrs_i = qrs_i(1:Beat_C);
341
%% ======================= Plottings ================================= %%
342
if gr
343
hold on,scatter(qrs_i,qrs_c,'m');
344
% hold on,plot(locs,NOISL_buf ,'--k','LineWidth ',2);
345
%hold on,plot(locs,SIGL_buf ,'--r','LineWidth ',2);
346
%hold on,plot(locs,THRS_buf ,'--g','LineWidth ',2);
347
if any(ax)
348
ax(~ax) = [];
349
linkaxes(ax,'x');
350
zoom on;
351
end
352
end
353
%% ================== overlay on the signals ========================= %%
354
if gr
355
figure;
356
az(1)=subplot(311);
357
plot(ecg_h);
358
title('QRS on Filtered Signal');
359
axis tight;
360
hold on,scatter(qrs_i_raw ,qrs_amp_raw ,'m');
361
hold on,plot(locs,NOISL_buf1 ,'LineWidth',2,'Linestyle','--','color','k');
362
hold on,plot(locs,SIGL_buf1 ,'LineWidth',2,'Linestyle','-.','color','r');
363
hold on,plot(locs,THRS_buf1 ,'LineWidth',2,'Linestyle','-.','color','g');
364
az(2)=subplot(312);plot(ecg_m);
365
title('QRS on MVI signal and Noise level(black),Signal Level (red) and
Adaptive Threshold(green)');axis tight;
366
hold on,scatter(qrs_i,qrs_c,'m');
367
hold on,plot(locs,NOISL_buf ,'LineWidth',2,'Linestyle','--','color','k');
368
hold on,plot(locs,SIGL_buf ,'LineWidth',2,'Linestyle','-.','color','r');
369
hold on,plot(locs,THRS_buf ,'LineWidth',2,'Linestyle','-.','color','g');
Cuffless Blood Pressure Estimation Based on Continuous Vital Signs
145
==PAGE:154==
370
az(3)=subplot(313);
371
plot(ecg-mean(ecg));
372
title('Pulse train of the found QRS on ECG signal');
373
axis tight;
374
line(repmat(qrs_i_raw ,[2 1]) ,...
375
repmat([min(ecg-mean(ecg))/2; max(ecg-mean(ecg))/2],size(qrs_i_raw))
,...
376
'LineWidth',2.5,'LineStyle','-.','Color','r');
377
linkaxes(az,'x');
378
zoom on;
379
end
380
end
Matlab/pan_tompkin.m
146
Cuffless Blood Pressure Estimation Based on Continuous Vital Signs
==PAGE:155==
A.0.27
Balance data
Matlab function to balance the data, and is used to train the model
1
function [ballanced] = Table_ballanced(tab1,num_classification)
2
% This Function takes the table with all the features and the type of
ballancing as input and then outputs a ballanced
3
% dataset
4
5
% Author: Benjamin Trasborg s184038 and Matin Riedel s184032
6
% Date: 13/02/2023
7
8
% 3_class ballance data 33/33/33
9
if num_classification==3
10
%remove all empty BPState rows
11
idxLOW=find(tab1.BPState=="LOW");
12
idxHIGH=find(tab1.BPState=="HIGH");
13
idxNORMAL=find(tab1.BPState=="NORMAL");
14
15
% find number of observaions in each class
16
lengthOfClasses=[
17
length(idxLOW)
18
length(idxHIGH)
19
length(idxNORMAL)];
20
21
% find the class with the lowest number of observations
22
shortestClass=min(lengthOfClasses);
23
24
% randomly select shortestClass number of observation from each class
25
idxLOW=idxLOW(randperm(length(idxLOW),shortestClass));
26
idxHIGH=idxHIGH(randperm(length(idxHIGH),shortestClass));
27
idxNORMAL=idxNORMAL(randperm(length(idxNORMAL),shortestClass));
28
29
% combine the randomly selected observation in one array
30
idxcombined=[idxLOW
31
idxHIGH
32
idxNORMAL];
33
%randomaize the idxcombined
34
randidxcombined = idxcombined(randperm(length(idxcombined)));
35
ballanced=tab1(randidxcombined ,:);
36
37
% 2_class 50% Normal 50% Abnormal
38
elseif num_classification==2
39
%remove all empty BPState rows
40
idxABNORMAL=find(tab1.BPState_2_class=="ABNORMAL");
41
idxNORMAL=find(tab1.BPState_2_class=="NORMAL");
42
43
% find number of observaions in each class
44
lengthOfClasses=[
45
length(idxABNORMAL)
46
length(idxNORMAL)];
47
48
% find the class with the lowest number of observations
49
shortestClass=min(lengthOfClasses);
50
51
% randomly select shortestClass number of observation from each class
52
idxABNORMAL=idxABNORMAL(randperm(length(idxABNORMAL),shortestClass));
53
idxNORMAL=idxNORMAL(randperm(length(idxNORMAL),shortestClass));
54
55
%combine he indexes
56
idxcombined=[idxABNORMAL
57
idxNORMAL];
58
Cuffless Blood Pressure Estimation Based on Continuous Vital Signs
147
==PAGE:156==
59
%randomaize the idxcombined
60
randidxcombined = idxcombined(randperm(length(idxcombined)));
61
ballanced=tab1(randidxcombined ,:);
62
63
% skew class All HIHG, All LOW, LOW-number of NORMAL
64
else
%remove all empty BPState rows
65
idxLOW=find(tab1.BPState=="LOW");
66
idxHIGH=find(tab1.BPState=="HIGH");
67
idxNORMAL=find(tab1.BPState=="NORMAL");
68
69
% find number of observaions in each class
70
lengthOfClasses=[
71
length(idxLOW)
72
length(idxHIGH)];
73
74
% find the class with the highest number of observations
75
longestClass=max(lengthOfClasses);
76
77
% randomly select longestClass number of observation from NORMAL class
78
idxNORMAL=idxNORMAL(randperm(length(idxNORMAL),longestClass));
79
80
%combine he indexes
81
idxcombined=[idxLOW
82
idxHIGH
83
idxNORMAL];
84
85
%randomaize the idxcombined
86
randidxcombined = idxcombined(randperm(length(idxcombined)));
87
ballanced=tab1(randidxcombined ,:);
88
end
Matlab/Table_ballanced.m
148
Cuffless Blood Pressure Estimation Based on Continuous Vital Signs
==PAGE:157==
A.0.28
Train random forest models
Matlab functions to train the HIGH­model and LOW­model used in the combined model.
1
function [trainedClassifier , validationAccuracy] = trainClassifier_vital(
trainingData)
2
% [trainedClassifier , validationAccuracy] = trainClassifier(trainingData)
3
% Returns a trained classifier and its accuracy. This code recreates the
4
% classification model trained in Classification Learner app. Use the
5
% generated code to automate training the same model with new data, or to
6
% learn how to programmatically train models.
7
%
8
%
Input:
9
%
trainingData: A table containing the same predictor and response
10
%
columns as those imported into the app.
11
%
12
%
Output:
13
%
trainedClassifier: A struct containing the trained classifier. The
14
%
struct contains various fields with information about the trained
15
%
classifier.
16
%
17
%
trainedClassifier.predictFcn: A function to make predictions on new
18
%
data.
19
%
20
%
validationAccuracy: A double containing the accuracy as a
21
%
percentage. In the app, the Models pane displays this overall
22
%
accuracy score for each model.
23
%
24
% Use the code to train the model with new data. To retrain your
25
% classifier , call the function from the command line with your original
26
% data or new data as the input argument trainingData.
27
%
28
% For example , to retrain a classifier trained with the original data set
29
% T, enter:
30
%
[trainedClassifier , validationAccuracy] = trainClassifier(T)
31
%
32
% To make predictions with the returned 'trainedClassifier ' on new data T2,
33
% use
34
%
yfit = trainedClassifier.predictFcn(T2)
35
%
36
% T2 must be a table containing at least the same predictor columns as used
37
% during training. For details , enter:
38
%
trainedClassifier.HowToPredict
39
40
% Auto-generated by MATLAB on 15-Jun -2023 10:46:21
41
42
43
% Extract predictors and response
44
% This code processes the data into the right shape for training the
45
% model.
46
inputTable = trainingData;
47
% Split matrices in the input table into vectors
48
inputTable = [inputTable(:,setdiff(inputTable.Properties.VariableNames , {'
ECG_segments_feature', 'PPG_cali_segments_tab', 'PPG_segments_feature', '
cali_segments_tab'})), array2table(table2array(inputTable(:,{'
ECG_segments_feature', 'PPG_cali_segments_tab', 'PPG_segments_feature', '
cali_segments_tab'})), 'VariableNames', {'ECG_segments_feature_1', '
ECG_segments_feature_2', 'ECG_segments_feature_3', 'ECG_segments_feature_4
', 'ECG_segments_feature_5', 'ECG_segments_feature_6', '
ECG_segments_feature_7', 'ECG_segments_feature_8', 'ECG_segments_feature_9
', 'ECG_segments_feature_10', 'ECG_segments_feature_11', '
ECG_segments_feature_12', 'ECG_segments_feature_13', '
ECG_segments_feature_14', 'ECG_segments_feature_15', '
Cuffless Blood Pressure Estimation Based on Continuous Vital Signs
149
==PAGE:158==
ECG_segments_feature_16', 'ECG_segments_feature_17', '
ECG_segments_feature_18', 'ECG_segments_feature_19', '
ECG_segments_feature_20', 'ECG_segments_feature_21', '
ECG_segments_feature_22', 'ECG_segments_feature_23', '
ECG_segments_feature_24', 'PPG_cali_segments_tab_1', '
PPG_cali_segments_tab_2', 'PPG_cali_segments_tab_3', '
PPG_cali_segments_tab_4', 'PPG_cali_segments_tab_5', '
PPG_cali_segments_tab_6', 'PPG_cali_segments_tab_7', '
PPG_cali_segments_tab_8', 'PPG_cali_segments_tab_9', '
PPG_cali_segments_tab_10', 'PPG_cali_segments_tab_11', '
PPG_cali_segments_tab_12', 'PPG_cali_segments_tab_13', '
PPG_cali_segments_tab_14', 'PPG_cali_segments_tab_15', '
PPG_cali_segments_tab_16', 'PPG_cali_segments_tab_17', '
PPG_cali_segments_tab_18', 'PPG_cali_segments_tab_19', '
PPG_cali_segments_tab_20', 'PPG_cali_segments_tab_21', '
PPG_cali_segments_tab_22', 'PPG_cali_segments_tab_23', '
PPG_cali_segments_tab_24', 'PPG_segments_feature_1', '
PPG_segments_feature_2', 'PPG_segments_feature_3', 'PPG_segments_feature_4
', 'PPG_segments_feature_5', 'PPG_segments_feature_6', '
PPG_segments_feature_7', 'PPG_segments_feature_8', 'PPG_segments_feature_9
', 'PPG_segments_feature_10', 'PPG_segments_feature_11', '
PPG_segments_feature_12', 'PPG_segments_feature_13', '
PPG_segments_feature_14', 'PPG_segments_feature_15', '
PPG_segments_feature_16', 'PPG_segments_feature_17', '
PPG_segments_feature_18', 'PPG_segments_feature_19', '
PPG_segments_feature_20', 'PPG_segments_feature_21', '
PPG_segments_feature_22', 'PPG_segments_feature_23', '
PPG_segments_feature_24', 'cali_segments_tab_1', 'cali_segments_tab_2', '
cali_segments_tab_3', 'cali_segments_tab_4', 'cali_segments_tab_5', '
cali_segments_tab_6', 'cali_segments_tab_7', 'cali_segments_tab_8', '
cali_segments_tab_9', 'cali_segments_tab_10', 'cali_segments_tab_11', '
cali_segments_tab_12', 'cali_segments_tab_13', 'cali_segments_tab_14', '
cali_segments_tab_15', 'cali_segments_tab_16', 'cali_segments_tab_17', '
cali_segments_tab_18', 'cali_segments_tab_19', 'cali_segments_tab_20', '
cali_segments_tab_21', 'cali_segments_tab_22', 'cali_segments_tab_23', '
cali_segments_tab_24'})];
49
50
predictorNames = {'meanHeartRate', 'meanRespirationRate', 'meanSpO2', '
meanPulseRate', 'sdHeartRate', 'sdRespirationRate', 'sdSpO2', 'sdPulseRate
', 'minHeartRate', 'minRespirationRate', 'minSpO2', 'minPulseRate', '
maxHeartRate', 'maxRespirationRate', 'maxSpO2', 'maxPulseRate', '
rangeHeartRate', 'rangeRespirationRate', 'rangeSpO2', 'rangePulseRate', '
skewnessHeartRate', 'skewnessRespirationRate', 'skewnessSpO2', '
skewnessPulseRate', 'meanHeartRate_cali', 'meanRespirationRate_cali', '
meanSpO2_cali', 'meanPulseRate_cali', 'meanSBP_cali', 'sdHeartRate_cali',
'sdRespirationRate_cali', 'sdSpO2_cali', 'sdPulseRate_cali', 'sdSBP_cali',
'minHeartRate_cali', 'minRespirationRate_cali', 'minSpO2_cali', '
minPulseRate_cali', 'minSBP_cali', 'maxHeartRate_cali', '
maxRespirationRate_cali', 'maxSpO2_cali', 'maxPulseRate_cali', '
maxSBP_cali', 'rangeHeartRate_cali', 'rangeRespirationRate_cali', '
rangeSpO2_cali', 'rangePulseRate_cali', 'rangeSBP_cali', '
skewnessHeartRate_cali', 'skewnessRespirationRate_cali', '
skewnessSpO2_cali', 'skewnessPulseRate_cali', 'skewnessSBP_cali', '
ECG_segments_feature_1', 'ECG_segments_feature_2', 'ECG_segments_feature_3
', 'ECG_segments_feature_4', 'ECG_segments_feature_5', '
ECG_segments_feature_6', 'ECG_segments_feature_7', 'ECG_segments_feature_8
', 'ECG_segments_feature_9', 'ECG_segments_feature_10', '
ECG_segments_feature_11', 'ECG_segments_feature_12', '
ECG_segments_feature_13', 'ECG_segments_feature_14', '
ECG_segments_feature_15', 'ECG_segments_feature_16', '
ECG_segments_feature_17', 'ECG_segments_feature_18', '
ECG_segments_feature_19', 'ECG_segments_feature_20', '
150
Cuffless Blood Pressure Estimation Based on Continuous Vital Signs
==PAGE:159==
ECG_segments_feature_21', 'ECG_segments_feature_22', '
ECG_segments_feature_23', 'ECG_segments_feature_24', '
PPG_segments_feature_1', 'PPG_segments_feature_2', 'PPG_segments_feature_3
', 'PPG_segments_feature_4', 'PPG_segments_feature_5', '
PPG_segments_feature_6', 'PPG_segments_feature_7', 'PPG_segments_feature_8
', 'PPG_segments_feature_9', 'PPG_segments_feature_10', '
PPG_segments_feature_11', 'PPG_segments_feature_12', '
PPG_segments_feature_13', 'PPG_segments_feature_14', '
PPG_segments_feature_15', 'PPG_segments_feature_16', '
PPG_segments_feature_17', 'PPG_segments_feature_18', '
PPG_segments_feature_19', 'PPG_segments_feature_20', '
PPG_segments_feature_21', 'PPG_segments_feature_22', '
PPG_segments_feature_23', 'PPG_segments_feature_24', 'cali_segments_tab_1'
, 'cali_segments_tab_2', 'cali_segments_tab_3', 'cali_segments_tab_4', '
cali_segments_tab_5', 'cali_segments_tab_6', 'cali_segments_tab_7', '
cali_segments_tab_8', 'cali_segments_tab_9', 'cali_segments_tab_10', '
cali_segments_tab_11', 'cali_segments_tab_12', 'cali_segments_tab_13', '
cali_segments_tab_14', 'cali_segments_tab_15', 'cali_segments_tab_16', '
cali_segments_tab_17', 'cali_segments_tab_18', 'cali_segments_tab_19', '
cali_segments_tab_20', 'cali_segments_tab_21', 'cali_segments_tab_22', '
cali_segments_tab_23', 'cali_segments_tab_24', 'PPG_cali_segments_tab_1',
'PPG_cali_segments_tab_2', 'PPG_cali_segments_tab_3', '
PPG_cali_segments_tab_4', 'PPG_cali_segments_tab_5', '
PPG_cali_segments_tab_6', 'PPG_cali_segments_tab_7', '
PPG_cali_segments_tab_8', 'PPG_cali_segments_tab_9', '
PPG_cali_segments_tab_10', 'PPG_cali_segments_tab_11', '
PPG_cali_segments_tab_12', 'PPG_cali_segments_tab_13', '
PPG_cali_segments_tab_14', 'PPG_cali_segments_tab_15', '
PPG_cali_segments_tab_16', 'PPG_cali_segments_tab_17', '
PPG_cali_segments_tab_18', 'PPG_cali_segments_tab_19', '
PPG_cali_segments_tab_20', 'PPG_cali_segments_tab_21', '
PPG_cali_segments_tab_22', 'PPG_cali_segments_tab_23', '
PPG_cali_segments_tab_24'};
51
predictors = inputTable(:, predictorNames);
52
response = inputTable.BPState;
53
isCategoricalPredictor = [false, false, false, false, false, false, false,
false, false, false, false, false, false, false, false, false, false,
false, false, false, false, false, false, false, false, false, false,
false, false, false, false, false, false, false, false, false, false,
false, false, false, false, false, false, false, false, false, false,
false, false, false, false, false, false, false, false, false, false,
false, false, false, false, false, false, false, false, false, false,
false, false, false, false, false, false, false, false, false, false,
false, false, false, false, false, false, false, false, false, false,
false, false, false, false, false, false, false, false, false, false,
false, false, false, false, false, false, false, false, false, false,
false, false, false, false, false, false, false, false, false, false,
false, false, false, false, false, false, false, false, false, false,
false, false, false, false, false, false, false, false, false, false,
false, false, false, false, false, false, false, false, false, false,
false, false, false];
54
55
% Data transformation: Select subset of the features
56
% This code selects the same subset of features as were used in the app.
57
includedPredictorNames = predictors.Properties.VariableNames([true true true
true true true true true true true true true true true true true true true
true true true true true true true true true true true true true true
true true true true true true true true true true true true true true true
true true true true true true true false false false false false false
false false false false false false false false false false false false
false false false false false false false false false false false false
false false false false false false false false false false false false
Cuffless Blood Pressure Estimation Based on Continuous Vital Signs
151
==PAGE:160==
false false false false false false false false false false false false
false false false false false false false false false false false false
false false false false false false false false false false false false
false false false false false false false false false false false false
false false false false false false]);
58
predictors = predictors(:,includedPredictorNames);
59
isCategoricalPredictor = isCategoricalPredictor([true true true true true true
true true true true true true true true true true true true true true
true true true true true true true true true true true true true true true
true true true true true true true true true true true true true true
true true true true true false false false false false false false false
false false false false false false false false false false false false
false false false false false false false false false false false false
false false false false false false false false false false false false
false false false false false false false false false false false false
false false false false false false false false false false false false
false false false false false false false false false false false false
false false false false false false false false false false false false
false false false false]);
60
61
% Train a classifier
62
% This code specifies all the classifier options and trains the classifier.
63
template = templateTree(...
64
'MaxNumSplits', 2000, ...
65
'NumVariablesToSample', 'all');
66
classificationEnsemble = fitcensemble(...
67
predictors , ...
68
response , ...
69
'Method', 'Bag', ...
70
'NumLearningCycles', 100, ...
71
'Learners', template , ...
72
'ClassNames', {'HIGH'; 'LOW'; 'NORMAL'});
73
74
% Create the result struct with predict function
75
splitMatricesInTableFcn = @(t) [t(:,setdiff(t.Properties.VariableNames , {'
ECG_segments_feature', 'PPG_cali_segments_tab', 'PPG_segments_feature', '
cali_segments_tab'})), array2table(table2array(t(:,{'ECG_segments_feature'
, 'PPG_cali_segments_tab', 'PPG_segments_feature', 'cali_segments_tab'})),
'VariableNames', {'ECG_segments_feature_1', 'ECG_segments_feature_2', '
ECG_segments_feature_3', 'ECG_segments_feature_4', 'ECG_segments_feature_5
', 'ECG_segments_feature_6', 'ECG_segments_feature_7', '
ECG_segments_feature_8', 'ECG_segments_feature_9', '
ECG_segments_feature_10', 'ECG_segments_feature_11', '
ECG_segments_feature_12', 'ECG_segments_feature_13', '
ECG_segments_feature_14', 'ECG_segments_feature_15', '
ECG_segments_feature_16', 'ECG_segments_feature_17', '
ECG_segments_feature_18', 'ECG_segments_feature_19', '
ECG_segments_feature_20', 'ECG_segments_feature_21', '
ECG_segments_feature_22', 'ECG_segments_feature_23', '
ECG_segments_feature_24', 'PPG_cali_segments_tab_1', '
PPG_cali_segments_tab_2', 'PPG_cali_segments_tab_3', '
PPG_cali_segments_tab_4', 'PPG_cali_segments_tab_5', '
PPG_cali_segments_tab_6', 'PPG_cali_segments_tab_7', '
PPG_cali_segments_tab_8', 'PPG_cali_segments_tab_9', '
PPG_cali_segments_tab_10', 'PPG_cali_segments_tab_11', '
PPG_cali_segments_tab_12', 'PPG_cali_segments_tab_13', '
PPG_cali_segments_tab_14', 'PPG_cali_segments_tab_15', '
PPG_cali_segments_tab_16', 'PPG_cali_segments_tab_17', '
PPG_cali_segments_tab_18', 'PPG_cali_segments_tab_19', '
PPG_cali_segments_tab_20', 'PPG_cali_segments_tab_21', '
PPG_cali_segments_tab_22', 'PPG_cali_segments_tab_23', '
PPG_cali_segments_tab_24', 'PPG_segments_feature_1', '
152
Cuffless Blood Pressure Estimation Based on Continuous Vital Signs
==PAGE:161==
PPG_segments_feature_2', 'PPG_segments_feature_3', 'PPG_segments_feature_4
', 'PPG_segments_feature_5', 'PPG_segments_feature_6', '
PPG_segments_feature_7', 'PPG_segments_feature_8', 'PPG_segments_feature_9
', 'PPG_segments_feature_10', 'PPG_segments_feature_11', '
PPG_segments_feature_12', 'PPG_segments_feature_13', '
PPG_segments_feature_14', 'PPG_segments_feature_15', '
PPG_segments_feature_16', 'PPG_segments_feature_17', '
PPG_segments_feature_18', 'PPG_segments_feature_19', '
PPG_segments_feature_20', 'PPG_segments_feature_21', '
PPG_segments_feature_22', 'PPG_segments_feature_23', '
PPG_segments_feature_24', 'cali_segments_tab_1', 'cali_segments_tab_2', '
cali_segments_tab_3', 'cali_segments_tab_4', 'cali_segments_tab_5', '
cali_segments_tab_6', 'cali_segments_tab_7', 'cali_segments_tab_8', '
cali_segments_tab_9', 'cali_segments_tab_10', 'cali_segments_tab_11', '
cali_segments_tab_12', 'cali_segments_tab_13', 'cali_segments_tab_14', '
cali_segments_tab_15', 'cali_segments_tab_16', 'cali_segments_tab_17', '
cali_segments_tab_18', 'cali_segments_tab_19', 'cali_segments_tab_20', '
cali_segments_tab_21', 'cali_segments_tab_22', 'cali_segments_tab_23', '
cali_segments_tab_24'})];
76
extractPredictorsFromTableFcn = @(t) t(:, predictorNames);
77
predictorExtractionFcn = @(x) extractPredictorsFromTableFcn(
splitMatricesInTableFcn(x));
78
featureSelectionFcn = @(x) x(:,includedPredictorNames);
79
ensemblePredictFcn = @(x) predict(classificationEnsemble , x);
80
trainedClassifier.predictFcn = @(x) ensemblePredictFcn(featureSelectionFcn(
predictorExtractionFcn(x)));
81
82
% Add additional fields to the result struct
83
trainedClassifier.RequiredVariables = {'maxHeartRate', 'maxHeartRate_cali', '
maxPulseRate', 'maxPulseRate_cali', 'maxRespirationRate', '
maxRespirationRate_cali', 'maxSBP_cali', 'maxSpO2', 'maxSpO2_cali', '
meanHeartRate', 'meanHeartRate_cali', 'meanPulseRate', 'meanPulseRate_cali
', 'meanRespirationRate', 'meanRespirationRate_cali', 'meanSBP_cali', '
meanSpO2', 'meanSpO2_cali', 'minHeartRate', 'minHeartRate_cali', '
minPulseRate', 'minPulseRate_cali', 'minRespirationRate', '
minRespirationRate_cali', 'minSBP_cali', 'minSpO2', 'minSpO2_cali', '
rangeHeartRate', 'rangeHeartRate_cali', 'rangePulseRate', '
rangePulseRate_cali', 'rangeRespirationRate', 'rangeRespirationRate_cali',
'rangeSBP_cali', 'rangeSpO2', 'rangeSpO2_cali', 'sdHeartRate', '
sdHeartRate_cali', 'sdPulseRate', 'sdPulseRate_cali', 'sdRespirationRate',
'sdRespirationRate_cali', 'sdSBP_cali', 'sdSpO2', 'sdSpO2_cali', '
skewnessHeartRate', 'skewnessHeartRate_cali', 'skewnessPulseRate', '
skewnessPulseRate_cali', 'skewnessRespirationRate', '
skewnessRespirationRate_cali', 'skewnessSBP_cali', 'skewnessSpO2', '
skewnessSpO2_cali', 'ECG_segments_feature', 'PPG_cali_segments_tab', '
PPG_segments_feature', 'cali_segments_tab'};
84
trainedClassifier.ClassificationEnsemble = classificationEnsemble;
85
trainedClassifier.About = 'This struct is a trained model exported from
Classification Learner R2022a.';
86
trainedClassifier.HowToPredict = sprintf('To make predictions on a new table,
T, use: \n
yfit = c.predictFcn(T) \nreplacing ''c'' with the name of the
variable that is this struct , e.g. ''trainedModel''. \n \nThe table, T,
must contain the variables returned by: \n
c.RequiredVariables \nVariable
formats (e.g. matrix/vector , datatype) must match the original training
data. \nAdditional variables are ignored. \n \nFor more information , see <
a href="matlab:helpview(fullfile(docroot , ''stats'', ''stats.map''), ''
appclassification_exportmodeltoworkspace'')">How to predict using an
exported model </a>.');
87
88
% Extract predictors and response
89
% This code processes the data into the right shape for training the
90
% model.
Cuffless Blood Pressure Estimation Based on Continuous Vital Signs
153
==PAGE:162==
91
inputTable = trainingData;
92
% Split matrices in the input table into vectors
93
inputTable = [inputTable(:,setdiff(inputTable.Properties.VariableNames , {'
ECG_segments_feature', 'PPG_cali_segments_tab', 'PPG_segments_feature', '
cali_segments_tab'})), array2table(table2array(inputTable(:,{'
ECG_segments_feature', 'PPG_cali_segments_tab', 'PPG_segments_feature', '
cali_segments_tab'})), 'VariableNames', {'ECG_segments_feature_1', '
ECG_segments_feature_2', 'ECG_segments_feature_3', 'ECG_segments_feature_4
', 'ECG_segments_feature_5', 'ECG_segments_feature_6', '
ECG_segments_feature_7', 'ECG_segments_feature_8', 'ECG_segments_feature_9
', 'ECG_segments_feature_10', 'ECG_segments_feature_11', '
ECG_segments_feature_12', 'ECG_segments_feature_13', '
ECG_segments_feature_14', 'ECG_segments_feature_15', '
ECG_segments_feature_16', 'ECG_segments_feature_17', '
ECG_segments_feature_18', 'ECG_segments_feature_19', '
ECG_segments_feature_20', 'ECG_segments_feature_21', '
ECG_segments_feature_22', 'ECG_segments_feature_23', '
ECG_segments_feature_24', 'PPG_cali_segments_tab_1', '
PPG_cali_segments_tab_2', 'PPG_cali_segments_tab_3', '
PPG_cali_segments_tab_4', 'PPG_cali_segments_tab_5', '
PPG_cali_segments_tab_6', 'PPG_cali_segments_tab_7', '
PPG_cali_segments_tab_8', 'PPG_cali_segments_tab_9', '
PPG_cali_segments_tab_10', 'PPG_cali_segments_tab_11', '
PPG_cali_segments_tab_12', 'PPG_cali_segments_tab_13', '
PPG_cali_segments_tab_14', 'PPG_cali_segments_tab_15', '
PPG_cali_segments_tab_16', 'PPG_cali_segments_tab_17', '
PPG_cali_segments_tab_18', 'PPG_cali_segments_tab_19', '
PPG_cali_segments_tab_20', 'PPG_cali_segments_tab_21', '
PPG_cali_segments_tab_22', 'PPG_cali_segments_tab_23', '
PPG_cali_segments_tab_24', 'PPG_segments_feature_1', '
PPG_segments_feature_2', 'PPG_segments_feature_3', 'PPG_segments_feature_4
', 'PPG_segments_feature_5', 'PPG_segments_feature_6', '
PPG_segments_feature_7', 'PPG_segments_feature_8', 'PPG_segments_feature_9
', 'PPG_segments_feature_10', 'PPG_segments_feature_11', '
PPG_segments_feature_12', 'PPG_segments_feature_13', '
PPG_segments_feature_14', 'PPG_segments_feature_15', '
PPG_segments_feature_16', 'PPG_segments_feature_17', '
PPG_segments_feature_18', 'PPG_segments_feature_19', '
PPG_segments_feature_20', 'PPG_segments_feature_21', '
PPG_segments_feature_22', 'PPG_segments_feature_23', '
PPG_segments_feature_24', 'cali_segments_tab_1', 'cali_segments_tab_2', '
cali_segments_tab_3', 'cali_segments_tab_4', 'cali_segments_tab_5', '
cali_segments_tab_6', 'cali_segments_tab_7', 'cali_segments_tab_8', '
cali_segments_tab_9', 'cali_segments_tab_10', 'cali_segments_tab_11', '
cali_segments_tab_12', 'cali_segments_tab_13', 'cali_segments_tab_14', '
cali_segments_tab_15', 'cali_segments_tab_16', 'cali_segments_tab_17', '
cali_segments_tab_18', 'cali_segments_tab_19', 'cali_segments_tab_20', '
cali_segments_tab_21', 'cali_segments_tab_22', 'cali_segments_tab_23', '
cali_segments_tab_24'})];
94
95
predictorNames = {'meanHeartRate', 'meanRespirationRate', 'meanSpO2', '
meanPulseRate', 'sdHeartRate', 'sdRespirationRate', 'sdSpO2', 'sdPulseRate
', 'minHeartRate', 'minRespirationRate', 'minSpO2', 'minPulseRate', '
maxHeartRate', 'maxRespirationRate', 'maxSpO2', 'maxPulseRate', '
rangeHeartRate', 'rangeRespirationRate', 'rangeSpO2', 'rangePulseRate', '
skewnessHeartRate', 'skewnessRespirationRate', 'skewnessSpO2', '
skewnessPulseRate', 'meanHeartRate_cali', 'meanRespirationRate_cali', '
meanSpO2_cali', 'meanPulseRate_cali', 'meanSBP_cali', 'sdHeartRate_cali',
'sdRespirationRate_cali', 'sdSpO2_cali', 'sdPulseRate_cali', 'sdSBP_cali',
'minHeartRate_cali', 'minRespirationRate_cali', 'minSpO2_cali', '
minPulseRate_cali', 'minSBP_cali', 'maxHeartRate_cali', '
maxRespirationRate_cali', 'maxSpO2_cali', 'maxPulseRate_cali', '
154
Cuffless Blood Pressure Estimation Based on Continuous Vital Signs
==PAGE:163==
maxSBP_cali', 'rangeHeartRate_cali', 'rangeRespirationRate_cali', '
rangeSpO2_cali', 'rangePulseRate_cali', 'rangeSBP_cali', '
skewnessHeartRate_cali', 'skewnessRespirationRate_cali', '
skewnessSpO2_cali', 'skewnessPulseRate_cali', 'skewnessSBP_cali', '
ECG_segments_feature_1', 'ECG_segments_feature_2', 'ECG_segments_feature_3
', 'ECG_segments_feature_4', 'ECG_segments_feature_5', '
ECG_segments_feature_6', 'ECG_segments_feature_7', 'ECG_segments_feature_8
', 'ECG_segments_feature_9', 'ECG_segments_feature_10', '
ECG_segments_feature_11', 'ECG_segments_feature_12', '
ECG_segments_feature_13', 'ECG_segments_feature_14', '
ECG_segments_feature_15', 'ECG_segments_feature_16', '
ECG_segments_feature_17', 'ECG_segments_feature_18', '
ECG_segments_feature_19', 'ECG_segments_feature_20', '
ECG_segments_feature_21', 'ECG_segments_feature_22', '
ECG_segments_feature_23', 'ECG_segments_feature_24', '
PPG_segments_feature_1', 'PPG_segments_feature_2', 'PPG_segments_feature_3
', 'PPG_segments_feature_4', 'PPG_segments_feature_5', '
PPG_segments_feature_6', 'PPG_segments_feature_7', 'PPG_segments_feature_8
', 'PPG_segments_feature_9', 'PPG_segments_feature_10', '
PPG_segments_feature_11', 'PPG_segments_feature_12', '
PPG_segments_feature_13', 'PPG_segments_feature_14', '
PPG_segments_feature_15', 'PPG_segments_feature_16', '
PPG_segments_feature_17', 'PPG_segments_feature_18', '
PPG_segments_feature_19', 'PPG_segments_feature_20', '
PPG_segments_feature_21', 'PPG_segments_feature_22', '
PPG_segments_feature_23', 'PPG_segments_feature_24', 'cali_segments_tab_1'
, 'cali_segments_tab_2', 'cali_segments_tab_3', 'cali_segments_tab_4', '
cali_segments_tab_5', 'cali_segments_tab_6', 'cali_segments_tab_7', '
cali_segments_tab_8', 'cali_segments_tab_9', 'cali_segments_tab_10', '
cali_segments_tab_11', 'cali_segments_tab_12', 'cali_segments_tab_13', '
cali_segments_tab_14', 'cali_segments_tab_15', 'cali_segments_tab_16', '
cali_segments_tab_17', 'cali_segments_tab_18', 'cali_segments_tab_19', '
cali_segments_tab_20', 'cali_segments_tab_21', 'cali_segments_tab_22', '
cali_segments_tab_23', 'cali_segments_tab_24', 'PPG_cali_segments_tab_1',
'PPG_cali_segments_tab_2', 'PPG_cali_segments_tab_3', '
PPG_cali_segments_tab_4', 'PPG_cali_segments_tab_5', '
PPG_cali_segments_tab_6', 'PPG_cali_segments_tab_7', '
PPG_cali_segments_tab_8', 'PPG_cali_segments_tab_9', '
PPG_cali_segments_tab_10', 'PPG_cali_segments_tab_11', '
PPG_cali_segments_tab_12', 'PPG_cali_segments_tab_13', '
PPG_cali_segments_tab_14', 'PPG_cali_segments_tab_15', '
PPG_cali_segments_tab_16', 'PPG_cali_segments_tab_17', '
PPG_cali_segments_tab_18', 'PPG_cali_segments_tab_19', '
PPG_cali_segments_tab_20', 'PPG_cali_segments_tab_21', '
PPG_cali_segments_tab_22', 'PPG_cali_segments_tab_23', '
PPG_cali_segments_tab_24'};
96
predictors = inputTable(:, predictorNames);
97
response = inputTable.BPState;
98
isCategoricalPredictor = [false, false, false, false, false, false, false,
false, false, false, false, false, false, false, false, false, false,
false, false, false, false, false, false, false, false, false, false,
false, false, false, false, false, false, false, false, false, false,
false, false, false, false, false, false, false, false, false, false,
false, false, false, false, false, false, false, false, false, false,
false, false, false, false, false, false, false, false, false, false,
false, false, false, false, false, false, false, false, false, false,
false, false, false, false, false, false, false, false, false, false,
false, false, false, false, false, false, false, false, false, false,
false, false, false, false, false, false, false, false, false, false,
false, false, false, false, false, false, false, false, false, false,
false, false, false, false, false, false, false, false, false, false,
false, false, false, false, false, false, false, false, false, false,
Cuffless Blood Pressure Estimation Based on Continuous Vital Signs
155
==PAGE:164==
false, false, false, false, false, false, false, false, false, false,
false, false, false];
99
100
% Perform cross-validation
101
partitionedModel = crossval(trainedClassifier.ClassificationEnsemble , 'KFold',
5);
102
103
% Compute validation predictions
104
[validationPredictions , validationScores] = kfoldPredict(partitionedModel);
105
106
% Compute validation accuracy
107
validationAccuracy = 1 - kfoldLoss(partitionedModel , 'LossFun', 'ClassifError'
);
Matlab/trainClassifier_vital.m
1
function [trainedClassifier , validationAccuracy] = trainClassifier_segments(
trainingData)
2
% [trainedClassifier , validationAccuracy] = trainClassifier(trainingData)
3
% Returns a trained classifier and its accuracy. This code recreates the
4
% classification model trained in Classification Learner app. Use the
5
% generated code to automate training the same model with new data, or to
6
% learn how to programmatically train models.
7
%
8
%
Input:
9
%
trainingData: A table containing the same predictor and response
10
%
columns as those imported into the app.
11
%
12
%
Output:
13
%
trainedClassifier: A struct containing the trained classifier. The
14
%
struct contains various fields with information about the trained
15
%
classifier.
16
%
17
%
trainedClassifier.predictFcn: A function to make predictions on new
18
%
data.
19
%
20
%
validationAccuracy: A double containing the accuracy as a
21
%
percentage. In the app, the Models pane displays this overall
22
%
accuracy score for each model.
23
%
24
% Use the code to train the model with new data. To retrain your
25
% classifier , call the function from the command line with your original
26
% data or new data as the input argument trainingData.
27
%
28
% For example , to retrain a classifier trained with the original data set
29
% T, enter:
30
%
[trainedClassifier , validationAccuracy] = trainClassifier(T)
31
%
32
% To make predictions with the returned 'trainedClassifier ' on new data T2,
33
% use
34
%
yfit = trainedClassifier.predictFcn(T2)
35
%
36
% T2 must be a table containing at least the same predictor columns as used
37
% during training. For details , enter:
38
%
trainedClassifier.HowToPredict
39
40
% Auto-generated by MATLAB on 15-Jun -2023 10:44:35
41
42
43
% Extract predictors and response
44
% This code processes the data into the right shape for training the
45
% model.
156
Cuffless Blood Pressure Estimation Based on Continuous Vital Signs
==PAGE:165==
46
inputTable = trainingData;
47
% Split matrices in the input table into vectors
48
inputTable = [inputTable(:,setdiff(inputTable.Properties.VariableNames , {'
ECG_segments_feature', 'PPG_cali_segments_tab', 'PPG_segments_feature', '
cali_segments_tab'})), array2table(table2array(inputTable(:,{'
ECG_segments_feature', 'PPG_cali_segments_tab', 'PPG_segments_feature', '
cali_segments_tab'})), 'VariableNames', {'ECG_segments_feature_1', '
ECG_segments_feature_2', 'ECG_segments_feature_3', 'ECG_segments_feature_4
', 'ECG_segments_feature_5', 'ECG_segments_feature_6', '
ECG_segments_feature_7', 'ECG_segments_feature_8', 'ECG_segments_feature_9
', 'ECG_segments_feature_10', 'ECG_segments_feature_11', '
ECG_segments_feature_12', 'ECG_segments_feature_13', '
ECG_segments_feature_14', 'ECG_segments_feature_15', '
ECG_segments_feature_16', 'ECG_segments_feature_17', '
ECG_segments_feature_18', 'ECG_segments_feature_19', '
ECG_segments_feature_20', 'ECG_segments_feature_21', '
ECG_segments_feature_22', 'ECG_segments_feature_23', '
ECG_segments_feature_24', 'PPG_cali_segments_tab_1', '
PPG_cali_segments_tab_2', 'PPG_cali_segments_tab_3', '
PPG_cali_segments_tab_4', 'PPG_cali_segments_tab_5', '
PPG_cali_segments_tab_6', 'PPG_cali_segments_tab_7', '
PPG_cali_segments_tab_8', 'PPG_cali_segments_tab_9', '
PPG_cali_segments_tab_10', 'PPG_cali_segments_tab_11', '
PPG_cali_segments_tab_12', 'PPG_cali_segments_tab_13', '
PPG_cali_segments_tab_14', 'PPG_cali_segments_tab_15', '
PPG_cali_segments_tab_16', 'PPG_cali_segments_tab_17', '
PPG_cali_segments_tab_18', 'PPG_cali_segments_tab_19', '
PPG_cali_segments_tab_20', 'PPG_cali_segments_tab_21', '
PPG_cali_segments_tab_22', 'PPG_cali_segments_tab_23', '
PPG_cali_segments_tab_24', 'PPG_segments_feature_1', '
PPG_segments_feature_2', 'PPG_segments_feature_3', 'PPG_segments_feature_4
', 'PPG_segments_feature_5', 'PPG_segments_feature_6', '
PPG_segments_feature_7', 'PPG_segments_feature_8', 'PPG_segments_feature_9
', 'PPG_segments_feature_10', 'PPG_segments_feature_11', '
PPG_segments_feature_12', 'PPG_segments_feature_13', '
PPG_segments_feature_14', 'PPG_segments_feature_15', '
PPG_segments_feature_16', 'PPG_segments_feature_17', '
PPG_segments_feature_18', 'PPG_segments_feature_19', '
PPG_segments_feature_20', 'PPG_segments_feature_21', '
PPG_segments_feature_22', 'PPG_segments_feature_23', '
PPG_segments_feature_24', 'cali_segments_tab_1', 'cali_segments_tab_2', '
cali_segments_tab_3', 'cali_segments_tab_4', 'cali_segments_tab_5', '
cali_segments_tab_6', 'cali_segments_tab_7', 'cali_segments_tab_8', '
cali_segments_tab_9', 'cali_segments_tab_10', 'cali_segments_tab_11', '
cali_segments_tab_12', 'cali_segments_tab_13', 'cali_segments_tab_14', '
cali_segments_tab_15', 'cali_segments_tab_16', 'cali_segments_tab_17', '
cali_segments_tab_18', 'cali_segments_tab_19', 'cali_segments_tab_20', '
cali_segments_tab_21', 'cali_segments_tab_22', 'cali_segments_tab_23', '
cali_segments_tab_24'})];
49
50
predictorNames = {'meanHeartRate', 'meanRespirationRate', 'meanSpO2', '
meanPulseRate', 'sdHeartRate', 'sdRespirationRate', 'sdSpO2', 'sdPulseRate
', 'minHeartRate', 'minRespirationRate', 'minSpO2', 'minPulseRate', '
maxHeartRate', 'maxRespirationRate', 'maxSpO2', 'maxPulseRate', '
rangeHeartRate', 'rangeRespirationRate', 'rangeSpO2', 'rangePulseRate', '
skewnessHeartRate', 'skewnessRespirationRate', 'skewnessSpO2', '
skewnessPulseRate', 'meanHeartRate_cali', 'meanRespirationRate_cali', '
meanSpO2_cali', 'meanPulseRate_cali', 'meanSBP_cali', 'sdHeartRate_cali',
'sdRespirationRate_cali', 'sdSpO2_cali', 'sdPulseRate_cali', 'sdSBP_cali',
'minHeartRate_cali', 'minRespirationRate_cali', 'minSpO2_cali', '
minPulseRate_cali', 'minSBP_cali', 'maxHeartRate_cali', '
maxRespirationRate_cali', 'maxSpO2_cali', 'maxPulseRate_cali', '
Cuffless Blood Pressure Estimation Based on Continuous Vital Signs
157
==PAGE:166==
maxSBP_cali', 'rangeHeartRate_cali', 'rangeRespirationRate_cali', '
rangeSpO2_cali', 'rangePulseRate_cali', 'rangeSBP_cali', '
skewnessHeartRate_cali', 'skewnessRespirationRate_cali', '
skewnessSpO2_cali', 'skewnessPulseRate_cali', 'skewnessSBP_cali', '
ECG_segments_feature_1', 'ECG_segments_feature_2', 'ECG_segments_feature_3
', 'ECG_segments_feature_4', 'ECG_segments_feature_5', '
ECG_segments_feature_6', 'ECG_segments_feature_7', 'ECG_segments_feature_8
', 'ECG_segments_feature_9', 'ECG_segments_feature_10', '
ECG_segments_feature_11', 'ECG_segments_feature_12', '
ECG_segments_feature_13', 'ECG_segments_feature_14', '
ECG_segments_feature_15', 'ECG_segments_feature_16', '
ECG_segments_feature_17', 'ECG_segments_feature_18', '
ECG_segments_feature_19', 'ECG_segments_feature_20', '
ECG_segments_feature_21', 'ECG_segments_feature_22', '
ECG_segments_feature_23', 'ECG_segments_feature_24', '
PPG_segments_feature_1', 'PPG_segments_feature_2', 'PPG_segments_feature_3
', 'PPG_segments_feature_4', 'PPG_segments_feature_5', '
PPG_segments_feature_6', 'PPG_segments_feature_7', 'PPG_segments_feature_8
', 'PPG_segments_feature_9', 'PPG_segments_feature_10', '
PPG_segments_feature_11', 'PPG_segments_feature_12', '
PPG_segments_feature_13', 'PPG_segments_feature_14', '
PPG_segments_feature_15', 'PPG_segments_feature_16', '
PPG_segments_feature_17', 'PPG_segments_feature_18', '
PPG_segments_feature_19', 'PPG_segments_feature_20', '
PPG_segments_feature_21', 'PPG_segments_feature_22', '
PPG_segments_feature_23', 'PPG_segments_feature_24', 'cali_segments_tab_1'
, 'cali_segments_tab_2', 'cali_segments_tab_3', 'cali_segments_tab_4', '
cali_segments_tab_5', 'cali_segments_tab_6', 'cali_segments_tab_7', '
cali_segments_tab_8', 'cali_segments_tab_9', 'cali_segments_tab_10', '
cali_segments_tab_11', 'cali_segments_tab_12', 'cali_segments_tab_13', '
cali_segments_tab_14', 'cali_segments_tab_15', 'cali_segments_tab_16', '
cali_segments_tab_17', 'cali_segments_tab_18', 'cali_segments_tab_19', '
cali_segments_tab_20', 'cali_segments_tab_21', 'cali_segments_tab_22', '
cali_segments_tab_23', 'cali_segments_tab_24', 'PPG_cali_segments_tab_1',
'PPG_cali_segments_tab_2', 'PPG_cali_segments_tab_3', '
PPG_cali_segments_tab_4', 'PPG_cali_segments_tab_5', '
PPG_cali_segments_tab_6', 'PPG_cali_segments_tab_7', '
PPG_cali_segments_tab_8', 'PPG_cali_segments_tab_9', '
PPG_cali_segments_tab_10', 'PPG_cali_segments_tab_11', '
PPG_cali_segments_tab_12', 'PPG_cali_segments_tab_13', '
PPG_cali_segments_tab_14', 'PPG_cali_segments_tab_15', '
PPG_cali_segments_tab_16', 'PPG_cali_segments_tab_17', '
PPG_cali_segments_tab_18', 'PPG_cali_segments_tab_19', '
PPG_cali_segments_tab_20', 'PPG_cali_segments_tab_21', '
PPG_cali_segments_tab_22', 'PPG_cali_segments_tab_23', '
PPG_cali_segments_tab_24'};
51
predictors = inputTable(:, predictorNames);
52
response = inputTable.BPState;
53
isCategoricalPredictor = [false, false, false, false, false, false, false,
false, false, false, false, false, false, false, false, false, false,
false, false, false, false, false, false, false, false, false, false,
false, false, false, false, false, false, false, false, false, false,
false, false, false, false, false, false, false, false, false, false,
false, false, false, false, false, false, false, false, false, false,
false, false, false, false, false, false, false, false, false, false,
false, false, false, false, false, false, false, false, false, false,
false, false, false, false, false, false, false, false, false, false,
false, false, false, false, false, false, false, false, false, false,
false, false, false, false, false, false, false, false, false, false,
false, false, false, false, false, false, false, false, false, false,
false, false, false, false, false, false, false, false, false, false,
false, false, false, false, false, false, false, false, false, false,
158
Cuffless Blood Pressure Estimation Based on Continuous Vital Signs
==PAGE:167==
false, false, false, false, false, false, false, false, false, false,
false, false, false];
54
55
% Data transformation: Select subset of the features
56
% This code selects the same subset of features as were used in the app.
57
includedPredictorNames = predictors.Properties.VariableNames([false false
false false false false false false false false false false false false
false false false false false false false false false false false false
false false false false false false false false false false false false
false false false false false false false false false false false false
false false false false true true true true true true true true true true
true true true true true true true true true true true true true true true
true true true true true true true true true true true true true true
true true true true true true true true true true true true true true true
true true true true true true true true true true true true true true
true true true true true true true true true true true true true true true
true true true true true true true true true true true true true]);
58
predictors = predictors(:,includedPredictorNames);
59
isCategoricalPredictor = isCategoricalPredictor([false false false false false
false false false false false false false false false false false false
false false false false false false false false false false false false
false false false false false false false false false false false false
false false false false false false false false false false false false
false true true true true true true true true true true true true true
true true true true true true true true true true true true true true true
true true true true true true true true true true true true true true
true true true true true true true true true true true true true true true
true true true true true true true true true true true true true true
true true true true true true true true true true true true true true true
true true true true true true true true true true]);
60
61
% Train a classifier
62
% This code specifies all the classifier options and trains the classifier.
63
template = templateTree(...
64
'MaxNumSplits', 2000, ...
65
'NumVariablesToSample', 'all');
66
classificationEnsemble = fitcensemble(...
67
predictors , ...
68
response , ...
69
'Method', 'Bag', ...
70
'NumLearningCycles', 100, ...
71
'Learners', template , ...
72
'ClassNames', {'HIGH'; 'LOW'; 'NORMAL'});
73
74
% Create the result struct with predict function
75
splitMatricesInTableFcn = @(t) [t(:,setdiff(t.Properties.VariableNames , {'
ECG_segments_feature', 'PPG_cali_segments_tab', 'PPG_segments_feature', '
cali_segments_tab'})), array2table(table2array(t(:,{'ECG_segments_feature'
, 'PPG_cali_segments_tab', 'PPG_segments_feature', 'cali_segments_tab'})),
'VariableNames', {'ECG_segments_feature_1', 'ECG_segments_feature_2', '
ECG_segments_feature_3', 'ECG_segments_feature_4', 'ECG_segments_feature_5
', 'ECG_segments_feature_6', 'ECG_segments_feature_7', '
ECG_segments_feature_8', 'ECG_segments_feature_9', '
ECG_segments_feature_10', 'ECG_segments_feature_11', '
ECG_segments_feature_12', 'ECG_segments_feature_13', '
ECG_segments_feature_14', 'ECG_segments_feature_15', '
ECG_segments_feature_16', 'ECG_segments_feature_17', '
ECG_segments_feature_18', 'ECG_segments_feature_19', '
ECG_segments_feature_20', 'ECG_segments_feature_21', '
ECG_segments_feature_22', 'ECG_segments_feature_23', '
ECG_segments_feature_24', 'PPG_cali_segments_tab_1', '
PPG_cali_segments_tab_2', 'PPG_cali_segments_tab_3', '
Cuffless Blood Pressure Estimation Based on Continuous Vital Signs
159
==PAGE:168==
PPG_cali_segments_tab_4', 'PPG_cali_segments_tab_5', '
PPG_cali_segments_tab_6', 'PPG_cali_segments_tab_7', '
PPG_cali_segments_tab_8', 'PPG_cali_segments_tab_9', '
PPG_cali_segments_tab_10', 'PPG_cali_segments_tab_11', '
PPG_cali_segments_tab_12', 'PPG_cali_segments_tab_13', '
PPG_cali_segments_tab_14', 'PPG_cali_segments_tab_15', '
PPG_cali_segments_tab_16', 'PPG_cali_segments_tab_17', '
PPG_cali_segments_tab_18', 'PPG_cali_segments_tab_19', '
PPG_cali_segments_tab_20', 'PPG_cali_segments_tab_21', '
PPG_cali_segments_tab_22', 'PPG_cali_segments_tab_23', '
PPG_cali_segments_tab_24', 'PPG_segments_feature_1', '
PPG_segments_feature_2', 'PPG_segments_feature_3', 'PPG_segments_feature_4
', 'PPG_segments_feature_5', 'PPG_segments_feature_6', '
PPG_segments_feature_7', 'PPG_segments_feature_8', 'PPG_segments_feature_9
', 'PPG_segments_feature_10', 'PPG_segments_feature_11', '
PPG_segments_feature_12', 'PPG_segments_feature_13', '
PPG_segments_feature_14', 'PPG_segments_feature_15', '
PPG_segments_feature_16', 'PPG_segments_feature_17', '
PPG_segments_feature_18', 'PPG_segments_feature_19', '
PPG_segments_feature_20', 'PPG_segments_feature_21', '
PPG_segments_feature_22', 'PPG_segments_feature_23', '
PPG_segments_feature_24', 'cali_segments_tab_1', 'cali_segments_tab_2', '
cali_segments_tab_3', 'cali_segments_tab_4', 'cali_segments_tab_5', '
cali_segments_tab_6', 'cali_segments_tab_7', 'cali_segments_tab_8', '
cali_segments_tab_9', 'cali_segments_tab_10', 'cali_segments_tab_11', '
cali_segments_tab_12', 'cali_segments_tab_13', 'cali_segments_tab_14', '
cali_segments_tab_15', 'cali_segments_tab_16', 'cali_segments_tab_17', '
cali_segments_tab_18', 'cali_segments_tab_19', 'cali_segments_tab_20', '
cali_segments_tab_21', 'cali_segments_tab_22', 'cali_segments_tab_23', '
cali_segments_tab_24'})];
76
extractPredictorsFromTableFcn = @(t) t(:, predictorNames);
77
predictorExtractionFcn = @(x) extractPredictorsFromTableFcn(
splitMatricesInTableFcn(x));
78
featureSelectionFcn = @(x) x(:,includedPredictorNames);
79
ensemblePredictFcn = @(x) predict(classificationEnsemble , x);
80
trainedClassifier.predictFcn = @(x) ensemblePredictFcn(featureSelectionFcn(
predictorExtractionFcn(x)));
81
82
% Add additional fields to the result struct
83
trainedClassifier.RequiredVariables = {'maxHeartRate', 'maxHeartRate_cali', '
maxPulseRate', 'maxPulseRate_cali', 'maxRespirationRate', '
maxRespirationRate_cali', 'maxSBP_cali', 'maxSpO2', 'maxSpO2_cali', '
meanHeartRate', 'meanHeartRate_cali', 'meanPulseRate', 'meanPulseRate_cali
', 'meanRespirationRate', 'meanRespirationRate_cali', 'meanSBP_cali', '
meanSpO2', 'meanSpO2_cali', 'minHeartRate', 'minHeartRate_cali', '
minPulseRate', 'minPulseRate_cali', 'minRespirationRate', '
minRespirationRate_cali', 'minSBP_cali', 'minSpO2', 'minSpO2_cali', '
rangeHeartRate', 'rangeHeartRate_cali', 'rangePulseRate', '
rangePulseRate_cali', 'rangeRespirationRate', 'rangeRespirationRate_cali',
'rangeSBP_cali', 'rangeSpO2', 'rangeSpO2_cali', 'sdHeartRate', '
sdHeartRate_cali', 'sdPulseRate', 'sdPulseRate_cali', 'sdRespirationRate',
'sdRespirationRate_cali', 'sdSBP_cali', 'sdSpO2', 'sdSpO2_cali', '
skewnessHeartRate', 'skewnessHeartRate_cali', 'skewnessPulseRate', '
skewnessPulseRate_cali', 'skewnessRespirationRate', '
skewnessRespirationRate_cali', 'skewnessSBP_cali', 'skewnessSpO2', '
skewnessSpO2_cali', 'ECG_segments_feature', 'PPG_cali_segments_tab', '
PPG_segments_feature', 'cali_segments_tab'};
84
trainedClassifier.ClassificationEnsemble = classificationEnsemble;
85
trainedClassifier.About = 'This struct is a trained model exported from
Classification Learner R2022a.';
86
trainedClassifier.HowToPredict = sprintf('To make predictions on a new table,
T, use: \n
yfit = c.predictFcn(T) \nreplacing ''c'' with the name of the
160
Cuffless Blood Pressure Estimation Based on Continuous Vital Signs
==PAGE:169==
variable that is this struct , e.g. ''trainedModel''. \n \nThe table, T,
must contain the variables returned by: \n
c.RequiredVariables \nVariable
formats (e.g. matrix/vector , datatype) must match the original training
data. \nAdditional variables are ignored. \n \nFor more information , see <
a href="matlab:helpview(fullfile(docroot , ''stats'', ''stats.map''), ''
appclassification_exportmodeltoworkspace'')">How to predict using an
exported model </a>.');
87
88
% Extract predictors and response
89
% This code processes the data into the right shape for training the
90
% model.
91
inputTable = trainingData;
92
% Split matrices in the input table into vectors
93
inputTable = [inputTable(:,setdiff(inputTable.Properties.VariableNames , {'
ECG_segments_feature', 'PPG_cali_segments_tab', 'PPG_segments_feature', '
cali_segments_tab'})), array2table(table2array(inputTable(:,{'
ECG_segments_feature', 'PPG_cali_segments_tab', 'PPG_segments_feature', '
cali_segments_tab'})), 'VariableNames', {'ECG_segments_feature_1', '
ECG_segments_feature_2', 'ECG_segments_feature_3', 'ECG_segments_feature_4
', 'ECG_segments_feature_5', 'ECG_segments_feature_6', '
ECG_segments_feature_7', 'ECG_segments_feature_8', 'ECG_segments_feature_9
', 'ECG_segments_feature_10', 'ECG_segments_feature_11', '
ECG_segments_feature_12', 'ECG_segments_feature_13', '
ECG_segments_feature_14', 'ECG_segments_feature_15', '
ECG_segments_feature_16', 'ECG_segments_feature_17', '
ECG_segments_feature_18', 'ECG_segments_feature_19', '
ECG_segments_feature_20', 'ECG_segments_feature_21', '
ECG_segments_feature_22', 'ECG_segments_feature_23', '
ECG_segments_feature_24', 'PPG_cali_segments_tab_1', '
PPG_cali_segments_tab_2', 'PPG_cali_segments_tab_3', '
PPG_cali_segments_tab_4', 'PPG_cali_segments_tab_5', '
PPG_cali_segments_tab_6', 'PPG_cali_segments_tab_7', '
PPG_cali_segments_tab_8', 'PPG_cali_segments_tab_9', '
PPG_cali_segments_tab_10', 'PPG_cali_segments_tab_11', '
PPG_cali_segments_tab_12', 'PPG_cali_segments_tab_13', '
PPG_cali_segments_tab_14', 'PPG_cali_segments_tab_15', '
PPG_cali_segments_tab_16', 'PPG_cali_segments_tab_17', '
PPG_cali_segments_tab_18', 'PPG_cali_segments_tab_19', '
PPG_cali_segments_tab_20', 'PPG_cali_segments_tab_21', '
PPG_cali_segments_tab_22', 'PPG_cali_segments_tab_23', '
PPG_cali_segments_tab_24', 'PPG_segments_feature_1', '
PPG_segments_feature_2', 'PPG_segments_feature_3', 'PPG_segments_feature_4
', 'PPG_segments_feature_5', 'PPG_segments_feature_6', '
PPG_segments_feature_7', 'PPG_segments_feature_8', 'PPG_segments_feature_9
', 'PPG_segments_feature_10', 'PPG_segments_feature_11', '
PPG_segments_feature_12', 'PPG_segments_feature_13', '
PPG_segments_feature_14', 'PPG_segments_feature_15', '
PPG_segments_feature_16', 'PPG_segments_feature_17', '
PPG_segments_feature_18', 'PPG_segments_feature_19', '
PPG_segments_feature_20', 'PPG_segments_feature_21', '
PPG_segments_feature_22', 'PPG_segments_feature_23', '
PPG_segments_feature_24', 'cali_segments_tab_1', 'cali_segments_tab_2', '
cali_segments_tab_3', 'cali_segments_tab_4', 'cali_segments_tab_5', '
cali_segments_tab_6', 'cali_segments_tab_7', 'cali_segments_tab_8', '
cali_segments_tab_9', 'cali_segments_tab_10', 'cali_segments_tab_11', '
cali_segments_tab_12', 'cali_segments_tab_13', 'cali_segments_tab_14', '
cali_segments_tab_15', 'cali_segments_tab_16', 'cali_segments_tab_17', '
cali_segments_tab_18', 'cali_segments_tab_19', 'cali_segments_tab_20', '
cali_segments_tab_21', 'cali_segments_tab_22', 'cali_segments_tab_23', '
cali_segments_tab_24'})];
94
95
predictorNames = {'meanHeartRate', 'meanRespirationRate', 'meanSpO2', '
Cuffless Blood Pressure Estimation Based on Continuous Vital Signs
161
==PAGE:170==
meanPulseRate', 'sdHeartRate', 'sdRespirationRate', 'sdSpO2', 'sdPulseRate
', 'minHeartRate', 'minRespirationRate', 'minSpO2', 'minPulseRate', '
maxHeartRate', 'maxRespirationRate', 'maxSpO2', 'maxPulseRate', '
rangeHeartRate', 'rangeRespirationRate', 'rangeSpO2', 'rangePulseRate', '
skewnessHeartRate', 'skewnessRespirationRate', 'skewnessSpO2', '
skewnessPulseRate', 'meanHeartRate_cali', 'meanRespirationRate_cali', '
meanSpO2_cali', 'meanPulseRate_cali', 'meanSBP_cali', 'sdHeartRate_cali',
'sdRespirationRate_cali', 'sdSpO2_cali', 'sdPulseRate_cali', 'sdSBP_cali',
'minHeartRate_cali', 'minRespirationRate_cali', 'minSpO2_cali', '
minPulseRate_cali', 'minSBP_cali', 'maxHeartRate_cali', '
maxRespirationRate_cali', 'maxSpO2_cali', 'maxPulseRate_cali', '
maxSBP_cali', 'rangeHeartRate_cali', 'rangeRespirationRate_cali', '
rangeSpO2_cali', 'rangePulseRate_cali', 'rangeSBP_cali', '
skewnessHeartRate_cali', 'skewnessRespirationRate_cali', '
skewnessSpO2_cali', 'skewnessPulseRate_cali', 'skewnessSBP_cali', '
ECG_segments_feature_1', 'ECG_segments_feature_2', 'ECG_segments_feature_3
', 'ECG_segments_feature_4', 'ECG_segments_feature_5', '
ECG_segments_feature_6', 'ECG_segments_feature_7', 'ECG_segments_feature_8
', 'ECG_segments_feature_9', 'ECG_segments_feature_10', '
ECG_segments_feature_11', 'ECG_segments_feature_12', '
ECG_segments_feature_13', 'ECG_segments_feature_14', '
ECG_segments_feature_15', 'ECG_segments_feature_16', '
ECG_segments_feature_17', 'ECG_segments_feature_18', '
ECG_segments_feature_19', 'ECG_segments_feature_20', '
ECG_segments_feature_21', 'ECG_segments_feature_22', '
ECG_segments_feature_23', 'ECG_segments_feature_24', '
PPG_segments_feature_1', 'PPG_segments_feature_2', 'PPG_segments_feature_3
', 'PPG_segments_feature_4', 'PPG_segments_feature_5', '
PPG_segments_feature_6', 'PPG_segments_feature_7', 'PPG_segments_feature_8
', 'PPG_segments_feature_9', 'PPG_segments_feature_10', '
PPG_segments_feature_11', 'PPG_segments_feature_12', '
PPG_segments_feature_13', 'PPG_segments_feature_14', '
PPG_segments_feature_15', 'PPG_segments_feature_16', '
PPG_segments_feature_17', 'PPG_segments_feature_18', '
PPG_segments_feature_19', 'PPG_segments_feature_20', '
PPG_segments_feature_21', 'PPG_segments_feature_22', '
PPG_segments_feature_23', 'PPG_segments_feature_24', 'cali_segments_tab_1'
, 'cali_segments_tab_2', 'cali_segments_tab_3', 'cali_segments_tab_4', '
cali_segments_tab_5', 'cali_segments_tab_6', 'cali_segments_tab_7', '
cali_segments_tab_8', 'cali_segments_tab_9', 'cali_segments_tab_10', '
cali_segments_tab_11', 'cali_segments_tab_12', 'cali_segments_tab_13', '
cali_segments_tab_14', 'cali_segments_tab_15', 'cali_segments_tab_16', '
cali_segments_tab_17', 'cali_segments_tab_18', 'cali_segments_tab_19', '
cali_segments_tab_20', 'cali_segments_tab_21', 'cali_segments_tab_22', '
cali_segments_tab_23', 'cali_segments_tab_24', 'PPG_cali_segments_tab_1',
'PPG_cali_segments_tab_2', 'PPG_cali_segments_tab_3', '
PPG_cali_segments_tab_4', 'PPG_cali_segments_tab_5', '
PPG_cali_segments_tab_6', 'PPG_cali_segments_tab_7', '
PPG_cali_segments_tab_8', 'PPG_cali_segments_tab_9', '
PPG_cali_segments_tab_10', 'PPG_cali_segments_tab_11', '
PPG_cali_segments_tab_12', 'PPG_cali_segments_tab_13', '
PPG_cali_segments_tab_14', 'PPG_cali_segments_tab_15', '
PPG_cali_segments_tab_16', 'PPG_cali_segments_tab_17', '
PPG_cali_segments_tab_18', 'PPG_cali_segments_tab_19', '
PPG_cali_segments_tab_20', 'PPG_cali_segments_tab_21', '
PPG_cali_segments_tab_22', 'PPG_cali_segments_tab_23', '
PPG_cali_segments_tab_24'};
96
predictors = inputTable(:, predictorNames);
97
response = inputTable.BPState;
98
isCategoricalPredictor = [false, false, false, false, false, false, false,
false, false, false, false, false, false, false, false, false, false,
false, false, false, false, false, false, false, false, false, false,
162
Cuffless Blood Pressure Estimation Based on Continuous Vital Signs
==PAGE:171==
false, false, false, false, false, false, false, false, false, false,
false, false, false, false, false, false, false, false, false, false,
false, false, false, false, false, false, false, false, false, false,
false, false, false, false, false, false, false, false, false, false,
false, false, false, false, false, false, false, false, false, false,
false, false, false, false, false, false, false, false, false, false,
false, false, false, false, false, false, false, false, false, false,
false, false, false, false, false, false, false, false, false, false,
false, false, false, false, false, false, false, false, false, false,
false, false, false, false, false, false, false, false, false, false,
false, false, false, false, false, false, false, false, false, false,
false, false, false, false, false, false, false, false, false, false,
false, false, false];
99
100
% Perform cross-validation
101
partitionedModel = crossval(trainedClassifier.ClassificationEnsemble , 'KFold',
5);
102
103
% Compute validation predictions
104
[validationPredictions , validationScores] = kfoldPredict(partitionedModel);
105
106
% Compute validation accuracy
107
validationAccuracy = 1 - kfoldLoss(partitionedModel , 'LossFun', 'ClassifError'
);
Matlab/trainClassifier_segments.m
Cuffless Blood Pressure Estimation Based on Continuous Vital Signs
163
==PAGE:172==
A.0.29
Post processing
Matlab function to make post processing
1
function [ballanced] = Table_ballanced(tab1,num_classification)
2
% This Function takes the table with all the features and the type of
ballancing as input and then outputs a ballanced
3
% dataset
4
5
% Author: Benjamin Trasborg s184038 and Matin Riedel s184032
6
% Date: 13/02/2023
7
8
% 3_class ballance data 33/33/33
9
if num_classification==3
10
%remove all empty BPState rows
11
idxLOW=find(tab1.BPState=="LOW");
12
idxHIGH=find(tab1.BPState=="HIGH");
13
idxNORMAL=find(tab1.BPState=="NORMAL");
14
15
% find number of observaions in each class
16
lengthOfClasses=[
17
length(idxLOW)
18
length(idxHIGH)
19
length(idxNORMAL)];
20
21
% find the class with the lowest number of observations
22
shortestClass=min(lengthOfClasses);
23
24
% randomly select shortestClass number of observation from each class
25
idxLOW=idxLOW(randperm(length(idxLOW),shortestClass));
26
idxHIGH=idxHIGH(randperm(length(idxHIGH),shortestClass));
27
idxNORMAL=idxNORMAL(randperm(length(idxNORMAL),shortestClass));
28
29
% combine the randomly selected observation in one array
30
idxcombined=[idxLOW
31
idxHIGH
32
idxNORMAL];
33
%randomaize the idxcombined
34
randidxcombined = idxcombined(randperm(length(idxcombined)));
35
ballanced=tab1(randidxcombined ,:);
36
37
% 2_class 50% Normal 50% Abnormal
38
elseif num_classification==2
39
%remove all empty BPState rows
40
idxABNORMAL=find(tab1.BPState_2_class=="ABNORMAL");
41
idxNORMAL=find(tab1.BPState_2_class=="NORMAL");
42
43
% find number of observaions in each class
44
lengthOfClasses=[
45
length(idxABNORMAL)
46
length(idxNORMAL)];
47
48
% find the class with the lowest number of observations
49
shortestClass=min(lengthOfClasses);
50
51
% randomly select shortestClass number of observation from each class
52
idxABNORMAL=idxABNORMAL(randperm(length(idxABNORMAL),shortestClass));
53
idxNORMAL=idxNORMAL(randperm(length(idxNORMAL),shortestClass));
54
55
%combine he indexes
56
idxcombined=[idxABNORMAL
57
idxNORMAL];
58
164
Cuffless Blood Pressure Estimation Based on Continuous Vital Signs
==PAGE:173==
59
%randomaize the idxcombined
60
randidxcombined = idxcombined(randperm(length(idxcombined)));
61
ballanced=tab1(randidxcombined ,:);
62
63
% skew class All HIHG, All LOW, LOW-number of NORMAL
64
else
%remove all empty BPState rows
65
idxLOW=find(tab1.BPState=="LOW");
66
idxHIGH=find(tab1.BPState=="HIGH");
67
idxNORMAL=find(tab1.BPState=="NORMAL");
68
69
% find number of observaions in each class
70
lengthOfClasses=[
71
length(idxLOW)
72
length(idxHIGH)];
73
74
% find the class with the highest number of observations
75
longestClass=max(lengthOfClasses);
76
77
% randomly select longestClass number of observation from NORMAL class
78
idxNORMAL=idxNORMAL(randperm(length(idxNORMAL),longestClass));
79
80
%combine he indexes
81
idxcombined=[idxLOW
82
idxHIGH
83
idxNORMAL];
84
85
%randomaize the idxcombined
86
randidxcombined = idxcombined(randperm(length(idxcombined)));
87
ballanced=tab1(randidxcombined ,:);
88
end
Matlab/Table_ballanced.m
Cuffless Blood Pressure Estimation Based on Continuous Vital Signs
165
==PAGE:174==
A.0.30
MIMIC Main
Matlab function to process MIMIC data
1
%%
2
%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
3
%%%%%%%%%%%
MIMIC MAIN
%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
4
%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
5
% load MIMIC data
6
load('test_nydata5.mat', 'TT')
7
%%
8
MIMIC_dataset=MIMIC_data(TT);
9
10
%% make 1 row for each timestamp and remove unused columns
11
[MIMIC_Patients1] = mimicuniquetime(MIMIC_dataset);
12
clear("MIMIC_dataset","TT");
13
14
%%
15
%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
16
%%%%%%%%%%%
Removing outliers MIMIC
%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
17
%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
18
MIMIC_filtered=removeOutliers2(MIMIC_Patients1);
19
clear('MIMIC_Patients1')
20
21
%% plot all patients combined
22
boxplotallpatients(MIMIC_patients_filtered ,'All MIMIC Data Filtered')
23
24
%% Find number of removed data
25
FindRemoved(MIMIC_Patients1 ,MIMIC_patients_filtered);
26
27
%% make MIMIC validation set
28
MIMIC_validation=MIMIC_filtered(1:1700);
29
MIMIC_training=MIMIC_filtered(1701:end);
30
31
%% make timestamp have value every minute
32
MIMIC_interpolated_time_training = InterpolationMIMIC_Time2(MIMIC_training);
33
MIMIC_interpolated_time_validation = InterpolationMIMIC_Time2(MIMIC_validation
);
34
35
%% make 1 row for each timestamp and remove unused columns
36
[MIMIC_Patients1] = mimicuniquetime(MIMIC_dataset);
37
clear("MIMIC_dataset","TT");
38
39
%% This function interpolates all features
40
[MIMIC_patients_interpoleated1] = Interpolation3(
MIMIC_interpolated_time_training ,2);
41
[MIMIC_patients_interpoleated2] = Interpolation3(MIMIC_patients_interpoleated1
,3);
42
[MIMIC_patients_interpoleated3] = Interpolation3(MIMIC_patients_interpoleated2
,4);
43
[MIMIC_patients_interpoleated4] = Interpolation3(MIMIC_patients_interpoleated3
,5);
44
[MIMIC_patients_interpolated_all_features] = Interpolation3(
MIMIC_patients_interpoleated4 ,6);
45
46
M1=MIMIC_patients_interpolated_all_features(1:1000);
47
M2=MIMIC_patients_interpolated_all_features(1001:2000);
48
M3=MIMIC_patients_interpolated_all_features(2001:3000);
49
M4=MIMIC_patients_interpolated_all_features(3001:4000);
50
M5=MIMIC_patients_interpolated_all_features(4001:5000);
51
M6=MIMIC_patients_interpolated_all_features(5001:6000);
52
M7=MIMIC_patients_interpolated_all_features(6001:7000);
53
M8=MIMIC_patients_interpolated_all_features(7001:8000);
166
Cuffless Blood Pressure Estimation Based on Continuous Vital Signs
==PAGE:175==
54
M9=MIMIC_patients_interpolated_all_features(8001:9000);
55
M10=MIMIC_patients_interpolated_all_features(9001:10000);
56
M11=MIMIC_patients_interpolated_all_features(10001:11000);
57
M12=MIMIC_patients_interpolated_all_features(11001:12000);
58
M13=MIMIC_patients_interpolated_all_features(12001:13000);
59
M14=MIMIC_patients_interpolated_all_features(13001:14000);
60
M15=MIMIC_patients_interpolated_all_features(14001:15000);
61
M16=MIMIC_patients_interpolated_all_features(15001:16017);
62
63
clear('MIMIC_patients_interpolated_all_features','
MIMIC_patients_interpoleated4','MIMIC_patients_interpoleated3','
MIMIC_patients_interpoleated2','MIMIC_patients_interpoleated1')
64
65
%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
66
%%%%%%%%%%%
make column with BP state MIMIC
%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
67
%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
68
M1_bp_state=BPState4(M1);
69
clear('M1')
70
M2_bp_state=BPState4(M2);
71
clear('M2')
72
M3_bp_state=BPState4(M3);
73
clear('M3')
74
M4_bp_state=BPState4(M4);
75
clear('M4')
76
M5_bp_state=BPState4(M5);
77
clear('M5')
78
M6_bp_state=BPState4(M6);
79
clear('M6')
80
M7_bp_state=BPState4(M7);
81
clear('M7')
82
M8_bp_state=BPState4(M8);
83
clear('M8')
84
M9_bp_state=BPState4(M9);
85
clear('M9')
86
M10_bp_state=BPState4(M10);
87
clear('M10')
88
M11_bp_state=BPState4(M11);
89
clear('M11')
90
M12_bp_state=BPState4(M12);
91
clear('M12')
92
M13_bp_state=BPState4(M13);
93
clear('M13')
94
M14_bp_state=BPState4(M14);
95
clear('M14')
96
M15_bp_state=BPState4(M15);
97
clear('M15')
98
M16_bp_state=BPState4(M16);
99
clear('M16')
100
101
102
%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
103
%%%%%%%%%%%
Table with features of MIMIC data
%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
104
%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
105
[MIMIC_features_table_1] = Find_features5(M1_bp_state);
106
clear('M1_bp_state')
107
[MIMIC_features_table_2] = Find_features5(M2_bp_state);
108
clear('M2_bp_state')
109
[MIMIC_features_table_3] = Find_features5(M3_bp_state);
110
clear('M3_bp_state')
111
[MIMIC_features_table_4] = Find_features5(M4_bp_state);
112
clear('M4_bp_state')
113
[MIMIC_features_table_5] = Find_features5(M5_bp_state);
Cuffless Blood Pressure Estimation Based on Continuous Vital Signs
167
==PAGE:176==
114
clear('M5_bp_state')
115
[MIMIC_features_table_6] = Find_features5(M6_bp_state);
116
clear('M6_bp_state')
117
[MIMIC_features_table_7] = Find_features5(M7_bp_state);
118
clear('M7_bp_state')
119
[MIMIC_features_table_8] = Find_features5(M8_bp_state);
120
clear('M8_bp_state')
121
[MIMIC_features_table_9] = Find_features5(M9_bp_state);
122
clear('M9_bp_state')
123
[MIMIC_features_table_10] = Find_features5(M10_bp_state);
124
clear('M10_bp_state')
125
[MIMIC_features_table_11] = Find_features5(M11_bp_state);
126
clear('M11_bp_state')
127
[MIMIC_features_table_12] = Find_features5(M12_bp_state);
128
clear('M12_bp_state')
129
[MIMIC_features_table_13] = Find_features5(M13_bp_state);
130
clear('M13_bp_state')
131
[MIMIC_features_table_14] = Find_features5(M14_bp_state);
132
clear('M14_bp_state')
133
[MIMIC_features_table_15] = Find_features5(M15_bp_state);
134
clear('M15_bp_state')
135
[MIMIC_features_table_16] = Find_features5(M16_bp_state);
136
clear('M16_bp_state')
137
138
MIMIC_features_table_all=vertcat(MIMIC_features_table_1 ,MIMIC_features_table_2
)
139
clear('MIMIC_features_table_1','MIMIC_features_table_2')
140
MIMIC_features_table_all=vertcat(MIMIC_features_table_all ,
MIMIC_features_table_3)
141
clear('MIMIC_features_table_3')
142
MIMIC_features_table_all=vertcat(MIMIC_features_table_all ,
MIMIC_features_table_4)
143
clear('MIMIC_features_table_4')
144
MIMIC_features_table_all=vertcat(MIMIC_features_table_all ,
MIMIC_features_table_5)
145
clear('MIMIC_features_table_5')
146
MIMIC_features_table_all=vertcat(MIMIC_features_table_all ,
MIMIC_features_table_6)
147
clear('MIMIC_features_table_6')
148
MIMIC_features_table_all=vertcat(MIMIC_features_table_all ,
MIMIC_features_table_7)
149
clear('MIMIC_features_table_7')
150
MIMIC_features_table_all=vertcat(MIMIC_features_table_all ,
MIMIC_features_table_8)
151
clear('MIMIC_features_table_8')
152
MIMIC_features_table_all=vertcat(MIMIC_features_table_all ,
MIMIC_features_table_9)
153
clear('MIMIC_features_table_9')
154
MIMIC_features_table_all=vertcat(MIMIC_features_table_all ,
MIMIC_features_table_10)
155
clear('MIMIC_features_table_10')
156
MIMIC_features_table_all=vertcat(MIMIC_features_table_all ,
MIMIC_features_table_11)
157
clear('MIMIC_features_table_11')
158
MIMIC_features_table_all=vertcat(MIMIC_features_table_all ,
MIMIC_features_table_12)
159
clear('MIMIC_features_table_12')
160
MIMIC_features_table_all=vertcat(MIMIC_features_table_all ,
MIMIC_features_table_13)
161
clear('MIMIC_features_table_13')
162
MIMIC_features_table_all=vertcat(MIMIC_features_table_all ,
MIMIC_features_table_14)
168
Cuffless Blood Pressure Estimation Based on Continuous Vital Signs
==PAGE:177==
163
clear('MIMIC_features_table_14')
164
MIMIC_features_table_all=vertcat(MIMIC_features_table_all ,
MIMIC_features_table_15)
165
clear('MIMIC_features_table_15')
166
MIMIC_features_table_all=vertcat(MIMIC_features_table_all ,
MIMIC_features_table_16)
167
clear('MIMIC_features_table_16')
168
169
%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
170
%%%%%%%%%%%
Table add binary class
%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
171
%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
172
MIMIC_binary_class = Table_binary_class2(MIMIC_features_table_all);
173
174
%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
175
%%%%%%%%%%%
Table with ballanced data
%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
176
%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
177
[MIMIC_ballanced_2_class] = Table_ballanced(MIMIC_binary_class ,2); % 50/50
ABNORMAL/NORMAL
178
[MIMIC_ballanced_3_class] = Table_ballanced(MIMIC_binary_class ,3); % 33/33/33
HIGH/LOW/NORMAL
179
MIMIC_ballanced_jelle_class = Table_ballanced(MIMIC_binary_class ,4); % All_LOW
/All_HIGH/Some normal HIGH/LOW/NORMAL
180
181
%% Combine WARD and MIMIC Date
182
%[all_ballanced_2_class] = Table_ballanced(alljellecombined ,2); % 50/50
ABNORMAL/NORMAL
183
%[all_ballanced_3_class] = Table_ballanced(MIIMC_AND_WARD_COMBINED ,3); %
33/33/33 HIGH/LOW/NORMAL
184
all_ballanced_jelle_class = Table_ballanced(MIIMC_AND_WARD_COMBINED ,4); %
All_LOW/All_HIGH/Some normal HIGH/LOW/NORMAL
185
186
%%
187
% Generate a vector of random indices
188
nRows = height(alljellecombined);
189
randIdx = randperm(nRows);
190
191
% Rearrange the rows of the table
192
alljellecombined_random = alljellecombined(randIdx ,:);
193
194
195
alljellecombined_random_small=alljellecombined_random(1:100000,:);
196
%%
197
length(find(alljellecombined_random_small.BPState=="HIGH"))
198
length(find(alljellecombined_random_small.BPState=="LOW"))
199
length(find(alljellecombined_random_small.BPState=="NORMAL"))
200
201
%% Combine WARD and MIMIC
202
MIIMC_AND_WARD_COMBINED=[MIMIC_binary_class(1:25000,:);
ward_lin_interpol_binary_training];
203
204
%% randomaize the idxcombined
205
MIIMC_AND_WARD_COMBINED_randomized = MIIMC_AND_WARD_COMBINED(randperm(height(
MIIMC_AND_WARD_COMBINED)), :);
Matlab/MIMIC_Main.m
Cuffless Blood Pressure Estimation Based on Continuous Vital Signs
169
==PAGE:178==
A.0.31
PKL­files to CSV in Python
The following python code converts the WARD Segment data PKL­files to CSV­files.
1
# import libraries
2
import os
3
import pandas as pd
4
import pickle
5
6
# create an empty DataFrame to store the data
7
df = pd.DataFrame()
8
folder_path2 = f'/Volumes/WININSTALL/PPG_segments/PPG_segments_COPD'
# path
to save CSV-files
9
#folder_path2 = f'/Volumes/WININSTALL/PPG_segments/ECG_segments_COPD'
# path
to save CSV-files
10
# loop through the folders
11
for i in range(0, 203):
12
13
folder_path = f'/Volumes/Department/Sund/Public/WARD/Datasets/
Observational_COPD/{i}'
# path to where PPG data is stored
14
file_path = os.path.join(folder_path , 'PPG_segments.pkl')
# joind path
and file name to file to load
15
#file_path = os.path.join(folder_path , 'ECG_segments.pkl')
# joind path
and file name to file to load
16
file_path2 = os.path.join(folder_path2 , f'PPG_segments{i}')
# joind path
and file name to file to save
17
#file_path2 = os.path.join(folder_path2 , f'ECG_segments{i}')
# joind path
and file name to file to save
18
try:
19
if os.path.isfile(file_path):
20
# read the file
21
with open(file_path , 'rb') as f:
22
data = pickle.load(f)
23
# assuming your DataFrame is called df
24
column_names = df.columns.tolist()
25
# save the DataFrame to a CSV file
26
data.to_csv(file_path2)
27
print(f"{file_path} done")
28
else:
29
print(f"{file_path} does not exist.")
30
except:
31
print('Could not convert file')
Listing A.1: Python example
170
Cuffless Blood Pressure Estimation Based on Continuous Vital Signs
==PAGE:179==
Cuffless Blood Pressure Estimation Based on Continuous Vital Signs
171
==PAGE:180==
Hello, here is some text without a meaning. This text should show what a printed text will look like
at this place. If you read this text, you will get no information. Really? Is there no information? Is
there a difference between this text and some nonsense like “Huardest gefburn”? Kjift – not at all!
A blind text like this gives you information about the selected font, how the letters are written and an
impression of the look. This text should contain all letters of the alphabet and it should be written in
of the original language. There is no need for special content, but the length of words should match
the language.
Technical
University of
Denmark
Ørsteds Plads, Building 345
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
https://www.healthtech.dtu.dk/english
