==PAGE:1==
EEG data collection for biometric authentica­
tion with Muse Device
Master Thesis
DTU Computer Science
Department of Computer Science and Mathematics
==PAGE:2==
EEG data collection for biometric authentication with Muse Device
Master Thesis
June, 2023
By
Elena Catalina Barbulescu
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Computer Science and Mathematics, Brovej, Build­
ing 118, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.byg.dtu.dk
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (printed version)
==PAGE:3==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over six months at the Department of Applied Mathematics
and Computer Science, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment
for the degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng.
Elena Catalina Barbulescu ­ s202773
Signature
Date
EEG data collection for biometric authentication with Muse Device
ii
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
Sophisticated EEG devices have been primarily used in the medical industry. Recently,
several studies have been conducted on using the unique patterns of the EEG signal to
authenticate users. A low­consumer­grade EEG device will be used throughout this re­
search to validate the biometric authentication. The device used during the data collection
will be the Muse EEG device, which contains only four sensors. The research will proceed
to create and publish a dataset that can be used for further research. To do so, an exper­
iment will be designed to collect a diverse dataset. Furthermore, this paper will present
filtering techniques to extract the Gamma and Alpha frequencies from the collected data.
Then, five machine learning algorithms will be used to differentiate between users: Sup­
port Vector Machine (SVM), K­Nearest­Neighbor(KNN), Decision Tree, Random Forest
and Naive Bayes
EEG data collection for biometric authentication with Muse Device
iii
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
Elena Catalina Barbulescu, MSc Civil Engineering, DTU
Creator of this thesis template.
Weizhi Meng, Associate Professor, DTU Compute
Supervisor
Wei­Yang Chiu, Associate Professor, DTU Compute
Supervisor
EEG data collection for biometric authentication with Muse Device
iv
==PAGE:6==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Main Issues and Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.3
Contribution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Literature Review
4
2.1
EEG data collection
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2
EEG authentication . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.3
State of the art . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3
Background
9
3.1
EEG . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.2
Biometric Authentication . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.3
Data Preprocessing Techniques
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
3.4
Machine learning techniques
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
4
Methodology
18
4.1
Quantitative and qualitative data collection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
4.2
Interview
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
4.3
GDPR compliance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
4.4
Our proposed design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
4.5
Methodological approach
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
4.6
Tools . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
4.7
Delimitations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
5
Data pre­processing
28
5.1
Data format . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
6
Machine Learning Performance
32
6.1
ML models performance metrics
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
6.2
Machine learning Performance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
7
Discussion and Challenges
43
7.1
Data collection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
7.2
Machine learning performance
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
7.3
Future Directions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46
8
Conclusion
48
A Appendix
56
A.1 Interview
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 56
A.2 Experiment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 57
A.3 Application Form . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 62
EEG data collection for biometric authentication with Muse Device
v
==PAGE:7==
1
Introduction
Authentication methods have evolved during the last decades due to the evolution of tech­
nology and the different cyber attacks. Authentication enables an authorized user to gain
access to protected systems or devices. The authentication process checks if someone’s
credentials provided match the ones stored in the database in order to enable access.
The forms of authentication have evolved over time. The most common one is through a
password, known as single­factor authentication. Then, over time, a simple password was
not enough to provide authentication as they can be subjected to different cyber attacks.
For example, someone could reinforce a brute­force attack ­ guessing the password, a
dictionary attack ­ a preselected number of phrases used to guess the password [1]. As
a result, different methods have been provided to help strengthen the authentication pro­
cess which lead to 2 factor authentication ­ two ways of authenticating users. Examples
can be a combination between a password and a third party that will send a message with
a unique code. Among multi­factor authentication, biometric authentication is an increas­
ingly attractive field of research for authentication purposes. Many different features are
used for biometric authentication, from face recognition to fingerprint recognition. These
have become widespread authentication tools that are now used by millions of people.
But even if biometric authentication is a popular authentication method, it is still vulnera­
ble to different attacks such as presentation attacks which could be done with generative
AI[2].
Generative AI is a model that can synthetically generate content for different purposes
including malicious ones[3]. Currently, research on biometric authentication is exploring
the use of EEG signals as a method of authentication. While some biometric features are
more visible and accessible than others, EEG authentication is not as widely available
as facial recognition on smartphones. Before EEG authentication can become a part of
daily life, it is important to determine whether consumer­grade EEG devices can provide
satisfactory results.
1.1
Background
The brain­computer interaction is a field that relies either on using wearable or implanted
devices that can read the brain activity and translate it into signals that will be used to
interact with the external environment. The focus is on the electroencephalogram (EGG)
which is a wearable non­invasive device that consists of dry or wet electrodes that are
placed on the scalp of a user with the purpose of monitoring brain activity[4]. Many dif­
ferent devices range from more consumer­grade devices to clinical devices, all of them
ranging in how accurately the data is recorded and how the placement on the scalp takes
place. There are many use cases for using the EEG data, which have applications to
healthcare to develop a more secure system to authenticate the users .
1.2
Main Issues and Motivation
Biometric authentication has been used as an extra layer of authenticating users more
securely. However, biometric authentication, as much as it evolves, remains vulnerable
to different types of attacks, depending on which biological feature is being used to grant
access to a service. Biometric features are easily accessible and almost publicly avail­
able, and someone’s unique features are not considered secret information nor sensitive
one unless someone is under special circumstances. For example, facial recognition as
EEG data collection for biometric authentication with Muse Device
1
==PAGE:8==
the name suggests, implies authentication based on someone’s facial features. However,
it can be easy to evade this facial recognition system by mimicking someone’s features or
even using deepfake technology to impersonate someone[2]. For example, a company,
Adversa, is raising awareness around the flaws of facial recognition and is showcasing
how their program, by using adversarial AI, can use a picture of someone and transform
that person into just anyone by adding noise to the picture[5]. The example above is a
much more sophisticated technique to fool a system, by assuming someone’s identity,
but there are, for example, 2D pictures that can be used in impersonation. To prevent
this, biometric defence technologies will try to assess someone’s liveness by distinguish­
ing between a fake 2D picture and a live person’s face. On top of using fake artefacts to
fool an authentication system, during the enrollment phase of the sample, inappropriate
artefacts could also be registered as part of the biometric feature, which violated the in­
tegrity property of enrollment[6]. On the other hand, EEG data has been used in medical
fields to diagnose different mental disorders, making it part of the sensitive category as it
would reveal the medical history of someone. For that reason, this data itself is not easily
accessible compared to the facial features, voice, and handwriting of someone.
The above­mentioned examples are already used in practice a lot, but since they suffer
from different design flaws, another emerging biometric authentication is gaining attention,
and that one is EEG authentication. Currently, the research is mainly conducted with EEG
headsets that use wet or dry electrodes to capture the brainwave activity. Not everyone
has access to an advanced medical EEG headset, and the methodological approach con­
sists of acquiring data in a very controlled environment[7]. Currently, the publicly available
datasets exclude individuals based on their medical history when participating in an exper­
iment[7]. The results with healthy individuals are promising[8], [9], [10], but at the same
time, there is not enough diversity in the publicly available datasets.
For example, there are usually only healthy individuals aged between 20 and 30 years
old. It does not consider the age categories of over 30­year­olds. That does not make
the dataset as diverse as it should be. For example, during the early stages of facial
recognition, the design and the samples mainly focused only on white people, making the
technology racially biased[11]. As a result, different ethnic groups are overlooked during
the research phase. Hence, once the technology is commercially available and widely
used in public governmental institutions, their lack of representation leads to higher rates
of false positives, which can be wrongly used in law enforcement situations[11].
A design flaw similar to the one found in facial recognition technology can occur when
individuals are excluded based on their medical history, particularly mental illnesses. To
ensure that a larger portion of the population can benefit from authentication methods,
research should take into account the diversity of individuals with various neurological
conditions. The usage of this application would probably be used in scenarios where the
portability requirement is not very important, as the whole process takes some time to
adjust the headset, and the enrollment phase can take a very long time.
The reason for driving the research into the EEG authentication method relies on some
unique characteristics of the brainwave signal[8], [12]. First, the person needs to be alive
and the signal is not publicly available and cannot be easily collected compared to other
biometric features such as online pictures or fingerprints which can be easily collected.
The EEG signal is a type of data that is more difficult to collect from the start, making it
more appealing for security systems.
EEG data collection for biometric authentication with Muse Device
2
==PAGE:9==
1.3
Contribution
The paper aims to provide a more diverse dataset collected with a commercially avail­
able EEG device. The problems mentioned above the datasets collection, especially in
machine learning applications, create inequality, unfairness and a distrust in technology.
One of the current limitations and the issues around the available public datasets is that
they have substantial exclusion and inclusion criteria, which influence the applicability of
such authentication methods for a broader population.
The exclusion criteria in this EEG dataset collection are more lenient in a way that there is
no exclusion based on someone’s medical history, race, nationality or age. Additionally,
medical data falls into the sensitive category collected from someone, and therefore the
recruitment process will not jeopardize someone’s medical history. However, everyone
should be able to benefit from this method. Besides providing a more diverse dataset for
research purposes, the experimental design will be in a less controlled lab environment
compared to the available public datasets. The less controlled environment means that
there is no particular lab where the experiment will take place. It will take advantage of
the portability feature that a wireless wearable device offers.
1.3.1
Problem Statement
In regards to the research done and the biometric authentication using EEG data due to
its unique nature, the following research questions came up:
How can we differentiate between users by collecting EEG data with the help of a
consumer­grade device?
How can we provide an inclusive dataset that will serve the research community
for further analysis on EEG authentication?
The above research questions are centred around collecting data with a consumer­grade
electronic device from a variety of people since the majority of the studies are conducted
on healthy individuals with the help of a commercially available EEG device. This implies
constructing and designing the experiment, then collecting and validating the data using
a few classical, popular machine learning algorithms.
EEG data collection for biometric authentication with Muse Device
3
==PAGE:10==
2
Literature Review
This chapter will present the different EEG data collection and related work that aims at
providing an overview of the current EEG authentication. These subsections serve as
inspiration for designing the experiment and what to focus on when retrieving the data
specifically for biometric authentication. This chapter will present briefly some concepts
and algorithms, however, it will not dive into explaining them. Further explanation will be
presented in the next Chapter Background 3.
2.1
EEG data collection
The EEG collection varies mainly on the scope of the project and what it aims at achieving.
The more sophisticated the EEG device is, the more accurate the data can be and different
goals are established for the experiment. There are quite a few available datasets that
have been used for different applications.
In Bidgoly et al. 2020, [13], the authors describe the available datasets with their afferent
tasks for the experiments. The most popular one is the Resting Protocol, where the alpha
band is the one that should be analysed further on [13]. The resting state requires the
participant to stand still and to open or close his/her eyes. Based on this protocol, several
papers have constructed their own experiments such as in Kaur et al. 2017 [10].
There are many different experimental designs. They can be visual acoustic, sensory and
mental stimuli. Each design has been done in accordance with what is needed. For ex­
ample, emotional classification requires triggering a variety of experiences for someone.
In Chen et. al. 2021, [14], the authors are classifying the emotions in anger, disgust, fear,
happy, surprised, and neutral with the help of multiple supervised machine learning algo­
rithms. For example, KNN, SVM, and Random Forest had an accuracy of around 40%.
However, the authors suggest that the emotions could be categorized between negative,
neutral and positive. This way, it will make it easier to detect which emotion a participant
is feeling, and it will lead to higher accuracy for the classification models. In the same
paper, the authors say that even though their data sample consists of 11 people, it is
enough to produce significant results for the research community [14]. In their process­
ing stage, the authors have also used the EEGLab plugin to remove artefacts as it is a
popular tool within the EEG signal processing workflows[14]. In the emotion recognition
stage, it is acknowledged that one of the limitations of classifying emotions is based on
the self­report of the subject’s experience. The participants were trained actors who could
mimic the emotion better once they heard it [14].
Other EEG data collections do not focus on emotional recognition but on engaging dif­
ferent areas of the brain. For example, there are different and many mental tasks. This
task typically requires the individual to perform calculations independently or visualize the
movement of a particular body part[7]. This type of protocol served as an inspiration for
other works with fewer people engaged in the EEG experiment [9] but with the aim of
testing commercial EEG headsets.
Then, there are visual stimuli tasks. These refer to showing the participant a series of
images that can be familiar or non­familiar to the participant. The acoustic experiment
refers to participants listening to different genres, a framework proposed in [15].
Examples of publicly available datasets are [16], [17] and [18].
Some range from a
15­minute total of recordings to a one­hour worth of recordings. The aforementioned
EEG data collection for biometric authentication with Muse Device
4
==PAGE:11==
datasets could be categorized either into motor­imagery which as the name describes,
involves people doing some light physical activity such as opening/closing eyes or imag­
ining the hand movement without actually performing the motor activity [7], [16], [19].
Other datasets analyse the emotional response to different stimuli such as [17] or playing
a game, the most popular used being ”Brain Invaders” where the players need to identify
which one of the symbol targets displayed on the screen needs to be destroyed. The
game quickly takes advantage of the EEG data and corrects, preprocesses the signal in
real time and based on the collected data it will eliminate the targeted symbol[20]. This
game has been used to construct various datasets that fall into the category of ’event­
based’ scenarios such as [21], [22]. Something to be noted about all of these datasets
is that they usually collect data from generally healthy young people with no ongoing
illnesses, and in some cases, they instruct their users not to have had caffeine on the
experiment day [23].
For the EEG data collection, mostly trained professionals take and adjust the EEG device
on the participants[24]. However, it is possible to leave it up to each participant to put and
adjust the headset, but it comes with a few challenges[24]. One of the main challenges
relies on the inconsistency of the data collection [24]. Which in turn affects the results. On
top of this, different environments for collecting the dataset lead to this non­standardised
quality of data collection[24]. It is recommended to have a quiet environment regardless
of whether the experiment takes place in a lab or not[24].
2.2
EEG authentication
Even if the EEG signals have been used primarily for a medical setting and with the goal
of diagnosing someone, there have been quite a few research areas that focused on the
EEG authentication. Different works such as [9], [13], [25], [26], [23], [27], [8], [28], [12]
have researched methods of pre­processing and the machine learning algorithms that
would prove the efficiency of EEG authentication.
The Gamma and Beta frequency bands tend to be the most sought­after features for au­
thentication purposes due to the higher accuracy[29]. However, an individual’s unique
activity is not tied to only one frequency band to achieve authentication, and each fre­
quency correlates to a certain state of mind. For that reason, it is important to analyse
the frequency band that correlates the most with the associated task from an experiment
[29]. But in some works, such as in [23] and [28], the study focused on extracting all the
frequency bands for each user, whereas in some cases, only one frequency band [8],
gamma frequency was extracted and still showed high accuracy performance with the
machine learning algorithms.
Another aspect discovered within the EEG authentication is the number of sessions used
for retrieving the data. Either in one session or over the course of a few months. It is
noted that the performance of the classifiers degrades [28] if the participants’s EEG data
is collected over multiple sessions. The causes for the performance degradation need
to be understood a little bit better if EEG authentication is to become a reality[28]. The
reason implied in [28] lies in the mood changes for someone or the placement of the
electrodes on the scalp. However, the majority of the works use EEG devices with more
sensors.
For example, similar work has been conducted in [9] where an Emotiv Epoc EEG head­
set(seen also in Figure 3.2) is being used for the development and collection of the data.
Something to be noted from their work conducted previously is that it is enough to have
only 5 seconds of EEG activity recorded[9]. The experiment was conducted based on fa­
EEG data collection for biometric authentication with Muse Device
5
==PAGE:12==
miliar images with public figures that were shown to the participants. According to the in­
terview conducted, the visual stimulus is the strongest type of signal that can be recorded,
although other stimuli such as smell or tactile can give out a fairly strong signal. They also
cover some of the basics of sensor placement, where it is emphasized that it is not nec­
essarily important to have the sensors placed in the same spot, but it is important for the
sensors to be placed in a similar previous position. In addition to that, it is talked about
the ageing of an EEG signal in relation to whether or not having an authentication system
based on that is feasible for long term. The authors are saying that the signal changes
mostly in young people, but after they reach adulthood, defined as over 18 years olds,
the signal should be the same until they are much older[9]. The interview also revealed
the conditions that can affect someone when their EEG is being taken, such as low sugar
level and that is why patients will be given something to eat before performing the exper­
iment. Moreover, it is recommended that the patients relax when they undergo an EEG
scan[9].
For EEG authentication, classification algorithms have been used to demonstrate the fea­
sibility of this biometric authentication type. In Duo et. al. 2022, [30], the authors have
tested the performance for SVM, KNN, Random Forest and Decision Tree with an accu­
racy between 50 to 60%. In contrast, other works have shown results with over 100%
accuracy for KNN with Euclidean Distance [31], Random Forest and SVM with 98%. In
Kaur et. al. 2017, [10], the authors set out to test the feasibility of this biometric authen­
tication by taking into account the ageing factors. Their work achieved an accuracy of
80% when testing the ageing of the signal by conducting six sessions over a period of 6
months with 10 users. The Euclidean distance for the KNN algorithms has been a popular
choice as a hyperparameter for the aforementioned works, and for SVM, the RBF kernel
has shown good performance in achieving a higher accuracy [31], [10].
2.3
State of the art
For the EEG signal acquisition, there are two types of EEG headsets that work with either
dry electrodes or wet electrodes. The difference between these two types consists in
the application of a gel on the scalp so the signal is much better collected [32]. In terms
of usability, the dry electrodes that are wirelessly connected to a computer, were more
preferred by participants compared to the wet electrode system, especially after a longer
period of time [32]. Plus, the participants do not feel as restrained as if it were with a wet
EEG headset and it would make it easier for home­usage applications. In [32], the authors
prove that the dry EEG headset can have comparable results to a wet EEG headset, but
the dry EEG headsets are more prone to noise artefacts. Although, that has not stopped
the research community from testing different hypothesis by using consumer­grade EEG
devices such as Muse [33], Emotiv [34] [9], Neurosky [35].
The Muse headset is one of the commercially available EEG headsets that can be used for
other purposes as well[33]. The company advertises as a device intended for meditation.
This device comes with a headband placed on the head’s frontal side. The device itself
does not provide the same level of quality data as a medical EEG device[36], but it is still
useful in conducting experiments that can help identify the level of attention. The Muse
2.0 version comes with only four sensors and an app to track the meditation progress.
It connects easily via Bluetooth to the Muse app, where a series of guided meditation
videos are displayed. It comes equipped with two sensors placed on the forehead and
two sensors at the back of the ear and they are placed according to the international
standard EEG system[37]. The placement of the EEG sensors can be seen in Figure 2.1.
In Figure 2.1, it can be seen on the left side how the Muse electrode sensors look like when
EEG data collection for biometric authentication with Muse Device
6
==PAGE:13==
placed on someone’s head, which is close to the standard EEG placement system. On
the left side of the picture, the EEGlab [38]plugin computed the placement of the sensors
on someone’s head with the collected data. The data can be collected by using the Python
package developed by Alexandre Barachant[39]. The package can be installed either on
a Linux or Windows OS, and it has a straightforward path to stream and visualize the
data. The data displays the recordings from the four sensors: TP9, TP10, AF7, AF8 in
a color­coded manner, making it easier to track which brainwave corresponds to which
state. The sampling frequency is 256Hz, and the time recorded is in Unix units[39].
Figure 2.1: EEG placement. Left side ­ Muse EEG placement. Right side ­ standard EEG
placement[40]
Figure 2.2: Muse headset[41]
The pictures show how the headset is supposed to be placed on someone’s head. How­
ever, there are a few guidelines detailing on how to place a headset with dry electrodes,
since it is not as accurate as a medical EEG device. The purpose of these guidelines is
to maximise the signal acquisition as much as possible.
First, it is necessary to wipe off any residual dust or sweat from the headband with a wipe.
As a reference on how the headband is supposed to be arranged, as in Figure 2.2, the
front side should be placed in the middle of the forehead, but not too close to the hairline
scalp, and neither too close to the eyebrows [41]. The sensors on the ears need to be
symmetrically arranged, and need to be worn the same way as a pair of glasses would
sit behind someone’s ear[41]. The headset should not be too tight either on someone’s
head, as it still should be comfortable enough to wear, but neither to loose. The hair
EEG data collection for biometric authentication with Muse Device
7
==PAGE:14==
should be either tied up in a ponytail if someone has long hair, and any hair strand should
be removed from the contact between the headband and the skin. It is recommended to
wait between 30 to 60 seconds for the signal to settle [41].
Conclusion
The presented chapters have provided suggestions on what type of available public datasets
are and the different stimuli of the experiment. Since there are already many different
types of conducting and designing experiments and the opportunity we have to make our
own experiments with the Muse EEG device, we can create experiments that trigger the
Gamma frequency and the Alpha frequency. Each one of these bands requires different
tasks which will be further on discussed in the next chapter. The state­of­the­art section
has provided an overview for a consumer­grade device alongside its technical specifica­
tions and guidelines on how to place the device. All of these suggestions are helpful in
making sure, there is as little noise disruption in the data collection. The algorithms used
for classification and presented will serve as a threshold to compare the results from val­
idating the dataset.
EEG data collection for biometric authentication with Muse Device
8
==PAGE:15==
3
Background
This chapter will discuss an introduction and a background of the EEG signal as it is impor­
tant to understand the different categories of this signal. The EEG signal has been briefly
presented earlier in relation to biometric authentication, however, this will dive deeper into
the EEG signal. The previous section served as a starting point in choosing the necessary
tools for processing the data. Those were succinctly introduced and their performance in
relation to biometric authentication. However, they need to be understood a bit more
before applying all of these tools to the dataset.
3.1
EEG
The brain is one of the main pieces of the human anatomy that helps in solving different
complex problems. The brain is constantly active even when someone is asleep. The
brain consists of neurons that communicate via synapses. These synapses generate
a subtle electrical impulse which is called postsynaptic potential. Gathering the signal
from one neuron is very difficult, but when there are thousands of neurons, they generate
a signal that is strong enough to be picked up with the help of a device that is usually
placed on the surface of the scalp of the head[4].
Electroencephalography (EEG) is the process of recording electrical activity generated
by the brain via electrodes. There are two types of electrodes, dry or wet electrodes that
can be mounted on someone’s scalp[4]. An EEG system provides a good time resolution,
making it easier to detect activity within the cortical areas. The recorded data is then
digitized and sent to an amplifier which will be displayed as a sequence of voltages, which
form a waveform that is usually seen a lot in EEG recordings[4].
The signal, based on its characteristics such as frequency, amplitude divide the waveform
in five categories which correlate to different cognitive stages for an individual.
• Gamma: [30­100]HZ. These waves are usually associated with perception and con­
sciousness, but they are mostly occurring during hyperalertness[4]. It can be asso­
ciated to learning a new skill or listening to an expert giving out a talk that is of high
interest and the person is immersed completely in the discussion.
• Beta: [12­30]Hz. This frequency is seen in problem solving and engaging tasks,
however it can also be associated with anxiety or panic attacks. This frequency is
seen in any conscious state like talking or decision­making[4].
• Alpha: [8­12]Hz. This frequency is active in relaxing and recharging situations. It
can also be seen in an ’eyes closed’ scenario. Opening the eyes would reduce the
activity of these frequencies.
• Theta: [4­8]Hz. This frequency is much lower compared to the other ones, because
it correlates to a daydreaming stage and most importantly present in the first stage
of sleep[4]. It appears when someone is in between being conscious and in deep
sleep.
• Delta: [0.5­4]Hz. This frequency is seen only in deep sleep situations where no
dreaming occurs. It also has the highest amplitude compared to the the other ones,
but it is one of the slowest wave[4].
EEG data collection for biometric authentication with Muse Device
9
==PAGE:16==
The EEG systems used to be accessible primarily within a medical professional setting,
however, there is a rise in commercially available devices which allow an average person
to use such devices for their own personal use. In a medical setting, these systems have
been mainly used for diagnosing different mental conditions such as seizures or memory
problems. The price depends on the number of electrodes and the sampling rate(Hz) as
well. In Figure 3.1, there is an example of a headset with multiple dry electrodes. There
are many companies in the market specializing in manufacturing these headsets. Another
simpler device can be seen in Figure 3.2.
Figure 3.1: Multiple electrode placement device
[42]
Figure 3.2: Emotiv headset
[43]
Over the years, the EEG devices have been used beyond their medical purposes and
these lower grade commercially devices started being marketed towards research bodies
or for any personal interest. Examples of use case for the EG devices are in the following
fields: neuromarketing, social interactions, fitness, psychology, neuroscience, psyschia­
tritic studies and lastly Brain Computer Interaction.
EEG data collection for biometric authentication with Muse Device
10
==PAGE:17==
3.2
Biometric Authentication
Authentication is a process in which someone’s identity is being checked and grant the
appropriate access rights to a service. Traditional authentication systems rely on the
following factors to verify someone’s identity: something you know, something you have
or something you are[12].
The first factor, something you know, shows up in the form of a password. That password
is known by the person who wants to authenticate themselves and the validator[12]. Un­
fortunately, this particular method has a few vulnerabilities, including the use of the same
password across multiple websites, the use of weak passwords, the risk of password stor­
age, and the possibility of forgetting one’s password. The second factor, something that
you have usually can be seen as any form of card or tag. This form adds an extra layer
of security to the system. And lastly, something that you are refers to biometrics[44].
Biometric authentication has been used as another layer to authenticate a user based on
their human characteristics. Those human characteristics can range from behavioural to
physical ones. The behavioural ones refer to something has been learnt throughout an
individual’s life such as handwriting while the physical trait refers to something you are
born with. In the latter, that includes, our face, eyes, DNA fingerprint etc. [12].
The following list denotes the requirements for a biometric authentication system, a list
gathered from [28], [12], [44]:
• Universality: the characteristic is present in the general population
• Distinctiveness: the characteristic is unique to each individual, any two people’s
collected data is different from one another
• Permanence: the characteristic should not change so often over a period of time. If
it changes significantly, the trait is not useful
• Measurability: the acquisition protocol for the data should not be causing significant
discomfort to an individual and the data captured should contain relevant features
• Acceptability: all individuals should be willing to give their consent for their biometric
to be used
• Circumvention: the method should be secure enough in order to prevent any mimicry
attacks (e.g. foolproof against fake fingers, fake iris)
• Performance: the application should be fast and accurate at detecting the charac­
teristic
Compared to other available biometrics highlighted in [12], using EEG signals as an au­
thentication method satisfies majority of the requirements mentioned above. One main
advantage of using EEG signals is that it ensures the confidentiality, simply because when
an individual is exposed to a certain stimulus, it is very difficult to observe the activity. An
EEG signal is heavily affected by other traits such as mood, hunger, age, medications and
so on which enhance the complexity of mimicking someone’s EEG signal. Another advan­
tage of this biometric authentication option is that it satisfies the Universality requirement
because it does not restrict people based on specific characteristics that they are miss­
ing, therefore ensuring accessibility. Although, Acceptability is a requirement that has not
been yet seen in the application as much since the technology is still under development,
in [12] is suggested that as long as acquisition protocol remains non­invasive, it should
not be a problem in the future. Moreover, Permanence would also be satisfied over the
long term.
EEG data collection for biometric authentication with Muse Device
11
==PAGE:18==
As appealing as the EEG authentication sounds, since someone’s mood affects the EEG
signal, the signal needs to be consistent over a more extended period of time, and the
same response to a different task needs to be consistent in order to perform authentication
[12]. To add on top of that, usability is another factor that might not make it such an
appealing method for the broader general public, as the consumer­grade devices take at
the moment some time to put them on in order for the sensors to capture the necessary
features [12]. Another issue is that the enrollment stage of the data needs to match every
scenario for when this device can be used for authentication. On the other hand, wearing
the EEG device ensures continuous authentication for someone.
3.3
Data Preprocessing Techniques
The signal when it is being collected does not always reflect the actual signal from the brain
and thus it can create opportunities for attackers to take advantage of the noise within the
signal. Therefore, it is important to pre­process the signal and present some general
information about it. The signal can be disturbed by physiological or non­physiological
artefacts. The first category refers to any body movement that it is either involuntary
or voluntary. Examples of physiological and non­physiological artifacts are the following
ones[45]:
• Physiological artifacts
– Eye blinks
– Heart beats
– Head/Body movements
• Non­physiological artifacts
– Power line interference(50Hz in Europe)
– Bad electrode position
– Any malfunction of the headset
The following artifacts look like this in the following Figure 3.3. The above physiological
or non­physiological artifacts can be observed during the adjustment phase of the EEG
headset. During an experiment design, it is essential to pay attention to the type of task
that is being performed and the unavoidable artefacts that will interfere with the EEG
signal. For example, a problem­solving task would generate eye­blinks artifacts or hand/­
neck/head movement. On top of that, the power line is almost always present, so a notch
filter or bandstop filter will be applied to eliminate the 50HZ frequency. The purpose of
removing the unwanted signal is to retrieve accurate and reliable EEG signals for further
analysis. The bioelectrical signal is in general very weak and in adults it does not exceed
±100 µV [46]. These frequencies are usually amplified during the acquisition process,
but more unwanted frequencies enter.
In general, regardless of the origin of the artifacts, they can be removed by applying dif­
ferent filtering techniques. Based on the requirements needed for the EEG signal, certain
frequencies that are too high or too low can be band passed, as in allowed to pass or not
through a filter frequency. A low­pass filter means that frequencies below that specified
value are kept within the EEG data and the ones above the value specified, are either
removed or attenuated. The same concept applies for the high­pass filter, but it removes
the frequencies below the specified value[45]. Sometimes, both of those filtering tech­
niques need to be used to eliminate both out­of­range too low or too high frequencies,
EEG data collection for biometric authentication with Muse Device
12
==PAGE:19==
Figure 3.3: Bad EEG signal example
and for that, a bandpass filter is used. As opposite to the bandpass filter, a stopband filter
removes the frequencies between the range specified. A bandpass filter is mostly used to
remove the power line interference [45]. It is recommended to first apply the filtering tech­
niques before proceeding any further with other filtering techniques. Usually a high pass
filter is set at 0.1Hz and a lowpass filter at 30HZ[45]. However the filters range needs to
be considered on the basis of which frequency range is needed for the project. For exam­
ple, if the gamma band is the one desired for the project, then the upper and lower bonds
are between 30Hz and 100Hz, or for alpha a range of 8Hz to 12Hz[45]. That means in
both examples only the values between the interval are kept for analysis. However, it is
advised to keep the filtering at a minimum level, as the signal can be distorted a little bit
too much, and therefore it should not be used lightly [47].
After filtering and keeping the needed frequencies, it is not enough to make meaningful
interpretations of the data, so it is needed to apply another decomposition technique such
as Independent Component Analysis (ICA) or Principal Component Analysis (PCA). ICA
belongs in the blind source separation problem(BSS)[48]. In short, the problem revolves
around the concept known as the ”cocktail party”[48]. The cocktail party problem deals
with a mixture of signals without knowing exactly from which source the signal comes from.
An example scenario is to think about having two people talking at the same time on the
microphone and its output is a mix of two people’s voices. Its use has been seen mostly in
speech recognition applications. However, the cocktail problem can be also applied to an
EEG signal. The collected EEG data comes from the different electrodes and therefore
we can apply this technique to identify from which component the signal comes from,
but it is also helpful in removing noise artifacts. In order to be considered effective, both
PCA and ICA require large amounts of data[48] as input. The methods can remove the
artefacts, but both need a manual visual inspection even after applying the algorithms
to the signal[48]. Although both methods are used in signal decomposition, each one of
them has a different purpose: PCA is used for data dimensionality reduction while the
ICA separates the data sources. During the data preprocessing stage, both can be used,
but only in the following order: first PCA and then ICA, but sometimes it is sufficient to
use ICA in the preprocessing stage [45]. PCA, due its design, will create a new dataset
EEG data collection for biometric authentication with Muse Device
13
==PAGE:20==
that aims at maximising the most important features, however, when the signal needs to
be reconstructed, it will no longer resemble the original dataset [49][48]. Therefore, PCA
is barely used [45]. The limitation in general for this technique of separating the source
signals is that since it requires multi­channels, and once the signal has been separated, it
might remove essential authentic EEG signal [45]. But ICA still remains a popular choice
in many related works for artefact removal[9][45] [46].
3.4
Machine learning techniques
To validate and test the feasibility of using a consumer low­grade EEG device, machine
learning algorithms are a popular choice to test and authenticate users. Biometric authen­
tication consists of two phases: Enrollment Phase and the Authentication Phase [25]. A
machine learning algorithm also implies two phases: a training and a testing set. In [25],
the authors associate the training with the enrollment phase and the testing with the au­
thentication phase which should also be enough to validate our experiment for a biometric
authentication.
After applying a filtering technique, the signal should be ready to be fed into machine­
learning algorithms. For the machine learning algorithms, there have been sufficient pa­
pers detailing the process of which algorithm works with which data acquisition protocol
works best. In [13], the survey points out that shallow classification works and it provides
an accuracy of over 80% with the available public datasets. Shallow classifiers refer to
any model that is not a deep learning model, hence its name. Some examples of shallow
classifiers are the following ones: Support Vector Machine(SVM), Random Forest, Naive
Bayes, Decision Trees and K­Nearest Neighbour (KNN). On the opposite spectrum, deep
classification takes advantage of a convolutional neural network. The convolutional net­
works are used predominantly in image processing, but they were also used within EEG
classification, achieving an accuracy of over 98% [8]. However, neither of these options is
without any flaws, as the results are not consistent across different sessions [50]. Different
sessions refer to carrying out the experiments over an extended period of time.
The machine learning algorithms can be classified into supervised or unsupervised [51].
The choice of which algorithm to use depends on the goal set of the project. For exam­
ple, a supervised learning approach is better for data classification, requiring the data to
have labels, while unsupervised learning works without labelled data. The unsupervised
model will usually be able to find underlying patterns and find hidden associations that
are not easy to see by naked eye. On top of that, it saves more time when it comes to
feeding unlabeled data to the algorithm. There is no need for explicit supervision, but this
comes as a disadvantage. The unsupervised algorithms can help form clusters where
there is a need to interpret the results where more valid correlations make sense, and the
interpretation depends on the expertise level of the person who is adjusting the algorithm.
Since the supervised algorithms rely on the labeled data to learn the relationship between
the input and output, they can result in either overfitting or underfitting[52]. This means the
model performs very well on the training data but fails to generalise on new data. Under­
fitting means that neither the training stage results in a good performance and therefore,
neither the testing stage performs well. The problem usually occurs when there are too
many labels assigned to the data, which results in overfititng[53]. Underfitting can result
due to a poor selection of features or the input data not being adequately preprocessed.
The process of labelling data is time­consuming and challenging because in order for the
algorithm to work, carefully selected features need to be fed into the algorithm[52]. Su­
pervised learning can be divided into classification and regression problems. The first
one is useful for predicting a categorical type of data, something that is not a number. For
EEG data collection for biometric authentication with Muse Device
14
==PAGE:21==
example, it can be a True/False, male/female or positive/negative value. Meanwhile, the
regression problem works on continuous data, data that can be quantified. An example
of that would be predicting the house price in the next year [54].
Examples of algorithms that fall into the supervised category are the following:
• Support Vector Machines(SVM)
• Naive Bayes Classifier
• Decision Trees
• Random Forest
• K­Nearest Neighbour (KNN)
The SVM algorithm has the objective of finding the most hyperplane that separates the
data into different classes. This hyperplane is a decision boundary that helps in classifying
the input data. If there are two features, then the hyperplane becomes a line that will
separate those in two classes. The hyperplane dimension increases with the number of
features assigned. Then, we have the support vectors which are data points closest to the
hyperplane, but the objective is to find the maximum distance from those data points to the
hyperplane[55]. The reason for that is that it will provide higher accuracy when introducing
a new data point that will fall on either side of the hyperplane. This algorithm can perform
well when the dataset is small, but it cannot perform well with many features.[56].
The Naive Bayes Classifier is a simple but effective algorithm that is based on the Bayes
theorem[55], [57]. It is one of the first algorithms usually learnt in data science due to how
easy it is to implement. This type of algorithm is used mostly in spam filtering, system
recommendation, and cognitive behaviour[58]. It starts by assuming that all the predictors
are equally independent, hence the name of naive[57]. Moreover, the features are also
contributing equally to the outcome. However, that is not the case in real world scenarios,
as some variables might depend on each other. But that does not stop the algorithm from
performing very well, especially on smaller datasets[57]. There are three types of this
classifier based on the input data. An example is the Gaussian Naive Bayes which uses
Gaussian distributions[57]. It works with a normal distribution and continuous variables.
Next variations of the algorithm is the Multinomial Naive Bayes[57]. The distribution in this
case is assumed to be multinomial and it makes sense to be used when the input data is a
discrete type. Last variation of the algorithm is the Bernoulli Naive Bayes that works with
boolean variables (True or False) or binary values(0 or 1[57]). The advantage of using
this algorithm is that it handle high dimensional data and it has a low storage requirement.
On the other hand, this algorithm is subject to the zero frequency disadvantage[57]. That
occurs when a categorical variable does not exist within the training set. It is a probability
theorem that tries to predict a variable based on the occurrence of the previous variable.
As can be seen in the equation below, it can be interpreted as how often A happens given
that B happened, and if B has a value of zero, then A will also be zero[57].
P(A|B) = P(B|A)·P(A)
P(B)
Next, the Decision Tree is a flow­chart­like a data structure where each node represents
a test on a feature. They are usually built in a way that it identifies ways to split the data
based on different conditions. The algorithm will split the datasets into smaller subsets and
then it will make predictions based on the subsets[59], [58]. This algorithm will continue
to split the dataset until it can no longer improve the predictions. The algorithm is built on
top of the greedy algorithm which means that it aims at finding the optimal local solution
EEG data collection for biometric authentication with Muse Device
15
==PAGE:22==
at every step[59]. This algorithm can be used for both regression and classification tasks.
But this type of algorithm, even if it is easier and faster to train, it is prone to overfitting
and it is less flexible[59].
As a contrast to some of the downsides of using the Decision Tree algorithm, the Ran­
dom Forest algorithm can handle some of the issues presented earlier. This algorithm
belongs to the ensemble family where multiple decision trees are combined to make ac­
curate predictions. Since Random Forest is based on multiple decision trees, each tree
is built via a process called bagging[60]. This refers to randomly selecting samples with
replacement from the training set. As a result, these trees can capture hidden aspects of
the data. In contrast to finding the best local solution, the random forest will find the global
optimal solution[60]. Due to that, it has improved accuracy. They are more robust against
overfitting , they can also handle large datasets with high dimensionality. Random Forest
can be used for both classification and regression tasks. If it is a regression task, the indi­
vidual decision trees will be averaged while for the classification task, a majority vote will
occur[60]. It has applicability in different industries, and some of them include the finan­
cial sector, detecting fraud schemes or in the healthcare industry, detecting responses to
different drug administrations[60].
KNN algorithm is a supervised algorithm used for both classification and regression tasks.
It uses proximity to make classifications or predictions about the grouping of an individual
points[58]. It is more popular among classification tasks working on the assumption that
similar points can be found near each other. A class label is usually assigned on the
basis of a majority voting rule, which means that a label that is mostly represented around
a given data point will be used. The algorithm performs well for smaller datasets, however
it becomes inefficient when the dataset expands. During the training phase, it stores the
entire training set as a reference. Then, when it has to make predictions, it calculates the
distance between the input datapoint and all the training examples by using a distance
metric such as the Euclidian distance[14]. Based on the distance, the algorithm identifies
the K­nearest neighbour to the input data. The performance is usually affected by the
choice of K and the distance metric. K is usually an odd number, and it represents the
voting power. If k=1, the error rate is usually zero, because the closest point to any training
data point is itself. Usually, it is recommended to try with different values for K in order to
get a good estimation[14].
After covering some of the supervised algorithms, examples of unsupervised machine
learning algorithms are the following ones:
• Independent Component Analysis (ICA)
• Principal Component Analysis (PCA)
The above mentioned unsupervised algorithms have been predominantly used in the pre­
processing stage before performing any classification on the data, and they are presented
in the Pre­Processing section 3.3.
Conclusion
This chapter has summarized the pre­processing tools and the machine learning algo­
rithms which will be implemented on the dataset. The pre­processing of the data will
consists of applying a bandpass filter that will make sure only certain frequencies can
pass through. Then the targeted frequencies are the Gamma and the Alpha ones which
can be easily extracted from the signal. Furthermore, the algorithms that will be used
EEG data collection for biometric authentication with Muse Device
16
==PAGE:23==
further on are the KNN, SVM, Random Forest, Decision Tree and Naive Bayes. These
tools have provided a good understanding of what needs to be done and how to do it.
EEG data collection for biometric authentication with Muse Device
17
==PAGE:24==
4
Methodology
Literature Review and Background have provided each one of them with different guide­
lines on what is already being done for biometric authentication and how to work with the
acquired data. This chapter will focus on motivating the design of the experiment since
we have the Muse EEG device to perform and collect our data. The main targets are the
Gamma and Alpha frequency bands according to the Literature Review, so the presented
tasks will be in relation to the target. On top of that, an interview with an expert from a
neuromarketing firm is presented which will provide a deeper understanding of the meth­
ods, duration and different factors taken into account. The chapter will present types of
data collected, the experiment and the GDPR compliance.
4.1
Quantitative and qualitative data collection
When it comes to data collection, the method used to collect data can be classified into
two categories: quantitative and qualitative data. The research questions dictate which
type of data is most suitable for this project as both types offer different insights on the sub­
ject that is analyzed. Each type of data, quantitative and qualitative comes with different
techniques on how to collect data. For example, the quantitative method is about collect­
ing information that can be measured or counted in a numerical value, while the qualitative
data seeks to gain a deeper understanding into the issue by having open questions such
as ”why” and ”how” which allows participants to express their experience[61].
An essential component in data collection is the sampling technique which can be divided
into 5 categories: random, stratified, cluster, systematic and convenience[61]. Random
sampling means that any subject has an equal chance of being selected for the data
collection. Next one, stratified sampling will be based on certain characteristics that will be
used to divide the people into groups. Similarly, on the characteristic trait, the systematic
approach will start from a chosen point of categorisation and then, this approach allows to
change the course on how to divide the groups based on the discovered pattern. Lastly,
convenience sampling is based on how easy it is to get access to the subjects, but also
the subjects fulfill the inclusion and exclusion criteria. In this project, the sampling method
will be random as there is no need to look for certain characteristics from groups, which
means anyone can be chosen for this experiment. On top of that, it can be said that this
random choice can be seen as convenient as well, because the chosen subjects are the
easiest to get access to.
For this thesis, the most important data gathered will be the quantitative data. Examples of
quantitative data are experiments, questionnaires, and surveys. The approach is highly
structured and it is based a lot on what the users do compared to the other approach,
the qualitative data which challenges more the context of how and what the users are
doing[61]. However, the qualitative approach is not of focus for an EEG data collection
experiment. However, it will be used to gather feedback at the end of each experiment
in order to assess the receptiveness/willingness of a user to adopt this type of wearable
device for authentication purposes. The qualitative data is in relation to the biometric
requirements discussed earlier in the Background chapter 3. At the same time, it will be
used to understand concerns over data handling, what that signifies to them and whether
or not discomfort was caused by the Muse device.
This type of data relies more on raw numbers collected from the four sensors which will
be used later on to calculate the targeted frequency bands: Gamma and Alpha. In order
EEG data collection for biometric authentication with Muse Device
18
==PAGE:25==
to make to validate the dataset and the device, it is recommended to have a sample
size of around 30 participants [62]. The reviewed papers which conducted research on
their own without using any public available datasets, had between 10 and 16 people
partaking with low­level consumer grade devices. The largest one is the BCI set with
106 participants[7]. But their dataset is recorded with EEG devices that contain over 4
channels, namely 64 channels[7]. Those devices are not available to everyone except for
professionals in neuroscience. They are more expensive and require more knowledge to
set them up. However, our dataset aims at providing a dataset that is diverse enough and
takes advantage of the simple portable EEG device that does not require professional
assistance. It is available to everyone who would like to use this device.
4.2
Interview
In order to get an idea on how the industry is using the EEG data, an interview with a
professional background can give many insights on data acquisition for different purposes.
The main scope of the interview is to find the minimum necessary of an EEG recording
per person. The other purpose is to understand other external factors that influence the
quality of the data. Other questions are about the variation of the EEG signal, or the
ageing of it. The questions asked for this interview can be found in the Appendix.
Theo Sell is a Project Coordinator and Researcher at Neurons [63], a company that spe­
cialises in predicting consumer behaviour by performing their own EEG analysis and data
collection. When asked about the significance of the age of their consumers, the experi­
ments are harder to perform on younger people but also on pregnant women due to the
hormonal changes within the body. Injuries, epilepsy or even sleeping pills can affect
the EEG signal when it is being collected, including whether or not someone is right or
left­handed. When these profiles show up for an experiment, it is better to conduct more
sessions in order to have a benchmark to compare it with. Having a benchmark was a re­
curring point throughout the interview. This benchmark that is being talked about refers to
understanding someone’s mood before the experiment starts, the environment of where
that participant and also how noisy this physical environment is. The benchmark ensures
that noise or other forms of distractions have been reduced as much as possible. Fa­
tigue is also another factor that can influence the cognitive activity, and the result of it
means that an individual is able to process less information than they are active. How­
ever, a repetitive task that will induce fatigue can be used as a benchmark to compare
the different states of mind against the same task.
Also a benchmark in terms of time that they are using with a 9 channel EEG headset
is 10 minutes, the shortest time that it is feasible to acquire a baseline data for each
participant. Otherwise, in an optimal case, 15 to 20 minutes is a reasonable amount of
time for recording EEG data, although, this time spent on acquiring data is dependent on
how many channels are used to record data.
With all the information acquired from the interview, the following factors need to be con­
sidered: noise, fatigue, tiredness, and pregnancy in some cases. Then the minimum
required time for acquiring data should be around 10 minutes. Also, the repetition of a
task would ensure that there is a benchmark for how the EEG pattern behaves and it
would serve as a comparison for the experimental classification later on.
4.3
GDPR compliance
Our project is carried out in Europe, and therefore follows the GDPR rules around a user’s
data. The GDPR provides extensive guidelines on how to handle sensitive data and what
EEG data collection for biometric authentication with Muse Device
19
==PAGE:26==
the rights are for a user who is consenting to give their data to someone else[64]. For
that reason, any user needs to be informed in a transparent and cohesive manner about
the project scope and how their own data will be used in the project and it should be
given on a voluntary basis Art 6 [64]. The participants are informed before the start of
the experiment, and they will be asked to sign on a piece of paper their consent to have
their data collected. The data will be stored locally only on the ’SptageLab’ laptop during
the whole project until the project gets approval to make this dataset publicly available for
other research purposes. The participants will be informed about the end goal of making
this dataset available for further research projects. All the tasks will be presented before
the experiment starts, and the users will be informed about collecting their gender and
age for the purpose of the classification process later on.
The participant’s information will be pseudonymous; each participant will receive a number
of their voluntarily participation in the project which will act as a shielding technique. This
process is defined as processing the personal data of someone in such a way that the
data can not be traced back to the user. The collected data will be the user’s first name,
age, and gender. The person’s name will be the one shielded and receive a nickname
such as ”Person 1”. Gender could potentially help in the classification algorithm later on.
Still, age is known to affect the ageing of the EEG signal collected[65], which is a feature
that could prove useful in technical processing. However, the EEG signal is a biometric
data, which is considered by the GDPR to be a special category of sensitive personal
data, because it can be traced back to an individual and it is protected by Art 9 [64].
The EEG signal on its own contains so much more valuable information, especially about
someone’s health. This data has been used specifically more in the neuroscience com­
munity to diagnose someone’s early onstage schizophrenia or Alzheimer. This includes
the EEG data into the sensitive personal category of data. In [66], the authors point out
that some soft traits within the biometric data acquisition such as emotional states escape
the GDPR protection. The authors are not defining entirely in which cases, the biomet­
ric features are not protected, but they do mention that when the data is anonymous(a
characteristic that is no longer protected by GDPR) and further processing techniques
are used, even if it is dealt with sensitive information, the data is again not protected by
GDPR which grants permission to work with this data for research purposes.
4.4
Our proposed design
The scenario is divided into 3 tasks. The first one is a problem­solving task that requires
the participant to play a puzzle game for 3 minutes twice. Then, the second task involves
the user standing still for 1 minute and 20 seconds with their eyes closed in a relaxed
position. The participants will hear 7 words that will start with comments deemed to have
a positive experience, afterwards enumerating words that carry a negative inducing state.
This way the experience will cover different states of mind for someone. So, someone
is not limited only to a certain mood, but it aims at covering a few experiences divided
into positive, neutral and negative. It’s difficult for the brain to rapidly switch from a posi­
tive feeling to a negative one, which is why the focus is on recognizing and differentiating
between negative and positive emotions. This approach is inspired by the research on
emotion recognition, documented in [14]. There is a time difference of 10 seconds be­
tween each word. It is enough time to think about what the word means without getting
the participant bored or not giving the participant enough time to think about the emotional
impact the term has on him/her. On top of that, these labels can be further used for the
machine learning algorithm in hopes of classifying and distinguishing between users by
also considering their emotional state throughout the second task. The third task involves
EEG data collection for biometric authentication with Muse Device
20
==PAGE:27==
showing unfamiliar images to the participants which range from a positive reinforcement to
a negative reinforcement of the images. The photos are supposed to trigger some excite­
ment in the participant, however since there is no familiarity between the participant and
the photos, there might be no significant emotional response. The option of asking par­
ticipants to bring a familiar image was also discussed, however, due to the subjectivity of
the choice of the pictures, and some discussions regarding the privacy of the images, the
idea was discarded. Repeating the first two tasks(emotional­based and problem­solving)
would cover a wider range of emotions and different states that someone can go through.
Therefore, there is a Gamma­induced activity and an alpha­induced activity.
Experimental discussion
The experiment on its own varied greatly from person to person in terms of how long it
took someone to put the headset on or how many times we needed to adjust the head­
set in order to continue the experiment. Sometimes it took 10 minutes to do the whole
experiment or 2 hours to put the headset on. The factors that influenced this are based
on whether or not the hair of the participant got in the way, and whether someone had
glasses on or not. As a result, these two accessories were interfering with each other
during the setup stage. However, it was important to have data that is as less noisy as
possible, so the experiment wouldn’t start until the visual graphics looked like in Figure
4.1. The example shown illustrates a good benchmark that will allow for better data pre­
processing in the next stage. This first part was very important to have under control, as
the pre­processing will consist of smoothing out the signals or other high amplitude fre­
quencies that are not relevant in general to perform data analysis on. Firstly, I connected
the headset to the computer by following the GitHub tutorial [39], then I stabilized the en­
vironment by checking the signal and adjusting the headset according to what was seen
in the picture below. Afterwards, the data was saved into a CSV file which I would inspect
manually in Matlab by using the EEGlab plugin[38]. The EEGlab has been greatly used
within the EEG community. It is a great tool when someone starts diving into the EEG
signal and wants to know how the signal looks like. It is quickly done, and someone can
get a pretty good idea of whether or not the quality of the signal is good to work with.
Before any task started, the participants would be informed about the tasks performed
and also the length, and be asked about their consent on the experiment. The first task,
the one with the puzzle, can be seen in Figure 4.2. The idea of the game is to move the
red block towards the right side smaller red part. The game starts very easily from the
beginning, allowing for a gradual increase in difficulty. The first 10 to 20 levels have been
reported as being boring or not interesting, and very easy. As a result, the majority of the
people started getting engaged after level 25, when it started becoming more difficult to
play the game. The movement of each participant during the game was minimal. They
only moved their hand to play the game, and the head’s position was barely moved. The
task was repeated twice. The participants were asked about how they felt before the
task started, and some were very curious, and others were a little bit nervous to play the
game with the Muse Headset on. The game, however was rated as being much more
difficult by someone over 50, and therefore, those participants had a much more difficult
time starting the game. However, when the participants were observed, the profile of
someone over 50 who was part of the experiment, did not have a good grasp of technology
and therefore, they found it difficult to interact with the laptop on which the game was
played. The laptop in question is a MacBook Pro and during the experiment, the senior
participants of the experiment found it very difficult to work with the touchbar of the laptop.
One of the requirements was to not speak during the experiment as it would add too much
noise. As a result, some of the seniors did not know how to manoeuvre and move that
EEG data collection for biometric authentication with Muse Device
21
==PAGE:28==
Figure 4.1: EEG signal with Muse
rectangle red block. This resulted in visible frustration and no interaction with the game.
Therefore, I stopped the first task to try to teach them how to use the touch bar on the
laptop. Otherwise, these users would simply be left out of the experimental discussion
and they would not be engaged in an active problem­solving stage. After a bit of time, the
senior category was a bit more at ease with using the laptop and therefore they were able
to play the game. However, the game was not very easy even after learning how to play
the game. There was definitely a very different experience with each game depending on
the age group.
The instructions might not have been clear enough in some situations because there
were a few instances when the experiment was restarted because someone would start
talking during the experiment. The questions varied either from a language barrier or
maybe too much information was disclosed, which made it harder to remember during the
experiment. As a result, I tried to adapt as much as possible to explain the experiment and
the steps before any task recording started. That led to spending 10­20 minutes briefing
the information while putting the device on and making the users comfortable with the
setup.
The requirement for keeping it quiet during the experiment is partly due to the cleaning
process. The moment that data gets into the pre­processing stage, due to the noise and
all the necessary tools applied on the data, it would smooth too much the signal, and the
data itself could no longer resemble the original data.
Sometimes, due to the design flaw within the Muse headset, the Bluetooth would discon­
nect from the laptop, and that resulted in a few re­trials of the same experiment. The fact
that in a few instances the device was not correctly connecting to the laptop, it started
leading towards frustration, fatigue and the value on some of the tasks would probably
not be as significant. Luckily, this mainly happened from Participants number 9 to 15, and
then again from Participants 20 to 22. The consequence was rescheduling with some
people for another day of the experiment.
EEG data collection for biometric authentication with Muse Device
22
==PAGE:29==
Figure 4.2: Unblock me puzzle
Moving on to the second task, the task with words repeated to someone and then as­
signing a positive, negative or neutral excitement level to those words uncovered some
linguistic issues as not everyone knows some of the terms or the meanings. The different
nationalities and some of the seniors not being proficient in English led to translating the
words of the experiment into either Arabic or Romanian. The seniors belong to this nation­
ality and hence the translation. The aim of the task was to go through different stages of
emotions that could detect someone’s level of excitement. This level of excitement often
varies from day to day and from person to person, and therefore, by capturing a range
of emotions, the feasibility of this testing can be applied in a real­world scenario. These
results with the level of excitement for each word were recorded for each participant on
a piece of paper, and the results showed that the repetition of the second task induced
a neutral feeling. The neutral stage was observed only midway through the experiment.
Some reported that this neutral stage is because they know what is coming, and it does
not matter the meaning behind it anymore. Due to this, once I was more than halfway
through with the experiment, there were some questions raised about the relevance of
having this task repeated twice. However, since we started out with the experiment, I
decided to continue to ensure a consistent task recording.
The last task, showing unfamiliar pictures, could serve as a benchmark, because the
majority of the feedback on the images showed that they were inducing a neutral expe­
rience. This can be similar to resting and imagining a particular body movement without
doing anything physically. The participants were mostly neutral to the pictures that can
be found in Appendix A.2. After the end of the whole experiment, the participants were
asked about their own experiences around the diversity of the tasks. Some of them re­
ported that they found it interesting to have such a range of different cognitive experiences,
while others mentioned that the second task is biased since everyone has a different life
story influencing their perception and mood. But even so, the reactions are different. The
premise of the experiment is that each one of us has a unique brain activity pattern, and
therefore, having all of these reactions reinforces the idea of how unique the EEG signals
are for each person based on that, there is the possibility of having this type of biometric
EEG data collection for biometric authentication with Muse Device
23
==PAGE:30==
authentication.
There were in total 30 people, out of which 16 were males, 14 females. In total, there were
15 full­time students and 15 people with full­time jobs. Out of the total number, 3 people,
2 males and 1 female were on antidepressants ­information provided informally during
the experiment while they were asking if their own medications influence the quality of
the data. No one else discussed or disclosed by any reinforcement means their medical
history. It came afterwards when the experiment was done and the majority were curious
about the biometric authentication using EEG signal.
4.5
Methodological approach
For the quantitative data collection, the following framework will be used to gather data.
The framework has been developed by Demazure et. al.(2021)[24]. It is an iterative pro­
cess that relies on continuous assessment of the data quality gathered. It is an agile
process that considers the environment’s unpredictable behaviour. Although the frame­
work is mainly aimed at remote EEG data collection, it still provides an agile framework
suitable for the commercially available EEG headset. This approach ensures constant
improvement in the data collection, so the main experiment for data analysis consists of
more reliable data. There are other similar guidelines on how to collect data, as in [67]. In
[67], the guidelines are directed to large­scale EEG data collection, however they empha­
size on defining the number of people needed for the EEG experiment, a team assigned
for checking the quality of the data, a group responsible on the pre­processing, as each
category requires different skills. For the experiment taking place, two people will super­
vise the experiment: me and a friend. The reason for that lies in the fact that, due to the
different background of some of the participants ’ lack of English skills required help to
translate the second task’s words and the briefing before each experiment.
The proposed framework will start with designing the experiment and defining the con­
ditions for the environment. It is aimed for a quiet environment without many disturbing
factors. Then, the next phase involves a training workshop that monitors the user and
gathers feedback from it. At this stage, performance issues such as headset positioning
can be adjusted and implemented as a guideline for the next iteration or how to properly
record data using the computer. This stage can be iterated until satisfactory data has
been collected and all of these issues identified can be integrated into the data collec­
tion stage. Changes can be done during the experiment as well, because there can be a
failure from the device where the Bluetooth connection drops or the screen freezes. How­
ever, in [67], it is advised to never change the experiment while it has officially started,
and if it is changed, a lot of documentation for which participant task was modified needs
to be taken into account. These guidelines mainly provide a blueprint that can be used
before any experiment starts, during, or after. Another emphasised factor is always to do
quality control of the data. This means checking if the headset and laptop work before
the participant arrives. Then, right after, the data needs to be inspected to check for any
abnormalities. This is usually done with the naked eye. The troubleshooting needs to
be documented and taken the necessary steps to resume the experiment. The following
troubleshooting issues evolved from the experiment: the device disconnecting from the
laptop or the device not recording.
After the data has been collected in a way that reduces the artefacts from the start, the data
needs to be preprocessed. This refers to eliminating any of the artifacts that can interfere
with the data quality. Artifacts are, for example, eye blinks or any other muscle movements
or outside noise. The scenario and the environmental setup were chosen in such a way
that the muscle movement is reduced as much as possible, plus there are as few potential
EEG data collection for biometric authentication with Muse Device
24
==PAGE:31==
disturbing external factors, hence the quiet environment chosen. Pre­processing the data
is an important step, and due to the artefact removal step, the remaining data can be
significantly reduced or not really correlating to the original data. It is essential to have a
more extensive set that we can perform further analysis on to stay relevant to the results.
For the preprocessing of the data, the EEGLab [38] plugin will be used as a tool to analyse
the quality of the dataset recorded quickly. It provides a quick way of assessing the signal.
After pre­processing the data and applying the necessary filters, the data can be adjusted
to fit into the machine­learning algorithms. Some of the algorithms will require the data
to be labelled, and therefore, the data needs to be further modified. The adjustments will
consist of adding features that were not automatically recorded within the recorded EEG
session, such as Task_id, Gender, and Age. On top of those features, the gamma alpha
frequencies need to be calculated as they were the ones activated during the experiments.
The variables added during the data pre­processing can be added or eliminated depend­
ing on the machine learning requirements that can either lead to overfitting or underfitting.
Once these frequencies have been isolated, the data can be fed into the next stage of
this paper. The whole process from data acquisition to filtering and classification, can be
visualized in Figure 4.3
Figure 4.3: Workflow Process
The whole process has been more iterative during the data collection, as it involved repet­
itive testing and assessing different factors that can influence the experiment. However,
there were more learnings achieved during the experiment itself which will be discussed
later in Discussion and Challenged Chapter 7.
4.6
Tools
Regarding the tools to be used, EEGlab[38] is a tool used a lot for the EEG pre­processing
features. It comes with a built­in toolbox that visualizes and filters the data. This tool has
been used for quickly visualizing the data quality, however it will not be used to the full
capacity, because it would mean that all of these settings would create uneven datasets
for each participant. On top of that, it would require a much more manual work since it is
EEG data collection for biometric authentication with Muse Device
25
==PAGE:32==
based on visual inspection. Due to the visual inspection and deciding on how to clean the
signal, it leads to biased cleaning. Even if it is a tool used heavily in the pre­processing
stage for EEG signal and it is mostly used by professionals, it serves as a great reference
point for getting an understanding of how to work with the EEG signal.
Then, for the classification, there are more choices in terms of which programming lan­
guage to use for machine learning. But for the most part, Python will be used since it
provides many packages that can be used for both pre­processing and filtering the data.
Machine learning requires continuous data, and Python comes with a broad variety of
libraries that make it easier for any developer with basic programming skills to work with
various ML algorithms. The advantage of using these libraries is that it takes off the load
of implementing an algorithm from scratch. For example, for pre­processing, there are a
few packages that help in filtering the signal such as the scipy.signal package. Python
provides libraries for working with textual data such as numpy, scikit, mne. The last library
mentioned, mne, is a specialized library designed for exploring and visualizing neurophys­
iological data, and it helps in preparing the data before feeding it into an algorithm. All
of these aforementioned tools will be used to make it easier to process large amounts
of data. The machine learning algorithms also come in packages already available from
the sklearn Python package: Naive Bayes, Decision Trees, SVM, and Random Forest.
Having the algorithms already implemented, the work can be done around fine­tuning or
standardizing the data.
4.7
Delimitations
The first thing that needs to be acknowledged is that using a commercially available EEG
headset such as Muse cannot provide high­quality readings such as the clinical EEG
headsets. On top of that, the Muse headset uses dry electrodes which comes with the
benefit of having a low­cost portable wearable device, but at the same time, the tradeoff is
that it cannot measure deep activity inside the brain due to its poor spatial resolution[24],
as in it cannot detect from which part of the brain the signal comes from. However, that is
out of the scope of this project. On top of that, another delimitation lies in the low number
of sensors used for this experiment, although the goal of the paper is to see whether using
this commercially available headset can collect unique EEG signals which can be later on
used for authentication purposes, but it should be kept in mind that the data is not as
accurate as a professional one.
Another limitation lies in the choice of the experiment sessions. For example, an experi­
ment conducted with the same people over an extended period would provide a different
perspective as it would surely cover a wider range of emotional stages of each person.
Another delimitation is that it requires a lot of knowledge working with the EEG signal,
and therefore, this pre­processing stage will be done according to the literature review’s
steps: bandpass filtering and frequency extraction without going deeper into cleaning the
signal further.
Conclusion
As a summary to this chapter, methodology has focused on providing the ”how to” guide­
lines on how to validate the EEG signal with the help of a low consumer grade EEG device.
There are a few delimitations that were acknowledged during this chapter such as the low
number of sensors that will probably affect the quality of the data. This chapter has fo­
cused on discussing the workflow for acquiring, filtering and classifying the data collected
data. However, the biggest focus was on the data collection itself. The proposed design
consists of 3 tasks. The first one is a three­minute puzzle game, repeated twice, the sec­
EEG data collection for biometric authentication with Muse Device
26
==PAGE:33==
ond one is a list of terms with different meanings, repeated twice and lasting one minute
and 20 seconds each. Lastly, a series of images, repeated once, lasting one minute and
10 seconds. There was also a learning curve discovered during the experiments which
might justify the results in the machine learning performance. The experiment aligns with
the GDPR collection rules, where it states that someone’s data being fully anonymized
means they are no longer protected by GDPR. The main goal is to provide the research
community with a dataset that can be used further on for EEG authentication.
EEG data collection for biometric authentication with Muse Device
27
==PAGE:34==
5
Data pre­processing
This chapter will explain the process of filtering the data before being fed into machine
learning algorithms. This stage is important as having some noise within the data can
open the doors for a different attack. This section follows the guidelines which were dis­
cussed in the previous Chapters, Literature Review 2 and 3. The guidelines are about
filtering the data by applying a bandpass filter and isolating the frequency bands: Gamma
and Alpha which correlate to the proposed design in the Methodology Chapter 4. This
chapter will dive a bit deeper into the work that has been done for pre­processing the
signal.
5.1
Data format
In order to record and visualize the data, the following command lines from the MuseLSL
[39] were used during the recording.
# connect the headsets to the DTU computer
muselsl stream
# view the data
muselsl visualize
#record the EEG data with duration of 3 min,
1 min 20 sec, 1 min 10 sec
muselsl record -d 180 -t EEG
muselsl record -d 80 -t EEG
muselsl record -d 70 -t EEG
There is a slight delay between starting the recording, which was around 7 to 8 seconds.
The raw data collected records only the time taken to do the recording and the values for
the sensors: TP9, TP10, AF7, AF8. The muse headset also allows for another plug­in
to connect for the data to be recorded, but since it has not been used, it was an empty
column, as can be seen in Figure 5.1. The timestamp is the UNIX timestamp. The data
Figure 5.1: RAW Data CSV
was collected on the computer borrowed from DTU, where all the data was stored in a
CSV format. The CSV format makes it easier to work with the recorded data. The data has
been afterwards converted into a Data Frame using the Pandas library. The advantage
of using such a library lies in the fact that it provides different options to clean the data,
EEG data collection for biometric authentication with Muse Device
28
==PAGE:35==
handle missing values, merge or rename columns in a much more user­friendly manner.
The library has been often used in data analytic or machine learning applications. Pandas
also perform better when there are more than 500000 rows compared to other available
packages, however, it is prone to consume a lot of memory[68]. However, the Pandas
work very well with other popular packages such as numpy arrays and matplotlib which
are often combined together when it comes to arranging and cleaning the data.
The name of each data recorded contains the date of the recording, but in order to include
more variables into the dataset for analysis, I added the id of each person, the gender,
the age and the task id. This resulted in more data that represents more accurately the
identity of the person who participated in the data collection. The new columns could be
used for later processing in the Machine Learning Algorithms. These factors, except for
gender, influence to some extent the collected data from the sensors and they can weigh
in later on. But the formatting of the data can be seen in Figure 5.2 as well as the unfiltered
signal in Figure 5.3.
Figure 5.2: Formatting the data
Figure 5.3: Raw unfiletered signal
Further on, based on Section 5, there were numerous artefacts that needed to be filtered
in order to provide high­quality data to the ML models. Firstly, the frequencies needed to
be filtered according to the tasks performed, were Gamma and Alpa. The Gamma band
EEG data collection for biometric authentication with Muse Device
29
==PAGE:36==
correlated with the first task, the one where a participant would play the puzzle game,
and the alpha frequency which were supposed to be calm tasks that did not require a
lot of creativity nor problem­solving, and therefore the alpha channel made sense to be
extracted from the dataset.
In order to reduce the noise, a butterbandpass filter was applied on the whole set to allow
only for frequencies between 0.1 and 100 V to pass through. It is a digital analog filter
for which the output will be as flat as possible in response to the filtering. In Figure 5.4,
there are three functions that help achieve this. The first one, the butter_bandpass takes
in the highcut and lowcut arguments, the sampling frequency 256 HZ, as provided by the
MuseLSL website and the order of the pass, defaulting to 5. This function returns Second
order Sections, (sos) which represent the filter coefficients. Then, these coeficients are
fed into the next function butter_bandpass_filter which are applied on the dataset.
Figure 5.4: Butterbandpass filter
The functions discussed earlier are helpful in extracting the Gamma and Alpha frequen­
cies by indicating the needed range. In this case, as seen in Figure 5.5, the gamma takes
on the range between 30 and 100Hz, while the Alpha frequency takes on the values be­
tween 8 and 12 Hz.
Figure 5.5: Gamma and Alfa Filtering functions
The newly added values are added as new columns to the dataset so they can be used
EEG data collection for biometric authentication with Muse Device
30
==PAGE:37==
as parameters for the ML algorithms. This bandpass filter will take care of the irregular
frequencies and it will help out in providing a more stable outlook on the frequencies.
Figure 5.6: Filtered signal for one person, for one task
The signals from Figure 5.6 represent the filtered signal for one person. The waves are
consistent and do not spike as much as seen in Figure 5.3. The signals are much more
precise, and they can be easily differentiated from each other. Some channels have higher
amplitude like TP9 and TP10, but the other ones AF7 and AF8 have a lower amplitude.
The result is expected and it is good enough to work with.
According to the literature review, it is suggested to apply a further pre­processing stage.
The proposed approach is to use ICA. This was implemented, however, it became quickly
apparent that it aimed at choosing a ”bad channel”. The dataset contains only 4 channels,
and leaving one channel would shrink the available dataset. On top of that, it still requires
a visual inspection to choose which one is the bad signal, and not all channels can be
considered bad for everyone.
EEG data collection for biometric authentication with Muse Device
31
==PAGE:38==
6
Machine Learning Performance
This chapter will go through the classical machine learning models implemented and it will
discuss the performance for each one of them in relation to the collected dataset. This
will include an introduction to the basic metrics used for measurement and their definition.
Next, the results of the machine learning algorithms will be presented based on the metrics
mentioned above.
6.1
ML models performance metrics
The dataset contains continuous and categorical data. The continuous data comes from
the sensors, the calculated gamma and alpha bands, age and task. The categorical data
is the person’s id and gender. Therefore, there is a mix of the two data types that influence
the choice of the algorithms. The goal is to authenticate users based on their unique EEG
signal, which is why, the input data will contain the EEG data while other variables can be
added or substracted to assess the performance of the algorithm.
The performance of the machine learning models is usually observed via a few met­
rics that serve as indicators of the model’s performance. If it is a regression problem,
there are the following performance metrics: mean­absolute­error(MAE), mean­squared­
error(MSE) and root­mean­squared­error(RMSE)). But the project deals with a classifica­
tion problem ­ aiming at differentiating users between eachother with the current dataset.
However, there are different metrics for classification problems such as Accuracy, Con­
fusion Matrix, F1­score and Precision and Recall, K­fold validation, Training and Testing
score[69]. The confusion matrix is not a metric per se, but it helps visualize the model’s
performance.
The confusion matrix is a visualization tool that tells us where the model gets ”confused”[70].
This type of metric can be used only in supervised machine learning algorithms where the
output is known. It is a NxN matrix, where N represents the number of classes or out­
put[71]. Figure 6.1 illustrates how to interpret the confusion matrix. The green boxes
represent the correct predicted values while the pink boxes represent the number of in­
correct predictions. In each box, it can be seen the following labels: True Positive, True
negative, False Positive and False Negative. The meaning behind these labels is as the
following one :
• True Positives(TP)[70]: The model correctly predicted the positive instance as pos­
itive
• True Negatives(TN)[70]: The model correctly predicted the negative instances as
negative
• False Positive(FP)[70]: The model incorrectly predicted the negative instances as
positive
• False Negative(FN)[70]: The model incorrectly predicted the positive instances as
negative
Understanding this matrix is crucial in assessing the model’s performance in a classifica­
tion algorithm. It provides a visual way of seeing which one of the instances got misclassi­
fied in the model. These images can also be converted in numerical values to assess the
EEG data collection for biometric authentication with Muse Device
32
==PAGE:39==
Figure 6.1: Confusion Matrix
performance better by using metrics that take advantage of the matrix annotations from
Figure 6.1.
The accuracy metric is one of the simplest metrics to implement, which tells the percent­
age of correct predictions a model makes. The formula considers the number of correct
predictions divided by the total number of predictions. The formula for calculating the
accuracy metric is the following[72]:
Accuracy =
TruePositives+TrueNegatives
(TruePositives+FalsePositives+TrueNegatives+FalseNegatives)
from sklearn.metrics import accuracy_score
accuracy_score(y_true, y_pred)
Next key metric is the precision metric[72]. It is usually closely related to the confusion
matrix. The formula for calculating the precision metric is the following one:
Precision =
TruePositives
(TruePositives+FalsePositives)
A high score indicates that the model has a low rate of false positives. This is an important
metric where false positives can have costly repercussions. If the score is low, there is a
higher chance of misclassifying negative instances as positive. An example from a real­
life scenario would be when the model diagnoses a healthy patient with a disease which
in turn leads to unnecessary procedures.
The aforementioned metric should not be interpreted on its own. It should be interpreted
with other metrics such as the recall and F1­score. The recall metric is calculated using
the next formula[72]:
Recall =
TruePositives
(TruePositives+FalseNegatives)
It is used to correctly identify the positive instances out of all the actual positive instances.
A high recall score indicates that the model has a low rate of missing on positive instances.
Following the same scenario within a healthcare scenario, the model would not be missing
EEG data collection for biometric authentication with Muse Device
33
==PAGE:40==
out on the patients that have been diagnosed. Therefore, the patients who are actually
ill can get the medical attention needed. On the opposite side, a low recall score would
mean that many of the patients that need to be checked by a doctor are actually missed
out by the model.
The F1­score is another complementary metric to the ones mentioned above and it is
calculated by using the Recall and Precision score as follows[73]:
F1 −score = 2 ·
Precision·Recall
(Precision+Recalls)
The result ranges from 0 to 1. If the value is close to zero then the model is underper­
forming and closer to one, it means that the model is performing fairly well[73]. It is a
metric generally used when there is a need to balance out the precision and recall score.
In general, it is used when there are uneven number of classes[73].
The training and test scores are useful metrics used to determine if the model is either
underfitting over overfitting[74], [75]. For example, the training score measures the perfor­
mance of a model on the training data it was used on. This metric indicates how well the
model has performed on the trained data and it shows that it has managed to successfully
capture the underlying relationship between the features. The testing score is performed
as the name suggests on the test dataset. Since that data has not been used during the
training stage, it provides insights on how the algorithm could perform in a real­life sce­
nario. A high score means that the model can generalize very well and make accurate
predictions based on unseen data. It also means that the model has learnt very well the
underlying pattern between the variables. However, these scores need to be interpreted
together, because it generally reflects on the common issue of either having too many or
too little features in the input dataset. For example, overfitting results when the training
score is very high but the testing score is actually very low[75]. In general, the training
score will be slightly higher than the testing score which is usually expected. The only key
aspect of interpreting these numbers is to make sure that the difference between these
two metrics is not significantly high. Otherwise, the model needs to be tweaked and fitted
again[75].
The next metric worth mentioning for assessing the performance of the model is the cross­
validation metric or the ”K­fold” metric. The k­fold is a resampling technique used to
evaluate the machine learning model on a limited data sample[76]. The procedure takes
in a single parameter k that represents the number of groups the dataset to be split into.
When the number is chosen, such as 5, it is being referred to as a 5­fold cross­validation.
These five equally divided subsets are then used for training and testing. The model is
trained and evaluated five times or k times. Each fold will be used as a test set once and
the remaining ones will be used for training. Usually, the value 10 is recommended to use
in the machine learning projects as it has shows to have empirically good results[76]. It is
usually applied before splitting the dataset into smaller subsets. This way, the model gets
trained on different subsets of the input data[76].
These metrics will be used to analyze the performance of the following machine learning
algorithms: Support Vector Machine, Support Vector Machine, Naive Bayes Classifier,
K­Nearest Neighbour, and Random Forest.
Feature engineering
The collected data is a mixed type since it contains categorical data and discrete data.
Some algorithms will work only with categorical data, others will work only with discrete
values, and feature engineering is used as a technique to convert different values into
numerical values that can be interpreted by the model[77]. For example, a label such as
EEG data collection for biometric authentication with Muse Device
34
==PAGE:41==
male or female can be converted into values 1 or 2 to differentiate between the two val­
ues[78]. The only label recorded within the dataset is the gender which was transformed
into a binary form with the help of the encoder. Gender is not needed for the input data as
it does not affect the activity of the EEG signal, but it was taken into account when playing
with the input data The example can be seen below by using the One Hot Encoder [78].
import category_encoders as ce
encoder = ce.OneHotEncoder(['Gender'])
Other feature engineering techniques rely on standardization. By doing so, all the data
gets on the same scale [79]. This allows for the models to be more fair and unbiased
and it makes sure that no feature dominates the model fitting during the training process.
Standardization makes it easier to handle outliers[79]. Those outliers can overshadow
the other features[79]. It is quite common for some algorithms such as KNN, SVM, SVR,
Naive Bayes to require some form of standardization. On the other hand, Random Forest
algorithm does not require standardization as they are not so sensitive to feature scal­
ing[60]. In general, they are not strictly required, but they are heavily recommended. The
packages are easily imported from the sklearn library in Python.
#First initialize a standardscaler object
sc_Y=StandardScaler()
#Second transform the dataset with the standard scaler
x=sc_X.fit_transform(X_stacked)
6.2
Machine learning Performance
The performance of the following five popular classical algorithms will be summarized in
Table 6.1. The input variables are the sensors values, the gamma, alpha and the task
id. The reason was to try different variables and check which one would perform better
for authentication. The goal is to identify unique individuals based on their unique EEG
activity. So there were a few trials with different input and output data. Since the goal
of the paper is to authenticate users, the output variable should be the person’s ID and
measure the accuracy according to the performance metrics described above.
The algorithms used in this paper go through similar stages of preparation, starting with
the encoding of the categorical data, and also the scaling of the data. The variables x and
y were the same across all models. All the models require the data to be split into training
and testing variables. So that means that there will be an x_train, x_test y_train, y_test.
X_train, X_test, y_train, y_test = train_test_split(x, y,
test_size=0.20, random_state=42)
The random state can take up several values, however within the sklearn package from
Python, it is recommended to use the value 42 in order for the code to have the same out­
put so other people can test the model and get the same results no matter how many times
the model is trained[80]. In short, it meant for reproducible results. If the random_state
is not specified, there will be different results from the model. Therefore, for consistency,
all the models have the same value. Then the test_size refers to a percentage on how
to split the data between training and testing. In the majority of the cases in machine
learning models, the ratio used is 9:1 or 8:2[81]. However, there is no clear guidance on
which one works best, as many different ratios have been used. If the dataset is small
EEG data collection for biometric authentication with Muse Device
35
==PAGE:42==
it is recommended a ratio of 7:3, and in larger datasets, it is used a ratio of 9:1. During
experiments, I chose to experiment with multiple values, and in the end, I chose the 8:2
ratio for the models, as the results were neither very optimistic, but the models did not
perform poorly either.
After the dataset has been split, each model can be created and applied to the dataset.
The Python package sklearn comes with out­of­the­box ready­to­be­used models, making
it easier to implement and apply on the models.
The SVM algorithm takes in the following popular hyperparameters that help in tuning in
the model, especially when there is a non­linearity relationship between the data points:
• kernel: maps the input data into a higher dimensional space. Popular choices are :
Radial Basis Function (RBF), Polynomial, Linear, Sigmoid.
• gamma: influences the shape and the influence on the decision boundary of the
kernel function. A low value means a further away data point can influence the
decision, while a higher value means closer values can influence the decision. If
the value is high, it can lead to overfitting, while a smaller value will not capture the
underlying pattern between vectors.
• C: can be seen as the degree of correct classifications, but it deals with outliers.
Low C means that more outliers are allowed and higher C less outliers are allowed.
But a high C can lead to misclassification[82].
The parameters chosen for the SVM model were the kernel = ’RBF’ with a C=1 and gamma
= ’scale’ as they showed to have the best performance out of all the combinations.
classifier=SVR(kernel='rbf', C=1.0, gamma='scale')
The KNN algorithm takes in the following hyperparameters:
• n_neighbours: experiment with the number of neighbours that will do the majority of
the vote. A higher number can lead to underfitting while a smaller number can lead
to overfitting.
• metric: this is the distance metric to be used to calculate the distance between the
datapoints. Examples of metric distance types: Euclidean, Manhattan etc. The
most popular one is the Euclidean distance, as it calculates the true straight line
between two points.
• weights: adds weight to the nearby neighbours, therefore influencing the decision
boundary[83].
knn=KneighborsClassifier(n_neighbours, weights = 'uniform',
metric = 'euclidean')
The above hyperparameters turned out to result in the most optimal combination between
the choice of the number of neighbours and the uniform metric. Checking the different
combinations of neighbours, having 7 neighbours turned out with better accuracy com­
pared to other options.
The Random Forest algorithm is based on a set of trees, and the hyperparameters are
mostly oriented towards the number of them. This contains the following hyperparame­
ters:
EEG data collection for biometric authentication with Muse Device
36
==PAGE:43==
• n_estimators: This estimates how many trees need to be created for the model. The
default value is 100
• max_depth: refers to the maximum number of splits each tree can take. If there is
a low value, then the model will not be trained properly, but with a high number, it
will lead to overfitting
• max_features: refers to the number of features given that can predict the target[83].
#Random Forest hypertuning
random_forest_classifier=RandomForestClassifier(n_estimators=100,
max_features='auto', max_depth='None')
#Decision Tree hypertuning
decision_tree_classifier=DecisionTreeClassifier()
Choosing the default options for this algorithm gave the best results in terms of accuracy.
The same parameters are available for the Decision Tree Classifier with the exception
of the n_estimator[83]. However, going with the same hyperparameters resulted in a
much poorer performance. The two algorithms are similar in concepts, and they are both
used in supervised machine learning applications. The difference can be observed in the
numbers from Table 6.1. The tuning of the Decision Tree algorithm did not provide any
better results, showing that it leads to overfitting, as a result, it remained empty.
The Naive Bayes algorithm does not have as many parameters as the previously dis­
cussed ones, and it is not as sensitive to tuning compared to the other ones. So some­
times going with the default parameters can provide a good accuracy. The hyperparam­
eteres are the following ones:
• smoothing parameter: it is used to control the zero probability case.
• prior probability: this assumes that you are aware of the probability of an event to
happen and it will override the model’s own probability calculation[84].
The experiment showed best results without the need of adjusting the parameters for
the algorithm. But for testing purposes, the two aforementioned hyperparameters were
added to test whether the model could be improved. The addition of the hyperparameters
resulted in very poor accuracy, close to 3%. As a result, any fine tuning was discarded
naive_bayes_classifier=GaussianNB()
After presenting the models and their choice for parameters, the metrics that can be seen
in Table 6.1 can be extracted with the help of the calculation report for classification algo­
rithms. It takes in as arguments the y_train and y_test variables to calculate the report
from sklearn.metrics import classification_report
print(classification_report(y_train, y_test))
precision
recall
f1-score
support
EEG data collection for biometric authentication with Muse Device
37
==PAGE:44==
1
0.43
0.94
0.59
34
2
1.00
1.00
1.00
65
3
1.00
1.00
1.00
52
4
1.00
1.00
1.00
52
5
0.64
0.94
0.76
52
6
1.00
1.00
1.00
56
7
0.91
0.57
0.70
54
8
1.00
1.00
1.00
53
9
0.48
0.30
0.37
53
10
0.52
0.43
0.47
35
11
0.16
0.21
0.18
47
12
1.00
1.00
1.00
50
13
1.00
1.00
1.00
49
14
0.84
1.00
0.91
37
15
1.00
1.00
1.00
51
...
weighted avg
0.86
0.84
0.84
1460
The above output is from the Naive Bayes classification report and it shows the Preci­
sion, Recall, f1­score, and support. The Support metric represents the number of classes
present during the y_train stage[85]. On the left side, the chronological numbers rep­
resent the person’s id and for each person, there are available metrics to illustrate how
accurate was for someone to be correctly identified or misclassified. The weighted avg
metric presents the average value for the whole set.
Metric
SVM
KNN
Random Forest
Naive Bayes
Decision Tree
Accuracy
78%
77%
96%
84%
41%
Training
Score
85%
85%
99%
100%
100%
Testing
Score
78%
78%
96%
96%
40%
Precision
79%
79%
96%
96%
43%
Recall
79%
78%
96%
88%
42%
F1­score
79%
79%
97&
81%
42%
K­fold
78%
77%
96%
96%
40%
Table 6.1: Machine Learning Algorithms Performance
It seems that the best­performing algorithm was the Random Forest in comparison to the
other ones. The results that worked the best represent the default ones. In other works,
the Random Forest classifier has scored higher, close to 98%[31]. The next one that
seems to also be providing fairly good results is the Naive Bayes algorithm with an accu­
racy of 84%. In contrast, in other works, this algorithm has achieved a higher percentage
close to 99%[31]. The next two algorithms, the SVM and KNN have achieved a similar
score with all the fine tuning of the parameters, the score for accuracy did not go higher
than 78%. The training and testing scores for both algorithms are in a similar range sug­
gesting that there is no overfitting or underfitting. These two algorithms range from 70% to
79% in performance, which indicates that further tuning of the parameters could be added
in order to improve the results since other works suggest that these algorithms can reach
over 90% accuracy[31].
EEG data collection for biometric authentication with Muse Device
38
==PAGE:45==
The same cannot be said about the Decision Tree algorithm, since the data suggests
that it has been subjected to overfitting due to the 100% training score and a much more
significantly lower testing score. It means that this model cannot accurately predict good
results on new data.
The following pictures depict the confusion matrixes done for all of the presented algo­
rithms. Overall, it seems that in every confusion matrix, Figures 6.4, 6.3, 6.2, 6.6and 6.5,
the numerical values correlate to the confusion matrix, displaying the misclassification
between people’s id. An example, would be in Figure 6.2, id 20 got misclassified as id 7,
13 times. The same is shown in the next confusion matrixes. Anything that is below or
above the blue diagonal, shows where the model got confused on the identity of people.
Overall, the illustrations depict a general good accuracy for identifying each person based
off their unique EEG data.
Figure 6.2: Confusion Matrix SVM
EEG data collection for biometric authentication with Muse Device
39
==PAGE:46==
Figure 6.3: Confusion Matrix KNN
Figure 6.4: Confusion Matrix Random Forest Classifier
EEG data collection for biometric authentication with Muse Device
40
==PAGE:47==
Figure 6.5: Confusion Matrix Naive Bayes
Figure 6.6: Confusion Matrix Decision Tree
EEG data collection for biometric authentication with Muse Device
41
==PAGE:48==
Conclusion
Overall, this chapter has presented the work done to validate the collected data set with
a low­grade consumer EEG headset. This work was built on top of filtering the frequency
bands described earlier. This chapter has provided an overview of the performance us­
ing the most popular metrics for classification algorithms and how the algorithms were
fine­tuned to achieve the best performance. Different metrics were either added for hy­
pertuning or removed completely as they degraded the performance of the algorithms
significantly. The input variables were the same for all the algorithms. From this work, the
Random Forest algorithm achieved the highest accuracy score compared to the Decision
Tree, which showed an abysmal performance.
EEG data collection for biometric authentication with Muse Device
42
==PAGE:49==
7
Discussion and Challenges
This chapter will present the discussion and challenges encountered throughout the project,
from the beginning, the data collection phase, all the way to the results from the machine
learning algorithms. This will serve as a reflection of all the steps involved in the project.
This chapter comprises three main areas involved in this project: data collection, pre­
processing and machine learning. Each one of them consisted of different challenges
which is why they will be discussed separately.
7.1
Data collection
One of the most time­consuming tasks was to collect data from participants. It was a
challenge to find enough people for this study and also make sure everyone was available
for the experiment. On top of that, the design of the experiment was inspired by different
literature review papers, but the design itself could also be flawed. One of the flaws is that
when it comes down to the choice of terms and images for the second and third tasks are
biased and are influenced heavily by my perception of the world.
The first task was aimed at triggering the Gamma activity, while the others were meant
to be calmer and relaxed, which would trigger the alpha activity. Furthermore, one of the
reasons for repeating the first and second tasks was to get an average baseline for the
same response. Ideally, someone would have gone through different and multiple rounds
of the experiment in order to collect as much data as possible. However, in a real­life
scenario, it would be impractical for someone to go through several weeks of enrolling
their data into the system just so that they could authenticate based on their EEG signals.
However, if it were to test a short enrollment phase, it would have resulted in too little
data to work with during the pre­processing stage. According to different literature review
sources and interviews, the recording length varies from four seconds worth of data to
fifteen­twenty minutes to get meaningful data. Each person’s different moods throughout
the day heavily influence the EEG activity, so that’s why some questions about being
tired, nervous, and hungry were asked. One of the limitations was that our experiments
were conducted with a headset with only four sensors, and the available public datasets
involved EEG headsets with a minimum of 8 sensors and a minimum of 10 minutes worth
of collected data. The papers presented during the Literature Review Chapter 2 showed
reasonably good results; therefore, our experiment design was also close to 10 minutes’
worth of data for one person. The difference lies in the number of sensors.
We could have copied existing frameworks for experiments. However, there is an oppor­
tunity to do and collect data our experiments. The diversity of the tasks, or the methods of
designing an experiment provided excellent results in biometric authentication. Since the
method of coming up with an experiment has not been suggested to be one of the prob­
lems with the performance of the machine learning algorithms, I decided to design the
experiment per what triggers Gamma and Alpha activities. These tasks were supposed
to cover a broader range of feelings, emotions and concentration levels. This inspiration
came mainly from the emotion recognition papers[14]. Their main goal was to classify
emotions based on someone’s EEG activity, and the intention was to capture a broader
range of emotions for someone.
However, there are a few ethical concerns over the second task. The range of emotions
can vary greatly, and I did not dive into which emotion was triggered. Still, I tried to place all
EEG data collection for biometric authentication with Muse Device
43
==PAGE:50==
these emotions into three categories: positive, neutral or negative. These emotions could
have been more triggering for others. Luckily, after each session with the participants, no
one reported as having a traumatic experience. However, something to be noted after
the experiments is that, every person that went through the second task was reporting
mostly a neutral feeling towards the terms heard. The third task also seemed to have
been perceived mostly as neutral. The unfamiliarity with the images did not resonate with
anyone from the participants. However, most people reported covering these emotional
stages: positive, neutral and negative. This means, that all of these mood changes should
have been captured by the EEG headset. In a real­life scenario, if someone were to
authenticate using the EEG headset, they would use it in different stages: when they are
excited, sad, surprised, etc.
Due to the technical setup and the equipment, specifically the EEG headset that was
disconnecting quite a few times, the experiments had to be postponed for a few hours or
days in order to figure out how to make them work. A solution was to let the headsets
”rest” for a few hours while charging. Due to that and the moment the headsets would
disconnect, the participants got used to the game that was presented. The game was
seen as more boring because it had to be repeated. As a result, some of the initial tasks
may not have stimulated Gamma activity.
When it came down to the briefing part, before the experiment, some of the participants
were reluctant to the idea. Mainly because the idea of authenticating based on your unique
EEG features was considered ”science fiction”, although it would still be seen as a ”cool
idea”. Then, the briefing also explained how their data will be anonymized in order to
protect their identity. As a data owner, I have the records for who is who in the collected
data. The stored data on the laptop contains only the age, gender, id, and tasks id. Other
personal information such as names were recorded only on a piece of paper.
More sensitive data, such as medications for different mental illnesses, were primarily
disclosed informally, without being recorded anywhere. According to the literature review
and the interview with the expert, drugs affect the EEG activity. However, since this data
collection was not about discriminating against anyone over their medical history and it
was about being as inclusive as possible, the dataset achieves this variety in the partici­
pants. The medical information and history of some of the participants mainly came from
them asking if their own medications could affect the EEG collection. At no point during
the whole process was someone asked about their medical records. However, some were
concerned about the quality of the data that they were contributing with. The majority of
people interviewed come from diverse backgrounds and from different nationalities such
as Romania, Syria, Lebanon, Slovakia, Lithuania, Latvia, Denmark, Croatia, and China.
The youngest participant was 19 and the oldest was 55 at the time of conducting exper­
iments. The majority of the participants were between 20 and 30 years old, 22 of them
more precisely. It would have been more inclusive to have an even participation of the
age groups because this way we have only 26% of the participants bringing more diversity
into the dataset. The gender distribution was fairly even 16 males and 14 women.
7.1.1
Data pre­processing
Once the collection of the data had been done, there were different methods available for
processing the data. One of the most popular ones among researchers within the EEG
field was mostly using the EEGLAB offered by matlab. That tool was very time­consuming
as it required a lot of manual work and especially manual tweaking of the data to remove
eye­blinks. The manual labour consisted of removing chunks of data. As a result, instead
of having a few minutes of recording, the chopping off of the data resulted in less than
EEG data collection for biometric authentication with Muse Device
44
==PAGE:51==
30 seconds worth of data. Not everyone would have the same amount of data available
used for machine learning later on. Moreover, even if there are guidelines on how to clean
the data of noise, the procedure itself is very biased and time­consuming and the dataset
will not be the same for all the participants. As a result, even if the EEGLAB tool would
be more helpful in cleaning the data due to its simplicity and integration with MuseLSL, I
decided to disregard the manual work and try to have an automated pipeline for the data
processing as it would ensure that all of the datasets have the same length and same
quality.
The challenge lies in not having as much control over the data quality as with the other
tool. I found that visually inspecting the data in Python was less accurate compared to
using EEGlab. However, it is stated in some literature review works that relying on all of
this manual labour does not make it easy for other authors to replicate the experiments
[13]. To ensure the dataset’s validation, we followed standard guidelines from previous
works that resulted in high accuracy scores for Machine Learning algorithms.
The available packages from Python for data processing helped in filtering the signals
and isolating the Gamma and Alpha frequencies. The new numbers resulting from the
filtering are quite hard to grasp on their own and what they mean. Therefore, visually
checking the signal was a good way of validating the results seen with Python. Validating
the results just by a visual inspection is fairly biased because a professional would know
better whether or not the data has been properly cleaned. After reviewing similar works
and examining other examples of a cleaned EEG signal, I used my knowledge to ensure
that all artefacts were removed before making a decision.
The Python packages used for filtering the EEG signal helped in simplifying the manual
work and it did show similar results to the ones expected in the matlab toolbox. Another
advantage was that it seemed to have gotten rid of really high oscillations in the signal with
the help of the butterbandpass filter. As a non­expert in the EEG signal, and consulting
the steps in the literature review, some authors have only stuck to a bandpass filter for
their EEG analysis and I decided to do the same.
However, some authors took the next step in the pre­processing stage and applied ICA
to their datasets. However, it was suggested that this algorithm works better with more
channels(sensors). We applied the algorithm to our dataset, but it functions by eliminating
a ”noisy” channel. The exclusion of this channel is determined through a visual exami­
nation of the data. Unfortunately, the results obtained through ICA were limited and the
dataset no longer resembled an EEG signal. Moreover, the algorithm still asked the de­
veloper to choose which channel needed to be removed. It is possible that the placement
of the headset may cause some sensors to produce noisier data. Moreover, not everyone
will have the same placements for the sensors and not the same ”bad channels”. As a
result, and due to the lack of control over this step, ICA was not taken into account to test
further with the machine learning algorithms. On top of that, the data could have been
altered too much and it is advised to apply a limited number of filtering steps[38].
7.2
Machine learning performance
One of the challenges around machine learning was choosing the input data and the
target variable. For instance, there was a combination of categorical and discrete data.
Depending on the algorithm of choice, the data itself needed to be converted into a nu­
merical value that was accepted by the algorithm. Since this is about authentication, the
target variable needs to be something unique to the user and in our case it was the id of
each person.
EEG data collection for biometric authentication with Muse Device
45
==PAGE:52==
During the training, a variety of number of input data were added or excluded in order to
test the performance of model. But for all the algorithms, the same input data has been
used to maintain a certain degree of standardization.
Hypertuning the algorithms is a common technique that helps in adjusting the performance
of the algorithms, but not all of them seemed to need hypertuning, and the example for that
is the Random Forest classifier. The default parameters seemed to have been providing
a much better performance rather than adjusting or limiting the number of nodes. The
same thing cannot be said about the SVM and KNN algorithm which required more fine
tuning in order for the score to be between 70 and 79%.
Deciding which hyperparameters and how to tune the algorithm has been one of the chal­
lenges because some values can lead to overfitting or underfitting. In order to check
for this issue, it was important to look over the difference between the training and testing
scores in order to make a decision about the input variables. On top of that, all the param­
eter tuning has guidelines and suggested values to avoid the aforementioned problems
in machine learning. Each metric is essential in deciding whether the model is perform­
ing well, however, some metrics can be more important than others, depending on the
business case and the associated risk with it. When it comes to biometric authentication,
it is vital to have a balance between accepting non­genuine users and rejecting genuine
users.
This trade­off is seen between the Precision and Recall metric. From a user perspective,
if the genuine user is not authenticated correctly, it leads to some friction in the user
experience. That means the user will become frustrated with the process itself. However,
from a business perspective, rejecting genuine users is a risk that a business is much more
willing to take rather than a customer’s frustration[86]. The implications for accepting
a non­genuine user impose much higher risks depending on the business sector. If it
is within the financial sector, illegal transactions can take place if a non­registered user
gains access to the systems[86]. The scenarios are infinite for what can happen when
non­authenticated users gain access to different systems.
In the case of EEG authentication, the Recall metric is the one that makes the most sense
to look at and assess the performance of the model for authentication, which correlates to
the False Negative, as in genuine users being denied access[86]. Luckily, the scores for
Recall and Precision were in the same range for SVM, KNN, Random Forest. By same
range, I am referring to not having a significant difference between these two scores. On
the other hand, Naive Bayes’s recall score was much lower compared to the Precision
one, which means that there is a higher chance of a false positive, so someone could gain
access by being mistaken for someone else. The Decision Tree did not perform well in
general, and the scores for both Precision and Recall are significantly low, 42%, which
means that there is a high chance for both false positives and false negatives.
7.3
Future Directions
This work aimed at validating the usability and the performance of the Muse device for
collecting data. However, this validation has been carried out under no ”attack” scenarios.
Therefore, in order to validate this work even further, there could be included a few attack
scenarios on the data. Moreover, these classical algorithms performed reasonably well
with this dataset, but it does not reach the same accuracy as the one presented in the liter­
ature review. Therefore, this dataset could be tested with more complex algorithms from
machine learning, such as Recurrent Natural Neworks or Convolutional Neural Networks.
These might achieve a much better accuracy compared to the classical ones. Also, since
EEG data collection for biometric authentication with Muse Device
46
==PAGE:53==
those algorithms are better at making predictions, the signal pre­processing stage could
be disregarded.
Furthermore, since EEG falls into the category of sensitive data, more research can be
done to ensure that the individuals who gave their consent over the data collection can still
track their data. In relation to the GDPR rules, their rights to their data have been revoked
due to the anonymisation process. But in the future, their data could be encrypted, or a
hash key would be generated for them to be still able to track and delete their data. The
data itself cannot be interpreted easily, so if someone were to get access to this informa­
tion, they would need to be specialized in interpreting the EEG signal. Moreover, the EEG
signal ages, which means that someone’s EEG signal could have changed significantly
and cannot be easily tracked to someone [65]. The literature has showed that the perfor­
mance degrades over the course of multiple sessions, therefore, it could be investigated
for how long the EEG signal can be used in authentication after it has been collected.
EEG data collection for biometric authentication with Muse Device
47
==PAGE:54==
8
Conclusion
This chapter will summarize the findings in relation to the research questions addressed
in the first part of this paper which is around building and validating the data collected with
a commercially available EEG headset, specifically the Muse headset.
The research questions were the following ones:
RQ1: How can we differentiate between users by collecting EEG data with the help
of a consumer­grade device?
The first RQ1 focused on gathering data with a commercially available device, and in
order to prove that, a few classification algorithms were employed to reach the result.
Based on findings from a literature review, EEG can be used as a reliable biometric au­
thentication method. However, accuracy may vary depending on the quality of the EEG
device used. The challenge lies in obtaining accurate data from commercially available
headsets with fewer sensors, such as those with only four sensors.
To differentiate between users, several steps needed to be done to identify users based
on their unique EEG activity. First, the tasks needed to be designed to allow for specific
EEG activity to be extracted. Then, appropriate pre­processing steps were essential to
filter out unwanted artefacts such as noise, very high frequencies, or too low frequencies,
by applying a bandpass filter. The Gamma and Alpha frequencies were extracted as they
correlated the most with the designated tasks.
After the pre­processing stage, classification algorithms were implemented to test the
Muse EEG device. KNN, Naive Bayes, Random Forest, Decision Tree and SVM were
used for classifying the users. The accuracy metrics were used to validate our research
question. After hypertuning the models, the Random Forest showed the highest accuracy,
96% compared to all of the other algorithms. The worst performing one was the Decision
tree with an accuracy of 41%, while the other ranged between 77% to 84% accuracy.
The results varied in their performance. However, the results are promising and perhaps
with improving the pre­processing stage and choosing more accurate machine learning
algorithms, the performance could increase.
These results are an encouraging step in adopting this device as an authentication method.
Compared to the other available biometric authentication methods, someone’s unique fea­
tures cannot be replicated. However, the type of data that the EEG signal reveals is a
sensitive type of information, so this data needs to be carefully handled and stored.
RQ:2 How can we provide an inclusive dataset that will serve the research commu­
nity for further analysis on EEG authentication?
The second RQ2 is narrowed down from the first question but it makes sure to take
into account a more diverse background of people participating in this experiment. This
dataset can be validated only with the classification algorithms chosen and appropriate
pre­processing steps.
The experiment itself recorded almost 10 minutes’ worth of data from the participants.
In total, there were 30 different people with different nationalities, backgrounds, ages,
and occupations. In order to achieve a more diverse dataset and according to the time
limit and schedule, each person has been randomly selected based on the convenience
EEG data collection for biometric authentication with Muse Device
48
==PAGE:55==
method. The majority of the available public datasets include only healthy individuals with
no medical history record which can influence the research for EEG authentication making
it more biased. None of the participants from this experiment were inquired about their
medical history nor have they been discriminated against based on it.
On top of that, the feedback from the users has been positive with putting on the EEG
headset, some people seemed a bit terrified of the concept. However, it was not an
obstacle, and they were receptive to having this technology adopted in the near future.At
present, the data sample is insufficient to make definitive assumptions, but it does provide
a useful indication.
In summary, this project has provided a dataset that was collected using a low­level
consumer­grade device. This dataset enables the potential use of the device for biometric
authentication purposes in the future.
EEG data collection for biometric authentication with Muse Device
49
==PAGE:56==
Bibliography
[1]
Septian Rheno Widianto et al. “Python gmail dictionary attack using wordlist”. In: AIP
Conference Proceedings 2714.1 (May 2023), p. 030033. DOI: 10.1063/5.0128464.
URL: https://doi.org/10.1063/5.0128464.
[2]
National Cyber Security Centre. Biometric recognition and authentication systems?
URL: https://www.ncsc.gov.uk/collection/biometrics/how-biometrics-are-attacked#
section_2. (accessed: 17.03.2023).
[3]
Zahid Akhtar. “Deepfakes Generation and Detection: A Short Survey”. In: Journal
of Imaging 9.1 (2023). ISSN: 2313­433X. URL: https : / / www . mdpi . com / 2313 -
433X/9/1/18.
[4]
J. Satheesh Kumar and P. Bhuvaneswari. “Analysis of Electroencephalography
(EEG) Signals and Its Categorization–A Study”. In: Procedia Engineering 38 (2012).
INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE ON MODELLING OPTIMIZATION AND COM­
PUTING, pp. 2525–2536. ISSN: 1877­7058. DOI: https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j .
proeng . 2012 . 06 . 298. URL: https : / / www . sciencedirect . com / science / article / pii /
S1877705812022114.
[5]
Adversa AI. Face Recognition Attack: Adversarial Octopus. https://adversa.ai/face-
recognition-attack-adversarial-octopus/. Accessed May 26, 2023.
[6]
National Cyber Security Centre (NCSC). How Biometrics are Attacked. https://
www.ncsc.gov.uk/collection/biometrics/how-biometrics-are-attacked. Accessed May
26, 2023.
[7]
G. Schalk et al. “BCI2000: a general­purpose brain­computer interface (BCI) sys­
tem”. In: IEEE Transactions on Biomedical Engineering 51.6 (2004), pp. 1034–
1043. DOI: 10.1109/TBME.2004.827072.
[8]
Bingkun Wu, Weizhi Meng, and Wei­Yang Chiu. “Towards Enhanced EEG­Based
Authentication with Motor Imagery Brain­Computer Interface”. In: Proceedings of
the 38th Annual Computer Security Applications Conference. ACSAC ’22. Austin,
TX, USA: Association for Computing Machinery, 2022, pp. 799–812. ISBN: 9781450397599.
DOI: 10.1145/3564625.3564656. URL: https://doi.org/10.1145/3564625.3564656.
[9]
Juris Kļonovs and Christoffer Kjeldgaard Petersen. “Development of a Mobile EEG­
Based Feature Extraction and Classification System for Biometric Authentication”.
In: Aalborg University Copenhagen Lautrupvang 4B,2720 Ballerup, 2012.
[10]
Barjinder Kaur et al. “Impact of Ageing on EEG based Biometric Systems”. In: PRO­
CEEDINGS 2017 4TH IAPR ASIAN CONFERENCE ON PATTERN RECOGNITION
(ACPR). IAPR; CASIA; Nanjing Univ Sci & Technol. 2017, pp. 459–464. ISBN: 978­
1­5386­3354­0. DOI: 10.1109/ACPR.2017.33.
[11]
Manideep Kolla and Aravinth Savadamuthu. “The Impact of Racial Distribution in
Training Data on Face Recognition Bias: A Closer Look”. In: 2023 IEEE/CVF Win­
ter Conference on Applications of Computer Vision Workshops (WACVW). 2023,
pp. 313–322. DOI: 10.1109/WACVW58289.2023.00035.
[12]
M. S. A. Muhammad Azizi et al. “Authentication with brainwaves: a review on the
application of EEG as an authentication method”. In: 2018 Fourth International Con­
ference on Advances in Computing, Communication and Automation (ICACCA).
2018, pp. 1–6. DOI: 10.1109/ICACCAF.2018.8776850.
[13]
Amir Jalaly Bidgoly, Hamed Jalaly Bidgoly, and Zeynab Arezoumand. “A survey on
methods and challenges in EEG based authentication”. In: Computers and Security
EEG data collection for biometric authentication with Muse Device
50
==PAGE:57==
93 (2020), p. 101788. ISSN: 0167­4048. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cose.2020.
101788. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0167404820300730.
[14]
Jin Chen, Tony Ro, and Zhigang Zhu. “Emotion Recognition With Audio, Video,
EEG, and EMG: A Dataset and Baseline Approaches”. In: IEEE Access 10 (2022),
pp. 13229–13242. DOI: 10.1109/ACCESS.2022.3146729.
[15]
Barjinder Kaur, Dinesh Singh, and Partha Roy. “A Novel framework of EEG­based
user identification by analyzing music­listening behavior”. In: Multimedia Tools and
Applications 76 (Dec. 2017). DOI: 10.1007/s11042-016-4232-2.
[16]
C. Brunner et al. BCI Competition 2008 – Graz data set A. URL: https://www.bbci.
de/competition/iv/#dataset2a. (accessed: 17.03.2023).
[17]
Sander Koelstra et al. “DEAP: A Database for Emotion Analysis ;Using Physiologi­
cal Signals”. In: IEEE Transactions on Affective Computing 3.1 (2012), pp. 18–31.
DOI: 10.1109/T-AFFC.2011.15.
[18]
PhysioNet. https://physionet.org/about/database/. Accessed: July 27, 2023.
[19]
Stieger and James. “Human EEG Dataset for Brain­Computer Interface and Medi­
tation. figshare. Dataset.” In: IEEE Transactions on Biomedical Engineering (2021).
DOI: https://doi.org/10.6084/m9.figshare.13123148.v1.
[20]
Marco Congedo et al. “”Brain Invaders”: a prototype of an open­source P300­ based
video game working with the OpenViBE platform”. In: Sept. 2011, pp. 280–283.
[21]
Erwan Vaineau et al. “Brain Invaders Adaptive versus Non­Adaptive P300 Brain­
Computer Interface dataset”. In: Apr. 2019.
[22]
Gijsbrecht Veen et al. “Building Brain Invaders: EEG data of an experimental vali­
dation”. In: May 2019.
[23]
Christos Stergiadis et al. “A Personalized User Authentication System Based on
EEG Signals”. In: Sensors 22.18 (2022). ISSN: 1424­8220. DOI: 10.3390/s22186929.
URL: https://www.mdpi.com/1424-8220/22/18/6929.
[24]
Théophile Demazure et al. “Distributed Remote EEG Data Collection for NeuroIS
Research: A Methodological Framework”. In: Augmented Cognition. Ed. by Dylan
D. Schmorrow and Cali M. Fidopiastis. Cham: Springer International Publishing,
2021, pp. 3–22.
[25]
Luis Hernández­Álvarez et al. “EEG Authentication System Based on One­ and
Multi­Class Machine Learning Classifiers”. In: Sensors 23.1 (2023). ISSN: 1424­
8220. URL: https://www.mdpi.com/1424-8220/23/1/186.
[26]
Jordan Ortega et al. “Biometric Person Authentication Using a Wireless EEG De­
vice”. In: Innovation in Information Systems and Technologies To Support Learning
Research. Springer International Publishing, 2019, pp. 615–620. ISBN: 3030367770.
DOI: 10.1007/978-3-030-36778-7_67.
[27]
Salah Albermany and Fatima M. Baqer. “EEG authentication system using fuzzy
vault scheme”. In: Journal of Discrete Mathematical Sciences and Cryptography
25.8 (2022), pp. 2405–2410. DOI: 10.1080/09720529.2020.1859798. eprint: https:
//doi.org/10.1080/09720529.2020.1859798. URL: https://doi.org/10.1080/09720529.
2020.1859798.
[28]
Corey Ashby et al. “Low­cost electroencephalogram (EEG) based authentication”.
In: 2011 5th International IEEE/EMBS Conference on Neural Engineering. 2011,
pp. 442–445. DOI: 10.1109/NER.2011.5910581.
[29]
Shuai Zhang et al. “Review on EEG­Based Authentication Technology”. In: Compu­
tational Intelligence and Neuroscience 2021 (Dec. 2021), pp. 1–20. DOI: 10.1155/
2021/5229576.
[30]
Zhou Duo and Zeng. “EEG4Students: An Experimental Design for EEG Data Col­
lection and Machine Learning Analysis”. In: (2022).
EEG data collection for biometric authentication with Muse Device
51
==PAGE:58==
[31]
Amir Jalaly Bidgoly, Hamed Jalaly Bidgoly, and Zeynab Arezoumand. “Towards a
universal and privacy preserving EEG￿based authentication system”. In: Nature
Research (2022), p. 2531. ISSN: 20452322. DOI: 10.1038/s41598-022-06527-7.
[32]
Hermann Hinrichs et al. “Comparison between a wireless dry electrode EEG system
with a conventional wired wet electrode EEG system for clinical applications”. In:
Scientific Reports 10 (2020), p. 5218. DOI: 10.1038/s41598- 020- 62154- 0. URL:
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-020-62154-0.
[33]
ChooseMuse. https://choosemuse.com/. Accessed: 27.05.2023.
[34]
Emotiv EPOC X. https://www.emotiv.com/. Accessed: July 27, 2023.
[35]
NeuroSky Store. https://store.neurosky.com/. Accessed: 27.05.2023.
[36]
Pouya Bashivan, Irina Rish, and Steve Heisig. “Mental State Recognition via Wear­
able EEG”. In: (Feb. 2016).
[37]
Erich L. Gibbs and Trudy J. Gibbs. “Universal APEEGE (Anatomical Placement of
EEG Electrodes) System”. In: Clinical Electroencephalography 15.1 (1984), pp. 1–
21. DOI: 10.1177/155005948401500103. URL: https://doi.org/10.1177/155005948401500103.
[38]
Arnaud Delorme and Scott Makeig. “EEGLAB: an open source toolbox for anal­
ysis of single­trial EEG dynamics including independent component analysis”. In:
Journal of Neuroscience Methods 134.1 (2004), pp. 9–21. ISSN: 0165­0270. DOI:
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jneumeth.2003.10.009. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.
com/science/article/pii/S0165027003003479.
[39]
Alexandre Barachant et al. muse­lsl. May 2019. DOI: 10.5281/zenodo.3228861. URL:
https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.3228861.
[40]
Gonzalo Rojas et al. “Study of Resting­State Functional Connectivity Networks Us­
ing EEG Electrodes Position As Seed”. In: Frontiers in Neuroscience 12 (Mar. 2018).
DOI: 10.3389/fnins.2018.00235.
[41]
ChooseMuse. How do I wear Muse 2? https://choosemuse.my.site.com/s/article/
How-do-I-wear-Muse-2?language=en_US. Accessed: 27.05.2023.
[42]
OpenBCI EEG Electrocap. https : / / shop . openbci . com / products / openbci - eeg -
electrocap. 02.07.2023. OpenBCI.
[43]
Emotv Epoc Device. https://www.emotiv.com/epoc/. 21.07.2023. Emotiv.
[44]
Sharath Pankanti, Ruud M. Bolle, and Anil Jain. “Guest Editors’ Introduction: Biometrics­
The Future of Identification”. In: Computer 33.2 (Feb. 2000), pp. 46–49. ISSN: 0018­
9162. DOI: 10.1109/2.820038. URL: https://doi.org/10.1109/2.820038.
[45]
Weiwei Peng. “EEG Preprocessing and Denoising”. English. In: EEG preprocessing
and denoising. Ed. by Li Hu and Zhiguo Zhang. Springer Singapore, 2019. Chap. 5,
pp. 71–87. DOI: 10.1007/978-981-13-9113-2_5.
[46]
Junjie An et al. “Recognizing the consciousness states of DOC patients by classi­
fying EEG signal”. In: 2022 15th International Congress on Image and Signal Pro­
cessing, BioMedical Engineering and Informatics (CISP­BMEI). 2022, pp. 1–6. DOI:
10.1109/CISP-BMEI56279.2022.9980122.
[47]
Rufin Vanrullen. “Four Common Conceptual Fallacies in Mapping the Time Course
of Recognition”. In: Frontiers in Psychology 2 (2011). ISSN: 1664­1078. DOI: 10.
3389/fpsyg.2011.00365. URL: https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fpsyg.
2011.00365.
[48]
Monika Kaczorowska et al. “Comparison of the ICA and PCA methods in correction
of EEG signal artefacts”. In: Jan. 2017, pp. 262–267. DOI: 10.1109/ATEE.2017.
7905095.
[49]
Priyanka Khatwani and Archana Tiwari. “A survey on different noise removal tech­
niques of EEG signals”. In: 2013.
EEG data collection for biometric authentication with Muse Device
52
==PAGE:59==
[50]
Ozan Özdenizci et al. “Adversarial Deep Learning in EEG Biometrics”. In: IEEE Sig­
nal Processing Letters 26.5 (2019), pp. 710–714. DOI: 10.1109/LSP.2019.2906826.
[51]
Alicia Guadalupe Lazcano­Herrera, Rita.Q. Fuentes­Aguilar, and Mariel Alfaro­Ponce.
“EEG motor/imagery signal classification comparative using machine learning algo­
rithms”. In: 2021 18th International Conference on Electrical Engineering, Comput­
ing Science and Automatic Control (CCE). 2021, pp. 1–6. DOI: 10.1109/CCE53527.
2021.9633055.
[52]
Overfitting vs Underfitting. https://www.v7labs.com/blog/overfitting-vs-underfitting.
Accessed: July 27, 2023.
[53]
AWS ­Overfitting vs Underfitting. https://docs.aws.amazon.com/machine-learning/
latest/dg/model-fit-underfitting-vs-overfitting.html. Accessed: July 27, 2023.
[54]
Aditya Biswas, Ishan Saran, and F Perry Wilson. “Introduction to Supervised Ma­
chine Learning”. In: Kidney360 2.5 (2021), pp. 878–880. ISSN: 2641­7650. DOI:
10.34067/KID.0000182021. URL: https://doi.org/10.34067/KID.0000182021.
[55]
Athira Unnikrishnan, Uma Narayanan, and Shelbi Joseph. “Performance analysis
of various supervised algorithms on big data”. In: 2017 International Conference
on Energy, Communication, Data Analytics and Soft Computing (ICECDS). 2017,
pp. 2293–2298. DOI: 10.1109/ICECDS.2017.8389861.
[56]
GeeksforGeeks. Support Vector Machine in Machine Learning. https://www.geeksforgeeks.
org/support-vector-machine-in-machine-learning/. Accessed May 26, 2023.
[57]
Poornachandra Sarang. “Naive Bayes”. In: Thinking Data Science: A Data Science
Practitioner’s Guide. Cham: Springer International Publishing, 2023, pp. 143–152.
ISBN: 978­3­031­02363­7. DOI: 10.1007/978-3-031-02363-7_7. URL: https://doi.
org/10.1007/978-3-031-02363-7_7.
[58]
P B Sunitha, Shelbi Joseph, and P V Akhil. “A Study on the Performance of Su­
pervised Algorithms for Classification in Sentiment Analysis”. In: TENCON 2019 ­
2019 IEEE Region 10 Conference (TENCON). 2019, pp. 1351–1356. DOI: 10.1109/
TENCON.2019.8929530.
[59]
Poornachandra Sarang. “Naive Bayes”. In: Thinking Data Science: A Data Sci­
ence Practitioner’s Guide. Cham: Springer International Publishing, 2023, pp. 75–
96. ISBN: 978­3­031­02363­7. DOI: 10.1007/978-3-031-02363-7_7. URL: https:
//doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-02363-7_7.
[60]
Emil D. Attanasi and Timothy C. Coburn. “Random Forest”. In: Encyclopedia of
Mathematical Geosciences. Ed. by B. S. Daya Sagar et al. Cham: Springer Interna­
tional Publishing, 2023, pp. 1182–1185. ISBN: 978­3­030­85040­1. DOI: 10.1007/
978-3-030-85040-1_265. URL: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-85040-1_265.
[61]
Y.C. Latunde. “Research in Parental Involvement”. In: Palgrave macmillan, 2017.
Chap. 9.
[62]
Donald Knuth. What is Quantitative Research? URL: https : / / www . interaction -
design.org/literature/topics/quantitative-research. (accessed: 17.03.2023).
[63]
Neurons INC. Predicting Human Behaviour. URL: https://www.neuronsinc.com/.
(accessed: 17.03.2023).
[64]
General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR). https://gdpr-info.eu/. Accessed May
26, 2023.
[65]
Obada Al Zoubi et al. “Predicting Age From Brain EEG Signals­A Machine Learning
Approach”. In: FRONTIERS IN AGING NEUROSCIENCE 10 (July 2018). ISSN:
1663­4365. DOI: 10.3389/fnagi.2018.00184.
[66]
Tamas Bisztray et al. “Emerging Biometric Modalities and their Use: Loopholes in
the Terminology of the GDPR and Resulting Privacy Risks”. In: 2021 International
EEG data collection for biometric authentication with Muse Device
53
==PAGE:60==
Conference of the Biometrics Special Interest Group (BIOSIG). 2021, pp. 1–5. DOI:
10.1109/BIOSIG52210.2021.9548298.
[67]
Megan A. Boudewyn et al. “Managing EEG studies: How to prepare and what to
do once data collection has begun”. In: Psychophysiology n/a.n/a (). e14365 PsyP­
2023­0065.R1, e14365. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1111/psyp.14365. eprint: https:
//onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1111/psyp.14365. URL: https://onlinelibrary.
wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1111/psyp.14365.
[68]
Pandas vs Numpy. https://www.interviewbit.com/blog/pandas-vs-numpy. Accessed:
July 27, 2023.
[69]
Classification vs Regressin Metrics. https://acua.qcri.org/blog/comparing- the-
results-classification-vs-regression-models-in-machine-learning/. Accessed: July 27,
2023.
[70]
Confusion Matrix. https://towardsdatascience.com/understanding-confusion-matrix-
a9ad42dcfd62. Accessed: July 27, 2023.
[71]
Understanding the Confusion Matrix. https://www.analyticsvidhya.com/blog/2021/
06/confusion-matrix-for-multi-class-classification. Accessed: July 27, 2023.
[72]
taking­the­confusion­out­of­confusion­matrice. https://towardsdatascience.com/taking-
the-confusion-out-of-confusion-matrices-c1ce054b3d3e. Accessed: July 27, 2023.
[73]
F1 score guide. https://www.v7labs.com/blog/f1-score-guide. Accessed: July 27,
2023.
[74]
Training and testing Score. https://datascience.stackexchange.com/questions/70054/
interpretation-for-test-score-training-score-and-validation-score-in-machine-l. Ac­
cessed: July 27, 2023.
[75]
Training and testing Score. https://medium.com/@alexstrebeck/training-and-testing-
machine-learning-models-e1f27dc9b3cb. Accessed: July 27, 2023.
[76]
K Fold validation score. https://machinelearningmastery.com/k-fold-cross-validation/.
Accessed: July 27, 2023.
[77]
Feature Engineering. https://towardsdatascience.com/what-is-feature-engineering-
importance-tools-and-techniques-for-machine-learning-2080b0269f10. Accessed: July
27, 2023.
[78]
One hot encoder. https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/ml-one-hot-encoding-of-datasets-
in-python/. Accessed: July 27, 2023.
[79]
Scikit Pre­processing Standard Scaler. https://scikit- learn.org/stable/modules/
generated/sklearn.preprocessing.StandardScaler.html. Accessed: July 27, 2023.
[80]
Scikit Common Pitfalls. https://scikit-learn.org/stable/common_pitfalls.html. Ac­
cessed: July 27, 2023.
[81]
V. Roshan Joseph. “Optimal ratio for data splitting”. In: Statistical Analysis and Data
Mining: The ASA Data Science Journal 15.4 (2022), pp. 531–538. DOI: https://doi.
org/10.1002/sam.11583. eprint: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1002/sam.
11583. URL: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/sam.11583.
[82]
SVM hyperparameters. https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/svm-hyperparameter-tuning-
using-gridsearchcv-ml/. Accessed: July 27, 2023.
[83]
SVM hyperparameters. https://machinelearningmastery.com/hyperparameters-for-
classification-machine-learning-algorithms/. Accessed: July 27, 2023.
[84]
SVM hyperparameters. https://coderzcolumn.com/tutorials/machine-learning/scikit-
learn-sklearn-naive-bayes. Accessed: July 27, 2023.
[85]
SVM hyperparameters. https://www.statology.org/sklearn- classification- report/.
Accessed: July 27, 2023.
EEG data collection for biometric authentication with Muse Device
54
==PAGE:61==
[86]
AWA. metrics­for­evaluating­an­identity­verification­solution. URL: https://aws.amazon.
com/blogs/machine-learning/metrics-for-evaluating-an-identity-verification-solution/.
(accessed: 17.03.2023).
EEG data collection for biometric authentication with Muse Device
55
==PAGE:62==
A
Appendix
A.1
Interview
The interview was carried it out via a co­worker that got the time to ask the questions
with Theo Sell. I prepared the questions, but I was not offered the possibility to interview
directly this person, due to their busy schedule, however my personal contact asked on
my behalf the following questions:
1.Do you think it is possible to have eeg authentication? ­ unlock your phone with your
unique eeg pattern ? Yes or no ?
I would be very skeptical because eeg are not very good at facial recordings so depending
on the type of eeg how many channels and so on I don’t know if you have enough data to
basically get a unique pattern for someone because ultimately you need a unique pattern
within a different timeframe. I would be skeptical but I’m not sure
2.How much time is needed to record eeg data in order to capture the unique activity ?
What do you consider significant data to work with ?
So basically with the device we use a nine­channel device and there we get the shortest
benchmarks that we can within 10 minutes. To get a baseline for each participant, you
can do it 15 minutes you can do it for I think 20 or 30 minutes. It’s hard to say it depends
on the device.
3.What are some example of tasks that you think could be used for capturing significant
alert states for eeg data ?
So example for tasks basically to do different tasks that would induce you to different
states so we’ll have a task that is later on would induce the kicks of very repetitive tasks.
Having them click the spacebar based on something. It could be audio could be visual
and then have them do something more complicated like if this happened to this if this
happens to that, so that would induce more cognitive load, Get them into different states.
I would probably recommend doing it. like depending on how you connect your device
probably on a laptop or computer because that’s the easiest, so anything visual or audio
related would be fine for that depending on the alert states you’re talking about.
4.Are resting imagining tasks effective for capturing eeg signal that is unique ?
I am not sure at all, repetitive tasks like we mentioned before or based on imaging. You
can do it to get an individual base and I’m not sure how unique the signal is to identify an
individual. I don’t know
5.Does it make a difference if someone is taking certain pills for any mental disorder?
Such as depression, schizophrenia or bipolar disorder?
Yes
6.Is the age of the participants significant when collecting eeg data ? Your brain is still
developing so the brain responses will be way different. That’s why it’s hard to test kids or
generally even teens. So definitely since the brain is still growing and developing, it can
differ. But also things like pregnancy for example and so during pregnancy because your
hormones are different to your other general state.
EEG data collection for biometric authentication with Muse Device
56
==PAGE:63==
7.What about ageing of the eeg signal ? If potentially we are using the eeg signal for
authentication purposes ­ unlock your phone with your cerebral activity , can the same
signal be the same over an extended period of time ? Such as reproduce the same
activity over the next 2­3 years ?
I mean, the more recent the benchmark the better. So like, if you consider for example,
pregnancy.You would need to do a benchmark probably like almost every other week at
least, if not more often, Depending on your hormonal state. The more often you do it, the
better. I don’t know for how long it would be good. Probably as soon as you start running
into issues, you should do a new benchmark. So it depends very much on the device,
the type of benchmark and the person. So it’s hard to give like an exact timeframe, but
I would say like two to three years is a very long time I would say so every few months
generally.
8. Are there any certain factors that are very important to keep in mind when collecting
eeg data ?
I mean, anything that will influence the state that you’re in, right, to keep in mind when
collecting eeg data, you have the environment, for example, like what environment are you
in? What general state of mind are you in at the moment, right? So that’s why usually you
collect benchmark data right before you collect the actual eeg data, which I guess wouldn’t
be very practical for this one. But, yeah, so, like, any factors, yeah, whatever is going on
with the person currently in that environment. The more noise you can eliminate from the
environment, the better. I don’t know if that’s very helpful for this, for your particular thesis,
but, yeah, so, definitely.
9. How much does fatigue contribute to the quality of the eeg signal ?
Fatigue definitely influences the eeg data because you’re cognitive load and your brain
activity and you know how much data you’re able to process is influenced by fatigue, right,
if I’m very exhausted in one moment. Generally, my cognitive load will be lower because
I’m able to process less information at any given point versus when I’m very awakened
and just had three coffees.
10. The repetitive task could induce some fatigue, How much validity do the repetitive
task hold when it comes to analyzing the data ?
For repetitive tasks, it can induce fatigue definitely, but that would be the goal right? So
if you have a task like that, let’s say when you collect the benchmark to have a baseline
for individuals. Then, a very repetitive task like showing a dot blinking in the middle of a
screen or something, and having something based on that. The purpose of that would be
to induce fatigue, right? So they can definitely induce fatigue and you do that in order to
have a baseline for this specific type so you can account for it later on, for the data that
you’re collecting.
A.2
Experiment
Before starting with the testing,
Ask the following question:
• Are you tired? yes
• How excited do you feel?
• Are you nervous?
EEG data collection for biometric authentication with Muse Device
57
==PAGE:64==
Problem solving task (3 min) ­ repeated twice
Open the unblock game https://www.xpgameplus.com/games/unblockme/index.html
Figure A.1: Unblock­me
Take break for 2­3 min, repeat the task
Ask again how tired the participant is plus nervousness.
Relaxed posture with eyes closed (1 min 20 sec) ­ repeated twice in silence
Play some forest music in the background
Repeat the following words and ask the user to only think about what that word means
without thinking out loud
Give a space of 10 seconds between key words for the user to associate that word with
something familiar
The following key words: promotions, music, happiness, favorite food, sadness, unfair­
ness, disgust, deadlines
Take 1 –2 min break
After the two iterations of the testing, ask the user to label each word with either positive,
negative or neutral label.
3. Looking over the following pictures from this power point presentation
Look over the following pictures:
Change each picture every 10 seconds and ask afterwards the participant to give a label:
positive, neutral, negative
In the end, ask the participant about its experience with the headset, the difficulty of the
game and the choice of words (the resting thinking task) and the pictures as well.
EEG data collection for biometric authentication with Muse Device
58
==PAGE:65==
Figure A.2: Image1
Figure A.3: Image2
Figure A.4: Image3
EEG data collection for biometric authentication with Muse Device
59
==PAGE:66==
Figure A.5: Image4
Figure A.6: Image5
Figure A.7: Image6
EEG data collection for biometric authentication with Muse Device
60
==PAGE:67==
Figure A.8: Image7
EEG data collection for biometric authentication with Muse Device
61
==PAGE:68==
A.3
Application Form
Application for ethical approval at DTU Compute’s Institutional Review Board
Project title: Biometric authentication using EEG data
Principal investigator: Associate Professor Professor Weizhi Meng Department of Applied
Mathematics and Computer Science
Other investigators: Ph.D student Wei­Yang Chiu at Department of Applied Mathematics
and Computer Science, MSc Elena Catalina Barbulescu at Department of Applied Math­
ematics and Computer Science
Date: 24.03.2023
Contact person: Elena Catalina Barbulescu s202773@student.dtu.dk
Project motivation, background, and hypotheses
The interest is in biometric authentication using EEG data. The reason for this is that
it provides a more reliable method for authenticating a user as the EEG data has been
proven to be effective against malware attacks and any fraud activities due to how unique
the pattern is for each user [1]. The headset that will be used is a commercially available
device, the name is Muse Headset with 4 sensors that records the 5 different channels
of cerebral activity[2]. However, we are using a python script specifically designed for
the Muse headset that will record raw data in a CSV format[3]. Most of the research has
been done on publicly available data or by designing experiments with more advanced
EEG headsets[4]. We want to test the capability of the Muse headset as it is a cheaper
device compared to the other more advanced ones, and we want to construct our own
dataset with the help of this headset. Afterwards, to do biometric authentication, we need
to break down the project in understanding whether the headset can capture or not the
unique cerebral activity of a user. If we can capture that unique activity, it means we can
construct an authentication token based on that unique recorded activity. The idea is that
we all have unique EEG signals, which we want to capture into an authentication token by
using the MuseHeadset. Moreover, the available dataset on the internet is too large and
too complex for our purposes, and we want to contribute to the scientific community with
a much simpler dataset that can be more useful in training and validating the following
machine learning models: k­nearest neighbor (KNN) algorithm, support vector machines
(SVM) algorithm. More machine learning models might be tested further on this dataset.
On top of that, we want to provide a dataset that is more diverse, and it does not dis­
criminate against any mental illnesses, but neither age. The dataset will want to achieve
the diversity within the subjects, as the current available datasets consider only healthy
individuals for experiments.
Study methods
Measurement techniques
The Muse EEG headset will be used to collect raw data from the participants. It is a
non­invasive method for collecting EEG data.
Experimental design/setup
The experiment will be conducted in a room with as less disturbing factors as possible.
The friends of the main conductor of the experiment are used to the home of the main
conductor, therefore that place will be used to conduct the experiment. Then, to scale the
experiment, the Skylab location from DTU will be used for collecting EEG data.
EEG data collection for biometric authentication with Muse Device
62
==PAGE:69==
2.3 Procedure
Before starting with the testing,
Ask the following question:
Are you tired?
Yes or no
How excited do you feel?
Choose between positive, neutral or negative
Are you nervous?
Yes or no
Problem solving task (3 min) ­ repeated twice
Open the unblock game https://www.xpgameplus.com/games/unblockme/index.html
Take break for 2­3 min, repeat the task
Ask again how tired the participant is plus nervousness.
Relaxed posture with eyes closed (1 min 20 sec) ­ repeated twice in silence
Play some forest music in the background
Repeat the following words and ask the user to only think about what that word means
without thinking out loud
Give a space of 10 seconds between key words for the user to associate that word with
something familiar
The following key words: promotions, music, happiness, favorite food, sadness, unfair­
ness, disgust, deadlines
Take 1 –2 min break
After the two iterations of the testing, ask the user to label each word with either positive,
negative or neutral label.
3. Looking over the following pictures from this power point presentation
Change each picture every 10 seconds and ask afterwards the participant to give a label:
positive, neutral, negative
In the end, ask the participant about its experience with the headset, the difficulty of the
game and the choice of words (the resting thinking task) and the pictures as well.
2.4 Statistical considerations (sample size, statistical analyses)
A ML model will be used to differentiate between the user’s unique activity. We need
30 participants for this dataset that we will construct. The questionnaire will be used to
validate if the user had the same reaction to each of the words that are repeated to them.
The label might help to determine to see how positive thoughts look for each user. This
will help in interpreting the results or even to classify the emotional reactions.
Participant info
EEG data collection for biometric authentication with Muse Device
63
==PAGE:70==
(inclusion/exclusion criteria, age and number of participants, recruitment procedure, re­
imbursement if any, debriefing)
There is no inclusion or exclusion criteria for the participants. The choice of participants
is based on the convenience method which means that whoever is most accessible to
conduct the experiment with, that person will be selected. One exclusion criteria for the
participants is to be over 18 years so they can give their own consent to this. The research
aims to collect data from at least 30 participants from different backgrounds and from
different age categories. The participants will be offered refreshments such as water or
coffee during the experiment. The participants will be informed about the purpose of this
study which aims at constructing a dataset that will be available in the research community
for performing EEG biometric authentication.
Ethical considerations (informed consent, side effects, risks, inconveniences)
(discuss any ethical issues including informed consent – how will it be obtained, risks and
safety concerns and side­effects, any deception used, etc.)
The ethical concerns are around the choice of words that are meant to trigger a nega­
tive emotional response which in turn might make the user feel uncomfortable. Due to
this concern, before the experiment starts, the user will be asked if certain words can
cause emotional distress, in which case, that word will be avoided during the experiment.
Other possible factors that could influence the well­being of the participant is the fatigue
acquired during the experiment. The experiment will be debriefed before beginning it
which will include a debriefing on what the experiment is meant to achieve throughout.
The same debrief will be found under the consent form included in the Appendix. The
form will be presented in a digital format to the participants. The EEG headset is a non­
invasive method for recording EEG data, and therefore presents no health issues related
to wearing it.
Data protection & handling
The collected data will be done by Elena Catalina Barbulescu and it will be stored locally
on the laptop. The person’s identity is not needed and therefore the collected data will
be assigned a number such as Person no. 1, Person no. 2, etc. ­ therefore the data
is anonymous. Other information that we will get from the participants are gender and
age. The data collected consists of EEG signals that will be associated with a person’s
number plus the answers from the questionnaires. There is no need for any other personal
information from the users. The purpose of getting their age and gender is to ensure a
diversity level in our dataset. The data will be anonymous, but it is meant to be further
used in the research community.
Finances
The initiator of this project is Professor Weizhi Meng The research group has no financial
conflicts of interest.
Dissemination of results
The results of the experiment will be shared only with other DTU faculty members.
Future applications and implications of the proposed research
Future applications could use this information to construct a more refined authentication
token, if this project fails in doing so by the end of it in August. The methodology and the
dataset could be expanded further on to collect and refine the dataset collection.
EEG data collection for biometric authentication with Muse Device
64
==PAGE:71==
Study period (data collection only)
The data collection for the project will start in March 2023 and end in July 2023.
References
[1] Shams, Tarik & Hossain, Md. Sakir & Mahmud, Md & Tehjib, Md & Hossain, Zahid &
Pramanik, Ileas. (2022). EEG­based Biometric Authentication Using Machine Learning:
A Comprehensive Survey. 10.13140/RG.2.2.33744.58886.
[2] Muse Headset https://choosemuse.com/ Accessed 27.03.2023
[3] Alexandre Barachant, Dano Morrison, Hubert Banville, Jason Kowaleski, Uri Shaked,
Sylvain Chevallier, & Juan Jesús Torre Tresols. (2019, May 25). muse­lsl (Version v2.0.2).
Zenodo. http://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.3228861
[4] (2022) ECTI Transactions on Electrical Engineering, Electronics, and Communica­
tions, 20 (2), pp. 225­241. https://www.tci­thaijo.org/index.php/ECTI­EEC/ doi: 10.37936/ecti­
eec.2022202.246906
EEG data collection for biometric authentication with Muse Device
65
==PAGE:72==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Brovej, Building 118
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.byg.dtu.dk
