==PAGE:1==
Master Project
Super Halides as electrolyte for All solid
state lithium metal batteries (ASSLMBs)
June 23, 2023
Supervisor : Prof. Poul Norby
Co-Supervisor : Associate prof. Apurv Dash
Author : Suzan Sah
==PAGE:2==
DTU Energy
Department of Energy Conversion and Storage
Technical University of Denmark
Building 310
Fysikvej
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
info@energy.dtu.dk
www.energy.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Acknowledgement
I would sincerely like to thank Poul and Apurv for giving me the opportunity to work on one
of the emerging technology in energy storage. You have been an amazing guide throughout
my work and helped to make the right decisions at every step of my work. I would also like
to thank Michelle, Matthew, Michael, and Anders for their amazing support with all kinds
of practical work in the lab. Similarly, I would also like to appreciate Mohammad, Victor,
Smobin, and Williams for continuously giving insight into my work and motivating me.
In the end, I would like to thank my family in Nepal, Flemming and Dan who have been a
family for me in Danmark for their support throughout my study at DTU.
i
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
All-solid-state batteries (ASSBs) have gained attention in recent years due to their potential
to meet the growing demand for safer and higher-density batteries. In search of suitable solid
electrolytes (SEs) for ASSBs, LYC (Li3YCl6), has been synthesized and characterized in this
study. Ammonium chloride-assisted synthesis from both metal chlorides (YCl3) and metal
oxides (Y2O3) has been effectively applied to produce halide-based superionic conductor SEs.
In this study, for the first time, an attempt was made to synthesize LYC from Y2O3. And, the
successful synthesis of LYC from metal oxide opened up a more practical and cost-effective
route for the production of halide-based SEs. The development of the synthesis process,
the purity of the electrolyte, and the performance of the electrolyte have all been tracked
using XRD, SEM, and electrochemical characterizations (EIS and GCPL). In comparison to
the one-step metal chloride route, the one-step metal oxide route of synthesis exhibits high
purity and is more effective for the production of LYC. It is also confirmed from XRD analysis
that the Orthorhombic phase of LYC is possible to synthesize by changing the duration and
temperature of annealing.
The room temperature ionic conductivity of 0.1 mS/cm was
possible to achieve during the synthesis. From GCPL tests, it was also determined that
the overpotential at a higher current of 0.2 mA was not too high and the stability was also
promising.
ii
==PAGE:5==
Nomenclature
Physics Constants
F
Faraday constant
96485.332 C mol−1
kB
Boltzmann constant
8.617 × 10−5 eV K−1
R
molar gas constant
8.314 J mol−1 K−1
Symbols
∆G
change in Gibbs energy
J mol−1
∆H
change in enthalpy
J mol−1
∆S
change in entropy
J mol−1
∆U
change in internal energy
J mol−1
ηka
charge transfer overpotential at anode
V
ηkc
kinetics overpotential at cathode
V
ηta
charge transfer overpotential at anode
V
ηtc
charge transfer overpotential at cathode
V
µA
Potential at anode
V
µC
Potential at cathode
V
Ea
activation energy
eV
Ecell
equilibrium cell voltage
V
P
pressure
bar
T
temperature
K
Acronyms
ASSBs All-solid-state batteries
AY C Ammonium yttrium chloride
iii
==PAGE:6==
CC
Conducting carbon
CV
Cyclic voltammetry
DOS Density of states
ECM Equivalent circuit model
ECs
Electrolyte cells
EIS
Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy
GCPL Galvanostatic cycling with potential limit
HOMO Highest occupied molecular orbital
LUMO Lowest unoccupied molecular orbital
LY C Lithium yttrium chloride
OCV Open circuit model
RT
Room temperature
SEM Scanning electron microscopy
SPS
Spark plasma sintering
XRD X-ray diffraction
MIEC Mixed ionic and electronic conductor
iv
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Aknowledgement
i
Abstract
ii
Nomenclature
iii
1
Introduction and Motivation
1
1.1
Working principle of batteries and thermodynamics . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.1.1
Cell Voltage and electrochemical stability window . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.2
Terms used to quantify the performance of electrolyte and battery cells . . .
7
1.3
Objective of the project
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2
Materials Synthesis and Characterization Methodology
11
2.1
Structure of electrolyte Li3YCl6 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.2
Synthesis methods of electrolyte Li3YCl6 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.2.1
Mechanochemical synthesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.2.2
Ammonium chloride assisted Wet chemistry synthesis . . . . . . . . .
14
2.2.3
Synthesis of metal chloride from oxide
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.2.4
Spark plasma sintering (SPS)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.3
Characterization methods
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.3.1
X-ray diffraction (XRD) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.3.2
Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2.3.3
Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
2.3.4
Galvanostatic Cycling with Potential Limitation (GCPL) . . . . . . .
22
3
Experimental procedures and arrangements
23
3.1
Synthesis of electrolyte . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.1.1
Metal halide (YCl3) route of synthesis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.1.2
Metal oxide (Y2O3) route of synthesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.2
Preparation of electrodes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.3
SPS
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.4
XRD . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.5
Cell assembly . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.5.1
For electrolyte characterization
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.5.2
For full cell characterization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3.6
Electrochemical measurements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.7
SEM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
v
==PAGE:8==
4
Results and Discussion
30
4.1
Electrolyte Characterization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4.1.1
Synthesis of electrolyte via metal halide route . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4.1.2
Synthesis of electrolyte via metal oxide route . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4.1.3
Comparison between the two synthesis methods . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.1.4
EIS on electrolyte . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
4.1.5
GCPL analysis results from symmetric cells
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
4.2
Analysis of results from full cells . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
4.3
Sintering of LYC for densification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
4.4
Results analysis from imaging (SEM) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
5
Future Outlook
50
6
Conclusion
52
List of Tables
IV
Relevent XRD from ICSD database
IX
References
X
vi
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction and Motivation
In recent years, the concern of rising environmental pollution is a thriving force that is leading
to the dependent on uninterrupted power sources for different purposes including transporta-
tion, communication, and many others. However, the pursuit of high energy density and
robust battery technology is still a milestone to be achieved. There exists a gap between the
development of energy storage and conversion technology. The progress of human civilization
and industrial technology is heavily dependent on fossil fuel-based primary energy sources
such as coal, crude oil, and natural gas.
In the field of battery technology, the commercialization of lithium-ion batteries in 1991 with
promising energy density has played a significant role, from portable electronics to electric
vehicles (EVs) and grid-scale energy storage. This technology covers a global market value
of USD 41.97 billion in 2021 and is expected to expand at a compound annual growth rate
(CAGR) of 18.1% from 2022 to 2030. This is mostly attributed to the increasing acceptance
of electric vehicles (EVs) as well as the transition from lead acid batteries to Li-ion, owing to
EPA regulations on lead contamination and resulting environmental hazards, coupled with
the regulations on lead-acid battery storage, disposal, and recycling [1]. However, with the
development of next-gen technologies such as aerial drones and electric planes, the surge in
demand for new battery technology is inevitable. The new technology is expected to address
the shortcomings like physio-chemical limitations and safety concerns that arise from highly
flammable liquid electrolytes of state-of-the-art LIBs [2].
Figure 1.1: Role of battery technology in energy mix
Page 1 of 52
==PAGE:10==
Despite the development in other energy storage technologies such as fuel cells, the battery
technology provides several benefits, with the key benefit being, on-site production and de-
mand management or balancing. From Figure 1.1, it is key to note that, battery plays an
important role in the modern energy system mix where there are highly intermittent power
generation sources like wind and solar. Therefore, it is essential to develop next-gen energy
storage technology that can provide higher energy density, high voltage operation as well as
intrinsic safety.[3, 4, 5, 6, 7]
To address the safety issues and increase the energy density, all solid-state batteries (ASSBs)
have been widely studied. There have been several classes of solid-state electrolytes (SSEs)
studied so far, including oxides, sulfides, borohydrides, polymers, and halides. Among these
groups of materials studied, the halide-based SSEs have several intrinsic chemical properties
of halogen anions over chalcogen and could be a game changer in pushing ASSB technology
a step closer to reality.
In this study, the halide-based ASSE is studied. The reasoning
behind choosing this group of materials in this study will be discussed in more detail in the
section Methods and Materials. Halides have been studied since the 1930s, however, their
low ionic conductivity at room temperatures restrained them from gaining wide attention
until 2018[3]. In 2018, Asano et al. [8] presented a study showing high ionic conductivity
(> 1 mScm−1), voltage stability, excellent deformability and wanted dry air stability of the
halide SSEs Li3YCl6 and Li3YBr6 at room temperature.
Figure 1.2: Spider plots comparing the key performances of three major inorganic SEs:
sulfides, halides, and oxides.[9]
There are also several reasons behind halides having higher potential over other groups of
SSE materials. It is studied that, Sulfides show high ionic conductivity and soft mechanical
properties but poor air stability, as it is prone to release toxic H2S gas upon exposure to
humid air [10]. Even though polymer electrolytes show excellent flexibility and plausibility
for large-scale manufacturing, their low ionic conductivity at room temperature is a huge
Page 2 of 52
==PAGE:11==
1.1
Working principle of batteries and thermodynamics
drawback [11, 12, 13].
Similarly, Oxides have demonstrated high ionic conductivity and
wide electrochemical windows but unfavorable mechanical stiffness for processing [14, 15].
Compared to sulfide electrolytes, solid-state halide electrolytes do not release harmful H2S
gas when exposed to the ambient environment and have better high-voltage stability and
wider electrochemical windows, making them attractive and feasible for ASSLMBs toward
high safety and high energy density [2, 16]. To have a clear sense of research on different SSE
materials, the timeline exhibiting their development and its corresponding ionic conductivity
could be studied in Figure 1.3.
Figure 1.3: Chronology of development of halide electrolytes for ASSBs [2]
1.1
Working principle of batteries and thermodynamics
To illustrate the general working principle of the batteries, the schematics and reactions at
different electrodes and their properties will be elaborated in this section. The key differ-
ence between conventional lithium-ion batteries (LIBs) and ASSBs is that ASSBs have solid
electrolytes instead of liquid or gel electrolytes used in traditional batteries. The schematics
presented in Figure 1.4 show the detailed configuration of ASSBs.
The reactions taking place at positive and negative electrodes during the charging and dis-
charging of the battery can be illustrated as follows.
Lixi[ cathode ] + (xj −xi) Li[ anode ] ↔Lixj[ cathode ] + [ anode ]
(1.1.1)
Page 3 of 52
==PAGE:12==
1.1
Working principle of batteries and thermodynamics
In this case, the positive electrode taken into consideration is lithium iron phosphate (LFP)
and the negative electrode is lithium metal. The reaction below takes place when the cell is
discharging and reverses when the cell is charging.
At negative electrode:
Li −−→Li+ + e−
[−3.04V vs.SHE]
(1.1.2)
At positive electrode:
LiFe|||PO4 + Li+ + e−−−→Fe||PO4
[3.4V vs.Li/Li+] (1.1.3)
Charge (Electrolytic)
Discharge (Galvanic)
LYC electrolyte
LYC + LFP + C65
e-
e-
Li+
Li metal
Cu current collector
Al current collector
Li+
-
+
Anode
Anode
Cathode
Cathode
Figure 1.4: Schematics of the working principle of ASSBs. In the galvanic process (discharge),
Li metal is oxidized to Li+ ions, giving away electronic current to the gadgets whereas, in the
electrolytic process (charge), an electric potential is applied causing Li+ ions to move back
to Li metal (meaning Li metal is reduced).
1.1.1
Cell Voltage and electrochemical stability window
Half cell potential, commonly denoted by E1/2 is defined as the potential developed at an
electrode to undergo oxidation or reduction. In other words, it can also be explained as the
measure of the tendency of an electrode to lose or gain electrons compared to a reference
electrode under standard conditions. As it is known, the standard hydrogen electrode (SHE)
has a half-cell potential of 0 V, hence SHE is a reference electrode used to measure the
half-cell potential of other electrodes. It consists of a platinum electrode in contact with a
solution of 1 M H+ ions at a pressure of 1 atm of hydrogen gas. The electrode potential of
any other half-cell can be measured by connecting it to the SHE and measuring the potential
difference between the two electrodes.
The term cell voltage is frequently used in electrochemistry and is defined as the affinity of
the complete cell system including the electrodes and the electrolyte. Similarly, open circuit
Page 4 of 52
==PAGE:13==
1.1
Working principle of batteries and thermodynamics
voltage (VOC) also known as working voltage is determined as the difference between the
chemical potentials of anode (µA) and cathode (µC) divided by the magnitude of the charge
(e) [17, 18].
VOCV = µA −µC
e
(1.1.4)
The difference in Gibbs free energy (∆G◦) for the reaction between the charged state and
discharge state is described by the following equation [19]:
∆Gr = ∆Hr −T∆Sr = ∆Ur + P∆Vr −T∆Sr
(1.1.5)
where P is the pressure and T, is the temperature of the system. The terms P∆Vr and
T∆Sr correspond to the volume change and the change in the vibrational and configurational
entropies of ion insertion or extraction, which are negligible as they are of the order of 105 and
102 eV, respectively. ∆Ur is the change in internal energy, which can be approximated as 2-3
eV to evaluate ∆Gr in the reaction [19, 20]. Using equation 1.1.4 and 1.1.5, the equilibrium
voltage can be obtained as follows:
E◦
cell = −∆G◦
nF
(1.1.6)
The general conception is that the energy equivalent to this potential is useful energy. How-
ever, this is not the case in reality as there are several factors such as resistance (R) from
electrolytes, circuit wiring, overpotential (η) from mass transport, kinetics, and so on. The
useful energy is equivalent to the potential given by,
V = Vocv −iRohmic −(ηkc + ηka) −(ηtc + ηta)
(1.1.7)
In this equation, Vocv is the open circuit voltage which is defined in the above paragraphs.
The potential loss due to the whole circuit (electrodes, wires, and electrolyte) is given by
iRohmic where, Rohmic is ohmic resistance.
The ηkc and ηka are the cathodic and anodic
kinetic overpotentials associated with the faradaic processes’ kinetics. Similarly, the transport
overpotential associated with the energy needed to transport charge carriers at the anode
and cathode is ηta and ηtc. The transport overpotentials are driven due to mass transport
limitations.
Electrochemical stability is a crucial factor when selecting electrode materials. To better
understand this concept, refer to
1.5a. It is important to note that the electrochemical
stability window of the electrolyte also plays a role in material selection. Despite having a
wider gap between the anodic and cathodic potentials, a narrower stability window limits the
working voltage. Thus, it is essential to choose anodes and cathodes with µA values below
the LUMO and µC values above the HOMO levels of the electrolyte, respectively. This is
Page 5 of 52
==PAGE:14==
1.1
Working principle of batteries and thermodynamics
because the electrolyte will be reduced on the anode if the LUMO is below the µA or oxidized
on the cathode if µC is above the HOMO level.
Figure 1.5: Theoretical understanding of the electrochemical stability window: (a) The nega-
tive and positive potential limits for the electrolyte stability, and the energy levels of HOMO
and LUMO. [21] (b)Density of states (DOS) diagram showing the band gap and the HOMO-
LUMO levels identifying the anodic and cathodic limits. [22]
In the case of LYC, to determine the electrochemical stability window, generally Cyclic
Voltammetry (CV) measurements on Li/LYC/Li blocking cells are performed. However, the
results are inaccurate due to the presence of carbon additives in the electrode composites that
can enhance the decomposition of SSEs, especially at high working voltage. It is reported
that the electrochemical stability window computed from CV of Li10GeP2S12 and Li6PS5Cl
are 5 V which is not that high in reality.
According to Mo et al.
[23], applying first-
principles calculations, the electrochemical stability window for sulfide-based SSEs was 1.7-
2.4 V vs.
Li/Li+, which is much closer to reality.
Applying first principles calculations
for LYC, the electrochemical stability window was assessed to be 0.62-4.21 V vs Li/Li+,
again much narrower than that calculated from CV without carbon additives. Furthermore,
applying the HOMO-LUMO method, the band gap width was computed to be 4.8 eV and
the anodic and cathodic limit of LYC is 2.77 eV and -1.71 eV. The density of states diagram
exhibiting the results mentioned is shown in 1.5b.
It is known that, to obtain the electrolyte with satisfactory performance not only ionic con-
ductivity but also other factors like electrochemical stability window, global abundance, and
economy need to be considered and the most successful candidate is the one which provides
high performance of the cell without compromising any of these parameters significantly. To
understand the significance of LYC over other halide-based electrolytes it is worthwhile to
notice the two key parameters, ionic conductivity and the electrochemical stability window
Page 6 of 52
==PAGE:15==
1.2
Terms used to quantify the performance of electrolyte and battery cells
of different halide-based electrolytes. From Figure 1.6, it can be noticed that both the elec-
trochemical stability window and ionic conductivity of chloride-based ternary electrolytes are
attractive.
Figure 1.6: a. The ionic conductivity of several ternary halide-based electrolytes, and b. the
electrochemical stability window of several SSE candidates[3].
1.2
Terms used to quantify the performance of electrolyte and bat-
tery cells
In this section, the most common terms used in electrochemistry to explain the characteristics
and performance quantitatively will be discussed briefly.
Activation energy is a very often used term in all fields of chemistry and in general terms,
it can be explained as the amount of energy required to activate a reaction or overcome the
reaction barrier. To obtain the activation energy (Ea) for the thermally activated conduction,
the ionic conductivity at different temperatures are plotted in an Arrhenius plot using the
relation,
Page 7 of 52
==PAGE:16==
1.2
Terms used to quantify the performance of electrolyte and battery cells
σT = σo exp

−Ea
kBT

(1.2.1)
where T is the absolute temperature, kB is the Boltzmann’s constant, and σ0 is a pre-
exponential factor. The equation may be linearized by plotting a logarithmic relationship
between log(σ) and 1000/T.
To get to this expression to determine temperature-dependent ionic conductivity, it is es-
sential to understand the ionic transport mechanism in SEs. Unlike liquid electrolytes, SEs
have comparatively low ionic conductivity and this is due to the charge transport mechanism
in SEs. In Solids, generally, the charge transportation takes place by a hopping transport
mechanism. In this mechanism, the free charge jumps to other interstitial sites (generally
vacancies) due to thermal vibrations. These vacancies or interstitial sites are charge carriers
and the transport in SEs is limited to them. So, the conductivity in SEs the number of
charge movements per volume.
σ = Nqµ
(1.2.2)
where N is the volumetric density of the charge carriers, q is the elementary charge, and µ is
the mobility of charge carriers. The mobility of the charge carrier is further defined by the
Nernst-Einstein relation as a function of materials’ diffusion coefficient as follows.
µ = D
q
kBT
(1.2.3)
where D is the diffusion coefficient. The relation between the diffusion coefficient and acti-
vation energy is given by the Arrhenius equation as,
D = D0e−Ea
RT
(1.2.4)
On combining the equations 1.2.2, 1.2.3 and 1.2.4, the conductivity can be quantified from
the diffusion coefficient and activation energy as follows.
σ = D0N q2
kBT e−Ea
RT
(1.2.5)
Theoretical capacity of the cell is determined by applying Faraday’s law. It gives an idea
about the expected range of capacity that a cell can provide. It is measured in mA h· g−1 as,
QT = n · mi · F
Mi
(1.2.6)
Where n is the number of charge carriers, F is the Faraday constant, Mi is the molecular
Page 8 of 52
==PAGE:17==
1.3
Objective of the project
weight and mi is the active material mass of the limiting electrode.
Similarly, Coulombic efficiency (CE) reveals information regarding the efficiency by which
the electrons are transferred in the batteries. It is the ratio of the total charge extracted
(Qdischarge) from the battery to the total charge inserted or put into (Qcharge) the batteries.
ϵcoulombic = Qdischarge
Qcharge
(1.2.7)
1.3
Objective of the project
From the discussion in the previous section, it is clear that the role of high-density and non-
inflammable batteries is quite noteworthy. To achieve this milestone, a significant amount of
research must be carried out within the electrolyte and active electrode materials class. This
research project focuses on synthesizing a halide-based all-solid-state electrolyte (ASSE) and
then constructing a full-functioning cell based on this electrolyte. The main challenge with
most of the ASSEs is related to the high ionic resistance and hence lower ionic conductivity.
It is not only important to have high ionic conductivity of the electrolyte but as mentioned
in the above section, other materials properties like deformability, electrochemical stability,
and cell processability also need high attention.
To start with the synthesis of the solid electrolyte, the ammonium chloride mediated wet
chemistry synthesis method is adapted. This process is industrially applied for synthesizing
a wide variety of products including various anhydrous metals MX3 (M = Tb-Lu, Y, and
Sc; X = Cl, Br, and I) and is well proven.
[24, 25, 26].
It is also intended to explore
whether there are any other methods for the synthesis of LYC which might be easier and
economically beneficial. Various characterization methods will be explored and applied to
confirm the expected phase. One of the other main challenges is related to interlayer contact
and enabling a higher degree of contact is also essential which will also be the motive of this
study. Furthermore, different options for the electrodes are also to be explored. The other
concern related to the use of Li metal as the anode is its poor stability towards the electrolyte
and to address this issue to some extent, in the full cell is also one of the motives of this
study. At different stages of the study, as the synthesis progressed, essential characterization
techniques like EIS, GCPL, SEM, and XRD will be performed to follow the progress. To have
a clear idea of different synthesis approaches, a self-descriptive flow chart has been included
below.
Page 9 of 52
==PAGE:18==
1.3
Objective of the project
Figure 1.7: Self-descriptive flow chart for the approaches to the synthesis of LYC. One-step
refers to the synthesis where all three precursors are dissolved (for wet synthesis) or ground
(for dry synthesis) together.
Two-step refers to the synthesis where LiCl is added after
synthesis of the intermediate phase (AYC).
Page 10 of 52
==PAGE:19==
2
Materials Synthesis and Characterization Methodology
In this section, the focus will be on familiarizing with the materials and understanding dif-
ferent synthesis methods and characterization techniques. The materials include electrolyte
and active electrodes. The characterization techniques applied to analyze the materials syn-
thesized and the essential concepts related to these methodologies will also be discussed.
2.1
Structure of electrolyte Li3YCl6
The key focus as aforementioned is to synthesize halide-based electrolyte, Li3MX6, where
metal M is yttrium and X is chlorine in this case. One of the reasons behind choosing yt-
trium halides is that YCl6
3– are highly stable octahedrons as well as the expected conduction
path incorporated with each trivalent yttrium that offers two empty cation sites[16].
Figure 2.1: Possible crystal structure of LYC depicting the Li-ion migration pathway in (a)
monoclinic, (b) orthorhombic, and (c) trigonal obtained using the bond valence site energy
(BVSE) method.[27]
Generally Li3MX6 exhibits either of the three structures, namely monoclinic, orthorhombic,
Page 11 of 52
==PAGE:20==
2.1
Structure of electrolyte Li3YCl6
or trigonal based on the synthesis temperature and time. Based on the structure, the physical
properties like conductivity also differ. According to Wang and Co [3], the ionic conductivity
of the SEs had shown the following trend, σmonoclinic > σorthorhombic > σTrigonal. To further
investigate the reason behind this trend, crystal structures for LYC are visually compared.
It is worthwhile to mention that the orthorhombic structure of LYC hasn’t been well-
researched experimentally. Park and Co. [27] have performed a theoretical study on chloride-
based superionic conductors for 12 different metals. They have carried out studies related to
structural phase stability, electrochemical stability, Li-ion migration pathways, and Li-ion dif-
fusivity. It is reported that the Ehull (meV/atom) for monoclinic, trigonal, and orthorhombic
structures are 20, 25, and 21 meV/atom respectively. "E_hull" is a term used in the the-
oretical study of energy materials to describe the energy above the convex hull. Out of all
the potential structures or combinations of an elemental set, the convex hull represents the
configuration with the lowest energy. The stability and thermodynamic viability of various
materials or phases are evaluated using this method. It is the understanding that the phases
with E_hull below 25 meV are the stable ones. This means that all three phases of LYC
are stable with slight variations. The Li-ion migration pathways are highly favored in or-
thorhombic over trigonal structures. This was justified by applying the BVSE method to
quantify the migration energy barriers in orthorhombic and trigonal structures. The study
showed that LYC exhibited a lower migration energy barrier in orthorhombic structures than
in trigonal and this is why the Li/ion migration is more favored in orthorhombic compared
to the later one.
Figure 2.2: Li-ion migration energy barriers between octahedral Li sites along the 1D Oct-
Oct path and 2D Oct-Tet-Oct path in (a) orthorhombic Li3YCl6 and (b) trigonal Li3YCl6
from the BVSE model.[27]
Page 12 of 52
==PAGE:21==
2.1
Structure of electrolyte Li3YCl6
It is also reported from the computational study carried out by following ab initio molecular
dynamics (AIMD) simulations that Li-ion diffusivity was the lowest for trigonal structure.
Similarly, the theoretical activation energy of trigonal was reported to be 0.26 eV which is
slightly larger than orthorhombic being 0.24 eV. These all parameters from the theoretical
study signify that the orthorhombic structure exhibits higher ionic conductivity than the
trigonal structure.
Similarly, according to the study carried out by [28], a Trigonal structure can be synthesized
in two different phases namely, α and β, depending on the temperature of annealing. As
shown in Figure 2.3, in both α and β-Li3YCl6 phases, Cl– ions arrangement is represented
as a hexagonal close-packed (hcp) structure.
Figure 2.3: Crystal structure of α-Li3YCl6 and β-Li3YCl6. The unit cells are denoted through
the black lines, and the migrations of Y during the phase transition from α-Li3YCl6 to β-
Li3YCl6 are represented by red arrows.[28]
The α phase is obtained when the substrate,YCl3 and LiCl is heated above 600 K whereas
the β which is also the metastable phase of LYC is obtained when heated below 600 K. Both
of these phases have similar arrangements of Cl– ion as mentioned earlier. The key difference
between these two phases is in terms of the occupancy of yttrium atoms in the unit cell.
In the α phase, the yttrium atoms are more disordered compared to that of the β phase. This
disorderliness is partially the reason in this case, why the α phase has lower ionic conductivity.
Page 13 of 52
==PAGE:22==
2.2
Synthesis methods of electrolyte Li3YCl6
To clarify this, it can be understood in this way that, when you have highly ordered Y3+
ions, they have larger lattice parameters (per atom) caused by the repulsive force between
each other which leads to wider Li+ ions conduction pathways. Since there is more space for
percolation of Li+ ions, this means lower activation energy is required and this results in the
higher Li+ ions conductivity in β-Li3YCl6 [28].
2.2
Synthesis methods of electrolyte Li3YCl6
It is quite important that halide-based ASSE materials are economical and scalable. Several
paths are taken into account to identify the efficient method for the synthesis of LYC. Along
with some established methods, some new methods of synthesis will be briefed in this section.
Also, the method applied for densification will be briefly introduced.
2.2.1
Mechanochemical synthesis
This method is the classical method of synthesizing halide electrolytes.
In this method,
initially, the stoichiometric amounts of binary halide materials, LiCl and YCl3 are weighed
and loaded into zirconia pots containing zirconia balls with a diameter(ϕ) of 5mm. It is
crucial to perform the preparations in an inert atmosphere, typically in a glove box filled
with argon. Then, the mixed starting materials are planetary ball milled for 50 h over 500
rpm. In this way, the obtained LYC are white powders with low crystallinity (lc) and are
hygroscopic, meaning needs to be dealt with in a dry atmosphere at all time. This method
is not applied in this study.
2.2.2
Ammonium chloride assisted Wet chemistry synthesis
Except for Li3InCl6, Wet chemistry synthesis is not generally applied for the synthesis of
halide-based electrolytes and this is due to the easy hydrolysis of metal chloride (MCl3 ·nH2O)
upon heating. Li3InCl6 is a special halide-based electrolyte that can be synthesized using
water as the solvent and this is possible due to the unique behavior, which is the recovery
of a hydrated form of Li3InCl6 to pristine structure on heating at 200◦C under vacuum
for an hour [29]. However, given the benefits that the wet chemistry method can bring in
terms of controlling the morphology and size of the solid electrolytes, fabricating sheet-typed
electrodes with intimate solid-solid ionic contact for practical pouch cell manufacturing and
scalability [16, 30, 31], it is prominent to carry out studies to find a route to synthesize this
class of materials by wet chemistry. Considering that, it is essential to avoid the hydrates
in the solution from forming metal oxychlorides (MOCl) on heating. To do so, the very
well-established ammonium chloride-assisted synthesis comes into play.
Page 14 of 52
==PAGE:23==
2.2
Synthesis methods of electrolyte Li3YCl6
Figure 2.4: Schematic illustrating the ammonium-assisted synthesis method of halide SEs [9]
In this method, ammonium chloride is dissolved in the solvent initially, such that it acts as a
coordinating reagent prohibiting the formation of MOCl on heating. So, as explained, in this
method along with metal halide precursors, ammonium chloride is dissolved in the solvent,
vacuum dried, and annealed to obtain LYC. The reaction taking place during the synthesis
is as follows.
MCl3 · nH2O + 3NH4Cl
nH2O
−→(NH4)3 [MCl6]
(NH4)3 [MCl6] + 3LiCl
Heating
−→
Li3MCl6 + 3NH3 + 3HCl
(2.2.1)
It can be followed from the reaction 2.2.1, the reaction takes place in two steps with (NH4)3 [MCl6]
as the intermediate phase. It is essential to notice that when the mixture is heated at a higher
temperature (> 300◦C) the byproducts are the gaseous form of NH3 and HCl which has to
be dealt with. The detailed synthesis procedure following this method will be explained in
the experimental section.
2.2.3
Synthesis of metal chloride from oxide
In this section, the method from which the metal oxide route of synthesis of LYC is inspired
will be briefed. To synthesize anhydrous rare earth metal trichlorides, MCl3, ammonium
chloride-assisted synthesis is quite a mature industrial technique used very often due to its
inexpensiveness and straightforwardness. There are several pathways to get to the anhydrous
metal trichlorides, starting from either metal oxide, the metal itself, or hydrated metal halides.
12NH4Cl + Y2O3 −→2 (NH4)3 [YCl6] + 6NH3 + 3H2O
(2.2.2)
6NH4Cl + 2YCl3 · 6H2O −→2 (NH4)3 [YCl6] + 12H2O
(2.2.3)
12NH4Cl + 2Y −→2 (NH4)3 [YCl6] + 6NH3 + 3H2
(2.2.4)
2 (NH4)3 [YCl6] −→{(NH4) [Y2Cl7] + 5NH4Cl}
(NH4) [Y2Cl7] −→2YCl3 + 6NH4Cl
(2.2.5)
Page 15 of 52
==PAGE:24==
2.2
Synthesis methods of electrolyte Li3YCl6
According to Meyer [24], the pure form of metal trichlorides is accomplished simply by heat-
ing the mixture of rare earth oxides and excess ammonium chloride at 200◦C or above.
As shown in reaction 2.2.2,2.2.3,2.2.4, the first method is synthesis of (NH4)3 [MCl6] from
yttrium oxide where an excess of NH4Cl is simply dried mixed with Y2O3 and heat treated
at 200◦C or above.
It is essential to add an excess of ammonium chloride as it does not only prevent hydrolysis
i.e., formation of metal oxychlorides, MOCl but is also important for the formation of early-
stage intermediate complex halide phase such as AYCl, (NH4)3 [MCl6]. It is reported by
Meyer that if the wet route is performed to synthesize AYC it has to start from YCl3 ·6H2O
or if Y2O3 is used, the stoichiometric amount of Y2O3 and excess NH4Cl has to be dissolved
in HCl. Then the mixture has to be heated to boiling point to obtain a clear solution. Slow
evaporation is carried out and it is supposed to have at least partly (NH4)2[YCl5 ·H2O] which
on further heating can yield pure AYCl. As the intermediate complex is the same whether
started from metal chloride or oxide as an initial precursor, this method could also be adapted
to synthesize LYC. More details on the synthesis procedure and results will be explained in
section 3 and section 4 respectively.
2.2.4
Spark plasma sintering (SPS)
Figure 2.5: A schematic of the SPS process.
[32]
Spark plasma sintering or pulsed electric
current sintering (PECS) is a method ap-
plied for the densification of materials. This
method utilizes the uniaxial force and pulsed
direct current (DC) under low atmospheric
pressure to perform high-speed strengthen-
ing of the powder samples.
The key benefit of SPS is that the direct way
of heating allows the application of very high
heating and cooling rates, pushing densifica-
tion over the diffusion mechanism which gen-
erally leads to grain growth. This also allows
for further maintain the intrinsic properties
of nanopowders in their fully dense form. In
conventional hydraulic pressure (HP) sinter-
ing techniques external heating elements are
used for heating the furnace and the sample
is heated by conduction from the container.
This kind of processes are typically slow and
Page 16 of 52
==PAGE:25==
2.3
Characterization methods
can last for hours and the amount of heat wasted is also high as the whole volume of space
has to be heated. However, SPS is a highly efficient process, particularly when highly insu-
lating sample powders are used and the pulsed electric current is applied. It is essential to
maintain the temperature gradient inside the sample for the homogeneous sintering and the
homogeneity depends on the factors like the electrical conductivity, the die wall thickness,
and the graphite papers used to prevent contact between the sample and the holder wall
while guaranteeing electrical contacts between all parts [33].
2.3
Characterization methods
In this section, the methods applied for the characterization of electrolyte and full battery
cells will be explained.
2.3.1
X-ray diffraction (XRD)
XRD is the most widely used technique among inorganic material scientists working with the
analysis of the atomic and molecular structure of the materials. It is an essential technique
as it can measure different properties like lattice constants, and the crystal structure of
unknown crystalline substances with high accuracy. In this method, X-rays are emitted from
a cathode tube or rotating target, which is focused on a sample to be analyzed. When the
monochromatic X-rays scatter from a substance with a structure on a nanometer scale, it
causes interferences, which could be both constructive or destructive depending on whether
the difference between the path traveled by the X-ray between the planes is integer or not.
Depending on whether the interference is constructive or destructive, the lower and higher
intensities patterns are formed following Bragg’s law. According to Bragg’s law,
Figure 2.6: Working schematics of X-
Ray Diffraction
nλ = 2dsinθ
(2.3.1)
Where λ is the wavelength, n is an integer denoting lattice plane, d is the inter-planar distance
between two lattice planes, and θ is the angle of incidence. The inter-planar spacing (d) is
unique for different materials, this makes the analysis of crystal structure possible. After
Page 17 of 52
==PAGE:26==
2.3
Characterization methods
the XRD is carried out, the d-values are compared to the database with reference patterns’
d-values which then identifies the closest matching structure of the sample.
2.3.2
Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS)
Figure 2.7: Sinusoidal Current Response in a
Linear System [34]
To understand the performance of the syn-
thesized electrolyte and full cell, EIS is one
of the best techniques.
The difference be-
tween resistance from an ideal resistor and
impedance is that resistance is only the op-
position to the flow of electric current in
the circuit whereas impedance is the oppo-
sition to the flow of AC current from any of
the three (resistive, inductive, or capacitive)
components.
In other words, impedance
is the combination of both resistance (real
part) and reactance (complex part). Elec-
trochemical Impedance (EI) is measured as
the current response, I(t) = I0sin(ωt) from
a small excitation potential signal, E(t) =
E0sin(ωt) for exciting a linear time-invariant
(LTI) circuit system. The current response
I(t) has the same frequency as the applied potential E(T), with a shifted phase (ϕ) as shown
in figure 2.7. ω being the radial frequency, defined by the relation ω = 2πf. This process
where a small sinusoidal perturbation voltage, E(t) is applied to an electrochemical system
is termed potentiostatic EIS (PEIS) and when the input is an alternating current is termed
galvanostatic EIS (GEIS). At high frequencies, the response from the fastest processes oc-
curring such as ion migration can be detected whereas at low frequencies slower processes
such as diffusion is dominating.
Impedance is defined as the complex number Z, given by the expression:
Z = E(t)
I(t) =
E0sin(ωt)
I0sin(ωt + ϕ)
(2.3.2)
Considering the complex part of the resistance, based on Euler’s relationship, ejϕ = cos(ϕ)+
jsin(ϕ), impedance (Z) can be expressed as:
Z = Z0(cosϕ + jsinϕ) = ZR + jZIm
(2.3.3)
Where, ZR denotes the real part and ZIm denotes the imaginary part of the impedance.
The evaluation of the EIS spectrum data is quite important for the devolution of processes and
Page 18 of 52
==PAGE:27==
2.3
Characterization methods
their distinctive time intervals. Since many of the electrochemical processes have distinctive
and characteristic frequencies, EIS spectra could be modeled by an equivalent circuit model
(ECM). With the use of correct modeling elements, precise quantification and understanding
of different electrochemical processes can be done. Generally, the combination of elements
applied is a resistor and capacitor in parallel. Figure 2.8a show that the resistor (R0) is
connected in series with (RC)1 element and capacitor C2 is commonly used to model dielectric
materials and determine solid electrolyte conductivity using ion-blocking electrodes. There
are several other components used in an equivalent circuit model, such as;
Element
Symbol
Physical meaning
Resistor (R)
resistor
Represents bulk ionic and grain boundary resistance of
the SE, and charge-transfer resistance between the
SE and electrodes.
Constant Phase
Element (CPE, Q)
-»-
Used for non-ideal capacitances which may be caused by
inhomogeneity and porosity of the electrochemical
materials and interfaces. The value of α given to
the CPE dictates its capacitative behavior (where 0 is
purely resistive, and 1 is an ideal capacitor). An α para-
meter close to 0.5 describes an infinite diffusion Warburg
element.
Capacitor (C)
capacitor
This can be used to represent charge accumulation/
depletion occurring across phase boundaries and at the
SE/electrode interface.
Warburg (W)
-W-
Used for resistances that occur due to mass transfer
(diffusion), which is most prominent at low frequencies.
Inductor (L)
inductor
Represents impedance contributions associated with wound
wires/electrical connections at high frequencies and
degradation processes at low frequencies.
Table 1: Most commonly used equivalent circuit elements and the physical meaning behind
them[35].
Page 19 of 52
==PAGE:28==
2.3
Characterization methods
Figure 2.8: a) Equivalent circuit for single electron transfer and ion migration in the elec-
trolyte. b) Nyquist plot of the real impedance against the imaginary impedance showing the
resistance for the electrolyte. c) Bode plot of the magnitude of the impedance and phase
angle against frequency.[35]
From Figure 2.8b, it can be seen that the Nyquist plot contains a symmetrical semi-circle
with an offset from the origin on the x-axis. This offset denotes the resistance (R0) from the
wires and contacts. The peak of the semicircle denotes the time constant, (RC)1 related to
the conduction process. Moreover, the Bode diagrams depict EIS data within the temporal
realm, enabling us to establish connections between distinct impedance contributions and
their corresponding time intervals. This information, which is not explicitly perceived from
the Nyquist plot, allows for a more comprehensive understanding of the system’s behavior.
2.3.3
Scanning electron microscopy (SEM)
Scanning electron microscopy is the most effective tool when it comes to microstructure
characterization of materials in interest. This technique, as the name implies, uses a beam
of electrons from an electron source for high-quality compositional information as well as
surface structure and topographical information.
Page 20 of 52
==PAGE:29==
2.3
Characterization methods
Figure 2.9: The interaction of the electron beam with the specimen and the signal emitted
from the sample.[36]
When the beam of electrons strikes the sample, various kinds of signals are emitted. All
these signal carries different information about the sample/material. It depends on the en-
ergy with which the electrons scatter back after interaction with the sample as well as the
depth from where it originated. For instance, backscattered electrons (BSE) are high-energy
electrons that originated from deep (a few microns below the surface) within the sample and
interact strongly with the sample. These electrons provide compositional information and
lower-resolution images. Similarly, secondary electrons (SE) come from a lower depth (within
a few nanometers of the sample surface) with lower energy (< 50 eV, as they are formed from
the ionization of the sample) compared to BSE. They are very sensitive to the surface struc-
ture, they provide topographic information. SE results from inelastic interactions between
the electron beam and the atoms of the sample.
BSE shows higher sensitivity to the atomic numbers, the higher the atomic numbers the
brighter the material appears in the image. Another possibility is that when the sample
is ionized by BSE at lower energy, it might also release compound-specific characteristics
x-rays emitted from the energetic decay of an electron in the compound. Capturing these
characteristic X-rays allows to measure energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS). Mostly
EDS is applied to identify different elemental availability in an SEM image. In this case,
SEM analysis will mostly be carried out on the synthesized electrolyte which is electronically
insulating, it causes the trapping of electrons within the sample resulting in the charging of
the sample. This will lead to the bad quality of the image as it will be bright due to charging.
To avoid that it is essential to coat the sample with conductive materials such as carbon or
gold. The sample is coated within nm thickness which limits the visibility of coating on the
Page 21 of 52
==PAGE:30==
2.3
Characterization methods
actual image.
2.3.4
Galvanostatic Cycling with Potential Limitation (GCPL)
The most common methodology for examining the behavior of cycling batteries is galvano-
static cycling with potential limitation (GCPL). The charge and discharge conditions of a
battery, which are typically a fixed rate and a potential range, determine its performance.
The nominal battery capacity (which includes both positive and negative electrodes) must
pass through in h hours for the galvanostatic rate (which pertains to batteries) to be stated
as C·h−1. C is typically the charge that corresponds to the overall anticipated reduction or
oxidation of the intercalation species in the electrode under study. The galvanostatic rate can
be stated in current per active mass (mA·g−1), and the specific capacity of an intercalation
electrode material per weight is frequently taken into consideration. The theoretical capac-
ity of a certain electrode can be accessed in battery procedures by entering the electrode
parameters in the corresponding window. From there, the charge/discharge currents can be
calculated based on the rate that has to be applied.
Page 22 of 52
==PAGE:31==
3
Experimental procedures and arrangements
In this section, a detailed explanation of each step followed to synthesize the electrolytes,
and the setup used for the characterization will be elaborated. It includes information on the
chemicals used, conditions at which each step of the experiment was carried out, and so on.
3.1
Synthesis of electrolyte
By the end of this section one should be able to synthesize LYC via any of the two methods
by following the synthesis process explained below.
3.1.1
Metal halide (YCl3) route of synthesis
As explained in the subsubsection 2.2.2, for the synthesis of Li3YCl6 the stoichiometric
amounts of LiCl (< 99.9%, sigma aldrich), YCl3 (<99.9%, sigma aldrich) and double the
stoichiometric amount of NH4Cl (< 99.9%, sigma aldrich) was calculated and weighed. LiCl
was vacuum dried beforehand at 100◦C overnight to exempt from any kind of error between
stoichiometric calculation and weighed amounts as LiCl is deliquescent and crystallizes as
hydrates (LiCl · H2O). First, ammonium chloride was put in a beaker and completely dis-
solved in deionized water with continuous stirring. Then yttrium chloride was added carefully
as the addition of YCl3 is an exothermic reaction. Once these compounds were completely
dissolved then LiCl was added to the solution and dissolved completely until a clear solution
was observed. After that, the beaker was placed on the hot plate, then heated to 80◦C. At
this temperature, the solution was dried until no visible moisture was observed.
Figure 3.1: a. Vacuum drying @80◦C for 5 h, b. The mixture after drying, and c. pellets
after heat treatment @ 500◦C for 5 h in the presence of Ar gas.
Page 23 of 52
==PAGE:32==
3.1
Synthesis of electrolyte
The mixture still contained some intrinsic moisture which was then vacuum dried at 80◦C
for 5 hours. The resulting mixture containing mostly (NH4)3 [YCl6] · LiCl was then pressed
into pellets at 100 MPa. The pellets were then transported in a desiccator to prohibit the
hydration of the intermediate complex. The pellets are then transferred to the crucible and
annealed at 500◦C for 5 hours with a ramp rate of 120◦C·h−1 and then cooled down at
the ramp rate of 200◦C·h−1. In the coming sections, this ramping condition is regarded as
normal ramp rates. The obtained pellets after annealing can be observed in Figure 3.1c.
These pellets are then hand-ground in a mortar for 5 minutes and the obtained powder is a
highly pure electrolyte, LYC. To understand the reaction mechanism, a two-step method was
also performed. In this method, the mentioned precursors weren’t added at once, instead
NH4Cl and YCl3 were dissolved as mentioned earlier and dried completely. In this way, the
intermediate complex AYC ((NH4)3 [YCl6]) is first prepared and analyzed. And then only
the LiCl was briefly ground together with AYC and annealed.
3.1.2
Metal oxide (Y2O3) route of synthesis
To understand the process followed during the synthesis, the reaction mentioned in 2.2.2
can be modified. As the first step, the intermediate complex is synthesized followed by the
addition of LiCl to the complex and annealing should give the pure LYC.
Y2O3 + 12NH4Cl−→2 (NH4)3 [YCl6] + 6NH3 + 3H2O
(NH4)3 [YCl6] + 3LiCl
Heating
−→
Li3YCl6 + 3NH3 + 3HCl
(3.1.1)
As this method to synthesize LYC has not been carried out before (to my knowledge), so to
make sure that yttrium oxide could be directly used as a precursor instead of yttrium chlo-
ride, firstly two-step dry synthesis was planned. For this, an excess (twice the stoichiometric
amount) of NH4Cl (ACS, 99.5% min, Alfa Aesar) was grounded first in a mortar followed
by the addition of Y2O3 (99.9%(REO) powder, Alfa Aesar). After subsequent grinding, the
mixture was transferred to a crucible partially covered by the porous ceramic sheet. This is
done to keep the cover of ammonium chloride to attain a complete conversion of Y2O3 and
hence a better intermediate complex yield. The mixture is then heat treated at 250 ◦C at
the ramp rate of 30◦C·hr−1 in a tube furnace for 35 hours in the presence of Ar flow. This
process was repeated for different temperatures, namely, 225 and 235 ◦C and ramp rates
which will be discussed more in the results and discussion section. Once the pure phase of
the intermediate complex AYC ((NH4)3 [YCl6]) is obtained, it was taken back to the glove
box in a desiccator where the stoichiometric amount of previously hand ground LiCl is added
to AYC. After subsequent grinding for approximately 10 minutes in a mortar, the mixture
was pelleted at ∼100 MPa and annealed at 500◦C under Ar atmosphere.
Similarly, for one-step synthesis, as mentioned for two-step synthesis after grinding NH4Cl
Page 24 of 52
==PAGE:33==
3.2
Preparation of electrodes
and Y2O3, LiCl is also ground with the mixture. This mixture is then pelleted and heat
treated at 500◦C under the same conditions as of the metal halide route of synthesis.
Y2O3 + 12NH4Cl + 6LiCl
Heating
−→
2Li3YCl6 + 12NH3 + 6HCl + 3H2O
(3.1.2)
For ammonium chloride-assisted wet synthesis from sesquioxide, a two-step synthesis ap-
proach was undertaken. Even though Meyer and Co [24] suggested using HCl acid to dissolve
the precursors, in this study, deionized water was used. Similar to the wet halide synthesis
process, the precursor was dried upon slower heating at 80◦C and then vacuum dried at the
same temperature for approximately 5 hours.
3.2
Preparation of electrodes
To achieve high voltage (4 V) class cathode, layered oxide cathode active material has been
prepared. Firstly, LFP (lithium iron phosphate) was chosen as the active cathode material
(ACM), considering the no use of cobalt (Co) and high specific capacity of 170 mAh·g−1. To
address the issue of electronic conductivity, conducting carbon black (CC), C65 was added
to the ACM. The addition of CC is essential as LYC is an electronic insulator and the pres-
ence of LYC in the ACM requires boosting of electronic conductivity for achieving the fully
functional cathode. After literature reviews, different compositions of ACM/LYC/C65 sug-
gested are studied, and in this work for LFP cathode, 57/40.5/2.5 Wt% and 50/40/10 Vol%
and for NMC cathode, 57/40.5/2.5 Vol% compositions were prepared. Starting with drying
the mixture of LFP and C65 for roughly 10 hours, the catholyte (LYC) is then mixed inside
a glove box in a mortar for approx. 10 minutes to acquire a homogeneous cathode composite.
For the anode, due to the unbeatable capacity of Li metal, this has been the first choice.
However, other options have been also explored considering the instability of LYC towards Li
metal. It has been recently studied that the use of In as the layer between LYC and Li anode
forms an alloy of LiIn which has a potential higher than Li. This means that the potential at
the negative electrode is higher than the lower value of the electrochemical stability window
[37].
3.3
SPS
Among other densification methods, SPS was chosen because it doesn’t affect the crystal
structure and is very quick to perform as well as less energy intensive. SPS was performed
for the first time on LYC electrolyte which made it interesting as well as challenging. Since
the constraints like time, pressure and temperature were unknown a lot of different trials
were performed to figure out what could work for this material to achieve maximum density.
Page 25 of 52
==PAGE:34==
3.4
XRD
For low-pressure sintering, a graphite die was used whereas for high-pressure sintering a metal
die was used. In both cases, to protect the sample from the die walls and pistons, a graphite
sheet was applied. The sample was filled in the die inside the glovebox and transported in
a closed container. Initially, the sample is cold pressed at 100 MPa to ensure the smooth
surface of the pellets when transporting it.
3.4
XRD
XRD was extensively used at each step of the synthesis as it provided essential information
about the phases and purity of the product. To perform XRD, the obtained materials either
the final LYC or intermediate products were finely ground as mentioned in previous sections.
Then the fine powders are mounted on a silicon sample holder used in the Aeris diffractometer,
which was used for almost all XRD.
Figure 3.2: XRD sample as prepared.
It is essential to prepare XRD samples in a
glove box to avoid the formation of any kind
of hydrates or contamination of the samples.
To maintain the purity of the samples, fur-
thermore, Kapton tapes were used to cover
the samples which helped with the protec-
tion from humidity in the atmosphere. Af-
ter each step, it was analyzed whether the
degree of reaction expected was achieved or
not. This was done by simply performing Ri-
etveld refinement of the peaks obtained for
different phases. This provides quantitative
estimates of the phases listed and hence the
degree of purity of the samples.
3.5
Cell assembly
To perform characterization of the full battery cell, the pelleted electrolytes have to be
assembled together with blocking electrodes to characterize electrolytes and with different
anodes and cathodes to characterize the full cell. In this section, different cell assemblies will
be introduced such that it will be convenient to follow in the coming sections.
In this study, for the convenience and sake of easier analysis of the effect of external pressure
on interlayer contact, the Swagelok cells have been used.
Page 26 of 52
==PAGE:35==
3.5
Cell assembly
Figure 3.3: Figures depicting the process of Swagelok cell assembly.
One of the major reasons to use a Swagelok was that, for solid-state cells, contact between
the layers has been a key issue. By applying external pressure, this issue could be resolved
to some extent. However, it is also quite important to apply the known amount of pressure.
To do so, a transducer was used to measure the maximum pressure that a user can apply
when using the clamps as shown in the last image of Figure 3.3. In this study, the maximum
pressure applied to ensure better contact was approximately 20 MPa.
3.5.1
For electrolyte characterization
Once the electrolyte is successfully synthesized and confirmed by applying XRD analysis, then
electrochemical characterization were performed. To do so the electrolytes were cold pressed
in a die with 12 mm diameter and a hydraulic pressure of 500 MPa. A rough estimate of the
density achieved by applying this amount of pressure was
85%. The various combinations
of blocking and non-blocking electrodes were applied and the combinations are presented in
Table 2 and Figure 3.4.
Figure 3.4: Schematics of symmetric cells assembled with different electrodes. SES refers to
the symmetric cell with stainless steel, GEG with graphite, AEA with aluminum, and LEL
with lithium as electrodes.
Page 27 of 52
==PAGE:36==
3.5
Cell assembly
Electrolyte cell
(EC)
mass LYC
(mg)
Electrodes
(B/NB)
pellets
density (%)
synthesis
method
SES1
128
Stainless steel (B)
84
One-step metal halide
SES2
500
Stainless steel (B)
-
One-step metal halide
GEG1
142
Graphite (B)
81
One-step metal halide
GEG2
137
Graphite (B)
87
Two-step metal oxide
LEL1
145
Lithium metal (NB)
90
One-step metal halide
LEL2
120
Lithium metal (NB)
85
One-step metal oxide
AEA
135
Aluminium (B)
84
One-step metal halide
Table 2: Different cell setup for the electrolyte characterization with blocking (B) electrode
for electrolyte analysis initially and non-blocking (NB) electrode for GCPL measurements.
To effectively calculate the ionic resistance, it is important to apply blocking electrodes. This
is so because when non-blocking electrodes are applied, the system is more complicated as
more electrochemical reactions occur at the electrodes other than the ionic transport within
the electrolyte. For instance, if there is a non-blocking electrode there is a higher likeliness
of mass ingression or in other words intercalation of ions into the electrodes. SES2 is the
electrolyte cell with sintered electrolyte by applying SPS; the details will be discussed in the
coming sections.
3.5.2
For full cell characterization
To perform electrochemical characterization on a full cell, different cathode options were
considered. The full-cell schematics are depicted in the Figure 3.5.
Figure 3.5: Schematics of full cells assembled with different electrodes.
As shown in the above figure, a Li metal sheet was used as the anode. For the cathode, as
mentioned in the electrode preparation section, different compositions of ACM, LYC, and
C65 were studied. The full cell was assembled with the electrolyte from both halide and
Page 28 of 52
==PAGE:37==
3.6
Electrochemical measurements
sesquioxide routes. The ACM that has been taken into consideration are LFP and NMC.
Hereon, FC_LFP1 will be used for describing the full cell with LFP as ACM with lower
(2.5%) CC content and FC_LFP2 with higher (10%) CC content, and FC_NMC will be
used for describing full cells with NMC as ACM.
3.6
Electrochemical measurements
EIS and GCPL measurements were performed using BioLogic VMP3 and MPG2 poten-
tiostats. A 10 mV sinusoidal amplitude was applied with 10 points per decade and an average
of 20 measures were taken per frequency. The frequency range in which most of the mea-
surements were carried out is between 0.1 kHz - 1 MHz and will be mentioned if otherwise.
For GCPL measurements, the potential range was set to 0.3 and -0.3 V for stripping and
deposition and the time for each stripping and deposition was 0.5 hours. PEIS measurements
were carried out initially before starting GCPL to confirm better contacts.
3.7
SEM
SEM was performed on as-synthesized LYC from the wet halide and dry oxide route. Fur-
thermore, the effect of sintering was also analyzed by studying the morphology of the sintered
sample. In this study, the SEM was carried out using a ZEISS EVO MA10 machine available
at DTU Energy. As mentioned in subsubsection 2.3.3, LYC has significantly low electronic
conductivity, because of which the imaging can be difficult and of bad quality. However,
carbon sputtering could be applied to achieve higher-resolution images. The sample was
mounted on a sample holder with carbon tape on it. Also, the prepared samples were trans-
ported in a closed environment with minimal or no humidity.
Page 29 of 52
==PAGE:38==
4
Results and Discussion
In this section, the results obtained from all the experiments will be presented and discussed.
It will include the results from as-synthesized electrolyte characterization, symmetric cell
characterization, and full-cell characterization.
4.1
Electrolyte Characterization
In this section, the XRD patterns from each analysis will be compared to explain the effect
of different parameters like synthesis time, temperature, and other synthesis conditions. The
results from both the halide route and oxide routes will be presented and discussed.
4.1.1
Synthesis of electrolyte via metal halide route
The electrolytes obtained from the metal halide synthesis route from different conditions
mentioned in Table 2 were first analyzed for the pure phase. For one-step synthesis before
the heat treatment, the pre-dried material was analyzed for AYC, which is the expected
intermediate phase. Furthermore, it was also essential to verify the role of the excess amount
of coordinating reagent (NH4Cl) during the synthesis. For this reason, batches were synthe-
sized with exactly a stoichiometric amount, 50% more than the stoichiometric amount and
100% more than the stoichiometric amount. The results from the XRD analysis were aligned
with the observation made by Meyer and Co.[24] regarding the insufficient amount of NH4Cl
leads to the formation of YOCl and lack of formation of the early phase of intermediate
complex AYCl. It was observed that the synthesis batches where the insufficient or exact
stoichiometric amount of NH4Cl was used had least or no intermediate phases present and
also the formation of oxychlorides were detected. In the case of 50% excess, and one-step
annealing, generally, the orthorhombic phase with low amount of LiCl was detected whereas
when 100% excess NH4Cl showed higher unreacted LiCl and Trigonal phases.
Page 30 of 52
==PAGE:39==
4.1
Electrolyte Characterization
(a) Rietveld refinement of XRD data taken from one-step wet halide synthesis with 1.5XNH4Cl and
annealing carried out at 500◦C for 5 hours in a preheated (150◦C) tube furnace in presence of Ar.
(b) XRD data taken from varying, amount of NH4Cl used during synthesis, and temperature and ramp
rate applied during annealing.
Figure 4.1: XRD analysis of One-step wet halide synthesis.
Page 31 of 52
==PAGE:40==
4.1
Electrolyte Characterization
The importance to perform heat treatment in the presence of an inert atmosphere was also
understood. To do so, the synthesized sample was annealed in the presence of air, leading to
the formation of oxychlorides. So, even though LYC does not react with pure O2, using air
during heat treatment is not ideal. Another reason for the presence of oxychlorides could be
an impure supply of O2 (containing H2O) content.
Heating at 500◦C is generally applied to anneal intermediate complex, however, it hasn’t been
analyzed whether the step-wise heating makes any difference to the final product. Keeping
all the parameters the same first the temperature is set to 350◦C for 3 hours and then heated
to 500◦C for the last 2 hours. The ramp rate used for heating was the same(2◦C · min−1.) for
both annealings. The LYC phase present for annealing at 500◦C for 5 hours was orthorhombic
(00-044-0286) whereas 2-step heating was trigonal (01-090-3709).
4.1.2
Synthesis of electrolyte via metal oxide route
As mentioned in subsubsection 2.2.3 the synthesis of LYC from oxide was inspired by the
industrial methods widely used to synthesize metal chloride from metal oxide (sesquioxide).
The reaction portraying the synthesis could be represented by the modified form of the
Equation 2.2.2. It is known that the intermediate complex that is formed when performing
ammonia-assisted wet chemistry synthesis is the same as the intermediate complex observed
in Equation 2.2.2.
Intermediate complex analysis:
To understand the potential of this method in the synthesis of pure LYC, first, the two-step
dry synthesis was carried out at various temperatures and the XRD results confirmed that
when the finely grounded mixture of Y2O3 and excess NH4Cl is heat treated at 225◦C for 30
hours achieves the pure intermediate complex. Before heating for 30 hours, with the same
conditions mentioned above, the two-step method was carried out at 250◦C for approx. 35
hours and this resulted in the formation of a pure AYC phase but with a different structure
((NH4)Y2Cl7). This was already anticipated from the reaction mechanism Equation 2.2.2
that heating of the mixture for a longer time would eventually form (NH4)Y2Cl7.
Page 32 of 52
==PAGE:41==
4.1
Electrolyte Characterization
Figure 4.2: Comparison between the intermediate complexes obtained after different heating
temperatures and time.
At the same conditions, wet oxide synthesis was also heat treated, and as shown in Figure 6.1,
for both heat treatment conditions there were no significant differences in the acquired in-
termediate phases.
Analysis of one step and two step oxide synthesis post annealing:
Once the synthesis of the intermediate complex was confirmed from the XRD results shown
in Figure 4.2, the stoichiometric amount of LiCl was added to the intermediate complex
and grounded well followed by the annealing at 500◦C for 5 hours. Post-annealing of the
intermediate complexes (after 30 and 35 hours), the XRD patterns confirmed that there
wasn’t any pure LYC present. There could be several reasons behind this, including errors
due to the flow of Air instead of Ar gas. And as was observed before in the one-step wet
halide synthesis route, the flow of air instead of Ar truly affects the annealing process. It
is also observed from Figure 4.2 that the blue XRD pattern is from 20 h heat treatment
of two-step 2 mmol Y2O3 synthesis batch which was one of the successful batches and the
other XRD patterns are the same. This proves that there is no defect in the intermediate
complexes synthesized after 30 and 35 hours of heat treatment. Also, the analysis of XRD
patterns showed no oxychloride formation or any other kind of contaminant in the sample
denoting the purity of intermediate complexes.
Page 33 of 52
==PAGE:42==
4.1
Electrolyte Characterization
(a) Rietveld refinement of XRD data taken from one-step dry oxide synthesis route and annealing
carried out at 235◦C for 20 hours followed by 5 hours at 500◦C in presence of Ar.
(b) XRD data taken from metal oxide route of synthesis with varying synthesis batch size and steps of
synthesis.
Figure 4.3: XRD analysis of One and two-step dry synthesis from metal oxide route.
Page 34 of 52
==PAGE:43==
4.1
Electrolyte Characterization
Next, a small batch of two-Step synthesis followed by one-Step was carried out for the syn-
thesis of 2 mmol of LYC following the same dry oxide route. It was quite interesting to see
that there were differences in the phases of the final results obtained depending on the one or
two-step route. The 2-Step synthesis had a pure trigonal phase with the space group p-3m1
and lattice parameters a = b = 11.1971 Å and c = 6.0307 Å, whereas the 1-Step synthesis had
an orthorhombic structure with space group Pnma and the lattice parameters a = 12.930 Å,
b = 11.212 Å and c = 6.040 Å. Afterwards, a bigger batch i.e., 6 mmol was also prepared by
the one-step synthesis method and the XRD analysis from both the 2 mmol batch and 6 mmol
batch represented the same results, pure orthorhombic phases. The XRD graph Figure 6.2
can be observed to follow the progress of the synthesis progress. It includes the comparison
of XRD patterns from the step-wise progress of dry two-step metal oxide synthesis.
4.1.3
Comparison between the two synthesis methods
The observations from the one-step wet metal halide route and dry oxide routes have shown
consistent results in terms of the structure obtained when heating at a constant temperature
of 500◦C. In both cases, the halide-based wet synthesis and oxide-based dry synthesis of the
pure orthorhombic phase with high purity (∼95%) were obtained. Similarly, when two-
step synthesis was carried out, it generally exhibited a trigonal phase. The phases present
for different syntheses and the purity of each product can be compared and understood by
studying Table 3. From the different conditions applied to one-step wet halide synthesis,
heating at a temperature higher than 500◦C, more precisely 525◦C, yields orthorhombic
LYC. Similar results were observed when the ramp rate was reduced to 90◦C/hr.
This
could be again explained by the disorderliness caused at the cations sites depending on the
temperature and duration of synthesis as suggested by Schlem and Co.[38]. Slow ramping
up also increases the duration of synthesis to some extent, causing higher disorderliness and
orthorhombic structure can be obtained by a slow ramp rate.
Page 35 of 52
==PAGE:44==
4.1
Electrolyte Characterization
Synthesis
Phase
Purity (%)
Method
Conditions
Li3YCl6
LiCl
One-step wet halide
1.5XNH4Cl, 500◦C, 5h,
Ar, slow ramp
Orthorhombic
89
11
1.5XNH4Cl, 500◦C, 5h,
Ar, normal ramp,
furnace preheated to 150C
Trigonal
94
6
1.5XNH4Cl, 525◦C, 5h,
Ar, normal ramp
Orthorhombic
97
3
2.0XNH4Cl, 500◦C, 5h,
Ar, normal ramp
Trigonal
76.00
24.00
2.0XNH4Cl, 500◦C, 5h,
Ar, normal ramp, 2step
heat annealing
Trigonal
70
30
One-step dry oxide
2 mmol Y2O3,
20h-235◦C + 5h-500◦C,
Ar, normal ramp
Orthorhombic
98.90
1.10
6 mmol Y2O3,
20h-235◦C + 5h-500◦C,
Ar, normal ramp
Orthorhombic
98.82
1.18
Two-step dry oxide
2 mmol Y2O3,
20h-235◦C + 5h-500◦C,
Ar, normal ramp
Trigonal
93.50
6.50
Table 3: Information on all the synthesis conditions applied and the corresponding results
on phase identity as well as purity of desired products.
Comparing the two synthesis methods, it is proven that oxide can also be used for the
synthesis of high-purity LYC. From the experiments and results analysis, it is observed that
it is more effective to use oxide. However, since the most successful batches of dry metal
oxide were small-scale syntheses, it will be of great interest to perform even bigger batches of
synthesis and follow the results. It is not mentioned in the recent studies published whether
there is any trend to use NH4Cl based on the size of synthesis for higher yield of the main
product. From this study, it is clear that an excess of NH4Cl is evident but in the case of
2 mmol dry metal oxide synthesis, only 10% excess NH4Cl was used and still, the product
was of high purity whereas, for wet halide synthesis route, at least 50% excess NH4Cl was
Page 36 of 52
==PAGE:45==
4.1
Electrolyte Characterization
used. According to Meyer and Co.[24] for the synthesis of metal chloride, at least 12 mmol
of NH4Cl or even 15 mmol of NH4Cl should be used per mmol of metal oxide and this could
be also applicable for LYC synthesis.
Figure 4.4: Comparison between the oxide and halide synthesis routes after annealing at
500◦C for 5 hours in the presence of Ar flow. Both syntheses at the given conditions exhibited
trigonal phases.
Oxide route of synthesis is not only interesting due to the higher level of purity in LYC but
also considering the economical aspect, it is significantly favorable. This is simply because in
the industries, initially metal halides are prepared from the metal oxides. On comparing the
prices for commercially available Y2O3 to that of YCl3, the use of Y2O3 to synthesize LYC
can minimize the overall cost by at least two times.
From the crystal structure analysis in 2.1, it was explained that the LYC with trigonal struc-
ture had lower ionic diffusivity, higher ion migration barriers and hence lower conductivity
over orthorhombic LYC. The possible reason behind lower ionic diffusivity and higher migra-
tion energy barriers could be explained by observing the positioning and occupancy of Y3+
ions in Figure 6.4. In the orthorhombic crystal structure, there could be a higher number
of Li+ vacancies compared to the trigonal structure. On analyzing the orthorhombic struc-
ture (Figure 6.4), it can be seen that there is a void between two Y atoms in orthorhombic
Page 37 of 52
==PAGE:46==
4.1
Electrolyte Characterization
which could possibly be the vacancies. These vacancies could create a pathway with low-
ered ion migration barriers that are observed from the theoretical study by Park and Co. [27]
There could be another possibility that the higher time of annealing and temperature slightly
above 500◦C might cause higher disorder in the cations and this causes higher ionic conduc-
tivity. For example, it has been studied by Schlem and Co. [38] for Li3ErCl6, that higher
disorder of Er2–Er3 site increases the ionic conductivity. This will likely happen from lithium
reordering due to Coulombic repulsion with the disordered erbium. The reordering greatly
influences the transport mechanism as it alters the effective carrier density in both planes.
4.1.4
EIS on electrolyte
The electrolytes obtained from different synthesis routes mentioned in Table 2 were tested
at 5 different temperatures between room temperature (RT) to 60 ◦C. The Nyquist graph
depicting the measurements from different ECs is shown in Figure 4.5.
Figure 4.5: Nyquist plot depicting the resistance for a. SES1 with stainless steel as blocking
electrodes, b.
SES2 with SPS electrolyte, c.
GEG1 with graphite as blocking electrode
and electrolyte synthesized with metal halide route and d. GEG2 with graphite as blocking
electrode and electrolyte synthesized with metal oxide route.
Page 38 of 52
==PAGE:47==
4.1
Electrolyte Characterization
Temperatures (◦C)
Ionic resistance (Ω)
SES1
SES2
GEG1
GEG2
20
9818
19370
1100
1236
30
6365
11496
777
840
40
3303
9665
458
496
50
2286
3671
289
324
60
1193
2182
182
212
Table 4: Ionic resistance calculated by applying equivalent circuit model presented in Fig-
ure 4.5b. in the EC-Lab program.
One of the main issues with SEs is the complication with good interlayer contact for efficient
ionic conductivity. The higher resistance values (Figure 4.5a.) were the results of the poor
contact between the stainless steel and the electrolyte. This was proven when adding the
graphite layer between the stainless steel from the Swagelok showed significantly improved
resistance. Moreover, it can be observed from Figure 4.5c and d, the addition of graphite
layers was effective as the resistance was reduced by approximately 10 times. It could be that
the stainless steel from the Swagelok was inflexible/stiff and the external pressure was not ef-
fective in making better contact. And the addition of a flexible graphite sheet which deforms
well on the surface of LYC and steel on both sides provides the much-needed contacts. Also,
considering that Graphite might have some surface intercalation of Li-ions, highly pure thin
Al sheets were applied to check the effectiveness when Al is used as the blocking electrode. It
also helped a lot to reduce the contact issue but wasn’t as effective as using a graphite sheet.
On applying graphite as blocking electrodes, it is key to ensure that the graphite sheets are
well trimmed on the edges before assembly as it is highly possible to short circuit when they
come in contact.
SES2 is the symmetric cell with spark plasma sintered electrolyte and stainless steel as elec-
trodes. Considering SPS as one of the most effective and efficient methods for sintering, it
was applied to densify the electrolyte pellets which were pre-hydraulic pressed at 100 MPa.
SPS is performed to achieve higher densities without distorting the crystal structure of the
material. The EIS measurement in Figure 4.5b, shows higher resistance even after sinter-
ing. However, a better comparison between SES1 and SES2 can be done by looking at the
Arrhenius graph in Figure 4.6 and the ionic conductivity in Table 5. The ionic conductiv-
ity and activation energy hasn’t improved after sintering shows that sintering wasn’t effective.
The resistance observed from the electrolyte synthesized via the two-step metal oxide route
(GEG2) was pretty similar to that of the one-step metal halide route (GEG1) with GEG1
having slightly lower resistance. This result is also aligned with the observations made in
Page 39 of 52
==PAGE:48==
4.1
Electrolyte Characterization
the previous section regarding the two-step oxide route of synthesis possessing the same
structure as one-step metal halide synthesis at normal ramp rates. The resistances obtained
from the EIS data fitted with ECM at different temperatures are applied to the equation
σ =
1
R · l
A to obtain the ionic conductivity. Where A is the area and l, is the thickness of
the electrolyte pellets. The calculated conductivity (σ) is plotted in a linearized form by
plotting a logarithmic relationship between log(σ) and 1000/T. Applying log on both sides
of equation 1.2.1 and comparing this to the equation of the linear line, gives the slope of the
fitted line to be, −Ea
KBT and equating this to the slope of the fitted line gives the activation
energy in each case.
Figure 4.6: The ionic conductivity at different temperatures presented in Arrhenius plot (
log(σ) vs. 1000/T) to obtain the activation energy (Ea) for the thermally activated conduc-
tion.
Electrolyte cells (ECs)
SES1
SES2
GEG1
GEG2
Ionic conductivity (σRT , mS· cm−1)
0.0050
0.0046
0.0442
0.0393
Activation energy (Ea, eV)
0.4280
0.4473
0.0.3745
0.3664
Table 5: Ionic conductivities and activation energy for each cell.
During the synthesis process, one of the one-step metal halide syntheses was annealed at
a lower ramp rate (up:90◦C·h−1 and down:150◦C·h−1) showed a significant decrease in the
resistance.
In this case, graphite was applied as well for better contact.
Unfortunately,
Page 40 of 52
==PAGE:49==
4.1
Electrolyte Characterization
there was no XRD data available for this particular annealing batch, however, the XRD data
available for other annealing batches with the same ramp rate showed orthorhombic phase.
Figure 4.7: Impedance measurement from GEG cell setup, one-step wet halide synthesis,
electrolyte annealed at lower ramp rate (up: 90◦C·h−1 and down: 150◦C·h−1).
The RT ionic resistance was estimated from the ECM to be around 499 Ω, giving the RT
ionic conductivity of 0.1 mS·cm−1, which is pretty close to what has been reported by Sun et
al.[16]. This indicates that optimizing certain parameters like interface contacts and avoid-
ing any kind of contamination during synthesis could lead to higher RT ionic conductivity.
Furthermore, another potentiostat (SP300) which could take measurements up to 7 MHz was
also used to confirm that the full semicircle exists at a higher frequency and the IS can be
visualized in Figure 6.7.
4.1.5
GCPL analysis results from symmetric cells
In this section, the measurements carried out on Li-symmetrical cells to understand the
overpotential of the cell at different current densities have been presented and discussed. To
figure out the suitable current density at which the cell could be cycled to achieve higher
performance and lower degradation, GCPL is performed. This experiment was performed
on two symmetric cells, one with the electrolyte from one-step dry oxide synthesis (LEL1)
and the other from one-step wet halide synthesis (LEL2). As mentioned in the experimental
section, the symmetric cells included Li metal sheets with 6 mm diameter as the electrodes
in both cases. The analysis was carried out at different currents ranging from 0.07 mA, 0.1
mA, and 0.2 mA. The measurements from the GCPL experiment for both electrolytes (halide
and oxide routes) are presented in Figure 4.8.
Page 41 of 52
==PAGE:50==
4.1
Electrolyte Characterization
(a) GCPL analysis of symmetric cell (LEL1) with one-step wet halide route LYC at
different currents over 160 hours.
(b) GCPL analysis of symmetric cell (LEL2) with one-step dry oxide route LYC at different
currents over 530 hours.
Figure 4.8: GCPL analysis of Li symmetric cells with electrolytes synthesized via a) wet
metal halide and b) dry metal oxide routes.
Page 42 of 52
==PAGE:51==
4.1
Electrolyte Characterization
For LEL1, for the first 45 hours, there was no pressure applied. Even though initially the
overpotential was decreasing, it started growing rapidly after 25 hours. The rapid growth
of overpotential could be from the uneven deposition and stripping of Li from the electrode
surface causing poor contact between the electrodes and the electrolyte. This might have
been the reason since a slight pressure on the cell caused significant improvement in the
overpotential. The overpotential of LEL2 was pretty high in the initial 50 hours. However,
the subsequent decrease in overpotential which is slightly larger in LEL2 compared to LEL1
could be attributed to the "break-in" process where solid-state conduction pathways are being
established. At 0.1 and 0.2 mA, LEL2 had a slightly larger overpotential but it was more
stable compared to that of LEL1. The instability of the overpotential could be triggered by
several reasons such as side reactions causing due to air leakage or increasing poor contact
at higher currents. It is known that the external pressure on LEL1 was very small compared
to that of LEL2 and this could be the cause of unstable contact for LEL1 at higher currents
as the stripping and deposition rate is higher.
Figure 4.9: Overpotential comparison at different currents between two electrolyte synthesis
methods.
Ideally, the OCV of a symmetrical cell should be zero as long as there is no concentration
gradient or potential difference between the two electrodes. But a small OCV was observed
in both symmetrical cells during GCPL analysis. Some circumstances can result in a non-
zero OCV in real life. The potential causes for non-zero OCV could be that the impurities
Page 43 of 52
==PAGE:52==
4.2
Analysis of results from full cells
in the electrolyte or cell components triggered extra redox reactions and caused a slight
increase in OCV. Another reason could be asymmetry in the electrode surface morphology
or roughness, even though the electrodes are composed of the same material. This might
cause minor changes in the redox reactions that take place at each electrode, resulting in
a non-zero OCV. One other possibility might be that there were some junction potentials
developed at electrolyte-electrode, resulting in a potential difference that adds to the OCV.
It is also likely that there were an oxide layer on the Li metal surface which could cause some
redox reactions and hence non-zero OCV.
4.2
Analysis of results from full cells
For FC_LFP, the first challenge was to find the right composition of CC, ACM, and catholyte
(C65, LFP, and LYC) that can provide high mixed ionic and electronic conductivity (MIEC).
As mentioned before, the role of conducting carbon in composite cathodes is quite essential.
This is so because when the catholyte is added to the ACM, due to its electronically insulating
property at a higher degree, this could easily cause immobility of electrons within the cathode.
This could not only cause the low capacity of the cell but could also lead to the complete
failure of the cell. There were two full cells with LFP and one full cell with NMC as ACM
assembled. FC_LFP1 is the one with low CC content and FC_LFP2 with higher CC content.
Full cells
Catholyte
synthesis
route
Vol% of
ACM/CC/LYC
Mass of
ACM (mg)
QT
(mAh/g)
% of QT
achieved
FC_LFP1
One-step halide
57/2.5/40.5
39.9
169.8
0.2 %
FC_LFP2
One-step halide
50/10/40
2.5
169.8
0.4%
FC_NMC
One-step oxide
57/2.5/40.5
7.5
209.5
0.01 %
Table 6: Specifications of full cells analyzed above.
For FC_LFP1, the first 100 cycles, the discharge C-rate was 0.0015C and the coulombic effi-
ciency was above 95%. After approximately 100 cycles the discharge C-rate was increased to
0.003C which advanced the degradation of performance. The next 100 cycles exhibit promis-
ing efficiency even at 0.003C maintaining efficiency higher than 90%. However, the efficiency
of the cell degrades linearly over the next 600 cycles. To understand the degradation, the
Nyquist plot in Figure 4.10 was observed, it can be noticed that around the middle-frequency
range (0.8 MHz - 0.6 MHz), the larger semicircle is observed which is not present in the initial
cycles. This semi-circle could be attributed to the contribution of the cathode electrolyte
interface.
Page 44 of 52
==PAGE:53==
4.2
Analysis of results from full cells
Figure 4.10: a. Cycling of full cell FC_LFP1 (Li/LYC/LFP) with low CC, for 800 cycles at
different discharge rates and the specific capacity associated with each C-rate. b. Nyquist
plot portraying impedance measurement every 8 hours for 671 hours.
It is also to be noticed that the semi-circle observed at a higher frequency is related to the
resistance from the electrolyte, mostly contributed by the grain boundary. This resistance
is decreasing over time which could be due to several reasons such as, the formation of
SEI relaxes over cycling, this can contribute to the reduction in interfacial resistance by
facilitating transport of ions across the electrode-electrolyte interfaces. However, at the same
time, the resistance related to the cathode-electrolyte interface is increasing over time. The
increase in resistance could be due to reasons like the agglomeration of cathode particles
within the structure, electrode-electrolyte contact issues, and volume expansion. Clustering
or formation of lumps strict the surface area leading to increased resistance. The continuous
expansion and contraction of volume over charge/discharge due to the insertion of Li+ ions
cause a change in the lattice dimensions. The increase in middle-frequency resistance could
be observed in all three cells tested. The small semicircle below 0.8 MHz is related to the
Li/electrolyte interface.
Page 45 of 52
==PAGE:54==
4.2
Analysis of results from full cells
Figure 4.11: a. Cycling of full cell FC_LFP2 for 1000 cycles at a discharge rate of 0.019
mA/cm2 and the specific capacity associated with C-rate of 0.025C and 0.05C. b. Nyquist
plot portraying impedance measurement every 10 cycles for 67 hours.
The specific capacity observed from the FC_LFP1 was significantly lower which could have
been because a lower percentage of CC was used.
To mitigate this problem, FC_LFP2
was assembled where the CC was increased to 10 Vol% from 2.5 Vol% previously used.
This increased the specific capacity to some extent compared to that of FC_LFP1. This
might have been the reason for lower cell capacity but wasn’t the main cause as the cell
capacity is still nowhere near compared to what has been reported for the cells with similar
configurations. Similarly, for FC_NMC, Ni0.5Mn0.3Co0.2O2 was used as the ACM and as
it can be observed from Figure 4.12a., the specific capacity is the lowest of all three cells
in this case. Compared to the literature ([37]), where Kim and Co. have used the same
configuration of cells except that the NMC used by them is NMC811 which has higher Ni
content, the specific capacity is really low. The higher content of Ni in the NMC cathode
can also be the reason why a lower percentage of CC has been used by Kim and Co. as
Ni is a good electronic conductor, which enhances the electronic conductivity within the
cathode. Another reason that could also explain the lower specific capacity for all the cells
could be the process applied to prepare cathode composite. It is essential to have intimate
contact between the materials within the cathode but since LYC is prone to hydrolysis it is
not possible to apply the usual method of cathode preparation where a binder is applied to
acquire adhesion within the cathode materials. During the mixing as well it was observed
that the CC flakes which are very light detach from the mixture.
Page 46 of 52
==PAGE:55==
4.3
Sintering of LYC for densification
Figure 4.12: a. Cycling of full cell FC_NMC for 1000 cycles at a discharge rate of 0.011
mA/cm2 and the specific capacity associated with a C-rate of 0.025C. b. Nyquist plot
portraying impedance measurement every 10 cycles 115 hours.
So, it is very likely that the higher resistance contribution arises from the cathode-electrolyte
interface, the poor cathode material adhesion due to dry mixing. The lower electronic con-
ductivity within the cathode as well as between the current collector and the cathode could
also be held responsible for poor full cells.
4.3
Sintering of LYC for densification
Cold press was done by applying a hydraulic press of electrolytes at 500 MPa for a couple of
minutes. In this way, the obtained density was ∼85% of the theoretical density of LYC. In
search of methods that can be applied for increasing the density beyond 90% without chang-
ing the structure of LYC, SPS was first applied. As explained in the experimental section, it
is essential to apply graphite to protect the electrolyte sample from contamination from the
die. But, it is also important to be able to safely detach the graphite sheet after sintering to
be able to use it for the characterization. For EIS it could be used with graphite as it can
provide better contact but otherwise, it will be challenging. Initially, 9 kN of pressure and
a temperature of 350◦C were applied. However, as soon as the temperature reached 300◦C,
the plastic deformation of the sample happened, suggesting the upper limit of temperature
for SPS sintering under 9kN pressure. There were several other unsuccessful attempts made
to achieve higher density, including the increase of pressure to 30kN while reducing the tem-
perature to 200◦C.
Page 47 of 52
==PAGE:56==
4.4
Results analysis from imaging (SEM)
The other method applied for densification was high-temperature sintering. Since, the maxi-
mum temperature of annealing LYC was 500◦C, the sample pre-pressed at 500 MPa is sintered
at 500◦C for 2 hours. In this case, the pellets were deformed in shape. This could be due
to the Le-Chateliers principle, which means that post-annealing the material has already
reached equilibrium, and due to exposing the sample again to a higher temperature shifts
the equilibrium causing any unreacted LiCl to undergo solid sublimation causing the defor-
mation in the shape. To counteract this issue, the next batch of sintering was performed by
submerging the cold-pressed pellets into the LYC powder so that the LiCl from the pellets
doesn’t escape and hence keeps the shape intact. It worked and there was no deformation in
the shape, however, the EIS measurements didn’t show any improvement in the resistance
at RT.
4.4
Results analysis from imaging (SEM)
In this section, the SEM images of the synthesized electrolytes are analyzed. Figure 4.13a.,
is the powder LYC synthesized by a one-step wet halide route whereas, Figure 4.13b., is the
one synthesized by one-step dry oxide route. The two images have very much alike particle
sizes and the distribution of the particles is also very even. The particle size in both cases
could be in the range of 100-200nm which is quite good when compared to that synthesized
mechanochemically, generally ranging in the micrometer range. The smaller size of particles
ensures that the electrolytes once pressed delivers higher density and hence more mechanical
stability. However, it is also very likely that if the particle size is too small, this will also
increase the ratio of surface area to volume ratio significantly. The increased surface area
can lead to an increased number of grain boundaries, causing a higher number of barriers
and hence smaller ionic conductivity.
Page 48 of 52
==PAGE:57==
4.4
Results analysis from imaging (SEM)
Figure 4.13: SEM analysis of as-synthesized LYC powder by, a. one-step metal halide
route, b. one-step metal oxide route, and c.,d. post sintering of pellets pressed at 500 MPa
at 500◦C for an hour.
Similarly, Figure 4.13c,d, are the SEM images from the one-step wet halide electrolyte post
sintering for an hour at 500◦C. As mentioned, the pellets were cold pressed at 500 MPa, before
C-sputtering. The plate-like particles were observed from the imaging which still needs to be
studied.
Page 49 of 52
==PAGE:58==
5
Future Outlook
From the synthesis methods, it was clear that both methods could exhibit both trigonal
(which have been generally reported) and orthorhombic structures. There were several ob-
servations made, from the effect of the amount of coordinating reagent (NH4Cl) used to
the annealing process applied. Most of the observations reported on crystal structures from
different synthesis procedures have been from XRD analysis post-annealing. However, to
further prove these results other characterization techniques would be highly beneficial. It
is reported that the one-step metal oxide and two-step metal oxide routes exhibit different
crystal structures and performing the EIS measurements on these two specific electrolytes
might give more detail. Specifically, as mentioned, the two structures exhibited by LYC could
have a noticeable difference in activation energy which could be analyzed by collecting some
measurements from temperature-dependent EIS. It is quite essential to analyze the factor
that triggers the phase transition. To do so, in-situ XRD while annealing the intermediate
complex can be carried out. Collecting the XRD at critical conditions such as temperatures
between 450 and 525◦C.
Similarly, microstructure analysis performed by applying SEM doesn’t reveal much about
the difference in the structure of the two synthesis methods applied. Firstly, the SEM was
performed without C-sputtering, which enhanced the brightness of the sample at high volt-
age, because the electrons were trapped due to LYC being a highly electronic insulator. So,
it would be of great interest to visualize the particle size, grain boundary, and distribution
of particles on samples with C-sputtering. Furthermore, TEM analysis of the sample could
also be worthwhile to understand the difference in atomic structure and the crystal structure
of the two synthesis methods in depth.
The Swagelok cell setup is handy and efficient not only for assembly but also when it comes
to applying external pressure to maintain proper interface contacts. However, there is one
drawback with the Swagelok that was used, it was challenging to monitor the pressure ap-
plied. To solve this problem, in the future, it is possible to fix a transducer on one end of
the Swagelok which could give real-time pressure applied. This would help with making the
right comparisons between the different cells analyzed. Similarly, some attempts at SPS were
carried out and one of the initial samples was successfully recovered but didn’t show much
improvement compared to one without SPS. However, high-temperature sintering attempts
were promising, and trying different temperatures and sintering times might increase the
density of the pellets.
Lastly, the poor performance of the full cells could be attributed to the cathode electrode
to quite some extent. To understand the actual reasoning behind the poor performance of
Page 50 of 52
==PAGE:59==
the cathode, the microstructure characterization could reveal the issue. As aforementioned,
the agglomeration of the cathode composite or in other words the poor dispersion of the
composite materials could be explained when looking under SEM. Also, applying NMC811
instead of NMC532 would be interesting to see if it addresses the poor performance of the
full cell.
The use of In metal sheets in between Li anode and electrolyte to control the
anode-electrolyte instability which was attempted a couple of times could be interesting to
apply.
Page 51 of 52
==PAGE:60==
6
Conclusion
It is evident from this study that the ammonium chloride-assisted synthesis route is promising
when it comes to the synthesis of halide-based electrolytes within nano-scale-sized particles.
The synthesis carried out in this study included metal halide-based and metal-oxide-based
routes. The reason behind choosing metal-oxide-based synthesis was due to its inexpensive-
ness and easier handling compared to metal halides. The SEM analysis of the synthesized
particles in both cases exhibited a particle size as small as 100-200 nm. Similarly, the room
temperature ionic conductivity that was achieved was as high as 0.1 mS/cm.
From the
GCPL analysis, the overpotentials related to different currents revealed the higher stability
of the electrolyte even at a large current of 0.2 mA. In this study, there wasn’t any extra
layer of electrolyte used and still, the overpotential was within 160 mV at 0.1 mA at the
end of 428 hours of stripping and deposition. This value is pretty promising compared to
that reported by literature where an extra layer of sulfide-based electrolyte is applied to
stabilize the anode-electrolyte interface. It is also observed that external pressure is impor-
tant to achieve better contact within the interfaces. Furthermore, the significance of the
crystal structure on ionic conductivity is analyzed and backed by several theoretical studies
revealing that the orthorhombic structure exhibits higher ionic conductivity over trigonal
structure. It is also found from the experiments that it is possible to synthesize trigonal or
orthorhombic structures by changing annealing parameters like temperature, time, heating
steps, and ramp rates. It is observed from Rietveld’s refinement of XRDs that the one-step
metal oxide synthesis route has the highest purity of LYC and can possess the orthorhombic
crystal structure.
The lower specific capacity was observed for all three full cells assembled. However, there was
a clear trend that when a lower amount of conducting carbon (CC) was used in the cathode,
it had a lower capacity compared to the one with higher CC. This means that the cells were
functioning but not at their full performance. This failure of the cells from different research
and analysis could be attributed to the poor cathode in the cell.
There is a lot of room for improvement, which includes optimization and detailed analysis
of the electrolyte synthesis process, addressing anode-electrolyte stability issues, and a more
robust setup for characterization. However, there are so many possibilities to apply and
address these issues one by one and the results from this study could be used as a stepping
stone for further improvement.
Page 52 of 52
==PAGE:61==
Appendix A
List of Figures
1.1
Role of battery technology in energy mix . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Spider plots comparing the key performances of three major inorganic SEs:
sulfides, halides, and oxides.[9] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Chronology of development of halide electrolytes for ASSBs [2] . . . . . . . .
3
1.4
Schematics of the working principle of ASSBs. In the galvanic process (dis-
charge), Li metal is oxidized to Li+ ions, giving away electronic current to the
gadgets whereas, in the electrolytic process (charge), an electric potential is
applied causing Li+ ions to move back to Li metal (meaning Li metal is reduced).
4
1.5
Theoretical understanding of the electrochemical stability window: (a) The
negative and positive potential limits for the electrolyte stability, and the
energy levels of HOMO and LUMO. [21] (b)Density of states (DOS) diagram
showing the band gap and the HOMO-LUMO levels identifying the anodic
and cathodic limits. [22] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.6
a. The ionic conductivity of several ternary halide-based electrolytes, and b.
the electrochemical stability window of several SSE candidates[3].
. . . . . .
7
1.7
Self-descriptive flow chart for the approaches to the synthesis of LYC. One-step
refers to the synthesis where all three precursors are dissolved (for wet synthe-
sis) or ground (for dry synthesis) together. Two-step refers to the synthesis
where LiCl is added after synthesis of the intermediate phase (AYC).
. . . .
10
2.1
Possible crystal structure of LYC depicting the Li-ion migration pathway in
(a) monoclinic, (b) orthorhombic, and (c) trigonal obtained using the bond
valence site energy (BVSE) method.[27] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.2
Li-ion migration energy barriers between octahedral Li sites along the 1D
Oct-Oct path and 2D Oct-Tet-Oct path in (a) orthorhombic Li3YCl6 and (b)
trigonal Li3YCl6 from the BVSE model.[27]
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.3
Crystal structure of α-Li3YCl6 and β-Li3YCl6.
The unit cells are denoted
through the black lines, and the migrations of Y during the phase transition
from α-Li3YCl6 to β-Li3YCl6 are represented by red arrows.[28]
. . . . . . .
13
2.4
Schematic illustrating the ammonium-assisted synthesis method of halide SEs
[9]
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.5
A schematic of the SPS process. [32]
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.6
Working schematics of X-Ray Diffraction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.7
Sinusoidal Current Response in a Linear System [34]
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
I
==PAGE:62==
Appendix
2.8
a) Equivalent circuit for single electron transfer and ion migration in the
electrolyte.
b) Nyquist plot of the real impedance against the imaginary
impedance showing the resistance for the electrolyte.
c) Bode plot of the
magnitude of the impedance and phase angle against frequency.[35]
. . . . .
20
2.9
The interaction of the electron beam with the specimen and the signal emitted
from the sample.[36]
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.1
a. Vacuum drying @80◦C for 5 h, b. The mixture after drying, and c. pellets
after heat treatment @ 500◦C for 5 h in the presence of Ar gas. . . . . . . . .
23
3.2
XRD sample as prepared.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.3
Figures depicting the process of Swagelok cell assembly. . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.4
Schematics of symmetric cells assembled with different electrodes. SES refers
to the symmetric cell with stainless steel, GEG with graphite, AEA with
aluminum, and LEL with lithium as electrodes.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.5
Schematics of full cells assembled with different electrodes. . . . . . . . . . .
28
4.1
XRD analysis of One-step wet halide synthesis.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.2
Comparison between the intermediate complexes obtained after different heat-
ing temperatures and time.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.3
XRD analysis of One and two-step dry synthesis from metal oxide route.
. .
34
4.4
Comparison between the oxide and halide synthesis routes after annealing at
500◦C for 5 hours in the presence of Ar flow. Both syntheses at the given
conditions exhibited trigonal phases.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
4.5
Nyquist plot depicting the resistance for a. SES1 with stainless steel as block-
ing electrodes, b.
SES2 with SPS electrolyte, c.
GEG1 with graphite as
blocking electrode and electrolyte synthesized with metal halide route and d.
GEG2 with graphite as blocking electrode and electrolyte synthesized with
metal oxide route. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
4.6
The ionic conductivity at different temperatures presented in Arrhenius plot
( log(σ) vs. 1000/T) to obtain the activation energy (Ea) for the thermally
activated conduction.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
4.7
Impedance measurement from GEG cell setup, one-step wet halide synthesis,
electrolyte annealed at lower ramp rate (up: 90◦C·h−1 and down: 150◦C·h−1).
41
4.8
GCPL analysis of Li symmetric cells with electrolytes synthesized via a) wet
metal halide and b) dry metal oxide routes.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
4.9
Overpotential comparison at different currents between two electrolyte syn-
thesis methods. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
4.10 a. Cycling of full cell FC_LFP1 (Li/LYC/LFP) with low CC, for 800 cycles at
different discharge rates and the specific capacity associated with each C-rate.
b. Nyquist plot portraying impedance measurement every 8 hours for 671 hours. 45
Page II of XIII
==PAGE:63==
Appendix
4.11 a. Cycling of full cell FC_LFP2 for 1000 cycles at a discharge rate of 0.019
mA/cm2 and the specific capacity associated with C-rate of 0.025C and 0.05C.
b. Nyquist plot portraying impedance measurement every 10 cycles for 67 hours. 46
4.12 a. Cycling of full cell FC_NMC for 1000 cycles at a discharge rate of 0.011
mA/cm2 and the specific capacity associated with a C-rate of 0.025C. b.
Nyquist plot portraying impedance measurement every 10 cycles 115 hours. .
47
4.13 SEM analysis of as-synthesized LYC powder by, a. one-step metal halide route,
b. one-step metal oxide route, and c.,d. post sintering of pellets pressed at
500 MPa at 500◦C for an hour.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
6.1
XRD from dry and wet two-step sesquioxide route depicting the intermediate
complex phase after heat treatment for 30 hours at 225◦C with continuous Ar
flow. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
V
6.2
XRD from dry two-step metal oxide route depicting the progress of reaction
at each step, after heat treatment for 20 hours at 235◦C with continuous Ar
flow, before annealing after addition of LiCl, and after annealing at 500◦C . .
V
6.3
XRD pattern of LYCl taken from ICSD for Trigonal phase.
. . . . . . . . .
VI
6.4
Crystal structure of LYCl (a) trigonal and (b) orthorhombic. . . . . . . . . .
VI
6.5
Break down of resistance in Na-ASSBs.[39]
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
VII
6.6
Rietveld refinement of XRD data taken from one-step wet halide synthesis
with 2XNH4Cl and annealing carried out at 500◦C for 5 hours in the presence
of Ar.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
VII
6.7
Impedance measurement carried out at a high frequency of 7 MHz- 1 mHz
using potentiostat SP300.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . VIII
Page III of XIII
==PAGE:64==
Appendix
List of Tables
1
Most commonly used equivalent circuit elements and the physical meaning
behind them[35].
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
2
Different cell setup for the electrolyte characterization with blocking (B) elec-
trode for electrolyte analysis initially and non-blocking (NB) electrode for
GCPL measurements. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3
Information on all the synthesis conditions applied and the corresponding re-
sults on phase identity as well as purity of desired products.
. . . . . . . . .
36
4
Ionic resistance calculated by applying equivalent circuit model presented in
Figure 4.5b. in the EC-Lab program.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
5
Ionic conductivities and activation energy for each cell. . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
6
Specifications of full cells analyzed above.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
Page IV of XIII
==PAGE:65==
Appendix
Appendix B
Figure 6.1: XRD from dry and wet two-step sesquioxide route depicting the intermediate
complex phase after heat treatment for 30 hours at 225◦C with continuous Ar flow.
Figure 6.2: XRD from dry two-step metal oxide route depicting the progress of reaction
at each step, after heat treatment for 20 hours at 235◦C with continuous Ar flow, before
annealing after addition of LiCl, and after annealing at 500◦C .
Page V of XIII
==PAGE:66==
Appendix
Figure 6.3: XRD pattern of LYCl taken from ICSD for Trigonal phase.
Figure 6.4: Crystal structure of LYCl (a) trigonal and (b) orthorhombic.
Page VI of XIII
==PAGE:67==
Appendix
Figure 6.5: Break down of resistance in Na-ASSBs.[39]
Figure 6.6: Rietveld refinement of XRD data taken from one-step wet halide synthesis with
2XNH4Cl and annealing carried out at 500◦C for 5 hours in the presence of Ar.
Page VII of XIII
==PAGE:68==
Appendix
Figure 6.7: Impedance measurement carried out at a high frequency of 7 MHz- 1 mHz using
potentiostat SP300.
Theoretical capacity calculations:
Page VIII of XIII
==PAGE:69==
Appendix
Stiochiometric calculations for synthesis:
Page IX of XIII
==PAGE:70==
References
References
[1] G. V. Research, “Lithium-ion battery market size, share
trends analysis report by
product (lco, lfp, nca, lmo, lto, nmc), by application (consumer electronics, energy
storage systems, industrial), by region, and segment forecasts, 2022 - 2030,” Market
Analysis Report, 2022.
[2] X. Li, J. Liang, X. Yang, K. R. Adair, C. Wang, F. Zhao, and X. Sun, “Progress and
perspectives on halide lithium conductors for all-solid-state lithium batteries,” Energy
Environ. Sci., vol. 13, pp. 1429–1461, 2020.
[3] C. Wang, J. Liang, J. T. Kim, and X. Sun, “Prospects of halide-based all-solid-state
batteries: From material design to practical application,” 2022.
[4] J. Janek and W. G. Zeier, “A solid future for battery development,” Nature Energy,
vol. 1, p. 16141, Sept. 2016.
[5] Y.-G. Lee, S. Fujiki, C. Jung, N. Suzuki, N. Yashiro, R. Omoda, D.-S. Ko, T. Shiratsuchi,
T. Sugimoto, S. Ryu, J. H. Ku, T. Watanabe, Y. Park, Y. Aihara, D. Im, and I. T. Han,
“High-energy long-cycling all-solid-state lithium metal batteries enabled by silver-carbon
composite anodes,” Nature Energy, vol. 5, p. 299, Mar. 2020.
[6] A. Manthiram, X. Yu, and S. Wang, “Lithium battery chemistries enabled by solid-state
electrolytes,” Nature Reviews Materials, vol. 2, p. 16103, 02 2017.
[7] L. Fan, H. He, and C. Nan, “Tailoring inorganic–polymer composites for the mass pro-
duction of solid-state batteries,” Nature Reviews Materials, vol. 6, pp. 1003 – 1019,
2021.
[8] T. Asano, A. Sakai, S. Ouchi, M. Sakaida, A. Miyazaki, and S. Hasegawa, “Solid halide
electrolytes with high lithium-ion conductivity for application in 4 v class bulk-type
all-solid-state batteries,” Advanced Materials, vol. 30, no. 44, p. 1803075, 2018.
[9] H. Kwak, S. Wang, J. Park, Y. Liu, K. T. Kim, Y. Choi, Y. Mo, and Y. S. Jung,
“Emerging halide superionic conductors for all-solid-state batteries: Design, synthesis,
and practical applications,” ACS Energy Letters, vol. 7, no. 5, pp. 1776–1805, 2022.
[10] J. Wu, S. Liu, F. Han, X. Yao, and C. Wang, “Lithium/sulfide all-solid-state batteries
using sulfide electrolytes,” Advanced Materials, vol. 33, no. 6, p. 2000751, 2021.
[11] D. Zhou, D. Shanmukaraj, A. Tkacheva, M. Armand, and G. Wang, “Polymer elec-
trolytes for lithium-based batteries: Advances and prospects,” Chem, vol. 5, no. 9,
pp. 2326–2352, 2019.
Page X of XIII
==PAGE:71==
References
[12] H. Zhang, C. Li, M. Piszcz, E. Coya, T. Rojo, L. M. Rodriguez-Martinez, M. Armand,
and Z. Zhou, “Single lithium-ion conducting solid polymer electrolytes: advances and
perspectives,” Chem. Soc. Rev., vol. 46, pp. 797–815, 2017.
[13] L. Yue, J. Ma, J. Zhang, J. Zhao, S. Dong, Z. Liu, G. Cui, and L. Chen, “All solid-
state polymer electrolytes for high-performance lithium ion batteries,” Energy Storage
Materials, vol. 5, pp. 139–164, 2016.
[14] V. Thangadurai, S. Narayanan, and D. Pinzaru, “Garnet-type solid-state fast li ion
conductors for li batteries: critical review,” Chem. Soc. Rev., vol. 43, pp. 4714–4727,
2014.
[15] M. Jia, N. Zhao, H. Hanyu, and X. Guo, “Comprehensive investigation into garnet
electrolytes toward application-oriented solid lithium batteries,” Electrochemical Energy
Reviews, vol. 3, 07 2020.
[16] C. Wang, J. Liang, J. Luo, J. Liu, X. Li, F. Zhao, R. Li, H. Huang, S. Zhao, L. Zhang,
J. Wang, and X. Sun, “A universal wet-chemistry synthesis of solid-state halide elec-
trolytes for all-solid-state lithium-metal batteries,” Science Advances, vol. 7, 9 2021.
[17] J. B. Goodenough and K.-S. Park, “The li-ion rechargeable battery: A perspective,”
Journal of the American Chemical Society, vol. 135, no. 4, pp. 1167–1176, 2013. PMID:
23294028.
[18] L.-X. Yuan, Z.-H. Wang, W.-X. Zhang, X.-L. Hu, J.-T. Chen, Y.-H. Huang, and J. B.
Goodenough, “Development and challenges of lifepo4 cathode material for lithium-ion
batteries,” Energy Environ. Sci., vol. 4, pp. 269–284, 2011.
[19] P. Saha, M. K. Datta, O. I. Velikokhatnyi, A. Manivannan, D. Alman, and P. N. Kumta,
“Rechargeable magnesium battery: Current status and key challenges for the future,”
Progress in Materials Science, vol. 66, pp. 1–86, 2014.
[20] J.-K. Park, Principles and applications of lithium secondary batteries. John Wiley &
Sons, 2012.
[21] P. Peljo and H. H. Girault, “Electrochemical potential window of battery electrolytes:
the homo–lumo misconception,” Energy Environ. Sci., vol. 11, pp. 2306–2309, 2018.
[22] G. Xu, L. Luo, J. Liang, S. Zhao, R. Yang, C. Wang, T. Yu, L. Wang, W. Xiao, J. Wang,
J. Yu, and X. Sun, “Origin of high electrochemical stability of multi-metal chloride solid
electrolytes for high energy all-solid-state lithium-ion batteries,” Nano Energy, vol. 92,
p. 106674, 2022.
Page XI of XIII
==PAGE:72==
References
[23] Y. Zhu, X. He, and Y. Mo, “First principles study on electrochemical and chemical
stability of solid electrolyte–electrode interfaces in all-solid-state li-ion batteries,” J.
Mater. Chem. A, vol. 4, pp. 3253–3266, 2016.
[24] G. Meyer, E. Garcia, and J. Corbett, The Ammonium Chloride Route to Anhydrous
Rare Earth Chlorides—The Example of Ycl3, vol. 25, pp. 146 – 150. 01 2007.
[25] M. Simon and G. Meyer, “The oxidation of tantalum with ammonium chloride as an
example of a novel route to early transitional metal–nitrogen cluster compounds. syn-
thesis and crystal structure of (nh4)6[ta5(nh)4cl17],” J. Chem. Soc., Chem. Commun.,
pp. 460–461, 1993.
[26] A. Bohnsack, F. Stenzel, A. G. Zajonc, G. Balzer, M. S. Wickleder, and G. H. Meyer,
“Ternary halides of the a3mx6 type. part 6. ternary chlorides of the rare-earth elements
with lithium, li3lncl6 (ln: Tb-lu, y, sc): Synthesis, crystal structures, and ionic motion.,”
ChemInform, vol. 28, 1997.
[27] D. Park, H. Park, Y. Lee, S.-O. Kim, H.-G. Jung, K. Y. Chung, J. H. Shim, and
S. Yu, “Theoretical design of lithium chloride superionic conductors for all-solid-state
high-voltage lithium-ion batteries,” ACS Applied Materials & Interfaces, vol. 12, no. 31,
pp. 34806–34814, 2020. PMID: 32643369.
[28] H. Ito, K. Shitara, Y. Wang, K. Fujii, M. Yashima, Y. Goto, C. Moriyoshi,
N. Rosero Navarro, A. Miura, and K. Tadanaga, “Kinetically stabilized cation arrange-
ment in li3ycl6 superionic conductor during solid-state reaction,” Advanced Science,
vol. 8, 08 2021.
[29] X. Li, J. Liang, N. Chen, J. Luo, K. R. Adair, C. Wang, M. N. Banis, T.-K. Sham,
L. Zhang, S. Zhao, S. Lu, H. Huang, R. Li, and X. Sun, “Water-mediated synthesis of a
superionic halide solid electrolyte,” Angewandte Chemie International Edition, vol. 58,
no. 46, pp. 16427–16432, 2019.
[30] C. Wang, J. Liang, M. Jiang, X. Li, S. Mukherjee, K. Adair, M. Zheng, Y. Zhao,
F. Zhao, S. Zhang, R. Li, H. Huang, S. Zhao, L. Zhang, S. Lu, C. V. Singh, and X. Sun,
“Interface-assisted in-situ growth of halide electrolytes eliminating interfacial challenges
of all-inorganic solid-state batteries,” Nano Energy, vol. 76, p. 105015, 2020.
[31] A. Miura, N. Rosero Navarro, A. Sakuda, K. Tadanaga, N. H. H. Phuc, A. Matsuda,
N. Machida, A. Hayashi, and M. Tatsumisago, “Liquid-phase syntheses of sulfide elec-
trolytes for all-solid-state lithium battery,” Nature Reviews Chemistry, vol. 3, p. 1, 02
2019.
Page XII of XIII
==PAGE:73==
References
[32] Z.-H. Zhang, Z.-F. Liu, J.-F. Lu, X.-B. Shen, F.-C. Wang, and Y.-D. Wang, “The sinter-
ing mechanism in spark plasma sintering – proof of the occurrence of spark discharge,”
Scripta Materialia, vol. 81, pp. 56–59, 2014.
[33] M. Suarez, A. Fernandez, J. Menendez, R. Torrecillas, H. U. Kessel, J. Hennicke,
R. Kirchner, and T. Kessel, “Challenges and opportunities for spark plasma sintering: A
key technology for a new generation of materials,” in Sintering Applications (B. Ertuğ,
ed.), ch. 13, Rijeka: IntechOpen, 2013.
[34] “Basics of electrochemical impedance spectroscopy.” https://tinyurl.com/ypn9wwv4.
Accessed: May , 2021.
[35] P. Vadhva, J. Hu, M. J. Johnson, R. Stocker, M. Braglia, D. J. L. Brett, and A. J. E.
Rettie, “Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy for all-solid-state batteries: Theory,
methods and future outlook,” ChemElectroChem, vol. 8, no. 11, pp. 1930–1947, 2021.
[36] K. Akhtar, S. A. Khan, S. B. Khan, and A. M. Asiri, Scanning Electron Microscopy:
Principle and Applications in Nanomaterials Characterization, pp. 113–145.
Cham:
Springer International Publishing, 2018.
[37] S. Y. Kim, H. Cha, R. Kostecki, and G. Chen, “Composite cathode design for high-
energy all-solid-state lithium batteries with long cycle life,” ACS Energy Letters, vol. 8,
no. 1, pp. 521–528, 2023.
[38] R. Schlem, S. Muy, N. Prinz, A. Banik, Y. Shao-Horn, M. Zobel, and W. G. Zeier,
“Mechanochemical synthesis: A tool to tune cation site disorder and ionic transport
properties of li3mcl6 (m = y, er) superionic conductors,” Advanced Energy Materials,
vol. 10, no. 6, p. 1903719, 2020.
[39] H. Yamauchi, J. Ikejiri, K. Tsunoda, A. Tanaka, F. Sato, T. Honma, and T. Komatsu,
“Enhanced rate capabilities in a glass-ceramic-derived sodium all-solid-state battery,”
Scientific Reports, vol. 10, p. 9453, 06 2020.
Page XIII of XIII
