==PAGE:1==
L – A Gradual Compiler
Master Thesis
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
L – A Gradual Compiler
Master Thesis
July, 2023
By
Christian Gernsøe and Marc Kaa Brejner
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science,
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 324, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over six months at the Section for Software Systems En­
gineering, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science, at the Technical
University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment for the degree Master of Science in En­
gineering, MSc Eng.
It is assumed that the reader has basic knowledge in the areas of computer science.
Christian Gernsøe – s163552
Signature
Date
Marc Kaa Brejner – s174161
Signature
Date
ii
L – A Gradual Compiler
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Computer science students at university level, learn programming using languages with a
high abstraction level such as Java. The dropout rates of computer science students re­
main as one of the highest across engineering disciplines. Literature suggests this is due
to a lack of understanding of general programming concepts which are prominent in low­
level languages, but are overshadowed in high­level languages by complex syntax and
object oriented programming. It is unknown whether learning programming from a low­
level like language and gradually adding complexity to the language is superior to learning
high­level languages such as Java. Currently there does not exist a tool which facilitates
this. In this thesis we propose a framework design with high cohesion and low coupling,
which allows a custom compiler to be easily extended gradually with higher abstraction
levels. We were able to successfully build a prototype compiler, based on a novel low­
level language L, which implements the framework. Furthermore, we were able to extend
the prototype compiler with four different programming constructs of varying complex­
ity. These include jumps, variables, scopes, nested expressions, if/else statements, and
loops. The framework allows transparency of the inner workings of the compiler in or­
der to illustrate the state of a program execution in any UI built for the framework. We
hope our framework can be used in the future, to investigate the possibilities of learn­
ing programming through starting from a low level language, and gradually increasing
the complexity, in order to facilitate learning fundamental programming concepts before
further abstractions are introduced.
L – A Gradual Compiler
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
Christian Gram Kalhauge,
Assistant Professor, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science, DTU
Supervisor
Alberto Lluch Lafuente,
Professor, Head of section, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science,
DTU
Supervisor
Christian Nicolai Nielsen,
MSc Civil Engineering, DTU
Creator of this thesis template.
iv
L – A Gradual Compiler
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
2
Preliminaries
5
2.1
Programming languages . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Programming and learning
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.3
Visitor pattern . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3
L ­ The base language
11
3.1
Syntax of L . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.2
Semantics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
4
Framework
17
4.1
Specification
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
4.2
Visitor­Emitter system . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
4.3
Alternate Designs
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
5
Prototype
25
5.1
Overview
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
5.2
The environment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
5.3
A Program
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
5.4
Virtual Machine . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
6
Implementation details
29
6.1
Typographic conventions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
6.2
Structure
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
6.3
Parsing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
6.4
Entry point of the compiler . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
6.5
Program . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
6.6
Virtual Machine . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
6.7
The coding environment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
6.8
Build module . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
6.9
Test module . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
7
Evaluation
41
7.1
Overview
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
7.2
L0 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42
L – A Gradual Compiler
v
==PAGE:8==
7.3
L1 ­ Goto
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
7.4
L2 ­ Variables and Context
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49
7.5
L3 ­ Nested Expressions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 54
7.6
L4 ­ if/else and loops . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 57
7.7
Results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 61
8
Perspective
63
8.1
Limitations and future work
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 63
8.2
Related Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 64
9
Conclusion
67
Bibliography
69
A Planning
71
A.1 Attack Tree . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 71
A.2 Minimal Viable Product
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 71
A.3 Time plan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 71
vi
L – A Gradual Compiler
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
Aspiring programmers are often introduced to programming through a high­level language
such as Java. This can be a very daunting experience, because these languages are
extremely large. In addition to this, literature suggests [1] that introducing students to
high­level abstractions while learning to program may be detrimental to their learning.
The problem with starting out learning a language with a high abstraction level, is that
they have to develop mental models about how the computer executes these abstractions,
which are often wrong. For example, someone who is completely new to programming
might know how to store a variable in a programming language, but usually has no idea
how memory works. This leads them to develop their own, often wrong, mental model
about how variables are stored in the computer. This mental model can then conflict with
future understanding of how computers work.
Literature[2] shows students have an easier time learning a new programming language
when the syntax of the language is simple. Hedy[2] gradually increases the complexity
of the language until it resembles python. This method has shown positive results when
teaching students. However Hedy can not be used to teach low level programming due to
the abstraction level of Hedy being close to that of Python which is a high level language.
Is it possible to get the same results as Hedy while teaching from assembly level and up?
We are unable to answer this question because there currently does not exist a framework
which allows users to extend an assembly like language and where each extension has
the ability to increase the abstraction level.
If such a framework existed teachers would be able to define a language specific to the
subject they are teaching, be that functional­, low­level­, assembly­programming or other.
With the framework teachers would also be able to control the order at which the stu­
dents learn new concepts and if there is a large gap in abstraction they can extend their
language to gradually increase the abstraction. Other extendable languages exist which
allow users to extend the language freely, such as Lisp [3]. However they do not start
from an assembly level and the abstraction level stays roughly the same after extension
of the language. This informs our research question:
Is it possible to develop a framework, which can easily extend a low­level
programming language with higher abstraction level programming constructs?
To which we answer, yes! In this project, we explore the possibility of creating a framework
with high cohesion and low coupling, which allows the user to write their own extensible
compiler for their custom language. By creating a compiler using this framework it is pos­
sible to extend the compiler gradually by adding separate plugin­like extensions to the
previous compiler class which will add the constructs of the new compiler extension on
top of the existing ones. Imagine a language which allow jumps by setting the program
L – A Gradual Compiler
1
==PAGE:10==
counter programmatically. An abstraction of this can be made by creating a compiler ex­
tension which introduces goto/jump. As a proof of concept, a prototype which implements
this framework has been developed and evaluated.
Methodology
Designing the framework was an iterative process, and multiple designs
were considered before deciding on the final framework design. Additionally, a prototype
implementing the framework was built. The prototype was initially based on some of
the earlier iterations of the framework, but was later updated accordingly whenever the
design was changed. For the prototype, a simple low­level base language called L was
developed, along with a virtual machine and an environment which can execute L. As part
of the prototype, an extendable L compiler which implements the framework was built.
Lastly, the prototype was evaluated by examining the implementation of the extendable L
compiler, and each of the compilers extensions.
Contributions
A short overview of the preliminaries needed to understand the thesis,
can be found in chapter 2. The rest of our thesis follows our contributions.
• In chapter 3, we introduce a novel language L , which we use as the base for our
prototype compiler. The critical part of this language is that it is a very simple low
level language. It only has five different instructions, as well as simple operational
semantics.
• In chapter 4, we go over the design of the framework in detail. The framework is
an extendable compiler design, which facilitates gradually compiling an extended
language Lx to a base language L0, while maintaining traceability of syntax across
levels. Furthermore, the framework allows for saving and displaying compilation
related information specific to each extension.
• In chapter 5 we explain the prototype which we designed and built, with the goal of
testing the design of the framework. However, the prototype as a whole contains
more than the compiler which implements the framework. The prototype as a whole
is an interactive and extendable coding environment based on L. It contains a code
editor and a virtual machine able to run L, as well as a compiler explorer. Lastly it
contains a build module which builds and bundles everything up into a single HTML
file without dependencies, as well as an end­to­end test suite.
• In chapter 6 we go over the implementation details of the prototype. Additionally,
some of the challenges faced when implementing the prototype, as well as solutions
to these challenges are explained. This chapter also contains a link to the source
code, as well as an online­demo.
• In chapter 7, we evaluate the prototype based on how well it implements the L com­
piler. We examine each of the extensions of the L language, added to the compiler
using the framework, and evaluate them based on how complex they were to ex­
tend the compiler with. Furthermore, in this chapter we discuss the results of the
2
L – A Gradual Compiler
==PAGE:11==
evaluation
• Following this, in chapter 8, we put some limitations of the framework as well as
possible future work for the project into perspective. Furthermore, we discuss some
of the existing works and literature in relation to this thesis.
• Lastly in chapter 9, we conclude upon whether or not the framework successfully
allows for easily building and extending a low­level language with higher abstraction
level programming constructs.
L – A Gradual Compiler
3
==PAGE:12==
4
L – A Gradual Compiler
==PAGE:13==
2
Preliminaries
In this chapter we will go over some key aspects of programming languages and compilers
needed to understand the rest of the thesis. In this chapter we also briefly examine some
of the literature concerning itself with learning and programming.
2.1
Programming languages
In this section we explain core concepts to programming languages, which are essential
to understand when creating a compiler.
2.1.1
Syntax
Programming languages are used by the programmer, to describe and manipulate data.
All programming languages have certain building blocks, these can be either data struc­
tures or operations which can be performed on data structures. These building blocks are
defined by their syntax and semantics.
The syntax of a language are a set of rules which must be followed when writing that
language. The syntax dictates which order and combination the building blocks of the
language are allowed to appear in. In order to write a syntactically correct program in a
given language, the syntactic rules must be followed. While most programs are textual,
they are not required to be. Some languages like Scratch[4] have a graphical syntax. A
textual syntax is commonly defined using BNF (Backus­Naur form)[5].
As an example of a very simple syntax, let us consider a language which allows the
definition of expressions, where an expression can only consist of a number, a plus or
minus operator, and another number. The BNF definition of this example language can
be seen below:
⟨language⟩
::=
⟨expression⟩+
⟨expression⟩
::=
⟨number⟩⟨op⟩⟨number⟩
⟨op⟩
::=
+ | -
⟨number⟩
::=
[0-9]+
Notice that op and number are the only terminal nodes.
2.1.2
Semantics
While the syntax of a language dictates the allowed combination of symbols when writing
the language, the semantics of a language defines the meaning behind the combination
of symbols. An example of this is the natural language. One could say ”The sky is blue”
this statement follows the syntactic rules of English. However, the syntax alone does not
say anything about the meaning of the statement. The semantics is the meaning of the
L – A Gradual Compiler
5
==PAGE:14==
Figure 2.1: Example abstract syntax tree, parsed from ”2+5 6­2”. Each symbol in the BNF be­
comes a node in the tree.
statement. So in this case, we know that ”The” refers to an object, ”sky” is the object, ”is”
tells us that the aforementioned object is about to be described, and ”blue” is a property
of the object. Through the semantics the statement has a meaning, which the syntax
alone does not provide. Therefore both the syntax and semantics are core aspects of a
programming language.
While the syntax of a language is a set of rules defined through a grammar, the semantics
of a language depends on the domain of the language. In the case of programming
languages, the semantics are defined through the machine which executes the program
which the programming language is used to write.
2.1.3
Parsing
In order for the compiler to understand the symbols which make up a program, the pro­
gram has to be transformed into some form of data structure, usually an abstract syntax
tree (AST). This is the purpose of a parser. The parser is commonly combined with a
tokenizer which converts the symbols in the program, into identifiable tokens which can
then be parsed by the parser.
An AST is a tree structure which represents the source code, while maintaining the struc­
ture of it. The AST plays a crucial role in programming languages and compilers. In the
AST, each building block of the programming language is typically represented as a node.
As an example, if we look at a statement ”2+5 6­2” written in the example syntax shown
above in section 2.1.1. This would be parsed into the AST shown in fig. 2.1
2.1.4
Compiling
Compiling a program is the process of translating the source code written in a, typi­
cally high­level, programming language into another, typically low­level, programming
language. This process is carried out by another program called a compiler. Another
possible output of a compiler is bytecode. Bytecode is an intermediary result which can
6
L – A Gradual Compiler
==PAGE:15==
Figure 2.2: This figure shows programming languages of different abstractions ranked from high
to low level. A red color indicates that it is not readable by humans, while a green color indicates
that it is. The higher a language is in the hierarchy, the higher the abstraction level of that language
is. There exists a lot of programming languages of varying abstraction levels between Assembly
language and high­level languages. However assembly language is the first abstraction higher
than machine code which is readable by humans.
be used for efficient execution by an interpreter. It is intermediary in the sense that it is
not directly executed as machine code, but rather designed in a way that it is easy for an
interpreter, such as a virtual machine, to determine how to execute it. Where a virtual ma­
chine is an emulation of a real physical computer system, and can vary in how precisely
it emulates the real world.
Compiling source code usually involves parsing it to an AST, and then traversing the AST
to build the output code. There are many types of compilers. To name a few, there
are transpilers which translate high­level languages to another high­level language, and
Compiler­compilers which are compilers which output another compiler[6].
Compiling a program can consist of many subprocesses, however the core steps involved
in compiling a program are tokenizing (lexical analysis), parsing and code generation.
Some compilers also perform semantic analysis, which can mean type checking, as well
as checking whether a variable is declared before it is used etc. It is also not uncommon
for compilers to perform code optimization. Which there exists a lot of techniques for, all
of which serve the purpose to decrease run time or decrease the amount of memory re­
quired. Generating debug data and scheduling instructions as well as allocating registers
for variables can all be part of the compilers job as well.
If we continue with the example AST shown in figure 2.1. This source code has already
been tokenized and parsed. From here the AST can be traversed and code can be gen­
erated. The actual code executed by a computer is machine code, which is not human
readable and is made up of only 1s and 0s. Some compilers produce machine code
directly, while others produce bytecode or assembly language.
Assembly language is a term that encompasses low level languages, which are designed
to be human­readable while maintaining a very strong likeness to the structure of the
corresponding machine code which the executing CPU accepts. Because of this, the
L – A Gradual Compiler
7
==PAGE:16==
1
mov eax, 2
; Move the value 2 into the EAX register
2
add eax, 5
; Add 5 to the value in the EAX register
3
4
mov eax, 6
; Move the value 6 into the EAX register
5
sub eax, 2
; Subtract 2 from the value in the EAX register
Listing 2.1: Assembly­like code generated
exact instruction set of an assembly language, depends on the architecture of the CPU
it is designed for[7]. Assembly languages are generally the lowest level of programming
languages that are still human­readable, and it acts as a bridge between humans and
machine code as seen in figure 2.2. In assembly code, much like in machine code, data
is stored and operated on directly in registers and memory, as opposed to high level
languages where abstract variables are typically used to represent data.
If the AST from figure 2.1 was to be compiled into assembly language the output would,
depending on the assembly language, resemble the code shown in listing 2.1 below:
While assembly languages have more available instructions than just mov, add, and sub,
the general idea is that operations in assembly are usually a single arithmetic operation,
or operations that jump to a specific instruction.
2.2
Programming and learning
Computer science dropout rates are a serious issue in universities all over the world. Ac­
cording to ”Successful Steps in Higher Education to Stop Computer Science Students
from Attrition”[8], the overall dropout rate within the first year of study at a large european
university (Eötvös Loránd University, Budapest, Hungary) is 30%, while the dropout rate
their Faculty of Informatics is 60%. This is not an uncommon phenomena, and is some­
thing that is seen all over the world. Extensive research and speculation has gone into
why this is the case, but no single reason has been pinpointed as the culprit[8]. One pa­
per which discusses these issues is ”Why the High Attrition Rate for Computer Science
Students: Some Thoughts and Observations”[1] by Beaubouef, T. & Mason J. In this
paper the authors speculate that the increasing focus on high­level and object oriented
programming which students are introduced to early in their studies, plays a role in this
phenomena.
In the paper, a study is cited in which computer science textbooks used to teach stu­
dents, was analysed over a 3 decade period. This study shows that the modern and
high­level languages such as java, and their accompanying textbook, was on average
much longer than the older textbooks. It is no wonder that a larger language is harder to
grasp. Furthermore, the authors note that newer textbooks on average has less coverage
of fundamental programming constructs such as data types, arithmetic expressions, and
repetition statements(loops).
Students are often introduced to high­level programming constructs early in one course
8
L – A Gradual Compiler
==PAGE:17==
such as introductory programming, while simultaneously being taught about very low­
level programming in another course. For a student who is completely new to the field of
computer science, connecting the dots between low­level and high­level constructs can
be a very hard task. This forces students to develop their own mental models about how
the computer operates on a low level. These mental models which are often wrong, will
then conflict with their learning when they are actually taught how low level and high level
programming languages relate.
2.3
Visitor pattern
The visitor pattern is a design pattern which separates the algorithms and the data struc­
tures they operate on. This pattern allows the algorithms to be extended or altered, without
having to modify the existing data structure[9].
The visitor pattern is usually implemented using two methods. An accept method which
resides within each node of the data structure, and a visit method which is implemented
in specialized and separate visitor­classes. The visitor implements operations that can be
performed on the elements of the data structure. For each type of element, there should
be an implementation of a concrete visitor, designed to visit that specific type of element.
In the pattern, the visitor will call visitor.visit on the children of the node. Because of
this the visitor does not need to be aware of the data structure, as which child to visit
is handled by the node itself. It also means that the visitor class could be modified or
changed without having to update the data structure, as long as the node still has an
accept method. All of the different types of visitors should make up a closed union of
each type of element in the data structure. This is important in order to ensure that every
type of element can be handled by a concrete visitor. However, multi­purpose concrete
visitors can be implemented, which can cover multiple element types.
The visitor design pattern follows the open­closed principle[10] which is one of the SOLID
object­oriented programming principles. If following the visitor pattern, the data structure
and the traversal of it is closed for modification, but the operations which are performed
on the data structure is highly extendable because it is separate.
L – A Gradual Compiler
9
==PAGE:18==
10
L – A Gradual Compiler
==PAGE:19==
3
L ­ The base language
In this section we introduce a novel programming language, L. We introduce the syntax of
the language together with a simple example program to showcase how to write a program
in L. Furthermore, we show how L is executed using single­step semantics. In order to
understand the semantics we first have define the environment L runs in. This includes a
definition of a program, program state, and a program step. To illustrate how this works
in practice, we will continue the syntax example by evaluating it using the semantics.
3.1
Syntax of L
The syntax of L is a simple set of instructions which take the form of:
•
$r := e
– assign the result of expression e to register r.
•
$r ?= e
– conditionally ($? , 0) assign the result of expression e to location l.
•
[e, t] := e
– load the right hand side expression e into memory location l pointed
to by the result of the left hand side expression e, with type t.
•
$r := [e, t]
– read the memory at location l pointed to by the result of the expres­
sion e, with type t, into register r.
•
syscall
– call out to the virtual machine.
Where expressions e are described like this:
•
l
– A constant or a register
•
l ⟨op⟩l
– A binary operation (+, ­, ..)
•
⟨op⟩l
– A unary operation ...
If location l is a register location, then the value read from the register will be that of an
integer. The integer will reflect how integers are handled in JavaScript, where the max
value is 253 −1 and the min value is −(253 −1).
However if the location l is a memory location, the value will be stored as bytes. When
a value is loaded into a memory location it is converted to bytes and stored in a point
in memory, pointed to by an expression e and the size of memory is allocated with the
type t. Similarly when loading a value from a memory location into a register the byte is
converted to a JavaScript integer.
The types t supported in memory are unsigned­ and signed integers of size 8, 16, 32, and
64 bits.
3.1.1
A simple sample program
To put the syntax into context we will look at an example of a program which counts to
3 and saves the result in memory. Imagine a virtual machine which keeps its program
L – A Gradual Compiler
11
==PAGE:20==
0
$? := 3;
1
$n := 0;
2
$n := $n + 1;
3
$? := $? - 1;
4
$! ?= 2;
5
[0, u8] := $n;
Listing 3.1: Example program counting to 3 and saving the result in memory
ω ⊢⟨{}, {$!: 0, $?: 0, $n: 0}⟩→⟨{}, {$!: 1, $?: 3, $n: 0}⟩
use (reg­assign) at
$? := 3;
→⟨{}, {$!: 2, $?: 3, $n: 0}⟩
use (reg­assign) at
$n := 0;
→⟨{}, {$!: 3, $?: 3, $n: 1}⟩
use (reg­assign) at
$n := $n + 1;
→⟨{}, {$!: 4, $?: 2, $n: 1}⟩
use (reg­assign) at
$? := $? −1;
→⟨{}, {$!: 2, $?: 2, $n: 1}⟩
use (cond)
at
$! ?= 2;
→⟨{}, {$!: 3, $?: 2, $n: 2}⟩
use (reg­assign) at
$n := $n + 1;
→⟨{}, {$!: 4, $?: 1, $n: 2}⟩
use (reg­assign) at
$? := $? −1;
→⟨{}, {$!: 2, $?: 1, $n: 2}⟩
use (cond)
at
$! ?= 2;
→⟨{}, {$!: 3, $?: 1, $n: 3}⟩
use (reg­assign) at
$n := $n + 1;
→⟨{}, {$!: 4, $?: 0, $n: 3}⟩
use (reg­assign) at
$? := $? −1;
→⟨{}, {$!: 5, $?: 0, $n: 3}⟩
use (not­cond)
at
$! ?= 2;
→⟨{0: 0x3}, {$!: 6, $?: 0, $n: 3}⟩use (write­mem) at
[0, u8] := $n;
Figure 3.1: Sample program which counts to three using the semantics of L
counter in register $! and executes the instruction at the line number according to $!. In
the program written in listing 3.1 we can see how this is utilized to create a loop. We can
use the conditional assignment of $! to only jump back in the code whenever $? is not
equal to 0. The conditional register $? is set to 3 on the first line and will be decremented
by 1 after every count. The $n register is used to store the counter. It is initialized to 0 and
will be incremented by 1 in line 2. The $! register is conditionally set to 2 such that we do
not initialize $? and $n again when we take the jump. After taking the jump 3 times, $?
would be 0 and the conditional assignment will no longer be executed. Lastly the value of
$n is read into memory at location 0 as an 8 bit unsigned integer. Before explaining how
the sample program is executed semantically, we will first introduce the semantics of L in
the following section.
12
L – A Gradual Compiler
==PAGE:21==
3.2
Semantics
We define our semantics as steps in the state of a virtual machine:
⟨τ, µ, ϕ⟩⊢⟨ψ, ρ⟩→⟨ψ′, ρ′⟩
Here ⟨τ, µ, ϕ⟩is the program, where τ is a list of instructions, µ is a mapping of data, and
ϕ is a mapping of constants. The state of the machine is defined as ⟨ψ, ρ⟩, where ψ is a
set of memory locations mapped to values, and ρ is a set that maps registers to values.
Mapping will be denoted as 7→in the semantics, where x 7→2 indicates that x maps to 2.
The single­step semantics of L are defined for each instruction in the syntax. The seman­
tics can be seen in fig. 3.3. Each semantic definition has a horizontal line which separate
the conclusion from the conditions. The conclusion below the line only occurs once all
the conditions above the line holds true. In this section we will go over each of these
steps and explain how they work. To help define the semantics, we have created helper
functions which can be seen in fig. 3.2.
The first condition of all our single­step semantics inspects the current instruction by using
the function seen in eq. (inst). The instruction is fetched from the instruction list using the
$! register which holds the program counter. This condition ensures that the semantics
of e.g. a register assignment is only executed when the current instruction is a register
assignment.
3.2.1
Register assignment
The semantics of a register assignment can be seen in eq. (reg­assign). The second
condition evaluates the expression by looking it up in the registers of the current state.
The helper function used for this can be seen in eq. (eval). If both conditions hold the
conclusion will happen, which is a step in the state that uses the • function seen in eq. (set­
union) to combine the set of all registers with the new set mapping the value v to the
register of the instruction.
3.2.2
Syscall
In eq. (sys) we see the definition of a syscall, which only requires that the current instruc­
tion is a syscall. The step in the program will update the state in whichever way syscall
is defined in the virtual machine. Therefor it is up to the creators of the virtual machine to
define what occurs once syscall is executed.
3.2.3
Conditional assignment
The definition for conditional assignment has two different outcomes based on the value
of register $?. The first outcome can be seen in eq. (cond) where $? is not allowed to be
0. If $? is not 0, then we evaluate the expression and update the register just like we did
for register assignment. In the other outcome seen in eq. (not­cond) the $? register has
to be zero. Because we do not want to do anything when $? is 0, the expression is not
evaluated and no register is updated in the state.
L – A Gradual Compiler
13
==PAGE:22==
3.2.4
Read memory
The semantics for reading from memory can be seen in eq. (read­mem). Here we see
two free variables k and t, where k is the memory pointer and t is the type, e.g. u8. It
should hold that k is evaluated to a value d and that the type is converted to bytes using
the function eq. (bytes). The value v is found at memory location d with byte size b using
the function eq. (mem­lookup). If all conditions hold, the register r is updated with the
value v which we read from memory.
3.2.5
Write memory
The semantics for writing to memory can be seen in eq. (write­mem). The memory pointer
and type is evaluated as in section 3.2.4. And the expression is evaluated using eq. (eval).
Updating the memory is done using the function write­mem which splits the value up into
bytes and places it in memory based on the type of the memory assignment.
Example (cont.)
We now continue our example in fig. 3.1, by evaluating it using our
semantics. Here we assume that the beginning state consists of empty memory and
three registers, $!, $?, and $n. All registers are assumed to start with value 0. For each
new line, we omit writing the program and initial state of the step to reduce clutter, however
it should be noted that for each new line, the initial state will be the updated state of the
step before it. Such that in step two, the initial state will be the state after step one.
14
L – A Gradual Compiler
==PAGE:23==
Xk =

v
if (k, v) ∈X
ε
if k < X ∨X ∈∅
(indexing)
inst(τ, k) =

τk
if k ≤|τ|
ε
if k > |τ| ∨|τ| = 0
(inst)
bytes(t) =

1
if t ∈{u8, i8}
2
if t ∈{u16, i16}
4
if t ∈{u32, i32}
8
if t ∈{u64, i64}
(bytes)
lookup(r, ρ) =

ρx
if r =
$x
r
if r ∈Z ·
(lookup)
memlookup(d, b, ψ) = ψd+0 ⊕ψd+1 ⊕... ⊕ψd+b ·
(mem­lookup)
memassign(d, b, v, ψ) = ψ • {d + k 7→xk | k ∈{0, 1, . . . , b}}
where
v = x0, x1, . . . , xb
(mem­assign)
X • Y = {r 7→Z | Z = lookup(r, X) ∨(Z = lookup(r, Y) ∧ε = lookup(r, X))}
(set­union)
eval(e, ρ) =

lookup(n, ρ) + lookup(m, ρ)
if e =
n + m
lookup(n, ρ) −lookup(m, ρ)
if e =
n −m
lookup(n, ρ) ∗lookup(m, ρ)
if e =
n ∗m
lookup(n, ρ)/lookup(m, ρ)
if e =
n/m
−lookup(n, ρ)
if e =
−n
lookup(n, ρ)
if e =
n
·
(eval)
Figure 3.2: Semantic helper functions
inst(τ, ρ!) =
$r := e
v = eval(e, ρ)
⟨τ, µ, ϕ⟩⊢⟨ψ, ρ⟩→⟨ψ, ρ • {r 7→v}⟩
(reg­assign)
inst(τ, ρ!) =
syscall
⟨τ, µ, ϕ⟩⊢⟨ψ, ρ⟩→syscall(ψ, ρ)
(sys)
inst(τ, ρ!) =
$r ?= e
ρ? , 0
v = eval(e, ρ)
⟨τ, µ, ϕ⟩⊢⟨ψ, ρ⟩→⟨ψ, ρ • {r 7→v}⟩
(cond)
inst(τ, ρ!) =
$r ?= e
ρ? = 0
⟨τ, µ, ϕ⟩⊢⟨ψ, ρ⟩→⟨ψ, ρ⟩
(not­cond)
inst(τ, ρ!) =
$r := [k, t]
d = eval(k, ρ)
b = bytes(t)
v = memlookup(d, b, ψ)
⟨τ, µ, ϕ⟩⊢⟨ψ, ρ⟩→⟨ψ, ρ • {r 7→v}⟩
(read­mem)
inst(τ, ρ!) =
[k, t] := e
d = eval(k, ρ)
b = bytes(t)
v = eval(e, ρ)
⟨τ, µ, ϕ⟩⊢⟨ψ, ρ⟩→⟨memassign(d, b, v, ψ), ρ⟩
(write­mem)
Figure 3.3: L Semantics
L – A Gradual Compiler
15
==PAGE:24==
16
L – A Gradual Compiler
==PAGE:25==
4
Framework
The framework is an extendable compiler design and in this chapter we provide an in­
depth explanation of the design.
When describing the framework, we base the explanation on the base language L which
can be linearly extended through multiple levels, starting at L0, where L0 is an implemen­
tation of L. The framework is extended such that L0 is followed by L1 which is followed by
L2 etc. We refer to these levels as Lx where x is the amount of extensions.
Within this chapter, we first specify the goals of the framework in section 4.1. After this,
we go over the design of the base level compiler, and the different parts that it is made up
of in section 4.2. Following this, we go over how the framework facilitates user­defined
compiler extensions in section 4.2.4. Then, we explain and discuss how the framework
provides traceability of syntax across levels in section 4.2.5. Furthermore, the framework
allows the user to save and visualize compilation data after a program has been compiled,
this mechanism is explained in section 4.2.3. Lastly, we go over some of the alternate
designs which were considered in section 4.3.
4.1
Specification
The main goal of the compiler, is to be able to take any Lx AST and gradually compile it into
L0. Furthermore, the system should be easily extendable so that it facilitates expanding
the language, without having to build a new compiler from the ground up. The system
should also allow for traceability of syntax from the input AST all the way to the compiled
L0 code. The framework aims to have high cohesion and low coupling. Furthermore,
the framework should allow for dynamically storing compilation data to be examined after
compilation.
4.2
Visitor­Emitter system
When designing the compiler, we wanted to separate the traversal of the AST, from the
operations which we need to perform on its nodes.
The visitor pattern described in section 2.3 provides a way to do exactly this. However,
with the visitor pattern, each node will have to implement an accept method, as described
in the preliminaries. This means that the AST has to accept the use of a visitor. In our
design, we wanted a framework where the AST did not have to accommodate for the use
of a visitor. While we do not implement the visitor pattern directly, we draw inspiration
from some of the properties of the pattern. Mainly that the traversal of the data structure,
is separate from the operations performed on the data structure. Furthermore, we draw
inspiration from the closed union of node types created by the pattern.
We propose a design, which is made up of three independent subsystems. These three
subsystems are: visitor, emitter and drawer. The essence of this design, is that the visitor
L – A Gradual Compiler
17
==PAGE:26==
Figure 4.1: Consider the following set of visitors, which is made for a graph with only three node
types A, B or C. It is easy to see how such a visitor can be easily extended. Forexample, if the
AST was expanded so that it now includes node type D, it is simply a matter of adding a Visitor3
which implements a method D(node).
traverses the data structure, and extracts information from each node. Note that the
visitor is in our design, is a system that traverses the AST. In contrast, the visitor in the
visitor pattern describes an object which visits a node, and performs operations on the
information stored in the node. The extracted information is then sent to the emitter, but the
emitter never receives the node itself. This detail is what makes the emitter independent
of the visitor, and it will become very useful when extending the framework as we explain
in section 4.2.4. Lastly the drawer stores compiler data, specific to each compilation state,
alongside user­defined functions which visualizes this data.
We now examine each of these subsystems separately, as well as their responsibilities.
4.2.1
Visitor
The visitors main responsibility is to traverse the AST. In the visitor there should be a visit
method for each type of node in the AST, and the visit method takes the node as input.
Similar to the visitor pattern, all the visit methods should make up a closed union of the
types of nodes in the AST, such as shown in figure 4.1. This ensures that any node that
is visited is always handled by the intended function.
When visiting a node, another important responsibility of the visitor, is to extract the nec­
essary information contained by the node. This is because the emitter should not need or
have any information about the AST, and thus the visitor will have converted the data of
the AST, into something that can be passed on to the emitter. For example, if we assume
a scenario where the visitor visits an expression node ”2+3”, it would be the visitors job to
18
L – A Gradual Compiler
==PAGE:27==
make sure three parameters are extracted: 2, ”+” and 3. By assigning this responsibility
to the visitor, the emitter will be completely independent of the AST.
4.2.2
Emitter
The main responsibility of the emitter, is to emit data based on the information passed on
to it, from the visitor. Note that because the functionality of the visitor does not rely on the
emitter, the emitter is interchangeable with another emitter with the same interface.
In this case, a simple emitter is one that generates executable L instructions, given the
information stored in the nodes of the AST. To do this it will need to keep track of the
compilation state. For example, if we take a look at the AST in fig. 2.1 from chapter 2.
Once the visitor extracts ”2”, ”­”, ”5” from the left expression node, and passes these to
the emitter, the emitter will emit a corresponding instruction. This instruction is added to
the compilation state, containing all the instructions emitted so far.
4.2.3
Drawer
The draw system allows transparency of the compiler, by allowing the compilation state
to be saved at any given moment during compilation. This saved information can later
be used to create visual output. The draw system assumes that the framework is used
in a context where there is a visual context, and because of the low coupling between
the three systems, the draw system is optional. The drawer does not necessarily need to
utilize the compilation state, but it is possible.
An example of a simple draw system could be one which only responsibility is to pretty­
print the instructions emitted by the emitter. If we take a look at example from the previous
section, the simple drawer could for example pretty­print ”2 ­ 5”, based on the emitted
instruction. The draw system does not have a lot of limitations, and the most important
feature of it, is that it facilitates the implementation of a visual component, as well as
allowing the inclusion of usually compiler­exclusive compilation data.
4.2.4
Extend­ability
The framework allows the compiler to be easily extended through the use of class inher­
itance. The base compiler is comprised of an L0 visitor and emitter. The compiler can
then be easily extended through implementing an L1 visitor and emitter. The key to this is
that the L1 extensions only have to implement the functions which handle the constructs
that were introduced in the L1 language. Each of the systems will always inherit from the
one before it. So an Lx system will inherit from Lx−1. The framework assumes that an Lx
parser, able to transform Lx source code to an Lx AST is available. An important effect
of this, is that each extension is only responsible for compiling the constructs that it intro­
duces. Which means that when multiple extensions are introduced, the code is gradually
compiled by moving through each extension.
In fig. 4.2 it can be seen how the compiler can be extended. For each level of L which the
compiler needs to handle, a visitor and emitter is required. However, because the highest
level extends the previous levels, only a single Lx visitor and emitter which extends all of
the previous ones have to be instantiated.
L – A Gradual Compiler
19
==PAGE:28==
L{X}Emitter
L{X-1}Emitter
L0Emitter
Extends
L{...}Emitter
Extends
Extends
L{X}Visitor
L{X-1}Visitor
L0Visitor
Extends
L{...}Visitor
Extends
Extends
Emits
Compiled L
Code
Figure 4.2: For a selected level X of L, an Lx Visitor is created, with an instance of an Lx Emitter.
The entry point of the system is the LX visitor, where the root node of an Lx AST should be the
first input to the visitor. The node type of the AST is then used to call a corresponding function in
the visitor, which passes on the relevant information to the emitter. The emitter keeps track of the
current state of the compilation and will gradually fill up the data structures which will eventually
be used to create the program,
20
L – A Gradual Compiler
==PAGE:29==
To facilitate easily extending the compiler, a very important feature is that the framework
should allow new levels of L, to be defined using constructs from all lower levels. For ex­
ample, if L1 implements jump statements, which allows for jumping to a certain instruction
number, this construct should also be available to use for defining L3 which might imple­
ment if­else statements. The alternative would be that L3 would have to redefine jump if it
was needed to implement if­else statements. This would lead to code­duplication as well
as more difficulty extending the compiler.
We have already seen in fig. 4.1 how the visitor can be easily extended to include new
additions to the AST, along with the language evolving. Let us now examine how the
emitter is extended. As previously mentioned, the should not expect a node from the AST
as input. Because of this, higher levels of L compilers, can call the lower level emitter
functions directly, when implementing high level constructs. For example, the L0 emitter
might implement a function which emits an instruction from an assignment
$r := e .
All levels Lx where x>0, can then call this function from the L0 implementation, in their
definitions of higher level constructs.
This can also be chained together, for example, if L1 implements conditional jump, which
is defined using the L0 emitter’s conditional assignment
$r ?= e . A level Lx>1 can then
implement a new construct, utilizing jump such as an if­guard. The if­guard could then be
re­used internally when implementing a for­loop etc. This allows for a lot of re­usability,
and therefore easy extension. When emitting the code, the compiler will then gradually
move through these implementation, ensuring that it arrives at L0.
One problem with extending the compiler, is that the base level compiler might lack con­
structs which are used internally by the compiler, such as a way of keeping track of context.
This is necessary if implementing for example methods and scopes. This can however
be solved, by implementing these compiler constructs in emitter extensions. Because an
LX emitter is a standalone class, it can contain state extensions which are global within
the emitter, and therefore any emitters above it. This allows the emitter to internally keep
track of things such as stack frames, by implementing this in the emitter level where it
becomes necessary.
An example
Let us examine a small example, of how source code written in an extended language L2
can be gradually compiled to the base language L0 using the methods described above.
In this example, we assume the code is made for a virtual machine similar to the one
described in section 3.1.1.
Imagine an extended language L2 which adds loops that repeat a block of code a specified
amount of time. Let us also imagine an extended language L1 that adds JNZ (jump not­
zero) which checks the register $? and jumps to the specified line number if the register
is not 0.
In the example, we see how the L2 code can be compiled to L1 which can then compiled
L – A Gradual Compiler
21
==PAGE:30==
Listing 4.1: L2 code
1
repeat 5:
2
$x := $x + 1;
Listing 4.2: L1 code
1
$? := 5;
2
$x := $x + 1;
3
$? := $? - 1;
4
JNZ 2;
Listing 4.3: L0 code
1
$? := 5;
2
$x := $x + 1;
3
$? := $? - 1;
4
$! ?= 2;
Figure 4.3: An example which illustrates how an extended language can be gradually compiled
to L0.
Because each stage of the compiler only handles certain constructs, which is handled by
that level, and therefore compiled, green.
4.2.5
Traceability
Because code is compiled in different levels of the emitters and visitors, there is a chal­
lenge in keeping track of which L0 code, stem from what part of the LX source code.
Keeping track of this is important because it allows for a better understanding of how the
code is compiled. It is also needed by the draw system to be able to display the right
information. To be able to trace this, there needs to be a mapping between the emitted
code, and the source code. Because the AST represents the source code, and the vis­
itors already work on the AST, creating a mapping between nodes in the AST and the
emitted code, is convenient. There are however some challenges in making sure that the
mapping is correct between nodes and emitted code.
The way we solve this, is by keeping a stack containing the visited nodes, within the base
level emitter. When the visitor visits a node, it pushes the node to the stack, and once
it leaves the node it pops the stack. Whenever the emitter emits an instruction, we can
then be sure that whatever is at the top of the stack, is the AST node that the instruction
stemmed from. By using a stack and not just overwriting a variable with the node, we also
take into account the scenario where multiple nodes might only spawn a single instruction,
as well as the other way around, a single source code node spawning multiple instructions.
4.3
Alternate Designs
Before deciding to go with the design described in section 4.2, some alternate designs
were considered. In this section, we briefly go over these designs, as well as why they
were discarded.
4.3.1
Source­code emitter
The first design which was considered, was to implement a system where the input Lx
source code is gradually transpiled downward to Lx−1 until L0 was reached. This ap­
proach would take Lx source code, parse it using an Lx­parser, and then run through the
AST. While traversing the AST, an Lx transpiler would then output corresponding Lx−1
source code as text. The new source code would then have to be parsed again using an
Lx−1 parser, and this would continue all the way down to L0. The result was that any LX
22
L – A Gradual Compiler
==PAGE:31==
source code could be transformed to an L0 AST which could then be compiled to execute­
able code. A pseudo­code implementation of how this can be achieved, can be seen in
listing 4.4 below.
1
EmitDown(SourceCode: string, EmitFunctions : array,
2
Parsers : array, StartLevel : int){
3
4
SourceLX = SourceCode
5
TreeLX = Parsers[StartLevel].Parse(SourceLX)
6
7
for i in StartLevel to 1:
8
SourceLX = EmitFunctions[i].Emit(TreeLX)
9
TreeLX = Parsers[i-1].Parse(SourceLX)
10
end for
11
12
return TreeLX // Which is now an L0 AST
13
}
Listing 4.4: Gradually emitting source code to L0
This approach had the benefit of being easy to implement, as well as easy to extend.
However, it had several issues. First of all, having to parse every level of L separately
was wasteful. In addition to that, the solution lacked traceability, because the origin of the
source code was lost once it was converted from AST to text, and since this had to be
done X amount of times for Lx it was a convoluted task to keep track of which L0 code
stemmed from which Lx code. Furthermore, because a each level only knows about the
level directly below it. This means that any new constructs can only be re­used in the
level immediately after, this is big weakness of this design. Because of these issues, this
option was dropped.
4.3.2
Compiler­chain system
This system consists of a series of ”builders” where each level of L has an associated
builder. Each builder is then responsible for generating L0 code, for the level of L that it is
associated with. For the compilation to be gradual, the system should be able to delegate
the parts of the AST which are introduced in certain levels of L to the associated builder.
This allows the system to be easily extended because adding a new level Lx only requires
the implementation of a builder which handles exactly the new constructs introduced in
Lx without having to worry about the constructs introduced in lower levels of L.
For a selected level x of L (Lx), the system should work by recursively traversing the Lx
AST, using the Lx builder as an entry point. The Lx builder should then handle all of the
nodes which are associated with level x. By handling a certain node, the outcome should
be that the Lx builder outputs corresponding L0 code directly. Similarly to the visitor­emitter
design, the rest of the nodes which contain constructs that were not introduced specifically
in Lx, should then be passed on to the Lx −1 builder, which will repeat the process. The
end result should be that the entire Lx AST is transformed into corresponding L0 code by a
series of builders. Each builder can be viewed as a partial compiler, because it compiles
L – A Gradual Compiler
23
==PAGE:32==
L{X}Builder
L{X-1}Builder
L0Builder
Extends
L{...}Builder
Extends
Extends
Builds
Compiled L
Code
Figure 4.4: This figure illustrates the composition of the builder chain. When a new extension of
the compiler is introduced it should extend the previous builder level, such that L1Builder extends
L0Builder, and L2Builder would extend the L1Builder.
exactly the constructs introduced in the associated level. This also means that the L0
builder is essentially a complete compiler for the L0 language.
While this approach is somewhat similar to that of the visitor­emitter system, it suffers
from the fact that the outputting compiled, is too tightly coupled with the traversal of the
AST. This means that higher level languages can not be defined through re­using pre­
vious constructs, as the previous constructs requires a node from the AST. Another key
difference is that for every node in the AST will have to be evaluated by every level of
compiler. If the node is not part of that levels constructs, it will then be passed on to the
next level and so on. In contrast to the visitor­emitter system where the visitor methods
make up a closed union, only a single visitor is a possible handler for each node.
24
L – A Gradual Compiler
==PAGE:33==
5
Prototype
In this chapter, we describe the design of the prototype developed to test how well the pre­
viously discussed compiler design facilitates extending the base language L. This chapter
does not cover the design of the compiler itself, as this has been covered in the previous
chapter, but rather the design of the rest of the components which make up the prototype.
5.1
Overview
In this section we provide a brief holistic overview of the prototype design and its function­
alities.
The prototype is a learning environment based on L with several language extensions as
well as a GUI. It consists of the language L, along with a VM able to run the bytecode
produced by the prototype gradual compiler. The prototype environment also allows for
debugging and syntax highlighting.
The prototype is at it’s core an extendable coding environment in which the user of the en­
vironment can write, run and debug code written in L. Aside from the coding environment,
there is an L compiler built upon the design of the framework discussed in section 4.2.
The compiler outputs a program which a virtual machine is able to run, and the results
can then be displayed to the user.
Furthermore, the prototype contains a build module, which builds the environment based
on the user­defined compiler­modules, and bundles everything up into a single HTML file,
including any dependencies.
5.2
The environment
The environment is the output of the build module. It is an interactive HTML page which
contains everything that the build module was bundled with.
When debugging code in L, the user should be able to see updates to the memory and
registers in real time, in order to visualize the state of the machine at any given moment.
To accommodate this, a front end has been designed, which takes some inspiration from
the online compiler explorer godbolt.org[11]. The design can be seen in figure 5.1.
L – A Gradual Compiler
25
==PAGE:34==
DEBUG
RUN
L^X code
Compiled
L0 code
VM State (Registers & Memory)
Custom front-end extensions
SELECT LEVEL
Figure 5.1: The front­end should be split into two windows, one in which the user can write code
at a level of L that they have specified from the front­end. The second window should show
the equivalent L0 code. When debugging the code, the line which will be executed next should
be highlighted in both windows. When a line of code is executed while debugging it should be
possible to see its effect on the associated registers or memory.
5.3
A Program
A program consists of four main data structures. These are: an ordered list of instructions
which can be executed by the virtual machine, a data mapping, a constants mapping, and
a label mapping.
Instructions
An L instruction is represented as bytecode. Each instruction is going to have an OP
(operation) code which defines the operation that should be performed by the virtual ma­
chine. Using OP codes as part of an instruction, is an indication to the virtual machine
which tells it what to do with the instruction. This approach is widespread, but was in our
case mainly inspired by LC3[12].
There are four types of instructions, and associated OP codes, those are:
• system call: SYSCALL
• Binary assignment: ASSIGN_BIN
• Unary assignemnt: ASSIGN_UN
• Assignment: ASSIGN
Each bytecode instruction is made up of the OP code, and a set of operands. These
operands can then be passed on to the virtual machine, along with the OP code which
tells the virtual machine what to do with the operands. A simple example would be that of
a register assignment such as :
$x := 1; . This instruction has the OP code ”ASSIGN”
and the operands are the writer which in this case is register $x and the reader 1,
26
L – A Gradual Compiler
==PAGE:35==
The opcodes relate to the syntax of the base language. In the bytecode, an opcode is
used to determine the type of assignment. This is done so that it is easier for the VM
to determine how to execute it. Furthermore, conditional assignments do not have their
own opcode, as a boolean can be used as part of the operands to determine whether
the assignment is conditional. The purpose of this is to avoid needing another three OP
codes
The last instruction, systemcall, calls the system which runs the instruction and the specific
implementation of the system call is then defined in the system which in this case is the
virtual machine. Because the implementation of the system call depends on the system
the functionality of it varies, however one example is to have the system print data from
memory.
In addition to instructions, a program should be able to contain static information such
as constants or data. When writing a program, a user should be able to define static
information. When the program is then later loaded by the virtual machine, the virtual
machine will save the data in its memory.
5.4
Virtual Machine
The virtual machine is responsible for executing programs. A virtual machine at it’s core,
is a program which has an internal state consisting of virtual memory and registers. The
machine should be capable of executing L instructions and changing the internal state
accordingly. To keep track of which instruction to execute next, the machine should have
a program counter. This program counter is stored in a virtual register $!.
5.4.1
Build module
The build module sets up the environment based on the code written by the user of the
prototype. The desired output of the script is an HTML page which can be distributed
without needing to install any dependencies. This also makes it possible to embed the
HTML page into another page if desired.
The first group of files that the prototype is concerned with, are all the files which the user
should not need to interact with (but can if they want to). These include the CodeMirror
library, the Tree­sitter library, the virtual machine, the bytecode structure, and the general
structure of the output environment. All of these need to be a part of the output environ­
ment, but there is no need to modify them, when extending the compiler.
The second group is compiler extensions. An extension consists of an extended gram­
mar, and a compiler­module. The extended grammar should be a file which contains the
extended grammar in BNF. A compiler­module is an extension to the previous compiler
module, and it should be written so that it handles only the syntactic constructs introduced
or modified in the extended grammar file included with it. A compiler­module consists of
the three parts mentioned in chapter 4: a visitor, an emitter, and a draw.
L – A Gradual Compiler
27
==PAGE:36==
Compiler Module
+L0Visitor: Class
+L0Emitter: Class
+L0Draw : Class
L0
Grammar
Environment.html
Container
SRC
HTML-
Template
CSS
Assets
L0
LX
LX-1
...
Tree-Sitter,
CodeMirror
Figure 5.2: The build module uses the user­defined L grammar and compiler modules, and sends
them into a container. In the container, the libraries CodeMirror and Tree­Sitter are downloaded
and the L grammars are used to build Tree­Sitter parsers. These parsers are then bundled with
the compiler modules, as well as the source code which makes the environment run. The output
is a single HTML page with no dependencies.
As it can be seen in figure 5.2, the tree­sitter and CodeMirror libraries are downloaded
through the docker container, and discarded after being bundled.
28
L – A Gradual Compiler
==PAGE:37==
6
Implementation details
This chapter will cover the implementation details of the prototype. The entire code base
can be found at the following URL:
https://github.com/MarcBrejner/browser-l.
Furthermore the prototype can be experienced first­hand as it is hosted online at the
following URL with a pre­loaded example:
https://gernsoe.github.io/.
Try out the example by clicking debug and see how each line of L4 code on the left side is
compiled down to L0 code on the right. Notice how the register and memory are updated
when you step through the code. Hold your mouse over a piece of memory under the
right text editor to see which data declaration or variable it comes from. Under the left
text editor you will see the stack of temporary variables. When a temporary variable is
declared you can also find it at the bottom of memory under the right text editor.
6.1
Typographic conventions
In the description of the implementation, these typographical conventions are used:
• Bold ­ used for classes
• Italic ­ used for objects, parameters, and variables
• Typewriter ­ used for methods
6.2
Structure
In this section, a brief overview of the core structure of the prototype is provided.
The prototype is an extendable environment, in which the programmer can add extensions
to the base language L0 showcased in chapter 3. The programmer can add extensions to
the base language, through compiler extensions which consists of a compiler­module.js
file which contains the visitor, emitter, and draw class, as well as a grammar.js file in
BNF. Furthermore, the prototype contains a build module, which stems from the design
explained in section 5.4.1. This build module takes all the compiler extensions defined
by the programmer, and uses them to build parsers and compilers for each level of L.
It also gathers any dependencies, as well as the rest of the source code making up the
interactive environment, and bundles everything up into a single html page, containing an
interactive coding environment.
6.3
Parsing
As building a custom parser is not within the scope of this project, as well as having no
obvious benefits, we chose to use a parser generator. There are many parser generators
L – A Gradual Compiler
29
==PAGE:38==
1
var emitter = get_emitter(level);
2
var visitor = get_visitor(level);
3
var drawer = get_drawer(level);
4
visitor._emitter = emitter;
5
visitor._emitter._drawer = drawer;
Listing 6.1: Coupling the classes of the framework
to choose from, however for this project the Tree­Sitter library has been selected, as it
easily facilitates the user defining their own custom language. Furthermore Tree­Sitter
can be integrated with many different programming languages. Additionally, Tree­Sitter
brands itself on being dependency free which is a useful aspect for the prototype.
6.4
Entry point of the compiler
The compiler.js file acts as the entry point to the compiler described in chapter 7. It is
comprised of a single function Compile(tree). This function initializes a visitor, emitter,
and drawer, based on the level of L chosen. This can be seen in listing 6.1.
After initializing the systems, they are started by calling visit with the root node of the
tree as input. Post compilation it collects the compiled bytecode, data, constants, labels,
and draw objects which are used to create the program.
6.4.1
Errors
Before compiling the program, the AST is checked for errors. This is done before com­
pilation, because a program with errors should not be compiled. The function used for
finding errors can be seen below in listing 6.2
The function takes a node in the AST and an array as input. The node given to the function
when finding errors is the root node of the AST. It then works by recursively traversing the
nodes of the AST. For every node it visits, it checks if the node contains an error message.
These error messages are generated by Tree­Sitter, and usually contains either ”MISS­
ING” which indicates that a symbol is missing from the syntax, a common error might be
”MISSING ’;’” i.e. missing a semicolon. Another possible error is ”UNEXPECTED”, this
error node occurs when a the parser tries to parse a symbol which does not belong in that
part of the grammar.
If an error node is found, an error message string is generated, using the position in the
source code at which the error was found, as well as the error itself. An example error
message generated by this could be ”Syntax error: MISSING ”;” on line: 7”. This is
possible because the parser stores the position in the source code, at which each node
was generated from. Which is the same mechanism used for traceability.
To check whether or not a node is an error node, a regular expression is used to pattern
match on the node. If an error is found, after the error message has been generated,
this error message is then pushed onto the array which is given as input parameter when
30
L – A Gradual Compiler
==PAGE:39==
1
function find_error(node, errors){
2
if (node.childCount == 0 && !node.isMissing()){
3
return [""];
4
}
5
if(node.type == "ERROR" || node.isMissing()){
6
let matches = node.toString().match(error_pattern);
7
let error_msg = matches === null ? "Syntax error on line: "+
8
(node.startPosition.row+1) :
9
"Syntax error: "+
10
matches[0]+" on line:"+(node.startPosition.row+1);
11
errors.push(error_msg);
12
return errors;
13
}
14
15
for (let n_i = 0; n_i < node.childCount; n_i++) {
16
let next_node = node.child(n_i);
17
find_error(next_node,errors);
18
}
19
20
return errors;
21
}
Listing 6.2: Finding errors in the AST
the function is called again recursively. This way, the input array acts as an accumulator,
containing all the errors found in the AST.
This array of error messages is then checked after finding errors, and if the length of
the array is larger than 0, then at least one error has been found. In this case, the AST
will not be compiled, but rather an empty program containing the error message will be
constructed instead. The reason a program containing just the error is constructed, is so
that it can be passed on to the rest of the mechanisms of the environment, which expects
a program as output of the compiler.
When these parts receive a program containing an error message, they will either abort
normal execution, such as in the case of the virtual machine. Alternatively, they might
display the error message, such as in the case of the draw function of L0. This will allow
the user to instantly know which errors they have in their code, and where they are located.
6.5
Program
A program in the prototype is represented as a JavaScript object. It consists of an array
of instructions in bytecode format. The instructions are ordered, so that the index of the
instruction in the instruction array, corresponding to the program counter at which point
that instruction should be executed. The program is built by the compiler, and it is the
compiler which is responsible for building and adding these instructions in the correct
order.
L – A Gradual Compiler
31
==PAGE:40==
1
handle(handler) {
2
switch (this.opcode) {
3
case OP.SYSCALL:
4
return handler.syscall();
5
case OP.ASSIGN_BIN:
6
var [conditional, w, reader1, opr, reader2] = this.operands;
7
return handler.assign_binary(conditional, w, reader1, opr, reader2);
8
case OP.ASSIGN_UN:
9
var [conditional, w, opr, r] = this.operands;
10
return handler.assign_unary(conditional, w, opr, r);
11
case OP.ASSIGN:
12
var [conditional, w, r] = this.operands;
13
return handler.assign(conditional, w, r);
14
default:
15
throw new Error("Unknown Opcode");
16
}
17
}
Listing 6.3: Bytecode handle function
Additionally a program contains additional information, such as labels, constants, data
and optionally an error message. Most of this information is used to initialize the state of
the virtual machine, once the program is loaded in.
6.5.1
Bytecode
As previously mentioned, bytecode is used in the prototype as an intermediary represen­
tation of the source code. Bytecode is the output of the compiler, and it also what the VM
is able to execute.
A single bytecode instruction, is a JavaScript class/object. It has a constructor which
takes the opcode as well as optional operands. The opcode is an enum, and the different
options for opcodes are the ones discussed in section 5.3.
Furthermore, the bytecode class has a handle function.
The handle method seen in listing 6.3 takes a handler as input. In our case, the handler
given as input is a virtual machine. Notice how the handle method calls the functions of
the input handler object, and returns the result.
6.6
Virtual Machine
The virtual machine is implemented as a JavaScript object/class. Our implementation of
the VM was inspired by the LC3 (Little Computer 3)[13]. To initialize the VM, a program
must be provided as a parameter to the update_vm method.
6.6.1
state
When the VM is updated, the state of the VM is set. The state is represented as an object,
containing virtual memory and registers. The memory starts out as an empty array, filled
with zeros, the default memory size is 128. All numbers are stored in memory as bytes.
32
L – A Gradual Compiler
==PAGE:41==
1
function map_strings_to_memory(program_data){
2
var pointer = 0;
3
Object.entries(program_data).forEach(([id,str]) =>{
4
state_data[id] = pointer;
5
for(let char in str){
6
memory_id[pointer] = id;
7
memory[pointer] = number_to_byte_array(str.charCodeAt(char),8)[0];
8
pointer += 1;
9
}
10
memory_id[pointer] = id;
11
memory[pointer] = number_to_byte_array(0, 1);
12
pointer += 1;
13
});
14
}
Listing 6.4: Moving declaration data to virtual memory
JavaScript integers are converted to bytes represented as hexadecimal numbers. This
conversion happens whenever a number is stored in memory. Both signed and unsigned
integers are able to be stored.
If the user has declared any data in their code, this data would be stored in the program
as a mapping between the data identifier, and the data. When the state of the VM is
initialized, the strings are mapped to memory.
The function seen in listing 6.4 iterates through the key­value pairing from the program,
and maps these over to virtual memory. This is done by saving a pointer to the start of
the data in state_data which is an internal mapping used by the virtual machine. If the VM
receives a pointer to the data, it can look up the memory location where the data starts,
using state_data. For every entry in the data mapping from the program, every character
of the string is converted to the corresponding ASCII code, and the ASCII code is then
converted to bytes represented as hexadecimal. Each character is then stored as a byte
in memory. After the entire string of one data entry has been run through, a null separator
is added afterward. This is used by the VM to know when a string ends. The pointer is
moved to the end of the string, and the process is repeated for the next data entry.
While data is copied over to memory, constants and labels are stored within the program,
and are not moved over to the state of the VM. Additionally, the VM is initialized with
several registers. Some registers have special functions:
• $!: Stores the program counter
• $?: Conditional check
• $x: Used for syscall
• $y: Used for syscall
• $fp: Frame pointer (stack)
L – A Gradual Compiler
33
==PAGE:42==
1
const CONTENT_TYPES = {
2
REGISTER: 0,
3
MEMORY: 1,
4
CONSTANT: 2,
5
DATA: 3,
6
LABEL: 4,
7
NUMBER: 5,
8
EXPRESSION: 6,
9
UN_EXPRESSION: 7,
10
BIN_EXPRESSION: 8,
11
};
Listing 6.5: Content type enums
6.6.2
Content
When reading bytecode instructions the virtual machine needs to know what objects the
instruction is being performed upon. In an assignment it has to know exactly who the writer
is and where to store the information, it also has to know who the readers are in order
to read from them and evaluate the RHS of the assignment. There are multiple ways to
go about this. At first a writer object and a reader object was created, an example where
this was helpful was when dealing with registers, as they can be either readers or writers.
Creating an object specifically for readers or writers helped the virtual machine determine
what to do with the register. However this was redundant since it can be inferred from
the position a register has in the bytecode. Therefor the two objects were combined into
content.
The content object sets the type, an id, and an optional datatype through its constructor.
We will briefly describe what each of these fields are used for. The type is used to deter­
mine the type of content, it is set using an enum which includes all the possible types in
the grammar. The enum can be seen in listing 6.5. The id of content is dependent on the
type of content. For example the id of a register is the name of said register, e.g. ”$x”.
If the content is a number, the id will be the actual number. Lastly the datatype is used
exclusively for memory, as memory not only requires an id which tells the virtual machine
where to look in memory, it also requires the size and type of the data that has to be either
read or written.
6.6.3
Expression
The content object is not able to hold all the information of an expression. For this an ex­
pression object was created. This object sets the fields: type, reader1, opr, and reader2
through it’s constructor. The opr and reader2 are optional as they are only needed for
unary and binary expressions. The type of an expression uses the same enum as con­
tent, however an expression only uses the last three options. The ”EXPRESSION” type
is used when there’s only one reader and no operator. The ”UN_EXPRESSION” and
”BIN_EXPRESSION” are used for unary and binary expression respectively. These types
are technically redundant as they can be inferred by the fields of the expression object.
34
L – A Gradual Compiler
==PAGE:43==
1
execute_bytecode() {
2
var pc = this.state.registers['$!'];
3
this.program.instructions[pc].handle(this);
4
this.state.registers['$!']++;
5
}
Listing 6.6: Executing a bytecode instruction in the virtual machine
It was chosen to use these types to increase readability in the VM as a switch is imple­
mented that checks the type of content and the expression types can now be added to
the switch. Nested expressions can be formed by creating an expression object as the
readers.
6.6.4
Running bytecode
The VM executes one bytecode instruction at a time. It is up to the user of the coding
environment whether they want to execute all instructions at once, or step through them
one at a time (debug).
The VM runs an instruction using the function seen in listing 6.6.
The VM fetches the instruction which the current program counter points to, and calls the
handle function seen in listing 6.3 using itself as input.
The VM then implements each of the possible functions shown in the switch case of the
handle function, and calls the appropriate one based on the OPcode of the instruction.
An example of this, would be assign_binary(cond, not, writer, reader, opr,
reader2). Where cond is used as a boolean which determines whether or not to check
the $? register, for execution rights and not is logical negation. This function evaluates
the expression made up of reader, opr, reader2 using the JavaScript eval function, how­
ever, before the readers are passed to eval, they are read by the VM, and the result
of read is passed instead. The evaluation is then assigned to the writer provided as a
parameter, this is done through the write function implemented by the VM.
6.6.5
Read and write
Reading is done by the virtual machine, through the read function. This function takes a
reader, which is a type of content. The reader has a type field, which is used to determine
what type of reader it is. Most reader types such as CONTENT_TYPES.REGISTER will
simply require the VM to look up in a key­value pairing which stores the value of the
reader, using the id of the reader. In the case of a register reader, the id would be equal
to the name of the register, and thus the value is easily retrieve­able. The same goes for
constants and labels. A reader can also be a number or an expression. In the case of a
number, the number is stored in the id field of the reader. In the case that the reader is an
expression, the expression is evaluated using the already existing evaluate functions.
Lastly and most interestingly, is the case where the type of reader, is a memory reader.
In this case, the reader will contain a memory index, as well as a datatype. The memory
L – A Gradual Compiler
35
==PAGE:44==
index can be any other reader, this allows the user to index using a register, a constant or
even an expression. The datatype can be either a signed or an unsigned integer, with 8,
16, 32 or 64 bit. The memory index is used by the VM to know when
6.7
The coding environment
The coding environment is implemented as a html page, which contains the entire func­
tionality of the prototype. The entry point for the user of the environment, is the environ­
ment.js file. This is the file which sets up the interactive coding windows, and draws the
front­end dynamically.
On the left of the page, there is a window in which the user can write code. To implement
this window, we use the open­source library, CodeMirror 5[14]. CodeMirror allows the
creation of interactive text windows, and provides many functionalities which are used
throughout the project.
Whenever the user changes the content of the left side window, a ’change’ event is fired.
An event listener is used to listen for this event. Once this event is caught, the content of
the left side window is sent to the method parse_and_pretty_print(source_code)
shown below in listing 6.7.
This function parses the source code using the correct parser, corresponding to the level
chosen by the user, in the selection field shown above the left­side window in fig. 6.1. The
output AST is then compiled, and the virtual machine with this program is then drawn.
This makes it so that whenever the user changes the content of the left side window, they
immediately see the corresponding compiled L0 code, with syntax highlighting. This way,
the user will get instant visual feedback from the code that they are writing. In fig. 6.2
below, the right side of the page, at the time of execution shown infig. 6.1 can be seen.
Furthermore, if the user has made a syntactical error in their left­hand side content, an
appropriate error message is instantly displayed in the right hand window instead of the
compiled code.
6.8
Build module
The build module described in section 5.4.1 is implemented as a Python script. The script
creates a docker container, this is done using the ”docker” python library which allows
docker to be controlled through Python. The docker is built from a docker image, specified
in a Dockerfile. Through the Dockerfile, the container is spun up using Ubuntu 22.04.
The After this, the container downloads and installs several needed for the build process.
These are: curl, sudo, git, xz­utils, lbzip2, Nodejs 14.15.5, Emscripten 2.0.24, Tree­Sitter
20.0, and CodeMirror 5.
Because the desired output of the build module is single HTML file without dependen­
cies, some parts will have to be compiled to WebAssembly (WASM), which most modern
browsers are able to run. Within the docker container, each of the grammars defined by
the user for each level, is copied into the container. From here, TreeSitter is used to build
36
L – A Gradual Compiler
==PAGE:45==
Figure 6.1: Left side of the page, showing the interactive text­editor window. In the picture, L3
code is currently being debugged. Below the window there are several buttons used to execute or
debug the code. Below the buttons, the variables in the currently debugging step are shown. The
variables are shown as a stack, where each stack frame is below the one before it. Furthermore,
a level selector can be seen above the window, used to switch between different levels of L.
1
async function parse_and_pretty_print(source_code) {
2
let parsers = await initialize_parser();
3
let AST = parsers[chosenLevel.value].parse(source_code);
4
let program = Compile(AST);
5
var VM = get_virtual_machine(program);
6
draw(VM);
7
}
Listing 6.7: Function which parses and draws source code
L – A Gradual Compiler
37
==PAGE:46==
Figure 6.2: Right hand side of the same execution shown in figure 6.1. The window at the top
shows L0 code compiled from L3 code. Furthermore, instruction 11 is currently being executed
by the VM, which corresponds to the code highlighted in the left side window. Not shown in this
picture, is the registers and memory at the current point of execution, which are located below the
content shown in the picture.
a parser for each level. After this, each parser as well as the TreeSitter library itself is
compiled to WASM.
The compiled WASM files, as well as the CodeMirror library is moved to a temporary
folder outside of the docker container. The next step, is that the WASM files are encoded
into Base64. This allows us to encode the WASM objects into the final HTML file, and
then later decode them to objects. This allows us to get rid of all dependencies that is the
generated L parsers and the TreeSitter library.
Following this, the index.html file which is used to structure the coding environment, is run
through. For each file that the HTML file loads, that section of the HTML file is replaced
with the contents of the file that it was going to load. This is a simple but effective way of
bundling all JavaScript and CSS files into a single HTML file. The downside of this is that
the HTML file itself becomes large, but that is a necessary trade­off if we wish to output
only a single file. A possible remedy to this, is to use a minifier/compressor. This is a
tool which runs through a document, and replaces all functions and variable names with
single, double or maybe triple character variants to save space. However, we decided
that there was no real gain to be obtained from doing this as final HTML file is still small.
It also has the downside that if someone wanted to debug the HTML, doing so on minified
code is much harder.
The last step of the build process is to delete all of the temporary folders, used in the
process.
38
L – A Gradual Compiler
==PAGE:47==
6.9
Test module
A test setup was built, using the golden test strategy. The golden test strategy revolves
around comparing the output of a project, to ”golden” output files. Every time the test is
run, if the output of the project differs from the previous output files, something is wrong
with the output. The caveat is that we need to be sure that the golden output files are
actually correct.
The test script is made as a Python script, and it is an end­to­end test. The test setup uses
two folders, the case folder and the result folder. In the test folder, L code to be tested are
placed in separate files, and when the test is run a result file is placed in the result folder,
for each case file.
The test script starts a small web scraper application, which executes the source code
specified in the case files, and scrapes the output HTML. Version control then alerts us if
any of the result files have changed. This ensures that all test cases perform as expected,
when any changes are made to the code base.
L – A Gradual Compiler
39
==PAGE:48==
40
L – A Gradual Compiler
==PAGE:49==
7
Evaluation
The framework has been implemented for the base language L and several language ex­
tensions has been created, up to L4. In this section, we evaluate how well the framework
facilitates extending the compiler. Each extension will be evaluated separately and intro­
duce changes to the syntax. These changes are either new additions or modifications
to the existing syntax. To finish off this chapter, an evaluation of the framework is done
holistically in section 7.7.
It was not enough to simply evaluate the amount of code needed to implement each
extension, this is because they vary in complexity. Take scoped variables as an example,
a scoped variable should be temporary, such that it only exists withing the scope. In order
to implement this the compiler has to keep track of the context of the program to know if
a variable is inside a scope or not. This is a lot more complex than doing a simple code
translation and it will require more code in order to be implemented.
7.1
Overview
To answer our research question
Is it possible to develop a framework, which can easily extend a low­level
programming language with higher abstraction level programming constructs?
We have developed a framework which can extend low­level programming languages. In
this evaluation, we tried to answer the following questions:
• Is the framework easy to extend, and is it easy to re­use constructs defined in lower
levels when extending?
• Can the framework be used to implement complex extensions?
In table 7.1 we list all the extensions we have done to the language. L0 is the first level,
which implements the base language (section 7.2). L1 is introduced to show that simple
extension are possible and that constructs from the previous extension can be reused. L2
Table 7.1: A table of the extensions we made to L
Level
Description
LOC
Added Syntax
L0 (Section 7.2)
The initial language
410
26
L1 (Section 7.3)
Goto’s
27
2
L2 (Section 7.4)
Variables and Scopes
319
7
L3 (Section 7.5)
Nested expressions
115
1
L4 (Section 7.6)
If­else statements and loops
186
5
L – A Gradual Compiler
41
==PAGE:50==
is introduced to show that we can create more complex abstractions by introducing vari­
ables and scopes. Variables inside a scope are temporary and can only be used within
the scope. This creates context to the language which is useful for other programming
concepts such as loops, branch statements and methods. L3 introduces nested expres­
sions. This was done to showcase that our design is powerful enough to easily handle
arbitrarily big expressions, and that it can compute them correctly as long as precedence
is defined properly in the syntax. L4 is introduced to show that it is simple to add high­level
programming concepts such as loops and if­else statements. Here we also show that it
is easy to utilize the scopes created in L2 and goto which were created in L1. We have
listed the number of lines needed to perform the extensions. This metric shows that each
extension have been manageable in size.
All the compiler modules containing the levels described in this chapter are available at:
https://github.com/MarcBrejner/browser-l/tree/main/framework/levels.
7.2
L0
In this section we introduce the implementation of L0. The syntax of L0 can be seen in
fig. 7.1 and it is defined in BNF. The root of the syntax is the source_file symbol. From here
the user can optionally define an any amount of declarations followed by statements. A
statement can either be an assignment or a syscall, which corresponds to the five possible
instructions of the L base language described in chapter 3.
Non­terminal symbols are defined with ⟨symbol⟩. The terminal nodes are defined using
regular expressions.
7.2.1
L0 Visitor
Let us examine the visit(node) which is implemented in the base class L0Visitor. The
code inside the visit function of listing 7.1 utilizes the fact that classes in JavaScript are
simply JavaScript objects. this[node.type] resolves to a function within the object which
has the same name as the type of the node.
If no such function is found it will in­
stead resolve to undefined. If it is resolved as a function, the function can be called with
this[node.type](node). Because some node types have no other purpose than structur­
ing the AST, these types are grouped together, and handled by the default function.
Using default, rather than adding each of these types as functions which perform the
same operation, greatly improved readability of the L0Visitor and enforced the DRY prin­
ciple[15] as the the L0Visitor only contains a function for each node which has to be
handled uniquely.
An example of a node added to the closed union can be seen in listing 7.2. It simply
extracts the necessary information from the node and forwards it to the emitter system
which will be covered in section 7.2.2.
Some functions recursively explore the children of the input node. An example of this
can be seen in listing 7.3. The writer of the assignment is the left hand side and it is
42
L – A Gradual Compiler
==PAGE:51==
⟨source_file⟩
::=
⟨declarations⟩? ⟨statements⟩
⟨declarations⟩
::=
⟨declaration⟩+
⟨declaration⟩
::=
⟨constant_declaration⟩| ⟨data_declaration⟩
⟨constant_declaration⟩
::=
const ⟨constant⟩⟨number⟩
⟨data_declaration⟩
::=
data ⟨data⟩⟨string⟩
⟨statements⟩
::=
⟨label⟩? ⟨statement⟩+ ⟨comment⟩?
⟨statement⟩
::=
⟨syscall⟩| ⟨assignment⟩
⟨assignment⟩
::=
⟨writer⟩:= ⟨not⟩? ⟨expression⟩| ⟨writer⟩?= ⟨not⟩? ⟨expression⟩
⟨expression⟩
::=
⟨reader⟩⟨op⟩⟨reader⟩| ⟨reader⟩⟨logical_op⟩⟨reader⟩|
- ⟨reader⟩| ⟨reader⟩
⟨reader⟩
::=
⟨register⟩| ⟨memory⟩| ⟨number⟩| ⟨label⟩| ⟨constant⟩| ⟨data⟩
⟨writer⟩
::=
⟨register⟩| ⟨memory⟩
⟨memory⟩
::=
[ ⟨memory_reader⟩, ⟨type⟩] | [ ⟨memory_expression⟩, ⟨type⟩]
⟨memory_expression⟩
::=
⟨memory_reader⟩⟨op⟩⟨memory_reader⟩
⟨memory_reader⟩
::=
⟨register⟩| ⟨number⟩| ⟨constant⟩| ⟨data⟩
⟨constant⟩
::=
@[_a-zA-Z]+
⟨data⟩
::=
&[_a-zA-Z]+
⟨label⟩
::=
#[A-Z]+
⟨type⟩
::=
i8|i16|i32|i64|u8|u16|u32|u64|f8|f16|f32|f64
⟨register⟩
::=
$[x,y,i,j,k,l,m,n,?,!]
⟨syscall⟩
::=
"syscall"
⟨op⟩
::=
[+-/*]
⟨logical_op⟩
::=
[&, |, <, >, >=, <=, ==]
⟨number⟩
::=
[0-9]+
⟨string⟩
::=
".+"
⟨comment⟩
::=
//[a-zA-Z0-9]+
⟨not⟩
::=
!
Figure 7.1: L0
L – A Gradual Compiler
43
==PAGE:52==
1
visit(node) {
2
this._emitter.node_stack.push(node);
3
if (this[node.type] === undefined) {
4
var r = this.default(node);
5
this._emitter.node_stack.pop();
6
return r;
7
} else {
8
var r = this[node.type](node);
9
this._emitter.node_stack.pop();
10
return r;
11
}
12
}
13
14
default(node) {
15
if (node.childCount == 1) {
16
return this.visit(node.child(0));
17
} else {
18
node.children.forEach(c => { this.visit(c) });
19
}
20
}
Listing 7.1: The visit and default function
1
register(node) {
2
var register_id = node.text;
3
return this._emitter.register(register_id);
4
}
Listing 7.2: Registers added to the closed union
44
L – A Gradual Compiler
==PAGE:53==
1
assignment(node) {
2
var is_conditional = node.child(1).text === "?=" ? true : false;
3
var writer = this.visit(node.child(0));
4
var expression = this.visit(node.child(2));
5
this._emitter.assignment(is_conditional, writer, expression);
6
}
Listing 7.3: Assignments added to the closed union
1
expression(node) {
2
switch (node.childCount) {
3
case 1:
4
var reader = this.visit(node.child(0));
5
return this._emitter.expression(reader)
6
case 2:
7
var oper = node.child(0).text;
8
var reader =
this.visit(node.child(1));
9
return this._emitter.unary_expression(oper, reader)
10
case 3:
11
var left_reader = this.visit(get_left_child(node));
12
var oper = get_operator(node).text;
13
var right_reader = this.visit(get_right_child(node));
14
return this._emitter.binary_expression(left_reader,
15
oper, right_reader);
16
}
17
}
Listing 7.4: Handling expressions in the L0Visitor by adding expression to the closed union
resolved by recursively calling visit. Similarly the expression which is the right hand
side is explored recursively. Visiting the writer will eventually invoke a call to the emitter,
which will return content as described in section 6.6.2 containing information of the writer.
An expression can have multiple children based on the type of expression. This is han­
dled by checking the child count of the expression node and then calling the appropriate
function in the emitter. The implementation of this can be seen in listing 7.4.
7.2.2
L0 Emitter
The L0 emitter is the base emitter class. The emitter implements functions which are called
by the visitor. Most of these functions return either the content or expression object. An
example of how content is created and returned can be seen in listing 7.5, which shows
how the function simply takes the input it gets from the visitor and creates a new content
object based on this.
Furthermore, the L0 emitter is the only point in the entire system, which creates and emits
bytecode to the instructions array. This happens through the assignment function seen
in listing 7.6. This function is the only function ever used to emit bytecode in the system.
It is also called either directly or indirectly by higher levels of L when they need to emit an
L – A Gradual Compiler
45
==PAGE:54==
1
memory(memory_id, datatype) {
2
return new Content(CONTENT_TYPES.MEMORY, memory_id, datatype);
3
}
Listing 7.5: Memory content
1
assignment(writer, expression, is_conditional=false, has_not=false) {
2
this.push_statement(new ByteCode(get_opcode(expression),
3
[is_conditional, has_not, writer]
4
.concat(convert_content_to_array(expression))));
5
}
6
7
push_statement(byte_code) {
8
this._statements.push(byte_code);
9
this._drawer.node_ECS.push(this.node_stack.peek());
10
}
Listing 7.6: Pushing a bytecode instruction in the L0Emitter
instruction.
7.2.3
Draw
All draw modules contain a draw function, which takes the virtual machine as the only
input. This draw function can then later be called by the coding environment. The drawer
of the L0 compiler has several responsibilities, these include:
• Pretty­printing the compiled L0 code
• Highlighting currently executing code when debugging
• Drawing the state of the VM
Pretty printing is done by getting the program from the VM, and then running through
each instruction. For each instruction, the bytecode within it is pretty printed. Drawing the
state of the VM, simply involves getting the current registers and memory from the VM,
and displaying these with HTML. Highlighting executing code when debugging utilizes
the fact that framework allows for traceability of syntax. We see this in listing 7.6 where
the node_stack is peeked, and the current node is pushed to the drawer. This creates
a mapping within the drawer, between the source code and the pretty printed code. By
using this mapping, the drawer can simultaneously highlight the currently executing pretty­
printed instruction, along with the source code which it stemmed from.
This is done with the color function, of the L0 drawer, which can be seen in listing 7.7.
Here we can see how the node mapping node_ECS of the drawer, along with the program
counter, is used to find the start­ and end­ position of the source code which it stemmed
from, in the code editor. These positions are then used to color the text. Meanwhile, the
simultaneous highlighting of the pretty­printed code is handled by the pretty­printer.
46
L – A Gradual Compiler
==PAGE:55==
1
color(vm){
2
var pc = vm.state.registers["$!"];
3
if(pc >= vm.program.instructions.length){
4
return;
5
}
6
clear_highlights()
7
const start = {
8
line: this.node_ECS[pc].startPosition.row,
9
ch: this.node_ECS[pc].startPosition.column
10
}
11
12
const end = {
13
line: this.node_ECS[pc].endPosition.row,
14
ch: this.node_ECS[pc].endPosition.column
15
}
16
codeMirrorEditor.markText(start, end, { className: 'highlight-line' });
17
}
Listing 7.7: Highlighting debugged code in the code­editor
1
#LABEL
2
$n := $n + 1;
3
$! ?= #LABEL - 1;
Listing 7.8: Jump to a label in L0
7.2.4
Reflections
We observe from the L0 implementation how each of the components of the framework
are able to interact and create a functioning stand­alone compiler without any extensions.
It achieves this while maintaining low cohesion through the separation of input parameters
to each of the systems. All visitor functions only take a single node as input, and nothing
else. Meanwhile we see that the emitter never takes a node as input, and does not rely
in any way on the AST directly.
7.3
L1 ­ Goto
L1 was made as an initial test of the framework. Adding only a single and simple extension.
Specifically, L1 adds the goto construct to the base language. The purpose of goto is to
jump to a specific label in the code. In listing 7.8 the L0 code of a jump can be seen,
where the label is attached to the statement
$n := $n + 1; . The program counter has
to be conditionally assigned to the instruction number which the label points to. This
number has to be subtracted by 1 because the program counter is incremented before an
instruction is executed. This is made easier by adding goto, the equivalent L1 code can
be seen in listing 7.9. The goto in the L1 example will be compiled down to the conditional
assignment we see in listing 7.8.
L – A Gradual Compiler
47
==PAGE:56==
1
#LABEL
2
$n := $n + 1;
3
goto #LABEL;
Listing 7.9: Jump to a label in L1
⟨statement⟩
::=
⟨assignment⟩| ⟨syscall⟩| ⟨goto⟩
⟨goto⟩
::=
goto ⟨register⟩| goto ⟨label⟩
Figure 7.2: New syntax added to the L0 syntax can be seen highlighted in green
7.3.1
Grammar modification
goto is added as an additional option to statement. The updated grammar can be seen
in fig. 7.2.
After compiling a goto statement, the register containing the program counter should con­
ditionally be set to the instruction number which the given label points to. The reasoning
behind compiling goto down to a conditional assignment is to allow conditional jumps,
which will be very valuable when branches and loops are introduced. Extending the com­
piler to handle goto’s was a simple task due to how the framework is designed.
In the listing below, the entire L1 compiler module is seen. It can be seen how it consists
of the three parts of the framework, visitor, emitter and draw, discussed in section 4.2.
It can be seen in the visitor’s goto function, how it gets the reader and the label, by calling
it’s own visit method, i.e. the L0 visit. The extracted information is then passed on
the to emitter goto which emits a conditional assignment instruction. Where the register
to be assigned is the program counter $!, and the right hand side is the label subtracted
with one.
Notice how the higher level L1 emitter is able to easily create constructs from L0 because
it extends it. For example by calling this.register(’$!’) the L0 method creates the correct
content type used to represent the register $!. This mechanism is what allows the user to
define higher levels of L, using any constructs introduced below it, and not just constructs
from L0.
L1 does not draw anything new, so the L1 drawer simply extends the L0 drawer and calls
super.draw to make sure L0 draw is always called even if a higher level of L is selected.
7.3.2
Reflections
While implementing this first extension we learned that it is easy to create an extension of
a simple syntax addition as the only requirement is to create the extensions classes and
a function for each new product of the syntax. We also learned that re­using constructs
from a lower level is straight­forward and eases the development of the new extension.
48
L – A Gradual Compiler
==PAGE:57==
1
class L1Visitor extends L0Visitor {
2
goto(node) {
3
var reader = node.child(1);
4
var pos = this.visit(reader);
5
this._emitter.goto(pos);
6
}
7
}
8
9
class L1Emitter extends L0Emitter{
10
goto(pos){
11
this.assignment(
12
this.register('$!'),
13
this.binary_expression(pos, '-', this.number(1)),
14
true
15
);
16
}
17
}
Listing 7.10: L1 compiler module, the emitter’s goto function can be built almost entirely by re­
using L0 emitter functions.
7.4
L2 ­ Variables and Context
In this level things become a little more complex as we now introduce scopes and vari­
ables. Variables are by default globally accessible in the code, however if a variable is
defined within a scope, then it will be a temporary variable that only exists within the
scope. This adds context to the language, and the compiler extension needs to be able
to handle this context correctly by keeping track of whether the current program state is
inside a scope or not. In this section we go over the modifications made to the syntax
of the previous L1 grammar. We then explain how the compiler was extended to include
variables and scopes.
7.4.1
Grammar modification
In this level scope has been introduced, which changes the structure of the grammar sig­
nificantly. A new type statement_block has been introduced which can only hold scopes
for now. It is intended to hold all constructs which uses scopes. The only reason the
statement_block is introduced is to emit semicolon which is enforced after every state­
ment. In this level variable is added as a new option in statement. The updated grammar
includes variable_name, which can be used in either a reader or a variable. The updated
grammar can be seen in fig. 7.3.
7.4.2
Variables
A variable should be declared using an arbitrary name for the variable, the type of the
variable, and the value the variable should hold. An example of a variable declaration
can be seen in listing 7.11. The value of the variable should be stored in memory and it
should be easy for a programmer to see where in memory the variable is stored. Memory
should be allocated to accommodate the size of the variable, which is determined by its
L – A Gradual Compiler
49
==PAGE:58==
⟨statements⟩
::=
⟨label⟩? ⟨statement⟩+ ⟨comment⟩? |
⟨label⟩? ⟨statement_block⟩+ ⟨comment⟩?
⟨statement⟩
::=
⟨assignment⟩| ⟨syscall⟩| ⟨goto⟩| ⟨variable⟩
⟨statement_block⟩
::=
⟨scope⟩
⟨scope⟩
::=
{ ⟨statements⟩}
⟨variable⟩
::=
⟨variable_name⟩: ⟨type⟩= ⟨not⟩? ⟨expression⟩
⟨reader⟩
::=
⟨register⟩| ⟨memory⟩| ⟨number⟩| ⟨label⟩|
⟨constant⟩| ⟨data⟩| ⟨variable_name⟩
⟨variable_name⟩
::=
[_a-zA-Z]+
Figure 7.3: Partial L2 syntax, which shows the changes made to the L0 syntax where newly added
syntax can be seen highlighted in green.
1
exampleVariable:u8=42;
Listing 7.11: This listing shows the declaration of an unsigned 8 bit variable with a value of 42.
type. The variable types supported by L2 are the same as those used for memory access
introduced in L0.
If a variable is declared with a name that has already been used it should overwrite the
value of the existing variable. Creating the visitor extension for variables was easy, as
only one function was needed, which mostly needs to extract the name, type, and value
of the variable. The visitor extension can be seen in listing 7.12. In the code snippet,
we see that the expression node has to be visited before it can be sent to the emitter.
Furthermore, because it is possible to negate the expression, the exact position of the
expression inside the variable node can change. The logic which ensures that the right
child of the node is visited can be seen at line 3­10 in listing 7.12.
7.4.3
Emitting global variables
When compiling a variable declaration down, there are two prominent questions, how do
we find a free memory location to put the variable and how do we keep track of all the
variables such that they can be read from after their declaration. The first one is rather
simple to solve because of how we have implemented data declarations for L0. When we
want to declare a variable we will simple reuse the functionality of data declaration which
takes care of finding a spot for the variable. The name of the variable will be the key to
access the correct memory. In order to allocate enough memory for the variable a string
containing zeroes is made which takes up as much memory as the type requires. We
will keep track of all variables by using a variable dictionary in within the L2 emitter. This
dictionary will have the name of the variable as the key and the type of the variable as the
value. These are the only two necessary components required when reading the variable
50
L – A Gradual Compiler
==PAGE:59==
1
variable(node)
{
2
var var_name = node.child(0).text;
3
var var_size = node.child(2).text;
4
var has_not = node.child(4).text === '!' ? true : false;
5
var expression = null;
6
if (has_not) {
7
var expression = this.visit(node.child(5));
8
} else {
9
var expression = this.visit(node.child(4));
10
}
11
return this._emitter.variable(var_name, var_size, expression, has_not);
12
}
Listing 7.12: Implementation of variable declaration in the L2 visitor
value from memory. Because the variable has been declared in memory as a string of
zeroes, only one L instruction is required to finish the variable declaration. A call to L0
assignment is done by also using the L0 function for creating a memory expression. The
memory expression contains the variable name and the type. The full code for this can
be seen in listing 7.13. At line 5 in listing 7.13 we check if the variable already exists, if it
does not exist then we go into the if statement and here we see how the variable name
is added to the variable dictionary and how the memory allocation is done by adding the
variable name to the data map. On line 15 we see a call to the drawer system, which will
be explained later in section 7.4.6. At line 4 there is a call to a read_var function inside
the emitter, this function simply looks up a variable in the variable dictionary we defined
earlier. This is the same function which is called when a variable_name node is found by
the visitor.
7.4.4
Scope
The visitor extensions for the scope was easy to implement as we simply have to explore
every statement inside the scope. The code can be seen in listing 7.14, where it is up to
the emitter to define what happens once a scope begins or ends.
7.4.5
Emitter
In the emitter, we had to find a solution for keeping track of when we are inside a scope
and when we are not. This was necessary, so that variables declared inside the scope will
be declared as temporary variables, and when reading from a variable inside the scope
we will be reading from a temporary variable if it exists, and otherwise global variables. To
solve this, we introduce a stack. Where each scope will be a frame on the stack. A stack
frame contains all the variables which are defined inside that scope. Furthermore a frame
has a pointer to the frame which was defined before itself, as it should be possible for an
inner scope to access the temporary variables defined in an outer scope. An illustration
of the stack can be seen in fig. 7.4.
The stack is going to be added to memory as we will see, when we examine temporary
variables later in this section. The idea is that the stack starts at a position indicated by
L – A Gradual Compiler
51
==PAGE:60==
1
variable_declaration(var_name, var_size, expression, has_not) {
2
var p_var = '&_' + var_name;
3
var byte_size = get_variable_bytesize(var_size)
4
var writer = this.read_var(p_var, var_size);
5
if (writer === null) {
6
this.variables[p_var] = var_size;
7
var memory_allocation = "";
8
for (var i = 0; i < byte_size; i++) {
9
memory_allocation += "0";
10
}
11
12
this._data[p_var] = memory_allocation;
13
}
14
15
this._drawer.variable_states[this._statements.length] =
16
[structuredClone(this.variables), null];
17
this.assignment(
18
this.memory(this.data(p_var), get_datatype(var_size)),
19
expression, false, has_not);
20
}
Listing 7.13: Declaration of a variable
1
scope(node) {
2
this._emitter.start_scope();
3
this.visit(node.child(1));
4
this._emitter.end_scope();
5
}
Listing 7.14: Scopes added to the closed union
52
L – A Gradual Compiler
==PAGE:61==
Figure 7.4: In this figure it can be seen how the stack frames are connected. It is possible to travel
from the head of the stack all the way to the bottom by following the next pointer of each stack
frame. This is what allows innermost scopes to access the temporary variables of their outer
scopes as the outermost scopes are placed closer to the bottom of the stack where the frame
pointer is. Furthermore since it is impossible to traverse the stack in the opposite direction, the
frame at the bottom of the stack is unable to access any of the variables defined in the two inner
stack frames.
1
this._drawer.variable_states[this._statements.length] =
2
[structuredClone(this.variables), structuredClone(this.head)];
Listing 7.15: Snapshotting and writing states to the drawer
a pointer, the frame pointer, which will point to the top of memory, e.g the last memory
index. Within the emitter, we keep a pointer to the head of the stack.
Entering a scope is handled by the start_scope function. This creates a new stack
frame, puts it on the stack and moves the head. When exiting a scope we do not delete a
stack frame, we simply move the head back such that the scope we just exited is no longer
accessible. When a new scope is added it will simply overwrite any old stack frames.
Whether a temporary variable or a normal variable should be declared is decided by a
global boolean in_scope. A temporary variable is created similarly to a normal variable,
however instead of allocating memory by using data, the variable is added to the variable
map of the current stack frame.
7.4.6
Draw
As L2 introduces variables as well as scoped variables, the L2 drawer was added to vi­
sualize these. Whenever a variable is created, whether it be temporary or not, the global
variables as well as the head of the stack is snapshotted, and written to the L2 drawer as
seen in listing 7.15.
The snapshots are written to the drawer in the order at which they were created. Because
of this, the programming counter of the VM, can be used to easily determine which snap­
L – A Gradual Compiler
53
==PAGE:62==
Figure 7.5: Example stack drawn by L2 Drawer. &_z is in the global scope, while the variable h
is in the innermost scope, and therefore the head of the stack.
shots should be displayed at which point during debugging. By utilizing this mapping and
the snapshots, the L2 drawer can visualize the stack as seen in fig. 7.5 below:
7.4.7
Reflection
From adding L2, we learned that it is possible to create more complex extensions and
that it is possible to create supporting infrastructure to handle internal states. We learned
this from the fact that we were able to keep track of scopes and stack frames within the
extension, without having to modify any of the lower levels of L. In the implementation of
L4 we will see how the implementation of scopes and its stack are re­used to extend the
language with loops and if/else statements.
7.5
L3 ­ Nested Expressions
The L3 visitor had to overcome a few more challenges, than the previous visitors. Modi­
fying the existing expression node so that it allows nested expressions raised two major
challenges. Firstly an algorithm that allows exploration of the expression in the correct
order was needed. Furthermore, this algorithm had to abide by the rules of precedence
defined in the grammar. Secondly, if the expression node has to handle both the previous
version of expressions, as well as the nested ones, then the L3 visitor has to override the
existing expression. The second problem raised the question, how do we ensure that an
expression is explored correctly when we have two functions that work on the same node
type, but explores it in a vastly different manner. We answer this question in section 7.5.3.
7.5.1
Grammar Modifications
In this level, the only change to the grammar has been an expansion of the expressions.
It is now possible to have an expression as the left, right, or both sides of the expression.
Furthermore precedence has been added, to ensure that multiplication and division are
54
L – A Gradual Compiler
==PAGE:63==
⟨expression⟩
::=
(⟨expression⟩) ⟨logical_op⟩(⟨expression⟩) |
(⟨expression⟩) ⟨logical_op⟩⟨reader⟩|
⟨reader⟩⟨logical_op⟩(⟨expression⟩) |
(⟨expression⟩) ⟨op⟩(⟨expression⟩) |
(⟨expression⟩) ⟨op⟩⟨reader⟩|
⟨reader⟩⟨op⟩(⟨expression⟩)
⟨reader⟩⟨op⟩⟨reader⟩| ⟨reader⟩⟨logical_op⟩⟨reader⟩
Figure 7.6: The updated expression syntax for L3, all the changes made to the previous version
of expression can be seen highlighted in green
resolved before addition and subtraction. Logical operations has been given the same
precedence as multiplication and division. These can be seen in fig. 7.6.
7.5.2
Nested expressions
Using expressions in the previous levels of L have been restrictive in the sense that
only two readers can be operated on in a single statement. A statement such as this:
$x := $y ∗2 + $z;
would have to be split up into two separate statements as such:
$x := $y ∗2;
$x := $x + $z;
L3 should be able to evaluate the correct result of an expression that has an arbitrary
number of operations. Furthermore it should calculate the result correctly, following the
rules of precedence. In order to achieve this the expressions of L3 are designed as a
binary tree, where each node is either an expression or a reader. Each expression node
contains an operator that should be performed on the left and right child nodes. Prece­
dence dictates the placement of nodes within the tree. The expression at the leaf nodes
have the highest precedence and will be evaluated first, while the node at the root has
the lowest precedence and will be evaluated last.
In order to adhere by the rule of precedence the traversal algorithm uses DFS to evaluate
the leaf nodes first. Pre­order traversal was chosen because it follows the natural way
of reading from left to right. Because L0 can at most operate on binary expressions, the
result of each expression has to be saved in a register for every following expression to
accumulate the result. In the example above, the result of
$y ∗2
has to be saved in
a register such as $x before it can be added together with $z. It is convenient to always
accumulate the result of every binary expression in a single register because a limited
amount of registers are available in the VM. However a problem also arises with this
approach. Take this assignment as an example:
$x := (1 ∗2) + (3 ∗4);
L – A Gradual Compiler
55
==PAGE:64==
If we try to accumulate the result in register $x while following the rule of precedence
we will end up overwriting the result of the left expression, with the result of the right
expression. There is no way we can accumulate the right expression in the same register
without breaking the rule of precedence. We would have to save the result in another
register and then add the two register together as follows:
$x := 1 ∗2;
$y := 3 ∗4;
$x := $x + $y
But this brings us back to the problem of limited registers in the VM, as one could imagine
a very large expression taking up all the registers. The solution to this problem is to use
temporary variables from L2 to store the results of the left­child expressions. However we
know that we only have to make a temporary variable, whenever the right­child is a binary
expression. This is because if the right child is a unary expression, or simply a reader, we
can accumulate the result in register $x as shown in the first example. This optimization
can save a lot of memory when an expression is a long chain of operations of the same
precedence, as these can all be accumulated in a single register.
With this information in mind, the following algorithm was designed
1. Start scope
2. Recursively handle left child
3. Save the result of the left child in a temporary variable if the right child is also an
expression otherwise save it in $x
4. Recursively handle right child
5. Save the result of the right child in $x
6. Accumulate the result of the left and the right child in register $x
7. End scope
This algorithm solves the first problem described in section 7.5.2 and it was easy to imple­
ment the algorithm in the visitor and emitter. The visitor contains a single function for the
expressions and inside the function a line of code is made for each step in the algorithm.
Start and end scope calls the already implemented functions of L2. The recursive calls
are done by calling visit. Saving and accumulating the results are done by the emitter,
the visitor simply calls the correct emitter functions.
7.5.3
Handling multiple functions with the same name
When a node with type ”expression” is found, visit calls this.expression(node) which means
the function that is called will always be the highest level visitor with an expression func­
tion. In the case of L3 it is not necessary for L3 to take care of an expression if it does
not contain nested expressions. Because of this a check is made to see if an expres­
sion is nested. If it is not then super.expression will be called. This is a specific solution
56
L – A Gradual Compiler
==PAGE:65==
⟨statement_block⟩
::=
⟨scope⟩| ⟨if⟩| ⟨for⟩| ⟨while⟩
⟨if⟩
::=
if ( ⟨expression⟩) ⟨scope⟩⟨else⟩?
⟨else⟩
::=
else ⟨scope⟩
⟨for⟩
::=
for ( ⟨variable⟩; ⟨expression⟩; ⟨expression⟩) ⟨scope⟩
⟨while⟩
::=
while ( ⟨expression⟩)
Figure 7.7: Grammar modification for L4
that works for JavaScript and their class inheritance, however it is possible to solve this
problem in a similar fashion in other programming languages.
7.5.4
Reflections
In this extension we learned that it is easy to utilize the recursive nature of the framework
to handle large nested statements. We also learned that it is easy to compile a single line
of high level code down to multiple L0 instructions, without losing traceability of syntax.
Furthermore, we see that the framework also allows us to modify and overwrite previously
existing functions.
7.6
L4 ­ if/else and loops
In this level of L we introduce if­ and else statements as well as while­, and for loops.
In this section we explain how the compiler was extended to handle these programming
concepts.
7.6.1
Grammar modifications
In L4 grammar modification seen in fig. 7.7, the statement_block was expanded with three
new products, if, for, and while. The if statements has an optional else. All the new
products re­use the scope from the previous level, which allows temporary variables and
includes curly braces. The for loop is designed similar to that of a C or Java for loop,
where an accumulator is initialized first. Then a boolean guard is defined, and the loop is
intended to run while the guard holds true.
7.6.2
The visitor extensions
When creating the visitor extension for L4 we first wrote down some examples, of how
each of the new concepts should be written in L4, and then we wrote down the equivalent
L0 code that it should be compiled down to. By doing this it was easier to see which emit­
ter functions were required to compile properly. Let us look at the if­else statement as an
example. In listing 7.16 the code for an if­else statement written in L4 can be seen, here
we used ”if_statements” to indicate that an arbitrary number of statements are written, and
that they belong to the if case. Because of this it will be easier to see where these state­
ments end up when we compile it down to L0 code which can be seen in listing 7.17. The
guard expression, denoted as expr in listing 7.16 will be treated as a boolean expression
where 0 resolves to false and any other value will resolve to true.
L – A Gradual Compiler
57
==PAGE:66==
1
if (expr) {
2
if_statements
3
else {
4
else_statements
5
}
Listing 7.16: If else statement in L4 syntax
1
$? := !expr;
2
$! ?= #ELSE_1 - 1;
3
#IF_1
4
if_statements;
5
$! := #END_IF_1 - 1;
6
#ELSE_1
7
else_statements;
8
#END_IF_1
Listing 7.17: If else statement in L0 syntax
Since the statements of an if should only be executed if the guard­expression resolves to
true, a way to jump over the if statements is required. An easy way to make this happen
is to negate the guard expression. By doing this if the expression was originally false, we
set it to true, and we can make a jump over the if statements. However if the expression
is originally true, we set it to false and we do not take a jump, which therefore executes
the statements. The resulting L0 code can be seen in listing 7.17.
When looking at the L0 example for an if­else block, we can see that three lines of code
has to be emitted before we get to the if_statements. The two lines of code has to be
emitted between the if_statements and else_statements. Lastly, a label is placed at the
end, to allow the code to jump past the else block after completing the if block. Emitting
these different pieces of code easily translates to function calls, which are created in the
emitter extension.
The visitor is responsible for calling these functions in the correct order. The visitor imple­
ments an if and an else function. Let us first explain what happens in the if function.
The first thing that is done, is resolving the guard expression of the statement. The guard
expression is resolved by calling visit, and re­using the expression handling of the
lower levels. If the L4 code was written without an else block, then the label at line 2 in
listing 7.17 is changed, to jump to #END_IF_1 and everything between line 4 and line 8
can be omitted. The L4 emitter, uses labels and jumps through the L0 implementation
of goto and label. After evaluating the if­block, the visitor now visits the scope of the
if­statement, which leads to everything within it being visited and emitted by the lower
levels.
Next we want to emit the code on line 5 and 6 in listing 7.17. This marks the end of the
if­block. The emitted code depends on whether it has an else­block or not. If it has an
58
L – A Gradual Compiler
==PAGE:67==
1
while (expr) {
2
while_statements;
3
}
Listing 7.18: L4 while loop
1
$! := #WHILE_GUARD_1 - 1;
2
#WHILE_CONTENT_1
3
while_statements;
4
#WHILE_GUARD_1
5
$? := expr;
6
$! ?= #WHILE_CONTENT_1 - 1;
Listing 7.19: L0 while loop
else­block, it will emit the jump, otherwise it will emit the end­label. This is because an
else statement can only be written after an if statement, since the else node is a child
of the if node. In case there is an else­block, a process similar to the how the if­block
was handled, is carried out by the else block. The main difference being that the else
block does not need to check any guards, and it does not need to check for succeeding
else­blocks.
The labels used in the code examples are numbered with the number 1. This numbering
is required when ever there are multiple if/else blocks in the code, such that the jumps go
to the right labels. In order to keep track of this numbering a new stack was implemented.
Whenever an if statement is found by the visitor it will put a counter which is the label
number on top of the stack and increment the counter. Whenever we are done with an
if/else block the stack is popped.
7.6.3
Extending with loops
Extending the compiler with loops was very similar to how it was done with the if­else
statements. We use a stack to keep track of labels, and then we jump around in the code
based on a boolean condition. Let us take a look at how a while loop can be written in
L4 and how the compiled L0 code should look. The syntax of an L4 while loop can be
seen in listing 7.18. It is up to the programmer to ensure that the expression of the while
loop will terminate eventually. In listing 7.19 we show what the code should be compiled
down to. With a while loop the while_statements are written before the condition. This is
done such that when the condition of the while loop no longer holds we can continue in
the code without running the while_statements one last time.
For loops require a variable to be declared by the user which will be an accumulator for
the loop. This should be a temporary variable such that it doesn’t clutter the memory.
To do this a scope is started by calling the L2 emitters start_scope function when the
visitor encounters a for­loop. When exiting the function a call to L2 end_scope is made.
The code for an L4 for loop can be seen in listing 7.21 and the compiled code can be seen
L – A Gradual Compiler
59
==PAGE:68==
1
start_for() {
2
this.assignment(this.register('$?'), this.number(1), false, false);
3
this.goto(this.get_label(`#FOR_GUARD_${this.current_for.peek()}`));
4
this.set_label(`#FOR_CONTENT_${this.current_for.peek()}`);
5
}
6
7
end_for(condition, var_name, var_size, expression) {
8
this.set_label(`#FOR_GUARD_${this.current_for.peek()}`);
9
this.variable(var_name, var_size, expression);
10
this.assignment(this.register('$?'), condition, false, false);
11
this.goto(this.get_label(`#FOR_CONTENT_${this.current_for.peek()}`));
12
}
Listing 7.20: L4 emitter start­ and end for­loop
1
for (temp_variable ; guard_expr ; incr_expr) {
2
for_statements;
3
}
Listing 7.21: L4 for loop
in listing 7.22. Let us examine how the emitter starts and ends a for­loop, see listing 7.21.
Here we can see how the corresponding L0 code for starting an ending a loop is emitted
using entirely functions implemented in L0 and L1 emitters.
7.6.4
Reflections
We expected this level to be the most complex to develop, however it turned out to be
relatively straight­forward. Writing down how an Lx language should be compiled down
to L0 it is much more intuitive to design functions which emit the code in the correct or­
der. Combined with the fact that we already had most of the components needed to emit
the output, from previous levels, this meant that this extension was much easier than ex­
pected. The visitor and emitter extensions were completed with just 186 lines of code as
can be seen in table 7.1. We believe this is not a large amount of code, considering the
complexity of this language construct. Furthermore, we did not actively try to write as few
lines of code as possible, but rather prioritized readability.
1
temp_variable
2
$! := #FOR_GUARD_1 - 1;
3
#FOR_CONTENT_1
4
for_statements
5
#FOR_GUARD_1
6
temp_variable := inc_expr;
7
$? := guard_expr;
8
$! ?= #FOR_CONTENT_1 - 1;
Listing 7.22: L0 for loop
60
L – A Gradual Compiler
==PAGE:69==
7.7
Results
During the evaluation, we saw how the framework could be used as a compiler consisting
of the visitor­, the emitter­ and optionally the draw modules. This was made apparent in
section 7.2 where we examined the first language extension L0.
Furthermore, we observed how the framework L0 compiler could be easily extended,
through the succeeding levels L1 to L4. In these extensions, re­using the constructs de­
fined previous levels made it much easier to define higher abstraction levels. We also
saw that it was possible to re­use constructs from all levels below the current one, and
not just the level immediately below it. Allowing for re­usability of all constructs was a cru­
cial aspect for allowing easy extension of the compiler, and it was therefore an important
observation that this worked as expected. We mainly attribute the possibility of re­using
lower level constructs, to the fact that the emitter is not tightly coupled to the visitor. As
we saw, this means that it can be called easily and directly by higher level emitters.
The evaluation also unsurprisingly showed us, that more complex programming con­
structs require more complex solutions using the framework. However, more interestingly,
we observed that the complexity is not necessarily linear. One could argue that creating
if/else statements and loops is a more complex task than creating variables and scopes.
But creating if/else statements and loops using the framework was one of the easier lev­
els to add. The main reason for this was because we could utilize the functionality of the
extensions below. The re­use of scopes and variables made the implementation of if/else
statements and loops a simple task.
L2 could only utilize the functionality of L1 and L0, but L1 was a very small extension, and
therefore did not have a lot of constructs which could be re­used. This is partly why a lot
of code was required to ensure that the context of scopes would work correctly, and that
variables declared inside the scope would become temporary. In theory, L2 could have
been broken down into multiple levels, which would each have been smaller. Forexample,
one level could have been variables, and another could be scopes.
Creating variables in of itself was an easy task in the framework as all the required com­
ponents were already available in L0. From this one might conclude that higher levels are
easier to implement because they have more functionality from the levels below which
they can utilize. Which would imply that L0 was tough to implement as it is the foundation
of the extendable compiler. We would like to argue that this implication is wrong. Due to
the design of the framework the implementation of a base level is rather simple, it requires
a lot of code simply because there are a lot of syntax introduced in the base level which
has to be covered by both the visitor and emitter. But as was seen in section 7.2, all of the
required are simple to implement as they highly reflect the syntax which they are built for.
This is in contrast to the higher level implementations which usually needed more internal
operations to function.
L – A Gradual Compiler
61
==PAGE:70==
62
L – A Gradual Compiler
==PAGE:71==
8
Perspective
In this chapter we will consider some limitations to the framework and how these limi­
tations could be overcome through future work. Finally we will examine some related
works. In the related works section, we identify some categories of works that relate to
our project, and discuss some examples of how our contributions relate and differs from
each category.
8.1
Limitations and future work
In this section we will go over some limitations of the framework as well as possible future
works.
8.1.1
Merging Grammars
Currently the framework does not contain any design for a mechanism which would allow
grammars of different levels to be merged together. This is an issue which [2] fixed in
order to reduce code duplication and to grant a clear view of what is added to a grammar
in each level. This is something that can be created by the user when implementing the
framework, however it would be a nice addition to include in the design of the framework.
8.1.2
Additional levels
An important programming concept which never got implemented and evaluated using
the framework is that of functions. We have no guarantee that it is possible to implement
functions with the framework. But it should be possible, one can imagine that the name of
a function can be added onto a stack similarly to how scopes handle temporary variables.
The frames on the stack could be extended to also hold any parameters that the function
should take as input. When a function name is seen it is easy to jump to the function by
utilizing goto and label. Everything inside a function should be within a scope, which is
easy to do as was seen in L4.
Another interesting addition would be levels which remove previous constructs. Some
or even all constructs of the low­level language are usually not available in a high­level
language. For example, languages like Java typically do not allow writing directly to a reg­
ister. In our evaluation we did not include any levels which removes previous constructs,
and this could be interesting to work on in the future.
8.1.3
Compiler optimizations
In the current design of the framework it is not possible to create compiler optimizations
such as inlining, which replaces function calls with the actual code of the function. This
saves overhead in regards to the call stack, in exchange for more lines of code. However
in order to create proper optimization such as inlining the framework needs an overview
of the entire compiled code. One can imagine functions being implemented using the
L – A Gradual Compiler
63
==PAGE:72==
frameworks as described in section 8.1.2. To optimize functions using inlining the frame­
work has to replace every call to a specific function with the code of the actual function,
but there is no guarantee that the function will be defined before it is called.
8.1.4
Evaluating the framework with other languages
The compiler and its extensions described in the evaluation was not built directly for the
base language L, however the language L influenced the design of the framework and
prototype. Because of this, we question how the framework would perform if a language
completely different from L was used as a base language. While L was made to be a
simple low­level language, which is exactly what the framework was made to extend, it
would be interesting to test the framework in a different context. For example it would
be interesting to investigate whether it is possible to extend a main stream assembly
language such as ARM or x86, all the way up to something that resembles a high­level
language such as Java using our framework.
8.2
Related Work
In this section we identify some categories of related works. Within each category we
then highlight some examples of work within that category. We then provide a very brief
overview of the work, and lastly we discuss how it relates and differs to our contributions.
8.2.1
Extendable compilers and Languages in general
In this section, we examine some examples of works that concern themselves with ex­
tending compilers and programming languages. Common for all of the works are that they
allow extensions of a programming language. However, none of them directly accommo­
date moving between different levels, as ours does. This is not a surprise, because this
functionality mostly has a purpose, in regards to facilitating learning as well as under­
standing the compiler.
Macros
Extendable programming is a term that covers computer programming where the focus
is on extending the language, compiler and runtime environment. The idea is not new,
and has been around at least since 1960[16] where macros for higher­level languages
were described. Macros are user­defined blocks of code which can be called at another
point in the code much like functions. They are however not just functions, as there are
some key differences, one of them being that macros are pre­processed by the compiler,
where as functions are not. So the piece of code that calls the macro, is usually replaced
by the entire macro by the compiler. Effectively, macros become sub programs that are
executed before the main program.
Growing a Syntax
This paper[17] describes the extension of a programming language called Fortress, The
authors’ goal is to design and implement a macro system that allows for the language to
grow and accommodate the evolving needs of its users. In Fortress, users are allowed
to design macros, using existing macros by extending them. They achieve this by first
parsing the grammar declaration, but where each time a macro is encountered, a ”trans­
64
L – A Gradual Compiler
==PAGE:73==
formation node” is placed in place of the macro, in the resulting AST. These transformation
nodes are then transformed into the corresponding template bodies, which is the code de­
fined by the macro, in the transformation step. Similarly to our design, their system allows
the user to re­use previous constructs/macros. However, since macros only add callable
blocks of code, they do not directly modify the base syntax. This means that this system
does not facilitate different functionalities of the same constructs, based on different levels
of abstraction. Our framework does this, as we saw in L3 where the existing expression
nodes are handled differently, based on which level of L we reside it.
LISP
Lisp[3] is another example of extensible programming. It is a powerful high­level lan­
guage, which is widely used today. Lisp programs are Lisp data structures, which can be
modified and structured to the users needs through Lisp. This means that it is highly ex­
tendable and has a very high degree of customization. Users can for example create their
own operators, and it will be indistinguishable from the regular Lisp syntax[18]. In Lisp,
the language is extended through Lisp itself, as opposed to having a separate extend­
able compiler. Because Lisp is extended through the language itself, the the extension
mechanism is tied to the Lisp language. This means that it cannot be used to extend a
different, low­level language in the manner that we want to.
8.2.2
Extendable languages with emphasis on learning
This category contains some examples of extendable programming languages which
were made with the purpose of facilitating learning. This category has some examples of
moving between levels, to make learning easier. However, none of them allow for starting
out at a low­level language. The works found in this category primarily concerns them­
selves with having the easiest syntax possible, which has the side­effect of starting at a
higher abstraction level.
Hedy: A Gradual Language for Programming Education
Hedy[2] is a gradual programming language which was developed to help teach new
programmers, through a very simple gradual syntax. Hedy does not utilize a compiler,
instead it transpiles the syntax of Hedy to python, which can then be executed. In the
initial implementation of Hedy, each level used its own complete grammar, as if each level
was a separate language. This caused a great amount of duplication in the grammar of
each level. To solve this problem they created a mechanism to merge a partial grammar
with a complete grammar in order to create a brand new grammar. Any rule that is not
defined in level n, will be copied from level n­1. Options to a rule can be redefined, by
writing the name of a rule succeeded by one of the following symbols and the name of
the new options. += will add new rules as an option to an existing rule. ­= will remove
existing options from an existing rule. > can be used to indicate the priority of newly added
options in a rule. Using this merging technique, a total grammar n merged with a partial
grammar n+1, will result in a total grammar n+1. Even the lowest levels of Hedy consists
of a syntax of same abstraction level as python. Because of this, Hedy does not address
the issue of starting out with a high abstraction level.
L – A Gradual Compiler
65
==PAGE:74==
ProfessorJ: A Gradual Introduction to Java through Language Levels
[19] ProfessorJ is a simplified interface which translates the Java language and compiler
errors, to something that is easier for the students to understand. ProfessorJ is also grad­
ual in the sense that it implements language levels, ranging from a simple ”beginner” Java,
to full regular Java. This is useful as Java is a commonly taught language to beginners,
however it does not address the gap between low level and high level languages, but
rather focuses on introducing Java in smaller and easier to understand segments.
Gradual and Tolerant Programming for Novices
[20] This paper describes AryaBota, which is a ”tolerant” version of Hedy, which initially
solves the same problems as Hedy, also with a high­level python like syntax. However,
unlike Hedy, AyraBota is ”tolerant” which means that all the syntax is available at all levels,
and the higher level programming constructs that are introduced at each level, are only
made as suggestions to the user, rather than making changes to the language. AryaBota
concerns controlling a robot, so that the user can get graphical feedback easily. Their
main difference compared to Hedy is the visual feedback.
8.2.3
Compiler explorers
This category cover tools that allow the user to explore the compiled code, based on
code they write themselves. This is similar to the feature which we implemented in the
prototype, which allows the user to see the compiled L0 code, no matter which level of L
they wrote in. This category of related works served as an inspiration to our prototype.
Common for all of these, is that unlike our compiler explorer they do not interact with any
gradual languages. Furthermore, they are isolated tools where as our compiler explorer
is integrated as part of the prototype.
Godbolt.org
Matt Godbolt is the author of an online compiler explorer tool located on Godbolt.org[11].
This is a tool which allows the user to select popular programming languages, and if they
write a valid syntax in the given language, the Godbolt tool will display the output of the
compiler for the selected language. Godbolt is very feature rich, and also allows the
user to add libraries and compiler options. One of the biggest strength of Godbolt is that
unlike any of the other compiler explorers, it allows the user to examine many different
programming languages.
C to Assembly
C to Assembly[21] is an online tool which allows the user to explore the compiled assembly
code, based on user input C code. While Godbolt has more features and allows more
languages to be inspected, C to assembly implements a unique feature. This feature
is dynamic descriptions of the assembly output, as well as how it relates to the input
code. This feature is a great aid in understanding the connection between source code
and compiled assembly, and could an interesting feature to incorporate, if developing a
similar project to the prototype in the future.
66
L – A Gradual Compiler
==PAGE:75==
9
Conclusion
In this thesis we have designed a framework which allow users to write their own extend­
able compiler. As a proof of concept, we have also implemented a prototype which show­
cased how easy it is to extend a compiler using the framework. Programming concepts
of varying complexities were added to the extendable compiler and as expected the com­
plexity of extending the compiler is related to the complexity of the language extension.
Complex programming concepts will be more difficult to implement using the framework,
however the framework is powerful enough to support the various extensions created and
to make the implementation of them relatively easy. The framework follows the principle
of high cohesion by tightly grouping the properties of the framework together in the three
different systems, visitor, emitter, and draw. Additionally, it follows the principle of low
coupling by allowing one system implementation to easily be replaced by another without
affecting the rest of the framework. Furthermore, the design facilitates creating a pro­
gramming language intended for learning, by allowing users to freely customize how the
inner workings of the compiler and virtual machine should be illustrated.
We hope that this framework can be used in the future to build gradual languages and
compilers. These may be used to investigate, whether learning programming by starting
at an assembly like language, and gradually adding higher abstractions, is more effective
than starting with a high­level language.
L – A Gradual Compiler
67
==PAGE:76==
68
L – A Gradual Compiler
==PAGE:77==
Bibliography
[1]
Theresa Beaubouef and John Mason. “Why the High Attrition Rate for Computer
Science Students: Some Thoughts and Observations”. In: SIGCSE Bull. 37.2 (June
2005), pp. 103–106. ISSN: 0097­8418. DOI: 10.1145/1083431.1083474. URL: https:
//doi-org.proxy.findit.cvt.dk/10.1145/1083431.1083474.
[2]
Felienne Hermans. “Hedy: A Gradual Language for Programming Education”. In:
Proceedings of the 2020 ACM Conference on International Computing Education
Research. ICER ’20. Virtual Event, New Zealand: Association for Computing Ma­
chinery, 2020, pp. 259–270. ISBN: 9781450370929. DOI: 10.1145/3372782.3406262.
URL: https://doi.org/10.1145/3372782.3406262.
[3]
Wikipedia contributors. Lisp (programming language) — Wikipedia, The Free Ency­
clopedia. [Online; accessed 25­June­2023]. 2023. URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/
w/index.php?title=Lisp_(programming_language)&oldid=1148473957.
[4]
John Maloney et al. “The scratch programming language and environment”. eng.
In: Acm Transactions on Computing Education 10.4 (2010), p. 16. ISSN: 19466226.
DOI: 10.1145/1868358.1868363.
[5]
Wikipedia contributors. Backus–Naur form — Wikipedia, The Free Encyclopedia.
[Online; accessed 27­June­2023]. 2023. URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.
php?title=Backus%E2%80%93Naur_form&oldid=1145504907.
[6]
Wikipedia contributors. Compiler — Wikipedia, The Free Encyclopedia. [Online; ac­
cessed 28­June­2023]. 2023. URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=
Compiler&oldid=1161027989.
[7]
Beau Carnes. Learn Assembly Language Programming with ARM. https://www.
freecodecamp.org/news/learn-assembly-language-programming-with-arm/. (Ac­
cessed on 06/28/2023). Apr. 2022.
[8]
Rita Takács et al. “Successful Steps in Higher Education to Stop Computer Science
Students from Attrition”. eng. In: Interchange 53.3­4 (2022), pp. 637–652. ISSN:
15731790, 08264805. DOI: 10.1007/s10780-022-09476-2.
[9]
Wikipedia contributors. Visitor pattern — Wikipedia, The Free Encyclopedia. [On­
line; accessed 19­July­2023]. 2023. URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?
title=Visitor_pattern&oldid=1165805896.
[10]
Wikipedia contributors. Open–closed principle — Wikipedia, The Free Encyclope­
dia. [Online; accessed 26­June­2023]. 2023. URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/w/
index.php?title=Open%E2%80%93closed_principle&oldid=1139495356.
[11]
Matt Godbolt. Compiler Explorer. https://godbolt.org/. (Accessed on 06/27/2023).
[12]
Understanding the LC3 Runtime Stack. https://www.cs.colostate.edu/~fsieker/
misc/runtimeStack/runtimeStack.html. (Accessed on 06/26/2023).
[13]
Justin Meiners and Ryan Pendleton. Writing your Own Virtual Machine. URL: https:
//www.jmeiners.com/lc3-vm/.
L – A Gradual Compiler
69
==PAGE:78==
[14]
CodeMirror 5. https://codemirror.net/5/. (Accessed on 07/11/2023).
[15]
Don’t repeat yourself. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Don’ t_repeat_yourself.
(Accessed on 06/26/2023).
[16]
M. Douglas McIlroy. “Macro Instruction Extensions of Compiler Languages”. In:
Commun. ACM 3.4 (Apr. 1960), pp. 214–220. ISSN: 0001­0782. DOI: 10.1145/
367177.367223. URL: https://doi.org/10.1145/367177.367223.
[17]
Eric Allen et al. “Growing a syntax”. In: Proceedings of Workshop on Foundations
of Object­Oriented Languages. 2009.
[18]
Paul Graham. On LISP: Advanced Techniques for Common LISP. USA: Prentice­
Hall, Inc., 1993. ISBN: 0130305529.
[19]
Kathryn E. Gray and Matthew Flatt. “ProfessorJ: A Gradual Introduction to Java
through Language Levels”. In: Companion of the 18th Annual ACM SIGPLAN Con­
ference on Object­Oriented Programming, Systems, Languages, and Applications.
OOPSLA ’03. Anaheim, CA, USA: Association for Computing Machinery, 2003,
pp. 170–177. ISBN: 1581137516. DOI: 10.1145/949344.949394. URL: https://
doi.org/10.1145/949344.949394.
[20]
Prerna Rao et al. “Gradual and Tolerant Programming for Novices”. eng. In: Ieee
Global Engineering Education Conference, Educon 2022­ (2022), pp. 1460–1466.
ISSN: 21659567, 21659559. DOI: 10.1109/EDUCON52537.2022.9766736.
[21]
Darijan Jankovic. C to Assembly Compiler and Interpreter. http://www.ctoassembly.
com/. (Accessed on 07/18/2023).
70
L – A Gradual Compiler
==PAGE:79==
A
Planning
A.1
Attack Tree
A.2
Minimal Viable Product
Our minimal viable product (MVP) is an assembly like language, L core, and at least
two expansions i.e. L1 and L2. L1 and L2 should introduce new programming concepts
such as variables, loops or if­statements, however they should not introduce the same
concepts. If we can compile linearly from L2 to L1, and from L1 to L core, then we have
a gradual compiler and this would be our MVP. In order to evaluate this we would need to
implement syntax highlighting and create a debugger.
A.3
Time plan
L – A Gradual Compiler
71
==PAGE:80==
Figure A.1: Attack Tree
Figure A.2: Timeplan
72
L – A Gradual Compiler
==PAGE:81==
L – A Gradual Compiler
73
==PAGE:82==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 324
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.compute.dtu.dk
