==PAGE:1==
The Technical University of Denmark
Assessing T cell clonality, distribution, and
function during health and Crohn’s Disease
MSc. in Biotechnology
Melissa Birch (s165520)
2nd of July 2023
Supervisors:
Urs Michael M¨orbe (Postdoc)
William Winston Agace (Professor)
Fredrik Viktor Junghus (Ph.d.-student)
Venla Anniina V¨a¨an¨anen (Ph.d.-student)
Department of Health Technology (DTU Health Tech)
Section of Experimental and Translational Immunology
Mucosal Immunology Group
==PAGE:2==
Abstract
Gut associated lymphoid structures are key inductive and antigen sampling sites in the
mucosal layer of the intestinal wall and include isolated lymphoid follicles (ILFs) and multi-
follicular Peyer’s patches (PP). Crohn’s disease is a subtype of inflammatory bowel diseases
characterized by chronic inflammation and is known to affect the entire intestinal wall pri-
mary in the distal ileum. The cellular and molecular causes of Crohn’s disease are based on
epithelial layer disruption leading to excessive activation of T cells resulting in dysregulation
of Th1 and Th17 immune responses together with defects in the immunosuppressive func-
tion of T regulatory cells affecting the immune tolerance. I therefore wanted to study the
abundance and activation status of intestinal T cells during homeostasis and Crohn’s disease
using bioinfomatical analysis of single cell RNA-sequencing data, flow cytometry, and histol-
ogy. With single cell RNA-sequencing analysis I found different CD4+ T cell subsets and an
association between CD4+ T cell proliferation and areas of active inflammation. I confirmed
these results with flow cytometry where I in addition found an increase in proliferating na¨ıve,
Tcm, and Tem CD4+ subsets during inflammation compared to homeostasis. Na¨ıve, Tcm,
and Tem cell proliferation was observed mainly in LP and MLN, but also in GALT. For
Crohn’s disease pathology this could mean that T cells in both LP and GALT may con-
tribute to inflammation associated with Crohn’s disease. With confocal laser microscopy, I
found proliferating CD4+ T cells in both in the human LP, GALT, and MLN. Combining
CITE-seq and flow cytometry, I lastly identified CD71 as a possible novel marker for CD4+ T
cell proliferation. Together, this study delivers a new in-depth picture of the intestinal T cell
landscape during health and Crohn’s disease. It shows that GALT have distinct composition
of T cells, different from the surrounding LP, but finds elevated numbers of proliferating T
cells in both GALT and LP in areas of active Crohn’s disease, and especially for Tcm and
Tem cell compartments. However, more samples are needed to support and confirm these
results.
i
==PAGE:3==
Contents
Abstract
i
Abbrevations
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Intestinal immune system
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.1.1
Intestinal anatomy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Development and function of T cells during homeostasis
. . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Inflammatory bowel disease and its causes
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
Aim of Study
8
2
Materials and methods
9
2.1
Human sample collection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.2
Isolation and processing of LP, MLN, and GALT
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.2.1
Tissue preparation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.2.2
Isolation of PPs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.2.3
Isolation of LP and muscularis mucosa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.2.4
Isolation of ILFs
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.2.5
Preparation of single cell suspension
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.3
Flow cytometry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.3.1
Surface staining . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.3.2
Fixation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.3.3
Intracellular staining . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.3.4
Compensation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.4
Histology
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.4.1
Tissue fixation and sectioning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.4.2
Tissue staining
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.5
Single cell-RNA sequencing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3
Results
15
ii
==PAGE:4==
3.1
CITE-seq analysis identifying CD4+ T cell subsets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.2
CITE-seq analysis determining proportions of proliferating CD4+ T cell pop-
ulations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.3
Flow cytometry analysis determining the proportions and proliferation of
CD4+ T cell populations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.4
Flow cytometry analysis determining the proportions and proliferation of
CD4+ T cell subsets
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.5
Immunohistochemistry analysis determining the location of proliferating CD4+
T cells . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.6
CITE-seq and flow cytometry analysis assessing the usefulness of CD71 as a
novel marker for proliferating CD4+ T cells . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4
Discussion
28
Acknowledgement
30
References
31
A Appendix
37
A.1 Resected human intestinal digestion protocol . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
A.2 T cell panel for flow cytometry
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
A.3 Histology protocol
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
A.4 T cell panel for histology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
iii
==PAGE:5==
Abbrevations
APC
Antigen presenting cell
CD
Crohn’s disease
CRC
Colorectal cancer
DC
Dendritic cell
FACS
Fluorescence activated cell sorting
FOXP3
Forkhead box P3
GALT
Gut associated lymphoid tissue
GI
Gastrointestinal
IBD
Inflammatory bowel disease
IFN
Interferon
IL
Interleukin
ILF
Isolated lymphoid follicle
LN
Lymph node
LP
Lamina propria
MHC
Major histocompatibility complex
M-ILF
Mucosal isolated lymphoid follicle
MLN
Mesenteric lymph node
PP
Peyer’s Patch
SLO
Secondary lymphoid organs
SM-ILF
Submucosal isolated lymphoid follicle
TCR
T cell receptor
Tcm
T central memory cell
Tem
T effector memory cell
Tfh cell
T follicular helper cell
Th cell
T helper cell
TNF
Tumor necrosis factor
TGF
Transforming growth factor
Treg cell
Regulatory T helper cell
Trm cell
Resident T memory cell
iv
==PAGE:6==
1
Introduction
1.1
Intestinal immune system
The intestinal mucosal surface is exposed to trillions of non-pathogenic bacteria residing in
the gut lumen every day. These non-pathogenic bacteria are together referred to as the
microbiota and includes commensal bacteria and food antigens that co-exist with the host.
At the same time the intestinal mucosal surface is also one of the main entry points of
pathogenic bacteria. Therefore, the intestines host an array of immune cells like antibody
producing plasma cells and cytokine producing T cells. These work together to generate an
appropriate immune response depending on whether the antigen encountered is characterized
as pathogenic or not [1]. The key challenge of the intestinal immune system is to maintain
balance between tolerating the bacteria of the microbiota, while responding to bacteria and
antigens that are pathogenic. When this immune tolerance is disturbed it can lead to chronic
diseases like inflammatory bowel disease [2].
1.1.1
Intestinal anatomy
The small intestine is split into three parts: the duodenum which follows the stomach, the
jejunum, and the ileum that is connected to the cecum, the first part of the large intestine.
The following colon continues as an ascending, transverse and then descending part, where it
is connected to the sigmoid colon and at last the rectum. Both the small and large intestine
are key effector sites of the immune system as their mucosal surface is constantly exposed
to commensal bacteria and potential pathogens from the lumen. The mucosal surface of
the small intestine is covered with thousands of villi forming crypts and which are built
from epithelium that helps to absorb nutrients. Under the epithelium is the lamina propria
(LP), where gut associated lymphoid tissues (GALT) are also located. Below the LP is
the muscularis mucosae. Together these sub-layers from epithelium to muscularis mucosae
compose the mucosa. Underneath is the submucosa, the muscularis externa or muscle layer,
and lastly the serosa. [3] [4, Chapter 12].
The GALT includes isolated lymphoid follicles (ILFs) and multifollicular Peyer’s patches
1
==PAGE:7==
(PPs) as well as the lymphoid follicles of the appendix. Together with the mesenteric lymph
nodes (MLNs), these are considered local immune inductive sites, where na¨ıve lymphocytes
can be primed by antigen presentation and long-lived central memory cell that are res-
timulated. An ILF consists of a single follicle and can be found in both the mucosal and
submucosal layer of the intestinal wall. A PP is an aggregation of multiple lymphoid follicles
often found in the mucosa extending into the submucosa. ILFs and PPs are located right
under the epithelium and can be separated into a sub-epithelial dome (SED) closest to the
epithelium, a B cell zone beneath the SED, and a surrounding T cell zone. Epithelial cells
such as microfold cells (M cells) take up and transports luminal antigens into the underlying
SED where antigen presenting cells (APCs) such as dendritic cells (DCs) engulf and present
them to na¨ıve lymphocytes [3, Chapter 9+12] [5]. DCs are also known to reach through
the tight junctions connecting the M cells to sample intestinal antigens themselves [2]. In
the T cell zone na¨ıve T helper and T memory cells reside and screen for antigens. The B
cell zone consists of three regions. The inner germinal center (GC), where B cells proliferate
(the light zone) and are activated by follicular T helper cells into immunoglobulin A (IgA)
secreting plasma cells (the dark zone). The surrounding the mantle zone where na¨ıve B cells
reside and the outer marginal zone homing memory B cells. T and B lymphocytes travel
to these immune priming sites via high endothelial venules (HEV). When activated in the
secondary lymphoid organs (SLO) such as GALT and MLN, they migrate further via HEV
or lymphatics to the LP. Here plasma cells secrete IgA antibodies and T cells secrete specific
cytokines depending on the subset they were regulated to become. As the location for all
effector molecules, the LP is considered the key immune effector site [3, Chapter 9+12] [4,
Chapter 12] [5].
1.2
Development and function of T cells during homeostasis
As important branch of the adaptive immune system, T cells play a major role in antigen-
specific immune responses. T cell development starts in the bone marrow where lymphoid
progenitor cells develop into T cell precursors. T cell precursors travel to the thymus via
the bloodstream where they will undergo several rounds of proliferation and differentiation,
during which they will undergo different stages of maturation that can be traced by the
2
==PAGE:8==
alterations in the cell-surface marker expression [6][3, Chapter 8]. Initially, the T cells will
develop either a T cell receptor (TCR) αβ chain by VJ recombination or a TCR γδ chain
by VDJ recombination. In humans, 95% will become αβ T cells and the remaining 5% will
become γδ T cells, which are categorized as double negative, as they do not express any
of the CD4 or CD8 co-receptors. Subsequently, the T cells will become CD3+CD4+CD8+
transitioning a to double positive state [7][3, Chapter 8]. They will later undergo positive
and negative selection, where only the double positive T cells that recognize major histo-
compatibility complex (MHC) class I or II molecules and at the same time do not recognize
self-antigens as pathogenic will survive. T cells that recognize MHC class II molecules will
become CD4+ T cells, and those that recognize MHC class I molecules will become CD8+ T
cells. The former also known as T helper (Th) cells and the latter known as T killer cells or
cytotoxic T cells. These cells have reached a mature state and will upregulate expression of
CD62L, CCR7, and CD45RA that will lead their migration to SLO like GALT and LNs as
na¨ıve T cells [8][3, Chapter 8]. Upon activation, the Th cells can further differentiate into
Th1, Th2, Th17, Treg, and Tfh cells, which all produce cytokines that function differently
to help regulating the immune responses [9]. Activation of intestinal CD4+ Th cells can
occur in SLO such as the ILFs, PPs, and MLNs through three signals from an APC: antigen
recognition by the interaction between TCR and MHC class II molecules, co-stimulation
through CD28 co-receptor to CD80/CD86 (B7) interaction, and cytokine signalling defining
the phenotype the T cell needs to differentiate into to fight the specific type of incursion [3,
Chapter 1].
When the body encounters a pathogenic infection, APCs such as DCs and macrophages, use
their pattern recognition receptors to recognize a broad spectrum of pathogenic molecules
called pathogen-associated molecular patterns. The pathogenic molecules are ingested and
degraded into peptide fragments from where they can be presented on an MHC molecule
to T lymphocytes. After their activation and maturation, antigen-loaded DCs subsequently
migrate from the periphery to SLO such as LNs via the lymphatics. Besides from the circu-
lation and LNs, there is a greater proportion of na¨ıve T cells located in SM-ILFs compared
to M-ILFs and PPs, but all of these GALT comprise na¨ıve T cells as well [5], which enter
the lymphoid tissue via HEV endothelium by the use of selectins, chemokine receptors, and
3
==PAGE:9==
integrins [3, Chapter 1+9]. Activation of na¨ıve CD4+ Th cells downregulates CD45RA and
CCR7 while upregulating a CD45RO+ phenotype. This leads to proliferation characterized
by KI67 expression, which is driven by the cytokine interleukin-2 (IL-2) that is produced
by DCs and the activated T cell itself [3, Chapter 1] [8]. From here activated CD4+ T cells
differentiate into either effector or regulatory T cells, depending on the types of cytokines
secreted by the APC and surrounding cells.
For example, the differentiation into T follicular helper (Tfh) cells is promoted by IL-6
production. Tfh cells migrate to the B-T cell border in the lymphoid follicles where they
facilitate T cell dependent B cell activation [10, 5]. Tfh cells secrete IL-21 and ICOS to
help B cells in antibody production and isotype switching in the germinal center [3, Chap-
ter 9] [11]. CD4+ T cell subsets that differentiate into effector T cells like Th1, Th2, and
Th17 all migrate to peripheral tissues such as the LP after their activation but perform
different immune responses depending on the type of inflammatory milieu [10]. Th1 cells
orchestrate type 1 immune responses, which means that they protect against intracellular
viral and bacterial pathogens. Th1 responses evolve upon interferon gamma (IFN-γ) and
IL-12 exposure. Th1 cells are characterized by their transcription factor T-bet and their
secretion of IFN-γ that facilitates activation of infected macrophages and activation of B
cells for antibody production [12]. The Th2 cells perform type 2 immune responses that
are correlated to parasitic infections and allergies. The cytokines IL-4 and IL-2 stimulate
differentiation into Th2 cells which are characterized by transcription factor GATA-3. Th2
cells produce IL-4 and IL-5 that also help B cells for antibody production, in this case more
specifically B cell isotype switching to IgE [3, Chapter 9] [11]. Th17 immune responses are
known to protect against extracellular pathogens, especially at mucosal and epithelial bar-
riers. The cytokines inducing this type of immune response differ between host species. For
mice, Th17 is induced from expose to transforming growth factor-β (TGF-β) and IL-6 and
for humans IL-1β and IL-6 are the main inducers. However, Th17 cells from both species
secrete IL-6 and IL-17 cytokines that stimulate neutrophil response and promote skin and
intestine barrier integrity. Th17 cells are also characterized by their retinoic acid receptor-
related orphan nuclear receptor γ (RORγ) transcription factor. Lastly, when the immune
system needs to suppress inflammatory responses, DCs produce high amounts of TGF-β,
4
==PAGE:10==
which subsequently triggers Th cells to express CD25, CTLA4, and the transcription factor
for regulatory T (Treg) cells, FOXP3. Treg cells will secrete TGF-β that, while suppressing
the production of pro-inflammatory cytokines, promotes IL-10 anti-inflammatory cytokine
production from T cells at sites of inflammation and in SLO [3, Chapter 11+12+15] [13].
Only 10% of the effector T cells will become long-lived memory T cells. Some are called
resident T memory cells (Trm) as they persist at peripheral sites of previous inflammation.
Others express homing receptors facilitating migration to either lymphoid or non-lymphoid
sites of inflammation. These are called central memory (Tcm) and effector memory (Tem) T
cells, respectively [14, 15]. Performing the right effector function and regulating the immune
response are critical elements for a homeostatic immune system . Too strong activation of
T cells or dysregulation of regulatory T cells can lead to severe and chronic inflammation
causing auto-inflammatory disease such as inflammatory bowel disease.
1.3
Inflammatory bowel disease and its causes
Inflammatory bowel diseases (IBD) is characterized by chronic inflammation of the gastroin-
testinal (GI) tract and exists in two main manifestations: Crohn’s disease and ulcerative col-
itis. While ulcerative colitis involves contiguous inflammation and sores working its way up
from the rectum throughout the colon, patches of inflammation in individuals with Crohn’s
disease can in principle occur anywhere in the GI tract, but it will most often affect the
distal ileum, the small intestine right before the large intestine. [4, Chapter 31]. In regard
to disease manifestation it has been shown that ulcerative colitis usually affects the mucosal
and submucosal layers, where Crohn’s disease can occur across the entire intestinal wall [2].
The prolonged inflammation associated with both of these types of IBD can subsequently
lead to permanent damage of the intestines requiring lifelong treatment, hospitalization,
and ultimately often surgery as remedies to control the disease [16, 17]. Crohn’s disease
typically affects individuals of 20-30 years of age but can affect people in all stages of life
from children to elderly. Crohn’s disease patients usually have epithelial barrier disruption
in common, followed by abnormal sensing of the intestinal microbiota and an associated
dysregulated T cell response. However, the exact causes remain poorly understood, but ap-
pear to be multifactorial including both genetic and environmental factors [2]. For example
5
==PAGE:11==
the pathogenesis of Crohn’s disease is shown to be associated with immune dysregulation
due to underlying genetic defects in microbial sensing or antigen presentation [2], but also
correlates with Westernized lifestyle-associated environmental factors such as Western diet
[4, Chapter 31][18].
Independently of the exact causes, Crohn’s disease patients have in common that intestinal
barrier disruption is associated with an irregular infiltration of innate and adaptive immune
cells to the intestinal mucosa.
This in return causes an inappropriate immune response
against otherwise harmless components of the microbiota including reduced responses of T
regulatory cells due to defects in immunosuppressive cytokines like IL-10 together with ex-
cessive activation of effector T cells [19, 20, 21]. In general, there are higher percentage of
both CD4+, Treg, and Tcm cells in IBD [19], however, with different roles during inflam-
mation. Crohn’s disease is for example associated with Th1 and Th17 immune responses
and increased productions of TNF-α, IL-12, IL-6, and IL-17 contributing to disease [2]. The
differentiation of na¨ıve T cells into Th1 cells is induced by IL-12 and in turn causes a produc-
tion of IFN-γ by the activated Th1 cells [22]. The pro-inflammatory cytokine tumor necrosis
factor-α (TNF-α) is mainly secreted by Th1 and macrophages and is elevated during Crohn’s
disease and has an array of biological functions [23]. For example to recruit inflammatory
cells to the site of disruption or infection, modulate immune cell proliferation and apoptosis
as well as producing cytokines such as IL-2 [24, 25]. Th17 responses are important for main-
taining epithelial cell barrier function during homeostasis with their production of IL-17 and
IL-6 cytokines, but have also been shown to worsen diseases when triggered in autoimmunity
and autoinflammatory diseases such as IBD. Elevated levels of IL-23, one of the inducing
cytokines expanding Th17 cells, have been shown in intestinal biopsies from IBD patients
and additionally, colitis in mice was demonstrated to be induced by an excessive production
of TNF and elevated levels of IL-17 that caused microbial infiltration in the intestinal lining,
where elevated disease was linked to enhanced immune cell infiltration to the intestines [26].
Together, despite of being a multifactorial disease, Crohn’s disease is usually associated with
an increase of Th1-associated cytokines such as TNF-α, IFN-γ and IL-12 as well as in Th17-
associated cytokines such as IL-17, IL-6, and IL-23 as well and defects in the Treg-associated
cytokine IL-10 and increase in TGF-β, which all together play crucial a role in pathogenesis
6
==PAGE:12==
of IBD [26, 21]. Figure 1 summarizes the T cells associated with Crohn’s disease and how
associated cytokines are influenced by the disease compared to homeostasis.
Figure 1: Th1, Th17, and Treg cytokine response regulations in Crohn’s disease
versus homeostasis. On the left, homeostatic conditions with less production of IL-12, IL-
23, TNF-α, IL-6, IFN-γ, IL-17, IL-22, TGF-β cytokines. IL-10 is present under homeostasis
but whether its defects associated with Crohn’s disease have an impact on the level of
production is not known. On the right, Crohn’s disease-associated inflammation triggering
proliferation of Th1, Th2, and Treg cells and an increase in their associated cytokines. IL:
interleukin. TNF: tumor necrosis factor. IFN: interferon. TGF: transforming growth factor.
The illustration is created with BioRender.
7
==PAGE:13==
Aim of Study
The work conducted throughout this thesis has the ultimate goal to identify local T cell-
associated changes during Crohn’s disease that could explain features of Crohn’s disease
pathology. Literature studies in this field are however generally biopsy based. This limits
the research to only study how the T cell responses are dysregulated in Crohn’s disease and
not where they are initiated.
To address this, several laboratory experiments have been conducted where T cells from
human donors that have undergone surgery due to Crohn’s disease-related pathology, and
T cells and from colorectal cancer control donors, have been assessed. T cells from GALT,
MLNs, and LP have been isolated and their phenotypes have been studied with methods
such as CITE-seq, flow cytometry, and immunohistochemistry. The data acquired from these
methods has been analyzed using appropriate software such as FlowJo and Graph Pad Prism
for processing of flow cytometry data and Zen and Imaris for the processing of histological
images. In dept CITE-seq analysis of acquired RNA-sequencing datasets using R has been
performed by F. Junghus. The results have been compared to relevant literature studies to
address correlations and differences.
8
==PAGE:14==
2
Materials and methods
2.1
Human sample collection
To study living cells from human intestinal tissue, samples used for this thesis were collected
from donors at Herlev and Hvidovre Hospital following informed patient consent under the
project permit H-20054066, approved by the Danish Authorities. The donor tissues included
in this thesis were collected from patients diagnosed with either colorectal cancer (CRC) or
Crohn’s disease undergoing resection of the intestine for disease relief. CRC patient surgeries
aimed to remove the whole tumor, and only the parts most distant from the tumor (>10
centimeters away from tumor and macroscopically tumor free) were used for this thesis as
non-inflamed control tissue. Samples from Crohn’s disease patients were collected from the
terminal ileum up to and including some of the cecum. The Crohn’s disease tissues included
in this thesis were labeled as inflamed and non-inflamed following assessment by a trained
pathologist
2.2
Isolation and processing of LP, MLN, and GALT
To study CD4+ T cell activity in the inductive and effector site separately, the tissues of
the collected human intestine samples were divided into colon LP, small intestinal LP, and
the GALT such as PPs, M-ILFs, and SM-ILFs. This experimental procedure was conducted
based on a protocol developed by the Agace laboratory, which can be found in Appendix
A.1 or under reference Jørgensen et al [27].
2.2.1
Tissue preparation
The very first step was to wash and transfer the samples to R5 medium. R5 contains RPMI
1640 + L-Glut, 5% heat-inactivated Fetal Calf Serum (FCS HI), and 1% penicillin/strepto-
mycin and will thus keep the conditions sterile and nutritious, so the tissue remains clean and
intact. Hereafter, the two outer layers; the serosa and muscularis externa (muscle layer),
were carefully removed using forceps and scissors. The samples were cut into sections of
5-7cm2 and shaken in an incubator with dithiothreitol (DTT) buffer twice for 10 minutes at
9
==PAGE:15==
37◦C. DTT buffer holds R5 and 4mM DTT and was used to remove any remaining unwanted
content from lumen together with leftover mucus.
2.2.2
Isolation of PPs
The samples were placed in R5 and submucosa was carefully removed by pulling it upwards
with forceps and cutting it off with scissors. This was done as close to the muscularis mucosa
as possible without interfering with the mucosal layer, leaving only a thin layer of submucosa.
From here it was possible to locate PPs from the LP with the naked eye and isolate them
with scalpels.
Next, PPs were either processed for a single cell suspension or fixed for
histology. Each sample was washed with HBSS (HBSS, 1% penicillin/streptomycin, 16 mM
Hepes) to get rid of excess unwanted material. This was followed by incubation with EDTA
buffer (HBSS and 5mM EDTA) on a shaker for 10 minutes at 37◦C to get rid of epithelial
cells. This procedure was repeated until the suspension appeared as a clear solution free of
epithelium. At last, all samples were stored in R5.
2.2.3
Isolation of LP and muscularis mucosa
Using a dissecting microscope, it was now possible to carefully peel muscularis mucosa from
the LP using two forceps. To get rid of unwanted material and epithelial cells the LP was
also washed with HBSS and shaken in an incubator for 10 minutes at 37◦C with EDTA
buffer. Again, this step was repeated until the solution was free of epithelium. As the EDTA
wash was completed, LP was examined for possible mucosal ILFs (M-ILFs) using a stere-
omicroscope. Any visible M-ILFs were extracted using a scalpel and pooled for downstream
tissue digestion.
2.2.4
Isolation of ILFs
While the LP was washing in EDTA buffer, the submucosa was washed with phosphate-
buffered saline (PBS) and thereafter stained with 0.1% methylene blue (MB) in PBS for 2
minutes to stain all cells making it easier to identify ILFs under the dissecting microscope.
To get rid of excess MB stain, the tissues were washed in PBS twice and rinsed in MB rinse
buffer for 2-5 minutes. It is important that this step is thoroughly repeated until the MB
10
==PAGE:16==
rinse buffer appears clear, as MB will otherwise be able to be detected by the red laser during
flow cytometry causing disturbance.
From here it was possible to locate and isolate SM-ILFs from the submucosa under the
dissecting microscope using a scalpel.
The SM-ILFs were extracted using a scalpel and
pooled for subsequent tissue digestion.
2.2.5
Preparation of single cell suspension
To give the digestive enzymes optimal conditions for binding, the surface area of all the
tissues was increased by cutting them into pieces of 2-3mm2 using scalpels in a dish with
digestion buffer. The digestion buffer consists of R5, collagenase D (25 µl/ml) to break
down extracellular matrix, and DNase I (10 µl/ml) to degrade free DNA and prevent cell
aggregation.
The cut pieces were then placed in digestion buffer in a 37◦C shaking incubator for 45
minutes. After digestion, the samples were dissolved using a Pasteur pipette and strained
by passing them through a 100 µm filter topped up with R5. At last, the cells were counted
with Sysmex and frozen down to -80◦C with freezing media until needed for further analysis.
2.3
Flow cytometry
Flow cytometry was performed to analyze the populations and locations of different subsets
of CD4+ T cells in isolated tissues.
2.3.1
Surface staining
To distinguish between live and dead cells, a live/dead stain was added to all the samples
together with PBS and stored at 4◦C for 30 minutes for the stain to bind properly. To get
the best signal-to-noise ratio, it was important that the live/dead staining was added before
mouse blocking as mouse serum consists of proteins which the live/dead staining would
otherwise bind as well. After live/dead staining, the samples were spun down and washed in
FACS buffer to remove excess staining. To prevent unspecific binding of the antibodies, the
samples were blocked with 5% mouse serum and stored at 4◦C for at least 15 minutes before
11
==PAGE:17==
adding the fluorescently labeled antibodies. For staining of surface markers, antibodies, and
brilliant stain (BS) buffer were mixed according to Appendix 1, added to the samples, and
stored at 4◦C for 30 minutes. Here after the samples were washed in FACS buffer three
times, again to remove excess unbound antibodies.
2.3.2
Fixation
To avoid protein degradation and to permeabilize cells, the samples were fixed after sur-
face staining with a FOXP3/transcription factor staining buffer kit in a 1:3 proportion of
fixation/permeabilization concentrate and fixation/perm diluent and incubated at 4◦C for
another 30 minutes. The samples were subsequently washed twice with and stored in per-
meabilization buffer overnight to keep the cell membrane permeable for the staining buffer
to enter.
2.3.3
Intracellular staining
The next day, the samples were spun down and mouse serum was again added to avoid
unspecific binding now of the intracellular antibodies. Usually, to prepare for intracellular
staining, antibodies were mixed with permeabilization buffer, but as I only used one intra-
cellular antibody, it was just added directly to the samples to make pipetting easier. See
Appendix 1 for the exact amount used. After the intracellular antibody was transferred to
the samples, they were incubated for 30-40 minutes at 4◦C. After incubation, the samples
were resuspended, spun down, and washed twice, all in permeabilization buffer. Samples
were then stored in FACS buffer at 4◦C until needed for flow cytometry.
2.3.4
Compensation
To avoid spectral overlap from the different fluorochrome emissions, single-color flow cytom-
etry controls were created. This was done by using every antibody used in the panel, each
in a separate tube, with compensation beads and FACS buffer. This was also done for an
unstained and a live/dead control. These were run before the actual samples on the BD
Fortessa II flow cytometer to apply good compensation settings for the samples.
12
==PAGE:18==
The collected flow cytometry data was further analyzed with the FlowJo software version
10.8.1 from BD Biosciences and Graph Pad Prism version 9.
2.4
Histology
To visualize the tissue structure and the different CD4+ T cell populations and locations,
confocal laser microscopy was used for imaging. The full protocol for histology preparations
can be found in Appendix A.3.
2.4.1
Tissue fixation and sectioning
To fix the human intestinal samples, they were submerged in 4% PFA in PBS-XG (0.2%
Triton X-100, 0.1% thimerosal, 5% FCS in PBS) for a minimum of 6 hours to a maximum
of 12 hours and then stored in PBS-XG at 4◦C until further use.
After fixation the human intestinal samples were cut into smaller pieces to fit tissue embed-
ding molds. To stabilize the samples, they were embedded in warm 4% low melting point
agarose in PBS and put on ice to solidify. It was important that the samples were placed
upright on the side so every cut section in theory will hold all the intestinal layers from
epithelium to submucosa.
The agarose embedded samples were glued to the metal sample holder with super glue. After
the glue was dry, the samples were one by one submerged into PBS and sectioned with the
Vibratome in sections of 70-100 µm thickness and stored in PBS.
2.4.2
Tissue staining
To image specific CD4+ T cells, associated markers were stained using fluorescently la-
beled antibodies. The panel of antibodies used and associated information can be found in
Appendix A.4.
3-5 slices of each sample were submerged into wells (18 well plate) of 500 µl PBS-XG each
together with the chosen antibodies and left in a cold room (4-6◦C) overnight shaking at
around 100 rpm. Next, the samples were washed by transferring them to a 6 well plate and
13
==PAGE:19==
submerging them in 5 ml PBS-XG for at least 3 hours in a cold room overnight shaking
at around 100 rpm Lastly, the samples were mounted on glass slides with ProLong Glass
Antifade Mountant drops, and ready for imaging with the confocal microscope. The imaging
data was collected and analyzed using the software Zen version 2.3 and Imaris version 10.
2.5
Single cell-RNA sequencing
Single cell data from 7 patients and 40 samples was pre-processed following the current best
practices described under reference Luecken et al [28]. Integration, dimensionality reduction,
and clustering of the data was carried out using the Seurat pipeline. The pre-processing was
performed by the experienced bioinformatician F. Junghus in the laboratory. Using signature
genes from literature, CD4+ T cell clusters were annotated by cell type.
14
==PAGE:20==
3
Results
3.1
CITE-seq analysis identifying CD4+ T cell subsets
To get an understanding of what types of CD4+ T cells we were working with, F. Junghus
analysed single cell RNA-sequencing (scRNA-seq) data using the Seurat R package [29].
The data consisted of 40 samples originating from 7 different patients (2 CRC healthy and
5 Crohn’s disease). The samples consisted of isolated GALT, MLN, or GALT-free LP and
were obtained from ileum and colon and classified as healthy (CRC tissue > 10 cm from
tumour), non-inflamed (Crohn’s tissue non-inflamed), or inflamed (Crohn’s tissue inflamed).
The Seurat pipeline was used for pre-processing and integration of the samples into a single
dataset. Dimensionality reduction and clustering was performed on the integrated data,
generating a two-dimensional UMAP-plot (Figure 2A). Differential gene expression analysis
at both the RNA and CITE-seq levels was performed on the generated clusters. Cross-
referencing against literature of the differentially expressed genes and CITE-seq markers
allowed for annotation of the clusters to known CD4+ T cell subsets, namely: na¨ıve, T
resident memory (Trm), T central memory (Tcm), T follicular helper (Tfh), T regulatory
(Treg), Th1-like, Th2-like, Th17-like, and T proliferating (TProlif). For further confirmation
of the cluster annotation, gene signatures for these subsets were generated by F. Junghus
based on literature studies of genes that are known to classify the different CD4+ T subsets
in scRNA-seq data (Figure 2B) [30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36, 37, 38]. Depending on the level
of expression of the respective gene signatures, each individual cell was given a signature
score, which ranges from blue that indicates low expression to red indicating high expression
(Figure 2C). For example, high gene expression of MKI67, STMN1, and TUBB are markers
of proliferating T cells, where the expression of CCR7, SELL, LEF1, KLF2, and TCF7 is
associated with na¨ıve T cells. The feature plots thus highlight the expression of the signature
genes associated with the different CD4+ T cell subsets, which helped us to determine the
locations of the subsets in the UMAP-plot.
15
==PAGE:21==
Figure 2: Caption on next page.
16
==PAGE:22==
Figure 2: UMAP-plot, gene signatures, and features plots of CD4+ T cell subsets.
(A) UMAP-plot of CD4+ T cell clusters defined by color. Every dot in the UMAP is an
individual cell. (B) List of signature genes, used to define clusters. (C) Feature plots based
on CITE-seq analysis and gene signatures of the CD4+ T cell subsets. Blue color indicates
low expression of the associated signature genes and red indicates high expression. Trm:
resident memory T cell.
Treg: regulatory T cells.
Tcm: central memory T cells.
Tfh:
follicular T helper cells. TProlif: proliferating T cells.
3.2
CITE-seq analysis determining proportions of proliferating
CD4+ T cell populations
CD4 T cell activation has been suggested to play an important role in driving Crohn’s
disease, we therefore focused on the proliferating CD4+ population for further analysis. We
used KI67 as a marker for proliferation and found that, irrespective of the type of organ,
the inflamed tissues of Crohn’s disease tend to have a higher proportion of CD4+KI67+ T
cells compared to healthy control tissues. In the analysis of inflamed versus non-inflamed
areas in Crohn’s disease patients, we found proportionally more proliferating CD4+ T cells
in locations of active inflammation, especially within the GALT and LP. As this data set did
not contain any MLNs from inflamed or control tissues, it was not possible to determine if
this was also the case for the MLN. This distribution is visualized in Figure 3.
Figure 3: Proportions of proliferating CD4+ T cells.
Proportions of proliferating
(KI67+) CD4+ T cells in LP, M-ILFs, SM-ILFs, PPs, and MLNs from Crohn’s disease (non-
inflamed and inflamed areas) and CRC patients (healthy control). CRC: colorectal cancer.
LP: lamina propria. M-ILF: mucosal isolated lymphoid follicle. SM-ILF: submucosal isolated
lymphoid follicle. PP: Peyer’s patch. MLN: mesenteric lymph node.
17
==PAGE:23==
3.3
Flow cytometry analysis determining the proportions and pro-
liferation of CD4+ T cell populations
We used flow cytometry to assess the impact of Crohn’s disease-associated inflammation
on the intestinal T cell population by comparing the proportion of CD4+ cells found at
intestinal priming and effector sites in health and disease. As shown in Figure 4A, we used
flow cytometry to pre gate on lymphocytes, single cells, live cells, and CD3+ T cells be-
fore determining CD4+ cell population. During both homeostasis and Crohn’s disease, we
found that within the ileum, the proportion of CD4+ expressing cells among CD3+ were
very alike in the M-ILF, PPs, and LP, and similar proportions were found in the LP and
SM-ILF within the colon (Figure 4B). The MLNs associated with the ileum seemed to be
more enriched with CD4 T cells compared to their counter parts associated with the colon,
however further samples are required to confirm this finding. Overall, the results in Figure
4B showed that the proportion of CD4+ that are CD3+ generally remains similar in GALT
and LP during both homeostasis and disease. This indicates that Crohn’s disease did not
have an impact on the abundance of CD4+ T cells per se. Regarding the CD4/CD8 ratio,
the average proportion of CD4+ T cells in all organs were about 60%, leaving approximately
for 40% CD8+ and γδ T cells, well in line with studies indicating that a CD4/CD8 ratio
of more than 1, usually between 1.5 and 2.5, is homeostatic and indicates a normal strong
immune system [39, 40, 41]. The proportion of CD4+ were thereby pointing towards a good
responsive immune system of the Crohn’s disease patients. Subsequently, we wanted to de-
termine the proportion of proliferating CD4+ T cells within each organ where of we used
KI67 as the proliferation marker like we did for the CITE-seq analysis. The results in Figure
4C shows almost no proliferation during homeostasis and a clear increase in proliferation in
Crohn’s disease tissues in line with our expectations [19, 42]. Interestingly, we also observed
higher T cell proliferation in areas of non-inflamed Crohn’s disease patient-derived tissue
when compared to CRC tissue donors (Figure 4)C. This might suggest that there is more
(subpathological) proliferation going on than expected in areas that otherwise seem unin-
volved to the eye. However, more studies will be needed to confirm this.
18
==PAGE:24==
Figure 4: Proportion and activation status of human intestinal CD4+ T cells.
(A) Flow cytometry gating strategy for CD4+ T cells.
(B) Proportion of CD4+ T cells
that are CD3+. (C) Proportion of CD4+ T cells that are proliferating, indicated by their
expression of KI67. The proportions of (B) and (C) are visualized within LP, M-ILFs, SM-
ILFs, PPs, and MLNs from Crohn’s disease (non-inflamed and inflamed areas) and CRC
(healthy control) samples. LP: lamina propria. M-ILF: mucosal isolated lymphoid follicle.
SM-ILF: submucosal isolated lymphoid follicle. PP: Peyer’s patch. MLN: mesenteric lymph
node. Each dot represents an individual data point derived from the indicated organ from a
Crohn’s disease or CRC donor.
3.4
Flow cytometry analysis determining the proportions and pro-
liferation of CD4+ T cell subsets
We also used flow cytometry to assess the impact of Crohn’s disease-associated inflammation
on the intestinal T cell subsets. To characterize T cell subsets of the CD4+ population, we
used CCR7 and CD45RA as shown in the flow cytometry gating strategy in Figure 5A. By
using these two markers, CD4+ T cells could be classified into na¨ıve (CCR7+CD45RA+),
19
==PAGE:25==
central memory (CCR7+CD45RA−), and effector memory (CCR7−CD45RA−) subsets. The
CD4+ T cell subsets are based on the same gating strategy as shown in Figure 4A.
Figure 5: Proportion and activation status of human intestinal na¨ıve, Tcm, and
Tem CD4+ T cell subsets. (A) Flow cytometry gating strategy for na¨ıve, central memory,
and effector memory subsets of CD4+ T cells followed by further gating on effector memory
representing how the proliferating CD4+ subsets were determined. (B) Proportions of na¨ıve,
central memory, and effector memory CD4+ subsets.
(C) Proportions of na¨ıve, central
memory, and effector memory CD4+ subsets that are proliferating. Proportions in (B) and
(C) are visualized within LP, M-ILFs, SM-ILFs, PPs, and MLNs from Crohn’s disease (non-
inflamed and inflamed areas) and CRC-patients (healthy control). CRC: colorectal cancer.
LP: lamina propria. M-ILF: mucosal isolated lymphoid follicle. SM-ILF: submucosal isolated
lymphoid follicle. PP: Peyer’s patch. MLN: mesenteric lymph node.
Na¨ıve T cells are common in SLO to which they migrate by expressing CD62L and the
chemokine receptor CCR7, following gradients of the chemokines CCL19 and CCL21 pro-
20
==PAGE:26==
duced at these sites. [14]. During homeostasis, we found an overall very low abundance of
na¨ıve cells in all organs (Figure 5B), possibly due to the high age of tissue donors and the
gradual loss of na¨ıve T cells during ageing [43, 44]. However, one SM-ILF sample from the
colon fell out of this trend showing higher abundance of na¨ıve cells. In the samples of tissue
donors with Crohn’s disease, we found more pronounced na¨ıve T cell populations with the
highest proportion of na¨ıve T cells in SM-ILFs of the colon and MLNs associated to both the
colon and ileum, confirming that these cells can be mainly found in the indicated SLO. Inter-
estingly, we do not find any na¨ıve cells in the M-ILF, which could question the presence of an
ILF in this sample. Together, our data suggest that na¨ıve T cells are generally most present
in SLO, in line with previous findings [5]. However, more tissue donors, ideally of younger
age than the CRC patient donors included here, are required to draw any conclusions about
Crohn’s disease-associated changes in the na¨ıve T cell poll.
Similar to the na¨ıve T cells, central memory T (Tcm) cells are mainly restricted to circulation
between SLO as they express CD62L and CCR7, but lack the chemokine receptors and
adhesion molecules required for peripheral migration. Upon reactivation, Tcm cells do not
produce an extensive amount of cytokines but proliferate rapidly [14, 8]. The results during
homeostasis showed an abundance of Tcm mainly in all SLO as opposed to LP (Figure 5B),
which is in line with what has been described previously [5]. The results further showed
the highest proportions of Tcm cells in ILFs, but an overall increase of Tcm cells in both
SLO and LP during Crohn’s disease was observed. The abundance of Tcm seems to be
higher in inflamed areas compared to non-inflamed counterparts, in line with what has been
described previously [19]. While the exact biological consequences of elevated Tcm numbers
during Crohn’s disease, especially in the LP, remain elusive here, this finding could be due
to different underlying reasons.
First, Crohn’s disease-associated inflammation could be
associated with the appearance of CCR7+ T cells in the LP. Second, it has been described
that ILFs become larger during active Crohn’s disease [27] and as we observed higher degrees
of fibrosis in inflamed areas, this could possibly cause more remnants of ILFs to remain in
our Crohn’s disease samples. Lastly, it has been described that Crohn’s disease is associated
with the appearance with tertiary lymphoid structures, which are structures that resemble
SLO to some extent regarding their cellular contents [45, 46].
21
==PAGE:27==
Tem cells have low or no expression of CD62L and CCR7, which means that they are not
attracted to SLO but free to migrate between peripheral tissues such as the LP via the
bloodstream. Upon infection or disease, we expect to observe an evident higher absolute
amount of Tem cells in effector sites than priming sites as this is where they would perform
their reactivated effector function in response to disease [14]. We found that during home-
ostasis, almost all CD4+ T cells that reside in the ileal LP were Tem cells, based on their
CCR7−CD45RA−expression (Figure 5B). Equivalent in the colon, we observe about 80%
of the CD4+ T cells to be within the LP. Also, high amounts of Tem were found in both
M-ILFs and PPs in the ileum, but a lower amount of SM-ILFs in the colon, possibly due
to the great variation in SM-ILF samples. In areas of inflammation, we found a decreased
relative abundance of Tem in the LP compared to non-inflamed areas and homeostasis. In
line with previous findings [5], we found the highest proportion of Tem cells in the LP. The
observation, that we found a lower relative abundance of Tem in the LP in inflamed areas
compared to non-inflamed, could be due to the expansion of other cells like Tcm in the same
areas. Further experiments are required to assess and compare the cytokine profiles of these
cells in inflamed and non-inflamed areas to investigate whether the effector functions of these
cells are altered during Crohn’s disease, possibly contributing to inflammation.
We then compared the proliferation status of the identified T cell subsets (na¨ıve, Tcm, Tem)
between inflamed Crohn’s disease tissues and control tissues to investigate whether Crohn’s
disease-associated inflammation is tied to an expansion of a certain T cell subset in the
LP and GALT. We used KI67 as a marker of proliferation of the CD4+ T cell subsets and
the gating strategy is represented by effector memory T cells in Figure 5A. We found some
proliferation in the na¨ıve cells residing in the ileum-associated MLNs (Figure 5C), in line with
previous studies describing these sites as key sites for na¨ıve T cell priming. Surprisingly, we
found a greater proportion in the colon. However, we only had a few data from the colon, so
this could be justified by low number of samples, patient variation, or previous treatments.
On another note we see some proliferation in LP in all areas of both ileum and colon in
homeostasis and Crohn’s disease. However, the proportion of na¨ıve cells that are found in
the LP of these areas are close to zero, that one could argue that it is debris or in so low
numbers that it does not have biological relevance. When looking at the Tcm compartment
22
==PAGE:28==
during homeostasis we found less than 5% proliferation in both SLO and LP. During Crohn’s
disease, we interestingly found proliferation not only in SLO as expected, but also in the LP,
especially in the ileum (Figure 5C). This suggests that Crohn’s disease reactivates the unusual
Tcm cell compartment found in the LP. In regard to the Tem compartment, we found close
to zero Tem cell proliferation during homeostasis, with one SM-ILF sample outlier. Contrary
to this, we observed proliferation in both LP and SLO during Crohn’s disease, indicating
production of effector cytokines in these organs. This could potentially contribute to driving
the disease as Crohn’s disease is known to be linked to excessive activation of T cells [19].
Proliferation of Tem was found to be higher in ileum than the colon, which supports the
literature, as this is the area where Crohn’s disease occurs most frequently [5]. Surprisingly,
we also found some proliferation of Tem cells in non-inflamed areas, which could suggest
that the assigned non-inflamed areas are still affected by the disease. Another explanation
to this, could be homeostatic proliferation. A term where T cells can proliferate and acquire
Tem like properties to reconstitute the peripheral compartment in hosts with low numbers
of lymphocytes, which has been shown to occur in autoimmune diseases [47].
3.5
Immunohistochemistry analysis determining the location of
proliferating CD4+ T cells
To assess the location of proliferating CD4+ T cells (CD3+CD4+KI67+) in Crohn’s disease
versus health, we used confocal laser microscopy to stain CRC healthy control and Crohn’s
disease inflamed tissue sections.
Images under Figure 6A-C depict CD3+ cells in white,
CD4+ cells in red, and KI67+ cells in green colors.
23
==PAGE:29==
Figure 6: Images of proliferating CD4+ T cells in different tissues taken with a
confocal laser microscope. (A-C) CD3+ staining is depicted in white, CD4+ in red, and
KI67+ in green. Yellow boxes on the left images represents the zoomed in location seen
on the right hand images. The scale bars are 15 and 40 µm for the right and left images
respectively and yellow arrows points to proliferating CD4+ T cells. (A) Staining of SM-ILF
from a CRC and a Crohn’s disease sample. (B) Staining of LP from a CRC and a Crohn’s
disease sample. (C) Staining of MLN from a Crohn’s disease sample. Crohn’s disease samples
are based on inflamed areas and CRC samples are healthy controls. Images (A-C) show one
representative image of 2 CRC patients and 5 Crohn’s disease patients. CD: Crohn’s disease.
CRC: colorectal cancer. SM-ILF: submucosal isolated lymphoid follicle. LP: lamina propria.
MLN: mesenteric lymph node.
24
==PAGE:30==
Representing GALT as intestinal priming site, are tissues from SM-ILFs from the colon
shown in Figure 6A. The images clearly indicates that the ILFs are composed of an outer
T cell zone, where the CD4+ T cells seem to reside, and an inner B cell zone (germinal
center). Some T cells, most likely Tfh cells, are located across the mantle zone to the border
of the germinal center, where they to activate B cells that subsequently express KI67 and
thereby obtain proliferating status. The germinal center does not show staining for CD3
or CD4, which indicates that these cells are not T cells but most likely germinal center B
cells, that were described to be located in the center of lymphoid tissue follicles [5]. Another
priming site we had access to in this study was an inflamed MLN from the sigmoid colon
shown in Figure 6C. Similar to Figure 6A, we found a clear division of zones in the follicle of
where T cells seem to reside in the T cell zone and crossing to the boarder of the germinal
center, where cells that are not T cells express KI67. The effector site is represented by LP
from the ileum shown in Figure 6B. The structure of the villi looks more defined and stand
freer in the CRC healthy control tissue than in the inflamed, in line with the notion that
Crohn’s disease is associated with loss of the typical crypt/vili structure [48]. The majority
of proliferating cells observed in Figure 6B can be found in the crypts of the epithelial layer,
likely representing epithelial cells. Only very few proliferating CD4+ T cells seem to be
located in the LP in the analyzed sections.
Together, and in line with previous reports [49, 50], we found many proliferating cells in
the germinal centers of ILFs and in the crypts of the epithelial layer, confirming that our
experimental procedures were working as intended. Interestingly, we found more proliferating
T cells in the SM-ILF and LP from healthy control tissue when comparing to the inflamed.
This finding can possibly be explained by the low number of samples used for this experiment
and the low number of KI67+ cells observable by our chosen approach. Still some proliferating
CD4+ T cells were found in the ILFs and LP during both inflammation and homeostasis.
However, studies including more tissue donors are needed to be able to quantify by histology
whether Crohn’s disease is associated with a higher amount of KI67+ T cells in the LP or
GALT and whether these cells can be found in defined niches or scattered across the tissue.
An increase in tissue donors for further studies would also help to support our CITE-seq,
flow cytometry, and other literature studies in the fact that inflammation is correlating to
25
==PAGE:31==
higher numbers of proliferating CD4+ T cells compared to homeostasis.
3.6
CITE-seq and flow cytometry analysis assessing the usefulness
of CD71 as a novel marker for proliferating CD4+ T cells
Staining of the intracellular marker KI67 by flow cytometry or histology requires previous
fixation and permeabilization of the analyzed cells, which limits many potential downstream
applications, such as cell culture studies or RNA-sequencing experiments. To investigate
if other markers could identify proliferating CD4+ T cells, the single-cell sequencing data
was used to perform Pearson correlations between the expression levels of each of the 151
CITE-seq antibodies and the expression of MKI67 at the RNA level. The top 10 CITE-
seq antibodies demonstrating the greatest positive correlation with MKI67 were obtained
(Figure 7A) where of CD71 was found to be the marker with the highest positive correlation
with MKI67 expression at the RNA level and therefore the most potential as a marker for
proliferating CD4+ T cells.
To validate this discovery, we used flow cytometry to compare KI67 and CD71 expression in
different organs of CD4+ T cells. The co-expression of the two markers depicted in Figure
7C are gated on CD4+ T-cells from an inflamed MLN as representative result. Figure 7B
shows an evident KI67+CD71+ population, supporting our CITE-seq results. To get a better
understanding of the amount of CD4+ T cell that were KI67+CD71+ cells, we looked into the
proportions of KI67+CD71+ CD4+ T cells in the different organs and found that 40-70% of
KI67+ CD4+ T cells expressed high levels of CD71 (Figure 7C). In the ileum of areas infected
with Crohn’s disease, we found a tendency that showed higher proportions of KI67+CD71+
T cells compared to homeostasis (Figure 7D), just as we did for proliferating CD4+ T cells.
This supports CD71 as a potentially good marker for proliferation.
26
==PAGE:32==
Figure 7: Assessment of surface markers that correlate with CD4+ T cell pro-
liferation. (A) The 10 CITE-seq antibodies with the greatest positive correlation to the
expression of MKI67 at the RNA level and associated Pearson correlations ranging from -1
to +1 with +1 being a complete positive correlation. (B) Gating strategy for KI67+CD71+
co-expression (inflamed MLN as representative). The gating strategy is in connection to the
gating strategy for CD4+ T cells illustrated in Figure 4A. (C) Proportion of KI67+CD71+
T cells that are CD4+ in all organs of non-inflamed and inflamed tissues of Crohn’s disease.
LP: lamina propria. M-ILF: mucosal isolated lymphoid follicle. SM-ILF: submucosal iso-
lated lymphoid follicle. PP: Peyer’s patch. MLN: mesenteric lymph node.
27
==PAGE:33==
4
Discussion
In this study, I aimed to describe the CD4+ T cell populations of the inflamed and healthy hu-
man intestine in detail. By using a recently developed technique to separate GALT from the
surrounding LP [27], I studied these immune inductive and effector sites during homeostasis
and inflammation originating from Crohn’s disease. scRNA-seq analysis revealed nine larger
populations within the CD4+ T cell dataset, namely: na¨ıve, T resident memory, T central
memory, T follicular helper, T regulatory, Th1-like, Th2-like, Th17-like, and T proliferating.
In addition, proliferating CD4+ T cell were linked to actively inflamed areas of Crohn’s dis-
ease. The following flow cytometry analysis confirmed a higher abundance of proliferating
CD4+ cell within the areas related to Crohn’s disease, as seen with scRNA-seq, and showed
that Crohn’s disease did not have an impact on the abundance of CD4+ T cells with in the
CD3+ compartment. Most na¨ıve CD4+ T cells (CCR7+CD45RA+) were located in the SLO,
Tcm cells (CCR7+CD45RA−) were mainly in ILFs, and Tem cells (CCR7−CD45RA−) in the
LP. Here of na¨ıve cells revealed high proliferation in MLN, where Tcm and Tem were both
holding proliferating cells in SLO and in LP. I studied the location of KI67+ T cells with
confocal laser microscopy and found that KI67+ T cells were present in both the human LP,
MLN and GALT and appear to be enriched in MLN. At last, analysis with flow cytometry
proved possible properties for CD71 as a novel surface marker of proliferation status within
CD4+ T cells.
Together, my findings deliver a detailed picture of the human intestinal T cell landscape
during homeostasis and Crohn’s disease and show that proliferative status of CD4+ T cell
compartment and subsets are associated with areas of inflammation as a response to incur-
sion. I especially observed proliferation in the MLN and LP (10-20% proliferation), where
GALT showed about 5%. As such, it adds to our current knowledge about the intestinal T
cell compartment as previous studies mostly relied on intestinal biopsies that do not feasibly
allow the analysis of GALT and LP in separation. Importantly, my data suggests that active
Crohn’s disease is associated with increased T cell proliferation in GALT, MLN, and LP,
particularly in the LP and MLN, indicated by expression of the proliferation marker KI67.
An overall higher percentage is observed in the Tcm and Tem cell compartments compared
28
==PAGE:34==
to the na¨ıve although all three subsets do not differ extensively. As enhanced T cell prolif-
eration is associated with Crohn’s disease associated pathology [51] our findings could mean
that T cells in both the LP and GALT may contribute to Crohn’s disease.
However, given the nature of the project, the limited sample availability and the short
time of this study, there were several potential limitations that should be considered when
interpreting the results presented in this study. First, the non-inflamed tissues we had access
to were derived from CRC patients that are usually > 60 years old, while Crohn’s disease
patients are usually in their mid-twenties and treated with anti-inflammatory drugs such as
anti TNF therapy or broad immunosuppressants. Further experiments using age-matched
tissue donors that did not receive treatment recently would therefore be of great use for future
experiments. Second, Crohn’s disease-associated inflammation and fibrosis made it difficult
to identify and separate GALT from the surrounding LP and it could be possible that Crohn’s
disease-patient derived GALT structures contained on average more contaminating cells from
the surroundings. Along these lines, Crohn’s disease is also associated with the appearance
of de novo tertiary lymphoid structures [45, 46] and there are no guidelines yet on how to
distinguish these structures from GALT, potentially impacting on our findings. Lastly, it
should be kept in mind that Crohn’s disease is a multifactorial disease [2, 18], meaning that
the environmental and genetic causes for Crohn’s disease could differ significantly between
patients.
As this study only included samples from 6 Crohn’s disease and 3 CRC non-
inflamed control tissue donors (flow cytometry experiment), further experiments should first
of all be performed on more tissue donors. Third, most often a single marker is not enough
to define a specific type of cell and it would therefore also be interesting to further investigate
whether CD71 in combination with other markers that are highly correlated to KI67 such
as CD88 or CD122 would improve the ability to determine proliferating CD4 T cells than
CD71 on its own.
29
==PAGE:35==
Acknowledgement
I would like to give my deepest appreciation to William Winston Agace for giving me op-
portunity to work on this project in his talented and passionated research group. I would
like to extent my deep gratitude to Urs Michael M¨orbe for guiding me in the laboratory
and providing me with very elaborate and thorough feedback throughout this project. I also
wish thank him for getting me back on track in profound times and especially for the com-
prehensive assistance and availability when time was short. I am extremely grateful to Venla
Anniina V¨a¨an¨anen for always taking the time to help and assist me without notice. It is
truly appreciated how much time and energy she put into teaching and assisting me in both
laboratory procedures and analytical software tools. At last, I deeply value her patience and
overall indispensable guidance. Great appreciation also goes to the support and good energy
during late night experiments and long days in the laboratory from both U. M¨orbe and V.
V¨a¨an¨anen. A thank you should also be in order to Fredrik Viktor Junghus for providing
CITE-seq data analysis laying the foundation of this project and for always being happy to
explain urgent questions. At last, I would like to thank my family and friends for providing
me with a healthy work/life balance, for encouraging and believing in me during good and
frustrating times and for always reminding me of what I am capable of.
30
==PAGE:36==
References
[1] R. B. Sartor, “Microbial Influences in Inflammatory Bowel Diseases,” Gastroenterology,
vol. 134, no. 2, pp. 577–594, 2008.
[2] J. H. Cho, “The genetics and immunopathogenesis of inflammatory bowel disease,” 6
2008.
[3] K. K. M. Murphy, C. Weaver, and C. Janeway, Janeway’s immunobiology.
[4] P. Smith, T. MacDondald, and R. Blumberg, Principles of Mucosal Immunology. Gar-
land Science, 9th ed., 2012.
[5] U. M. M¨orbe, P. B. Jørgensen, T. M. Fenton, N. von Burg, L. B. Riis, J. Spencer, and
W. W. Agace, “Human gut-associated lymphoid tissues (GALT); diversity, structure,
and function,” 7 2021.
[6] B. V. Kumar, T. J. Connors, and D. L. Farber, “Human T Cell Development, Local-
ization, and Function throughout Life,” 2 2018.
[7] T. Dupic, Q. Marcou, A. Walczak, T. Mora, T. Mora Genesis, Q. MarcouID, A. M.
Walczak, and T. MoraID, “Genesis of the αβ T-cell receptor,” PLoS Computational
Biology, vol. 15, no. 3, p. 1006874, 2019.
[8] B. V. Kumar, T. J. Connors, and D. L. Farber, “Human T Cell Development, Local-
ization, and Function throughout Life,” 2 2018.
[9] X. Zhu and J. Zhu, “CD4 T helper cell subsets and related human immunological
disorders,” 11 2020.
[10] W. Agace, “Generation of gut-homing T cells and their localization to the small intesti-
nal mucosa,” Immunology Letters, vol. 128, pp. 21–23, 1 2010.
[11] M. K. MacLeod, E. T. Clambey, J. W. Kappler, and P. Marrack, “CD4 memory T cells:
What are they and what can they do?,” 4 2009.
31
==PAGE:37==
[12] A. Billiau, “[Interferon-gamma, the Th1/Th2 paradigm and autoimmune diseases].,”
Verhandelingen - Koninklijke Academie voor Geneeskunde van Belgie, vol. 60, no. 4,
pp. 271–85, 1998.
[13] Y. Y. Wan and R. A. Flavell, “TGF-β and regulatory T cell in immunity and autoim-
munity,” 11 2008.
[14] J. I. Gray, L. M. Westerhof, and M. K. MacLeod, “The roles of resident, central and
effector memory CD4 T-cells in protective immunity following infection or vaccination,”
8 2018.
[15] M. Pepper and M. K. Jenkins, “ORIGINS OF CD4+ EFFECTOR AND CENTRAL
MEMORY T CELLS,” Tech. Rep. 6, 2011.
[16] K. Li, C. Feng, H. Chen, Y. Feng, and J. Li, “Trends in Worldwide Research in Inflam-
matory Bowel Disease Over the Period 2012–2021: A Bibliometric Study,” Frontiers in
Medicine, vol. 9, 5 2022.
[17] J. Burisch, T. Jess, M. Martinato, and P. L. Lakatos, “The burden of inflammatory
bowel disease in Europe,” 5 2013.
[18] J. C. Martin, C. Chang, G. Boschetti, R. Ungaro, M. Giri, J. A. Grout, K. Gettler, L. s.
Chuang, S. Nayar, A. J. Greenstein, M. Dubinsky, L. Walker, A. Leader, J. S. Fine, C. E.
Whitehurst, M. L. Mbow, S. Kugathasan, L. A. Denson, J. S. Hyams, J. R. Friedman,
P. T. Desai, H. M. Ko, I. Laface, G. Akturk, E. E. Schadt, H. Salmon, S. Gnjatic, A. H.
Rahman, M. Merad, J. H. Cho, and E. Kenigsberg, “Single-Cell Analysis of Crohn’s
Disease Lesions Identifies a Pathogenic Cellular Module Associated with Resistance to
Anti-TNF Therapy,” Cell, vol. 178, pp. 1493–1508, 9 2019.
[19] C. Smids, C. S. T. Horje, J. Drylewicz, B. Roosenboom, M. J. Groenen, E. v. Koolwijk,
E. G. van Lochem, and P. J. Wahab, “Intestinal T cell profiling in inflammatory bowel
disease: Linking T cell subsets to disease activity and disease course,” Journal of Crohn’s
and Colitis, vol. 12, pp. 465–475, 4 2018.
32
==PAGE:38==
[20] J. Jacobse, J. Li, E. H. H. M. Rings, J. N. Samsom, and J. A. Goettel, “Intestinal
Regulatory T Cells as Specialized Tissue-Restricted Immune Cells in Intestinal Immune
Homeostasis and Disease,” Frontiers in Immunology, vol. 12, 8 2021.
[21] S. Bharti and M. Bharti, “The Business of T Cell Subsets and Cytokines in the Im-
munopathogenesis of Inflammatory Bowel Disease,” Cureus, 7 2022.
[22] C. Heufler, F. Koch, U. Stanzl, G. Topar, M. Wysocka, G. Trinchieri, A. Enk, R. M.
Steinman, N. Romani, and G. Schuler, “Interleukin-12 is produced by dendritic cells
and mediates T helper 1 development as well as interferon-γ production by T helper 1
cells,” European Journal of Immunology, vol. 26, pp. 659–668, 4 1996.
[23] D.-I. Jang, A.-H. Lee, H.-Y. Shin, H.-R. Song, J.-H. Park, T.-B. Kang, S.-R. Lee, and S.-
H. Yang, “The Role of Tumor Necrosis Factor Alpha (TNF-α) in Autoimmune Disease
and Current TNF-α Inhibitors in Therapeutics.,” International journal of molecular
sciences, vol. 22, 3 2021.
[24] A. K. Mehta, D. T. Gracias, and M. Croft, “TNF activity and T cells,” Cytokine,
vol. 101, pp. 14–18, 1 2018.
[25] M. Croft, “The role of TNF superfamily members in T-cell function and diseases,”
Nature Reviews Immunology, vol. 9, pp. 271–285, 4 2009.
[26] T. Imam, S. Park, M. H. Kaplan, and M. R. Olson, “Effector T helper cell subsets in
inflammatory bowel diseases,” 6 2018.
[27] P. B. Jørgensen, T. M. Fenton, U. M. M¨orbe, L. B. Riis, H. L. Jakobsen, O. H. Nielsen,
and W. W. Agace, “Identification, isolation and analysis of human gut-associated lym-
phoid tissues,” 4 2021.
[28] M. D. Luecken and F. J. Theis, “Current best practices in single-cell RNA-seq analysis:
a tutorial,” Molecular Systems Biology, vol. 15, 6 2019.
[29] Y. Hao, S. Hao, E. Andersen-Nissen, W. M. Mauck, S. Zheng, A. Butler, M. J. Lee,
A. J. Wilk, C. Darby, M. Zager, P. Hoffman, M. Stoeckius, E. Papalexi, E. P. Mimitou,
J. Jain, A. Srivastava, T. Stuart, L. M. Fleming, B. Yeung, A. J. Rogers, J. M. McElrath,
33
==PAGE:39==
C. A. Blish, R. Gottardo, P. Smibert, and R. Satija, “Integrated analysis of multimodal
single-cell data,” Cell, vol. 184, pp. 3573–3587, 6 2021.
[30] D. Y. Oh, S. S. Kwek, S. S. Raju, T. Li, E. McCarthy, E. Chow, D. Aran, A. Ilano,
C.-C. S. Pai, C. Rancan, K. Allaire, A. Burra, Y. Sun, M. H. Spitzer, S. Mangul,
S. Porten, M. V. Meng, T. W. Friedlander, C. J. Ye, and L. Fong, “Intratumoral CD4+
T Cells Mediate Anti-tumor Cytotoxicity in Human Bladder Cancer.,” Cell, vol. 181,
pp. 1612–1625, 6 2020.
[31] P. A. Szabo, H. M. Levitin, M. Miron, M. E. Snyder, T. Senda, J. Yuan, Y. L. Cheng,
E. C. Bush, P. Dogra, P. Thapa, D. L. Farber, and P. A. Sims, “Single-cell transcrip-
tomics of human T cells reveals tissue and activation signatures in health and disease,”
Nature Communications, vol. 10, 12 2019.
[32] V. Golubovskaya and L. Wu, “Different Subsets of T Cells, Memory, Effector Functions,
and CAR-T Immunotherapy.,” Cancers, vol. 8, 3 2016.
[33] S. Yenyuwadee, J. L. Sanchez-Trincado Lopez, R. Shah, P. C. Rosato, and V. A. Bous-
siotis, “The evolving role of tissue-resident memory T cells in infections and cancer,”
Science Advances, vol. 8, 8 2022.
[34] S. Horiuchi, H. Wu, W.-C. Liu, N. Schmitt, J. Provot, Y. Liu, S.-E. Bentebibel, R. A.
Albrecht, M. Schotsaert, C. V. Forst, B. Zhang, and H. Ueno, “Tox2 is required for
the maintenance of GC TFH cells and the generation of memory TFH cells.,” Science
advances, vol. 7, p. eabj1249, 10 2021.
[35] S. Crotty, “T Follicular Helper Cell Biology: A Decade of Discovery and Diseases,”
Immunity, vol. 50, pp. 1132–1148, 5 2019.
[36] Y. Lu, C. Malmh¨all, M. R˚adinger, M. Sj¨ostrand, S. O&#039;Neil, B. Lundb¨ack,
J. L¨otval, and A. Bossios, “Different Th1, Th2, Th17 and Treg associated chemokine
local pattern expression in lung in a murine model of allergic inflammation,” European
Respiratory Journal, vol. 38, p. p1839, 9 2011.
34
==PAGE:40==
[37] O. J. Harrison, N. Srinivasan, J. Pott, C. Schiering, T. Krausgruber, N. E. Ilott, and
K. J. Maloy, “Epithelial-derived IL-18 regulates Th17 cell differentiation and Foxp3
Treg cell function in the intestine.,” Mucosal immunology, vol. 8, pp. 1226–36, 11 2015.
[38] K. Hirota, H. Yoshitomi, M. Hashimoto, S. Maeda, S. Teradaira, N. Sugimoto, T. Yam-
aguchi, T. Nomura, H. Ito, T. Nakamura, N. Sakaguchi, and S. Sakaguchi, “Preferential
recruitment of CCR6-expressing Th17 cells to inflamed joints via CCL20 in rheumatoid
arthritis and its animal model,” Journal of Experimental Medicine, vol. 204, pp. 2803–
2812, 11 2007.
[39] J. A. McBride and R. Striker, “Imbalance in the game of T cells: What can the
CD4/CD8 T-cell ratio tell us about HIV and health?,” PLoS pathogens, vol. 13,
p. e1006624, 11 2017.
[40] W. Jiang, L. Kang, H.-Z. Lu, X. Pan, Q. Lin, Q. Pan, Y. Xue, X. Weng, and Y.-W.
Tang, “Normal values for CD4 and CD8 lymphocyte subsets in healthy Chinese adults
from Shanghai.,” Clinical and diagnostic laboratory immunology, vol. 11, pp. 811–3, 7
2004.
[41] T. Senda, P. Dogra, T. Granot, K. Furuhashi, M. E. Snyder, D. J. Carpenter, P. A.
Szabo, P. Thapa, M. Miron, and D. L. Farber, “Microanatomical dissection of human in-
testinal T-cell immunity reveals site-specific changes in gut-associated lymphoid tissues
over life.,” Mucosal immunology, vol. 12, pp. 378–389, 3 2019.
[42] F. Autschbach, L. Qiao, R. Wallich, S. Meuer, G. Schrmann, and H. Merz, “Cytokine
messenger RNA expression and proliferation status of intestinal mononuclear cells in
noninflamed gut and Crohn’s disease,” Virchows Archiv, vol. 426, 2 1995.
[43] B. R. Becklund, J. F. Purton, C. Ramsey, S. Favre, T. K. Vogt, C. E. Martin, D. S.
Spasova, G. Sarkisyan, E. LeRoy, J. T. Tan, H. Wahlus, B. Bondi-Boyd, S. A. Luther,
and C. D. Surh, “The aged lymphoid tissue environment fails to support naive T cell
homeostasis,” Scientific Reports, vol. 6, 8 2016.
[44] L. Lazuardi, B. Jenewein, A. M. Wolf, G. Pfister, A. Tzankov, and B. Grubeck-
Loebenstein, “Age-related loss of na¨ıve T cells and dysregulation of T-cell/B-cell in-
35
==PAGE:41==
teractions in human lymph nodes,” Immunology, vol. 114, pp. 37–43, 1 2005.
[45] E. N. McNamee and J. Rivera-Nieves, “Ectopic Tertiary Lymphoid Tissue in Inflam-
matory Bowel Disease: Protective or Provocateur?,” Frontiers in Immunology, vol. 7, 8
2016.
[46] R. Pabst, “Plasticity and heterogeneity of lymphoid organs. What are the criteria to
call a lymphoid organ primary, secondary or tertiary?,” 9 2007.
[47] S. P. Hickman and L. A. Turka, “Homeostatic T cell proliferation as a barrier to T
cell tolerance.,” Philosophical transactions of the Royal Society of London. Series B,
Biological sciences, vol. 360, pp. 1713–21, 9 2005.
[48] U. Erben, C. Loddenkemper, K. Doerfel, S. Spieckermann, D. Haller, M. M. Heimesaat,
M. Zeitz, B. Siegmund, and A. A. K¨uhl, “A guide to histomorphological evaluation of
intestinal inflammation in mouse models.,” International journal of clinical and exper-
imental pathology, vol. 7, no. 8, pp. 4557–76, 2014.
[49] M. Gad, J. Brimnes, and M. H. Claesson, “CD4+ T regulatory cells from the colonic
lamina propria of normal mice inhibit proliferation of enterobacteria-reactive, disease-
inducing Th1-cells from scid mice with colitis.,” Clinical and experimental immunology,
vol. 131, pp. 34–40, 1 2003.
[50] M. Stebegg, S. D. Kumar, A. Silva-Cayetano, V. R. Fonseca, M. A. Linterman, and
L. Graca, “Regulation of the Germinal Center Response,” Frontiers in Immunology,
vol. 9, 10 2018.
[51] W. Strober and I. J. Fuss, “Proinflammatory cytokines in the pathogenesis of inflam-
matory bowel diseases.,” Gastroenterology, vol. 140, pp. 1756–1767, 5 2011.
36
==PAGE:42==
A
Appendix
A.1
Resected human intestinal digestion protocol
Agace lab resected human intestinal LP/GALT digest protocol
Media:
• Cold HBSS (HBSS, 1% penicillin/streptomycin, 16 mM Hepes)
– 500 (-63) ml autoclaved Mili Q water
– 50 ml HBSS 10X without Ca2+/Mg+
– 8 ml 1M Hepes
– 5 ml penicillin/streptomycin
• Cold R5 (RPMI 1640, 1% p/s, 5% heat-inactivated FCS)
– 500 ml RPMI 1640 (with L-Glut)
– 25 ml heat-inactivated FCS
– 5 ml penicillin/streptomycin
• DTT buffer (R5, 4 mM DTT)
– 50 ml warm R5
– 200 µl of 1M stock DTT (4 µl/ml)
• EDTA buffer (HBSS, 5 mM EDTA)
– 50 ml warm HBSS
– 500 µl of 0.5 M stock (10 µl/ml)
• Digest buffer (R5, 60 µg/ml TM)
– 10 ml warm R5
37
==PAGE:43==
– 240 µl of 2.5 mg/ml TM stock (24 µl/ml)
– Alternatively, 250 µl of 200mg/ml collagenase D (25 µl/ml)
– DNase I (100 µl)
• Methylene blue (PBS, 0.1% mb)
– 1 ml of 1.5% methylene blue
– 14 ml PBS
• MB rinse buffer (PBS, 5mM EDTA)
– 50 ml warm PBS
– 500 µl EDTA
Materials:
Dumont #7 forceps, sharp curved dissecting scissors, scalpels, dissecting microscope in BSC,
petri dishes, falcons, pasteur pipettes, biopsy punch, 37◦C shaking incubator set to 370 RPM.
Method:
• Wash resection sample in cold R5
• Place sample in petri dish with cold R5
• Remove serosa and muscularis externa with forceps and scissors
• Cut samples into 5-7 cm2 sections
• Place sample in 50 ml falcon with DTT buffer in 37◦C shaking incubator for 10 minutes,
x2 (10 ml per 5-7 cm2 tissue)
• Place sample in petri dish with 5 ml cold R5
• Carefully remove submucosa with scissors
• Detach muscularis mucosa carefully under dissecting microscope (using two sharp for-
ceps, carefully and very slowly peel lamina propria from muscularis mucosa)
38
==PAGE:44==
• Store sample in R5 in 2 falcons on ice; 1 for LP, 1 for submucosa
• When all samples are ready, wash LP with HBSS
• Shake 5-7 cm2 lamina propria tissue in 10 ml EDTA buffer in 37◦C incubator for 10
minutes, repeat until no epithelium remains in suspension (usually x3 for colon, x4 for
small intestine).
• Meanwhile wash muscularis mucosa tissue with PBS
• Stain muscularis mucosa in warm 0.1% methylene blue for 2 minutes
• Wash in warm PBS 2 times
• Wash in 10 ml warm MB rinse buffer 3 times for 2-5 mins each until buffer stays clear
• Remove GALT from submucosa under dissecting microscope in cold R5, using biopsy
punch or scalpel
• Once LP EDTA step is complete, check LP for leftover lymphoid tissue and remove
(especially terminal ileum and rectum)
• Using scalpels, cut LP into 2-3 mm2 pieces
• Transfer cut LP pieces into 50 ml falcon with 10 ml digest buffer per 5-7 cm2 tissue
section and place in 37◦C shaking incubator for 45 min (horizontal, if possible)
• Add 700 µl digest media to 1.5ml Eppendorf with ILF
• Incubate ILF for 45 min at 37 degrees at 350 rpm
• Dissociate LP with Pasteur pipette (up and down 50 times) after digest
• Pass supernatant through 100 µm filter and dilute with 30 ml cold R5, store on ice
• Dissociate ILF by scraping thoroughly with syringe handle over 100 µm filter
• Centrifuge cells at 400g for 7 minutes
• Resuspend cells in 1 mL cold R5
• Count cells with Sysmex
39
==PAGE:45==
A.2
T cell panel for flow cytometry
Surface Marker
Intracellular Marker
Color
Target
µl/sample
Target
µl/sample
BUV395
CD28
1
BUV737
CD38
0.2
BV421
CCR7
5
BV480
CD45RA
1
BV605
CD71
1
BV650
KI67
2.5
BV711
CD4
0.5
BV785
CD27
1
AF488
CXCR3
1.5
PE
CD3
1
PECF594
CD127
2.5
PECy5
CD45
0.6
PECy7
CD25
1
APC
Life/Dead Far Red
AF700
HLA-DR
1
APC-Fire 750
CD8
1
Brilliant Stain Buffer
21.7
Permeabilization buffer
47.5
Table 1: T cell panel for flow cytometry. Table includes colors of the used antibodies
together with their associated target surface or intracellular marker. The concentration of
each antibody is listed in µl/sample examined.
40
==PAGE:46==
A.3
Histology protocol
General protocol: Histology methods WA lab (version: Feb 2020)
Buffers:
• 4% PFA
• PBS-XG (PBS +5%FCS + 0.2% Triton-X100 + 0.01% Thimerosal)
Fixation:
• Take samples, wash if dirty (e.g. intestinal samples) with PBS or HBSS; be careful to
not disrupt villi etc.
• Place in 4% PFA for >6h to <24h depending on size (overnight usually fine). Wash
overnight or longer with PBS-XG, store in PBS-XG.
Vibratome sectioning:
• Embed sample after fixation and washing with PBS-XG in warm (approx. 40◦C, but
not boiling) 4% low melting agarose.
• Let agarose solidify, glue sample in agarose to sample holder using super glue. Wait
for 2 min until super glue is definitely dry.
• Cut samples with a vibratome in 4◦C cold PBS into sections (usual range 40µm to 100
µm thickness).
• Collect samples until use in PBS-XG (optional +aCD32 FC-block; ideally use 2-5%
serum from host of antibodies used for staining) for blocking. Samples can be stored
in blocking buffer for up to 6 months at 4◦C.
Staining: Vibratome sections
• Optional: Apply primary antibodies in 500 µl PBS-XG in a 24 well plate or an Eppen-
dorf tube. Normal staining times >2-3h or overnight, depending on antibody affinity,
concentration and sample thickness. Stain and wash under constant agitation (120rpm)
and 4◦C. Wash for 2h or longer with >5ml PBS-XG.
41
==PAGE:47==
• Staining with directly conjugated antibodies, and if applicable, with secondary anti-
bodies in 500 µl PBS-XG for 2h-3h, depending on antibody affinity, concentration and
sample thickness. Wash for 2h or longer with >5ml PBS-XG.
• Stain 5min with 1:1000 DAPI in 500 µl PBS-XG. Rinse with PBS-XG.
• Place samples with a brush or a forceps on glass.
• Mount using ProLong Gold or another mounting medium. Apply cover glass.
42
==PAGE:48==
A.4
T cell panel for histology
Target
Color
Clone
Dilution
All nuclei
DAPI
-
1:1000
CD3
PE-CY594
UCHT1
1:200
CD4
VioR623
REA623
1:50
KI67
FITC
REA183
1:100
Table 2: T cell panel for histology. Table listing the colors, clones, and dilutions used
to stain target molecules in confocal laser microscopy. DAPI was used to stain all cells, PE-
CY594 was used to stain CD3+ T cells, Vio REA to stain CD4+ T cells, and FITC KI67+
T cells.
43
