==PAGE:1==
Incorporating feature similarity in omics
analysis for improved modelling and
biological interpretation
Authors
Alem Gusinac - s213012
Supervisors
Ole Lund and Asker Brejnrod
July 14, 2023
==PAGE:2==
Abstract
Omics is the study of many genes, proteins or metabolites in a system. Omics analysis is com-
positional, meaning it represents the relative information from the absolute. Omics data may
suffer of high dimensionality and sparsity that complicates downstream processes, causing
overfitting and bias. Common dimensional reduction methods, such as principal coordinate
analysis (PCoA), are often poor in handling sparse and high-dimensional data, making it
challenging to interpret the results due to increased susceptibility to noise and outliers. In
this work, the CSCSomics tool is developed that is capable to reduce the dimensionality
of sparse data sets of metagenomics, proteomics and metabolomics and increase biological
interpretation of PCoA. The CSCSomics is a generalized tool that applies the Chemical
Structural and Compositional Similarity (CSCS) metric, eigenvalue optimization and sta-
tistical visualization of the results. Algorithms to generate simulated data, down-sampled
empirical data and eigenvalue optimization via gradient descent were developed. Recovery
of similarity explained at increasing sparse levels were observed from both down-sampled
empirical and simulated data. Visual and statistical inspections of parameters have resulted
in the setup of a final model to be implemented in the CSCSomics framework. The final
model is a generic algorithm that is capable of increasing the sample dispersion of similarity
metrics, which leads to improved biological interpretation. Therefore, the CSCSomics is a
generalized tool capable of applying the same method on a variety of omics data and allows
optimization of other similarity/dissimilarity metrics via a custom option.
Further research is required, to validate it’s performance on a higher number of clusters
and the extension to other omics.
i
==PAGE:3==
Contents
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Metagenomics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Proteomics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Metabolomics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.4
Sparsity in omics data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2
Methodology
4
2.1
File handling
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.1.1
Metagenomics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.1.2
Proteomics
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.1.3
Metabolomics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.2
Chemical Structural and Compositional Similarity (CSCS) . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3
Parallelism . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.4
Singular Value Decomposition (SVD) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.5
Principal Coordinate Analysis (PCoA)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.6
Eigenvalue optimization
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.6.1
Model 1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.6.2
Model 2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.6.3
Model 3 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.7
Permutational Multivariate ANOVA (PERMANOVA) . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.8
Benchmarking . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.8.1
Distance metrics
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.8.2
Simulating sparse data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.8.3
Down sampling on Empirical mice data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.9
Evaluation of cluster dispersion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
2.10 Kruskal-Wallis test . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
2.11 Visualization of benchmark data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3
Results
20
3.1
CSCSomics tool . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.2
Construction of down-sampled empirical data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.3
Model 1 recovers similarity explained at high sparsity . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.4
Model 2 improves similarity explained with poor biological interpretation . .
26
3.5
Model 2 and 3 both complicate PCoA interpretation
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3.6
Model 1 improves PCoA interpretation via intra group dispersion
. . . . . .
30
3.7
Speed and Memory consumption
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4
Discussion
33
4.1
Weight (theta) initialization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.2
Global maximum . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.3
Algorithm 3: Down sampling on Empirical mice data . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4.4
Number of clusters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
ii
==PAGE:4==
4.5
Pseudo F statistic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
5
Conclusion
35
References
36
A Appendix
40
A.1 Benchmark of Model 1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
A.1.1
Method 1
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
A.1.2
Method 2
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
A.1.3
Method 3
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
A.2 Benchmark on step size (alpha) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
A.3 Benchmark on gradient . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
A.4 Benchmark of Model 2 with simulated data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
A.5 Benchmark of Model 3 with simulated data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
A.6 Weight representation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
A.7 Convergence . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
A.8 Simulation of 3 clusters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
68
iii
==PAGE:5==
1
Introduction
The study of biological processes has been extensively based on low-throughput techniques,
where few genes, proteins or metabolites are studied in highly complex mixtures to unravel
their dynamic functions. Due to the complexity and low number of compounds that are
studied, it is difficult to gain a comprehensive view of the parameters that are involved.
Therefore, new technologies were developed to conduct "omics" analysis, the analysis of
many genes, proteins or metabolites in a biological system [1]. The methodological advance-
ment due to omics techniques has allowed a researcher to identify the taxonomical order
of organisms in a sample (metagenomics), the characteristic proteins that are distinct in
one community of organism to another (proteomics), and metabolic variation among com-
munities (metabolomics). These studies belong to the three big omics, i.e. metagenomics,
proteomics and metabolomics, which apply either high-throughput next-generation sequenc-
ing for DNA/RNA or mass-spectrometry techniques for protein/metabolites.
Omics analysis are involved in a variety of fields for the analysis of biological processes or
ecological communities [2]. In this report, the microbiota will be used as an example to
explain the application of omics in the analysis of different bacterial communities. Microbial
data is compositional, which means that relative information is obtained and the absolute
count of bacteria within a community is unknown [3].
1.1
Metagenomics
Genome sequencing techniques are used to identify the variation among bacteria within
a microbial community by sequencing the genome of interest. Sequencing techniques are
divided into three main generation of DNA sequencing technologies. The first generation is
known as Sanger sequencing, that uses long reads (i.e.
1000 bp), low sample amount but
high base accuracy (i.e. 99,99%) [4], and was used to complete the Human genome project
[5]. The second generation, which is often referred as Next-Generation Sequencing (NGS),
improves the field of DNA sequencing via high scalability and speed [6].
The improved
performance of NGS is achieved by using short reads (i.e. between 32 and 330 bp), which
also comes with a 10 fold reduced accuracy compared to Sanger sequencing [7].
The concept metagenomics is to use NGS techniques to obtain a catalog of many different
genomes from a biological or environmental sample, it was first introduced in 1998 and has
since revolutionized the study of microbial communities in animal hosts and environmental
samples (e.g. marine, soil) [8]. Metagenomics studies focused at microbial communities offers
a way to characterize different bacteria within communities and between samples. A common
approach for the study of bacterial diversity is the isolation and sequencing of 16S ribosomal
RNA (rRNA), which are then clustered based on 97% sequence similarity into Operational
Taxonomic Units (OTU’s) [9] (Fig. 1). These OTU’s can be viewed as uncultivable bacterial
species, genera or groups and be compared to other biological or environmental samples to
determine the diversity of bacteria among communities.
1
==PAGE:6==
Figure 1: General overview of DNA sequencing of 16S ribosomal RNA: Metagenomics in bacte-
rial community analysis, is often approached by using 16S ribosomal RNA (rRNA) that is reverse
transcribed into complementary DNA (cDNA) and sequenced by using second generation sequenc-
ing. The short reads that show at least 97% sequence similarity are clustered to form Operational
Taxonomic Units (OTU). Figure created with Biorender.com (2023)
1.2
Proteomics
The analysis of the amino acid sequence of proteins from a bacterial organism is the field of
proteomics, which is achieved via the use of mass spectrometry techniques. In general, mass
spectrometry (MS) measures charged molecules by their mass-to-charge (m/z) ratio, these
molecules are charged beforehand and the intensity of their charge reflects the quantity of
the molecule within the sample [1] (Fig. 2).
Figure 2: General overview of a "top-down" Mass Spectrometry strategy: Intact proteins are used
to generate unique protein profiles, which are fragmented via ion collisions of a neutral gas to
generate ion fragments. Ion fragments are grouped by their mass-to-charge ratio and represent the
mass analyzer 1 spectral graph. These ion fragments are then put into mass analyzer 2, which
analysis the final protein profile.
Adapted from "Types of Proteomics Workflows (Bottom-up, Middle-down and Top-down)", by
Biorender.com (2023)
There are different MS based strategies for the investigation of proteins in a sample. The
most applied MS strategy is defined as a "bottom-up" approach, where proteins are digested
into peptides, separated by liquid chromatography and then fed into the MS machine [10].
The "bottom-up" MS strategy is not well suited for the detection of protein isoforms in
bacterial communities, where bacteria may share proteins with high sequence similarity.
The "top-down" approach performs protein fragmentation via tandem mass spectrometry
techniques (MS/MS) to generate unique profiles of de novo proteins [11] [12].
In figure
2
==PAGE:7==
2, a "top-down" approach is displayed, where intact proteins are fed into mass analyzer 1
(MS1) that fragments proteins via collision with a neutral gas (e.g. helium or nitrogen) and
generates a protein profile represented as "ion fragments" [13]. The clustered ion fragments
are then further analyzed by mass analyzer 2 (MS2) to characterize each protein profile [12]
(Fig. 2).
The final MS2 profile contains information of the m/z ratio and abundance (intensity) of
the fragmented peptides. The MS/MS spectrums of different ion fragments are grouped
via spectral alignment and peptide sequences are established via the use of specific spectral
libraries of known structures [14].
1.3
Metabolomics
The field of metabolomics is focused on the identification and characterization of small
molecules (i.e. less than 1.5 kDa) produced from metabolic pathways [1]. The focus is to
map all the metabolites that are present within a bacterial community. The detection of
metabolites with the same molecular mass but different chemical formula is analyzed via
MS/MS techniques [15], which are in turn coupled with either a liquid or gas separation
stage [16] [17]. It is found that MS approaches are most suitable for the detection of a wide
spectrum of metabolites [18]. In figure 3, a general overview of the Liquid-Chromatograpcy
(LC) MS is displayed, where samples containing metabolites are injected into a LC column.
The separation column can be viewed as a river with rocks, metabolites that have high affinity
to the rocks will bind (stationary phase), whereas the flow of the river is the mobile phase.
Metabolites are separated by the retention time, which is the time spent from injection to the
MS detector (Fig. 3). Metabolites that spent equal time to pass the column will have similar
chemical structures, these are then analyzed by their mass-to-charge ratio (m/z), the same
procedures as described in section 1.2. Metabolites with different chemical structures are
displayed by their retention time and m/z ratio, from where they are clustered to measure
their quantity within the sample (Fig. 3, step MS2).
Figure 3: General overview of LC-MS/MS: Metabolites are injected into a Liquid-Chromatography
(LC) column that separates metabolites by their chemical structure, which then are directed to
the Mass Spectrometry (MS) detector that measures their charge-to-mass (m/z) ratio. The LC-
MS graph represents similar chemical structures by their m/z ratio, which are then selected to
be analyzed by the second mass analyzer 2. The final MS2 measures the intensity (quantity) of
each metabolite profile from the group of chemical similar metabolites. Adapted from "Metabolomics
General Overview", by Biorender.com (2023).
The obtained MS2 spectra display the metabolites as m/z ratio’s with their abundance as
intensities per sample (Fig. 3, step MS2). An interesting approach to measure the similarity
3
==PAGE:8==
of compounds among samples is the Chemical Structural Compositional Similarity (CSCS)
metric [19].
1.4
Sparsity in omics data
All the three big omics; metagenomics, proteomics and metabolomics suffer from sparsity
and high dimensionality [20]. Sparse data is characterized by the absence of certain com-
pounds (DNA, protein or metabolite) when analyzing multiple samples [21]. These absent
compounds are denoted by a zero, this can be caused due to their absence in the sample or
their low abundance, which puts them below the detection limit of the detector [22]. Sparse
omics is highly compositional and dimensional reduction methods, such as Principal Coordi-
nate Analysis (PCoA) are often poor in handling sparse and high-dimensional data [23][24].
This leads to challenges in interpretation and increased sensitivity to noise and outliers [24].
In this work, the CSCSomics tool is developed that implements the CSCS similarity metric
to reduce dimensionality in compositional sparse data. The generalized tool finds structural
similar compounds among samples from the three big omics categories.
The proposed tool will be subdivided into the following three parts:
1) Construction of a robust framework for the handling of different omics data types, ap-
plication of the CSCS metric, and output of PCoA graphs and statistical tests that may
contribute the user.
2) The CSCS metric will be optimized to deal with sparse and high-dimensional data, in such
a way to decrease the dimensionality and improve modelling and biological interpretation
downstream.
3) Finally, the tool can be generalized to deal with additional types of omics data. The
method that optimizes the CSCS similarity metric, will be a generic optimization step that
is capable of optimizing other types of similarity and dissimilary metrics that are provided
by the user.
2
Methodology
The methodology chapter is subdivided into the main components that make-up the CSC-
Somics tool. Each component will be explained from their basic principle until the mathemat-
ical core concepts that make it possible. These main concepts are all incorporated via Object-
Orientated Programming (OOP) method with Python version 3.9 [25]. The ideology behind
OOP is to treat every omics data as an object, that can be manipulated by a set of tools. In
figure 4, an example of the framework is given, where the class "Tools" contains the meth-
ods; File handling, computation of CSCS similarity metric, Optimization and generation of
Graphs. These tools can be inherited by other omics classes (e.g. proteomics) (Fig. 4), where
only small changes can be made to the file handling method, while keeping the overall struc-
4
==PAGE:9==
ture intact. In the following chapters, compounds either consisting out of DNA, protein or
metabolites will be referred to as features, whereas the quantity of these features will be called
counts.
Figure 4:
Structure of Object-Orientated Pro-
gramming:
The CSCSomics tool is structured
by Object-Orientated Programming (OOP) in
Python3.9.
A main class tools contains various
methods to be applied on omics data. The omics
data belong to their own class and inherit meth-
ods from the main class. Figure created with Bioren-
der.com
2.1
File handling
The core file handling method identifies the
files that contain either features or counts
of the features for every sample. The user is
required to write those files after the -i state-
ment in any order. Further on, the output
directory can be specified with -o, if the di-
rectory doesn’t exist it will be created and
the user will be informed. The conversion
from file to a matrix depends on the type
of file format described as follows. The tool
statements are implemented via the python
inbuilt argparse module (version 1.1).
2.1.1
Metagenomics
In figure 5, a typical fasta file is represented,
that is characterized by headers after the
">" sign, followed by nucleotide sequences
in either upper or lowercase letters. For ev-
ery sample the abundance of the features
(OTU’s) is described in the counts file (Fig.
5).
Figure 5: General view of file inputs for the metagenomics class: The fasta file contains headers
with the feature names (e.g. otu_1) and below the nucleotide sequence is located. The counts file
stores the abundance of every feature in a sample. Figure created with Biorender.com
The CSCS similarity metric requires a Chemical Structure Similarity (CSS) matrix between
all the features in the fasta file. Therefore, the metagenomics class performs the feature
similarity by Basic Local Alignment Search Tool (BLAST) with nucleotide as input from
the Bio package [26]. The Bio module (version 1.80) calls BLASTn from the command line
5
==PAGE:10==
(version 2.12.0+), performs pairwise alignment and filters for the highest scoring sequence
pair (i.e. based on the number of matches and gaps) [27]. The similarity is based on the
percent identity between two sequences, in this case it is the number of matching nucleotides
divided by the total length, which result in a score between 0 and 1 [28].
2.1.2
Proteomics
The proteomics class is almost identical to the metagenomics, they both require a fasta and
counts file. Except the content of the fasta file contains amino acid instead of nucleotide
sequences (Fig. 5). The CSS matrix is constructed via the pairwise feature similarity with
BLASTp (version 2.12.0+) from the Bio module (version 1.80) [26].
2.1.3
Metabolomics
The MS2 spectra are aligned by their m/z ratio, and cosine similarity of two features (OTU’s)
is measured based on the angle between the two vectors (otu_1 and otu_2) [19] (Fig. 6). For
example, if the two vectors are identical they will point towards the same direction, whereas
samples that are distinct will be perpendicular to each other. The cosine similarity gives a
numeric range between 0 and 1. The file containing these cosine scores is generated from
the Global Natural Products Social Molecular Networking (GNPS) web-based platform that
contains raw, processed or annotated fragmentation derived from MS/MS [29]. The cosine
scores are then loaded into a symmetric matrix denoted as CSS. The counts file for the
metabolomics class is the same as in the other classes (Fig. 6).
Figure 6: General view of file inputs for the metabolomics class: The feature similarity between
different type of metabolites (described as OTU’s) are aligned by their m/z ratio and the cosine
angle between them is measured.
The counts file contains the quantity of each metabolite per
sample. Figure created with Biorender.com
2.2
Chemical Structural and Compositional Similarity (CSCS)
The CSCS similarity metric was originally developed and applied for metabolomics data to
study tree communities [30]. The algorithm was later optimized with standard library’s in
both Python and R [31]. The algorithm requires a CSS matrix that is constructed from
6
==PAGE:11==
the fasta file (i.e. of metagenomics and proteomics) or directly obtained from the cosine
scores of GNPS (i.e. of metabolomics) [29]. The CSS is a feature by feature matrix (Fig.
7, f = feature). To obtain the distance of two samples with different features, an element-
wise matrix multiplication is applied of vector a and the transpose of vector b (Fig. 7). In
essence, the vectors a and b are the columns from the counts file, where the rows represent
the features and are in the same order as in the CSS matrix. For example, a1 is the quantity
of feature f1,1 from sample A (Fig. 7). Eventually, the ab.T product is again element-wise
multiplied against the CSS matrix to obtain the final CSSab.T matrix (Fig. 7).
Figure 7: General overview of Element-wise matrix multiplication: For every pair of samples, a
and b, an element-wise matrix multiplication between the two column pairs is carried out, denoted
by the ⊙sign. The color indicators show the order of multiplication of a and b, and eventually
against the CSS matrix containing the features.
In equation 1, the CSCS distance between two pair of samples is computed by dividing
the sum of all elements within matrix CSSabT by the greatest sum of either CSSaaT or
CSSbbT. The division acts as a scalar to finalize the CSCS values in the range of 0 to 1,
where 1 indicates identical samples and 0 distinct.
CSCS =
P CSS ⊙abT
max(P CSS ⊙aaT, P CSS ⊙bbT)
(1)
The element-wise matrix multiplication is carried out with the numpy module (version
1.23.5)[32], and scipy sparse (version 1.9.3) is used to store the CSS matrix [33].
2.3
Parallelism
The computation of the CSCS similarity for every pair will become very time consuming
if this is done for a combination of 100 samples, these computations quickly scale up if
run on one processor. Therefore, the use of parallelism allows the execution of multiple
"worker" programs that each take a combination of pairs and compute the CSCS similarity
for that pair. In this report, the CSCS metric is optimized by the use of the python inbuilt
multiprocessing module, which divides the number of tasks in a batch to the available CPU’s
(Fig. 8). Multiprocessing is used to speed up computations that can be broken down in small
tasks by using the advantage of multiple cores. Each core will obtain a pair, and the available
memory and resources to accomplish this task. A queuing system will make sure that every
core is provided with a task and the results will be collected within a new symmetric matrix,
that results to be the CSCS. In multithreading multiple programs share the same CPU and
7
==PAGE:12==
memory, this allows dynamic switching between threads and little memory that is required
to be duplicated. Multithreading is enabled under the hood of the scipy and numpy modules
via the mkl (version 2.4.0) module [34], to increase the performance of certain computational
heavy calculations. A thread will refer to a piece of code from a numpy or scipy function.
Figure 8: Types of Parallelism: The multipro-
cessing divides tasks to individual CPU’s that con-
tain their private cache memory. Multithreading
can have single or multiple programs running on
the same CPU with shared memory, the difference
is that the threads are stacked and can be inter-
changed. The threads can be imagined as a numpy
or scipy function that are shared among the pro-
grams, this leads to parallelized and increased per-
formance of solving mathematical computations.
Figure created with Biorender.com
2.4
Singular Value Decomposi-
tion (SVD)
Eigendecomposition is the representation of
a matrix by it’s eigenvectors and eigenval-
ues. The eigenvectors of a matrix A are the
loading scores and refer to how much the ma-
trix elongates or shrinks, which is scaled by
the eigenvalue [35]. In this report, eigende-
composition is performed via Singular Value
Decomposition (SVD), where A is a matrix,
U are the left eigenvectors and the transpose
of V are the right eigenvectors of A (Eq. 2).
The eigenvalues are denoted by S and found
at the diagonal in descending order (Eq. 2),
which are referred as singular values in SVD.
A = USV T
(2)
Given a positive symmetric matrix (i.e
CSCS) of values ranging from 0 to 1, with
1’s at the diagonal. To compute the right
eigenvectors of CSCS, a compressed matrix
must be generated via matrix multiplication,
where the transpose of CSCS is multiplied
by CSCS itself. In figure 9, a color scheme
is shown of the procedure, briefly the first
row of CSCST is multiplied by the first column of CSCS and summed to obtain S1,1, this
process is repeated until the CSCSTCSCS product.
8
==PAGE:13==
Figure 9: Step 1: Finding the right eigenvectors of CSCS matrix: Briefly, matrix multiplication is
performed to achieve a compressed final matrix denoted as CSCST CSCS. The dot-product uses
the · sign, and sums the multiplication of the first row of CSCST by the first column of CSCS to
obtain S1,1
The final CSCSTCSCS product is used to solve the equation CSCSTCSCS −λI, where
λ is the eigenvalue we want to know, I is the identity matrix with 1’s on the diagonal and
zero’s elsewhere. In figure 10, the λ is plugged in the diagonal, and by following the color
scheme, the values for each eigenvalue can be extracted. For example to obtain the first
eigenvalue problem S1,1 −λ times the square matrix, imagine a horizontal line fixed at the
first row of the CSCSTCSCS matrix and a moving vertical line that starts at column 1
to the end. The vertical line will intercept the fixed horizontal line at position S1,1 −λ,
so we put this aside with the non-crossed values that gives a square matrix. This process
is repeated for the number of columns present in CSCSTCSCS. Finally, via cross-wise
multiplication of the square matrices, an equation is simplified via substitution to find an
equation in the form of (λ −5)(λ −1)(λ −0.5), where each λ indicates the position on
the diagonal of the original CSCSTCSCS matrix. The found eigenvalues are plugged back
Figure 10: Step 2: Finding the right eigenvectors of CSCS matrix: At this step the compressed
CSCST CSCS matrix is used to solve the equation CSCST CSCS −λI, where the focus is to solve
for λ.
into the CSCSTCSCS matrix in the diagonal. In figure 11, an example is shown for the
first eigenvalue (i.e. λ = 5), where the represented linear equation is solved to find the
value x1, this process is repeated for all the rows to find the right eigenvector V T. To find
the left eigenvectors U, the same process is repeated by solving CSCS CSCST instead of
CSCSTCSCS. This means there are as many eigenvalues and corresponding eigenvectors
as the number of samples.
2.5
Principal Coordinate Analysis (PCoA)
In Principal Component Analysis (PCA), SVD is applied in numpy and retrieves the eigen-
vectors and eigenvalues in decreasing order [32]. The eigenvectors are denoted as principal
9
==PAGE:14==
Figure 11: Step 3: Loading scores of the right eigenvector of CSCS matrix: The final step is
simply replacing the λ by the found eigenvalues for each eigenvalue, and solving the top row linear
equation to find the values for x1, x2 and x3 that represent the loading scores for the samples given
the eigenvalue.
components that contain the positions for the different samples pairs. In PCA, the eigenval-
ues indicate how much variance is explained along their principal components. The first two
principal components capture most of the variance explained [35]. In this report, the CSCS
similarity metric is applied to the data, therefore the first two principal components capture
the maximum similarity between the sample pairs (Fig. 12). Principal Coordinate Analysis
(PCoA) is almost identical to PCA, except it takes in a matrix with similarities instead of a
covariances.
Figure
12:
Principal
Coordinate
Analysis
(PCoA): The colored dots represent the sample
pairs of the CSCS matrix. The first two principal
components (PC) 1 and 2 capture the maximum
similarity.
The sklearn (version 1.2.0) module is used
to compute the principal components, which
also applies the SVD method to find the
eigenvectors [36]. The function decomposi-
tion.PCA only computes the first two prin-
cipal components.
2.6
Eigenvalue optimization
PCoA are often used in ecological and micro-
bial studies to find potential groups of com-
munities [9] [14]. To find the eigenvectors
that capture the maximum similarity be-
tween sample pairs, it is required to find the
highest eigenvalue. The CSCS matrix (de-
noted as A in equation 3 and 4) is symmet-
ric and positive, with numeric values ranging
from 0 to 1, and 1’s on the diagonal. To find
the highest eigenvalue, it is required to apply
changes to the matrix by θ, and look along
the gradient to find the maximum similarity
explained of the first two eigenvalues. The
SVD uses the left eigenvectors (U) and right eigenvectors (V), both are required for a general
non-symmetric matrix (Eq. 2, 3). In the case of a symmetric matrix, either the U or V alone
will be sufficient (Eq. 4) [35] [37]. Since, both UU T = 1 and V V T = 1 it does not matter
10
==PAGE:15==
which eigenvectors to use. Nevertheless, in this work the U eigenvectors are used for the
symmetric case.
∂λ
∂θ = U1 · (∂A
∂θ ) · V T
1
(3)
∂λ
∂θ = U1 · (∂A
∂θ ) · U T
1
(4)
The θ is sampled from a beta distribution, and both alpha (α) and beta (β) are computed
for each matrix and assembled into a symmetric matrix representing the weights (θ) with
equal dimensions as the original matrix (Eq. 5 and 6).
α = µ(µ(1 −µ)
σ
−1)
(5)
β = (1 −µ)(µ(1 −µ)
σ
−1)
(6)
The θ matrix is element-wise multiplied against the A matrix to yield the weighted A ma-
trix (Alg. 1, line 4), which is used to find the eigenvalues and eigenvectors via the SVD
method. Only the first eigenvectors belonging to the highest eigenvalue are used to squeeze
the unweighted A matrix to yield the gradient (Alg. 1, line 4). The θ is updated via the
alpha and gradient at every iteration (Alg. 1, line 14). Early stopping halts the search when
the difference between the current and previous similarity explained is below the Exploit
Prediction Scoring System (EPSS) of numpy float data type with 64 bit (Alg. 1, line 7) [32].
The algorithm 1, is a basic gradient descent that keeps iterating until the best set of weights
are found. The step size (alpha) that makes either big jumps or small steps towards the
global maximum is set by the user (Alg. 1, line 1). In theory, the algorithm can be applied
to any given symmetric matrix, which makes it generic.
Algorithm 1 Weights are applied to increase the similarity explained on the first two
principal components.
Require: matrix, alpha = 0.1, iterations=100, EPSS
Ensure: weighted_matrix
1: θ ←samples from beta-distribution
2: original_explained ←λ1+2/λsum
3: for i in iterations do
4:
U1, λ ←SVD(matrix ⊙θ)
5:
gradient ←U ⊙matrix ⊙U T
6:
current_explained ←λ1+2/λsum
7:
if absolute difference of current_explained −prev_explained < EPSS then
8:
break
9:
end if
10:
if current_explained > best_explained then
11:
best_explained ←current_explained
12:
best_theta ←θ
13:
end if
14:
θ ←θ + alpha ⊙gradient
15:
θ ←constrain values between 0 and 1
16:
prev_explained ←current_explained
17: end for
18: weighted_matrix ←best_theta ⊙matrix
19: Return weighted_matrix
11
==PAGE:16==
There are certain hypothesis on how to optimize the eigenvalue, these different hypothesis
are put into a model, with a set of parameters that may be better for finding the global
maximum.
2.6.1
Model 1
The first model is based on the hypothesis that the CSCS matrix contains enough information
to explain the similarity between the pair of samples. Despite that the CSS is weighted
against the abundance and summed to get a single value. If two samples share common
features, they will be positioned close to each other. This model can be broken down into
three methods (Fig. 13), 1) Both U and V T of SVD are able to find the global maximum
by recreating the symmetric matrix via the upper triangle. 2) The symmetric matrix can be
reconstructed by the dot product of U and U T. 3) The dot-product of two eigenvectors results
in a scalar and individual samples will not be influenced by the eigenvectors. Therefore,
method 3 replaces the dot-product by element-wise multiplication.
Figure 13:
Overview of three methods for Model 1: All three methods try to find the global
maximum of the eigenvalue, the first method assumes that a general matrix can be reconstructed
into a symmetric matrix. The second method uses either the left or right eigenvectors to re-construct
the symmetric matrix. The third method tries to influence the sample pairs by the eigenvectors via
element-wise matrix multiplication.
2.6.2
Model 2
The second model assumes that information is lost during the summing of the features,
therefore the global maximum is searched in a gradient with low resolution. The second
model applies algorithm 1 on the CSSabT matrix from equation 1. The algorithm is generic,
therefore it can be used to optimize the global maximum of any matrix.
The weighted
CSSabT is then standardized to get a single value for the CSCS similarity by equation 1.
12
==PAGE:17==
2.6.3
Model 3
The third model weights the column of abundances from the counts file directly and compares
it against the paired sample B (Fig. 14) [37]. In the beginning both sample A and B are
weighted by their own separate θ vectors, except the weights belonging to sample A are
updated at every iteration. The SVD requires a square matrix, therefore the eigenvalue
of sample B is computed from the CSSbbT matrix and the eigenvectors of sample A are
derived from the CSSabT matrix (Fig. 14). In the final CSCS computation, only the sample
columns are weighted, a and b in equation 1.
Figure 14: Overview of model 3: The derivative of the eigenvalue is related to sample A that is
weighted separately from sample B, and only sample A weight is updated. The eigenvectors are
computed from the CSSabT where both a and b are weighted by distinct weights. Sample B’s
eigenvalues are derived from the CSSbbT matrix and are subtracted from the unweighted CSSabT
[37].
2.7
Permutational Multivariate ANOVA (PERMANOVA)
The Analysis of Variance (ANOVA) is a statistical analysis that uses the group average as
unit to compare within and between groups [38]. The Permutational Multivariate ANOVA
(PERMANOVA) uses the distance metric and measures the sum of squares within and be-
tween defined groups [39].
SST = 1
N
N−1
X
i=1
N
X
j=i+1
d2
ij
(7)
SSW = 1
n
N−1
X
i=1
N
X
j=i+1
d2
ijϵij
(8)
13
==PAGE:18==
Figure
15:
Example of PERMANOVA on
grouped samples: Given a matrix of distances be-
tween samples (colored dots) and a defined group
(e.g. A, B and C) a pseudo F statistic can be per-
formed. The centroid distance between samples
within a group is denoted as SSW and the cen-
troid distance among groups is denoted as SSA.
To compute the SSA it is required to compute the
sum of squares of SST and SSW and substracting
them from each other.
They both give an F statistic score, except
the PERMANOVA also shuffles the samples
between groups to compute the significance
for the given F statistic score and compares
it to the null-hypothesis F statistic of no
change [39]. In figure 15, an example with
groups (A, B and C) and samples (colored
dots) is shown. The sum of squares regard-
ing the distance between groups is defined
as SSA and requires first the computation
of the overall sample distance, SST (Eq. 7),
and the sum of squares between samples for
each group, denoted as SSW (Eq. 8). The
difference between the groups A, B and C is
obtained by subtracting the SST and SSW
to yield SSA, which is the distance among
the groups, it is visualized as the centroid
distance in figure 15.
The pseudo F test
statistic score is computed by dividing the
scaled distance among groups by the scaled
distance within samples (Eq. 9, where p are
the number of groups and N are the num-
ber of samples).
The PERMANOVA also
computes the significance of permutated F
statistic scores against the null hypothesis.
For each permutation a pseudo F statistic (F p) score is computed via equation 9 and counted
if it is equal or greater than the null hypothesis (F). The significance (P) uses the counted
F p to divide by the total count of F p (Eq. 10). The PERMANOVA is applied via the skbio
(version 0.5.6) module and the number of permutations are set at 9999 [40].
F =
SSA
p−1
SSW
N−p
(9)
P = (count F p ≥F) + 1
(total count F p) + 1
(10)
2.8
Benchmarking
The testing and selection of the most beneficial model that will serve the eigenvalue opti-
mization algorithm, must be subjected to a testing phase, where the CSCS similarity metric
is compared to other metrics deployed in current studies. Testing data where the output is
known is scarcely available, therefore simulated and empirical down-sampled data will be
applied to study the model robustness.
14
==PAGE:19==
2.8.1
Distance metrics
Figure 16: General view of compositional sam-
ple: The colored dots represent the features within
the boundaries of the black solid circle. There are
two solid circles, which are named sample A and
B. The dashed arrows between colored dots indi-
cate the distance between the abundance of each
feature pair.
Distance metrics are used to define how dis-
similar two points are within a space.
In
figure 16, two samples, A and B, are rep-
resented that contain certain features (col-
ored dots). By applying a distance metric it
is possible to measure how dissimilar these
two samples are based on the distance be-
tween the features (Fig. 16). Features that
are very similar will have similar values and
cluster closer to each other, a common dis-
tance metric that is applied is the euclidean
distance metric that measures the dissimi-
larity between two samples (Eq.
11) [41].
Given two features, Ai and Bi, the euclidean
distance uses the Pythagoras theorem to de-
fine the distance d between these two fea-
tures. In practical, the euclidean distance is
applied on the counts file, and the features
are represented by their abundance.
The Bray-Curtis dissimilarity metric also uses the
counts file and gives a measure of how relatively distinct two compositional sites are from
each other (Eq. 12) [42]. In figure 16, the green and orange features are present in both
samples in equal amounts, the distance is the sum of difference between the green and orange
features divided by their total (Eq. 12) [33]. The Ai and Bi represent the total number of
counts.
d(A, B) =
qX
(Ai −Bi)2
(11)
d(A, B) =
P |Ai −Bi|
P |Ai + Bi|
(12)
The Jaccard similarity looks at the union of features that are present in both samples [43],
which differs to the Bray-Curtis that looks at the relative abundance of features (Eq. 13).
The union of two features is then divided by the total number of unique features.
J(A, B) = |A ∩B|
|A ∪B|
(13)
The Jensen-Shannon divergence is a similarity metric that measures the distance between
two probability distributions [44]. In equation 14, a schematic example of sample A and B
15
==PAGE:20==
and their features as abundances are shown. The D(A||m) is the Kullback-Leibler divergence
that computes a distance based on how likely a distribution is generated from m to A [45].
The Jensen-Shannon divergence is based on the square root of the average of these two
distances (Eq. 14).
d(A, B) =
r
D(p||m) + (D(q||m)
2
(14)
The Weighted Unifrac metric tries to capture the dissimilarity between bacterial communi-
ties by using a phylogenetric tree of the features, and weights the branch lengths by their
abundances [46]. In equation 15, a schematic phylogenetic tree representing the features
(colored node) is shown alongside the weighted unifrac equation (W), where bL is the branch
length, Ai and Bi are the number of sequences from both samples A and B, AT and BT
are the total number of sequences, S is the number of sequences of the tree and Lj is the
total branch length. Given an example with samples A and B, where the highlighted node is
found in both samples A and B, the W is computed by dividing the sum of the standardized
branch length multiplied by the difference of relative abundance between the two samples.
W =
NP
i=1
bL
 Ai
AT −Bi
Bt

SP
j=1
Lj
(15)
In this work, a phylogenetic tree is constructed via multiple alignment with mafft [47], model
selection via jmodeltest and filtering the method with the lowest akaike information criterion
(AIC) score [48]. The lowest AIC is the model that doesn’t overfit nor underfit the given
data [49]. The jmodeltest returns the paup commands to construct a phylogenetic tree with
maximum likelihood method in paup [50]. The phylogenetic tree is then saved as a "newick"
format to compute the weighted unifrac distance with the skbio module [40].
To compare distance metrics to the CSCS similarity, the Bray-Curtis, Euclidean and Weighted
Unifrac are converted to a similarity metric via 1 −dissimilarity.
2.8.2
Simulating sparse data
To better understand how the optimization algorithm works it is required to have a data
set that can be controlled. In figure 17, features are represented as colored dots, and those
16
==PAGE:21==
within the circle bounds belong to a sample. Samples may have certain features up-regulated
and others turned off, the higher count of zero’s results in sparse data. The latter can be con-
trolled with the "switch" that can be either user specified or constructed from the scipy sparse
distribution, which adds zero’s depending on the specified density (percentage of zero’s) (Fig.
17).
Figure 17: Overview of simulated data: The cir-
cle represent the sample, and the colored dots
within are the features.
The sample (f) repre-
sent the columns, and xn the feature attributes as
rows. The "switch" turns features off by a zero or
up simulating the abundance.
Algorithm 2, generates a sparse count ta-
ble, with samples as columns and features as
rows, requires the mentioned "switch" and
size of samples and features as inputs. The
features are sampled from a numpy uniform
distribution, with values ranging from 0 to
1 (Alg.
2, line 1).
Notice that the sam-
ple and feature order is reversed in the al-
gorithm and later will be transposed to rep-
resent the correct counts file (Alg. 2, lines
1 and 16). The main loop iterates through
the number of samples and splits the sam-
ples into two groups by default, assigns the
beta values to each group and labels them
(Alg. 2, lines 4 until 15) These two groups
are implemented as a negative control since
they should not overlap.
The output of
the function is a counts table containing the
abundance ((X ⊙Betas)T), the CSS matrix
(cos(XT)) and the labels corresponding to
the groups as input for the PERMANOVA
(Alg. 2, line 16).
2.8.3
Down sampling on Empirical mice data
The mice data was used because of the clear distinction of two groups that were fed with two
different diets; with (group A) and without fibers (group B). These two groups of mice were
an ideal data set to compare with the simulated data and to explore the effect of sample
size and sparsity on the optimization algorithm 1. Briefly, numpy arrays were initialized
containing either positive or zero indices belonging either to group A or group B (Alg. 3,
lines 1 until 4). The main loop iterates through every feature and populates it either with
positive or zero’s for each group, followed by an individual shuffling of both rows before fusing
them into one and stacking it vertically (Alg. 3, line 5 until 16). The shuffling prevents that
entire samples are cancelled out (Alg. 3, line 8 and 11). The final output is a vertical stack
of rows (features) that represent the counts table and the OTU_indices contain the index
for the features, which is used to start the BLASTn of the selected features and construct
the CSS matrix (Alg. 3, line 18). The labels were made based on the fact that the first half
of the samples belong to group_A and the other half to group_B.
17
==PAGE:22==
Algorithm 2 Generates a count table that represents sparse abundances from omics data.
The beta can be replaced by a random distribution of zero’s and positive integers.
Require: beta, n_samples, n_features
Ensure: counts, css, labels
1: X ←array size = (n_samples, n_features) ←uniform distribution
2: Labels ←array size = (n_samples,)
3: Betas ←array size = (n_samples, length beta)
4: for i in n_samples do
5:
index ←i % len(beta)
6:
group_A ←beta[index]
7:
group_B ←inverse(group_A)
8:
if first half then
9:
Betas[i,:] ←group_A
10:
Labelsi ←index
11:
else
12:
Betas[i,:] ←group_B
13:
Labelsi ←index
14:
end if
15: end for
16: Return (X ⊙Betas)T , cos(XT ), Labels
Algorithm 3 Samples from an empirical count table of two distinct groups and populates
it with either zero or positive counts.
Require: sparse_density, n_samples, group_A, group_B, OTU_table
Ensure: counts, OTU_indices
1: zero_indices_A ←zero values in group_A
2: pos_indices_A ←positive values in group_A
3: zero_indices_B ←zero values in group_B
4: pos_indices_B ←positive values in group_B
5: for index in features do
6:
if sampling of row is sufficient for both groups then
7:
row_A ←zero_indices_A + pos_indices_A
8:
shuffle(row_A)
9:
10:
row_B ←zero_indices_B + pos_indices_B
11:
shuffle(row_B)
12:
13:
OTU_indices ←index
14:
row ←row_A + row_B
15:
row_list ←row
16:
end if
17: end for
18: Return vertical stack of row_list, OTU_indices
18
==PAGE:23==
2.9
Evaluation of cluster dispersion
The PERMANOVA computes the sum of the centroid distances within groups (SSW) and
among groups (SSA) under the hood in the skbio module. A similar clustering evaluation
measure is the Davies-Bouldin index that computes the maximum distance within (intra)
and between (inter) groups (Eq. 1617) [51], which is slightly adapted in this study. The inter
group distance is the maximum absolute difference between two points from each group (Eq.
16), where SAi is the sample position i from group A and SBj is the sample position j from
group B. The intra group distance in equation 17, is the maximum sample that disperses
from the centroid divided by the inter group distance from equation 16, where Xj is a sample
of group A and Ai is the mean centroid distance of group A.
inter = max |SAi −SBj|
(16)
intra = max |Xj −Ai|
inter
(17)
2.10
Kruskal-Wallis test
The Kruskal-Wallis is a non-parametric test that compares the sum of ranks between groups
with independent variables[52]. The Kruskal-Wallis is also referred as the chi-squared, since
the H test value is equivalent to the chi-squared (Eq.
18).
Given benchmark data sets
from algorithm 1 that were tested with different methods or models, the Kruskal-Wallis
chi-squared test can be used to find the difference between them. In equation 18, N rep-
resents the number of groups (i.e. benchmarked datasets), C is the number of variables
per group, ¯Ri is the mean Rank sum of the individual groups, ¯R is the mean of all ranks.
If the models are distinct to each other, this would result in a low p value and a extreme
H value, whereas groups that are highly similar result in a low H and a high p value (Eq. 19).
H = N −1
N
C
X
i=1
( ¯Ri −¯R)2
1
12(N 2 −1)
(18)
P(HifH0true ≥Hobserved)
(19)
2.11
Visualization of benchmark data
The benchmark data were stored in a file with parameters; replicate number, sparse degree,
sample size, number of features, metric name, distance explained, pseudo F statistic and the
p-value from the PERMANOVA. These data were collected before and after optimization
with algorithm 1. The benchmark data was wrangled and if applicable cleaned in Rstudio
(version 2022.12.0) with tidyverse (version 2.0.0) library [53][54]. Visualization was achieved
with ggplot2 (version 3.4.2) from the tidyverse library, accompanied with RColorBrewer
(version 1.1-3) [55] and patchwork (version 1.1.2) [56]. Graphs with extreme values were
adjusted via the addition of breaks along the y-axis (ggbreak, version 0.1.1) [57].
The R scripts for benchmark visualization and mice data inspection can be found on Github1.
1https://github.com/agusinac/CSCS-omics/tree/main/CSCS_models/BenchmarkgraphsR
19
==PAGE:24==
3
Results
3.1
CSCSomics tool
In figure 18, an overview of the CSCSomics tool is represented. The source code can be
found on Github2, the exact use of the tool is shown by calling "python CSCSomics.py –
help" from the terminal. Briefly, input files are specified after the -i argument and should
contain a count and fasta or cosine file. The output must be directed to a directory specified
with -o, if it doesn’t exist it will be automatically created. The mode is specified via -
m and supports metagenomics, proteomics, metabolomics and custom. The custom mode
accepts any distance metric to be optimized by the algorithm, in this case the –input should
only contain a similarity or dissimilarity matrix. Samples are by default normalized, but
this can be turned off via -n False. Lastly, the output is by default the optimized CSCS
similarity matrix, PCoA and PERMANOVA graphs are generated upon the specification
of the metadata via -md [FILE PATH] [SAMPLE ID COLUMN] [GROUPING COLUMN].
The grouping column could be something of interest to the user, such as the geological
sampling location.
Figure 18: Overview of the CSCSomics pipeline: The input are either metagenomics, proteomics
or metabolomics data that will be converted into a CSS matrix either via GNPS cosine scoring or
Blastn. The CSCS metric requires the counts file for CSCS matrix construction and optimization.
Finally, PCoA and permanova graphs are generated upon metadata specification.
*This step is
parallelized via multiprocessing module, it can also handle a custom metric that is specified by the user.
This means the custom metric will be optimized and the steps beforehand will be skipped.
The eigenvalue optimization step denoted as CSCSθ in figure 18 will be replaced by the model
and method that maximizes the similarity explained for the first two principal components
at varying sparsity.
2https://github.com/agusinac/CSCS-omics
20
==PAGE:25==
3.2
Construction of down-sampled empirical data
The mice data consists out of two types of diet, "Pre diet" and "Termination", which are
two distinct clusters. Since, these clusters were very distinct from each other, it could be
used as an empirical model to reconstruct data sets that had a low or high sparsity degree
(percentage of zero’s). The application of algorithm 3, quickly revealed a trend, where higher
sample size reduced the number of features in the data sets (Fig. 19). Especially, a sample
size of 80 represens a low-throughput method, rather a omics data set, it was therefore
decided to only focus on sample size 20 (Fig. 19A).
The effect of down-sampling on empirical data on the eigenvalue optimization algorithm is
not known, therefore the simulated data will act as a control group. The control group
consists out of two clusters that are the inverse of each other, this means that the algorithm
1 will likely have little to no effect on the similarity explained.
Figure 19: Feature distribution of down-sampled empirical data: Overview of number of features that
decrease by sample size. The number of features do increase by higher percentage of zero’s.
The simulated data requires certain information from the down-sampled empirical data sets,
such as the sample size, number of features and the range of the abundance (i.e. of simulated
data, it is the "switch" input). In figure 20, an overview of the distribution of zero’s and
positive counts from both Pre diet and Termination groups is displayed. It can be observed
that samples from the Pre diet group have the opposite number of positive’s and zero’s than
samples found in the Termination group (Fig. 20A vs B). The total percentage of zero’s is
around 60%.
21
==PAGE:26==
Figure 20: Distribution of positive and zero values in the two diet groups: The distribution of the
counts (y-axis) of positive and zero values (x-axis) is displayed for the Pre diet (A) and Termination (B)
groups.
Further on, the range of numeric values in Pre diet is between 0 - 150 with a maximum
observed value of 13600, and the range of numeric values in Termination is between 0 -
200 with a maximum observed value of 17600. The simulated data has been ran with a
mean of 50 and a range of 0 - 1000, both settings had the same effect on the PCoA and
PERMANOVA statistics. It is decided to use a range of 0 - 1000, since this may represent
a more realistic abundance range.
22
==PAGE:27==
3.3
Model 1 recovers similarity explained at high sparsity
In this section only results with sample size 20 are shown. Benchmark on all sample sizes
from figure 19 can be found in appendix A. The first model uses algorithm 1 and only changes
the gradient, which are the methods introduced in figure 13. As a reminder, dissimilarity
metrics are converted into similarity, whereas PERMANOVA requires a dissimilarity and
shows the statistics based on the distances. The first method shows a high variation among
the replicates in the down-sampled empirical data compared to the simulated data (Fig. 21A
versus 30A). Algorithm 1 does show recovery of similarity explained at increasing percentage
of zero’s in all of the weighted similarity metrics (Fig. 21A), whereas the control shows a
slight increase below 30% zero’s compared to the unweighted metric (Fig. 21A).
Figure 21:
Model 1 with Method 1 applied on down-sampled empirical data:
A) represent the
similarity explained (y-axis) at increasing percentage zero’s (x-axis) with sample size of 20.
Error-bars
represent the variation between the 10 replicates. The legend at the right represents the different similarity
metrics, with paired colors between unweighted (e.g. CSCS) versus weighted (e.g. CSCS_w). B) Shows
the PERMANOVA results for sample size 20. The pseudo F statistic is normalized against the unweighted
(e.g. CSCS) and log scaled. Error-bars represent the variation among the 10 replicates and red asterisks(*)
represent if all 10 replicates were significant.
The PERMANOVA statistics show some significance for the Jensen-Shannon divergence
metric (Fig. 21B). The rest of the distance metrics show high variation of the pseudo F
statistic and none significance for all replicates (Fig.
21B). The negative control group
does show higher significance at higher percentage zero’s, especially for the Bray-Curtis and
occasionally the CSCS (Fig. 31A).
23
==PAGE:28==
The benchmark on all sample sizes for both down-sampled empirical and simulated data
can be found in the appendix A.1.1. Overall, the same trends of the similarity explained
in regards of the down-sampled empirical data are observed at increasing sample sizes (Fig.
32), except the recovery of the similarity explained is much later for lower amount of features.
Indicating, that the number of features is related to the positive effect of algorithm 1.
In figure 22A, the similarity explained of method 2 shows a steeper increase and lower
variance than with method 1 (Fig. 21A). Further on, the PERMANOVA statistics show
increased pseudo F statistic at higher percentage zero’s for the CSCS and other weighted
metrics (Fig. 21B). Based on observations it seems that method 2 outperforms method 1,
this is also significantly validated (p < 2.2e-16) by the Kruskal-Wallis test.
Figure 22:
Model 1 with Method 2 applied on down-sampled empirical data:
A) represent the
similarity explained (y-axis) at increasing percentage zero’s (x-axis) with sample size of 20.
Error-bars
represent the variation between the 4 replicates. The legend at the right represents the different similarity
metrics, with paired colors between unweighted (e.g. CSCS) versus weighted (e.g. CSCS_w). B) Shows
the PERMANOVA results for sample size 20. The pseudo F statistic is normalized against the unweighted
(e.g. CSCS) and log scaled. Error-bars represent the variation among the 10 replicates and red asterisks(*)
represent if all 10 replicates were significant.
The simulated data of method 2 (Fig. 34A) is almost identical to method 1 (Fig. 30A), except
the weighted Jaccard in method 2 is overall up-regulated. The PERMANOVA statistics also
show increased pseudo F statistic, especially for the weighted Euclidean and Jaccard (Fig.
35A). The benchmark on all sample sizes for both down-sampled empirical and simulated
data can be found in the appendix A.1.2. Overall, the same trends of similarity explained
and PERMANOVA are observed at higher sample size with method 2 as with method 1.
24
==PAGE:29==
Finally, when comparing method 2 versus method 3, there seems no striking difference for
both the increase of the similarity explained as the PERMANOVA statistics on the empirical
data (Fig. 22 versus 23) and simulated data (Fig. 34, 35 versus 38, 39). Based on the
Kruskal-Wallis test, method 1 is significantly different to both method 2 and 3 (p < 2.2e-16)
and method 2 and 3 are likely identical (p = 0.9). Method 3 is chosen based on the fact that
element-wise multiplication of the eigenvectors allows samples to be individually affected.
Figure 23:
Model 1 with Method 3 applied on down-sampled empirical data:
A) represent the
similarity explained (y-axis) at increasing percentage zero’s (x-axis) with sample size of 20.
Error-bars
represent the variation between the 4 replicates. The legend at the right represents the different similarity
metrics, with paired colors between unweighted (e.g. CSCS) versus weighted (e.g. CSCS_w). B) Shows
the PERMANOVA results for sample size 20. The pseudo F statistic is normalized against the unweighted
(e.g. CSCS) and log scaled. Error-bars represent the variation among the 10 replicates and red asterisks(*)
represent if all 10 replicates were significant.
In appendix A.2, further investigation on the effect of the step-size (Alg. 1, line 1) has been
conducted for both the empirical data (Fig. 44-45) and simulated data (Fig. 42-43). The
similarity explained in regards of the simulated data seems to be quite consistent (Fig. 42A,
B, C), and the PERMANOVA is improved when using a variable step size (Fig. 43C). In
contrast to the simulated data, the empirical data displays a different trend. Both alpha
of 0.01 and variable dampens the similarity explained (Fig. 44A, B), whereas alphas of 0.1
steepens the curve from 50% zero’s and upwards (Fig. 44C). The PERMANOVA statistics
shows only the positive values normalized by the unweighted metric, alpha set at 0.01 and
variable turns the CSCS negative (Fig. 45B, C) while alpha equal to 0.1 shows the opposite
desired effect (Fig. 45A). These observations favor alpha of 0.1 for algorithm 1.
25
==PAGE:30==
3.4
Model 2 improves similarity explained with poor biological in-
terpretation
In section 2.6.2, it was mentioned to use the CSSabT matrix from equation 1 as input to
algorithm 1. Since, multithreading of the SVD function in numpy and scipy is not sup-
ported with the current package that is deployed under the hood. A custom numpy version
is built that uses the OpenBLAS [58], which does support multithreading of the SVD func-
tion. Upon re-building the numpy module, model 2 was ran in an HPC environment for 4
replicates on both empirical (Fig. 24) and simulated data (Fig. 50). In figure 24A, it can
be observed that model 2 unweighted (CSCS_M2_u) performs worse than the unweighted
CSCS (CSCS_M1_u), but upon re-entering the CSCS weighted via model 2 into the model
1 with method 3 algorithm (CSCS_M2_w), it shows higher similarity explained than the
weighted CSCS (CSCS_M1_w) with very low to none variation among the replicates. The
PERMANOVA reaches abnormal high pseudo F statistic with non-significant values (Fig.
24B).
Figure 24:
Model 2 with Method 3 applied on down-sampled empirical data:
A) represent the
similarity explained (y-axis) at increasing percentage zero’s (x-axis) with sample size of 20.
Error-bars
represent the variation between the 4 replicates. The legend at the right represents the different similarity
metrics, with paired colors between unweighted (e.g. CSCS) versus weighted (e.g. CSCS_w). B) Shows
the PERMANOVA results for sample size 20. The pseudo F statistic is normalized against the unweighted
(e.g. CSCS) and log scaled. Error-bars represent the variation among the 4 replicates and red asterisks(*)
represent if all 4 replicates were significant.
26
==PAGE:31==
Upon closer inspection, PCoA plots were generated at different sparsity degrees to visualize
the situation. In figure 25 at 30% zero’s, weighting of CSCS with model 1 shows a small
increase of the pseudo F statistic but a significant decrease of the p-value (Fig. 25A versus
B and E versus F). The model 2 shows poor performance on both optimization with model
2 unweighted (Fig. 25C) and with model 2 combined with Model 1 (Fig. 25D). On top of
that, the samples are not well separated, making visual inspections very difficult.
Figure 25: Effect of Model 2 on the biological interpretation: A) CSCS is unweighted, B) CSCS
weighted via Model 1 with Method 3, C) CSCS is weighted with Model 2, D) CSCS weighted with Model
2 is then also weighted by Model 1 with Method 3, E) PERMANOVA pseudo F-statistic of unweighted
distance metrics (incl. figures A and C) with significance values (p), F) PERMANOVA pseudo F-statistic
of weighted distance metrics (incl. figures B and D).
27
==PAGE:32==
3.5
Model 2 and 3 both complicate PCoA interpretation
In section 2.6.3, it was mentioned to weight the column of the counts file by θ. The bench-
mark of model 3 also requires multithreading, therefore the same custom numpy module
as in benchmark of model 2 was used. The benchmark was ran for 4 replicates in an HPC
environment on both empirical and simulated data (Fig. 51). In figure 26, it can be observed
that model 3 also shows a poor similarity explained with model 3 alone, and re-entry into
model 1 with method 3 shows increased similarity explained and higher variance among the
replicates (Fig. 26A). The PERMANOVA statistics show less extreme values compared to
model 2 (Fig. 26B versus 24B). In figure 27 at 30% zero’s, the same effect as observed in
model 2 (Fig. 25D) is seen in model 3 (Fig. 27D), where samples are clustered together
instead of being spread out. The significant of the PERMANOVA is poor in both cases (Fig.
27E and F).
Figure 26:
Model 3 with Method 3 applied on down-sampled empirical data:
A) represent the
similarity explained (y-axis) at increasing percentage zero’s (x-axis) with sample size of 20.
Error-bars
represent the variation between the 4 replicates. The legend at the right represents the different similarity
metrics, with paired colors between unweighted (e.g. CSCS) versus weighted (e.g. CSCS_w). B) Shows
the PERMANOVA results for sample size 20. The pseudo F statistic is normalized against the unweighted
(e.g. CSCS) and log scaled. Error-bars represent the variation among the 4 replicates and red asterisks(*)
represent if all 4 replicates were significant.
Thus far it can be noted that algorithm 1 seems to be most consistent, least variable when
implemented with model 1 and method 3, with an alpha set at 0.1. Interestingly, high pseudo
F statistic does not guarantee high separation, rather significance of the groups. Therefore,
the main algorithm 1 will be modified to repeat itself 5 times with iterations set at 1000
28
==PAGE:33==
(Alg. 1, line 1) to output the weights that not only show higher similarity explained but
also take into account the significance of the PERMANOVA compared to the unweighted
metric.
Figure 27: Effect of Model 3 on the biological interpretation: A) CSCS is unweighted, B) CSCS
weighted via Model 1 with Method 3, C) CSCS is weighted with Model 3, D) CSCS weighted with Model
3 is then also weighted by Model 1 with Method 3, E) PERMANOVA pseudo F-statistic of unweighted
distance metrics (incl. figures A and C) with significance values (p), F) PERMANOVA pseudo F-statistic
of weighted distance metrics (incl. figures B and D).
29
==PAGE:34==
3.6
Model 1 improves PCoA interpretation via intra group disper-
sion
The down-sampling of the mice data to act as the empirical data for testing, might have
introduced some bias in the positioning of the samples. Therefore, the original mice data is
used to compare the CSCS with the other similarity metrics. In figure 28, it can be observed
that both the CSCS, Unifrac, Bray-Curtis and Euclidean already show good separation
visually (Fig. 28A, B, C, F) and statistically (Fig. 28G).
Figure 28: Comparison of unweighted CSCS with state-of-art Unifrac on Empirical mice data:
Figures A - F display the PCoA with the first two principal components for unweighted similarity metrics
for the two groups "Pre Diet" and "Termination" taken from the original mice data. G) shows the PER-
MANOVA pseudo F-statistic of unweighted figures belonging to A - F, with p-value.
30
==PAGE:35==
The optimization algorithm 1, coupled with model 1 with method 3 and five repetitions finds
the lowest p-value and highest similarity explained (Fig. 29). The CSCS, Unifrac, Bray-
Curtis and Euclidean are unchanged after optimization (Fig. 29A, B, C, F and G), whereas
the Jaccard and Shannon-divergence benefit from the optimization via higher similarity
explained (Fig. 29D, E) and statistical significance of the clusters (Fig. 29G). The main
difference between CSCS and Unifrac is the total computation time, Unifrac takes a total of
76h and CSCS is achieved in less than 2 minutes by using the CSCSomics tool.
Figure 29: Comparison of weighted CSCS with state-of-art Unifrac on Empirical mice data: Figures
A - F display the PCoA with the first two principal components for weighted similarity metrics for the two
groups "Pre Diet" and "Termination" taken from the original mice data. G) shows the PERMANOVA
pseudo F-statistic of weighted figures belonging to A - F, with p-value.
31
==PAGE:36==
Visually, it seems that the CSCS is able to disperse the samples along the principal com-
ponents better than Unifrac (Fig. 29A, B). Therefore, inter- and intra-cluster dispersion
has been computed according to the Davies-Bouldin Index in table 1. The inter-cluster is
the maximum distance between the clusters Pre Diet and Termination (Fig. 29), whereas
the intra-cluster is the mean distance between samples within the cluster. The algorithm
had effect on the Jaccard and Jensen-Shannon divergence and shows increased dispersion
of samples within clusters (Tab. 1, intra-cluster(w)), while decreasing the distance between
clusters (Tab. 1, inter-cluster(w)).
Table 1: Effect of inter- and intra-cluster dispersion: The inter- and intra-cluster dispersion is
computed for each distance metric before (u) and after (w) optimization.
Metric
inter-cluster (u)
inter-cluster (w)
intra-cluster (u)
intra-cluster (w)
CSCS
5.03
5.03
0.53
0.53
Unifrac
1.92
1.92
0.45
0.45
Bray-curtis
3.93
3.93
0.39
0.39
Jaccard
0.47
0.23
3.03
3.15
Jensen-Shannon
2.91
1.72
0.39
1.27
Euclidean
85940
85940
0.70
0.70
3.7
Speed and Memory consumption
The completed CSCSomics tool was ran on raw data consisting out of metagenomics and
metabolomics to mainly measure the speed and memory consumption on a Dell with eight
11th Gen intel cores with 2.80 GHz (Tab.
2).
It can be observed that the eigenvalue
optimization algorithm runs in mere 5 seconds when using the metabolomics mode or custom
mode (data not shown). The number of features from metagenomics 1 to 2 is increased by
26 fold, whereas memory is increased by 2 fold and time almost by 6 fold.
Table 2: Speed & Memory of CSCSomics tool: The speed and memory of the CSCSomics tool is
evaluated by looking at the number of features and samples for each type of data.
Data
no. features
no. samples
Time (min)
Memory (Mb)
Metagenomics 1
1,478
125
1.23
254
Metagenomics 2
39,228
149
8.00
480
Metabolomics
6,998
21
0.05
229
32
==PAGE:37==
4
Discussion
In this report, the aim is to construct a generalized tool for a variety of sparse omics data,
and to optimize the similarity explained that results in dimensional reduction. For now,
the tool is limited to metagenomics, proteomics and metabolomics data due to the lack of
suitable omics data sets. The current data sets are all cleaned and pre-processed, which
makes the focus on the development of the optimization algorithm easier. This is also the
implication of adding new omics classes to the tool. There is no difficulty of creating a new
class for a new omics, rather decision making of which file format is most suitable for the
new omics requires pre-liminary knowledge of the omics at hand.
The CSCSomics tool main focus is to act as an intermediate step prior to downstream
modelling tools, such as linear regression, machine learning approaches and PCoA analysis
[59]. The reduced dimensionality may reduce over-fitting [60].
4.1
Weight (theta) initialization
The weight initialization has been a debate since the early phase of the project.
Espe-
cially, since weights change the matrix from symmetric to a general matrix. It was observed
that sampling from a beta distribution was the most reasonable and benefiting for the up-
regulation of the similarity explained (data not shown). Interestingly, populating the diago-
nal of the weight matrix with zero’s showed a steeper ascend of the similarity explained (Fig.
55). To retrieve the symmetric matrix with one’s on the diagonal, the weighted matrix is
scaled by it’s own diagonal. Resulting in the standardisation of the column by the diagonal
value (e.g. first position of the diagonal corresponds to the first column of the weighted
matrix).
Weights are originally represented by the first relative sample weights compared to the other
samples (Fig. 52). This was done by stacking the first column from the weight matrix at
every iteration, resulting in a sample by iteration matrix. Unfortunately, the method did
not include all the weight information, therefore the second method computed the sum of
the weight difference per sample (P Wi −Wj) for every iteration (Fig. 53). Interestingly,
the algorithm 1 shows a higher weight difference for the Termination samples than the Pre
diet samples, which slowly descend to zero difference (Fig. 53). On the other hand, the first
method gives information if samples are diverging (towards zero) or converging (towards
one) (Fig. 52). Most samples never are switched off rather the weighting is kept close to
zero.
4.2
Global maximum
The aim of algorithm 1 is to find the global maximum, where the maximum similarity is
explained by the first two principal components. Unfortunately, it is not certain that the
global maximum is found, this would depend on the chosen step-size, weights and gradient
of interest.
Perhaps, the early stopping prevents the detection of the global maximum.
Therefore, the algorithm has been ran without early stopping to visualize the convergence
on the mice data (Fig. 54). The convergence seems to be within the 1000 iterations, which
33
==PAGE:38==
is higher than the number of iterations set in algorithm 1 and seems to be benefiting the
Jensen-Shannon divergence metric. The CSCS convergence was found in previous tests to
be within the range of 20 iterations, therefore the number of iterations were set at 100
(data not shown). This is an arbitrary choice and adjustments will be made available in the
CSCSomics tool.
4.3
Algorithm 3: Down sampling on Empirical mice data
In figure 25A vs B, it was observed that the optimization algorithm 1 improved the similarity
explained and enhanced the significance of the two groups. In contrast to figure 27, the
optimization algorithm is incapable of separating the two groups. This could be because
algorithm 3 is not random and selects samples based on the features they have in common.
This could lead to data sets with common features and similar abundances. The decrease
of the Pseudo F statistic in figure 27F, indicates that the inter-dispersion between groups
decreases while intra-dispersion increases. Supporting the potential explanation that samples
from Pre Diet and Termination groups are similar.
4.4
Number of clusters
The testing of the eigenvalue optimization algorithm 1 was only applied on clusters that
already were well separable from each other. This could be an explanation, why the CSCS
optimization on the original mice data had no effect (Fig. 28 vs 29). Different similarity
metrics position the samples in a different manner, creating a different view of the composi-
tion [61]. The CSCS, Weighted Unifrac, Bray-Curtis and Jensen-Shannon similarity metrics
operate on quantitative data and do show a clear separation between the two clusters (Fig.
28A, B, C, E). The Jaccard similarity metric on the other hand performs better at presence
or absence and may not capture quantitative data that well (Fig. 28D) [43]. The mice data
has also showed a clear difference in the number of positive and zero values between the
two clusters (Fig. 20), indicating that the Bray-Curtis may be most suitable to capture the
underlying structure and pattern, and could be an explanation why it doesn’t improve after
optimization with algorithm 1 [42]. The same explanation could be applied to the CSCS and
Weighted Unifrac, they both take the features into account and this may be more suitable to
capture the underlying structure. Therefore, this could explain why the CSCS in most PER-
MANOVA statistics equaled to one, which means both the unweighted as weighted CSCS
are indifferent.
An approach to evaluate the effect of algorithm 1 on 3 simulated clusters (0, 1 and 2) is
shown in figure 56. The same scenario as from the benchmark data is copied, where the seed
number is set at 100, number of features at 1000, sample size at 20. Cluster 0 and 2 are
the inverse of 1, 2 has 20 fold lower abundance than cluster 0. The test shows that with 3
clusters, convergence is reached (Fig. 56D) and higher similarity explained is found. Since
cluster 0 and 2 share the same features they are clustered together (Fig. 56A vs B) and inter-
dispersion is increased causing a decrease of the pseudo F-statistic and drop of the p-value
(Fig. 56C). The Pearson confidence eclipse show the number of samples captured at the first
34
==PAGE:39==
two principal components and support that clusters 0 and 2 form the same cluster (Fig. 56).
For further investigations, empirical data is required to validate these observations.
4.5
Pseudo F statistic
The pseudo F statistic is based on the distance among clusters divided by the distance within
clusters [39]. A higher Pseudo F statistic indicates a low distance within clusters but higher
separation between clusters indicates a good separation. Unfortunately, in this project a
high pseudo F statistic will decrease the distance within clusters, which in turn creates over-
lap as observed with Model 2 and Model 3. Finding a good pseudo F statistic that may
measure the performance of the algorithm 1 is difficult. On the other hand, the p-value
from the PERMANOVA test measures the number of pseudo F statistics with permutations
that is greater or equal than the null hypothesis of no change [39]. The p-value suggests
that the observed differences between clusters are unlikely to have occurred by chance [39].
Therefore, a low p-value gives statistical significance that the two clusters are distinct, and is
the main drive for selecting the weights that have the highest distance explained and lowest
p-value. Unfortunately, it is not always possible to know to which clusters samples belong
to.
In this project the main focus was to find a high Pseudo F statistic value that would indicate
a good separation. But it has been observed that a high pseudo F statistic does not improve
the biological interpretation of the PCoA results (Fig. 25E vs F and 27E vs F).
In regards of the dispersion of clusters, ideally it would have been most convenient to
retrieve the information in regards of the distance within and between groups from the
PERMANOVA sklearn module. Unfortunately, this was not applicable and the inter- and
intra-cluster disperson was computed by taking the maximum mean, which may not be well
comparable with the PERMANOVA. Taking the above statements into account, it is diffi-
cult to conclude if the CSCS outperforms the weighted Unifrac (Fig. 28). It does seem that
CSCS separates the clusters with a greater distance than Unifrac does, but this has to be
reconfirmed with the PERMANOVA, within and between cluster measures (Tab. 1).
5
Conclusion
In this work a generalized python tool is developed that improves the similarity explained
along the first two principal components of metagenomics, proteomics, metabolomics or
custom metrics that are influenced by sparsity and high dimensionality.
The improved
similarity explained has been validated in both empirical and simulated data at varying
sparse degrees and compared to other similarity/dissimilarity metrics applied within the
omics field.
The CSCSomics tool offers a quick approach to increase the similarity explained in sparse
data sets with reduced the dimensions.
35
==PAGE:40==
References
[1] X. Dai and L. Shen, “Advances and trends in omics technology development,” Frontiers in Medicine,
vol. 9, July 2022.
[2] R. Martín, S. Miquel, P. Langella, and L. G. Bermúdez-Humarán, “The role of metagenomics in under-
standing the human microbiome in health and disease,” Virulence, vol. 5, pp. 413–423, Feb. 2014.
[3] T. P. Quinn, I. Erb, G. Gloor, C. Notredame, M. F. Richardson, and T. M. Crowley, “A field guide for
the compositional analysis of any-omics data,” GigaScience, vol. 8, Sept. 2019.
[4] J. Shendure and H. Ji, “Next-generation DNA sequencing,” Nat. Biotechnol., vol. 26, pp. 1135–1145,
Oct. 2008.
[5] F. Sanger, “Determination of nucleotide sequences in DNA,” Bioscience Reports, vol. 24, pp. 237–253,
Aug. 2004.
[6] R. D. Mitra and G. M. Church, “In situ localized amplification and contact replication of many individual
DNA molecules,” Nucleic Acids Res., vol. 27, p. e34, Dec. 1999.
[7] B. Tran, J. E. Dancey, S. Kamel-Reid, J. D. McPherson, P. L. Bedard, A. M. K. Brown, T. Zhang,
P. Shaw, N. Onetto, L. Stein, T. J. Hudson, B. G. Neel, and L. L. Siu, “Cancer genomics: technology,
discovery, and translation,” J. Clin. Oncol., vol. 30, pp. 647–660, Feb. 2012.
[8] M. T. Dimon, H. M. Wood, P. H. Rabbitts, and S. T. Arron, “IMSA: integrated metagenomic sequence
analysis for identification of exogenous reads in a host genomic background,” PLoS One, vol. 8, p. e64546,
May 2013.
[9] Y. He, J. G. Caporaso, X.-T. Jiang, H.-F. Sheng, S. M. Huse, J. R. Rideout, R. C. Edgar, E. Kopylova,
W. A. Walters, R. Knight, and H.-W. Zhou, “Stability of operational taxonomic units: an important
but neglected property for analyzing microbial diversity,” Microbiome, vol. 3, p. 20, May 2015.
[10] B. T. Chait, “Mass spectrometry: Bottom-up or top-down?,” Science, vol. 314, pp. 65–66, Oct. 2006.
[11] J. J. Coon, J. E. Syka, J. Shabanowitz, and D. F. Hunt, “Tandem mass spectrometry for peptide and
protein sequence analysis,” BioTechniques, vol. 38, pp. 519–523, Apr. 2005.
[12] W. Cai, T. M. Tucholski, Z. R. Gregorich, and Y. Ge, “Top-down proteomics: Technology advancements
and applications to heart diseases,” Expert Review of Proteomics, vol. 13, pp. 717–730, July 2016.
[13] A. R. Johnson and E. E. Carlson, “Collision-induced dissociation mass spectrometry: A powerful tool
for natural product structure elucidation,” Analytical Chemistry, vol. 87, pp. 10668–10678, July 2015.
[14] A. Bauermeister, H. Mannochio-Russo, L. V. Costa-Lotufo, A. K. Jarmusch, and P. C. Dorrestein,
“Mass spectrometry-based metabolomics in microbiome investigations,” Nature Reviews Microbiology,
vol. 20, pp. 143–160, Sept. 2021.
[15] U. Ceglarek, A. Leichtle, M. Brügel, L. Kortz, R. Brauer, K. Bresler, J. Thiery, and G. M. Fiedler,
“Challenges and developments in tandem mass spectrometry based clinical metabolomics,” Molecular
and Cellular Endocrinology, vol. 301, pp. 266–271, Mar. 2009.
[16] N. Carriot, B. Paix, S. Greff, B. Viguier, J.-F. Briand, and G. Culioli, “Integration of LC/MS-
based molecular networking and classical phytochemical approach allows in-depth annotation of the
metabolome of non-model organisms - the case study of the brown seaweed taonia atomaria,” Talanta,
vol. 225, p. 121925, Apr. 2021.
[17] N. Taya, N. Katakami, K. Omori, S. Arakawa, S. Hosoe, H. Watanabe, M. Takahara, K. Miyashita,
H. Nishizawa, T.-A. Matsuoka, M. Furuno, T. Bamba, J. Iida, E. Fukusaki, and I. Shimomura, “Eval-
uation of change in metabolome caused by comprehensive diabetes treatment: A prospective obser-
vational study of diabetes inpatients with gas chromatography/mass spectrometry-based non-target
metabolomic analysis,” Journal of Diabetes Investigation, vol. 12, pp. 2232–2241, July 2021.
36
==PAGE:41==
[18] C. H. Johnson, J. Ivanisevic, and G. Siuzdak, “Metabolomics: beyond biomarkers and towards mecha-
nisms,” Nature Reviews Molecular Cell Biology, vol. 17, pp. 451–459, Mar. 2016.
[19] B. E. Sedio, “Recent breakthroughs in metabolomics promise to reveal the cryptic chemical traits that
mediate plant community composition, character evolution and lineage diversification,” no. 1964, 2017.
[20] B. B. Misra, C. Langefeld, M. Olivier, and L. A. Cox, “Integrated omics: tools, advances and future
approaches,” Journal of Molecular Endocrinology, vol. 62, pp. R21–R45, Jan. 2019.
[21] T. Ronan, Z. Qi, and K. M. Naegle, “Avoiding common pitfalls when clustering biological data,” Science
Signaling, vol. 9, June 2016.
[22] S. Busato, M. Gordon, M. Chaudhari, I. Jensen, T. Akyol, S. Andersen, and C. Williams, “Composition-
ality, sparsity, spurious heterogeneity, and other data-driven challenges for machine learning algorithms
within plant microbiome studies,” Current Opinion in Plant Biology, vol. 71, p. 102326, Feb. 2023.
[23] C. Martino, J. T. Morton, C. A. Marotz, L. R. Thompson, A. Tripathi, R. Knight, and K. Zengler, “A
novel sparse compositional technique reveals microbial perturbations,” mSystems, vol. 4, Feb. 2019.
[24] S. Dollhopf, S. Hashsham, and J. Tiedje, “Interpreting 16s rDNA t-RFLP data: Application of self-
organizing maps and principal component analysis to describe community dynamics and convergence,”
Microbial Ecology, vol. 42, pp. 495–505, Dec. 2001.
[25] G. Van Rossum and F. L. Drake, Python 3 Reference Manual. Scotts Valley, CA: CreateSpace, 2009.
[26] P. J. Cock, T. Antao, J. T. Chang, B. A. Chapman, C. J. Cox, A. Dalke, I. Friedberg, T. Hamelryck,
F. Kauff, B. Wilczynski, et al., “Biopython: freely available python tools for computational molecular
biology and bioinformatics,” Bioinformatics, vol. 25, no. 11, pp. 1422–1423, 2009.
[27] C. Camacho, G. Coulouris, V. Avagyan, N. Ma, J. Papadopoulos, K. Bealer, and T. L. Madden,
“BLAST+: architecture and applications,” BMC Bioinformatics, vol. 10, Dec. 2009.
[28] S. Maturu, “Application of Cosine Similarity in Bioinformatics,” p. 76, 2018.
[29] S. M. Networking, “Perspective Sharing and community curation of mass spectrometry data with Global
Natural Products Social Molecular Networking,” vol. 34, no. 8, 2016.
[30] B. E. Sedio, J. C. R. Echeverri, C. A. B. P., and S. J. Wright, “Sources of variation in foliar secondary
chemistry in a tropical forest tree community,” Ecology, vol. 98, pp. 616–623, Mar. 2017.
[31] A. D. Brejnrod, M. Ernst, P. Dworzynski, L. B. Rasmussen, P. Dorrestein, J. van der Hooft, and
M. Arumugam, “Implementations of the chemical structural and compositional similarity metric in R
and Python,” bioRxiv Bioinforma., pp. 11–14, 2019.
[32] C. R. Harris, K. J. Millman, S. J. van der Walt, R. Gommers, P. Virtanen, D. Cournapeau, E. Wieser,
J. Taylor, S. Berg, N. J. Smith, R. Kern, M. Picus, S. Hoyer, M. H. van Kerkwijk, M. Brett, A. Haldane,
J. F. del Río, M. Wiebe, P. Peterson, P. Gérard-Marchant, K. Sheppard, T. Reddy, W. Weckesser,
H. Abbasi, C. Gohlke, and T. E. Oliphant, “Array programming with NumPy,” Nature, vol. 585,
pp. 357–362, Sept. 2020.
[33] P. Virtanen, R. Gommers, T. E. Oliphant, M. Haberland, T. Reddy, D. Cournapeau, E. Burovski,
P. Peterson, W. Weckesser, J. Bright, S. J. van der Walt, M. Brett, J. Wilson, K. J. Millman, N. Mayorov,
A. R. J. Nelson, E. Jones, R. Kern, E. Larson, C. J. Carey, İ. Polat, Y. Feng, E. W. Moore, J. VanderPlas,
D. Laxalde, J. Perktold, R. Cimrman, I. Henriksen, E. A. Quintero, C. R. Harris, A. M. Archibald,
A. H. Ribeiro, F. Pedregosa, P. van Mulbregt, and SciPy 1.0 Contributors, “SciPy 1.0: Fundamental
Algorithms for Scientific Computing in Python,” Nature Methods, vol. 17, pp. 261–272, 2020.
[34] “Math kernel library.”
[35] A. Lewis, “The mathematics of eigenvalue optimization,” Mathematical Programming, vol. 97, pp. 155–
176, July 2003.
37
==PAGE:42==
[36] F. Pedregosa, G. Varoquaux, A. Gramfort, V. Michel, B. Thirion, O. Grisel, M. Blondel, P. Pret-
tenhofer, R. Weiss, V. Dubourg, J. Vanderplas, A. Passos, D. Cournapeau, M. Brucher, M. Perrot,
and E. Duchesnay, “Scikit-learn: Machine learning in Python,” Journal of Machine Learning Research,
vol. 12, pp. 2825–2830, 2011.
[37] K. T. Abou-moustafa, “On derivatives of eigenvalues and eigenvectors of the generalized eigenvalue
problem differentiating eigenvalues and eigenvectors,” 2010.
[38] E. R. Girden, ANOVA: Repeated measures. No. 84, Sage, 1992.
[39] M. J. Anderson, “Permutational multivariate analysis of variance (permanova),” Nov. 2017.
[40] T. scikit-bio development team, “scikit-bio: A bioinformatics library for data scientists, students, and
developers,” 2020.
[41] S. Böcker, “Algorithmic Mass Spectrometry,” no. 36643, 2019.
[42] J. R. Bray and J. T. Curtis, “An ordination of the upland forest communities of southern wisconsin,”
Ecological Monographs, vol. 27, pp. 325–349, Oct. 1957.
[43] P. Jaccard, “THE DISTRIBUTION OF THE FLORA IN THE ALPINE ZONE.1,” New Phytologist,
vol. 11, pp. 37–50, Feb. 1912.
[44] D. Endres and J. Schindelin, “A new metric for probability distributions,” IEEE Transactions on In-
formation Theory, vol. 49, pp. 1858–1860, July 2003.
[45] S. Kullback and R. A. Leibler, “On information and sufficiency,” The Annals of Mathematical Statistics,
vol. 22, pp. 79–86, Mar. 1951.
[46] C. Lozupone, M. E. Lladser, D. Knights, J. Stombaugh, and R. Knight, “UniFrac: an effective distance
metric for microbial community comparison,” The ISME Journal, vol. 5, pp. 169–172, Sept. 2010.
[47] K. Katoh and D. M. Standley, “MAFFT multiple sequence alignment software version 7: Improvements
in performance and usability,” Molecular Biology and Evolution, vol. 30, pp. 772–780, Jan. 2013.
[48] D. Posada, “jModelTest: Phylogenetic model averaging,” Molecular Biology and Evolution, vol. 25,
pp. 1253–1256, Apr. 2008.
[49] E. Susko and A. J. Roger, “On the use of information criteria for model selection in phylogenetics,”
Molecular Biology and Evolution, vol. 37, pp. 549–562, Nov. 2019.
[50] D. L. Swofford, PAUP*. Phylogenetic Analysis Using Parsimony (*and Other Methods). 2003.
[51] D. L. Davies and D. W. Bouldin, “A cluster separation measure,” IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis
and Machine Intelligence, vol. PAMI-1, pp. 224–227, Apr. 1979.
[52] W. H. Kruskal and W. A. Wallis, “Use of ranks in one-criterion variance analysis,” Journal of the
American Statistical Association, vol. 47, pp. 583–621, Dec. 1952.
[53] RStudio Team, RStudio: Integrated Development Environment for R. RStudio, PBC., Boston, MA,
2020.
[54] H. Wickham, M. Averick, J. Bryan, W. Chang, L. D. McGowan, R. FranĂ§ois, G. Grolemund, A. Hayes,
L. Henry, J. Hester, M. Kuhn, T. L. Pedersen, E. Miller, S. M. Bache, K. MĂźller, J. Ooms, D. Robinson,
D. P. Seidel, V. Spinu, K. Takahashi, D. Vaughan, C. Wilke, K. Woo, and H. Yutani, “Welcome to the
tidyverse,” Journal of Open Source Software, vol. 4, no. 43, p. 1686, 2019.
[55] E. Neuwirth, RColorBrewer: ColorBrewer Palettes, 2014.
[56] T. L. Pedersen, patchwork:
The Composer of Plots, 2022.
https://patchwork.data-imaginist.com,
https://github.com/thomasp85/patchwork.
[57] S. Xu, M. Chen, T. Feng, L. Zhan, L. Zhou, and G. Yu, “Use ggbreak to effectively utilize plotting
space to deal with large datasets and outliers.,” Frontiers in Genetics, vol. 12, p. 774846, 2021.
38
==PAGE:43==
[58] “OpenBLAS: An optimized blas library.” https://github.com/xianyi/OpenBLAS. Accessed: June 25,
2023.
[59] J. E. McDermott, J. Wang, H. Mitchell, B.-J. Webb-Robertson, R. Hafen, J. Ramey, and K. D. Rodland,
“Challenges in biomarker discovery: combining expert insights with statistical analysis of complex omics
data,” Expert Opinion on Medical Diagnostics, vol. 7, pp. 37–51, Aug. 2012.
[60] S. Vinga, “Structured sparsity regularization for analyzing high-dimensional omics data,” Briefings in
Bioinformatics, vol. 22, pp. 77–87, June 2020.
[61] S. Weiss, Z. Z. Xu, S. Peddada, A. Amir, K. Bittinger, A. Gonzalez, C. Lozupone, J. R. Zaneveld,
Y. Vázquez-Baeza, A. Birmingham, E. R. Hyde, and R. Knight, “Normalization and microbial differ-
ential abundance strategies depend upon data characteristics,” Microbiome, vol. 5, Mar. 2017.
39
==PAGE:44==
A
Appendix
The appendix is subdivided into Benchmarking of Model 1, with the introduced three methods, and the
benchmarking of the effect of the gradient and step-size on finding the global maximum of the similarity
explained on the first two principal components.
A.1
Benchmark of Model 1
Benchmarks containing all four sample sizes were benchmarked with Model 1, see source code on Github3
on both simulated and empirical data.
A.1.1
Method 1
Figure 30: Similarity explained: Method 1 on simulated data: A, B, C, D) represent the
similarity explained (y-axis) at increasing percentage zero’s (x-axis). Plots start with sample size 20 until 80,
error-bars represent the variation between the 10 replicates. The legend at the bottom represents the different
similarity metrics, with paired colors between unweighted (e.g. CSCS) versus weighted (e.g. CSCS_w).
3https://github.com/agusinac/CSCS-omics/blob/main/CSCS_models/Model_1.py
40
==PAGE:45==
Figure 31: PERMANOVA: Method 1 on simulated data: A, B, C, D) Show the PERMANOVA
results, in order of sample size 20, 40, 60 and 80, the pseudo F statistic is normalized against the unweighted
(e.g. CSCS) and log scaled. Error-bars represent the variation among the 10 replicates and red asterisks(*)
represent if all 10 replicates were significant.
41
==PAGE:46==
Figure 32:
Similarity explained:
Method 1 on down-sampled empirical data: A, B,
C, D) represent the similarity explained (y-axis) at increasing percentage zero’s (x-axis). Plots start with
sample size 20 until 80, error-bars represent the variation between the 10 replicates. The legend at the
bottom represents the different similarity metrics, with paired colors between unweighted (e.g.
CSCS)
versus weighted (e.g. CSCS_w).
42
==PAGE:47==
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 33: PERMANOVA: Method 1 on down-sampled empirical data: a, b, c, d) Show the
PERMANOVA results, in order of sample size 20, 40, 60 and 80, the pseudo F statistic is normalized against
the unweighted (e.g. CSCS) and log scaled. Error-bars represent the variation among the 10 replicates and
red asterisks(*) represent if all 10 replicates were significant.
43
==PAGE:48==
A.1.2
Method 2
Figure 34: Similarity explained: Method 2 on simulated data: A, B, C, D) represent the
similarity explained (y-axis) at increasing percentage zero’s (x-axis). Plots start with sample size 20 until 80,
error-bars represent the variation between the 10 replicates. The legend at the bottom represents the different
similarity metrics, with paired colors between unweighted (e.g. CSCS) versus weighted (e.g. CSCS_w).
44
==PAGE:49==
Figure 35: PERMANOVA: Method 2 on simulated data: A, B, C, D) Show the PERMANOVA
results, in order of sample size 20, 40, 60 and 80, the pseudo F statistic is normalized against the unweighted
(e.g. CSCS) and log scaled. Error-bars represent the variation among the 10 replicates and red asterisks(*)
represent if all 10 replicates were significant.
45
==PAGE:50==
Figure 36:
Similarity explained:
Method 2 on down-sampled empirical data: A, B,
C, D) represent the similarity explained (y-axis) at increasing percentage zero’s (x-axis). Plots start with
sample size 20 until 80, error-bars represent the variation between the 10 replicates. The legend at the
bottom represents the different similarity metrics, with paired colors between unweighted (e.g.
CSCS)
versus weighted (e.g. CSCS_w).
46
==PAGE:51==
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 37: PERMANOVA: Method 2 on down-sampled empirical data: a, b, c, d) Show the
PERMANOVA results, in order of sample size 20, 40, 60 and 80, the pseudo F statistic is normalized against
the unweighted (e.g. CSCS) and log scaled. Error-bars represent the variation among the 10 replicates and
red asterisks(*) represent if all 10 replicates were significant.
47
==PAGE:52==
A.1.3
Method 3
Figure 38: Similarity explained: Method 3 on simulated data: A, B, C, D) represent the
similarity explained (y-axis) at increasing percentage zero’s (x-axis). Plots start with sample size 20 until 80,
error-bars represent the variation between the 10 replicates. The legend at the bottom represents the different
similarity metrics, with paired colors between unweighted (e.g. CSCS) versus weighted (e.g. CSCS_w).
48
==PAGE:53==
Figure 39: PERMANOVA: Method 3 on simulated data: A, B, C, D) Show the PERMANOVA
results, in order of sample size 20, 40, 60 and 80, the pseudo F statistic is normalized against the unweighted
(e.g. CSCS) and log scaled. Error-bars represent the variation among the 10 replicates and red asterisks(*)
represent if all 10 replicates were significant.
49
==PAGE:54==
Figure 40:
Similarity explained:
Method 3 on down-sampled empirical data: A, B,
C, D) represent the similarity explained (y-axis) at increasing percentage zero’s (x-axis). Plots start with
sample size 20 until 80, error-bars represent the variation between the 10 replicates. The legend at the
bottom represents the different similarity metrics, with paired colors between unweighted (e.g.
CSCS)
versus weighted (e.g. CSCS_w).
50
==PAGE:55==
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 41: PERMANOVA: Method 3 on down-sampled empirical data: a, b, c, d) Show the
PERMANOVA results, in order of sample size 20, 40, 60 and 80, the pseudo F statistic is normalized against
the unweighted (e.g. CSCS) and log scaled. Error-bars represent the variation among the 10 replicates and
red asterisks(*) represent if all 10 replicates were significant.
51
==PAGE:56==
52
==PAGE:57==
A.2
Benchmark on step size (alpha)
Figure 42: Similarity explained: Effect of step-size on simulated data: A, B, C) respectively
represent the gradient from Method 3 with alpha set at 0.1, alpha set at 0.01 and alpha depended on the
first two eigenvalues
2
e1+e2 . Error-bars represent the variation between the 4 replicates. For each graph the
similarity explained in percentage is displayed at the y-axis and the percentage zero’s on increasing order on
the x-axis for different unweighted (e.g. CSCS) and weighted (e.g. CSCS_w) similarity metrics.
53
==PAGE:58==
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 43:
PERMANOVA: Effect of step-size on simulated data:
a, b, c) respectively
represent the gradient from Method 3 with alpha set at 0.1, alpha set at 0.01 and alpha depended on the
first two eigenvalues
2
e1+e2 . Error-bars represent the variation between the 4 replicates. For each graph the
PERMANOVA statistics: pseudo F statistic is normalized by the unweighted distance metric and log scaled.
The red asterisks(*) represent if all 4 replicates are significant
54
==PAGE:59==
Figure 44: Similarity explained: Effect of step-size on down-sampled empirical data:
A, B, C) respectively represent the gradient from Method 3 with alpha set at 0.1, alpha set at 0.01 and alpha
depended on the first two eigenvalues
2
e1+e2 . Error-bars represent the variation between the 4 replicates.
For each graph the similarity explained in percentage is displayed at the y-axis and the percentage zero’s on
increasing order on the x-axis for different unweighted (e.g. CSCS) and weighted (e.g. CSCS_w) similarity
metrics.
55
==PAGE:60==
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 45: PERMANOVA: Effect of step-size on down-sampled empirical data: a, b,
c) respectively represent the gradient from Model 1 with Method 3 with alpha set at 0.1, alpha set at 0.01
and alpha depended on the first two eigenvalues
2
e1+e2 . Error-bars represent the variation between the 4
replicates. For each graph the PERMANOVA statistics: pseudo F statistic is normalized by the unweighted
distance metric and log scaled. The red asterisks(*) represent if all 4 replicates are significant
56
==PAGE:61==
57
==PAGE:62==
A.3
Benchmark on gradient
Figure 46: Similarity explained: Effect of gradient on simulated data: A, B, C) respectively
represent the gradient from Method 3, without eigenvectors U and U T , and without gradient, which only
depends on unweighted CSCS matrix that is multiplied by the step-size (alpha = 0.1). Error-bars represent
the variation between the 4 replicates. For each graph the similarity explained in percentage is displayed at
the y-axis and the percentage zero’s on increasing order on the x-axis for different unweighted (e.g. CSCS)
and weighted (e.g. CSCS_w) similarity metrics.
58
==PAGE:63==
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 47:
PERMANOVA: Effect of gradient on simulated data:
a, b, c) respectively
represent the gradient from Method 3, without eigenvectors U and U T , and without gradient, which only
depends on unweighted CSCS matrix that is multiplied by the step-size (alpha = 0.1). Error-bars represent
the variation between the 4 replicates. For each graph the PERMANOVA statistics: pseudo F statistic is
normalized by the unweighted distance metric and log scaled. The red asterisks(*) represent if all 4 replicates
are significant.
59
==PAGE:64==
Figure 48: Similarity explained: Effect of gradient on down-sampled empirical data:
A, B, C) respectively represent the gradient from Method 3, without eigenvectors U and U T , and without
gradient, which only depends on unweighted CSCS matrix that is multiplied by the step-size (alpha =
0.1). Error-bars represent the variation between the 4 replicates. For each graph the similarity explained in
percentage is displayed at the y-axis and the percentage zero’s on increasing order on the x-axis for different
unweighted (e.g. CSCS) and weighted (e.g. CSCS_w) similarity metrics.
60
==PAGE:65==
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 49: PERMANOVA: Effect of gradient on down-sampled empirical data: a, b, c)
respectively represent the gradient from Method 3, without eigenvectors U and U T , and without gradient,
which only depends on unweighted CSCS matrix that is multiplied by the step-size (alpha = 0.1). Error-bars
represent the variation between the 4 replicates. For each graph the PERMANOVA statistics: pseudo F
statistic is normalized by the unweighted distance metric and log scaled. The red asterisks(*) represent if
all 4 replicates are significant.
61
==PAGE:66==
A.4
Benchmark of Model 2 with simulated data
Benchmarks containing all four sample sizes were tested with Model 2, see source code on Github4 on both
simulated and empirical data.
Figure 50: Similarity explained and PERMANOVA: Model 2 with Method 3 applied
on simulated data: A) represent the similarity explained (y-axis) at increasing percentage zero’s (x-
axis) with sample size of 20. Error bars represent the variation between the 4 replicates. The legend at the
right represents the different similarity metrics, with paired colors between unweighted (e.g. CSCS) versus
weighted (e.g. CSCS_w). B) Shows the PERMANOVA results for sample size 20. The pseudo F statistic
is normalized against the unweighted (e.g. CSCS) and log scaled. Errorbars represent the variation among
the 4 replicates and red asterisks(*) represent if all 4 replicates were significant.
4https://github.com/agusinac/CSCS-omics/blob/main/CSCS_models/Model_2.py
62
==PAGE:67==
A.5
Benchmark of Model 3 with simulated data
Benchmarks containing all four sample sizes were tested with Model 3, see source code on Github5 on both
simulated and empirical data.
Figure 51: Similarity explained and PERMANOVA: Model 3 with Method 3 applied
on simulated data: A) represent the similarity explained (y-axis) at increasing percentage zero’s (x-
axis) with sample size of 20. Error bars represent the variation between the 4 replicates. The legend at the
right represents the different similarity metrics, with paired colors between unweighted (e.g. CSCS) versus
weighted (e.g. CSCS_w). B) Shows the PERMANOVA results for sample size 20. The pseudo F statistic
is normalized against the unweighted (e.g. CSCS) and log scaled. Errorbars represent the variation among
the 4 replicates and red asterisks(*) represent if all 4 replicates were significant.
5https://github.com/agusinac/CSCS-omics/blob/main/CSCS_models/Model_3.py
63
==PAGE:68==
A.6
Weight representation
Figure 52: Method 1 for weights representation: The first method takes the first column of
every weight matrix and stacks it by iteration into the final represented matrix for every similarity metric.
The y-axis represent the cluster; Pre diet and Termination, and x-axis the iterations.
64
==PAGE:69==
Figure 53: Method 2 for weights representation: The second method computes the difference
per sample (row-wise) of all the weights via P Wi −Wj for every similarity metric. The y-axis represent
the cluster; Pre diet and Termination, and x-axis the iterations.
65
==PAGE:70==
A.7
Convergence
Figure 54: Overview similarity explained per iteration: For every plot the similarity explained
(y-axis) is displayed against the number of iterations (x-axis), red-dotted line indicates the position where
the best similarity explained is found. The convergence of the Jensen-Shannon divergence seems to be found
around 200 iterations. The CSCS similarity explained drops from 60% to 30% and slowly goes up but it
seems that it converges to a stationary state.
66
==PAGE:71==
Figure 55: Convergence of CSCS: For every plot the similarity explained (y-axis) is displayed against
the number of iterations (x-axis), red-dotted line indicates the position where the best similarity explained
is found. A) Alpha is set at 0.1 and the weight matrix contains zero’s on the diagonal. B) Alpha is set at 0.1
and the weight matrix contains one’s on the diagonal. C) The weight matrix contains zero’s on the diagonal
and alpha is set at: 2 divided by the sum of the first and second eigenvalue.
67
==PAGE:72==
A.8
Simulation of 3 clusters
Figure 56: Evaluation of three clusters: The clusters 0 and 1 are the inverse from each other.
Cluster 2 has the same features as cluster 1, except the counts are increased by 20 fold.
A) PCoA of
unweighted cscs, circles represent confidence eclipse based on pearson correlation. B) PCoA of weighted cscs,
circles represent confidence eclipse based on pearson correlation. C) PERMANOVA statistics of unweighted
versus weighted CSCS. D) The similarity explained (y-axis) per iteration (x-axis) is displayed. The red-
dotted vertical line represents where the highest similarity explained is found.
68
