==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Optimizing Real-Time Applications: Scheduling
and Mapping of Time-Triggered and Event-Triggered
Tasks on ADAS Multi-Core Platforms
Carlo Meroni
==PAGE:2==
DTU Compute
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
This thesis tackles the significant challenge of guaranteeing the timing and safety re-
quirements of Advanced Driver Assistance Systems (ADAS) operating on multi-core
architectures. It investigates the problem of integrating Time-Triggered (TT) and Event-
Triggered (ET) tasks, and the problem of mapping tasks to multiple CPU cores in order
to improve the system performance. Given that this as a combinatorial optimization
problem with a vast search space, the study proposes an optimization algorithm based on
meta-heuristics to generate task-to-core mappings and fine-tune parameters for the differ-
ent types of tasks integration. Key contributions include a novel hierarchical scheduling
approach for TT and ET tasks and a parallelizable genetic algorithm for task-to-core
mapping optimization. Experimental results demonstrate superior performance over ex-
isting similar methods, including higher schedulability rates, lower average worst-case
response time, and lower execution time for the schedule synthesis process. The findings
of this work contribute to the development of eﬀicient scheduling algorithms for ADAS
systems operating on multi-core architectures.
i
==PAGE:4==
Preface
This master thesis was done at the Technical University of Denmark for my Master
degree in Computer Science and Engineering. This was a 30 ECTS project that ran
from January 23rd to June 23rd.
I am grateful for my supervisor, Professor Paul Pop, for his guidance and support during
this project. His knowledge helped me understand the topic better. Also, I appreciate
Silviu S. Craciunas, researcher at TTTech, for sharing his knowledge and giving valuable
feedback. His dedication to the field inspired me and his feedback was key in dealing
with the tough parts of this thesis. I want to thank my family who always believed in
me and supported me throughout my studies. Finally, a special thanks to my girlfriend
Laura. Her patience, kindness, and belief in me made a huge difference.
Kongens Lyngby, June 23, 2023
Carlo Meroni
ii
==PAGE:5==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
ii
Contents
iii
1
Introduction
1
2
System model
3
3
Problem Statement
6
4
Related work
7
4.1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
4.2
Integrating Time-Triggered and Event-Triggered tasks . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
4.2.1
Hierarchical scheduling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
4.2.2
Slot Shifting scheduling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
4.2.3
Constructive scheduling
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
4.2.4
Holistic scheduling
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
4.3
Eﬀicient Mapping of Tasks on Multi-Core systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
5
Schedule synthesis and analysis
12
5.1
Schedule synthesis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
5.1.1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
5.1.2
Scheduling TT tasks using EDF scheduling algorithm . . . . . . . . 12
5.1.3
Integrating TT and ET tasks with periodic polling servers
. . . . . 13
5.1.4
Drawbacks of handling ET tasks with periodic polling servers
. . . 14
5.1.5
Scheduling idle slots using token-bucket scheduling algorithm . . . . 16
5.1.6
Schedule synthesis with EDF and TB algorithms
. . . . . . . . . . 18
5.1.7
Schedule storage
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
5.1.8
Schedule synthesis for multiple cores
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
5.1.9
Schedulability analysis of TT tasks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
5.2
Schedulability analysis of ET tasks
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
5.2.1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
5.2.2
Schedulability analysis using the lower bound supply function
. . . 24
5.2.3
Drawbacks of using lbsf(t) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
5.2.4
Schedulability analysis using Zs(t) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
5.2.5
Optimizing the schedulability analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
5.2.6
Assigning ET tasks priorities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
iii
==PAGE:6==
6
Optimization
35
6.1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
6.2
Genetic algorithm with k-tournament selection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
6.2.1
Overview
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
6.2.2
Algorithm pseudo-code . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38
6.2.3
Finding a good chromosome . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
6.2.4
Finding a bad chromosome . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
6.2.5
Chromosome content . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
6.2.6
Fitness function . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42
6.2.7
Mutation function
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
6.2.8
Crossover function
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 44
6.3
Optimizing idle slots placement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 44
6.3.1
Generating initial solutions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 44
6.3.2
Combining solutions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
6.3.3
Mutating parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
6.4
Optimizing the mapping of tasks to cores . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
6.4.1
Generating initial mappings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
6.4.2
Combining task-to-core mappings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
6.4.3
Mutating task-to-core mappings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
6.5
Mutation rate schedule . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
6.6
Rounds count schedule . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 48
6.7
Distributed optimization over multiple cores . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49
6.8
Distributed optimization over multiple nodes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 50
6.8.1
Parallel island model of genetic algorithms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 50
6.8.2
Implementation of island model using Open MPI
. . . . . . . . . . 52
7
Results
55
7.1
Introduction to results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 55
7.1.1
Token Bucket method
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 55
7.1.2
Simple polling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 56
7.1.3
Advanced Polling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 57
7.2
Single-core schedule synthesis experiment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 57
7.3
Multi-core schedule synthesis experiment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 60
7.4
Evaluation of Mapping Initialization Methods
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 62
7.5
Comparing schedulability analysis with lbsf(t) and with Z(t) . . . . . . . . 64
7.6
Scalability experiments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 66
7.6.1
Distributing optimization over multiple cores . . . . . . . . . . . . . 67
7.6.2
Distributing optimization over multiple nodes
. . . . . . . . . . . . 68
8
Conclusion
71
9
Future works
72
10 List of symbols
73
Bibliography
75
iv
==PAGE:7==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
The automotive industry has widely adopted Advanced Driver Assistance Systems (ADAS)
to increase safety, comfort, and eﬀiciency when driving. These systems integrate various
functionalities that assist drivers, such as lane departure warnings, collision avoidance
systems, and adaptive cruise control. These sophisticated functions are the result of a
seamless blend of hardware and software components, all of which need to fulfill strict
timing and safety requirements. The advent of ADAS has largely been motivated by
the fact that a majority of road accidents stem from human error. In response to this
issue, ADAS have been developed to improve the automation, adaptability, and enhance-
ment of vehicle systems. The primary objective of this innovation is to optimize driving
conditions, thereby significantly improving safety (Brookhuis et al. (2001)). The effec-
tiveness of ADAS in reducing road accidents has been shown by Hamid et al. (2017), who
presented evidence that these systems have reduced instances of human error, thereby
playing a crucial role in decreasing the number of road fatalities.
One of the key components of ADAS systems is Time-Triggered (TT) systems, which
provide a predictable and deterministic environment for executing critical functions. TT
systems are designed to perform specific tasks at predefined times, ensuring that dead-
lines are met and that the system operates reliably (Xu and Parnas (2000), Sagstetter
et al. (2014)). In recent years, multi-core architectures have become prevalent in ADAS
systems to address the increasing computational requirements of these functionalities.
Guaranteeing the timing and safety requirements of ADAS systems on multi-core archi-
tectures is a challenging task, which requires an eﬀicient scheduling algorithm that can
generate schedules that are both schedulable and optimized to be fast and eﬀicient.
Despite its advantages in terms of predictability, stability, compositionality, and deter-
minism, the use of a fixed timetable in Time-Triggered systems is widely recognized as
ineffective for integrating sporadic Event-Triggered (ET) tasks. On the other hand, ET
systems allow more flexibility to respond quickly to sporadic events and result in lower
average response times for tasks, but lack predictability and determinism. Therefore it is
an advantages to combine both approaches, which enables a TT system to be adaptable
enough to respond to sporadic events when required. As a consequence, many automo-
tive applications have moved to integrate a mix of Time-Triggered and Event-Triggered
scheduling (Fleming and Burns (2015)).
In this context, the thesis aims to explore the challenges of integrating TT and ET tasks
as well as scheduling tasks on multiple CPU/GPU cores which requires finding a good
mapping between tasks and cores. The problem at hand is a NP-complete problem, a
1
==PAGE:8==
combinatorial optimization problem with an extensive search space, and solving it re-
quires a powerful and flexible approach such as meta-heuristics. For instance, there are
about 8 · 1012 possible combinations for mapping 240 tasks on 8 cores, but only one (or
few) optimal solution. Therefore, this thesis proposes an optimization algorithm based
on meta-heuristics that can solve this complex problem. The primary objective of the
thesis is to contribute to the development of eﬀicient scheduling algorithms for ADAS
systems operating on multi-core architectures. The main contributions of this work are
the following:
• A novel hierarchical scheduling approach for integrating TT and ET tasks is pro-
posed which improves on existing hierarchical approaches.
• A highly parallelizable genetic algorithm that can be run over multiple cores and
nodes is proposed for optimizing the task-to-core mapping and to fine-tune param-
eters for the schedule synthesis process.
In chapter 5 the schedule synthesis and analysis methods are described. It is described
how the schedule synthesis algorithm handles TT tasks using Earliest Deadline First
(EDF) and creates temporal isolation between TT and ET tasks by placing idle slots
in the schedule using a Token Bucket algorithm. In section 5.1.4 it is argued that this
method of establishing temporal isolation between the two types of tasks is better than
conventional periodic polling server approaches. In section 5.2 and 5.2.3, an existing
method of schedulability analysis for ET tasks is analyzed and it is argued that the
method is inherently pessimistic and not flexible, primarily due to its reliance on a
lower-bound supply from the schedule to determine the schedulability of ET tasks. In
contrast, a novel approach is proposed which uses the exact supply function ZS(t) given
by the schedule to determine the schedulability of the tasks, which effectively removes
the pessimism of the algorithm and makes the method very flexible without compromis-
ing too much on speed. In section 5.2.6, a solution to the problem of assigning priorities
to ET tasks is presented.
In chapter 6, a genetic algorithm is proposed for solving the task-to-core mapping prob-
lem and for optimizing parameters for the schedule synthesis process. It is also demon-
strated how this algorithm can be eﬀiciently scaled by distributing the computation
across multiple cores by using multi-threading techniques and on multiple nodes by us-
ing parallel programming frameworks such as OpenMPI paired with an island model of
genetic algorithms.
Finally, in chapter 7, experiments were conducted to evaluate the effectiveness of the pro-
posed algorithm and to compare it to similar hierarchical scheduling approaches. The
results show that, compared to the other methods, the proposed solution has higher
schedulability rates, generates schedules where TT and ET tasks have lower worst-case
response time and it is overall faster. The high effectiveness of the proposed genetic algo-
rithm to solve the task-to-core mapping problem is shown also when applied to already
existing hierarchical methods for integrating TT and ET tasks.
2
==PAGE:9==
CHAPTER 2
System model
ADAS (Advanced Driver Assistance Systems) platforms are multi-core multi-SoC (System-
on-Chip) embedded Electronic Control Units (ECUs) utilizing various CPUs and GPUs
that are interconnected using either a deterministic Ethernet backbone or PCIe (Som-
mer et al. (2013) and Becker et al. (2016)). These platforms can run different operating
systems with varying scheduling policies based on safety and performance requirements.
To provide a common execution environment and hardware abstraction, a middleware
layer is used on top of each operating system. An example of ADAS platform is the
one shown in figure 2.1, described by Sokcevic (2020), which has the MotionWise mid-
dleware layer, developed by TTTech, running on top of each operating system (TTTech
(2023)). The middleware layer ensures portability of software functions and the capabil-
ity to execute tasks according to a table-driven pre-computed schedule, independent of
the underlying OS dispatching mechanisms which ensures temporal isolation.
Figure 2.1: ADAS platform model (Sokcevic (2020))
The software model of ADAS comprises a vast array of diverse functionalities. These
must be integrated and systematically deployed to ensure an effective, cohesive system.
The system is composed of periodic tasks, that have real-time requirements in terms of
execution and deadlines. There are two types of tasks: Time-triggered tasks (TT) and
sporadic Event-triggered (ET) tasks.
3
==PAGE:10==
• Time-triggered tasks, also known as periodic tasks, are a type of task that are
scheduled to run at regular, predetermined intervals. A TT task is defined by its
priority pTT
i
, duration dTT
i
, period T TT
i
, relative deadline DTT
i
and the CPU/GPU
core ID KTT
i
that handles the task.
• Sporadic Event-triggered tasks are triggered by specific events within the system,
and their arrival times can be irregular and unpredictable. An ET task is defined
by its priority pET
i
, duration dET
i
, minimal inter-arrival distance T ET
i
, relative
deadline DET
i
, and the CPU/GPU core ID KET
i
that handles the task.
In the system model considered in this thesis, a task dispatcher that schedules TT tasks
based on an offline generated static schedule table (cyclic executive) is assumed, and
in the slots that are left (idle slots) for ET tasks, implements a 2nd-level preemptive
scheduler based on fixed priorities.
Figure 2.2 shows an example of offline generate
TT schedule and how ET tasks could be handled within the idle slots by a 2nd-level
preemptive scheduler.
Figure 2.2: Event-Triggered tasks are scheduled to execute during idle slots at run-
time, with higher priority tasks denoted by τ being given precedence.
The schedule’s timeline is partitioned into uniform segments, represented by the micro-
tick ’mt’. This micro-tick signifies the smallest possible unit for task scheduling, which
defines the granularity of task management. It is assumed that Di, di, and Ti of both
TT and ET tasks are all multiples of mt. A task schedule for a finite set, denoted by
τ = τ TT ∪τ ET, is represented by a partial function σ : N →T. This function allocates
a task to each discrete time interval, specifically [t ∗mt, (t + 1) ∗mt)], established by
the micro-tick granularity. Each task schedule, σ, cycles after a certain time period
referred to as the ’schedule cycle’. This cycle corresponds to the system’s hyper-period,
symbolized by tTT
h
= lcmτi∈τ T T T TT
i
, where ’lcm’ is an abbreviation for the ’least common
multiple.’ This term signifies the smallest common interval for recurring TT tasks.
Typically, Time-triggered tasks follow a strict deadline schedule, whereas Event-triggered
tasks may have a deadline that is not necessarily bound by the inter-arrival time. Both
TT and ET tasks can be preempted at any time. It is worth noting that all TT tasks
share the same priority, which is the highest priority. On the other hand, ET tasks have
lower priority than TT tasks, and are indexed in descending order of priority. In the
case where multiple ET tasks share the same priority, they are selected based on the
4
==PAGE:11==
first-in, first-out (FIFO) order.
Each CPU/GPU core in the ADAS system has its own schedule σi. Different TT and
ET tasks are mapped to a specific core, in that the Ki of a task τi ∈τ TT ∪τ ET can take
any value from a finite set of core values γ. The assignment of tasks to cores is captured
by the mapping function M : τ TT ∪τ ET →γ. Also tasks might have requirements on
which cores they can be executed. Each core has its own offline generated static schedule
that defines at which micro-ticks each task mapped to each core needs to be handled.
Figure 2.3: Example of 14 micro-ticks of static schedule for each core.
5
==PAGE:12==
CHAPTER 3
Problem Statement
Description
The problem under consideration is a combinatorial optimization problem focusing on
scheduling Time-triggered (TT) and Event-triggered (ET) tasks in a multi-core archi-
tecture. The input of the problem comprises of:
• A set of TT tasks, each with a specified period T TT
i
, relative deadline DTT
i
, duration
dTT
i
, and priority pTT
i
. All TT tasks share the highest priority value.
• A set of ET tasks, each with a defined minimum inter-arrival time T ET
i
, relative
deadline DET
i
, duration dET
i
, and priority pET
i
.
• The number of cores in the target system K.
• The mapping constraints of specific TT and ET tasks to the cores of the target
system.
All tasks are considered preemptable, meaning they can be paused to allow another task
to execute and then resumed to complete. It is assumed that tasks are independent and
do not communicate with each other. The problem is to determine the mapping of TT
and ET tasks to cores, identify the idle slot placements in the schedule to effectively
handle ET tasks and assign priorities to ET tasks such that the constraints are fulfilled
and the response time of the tasks is minimized.
Constraints
The problem constraints include:
• Both TT and ET tasks must be schedulable, ensuring that all tasks can complete
before their respective deadlines.
• The mapping constraints of TT and ET tasks to cores must be fulfilled.
• TT task deadlines must be less than or equal to their periods, while ET tasks may
have arbitrary deadlines (larger than their periods).
Objective
The aim of this optimization problem is to minimize the average worst-case response
time of all tasks while fulfilling the constraints.
6
==PAGE:13==
CHAPTER 4
Related work
4.1
Introduction
Real-time systems research has extensively studied the problem of scheduling task-sets
that include both periodic Time-triggered (TT) tasks and sporadic Event-triggered (ET)
tasks. Several techniques have been proposed over the years to address this challenge,
and this chapter provides a comprehensive review of related work in this area, with a
focus on integrating TT and ET tasks and mapping tasks to multiple cores.
4.2
Integrating Time-Triggered and Event-Triggered tasks
One of the significant challenges in scheduling TT and ET tasks on multi-core systems
is to establish temporal isolation between the two types of tasks. Effective management
of periodic and sporadic tasks requires this isolation. To achieve this, researchers have
proposed the use of bandwidth servers. These servers are periodic tasks with a specific
budget and period, which can handle one or more aperiodic events. By scheduling the
bandwidth server alongside the periodic or sporadic tasks through dispatchers such as
fixed-priority or dynamic-priority dispatchers, temporal isolation can be maintained.
Several examples of bandwidth servers have been proposed for handling aperiodic ET
tasks, including the Polling Server by Lehoczky et al. (1987), the Deferrable Server
by Strosnider et al. (1995), and the Sporadic Server by Sprunt et al. (1989). These
servers can effectively manage the integration of TT and ET tasks on multi-core systems,
ensuring that temporal isolation is maintained, and system performance is optimized.
Many approaches have been proposed to construct schedules that establish temporal
isolation between TT and ET tasks through the use of bandwidth servers, with the goal
of ensuring schedulability and low response time of the tasks. The following sections
gives an overview of the main approaches.
4.2.1
Hierarchical scheduling
In hierarchical scheduling, such as in the methods proposed by Shin and Lee (2004)
and Almeida (2004), the available system resources (like CPU time) are divided into
a set of partitions. Each partition is then assigned to a subsystem, essentially giving
that subsystem a dedicated portion of the resources. This is also known as temporal
7
==PAGE:14==
partitioning. Each partition then has its own scheduler (local scheduler), which sched-
ules the tasks within that partition. The tasks within a partition do not interfere with
tasks in other partitions, because they have their own dedicated resources. The system
also has a global scheduler, which schedules the partitions themselves. One of the main
advantages of this approach is that it provides strong isolation between subsystems. If
a task in one partition misbehaves (e.g., by running for longer than expected), it cannot
affect tasks in other partitions because it cannot use more than its allocated share of
the resources. This method can be used to integrate TT and ET tasks by partitioning
the resources using a Polling Server and having a local scheduling algorithm run by the
polling server to handle ET tasks at run-time.
Shin and Lee (2004) describes a hierarchical scheduling framework, where scheduling
components form a hierarchy and resources are allocated from a parent component to
its child components in the hierarchy. The paper discusses the problem of analyzing the
feasibility of a scheduling component that consists of a bounded-delay workload model
and a resource model. It develops an exact feasibility condition using a linear supply
lower bound as a resource model and using a bounded-delay workload model. The paper
concludes by stating that the methods presented can be used as a scheduling interface
model for a hierarchical scheduling framework. The authors believe that the model can
be useful to handle non-periodic real-time workloads (such as Event-triggered tasks).
Similarly, Almeida (2004) is addressing two problems that arise in hierarchical schedul-
ing: how to derive real-time guarantees for the applications running within each server,
and how to design the server for a given application so that it fulfills the application
requirements with the least resource utilization. The paper focuses on the particular
case of fixed priorities-based application-level schedulers together with a periodic server
model at the system level. It presents an adequate response time analysis based on the
notion of server availability, and a server design approach that considers a more com-
plete task model, effectively computing the server parameters and establishing a better
trade-off concerning complexity and tightness.
The downside of hierarchical scheduling approaches is that it involves an abstraction
overhead and introduces the problem of finding the server parameters (server design
problem), which can be a diﬀicult to solve. In addition, for a mixed ET and TT system,
there is the additional complexity of deciding how many polling tasks (i.e., resource
abstractions/servers) to use and how to assign ET task subsets to the resources.
4.2.2
Slot Shifting scheduling
Slot-shifting scheduling was first introduced by Fohler (1995). Slot-shifting scheduling
is a method that allows static time-triggered schedules to be adjusted at runtime to
accommodate sporadic and aperiodic tasks.
After creating a static schedule for the periodic tasks, the algorithm determines the
8
==PAGE:15==
amount and distribution of unused resources and margin in the schedule. This margin
is then used to shift the execution of periodic tasks, creating gaps in the schedule that
can be used for aperiodic tasks. The algorithm ensures that the periodic tasks remain
feasible by avoiding any conflicts with the shifted tasks. Slot-Shifting scheduling allows
the system to fully utilize processors and communication nodes, while providing a high
guarantee ratio for various load and deadline scenarios, making it an eﬀicient method
for joint scheduling.
Another example of Slot-Shifting scheduling method is the one presented by Isovic and
Fohler (2009), which shows an offline analysis for sporadic ET tasks, which only looks
at so-called critical slots in order to guarantee schedulability.
The downside of the Slot-Shifting scheduling method is that it does not guarantee that
all sporadic tasks will be scheduled and executed on time, and it requires the implementa-
tion of a flexible Time-Triggered dispatcher, which is not available in many table-driven
dispatchers.
4.2.3
Constructive scheduling
Constructive methods for integrating Time-Triggered and Event-Triggered tasks are ap-
proaches designed to build static schedules that effectively combine the advantages of
TT and ET systems. In these methods, the schedule is constructed in such a way that
it starts from a constraint that guarantees the schedulability of ET tasks. By adhering
to this constraint, the method ensures that both TT and ET tasks meet their respective
deadlines while maintaining the benefits of the time-triggered architecture. The process
of constructing the schedule based on this constraint allows for the effective integration
of ET tasks within the TT system.
For instance, a constructive method is proposed by Finzi et al. (2022), that involves the
following steps:
1. Compute a maximal aﬀine envelope for the TT tasks in the system. This envelope
is defined by a maximum burst and a rate. The key idea is that if the TT schedule
adheres to this envelope, all sporadic ET tasks will meet their deadline.
2. Express the aﬀine envelope as a burst limiting constraint on the TT schedule.
This constraint is then used to construct the static schedule table by simulating a
modified Least-Laxity-First (LLF) scheduler. The resulting schedule ensures that
both TT and ET deadlines are met, as it respects the aﬀine envelope.
The constructive method presented in the paper provides an eﬀicient way to integrate ET
tasks into TT systems by building the schedule based on the constraint (maximal aﬀine
envelope) that guarantees ET tasks’ schedulability. This approach results in a more
computationally eﬀicient method compared to traditional polling methods and enables
an effective design optimization technique for iterative design processes, where ET tasks
9
==PAGE:16==
can be added or changed without modifying the existing TT schedule generated using
this approach.
4.2.4
Holistic scheduling
The holistic scheduling approach for integrating Time-Triggered and Event-Triggered
tasks is a method that aims to analyze and optimize the schedulability of systems where
tasks are event-triggered, but the communication backbone is based on a Time-Triggered
bus protocol, such as TTP (Time-Triggered Protocol).
In this context, the holistic
scheduling approach aims to address the complexities and challenges that arise when
combining both TT and ET tasks within the same system.
This approach was presented by Eles et al. (2000) and Pop et al. (2000), and it focuses on
designing an eﬀicient and feasible schedule for both TT and ET tasks. The authors first
analyze the schedulability of event-triggered tasks given a pre-defined Time-Triggered
schedule. Then, they use a list-scheduling-based heuristic with limited backtracking to
guide the generation of TT task schedules, aiming to increase the schedulability of ET
tasks as well.
It is important to note that this approach favors the correctness of TT schedules over
the schedulability of ET tasks and does not guarantee finding a feasible schedule for
both types of tasks. Instead, it can be viewed as a greedy method for generating TT
schedules while checking the schedulability of ET tasks in the process. The heuristic
used in this approach improves the probability of finding a schedule that accommodates
both TT and ET tasks.
Overall, the holistic scheduling approach for integrating TT and ET tasks aims to opti-
mize the performance and schedulability of mixed Time- and Event-Triggered systems
while ensuring that both types of tasks can coexist and execute effectively within the
same system.
4.3
Efficient Mapping of Tasks on Multi-Core systems
In the domain of Advanced Driver-Assistance Systems (ADAS), the eﬀicient manage-
ment of computational resources for automotive applications has become increasingly
important. In particular, one of the challenges lies in optimally mapping tasks to pro-
cessing cores and scheduling tasks, while adhering to constraints such as deadlines and
end-to-end task chain latencies. There is a large amount of research on task mapping to
heterogeneous architectures that is summarized by Braun et al. (2001).
In the context of ADAS systems, McLean et al. (2022) address this issue by proposing
two meta-heuristic solutions, a Genetic Algorithm (GA) and Simulated Annealing (SA),
that explore the solution space for generating static schedule tables for tasks. They
10
==PAGE:17==
achieve this by simulating Earliest Deadline First (EDF) dispatching with varying task
deadlines and offsets.
The results demonstrate that the heuristic strategy surpasses other approaches, satisfy-
ing jitter constraints more than six times as often and task chain constraints 41% more
often on average. This highlights the potential of the proposed method in addressing
the computational challenges in the context of ADAS platforms.
Similarly, the work of Maticu et al. (2016) presents a Simulated Annealing-based Map-
ping approach (SAM) for optimizing mixed-criticality automotive applications on AU-
TOSAR (AUTomotive Open System ARchitecture) distributed architectures, which con-
sist of heterogeneous multi-core ECUs (Electronic Control Units) interconnected by a
CAN bus. The goal is to automatically assign software functionality to multi-core dis-
tributed architectures while considering mapping constraints, schedulability, spatial and
temporal isolation for different safety-criticality levels, minimizing overall communica-
tion bandwidth, and balancing core utilization. The proposed SAM algorithm uses a
Simulated Annealing-based approach, a meta-heuristic optimization technique, to solve
the mapping problem.
In conclusion, the advancements in task mapping and scheduling solutions for ADAS
provide promising pathways for future research and have the potential to impact the
automotive industry by enhancing resource management and system performance.
11
==PAGE:18==
CHAPTER 5
Schedule synthesis and analysis
5.1
Schedule synthesis
5.1.1
Introduction
The following sections outlines the proposed hierarchical scheduling solution for inte-
grating Time-Triggered (TT) and Event-Triggered (ET) tasks in multi-core systems,
developed during the course of this thesis. To schedule TT tasks, the Earliest Deadline
First (EDF) algorithm is proposed. Idle slots are placed throughout the schedule using
the Token-Bucket algorithm, with a particular frequency in order to ensure temporal
isolation between ET and TT tasks. Event-triggered tasks are handled in the idle slots,
using a 2nd-level preemptive scheduler with fixed priorities. Section 5.1.2 provides an
overview of the EDF algorithm. Sections 5.1.3 and 5.1.4 explains how periodic polling
servers can be used to handle ET tasks and it is argued that this methodology has mul-
tiple drawbacks. Section 5.1.5 provide an overview on how the proposed Token-Bucket
scheduling algorithm can be used to ensure temporal isolation between ET and TT tasks,
instead of using polling servers. Finally, Sections 5.1.6 and 5.1.7 provide a detailed de-
scription of the proposed schedule synthesis algorithm and the schedule storage method.
The presented solution can be applied to multi-core systems, as explained in section
5.1.8.
5.1.2
Scheduling TT tasks using EDF scheduling algorithm
Scheduling tasks on a processor is a well-known complex problem that can be NP-
complete. NP-complete problems are easy to verify but diﬀicult to solve, making them
some of the most challenging problems in computer science. The Earliest Deadline First
(EDF) scheduling algorithm, first introduced by Liu and Layland (1973), addresses this
problem by prioritizing tasks based on their deadlines.
EDF is a real-time, preemptive scheduling algorithm used in operating systems to man-
age tasks with varying priorities. It is widely employed in systems where meeting dead-
lines is critical, such as control systems, multimedia systems, and communication sys-
tems. Each task is assigned a deadline, which can be a hard deadline (must be met) or
a soft deadline (can be missed, but with degraded performance).
The algorithm operates by maintaining a priority queue of tasks waiting to be executed.
Each task in the queue is associated with a deadline, with the task having the earliest
12
==PAGE:19==
deadline given the highest priority. When a new task arrives, it is inserted into the
queue based on its deadline. If the new task’s deadline is earlier than that of the current
highest-priority task, it is scheduled first. Otherwise, it is placed in the queue according
to its deadline.
The EDF scheduling algorithm has several advantages over other scheduling algorithms:
• Predictability: EDF provides a high degree of predictability in scheduling tasks.
It ensures that the task with the earliest deadline is always scheduled first, which
helps to meet critical deadlines and maintain the system’s overall performance.
• Optimality: EDF is an optimal scheduling algorithm for a single processor system
for reducing the maximum worst-case respone time (see Liu and Layland (1973)).
• Simplicity: EDF is relatively easy to implement and can be used in a variety of
real-time systems. This is because it only requires a priority queue to store tasks
based on their deadlines.
• Eﬀiciency: EDF can improve the eﬀiciency of resource utilization by prioritizing
tasks with short deadlines. Infact, EDF is optimal in terms of minimizing the
number of missed deadlines. The paper by Liu and Layland (1973) shows that
when the task set is schedulable under EDF, no other algorithm can provide better
results in terms of deadline miss rate. Also, the paper shows that EDF outperforms
fixed-priority scheduling in terms of system utilization, particularly when the task
set has different periods and deadlines.
ADAS systems have strict timing requirements and deadlines that must be met, and
failure to do so can result in catastrophic consequences. Therefore, it is essential to
have eﬀicient scheduling algorithms such as EDF that can handle tasks with different
priorities and deadlines, and provide a reasonable solution to the scheduling problem.
In the solution proposed in this thesis, Time-Triggered tasks are scheduled using the
EDF algorithm due to its ability to minimize worst-case response times and optimize
resource utilization effectively.
5.1.3
Integrating TT and ET tasks with periodic polling servers
Integrating Time-Triggered (TT) and Event-Triggered (ET) tasks is a significant chal-
lenge in the field of real-time scheduling. The primary goal is to establish temporal
isolation between these two types of tasks to enable effective management of periodic
(TT) and sporadic (ET) tasks. To achieve this, researchers have proposed the use of
bandwidth servers. These servers are periodic tasks with a specific budget and period,
which can handle one or more aperiodic events. By scheduling the bandwidth server
alongside the periodic or sporadic tasks through dispatchers such as fixed-priority or
dynamic-priority dispatchers, temporal isolation can be maintained. As described ear-
lier in section 4.2, different approaches have been proposed to construct schedules that
13
==PAGE:20==
fulfill the temporal isolation between TT and ET, such as Hierarchical scheduling, Slot-
Shifting scheduling, Holistic scheduling and Constructive scheduling. This thesis focuses
on a Hierarchical scheduling approach and proposed a solution based on this scheduling
method.
Hierarchical scheduling approaches such as the work by Almeida (2004) and Shin and Lee
(2004) can be seen as an extended version of a polling approach, in which a fixed-priority
scheduler is employed for ET tasks at one level, while a periodic resource abstraction
(or polling server) is utilized at the underlying layer to separate TT schedule generation
from ET task schedulability analysis. A Polling Server is a component in a real-time
system that serves external events or tasks (ET tasks) by periodically checking their
status and responding appropriately. The Polling Server is typically implemented as
a periodic task that runs at regular intervals, and it is responsible for detecting and
servicing any pending external events or tasks. The Polling Server has three important
parameters:
• The period T S of the Polling Server is the time interval between consecutive arrivals
of the server. It determines how often the server budget is replenished.
• The budget b is the amount of time that the Polling Server can spend servicing all
pending ET tasks after one arrival.
• The deadline DS of the Polling Server is the maximum amount of time after the
server arrival that the server can take to handle ET tasks for a an amount of time
equal to the budget. Often the server deadline is equal to the server period.
Using a Polling Server to handle ET tasks effectively allow to integrate both types of
tasks and to separate the TT schedule generation and analysis from the ET schedulability
analysis.
5.1.4
Drawbacks of handling ET tasks with periodic polling servers
In this section, it is argued that handling ET tasks using Polling Servers that are sched-
uled as a periodic Time-Triggered tasks with EDF as shown by Almeida (2004), has
several drawbacks.
Since the arrival time of ET tasks is not known a priori, the Polling Server must be sched-
uled with a suitable frequency to avoid delay of execution of ET tasks. This frequency,
denoted as f, is defined as f = T S
b , the ratio between the period T S and the budget b
of the polling server. A long server period can result in areas within the schedule where
the execution of sporadic events is significantly delayed. This is primarily due to the
EDF algorithm’s priority to schedule the Polling Server as early as feasible if its relative
deadline is smaller compared to other Time-Triggered tasks. This often results in a
non-uniform allocation of Polling Servers throughout the schedule. As a consequence,
sporadic ET tasks may experience considerable delay before they are processed by the
14
==PAGE:21==
server. For example, figure 5.1 demonstrates the implications of scheduling a Polling
Server with T S = 90 micro-ticks, DS = T S = 90 micro-ticks, and b = 30 micro-ticks.
This setup gives rise to an interval in the schedule where the execution of arriving ET
tasks will be maximally delayed. Consequently, this delay can potentially increase re-
sponse times or even cause missed deadlines for ET tasks arriving within that particular
interval.
Figure 5.1: Using a Polling Server with T S = 90 mt and b = 30 mt results in the
formation of long unavailability sections in the schedule.
On the other hand, a short server period can lead to low granularity in the possible
frequencies of Polling Server placements. This means that the optimization algorithm
lacks the precision to schedule the server at an exact frequency, thereby resulting in sub-
optimal handling of sporadic events. For instance, in figure 5.2 it is shown an example
of scheduling a Polling Server with T S = DS = 6 micro-ticks and b = 2 micro-ticks.
The server with such period can be scheduled only with 4 different possible frequencies
(not considering f = 1 and f = 0). Since the frequency of the scheduling of the Polling
Server controls the variation rate of the supply function (explained later in section 5.2.2
and 5.2.4), it is critical for the schedulability of ET tasks to have precise control over
this frequency.
Figure 5.2: Polling Servers with a short period cannot be scheduled with a precise
average frequency.
Another drawback of scheduling the Polling Server as a periodic task is that the server
period has an impact on the length of the schedule, since the length is given by the
hyper-period of the task-set including the server task. As a consequence, it is critical to
make sure that the length of the schedule of the solutions are within a maximum length
that is supported by the target system. If the Polling Server parameters are optimized
15
==PAGE:22==
using a meta-heuristic (such as the method proposed in this thesis), then the schedule
synthesis algorithm and ET schedulability analysis will be often slowed down by solu-
tions that have a large hyper-period, considerably slowing down the whole optimization
process. It is also very important to make sure the server period do not assume values
of prime numbers that can make the length of the schedule too big which potentially
can cause memory errors.
Different types of server have been proposed to solve the problem of long unavailability
periods of Polling Servers. In particular, in Deferrable Servers (Strosnider et al. (1995))
and in Sporadic Servers (Sprunt et al. (1989)), the server’s budget is only consumed when
Event-Triggered tasks are available. Any remaining capacity is carried over to the next
period, at which point it is replenished. This mechanism improves the response time
of aperiodic tasks compared to the Polling Server approach. It allows for the server’s
capacity to be utilized throughout the entire period, as long as the capacity has not
been exhausted. However, despite the advantages of Deferrable Servers and Sporadic
Servers, these approaches come with some drawbacks. The complexity of these systems
is increased due to the need for dynamic scheduling decisions at run-time. This dynamic
nature can also lead to decreased predictability, which can be problematic in real-time
systems where predictability is often a critical requirement. Additionally, the dynamic
scheduling decisions increase the scheduling overhead, including the time and compu-
tational resources required for decision-making and potential context switches between
tasks. This overhead can impact the system’s overall performance. These algorithms
also require support from the operating system or run-time environment and may not
be compatible with all types of hardware or software.
An alternative approach to using Polling Servers that aims to solve the problems de-
scribed, is proposed in the following section.
5.1.5
Scheduling idle slots using token-bucket scheduling algorithm
As described earlier in the chapter 2, in the considered system model, Time-Triggered
tasks are scheduled based on an offline generated static schedule table, while Event-
Triggered tasks are scheduled in the slots that are left (idle slots) using an online 2nd-
level preemptive scheduler based on fixed priorities. Since the arrival time of ET tasks
is unknown, it is crucial for guaranteeing their schedulability that enough idle slots
are present throughout the schedule to handle the worst case of all ET tasks arriving
simultaneously at any given point in the schedule.
One solution to this issue is to incorporate idle slots into the schedule by utilizing the
Token-Bucket algorithm. This algorithm, as outlined by Medhi and Ramasamy (2018),
is commonly employed in network traﬀic management to regulate the flow of data. By
implementing a token bucket, the amount of data that can be transmitted or received
over the network is limited, mitigating the likelihood of congestion and guaranteeing a
consistent network performance.
16
==PAGE:23==
The Token-Bucket algorithm can be also used as a scheduling algorithm, for scheduling
tasks with a particular frequency. The token bucket is a buffer that contains tokens,
which are used to determine whether a task can be scheduled or not. When a task
wants to be executed, it needs to request tokens from the bucket. If the bucket has
enough tokens, the task is executed, and the number of tokens requested by the task is
deducted from the bucket. If the bucket does not have enough tokens, the task is not
executed, and it needs to wait until there are enough tokens in the bucket.
The Token-Bucket scheduling algorithm has three parameters:
• Token rate (ft): The token rate determines the rate at which tokens are added
to the token bucket. The token generation rate is typically fixed and determines
the maximum rate at which idle slots can be scheduled. The token rate can be set
to choose a target average frequency of idle slots in the schedule. For instance, if
ft = 0.30 then about 30% of the schedule will be composed of uniformly distributed
idle slots.
• Initial token bucket (It): A token bucket is a buffer that contains tokens. The
initial token bucket is the number of tokens present in the bucket at the beginning
of the schedule synthesis process. For instance, if It = 0.0, then the bucket is
empty. On the other hand if It = 3.0 there are 3 tokens in the bucket at the
beginning of the schedule which means that 3 idle slots will be placed immediately
at the start of the schedule.
• Burst size (B): The burst size in the Token-Bucket algorithm is the maximum
number of tokens that can be removed from the bucket at once. It defines the
amount of idle slots that can are placed in the schedule simultaneously.
The proposed algorithm has a token bucket θ that accumulates tokens (or partial tokens)
at a rate ft at each time-step of the schedule synthesis. The burst size B is equal to
1. When θ ≥B, a full token is available in the bucket, then an idle slot is placed in
the schedule at the current time-step and one token is removed from the bucket. The
algorithm is repeated, until the end of the schedule is reached. Figure 5.4 shows an
example where idle slots are scheduled using the token-bucket algorithm with ft = 0.4
and Is = 0.
With the Token-Bucket scheduling algorithm, idle slots are placed throughout the sched-
ule uniformly, avoiding the formation of long unavailability periods. The token gener-
ation rate ft can be adjusted to achieve a target average frequency of idle slots in the
schedule with high precision, which means that the schedule can be optimized to handle
different demands of ET tasks accurately. Additionally, the initial token bucket It value
can be used to place idle slots at more specific times in the schedule, which allows for
even greater flexibility in handling sporadic ET tasks. Unlike Polling Server approaches,
the Token Bucket algorithm is able to create temporal isolation between TT and ET
tasks without increasing the length of the schedule since it doesn’t introduce any new
task in the task-set. This distinction significantly improves the schedule synthesis algo-
rithm in terms of speed.
17
==PAGE:24==
Figure 5.3: Scheduling idle slots using TB algorithm with ft = 0.4, Is = 0 and B = 1.
Overall, the Token-Bucket scheduling algorithm provides a simple and eﬀicient way to
place idle slots uniformly in the schedule with a precise frequency, which is important
for handling sporadic tasks. By using this algorithm, the schedule can be optimized to
ensure that it has enough idle slots to handle worst-case demand and optimize response
time of ET tasks.
5.1.6
Schedule synthesis with EDF and TB algorithms
In this section, an off-line scheduling algorithm for multi-core processors based on Earli-
est Deadline First (EDF) algorithm and Token-Bucket (TB) algorithm is presented. An
off-line scheduler for multi-core processors operates by analyzing the characteristics of
the tasks and the available processing cores in advance, and then generating a schedule
that is optimal with respect to some performance criteria. In particular, the algorithm
presented has the goal to minimize the worst case response time of all tasks. The schedul-
ing algorithm is able to determine if a given set of Time-triggered tasks τ TT is schedulable
or not on the available processing cores. This involves analyzing the deadlines and exe-
cution times of the tasks and ensuring that they can be executed within their deadlines,
while taking into account the capabilities of the processing cores. The algorithm is also
capable of computing and storing the worst case response time of each Time-Triggered
task, which is useful for analysing the schedule performance and iteratively optimizing it
further as it will be shown later in chapter 6. Furthermore, the algorithm schedules idle
slots between TT tasks using a Token-Bucket scheduling algorithm, in order to handle
sporadic Event-Triggered tasks at run-time using a 2nd-level preemptive scheduler with
fixed priorities executing as a background server during idle slots.
The following is a pseudo-code of the proposed scheduling algorithm:
18
==PAGE:25==
Algorithm 1 Algorithm for schedule synthesis from TT tasks descriptions and Token-
Bucket parameters.
1: function generateTTSchedule(tasks, bucket, tokenRate, burstSize)
2:
hyperperiod ←computeHyperperiodTT(tasks)
3:
readyQueue ←∅
4:
schedule ←∅
5:
executingJob ←∅
6:
t_nextArrival ←0
7:
for t ←0 to hyperperiod - 1 do
8:
if t == t_nextArrival then
9:
addReadyTasks(tasks, t, readyQueue)
10:
sortReadyQueue(readyQueue)
11:
t_nextArrival ←computeNextArrival(tasks, t)
12:
end if
13:
14:
bucket ←bucket + tokenRate
15:
if bucket ≥burstSize then
▷Schedule idle slots with TB scheduling
16:
schedule.appendJobNTimes(NULL, burstSize)
▷IDLE slot
17:
t ←t + burstSize
18:
bucket ←bucket - burstSize
19:
continue
20:
end if
21:
22:
if readyQueue.isEmpty() then
23:
schedule.appendJobNTimes(NULL, t_nextArrival - t)
▷IDLE slot
24:
t ←t + earliestArrival
▷Skip to next arrival time
25:
continue
26:
end if
27:
executingJob ←readyQueue.front()
28:
executeJobForMicroticks(executingJob, 1)
29:
schedule.appendJobNTimes(executingJob, 1)
▷Schedule TT task
30:
t ←t + 1
31:
if jobMissesDeadline(executingJob, t) then
32:
schedule.setValidity(false)
▷Not schedulable
33:
end if
34:
if jobIsDone(executingJob) then
35:
updateTaskWorstResponseTime(tasks, executingJob, t)
36:
removeJobFromQueue(readyQueue)
37:
end if
38:
end for
39:
checkScheduleValidity(readyQueue, schedule)
40:
return schedule
41: end function
19
==PAGE:26==
The algorithm is structured in 4 main parts: the initialization, handling tasks arrival,
handling idle slots placement and handling jobs simulation.
Initialization
The first part of the algorithm handles the initialization of the schedule and the job
queue. Since all TT tasks are periodic and have fixed periods, the length of the final
schedule is the hyper-period tTT
h
= lcmτi∈τ T T {T TT
i
} of the task-set (where lcm stands
for least common multiple). Several variables are initialized:
• readyQueue is a list that will hold the jobs that are ready to be executed at any
given time.
• schedule is a list that will hold the generated schedule using run-length encoding
(see section 5.1.7).
• executingJob is a variable that holds the job that is currently being executed.
• t_nextArrival is the time of the next earliest task arrival.
Handling tasks arrivals
The algorithm than iterates over all possible time-steps t ∈(0, tTT
h ) in the schedule and
simulates the arrival and execution of tasks. At each iteration of the loop, the algorithm
checks whether a task has arrived at the current time-step. A task that is ready to be
executes is called job. If a task has arrived, it is added as a job to the ready queue,
and the queue is sorted based on the deadlines of the jobs in ascending order. In case
multiple job have the same deadline, they are sorted based on their duration, giving
priority to the job with shorter duration. Handling this corner case makes sure that
if many jobs have the same deadline, they are executed in an order that delays the
execution of the least amount of jobs. The sorting procedures guarantees that the top of
the queue always holds the job with the earliest deadline that needs to be handled fist.
Note than when a job is added to the queue, it’s arrival time t and its absolute deadline
time δTT
i
= t + DTT
i
(where DTT
i
is the relative deadline of the task) are computed and
stored for later.
The next arrival time is then computed and stored in the variable ”t_nextArrival”. In
practice, given ωk the set of TT tasks ids of tasks mapped on core k, the earliest next
arrival time is computed as follow:
min
∀i∈ωk{t + T TT
i
−(t mod T TT
i
)}
(5.1)
20
==PAGE:27==
Handling idle slots placement
The algorithm then handles the idle slot placement using a token-bucket scheduling
algorithm (see section 5.1.5). The bucket content is updated by adding a partial to-
ken ”tokenRate” at each time-step. If the bucket holds an amount of tokens equal to
”burstSize” then that amount of idle slots are placed in the schedule and the tokens are
removed from the bucket.
Handling jobs simulation
After handling the idle slots placement, the algorithms checks if the ready queue is empty,
and if that is the case, it appends an idle slots to the schedule until the next earliest
task arrival. The variables ”t” is updated to skip to the next arrival time, and the loop
continues to the next iteration.
If the ready queue is not empty, the first job in the queue is selected to be executed.
The selected job is then executed for one micro-tick, and the corresponding entry is
appended to the schedule.
If the executing job misses its deadline, the algorithm sets the validity of the schedule
to false (without interrupting the schedule synthesis), indicating that the generated
schedule is not valid.
The algorithm then checks whether the executing job has completed its execution. If
the job has completed its execution, it is removed from the ready queue and its worst
case response time is updated and stored.
After the loop has completed, the algorithm checks the validity of the generated schedule
by checking whether all the jobs have been executed and whether they have met their
deadlines. If the schedule is not valid then the validity of the schedule is set to false.
Schedule synthesis example
The following example shows 10 micro-ticks of schedule synthesis. For each micro-tick,
the current state of the token bucket ω is shown. The token rate has a value of ft = 0.4
with and It = 0 (empty initial bucket) and burst size B = 1. Idle slots are placed when
a full token is available and TT tasks are scheduled in between based on EDF. There
are three TT tasks that are released simultaneously at t=0:
• TT1: has T TT
1
= DTT
1
= 100 mt and dTT
1
= 3 mt.
• TT2: has T TT
2
= DTT
2
= 200 mt and dTT
2
= 2 mt.
• TT3: has T TT
3
= DTT
3
= 200 mt and dTT
3
= 8 mt.
21
==PAGE:28==
Figure 5.4: Idle slots are placed using a token-bucket algorithms while TT tasks are
scheduled between the idle slots using EDF.
As it can be observed from figure 5.4, task TT1 is scheduled first since it has the earliest
deadline. Tasks TT2 and TT3 have the same deadline so task TT2 is scheduled after
task TT1 is done since it has the shortest duration. Idle slots are placed every time the
toke-bucket has a full token available, which happens with a frequency of 0.4 Hz. The
resulting response time for TT1 and TT2 in this case is 4 and 7 micro-ticks respectively.
5.1.7
Schedule storage
The schedule is stored using run-length encoding (RLE) technique. In the RLE tech-
nique, the schedule is represented as a sequence of runs, where each run corresponds to a
sequence of time-steps during which the same task is executed. Each run is represented
by a pair (task, length), where ”task” is the ID of the task being executed by the job
and ”length” is the number of time-steps for which the job is executed. In this way,
the schedule is stored in a compressed representation that takes up much less space
than the original sequence and is more eﬀicient to store and move (for example between
main memory and cache). Additionally, scheduling a task for many micro-ticks can be
done quickly in a single operation by increasing the run-length. One drawback of using
run-length encoding is that the possibility to perform random access in constant time
is lost. For the optimization algorithms proposed in this thesis, run-length encoding is
used, as fast random access of the schedule is not required.
5.1.8
Schedule synthesis for multiple cores
To generate schedules for multiple cores, algorithm 1 can be run for each core with
the appropriate arguments. The task-set is partitioned in multiple groups, each one
corresponding to a target core. The tasks mapped to the same core are passed to the
scheduling algorithm as well as the initial token-bucket value, the token-rate and burst
size. Note that each core has its own unique token-rate and initial bucket parameters
as different cores may need to handle different workloads of ET tasks. The algorithm
generates a schedule for a single core based on the tasks mapped to that core and returns
22
==PAGE:29==
a schedule object containing the schedule. Once the list of the schedules of all cores is
computed, it represents and describes the behaviour of the system.
5.1.9
Schedulability analysis of TT tasks
During the schedule synthesis process, the algorithm performs the schedulability analysis
of Time-Triggered (TT) tasks.
This involves computing and storing the worst-case
response time of each TT task. Specifically, a TT task is considered schedulable if and
only if its worst-case response time, denoted by RTT
i
, does not exceed its deadline dTT
i
.
The TT-validity of a core is then determined based on these individual task evaluations.
A core is designated as TT-valid if all the TT tasks assigned to it are schedulable. The
TT-validity, ui, for the i-th target core can be defined as:
ui =



1
if ∀i ∈{0, 1, 2, ..., |τ TT|}, RTT
i
≤dTT
i
0
otherwise
(5.2)
Once the TT-validity of a solution is determined, it is useful to examine the overall
responsiveness of the TT tasks. A good metric for the responsiveness of the generated
schedule is the normalized average worst-case response time (WCRT) of all tasks:
1
|τ TT| ·
|τ T T |
∑
i=0
RTT
i
dTT
i
(5.3)
Note that the schedule synthesis algorithm does not provide any information regarding
the schedulability of ET tasks. The analysis of ET tasks schedulability is a significantly
more complex issue, and it is presented in the following sections.
5.2
Schedulability analysis of ET tasks
5.2.1
Introduction
In the following sections, the complex problem of defining precise schedulability con-
ditions for sporadic Event-Triggered tasks is addressed, as well as calculating their
worst-case response time. This exploration introduces a solution that improves upon
the hierarchical scheduling approaches presented in previous studies ( Lipari and Bini
(2003) ,Shin and Lee (2004) and Almeida (2004)). The proposed schedulabilty analysis
method allows to evaluate the schedulability of sporadic Event-triggered tasks and calcu-
late their precise worst case response time without any pessimism. Notably, this solution
has a comparable speed to previous methods while being more flexible and precise. In
particular:
• In section 5.2.3 it is argued that performing the schedulability analysis using a lower
bound of the supply function has many drawbacks. An alternative algorithm to
23
==PAGE:30==
perform schedulability analysis using the actual supply function ZS(t) is proposed
in section 5.2.4. Since the proposed algorithm is very slow, in section 5.2.5 multiple
optimizations are presented to make the algorithm as fast as previous methods.
• In section 5.2.6 the problem of assigning the priorities of ET tasks to improve the
worst case response time is discussed.
It is worth noting that the assumption of the work of Shin and Lee (2004) and Almeida
(2004) are partially different than the assumption proposed in this thesis: the system
model proposed is different because ET tasks are not handled by polling servers but
by idle slots in the schedule. Even tho the system models are different, ultimately the
equivalent problem is addressed in practice: establishing temporal isolation between TT
and ET tasks.
5.2.2
Schedulability analysis using the lower bound supply function
The problem of integrating TT and ET tasks with fixed priorities using a hierarchical
approach is to determine the schedulability of ET tasks on a given Polling Server. This
problem has been already approached in different ways. For example Saewong et al.
(2002) compute the worst-case response time of every task in the presence of the server.
Shin and Lee (2004) proposes schedulability conditions for a scheduling model based on a
periodic Polling Server but it does not consider the problem of finding the optimal server
parameters. It shows that the schedulability of ET tasks can be evaluated eﬀiciently
by considering a linear lower bound of the supply given by the polling server and by
determining when the supply exceeds the demand given by the ET tasks. Similarly,
Almeida (2004) focuses on fixed priority-based application-level schedulers and a periodic
server model at the system level. It proposes a response time analysis based on polling
server availability and addresses the problem of designing a server that meets application
time constraints with minimal resource requirements. The analysis proposed by Almeida
(2004) uses a staircase lower bound supply function that it is more precise than the linear
one proposed by Shin and Lee (2004). Like Almeida (2004), Lipari and Bini (2005)
propose an approach to not only check the feasibility of scheduling ET tasks on a given
server, but also to find the best server that guarantees the schedulability. The analysis
considers the worst-case scenario for both the server and task-set, and focuses on the
critical instant, when all higher priority tasks are released.
In these studies, the allocation of resources provided by a server at any given time is
represented by its supply function ZS(t), while the demand of level-i of the tasks of
priority pi ≥i at a given time is represented by the load (or demand) function Hi(t).
Given that the ZS(t) function is complex to analyse, the authors in these studies decided
to use a simple lower bound function of the actual supply given by the polling server.
In particular, Shin and Lee (2004) propose to use a linear lower bound function while
Almeida (2004) uses a staircase lower bound function which is more precise. Given ds the
duration (or budget) of the server, Ts the period of the server and Ds the deadline of the
24
==PAGE:31==
server than the linear lower bound supply function with α =
b
T S and ∆= T S +DS −2·b
is defined as follows:
lbsf(t) = max{0, α · (t −∆)}
(5.4)
Given τ ET the task-set of ET tasks, for each instant t the maximum load (or demand)
of task τi and all higher and equal priority tasks (maximum demand of level-i) Hi(t) is
defined as:
Hi(t) =
∑
∀τj∈τ ET ,pj≥pi
[
t
T ET
j
] · dj
(5.5)
As stated by Shin and Lee (2004) and Almeida (2004), it is possible to determine the
worst case response time of a ET task τi ∈τ ET of priority level-i by determining the
earliest instant in which the maximum demand of level i Hi(t) matches the least server
supply lbsf(t).
RET
i
=
min
t∈(0,tET
h
){t ≥0|lbsf(t) = Hi(t)}
(5.6)
The ET-validity of a core is then determined based on individual ET task evaluations.
A core is designated as ET-valid if all the ET tasks assigned to it are schedulable. The
ET-validity, vi, for the i-th target core can be defined as:
vi =



1
if ∀i ∈{0, 1, 2, ..., |τ ET|}, RET
i
≤dET
i
0
otherwise
(5.7)
Figure 5.5: Visual representation of the schedulability analysis of an ET task. The
response time of the task is computed by finding the earliest intersection between the
demand and the lower bound of the supply.
Figure 5.5 shows a visual representation of the schedulability analysis of a single task.
The linear lower bound of the supply and the demand are plotted. The response time of
the task is determined by the intersection point of this two function, which in this case
25
==PAGE:32==
it is clearly at an earlier time-step compared to the task’s deadline, which means that
the given ET task is schedulable.
The time complexity of the algorithm is O(tET
h
· |τ ET|2). This is calculated based on
the following considerations: The algorithms needs to evaluate the worst-case response
time of each ET tasks, which are at most |τ ET| tasks. Additionally, for each ET task,
the algorithm evaluates at most tET
h
time-steps to find the earliest intersection between
supply and demand. This is because the supply and demand functions are periodic with
a period equal to tET
h , the hyper-period of the ET tasks. For each of the tET
h
time-steps,
the algorithm iterates over all ET tasks to compute the demand value at that time-step.
This involves computing the demand for |τ ET| tasks for each time-step, contributing a
factor of |τ ET| to the time complexity.
The overall time complexity of the algorithm is O(tET
h ·|τ ET|2). The algorithm is relatively
eﬀicient in practice, considering that the values of tET
h
and |τ ET| are typically not very
large for most practical applications.
5.2.3
Drawbacks of using lbsf(t)
Given that the supply function ZS(t) is complex to analyse, the authors in the mentioned
studies decided to use a lower bound of the actual supply function. There are arguably
many drawbacks associated with this design decision:
Firstly, the lbsf(t) introduces pessimism in the results of the schedulability analysis,
because it represents a lower bound of the true supply function. As a result, the schedu-
lability analysis using the lbsf(t) on a task-set τ ET might incorrectly conclude that the
task-set is not schedulable when, in reality, it is. Similarly, the computed response time
of ET tasks will also be pessimistic. For instance, it can be demonstrated from equation
5.4 that this method cannot schedule ET tasks that have deadline of value either 2 or 3
as a result of the pessimism. Lets consider the best case scenario of a Polling Server with
lowest period T S = 2, deadline DS = T S = 2 and budget b = 1. It can be proved that
given such server the lower-bound supply will be able to handle a ET task of duration
di = 1 only after at most 4 micro-ticks by solving α · (t −∆) = 1 for t:
α · (t −∆) = 1
b
Ti
· (t −T S + DS −2 · b) = 1
1
2 · (t −2) = 1
t = 4
(5.8)
When the polling server period increases, the pessimism worsen as well, which is a
limitation of the method.
Secondly, this method assumes proper scheduling of the Pooling Server, which cannot
26
==PAGE:33==
be assumed while using an optimization approach based on meta-heuristics (as the one
proposed later in this thesis). The server can potentially fail to meet its own deadline
in the schedule due to resource contention because of how tasks are mapped to cores.
In that case, lbsf(t) can be very different to Zs(t) and might not be used effectively to
guide the optimization process.
Lastly, the schedulability analysis using lbsf(t) is not flexible, since it assumes that
the temporal isolation between TT and ET tasks is performed using a Polling Server,
scheduled as a periodic task with a fixed period and budget. However, the temporal
isolation between TT and ET tasks can be achieved using different approaches.
In
this thesis, it is proposed that idle slots are placed in the schedule with a particular
frequency using a Token Bucket algorithm, and ET tasks are handled within these idle
slots, with a 2nd-level preemptive scheduler based on fixed priorities.
This method
results in a complex supply function, making it challenging to establish a lower bound
without being overly pessimistic. Figure 5.6 shows a visual example of a supply function
when using the Polling Server approach and one when using the Token Bucket method.
Figure 5.6: On the left, the supply given by a Polling server approach is shown and
on the right the supply given by the Token Bucket algorithm is displayed.
As it can be observed from the picture on the right, its evident that the supply function
varies significantly throughout time when using the proposed method. This fluctuation
are primarily due to the fact that idle slots within certain sections of the schedule are
placed with a particular frequency by the Token Bucket algorithm, while in other sec-
tions, the schedule might be filled exclusively with idle slots in some cases, because there
are no Time-Triggered (TT) tasks that needs to be handled in that part of the schedule.
This behaviour results in a supply function with an unpredictable slope that may change
significantly over time.
In conclusion, although lbsf(t) is often employed in online system-level scheduling poli-
cies where the specific pattern of Zs(t) may be hard to predict, this thesis focuses on
static offline scheduling where Zs(t) can be precisely characterized in advance.
The
27
==PAGE:34==
lbsf(t) is inherently pessimistic, which might results in poorer schedulability and lower
response time of ET tasks when the schedulability analysis is performed using it. Since
the proposed solution is centered around schedule optimization via meta-heuristics, the
schedulability of TT tasks cannot be assumed during the optimization process. The
use of lbsf(t) during the schedulability analysis of ET tasks makes the assumption that
the Polling Server is schedulable, which may not always be the case during optimiza-
tion. Most importantly, when the proposed Token Bucket algorithm is used to establish
temporal isolation between TT and ET tasks, computing a linear lower bound supply
function becomes unfeasible without being overly pessimistic. Hence, it is essential to
conduct schedulability analysis using ZS(t).
5.2.4
Schedulability analysis using Zs(t)
Shifting focus from the previously discussed limitations of using lbsf(t), this section
proposes a different approach for schedulability analysis of Event-Triggered tasks using
the actual supply function Zs(t). This method addresses the issues associated with using
a lower bound supply.
For explaining this approach, it is necessary to first better define the concept of supply
function ZS(t) and the concept of supply of window. A partition is a function Π(t) that
has values in {0, 1}. If Π(t) = 1, then, depending on the approach, the idle slot or the
Polling server is allocated to the application at time t. From the definition of partition
and given tTT
h
= lcmτi∈τ T T {Ti} (the hyper-period of TT tasks), the supply provided by
the partition, since t = 0, can be defined as:
Zs(t) =
∫th
t=0 Π(t) dt
(5.9)
From the definition of Zs(t) it is possible to derive the definition of supply of window
Ws(ts, te) which is the supply provided by the partition in any window of time starting
from the micro-tick ts up until the micro-tick te:
Ws(ts, te) =
=
∫te
t=ts Π(t) dt
=
∫te
t=0 Π(t) dt −
∫ts
t=0 Π(t) dt
= Zs(te) −Zs(ts −1)
(5.10)
Following the same principle as presented in 5.6, it is possible to compute the worst case
response time of an ET task with priority i by finding the maximum earliest intersection
between all the possible supply windows with ts ∈(0, tTT
h ) (where th is the ET tasks
hyper-period) and the demand of level-i Hi(t):
Ri =
max
t0∈(0,tT T
h
)
[
min
t∈(0,tET
h
){t ≥0|W(t0, t0 + t) = Hi(t)}
]
(5.11)
28
==PAGE:35==
Essentially, the method simulates the arrival of all ET tasks for every possible time-step
t0 ∈(0, tTT
h ) in the schedule in order to find the worst arrival time tw that will lead
to the worst-case response time for each ET task. In this way, the proposed technique
takes into account the local variations in the supply function, and does not approximate
them away, making a more precise analysis compared to the method proposed by Shin
and Lee (2003).
Similarly as the approach seen previously in section 5.7, its possible to evaluate the
ET-validity schedule synthetized for a specific core by analyzing the response time of
each ET task:
vi =



1
if ∀i ∈{0, 1, 2, ..., |τ ET|}, RET
i
≤dET
i
0
otherwise
(5.12)
Unfortunately, this approach in its base form is computationally expensive, since the
worst time tw which simulates the arrival of all ET tasks, that will lead to the worst
response time, is not known. Therefore, simulating the arrival of ET tasks for all the
possible time-steps t0 ∈(0, tTT
h ) , as described in equation 5.11, is required. As a result
the time complexity of this approach is O(tET
h
· |τ ET|2 · tTT
h ) which is much slower than
the method shown previously in section 5.2.2. Thus, the following sections focus on
improving and optimizing the proposed method to make it practical.
5.2.5
Optimizing the schedulability analysis
Finding the worst arrival time for ET tasks efficiently
The following optimization has the objective to reduce the number of simulations of ET
tasks arrivals needed to compute the worst case response time of a task. It shows that
it is not necessary to simulate all possible ET tasks arrival times t0 ∈(0, tTT
h ) since most
of them can be skipped based on a simple condition.
Theorem 5.2.1. Given Rw the worst case response time found so far, Hw the demand
associated to Rw, and t0 the current time-step being evaluated, if all ET tasks arrive at
t0, the response time will be Ri < Rw if:
W(t0, t0 + Rw) ≥Hw
(5.13)
Proof. Since that W and H are monotonically increasing functions of time t, and that
W(t0, t0) = 0 while H(t) > 0|∀t, if W(t0, t0 + Rw) > H(Rw), then there must exist a
response time value Ri ∈(0, Rw) where W(t0, t0 + Ri) = H(Ri), and thus we have that
the response time evaluated at t0 is Ri < Rw (not the worst case response time).
29
==PAGE:36==
Figure 5.7: The plot on the left shows the response time analysis when all ET tasks
arrive at t0 = 0, which results in a WCRT of Rw = 2967 micro-ticks for task ”ET-21”.
The plot on the right on the other hand shows the response time analysis when ET tasks
arrive at t0 = 1000. As it can be seen W(1000, 1000 + Rw) > H(Rw), so this scenario is
not the worst-case.
As can be seen from the plots 5.7, if the supply after a time interval of Rw is over the
demand, then the response time when ET tasks arriving at time t0 must be less then
Rw, since the intersection between supply and demand must have been at an earlier
time-step t ∈(t0, t0 + Rw).
In practice, the condition in equation 5.13 can be performed with time complexity O(1)
by storing the supply function Zs(t) in an array and computing Ws(ts, te) using Zs(t).
The optimized algorithm can be implemented as follow:
Algorithm 2 Optimization 1 of ET tasks schedulability analysis using Zs(t)
Input: τ TT, τ ET, Z
1: t0 ←0
2: Ri, Hi ←simulate(τ ET, t0, Z)
▷Response time when tasks are arriving at t0 = 0
3: Rw = Ri
▷Store response time as current worst response time
4: Hw = Hi
5: tTT
h
= getHyperperiod(τ TT)
6: for t0 ←1 to tTT
h
do
7:
if getSupplyofWindow(Z, t0, t0 + Rw) ≥Hw then
8:
continue
▷Skip simulation for t0
9:
else
10:
Ri, Hi ←simulate(τ ET, t0, 0, Z)
30
==PAGE:37==
11:
if Ri > Rw then
▷Update current worst case response time
12:
Rw = Ri
13:
Hw = Hi
14:
end if
15:
end if
16: end for
17: return Rw
The algorithm takes as input the task sets of TT and ET tasks, and the supply function
Z given by the schedule. The algorithm initializes the current known worst-case response
time of the sporadic tasks Rw to the response time when all sporadic tasks arrive at time
t0 = 0, and the corresponding demand associated with it Hw. Then, for each time step
t0 ∈(1, tTT
h ) in the schedule, the algorithm checks whether the supply given by the
schedule within the window between t0 and t0 + Rw is enough to handle the worst-case
response time of the sporadic tasks. If it is enough, the simulation for that time step
can be skipped. Otherwise, the algorithm simulates the execution of sporadic tasks that
arrive at time t0 and updates the worst-case response time if a longer response time is
observed. Finally, the algorithm returns the worst-case response time of the sporadic
tasks. By skipping the simulation for most time-steps, the algorithm reduces the overall
simulation time and substantially improves the eﬀiciency of the schedulability analysis.
Computing ET tasks response time efficiently
The purpose of the following optimizations is to enhance the eﬀiciency of simulating ET
task arrivals for response time analysis. The simulation algorithm aims to identify the
earliest point of intersection between the supply and demand functions. This problem
is complex since both functions are non-linear and multiple intersection points might
exists. The proposed optimization technique leverages the mathematical properties of
the demand function H(t), which is a monotonically increasing staircase function, and
the supply of window function W(t0, t0 + t), which is also a monotonically increasing
function and a Lipschitz function with Lipschitz constant K = 1. A function is a Lipschitz
function with constant K when its variation is bounded such that:
|f(x) −f(y)| ≤K|x −y| ∀x, y ∈R
(5.14)
In particular, considering the supply window function W with K = 1:
|W(t0, t0 + ta) −W(t0, t0 + tb)| ≤|tb −ta| ∀ta, tb ∈R
(5.15)
As a result, it is unnecessary to evaluate all possible t ∈(0, tET
h ) to locate the earliest
intersection point where W(t0, t0+t) = H(t). Instead, the proposed optimized algorithm
advances by multiple time-steps at each iteration, by stepping ahead of H(t)−W(t0, t0+t)
micro-ticks which reduce the gap between the two functions while guaranteeing not
to overshoot the intersection time-step, since the variation of the supply function is
31
==PAGE:38==
bounded. This approach dramatically decreases the number of evaluations required to
identify the earliest intersection point.
A second optimization that can be performed considering that the demand function H(t)
is a stair-case function and therefore only changes values at few specific time-steps (at
ET tasks arrival times). As a consequence, it is not needed to compute the value of H(t)
at each time-step, which is computationally expensive, but only re-compute the demand
at ET tasks arrival time-steps.
The following pseudo-code provides an outline of how the optimized simulation algorithm
operates:
Algorithm 3 Optimized simulation of ET tasks arrival using Zs(t)
Input: τ ET, t0, t, Z
1: tET
h
←getHyperperiod(τ ET)
2: earliestArrival ←0
3: while t < tET
h
do
4:
if earliestArrival ≤0 then
5:
earliestArrival ←computeEarliestArrivalTime(τ ET, t)
6:
demand ←computeDemand(τ ET, t)
▷Update current demand
7:
end if
8:
responeTime ←t
9:
supply ←getSupplyOfWindow(Z, t0, t0 + t)
▷Update current supply
10:
11:
if supply ̸= 0 & supply ≥demand then
12:
return responseTime, demand
▷Intersection found
13:
end if
14:
step ←demand −supply
15:
t ←t + step
▷Jump foreward in time
16:
earliestArrival ←earliestArrival −step
▷Keep track of next tasks arrival
17:
18:
responseTime ←min(t, tET
h
−1)
▷Prevent responseTime ≥tET
h
19: end while
20: return responseTime, demand
The algorithm gets as input the task-set of ET tasks τ ET, t0 the time-step in the schedule
where all ET tasks are arriving, t the time-step of the simulation and Z the supply
function. The algorithm starts by computing the ET tasks hyper-period and initializing
a variable for storing the earliest arrival time of the next ET task and setting it to 0.
Then, it iterates over all the simulation time-steps t ∈(0, tET
h ). At each iteration if one
or more ET tasks are arriving at time-step t then the demand is recomputed and the
next earliest arrival time is also calculated. Next, the supply of the window of time from
t0 to t0+t is computed. The algorithm evaluates whether the supply is enough to handle
32
==PAGE:39==
the demand and in that case it terminates, and returns the response time and associated
demand. Otherwise it moves forward in time by an amount of demand−supply, to close
the gap between the demand and supply functions. Finally, after all the iterations, if the
supply is always lower than the demand then a response time of th −1 is returned with
the associated demand to handle the corner case where there is no intersection between
the two functions due to low supply.
Conclusion
In conclusion, the method described presents a comprehensive technique for schedula-
bility analysis using ZS(t). The algorithm proposed is flexible since it uses the precise
supply of ZS(t), it remains effective regardless of the method used to establish the under-
lying resource partition. Despite its utility, the method is computationally expensive in
its basic form. However, with the proposed optimizations, the execution time of the al-
gorithm is significantly reduced, making it practical. The first optimization reduces the
number of required simulations of ET tasks arrivals to compute the worst-case response
time. The second optimization enhances the eﬀiciency of simulating ET task arrivals for
response time analysis. The proposed optimized algorithm, represents a contribution
towards more flexible, eﬀicient and practical response time analysis for mixed TT and
ET systems.
5.2.6
Assigning ET tasks priorities
Task priorities play an important role in schedulability and response time of ET tasks.
Deadline Monotonic (DM), first introduced by Liu and Layland (1973), is a priority
assignment algorithm that assigns priorities to tasks based on their deadlines, with tasks
having earlier deadlines receiving higher priorities. This means that tasks with tight
deadlines are given higher priority, and the scheduler ensures that they are executed
first to meet their deadlines. As shown by Liu and Layland (1973), Deadline Monotonic
is an optimal priority assignment algorithm for scheduling real-time tasks in a system
when certain conditions are met. These conditions include:
• Preemptive tasks: DM scheduling assumes that a task with a higher priority
can preempt or interrupt a lower priority task that is currently executing.
• Independent tasks: The tasks should be independent, meaning that they do not
share resources or have inter-dependencies that could lead to deadlocks or priority
inversions.
• Hard real-time tasks: The system must be hard real-time, meaning that it is
absolutely critical to meet all task deadlines. In a hard real-time system, missing
a deadline could have catastrophic consequences.
33
==PAGE:40==
• Fixed task parameters: The tasks should have fixed computation times and
deadlines.
The deadline of each task should also be less than or equal to its
period.
• Synchronous task arrival (no jitter): All tasks are assumed to be ready for
execution at time 0.
The schedulability analysis for ET tasks proposed in this thesis assigns priority to each
ET task based on Deadline Monotonic, since it is optimal given the assumptions of the
problem at hand. When considering task-sets with tasks with arbitrary deadlines, al-
though deadline monotonic is not optimal, it still a good heuristic for assigning priorities.
34
==PAGE:41==
CHAPTER 6
Optimization
6.1
Introduction
This chapter presents a Genetic Algorithm (GA) as a method to optimize schedules for
multi-core systems that integrate Time-triggered and Event-Triggered tasks. In particu-
lar the proposed GA is used to solve the task-to-core mapping problem and to optimize
the Token Bucket parameters.
Genetic algorithms are a type of meta-heuristic that uses concepts from biological evolu-
tion to search for the optimal solution to a given problem. In section 6.2.1, an overview
of genetic algorithms with k-tournament selection is provided. Section 6.2.2 presents
an algorithm pseudo-code that describes the GA with k-tournament selection in detail,
including the various parts that comprise it. The k-tournament selection policy, which
the GA algorithm uses to find good and bad solutions, is further explained in sections
6.2.3 and 6.2.4. Section 6.2.6 describes how solutions are evaluated using a fitness func-
tion that returns a score of the ”goodness” of the solution.
The algorithm evolves the solutions by combining two existing good solutions using a
crossover operation (section 6.2.8) and by applying random mutations (section 6.2.7).
Section 6.3 specifically describes how solutions are combined and mutated to optimize
the idle slots placement pattern in the schedules. Section 6.4 explains how task-to-core
mappings are optimized through crossover and mutation.
Finally, in sections 6.7 and 6.8, it is demonstrated how the algorithm can be highly
parallelized, and the computation can be distributed over multiple cores and nodes in a
network, allowing to scale the optimization to larger task-sets or more complex assump-
tions and speed-up the optimization process.
6.2
Genetic algorithm with k-tournament selection
6.2.1
Overview
Genetic algorithms are a class of optimization algorithms that are inspired by the pro-
cess of natural selection and evolution. They are used to find the optimal solution to
a problem by simulating the evolutionary process of selection, reproduction, and mu-
tation. The algorithm works by randomly creating a population of potential solutions,
35
==PAGE:42==
evaluating their fitness based on how well they solve the problem, and then using the
fittest solutions to create the next generation of solutions.
One of the earliest and most influential papers on genetic algorithms was published by
Holland (1975), titled ”Adaptation in Natural and Artificial Systems”. In this paper,
Holland introduced the concept of a genetic algorithm and discussed how it could be
used to solve complex optimization problems.
The key idea behind genetic algorithms is that they mimic the process of natural se-
lection, which works by selecting the fittest individuals to reproduce and pass on their
genetic material to the next generation. In a genetic algorithm, each potential solution
to the problem is represented as a chromosome, which is composed of a string of binary
digits (bits) or real-valued parameters.
The algorithm begins by creating an initial population of chromosomes, which are ran-
domly generated. Each chromosome is then evaluated based on a fitness function that
measures how well it solves the problem. The fittest chromosomes are then selected
for reproduction, which is done through a process called crossover. During crossover,
pairs of chromosomes exchange pieces of their genetic material to create new offspring
chromosomes.
In addition to crossover, genetic algorithms also include a mutation step, which intro-
duces random changes into the genetic material of the offspring chromosomes. This helps
to prevent the algorithm from getting stuck in local optima and encourages exploration
of the search space.
As shown in figure 6.1, the process of selection, crossover, and mutation is repeated
for multiple generations, with the hope that the population will evolve toward an opti-
mal solution to the problem. The algorithm terminates either when a solution meets a
specified fitness threshold or when a maximum number of iterations is performed.
Figure 6.1: A diagram of genetic algorithm
Genetic algorithms have been applied to a wide range of optimization problems, includ-
ing function optimization, parameter tuning, and machine learning. Since the paper
by Holland (1975) many different extensions and variations of the algorithm have been
proposed.
In the paper ”A Comparative Analysis of Selection Schemes Used in Ge-
netic Algorithms” by Goldberg and Deb (1991), the authors compares and analyzes
several selection schemes that can be used in genetic algorithms. The authors investi-
36
==PAGE:43==
gate proportionate reproduction, ranking selection, tournament selection, and Genitor
(or ”steady-state”) selection. They analyze these schemes based on solutions to deter-
ministic difference or differential equations and computer simulations. The authors find
that tournament selection is an effective selection scheme for genetic algorithms. Specif-
ically, they find that tournament selection is able to strike a balance between selection
pressure and diversity, leading to effective and eﬀicient search for solutions.
Tournament selection involves selecting a certain number of individuals from the pop-
ulation at random and selecting the best individual among them to become a parent
for the next generation. This process is repeated until the desired number of parents
is obtained. Goldberg and Deb (1991) found that tournament selection provides higher
selection pressure than proportionate selection (in which individuals are selected with
a probability proportional to their fitness) and allows for a diverse population to be
maintained throughout the search process. Additionally, tournament selection can be
implemented with varying tournament sizes, which allows for a trade-off between selec-
tion pressure and diversity. Smaller tournament sizes increase diversity, while larger
tournament sizes increase selection pressure.
In this thesis, genetic algorithms with k-tournament selection are used to solve the com-
plex combinatorial problem of finding and optimizing a schedule for TT and ET tasks
on multi-core system with complex requirements such as ADAS systems. This choice is
due to several reasons:
• Balancing exploration and exploitation: k-tournament selection is designed
to balance exploration and exploitation by allowing good solutions to survive while
also exploring other parts of the search space.
This is important for complex
problems such as scheduling Time-Triggered and Event-Triggered tasks on a multi-
core system, where finding the optimal solution may require exploring a large
portion of the search space.
• Scalability: Genetic algorithms with k-tournament selection can scale well to
larger problem sizes. As the size of the problem increases (for instance by increasing
the number of TT and ET tasks and the number of cores in the system), it may not
be practical to exhaustively search the entire search space. Genetic algorithms can
eﬀiciently search large search spaces and find good solutions without necessarily
evaluating all possible solutions.
• Parallelization: Genetic algorithms with k-tournament selection are well-suited
for parallelization, which can further speed up the optimization process.
Par-
allelization allows multiple solutions to be evaluated simultaneously, which can
reduce the overall search time and increase the likelihood of finding a good so-
lution. In section 6.7 it is shown how the optimization process can be sped up
by distributing the computation over multiple CPU cores and in section 6.8 it is
shown how to further distribute the computation over multiple machines using the
island model of genetic algorithms.
37
==PAGE:44==
• Handling complex constraints: In many complex optimization problems, there
may be various constraints that must be satisfied. Genetic algorithms can be easily
adapted to handle complex constraints and can even be extended to include penalty
functions or other constraint-handling techniques.
• Robustness: Genetic algorithms can be robust to noise and uncertainty in the
problem, making them well-suited for real-world optimization problems such as
scheduling tasks for ADAS systems.
6.2.2
Algorithm pseudo-code
The following pseudo-code implements a genetic algorithm with k-tournament selection
that can be run on multiple threads:
Algorithm 4 Genetic algorithm with k-tournament selection
Input: maxIterations, population, populationSize
1: i ←0
2: father ←copy(population[getGoodChromosomeID()])
3: mother ←copy(population[getGoodChromosomeID()])
4: while i < maxIterations do
5:
mutationRate ←mutationSchedule(
i
maxIteration)
6:
roundCount ←roundSchedule(
i
maxIterations)
7:
8:
son ←crossingOver(mother, father)
9:
son ←mutate(son, mutationRate)
10:
sonFitness ←computeFitness(son)
11:
12:
mutex.lock()
13:
victimId ←getBadChromosomeID()
14:
population[victimId] ←son
15:
populationFitness[victimId] ←sonFitness
16:
father ←copy(population[getGoodChromosomeID()])
17:
mother ←copy(population[getGoodChromosomeID()])
18:
mutex.unlock();
19:
20:
i ←i + 1;
21: end while
The algorithm begins by initializing a counter of the current iteration, i, to 0. It then
selects a good-performing chromosome from the current population using the getGood-
ChromosomeID function, which returns the ID of the chromosome that has the highest
fitness value among a random subset of size k of the population (where k is the round
38
==PAGE:45==
count). This chromosome is copied and used as parent chromosome for the next genera-
tion. Next, the algorithm repeats the same process and select another high-performing
chromosome to use as other parent.
The algorithm subsequently enters the primary loop, which proceeds for a maximum
number of iterations dictated by maxIterations. Within each iteration, the algorithm
calculates the mutation rate and number of rounds (tournaments) by using the muta-
tionSchedule and roundSchedule functions. The crossover operation is then performed
on the parent chromosomes to generate a new offspring chromosome. The mutation
operation is then applied to the new solution with the mutation rate computed in the
previous step. The fitness of the offspring chromosome is then evaluated (and stored)
using the computeFitness function, which returns a fitness value based on how well the
chromosome solves the problem.
To prevent race conditions while running the algorithm on multiple cores, the population
data structure is locked before writing back the new generated solution to the original
population. The lock effectively prevents multiple threads to access the same data si-
multaneously. The algorithm then selects a victim chromosome from the population
to be replaced by the offspring chromosome using the getBadChromosomeID function,
which returns the ID of the chromosome with the lowest fitness value among a random
subset of the population. The victim chromosome is then replaced with the offspring
chromosome and the fitness value is updated. Afterwards, the algorithm selects new
parents chromosomes from the population using getGoodChromosomeID. This process
repeats until the maximum number of iterations is reached. Note that many possible
stop criterion can be used. Another useful criterion is to stop the optimization process
after a certain amount of time has elapsed.
The genetic algorithm uses a combination of selection, crossover, and mutation to evolve
a population of potential solutions to a given problem. The fittest chromosomes are se-
lected for reproduction, which increases the likelihood of producing even fitter offspring
in the next generation. The algorithm continues to evolve the population for a specified
number of iterations, after which the best-performing chromosome is returned as the
solution to the problem.
In the next sections it is shown how the various functions of the algorithm are imple-
mented to optimize the scheduling problem considered in this thesis.
6.2.3
Finding a good chromosome
In the solution proposed, k-tournament selection is used to decide which chromosomes
will be kept over time and which chromosomes will be removed. A ”good” chromosome
is a chromosome that has relatively high fitness compared to a randomly picked subset
of size k of the population, and it will be used as a parent to generate a new chromosome.
To find a good chromosome, first a random individual in the population is picked and
39
==PAGE:46==
it is set as the current best candidate. Then it is compared to another randomly picked
individual in the population. The solution that has higher fitness between the two is
set as the current best candidate with a probability known as the ”selectionProbability”.
The comparison process is repeated for a specific number of rounds (also known as
tournaments). After all rounds have been evaluated, the final winner solution of all the
comparison is the good chromosome. The following pseudo-code illustrates the selection
algorithm just described:
Algorithm 5 Selecting a good chromosome with tournament selection
Input: roundsCount, selectionProbability, population, populationFitness, popula-
tionSize
1: i ←0
2: searchId ←rand() % populationSize
▷Select random individual
3: bestId ←searchId
4: currentFitness ←populationFitness[searchId]
▷Fetch individual fitness value
5: while i <= roundsCount do
6:
searchId ←rand() % populationSize
7:
p ←rand_uniform(0.0, 1.0)
8:
if populationFitness[searchId] > currentFitness then
9:
if p ≤selectionProbability then
10:
bestId ←searchId
▷Update current best candidate
11:
currentFitness ←populationFitness[searchId]
12:
end if
13:
else
14:
if p > selectionProbability then
15:
bestId ←searchId
▷Update current best candidate
16:
currentFitness ←populationFitness[searchId]
17:
end if
18:
end if
19:
i ←i + 1
20: end while
21: return bestId
The parameters roundsCount and selectionProbability control the selective pressure dur-
ing the k-tournament selection process:
• The roundsCount parameter determines the number of rounds (or tournaments)
to be held in the k-tournament selection process. Increasing the number of rounds
will increase the number of tournaments, resulting in a stronger selection pressure
and potentially faster convergence to a good solution. However, a higher selection
pressure may also increase the risk of premature convergence and the loss of genetic
diversity.
40
==PAGE:47==
• The selectionProbability parameter determines the probability that a good chro-
mosome (i.e., a winner of a tournament) is selected as a parent for generating the
next generation. A higher selection probability will result in a stronger selection
pressure and may lead to faster convergence, but it may also increase the risk of
premature convergence and the loss of genetic diversity. On the other hand, a
lower selection probability will result in weaker selection pressure and may lead to
slower convergence, but it may also maintain a higher level of genetic diversity.
Therefore, the values of roundsCount and selectionProbability can be adjusted to tune the
selection pressure and balance the trade-off between convergence speed and maintaining
genetic diversity in the population.
6.2.4
Finding a bad chromosome
Because the population size is fixed, every time a new solution is generated, an already
present solution need to be removed from the population. To do that it is necessary
to find a bad chromosome to replace. A bad chromosome is defined as a chromosome
that has relatively low fitness compared to a randomly picked subset of size k of the
population. It is found with the same algorithm presented earlier in section 6.2.3, for
selecting a good chromosome, but instead of maximizing the fitness, the goal is to
minimize it, which means that at the end of each round the solution with low fitness
among the candidates is kept as best candidate for a bad chromosome.
6.2.5
Chromosome content
As previously discussed, chromosomes are used as a representation of solutions for opti-
mization problems. In the context of our proposed method, a chromosome is a unique
list of values that describes a single solution for the problem at hand. Each chromosome
is composed of three distinct sections:
• Token Bucket parameters: For each target core the chromosome holds two
parameters, the token rate and the initial bucket value. This section of the chro-
mosome specifies how to schedule idle slots on each core.
• Task-to-core mapping: For each TT and ET task, the id of the core that will
handle the task is store. This section of the chromosome describes, how tasks are
mapped to cores.
• ET tasks priorities: For each ET tasks, the priority value is store in this section.
Figure 6.2 show a diagram of the chromosome structure. Note that the length of chro-
mosomes depends on both the number of cores in the target system and number of tasks
in the task-set at hand.
41
==PAGE:48==
Figure 6.2: A diagram of the chromosome structure.
All the data in the chromosome describe how to generate the schedules for the multi-core
system.
6.2.6
Fitness function
The fitness function is used to evaluate the fitness of each individual in the population
and assign a fitness value to it. The fitness value indicates how well the individual solves
the problem at hand. The fitness function is usually problem-specific and designed based
on the objective of the optimization problem. As presented in chapter 3 the optimiza-
tion goal is to find a solution where the task-set is schedulable and the response time
of all tasks is minimized. In particular, the objective is to minimize the normalized
average worst-case response time of both Time-Triggered and Event-Triggered tasks.
The schedulability and response time of Time-Triggered tasks is determined using the
method presented in section 5.1.9 while the schedulability analysis of Event-Triggered
tasks is evaluated using the method shown in section 5.2.5.
The fitness function proposed is comprised of two parts: f1(x) evaluates the ”responsive-
ness” of the solution using the worst-case response time of all tasks as a metric, while
f2(x) evaluates the schedulability of TT and ET tasks on each core. Given τ TT and τ ET
the set of TT and ET tasks respectively, RTT
i
(x) and RET
i
(x) the worst case response
time of the i-th task given the solution x, dTT
i
and dET
i
the deadline of the i-th task, ωTT
and ωET the weight factor for TT and ET tasks, then f1(x) is defined as follow:
f1(x) = ωTT
|τ TT| ·
|τ T T |
∑
i=1
RTT
i
(x)
dTT
i
(x) + ωET
|τ ET| ·
|τ ET |
∑
i=1
RET
i
(x)
dET
i
(x)
(6.1)
The goal of f1(x) is to let the meta-heuristic algorithm minimize the worst case response
time of all tasks while also being able to shift the priority of responsiveness more towards
either TT tasks or ET tasks. For instance, when ωTT = ωET = 1 both TT and ET tasks
are optimized to have a quicker response time, while when ωTT = 1 and ωET = 0 only
the TT tasks are optimized.
The function f2(x) is used to penalize solutions that are not schedulable. The schedu-
lability of Time-Triggered and Event-Triggered tasks for each core are represented by
ui(x) and vi(x) for a given solution x. The penalty factors for unschedulable TT and
ET tasks are denoted by λTT and λET, respectively. Specifically, a penalty of λTT is
added for each core where one or more TT tasks are not schedulable, and a penalty
42
==PAGE:49==
of λET is added for each core where one or more ET tasks are not schedulable. This
penalty scheme incentives the optimization process to quickly converge towards schedu-
lable solutions. In this context, and given K the number of cores in the target system,
the expression for f2(x) is given by:
f2(x) = λTT ·
K
∑
j=1
uj(x) + λET ·
K
∑
k=1
vk(x)
(6.2)
Genetic algorithms are designed to maximize the fitness of chromosomes. In the case of
minimizing both f1(x) and f2(x), it becomes necessary to convert the problem from a
minimization problem to a maximization one. This can be achieved by negating both
expressions. The final fitness function with both terms combined is the following:
f(x) = −[f1(x) + f2(x)]
(6.3)
The function f(x) is a good choice for this optimization problem for several reasons.
First, it combines two objectives that are crucial for the problem at hand, namely min-
imizing the worst-case response time of all tasks and ensuring the schedulability of the
system. The former objective is essential to provide timely and eﬀicient responses to
events and tasks, while the latter guarantees the correctness and reliability of the system.
The use of penalty factors to discourage unschedulable solutions promotes the search to-
wards feasible and eﬀicient solutions.
Second, the fitness function is designed to be
flexible and customizable, allowing the optimization process to adjust the weight factor
of TT and ET tasks based on the specific requirements of the problem. Finally, the
combination of both terms in the final fitness function as a negative value is a common
technique in optimization problems where multiple objectives are being minimized si-
multaneously, and it allows the algorithm to find a single optimal solution that balances
both objectives.
6.2.7
Mutation function
In genetic algorithms, a mutation function is a genetic operator that introduces random
changes to the genetic material (i.e., the chromosomes) of an individual in a population.
The goal of the mutation function is to introduce new genetic material into the popu-
lation that may help the population to explore new regions of the solution space that
would otherwise be inaccessible through crossover and selection alone.
The mutation function works by randomly selecting one or more parameters within an
individual’s chromosome and changing their value in some way. The nature and extent
of the change will depend on the specific mutation function used.
In the proposed algorithm, mutations are applied to explore different frequencies of
idle slots placements, and different task-to-core mappings. Optionally, ET tasks prior-
ities can be mutated, since assigning priorities using deadline monotonic as explained
in section 5.2.6 is optimal only if the assumptions hold. In systems where tasks have,
43
==PAGE:50==
for instance, jitter requirements, optimizing task priorities using genetic algorithms is
a good solution. The following is a description of each part of the mutation function
proposed:
• Idle Slot Placement mutation: In section 6.3.3, a function to randomly change
the parameters of the Token Bucket algorithm used to place idle slots in the sched-
ule is presented. This helps to explore different idle slots placement configurations,
which could lead to better handling of ET tasks and better solutions in general
(see section 6.3.3).
• Task-to-Core mapping mutation: In section 6.4.3, a function to randomly
change the mapping of TT and ET tasks to cores is described.
This helps to
explore different task-to-core mappings, which could lead to better solutions.
• Task priority mutation: This function randomly changes the priority of tasks
in the solution. This helps to explore different task prioritizations, which could
lead to better solutions.
6.2.8
Crossover function
Crossover is a fundamental genetic operator that combines genetic information from two
parent solutions to create a new offspring solution. This process mimics the natural pro-
cess of genetic recombination that occurs during sexual reproduction in living organisms.
The crossover function takes two parent solutions, and based on a certain probability,
selects a subset of genes from each parent and combines them to form a new offspring
solution. The importance of choosing the crossover function carefully is paramount in
genetic algorithms. The choice of crossover function can greatly impact the convergence
speed, diversity of the population, and ultimately the quality of the solutions obtained.
The proposed crossover function has the objective to combine different TB parameters
for idle slots placement (see section 6.3.2), TT tasks to core mappings (see section 6.4.2,
ET tasks to core mappings and ET tasks priorities in order to create a new solution
given two already existing solutions.
6.3
Optimizing idle slots placement
6.3.1
Generating initial solutions
As described previously in section 5.1.5, idle slots are placed in the schedule using a
token-bucket algorithm. The placement pattern is described by two parameters: token
rate and initial bucket value. The former parameter determines the frequency of idle
slots, while the latter controls the offset. Notably, each core of the system possesses its
unique placement pattern, characterized by its own set of parameters. For instance, in
a system comprising of 8 cores, the solution for the idle slot placement will be described
44
==PAGE:51==
by 16 parameters in total.
In order to generate a new random solution, the initial
parameters are generated randomly. Specifically, the token rate and the initial bucket
content are sampled from uniform distributions spanning the range of 0 to 0.5 and 0 to
1.0, respectively.
6.3.2
Combining solutions
Creating a new solution for the placement patter of idle slots can be achieved by mixing
two existing solutions. This process involves choosing parameters from either of the
parent solutions, with an equal probability for each. For example, in a system with
eight cores, the new solution will have some cores reflecting the idle slot placement of
one parent, while other cores will have the idle slot placement pattern of the other parent.
This method allows for a wide range of unique solutions by making use of the strong
points of the parent solutions.
6.3.3
Mutating parameters
The parameters of the Token-Bucket algorithm are mutated with a probability of
1
K
where K is the number of cores in the system. This makes sure that, on average, the
idle slots placement pattern of only one core is mutated for each iteration. Given µ
the current mutation rate, the token rate is mutated by adding a small random number
picked from a uniform distribution in the range of (−0.3µ, 0.3µ). Similarly, the initial
bucket value is mutated by adding a small random number picked from a uniform dis-
tribution in the range of (−0.5µ, 0.5µ). The advantage of this approach is that it allows
the optimization algorithm to quickly identify an approximate solution at the beginning
of the optimization process. As the algorithm progresses, the parameters can then be
refined with greater precision, due to their proportional relationship with the mutation
rate. The mutated token rate values are then clipped to be in the range of (0.0, 1.0) to
prevent errors.
6.4
Optimizing the mapping of tasks to cores
6.4.1
Generating initial mappings
To generate initial task-to-core mappings for both Time-Triggered and Event-Triggered
tasks, four different methods of task-to-core mapping initialization are considered. These
methods are as follows:
45
==PAGE:52==
6.4.1.1
Random mapping
In this method, task-to-core mappings are generated randomly without any regard to
the current workload on the cores. This method is not recommended as it may result in
imbalanced workloads on the cores and produce many solutions that are not schedulable.
On the other hand it creates a initial population that has high diversity, which might
help the optimization algorithm to find better solutions.
6.4.1.2
Laxity round-robin mapping
In this method, task-to-core mappings are generated using a round-robin approach where
tasks are assigned to cores in a cyclic manner. The laxity (or slack time) Li of a task is
defined as the difference between it’s deadline DTT
i
and its duration dTT
i
:
Li = DTT
i
−dTT
i
(6.4)
The laxity of all tasks are computed and the tasks are sorted in order of laxity in
descending order. The tasks are than assigned to cores in a cyclic manner. This method
is simple to implement and can result in a good initial workload balance. However, it
does not take into account the utility of the tasks, which may result in sub-optimal
performance.
6.4.1.3
Load balancing mapping
In this method, task-to-core mappings are generated by first calculating the current
workload on each core based on the number of tasks assigned to the core and their
utilities. Tasks are then assigned to the core with the lowest workload Uk. The core
utilization (or workload) of the k-th core Uk is calculated by summing the resource
utilization of each task mapped to the core:
Uk =
|τ T T |
∑
i
dTT
i
T TT
i
(6.5)
The core utility provides an estimate of the workload given by tasks that the core will
handle. This method can result in a good workload balance between the system cores,
but it may not take into account the deadlines of the tasks, which could result in missed
deadlines.
6.4.1.4
Delay minimizing mapping
The delay minimising task-to-core mapping initialisation algorithm sorts all tasks in
decreasing order of duration and then assigns each task to the core that would minimize
the total delay of execution caused by existing tasks on that core. For each task, the
algorithm calculates the delay that would be caused by mapping the task on each core,
46
==PAGE:53==
by summing the duration of all tasks on the core that would be handled first by EDF.
The algorithm then assigns the task to the core where the delay of execution is minimum.
This ensures that the tasks are assigned to cores in a way that minimizes the total delay
caused by already existing tasks, which can be beneficial for meeting task deadlines.
6.4.2
Combining task-to-core mappings
A new mapping solution of task-to-core mapping solution can be generated by merging
two existing mapping solutions. For each Time-Triggered and Event-Triggered task, the
core assignment in the new solution is chosen from either of the parent solutions with an
equal chance. This method helps create diverse and potentially more effective mapping
solutions.
6.4.3
Mutating task-to-core mappings
The tasks mapping to cores are mutated with a probability of
1
|τ T T | for TT tasks and
1
|τ ET | for ET tasks, so that, on average, the mapping of one TT task and one ET tasks
are mutated for each iteration. To mutate the mapping of a single task, a different core
is randomly picked amongst the cores that fulfill the mapping constrains.
6.5
Mutation rate schedule
The mutation rate schedule is a plan for how the mutation rate will change over time as
the optimization algorithm runs. The mutation rate determines how frequently random
mutations are introduced into the genetic population during the evolution process. A
mutation rate schedule can be important to tune properly because it can have a sig-
nificant impact on the effectiveness of the genetic algorithm. If the mutation rate is
too low, the algorithm may get stuck in local optima and fail to explore the full search
space effectively. On the other hand, if the mutation rate is too high, the algorithm may
lose important genetic information and fail to converge towards an optimal solution. By
carefully adjusting the mutation rate schedule, the genetic algorithm can strike a balance
between exploration and exploitation, allowing it to eﬀiciently search the solution space
and converge to the best possible solution. Two parameterized mutation rate functions
were experimentally tested:
• Linearly Decreasing Mutation Rate: In this approach, the mutation rate
starts high and gradually decreases over time. This approach is motivated by the
idea that high mutation rates are useful for exploring the search space early in the
evolution process, while lower mutation rates are useful for exploiting promising
solutions later on. A Linearly decreasing mutation rate schedule is represented by
the equation:
µ = 1.0 −to.
(6.6)
47
==PAGE:54==
• Exponentially Decreasing Mutation Rate: In this approach, the mutation
rate decreases exponentially over time. The motivation is similar to the linearly
decreasing mutation rate approach, but the decrease in mutation rate is more rapid
early in the evolution process and more gradual later on. An exponential mutation
rate schedule is represented by the equation:
µ = e−kto
(6.7)
The factor k controls the shape of the exponential curve.
The variable to denotes the percentage of work completed and is calculated as the ratio of
the time passed since the start of the optimization to the target time for the completion
of the optimization process. Specifically, to is defined as to =
t
tMAX . Multiple experiments
were carried out to evaluate different mutation rate schedules.
Figure 6.3:
The plot shows different mutation schedules that were experimentally
tested
It was found that the different schedules proposed had a similar impact on the aver-
age final solution fitness. Arguably, this is because in the proposed solutions only the
mutation of the idle slots placement depends on µ, while the probability of mutating
task-to-core mappings is fixed (see section 6.3.3 and 6.4.3. In practice, an exponentially
decreasing mutation rate with k = 1.5 was chosen as it displayed slightly better results
than the other schedules.
6.6
Rounds count schedule
When using genetic algorithms with k-tournament selection, the choice of the round
count k can have a significant impact on the performance of the algorithm. There is no
48
==PAGE:55==
universally accepted method for selecting the value of k, as the optimal value depends
on various factors such as the problem domain, the population size, and the selection
pressure desired. However, some heuristics have been suggested in the literature:
• Empirical studies by Goldberg and Deb (1991) have shown that a value of k be-
tween 2 and 10 usually yields good results for most problems. A larger k value may
increase selection pressure, but it may also increase the likelihood of premature
convergence.
• The suggestion to make k proportional to the population size N (e.g., k=0.05N)
was proposed by Holland (1975) as a way to ensure that selection pressure remains
constant as the population size changes. This heuristic has been used in many
studies of genetic algorithms and other evolutionary computation methods.
The idea of gradually increasing the selection pressure over time is a common technique
in evolutionary algorithms and is often referred to as ”dynamic selection pressure”. This
can be achieved by varying the value of k, starting with a small value of k to promote
diversity in the early stages of evolution, and then gradually increasing k as the popula-
tion converges to improve selection pressure.
In the solution proposed in this thesis, these ideas are combined to schedule the tour-
nament rounds starting from k = 1 at the beginning of the optimization process up to
k = 0.05∗N (where N is the population size) at the end of the optimization. In practice
the tournaments rounds are scheduled using the following function:
k = 1 + (0.05 · N −1) · to
(6.8)
Where to is a value between 0 and 1 representing the progress of the optimization process,
defined as to =
t
tMAX . This function gradually increases the value of k over time, starting
with a small value to promote diversity and gradually increasing to improve selection
pressure as the population converges.
6.7
Distributed optimization over multiple cores
Genetic algorithm with k-tournament selection is a highly parallelizable algorithm. In
parallel computing, multiple tasks are executed simultaneously by multiple processing
units. In the case of genetic algorithms with k-tournament selection, each processing
unit can evaluate a solution, perform crossover and mutation on different individuals of
the population in parallel without the need to split the population into sub-groups. This
can be achieved by creating a system, where each processing unit operates independently,
and race conditions are prevented by utilizing a read-write lock on the population. In a
parallel computing environment, multiple processors may attempt to access and modify
the same memory location simultaneously, which can lead to race conditions and data
inconsistency (Kirk and Wen-Mei (2016)). A lock is a mechanism that ensures that only
49
==PAGE:56==
one processor or thread can access a particular memory location at a time. The lock
works by allowing one processor or thread to acquire the lock and access the memory
location, while blocking all other processors from accessing the memory location until
the lock is released (Kirk and Wen-Mei (2016)).
In the proposed parallel GA, each processing unit copies from the original population
two parents solutions and creates a new solution by performing cross over and mutation,
without modifying the original population. Once a processing unit have completed it’s
work, the new solution is merged back into the original population while simultaneous
memory writes from multiple threads are prevented using the lock. By parallelizing the
genetic algorithm with k-tournament selection, the algorithm can leverage the computa-
tional power of multiple cores, which is important for several reasons:
• Faster computation: By dividing the computation workload among multiple
processors, the optimization process speeds up.
• Scalability: Parallelizing the optimization process allows it to scale to larger
problems. As the size of the problem increases, for instance by considering bigger
task-sets of TT and ET tasks and more complex target systems, more processors
can be added to the computation, allowing the optimization process to handle
increasingly more complex problems in a realistic amount of time.
6.8
Distributed optimization over multiple nodes
6.8.1
Parallel island model of genetic algorithms
Genetic algorithms can be eﬀiciently parallelized further on multiple nodes by using a
model known as island model of genetic algorithms. According to Whitley et al. (1998)
and Cantú-Paz et al. (1998), the island model is a variation of the standard genetic al-
gorithm that involves running multiple sub-populations of individuals in parallel. These
sub-populations, or ”islands,” are evolved independently and periodically exchange indi-
viduals with each other to promote genetic diversity and exploration of the search space.
The basic idea behind the island model is to simulate a scenario in nature where a pop-
ulation of a species is split into multiple isolated sub-populations due to geographical
barriers. In such a scenario, the sub-populations evolve independently over time, adapt-
ing to their local environment and developing distinct genetic characteristics. However,
occasional migration of individuals between the sub-populations can introduce new ge-
netic material, leading to increased diversity and potentially better adaptation.
In the context of genetic algorithms, the islands represent sub-populations of individ-
uals that are evolved using a standard genetic algorithm, for instance the GA with
k-tournament selection, presented earlier in this chapter. Each island has its own set
50
==PAGE:57==
of parameters, such as population size and mutation rate, that are chosen based on the
specific problem being solved and the available computing resources.
Figure 6.4: Diagram of island model of genetic algorithm with 4 islands and a fully-
connected topology.
Parallel Island Models have often been reported to display better search performance
than serial single population models, both in terms of the quality of the solution found
as well as reduced effort as measured in terms of total number of evaluations corre-
sponding to points sampled in the search space (Whitley et al. (1998)). One reason
for the improved search quality is that the various ”islands” maintain some degree of
independence and thus explore different regions of the search space while at the same
time sharing information by means of migration. This can also be seen as a means of
sustaining genetic diversity. It is especially important in complex problems where the
search space is large, and there are many local optima that can trap the algorithm. By
allowing the islands to evolve independently and occasionally exchange individuals, the
algorithm can escape from local optima and discover new regions of the search space.
Although parallel GAs based on island model are very promising in terms of the gains
in performance, they are also more complex than their serial counterparts. According
to Cantú-Paz et al. (1998), the migration of individuals from one island to another is
controlled by several factors:
• Topology: The topology that defines the connections between the islands. For
instance, islands can be connected in a ring topology, fully-connected topology or
hub topology. Each topology may promote different levels of mixing of individuals,
but also can have different communication costs which can make the algorithm
slower or faster.
• Migration interval: The number of iterations, generations or seconds between
migrations of individuals between islands. The parameter impacts the population
diversity among islands, as well as the communication cost.
51
==PAGE:58==
• Migration size: The number of individuals that migrate from one island to
another. Similarly to the migration interval, this parameter effects the population
diversity among islands and the communication cost.
• Migration mode: Whether the migration occurs synchronously or asynchronously
between islands.
• Migration policy: The policy that determines which solutions are migrated to
other island. For instance, solutions can be picked randomly to migrate to other is-
lands or may be picked based on their fitness value, allowing only the best solutions
in the population to migrate.
Overall, the parallel island model of genetic algorithm is well-suited for solving complex
combinatorial problems like optimizing a schedule for ADAS systems for several reasons:
• Exploration of diverse solutions: The island model can be used to promote
exploration of diverse solutions across islands, which can help prevent the algorithm
from getting stuck in local optima (Whitley et al. (1998)).
• Eﬀicient use of resources: The parallel island model allows the algorithm to
make eﬀicient use of available computing resources, because of its inherent high
parallelisation eﬀiciency that can be precisely controlled by changing the migra-
tion size and interval. For example, increasing the migration interval reduces the
overhead associated with synchronizing the nodes and communication, effectively
increasing parallel eﬀiciency.
• Scalability: The parallel island model can be scaled up or down to handle different
problem sizes by increasing or decreasing the number of nodes used.
6.8.2
Implementation of island model using Open MPI
The parallel island model of genetic algorithm can be eﬀiciently implemented using Open
MPI to run on multiple nodes. Open MPI is a popular message-passing interface (MPI)
library that enables communication between processes running on different nodes in a
parallel computing environment (Kirk and Wen-Mei (2016) chapter 19.3).
To implement the parallel island model using Open MPI, each island can be run as a sep-
arate MPI process on a different node. The migration of individuals between islands can
be accomplished using MPI communication routines, such as MPI_Send and MPI_Recv
which effectively transfer data from one node to another over the network.
This thesis presents a parallel implementation of a genetic algorithm based on the island
model, capable of running on multiple computers simultaneously. The implementation
was developed using OpenMPI. A genetic algorithm with k-tournament selection, as de-
scribed in sections 6.2.2 and 6.7, is utilized to optimize solutions within a node, utilizing
52
==PAGE:59==
all available cores. The island model described in this section is used to migrate solu-
tions between nodes, further distributing the computation. Each node has its own MPI
process and behave as separate islands, with their own population. The topology of the
island model is a fully-connected topology where each island migrates solutions to every
other island. The migration is performed synchronously at regular intervals, measured
in seconds. To maintain a low selective pressure and prevent the optimization process
from getting stuck in a local minimum, solutions are selected for migration completely
randomly. The following pseudo-code shows how the GA with k-tournament selection
(algorithm 4) is extended with the island model, with the added code highlighted in
yellow:
Algorithm 6 Genetic algorithm with k-tournament selection and island model
Input: maxIterations, population, populationSize, migrationInterval
1: i ←0
2: father ←copy(population[getGoodChromosomeID()])
3: mother ←copy(population[getGoodChromosomeID()])
4: startTime ←getTime()
5: while i < maxIterations do
6:
mutationRate ←mutationSchedule(
i
maxIteration)
7:
roundCount ←roundSchedule(
i
maxIterations)
8:
9:
son ←crossingOver(mother, father)
10:
son ←mutate(son, mutationRate)
11:
sonFitness ←computeFitness(son)
12:
13:
mutex.lock()
14:
victimId ←getBadChromosomeID()
15:
population[victimId] ←son
16:
populationFitness[victimId] ←sonFitness
17:
father ←copy(population[getGoodChromosomeID()])
18:
mother ←copy(population[getGoodChromosomeID()])
19:
20:
elapsedTime = getTime() −startTime
21:
if elapsedTime >= migrationInterval then
22:
migrate()
▷Sends and receives chromosomes
23:
startTime ←getTime()
24:
end if
25:
mutex.unlock();
53
==PAGE:60==
26:
27:
i ←i + 1;
28: end while
The modified algorithm checks if the time elapsed is equal to the migration interval and
in that case transfers and receives choromosomes between other islands using MPI_Send
and MPI_Recv functions provided by OpenMPI. The optimization process ends when
a specific amount of time has elapsed.
54
==PAGE:61==
CHAPTER 7
Results
7.1
Introduction to results
In this chapter, the implementation of the solution proposed in this thesis is assessed
using multiple task-sets to evaluate its ability to create schedules with high schedula-
bility rates and low response times, integrating TT (Time-Triggered) and ET (Event-
Triggered) tasks on multi-core systems. The proposed solution is also compared to other
existing hierarchical scheduling approaches.
Firstly, sections 7.1.2 and 7.1.3 introduce the hierarchical scheduling approaches that
are used as comparative benchmarks in the experiments. The methods compared are
the following: Token bucket method (thesis proposed solution), Simple polling and Ad-
vanced polling.
Tn section 7.2, the methods are evaluated and compared on task-sets with a single-core
target system. This approach focuses on assessing the algorithm’s ability to effectively
integrate TT and ET tasks, while eliminating the problem of finding an optimal task-to-
core mapping. The schedulability rate, execution time, and worst-case response time of
the generated solutions of the various scheduling algorithms are analyzed and compared.
In section 7.3, the methods are compared on task-sets with an 8-core target system. The
effectiveness of the proposed genetic algorithm in solving the task-to-core mapping prob-
lem is demonstrated. Once again, the algorithms are compared in terms of schedulability
rate, execution time, and worst-case response time of the solutions in this context.
Finally, in sections 7.6.1 and 7.6.2, experiments were conducted to evaluate the effec-
tiveness of parallelizing the proposed genetic algorithm on multiple cores, using multi-
threading, and on multiple nodes using the island model implemented with Open-MPI.
7.1.1
Token Bucket method
The Token Bucket method proposed in this thesis is a hierarchical approach for integrat-
ing TT and ET tasks. This two-level scheduling technique involves first scheduling TT
tasks using the Earliest Deadline First (EDF) algorithm, followed by placing idle slots
in the schedule at a specific frequency using the Token Bucket scheduling algorithm (see
section 5.1.5). The second level of the hierarchy involves using a preemptive scheduler
with fixed priorities to handle ET tasks within the allocated idle slots. This approach ef-
fectively accommodates both TT and ET tasks in the schedule, while maintaining system
55
==PAGE:62==
performance and schedulability. The schedulability analysis of ET tasks is performed
using the algorithm presented in section 5.2.5 which build upon the work of Almeida
(2004) and Shin and Lee (2004). This algorithm computes the worst-case response time
of ET tasks by eﬀiciently identifying the most unfavorable arrival time for each task and
simulating the handling of ET tasks by the system using the supply function Zs(t). A
potential drawback of the Token Bucket method is the need to determine the token rate
parameter and the initial bucket parameter. To address this challenge, the following
experiments sections employs genetic algorithms to optimize the token bucket param-
eters. In the multi-core experiments, the task-to-core mapping problem is also solved
using the proposed genetic algorithms, further enhancing the method’s overall eﬀicacy
in a multi-core setting.
7.1.2
Simple polling
The Simple Polling method, as described by Finzi et al. (2022), is a hierarchical approach
derived from the work of Almeida (2004) and Shin and Lee (2004), that offers a simple
and computationally eﬀicient technique for integrating time-triggered (TT) and event-
triggered (ET) tasks. The main idea of the algorithm is that each ET task is managed
by a polling task, which is a periodic TT task characterized by a budget and a period.
The algorithm assigns each ET task τi ∈T ET to its corresponding TT polling task τ p
i
that will handle it at run-time. The schedule is synthetized by scheduling polling tasks
together with other Time-triggered tasks using Earliest Deadline First. The period and
budget of each polling task can be easily pre-computed. When the generated schedule
table is known to be strictly periodic and the deadline is equal to the period, the period
of τ p
i can be set to T p
i = Di, and the computation time (or duration) can be set to
dp
i = di. In the case of non-strictly periodic slot placement and arbitrary ET deadlines,
over-sampling is required to place the polling task in the static schedule table. The
over-sampling period Tp can be calculated using the availability function, resulting in
T p
i = ⌊Di+di
2
⌋. For sporadic ET tasks with arbitrary deadlines, the polling task budget
must consider the number of previous job releases within any polling period, leading to
dp
i = ⌈
T p
i
Ti ⌉· di.
The Simple Polling approach is easy to implement and it is fast but it also has some
drawbacks. In particular, it has low schedulability for tasks with short deadlines and
long minimum inter-arrival time (MIT)/period or long deadlines and short MIT/period,
resulting in significant over-utilization and often unlikely to yield a feasible TT schedule.
To synthetize schedules for multi-core systems, in the following experiments the Simple
polling approach for integrating TT and ET tasks is paired with the genetic algorithm
for solving the task-to-core mapping problem.
56
==PAGE:63==
7.1.3
Advanced Polling
The Advanced Polling method, as described by Almeida (2004) and Shin and Lee (2004),
is a hierarchical scheduling approach comprising two levels: a second-level fixed-priority
dispatcher for ET tasks and a time-triggered dispatcher at the lowest level.
In this
method, ET tasks are managed by polling servers, which are periodic TT tasks charac-
terized by a budget and a period. The polling server’s budget represents the amount of
computation time allocated for handling the ET tasks within a given period. When an
ET task arrives, it is placed in the second-level fixed-priority queue. The polling server
then executes the highest-priority ET task in the queue, consuming the server’s budget
in the process. Once the server’s budget is depleted, it cannot execute any more ET tasks
until the start of its next period. The server’s budget replenishes at the beginning of
each period, allowing it to resume processing ET tasks. Polling servers can be seamlessly
integrated with other TT tasks in the scheduling process by employing algorithms such
as Earliest Deadline First (EDF) and Least Laxity First (LLF) to synthesize a schedule.
The schedulability analysis of ET tasks is performed using the method described in sec-
tion 5.2.2, which computes the worst-case response time of a task τi ∈τ ET of priority
level i by determining the earliest instant at which the maximum demand of level i Hi(t)
matches the least server supply lbsf(t), as detailed in Almeida (2004) and Shin and Lee
(2004).
One drawback of the the Advanced Polling method is that there is an additional challenge
of determining the polling server parameters, also known as the server design problem.
The polling server’s period and budget need to be carefully optimized to ensure eﬀicient
handling of ET tasks while maintaining system schedulability.
In the following experiments, each target core has a single polling server, and the polling
server parameters are optimized using genetic algorithms. For the multi-core experi-
ments, the task-to-core mapping is solved with genetic algorithms, while the integration
of TT and ET tasks is handled using the Advanced Polling method.
7.2
Single-core schedule synthesis experiment
This experiment aims to evaluate the effectiveness of three different scheduling methods
in generating valid schedulable solutions and to compare their execution times. The
methods are applied on 3400 task-sets, each consisting of 30 constrained-deadline Time-
Triggered (TT) tasks and 20 arbitrary-deadline Event-Triggered (ET) tasks running on
a single-core target system. Each task has a period of either 2000, 3000 or 4000 micro-
ticks. Other tasks parameters, such as duration and deadline were randomly generate
to utilize a fixed percentage of resources. The mapping problem of tasks to cores is not
considered in this experiment.
The Token Bucket and Advanced Polling methods have their algorithm parameters opti-
mized using the genetic algorithm presented in the thesis. The Simple polling approach
57
==PAGE:64==
requires no optimization since the Polling tasks parameters can be directly computed
as explained in 7.1.2. The genetic algorithm is configured with a population size of
N = 50, a selection probability of 1.0, a linearly increasing round count schedule of
k(t0) = 1+(0.05·N −1)·t0, and a linearly decreasing mutation schedule of µ(t0) = 1−t0.
The optimization process is executed for a total of 2500 iterations on each task set. For
each group of task-sets with the same utilization U TT and U ET, the schedulability per-
centage of each method is calculated.
Figure 7.1: Schedulability comparison of the three scheduling methods on task-sets
with a single-core target system.
Figure 7.1 presents the results of the experiment in 7 graphs. It can be observed that
both the Token Bucket and Advanced Polling methods exhibit high schedulability rates,
which decrease slightly for more challenging task-sets with higher utilization rates. The
Token Bucket scheduling method demonstrates slightly better performance overall, with
an average schedulability of 96.0% compared to Advanced Polling which shows an av-
erage schedulability of 95.0%. As expected, Simple Polling underperforms compared to
the other two methods, especially when the utilization U TT and U ET increases. The
observed average schedulability of the Simple polling approach is 56.7%.
Figure 7.2 shows the recorded execution times for all three methods during the experi-
ment. It can be observed that the Token Bucket method consistently has lower execution
times compared to the Advanced polling algorithm, which is on average more than 3
times slower. This result can be attributed to the fact that Advanced Polling integrates
Polling servers into the schedule, which have their own periods. Consequently, the total
hyper-period of the task-set can change and increase during the optimization process, re-
sulting in longer schedules and, as a consequence, longer execution times required for the
schedule synthesis process. In contrast, the Token Bucket scheduling algorithm does not
58
==PAGE:65==
introduce new periodic tasks in the task-set, so the schedule length remains unchanged
during the optimization process, which makes the algorithm faster. The Simple polling
approach is much faster than the other approaches in the single-core setting, since the
schedule can be computed in one step and does not require any iterative optimization
process like the other two methods.
Figure 7.2: Execution time comparison of the three scheduling methods on task-sets
with a single-core target system.
Another factor that should be compared other than the schedulability rate is the quality
of the synthetized schedules itself. Schedules that have lower average worst-case response
time (WCRT) for both TT and ET are better since they have improved responsiveness.
When comparing the mean WCRT value of the solutions generate by the 3 methods
on all 3400 considered task-sets it can be observed that the Token bucket approach
generates solution that have 9.8% lower mean worst-case response time compared to the
Advanced Polling method and 74.7% less compared to the Simple Polling scheduling
algorithm. The plots 7.3(a) and 7.3(b) show two examples of normalized worst-case
response time of solutions generated by the 3 methods on 2 specific task-sets.
59
==PAGE:66==
((a))
((b))
Figure 7.3
The results demonstrates that the Token Bucket scheduling algorithm is able to find bet-
ter solutions which can be attributed to the more precise placement pattern of idle slots
given by the Token Bucket algorithm (see section 5.1.5) and by the improved schedula-
bility analysis using the supply function Zs(t) (see section 5.2.5) which is less pessimistic
compared to the method used by the Advanced Polling algorithm.
Overall, the experiment demonstrates that the proposed Token Bucket scheduling method
exhibits both high schedulability rates and low execution times in the single-core problem
setting. This superior performance positions it as a more effective solution compared to
the other two scheduling algorithms under evaluation. The schedules synthetized using
this methodology have lower worst-case response time on average, making it a better
option for integrating TT and ET tasks in time-critical systems.
7.3
Multi-core schedule synthesis experiment
In this section, the effectiveness of the three scheduling methods is evaluated in a multi-
core environment. The experiment is performed on task-sets running on an 8-core target
system. Each task-set consists of 240 constrained-deadline Time-Triggered (TT) tasks
and 160 arbitrary-deadline Event-Triggered (ET) tasks. Each task has a period of either
2000, 3000 or 4000 micro-ticks. Other tasks parameters, such as duration and deadline
were randomly generate to utilize a fixed percentage of resources. The Token Bucket
and Advanced Polling methods again have their algorithm parameters optimized using
the genetic algorithm, as outlined in section 7.2. For all the 3 methods, the partition-
ing problem of finding an good task-to-core mapping is solved using genetic algorithms.
The initial mappings are generated using the ”delay minimizing” heuristic presented in
section 7.4. The schedulability percentage of each method is computed for each group
of task-sets with the same utilization U TT and U ET.
60
==PAGE:67==
Figure 7.4 presents the results of the multi-core experiment. It can be observed that
the Token Bucket scheduling method significantly outperforms the other two methods
in terms of schedulability. The Token Bucket method achieves an impressive average
schedulability rate of 97.1%, whereas the Advanced Polling method only reaches an aver-
age schedulability of 80.7%. The Simple Polling method shows the lowest performance,
with an average schedulability rate of 39.5%. Interestingly, the Token Bucket method
displays a slightly higher schedulability rate in the multi-core setting compared to the
single-core setting.
This might seem counter-intuitive due to the significantly larger
optimization search space in a multi-core context. However, this improvement can be
attributed to the increased degrees of freedom available in the multi-core setting. While
the complexity of the task mapping and scheduling problem increases with more target
cores, the optimization algorithm also gains more flexibility to generate diverse solutions,
thereby enhancing the schedulability across all target cores.
Figure 7.4: Schedulability comparison of the three scheduling methods on task-sets
with a multi-core target system.
Figure 7.5 shows the execution times of the three scheduling methods.
The Token
Bucket method exhibits the lowest execution times, on average 1.319 seconds, which is
significantly faster than the Advanced Polling method with an average execution time
of 2.263 seconds. The Simple Polling method, which was the fastest in the single-core
experiment, has the longest execution time in the multi-core setting, with an average of
4.135 seconds. This increase in execution time for the Simple Polling method is caused
by the added iterative optimization needed to solve the task-to-core mapping problem.
61
==PAGE:68==
Figure 7.5: Execution time comparison of the three scheduling methods on task-sets
with a multi-core target system.
When comparing the quality of the schedules, specifically the worst-case response time
(WCRT), the Token Bucket approach again outperforms the other two methods. On
average, the schedules generated by the Token Bucket method have a 10.7% lower mean
worst-case response time compared to the Advanced Polling method and a substantial
76.2% less compared to the Simple Polling scheduling algorithm.
Overall, the multi-core experiment validates the results of the single-core experiment,
showing that the Token Bucket scheduling method is superior in terms of schedulability,
execution time, and quality of schedules. These results also highlight the eﬀicacy of the
proposed genetic algorithm in adapting existing scheduling methodologies, such as the
hierarchical method evaluated in these experiments, to a multi-core target architecture.
Notably, the Advanced Polling method exhibits high schedulability rates in multi-core
settings, which could be further improved by increasing the number of iterations used
for the optimization process. These experiments indicate that the proposed methods
are successful in integrating TT and ET tasks on multi-core time-critical systems, such
as Advanced Driver Assistance Systems (ADAS). The findings offer promising prospects
for the eﬀicient management and optimization of such complex systems.
7.4
Evaluation of Mapping Initialization Methods
This section presents an experimental comparison between different mapping initial-
ization methods for task-to-core assignments. For the schedule synthesis process and
integration of TT and ET tasks, the Token Bucket scheduling algorithm was used. A
task-set composed of 240 Time-Triggered (TT) tasks and 160 Event-Triggered (ET)
62
==PAGE:69==
tasks, targeting an 8-core system, was utilized for this experiment. The primary objec-
tive was to optimize the schedule for handling the given task-set while initializing the
starting population of solutions using the proposed task-to-core mapping initialization
methods.
The experiment evaluated the performance of these methods based on two key metrics:
the speed of convergence and the normalized mean worst-case response time (WCRT).
((a)) Convergence speed of the mapping ini-
tialization methods.
((b))
Final
solution’s
normalized
mean
WCRT
for
each
mapping
initialization
method.
Figure 7.6: Comparison of the mapping initialization methods based on convergence
speed and normalized mean WCRT.
Figure 7.6(a) compares the convergence speed of each method over 15000 iterations of
optimization. The results are average over 20 optimization runs. The delay minimiza-
tion method converges rapidly to a stable solution, outperforming the other methods in
terms of convergence speed.
Figure 7.6(b) shows the normalized mean WCRT of the final solution after 15000 iter-
ations for each mapping initialization method. Again, the delay minimization method
achieves the lowest value, indicating the highest quality of schedules in terms of WCRT.
These results highlight the importance of properly selecting an mapping initialization
method. In this setting, the results indicate the superiority of the delay minimization
method as an effective initialization strategy for task-to-core mapping. Its capacity to
quickly converge to high-quality solutions that reduce the worst-case response time of all
tasks makes it a particularly good choice for the initialization of mapping in multi-core
scheduling problems.
63
==PAGE:70==
7.5
Comparing schedulability analysis with lbsf(t) and with Z(t)
This section provides a comparative analysis between the schedulability of ET tasks
using the lower-bound supply function (lbsf(t)), as detailed in section 5.2.2, and the
schedulability using the exact supply function ZS(t), as explained in sections 5.2.4 and
5.2.5. The comparison focuses on the rate of schedulability of the generated solutions and
the execution time. To ensure a good comparison, schedules were generated from 3400
task-sets using the Advanced Polling scheduling algorithm. The algorithm employed
either lbsf(t) or ZS(t) for the ET tasks schedulability analysis. The experiment mir-
rored the conditions of the prior ones, running the task-sets on an 8-core target system.
Each task-set comprised 240 constrained-deadline Time-Triggered (TT) tasks and 160
arbitrary-deadline Event-Triggered (ET) tasks. Each task has a period of either 2000,
3000 or 4000 micro-ticks. Other tasks parameters, such as duration and deadline were
randomly generate to utilize a fixed percentage of resources. The task-to-core mapping
problem was solved using a genetic algorithm as outlined in the experiment in section
7.2. Figure 7.7 shows the schedulability of both experimental setups while generating
schedules from task-sets with varying utilizations U TT and U ET.
Figure 7.7
As it can be observed in figure 7.7, the schedulability rate of both methodologies is
very similar with no clear indication that one algorithm is better than the other. The
results show that, in many cases, the pessimism given by the lbsf(t) is negligible and
does not impact the schedulability rate or the worst-case response time of the tasks in
the generated solutions. However, in specific task-sets with small task periods and low
micro-tick granularity, the pessimism of the algorithm may affect the outcomes.
To investigate this, the experiment is repeated on a different task-set composed of tasks
with small periods. The period values assumed by the tasks are either 20, 40, 80, 160
64
==PAGE:71==
or 320. Figure 7.8 shows the results of the experiments. It is clear that in this setting,
using the schedulability analysis based on ZS(t) produces better reasults in terms of
schedulability rate. The solution generated are also better in terms of responsiveness,
with a 12.68% lower worst case response time compared to the approach using the lbsf(t).
Figure 7.8
Overall the experiments shows that the proposed schedulability analysis works and pro-
duces similar or better results to the one based on the lbsf(t), supporting the arguments
presented in section 5.2.3.
Another factor worth to compare is the execution time of these schedulability analysis
algorithms. In the following experiment, tree different schedulability analysis algorithms
for ET tasks are compared in terms of execution time. The algorithms studied are the
following:
• EDP using lbsf(t) as outlined in section 5.2.2.
• Unoptimized EDP using Zs(t) as detailed in section 5.2.4.
• Optimized EDP using Zs(t), as descibed in section 5.2.5.
To conduct this experiment, a singular taskset consisting of 20 ET tasks, allocated on a
single pooling server, was employed. Each algorithm was run 100 times on this taskset,
and the average execution time was then registered. The experiment utilized varying
pooling server parameters values for the budget and period, as the algorithm’s speed
is influenced by the shape of the supply function. A pooling server with a period of 5
and a budget that ranged from 1 to 4 was selected, thereby resulting in four distinct
experimental setups for every method. All tests were performed on a 2022 MacBook Air
65
==PAGE:72==
equipped with an M2 chip and 8GB of RAM. The experimental results, presented in the
table below, indicate the execution time of each algorithm in microseconds:
Table 7.1: Execution time of each algorithm given a specific server setup
Experiment
B=1 T=5
B=2 T=5
B=3 T=5
B=4 T=5
EDP lbsf(t)
181 µs
52 µs
45 µs
43 µs
EDP Zs(t) (optimized)
839 µs
64 µs
47 µs
38 µs
EDP Zs(t)
488922 µs
104211 µs
29696 µs
16530 µs
The data in table 7.1, shows that the optimized EDP implementation using the Zs(t)
supply function exhibits an execution time similar to the method using the lbsf(t). Inter-
estingly, the unoptimized version is, on average, 400-600 times slower than its optimized
counterpart.
These results show the effectiveness and speed of the optimization strategy proposed in
section 5.2.5, thereby validating the eﬀiciency of the introduced schedulability analysis
algorithm. Although the first experiment does not necessarily indicate a significant im-
provement in task schedulability or response time due to the already minimal pessimism
associated with EDF using lbsf(t), the value of the proposed method’s flexibility should
not be overlooked.
The new method can be seamlessly integrated with any technique that ensures temporal
isolation between Time-Triggered (TT) and Event-Triggered (ET) tasks, thus not being
confined to just polling server methodologies. The proposed Token Bucket algorithm,
for instance, generates a supply function where it is challenging to establish a linear
lower bound without resulting in excessive pessimism of the analysis. Therefore, when
combined with the proposed temporal isolation method, the new schedulability analy-
sis enhances the system’s overall effectiveness significantly. This combination offers a
valuable solution.
7.6
Scalability experiments
This section investigates the scalability of genetic algorithms with k-tournament selec-
tion for optimizing schedules in multi-core ADAS systems. The objective is to evaluate
the performance improvement when distributing the computation over multiple cores
and over multiple nodes during the optimization process. The experimental setup, re-
sults, and implications of the findings for large and complex problems are presented and
discussed.
66
==PAGE:73==
7.6.1
Distributing optimization over multiple cores
This subsection delves into an experiment designed to evaluate the impact of distributing
the optimization process over multiple cores and the resulting performance improvements.
The experiment was conducted using a task-set composed of 240 Time-Triggered tasks
and 160 Event-Triggered tasks, targeting a system with 8 cores. A Mac Mini with an
8-core M2 CPU and 16 GB of RAM served as the hardware for this experiment.
Figures 7.9(a) and 7.9(b) display the results of the experiment, illustrating how dis-
tributing the computation over multiple cores during the optimization process leads to
a significant speedup. In particular, Figure 7.9(a) demonstrates that as the number of
cores used increases, the execution time decreases. For instance, when a single core is
used, the execution time required for the optimization process is approximately 30.8 sec-
onds, while when using 8 cores, its about 5.7 seconds on average. Figure 7.9(b) reveals
the speedup resulting from using multiple cores, showcasing a speedup of up to 5.3x
using 8 cores. Figure 7.10 depicts how the parallel eﬀiciency decreases as the number of
cores used increases. For example, when the optimization is performed using 8 cores, the
observed speedup is 5.3x instead of an optimal speedup of 8x, which means the parallel
eﬀiciency is 66.7%.
((a))
((b))
Figure 7.9: Plot on the left (a) shows how the execution time is reduced by increasing
the number of cores, while the plot on the right (b) shows the speed-up given by each
number of cores used.
67
==PAGE:74==
Figure 7.10: Parallel eﬀiciency given the number of cores used
The ineﬀiciency results from the overhead caused by thread synchronization, which is nec-
essary to prevent simultaneous memory writes from multiple threads. For more complex
problems, parallel eﬀiciency improves, since the delay caused by thread synchronization
becomes negligible compared to the time required to evaluate, combine, and mutate
chromosomes.
In conclusion, parallelizing genetic algorithms with k-tournament selection using multi-
threading enables faster computation and scalability.
This is evidenced by the sub-
stantial speedup achieved by distributing the computation over multiple cores, making
it an eﬀicient optimization process for large and complex problems such as optimizing
schedules for multi-core ADAS systems.
7.6.2
Distributing optimization over multiple nodes
The following experiment demonstrates the speedup and scalability given by parallelizing
over multiple nodes, using the proposed genetic algorithm with the island model of
genetic algorithms described in section 6.8. The task-set used to perform the experiment
is composed of 240 Time-Triggered tasks and 160 Event-Triggered tasks and has a target
system with 8 cores. The goal of each experiment is to optimize the schedule given the
task-set with a time limit of 40 seconds. Migration between nodes happens every 7
seconds. During each migration event, 20% of the total population of each island is
transferred to other islands. The experiments were performed on two nodes:
• Node 1: Macbook Air with an 8-core M2 CPU and 8 GB of RAM.
• Node 2: Mac Mini with an 8-core M2 CPU and 16 GB of RAM.
Three experiments are shown and compared:
• Experiment 1: The optimization process is run only on Node 1.
• Experiment 2: The optimization process is run only on Node 2.
68
==PAGE:75==
• Experiment 3: The optimization process is distributed over Node 1 and Node 2.
((a))
((b))
Figure 7.11: Plot on the left (a) shows how distributing the computation leads to an
increase in iterations per second and plot on the right (b) shows how this results in
finding better solutions and increased convergence speed.
As shown in Figure 7.11(a) on the left, when the optimization program is distributed
over both nodes, it is able to perform roughly twice the amount of iterations (evalua-
tion, mutation, and crossover) within 40 seconds of optimization. This results in a high
parallel eﬀiciency of 97.5%, which can be further improved by increasing the migration
interval or reducing the migration size, effectively reducing the overhead caused by com-
munication and synchronization between nodes. This demonstrates the eﬀiciency and
scalability of the optimization methodology.
Figure 7.11(b) displays the normalized mean worst-case response time (WCRT) of the
best solution found by the optimization process over time. Note that the plots are av-
eraged over 10 runs. It can be observed that when the computation is distributed over
both nodes, the optimization process converges faster and finds better solutions within
the same amount of time compared to optimizing only using node 1 or 2. This result
demonstrates that the increased performance achieved with the island model translates
to finding better solutions within the given amount of time.
In conclusion, the experiments presented in this section provide evidence of the effec-
tiveness of a parallel genetic algorithm for optimizing schedules for multi-core systems
integrating Time-Triggered and Event-Triggered tasks. By distributing the optimiza-
tion process over two nodes, the algorithm demonstrated a speed-up of roughly two
times the amount of iterations in the same time, with a high parallel eﬀiciency of 97.5%.
69
==PAGE:76==
Additionally, the optimized solutions found by the distributed algorithm showed faster
convergence and better results in the same amount of time compared to optimizing only
using one node. These results highlight the scalability and eﬀiciency of the proposed
optimization methodology.
70
==PAGE:77==
CHAPTER 8
Conclusion
This thesis has provided an exploration into the integration of Time-Triggered and Event-
Triggered tasks within Advanced Driver Assistance Systems on multi-core architectures.
The aim was to address the computational requirements of ADAS systems and to ensure
that the timing and safety requirements are met. A novel scheduling approach was de-
veloped, which involved a hierarchical scheduling method integrating TT and ET tasks,
as well as a highly parallelizable genetic algorithm for optimizing task-to-core mapping.
This thesis showcased how a combination of Earliest Deadline First (EDF) and a Token
Bucket algorithm could handle TT tasks and establish temporal isolation between TT
and ET tasks. The proposed approach was shown to be more eﬀicient than conventional
periodic polling server approaches.
In addition, an alternative method for schedulability analysis for ET tasks was proposed.
This method used the exact supply function given by the schedule to determine the
schedulability of tasks, thereby eliminating the pessimism of the conventional method
and enhancing flexibility without sacrificing speed.
Furthermore, the genetic algorithm proposed to solve the task-to-core mapping problem
was shown to be effective and highly scalable. By distributing computations across mul-
tiple cores and nodes, the algorithm was able to optimize the task-to-core mapping and
parameters for the schedule synthesis process in a significantly eﬀicient manner.
The experimental results presented in the final chapter confirmed the effectiveness of
the proposed solutions. The novel hierarchical scheduling approach combined with the
genetic algorithm outperformed similar hierarchical methods in terms of schedulability
rates and worst-case response times of the tasks of the generated schedules. The exper-
iments also show that the proposed genetic algorithm can be effectively used to extend
existing approaches that combine TT and ET tasks to the multi-core setting, by eﬀi-
ciently solving the task-to-core mapping problem.
In conclusion, this thesis has made contribution to the scheduling of tasks in ADAS
systems on multi-core architectures by proposing a solution that effectively addresses
the computational requirements of ADAS systems.
71
==PAGE:78==
CHAPTER 9
Future works
The work carried out in this thesis has demonstrated promising results in integrating
Time-Triggered and Event-Triggered tasks in Advanced Driver Assistance Systems using
multi-core architectures. However, there are still several opportunities of future work
that could extend and improve the proposed scheduling methodology.
This work primarily focused on guaranteeing schedulability and improving worst-case
response times of tasks. An interesting extension would be to investigate the impact of
task jitter on the proposed scheduling method. Task jitter, which is the variability in
the execution time of a task, could impact the performance of TT and ET tasks. In-
corporating jitter analysis into the scheduling framework could make the solution more
robust and versatile.
Another potential research direction is to incorporate the concept of task chains in the
proposed model.
This involves accounting for temporal dependencies between tasks.
Currently, the model assumes that all tasks are independent of each other, which may
not always be the case, particularly in complex ADAS systems where tasks are often
interdependent.
Additionally, although the focus of this research was on static scheduling of tasks, future
work could explore the implementation of dynamic scheduling approaches. This could
be especially beneficial in managing ET tasks, whose arrival and execution times can
vary significantly.
A key limitation of the current solution is the potential waste of
computational resources during periods of low ET task demand. Since a static schedule
is considered, resources are dedicated to handle ET tasks based on worst-case assump-
tions, which may not be fully utilized when the number of real-time ET tasks is less
than anticipated. To address this issue, the proposed method could be extended with
dynamic scheduling methods, which can adapt resource allocation based on real-time
demands.
Finally, a significant area for future investigation lies in exploring the utilization of
Graphics Processing Units (GPUs) for the parallelization of the proposed schedule syn-
thesis and analysis algorithm. Due to their architecture, GPUs are highly suited for
executing parallel operations, offering often substantial computational speed-ups com-
pared to CPUs.
The inherent parallelism of genetic algorithms could be effectively
exploited on GPUs to accelerate the optimization process. This could lead to more eﬀi-
cient handling of larger search spaces and the generation of better quality solutions in
less time.
72
==PAGE:79==
CHAPTER 10
List of symbols
τ
Task-set of all TT and ET tasks
τ TT
Set of TT tasks
τ ET
Set of TT tasks
tTT
h
TT tasks hyper-period (schedule length)
tET
h
ET tasks hyper-period
γ
Set of core ID values
K
Number of cores in target system (K = |γ|)
T TT
i
Time-Triggered task period
DTT
i
Time-Triggered task relative deadline
dTT
i
Time-Triggered task duration (or cost)
pTT
i
Time-Triggered task priority
RTT
i
Time-Triggered task worst case response time
T ET
i
Event-Triggered task inter-arrival time
DET
i
Event-Triggered task relative deadline
dET
i
Event-Triggered task duration (or cost)
pET
i
Event-Triggered task priority
RET
i
Event-Triggered task worst case response time
T S
Polling Server period
b
Polling Server budget (or duration)
DS
Polling Server relative deadline
ft
Token rate for Token-Bucket algorithm
It
Initial bucket value for Token-Bucket algorithm
B
Burst size of Token-Bucket algorithm
θ
Current bucket content
ui
TT schedule validity for i-th core
vi
ET schedule validity for i-th core
lbsf(t)
Lower bound supply function
Hi(t)
Demand function of level-i
ZS(t)
Supply function
W(t0, t1)
Cumulative supply in window of time
Rw
Current known worst-case response time
Hw
Demand associated to worst-case response time
ωTT
Weight factor for TT tasks response time
ωET
Weight factor for ET tasks response time
λTT
Penalty factor for TT schedule not valid
λET
Penalty factor for ET schedule not valid
73
==PAGE:80==
f(x)
Fitness function
f1(x)
First term of the fitness function evaluating the responsiveness
f2(x)
Second term of the fitness function evaluating the schedulability
µ
Mutation rate
k
Round counts (or tournament counts)
Uk
Utilization of k-th core by TT tasks
Li
Laxity or slack time of i-th TT task
74
==PAGE:81==
Bibliography
L. Almeida. Scheduling within temporal partitions: response-time analysis and server
design. pages 95–103, 09 2004. doi: 10.1145/1017753.1017772. URL https://dl.acm.
org/doi/10.1145/1017753.1017772.
M. Becker, D. Dasari, B. Nicolic, B. Akesson, V. Nélis, and T. Nolte. Contention-free
execution of automotive applications on a clustered many-core platform. In 2016 28th
Euromicro Conference on Real-Time Systems (ECRTS), pages 14–24. IEEE, 2016.
T. D. Braun, H. J. Siegel, N. Beck, L. L. Bölöni, M. Maheswaran, A. I. Reuther, J. P.
Robertson, M. D. Theys, B. Yao, D. Hensgen, and R. F. Freund. A comparison of
eleven static heuristics for mapping a class of independent tasks onto heterogeneous
distributed computing systems. Journal of Parallel and Distributed Computing, 61(6):
810–837, 2001. ISSN 0743-7315. doi: https://doi.org/10.1006/jpdc.2000.1714. URL
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0743731500917143.
K. A. Brookhuis, D. De Waard, and W. H. Janssen. Behavioural impacts of advanced
driver assistance systems–an overview. European Journal of Transport and Infrastruc-
ture Research, 1(3), 2001.
E. Cantú-Paz et al. A survey of parallel genetic algorithms. Calculateurs paralleles,
reseaux et systems repartis, 10(2):141–171, 1998.
P. Eles, A. Doboli, P. Pop, and Z. Peng. Scheduling with bus access optimization for
distributed embedded systems. IEEE Transactions on Very Large Scale Integration
(VLSI) Systems, 8(5):472–491, 2000.
A. Finzi, S. S. Craciunas, and M. Boyer. A real-time calculus approach for integrating
sporadic events in time-triggered systems. 2022.
T. Fleming and A. Burns. Investigating mixed criticality cyclic executive schedule gen-
eration. In Proc. Workshop on Mixed Criticality (WMC), 2015.
G. Fohler. Joint scheduling of distributed complex periodic and hard aperiodic tasks in
statically scheduled systems. In Proceedings 16th IEEE Real-Time Systems Sympo-
sium, pages 152–161, 1995. doi: 10.1109/REAL.1995.495205.
D. E. Goldberg and K. Deb. A comparative analysis of selection schemes used in genetic
algorithms. 1:69–93, 1991. ISSN 1081-6593. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-08-
050684-5.50008-2. URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
B9780080506845500082.
75
==PAGE:82==
U. Z. A. Hamid, F. R. A. Zakuan, K. A. Zulkepli, M. Z. Azmi, H. Zamzuri, M. A. A.
Rahman, and M. A. Zakaria. Autonomous emergency braking system with potential
field risk assessment for frontal collision mitigation. In 2017 ieee conference on systems,
process and control (icspc), pages 71–76. IEEE, 2017.
J. H. Holland. Adaptation in Natural and Artificial Systems: An Introductory Analysis
with Applications to Biology, Control and Artificial Intelligence. MIT Press, Cam-
bridge, MA, USA, 1975. ISBN 0262082136.
D. Isovic and G. Fohler. Handling mixed sets of tasks in combined offline and online
scheduled real-time systems. Real-time systems, 43:296–325, 2009.
D. B. Kirk and W. H. Wen-Mei. Programming massively parallel processors: a hands-on
approach. Morgan kaufmann, 2016.
J. P. Lehoczky, L. Sha, and J. K. Strosnider. Enhanced aperiodic responsiveness in hard
real-time environments. In Unknown Host Publication Title, pages 261–270. IEEE,
1987.
G. Lipari and E. Bini. Resource partitioning among real-time applications. In 15th Eu-
romicro Conference on Real-Time Systems, 2003. Proceedings., pages 151–158. IEEE,
2003.
G. Lipari and E. Bini. A methodology for designing hierarchical scheduling systems.
J. Embed. Comput., 1(2):257–269, 2005.
URL http://content.iospress.com/
articles/journal-of-embedded-computing/jec00019.
C. L. Liu and J. W. Layland. Scheduling algorithms for multiprogramming in a hard-
real-time environment. J. ACM, 20(1):46–61, jan 1973. ISSN 0004-5411. doi: 10.
1145/321738.321743. URL https://doi.org/10.1145/321738.321743.
F. Maticu, P. Pop, C. Axbrink, and M. Islam.
Automatic functionality assign-
ment to autosar multicore distributed architectures.
SAE Technical Paper, Tech.
Rep, 2016. URL https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/frobt.2021.
762227/full#B41.
S. D. McLean, E. A. Juul Hansen, P. Pop, and S. S. Craciunas.
Configuring adas
platforms for automotive applications using metaheuristics. Frontiers in Robotics and
AI, page 353, 2022.
D. Medhi and K. Ramasamy.
Chapter 18 - traﬀic conditioning.
In D. Medhi and
K. Ramasamy, editors, Network Routing (Second Edition), The Morgan Kaufmann
Series in Networking, pages 626–644. Morgan Kaufmann, Boston, second edition
edition, 2018.
ISBN 978-0-12-800737-2.
doi:
https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-
800737-2.00021-1. URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
B9780128007372000211.
76
==PAGE:83==
P. Pop, P. Eles, and Z. Peng. Bus access optimization for distributed embedded sys-
tems based on schedulability analysis. In Proceedings of the conference on Design,
automation and test in Europe, pages 567–575, 2000.
S. Saewong, R. Rajkumar, J. P. Lehoczky, and M. H. Klein. Analysis of hierarchical fixed-
priority scheduling.
June 2002.
URL https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/
1019197.
F. Sagstetter, S. Andalam, P. Waszecki, M. Lukasiewycz, H. Stähle, S. Chakraborty, and
A. Knoll. Schedule integration framework for time-triggered automotive architectures.
In Proceedings of the 51st Annual Design Automation Conference, pages 1–6, 2014.
I. Shin and I. Lee. Periodic resource model for compositional real-time guarantees. In
RTSS 2003. 24th IEEE Real-Time Systems Symposium, 2003, pages 2–13, 2003. doi:
10.1109/REAL.2003.1253249.
I. Shin and I. Lee. Compositional real-time scheduling framework. In 25th IEEE Inter-
national Real-Time Systems Symposium, pages 57–67. IEEE, 2004.
M. Sokcevic.
Partitioned complexity., 2020.
URL https://www.tttech-auto.com/
knowledge-platform/partitioned-complexity.
S. Sommer, A. Camek, K. Becker, C. Buckl, A. Zirkler, L. Fiege, M. Armbruster,
G. Spiegelberg, and A. Knoll.
Race: A centralized platform computer based ar-
chitecture for automotive applications. In 2013 IEEE International Electric Vehicle
Conference (IEVC), pages 1–6. IEEE, 2013.
B. Sprunt, L. Sha, and J. Lehoczky. Aperiodic task scheduling for hard-real-time systems.
Real-Time Systems, 1:27–60, 1989.
J. Strosnider, J. Lehoczky, and L. Sha. The deferrable server algorithm for enhanced
aperiodic responsiveness in hard real-time environments. IEEE Transactions on Com-
puters, 44(1):73–91, 1995. doi: 10.1109/12.368008.
TTTech. Motionwise, 2023. URL https://www.tttech-auto.com/motionwise.
D. Whitley, S. Rana, and R. Heckendorn.
The island model genetic algorithm: On
separability, population size and convergence. Journal of Computing and Information
Technology, 7, 12 1998.
J. Xu and D. L. Parnas. Priority scheduling versus pre-run-time scheduling. Real-time
systems, 18:7–23, 2000.
77
==PAGE:84==
