==PAGE:1==
 
Discovery of Broadly 
Neutralising Antibodies 
Against Snake Toxins 
Using Designed Antigens 
Center for  
Antibody Technologies 
Technical University  
of Denmark 
 
Ida Bisbo, s174572 
Anneline Vlamynck, s162842  
  
Supervisors:  
Senior Researcher Anne Ljungars 
Assistant Professor Esperanza Rivera de Torre 
Spring 2023 
 
MSc Thesis in Pharmaceutical Design and Engineering 
==PAGE:2==
Abstract
Snakebite envenomings have earned their place on the World Health Organization’s list
of neglected tropical diseases as they cause more than 100,000 deaths annually and inflict
life-altering disabilities upon hundreds of thousands of victims.
The current treatment for snakebite envenomings involves the administration of an an-
tivenom injection, which contains polyclonal antibodies derived from immunised animals.
While this approach has undeniably played a crucial role in saving snakebite victims, it is
not without its drawbacks. To address these drawbacks, a new approach known as recom-
binant human antivenom offers promising potential.
The antivenom comprises recombinantly produced antibodies and/or nanobodies, which are
screened using phage display selection. This innovative approach allows for the selection
of candidates that effectively bind to the target toxin. These selected toxin-binders can
then be incorporated into a neutralising antivenom, enhancing its efficacy in mitigating the
harmful effects of snakebite envenomings.
This study focused on the phage display selection of two consensus toxins. The consensus
toxins were designed toxins, engineered to represent an average sequence of naturally occur-
ring three-finger toxins from Elapid snakes in Sub-Saharan Africa. Both a short and a long
α-neurotoxin were produced recombinantly in the P. pastoris yeast system. Subsequently,
the toxins were biotinylated and screened for their binding to human naïve κ and λ light
chain antibodies (scFv) from the IONTAS library and immunised 8-week and boosted llama
nanobodies in a phage display selection setup. The selected antigen-binders were further
evaluated using a polyclonal phage ELISA to assess their binding capabilities against the
two consensus toxins and a variety of commercial toxins.
Following the phage display selection conducted in this study, a number of toxin-binding
nanobody candidates have emerged. These candidates hold promise for inclusion in a snake
antivenom with broad neutralising capabilities, offering potential treatment for snakebites
caused by venomous Elapid snakes in Sub-Saharan Africa. However, additional testing of
the nanobody candidates is necessary to assess their affinity for binding and neutralisation
to the target toxins and to evaluate their in vivo characteristics.
i
==PAGE:3==
Resumé
Slangebid har fortjent deres plads på WHO’s liste over forsømte tropiske sygdomme af en
alvorlig grund. Slangebid forårsager mere end 100.000 dødsfald årligt og påfører hundred-
tusindvis af ofre livsændrende handicap.
Den nuværende behandling mod forgiftning efter slangebid involverer en antigift-injektion
i offeret som indeholder polyklonale antistoffer fra immuniserede dyr. Denne tilgang har
uden tvivl spillet en væsentlig rolle i at redde ofre for slangebid, men behandlingen har flere
ulemper. Disse ulemper ved traditionel antigiftproduktion kan muligvis undgås ved hjælp
af en ny antigifttilgang, kaldet rekombinant humant antigift.
Antigiften består af antistoffer og/eller nanostoffer, der er rekombinant produceret og
screenet ved hjælp af fagdisplay. Denne tilgang muliggør udvælgelse af kandidater, der
binder toksinet og kan dermed inkorporeres i en neutraliserende antigift, hvilket muliggør
en formindskelse af de skadelige effekter af slangebid.
I dette studie har fagdisplay med konsensus-toksiner været omdrejningspunktet. Konsensus-
toksinerne er toksiner, som er konstrueret til at repræsentere en gennemsnitlig sekvens
af naturligt forekommende three-finger-toksiner fra Elapid-slanger fra Subsaharisk Afrika.
Konsensustoksinerne, et kort og et langt α-neurotoksin, er blevet produceret rekombinant
ved hjælp af P. pastoris. Efterfølgende blev toksinerne biotinyleret og screenet for deres
binding til humane naive κ og λ let-kædeded antistoffer (scFv) fra IONTAS biblioteket og
immuniserede 8-ugers og boostede lama nanobodies i et fagdisplay-selektions eksperiment.
De udvalgte antigen-bindere blev evalueret i en polyklonal fag-ELISA for deres binding mod
de to konsensustoksiner og en række kommercielle toksiner.
En række lovende nanobody toksin-bindende kandidater er blevet opdaget igennem dette
fagdisplay-studie. Disse kandidater har potentialet til at blive inkorporeret i slange-antigift,
med bred neutraliserende effekt, der vil hjælpe med at helbrede slangebid fra giftige Elapid-
slanger i Subsaharisk Afrika. Før dette kan realiseres, er yderligere test af disse antigen-
bindende nanobodies dog nødvendig, for bl.a. at evaluere deres affinitetsbinding, evne til
at neutralisere deres target og deres in vivo karakteristika.
ii
==PAGE:4==
Contents
Abstract
i
Resumé
ii
Acknowledgment
v
Abbreviation
vi
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Venomous Snakes: A Global Health Challenge . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Snake Venom
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2.1
Three-Finger Toxins
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Theoretical Background
5
2.1
Traditional Antivenom Production
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Human Recombinant Antivenom
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.3
Protein Expression Systems
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.3.1
Recombinant Protein Expression in P. pastoris
. . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.4
Introduction to Phage Display . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.4.1
Bacteriophages
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.4.2
Phage Display Selection
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3
Materials and Methods
15
3.1
Materials
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.1.1
Phage Display Libraries
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.1.2
Snake Toxins
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.1.3
Primers
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.1.4
Plates
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.1.5
Cell Strains . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.1.6
Reagents . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.1.7
Buffers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.1.8
Antibiotics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.2
Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.2.1
Aim of Study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
iii
==PAGE:5==
3.2.2
Experimental Strategy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.2.3
Subcloning by NEBuilder Assembly . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.2.4
Transformation of Toxins Into E. coli . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.2.5
Sequencing Confirmation of Transformed Gene Constructs . . . . . .
24
3.2.6
Electroporation of Genes Into P. pastoris . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.2.7
Protein Expression in P. pastoris
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.2.8
Protein Purification by Column Chromatography and CD Characterisation
27
3.2.9
Phage Display Selection of Antibodies and Nanobodies . . . . . . . .
28
3.2.10 Biotinylation of Consensus Toxins . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3.2.11 Solid Phage Display Selection with Consensus Toxins . . . . . . . . .
29
3.2.12 Polyclonal Phage ELISA of Toxins
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4
Results
34
4.1
Subcloning by NEBuilder Assembly and Transformation
. . . . . . . . . . .
34
4.2
Protein Expression and Column Chromatography Purification . . . . . . . .
36
4.3
Protein Characterisation by Circular Dichroism
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
4.4
Assessment of Biotinylation Ratios on Toxins
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
4.5
Phage Display Selection Output for Consensus Toxins . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
4.6
Polyclonal Phage ELISA Evaluation of Selected Phages . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
5
Discussion
48
5.1
Assessment of Protein Expression in P. pastoris . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
5.2
Toxin Biotinylation: NHS-PEG4 and Innolink Biotin
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
5.3
Evaluation of 3FTx-binding scFvs and Nanobodies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
5.4
Utilisation of Consensus Toxins . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
6
Conclusion
54
7
Next Steps: Research and Perspectives
55
7.1
Future research . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
7.2
Alternative Method of Antivenom Research
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
References
56
Appendix
60
iv
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgment
We would like to take this opportunity to express our heartfelt gratitude to everyone who
has contributed to our successful completion of the M.Sc. in Pharmaceutical Design and
Engineering. This project was carried out at DTU Bioengineering in the research group
CAT, and it has been an incredible journey into the fascinating world of venomous snakes
and phage display technology.
First and foremost, a sincere thanks to Andreas Hougaard for introducing us to the CAT
group and directing us toward the remarkable work carried out in the Wellcome project,
led by Anne Ljungars.
Additionally, we want to express our gratitude towards our supervisor Esperanza Rivera
de Torre, whom we would like to thank for her supervision, knowledge sharing, and for
cheering us up whenever we needed it. It has been a pleasure to work with her.
Additionally, we would like to thank our day-to-day supervisor Ph.D. Anna Damsbo, for
her continuous guidance, expertise, availability, and patience in the lab. The experience
would not have been the same without her, and her remarkable positivity, even on days
when nothing seemed to work as intended.
We would like to extend our gratitude to Arijit Paul, Anna Damsbo, Jack Wade, Tulika,
and Vlad Rosca, Mark Møiniche who provided valuable feedback on our written thesis.
Their input has been an invaluable lesson for us.
Moreover, we have to thank everyone in the CAT group for their unwavering moral sup-
port and assistance we have received in the laboratory. Everyone in the group has been
willing to help us, always, no matter a big or a small question. We have felt welcomed
since the beginning and have truly enjoyed working in such an international, friendly, and
open-minded environment.
As a final note, we would like to address our appreciation for our closest friends and family’s
support throughout the project. Their encouragement has meant the world to us.
v
==PAGE:7==
Abbreviation
• 3FTx - Three finger toxin
• AOX - Alternative Oxidase
• BLI - Bio-Layer Interferometry
• CAT - Center for Antibody Technologies
• CD - Circular Dichroism
• CFU - Colony Forming Unit
• DNA - Deoxyribonucleic Acid
• E. coli - Escherichia coli
• ELISA - Enzyme-Linked Immunoassay
• Fab - Fragment Antigen-Binding
• G3P - Coat Gene 3 Protein
• MALDI-TOF - Matrix-Assisted Laser Desorption - Ionisation-Time of Flight
• MS - Mass Spectrometry
• NTD - Neglected Tropical Disease
• Nn4 - Fraction no. 4
• Nn8 - Fraction no. 8
• O/N - Over-Night
• OD - Optimal Density
• P. pastoris - Pichia Pastoris
• PCR - Polymerase Chain Reaction
• PTM - Post-Translational Modification
vi
==PAGE:8==
• RF - Replicative form
• RPM - Revolutions Per Minute
• RT - Room Temperature
• VH - Heavy Chain Variable Domain
• VHH - Single Domain Heavy Chain
• VL - Light Chain Variable Domain
• WHO - World Health Organization
• nAChRs - Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
• nnbA - 8-week Nanobody Llama Library
• nnbC - Boosted Nanobody Llama Library
• pLDDT - Per-Residue Confidence Score
• sNTX - Short neurotoxin
• scFv - Single-Chain Variable Fragment
vii
==PAGE:9==
Spring 2023
1
Introduction
1.1
Venomous Snakes: A Global Health Challenge
Snakebite envenomings is an overlooked and neglected public health challenge. According
to the World Health Organization (WHO), snakebites claims more than 100,000 lives every
year, making it a major cause of mortality worldwide. Additionally, hundreds of thousands
more suffer from severe disabilities, including bleeding disorders and limb amputations, as
a result of an encounter with a venomous snake [1].
In 2017, snakebite envenomings were reinstated on WHO’s list of neglected tropical diseases
(NTD) due to antivenom shortages and persistent advocacy efforts by researchers in the
field [2]. Given that snakebite envenomings are classified as a NTD and the target set by
WHO to halve the number of snakebite envenomings and deaths by 2030, researchers in
the field are working to optimise and develop more effective antivenoms.
The global incidence and mortality rates caused by venomous snake bites are depicted on
the map in Figure 1. According to numbers reported by Roberts et al. [2] in 2022, the
highest number of venomous snake bites and deaths occur in South Asia, with Sub-Saharan
Africa ranking a close second.
Figure 1: Global Incidence and Mortality Rates of Snake Envenomings. The world map displays estimated ranges
for the number of snake envenomings and related fatalities. These numbers have been derived from Gutierrez et al. [3].
Page 1 of 59
==PAGE:10==
Spring 2023
A large meta-analysis conducted by Chippaux et al.
in 2011 [4] supports the numbers
from Roberts et al., reporting 314.078 annual snake bites and 7.331 deaths in Sub-Saharan
Africa.
The numbers in the meta-analysis are based on data from household surveys,
hospital records, and national health systems, covering the time period between 1970 and
2010. The number of annual amputations caused by snakebites in this region is estimated
to range from 5,908 to 14,614. However, Chippaux et al. suggest that the incident numbers
are likely 3-5 times higher than reported. This is due to the behaviors of treatment-seeking
in this region, such as seeking help from traditional healers instead of formal healthcare
institutions [4]. These statistics highlight the burden of snakebite envenomings in these
areas and the urgent need for efficient treatment measures which requires an in-depth
analysis of the composition of the snake venom.
1.2
Snake Venom
Snake venom encompasses a wide array of components, including protein-based toxins. In
cases of envenomation, snakebites can cause considerable harm, resulting in diverse effects
such as neurotoxicity and cytotoxicity. The clinical manifestations of these different types
of toxicities may vary, from less severe manifestations such as local inflammation, swelling,
blistering, and bruising [5], to more severe outcomes such as hemorrhage, necrosis, acute
kidney injury, shock, and respiratory failure [6]. Side effects vary based on snake species
and venom composition.
Figure 2: Venomous Elapid Snakes. The left picture displays a Black Necked Spitting Cobra, a type of Elapid snake
found in Sub-Saharan Africa. The right picture shows a Black Mamba, one of the world’s most dangerous snakes. The Black
Mamba habitats Africa, and is one of the longest and fastest types of snakes in this region [7]. The picture belongs to Reptile
Range and Andrey Korabelnikov, respectively.
Page 2 of 59
==PAGE:11==
Spring 2023
Elapids, including mambas and cobras, see Figure 2, are medically significant snakes in
Sub-Saharan Africa due to their abundance and high toxicity. Their venom consist mainly
of ∼79% three-finger toxins (3FTxs) and ∼17% phospholipase A2s [5].
1.2.1
Three-Finger Toxins
Since the discovery and purification of the first protein of the 3FTx family in the early 1960s,
over one thousand amino acid sequences of the protein have been uploaded to UniProt
Knowledgebase as of January 2023 [8]. The 3FTxs, which belong to a large superfamily of
proteins, are a type of α-neurotoxin known for their non-enzymatic effects [9]. The protein
is named for its characteristic structure, as depicted in Figure 3. 3FTxs are polypeptides
consisting of approximately 60-75 amino acids, and depending on their amino acid length,
the α-neurotoxins are divided into a short (60-62) and long (71-75) chain type, with four
and five disulfide bonds, respectively. As their name indicates, the protein is folded into
three fingers, supported by β-sheets which extend from the central core. Four of these
bonds are conserved across the proteins within the superfamily of 3FTxs [10].
Figure 3: Structure of Three-Finger Toxin. The general structure of 3FTx exhibits a three-finger-like configuration
with β-sheets extending from a central hydrophobic core. The toxin can be found in venomous snakes in Sub-Saharan Africa
in e.g., the Elapids snake family. a) Short-chain 3FTx toxin. b) Long-chain 3FTx toxin. Figure from Osipov et al. [11].
Despite structural similarities, 3FTxs exhibit diverse physiological effects due to variations
in their structure. The predominant physiological effect of Elapid snakes is systemic neu-
rotoxicity, mainly caused by 3FTxs [12]. The neurotoxins serve to paralyse or kill the prey
[11] and their effects manifest themselves on the cholinergic system that covers a range of
enzymes, protein transporters, and receptors.
Page 3 of 59
==PAGE:12==
Spring 2023
In this context, nicotinic acetylcholine (nAChRs) receptors are of most interest. nAChRs
help to control muscle contraction, signal transmission in the sympathetic and parasympa-
thetic nervous system, and regulate inflammation and signaling processes in the immune
system. nAChRs are ionotropic receptors that enable the flow of ions across cell mem-
branes, facilitating neural signal transmission upon acetylcholine binding. Under normal
circumstances, acetylcholine binds to nAChR receptors in the synaptic cleft, facilitating
neuromuscular junctions and muscle contraction. However, 3FTxs act as selective antago-
nists to these receptors, inhibiting muscle contraction and potentially leading to detrimental
outcomes like respiratory failure in envenomated victims. [13, 14, 11].
The binding interaction between the 3FTx and its target receptor, nAChR, varies depend-
ing on the length of the toxin chain. Both the long- and short-chain types are able to bind
the nAChR receptors of the muscle-type with high affinity. Only the long chain type can,
however, bind to nAChR receptors of the neuronal type, which controls physiological and
pathological functions, with high affinity [15]. The general interaction of the 3FTx with the
nAChR receptor also depends on the chain length. The long-chain type has an additional,
fifth disulfide bond, compared to the short-chain type, constraining the II-loop of the toxin
as seen in Figure 3b. This mediates the formation of a helical domain which is binding
the aromatic, orthosteric site of the nAChR receptor. The short-chain type of the toxin
has just four disulfide bonds, and thus, does not form the helical domain as the long-chain
type does. However, the toxin forms a hairpin-like structure from the β-sheet in the tip of
the II-loop as seen in Figure 3a, interacting with the orthosteric site residue of the nAChR
receptor [15].
The substantial size of the 3FTx family, coupled with its prevalence as a major component
in the venom of various medical relevant snakes, renders them an appealing candidate for
the development of a broadly neutralising antivenom. To gain insights into how the process
of developing such an antivenom can be improved, the next section delves into the current
production methods of antivenoms.
Page 4 of 59
==PAGE:13==
Spring 2023
2
Theoretical Background
2.1
Traditional Antivenom Production
As of now, snakebite envenomings are treated with intravenous administration of plasma-
derived polyclonal antibodies from animals. These antibodies are obtained by repeatedly
immunising animals with a sub-lethal amount of venom(s) from relevant snake(s). When
exposed to the toxins in the venom(s), the production animal elicits an immune response
specific to these toxin(s), and antibodies are obtained from the blood of the animals [16].
The process of traditional antivenom production has been depicted in Figure 4.
Figure 4: Traditional Antivenom Production. 1) The venom from the snake of interest is milked. 2) The production
animal is injected with venom using a sub-lethal dose. 3) Antibody-containing blood samples are obtained from the injected
animal(s). 4) The plasma, containing the antibodies, is separated from the blood. 5) Antibodies from the plasma are purified.
6) Formulation of the antivenom is conducted and the product is ready to be used in a clinical setting. Illustration created
with BioRender.com
While this treatment option has undeniably played a pivotal role in saving numerous lives
and enhancing overall outcomes for patients suffering from venomous bites over the years,
it does exhibit several drawbacks [16].
A notable drawback of producing antivenoms through animal injection with snake toxins is
the fact that certain compounds present in the venom are essential for their physiological ef-
fects, but do not stimulate a strong immune response. As a result, when these toxins are not
recognised by the immune system, no antibodies are generated in response. Consequently,
Page 5 of 59
==PAGE:14==
Spring 2023
the resulting antivenom fails to effectively neutralise these particular toxins, potentially
leading to fatal outcomes for the patients [12]. Moreover, the pool of antibodies obtained
from the production animals can differ depending on the age, sex, and geographical sam-
pling area of the production animal, and contain content from previous infections that the
animal has been in contact with. Obtaining solely the therapeutically relevant antibodies
from the blood of animals is not an easy procedure, thus antivenom can include irrelevant
antibodies for the target toxin [12]. The result is an antivenom containing irrelevant and
non-therapeutic substances, which can potentially weaken the effectiveness. Additionally,
differences in the immune response of the production animal across different production
cycles can contribute to batch-to-batch variations.
Allergic reactions are another drawback of the current antivenom production approach.
The discrepancy between the animal and human immune systems can cause severe adverse
reactions. A too-high concentration of a substance that is incompatible with the human
immune system can cause allergic reactions, which in the worst case, can develop into
anaphylactic shock. However, the concentration of the administered dose needs to be ade-
quately high enough to effectively neutralise the toxin [16].
The antibodies obtained from the plasma of immunised production animals are polyclonal.
Polyclonal antibodies are able to detect antigens with low abundance, however, their speci-
ficity is not always adequate, and due to their heterologous nature, they can elicit unwanted
immune reactions in human recipients of the antivenom [6]. Lastly, the expensive nature of
the current production process, is a problem, considering that snake bite envenomings are
a threat in low-income, developing countries.
Given the numerous drawbacks associated with the current antivenom production process,
it is evident that an innovative treatment approach is needed. This project seeks to in-
novate the existing treatment option by addressing many of the limitations of traditional
antivenoms, such as immunogenicity, batch-to-batch variations, and low antigen specificity,
through the production of a human recombinant antivenom. The subsequent section will
provide a detailed explanation of this novel approach and its potential advantages.
Page 6 of 59
==PAGE:15==
Spring 2023
2.2
Human Recombinant Antivenom
Recognising the adverse effects of snake bite envenomings and the shortcomings of the exist-
ing antivenom treatments, there is an immense need for an innovative, alternative method
for producing antivenom. Consequently, researchers have explored various approaches to
enhance the effectiveness of the current treatment, such as innovative immunisation strate-
gies, inhibitors targeting enzymatic toxins, and the development of recombinant antiven-
oms. This thesis focuses on the latter approach, aiming to create a broadly neutralising
antivenom, utilising nanobodies and antibodies [17].
Human recombinant nanobodies and antibodies offer several advantages for use in antiven-
oms. They are compatible with the human immune system, eliminating the need for human-
ization of the final product. This reduces the risk of side effects, including serum sickness
and anaphylactic shock. Additionally, a cost estimate analysis on recombinant antivenom
manufacture focusing on snakebite envenoming in Sub-Saharan Africa by Laustsen et al.
[12] shows that the production of human recombinant antivenoms may be cost-competitive
compared to the current animal-derived solution. Another benefit of the human recombi-
nant solution, is, that it can produce monoclonal antibodies and nanobodies, as opposed
to the current antivenoms, that utilise polyclonal antibodies. The use of monoclonal an-
tibodies or nanobodies provides better control over the production of specific therapeutic
molecules. It allows for a defined mixture of antibodies/nanobodies that are therapeuti-
cally relevant, resulting in the development of a more effective antivenom [12]. To achieve
broadly neutralising capabilities utilising the monoclonal approach, consensus toxins have
been recombinantly designed and implemented in this study.
Antibodies
Antibodies, also commonly known as immunoglobulins, are used by the immune system to
identify and neutralise antigens, such as toxins, by recognising their unique sequence known
as the epitope. Antibodies are composed of two identical heavy and light chains connected
by disulfide bonds. The heavy chain is composed of three constant domains (CH1, CH2,
CH3) and a variable domain (VH). The light chain consists of one constant (CL) and one
variable domain (VL). The variable domains are also known as the single-chain variable
fragment (scFv) where three hypervariable complementary determining regions known as
Page 7 of 59
==PAGE:16==
Spring 2023
CDR1, CDR2, and CDR3 are responsible for antigen recognition and binding [16].
A
representation of an antibody structure is illustrated in Figure 5c.
Figure 5: Antibody and Nanobody Structure. a) illustrates a nanobody with camelid origin, as seen in b) containing
a single variable domain on the heavy chain (VHH). c) Structure of a conventional antibody. scFv = Single-chain variable
fragment. Fab = Antigen binding fragment. Fc = Fragment crystallisable. Illustration created with BioRender.com
Antibodies have been widely used in the therapeutic field due to their specificity and neu-
tralising capabilities. Antibodies can neutralise toxins in two ways: by direct or indirect
inhibition [16]. When a toxin is directly inhibited, the antibody binds to the toxin and
competes for the site of interaction. Indirect inhibition occurs via three different mecha-
nisms: 1) Allosteric inhibition, where the binding interaction between the antibody and
toxin induces a conformational change in the toxin, preventing it from binding to its target
site. 2) steric hindrance, where the antibody binds close to the target site, preventing the
accessibility of the toxin. 3) Prevention of either the dissociation of the toxin complexes or
formation of active toxins [16]. Needless to say, these neutralising capabilities are highly
beneficial and necessary when targeting 3FTxs and constructing antivenoms.
Nanobodies
In recent years the benefits of nanobodies have gained interest in the therapeutic field.
Opposite to antibodies, the structure of nanobodies is less complex and consists only of a
single domain (VHH) derived from heavy chain antibodies naturally present in the serum of
Page 8 of 59
==PAGE:17==
Spring 2023
camelids, which has been illustrated in Figure 5a. These nanobodies comprise full antigen-
binding potential and have a strong affinity towards their cognate antigen. Nanobodies have
their own lists of beneficial applications, including high stability, strong antigen-binding
affinity, water solubility, and small size (∼15 kDa) compared to conventional human anti-
bodies (∼150 kDa). The small size of nanobodies has proven a major advantage, allowing
the nanobodies to enter tissues that the larger-sized conventional antibodies cannot reach,
which is beneficial when needing to reach deep tissue or distal sites in the body. How-
ever, the small size can also be a disadvantage, as nanobodies will be more rapidly cleared
through the kidneys since their molecular mass is below the threshold for glomerular filtra-
tion [18]. Another benefit of nanobodies is that they typically have a lower production cost
than antibodies. This is due to the complex structure and post-translational modifications
(PTMs) of the antibodies, which often require production in mammalian cells leading to
high expenses for their large-scale production. In contrast, numerous studies have shown
that nanobodies are able to be produced in different microorganisms in a low-cost manner,
still displaying high stability [19]. Furthermore, nanobodies have a low immunogenic profile
due to their small size, which makes them suitable for human administration. Lastly, the
CD3 loop on the nanobody is on average 18 amino acids long, whereas the human CD3 loop
is 14 amino acids long. This extended CD3 loop has been suggested to give accessibility to
hidden antigenic sites [19].
2.3
Protein Expression Systems
Protein expression systems play a crucial role in the medical field, enabling the production
of recombinant proteins by the use of e.g., mammalian, insect, yeast, or bacterial expression
systems [20]. A major benefit of expressing toxins recombinantly is, that it enables the de-
sign and construction of artificially designed toxins not present in nature, using molecular
biology tools. Recombinant proteins have diverse applications, ranging from e.g., vaccines
and agricultural products, to antibody fragments, etc. When producing toxins, one of the
main challenges is obtaining toxins that are correctly folded, harboring the proper disulfide
patterns for toxin activity. Therefore, the choice of expression system for recombinant pro-
tein production is not insignificant, as each system has its own advantages and limitations
[20].
Page 9 of 59
==PAGE:18==
Spring 2023
In this project, the selected expression system has been the yeast Pichia pastoris (P. pas-
toris).
This choice was made as P. pastoris offers several advantages compared to the
commonly used expression organism Escherichia coli (E. coli). One of the main advantages
of using P. pastoris is its eukaryotic nature, which helps address challenges related to pro-
tein misfolding and the lack of PTMs, typically encountered when working with prokaryotic
expression systems [20].
P. pastoris is known to perform PTMs, such as N- and O-linked glycosylation and disulfide
bonding, in the endoplasmic reticulum, which closely resemble those of higher eukaryotes.
By the use of Kex2 as signal peptidase, the yeast can secrete proteins extracellularly [21].
The yeast system is relatively inexpensive and by the use of bioreactors, it is possible to
upscale the protein production in the organism. Due to the yeast’s restricted production of
endogenous proteins [21], purification of the secreted protein proves to be relatively achiev-
able in the yeast. In Figure 6, an overview of the main advantages of P. pastoris as a
protein expression system, is shown.
Figure 6: P. pastoris Production Organism. The figure summarises some of the advantages of using P. pastoris as
a production organism, including, but not limited to, post-translational modifications, extracellular secretion of proteins,
methylotrophic nature, and genome integration of genes of interest. Illustration created with BioRender.com
Like any biological expression system, the use of P. pastoris for the production of recom-
binant protein also has its limitations. One limitation of the P. pastoris system, is, that
there are only a few selectable markers available for the P. pastoris transformation [22,
23]. Strategies available for selection comprise either auxotrophic markers or antibiotic-
resistance markers. Auxotrophic markers are unable to synthesise an essential nutrient due
to a mutation in the DNA that their wild-type counterpart has intact, thus, aiding the se-
Page 10 of 59
==PAGE:19==
Spring 2023
lection of transformants by altering the growth media composition. Examples are his4 and
arg4. Antibiotic-resistance markers enable the yeast resistant to certain antibiotics for the
purpose of transformants selection. An example of such a marker is the ShBle gene used in
this study, originating from the bleomycin family of antibiotics isolated from Streptomyces,
rendering the yeast resistant to zeocin [23].
Another limitation of the P. pastoris system is, that the organism produces proteases, which
can pose a challenge to the secreted proteins of P. pastoris. A potential solution to prevent
protein degradation is to utilize engineered P. pastoris strains that are protease-deficient,
such as BG21 [21]. The growth rate of P. pastoris is typically slower compared to bacteria
like E. coli, and the expression levels achieved in P. pastoris are generally lower than those
in organisms like E. coli [20, 21].
With a solid foundation in the understanding of P. pastoris as a protein expression system,
the attention now turns to investigating the underlying mechanisms involved in protein
expression within this organism.
2.3.1
Recombinant Protein Expression in P. pastoris
To express recombinant protein in P. pastoris, there are some general steps that need to
be followed: First, the gene of interest needs to be cloned into a suitable expression vector,
before the vector can be integrated into the genome of P. pastoris, and protein expression
in P. pastoris can be performed using suitable expression conditions [21].
For the integration of a target gene into the genome of P. pastoris, one can utilise NEBuilder
assembly, which enables integration of DNA into the vector without the use of restriction
enzymes. The P. pastoris expression vector is an essential component of the expression
system, that enables the production of recombinant protein in the yeast. The vector consists
of three main components: a promoter sequence (AOX1 or AOX2, see below) in the 5’end,
a transcriptional terminating region in the 3’ end, and an origin of replication [21].
P. pastoris is a methylotrophic yeast, which means that it is able to utilise methanol as
its sole carbon and energy source. This is a crucial element for protein expression in P.
pastoris, as the two genes, AOX1 and AOX2, both encode the AOX enzyme, which is an
alcohol oxidase. When the yeast organism is exposed to methanol, it will activate the AOX
promoter to transcribe the gene of interest and later secretion aided by the α-mating factor
Page 11 of 59
==PAGE:20==
Spring 2023
prepro secretion signal. The AOX1 gene produces more of the AOX enzyme than the AOX2
gene. Moreover, the AOXI promotor is tightly repressed by glucose among other carbon
sources, thus by controlling the components in the growth media, the expression of protein
can be regulated [24].
2.4
Introduction to Phage Display
This study focuses on the discovery of antibody and nanobody toxin-binders by the use of
phage display selection. Phage display is both a robust, simple, effective, rapid, and low-
cost method, that has made significant advancements for its use in immunotherapeutics,
drug discovery, and epitope mapping to mention a few [25]. In this study, phage display
has been used for the display of toxins to find antibody and nanobody binders that have
the potential to neutralise the target snake toxins. The following sections will explain the
mechanisms of the M13 bacteriophage employed in this study, as well as the process of
phage display selection.
2.4.1
Bacteriophages
Phage display selection relies on the use of bacteriophages, presenting proteins on its surface
to screen candidates for their binding with the target protein [25]. To gain a comprehensive
understanding of how proteins are screened using phage display, it is crucial to familiarise
oneself with the fundamental mechanisms of bacteriophages.
In 1985, it was discovered that bacteriophages can be used to present fusion peptides on
the surface, by the use of coat proteins [25]. The genome of the M13 phage consists of a
single-stranded DNA that encodes coat and replication proteins [26, 27]. The principles
of M13 phages rely on the binding between a coat protein, G3P, and the tip of the F
pilus, which is expressed on E. coli hosts. Upon binding, the E. coli cell undergoes chronic
infection, leading to the uptake of the phage genome. Subsequently, the host cell’s DNA
synthesis machinery is activated, resulting in the translocation and further infection of
M13 phages. In antibody and nanobody phage display selection, the gene of interest is
engineered to be inserted into a gene encoding the phage coat protein. This modification
allows the phage to express and display the protein of interest, e.g., an scFv or nanobody,
on the surface of the phage, specifically on the G3P protein [26], as illustrated in Figure 7.
Page 12 of 59
==PAGE:21==
Spring 2023
Figure 7: M13 Bacteriophage. M13 phage containing
a scFv fragment or a nanobody in its genome, displaying
either on its surface of the G3P coat protein. Illustration
created with BioRender.com
This connection between the genotype (the in-
serted gene) and the phenotype (the displayed
protein) is what enables the phage to act as
a powerful tool for the selection and isolation
of antibodies and nanobodies with the desired
properties. Since the discovery of phage dis-
play in 1985, and the fusion of gene encod-
ing entire antibody binding domains (scFvs)
with coat proteins in 1990, many different an-
tibody formats, such as nanobodies and Fabs
have been employed in phage display [26].
A drawback of bacteriophages for this purpose is, that it typically carries several G3P coat
proteins on their surface. Thus, a multivalent display of antibody fragments can take place,
which is an issue when performing phage display.
To avoid this issue, M13 phagemids
(phage + plasmid) vectors can be incorporated, as these bear the properties of both bacte-
riophages and plasmids. Phagemids contain an antibiotic marker for selection, replication
of origin, and the gene encoding the scFv- or nanobody-G3P fusion protein. However, it
should be noted that phagemids alone lack the ability to generate new phages and do not
possess the fusion properties of G3P-antibody/nanobody. They require certain essential
phage proteins for assembly, capsid production, and replication processes. To circumvent
this, E. coli containing phagemids are infected with helper phages, which contain the entire
M13 genome encoding all these crucial phage proteins. The helper phage G3P will, upon
infection, compete with the G3P-antibody fusion protein for incorporation in the phage.
The outcome is, that most of the resulting phages will display none to just a single fusion
protein, as the helper phage contains a low-copy origin and the phagemid a high-copy origin
[26]. Thus the issue of multivalent antibody fragment display can be eliminated.
2.4.2
Phage Display Selection
Multiple selection rounds can be performed during phage display to screen the binding
abilities of phage libraries to target antigens, such as snake toxins.
Page 13 of 59
==PAGE:22==
Spring 2023
Figure 8: Phage Display Selection Process. The phage display selection process involves several steps. A) First step
is the presentation of the phages to the antigen-coated well. B) Phages with the highest affinity binds to the antigen. C)
Unbound and non-specific phages are washed away. D) Phages remaining are eluted. E) Eluted phages are amplified. The
cycle is repeated anywhere from 1-5 times and an evaluation step is performed e.g., using phage ELISA. Illustration created
with BioRender.com
The process of a phage display biopanning round has been illustrated in Figure 8A-E, and
involves several steps to prove successful. The first step in the process is the presentation
of the phage library to the immobilised antigen target. Immobilisation of the target can
be either direct or indirect. In this project, the antigen was indirectly immobilised using
the capture system streptavidin-biotin by utilising biotinylation of the antigen [26]. Next,
binding of the phages with the displayed antigen takes place followed by washing of, to
remove unspecific, non-bound phages. Phages are then eluted using e.g., trypsin digestion.
Lastly, the eluted phages are amplified, before a new round of selection is initiated or
evaluated for their binding, using e.g. phage ELISA [28].
Page 14 of 59
==PAGE:23==
Spring 2023
3
Materials and Methods
3.1
Materials
3.1.1
Phage Display Libraries
The human naïve scFv library utilised for phage display in this study was kindly donated
from IONTAS Limited, United Kingdom. The library has been obtained from the B lym-
phocytes obtained from the peripheral blood of 42 naïve donors, and from the tonsil lymph
node of a single donor. The library consist of a λ and a κ light chain format, providing
library diversity of 4 x 1010 clones.
The nanobody library utilised in this study was created by the Center for Antibody Tech-
nologies (CAT) group. Two llamas were injected with whole venom from 18 different Elapid
snakes, as summarised in the Appendix, Figure 35. The llamas were injected biweekly for
16 weeks and samples were taken at 8 weeks and 16 weeks, which provided the nnbA and
nnbB libraries, respectively. Furthermore, the llamas were boosted with three injections: 1)
One year after the 16 weeks, 2) one year and two weeks after the 16 weeks, 3) one year and
six weeks after the 16 weeks. Samples from the booster injection were obtained, providing
the nnbC library. The nnbA and nnbC libraries have been included in this study.
3.1.2
Snake Toxins
The short consensus α-neurotoxin (STX18) and long consensus α-neurotoxin (STX19)
utilised in this study, have been designed by Anna Damsbo Jensen and subsequently pur-
chased from Eurofins. The sequence of the two consensus toxins, STX18 and STX19, can
be seen in the Appendix Figure 36 and Figure 37, respectively, and designed based on neu-
rotoxin UniProt sequences for African Elapid snakes. The commercial toxins, α-cobratoxin
from Naja kaouthia, short neurotoxin (sNTX) from Naja pallida, Nn4 Fraction no. 4 from
Naja Nivea, and Nn8 Fraction no. 8 from Naja nivea were all purchased from Latoxan.
Snake toxins from Naja annulifera (STX14) and Naja kaouthis (STX17) were purchased
from Eurofins.
Page 15 of 59
==PAGE:24==
Spring 2023
3.1.3
Primers
Name
Sequence
Forward
primer
(STX14,
STX17, STX18, and STX19)
CGAGAAAAGACACCATCATCACCATCAC
Reverse
primer
(STX14,
STX17, STX18, and STX19)
TTGTTCTAGAGTCGAGGTCGGGGGA
Forward primer (Xy-001)
CGACCTCGACTCTAGAACAAAAACTCATCTCAG
Reverse primer (Xy-001)
GATGATGGTGTCTTTTCTCGAGAGATACCC
Table 1: Overview of primers
3.1.4
Plates
Plate
Components
YPDS-Zeo
20g/L Peptone, 10 g/L Yeast Extract, 100mL/L Dex-
trose 20%, 182.2 g/L Sorbitol, 20g/L Agar, Zeocin (1000
mg/mL), 900 dH2O
Minimal media plates
6 g/L Na2HPO4 x 2H2O, 3 g/L KH2PO4, 0.5 g/L NaCl, 1
g/L NH4Cl, 15 g/L Agar, 20 g/L glucose, 2 mM MgSO4,
100 µM CaCl2, 1 mM Thiamine-HCl
2YTAK
16 g/L tryptone, 10 g/L yeast extract, 5 g/L NaCl, 15 g/L
agar, 100 mg/L ampicillin, 100 mg/L kanamycin
Table 2: Overview of plates
3.1.5
Cell Strains
Strain
Supplier
P. pastoris KM71H
Invitrogen™
E. coli DH5α competent cells
Invitrogen™
TG1 cells
Agilent Technologies
Table 3: Overview of bacterial and yeast strains
Page 16 of 59
==PAGE:25==
Spring 2023
3.1.6
Reagents
Reagents
Manufacturer
Q5 High-Fidelity 2X Master Mix
New England Biolabs
NEBuilder HiFi DNA Assembly Master Mix
New England Biolabs
SOC Medium
Invitrogen™
YNB Media
Invitrogen™
Streptavidin
Thermo Scientific™
Anti-M13 Phage Antibodies
Invitrogen
TMB Substrate Solution
Thermo Scientific™
Chloroform:Phenol:Isoamyl alcohol (25:24:1, v/v)
ITW Reagents
LiCl and MgCl2
4M and 0.1M
Ethanol 96% (-20◦C)
VWR Chemicals
FastDigest Buffer (10X)
Thermo Scientific™
Ethanol 70% (4◦C)
VWR Chemicals
SYBR™Safe DNA Gel Stain
Invitrogen™
PageRuler™Unstained Low Range Protein Ladder
Thermo Scientific™
Spectra™Multicolor Low Range Protein Ladder
Thermo Scientific™
DNA 1kb Plus Ladder
Thermo Scientific™
NHS-PEG4 Biotin
Thermo Scientific™
Innolink Biotin 354S
Vector Laboratories
1M sorbitol
Sigma-Aldrich
NI-NTA beads
Sigma-Aldrich
Dynabeads™M280 Streptavidin
Invitrogen™
Methanol
Sigma-Aldrich
Glycerol
Alfa Aesar
Table 4: Overview of reagents
Page 17 of 59
==PAGE:26==
Spring 2023
3.1.7
Buffers
Buffer
Components
YPD
20g/L Peptone, 10 g/L Yeast Extract, 100mL/L Dextrose 20%,
and 900 mL/L dH2O
BMMY
10g/L Yeast Extract, 20 g/L Peptone, 100mL/L Potassium phos-
phate 1M pH 6.0, 100, 100mL/L YNB 10x, 100 mL/L 5%
Methanol, 2 mL/L Biotin 500x, 700 mL/L dH2O
BMGY
10g/L Yeast Extract, 20 g/L Peptone, 100mL/L Potassium phos-
phate 1M pH 6.0, 100, 100mL/L YNB 10x, 100 mL/L Glycerol
10x, 2 mL/L Biotin 500x, 700 mL/L dH2O
PBS 1x
8,0 g/L NaCl, 0,2 g/L KCl, 1,42 g/L Na2HPO4, 0,24 g/L
KH2PO4
PBS + 0.1% Tween20
8 g/L NaCl, 0.2 g/L KCl, 1.4 g/L Na2HPO4, 0.24 g KH2PO4,
0.1% Tween
2xYT
16 g/L tryptone, 10 g/L yeast extract, 5 g/L NaCl
2xYTAK
2xYT, 100 µg/mL kanamycin, 100 µg/mL ampicillin
2xYTGA
2xYT, 2% (w/v) glucose, 100 mg/L ampicillin
2xYTGK
2YT, 2% (w/v) glucose, 100 mg/L kanamycin
3% MPBS
1xPBS, 30 g/L milk powder
Freezing medium
2TYGA, 25% glycerol
H2SO4
2M
Trypsin elution buffer
Trypsin (1/100), 0.1 mg/mL
PEG-8000
2.5 M NaCl PEG-8000, 2.5 M NaCl
Table 5: Overview of buffers
Page 18 of 59
==PAGE:27==
Spring 2023
3.1.8
Antibiotics
Antibiotic
Manufacturer
Zeocin
Invitrogen™
Ampicilin
VWR chemicals
Kanamycin
VWR chemicals
Table 6: Overview of antibiotics
3.2
Methods
3.2.1
Aim of Study
This master’s thesis is part of a comprehensive study conducted at the CAT research group
at DTU Bioengineering. The primary objective of the study has been to develop a re-
combinant antivenom that can cross-neutralise multiple native 3FTxs, providing a broad
treatment against snake bite from Elapid snakes in Sub-Saharan Africa. Thus, the focus
of this thesis has been to utilise phage display to identify antibodies and nanobodies with
the potential to bind and neutralise 3FTxs found in the venom of Elapid snakes. For this
purpose, two consensus toxins were used. The ultimate goal of this endeavor is to lay the
groundwork for the development of a novel antivenom.
3.2.2
Experimental Strategy
As described in section 3.1.2, this study has been centered around four target toxins: two
native toxins, a short neurotoxin (STX14) and an α-cobratoxin (STX17), and two consensus
toxins: a short α-neurotoxin (STX18) and a long α-neurotoxin (STX19). The consensus
toxins used in this experiment are genetically engineered toxins that consist of an average
sequence derived from naturally occurring neurotoxins from African Elapid snakes (see
section 3.1.2). The incorporation of consensus toxins in the study allows the screening of
antibodies and nanobodies with potentially broadly neutralising effects. The aim is, that
these antibodies and nanobodies will bind and neutralise the natural toxins in a cross-
neutralisation manner, effectively targeting a wide range of toxin variants [20]. Figure 9
shows a prediction of the 3D structure of the two consensus toxins, STX18 and STX19.
Page 19 of 59
==PAGE:28==
Spring 2023
The structure has been predicted using AlphaFold, which produces a per-residue confidence
score (pLDDT) between 0 and 100, as seen in the figure.
Figure 9: Predicted 3D Structure of Consensus Toxins. AlphaFold has been used to predict the structure of the
two consensus toxins, STX18 and STX19. It is evident that the two toxins both exhibit the characteristic three-finger-like
structure, supported by β-sheets extending from the core. A) STX18 short consensus neurotoxin. B) STX19 long consensus
neurotoxin, harboring the additional helical domain. The confidence score (pLDDT) of the predicted structure can be viewed
in the figure and shows a pLDDT > 90 for the majority of the two toxins.
To successfully fulfill the aim of the study described above, the first step involved genetically
engineering the genes encoding the four toxins in E. coli. These genes were then subcloned
into P. pastoris. An overview of the toxins is outlined in Table 7.
Toxin Name
Toxin Type
Toxin Origin
STX14
Short neurotoxin
Naja annulifera
STX17
Long α-cobratoxin
Naja kaouthia
STX18
Short α-neurotoxin
Consensus
STX19
Long α-neurotoxin
Consensus
Table 7: Toxins. The table provides an overview of the name, type, and origin of the toxins utilised in this study.
Page 20 of 59
==PAGE:29==
Spring 2023
After subcloning and transformation of the plasmids encoding the genes into E. coli, elec-
troporation was performed to transfer the genes into P. pastoris yeast, in which protein
expression was performed. Subsequently, the expressed proteins were purified and charac-
terised. Finally, the purified toxins were utilised in a phage display screening process to
select phages exhibiting binding toward the two consensus toxins. Figure 10 provides a
more detailed overview of the process of the different experiments and the work conducted
throughout this thesis, divided into sub-experiments.
Figure 10: Experimental Setup. Four sub-experiments were part of the overall experiment to identify broadly neutralising
antibodies against the target toxins. A) Subcloning of toxins from bacterial to yeast vectors included 1) PCR amplification,
2) NEBuilder, 3) transformation, 4) sequencing, and 5) electroporation. B) Expression of the plasmid containing the genes of
interest in P. pastoris included 1) inoculating expression media with colonies, 2) the expression for 96 hours, 3) transcription
activation with methanol, and 4) SDS-PAGE confirmation. C) Purification of the toxins included 1) dialysis with imidazole, 2)
affinity chromatography by gravity flow for purification, and 3) SDS-PAGE for confirmation before 4) protein characterisation.
D) Phage display included 1) toxin biotinylation, 2) antigen and library presentation 3) phage display selection with washing
and elution, and 4) polyclonal phage ELISA.
Page 21 of 59
==PAGE:30==
Spring 2023
3.2.3
Subcloning by NEBuilder Assembly
To perform subcloning of the target genes, PCR amplification was performed. The genes
and expression vector Xy-001, were amplified by mixing 1 µL of template DNA, 2.5 µL
of forward primer (10 µM), 2.5 µL of reverse primer (10 µM), 25 µL Q5 High-Fidelity
2x MasterMix, and water to a final volume of 50 µL. For the PCR amplification of the
vector and genes, different temperatures for the primer annealing step was required, 61◦C
and 60◦C, and their PCR cycle conditions have been described in Table 8 and Table 9,
respectively. The plasmid map of the expression vector, Xy-001, is shown in Figure 11.
Step
Temperature
Time
# of Cycles
Initial Denaturation
98◦C
30 sec
1
Denaturation
98◦C
10 sec
35 cycles
Primer annealing
61◦C
15 sec
Extension
72◦C
1.5 min
Final Extension
72◦C
5 min
1
Table 8: PCR Amplification of Expression Vector.
Step
Temperature
Time
# of Cycles
Initial Denaturation
98◦C
30 sec
1
Denaturation
98◦C
10 sec
30 cycles
Primer annealing
60◦C
15 sec
Extension
72◦C
10 min
Final Extension
72◦C
5 min
1
Table 9: PCR Amplification of Target Genes.
Page 22 of 59
==PAGE:31==
Spring 2023
Figure 11: Xy-001 P. pastoris vector. Plasmid map illustration of the composition of the Xy-001 vector used in the
expression of recombinant proteins in this present study. Of particular interest is the AOX1 promoter, the BleoR resistance
gene, the 6xHis tags, origin of replication, transcriptional terminating region, α-secretion factor, and the gene of interest.
After the PCR amplification of the vector and genes, a gel electrophoresis experiment was
conducted. The respective bands were excised from the gel and purified using the GeneJet
PCR Gel Extraction Kit provided by Thermo Scientific. The purification was performed
using the enclosed protocol from the manufacturer. Once the genes had been amplified and
purified, NEBuilder Assembly was performed on ice in a ratio of 3 inserts to 1 vector, using
Thermo Scientific’s NEBuilder HiFi DNA Assembly Master Mix. Appropriate volumes of
each gene were added in a tube with 50 ng vector, 10 µL of NEBuilder HiFi Master Mix
(2x), and dH2O to a total volume of 20 µL. The samples were incubated in a thermocycler
at 50 ◦C for 15 min before the transformation.
3.2.4
Transformation of Toxins Into E. coli
Page 23 of 59
==PAGE:32==
Spring 2023
Following the NEBuilder step, transformation of the plasmids containing the genes into E.
coli DH5α competent cells were performed. The competent cells were thawed on ice for
10 min. Under sterile conditions, 10µL of plasmid was added to 50µL of competent cells
and gently mixed before incubation on ice for 20 min. The mixture was heat shocked at
42◦C for 20 sec before the samples were cooled on ice for 2 min. 950µL of SOC media
was added to the samples and incubated for 1 hour, with shaking, at 37◦C. Following
the 1-hour incubation, the cells were harvested by centrifuging at 2,000g for 5 min. The
supernatant was discarded, the pellet was resuspended in the 150uL low-salt LB media,
and the volume was plated on low-salt agar plates containing LB media and zeocin. Plates
were left O/N at 37◦C in dark conditions. In Figure 12 the NEBuilder process following
bacterial transformation has been outlined.
Figure 12: NEBuilder and Transformation. Gene of interest is cleaved using exonucleases and incorporated into the
Xy-001 plasmid. Gene and vector is amplified and annealed by NEBuilder assembly and transformed into DHα competent E.
coli cells. Illustration created with BioRender.com
To confirm the presence of the target genes in the colonies, colony PCR was performed
using forward and reverse primers specific to each of the four genes of interest. The PCR
amplification was carried out with the conditions used in Table 9, and 5 µL of the product
was analysed using electrophoresis.
3.2.5
Sequencing Confirmation of Transformed Gene Constructs
To confirm the integration of the gene into the plasmid, colonies from the transformation
plates were selected after O/N incubation and added to 50mL Falcon tubes, containing
5mL of low salt media and zeocin. The mixture was then incubated at 37◦C O/N with 220
Page 24 of 59
==PAGE:33==
Spring 2023
RPM. The culture was purified on the following day, using the Thermo Scientific GeneJET
MiniPrep Kit, and subsequently sent for sequencing at Eurofins Genomics to confirm the
presence of the genes in the plasmids.
3.2.6
Electroporation of Genes Into P. pastoris
To facilitate the electroporation of the genes from the E. coli plasmids into P. pastoris,
several preparation steps were implemented, as describes in the following sections:
1) Preparing Electrocompetent P. pastoris Cells
Electrocompetent cells were created to enable the transfer of genetic material into P. pas-
toris. The first step was to streak a fresh YPD plate with a glycerol stock containing the
P. pastoris and incubate it for two days in 30 ◦C. A single colony was inoculated with
5mL of YPD and incubated at 30 ◦C, O/N. The resulting culture was used to inoculate
50mL of fresh YPD medium with 200 µL of the previous culture and incubated at 30 ◦C,
O/N. To prepare the cells for electroporation, the culture was pelleted by centrifugation at
1500 xg for 5 min and washed three times (50mL, 25mL, and 10mL sterile, ice-cold water)
with a centrifugation step in between each wash. Lastly, the sample was centrifuged and
resuspended in 4mL 1M sorbitol. The last step was performed three times. All steps were
performed in sterile conditions, and the centrifugation steps were performed at 4◦C.
2) Linerasation and DNA Precipitation
To obtain an adequate quantity of DNA from the samples, the Thermo Scientific GeneJET
Plasmid Midiprep Kit was used, following the instructions in the manufacturer’s protocol.
Linearisation was carried out by mixing 30 µL of Fast Digest Buffer, 10 µg of the gene of
interest, 2µg of Sac1 enzyme, and water to a final volume of 300 µL.
Following the linearisation step, precipitation with phenol was performed. 300µL of Chlo-
roform:Phenol:Isoamyl alcohol (25:24:1, v/v) was added to the final volume from the lin-
earisation, and the solution was vortexed for 1 min. The mixture was then centrifuged at
4 ◦C for 15 min, 15000 xg. 290µL of the aqueous phase was then combined with 29µL 4M
LiCi:0.1M MgCl2 and 725µL 96% ethanol. The solution was incubated at -20 ◦C for 1 hour
Page 25 of 59
==PAGE:34==
Spring 2023
before centrifugation for 15 min at 15000 xg. Before the final centrifugation for 5 min at
15000 xg, 1mL of 70% ethanol was added to the mixture. Finally, 10µL of preheated 65◦C
sterile dH2O was added, and the samples were stored at -20◦C until electroporation.
3) Integration of DNA into P. pastoris Chromosome
A mixture of 9.5µg (9.5µL) linearised DNA and 80µL of electrocompetent P. pastoris was
prepared and incubated on ice, for 5 min. Electroporation was then executed with a voltage
of 2000V. Immediately after electroporation, 1mL of 1M sorbitol was added and the mix-
ture was incubated on ice for 2 hours. Then 1mL of YPD was added and the mixture was
further incubated on ice for 4 hours. The cells were then plated on agar plates containing
different zeocin concentrations (100µg/mL, 500µg/mL, 1000µg/mL) and incubated O/N at
30◦C until colonies appeared.
3.2.7
Protein Expression in P. pastoris
The clones picked for expression and purification were all selected based on positive se-
quencing results. A single colony from each of the four P. pastoris electroporation plates
were inoculated in 5 mL of YPD media. The precultures were incubated at 30◦C with 200
RPM agitation, O/N. To promote successful growth of the P. pastoris strains, 2.5 mL of
the precultures were added to 700 mL of BMGY media and incubated at 30◦C with 200
RPM agitation, O/N. Subsequently, the BMGY cultures were centrifuged at 5000xg for 10
min, and the supernatant was discarded. The pellet was resuspended in 70 mL of BMYY
culture and incubated at 25◦C with 200 RPM for four days. Methanol was added at four
time points: 0, 24, 48, and 72 hours, and aliquots were obtained at 0, 24, 48, 72, and 96
hours for further analysis. After 96 hours, the cultures were centrifuged at 5000xg for 15
min at 4◦C, and the supernatant was transferred and centrifuged again at 10,000xg for 15
min at 4◦C. Finally, the supernatants were filtered using a Milipore system and subjected
to dialysis before purification.
Page 26 of 59
==PAGE:35==
Spring 2023
3.2.8
Protein Purification by Column Chromatography and CD Characterisation
Protein purification was performed by dialysis after the expression media had been cen-
trifuged and the supernatant had been collected. The expression media containing the pro-
teins were poured into SnakeSkin Dialysis Tubing membranes (size 3.5K MWCO, 16mm
dry) from Thermo Scientific. The membranes were dialysed in 4L dialysis buffer contain-
ing 1xTris buffer and 20mM imidazole. The buffer was changed once, and samples were
left O/N in the buffer to reach equilibrium. Following dialysis, a protein purification kit
from Thermo Scientific was used aiding the purification by affinity chromatography using
gravity flow. 10mL solution containing 50% ethanol and 50% resin was loaded into pu-
rification columns. Columns were washed twice with dH2O water and the samples were
added to the columns and the flow-through was collected. The resin was resuspended with
the samples and incubated for 1 hour at 4◦C, with rolling. Following incubation, samples
were centrifuged for 3 min, 10,000xg, and the supernatant was collected as the non-retained
fraction. The resin was then resuspended in 10mL wash buffer and centrifuged for 3 min
at 10,000xg before the supernatant was collected once again. The wash step was repeated
once more and the flow-through was collected. Finally, the samples were eluted six times
with 1.5 mL of elution buffer and each elution was collected.
To confirm the presence of the proteins in the ’non-retain’, ’wash’ and ’elution’ fractions, an
SDS-PAGE experiment was conducted. 10uL of 3x loading buffer was mixed with 20uL of
sample, and loaded into a 10% NuPage SDS-PAGE, for 30 min at 200V. Once the presence
of the proteins was confirmed in the SDS-PAGE gel, a re-dialysis was performed on the
eluted samples containing protein in 1xPBS buffer, again using SnakeSkin Dialysis Tubing
membranes (size 3.5K MWCO, 16mm dry) from Thermo Scientific, which was left O/N for
dialysis before protein characterisation.
Protein characterisation was performed by circular dichroism (CD) spectroscopy. To pre-
pare the proteins for CD, 350uL of proteins were dialysed in 1L buffer (100mL potassium
phosphate buffer, 900mL dH2O) using in Slide-A-Lyzer Dialysis Casettes, 3.5K MWCO,
from Thermo Scientific™. The buffer was exchanged once, before leaving the samples for
Page 27 of 59
==PAGE:36==
Spring 2023
dialysis in the buffer media O/N. Two native toxins, short neurotoxin (Naja pallida) and
α-cobratoxin (Naja kaouthia), were included in the CD characterisation as controls.
The CD spectroscopy was performed using a JASCO J-1500 spectrophotometer and 0.1
mm quartz cuvettes. The spectra were obtained by running 10 accumulations for each
toxin between 250-190 nm with a data pitch of 0.1 nm at a scanning speed of 50 nm/sec.
Before initiating the CD scan, a blank sample of pure buffer solution was scanned to serve
as a reference for background noise. The resulting spectrum from the blank sample was
subtracted from the sample spectra to account for the buffer contribution. Following the ac-
quisition of spectra for all toxins, the data were processed using JASCO’s SpectraManager
software. Mean residue ellipticity values were calculated, considering variations in protein
concentrations and the number of amino acids for each toxin. The resulting curves were
then smoothed using JASCO software and GraphPad Prism.
3.2.9
Phage Display Selection of Antibodies and Nanobodies
To discover a broadly neutralising antivenom, a human naïve and an immunised llama
nanobody library was employed and panned against the two consensus toxins, STX18 and
STX19, for three consecutive rounds.
3.2.10
Biotinylation of Consensus Toxins
To enable indirect immobilisation in the ohage display selection, the toxins were biotiny-
lated.
NHS-PEG4-Biotin (1:1.5 ratio) was used to biotinylate both toxin STX18 and
STX19. The toxins were incubated at RT for 1 hour. Amicon 3K MWCO, 50mL falcon
tubes (15mL filters) from Milipore were washed with 15mL 1xPBS for 10 min, 4000xg at
4◦C. After centrifugation, 1xPBS and the biotinylated samples were transferred to the spin
columns, and the tubes were spun for 5-10 min, 4000xg at 4◦C three times, re-suspending
the liquid in the filters between each centrifugation step. A MALDI-TOF Mass Spectrom-
etry (MS) was performed on the biotinylated toxins, using Ultraflex II MALDI-TOF/TOF
instrument from Burker, revealing that the 60% of the STX18 toxin was bound with 1
Page 28 of 59
==PAGE:37==
Spring 2023
biotin molecule. However, STX19 had not been biotinylated successfully, and the toxin
was biotinylated again, in a molar ratio of 1:15 of Innolink Biotin per toxin. To confirm
the biotinylation of the STX19, a UV-1280 Multipurpose UV-Visible Spectrophotometer
from Shimadzu Europa GmbH was used, measuring the absorbance at A280 and A354, and
E1% Biotin MSR Calculator was used to confirm the biotinylation ratio of 2:1 of biotin per
toxin.
3.2.11
Solid Phage Display Selection with Consensus Toxins
Three consecutive phage display selection rounds were performed using two different types
of phage libraries: immunised nanobody libraries (nnbA/nnbC) and human naïve IONTAS
scFv libraries (κ and λ light chain). Both libraries were panned against the two consensus
toxins, STX18 and STX19. This principle of phage binding to the biotinylated toxin on
streptavidin-coated beads, as been illustrated in Figure 13A.
Figure 13: Solid Phage Display Preparations. A) In phage display selection the biotinylated toxin is bound to the
beads coated with streptavidin. The phage library is then added and antigen-binding phages are selected. B) Phage library
is blocked by adding milk proteins to block any unspecific binding between the phages and the toxin. C) Blocking of beads
takes place by adding milk-protein to block any unspecific binders that can bind phages or toxin. Illustration created with
BioRender.com
To begin the three consecutive panning rounds, the nnbC library needed to be rescued.
Starting from a TG1 immune library stock, 2xTY/amp100/gluc2% media was inoculated
with enough cells to reach an optimal density (OD) of 0.1 at 600nm.
The cells were
incubated at 37◦C, 250 RPM until an OD of 0.5 at 600nm was reached. Subsequently,
the TG1 cells were superinfected with M13 phages for 30 min in a warm water bath set
to 37◦C. The superinfected cells were then spun for 5 min at 4500 RPM at RT, and the
pellet was resuspended in 50 mL 2xTY/Km100/Amp100 media and grew at 37°C O/N at
Page 29 of 59
==PAGE:38==
Spring 2023
250 RPM. Finally, TG1 cells from a glycerol stock were streaked onto a plate containing
minimal media and incubated at 37◦C, O/N.
On the following day, the phages from the nnbC library were precipitated.
The O/N
cultures were centrifuged at 10.500 RPM, 4◦C for 10 min, and the resulting supernatant
was mixed with a 1/4th of the volume of ice-cold PEG/NaCl (20% PEG 6000/2.5 M NaCl)
and incubated on ice for 30 min. After incubation, the cultures were centrifuged with the
same configurations for 10 min and the pellet was resuspended in 1mL 1xPBS before another
round of centrifugation was performed for 1 min at 13.300 RPM, 4◦C. The supernatant was
transferred to new tubes containing 250 µL of PEG/NaCl, incubated on ice for 10 min,
and then subjected to another round of centrifugation for 10 min at 13.300 RPM, 4◦C to
obtain the pellet. The pellet was resuspended in 1mL 1xPBS and centrifuged with the same
settings for 20 min to remove any cell debris and the supernatant was recovered.
To determine the phage titers, the phage preparation was diluted in a 100-fold dilution of
1xPBS, and 200 µL of the phage solution was pipetted into cuvettes. The plaque-forming
unit was measured at 260 nm, and the phage titers were calculated using the following
Equation 1.
Phage
mL
= PFU260 × 100 × 22.14 × 1010
(1)
To ensure proper concentration of the libraries used in the selection rounds, the calcu-
lation shown in Equation 1 was used to determine the amount of Colony Forming Units
(CFU)/mL. The IONTAS scFv κ and (λ) library and the nnbA library were each panned
with a concentration of 100 nM antigen, while the nnbC library was panned with a con-
centration of 50 nM antigen. All four libraries had a 50x coverage, meaning that each
unique scFv or nanobody was represented 50 times. However, before performing the selec-
tion rounds both beads and the libraries were blocked, as hass been represented in Figure
13B and C.
For blocking, 120 µL of Invitrogen™Dynabeads™M-280 Streptavidin were used per selec-
tion (60 µL for deselecting the library and 60 µL for selection). The beads were loaded into
Eppendorf tubes on a DynaMag magnetic rack and washed three times in 3% MPBS. The
Page 30 of 59
==PAGE:39==
Spring 2023
beads were blocked by end-over-end rotation for 1 hour at RT before being placed onto the
DynaMag magnetic rack to remove the supernatant. Thereafter, the solution was placed
onto the DynaMag magnetic rack to remove the supernatant and washed three times with
3% MPBS. The beads were resuspended in the original volume of 3% MPBS and ready to
be used to deselect the phage libraries and in the selection rounds.
The four libraries were blocked in 3% MPBS at RT for 1 hour with end-over-end rotation,
and later resuspended in the blocked beads to undergo deselection. The deselection was
carried out at RT for 1 hour to eliminate phages that bound to the beads or streptavidin.
Following incubation, the tubes were loaded onto the magnetic rack and the supernatant
was collected, thus removing all the phages that showed binding to the beads.
After completing the deselection step, the actual selection began by mixing 60 µL of the
blocked and washed beads together with 35 µL of the selected antigen, STX18 and STX19,
in each tube. The beads and antigen were then incubated at RT with end-over-end rota-
tion for 10 min. Following the incubation, the tubes were loaded into the magnetic rack,
allowing the removal of the supernatant containing the unbound toxin. The beads were
then washed three times with 3% MPBS to eliminate any unbound toxins and resuspended
in 35µL 3% MPBS. The immobilised antigens on the beads were then mixed with the des-
elected libraries and selection was carried out for 1 hour at RT with end-over-end rotation.
To ensure the specificity of the selection process, a control containing no antigen was also
prepared for each library.
After selection, the beads were washed and eluted using trypsin. The phages were diluted
in a 200uL of trypsin elution buffer per selection (0.1 mg/mL), performed on a KingFisher™
Flex from Thermo Scientific™. From the elution plate, 100 µL of the eluted phages were
transferred to 50 mL falcon tubes and mixed with 3 mL of TG1 culture at OD of 0.5 at
600nm, in 2YT media. The infected bacteria were incubated for 1 hour at 37◦C. Following
the incubation, a 96-well plate was used to create a dilution series of the TG1 cells infected
with phages (1/10, 1/100, 1/1000, 1/10000, 1/100000) in 2YT media starting with 90 µL
2YT media and 10 µL of phage-infected TG1 cells, subsequently transferring 10 µL to the
next well for dilution. To determine the selection phage count, 5 µL of the infected TG1
cells were spotted in duplicates on 2YTGA plates. Each plate was divided into two sec-
Page 31 of 59
==PAGE:40==
Spring 2023
tions: one for the spotting of each phage dilution and one for the spotting of the negative
controls (no antigen). The plates were incubated at 30◦C O/N. The next day, the colonies
in the highest dilution were counted, and the count was correlated by subtraction of the
background (no antigen) using Equation 2 to determine the selection phage count, i.e., the
number of eluted phages. Finally, two O/N cultures of 7 mL of 2TYGA were added to TG1
cultures containing the phages and incubated at 30◦C with 280 RPM.
CFU
3 mL = Counted colonies
uL plated
× dilution factor × 3000 uL
(2)
Cells obtained in one of the two O/N cultures were centrifuged, and a 2mL glycerol stock was
prepared by resuspending the pellet in freezing media. The remaining cultures were diluted
and transferred to 5mL of 2TYGA media to achieve an OD of 0.05-0.1 at 600nm, and the
cultures were incubated at 37◦C at 280 RPM until an OD of 0.5 at 600nm (approximately
1-2 hours) was reached. Once the desired OD of 0.5 at 600nm was obtained, a multiplicity
of infection by 20 was added to achieve a coverage of 20x helper phages per cell. The
solution was incubated for 1 hour, and then spun twice at 3,200 RPM for 10 min and 2
min, respectively. The supernatant containing the glucose was removed, and the pellet was
resuspended in 10 mL 2xYTAK (2xYT containing 100 ug/mL of Ampicillin + 100 ug/mL
of Kanamycin). 5 mL of the media was transferred to a new 50 mL falcon tube, and all were
incubated at 25◦C O/N, at 280 RPM rotation. The two O/N cultures for each selection
were combined in a falcon tube (10mL) and phage precipitation was conducted as described
for the precipitation of the phage library nnbC.
The toxin-binding properties of the selected phages from the process described above were
assessed using a polyclonal phage ELISA as described in the following:.
3.2.12
Polyclonal Phage ELISA of Toxins
To evaluate the binding against the consensus antigens and the selected phages, a poly-
clonal phage ELISA experiment was conducted in 96-well plates.
Page 32 of 59
==PAGE:41==
Spring 2023
On the first day, the ELISA plates were prepared by coating with 60 µL of streptavidin
at a concentration of 10µg/mL in a solution of 1xPBS. For each of the two toxins, STX18
and STX19, a negative control was included, consisting of only 1xPBS. Additionally, a
streptavidin control was implemented, containing phages without any toxin, to evaluate
the number of streptavidin-binding phages. The plates were incubated O/N at 4 ◦C. The
following day, the plates were washed three times with 1xPBS to remove any unbound
streptavidin. Then, 60 µL of biotinylated consensus toxins (STX18 and STX19) and com-
mercial (sNTX, Nn4, Nn8, and α-cobratoxin) toxins at a concentration of 5 µg/mL in a
3% MPBS solution were added to the corresponding wells. The plates were incubated at
RT for 1 hour to allow binding between the biotinylated toxins and streptavidin. After the
incubation, the wells were washed three times with 1xPBS to remove any unbound toxins.
Subsequently, the wells were blocked with 200 µL of 3% MPBS at RT for 1 hour to prevent
non-specific binding. The blocking solution was then discarded, and the plates were washed
three times with 1xPBS to remove any residual blocking solution. Next, 10µL of 20x phages
prepared in 50µL of 3% MPBS, were added to each well. The plates were stored at RT for 1
hour to allow binding between the phages and the antigens. After the incubation, the phage
solution was removed, and the wells were washed three times with 1xPBS containing 0.1%
Tween to wash away any unbound phages. This was followed by an additional washing step
with 1xPBS to ensure thorough cleaning of the wells and the removal of tween. Thereafter,
60 µL of a 1:5500 dilution of anti-M13-HRP in 3% MPBS were added to each well and
incubated for 1 hour at RT. Finally, the wells were washed again using the same washing
procedure as before, and 60 µL of TMB substrate solution was added to each well. The
reaction was allowed to proceed to reach enough color development and stopped by adding
2M sulfuric acid. The absorbance at 450 nm was measured using a plate reader.
Page 33 of 59
==PAGE:42==
Spring 2023
4
Results
4.1
Subcloning by NEBuilder Assembly and Transformation
The subcloning process aimed to enable the production of both the two consensus and two
native neurotoxins. A PCR amplification was performed on the genes of interest and the
P. pastoris expression vector, Xy-001, shown in an agarose gel in Figure 14. In the gel,
distinct bands corresponding to the genes encoding the toxins is observed: STX14 = 242
bp, STX17 = 272 bp, STX18 = 242 bp, and STX19 = 275 bp. Additionally, the Xy-001
vector band is present at 3538 bp.
Figure 14: PCR Amplification. PCR amplification of toxins and expression vector.
Figure 14 shows that all four gene inserts and the vector were successfully amplified. Con-
sequently, the constructs were extracted from the gel and subjected to NEBuilder assembly,
followed by transformation into E. coli. Colonies grew on all four plates after transforma-
tion as depicted in Figure 15. Colonies were picked and sequenced, which can be seen in
Appendix Figures 29, 30, 31, and 32 respectively, confirming the successful implementation
of the genes into the expression vector.
Page 34 of 59
==PAGE:43==
Spring 2023
Figure 15: Transformation. Construct transformation into E. coli cells. A) STX14, B) STX17, C) STX18, D) STX19
.
To facilitate the integration of the four constructs into P. pastoris, a series of steps were
performed.
Initially, Midiprep cultures were prepared from the colonies that had been
confirmed to contain the inserts by sequencing.
From these cultures, linearisation and
DNA precipitation were conducted. Subsequently, the linearised and precipitated samples
were subjected to gel electrophoresis to confirm the presence of the gene constructs prior
to conducting electroporation into P. pastoris as seen in Figure 16. The gel confirms the
presence of the four gene constructs by the shift in band position corresponding to the
size of each gene when compared to the empty Xy-001 vector. The positions of the bands
are: STX14 = 3780bp, STX17 = 3810bp, STX18 = 3780bp, and STX19 = 3813bp, Xy-001
vector = 3592bp. Thus, linearisation and precipitation were successfully conducted and the
constructs were subjected to electroporation.
Figure 16:
DNA Linearisation and Precipitation.
Confirmation of the presence of the four gene constructs after
linearisation and DNA precipitated.
Page 35 of 59
==PAGE:44==
Spring 2023
4.2
Protein Expression and Column Chromatography Purification
After electroporation, protein expression was executed. During the expression, samples were
collected at multiple time points: 0, 24, 48, 72, and 96 hours to follow the protein expression
yield. The collected samples are present in the gel in Figure 17, showing increased protein
expression yield with time, with the highest protein yield observed at 96h. Moreover, the
proteins encoding toxin STX14 and STX18 showed a higher protein yield than toxin STX17
and STX19.
Figure 17: Protein Expression. Protein expression of toxins STX14, STX17, STX18, and STX19 in P. pastoris. Samples
were obtained at time points: 0, 24, 48, 72, and 96 hours as visualised in the gel.
An SDS-PAGE analysis of the proteins following dialysis and purification by column gravity
is presented in Figure 18. A comparison between Figure 17 and Figure 18 reveals that the
bands, particularly for the STX14 toxin, appear less distinct after the purification process.
The figure shows that the STX18 toxin exhibited the highest protein yield, followed by
the STX19 toxin. Furthermore, the two native toxins, STX14 and STX17, showed a rela-
tively low protein yield, particularly the STX17 toxin. These observations were supported
by NanoDrop measurements after purification: STX14 = 0.104 mg/mL, STX17 = 0.044
mg/mL, STX18 = 0.443 mg/mL, and STX19 = 0.303 mg/mL. NanoDrop measurements
revealed enough protein concentration of STX18 and STX19 to utilise them in protein char-
acterisation and phage display. However, the protein yield for the two native toxins, STX14
and STX17, was too low to include them in the polyclonal ELISA evaluation.
Page 36 of 59
==PAGE:45==
Spring 2023
Figure 18:
Toxin Purification.
SDS-PAGE experiment, evaluating the protein yield following protein purification of
STX14, STX17, STX18, and STX19 toxin.
Protein expression of the four toxins was performed in P. pastoris. Before the purification
STX14 and STX17 yielded a high protein concentration. However, following protein purifi-
cation, it was evident that a fraction of the obtained proteins had been lost, especially for
STX14.
4.3
Protein Characterisation by Circular Dichroism
To assess the secondary structure of the toxins, a CD protein characterisation was evaluated.
In the analysis, the four target toxins were included, STX14, STX17, STX18, and STX19,
as well as two commercial toxins, α-cobratoxin from Naja kaouthia and a short neurotoxin
from Naja pallida as controls.
Figure 19: Circular Dichroism Spectra. Protein fingerprint of STX14, STX17, STX18, STX19 and two native toxins,
α-cobra toxin and short neurotoxin.
From the CD spectrum in Figure 19, it is evident that the STX18 toxin and the two
commercial toxins harbor a β-sheet in their protein structure.
This is observed in the
Page 37 of 59
==PAGE:46==
Spring 2023
figure as a minimum peak at 218 nm. The remaining three toxins, STX14, STX17, and
STX19, showed no sign of protein misfolding, but no further conclusions can be made on
the secondary structure of the proteins, which is likely due to too low concentrations of the
proteins utilised for the CD analysis.
Based on a CD analysis of the protein secondary structure of the toxins, it has been con-
cluded that STX18 is properly folded, whereas the structure of the STX19 toxin is not
misfolded, but further information on the secondary structure of the protein cannot be
concluded based on the CD analysis.
4.4
Assessment of Biotinylation Ratios on Toxins
The two consensus toxins, STX18 and STX19, were biotinylated with NHS-PEG4-Biotin,
as described in section 3.2.10. The biotinylated toxins were evaluated using MALDI-TOF
MS.
Figure 20: MALDI-TOF MS of Biotinylatd STX18. Mass spectra of biotinylated STX18, with 60% of the STX18
toxin was successfully biotinylated x1.
The results from the MALDI-TOF MS of STX18 is displayed in Figure 20, showing that
the toxin was biotinylated with a 0.6 biotin ratio, meaning that 60% of the STX18 toxin
had been biotinylated with 1 biotin molecule. This biotinylation ratio is represented by the
peak to the right (8131.415 Da), shifted by 475 Da, compared to the unmodified toxin of
7656 Da, left peak in the MS. This mass shift correlates with the expected mass shift for the
NHS-PEG4-Biotin reagent. Figure 21 shows the MALDI-TOF MS for STX19 toxin, show-
ing only the unbiotinylated toxin, represented by a single peak on the spectrum (8807.316
Page 38 of 59
==PAGE:47==
Spring 2023
Da). Based on this peak, it can be concluded that STX19 did not biotinylate as anticipated.
Therefore, a second biotinylation of STX19 was performed using Innolink Biotin. The bi-
otin molar substitution ratio was quantified using UV spectra at A280/354, revealing A280
= 0.294 absorbance and A354 = 0.648 absorbance. The biotinylation of the toxin was de-
termined using the E1% Biotin MSR Calculator, by inserting the absorbance measurements
at A280 and A354, revealing that the STX19 toxin was 2x biotinylated.
Figure 21: MALDI-TOF MS of Biotinylated STX19. Mass spectra of the intended biotinylated STX19. Only a single
peak was observed visualising the unbiotinylated toxin indicating that the biotinylation was unsuccessful.
4.5
Phage Display Selection Output for Consensus Toxins
Once the consensus toxins were biotinylated, multiple rounds of phage display selection
were conducted.
The IONTAS scFv κ and λ phage libraries, as well as the nanobody
libraries nnbA (8-weeks) and nnbC (booster), were used for the selection. These libraries
were panned against the two consensus toxins.
A total of three selection rounds were
performed, and after each round, the output was evaluated to determine which libraries
would be included in the subsequent round.
Phage Selection Round 1
The first selection round, included all four phage libraries: human naïve scFv, κ and λ, and
nanobody library, nnbA and nnbC. Figure 22 shows the output of TG1 cells infected with
phages after the first selection round. Panning of STX18 and STX19 against the nnbA
Page 39 of 59
==PAGE:48==
Spring 2023
and nnbC libraries showed better enrichment than against the scFv κ and λ libraries. The
λ library showed no enrichment against neither the STX18 nor STX19 toxin (picture not
shown). Thus, this scFv λ library was excluded in the second selection round.
Figure 22: Phage Selection Round 1. Output from the first selection round of the nanobody nnbA, nnbC, and IONTAS
scFv λ (not shown), and κ libraries panned against the STX18 and STX19 toxins displayed on the left side of the plates. The
controls-phages have not been panned against any toxins, which is displayed on the right side of the plates.
Phage Selection Round 2
The second selection round included the scFv κ library, and the nanobody nnbA and nnbC
libraries. The phage-infected TG1 cells remaining at the end of the selection round was
plated, as seen in Figure 23. The selection plates show that the nnbA library (plates A and
D) and the nnbC library (plate B and E) outperformed the scFv κ library (plate C and F),
as better enrichment is observed on the plates. Thus, the scFv κ library was excluded after
the second selection round.
Furthermore, the nnbA library showed better enrichment when panned against the STX18
toxin (plate D, Figure 23) compared to the STX19 toxin (plate A, Figure 23). Due to the
better performance of the nnbA library panned against the STX18 toxin, it was decided that
two different concentrations of the STX18 toxin for the nnbA library were to be included
Page 40 of 59
==PAGE:49==
Spring 2023
in the third selection round, aiming to elute high-affinity binders.
The enrichment observed for the nnbC library panned against the two toxins proved better
for the STX19 than the STX18 toxin, as seen in plate B and E in Figure 23), respectively.
Ideally, both the STX18 and STX19 toxins panned against the nnbC library would have
been included in two different concentrations in the third selection round. However, due to
a laboratory error, only two selection rounds were performed for the nnbC library panned
against the STX19 toxin. Thus, it was decided to perform a third selection round with the
STX18 against the nnbC library in two different concentrations.
Figure 23: Phage Selection Round 2. Output from the second selection round of the nanobody nnbA, nnbC, and IONTAS
scFv κ libraries panned against the STX18 and STX19 toxins displayed on the left side of the plates. The controls-phages
have not been panned against any toxins, which is displayed on the right side of the plates.
Phage Selection Round 3
The third selection round included only the nnbA and nnbC libraries, panned against
STX18 and STX19 toxin. The STX18 toxin was included in this round, in two different
concentrations for each of the two libraries. For the nnbA library, the STX18 toxin was
added in a 10nM and 100nM concentration, and for the nnbC library, the STX18 toxin was
Page 41 of 59
==PAGE:50==
Spring 2023
added in a 5nM and 50nM concentration.
The selection plates are shown in Figure 24. Plates A-D in Figure 24 show the output of the
third selection round for the STX18 toxin. Plates A and B for the nnbA library in Figure 24,
show similar results, however, it is hypothesised that the eluted phages remaining from the
lower concentration (10nM) will exhibit a higher binding affinity against STX18 toxin than
the eluted phages in the higher concentration (100nM). The same is hypothesised for the
eluted phages in the nnbC library panned against the STX18 toxin, as the plating of the 5nM
and 50nM concentrations show comparable counts of colonies. For the nnbA library panned
against the STX19 toxin, plate E in Figure 24, control side, exhibits numerous colonies.
This points to a low enrichment for the nnbA library for the STX19 toxin compared to
STX18.
Figure 24: Phage Selection Round 3. Output from the third selection round of the nanobody nnbA and nnbC libraries
panned against the STX18 and STX19 toxins displayed on the left side of the plates. The controls-phages have not been panned
against any toxins, which is displayed on the right side of the plates. In this selection round, two different concentrations were
included for the STX18 toxin against the nnbA (10nM and 100nM) and nnbC (5nM and 50nM) libraries.
In addition to examining the plates from the phage selection rounds and comparing them
qualitatively with the controls, CFU values were determined. These values were determined
based on the counts obtained from the lowest dilution that could be accurately counted
(Figure 22, 23, and 24), subtracting this number with the corresponding negative control.
Notably, the dilution series was expected to result in a 10-fold decrease in colonies for
Page 42 of 59
==PAGE:51==
Spring 2023
each dilution. However, it is evident from Figure 22, 23, and 24 that this trend was not
consistently observed. Thus, the CFU calculation should be regarded as tendencies rather
than exact numbers. The CFU ratio for each selection can be used as an indicator for the
enrichment of phages that binds to the target toxin.
Figure 25: CFU Values for STX18. CFU values were obtained from three selection rounds performed on the nnbA and
nnbC libraries. For the third selection round two concentration of the toxin STX18 was used: nnbA =10nM and 100nM and
nnbC = 5nM and 50nM
The CFU values for STX18 toxin for the three selection rounds is depicted in Figure 25 on
a log-scale. Both the nnbA and nnbC libraries exhibited an increase in enrichment from
round 1 to round 2, and from round 2 to round 3 for toxin STX18. Furthermore, in round
3, two different concentrations of STX18 were utilised: 5nM and 50nM for the nnbC library,
and 10nM and 100nM for the nnbA library. Comparing the results obtained from the two
concentrations for both the nnbA and nnbC libraries, no notable difference is observed.
Figure 26 presents the graphical representation of the CFU values for STX19. As previously
mentioned, two selection rounds were performed for the nnbC library, while the nnbA
library underwent three selection rounds. For both nnbA and nnbC libraries, an increase in
enrichment is observed from round 1 to round 2. However, a slight increase in enrichment
is observed from round 2 to round 3 for the nnbA library.
Page 43 of 59
==PAGE:52==
Spring 2023
Figure 26: CFU Values for STX19. CFU values obtained from three selection rounds performed for the nnbA library,
and two selection rounds performed for the nnbC library.
Colony count on from selection plates confirmed the successful selection using the nnbA
and nnbC libraries panned against the STX18 and STX19 toxins. The scFv λ library was
eliminated after one selection round, and the κ library after two selection rounds. CFU
values indicated enrichment between round 1 and 2, and round 2 and 3 for the STX18 toxin
for both nnbA and nnbC library. Similarly, enrichment was observed between round 1 and
round 2 for the STX19 toxin for the nnbA and nnbC libraries.
4.6
Polyclonal Phage ELISA Evaluation of Selected Phages
To evaluate the selected phages from the phage display experiment, a polyclonal phage
ELISA was conducted to assess the binding against both consensus and native antigens.
Figure 27 (right graph) shows the results of the phage ELISA for selected phages obtained
from the nnbA library. Comparing round 1 and round 2, a notable enrichment is evident.
However, there is no substantial difference in enrichment when comparing round 2 and round
3. In round 3, the nnbA library was panned against two different concentrations (10nM
and 100nM) of the STX18 consensus toxin. The purpose of this approach was to elute
phages that have a high-affinity binding to the STX18 toxin during the low-concentration
(10nM) selection process. However, it is crucial to understand that the polyclonal ELISA
method solely confirms the presence or absence of binding, without providing information
about the actual binding affinity between the eluted phages and the STX18 toxin. When
Page 44 of 59
==PAGE:53==
Spring 2023
comparing the results obtained from the two concentrations used in round 3, no significant
differences was observed. Figure 27 (right graph) shows the results of the phage ELISA
for selected phages obtained from the nnbA library. Comparing round 1 and round 2, a
notable enrichment is evident. However, there is no substantial difference in enrichment
when comparing round 2 and round 3. In round 3, the nnbA library was panned against two
different concentrations (10nM and 100nM) of the STX18 consensus toxin. The purpose of
this approach was to select phages with high-affinity binding to the STX18 toxin from the
low-concentration (10nM). However, it is important to remember that the polyclonal ELISA
method solely confirms the presence or absence of binding, without providing information
about the actual binding affinity between the eluted phages and toxin. When comparing
the results obtained from the two concentrations used in round 3, no significant differences
was observed.
Figure 27: Polyclonal Phage ELISA, STX18. Binding assessment of selected phages against the STX18 toxin. Two
different concentrations were included in the phage selection round 3, nnbC (50nM and 5nM) and nnbA (100 nM and 10mM).
Streptavidin was included to test if any phages with streptavidin binding had been eluted. A negative control was included,
without any of the eluted phages. sNTX = Short neurotoxin 1 from Naja pallida, Nn4 = Fraction no. 4 from Naja nivea.
By examining the nnbC library in Figure 27, left graph, it is apparent that the number
o f selected phages obtained from each round is increasing, with the highest number of
selected phages resulting from round 3. During the third selection round, two different
concentrations (5nM and 50nM) were panned against the nnbC library. Notably, a higher
Page 45 of 59
==PAGE:54==
Spring 2023
quantity of phages capable of binding to STX18 was observed in the 50mM concentration,
compared to the 5nM concentration.
However, it is important to recognise the 50nM
selection exhibited a higher standard deviation for both STX18 and sNTX, indicating the
presence of outliers in the data. Moreover, when comparing the two native toxins, sNTX
and Nn4, it is evident that a larger amount of binders were found for Nn4 in the nnbA
library, than in the nnbC library.
In the ELISA set-up, streptavidin was introduced into a subset of wells to determine the
extent to which phages had bound to streptavidin rather than the targeted antigen. This
is crucial information as phages binding solely to streptavidin would generate false positive
signals. When analysing the combined results from all rounds, it can be observed that only
a limited number of phages exhibit binding for streptavidin.
Figure 28: Polyclonal Phage ELISA, STX19. Binding assessment of selected phages against the STX19 toxin. Strepta-
vidin was included to test if any phages with streptavidin binding had been eluted. A negative control was included, without
any of the eluted phages. a-cobra = alpha-cobratoxin from Naja kaouthia, Nn8 = Fraction no. 8 from Naja nivea.
An analysis of the phage libraries panned against the STX19 toxin is depicted in Figure 28.
The right side of the graph shows the panning against the nnbA library, with three selection
rounds. The data shows an increase in the number of binders between round 1 and 2, while
no real increase is observed between round 2 and 3. Furthermore, it is noteworthy that
the selected phages from all three rounds demonstrate a similar number of binders against
the two native toxins, α-cobra toxin and Nn8. The phages binding to the STX18 toxin
Page 46 of 59
==PAGE:55==
Spring 2023
exhibit a higher standard deviation compared to the two native toxins. A high standard
deviation suggests that the data displaying the binding of phages panned against STX18 is
more spread and contains outliers.
For the nnbC library, Figure 28, left graph, two rounds of phage selection were conducted.
Evaluating the ELISA data from these rounds reveals a noticable increase in phage binders
between round 1 and round 2, similar to the nnbA library. Furthermore, a similar trend is
observed for the binding capabilities of the selected phages towards the two native toxins,
α-cobratoxin and Nn8, with a substantial increase observed from round 1 to round 2.
Comparing the two libraries with each other in the context of the first selection round, more
binder is obtained from the nnbC library compared to the nnbA library. Moreover, when
considering the number of phages from the two libraries panned against the two native
toxins, the nnbC library demonstrated a greater quantitative binding capacity than the
nnbA library.
Lastly, streptavidin was included in the same manner as in the case of the STX18 toxin.
When analysing the data from the ELISA analysis, it is evident that only a limited number
of phages exhibited binding for streptavidin, confirming the specificity of the eluted phages
eluted after selection.
To sum up the results from the polyclonal phage ELISA: The nnbA library, round 2 of
panning against the STX18 toxin demonstrated superior enrichment compared to round 1,
but no significant difference was observed between round 2 and round 3. The ELISA output
for STX18 showed no notable disparity between the 10nM and 100nM concentrations in the
nnbA library. In the nnbC library, round 3 outperformed both round 1 and round 2, with
the 50nM concentration yielding the highest output. For nnbA panned against STX19,
round 2 exhibited the best results, while nnbC showed an increase in the enrichment of
phages binding to STX19 from round 1 to round 2.
Page 47 of 59
==PAGE:56==
Spring 2023
5
Discussion
In line with this study’s introduction, this project’s objective has been to identify broadly
targeting antibodies and nanobodies capable of binding to the 3FTxs found in venomous
Elapid snakes in Sub-Saharan Africa. To achieve this goal, molecular biology experiments
were conducted to express the proteins in P. pastoris, enabling their biotinylation for phage
display selection. Ultimately, the hope is that these toxin-binding agents will be incorpo-
rated into a broadly neutralising venom, that could potentially help save some of the more
than 100,000 victims [1] that die annually as a result of a venomous snake bite.
5.1
Assessment of Protein Expression in P. pastoris
Toxins were subcloned into E. coli and expressed in P. pastoris where samples were collected
at different time points during the protein expression process. Analysis of the results showed
that STX14 yielded the highest protein amount compared to the other proteins, as depicted
on the gel in Figure 17. Additionally, the purification process was expected to produce more
pronounced bands in the gel electrophoresis than what was observed (see Figure 18).
Hence, it was suspected that a certain amount of protein may have been lost during either
dialysis or protein purification. Further examination of the gel revealed minimal protein
loss in the flow-through and wash steps during the purification. Thus, it is likely that the
protein loss observed during the dialysis process, using 1x Tris (20 mM Tris) and 20 mM
imidazole, could be attributed to the proteins being exposed to an unfavorable environment.
5.2
Toxin Biotinylation: NHS-PEG4 and Innolink Biotin
In the biotinylation process of antigens for phage display selection, the ideal goal is to attain
a 1:1 ratio of biotin molecule to protein molecule. In this study, a molar ratio of 1 toxin
to 1.5 NHS-PEG4-Biotin was employed to attain the desired biotinylation ratio. Figure 20
depicts the biotinylation of toxin STX18, displaying a ratio of approximately 60% of the
toxin being biotinylated with a single biotin molecule. This is evidenced by the presence
of a second peak (8131 Da) in the MALDI-TOF MS, indicating a molecular mass shift
corresponding to the NHS-PEG4-Biotin molecule of 475 Da. However, the spectrum is still
showing a peak of 7656 Da, representing the remaining, unbiotinylated toxin.
Page 48 of 59
==PAGE:57==
Spring 2023
It is worth noting that the actual mass of the NHS-PEG4-Biotin used in this experiment is
473 Da [29]. The disparity between the measured (475 Da) and expected mass shift (473
Da) can likely be attributed to unsuccessful calibration of the MALDI-TOF instrument,
prior to the analysis, and inaccurate measurements of using the specific MALDI-TOF in-
strument.
Lastly, it is important to emphasize that the evaluation of the MALDI-TOF MS is a semi-
quantitative method, and the determination of the biotinylated toxin ratio relies on a visual
interpretation of the spectrum. It should be noted that the observed ratio may vary de-
pending on the analysis of the spectrum.
For the biotinylation of the STX19, the use of NHS-PEG4-Biotin seemed to prove unsuc-
cessful as there were no additional peaks of mass shifts in the MALDI-TOF MS after bi-
otinylation. The biotinylation using NHS-PEG4-Biotin could have been unsuccessful due to
e.g., too low molar ratio of the NHS-PEG4-Biotin reagents, or even a coincidence. Instead,
the toxin was biotinylated using Innolink Biotin in a molar ratio of 1 toxin to 15 biotin
molecules. The biotinylation of the STX19 toxin was confirmed using UV spectroscopy
confirming the presence of two peaks at A280 and A354, respectively. The biotinylation
ratio was calculated, revealing that the STX19 toxin was over-biotinylated, with an ap-
proximately 2:1 ratio of biotin molecule to toxin molecule.
The under-biotinylation of STX18 and the over-biotinylation of STX19 was compensated
for in the phage display selection, as higher concentrations of the under-biotinylated STX18
toxin were used, compared to the over-biotinylated STX19 toxin. However, insufficient bi-
otinylation of STX18 poses a risk of losing antigen-binding phages since unbiotinylated
toxins will not be captured, while the over-biotinylated STX19 could pose a risk of masking
or modifying epitopes, as well as potentially changing the protein conformation [28, 26].
To potentially address the issue of suboptimal biotinylation ratios of the toxin, the expres-
sion vector, Xy-001, could have been modified by incorporating a DNA sequence encoding
an Avi-tag. This modification would allow for the addition of an Avi-tag at the C-terminus
in the two proteins, following protein expression. Subsequently, enzymatic biotinylation
of the Avi-tag using BirA could be performed, resulting in the covalent attachment of a
single biotin molecule within the Avi-tag. This method enables precise binding of the biotin
molecule, in contrast to the current approach which chemically attaches the biotin molecule
Page 49 of 59
==PAGE:58==
Spring 2023
at the lysine side-chains on the toxin. The less controlled attachment of biotin molecules
on the toxin could potentially mask or hide binding sites between the toxin and the phages.
However, it is important to note that the utilisation of biotinylation through an Avi-tag
requires an additional purification step to remove the BirA enzyme [30].
5.3
Evaluation of 3FTx-binding scFvs and Nanobodies
During the phage display selection, two human naïve scFv libraries, a κ and a λ light
chain format, and two immunised llama nanobodies libraries, nnbA and nnbC, were se-
lected against the consensus toxins. However, due to insufficient enrichment after colony
counting, the scFv libraries, λ, and κ, were excluded following the first and second selection
round, respectively.
As expected, the nanobody library demonstrated higher enrichment than the scFv library
during the phage display selections, as evidenced by colony growth on the selection plates
and CFU values. This difference in library performance has been assessed to be due to the
nanobodies having been previously immunised with whole venom from snake species which
has been included in the design of the two consensus toxins. The immune system is able to
develop memory against any antigen that it encounters, thus providing better recognition
and clearance of that antigen during a potential re-encounter. Thus, a larger degree of
enrichment for the nanobody libraries was expected and also observed when compared to
the naïve scFvs, which encountered the toxins for the first time during the phage selection.
The same principle with antigen recognition also contributes to why the boosted nanobody
library (nnbC) was expected to exhibit more binders in the phage selection than the 8-week
nanobody library (nnbA). However, based on the selection plates (Figure 22, 23, and 24)
and the CFU values (Figure 25 and 26) only the STX19 toxin exhibited better enrichment
for the nnbC than the nnbA library, which was not the case for the STX18 toxin. When
taking the ELISA results (Figure 27 and 28) into consideration, there is, however, not a
noticeable difference in the number of selected phages from the nnbA library compared to
the nnbC library against the consensus toxins.
The protein concentrations of the native toxins, STX14 and STX17, was too low following
protein purification, preventing their inclusion in the polyclonal phage ELISA evaluation
Page 50 of 59
==PAGE:59==
Spring 2023
based on NanoDrop measurements and the evaluation of Figure 18. Originally, the objec-
tive of including the recombinantly expressed native toxins in the phage ELISA experiment
was to investigate whether any recognition issues towards the commercial toxins were due
to the artificial consensus sequence or the recombinant expression method used for the
construction of the consensus sequence. Unfortunately, only the commercial toxins were
included in the phage ELISA evaluation, which prevented the comparison of the binding
capabilities of selected phages against both the recombinantly expressed and commercial
toxins.
From Figure 27, showing the phage ELISA output for the STX18 toxin, it is evident that
a higher degree of phages was selected against the sNTX than the Nn4 toxin for the nnbA
library, whereas the nnbC library exhibited phages with binding against both the sNTX
and the Nn4 toxin, with a slightly higher degree of obtained binders for the sNTX than the
Nn4 toxin. This suggests that the nnbC library may include selected phages with broader
coverage than the nnbA library. Furthermore, it is evident that sNTX and STX18 toxins
display similar phage ELISA results, suggesting that the selected phages recognise both the
consensus and native toxin with comparable binding. This result indicates that the selected
phages has the potential to bind to naturally occurring 3FTxs.
Figure 28 presents the phage ELISA results for the STX19 toxin, revealing that the phages
selected in the second round from the nnbC library, targeting the α-cobra and Nn8 toxin,
exhibit superior binding capabilities compared to the phages selected from the second round
of the nnbA library. This discrepancy suggests that the nnbC library contains a larger pool
of potential toxin-binding phages to the native toxins compared to the nnbA library.
The phage display method employed in this study offers a high-throughput approach, capa-
ble of screening large libraries containing up to 1012 variants. This enables rapid screening of
candidate molecules in a comprehensive manner. Contrarily, it is important to acknowledge
that the phage display method can be laborious and time-consuming [31]. Furthermore, it
primarily provides information regarding the binding capabilities of the selected molecules,
without evaluating their potential for high-affinity binding and neutralisation of the 3FTx
present in snake venom. Before conducting phage display selection, extensive preparation is
required, involving subcloning, transformation, expression, purification, and biotinylation.
Page 51 of 59
==PAGE:60==
Spring 2023
Additionally, obtaining nanobodies from llamas comes with ethical issues and is a tedious
process of injecting the animal to obtain suitable candidates for use in phage display selec-
tion. By using (human) naïve libraries, ethical issues are avoided, however, these libraries
are unbiased toward the target antigens, typically displaying a much lower affinity, than
immunised libraries. Such naïve libraries should ideally be obtained from a large pool of
healthy donors from diverse ethnic backgrounds [31]. The results from this study high-
light this point of human naïve scFv libraries, as these showed the least enrichment during
selection (section 4.5), and for this reason, were eliminated from the final phage display
selection.
5.4
Utilisation of Consensus Toxins
The consensus toxins used in this experiment have been engineered to represent an aver-
age sequence of naturally occurring 3FTxs. They were employed to select antibodies and
nanobodies with broad binding potential against the target toxins.
Importantly, snake
venoms are complex and unlikely to be neutralised by a single molecule in a "univer-
sal antivenom". Thus, future antivenom development may involve complex therapeutic
products combining different toxin-neutralising components. These antivenoms could be
region-specific and consider toxin similarities [32]. Consensus toxins are an important tool
in this context, as they enable the creation of a cost-effective antivenom with a broad bind-
ing potential, using few components, offering a practical solution for regions with limited
resources and access to healthcare [32]. The implementation of a comprehensive treatment
option covering multiple snake species could improve patient outcomes by reducing the
risks of misdiagnosis. However, using artificially constructed consensus toxins carries the
risk that selected phages will not recognise the native toxins. Needless to say, if this is the
case, the utilisation of consensus toxins would prove pointless.
Fortunately, the polyclonal phage ELISA results in this study indicate, that the phages se-
lected against the consensus toxins are able to recognise and bind to native toxins, demon-
strating broad binding coverage.
No 3D protein structure of the toxins is commercially available, thus s prediction of the
structure has been constructed using AlphaFold (Figure 9). However, this structure is only
Page 52 of 59
==PAGE:61==
Spring 2023
a prediction, thus, protein characterisation by CD was utilised to obtain information on the
actual secondary structure of the toxins. The CD spectrum only provided limited infor-
mation about the protein structure, most likely due to too low concentrations of proteins
used in the analysis, as evident from the NanoDrop measurements of the proteins. The
only information obtained from the CD analysis of the proteins was, that the STX18 toxin
harbored the β-sheet, as a minimum peak was observed in the CD spectra at 218 nm. The
structure of the STX19 toxin showed no sign of misfolding, yet no further information was
obtained from the CD analysis. Instead of continuing with the biotinylation and phage
display selection of the toxin immediately after the CD analysis, a NanoDSF analysis ob-
taining information about protein stability could have been conducted. If one wanted an
in-depth analysis of the protein structure, an Nuclear Magnetic Resonance spectroscopy
analysis, or even an X-ray crystallography analysis, could have been performed as well.
When analysing the unbiotinylated STX19 toxin from the MALDI-TOF MS, a single peak
of 8807 Da is observed. The expected mass of the toxin is however 8812 Da. This difference
in mass is likely a result of the specific MALDI-TOF instrument being generally inaccurate,
and furthermore, it was not possible to correctly calibrate the instrument before the anal-
ysis began. Nevertheless, this analysis is a confirmation of the mass of the STX19 toxin, if
the instrument is to be trusted.
Page 53 of 59
==PAGE:62==
Spring 2023
6
Conclusion
This study aimed to identify human naïve scFvs and immunized llama nanobodies that bind
to native 3FTxs from venomous Elapid snakes. To achieve this, phage display selection was
employed, and polyclonal phage ELISA was used to evaluate their binding to toxins.
Due to poor enrichment in the phage display selection, the scFv κ and λ libraries were
excluded, and only the nanobody libraries were screened further. Polyclonal phage ELISA
evaluation revealed comparable binding of the selected phages from both the 8-week library
(nnbA) and the booster library (nnbC) to the consensus toxins. Phages selected for the
STX18 consensus toxin revealed that the booster library (nnbC) had a higher number of
binders against the native toxin (Nn4) compared to the 8-week library (nnbA). Similarly,
the phages selected against the STX19 consensus toxin showed that the booster library
(nnbC) exhibited more binders against the two native toxins (Nn8 and α-cobra) than the
8-week library (nnbA).
The discovered nanobodies from this study are in the early testing phase, but have shown
promising results. By using consensus toxins, it has been possible to identify and select
phages with broad binding capabilities against native toxins from Elapid snakes.
This
marks an important initial step towards developing a fully human recombinant antivenom,
that offers a broad and neutralising effect. Such an antivenom would serve as an alternative
to the current method of using polyclonal antibodies derived from immunised animals.
Further testing is required to determine the binding affinity and in vivo neutralisation poten-
tial of the discovered nanobodies against the target toxins. If these candidates demonstrate
effective neutralisation abilities in pre-clinical and clinical trials, they will be incorporated
into a commercialised snake antivenom for the treatment of venomous snake bites against
the 3FTx from Elapid snakes in Sub-Saharan Africa.
Page 54 of 59
==PAGE:63==
Spring 2023
7
Next Steps: Research and Perspectives
7.1
Future research
To realise the potential of the toxin-binding nanobodies discovered in this study, addi-
tional testing is require to access their ability to neutralise 3FTxs from snake venom. The
nanobodies needs to be subcloned from the phagemids into E. coli, to achieve monoclonal
cultures expressing nanobodies, for screening purposes. A preliminary screening using mon-
oclonal ELISA will identify binders against the consensus toxins. and compare the nanobod-
ies’ ability to bind to various native toxins at different concentrations. Next, DELFIA can
be performed on the monoclonal nanobody cultures to assess their binding properties. The
candidates should then be sequenced to identify the nanobody of each candidate, followed by
Bio-Layer Interferometry to measure the binding strength and disassociation. On remaining
candidates, patch clamp can be utilised to investigate if the nanobodies can neutralisation
native 3FTx derived from Elapids, followed by in vivo testing.
7.2
Alternative Method of Antivenom Research
An alternative method to phage display for the discovery of candidates for a broad, neu-
tralising antivenom is hybridoma technology. A production animal is immunised with the
antigen(s) of interest, harvesting antibody-producing B-cells against the antigen(s), fusing
these with myeloma cells to create a cell line hybridoma. The obtained hybridoma cells can
then be examined for the secretion of toxin-binding monoclonal antibodies, and their abil-
ity to neutralise the injected antigen(s) both in laboratory settings (in vitro) and in living
organisms (in vivo). This method enables the production of monoclonal antibodies, while
preserving the natural processes of recombination and affinity maturation that occur within
living organisms [33]. In 2008, Morine et al. [34] successfully generated two monoclonal
antibodies (IgGs), capable of neutralising snake venom in vitro by employing hybridoma
technology. Although hybridomas have traditionally been used for antibody expression,
they have certain limitations making them less suitable for large-scale production. These
limitations include accumulation of toxic metabolites, high oxygen demand, chromosomal
instability, and fragility of the cells [33].
Page 55 of 59
==PAGE:64==
Spring 2023
References
[1]
World Health Organization. Snakebite envenoming. May 2017. url: https://www.
who.int/news-room/fact-sheets/detail/snakebite-envenoming.
[2]
Nicholas L.S. Roberts et al. “Global mortality of snakebite envenoming between 1990
and 2019”. In: Nature Communications 13.1 (Dec. 2022). issn: 20411723. doi: 10.
1038/s41467-022-33627-9.
[3]
José María Gutiérrez et al. “Snakebite envenoming”. In: Nature Reviews Disease
Primers 3.1 (Sept. 2017). issn: 2056676X. doi: 10.1038/NRDP.2017.63.
[4]
Jean Philippe Chippaux. “Estimate of the burden of snakebites in sub-Saharan Africa:
A meta-analytic approach”. In: Toxicon 57.4 (Mar. 2011), pp. 586–599. issn: 00410101.
doi: 10.1016/j.toxicon.2010.12.022.
[5]
Giang Thi Tuyet Nguyen et al. “High-throughput proteomics and in vitro functional
characterization of the 26 medically most important elapids and vipers from sub-
Saharan Africa”. In: GigaScience 11 (Dec. 2022). issn: 2047217X. doi: 10.1093/
gigascience/giac121.
[6]
Andreas H. Laustsen. “How can monoclonal antibodies be harnessed against neglected
tropical diseases and other infectious diseases?” In: Expert Opinion on Drug Discovery
14.11 (Nov. 2019), pp. 1103–1112. issn: 1746045X. doi: 10.1080/17460441.2019.
1646723.
[7]
NATIONAL GEOGRAPHIC. “Black Mamba”. In: (). url: https://www.nationalgeographic.
com/animals/reptiles/facts/black-mamba.
[8]
UniProtKB. Hits on UniProtKB on three-finger toxins. Jan. 2023. url: https://
www.uniprot.org/uniprotkb?query=three-finger%20toxin.
[9]
R. Manjunatha Kini and Robin Doley. Structure, function and evolution of three-finger
toxins: Mini proteins with multiple targets. Nov. 2010. doi: 10.1016/j.toxicon.
2010.07.010.
[10]
Yuri N. Utkin. Three-finger toxins, a deadly weapon of elapid venom - Milestones of
discovery. Feb. 2013. doi: 10.1016/j.toxicon.2012.09.007.
Page 56 of 59
==PAGE:65==
Spring 2023
[11]
Alexey V. Osipov and Yuri N. Utkin. “Snake Venom Toxins Targeted at the Nervous
System”. In: Snake Venoms. Springer Netherlands, 2015, pp. 1–21. doi: 10.1007/978-
94-007-6648-8{\_}23-1.
[12]
Andreas H. Laustsen et al. “Recombinant snakebite antivenoms: A cost-competitive
solution to a neglected tropical disease?” In: PLoS Neglected Tropical Diseases 11.2
(Feb. 2017). issn: 19352735. doi: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0005361.
[13]
Akinori Akaike and Yasuhiko Izumi. “Overview”. In: Nicotinic Acetylcholine Recep-
tor Signaling in Neuroprotection. Springer Singapore, Apr. 2018, pp. 1–15. isbn:
9789811084881. doi: 10.1007/978-981-10-8488-1{\_}1.
[14]
Mieke Nys et al. “The molecular mechanism of snake short-chain α-neurotoxin binding
to muscle-type nicotinic acetylcholine receptors”. In: Nature Communications 13.1
(Dec. 2022). issn: 20411723. doi: 10.1038/s41467-022-32174-7.
[15]
Alican Gulsevin and Jens Meiler. “An investigation of three-finger toxin-nachr inter-
actions through rosetta protein docking”. In: Toxins 12.9 (Sept. 2020). issn: 20726651.
doi: 10.3390/toxins12090598.
[16]
Wilmar Dias da Silva et al. Antibodies as Snakebite Antivenoms: Past and Future.
Sept. 2022. doi: 10.3390/toxins14090606.
[17]
Shirin Ahmadi et al. “An in vitro methodology for discovering broadly-neutralizing
monoclonal antibodies”. In: Scientific Reports 10.1 (Dec. 2020). issn: 20452322. doi:
10.1038/s41598-020-67654-7.
[18]
Ivana Jovčevska and Serge Muyldermans. The Therapeutic Potential of Nanobodies.
Feb. 2020. doi: 10.1007/s40259-019-00392-z.
[19]
M. M. Harmsen and H. J. De Haard. Properties, production, and applications of
camelid single-domain antibody fragments. Nov. 2007. doi: 10.1007/s00253-007-
1142-2.
[20]
Esperanza Rivera-de-Torre et al. Strategies for Heterologous Expression, Synthesis,
and Purification of Animal Venom Toxins. Jan. 2022. doi: 10.3389/fbioe.2021.
811905.
Page 57 of 59
==PAGE:66==
Spring 2023
[21]
Mohsen Karbalaei, Seyed A. Rezaee, and Hadi Farsiani. Pichia pastoris: A highly
successful expression system for optimal synthesis of heterologous proteins. Sept. 2020.
doi: 10.1002/jcp.29583.
[22]
V Balamurugan, G R Reddy, and S Suryanarayana. Pichia pastoris: A notable het-
erologous expression system for the production of foreign proteins-Vaccines. Tech. rep.
2007, pp. 175–186.
[23]
Geoffrey P Lin Cereghino et al. New selectable marker/auxotrophic host strain com-
binations for molecular genetic manipulation of Pichia pastoris q. Tech. rep. url:
www.elsevier.com/locate/gene.
[24]
Hyun Henry Joo et al. “Structural characterization of the α-mating factor prepro-
peptide for secretion of recombinant proteins in Pichia pastoris”. In: Gene 598 (Jan.
2017), pp. 50–62. issn: 18790038. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2016.10.040.
[25]
Taruna Anand et al. Phage Display Technique as a Tool for Diagnosis and Antibody
Selection for Coronaviruses. Apr. 2021. doi: 10.1007/s00284-021-02398-9.
[26]
Line Ledsgaard et al. Basics of antibody phage display technology. June 2018. doi:
10.3390/toxins10060236.
[27]
Andreas Hougaard Laustsen et al. “Pitfalls to avoid when using phage display for
snake toxins”. In: Toxicon 126 (Feb. 2017), pp. 79–89. issn: 18793150. doi: 10.1016/
j.toxicon.2016.12.010.
[28]
Anne Ljungars et al. “Line Ledsgaard”. In: (). doi: 10.1016/j.drudis.2022.05.
002This. url: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.drudis.2022.05.002This.
[29]
Thermo Scientific. “EZ-Link™NHS-PEG4-Biotin, Thermo Scientific™”. In: Thermo
Scientific™
(). url: https://www.thermofisher.com/order/catalog/product/
21330.
[30]
Michael Fairhead and Mark Howarth. “Site-specific biotinylation of purified pro-
teins using BirA”. In: Methods in Molecular Biology 1266 (2015), pp. 171–184. issn:
10643745. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4939-2272-7{\_}12.
[31]
Mohamed A. Alfaleh et al. Phage Display Derived Monoclonal Antibodies: From Bench
to Bedside. Aug. 2020. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2020.01986.
Page 58 of 59
==PAGE:67==
Spring 2023
[32]
Cecilie Knudsen et al. Engineering and design considerations for next-generation
snakebite antivenoms. Sept. 2019. doi: 10.1016/j.toxicon.2019.06.005.
[33]
Andreas H. Laustsen et al. “Pros and cons of different therapeutic antibody formats
for recombinant antivenom development”. In: Toxicon 146 (May 2018), pp. 151–175.
issn: 18793150. doi: 10.1016/j.toxicon.2018.03.004.
[34]
Nobuya Morine et al. “Neutralization of hemorrhagic snake venom metalloproteinase
HR1a from Protobothrops flavoviridis by human monoclonal antibody”. In: Toxicon
51.3 (Mar. 2008), pp. 345–352. issn: 00410101. doi: 10.1016/j.toxicon.2007.10.
009.
Page 59 of 59
==PAGE:68==
Appendix
Figure 29: Sequencing results for STX14. Result from the sequencing of the expression vector Xy-
030, confirming the presence of the inserted STX14 gene. Sequencing performed by Eurofins Genomics
Figure 30: Sequencing results for STX17. Result from the sequencing of the expression vector Xy-
031, confirming the presence of the inserted STX17 gene. Sequencing performed by Eurofins Genomics
Figure 31: Sequencing results for STX18. Result from the sequencing of the expression vector Xy-
032, confirming the presence of the inserted STX18 gene. Sequencing performed by Eurofins Genomics
==PAGE:69==
Figure 32: Sequencing results for STX19. Result from the sequencing of the expression vector Xy-
033, confirming the presence of the inserted STX19 gene. Sequencing performed by Eurofins Genomics
Figure 33: Selection round 2 - Control plates. Control plates from the second phage display selection
round, including the IONTAS scFv kappa library, as well as the nnbA and nnbC libraries, without antigen
panning, to evalute the background level, plated in a 1/10 dilution, 100uL
==PAGE:70==
Figure 34: Selection round 3 - Control plates. Control plates from the third phage display selection
round, including the nnbA and nnbC libraries, without antigen panning, to evalute the background level,
plated in a 1/10 dilution, 100uL
Figure 35: Snake venom used for immunization. The table summarizes the whole venoms of snake
species from the Elapid family utilised in the immunisation of the two llamas for the construction of the
nanobody libraries used in this study.
==PAGE:71==
Figure 36: Design of STX18 consensus short α-neurotoxin. Consensus toxin STX18 has been
designed based on UniProt output from 20 different short alpha-neurotoxin sequences from Naja, Den-
droaspsis and Hemachatus families.
Figure 37: Design of STX19 consensus long α-neurotoxin. Consensus toxin STX19 has been de-
signed based on UniProt output from 14 different long alpha-neurotoxin sequences from Naja, Dendroaspsis
and Aspidelaps families
