==PAGE:1==
Carbon Capture from Biogas Using Innovative
Solvents: Modelling and Experiments
Master Thesis in Chemical and Biochemical Engineering
s174090 - Rasmus Juel Friis - s174090@student.dtu.dk
s174070 - Xenia Bonnén Sjøgren - s174070@student.dtu.dk
Supervisors:
Jens Abildskov - ja@kt.dtu.dk
Philip Loldrup Fosbøl - plf@kt.dtu.dk
Jens Kristian Jørsboe - jekjor@kt.dtu.dk
Technical University of Denmark
27th of July, 2023
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Preface
This project is a 30 ECTS credit Master Thesis. Research was initiated on the 6th of
February 2023 and the ﬁnal project handed in on the 27th of July 2023.
The group gratefully acknowledges the support provided by Jens Kristian Jørsboe (primary
DTU supervisor) for gathering of samples at the pilot plant at Hashøj Biogas as well as
provision of steady state data as well as analysis and interpretation of results. The group
thanks Jens Abildskov (DTU supervisor) for contributions when developing the density
model and Philip Loldrup Fosbøl (DTU supervisor) for the overall guiding. This project
would not have been possible without their valuable insights throughout the process. We
are very grateful for the support in the laboratory provided by Zacarias Tecle and Tran
Thuong Dang. This project could not have been accomplished without their help.
This report is written only by the following members of the group sharing the workload
equally:
Rasmus Juel Friis (s174090)
Xenia Bonnén Sjøgren (s174070)
Date: 27-07-2023
Date: 27-07-2023
==PAGE:4==
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
This project studies the results for an amine-based solvent in a carbon capture pilot plant
at Hashøj Biogas. The pilot plant used an aqueous MDEA-PZ solvent, and experiments
at the plant were performed with diﬀerent conﬁgurations including absorber intercooling
(IC), cold solvent split (CSS) and vacuum operated stripper (VOS).
Experimental analysis of pilot plant samples resulted in densities between 1038-1060
kg/m3, CO2 concentrations between 0.7-3.15 wt% and amine concentrations between 44-
56 wt% with CO2 for the lean solvent. In rich samples, the density was between 1080-1091
kg/m3, CO2 concentration between 4.4-6.1 wt% and amine concentration between 42-53
wt% with CO2. The lowest CO2 loading was 0.03, whilst the highest was 0.33.
With experimental results and pilot plant data, total and component mass balances were
closed using data reconciliation. By examining the biggest contributors to the object func-
tion value, it was determined that the rich solvent and CO2 product ﬂow rate should be
estimated from the mass balances. For most reconciled variables, a conﬁdence interval
of 95 % was ultimately achieved. Lean and rich amine concentrations had the highest
relative residuals, with some residuals above 4 standard deviations.
A density model for the four component system MDEA-PZ-H2O-CO2 was developed from
literature data and density measurements, by using Redlich-Kister expansions for binary
and ternary interactions for the MDEA-PZ-H2O solvent. Interactions with CO2 was im-
plemented by assuming the system could be described as a pseudo-binary linear system
of only amine solvent and CO2. The standard deviation of the model was estimated to
3 kg/m3, which was about half the standard deviation of the density measurements per-
formed at the plant. The model estimated the amine fraction of the solvent to be between
40-48 wt% and 39-44 wt% for lean and rich solvent streams, respectively.
Speciﬁc reboiler duty (SRD) was calculated for experiments with reconciled data, to as-
sess the performance of the solvent in the pilot plant at varying stripper pressure and
process conﬁguration. A combination of IC and CSS at a stripper pressure of 0.1 barg was
discovered to have the best performance with a low SRD of 2.47 MJ/kg. This SRD was
signiﬁcantly lower than values found in literature for similar amine solvents. Furthermore,
it was determined that the SRD increased with increasing stripper pressure. From these
results it was established that MDEA-PZ solvent mixtures and the use of the process mod-
iﬁcations IC and CSS, have the potential to reduce the operational costs of amine-based
biogas upgrading.
==PAGE:6==
==PAGE:7==
Resumé
Dette projekt undersøger resultater for et aminbaseret opløsningsmiddel på et CO2-fangst
pilotanlæg ved Hashøj Biogas. Pilotanlægget brugte en vandig MDEA-PZ opløsning, og
på anlægget blev der foretaget eksperimenter med forskellige konﬁgurationer, såsom ab-
sorber interkøling (IC), cold solvent split (CSS) og vakuumdrevet desorber (VOS).
Eksperimentel analyse af prøver fra pilotanlægget gav densiteter mellem 1038-1060 kg/m3,
CO2 koncentrationer mellem 0.7-3.15 vægt% og aminkoncentrationer mellem 44-56 vægt%
med CO2 i den CO2-fattige strøm. I den CO2-rige strøm var densiteten mellem 1080-1091
kg/m3, CO2 koncentrationen mellem 4.4-6.1 vægt% og aminkoncentrationen mellem 42-53
vægt% med CO2. Den laveste målte CO2 loading var 0.03 og den højeste 0.33.
Total og komponent massebalancer for pilotanlægget blev lukket ved brug dataafstemning,
med eksperimentelle resultater samt data fra pilotanlægget som input. Ved undersøgelse
af de største bidragsydere til værdien af objektfunktionen, blev det obserberet, at vari-
ablerne CO2-rigt opløsningsmiddel og CO2-produkt strømmene var nødsaget til at blive
estimeret ud fra massebalancerne og ikke pilotanlæg datasættet. Et konﬁdensinterval på
95% blev opnået for de ﬂeste afstemte variabler. aminkoncentrationerne for de CO2-rigt
og CO2-fattig strømme havde de højeste relative residualer, med nogle residualer over 4
standardafvigelser.
En densitetsmodel for ﬁrekomponent-systemet MDEA-PZ-H2O-CO2 blev udviklet ved
brug af litteratur data og egne densitetsmålinger.
Redlist-Kister række-udvikling blev
brugt for de binære og ternære interaktioner i MDEA-PZ-H2O opløsningsmidlet. Interak-
tioner med CO2 blev modelleret ved antagelse om at det kvartinære system var et lineært
pseudo-binært systemn, bestående af opløsningsmiddel og CO2.
Modellens standard-
afvigelse blev estimeret til at være 3 kg/m3, hvilket var ca. halvdelen af standardafvigelsen
for apparaturet, der målte densitet på pilotanlægget. Modellen blev desuden brugt til at
udregne opløsningmidlets aminfraktioner i de CO2-fattige og CO2-rige strømme, og her
var resultatet hendholdsvis mellem 40-48 vægt% og 39-44 vægt%.
For at bestemme ydeevnen af opløsningsmidlet ved varierende desorber tryk og forskellige
konﬁgurationer, blev den speciﬁkke eﬀekt af kedlen (SRD) udregnet for eksperimenter
ved brug af det afstemte data. En kombination af IC og CSS ved et desorber tryk på
==PAGE:8==
0.1 barg blev bestemt til at give den bedste ydeevne med en lav SRD på 2.47 MJ/kg.
Denne værdi af SRD var væsentlig lavere end hvad der kunne ﬁndes i litteraturen for
lignende amin-baserede opløsningsmidler. Ydermere steg værdien af SRD ved stigende
desorber tryk. Ud fra disse resultater kunne det ses, at der er potentiale for at reducere
driftsomkostningerne i amin-baseret biogas opgradering, ved brug af en kombination af
MDEA-PZ opløsningsmidlet og procesmodiﬁkationerne IC og CSS.
==PAGE:9==
Project Statement
Production of biomethane from waste products have a large potential for replacing fossil
fuel based natural gas as a renewable energy source. Biomethane is produced from up-
grading biogas by reducing the CO2 content to less than 3.0 mol%. Most biogas upgrade
technologies are energy intensive thus resulting in a high biomethane price compared to
natural gas. Of these technologies, amine solvent scrubbing is a versatile process, which
have already been researched extensively for use in post combustion carbon capture. By
optimising the solvent and process conﬁguration to the high CO2 content of biogas (30-
50%) operation costs can be reduced, making biomethane more economically competitive.
This project aims to investigate the use of an aqueous solution of N-methyldiethanolamine
(MDEA) and piperazine (PZ) in a pilot plant at Hashøj Biogas for process optimisation.
Studies of mixtures of MDEA and PZ have been shown to combine a high CO2 absorption
capacity with relatively high reactivity. This project includes experimental analysis of
steady state samples from the pilot plant and data reconciliation of plant data. Further-
more, a pseudo-binary density model of the quaternary MDEA-PZ-H2O-CO2 system is
developed. The model is developed for prediction of the loading or amine concentration
from density measurements. Based on results of the model and data reconciliation, per-
formance of the pilot plant determined and the optimal process conﬁguration is discussed.
Learning objectives:
1. Collection of literature data for solvent investigation and density model development
2. Perform experimental analysis on steady state samples collected from the pilot plant
at Hashøj Biogas
3. Analysis of quaternary MDEA-PZ-H2O-CO2 data
4. Development of pseudo-binary density model for the quaternary MDEA-PZ-H2O-
CO2 system
5. Development and calculation of mass balances for pilot plant including data recon-
ciliation
6. Discussion of model, data reconciliation and process performance
7. Dissemination of results
==PAGE:10==
==PAGE:11==
Methodology
One month was used on gathering relevant literature and planning of experimental analy-
ses. The literature search included topics such as knowledge of amine solvents character-
istics, process modiﬁcations, and density measurements for the model development. The
literature search was done using a combination of "DTU Findit", "Google Scholar" and
"SciFinder", which provided good understanding of the pilot plant, the diﬀerent conﬁgu-
rations used, and the characteristics of the solvent needed for density model development.
This work investigates the performance of a MDEA/PZ solvent at the Hashøj Biogas pilot
plant and develops a pseudo-binary density model for a quaternary MDEA-PZ-H2O-CO2
system. To investigate the performance of the pilot plant, it is necessary to gain knowledge
of the following: i) CO2 content and amine fractions of steady state plant samples, ii) plant
mass balances and data reconciliation and iii) speciﬁc reboiler duty as a function of stripper
pressure. To develop the density model, it is necessary to i) gain knowledge of the binary
interactions of the ternary MDEA-PZ-H2O solvent and ii) measure density of the steady
state samples collected from the plant.
The experimental analyses were done over a period of 3 months and both authors con-
tributed to these analyses. Steady state samples from the Hashøj Biogas pilot plant were
characterised by determination of CO2 content, amine concentration and density. The
amine concentration was determined by titration with HCl and CO2 content was deter-
mined by liquid phase analysis using BaCl2 to precipitate dissolved CO2.
The plant mass balances were developed and used for data reconciliation. This was done
over a three-month period and the primary contributor to this was Xenia Bonnen Sjö-
gren. For the data reconciliation, a sensitivity analysis was performed to identify the
biggest contributors to an object function. Subsequently, the data reconciliation results
were used to determine the performance of the pilot plant for diﬀerent plant conﬁgura-
tions. To do this, it was necessary to investigate the contribution of the heat loss to the
surroundings of the plant.
The density model for the quaternary MDEA-PZ-H2O-CO2 was developed over a period
==PAGE:12==
of ﬁve months with the primary contributor being Rasmus Juel Friis. In the ﬁrst two
months, studies of the binary MDEA-H2O interaction were collected and modelled. In the
next month, experiments with high weight percentages of aqueous piperazine were done
to explore the PZ-H2O interaction. The next month was used to combine the ﬁndings into
a ternary MDEA-PZ-H2O density model, which then was coupled with MDEA-PZ-H2O-
CO2 data to arrive at a ﬁnal pseudo-binary density model. The ﬁnal month was spent
on using the model and the known CO2 content to determine amine fractions and using
these for data reconciliation instead of the experimental amine fraction values.
The report was written in Overleaf and submitted electronically the 27th of July at CERE,
Department for Chemical and Biochemical Engineering, DTU.
Two status reports have been handed in over the course of the project. Furthermore, a
midway presentation was held. The project’s GANTT chart can be seen in the ﬁgure
below.
GANTT chart of the project.
==PAGE:13==
Contents
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Biogas Puriﬁcation Technologies
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Chemical Scrubbing Optimisation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
1.3
Description of Project . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2
Description of Amine Solvents and Process Modiﬁcations
11
2.1
Amine Solvent Chemistry and Properties
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.2
Mixtures of MDEA and PZ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.3
Optimisation Conﬁgurations at Hashøj Biogas . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3
Experimental Methods and Procedures
20
3.1
Amine Concentration Determination . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.2
Liquid Phase Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.3
Removal of CO2 from Loaded Samples . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.4
Standardisation of Titration Solutions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
3.5
Preparation of Aqueous Piperazine Solutions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
3.6
Density Measurements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4
Results and Discussion of Experimental Analysis
36
5
Quaternary Density Model Development
42
5.1
Ideal Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
5.2
Non-ideal Model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
5.3
MDEA-H2O Interaction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
5.4
PZ-H2O Interaction
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
5.5
MDEA-PZ-H2O Density Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
5.6
MDEA-PZ-H2O-CO2 Density Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
70
6
Setup and Calculation of Steady State Mass Balances
75
6.1
System Boundaries and Assumptions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
75
6.2
Calculation of Condenser Flow and CO2 Product Composition
. . . . . . .
77
==PAGE:14==
6.3
Calculation of Biogas and Methane Product Composition
. . . . . . . . . .
78
6.4
Initial Results of Mass Balance Calculations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
81
6.5
Data Reconciliation Method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
84
6.6
Reconciled Data Results and Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
87
7
Combined Discussion
96
7.1
Quaternary Density Model Development . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
96
7.2
Data Reconciliation with Density Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
97
7.3
Calculation of Pilot Plant Performance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 102
7.4
SRD Performance Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 108
8
Conclusion
114
9
Future Work
116
References
118
List of Figures
127
List of Tables
134
Appendices
137
A Updated SOP for Liquid Phase Analysis
137
B Results of experimental analysis
141
C Data and ﬁgures used for the density model development
148
C.1 Parameters from test of the 14 diﬀerent MDEA-H2O models. . . . . . . . . 148
C.2 MDEA literature data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 148
C.3 Piperazine data and ﬁgures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 162
C.4 MDEA/PZ/H2O literature data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 167
C.5 MDEA-PZ-H2O-CO2 literature data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 172
D CO2 and O2 content in biogas feed stream
173
==PAGE:15==
Master Thesis
1
Introduction
There is an imminent need new of sources for renewable energy in Europe.
In 2020
nearly 23.7% of the total energy usage of citizens in the European Union was provided
by natural gas [1]. Over the course of the last 30 years the natural gas usage in Europe
has not decreased but increased; a concerning development. However, the development in
Denmark has more promising prospects, as only 11.4% of Danish energy consumption is
based on natural gas [2]. An overview of the development in energy sources in Denmark
for 1990-2021 is shown in Figure 1.
1990
1995
2000
2005
2010
2015
2020
Year
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Energy consumption [%]
Oil
Biofuels and waste
Wind, solar, etc.
Hydro
Natural gas
Coal
Figure 1: Energy consumption in percentage per source in Denmark. Based on data
from the International Energy Agency [2].
Given the current tense political situation in Europe, as well as the environmental impli-
cations of using natural gas as an energy source, new technologies are desperately needed
in order to continuously supply the demand for energy. One of the most promising sources
is biomethane, produced from biogas. In Denmark alone, 25% of the energy supplied in
the gas system in 2021 was biomethane, increasing from 21% in 2020 [3]. In 2030 the
expected coverage of biomethane is 75% and in 2034 it is expected that the full gas supply
is provided by facilities producing and upgrading biogas. Since 2013, 51 new facilities have
been connected to the Danish gas system [3].
Page 1 of 175
==PAGE:16==
1.1
Biogas Puriﬁcation Technologies
Master Thesis
Biogas is a waste product of many decomposition processes in nature. Biogas is generated
from the decomposition of cattle manure and other wet organic waste. The process depends
on the synergy between multiple organisms, as the organic matter is ﬁrst decomposed to
either acetate or CO2 and H2, which is then converted to methane with by-products of
water and CO2 from the reaction of CH4 + H2 and acetate respectively.
The biogas
produced from these processes contains 50-70% methane and 30-50% CO2, with trace
amounts of water vapour, nitrogen, hydrogen sulphide, and oxygen among others [4].
According to Danish law, the legal requirements for biomethane facilities to be connected
to the gas distribution system is 3.0 mole% CO2 [5]. Therefore, the biogas needs to be
treated and upgraded before it can be used as an alternative to natural gas, as described
in the following section.
1.1
Biogas Puriﬁcation Technologies
Biogas upgrade usually takes place in two steps. The ﬁrst step is often deﬁned as pre-
treatment and include the removal of trace impurities and moisture. Impurities include
compounds such as H2S, NH3 and particles. Hydrogen sulphide is generally seen as the
most critical trace impurity to remove, as it is corrosive to equipment and produces sul-
phur dioxide when burned [6]. H2S can be removed biologically with the use of bacteria
and algae, where the organisms work as an absorber of the H2S. This method is widely
used, as it has been shown to be highly eﬀective [7]. H2S can also be removed using FeCl3
or Fe2O3, which reacts with the hydrogen sulphide to produce solid Fe2S3, thus separating
it from the gas stream [6]. Alternatively, the use of an electrochemical cell and scrubbing
tower has also been shown to be eﬀective [8]. Other trace compounds can be removed with
adsorbents such as activated carbon or carbon molecular sieves. However, water vapor
does need to be removed before the use of activated carbon. Water vapour can be trapped
using water condensation or silica gel activated carbon [6]. The result of the pretreatment
is a dry biogas stream, which is ready for the next step.
In the second step CO2 is removed. The most common carbon capture methods used in
biogas upgrading are adsorption, membrane technology, cryogenic separation and scrub-
Page 2 of 175
==PAGE:17==
1.1
Biogas Puriﬁcation Technologies
Master Thesis
bing. These methods are brieﬂy summarized in the following sections.
1.1.1
Adsorption
In the adsorption process, the feedstock biogas is led through a packed column where
the CO2 is adsorbed onto a solid material such as a zeolite, metal-organic framework,
or activated carbon, governed by the van der Waals forces [9].
To increase the mass
transfer rate, the adsorption process is operated cyclically, where changes in pressure or
temperature promotes the adsorption and desorption of CO2 onto and oﬀ, respectively,
the chosen material. The most common commercial implementations are pressure (PSA),
vacuum (VSA) and temperature (TSA) swing adsorption [9]. Of these three methods,
PSA is the most used in biogas upgrading. Here, the pressure of the feedstock is increased
up to 1 MPa before being led through a packed column where the CO2 is absorbed. The
outlet stream is therefore a puriﬁed biogas stream with a purity of 96-98% methane and a
loss of <4% methane [4]. The column is then depressurized, releasing the adsorbed CO2
and thus regenerating the column. Finally, the column is repressurized in preparation for
the next cycle. The PSA process is shown in Figure 2.
Figure 2: Schematic overview for continuous operation of pressure swing absorption for
biogas upgrade [4].
VSA and TSA generally operate with the same principles, with VSA using pressures close
to ambient pressure for adsorption followed by a drop in pressure for desorption. TSA
Page 3 of 175
==PAGE:18==
1.1
Biogas Puriﬁcation Technologies
Master Thesis
utilizes an increase in temperature of the column at constant pressure for the desorption
of CO2 [6]. The main advantages of using adsorption is a high purity product, fast process
and avoiding the use of chemicals. However, the process does require multiple columns
for continuous operation, have relatively high operational costs and requires the removal
of both H2S and moisture as pretreatment [6].
1.1.2
Membrane Technology
Semipermeable membranes can be used to separate the biogas based on size and selectivity
of the membrane. To achieve the wanted purity of the methane product and a high recovery
percentage, two membrane units are usually used in series. A schematic overview of this
process is shown in Figure 3. The most used membrane type is polymeric membranes with
an optimal CO2/CH4 selectivity of 15-20 and a high CO2 permeance [10]. Usually, two
of the same types of membranes are used, but recent research has shown that the process
can be optimized by using two diﬀerent membranes. The main advantages of membranes
are low energy consumption, the use of environmentally friendly materials and simplicity.
However, membrane fouling does present a signiﬁcant challenge for operation [10], and the
amount of membrane types which have been thoroughly examined are still low [6].
Figure 3: Schematic overview of 2-step membrane separation of biogas[10].
Page 4 of 175
==PAGE:19==
1.1
Biogas Puriﬁcation Technologies
Master Thesis
1.1.3
Cryogenic Separation
In cryogenic separation, the CO2 is separated from the methane by compressing and cool-
ing the biogas until the carbon dioxide liqueﬁes, due to its higher boiling point compared
to methane. Compression and cooling are usually done gradually, to a temperature of
about -55℃and a pressure of 8 MPa. The feed is then led into an expansion column,
where the liquid CO2 is separated from the methane. The result is an upgraded biogas
stream with 97-98% methane and a loss of less than 2% methane. Cryogenic separation
is therefore able to produce a high purity product with only a small loss of methane and
without the use of chemicals. The process does however have a high energy consumption
and requires high investment costs [4].
1.1.4
Scrubbing
Scrubbing of the biogas can either be done physically with water or organic solvent, or
chemically, the latter most often done using alkanol amines [4, 6]. The working principle for
physical scrubbing is that CO2 is more soluble than methane, while for chemical scrubbing
the relative reactivity of CO2 is utilized to increase the mass transfer rate and the loading
capacity of the solvent. Physical scrubbing was the most used method at biogas upgrading
plants among IEA Bioenergy members in 2015 [4].
For both methods, the absorption is done with a counter-ﬂow packed bed reactor, where
the solvent is fed at the top and the biogas at the bottom. As the gas travels up through
the column, the CO2 is transferred into the liquid, resulting in a puriﬁed methane stream
and a solvent stream loaded with CO2. The solvent stream is then regenerated in a sep-
arate stripping column, where the solvent is heated until most of the absorbed CO2 is
released [6]. For chemical scrubbing, the absorber column is conventionally operated at a
temperature of 40-65 ℃and a pressure of 1-2 bar, while the stripping column is run at
a temperature of 100-150℃and pressure of 1.5-3 bar [11]. Figure 4 shows a schematic
overview of a chemical scrubbing process.
Page 5 of 175
==PAGE:20==
1.1
Biogas Puriﬁcation Technologies
Master Thesis
Figure 4: Schematic overview of a chemical scrubbing process [12].
The advantages of physical scrubbing are that it is a simple process, uses low-cost ab-
sorbents such as water, and eliminates the need for removal of moisture before CO2 re-
moval. A second step is nevertheless usually necessary to reach biomethane standards [6].
Using organic solvents with higher CO2 capacity and eﬃciency decreases the amount of
absorbent needed, but comes with higher solvent costs and the risk of loss of potentially
toxic chemicals to the surroundings [6].
Chemical scrubbing is fast, have a high capacity and is able to achieve a biomethane
purity of >98% [13, 14]. The selectivity of the chemicals ensures methane losses of less
than 0.1%, making it possible to also produce a high purity CO2 stream from the stripping
column. Furthermore, methane slip to the atmosphere using chemical scrubbing has been
shown to be signiﬁcantly lower than other processes, with values of 0.05% compared to
0.52% using membranes and 1.52% with water scrubbing [11]. However, alkanol amines
are regarded as toxic to the environment, and losses to surroundings can happen through
ﬂuid connections or through volatilisation into the product streams. Operational costs are
Page 6 of 175
==PAGE:21==
1.2
Chemical Scrubbing Optimisation
Master Thesis
also considered to be relatively high, due to the energy needed for solvent regeneration
and the cost of solvents. Furthermore, the outlet gas streams also need to be compressed
for storage and transportation, which increases the overall operation costs [4, 6].
The high purity and recovery of the methane, combined with the possibility of the simul-
taneous production of an almost pure CO2 gas, makes chemical scrubbing an important
candidate for carbon capture from biogas on an industrial scale.
Optimisation of the
process should be done to increase the eﬃciency of the process to reduce capital and
operational costs, but also to decrease the environmental impact. These optimisations in-
clude process conﬁgurations, operation conditions, and solvent reactivity as well as loading
capacity. This is described further in the next section.
1.2
Chemical Scrubbing Optimisation
A wide variety of equipment conﬁgurations for post-combustion CO2 have been explored in
published and patented literature [15, 16, 17, 18]. Le Mouellec et al. divides the equipment
into three categories; absorption enhancement, heat integration, and heat pumps [16]. For
absorption enhancement, the objective is to increase the eﬃciency of loading CO2 into
the solvent, thereby reducing the solvent ﬂow rate needed to achieve the chosen capture
eﬃciency. This could be increasing the solvent loading at the bottom of the absorber or
reducing excessive driving force in the column. The idea of heat integration is to reduce
heat losses from external heating and cooling, by exchanging heat directly between cold
and hot process streams. Finally, heat pumps can be used to increase the heat quality, by
addition of mechanical work to the system. Overall, the modiﬁcations are all implemented
to increase the energy eﬃciency of the process, which is usually measured as a reduction
in reboiler duty, since this is the largest energy consumer of the system [16].
Process optimisation can also be done by changing the operating conditions. This includes
changing the pressure of the stripper or absorber, solvent ﬂow rates and biogas ﬂow rates.
This does however not seem to have been studied systematically, especially when using
process conﬁgurations which include modiﬁcations such as described above.
Detailed studies of alkanol amines, usually in aqueous solutions, have been conducted
Page 7 of 175
==PAGE:22==
1.3
Description of Project
Master Thesis
to optimize the process in terms of CO2 capacity, chemical and thermal resistance, and
operation costs. Monoethanolamine (MEA) have been extensively researched due to high
reactivity, low viscosity, and relatively low price. It is therefore often used as a benchmark
solvent when comparing diﬀerent amines and process modiﬁcations. Other amines which
have been studied include diethanolamine (DEA) [11, 19], 2-amino-2-methyl-1-propanol
(AMP) [20, 21], piperazine (PZ) [11, 20], and N-methyldiethanolamine (MDEA) [22, 23,
24]. Furthermore, mixes of the highly reactive PZ with a high CO2 capacity amine, such
as MDEA or AMP, have been shown to be more eﬀective than using the amines separately
[25, 26].
Mixtures of MDEA and PZ for CO2 capture has been widely investigated in literature
[27, 28, 29]. These studies have shown that it is possible to achieve higher performance
than conventional solutions, as the PZ acts an activator, increasing the reactivity and
capacity of the mixture [11]. Furthermore, the chemical bonds between CO2 and MDEA
are much weaker compared to CO2 and MEA, decreasing the energy requirement for
regeneration of the solvent. The combination with MDEA-PZ is preferred over AMP-
PZ for biogas upgrade, even though the latter is better for CO2 removal, due to higher
chemical resistance against H2S of MDEA compared to AMP [30].
H2S is selectively
absorbed into the MDEA solution, making it possible to possibly skip the pretreatment
of the biogas before upgrading to biomethane [31].
A MDEA-PZ mixture is also used in the pilot plant facility at Hashøj Biogas, where a
ratio of 39/6 weight percentage of the two components were used. The study based on
samples and data from this pilot plant is described in the following section.
1.3
Description of Project
The primary objective of this study is the assessment of the performance of the aqueous
MDEA-PZ solvent used at the carbon capture pilot plant at Hashøj Biogas, using an
aqueous MDEA-PZ solvent for chemical absorption. This is done through experimental
analysis of samples from the pilot plant and development of a pseudo-binary mathematical
model, describing the density correlation between CO2 content and the solvent. Using a
Page 8 of 175
==PAGE:23==
1.3
Description of Project
Master Thesis
combination of experimental analysis and steady state measurements from the pilot plant,
data reconciliation will be performed to close the mass balances of the system. Using
the reconciled data, the performance of the pilot plant will be determined to choose the
optimal operating conditions and conﬁguration. Furthermore, the study will investigate
the inﬂuence of the stripper pressure on the energy consumption. A ﬂow diagram showing
the process of the study is shown in Figure 5.
Figure 5: Flow diagram of the project process.
Section 2 describes solvents used in biogas upgrade plants, which is gathered from litera-
ture, and will be used to reason why MDEA-PZ is the most promising solvent. Then, a
theoretical description of the chemical scrubbing optimisation conﬁgurations will be made.
Section 3 describes the analysis of samples from the biogas pilot plant, where measure-
ments of CO2 loading, amine concentration and density have been conducted. The amine
concentration is determined with titration with HCl, density is determined with a den-
simeter, and CO2 loading is determined using barium chloride to precipitate dissolved
CO2. The results of the experiments can be seen in Section 4.
Section 5 describes the model quaternary model development. The binary interactions
in the MDEA-PZ-H2O solvent will be modelled through literature, data obtained from
previous projects and experimental results to arrive at a ﬁnal ternary mathematical model
for the aqueous MDEA-PZ solution. This will then be combined with literature data for
Page 9 of 175
==PAGE:24==
1.3
Description of Project
Master Thesis
CO2 loaded aqueous MDEA-PZ solutions, to obtain a pseudo-binary model describing the
correlation between CO2 loading of the solvent and density.
Data from the pilot plant at Hashøj Biogas was provided by Jens K. Jørsboe. A schematic
overview of the pilot plant can be seen in Figure 6. In Section 6 the data is used together
with experimental analysis of samples to calculate mass balances.
Data reconciliation
will be used to ensure consistency between measurements and mass balances, and to
identify possible unreliable measurements. In Section 7, density measurements will be
used, and the developed model will be compared to results from experimental analysis
of the amine fraction.
The new determined amine fractions will be used in the data
reconciliation. Finally, the performance of the pilot plant, calculated as speciﬁc reboiler
duty, will be estimated at diﬀerent stripper pressures and process conﬁgurations, using a
combination of absorber intercooling, cold solvent split and vacuum pump. From these
results, optimisation of the process conﬁguration towards usage at industrial scale will be
suggested.
Figure 6: Schematic overview of Hashøj Biogas pilot plant.
Page 10 of 175
==PAGE:25==
Master Thesis
2
Description of Amine Solvents and Process Modiﬁcations
In this section, the absorption chemistry of monoethanolamine, 2-amino-2-methyl-1-propanol,
N-methyldiethanolamine, and piperazine in aqueous solutions is brieﬂy described, with a
focus on mixtures of MDEA and PZ. Furthermore, modiﬁcations of a conventional scrub-
bing process used to optimise the CO2 removal at the Hashøj Biogas pilot plant are
described, and their potential is discussed.
2.1
Amine Solvent Chemistry and Properties
Research have shown that aqueous solutions of alkanol amines are eﬃcient in removing
CO2 during the chemical scrubbing of biogas. This is due to the amines reacting with
CO2, increasing the concentration gradient and thereby the mass transfer rate, compared
to physical scrubbing. For primary and secondary amine-groups, the main reaction is the
production of a carbamate and concurrent release of a proton as shown in the following
reaction [21]:
CO2 + R1R2NH + Base −−⇀
↽−−BaseH+ + R1R2NCOO−
(1)
The reacting base can either be the amine itself, another amine or alkaline components
such as carbonate [11]. This reaction results in a theoretical CO2 capacity of 0.5 mol CO2
per mol amine. The pKa value of the chosen alkanol amine has also been shown to inﬂuence
the reactivity with CO2 [21]. As described earlier, the primary amine monoethanolamine
(MEA) in a 30% aqueous solution is often a benchmark solvent for removal of CO2 as its
properties are well researched.
Tertiary amines are only able to bind the CO2 as bicarbonate and are generally less
reactive, due to steric hindrance. However, they have the advantage of lower heat capacity,
thus resulting in an increased desorption rate compared to using other amines under
the same conditions. By binding the CO2 as bicarbonate, the theoretical CO2 capacity
becomes 1 mol CO2 per mole amine, which is twice as high as during carbamate formation.
Examples of used tertiary amines are N-methyldiethanolamine (MDEA), diethanolamine
(DEA) and triethanolamine (TEA) [32, 33].
The properties and advantages of MEA,
Page 11 of 175
==PAGE:26==
2.1
Amine Solvent Chemistry and Properties
Master Thesis
AMP, MDEA, and PZ are further described in the following.
2.1.1
Monoethanolamine
The primary amine MEA has many advantages including fast mass transfer rates, low
viscosity, and low price.
MEA has also been investigated extensively in research, and
its properties are therefore well known. MEA is therefore readily used for simulations of
systems with diﬀerent conﬁgurations, compared to less researched solvents [21, 22]. The
structure of MEA is shown in Figure 7.
Figure 7: The structure of MEA [34].
2.1.2
2-amino-2-methyl-1-propanol
AMP is a sterically hindered primary amine and the structure can be seen in Figure 8.
The sterically hindered nature of AMP increases the CO2 adsorption capacity compared to
other primary and secondary amines, such as MEA and DEA [20], by forming bicarbonate
instead of carbamates. One of the advantages of using AMP for biogas upgrade and CO2
capture is the low regeneration energy requirements [35].
Figure 8: The structure of AMP [36].
2.1.3
N-methyldiethanolamine
MDEA is a tertiary amine and therefore have slower reaction rates with CO2, compared to
primary and secondary alkanol amines. The structure of the chemical is shown in Figure
9. Tertiary amines increase the absorption of CO2 in water by producing hydroxyl radicals
Page 12 of 175
==PAGE:27==
2.2
Mixtures of MDEA and PZ
Master Thesis
[32]. Therefore, MDEA has a selectivity towards absorbing H2S in carbon capture pro-
cesses without being deactivated [32]. This selectivity makes it possible to simultaneously
remove H2S and CO2 from biogas using MDEA.
Figure 9: The structure of MDEA [37].
2.1.4
Piperazine
Piperazine(PZ) is a secondary amine with 2 amine groups, which makes it theoretically
possible to absorb 2 moles CO2 per mole amine [20]. The structure of PZ is a six-membered
ring with two amine groups at opposite positions, which is shown in Figure 10. Due to this
structure, PZ is highly reactive with CO2. At room temperature, PZ is solid but dissolves
readily in water. Precipitation of PZ has however proved to be a challenge during operation
with highly concentrated solutions [38]. Piperazine is therefore often combined with high
loading capacity amines in aqueous solution, such as AMP or MDEA, to improve the
overall reactivity of the mixture at relatively low piperazine concentrations. Such amine
mixtures have shown to have superior performance compared to 30 wt% MEA [21].
Figure 10: The structure of piperazine [39].
2.2
Mixtures of MDEA and PZ
Combining piperazine and MDEA has proven to be advantageous and shown to increase
performance of CO2 removal [21]. The solvent mixture has been used for years because of
greater capacity and lower work rate than other amine solvents in CO2 removal. However,
Page 13 of 175
==PAGE:28==
2.2
Mixtures of MDEA and PZ
Master Thesis
information about resistance to degradation as well as vapor-liquid equilibrium is limited
[26]. As mentioned in section 2.1.3, MDEA is widely used due to characteristics such as
high resistance to degradation, low corrosiveness as well as possibility for higher loading
[32]. However, MDEA also has a slow reaction with CO2, resulting in a lower eﬃciency.
The slow reaction rate can be accommodated by adding piperazine to the solvent as a
promoter. Piperazine increases the reaction rate with CO2 due to the rapid formation of
carbamates. Furthermore, piperazine can interact with MDEA and CO2, increasing the
reaction rate compared to using the two amines separately [11]. However, when using it
as a promoter, it is imperative that the concentration does not exceed a certain amount.
If the concentration of piperazine becomes too high, piperazine starts to precipitate due
to reaching its solubility in water. Furthermore, too much piperazine will lead to damage
to the piping in the plant from to corrosion [40].
When MDEA and PZ mixtures are used for absorption of CO2, multiple reactions take
place. According to Dash et al. [41], the main reactions are:
physical absorption of carbon oxide: CO2(g) −−⇀
↽−−CO2(aq)
(2)
dissolution of water: 2H2O −−⇀
↽−−H3O+ + OH−
(3)
formation of bicarbonate ions: CO2 + 2H2O −−⇀
↽−−HCO3−+ H3O+
(4)
dissolution of bicarbonate ions: HCO3−+ H2O −−⇀
↽−−CO32−+ H3O+
(5)
dissolution of protonated MDEA: MDEAH+ + H2O −−⇀
↽−−MDEA + H3O+
(6)
dissolution of protonated piperazine: PZH+ + H2O −−⇀
↽−−PZ + H3O+
(7)
dissolution of piperazine carbonate: PZ + HCO3−−−⇀
↽−−PZCOO−+ H3O+
(8)
dissolution of zwitter ions: H+PZCOO−+ H2O −−⇀
↽−−PZCOO−+ H3O+
(9)
dissolution of piperazine bicarbonate: PZCOO−+ HCO3−−−⇀
↽−−PZ(COO−)2 + H2O
(10)
Here, reaction (2)-(6) takes place in all aqueous MDEA solutions, while reaction (7)-(10)
only occur when piperazine is present [42].
Reaction (2)-(5) takes place when CO2 is
dissolved in water and are thus not unique reactions to the solvent itself. As the use of
Page 14 of 175
==PAGE:29==
2.3
Optimisation Conﬁgurations at Hashøj Biogas
Master Thesis
piperazine as a promoter compound adds four possible reactions, the potential for a more
eﬃcient solvent is clear.
A study by Zhang et al. investigated the limit of piperazine in an amine mixture, which
could be used eﬃciently [25]. In this study piperazine was mixed with AMP, but assuming
there is no signiﬁcant change in the behaviour of piperazine when changing AMP to
MDEA, the results can still be generally applied to a MDEA/PZ mixture. They discovered
that AMP/PZ ratio had a large inﬂuence on the reboiler duty. Keeping the total amine
content constant at 45 wt%, the study showed that the combination with the lowest
amount of piperazine (7 wt%) was the most eﬃcient [25].
The solvent used in the biogas upgrade pilot plant at Hashøj Biogas has a total weight
percentage of amine of 45%. Here, the MDEA weight percentage is 39% and piperazine
6%. In the next section, the process modiﬁcations which have been examined at the pilot
plant are presented.
2.3
Optimisation Conﬁgurations at Hashøj Biogas
For the experiments investigated in this project, three modiﬁcations have been used to
attempt to optimise the CO2 removal process. This includes an absorber intercooler, cold
solvent split and vacuum operated stripper. The principle of these three modiﬁcations
and some optimisation results from literature are presented in the following sections.
2.3.1
Absorber Intercooling
For all experiments done at the Hashøj biogas pilot plant, an absorber intercooler (IC)
has been used to reduce the temperature of the absorber column. The intercooler works
by removing solvent from a chosen location of the absorber, cooling it to a set cooling
temperature, and then adding the solvent back into the absorber. The solvent is usually
added back slightly below where it was removed [43].
This modiﬁcation can be advantageous as the reaction between CO2 and the amines is
exothermic, thus increasing the temperature of the absorber.
Increasing temperature
shifts the absorption equilibrium of CO2 towards the gas phase, thereby decreasing the
Page 15 of 175
==PAGE:30==
2.3
Optimisation Conﬁgurations at Hashøj Biogas
Master Thesis
CO2 capacity of the solvent. With these temperature changes, the partial pressure of
the CO2 in the gas phase remains almost constant.
The driving force, deﬁned as the
pressure diﬀerence of CO2 between the gas phase and equilibrium partial pressure of the
liquid phase, therefore decreases with increased temperature. However, with increasing
temperature the reaction rate between amine and CO2 increases, thus also increasing the
overall mass transfer coeﬃcient Kov. Equation (11) shows how the driving force and the
overall mass transfer coeﬃcient are related to the ﬂux of CO2 between the gas and the
liquid phase.
Nabs
CO2
A
= Kov ·
(
P gas
CO2 −P liq
CO2
)
(11)
where NCO2 is the moles of CO2, A is the surface area, P gas
CO2 is the partial pressure of CO2
in the gas and P liq
CO2 is the equilibrium partial pressure for CO2. In equation (11), it can
be seen that the ﬂux of CO2 is the product of Kov and the driving force
(
P gas
CO2 −P liq
CO2
)
.
By using an intercooler in the absorber, the absorption of CO2 can therefore be used to
decrease the equilibrium partial pressure, thus increasing the driving force. However, if
the cooling temperature is too low, the decrease in Kov negates the eﬀect of increased
driving force. The cooling temperature therefore needs to be optimised based on the used
absorbent solvent and the desired CO2 capture percentage, to achieve optimum eﬃciency
of the solvent. This results in a lower solvent ﬂow rate needed to achieve the same CO2
capture, and thus lower reboiler duty [18]. However, it does increase the required cooling
duty of the column, which needs to be considered to determine the overall energy savings
of implementing this modiﬁcation [18].
The positioning of the intercooler can also inﬂuence the reduction of the reboiler duty.
Zhao et al. simulated both the optimal position and temperature of an absorber inter-
cooler, for a solvent mixture with 20 wt% PZ and 30 wt% MDEA in a post combustion
carbon capture (PCC) plant [44]. For an absorber column with 10 equilibrium stages, the
optimal position was determined to be on stage 9. With a cooling temperature of 20℃
the total reboiler duty was reduced with 12.61% compared to the process without inter-
cooling [44]. However, this result does depend on 10℃cooling water being available in the
system. 30℃have been presented by Karimi et al. as a reasonable cooling temperature
Page 16 of 175
==PAGE:31==
2.3
Optimisation Conﬁgurations at Hashøj Biogas
Master Thesis
in the industry [43]. This decreases the reboiler duty reduction reported by Zhao et al. to
7.76%, which is still a signiﬁcant reduction [44].
2.3.2
Cold Solvent Split
The second process conﬁguration used to optimise the Hashøj biogas pilot plant is the cold
solvent split (CSS). The basic principle of CSS is that the rich solvent from the bottom
of the absorber is split in two streams before entering the stripper. One of the streams
is bypassed directly to the stripper, whereas the other is sent through a heat-exchanger,
where heat from the lean solvent from the reboiler is exchanged.
The purpose of splitting the rich solvent is to reduce the reboiler- and condenser duties
without the use of additional energy-consuming equipment [27]. This concept was ﬁrst
proposed in the patent by Shoeld [45] and further developed by Eisenberg et al.
[46]
using MEA. The cold solvent split ensures a better control over the temperature proﬁle
in the absorber, by changing the ratio of the split [47]. Furthermore, the modiﬁcation
helps recovery of the potential heat of vapour in the upward gas stream in the stripper
[44]. However, too much cold solvent fed into the top of the stripper would result in an
ineﬃcient process, as more sensible heat is required to heat the cold split solvent to the
required temperature for solvent regeneration [27].
Therefore, there is an optimum for the split. In their patent, Eisenberg et al. found that
a fraction of around 0.4-0.45 was optimal with a MEA solvent of 20 wt%. [46]. Khan et
al. used an MDEA-PZ solvent and investigated both reboiler and condenser duties with
increasing split fraction (from 5% to 25%). In Figure 11 the results of the investigation
can be seen.
Page 17 of 175
==PAGE:32==
2.3
Optimisation Conﬁgurations at Hashøj Biogas
Master Thesis
Figure 11: Eﬀect of split fraction on reboiler duty and condenser duty [27].
From Figure 11 it can be seen, that Khan et al. found that a split fraction of 15% was the
optimum regarding reboiler duty [27]. Regarding the condenser duty, it kept decreasing
with increasing split fraction. However, the decrease in condenser duty seemed to stagnate,
suggesting that a further increase in split fraction perhaps might lead to an increase in
condenser duty. Zhao et al. found the optimal split fraction was 0.2 in a post combustion
system that utilised MDEA as solvent [44].
Jung et al. tested the eﬀect of a cold solvent split in a post combustion capture process,
where MEA was used as solvent [48]. The split fraction was 23% and the net energy
reduction eﬀect was 27% compared with a reference process. Cousins et al. tested the
split on a pilot plant using 30% MEA as a solvent and also varied the split ratio from
around 0%-60% and found an optimum around a 30% split fraction, where the reboiler
duty was the lowest [49].
Jørsboe et al. tested a cold split solvent conﬁguration on a biogas pilot plant. They found
that the cold solvent split could decrease the reboiler duty by 10% at optimum conditions
[50].
Page 18 of 175
==PAGE:33==
2.3
Optimisation Conﬁgurations at Hashøj Biogas
Master Thesis
2.3.3
Vacuum operated stripper
The third modiﬁcation of the system, vacuum operated stripper, requires the use of a
vacuum pump on the CO2 product ﬂow. This makes it possible to decrease the pressure
in the stripper to below ambient pressure. This causes the temperature in the stripper to
decrease, thus decreasing the desorption rate of CO2, requiring the use of a larger stripper
to reach the same CO2 capture [16].
However, this also makes it possible to use low
pressure steam as heat source for the reboiler. The eﬀect on performance of using this
modiﬁcation highly depends on the solvent. If the CO2 heat of absorption is lower than
waters heat of evaporation the steam demand decreases, while the opposite case increases
the steam demand [51].
A simulation study by Le Moullec investigated the use of stripper pressures between 0.06-
2.5 bar using MEA as solvent at a post combustion carbon capture plant [52]. The study
showed the largest increase in plant eﬃciency for a pressure of 0.06 bar. However, it also
concluded that the increase in eﬃciency was not enough to justify pilot plant experiments
for this application, as the size of the vacuum pump and the stripper needed for full scale
operation was unrealistically large.
Page 19 of 175
==PAGE:34==
==PAGE:35==
Master Thesis
3
Experimental Methods and Procedures
In this section, the experimental procedures conducted as part of the project are described.
In total, 4 diﬀerent experiments have been conducted on samples of amine solutions; titra-
tion to determine amine concentration, liquid phase analysis for CO2-loading determina-
tion, density measurements, and removal of CO2 from samples. Related to the model
development, piperazine solutions of diﬀerent concentrations are produced. Furthermore,
standardisation of the NaOH and HCl solutions used for titration in the experiments are
done. The following sections introduce each method and describes the equipment and
chemicals that are used.
3.1
Amine Concentration Determination
The amine concentration is determined by simple titration with HCl, which is done using
an autotitrator. The setup include a magnetic stirrer and a pH meter, and the setup is
shown in Figure 12. 1 g of sample is measured in a 100 mL glass beaker. Demineralised
water is added until the total volume is about 30 mL, to ensure the pH meter is fully
covered by liquid. A magnet is placed into the beaker and stirring commences. After a
minute of stirring, the titration program is executed, where 15 mL of 0.5 M HCl is added
using an autotitrator. Subsequently, the equivalence point volumes are used to calculate
the amine concentration.
Figure 12: Picture of the used autotitration setup.
Page 20 of 175
==PAGE:36==
3.1
Amine Concentration Determination
Master Thesis
As the samples contain 2 amine compounds MDEA and PZ, which have diﬀerent pKa
values, up to 3 equivalence points are visible. However, with this method only 2 equivalence
points can be identiﬁed, as shown in Figure 13 (EP1 and EP2). This analysis has been
done on four types of samples: stock solution to determine the ratio of the two amines,
piperazine solutions, steady state samples from the pilot plant, and amine samples where
CO2 have been removed.
Figure 13: Titration of amine solvent with HCl.
The ﬁrst equivalence point (EP1) is assumed to include the reaction of both MDEA and PZ
with one equivalent of HCl. Therefore, the second equivalence point (EP2) is the further
reaction of PZ to a total of two equivalents of HCl. The moles of piperazine in the analysed
sample nPZ is therefore equal to the HCl used from the ﬁrst to the second equivalence
point. This is determined by multiplying the volume of HCl with the concentration as
seen in equation (12) below,
nPZ = nHCl,1−2 = (VHCl,2 −VHCl,1) · cHCl
(12)
where nHCl,1−2 is the moles of HCl used from the ﬁrst to the second equivalence point,
VHCl,i is the volume of HCl used for equivalence point i and cHCl is the concentration of
the HCl. The moles of MDEA are then determined as the moles of HCl used for the ﬁrst
Page 21 of 175
==PAGE:37==
3.1
Amine Concentration Determination
Master Thesis
equivalence point minus the amount of piperazine determined above using equation (13)
below:
nMDEA = VHCl,1 · cHCl −nPZ
(13)
From equation (13) it is also possible to derive the total amount of amine as the amount of
HCl used to reach the ﬁrst equivalence point. The moles of the amines are then converted
to mass by multiplying each with their respective molar mass, as shown in equation (14),
mi = ni · Mi
(14)
where mi, ni and Mi is the mass, moles and molar mass, respectively, of component i.
From this the weight fraction wamine is determined by dividing the amine mass with the
total mass of the sample:
wamine = mamine
msample
(15)
This procedure is done for both amines and the total amine concentration is found as the
sum of the two.
After experiments have been done to determine the concentration of each amine, it is
assumed that the relation between MDEA and PZ will stay constant regardless of the
total amine concentration.
Therefore, only the second equivalence point is needed for
further samples. The moles of each amine in a sample can then be determined by solving
the following two equations with two unknown variables,
nHCl,2 =nMDEA + 2nPZ
(16)
k =nMDEA
nPZ
(17)
where k is the molar ratio of MDEA/PZ in the solution determined by titration of the
stock solution. The total moles of amine is then,
namine = nMDEA + nPZ
(18)
where namine is the total moles of both the amines. The total mass of amine mamine in
Page 22 of 175
==PAGE:38==
3.2
Liquid Phase Analysis
Master Thesis
the sample is then calculated as,
mamine = namine · Mamine mix
(19)
where Mamine mix is the molar mass of the mixed amine, determined as the sum of the
molar mass multiplied with the molar fraction for each amine,
Mamine mix = xPZ · MPZ + xMDEA · MMDEA
(20)
where xi is the molar fraction of component i. The amine concentration is ﬁnally deter-
mined by dividing the mass of amine with the total mass of the sample.
wamine = mamine
msample
(21)
If the analysed sample contains a known amount of CO2, the amine concentration de-
termined above can be converted to the corresponding amine concentration without CO2
using equation (22).
wamine,without CO2 = wamine,with CO2 ·
1
1 −wCO2
(22)
Where wamine,without CO2 and wamine,with CO2 are the weight fractions of amine for the
solvent without and CO2, respectively, and wCO2 the weight fraction of CO2 in the solvent
mixture. The amount of CO2 in a sample is determined with the liquid phase analysis
described in the next section.
3.2
Liquid Phase Analysis
The liquid phase analysis method used to determine the CO2 loading is the most time-
consuming of all the experimental analysis. An eﬀort was therefore made to optimise the
procedure both in terms of time spent and the amount of chemicals used for each analysis.
The updated procedure can be seen in Appendix A, respectively. The setup used for the
analysis is shown in Figure 14.
Page 23 of 175
==PAGE:39==
3.2
Liquid Phase Analysis
Master Thesis
Figure 14: Picture of the suction ﬁltration.
3.2.1
Procedure Optimisation
Due to limited availability of an autotitrator, it was decided to use manual titration with
phenol red as indicator, as it changes colour from yellow to pink around a pH of 7. This also
makes it possible to reduce the time spent on the second and third analysis of each sample,
when the approximate CO2 content have been determined from the ﬁrst analysis. From
analysing samples of the same amine solution during a previous project [53], the highest
CO2 content was found to be about 6.5 wt%. Using this as the maximum expected CO2
content at a sample size of 1 g, the needed amount of barium chloride and hydrochloric
acid could be determined. For the initial reaction between dissolved carbonate species
and BaCl2 the reactants react 1:1. However, it is desirable to have an excess of BaCl2 to
ensure complete reaction. For the original procedure, a total of 25 mL 0.5 M BaCl2 is
used, giving a minimum ratio of 8.5 BaCl2/CO2. By reducing the volume to 10 mL BaCl2
the ratio is instead 3.4, which is more reasonable while still ensuring an excess of BaCl2.
Doing multiple analyses of a sample with diﬀerent volumes of BaCl2 down to 10 mL also
did not show a signiﬁcantly diﬀerent result, thus conﬁrming that there still was suﬃcient
excess of BaCl2.
To reach equivalency in the reaction of BaCO3 and HCl for a 1 g sample with 6.5 wt%
CO2 about 6 mL of 0.5 M HCl is needed. Again, an excess of HCl is needed to be able to
Page 24 of 175
==PAGE:40==
3.2
Liquid Phase Analysis
Master Thesis
titrate back with 0.1 M NaOH. Thus, 7 mL 0.5 M HCl was initially chosen, however, this
resulted in signiﬁcantly longer dissolution time for some samples with high loading. Fur-
thermore, some of the highly loaded samples also turned cloudy during manual titration,
making it diﬃcult to accurately determine the colour change and thus the equivalence
point. However, both problems could be solved by adding 1 mL additional HCl to the
BaCO3 particles for later samples. Therefore, the updated procedure speciﬁes to use 8 mL
HCl to avoid these challenges. Using a smaller amount of HCl has the added beneﬁt of
reducing the amount of NaOH needed for the back titration, and thus also how long the
titration takes. In the next section, the equations used for data treatment of this analysis
is described.
3.2.2
Equations for Data Processing
When the BaCO3 particles are heated with the HCl, the two react according to the
following reaction:
BaCO3(s) + 2 HCl −−→H2O + CO2(g) + BaCl2
(23)
The titration with NaOH is therefore used to determine how much HCl was used in the
reaction with BaCO3. The weight percentage of CO2 in the sample (wt%CO2) can be
determined with the following,
wCO2 = cHCl · VHCl −cNaOH · VNaOH
2 · msample
· MCO2
(24)
where c and V is the concentration and volume respectively of the used HCl and NaOH,
msample is the mass of the sample and MCO2 is the molar mass of CO2. If the amine
concentration with CO2 is known, equation (25) can be used to determine the CO2 loading:
αCO2 =
wCO2
wamine,total
· Mamine mix
MCO2
(25)
Where αCO2 is CO2 loading.
Page 25 of 175
==PAGE:41==
3.3
Removal of CO2 from Loaded Samples
Master Thesis
3.3
Removal of CO2 from Loaded Samples
Two diﬀerent approaches were used to develop a method for removal of CO2 from a loaded
sample without aﬀecting the solvent. The purpose of removing the CO2 is to determine
whether the CO2 can aﬀect the result of the amine concentration determination. The
ﬁrst method involves the use of 0.5 M BaCl2 for precipitation of CO2 as BaCO3, and the
second the addition of HCl to a pH around 1 to decrease the solubility of the CO2 and
releasing it as a gas.
For the precipitation method, 10 mL 0.5 M BaCl2 solution was added to about 1 g of
sample in a 100 mL beaker. For the ﬁrst attempt, the lean and rich Hashøj samples with
the highest determined CO2 were used. After addition of the BaCl2 solution, the beaker
was heated to the boiling point with stirring as described in the ﬁrst part of the liquid phase
analysis. After cooling to room temperature, the solution was vacuum ﬁltered, followed
by washing of the beaker and ﬁlter with a small amount of water. The ﬁlter and solids
were then discarded, and the clear liquid was transferred to a clean 100 mL beaker. The
titration was then performed with an autotitrator to determine the amine concentration
as described in section 3.1. The resulting titration curves are shown in ﬁgure 15 and 16,
together with the titration curve of the same sample where CO2 has not been removed.
For both equivalence points, linear regression has been used to determine the slope of the
curve close to the equivalence points.
(a)
(b)
Figure 15: Titration curve for rich sample before (a) and after (b) CO2 removal with
BaCl2. Grey points and orange points are used for caculation of linear ﬁt for equivalence
point 1 and 2, respectively.
Page 26 of 175
==PAGE:42==
3.3
Removal of CO2 from Loaded Samples
Master Thesis
(a)
(b)
Figure 16: Titration curve for lean sample before and after CO2 removal with BaCl2.
Grey points and orange points are used for caculation of linear ﬁt for equivalence point 1
and 2, respectively.
The ﬁgures show that for both samples there is a signiﬁcant change in the volume of
HCl needed for titration, as both equivalence points are reached earlier for the samples
after CO2 has been removed.
Furthermore, the slope of the ﬁrst equivalence point is
signiﬁcantly increased for both lean and rich after removal of CO2. The change in slope
for the ﬁrst equivalence point and the similarity between the curve proﬁle between Figure
15b and 16b indicates that at least most of the CO2 was removed. However, the large
change in amount of HCl needed also indicate that some of the amines have been removed.
By repeating the procedure for removing CO2 from the rich sample, but without heating,
a somewhat diﬀerent result is achieved. To ensure the mixture had time to precipitate,
the BaCO3 the solution was mixed for 10 min, as this was approximately the time it took
for the previous solutions to boil. The titration curve for this experiment is shown in
Figure 17 and shows a relatively smaller change in HCl volume compared to Figure 15b
in relation to the unaltered sample.
Page 27 of 175
==PAGE:43==
3.3
Removal of CO2 from Loaded Samples
Master Thesis
Figure 17: Titration curve of rich sample after removal of CO2 with BaCl2 without
heating. Grey points and orange points are used for caculation of linear ﬁt for equivalence
point 1 and 2, respectively.
However, by not heating the sample a diﬀerent challenge arose, as the ﬁltered solution
became cloudy after only a few minutes. As the pH decreased during the titration, the
cloudiness disappeared.
To investigate whether it is MDEA which precipitates in the
presence of BaCl2, a small sample of 10 mL MDEA was prepared in one 100 mL beaker
and an aqueous solution of about 5 mL MDEA and 15 mL water was prepared in another.
0.5 M BaCl2 was then added in small quantities to both beakers multiple times using a
magnetic stirrer to mix the solutions. After a few mL of BaCl2 solution had been added
to the aqueous MDEA solution, some white precipitation could be seen in the beaker. By
adding more BaCl2 solution, the amount of precipitation also seemed to increase. For the
beaker with pure MDEA it was not possible to see any precipitation up to about 15 mL
BaCl2 solution added. The beakers were then left to stand overnight and during inspection
the following day, both solutions seemed to have some precipitation as shown in Figure
18.
Page 28 of 175
==PAGE:44==
3.3
Removal of CO2 from Loaded Samples
Master Thesis
(a)
(b)
Figure 18: Pure MDEA (a) and 25 vol.% aqueous MDEA solution (b), both with 15 0.5
M BaCl2 added. Left at room temperature overnight to precipitate.
Generally, the aqueous solution in Figure 18b seem to have the most signiﬁcant precipi-
tation at the bottom, while the pure MDEA solution is cloudy instead of having a solid
layer at the bottom. This diﬀerence is probably caused by the diﬀerence in the amount
of water in the mixture, which makes it possible for the MDEA molecules to be charged
and thereby react with the charged ions of the BaCl2 solution. The results of these tests
indicate that when MDEA is in aqueous solution it will react with the BaCl2 solution
causing the formation of an unknown complex which has a low solubility in the solution.
Therefore, trying to remove the CO2 from a sample using a BaCl2 solution most likely also
removes some of the MDEA, which would explain how the volume of HCl needed for equiv-
alence in Figure 15b and 16b is reduced after the treatment with BaCl2. This method is
therefore clearly not optimal regarding determination of the amine concentration without
CO2 experimentally.
To decrease the CO2 capacity of the solvent, the pH is reduced to one by addition of 12 mL
0.5 M HCl. The amount of HCl needed is chosen based on examination of previous amine
concentration analyses. In a 100 mL beaker, 1 g sample was therefore combined with 12
mL 0.5 M HCl, weighted to accurately determine the amount of HCl added. The solution
was then heated with stirring for 10-15 min, where visible gas bubbles were formed as
CO2 was released from the solution. In Figure 19 a picture is shown of a sample where
bubbles are starting to form after addition of HCl. The solution was then cooled to room
Page 29 of 175
==PAGE:45==
3.3
Removal of CO2 from Loaded Samples
Master Thesis
temperature, followed by addition of 0.1 M NaOH equimolar to the amount of HCl added.
For this purpose, a 10 mL burette was used, and about 60 mL of 0.1 M NaOH was added
in total. The solution was then titrated using an autotitrator to determine the amine
content.
Figure 19: Picture of CO2 bubbles formed in a loaded sample after addition of HCl.
The two methods were then compared with results achieved without removing CO2 and
the solution before loading. For this, a solution with 46% amine loaded with CO2 to an
about 0.1 mole CO2 per mole amine was used. This solution was made during an earlier
project, which also included determination of the amine content before loading with CO2
[53].
Three analyses were done for each solution to be able to determine statistically
diﬀerences. A titration curve for each solution is shown in Figure 20, including linear
regression lines for each equivalence point (EP1 and EP2). Table 1 shows the average
slope for both equivalence points for each solution.
Page 30 of 175
==PAGE:46==
3.3
Removal of CO2 from Loaded Samples
Master Thesis
Figure 20: Titration curves for (a) 45% stock solution, (b) 0,1 loading solution, (c) CO2
removed with BaCl2, and (d) CO2 removed with HCl. Grey points and orange points are
used for caculation of linear ﬁt for equivalence point 1 and 2, respectively.
Table 1: Average slopes for ﬁrst and second equivalence points for amine titration curves
of unloaded solution, 0.1 loading solution, BaCl2 method, and HCl method.
Description
Slope at EP1
Slope at EP2
unloaded solution
-2.23 ±0.03
-13.84 ±1.66
0,1 loading solution
-1.72 ±0.13
-8.77 ±0.45
BaCl2 method
-2.00 ±0.06
-7.80 ±0.51
HCl method
-2.21 ±0.07
-7.62 ±0.59
From Figure 20 and Table 1 it is clear that the slope for the second equivalence point
is highest for the non-loaded solution. For the ﬁrst equivalence point, this is only true
for the loaded solution and the solution where BaCl2 was used to remove the CO2. The
titration curve from the HCl method generally have a large resemblance to the curve for the
unloaded solution, indicating this method removes most of the CO2 without signiﬁcantly
changing the composition of the remaining solution. This is conﬁrmed from the amine
concentrations presented in Table 3, which are calculated using the second equivalence
point.
Page 31 of 175
==PAGE:47==
3.4
Standardisation of Titration Solutions
Master Thesis
Table 2: Average amine concentration without CO2, determined from titrations shown
in Figure 20.
Table 3
Description
Amine weight fraction
unloaded solution
0.460 ±2.03 · 10−5
0,1 loading solution
0.457 ±2.26 · 10−3
BaCl2 method
0.449 ±2.87 · 10−3
HCl method
0.458 ±1.68 · 10−3
From Table 3, the result achieved with the HCl method is slightly closer to the expected
amine concentration of the unloaded solution, than the value for the loaded solvent at
0.457. This amine concentration was calculated using the CO2 content determined from
the liquid phase analysis. This method was therefore chosen for removal of CO2 from
samples of the Hashøj biogas pilot plant and is described in the following.
3.3.1
Final HCl method for removal of CO2 from loaded samples
To a 100 mL beaker, measure about 1 g of a loaded sample from the Hashøj biogas plant
and add 12 mL 0.5 M HCl. Heat the beaker under stirring for 10-15 min, checking the
solution has stopped to form CO2 bubbles. The beaker is cooled to room temperature and
60 mL of 0.1 M NaOH is then added to the beaker using a 10 mL burette. The solution
is then titrated with an autotitrator as described in section 3.1.
3.4
Standardisation of Titration Solutions
For the analyses described above, it is important to accurately know the concentration of
the used HCl and NaOH solutions. The HCl concentration is determined ﬁrst, by using it
to titrate a known solution of sodium carbonate. To make the sodium carbonate solution,
solid Na2CO3 is dried overnight in an oven at 100℃, cooled down in a desiccator to room
temperature and a measured amount of dry Na2CO3 is then dissolved in water.
For each analysis, a sample of 20 mL 0.1377 M Na2CO3 solution is added to a 100 mL
beaker using a pipette. Using an autotitrator the sample is titrated with an approximate
Page 32 of 175
==PAGE:48==
3.4
Standardisation of Titration Solutions
Master Thesis
0.5 M HCl solution. The reactions between Na2CO3 and HCl is as follows:
Na2CO3 + HCl ←−→NaHCO3 + NaCl
(26)
NaHCO3 + HCl ←−→H2CO3 + NaCl
(27)
The result is a pH curve with two equally spaced equivalence points, as shown in Figure
21. As the second equivalence point has the steepest slope, this is the point which is used
to calculate the concentration of the HCl.
0
5
10
15
V [mL]
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
pH
EP2
EP1
Figure 21: Titration curve for titration of Na2CO3 with HCl for standardisation of the
HCl solution.
The moles of Na2CO3 solution in the sample nNa2CO3 is determined by,
nNa2CO3 = cNa2CO3 · VNa2CO3
(28)
where cNa2CO3 is the concentration of the Na2CO3 solution and VNa2CO3 is the volume of
the sample. At the second equivalence point 2 moles of HCl is used per mole of Na2CO3,
thus giving,
nHCl,2 = 2 · nNa2CO3
(29)
where nHCl,2 is the total moles of HCl used in to reach the second equivalence point. The
Page 33 of 175
==PAGE:49==
3.5
Preparation of Aqueous Piperazine Solutions
Master Thesis
concentration of the HCl cHCl is then determined by dividing nHCl with the used volume
VHCl:
cHCl = nHCl
VHCl
(30)
When the HCl solution has been standardised, it can be used to standardise the 0.1 M
NaOH solution by titration of a known amount of HCl. A sample of 2.2 g 0.5 M HCl
is measured in a 50 mL beaker, and water is then added to cover the magnet used for
stirring during the titration. 34 drops of phenol red solution are added as indicator and is
then manually titrated until the solution changes colour from yellow to slightly pink. The
mass of HCl mHCl is converted to moles by dividing with the density of 0.5 M HCl ρHCl
and multiplying with the concentration cHCl:
nHCl = mHCl
ρHCl
· cHCl
(31)
NaOH and HCl reacts 1:1, meaning nHCl = nNaOH and the concentration of the NaOH
can then be determined:
cNaOH = nNaOH
VNaOH
(32)
3.5
Preparation of Aqueous Piperazine Solutions
A 100 mL beaker is used for preparation of the solution. The desired amount of piperazine
crystals is weighted on a weight and dissolved slowly under stirring and heating in water. It
is important that the sample is not cooled to make sure the solution does not crystallise. In
Table 4 an overview of the prepared solutions can be seen as well as in which temperature
interval measurements were possible.
Table 4: Overview of analysed aqueous piperazine mixtures and in which temperature
interval their density have been measured.
PZ wt%
1.71
3.45
7.99
13.04
20.0
30.0
40.0
50.0
55.0
60.0
65.0
xP Z
0.0036
0.0074
0.018
0.030
0.050
0.082
0.12
0.17
0.20
0.24
0.28
Temp int
20-70
20-70
20-70
20-70
40-70
50-70
50-70
50-70
50-70
50-70
50-70
Page 34 of 175
==PAGE:50==
3.6
Density Measurements
Master Thesis
3.6
Density Measurements
The density measurements are performed on an Anton Paar DMA 4500 M densimeter. The
densimeter is ﬁrst thoroughly washed with demineralised water. The sample is inserted
into the densimeter utilising a 5 mL single-use pipette and 2 mL of sample is analysed. If
preheating is needed, the sample is placed into a water bath set to the desired temperature
before being inserted into the densimeter. A picture of the density measurement setup is
shown in Figure 22.
Figure 22: Picture of the DMA 4500 densimeter used for the density measurements in
the lab.
Page 35 of 175
==PAGE:51==
Master Thesis
4
Results and Discussion of Experimental Analysis
In this section, the results of the laboratory experiments related to the pilot plant are
presented.
The samples were collected during steady state experiments in summer of
2022. This includes amine concentration of pure solvent, pilot plant samples and samples
with CO2 removed. It also includes CO2 concentration determinations and comparisons
between experimentally determined density and CO2 concentration.
Measured sample
weights, titration volumes and calculated results for amine concentration and CO2 loading
experiments are shown in Appendix B.
Results from titration of pure aqueous MDEA-PZ solvent are shown in Table 5, where
titrations were performed for both cold and room temperature samples. This was done as
the solvent and samples were stored at around 5℃between experiments. At this temper-
ature the expected piperazine concentration in the pure solvent is close to the solubility
of the amine in water and since the inﬂuence of MDEA on the piperazine solubility at
these temperatures is not known, small non-visible piperazine crystals might form during
storage [54].
Table 5: Amine concentration of pure solvent.
Amine
Concentration (%)
5 ℃
25℃
MDEA
51.4 ± 0.2
51.5 ± 0.3
PZ
6.4 ± 0.1
6.6 ± 0.1
Total
57.7 ± 0.1
58.0 ± 0.3
From Table 5 there is only a small diﬀerence between the two temperatures, with room
temperature resulting in slightly higher amine concentrations for both MDEA and piper-
azine. The average total amine concentration was determined to 57.7% and 58.0% for
cold and room temperatures, respectively. It is therefore unlikely that the temperature
of the samples will have a signiﬁcant inﬂuence on the amine concentration results. Since
the samples are only 20 mL and stored in plastic containers, they will however quickly
change temperature when removed from the refrigeration. Therefore, all subsequent amine
concentration titrations were performed with 25℃samples to ensure consistent results.
Page 36 of 175
==PAGE:52==
Master Thesis
For the pilot plant experiments, the goal was to operate with a total amine concentration
of 45% in the solvent, with 37% MDEA and 8% PZ, respectively. However, converting the
results seen in Table 5 to a 45% concentration, shows a distribution much closer to 40/5
of MDEA/PZ. This is also shown in Table 6, where the distribution also is determined for
steady state samples titrated after CO2 have been removed. Here, the ratio between the
two amines is about 39/6 of MDEA/PZ, which is closer to the desired distribution.
Table 6:
Amine distribution for a solvent with 45 wt% amine, for pure solvent and
samples where CO2 have been removed.
Amine
Pure solvent
CO2 removed samples (average)
MDEA
39.9%
39.1%
PZ
5.1%
5.9%
The pure solvent was originally made by mixing of products provided by Pentair, following
their mixing ratios. The diﬀerence in the ratio of MDEA and piperazine might have been
caused by the products being less pure than expected, as the total solvent concentration
determined to be 58% also was lower than the expected 61%. Assuming the results for
the steady state samples are more representative of the state of the solvent while it was
used in the pilot plant, the 39/6 ratio was chosen for further calculations, instead of the
40/5 ratio determined for the pure solvent.
The results of titrations of the CO2 loaded samples are shown in Figure 23, where the amine
concentration is calculated as weight percentage of the solvent. The CO2 concentrations
used for these calculations are presented in Figure 24.
Page 37 of 175
==PAGE:53==
Master Thesis
Figure 23: Solvent amine fraction of pilot plant samples as a function of steady state
date and time. Calculated as if there were no CO2 in the samples.
Figure 23 shows that the amine concentration ﬂuctuates with time, as more water leaves
the pilot plant as water vapour with the CO2 product, than enters with the biogas. As the
amount of water which is lost this way largely depends on the conﬁguration of the pilot
plant, make-up water was added in batches when the concentration of amine was deemed
too high. This was determined by titration of solvent samples at the site. For most of the
period where pilot plant experiments were conducted, the lean amine concentration was
kept around 50-55% as shown in Figure 23. The goal was to keep the amine concentration
below 50% assuming the amines were distributed 37/8. By using 39/6 as ratio instead, the
molar mass of the amine mixture is higher, thus increasing the actual mass fraction of the
amine. This therefore explains some of the deviation from the wanted amine concentration.
For some experiments, there is a signiﬁcant diﬀerence between the amine concentration
of the lean and the rich solvent in Figure 23. As the condensed water from the condenser
is added to the absorber, it is expected that the amine concentration in the rich solvent
is slightly lower than the lean solvent. However, for some of the samples with lean amine
concentrations around 55%, the rich amine concentration is 1-2 percentage points lower
than the one in the lean solvent, which seems unexpectedly high. This could also indicate
Page 38 of 175
==PAGE:54==
Master Thesis
that there are some uncertainties in the experimental results, which causes the diﬀerence
between lean and rich to be higher than expected. This likely due to results in the CO2
concentration determination, as these experiments have a relative standard deviation of
1-5%, compared to a maximum of 1% for the amine determinations.
Figure 23 also shows analyses of lean solvent samples taken between the 18/7-21/7 gener-
ally have very similar amine concentrations. Assuming this is also true for other periods
with experiments done within a short time frame, some of the amine concentrations can
be estimated for the period 2/7-5/7. This is done by analysing the samples at each end
of the period and one in the middle, and considering that make-up water is added on the
3/7. By assuming the amine concentration in the solvent is increasing linearly throughout
the period, the missing amine concentrations are estimated.
CO2 was removed from a total of four diﬀerent rich solvent samples, to investigate if
this method is viable for determination of solvent amine concentration with no CO2. The
determined total amine concentrations are compared to the concentration calculated using
results of the liquid phase analysis in Table 7. The samples analysed with this method
were chosen to reﬂect a wide range of CO2 concentrations, to see if this had an inﬂuence
on the amine concentration, which could be determined by simple titration. The results
shown in Table 7 shows that for all four samples, the amine concentration was lower when
CO2 was removed before titration.
Table 7: Total amine concentration for rich solvent samples with and without removal
of CO2 with HCl. All concentrations are given in wt%.
Steady state
Date of
Amine concentration
CO2 concentration
number
steady state
No CO2 removal
With CO2 removal
14
14/7
52.6 ± 0.8
51.2 ± 1.0
5.20 ± 0.08
34
2/8
52.5 ± 1.9
45.6 ± 0.4
4.40 ± 0.16
42
4/8
50.2 ± 0.6
41.0 ± 0.3
5.68 ± 0.06
45
5/8
49.8 ± 1.1
45.8 ± 1.4
6.07 ± 0.14
The largest diﬀerence in amine concentration was found for steady state number 42, where
the result was about 9 percentage points lower than for the sample with CO2 removed,
compared to the normal titration. This sample has a CO2 concentration of 5.68 wt%,
Page 39 of 175
==PAGE:55==
Master Thesis
while a sample with 5.20 wt% CO2 only have a 1.4 percentage points diﬀerence in amine
concentration. The remaining two samples have a diﬀerence in 4.1 and 6.9 percentage
points, with a CO2 concentration of 6.07 wt% and 4.40 wt%, respectively. Due to this
wide range of diﬀerences, there is no clear correlation between the amine concentration
determined with the two methods and their CO2 concentration. It is diﬃcult to determine
which of the methods result in an amine concentration closest to the actual value, without
additional experiments or calculations. Despite of this, the amine concentrations in Figure
23 is chosen for further calculations, as removing CO2 from all the samples before titration
would be too time consuming.
Figure 24 shows the lean and rich CO2 concentrations for each of the analysed steady
states. The ﬁgure shows the lean CO2 concentration is always lower than for the rich
solvent, around 1-3% and 4.5-6%, respectively. Furthermore, high CO2 concentration in
the lean solvent generally also coincides with a high CO2 concentration in the rich solvent.
The ﬂuctuations in CO2 concentration over time are most likely due to changes in the
conﬁguration of the pilot plant, such as reduced stripper pressure or the use of rich cold
split. The results achieved with this analysis method are therefore as expected.
Figure 24: CO2 concentration in pilot plant samples as a function of date and time for
the pilot plant experiments.
Page 40 of 175
==PAGE:56==
Master Thesis
These results can therefore be used to determine whether there is a correlation between
the CO2 concentration and the density of the samples. This is shown in Figure 25 where
density is plotted as a function of CO2 concentration.
The ﬁgure shows a signiﬁcant
inﬂuence of the CO2 concentration on the density of the loaded solvent, with an almost
linear relation for the lean samples. This is despite the amine concentration changing over
the course of the pilot plant experiments. The rich samples do not have a nearly strong
correlation, as they have a wider spread in density, especially around 5-5.5 wt% CO2.
Figure 25: Sample density as a function of CO2 concentration, based on experimental
results.
By extending the linear relation determined for the lean CO2 concentrations, the trend
line is below the concentrations determined for the rich samples. This correlation can
therefore not be used to directly estimate the CO2 concentrations for the rich samples. A
more complex density model is therefore needed, which is developed in the next section.
However, the results presented in this section are also crucial for calculating mass balances
for the ﬂow of CO2, H2O and amine in the pilot plant. The calculations of these and total
mass balances are described in section 6.
Page 41 of 175
==PAGE:57==
Master Thesis
5
Quaternary Density Model Development
In this section, a density model for the quaternary system MDEA-PZ-H2O-CO2 is devel-
oped. First, the binary interactions for the solvent MDEA-H2O and PZ-H2O are explored.
Subsequently, the combined ternary interaction is derived and ﬁnally, the dependency of
CO2 is included. Although the system of interest consists of four components: CO2, piper-
azine, MDEA and water, the aim is to develop a pseudo-binary model, where the ternary
solvent system is one part and CO2 the other. If possible, this will greatly simplify the
model. All literature data used in the density modelling can be seen in Appendix C.
If the level of CO2 can be directly calculated from the density using the model, more
tedious methods like the liquid phase analysis described in Section 3.2 are not needed to
determine the eﬃciency of the tested conﬁgurations. The model is developed both ideally
and non-ideally using the methods described in Section 5.1 and 5.2. A description of the
approach for both types of development is also provided in the sections.
5.1
Ideal Model
In this section, the development of an ideal density model is described. The ideal density
model is based on the molar volume equation shown below,
VM,1,2 = x1 · VM,1 + x2 · VM,2
(33)
where VM,1,2 is the combined molar volume of the two components, and xi and VM,i are the
molar fraction and molar volume of component i, respectively. Furthermore, the combined
molar mass MW,1,2 needs to be calculated as follows,
MW,1,2 = x1 · MW,1 + x2 · MW,2
(34)
where Mi is the molar mass of component i. From this, the density of the mixture ρ1,2
can be calculated as:
ρ1,2 = MW,1,2
VM,1,2
(35)
Page 42 of 175
==PAGE:58==
5.2
Non-ideal Model
Master Thesis
5.2
Non-ideal Model
This section describes the development of an excess volume model, which is used for the
density model formulation, if the ideal model is deemed unsatisfactory. Excess volume
describes changes in volume due to interactions between diﬀerent molecules, which is not
accounted for in the ideal model. The excess volume is therefore expressed as an additional
term added to the ideal molar volume, to calculate the total molar volume of the mixture.
This can be seen in equation (36).
Vm = Vid + V E
(36)
Where Vid is the ideal molar volume and V E is the excess volume.
The excess volume models developed in this project use diﬀerent variations of a Redlich-
Kister expansion for approximation of the excess molar volume. The general expression
is as seen below:
V E = x1x2 ·
(
A + B · (x1 −x2) + C · (x1 −x2)2 + ...
)
(37)
where A, B, and C are coeﬃcients adjusted to ﬁt experimental data. However, to test
whether this development is the most correct, other models will also be investigated for
the MDEA-H2O interaction. To develop a ternary model, each of the binary interactions
in the ternary system needs to be modelled and described as seen in equation (38) below,
V E
123 = V E
12 + V E
13 + V E
23
(38)
where V E
123 is the excess volume of the ternary mixture and V E
ij is the excess volume of
the component pair ij. For the model development, the constants seen in equation (37)
Page 43 of 175
==PAGE:59==
5.3
MDEA-H2O Interaction
Master Thesis
are determined by equations (39) and (40).
min

∑
j
(Vmodel −Vobs)2
j


(39)
min

∑
j
(ρmodel −ρobs)2
j


(40)
where Vmodel and Vobs is the molar volume of the model and experiments, respectively, and
ρmodel and ρobs is the density of the model and experiments, respectively. This method,
as it is beneﬁcial to eliminate the largest errors for the approximation.
5.3
MDEA-H2O Interaction
In this section, the binary system of water and MDEA is modelled. Initially, it is in-
vestigated ideally at 25 °C and 1 bar. If the model is not deemed ideal, the MDEA-H2O
interaction will be developed non-ideally at 1 bar of pressure and at diﬀerent temperatures.
The ideal density model for the binary system consisting of MDEA and water is shown in
Figure 26 together with experimental data from the literature.
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
MDEA molar fraction
990
1000
1010
1020
1030
1040
1050
1060
Density [kg/m3]
Ideal
Experimental
Figure 26: Density of MDEA-H2O mixtures as a function of MDEA molar fraction at
25 °C. Blue curve represents ideal model and orange curve the literature data [22, 55, 56,
57, 58, 59].
Page 44 of 175
==PAGE:60==
5.3
MDEA-H2O Interaction
Master Thesis
From Figure 26 it can be seen that the density does not adopt an ideal behaviour, as the
experimental density is generally higher than the ideal density. This indicates that the
molecules are packed closer than they would be in an ideal mixture, and the addition of an
excess volume term is therefore needed to accommodate for this discrepancy. Additionally,
it can be seen that the deviation from the ideal model decreases when the molar fraction
of the component is approaching zero or one. As the measured densities of the mixture
are higher than the ideal densities, the excess volume term will in this case be negative.
The interaction between MDEA and water is well-deﬁned in literature [22, 55, 56, 57, 58,
59]. This also goes for their physiochemical properties, therefore no additional density
measurements of the aqueous MDEA solution are needed. The excess molar volume of the
MDEA-H2O interaction is developed at 40℃and a temperature dependency of the model
is added in the next section. 14 diﬀerent variations of an excess molar volume function
have been tested, and these are presented in Table 8.
Table 8: Proposed models for the excess molar volume of the MDEA-H2O interaction.
Excess volume equation
Excess volume equation
1
A · x1x2
8
D · (x1x2)2 + E · x1x2(x1 −x2)
2
A · x1x2 + B · (x1)2x2
9
A · x1x2 + D · (x1x2)2
3
A · x1x2 + B · (x1)2x2 + C · x1(x2)2
10
A · x1x2 + E · x1x2(x1 −x2)
4
A · x1x2 + C · x1(x2)2
11
A · x1x2 + F · x1x2(x1 −x2)2 + G · x1x2(x1 −x2)3
5
B · (x1)2x2 + C · x1(x2)2
12
F · x1x2(x1 −x2)2 + G · x1x2(x1 −x2)3
6
C · x1(x2)2 + D · (x1x2)2
13
A · x1x2 + b · (x1)2x2 + F · x1x2(x1 −x2)2
7
B · (x1)2x2 + D · (x1x2)2
14
B · (x1)2x2 + E · x1x2(x1 −x2)+
F · x1x2(x1 −x2)2 + G · x1x2(x1 −x2)3
The coeﬃcients are determined by using equations (39) and (40). After the coeﬃcients
have been determined, the summed square error can be used to compare how well the
models ﬁt the experimental measurements. Before the models are plotted with experi-
mental values, an initial model check is performed. First, the equations are divided with
the product of the molar fractions x1x2, giving the expression V E/x1x2 on the left side.
With some manipulation and replacing one of the mole fractions as a function of the other,
the functions are written as seen in Table 9.
Page 45 of 175
==PAGE:61==
5.3
MDEA-H2O Interaction
Master Thesis
Table 9: Modiﬁed equations from Table 8 for mathematical analysis.
V E/x1x2
V E/x1x2
1
A
8
x1 · (D −D · x1 + 2E) −E
2
(A + B) −B · x2
9
A + x1 · (D −D · x1)
3
A + C + (B −C) · x1
10
A + E · (x1 −x2)
4
(A + C) −C · x1
11
A + F · (x1 −x2)2 + G · (x1 −x2)3
5
C + (B −C) · x1
12
F · (x1 −x2)2 + G · (x1 −x2)3
6
x2 · (−D · x2 + C + D)
13
A + B · x1 + F · (x1 −x2)2
7
x1 · (−D · x1 + B + D)
14
B · x1 + E · (x1 −x2)+
F · (x1 −x2)2 + G · (x1 −x2)3
Model 2-5 in Table 9 are now ﬁrst order polynomial, and thus the same summed square
of errors is to be expected. This is due to the solver having the same degrees of freedom
to adjust. Furthermore, it seems as though there is a redundant parameter in model 3,
given that c could be set to any number and by adjustment of a and b this could be
accommodated. Models 6-14 are harder to directly compare due to the more complex
equations, but it does seem as though, models 9, 10, 11 and 13 have the potential to be
good due to the coeﬃcient A being independent of the molar fractions. 12 is expected to
perform badly due to the complex context in which constants F and G are present.
The 14 models are now plotted along with the experimental values, as shown in Figure
27. From this ﬁgure
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
Molar fraction
-1.2
-1
-0.8
-0.6
-0.4
-0.2
0
VE [m3/mol]
10-6
mod1
mod2
mod3
mod4
mod5
mod6
mod7
mod8
mod9
mod10
mod11
mod12
mod13
mod14
VEexp
Figure 27: Excess volume as a function of molar fraction for the 14 diﬀerent models
described in Table 8.
Page 46 of 175
==PAGE:62==
5.3
MDEA-H2O Interaction
Master Thesis
From Figure 27 it is not clear which model ﬁts the best, as only around ﬁve to six models
can be clearly distinguished. To determine the best ﬁt, the numerical values obtained
using equation (39) are therefore shown in Table 10.
Table 10: Molar volume sum of square error for models of the MDEA-H2O binary pair.
The values have been multiplied by 1012. The parameters (A-F) values can be seen in
Appendix C.1
#
∑i
n=1(V Eexp −V Emo)2
#
∑i
n=1(V Eexp −V Emo)2
1
1.0870
8
0.032337
2
0.032333
9
1.0866
3
0.032333
10
0.032329
4
0.032333
11
0.36177
5
0.052549
12
10.134
6
0.032333
13
0.032329
7
1.0866
14
0.65231
Based on the analysis of the equations in Table 9, some of the expectations are not met
by the results in Table 10. For example, the summed square of errors for model 6 and 7 is
not lower than 8. Indeed, 7 seems to be one of the worst models, even though the amount
of adjustable parameters the same as model 2-5. For the prediction of model 2-5, only
model 5 has a slightly higher summed square of errors than expected. Model 12 performs
the worst, which was also predicted earlier. Less complex terms seems to be needed in
the excess molar volume model, which is also evident when looking at the performance of
models 10 and 13. However, it appears that most of these errors are due to Excel’s solver
being used for minimisation rather than the method itself. However, this initial procedure
is mainly for identifying the right model. The coeﬃcient values of the chosen model will
be adjusted accordingly later.
From Table 10 it seems that model 2, 3, 4, 6, 10 and 13 are the best models. These are
shown on the left side of Figure 28. Of the six, model 10 and 13 have slightly lower sum
squares and are therefore shown separately to the right in Figure 28. For the left ﬁgure
in Figure 28 only one model seems present. The values obtained by using the 6 diﬀerent
models are so close that the models are plotted on top of each other, and thus only one is
visible. This is also why the right plot of Figure 28 is necessary.
Page 47 of 175
==PAGE:63==
5.3
MDEA-H2O Interaction
Master Thesis
Figure 28: Left: The 6 models with the lowest summed squares. Right: Zoom of the left
plot with only models 10 and 13.
From the right plot in Figure 28, model 10 performs slightly better and is slightly closer
to the experimental data around a molar fraction of 0.37. Furthermore, comparing the
expression of model 10 and 13, model 10 is simpler than model 13, making it the preferred
model. Moreover, the model is a type of Redlist-Kister expansion. Thus, the excess molar
volume of the MDEA-H2O interaction can be described as follows:
V E = a · x1x2 + e · x1x2(x1 −x2)
(41)
where x1 is the molar fraction of MDEA, x2 is the molar fraction of water and a and e
are constants determined to be −4.30 × 10−6 and 2.64 × 10−6, respectively.
5.3.1
Temperature Dependency
For the MDEA-H2O interaction to be used in the overall density model, a temperature
dependency must be included. The molar volume of both MDEA and H2O is dependent on
temperature and therefore data from Karunarathne et al. is therefore used to determine a
temperature dependent expression for the molar volume of MDEA[60]. The experimental
data is plotted as a function of temperature in Figure 29, along with a linear correlation.
Page 48 of 175
==PAGE:64==
5.3
MDEA-H2O Interaction
Master Thesis
300
310
320
330
340
350
Temperature [K]
990
1000
1010
1020
1030
1040
1050
Density [kg/m3]
exp
corr
y = -0.7666+1265.5
R2 = 1
Figure 29: Density as a function of temperature for pure MDEA.
Using the density correlation and rewriting equation (35), a molar volume correlation is
obtained for pure MDEA,
VmMDEA =
MwMDEA
−0.7666 · T[K] + 1265.5
(42)
where MwMDEA is the molar weight of MDEA and T is the temperature in kelvin. The
same can be done for the molar volume of the water. Water density data is collected from
internetchemistry.com [61].
Thus, both coeﬃcients achieved in Section 5.3 are made temperature dependent. The
coeﬃcients are made temperature dependent by splitting the original coeﬃcients into two.
For the two coeﬃcients a and e the equations become:
A =A0 + A1 · (T −313.15)
(43)
B =E0 + E1 · (T −313.15)
(44)
where a0 and e0 are the values determined for a and e above at 40 ℃and T is the tem-
perature in kelvin. The coeﬃcients a1 and e1 are estimated by using equation (39) and
literature data. This gives a1 = 1.86 × 10−8 and e1 = −3.57 × 10−8. In Figure 30, the
model is compared to the used literature data.
Page 49 of 175
==PAGE:65==
5.3
MDEA-H2O Interaction
Master Thesis
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Molar fraction
-1.4
-1.2
-1
-0.8
-0.6
-0.4
-0.2
0
VE [m3/mol]
10-6
20C
30C
40C
50C
60C
Figure 30: Molar excess volume as a function of MDEA molar fraction. Dots are exper-
imental excess volumes and lines are model excess volumes.
While the coeﬃcients are relatively small compared to the values of a0 and e0, it does
seem to have a great eﬀect on the model behaviour.
For 20 ℃the model shows the
least compatibility, suggesting further developments could be made. To see whether this
discrepancy is present in the model densities, the literature data is plotted together with
the model calculations for density. This can be seen in Figure 31.
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
Molar fraction
980
990
1000
1010
1020
1030
1040
1050
1060
Density [kg/m3]
20C
30C
40C
50C
60C
Figure 31: Density as a function of the MDEA molar fraction. The dots are experimental
values and the line are model densities.
As can be seen from the ﬁgure, the temperature dependency of the model is in good
Page 50 of 175
==PAGE:66==
5.3
MDEA-H2O Interaction
Master Thesis
accordance with the experimental data. This suggests the slight discrepancy of the excess
molar volume model seen in Figure 30 for 20 °C is negligible when calculating the density.
However, the model is not satisfactory in small molar fractions. Given that the ternary
system will have a MDEA weight fraction of around 0.4 and a molar fraction of 0.1, this
is not optimal for the later development of the density model. For demonstration, the
models at molar fractions 0-0.2 is presented in Figure 32.
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
Molar fraction
980
990
1000
1010
1020
1030
1040
1050
1060
Density [kg/m3]
20C
30C
40C
50C
60C
Figure 32: Density as a function of molar fraction of MDEA for a molar fraction of 0-0.2
for diﬀerent temperatures. The dots represent the respective temperatures’ experimental
data.
Especially at 60 °C, the model is not suﬃcient for low mole fractions. Furthermore, a
data point for pure water is missing, which could provide a better point of reference for
the model’s intercept. This could also be helpful for determination of the molar volume
of water for each temperature.
This would ensure that the model developed has the
correct density for a molar fraction of zero. From Figure 32 it can also be seen that some
molar fractions have multiple measurements at the same molar fractions, which causes
uncertainties in the model. Therefore, only unique molar fraction data points has been
kept. When more than one density measurement was available at a molar fraction, the
one closest to the trend line has been kept.
The molar volume of water at each temperature is added to the data set and equation 40
Page 51 of 175
==PAGE:67==
5.3
MDEA-H2O Interaction
Master Thesis
is used to determine new coeﬃcients. Additionally, errors for measurements with a molar
fraction under 0.2 are prioritised by multiplying the errors with 2. From this, the following
model coeﬃcients are determined:
A0 = −5.15 × 10−6; A1 = 2.24 × 10−8; E0 = 1.27 × 10−6; E1 = 1.17 × 10−8
(45)
Comparing these with the old values seen in equations (43) and (44), it is clear that the
new< the constants are only slightly diﬀerent. In Figure 33a the new model is compared
to the literature data.
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
Molar fraction
980
990
1000
1010
1020
1030
1040
1050
1060
Density [kg/m3]
20C
30C
40C
50C
60C
(a)
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
Molar fraction
980
990
1000
1010
1020
1030
1040
1050
1060
Density [kg/m3]
20C
30C
40C
50C
60C
(b)
Figure 33: Density as a function of molar fraction of MDEA with the new model at
diﬀerent temperatures for (a): molar fractions from 0-1 and (b): molar fraction from 0-
0.2.
As expected, the new model is less precise at molar fractions higher than 0.3. It is however
also much better at predicting the density at low molar fractions, which is preferred for
the wanted application of the model. This is also shown in Figure 33b, where the model
is plotted for a molar fraction of 0 to 0.2. Therefore, the MDEA-water interaction will be
described as:
V EMDEA,H2O = xMDEA · xH2O ·
(
−5.15 × 10−6 + 2.24 × 10−8 · (T −313.15)
)
+
(xMDEA −xH2O) ·
(
1.27 × 10−6 + 1.17 × 10−8 · (T −313.15)
)
(46)
Page 52 of 175
==PAGE:68==
5.4
PZ-H2O Interaction
Master Thesis
5.4
PZ-H2O Interaction
The interaction between water and piperazine is not well described in literature, due to
the relatively poor solubility of piperazine in water. In Figure 34 the phase-diagram of
aqueous piperazine can be seen. The ﬁgure shows that at room temperature (25 °C), an
aqueous solution of 15 w/w% is obtainable. To work with aqueous solutions of piperazine
at higher concentrations, the temperature needs to be raised.
Figure 34: Solubility of piperazine in aqueous solutions [54].
This makes it diﬃcult to accurately develop a molar volume and thus a density model, as
a weight percentage of 14% piperazine corresponds to around 4% in molar percentage.
To characterise the piperazine-water interaction, higher weight percentage solutions are
prepared as described in Section 3.5. In Table 11 below, an overview of the solutions
analysed in this project is shown.
Table 11: Analysed aqueous piperazine mixtures and in which temperature interval their
density has been measured.
PZ wt%
1.71
3.45
7.99
13.04
20.0
30.0
40.0
50.0
55.0
60.0
65.0
xP Z
0.0036
0.0074
0.018
0.030
0.050
0.082
0.12
0.17
0.20
0.24
0.28
Temp int
20-70
20-70
20-70
20-70
40-70
50-70
50-70
50-70
50-70
50-70
50-70
Page 53 of 175
==PAGE:69==
5.4
PZ-H2O Interaction
Master Thesis
To investigate whether the amount of weighted piperazine is correct, solutions up to 30
w/w % are titrated as described in Section 3.1 and a parity plot is made to determine
whether the mass percentage calculated from weighting the samples are accurate.The
parity plot with both equivalence points can be seen in Figure 35.
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Theoretical wt%
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
Actual wt%
EP1
EP2
Figure 35: Parity plot for titrations of piperazine solutions. The dashed lines indicate a
±5% variation.
From the parity plot, there is no clear evidence as to which of the two equivalence points
is better. Furthermore, the points are spread randomly across the parity line, meaning the
weighted piperazine accurately represents the actual weight percentage of the piperazine
solutions. In Figure 36, the measured density of the piperazine solutions is plotted as a
function of molar fraction for diﬀerent temperatures.
Page 54 of 175
==PAGE:70==
5.4
PZ-H2O Interaction
Master Thesis
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
0.3
Molar fraction
975
980
985
990
995
1000
1005
1010
1015
1020
1025
Density [kg/m3]
20 oC
30 oC
40 oC
50 oC
60 oC
70 oC
Figure 36: Measured densities of prepared piperazine solutions as a function of piperazine
molar fraction at diﬀerent temperatures.
From this ﬁgure, the piperazine and water interaction displays similar behaviour as the
MDEA-H2O interaction. It has a maximum in density with increasing molar fraction,
which requires the use of an excess volume model. The excess molar volume was easily
described in the MDEA-H2O interaction, as data at all molar fractions were available from
literature. Due to the limited solubility this is however not the case with PZ. The molar
volume of pure piperazine is therefore hypothetical and will be an extrapolation of the
measurements in this project. As can be seen in Figure 36 the measured interval goes up
to a molar fraction of around 0.28. Thus, a projection for the rest of the molar fractions
up until one is needed.
To approximate the value of VPZ, the measured molar volumes of PZ-H2O mixtures are
plotted as function of the molar fraction in Figure 37.
Page 55 of 175
==PAGE:71==
5.4
PZ-H2O Interaction
Master Thesis
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
Molar fraction
1.8
2
2.2
2.4
2.6
2.8
3
3.2
3.4
3.6
3.8
Molar volume [m3/mol]
10-5
Measured VM
Trendline
y =6.4359E-05 + 1.8221E-05
R2 = 0.9998
Figure 37: Molar volume of the mixture as a function of the molar fraction of piperazine.
From the trend line, it seems as though the dependency between molar fraction and
molar volume is linear, which contradicts the behaviour shown in Figure 36. Furthermore,
using the linear correlation in Figure 37 to calculate H2O’s molar volume at 50 °C gives
1.822 × 10−5 m3/mol, which is close to its actual molar volume of 1.823 × 10−5 m3/mol.
Thus, extrapolating to a molar fraction of one gives an estimate of the molar volume of
pure piperazine at 50 ° C. This gives a density of pure piperazine around 1043 kg/m3,
which is plausible in terms of magnitude. However, from Figure 36 this would most likely
not be the case as the density peaks at around 1020 kg/m3. This is purely hypothetical,
as piperazine would be solid, and the estimate is based on an assumption of piperazine
being liquid.
The density model is initially developed at one temperature and subsequently made tem-
perature dependent. 50 °C is chosen for the initial model, as this is one of the temperatures
with the most measurements, and is relatively close to the middle of the examined tem-
perature interval.
To include the estimation of VPZ in the model, the general model
expression for PZ-H2O using the Redlich-Kister expansion becomes:
Vmodel,PZ-H2O = xPZ · VPZ + xH2O · Vm,H2O+
xPZxH2O ·
(
A + B · (xH2O −xPZ) + C · (xH2O −xPZ)2 + ...
)
(47)
Page 56 of 175
==PAGE:72==
5.4
PZ-H2O Interaction
Master Thesis
In Figure 38, the investigated variations of equation (47) are plotted.
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
Molar fraction
985
990
995
1000
1005
1010
1015
1020
1025
Density [kg/m3]
m
Vm
p
Vm
p ,A
Vm
p , A, B
A,B
A,B,C
(a)
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
Molar fraction
985
990
995
1000
1005
1010
1015
1020
1025
Density [kg/m3]
m
Vm
p
Vm
p ,A
Vm
p , A, B
A,B
A,B,C
(b)
Figure 38: Models of density of the piperazine/water pair as a function of molar fraction
when minimising molar volume (a) and density (b).
From Figure 38 it is clear that solving only for the molar volume of piperazine, thus
achieving an ideal model, is not satisfactory. Introducing the A coeﬃcient produces a
better ﬁt, however still without the expected peak in density. Introducing the B coeﬃcient
yields an almost perfect ﬁt, for both minimisation of the error of ρ and error of Vm.
Additionally, keeping the VPZ obtained from the model with VPZ and A, and varying A,
B and C also yields a good result. Table 12 shows an overview of the numerical errors for
the diﬀerent minimisation problem.
Table 12: Summed square of the errors for the diﬀerent combined model types. Vpz is
the molar volume of pure piperazine, and A, B, and C are constants from equation (47).
Minimisation of VM error
Minimisation of ρ error
Variables
∑i
n=1(VM,exp −VM,mo)2
∑i
n=1(ρexp −ρmo)2
∑i
n=1(VM,exp −Vm,mo)2
∑i
n=1(ρexp −ρmo)2
Vpz
0.09388
99.25
0.09630
96.76
Vpz, A
0.04131
69.53
0.04589
62.84
Vpz, A, B
0.001633
2.445
0.001786
2.211
A, B
0.04101
65.63
0.04849
62.23
A, B, C
0.0007908
1.039
0.0008035
0.9763
From Table 12, it seems that keeping Vpz constant and varying A, B and C yields the best
model, regardless of the minimisation being done with molar volume or density. In Tables
Page 57 of 175
==PAGE:73==
5.4
PZ-H2O Interaction
Master Thesis
13 and 14 the molar volume of pure piperazine and constants obtained for the models
are presented. From Figure 38 and Table 14, the model where VPZ, A, and B are varied,
seems to be a good ﬁt. However, the values of the molar volume in Tables 13 and 14
suggests otherwise. From Figure 37, the molar volume of pure piperazine in liquid form is
projected to be close to 8-9 ×10−5 m3/mol, so 1.56×10−4 m3/mol does not seem plausible.
Table 13: Molar volumes of piperazine and A, B and C values, when minimising molar
volume error.
Variables
Vpz [m3/mol]
A
B
C
Vpz
8.25×10−5
Vpz, A
8.90×10−5
-8.27×10−6
Vpz, A, B
1.51×10−4
-1.16×10−4
4.82×10−5
A, B
8.90×10−5
-8.49×10−6
3.80×10−7
A, B, C
8.90×10−5
2.51×10−6
-3.64×10−5
2.93×10−5
Table 14: Molar volumes of piperazine and A, B and C values, when minimising density
error.
Variables
Vpz [m3/mol]
A
B
C
Vpz
8.24×10−5
Vpz, A
8.71×10−5
-5.84×10−6
Vpz, A, B
1.56×10−4
-1.24×10−4
5.17×10−5
A, B
8.71×10−5
-6.12×10−6
4.58×10−7
A, B, C
8.71×10−5
6.41×10−6
-3.99×10−5
3.10×10−5
This leaves the model varying the coeﬃcients A, B and C as the best option. Minimising
the error in density gives the lowest summed density error, thus the values presented for
this model in Table 14 are used for the expression of the excess volume at 50 ℃.
V E = xH2O · xPZ ·
(
6.41 × 10−6 −3.99 × 10−5 · (xH2O −xPZ)
+3.10 × 10−5 · (xH2O −xPZ)2)
(48)
Page 58 of 175
==PAGE:74==
5.4
PZ-H2O Interaction
Master Thesis
5.4.1
Temperature Dependency
In this section, the temperature dependency of the piperazine-water model is developed.
The approximation of the molar volume is found by series expansion:
VPZ = VPZ,50 + VPZ,1 · (T[K] −323.15[K]) + VPZ,2 · (T[K] −323.15[K])2 + ...
(49)
Where VPZ,i is temperature coeﬃcient i for the molar volume of piperazine. Likewise, for
each coeﬃcient A, B and C the expression becomes:
A =A0 + A1 · (T[K] −323.15) + A2 · (T[K] −323.15)2 + ...
(50)
B =B0 + B1 · (T[K] −323.15) + B2 · (T[K] −323.15)2 + ...
(51)
C =C0 + C1 · (T[K] −323.15) + C2 · (T[K] −323.15)2 + ...
(52)
In Figure 39 below, the models found by both minimisations problems at 60 °C can be
seen. In Appendix C.3, corresponding ﬁgures at 20-50 ℃and 70 ℃can be found.
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
Molar fraction
985
990
995
1000
1005
1010
Density [kg/m3]
m
vi2
vi2,vi3
vi2, A1
vi2,vi3,A1
vi2,vi3,A1,B1
B1
B1,C1
(a)
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
Molar fraction
985
990
995
1000
1005
1010
Density [kg/m3]
m
vi2
vi2,vi3
vi2, A1
vi2,vi3,A1
vi2,vi3,A1,B1
B1
B1,C1
(b)
Figure 39: Models for piperazine/water mixtures as a function of molar fraction at 60
°C, when minimising molar volume (a) and density (b).
In general, minimising the summed square of the density error yields a result closer to the
measured data, than minimising the molar volume error. However, Figure 39b does not
clearly show which of the models is the best. Instead, the numeric values of the errors and
Page 59 of 175
==PAGE:75==
5.4
PZ-H2O Interaction
Master Thesis
the model coeﬃcients are presented in Table 15.
Table 15:
Temperature dependent piperazine/water model coeﬃcients and summed
square errors when minimising density error. The column "variables" gives an overview of
variables adjusted in each minimisation problem.
Variables
Verror
ρerror
VP Z2
VP Z3
A1
B1
C1
VP Z2
1.29×10−2
23.45
9.47×10−8
-
-
-
-
VP Z2, VP Z3
8.44×10−3
11.26
8.16×10−8
7.56×10−10
-
-
-
VP Z2, A1
9.95×10−3
11.73
1.98×10−7
-
-1.29×10−7
-
-
VP Z2, VP Z3,
A1
7.51×10−3
8.222
1.68×10−7
3.62×10−10
-9.88×10−8
-
-
VP Z2, VP Z3,
A1, B1
7.06×10−3
8.057
1.54×10−7
4.68×10−10
-8.02×10−8
-1.62×10−11
-
A1, B1
6.44×10−3
7.058
1.54×10−7
4.68×10−10
-8.29×10−8
1.05×10−10
-
B1
6.41×10−3
7.034
1.54×10−7
4.68×10−10
-8.29×10−8
8.84×10−11
-
B1, C1
6.53×10−3
7.596
1.54×10−7
4.68×10−10
-8.29×10−8
-2.44×10−10
-1.00×10−9
From this table, the closest resemblance to the literature data is obtained when the excess
volume expression is made temperature dependent. In Table 15 only one temperature
dependent term is present for the coeﬃcient A, B and C. Using the molar volume piperazine
constants that yield the lowest ρerror, and subsequently introducing the constants A2, B2
and C2, it is determined if the model can be further improved. The resulting errors and
model parameters are shown in Table 16 and the model is plotted with the experimental
data in Figure 40.
Table 16: Summed square errors and parameter values determined for ﬁnal piperazine-
water model.
Verror
ρerror
A1
B1
C1
A2
B2
C2
3.10×10−3
3.258
-2.58×10−8
-4.90×10−8
-2.99×10−8
-1.09×10−8
2.78×10−8
-1.75×10−8
Page 60 of 175
==PAGE:76==
5.4
PZ-H2O Interaction
Master Thesis
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
Molar fraction
975
980
985
990
995
1000
1005
1010
1015
1020
1025
Density [kg/m3]
20oC
25oC
30oC
40oC
50oC
60oC
70oC
Figure 40: Density as a function of molar fraction of piperazine. The dots are the original
experimental data and the lines are the calculated model data.
There seems to be some discrepancies with increasing molar fraction. However, the model
closely resembles the experimental data in the lower mole fractions and the ability to
handle the local maximum satisfactory. Furthermore, the summed square error of both
ρ and V has been decreased signiﬁcantly, which conﬁrms the need for the extra set of
coeﬃcients.
The limitations and shortcomings of this model is discussed in the next
section.
5.4.2
Discussion of model limitations
The proposed model for the PZ-H2O interaction has a limited interval of usability. This is
due to multiple factors, particularly that the molar volume of pure piperazine is theoretical.
Furthermore, the limited solubility of piperazine in water complicates the determination
of the physiochemical properties of the mixture. Therefore, it might not be possible to
accurately model the density for all molar fractions of piperazine. So far, the model has
been used up until a molar fraction of 0.28 for temperatures at 50-70 °C. Expanding the
model at lower temperatures to a molar fraction of 0.28, yields the result shown in Figure
41.
Page 61 of 175
==PAGE:77==
5.4
PZ-H2O Interaction
Master Thesis
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
Molar fraction
970
980
990
1000
1010
1020
1030
1040
1050
1060
Density [kg/m3]
20oC
25oC
30oC
40oC
50oC
60oC
70oC
Figure 41: Density as a function of molar fraction of piperazine for temperatures at
20-70°C. Dots represent experimental data and lines the density model.
In Figure 41, most of the temperatures have a peak in density inside the interval. The
peaks are located at diﬀerent molar fractions, which is most likely due to changes in molar
volumes of the pure components with temperature. By extrapolating up until a molar
fraction of one, it is possible to determine if the model is suited for predicting densities at
higher piperazine molar fractions. This is shown in Figure 42.
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Molar fraction
880
900
920
940
960
980
1000
1020
1040
1060
1080
Density [kg/m3]
20oC
25oC
30oC
40oC
50oC
60oC
70oC
Figure 42: Density as a function of molar fraction of piperazine for diﬀerent tempera-
tures. Extrapolation of the model for molar fractions above 0.28.
when extrapolating outside the area of data available from experiments, it seems as though
the model has been overﬁtted to the data. Overlapping densities for diﬀerent temperatures
Page 62 of 175
==PAGE:78==
5.4
PZ-H2O Interaction
Master Thesis
is not expected as the binary mixtures’ behaviour is expected to be similar for diﬀerent
temperatures. Furthermore, the large change in density up to around 30-40 kg/m3, from
a molar fraction of 0.8 to 1.0 is very unusual.
As PZ is an amine like MDEA, it is
expected that the density would change similarly, meaning that the slopes decrease at a
certain point. However, this does not happen. Even though the knowledge of the PZ-H2O
interaction is limited, it would be unexpected for the binary mixture to behave as seen
in Figure 42. Therefore, the model is not applicable for molar fractions higher than 0.28.
The excess volumes as a function of molar fraction at 313 K is compared for MDEA and
PZ in Figure 43.
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
Molar fraction
-2
-1
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
VE [m3/mol]
10-6
Available PZ-data
VE
PZ
VE
MDEA
Figure 43: Excess molar volume as a function of molar fraction at 313 K, for the MDEA-
water and the PZ-water model.
In Figure 43, the models follow each other at molar fractions below 0.3, after which the
piperazine-water model changes direction and the excess volume becomes positive. For
the MDEA model the excess volume stays negative for all molar fractions.
A change
from negative to positive excess volume is unexpected as this indicates signiﬁcant changes
in the interactions between the piperazine and water molecules.
However, this is not
unprecedented. Mahajan et al. showed the same behaviour with a mixture of octan-2-ol
and n-octane [62]. However, this comparison has only limited validity as the absolute
value of the peak of the negative excess volume is only slightly bigger than its peak in the
Page 63 of 175
==PAGE:79==
5.4
PZ-H2O Interaction
Master Thesis
positive value [62]. In Figure 43 the diﬀerence is around a factor of six.
To avoid the model changing from negative excess volume, the solver can be forced to
only use constants for the model that results in negative excess volumes. Alternatively
the magnitude of the absolute excess molar volumes can be limited to a certain value,
ensuring a behaviour that more closely resembles the one presented by Mahajan et al.
[62]. Three diﬀerent methods have been tested to improve the model:
1. Enforcing a maximum absolute excess volume at 5 ×10−6, while keeping the values
found for a0, b0 and c0 constant
2. An excess molar volume function identical to the one for MDEA-water and letting
the solver determine a0 and b0
3. Letting the solver modify all the nine constants a0-c2, while forcing the excess molar
volume to be negative
The results can be seen in Figure 44.
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
Molar fraction
-3
-2.5
-2
-1.5
-1
-0.5
0
0.5
1
VE [m3/mol]
10-5
Available PZ-data
VE
PZ,original
VE
PZ,1
VE
PZ,2
VE
PZ,3
Figure 44: Excess molar volume as a function of molar fraction of piperazine, enforcing
diﬀerent constraints on the model.
From Figure 44 it is clear that none of the methods closely resembles the original model
in the molar fraction interval of available data. Although the behaviour of the excess
molar volume of the PZ-water interaction is unexpected at the higher molar fractions,
Page 64 of 175
==PAGE:80==
5.5
MDEA-PZ-H2O Density Model
Master Thesis
the original model in Figure 44 is chosen due to the good resemblance with the available
experiment data. However, the model should not be used at molar fractions of piperazine
higher than 0.28, as the ﬁt of data from 0-0.28 is an overﬁt for the rest of the interval.
For the ternary system model, the molar fractions of piperazine is not expected to excede
0.04 and the model therefore seems to be suitable. The excess molar volume model for
the piperazine-water interaction can now be described as:
V EPZ,H2O = xPZ · xH2O ·
(
A + B · (xH2O −xPZ) + C · (xH2O −xPZ)2)
(53)
Where the three coeﬃcients A, B, and C are,
A = 6.41 × 10−6 −2.58 × 10−8 · (T[K] −323.15 K) −1.09 × 10−8 · (T[K] −323.15 K)2
B = −3.99 × 10−5 −4.90 × 10−8 · (T[K] −323.15 K) + 2.78 × 10−8 · (T[K] −323.15 K)2
C = −3.1 × 10−5 −2.99 × 10−8 · (T[K] −323.15 K) −1.75 × 10−8 · (T[K] −323.15 K)2
5.5
MDEA-PZ-H2O Density Model
In this section, the ternary MDEA-PZ-H2O system is assessed, and a density model is
proposed. The ternary system excess molar volume consists of three binary interactions,
and equation (38) therefore becomes:
V Esolvent = V EMDEA,H2O + V EPZ,H2O + V EMDEA,PZ + V EMDEA,PZ,H2O
(54)
Where V EMDEA,PZ is the interactions of the MDEA-PZ pair and V EMDEA,PZ,H2O is ex-
cess volume from ternary interactions. However, there are no data on MDEA-PZ binary
systems, and deriving such a model from ternary data is not desirable. Therefore, this bi-
nary pair is assumed to behave ideally, thus giving the excess molar volume a value of zero.
Initially, it is assumed that there are no ternary interactions, meaning V EMDEA,PZ,H2O
= 0. Inserting the models for MDEA-H2O and PZ-H2O gives the ternary model shown in
Figure 45, plotted together with data from Derks et al. [24].
Page 65 of 175
==PAGE:81==
5.5
MDEA-PZ-H2O Density Model
Master Thesis
0
0.005
0.01
0.015
0.02
PZ molar fraction
1005
1010
1015
1020
1025
1030
Density [kg/m3]
20 oC
25 oC
30 oC
40 oC
50 oC
Figure 45: Density as a function of amine concentration at diﬀerent temperatures [24].
Dots are experimental data and lines are density model. MDEA molar fraction: 0.044-
0.048, PZ molar fraction: 0-0.0243.
From this ﬁgure, the binary interactions provide a decent estimate of the actual density
measured in the experiments. However, there is a small error when the solution consists
of only MDEA and H2O. To ﬁx this, the model of the excess molar volume of the MDEA-
H2O interaction would have to be changed. At low temperatures, the error also increases,
especially for amine molar fractions above 0.05. This suggests a correction for temperature
is needed. The higher accuracy at 40°C and 50°C are probably caused by the MDEA-
H2O and PZ-H2O being developed at these temperatures, respectively. From this it is
determined that a temperature dependent ternary interaction is aﬀecting the excess molar
volume. The ternary interaction is generally described as:
V EMDEA,PZ,H2O = xMDEA · xPZ · xH2O ·
n−1
∑
i=0
Ai ((xH2O −xMDEA) xPZ)i
(55)
The same procedure as for the binary interactions between MDEA-H2O and PZ-H2O is
used to determine the ternary model contributions. Speyer et al. and Derks et al. have
conducted experiments on ternary solutions at 293.15K, at which the ternary contribution
is developed [63, 24]. Although this is in the low end of the interval, the number of exper-
iments is enough to justify the ternary contribution to be developed at this temperature.
In Table 17, the results of the error minimisations are shown.
Page 66 of 175
==PAGE:82==
5.5
MDEA-PZ-H2O Density Model
Master Thesis
Table 17: Summed square errors of ρ and VM for minimisation of both ρ and VM. The
summed square errors have been multiplied by 1012.
Minimisation of VM error
Minimisation of ρ error
Variables
∑i
n=1(VM,id −Vm,mo)2
∑i
n=1(ρid −ρmo)2
∑i
n=1(VM,id −Vm,mo)2
∑i
n=1(ρid −ρmo)2
A0
9.74×10−3
117.57
1.02×10−2
45.23
A0, A1
9.68 ×10−3
904.33
9.81×10−3
30.44
A0, A1, A2
9.68 ×10−3
187.30
9.96×10−3
28.10
From Table 17, the use of a second order approximation of the ternary interaction, results
in a model closest to experimental values. However, this could change when expanding
the model to be temperature dependent. This is done by expanding each coeﬃcient Ai as
shown in equation (56).
Ai = Ai,0 + Ai,1 · (T −293.15K) + Ai,2 · (T −293.15K)2 + ...
(56)
Table 18 shows the results of this development, where the summed square of errors has
been minimised for density, as this resulted in the lowest errors in Table 17. For these
models, studies by Derks et al., Samanta et al., and Khan et al. are used [28, 24, 20].
Table 18: Summed square errors of ρ and VM from minimisation of ρ. The summed
square errors have been multiplied by 1012.
Minimisation of ρ error
Model number
Variables
∑i
n=1(VM,id −Vm,mo)2
∑i
n=1(ρid −ρmo)2
1
A0,1
8.16 ×10−2
122.71
2
A0,1, A0,2
1.00×10−1
198.93
3
A0,1, A1,1
1.22×10−1
207.00
4
A0,1, A1,1, A0,2, A1,2
4.96×10−2
101.22
5
A0,1, A1,1, A2,1
6.36×10−2
128.08
6
A0,1, A1,1, A2,1, A0,2, A1,2, A2,2
5.56×10−2
112.88
From these results, the best option is using the model which was determined as most
accurate in Table 17, and expanding it using the ﬁrst two terms in equation (56). To
conﬁrm this, the six models from Table 18 are plotted at 323.15 K using the data from
Derks et al. [24].
Page 67 of 175
==PAGE:83==
5.5
MDEA-PZ-H2O Density Model
Master Thesis
0.045
0.05
0.055
0.06
0.065
0.07
Amine molar fraction
1006
1007
1008
1009
1010
1011
1012
Density [kg/m3]
Exp data
1
2
3
4
5
6
Figure 46: Density as a function of total amine molar fraction, at 50 °C [24]. MDEA
molar fraction: 0.0448-0.0487, PZ molar fraction: 0-0.0243
From Figure 46, it is clear that neither model 6 nor model 3 are feasible. Furthermore,
models 1 and 2 seems not to adjust to the decrease in the slope with increasing piperazine
concentration. Of the two remaining models, model 4 adjusts better to the decrease in the
slope and is closest to the measured data points. This is consistent with model 4 having
the lowest summed square of density errors in Table 18. The proposed ﬁnal density model
is shown together with experimental data in Figure 47.
0.045
0.05
0.055
0.06
0.065
0.07
Amine molar fraction
1005
1010
1015
1020
1025
1030
Density [kg/m3]
20 oC
25 oC
30 oC
40 oC
50 oC
Figure 47: Density as a function of amine concentration at diﬀerent temperatures [24].
MDEA molar fraction: 0.044-0.048, PZ molar fraction: 0-0.0243.
From Figure 47, The model is generally in good accordance with the experimental data
Page 68 of 175
==PAGE:84==
5.5
MDEA-PZ-H2O Density Model
Master Thesis
and the ternary contribution have visibly improved the model. The ternary contribution
thus has the ﬁnal equation,
V EMDEA,PZ,H2O = xMDEA · xPZ · xH2O (A0 + A1 ((xH2O −xMDEA) xPZ))
(57)
where the coeﬃcients A0 and A1 are:
A0 = −4.05 × 10−5 −4.58 × 10−6 · (T[K] −293.15 K) −1.87 × 10−7 · (T[K] −293.15 K)2
A1 = 1.07 × 10−3 −1.61 × 10−4 · (T[K] −323.15 K) −6.30 × 10−6 · (T[K] −323.15 K)2
The full excess molar volume model which will be used for the solvent from Hashøj Biogas
have the form:
V Esolvent = V EMDEA,H2O + V EPZ,H2O + V EMDEA,PZ,H2O
(58)
Where V EMDEA,H2O is equation (46), V EPZ,H2O is equation (48) and V EMDEA,PZ,H2O is
equation (57). Thus, the density model becomes,
ρsolvent =
Mw,solvent
Vid,solvent + V Esolvent
(59)
5.5.1
Discussion of Model Limitations
To discuss the quality of the model, a plot with diﬀerent weight ratios of MDEA and PZ
is made in Figure 48. Here, the diﬀerent weight fraction ratios have signiﬁcant inﬂuence
on the behaviour of the model. The diﬀerences between the ratios are most likely due to
the amount of piperazine present, which for a ratio of 2 comes close to the maximum value
used in experiments. The ratio 6.5 represents the ratio determined by experiments on the
solvent used at the Hashøj Biogas pilot plant. For all ratios, lower total amine fractions
have a linear behaviour with slightly diﬀerent slopes. The density, 1022 kg/m3 has been
arbitrarily chosen to show how small variations in density yields large changes in amine
Page 69 of 175
==PAGE:85==
5.6
MDEA-PZ-H2O-CO2 Density Model
Master Thesis
fraction. The standard deviation of +/- 0.65% is the standard deviation of the on-line
density measurements at the plant.
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
Total amine weight fraction
990
1000
1010
1020
1030
1040
Density [kg/m3]
MDEA/PZ = 2
MDEA/PZ = 4
MDEA/PZ = 6.5
MDEA/PZ = 8
(a)
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
Total amine weight fraction
980
990
1000
1010
1020
1030
1040
1050
1060
Density [kg/m3]
20 oC
30 oC
40 oC
50oC
60oC
(b)
Figure 48: Density as a function of total amine fraction for (a) diﬀerent MDEA-PZ weight
fraction ratios at 40℃and (b) diﬀerent temperatures with a MDEA-PZ weight fraction
ratio of 6.5. A line at 1022 kg/m3 have been inserted, with dashed lines indicating a
deviation of +/- 0.65%.
Figure 48b shows that the model does diﬀer slightly when changing the temperature. The
slope does not seem to diﬀer signiﬁcantly, but there is a slight change. The lower the
temperature, the more linear it seems, which would make good sense, as the MDEA-
H2O, PZ-H2O and ternary interactions were originally developed at 40°C, 50°C and 20°C,
respectively, it makes sense that the model behaviour could change at higher temperatures.
Figure 48a also shows that low variations in density of 0.65% have a huge impact on the
amine fraction for the solvent. This will have signiﬁcant implications if the model is used
to determine amine weight fractions from a known ratio and a known density. By manual
measurement, a variation in density of 0.65% could result in amine fraction variations
between 0.28 and 0.46.
5.6
MDEA-PZ-H2O-CO2 Density Model
In this section, CO2 is introduced into the ternary density model. Similar to piperazine,
the molar volume of CO2 is unknown as it is a gas at the conditions relevant for the model.
The theoretical molar volume is therefore determined in the same way as for piperazine.
Page 70 of 175
==PAGE:86==
5.6
MDEA-PZ-H2O-CO2 Density Model
Master Thesis
Furthermore, because CO2 is relatively easily released from the amine solvent, changes
in temperature and environment can have a signiﬁcant inﬂuence on how much CO2 is
dissolved.
To keep the model as simple as possible, it determined as a single solvent/CO2 binary
interaction pair, thus making the model pseudo-binary. Only few data can be found in
literature about this particular mixture. A plot of data from a PhD dissertation by Frailie
is presented in Figure 49 [64].
0
0.005
0.01
0.015
0.02
0.025
0.03
0.035
CO2 molar fraction
1010
1020
1030
1040
1050
1060
1070
1080
1090
1100
1110
Density [kg/m3]
20 oC
30 oC
50 oC
60 oC
Figure 49: Density as a function of CO2 molar fraction for a constant amine concentration
[64]. MDEA weight fraction: 0.416, PZ weight fraction: 0.084.
From Figure 49, the slope of the density as function of CO2 molar fraction becomes slightly
steeper with increasing molar fractions. This indicates some non-ideal behaviour and the
model is therefore developed as:
ρsolvent,CO2 = ρsolvent +
n
∑
i=0
Ai · xCO2
i
(60)
where xCO2 is the molar fraction of CO2, Ai model coeﬃcient i, ρsolvent,CO2 the density
of the solvent with CO2, and ρsolvent the density of the solvent if it did not contain CO2.
ρsolvent is determined by the ternary model. As shown in Figure 49, most of the data
points are around a CO2 molar fraction of 0.01 and lower.
Using the assumption of
Page 71 of 175
==PAGE:87==
5.6
MDEA-PZ-H2O-CO2 Density Model
Master Thesis
inﬁnite dilution, data points under a molar fraction of CO2 of 0.01 are expected to have a
linear behaviour. To determine if this assumption is applicable for all presented data, the
data is used to ﬁt the model with 1-4 coeﬃcients by minimising the summed square error
for density. The results are presented in Table 19.
Table 19: Fitted model parameters based on equation (60) and their summed square of
errors in density.
i
Variables
∑i
n=1(ρid −ρmo)2
1
A1
32.31094419
2
A1, A2
31.15418386
3
A1, A2, A3
31.15417307
4
A1, A2, A3, A4
31.15417048
From this table, increasing the number of terms in the model have limited eﬀect. Especially
when increasing above a second-order approximation. This is as expected given the mostly
linear nature of the CO2 dependency seen in Figure 49. Figure 50 shows the ﬁrst order
and second order models against the experimental data.
0
0.005
0.01
0.015
0.02
0.025
0.03
0.035
CO2 molar fraction
1010
1020
1030
1040
1050
1060
1070
1080
1090
1100
1110
Density [kg/m3]
20oC
40oC
50oC
60oC
Figure 50: Density as a function of CO2 molar fraction. Dashed lines are the linear
model, while solid lines are the second order model. Dots are experimental data [64].
From Figure 50, the linear model is slightly worse in comparison to the second order
model. However, the diﬀerence is small, which is consistent with the numerical values
in Table 19. Both models are generally in good agreement with the data, but using the
higher order model increases the risk of an overﬁt. Both models show a standard deviation
Page 72 of 175
==PAGE:88==
5.6
MDEA-PZ-H2O-CO2 Density Model
Master Thesis
around +/- 3 kg/m3. The models are the worst at 60 ℃, which makes sense, as none of the
model components have been developed at that temperature. The MDEA-H2O interaction
was developed at 40 ℃, PZ-H2O at 50 ℃and the ternary contribution at 20 ℃. As the
intercept is determined with the model for the ternary system from independent studies,
it is accepted that there will be some deviations of a maximum of 3 kg/m3 between the
model and the experiments. The overall summed square of errors for ρ only decreases
around 3%, when increasing from a ﬁrst-order to a second-order model. The linear model
is therefore chosen, which validates the assumption of inﬁnite dilution at the examined
molar fractions of CO2. The quaternary density model is as shown in equation (61).
ρsolvent,CO2 = ρsolvent + 1684.89 · xCO2
(61)
This model is however only valid at limited CO2 molar fractions, as it results in a density
of 2800 kg/m3 for pure liquid CO2, which is not realistic [65]. However, the purpose of this
density model development was not to describe all molar fractions of CO2, but rather to
describe the impact of dissolved CO2 on the density of the aqueous MDEA-PZ solvent at
the Hashøj Biogas plant. In Figure 51, the ﬁnal density model for the quaternary system
is plotted.
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
0.3
0.35
Loading [mol CO2/mol amine]
1020
1030
1040
1050
1060
1070
1080
1090
1100
Density [kg/m3]
Figure 51: Density as a function of CO2 loading at 40°C, with an amine weight fraction of
0.45 and a MDEA-PZ ratio of 6.5. The lines around 1087 kg/m3 and 1050 kg/m3 represents
average rich and lean density, respectively. The dashed lines indicate +/- 0.65%.
Page 73 of 175
==PAGE:89==
5.6
MDEA-PZ-H2O-CO2 Density Model
Master Thesis
From Figure 51, the standard deviation of 0.65% of the plant’s density measurements
results in a wide range of CO2 loadings. As the amount of amine is assumed constant,
CO2 captured can be determined from the diﬀerence in loading between the rich and
lean solvent. With a standard deviation of 0.65% in the density, the amount of captured
CO2 could potentially vary with 0.1-0.28 mole CO2 per mole amine. That is a signiﬁcant
diﬀerence, which would make it diﬃcult to determine if the current conﬁguration of the
plant is advantageous or not.
As the CO2 concentration has been measured for the samples from Hashøj Biogas, the
density model can also be used to calculate the amine fraction given the MDEA-PZ weight
fraction ratio of 6.5. If the CO2 concentration is known, then ρsolvent can be found by
isolating it in equation (61). When ρsolvent is known, only the amine fraction is unknown.
ρsolvent is the intercept in Figure 51 and can be found at any loading and any temperature
as shown in Figure 52.
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.1
0.12
0.14
0.16
0.18
0.2
Loading [mol CO2/mol amine]
1020
1030
1040
1050
1060
1070
1080
Density [kg/m3]
(0, 30 oC) = solvent(30 oC)
(0, 50 oC) = solvent(50 oC)
(0, 20 oC) = solvent(20 oC)
(0.15, 20 oC)
(0.15, 30 oC)
(0.15, 50 oC)
Figure 52: Density as a function of CO2 loading. In the parenthesis for each point is
indicated the loading and temperature. The amine fraction is 0.45 and the MDEA/PZ
ratio is 6.5.
Page 74 of 175
==PAGE:90==
==PAGE:91==
Master Thesis
6
Setup and Calculation of Steady State Mass Balances
In this section, the use of steady state mass balances of the pilot plant and the motivation
for the use of these for process optimisation is described. This is followed by the presen-
tation of parity plots which relates the perceived ﬂow in and out of the outlined system
boundaries, calculated by a combination of ﬂow measurements from the pilot plant and
experimental lab results. This leads to the use of mass reconciliation as a tool to close the
mass balances, making it possible to determine the performance of the process.
6.1
System Boundaries and Assumptions
Measurements of the pilot plant streams are used to determine when the system is in
steady state and gauge how eﬃcient the process is.
To ensure the measurements are
consistent, total and component mass balances for the system at steady state are written.
For this purpose, the mass ﬂows have been numbered, and mass balance boundaries made,
as shown in Figure 53.
Figure 53: Simpliﬁed schematic of pilot plant with numbered streams and mass balance
boundaries for full system (green), absorber (blue) and stripper (yellow).
Page 75 of 175
==PAGE:92==
6.1
System Boundaries and Assumptions
Master Thesis
Three sets of boundaries are set for the mass balances; full system, absorber and stripper.
In Table 20 an overview describing the numbered streams is shown.
Table 20: Description of numbered ﬂows shown in Figure 53.
Stream number
Description
1
Biogas inlet
2
Methane product
3
CO2 product
4
Lean solvent
5
Rich solvent
6
Condenser liquid
7
make-up water
From these boundaries, the balances for the total mass and component mass are as shown
in equation (62)-(64) and (65)-(67), respectively,
˙m1 + ˙m7 = ˙m2 + ˙m3
(62)
˙m1 + ˙m7 + ˙m4 + ˙m6 = ˙m2 + ˙m5
(63)
˙m5 = ˙m3 + ˙m4 + ˙m6
(64)
w1,i · ˙m1 + w7,i · ˙m7 = w2,i · ˙m2 + w3,i · ˙m3
(65)
w1,i · ˙m1 + w7,i · ˙m7 + w4,i · ˙m4 + w6,i · ˙m6 = w2,i · ˙m2 + w5,i · ˙m5
(66)
w5,i · ˙m5 = w3,i · ˙m3 + w4,i · ˙m4 + w6,i · ˙m6
(67)
where ˙mj is the mass ﬂow rate for stream j and wj,i is the mass fraction of component i
in stream j. To calculate these balances, the following assumptions were made:
• All gases are ideal
• Added air to the biogas before the inlet is assumed to be 21% oxygen and 79%
nitrogen.
• The methane product stream has a 100% relative humidity
• For the gas ﬂowing through the absorber, only the amount of CO2 and H2O changes
• Gas ﬂow into the condenser consists of only water and CO2
Page 76 of 175
==PAGE:93==
6.2
Calculation of Condenser Flow and CO2 Product Composition
Master Thesis
• Vapour-liquid equilibrium for water in the condenser
• No CO2 is dissolved into the liquid phase leaving the condenser
The use of these assumptions is described in further detail in the following sections, where
equations used to estimate the condenser ﬂow, and the composition of the gas ﬂows in
and out of the system are described. In addition to these calculations, 10 kg/h is added
to the measured rich solvent ﬂow rate, due to a systematic error in the ﬂow meter.
6.2
Calculation of Condenser Flow and CO2 Product Composition
As the liquid ﬂow from the condenser is not monitored, this ﬂow needs to be estimated
instead.
This is done using temperature and pressure measurements of the inlet and
outlet ﬂows of the condenser, assuming the liquid and vapour of water in the condenser
is in equilibrium and all gases are ideal. The Antoine equation can thereby be used to
determine the partial pressure of water in the CO2 product stream (stream 3),
log10 (pH2O) = 5.40221 −
1838.675
T −31.737
for T < 300 K
(68)
log10 (pH2O) = 6.20963 −2354.731
T + 7.559
for 300 K < T < 343 K
(69)
log10 (pH2O) = 4.6543 −
1435.264
T −64.848
for T > 343 K
(70)
where pH2O is the partial pressure of water and T is the temperature in kelvin.
The
coeﬃcients shown in equation (68)-(70) have been obtained from the National Institute of
Standards and Technology [66]. The molar fraction of water yH2O can now be determined
by dividing with the total pressure of the gas ﬂow P:
yH2O = pH2O
P
(71)
Assuming the CO2 product stream only consists of H2O and CO2, the molar fraction of
CO2 can be determined together with the combined molar mass of stream 3,
M3 = y3,H2O · MH2O + (1 −y3,H2O) · MCO2
(72)
Page 77 of 175
==PAGE:94==
6.3
Calculation of Biogas and Methane Product Composition
Master Thesis
where M3 is the molar mass of stream 3. The amount of moles of water in stream 3 per
hour ˙n3,H2O is then determined as:
˙n3,H2O = ˙m3
M3
· y3,H2O
(73)
Using the same procedure for the ﬂow from the stripper into the condenser, the total
amount of water which leaves the stripper is determined. Assuming no CO2 is dissolved
in the condensed water, the liquid ﬂow from the condenser ˙m6,H2O is determined as:
˙m6,H2O = ˙m6 = ( ˙nstripper,H2O −˙n3,H2O) · MH2O
(74)
This ﬂow is important not only for the total mass balance of the absorber, but also for the
H2O balance. To complete the component mass balances of the absorber, the composition
of the biogas and the methane product must be determined.
6.3
Calculation of Biogas and Methane Product Composition
In this section, the composition of the gas ﬂow in and out of the absorber is calculated
using measured quantities such as CO2 and O2 mol% measurements, and temperature and
pressure measurements to estimate the H2O fraction. A gas probe had originally been in-
stalled at the biogas inlet to continuously measure the CH4, CO2 and H2O molar fractions.
However, the probe stopped responding after only a few steady state measurements, and
it was not possible to get it online before the experiments had been concluded. Daily
measurements of the CO2 and O2 molar fractions from the biogas plant were therefore
used in these calculations instead, and values of these measurements are shown in Ap-
pendix D. For days when the oxygen concentration has not been recorded, it is assumed
to be the same concentration as the last measurement at 1.3 mole%. This was chosen as
the concentration had only increased once from 1.2% to 1.3% during the period it was
recorded and is therefore assumed to be fairly constant.
First, the fraction of air in the biogas is determined. Oxygen is added to the biogas using
atmospheric air, to aid in the biological removal of SO2. This process is performed right
Page 78 of 175
==PAGE:95==
6.3
Calculation of Biogas and Methane Product Composition
Master Thesis
before the biogas reaches the pilot plant. Using the assumptions that the O2/N2 ratio in
the biogas entering the pilot plant is the same as in atmospheric air and the air consists
of only O2 and N2, the total mol % of air is determined as:
y1,air =
(
1 + 0.79
0.21
)
· y1,O2
(75)
where y1,air and y1,O2 are the molar fractions of air and oxygen in the biogas, respectively.
Likewise, the molar mass of the added air Mair is calculated as:
Mair = 0.79 · MN2 + 0.21 · MO2
(76)
Due to the depletion of O2 when performing the SO2 removal, the ratio of N2/O2, would
be higher. However, the amount of oxygen used in the biological process is not known.
Therefore, it is assumed that the ratio of N2/O2 is the same as it is in atmospheric air.
Using the Antoine equation and (71) and assuming a relative humidity of 100%, the molar
fraction of water in the biogas can be determined. It is, however, likely that actual the
relative humidity is lower, and this estimation therefore represents the maximum possible
amount of water in the biogas. From the measured CO2 and the calculated air and water
contents, it is possible to determine the methane molar fraction and the molar mass of the
biogas:
yCH4,1 =1 −y1,CO2 −y1,air −y1,H2O
(77)
Mbiogas =y1,CO2 · MCO2 + y1,air · Mair + y1,H2O · MH2O + y1,CH4 · MCH4
(78)
As the methane fraction is determined as the remaining molar fraction of the biogas, using
a higher N2/O2 ratio for the air calculation would result in more total air and thus a lower
methane fraction. The mass fractions of each component are ﬁnally determined with the
general formula for component i and stream j:
wj,i = yj,i · Mi
Mj
(79)
Page 79 of 175
==PAGE:96==
6.3
Calculation of Biogas and Methane Product Composition
Master Thesis
For the methane product leaving the absorber, the CO2 molar fraction is measured con-
tinuously. However, these measurements are only valid for 25℃and 1 atm. To adjust the
molar fraction for a slightly higher temperature (31-38℃) and pressure (about 1.1 bar)
equation (80) is used. Due to the relatively high temperature and low pressure used in
the system, it is assumed the gas is ideal.
yCO2,2 = yMeasured CO2, 2 ·
(
298.15
T2 + 273.15 · P2 + 1.01325
1.01325
)−1
(80)
where T2 and P2 is the temperature in degrees Celsius and pressure in barg for stream
2, respectively. The water content is determined with the Antoine and (71) assuming
100% relative humidity, which is a reasonable assumption considering the large amount of
water ﬂowing through the absorber. By assuming only the amount of CO2 and H2O in
the gas changes over the absorber column, the ratio between the air-mixture and methane
stays constant. The molar mass and fraction of the air/methane mixture in the methane
product is therefore determined as:
y2,air+CH4 =1 −y2,CO2 −y2,H2O
(81)
Mair+CH4 =
˙nair
˙nair + ˙nCH4
· Mair +
˙nCH4
nair + ˙nCH4
· MCH4
(82)
Where ˙nair and ˙nCH4 are calculated using equation (83).
˙nj,i = ˙mj
Mj
· yj,i
(83)
Where ˙nj,i is molar ﬂow rate for component i in stream j. The molar mass of the methane
product ﬂow M2 can now be determined as:
M2 = y2,CO2 · MCO2 + y2,H2O · MH2O + y2,air+CH4 · Mair+CH4
(84)
The mass fractions for each component are then determined from equation (79) using the
molar mass determined in equation (84). In the next section, these calculations are used
to determine the mass balances presented in equation (62)-(67).
Page 80 of 175
==PAGE:97==
6.4
Initial Results of Mass Balance Calculations
Master Thesis
6.4
Initial Results of Mass Balance Calculations
In the following, parity plots are presented, comparing the ﬂows in and out of the system
boundaries shown in Figure 53.
The ﬂows are calculated from the mass balances to
determine how close the collected data is to closing the mass balances.
In Figure 54 parity plots of the total mass ﬂow are shown with in-ﬂow on the x-axis and
out-ﬂow on the y-axis. Figures 54a and 54b show the balance for the full system and
the absorber, respectively. Each data point represents an average of the measurements
recorded at steady state. For Figure 54a there is no clear trend in how the points are
distributed, with most data points outside the 5% deviation range. The large scattering of
the points indicates that one or more of the ﬂow measurements contain signiﬁcant errors,
which impact the results. Meanwhile, for the absorber as shown in Figure 54b all but two
points are within 5% deviation, with almost all points also below the parity line. This
shows the total measured ﬂow into the absorber is generally slightly higher the ﬂow out.
(a)
(b)
Figure 54: Parity plots for in vs. out ﬂow for the total mass ﬂow of the system (a) and
the absorber (b).
For the CO2 component mass balances, a similar trend is clear, with a high scattering
of the data points for the system in Figure 55a and slightly more data points below the
parity line than above. In Figure 55b showing the CO2 balance for the absorber, all points
are on or below the parity line with a tendency of increased deviation as the mass ﬂows
are increased. Using regression to construct a linear trend line suggests a strong linear
correlation, with a slope of about 0.91 conﬁrming the observation of increasing deviation.
In Figure 55b there are also much fewer data points than for the system balance as data
Page 81 of 175
==PAGE:98==
6.4
Initial Results of Mass Balance Calculations
Master Thesis
from the lab experiments are needed to calculate the amount of CO2 in the liquid ﬂows.
(a)
(b)
Figure 55: Parity plots for in vs. out ﬂow for the CO2 mass ﬂow of the system (a) and
the absorber (b).
For the water balance of the system shown in Figure 56a, the scattering of the data points
are less pronounced compared to the total and CO2 mass balances, as it seems to follow
the parity line more. A signiﬁcant number of points still deviates with more than 5%,
however as the scale for this balance is only around 0.3-1.2 kg/h small changes in ﬂow rate
have a high signiﬁcance. This is especially true compared to the total mass balance for
the system, in which the data points have a range of 17-25 kg/h.
(a)
(b)
Figure 56: Parity plots for in vs. out ﬂow for the H2O mass ﬂow of the system (a) and
the absorber (b).
The most likely cause of the scattered data points for the system balances, described
above, is inaccurate measurements for the ﬂow meter measuring the CO2 product ﬂow.
This assumption is due to the gas ﬂowing through the ﬂow meter is expected to always
Page 82 of 175
==PAGE:99==
6.4
Initial Results of Mass Balance Calculations
Master Thesis
be below the minimum accurate ﬂow limit of 20 kg/h. To investigate whether this is true,
the CO2 captured by the pilot plant is calculated as the change in mass for the gas and
change in CO2 mass for the liquid. This is then compared to the measured ﬂow for the
CO2 product with the water content subtracted, as shown in Figure 57. The equations
used for these calculations are as shown:
˙mCO2, product flow = m3 −mH2O,3
(85)
˙mCO2, gas = m1 −m2 −(mH2O,1 −mH2O,2)
(86)
˙mCO2, liquid = wCO2,5 · mCO2,5 −wCO2,4 · mCO2,4
(87)
Figure 57: Captured CO2 in the pilot plant, determined from measurements of CO2
product ﬂow and change in CO2 ﬂow of the biogas (solid lines) and experiments (dashed
line).
From this ﬁgure, it can be seen that the CO2 product ﬂow measurement have much larger
ﬂuctuations in the mass of CO2 captured, compared to both the gas and liquid calculations.
Furthermore, the results for both calculations are relatively close to each other. These two
observations support the thought that it is mainly the CO2 product ﬂow measurements
that cause large deviations for the system balances.
Page 83 of 175
==PAGE:100==
6.5
Data Reconciliation Method
Master Thesis
In Figure 58 the measured CO2 product ﬂow is compared to the stripper pressure to
determine if there is a correlation between the two measurements. As is clear from the
ﬁgure, there is no consistent trend for the measured ﬂow with changes in pressure. This
further underlines the theory that the CO2 product ﬂow measurements cannot be seen as
reliable for further analysis.
Figure 58: Captured CO2 in the pilot plant, measured by ﬂow meter and calculated with
experimental results (circles) and stripper pressure (squares). Both as function of steady
state number.
To use the data from the pilot plant to determine the amount of CO2 captured, it is very
important that the mass balances are fully closed. As the ﬁgures above show, this is not
achieved suﬃciently using the measurements directly and data reconciliation is therefore
needed, as described in the following section.
6.5
Data Reconciliation Method
In this section, the method and assumptions used for data reconciliation are described,
as well as equations used for determining standard deviations. Data reconciliation refers
to the method of adjusting measured data from a physical system to ensure constraints
such as mass conservation are fulﬁlled. This is done by the adding a residual term to each
Page 84 of 175
==PAGE:101==
6.5
Data Reconciliation Method
Master Thesis
measurement, which is subsequently adjusted until the deﬁned constraints are satisﬁed.
For each measurement, a new value y is therefore deﬁned as:
Y = X −ϵ
(88)
where X is the original measurement and ϵ is the residual. Constraints include a total of
7 mass balances to be closed as described by:
∑
min −
∑
mout = 0
(89)
These mass balances include both total mass balances and component balances for CO2,
H2O and amine. A complete overview of the equations are shown in table 21, where only
terms relevant for the speciﬁc components are included in the equations.
Table 21: Mass balances used for data reconciliation.
Boundary
Component
Equation
System
Total mass
˙m1 + ˙m7 =
˙m2 + ˙m3
CO2
w1,i · ˙m1 = w2,i · ˙m2 + w3,i · ˙m3
H2O
w1,i · ˙m1 + w7,i · ˙m7 = w2,i · ˙m2 + w3,i · ˙m3
Absorber
Total mass
˙m1 + ˙m7 + ˙m4 + ˙m6 = ˙m2 + ˙m5
CO2
w1,i · ˙m1 + w4,i · ˙m4 = w2,i · ˙m2 + w5,i · ˙m5
H2O
w1,i · ˙m1 + w7,i · ˙m7 + w4,i · ˙m4 + w6,i · ˙m6 = w2,i · ˙m2 + w5,i · ˙m5
Amine
w4,i · ˙m4 = w5,i · ˙m5
The optimal values of the residuals are then determined with the object function shown
in equation (90).
ϕ =
n
∑
i=1
( ϵi
σi
)2
(90)
where ϕ is the value of the object function determined as the sum of the residual ϵi divided
by the standard deviation σi of the mean squared for each measurement i. The values of
the residuals are then determined by minimising the sum. By dividing the residuals with
their respective mean standard deviations, the uncertainty of each value is considered.
The standard deviation for each measurement is generally estimated with three diﬀerent
Page 85 of 175
==PAGE:102==
6.5
Data Reconciliation Method
Master Thesis
methods. For values such as amine and CO2 concentration determined experimentally, the
standard deviations of the mean are directly calculated from the results. The experiments
have been conducted in such a way that the relative standard deviations have a maximum
value of about 1% and 5% for the amine and CO2 concentrations, respectively.
For values determined by measurement at the plant, the standard deviations are estimated
either from the ﬂuctuations of the values measured during 1 hour of steady state or by
assuming a reasonable value. For some composition calculations, such as the CO2 product
ﬂow, the calculated H2O fraction is based on mean temperature and pressure measure-
ments. The standard deviation for each step in the calculations described in section 6.2,
must therefore be calculated using error propagation equations.
In this project, three
diﬀerent types of error propagation equations are used; addition/subtraction, multiplica-
tion/division and logarithm base 10. These equations are shown below:
σz =
√
A2 · σ2x + B2 · σ2y
for
z = x + y
or
z = x −y
(91)
σz = z ·
√(σx
x
)2
+
(σy
y
)2
for
z = x · y
or
z = x
y
(92)
σz = z · ln 10 · σx
for
z = 10x
(93)
where x and y are means of a distribution each, with corresponding standard deviations
σx and σy. A and B are known constant values with standard deviations σ = 0. For all
three equations, it is assumed that there is no correlation between x and y.
A script developed in Matlab R2022b is used for the data reconciliation, in which the
object function is minimised using the function Fmincon. An Illustration of the ﬂow of
the script is shown in Figure 59. For each steady state considered, a total of 15 means and
their standard deviation from a combination of measurements and calculations are used as
input, with the output being the reconciled values and the determined residuals. Make-up
water ﬂow required to compensate for water vapour leaving the stripper is calculated as
a 16. variable. Furthermore, the sum of the object function value for all steady states
is calculated. This makes it possible to compare the results achieved when changing the
script. This includes sensitivity analysis of the inputs means and standard deviations.
Page 86 of 175
==PAGE:103==
6.6
Reconciled Data Results and Discussion
Master Thesis
Figure 59: Illustration of data reconciliation ﬂow. Green: input, yellow: data reconcili-
ation, blue: output.
Besides describing the data reconciliation with experiment results and pilot plant data,
Figure 59 also include amine fractions estimated by the density model as input for the
data reconciliation. The former is described in the following section, including sensitivity
analysis of the standard deviations. Using the model for data reconciliation is described
in Section 7.2.
6.6
Reconciled Data Results and Discussion
Initially, data reconciliation is done with the standard deviations determined as described
above and shown in Table 22.
Page 87 of 175
==PAGE:104==
6.6
Reconciled Data Results and Discussion
Master Thesis
Table 22: Standard deviations used for initial data reconciliation. The 16. input make-
up ﬂow rate have no standard deviation, as the ﬂow rate is determined from the data
reconciliation.
Stream
Input number
Description
Method
Standard deviation
Biogas
1
Mass ﬂow
SS meas.
0.64-1.34 kg/h
2
CO2 conc.
Estimation
0.01 w/w
3
H2O conc.
Estimation
5×10−3 w/w
Methane product
4
Mass ﬂow
Estimation
0.1 kg/h
5
CO2 conc.
SS meas.
1×10−4-0.055 w/w
6
H2O conc.
SS meas.
1.1×10−3-1.8×10−3 w/w
CO2 product
7
Mass ﬂow
SS meas.
0.61 - 7.70 kg/h
8
H2O conc.
SS meas.
1.8×10−5 - 1.78×10−4 w/w
Lean solvent
9
Mass ﬂow
SS meas.
0.52 - 21.83 kg/h
10
CO2 conc.
Experiment
3×10−4-0.016 w/w
11
Amine conc.
Experiment
1×10−4-3.4×10−3 w/w
Rich solvent
12
Mass ﬂow
SS meas
1.81 - 11.36 kg/h
13
CO2 conc.
Experiment
5×10−3-0.023 w/w
14
Amine conc.
Experiment
3×10−4-5×10−3 w/w
Condenser liquid ﬂow
15
Mass ﬂow
SS meas
0.030-1.64 kg/h
The results are shown in Figure 60, with a histogram for each reconciled variable. The
x-axis shows the ratio ϵ/σ, thus indicating how large a residual relative to the standard
deviation is needed to reconcile the variable. A positive value of ϵ/σ indicates the original
value was higher than the reconciled, and opposite for negative values. The y-axis shows
the number of observations in each column and the width of the columns, indicating how
wide the observations are spread in their ϵ/σ ratio. Finally, the red line in each histogram
shows an approximated normal distribution for the relevant variable. The histograms can
be used to determine which measurements are reliable, which they are considered if the
observations are generally between -2 and 2 ϵ/σ.
Page 88 of 175
==PAGE:105==
6.6
Reconciled Data Results and Discussion
Master Thesis
Figure 60: Histograms of ϵ/σ ratios for each reconciled variable, determined with initial
standard deviations.
From Figure 60 it is seen that the relatively largest residuals in both positive and negative
direction are for the CO2 product ﬂow rate.
This was expected based on the results
presented in the previous section. Other variables which have a signiﬁcant number of
observations outside the desired range include the ﬂow rates and CO2 concentration of both
the lean and rich solvent, condenser ﬂow rate and the biogas ﬂow rate. The determined
condenser ﬂow rate is however directly dependent on the measured CO2 product ﬂow rate.
Large variations in the condenser ﬂow rate are therefore most likely due to the variations
in the CO2 product ﬂow rate.
By increasing the standard deviation of the CO2 product ﬂow rate, the large variations
of the ﬂow rate are given less weight in the reconciliation calculations. This is therefore
Page 89 of 175
==PAGE:106==
6.6
Reconciled Data Results and Discussion
Master Thesis
investigated by running the script with diﬀerent standard deviations, as shown in Figure
61. In the ﬁgure, the sum of the object function is plotted against the standard deviation.
As is evident from Figure 61 an increase in standard deviation from 1-3 kg/h drastically
decreases the value of the object function, where increases above that only cause a minor
decrease in the object function. This indicates that using a standard deviation higher than
5 kg/h signiﬁcantly reduces the inﬂuence of the CO2 product ﬂow rate on the ﬁnal results.
With measured ﬂow rate means around 10-15 kg/h, the standard deviation is, however,
between 33-50% of the total ﬂow rate, which is much higher than would be expected of
such a measurement.
Figure 61: Object function value as a function of standard deviation for the CO2 product
ﬂow rate.
Considering these observations it is therefore decided to remove the residual of the CO2
product ﬂow rate from the object function, allowing it to be fully estimated by the script,
instead of relying on the measurement from the plant. As can be seen in Table 23 remov-
ing the CO2 product ﬂow rate from the object function signiﬁcantly decrease the object
function value from 620.1 to 386.3, when no other changes are made.
Page 90 of 175
==PAGE:107==
6.6
Reconciled Data Results and Discussion
Master Thesis
Table 23: Sums of the object function ϕ from the data reconciliations with diﬀerent
settings and 18 steady states. The table also includes the three biggest contributors to
the object function value.
#
Description
ϕ
1.
2.
3.
1
Initial reconciliation
617.5
214.4 ( ˙m3)
74.2 (w5,CO2)
54.5 ( ˙m5)
2
Without CO2 product residual
383.9
65.8 (w5,CO2)
52.0 ( ˙m5)
51.7 (w4,CO2)
3
20 kg/h rich ﬂow correction
280.2
46.8 (w4,Amine)
43.5 (w5,CO2)
35.2 (w4,CO2)
4
Estimated ˙m3 and ˙m5
290.4
64.1 (w4,Amine)
45.9 (w5,Amine)
36.6 (w5,CO2)
To obtain a quantitative measure of the sensitivity of the variable’s standard deviations on
the reconciliation, the standard deviation of 14 of the variables are varied by multiplying
with a factor of 0.25-3. The two inputs which are not considered here are the CO2 product
ﬂow rate and the make-up water. These are not examined as they are not included in
the object function, which value is used as measure for the sensitivity. The results of this
analysis are shown in Figure 62. From this ﬁgure it is clear the object function value is most
sensitive to changes in the methane gas ﬂow, rich solvent ﬂow and rich CO2 concentration.
This is generally consistent with the observations of Figure 60. Of these three variables,
the rich solvent ﬂow rate is chosen to be closer investigated, due to its high sensitivity and
ease of adjustment.
Figure 62: Sensitivity analysis of standard deviations used in data reconciliation, with
CO2 product removed from object function.
The plot shows object function value as
function of standard deviation multiplier.
Page 91 of 175
==PAGE:108==
6.6
Reconciled Data Results and Discussion
Master Thesis
In the initial mass balances presented in section 6.4, 10 kg/h is added to the rich solvent
ﬂow rate, due to the current calibration of the liquid ﬂow meter. A separate sensitivity
analysis is therefore done for the rich solvent ﬂow, by adding 10-22 kg/h to the total
ﬂow rate. As Figure 60 indicated, the measured rich solvent ﬂow rate is lower than the
reconciled ﬂow, it would make sense to increase the correction to more than 10 kg/h.
The result of this analysis is shown in Figure 63. Here, the minimum value of the object
function is found between 19-21 kg/h. Using 20 kg/h gives a value of 280.2, which again
is signiﬁcantly lower than before the analysis was done.
Figure 63: Object function value as a function of kg/h added to the rich ﬂow rate for
correction.
These results are further conﬁrmed by the histograms shown in Figure 64 from utilising
the two changes described above. For both the lean and the rich solvent ﬂow rates, the
observations are spread more evenly, with most values inside the -2 to 2 intervals and
the top of the approximate normal distribution close to 0. The variation of the amine
concentration of the two liquid ﬂows are however somewhat wider than before.
Page 92 of 175
==PAGE:109==
6.6
Reconciled Data Results and Discussion
Master Thesis
Figure 64:
Histograms of each reconciled variable.
Based on calculations with CO2
product ﬂow rate removed from the object function and a correction of 20 kg/h for the
rich solvent ﬂow rate.
Instead of adjusting the rich solvent ﬂow rate, it can be estimated using the total mass
balance for the stripper:
˙m5 = ˙m3 + ˙m4 + ˙m6
(94)
Where ˙mi is the mass ﬂow of stream i, as indicated in Figure 53. However, this also
requires the estimation of the CO2 product and the condenser ﬂow rate. ˙m3 is calculated
as:
˙m3 = w1,CO2 · ˙m1 −w2,CO2 · ˙m2
w3,CO2
(95)
˙m3 can also be estimated using the total mass balance for the system, as shown in equation
Page 93 of 175
==PAGE:110==
6.6
Reconciled Data Results and Discussion
Master Thesis
(62). However, as more water is removed from the system through the stripper, than added
with the biogas this equation would give a less accurate value for ˙m3. The condenser
ﬂow rate is then determined using the method described in section 6.2 with the value of
˙m3 calculated in equation (95). Using the error propagation equations presented in the
previous section, new standard deviations are calculated for the three ﬂow rates. Running
the data reconciliation script now gives the histograms shown in Figure 65.
Figure 65: Histograms of each reconciled variable. CO2 product and rich solvent ﬂow
rates calculated from mass balances.
As can be seen from this ﬁgure, both the lean and rich solvent ﬂow rates generally have
values of ϵ/σ closer to zero than earlier reconciliations, with only 2 observations each below
-2. The CO2 product ﬂow rate is also much closer to the -2 to 2 range, which is expected
as the ﬂuctuations in CO2 ﬂow rate in the biogas and methane product is much lower than
the original measured CO2 product ﬂow rate. The amine concentration of both the lean
Page 94 of 175
==PAGE:111==
6.6
Reconciled Data Results and Discussion
Master Thesis
and the rich solvent are now the only variables which have more than three measurements
outside the 95 % conﬁdence interval. In the next section the development and possible
uses of the density model is discussed. This includes using the model to determine amine
concentrations from density measurements and CO2 analysis results, in an attempt to
further improve the data reconciliation.
Page 95 of 175
==PAGE:112==
==PAGE:113==
Master Thesis
7
Combined Discussion
In this section, the procedure for the quaternary MDEA-PZ-H2O-CO2 density model de-
velopment is discussed. Subsequently, the model is used for calculation of amine fractions,
which is inserted into the data reconciliation script described in Section 6.6. The den-
sities and amine fractions obtained from reconciled experiments and from the model are
compared in parity plots. Finally, the performance of the pilot plant conﬁgurations are
calculated and discussed.
7.1
Quaternary Density Model Development
The choices made for the development of the quaternary density model are discussed be-
low. The objective of developing the is faster determination of performance for MDEA-PZ
aqueous solvents for use in carbon capture from biogas. If the model can accurately deter-
mine the loading of the solvent based on density, more time-consuming characterisation
methods such as liquid phase analysis become unnecessary. Fitting the data to relevant
solvent concentrations and CO2 loadings is therefore more important, than developing a
model which can be used at all mixing ratios.
As the solvent is a ternary system, three binary systems and ternary contribution have been
modelled. However, the density of mixtures have only been fully described for the binary
pair of MDEA-H2O. For PZ-H2O, no weight fractions of piperazine higher than 0.14 have
been investigated in literature [67]. Of the ternary solvent studies, the piperazine weight
fraction rarely exceeds 0.1, as high concentrations of piperazine in the solvent reduce the
longevity of the carbon capture plant, due to corrosion. Furthermore, no studies have
investigated the density for mixtures of MDEA and piperazine, which is most likely due
to the amines only being applied in aqueous solutions.
For the MDEA/H2O pair, a decision was made to increase the accuracy of the model at
MDEA molar fractions below 0.3, as this is the relevant range for the solvent. However,
there still is some error in the MDEA/H2O binary interaction, which was also present
for the ternary and the quaternary model.
This is most likely due to the data from
the modelling stemming from a variety of diﬀerent studies, as well as the low number of
Page 96 of 175
==PAGE:114==
7.2
Data Reconciliation with Density Model
Master Thesis
studies available for the ternary model. Furthermore, it is hard to graphically represent
a ternary model, as most of the studies had the weight fractions of the amines vary
simultaneously. This makes it hard to show the impact of a speciﬁc compound on the
density. Additionally, the modelling had a criterion for temperature dependency, which
also increase the complexity of the model and makes it diﬃcult to get satisfactory results
at all conditions.
To decrease the complexity of the model, it could be beneﬁcial to develop a model specif-
ically for the conditions used at the relevant plant. In this case, the Hashøj Biogas plant
with density measured at about 40℃, using a solvent with 39/6 weight percent MDEA-PZ.
This would however make it impossible to use the model if the temperature or the mix-
ture was changed signiﬁcantly. Therefore, there is not an ideal way to model this complex
system due to the lack of data, especially for piperazine’s binary and ternary behaviour.
7.2
Data Reconciliation with Density Model
In this section, the pseudo-binary density model is used to calculate amine concentrations,
for use in the data reconciliation script. The results are compared to the results from
analysis of pilot plant samples.
When the CO2 content and the ratio between MDEA and PZ in the solvent are known,
the model can be used to determine the amine concentration. The results of the amine
concentration in the lean and rich stream are presented in Table 24, together with the
experimental results.
Page 97 of 175
==PAGE:115==
7.2
Data Reconciliation with Density Model
Master Thesis
Table 24: Results of amine concentration from titration experiments and the model. All
amine weight percentages shown are with CO2.
Titration
Modelling
Date
Experiment type
Lean
Rich
Lean
Rich
15-Jul
IC
50.53%
48.29%
43.49%
40.03%
18-Jul
IC
53.08%
50.74%
45.97%
40.04%
18-Jul
IC
54.80%
52.48%
47.74%
43.37%
19-Jul
IC
53.91%
50.98%
44.70%
43.85%
19-Jul
IC
54.17%
51.51%
46.27%
41.70%
20-Jul
IC
53.74%
50.79%
44.17%
41.48%
20-Jul
IC
54.27%
49.89%
48.47%
41.33%
21-Jul
IC
53.19%
49.98%
46.38%
41.92%
28-Jul
IC + CS
55.66%
52.89%
46.87%
42.36%
29-Jul
IC + CS
55.36%
51.52%
47.42%
41.55%
02-Aug
IC
51.97%
50.22%
45.79%
44.29%
03-Aug
IC
51.57%
49.71%
45.13%
42.10%
03-Aug
IC + CS
49.13%
46.81%
43.91%
41.52%
04-Aug
IC + CS
48.94%
46.94%
42.08%
40.32%
04-Aug
IC + CS + Vacuum
48.89%
47.09%
39.99%
39.74%
05-Aug
IC + Vacuum
48.81%
47.13%
40.38%
38.91%
15-Aug
IC + Vacuum
46.01%
44.24%
39.95%
38.69%
16-Aug
IC + CS
44.25%
42.44%
40.94%
38.88%
From Table 24, there are some discrepancies between the results from titration experiments
and the model. In general, the model gives signiﬁcantly lower amine weight percentages
compared to the titration experiments. As discussed earlier, the CO2 content inﬂuences
the amine titrations results, but even this is not enough to explain the gap between the
results. The amine concentration is expected to be around 45% without CO2. As all these
results are with CO2 the actual amine concentration without CO2 is higher. The model
results is therefore closer to the expected amine concentrations than the titration results.
To further investigate this, parity plots for density and amine concentrations are shown
in Figure 66a and 66b.
Page 98 of 175
==PAGE:116==
7.2
Data Reconciliation with Density Model
Master Thesis
0.4
0.45
0.5
0.55
0.6
Measured amine fraction
0.35
0.4
0.45
0.5
0.55
0.6
0.65
Calculated amine fraction
Modellean
Modelrich
Reclean
Recrich
(a)
1030 1040 1050 1060 1070 1080 1090 1100 1110 1120 1130
Measured density [kg/m3]
1020
1040
1060
1080
1100
1120
1140
Calculated Density [kg/m3]
Aminelean
Aminerich
Reclean
Recrich
(b)
Figure 66: Parity plots for (a) measured vs. calculated amine fraction and (b) measured
vs.
calculated density.
Values are calculated using data reconciliation or the density
model. Dashed lines indicate a +/- 5% deviation from parity in plot (a) and +/- 0.65 %
for plot (b).
In Figure 66a, there is a wider spread amongst the results for the model than for the recon-
ciled data. As the reconciled results are slightly above the parity line, the amine concentra-
tions obtained in the titration experiments seems too high. This is further demonstrated
in Figure 66b, where the amine concentrations from the titration experiments and the
reconciled amine concentration are put into the model, give densities higher than mea-
sured. The lean samples inserted into the model are generally closer to the measured
densities, which is consistent with CO2 having an inﬂuence on the titration results. The
model calculations have a diﬀerent trend in Figure 66a, with a less steep slope and close
to the expected amine weight fraction. As these data are with CO2, the actual amine con-
centrations are slightly higher for the pure solvent. Therefore, the model amine fractions
without CO2 would be even closer to the 0.45 weight fraction line, further showing that
the model might be closer to the actual amine fractions than the titration experiments.
To use the amine fractions calculated with the model in the data reconciliation, a new
standard deviation for the model needs to be calculated through error propagation. In
principle, all constants present in the model have a standard deviations. However, it is
outside the scope of the project to propagate the error for each constant. As mentioned
earlier, an reasonable estimate for the standard deviation of the density model is 1 kg/m3.
Page 99 of 175
==PAGE:117==
7.2
Data Reconciliation with Density Model
Master Thesis
First the model seen in Figure 48a is approximated with a linear function, using the
standard deviation for the pilot plant density measurements. The standard deviation for
the standard deviation of the amine fraction is then estimated from the slope of the linear
function. In Figure 67, the linear approximation and the function for the line is shown.
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
Total amine weight fraction
990
995
1000
1005
1010
1015
1020
1025
1030
1035
1040
Density [kg/m3]
Model
Tangent line
 = 80.87*xA + 992.21
Figure 67: Linear approximation of ternary density model at a MDEA-PZ ratio of 6.5
and 40 ℃, used for estimation of amine standard deviation. A horizontal black solid line
is located at a density of 1022 kg/m3 and dashed black lines at +/- 0.65% deviation.
Using the slope, the standard deviation of the calculated amine fractions is calculated as
seen in equation (96).
σρsolvent = 80.87 · σwA ↔σwA = σρsolvent
80.87
(96)
Where σρsolvent is the estimated standard deviation of the ternary density model and σwA
is the standard deviation of the amine fraction. This approximation is made on ternary
amine data without, CO2 and the amine fractions calculated through the model are with
CO2. However, the standard deviation is only estimated to determine whether the model
can provide comparable or more accurate input data than the titration results. Inserting
the standard deviation of 1 kg/m3 gives an amine weight fraction standard deviation of
0.012. The data reconciliation is now run with the results from the model seen in Table
24), and the result of the reconciliation is shown in Figure 68.
Page 100 of 175
==PAGE:118==
7.2
Data Reconciliation with Density Model
Master Thesis
Biogas Flow Rate 
-4
-2
0
2
4
0
5
10
Biogas CO2 conc
-4
-2
0
2
4
0
5
10
 Biogas H2O conc
-4
-2
0
2
4
0
5
10
Methane Flow Rate 
-4
-2
0
2
4
0
2
4
6
Methane CO2 Conc
-4
-2
0
2
4
0
5
10
15
Methane H2O Conc
-4
-2
0
2
4
0
2
4
6
CO2 Product Flow Rate 
-4
-2
0
2
4
0
2
4
6
CO2 Product H2O Conc
-4
-2
0
2
4
0
5
10
Lean Solvent Flow Rate 
-4
-2
0
2
4
0
5
10
Lean CO2 Conc
-4
-2
0
2
4
0
5
10
Lean Amine Conc 
-20
0
20
0
5
10
 Rich Solvent Flow Rate 
-4
-2
0
2
4
0
2
4
6
Rich CO2 Conc
-4
-2
0
2
4
0
5
10
Rich Amine Conc 
-40
-20
0
20
0
2
4
6
Condenser Flow Rate 
-4
-2
0
2
4
0
5
10
Make up 
-4
-2
0
2
4
0
2
4
6
Figure 68: Histograms for data reconciliation using amine concentrations determined
with the density model.
From Figure 68, using the model for calculation of amine fraction has potential. However,
there are some large values of ϵ/σ, which is located at the same absolute value for both
rich and lean but with opposite sign. The lean and rich amine concentration have 12 and
11 steady states, which have residuals within the desired limit of 4 standard deviations,
respectively. Most are concentrated close to zero, which shows potential regarding using
the model to obtain data for reconciliation.
However, the object function has a value of 2405.7, even though the reconciliation is done
with the same setup that reached a value of 290.4 with experimental results. This could
be due to the low standard deviation of 0.012, which in relative deviation is approximately
2.48-3.1%. Therefore, the reconciliation has been repeated with other values of standard
deviation for the amine fractions and the results of the object function can be seen in
Figure 69.
Page 101 of 175
==PAGE:119==
7.3
Calculation of Pilot Plant Performance
Master Thesis
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.1
0.12
0.14
Standard deviation of amine fraction
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
Value of object function
Figure 69: Object function value for the data reconciliation, as function of the amine
weight fraction standard deviation.
From Figure 69, the standard deviation need to be around 10% for it to be somewhat
close to the results obtained in Section 6.6. However, there are clear promises for using
the model for either amine fraction, although the results are not as good as when using
the experimental results. Therefore, in the next section, where performance is investigated
and discussed, the reconciled data from Section 6.6 is used.
7.3
Calculation of Pilot Plant Performance
In this section, the performance of the pilot plant is calculated and discussed. The perfor-
mance is monitored by calculating the speciﬁc reboiler duty (SRD) from equation (97).
SRD =
˙Qreb −˙Qloss,strip
˙mCO2 capture
(97)
˙Qreb is the heat duty of the reboiler, ˙Qloss,strip is the heat loss to the surroundings of the
stripper and ˙mCO2 capture is the mass of CO2 removed from the biogas per hour. SRD is
a measure of how much energy is added through the reboiler (corrected for heat loss to
surroundings) per kg captured CO2. This can be used to compare diﬀerent conﬁgurations
and operating conditions and thus optimise the process. The heat loss from the stripper
depends on the total heat loss to the surroundings ˙Qloss. The total heat loss is determined
Page 102 of 175
==PAGE:120==
7.3
Calculation of Pilot Plant Performance
Master Thesis
using a steady state energy balance. This balance includes energy ﬂow for in- and outlet
streams, heat loss to surroundings, heat added and removed by utilities, and work by
utilities. Figure 70 presents the relevant utilities.
Figure 70: Schematic of utilities and sources of heat loss in the system. Red lines indicate
steam cycle for reboiler. Blue heat exchangers and column borders indicate cooling of
streams and loss of heat to surroundings, respectively.
Using the notation for the utilities presented in Figure 70, the energy balance becomes:
˙Qreb + ˙Estreams, in + ˙Wc + ˙Wp,rich + ˙Wp,lean = ˙Qcool + ˙Estreams, out + ˙Qloss
(98)
where Estreams, in and Estreams, out are the energy ﬂow of the streams in and out of the
system, respectively,
˙Wc is the work done by the compressor on the biogas,
˙Wp,rich and
˙Wp,lean are the pump work done on the rich and lean solvent ﬂow, respectively. Qcool is
the total cooling duty, composed of contributions from the three heat exchangers; lean
Page 103 of 175
==PAGE:121==
7.3
Calculation of Pilot Plant Performance
Master Thesis
ﬂow, condenser and intercooler (IC):
Qcool = QHX, lean + QHX, cond + QHX, IC
(99)
To simplify equation (98), it is assumed that the work done by the compressor and the
pumps is negligible for the total energy balance.
This assumption is used, since the
columns are operated at relative low pressures of 1.1 bar and 0.9-1.5 bar for the absorber
and the stripper, respectively, for the relevant experiments. Furthermore, it is assumed
that the change in energy for the in- and outlet gas streams is negligible, due to the gasses
leaving the system with a temperature close to the inlet temperature and the relative low
heat capacity of gasses. For the experiments with reconciled data, the temperature of
the biogas is 23-39℃, while the temperature of the methane and CO2 product is between
31-38℃and 24-36℃, respectively. This leaves only the contribution of energy used for
evaporation of the make-up water, ˙Qvap, make−up, regarding energy from the streams. The
energy balance is thereby reduced to:
˙Qreb = ˙Qcool + ˙Qvap, make−up + ˙Qloss
(100)
where ˙Qvap, make−up is calculated as:
˙Qvap, make−up = ˙m7 · ∆Hvap,H2O
MH2O
(101)
where ˙m7 is the mass ﬂow of make-up water determined with data reconciliation and
∆Hvap,H2O is the heat of evaporation for water.
As the temperature of the make-up
water is unknown, the heat of evaporation is chosen at standard conditions, meaning that
∆Hvap,H2O = 43.99 kJ/mol.
For each heat exchanger, the duty can be determined by multiplying the ﬂow of cooling
water with the heat capacity of water, Cp, H2O, integrated over the temperature of the
Page 104 of 175
==PAGE:122==
7.3
Calculation of Pilot Plant Performance
Master Thesis
cooling water ﬂows in and out of the heat exchanger:
QHX, i = ˙mreal, i ·
∫Tout
Tin
Cp, H2O(T) dT
(102)
where QHX, i is the cooling duty for heat exchanger i, ˙mreal, i is the real mass ﬂow of
cooling water into heat exchanger i, and Tin and Tout are the temperatures of the cooling
water in and out of the heat exchanger in kelvin, respectively.
For the integration of
Cp, H2O the following equation is used [68].
Cp, H2O(T) = 4.1908 −6.62 × 10−4 · T + 9.14 × 10−6 · T 2
(103)
The mass ﬂow of cooling water is measured after the heat exchanger. Therefore, the ﬂow
is corrected from the measured value using equation (104) to account for the change in
density with temperature.
˙mreal, i = ˙mmeas, i ·
√
ρfloat −ρ H2O(tout)
ρfloat −ρscale
· ρ H2O(tout)
ρscale
(104)
where ˙mmeas, i is the measured cooling water ﬂow, ρfloat is the density of the stainless steel
ﬂoat in the ﬂow meter at 8.04 g/cm−3, ρscale is the calibration density of water at 0.995
g/cm−3 and ρ H2O(tout) is the density of water at the outlet temperature tout in degrees
Celsius. The density correlation ρ H2O(t) is shown in equation (105). This equation is
valid for a temperature interval of -30 to 150 ℃[69].
ρ H2O(t) [g/cm−3] = (999.83952 + 16.945176 · t −7.9879401 × 10−3 · t2
−46.170461 × 10−6 · t3 + 105.56302 × 10−9 · t4
−280.54253 × 10−12 · t5) · (1 + 16.897850 × 10−3 · t)−1 · 10−3
(105)
The heat loss from the stripper can now be calculated by developing a relation between
the heat loss from the absorber, the stripper, and the full system.
Assuming ˙Qloss is
split between the absorber ( ˙Qloss, A) and the stripper ( ˙Qloss, S), the total heat loss can be
Page 105 of 175
==PAGE:123==
7.3
Calculation of Pilot Plant Performance
Master Thesis
described as:
˙Qloss = ˙Qloss, A + ˙Qloss, S
(106)
By assuming the two columns work as independent heat exchangers with the surroundings,
the heat loss can be described as proportional to the temperature diﬀerence ∆T and the
surface area. The general equation for heat transfer in a heat exchanger is described as:
Q = U · A · ∆T
(107)
where U is the heat transfer coeﬃcient and A is the heat exchanger surface area. As
the two columns are of the same materials and isolation, the heat transfer coeﬃcient is
assumed to be the same for both. The columns are also of equal height and diameter,
but the full height of the stripper is only utilised for experiments using cold split. The
dimensions of the columns are shown in Table 25.
Table 25: Dimensions for absorber and stripper column.
Dimension
Absorber
Stripper
Diameter
21.5 cm
21.5 cm
Height (cold split exp.)
11.24 m
11.24 m
Height (other exp.)
11.24 m
6.24 m
This makes it possible to write the following expression for the total heat loss:
Qloss = U · (AA∆TA + AS∆TS)
(108)
where AA and AS is the surface area of the absorber and stripper column, respectively,
and ∆TA and ∆TS are the temperature diﬀerences between surroundings and the absorber
and stripper, respectively. This diﬀerence is calculated from a mean temperature of each
column and a measurement of the air temperature close to the equipment. The mean
temperatures of the two columns are determined as the average of ﬁve temperature mea-
surements, measured at evenly distributed locations of the columns. The surface areas are
Page 106 of 175
==PAGE:124==
7.3
Calculation of Pilot Plant Performance
Master Thesis
determined by assuming the columns are shaped like cylinders:
Asurface, cyl = d · π · h + 2 ·
(d2
4 · π
)
(109)
Where h and d is the height and diameter of the cylinder, respectively. Isolating Qloss in
equation (100), the heat loss for experiments with only absorber intercooling as modiﬁca-
tion can be determined. This conﬁguration is chosen, as it is the simplest of the examined
experiments and is used in the majority of the experiments. The results are shown in
Figure 71, where equation (108) have been used to determine a linear ﬁt of the heat loss.
The slope of this ﬁt is therefore equal to the heat transfer coeﬃcient, which is found to be
U = 0.0105 kW/(m2 ℃).
Figure 71: Heat loss to surroundings as function of total temperature diﬀerence between
equipment and surroundings. Include Qloss calculated for IC experiments and a linear ﬁt
of the points as function of ∆Ttot.
As can be seen from Figure 71 the data points do not completely line up with the ﬁt, but
they do seem to follow a general increasing trend. The deviations from the linear ﬁt are
most likely caused by a combination of uncertainties of the pilot plant measurements and
the assumptions made for the energy balance. As there are no important outliers, the ﬁt
Page 107 of 175
==PAGE:125==
7.4
SRD Performance Results
Master Thesis
is deemed to be good enough for its purpose. The determined value for U can now be
used to calculate ˙Qloss, S for all experiments using equation (110).
Qloss,S = U · AS · ∆TS
(110)
For the IC experiments, the heat loss from the stripper can alternatively be determined
directly from the total heat loss shown as points in Figure 71. This is done by eliminating
˙Qloss, A from equation (106), by deﬁning a ratio of ˙Qloss, A/ ˙Qloss, S:
k =
˙Qloss, A
˙Qloss, S
= AA · ∆TA
AS · ∆TS
(111)
where k symbolises the value of the ratio. Isolating ˙Qloss, A in equation (111) and inserting
this expression into equation (106) gives:
˙Qloss = k · ˙Qloss, S + ˙Qloss, S
(112)
˙Qloss, S is then isolated:
˙Qloss, S =
˙Qloss
1 + k
(113)
Both methods are used to determine the heat loss for IC experiments, while equation (110)
is used to calculate the heat loss for the remaining experiments. From these calculations
the speciﬁc reboiler duties are determined with equation (97) and the results are presented
and discussed in the following section.
7.4
SRD Performance Results
Figure 72 shows the speciﬁc reboiler duty as a function of stripper pressure for the recon-
ciled data. The points have been separated into the four diﬀerent conﬁgurations examined,
making it easier to compare their performance. For Figure 72a, the IC experiments’ ˙Qloss, S
is calculated with equation (113), while for Figure 72b equation (110) is used instead. As
is evident from both ﬁgures, no experiments seem to have been done at atmospheric pres-
sure, while there are 10 experiments around 0.1 barg. For experiments around 0.1 barg,
Page 108 of 175
==PAGE:126==
7.4
SRD Performance Results
Master Thesis
the valve controlling the stripper pressure placed after the condenser was fully open. As
the pressure of the stripper is measured at the bottom of the stripper above the reboiler,
the 0.1 barg pressure represents the pressure drop from the bottom of the stripper to the
controlling valve.
(a)
(b)
Figure 72: Speciﬁc reboiler duty for reconciled experiments. (a) IC ˙Qloss, S calculated
from equation (113). (b) IC ˙Qloss, S calculated from equation (110). IC: intercooler, CSS:
cold solvent split, Vac: vacuum pump.
For both methods, the SRD-values are generally higher for experiments using exclusively
IC, than for other experiments. However, for Figure 72b there is a single IC experiment
at 0.4 barg which have an SRD comparable to values obtained for CSS and vacuum pump
experiments, with a value of 2.9 MJ/kg. This is due to the total heat loss for this speciﬁc
experiment being estimated to 6.5 kW, which is the highest value calculated. As 6.5 kW
is signiﬁcantly higher than expected by the linear correlation, using equation (110) results
in lower heat loss and a higher SRD, as evident from Figure 72b.
To determine which method is closest to expected, the speciﬁc reboiler duties for the cold
split experiments are considered. It would be expected that a well conﬁgured cold split
reduces the speciﬁc reboiler duty, compared to experiments without cold split at the same
pressure. This is true for four out of ﬁve experiments in both plots shown in Figure 72,
with the ﬁfth experiment in the middle of the IC experiments. The wide spread in SRD
for these experiments is caused by the use of diﬀerent split ratios. As the cold solvent is
Page 109 of 175
==PAGE:127==
7.4
SRD Performance Results
Master Thesis
added to the top of the stripper, it cools the gas, thereby reducing the needed duty of the
condenser. However, if the ratio of cold solvent is too high, additional heating is required
from the reboiler to keep the temperature high enough to desorb the CO2. Therefore, it
seems unlikely that the IC experiment at 0.4 barg is able to achieve a speciﬁc reboiler
duty on level with the CSS experiments that have an SRD below 3.0 MJ/kg.
Furthermore, a generally increasing trend in speciﬁc reboiler duty as a function of stripper
pressure, can be seen for the results at the lower and upper limits of the investigated
pressure. This trend is illustrated in Figure 73 as a dashed line. Using equation (110)
to calculate stripper heat loss for all experiments therefore seems to give more consistent
results.
Figure 73: Speciﬁc reboiler duty as function of stripper pressure for reconciled data.
˙Qloss, S for IC experiments calculated from equation (110). Dashed black line indicates
general trend for speciﬁc reboiler duty with changing stripper pressure. IC: intercooler,
CSS: cold solvent split, Vac: vacuum pump.
With decreasing stripper pressure, the temperature of the stripper is decreased. As the
temperature of the absorber remains constant, the temperature diﬀerence between the
rich and lean solvent entering the main heat exchanger also decreases. Assuming the duty
of the heat exchanger remains constant, an extra term is needed for the general heat
Page 110 of 175
==PAGE:128==
7.4
SRD Performance Results
Master Thesis
transfer equation to compensate for ∆T being lower. This could be energy used to desorb
CO2 from the solvent. The heat transfer equation for the main heat exchanger thereby
becomes:
Qmain = UA∆T + nCO2 desorbed · (−∆Habs)
(114)
where Qmain is the duty of the main heat exchanger, nCO2 desorbed the amount of CO2
desorbed from the solvent in moles, and ∆Habs the heat of absorption of CO2 for the
solvent. This could therefore explain the reduced speciﬁc reboiler duty with decreasing
stripper pressure seen for the examined solvent. The assumption of constant duty for the
main heat exchanger can be controlled by calculating the change in energy for the lean
solvent at diﬀerent stripper pressures. This can be done using the following equation:
Qmain = ˙m4 ·
∫Tout
Tin
Cp, solvent(T)dT
(115)
Where Cp, solvent(T) is the heat capacity of the solvent as function of temperature. How-
ever, Cp, solvent(T) is not known for the investigated aqueous mixture of MDEA/PZ, and
the determination of the heat capacity is outside the scope of this project. It could however
be relevant to determine in future work as described in Section 9.
In the stripper, the decreased pressure also increase ratio of water vapour in the gas phase.
This would be expected to increase the amount of energy required to reach the same CO2
capture.
As this is not evident, it seems that the eﬀect of the main heat exchanger
have a larger inﬂuence on resulting performance of the system.
The inﬂuence of the
stripper pressure on the speciﬁc reboiler duty for diﬀerent solvents have been investigated
by Oexmann et al. [51]. This study showed that when decreasing the stripper pressure
for solvents with a heat of absorption lower than the heat of evaporation for water, their
performance increased. As this is the same trend found in this project, it would indicate
that the heat of absorption for the MDEA/PZ mixture is lower than the heat of evaporation
for water. This is consistent with MDEA being chosen for its low heat of absorption [32],
and shows that even with the addition of the more active piperazine to the solvent, it
is advantageous to operate at low stripper pressures. Lower temperature in the stripper
Page 111 of 175
==PAGE:129==
7.4
SRD Performance Results
Master Thesis
also reduces the thermal degradation of the amines, thereby increasing the lifetime of the
solvent and reducing maintenance costs related to replacement of solvent.
The temperature of the reboiler is shown as a function of stripper pressure in Figure 74.
This ﬁgure shows that a total of 7 experiments was run at a temperature below 100℃.
This temperature is also shown as a dashed horizontal line in the ﬁgure, as running the
reboiler below this line would make it possible to replace steam with heat pumps as heating
source. This could reduce initial investment costs and operational costs of the process.
Figure 74: Reboiler temperature as function of stripper pressure for reconciled experi-
ments. IC: intercooler, CS: cold split, Vac: vacuum pump.
Looking at individual experiments in Figure 73, the lowest speciﬁc reboiler duty is found
for an CSS experiment at 2.47 MJ/kg. Similar studies, by Jørsboe et al. and Oh et al.,
investigating the performance for CO2 capture with diﬀerent amine solvents have found
values of 3.78 MJ/kg [12] and 3.36 MJ/kg [70] for 30% MEA, when using biogas and
post combustion ﬂue gas as feed gas, respectively. Another study, by Verhaeghe et al.,
investigated a mixture of 10 wt% MDEA and 20 wt% PZ, achieved a minimum SRD of
3.22 MJ/kg with a post combustion ﬂue gas and various process optimisations [71]. It
was not possible to ﬁnd any values for a comparable MDEA/PZ mixture to the 39/6
Page 112 of 175
==PAGE:130==
7.4
SRD Performance Results
Master Thesis
mixture used in this project. However, comparing the SRD values presented from other
studies with the values in Figure 72, shows that they are signiﬁcantly lower compared to
results for both MEA and MDEA/PZ mixtures. Based on these results, the 39/6 solvent
mixture have a large potential in reducing the energy needs and operational costs if used
at industrial levels, compared to other solvents.
Page 113 of 175
==PAGE:131==
Master Thesis
8
Conclusion
This project investigated the performance of an amine solvent in a carbon capture pilot
plant at Hashøj Biogas. This was done by analysis of steady state samples, density model
development, investigation of mass balances, data reconciliation and ﬁnally, analysis of
speciﬁc reboiler duty.
By experimental analysis performed on 18 samples gathered from the Hashøj Biogas
pilot plant, the density, loading and amine fraction are determined. Furthermore, the
MDEA/PZ wt% ratio was found to be 6.5. For the lean samples, the density was between
1038-1060 kg/m3, CO2 concentration was between 0.7-3.15 wt% and the amine concen-
tration was between 44-56 wt% with CO2. For the rich samples, the density was between
1080-1091 kg/m3, CO2 concentration was between 4.4-6.1 wt% and the amine concentra-
tion was between 42-53 wt% with CO2. The maximum achieved CO2 loading in the plant
was 0.33 and the minimum was 0.03.
A density model was developed for the quaternary MDEA-PZ-H2O-CO2. For the MDEA-
H2O binary interaction, 14 diﬀerent models were examined, but it was found that a Redlist-
Kister expansion was the most accurate. The MDEA-H2O interaction was optimised to
be used in a molar fraction interval of 0-0.2. For the PZ/H2O interaction, a Redlich-
Kister expansion model was chosen due to the results obtained for MDEA-H2O.
For
the ternary solvent system it was found that a ternary contribution was needed. The
estimated standard deviation of the ternary model was +/- 1 kg/m3. Finally, the pseudo-
binary solvent-CO2 density model was found to be linear with respect to the molar fraction
of H2O. The standard deviation of the model was estimated to be around +/- 3 kg/m3,
which is much lower than the on-line density measurement of +/- 6.5 kg/m3 at the pilot
plant.
Using the experimental analysis results, it was found that the mass balances of the Hashøj
Biogas pilot plant could not be closed directly, thus data reconciliation was necessary.
Through data reconciliation, it was found that the measurements of CO2 product ﬂow
rate was the biggest contributor to the value of the object function. A sensitivity analysis
Page 114 of 175
==PAGE:132==
Master Thesis
of the standard deviations found that changes in methane gas ﬂow, rich solvent ﬂow and
the CO2 concentration in the rich stream also had a signiﬁcant impact on the value of the
object function. By estimating of rich ﬂow rate and CO2 product ﬂow rate from the mass
balances, the residuals for the majority of measurements were within 2 standard deviations.
The relatively largest residuals are found for the lean and rich amine concentrations, with
some residuals of the lean amine concentration exceeding 4 standard deviations.
Using the pseudo-binary density model and known CO2 concentrations to calculate amine
fractions, estimated the amine fractions in the pilot plant samples to be between 40-48
wt% and 39-44 wt% with CO2 for lean and rich solvent, respectively, with a standard
deviation of 0.012. Data reconciliation using these new amine fractions led to all variables
having residuals within 4 standard deviations, except for the amine fractions, which were
between within 20. Sensitivity analysis of the amine fraction standard deviation showed
that a standard deviation of 0.048, and consequentially the residuals being between 3
standard variations for the variables, except the amine fraction residuals, which now were
within 5 standard deviations.
Finally, the performance of the pilot plant with diﬀerent conﬁgurations was investigated
through calculations of the speciﬁc reboiler duty (SRD). By comparison with literature,
the solvent’s heat of adsorption was estimated to be lower than the heat of adsorption
for water. The combined intercooling and cold solvent split plant conﬁguration was the
most energy eﬃcient, with an SRD of 2.47 MJ/kg at 0.1 barg. Based on the results of this
project it was suggested, that the cold solvent split and intercooling conﬁgurations could
be used for industrial scale.
Page 115 of 175
==PAGE:133==
Master Thesis
9
Future Work
This section presents suggestions for future work related to the project, which provides
further insight into optimisation options and the validity of assumptions. The suggestions
can generally be divided into three parts; density model related work, solvent characteri-
sation and pilot plant.
For the model it would be relevant to do a statistic analysis of the deviations of each
coeﬃcient, followed by error propagation to calculate the standard deviation of the com-
bined model. This standard deviation could then be used for the data reconciliation. To
improve the model it would be advantageous to increase the data input to the model,
by performing density measurements of MDEA-PZ, MDEA-PZ-H2O, and loaded solvent
mixtures. By increasing the data input, the model coeﬃcients can be tuned to better
describe the quarternary system. The model can also be improved by expanding it to a
pseudo-ternary model, separating the solvent into amine-H2O-CO2.
Relevant characterisation of the MDEA-PZ solvent include determination of heat capacity
and CO2 heat of absorption. These could for example be determined experimentally. As
the values depend on the CO2 content, it would be advantageous to determine them for
a range of CO2 loadings. Using the heat capacity, the duty of the main heat exchanger
can be determined at diﬀerent stripper pressures, which can then validate the assumption
of constant duty at decreasing temperature diﬀerence between lean and rich solvent. Fur-
thermore, determination of the CO2 heat of absorption can be compared to the heat of
evaporation of water, to ensure consistency between the pilot plant performance results
and simulations done by Oexmann et al. [51].
Further work related to the pilot plant and sample analysis include: increasing the com-
plexity of the energy balance, determination of the optimal CSS ratio, and optimisation
of experimental analysis methods. Including terms such as the change in energy ﬂow from
inlet to outlet streams, and compression and pump work, the energy balance becomes more
complete. Furthermore, by determining the heat capacity and CO2 heat of absorption the
energy balance for the absorber and stripper can be determined separately. This would
result in a more accurate calculation of pilot plant performance. As the cold solvent split
Page 116 of 175
==PAGE:134==
Master Thesis
ratio have an signiﬁcant impact on the speciﬁc heat duty, it would be relevant to investi-
gate the optimal ratio for performance. Optimisation of the amine concentration analysis
could increase the accuracy of the results. One option could be to analyse the rest of the
pilot plant samples for their amine concentration after de-loading with HCl. This could
be used to discover the best method for amine concentration determination, by comparing
with density model and data reconciliation results.
Page 117 of 175
==PAGE:135==
REFERENCES
Master Thesis
References
[1] “Energy Statistics - an Overview.” Eurostat. https://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/
statistics-explained/index.php?title=Energy_statistics_-_an_overview/.
[Online; accessed 10/02-2023].
[2] “Denmark - Key Energy Statistics.” International Energy Agency. https://www.iea.
org/countries/denmark. [Online; accessed 10/02-2023].
[3] “New record for biogas in the gas system in 2021.” EnergiNet. https://en.
energinet.dk/About-our-news/News/2022/01/07/New-record-biogas/. [Online;
accessed 10/02-2023].
[4] A. I. Adnan, M. Y. Ong, S. Nomanbhay, K. W. Chew, and P. L. Show, “Technologies
for biogas upgrading to biomethane: A review,” Bioengineering, vol. 6, no. 4, p. 92,
2019.
[5] “Bekendtgørelse
om
gaskvalitet.”
Retsinformation.dk.
https://www.
retsinformation.dk/eli/lta/2018/230. [Online; accessed 10/02-2023].
[6] H. Karne, U. Mahajan, U. Ketkar, A. Kohade, P. Khadilkar, and A. Mishra, “A
review on biogas upgradation systems,” Materials Today: Proceedings, 1 2022.
[7] L. Meier, D. Stará, J. Bartacek, and D. Jeison, “Removal of H2S by a continuous
microalgae-based photosynthetic biogas upgrading process,” Process Safety and En-
vironmental Protection, vol. 119, no. October, pp. 65–68, 2018.
[8] S. Nis Bay Villadsen, M. Ahrensberg Kaab, L. Pleth Nielsen, P. Møller, and P. Lol-
drup Fosbøl, “New electroscrubbing process for desulfurization,” Separation and Pu-
riﬁcation Technology, vol. 278, p. 119552, 12 2021.
[9] S. S. Hosseini and J. F. Denayer, “Biogas upgrading by adsorption processes: Math-
ematical modeling, simulation and optimization approach - A review,” Journal of
Environmental Chemical Engineering, vol. 10, 6 2022.
Page 118 of 175
==PAGE:136==
REFERENCES
Master Thesis
[10] D. Havas and H. Lin, “Optimal membranes for biogas upgrade by removing CO2: High
permeance or high selectivity?,” Separation Science and Technology (Philadelphia),
vol. 52, pp. 186–196, 1 2017.
[11] A. J. Ward, L. Feng, and H. B. Møller, “Chemical absorption-amine absorp-
tion/stripping technology for biogas upgrading,” in Emerging Technologies and Bio-
logical Systems for Biogas Upgrading, pp. 29–55, Elsevier, 1 2021.
[12] J. K. Jørsboe, S. H. B. Vinjarapu, R. Neerup, A. C. Møller, S. Jensen, J. Abildskov,
and P. Fosbøl, “Mobile pilot plant for CO2-capture in biogas upgrading using 30 wt%
MEA,” Fuel, vol. 350, p. 128702, 10 2023.
[13] S. Sahota, G. Shah, P. Ghosh, R. Kapoor, S. Sengupta, P. Singh, V. Vijay, A. Sahay,
V. K. Vijay, and I. S. Thakur, “Review of trends in biogas upgradation technologies
and future perspectives,” Bioresource Technology Reports, vol. 1, pp. 79–88, 3 2018.
[14] F. Capra, F. Fettarappa, F. Magli, M. Gatti, and E. Martelli, “Biogas upgrading by
amine scrubbing: Solvent comparison between MDEA and MDEA/MEA blend,” in
Energy Procedia, vol. 148, pp. 970–977, Elsevier Ltd, 2018.
[15] K. O. Yoro, P. T. Sekoai, A. J. Isaﬁade, and M. O. Daramola, “A review on heat
and mass integration techniques for energy and material minimization during CO2-
capture,” International Journal of Energy and Environmental Engineering, vol. 10,
pp. 367–387, 9 2019.
[16] Y. Le Moullec, T. Neveux, A. Al Azki, A. Chikukwa, and K. A. Hoﬀ, “Process
modiﬁcations for solvent-based post-combustion CO2-capture,” International Journal
of Greenhouse Gas Control, vol. 31, pp. 96–112, 2014.
[17] M. Mazzotti and J.-F. Pérez-Calvo, “Techno-economic assessment of post-combustion
CO2-capture using aqueous piperazine at diﬀerent ﬂue gas compositions and ﬂowrates
via a general optimization methodology,” International Journal of Greenhouse Gas
Control, vol. 114, 2022.
Page 119 of 175
==PAGE:137==
REFERENCES
Master Thesis
[18] O. Khalifa, I. I. I. Alkhatib, D. Bahamon, A. Alhajaj, R. Mohammad, M. Abu-
zahra, and L. F. Vega, “Modifying absorption process conﬁgurations to improve their
performance for Post-Combustion CO2-capture - What have we learned and what is
still Missing?,” Chemical Engineering Journal, vol. 430, no. P3, p. 133096, 2022.
[19] P. Galindo, A. Schäﬀer, K. Brechtel, S. Unterberger, and G. Scheﬀknecht, “Exper-
imental research on the performance of CO2-loaded solutions of MEA and DEA at
regeneration conditions,” Fuel, vol. 101, pp. 2–8, 11 2012.
[20] A. Samanta and S. S. Bandyopadhyay, “Absorption of carbon dioxide into piperazine
activated aqueous N-methyldiethanolamine,” Chemical Engineering Journal, vol. 171,
no. 3, pp. 734–741, 2011.
[21] P. H. Feron, A. Cousins, K. Jiang, R. Zhai, and M. Garcia, “An update of the
benchmark post-combustion CO2-capture technology,” Fuel, vol. 273, p. 117776, 8
2020.
[22] S. S. Karunarathne, D. A. Eimer, and L. E. Øi, “Density, viscosity, and excess proper-
ties of MDEA + H2O, DMEA + H2O, and DEEA + H2O mixtures,” Applied Sciences
(Switzerland), vol. 10, no. 9, 2020.
[23] A. Muhammad, M. I. Abdul Mutalib, T. Murugesan, and A. Shafeeq, “Density and ex-
cess properties of aqueous n-methyldiethanolamine solutions from (298.15 to 338.15)
K,” Journal of Chemical and Engineering Data, vol. 53, no. 9, pp. 2217–2221, 2008.
[24] P. W. Derks, E. S. Hamborg, J. A. Hogendoorn, J. P. Niederer, and G. F. Versteeg,
“Densities, viscosities, and liquid diﬀusivities in aqueous piperazine and aqueous
(piperazine + N-methyldiethanolamine) solutions,” Journal of Chemical and Engi-
neering Data, vol. 53, no. 5, pp. 1179–1185, 2008.
[25] W. Zhang, J. Chen, X. Luo, and M. Wang, “Modelling and process analysis of post-
combustion carbon capture with the blend of 2-amino-2-methyl-1-propanol and piper-
azine,” International Journal of Greenhouse Gas Control, vol. 63, pp. 37–46, 2017.
Page 120 of 175
==PAGE:138==
REFERENCES
Master Thesis
[26] F. Closmann, T. Nguyen, and G. T. Rochelle, “MDEA/Piperazine as a solvent for
CO2-capture,” in Energy Procedia, vol. 1, pp. 1351–1357, 2 2009.
[27] B. A. Khan, A. Ullah, M. W. Saleem, A. N. Khan, M. Faiq, and M. Haris, “Energy
minimization in piperazine promoted MDEA-based CO2-capture process,” Sustain-
ability (Switzerland), vol. 12, no. 20, pp. 1–13, 2020.
[28] A. A. Khan,
G. N. Halder,
and A. K. Saha,
“Experimental investigation
on eﬃcient carbon dioxide capture using piperazine (PZ) activated aqueous
methyldiethanolamine (MDEA) solution in a packed column,” International Jour-
nal of Greenhouse Gas Control, vol. 64, no. July, pp. 163–173, 2017.
[29] S. Saleh, A. Razali, R. Hanaﬁah, A. Tamidi, and Z. P. Chan, “Optimization of MDEA-
PZ Ratio and Concentration for CO2 Removal in Semi-Lean Membrane Contactor
Process,” in E3S Web of Conferences, vol. 287, EDP Sciences, 7 2021.
[30] J. Reza and A. Trejo, “Degradation of aqueous solutions of alkanolamine blends
at high temperature, under the presence of CO2 and H2S,” Chemical Engineering
Communications, vol. 193, pp. 129–138, 1 2006.
[31] T. N. G. Borhani, M. Afkhamipour, A. Azarpour, V. Akbari, S. H. Emadi, and
Z. A. Manan, “Modeling study on CO2 and H2S simultaneous removal using MDEA
solution,” Journal of Industrial and Engineering Chemistry, vol. 34, pp. 344–355,
2016.
[32] T. N. Borhani and M. Wang, “Role of solvents in CO2-capture processes: The re-
view of selection and design methods,” Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews,
vol. 114, no. February, p. 109299, 2019.
[33] X. Wu, Y. Yu, Z. Qin, and Z. Zhang, “The advances of post-combustion CO2-capture
with chemical solvents: Review and guidelines,” Energy Procedia, vol. 63, pp. 1339–
1346, 2014.
[34] “Monoethanolamine.” National Institute of Standards and Technology. https://
webbook.nist.gov/cgi/cbook.cgi?ID=141-43-5. [Online; accessed 21/02-2023].
Page 121 of 175
==PAGE:139==
REFERENCES
Master Thesis
[35] F. Meng, T. Ju, S. Han, L. Lin, J. Li, K. Chen, and J. Jiang, “Study on biogas up-
grading characteristics and reaction mechanism of low energy consumption 2-Amino-
2-methylpropanol (AMP)/piperazine (PZ)/H2O mixed amines,” Separation and Pu-
riﬁcation Technology, vol. 310, no. January, p. 123195, 2023.
[36] “2-Amino-2-methyl-1-propanol.” National Institute of Standards and Technology.
https://webbook.nist.gov/cgi/inchi?ID=C124685&Mask=200. [Online; accessed
21/02-2023].
[37] “Methyldiethanolamine.” National Institute of Standards and Technology. https:
//webbook.nist.gov/cgi/cbook.cgi?ID=C105599&Mask=200.
[Online;
accessed
21/02-2023].
[38] J. Gaspar, N. Von Solms, K. Thomsen, and P. L. Fosbøl, “Multivariable optimization
of the piperazine CO2post-combustion process,” Energy Procedia, vol. 86, pp. 229–
238, 2016.
[39] “Piperazine.” National Institute of Standards and Technology. https://webbook.
nist.gov/cgi/cbook.cgi?ID=C110850&Mask=8. [Online; accessed 21/02-2023].
[40] M. Nainar and A. Veawab, “Corrosion in CO2-capture process using blended mo-
noethanolamine and piperazine,” Industrial and Engineering Chemistry Research,
vol. 48, no. 20, pp. 9299–9306, 2009.
[41] S. K. Dash and S. S. Bandyopadhyay, “Studies on the eﬀect of addition of piperazine
and sulfolane into aqueous solution of N-methyldiethanolamine for CO2-capture and
VLE modelling using eNRTL equation,” International Journal of Greenhouse Gas
Control, vol. 44, pp. 227–237, 2016.
[42] Y. Zheng, E. El Ahmar, M. Simond, K. Ballerat-Busserolles, and P. Zhang, “CO2
Heat of Absorption in Aqueous Solutions of MDEA and MDEA/Piperazine,” Journal
of Chemical and Engineering Data, vol. 65, no. 8, pp. 3784–3793, 2020.
Page 122 of 175
==PAGE:140==
REFERENCES
Master Thesis
[43] M. Karimi, M. Hillestad, and H. F. Svendsen, “Investigation of intercooling eﬀect in
CO2-capture energy consumption,” in Energy Procedia, vol. 4, pp. 1601–1607, Elsevier
Ltd, 2011.
[44] B. Zhao, F. Liu, Z. Cui, C. Liu, H. Yue, S. Tang, Y. Liu, H. Lu, and B. Liang,
“Enhancing the energetic eﬃciency of MDEA/PZ-based CO2-capture technology for
a 650 MW power plant: Process improvement,” Applied Energy, vol. 185, pp. 362–375,
1 2017.
[45] M. Shoeld, “Puriﬁcation of Seperation and Gaseous Mixtures,” U.S Patent 1 971 798,
Jan. 1934.
[46] B. Eisenberg and R. R. Johnson, “Amine regeneration process,” U.S. Patent 4 152
217, May. 1979.
[47] D. Bhattacharyya and D. C. Miller, “Post-combustion CO2-capture technologies a re-
view of processes for solvent-based and sorbent-based CO2-capture,” Current Opinion
in Chemical Engineering, vol. 17, pp. 78–92, 2017.
[48] J. Jung, Y. S. Jeong, Y. Lim, C. S. Lee, and C. Han, “Advanced CO2-capture pro-
cess using MEA scrubbing: Conﬁguration of a split ﬂow and phase separation heat
exchanger,” Energy Procedia, vol. 37, pp. 1778–1784, 2013.
[49] A. Cousins, L. T. Wardhaugh, and P. H. Feron, “Preliminary analysis of process ﬂow
sheet modiﬁcations for energy eﬃcient CO2-capture from ﬂue gases using chemical
absorption,” Chemical Engineering Research and Design, vol. 89, no. 8, pp. 1237–
1251, 2011.
[50] J. K. Jørsboe, S. Hema, B. Vinjarapu, A. Christian, S. Jensen, J. Lindkvist, and
P. Fosbøl, “Pilot study of CO2-capture for biogas upgrading: Optimization of solvent
and process conﬁgurations,” in 16th International Conference on Greenhouse Gas
Control Technologies GHGT-16, no. October, pp. 1–4, 2022.
[51] J. Oexmann and A. Kather, “Minimising the regeneration heat duty of post-
combustion CO2-capture by wet chemical absorption: The misguided focus on low
Page 123 of 175
==PAGE:141==
REFERENCES
Master Thesis
heat of absorption solvents,” International Journal of Greenhouse Gas Control, vol. 4,
no. 1, pp. 36–43, 2010.
[52] Y. Le Moullec, “Vacuum regeneration of amine solvent for post-combustion carbon
capture with compression train integration,” in Energy Procedia, vol. 37, pp. 1814–
1820, Elsevier Ltd, 2013.
[53] R. J. Friis, X. B. Sjøgren, “Absorption of Carbon Dioxide from Biogas - Analysis and
Experiments,” August 2022.
[54] P. L. Fosbøl, B. Maribo-Mogensen, and K. Thomsen, “Solids modelling and capture
simulation of piperazine in potassium solvents,” Energy Procedia, vol. 37, pp. 844–859,
2012.
[55] A. Dey, S. K. Dash, and B. Mandal, “Equilibrium CO2 solubility and ther-
mophysical properties of aqueous blends of 1-(2-aminoethyl) piperazine and N-
methyldiethanolamine,” Fluid Phase Equilibria, vol. 463, pp. 91–105, 2018.
[56] S. Paul and B. Mandal, “Density and viscosity of aqueous solutions of (N-
methyldiethanolamine + piperazine) and (2-amino-2-methyl-1-propanol + piper-
azine) from 288 to 333 K,” Journal of Chemical and Engineering Data, vol. 51, no. 5,
pp. 1808–1810, 2006.
[57] D. D. Pinto, J. G. Monteiro, B. Johnsen, H. F. Svendsen, and H. Knuutila, “Den-
sity measurements and modelling of loaded and unloaded aqueous solutions of
MDEA (N-methyldiethanolamine), DMEA (N,N-dimethylethanolamine), DEEA (di-
ethylethanolamine) and MAPA (N-methyl-1,3-diaminopropane),” International Jour-
nal of Greenhouse Gas Control, vol. 25, pp. 173–185, 2014.
[58] M. E. Rebolledo-Libreros and A. Trejo, “Density and viscosity of aqueous blends
of three alkanolamines: N-methyldiethanolamine, diethanolamine, and 2-amino-2-
methyl-1-propanol in the range of (303 to 343) K,” Journal of Chemical and Engi-
neering Data, vol. 51, no. 2, pp. 702–707, 2006.
Page 124 of 175
==PAGE:142==
REFERENCES
Master Thesis
[59] H. A. Al-Ghawas,
D. P. Hagewiesche,
G. Ruiz-Ibanez,
and O. C. Sandall,
“Physicochemical Properties Important for Carbon Dioxide Absorption in Aqueous
Methyldiethanolamine,” Journal of Chemical and Engineering Data, vol. 34, no. 4,
pp. 385–391, 1989.
[60] S. S. Karunarathne, D. A. Eimer, K. J. Jens, and L. E. Øi, “Density, Viscosity, and
Excess Properties of Ternary Aqueous Mixtures of MDEA + MEA, DMEA + MEA,
and DEEA + MEA,” Fluids, vol. 5, no. 1, 2020.
[61] “Water Density Table.” Internetchemistry. https://www.internetchemistry.com/chemical-
data/water-density-table.php. [Online; accessed 08/07-2023].
[62] A. Mahajan and S. Mirgane, “Excess Molar Volumes and Viscosities for the Binary
Mixtures of n-Octane, n-Decane, n-Dodecane, and n-Tetradecane with Octan-2-ol at
298.15 K,” Journal of Thermodynamics, vol. 2013, 01 2013.
[63] D. Speyer, V. Ermatchkov, and G. Maurer, “Solubility of carbon dioxide in aqueous
solutions of n-methyldiethanolamine and piperazine in the low gas loading region,”
Journal of Chemical and Engineering Data, vol. 55, no. 1, pp. 283–290, 2010.
[64] P.
T.
Frailie,
Modeling
of
carbon
dioxide
absorption/stripping
by
aqueous
methyldiethanolamine/piperazine. PhD thesis, University of Texas, 2014.
[65] “Densities
of
Metals
and
Elements
Table.”
Engineers
Edge.
https://www.
engineersedge.com/materials/densities_of_metals_and_elements_table_
13976.htm. [Online; accessed 14/07-2023].
[66] “Water.” National Institute of Standards and Technology. https://webbook.nist.
gov/cgi/cbook.cgi?ID=C7732185&Mask=4&Type=ANTOINE&Plot=on#ref-2.
[On-
line; accessed 22/05-2023].
[67] P. W. Derks, K. J. Hogendoorn, and G. F. Versteeg, “Solubility of N2O in and density,
viscosity, and surface tension of aqueous piperazine solutions,” Journal of Chemical
and Engineering Data, vol. 50, no. 6, pp. 1947–1950, 2005.
Page 125 of 175
==PAGE:143==
REFERENCES
Master Thesis
[68] S. Cheng, A. Meisen, and A. Chakma, “Predict amine solution properties accurately,”
Hydrocarbon Processing, vol. 75, no. 2, pp. 81–84, 1996.
[69] “Liquid Water Properties: correlations as a function of temperature.” Process En-
gineer’s Tools. https://powderprocess.net/Tools_html/Data_Diagrams/Water_
Properties_Correlations.html. [Online; accessed 11/07-2023].
[70] S. Y. Oh and J. K. Kim, “Operational optimization for part-load performance of
amine-based post-combustion CO2-capture processes,” Energy, vol. 146, pp. 57–66, 3
2018.
[71] A. Verhaeghe, L. Dubois, L. Bricteux, D. Thomas, and W. De Paepe, “Absorption-
based carbon capture energy penalty reduction for micro gas turbine application:
pre-assessment of the impact of appropriate amine solvent and process selection (ﬁnal
version),” in 34th International Conference on Eﬃciency, Cost, Optimization, Simu-
lation and Environmental Impact of Energy Systems (ECOS 2021), (Tokyo, Japan),
pp. 2111–2123, ECOS 2021 Program Organizers, 2022.
Page 126 of 175
==PAGE:144==
==PAGE:145==
LIST OF FIGURES
Master Thesis
List of Figures
1
Energy consumption in percentage per source in Denmark. Based on data
from the International Energy Agency [2]. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
2
Schematic overview for continuous operation of pressure swing absorption
for biogas upgrade [4]. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
3
Schematic overview of 2-step membrane separation of biogas[10]. . . . . . .
4
4
Schematic overview of a chemical scrubbing process [12]. . . . . . . . . . . .
6
5
Flow diagram of the project process. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
6
Schematic overview of Hashøj Biogas pilot plant. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
7
The structure of MEA [34]. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
8
The structure of AMP [36]. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
9
The structure of MDEA [37]. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
10
The structure of piperazine [39].
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
11
Eﬀect of split fraction on reboiler duty and condenser duty [27]. . . . . . . .
18
12
Picture of the used autotitration setup.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
13
Titration of amine solvent with HCl. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
14
Picture of the suction ﬁltration. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
15
Titration curve for rich sample before (a) and after (b) CO2 removal with
BaCl2. Grey points and orange points are used for caculation of linear ﬁt
for equivalence point 1 and 2, respectively. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
16
Titration curve for lean sample before and after CO2 removal with BaCl2.
Grey points and orange points are used for caculation of linear ﬁt for equiv-
alence point 1 and 2, respectively. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
17
Titration curve of rich sample after removal of CO2 with BaCl2 without
heating. Grey points and orange points are used for caculation of linear ﬁt
for equivalence point 1 and 2, respectively. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
18
Pure MDEA (a) and 25 vol.% aqueous MDEA solution (b), both with 15
0.5 M BaCl2 added. Left at room temperature overnight to precipitate.
. .
29
19
Picture of CO2 bubbles formed in a loaded sample after addition of HCl. . .
30
Page 127 of 175
==PAGE:146==
LIST OF FIGURES
Master Thesis
20
Titration curves for (a) 45% stock solution, (b) 0,1 loading solution, (c)
CO2 removed with BaCl2, and (d) CO2 removed with HCl. Grey points
and orange points are used for caculation of linear ﬁt for equivalence point
1 and 2, respectively. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
21
Titration curve for titration of Na2CO3 with HCl for standardisation of the
HCl solution. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
22
Picture of the DMA 4500 densimeter used for the density measurements in
the lab.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
23
Solvent amine fraction of pilot plant samples as a function of steady state
date and time. Calculated as if there were no CO2 in the samples.
. . . . .
38
24
CO2 concentration in pilot plant samples as a function of date and time for
the pilot plant experiments. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
25
Sample density as a function of CO2 concentration, based on experimental
results. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
26
Density of MDEA-H2O mixtures as a function of MDEA molar fraction at
25 °C. Blue curve represents ideal model and orange curve the literature
data [22, 55, 56, 57, 58, 59]. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
27
Excess volume as a function of molar fraction for the 14 diﬀerent models
described in Table 8. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
28
Left: The 6 models with the lowest summed squares. Right: Zoom of the
left plot with only models 10 and 13. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
29
Density as a function of temperature for pure MDEA. . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
30
Molar excess volume as a function of MDEA molar fraction.
Dots are
experimental excess volumes and lines are model excess volumes. . . . . . .
50
31
Density as a function of the MDEA molar fraction. The dots are experi-
mental values and the line are model densities.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
32
Density as a function of molar fraction of MDEA for a molar fraction of 0-0.2
for diﬀerent temperatures. The dots represent the respective temperatures’
experimental data. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
Page 128 of 175
==PAGE:147==
LIST OF FIGURES
Master Thesis
33
Density as a function of molar fraction of MDEA with the new model at
diﬀerent temperatures for (a): molar fractions from 0-1 and (b): molar
fraction from 0-0.2. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
34
Solubility of piperazine in aqueous solutions [54]. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
35
Parity plot for titrations of piperazine solutions. The dashed lines indicate
a ±5% variation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
36
Measured densities of prepared piperazine solutions as a function of piper-
azine molar fraction at diﬀerent temperatures. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
37
Molar volume of the mixture as a function of the molar fraction of piperazine. 56
38
Models of density of the piperazine/water pair as a function of molar frac-
tion when minimising molar volume (a) and density (b).
. . . . . . . . . .
57
39
Models for piperazine/water mixtures as a function of molar fraction at 60
°C, when minimising molar volume (a) and density (b).
. . . . . . . . . . .
59
40
Density as a function of molar fraction of piperazine.
The dots are the
original experimental data and the lines are the calculated model data. . . .
61
41
Density as a function of molar fraction of piperazine for temperatures at
20-70°C. Dots represent experimental data and lines the density model.
. .
62
42
Density as a function of molar fraction of piperazine for diﬀerent tempera-
tures. Extrapolation of the model for molar fractions above 0.28.
. . . . .
62
43
Excess molar volume as a function of molar fraction at 313 K, for the
MDEA-water and the PZ-water model. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
44
Excess molar volume as a function of molar fraction of piperazine, enforcing
diﬀerent constraints on the model.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
45
Density as a function of amine concentration at diﬀerent temperatures [24].
Dots are experimental data and lines are density model.
MDEA molar
fraction: 0.044-0.048, PZ molar fraction: 0-0.0243.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
46
Density as a function of total amine molar fraction, at 50 °C [24]. MDEA
molar fraction: 0.0448-0.0487, PZ molar fraction: 0-0.0243
. . . . . . . . .
68
47
Density as a function of amine concentration at diﬀerent temperatures [24].
MDEA molar fraction: 0.044-0.048, PZ molar fraction: 0-0.0243.
. . . . . .
68
Page 129 of 175
==PAGE:148==
LIST OF FIGURES
Master Thesis
48
Density as a function of total amine fraction for (a) diﬀerent MDEA-PZ
weight fraction ratios at 40℃and (b) diﬀerent temperatures with a MDEA-
PZ weight fraction ratio of 6.5. A line at 1022 kg/m3 have been inserted,
with dashed lines indicating a deviation of +/- 0.65%. . . . . . . . . . . . .
70
49
Density as a function of CO2 molar fraction for a constant amine concen-
tration [64]. MDEA weight fraction: 0.416, PZ weight fraction: 0.084.
. . .
71
50
Density as a function of CO2 molar fraction. Dashed lines are the linear
model, while solid lines are the second order model. Dots are experimental
data [64].
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
72
51
Density as a function of CO2 loading at 40°C, with an amine weight fraction
of 0.45 and a MDEA-PZ ratio of 6.5. The lines around 1087 kg/m3 and 1050
kg/m3 represents average rich and lean density, respectively. The dashed
lines indicate +/- 0.65%. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
73
52
Density as a function of CO2 loading. In the parenthesis for each point is
indicated the loading and temperature. The amine fraction is 0.45 and the
MDEA/PZ ratio is 6.5. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
74
53
Simpliﬁed schematic of pilot plant with numbered streams and mass balance
boundaries for full system (green), absorber (blue) and stripper (yellow). . .
75
54
Parity plots for in vs. out ﬂow for the total mass ﬂow of the system (a) and
the absorber (b). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
81
55
Parity plots for in vs. out ﬂow for the CO2 mass ﬂow of the system (a) and
the absorber (b). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
82
56
Parity plots for in vs. out ﬂow for the H2O mass ﬂow of the system (a) and
the absorber (b). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
82
57
Captured CO2 in the pilot plant, determined from measurements of CO2
product ﬂow and change in CO2 ﬂow of the biogas (solid lines) and experi-
ments (dashed line).
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
83
58
Captured CO2 in the pilot plant, measured by ﬂow meter and calculated
with experimental results (circles) and stripper pressure (squares). Both as
function of steady state number.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
84
Page 130 of 175
==PAGE:149==
LIST OF FIGURES
Master Thesis
59
Illustration of data reconciliation ﬂow. Green: input, yellow: data recon-
ciliation, blue: output. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
87
60
Histograms of ϵ/σ ratios for each reconciled variable, determined with initial
standard deviations. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
89
61
Object function value as a function of standard deviation for the CO2 prod-
uct ﬂow rate. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
90
62
Sensitivity analysis of standard deviations used in data reconciliation, with
CO2 product removed from object function. The plot shows object function
value as function of standard deviation multiplier.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
91
63
Object function value as a function of kg/h added to the rich ﬂow rate for
correction. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
92
64
Histograms of each reconciled variable. Based on calculations with CO2
product ﬂow rate removed from the object function and a correction of 20
kg/h for the rich solvent ﬂow rate. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
93
65
Histograms of each reconciled variable. CO2 product and rich solvent ﬂow
rates calculated from mass balances. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
94
66
Parity plots for (a) measured vs. calculated amine fraction and (b) mea-
sured vs. calculated density. Values are calculated using data reconciliation
or the density model. Dashed lines indicate a +/- 5% deviation from parity
in plot (a) and +/- 0.65 % for plot (b). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
99
67
Linear approximation of ternary density model at a MDEA-PZ ratio of 6.5
and 40 ℃, used for estimation of amine standard deviation. A horizontal
black solid line is located at a density of 1022 kg/m3 and dashed black lines
at +/- 0.65% deviation.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 100
68
Histograms for data reconciliation using amine concentrations determined
with the density model.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 101
69
Object function value for the data reconciliation, as function of the amine
weight fraction standard deviation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 102
Page 131 of 175
==PAGE:150==
LIST OF FIGURES
Master Thesis
70
Schematic of utilities and sources of heat loss in the system.
Red lines
indicate steam cycle for reboiler. Blue heat exchangers and column borders
indicate cooling of streams and loss of heat to surroundings, respectively.
. 103
71
Heat loss to surroundings as function of total temperature diﬀerence be-
tween equipment and surroundings. Include Qloss calculated for IC experi-
ments and a linear ﬁt of the points as function of ∆Ttot. . . . . . . . . . . . 107
72
Speciﬁc reboiler duty for reconciled experiments. (a) IC ˙Qloss, S calculated
from equation (113). (b) IC ˙Qloss, S calculated from equation (110). IC:
intercooler, CSS: cold solvent split, Vac: vacuum pump. . . . . . . . . . . . 109
73
Speciﬁc reboiler duty as function of stripper pressure for reconciled data.
˙Qloss, S for IC experiments calculated from equation (110). Dashed black
line indicates general trend for speciﬁc reboiler duty with changing stripper
pressure. IC: intercooler, CSS: cold solvent split, Vac: vacuum pump.
. . . 110
74
Reboiler temperature as function of stripper pressure for reconciled exper-
iments. IC: intercooler, CS: cold split, Vac: vacuum pump.
. . . . . . . . . 112
75
(a): Models of density of the piperazine/water pair as a function of molar
fraction when minimising molar volume at 20 °C. (b): Models of density of
the piperazine/water pair as a function of molar fraction when minimising
density at 20°C. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 165
76
(a): Models of density of the piperazine/water pair as a function of molar
fraction when minimising molar volume at 25 °C. (b): Models of density of
the piperazine/water pair as a function of molar fraction when minimising
density at 25°C. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 165
77
(a): Models of density of the piperazine/water pair as a function of molar
fraction when minimising molar volume at 30 °C. (b): Models of density of
the piperazine/water pair as a function of molar fraction when minimising
density at 30°C. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 166
Page 132 of 175
==PAGE:151==
LIST OF FIGURES
Master Thesis
78
(a): Models of density of the piperazine/water pair as a function of molar
fraction when minimising molar volume at 40 °C. (b): Models of density of
the piperazine/water pair as a function of molar fraction when minimising
density at 40°C. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 166
79
(a): Models of density of the piperazine/water pair as a function of molar
fraction when minimising molar volume at 50 °C. (b): Models of density of
the piperazine/water pair as a function of molar fraction when minimising
density at 50°C. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 167
80
(a): Models of density of the piperazine/water pair as a function of molar
fraction when minimising molar volume at 70 °C. (b): Models of density of
the piperazine/water pair as a function of molar fraction when minimising
density at 70°C. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 167
Page 133 of 175
==PAGE:152==
==PAGE:153==
LIST OF TABLES
Master Thesis
List of Tables
1
Average slopes for ﬁrst and second equivalence points for amine titration
curves of unloaded solution, 0.1 loading solution, BaCl2 method, and HCl
method. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
2
Average amine concentration without CO2, determined from titrations shown
in Figure 20.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
3
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4
Overview of analysed aqueous piperazine mixtures and in which tempera-
ture interval their density have been measured. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
5
Amine concentration of pure solvent. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
6
Amine distribution for a solvent with 45 wt% amine, for pure solvent and
samples where CO2 have been removed. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
7
Total amine concentration for rich solvent samples with and without re-
moval of CO2 with HCl. All concentrations are given in wt%. . . . . . . . .
39
8
Proposed models for the excess molar volume of the MDEA-H2O interaction. 45
9
Modiﬁed equations from Table 8 for mathematical analysis. . . . . . . . . .
46
10
Molar volume sum of square error for models of the MDEA-H2O binary
pair.
The values have been multiplied by 1012.
The parameters (A-F)
values can be seen in Appendix C.1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
11
Analysed aqueous piperazine mixtures and in which temperature interval
their density has been measured. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
12
Summed square of the errors for the diﬀerent combined model types. Vpz is
the molar volume of pure piperazine, and A, B, and C are constants from
equation (47). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
13
Molar volumes of piperazine and A, B and C values, when minimising molar
volume error. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
14
Molar volumes of piperazine and A, B and C values, when minimising den-
sity error. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
Page 134 of 175
==PAGE:154==
LIST OF TABLES
Master Thesis
15
Temperature dependent piperazine/water model coeﬃcients and summed
square errors when minimising density error. The column "variables" gives
an overview of variables adjusted in each minimisation problem. . . . . . . .
60
16
Summed square errors and parameter values determined for ﬁnal piperazine-
water model.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
17
Summed square errors of ρ and VM for minimisation of both ρ and VM.
The summed square errors have been multiplied by 1012. . . . . . . . . . . .
67
18
Summed square errors of ρ and VM from minimisation of ρ. The summed
square errors have been multiplied by 1012.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
19
Fitted model parameters based on equation (60) and their summed square
of errors in density. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
72
20
Description of numbered ﬂows shown in Figure 53. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
76
21
Mass balances used for data reconciliation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
85
22
Standard deviations used for initial data reconciliation.
The 16.
input
make-up ﬂow rate have no standard deviation, as the ﬂow rate is determined
from the data reconciliation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
88
23
Sums of the object function ϕ from the data reconciliations with diﬀerent
settings and 18 steady states.
The table also includes the three biggest
contributors to the object function value.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
91
24
Results of amine concentration from titration experiments and the model.
All amine weight percentages shown are with CO2. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
98
25
Dimensions for absorber and stripper column. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 106
26
Overview of results of amine concentration experiments on lean samples. . . 141
27
Overview of results of amine concentration experiments on lean samples. . . 142
28
Experiment results for the BaCl2 to determine CO2 weight percentage.
These results are for the lean samples. All averages have been calculated
from the three experiments from each experiment number, which provided
the lowest STD. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 143
Page 135 of 175
==PAGE:155==
LIST OF TABLES
Master Thesis
29
Experiment results for the BaCl2 to determine CO2 weight percentage.
These results are for the lean samples. All averages have been calculated
from the three experiments from each experiment number, which provided
the lowest STD. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 145
30
Experiment results for standardisation of the HCl solutions. All averages
have been calculated from the three experiments from each HCl solution
standardisation, which provided the lowest STD. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 147
31
Experiment results for standardisation of the NaOH solutions. All averages
have been calculated from the three experiments from each HCl solution
standardisation, which provided the lowest STD. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 147
32
List of coeﬃcient values for the 14 diﬀerent models evaluated in Section 5.3. 148
33
MDEA-H2O literature density data sorted by study, temperature and then
weight percentage. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 148
34
PZ-H2O experimental results of density measurements sorted by tempera-
ture and then weight percentage. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 162
35
Literature data used for the ternary part of the density model development.
In the table is shown temperature, amine weight fractions, density and
which study the data is from. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 168
36
MDEA-PZ-H2O-CO2 literature data from Frailie et al., which was the only
source to be found in literature [64].
Two types of solutions have been
investigated, which are also split in the table.
Thereafter, the order is
temperature and then loading.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 172
37
CO2 and O2 content in biogas feed stream, used for calculation of biogas
composition in Section 6.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 173
Page 136 of 175
==PAGE:156==
==PAGE:157==
Master Thesis
Appendices
A
Updated SOP for Liquid Phase Analysis
Page 137 of 175
==PAGE:158==
Liquid Phase Analysis 
1. General Description 
This procedure is used to determine the content of chemically and physically bound carbon 
dioxide from a liquid sample. The liquid sample will be mixed with an excess of NaOH, 
resulting in the transformation of physically bound CO2 (aq) and Carbamate species to 
nonvolatile bicarbonate (HCO3-) and carbonate (CO32-). The carbonate will precipitate by 
the addition of excess BaCl2 forming insoluble BaCO3. After filtration the solids will be 
mixed with a well-known amount of HCl leading to the release of CO2, as described by the 
following reaction: 
BaCO3 + 2HCl →H2O + CO2(g) + Ba2+ + 2Cl2− 
This solution will be titrated back with NaOH to pH 7. The amount of NaOH needed for 
back-titration gives information about how much CO2 was dissolved in the sample. 
 
2. Used chemicals and equipment 
A) Chemicals 
0.1 M NaOH solution 
 
 
(5 ml + up to 40 ml for titration) 
0.5 M HCl Solution 
 
 
(8 ml per Analysis) 
0.5 M BaCl2 Solution 
 
 
(10 ml per Analysis) 
If manual titration is done: 
0.01% Phenol red indicator solution 
 
(3-4 drops per Analysis) 
B) Equipment 
-Pipettes (5 ml, 12 ml (2x 6ml), 20 ml, 25 ml), an adjustable 1-10 ml pipette is also 
suitable 
-100 ml beaker 
-vacuum system 
-cellulose nitrate filter with 45 µm pore size 
-heating plate 
-25 ml burette (only if manual titration is done) 
 
3. Procedure 
• Take beaker and note the weight, then add 5 ml 0.1 M NaOH and note the total 
weight, use for this purpose the form, that is attached to this file. 
• Add between 1-1.5 g of the sample, depending how high is the expected loading, use 
for higher loadings 1 g and for lower 1.5 g, note the total weight in the form. 
• Add 10 ml BaCl2 solution and note the total weight. 
• Bring the solution to boil for approx. 4 min and let it cool down to room 
temperature. 
==PAGE:159==
• Filter the solution over a 45 µm cellulose nitrate filter with vacuum suction. Wash 
the filter with demineralized water 4 times with about 25 ml shake the water in the 
beaker before, to make sure all solids are removed and washed on the filter. Use a 
squeeze bottle to make sure, that no particles stick to the side of the glassware of the 
filter setup. 
• Note weight of the beaker and add 8 ml of HCl 0.5 M and note total weight. The 
beaker from before can be used, as long as there are no visible BaCO3 particles left. 
• Put the filter with particles into the beaker, rinse the glass tube from the filtration 
setup over the beaker with DI water, if particles are bound there. 
• Bring the beaker to boil for a short period and make sure, all particles are dissolved. 
Let it cool again to about room temperature, as the pH measured by the autotitrator is 
dependent on the temperature of the solution. 
• Titrate the solution in an autotitrator with NaOH 0.1 M, set the endpoint of the 
titration to 7.5 or 8, but not to 7; the titration stops then if a pH of 7 is measured, but 
in the most cases the pH is not stable by then and drops below 7 again, but the 
titration has already stopped. Alternatively, the solution can be titrated manually by 
instead adding 3-4 drops of 0.01 % phenol red solution and titrating until the solution 
changes color from yellow to slightly pink.  
• Calculate the wt % CO2 with the following formula: 
𝑤𝑡%𝐶𝑂2 = 𝐶𝐻𝐶𝑙∗𝑉𝐻𝐶𝑙−𝐶𝑁𝑎𝑂𝐻∗𝑉𝑁𝑎𝑂𝐻
2 ∗𝑚𝑠𝑎𝑚𝑝𝑙𝑒
∗𝑀𝐶𝑂2 ∗100 
𝐶𝑂2𝑙𝑜𝑎𝑑𝑖𝑛𝑔=
𝑤𝑡%𝐶𝑂2
𝑤𝑡%𝑠𝑜𝑙𝑣𝑒𝑛𝑡
𝑀𝑠𝑜𝑙𝑣𝑒𝑛𝑡
𝑀𝐶𝑂2
 
 
Note: The amount of NaOH used in this equation above is the result from the 
titrator. For the wt% solvent it has to be accounted that CO2 is dissolved and 
therefor the solvent is diluted. A 30 wt% MEA(mixed in the beginning) with now a 
wt% of CO2 which is 5 wt% now has a MEA wt% which is lower (28,5 wt%). 
The new weight% of solvent can be calculated from the wt% of CO2 according to: 
𝑤𝑡%𝑠𝑜𝑙𝑣𝑒𝑛𝑡= 100 −𝑤𝑡%𝐶𝑂2
100
∗𝑤𝑡%𝑠𝑜𝑙𝑣𝑒𝑛𝑡(𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑟𝑡) 
𝑬𝒙𝒂𝒎𝒑𝒍𝒆:                           28,5% = 100% −5%
100%
∗30% 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:160==
4. Form 
Fill in the total weight of the beaker, do not use the tara function because then you can later 
on comprehend if you already added the sample or some chemical to your beaker or not. 
Amount 
 
 
 
 
g 
Flask tara 
 
 
 
5 ml 
NaOH 0.1 M 
 
 
 
1-1.5 g 
sample 
 
 
 
10 ml 
BaCl2 0.5 M 
 
 
 
g 
Flask tara 
 
 
 
8 ml 
HCl 0.5 M 
 
 
 
20 ml 
DI water 
 
 
 
- 
Start pH 
 
 
 
ml til pH 5.2 
NaOH 0.1 M  
 
 
 
ml til pH 7 
NaOH 0.1 M 
 
 
 
 
Comments 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:161==
Master Thesis
B
Results of experimental analysis
Table 26: Overview of results of amine concentration experiments on lean samples.
Exp. #
Date
Exp
Sample
Sample [g]
HCl
added
[mL]
wt.
fraction
Average
SD
CV (%)
3
15-Jul
1
1.0437
10.7581
0.5061
0.5053
0.00104
0.2059
2
1.0176
10.4479
0.5041
3
1.0169
10.4724
0.5056
4
18-Jul
1
1.0117
10.9438
0.5311
0.5308
0.000295
0.0555
2
1.0412
11.2507
0.5305
3
1.0171
10.994
0.5307
5
18-Jul
1
1.006
11.2516
0.5475
0.5480
0.000542
0.0989
2
1.0742
12.0375
0.5486
3
1.0103
11.306
0.5478
9
19-Jul
1
1.0108
11.107
0.5379
0.5391
0.001428
0.2650
2
1.0059
11.0683
0.5387
3
1.0072
11.1242
0.5407
10
19-Jul
1
1.0074
11.117
0.5402
0.5417
0.001239
0.2287
2
1.0076
11.167
0.5426
3
1.0144
11.2338
0.5422
13
20-Jul
1
1.0182
11.1872
0.5379
0.5374
0.000463
0.0862
2
1.0033
11.0064
0.5371
3
0.9989
10.9595
0.5371
14
20-Jul
1
1.003
11.0827
0.5409
0.5427
0.003342
0.6159
2
1.0079
11.1284
0.5405
3
0.9995
11.1578
0.5465
18
21-Jul
1
1.003
10.8884
0.5315
0.5319
0.000412
0.0775
2
1.0079
10.9555
0.5321
3
0.9992
10.8624
0.5322
22
28-Jul
1
1.0208
11.5921
0.5559
0.5566
0.000985
0.1770
2
1.0331
11.7343
0.5561
3
1.0051
11.45
0.5577
25
29-Jul
1
0.989
11.1851
0.5537
0.5536
9.87E-05
0.0178
2
1.0311
11.6571
0.5535
3
1.0329
11.6791
0.5535
34
02-Aug
1
1.0869
11.52
0.5188
0.5197
0.000736
0.1417
2
1.1198
11.9006
0.5203
3
1.1205
11.8986
0.5199
39
03-Aug
1
1.0383
10.27
0.4939
0.4913
0.002921
0.5945
Page 141 of 175
==PAGE:162==
Master Thesis
2
1.0026
9.8045
0.4881
3
1.0025
9.8786
0.4919
45
05-Aug
1
1.0207
11.79
0.5653
0.4881
0.002157
0.4419
2
1.0472
11.1936
0.5233
3
1.0471
10.7274
0.5015
4
1.0061
10.0582
0.4894
5
1.08
10.7917
0.4892
6
1.0328
10.2439
0.4856
57
15-Aug
1
1.0432
9.8155
0.4606
0.4601
0.0005
0.1061
2
1.0703
10
0.4598
3
0.9546
8.9646
0.4597
60
16-Aug
1
1.1845
10.623
0.4391
0.4425
0.0030
0.6794
2
0.9714
8.8234
0.4447
3
1.0733
9.7278
0.4437
Table 27: Overview of results of amine concentration experiments on lean samples.
Exp. #
Date
Exp
Sample
Sample [g]
HCl
added
[mL]
wt.
fraction
Average
SD
CV (%)
3
15-Jul
1
0.9918
9.7211
0.4812
0.4829
0.0014
0.2989
2
1.042
10.2680
0.4838
3
1.0065
9.9145
0.4836
4
18-Jul
1
1.0196
10.6425
0.5098
0.5074
0.0020
0.3992
2
1.0035
10.4018
0.5062
3
1.004
10.4081
0.5063
5
18-Jul
1
1.0162
10.9205
0.5248
0.5248
0.0007
0.1425
2
1.0072
10.8072
0.5240
3
0.9952
10.7089
0.5255
9
19-Jul
1
0.9887
10.3321
0.5089
0.5098
0.0012
0.2258
2
1.0227
10.7339
0.5111
3
1.0028
10.4910
0.5095
10
19-Jul
1
1.0367
10.9604
0.5148
0.5151
0.0003
0.0574
2
1.0016
10.5960
0.5152
3
0.9928
10.5083
0.5154
13
20-Jul
1
1.014
10.6562
0.5118
0.5079
0.0040
0.7941
2
1.0019
10.4549
0.5082
3
1.0249
10.6013
0.5037
14
20-Jul
1
1.1351
11.5933
0.4974
0.4989
0.0013
0.2627
2
1.0105
10.3621
0.4994
Page 142 of 175
==PAGE:163==
Master Thesis
3
1.0228
10.4982
0.4998
18
21-Jul
1
0.9945
10.1961
0.4993
0.4998
0.0016
0.3237
2
1.0372
10.6841
0.5016
3
1.0118
10.3581
0.4985
22
28-Jul
1
1.0479
11.3904
0.5293
0.5289
0.0008
0.1460
2
1.0473
11.3567
0.5281
3
1.0139
11.0237
0.5295
25
29-Jul
1
1.014
10.6846
0.5131
0.5152
0.0018
0.3525
2
1.0095
10.7035
0.5163
3
1.0021
10.6228
0.5162
34
02-Aug
1
1.0891
10.9637
0.5025
0.5022
0.0004
0.0864
2
1.117
11.2414
0.5023
3
1.1349
11.4063
0.5017
39
03-Aug
1
1.0525
9.8259
0.4660
0.4681
0.0018
0.3915
2
1.0243
9.6308
0.4693
3
1.0118
9.5068
0.4690
45
05-Aug
1
1.0654
10.2983
0.4732
0.4713
0.0018
0.3765
2
1.096
10.5426
0.4709
3
1.1294
10.8364
0.4697
57
15-Aug
1
1.0206
9.2835
0.4453
0.4424
0.0049
1.1050
2
1.1426
10.1941
0.4368
3
1.2549
11.1921
0.4452
60
16-Aug
1
1.0178
8.6473
0.4241
0.4244
0.0003
0.0785
2
1.0707
9.111
0.4247
3
1.1467
9.751
0.4245
Table 28: Experiment results for the BaCl2 to determine CO2 weight percentage. These
results are for the lean samples. All averages have been calculated from the three experi-
ments from each experiment number, which provided the lowest STD.
Exp #
Date
Sample #
Sample [g]
NaOH
[mL]
CO2 wt.%
Avg
STD
CV (%)
3
15-Jul
1
1.1188
24.87
2.3481
2.2556
0.1081
4.7941
2
1.1571
23.87
2.1367
3
1.2485
22.55
2.2821
4
18-Jul
1
1.1833
25.75
1.9344
1.9398
0.0798
4.1144
2
1.2229
24.13
2.0222
3
1.2221
24.35
1.8628
5
18-Jul
1
1.2916
25.35
1.7302
1.6784
0.0484
2.8833
2
1.2447
25.82
1.6704
Page 143 of 175
==PAGE:164==
Master Thesis
3
1.2456
26.4
1.6344
9
19-Jul
1
1.2123
24.5
2.0580
2.0362
0.0236
1.1596
2
1.1736
24.78
2.0394
3
1.2225
24.2
2.0111
10
19-Jul
1
1.0145
26.15
2.0268
1.9449
0.0726
3.7307
2
1.0178
27.08
1.8886
3
1.0193
26.8
1.9193
13
20-Jul
1
1.1946
22.29
2.4239
2.3987
0.1111
4.6309
2
1.0259
23.88
2.4951
3
1.2176
23
2.2772
14
20-Jul
1
1.2032
20.62
0.8632
0.8058
0.0499
6.1874
2
1.2758
30.15
0.9652
3
1.1619
30.84
1.0560
4
1.2321
31.9
0.7727
5
1.5312
33.26
0.4689
6
1.4892
31.17
0.7816
18
21-Jul
1
1.2626
27.54
1.4368
1.4248
0.0167
1.1726
2
1.2118
27.98
1.4057
3
1.2747
28.4
1.4320
22
28-Jul
1
1.2168
26.88
1.6068
1.6415
0.0347
2.1129
2
1.2609
26.02
1.6762
3
1.2263
26.76
1.6415
25
29-Jul
1
1.0199
32.7
0.6526
0.6670
0.0348
5.2116
2
1.0095
32.5
0.6417
3
1.019
32.05
0.7066
34
02-Aug
1
1.2855
29.42
1.1287
1.1323
0.0150
1.3270
2
1.2154
29.62
1.1193
3
1.2058
30.66
0.9577
5
1.4997
29.86
1.0453
4
1.2077
33.22
0.4694
6
1.4323
29.4
1.1487
38
03-Aug
1
1.2425
24.2
1.9567
1.8763
0.1069
5.6985
2
1.2242
25.98
1.7550
3
1.238
24.6
1.9173
39
03-Aug
1
1.0273
26.94
1.8663
1.8490
0.0772
4.1772
2
1.0253
26.76
1.7646
3
1.2885
26.61
1.5737
4
1.2886
24.57
1.9162
42
04-Aug
1
1.2128
22.04
2.4888
2.5478
0.0568
2.2277
2
1.1979
21.61
2.6021
Page 144 of 175
==PAGE:165==
Master Thesis
3
1.2399
20.9
2.5524
43
04-Aug
1
1.2151
20.46
2.7389
2.7081
0.0694
2.5610
2
1.1797
20.64
2.7568
3
1.223
21.2
2.6287
45
05-Aug
1
1.2054
18.22
3.1509
3.1526
0.0528
1.6760
2
1.2279
18.15
3.1006
3
1.2041
17.84
3.2063
57
15-Aug
1
1.1954
28.22
1.4291
1.9349
0.0956
4.9431
2
1.2037
24.68
1.9998
3
1.2311
22.6
2.3487
4
1.2117
25.68
1.8251
5
1.2754
29.35
1.9799
60
16-Aug
1
1.2231
23.51
2.2137
1.9323
0.0781
4.0402
2
1.2016
25.38
1.8822
3
1.2067
25.44
1.8923
4
1.2172
27.1
1.6836
5
1.5289
22.42
2.0222
Table 29: Experiment results for the BaCl2 to determine CO2 weight percentage. These
results are for the lean samples. All averages have been calculated from the three experi-
ments from each experiment number, which provided the lowest STD.
Exp #
Date
Sample #
Sample [g]
NaOH
added [mL]
CO2 wt.%
Avg
STD
CV (%)
3
15-Jul
1
1.1382
6.3
5.510
5.7150
0.1861
3.2558
2
0.9822
8.68
5.873
3
0.9964
9.36
5.762
4
18-Jul
1
0.9744
9.11
5.851
5.7392
0.1193
2.0786
2
1.0291
8.85
5.613
3
1.0113
8.72
5.753
5
18-Jul
1
0.9777
12.3
5.222
5.2828
0.0745
1.4105
2
1.051
9.3
5.366
3
0.9808
11.75
5.261
9
19-Jul
1
1.0214
10.6
5.305
5.1940
0.1071
2.0619
2
1.028
11.4
5.091
3
1.0477
10.36
5.186
10
19-Jul
1
1.0219
11.08
5.131
5.2755
0.1293
2.4501
2
1.0514
9.33
5.379
3
1.0216
11.7
5.316
13
20-Jul
1
1.0231
10.78
5.304
5.3369
0.0552
1.0340
Page 145 of 175
==PAGE:166==
Master Thesis
2
1.0224
10.55
5.306
3
1.0056
10.25
5.401
14
20-Jul
1
1.0255
10.94
5.202
5.2034
0.0771
1.4812
2
0.9968
11.88
5.127
3
1.0021
11.36
5.281
18
21-Jul
1
1.014
9.25
5.663
5.4977
0.1430
2.6011
2
1.0077
10.81
5.417
3
0.95
11.98
5.413
22
28-Jul
1
0.9884
10.11
5.606
5.5427
0.1051
1.8956
2
1.0443
9.72
5.421
3
1.0002
9.62
5.600
25
29-Jul
1
1.0201
10.33
5.380
5.4370
0.0493
0.9071
2
1.001
10.15
5.470
3
1.0075
10.3
5.461
34
02-Aug
1
1.0488
16
4.348
4.3972
0.1560
3.5473
2
1.1936
16.98
4.272
3
1.0038
16.32
4.572
38
03-Aug
1
1.0512
1.74
6.932
5.3630
0.0469
0.8748
2
1.0189
10.52
5.325
3
1.0096
10.7
5.349
4
1.0293
14.55
5.415
39
03-Aug
1
1.0196
11.04
5.278
5.3175
0.0858
1.6132
2
1.0675
8.81
5.416
3
1.0332
11.26
5.258
42
04-Aug
1
1.0751
7.26
5.725
5.6807
0.0635
1.1172
2
1.0132
9.58
5.608
3
1.0066
13.96
4.666
4
1.0367
13.15
5.709
43
04- Aug
1
1.0021
9.83
5.682
5.5175
0.1746
3.1638
2
1.0035
9.99
5.536
3
1.1039
8.5
5.335
45
05-Aug
1
0.9916
9.87
5.969
6.0690
0.1358
2.2382
2
0.9945
7.89
6.224
3
1.0329
7.19
6.015
57
15-Aug
1
1.0643
15.16
4.214
5.2262
0.2289
4.3793
2
0.9971
11.6
5.285
3
0.9866
16.68
4.152
4
0.9962
18.08
4.974
5
1.0282
14.9
5.420
60
16-Aug
1
1.0341
10.41
5.268
5.3190
0.0786
1.4782
Page 146 of 175
==PAGE:167==
Master Thesis
2
1.0493
10
5.279
3
0.995
11.98
5.410
Table 30: Experiment results for standardisation of the HCl solutions. All averages have
been calculated from the three experiments from each HCl solution standardisation, which
provided the lowest STD.
Description
Sample #
Na2CO3
solution [mL]
HCl [mL]
cHCl [M]
Avg [M]
STD
CV (%)
1. HCl solution
1
19.40
10.00
0.5343
0.5034
0.0017
0.3472
2
18.25
10.00
0.5026
3
18.24
10.00
0.5023
4
18.35
10.00
0.5054
2. HCl solution
1
18.24
10.00
0.5023
0.5020
0.0013
0.2497
2
20.00
11.00
0.5006
3
20.00
10.95
0.5031
3. HCl solution
1
20.00
10.83
0.5084
0.5118
0.0030
0.5924
2
20.00
10.71
0.5143
3
20.00
10.74
0.5128
HCl for piperazine titrations
1
20.00
10.81
0.5097
0.5122
0.0031
0.6065
2
20.00
10.77
0.5113
3
20.00
10.68
0.5157
5. HCl solution
1
20.00
10.87
0.5066
0.5063
0.0004
0.0888
2
20.00
10.89
0.5058
3
20.00
10.87
0.5065
6. HCl solution
1
20.00
11.53
0.4775
0.4928
0.0135
2.7481
2
20.00
11.07
0.4976
3
20.00
10.94
0.5033
Table 31: Experiment results for standardisation of the NaOH solutions. All averages
have been calculated from the three experiments from each HCl solution standardisation,
which provided the lowest STD.
Description
Sample #
Sample HCl [g]
NaOH [mL]
cNaOH [M]
Avg [M]
STD
CV (%)
NaOH 1
1
2.9976
17.12
0.0873
0.0982
0.0007
0.6772
2
2.26
11.56
0.0974
3
2.1367
10.79
0.0987
4
2.1307
10.8
0.0983
5
2.1459
10.98
0.0974
NaOH 2
1
2.051
10.51
0.0970
0.0969
0.0003
0.2685
Page 147 of 175
==PAGE:168==
Master Thesis
2
2.2308
11.48
0.0966
3
2.2556
11.55
0.0971
C
Data and ﬁgures used for the density model development
C.1
Parameters from test of the 14 diﬀerent MDEA-H2O models.
Table 32: List of coeﬃcient values for the 14 diﬀerent models evaluated in Section 5.3.
Model #
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
1
-4.75E-06
-6.89E-06
2
-6.89E-06
5.09E-06
3
-8.45E-06
6.66E-06
1.56E-06
4
-1.80E-06
-5.09E-06
5
-1.38E-06
-7.17E-06
6
-5.09E-06
-1.80E-06
7
-4.77E-06
8
-4.34E-06
2.54E-06
9
-2.39E-06
-2.39E-06
10
-4.34E-06
2.54E-06
11
-4.50E-06
4.60E-07
4.68E-06
12
-1.34E-05
-1.09E-06
13
-6.87E-06
5.07E-06
-1.17E-08
14
-8.75E-06
5.09E-06
-3.23E-06
-2.12E-07
C.2
MDEA literature data
Table 33: MDEA-H2O literature density data sorted by study, temperature and then
weight percentage.
Temp [K]
w/w
Density [kg/m3]
Source
293.15
0.1000
1006.9
[59]
293.15
0.2000
1016.9
[59]
293.15
0.3000
1027.2
[59]
Page 148 of 175
==PAGE:169==
C.2
MDEA literature data
Master Thesis
293.15
0.4000
1037.1
[59]
293.15
0.5000
1045.4
[59]
298.15
0.1000
1005.4
[59]
298.15
0.2000
1015.2
[59]
298.15
0.3000
1025
[59]
298.15
0.4000
1034.6
[59]
298.15
0.5000
1042.7
[59]
303.15
0.1000
1004
[59]
303.15
0.2000
1013.2
[59]
303.15
0.3000
1022.9
[59]
303.15
0.4000
1032.2
[59]
303.15
0.5000
1039.6
[59]
308.15
0.1000
1002.5
[59]
308.15
0.2000
1011.3
[59]
308.15
0.3000
1020.5
[59]
308.15
0.4000
1029.2
[59]
308.15
0.5000
1036.4
[59]
313.15
0.1000
1000.7
[59]
313.15
0.2000
1009.1
[59]
313.15
0.3000
1018
[59]
313.15
0.4000
1026.6
[59]
313.15
0.5000
1033.1
[59]
318.15
0.1000
998.5
[59]
318.15
0.5000
1030.2
[59]
323.15
0.1000
996
[59]
323.15
0.2000
1004.7
[59]
Page 149 of 175
==PAGE:170==
C.2
MDEA literature data
Master Thesis
323.15
0.3000
1013
[59]
323.15
0.4000
1020.4
[59]
323.15
0.5000
1026.9
[59]
328.15
0.1000
993.7
[59]
328.15
0.5000
1023.4
[59]
338.15
0.1000
991.2
[59]
338.15
0.2000
999.3
[59]
338.15
0.3000
1006.9
[59]
338.15
0.5000
1019.9
[59]
293.15
0.1181
1008.67
[24]
298.15
0.1183
1007.14
[24]
303.15
0.1185
1005.56
[24]
323.15
0.1195
996.91
[24]
313.15
0.1190
1001.56
[24]
303.15
0.1000
1003.8
[55]
303.15
0.3000
1024.5
[55]
313.15
0.1000
999.5
[55]
313.15
0.3000
1019.5
[55]
323.15
0.1000
995.2
[55]
323.15
0.3000
1015.2
[55]
333.15
0.1000
990.5
[55]
333.15
0.2000
998.6
[55]
333.15
0.3000
1008.2
[55]
303.15
0.2000
1012.4
[55]
313.15
0.2000
1008.4
[55]
323.15
0.2000
1003.5
[55]
Page 150 of 175
==PAGE:171==
C.2
MDEA literature data
Master Thesis
293.15
0.0000
998.207
[61]
298.15
0.0000
997.048
[61]
303.15
0.0000
995.65
[61]
308.15
0.0000
994.03
[61]
313.15
0.0000
992.22
[61]
318.15
0.0000
990.21
[61]
323.15
0.0000
988.04
[61]
328.15
0.0000
985.69
[61]
333.15
0.0000
983.2
[61]
338.15
0.0000
980.55
[61]
343.15
0.0000
977.76
[61]
293.15
0.3000
1026.9
[22]
293.15
0.4000
1036.8
[22]
293.15
0.5000
1045.8
[22]
293.15
0.6000
1052.5
[22]
293.15
0.7000
1056.5
[22]
293.15
0.8000
1056
[22]
293.15
0.9000
1050.7
[22]
293.15
0.9400
1046.8
[22]
293.15
0.9700
1043.7
[22]
298.15
0.3000
1024.7
[22]
298.15
0.4000
1034.2
[22]
298.15
0.5000
1042.6
[22]
298.15
0.6000
1049.2
[22]
298.15
0.7000
1052.9
[22]
298.15
0.8000
1052.4
[22]
Page 151 of 175
==PAGE:172==
C.2
MDEA literature data
Master Thesis
298.15
0.9000
1047
[22]
298.15
0.9400
1043.2
[22]
298.15
0.9700
1040.1
[22]
303.15
0.3000
1022.4
[22]
303.15
0.4000
1031.5
[22]
303.15
0.5000
1039.5
[22]
303.15
0.6000
1045.7
[22]
303.15
0.7000
1049.3
[22]
303.15
0.8000
1048.6
[22]
303.15
0.9000
1043.3
[22]
303.15
0.9400
1039.4
[22]
303.15
0.9700
1036.3
[22]
308.15
0.3000
1019.9
[22]
308.15
0.4000
1028.6
[22]
308.15
0.5000
1036.3
[22]
308.15
0.6000
1042.2
[22]
308.15
0.7000
1045.6
[22]
308.15
0.8000
1044.9
[22]
308.15
0.9000
1039.5
[22]
308.15
0.9400
1035.7
[22]
308.15
0.9700
1032.6
[22]
313.15
0.3000
1017.3
[22]
313.15
0.4000
1025.6
[22]
313.15
0.5000
1033
[22]
313.15
0.6000
1038.6
[22]
313.15
0.7000
1041.8
[22]
Page 152 of 175
==PAGE:173==
C.2
MDEA literature data
Master Thesis
313.15
0.8000
1041
[22]
313.15
0.9000
1035.7
[22]
313.15
0.9400
1031.8
[22]
313.15
0.9700
1028.8
[22]
318.15
0.3000
1014.5
[22]
318.15
0.4000
1022.5
[22]
318.15
0.5000
1029.6
[22]
318.15
0.6000
1038.6
[22]
318.15
0.7000
1041.8
[22]
318.15
0.8000
1041
[22]
318.15
0.9000
1035.7
[22]
318.15
0.9400
1031.8
[22]
318.15
0.9700
1028.8
[22]
323.15
0.3000
1011.7
[22]
323.15
0.4000
1019.4
[22]
323.15
0.5000
1026.1
[22]
323.15
0.6000
1031.2
[22]
323.15
0.7000
1034.1
[22]
323.15
0.8000
1033.2
[22]
323.15
0.9000
1027.9
[22]
323.15
0.9400
1024.1
[22]
323.15
0.9700
1021.1
[22]
328.15
0.3000
1008.7
[22]
328.15
0.4000
1016.1
[22]
328.15
0.5000
1022.5
[22]
328.15
0.6000
1027.4
[22]
Page 153 of 175
==PAGE:174==
C.2
MDEA literature data
Master Thesis
328.15
0.7000
1030.2
[22]
328.15
0.8000
1029.2
[22]
328.15
0.9000
1024
[22]
328.15
0.9400
1020.2
[22]
328.15
0.9700
1017.2
[22]
328.15
1.0000
1014.1
[22]
333.15
0.3000
1005.5
[22]
333.15
0.4000
1012.7
[22]
333.15
0.5000
1018.9
[22]
333.15
0.6000
1023.6
[22]
333.15
0.7000
1026.2
[22]
333.15
0.8000
1025.1
[22]
333.15
0.9000
1020
[22]
333.15
0.9400
1016.3
[22]
333.15
0.9700
1013.3
[22]
338.15
0.3000
1002.2
[22]
338.15
0.4000
1009.2
[22]
338.15
0.5000
1015.1
[22]
338.15
0.6000
1019.6
[22]
338.15
0.7000
1022.1
[22]
338.15
0.8000
1021
[22]
338.15
0.9000
1015.8
[22]
338.15
0.9400
1012.3
[22]
338.15
0.9700
1009.4
[22]
343.15
0.3000
998.6
[22]
343.15
0.4000
1005.4
[22]
Page 154 of 175
==PAGE:175==
C.2
MDEA literature data
Master Thesis
343.15
0.5000
1011.3
[22]
343.15
0.6000
1015.6
[22]
343.15
0.7000
1018
[22]
343.15
0.8000
1016.9
[22]
343.15
0.9000
1011.9
[22]
343.15
0.9400
1008.3
[22]
343.15
0.9700
1005.5
[22]
293.15
1.0000
1040.6
[60]
298.15
1.0000
1036.8
[60]
303.15
1.0000
1033.2
[60]
308.15
1.0000
1029.4
[60]
313.15
1.0000
1025.6
[60]
318.15
1.0000
1021.8
[60]
323.15
1.0000
1018
[60]
333.15
1.0000
1010.3
[60]
338.15
1.0000
1006.4
[60]
343.15
1.0000
1002.4
[60]
298.15
0.0790
1004.057
[23]
298.15
0.1253
1008.406
[23]
298.15
0.2574
1020.08
[23]
298.15
0.3132
1026.392
[23]
298.15
0.3648
1030.846
[23]
298.15
0.5040
1042.798
[23]
298.15
0.5494
1045.445
[23]
298.15
0.6148
1049.907
[23]
298.15
0.6770
1050.842
[23]
Page 155 of 175
==PAGE:176==
C.2
MDEA literature data
Master Thesis
298.15
0.7124
1052.408
[23]
298.15
0.7924
1052.539
[23]
298.15
0.8331
1050.974
[23]
298.15
0.8954
1046.854
[23]
303.15
0.0790
1002.479
[23]
303.15
0.1253
1006.702
[23]
303.15
0.2574
1017.933
[23]
303.15
0.3132
1023.98
[23]
303.15
0.3648
1028.249
[23]
303.15
0.5040
1039.647
[23]
303.15
0.5494
1042.174
[23]
303.15
0.6148
1046.417
[23]
303.15
0.6770
1048.106
[23]
303.15
0.7124
1048.8
[23]
303.15
0.7924
1048.778
[23]
303.15
0.8331
1047.201
[23]
303.15
0.8954
1043.076
[23]
308.15
0.0790
1000.698
[23]
308.15
0.1253
1004.804
[23]
308.15
0.2574
1015.632
[23]
308.15
0.3132
1021.433
[23]
308.15
0.3648
1025.53
[23]
308.15
0.5040
1036.417
[23]
308.15
0.5494
1038.83
[23]
308.15
0.6148
1042.857
[23]
308.15
0.6770
1044.446
[23]
Page 156 of 175
==PAGE:177==
C.2
MDEA literature data
Master Thesis
308.15
0.7124
1045.139
[23]
308.15
0.7924
1044.967
[23]
308.15
0.8331
1043.379
[23]
308.15
0.8954
1039.276
[23]
313.15
0.0790
998.731
[23]
313.15
0.1253
1002.724
[23]
313.15
0.2574
1013.185
[23]
313.15
0.3132
1018.768
[23]
313.15
0.3648
1022.694
[23]
313.15
0.5040
1033.102
[23]
313.15
0.5494
1035.413
[23]
313.15
0.6148
1039.229
[23]
313.15
0.6770
1040.729
[23]
313.15
0.7124
1041.409
[23]
313.15
0.7924
1041.104
[23]
313.15
0.8331
1039.509
[23]
313.15
0.8954
1035.454
[23]
318.15
0.0790
996.584
[23]
318.15
0.1253
1000.48
[23]
318.15
0.2574
1010.589
[23]
318.15
0.3132
1015.978
[23]
318.15
0.3648
1019.743
[23]
318.15
0.5040
1029.709
[23]
318.15
0.5494
1031.918
[23]
318.15
0.6148
1035.539
[23]
318.15
0.6770
1036.948
[23]
Page 157 of 175
==PAGE:178==
C.2
MDEA literature data
Master Thesis
318.15
0.7124
1037.63
[23]
318.15
0.7924
1037.198
[23]
318.15
0.8331
1035.603
[23]
318.15
0.8954
1031.608
[23]
323.15
0.0790
994.273
[23]
323.15
0.1253
998.073
[23]
323.15
0.2574
1007.874
[23]
323.15
0.3132
1013.062
[23]
323.15
0.3648
1016.683
[23]
323.15
0.5040
1026.226
[23]
323.15
0.5494
1028.343
[23]
323.15
0.6148
1031.783
[23]
323.15
0.6770
1033.108
[23]
323.15
0.7124
1033.742
[23]
323.15
0.7924
1033.245
[23]
323.15
0.8331
1031.659
[23]
323.15
0.8954
1027.753
[23]
328.15
0.0790
991.808
[23]
328.15
0.1253
995.518
[23]
328.15
0.2574
1005.02
[23]
328.15
0.3132
1010.027
[23]
328.15
0.3648
1013.511
[23]
328.15
0.5040
1022.667
[23]
328.15
0.5494
1024.692
[23]
328.15
0.6148
1027.966
[23]
328.15
0.6770
1029.246
[23]
Page 158 of 175
==PAGE:179==
C.2
MDEA literature data
Master Thesis
328.15
0.7124
1029.769
[23]
328.15
0.7924
1029.243
[23]
328.15
0.8331
1027.676
[23]
328.15
0.8954
1023.83
[23]
333.15
0.0790
989.191
[23]
333.15
0.1253
992.82
[23]
333.15
0.2574
1002.039
[23]
333.15
0.3132
1006.729
[23]
333.15
0.3648
1010.236
[23]
333.15
0.5040
1019.024
[23]
333.15
0.5494
1020.961
[23]
333.15
0.6148
1024.082
[23]
333.15
0.6770
1025.291
[23]
333.15
0.7124
1025.947
[23]
333.15
0.7924
1025.197
[23]
333.15
0.8331
1023.664
[23]
333.15
0.8954
1019.875
[23]
338.15
0.0790
986.433
[23]
338.15
0.1253
989.984
[23]
338.15
0.2574
998.939
[23]
338.15
0.3132
1003.614
[23]
338.15
0.3648
1006.853
[23]
338.15
0.5040
1015.295
[23]
338.15
0.5494
1017.154
[23]
338.15
0.6148
1020.126
[23]
338.15
0.6770
1021.295
[23]
Page 159 of 175
==PAGE:180==
C.2
MDEA literature data
Master Thesis
338.15
0.7124
1021.898
[23]
338.15
0.7924
1021.103
[23]
338.15
0.8331
1019.603
[23]
338.15
0.8954
1015.585
[23]
293.15
0.2362
1020.27
[57]
293.15
0.4192
1038.44
[57]
293.15
0.5005
1045.42
[57]
293.15
0.6156
1052.98
[57]
293.15
0.7566
1056.28
[57]
293.15
0.7994
1056.34
[57]
293.15
0.8730
1052.15
[57]
293.15
0.9080
1049.52
[57]
293.15
0.9402
1046.6
[57]
293.15
0.9648
1044.13
[57]
293.15
0.9837
1042.3
[57]
293.15
1.0000
1040.12
[57]
313.15
0.2362
1011.67
[57]
313.15
0.4192
1026.96
[57]
313.15
0.5005
1032.8
[57]
313.15
0.6156
1038.94
[57]
313.15
0.7566
1041.26
[57]
313.15
0.7994
1041.37
[57]
313.15
0.8730
1036.94
[57]
313.15
0.9080
1034.31
[57]
313.15
0.9402
1031.32
[57]
313.15
0.9648
1028.95
[57]
Page 160 of 175
==PAGE:181==
C.2
MDEA literature data
Master Thesis
313.15
0.9837
1026.98
[57]
313.15
1.0000
1024.74
[57]
323.15
0.2362
1006.54
[57]
323.15
0.4192
1020.69
[57]
323.15
0.5005
1025.94
[57]
323.15
0.6156
1031.52
[57]
323.15
0.7566
1033.42
[57]
323.15
0.7994
1033.58
[57]
323.15
0.8730
1029.14
[57]
323.15
0.9080
1026.55
[57]
323.15
0.9402
1023.7
[57]
323.15
0.9648
1021.27
[57]
323.15
0.9837
1019.36
[57]
323.15
1.0000
1017.27
[57]
333.15
0.2362
1000.78
[57]
333.15
0.4192
1013.91
[57]
333.15
0.5005
1018.83
[57]
333.15
0.6156
1023.81
[57]
333.15
0.7566
1025.4
[57]
333.15
0.7994
1025.56
[57]
333.15
0.8730
1021.16
[57]
333.15
0.9080
1018.52
[57]
333.15
0.9402
1015.82
[57]
333.15
0.9648
1013.4
[57]
333.15
0.9837
1011.54
[57]
333.15
1.0000
1009.56
[57]
Page 161 of 175
==PAGE:182==
C.3
Piperazine data and ﬁgures
Master Thesis
313.15
0.3000
1017.3
[58]
323.15
0.3000
1011.5
[58]
333.15
0.3000
1011.5
[58]
313.15
0.1000
1000.4
[56]
313.15
0.2000
1008.6
[56]
313.15
0.3000
1019.3
[56]
333.15
0.1000
991.2
[56]
333.15
0.2000
999.5
[56]
333.15
0.3000
1007.1
[56]
C.3
Piperazine data and ﬁgures
Table 34: PZ-H2O experimental results of density measurements sorted by temperature
and then weight percentage.
Temp [K]
w/w
Density [kg/m3]
293.15
0.0000
998.29
293.15
0.0171
998.66
293.15
0.0345
999.49
293.15
0.0800
1001.85
293.15
0.1460
1005.24
298.15
0.0000
997.13
298.15
0.0171
997.53
298.15
0.0345
998.27
298.15
0.0800
1000.53
298.15
0.1304
1003.72
303.15
0.0000
995.71
303.15
0.0171
996.11
Page 162 of 175
==PAGE:183==
C.3
Piperazine data and ﬁgures
Master Thesis
303.15
0.0345
996.82
303.15
0.0800
998.99
303.15
0.1304
1002.03
313.15
0.0000
992.25
313.15
0.0171
992.64
313.15
0.0345
993.33
313.15
0.0800
995.34
313.15
0.1304
998.15
313.15
0.2000
1002.95
323.15
0.0000
988.02
323.15
0.0171
988.45
323.15
0.0345
989.09
323.15
0.0800
990.95
323.15
0.1304
993.52
323.15
0.2000
997.87
323.15
0.3000
1005.48
323.15
0.3998
1013.79
323.15
0.5000
1019.87
323.15
0.5500
1021.87
323.15
0.6000
1020.41
323.15
0.6501
1017.56
333.15
0.0000
983.13
333.15
0.0171
983.57
333.15
0.0345
984.20
333.15
0.0800
985.91
333.15
0.1304
988.30
Page 163 of 175
==PAGE:184==
C.3
Piperazine data and ﬁgures
Master Thesis
333.15
0.2000
992.20
333.15
0.3000
998.98
333.15
0.3998
1006.21
333.15
0.5000
1011.33
333.15
0.5500
1012.28
333.15
0.6000
1011.25
333.15
0.6501
1008.38
343.15
0.0000
977.63
343.15
0.0171
978.19
343.15
0.0345
978.75
343.15
0.0800
980.33
343.15
0.1304
982.51
343.15
0.2000
986.08
343.15
0.3000
992.10
343.15
0.3998
998.33
343.15
0.5000
1002.56
343.15
0.5500
1003.26
343.15
0.6000
1001.87
343.15
0.6501
998.68
Page 164 of 175
==PAGE:185==
C.3
Piperazine data and ﬁgures
Master Thesis
0
0.005
0.01
0.015
0.02
0.025
0.03
Molar fraction
999
1000
1001
1002
1003
1004
1005
1006
1007
Density [kg/m3]
m
vi2
vi2,vi3
vi2, A1
vi2,vi3,A1
vi2,vi3,A1,B1
B1
B1,C1
(a)
0
0.005
0.01
0.015
0.02
0.025
0.03
Molar fraction
999
1000
1001
1002
1003
1004
1005
1006
1007
Density [kg/m3]
m
vi2
vi2,vi3
vi2, A1
vi2,vi3,A1
vi2,vi3,A1,B1
B1
B1,C1
(b)
Figure 75: (a): Models of density of the piperazine/water pair as a function of molar
fraction when minimising molar volume at 20 °C. (b): Models of density of the piper-
azine/water pair as a function of molar fraction when minimising density at 20°C.
0
0.005
0.01
0.015
0.02
0.025
0.03
Molar fraction
998
999
1000
1001
1002
1003
1004
1005
Density [kg/m3]
m
vi2
vi2,vi3
vi2, A1
vi2,vi3,A1
vi2,vi3,A1,B1
B1
B1,C1
(a)
0
0.005
0.01
0.015
0.02
0.025
0.03
Molar fraction
998
999
1000
1001
1002
1003
1004
1005
Density [kg/m3]
m
vi2
vi2,vi3
vi2, A1
vi2,vi3,A1
vi2,vi3,A1,B1
B1
B1,C1
(b)
Figure 76: (a): Models of density of the piperazine/water pair as a function of molar
fraction when minimising molar volume at 25 °C. (b): Models of density of the piper-
azine/water pair as a function of molar fraction when minimising density at 25°C.
Page 165 of 175
==PAGE:186==
C.3
Piperazine data and ﬁgures
Master Thesis
0
0.005
0.01
0.015
0.02
0.025
0.03
Molar fraction
996
997
998
999
1000
1001
1002
1003
1004
Density [kg/m3]
m
vi2
vi2,vi3
vi2, A1
vi2,vi3,A1
vi2,vi3,A1,B1
B1
B1,C1
(a)
0
0.005
0.01
0.015
0.02
0.025
0.03
Molar fraction
996
997
998
999
1000
1001
1002
1003
1004
Density [kg/m3]
m
vi2
vi2,vi3
vi2, A1
vi2,vi3,A1
vi2,vi3,A1,B1
B1
B1,C1
(b)
Figure 77: (a): Models of density of the piperazine/water pair as a function of molar
fraction when minimising molar volume at 30 °C. (b): Models of density of the piper-
azine/water pair as a function of molar fraction when minimising density at 30°C.
0
0.005
0.01
0.015
0.02
0.025
0.03
0.035
0.04
0.045
Molar fraction
994
996
998
1000
1002
1004
Density [kg/m3]
m
vi2
vi2,vi3
vi2, A1
vi2,vi3,A1
vi2,vi3,A1,B1
B1
B1,C1
(a)
0
0.005
0.01
0.015
0.02
0.025
0.03
0.035
0.04
0.045
Molar fraction
994
996
998
1000
1002
1004
Density [kg/m3]
m
vi2
vi2,vi3
vi2, A1
vi2,vi3,A1
vi2,vi3,A1,B1
B1
B1,C1
(b)
Figure 78: (a): Models of density of the piperazine/water pair as a function of molar
fraction when minimising molar volume at 40 °C. (b): Models of density of the piper-
azine/water pair as a function of molar fraction when minimising density at 40°C.
Page 166 of 175
==PAGE:187==
C.4
MDEA/PZ/H2O literature data
Master Thesis
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
Molar fraction
990
995
1000
1005
1010
1015
1020
Density [kg/m3]
m
vi2
vi2,vi3
vi2, A1
vi2,vi3,A1
vi2,vi3,A1,B1
B1
B1,C1
(a)
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
Molar fraction
990
995
1000
1005
1010
1015
1020
Density [kg/m3]
m
vi2
vi2,vi3
vi2, A1
vi2,vi3,A1
vi2,vi3,A1,B1
B1
B1,C1
(b)
Figure 79: (a): Models of density of the piperazine/water pair as a function of molar
fraction when minimising molar volume at 50 °C. (b): Models of density of the piper-
azine/water pair as a function of molar fraction when minimising density at 50°C.
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
Molar fraction
980
985
990
995
1000
1005
Density [kg/m3]
m
vi2
vi2,vi3
vi2, A1
vi2,vi3,A1
vi2,vi3,A1,B1
B1
B1,C1
(a)
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
Molar fraction
980
985
990
995
1000
1005
Density [kg/m3]
m
vi2
vi2,vi3
vi2, A1
vi2,vi3,A1
vi2,vi3,A1,B1
B1
B1,C1
(b)
Figure 80: (a): Models of density of the piperazine/water pair as a function of molar
fraction when minimising molar volume at 70 °C. (b): Models of density of the piper-
azine/water pair as a function of molar fraction when minimising density at 70°C.
C.4
MDEA/PZ/H2O literature data
Page 167 of 175
==PAGE:188==
C.4
MDEA/PZ/H2O literature data
Master Thesis
Table 35: Literature data used for the ternary part of the density model development.
In the table is shown temperature, amine weight fractions, density and which study the
data is from.
Temp [K]
wt
fraction MDEA
wt
fraction PZ
Density [kg/m3]
Source
298.15
0.28
0.02
1025.4
[20]
298.15
0.25
0.05
1024.5
[20]
298.15
0.22
0.08
1023.2
[20]
303.15
0.28
0.02
1023.1
[20]
303.15
0.25
0.05
1022.3
[20]
303.15
0.22
0.08
1021.5
[20]
308.15
0.28
0.02
1020.8
[20]
308.15
0.25
0.05
1019.9
[20]
308.15
0.22
0.08
1019.3
[20]
313.15
0.28
0.02
1018.2
[20]
313.15
0.25
0.05
1017.15
[20]
313.15
0.22
0.08
1016.9
[20]
293.15
0.12
0.00
1008.67
[24]
293.15
0.12
0.02
1010.12
[24]
293.15
0.12
0.04
1011.41
[24]
293.15
0.12
0.06
1013.04
[24]
293.15
0.12
0.08
1014.45
[24]
293.15
0.23
0.00
1020.1
[24]
293.15
0.23
0.02
1021.69
[24]
293.15
0.23
0.04
1023.48
[24]
293.15
0.23
0.06
1024.98
[24]
293.15
0.23
0.08
1026.53
[24]
293.15
0.35
0.00
1032.14
[24]
293.15
0.35
0.02
1032.91
[24]
293.15
0.35
0.04
1034.37
[24]
293.15
0.35
0.06
1035.94
[24]
293.15
0.34
0.08
1037.24
[24]
293.15
0.46
0.00
1042.47
[24]
Page 168 of 175
==PAGE:189==
C.4
MDEA/PZ/H2O literature data
Master Thesis
293.15
0.46
0.02
1043.56
[24]
293.15
0.46
0.04
1044.73
[24]
293.15
0.46
0.06
1046.36
[24]
293.15
0.45
0.08
1047.85
[24]
298.15
0.12
0.00
1007.14
[24]
298.15
0.12
0.02
1008.48
[24]
298.15
0.12
0.04
1009.76
[24]
298.15
0.12
0.06
1011.29
[24]
298.15
0.12
0.09
1012.61
[24]
298.15
0.23
0.00
1018.87
[24]
298.15
0.23
0.02
1019.68
[24]
298.15
0.23
0.04
1021.31
[24]
298.15
0.23
0.06
1022.67
[24]
298.15
0.23
0.08
1024.2
[24]
298.15
0.35
0.00
1028.97
[24]
298.15
0.35
0.02
1030.42
[24]
298.15
0.35
0.04
1031.82
[24]
298.15
0.34
0.06
1037.8
[24]
298.15
0.35
0.08
1034.86
[24]
298.15
0.46
0.00
1039.68
[24]
298.15
0.46
0.02
1040.58
[24]
298.15
0.46
0.04
1041.71
[24]
298.15
0.46
0.06
1043.27
[24]
298.15
0.46
0.08
1044.61
[24]
303.15
0.12
0.00
1005.56
[24]
303.15
0.12
0.02
1006.8
[24]
303.15
0.12
0.04
1007.88
[24]
303.15
0.12
0.06
1009.42
[24]
303.15
0.12
0.09
1010.68
[24]
303.15
0.23
0.00
1016.09
[24]
303.15
0.23
0.02
1017.47
[24]
303.15
0.23
0.04
1019.05
[24]
Page 169 of 175
==PAGE:190==
C.4
MDEA/PZ/H2O literature data
Master Thesis
303.15
0.23
0.06
1020.36
[24]
303.15
0.23
0.08
1021.83
[24]
303.15
0.35
0.00
1026.49
[24]
303.15
0.35
0.02
1027.76
[24]
303.15
0.35
0.04
1029.26
[24]
303.15
0.35
0.06
1030.75
[24]
303.15
0.35
0.08
1031.96
[24]
303.15
0.46
0.00
1036.64
[24]
303.15
0.46
0.02
1038.36
[24]
303.15
0.46
0.04
1039.27
[24]
303.15
0.46
0.06
1040.64
[24]
303.15
0.46
0.08
1041.9
[24]
313.15
0.12
0.00
1001.56
[24]
313.15
0.12
0.02
1003.41
[24]
313.15
0.12
0.04
1003.81
[24]
313.15
0.12
0.06
1005.05
[24]
313.15
0.12
0.09
1006.22
[24]
313.15
0.24
0.00
1011.33
[24]
313.15
0.24
0.02
1012.71
[24]
313.15
0.24
0.04
1014.11
[24]
313.15
0.23
0.06
1015.21
[24]
313.15
0.23
0.08
1016.31
[24]
313.15
0.35
0.00
1020.97
[24]
313.15
0.35
0.02
1022.22
[24]
313.15
0.35
0.04
1023.46
[24]
313.15
0.35
0.06
1025.05
[24]
313.15
0.35
0.08
1025.86
[24]
313.15
0.46
0.00
1030.46
[24]
313.15
0.46
0.02
1030.98
[24]
313.15
0.46
0.04
1031.89
[24]
313.15
0.46
0.06
1033.11
[24]
313.15
0.46
0.08
1034.12
[24]
Page 170 of 175
==PAGE:191==
C.4
MDEA/PZ/H2O literature data
Master Thesis
323.15
0.12
0.00
996.91
[24]
323.15
0.12
0.02
997.6
[24]
323.15
0.12
0.04
999.05
[24]
323.15
0.12
0.06
1000.24
[24]
323.15
0.12
0.09
1001.25
[24]
323.15
0.24
0.00
1006.2
[24]
323.15
0.24
0.02
1007.42
[24]
323.15
0.24
0.04
1008.71
[24]
323.15
0.24
0.06
1009.59
[24]
323.15
0.24
0.09
1010.68
[24]
323.15
0.35
0.00
1015.02
[24]
323.15
0.35
0.02
1016.11
[24]
323.15
0.35
0.04
1017.31
[24]
323.15
0.35
0.06
1018.71
[24]
323.15
0.35
0.08
1019.45
[24]
323.15
0.47
0.00
1024.04
[24]
323.15
0.47
0.02
1024.21
[24]
323.15
0.47
0.04
1025.01
[24]
323.15
0.46
0.06
1026.05
[24]
323.15
0.46
0.08
1026.91
[24]
298.15
0.28
0.02
1025.46
[28]
298.15
0.25
0.05
1024.58
[28]
298.15
0.22
0.08
1023.24
[28]
298.15
0.2
0.1
1021.88
[28]
303.15
0.28
0.02
1023.15
[28]
303.15
0.25
0.05
1022.34
[28]
303.15
0.22
0.08
1021.58
[28]
303.15
0.2
0.1
1019.68
[28]
308.15
0.28
0.02
1020.83
[28]
308.15
0.25
0.05
1020.05
[28]
308.15
0.22
0.08
1019.4
[28]
308.15
0.2
0.1
1018.04
[28]
Page 171 of 175
==PAGE:192==
C.5
MDEA-PZ-H2O-CO2 literature data
Master Thesis
313.15
0.28
0.02
1018.27
[28]
313.15
0.25
0.05
1017.55
[28]
313.15
0.22
0.08
1017.06
[28]
313.15
0.2
0.1
1016.78
[28]
C.5
MDEA-PZ-H2O-CO2 literature data
Table 36: MDEA-PZ-H2O-CO2 literature data from Frailie et al., which was the only
source to be found in literature [64]. Two types of solutions have been investigated, which
are also split in the table. Thereafter, the order is temperature and then loading.
Temp [K]
w/w MDEA
w/w PZ
CO2 loading
Density
Source
293.15
0.4157
0.0859
0.000
1044.6
[64]
293.15
0.4157
0.0859
0.020
1048.6
[64]
293.15
0.4157
0.0859
0.094
1066
[64]
293.15
0.4157
0.0859
0.250
1108
[64]
313.15
0.4157
0.0859
0.000
1031.4
[64]
313.15
0.4157
0.0859
0.020
1035.5
[64]
313.15
0.4157
0.0859
0.094
1053.2
[64]
313.15
0.4157
0.0859
0.250
1095.6
[64]
323.15
0.4157
0.0859
0.000
1024.4
[64]
323.15
0.4157
0.0859
0.020
1028.5
[64]
323.15
0.4157
0.0859
0.094
1046.9
[64]
323.15
0.4157
0.0859
0.250
1089.2
[64]
333.15
0.4157
0.0859
0.000
1017.2
[64]
333.15
0.4157
0.0859
0.020
1021.4
[64]
333.15
0.4157
0.0859
0.094
1040.2
[64]
333.15
0.4157
0.0859
0.250
1082.7
[64]
293.15
0.2940
0.2125
0.180
1094.6
[64]
293.15
0.2940
0.2125
0.230
1107.7
[64]
293.15
0.2940
0.2125
0.280
1119.9
[64]
293.15
0.2940
0.2125
0.327
1131.5
[64]
Page 172 of 175
==PAGE:193==
Master Thesis
293.15
0.2940
0.2125
0.369
1142.6
[64]
313.15
0.2940
0.2125
0.180
1082.4
[64]
313.15
0.2940
0.2125
0.230
1096.6
[64]
313.15
0.2940
0.2125
0.280
1108.5
[64]
313.15
0.2940
0.2125
0.327
1120.2
[64]
313.15
0.2940
0.2125
0.369
1130.6
[64]
333.15
0.2940
0.2125
0.180
1070
[64]
333.15
0.2940
0.2125
0.230
1083.8
[64]
333.15
0.2940
0.2125
0.280
1096.3
[64]
333.15
0.2940
0.2125
0.327
1108.5
[64]
333.15
0.2940
0.2125
0.369
1118.9
[64]
D
CO2 and O2 content in biogas feed stream
Table 37: CO2 and O2 content in biogas feed stream, used for calculation of biogas
composition in Section 6.
Date
CO2 [vol%]
O2 [vol%]
19/06/2022
30.40
1.20
20/06/2022
30.00
1.20
21/06/2022
30.30
1.20
22/06/2022
30.30
1.20
23/06/2022
29.80
1.20
24/06/2022
31.80
1.20
25/06/2022
31.30
1.20
26/06/2022
32.40
1.20
27/06/2022
32.10
1.20
28/06/2022
31.40
1.20
29/06/2022
31.40
1.20
30/06/2022
31.60
1.20
01/07/2022
31.70
1.20
02/07/2022
31.70
1.20
Page 173 of 175
==PAGE:194==
Master Thesis
03/07/2022
31.60
1.20
04/07/2022
31.30
1.20
05/07/2022
30.90
1.20
06/07/2022
31.10
1.20
07/07/2022
31.60
1.20
08/07/2022
31.60
1.20
09/07/2022
31.20
1.20
10/07/2022
30.60
1.20
11/07/2022
30.30
1.20
12/07/2022
29.60
1.30
13/07/2022
31.00
1.30
14/07/2022
32.00
1.30
15/07/2022
31.10
1.30
16/07/2022
30.80
1.30
17/07/2022
30.30
1.30
18/07/2022
30.10
1.30
19/07/2022
29.10
1.30
20/07/2022
29.20
21/07/2022
29.80
22/07/2022
30.90
23/07/2022
31.40
24/07/2022
30.80
25/07/2022
31.00
26/07/2022
30.80
27/07/2022
30.60
28/07/2022
30.50
29/07/2022
30.00
30/07/2022
29.80
31/07/2022
29.80
01/08/2022
30.60
02/08/2022
30.10
03/08/2022
29.90
Page 174 of 175
==PAGE:195==
Master Thesis
04/08/2022
30.00
05/08/2022
30.40
06/08/2022
30.30
07/08/2022
29.40
08/08/2022
29.70
09/08/2022
30.40
10/08/2022
30.30
11/08/2022
30.20
12/08/2022
30.20
13/08/2022
30.30
14/08/2022
30.40
15/08/2022
29.80
16/08/2022
29.50
17/08/2022
29.50
18/08/2022
29.80
Page 175 of 175
