==PAGE:1==
Physics­informed Deep Generative Modeling
for Magnetism
Master Thesis
DTU Energy
Department of Energy Conversion and Storage
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Physics­informed Deep Generative Modeling for Magnetism
Master Thesis
June, 2023
By
Andrea González Boa
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Energy Conversion and Storage, Anker Engelunds
Vej, Building 301, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.energy.dtu.dk
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over six months at the Section for Continuum Modelling
and Testing, Department of Energy Conversion and Storage, at the Technical University
of Denmark (DTU), in partial fulfilment for the degree Master of Science in Physics and
Nanotechnology Engineering, MSc Eng.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of physics, mainly mag­
netism, and machine learning.
Andrea González Boa ­ s174370
Signature
Date
ii
Physics­informed Deep Generative Modeling for Magnetism
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Magnetism research often involves complex calculations that can be computationally de­
manding, and thus pose significant limitations. Recent advancements in the field have
shown promise in overcoming these limitations with machine learning algorithms. One
effective approach involves integrating the fundamental laws of physics governing mag­
netism into the training process of machine learning models, in what is called physics­
informed deep learning. By incorporating these laws, such as Maxwell’s equations, into
the loss functions of our model, we have successfully implemented a new approach to
the task of inpainting magnetic field regions.
To accomplish this, we take 3D magnetic fields measured in a square 2D area, and we
train a generative adversarial network (GAN). This GAN takes the magnetic field boundary
values of the selected region as input and learns to interpolate the inner values. To do
so, we adapt the magnetic field input data to only consist of discrete points defining the
boundary. First, a model was trained in which the input data was not altered, meaning that
all the input points of the boundary were given. These results were already very promising.
However, we wanted to train a new model that could handle fewer data points so that it
can generalize better. Thus, we decided to train the new model by randomly changing the
percentage of the values given in the input data with each iteration. Despite this difference,
both models successfully achieved our objectives. The latter model outperformed the first
one by getting closer to fulfilling Ampère’s law (0.07µT/px versus 2.71µT/px of the first
model), whereas the other losses were similar between both models and within the same
order of magnitudes when 100% of the input data points were given. The latter model also
outperforms the former in the inpainting task when fewer input boundary data values are
given (for an input of 50% of the data points, 6.1% mean averaged squared error versus
60.1% for the first model), thus generalizing better. This can be an advantage, as having
fewer input points means that fewer point measurements are required, which can speed
up the corresponding application.
Furthermore, our method was compared to other benchmark methods such as linear inter­
polation, cubic spline, and interpolation with Gaussian processes, which are learning­free
and based on statistics and defined rules. Our method outperformed these, as was ex­
pected due to its higher complexity, i.e. it is learning­based and it incorporates physics
into the learning process. The interpolation with Gaussian processes follows as second
best, but with a much higher inference time (114.81 ms for Gaussian processes, whereas
5.32 ms for our method). Thus, our method outperforms these benchmark methods.
Additionally, we explored a 2D model that exploits the relationship between the magnetic
field and the magnetic scalar potential. This is done because the scalar potential gradient
in the z−direction cannot be computed, and thus we need to adapt the problem to two
dimensions. Our results indicated that the scalar potential approach initially shows faster
learning but eventually reaches a point where it fails to improve further. Despite this,
this approach got closer to a zero curl loss compared to the main model adapted to 2D
(4.50×10−9µT/px versus 7.55µT/px), which is one of the goals of the architectural changes
to fulfill Ampère’s law. This also means that the scalar potential model generalizes better.
Further research is necessary to enhance these results.
In conclusion, this master’s thesis contributes to the field of physics­informed deep learn­
ing for magnetism by presenting a simplified GAN model for magnetic field inpainting,
using only boundary values. The promising results achieved here will hopefully pave the
way for further advancements in using physics­informed deep learning algorithms to en­
hance magnetic field analysis, reconstruction, and other magnetism­related tasks.
Physics­informed Deep Generative Modeling for Magnetism
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
Andrea González Boa, MSc student in Physics and Nanotechnology Engineering, DTU
Physics
Creator of this thesis.
Stefan Pollok, Postdoc, DTU Energy
Supervisor
Rasmus Bjørk, Profesor/Head of Section, DTU Energy
Supervisor
iv
Physics­informed Deep Generative Modeling for Magnetism
==PAGE:7==
To my family and friends, to whom I owe it all.
Physics­informed Deep Generative Modeling for Magnetism
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Physics­informed Deep Generative Modeling for Magnetism
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
2
Theory and background
3
2.1
Magnetism
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Deep Learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.3
Wasserstein GAN with gradient penalty
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.4
Reference model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.5
Scalar potential in deep learning­based optimization of magnetism . . . . .
8
3
Experiments
11
3.1
The main setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.2
Setup for scalar potential approach . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.3
Data acquisition
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
4
Magnetic field interpolation from boundary data
15
4.1
Model selection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
4.2
Comparing models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
4.3
Benchmark methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
5
Field reconstruction from reduced boundary data
23
5.1
Implementation and results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
6
Interpolation using magnetic scalar potential
27
6.1
Implementation and training . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
6.2
Evaluation of performance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
7
Discussion
31
7.1
WGAN­GP with boundary values . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
7.2
Scalar potential implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
8
Conclusion
33
Bibliography
35
Physics­informed Deep Generative Modeling for Magnetism
vii
==PAGE:10==
viii
Physics­informed Deep Generative Modeling for Magnetism
==PAGE:11==
1
Introduction
Deep learning (DL) algorithms have become increasingly popular in magnetism research.
These algorithms have transformed various fields by effectively identifying intricate pat­
terns and making precise predictions through extensive data analysis. In the context
of magnetism, DL algorithms offer a promising approach to tackle challenges in image
reconstruction. Specifically, these algorithms can reconstruct missing or corrupted re­
gions within magnetic field measurements, which is useful for many applications. Some
of these applications include completing or restoring missing or distorted areas of mag­
netic resonance imaging [1] [2] and enhancing image quality in magnetic resonance elec­
trical impedance tomography [3]. Additionally, it can be used in recovering concentration
maps for superparamagnetic nanoparticles in magnetic particle imaging and reconstruct­
ing data of corneal elevation maps in ophthalmology (corneal topography) [4]. Moreover,
inpainting magnetic field regions are valuable for mapping local magnetic disturbances in
Global Positioning Systems (GPS), particularly in magnetic indoor positioning systems [5]
[6].
This master’s thesis focuses on using the Wasserstein Generative Adversarial Network
with Gradient Penalty (WGAN­GP) for magnetic field inpainting. The goal is to fill in a
random area of a 3D magnetic field measured in a 2D space, using only the boundary
values of the region to be restored (see Fig. 1.1).
0
100
200
0
50
100
150
200
250
Bx-field
0
100
200
By-field
0
100
200
Bz-field
0.10
0.05
0.00
0.05
0.10
Figure 1.1: Example of the magnetic field data. As it is a 3D field measured in a 2D
area, the input data has three channels for each of the dimensions along x−, y−and
z−direction (namely Bx, By, BZ). The color bar shows the magnitude of the field at each
point in the region, in Tesla. The red color indicates a positive magnitude of the magnetic
field, whereas the blue color indicates a negative one.
The main goal of this study is to explore how DL can improve the accuracy and efficiency
of magnetic field reconstruction by capturing the fundamental physical principles at play.
Moreover, we will look into simplifying the model by S. Pollok et al. [7] to reduce compu­
tational time while maintaining high performance in inpainting magnetic field regions.
We will start by introducing the basic concepts in magnetism and DL so that the reader
can understand the research done during this work (Chapter 2). We will continue with
the architecture simplification parting from the DL framework from Ref. [7], to make the
model more efficient while maintaining its capability to capture important magnetic field
characteristics (Chapter 4). Specifically, two models have been trained using different
input data. The first model used the complete set of discrete points defining the boundary,
Physics­informed Deep Generative Modeling for Magnetism
1
==PAGE:12==
while the second model only used a percentage of these points, which varied with each
iteration (Chapter 5).
Additionally, we adopt a 2D framework that takes advantage of the scalar potential of the
magnetic field. This approach offers a convenient and effective way to take advantage of
the dynamics of the magnetic field. It also allows us to incorporate more physics into the
architecture of the DL framework (Chapter 6).
Lastly, we will discuss the strengths and limitations of our work, and relate them to other
research done in the field (Chapter 7). We conclude the work in Chapter 8.
2
Physics­informed Deep Generative Modeling for Magnetism
==PAGE:13==
2
Theory and background
2.1
Magnetism
In the following section, we will outline the basic concepts of magnetostatics to understand
the physics behind the implementations developed during this work.
Magnetostatics refers to the subfield within electromagnetism in which a system produces
a static magnetic field, such as the one generated by an electromagnet with a steady
current density, J, or by a permanent magnet [8]. However, it does not mean that the
magnetization (M) has to be static, i.e., it can vary over time. For the purpose of under­
standing the rest of the chapter, it is convenient to think of a permanent magnet with two
poles, namely North (N) and South (S), and as Michael Faraday described, the magnetic
flux goes from north to south pole of the magnet.
Figure 2.1: Schematic representation of a permanent magnet. The red lines going from
North to South pole represent the magnetic flux. In a real magnet, the field lines originate
on the entire surface of the poles.
The equations of magnetostatics are defined by Maxwell’s equations ­ Gauss’s magnetic
law, which is obtained by solving for the divergence of B at a position r:
∇· B(r) = 0
(2.1)
And the static version of Ampère’s law, which can be obtained by calculating the curl of
B:
∇× B(r) = µ0J
(2.2)
where µ0 is the vacuum magnetic permeability constant.
We will consider a space free of current, and thus Eq. 2.2 simply becomes:
∇× B = 0
(2.3)
and therefore B should be derivable there from the gradient of the magnetic scalar poten­
tial, ψM:
B = −∇ψM
(2.4)
Because ∇· µ0B = 0, we furthermore have the Poisson equation:
Physics­informed Deep Generative Modeling for Magnetism
3
==PAGE:14==
∇2ψ = 0
(2.5)
which we will be using later on for our implementations.
Summarizing, thanks to magnetostatics we can calculate the magnetic field B over the
whole space, given the geometry of a permanent magnet and its magnetization. It is
important to notice that this approach can be done in the macroscale, as we are averag­
ing the atomic magnetic moment contributions. Magnetostatics is valid until micrometer
length scale.
2.2
Deep Learning
As briefly mentioned in the introduction, machine learning techniques, such as deep learn­
ing (DL) methods, have been implemented in the field of magnetism with the goal of re­
ducing the computational restrictions that large simulations bring. In this chapter, the
techniques in DL used for this project will be discussed, to give a better understanding of
the models implemented.
2.2.1
Neural Networks
Neural networks (NNs) are a tool inspired by biological neural networks that aim to per­
form tasks that conventional algorithms struggle with. They are composed of neurons
organized into layers, with each layer consisting of multiple neurons.
During the training process, the neural network learns to adjust the weights and biases
of its neurons to optimize its performance. This is typically achieved through a technique
called backpropagation, which calculates the gradients of the network’s parameters with
respect to the loss function. Then, an optimization algorithm, such as stochastic gradi­
ent descent, is employed to minimize the calculated loss between the prediction and the
ground­truth.
Figure 2.2: Schematic figure showing the architecture of a simple neural network.
They are widely used in image recognition [9], as well as in other fields such as natu­
ral language processing [10] [11] or in science for molecule modeling [12], where NNs
are trained on labeled data or unsupervised. After training, predictions can be made on
unseen data by passing it through the network.
Neural networks have evolved into many different models, including convolutional neural
networks, physics­informed neural networks, and generative adversarial networks. These
three models of NNs will be now explained in more detail.
4
Physics­informed Deep Generative Modeling for Magnetism
==PAGE:15==
2.2.2
Convolutional neural networks
Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) are a type of neural network commonly used in
computer vision for tasks such as image recognition and processing [13] [14]. For exam­
ple, F. Spanhol et al. [15] used CNN for image processing in breast cancer histopatho­
logical image classification.
CNNs apply a set of kernels to the input image, learning local features like edges, corners,
and textures. The core component is the convolutional layer, which applies the kernel
to the input image and introduces a translation equivariance, producing a set of feature
maps. The pooling layer is used to downsample the feature maps making it invariant to
translations, and the fully connected layer performs the classification or regression task.
CNNs have achieved state­of­the­art performance in many computer vision tasks.
2.2.3
Physics­Informed Neural Networks
Physics­informed neural networks (PINNs) [16] are a type of neural network that incor­
porate physical principles into the network architecture to improve the accuracy of pre­
dictions in physics­based problems. This is achieved by including the underlying partial
differential equations (PDEs) of the physical system and its boundary conditions as a set
of constraints in the loss function during training, which allows the network to approxi­
mate the solution to the underlying physical equations. PINNs have been successfully
used in a wide range of physics­based problems, and have the potential to improve our
understanding of complex physical systems.
PINNs can be used for many applications such as solving nonlinear PDEs when combined
with interpolation polynomials, as done by S. Tang et al. [17].
In relation to our work of using PINNS for image inpainting, Z. Yao et al. [18] use PINNs
for the reconstruction of spatial missing climate information in the Antarctic, reconstruct­
ing monthly mean surface temperature using the mentioned technique. And even more
related to our work is the work done by U. Coskun et al. [19], where they use image in­
painting of magnetic field components within experimentally inaccessible regions, when
direct field measurements are not feasible. They placed magnetic sensors on a 3D mag­
netic setup and used the Biot­Savart law to generate training and validation data. Their
approach reconstructed the magnetic field within the defined area based on coordinate
points in the structure. Their method requires a specific placement of sensors, and new
training of the neural network is needed for different sensor placements. In contrast, we
aim to implement a DL framework that can be used for different input data that the model
has not seen during training.
2.2.4
Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs)
The main idea behind this machine learning framework is having two NNs, namely the
generator and discriminator, that are trained together in an adversarial fashion. The gen­
erator G is designed to translate a latent vector z into an image x, while the discriminator
D is trained to calculate and maximize a statistical distance between the real distribution
and the distribution of generated samples, by mapping an image x to its likelihood of being
genuine.
The two networks are trained together in an iterative process, where the generator tries to
produce samples that can fool the discriminator, while the discriminator tries to distinguish
between real and fake samples. Once the training is successful, meaning that D cannot
distinguish anymore, the generator can be used to generate new data samples that are
similar to the training data.
Since Goodfellow et al. [20] developed GANs for image inpainting in 2014, there has been
Physics­informed Deep Generative Modeling for Magnetism
5
==PAGE:16==
a lot of research done using GANs frameworks for image inpainting. For example, D. Zhu
et al. [21] use conditional encoder­decoder GANs for spatial interpolation; and E. Dupont
et al. [22] use GANs for generating realistic geology that is conditioned by physics mea­
surements, through inpainting. In our work, we instead use physics­informed Wasserstein
GANs with gradient penalty (see next section for more information), to achieve a similar
goal in the field of magnetism: the inpainting of regions conditioned by a set of physical
measurements. Moreover, we also embed physics into the loss function.
2.3
Wasserstein GAN with gradient penalty
The Wasserstein Generative Adversarial Network (WGAN) was proposed in 2017 by M.
Arjovsky et al. [23] to stabilize GAN training by introducing the Wasserstein distance as a
metric for measuring the statistical distance between probability distributions, instead of
the Jensen­Shannon divergence in the standard GAN. Minimizing the Wasserstein dis­
tance between the generated and real distributions encourages the generator to produce
more realistic outputs.
To enforce a smooth training process, a new improved training of WGAN was introduced
by I. Gulrajani et al. [24] in 2017. In this model, an additional regularization term is
added to the loss function, called the gradient penalty (GP, which gives this framework
the abbreviation WGAN­GP). This term penalizes the model if the gradient of the discrimi­
nator’s output deviates from a value of 1 (Lipschitz constraint). Together, the Wasserstein
distance and gradient penalty improve the stability and convergence of GAN training, re­
sulting in better quality generated samples [24].
The WGAN­GP loss function used in our work includes the standard WGAN loss function
and the gradient penalty term:
Lwgan−gp = E
x∼Pr
[D (x; θd)] −
E
˜x∼Pg
[D (˜x; θd)]
|
{z
}
Lwgan
+ λgp E
ˆx∼Pˆx
h
(∥∇ˆxD (ˆx; θd)∥2 −1)2i
|
{z
}
Lgp
,
(2.6)
The discriminator’s role is to maximize the distance, while the generator tries to minimize
it. The discriminator parameters to be optimized are denoted by θd. We use x ∼Pr to
indicate that a sample x is drawn from the real target distribution Pr, and ˜x = G (z; θg)
denotes a sample generated by the generator G with parameters θg, where z is the input
noise vector. We also introduce ˆx, which is a sample drawn from the probability distribution
Pˆx, which is defined by sampling pairs of points from Pr and Pg and take uniform mixtures
of these pairs to obtain a new distribution. Specifically, for any pair of points (xr, xg), we
sample a point ˆx uniformly from the line segment connecting xr and xg. The expected
value over ˆx is denoted by E[ˆx]. Lastly, λgp is the penalty coefficient for the gradient
penalty term. In our work, the samples denoted x refer to magnetic fields B with three
channels, corresponding to the x−, y−, and z−direction of the field (BX, By, Bz).
WGANs­GP have been widely used in research since their implementation in 2017. For
example, N. Ge et al. [25] use WGAN­GP for image inpainting, to produce visually plau­
sible image structures and textures. Another related work is that done by Q. Zheng et al.
[26], where they use physics­informed WGAN­GP applied to inpainting in geostatistical
modeling. They use a latent random variable conditioned by the real data distribution to
6
Physics­informed Deep Generative Modeling for Magnetism
==PAGE:17==
generate data, thus including indirect measurements in the training process. In a second
step, the latent space realization is optimized to match the known values (direct mea­
surements). In contrast, our generator produces samples parting from a given input of
magnetic field boundary values, and it is trained to match these values.
2.4
Reference model
In their recent work, S. Pollok et al. [7] introduce new techniques for interpolating and
extrapolating magnetic field values based on DL. The proposed approach involves using
GANs to predict magnetic field values from a limited set of point measurements.
The authors tackle two related problems: inpainting, which involves filling in an area
of unknown magnetic field values based on surrounding measurements (interpolation),
and outpainting, which involves generating missing magnetic field values from a limited
number of measurements (inter­ and extrapolation). These problems are solved using
the WGAN­GP model, which employs a discriminator (named ”critic”) that outputs the
Wasserstein­1 distance between generated and real distributions. The objective is to
minimize this distance to achieve optimal results.
The proposed approach is validated on an experimentally­verified magnetic field, thus
demonstrating its effectiveness in predicting magnetic field values from a limited set of
measurements.
2.4.1
DL architecture from S. Pollok et al. [7]
The DL architecture on which S. Pollok et al. based their work is adapted from J. Yul et al.
[27]. The input is a 3D magnetic field measured in a 2D rectangular area and the output
is an inter­ or extrapolated 3D magnetic field in that area. Then, during training, they are
multiplied with the binary mask m (containing a pixel value of 1 for missing magnetic field
values and a value of 0 if field measurements are available):
Bin = B ⊙(1 −m)
(2.7)
The way this is done is by the following two­step process:
Bcoarse = Gcoarse (Bin ⊙(1 −m), m) ,
Bfine = Gfine (Bcoarse ⊙m + Bin ⊙(1 −m), m) .
The approach involves two generator networks, namely Gcoarse and Gfine, that generate
predictions for the magnetic field. Firstly, Gcoarse generates a coarse prediction by apply­
ing several convolutional layers on Bin and the mask m using an encoder­decoder deep
learning architecture. The input field is first downsized to reduce computational complex­
ity and then upsampled to the original size resulting in Bin. Similarly, Gfine generates
Bfine using a similar approach.
Additionally, a contextual attention branch is used to improve reconstruction. This branch
splits the magnetic field into small patches of size 3x3 pixels. It allows for the global flow
of information from distant magnetic fields, overcoming the limitations of convolutional
layers that are restricted to local information.
2.4.2
The loss function
The variable on which to base the performance of the models is the loss function. The
final loss function used during training is described as follows:
Physics­informed Deep Generative Modeling for Magnetism
7
==PAGE:18==
L = λwgan−gpLwgan−gp + λmatchLmatch
+ λmimicLmimic + λdivLdiv + λcurlLcurl,
(2.8)
there λwgan−gp, λmatch, λmimic, λdiv, and λcurl are the penalty coefficients for each single
loss term and they define the relative importance of each term. Lwgan−gp is the loss
function of the WGAN­GP model defined in Eq. 2.6. Lmatch is a l1−loss term based on
the available information for the generator. It measures the difference between predicted
values, ˜x, and the input image x0. Lmimic is another l1−loss function between ˜x and the
ground­truth training sample x. These are described as:
Lmatch = ∥x0 ⊙(1 −m) −˜x ⊙(1 −m)∥1 ,
Lmimic = ∥x ⊙m −˜x ⊙m∥1,
(2.9)
Note that the predicted values ˜x, the input image x0, and the ground­truth x, are referring
to magnetic fields B with three channels for the x−, y−, and z−components. An example
of this field can be seen in Fig. 2.3.
0
100
200
0
50
100
150
200
250
Bx-field
0
100
200
By-field
0
100
200
Bz-field
0.10
0.05
0.00
0.05
0.10
Figure 2.3: Example of the magnetic fields data. The color bar shows the magnitude of
the field at each point in the region, in Tesla. The red color indicates a positive magnitude
of the magnetic field, whereas the blue color indicates a negative one.
Finally, there are the terms in the final loss function based on the physical properties of
the problem. Firstly, we have the divergence loss that is derived from Gauss’ law for
magnetism (Eq. 2.1), expressed as:
Ldiv = ∇· B
And secondly, we are assuming the absence of electric current density J or a changing
electric field over time E(t), we add a curl loss based on simplifying Ampère’s law (Eq.
2.2):
Lcurl = ∇× B = µ0J + µ0ϵ0
δE
δt
Both of these physical losses should be equal to zero.
2.5
Scalar potential in deep learning­based optimization of
magnetism
The relationship between magnetic field and magnetic scalar potential is defined in Eq.
2.4. The idea is to predict the magnetic scalar potential from which the magnetic field B
8
Physics­informed Deep Generative Modeling for Magnetism
==PAGE:19==
can then be inferred via Eq. 2.4. This can be used to optimize DL models for magnetism,
as demonstrated in the work of S. Barmada et al. [28]. In their study, they aimed to solve
a magnetostatic problem in a region without sources, and thus they used the magnetic
scalar potential, governed by Equations 2.1 and 2.4, as the basis for their implementation.
They developed a topology optimization model using DL, which exploits the symmetry of
the problem by expressing the boundary conditions on the left and right boundaries (a
symmetry plane and the pole piece, respectively) in terms of the magnetic scalar potential.
In contrast, we will create a symmetry plane by adjusting the setup of our magnets (more
information in Section 3.2).
In A. Solin et al. [29], they exploit the relationship from Eq. 2.4 in their probabilistic model
of the ambient magnetic field, where they choose to model the scalar potential instead of
the magnetic field directly. Their work consist on interpolating the magnetic field to spatial
locations from where there is not any measurements data, using Gaussian processes. In
our work, we use a DL framework instead.
Another notable implementation of the scalar potential approach is that by S. Schaffer et
al. [30], who conducted a study on micromagnetic energy minimization using PINNs. The
authors employed the scalar potential to calculate the stray field, which is essential for
determining the field generated by the magnetization of a magnetic system that extends
beyond its boundaries. It is an unsupervised, mesh­free approach in which the training
set only consists of feature vectors. In contrast, our generator is seeded by the boundary
values given.
Now, we have given an introduction to the basic concepts necessary to understand the
research done ahead. In the next chapters, we will describe the novel implementations
carried out in this project, which include the physics laws and DL features described in
this chapter.
Physics­informed Deep Generative Modeling for Magnetism
9
==PAGE:20==
10
Physics­informed Deep Generative Modeling for Magnetism
==PAGE:21==
3
Experiments
In this chapter, the different experiments carried out will be further explained, such as the
different setup adaptations for the different problems (3D and 2D) and the data acquisition
process.
The first implementation in this work consists on adapting the DL model in Ref. [7] to our
boundary problem. This consists on adapting the model to take as input data only the
pixels surrounding the area to be interpolated, i.e. the boundary, instead of the whole
image. The input data is still based on a 3D magnetic field measured on a 2D space, but
now we only consider the boundary described by 380 discrete points around the area of
interest, such that the boundary thickness is of only 1 pixel. We then use this input data
for the different experiments.
One of our set of experiments involves a gradient calculation to obtain the magnetic field
from the magnetic scalar potential. We here encounter the problem of having field values
in the z−direction, and we cannot compute the gradient along this direction. Thus, we
have to adapt our model to 2D. This is done by adapting the input data as well as the
layers in the generator. The scalar potential approach is further explained in Chapter 6.
3.1
The main setup
As mentioned, the setup consists of 3D magnetic fields measured in a 2D space. To get
a wide variety of these fields, we place multiple permanent magnetic around a squared
area, where 256 x 256 equidistant points are measured. We selected the prism as the
primary geometric shape. Our goal is to virtually simulate the physical experiment setup
conducted by S. Pollok et al. [7]. The experiment involves the use of multiple magnets that
are shaped like prisms with a fixed side length of 0.1 cm. These magnets are arranged
randomly in a 3D grid with a resolution of 10 x 10 x 5, which can be placed or not by a
50% chance. The magnets have a permanent magnetization of 1.2 T, but their easy axes
are randomly varied to introduce randomness in the system. The superposition of the
individual magnetic fields from a single magnet as shown in Fig. 3.1, which results in the
desired output.
3.2
Setup for scalar potential approach
The setup used for the scalar potential approach follows the same geometry as the pre­
viously described, but now with only 10x10x1 spots. Moreover, the scalar potential is
implemented to produce 2D magnetic fields in the output, and thus it is necessary to can­
cel the z­components of the magnetic field (Bz = 0). This can be done by making sure that
the field is measured in a symmetry plane. In principle, by introducing an infinitely long
magnet along the z­direction this can be achieved. In practice, we introduce a very long
magnet along this direction, ensuring that Bz = 0. Refer to Fig. 3.2 to see an example of
the setup.
Physics­informed Deep Generative Modeling for Magnetism
11
==PAGE:22==
Figure 3.1: Visualization of the setup to create dataset for the main model. The red
cubes represent the prism­shaped magnets, the black arrows inside the magnets are the
magnetization axes and the blue/white square placed in the center of the setup represents
the area of the magnetic field created by this setup that is going to be studied.
Figure 3.2: Visualization in the x, y−plane of the setup for the scalar potential approach.
In the z−direction the magnets extend 10 units. The red squars represent the prism­
shaped magnets, the black arrows inside the magnets are the magnetization axes and
the blue/white square in the center of the setup represents the area of the magnetic field
created by this setup that is going to be studied.
3.3
Data acquisition
The data for this project consists on magnetic fields created by random setups of per­
manent magnets on a 3D grid, using the micromagnetism and magnetostatic calculation
framework MagTense [31]. In the magnetostatic regime, the shape and the dimension of
the magnets can be chosen from different geometries, such as prisms, cylinders, spheres
or tetrahedrons. In our case, we chose prism­shaped magnets (as seen in Fig. 3.1 and
3.2). The framework uses a fully analytical calculation of the demagnetization tensor (refer
to Ref. [32] for information about this variable), and assumes the uniform magnetization in
each magnetic element. Refer to the literature for more information about the MagTense
implementation [31].
12
Physics­informed Deep Generative Modeling for Magnetism
==PAGE:23==
The framework is fully implemented in Fortran and has a Python interface, which is the
one used for this project.
The training dataset counts with 20,000 magnetic fields whereas the test data counts with
1,000 fields, for each of the models (3D and 2D).
Physics­informed Deep Generative Modeling for Magnetism
13
==PAGE:24==
14
Physics­informed Deep Generative Modeling for Magnetism
==PAGE:25==
4
Magnetic field interpolation from
boundary data
S. Pollok et al. [7] demonstrated successful reconstruction of magnetic field images using
WGAN­GP. They showed that the WGAN­GP architecture can achieve promising results
in filling the missing areas of magnetic fields by integrating physical laws into the DL archi­
tecture for the inpainting task. However, it should be possible to obtain optimal results by
using only the boundary values of the missing areas instead of the whole image by means
of Gauss’ law (Eq. 2.1) and the Poisson equation described in Eq. 2.5. This is possible
due to the electromagnetic uniqueness theorem, which states that the electromagnetic
fields within a given region can be uniquely determined if the boundary conditions and the
sources of the fields are known (i.e., with no sources inside the region delimited by those
boundaries), by using Maxwell’s equations.
Our setup and thus our models have some limitations, such as only having a discrete
number of measurement points describing the boundary, or a 3D magnetic field with only a
2D boundary given. Nevertheless, having only the 2D boundary values should be enough
to achieve similar results as in Ref. [7].
Therefore, the first novel implementation of this project is to demonstrate that optimal
results in the inpainting task of magnetic field reconstruction can also be obtained by only
using boundary values, thereby reducing the computational expense of the training stage.
To investigate this, the architecture used by S. Pollok et al. [7] is simplified by removing
features and adapting it to the boundary problem.
Parting from the work described in Section 2.4, we modify the WGAN­GP model to change
the input shape to only boundary values. This is done by taking as input the area randomly
chosen as mask (refer to Eq. 2.7), plus one pixel in each side of the box that defines the
mask, which works as boundary values. Thus, the input values now has a size of 96x96
pixels, instead of the 256x256 pixels that forms the original input image. The dimension
for the inpainted area was chosen arbitrarily after the results obtained in Ref. [7], where
different area dimensions were tested.
Figure 4.1: Masked model input from ground­truth data, adjusted to boundary problem.
These implementations were done with the well­known machine learning library PyTorch
[33]. The activation function ReLu was used to activate the convolutional layers in the
generator, whereas for the discriminator a Leaky ReLu function was used with a negative
slope of 0.2. The models were trained using the hyperfine parameters optimized by S.
Physics­informed Deep Generative Modeling for Magnetism
15
==PAGE:26==
Pollok et al. [7]. Thus, we use the coefficients for each loss terms to be λwgan−gp =
0.001, λgp = 10, λmatch = 7.2, λmimic = 3.6, λdiv = 500, and λcurl = 30, 000; with a learning
rate of 1e −4 and batch size of 150. The optimizer used is Adam optimizer [34], with
the hyperparameters to control the decay rate of the first and second moment β1 of 0.5
and β2 of 0.9, respectively. The number of iterations for training each model was set to
600,000 steps, given that it was concluded that fewer steps did not allow the model to be
converged.
4.1
Model selection
In total, five models are implemented parting from their DL architecture. Model 1 is the
most similar one, in which we have only accommodated the original architecture to the
boundary input data. Model 2 gets rid of the local discriminator and adapts the global
discriminator to our problem. Model 3, 4 and 5 are different variations of removing/keeping
the coarse generator and the l1−loss, to be able to compare results and achieve the best
performance.
4.1.1
Model 1: original model (for boundary problem)
.
Now the input mask consists of only a boundary of 1 pixel on each side, which is all we
need to predict the values inside the area of interest. We then adapt the original model
from S. Pollok et al. [7] to the boundary problem, without further modifications. The end
architecture can be seen in Fig. 4.2.
Figure 4.2: Model 1, where the original architecture [7] is adapted to the boundary prob­
lem.
4.1.2
Model 2: removing local discriminator
.
For the second model, we consider that as we are only going to be working with a small
area of the original input data, we do not need to consider the whole field of the input data
to train the model. That is, we can get rid of the layers in the neural networks that looked
into the global information, as now we are only looking into the boundary surrounding
the missing values. Therefore, we do not need a discriminator that considers the whole
image and another one that only considers the surrounding of the area of interest. We can
instead remove the local critic (Dlocal), and adapt the global critic (Dglobal) to our problem,
simplifying the structure to only one discriminator adapted to the boundary problem.
16
Physics­informed Deep Generative Modeling for Magnetism
==PAGE:27==
Figure 4.3: Model 2, where the local critic is removed and the global critic is adapted to
the boundary problem.
4.1.3
Model 3: removing coarse generator
.
Another feature that we can get rid of is the contextual attention branch. This layer works
in learning information from other pixels, to reconstruct the missing ones. However, mag­
netic fields are smooth and it is expected that distant information is not that important with
the boundary problem, and thus this layer can be removed. Moreover, we expect that the
model will still perform well by removing the coarse generator as well, as part of the role
behind this generator is to facilitate the implementation of the contextual attention branch.
Figure 4.4: Model 3, where the coarse generator is removed.
4.1.4
Model 4: no coarse generator, no Lmimic
.
Finally, we consider that the Lmimic loss function might not be necessary for training our
model, so we will remove it from the training process to see if we can still achieve optimal
results using only the Lmatch and the physical losses, divergence and curl.
The Lmimic loss function can be removed because we are now using the uniqueness
theorem, and we can assume that the field is uniquely defined by its boundary values.
Physics­informed Deep Generative Modeling for Magnetism
17
==PAGE:28==
Figure 4.5: Model 4, where both the coarse generator and the l1−loss are removed.
4.1.5
Model 5: keeping coarse generator, without Lmimic
.
In Model 3, the coarse generator is removed, but the Lmimic is retained, whereas in Model
4, both the coarse generator and the Lmimic are removed. Therefore, the final model
tested is a combination of the two, in which the coarse generator is reinstated but the
Lmimic is excluded. This approach allows us to investigate deeper the effects of the coarse
generator and the l1−loss on the model’s performance.
Figure 4.6: Model 5, where we reinstate the coarse generator but remove the Lmimic.
4.2
Comparing models
To evaluate the performance of the models, two different statistical errors will be com­
puted. First, we will calculate the mean squared error (MSE) defined as:
MSE = 1
n
n
X
i=1
(xi −˜xi)2
(4.1)
where xi refers to the original samples, and ˜xi to the generator output.
Lastly, we will compute the mean average percentage error (MAPE) between the ground­
truth and the predicted magnetic field values. It is defined as:
MAPE = 1
n
n
X
i=1
P∥(xi −˜xi) ⊙m∥1
P∥xi ⊙m∥1
· 100
(4.2)
where n is the total number of test samples from the test dataset, which have not been
used during training of the NNs.
18
Physics­informed Deep Generative Modeling for Magnetism
==PAGE:29==
As physical constraints, we compute the divergence (aiming to satisfy Eq. 2.1) and curl
(Eq. 2.2), and use these quantities to evaluate the model as well.
To perform these performance tests we ran 100 samples from the test dataset, created
with MagTense, through the generator from the last training step. Then, we averaged the
results for each of the tests (MSE, MAPE, divergence and curl losses). The results are
found in Table 4.1.
Model
Original
Gcoarse, l1
No Gcoarse, l1
No Gcoarse, no l1
Gcoarse, no l1
MSE [mT]
0.1 ± 0.2
0.1 ± 0.2
0.1 ± 0.2
0.1 ± 0.3
0.1 ± 0.3
MAPE [%]
6.6 ± 4.8
5.0 ± 4.2
5.1 ± 5.8
5.6 ± 4.8
5.1 ± 5.1
Div. [mT/px]
3.7 ± 1.4
2.9 ± 1.1
2.3 ± 1.2
2.1 ± 1.2
3.1 ± 1.3
Curl [µT/px]
70.6 ± 44.3
2.8 ± 2.2
2.9 ± 2.1
5.7 ± 5.6
19.5 ± 17.5
Inference time [ms]
50.13
43.71
4.53
3.91
12.01
Table 4.1: Models performance after 600,000 steps, as well as the inference time of each model
after the first run and an average over the next 100 runs.
From this table we can conclude several things, the first one being that the simplification
of the original model made significant improvements for our problem, mainly for the curl
loss and inference time. The second takeaway is that the work of the coarse generator
does not seem to have a big impact in the results. This outcome was expected as the
coarse generator was mainly necessary when using the entire image for inpainting the
smaller region of the field as done in Ref. [7]. Now, with the boundary approach, we can
achieve good results without using it. This layer contained the contextual layer, and since
we focused solely on the boundaries of the selected region for inpainting, this feature
seems to no longer be necessary and thus we can remove it (as the results show).
The third takeaway from looking at Table 4.1 is that the appearance of the l1−loss (Lmimic)
seems to improve the results. Nonetheless, we can see that the model that performs the
best is the one with coarse generator and Lmimic. However, the model where we remove
the coarse generator but keep Lmimic follows closely behind, and the latter model seems
to save inference time. Looking into the averaged inference time, we see how No Gcoarse,
l1 model is faster than Gcoarse,l1 by an order of magnitude (4.5 ms versus 43.71 ms). The
last model, with both Gcoarse and Lmimic removed, has an even lower inference time (3.91
ms). However, the curl loss is higher than if we keep Lmimic. Thus, we conclude that we
will use the model where we keep the l1−loss but remove the coarse generator for further
experiments (removal of boundary values and scalar potential approach).
4.3
Benchmark methods
Now, we will compare the method of WGAN­GP with the model chosen in the previous
section (no coarse generator, but keeping Lmimic), to the benchmark methods of linear,
cubic spline and Gaussian process interpolation.
For this, we add an extra statistical error named mean absolute error (MAE), which is
Physics­informed Deep Generative Modeling for Magnetism
19
==PAGE:30==
defined as:
MAE = 1
n
n
X
i=1
|xi −˜xi|
(4.3)
where, again, xi refers to the original samples, and ˜xi to the generator output.
Method
WGAN­GP
Linear
Spline
Gaussian
MAE [mT/px]
3.9 ± 3.1
10.1 ± 7.9
9.6 ± 7.6
5.8 ± 8.1
MSE [mT/px]
0.1 ± 0.2
4113.9 ± 5322.1
3785.5 ± 5080.7
2578.9 ± 6802.1
MAPE [%]
4.82 ± 4.35
10.98 ± 0.09
10.71 ± 0.09
6.28 ± 0.08
Div. [mT/px]
2.04 ± 1.1
0.69 ± 0.6
0.7 ± 0.6
0.32 ± 0.4
Curl [µT/px]
1.1 ± 1.5
3.5 ± 5.1
6.5 ± 11.2
1.3 ± 3.2
Inference time [ms]
5.12
6.31
10.33
114.81
Table 4.2: Table showing the result of different statistical errors for WGAN­GP (no coarse
generator, but keeping Lmimic), linear interpolation, cubic spline interpolation and Gaussian
processes interpolation, as well as the averaged inference time for 100 evaluation runs.
In Table 4.2 we find the results of the performance tests by the different interpolation
methods after averaging over 100 samples, as well as the inference time. It is observed
that the WGAN­GP interpolation method demonstrates significantly superior performance
compared to linear and spline interpolation methods, achieving MSE results that are multi­
ple orders of magnitude lower, as well as considerably lower MAPE (4.82% for WGAN­GP
versus 10.98% and 10.71% for linear and spline interpolation, respectively). Although the
interpolation method with Gaussian processes performs second best, it still falls behind
in terms of performance and has a much higher inference time (114.81 ms versus 5.12
ms of WGAN­GP). Thus, WGAN­GP outperforms all the other interpolation methods. Fig.
4.7 shows the result of the magnetic inpainting for each of the methods compared, where
it can also be seen that linear and cubic spline interpolation face difficulties in accurately
reproducing the curves of the magnetic field lines, whereas WGAN­GP and Gaussian
processes outputs are very close to the ground truth.
Figure 4.7: Figure showing the Bx result of the performance of WGAN­GP and different
methods for interpolation (linear, cubic spline and with Gaussian processes).
The fact that the cubic spline interpolation method yields unsatisfactory results is not sur­
20
Physics­informed Deep Generative Modeling for Magnetism
==PAGE:31==
prising considering that we are working with a 2D surface, and cubic interpolation typically
requires 4 data points for optimal results. In our case, we have values along the whole
boundary given and this causes the method to perform some sort of triangulation, where
piecewise cubic interpolation Bezier polynomials [35] are constructed in each triangle.
That would explain the triangular shape of the interpolant result, seeing in Fig. 4.7.
For more optimal results using this interpolation method, we change the boundary to be
defined by 2 pixels instead of one, and we ran the cubic spline method again over 100
test samples.
Spline
MAE [mT/px]
2.6 ± 3.3
MSE [T/px]
0.4 ± 0.8
MAPE [%]
1.67 ± 0.02
Div. [mT/px]
0.2 ± 0.3
Curl [µT/px]
0.6 ± 1.2
Inference time [sec]
0.027
Table 4.3: Table showing the result of cubic spline interpolation for a boundary defined by
2 pixels, as well as the inference time averaged over 100 runs. Note that now the MSE is
shown in T/px.
In Table 4.3 we can see how when the cubic spline method is adapted to a boundary of
2 pixels (and thus each spline segment is defined by two data points ­ the interval end­
points), it performs better. Now, it counts with two additional conditions for interpolation
and continuity, thus a total of 4 data points that we are providing by adjusting the bound­
ary thickness. If we refer to the work by S. Pollok et al. [7] we can see how they also
obtained that cubic spline outperforms all the other methods, including WGAN­GP, for
small inpainting areas. However, it falls behind when the interpolated region increases
in area, and with WGAN­GP we ensure to obtain good performance for a more flexible
range of area sizes.
The superior performance of the WGAN­GP method can be attributed to its complex ar­
chitecture, i.e. the use of physical losses and the learning­based approach of the DL
algorithm, which enables more accurate modeling and generation of data. The interpo­
lation methods, although commonly used, lack the advanced techniques and capabilities
present in the WGAN­GP approach as the interpolation methods are learn­free, meaning
that they work solely based on statistics or some predefined order, where the objective is
not directly coupled to underlying physics.
The findings align with our expectations, confirming that the WGAN­GP method excels
overall in generating high­quality results. This underscores the importance of leveraging
advanced architectures and techniques to achieve superior performance in tasks such as
image inpainting.
Physics­informed Deep Generative Modeling for Magnetism
21
==PAGE:32==
22
Physics­informed Deep Generative Modeling for Magnetism
==PAGE:33==
5
Field reconstruction from reduced
boundary data
The experiments done until now used as data input the complete set of boundary values
(380 discrete points). It was concluded that the model architecture in which we remove
the coarse generator but keep the l1−loss Lmimic was the best one to use for further
implementations (from now on, it is denoted as main model).
We are interested in evaluating how the main model performs when it has fewer input data
points in the boundary. We expect that the model will perform well even with fewer pixels,
however it might not be very good at generalizing for this input data (containing fewer
boundary points), that has not seen during training. Thus, we will also train a new model
with an input data containing fewer points in the boundary, and analyze its performance
to be able to compare it with the main model.
5.1
Implementation and results
To train the new model, we randomly select the percentage of pixel values that will be kept
from the boundary in each iteration. For example, if the distribution randomly outputs 50%,
only 190 points will be input to the model, if 25% then only 95 points will be fed into the
network, and so on. This is done with a normal distribution with mean 50% and a standard
deviation of 10%, to select random percentages of the points to keep. The modified input
with fewer pixels will be used to train the generator, while the rest of the framework remains
unchanged. This approach introduces randomness in the training process.
Figure 5.1: Mask without boundary values removed (left), with 50% of boundary values
kept (center) and with 25% (right).
Fig. 5.2 shows the curve of the absolute error between the original values and the pre­
dicted ones (Lmatch) during the training of each model (main model and new model).
Here, we can see how the new model learns much faster than the main model, and it
converges already after 150,000 steps, whereas the main model has not converged even
after 600,000 steps. The first 100,000 steps of the main model were accidentally deleted
from Weights & Biases [36], where this data was obtained. Nonetheless, we can assume
it followed the expected trend.
Physics­informed Deep Generative Modeling for Magnetism
23
==PAGE:34==
0
100000
200000
300000
400000
500000
600000
Steps
0.10
1.00
Absolute Error [mT], log scale
Absolute error, Lmatch
Main model
New model
Figure 5.2: Plot comparing the absolute error (Lmatch) during training of the main model
and the new model (trained with fewer boundary values), in logarithmic scale (y­axis).
To evaluate how both models perform, we assess the performance of the models us­
ing different percentages of boundary values: 10%, 25%, 50%, 75%, and 100%. These
percentages correspond to 38, 95, 190, 285, and 380 data points, respectively. We con­
ducted 100 test samples for each percentage and calculated the average results.
Main model
% values kept
10%
25%
50%
75%
100%
MSE [mT]
9.9 ± 5.9
8.5 ± 5.3
4.1 ± 2.4
1.8 ± 1.1
0.1 ± 0.1
MAPE [%]
91.7 ± 10.4
79.5 ± 10.9
60.1 ± 9.6
37.6 ± 8.9
4.9 ± 3.9
Div. [mT/px]
2.8 ± 0.7
4.2 ± 1.2
4.7 ± 1.4
4.5 ± 1.5
2.2 ± 1.1
Curl [µT/px]
6.1 ± 2.5
13.1 ± 6.3
16.8 ± 10.3
14.9 ± 9.4
2.7 ± 2.2
Table 5.1: Performance of the main model (without coarse generator and with l1−loss)
with respect to different percentages of the boundary points kept. This model was not
trained with different amount of boundary values for each iteration.
New model
% values kept
10%
25%
50%
75%
100%
MSE [mT]
0.9 ± 0.9
0.1 ± 0.3
0.1 ± 0.1
0.1 ± 0.3
0.1 ± 0.1
MAPE [%]
23.2 ± 8.7
7.2 ± 5.7
6.7 ± 6.1
6.8 ± 4.9
6.9 ± 4.1
Div. [mT/px]
2.3 ± 0.9
1.9 ± 1.2
1.8 ± 1.2
1.9 ± 1.3
1.8 ± 1.1
Curl [µT/px]
0.81 ± 0.37
0.12 ± 0.07
0.06 ± 0.03
0.06 ± 0.03
0.06 ± 0.03
Table 5.2: Performance of the new model (with same DL architecture as the main model,
without coarse generator and with l1−loss) with respect to different percentages of the
boundary points kept. This model was trained with different amount of boundary values
in each iteration.
24
Physics­informed Deep Generative Modeling for Magnetism
==PAGE:35==
Figure 5.3: Model (without coarse generator and with l1−loss) performance with boundary
values removed. The percentage in the figure refers to the percentage of the boundary
values kept. This model was not trained by removing values of the boundary.
Figure 5.4: Model (without coarse generator and with l1−loss) performance with boundary
values removed. The percentage in the figure refers to the percentage of the boundary
values kept. This model was trained by removing values of the boundary.
The statistical errors associated with evaluating the performance of the main model can
be found in Table 5.1, and a visual representation of the results are provided in Figure
5.3. For the new model, these results can be found in Table 5.2, and the visualization in
Fig. 5.4.
Looking at the results in Table 5.1, we observe that the main model performs well when
provided with all 100% of the data points. However, its performance decreases for other
input scenarios. This is not surprising because the main model was trained exclusively
on data containing all 380 points, and it has not seen data with fewer data points before.
When comparing result tables, Table 5.1 and 5.2, we see how the new model outperforms
the main model overall. The reason behind the better performance of the new model is
that it was trained with reduced boundary values, which could be thought of as a type
of data augmentation or perturbation. This forced the model to adapt and learn from a
more limited set of boundary information, and this constraint seems to have improved the
model’s ability to generalize and produce better results. It is also interesting to notice how
the results between the 50%, 75% and 100% of the values kept are very similar. This is
because the normal distribution had a mean of 50, and thus there was a higher probability
of having 50% of the values as input data, i.e. the model trained more frequently on this
input data. Moreover, we can assume that when the model is well trained with 50% of the
data points it will also perform well with more data points.
When comparing the performance specifically for cases where 100% of the values are
kept, the difference in performance is small and of similar magnitude between the models.
Physics­informed Deep Generative Modeling for Magnetism
25
==PAGE:36==
Therefore, we can say that the new model generally outperforms the main model, as it
can generalize better. Additionally, a visual examination of the figures, Fig. 5.3 and 5.4,
clearly shows why the new model outperforms the main model.
The findings from this experiment suggest that reducing the number of boundary pixels
during training can have a positive impact on the model’s performance. Further explo­
ration and analysis of this approach could provide valuable insights for optimizing training
strategies and improving overall model performance.
26
Physics­informed Deep Generative Modeling for Magnetism
==PAGE:37==
6
Interpolation using magnetic scalar
potential
To include even more physics in our physics­informed WGAN­GP, we will now implement
GANs that take into account the variable of the magnetic scalar potential (SP), ψM, which
we defined in Eq. 2.4: B = −∇ψM. The main idea behind this implementation is that we
can use the relationship just mentioned to obtain the magnetic field from the SP variable.
This can be done because we are considering a system free of current (Eq. 2.3: ∇× B =
0). Now we are using the 2D setup described in Section 3.2. Thus, now we are dealing
with a 2D magnetic field input: (Bx, By, 0).
In theory, we can calculate the SP of a field from the Poisson equation defined in Eq. 2.5.
Then, we can use this scalar variable to compute the magnetic field again by calculating
its gradient, using Eq. 2.4. Translating into DL architecture, the way to do it is by training
the generator to produce the SP as output from the input mask, which has not changed
from previous experiments (boundary defined by 1 pixel, with 100% of the points kept).
Then and before sending the generated output to the rest of the network, we calculate the
magnetic field back by calculating the negative gradient. Thus, now we have the magnetic
field again, and we can send it to the rest of the network which remains unchanged from
previous architectures.
Figure 6.1: Deep learning architecture for the spatial potential implementation.
6.1
Implementation and training
To predict the SP with the generator, we modify the last convolutional layer to produce
a one­dimensional variable (the SP). Then, we use the PyTorch gradient built­in function
to compute the gradient of this variable in the x and y dimensions, obtaining the field in
tensor form. This step ensures that the Bx and By coordinates are arising from the same
underlying magnetic SP, having the zero curl by definition, and incorporates more physics
into the model.
From this point, we are implementing this approach by adding an extra step to the DL
architecture, described in the previous section (Fig. 6.1).
To be able to investigate the performance of the SP approach, we also adapt the main
model used in previous experiments to 2D and compare the performance of these two
2D models. We plotted the absolute error Lmatch during the training of each model in Fig.
6.2. In this figure, it can be seen how the SP model seems to converge much faster than
the main model, after approximately 100,000 steps. However, it also seems that the SP
Physics­informed Deep Generative Modeling for Magnetism
27
==PAGE:38==
model stops learning and hits a plateau, whereas the main model converges after 350,000
steps but achieves a much lower Lmatch.
0
100000
200000
300000
400000
500000
Steps
1.00
Absolute Error [mT], log scale
Absolute error, Lmatch
Main 2D
SP
Figure 6.2: Plot showing the absolute error (Lmatch) during training of the main model
adaptation in 2D and the SP implementation, in logarithmic scale (y­axis).
The stall in the SP approach could potentially be due to the need for grounding the values
when calculating the field from the SP. Without grounding, there are an infinite number of
result possibilities. The model counts with a grounding in which the minimum value of the
field in each iteration is found, and this value is subtracted from all the others. Neverthe­
less, there might be better ways to implement this, and it should be further studied.
0
100000
200000
300000
400000
500000
Steps
1.0
10.0
100.0
Curl [ T], log scale
Curl loss, Lcurl
Main 2D
SP
Figure 6.3: Plot showing the curl loss (Lcurl) during training of the main model adaptation
in 2D and the SP implementation, in logarithmic scale (y­axis).
Even if the SP implementation shows a stall in the statistical errors during training, we
cannot see that stall in the physical losses. Fig. 6.3 shows the training curve of the curl
loss, for both models. This shows how they both follow a similar trend during training for
this physical loss.
6.2
Evaluation of performance
Once we finished training both models, we tested their performance with the same statisti­
cal errors as in previous experiments. The models were evaluated over 100 test samples,
28
Physics­informed Deep Generative Modeling for Magnetism
==PAGE:39==
and the errors show the average. The results can be found in Table 6.1.
Model
Main 2D
SP
MSE [mT]
0.02 ± 0.02
1.98 ± 1.92
MAPE [%]
2.8 ± 0.6
2.9 ± 0.5
Div. [mT/px]
0.3 ± 0.2
3.1 ± 1.3
Curl [µT/px]
7.5 ± 9.1
4.5e­09 ± 3.5e­9
Inference time [s]
0.036
0.039
Table 6.1: Main model in 2D and SP model performance after 600K steps.
From this table, we can see how the main model outperforms the SP model in the MSE as
well as divergence loss, but both models obtain very similar MAPE. The SP model obtains
a closer to zero curl loss, which is expected as fundamentally the curl of the gradient of any
scalar field is always the zero vector field [37]. Thus, by implementing the SP approach
we are closer to fulfilling Ampère’s law (Eq. 2.2). This is interesting as, when looking at
Fig. 6.3, we saw how during training both models showed similar learning curves for the
curl loss, but it seems that the SP model generalizes better.
Lastly and for visualization purposes, we show the result after the evaluation of these two
models in Fig. 6.4.
Figure 6.4: Visualization of results comparing main model in 2D to SP implementation.
Summarizing, we have implemented some of the physics from the loss function (i.e., now
we ensure a closer to zero curl loss and thus, this physical loss could be removed from the
loss function) into the DL architecture by transforming the model to two dimensions and
incorporating the relationship from Eq. 2.4, which connects the magnetic field to the scalar
potential. The expectation was that this modification would either improve or maintain the
same level of performance, as the incorporation of physics principles should theoretically
not alter the results.
However, as seen in Figure 6.2, we observed that the model trained with the SP approach
initially showed faster learning but eventually reached a point where it stopped improving.
On the other hand, the main model adapted to 2D initially learned at a slower pace, but it
continued to improve and yield better results over iterations.
When evaluating the performance of the models (Table 6.1), although the main model
Physics­informed Deep Generative Modeling for Magnetism
29
==PAGE:40==
outperforms the SP model in MSE, MAPE and divergence loss, with the SP approach we
obtain a lower curl loss, closer to zero. Thus, the SP model generalizes better.
30
Physics­informed Deep Generative Modeling for Magnetism
==PAGE:41==
7
Discussion
In this chapter, we will discuss the strengths and weaknesses of our achievements. We
will also discuss the relevant research conducted by other groups in the field of image
inpainting using DL frameworks, and how it relates to our work.
7.1
WGAN­GP with boundary values
Our simplified DL framework from the work done by S. Pollok et al. [7], successfully
achieved the task of magnetic field reconstruction by inpainting. The highlight of our im­
plementations is not only that we managed to achieve promising results only using bound­
ary values, but that we trained even a better model by only using a smaller set of boundary
points. This can be an advantage for experimental applications, as it reduces the number
of required data measurement points for reconstructing the missing area. Moreover, we
successfully proved that the DL framework performs better than learning­free statistical
interpolation methods, which is expected as our model is learning­based and accounts for
physical losses. The next step would be to increase the resolution of the inpainting area,
as demonstrated by S. Pollok et al. [7], while maintaining our boundary­based approach.
This way we could find the limit of our model as well as we could prove that our method
outperforms the benchmark methods even further for bigger resolution images.
Furthermore, S. Pollok et al. [7] also looks into the task of outpainting to reconstruct
the magnetic field images, parting from a few data points located inside the region to
reconstruct. This would not make sense to study with our boundary approach, however, it
would be interesting to study the results we could obtain for outpainting using our simplified
model.
Some of the limitations we encountered were that we achieved high uncertainty in the
results of our models, which would be worth studying further. Additionally, addressing the
challenge of matching predicted boundary values to the ground truth, as observed by S.
Pollok et al. [7], could be an interesting problem to solve within our boundary­values­only
approach. This could be done in future steps.
The research group U. Coskun et al. [19] proposed a method using PINNs to map mag­
netic fields in inaccessible regions, by only using a set of discrete input points. However,
their work is limited by the placement of these points, thus a new training is required when
changing the location of the input points. In contrast, our novel implementation allows the
training of a framework that can be used for different input data that the model has not
seen during training. Nonetheless, both works achieve successful image reconstruction
by using only a set of boundary values
In our framework, we obtain very promising results in the reconstruction of magnetic fields
even only using 95 discrete points, defining the boundary (25% of the complete set of
boundary points).
The predictions made with this new model are more physical and
therefore can generalize better. Thus, an interesting future direction could be to adopt
an approach similar to Q. Zheng et al. [26], where they only use physical losses in their
model, and reconstruction of a specific field happens in a second step. This approach is
very promising and we could explore it in the context of magnetic field inpainting.
Furthermore, DL frameworks are evolving rapidly, and it would be interesting to investigate
the application of state­of­the­art DL architectures to solve the magnetic field inpainting
Physics­informed Deep Generative Modeling for Magnetism
31
==PAGE:42==
problem. For example, diffusion GANs, as presented by Z. Wang et al. [38], could be con­
sidered. Their model introduces a diffusion process to reduce instability in GAN training
by gradually adding random Gaussian noise to the generated image. Incorporating such
diffusion processes into our framework could be a promising avenue for future research.
7.2
Scalar potential implementation
In terms of our experiments with the scalar potential approach, we can compare our work
to S. Solin et al. [29]. They also used the relation between the magnetic field and its
scalar potential but with a more mathematical approach. Their method involved using
Gaussian processes to model the magnetic field components together and focused on
the scalar potential representation using a Gaussian process prior. In contrast, our work
implemented a DL framework using GANs, where we generated the scalar potential based
on the magnetic field boundary input data. We then computed the gradient to obtain the
corresponding magnetic field.
Moreover, with the SP implementation we see how the curl gets closer to zero, as funda­
mentally the curl of the gradient of any scalar field is always the zero vector field. Thus,
we get closer to fulfilling Ampère’s law. This is a big strength that we have introduced into
our model with the SP approach, and it means that we could get rid of the curl loss fron
the loss function altogether.
However, our SP approach exhibited limitations, including a plateau in the learning curve
and inferior results compared to the model without SP implementation. This could relate
to the infinite results we obtain using this approach, as we are computing a negative
gradient. However, this infinite solution space can be shifted. One potential approach
to solve this could involve introducing a gauge to ground the values, which may enhance
stability and improve the learning process. Further research is needed to overcome these
challenges.
Another limitation of this approach is that we needed to adapt our problem to 2D, in order
to implement it. This was done to overcome the problem of having a gradient in the
z−direction. However, an interesting approach to scaling the problem back to 3D would
be to solve the scalar potential for three different layers of the problem, thus addressing
each of the three dimensions.
32
Physics­informed Deep Generative Modeling for Magnetism
==PAGE:43==
8
Conclusion
To summarize, parting from simplifying the WGAN­GP framework laid by Ref. [7], we
have successfully achieved the task of magnetic field image inpainting using only bound­
ary values of the region to be reconstructed, while saving computational time as well as
improving the curl loss.
Our WGAN­GP model successfully interpolated the inner values of a selected region in
the magnetic field using only the boundary values as input. Two models were trained
with the same architecture but different inputs: one with all the input boundary points and
another with a varying percentage of input points. Both models achieved our objectives,
but the latter model outperformed the former by minimizing the curl loss more effectively
(0.06µT/px versus 2.7µT/px, when all the available boundary points were given), as well
as by generalizing better when the input contains fewer boundary points.
Furthermore, our method was compared to other interpolation techniques, such as lin­
ear interpolation, cubic spline, and interpolation with Gaussian processes. Our method
demonstrated superior performance and a lower inference time. Thus, our DL model
outperforms all the interpolation methods studied here, for the conditions of our problem.
Additionally, we explored a 2D model that takes advantage of the relationship between the
magnetic field and the magnetic scalar potential. While the scalar potential approach ini­
tially showed faster learning, it eventually reached a plateau and could not further improve.
However, this approach achieved a lower curl loss compared to the main 2D model, align­
ing with the goal of fulfilling Ampère’s law (4.50 × 10−9µT/px versus 7.55µT/px). This is
interesting because both models showed a similar learning curve for the curl loss, which
means that the scalar potential model generalizes better. Nevertheless, further research
is needed to refine and optimize these results and ensure that the application of physics
principles does not have a negative impact on the output.
Overall, this thesis has made significant strides in the application of physics­informed
deep learning algorithms for magnetic field analysis, reconstruction, and related tasks.
The promising outcomes of this research lay the groundwork for future advancements in
enhancing magnetic field analysis and other magnetism­related endeavors.
Physics­informed Deep Generative Modeling for Magnetism
33
==PAGE:44==
34
Physics­informed Deep Generative Modeling for Magnetism
==PAGE:45==
Bibliography
[1]
Karim Armanious et al. “ipA­MedGAN: Inpainting of arbitrary regions in medical
imaging”. In: 2020 IEEE international conference on image processing (ICIP). IEEE.
2020, pp. 3005–3009.
[2]
Seung Kwan Kang et al. “Deep learning­based 3D inpainting of brain MR images”.
In: Scientific reports 11.1 (2021), pp. 1–11.
[3]
Kiwan Jeon et al. “Integration of the denoising, inpainting and local harmonic Bz
algorithm for MREIT imaging of intact animals”. In: Physics in Medicine & Biology
55.24 (2010), p. 7541.
[4]
Andrea Andrisani et al. “Applications of PDEs inpainting to magnetic particle imag­
ing and corneal topography”. In: Opuscula Mathematica 39.4 (2019).
[5]
Etienne Le Grand and Sebastian Thrun. “3­axis magnetic field mapping and fusion
for indoor localization”. In: 2012 IEEE International Conference on Multisensor Fu­
sion and Integration for Intelligent Systems (MFI). IEEE. 2012, pp. 358–364.
[6]
Janne Haverinen and Anssi Kemppainen. “Global indoor self­localization based on
the ambient magnetic field”. In: Robotics and Autonomous Systems 57.10 (2009),
pp. 1028–1035.
[7]
Stefan Pollok et al. “Magnetic field prediction using generative adversarial networks”.
In: Journal of Magnetism and Magnetic Materials 571 (2023), p. 170556.
[8]
Multiphysics Cyclopedia. URL: https://www.comsol.com/multiphysics/magnetostatics-
theory.
[9]
Kaiming He et al. “Deep residual learning for image recognition”. In: Proceedings
of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition. 2016, pp. 770–
778.
[10]
Sun­Ting Tsai, En­Jui Kuo, and Pratyush Tiwary. “Learning molecular dynamics with
simple language model built upon long short­term memory neural network”. In: Na­
ture communications 11.1 (2020), p. 5115.
[11]
Lingfei Wu et al. “Graph neural networks for natural language processing: A survey”.
In: Foundations and Trends® in Machine Learning 16.2 (2023), pp. 119–328.
[12]
Marwin HS Segler et al. “Generating focused molecule libraries for drug discovery
with recurrent neural networks”. In: ACS central science 4.1 (2018), pp. 120–131.
[13]
Samer Hijazi, Rishi Kumar, Chris Rowen, et al. “Using convolutional neural networks
for image recognition”. In: Cadence Design Systems Inc.: San Jose, CA, USA 9
(2015), p. 1.
[14]
Yu Han Liu. “Feature extraction and image recognition with convolutional neural
networks”. In: Journal of Physics: Conference Series. Vol. 1087. 6. IOP Publishing.
2018, p. 062032.
[15]
Fabio Alexandre Spanhol et al. “Breast cancer histopathological image classifica­
tion using convolutional neural networks”. In: 2016 international joint conference on
neural networks (IJCNN). IEEE. 2016, pp. 2560–2567.
[16]
Maziar Raissi, Paris Perdikaris, and George E Karniadakis. “Physics­informed neu­
ral networks: A deep learning framework for solving forward and inverse prob­
lems involving nonlinear partial differential equations”. In: Journal of Computational
physics 378 (2019), pp. 686–707.
[17]
Siping Tang et al. “Physics­informed neural networks combined with polynomial in­
terpolation to solve nonlinear partial differential equations”. In: Computers & Math­
ematics with Applications 132 (2023), pp. 48–62.
Physics­informed Deep Generative Modeling for Magnetism
35
==PAGE:46==
[18]
Ziqiang Yao et al. “Physics­Informed Deep Learning for Reconstruction of Spatial
Missing Climate Information in the Antarctic”. In: Atmosphere 14.4 (2023), p. 658.
[19]
Umit H Coskun, Bilgehan Sel, and Brad Plaster. “Magnetic field mapping of inacces­
sible regions using physics­informed neural networks”. In: Scientific Reports 12.1
(2022), p. 12858.
[20]
Ian Goodfellow et al. “Advances in neural information processing systems”. In: Cur­
ran Associates, Inc 27 (2014), pp. 2672–2680.
[21]
Di Zhu et al. “Spatial interpolation using conditional generative adversarial neu­
ral networks”. In: International Journal of Geographical Information Science 34.4
(2020), pp. 735–758.
[22]
Emilien Dupont et al. “Generating realistic geology conditioned on physical mea­
surements with generative adversarial networks”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1802.03065
(2018).
[23]
Martin Arjovsky, Soumith Chintala, and Léon Bottou. Wasserstein GAN. 2017. arXiv:
1701.07875 [stat.ML].
[24]
Ishaan Gulrajani et al. “Improved training of wasserstein gans”. In: Advances in
neural information processing systems 30 (2017).
[25]
Na Ge, Wenhui Guo, and Yanjiang Wang. “Globally Consistent Image Inpainting
based on WGAN­GP Network optimization”. In: 2022 16th IEEE International Con­
ference on Signal Processing (ICSP). Vol. 1. IEEE. 2022, pp. 70–75.
[26]
Qiang Zheng, Lingzao Zeng, and George Em Karniadakis. “Physics­informed se­
mantic inpainting: Application to geostatistical modeling”. In: Journal of Computa­
tional Physics 419 (2020), p. 109676.
[27]
Jiahui Yu et al. “Generative Image Inpainting With Contextual Attention”. In: (June
2018).
[28]
Sami Barmada et al. “A Deep Learning Surrogate Model for Topology Optimization”.
In: IEEE Transactions on Magnetics 57.6 (2021), pp. 1–4. DOI: 10.1109/TMAG.
2021.3063470.
[29]
Arno Solin et al. “Modeling and Interpolation of the Ambient Magnetic Field by Gaus­
sian Processes”. In: IEEE Transactions on Robotics 34.4 (2018), pp. 1112–1127.
DOI: 10.1109/TRO.2018.2830326.
[30]
Sebastian Schaffer et al. “Physics­informed machine learning and stray field com­
putation with application to micromagnetic energy minimization”. In: Journal of Mag­
netism and Magnetic Materials 576 (2023), p. 170761.
[31]
Magtense ­ A micromagnetism and magnetostatic framework. URL: https://www.
magtense.org/.
[32]
R Moskowitz and E Della Torre. “Theoretical aspects of demagnetization tensors”.
In: IEEE Transactions on Magnetics 2.4 (1966), pp. 739–744.
[33]
Adam Paszke et al. “Pytorch: An imperative style, high­performance deep learning
library”. In: Advances in neural information processing systems 32 (2019).
[34]
Diederik P Kingma and Jimmy Ba. “Adam: A method for stochastic optimization”.
In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.6980 (2014).
[35]
Mustafa Abbas Fadhel and Zurni B Omar. “Geometric piecewise cubic bézier in­
terpolating polynomial with C2 continuity”. In: Информатика и автоматизация
20.1 (2021), pp. 133–159.
[36]
Weights & Biases ­ Developer tools for ML. URL: https://wandb.ai/site.
[37]
Curl (mathematics). June 2023. URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Curl_(mathematics).
[38]
Zhendong Wang et al. “Diffusion­gan: Training gans with diffusion”. In: arXiv preprint
arXiv:2206.02262 (2022).
36
Physics­informed Deep Generative Modeling for Magnetism
==PAGE:47==
Physics­informed Deep Generative Modeling for Magnetism
37
==PAGE:48==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Anker Engelunds Vej, Building 301
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.energy.dtu.dk
