==PAGE:1==
Conductive polymers and their composites as coating films on
metal plates for fuel cell applications - Master Thesis Project
Department of Energy Conversion and Storage
Supervisors: Qingfeng Li
David Aili
Student: Chuan He (s202361)
July 28, 2023
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Acknowledgment
I would like to thank my main supervisor professor Qingfeng Li, who shows patience
and knowledge for helping and guiding me finish the whole project. I would also like to
thank my supervisor Dr. David Aili, who provides critical view for helping me processing
the project. And I would also like to thank Chao Pan, who supports me in lab work with
his abundant experience. Thank all the members and friends in DTU energy who help me
willingly.
The period of the project is really a hard time for me both mentally and physically,
thank my family and friends who support and help me. Time to have a rest.
i
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
The proton exchange membrane fuel cell (PEMFC) is one of five main types of fuel
cell. Because of the advantage of low operating temperature, electrolyte management and
long lifetime, it is seen as a main challenger for future energy industry. Bipolar plate is
a main component of PEMFC, which have multifunction in PEMFC. However, despite of
other problems like expensive cost and fuel source, the corrosion of bipolar plates also limit
the development of PEMFC. The poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) : poly(styrenesulfonic
acid)-PEDOT:PSS is one of the most successful commercialized conductive polymers in the
world. It is conductive meanwhile helping decrease the corrosion of metal bipolar plates.
In this project, the conductive polymer PEDOT:PSS are used to casting film and coating
on meatal surface as preliminary research for further application on corrosion of the bipolar
plates for fuel cells. The in plane conductivity of PEDOT:PSS film on polyimide substrate
by drop casting method reach 900 Scm−1. While out of plane conductivity of PEDOT:PSS
coating reach 0.24 Scm−1. And the processes for casting and coating were investigated and
optimized.
ii
==PAGE:5==
Contents
Contents
1
Introduction
1
2
Literature review
2
2.1
The carbon based bipolar plates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2.2
The metal bipolar plates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2.1
The corrosion of metal bipolar plates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.3
The modification on the metal bipolar plates surface
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3.1
Noble metal films . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3.2
Metal nitride films
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3.3
Metal carbide films . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.3.4
Conductive polymer films
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.4
The PEDOT:PSS conductive polymer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.4.1
The synthesis of PEDOT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.4.2
The properties of PEDOT:PSS
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.4.3
The approaches to improve conductivity of PEDOT:PSS . . . . . . .
11
3
Experiment and method
13
3.1
Material preparation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.1.1
The preparation of casting substrates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.1.2
The calibration and preparation of PEDOT:PSS solution . . . . . . .
14
3.2
The formation of PEDOT:PSS film and coating with post treatment methods
16
3.2.1
Drop casting of PEDOT:PSS film and coating . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.2.2
Spray coating of PEDOT:PSS coatings on metal tablets . . . . . . . .
17
3.2.3
The post treatment of PEDOT:PSS films and coatings
. . . . . . . .
18
3.3
The electrical conductivity of PEDOT:PSS films and coatings
. . . . . . . .
19
3.3.1
The measurement of thickness and swelling effect
. . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.3.2
The measurement of in plane conductivity of PEDOT:PSS films . . .
20
3.3.3
The measurement of out of plane conductivity of PEDOT:PSS coatings 21
4
Result and discussion
23
4.1
The PEDOT:PSS films . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.1.1
Preparation of PEDOT:PSS film and selection of polymer substrates
23
4.1.2
Conductivity enhancement of PEDOT:PSS film . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4.1.3
The structure of the PEDOT:PSS films . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.2
PEDOT:PSS coating on metal tablets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
4.2.1
Preparation of PEDOT:PSS coating on metal tablets . . . . . . . . .
36
4.2.2
Out of plane conductivity measurement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
5
Conclusion and outlook
46
References
48
iii
==PAGE:6==
List of Figures
1
The structure of one stack of PEMFC[1]
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Chemical structure of PEDOT:PSS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3
Microstructure of conjugated polymer films. a-c, Schematics of the microstruc-
ture of a semicrystalline polymer film, for example P3HT (a), disordered ag-
gregates (b) and a completely amorphous film (c)[2].
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
4
Timeline of conductivity values for PEDOT:PSS[3]
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
5
The polymer substrates. (a) polyimide, (b) Polytetrafluoroethylene and (c)
polybenzimidazole. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
6
The polishing of metal tablets. (a) unpolished metal tablet, (b) grinding discs
from rough to smooth and (c) polishing machine in working
. . . . . . . . .
14
7
The PEDOT:PSS solution. (a) Pristine PEDOT:PSS solution and (b) PE-
DOT:PSS solution with 5wt% DMAc under magnetic stirring. . . . . . . . .
15
8
The PEDOT:PSS solution on PI substrates after drop casting. . . . . . . . .
16
9
The PEDOT:PSS films on PI substrates dried on heating plate at 120◦C. . .
17
10
The stainless steel tablets under spray coating at 100◦C.
. . . . . . . . . . .
18
11
The thickness measurement. (a)The thickness measurement of PEDOT:PSS
film with substrates and (b) the thickness measurement in swelling effect
experiment. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
12
The setup for measurement of in plane conductivity. (a)The schematic dia-
gram of the setup and (b) the setup.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
13
The setup for measurement of out of plane conductivity. (a)The schematic
diagram of the setup and (b) the setup. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
14
The comparison of formation of PEDOT:PSS film on polymer substrates.
Before drying, (a) polyimide (b) polytetrafluoroethylene and (c) polybenz-
imidazole.
After drying, (d) polyimide (e) polytetrafluoroethylene and (f)
polybenzimidazole. Pristine PEDOT:PSS solution used. . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
15
The steps for preparation of PEDOT:PSS films.
Blue arrows indicate the
processes that were controlled in this work. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
16
The conductivity of PEDOT:PSS films by additive concentration. . . . . . .
25
17
The conductivity of PEDOT:PSS films with organic solvents as additives by
concentration. All samples were dried in room temperature and heated for 10
min to make sure total evaporation of solvents. Drop casting method and no
post treatment. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
18
The conductivity of PEDOT:PSS films by drying temperature. (a) Drying
condition 1, 30 wt% EG as additive, the samples were partly dried in fume
hood for 10 hours, then dried on heating plates at different temperature, the
RT one dried in room temperature for the whole progress, dipped in methanol
for 10 minutes as post treatment. (b) Drying condition 2, 15 wt% EG and
DMAc as additives, . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
iv
==PAGE:7==
List of Figures
19
The conductivity of PEDOT:PSS films by additives and post treatment. The
PEDOT:PSS films were formed with 5 wt% of additives and dried in room
temperature. Then the samples were heated on heating plate at 120◦C for 10
mins. The samples were dipped into solution for 10 minutes and then dried
on heating plate at 120◦C for 10 mins.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
20
The conductivity of PEDOT:PSS films by post treatment time. (a) methanol
post treatment and (b)H2SO4 post treatment. The PEDOT:PSS films were
formed with 5 wt% and 30 wt% of additives and dried in room temperature.
Then the samples were heated on heating plate at 120◦C for 10 mins. The
samples were dipped into solution for different time and then dried on heating
plate at 120◦C for 10 mins. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
21
The conductivity of PEDOT:PSS films by post treatment time.
The PE-
DOT:PSS films were formed with 5 wt% THF as additives and dried in room
temperature. Then the samples were heated on heating plate at 120◦C for
10 mins. The samples were dipped into methanol for different time and then
dried on heating plate at 120◦C for 10 mins. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
22
The thickness changing of pristine PEDOT:PSS films after swelling and dried.The
films were drop casted and dried in dried in room temperature before the test.
Then the films were dipped into methanol for different times and measured
thickness immediately after swelling.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
23
Schematic illustration of the phase separation in a slow-drying PEDOT:PSS
droplet. PEDOT:PSS in 50% DMSO:H2O[4]. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
24
The photograph of phase separation in forming PEDOT:PSS films.
PE-
DOT:PSS in 50 wt% EG aqueous solution. Red line circled separated PSS. .
35
25
The photograph of coating on metal tablets. The left one is aluminum based
and the right one is SS based. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
26
The resistance vs compaction force of PEDOT:PSS coated SS tablet.
(a)
Original data, the I-V curves for different pressure and (b) the resistance vs
compaction force. The metal coating was coated with PEDOT:PSS solution
with 5 wt% EG, dried in room temperature and heated on heating plate at
120◦C for 10 mins.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
27
The resistance vs compaction force of blank SS tablets. . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
28
The resistance vs compaction force of blank SS tablets and SS tablets with a
carbon paper. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
29
(a) The resistance vs compaction force of PEDOT:PSS coating on SS tablets
with a carbon paper (b) The out of plane conductivity vs compaction force
of PEDOT:PSS coating on SS tablets. The solution contain 5 wt% DMAc as
additive, without post treatment. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
30
(a) The resistance vs compaction force of PEDOT:PSS coating on SS tablets
with a carbon paper (b) The out of plane conductivity vs compaction force
of PEDOT:PSS coating on SS tablets. The PEDOT:PSS solution contain 5
wt% DMAc as additive, samp 1 and 2 without post treatment, samp 3 and 4
treated by methanol for 10 mins and then dried. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
v
==PAGE:8==
List of Figures
31
The conductivity vs coating thickness, measured with a carbon paper. The
PEDOT:PSS solution contain 5 wt% DMAc as additive, blue plots without
post treatment, orange plots treated by methanol for 10 mins and then dried.
42
32
The photograph of PEDOT:PSS coating by spray coating method. (a) PE-
DOT:PSS coating with the thickness of 200 nm, (b) PEDOT:PSS coating
with the thickness of 2 µm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
33
The out of plane conductivity of PEDOT:PSS coating by temperature in
coating, measured with a carbon paper.The solution consists of consisted of
19.7 vol% pristine PEDOT:PSS solution, 6.0 vol% H2O, 73.0 vol% IPA and
1.3 vol% ethylene glycol, no post treatment. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
34
(a) The resistance vs compaction force of PEDOT:PSS coating on SS tablets
by spray coating. (b) The out of plane conductivity vs compaction force of
PEDOT:PSS coating on SS tablets. The PEDOT:PSS solution contain 5 wt%
DMAc as additive, samp 1 and 2 without post treatment, samp 3 and 4 treated
by methanol for 10 mins and then dried. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
vi
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
New technologies sprout out day by day, and people consume much more energy year by
year. While the main energy source is the traditional fossil fuel, more and more greenhouse
gas was emitted into the air. And the world temperature increase dramatically in last few
decades.[5] It raises people’s concern about the climate and the global temperature. One of
the main source of greenhouse gas is the emission from the traditional internal combustion
engine, which should be replaced to decrease the greenhouse gas emission. And due to the
limitation of the combustion efficiency of internal combustion engine, it is hard to enhance the
performance. For requirement of both efficiency and greenhouse emission, the development
of fuel cell is necessary, and the fuel cell has huge potential to be the main source of engine
for many aspects in the future.
There are five main technical routes of fuel cells now, solid oxide fuel cell, molten car-
bonate fuel cell, phosphoric acid fuel cell, alkaline fuel cell and proton exchange membrane
fuel cell (PEMFC). Because of the advantage of low operating temperature and electrolyte
management, the proton exchange membrane fuel cell is the main competitor on vehicles.
However, despite of other problems like expensive cost and fuel source, the corrosion of bipo-
lar plates also limit the development of PEMFC. The poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):
poly(styrenesulfonic acid)-PEDOT:PSS is one of the most successful commercialized con-
ductive polymers in the world. It is conductive meanwhile helping decrease the corrosion
of metal bipolar plates. In this project, the conductive polymer PEDOT:PSS are used to
casting film and coating on metal tablets as preliminary research for further application on
corrosion of the bipolar plates for fuel cells.
Page 1 of 52
==PAGE:10==
2
Literature review
As mentioned above, the report focus on the performance of the proton exchange mem-
brane fuel cell (PEMFC). To be more specific, the performance of the bipolar plate, one of
the main components of proton exchange membrane fuel cell. There are two main kind of
materials of bipolar plates, the carbon based and metal based. To better understand the
motivation of this research, the development and the state of art for both carbon based
bipolar plates and metallic bipolar plates should be illustrated.
2.1
The carbon based bipolar plates
As the figure1 shows the structure of one stack of PEMFC, bipolar plates contain many
functions for a fuel cell. For requirements of electrochemistry, bipolar plates should distribute
the oxidant and fuel inside the fuel cell. It should be conductive while with low resistance.
And it should be hydrophobic to prevent leakage. And for requirements of stability of fuel
cell stack, bipolar plates should also facilitate the water and heat management. While the
density should be low, the mechanical strength of bipolar plates should be high enough to
keep the whole fuel cell structure stable.
Figure 1: The structure of one stack of PEMFC[1]
Page 2 of 52
==PAGE:11==
2.1
The carbon based bipolar plates
Non-porous graphite
Considering these requirements, the pure non-porous graphite as material for bipolar
plates seems to be a good choice. It has great stability and conductivity, low resistance and
also hydrophobic. However, the mechanical strength is weak and the cost is pretty high,
which make pure graphite out of competition[6].
Carbon polymer composites
Carbon-polymer composites are developed as a solution to this. The polymer component
increase the mechanical strength and decrease the cost of the composite, while the carbon
component provide great conductivity and corrosion resistance to the composite. The most
used carbon material, of course, is graphite, however, the other carbon materials like carbon
black, graphene, carbon fibers and even carbon nanotube can also be the component of the
carbon polymer composites.
Dweri and Sahari invested the material polypropylene as polymer and graphite as con-
ductive fillers to form composite for bipolar plates. The composites were prepared by melt
compounding method.
They used different ratio of graphite and polypropylene and the
conductivity of bipolar plates varied a lot up to 28 Scm−1. While they found additional
carbon black added to the composite of graphite and polypropylene, the conductivity could
be even higher to reach 35 Scm−1 when the ratio of composite is 25 wt.% carbon balck and
55 wt.% graphite to 20 wt.% polypropylene[7]. Xia et al. prepared polyphenylene sulfide
resin/graphite composite for bipolar plates. The composite were prepared by ball milling
method. They focused on the factor of preparing bipolar plates by compression molding
which is the most used method for this step. While the ratio of polyphenylene sulfide resin
and graphite kept the same, the conductivity of the bipolar plates changed when the treat-
ing temperature and bending strength changed. They achieved the highest conductivity of
118.9 Scm−1 when the polyphenylene sulfide resin was 20% and molded for 30 mins at 52.4
Mpa of bending strength[8]. The source of graphite can also influence the conductivity a
lot. Despite the source of synthetic and natural graphite, even the natural graphite from
different origin could be a huge difference. Wissler did a great and comprehensive job on
Page 3 of 52
==PAGE:12==
2.2
The metal bipolar plates
figuring out the structure of graphite and carbon powders from different sources and the per-
formance of them. It indicated that, the micro structure of the carbon materials influenced
the conductive path and could vary the performance a lot[9].
To be more specific on this, Cunningham et al. contributed a great example. They
respectively used polyphenylene sulfide and polyvinylidene fluoride as the polymer combined
with graphite as composites. As most of other researchers tested the in plane conductivity
of bipolar plates, they tested both in plane and through plane conductivity of the same
bipolar plates. For the polyphenylene sulfide/graphite composites, the in plane conductivity
was 325 Scm−1 and the through plane conductivity was 30 Scm−1. For the polyvinylidene
fluoride/graphite composites, the in plane conductivity was 292 Scm−1 and the through
plane conductivity was 32 Scm−1[10].
The in plane conductivity was much higher than
through plane, which can be explained by weak Van der Waals forces of the interlayer of
graphite which can reduce the conductivity of through plane.
To improve the through
plane conductivity of conductive fillers structure, Kakati et al. figured out a method that
using carbon nanoparticles as the supplement to fill the tiny space of graphite fillers that 5
percent of carbon black particles could increase the conductivity of both through plane and
in plane[11].
2.2
The metal bipolar plates
Compared to the carbon polymer composites bipolar plates, the metal are more possible
to be commercialized due to its low cost. Metal bipolar plates even behave better on the
mechanical strength and heating management. Though the density are higher, the strong
strength allows metal bipolar plates to be made as thin as 1mm, which will not be a defect
on the total weight. Considering the cost and the performance, the metals for the bipolar
plates usually include aluminum, copper, nickel, titanium and stainless steel. While the
metal bipolar plates have plenty of advantage, the biggest disadvantage severely limit the
development, that is corrosion.The high operating temperature and acidic environment could
corrode the metals easily. Obviously, the challenge for improving metal bipolar plates is
reducing corrosion.
Page 4 of 52
==PAGE:13==
2.2
The metal bipolar plates
2.2.1
The corrosion of metal bipolar plates
Stainless steels
Stainless steels are one of the most reasonable metals for bipolar plates. It has great
performance on chemical and thermal properties, while the cost is pretty low. Although
stainless steels show some kind of resistance to corrosion, the long time corrosive working
environment with heat and acidic ion in fuel cell will inevitably corrode the surface. Once
it get corrosion, the surface will not be smooth, and the interfacial contact resistance will
increase repidly. What’s more, the product of corrosive reaction will contact and poison the
catalysts, which will significantly decrease the life time of the stack and even the whole fuel
cell.
Wang et al. invested the corrosion resistance of different types of stainless steels in
stimulated fuel cell environment.
The results showed that 349TM >904L >317L >316L
on the corrosion resistance. The authors thought the difference were from the increase of
chromium in stainless steel[12].Kumagai et al. compared two stainless steels 19Cr2Mo and
22Cr2Mo respectively with 19% and 22% chromium. 22Cr2Mo with 22% chromium behaved
better on corrosion resistance in both the stimulated PEM fuel cell environment and real
fuel cell environment tests.
What’s more, the 22Cr2Mo formed chromium oxide passive
film after the test while the 19Cr2Mo formed iron oxide passive film. Based on this, they
thought at least 22% of chromium should be involved to form the chromium oxide passive
film[13]. The researchers focused on this discovery and did further research on the influence
of chromium content to the stainless steels. They studied the other stainless steels 310S,
304, and 316L. They performed the stimulated fuel cell test on these stainless steels for 1000
hours. The results were similar to previous work. The 310S stainless steels showed the best
corrosive resistance, and the 310S, also contained the largest amount of 22% chromium[14].
However, these works didn’t mean that the corrosive problem get solved. On the one hand,
stainless steels with high content of chromium could also be corroded especially when the
environment are more acidic. On the other hand, the chromium increase the total cost of
stainless steel bipolar plates a lot.
Page 5 of 52
==PAGE:14==
2.3
The modification on the metal bipolar plates surface
Other metals
There are other metals and their alloys which meet the requirement of bipolar plates
to be candidates.
Copper, aluminum, nikel and titanium and their alloys are the most
mentioned besides the stainless steels. However, unlike to the stainless steel, these other
metals and alloys generally are not be able to be the bipolar plates without any modification
on the surface.
2.3
The modification on the metal bipolar plates surface
2.3.1
Noble metal films
Noble metals are known for great chemical stability and electrical properties, and of
course, the high cost. And as the result, it was not rare to use noble metals as films for
protecting the bipolar plates surface. Wang et al. found that the gold-plated titanium bipolar
plates could prevent the formation of oxide layers with high resistance[15]. The contact
resistance was 0.0013 Ωwhich was a pretty low number. But the cost was pretty high to be
widely applied. Feng et al. implanted silver rich coating on the 316L stainless steel bipolar
plates. The coating side was tested in stimulated PEM fuel cell cathode environment. The
passive layer became thinner due to the silver rich coating which increase the polarization
resistance and the corrosion resistance.
The cost was low compare to the previous gold
coating[16].
2.3.2
Metal nitride films
The metal nitride films mainly includes, niobium nitride, tantalum nitride, chromium
nitride and titanium nitride. Chromium nitride and titanium nitride were widely investigated
due to its acceptable cost. Wang et al. studied the performance of CrN, TiN, TiAlN and 316L
stainless steel in different environment. The results showed that in O2 enrich environment,
the 316L stainless steel had highest corrosion resistance. But in H2 enriched environment
which should be acidic, the CrN and TiN both had higher corrosion resistance. However,
the TiN had much higher corrosion current density than CrN. That mean CrN was the
Page 6 of 52
==PAGE:15==
2.3
The modification on the metal bipolar plates surface
better choice to be used as protective coating for anode side of 316L stainless steel bipolar
plates[17]. Tian also coated CrN on the 316L stainless steel as bipolar plates. He found that
both corrosion resistance and interfacial contact resistance got better performance after the
coating[18]. Park et al. applied CrN/Cr coating on the 430 stainless steel surface. Their test
also showed a huge decrease for bot interfacial contact resistance and the corrosion current
density[19].
2.3.3
Metal carbide films
Compared to metal nitride films, metal carbides could even have better performance.
Fu et al. applied carbon film, CrC film and C–Cr–N film on the 316L stainless steel as
bipolar plates. They tested the films in stimulated PEM fuel cell environment. The CrC
film had a much lower interfacial contact resistance than others[20]. Wu et al. also focused
on the performance of CrC film on the 316L stainless steel. They prepared a series of CrC
films with different content of chromium and carbon for stimulated fuel cell tests. Unsurpris-
ingly, the more chromium the film contained, the better corrosion resistance and interfacial
conductivity it had. While the lower carbon they contained, the better performance they
had[21]. Bi et al. coated zirconium-carbon/amorphous carbon on 316L stainless steel as
bipolar plates. Both zirconium-carbon and amorphous carbon and mixture films behaved
much better on interfacial contact resistance and corrosion resistance[22]. The authors did
further research on the amorphous carbon film comprising Nb, Cr and Ti passivated seed
layers. They performed a high potential test to stimulate the running environment of a fuel
cell vehicle. The results showed that the amorphous carbon film with Nb and Ti are pretty
stable in high potential environment[23].
2.3.4
Conductive polymer films
Compared to other modification methods, conductive polymer film received much less
attention and had not been developed enough yet. The biggest problem may be the difficulty
for produce suitable polymer film on the metal surface. While conductive polymer film have
advantage on corrosion resistance, the interfacial contact resistance could be the another
Page 7 of 52
==PAGE:16==
2.4
The PEDOT:PSS conductive polymer
problem. Joseph et al. deposited polyaniline(PANI) and polypyrrole(PPY) on 304 stain-
less steel. They performed cyclic voltammetry and corrosion resistance test on the bipolar
plates. While the corrosion resistance got improved, the interfacial contact resistance are
pretty high especially when compared to the metal-based films[24]. Wang et al. also de-
posited polyaniline coating with Nb and TiO2 doped on 316L stainless steel by the method
of electro chemical deposition. The test for corrosion resistance showed an improvement of
corrosion resistance. What’s more important, the polymer film had high resistance in acidic
environment, which is critical for anodes of PEM fuel cells[25].
2.4
The PEDOT:PSS conductive polymer
The poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene): poly(styrenesulfonic acid)-PEDOT:PSS is one
of the most successful commercialized conductive polymers in the world. The structure of
PEDOT:PSS is shown below. This material had been widely applied in solar cell and semi-
conductive industries. The coating material of this projoect is exactly PEDOT:PSS. And it
is necessary to illustrate the basic characters of this material.
Figure 2: Chemical structure of PEDOT:PSS
2.4.1
The synthesis of PEDOT
There are three main polymerization routes for the synthesis of PEDOT. The transition
metal-mediated coupling of dihalogeno derivatives of EDOT, the electrochemical polymeriza-
Page 8 of 52
==PAGE:17==
2.4
The PEDOT:PSS conductive polymer
tion of EDOT-based monomers and the oxidative chemical polymerization of EDOT-based
monomers[26][27]. While the last one is the common method for the synthesis of commer-
cialized PEDOT today, most research focus on this route.
The oxidants used by early researchers are mainly Iron (III) complexes.
The Iron
(III) oxidates EDOT and the anions could be be the counter prat to stablize the formed
PEDOT solution system.
There are some typical complexes include Iron(III) chloride
(FeCl3), Iron(III) para-toluenesulfonate or tosylate (Fe(Tos)3) with Tos = (CH3C6H4SO3),
Iron(III) camphor sulfonate (Fe(C7H7OSO3)3) and Iron(III) trifluoromethanesulfonate or
triflate (Fe(OTf)3) with OTf = (CF3SO3 ) [28].
In 1990, a remarkable method was invented by Bayer AG. The Na2S2O8 in aqueous
polyelectrolyte solution oxidates EDOT and the polyelectrolyte especially PSS– stablize
PEDOT as counter anions[29]. And the product was PEDOT:PSS which is the main type of
commercilized PEDOT product. And base on the PEDOT:PSS, there are a lot of treatment
method to improve conductivity of the pristine PEDOT. And the details will be introduced
later. Winter-Jensen and West introduced a method to synthesize PEDOT by vapor phase
polymerization in 2004[30]. They used Fe(Tos)3 and pyridine as base and EDOT as vapors.
In 2005, Winther-Jensen and colleagues further developed the method. They mixed Fe(Tos)3,
pyridine and EDOT in n-butanol solvents. Then the solution was spin coated on the glass
and polymerization happened after heating[31]. These two methods for synthesizing PEDOT
then became the main routes for synthesis of PEDOT in lab.
2.4.2
The properties of PEDOT:PSS
There are many advantages for PEDOT:PSS as the coating. The high electrical conduc-
tivity is the most important one for its usage in cell industry. And unlike to solar cell, the
PEM fuel cell works in high temparature environment. Therefore, it requires high thermal
stability for the components. This is also one advantage the PEDOT:PSS have. What’s
more, it is very easy to form a PEDOT:PSS film which is also necessary when it is ap-
plied in industry. And due to the widespread research and applications, the commercialized
PEDOT:PSS product cost decrease a lot and is one of the lowest in conductive polymers.
Page 9 of 52
==PAGE:18==
2.4
The PEDOT:PSS conductive polymer
Besides the properties of PEDOT:PSS that we need in PEMFC application, the mechanism
for electrical conducting is very important as we need to improve the electrical conductivity
base on it. Similar to other conductive polymers, PEDOT:PSS consists of moleculars with
chains from different length. The total structure of PEDOT:PSS film is disordered, which
means the charge transport efficiency could be different regionally.
Figure 3: Microstructure of conjugated polymer films. a-c, Schematics of the microstructure
of a semicrystalline polymer film, for example P3HT (a), disordered aggregates (b) and a
completely amorphous film (c)[2].
To be more specific, the charge transport speed in a chain of a molecular will be the
highest. And the charge transport speed between two chain will be much lower. When
the two chain mainly stack in two planes, the speed could be the lowest. The differences
between charge transport efficiency in different condition cause the anisotropy of electrical
conductivity between the in plane direction and out of plane direction[32]. The conductivity
of out of plane could be lower than the conductivity by several magnitude of orders. To
enhance the electrical conductivity of PEDOT:PSS base on its structure, we could figure
out the methods to decrease the disordered level of PEDOT:PSS moleculars and therefore
increase the electrical conductivity. And unlike to other conductive polymers, PEDOT:PSS
consists with two components the PEDOT and the PSS. While the PEDOT is the conducting
component, the PSS is generally treated as the insulation. The PSS distribution in the final
PEDOT:PSS film is also one of the main factor that will influence the electrical conductivity.
Page 10 of 52
==PAGE:19==
2.4
The PEDOT:PSS conductive polymer
2.4.3
The approaches to improve conductivity of PEDOT:PSS
As we mentioned in last paragraph, the approaches to improve conductivity of PE-
DOT:PSS are critical here. The most common modification methods are thermal treatment
and organic solvents treatment. The organic solvents could be added during PEDOT:PSS
solution prepared period to help dispersion of PEDOT:PSS particle. Kim et al. was the
first one who reported a change of solvents of dimethyl sulfoxide, N,N-dimethyl formamide,
and tetrahydrofuran could increase the PEDOT:PSS film conductivity[33]. There are a lot
of different additive organic solvents that had been investigated. Table1 shows some great
enhancement by using different additive solvents.
Additive
Pristine conductivity(S·cm−1)
Conductivity with additive(S·cm−1)
Reference
DMSO
0.2(Clevios PH1000)
670.5
Lim et al.[34]
EG
0.4(Clevios PH500)
443
Yan et al.[35]
DMF
0.8
30
Kim et al.[33]
THF
0.8
4
Kim et al.[33]
Glycerol
0.2-1(Clevios PH500)
450
Lee et al.[36]
Sorbitol
0.24
118.3
Onorato et al.[37]
Methoxyethanol
0.003
0.61
Hu et al.[38]
Diethylene glycol
0.006
10
Crispin et al.[39]
Dimethyl sulfate
0.07(Clevios P)
132
Reyes-Reyes et al.[40]
Meso-erythritol
0.4
155
Ouyang et al.[41]
Table 1: The electrical conductivity of pristine PEDOT and PEDOT with additive.
Basically, the organic solvent should be high polarity to be additives. While the molec-
ular size of the organic solvent should not be too large. Because the space between PE-
DOT:PSS particles won’t be large enough for the additives. And after the PEDOT:PSS film
has been formed, the organic slovents can also be used as post treatment to the film. But
unlike to the organic solvents that can be used during dispersion and post treatment, acid
for example sulfric acid can only be used during post treatment process. Figure2.4.3 shows
typical process of enhancement of conductivity of PEDOT:PSS including solvent additive
methods and post treatment methods.
Page 11 of 52
==PAGE:20==
2.4
The PEDOT:PSS conductive polymer
Figure 4: Timeline of conductivity values for PEDOT:PSS[3]
.
And one thing that need to be mentioned, though the mechanism of enhancement of
conductivity is not totally clear. The mechanism of the organic solvents for dispersion and
post treatment are different with acid post treatment. This will be discussed in detail in
later chapter.
Page 12 of 52
==PAGE:21==
3
Experiment and method
3.1
Material preparation
The pristine PEDOT:PSS aqueous solution is commercialized product Clevios PH1000
bought from Heraeus and was stored in fridge. The chemicals used in the thesis were pur-
chased from VWR Chemicals, Honeywell and Sigma-Aldrich.
3.1.1
The preparation of casting substrates
The preparation of polymer substrates
Due to the requirement of later in plane conductivity measurement of PEDOT:PSS film,
the substrates used in this experiment are polymer films including polyimide (PI), Polyben-
zimidazole (PBI) and Polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE). While PBI films were produced in
lab by former researchers, the PI film and PTFE film were bought from Nordberg Tekniska.
The thickness of PI films are 76.2 µm and the thickness of PTFE films are 100 and 200 µm.
All the film substrates were cut off to 3x4 cm size. Then the films were washed by acetone
and ethanol by steps to remove possible organic and inorganic residue. Then the films were
blew under air flow for one minute to remove all the solvent and dirt from washing process.
Figure 5: The polymer substrates. (a) polyimide, (b) Polytetrafluoroethylene and (c) poly-
benzimidazole.
Page 13 of 52
==PAGE:22==
3.1
Material preparation
The preparation of metal tablets
The aluminum and 304 stainless steel tablets were produced by workshop of DTU energy.
The diagram of metal tablets were precise 1.2 cm while the thickness of the tablets were
around 1.5 mm which is not so relevant in our experiments. The face that will be coated
was polished. The polishing machine and grinding disc were from Struers. And the surface
of metal tablets were polish to a mirror finish.
Figure 6: The polishing of metal tablets. (a) unpolished metal tablet, (b) grinding discs
from rough to smooth and (c) polishing machine in working
3.1.2
The calibration and preparation of PEDOT:PSS solution
The calibration of concentration of PEDOT:PSS solution
The pristine PEDOT:PSS aqueous solution is Clevios PH1000 from Heraeus. The con-
centration labeled on the product was between 1 wt% to 1.3 wt%. The PEDOT:PSS solution
was dropped casted by a pipette on PI substrates and weighed. Then they were dried to
remove all solvents and weighed again. The concentration could be calculated by the ration
of two weights.
The calibration of thickness of PEDOT:PSS film
The pristine PEDOT:PSS solution was dropped casted by a pipette to a square shape
on PI substrates. The amount of solution that were used were weighed by a balance. Then
they were dried to remove all solvents and weighed again. The dried mass of PEDOT:PSS
were weighed out. Then the length, width and thickness of formed PEDOT:PSS films were
Page 14 of 52
==PAGE:23==
3.1
Material preparation
measured respectively. By calculating the volume of formed PEDOT:PSS film, we could get
a relation between the volume of PEDOT:PSS film and net weight of PEDOT:PSS polymer.
The preparation of PEDOT:PSS solution
0.95 ratio by weight of pristine PEDOT:PSS solution was weighed into several bottles.
0.05 dimethylacetamide(DMAc) and 0.05 ratio of ethylene glycol(EG) were weighed into the
bottles respectively. The bottles were shook for 10s for primary mixing. Then the magnetic
stirrers were added into the bottles and the solution were stirred for one hour. Then the
solution were under supersonic for 3 hours. And PEDOT:PSS solution with 5wt% additives
were prepared. By changing the solvent additives and ratio of pristine PEDOT:PSS solution,
all other PEDOT:PSS solution were prepared by the same method.
Figure 7:
The PEDOT:PSS solution.
(a) Pristine PEDOT:PSS solution and (b) PE-
DOT:PSS solution with 5wt% DMAc under magnetic stirring.
Page 15 of 52
==PAGE:24==
3.2
The formation of PEDOT:PSS film and coating with post treatment methods
3.2
The formation of PEDOT:PSS film and coating with post treat-
ment methods
3.2.1
Drop casting of PEDOT:PSS film and coating
After the PEDOT:PSS solution and the substrates including PI film and metal tablets
were prepared, take a clean pipette for casting. Drop casting the PEDOT:PSS solution on
the substrates through the pipettes. If the substrates were metal, then the weight of amount
of used PEDOT:PSS solution should be record for further calculation of the thickness of
PEDOT:PSS coating.
Figure 8: The PEDOT:PSS solution on PI substrates after drop casting.
Then the samples were dried under room temperature at fume hood for 20 hours and
on heating plates.
The specific drying process are different according to different cases,
including the changing of the drying time under room temperature and drying time and
drying temperature on heating plate.
Page 16 of 52
==PAGE:25==
3.2
The formation of PEDOT:PSS film and coating with post treatment methods
Figure 9: The PEDOT:PSS films on PI substrates dried on heating plate at 120◦C.
The selection of polymer substrates
The PEDOT:PSS films with pristine PEODT:PSS solution were produced by drop cast-
ing method on three polymer substrates, including polyimide (PI), Polybenzimidazole (PBI)
and Polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE). Then the samples were dried under room temperature
for 20 hours at fume hood.
3.2.2
Spray coating of PEDOT:PSS coatings on metal tablets
After the PEDOT:PSS solution and the stainless steel tablets were prepared, the spray
coating were processing by Exactcoat(PRO) from SONO-TEK. By changing the amount
of PEDOT:PSS solution for spray coating, the thickness of PEDOT:PSS coating can be
controlled.
And the metal tablets were heated on heating plate during the whole spray
coating process.
Page 17 of 52
==PAGE:26==
3.2
The formation of PEDOT:PSS film and coating with post treatment methods
Figure 10: The stainless steel tablets under spray coating at 100◦C.
3.2.3
The post treatment of PEDOT:PSS films and coatings
After the PEDOT:PS films and coating were prepared and dried, post treatment were
applied to samples respectively. The methanol and 1M H2SO4 were used for the post treat-
ment. For the PEDOT:PSS films on polymer substrates, the sample were dipped into the
methanol and 1M H2SO4 directly for different time. Then the samples were washed in deion-
ized water for one second to remove the solvents. Then the samples were dried on heating
plate at different temperature. And for the PEDOT:PSS coating on stainless steel tablets,
the samples were dipped into methanol directly. The 1M H2SO4 were dropped on the surface
of the coating to prevent corrosion of the metal. Then both the samples were washed deion-
ized water for one second to remove the solvents. And the samples were dried on heating
plate at different temperature.
Page 18 of 52
==PAGE:27==
3.3
The electrical conductivity of PEDOT:PSS films and coatings
3.3
The electrical conductivity of PEDOT:PSS films and coatings
3.3.1
The measurement of thickness and swelling effect
The thickness of PEDOT:PSS films were measured by thickness gauge.
During the
measurement, the average thickness of PEDOT:PSS films with PI substrates and the average
thickness of PI substrates were measured respectively. As the thickness of PI substrates were
76 µm according to the information from producer, to avoid the error of the thickness gauge,
the actual value of thickness of each PI substrates were measured by thickness gauge.
Figure 11: The thickness measurement. (a)The thickness measurement of PEDOT:PSS film
with substrates and (b) the thickness measurement in swelling effect experiment.
The swelling effect of PEDOT:PSS films
Several PEDOT:PSS films from pristine solution and solution with tetrahydrofuran
(THF) were prepared by the steps mentioned in former paragraphs. Two clean PTFE films
were prepared as protector during the thickness measurement. Then the thickness of PE-
DOT:PSS film samples were measured between two PTFE protectors. The PEDOT:PSS
film samples were dipped into methanol as post treatment for different time.
After the
samples were took out from the methanol, quickly remove the solvent on the surface and
measured the thickness between the PTFE protectors. As the fig11 shows, the protector was
Page 19 of 52
==PAGE:28==
3.3
The electrical conductivity of PEDOT:PSS films and coatings
helping spread the pressure from the thickness gauge. Then the swelling samples were dried
on heating plate at 120◦C for 10 mins. The thickness of dried samples were measured again
between the PTFE protectors.
3.3.2
The measurement of in plane conductivity of PEDOT:PSS films
The setup for measurement of in plane conductivity was constructed by technician and
the ohmmeter for measurement of the electrical resistance was KETHLEY175 AUTORANG-
ING MULTIMETER.
Figure 12: The setup for measurement of in plane conductivity. (a)The schematic diagram
of the setup and (b) the setup.
As figure12 shows, the structure of the setup mainly consists of holder, electrode and
ohmmeter. While the holder is insulated platic, it can also provide the force to the samples,
which could decrease the contact resistance. And the PI substrates are also insulation, the
ohmmeter which connected with electrode can gain the current and voltage information
from the PEDOT:PSS films at in plane direction. The calculation of the conductivity of
PEDOT:PSS film follows the formula3 below:
σ =
l
R · A
(1)
Page 20 of 52
==PAGE:29==
3.3
The electrical conductivity of PEDOT:PSS films and coatings
The σ is the electrical conductivity at in plane direction. And l is the distance be-
tween two electrodes, which is 2.0 cm in this setup. The resistance R was measured by the
ohmmeter. And the cross section A was calculated by the width and the thickness of the
PEDOT:PSS film. There is of course internal resistance of the setup and could be error of
the method. By using aluminum foil to test the internal resistance of the setup, we could
mainly diminish the influence from the internal resistance. According to the result, the error
of value of internal resistance is 2 magnitude of orders less than the value of resistance of
PEDOT:PSS film.
3.3.3
The measurement of out of plane conductivity of PEDOT:PSS coatings
While the basic principle of the measurement of out of plane conductivity of PE-
DOT:PSS coating is the same as the measurement of in plane condcutivity, the changing of
measuring direction decrease more than 4 magnitude of orders of the value of the result of
measured resistance. So it requires much higher accuracy of the setup. The figure13 below
shows the structure of setup.
Figure 13: The setup for measurement of out of plane conductivity.
(a)The schematic
diagram of the setup and (b) the setup.
Page 21 of 52
==PAGE:30==
3.3
The electrical conductivity of PEDOT:PSS films and coatings
The shematic diagram shows the general structure of the setup and the electrodes were
connected with a potentialstat. And for the pressure sensor, because of the range of the
sensors, two sensors were used in the measurement. The small and accurate one is for range
0 to 35 kg, and the large one is for range above 35 kg. The one in figure13 (b) was the large
one. There was a protector around the electrodes and metal tablets, which is not shown
in schematic diagram. It was mainly for help align the metal tablets and electrode, and
was insulated itself which would not influence the current. The same formula was used for
calculation:
σ =
l
R · A
(2)
But the symbol represent different physical values. The σ is the electrical conductivity
at out of plane direction. And l is the thichkness between two electrodes, which is calculated
by the relation between volume of PEDOT:PSS film and amount of PEDOT:PSS. The
resistance R was measured by potentialstat, which was VersaSTAT 3 from AMETEK. The
program of potentiostat was cyclic voltammetry from -0.1 mV to 0.1 mV and the out of plane
resistance was the slope of I-V curves of cyclic voltammetry. And the cross section A was
calculated by the radius of the meatal tablets which is 0.6 cm in this setup. And unlikely
to the measurement of in plane resistance, the measurement of out of plane resistance was
influnced a lot by the contact resistance. So the use of compressor is necessary to diminish
part of contact resistance. The pressure sensor provided the value of pressure on vertical
direction.
Page 22 of 52
==PAGE:31==
4
Result and discussion
4.1
The PEDOT:PSS films
4.1.1
Preparation of PEDOT:PSS film and selection of polymer substrates
The main requirement for substrates is to be able to form great quality of PEDOT:PSS
film on it. And due to the requirement of in plane conductivity measurement, the substrates
must be insulated. Besides these, it will be better if the substrates are easily gained and
processed. Base on these requirements, we had three competitors, polyimide (PI), polyben-
zimidazole (PBI) and polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE). All the samples were dried in fume
hood and room temperature overnight. The thickness of the films are around 10 to 20 µm
for all samples produced by drop casting, while the width of the films are around 0.6 cm to
1.5 cm.
Figure 14: The comparison of formation of PEDOT:PSS film on polymer substrates. Before
drying, (a) polyimide (b) polytetrafluoroethylene and (c) polybenzimidazole. After drying,
(d) polyimide (e) polytetrafluoroethylene and (f) polybenzimidazole. Pristine PEDOT:PSS
solution used.
Page 23 of 52
==PAGE:32==
4.1
The PEDOT:PSS films
Firstly, we need to compare the contact angle between the PEDOT:PSS solution and
the substrates. Because it determines whether regularly shaped film can be formed. And the
contact angle of PEDOT:PSS solution on PTFE substrate was obviously too large according
to figure14(b). We could find the PEDOT:PSS concentrated in middle during the drying
process. The PTFE substrates are out of consideration obviously. For PI and PBI, the
contact angle of PI is a little bit larger than the PBI but not too much.
PEDOT:PSS
films formed well on both two substrates. But considering the PI polymer was bought from
commercialized company and the surface is more smooth and even, the PI polymer was
definitely the better one as the substrates for producing PEDOT:PSS film in this work.
4.1.2
Conductivity enhancement of PEDOT:PSS film
As Chapter 2 metioned, there are a lot of methods for enhancing electrical conductiv-
ity of PEDOT:PSS film. In our work, the investigation of enehancement of conductivity
mainly locates at three processes, the organic solvent additives for PEDOT:PSS solution,
the temperature in crying process and the post treatment methods. For easily understand-
ing the whole process, figure15 shows the processes that were controlled in this work. It
must be noted that all the conductivity in this subsection are in plane conductivity of the
PEDOT:PSS films.
Figure 15: The steps for preparation of PEDOT:PSS films. Blue arrows indicate the pro-
cesses that were controlled in this work.
Page 24 of 52
==PAGE:33==
4.1
The PEDOT:PSS films
Organic solvent additives in PEDOT:PSS solution
Adding organic solvents as additives in PEDOT:PSS solution is the most common
methods to improve the final conductivity. The type of organic solvents and the concen-
tration both influence the conductivity.
The organic solvents that we used as additives
included tetrahydrofuran (THF), polyethylene glycol (PEG200), ethylene glycol (EG), N,N-
Dimethylacetamide (DMAc) and N,N-Dimethylformamide (DMF). All organic solvents were
added as 5 wt% to PEDOT:PSS solution. All the samples were drop casted and dried in
fume hood overnight Then the samples were heated on heating plates at 120◦C for 10 mins.
Figure 16: The conductivity of PEDOT:PSS films by additive concentration.
According to the figure above, the conductivity of PEDOT:PSS film were improved
from 0.29 S/cm to more than 1000 times by adding organic solvents. The mechanism for
these huge improvement can be divided into 3 possible reasons. Firstly, the additives help
dispersion of PEDOT:PSS in the solution. As we mentioned before, the speed of charge
transport in molecular is much higher than the speed between the moleculars. While the
PEDOT:PSS are particles in the solution, it is important to distribute the PEDOT:PSS
particles evenly to improve the charge transport between the moleculars. Secondly, while we
Page 25 of 52
==PAGE:34==
4.1
The PEDOT:PSS films
know that the PEDOT is the conducting part and PSS is the insulated part of PEDOT:PSS,
if the connection between PEDOT and PSS could be decreased, the PEDOT will be easier
to contact with other PEDOT moleculars.
And the transport of charge will be easier,
which means the improvement of the conductivity. For the solvent additvies, the polarity of
them allow them to combine with negative PSS ions and positive PEDOT ions to decrease
the combination of PEDOT and PSS. The weaker connection between PEDOT and PSS
leads the improvement of conductivity. And thirdly, the additvies could decrease the π-π
stacking distance between two PEDOT ions at side by side directing, which will be easier
for charge transport[42]. To achieve this, the solvents additives must have high boiling point
to be evaporated slower than the water. During evaporated process in the formation of
film, while most of water evaporate earlier than the additives, the remain organic solvents
could provide a less aqueous environment for crystallization of PEDOT and decrease the
π-π stacking distance. All three mechanism are not individuate and both contribute to the
improvement of conductivity.
So when we come back to the difference of the results.The THF additives improved the
conductivity slightly. This is because the polarity of THF is not high enough compared to
other solvents and didn’t help a lot for both the first and second mechanism. Meanwhile
the boiling point of THF is also very low, so it couldn’t help at the third mechanism. So it
is reasonable that THF behaved badly in this aspect. For PEG200 and EG, the EG have
nearly 100◦C boiling point than PEG200, and the size of EG molecular is also smaller than
PEG200. Both of these advantages allow EG to have better performance on enhancing the
conductivity. For DMAc and DMF, the size of DMF is much smaller than DMAc, and the
polarity of DMF is also higher than DMAc’s. Though the boilng point of DMF is a little bit
lower than DMAc, DMF also behaved some kind better than DMAc.
Page 26 of 52
==PAGE:35==
4.1
The PEDOT:PSS films
Figure 17: The conductivity of PEDOT:PSS films with organic solvents as additives by
concentration. All samples were dried in room temperature and heated for 10 min to make
sure total evaporation of solvents. Drop casting method and no post treatment.
The figure17 above shows the influence of additive concentration. For EG additive,
higher concentration didn’t influence the conductivity a lot. But for DMAc, the conductiv-
ity decrease with increase of concentration. The phase separation could be main reason of
lower conductivity when concentration is high. This will be discussed lately in this chapter.
While the molecular weight of solvent additives are much lower than the PEDOT:PSS, low
concentration is enough for additives to play their role. Generally we could use low concen-
tration for additives to get a good performance for improving conductivity of PEDOT:PSS
films.
Page 27 of 52
==PAGE:36==
4.1
The PEDOT:PSS films
Temperature control for drying process
As the figure15 shows, the temperature control could happen in drying condition 1 and
2. We will discuss by step.
Figure 18: The conductivity of PEDOT:PSS films by drying temperature. (a) Drying con-
dition 1, 30 wt% EG as additive, the samples were partly dried in fume hood for 10 hours,
then dried on heating plates at different temperature, the RT one dried in room temperature
for the whole progress, dipped in methanol for 10 minutes as post treatment. (b) Drying
condition 2, 15 wt% EG and DMAc as additives,
Due to the drop casting method we used in this work, if we dry the samples immediately
after drop casting, there will be sparks in the solution and the films we got are poor and
fragmented. So the samples were dried in room temperature at fume hood to evaporate
part of the water, then dried on heating plate at different temperature to evaporate all
the solvents. For the result of figure18 (a), the sample which dried at 120◦C have the best
performance on conductivity than other samples, but the difference is not so large. And even
the one which dried in room temperature totally have a good conductivity. Considering the
difficulty to control drying temperature and time for different solution due to the difference
of the boiling point and the little difference of the conductivity, the samples were decided
to be dried in room temperature to evaporate most of solvents and then dried on heating
Page 28 of 52
==PAGE:37==
4.1
The PEDOT:PSS films
plate at 120◦C to remove rest of the solvents. And for figure18 (b), while the conductivity
of samples with 15 wt% EG are close at different drying temperature at drying condition 1,
the conductivity of samples with 15 wt% DMAc is the highest at 120◦C at drying condition
2. So the samples were decided to be dried on heating plates at 120◦C for 10 mintures after
post treatment for later experiments of producing PEDOT:PSS films.
Page 29 of 52
==PAGE:38==
4.1
The PEDOT:PSS films
Post treatment for PEDOT:PSS films
Organic solvents and acid are two typical types of solution for post treatment of the
film. The PEDOT:PSS were dipped into the solvents, by controlling the time and we could
primarily investigated the effect of post treatment on conductivity. And what we discovered
above, the films were formed with 5 wt% of additives and dried in room temperature. Then
the samples were heated on heating plate at 120◦C for 10 mins. And the samples were ready
for post treatment.
Figure 19: The conductivity of PEDOT:PSS films by additives and post treatment. The
PEDOT:PSS films were formed with 5 wt% of additives and dried in room temperature.
Then the samples were heated on heating plate at 120◦C for 10 mins. The samples were
dipped into solution for 10 minutes and then dried on heating plate at 120◦C for 10 mins.
As figure19 shown, there are obvious improvement of conductivity after the samples
were dipped into methanol for 10 minutes.
And for pristine PEDOT:PSS solution, the
conductivity dramatically increase for 2,500 times.
As we discussed before, the THF as
additives didn’t help a lot on improving conductivity.
But with the post treatment of
methanol, the conductivity can be improved almost as high as other additives. When we
look at the H2SO4, the improvement didn’t happen for all samples. As we have discussed
the mechanisms for organic solvents as additives, the mechanism of methanol post treatment
could be similar to the solvent additives. The methanol decrease the combination between
Page 30 of 52
==PAGE:39==
4.1
The PEDOT:PSS films
PEDOT ions and PSS ions, and then increase the connection between different PEDOT ions.
But the mechanism for H2SO4 may be different, in the cases that the films didn’t get treated
with organic solvents in the whole process, the improvement of conductivity by H2SO4 post
treatment may not be so great. And as the methanol post treatment could improve the
conductivity close to the values reported by other authors, for example 830 S/cm compared
to 1360 S/cm[43], the improvement of H2SO4 post treatment is not so excited. Both of these
could be explained by the thickness of PEDOT:PSS films. The films that we produced are
around 10 to 20 µm, while the thickness of films are mostly 50 to 500 nm in other’s work. The
methanol molecular is very small and can enter into the PEDOT:PSS easily. So the thickness
didn’t influence a lot on the efficiency of improvement. Meanwhile the H2SO4 molecular is
much larger, and the sulfonate and hydron tends to combine with PSS, the H2SO4 is harder
to fulfill inside of the PEDOT:PSS. So in this case, the difference of thickness could be a
huge problem.
Figure 20: The conductivity of PEDOT:PSS films by post treatment time. (a) methanol
post treatment and (b)H2SO4 post treatment. The PEDOT:PSS films were formed with 5
wt% and 30 wt% of additives and dried in room temperature. Then the samples were heated
on heating plate at 120◦C for 10 mins. The samples were dipped into solution for different
time and then dried on heating plate at 120◦C for 10 mins.
Figure?? shows the changing of conductivity by post treatment time. The improved
values are too low to figure out a trend. With the time increasing, the conductivity could
Page 31 of 52
==PAGE:40==
4.1
The PEDOT:PSS films
increase and decrease. In Kim’s work, the conductivity also change like this[44]. And we’d
better to see a dramatically increase in a short treating time.
Figure 21: The conductivity of PEDOT:PSS films by post treatment time. The PEDOT:PSS
films were formed with 5 wt% THF as additives and dried in room temperature. Then the
samples were heated on heating plate at 120◦C for 10 mins. The samples were dipped into
methanol for different time and then dried on heating plate at 120◦C for 10 mins.
Figure21 shows that the conductivity increase 300 times after only 5 second methanol
post treatment. And after 30 seconds post treatment of methanol, the conductivity can be
improved as high as 600 seconds. So combing the results above, the post treatment for at
least methanol doesn’t need a long time, and once it arrives to the highest level, longger
time didn’t help on improving conductivity further. In general, although 10 minutes for post
treatment may not be the best but it can achieve the best level. And apply 10 minutes on
post treatment is reasonable for other cases.
Page 32 of 52
==PAGE:41==
4.1
The PEDOT:PSS films
4.1.3
The structure of the PEDOT:PSS films
Swelling of PEDOT:PSS film
During the experiments of post treatment, we observed that after the dipping, the
PEDOT:PSS film swelled and the thickness increase. And the the changing of thickness
were record.
Figure 22: The thickness changing of pristine PEDOT:PSS films after swelling and dried.The
films were drop casted and dried in dried in room temperature before the test. Then the
films were dipped into methanol for different times and measured thickness immediately
after swelling.
As figure22 above shown, the thickness increase a lot during the dipping process. It
can reach more than 300% of the origin thickness. And even dipping for 5 seconds, the
swelling is very close to the highest. While in post treatment, the value of enhancement of
conductivity can onlu reach half of the highest value. That indicates that the process of the
changing of the structure of PEDOT:PSS films mainly happen during the drying process
after post treatment. Extending the time that the PEDOT:PSS films dipped in methanol
also contributes to the changing of the structure. And there are slightly decrease of the
thickness, which could be the removal of PSS.
Page 33 of 52
==PAGE:42==
4.1
The PEDOT:PSS films
Phase separation of PEDOT:PSS films
We have discussed a lot about the PEDOT part and PSS part of PEDOT:PSS. To help
PEDOT solute in water, the existance of PSS is necessary. However, during the process
of formation of PEDOT:PSS films, we can remove the PSS as much as possible for better
connection of PEDOT ions.
Figure 23: Schematic illustration of the phase separation in a slow-drying PEDOT:PSS
droplet. PEDOT:PSS in 50% DMSO:H2O[4].
Ouyang’s work indicated that there is phase separation in the process of solvent evap-
oration of PEDOT:PSS solution. The higher concentration of organic solvent additive, the
obvious phase separation could happen[4].
Page 34 of 52
==PAGE:43==
4.1
The PEDOT:PSS films
Figure 24: The photograph of phase separation in forming PEDOT:PSS films. PEDOT:PSS
in 50 wt% EG aqueous solution. Red line circled separated PSS.
The phase separation of PSS could decrease the insulated part in PEDOT:PSS film,
which is positive to improve the conductivity. It’s easily to imagine that the phase separation
could happen at in plane direction because of the space on a plane. But when we coat on
a metal tablets, the in plane border is limited. And if there is similar phase separation
happened, it could be in out of plane direction which could negatively influence the out of
plane conductivity a lot.
The goal for producing PEDOT:PSS films is to figure out a method which could be used
in metal coating to form PEDOT:PSS film with great condcutivity. As we couldn’t find out
the best method, a great one is possible. The concentration of solvent additives do not
have to be very high. The drying temperature can be applied around 120◦C. And methanol
dipping as post treatment could also be a great choice for PEDOT:PSS coating. While the
process of coating is some kind different with film forming, the mechanism of enhancement
of conductivity can provide clue for the coating.
Page 35 of 52
==PAGE:44==
4.2
PEDOT:PSS coating on metal tablets
4.2
PEDOT:PSS coating on metal tablets
4.2.1
Preparation of PEDOT:PSS coating on metal tablets
Following the steps introduced in last chapter, the stainless steel 304L (SS) tablets and
aluminum tablets were prepared after polishing. According to results from PEDOT:PSS
films and considering the requirement for dispersion of metal surface, 5 wt% DMAc were
added as additives to the PEDOT:PSS solution. The coating were drop cast and dried in
room temperature for 20 hours to remove most of the solvent. Then the samples were heated
on heating plate at 120◦C for 10 mins.
Figure 25: The photograph of coating on metal tablets. The left one is aluminum based and
the right one is SS based.
As we can see in figure25, there are a lot of particles in the surface of PEDOT:PSS
coating on aluminum tablet, while the coating on SS tablet looks smooth and even. This
phenomenon indicates that during the first 20 hours drying period, the PEDOT:PSS crys-
tallized from the solution on aluminum tablet. And the difference of micro structure of these
two metal tablets could be the reason. By changing the additives, the problem could not be
solved. Considering stainless steel is one of the main competitor for producing metal bipolar
plates, the coating was only applied on stainless steel tablets for further experiments.
Page 36 of 52
==PAGE:45==
4.2
PEDOT:PSS coating on metal tablets
4.2.2
Out of plane conductivity measurement
Compaction force effect on contact resistance
Unlike to the in plane conductivity measurement, the contact resistance could influence
the result of out of plane conductivity a lot due to the large contacting surface of the
electrodes. By adding the pressure on the contacting surface, the contact resistance could
be partly reduced. According to Jensen’s work, with the increase of the compaction force
on the contacing surface, the total resistance will be stable[45], which means the contact
resistance were reduced as possible.
Figure 26: The resistance vs compaction force of PEDOT:PSS coated SS tablet. (a) Orig-
inal data, the I-V curves for different pressure and (b) the resistance vs compaction force.
The metal coating was coated with PEDOT:PSS solution with 5 wt% EG, dried in room
temperature and heated on heating plate at 120◦C for 10 mins.
The I-V curves at different pressure in figure26(a) clearly shows the decrease of the
slope when the pressure increase. And we can get figure26(b). It shows that the resistance
dramatically decrease at the begin, with the increase of compaction force, the trend of
decrease of resistance become smooth. At around 5 Mpa, the resistance start to be stable.
And till 30 Mpa, the resistance decrease slightly. Through the plots, we can determine the
compaction force which could prove a reliable resistance.
Page 37 of 52
==PAGE:46==
4.2
PEDOT:PSS coating on metal tablets
Calibration of the methods
As mentioned before, the out of plane conductivity is very easy to be influenced in the
measurement because of the tiny values. Hence, the calibration of the setup is extremely
important.
Figure 27: The resistance vs compaction force of blank SS tablets.
The figure27 shows the same trend with the figure26(b), the resistance start to be flat
for around 5 Mpa. While the curves overlap well when the compaction force is high, the
poor overlap is caused by the accuracy during little pressure. And the micro structure of the
surface of different tablets could be different, hence the contact resistance may vary a lot at
low compaction force range. Through the plots, we can calibrate the internal resistance of
the setup. And the value is 0.0055 Ω.
And the setup is not specilized for out of plane conductivity measurement, there could
be tiny gap between part of the coating and electrode, which will increase the resistance and
influence the accuracy a lot. So adding a high conducting carbon paper between the coating
and electrode could be a great choice. The calibratin of the carbon paper should also be
Page 38 of 52
==PAGE:47==
4.2
PEDOT:PSS coating on metal tablets
performed.
Figure 28: The resistance vs compaction force of blank SS tablets and SS tablets with a
carbon paper.
After adding a carbon paper on the coating, the resistance are obvious much higher at
low compaction forces. This is because the carbon paper itself is soft and a little bit fluffy,
it requires higher force to decrease the contact resistance. However, this property could be
advantage to allow fully contact between the coating and electrode. According to the results,
the internal resistance of the setup when a carbon paper applied increase to 0.0079 Ω.
Page 39 of 52
==PAGE:48==
4.2
PEDOT:PSS coating on metal tablets
Measurement of coating with methods from PEDOT film preparation
After we finished the calibration, we could measure the out of plane conductivity now.
According to the discussion at last subsection, the method of 5 wt% DMAc additives and
methanol post treatment should be a good choice.
Figure 29: (a) The resistance vs compaction force of PEDOT:PSS coating on SS tablets with
a carbon paper (b) The out of plane conductivity vs compaction force of PEDOT:PSS coating
on SS tablets. The solution contain 5 wt% DMAc as additive, without post treatment.
Just like the process of calibration, we could plot figure29 (a) by caculating the slope
of I-V curves. Then following the formula:
σ =
l
R · A
(3)
The σ is the electrical conductivity at out of plane direction. And l is the thickness
of PEDOT:PSS coating, which can be calculated through the relationship of PEDOT:PSS
volume and net weight. According to the result of calibration of thickness of PEDOT:PSS
film, 1g PEDOT:PSS molecular equal to 834 mm3. The resistance R was calculated by result
from figure29(a) and calibrated internal resistance. And the cross section A was the area
of metal tablets. There is of course internal resistance of the setup and could be the error
of the method. Then we could get figure29(b). The curves are great but the value is too
Page 40 of 52
==PAGE:49==
4.2
PEDOT:PSS coating on metal tablets
tiny and is even 6 magnitude of orders less than the in plane conductivity. And we could of
course apply post treatment on it.
Figure 30: (a) The resistance vs compaction force of PEDOT:PSS coating on SS tablets
with a carbon paper (b) The out of plane conductivity vs compaction force of PEDOT:PSS
coating on SS tablets. The PEDOT:PSS solution contain 5 wt% DMAc as additive, samp
1 and 2 without post treatment, samp 3 and 4 treated by methanol for 10 mins and then
dried.
Obviously, after methanol post treatment, the out of plane conductivity increase 3 times
than before. However it is still 6 magnitude of orders less than the in plane conductivity.
It is true that the PEDOT:PSS, as a conductive polymer, do have anisotropy on electrical
conductivity between the out of plane direction and in plane direction. However, according
to the report from Na’s, it’s possible to decrease the difference to one or two magnitude
of orders[46]. Although the coating method and substrates are very different between our
works, it should be reasonable to have huge potential to improve the out of plane conductivity
in our case.
Page 41 of 52
==PAGE:50==
4.2
PEDOT:PSS coating on metal tablets
Figure 31: The conductivity vs coating thickness, measured with a carbon paper.
The
PEDOT:PSS solution contain 5 wt% DMAc as additive, blue plots without post treatment,
orange plots treated by methanol for 10 mins and then dried.
By changing the thickness, the improvement of conductivity is still slight and new
method needed for further improvement.
Page 42 of 52
==PAGE:51==
4.2
PEDOT:PSS coating on metal tablets
Spray coating method
As we have discussed in last subsection, the phase separation of PSS on out of plane
direction could be a problem for the application of drop casting on PEDOT:PSS coat. We
need to figure out a method that could diminish the phase separation. Spray coating seems
to be a good choice. The amount for each spray is very tiny and the SS tablets could be
heated while being coating. In this case, the PEDOT:PSS will crystallized quickly after
contact the tablets, and there is no time for PSS to enrich.
Tait and his colleagues reported a method for spray coating the PEDOT:PSS on non
metal substrates [47]. As the time limited, we follow their ratio of PEDOT:PSS solution
for spray coating on SS tablets. The solution consists of consisted of 19.7 vol% pristine
PEDOT:PSS solution, 6.0 vol% H2O, 73.0 vol% IPA and 1.3 vol% ethylene glycol.
Figure 32: The photograph of PEDOT:PSS coating by spray coating method.
(a) PE-
DOT:PSS coating with the thickness of 200 nm, (b) PEDOT:PSS coating with the thickness
of 2 µm
As figure32 shows, the PEDOT:PSS coating looks dense and stick on the surface of SS
tablets tightly. The color is also different with coating by drop coating method, which is an
indication of the difference in micro structure. As we were coating on metal tablets which is
different, the heating temperature in the process could be important.
Page 43 of 52
==PAGE:52==
4.2
PEDOT:PSS coating on metal tablets
Figure 33: The out of plane conductivity of PEDOT:PSS coating by temperature in coat-
ing, measured with a carbon paper.The solution consists of consisted of 19.7 vol% pristine
PEDOT:PSS solution, 6.0 vol% H2O, 73.0 vol% IPA and 1.3 vol% ethylene glycol, no post
treatment.
The figure33 clearly shows the difference of the out of plane conductivity, 100 ◦C is the
best among them in spray coating process. The thickness of these coating are 200 nm. And
it can easily calculate that, if the out of plane conductivity of the PEDOT:PSS coating large
than one magnitude than the values from drop casting, the resistance will be too small to
be detected. Hence, it is necessary to increase the thickness of the coating by spraying more
ink.
Page 44 of 52
==PAGE:53==
4.2
PEDOT:PSS coating on metal tablets
Figure 34: (a) The resistance vs compaction force of PEDOT:PSS coating on SS tablets
by spray coating. (b) The out of plane conductivity vs compaction force of PEDOT:PSS
coating on SS tablets. The PEDOT:PSS solution contain 5 wt% DMAc as additive, samp
1 and 2 without post treatment, samp 3 and 4 treated by methanol for 10 mins and then
dried.
And as figure34 shows, the out of plane conductivity of PEDOT:PSS coating increase a
lot by using spray coating method. In figure (a), the trend of sample 3 and 4 looks similar to
the trend of other samples, and in figure (b), the trend are totally different. This is because
when compaction force keep increase, the resistance also decrease slightly. In this case, the
resistance is too low and very close to zero, which means the range of the setup may limit
the performance of the coating. Another interesting thing is that after post treatment of
methanol, the out of plane conductivity increased almost 1000 times, it can be imagined
that the structure of PEDOT:PSS coating by spay coating method could be very different
with the coating by drop casting method. As we discussed before, prevent phase separation
could be the key to improve out of plane conductivity.
Page 45 of 52
==PAGE:54==
5
Conclusion and outlook
In this work, it is successful to produce PEDOT:PSS films on PI substrates. The in plane
conductivity of the PEDOT:PSS films had been improved to a decent level to around 900
Scm−1. And the methods for conductivity enhancement had been some kind investigated.
In detail, the concentration and the type of solvent additives had both huge influence on
the quality. And the drying temperature, post treatment method could also influence the in
plane conductivity a lot. Basically, for organic solvents as additives to PEDOT:PSS solution,
the concentration don’t have to be so high, 5 wt% is proper for common cases. The boiling
points and polarity of the solvents should be high enough for a better enhancement. And the
best drying temperature should be at middle level and may differ a lot for different solvent
environment. Although there is not a best plan discovered for producing perfect PEDOT:PSS
film, the in plane conductivity of PEDOT:PSS films are improved high enough. Generally,
the requirement for in plane conductivity of PEDOT:PSS films are fulfilled. The treating
steps and method are able to be used in PEDOT:PSS metal coating.
The process of coating PEDOT:PSS on the surface of stainless steel table are succeed.
The coating are even and smooth. However, by replicating the producing methods from
PEDOT:PSS film, the out of plane conductivity of stainless steel PEDOT:PSS coating are
several magnitude of orders less than the in plane conductivity of PEDOT:PSS film from the
same producing method. Changing the factors which work well in producing PEDOT:PSS
films didn’t help on PEDOT:PSS coating.
Reducing phase separation of PSS could be
the key to improve the out of plane conductivity. Hence, spray coating were applied to
PEDOT:PSS coating. And the out of plane conductivity of PEDOT:PSS coating from spray
coating method were increased to 0.14 Scm−1 which is three magnitude of orders higher
than drop casting method.
The spray coating method was not dug in deep and could be improved by far in the
steps including the ratio of spraying ink and post treatment process. According to the results
from all experiments above, the clue to increase the out of plane conductivity is also weaken
the PSS ions. Besides the methods that had been tried in this work, the combination of
Page 46 of 52
==PAGE:55==
the use of high polarity organic solvents and acid could help due to different mechanism on
improving conductivity. And it will be reasonable to improve the out of plane conductivity
by one or two magnitude of orders. And the coating for metal tablets, as a preliminary work
for application for fuel cell, have a long way to go for application in fuel cell. The biggest
problem is still the value of out of plane conductivity.
To generally fulfill the whole plan of the project, there are many experiments that seems
not so great, which can be expanded to gain stronger or more persuasive conclusion. For
example, as mentioned before, the polarity and boiling point are both important for solvent
additive, it will be better if we can use solvents which have significant difference at these
two factors. And another excited one is the treating time of methanol. If we can prepare a
large amount of samples and test the enhancement of conductivity by second, we could get
a great result and may have better clue and understanding of the process of methanol post
treatment.
Page 47 of 52
==PAGE:56==
References
References
[1] Stucture of pemfc stack. https://www.horiba.com/fra/scientific/applications/
energy/pages/proton-exchange-membrane-fuel-cell-bipolar-plate-analyses-by-gd-oes-a
[2] Rodrigo Noriega, Jonathan Rivnay, Koen Vandewal, Felix PV Koch, Natalie Stingelin,
Paul Smith, Michael F Toney, and Alberto Salleo.
A general relationship between
disorder, aggregation and charge transport in conjugated polymers. Nature materials,
12(11):1038–1044, 2013.
[3] Hui Shi, Congcong Liu, Qinglin Jiang, and Jingkun Xu. Effective approaches to improve
the electrical conductivity of pedot: Pss: a review.
Advanced Electronic Materials,
1(4):1500017, 2015.
[4] Liangqi Ouyang, Chiara Musumeci, Mohammad J Jafari, Thomas Ederth, and Olle
Inganas. Imaging the phase separation between pedot and polyelectrolytes during pro-
cessing of highly conductive pedot: Pss films.
ACS applied materials & interfaces,
7(35):19764–19773, 2015.
[5] James Hansen, Makiko Sato, Reto Ruedy, Ken Lo, David W. Lea, and Martin Medina-
Elizade. Global temperature change. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,
103(39):14288–14293, 2006.
[6] Robert C. Makkus, Arno H.H. Janssen, Frank A. de Bruijn, and Ronald K.A.M. Mallant.
Stainless steel for cost-competitive bipolar plates in pemfcs. Fuel Cells Bulletin, 3(17):5–
9, 2000.
[7] Radwan Dweiri and Jaafar Sahari. Electrical properties of carbon-based polypropylene
composites for bipolar plates in polymer electrolyte membrane fuel cell (pemfc). Journal
of Power Sources, 171(2):424–432, 2007.
[8] Li gang Xia, Ai ju Li, Wei qiang Wang, Qiang Yin, Heng Lin, and Yi bo Zhao. Effects
of resin content and preparing conditions on the properties of polyphenylene sulfide
resin/graphite composite for bipolar plate. Journal of Power Sources, 178(1):363–367,
2008.
[9] Mathis Wissler. Graphite and carbon powders for electrochemical applications. Journal
of Power Sources, 156(2):142–150, 2006.
[10] Development of bipolar plates for fuel cells from graphite filled wet-lay material and a
compatible thermoplastic laminate skin layer. Journal of Power Sources, 168(2):418–
425, 2007.
[11] B.K. Kakati, D. Sathiyamoorthy, and A. Verma. Electrochemical and mechanical be-
havior of carbon composite bipolar plate for fuel cell. International Journal of Hydrogen
Energy, 35(9):4185–4194, 2010.
Page 48 of 52
==PAGE:57==
References
[12] Heli Wang, Mary Ann Sweikart, and John A Turner. Stainless steel as bipolar plate ma-
terial for polymer electrolyte membrane fuel cells. Journal of Power Sources, 115(2):243–
251, 2003.
[13] Masanobu Kumagai, Seung-Taek Myung, Takuma Ichikawa, and Hitoshi Yashiro. Ap-
plicability of extra low interstitials ferritic stainless steels for bipolar plates of proton
exchange membrane fuel cells. Journal of Power Sources, 195(21):7181–7186, 2010.
[14] Masanobu Kumagai, Seung-Taek Myung, Yasuyuki Katada, and Hitoshi Yashiro. Sta-
bility of type 310s stainless steel bipolar plates tested at various current densities in
proton exchange membrane fuel cells. Electrochimica Acta, 211:754–760, 2016.
[15] Szu-Hua Wang, Jinchyau Peng, Wai-Bun Lui, and Jin-Sheng Zhang. Performance of
the gold-plated titanium bipolar plates for the light weight pem fuel cells. Journal of
Power Sources, 162(1):486–491, 2006.
[16] Kai Feng, Zhuguo Li, Xun Cai, and Paul K. Chu. Silver implanted 316l stainless steel
as bipolar plates in polymer electrolyte membrane fuel cells. Materials Chemistry and
Physics, 126(1):6–11, 2011.
[17] L. Wang, D.O. Northwood, X. Nie, J. Housden, E. Spain, A. Leyland, and A. Matthews.
Corrosion properties and contact resistance of tin, tialn and crn coatings in simu-
lated proton exchange membrane fuel cell environments. Journal of Power Sources,
195(12):3814–3821, 2010.
[18] Rujin Tian. Chromium nitride/cr coated 316l stainless steel as bipolar plate for proton
exchange membrane fuel cell. Journal of Power Sources, 196(3):1258–1263, 2011.
[19] Young-Chul Park, Se-Hee Lee, Sang-Kyung Kim, Seongyop Lim, Doo-Hwan Jung, Se-
Young Choi, Jong-Hee Kim, and Dong-Hyun Peck. Effects of crn/cr coating layer on
durability ofÂ metal bipolar plates under a fuel recirculation system of direct methanol
fuel cells. International Journal of Hydrogen Energy, 38(25):10567–10576, 2013.
[20] Yu Fu, Guoqiang Lin, Ming Hou, Bo Wu, Zhigang Shao, and Baolian Yi. Carbon-based
films coated 316l stainless steel as bipolar plate for proton exchange membrane fuel
cells. International Journal of Hydrogen Energy, 34(1):405–409, 2009.
[21] Bo Wu, Guoqiang Lin, Yu Fu, Ming Hou, and Baolian Yi. Chromium-containing car-
bon film on stainless steel as bipolar plates for proton exchange membrane fuel cells.
International Journal of Hydrogen Energy, 35(24):13255–13261, 2010. 3rd Asian Bio
Hydrogen Symposium.
[22] Feifei Bi, Linfa Peng, Peiyun Yi, and Xinmin Lai. Multilayered zrâc/a-c film on stainless
steel 316l as bipolar plates for proton exchange membrane fuel cells. Journal of Power
Sources, 314:58–65, 2016.
Page 49 of 52
==PAGE:58==
References
[23] Feifei Bi, Xiaobo Li, Peiyun Yi, Kun Hou, Linfa Peng, and Xinmin Lai. Characteristics
of amorphous carbon films to resist high potential impact in pemfcs bipolar plates for
automotive application. International Journal of Hydrogen Energy, 42(20):14279–14289,
2017.
[24] Shine Joseph, J.C. McClure, R. Chianelli, P. Pich, and P.J. Sebastian. Conducting
polymer-coated stainless steel bipolar plates for proton exchange membrane fuel cells
(pemfc). International Journal of Hydrogen Energy, 30(12):1339–1344, 2005. Cancun
2003.
[25] Yanli Wang, Shenghua Zhang, Ping Wang, Zhaoxia Lu, Shibo Chen, and Lisheng Wang.
Synthesis and corrosion protection of nb doped tio2 nanopowders modified polyaniline
coating on 316 stainless steel bipolar plates for proton-exchange membrane fuel cells.
Progress in Organic Coatings, 137:105327, 2019.
[26] Andreas Elschner, Stephan Kirchmeyer, Wilfried Lovenich, Udo Merker, and Knud
Reuter. PEDOT: principles and applications of an intrinsically conductive polymer.
CRC press, 2010.
[27] Jean Roncali, Philippe Blanchard, and Pierre Frère. 3, 4-ethylenedioxythiophene (edot)
as a versatile building block for advanced functional π-conjugated systems. Journal of
Materials Chemistry, 15(16):1589–1610, 2005.
[28] Magatte N Gueye, Alexandre Carella, Jérôme Faure-Vincent, Renaud Demadrille, and
Jean-Pierre Simonato. Progress in understanding structure and transport properties of
pedot-based materials: A critical review. Progress in Materials Science, 108:100616,
2020.
[29] Eun Jin Bae, Young Hun Kang, Kwang-Suk Jang, and Song Yun Cho. Enhancement
of thermoelectric properties of pedot: Pss and tellurium-pedot: Pss hybrid composites
by simple chemical treatment. Scientific reports, 6(1):1–10, 2016.
[30] Bjørn Winther-Jensen and Keld West.
Vapor-phase polymerization of 3,
4-
ethylenedioxythiophene: a route to highly conducting polymer surface layers. Macro-
molecules, 37(12):4538–4543, 2004.
[31] Bjørn Winther-Jensen, Dag W Breiby, and Keld West. Base inhibited oxidative poly-
merization of 3, 4-ethylenedioxythiophene with iron (iii) tosylate.
Synthetic metals,
152(1-3):1–4, 2005.
[32] Kevin van de Ruit, Ilias Katsouras, Dirk Bollen, Ton van Mol, René AJ Janssen, Dago M
de Leeuw, and Martijn Kemerink. The curious out-of-plane conductivity of pedot: Pss.
Advanced Functional Materials, 23(46):5787–5793, 2013.
[33] J.Y. Kim, J.H. Jung, D.E. Lee, and J. Joo. Enhancement of electrical conductivity
of poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene)/poly(4-styrenesulfonate) by a change of solvents.
Synthetic Metals, 126(2):311–316, 2002.
Page 50 of 52
==PAGE:59==
References
[34] Kyounga Lim, Sunghoon Jung, Seunghun Lee, Jinhee Heo, Juyun Park, Jae-Wook
Kang, Yong-Cheol Kang, and Do-Geun Kim. The enhancement of electrical and optical
properties of pedot: Pss using one-step dynamic etching for flexible application. Organic
Electronics, 15(8):1849–1855, 2014.
[35] Hu Yan, Toshihiko Jo, and Hidenori Okuzaki. Highly conductive and transparent poly
(3, 4-ethylenedioxythiophene)/poly (4-styrenesulfonate)(pedot/pss) thin films. Polymer
journal, 41(12):1028–1029, 2009.
[36] Myung-Won Lee, Mi-Young Lee, Jae-Cheol Choi, Jong-Seung Park, and Chung-Kun
Song. Fine patterning of glycerol-doped pedot: Pss on hydrophobic pvp dielectric with
ink jet for source and drain electrode of otfts. Organic Electronics, 11(5):854–859, 2010.
[37] Amber Onorato, Michael A Invernale, Ian D Berghorn, Christopher Pavlik, Gregory A
Sotzing, and Michael B Smith. Enhanced conductivity in sorbitol-treated pedot–pss.
observation of an in situ cyclodehydration reaction. Synthetic Metals, 160(21-22):2284–
2289, 2010.
[38] Ziyang Hu, Jianjun Zhang, and Yuejin Zhu. Effects of solvent-treated pedot: Pss on
organic photovoltaic devices. Renewable Energy, 62:100–105, 2014.
[39] Xavier Crispin, FLE Jakobsson, Annica Crispin, PCM Grim, Peter Andersson, A v
Volodin, Christian Van Haesendonck, Mark Van der Auweraer, William R Sala-
neck, and Magnus Berggren.
The origin of the high conductivity of poly (3, 4-
ethylenedioxythiophene)- poly (styrenesulfonate)(pedot- pss) plastic electrodes. Chem-
istry of Materials, 18(18):4354–4360, 2006.
[40] Marisol Reyes-Reyes, Isidro Cruz-Cruz, and Román López-Sandoval. Enhancement of
the electrical conductivity in pedot: Pss films by the addition of dimethyl sulfate. The
Journal of Physical Chemistry C, 114(47):20220–20224, 2010.
[41] Jianyong Ouyang, C-W Chu, F-C Chen, Qianfei Xu, and Yang Yang. High-conductivity
poly (3, 4-ethylenedioxythiophene): poly (styrene sulfonate) film and its application in
polymer optoelectronic devices. Advanced Functional Materials, 15(2):203–208, 2005.
[42] Claudia M Palumbiny, Feng Liu, Thomas P Russell, Alexander Hexemer, Cheng Wang,
and Peter Müller-Buschbaum. The crystallization of pedot: Pss polymeric electrodes
probed in situ during printing. Advanced materials, 27(22):3391–3397, 2015.
[43] Desalegn Alemu, Hung-Yu Wei, Kuo-Chuan Ho, and Chih-Wei Chu. Highly conductive
pedot:pss electrode by simple film treatment with methanol for ito-free polymer solar
cells. Energy Environ. Sci., 5:9662–9671, 2012.
[44] Yong Hyun Kim, Christoph Sachse, Michael L Machala, Christian May, Lars Müller-
Meskamp, and Karl Leo. Highly conductive pedot: Pss electrode with optimized solvent
and thermal post-treatment for ito-free organic solar cells. Advanced Functional Mate-
rials, 21(6):1076–1081, 2011.
Page 51 of 52
==PAGE:60==
References
[45] Annemette Hindhede Jensen, Erik Christensen, and Jens H Von Barner. Contact re-
sistance of tantalum coatings in fuel cells and electrolyzers using acidic electrolytes at
elevated temperatures. ECS Electrochemistry Letters, 3(7):F50, 2014.
[46] Seok-In Na, Gunuk Wang, Seok-Soon Kim, Tae-Wook Kim, Seung-Hwan Oh, Byung-
Kwan Yu, Takhee Lee, and Dong-Yu Kim. Evolution of nanomorphology and anisotropic
conductivity in solvent-modified pedot: Pss films for polymeric anodes of polymer solar
cells. Journal of Materials Chemistry, 19(47):9045–9053, 2009.
[47] Jeffrey G Tait, Brian J Worfolk, Samuel A Maloney, Tate C Hauger, Anastasia L Elias,
Jillian M Buriak, and Kenneth D Harris. Spray coated high-conductivity pedot: Pss
transparent electrodes for stretchable and mechanically-robust organic solar cells. Solar
Energy Materials and Solar Cells, 110:98–106, 2013.
Page 52 of 52
