==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Biomedical Engineering
DTU Health Tech
Printable cell-adherent elastomer membranes
For mechanically active tissue culture devices
Anubhav Dureja (s175397)
Kongens Lyngby 2023
==PAGE:2==
DTU Healthtech
Department of Health Technology
Technical University of Denmark
Produktionstorvet
Building 423
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
There is a need for cheaper alternatives to animal testing in preclinical drug trials, in particular in
vitro cardiac models are needed. Here, we propose a new direct ink writing (DIW) three dimensionally
(3D) printed in vitro cardiac muscle model, that we believe can address this need by more accurately
modeling in vivo testing. This device is based on a multilayered design, where all five layers combined
produce culture conditions closer to that seen in vivo. My thesis describes the property requirements
for the materials needed to produce this proposed device using 3D printing, and which materials could
potentially meet these requirements. I discuss the development of two parts of the envisioned device
using selected materials: a cell adhesive layer (gelatin hydrogel) combined with an interfacial adhesive
(poly(vinyl alcohol) azide-unit pendant water-soluble crosslinkable photopolymer (PVA-AWP) (Tokyo
Gosei, BIOSURFINE TM)) and a flexible membrane (styrene-ethylene-butylene-styrene). I find that
the materials I propose, and the two parts I manufacture in this thesis, are functional within the mini-
mum specifications of the proposed device. In specific, fabrication protocols for an interfacial adhesive
layer and cell adherent layer that support C2C12 myoblast culture for 35 days without significant de-
lamination, and a flexible membrane capable of producing physiological strains (5-25% area expansion)
are provided.
==PAGE:4==
Preface
This M.Sc. thesis was prepared at the department of Health Technology at the Technical University of
Denmark in fulfillment of the requirements for acquiring a M.Sc. degree in Biomedical Engineering.
Supervisors:
Associate Professor, Johan Ulrik Lind
Postdoctoral Researcher, Shayla Nikzad
Kongens Lyngby, July 6, 2023
Anubhav Dureja (s175397)
Project Period:
6th February 2023 - 6th July 2023
ECTS:
30 Points
Education:
M.Sc.Eng.
Field:
Biomedical Engineering
Edition:
1st edition
Copyrights:
©Anubhav Dureja, 2023
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
I would like to start by thanking my main supervisor, Groupleader and Associate Professor, Johan
Ulrik Lind. Thank you for giving me the opportunity to work on this project and providing guidance
throughout. I would also like to extend my gratitude to postdoctoral researcher, Shayla Nikzad for
being my day-to-day supervisor and answering any question I may have had regardless of complexity.
You even helped me with my personal life. It is hard to formulate in words how much your help was
appreciated throughout my project, but I hope that you yourself know. Thank you Shayla.
Next I want everyone from TMAT to know that I loved getting to know you and appreciate the help
with all the small things along the way. You made an unfamiliar building feel like home. Thank you
Irene, Carmen, Sarkhan, Asli, Marko, Dora, Tasnim and Jason. A special thank you to Jason for a
cozy oﬀice atmosphere and open chats.
Outside of the group I would like to thank the building staff who make it possible to perform exper-
iments and provide guidance on equipment. Helene, Lotte and the rest of you. I hope retirement is
treating you well Ole, it was a pleasure receiving your aid.
As a finishing note, I would like to thank my family and friends for their support throughout not only
my project, but my entire education - I would never have gotten this far without you.
Thank you all.
==PAGE:6==
Abbreviations
DIW
Direct ink writing
3D
Three dimensional
R&D
Research and development
ECM
Extracellular matrix
FFF
Fused filament fabrication
FTIR
Fourier-transform infrared spectroscopy
IR
Infrared
ATR-FTIR
Attenuated total reflectance-FTIR
PS
Polystyrene
SEBS
Styrene-ethylene-butylene-styrene
UV
Ultraviolet
UVO
Ultraviolet/ozone
TCPS
Tissue culture polystyrene
PDMS
Polydimethylsiloxane
mTG
microbial Transglutaminase
PVA-AWP
Poly(vinyl alcohol) azide-unit pendant water-soluble photopolymer
PVA
Poly(vinyl alcohol)
CAD
Computer aided design
PBS
Phosphate-buffered saline
P/S
Penicillin/streptomycin
LAF
Laminar air flow
DMEM
Dulbecco’s modified eagle medium
FBS
Fetal bovine serum
HS
Horse serum
H2O
Water
IPA
Isopropyl alcohol
DI
Deionized
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
ii
Acknowledgements
iii
Abbreviations
iv
Contents
v
1
Introduction
1
2
Background
4
2.1
Motivation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2
Heart anatomy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.3
Cell cultures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.4
DIW 3D printing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.5
Plate bending theory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.6
Fourier transform infrared . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3
Part 1: Cell-adherent coatings
12
3.1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.2
Materials and methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.3
Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.4
Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
3.5
Conclusions & future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4
Part 2: Suspended membrane fabrication
35
4.1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.2
Materials and methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.3
Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
4.4
Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
4.5
Conclusions & future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
5
Overall conclusions and future work
47
A
BIOSURFINE
48
B
Full delamination data set and more cell images
50
C
Gelatin thickness plots
54
D
Full dataset for suspended membrane test
55
Bibliography
56
==PAGE:8==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
A number of biophysical in vitro cardiac models have already been reported, some of which are com-
mercially available. These devices are intended to provide faster and more accurate assays on how
drugs might affect the ventricles and atria of the heart.
One such device is the CellDrum and its
successor the FLEXcyte96 [1]. The key benefits of assays using this device is the ability to strain the
tissue, mimicking the strain cardiac tissue experiences when the heart is filled with blood (diastole).
InnoVitro (innoVitro GmbH, Jülich, Germany), the makers of the FLEXcyte describe it as ”...ultra-thin
and hyperelastic silicone membranes instead of stiff plastic surfaces as basis for human iPSC-derived
cardiomyocytes” [1]. Their technology uses the weight of the culture medium to deflect membranes and
they rely on the mature cardiomyocytes to contract and cause changes in the length of the membrane.
These changes can be measured and the stress calculated. The problem with both the CellDrum and
the FLEXcyte96 is that they do not offer any way of controlling the cell architecture and thus the strain
in relation to the cell orientation.
A device proposed by Dou et al. [2], attempted to solve this by radially aligning cells. While this
strategy is an improvement, it will not give uniform strain to the cells. The main issues with the device
proposed by Dou et al. are the thickness, which, in spite of the naming, is not ultrathin (25 um) and
the longevity of their cell culture. The thickness on its own is not a problem. The problem occurs when
the thickness and the modulus of elasticity are combined. If their membrane had an ultralow modulus
and was easily deflectable that would not be an issue. However, their modulus is not ultralow and they
compensate by using large pneumatic pressure (1.7 kPa for 15% increase in membrane area [2, 3]) to
generate physiologically relevant strains. This is less practical and makes it diﬀicult for cardiomyocytes
to contract. For the cell culture, they only show seven days of culture with no further explanation. One
can only assume that the cells were not viable after this point in time. To determine long term effects
during preclinical in vitro drug testing, more than seven days of culture may be necessary as illustrated
by Dragoj et al. [4].
To address these challenges, including thick membranes that are diﬀicult to deflect, lack of long-term
cell cultures, and lack of anisotropic membranes in state of the art, we aim to develop the device
shown in Figure 1.1. This device is comprised of a patterned cell adhesion surface that will allow
for long-term cell culture, an interfacial adhesive to glue the layers together, a flexible membrane ca-
pable of physiologically relevant deformations (defined as 15% [2, 3]) when subject to hydrodynamic
pressure, a strain gauge, and finally an anisotropic stretch created by differences in thickness of the
flexible membrane that will allow cells to align in combination with patterning of the cell adhesion layer.
Figure 1.1 shows how I imagine the device will look. The side view shows the stack of layers and the
top down view shows the slice in the center that will be thicker to allow for anisotropic deformation. On
the bottom left of Figure 1.1 a conceptual drawing of the strain is given. The uniform (single layer)
membrane bends towards the center equally from all equidistant points, which is also how the device
proposed by Dou et al. functions [2]. The image to the right of that is how our envisioned device will
function. The anisotropic stretch is produced by printing multiple layers in the pink colored section
causing it to be thicker and less prone to deflection. This is illustrated on the side view below the strain
sketches, another layer of the same material is added to increase the thickness. To the right of the
first side view an imagined deformation curve is shown for each membrane. The uniform membrane
==PAGE:9==
1 Introduction
2
Figure 1.1: An illustration of the envisioned device, This is a concept drawing of what our
envisioned device may look like.
It is shown as a six well device with a multilayered
suspended membrane at the bottom. A magnified side view is shown in the box with
dotted lines. Beneath the magnified view a top down view is given. The bottom left of
the figure shows the design of the flexible membrane. Overlaid on the top down view of
the membrane design, there are arrows showing the strain direction from their point of
origin.
has a half sphere like shape when viewed from the side, while the anisotropic membrane features a flat
bottom section with sides that deform more to compensate, but only when viewed from the sides where
the extra layers reach the edge.
We aim to fabricate the device in Figure 1.1 using direct ink writing (DIW) 3D (three dimensional)
printing. DIW 3D printing is chosen for this project due to its versatility when prototyping. The layer-
by-layer construction method in itself is a benefit, as it removes the labours associated with traditional
bonding and assembly of separately manufactured components. Another positive aspect is the ability
to easily create new patterns and shapes without the need for molds. Additionally, the printers in our
lab have multiple print heads to print multiple materials without changing the cartridge.
Our device will require print materials with different properties. The material layers required for the
device are summarized in Figure 1.2. As seen on Figure 1.2 we need a flexible membrane, a flexible
strain gauge, an interfacial adhesive, and a cell adhesion layer. The flexible membrane must consist
of a material soft enough to deform to physiologically relevant strains under hydrodynamic pressure.
Furthermore, it is desired that this layer be deflectable from the forces generated by the tissue grown
in the final device. The flexible strain gauge must be sensitive enough to measure contraction on a
cellular level. The cell adhesion layer will be a hydrogel as these have been reported to support long
term cell culture [5, 6]. Bonding of hydrogels to non-porous substrates has been reported as diﬀicult
[7, 8] because of water evaporation and weak interface bonding due to high water content [9]. Li et al.
==PAGE:10==
1 Introduction
3
solved this issue by using chemical bonding [9]. I aim to do the same with the interfacial adhesive layer.
The interfacial layer needs to secure the flexible layers and cell adhesive layer mechanically. Finally,
all of the mentioned layers should be as thin as possible. The desire for thin membranes stems from a
basic idea in plate bending (see section 2.5).
Figure 1.2: The layers required for our device, This figure shows the many layers deemed neces-
sary for overcoming current challenges faced in the pharmaceutical industry when testing
drug candidates in the post discovery phases.
In this thesis, I develop the materials and print protocols for the cell and interface adhesive layers (Chap-
ter 1) and the flexible membrane (Chapter 2). The integration of these layers with cells is demonstrated
using skeletal muscle cells (C2C12). The development of the electronic components of the proposed
device is not the focus of this thesis, still, I highlight here that 3D printed soft strain sensors capable of
gauging cellular contraction have been reported [10]. In future work the layers reported in this thesis
will be integrated with similar materials to produce a print in place flexible membrane that is both cell
adherent, able to measure electrical signals, and stimulate cells electrically.
For our device (Figure 1.1), I aim to match the thickness and deformability of state of the art solutions
like the cell drum (1-10 um, Young’s modulus 30 kPa reported by the manufacturer [11]. This value is
presumably local as silicone elastomers typically have Young’s modulus around 500-750 kPa at the low
end [12, 13]) presented by Linder et al. among others [1, 11, 14] and the device by Dou et al. (25 um,
Young’s modulus 1.27 MPa, 624 kPa locally [2]).
In summary, my thesis introduces methods for fabricating:
1. A cell adhesive layer
2. An interfacial adhesive layer
3. A suspended membrane
For use in an in vitro cardiac model for preclinical research.
==PAGE:11==
CHAPTER 2
Background
2.1
Motivation
Pharmaceutical companies produce drugs, advanced medicinal products, and pandemic-ending vaccines.
A typical pharmaceutical research and development (R&D) program, takes an early discovery (often
from academia) and turns it into a commercial product over the course of 10-15 years. The cost of
this process is often more than 1 billion USD [15, 16]. Outside of being costly, this process is lengthy,
arduous, and prone to ending in expensive failure. Less than 10% of therapies that enter this R&D
cycle make their way to market. The pharmaceutical companies must recoup the cost of the failing 90%
through sales of the succeeding 10%, making new drugs more expensive [15].
The high cost of pharmaceuticals is problematic as it renders some patients, especially those in countries
suffering poverty, unable to access treatment for illnesses they may suffer. One method of combating
this is reducing the cost of failed R&D programs [17]. Do note that this is no trivial challenge and will
require great innovation and effort.
To reduce the cost of failure we must first look at why drug development programs fail. Drug develop-
ment programs are faced with two major challenges: they must demonstrate eﬀicacy and safety. Eﬀicacy
is the ability of the therapeutic to treat or cure a disease. Safety refers to the therapeutics effects on
the human body, it must not harm subjects by altering normal human physiology. This means that a
therapy must specifically target the few mechanisms within the human body causing disease and alter
them to a state where they no longer significantly affect the life quality of the patient. This is quite
diﬀicult as the human body houses millions of biological processes and mechanisms on a molecular scale
that allow us to function.
During a research program these two challenges are assessed in multiple phases. Preliminary studies
include thousands of potential new medicines but are quickly narrowed down to hundreds as they un-
dergo high-throughput in vitro assays quickly screening out any candidates that fail to demonstrate
safety. The next stages include progressively larger animal models that are meant to provide more
human-relevant data. This funnel like process is shown on Figure 2.1. The ethics of animal models
will not be discussed but it is safe to say the topic is sensitive and heavily debated. Besides being
controversial, animal studies are also costly amounting to 17.2% of the total R&D budget of a pharma-
ceutical company [18]. This cost is beat only by the exceedingly expensive clinical trials performed on
humans. The average cost of clinical trials is a little less than half the average R&D budget at 48.5%
as seen on Figure 2.2.
We believe this process could be made more time and cost eﬀicient through the development of better
in vitro tools, which more accurately model in vivo tissues, for preclinical research. In vitro cardiac
models are particularly important because, in addition to the prevalence of cardiac diseases [19, 20, 21],
cardiac side effects are the most common cause for drug candidate failure during clinical trials [22, 23].
Our envisioned device is intended to replace animal models and given enough technological advance-
ment, similar devices could replace human testing. This will reduce the development costs by making
pharmaceutical companies less reliant on expensive in vivo testing.
==PAGE:12==
2.2 Heart anatomy
5
Figure 2.1: The phases of drug development, This figure is modified from [18]. The figure shows
the R&D pipeline of drugs from basic research and discovery up to market approval and
post launch monitoring of long term effects and side effects. Overlaid on the stages is a
triangular shape that narrows to illustrate how few drugs make it past each stage.
Figure 2.2: Breakdown of an R&D budget in a pharmaceutical company, This figure is
reproduced from [18]. The figure shows the average R&D budget of a pharmaceutical
company. The chart is divided into the major expenses including some phases of drug
development as well as regulatory approval and post launch surveillance.
2.2
Heart anatomy
Figure 2.3 shows a cross section of a human heart. The heart consists of two atria and two ventricles.
These four chambers are connected by valves that ensure unidirectional flow. These chambers and the
heart as a whole are wrapped in pericardium, myocardium, and endocardium. The myocardium is
shown in a magnified view on Figure 2.3. The myocardium is made up of cardiomyocytes, these form
the muscle fibers responsible for the pumping function of the heart. This contractile pumping behavior
is what I aim to model. The magnified view on Figure 2.3 shows how these muscle fibers are aligned
locally and the connections between cardiomycytes known as intercalated disks. What I ultimately
want to model are these cardiomyocytes. This local alignment of cells is important as this is exactly
what is missing in the membrane-based models currently considered state of the art [1, 2]. Because
these cells are locally aligned, cells within a local area will undergo unidirectional strain.
==PAGE:13==
2.2 Heart anatomy
6
Figure 2.3: Anatomy of the human heart, Reproduced from [24]. This figure shows a cross section
of the human heart as well as a magnified cross section of the myocardium.
2.2.1
Myogenesis
The ideal in vitro model of cardiac muscle would mimic the organization of myofibers seen in the human
heart (Figure 2.3). It would also feature electrical stimulus like the action potentials seen in the body,
allowing cardiomyocytes to experience mechanical stress and stimulation such that they can develop
into mature myofibers.
In order to develop an in vitro cardiac muscle model I use C2C12 as an affordable model. Mature
myofibers start their life as pluripotent stem cells that undergo a developmental process involving many
signalling factors and environmental cues [25]. The environment the cells mature in in vivo is known
as the extracellular matrix (ECM). The ECM is made up of collagen, glycoproteins and elastin and is
malleable as the cells develop [26]. The presence of a highly specific ECM alongside signalling factors
causes pluripotent stem cells to become myoblasts. Figure 2.4 shows this process step by step, from
pluripotent stem cells into myotubes and mature myofibers. C2C12 cells are myoblasts that are capable
of differentiating into myotubes and, given enough time, multinucleated myofibers [27] reminiscent of
striated human skeletal muscle.
Figure 2.4: Maturation of myofibers, Modified from [25]. This figure shows the development of a
cell from being a pluripotent stem cell up to a mature myofiber.
==PAGE:14==
2.3 Cell cultures
7
2.3
Cell cultures
The following subsections provide background information on the cells I use within this thesis and some
background on cell cultures in general. The cells used herein are skeletal muscle cells (myoblasts), from
an immortalized mouse cell line. For the sake of this thesis, these mimic cardiac muscle tissue as both
are striated muscle.
2.3.1
C2C12
C2C12 is an immortalized mouse cell line commonly used in micro physiological systems, another name
for in vitro models of organs. C2C12 cells are a skeletal myocyte line originally isolated by Yaffe et al.
in 1977 [28]. The cell line is derived from a two month old C3H mouse. C2C12 cells have the ability to
spontaneously differentiate in culture when serum is removed and can potentially form aligned elongated
myotubes [29]. Because of these abilities the cell line has seen widespread use in tissue engineering [30,
31, 32]. The widespread use of C2C12 can be attributed to reducing the use of animals, the easy and
homogeneous culture, as well as short experiment time [30]. One of the limitations of C2C12 is the fact
that it is derived from a mouse. It will inevitably differ from primary human cells and human tissue.
Furthermore, I am using these cells for a cardiac model despite their skeletal nature. All of these factors
should be kept in mind when working with C2C12 as despite the many similarities the results are not
perfectly representative.
2.4
DIW 3D printing
Direct ink writing 3D printing is a type of extrusion based 3D printing, specifically it is extrusion
without the use of heating or cooling [33]. Instead the rheological properties of the material are used
to print it. Extrusion is the oﬀicial name given to a specific 3D printing process where a material is
dispensed through a nozzle or orifice. Extrusion is the most common, and the simplest, 3D printing
technique. DIW is used extensively in this thesis to manufacture thin films from a variety of materials.
For the extrusion itself a variety of techniques are used. I will discuss pneumatic, piston-based, and
screws. Pneumatic (or pressure-based) is simply using air to push the material out of the nozzle. Piston-
based extrusion is similar to pneumatic in that it pushes material out of the nozzle, the difference lies
in the fine control. When using air you cannot be sure of the exact amount of material that is being
extruded. When using a piston coupled with a stepper motor and fine gearing, it is possible to very
precisely control the volume of material that is extruded. Piston-based dispensing is also known as
volumetric dispensing. Screw extrusion, like its name, contains a screw where material is deposited and
moved down through the threading of the screw as it rotates. The three types of extrusion can be seen
on Figure 2.5.
==PAGE:15==
2.4 DIW 3D printing
8
Figure 2.5: Types of extrusion, Figure reproduced from [34]. On the left, screw-driven extrusion,
where material is fed into a rotating screw and the threading is the main driver. In the
middle, a piston driven extrusion system where a plunger pushes material out of the nozzle.
On the right, a pneumatic system where pressurized air pushes material out of the nozzle.
2.4.1
DIW inks
DIW uses the rheological properties of the ink to enable printing.
This means that in contrast to
fused filament fabrication (FFF) 3D printing where the plastic melt congeals to create structures, in
DIW the rheological properties cause the ink to flow and in most cases transition to a semi-solid state
after leaving the nozzle. To understand how this works, we must understand what Newtonian and
non-Newtonian fluids are. Figure 2.6a shows a Newtonian fluid, these are fluids like water where the
viscosity (slope of the line) is constant and independent of shear rate. Figure 2.6b shows a shear-
thinning material.
Shear-thinning materials experience a decrease in viscosity with increased shear
stress. Figure 2.6c is the opposite, when shear stress increases the viscosity increases - this is called
shear-thickening. Figure 2.6d shows a Bingham plastic that exhibits shear-thinning behavior (often
called a Herschel–Bulkley fluid). A Bingham plastic is a viscoplastic material, in other words, the mate-
rial behaves like a rigid body at low stresses (no flow, slope=1) but flows once a certain stress is reached,
this is called the yield stress. A household example of this is toothpaste, it does not flow until a certain
pressure is applied to the tube. Figure 2.6e shows a Bingham plastic with Newtonian flow properties
(constant slope) when above the yield stress. To be completely clear the two graphs labeled Bingham
plastic (viscoplastic materials) could just as well be for viscoelastic materials. The difference between
the two is that viscoplastics (Bingham plastics) deform irrecoverably and viscoelastics can recover from
deformation [35].
DIW inks are commonly viscoelastic materials with a yield stress as these will not clog the nozzle nor
extrude when no pressure is applied. Furthermore, once the ink exits the nozzle it returns to its rigid
body behavior giving structure to the print. The inks I use in this thesis are often Newtonian with a
low viscosity (slope <0.5). The mode of solidification is solvent evaporation. Due to these properties I
use volumetric printing (a stepper motor controlling a plunger) with a user-definable flow rate. My inks
are also unsuitable for traditional layer-by-layer construction of 3D objects because of their rheological
properties. They tend to flow. This is not an issue for my intended use case as I aim to print thin films.
Printing thin films is an atypical use of DIW 3D printing but not unheard of, Lind et al. have used
DIW for the same purpose [10].
==PAGE:16==
2.4 DIW 3D printing
9
Figure 2.6: Shear rate depending on shear stress of different fluid types, Reproduced from
[36]. The figure shows the flow behavior of different fluids under stress.
2.4.1.1
Viscoelastic materials
This section is a brief insight into viscoelastic materials and why they behave the way they do. The
behavior of viscoelastic materials is based on two material properties, the elastic modulus and the
viscous modulus (G’, G”). These moduli greatly affect how a material responds to shear stress. While
the elastic modulus dominates (Figure 2.7 (2)) the material behaves like a solid and does not flow.
Once the viscous modulus is larger the material behaves like a fluid and flows (Figure 2.7 (1)). These
materials are known as viscoelastic solids, those with the opposite behavior, i.e.
viscous modulus
dominating at low stress, are known as viscoelastic fluids. These properties are important when DIW
3D printing as seen on the right side of Figure 2.7, the viscous modulus is larger due to the high shear
stress when the material is in the nozzle. Once the material has been deposited, the shear stress falls
and the elastic modulus dominates causing solid-like behavior. The elastic modulus is the cause behind
the shift in the y axis (the yield stress) before flow begins on Figure 2.6.
Figure 2.7: Viscoelastic behavior dependent on stress, Reproduced from [37].
Left shows a
graph of the elastic and viscous modulus of a material. Right, is a nozzle with material
flowing out. The two numbers designate what phase the material is in while being printed
and once deposited.
==PAGE:17==
2.5 Plate bending theory
10
2.5
Plate bending theory
The reason we wish for our device to be as thin as possible is because we want to be able to produce
physiologically relevant deformations using reasonable amounts of hydrodynamic pressure in the form
of culture medium, and we also want muscle cells to be able to contract the membrane.
For the following calculations we assume that the central part of our membrane, the anisotropic strain
region from Figure 1.1, is a rectangular plate fixed at both edges. Using the Kirchhoff-Love plate
theory and given a uniform distribution of load over a rectangular plate of thickness, H, Young’s
modulus, E, and Poisson’s ratio, v, we can calculate the flexural rigidity, D, as:
D =
E ∗H3
12 ∗(1 −v2)
(2.1)
The flexural rigidity, D, is defined as the force couple required to bend a fixed non-rigid structure
by a unit of curvature or simply as the resistance of a structure when undergoing bending [38, 39].
Poisson’s ratio and Young’s modulus are material constants. Given that these are non-zero, changing
the thickness of the plate results in a significant change in D, the resistance to bending. In fact, a
doubling of the thickness gives an 8x increase in the flexural rigidity (Equation 2.1). The flexural
rigidity is used in the Germain-Lagrange plate equation to calculate small deflections of thin rectangular
plates [39]:
∂4w
∂x4 + 2 ∗
∂4w
∂x2∂y2 + ∂4w
∂y4 = q
D
(2.2)
The left hand side of Equation 2.2 represents the deflection of the plate and the right hand side is the
transverse load per unit area, q, divided by the flexural rigidity. From this equation we can see that the
deflection at the same load will be higher with a lower flexural rigidity. Given that the flexural rigidity
octuples when the thickness doubles, it is imperative that the membranes are as thin as possible when
a single cardiomyocyte produces about 15 nN of force [40].
2.6
Fourier transform infrared
Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) is the most common form of infrared (IR) spectroscopy. In this
thesis I use FTIR to experimentally validate which bonds are present in my printed materials.
All infrared spectroscopies act on the base principle that IR radiation when passing through a sample,
will have some level of absorption. The radiation that passes through the sample unhindered is recorded.
Different molecules have different absorptions, because of this spectroscopy can be used to distinguish
molecules from one another. FTIR spectroscopy is a modern method where an interferogram is taken
and converted to an IR spectrum using a Fourier transform.
I previously mentioned that molecules can be distinguished from each other with IR spectroscopy, but
that is a bit misleading. The signal that we see on IR graphs comes from the bonds in molecules, this
could be a C-H bond or O-H bond. What makes molecules distinguishable is the unique combination
of bonds each molecule possesses.
The exact way FTIR detects specific bonds is by exploiting the specific vibrational frequencies that
are characteristic of their structure. The absorptions are resonant frequencies i.e. the frequency of the
absorbed radiation matches the frequency of the bond or group that vibrates. The resonant frequencies
are related to the strength of a given bond and the mass of the atoms on either end of it [41, 42].
Furthermore, molecules can vibrate in multiple ways, each way is known as a vibrational mode. Different
ways of vibration include symmetric and antisymmetric stretching, scissoring, rocking, wagging, and
twisting [41, 42]. Animations of these vibrational modes are available on [43].
==PAGE:18==
2.6 Fourier transform infrared
11
2.6.1
ATR-FTIR
Attenuated total reflectance-FTIR (ATR-FTIR) is the most common type of sampling methodology in
FTIR spectroscopy. In ATR sampling, the IR light travels through a crystal where it is fully reflected
in the crystal. However, during its reflection, some of the light passes into the sample where it can be
absorbed, this is known as an evanescent wave. The penetration depth of this wave is determined by the
difference in refraction between the sample and ATR crystal. The penetration depth can be calculated
using the angle of incidence as shown on Figure 2.8.
Figure 2.8: Penetration depth of ATR-FTIR, Reproduced from [44]. This figure shows the pen-
etration depth of ATR-FTIR depending on the angle of incidence.
==PAGE:19==
CHAPTER 3
Part 1: Cell-adherent
coatings
3.1
Introduction
Polystyrene (PS), has served as the fundamental substrate for adherent animal and human cell cul-
ture for more than 50 years [45]. Polystyrene’s many desirable traits include optical clarity, ease of
manufacture, and low cost which has caused the material to overtake glass for cell-based work [45].
However, polystyrene is a stiff brittle material making it unsuitable for use in cell culture where me-
chanical ductility may be advantageous, such as the device we propose in Figure 1.2. Instead I am
using styrene-ethylene-butylene-styrene (SEBS), a polystyrene based block copolymer elastomer. SEBS
is not diﬀicult to 3D print and has been characterized extensively within our laboratory, furthermore
it is translucent allowing for microscopy of cells cultured on it [46].
When culturing cells on polystyrene it needs to first be functionalized. PS on its own is not cell ad-
herent. Surface treatments such as ultraviolet (UV), plasma, and ultraviolet/ozone (UVO), oxidize the
surface layer of the polystyrene causing it to become hydrophilic [47, 48]. The hydrophilicity can be
attributed to the scission of C-C groups leaving behind oxygen containing functional groups like CO,
C=O and COOH on the surface of the polymer [47, 48]. Treated polystyrene is known as tissue culture
polystyrene (TCPS). Attempts have been made to apply this type of surface treatment to elastomers.
One attempt is reported by Mohan et al. using polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS). Initial results were suc-
cessful at creating a hydrophilic surface but the PDMS would slowly become hydrophobic again over
time [49, 50]. Mohan et al. attribute this to the migration of lurking polymeric chains from the bulk
material coming to the surface [49]. Borysiak et al. found the hydrophobic recovery of PDMS to occur
within hours if left in open air [50]. They also studied SEBS and found the same behavioral pattern
although SEBS recovered hydrophobicity slower [50]. A study by Efimenko et al. found that UVO
treatment of silicon elastomers not only caused the surface of the material to contain a large number
of hydrophilic -OH groups but also increased the material density within the first 5 nm to 50% of that
of pure silica [51]. Efimenko et al. write that though UVO treatment is more controlled than plasma
treatment, it may still cause uncontrollable results in silicon elastomer surfaces [51]. Particularly longer
exposures to UVO may cause a rigid, silica-like, layer to appear on the surface [52].
Instead we intend to use a multilayered structure to create long-term cell adhesion on the elastomer
membrane, like I illustrated on Figure 1.2 in the proposed device. The topmost layer, which will be a
hydrogel of a low bloom gelatin, will be responsible for the cell adhesion. Gelatin has been characterized
extensively in research and has been adopted for use in many biomedical applications [53]. Cheng et al.
report a study on cell attachment and detachment rates where thin gelatin films are used [54]. Their
findings suggest that films of thin gelatin are a good material for short term cell cultures. The films were
the best performers in the attachment study and also had the highest cell retention in the detachment
study [54]. Gelatin also has the potential to form a hydrogel through crosslinking with e.g. microbial
Transglutaminase (mTG) in an aqeuous solution [55, 56]. A study by Ito et al. reports a sweep of
gelatin concentrations and how the hydrogels formed with the different concentrations perform as a cell
==PAGE:20==
3.1 Introduction
13
adhesion material. Their results show that 5 w% to 1 unit/ml mTG has the largest amount of viable
cells at seven days of culture [55]. Gelatin hydrogels are an interesting alternative to dry gelatin films
because they mimic the ECM with their hydrophilic polymer network and high water content [57, 56].
We will attempt to covalently anchor the gelatin to the layers beneath it, using poly(vinyl alcohol) azide-
unit pendant water-soluble crosslinkable photopolymer (PVA-AWP) (Tokyo Gosei, BIOSURFINE TM)
[58]. BIOSURFINE (trade name of PVA-AWP) is a modified poly(vinyl alcohol) (PVA) copolymer
diluted in water. The chemical structure can be seen on Figure 3.1. It can be cured by UV light
(300-400 nm), and form a stable cured film (hydrogel) [58]. The formed film is hydrophilic and has
excellent organic solvent resistance [58]. Finally, it also suppresses protein adsorption and blocks cell
adhesion [58]. The possible chemical reactions of the nitrene formed when the molecule is activated are
shown on Figure 3.2. Out of the three branches of reactions we are primarily relying on those labeled
”II”.
Figure 3.1: Chemical structure of BIOSURFINE, This figure shows the chemical structure of
BIOSURFINE/PVA-AWP, a modified PVA copolymer.
Figure 3.2: Possible reactions for BIOSURFINE, Reproduced from [59]. This figure shows the
possible chemical reactions for BIOSURFINE.
In this chapter I first discuss the optimization of printing the PVA-AWP layer. Next I discuss integrating
this layer with two different types of gelatin layers (dry gelatin and mTG crosslinked gelatin hydrogel).
Here, I will discuss two separate ways of UV-curing the BIOSURFINE to the gelatin. The final part of
this chapter will detail my experimentation with cell cultures on BIOSURFINE with gelatin patterns
on top.
==PAGE:21==
3.2 Materials and methods
14
3.2
Materials and methods
No computer aided design (CAD) or gcode files are given in this thesis. Should these be of interest,
the author will freely distribute them upon request. If you are working in TMAT laboratories the files
should already be available on the computer. The materials and methods assume that these files are
already in hand.
3.2.1
Preparing BIOSURFINE ink and print parameters
BIOSURFINE inks are made by mixing BIOSURFINE and a solvent in appropriate ratios. For example:
given a 6 w% stock in water, a 3 w% ink can be created by mixing the 6 w% stock 1:1 with water by
weight. To make BIOSURFINE 1.5 w% diluted in both water and ethanol. I first diluted to 3 w% in
water and then diluted this solution again in ethanol while compensating for the difference in density
(1:1.267).
The print parameters for BIOSURFINE on TCPS using the R-GEN 100 bioprinter (REGENHU, Villaz-
St-Pierre, Switzerland) are as follows: 250 um teflon lined nozzle (TLT-25-050, Drifton A/S, Hvidovre,
Denmark), 1.16 mm line spacing (21.6% density), flow correction = 0.2, viscosity = 0.05, push retract
enabled, needle length 6.35 mm.
Once the ink is prepared it is wrapped in aluminium foil and stored in a dark place. Alternatively
in a UV shielded room. When printing, fill a Hamilton syringe (81420/01, Hamilton, Nevada, USA)
from the still foil wrapped ink container. Insert the syringe into the printer. Use volumetric printing.
The TCPS print plate is aligned and the printer is manually taught a 0-point. Do not use automatic
surface height measurement. An example of a good calibrated height from my experiments is 0.9789
mm. When printing, the teflon should brush the surface lightly. After the print, the printed area is
marked for future reference. Once it dries it is close to invisible.
3.2.2
Curing BIOSURFINE
In this thesis BIOSURFINE has been cured for different time lengths and from different UV light
sources. Not all variations of protocol are listed here. The standard protocol is listed and variations
are mentioned where applicable in the results.
A UVP BioSpectrum (Fisher Scientific, New Hampshire, USA) was used for the majority of UV curing.
The procedure was as follows: Open UV chamber, place two glass slides as platform for sample. Place
sample face down using the glass slides to avoid touching the UV light source (365 nm). Plug in UV
light source from external power (not the plug built into the UVP BioSpectrum). The on switch is
manually pressed while looking away to avoid UV exposure. Close the door to the UV chamber and
begin countdown as the device switches on. Remove device once curing is complete and note time. The
intensity of the UVP BioSpectrum light source is 3.16 mW/cm2.
The second UV light source is the R-GEN 100 bioprinter.
UV curing on the printer is enabled in
SHAPER (SHAPER, REGENHU, Villaz-St-Pierre, Switzerland [60])), a 3D bioprinting software, and
a dose is input. The software will automatically generate a path to cure the printed sample. Ensure
wavelength is set to 365 nm in SHAPER.
3.2.3
Preparing gelatin ink and print parameters
The gelatin ink is composed of low bloom gelatin (Product number 48723, Sigma Aldrich, Missouri,
USA) in water (4% w/v). Use a microbalance and tare with a dram vial centered. Use a spatula to
scoop an amount of gelatin into the vial. Note the weight, and calculate how much water is needed.
==PAGE:22==
3.2 Materials and methods
15
E.g. 150 mg of gelatin, (150 mg/4%)*100 = 3750 mg of water is added. Use precision pipettes to
add water to avoid overshoot. Afterwards screw the lid on and wrap parafilm (Parafilm, Bemis Com-
pany, Inc., Wisconsin, USA) around it. Place the gelatin mixture in a water bath at 40 ◦C for one
hour. Check viscosity and ensure no debris is present. If it does not seem dissolved leave until dissolved.
When printing use the R-GEN 100 bioprinter. Enable temperature controls 30 minutes before printing.
The cartridge is set to 35 ◦C and the print plate is set to 4 ◦C. Use a 60 um cylindrical steel nozzle
(nz5340505001, CELLLINK, Gothenburg, Sweden) with a Hamilton syringe to print volumetrically.
Before printing, test extrusion. If none, knurl the needle gently with a gloved hand sprayed with ethanol.
Again, the 0-point is taught manually. An example from my printing is 1.49 mm when printing on top
of a dry precured BIOSURFINE layer. The robot speed is changed to 5 mm/s for this print. Flow
correction is set to 2.
3.2.4
Thickness measurements
All thickness measurements were performed on a Dektak 150 (Veeco, New York, USA). The operating
procedure was: Measure test sample with 28 um grooves, ensure this measurement is within a reasonable
range (+-0.2um). After this place samples on wafer and measure. For more information on operating
protocols contact DTU Nanolab for training.
3.2.5
FTIR
FTIR measurements were taken using a Shimadzu IRAﬀinity-1S (Shimadzu, Kyoto, Japan). Samples
were placed on an ATR-mode sampler and fastened until first click. Results were exported to a USB
drive. For more information or training on this device contact Niels B. Larsen or Marko Mihajlovic.
3.2.6
Gelatin crosslinking (mTG) protocol
mTG is used in a concentration of 5 mg/ml. It is made in the following way: Remove mTG (100
U/g) from freezer. Put 20 ml phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) (non-sterile) in a tube. Weigh 1 g of
mTG on weighing paper. Mix. Filter with 20 ml syringe and 0.45 micron sterile filter. One filter can
approximately filter 10 ml, so have two handy. When finished store mTG in a fridge. This protocol is
courtesy of Shayla Nikzad [61].
To crosslink gelatin with mTG the following steps are taken: Cool substrate and print for 15/5 minutes.
Add cool mTG to the edge of the plate, do not add directly on top of your print. Place in 37 ◦C oven for
60 minutes. Remove mTG and add PBS (non-sterile). Store samples in fridge with PBS and parafilm.
In this thesis I use both 15 minute and 5 minute refrigeration times.
3.2.7
Protocol for seeding cells and maintaining culture
Once BIOSURFINE and gelatin have been printed into the well plate and it has been UV sterilized
with all internal surfaces facing upwards for 40 minutes, the well plates are placed inside of a carrier box
which has undergone sterilization with them. I use a Cleanview sterilization cabinet for this (Cleaver
Scientific Ltd, Warwickshire, United Kingdom). The PBS in the well plates is replaced with sterile
PBS with 1% penicillin/streptomycin (P/S) and the well plates are placed inside of the carrier. The
carrier is then removed from the laminar air flow (LAF) cabinet and transported to the cell lab. Here,
the carrier is introduced into another laminar flow cabinet and wiped with ethanol. The well plates
are taken out, and cells are seeded from suspension, do not let the cells sit in tube suspension for too
long, they will sediment. Immediately before seeding cells invert the tube 2-3 times. This process is
visualized on Figure 3.3.
==PAGE:23==
3.3 Results
16
C2C12 are seeded at a density of 5000 cells/cm2 [62]. The well plates I use have an area of 9.6 cm2
(627 160, Greiner Bio-One, Kremsmünster, Austria). I approximate this to 10 cm2 to make calculations
easier and seed 50.000 cells in each well. The order of magnitude is 100 ul of cells in suspension.
Once the cells are seeded, 2 ml of growth medium (Dulbecco’s modified eagle medium (DMEM) + 1%
P/S + 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS)) is added at the edge of the well. The day of seeding is denoted
culture day 0. The day after seeding is culture day 1 and on this day the growth media is removed
and 2 ml of fresh media is added. On culture day 2, the cells are checked to ensure there are no issues.
Culture day 3, at this point the cells are typically confluent and the media can be changed to differenti-
ation media instead (DMEM + 2% horse serum (HS) + 1% P/S). The cells are imaged every Monday,
Wednesday, and Friday where the media is also changed. Images are typically taken post media change,
but sometimes this was not possible and images contain presumably dead cells floating. These dead
cells wiggle when the culture plate is moved under the microscope.
All cells used are from 175 cm2 flasks (178883, Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc., Massachusetts, USA) I
maintained on the side, cells were within five passages of each other when seeded.
Figure 3.3: Workflow of seeding cells, This figure shows the chronological workflow used when
seeding cells. From top left, UV sterilization of carrier and well plates. Plates stored in
carrier and again sterilized with ethanol prior to placement in LAF bench and cell seeding.
The last images show media being added to the well. Created in biorender.
3.3
Results
3.3.1
Printability sweep of pure biosurfine dilutions
To determine the printability of pure biosurfine and achieve a thin and uniform layer I performed a
sweep of four dilutions. I printed the 6 w% dilution - the stock provided by the manufacturer: Toyo
Gosei Co., Ltd. [58], 3 w%, 1.5 w%, and 0.75 w%. All dilutions are in water. A full set of images and
the results in a tabular format are presented in Appendix A. We hypothesized different layer thickness
and uniformity could be produced from these materials based on their different fluid properties. To
characterize the fluid properties of these dilutions I perform an inversion test with the four dilutions
==PAGE:24==
3.3 Results
17
of BIOSURFINE. Figure 3.4 is a compilation of stills from a video where I perform the inversion
tests. The first images, on the top left in Figure 3.4 (a) show 0.75 w% BIOSURFINE in water, this
dilution behaved much like water does, in other words it is a Newtonian fluid.
Figure 3.4 (b,c),
1.5 w% and 3 w% BIOSURFINE were quite similar and flowed from top to bottom of the Eppendorf
tubes (Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany) quickly and effortlessly. I did not observe any thickness or
non-Newtonian behavior. The 6 w% seen on Figure 3.4 (d) was unlike all the others, it was a thick
viscous fluid that took time flowing down. This is especially clear when looking at the two images six
and 16 seconds after inversion. There is clearly more fluid at the bottom of the tube after 16 seconds
than at six seconds. Similarly the last two images show a clear difference in fluid level, this time between
five and 23 seconds after inversion.
Figure 3.4: Inversion test of BIOSURFINE, This figure shows snapshots from a filmed inversion
test of BIOSURFINE. The arrows represent the next image of the same dilutions while
the written text on top of the arrow is the time between the images.
I measured the thickness of each sample and inspected how smooth the thickness graph was.
The
samples included line spacings from 0.24 mm-1.2 mm (more material -> less material) across all four
dilutions.
The prints were performed on UVO oxidized polystyrene (surface treatment to make it
hydrophilic) using the R-GEN 100 bioprinter.
The results are shown in Table A.1.
The 1.5 w%
BIOSURFINE dilution did not give the thinnest films, but had clear advantages in terms of printability.
The thinner dilution (0.75 w%) was diﬀicult to work with though it did produce the thinnest films.
The 1.5 w% dilution came second in terms of thickness and still halved the thickness of 3 w% at times.
Furthermore, the thickness graphs were smooth unlike some of the 3 w% samples, two examples are
given on Figure 3.6. Figure 3.6 also shows the 3 w% 1.2 mm line spacing sample (9 on figure) from
Figure 3.5 and it is clear on both figures that the line spacing was too high. The final image on
Figure 3.6 is a 1.5 w% sample with a semi-smooth graph of a thin film (approx. 1.3 um avg.) and
very thick edges. Figure 3.7 shows two more 1.5 w% samples with profiles that are smoother than
those in Figure 3.6. Both samples also feature very low average thickness when ignoring the edges.
For the final device (Figure 1.1) the thickness of the edges is not nearly as important as the central
==PAGE:25==
3.3 Results
18
thickness where cells will be seeded. These thickness measurements correspond nicely with the inversion
tests. The higher solid content and more viscous 6 w% stock printed the thickest films on average. The
lower solid content dilutions had increasingly thinner prints on average as expected. The viscosity of
the thinnest dilution (0.75 w% in water) was so low that it became diﬀicult to print and reproducibility
became a concern. Ultimately, I chose 1.5 w% as the dilution I would work with moving forward. I
chose this dilution as it printed membranes of similar thickness to 0.75 w% - both were measured at
the thinnest point as 0.2 um, and its better print properties than 0.75 w%.
Figure 3.5: Images of printed BIOSURFINE, This figure shows four BIOSURFINE samples with
varying line spacings on a polystyrene slide. The red squares mark the location of each
sample and the blue sketch approximates how the sample looks.
Figure 3.6: Thickness graphs of BIOSURFINE dilutions, This figure shows the measured thick-
ness of four BIOSURFINE samples with varying line spacings. The concentration and line
spacing is shown in the top right.
==PAGE:26==
3.3 Results
19
Figure 3.7: Thickness graphs of BIOSURFINE dilutions, This figure shows the measured thick-
ness of two 1.5 w% BIOSURFINE samples with varying line spacings. The concentration
and line spacing is shown in the top right.
Still, the 1.5 w% showed some non-uniformity, which we hypothesized could be improved by changing
the surface wetting and rate of drying of the film. To do this I diluted the 6 w% stock in H2O (water)
and then the resulting 3 w% in ethanol while compensating for the difference in density. In theory I
had an ink with better wetting and quicker drying due to the volatile nature of ethanol. The quicker
drying was especially important because of the artifacts I noticed on multiple prints in my dilution
sweep. The bottom left sample on Figure 3.5 shows this kind of artifact, though it is diﬀicult to see.
Essentially, the liquid forms a droplet in the center of the print as it dries. The edges of this droplet
are the first to dry and the droplet decreases in size pulling material towards the center as it does so.
This results in a thick central circle with a thin circumference.
The mixed solvent dilution was a way to solve this, and it performed as expected. As a result, I used it
in all future work. I also settled on 1.16 mm of line spacing when printing with a 250 um teflon lined
nozzle. This setup gave smooth and quicker drying films.
3.3.1.1
Crosslinking methods
BIOSURFINE as a material for covalently bonding layers is only useful when it can be react with the
layers that are intended to be bonded together. To activate BIOSURFINE, it needs to be exposed to
UV light in the range 300-400 nm [58]. This causes the phenyl azide groups to produce highly reactive
nitrenes that can react with many different species and form CH, NH and CC bonds as shown on
Figure 3.2 and Figure 3.8.
Figure 3.8: BIOSURFINE crosslinking process, Reproduced from [58]. This figure shows how the
photosensitive groups in BIOSURFINE are activated and bond to the molecules around
them.
==PAGE:27==
3.3 Results
20
Validating UV-dosage of in line printing on R-GEN 100 printer
The R-GEN 100 printer we are using offers inline crosslinking, meaning samples can be printed and
then immediately crosslinked by the instrument on the print stage. The printer allows you to input a
specified dosage, but these dosages have not been experimentally validated. I set off on an experiment
to validate the power given by the printer. I used a Thorlabs (Thorlabs Inc., Newton, New Jersey,
United States) PM130D power meter bundle. The sensor included in this bundle, the S130VC, can
measure UV light between 200 and 1100 nm and up to 50 mW of power [63]. Using these instruments
from Thorlabs I tested the intensity the printer reports that it is delivering against what it delivers
according to the power meter.
For the testing I tried to use spot sizes from 2 mm up to 20 mm only to find out that the printer, in spite
of allowing these configurations, is limited to a spot size between 3.78 mm and 8.1 mm. Armed with
this information I limited spot sizes to this range and instead attempted to vary the intensity. Then I
learned that the printer would report error messages when asked for intensities above 2.76 mW/mm2
at spot sizes 5 mm and below and is limited to 1.92 mW/mm2 at spot sizes 6 mm and above. For ease
of calculation I set the intensity to 2 mW/mm2 and the spot size to 5 mm. The area of the spot size
is then 19.63 mm2, multiplying with the intensity we get 39.27 mW as the expected power we should
be measuring on the power meter. Instead I measured 33.5 mW giving us an error of 5.77 mW or 14%.
I also tried decreasing the spot size to 4 mm and doing the same calculations I should have measured
25.13 mW, but I only measured 8.49 mW, giving us an error of 16.64 mW or 66%. Finally, I attempted
to increase the intensity to 2.7 mW/mm2, just within the printers limits, while keeping the spot size of
4 mm, and here I should have seen 33.93 mW of power, but instead I measured 10.13 mW giving us an
error of 23.8 mW or 70%. All of this data is also shown on Table 3.1. What I took with me from this
experiment was to use a spot size of 5 mm and an intensity of 2 mW/mm2 when using the printer as
a UV light source. The last parameter in the printer software that I am yet to discuss, is the dosage.
The printer allows you to set any dose you desire between 0.01 and 1000 mJ. I did not calculate any
doses during this experimentation as I was focused on the incorrect intensity. As for the test equipment,
the Thorlabs S130VC measured 28-31 uW of power after being tared at ambient light levels and had
a circular measurement area with a diameter of 10 mm giving an area of 78.53 mm2. I also want to
note that no matter the test I never measured more than 47.3 mW of power on the power meter. The
47.3 mW measurement was during a test run where I asked for a spot size of 10 mm and an intensity
of 3 mW/mm2 where the printer defaulted to 8.1 mm and 2.76 mW/mm2. Running those numbers we
should have measured 142 mW/mm2 which is outside the 50 mW the power meter is limited to, but it
suggests that the power meter may also have been reporting low numbers. Another possibility is that
the intensity is a measure of the most concentrated part of the light beam. The printer documentation
does not include much information on the UV LED.
Table 3.1: Testing power output of UV LED, The table shows the calculated and measured power
from three tests of the R-GEN 100 3D printers built-in curing LED.
Spot size
Radius
Intensity
Area
Calculated pwr
Measured pwr
Error
4,00 mm
2,00 mm
2,00 mW/mm2
12,57 mm2
25,13 mW
8,49 mW
16,64 mW
4,00 mm
2,00 mm
2,70 mW/mm2
12,57 mm2
33,93 mW
10,13 mW
23,80 mW
5,00 mm
2,50 mm
2,00 mW/mm2
19,63 mm2
39,27 mW
33,50 mW
5,77 mW
3.3.1.2
Crosslinking BIOSURFINE
Figure 3.9 shows the IR of a BIOSURFINE sample as it is exposed to increasing amounts of UV
light. The uncrosslinked and 10 second crosslinked graphs have a clear valley at the azide peak (2120
cm-1). The 30 second crosslinked sample does not feature the same valley, but the measurement of this
sample is also of a lower amplitude as seen by the shift upwards and the characteristic BIOSURFINE
peak at 1650 cm-1 being much smaller. At 60 seconds of UV exposure, the sample still features a small
azide valley, but this flattens out drastically at 6 minutes. At 10 minutes of crosslinking the feature is
==PAGE:28==
3.3 Results
21
no longer visible. This tells us that BIOSURFINE is partially crosslinked up to a dose of 60 seconds,
multiply this by the intensity, 3.6 mW/cm2, and the dose at this point is 216 mJ/cm2. At 10 minutes
where the azide peak is no longer distinguishable the dose is 2160 mJ/cm2. For further work a dose of
2160 mJ is used. Stoytcheva et al. use 60 minutes of UV exposure to cure BIOSURFINE in their study
[64] and remark that this is the optimal exposure time for their use case. However, their dosage study
notes that the main difference in retention (adhesion) was the concentration of BIOSURFINE and not
the dosage [64].
Figure 3.9: Crosslinking BIOSURFINE with line of sight, This figure shows the spectrum of
BIOSURFINE as the dose of UV exposure increases in steps.
Prior to the next experiment I would like to show the spectrum of the TCPS substrate used in the tests.
It is seen on Figure 3.10 and the peaks that might coincide with our BIOSURFINE sample are 1500,
1550 and 1600 cm-1.
==PAGE:29==
3.3 Results
22
Figure 3.10: IR spectrum of TCPS, This figure shows the transmittance of IR through two TCPS
samples.
As a control of the previous study on dosage, I perform a harsh washing of a non-crosslinked BIO-
SURFINE and a crosslinked BIOSURFINE sample. Both undergo the same washing procedure: 37 ◦C
in a PBS bath for 24 hours. FTIR is measured before crosslinking, before washing, and after washing.
This data is shown on Figure 3.11 and Figure 3.12. The first figure shows the control sample, and
we see that the azide peak is present before crosslinking as well as the characteristic BIOSURFINE
peak at 1650 cm-1. Once washed every feature of BIOSURFINE is gone. The only features remaining
stem from the TCPS background as seen on Figure 3.10.
The crosslinked version of this test, Figure 3.12, similarly shows an azide peak prior to crosslinking,
and even has a small azide peak after crosslinking, suggesting that the material is not fully crosslinked.
Nonetheless, the sample is washed and rinsed in the exact same way as the control. The post wash
measurement shows the characteristic BIOSURFINE peak at 1650 cm-1 and even shows the remnant
azide peak. It is clear that crosslinking is causing the BIOSURFINE to bond both to the surface and
itself, leaving a layer of similar thickness (note the amplitude of the signals). This crosslinked layer
is able to resist the washing procedure significantly better than the non-crosslinked control. This also
tells us that the BIOSURFINE when crosslinked is insoluble in PBS at 37 ◦C, conditions the material
will face during cell culture.
==PAGE:30==
3.3 Results
23
Figure 3.11: Washing non-crosslinked BIOSURFINE, This figure shows a control sample of
BIOSURFINE that has not been crosslinked. The control is put through the same wash
as the crosslinked sample.
Figure 3.12: Washing crosslinked BIOSURFINE, This figure shows a sample of BIOSURFINE
pre- and post-crosslinking. The sample is also shown after washing in PBS at 37 ◦C and
rinsing with water.
==PAGE:31==
3.3 Results
24
The previous IR spectra are all taken from samples where the BIOSURFINE was crosslinked with line
of sight to the sample. To produce a multilayered device such as the one depicted on Figure 1.1. It is
not always possible to crosslink with line of sight, and may be more advantageous to crosslink samples
from the back through the substrate. This is an issue I faced when making gelatin hydrogels (see later
discussion in section subsubsection 3.3.2.2). The substrate I use in the following tests is TCPS.
The experimental setup is as follows: I print two samples of BIOSURFINE and take the absorption
spectra, then the samples are crosslinked for set amounts of time, 0 sec, 10 sec, 30 sec, 1 min, 6 min, and
10 minutes. The times are total duration under UV light. At each time point the samples are removed
from the UV curing chamber and again measured in the FTIR. Figure 3.10 shows the measurement
of the TCPS slide the samples are printed on. This figure is relevant because of the thickness of the
BIOSURFINE prints. They measure around 1 um and the penetration depth of the FTIR is at least 3-
4 um [44] (section 2.6), this means that the spectra of my samples will include parts of the background.
Figure 3.13 shows the spectra of each crosslinking step. The azide peak is prominent at 0, 10, 30
and 60 seconds of UV exposure and decreases significantly at 6 and 10 minutes. Comparing the azide
peak on Figure 3.13 at 60 seconds and that from the previous experiment with line of sight also at
60 seconds (Figure 3.9), it looks like the sample crosslinked through the substrate Figure 3.13 has
a larger azide peak in relation to other features characteristic to BIOSURFINE (1650 cm-1). Looking
at only Figure 3.13 we clearly see the azide peak disappearing as the UV dose increases, proving that
BIOSURFINE can be functionalized through TCPS and potentially other optically clear materials with
similar refraction indexes. In summary, it is possible to crosslink BIOSURFINE through TCPS and
this should not pose an issue for our device.
Figure 3.13: Magnified view of BIOSURFINE spectrum, This figure shows the transmittance
of IR through BIOSURFINE crosslinked for 0-600 seconds.
==PAGE:32==
3.3 Results
25
3.3.2
Gelatin conjugation
With the BIOSURFINE print in place, the next step is adding a layer for cell adhesion. The material
used in this thesis is a low bloom gelatin from Sigma-Aldrich.
Prior to printing into well plates, I performed preliminary tests with BIOSURFINE, gelatin, and their
composite to see if it was practically possible to bind gelatin with BIOSURFINE. I printed gelatin and
BIOSURFINE controls and a stack composed of gelatin on BIOSURFINE. The background for these
is TCPS (Figure 3.10). The FTIR of gelatin alone is shown on Figure 3.14. The twin peak at
1520-1600 cm-1 is characteristic of gelatin. BIOSURFINE does have some signal in this area as seen on
Figure 3.11 and Figure 3.12, but the spacing is different.
Figure 3.14: FTIR of gelatin, This figure shows the IR spectrum of gelatin.
Figure 3.15 shows the FTIR of BIOSURFINE, both uncrosslinked and crosslinked and the spectra
of gelatin. Comparing the BIOSURFINE graphs to the yellow gelatin graph we see that the spectra
are indeed different and gelatin uniquely has a double peak around 1550 and 1610 cm-1. An FTIR of
the same gelatin sample is taken after washing in PBS at 37 ◦C and rinsing with water. The resulting
graph is shown on Figure 3.15 in purple. Comparing the unwashed and washed gelatin graphs we
see that the twin peaks are gone while the peaks characteristic of TCPS remain (Figure 3.10). The
especially interesting graphs on this figure are the composites. The green, blue, and dark red lines
show a composite of BIOSURFINE and gelatin. The green shows them shortly after printing where
the peaks characteristic of gelatin are clear to see (1550, 1610 cm-1) as well as an azide peak for the
BIOSURFINE (2120 cm-1). Once crosslinked the azide peak disappears as expected and the amplitude
of the gelatin peaks is decreased though it is still present. This could be caused by a slightly different
measuring point or decreased thickness in the sample. The last graph, in dark red, shows the composite
washed. Here we see that the gelatin peaks look very similar to the unwashed crosslinked composite.
Most of the gelatin signal is retained, vastly different from the results of gelatin pre- and post wash
without a BIOSURFINE layer binding it.
==PAGE:33==
3.3 Results
26
Figure 3.15: Retenetion of gelatin through BIOSURFINE crosslinking, This figure shows the
IR spectrum of BIOSURFINE, gelatin, and a stack of the two.
3.3.2.1
Thin layer for cell culture
One of the strategies I used to test conjugation of gelatin to a BIOSURFINE substrate was simply print-
ing the gelatin solution onto it in the same way as the FTIR study (subsection 3.3.2). This resulted
in a thin layer of gelatin (average 0.45 um with peak up to 2 um when printed on BIOSURFINE, see
Figure C.1). This approach is simple in its methodology but unlikely to work for long term cultures,
as it is a thin dry layer. It is hypothesized that the cells will metabolize the thin layer of gelatin until
none is left. They will then have nothing to adhere to. We know from our prior FTIR experiments that
gelatin is retained in harsh conditions when bound by BIOSURFINE, the goal here is to get an initial
indication of if cells will adhere to the amount of gelatin that is bound.
Figure 3.16 shows the print features. First a square film of BIOSURFINE is printed, this is allowed to
dry before a simple checker pattern of gelatin is printed. Finally, the entire plate undergoes 10 minutes
of curing (dose approx. 2160 mJ). The yellow areas in Figure 3.16 mark the gelatin deposition, and
the red square contains BIOSURFINE within its borders. Outside of the red borders is TCPS with
nothing printed on it.
==PAGE:34==
3.3 Results
27
Figure 3.16: BIOSURFINE and dry gelatin print pattern, This figure depicts the pattern of
BIOSURFINE and gelatin as printed in the dry gelatin experiments.
The order of
printing, and thus the order in which they are layered, is BIOSURFINE onto TCPS
followed by gelatin onto BIOSURFINE. The figure also shows the four standard locations
imaged on each well (1-4).
Once the pattern was printed, cells were seeded and their growth and adhesion was monitored daily.
Figure 3.17 shows a series of images taken from location 2 (see Figure 3.16). Images shown are
from culture day one (one day after seeding), five, and seven. The proliferation of cells is clear to
see and myotube formation is seen on culture day seven. Despite some errors in the print we observe
a pattern of cells with clear edges, also evidencing that BIOSURFINE is working as a cell blocking layer.
This batch of well plates was discarded at nine days of culture due to a fungal infection observed on
day seven, resulting in a discarding of all well plates.
Figure 3.17: Development of myoblast culture on thin gelatin, This figure shows microscope
images of a C2C12 culture on dry gelatin. Magnification is 4x and scale bars are given
in the bottom right. Culture day is given at the top.
3.3.2.2
Gelatin hydrogel for cell culture
Given the low print quality (e.g. gaps and defects in gelatin layer Figure 3.17) and the inability to
produce a long term culture, I decided to move forward with a gelatin hydrogel as initially planned. I
printed the gelatin exactly as before but crosslinked it with mTG. Crosslinking of gelatin using mTG
has been documented previously and cells cultured on the resulting hydrogel are reported to differ in
morphology from cells grown on TCPS (even when coated in gelatin) [65]. The hydrogel formed from
crosslinking is thicker than a dry layer, which should allow cells to adhere for significantly longer. Yang
et al. [66] found that gelatin crosslinked with mTG to form a hydrogel has excellent performance in
terms of cell adhesion. Furthermore, Yang et al. speak of how the hydrogel promotes not only adhesion
but also proliferation and differentiation. They attribute these findings to the plasticity of the material
and the high moisture content [66]. It should be noted that Yang et al. are not using C2C12 for their
==PAGE:35==
3.3 Results
28
cell experiments, so any cell line specific effects are unknown.
The BIOSURFINE layer remains unchanged apart from a precuring step before the gelatin is printed.
The precuring step was added as uncrosslinked BIOSURFINE maintains some water solubility (Figure 3.11),
and some dissolution artifacts were observed in the previous experiment. The precuring step involves
exposing the BIOSURFINE layer to UV light for 10 seconds. This amount of time will not functional-
ize all azide groups as shown in subsubsection 3.3.1.2. We hope that this precuring will eliminate
dissolution artifacts, from printing gelatin, while still retaining azide groups for adhering the hydrogel.
Furthermore, I planned to mTG crosslink the gelatin before completing the BIOSURFINE curing. It
is crucial that the BIOSURFINE not dissolve during this procedure.
After the precuring gelatin is printed onto the BIOSURFINE exactly like in the previous step but this
time with a more complex patterning. Figure 3.18 shows a computer sketch of the printed pattern,
including accurate line spacing on the left and the printed result on the right. After printing the gelatin,
the sample is refrigerated. After 15 minutes the sample is removed from the fridge and cool (fridge
stored) mTG is added. Finally, the sample with mTG is placed in a 37 ◦C oven for 60 minutes.
Figure 3.18: Gelatin hydrogel print pattern, This figure depicts the print pattern for gelatin. Left
is in CAD software SHAPER [60], 1 square corresponds to 1 mm. Right is the printed
gelatin before further processing.
The results of this procedure are seen on Figure 3.19 (more cell images are available in Appendix B).
The figure shows the first day of culture where cells have already adhered to the hydrogel, a larger
amount than that seen with the dry gelatin (Figure 3.17). On the seventh day of culture long myotubes
have begun forming, but alignment across the sample is sporadic. Locally, cell to cell, alignment is
observed. The main difference from the seventh day of culture to the 28th is the delamination we
observe. On culture day 28 the links connecting the square pattern have disappeared and the bottom
left corner of the square is no longer round.
==PAGE:36==
3.3 Results
29
Figure 3.19: Development of myoblast culture on gelatin hydrogel, This figure shows micro-
scope images of a C2C12 culture on gelatin hydrogel. Magnification is 4x and scale bars
are given in the bottom right. Culture day is given at the top.
This delamination is seen across multiple samples, some far more severe (Figure B.4). We hypothe-
sized that the delamination observed in this set of samples was a product of too long refrigeration times,
which may have caused some shapes to dry out so that they could not be mTG crosslinked resulting in
them either being washed away in the crosslinking procedure or delaminating during culture (seen on
Figure B.4). This hypothesis was tested by reducing the refrigeration time significantly on the second
batch of well plates. The procedure for these was the exact same as the previous batch apart from the
refrigeration time which was reduced to 5 minutes exactly instead of 15 minutes.
Figure 3.20 shows the results of the 5 minute refrigeration. The culture days shown are one, five,
and 33. Culture day 28 was a weekend, hence the inclusion of day 33 as a substitute. The results are
reminiscent of those from the 15 minute refrigeration (Figure 3.19), but as a general note more shapes
were present on this batch of wells. One example is the circular shapes, only two of these were present
in the 15 minute refrigeration wells, while almost all wells from this 5 minute refrigeration batch have
these present. An image of the circular hydrogel and its shape fidelity is presented in Figure B.2.
The rightmost image on Figure 3.20 is vastly different from that seen in the previous hydrogel exper-
iment. Unfortunately this batch of my wells suffered an accidental drop that makes any delamination
results questionable. The drop occurred on the ninth day of culture and multiple well plates had fewer
than six shapes remaining post incident.
Figure 3.20: Development of myoblast culture on gelatin hydrogel, This figure shows micro-
scope images of a C2C12 culture on gelatin hydrogel. Magnification is 4x and scale bars
are given in the bottom right. Culture day is given at the top.
==PAGE:37==
3.3 Results
30
In summary, 5 minute refrigeration showed an improvement in the amount of visible patterns, but also
had delamination issues and some plates had no patterns at all suggesting that the gelatin did not
crosslink successfully and instead was washed away during the mTG protocol.
For the next iteration of hydrogel wells, I again sought to reduce the time between printing and mTG
crosslinking to form hydrogel. This iteration was produced in the exact same way as the previous, 5
minutes of refrigeration etc. The difference here was the complexity of the printed pattern. Instead of
the multiple small features seen on Figure 3.18 this batch featured a line pattern. This line pattern
is seen on Figure 3.21.
The line pattern prints much faster, giving the gelatin less time to dry.
Additionally, this kind of pattern is thought to help the cells align when forming myotubes [67, 68].
The pattern consists of four rectangles with each becoming twice as wide as the previous rectangle
(Figure 3.21). The second change I made for this batch was curing the BIOSURFINE on the printer
and neglecting the precuring step. So the gelatin was printed onto uncured BIOSURFINE and the
resulting stack was cured directly on the printer (approx. 2160 mJ).
Figure 3.21: Gelatin hydrogel line print pattern, This figure depicts the line print pattern for
gelatin. Blue lines are added to two of the edges to give an indication of size.
The results from this third iteration of hydrogel wells is shown on Figure 3.22. Cells were seeded
on these plates on a Friday making the first day of culture a weekend. Images of the third day in
culture are used as a substitute.
When looking at the figure the cells seem to avoid parts of the
rectangle suggesting defects in the gelatin print. The well plates feature greater myotube alignment
than previous experiments although there is a shadow around the gelatin prints. This shadow is likely
to be BIOSURFINE dissolution from printing gelatin onto the uncured BIOSURFINE. The shadow
lines are not gelatin as no cells have adhered to them. This suggests that the precuring step that was
left out should have been included. However, these wells where the precuring step was neglected have
shown no signs of delamination for 31 days of culture.
==PAGE:38==
3.3 Results
31
Figure 3.22: Development of myoblast culture on gelatin hydrogel, This figure shows micro-
scope images of a C2C12 culture on gelatin hydrogel. Magnification is 4x and scale bars
are given in the bottom right. Culture day is given at the top.
The third iteration of hydrogels also underwent a staining procedure and images were taken with a
fluorescent microscope. The stains and protocols for this are from [69] by Radeke et al. The staining
was performed by Shayla Nikzad [61] with help from the author of the paper, Carmen Radeke. The
left image on Figure 3.23 shows almost the entire printed area and showcases the shape fidelity but
also the artifacts from my print procedures. The thickest rectangle has a cut like gap in it and the
two thickest rectangles both feature a line that is slightly removed from the rectangle. This may be
because of the BIOSURFINE dissolving during the gelatin print. The right image on Figure 3.23
shows a magnified view of some myotubes, the alignment is excellent and the nucleus stain shows that
the myotubes are maturing as they contain multiple nuclei as seen on Figure 2.4. For comparison the
same cells before they were taken for fixation and staining are shown on Figure 3.24. Local myotube
alignment seems to be quite good, but the overall alignment across an entire line is lacking. The best
alignment is seen on the thinnest line on the left side of Figure 3.24, again suggesting that narrow
long shapes are the preferred print pattern. The thickest line has been cropped, but the rest of it looked
much the same: some general trends of alignment but still a bit random.
Figure 3.23: Confocal microscopy of stained cell culture, Figure courtesy of Shayla Nikzad [61].
The figure shows a confocal image of one of my cultures. The white stain is for actin,
and the blue is a nucleus stain. Scale bars are given in the bottom right. The plate was
taken on culture day 19.
==PAGE:39==
3.3 Results
32
Figure 3.24: Myotube alignment of cells in culture prior to staining, The figure shows C2C12
in culture. The lines are shown in ascending order of thickness from left to right. The
thickest line is cropped to fit the figure. Scale bars are given in the bottom right. The
plate was taken on culture day 19.
In summary, the third iteration of hydrogels had greatly improved feature retention and good myotube
alignment. However, BIOSURFINE dissolution was observed.
Delamination mini study
To address concerns of delamination I imaged every shape, in every well, every time I changed the
media. This effort culminated into Figure 3.25. The figure shows a single triangle, the same triangle,
as it remains in culture for 28 days. The triangle is from the first iteration of hydrogel plates, i.e. 15
minutes of refrigeration and precured BIOSURFINE.
Figure 3.25: Delamination study of gelatin hydrogel, This figure shows a series of images from
a well plate with a triangular gelatin hydrogel print from batch 1. The culture day is
listed on the image and scale bars are provided in the bottom right image.
==PAGE:40==
3.4 Discussion
33
The first day in culture (Figure 3.25) shows no noticeable delamination. On day two (see Figure B.1
for full dataset) the delamination begins to show and remains visible on day five. The level of delami-
nation seems to increase ever so slowly as the days in culture increase. There is a difference in adhesion
on day five and day 28 though it is hard to see. Ultimately, 28 days of culture is considered long-term
and I would argue competitive when compared to state of the art devices [1, 2]. As for the cause of
the delamination there are few possible culprits. It is possible that the density of azide groups in the
BIOSURFINE is not high enough resulting in poor adhesion. It could also be that the BIOSURFINE
layer that is responsible for the adhesion may only bond to a thin layer at the bottom of the gelatin
hydrogel. Assuming that BIOSURFINE can bond to fully crosslinked gelatin. This connection may not
be enough to anchor the remaining height of the hydrogel. Alternatively, the precuring step may be at
fault. This could be the case if the density of azide groups is too low. The precuring step might activate
the majority of the available azide groups causing the BIOSURFINE to bind to itself and the substrate
leaving too few azide groups left to bind the gelatin. The dry gelatin layers from Figure 3.17 did not
show delamination and neither did Figure 3.22. The common point between the two was the lack of
a precuring step. In fact, looking at Figure 3.22 the print defects on day 28 are the exact same as
those on day three. There is no observable delamination.
3.4
Discussion
The concentration of the BIOSURFINE interfacial adhesive layer is decided as 1.5 w% in water and
ethanol instead of pure water (1.5% BIOSURFINE, 48.5% water, 50% ethanol. w:w:w). The rationale
for choosing 1.5 w% stems from the thickness measurements. The dilutions with higher solid content
printed thicker films while the dilution with lower solid content was diﬀicult to print. The reason behind
using ethanol for the second dilution is two-fold. Firstly, ethanol has a lower surface tension than water
and better wetting behavior (in terms of spreading) [70], and second it dries faster due to its volatile
nature. The wetting behavior is preferred because the printed lines spread more resulting in a more
homogeneous film. It also allowed me to increase the line spacing to 1.16 mm and still print a gap-less
film. Given the increased spreading and line spacing it is not unreasonable to assume that the resulting
film is thinner than one printed with an equivalent water-based ink.
As for the UV crosslinking methods, they all seem to work so long as the administered dose is around
2160 mJ. The differences come in convenience and workflow. Using a UV chamber is beneficial when
working with multiple samples at once, the printer is preferable when dose needs to be administered
accurately - though it is arguable how accurate the printer is given my power meter tests. It is, however,
likely that the printer is precise, i.e. the dose administered by the printer e.g. 100 mJ will be the same
every time you ask for 100 mJ even though the actual dose may not be 100 mJ. In that sense curing
on the printer is reproducible, easy to do, and robust. It also eliminates the need to move samples that
are still wet, and eliminates moving samples as a whole decreasing risk of misalignment.
During the prints of my last batch of well plates, where I neglected to precure the BIOSURFINE prior to
printing gelatin, I observed dissolution. This strongly suggests that a precuring step should be included
in future work to maintain the integrity of the BIOSURFINE.
An open question for all gelatin prints is whether or not the BIOSURFINE exposed to UV light does in-
deed create covalent bonds to the gelatin at the interface. We cannot be sure that the layers are bonded
as it has not been observed directly experimentally using chemical analysis techniques. The fact that
some of the gelatin structures wash away, due to drying or delaminate, during culture could suggest
a lack of covalent bonding, or could be attributable to physical delamination prior to UV exposure.
Indeed the patterns do not appear to delaminate much further during culture, which could suggest the
latter (Figure 3.25). It is also unclear if gelatin will delaminate more under strain. Our ultimate goal
is to produce a device that will be strained and may even have cyclic contractions, we do not know if
the gelatin layer can withstand this. The accident where I dropped a batch of well plates caused many
==PAGE:41==
3.5 Conclusions & future work
34
of the wells to lose gelatin pieces entirely. My reasoning for saying that the pieces are lost is that no
cell adhesion occurs on the BIOSURFINE square, but cells are still visible on the TCPS outside of
the printed square. This suggests the loss of gelatin because cells remain in culture but none are seen
where the gelatin previously was. I was not able to microscope these wells to check if the gelatin was
floating around as I had to act quickly and remove all spillage in a sterile environment before adding
new differentiation media. I imaged the cells afterwards and found the plates less populated than before.
As for the difference between dry gelatin and gelatin hydrogels. I believe it is clear that hydrogels are
theoretically better but I am unable to showcase this conclusively with comparisons of cell cultures due
to the fungal infection I observed in the dry gelatin at day seven of culture. Still, the images taken
on the last day of culture of the dry gelatin, when compared to the gelatin hydrogels, do suggest the
superiority of this method. Had the dry gelatin plates survived for as long as the hydrogel plates it
would be easier to compare the cell morphologies and longevity. The differences between the gelatin
hydrogels are minimal. Cells proliferate on all iterations, but some patterns are found to be better than
others. Fluorescence images show maturation of myotubes and good alignment.
Throughout the hydrogel iterations small changes are made to the original protocol (subsection 3.2.6),
as I attempt to improve the results. The first batch where I refrigerated prints for 15 minutes ended up
drying out before I added mTG. I write this based on the amount of features retained in each plate. The
first plate that ultimately was refrigerated for more than 15 minutes had only the rightmost features
left. The features were printed left to right, so these would be the last ones to print. The very last plate
I refrigerated had only two missing features on the far left. Using this knowledge I decided to reduce
the refrigeration time to 5 minutes and this approach did show improvements. All successful well plates
came out with more features than the previous try, but I did have one well plate with no features at
all. I may have washed away the printed gelatin while adding mTG.
With the 5 minute refrigeration batch I had more features on the plates but these features still struggled
with delamination. My third attempt was another attempt to reduce the time the gelatin prints are
dry. I reduced the complexity of the print pattern significantly. The results I have seen so far from this
third attempt seem to be much better than both previous attempts. I am yet to see any delamination
from these short print time, 5 minute refrigeration prints that were cured on the printer.
3.5
Conclusions & future work
In conclusion, I found print parameters for a 1.5 w% BIOSURFINE ink diluted in water and ethanol.
This ink can be used to print thin films that are optically clear. I discovered that UV crosslinking
retains gelatin films bound by BIOSURFINE when washed. Furthermore, in my cell cultures, hydrogel
based cell adhesion seemed to give the best results especially in terms of myotube alignment, as shown
on the fluorescence images. The hydrogel wells were also able to support long term cell cultures (35 days
at the time of writing). I also discovered that delamination does not occur when precuring is skipped.
However, even with precuring adhered hydrogels samples do not seem to delaminate significantly in
culture as shown on Figure 3.25.
For future work I would suggest experimenting with the precuring dosage to minimize BIOSURFINE
dissolution and remove delamination as an issue. For prints I suggest minimizing print times (simple
patterns) so that the amount of time the gelatin is dry is reduced. Refrigeration time should remain
at five minutes. For the final curing I do think that the printer is the best option as it can cure the
BIOSURFINE while the printed gelatin is still wet. The next step is moving forward with printing
the BIOSURFINE and gelatin hydrogel on a suspended membrane in order to investigate delamination
behavior under strain.
==PAGE:42==
CHAPTER 4
Part 2: Suspended
membrane fabrication
This part of my thesis will cover the fabrication process and thoughts behind the suspended membrane
I manufactured. I will take the reader through the initial thoughts and explain why it was necessary to
fabricate our own composite cell wells.
4.1
Introduction
The membrane must possess a combination of Young’s modulus and thickness that allow it to strain to
physiologically relevant levels (15% [2, 3]) with reasonable aliquots of culture medium. Furthermore, it
should be possible for cardiomyocytes to contract on the membrane. The membrane must also deflect
in an anisotropic manner to aid in cell alignment. It must also be possible to manufacture the flexible
membrane and its modifications using DIW 3D printing.
While we ultimately desire to print membranes with locally varied thicknesses as a means of more
physiologically relevant uniaxial strain (seen on Figure 1.1), here, I focused on printing an isotropic
membrane as a first step. We chose to print these membranes from SEBS as previous work has shown
that SEBS diluted in a volatile solvent, like butyl acetate, is a viscoelastic material with shear-thinning
properties depending on the concentration of solid content [46]. These qualities make SEBS in butyl
acetate an ideal DIW ink. Pless et al. are able to print traces from SEBS diluted 1:5 in butyl acetate
with thicknesses below 100 um using a 200 um nozzle. It should be possible to dilute the SEBS further
and print films that are thinner than this.
4.2
Materials and methods
No CAD or gcode files are given in this thesis.
Should these be of interest, the author will freely
distribute them upon request. If you are working in TMAT laboratories the files should already be
available on the computer. The materials and methods assume that these files are already in hand.
4.2.1
Suspended membrane fabrication
Figure 4.1, shows the process used to fabricate the suspended membrane. First a layer of PVA is
printed onto a glass slide Figure 4.1(1). A surface height measurement is performed on the PVA
layer and a thin layer of SEBS 1:15 in butyl acetate (1.01974.2500, Avantor, Inc., Pennsylvania, USA)
is printed on top Figure 4.1(2). This layer is given time to dry under a fume hood for the solvent
to evaporate. The next step is printing a gasket out of a less dilute SEBS ink (Figure 4.1(3)). I
used SEBS 1:5 in butyl acetate. Immediately after the gasket is printed, the bottomless well plates are
aligned by hand and pressed onto the gasket strongly (Figure 4.1(4)). Once this is done, the sample
is carefully moved off of the print plate and set aside (still under ventilation) with a clamp pressing
==PAGE:43==
4.2 Materials and methods
36
the two pieces together or a weight on top.
The wells are left clamped or under weight overnight.
Finally, the membranes are soaked in water, dissolving the PVA and releasing them from the glass slide
(Figure 4.1(5)). Protocols for printing the layers, bonding, and releasing the wells are given in the
next sections.
Figure 4.1: Print process for suspended membrane fabrication, Figure by Shayla Nikzad [61].
The sketch shows the process used for fabricating suspended membranes. The steps are
illustrated in chronological order from printing a release layer until dissolution of the
release layer yielding a suspended membrane.
4.2.2
PVA print
The ink composition is 20% PVA (Mowiol 4-88, molecular weight 31000, Sigma Aldrich, Missouri, USA),
11% isopropyl alcohol (IPA), and 69% deionized (DI) H2O (w:w:w). The ink is mixed in the following
manner: Use blue cap bottle (1516/02D, Pyrex, Corelle Brands, Illinois, USA), place on weight and
tare. Add PVA and note weight. Calculate water and IPA amounts based on this. Add appropriate
amounts as well as stir bar. Leave stirring at low speed.
The PVA print is done on the REGENHU 3DDiscovery using the accompanying BioCAD software (RE-
GENHU, Villaz-St-Pierre, Switzerland). The substrate is a glass microscope slide perfectly dimensioned
for a 3-well plate. The cartridge is a 3cc disposable plastic syringe (CSC010300502, CELLLINK, Gothen-
burg, Sweden) with a pneumatic adapter. The nozzle used is 200 um conical plastic (nz4270005001,
CELLLINK, Gothenburg, Sweden). The line spacing is 0.75 mm and the pressure is 0.005 MPa.
4.2.3
SEBS print
The uniform SEBS film is printed with a SEBS 1:15 in butyl acetate (w:w) ink. The substrate is PVA
and the print is performed on the 3DDiscovery. A Hamilton syringe is used with a 200 um conical
plastic nozzle. The print is volumetric and print parameters are as follows: flow rate 0.789 ul/s, push
retract enabled at 0.05 mm. Line spacing of 0.6 mm.
When printing align the substrate on stage. Perform an automatic surface height measurement. Man-
ually extrude before printing.
If a clog is observed use butyl acetate in a cup to clean the nozzle.
Print. Dry the film without moving it for 1-2 minutes. Leave under ventilation overnight for solvent
evaporation.
4.2.4
Gasket print
The ink used for the gaskets is a SEBS 1:5 in butyl acetate (w:w). This print is done on top of a
SEBS 1:15 layer on the 3DDiscovery printer. Use a 3cc plastic disposable nozzle with an adapter for
pneumatic printing. The nozzle is a 580 um plastic conical (nz4200005001, CELLLINK, Gothenburg,
==PAGE:44==
4.3 Results
37
Sweden). The line spacing is 0.9 mm with an offset of 0.2 mm. The pressure used is 0.008 MPa of
pressure. Printing procedure is as follows: Align substrate (SEBS 1:15 film) perform automatic surface
height measurement. Extrude material prior to actual print (off to the side). If nozzle is clogged use a
butyl acetate nozzle cleaning cup to unclog. Once ready, print the supplied CAD file.
4.2.5
Bonding and release procedure
Manually align the well plates with the freshly printed gasket. Gently place down and keep hands very
steady. Begin applying pressure while maintaining steady grip. After a few seconds the sample can be
moved carefully and placed under heavy weight to continue pressure application or inside of a clamp
tightened enough to apply pressure. The wells are left overnight in fume hood. Potentially, samples
could be placed in vacuum oven at low temperature to accelerate solvent evaporation.
To release the wells place them in the clamp as shown on Figure 4.8. This is the best method for
releasing as there is a risk of the SEBS 1:15 membrane sticking to the glass slide once released. The
distance created by floating the wells using the clamp avoid this issue entirely.
4.2.6
Loading procedure
The liquid loading procedure is performed on a contact angle goniometer (OCA 20, DataPhysics In-
struments GmbH, Filderstadt, Tyskland) to use its side mounted camera and adjustable platform. The
well plate with suspended membranes is placed on the goniometer platform with glass slides as side
supports to lift the suspended membrane and give it space to deform within the camera view. The
liquid is loaded using precision pipettes 100 ul at a time. Still images are taken after each increment.
When unloading the liquid is removed with a transfer pipette without any measurements. An image is
taken once unloaded. Reloading the membrane is done with a precision pipette set to the maximum
volume the membrane could previously support. E.g. a well plate and membrane are full at 1900 ul,
when reloading set precision pipette to 1900 ul and transfer fluid. For each unloading and reloading an
image is taken.
4.3
Results
Figure 4.1 shows the process we imagined would function best after initial attempts at creating a
suspended membrane. On Figure 4.1 the first step is printing a PVA release layer followed by a SEBS
1:15 membrane. The third step is printing a SEBS 1:5 gasket to bond the bottomless well plate to the
SEBS 1:15 membrane. Finally, the figure shows the wells bound to the substrate and the subsequent
release of the suspended wells by dissolving the PVA layer. In the proceeding subsections I review in
detail the optimization of each of these fabrication steps.
4.3.1
PVA prints
To release the flexible membrane I had to include a release layer that could be removed without dam-
aging any of the other components. A commonly used method for this is spin-coating PVA onto your
print plate as seen in [71, 72], however, it is also possible to 3D print the PVA with good results [73].
For this project I chose to 3D print PVA for logistical reasons, and for a simpler workflow where all
work could be performed between two 3D printers. PVA is easily dissolved in H2O but resists organic
solvents (though slightly soluble in ethanol) [74].
I replicated the printing of a PVA sacrifical layer from our prior reports [46]. An image of a printed
PVA layer is shown in Figure 4.2. I measured the thickness of my PVA prints to be between 23.2 and
==PAGE:45==
4.3 Results
38
31 um. As the PVA is merely a sacrifical layer, the thickness of this layer is largely irrelevant so long
as it is uniform across the slide.
Figure 4.2: Printed PVA, An image of PVA printed on a large polystyrene slide. The PVA is close
to optically clear, though print artifacts on the closest edge make it visible.
4.3.2
SEBS prints
As mentioned previously, I aim to have the SEBS 1:15 membrane deflect to a physiologically relevant
strain with only culture medium as the load. As I explained in section 2.5 this will require the mem-
brane to be very thin.
Based on previous work [46] I knew that a more dilute SEBS:butyl acetate than 1:5 was needed to
achieve my goal of printing thin membranes for use in the proposed device (Figure 1.1). I first at-
tempted to print 1:6 SEBS, but found the result to be much too thick at 7.8 um on average between
two samples. I aim for a thickness closer to 1 um so that the membrane can be deflected by small
volumes of culture medium (section 2.5). I moved to SEBS 1:15 to print as thin of a layer as possible.
SEBS 1:15 printed films of approximately 0.66 um in thickness, as shown in Figure 4.3, but I also had
samples that were closer to 2.5 um in thickness. It should be noted that the graph on Figure 4.3 is
measured at the very edge of the print substrate. This part of the substrate is likely to be more uneven
than the central portions as the edge thickness and any start-of-extrusion artifacts will be present here
and not in the central parts of the print.
Figure 4.4 shows a printed SEBS 1:15 film. The edges are the only part of the layer that are easy
to see. One interesting thing that I noticed was the print lines along the membrane, it almost looks
like they have ever so small gaps in them. In later sections I will evidence that this is not the case as
leakage was not observed under liquid loading. Still, these nonuniformities may have implications when
attempting to apply controlled strains in future work.
==PAGE:46==
4.3 Results
39
Figure 4.3: Thickness measurement of SEBS 1:15, The figure shows the thickness profile of SEBS
1:15.
Figure 4.4: SEBS 1:15 printed film, The figure shows a layer of SEBS 1:15 printed on glass. The
edges of the layer are barely visible.
4.3.3
Gasket prints and bonding
For this project, Jonathan Bendix Fjendsbo produced bottomless well plates, from a styrene based
material, in the same dimension as the glass slides used for printing PVA and SEBS 1:15.
To bond the well plates to my printed flexible SEBS 1:15 membrane, I had to print an additional SEBS
layer to act as an interfacial gasket to prevent leakage and mechanically attach the two materials. For
the gasket I used SEBS 1:5 in butyl acetate. The solid content in this solution is significantly higher
==PAGE:47==
4.3 Results
40
but it still retains shear thinning properties making it easy to print pneumatically. I considered using
SEBS 1:2, but this was so thick and viscous that I had a hard time even loading it, though it should be
noted that the stock I attempted to use was from 2022 and may have lost solvent over time. The gasket
was designed with an offset of 0.2 mm compared to the opening at the bottom of the wells. These loose
tolerances were intended to make the bonding process more forgiving as I was aligning by hand. An
image of the resulting print can be seen on Figure 4.5.
Figure 4.5: Gasket used to bond wells, The image shows the gasket I printed.
The gasket is
printed on top of a SEBS 1:15 membrane which is on top of a sacrifical PVA layer. The
edges of these layers are barely visible.
The wells were bonded by first aligning by hand and placing the wells onto the still wet SEBS 1:5 gasket,
the force used when bonding the two was quite high and followed by either a weight being placed on
top, or them being clamped together. Figure 4.6 shows the method used for bonding after the initial
alignment and pressure application. Once clamped securely with slightly more pressure than necessary
to hold them in place, the wells were left overnight.
Figure 4.6: Bonding membrane to well plate, The image shows the clamping method used for
bonding.
Each printed gasket underwent a leak test in which the wells were filled with food dye and visually
inspected for leakage. An example of this test setup is shown in Figure 4.7. Through the execution
of these leak tests we found that the initial force applied was of great importance as well as the print
order. Gaskets where the circle around the well was printed last performed better. In the beginning
I also attempted to print thinner gaskets and different line spacings, but these all failed the leak test.
Figure 4.7 shows a batch of membranes where the optimal conditions were used. All but the rightmost
gasket have successfully sealed the wells. The top right well is leaking food dye.
==PAGE:48==
4.3 Results
41
Figure 4.7: Testing leakage of gaskets, The image shows my second batch of gaskets undergoing
a leak test.
With the seal working the next step is releasing the bonded membrane from the glass slide used during
printing. This is seen on Figure 4.8. The clamp is used to hold the wells slightly above the bottom
of the water-filled petri dish. This allows the glass slide to sink to the bottom as the PVA dissolves.
This approach was used instead of simply placing them in water as there was a risk of the SEBS 1:15
membrane sticking to the glass slide once the PVA released. With the clamp method we ensure that
the wells remain detached.
Figure 4.8: Releasing the suspended membranes, The image shows the best setup for releasing
membranes.
4.3.4
Liquid loading of suspended membranes
The next step was to experimentally find out if these printed membranes could hold aliquots of water
in similar sizes to what might be used in cell cultures. Furthermore, the test is used to characterize the
level of strain based on the amount of liquid loaded.
Membranes were loaded with increasing amounts of DI water in increments of 100 ul. The deflection
was recorded using a side mounted camera. Figure 4.9 shows a series of images in which a suspended
==PAGE:49==
4.3 Results
42
membrane I fabricated is tested (the full dataset is given in Appendix D). The membrane gradually
deflects as liquid is added and at 600 ul the water level in the well becomes visible. After this point the
water level in the well steadily rises and the membrane continues to deflect until 1900 ul at which point
the well is actually full as seen on the right side of Figure 4.10. The last image on the penultimate
row shows the well after unloading the 1900 ul, the last row shows the well being reloaded with 1900 ul
and unloaded repeatedly. The final image in the figure shows a photo taken by a smartphone during the
test. The smartphone image shows the level of deflection seen with most of my suspended membranes.
Some of the membranes look different however, and these will be discussed in the next section.
Figure 4.9: Liquid loading test of suspended membrane, The figure shows a collage of images
taken during a liquid loading test of a suspended membrane. The volume of the liquid
gradually increases until the well is full at 1900 ul, after which the well is unloaded and
reloaded repeatedly. The bottom right of the figure shows a picture taken during testing
with a smartphone.
Figure 4.10 shows two images of a membrane undergoing a loading test. The left image shows the
middle well about half full, and the right image shows the well filled almost to the brim. This behavior
is the same as what we see on Figure 4.9.
==PAGE:50==
4.3 Results
43
Figure 4.10: Membrane loading test, The image shows a membrane during a liquid loading test.
The extent of deflection was not constant across all membranes. Out of the five membranes I success-
fully manufactured, two showed the behavior observed on Figure 4.9 and two showed the behavior
on Figure 4.11 and Figure 4.12. During testing these membranes would deform similarly to the
previously shown images, but once the well contained 1000 ul of water, instead of the well filling up as
more liquid was added, the membrane continued deflecting. This trend continued up to 2200 ul with the
well filling slowly and membrane deflecting more than in previous testing. After 2200 ul the membrane
began deflecting significantly more. I stopped the test at 2700 ul and at this point the membrane had
become a deep pocket of water and the well was close to empty. Images of this behavior are shown on
Figure 4.11. Figure 4.12 also shows the unloading of the same membrane. The membrane is able
to return to a state reminiscent of its starting point, but we cannot eliminate the possibility of residual
plastic deformation with these images alone.
Figure 4.11: Strange membrane behavior, The image shows a membrane during a liquid loading
test.
==PAGE:51==
4.3 Results
44
Figure 4.12: Loading test of strange membrane, The image shows a membrane during a liquid
loading test. The unloading process is also shown, although these are snapshots from a
video instead of still images.
4.3.4.1
Strain calculations
Figure 4.13 shows a rough calculation of the increase in membrane area as liquid is loaded on it. The
data used is from Figure 4.9.
The membrane is assumed to be a half ellipsoid and calculations are based on this assumption. The
scale of the images is estimated to be 17.249 mm every 660 px this is used to calculate the increase in
radius as liquid is loaded. The area is then calculated as a half ellipsoid with radius a = b = 17.249mm
with c measured for each volume. This graph cannot be made for the membranes with the strange be-
havior as they deform so much that they exit the image captured by the camera during the loading test.
On Figure 4.13 we see that 5% strain is reached at 400 ul, 10% at 800 ul, 15% at 1000 ul, 20% at
1400 ul, 25% at 1700 ul and the maximum strain 28% at 1900 ul at which point the well is also full
(Figure 4.10).
==PAGE:52==
4.4 Discussion
45
Figure 4.13: Estimation of increase in surface area, The graph shows the estimated increase in
area during liquid loading for the membrane shown in Figure 4.9.
4.4
Discussion
I mentioned that there were lines on some of the SEBS 1:15 prints that would ultimately become
suspended membranes. These same prints seemed to have a fairly rough surface when looking at the
thickness profile, and the two samples I did measure the profile of had very different thicknesses at 0.66
um on average and 2.4 um on average. Both profiles looked similar, but the difference in thickness
is concerning given that they were printed with the same print parameters. A third measurement I
performed was on a PVA+SEBS 1:15 stack where the PVA was 24 um and the SEBS 1:15 was 0.8 um
on average. These differences in thickness are frankly unacceptable for further development and the
manufacturing process will need examination to ensure that the thickness of any future prints remain
within a small margin. The cause for the large variation in thickness may be the volatility of the solvent,
perhaps enough solvent evaporates between prints that the solid content differs from print to print. It
may be possible to reduce the print to print variation by freshly loading a syringe for each print instead
of using the same syringe for multiple prints in a row.
The bonding process is another piece of the manufacturing process that could use standardization. In
its current form the alignment is done manually and by eye, this is not ideal.
Another issue I faced during my thesis was aligning the glass slides each time a new layer was added.
In between layers the slides were set aside under a fume hood to dry, in the mean time I would print
on the next slide. While it would be possible to manufacture the membranes in a print-in-place fashion
and either changing the ink cartridge while waiting for the sample to dry, or alternatively loading all
required inks into different print heads. This approach is slower than the production line approach
I took, as the wait times cannot be used for anything else. So I aligned the glass slides by using a
”holder”, an extra glass slide I placed next to the print area, and aligning the sample slide to this. The
results were serviceable and all SEBS 1:15 membranes fit onto the previously printed PVA. I took the
same approach when printing the gaskets and again, this worked fine. The real challenge came when I
had to place the wells on the gasket. The wells had to be placed while the print was still wet and had
to be clamped tightly to ensure a good seal. Furthermore, the alignment of these could not be assisted
with my holder and ultimately was done entirely by eye and oscillating fingers. Once placed I also had
to apply force which more than once caused the wells to slide on the still-wet gasket, spreading material
against my wishes. In essence, despite my best efforts results would never be reproducible when aligning
by hand. For future work, I suggested introducing a holder for this purpose. My suggestion did not fall
==PAGE:53==
4.5 Conclusions & future work
46
upon deaf ears and a holder has already been taken into use.
One issue I found during loading tests of my suspended membranes was two separate types of strain
behavior. The first few membranes deformed elastically until the well was filled. However, two of my
printed membranes continued to deform and were able to contain far more fluid than the previous wells.
These two membranes were from the same glass slide, so they had the same PVA layer, SEBS 1:15
film, and gasket. These differences suggest that the manufacturing process for the printed membranes
is not currently robust. Future work will need to address this issue and make the printed membranes
and their level of deformation reproducible. As for why this happened with some of my membranes,
I believe that they may have printed thinner than other samples, despite identical print parameters,
causing the tendency to deflect at lower strains.
The ratio of SEBS to butyl acetate, namely 1:15, was used because of the low solid content enabling
DIW printing of thin films. The reason for making thin films is again the desire for easily deformable
membranes, the thickness of the membranes I printed seems to be quite good as we were able to strain
the membranes between 5-25% without issue. Physiologically relevant strain is about 15% [2, 3] and
this is attainable.
4.5
Conclusions & future work
In conclusion, I have successfully manufactured suspended membranes that are deformable. Further-
more, they are able to undergo physiologically relevant strains repeatedly without rupture. The manu-
facturing process for the membranes is currently not robust and will need to be examined in future work.
The print settings I used for the membranes I tested were all the same suggesting that the problem may
lie elsewhere. Perhaps the SEBS was not fully dissolved or had lost some solvent over time. As for the
strain behavior of the non-strange membranes I found that 1000 ul of DI water was able to strain the
membrane to a physiologically relevant degree (15% [2]).
In future work sample to sample variation must be reduced. As I mentioned in the results, it may be
prudent to load fresh SEBS 1:15 from the stock each time a membrane is printed, instead of filling
a syringe once and printing multiple membranes. This may solve the issue if it is caused by solvent
evaporating from the syringe while printing. If this does fix the issue it may be prudent to switch to a
less volatile solvent such as hexyl acetate. The next step towards our envisioned device (Figure 1.1)
is the introduction of patterned membranes to create anisotropic strains. I have already prepared the
print files for this purpose. Once printed, it can be tested and optimized as necessary. The starting
conditions are there.
==PAGE:54==
CHAPTER 5
Overall conclusions and
future work
Overall, I have shown that two parts of our envisioned device from Figure 1.1 are possible to manu-
facture and work as intended. There is still work to be done before a full device with microelectronics
can be manufactured, but my results suggest that it will be possible.
Protocols for printing BIOSURFINE, gelatin, and SEBS 1:15 membranes as well as SEBS 1:5 gaskets
have all been given in this thesis. Shayla [61] has already continued my work and shown that a full
stack combining the two halves of my project is printable. Figure 5.1 shows a stack of PVA, SEBS
1:15, BIOSURFINE, patterned gelatin, and SEBS 1:5 (gasket) with a well plate bonded to it. The
figure even showcases the optical clarity we desired from our device.
Figure 5.1: Four layer well plate, Figure courtesy of Shayla Nikzad. This figure shows a stack of
glass, PVA, SEBS 1:15, BIOSURFINE, gelatin, and SEBS 1:5 with a well plate bonded.
The main steps necessary for continuing my work are:
1. Standardizing the manufacturing process for SEBS 1:15 membranes to reduce sample to sample
variation
2. Locally printing multiple layers of the SEBS 1:15 membrane to form an anisotropic strain region
(seen on Figure 1.1)
3. Testing the gelatin adhesion during cyclic strain (cell culture)
4. Integration of microelectronics and beyond
==PAGE:55==
APPENDIX A
BIOSURFINE
Thickness of BIOSURFINE dilutions
Table A.1: BIOSURFINE notes, A table showing my raw notes from BIOSURFINE characteriza-
tion.
Dilution
Spacing
Density
Position
Thickness
Notes
6w%
0.6mm
10%
-60,0
N/A
200 kPa (see phone pic) , Damaged
by Dektak 3ST profilometer when
attempting to take measurement
6w%
0.4mm
15%
-40,0
0.7-0.95um
6w%
0.3mm
20%
-20,0
0.46-0.6um
6w%
0.24mm
25%
0,0
1.5-3.6um
Avg of 1.5um, no minimum measure-
ment noted.
3w%
0.6mm
10%
20,0
0.52-6um
50 kPa – flowed together well.
3w%
0.4mm
15%
40,0
0.45-12um
50 kPa – too much material.
For-
ward plans are changing.
Picture
taken of both 3w% samples.
3w%
0.8mm
7.5%
60,0
N/A
Printed
poorly
(late
extrusion).
Failed to measure thickness static
electricity
or
some
other
distur-
bance.
3w%
1.2mm
5%
-60,-20
1.2-5um
No extrusion, printed again at 75
kPa
3w%
1.2mm
5%
-40,-20
1-7um
75 kPa reprint
1.5w%
0.6mm
10%
-20,-20
0.7-9um
50 kPa Gapped
1.5w%
0.4mm
15%
0,-20
0.5-9um
Too much material, try 10% again
1.5w%
0.6mm
10%
20,-20
0.5-5um
Flowed together this time. Try 7.5
1.5w%
0.8mm
7.5%
40,-20
0.23-8um
Seemed to print on top of previous?
Print new to be sure
1.5w%
0.8mm
7.5%
-60,20
0.7-2.5um
Printed with gaps
0.75w%
0.6mm
10%
-40,20
0.3-3.5um
25 kPa – Looked like it printed on
top of something else, retry
0.75w%
0.6mm
10%
-20,20
0.2-2.5um
Worked, gaps
0.75w%
0.4mm
15%
0,20
0.3-4um
Gaps
0.75w%
0.3mm
20%
20,20
0.26-5.5um
Gaps, increase pressure perhaps.
0.75w%
0.6mm
10%
40,20
N/A
50 kPa – Slightly gappy, liquid is
coming out slow. Failed to measure
thickness, static electricity or some
other disturbance
==PAGE:56==
A BIOSURFINE
49
BIOSURFINE and gelatin printability
Initially the printability of BIOSURFINE 3w% mixed 1:1 with gelatin 0.5w/v was explored through a
rectangular print where a sweep of the fill pattern was performed. The fill was a rectilinear meander.
Figure A.1 shows one set of samples that were all printed with the exact same parameters (60um
nozzle, 50kPa) aside from the line spacing that was swept from 0.06mm (no spacing) to 0.6mm. Sample
#3 on Figure A.1 has the maximal line spacing of 0.6mm and the rectilinear infill is clear to see. This
is too little infill, our goal is to have the printed lines flow together and form a smooth surface. Samples
#15 #16 and #17 show 0.06mm, 0.12mm, and 0.24mm of line spacing respectively. All of them form a
droplet due to excess infill, on Figure A.1 these samples are yet to dry. Sample #10 and #11, 0.35mm
and 0.33mm of line spacing look good, but do have some line separation. Sample #9 and #2 are the
same at 0.3mm of line spacing and are at the level where line separation is no longer visible, but they
do seem to have a central artifact caused by drying with a droplet or the addition of the gelatin.
This experiment was to test if it was possible to print a thin film that could adhere to the layer
below it as well as have cells adhere to it.
Figure A.1: Line spacing sweep, This figure shows a polystyrene slide with a slew of BIO-
SURFINE+gelatin prints with varying line spacings.
In spite of exploring the idea of mixing BIOSURFINE and gelatin it is ultimately discarded as it
produced non-homogeneous films that are not optically clear even though BIOSURFINE on its own is
clear. Instead a composite approach is taken where BIOSURFINE is printed first and gelatin is layered
on top. This produces an almost transparent composite film and is therefore the chosen approach.
==PAGE:57==
APPENDIX B
Full delamination data set
and more cell images
Figure B.1 shows the full data set of the delamination study presented in subsubsection 3.3.2.2.
Figure B.2 shows the impressive shape fidelity of the hydrogels I manufactured in the form of a circular
Figure B.1: Delamination study of gelatin hydrogel, This figure shows a series of images from a
well plate with a triangular gelatin hydrogel print. The culture day is listed on the image
and scale bars are provided in the bottom right image.
construct of crosslinked gelatin hydrogel. The images are taken on the seventh day of culture and are
from the second batch of prints, those that were refrigerated for 5 minutes. No delamination is seen on
the figure but similarly alignment of cells is random which is not ideal.
==PAGE:58==
B Full delamination data set and more cell images
51
Figure B.2: Gelatin hydrogel shape fidelity, This figure depicts a single circle from plate 1 of
batch 2. Both images are the same circle. Left is 4x magnification, right is 10x. Scale
bars are given in the bottom right.
Figure B.3 shows another well from batch two (5 minute refrigeration, multipattern), this is the
only well from batch two that did not have the features shown on Figure 3.18. This plate is a unicorn
as it was subject to the protocols from batch 2 but has the features from batch 3. On Figure B.3
we see myotubes of lengths up to 1200um, furthermore the myotubes close to the upper edge of the
line are fairly aligned in a horizontal fashion. The myotubes on the left and right sides of the line are
also aligning to the edge of the gelatin hydrogel. This shows that it is possible for us to adhere cells to
specific areas with good precision and also align them to the edges of some 3D printed shapes - it did
not work with the circle after all (Figure B.2).
Figure B.3: Gelatin hydrogel shape fidelity and myotube alignment, This figure depicts a line
from plate J1 of batch 2. Both images are the same line. Left is 4x magnification, right
is 10x. Scale bars are given in the bottom right.
==PAGE:59==
B Full delamination data set and more cell images
52
Figure B.4: Delamination of hydrogels, This figure depicts squares from the 15 minute refrigera-
tion and precured BIOSURFINE batch on the 33rd day of culture. The images are 4x
magnification. Scale bars are given in the bottom right.
Figure B.4 show two squares from the same plate that have been in culture for 33 days (34 including
seeding day). They both suffer from delamination. The hydrogel square on the right side of Figure B.4
is missing most of the center and left parts. The bottom left corner is the only part of these sides
remaining. The right side of the square is still attached to the BIOSURFINE but also to the central
part of the square which has folded in on itself and moves about when imaging on the microscope. It is
hanging loosely. The square on the left of Figure B.4 shows similar behavior with a smaller piece of
the square having detached and folded on itself. Interestingly the left square also has shorter myotubes
than the right side square. The myotubes on the right side square also seem to be aligned in the same
direction, which is not the case on the left square, suggesting that long narrow shapes are best for cell
alignment.
Figure B.5: Myotube alignment to line prints, This figure depicts alignment of myotubes when
printed on rectangles of increasing width. Magnification is 4x and scale bars are given in
the bottom right. Images are all from culture day 14 batch 3. Plate J3 and J4.
Well plates using the line pattern seemed to have greatly improved cell alignment when compared
to dry gelatin and circular prints (Figure B.2). This is seen on Figure B.5. The left side of the figure
shows the thinnest line and almost all myotubes aligning to the length of the line. The middle image is
==PAGE:60==
B Full delamination data set and more cell images
53
of the thickest line, here the myotubes align in a similar fashion to that seen on Figure B.3, where the
myotubes create a curve between two edges. The rightmost image on Figure B.5 shows the second
thinnest line and how myotubes seem to be aligning quite well to the length of the line. Although it
does look like this is helped by the print artifact on the left side where no cell adhesion has occurred
likely due to an extrusion error during the print.
==PAGE:61==
APPENDIX C
Gelatin thickness plots
Figure C.1: Thicknes of gelatin on BIOSURFINE, This figure shows the thickness of gelatin
printed on a film of BIOSURFINE.
==PAGE:62==
APPENDIX D
Full dataset for suspended
membrane test
Figure D.1: Liquid loading test of suspended membrane, The figure shows a collage of images
taken during a liquid loading test of a suspended membrane. The volume of the liquid
gradually increases until the well is full at 1900ul, after which the well is unloaded and
reloaded repeatedly.
==PAGE:63==
Bibliography
[1]
FLEXcyte 96 Cardiac Contractility Assessment for Preclinical DD. url: https://innovitro.
de/flexcyte-technology/#Technology (visited on 30 June 2023).
[2]
Wenkun Dou et al. “Ultrathin and Flexible Bioelectronic Arrays for Functional Measurement
of iPSC-Cardiomyocytes under Cardiotropic Drug Administration and Controlled Microenviron-
ments.” In: Nano Letters 23 (March 2023). issn: 15306992. doi: 10.1021/ACS.NANOLETT.3C00017/
ASSET/IMAGES/LARGE/NL3C00017_0005.JPEG. url: https://pubs.acs.org/doi/full/10.
1021/acs.nanolett.3c00017.
[3]
Athanasios Moustogiannis et al. “Characterization of Optimal Strain, Frequency and Duration of
Mechanical Loading on Skeletal Myotubes’ Biological Responses.” In: In Vivo 34.4 (August 2020),
page 1779. issn: 17917549. doi: 10.21873/INVIVO.11972. url: /pmc/articles/PMC7439881/
%20/pmc/articles/PMC7439881/?report=abstract%20https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/
articles/PMC7439881/.
[4]
Miodrag Dragoj et al. “Development and Validation of a Long-Term 3D Glioblastoma Cell Culture
in Alginate Microfibers as a Novel Bio-Mimicking Model System for Preclinical Drug Testing.”
In: Brain Sciences 2021, Vol. 11, Page 1025 11.8 (July 2021), page 1025. issn: 2076-3425. doi:
10.3390/BRAINSCI11081025. url: https://www.mdpi.com/2076- 3425/11/8/1025/htm%
20https://www.mdpi.com/2076-3425/11/8/1025.
[5]
Julia Hartmann et al. “Alginate-Laminin Hydrogel Supports Long-Term Neuronal Activity in
3D Human Induced Pluripotent Stem Cell-Derived Neuronal Networks.” In: Advanced Materials
Interfaces 10.6 (February 2023), page 2200580. issn: 2196-7350. doi: 10.1002/ADMI.202200580.
url: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1002/admi.202200580%20https:
//onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/admi.202200580%20https://onlinelibrary.
wiley.com/doi/10.1002/admi.202200580.
[6]
Sharon Gerecht et al. “Hyaluronic acid hydrogel for controlled self-renewal and differentiation of
human embryonic stem cells.” In: Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United
States of America 104.27 (July 2007), pages 11298–11303. issn: 00278424. doi: 10.1073/PNAS.
0703723104/SUPPL_FILE/03723FIG8.PDF. url: https://www.pnas.org/doi/abs/10.1073/
pnas.0703723104.
[7]
Hyunwoo Yuk et al. “Tough bonding of hydrogels to diverse non-porous surfaces.” In: Nature Ma-
terials 2015 15:2 15.2 (November 2015), pages 190–196. issn: 1476-4660. doi: 10.1038/nmat4463.
url: https://www.nature.com/articles/nmat4463.
[8]
Hyunwoo Yuk et al. “Skin-inspired hydrogel–elastomer hybrids with robust interfaces and func-
tional microstructures.” In: Nature Communications 2016 7:1 7.1 (June 2016), pages 1–11. issn:
2041-1723. doi: 10.1038/ncomms12028. url: https://www.nature.com/articles/ncomms12028.
[9]
Z Li et al. “Gelatin Methacryloyl-Based Tactile Sensors for Medical Wearables.” In: Advanced
Functional Materials 30.49 (December 2020), page 2003601. issn: 1616-3028. doi: 10.1002/ADFM.
202003601. url: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1002/adfm.202003601%
20https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/adfm.202003601%20https://
onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adfm.202003601.
==PAGE:64==
Bibliography
57
[10]
“Instrumented cardiac microphysiological devices via multimaterial three-dimensional printing.”
In: Nature Materials 2016 16:3 16.3 (October 2016), pages 303–308. issn: 1476-4660. doi: 10.
1038/nmat4782. url: https://www.nature.com/articles/nmat4782.
[11]
Marta Lemme et al. “Mechanical Stimulation in a 2D High-Throughput Contractility System
Induces Functional Changes in Human Induced Pluripotent Stem Cell Derived Cardiomyocytes.”
In: ().
[12]
J. C. Lötters et al. “The mechanical properties of the rubber elastic polymer polydimethylsiloxane
for sensor applications.” In: Journal of Micromechanics and Microengineering 7.3 (September
1997), page 145. issn: 0960-1317. doi: 10.1088/0960-1317/7/3/017. url: https://iopscience.
iop.org/article/10.1088/0960-1317/7/3/017%20https://iopscience.iop.org/article/
10.1088/0960-1317/7/3/017/meta.
[13]
Overview of materials for Silicone Rubber. url: https://www.matweb.com/search/DataSheet.
aspx?MatGUID=cbe7a469897a47eda563816c86a73520&ckck=1 (visited on 4 July 2023).
[14]
P. Linder et al. “Contractile tension and beating rates of self-exciting monolayers and 3D-tissue
constructs of neonatal rat cardiomyocytes.” In: Medical and Biological Engineering and Computing
48.1 (January 2010), pages 59–65. issn: 01400118. doi: 10.1007/S11517-009-0552-Y/FIGURES/6.
url: https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s11517-009-0552-y.
[15]
Christian J. Pless et al. “Emerging strategies in 3D printed tissue models for in vitro biomedical
research.” In: Bioprinting: From Multidisciplinary Design to Emerging Opportunities (January
2022), pages 207–246. doi: 10.1016/B978-0-323-85430-6.00007-8.
[16]
Joseph A. DiMasi, Henry G. Grabowski, and Ronald W. Hansen. “Innovation in the pharmaceu-
tical industry: New estimates of R&D costs.” In: Journal of Health Economics 47 (May 2016),
pages 20–33. issn: 0167-6296. doi: 10.1016/J.JHEALECO.2016.01.012.
[17]
Jose Maria Fernandez, Roger M. Stein, and Andrew W. Lo. “Commercializing biomedical research
through securitization techniques.” In: Nature Biotechnology 2012 30:10 30.10 (September 2012),
pages 964–975. issn: 1546-1696. doi: 10.1038/nbt.2374. url: https://www.nature.com/
articles/nbt.2374.
[18]
Pfizer. How do we develop medicines? 2020. url: https://www.pfizereupolicy.eu/article/
how-do-we-develop-medicines (visited on 20 June 2023).
[19]
Tania Riddell and Susan Mary Wells. “Ethnic and socioeconomic disparities in the prevalence
of cardiovascular disease in New Zealand Work for Cancer Network-useful when working with
tumour streams View project.” In: (2018). url: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/
23660264.
[20]
William Hinton et al. “Incidence and prevalence of cardiovascular disease in English primary
care: a cross-sectional and follow-up study of the Royal College of General Practitioners (RCGP)
Research and Surveillance Centre (RSC).” In: BMJ Open 8.8 (August 2018), e020282. issn: 2044-
6055. doi: 10.1136/BMJOPEN-2017-020282. url: https://bmjopen.bmj.com/content/8/8/
e020282%20https://bmjopen.bmj.com/content/8/8/e020282.abstract.
[21]
Maurice Mittelmark et al. “Prevalence of Cardiovascular Diseases among Older AdultsThe Cardio-
vascular Health Study.” In: American Journal of Epidemiology 137.3 (February 1993), pages 311–
317. issn: 0002-9262. doi: 10.1093/OXFORDJOURNALS.AJE.A116678. url: https://dx.doi.org/
10.1093/oxfordjournals.aje.a116678.
[22]
John Arrowsmith and Philip Miller. “Phase II and Phase III attrition rates 2011–2012.” In: Nature
Reviews Drug Discovery 2013 12:8 12.8 (August 2013), page 569. doi: 10.1038/nrd4090. url:
https://www.nature.com/articles/nrd4090.
[23]
Harry Olson et al. “Concordance of the Toxicity of Pharmaceuticals in Humans and in Animals.”
In: Regulatory Toxicology and Pharmacology 32.1 (August 2000), pages 56–67. issn: 0273-2300.
doi: 10.1006/RTPH.2000.1399.
==PAGE:65==
Bibliography
58
[24]
Mammalian heart, Encyclopædia Britannica. url: https://www.britannica.com/science/
cardiac-muscle/images-videos#/media/1/95485/155703 (visited on 2 July 2023).
[25]
Sajedah M. Hindi, Marjan M. Tajrishi, and Ashok Kumar. “Signaling mechanisms in mam-
malian myoblast fusion.” In: Science signaling 6.272 (April 2013). issn: 1937-9145. doi: 10.1126/
SCISIGNAL.2003832. url: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/23612709/.
[26]
Robert Csapo, Matthias Gumpenberger, and Barbara Wessner. “Skeletal Muscle Extracellular
Matrix – What Do We Know About Its Composition, Regulation, and Physiological Roles? A
Narrative Review.” In: Frontiers in Physiology 11 (March 2020), page 517800. issn: 1664042X.
doi: 10.3389/FPHYS.2020.00253/BIBTEX.
[27]
Mi Jang et al. “Serum-free cultures of C2C12 cells show different muscle phenotypes which can be
estimated by metabolic profiling.” In: Scientific Reports 2022 12:1 12.1 (January 2022), pages 1–
15. issn: 2045-2322. doi: 10.1038/s41598-022-04804-z. url: https://www.nature.com/
articles/s41598-022-04804-z.
[28]
David Yaffe and Ora Saxel. “Serial passaging and differentiation of myogenic cells isolated from
dystrophic mouse muscle.” In: Nature 1977 270:5639 270.5639 (December 1977), pages 725–727.
issn: 1476-4687. doi: 10.1038/270725a0. url: https://www.nature.com/articles/270725a0.
[29]
Susan M. Abmayr and Grace K. Pavlath. “Myoblast fusion: lessons from flies and mice.” In: De-
velopment (Cambridge, England) 139.4 (February 2012), page 641. issn: 09501991. doi: 10.1242/
DEV.068353. url: /pmc/articles/PMC3265056/%20/pmc/articles/PMC3265056/?report=
abstract%20https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3265056/.
[30]
Yasuko Manabe et al. “Characterization of an Acute Muscle Contraction Model Using Cultured
C2C12 Myotubes.” In: PLOS ONE 7.12 (December 2012), e52592. issn: 1932-6203. doi: 10.1371/
JOURNAL.PONE.0052592. url: https://journals.plos.org/plosone/article?id=10.1371/
journal.pone.0052592.
[31]
S Burattini et al. “C2C12 murine myoblasts as a model of skeletal muscle development: morpho-
functional characterization.” In: European Journal of Histochemistry 48.3 (June 2009), pages 223–
234. issn: 1121-760X. doi: 10.4081/891. url: https://www.ejh.it/index.php/ejh/article/
view/891.
[32]
Adam P. Sharples et al. “Modelling in vivo skeletal muscle ageing in vitro using three-dimensional
bioengineered constructs.” In: Aging Cell 11.6 (December 2012), pages 986–995. issn: 1474-9726.
doi: 10.1111/J.1474-9726.2012.00869.X. url: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/
full/10.1111/j.1474-9726.2012.00869.x%20https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/
10.1111/j.1474-9726.2012.00869.x%20https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.
1474-9726.2012.00869.x.
[33]
Ryan D Sochol et al. “3D printed microfluidics and microelectronics.” In: (2017). doi: 10.1016/
j.mee.2017.12.010. url: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mee.2017.12.010.
[34]
Soukaina Lamnini et al. “Robocasting of advanced ceramics: ink optimization and protocol to
predict the printing parameters - A review.” In: Heliyon 8.9 (August 2022), e10651. issn: 2405-
8440. doi: 10.1016/J.HELIYON.2022.E10651.
[35]
Patrick Zerbe et al. “A viscoelastic-viscoplastic-damage model for creep and recovery of a semicrys-
talline thermoplastic.” In: International Journal of Solids and Structures 110-111 (April 2017),
pages 340–350. issn: 0020-7683. doi: 10.1016/J.IJSOLSTR.2016.10.029.
[36]
Non-Newtonian Flow and Applied Rheology: Engineering Applications - R. P. Chhabra, J.F.
Richardson - Google Books. url: https : / / books . google . dk / books ? hl = da & lr = &id =
_6nnoh9PtF0C&oi=fnd&pg=PP1&ots=mL0zYqgPjM&sig=lygGa5Xs-Lv9lXQ6ogUSEsD5n0A&redir_
esc=y#v=onepage&q&f=false (visited on 1 July 2023).
==PAGE:66==
Bibliography
59
[37]
Taylor V. Neumann and Michael D. Dickey. “Liquid Metal Direct Write and 3D Printing: A
Review.” In: Advanced Materials Technologies 5.9 (September 2020), page 2000070. issn: 2365-
709X. doi: 10.1002/ADMT.202000070. url: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/
10.1002/admt.202000070%20https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/admt.
202000070%20https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/admt.202000070.
[38]
Bending of plates - Wikipedia. url: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bending_of_plates
(visited on 30 June 2023).
[39]
“Chapter 4: A Look at Membrane and Thin Plate Theory.” In: ().
[40]
Marita L. Rodriguez et al. “Measuring the Contractile Forces of Human Induced Pluripotent
Stem Cell-Derived Cardiomyocytes With Arrays of Microposts.” In: Journal of Biomechanical
Engineering 136.5 (2014), page 0510051. issn: 15288951. doi: 10.1115/1.4027145. url: /pmc/
articles/PMC4158804/%20/pmc/articles/PMC4158804/?report=abstract%20https://www.
ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4158804/.
[41]
Infrared Spectroscopy - Systems Chemistry. url: https://www.ru.nl/systemschemistry/
equipment/optical-spectroscopy/infrared/ (visited on 1 July 2023).
[42]
Robert M Silverstein et al. “EIGHTH EDITION SPECTROMETRIC IDENTIFICATION OF
ORGANIC COMPOUNDS MASS SPECTROMETRY 1.” In: ().
[43]
Infrared spectroscopy - Wikipedia. url: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Infrared_spectroscopy
(visited on 1 July 2023).
[44]
ATR-Infrarotspektroskopie – Wikipedia. url: https://de.wikipedia.org/wiki/ATR-Infrarotspektroskopie
(visited on 29 June 2023).
[45]
Max J. Lerman et al. “The Evolution of Polystyrene as a Cell Culture Material.” In: Tissue
Engineering. Part B, Reviews 24.5 (October 2018), page 359. issn: 19373376. doi: 10.1089/TEN.
TEB.2018.0056. url: /pmc/articles/PMC6199621/%20/pmc/articles/PMC6199621/?report=
abstract%20https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6199621/.
[46]
Christian J. Pless et al. “Soft Electronic Block Copolymer Elastomer Composites for Multi-
Material Printing of Stretchable Physiological Sensors on Textiles.” In: Advanced Electronic Ma-
terials 9.5 (May 2023), page 2201173. issn: 2199-160X. doi: 10.1002/AELM.202201173. url:
https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1002/aelm.202201173%20https://
onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/aelm.202201173%20https://onlinelibrary.
wiley.com/doi/10.1002/aelm.202201173.
[47]
D. Zhang, S. M. Dougal, and M. S. Yeganeh. “Effects of UV irradiation and plasma treatment on
a polystyrene surface studied by IR-visible sum frequency generation spectroscopy.” In: Langmuir
16.10 (January 2000), pages 4528–4532. issn: 07437463. doi: 10.1021/LA991353I/ASSET/IMAGES/
LARGE/LA991353IF00008.JPEG. url: https://pubs.acs.org/doi/full/10.1021/la991353i.
[48]
Yen Theng Lau et al. “Plasma surface treatment of polystyrene in a low power low frequency argon
glow discharge.” In: Applied Surface Science 578 (March 2022), page 151963. issn: 0169-4332. doi:
10.1016/J.APSUSC.2021.151963.
[49]
Greeshma Mohan and Nathan D. Gallant. “Surface chemistry gradients on silicone elastomers
for high-throughput modulation of cell-adhesive interfaces.” In: Journal of Biomedical Materials
Research Part A 103.6 (June 2015), pages 2066–2076. issn: 1552-4965. doi: 10.1002/JBM.A.35349.
url: https : / / onlinelibrary . wiley . com / doi / full / 10 . 1002 / jbm . a . 35349 % 20https :
//onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/jbm.a.35349%20https://onlinelibrary.
wiley.com/doi/10.1002/jbm.a.35349.
[50]
Mark D. Borysiak et al. “Simple replica micromolding of biocompatible styrenic elastomers.” In:
Lab on a Chip 13.14 (June 2013), pages 2773–2784. issn: 1473-0189. doi: 10.1039/C3LC50426C.
url: https://pubs.rsc.org/en/content/articlehtml/2013/lc/c3lc50426c%20https:
//pubs.rsc.org/en/content/articlelanding/2013/lc/c3lc50426c.
==PAGE:67==
Bibliography
60
[51]
Kirill Efimenko et al. “Rapid formation of soft hydrophilic silicone elastomer surfaces.” In: Polymer
46.22 (October 2005), pages 9329–9341. issn: 0032-3861. doi: 10.1016/J.POLYMER.2005.07.046.
[52]
Kirill Efimenko, William E. Wallace, and Jan Genzer. “Surface Modification of Sylgard-184
Poly(dimethyl siloxane) Networks by Ultraviolet and Ultraviolet/Ozone Treatment.” In: Jour-
nal of Colloid and Interface Science 254.2 (October 2002), pages 306–315. issn: 0021-9797. doi:
10.1006/JCIS.2002.8594.
[53]
Kai Su and Chunming Wang. “Recent advances in the use of gelatin in biomedical research.” In:
Biotechnology Letters 37.11 (November 2015), pages 2139–2145. issn: 15736776. doi: 10.1007/
S10529-015-1907-0/METRICS. url: https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s10529-
015-1907-0.
[54]
Nai Chen Cheng et al. “Eﬀicient transfer of human adipose-derived stem cells by chitosan/gelatin
blend films.” In: Journal of Biomedical Materials Research Part B: Applied Biomaterials 100B.5
(July 2012), pages 1369–1377. issn: 1552-4981. doi: 10.1002/JBM.B.32706. url: https://
onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1002/jbm.b.32706%20https://onlinelibrary.
wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/jbm.b.32706%20https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.
1002/jbm.b.32706.
[55]
Akira Ito et al. “Transglutaminase-mediated gelatin matrices incorporating cell adhesion factors as
a biomaterial for tissue engineering.” In: Journal of Bioscience and Bioengineering 95.2 (January
2003), pages 196–199. issn: 1389-1723. doi: 10.1016/S1389-1723(03)80129-9.
[56]
Saad Asim et al. “Advances in Gelatin Bioinks to Optimize Bioprinted Cell Functions.” In:
Advanced Healthcare Materials (2023), page 2203148. issn: 2192-2659. doi: 10 . 1002 / ADHM .
202203148. url: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1002/adhm.202203148%
20https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/adhm.202203148%20https://
onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adhm.202203148.
[57]
Muhammad Rizwan, Alexander E.G. Baker, and Molly S. Shoichet. “Designing Hydrogels for
3D Cell Culture Using Dynamic Covalent Crosslinking.” In: Advanced Healthcare Materials 10.12
(June 2021), page 2100234. issn: 2192-2659. doi: 10.1002/ADHM.202100234. url: https://
onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1002/adhm.202100234%20https://onlinelibrary.
wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/adhm.202100234%20https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/
10.1002/adhm.202100234.
[58]
Water-soluble photosensitive resin￿TOYO GOSEI. url: https : / / www . toyogosei . co . jp /
english/rd/bio.html (visited on 20 June 2023).
[59]
Li Hong Liu and Mingdi Yan. “Perfluorophenyl azides: New applications in surface functional-
ization and nanomaterial synthesis.” In: Accounts of Chemical Research 43.11 (November 2010),
pages 1434–1443. issn: 00014842. doi: 10.1021/AR100066T/ASSET/IMAGES/MEDIUM/AR-2010-
00066T_0013.GIF. url: https://pubs.acs.org/doi/abs/10.1021/ar100066t.
[60]
3D BIOPRINTING SOFTWARE | Discover SHAPER. url: https : / / www . regenhu . com /
3dbioprinting-solutions/shaper-3dprinting-software/ (visited on 25 June 2023).
[61]
Shayla Nikzad — Welcome to DTU Research Database. url: https://orbit.dtu.dk/en/
persons/shayla-nikzad (visited on 25 June 2023).
[62]
C2C12 - CRL-1772 | ATCC. url: https://www.atcc.org/products/crl-1772 (visited on
29 June 2023).
[63]
Thorlabs - S130VC Slim Photodiode Power Sensor, UV-Extended Si, 200 - 1100 nm, 500 pW
- 0.5 mW, Up to 50 mW with Filter. url: https://www.thorlabs.com/thorproduct.cfm?
partnumber=S130VC (visited on 29 June 2023).
[64]
M. Stoytcheva et al. “PVA-AWP/tyrosinase functionalized screen-printed electrodes for dopamine
determination.” In: Analytical Methods 8.26 (June 2016), pages 5197–5203. issn: 1759-9679. doi:
10.1039/C6AY01395C. url: https://pubs.rsc.org/en/content/articlehtml/2016/ay/
c6ay01395c%20https://pubs.rsc.org/en/content/articlelanding/2016/ay/c6ay01395c.
==PAGE:68==
Bibliography
61
[65]
A. Paguirigan and D. J. Beebe. “Gelatin based microfluidic devices for cell culture.” In: Lab
on a Chip 6.3 (February 2006), pages 407–413. issn: 1473-0189. doi: 10.1039/B517524K. url:
https://pubs.rsc.org/en/content/articlehtml/2006/lc/b517524k%20https://pubs.rsc.
org/en/content/articlelanding/2006/lc/b517524k.
[66]
Gang Yang et al. “Enzymatically crosslinked gelatin hydrogel promotes the proliferation of adipose
tissue-derived stromal cells.” In: PeerJ 2016.9 (2016). issn: 21678359. doi: 10 . 7717 / PEERJ .
2497/SUPP-6. url: /pmc/articles/PMC5045885/%20/pmc/articles/PMC5045885/?report=
abstract%20https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5045885/.
[67]
Kazunori Shimizu, Hideaki Fujita, and Eiji Nagamori. “Alignment of skeletal muscle myoblasts
and myotubes using linear micropatterned surfaces ground with abrasives.” In: Biotechnology and
Bioengineering 103.3 (June 2009), pages 631–638. issn: 1097-0290. doi: 10.1002/BIT.22268.
url: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1002/bit.22268%20https://
onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/bit.22268%20https://onlinelibrary.wiley.
com/doi/10.1002/bit.22268.
[68]
Marina Flaibani et al. “Muscle differentiation and myotubes alignment is influenced by micropat-
terned surfaces and exogenous electrical stimulation.” In: Tissue engineering. Part A 15.9 (2009),
pages 2447–2457. issn: 1937-335X. doi: 10.1089/TEN.TEA.2008.0301. url: https://pubmed.
ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/19292666/.
[69]
Carmen Radeke et al. “Transparent and Cell-Guiding Cellulose Nanofiber 3D Printing Bioinks.”
In: ACS Applied Materials and Interfaces 15 (2022). issn: 19448252. doi: 10.1021/ACSAMI.
2C16126/ASSET/IMAGES/LARGE/AM2C16126_0009.JPEG. url: https://pubs.acs.org/doi/
full/10.1021/acsami.2c16126.
[70]
Xuemei Chen, Justin A. Weibel, and Suresh V. Garimella. “Water and Ethanol Droplet Wet-
ting Transition during Evaporation on Omniphobic Surfaces.” In: Scientific Reports 2015 5:1 5.1
(November 2015), pages 1–11. issn: 2045-2322. doi: 10.1038/srep17110. url: https://www.
nature.com/articles/srep17110.
[71]
Ronghua Gu et al. “Stretching-tunable metal gratings fabricated on an elastomeric substrate using
a water-soluble sacrificial layer.” In: Applied Physics A: Materials Science and Processing 121.2
(November 2015), pages 335–341. issn: 14320630. doi: 10.1007/S00339-015-9270-5/FIGURES/6.
url: https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s00339-015-9270-5.
[72]
Nicholas Ferrell, James Woodard, and Derek Hansford. “Fabrication of polymer microstructures
for MEMS: Sacrificial layer micromolding and patterned substrate micromolding.” In: Biomedical
Microdevices 9.6 (December 2007), pages 815–821. issn: 13872176. doi: 10.1007/S10544-007-
9094-Y/FIGURES/7. url: https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s10544-007-9094-
y.
[73]
K. Yang et al. “Water Based PVA Sacrificial Material for Low Temperature MEMS Fabrication
and Applications on e-textiles.” In: Procedia Engineering 87 (January 2014), pages 1565–1568.
issn: 1877-7058. doi: 10.1016/J.PROENG.2014.11.599.
[74]
V. García Ibarra, R. Sendón, and A. Rodríguez-Bernaldo De Quirós. “Antimicrobial Food Pack-
aging Based on Biodegradable Materials.” In: Antimicrobial Food Packaging (January 2016),
pages 363–384. doi: 10.1016/B978-0-12-800723-5.00029-2.
