==PAGE:1==
Microbiome Characterization
of Atlantic Salmon from EU
Countries
Dave Edison Rojas Calderon
Master’s Thesis
July 2023
National Food Institute, Research group for genomic epidemiology
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:2==
Title:
Microbiome Characterization of Atlantic Salmon from EU
Countries
Type:
Master’s Thesis
Date:
July 2023
Author:
Dave Edison Rojas Calderon
Supervisors:
Pimlapas Leekitcharoenphon
Frank Møller Aarestrup
University:
Technical University of Denmark
Department:
National Food Institute, Research group for genomic epidemiol-
ogy
Address:
DTU bygning 204
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Denmark
==PAGE:3==
Acknowledgements
I would like to express my deepest gratitude and appreciation to Senior Re-
searcher Pimlapas Leekitcharoenphon, my supervisor, for her invaluable guid-
ance, unwavering support, and remarkable expertise throughout the entirety of
this research endeavour. Her continuous encouragement, insightful advice, and
constructive feedback were instrumental in shaping the direction and outcome
of this study. I am truly fortunate to have had her as my supervisor, as she
demonstrated a genuine interest in this project, which greatly enhanced my mo-
tivation and commitment. I am also immensely grateful to Research Assistant
Frederik Duus Møller for his valuable assistance during the development of this
project.
==PAGE:4==
Declaration of authorship
I hereby declare that the work submitted in this master’s thesis is my own unless
specified otherwise. The project was conducted from the 1st of February 2023
and the 14th of July 2023, in order to fulfil the necessary criteria for obtaining
the Master of Science (MSc) degree in Bioinformatics and Systems Biology,
equivalent to 30 ECTS credits.
14th of July 2023, Ørestad.
Dave Edison Rojas Calderon
==PAGE:5==
Abbreviations
ANOVA
Analysis of Variance
AMR
Antimicrobial Resistance
ASV
Amplicon Sequence Variant
CIRCLES
Controlling Microbiomes Circulations for Better Food Systems
EU
European Union
H
Shannon Diversity Index
OTU
Operational taxonomic unit
PERMANOVA
Permutational Analysis of Variance
Q
Phred Quality Score
NMDS
Non-Metric Multidimensional Scaling
RAS
Recirculating Aquaculture System
SMMs
Smart Microbiome Modulators
SMFSs
Smart Microbiome Food Systems
TurkeyHSD
Turkey’s Honesty Significant Difference test
WP
Work Package
==PAGE:6==
Definition of terms
ANOVA
It is a statistical technique to analyze the differences be-
tween two or more groups. ANOVA assesses the statistical
significance differences in the means of the groups.
The
variance is partitioned into components attributable to dif-
ferent variation sources. ANOVA generates an F-statistic,
which uses to compare the variability within groups. If the
F-statistic is significant, it demonstrates that there are sig-
nificant differences between at least some of the groups.
Beta
disper-
sion
It refers to a statistical measure that quantifies the level
of variability or dispersion within a data set that follows
a beta distribution. The beta distribution is a continuous
probability distribution defined on the interval [0, 1], and it
is commonly used for modelling proportions or rates. Beta
dispersion provides insights into the spread or clustering of
data points within the distribution. It utilizes the coefficient
of variation, which compares the standard deviation to the
mean of the beta-distributed data. High beta dispersion val-
ues indicate greater variability or dispersion, while lower val-
ues denote more concentrated or less dispersed observations.
Bray-Curtis
dissimilarity
The Bray-Curtis dissimilarity is a statistic used in ecology
that quantifies the dissimilarity between two sites. It is cal-
culated with the following formula:
BCij = 1 −
2Cij
Si + Sj
Where the term Cij is the sum of the lesser values of those
species that the two sites Si and Sj have in common.
Chao1 index
This index is an estimator of species richness used in ecology.
It is calculated by:
S = Sobs + Q2
1
2Q2
==PAGE:7==
v
Where the term Sobs represents the total number of observed
species in the sample, Q2
1 and Q2 are the number of single-
tons and doubletons, respectively.
Microbiome
The collection of all bacteria and viruses that exist in a
certain environment, including the human body or a part
of the human body, for example, the gastrointestinal tract.
The microbiome also includes the genetic material of mi-
croorganisms in a certain habitat.
Microbiota
The assemblage of live microorganisms present in a specific
habitat (not including viruses, plasmids, prions, viroids or
free DNA).
NMDS
Non-metric multidimensional scaling is method of indirect
gradient analysis which generates an ordination based on
a dissimilarity or distance matrix. Contrary to approaches
that seek to maximize variance or correspondence between
items in an ordination, NMDS tries to reflect the pairwise
dissimilarity between objects in a low-dimensional space as
accurately as possible.
The distance matrix can be con-
structed with any dissimilarity or distance measure.
PERMANOVA It is a non-parametric multivariate statistical permutation
test.
PERMANOVA evaluates the null hypothesis that
there are no differences in the composition (centroid and
dispersion) of the groups investigated. The test utilizes the
dissimilarity between observations and uses the permutation
test to determine if the observed dissimilarities are signifi-
cantly different from those expected by chance. In order to
do that, PERMANOVA measures the sum of squares within
and between groups and uses the F test to compare with-
group to between-group variance.
==PAGE:8==
vi
Definition of terms
Phred quality
scores
Phred quality scores (Q) are related logarithmically to the
base-calling accuracy probabilities (P). It is calculated:
Q = −log10 P
Generally, the Q are represented using ASCII characters.
The meaning of the ASCII values will be determined by
either base 33 (Phred33) or 64 (Phred64), depending on the
sequencing platform.
Read
DNA sequence from one fragment (small section) of DNA
Relative
abundance
It measures how common or uncommon is a species relative
to other species found in a community. It is calculated by:
Ni
N · 100
Where Ni is the total number of occurrences of a read
mapped to a species i and N is the total number of reads
mapped in a sample.
Shannon
di-
versity index
This index is an estimator of species richness and evenness
in a community. It is calculated by:
H = −
S
X
i=1
(pi ln pi)
Where S is the number of ASVs and pi I the proportion of
community represented by ASV i.
TurkeyHSD
Turkey’s Honesty Significant Difference test is a post hoc
statistical test used in the analysis of variance to compare
all possible pairs of group means for significant differences.
The TurkeyHSD test can be employed to identify which spe-
cific groups differ significantly from each other. A critical
value called HSD value is calculated based on the number
of groups and the sample size, and the differences between
means are compared to the HSD value. If the difference be-
tween two group means exceeds the HSD value, there is a
statistical difference between those groups.
==PAGE:9==
vii
VSEARCH
It refers to Versatile Tool for Nucleotide and Protein Se-
quence Databases.
This algorithm is used primarily for
tasks such as sequence clustering, chimera detection, and
sequence similarity searching.
VSEARCH utilize efficient
heuristic methods, such as sorting sequences by length and
pre-clustering, to accelerate the analysis of large data sets.
It groups similar sequences using their pairwise sequence
similarity and a given identity threshold in Operational tax-
onomic units (OTUs). In this study, VSEARCH was ap-
plied to perform a sequence similarity search against a ref-
erence database, to identify the known species present in
our samples.
==PAGE:10==
Abstract
The project CIRCLES (Controlling Microbiomes Circulations for Better Food
Systems) aims to enhance the understanding of microbiomes in different food
chains and optimize their application to improve production, safety, resilience,
and sustainability. This study focuses on the microbiome characterization of
Atlantic salmon from EU countries using 16S rRNA gene analysis. A total of
1,476 samples were collected in Ireland and Norway, including farmed and wild
Atlantic salmon from the observation and intervention phase. The samples were
collected from different sample types (fish and environmental samples) and at
distinct developmental stages.
A high amount of ASVs (Amplicon Sequence
Variants) had unassigned taxonomy and the main reason theorized to justify it
is the lack of representation of fish microbiome components in the Silva database.
The diversity and richness dynamics through time differed in each sample type
and WPs, except for farmed Atlantic salmon from Ireland, where an increasing
diversity and richness from T0 (fertilised eggs) to T5 (post-vaccination) was
observed in fish samples and decreased when the fish was transferred to the sea
(T6). Although there were statistical differences between countries, farmed and
wild salmon, phases and sample types, the microbiome structure of the same
sample types was maintained due to similarities in microbial composition. The
core microbiome of both wild and farmed Atlantic salmon from Ireland and Nor-
way were Proteobacteria, Cyanobacteria, Actinobacteria and Firmicutes. The
same phyla were predominant in environmental samples, except for Firmicutes.
The presence of the most abundant genera, such as Chloroplast and Ricketsiales,
was justified by being abundant components of the fish feed. Bifidobacterium
and Cutibacterium, known as probiotics of the gastrointestinal tract, were found
in samples from intestines and digesta. Other abundant genera were identified,
Clostridium sensu stricto 1 and Hyphomicrobium, but their role in the Atlantic
salmon microbiome remains unknown. Even though the observation and inter-
vention phases showed statistically significant differences, the differences were
minimal. Moreover, the probiotic Aliivibrio strain was not found in the skin of
the treated Atlantic salmon. In order to improve the sustainability and produc-
tivity of the current production food systems of Atlantic salmon, it is essential to
create a dedicated database for future fish microbiome studies and to treat the
fish with probiotics for the gastrointestinal tract, which can ameliorate digestion
and enhance the fish’s growth.
==PAGE:11==
Contents
Acknowledgements
i
Declaration of authorship
ii
Abbreviations
iii
Definition of terms
iv
Abstract
viii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
CIRCLES project . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
The role of microbiomes in Aquaculture . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2.1
The gut microbiome . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2.2
Improving water quality in recirculating aquaculture sys-
tems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.2.3
Improving fish health
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.3
Atlantic salmon life cycle
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.3.1
Wild Atlantic salmon
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.3.2
Farmed Atlantic salmon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2
Objectives
9
3
Material and Methods
10
3.1
Workflow overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.2
Sample collection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.2.1
Intervention treatment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.2.2
Procedures for fish and environment sampling . . . . . . .
13
3.3
Samples processing, DNA extraction and Sequencing . . . . . . .
15
3.4
Bioinformatic analysis with QIIME2 pipeline
. . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.5
Data analysis with R . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.5.1
Quality assessment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.5.2
Microbiome Abundance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.5.3
Core Microbiome . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.5.4
Diversity and Richness . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.5.5
Microbiome structure
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.5.6
Microbiome statistical inference . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
==PAGE:12==
x
CONTENTS
4
Results
20
4.1
Quality assessment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4.2
Sequencing analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.3
Alpha diversity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.4
Microbiome structure
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4.5
Microbial composition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.5.1
Core microbiome . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
5
Discussion
35
5.1
High amount of unassigned ASVs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
5.2
Diversity and richness
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
5.3
Microbial composition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
5.3.1
The intervention treatment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
6
Conclusions
40
Bibliography
41
Programs & Scripts
46
Supplementary figures
48
==PAGE:13==
Introduction
Aquaculture is one of the most important food systems in the world, with a
production of 53.4 million tonnes of fish in 2017, valued in a total of 139.7
billion US dollars [1]. Although aquaculture include the production of a diverse
group of products, ranging from the unicellular algae Chlorella to the Atlantic
salmon (Salmo salar), it is dominated by the fish production, accounting for
47.7% of the global production and 56% of the total value [1].
Europe is one of the major producers of Atlantic salmon world wide.
The
european salmon aquaculture sector was valued in 687 million euros in 2018 [2].
The main producer countries of Atlantic salmon in the Europe are Norway and
Ireland [1].
Despite the economic importance of aquaculture and other food systems, such
as agriculture, their production is inefficient and not long-term sustainable. In
response to this concern, the European Union (EU) initiated the CIRCLES
project with a financial allocation of 10 million euros. The primary objective
of CIRCLES project is to enhance the safety, production, sustainability and
resilience of food systems [3].
1.1
CIRCLES project
The European project "Controlling Microbiomes Circulations for Better Food
Systems" (CIRCLES) has as a main objective to increase the knowledge and
understanding of microbiomes present in different food systems, such as aquacul-
ture, agriculture, poultry and swine production systems, to characterise smart
microbiome modulators (SMMs) that will be implemented in integrative cir-
cular actions in smart microbiome food systems (SMFSs). The integration of
the SMMs will increase food production, safety, sustainability and resilience of
SMFSs [4].
The CIRCLES project is divided in 10 work packages (WPs). WP1 and WP2
are dedicated to coordination and management, and to develop the common
procedures, tools and initiatives of the project. WP3 to WP6 represent the dif-
ferent food systems whose microbiomes are studied: plants (WP3), poultry and
swine (WP4), and farmed and wild seabream and Atlantic salmon (WP5 and
WP6). WP7 aims to design actions to decrease the incidence of antimicrobial
resistance in the studied food systems. WP8 is for data storage and processing
for microbiome characterization and modelling. WP9 has as a objective to iden-
==PAGE:14==
2
Introduction
tify the SMMs and microbiome-tailored circular actions to integrate in SMFSs.
Finally, WP10 is dedicated to the disseminate, communicate and give policy
recommendations [5].
This study is focused on the microbiome characterization of samples obtained
from farmed (WP5) and wild (WP6) Atlantic salmon. 16S rRNA genes sequenc-
ing was used to characterise the composition, structure, diversity and richness
of microbial communities.
1.2
The role of microbiomes in Aquaculture
Microorganisms communities occur naturally in aquaculture and fisheries and
play a main role in matter and nutrient recycling. Microbes can have differ-
ent interactions with fish, ranging from infecting and killing fish and larvae to
protecting them against disease and pathogens. Consequently, it is important
to monitor and exploit microbial populations to improve aquaculture environ-
ments, both increasing water quality and controlling infections [6].
1.2.1
The gut microbiome
The microorganisms present in the intestinal tract, also known as the gut mi-
crobiota, have a major role in fish growth and health, affecting it both positively
or negatively depending on the conditions.
The gut microbiome can modulate the host’s innate immune system. The in-
nate immune system is the first line of defence against pathogens. In contrast to
the acquired immune system, it recognizes and eliminates pathogens in a non-
specific way. The presence of commensal bacteria and their products can prevent
pathogenic infections by promoting or inhibiting the formation of favourable or
pathogenic microorganisms’ biofilms, respectively. The gut microbiome senses
and is affected by the hormones produced by the host. The epithelial turnover
and S-Ig production are increased by the presence of commensals.
Gut mi-
crobiome and their products affect other commensal microorganisms. Besides,
commensal products can modify the number of B-cells and the presence of an-
tibodies in the mucous [7]. An example is the presence of Bacillus spp. and
Lactobacillus spp. which can change the host gene expression and promote the
expression of antiviral mediators and proinflammatory genes, such as inflamma-
tory cytokines [8]. Figure 1.1 illustrates the general interactions between the
host immune system, commensals and pathogens.
==PAGE:15==
1.2 The role of microbiomes in Aquaculture
3
Figure 1.1: General mechanisms of interaction between host immune system,
commensal and pathogenic microorganisms. (A) Inhibition or stim-
ulation of biofilm formation. (B) Host hormone production affects
commensals. (C) S-Ig and epithelial turnover are promoted by mi-
crobiome presence. (D) Commensal microorganism and their prod-
ucts modulate other microbes. (E) Products derived from commen-
sal change and modulate the presence of B-cells and antibodies in
the mucous (F). Adapted from [7].
In addition, the gut microbiome can alter the host’s physiology. Certain food
components are not digestible by the fish. However, some microorganisms from
the gut microbiota can use those components to nourish themselves and the pro-
duced metabolites can be used as a source of energy for the fish. Besides, the
microbiome microbes can synthesize essential supplements needed by the fish,
such as vitamins [9]. Bacillus sp. and Lactobacillus spp. have been associated
with alterations of gut morphology, improving digestion and metabolism. Fur-
thermore, Bacillus spp. and Lactobacillus spp. can regulate genetic components
implicated in growth and appetite control [8]. The metabolites produced by the
commensal microorganisms can alter the appetite directly, by entering the cir-
culatory system and arriving in the brain, or indirectly, by interacting with
other nerve terminals, such as the vagal terminals, or changing the liberation
of appetite-regulating gut peptides, affecting the release of central appetite-
regulating neuropeptides [10], as illustrated in Figure 1.2.
The gut microbiota can alter the host homeostasis with other mechanisms, apart
from modulating the innate immune system and the regulation of the gut-
microbiota-brain axis. The gut microorganisms can alter the host’s response
to stress through bi-directional communication between the brain (compara-
bly to the mechanism shown in Figure 1.2) and peripheral organs. Also, the
microbiota has a major role in the development and reproduction of the host
by influencing the tissue, organ and gonadal development, and regulating the
feeding, growth and energy homeostasis [10].
==PAGE:16==
4
Introduction
Figure 1.2: Interaction mechanism between the gut-microbiota-brain axis. The
substrates present in the gut are digested by the gut microbiota
(green circle) producing the liberation of metabolites in the lumen.
these compounds locally activate endocrine cells of the gastrointesti-
nal tract (blue circle) and/or reach the brain. The endocrine cells
that have been stimulated liberate gut peptides, which have a local
impact on the gastrointestinal tract (GIT) and influence the feeding
centres in the brain. This, in turn, leads to changes in the release
of neuropeptides and alters feeding behaviour as well as energy reg-
ulation. Adapted from [10].
1.2.2
Improving water quality in recirculating aquaculture
systems
During the period 2001 to 2018, aquaculture has grown with an annual average
of 5.3% and, since 1990, the production has increased by over 600%. For this
reason, and in order to meet the growing demand for seafood products, one of
the strategies is to implement Recirculating Aquaculture Systems (RAS). The
advantages of RAS are the use efficiency of water, high productivity and sustain-
ability because it does not cause marine habitat destruction, water pollution,
eutrophication or diversity depletion [11].
In RAS, fish live at high densities and large scales in a reduced space, which
makes it difficult to maintain good water quality. The pollution of fish faeces,
feed rests and other inorganic nutrients increase the probability of eutrophica-
tion and fish mortality. For example, the use of autotrophic nitrifying bacte-
ria such as Nistrospira spp. and Nitrosomonas spp., and anoxic members of
Pseudomonas spp. have been suggested for denitrification of rearing water [6].
Nistrospira spp. and Nitrosomonas spp. transform the toxic ammonia (NH3)
generating nitrate (NO−
3 ). However, it is problematic when there is an incom-
plete ammonium transformation causing an increase in the concentration of
==PAGE:17==
1.2 The role of microbiomes in Aquaculture
5
nitrite (NO−
2 ), which is toxic for the fish. The integration of Pseudomonas spp.
to the filter’s biofilm can solve this problem. In Figure 1.3, it is illustrated that
denitrification is produced in the anoxic bottom of the biofilm by Pseudomonas
spp., while the nitrification is carried out in the oxic surface of the biofilm by
Nistrospira spp. and Nitrosomonas spp.
Figure 1.3: Proposed mechanism for water quality improvement of Recirculating
aquaculture systems (RAS) using autotrophic nitrifying bacteria as
Nistrospira spp.
and Nitrosomonas spp., and anoxic members of
Pseudomonas spp. Adapted from [6].
1.2.3
Improving fish health
Furthermore, the high population density of fish in aquaculture farms can lead
to a high and fast spread of diseases and pathogenic infections. In the case
of pathogenic microorganisms, to control the infections the conventional treat-
ment is antimicrobials which are a high risk for human health caused by the
spread of antimicrobial resistance [6]. In addition, long-term exposure to an-
tibiotics, such as oxytetracycline, has been associated with negative impacts on
growth, nutrient digestion and metabolism in fish [8]. An alternative to the use
of antimicrobials is vaccination and the use of probiotics. Probiotics are ben-
eficial for the host due to various mechanisms, like inhibiting the colonization
of pathogenic bacteria by competitive exclusion, production of inhibitory sub-
stances for pathogenic microorganisms, such as antagonist of quorum sensing
mechanism, competition for nutrients, and conferring better immunity to the
host due to interactions with the host immune system [12]. Besides, the immune
system modulation can also provide protection against external parasites like
sea lice.
==PAGE:18==
6
Introduction
An example of the advantages of using probiotics is bathing Atlantic salmon with
probiotic Aliivibrio strains. A study by Klakegg et al. showed that after the
treatment, there was a growth enhancement in the Atlantic salmon, a reduction
in mortality and the presence of skin ulcers decreased [13].
1.3
Atlantic salmon life cycle
1.3.1
Wild Atlantic salmon
The Atlantic salmon life cycle occurs within or between locations depending
on whether or not the salmon migrates to a different place and environment.
In general, Atlantic salmon presents an anadromous life cycle (Figure 1.4a) in
which they migrate from the streams to the sea.
Other life cycles that the
species can present are incomplete anadromy (Figure 1.4b) and non-anadromy
(Figure 1.4c) when the migration is incomplete or the salmon does not undergo
a marine migration at all, respectively [14].
This section will be focused on explaining the anadromous life cycle of Atlantic
salmon since it is the most relevant because aquaculture mimics it.
Adult females of Atlantic salmon construct redds which are depressions in the
river gravel created using their bodies and tails. In the redds, the females deposit
their eggs in one or more groups, and then, they bury them. Adult males do
not take part in the redds construction. Their main role is to seek, compete,
and mate with females. The spawn is produced when the male salmon fertilise
the eggs. Depending on the conditions of the river, like temperature and oxygen
dissolved, the incubation period can vary between 70 to 160 days [14].
When the incubation period is over, the fish larva, called yolk sac larvae, emerges
from the egg. The fish larva is still unable to start feeding since it continues to
absorb nutrients from the ventrally attached yolk sac. When the salmon larva
is further developed, it becomes a fry. In this stage, the yolk sac has nearly
disappeared.
Besides, the fry presents a functional bladder that allows the
juvenile salmon to move around the spawning bed up to the gravel surface. Over
time, the fry undergoes a transformation into a parr, exhibiting the capability
to feed itself in a freshwater environment.
The Atlantic salmon can live in freshwater for approximately 1 to 5 years before
starting the migration to the sea [15]. Once the young salmon is ready to start
the migration, it suffers a process called smoltification which involves a complex
==PAGE:19==
1.3 Atlantic salmon life cycle
7
(a) Anadromy
(b) Incomplete anadromy
(c) Non-anadromy
Figure 1.4: Three types of Atlantic salmon life cycle depending on the migration
occurrence. Adapter from [14]
physiological change to adapt to its new environment.
The Atlantic salmon
spends 1 to 4 years in the open sea finishing its development [15]. After this
period, the fully-grown Atlantic salmons return to their natal stream to spawn
and die, restarting the cycle again.
==PAGE:20==
8
Introduction
1.3.2
Farmed Atlantic salmon
Aquaculture imitates the anadromous life cycle of wild Atlantic salmon. The
production starts by fertilizing the eggs that will be introduced in a freshwater
tank that mimics the river streams. In the water tank, the yolk sac larvae emerge
from the egg. The salmon larva develops by consuming the yolk sac from its
abdomen and becomes a fry capable of receiving its first feeding. During the
parr stage, the juvenile salmon can receive treatments, such as vaccination, bio-
enhancers and probiotics [16].
The juvenile life stages of farmed Atlantic salmon are crucial because the pres-
ence of opportunistic pathogens can cause higher mortality. For this reason, it
is important to take special attention to the microbial composition of live feed
to avoid the appearance of opportunistic pathogens. The supplementation of
live feed with Lactobacillus spp. and Pediococcus spp. has shown beneficial
effects in mucosal immunity, increased growth and stress tolerance of larvae.
Besides, the use of lytic bacteriophages has also proven to reduce the prevalence
of opportunistic pathogens [8].
When the salmon is developed enough, it will pass the smoltification and all the
physiological changes that it entails. In the wild, the Atlantic salmon passes
through a salinity gradient when it migrates from the river to the sea. However,
in production systems smolts are usually transferred directly from freshwater
to seawater without considering the possible impact of the salinity shock to the
Atlantic salmon microbiome. The reduction of diversity in the fish microbiome
can result in the appearance of opportunistic pathogens. A study performed in
2022 showed that the transference of Atlantic salmon to seawater by gradual
changes in salinity increased the intestinal microbial abundance and richness
[17]. The final habitat of Atlantic salmon in aquaculture is the open-pen sea
cages located in the seawater, where the salmon will live and grow until it is
slaughtered [16].
A complete cycle of Atlantic salmon production is accomplished usually in 2
years in Nordlaks, Norway. In Ireland, the time needed to complete one full
production cycle is longer, approximately 12 months in freshwater, followed by
another 12 to 18 months in seawater, resulting in a total of 24 to 30 months
[16].
==PAGE:21==
Objectives
There is a lack of knowledge and understanding of microbiomes in food produc-
tion systems, such as Atlantic salmon aquaculture. For this reason, the present
master thesis aims to characterize the microbiome of Atlantic salmon from EU
countries using 16S rRNA gene analysis. 1476 samples collected in Ireland and
Norway, the main producers of Atlantic salmon in the EU, will be explored in
this study. In order to achieve the main objective, the microbial composition
will be analysed to determine the abundance, diversity, and richness of sample
types and collection time points of Atlantic salmon. Also, comparing the micro-
biome structure and composition between countries, farmed and wild Atlantic
salmon, phases, sample types and collection time points.
==PAGE:22==
Material and Methods
3.1
Workflow overview
An overview of the workflow presenting the main steps and methods utilized in
this master’s thesis is provided in Figure 3.1. Each part of the workflow will be
explained in detail in the following sections.
Figure 3.1: Workflow overview
==PAGE:23==
3.2 Sample collection
11
3.2
Sample collection
In this study, 564 and 912 samples of farmed and wild Atlantic salmon were
collected from Ireland and Norway, respectively. To guarantee consistency across
production cycles studied in CIRCLES project, it was proposed to start tracking
the salmon production from late winter or early spring, starting with the stage
of fertilised eggs.
The samples were collected from January 2020 to August
2022, in Ireland, and between October 2019 to February 2022 in Norway.
The distribution of samples according to the sample type is shown in Table 3.1.
The metadata of the samples analysed in this study is provided in Supplemen-
tary Table 1 [18].
Table 3.1: Sample distribution based on the sample type
Ireland
Norway
Work Package
Farmed
Wild
Farmed
Wild
Fish
Fertilised eggs
4
6
Yolk sac larvae
4
6
Fry
6
42
Skin
53
35
95
15
Anterior Intestine
53
36
95
15
Mid Intestine
53
29
95
15
Posterior Intestine
55
28
95
14
Anterior Digesta
54
11
95
15
Mid Digesta
54
13
95
15
Filet
34
Environmental
Biofilm
26
53
13
Upstream water to farm
3
Inlet water
19
8
Tank water
19
35
Outlet water
1
River water
0
10
Seawater inside pen
6
12
Seawater outside pen
6
0
Feed
6
24
Total per sample type
412
152
758
154
Total number of samples
1476
In Aquaculture, the sampling was performed during the most relevant develop-
mental stages. The farmed Atlantic salmon undergoes a total of nine different
stages of development within the aquaculture farm. These stages encompassed
six time points in freshwater, including fertilised eggs (T0), yolk sac larvae (T1),
fry (T2), parr (T3), pre-vaccination (T4), and post-vaccination (T5). Addition-
ally, there were two stages in seawater, namely post-sea transference (T6) and
the late growth phase (T7), followed by a final time-point after slaughter (T8).
The stages of development are shown chronologically ordered in Figure 3.2a.
==PAGE:24==
12
Material and Methods
(a) Aquaculture
(b) Wild
Figure 3.2: Sample collection time-points
The samples from wild Atlantic salmon were collected after the juvenile fish
abandoned the redds and emerged from the river gravel as fry (T2). Further-
more, samples were obtained from more developed stages of juvenile salmon,
namely parr (T3) and smolts still in the river (T5). Returning adults (T8) is
the last life stage at which samples were taken. In Figure 3.2b, are shown the
sample collection time points of wild Atlantic salmon.
3.2.1
Intervention treatment
The product used for the intervention phase is a product called Stembiont,
which is manufactured by Previwo. Stembiont is a probiotic that contains a
benign bacteria Aliivibrio. The genus Aliivibrio is naturally found in marine en-
vironments. As a probiotic, the main function of Stembiont is to provide "good
bacteria" to the Atlantic salmon. Bacteria provided by probiotics can compete
and prevent the colonization of harmful bacteria and parasites. Also, probiotic
microorganisms can interact with the host and modify the host’s immune system
==PAGE:25==
3.2 Sample collection
13
response, among other [19].
Studies performed using Aliivibrio indicated that the microorganisms produce
physiological changes and modulate the non-specific immune system of the host
[13]. The fish treated with Stembioint have a reduced risk of ulcers and sea lice
occurrence, and a higher survival rate and growth [19].
The intervention treatment with Stembiont was administered to the salmon by
bath, simultaneously with vaccination [16].
3.2.2
Procedures for fish and environment sampling
The CIRCLES D2.2 SOPs (EU CIRCLES, 2019) explain in detail the proce-
dures for sampling, storage and transport of animal and human samples for
microbiome analysis [16]. The main procedures for Atlantic salmon sampling
will be summarised in this section.
It is critical to have a clear order when fish and environmental samples are taken.
The recommended order is the following:
1. Water sampling
2. Environmental sampling (biofilms)
3. Anesthetize the fish
4. Blood sampling (not included in this study)
5. Euthanize fish
6. Fish and tissue sampling: Skin and gastrointestinal tract (including di-
gesta)
The feed samples can be taken independently. However, it is suggested to take
the samples before or when the salmon is being fed.
During the early life stages, including fertilised eggs, yolk sac larvae and fry, the
samples are not taken as individuals or single tissues. A total of 100 individuals
are randomly collected, transferred to 4 sterile stomacher bags (25 per bag) and
frozen until delivered to the analytical laboratory. There, the bag content is
homogenized in a stomacher at normal speed for 1 minute. Until DNA extrac-
tion, the homogenate is stored in a sterile plastic tube at -80ºC. In the case of
==PAGE:26==
14
Material and Methods
the other successive developmental stages, 10 individuals are selected randomly
from each tank, cage or net. 0.1 g/L of Tricaine Methanesulfonate is used to
anaesthetize the salmon and 0.3 to 0.5 g/L, of the same product is administered
to euthanize it.
For skin sampling, a portion of approximately 1-2 cm x 1-2 cm is dissected from
the left side of each individual. The dissection should be done in the position
marked by the red square in Figure 3.3. It is recommended to minimize the
inclusion of muscle tissue, avoiding the removal of scales and mucus from the
skin. The sample is stored in a sterile plastic tube at -80ºC until DNA extraction
in the analytical laboratory.
Figure 3.3: Position from the Atlantic salmon body where the skin sample shall
be taken, marked with a red square. Extracted from [16].
The gastrointestinal tract is dissected from each fish and it is divided, following
the indications shown in Figure 3.4, into pyloric caeca (PC) or anterior intestine,
the mid intestine and the distal or posterior intestine. 25 g of digesta contained
in each part of the gastrointestinal tract is separated from the tissue. When
the tissue is empty, it is washed 3 to 4 times in sterile PBS. The samples and
digesta are stored in sterile tubes at -80ºC until DNA extraction.
Figure 3.4: Positions marked by a dashed red line where the gastrointestinal
tract should be segregated into three sections of the same size: An-
terior intestine (AI), Mid Intestine (MI), and Posterior Intestine
(PI). Extracted from [16].
==PAGE:27==
3.3 Samples processing, DNA extraction and Sequencing
15
The water samples are collected at all developmental stages. As it was indicated
previously, the water samples are taken first to avoid operational contamination.
The samples of inlet, tank and outlet water are taken independently. In tanks,
the samples are taken at 0.5 meters depth. The samples of upstream water are
collected 10 meters upstream of the pens, and water inside and outside pens are
collected 2 meters inside the pens. 2 litters of water are taken for each sample.
The water is filtered twice, firstly using a 20 µm filter, and secondly with a
Sterivex filter with a 0.22 µm pore size using a peristaltic pump. The Sterivex
filter is stored in a sterile plastic bag at -80ºC until DNA extraction.
The biofilms are collected at the farms by swapping the wall or net at the water
surface and at a one-meter depth close to the water inlet and outlet. In the tanks,
the biofilm is collected from the bottom. The swabs collection and storage is
done following the instructions given by the sampling kit manufacturer.
During the fish sampling process, a collection of five random samples of 10 g each
is obtained from the feed that was most recently given to the fish. The samples
are stored in stomacher bags and are refrigerated until being delivered to the
analytical laboratory. There, the feed sample is mixed with 100 ml peptone
water, the samples are homogenized in the stomacher for 1 minute at normal
speed, and filtered (same procedure as the first water filtering). 25 ml of the
homogenate are stored in a sterile plastic tube at -80ºC.
3.3
Samples processing, DNA extraction and Se-
quencing
The DNA was extracted by partners of the CIRCLES project and the DNA
samples were delivered to the Technical University of Denmark for sequencing.
The DNA/RNA Shield Lysis Tube with Swab from ZymoResearch was used for
DNA extraction of swab samples using the manufacturer’s instructions. The
DNeasy PowerMax Soil Kit from Qiagen was used for the DNA extraction of
tissue samples following the manufacturer instructions with minor modifications,
as indicated in CIRCLES D2.2 Annex 2 – SOP WP5 (EU CIRCLES, 2019) [16].
The variable regions V3 and V4 of 16S rRNA genes from the samples were am-
plified with a two-step Polymerase Chain Reaction (PCR) following the protocol
16S Metagenomic Sequencing Library Preparation, from Illumina [20]. The am-
plified DNA was sequenced on Illumina MiSeq platform. The sequenced samples
were stored in the CIRCLES servers for their posterior analysis.
==PAGE:28==
16
Material and Methods
3.4
Bioinformatic analysis with QIIME2 pipeline
QIIME2 is a bioinformatic pipeline that enables the processing, analysis and
visualization of microbiome data, such as 16S rRNA genes sequencing [21]. The
files processed and created by QIIME2, except for the metadata, are stored
as artifacts which have .qza extension. The artifacts are zip files containing
essential information about the data, such as type, format, provenance, analysis
steps performed, etc [22]. The main steps followed in the QIIME2 bioinformatic
analysis were (shown in 3.1 in green):
1. Import sequencing data: qiime tools import converts the paired-
end fastq files into .qza artifacts using the manifest.csv file. This file
contains a table with three columns indicating the sample id, the absolute
path to the files and the direction (forward or reverse).
2. Quality assessment : qiime demux summarize creates a visualiza-
tion file, with .qzv extension, summarizing the demultiplexed artifacts.
The visualization file has an overview and an interactive quality plot that
can be visualized in QIIME2 view [23].
3. Denoising with DADA2 plugin: After the quality assessment, the arti-
fact containing the paired-end reads was denoised using the DADA2 plugin
[24]. Firstly, the DADA2 plugin filters, trims and dereplicates the fastq
files. Secondly, it learns the error rates introduced by PCR amplification.
The error rate models are used to infer the sample composition at a higher
resolution than other operational taxonomic units (OTUs) algorithms [24].
The control of errors in this method allows the creation of amplicon se-
quence variants (ASVs) down to the level of single-nucleotide differences,
not like OTUs which are clusters of sequencing reads that differ by less
than a given dissimilarity threshold [25]. Thirdly, DADA2 plugin merges
the forward and reverse reads and removes chimeras. Finally, it creates
the table of ASVs [26].
4. Taxonomic assignation with Feature-Classifier plugin: The
Feature-Classifier plugin assigns the taxonomy to the ASVs us-
ing classify-consensus-vsearch method and a reference database
(SILVA database v.138 [27]).
The qiime taxa barplot plugin was
used to create an initial visualization of the taxonomy assignation.
5. Phylogenetic analysis with Phylogeny plugin: This plugin creates
two phylogenetic trees (rooted and unrooted) that can be used for the
posterior diversity analysis. Firstly, the sequences are aligned using mafft.
Secondly, it filters positions that may introduce noise into the phylogenetic
tree (highly variable positions). Finally, Phylogeny plugin constructs an
==PAGE:29==
3.5 Data analysis with R
17
unrooted phylogenetic tree, and then, it adds the root to the unrooted
tree.
6. Diversity analysis with Diversity plugin: The diversity analysis utilize
the ASVs table and the rooted tree created in steps 3 and 5, respectively,
to calculate alpha and beta diversity, distance matrices, and make visual-
izations, such as PCoA and Emperor [22]. The Diversity plugin rarefies
the samples at the given depth. In our case, the rarefaction was performed
at 5000 sampling depth to get rid of samples that had a low number of
features (ASVs). The Chao1 index estimates diversity using abundance
data and calculates the number of rare taxa missed from undersampling.
The Shannon diversity index calculates the richness and diversity applying
a natural algorithm and it accounts for the abundance and evenness of the
present taxa.
The specific commands used in the bioinformatic analysis in QIIME2 can be
found in the qiime2_commands.txt stored in Science Data [28].
3.5
Data analysis with R
The data analysis and plotting were performed using R version 4.2.3 in RStudio
on Windows [29]. The RMarkdown files used for each specific step of the analysis
can be found in Science Data [28]. The .qza and .tsv files were imported to
R using the qiime2R package [30].
The data wrangling and plotting done in all steps were performed using the
Tydiverse and ggplot2 packages [31][32].
3.5.1
Quality assessment
The denoising and taxonomic assignation stats were plotted in order to deter-
mine the optimal truncation length and maximum error for the DADA2 plugin.
The input data for the pre-analysis were the denoising-stats.tsv tables
downloaded from denoising-stats.qzv visualized in QIIME2 view [23].
==PAGE:30==
18
Material and Methods
3.5.2
Microbiome Abundance
The artifacts, ASVs table and taxonomy class table, were used to create bar
plots of the mean relative abundance at the Phylum level for each sample type
and time-point in each country, WP and phase.
Besides, heatmaps at the Genus level were created using an Abundance Nor-
malization of the mean relative abundance:
NormAbundance = log10(MeanRelativeAbundance + 0.01)
3.5.3
Core Microbiome
The core microbiome was defined as any taxon present in at least 60% of the
samples with a minimum relative abundance of 4.5% at the phylum level [33].
For the genus level, the core microbiome was defined by the same sample pres-
ence but with a minimum relative abundance of 0.001%.
The taxa were filtered at phylum and genus level using the definitions given
above and were plotted in UpSet plots using UpSetR package [34].
3.5.4
Diversity and Richness
The diversity and richness were performed in QIIME2 using the Diversity
plugin and were imported to R using qiime2R. The diversity and richness are
calculated by QIIME2 using their definition formulas at the ASVs level and
sample depth of 5000. The Shannon diversity index and the Chao1 richness
index were plotted in box plots.
3.5.5
Microbiome structure
The microbiome structure of Atlantic salmon from EU countries was assessed
by performing a Non-metric multidimensional scaling (NMDS) ordination with
Bray-Curtis dissimilarity of the relative abundances at the genus level.
The
NMDS was conducted using the metaMDS() function from the Vegan package
and was plotted using ggplot2 [35].
==PAGE:31==
3.5 Data analysis with R
19
In order to reduce the number of groups present in the NMDS plot, the sample
types were grouped as it is indicated in Table 3.2. The grouped sample types
were also used for the microbiome statistical inference explained in the next
section.
Table 3.2: Grouped sample types.
Sample group
Sample type
Early life stages
Fertilised eggs
Yolk sack larvae
Fry
Skin
Skin
Intestine
Anterior intestine
Mid intestine
Posterior intestine
Digesta
Anterior digesta
Mid digesta
Filet
Filet
Biofilm
Biofilm
Freshwater
Inlet water
Tank water
Outlet water
River water
River water
Sea water
Upstream water to farm
Seawater inside pen
Seawater outside pen
Feed
Feed freshwater
Feed sea cage
3.5.6
Microbiome statistical inference
The multivariate differential abundance testing was performed after calculating
the Bray-Curtis dissimilarity matrix with vegdist() function with the relative
abundance table at the genus level. With the dissimilarity matrix, it was anal-
ysed the multivariate homogeneity of group dispersion (variances) with Martin
Anderson’s PERMDISP2 procedure, also called beta dispersion [36]. Then, the
analysis of variance of the beta dispersion was computed with anova() function
to check if the variance was significantly different between groups (WPs, phases
and grouped sample types). Finally, a Turkey Test Honest Significant Differ-
ence was conducted with the TurkeyHSD() function to determine what pairs
within a group were statistically different. Furthermore, Statistical compari-
son of the microbial communities between groups was assessed using a pairwise
PERMANOVA. The pairwise PERMANOVA was performed with a function
that includes adonis(). For all statistical analyses, the p-value significance
was set at 0.05 or less. All functions mentioned above are part of the Vegan
package.
==PAGE:32==
Results
4.1
Quality assessment
The quality of the sequenced reads assessed using the qiime demux sum-
marize plugin indicated that the quality scores of both forward and reverse
reads were low. As shown in Figure 4.1, the 9th percentile (lower whisker) went
below 30 quality score (Q30) at position 65 and 58 for forward and reverse
reads, respectively. Q30 is considered a standard for quality in next-generation
sequencing since it is equivalent to a 99.9% inferred base call accuracy. In the
case of Q20 (bottom of box), the inferred base call accuracy corresponds to 99%.
(a) Forward reads
(b) Reverse reads
Figure 4.1: Quality score plots. Extracted from QIIME2 view [23].
==PAGE:33==
4.2 Sequencing analysis
21
For the above reason, the trimming and quality filtering with DADA2 plugin
was repeated in two different positions:
• Truncation before the 25th percentile was lower than Q30 at po-
sitions 200 and 160 for forward and reverse reads, respectively.
• Truncation before the 25th percentile was lower than Q20 at po-
sitions 260 and 200 for forward and reverse reads, respectively.
In Figure 4.2a, it is presented the total amount of reads that survived each
step of the DADA2 denoising. If Min and 12 are compared, it is clear that a
greater amount of reads is obtained when truncating in positions 200 and 160
for forward and reverse reads, respectively. However, the number of assigned
reads by the Feature-Classifier plugin from Min in Figure 4.2b is nearly
negligible, while when truncating at 260 in the forward and 200 in the reverse
had a higher amount of assigned reads. For this reason, it was concluded that
the best truncation position was at 260 and 200 for the forward and reverse
reads, respectively.
In addition, the maximum error allowed in the DADA2 denoising was another
factor to take into account during the quality filtering. The denoising step was
repeated with different maximums errors: 2 (default value in QIIME2), 5, 12,
15, 20 and 25, using the truncation positions indicated before.
The results showed that the number of reads that survived each step of DADA2
and were assigned by the Feature-Classifier was maintained, except for 5
and 2 where the total number of reads decreased slightly (Figure 4.2). Therefore
and in order to maintain the highest amount of data with acceptable quality,
it was decided to proceed with the bioinformatic analysis of the data that was
truncated at positions 260 and 200 for forward and reverse reads, respectively,
and a maximum error of 5.
4.2
Sequencing analysis
The total number of raw and quality filtered merged reads produced by DADA2
plugin are provided in Supplementary Table 2 [18]. Only an average of 14%
of the paired-end reads passed the quality filtering and were merged. The total
number of merged reads per sample ranged between 0 (in four samples from
Norway) and 349,530. The total number of ASVs generated across all samples
was 257,981.
==PAGE:34==
22
Results
(a) Number of reads that passed each step of the DADA2 denoising
(b) Number of ASVs Assigned and Unassigned by Feature-Classifier plugin
Figure 4.2: Results from the quality assessment experiment depending on the
truncation position and the maximum error. Min: truncation at
position 200 in the forward reads and 160 in the reverse reads and
maximum error of 12. Others: truncation at position 260 and 200
for the forward and reverse reads, respectively, and maximum error
equal to 2, 5, 12, 15, 20 and 25 (from left to right).
The vast majority of ASVs had unassigned taxonomy (204,763 out of 257,981
ASVs). Consequently, only 53,218 ASVs had assigned taxonomy. In the follow-
ing sections, all analyses considered all ASVs (assigned and unassigned) since it
is theorized that the unassigned ASVs represent taxa that are not present in the
Silva database due to the lack of research in the fish microbiome (explained in
section 5.1). In section 4.5, only the assigned ASVs were considered in order to
facilitate the visualization and comparison of the abundance of the microbiome
that had assigned taxa.
==PAGE:35==
4.3 Alpha diversity
23
4.3
Alpha diversity
The alpha diversity of each fish and environmental sample was assessed by using
diversity and richness indices, namely the Shannon diversity index (H) and the
Chao1 index, respectively.
(a) Shannon diversity index
(b) Chao1 richness index
Figure 4.3: Diversity and richness indices of farmed Atlantic salmon from Ire-
land.
In the fish samples from Irish-farmed Atlantic salmon, it is possible to see how
==PAGE:36==
24
Results
the diversity and richness increase slowly from T0 (fertilised eggs) to T5 (post-
vaccination), being all time points part of the life stages in the freshwater en-
vironment (Figure 4.3).
When the Atlantic salmon is transferred to the sea
cages (T6), there is a reduction of diversity and richness in all fish samples. In
the posterior time points, the richness and diversity of skin decrease, while in
the other fish samples’ are maintained or increase slightly. In the case of the
environmental samples, the diversity and richness are maintained through time.
There is a gain in diversity and richness in the anterior intestine and anterior
and mid digesta from Irish wild Atlantic salmon (Figure 4.4). The skin and
mid-intestine diversity and richness stay at the same level, while the posterior
intestine seems to decrease in diversity maintaining the richness.
(a) Shannon diversity index
(b) Chao1 richness index
Figure 4.4: Diversity and richness indices of wild Atlantic salmon from Ireland.
In the samples of farmed Atlantic salmon from Norway, it is not possible to see
the gain trend in diversity and richness through the time points related to the
life stages in the freshwater environment (Figure 4.5). In general, the levels of di-
versity and richness are preserved through the entire production cycle of farmed
Atlantic salmon, both in fish and environmental samples, with some minimal
variations at some time points. If observation and intervention phases are com-
pared, the diversity and richness seem to be slightly lower in the intervention
phase at some time points, but the differences are minimal (Supplementary
figure S3).
==PAGE:37==
4.3 Alpha diversity
25
(a) Shannon diversity index
(b) Chao1 richness index
Figure 4.5: Diversity and richness indices of farmed Atlantic salmon from Nor-
way.
The diversity and richness in all wild Atlantic salmon samples from Norway rise,
except for skin that diminishes. In the case of the environmental samples, the
diversity and richness increase from T2 (fry) to T5 (smolts), to decrease at T6
(returning adults).
If the richness and diversity from farmed and wild are compared, the diversity
and richness of farmed Atlantic salmon from Ireland are higher than the wild
salmon, excluding anterior and mid digesta which are higher in the wild salmon
(Supplementary Figure S1A and S2A). However, in Norway happens the
opposite. All fish and environmental samples from wild Atlantic salmon have
higher diversity and richness compared to the Atlantic salmon from aquaculture
farms in Norway (Supplementary Figure S1B and S2B). Moreover, the
diversity and richness are decreased along the intestine both in Ireland and
Norway, except for the richness in farmed Atlantic salmon, where the trend is
not present. Besides, the freshwater samples (inlet, tank and outlet water) seem
==PAGE:38==
26
Results
to have a higher diversity and richness compared to the seawater samples (water
upstream to the farm and seawater inside and outside pen).
(a) Shannon diversity index
(b) Chao1 richness index
Figure 4.6: Diversity and richness indices of wild Atlantic salmon from Norway.
4.4
Microbiome structure
The microbial community structure of all samples was studied using an NMDS
based on Bray-Curtis dissimilarity of the relative abundances at the genus
level. The NMDS reflects the pairwise dissimilarity between objects in a low-
dimensional space as accurately as possible. Statistical significance was tested
using PERMDISP2 (also called Beta dispersion), TurkeyHSD and PERMANOVA.
Beta dispersion is a statistical measure that quantifies the level of variability of
==PAGE:39==
4.4 Microbiome structure
27
dispersion within the data. TurkeyHSD is employed to identify which groups’
beta dispersion differs significantly from each other. PERMANOVA evaluates
if there are statistical differences in the composition of the investigated groups.
−1
0
1
2
−2
−1
0
1
NMDS1
NMDS2
Source
Environmental
Fish
Sample type
Early stages
Skin
Intestine
Digesta
Biofilm
Fresh water
Sea water
Feed
A
−1
0
1
−0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
NMDS1
NMDS2
Sample type
Skin
Intestine
Digesta
B
Figure 4.7: Microbial community structure derived from different fish and envi-
ronmental samples from (A) farmed and (B) wild Atlantic salmon
collected in Ireland. The NMDS was produced using Bray-Curtis
dissimilarity of relative abundances at the genus level (stress value
= 0.146).
In Figure 4.7, it is possible to observe that the sample type clusters overlap
both in farmed and wild Atlantic salmon. For farmed salmon, the early stages,
skin and intestine are located in the bottom-right side of the NMDS. In the
top-right is located the freshwater cluster. Sea water and feed are situated in
the mid-left and bottom-left sides of the NMDS, respectively, while digesta and
biofilm are dispersed across the plot. A similar clustering is repeated in wild
Atlantic salmon (Figure 4.7B), where the intestine is located within the skin
cluster and digesta is dispersed.
==PAGE:40==
28
Results
Figure 4.8: Microbial community structure derived from different fish and en-
vironmental samples from (A) observation and (B) intervention
phase of farmed and (C) wild Atlantic salmon collected in Norway.
The NMDS was produced using Bray-Curtis dissimilarity of relative
abundances at the genus level (stress value = 0.146).
The sample type distribution is repeated in the NMDS of samples collected in
Norway. The early-stage samples are located in the same position with the skin.
The intestine is situated horizontally distributed on the bottom-right side of the
plot. The digesta is spread across the NMDS in the intervention phase, while it
==PAGE:41==
4.5 Microbial composition
29
is concentrated next to feed in the observation phase and wild salmon. The feed
is located at the bottom-left side and the freshwater and seawater are positioned
on the top-right and left side of the plots, respectively.
Figure S4 and S5 show the NMDS ordination of samples collected in Ireland
and Norway, respectively, with the colouring based on the time points (or salmon
production stages). No clear clustering based on time was observed. This indi-
cated that the sample clustering and microbial structure are mainly determined
by the sample type.
For this reason, statistical inference was performed to
analyse differences among countries, WPs, phases and sample type groups (not
including time points).
A significant difference in beta dispersion was observed between countries (p-
value < 0.05), WPs in Ireland (p-value < 0.05), observation and intervention
phases in Norway (p-value < 0.05), and sample type groups (p-value < 0.05).
The beta dispersion is illustrated in Supplementary Figures S6-S8 and the
p-values can be found in Supplementary Table 3 [18]). The TurleyHSD test
showed that generally, all sample type groups were statistically different (p-value
< 0.05) from each other, except for the pairs: biofilm with digesta, river water,
seawater; digesta with river water, seawater; early stages with feed, seawater and
freshwater; and river water, freshwater and seawater between each other. Since
the samples presented in general a heterogeneous dispersion, PERMANOVA was
carried out to compare the microbial communities. PERMANOVA showed sta-
tistical differences between countries (p-value = 0.001), WPs in both countries
(p-value = 0.001) and observation and intervention phases (p-value = 0.001).
Supplementary Table 4 show the resultant p-values from the PERMANOVA
[18]. Besides, all sample type groups were statistically different from each other
(p-value = 0.045).
4.5
Microbial composition
The 257,981 ASVs were classified into 2,558 unique taxonomic classes. A high
percentage of ASVs were unassigned, ranging from 50-99% in fish samples and
between 1-37% in environmental samples. The percentage of assigned and unas-
signed ASVs is presented in Supplementary Figures S9, S10 and S11. In
order to facilitate the visualization and comparison of the microbial composition
of samples, only the ASVs that had a taxonomy assigned were used to make the
bar plots.
The most abundant phyla in descending order are Proteobacteria, Cyanobacte-
ria, Firmicutes and Actinobacteriota.
==PAGE:42==
30
Results
Figure 4.9: Microbiome composition (Relative abundance of assigned ASVs) at
phylum level in (A) fish and (B) environmental samples of farmed
and (C) wild Atlantic Salmon collected in Ireland. The taxonomy
legend is ordered alphabetically.
In Ireland, Proteobacteria dominates all sample types of farmed Atlantic salmon,
except for the feed where it is Cyanobacteria the most abundant phylum (Figure
4.9A and B). Acidobacteriota, Chloroflexi and Planctomycetota are present in
the fertilised egg (T0) but their presence disappears in the following life stages.
The microbial composition of skin, intestine and digesta are similar with just a
few differences in the relative abundance of the main phyla. In the environmen-
tal samples from farmed Atlantic salmon, the main phyla are Proteobacteria,
Cyanobacteria and Actinobacteriota (Figure S9B). Firmicutes is not present
except for the feed samples. Chloroflexi and Patescibacteria are present in the
==PAGE:43==
4.5 Microbial composition
31
biofilm and the inlet and tank water. The samples from freshwater and seawater
have a completely different composition. The same main phyla can be seen in
wild Atlantic salmon samples: Proteobacteria, Actinobacteriota, Firmicutes and
Cyanobacteria (Figure 4.9C). However, there is not a clear predominant phy-
lum. Besides, Chloroflexi and Planctomycetota are present in all fish samples,
but in low proportion. Campilobacteota can be found in the posterior intestine
and digesta. There was not any clear developmental pattern through the life
stages.
Figure 4.10: Microbiome composition (Relative abundance of assigned ASVs) at
phylum level in (A) observation and (B) intervention phase of fish
and (C) environmental samples of farmed Atlantic Salmon collected
in Norway. The taxonomy legend is ordered alphabetically.
In Norway, the major phyla are repeated again: Proteobacteria, Cyanobacteria,
==PAGE:44==
32
Results
Actinobacteriota and Firmicutes (Figure 4.10 A and B). The most predominant
phylum changes depending on the sample type. Acidobacteriota is found in the
fry, skin, intestine and filet. Campilobacterota is present only in the filet (T9).
Skin and intestine have similar microbial profiles. Cyanobacteria diminish from
anterior to mid-digesta.
The microbiome composition of fish samples in the
observation and intervention phases are identical with just some minor differ-
ences. In Figure 4.10C can be seen the heterogeneity of environmental samples.
Patescibacteria is found in low proportion in the biofilm, inlet and tank water,
like in Ireland, and also in seawater inside pens. The microbial composition
of feed for freshwater and seawater life stages is completely different. When
looking at the microbiome in the different life stages there is no clear evolution
through time.
Figure 4.11: Microbiome composition (Relative abundance of assigned ASVs)
at phylum level in (A) fish and (B) environmental samples of wild
Atlantic Salmon collected in Norway. The taxonomy legend is or-
dered alphabetically.
The microbial composition of wild Atlantic salmon from Norway is predomi-
nated by: Proteobacteria, Firmicutes, Actinobacteriota and Cyanobacteria. The
major phyla depend on the sample type. The presence of Cyanobacteria and
Acidobacteriota seems to be lower than in farmed Atlantic salmon. Chloroflexi
and Patescibacteria are present in all sample types. Firmicutes decrease along
==PAGE:45==
4.5 Microbial composition
33
the intestine, while Proteobacteria increase. The major phyla of environmental
samples are Proteobacteria, Cyanobacteria and Actinobacteriota. Cyanobacte-
ria predominates biofilm, while Actinobacteriota and Proteobacteria dominate
river water. Patescibacteria is present in higher proportions in river water than
in biofilm.
The most abundant genera vary depending on the country, WPs, phase and
sample type (Supplementary Figures S12, S13, and S14). However, the
genus usually found in higher abundance are Chloroplast (Cyanobacteria), Mi-
tochondria (Proteobacteria Rickettsiales), Bifidobacterium (Actinobacteriota),
Methylobacterium-Methylorubrum (Proteobacteria), Sphingomonas (Proteobac-
teria) and Clostridium sense stricto 1 (Firmicutes).
The genera Aliivibrio, the probiotic present in the Stembiont intervention prod-
uct, was detected at low levels (only 6 ASVs with low abundance).
4.5.1
Core microbiome
The core microbiome was defined as any taxon present in at least 60% of the
samples with a minimum relative abundance of 4.5% at the phylum level. At
the genus level, the taxon had to be present in at least 60% of the samples with
a minimum relative abundance of 0.001%.
Table 4.1 summarizes the results of the core microbiome studied with the UpSet
plots located in the Appendix (Supplementary Figures S16-S24).
Proteobacteria, Cyanobacteria, Firmicutes and Actinobacteria were defined as
core microbiomes at the phylum level. The core microbiome at the genus level
varied depending on the country and WP. Besides, the core microbiome was gen-
erally found in the skin, intestine and digesta, and some environmental samples.
Also, the core microbiome was usually present in most of the developmental life
stages of Atlantic salmon.
==PAGE:46==
34
Results
Table 4.1: Core microbiome. This table summarizes the results of the core mi-
crobiome studied with the Upset plots located in the Appendix (Sup-
plementary Figures S16-S24).
Country
WP
Phylum
Genus
Ireland
Farmed
Proteobacteria
Mitochondria
Sphingomonas
Cyanobacteria
Chloroplast
Firmicutes
Actinobacteria
Cutinebacterium
Wild
Proteobacteria
Cutinebacterium
Cyanobacteria
Chloroplast
Firmicutes
Actinobacteria
Norway
Farmed
Proteobacteria
Bradyrhizobium
Cyanobacteria
Chloroplast
Actinobacteria
Firmicutes
uncultured Blastocatellaceae (Acidobacteriota)
Wild
Proteobacteria
Hyphomicrobium
Methylobacterium-Methylorubrum
Bradyrhizobium
Cyanobacteria
Chloroplast
Firmicutes
Clostridium sense stricto 1
Actinobacteria
Saccharimonadales (Patescibacteria)
==PAGE:47==
Discussion
5.1
High amount of unassigned ASVs
In this study, the samples had a high amount of unassigned ASVs, being the
samples of fertilised eggs, yolk sac larvae, fry, skin and intestine the fish samples
with a higher amount of unassigned ASVs (50-99%), while in the samples of
digesta, the proportion was smaller (23-77%). On the other side, environmental
samples had the lowest abundance of unassigned reads (1-37%).
Several reasons were theorized to explain the high proportion of unassigned
ASVs:
• Contamination: Since the samples that had more unassigned ASVs in-
cluded only the fish samples, one of the reasons could be contamination
with fish DNA. Nevertheless, this reason was discarded because this study
utilize as metabarcode the 16S rRNA gene which is not present in eukary-
otes, including fish.
• Low quality: As mentioned in section 4.1, the sequenced reads quality
was low and, although the denoising step on QIIME2 was repeated with
different parameters to guarantee to maintain as much data as possible
with the highest quality, some sequences with poor quality may have been
left. The unassigned ASVs may represent those sequences with poor qual-
ity and the taxonomy could not be attributed because those sequences
did not represent real 16S rRNA sequences from prokaryotic organisms
and were artefacts produced as a consequence of the low quality. Even
though this could be the reason for explaining the presence of part of the
unassigned ASVs, it does not explain why is there such a difference in the
proportion of unassigned ASVs between fish and environmental samples.
• Lack of fish microbiome representation in Silva database: The
microbiome studies have been mainly focused on the study of the envi-
ronment and the human microbiome for ecological and medical purposes,
respectively, since it was conceived in the 1980s, and recently the research
focus has expanded to answer other scientific questions in other fields, in-
cluding the fish microbiome [8]. For this reason, the unassigned ASVs may
represent microorganisms of the fish microbiome that are not available in
the Silva database. This reason may explain why there is a higher pro-
portion of unassigned reads in fish samples and not in the environmental
samples. Due to the number of ecological microbiome studies, the mi-
==PAGE:48==
36
Discussion
croorganisms found in the environment are known better and have been
characterized and stored in the database.
The presence of unassigned reads can be explained using the low quality of
the sequences, but mainly, for the lack of fish microbiome representation in the
Silva database. That is the reason why the unassigned ASVs were included in all
the different analyses (except in the microbial composition and core microbiome)
because the unassigned ASVs may represent microorganisms that have not been
characterized yet.
Since there is a rising demand for seafood, and consequently, an increasing
amount of studies of the fish microbiome to ameliorate the productivity and
sustainability of aquaculture [8], the creation of a dedicated fish microbiome
database would be a major breakthrough in the field.
5.2
Diversity and richness
The Shannon diversity and Chao1 index of fish samples increased slowly in
Ireland from T0 (fertilised eggs) to T5 (post-vaccination). After the salmon was
transferred to the sea cages (T6), the diversity and richness was diminished. The
Atlantic salmon spends the freshwater life stages (T0-T5) in a tank that imitates
the streams. The tank water is a closed environment where a high density of fish
live, as a result, there is a high concentration of substrates for microorganisms
to grow, such as inorganic nutrients, salmon faeces and food rests [6]. Even
though the tank water is filtered to guarantee water quality and avoid fish
diseases, the presence of microorganisms in the water and biofilms is high. This
is supported by the richness and diversity levels of inlet and tank water, which
have the same or higher Shannon diversity and Chao1 index than the anterior
intestine. The microorganisms present in the water and solid particles (feed,
probiotics, prebiotics and biofilms) are the main source of microbes to the fish
microbiome [8]. Nevertheless, in the Atlantic salmon production stages that
happen in the seawater (T6 post-sea transference and T7 late growth phase)
occur within sea pen cages, which are opened environments. The diversity and
richness of seawater (upstream water to the farm and seawater inside and outside
the pen) is lower than the tank water. The food rests, fish faeces and inorganic
nutrient concentration is diluted in the immensity of the sea. Besides, during
the smoltification, the salinity changes may cause the loss of bacterial diversity
and richness if the transference is made too fast due to salinity shock [17].
In Norway, the diversity and richness levels of the farmed Atlantic salmon are
maintained through all production stages with minimal variations at some time
==PAGE:49==
5.3 Microbial composition
37
points. The main difference is observed between the diversity and richness of
observation and intervention phases, where the samples from the intervention
phase seem to be slightly lower.
This could be produced by the Stembiont
probiotic modulating other microbial organisms’ presence.
The samples from wild Atlantic salmon were collected just at four developmen-
tal stages time points: fry (T2), parr (T3), smolt still in the river (T5) and
returning adults (T6). If those time points are compared with the farmed At-
lantic salmon, the richness and diversity of wild Atlantic salmon from Ireland are
lower, except for the digesta. In Noway happens the opposite, all wild Atlantic
salmon samples have greater diversity and richness compared to the farmed fish.
These differences are a consequence of the different selective pressure in captiv-
ity and in the wild from Ireland and Norway.
The reduction of diversity in
farmed Atlantic salmon could be associated with stress. However, it could also
be associated with a process of domestication and microbiome specialization to
live in captivity [37].
5.3
Microbial composition
In this study, the microbial structure and composition of the Atlantic salmon mi-
crobiomes were determined mainly by the sample type. Even though there were
significant statistical differences between countries, WPs and sample types, the
main four phyla were shared among the fish samples: Proteobacteria, Cyanobac-
teria, Actinobacteria and Firmicutes. The same major phyla was described in
environmental samples, except for Firmicutes.
The Cyanobacteria (Chloroplast genus) is not part of the skin and gut micro-
biota. Its presence is associated with the feed, where it is present in high abun-
dance in both countries. Besides, Cyanobacteria is a planktonic photosynthetic
bacteria that can be found freely in the water [38].
Proteobacteria have been found in the Atlantic salmon microbiome before. Mito-
chondria (from the order Rickettsialles) was one of the most abundant genera of
Proteobacteria. The presence of Rickettsialles is usually a sign of alarm because
the species Piscirickettsia salmonis cause the Salmonid Rickettsial Septicemia
[39].
However, this is not the case because the Rickettsialles present in our
samples were related to a variety of wheat called Triticum aestivum [40], part
of the feed (where it is present the most). Methylobacterium-Methylorubrum
was another genera of Proteobacteria found in fish samples, mostly digesta, and
it was part of the core microbiome of Wild Atlantic salmon collected in Nor-
way. Methylobacterium-Methylorubrum was identified in the gut microbiome
==PAGE:50==
38
Discussion
by Morales-Rivera et al., when they were studying the effects of gradual salinity
changes in the gastrointestinal microbiota abundance and richness [17]. Nev-
ertheless, the possible role of Methylobacterium-Methylorubrum in the gut or
skin microbiome remains unknown.
Actinobacteriota has been identified in previous studies and its abundance was
higher in Atlantic salmon that were fed with feeding that contained insects or
derivates [41]. The Actinobacteriota genera found with the higher mean rela-
tive abundance was Bifidobacterium and it was present mainly in feed, intestine
and digesta. Bifidobacterium is a gram-positive bacteria genus that primarily
ferments carbohydrates generating lactate and acetate.
It can be used as a
probiotic when the main source of protein in the feed is plants [42]. Cutibac-
terium is the other genera of Actinobacteriota found in the fish samples, and
it was part of the core microbiome in wild and farmed Atlantic salmon from
Ireland. Cutibacterium is a gram-positive bacteria, part of the family Propi-
onibacteriaceae, that has been identified in previous studies in the skin and gut
microbiome of Atlantic salmon [43][44]. Cutibacterium was present in all fish
samples but with a higher abundance in skin and digesta from the farmed and
wild Atlantic salmon collected in Ireland. Although the Cutibacterium function-
ality in the skin and gut microbiome of salmon is unknown, in the human gut
microbiome, bacteria from the Propionibacteriaceae family play an important
role in the maintenance of gut homeostasis [45]. The presence of the genera
Sphingomonas has been previously associated with weight loss and antibiotic
resistance as a consequence of disease treatment in juvenile salmon [46].
Firmicutes were the last phylum part of the core microbiome. The most abun-
dant genera of Firmicutes found in our samples was Clostridium sense stricto
1. Clostridium stricto and Hyphomicrobium (Proteobacteria) were part of the
core microbiome of wild Atlantic salmon in Norway. In a study about the gut
microbiome of Wild Baltic salmon parr performed in 2022, Clostridium stricto
and Hyphomicrobium were identified as dominant but at low levels in all the
gut samples [47]. However, their role in the gut microbiota has not been defined
yet.
In many studies, it was pointed out that the phylum Tenericutes is commonly
found in the gut microbiota of farmed and wild Atlantic salmon from the North-
and East Atlantic. Nevertheless, probably because of geographical and environ-
mental differences, Tenericutes was not found in our study [2][48][47].
==PAGE:51==
5.3 Microbial composition
39
5.3.1
The intervention treatment
The probiotic used in the intervention phase was bacteria from the genera Ali-
ivibrio. Aliivibrio is a genus belonging to the phylum Proteobacteria, specifically
to the class Gammaproteobacteria. Aliivibrio is usually seen as an opportunistic
pathogen that is correlated with ill Atlantic salmon when it is found in the gut
microbiota in high abundance [49]. Nevertheless, a study performed in 2020
showed that treatment of Atlantic salmon with beneficial strains of Aliivibrio
enhanced the growth, lowered the presence of ulcers on the skin and decreased
mortality in the treated fish [13].
In our samples, the genera Aliivibrio was represented by 6 ASVs found in 4
samples with a negligible abundance.
However, the Aliivibrio found in our
samples is not part of the beneficial strains found in the Stembiont (probiotic
product), since two of the samples were from untreated (observation phase)
Atlantic salmon from Ireland and Norway, both samples from digesta.
The
other two samples belong to treated (intervention) farmed Atlantic salmon from
Norway, but the samples were from digesta and intestine. Contrary to what was
expected, no Aliivibrio was found in the skin microbiome. The reason for this
can be that the beneficial Aliivibrio introduced to fish by just one bathing got
diluted. Moreover, specific primers and probes must be developed, by Previwo,
and used in order to amplify the DNA from the probiotic Aliivibrio, as indicated
in the CIRCLES D2.2 SOPs [16], if we want to find the bacteria.
On the other hand, although there were statistical differences between beta dis-
persion and microbiome composition of Atlantic salmon from the observation
and intervention phases, the differences in diversity and richness between the
observation and intervention phases were minimal. Besides, the microbial com-
position of sample types from different phases was similar both at the phylum
and at the genus level.
==PAGE:52==
Conclusions
There was a high amount of ASVs in this study that had unassigned taxonomy.
The presence of part of these unknown ASVs can be explained by the low qual-
ity of the data. Nevertheless, the lack of microbiome representation in the Silva
database probably justifies why the taxonomy could not be assigned to those
ASVs. This arises the necessity to create a dedicated fish microbiome database,
which could be essential for future fish microbiome studies. The richness and
diversity dynamics through time only presented a clear evolution pattern in
farmed Atlantic salmon from Ireland, where the richness and diversity increased
from T0 (fertilised eggs) until T5 (post-vaccination) in all fish samples. The
variation of diversity and richness of the other studied wild and farmed Atlantic
salmon depended on the sample type. The core microbiome was repeated in
salmon from Ireland and Norway: Proteobacteria, Cyanobacteria, Actinobac-
teriota and Firmicutes. The main phyla found in environmental samples were
the same, except for Firmicutes which in general was not present. The most
abundant genera were mainly obtained from the food (Chloroplast and Rick-
etsiales). Probiotics, such as Bifidobacterium and Cutibacterium, were found
mainly in the intestine and digesta where they play a major role in gastroin-
testinal homeostasis. Other identified genera Clostridium sensu stricto 1 and
Hyphomicrobium were observed in the gut microbiome. Nevertheless, their func-
tionality or role remains unknown. It would be interesting to add continuous
variables such as weight or size in future studies to see if there is a correla-
tion between the presence of some microorganisms and the growth and weight
gain of Atlantic salmon. In addition, it is encouraged the use of probiotics for
the gastrointestinal flora that can help the growth of salmon, such as Bacillus,
Lactobacillus, Bifidobacterium and bacteria of the Propionibacteriaceae family.
Although there were statistical differences between the observation and inter-
vention phases, the differences were minimal, both in microbiome composition
and diversity and richness. Besides, the probiotic Aliivibrio strains were not
found in the skin of the treated Atlantic salmon.
In conclusion, in order to improve the current production food systems of At-
lantic salmon, it is important to create a dedicated database for future studies of
fish microbiomes and to utilize other types of probiotics, such as Bacillus, Lac-
tobacillus and Bifidobacterium, which play a major role in the gastrointestinal
tract and can ameliorate fish digestion and enhance growth.
==PAGE:53==
Bibliography
[1]
Albert G. J. Tacon. “Trends in Global Aquaculture and Aquafeed Pro-
duction: 2000–2017”. In: Reviews in Fisheries Science & Aquaculture 28.1
(Jan. 2020), pp. 43–56. issn: 2330-8249. doi: 10.1080/23308249.2019.
1649634.
[2]
Colin Fogarty et al. “Diversity and composition of the gut microbiota
of Atlantic salmon (Salmo salar) farmed in Irish waters”. In: Journal of
Applied Microbiology 127.3 (Sept. 2019), pp. 648–657. issn: 1365-2672.
doi: 10.1111/jam.14291.
[3]
EUFIC and EVENT PROMOTIONS BELGRADE. CIRCLES - Front
page. url: https://circlesproject.eu/.
[4]
EUFIC and EVENT PROMOTIONS BELGRADE. CIRCLES - In brief.
url: https://circlesproject.eu/in-brief/.
[5]
EUFIC and EVENT PROMOTIONS BELGRADE. CIRCLES - Science.
url: https://circlesproject.eu/science/.
[6]
Mikkel Bentzon-Tilia, Eva C. Sonnenschein, and Lone Gram. “Monitoring
and managing microbes in aquaculture – Towards a sustainable industry”.
In: Microbial Biotechnology 9.5 (Sept. 2016), pp. 576–584. issn: 17517915.
doi: 10.1111/1751-7915.12392.
[7]
Cecelia Kelly and Irene Salinas. Under pressure: Interactions between com-
mensal microbiota and the teleost immune system. May 2017. doi: 10.
3389/fimmu.2017.00559.
[8]
William Bernard Perry et al. The role of the gut microbiome in sustainable
teleost aquaculture. May 2020. doi: 10.1098/rspb.2020.0184.
[9]
Kumarasan Yukgehnaish et al. Gut microbiota metagenomics in aquacul-
ture: factors influencing gut microbiome and its physiological role in fish.
Aug. 2020. doi: 10.1111/raq.12416.
[10]
Robyn Lisa Butt and Helene Volkoff. Gut microbiota and energy home-
ostasis in fish. 2019. doi: 10.3389/fendo.2019.00009.
[11]
Nesar Ahmed and Giovanni M. Turchini. “Recirculating aquaculture sys-
tems (RAS): Environmental solution and climate change adaptation”. In:
Journal of Cleaner Production 297 (May 2021), p. 126604. issn: 09596526.
doi: 10.1016/j.jclepro.2021.126604.
[12]
Mohammad Jalil Zorriehzahra et al. Probiotics as beneficial microbes in
aquaculture: an update on their multiple modes of action: a review. Oct.
2016. doi: 10.1080/01652176.2016.1172132.
==PAGE:54==
42
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[13]
Klakegg et al. “Enhanced growth and decreased mortality in Atlantic
salmon (Salmo salar) after probiotic bath”. In: Journal of Applied Mi-
crobiology 129.1 (July 2020), pp. 146–160. issn: 13652672. doi: 10.1111/
jam.14649.
[14]
J. Webb et al. “ The Atlantic Salmon”. In: ed. by Eric Verspoor, Lee
Stradmeyer, and Jennifer Nielsen. Blackwell Publishing, 2007, pp. 18–45.
isbn: 978-1-4051-1582-7.
[15]
Torbjørn Forseth et al. “The major threats to Atlantic salmon in Norway”.
In: ICES Journal of Marine Science 74.6 (July 2017), pp. 1496–1513. issn:
1054-3139. doi: 10.1093/icesjms/fsx020.
[16]
CIRCLES D2.2 SOPs for sampling, storage and transport of human and
animal biological samples, and for microbiome analysis. Tech. rep. 2019.
[17]
María F Morales-Rivera et al. “Atlantic Salmon (Salmo salar) Transfer
to Seawater by Gradual Salinity Changes Exhibited an Increase in The
Intestinal Microbial Abundance and Richness.” In: Microorganisms 11.1
(Dec. 2022). issn: 2076-2607. doi: 10.3390/microorganisms11010076.
[18]
Dave E. Rojas Calderon. Supplementary Tables. 2023. url: https://
silo1.sciencedata.dk/themes/deic_theme_oc7/apps/files_sharing/
public.php?t=f8502548bff5463c8b62ede6f983e27e&.
[19]
Previwo. Stembiont - FAQs. url: https : / / previwo . com / en / faq -
stembiont/.
[20]
Illumina. Metagenomic Sequencing Library Preparation Preparing - Prepar-
ing 16S Ribosomal RNA Gene Amplicons for the Illumina MiSeq System.
Tech. rep., pp. 2–14. url: https://support.illumina.com/documents/
documentation/chemistry_documentation/16s/16s- metagenomic-
library-prep-guide-15044223-b.pdf.
[21]
Evan Bolyen et al. “Reproducible, interactive, scalable and extensible mi-
crobiome data science using QIIME 2”. In: Nature Biotechnology 37.8
(Aug. 2019), pp. 852–857. issn: 1087-0156. doi: 10.1038/s41587-019-
0209-9.
[22]
Mehrbod Estaki et al. “QIIME 2 Enables Comprehensive End-to-End
Analysis of Diverse Microbiome Data and Comparative Studies with Pub-
licly Available Data”. In: Current Protocols in Bioinformatics 70.1 (June
2020). issn: 1934340X. doi: 10.1002/cpbi.100.
[23]
QIIME2 development team. QIIME2 view. 2016. url: https://view.
qiime2.org/.
[24]
Benjamin J Callahan et al. “DADA2: High-resolution sample inference
from Illumina amplicon data”. In: Nature Methods 13.7 (July 2016), pp. 581–
583. issn: 1548-7091. doi: 10.1038/nmeth.3869.
==PAGE:55==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
43
[25]
Benjamin J. Callahan, Paul J. McMurdie, and Susan P. Holmes. “Exact
sequence variants should replace operational taxonomic units in marker-
gene data analysis”. In: ISME Journal 11.12 (Dec. 2017), pp. 2639–2643.
issn: 17517370. doi: 10.1038/ismej.2017.119.
[26]
Benjamin J Callahan, Joey McMurdie, and Susan Holmes. Introduction to
dada2. Apr. 2023. url: https://bioconductor.org/packages/devel/
bioc/vignettes/dada2/inst/doc/dada2-intro.html#overview-of-
the-dada2-pipeline.
[27]
Nicholas A. Bokulich et al. “Optimizing taxonomic classification of marker-
gene amplicon sequences with QIIME 2’s q2-feature-classifier plugin”. In:
Microbiome 6.1 (Dec. 2018), p. 90. issn: 2049-2618. doi: 10.1186/s40168-
018-0470-z.
[28]
Dave E. Rojas Calderon. Scripts. July 2023. url: https : / / silo1 .
sciencedata . dk / themes / deic _ theme _ oc7 / apps / files _ sharing /
public.php?t=b8862a4bbf553aa940d68b7c692ca553&.
[29]
R Core Team. R: A Language and Environment for Statistical Computing.
Vienna, Austria, 2021. url: https://www.R-project.org/.
[30]
Jordan E. Bizans. qiime2R: Importing QIIME2 artifacts and associated
data into R sessions. 2018. url: https://github.com/jbisanz/qiime2R.
[31]
Hadley Wickham et al. “Welcome to the Tidyverse”. In: Journal of Open
Source Software 4.43 (Nov. 2019), p. 1686. issn: 2475-9066. doi: 10 .
21105/joss.01686.
[32]
Hadley Wickham. ggplot2: Elegant Graphics for Data Analysis. Springer-
Verlag New York, 2016. isbn: 978-3-319-24277-4. url: https://ggplot2.
tidyverse.org.
[33]
Alexander T Neu, Eric E Allen, and Kaustuv Roy. “Defining and quan-
tifying the core microbiome: Challenges and prospects”. In: Perspective
(2021). doi: 10.1073/pnas.2104429118/-/DCSupplemental. url: http:
//www.pnas.org/lookup/suppl/doi:10.1073/pnas.2104429118/-
/DCSupplemental..
[34]
Jake R Conway, Alexander Lex, and Nils Gehlenborg. “UpSetR: an R
package for the visualization of intersecting sets and their properties”. In:
Bioinformatics 33.18 (Sept. 2017), pp. 2938–2940. issn: 1367-4803. doi:
10.1093/bioinformatics/btx364.
[35]
Jari Oksanen et al. vegan: Community Ecology Package. 2022. url: https:
//CRAN.R-project.org/package=vegan.
[36]
Marti J. Anderson. “Distance-Based Tests for Homogeneity of Multivari-
ate Dispersions”. In: Biometrics 62.1 (Mar. 2006), pp. 245–253. issn:
0006341X. doi: 10.1111/j.1541-0420.2005.00440.x.
==PAGE:56==
44
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[37]
Tamsyn M Uren Webster et al. “Interpopulation Variation in the Atlantic
Salmon Microbiome Reflects Environmental and Genetic Diversity”. In:
(2018). doi: 10.1128/AEM. url: https://doi.org/10.1128/AEM.
[38]
Carola E. Dehler, Christopher J. Secombes, and Samuel A. M. Martin.
“Seawater transfer alters the intestinal microbiota profiles of Atlantic salmon
(Salmo salar L.)” In: Scientific Reports 7.1 (Oct. 2017), p. 13877. issn:
2045-2322. doi: 10.1038/s41598-017-13249-8.
[39]
Kevin Maisey, Ruth Montero, and Myron Christodoulides. “Vaccines for
piscirickettsiosis (salmonid rickettsial septicaemia, SRS): the Chile per-
spective”. In: Expert Review of Vaccines 16.3 (Mar. 2017), pp. 215–228.
issn: 1476-0584. doi: 10.1080/14760584.2017.1244483.
[40]
K. Tsunewaki and Y. Mukai. “Wheat”. In: 1990. Chap. 4. isbn: 978-3-642-
08081-4.
[41]
Pabodha Weththasinghe et al. “Modulation of Atlantic salmon (Salmo
salar) gut microbiota composition and predicted metabolic capacity by
feeding diets with processed black soldier fly (Hermetia illucens) larvae
meals and fractions”. In: Animal Microbiome 4.1 (Dec. 2022). issn: 25244671.
doi: 10.1186/s42523-021-00161-w.
[42]
Javad Sahandi et al. “The Use of Two Bifidobacterium Strains Enhanced
Growth Performance and Nutrient Utilization of Rainbow Trout (On-
corhynchus mykiss) Fry”. In: Probiotics and Antimicrobial Proteins 11.3
(Sept. 2019), pp. 966–972. issn: 18671314. doi: 10.1007/s12602-018-
9455-2.
[43]
Elisa Casadei et al. “Sex-dependent effects of mechanical delousing on
the skin microbiome of broodstock Atlantic salmon (Salmo salar L.)” In:
Scientific Reports 13.1 (July 2023), p. 10824. issn: 2045-2322. doi: 10.
1038/s41598-023-37670-4. url: https://www.nature.com/articles/
s41598-023-37670-4.
[44]
Jie Wang et al. “Microbiota in intestinal digesta of Atlantic salmon (Salmo
salar), observed from late freshwater stage until one year in seawater, and
effects of functional ingredients: a case study from a commercial sized
research site in the Arctic region”. In: Animal Microbiome 3.1 (Jan. 2021).
doi: 10.1186/s42523-021-00075-7.
[45]
Cecilia Binda et al. Actinobacteria: A relevant minority for the mainte-
nance of gut homeostasis. May 2018. doi: 10.1016/j.dld.2018.02.012.
[46]
H. Dvergedal et al. “Association of gut microbiota with metabolism in
juvenile Atlantic salmon”. In: Microbiome 8.1 (Dec. 2020). issn: 20492618.
doi: 10.1186/s40168-020-00938-2.
[47]
Vesta Skrodenyt˙e-Arbačiauskien˙e et al. “Gut Microbiome of Wild Baltic
Salmon (Salmo salar L.) Parr”. In: Microbial Ecology 84.4 (Nov. 2022),
pp. 1294–1298. issn: 1432184X. doi: 10.1007/s00248-021-01910-9.
==PAGE:57==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
45
[48]
James W. Wynne et al. “Microbiome Profiling Reveals a Microbial Dysbio-
sis During a Natural Outbreak of Tenacibaculosis (Yellow Mouth) in At-
lantic Salmon”. In: Frontiers in Microbiology 11 (Oct. 2020). issn: 1664302X.
doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2020.586387.
[49]
Davide Bozzi et al. “Salmon gut microbiota correlates with disease infec-
tion status: potential for monitoring health in farmed animals”. In: Animal
Microbiome 3.1 (Dec. 2021). issn: 25244671. doi: 10.1186/s42523-021-
00096-2.
==PAGE:58==
Programs & Scripts
Programs
Program
Description
Reference
QIIME2
Quantitative Insights in Microbial Ecol-
ogy 2 (QIIME2) is an open-source bioin-
formatics pipeline for processing, anal-
ysis and visualization of microbiome
data.
[21]
R
An open-source programming language
and environment for computing statisti-
cal data analysis and graphics.
[29]
Scripts
The following scripts are stored in ScienceData [28]:
• barplots_mean_abundance_phylum.Rmd
• betadisp_anova_turkeyhsd.Rmd
• chao1_richness.Rmd
• core_microbiome_with_upset_plot.Rmd
• find_aliivibrio.Rmd
• heatmap_mean_abundance_genus.Rmd
• NMDS_bray_curtis_dissimilarity.Rmd
• qiime2_commands.txt
• quality_assessment.Rmd
• shannon_diversity.Rmd
==PAGE:59==
Supplementary tables
The Supplementary Tables are stored in ScienceData [18]
Supplementary table
Description
1
Metadata of samples.
2
Number of raw reads and quality filtered merged
reads produces by DADA2 plugin.
3
Results from the Beta Disperion, ANOVA and
TurkeyHSD analysis.
3
Results from the Beta Disperion, ANOVA and
TurkeyHSD analysis.
4
Results from the PERMANOVA.
==PAGE:60==
Supplementary figures
Figure S1: Shannon diversity index of sample types from (A) Ireland and (B)
Norway.
==PAGE:61==
49
Figure S2: Chao1 richness index of sample types from (A) Ireland and (B) Nor-
way.
==PAGE:62==
50
Supplementary figures
(a) Shannon diversity index
(b) Chao1 richness index
Figure S3: Diversity and richness indices of observation and intervention phases
of farmed Atlantic salmon from Norway
==PAGE:63==
51
−1
0
1
2
−2
−1
0
1
NMDS1
NMDS2
Source
Environmental
Fish
Time point
T0
T1
T3
T4
T5
T6
T7
T8
A
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
−0.5
0.0
0.5
NMDS1
NMDS2
Time point
T3
T5
T6
B
Figure S4: Microbial community structure derived from different fish and en-
vironmental samples from (A) observation and (B) intervention
phase of farmed and (C) wild Atlantic salmon collected in Ireland.
The NMDS was produced using Bray-Curtis dissimilarity of relative
abundances at the genus level (stress value = 0.146). The colouring
is based on the collection time points.
==PAGE:64==
52
Supplementary figures
Figure S5: Microbial community structure derived from different fish and en-
vironmental samples from (A) observation and (B) intervention
phase of farmed and (C) wild Atlantic salmon collected in Norway.
The NMDS was produced using Bray-Curtis dissimilarity of relative
abundances at the genus level (stress value = 0.146). The colouring
is based on the collection time points.
==PAGE:65==
53
Figure S6: Beta dispersion of Ireland and Norway.
==PAGE:66==
54
Supplementary figures
Figure S7: Beta dispersion of WPs (top), sample types of WP5 (mid-left), time
points of WP5 (mid-right), sample types of WP6 (bottom-left), and
time points of WP6 (bottom-right) from Ireland.
==PAGE:67==
55
Figure S8: Beta dispersion of WPs (top-left), phases (top-right), sample types
of WP5 (mid-left), time points of WP5 (mid-right), sample types
of WP6 (bottom-left), and time points of WP6 (bottom-right) from
Norway.
==PAGE:68==
56
Supplementary figures
Figure S9: Percentage of assigned and unassigned ASVs in (A) farmed and (B)
wild Atlantic salmon and (C) environmental samples collected in
Ireland.
==PAGE:69==
57
Figure S10: Percentage of assigned and unassigned ASVs in Atlantic salmon
samples from (A) observation and (B) intervention phase and (C)
environmental samples collected in Norway.
==PAGE:70==
58
Supplementary figures
Figure S11: Percentage of assigned and unassigned ASVs in (A) wild Atlantic
salmon and (B) environmental samples collected in Norway.
==PAGE:71==
59
Figure S12: Heatmap showing the top 25 most predominant genera in (left)
farmed and (right) wild Atlantic salmon collected in Ireland in each
sample type (A) and time point (B).
==PAGE:72==
60
Supplementary figures
Figure S13: Heatmap showing the top 25 most predominant genera in (left)
environmental and (right) fish samples in farmed Atlantic salmon
observation phase collected in Norway in each sample type (A) and
time point (B).
==PAGE:73==
61
Figure S14: Heatmap showing the top 25 most predominant genera in (left)
environmental and (right) fish samples of farmed Atlantic salmon
intervention phase collected in Norway in each sample type (A) and
time point (B).
==PAGE:74==
62
Supplementary figures
Figure S15: Heatmap showing the top 25 most predominant genera in (left)
environmental and (right) fish samples in wild Atlantic salmon ob-
servation phase collected in Norway in each sample type (A) and
time point (B).
==PAGE:75==
63
69
29
26
11
9
8
7
1
1
1
1
0
20
40
60
Intersection Size
Proteobacteria
Actinobacteriota
Firmicutes
Cyanobacteria
   
0
50
100
150
Set Size
(a) Core Phyla
19
14
9
9
7
6
3
0
5
10
15
20
Intersection Size
Chloroplast
Cutibacterium
Sphingomonas
   
0
10
20
30
40
Set Size
(b) Core Genus
1
3
0
1
2
3
Intersection Size
   Farm
   Wild
   
0
1
2
3
4
Set Size
(c) Core Phyla shared across WPs
1
2
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
Intersection Size
   Farm
   Wild
   
0
1
2
3
Set Size
(d) Core Genus shared across WPs
Figure S16: Core microbiome shared between farmed and wild Atlantic salmon
collected in Ireland at the river life stages (a) at the Phylum level
and (b) at the Genus level. Distribution of the core microbiome
between WPs at the river life stages (c) at the Phylum level and
(d) at the Genus level.
==PAGE:76==
64
Supplementary figures
103
43
41
40
21
10
8
8
8
2
1
0
30
60
90
Intersection Size
Proteobacteria
Actinobacteriota
Cyanobacteria
Firmicutes
   
0
100
200
Set Size
(a) Core Phyla
184
48
34
0
50
100
150
200
Intersection Size
Chloroplast
Cutibacterium
   
0
50
100
150
200
Set Size
(b) Core Genus
2
2
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
Intersection Size
   Farm
   Wild
   
0
1
2
3
4
Set Size
(c) Core Phyla shared across WPs
1
1
0.0
0.3
0.6
0.9
Intersection Size
   Farm
   Wild
   
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
Set Size
(d) Core Genus shared across WPs
Figure S17: Core microbiome shared between farmed and wild Atlantic salmon
collected in Ireland at the sea life stages (a) at the Phylum level
and (b) at the Genus level. Distribution of the core microbiome
between WPs at the sea life stages (c) at the Phylum level and (d)
at the Genus level.
==PAGE:77==
65
131
76
57
53
39
19
14
11
6
3
1
0
50
100
150
Intersection Size
Proteobacteria
Actinobacteriota
Cyanobacteria
Firmicutes
   
0
100
200
300
400
Set Size
79
25
25
8
4
4
2
2
1
1
1
0
25
50
75
Intersection Size
Proteobacteria
Actinobacteriota
Firmicutes
Cyanobacteria
   
0
50
100
150
Set Size
1
1
2
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
Intersection Size
Skin
Posterior intestine
Mid intestine
Mid digesta
Anterior intestine
Anterior digesta
Biofilm
Tank water
Inlet water
Seawater outside pen
Seawater inside pen
Fertilised eggs
Feed sea cage
Feed freshwater
   
0
1
2
3
4
Set Size
1
3
0
1
2
3
Intersection Size
Skin
Posterior intestine
Mid intestine
Mid digesta
Anterior intestine
Anterior digesta
   
0
1
2
3
4
Set Size
2
2
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
Intersection Size
     T8
     T7
     T6
     T5
     T4
     T3
     T1
     T0
   
0
1
2
3
4
Set Size
(a) WP5
4
0
1
2
3
4
Intersection Size
     T6
     T5
     T3
   
0
1
2
3
4
Set Size
(b) WP6
Figure S18: (Top) Core microbiome at the Phylum level of farmed and wild
Atlantic salmon collected in Ireland. (Middle) Distribution of core
microbiome across sample types.
(Bottom) Distribution of core
microbiome across time points.
==PAGE:78==
66
Supplementary figures
121
53
39
39
30
27
22
17
14
13
11
7
4
2
2
0
50
100
Intersection Size
Chloroplast
Cutibacterium
Sphingomonas
Mitochondria
   
0
100
200
300
Set Size
101
26
20
0
30
60
90
Intersection Size
Chloroplast
Cutibacterium
   
0
50
100
Set Size
1
3
0
1
2
3
Intersection Size
Skin
Posterior intestine
Mid intestine
Mid digesta
Anterior intestine
Anterior digesta
Tank water
Inlet water
Biofilm
Seawater outside pen
Seawater inside pen
Fertilised eggs
Feed sea cage
Feed freshwater
   
0
1
2
3
4
Set Size
2
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
Intersection Size
Mid digesta
Anterior digesta
Posterior intestine
Mid intestine
Anterior intestine
Skin
   
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
Set Size
1
1
2
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
Intersection Size
     T8
     T7
     T6
     T5
     T4
     T3
     T0
     T1
   
0
1
2
3
4
Set Size
(a) WP5
2
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
Intersection Size
     T6
     T5
     T3
   
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
Set Size
(b) WP6
Figure S19: (Top) Core microbiome at the Genus level of farmed and wild At-
lantic salmon collected in Ireland. (Middle) Distribution of core
microbiome across sample types.
(Bottom) Distribution of core
microbiome across time points.
==PAGE:79==
67
65
14
5
0
20
40
60
Intersection Size
Proteobacteria
Firmicutes
Cyanobacteria
   
0
20
40
60
80
Set Size
(a) Core Phyla
15
5
3
3
3
3
2
2
2
2
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
0
5
10
15
Intersection Size
Clostridium_sensu_stricto_1
Methylobacterium−Methylorubrum
Chloroplast
Sphingomonas
Bradyrhizobium
Wolbachia
Mitochondria
uncultured Blastocatellaceae
   
0
10
20
30
40
50
Set Size
(b) Core Genus
1
2
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
Intersection Size
   Farm
   Wild
   
0
1
2
3
Set Size
(c) Core Phyla shared across WPs
1
7
0
2
4
6
8
Intersection Size
   Farm
   Wild
   
0
2
4
6
8
Set Size
(d) Core Genus shared across WPs
Figure S20: Core microbiome shared between farmed and wild Atlantic salmon,
in Norway, at the river life stages (a) at the Phylum level and (b)
at the Genus level. Distribution of the core microbiome between
WPs at the river life stages (c) at the Phylum level and (d) at the
Genus level.
220
106
74
63
53
26
17
14
9
7
3
2
2
2
1
0
50
100
150
200
250
Intersection Size
Proteobacteria
Cyanobacteria
Actinobacteriota
Firmicutes
   
0
200
400
Set Size
(a) Core Phyla
256
107
90
72
43
18
8
0
100
200
Intersection Size
Chloroplast
Bradyrhizobium
uncultured Blastocatellaceae
   
0
100
200
300
400
500
Set Size
(b) Core Genus
Figure S21: Core microbiome shared between farmed and wild Atlantic salmon
collected in Norway at the sea life stages (a) at the Phylum level
and (b) at the Genus level. The core phyla and genus were only
present in wild Atlantic salmon.
==PAGE:80==
68
Supplementary figures
425
191
74
30
9
9
5
0
100
200
300
400
Intersection Size
Proteobacteria
Cyanobacteria
Actinobacteriota
   
0
200
400
600
Set Size
68
31
25
9
7
7
3
1
1
1
1
0
20
40
60
Intersection Size
Proteobacteria
Actinobacteriota
Cyanobacteria
Firmicutes
   
0
50
100
150
Set Size
1
2
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
Intersection Size
Tank water
Skin
Seawater inside pen
Posterior intestine
Mid intestine
Mid digesta
Filet
Biofilm
Anterior intestine
Anterior digesta
Feed sea cage
Outlet water
Inlet water
Fry
Fertilised eggs
Feed freshwater
   
0
1
2
3
Set Size
1
1
1
1
0.0
0.3
0.6
0.9
Intersection Size
Mid digesta
Fry
Anterior digesta
Skin
Posterior intestine
Mid intestine
Anterior intestine
River water
Biofilm
   
0
1
2
3
4
Set Size
2
1
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
Intersection Size
     T7
     T6
   
0
1
2
3
Set Size
(a) WP5
4
0
1
2
3
4
Intersection Size
     T6
     T5
     T2
   
0
1
2
3
4
Set Size
(b) WP6
Figure S22: (Top) Core microbiome at the Phylum level of farmed and wild
Atlantic salmon collected in Norway. (Middle) Distribution of core
microbiome across sample types.
(Bottom) Distribution of core
microbiome across time-points.
==PAGE:81==
69
27
15
11
7
6
5
5
5
4
3
3
3
3
3
3
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
0
10
20
30
Intersection Size
Chloroplast
Bradyrhizobium
Clostridium_sensu_stricto_1
Methylobacterium−Methylorubrum
Saccharimonadales
hgcI_clade
Hyphomicrobium
   
0
50
100
Set Size
(a) Anadromy
1
1
2
1
1
1
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
Intersection Size
Mid digesta
Fry
Skin
Posterior intestine
Anterior digesta
Mid intestine
Biofilm
River water
Anterior intestine
   
0
2
4
6
Set Size
(b) Incomplete anadromy
7
0
2
4
6
8
Intersection Size
     T6
     T5
     T2
   
0
2
4
6
Set Size
(c) Non-anadromy
Figure S23: (Top) Core microbiome at the genus level of wild Atlantic salmon
collected in Norway.
(Middle) Distribution of core microbiome
across sample types.
(Bottom) Distribution of core microbiome
across time points. There was no core microbiome at genus level
for farmed Atlantic salmon.
==PAGE:82==
70
Supplementary figures
359
77
28
24
18
13
11
4
2
2
2
2
1
1
0
100
200
300
400
Intersection Size
Proteobacteria
Cyanobacteria
Actinobacteriota
Firmicutes
   
0
200
400
Set Size
(a) Core Phyla
259
82
71
69
35
20
7
0
100
200
Intersection Size
Chloroplast
uncultured Blastocatellaceae
Bradyrhizobium
   
0
100
200
300
400
500
Set Size
(b) Core Genus
4
0
1
2
3
4
Intersection Size
Intervention
Observation
   
0
1
2
3
4
Set Size
(c) Core Phyla shared across phases
3
0
1
2
3
Intersection Size
Intervention
Observation
   
0
1
2
3
Set Size
(d) Core Genus shared across phases
Figure S24: Core microbiome shared between observation and intervention
phase of Atlantic salmon collected Norway, (a) at the Phylum level
and (b) at the Genus level. Distribution of the core microbiome
between phases (c) at the Phylum level and (d) at the Genus level.
