==PAGE:1==
The 1-2-3 conjecture
Alice Ryhl
Spring 2023
3
1
3
3
3
2
3
3
1
3
3
3
2
3
3
1
2
2
1
1
2
3
3
1
2
2
1
1
2
3
3
3
1
1
1
1
1
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
1
1
1
1
1
Advisors:
Carsten Thomassen and Eva Rotenberg
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
The 1-2-3 conjecture says that, for any graph without isolated edges, you can construct a
proper vertex-coloring of the graph by first giving each edge an arbitrary weight from the
set {1,2,3}, and then coloring each vertex using the sum of edge weights of its incident
edges as the color. The paper that originally stated the conjecture proves that bipartite and
3-chromatic graphs are not counterexamples, and I give a new linear time algorithm for
constructing edge weights for those graphs. Then, I go through a framework for approaching
the conjecture using a relationship between maximum cuts and maximum flows in graphs
(the first “maximum” is not a typo!). Using this framework, I prove that if a graph has a
maximum cut where removing the cut edges results in only two components, then the graph
is a not a counterexample to the 1-2-3 conjecture. Using this result, I show that all complete
𝑘-partite graphs, and all graphs with minimum degree at least 4𝑛/5 are not counterexamples
to the conjecture, which was not known when I began working on the thesis. The constant
4/5 is not best possible in this result. However, 4/5 is best possible in the following result,
also new and proved in my thesis: Every graph with minimum degree at least 4𝑛/5 has a
maximum cut where removing the cut edges results in only two components. (Surprisingly,
every maximum cut has that property.)
==PAGE:4==
The 1-2-3 conjecture
Alice Ryhl
Contents
1
Introduction
2
1.1
Terminology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.2
Structure of this thesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2
The 1-2-3 conjecture
5
2.1
Coloring 3-chromatic graphs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Coloring 2-chromatic graphs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.3
Coloring 2-chromatic graphs in linear time . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.4
Coloring 3-chromatic graphs in linear time . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3
Maximum cuts in graphs
10
3.1
Applications to the 1-2-3 conjecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
3.2
Comparison to 1-2-3-4 paper
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
3.3
Comparison to 1-2-3 preprint . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
4
Dense graphs
21
4.1
Lower bound
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
4.2
Breaking the 4/5 barrier . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
References
25
List of Figures
1
Illustration for the proof of Lemma 1. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2
Illustration of how Lemma 3 augments even walks. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3
Illustration of how Lemma 5 constructs the walks. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
4
Illustration of Lemma 6 converts each edge into two edges in the auxiliary graph. . . .
9
5
Incrementing the weights of specific vertices using cycles. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
6
Illustration of how combining an edge 𝑒outside of the cut with a path in the cut can be
used to construct odd cycles. Adding weights to the cycle lets you modify the weight
at one endpoint of 𝑒. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
7
Illustration of how we need to orient 𝑒when 𝑣is on each side of the cut.
. . . . . . . . 11
8
Illustration that shows how 𝑒should be oriented when we are subtracting two from the
weight of 𝑣. The orientations are opposite from Figure 7. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
9
When making more than one modification, you can do so by choosing an odd cycle for
each modification. However, there are also other shapes that work. In general, any
circulation will work. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
10
Diagram for Lemma 8 that illustrates the cuts of 𝐺that appear in the proof.
. . . . . . 15
11
Illustration for the proof of Lemma 14. The illustration shows the two sides of a maxi-
mum cut, and illustrates what happens if the right side has more than one component.
The lower right “blob” is the smallest component on the right side. The two other
“blobs” have wavy lines because we have not assumed them to be a single component. . 23
Page 1 of 25
==PAGE:5==
The 1-2-3 conjecture
Alice Ryhl
1
Introduction
The topic of this thesis is the 1-2-3 conjecture, which was originally stated by Michał Karoński, Tomasz
Łuczak, and Andrew Thomason [9].
Question 1 (The 1-2-3 conjecture). Do all nice graphs have an edge weighting using the weights {1,2,3}
that induces a vertex weighting that is also a coloring?
This statement of the conjecture uses terminology that is specific to the conjecture. We give some
quick definitions here, but more detailed definitions can be found in the section on terminology. If
𝑊is a set of numbers, then an edge weighting with weights from 𝑊is a function 𝑓∶𝐸(𝐺) →𝑊that
assigns a weight from 𝑊to each edge of the graph. Given an edge weighting, we say that it induces
the vertex weighting where each vertex is weighted using the sum of weights on edges incident to the
vertex. A coloring is a vertex weighting where neighbouring vertices have different weights. A nice
graph is a graph with no isolated edges.
The paper that originally introduced the conjecture [9] proves that if a graph can be colored using
only three colors, then it is not a counterexample to the conjecture. It also states that the complete
graphs are not counterexamples. Finally, it uses a probabilistic argument to show that there is a set
𝑊of 183 real numbers such that the conjecture is true if you replace {1,2,3} with 𝑊. Section 2 will
discuss this paper in more details.
A paper from 2004 improves this by showing that it is possible using only integer weights [1]. The
paper uses the weights {1,2,…,30}. In 2005, a subset of the authors from the 2004 paper submit
a paper [2] that improves this to {1,2,…,16}. The 2005 paper also shows that for any 𝑝∈(0,1),
random graphs sampled by picking each edge with probability 𝑝are asymptotically almost surely not
counterexamples to the conjecture, even if the set of edge weights is just {1,2}. In 2008, a paper
refines the techniques from the 2005 paper and improves the result to use {1,2,…,13} as the set of
edge weights [15].
The next breakthrough happens in a 2010 paper by Maciej Kalkowski, Michał Karoński and Florian
Pfender [8]. In this paper, they use a different technique to reduce the set of weights to {1,2,3,4,5}.
The paper is very short and the proof readily admits a linear time algorithm for constructing the edge
weights.
There are several papers that investigate whether the weights {1,2} are enough for special classes
of graphs. In a 2011 paper [4], the exact number of edge weights needed is determined for paths,
cycles, complete graphs, complete bipartite graphs, and 𝑟-regular bipartite graphs with 𝑟≥3. Then, a
2016 paper by Carsten Thomassen, Yezhou Wu, and Cun-Quan Zhang [13] characterizes the bipartite
graphs where the weights {1,2} suffice completely. It was shown in a 2011 paper [5] that it is NP-hard
to determine whether a general graph can be colored with only two weights.
People have also studied several other variations of the conjecture. In 2018, Bojan Vučković solves
the variation where the edge weights are {1,2,3}, but the induced vertex weights are defined as the
multi-set of edge weights on incident edges, rather than by the sum of edge weights [14]. Building
on the methods for the multi-set version of the conjecture, a 2021 paper by Julien Bensmail, Hervé
Hocquard, Dimitri Lajou, and Éric Sopena proves that the conjecture is also true if the vertex weights
are the product of incident edge weights [3]. The conjecture is also known if you assign weights to
both vertices and edges (a total weighting) and construct the coloring by summing both the vertex
weight and edge weights [7].
Finally in 2022, Ralph Keusch publishes an arXiv preprint that reduces the weight set to {1,2,3,4}
using ideas related to maximum cuts in graphs [11]. Then, in 2023 during our work on this thesis,
Keusch publishes another arXiv preprint that proves the full 1-2-3 conjecture [10], expanding on the
Page 2 of 25
==PAGE:6==
The 1-2-3 conjecture
Alice Ryhl
ideas from his 2022 preprint. The 2022 preprint was published in Combinatorica in May 2023. The
2023 preprint has not yet undergone peer review, and is currently at its third version (first version 5th
march, second version 19th march, third version 9th april).
More results and variations of the 1-2-3 conjecture can be found in a survey by Ben Seamone [12].
1.1
Terminology
A graph has vertices and edges. Each edge has two endpoints, which refers to the two vertices that the
edge connects. We assume that all graphs are simple, that is, they have no loops and no double edges.
We also assume that graphs are undirected unless stated otherwise. We will use 𝑉(𝐺) for the vertex
set of the graph 𝐺, and 𝐸(𝐺) for the edge set of 𝐺. We say that an edge is incident to a vertex, if that
vertex is one of the endpoints of the edge. We say that two vertices are neighbours if there is an edge
they are both incident to. We say that the degree of a vertex is the number of edges that are incident
to the vertex. If 𝐴⊆𝑉(𝐺) is a set of vertices, then the induced subgraph 𝐺[𝐴] is the graph with vertex
set 𝐴and the edge set being all edges in 𝐺with both endpoints in 𝐴. We say that an isolated edge is
an edge where both endpoints have degree one.
Since the 1-2-3 conjecture is trivially false for graphs with isolated edges, we say that a graph is nice
if it has no isolated edges. An edge weighting is a function that assigns a weight to every edge of
the graph, and a vertex weighting is a function that assigns a weight to every vertex of the graph.
Given any edge weighting, we say that it induces the vertex weighting where a vertex is weighted
by the sum of the edge weights of incident edges. We say that a vertex weighting is a coloring if
neighbouring vertices get different weights. Similarly, given a vertex weighting, we say that there is
a conflict between two vertices if they are neighbours and have the same weight. When constructing
vertex weightings, we say that a vertex has a mismatch if its weight is different from the weight we
want it to have. (That is, conflicts happen between two vertices, and mismatches happen at a single
vertex.)
A cut in a graph 𝐺is a set 𝐶of edges with the property that there exists a partition of 𝑉(𝐺) into two
non-empty sets 𝐴,𝐵such that an edge is in 𝐶if and only if its endpoints are on different sides of the
cut. We say that 𝐴and 𝐵are the two sides of the cut, and we will often refer to the “left” and “right”
side of the cut as a way to distinguish the two sides from each other. For example, we may say “all
vertices on the left side have an even weight” or “these two vertices are on the same side of the cut”.
Since the partition 𝐴,𝐵uniquely determines a cut, we say that the partition induces that cut. We will
sometimes abuse notation by using 𝐴,𝐵to refer to the cut they induce. It should be noted that there
can be several partitions of 𝑉(𝐺) that induce the same cut (e.g., you can swap 𝐴and 𝐵). The size of
a cut is the number of edges in the cut. A maximum cut is a cut such that the graph has no cut with a
larger size.
We say that a partition 𝐴,𝐵⊆𝑉(𝐺) is unfriendly if no vertex has more neighbours within its own set
than it has neighbours in the other set. We say that a cut is unfriendly if the partition that the cut is
induced by is unfriendly (notably, you get the same answer no matter which partition you use).
When talking about directed graphs, then the orientation of an edge refers to the direction in which
it is directed. One operation that will be useful in this thesis is to take a set of undirected edges 𝐸
from an undirected graph 𝐺, and assign orientations to some edges in 𝐸. Motivated by this, we define
a directed subset of 𝐸to be a set 𝐹containing only directed edges that each correspond to an edge
from 𝐸. That is, 𝐹contains edges from 𝐸with orientations assigned to them.
Given an undirected graph 𝐺, where 𝐹is a directed subset of 𝐸(𝐺) (that is, edges in 𝐹correspond
to edges in 𝐸(𝐺), but with orientations assigned to them, as defined in the previous paragraph), and
𝑣∈𝑉(𝐺) is a vertex, we define the indegree of 𝑣in 𝐹to be the number of edges in 𝐹that are incident
Page 3 of 25
==PAGE:7==
The 1-2-3 conjecture
Alice Ryhl
to 𝑣and go from some other vertex to 𝑣. Similarly, the outdegree of 𝑣in 𝐹is the number of edges in
𝐹incident to 𝑣that go from 𝑣to some other vertex. Finally, we say that 𝐹is a circulation if, for each
vertex 𝑣∈𝑉(𝐺), the indegree and outdegree of 𝑣in 𝐹are equal.
We say that a graph is 𝑘-chromatic if 𝑘is the smallest number such that there is a vertex weighting
using the weights {1,…,𝑘} that is also a coloring. We say that a graph is 𝑘-partite if its vertices can
be partitioned into 𝑘(possibly empty) sets such that all edges go between vertices of different sets.
Notably, a graph is 𝑘-partite if and only if it is ℓ-chromatic for some ℓ≤𝑘. For 𝑘= 2, we use the word
bipartite rather than 2-partite. A complete 𝑘-partite graph is one where there is an edge between two
vertices if and only if they are in different sets. The complete graphs are denoted by K𝑛with n being
the number of vertices in the complete graph.
Zero is a natural number. The parity of a number refers to whether it is even or odd.
1.2
Structure of this thesis
This thesis has been split into three major parts.
The first part is Section 2, where we will investigate the paper that originally introduced the conjecture
[9]. In the first half of Section 2, I will explain some of the proofs from that paper in my own words.
In the latter half, I will present an algorithmic improvement to those results; the algorithm is my own
contribution.
The second part is Section 3, which is dedicated to a relationship between maximum flows and max-
imum cuts in graphs. The relationship itself is not my own; it was first shown in [11]. However, I
explain it in my own words in a more detailed way than [11], and I provide a full proof of my own.
Then, in Section 3.1, I use the relationship to prove several new partial results on the 1-2-3 conjecture:
1. I prove that if a graph has a maximum cut where all components on the right side have an even
number of vertices, then the graph is not a counterexample to the 1-2-3 conjecture.
2. I prove that if a graph has a maximum cut whose removal results in only two components, then
the graph is not a counterexample to the 1-2-3 conjecture.
3. I prove that no complete 𝑘-partite graph is a counterexample to the 1-2-3 conjecture.
4. I give a new proof for a variation of the 1-2-3 conjecture.
The first three results in the above list are new results that were not known when I started to work
on this thesis. (Though they are corollaries of the 2023 preprint [10] since it proves the full 1-2-3
conjecture.)
The third and last part of my thesis is Section 4. Here, I prove a new result saying that if a graph with
𝑛vertices has minimum degree at least 4𝑛/5, then all unfriendly cuts (note that maximum cuts are
always unfriendly) have the property that their removal results in only two components. I also prove
that the constant 4/5 is best possible for this result. Using the results of Section 3, it follows that when
a graph has minimum degree at least 4𝑛/5, then it is not a counterexample to the 1-2-3 conjecture.
Page 4 of 25
==PAGE:8==
The 1-2-3 conjecture
Alice Ryhl
2
The 1-2-3 conjecture
In this section, we will look into the paper by Karoński, Łuczak, and Thomason that originally posed
the 1-2-3 conjecture [9]. The paper states the conjecture in the following way:
Question 1 (The 1-2-3 conjecture). Is it possible to weight the edges of any non-trivial graph with the
integers {1,2,3} such that the resultant vertex weighting is a proper colouring?
The paper defines non-trivial as a connected graph with at least three vertices. More recent papers
have instead adopted the terminology nice graph for this. Additionally, the notion of a nice graph can
be extended to disconnected graphs by requiring that the graph has no isolated edges.
The paper answers the conjecture affirmatively for some classes of graphs. It states without proof that
the conjecture is true for complete graphs, and for small graphs with at most 10 vertices. Then, it gives
a proof for graphs that can be colored using at most three colors. Afterwards, it gives a probabilistic
proof that there is a set 𝑊of 183 real numbers, such that the conjecture is true when {1,2,3} is
replaced with 𝑊.
Section 2.1 and 2.2 contains the proofs for 2- and 3-chromatic graphs explained in my own words.
In Section 2.3 and 2.4, we will see a contribution of my own: an algorithm that constructs an edge
weighting for 2- and 3-chromatic graphs in linear time. (The proofs from Section 2.1 and 2.2 readily
admits only a quadratic time algorithm.)
2.1
Coloring 3-chromatic graphs
The paper handles non-bipartite and bipartite graphs separately. This is because non-bipartite graphs
have the property that any two vertices can be connected by a walk of even length. In this section, we
will show that 3-chromatic graphs are not counterexamples to the 1-2-3 conjecture. The proof in this
section was originally given in [9], but the exposition here is my own.
Lemma 1. In a non-bipartite connected graph, any two vertices can be connected by a walk of even length.
Proof. Since the graph is connected, there is a path 𝑝from 𝑢to 𝑣. If 𝑝is even, then we are done, so
assume that 𝑝is odd. Since the graph is not bipartite, it has an odd cycle 𝐶. Let 𝑞be the shortest path
from 𝑢to a vertex in 𝐶. Then, the walk 𝑞,𝐶,reverse(𝑞),𝑝is a walk from 𝑢to 𝑣of even length.
𝑞
𝑝
𝑢
𝑣
𝐶
Figure 1: Illustration for the proof of Lemma 1.
We also need another small result:
Lemma 2. If a group Γ has an odd number of elements, then for any element 𝑔∈Γ, there exists an ℎ∈Γ
such that 2ℎ= 𝑔.
Proof. I claim that ℎ= |Γ|+1
2
𝑔satisfies the property. To see this, note that 2ℎ= |Γ|𝑔+𝑔= 𝑔.
Page 5 of 25
==PAGE:9==
The 1-2-3 conjecture
Alice Ryhl
We can now show that 3-chromatic graphs are not counterexamples. We will do this by showing
something stronger:
Lemma 3. Let 𝑘be an odd integer, and let Γ be an abelian group with 𝑘elements. Let 𝐺be a connected,
non-bipartite, 𝑘-partite graph. For any vertex weighting 𝑔∶𝑉(𝐺) →Γ, there exists an edge weighting
𝑓∶𝐸(𝐺) →Γ such that 𝑓induces 𝑔.
Proof. We will construct the edge weighting 𝑓∶𝐸(𝐺) →Γ by repeatedly modifying 𝑓in an iterative
process. Let 𝑔∶𝑉(𝐺) →Γ be the vertex weighting that we want to achieve, and let 𝑔′ ∶𝑉(𝐺) →Γ be
the vertex weighting induced by the current value of 𝑓.
We start by initializing the edge weights 𝑓such that ∑𝑣∈𝑉(𝐺) 𝑔(𝑣) = ∑𝑣∈𝑉(𝐺) 𝑔′(𝑣) holds for the initial
choice of weights: this can be done by choosing an ℎ∈Γ with 2ℎ= ∑𝑣∈𝑉(𝐺) 𝑔(𝑣), and giving one of
the edges ℎas its initial weight. Every other edge is given the identity of Γ as its initial weight. This
results in the desired property, and the element ℎexists by Lemma 2.
After the above initialization step, there might be some vertices with 𝑔(𝑣) ≠𝑔′(𝑣). We will fix these
mismatches by repeating the following procedure: Let 𝑢,𝑣be two vertices that both have a mismatch,
and use Lemma 1 pick a walk 𝑝from 𝑢to 𝑣that uses an even number of edges. By modifying the
weights in 𝑓along the walk by 𝑔(𝑢)−𝑔′(𝑢) and 𝑔′(𝑢)−𝑔(𝑢) in an alternating manner (see Figure 2),
we modify 𝑔′ only at 𝑢and 𝑣, since the modifications cancel at all other vertices. Additionally, we
have 𝑔′(𝑢) = 𝑔(𝑢) after the modifications, which means that we decreased the number of mismatched
vertices in 𝐺.
To finish the proof, we show that it is not possible for there to be a single mismatched vertex left.
This is because when the walks have even length, the value of ∑𝑣∈𝑉(𝐺) 𝑔′(𝑣) remains unchanged when
augmenting, so it is still equal to ∑𝑣∈𝑉(𝐺) 𝑔(𝑣) after each iteration. Thus, the above process will
construct an edge weighting 𝑓such that 𝑔(𝑣) = 𝑔′(𝑣) everywhere after less than |𝑉(𝐺)| steps.
𝑔(𝑢)−𝑔′(𝑢)
𝑔′(𝑢)−𝑔(𝑢)
𝑔(𝑢)−𝑔′(𝑢)
𝑔′(𝑢)−𝑔(𝑢)
𝑢
𝑣
Figure 2: Illustration of how Lemma 3 augments even walks.
Using the above stronger result, the desired result follows:
Corollary 1. If a connected graph is 3-chromatic, then it not a counterexample to the 1-2-3 conjecture.
Proof. Let Γ be the integers modulo 3, and let 𝑔∶𝑉(𝐺) →Γ be a 3-coloring of 𝐺using the elements of
Γ as colors. Since 𝐺is 3-chromatic, it is 3-partite and not bipartite. By Lemma 3, there exists an edge
weighting 𝑓∶𝐸(𝐺) →Γ that induces 𝑔. However, the edge weighting 𝑓′ ∶𝐸(𝐺) →{1,2,3} defined by
𝑓′(𝑒) ≡𝑓(𝑒) (mod 3) must also induce a vertex coloring, since if two integers are different in Γ, then
they are also different in ℤ.
We have now seen how we can use the strategy of augmenting even walks to incrementally change
the graph until it has the desired vertex weighting. However, it is not clear how to construct the edge
weights in linear time. The walks constructed by Lemma 1 can be of linear length, so their combined
length could be quadratic. We will see how to construct shorter walks in Section 2.3.
Page 6 of 25
==PAGE:10==
The 1-2-3 conjecture
Alice Ryhl
2.2
Coloring 2-chromatic graphs
In a bipartite graph, Lemma 1 no longer holds in general. Instead, it holds only for vertices on the
same side of the partition. This results in the following idea: initialize the edge weights so that all
mismatched vertices are on the same side of the partition.
Let us see how that is done:
Lemma 4. Let 𝑘be an odd integer, and let Γ be an abelian group with 𝑘elements. Let 𝐺be a connected,
nice, bipartite graph. Then, there exists an edge weighting 𝑓∶𝐸(𝐺) →Γ that induces a coloring of 𝐺.
Proof. Since the graph is bipartite, 𝐸(𝐺) is a cut. Let 𝐴,𝐵be a partition that induces the cut 𝐸(𝐺).
Since 𝐺is nice, there must be a vertex 𝑤∈𝑉(𝐺) of degree at least two; assume without loss of
generality that 𝑤∈𝐵.
We will construct the edge weighting 𝑓∶𝐸(𝐺) →Γ by repeatedly modifying 𝑓in an iterative process.
Let 𝑔∶𝑉(𝐺) →Γ be the vertex weighting induced by the current value of 𝑓. We initialize 𝑓to be the
identity of Γ at all edges in the graph.
Let 𝛾∈Γ be any non-identity element of Γ. As long as there exists two vertices 𝑢,𝑣∈𝐵with 𝑔(𝑢) ≠𝛾
and 𝑔(𝑣) ≠𝛾, we modify 𝑓in the following way: Let 𝑝be a walk from 𝑢to 𝑣. Modify weights in 𝑓along
the walk by 𝛾−𝑔(𝑢) and 𝑔(𝑢) −𝛾in an alternating manner, which modifies 𝑔only at 𝑢and 𝑣, since
the modifications cancel at all other vertices. Additionally, we have 𝑔(𝑢) = 𝛾after the modifications,
which means that we have decreased the number of vertices in 𝐵with a weight other than 𝛾. By
repeating this process less than |𝐵| times, we can ensure that 𝑔(𝑣) = 𝛾at all 𝑣∈𝐵with at most one
exception. By never using 𝑢= 𝑤, we can ensure that the exception happens at 𝑤.
Now, if the above process constructs an edge weighting with 𝑔(𝑤) ≠0, then 𝑔is the identity every-
where in 𝐴due to how 𝑓was initialized, and different from the identity everywhere in 𝐵. Since every
edge goes from 𝐴to 𝐵, this means that we are done. On the other hand, if 𝑔(𝑤) = 0, then let ℎ∈Γ be
an element with 2ℎ= 𝛾, and add ℎto the weight of any two edges incident to 𝑤. This ensures that 𝑔
is 𝛾everywhere in 𝐵, and different from 𝛾everywhere in 𝐴.
An important difference between Lemma 3 and Lemma 4 is that we can only choose what the induced
vertex weighting should be when the graph is not bipartite. Combining the two results gives us:
Corollary 2. Let 𝑘be an odd integer, and let Γ be an abelian group with 𝑘elements. Let 𝐺be a nice
𝑘-partite graph. Then, there exists an edge weighting 𝑓∶𝐸(𝐺) →Γ that induces a coloring of 𝐺.
Proof. Assume without loss of generality that 𝐺is connected. If 𝐺is bipartite, then the result follows
from Lemma 4. Otherwise, let 𝑔∶𝑉(𝐺) →Γ be any coloring of 𝐺, and use Lemma 3 to construct an
edge weighting of 𝐺that induces 𝑔. In either case, the result follows.
And finally:
Corollary 3. If a graph is nice and 3-partite, then it not a counterexample to the 1-2-3 conjecture.
Proof. Let Γ be the integers modulo 3, and use Corollary 2 to construct an edge weighting 𝑓∶𝐸(𝐺) →Γ
that induces a coloring of 𝐺. Now, let 𝑓′ ∶𝐸(𝐺) →{1,2,3} be defined by 𝑓′(𝑒) ≡𝑓(𝑒) (mod 3). The
edge weighting 𝑓′ must also induce a vertex coloring, since if two integers are different in Γ, then they
are also different in ℤ.
This concludes my explanation of the proofs from [9]. In Section 2.3 and Section 2.4, we will discuss
how the previous proofs can be turned into an algorithm that can construct 𝑓in linear time.
Page 7 of 25
==PAGE:11==
The 1-2-3 conjecture
Alice Ryhl
2.3
Coloring 2-chromatic graphs in linear time
The above proof can be converted into an algorithm that constructs the edge weights in linear time,
given a coloring of the graph as input. This is easiest to see for bipartite graphs, so in this section we
will consider only bipartite graphs. The algorithm in this section is my own contribution.
To show this, we need the following lemma:
Lemma 5. Let 𝐺be a connected bipartite graph with 𝑚edges, and let 𝐴,𝐵be a partition that induces
the cut 𝐸(𝐺). Let 𝑤∈𝐵be any vertex. Then, there exists walks 𝑝1,…,𝑝|𝐵|−1 such that 𝑝𝑖is a walk from
𝑣𝑖to 𝑣𝑖+1, with 𝑣1,…,𝑣|𝐵| being the vertices of 𝐵in some order and 𝑣|𝐵| = 𝑤, with the total length of the
walks being less than 2𝑚.
Proof. We construct the (non-simple) graph 𝐺′ by duplicating every edge in 𝐺. Since every vertex in
𝐺′ has even degree, the graph has an Euler cycle. Translating the Euler cycle back to 𝐺results in a
cyclic walk in 𝐺that visits all vertices of 𝑉(𝐺) and uses each edge twice. Since 𝐺has 𝑚edges, the
cyclic walk uses exactly 2𝑚edges.
Since the cyclic walk visits every vertex of 𝐵, we can split it into |𝐵| walks 𝑝1,…,𝑝|𝐵| with 𝑝𝑖being a
walk from 𝑣𝑖to 𝑣𝑖+1 (or 𝑣1 for 𝑖= |𝐵|) with 𝑣1,…,𝑣|𝐵| being the vertices of 𝐵in some order. Without
loss of generality, we may assume that 𝑣|𝐵| = 𝑤. The total size of these walks is 2𝑚. Removing 𝑝|𝐵|
gives us the walks 𝑝1,…,𝑝|𝐵|−1 with the desired properties.
𝑤
Remove walk after 𝑤.
Figure 3: Illustration of how Lemma 5 constructs the walks.
Note that the total length can be reduced to 2𝑛by using a spanning tree of 𝐺to construct the Euler
cycle. Additionally, since Euler cycles can be found in linear time, the walks in Lemma 5 can be found
in linear time.
The rest is trivial: Let 𝑤∈𝐵be a vertex of degree at least two, and pick walks using Lemma 5. We
execute the modifications as outlined in Lemma 4 along each walk given to us by the lemma. (Note
that we can augment walks even if 𝑔(𝑢) = 𝛾or 𝑔(𝑣) = 𝛾; the only reason that Lemma 4 avoids this is
to prove termination.) After augmenting every walk, the only vertex with an incorrect weight is 𝑤,
which we fix as outlined in Lemma 4. We use 𝛾= 2 and ℎ= 1 in the integers modulo 3.
Since the total length of the walks is at most 2𝑚, everything described above runs in linear time in
the size of the graph.
2.4
Coloring 3-chromatic graphs in linear time
When the graph is 3-chromatic, we need another trick to ensure that the walks have even length. The
algorithm in this section is my own contribution.
Lemma 6. Let 𝐺be a connected non-bipartite graph with 𝑛vertices and 𝑚edges. Then, there exists walks
𝑝1,…,𝑝𝑛−1 such that 𝑝𝑖is a walk of even length from 𝑣𝑖to 𝑣𝑖+1, with 𝑣1,…,𝑣𝑛being the vertices of 𝐺in
some order, with the total length of the walks being less than 4𝑚.
Page 8 of 25
==PAGE:12==
The 1-2-3 conjecture
Alice Ryhl
Proof. Let us construct an auxiliary graph 𝐺′. The vertex set of 𝐺′ will contain two copies of 𝑉(𝐺), let
us call them 𝐴and 𝐵. For each edge 𝑢𝑣∈𝐸(𝐺), we add the edges 𝑎𝑢𝑏𝑣and 𝑏𝑢𝑎𝑣to 𝐸(𝐺′), with 𝑎𝑢,𝑏𝑢
being the copy of 𝑢in 𝐴and 𝐵respectively (see Figure 4). The resulting graph 𝐺′ has 2𝑛vertices,
has 2𝑚edges, is bipartite, and 𝐴,𝐵induces the cut 𝐸(𝐺′). Additionally, 𝐺′ is connected since 𝐺has
an odd cycle. By Lemma 5, there exists walks 𝑞1,…,𝑞𝑛−1 in 𝐺′ such that 𝑞𝑖is a walk from 𝑏𝑖to 𝑏𝑖+1,
where 𝑏1,…,𝑏𝑛are the vertices of 𝐵in some order. Now, let 𝑣1,…,𝑣𝑛be the vertices of 𝐺in the same
order as they appear in 𝑏1,…,𝑏𝑛. Define 𝑝1,…,𝑝𝑛−1 by translating each 𝑞𝑖to 𝐺by mapping each
edge in 𝐸(𝐺′) to the edge in 𝐸(𝐺) it was created from. Then, the walks 𝑝1,…,𝑝𝑛−1 have the desired
properties.
Using Lemma 6, the algorithm for 3-chromatic graphs can be implemented like in Section 2.3.
𝑢
𝑣
𝑎𝑢
𝑎𝑣
𝑏𝑢
𝑏𝑣
𝐺
𝐺′
𝐴
𝐵
Figure 4: Illustration of Lemma 6 converts each edge into two edges in the auxiliary graph.
Page 9 of 25
==PAGE:13==
The 1-2-3 conjecture
Alice Ryhl
3
Maximum cuts in graphs
In this section, we will introduce a framework for approaching the 1-2-3 conjecture based on a rela-
tionship between maximum cuts and maximum flows in graphs. Our main result will be the following:
Theorem 1. If a nice graph has a maximum cut whose removal results in no more than two components,
then the graph is not a counterexample to the 1-2-3 conjecture.
The main idea behind Theorem 1 is to use a lemma that lets us find a flow with nice properties in
a maximum cut. The lemma originates from a 2022 arXiv preprint by Ralph Keusch [11] that uses
similar ideas to show that the conjecture holds using the weights 1-2-3-4. Keusch later uses the same
lemma to show the full 1-2-3 conjecture in a 2023 preprint [10]. The 2022 preprint has since been
peer reviewed and published in Combinatorica.
To motivate how a flow can be used, consider what happens if you augment the graph along an odd
cycle: we increment and decrement weights along the cycle by +1 and −1 in an alternating manner.
At the starting vertex, both of the edges will be modified in the same way, so the starting vertex is
changed by +2 or −2. All of the other vertices have a balanced number of increments and decrements,
so their weights do not change. See Figure 5a for an illustration of this. These modifications are also
possible with other shapes than odd cycles. For example, you can use an even cycle to increment by
+2 at two different vertices, without changing the rest of the graph. See Figure 5b for an illustration
of this.
+1
−1
+1
−1
+1
+2
(a) Modifying one vertex using an odd cycle.
+1
−1
+1
+1
−1
+1
+2
+2
(b) Modifying two vertices using an even cycle.
Figure 5: Incrementing the weights of specific vertices using cycles.
As we just saw, odd cycles can be used to make targeted changes to a single vertex. Since we will
usually be working with a cut in the graph, it is useful to understand how odd cycles can be found
using a cut. One approach that can sometimes be used for that is to select an edge 𝑒∈𝐸(𝐺)⧵𝐶that
is not part of the cut. Then, we look for a path that connects the two endpoints of 𝑒, using only edges
from the cut. If we are able to find such a path, then we can combine it with 𝑒to get a cycle of odd
length, since the path must necessarily be of even length. This is illustrated in Figure 6a. Furthermore,
if we orient the edges of the path, then they will alternate between left-to-right and right-to-left (with
left and right being the two sides of the cut). By translating a left-to-right orientation to +1 and a
right-to-left orientation to −1, we get alternating +1 and −1 weight changes along the path. By also
adding +1 to 𝑒, this results in an odd cycle that modifies an endpoint 𝑣of 𝑒with +2. This is illustrated
in Figure 6b.
Page 10 of 25
==PAGE:14==
The 1-2-3 conjecture
Alice Ryhl
𝑒
𝑣
(a) A path in the cut becomes an odd cycle.
+1
−1
+1
−1
+1
+2
(b) With weights on the edges.
Figure 6: Illustration of how combining an edge 𝑒outside of the cut with a path in the cut can be used
to construct odd cycles. Adding weights to the cycle lets you modify the weight at one endpoint of 𝑒.
In the previous paragraph, we saw how the odd cycle can be oriented to modify an endpoint of 𝑒.
However, 𝑒has two endpoints, and we wish to control which of the endpoints is modified. Let 𝑣be
the endpoint whose weight we wish to modify. We assume that all of the edges in the odd cycle are
oriented so that they form a directed cycle, and we will use the convention of assigning +1 to the
left-to-right edges and −1 to the right-to-left edges regardless of whether 𝑒is on the left or right side
of the cut. This means that 𝑒must be oriented towards 𝑣when 𝑣is on the left side of the cut, and
away from 𝑣when 𝑣is on the right side of the cut. This is illustrated in Figure 7.
+1
−1
+1
−1
+1
+2
(a) When 𝑣is on the left, then 𝑒points towards 𝑣.
−1
+1
−1
+1
+1
+2
(b) When 𝑣is on the right, then 𝑒points away from 𝑣.
Figure 7: Illustration of how we need to orient 𝑒when 𝑣is on each side of the cut.
Previously, we saw how we can use odd cycles to add two to a vertex weight. It turns out that we
can also use odd cycles to subtract two from a vertex weight. This is done by modifying 𝑒by −1 and
orienting the odd cycle in the opposite direction from what you would otherwise do. This is illustrated
in Figure 8.
Page 11 of 25
==PAGE:15==
The 1-2-3 conjecture
Alice Ryhl
−1
+1
−1
+1
−1
−2
(a) When 𝑣is on the left, then 𝑒points away from 𝑣.
+1
−1
+1
−1
−1
−2
(b) When 𝑣is on the right, then 𝑒points towards 𝑣.
Figure 8: Illustration that shows how 𝑒should be oriented when we are subtracting two from the
weight of 𝑣. The orientations are opposite from Figure 7.
Using the previous analysis, we are now able to make weight modifications at a single vertex of our
choosing by just choosing 𝑒, an orientation for 𝑒, and whether 𝑒should be modified by +1 or −1.
(Because once 𝑒is chosen, it doesn’t matter what path we use — any path that forms a cycle with
𝑒modifies the same vertex in the same way.) This means that we can now represent our desired
modification using just the directed edge.
However, we actually want the ability to modify multiple vertices in a controlled way. Since each mod-
ification can be represented as a directed edge from 𝐸(𝐺)⧵𝐶, we may represent multiple modifications
using a set 𝐹that is a directed subset of 𝐸(𝐺)⧵𝐶.
Now, if we are able to find a set of edge-disjoint paths in 𝐶that each correspond to an edge from 𝐹,
then we are happy and can make the desired changes (they need to be edge-disjoint because we want
to initialize the weights to 2, and we want to ensure that the weights are still in the set {1,2,3} after
modifying the paths). Unfortunately, finding these odd cycles is too difficult. To solve this problem,
recall that odd cycles are not the only way we modify vertex weights (we saw this in Figure 5b).
It turns out that the appropriate generalization of “set of edge-disjoint odd cycles” is “circulation”.
Definition 1 (Circulation). A circulation in 𝐺is a directed subset of 𝐸(𝐺) where the indegree and out-
degree is equal at each vertex.
So basically, given a directed subset 𝐹of 𝐸(𝐺) ⧵𝐶that represents the desired modifications, we look
for a directed subset 𝐸of 𝐶such that 𝐸∪𝐹is a circulation. (Like how 𝑃∪{𝑒} should be an odd cycle
with 𝑃being the path.) This is illustrated in Figure 9.
+1
+1
+1
−1
+1
−1
+2
+2
(a) Two vertices modified using two odd cycles.
+1
+1
+1
−1
+1
−1
+2
+2
(b) Two vertices modified using a single even cycle.
Figure 9: When making more than one modification, you can do so by choosing an odd cycle for each
modification. However, there are also other shapes that work. In general, any circulation will work.
Page 12 of 25
==PAGE:16==
The 1-2-3 conjecture
Alice Ryhl
To formalize the above discussion, let 𝐺be an undirected graph and 𝐶be a cut in 𝐺. We will now
define the following concepts:
• By augmentation goal, we refer to a function 𝑔∶𝑉(𝐺) →ℤthat maps vertices of 𝐺to even
numbers. Informally, the goal is to modify the edge weights in a way that modifies the weight
of each vertex 𝑣∈𝑉(𝐺) by 𝑔(𝑣).
• Given an augmentation goal 𝑔∶𝑉(𝐺) →ℤ, we define an augmentation plan to be a set of edges
𝐹⊆𝐸(𝐺)⧵𝐶outside the cut, where each edge in 𝐹is assigned one of its endpoints and a value
that is either −2 or +2. It must be the case that, for each vertex 𝑣∈𝑉(𝐺), the sum of values on
edges assigned to 𝑣must be equal to 𝑔(𝑣). Based on the assigned endpoint and value of each
edge in 𝐹, we give each edge an orientation: the edge is oriented towards 𝑣if exactly one of
“𝑣is on the left side of the cut” and “the value is −2” is true, otherwise the edge is oriented
away from 𝑣. (This definition matches Figure 7 and Figure 8.) This makes 𝐹a directed subset
of 𝐸(𝐺)⧵𝐶.
• Given an augmentation plan 𝐹⊆𝐸(𝐺)⧵𝐶, we say that if 𝐸is a directed subset of 𝐶, then 𝐸will
execute the augmentation plan if 𝐸∪𝐹is a circulation when seen as a directed set of edges. We
define the action of executing the augmentation plan using 𝐸as modifying the edge weights in
𝐺in the following way: edges in 𝐸are modified by +1 when they go from left to right, and by
−1 when they go from right to left. Edges in 𝐹are modified by +1 if assigned the value +2, and
by −1 if assigned the value −2.
Often when using the word “augmentation”, you refer to something you do repeatedly several times.
However, with an augmentation goal you only “augment” once. This is because we are making many
modifications in one go, and we have to do it this way because, otherwise augmentations might not
be edge-disjoint, causing edge weights to go outside the set {1,2,3}. Knowing all of the changes in
advance lets us make many changes without having them overlap.
To show that the above definitions are meaningful, we show that executing an augmentation plan will
achieve the augmentation goal.
Lemma 7. Let 𝐶be a cut in a graph 𝐺. Let 𝐹⊆𝐸(𝐺)⧵𝐶be an augmentation plan for some augmentation
goal 𝑔∶𝑉(𝐺) →ℤ, and let 𝐸⊆𝐶be a directed set that executes 𝐹. If we let 𝑓old be the edge weights before
executing 𝐹using 𝐸, and let 𝑓new be the edge weights afterwards, then it is the case that
𝑔new(𝑣) = 𝑔old(𝑣)+𝑔(𝑣)
at all vertices 𝑣∈𝑉(𝐺), where 𝑓old induces 𝑔old and 𝑓new induces 𝑔new.
Proof. Define 𝐹+2(𝑣) and 𝐹−2(𝑣) as the number of edges with 𝑣as an endpoint in 𝐹, that are assigned
+2 or −2 respectively. Define 𝐹+(𝑣) and 𝐹−(𝑣) as the number of edges pointing towards and away
from 𝑣in 𝐹respectively. Define 𝐹+
+2(𝑣),𝐹+
−2(𝑣),𝐹−
+2(𝑣),𝐹−
−2(𝑣) as the number of edges that “points
towards 𝑣and is assigned +2”, “points towards 𝑣and is assigned −2”, “points away from 𝑣and is
assigned +2”, “points away from 𝑣and is assigned −2” respectively. We similarly define 𝐸+(𝑣) and
𝐸−(𝑣) except that we count edges in 𝐸instead.
Now, since 𝐸∪𝐹is a circulation (and 𝐸,𝐹are disjoint), it follows that 𝐸+(𝑣)+𝐹+(𝑣) = 𝐸−(𝑣)+𝐹−(𝑣),
which we can also write as 𝐸+(𝑣)−𝐸−(𝑣) = 𝐹−(𝑣)−𝐹+(𝑣). Assume that 𝑣is on the left. Then,
𝑔new(𝑣)−𝑔old(𝑣)
(1a)
= 𝐹+2(𝑣)−𝐹−2(𝑣)+𝐸+(𝑣)−𝐸−(𝑣)
(1b)
= 𝐹+2(𝑣)−𝐹−2(𝑣)+𝐹−(𝑣)−𝐹+(𝑣)
(1c)
Page 13 of 25
==PAGE:17==
The 1-2-3 conjecture
Alice Ryhl
= (𝐹+
+2(𝑣)+𝐹−
+2(𝑣))−(𝐹+
−2(𝑣)+𝐹−
−2(𝑣))+(𝐹−
+2(𝑣)+𝐹−
−2(𝑣))−(𝐹+
+2(𝑣)+𝐹+
−2(𝑣))
(1d)
= 2𝐹−
+2(𝑣)−2𝐹+
−2(𝑣)
(1e)
= 𝑔(𝑣).
(1f)
This is as desired. If 𝑣is on the right side, then an analogous computation gives the same result.
We are now ready to see the lemma mentioned at the beginning of this section. The lemma was
first shown as Lemma 2 in a paper by Ralph Keusch [11]. However, the version given here has been
reformulated using the terminology introduced above, and the proof given below is my own. The
lemma says that if the cut is a maximum cut, then you can always execute any augmentation plan.
This is useful because constructing an augmentation plan is a lot easier than finding a directed subset
of the cut that executes it.
Lemma 8 (Max-flow max-cut). Any augmentation plan can be executed if the cut is a maximum cut.
Proof. Let 𝐺be a graph, and let 𝐶be a maximum cut of 𝐺. Let 𝑆,𝑇⊆𝑉(𝐺) be the left and right
sides of 𝐶respectively. Let 𝐹⊆𝐸(𝐺)⧵𝐶be the augmentation plan. We are looking for a directed set
𝐸⊆𝐶such that 𝐸∪𝐹becomes a circulation. We will reformulate this into a flow problem. Let 𝐻be
an auxiliary graph with vertex set 𝑉(𝐺) ∪{𝜎,𝜏}, where 𝜎and 𝜏are two extra vertices (they will be
source and sink of the flow problem). The edges of 𝐻will be
𝐸(𝐻) = 𝐶∪{𝜎𝑣∣𝑢𝑣∈𝐹}∪{𝑢𝜏∣𝑢𝑣∈𝐹}.
(2)
This means that 𝐻is a mixed graph that has a mix of undirected edges (the edges of 𝐶) and directed
edges (the edges not from 𝐶). We give every edge a capacity of one. Given this graph 𝐻, we can ask
how large the maximum 𝜎-𝜏-flow in 𝐻is, and since the edges all have capacity one, we can encode
the flow as a set of edges 𝐸′ ⊆𝐸(𝐻), with orientations assigned to them. It can be checked that if a
flow 𝐸′ has size |𝐹|, then every edge in {𝑠𝑣∣𝑢𝑣∈𝐹} ∪{𝑢𝑡∣𝑢𝑣∈𝐹} will be in 𝐸′, so (𝐸′ ∩𝐶) ∪𝐹
will be a circulation. This means that 𝐸= 𝐸′ ∩𝐶would execute the augmentation plan. Therefore, we
wish to show that 𝐻has an 𝜎-𝜏-flow of size |𝐹|. To do this, we will show that |𝐹| is the size of the
smallest 𝜎-𝜏-cut in 𝐻.
We note that the cut ({𝜎},𝑉(𝐺)∪{𝜏}) consists of |𝐹| edges. Assume for contradiction that 𝐻has a
smaller 𝜎-𝜏-cut. Then, the cut separates the vertices into ({𝜎}∪𝐴,𝐵∪{𝜏}) with 𝐴,𝐵⊆𝑉(𝐺) being a
partition of 𝑉(𝐺) into two non-empty sets (if either is empty, then the cut is not smaller than |𝐹|).
Next we would like to derive a contradiction. Specifically, we want to show that (𝑆⊖𝐴,𝑇⊖𝐴) induces
a cut that is larger than 𝐶in 𝐺, which contradict with 𝐶being maximum in 𝐺. The set (𝑆⊖𝐴,𝑇⊖𝐴) can
be informally described as moving vertices in 𝐴to the other side of 𝐶, while keeping vertices in 𝐵on
the side of 𝐶they are already on. Define #𝐸(𝑋,𝑌) as the number of edges from 𝑋to 𝑌in 𝐻, and ⊖to
be the symmetric set difference. To reach the contradiction, we will show the following inequalities:
Number of edges in (𝑆⊖𝐴,𝑇⊖𝐴) but not in 𝐶.
(3a)
≥Number of edges from 𝐹with exactly one endpoint in 𝐴.
(3b)
≥Difference between #𝐸(𝜎,𝐴) and #𝐸(𝐴,𝜏).
(3c)
>#𝐸(𝐴,𝐵)
(3d)
=Number of edges in 𝐶but not in (𝑆⊖𝐴,𝑇⊖𝐴).
(3e)
The argument for each inequality follows:
Page 14 of 25
==PAGE:18==
The 1-2-3 conjecture
Alice Ryhl
𝑆∩𝐴
𝑇∩𝐴
𝑆∩𝐵
𝑇∩𝐵
(a) The edges in the cut 𝐶= (𝑆,𝑇).
𝑆∩𝐴
𝑇∩𝐴
𝑆∩𝐵
𝑇∩𝐵
(b) The edges in the cut (𝐴,𝐵).
𝑆∩𝐴
𝑇∩𝐴
𝑆∩𝐵
𝑇∩𝐵
(c) The edges in the cut (𝑆⊖𝐴,𝑇⊖𝐴).
Figure 10: Diagram for Lemma 8 that illustrates the cuts of 𝐺that appear in the proof.
(3a)≥(3b) First, we note that if an edge from 𝐹has exactly one endpoint in 𝐴(and the other in
𝐵), then it must be part of the cut (𝑆⊖𝐴,𝑇⊖𝐴), because otherwise the edge would have one
endpoint in 𝑆and the other in 𝑇, which is not possible since the edges of 𝐹are not in the cut 𝐶.
Refer to Figure 10 to see this.
(3b)≥(3c) Next, we consider the difference between #𝐸(𝜎,𝐴) and #𝐸(𝐴,𝜏). Each edge in 𝐹with
exactly one endpoint in 𝐴contributes exactly one edge in #𝐸(𝜎,𝐴), or exactly one edge in
#𝐸(𝐴,𝜏). The edges in 𝐹with two or zero endpoints in 𝐴contribute the same amount to both
sets, so they don’t affect the difference. It follows that the difference between #𝐸(𝜎,𝐴) and
#𝐸(𝐴,𝜏) is at most the number of edges in 𝐹with exactly one endpoint in 𝐴.
(3c)>(3d) By the assumption that ({𝜎}∪𝐴,𝐵∪{𝜏}) is a smaller cut in 𝐻than the trivial cut around 𝜎,
it follows that #𝐸(𝜎,𝐴)+#𝐸(𝜎,𝐵) = #𝐸({𝜎},𝑉(𝐺)∪{𝜏}) > #𝐸({𝜎}∪𝐴,𝐵∪{𝜏}) = #𝐸(𝜎,𝐵)+
#𝐸(𝐴,𝐵)+#𝐸(𝐴,𝜏). This inequality simplifies to #𝐸(𝜎,𝐴)−#𝐸(𝐴,𝜏) > #𝐸(𝐴,𝐵).
(3d)=(3e) Finally, we note that since #𝐸(𝐴,𝐵) is defined to count edges in 𝐻, the expression is equal
to the number of edges in 𝐶with one end in 𝐴and the other in 𝐵. However, these are exactly
the edges in 𝐶that are not in (𝑆⊖𝐴,𝑇⊖𝐴). Refer to Figure 10 to see this.
It follows that (𝑆⊖𝐴,𝑇⊖𝐴) is a larger cut in 𝐺than 𝐶, which is a contradiction since 𝐶is a maximum
cut. Thus, any smallest 𝜎-𝜏-cut in 𝐻has |𝐹| edges. The result follows.
We have now established our main tool for proving Theorem 1.
3.1
Applications to the 1-2-3 conjecture
In this section, we will look into how we can use the max-flow max-cut lemma from the previous
section to prove partial results on the 1-2-3 conjecture.
To give a simple example of how we can use the lemma, we will give a short proof for the following
variation on the 1-2-3 conjecture.
Corollary 4. Every graph 𝐺has an edge weighting 𝑓∶𝐸(𝐺) →{1,2,3} and vertex weighting ℎ∶𝑉(𝐺) →
{1,2} such that the vertex weighting 𝑔∶𝑉(𝐺) →ℕdefined by 𝑔(𝑣) = ℎ(𝑣)+∑𝑒∈𝑁(𝑣) 𝑓(𝑒) is a coloring of
the graph 𝐺.
Proof. Let 𝐶be a maximum cut of 𝐺and let 𝐴,𝐵be the left and right side of 𝐶respectively. Initialize
the edge weights 𝑓by assigning the weight 2 to every edge. Initialize the vertex weights ℎsuch that
𝑔(𝑣) is even at every vertex on the left side and odd at every vertex on the right side of the cut.
We now wish to resolve the color conflicts. To do that, we will construct an augmentation goal. Let
𝑣1,𝑣2,…,𝑣𝑛be an arbitrary ordering of 𝑉(𝐺). We now process the vertices in that order, increasing
Page 15 of 25
==PAGE:19==
The 1-2-3 conjecture
Alice Ryhl
the augmentation goal at 𝑣𝑖by two until it has no conflicts among its neighbours with a smaller index
in the ordering. It should be clear that the resulting augmentation goal will resolve all color conflicts.
We can find an augmentation plan that achieves the goal in the following way: Whenever we incre-
ment the augmentation goal at 𝑣𝑖by two, this is because it has a color conflict with a neighbour 𝑣𝑗
that has 𝑗< 𝑖. We add 𝑣𝑗𝑣𝑖to the augmentation plan 𝐹, assigning it to the endpoint 𝑣𝑖and value +2.
We note that 𝑣𝑖and 𝑣𝑗must be on the same side of the cut, since an even number can’t be equal to
an odd number. This process never adds the same edge to 𝐹more than once, since 𝑣𝑗’s color is never
changed again, and 𝑣𝑖’s color is only increased from now on.
By Lemma 8, we can execute the above augmentation plan, which modifies 𝑓to have the desired prop-
erties. We note that since each edge starts out with the value 2, and since executing an augmentation
plan only changes weights by +1 or −1, this does not result in edge weights outside of {1,2,3}.
The above variation of the 1-2-3 conjecture was already known to be true, but the existing proof uses
a completely different technique. The first proof was seen in [7] and a very short proof can be found
in [6].
In the next result, we do not have the vertex weighting ℎat our disposal to ensure that all the even
vertex weights are on the left side of the cut. Instead, we notice that edges on the right side of the cut
only ever have their weight changed by +1, and never by −1, so even if we initialized some of those
weights to 1, we would not end up with weights outside of {1,2,3}.
Corollary 5. If a nice graph 𝐺has a maximum cut 𝐶such that all components on the right side of the
cut have an even number of vertices, then there is an edge weighting 𝑓∶𝐸(𝐺) →{1,2,3} such that the
induced vertex weighting is a proper coloring.
Proof. Let 𝐺be a nice graph, and let 𝐶be a maximum cut such that all components on the right side
of the cut have an even number of vertices. Let 𝑆,𝑇be the left and right side of 𝐶respectively.
By the assumption that each component in the induced subgraph 𝐺[𝑇] has an even number of vertices,
we can pick a set 𝑃of edge-disjoint paths that pairs up the vertices of 𝐺[𝑇], and let 𝐷= ⋃𝑝∈𝑃𝑝be the
edges of those paths. We can now initialize the edge weights of 𝐺: for each edge in 𝐷, we initialize
its weight to 1. All other edges are initialized with the weight 2. Initializing the edge weights in this
way results in the vertex weights in 𝑆being initialized to even weights, and the vertex weights in 𝑇
being initialized to odd weights.
By the same argument as in Corollary 4, the result follows.
The above result has a somewhat unsatisfying condition on the right-hand-side of the maximum cut.
However, by improving how we construct the augmentation goal, we can obtain a different condition
on the cut. As we will see in Section 4, this alternate condition will turn out to be quite powerful —
in fact, it will be the main result of of Section 3.
Theorem 1. If a nice graph has a maximum cut whose removal results in no more than two components,
then the graph is not a counterexample to the 1-2-3 conjecture.
Proof. Let 𝐺be a nice graph, and let 𝐶be a maximum cut with 𝑆,𝑇being the left and right sides of
𝐶respectively. By assumption, both 𝐺[𝑆] and 𝐺[𝑇] are connected. We pick the cut such that 𝑇has
at least two vertices, which is always possible since 𝐺is nice (because you can swap 𝑆and 𝑇). This
implies that all vertices in 𝑇have a neighbour that is also in 𝑇.
Pick a set 𝑃of edge-disjoint paths that pairs up all vertices in 𝑇(except for one vertex if there is an
odd number of vertices in 𝑇) using edges from 𝐺[𝑇]. Let 𝐷be the edges of those paths. We now
Page 16 of 25
==PAGE:20==
The 1-2-3 conjecture
Alice Ryhl
initialize the edge weights in 𝐺by using the weight 1 for edges in 𝐷, and the weight 2 for all other
edges. Initializing the edge weights in this way results in the vertex weights in 𝑆being initialized to
even weights, and the vertex weights in 𝑇are initialized to odd weights, with at most one exception.
We will now construct an augmentation goal that will modify the vertex weights in a way such that
all color conflicts are resolved. Afterwards, we will show that there exists an augmentation plan that
achieves the augmentation goal.
Let 𝑠1,…,𝑠|𝑆| be the vertices of 𝑆and 𝑡1,…,𝑡|𝑇| be the vertices of 𝑇. If 𝑇has a vertex of even weight,
then we assume that it is 𝑡|𝑇|. We assume that the vertices of 𝑆are ordered so that, except for 𝑠1,
they always have a neighbour in 𝑆with a smaller index. We will now construct an augmentation
goal by processing the vertices in the order 𝑠1,𝑡1,…,𝑡|𝑇|,𝑠2,…,𝑠|𝑆|. When we process a vertex, we
want to choose the value for the augmentation goal at the vertex so that it has no color conflicts with
previously processed vertices. While processing a vertex, we define 𝑘to be the number of neighbours
on the same side of the cut that have already been processed. There are three cases:
• If we are processing 𝑠1, then there are no previously processed vertices, so we do nothing. The
augmentation goal takes the value 0 at 𝑠1.
• If we are processing a vertex 𝑡𝑖∈𝑇, then we let the augmentation goal at 𝑡𝑖be a value chosen
from {0,2,4,…,2𝑘} that avoids all conflicts with previously processed vertices. To see that
choosing such a value is always possible, there are two cases: If 𝑡𝑖has an odd weight, then it
can only conflict with its 𝑘previous neighbours on the same side, so 𝑘+ 1 choices are enough
to avoid any conflicts. If 𝑡𝑖has an even weight, then it only needs to avoid the color of 𝑠1, which
is possible since 𝑡𝑖has at least one neighbour in 𝑇, so 𝑘≥1 meaning that there are at least two
possible choices.
• If we are processing a vertex 𝑠𝑖∈𝑆with 𝑖≥2, then we let the augmentation goal at 𝑠𝑖be chosen
from the set {−2𝑘,…,−2,0,2,…,2𝑘} in a way such that it avoids conflicts with all previously
processed vertices. This is possible because we ordered the vertices of 𝑆in a way that guarantees
𝑘≥1, and each vertex needs only avoid the 𝑘previously processed neighbours of 𝑆, as well as
the vertex 𝑡|𝑇|. This means that there are at most 𝑘+1 colors we must avoid, and we have 2𝑘+1
possible colors to choose from, so it is always possible to pick an unused color.
It should be clear that the augmentation goal constructed above avoids all color conflicts. Next, we
will construct an augmentation plan. When doing this, we only assign edges to the endpoint with the
larger index. This ensures that each vertex has 𝑘edges that can be assigned to it, without using any
edge twice. Then, for vertices whose augmentation goal is non-negative, we pick some of the 𝑘edges
and give them the value +2, so that they sum to the augmentation goal. When the augmentation goal
is negative, we do the same but use the value −2 instead. In either case, 𝑘edges is enough because
the goal is at most 2𝑘in absolute value. Following this process results in an augmentation plan for
the augmentation goal.
By Lemma 8, the result follows. We note that edges in 𝐺[𝑇] are only ever modified by +1 when
executing the plan, so it is not a problem that 𝐺[𝑇] uses both 1 and 2 when initializing the edges.
The rest of the edges can be modified by both +1 and −1, but they were initialized to 2, so those
weights also stay within {1,2,3} as desired.
Finally, we can show that complete 𝑘-partite graphs are not counterexamples.
Corollary 6. Complete 𝑘-partite nice graphs are not counterexamples to the 1-2-3 conjecture.
Proof. If 𝑘= 2, then we are done by Lemma 3, so assume that 𝑘≥3. Let 𝑆,𝑇be a partition that
induced a maximum cut of the graph. If one of the sides contains two vertices 𝑢,𝑣from different
Page 17 of 25
==PAGE:21==
The 1-2-3 conjecture
Alice Ryhl
classes, then that side is connected, because there’s an edge between 𝑢and 𝑣, and all other vertices
are connected to at least one of 𝑢or 𝑣. Therefore, if this happens on both sides, then we are done
by Theorem 1. Assume that 𝑆has only vertices from a single class. Since 𝑘≥3, 𝑇must have vertices
from at least two classes, and hence 𝑇is connected and has |𝑇| ≥2.
We now initialize an edge weighting such that vertices in 𝑆have even weights and vertices in 𝑇have
odd weights, with at most one exception in 𝑇. This is possible by the same argument as in Theorem 1.
Next, we pick any ordering 𝑡1,…,𝑡|𝑇| of 𝑇such that if 𝑇has a vertex initialized to an even weight,
then it is 𝑡|𝑇|. Since 𝑇is connected and has at least two vertices, then 𝑡|𝑇| has a neighbour in 𝑇with
a smaller index.
At this point, we need to process the vertices of 𝑇in the given order. We notice that every vertex of 𝑆
has been initialized with twice its degree as its weight, and since the 𝑘-partite graph is complete, this
means that every vertex of 𝑆has been initialized to the same weight. This allows us to process the
vertices of 𝑇in exactly the same way as in Theorem 1, since when processing 𝑡|𝑇|, we only need to
avoid one color, even if there are many neighbours in 𝑆that we need to avoid having a conflict with.
By the same arguments as in Theorem 1 we are now done by Lemma 8.
In the proof for Lemma 6, we do not actually need to use Theorem 1 to handle the case where both
sides are connected. Instead, each class in 𝑆can be handled like Theorem 1 handles individual vertices
of 𝑆, since the vertices of the same class have the same weight and the same neighbours.
3.2
Comparison to 1-2-3-4 paper
The proofs in Section 3.1 are my own results, but they are based on ideas from the paper by Ralph
Keusch [11], and our Lemma 8 is a reformulation of Lemma 2 from that paper. In this section we
will see a sketch of Ralph Keusch’s paper on the 1-2-3-4 conjecture [11]. In the next section, we
will also see rough sketch of how it is used in his preprint that proves the full 1-2-3 conjecture [10].
The contents of this section will explain [11] in my own words, using the augmentation goal/plan
framework that I introduced previously.
To prove that the weights {1,2,3,4} are sufficient, Keusch introduces the following lemma.
Lemma 9 (Lemma 3 in [11]). Let 𝐺be a graph with |𝑉(𝐺)| ≥3, let 𝑣0 ∈𝑉(𝐺) be a vertex of degree
|𝑉(𝐺)|−1, and let 𝑔∶𝑉(𝐺) →ℕbe such that for each edge 𝑢𝑣∈𝐸(𝐺[𝑉(𝐺)⧵{𝑣0}]), it holds 𝑔(𝑢) ≠𝑔(𝑣).
Then there exists an edge weighting 𝑓∶𝐸(𝐺) →{0,1,2} that induces a vertex weighting 𝑔′ ∶𝑉(𝐺) →ℕ
such that
• 𝑓(𝑢𝑣) ∈{0,1}, whenever 𝑣0 ∉{𝑢,𝑣} and 𝑔(𝑢)+𝑔(𝑣) is even,
• 𝑓(𝑢𝑣) = 0, whenever 𝑣0 ∉{𝑢,𝑣} and 𝑔(𝑢)+𝑔(𝑣) is odd,
• 𝑔′(𝑣) ∈{0,2} for all 𝑣∈𝑉(𝐺)⧵{𝑣0}, and
• 𝑔(𝑢)+𝑔′(𝑢) ≠𝑔(𝑣)+𝑔′(𝑣) for each edge 𝑢𝑣∈𝐸(𝐺).
The above lemma is taken almost verbatim from [11]; it has only been modified to use our symbol
conventions, and we will not prove it here. The proof is by case analysis. However, we can give some
motivation for it. The main idea is the same as the proof for Corollary 5 — we want every vertex
on the left to be initialized with an even weight, and every vertex on the right to be initialized with
an odd weight. However, if the right-hand-side has an odd number of vertices, then it is impossible
to achieve this goal because the sum of vertex weights is always even. The paper [11] avoids this
by choosing a special vertex 𝑣0 that is not part of the maximum cut, and using Lemma 9 to “absorb”
Page 18 of 25
==PAGE:22==
The 1-2-3 conjecture
Alice Ryhl
the parity issue by having it use an odd weight when the right side of the cut has an odd number of
vertices.
Let us go into more details. Before using Lemma 9, the paper constructs an edge weighting with the
properties described below.
Lemma 10. Let 𝐺be a graph and 𝐶a maximum cut in 𝐺. Let 𝑣∈𝑉(𝐺) be a vertex on the right side of
the cut. There exists an edge weighting 𝑓∶𝐸(𝐺) →{2,3} such that the induced vertex weights are even
for all vertices on the left side of 𝐶, and odd for all vertices on the right of 𝐶, with the exception of 𝑣, which
may have any parity.
Proof. Since 𝐶is a maximal cut, the graph with the cut as edge set and 𝑉(𝐺) as vertex set is connected,
so we may pick a spanning tree 𝑇⊆𝐶of that graph and root it at 𝑣. We now construct our edge
weighting in the following way: The weight of any edge not in 𝑇will be 2. Then, we go through
all vertices of 𝑇in a bottom-up order. When we process a vertex (other than 𝑣), then the edge it
shares with its parent in 𝑇will be the only incident edge that has not yet been given a weight, and we
assign that edge the weight 2 or 3 such that the vertex being processed gets a weight with the right
parity. When we reach the root, we do nothing. Since the root may have any parity, the resulting
edge weighting has the desired property.
We can combine the above two lemmas to construct a situation where we can use Lemma 8.
Theorem 2 (Theorem 1 in [11]). Let 𝐺be a nice graph. Then there exists an edge weighting 𝑓∶𝐸(𝐺) →
{1,2,3,4} that induces a vertex weighting that is also a coloring.
Proof. We only sketch the proof. Assume that 𝐺is a nice connected graph. Let 𝑣0 ∈𝑉(𝐺) be any
vertex whose removal does not disconnect 𝐺, and let 𝐺′ be the graph you get after removing 𝑣0 from
𝐺(note that since 𝐺is nice, 𝐺′ has at least two vertices). Let 𝐻be the subgraph of 𝐺induced by 𝑣0
and its neighbours. Let 𝐶be a maximum cut of 𝐺′ and let 𝑣1 ∈𝑉(𝐺′) ∩𝑉(𝐻) be a vertex that is a
neighbour of 𝑣0 and on the right side of 𝐶. (If 𝑣0 only has neighbours on the left side of 𝐶, then swap
the left and right sides.) Label the remaining vertices with 𝑣2,…,𝑣|𝑉(𝐺)| such that 𝑣1,…,𝑣ℎare the
neighbours of 𝑣0, where ℎis the number of neighbours of 𝑣0.
First, we use Lemma 10 on 𝐺′ with 𝑣1 being the special vertex. Then, we expand that edge weighting
to all of 𝐺by assigning weights to the remaining edges. This is done by choosing the edge weight of
𝑣0𝑣1 from {1,2} to give 𝑣1 an odd weight, and using the weight 2 on any remaining edges. The final
edge weighting of 𝐺is such that everything on the left side of 𝐶has an even weight and everything
on the right side has an odd weight.
Then, we partially construct an augmentation goal on 𝑣1,…,𝑣ℎthat has no conflicts between any two
vertices from 𝑣1,…,𝑣ℎ, in the same way as in Corollary 5. Afterwards, we use Lemma 9 to update the
edge weights in 𝐻to also resolve color conflicts between 𝑣0 and 𝑣1,…,𝑣ℎ, without introducing new
color conflicts between 𝑣1,…,𝑣ℎ. Finally, we construct the rest of the augmentation goal by processing
𝑣ℎ+1,…,𝑣|𝑉(𝐺′)| like in Corollary 5.
The above works as long as ℎ≠1, since Lemma 9 requires |𝐻| ≥3. The case ℎ= 1 is handled
separately (but it is an easy case).
In our previous sections, we had to ensure that vertices had a weight of the right parity using only
edges outside the cut. This is because Lemma 8 can both add and subtract 1 from edge weights in the
cut, which forces us to use the weight 2 for every edge in the cut. However, when we allow the edge
weight 4, we gain the ability to use the edge weight 3 inside the cut before using Lemma 8.
Page 19 of 25
==PAGE:23==
The 1-2-3 conjecture
Alice Ryhl
3.3
Comparison to 1-2-3 preprint
In Section 3.2 we saw how Ralph Keusch uses Lemma 8 to prove that the conjecture is true with the
weights {1,2,3,4}, and in Section 3.1, we saw how I was able to use the same lemma to prove partial
results on the 1-2-3 conjecture. In this section, we will see how Ralph Keusch was able to use the same
lemma to prove the full 1-2-3 conjecture. The contents of this section are based on Ralph Keusch’s
2023 preprint [10], and are explained in my own words. We will only see a sketch of the proof (the
preprint is almost as long as this entire thesis). The preprint has not yet been published or undergone
peer review.
Before taking a maximum cut of the graph, the preprint uses the following lemma:
Lemma 11 (Lemma 2 in [10]). Any connected graph 𝐺has a partition of 𝑉(𝐺) into two non-empty sets
𝐴,𝐵such that 𝐴is an independent set and such that any two vertices are connected using only edges from
the cut induced by the partition 𝐴,𝐵.
Proof. Let 𝑣1,…,𝑣𝑛be an ordering of 𝑉(𝐺) such that all vertices have a neighbour with a smaller
index (except for 𝑣1). We will now construct 𝐴and 𝐵by incrementally assigning each vertex to one of
them: we process the vertices in order by their indices, assigning a vertex to 𝐴if it has no neighbours
in 𝐴, otherwise assigning it to 𝐵.
It should be clear that the resulting set 𝐴is independent. To see that the cut edges are connected,
we note that if 𝑣𝑖is added to 𝐵, then that’s because 𝑣𝑖is connected to 𝐴, and if 𝑣𝑖is added to 𝐴, then
all previous neighbours of 𝑣𝑖are in 𝐵, so since 𝑣𝑖has at least one previous neighbour in 𝐵, 𝑣𝑖remains
connected to the previous vertices via the cut edges in this case as well.
The preprint uses Lemma 11 to split the graph into an independent set 𝐴and the rest of the graph
𝐵. Then, it takes a maximum cut of 𝐵with 𝑆,𝑇being the left and right side respectively. Afterwards,
using the familiar Lemma 8, we resolve all color conflicts within 𝑆and within 𝑇, but without resolving
conflicts across the maximum cut (at this point, vertices in both 𝑆and 𝑇have even weights). After-
wards, the edges between 𝐴and 𝐵are utilized such that vertices in 𝐴are given even weights, and
such that vertices in 𝑆,𝑇are given weights equivalent to 1,3 modulo 4 respectively.
Actually ironing out all of the details in the above takes a long time, and there are also some special
cases that need to be handled when 𝑆or 𝑇have an odd number of vertices. However, the previous
paragraph describes the overall strategy.
Page 20 of 25
==PAGE:24==
The 1-2-3 conjecture
Alice Ryhl
4
Dense graphs
The density of a graph is measured using its minimum degree. Specifically, if a graph has 𝑛vertices and
a minimum degree of 𝑐𝑛, then 𝑐is its density. There is a paper from 2018 titled “The 1-2-3-conjecture
holds for dense graphs” [16], which proves the 1-2-3 conjecture for sufficiently large graphs with
𝑐> 0.99985. In this section, I will reduce that constant by proving the 1-2-3 conjecture for all graphs
with 𝑐≥4/5. All results in the rest of the thesis are my own.
In Section 3, our main result was that, if removing the maximum cut does not result in more than two
components, then the graph is not a counterexample to the 1-2-3 conjecture. Based on this, we may
conjecture that very dense graphs are guaranteed to satisfy this. Certainly, the complete graphs do.
Motivated by this, we pose the following question:
Question 2. What is the smallest real number 𝑐such that all graphs with minimum degree at least 𝑐𝑛
have a maximum cut whose removal results in only two components?
Generally, upper bounds for this question can be obtained by assuming that one side is disconnected
and using counting arguments to derive inequalities on 𝑐. However, the precise details of how the
counting argument is carried out matters a lot and affects which upper bound you get. As we will see
shortly, the answer is 𝑐= 4/5, but before finding the true upper bound, we had found upper bounds
of 𝑐≤8/9 and 𝑐≤6/7.
As another point of note, in Question 2 we only ask whether the graph has at least one maximum
cut with the property, but it turns out that the answer does not change if you require it to hold for
all maximum cuts in the graph. Additionally, it turns out that we can generalize the result to any
unfriendly cut, which is a cut where no vertex has more neighbors on the same side of the cut, than it
has neighbours on the other side of the cut.
My proof of the upper bound is as follows:
Lemma 12. If a graph with 𝑛vertices has a minimum degree of at least 4𝑛/5, then all unfriendly cuts
are such that both sides of the cut are connected.
Proof. Let 𝐺be a graph with 𝑛vertices and minimum degree at least 4𝑛/5, and let 𝐴,𝐵be an unfriendly
partition of the graph. Let 𝑎be the number of vertices in 𝐴. Vertices in 𝐴have at least 4𝑛/5 neighbours,
and since the cut is unfriendly, at least half of those vertices’ neighbours are in 𝐵. It follows that 𝐵has
at least 2𝑛/5 vertices, which implies that 𝑎≤3𝑛/5.
Let 𝐻be a component of 𝐺[𝐵], and let 𝑠be the number of vertices in 𝐻. Pick an arbitrary vertex
𝑣∈𝑉(𝐻). The neighbours of 𝑣are either in 𝐴or other vertices of 𝐻, so 𝑣has at most 𝑎+ (𝑠−1)
neighbours. Since 𝑣has at least 4𝑛/5 neighbours, it follows that 4𝑛/5 < 𝑎+𝑠. Combining that with
the previous inequality, we get that 8𝑛/5−3𝑛/5 < 2(𝑎+𝑠)−𝑎, which simplifies to (𝑛−𝑎)/2 < 𝑠.
We have now shown that all components of 𝐺[𝐵] have strictly more than half of the vertices of 𝐵.
Thus, 𝐺[𝐵] must be a connected graph. By symmetry, 𝐺[𝐴] is also connected.
We can combine this with Theorem 1 to apply it to the 1-2-3 conjecture.
Corollary 7. If a graph with 𝑛vertices has a minimum degree of at least 4𝑛/5, then it is not a counter-
example to the 1-2-3 conjecture.
Proof. We will show that a maximum cut is always also an unfriendly cut. Assume that a cut is not
unfriendly. Then, it has a vertex with strictly more neighbours on its own side than it has on the other
Page 21 of 25
==PAGE:25==
The 1-2-3 conjecture
Alice Ryhl
side of the cut. Moving that vertex to the other side of the cut leads to a larger cut. Thus, the cut is
not maximum.
By Lemma 12 and Theorem 1, the result follows.
4.1
Lower bound
Previously, we saw how to prove a upper bound for Question 2. In this section, we will see an lower
bound. This will fully answer Question 2 with 𝑐= 4/5.
To prove the lower bound, we will construct a sequence of graphs whose minimum degrees are ap-
proach 4𝑛/5. This means that for any 𝑐< 4/5, there will be a graph with minimum degree greater
than 𝑐𝑛, for which the conclusion of Lemma 12 does not hold.
To do this, we let 𝑇𝑘be any sequence of graphs where 𝑇𝑘is a (4𝑘−1)-regular graph with 6𝑘vertices.
Given this, we define the sequence 𝐺𝑘in the following way:
• Let 𝑆1 be a complete graph with 2𝑘vertices and add it to 𝐺𝑘.
• Let 𝑆2 be a complete graph with 2𝑘vertices and add it to 𝐺𝑘. It is disjoint from 𝑆1.
• Let 𝑇be isomorphic to 𝑇𝑘and add it to 𝐺𝑘. It is disjoint from 𝑆1 and 𝑆2.
• Add all edges between 𝑆= 𝑆1 ∪𝑆2 and 𝑇.
The resulting graph has 10𝑘vertices and is (8𝑘−1)-regular.
Lemma 13. The unique maximum cut of 𝐺𝑘is induced by 𝑆,𝑇.
Proof. We will show that 𝑆,𝑇is the unique maximum cut of 𝐺𝑘. To do that, let 𝐴,𝐵be another cut
of 𝐺𝑘. We can construct the cut 𝐴,𝐵by starting with 𝑆,𝑇, then moving 𝑡vertices in 𝑇from the right
side to the left side of the cut, then moving 𝑠1 vertices in 𝑆1 from left to right, and then moving 𝑠2
vertices in 𝑆2 from left to right. We may assume WLOG that 𝑡≤3𝑘. If we analyze the operations on
𝑆𝑖, then we may note that when we perform this operation, then the cut loses (6𝑘−𝑡)𝑠𝑖edges and
gains (𝑡+2𝑘−𝑠𝑖)𝑠𝑖edges. In total, the number of edges in the cut changes by (2𝑡−𝑠𝑖−4𝑘)𝑠𝑖.
There are two cases. Let us show that 𝑆,𝑇is a larger cut than 𝐴,𝐵in both cases.
If 𝑡≤2𝑘. In the first operation, each moved vertex loses at least 4𝑘edges in the cut (from 𝑆) and
gains at most 4𝑘−1 edges in the cut (from 𝑇), therefore the first operation reduces the total
number of edges unless 𝑡= 0. Since 2𝑡−𝑠𝑖−4𝑘< 0, the operations on 𝑆𝑖similarly reduce the
total number of edges unless 𝑠𝑖= 0. This is as desired.
If 𝑡> 2𝑘. In this case, the value of 𝑠𝑖that maximizes (2𝑡−𝑠𝑖−4𝑘)𝑠𝑖is 𝑠𝑖= 𝑡−2𝑘. Since the value of
𝑠𝑖does not otherwise affect the size of the cut, we may assume that 𝑠𝑖= 𝑡−2𝑘. However, then
the number of edges increases by at most 𝑡(6𝑘−𝑡)−4𝑘𝑡+2(2𝑡−(𝑡−2𝑘)−4𝑘)(𝑡−2𝑘), which
simplifies to (4𝑘−𝑡)(2𝑘−𝑡). That expression is always negative for 2𝑘< 𝑡≤3𝑘as desired.
Thus, 𝑆,𝑇is the unique maximum cut of 𝐺𝑘.
We can now show the lower bound.
Corollary 8. For all 𝑐< 4/5, there exists a graph with 𝑛vertices and minimum degree at least 𝑐𝑛where
no maximum cut is such that both sides are connected.
Page 22 of 25
==PAGE:26==
The 1-2-3 conjecture
Alice Ryhl
Proof. Let 𝑘∈ℕbe large enough that 1/10𝑘< 𝑐−4/5. Then if 𝑛= 10𝑘, it follows that 𝑐𝑛< 8𝑘−1.
However, the graph 𝐺𝑘has minimum degree 8𝑘−1, and the 𝑆side of its unique maximum cut is clearly
not connected. Thus, 𝐺𝑘has the desired property.
We have now found both a lower bound and upper bound for Question 2, so we conclude that 𝑐= 4/5.
4.2
Breaking the 4/5 barrier
In Section 4.1, we show that the minimum degree alone is not enough to prove the 1-2-3 conjecture
for graphs with minimum degree less than 4𝑛/5. However, that does not mean that the constant 4/5
is best possible for the 1-2-3 conjecture; in fact, according to the recent preprint that proves the full
1-2-3 conjecture [10], the best possible constant is 1/2 (due to K₂).
In this section, we will reduce the required density from 4/5 to 5/8 by imposing additional restrictions
on the graph. Specifically, we will also impose restrictions on the number of missing edges in the graph.
𝑎vertices
𝑏vertices
𝑡vertices
All edges missing
𝑠vertices
𝐻
A maximum cut
Figure 11: Illustration for the proof of Lemma 14. The illustration shows the two sides of a maximum
cut, and illustrates what happens if the right side has more than one component. The lower right
“blob” is the smallest component on the right side. The two other “blobs” have wavy lines because we
have not assumed them to be a single component.
Lemma 14. Let 𝑘∈ℝ+ and 𝜀∈(0,1] be fixed. Let 𝐺be a graph with 𝑛vertices and 𝑚edges, and assume
that 𝐺satisfies 𝑚≥1
2𝑛(𝑛−1) −𝑘𝑛2−𝜀and 𝛿≥5𝑛/8 + 8𝑘𝑛1−𝜀/3. Then, 𝐺is not a counterexample to
the 1-2-3 conjecture.
Proof. Let 𝐺be a graph that satisfies the conditions of this lemma, and let 𝐴,𝐵be the left and right
side of a maximum cut 𝐶in 𝐺, with 𝑎,𝑏the number of vertices in 𝐴and 𝐵respectively. Then, we get
𝑎,𝑏≤5𝑛/8. To see this, note that any vertex on one side has at least 𝛿/2 ≥3𝑛/8 neighbours on the
other side of the cut, which gives 3𝑛/8 ≤𝑎,𝑏.
Next, we will show that removing the cut edges results in only two components. To see this, assume
for contradiction that 𝐺[𝐵] is disconnected. Let 𝐻be the smallest component of 𝐺[𝐵] and let 𝑠be the
number of vertices in 𝐻. Let 𝑡= 𝑏−𝑠be the number of vertices in 𝐵but not in 𝐻. (See Figure 11.)
There are now two cases:
If 8𝑘𝑛1−𝜀/3 ≥𝑠. Then, the vertices of 𝐻can only have neighbours in 𝐴or 𝐻. Hence, vertices in 𝐻have
at most 𝑎+(𝑠−1) neighbours, but that is less than 5𝑛/8+8𝑘𝑛1−𝜀/3. This is a contradiction with
the minimum degree of the graph.
Page 23 of 25
==PAGE:27==
The 1-2-3 conjecture
Alice Ryhl
If 8𝑘𝑛1−𝜀/3 < 𝑠. In this case, 𝐺must be missing at least 𝑠𝑡edges because it is missing all edges between
𝐻and the rest of 𝐵. However, 𝑠𝑡> (8𝑘𝑛1−𝜀/3) ⋅(𝑏−8𝑘𝑛1−𝜀/3) = 8𝑘𝑛1−𝜀𝑏/3 −64
9 𝑘2𝑛2−2𝜀≥
(8𝑘𝑛1−𝜀/3) ⋅(3𝑛/8) −64
9 𝑘2𝑛2−2𝜀= 𝑘𝑛2−𝜀−64
9 𝑘2𝑛2−2𝜀> 𝑘𝑛2−𝜀. This is contradiction because 𝐺
is missing at most 𝑘𝑛2−𝜀edges.
We get a contradiction in either case. Thus, both sides remain connected after removing the edges of
a maximum cut. The result follows by Theorem 1.
Page 24 of 25
==PAGE:28==
The 1-2-3 conjecture
Alice Ryhl
References
[1]
Louigi Addario-Berry, Ketan Dalal, Colin McDiarmid, Bruce A. Reed, and Andrew Thomason.
“Vertex-colouring edge-weightings”. In: Combinatorica 27 (2007), pp. 1–12. doi: 10.1007/
s00493-007-0041-6.
[2]
Louigi Addario-Berry, Ketan Dalal, and Bruce A. Reed. “Degree constrained subgraphs”. In:
Discrete Applied Mathematics 156.7 (2008), pp. 1168–1174. doi: 10.1016/j.dam.2007.05.
059.
[3]
Julien Bensmail, Hervé Hocquard, Dimitri Lajou, and Éric Sopena. “A proof of the multiplicative
1-2-3 conjecture”. In: Combinatorica (2023), pp. 1–19. doi: 10.1007/s00493-023-00003-0.
[4]
Gerard J. Chang, Changhong Lu, Jiaojiao Wu, and Qinglin Yu. “Vertex-coloring Edge-weightings
of Graphs”. In: Taiwanese Journal of Mathematics 15.4 (2011), pp. 1807–1813. doi: 10.11650/
twjm/1500406380.
[5]
Andrzej Dudek and David Wajc. “On the complexity of vertex-coloring edge-weightings”. In:
Discrete Mathematics & Theoretical Computer Science 13.3 (2011), pp. 45–50. doi: 10.46298/
dmtcs.548.
[6]
Jarosław Grytczuk. “From the 1-2-3 conjecture to the Riemann hypothesis”. In: European Jour-
nal of Combinatorics 91 (2021), p. 103213. doi: 10.1016/j.ejc.2020.103213.
[7]
Maciej Kalkowski. “A note on the 1,2-conjecture”. PhD thesis. 2009.
[8]
Maciej Kalkowski, Michał Karoński, and Florian Pfender. “Vertex-coloring edge-weightings:
Towards the 1-2-3-conjecture”. In: Journal of Combinatorial Theory, Series B 100.3 (2010),
pp. 347–349. doi: 10.1016/j.jctb.2009.06.002.
[9]
Michał Karoński, Tomasz Łuczak, and Andrew Thomason. “Edge weights and vertex colours”.
In: Journal of Combinatorial Theory, Series B 91.1 (2004), pp. 151–157. doi: 10.1016/j.jctb.
2003.12.001.
[10]
Ralph Keusch. “A Solution to the 1-2-3 Conjecture”. In: arXiv preprint (2023). doi: 10.48550/
arXiv.2303.02611.
[11]
Ralph Keusch. “Vertex-coloring graphs with 4-edge-weightings”. In: Combinatorica (2023),
pp. 1–8. doi: 10.1007/s00493-023-00027-6.
[12]
Ben Seamone. “The 1-2-3 Conjecture and related problems: a survey”. In: arXiv preprint (2012).
doi: 10.48550/arXiv.1211.5122.
[13]
Carsten Thomassen, Yezhou Wu, and Cun-Quan Zhang. “The 3-flow conjecture, factors mod-
ulo 𝑘, and the 1-2-3-conjecture”. In: Journal of Combinatorial Theory, Series B 121 (2016),
pp. 308–325. doi: 10.1016/j.jctb.2016.06.010.
[14]
Bojan Vučković. “Multi-set neighbor distinguishing 3-edge coloring”. In: Discrete Mathematics
341.3 (2018), pp. 820–824. doi: 10.1016/j.disc.2017.12.001.
[15]
Tao Wang and Qinglin Yu. “On vertex-coloring 13-edge-weighting”. In: Frontiers of Mathematics
in China 3 (2008), pp. 581–587. doi: 10.1007/s11464-008-0041-x.
[16]
Liang Zhong. “The 1-2-3-conjecture holds for dense graphs”. In: Journal of Graph Theory 90.4
(2019), pp. 561–564. doi: 10.1002/jgt.22413.
Page 25 of 25
