==PAGE:1==
Can Forced Vibrations Transform the
Sound of New Violins?
Investigating perceptible and measurable
changes in a violin through artificial
vibration excitation
Master Thesis
DTU Electro
Department of Electrical and Photonics Engineering
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Can Forced Vibrations Transform the Sound of New Violins?
Investigating perceptible and measurable changes in a violin through artificial vibration excita-
tion
Master Thesis
July, 2023
By
Hella Dorothea Flocken
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the customary
bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Published by:
DTU, Department of Electrical and Photonics Engineering, Ørsteds Plads,
Building 352, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over five months at the Section for Acoustic Technology, De-
partment Electrical and Photonics Engineering, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU,
in partial fulfilment for the degree Master of Science in Engineering Acoustics.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of statistics and acoustic signal
processing.
Hella Dorothea Flocken - s212702
Signature
Date
ii
Can Forced Vibrations Transform the Sound of New Violins?
July 14, 2023
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
I would like to acknowledge the following individuals for their invaluable contributions and sup-
port throughout the completion of this work:
First, I would like to express my gratitude to my supervisors, Jonas Brunskog and Jeremy
Marozeau, whose guidance and expertise have been indispensable throughout the comple-
tion of this thesis.
I am particularly grateful to Jonas for his exceptional dedication and mentorship. His open and
easy communication style created an environment where I felt comfortable seeking advice and
discussing any aspect of the research process.
I would especially like to thank Jeremy for his pivotal role in putting me in touch with Claudia Fritz.
My sincere thanks are extended to John Heebøll for initiating this project, acquiring the violins,
and serving as a co-supervisor. His involvement and assistance have been instrumental in the
successful execution of this study.
I am immensely grateful to Claudia Fritz for her assistance in designing the playing tests and
providing invaluable insights based on her own experiences in conducting perceptual studies
with musicians. Her contributions greatly enhanced the quality of this research.
Special recognition goes to Luthier Birger Kulmbach for his meticulous work in setting up the
violins used in this study.
I would also like to express my appreciation to Luthier Frank Frobeen for generously sharing his
extensive experience and lending relevant literature at the beginning of the project. His insights
have been instrumental in shaping the direction of this research.
I am grateful to Matthias Lehmann for sharing his expertise on vibration dedamping in string
instruments, and providing insightful background knowledge and literature.
Finally, I would like to express my heartfelt thanks to my friends and family. In particular, I would
like to thank my dear friends Cathrina and Tyson for their emotional support and all the table
tennis and foosball breaks that provided much needed moments of respite and rejuvenation. I
would also like to thank Rahul, who was unable to be part of the table tennis breaks, but who,
despite being thousands of miles away, was always on hand to encourage me.
And last but not least, I am incredibly grateful to my partner, Jonathan, for his unwavering
support, understanding and love throughout this challenging journey, and all the hours he put
into proof reading earlier versions of this document.
Preface
This document is divided into a research paper in a format suitable for scientific publications
and a more extensive section condensing background and supplemental material of the thesis
work.
Can Forced Vibrations Transform the Sound of New Violins?
iii
==PAGE:6==
iv
Can Forced Vibrations Transform the Sound of New Violins?
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Paper
1
1
Background
9
1.1
Perceptual Evaluation of Violins . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
1.2
Bridge Admittance of Violins . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
1.3
Frequency Response Assurance Criterion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2
Experimental Design
11
2.1
Bridge Admittance Measurements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.2
Four-Week Vibration Excitation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.3
Playing Tests with Violinist . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3
Results
17
3.1
Bridge Admittance Measurement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.2
Playing Tests . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4
Further Discussion and Outlook
29
4.1
Bridge Admittance Measurements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.2
Playing Tests . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4.3
Final Remarks
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
Bibliography
31
Can Forced Vibrations Transform the Sound of New Violins?
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Can Forced Vibrations Transform the Sound of New Violins?
==PAGE:9==
Can Forced Vibrations Transform the Sound
of New Violins?
Abstract
This study examines the potential impact of forced vibrations on the sound quality of new vio-
lins. While it is widely believed that playing-in and regular playing improve sound characteristics,
the underlying reasons are not fully understood. Here, the aim is to investigate whether artifi-
cial excitation, similar to vibrations generated during playing, can contribute to perceptible and
measurable changes.
One of two similar unplayed new violins was subjected to controlled vibration excitation for four
weeks. Perceptual experiments with experienced violinists and bridge admittance measure-
ments were conducted before and after this period. The results of the playing tests indicate no
statistically significant differences in the rating scores for categories such as dynamic range,
richness of sound, ease of playing, experience and overall preference. Bridge admittance mea-
surements revealed modest changes in the acoustic properties of the violins. However, these
changes are likely to be impacted by environmental factors such as humidity and temperature
and too subtle to be perceptually relevant. Overall, the study suggests that the effects of forced
vibrations on the sound characteristics of new violins are limited, and that other factors may
play a more substantial role in the perceived improvement and superiority of older instruments.
Further research could explore environmental effects in more detail and test other types and
durations of vibration excitation.
Introduction
The notion that musical instruments improve in sound quality over time as they are played is a
widely held belief among musicians. It is commonly assumed that older instruments that have
been played extensively possess superior sound characteristics compared to new instruments.
However, the underlying reasons for this phenomenon are not yet fully understood. Several
factors may contribute to the perception of improved sound without necessarily altering the
intrinsic qualities of the instrument itself. The aim of this study is to investigate whether violins
undergo changes as a result of the vibrations they are exposed to during playing, independent
of other factors such as familiarisation with the instrument or the ageing of the wood.
Previous research has shed light on various aspects related to the evaluation of violin sound
quality and the effects of playing and ageing on violins. Double-blind experiments have shown
that experienced violinists are unable to distinguish between new and old instruments, and in
fact often prefer high-quality new violins over renowned Stradivarius instruments [1][2]. These
findings challenge the notion that age alone, which is often correlated with the total amount of
time an instrument has been played, determines the superior sound of older violins. In addition,
studies have examined the effects of playing and ageing on specific violins, with mixed results.
While some experiments have demonstrated potential changes in the mechanical properties
of violin wood [3] and the frequency spacing of signature modes [4] due to vibration, other
investigations have reported minimal or no significant changes in sound characteristics over
time [5].
1
==PAGE:10==
The main objective of this study is to determine whether artificial vibration excitations, resem-
bling the vibrations generated during playing, can induce perceptible and measurable changes
in a new violin. By subjecting one of two similar unplayed new violins to a controlled vibration
excitation, and conducting perceptual experiments and bridge admittance measurements, this
research aims to investigate possible changes in acoustic properties resulting from the vibration
exposure. Findings from this research may be relevant to the maintenance of unplayed or rarely
played stringed instruments.
Methods
Two very similar, factory-built, new, unplayed violins were selected for the experiment and set
up by a luthier to be ready to be played. One of the violins was subjected to a four-week
vibrating excitation period, while the other violin remained stored in the same room as a control.
The excitation was a force excitation with a sawtooth sweep applied to the G-string corner of the
bridge. Before and after the vibrating period, bridge admittance measurements were conducted
to evaluate changes in the violins’ acoustic properties. In a perceptual study with experienced
violinists, it was tested whether differences could be identified when playing the violin. The
timeline of the experiments is shown in Figure 1.
Figure 1: Timeline of experiments throughout the study
Playing Tests
Participants
11 experienced violinists, aged between 20 and 76 were recruited from different armature or-
chestras and from the Royal Danish Academy of Music. One of them only participated in the sec-
ond playing test. All participants provided informed consent and all experiments were approved
by the Science-Ethics Committee for the Capital Region of Denmark (reference H-16036391).
Experimental Setup
The experiment took place in an IEC listening room to provide controlled acoustic conditions.
Dimmed lighting conditions were implemented to eliminate visual cues and prevent participants
from recognising any visual differences between the violins. One violin was labelled as the
reference violin and marked with a big green gift wrap around the scroll for easy identification.
The other violin was designated as the test violin. To gather additional ratings and assess the
consistency of ratings, the participants were informed that they were comparing two different
test violins to the reference violin. In reality, they played the same test violin twice, with a slight
detuning and removal of the shoulder rest between the two evaluations.
The participants started by tuning both violins, placing shoulder rests, and fine-tuning the instru-
ments. Specific playing tasks were assigned for different rating categories, allowing participants
to focus on particular aspects of the violin. A description of the playing tasks and related ques-
tions is given in Table 1. The playing tasks for the categories dynamic range (Dynamic) and
Richness are the same as in [6].
The participants played the tasks on the reference violin first and then repeated them on the
test violin before providing their rating for the respective category. They were allowed to return
to the reference violin and repeat the task but always started with the reference and ended with
playing the test violin before they gave their rating. For rating, a continuous scale ranging from
−5 to 5 was used, with 0 indicating no perceived difference between the test and reference violin
2
==PAGE:11==
in a given category, and numbers above zero representing that the test violin is ranked higher
than the reference violin. To mitigate any bias related to the choice of the reference violin, the
reference and test violins were switched for half of the participants and the scores obtained from
these trials were inverted.
Table 1: Playing Tasks and Corresponding Rating Tasks used in the Playing Tests
Category
Rating Task
Playing Task
On a scale from −5 to 5, compared to
the reference violin, the test violin...
Dynamic
...has a wide dynamic range
Single notes in ppp and fff
Richness
...has a rich sound
Chromatic scale on the G string
Ease
...responds easily to my articulation
First ten bars of Mozart Violin
Concerto No. 3 in G major, K216
Experience
...has been played more
Preference
Which violin would you pay more for?
□reference □test
Bride Admittance Measurements
At multiple stages of the experiment, bridge admittance measurements were conducted follow-
ing the order in Figure 1. Each set of bridge admittance measurements consisted of 10 repeated
measurements for each violin. The violins were alternately measured, requiring repositioning
of the instrument between measurements. To measure the bridge admittance, force excitation
was applied at the G string corner of each violin using pink noise as the excitation signal, while
measuring the velocity at the E-String corner of the violin, using a laser vibrometer.
Prior to each bridge admittance measurement, the violins were tuned to their standard pitch.
The strings were dampened by inserting a card under the D and A strings to minimise string
resonances during the measurements.
To identify and quantify changes in the bridge admittance, the frequency assurance criterion
(FRAC) was employed [7]. This criterion allowed for the calculation of similarity between bridge
admittance curves obtained from different measurements. The FRAC takes values between 0
and 1 and is larger the more coherent the two compared frequency responses are. Additionally,
changes in the centre frequency and amplitude of characteristic modes were tracked to provide
further insights into alterations in the violins’ acoustic properties.
Results
Playing Tests
The results of the playing tests are shown in Figure 2. Figure 2a shows the scores from the
rating tasks for the different categories. The scores refer to the vibrated violin (violin A) as
the test violin. For the trials, where the unvibrated violin (violin B) was the test violin and the
vibrated violin reference, the scores were inverted. Comparing the scores before and after
the vibration period, it is noticeable that Richness, Ease and Experience were slightly higher
after the vibrating period. Looking at the scores split by reference violin in Figure 2a, it can
be observed that the scores in all categories were higher when B is the reference violin. This
difference seems to be larger than the before and after difference. These findings are statistically
analysed in the following, using linear mixed models.
3
==PAGE:12==
(a) Result scores from rating tasks split up into Be-
fore and After vibrating period and reference vio-
lin (A = vibrated violin and B = unvibrated violin).
(b) Preference responses before and after vibration
period
Figure 2: Responses from all categories of the
playing tests
For the scores given by the violinists in each cat-
egory, a bottom up linear mixed model analysis
was performed. The first and simplest model had
no fixed effect predictors and assumed that the
scores are solely determined by the random ef-
fect of the violinists.
Thereafter, models were
built for each of three possible fixed effects pre-
dictors: One for the before and after comparison
(Before/After), one for the choice of reference
violin (ViolinRef) and one for the measurement
repetition (Rep), since every participant performed
the experiment twice.
The AIC (Akaike Information Criterion) of each
model was calculated as a measure of model fit
with lower values indicating a better fit. All mod-
els, their AIC values and the P-values, indicating
if the respective predictor has a significant effect
on the score, are shown in Table 2. The P-values
represent the probability to obtain at least the ob-
served score if the respective effect is not a rele-
vant predictor.
In
all
rating
categories,
the
models
taking
ViolinRef as a fixed effect predictor had the low-
est AIC and indicated a significant effect of the
reference violin.
In neither of the categories,
Before/After was a significant predictor.
For
Ease, both the measurement repetition (Rep) and
reference violin (ViolinRef) were significant.
The question about the overall Preference led to
the response counts in Figure 2b. Before the vi-
bration period, 12 out of 20 responses were in
favour of violin B (unvibrated violin). After the vi-
bration period, 14 out of 22 Preference ratings
favoured the vibrated violin instead. Taking into
account only the answers of the 10 violinists who
took part in both playing tests, 60% preferred the
vibrated violin. Before the vibration period it was
40%.However, a Chi-squared test showed that
the trend in favour of the vibrated violin is not sig-
nificant (P = 0.22).
4
==PAGE:13==
Table 2: Mixed models analysis of subjective ratings in different categories
Model
Category
Fixed effect
P-Value
AIC
Dy0
Dynamic
−
189.46
Dy1
ViolinRef
0.0266 (*)
184.41
Dy2
Rep
0.965
190.69
Dy3
Before/After
0.507
190.21
Ri0
Richness
−
183.80
Ri1
ViolinRef
0.0269 (*)
178.74
Ri2
Rep
0.177
183.29
Ri3
Before/After
0.550
184.76
Ea0
Ease
−
203.22
Ea1
ViolinRef
0.001 (**)
194.34
Ea2
Rep
0.0294 (*)
199.18
Ea3
Before/After
0.459
203.428
Ex0
Experience
−
185.58
Ex1
ViolinRef
0.0427 (*)
180.90
Ex2
Rep
0.842
186.93
Ex3
Before/After
0.417
186.28
Bridge Admittance Measurements
Figure 3: Mean bridge admittance of the vibrated
and unvibrated violin in all four sets of
measurements.
The mean bridge admittance from each set of
measurements are shown in Figure 3. The
yellow line shows the measurement directly
after the vibration period (M3). From visual in-
spection it can be seen that the mode around
790 Hz is slightly shifted towards lower fre-
quencies in the vibrated violin.
The frequency response assurance criterion
(FRAC) was calculated for all comparisons of
two of the four measurement sets. Since each
set contains 10 measurements, each compar-
ison of two sets consists of 100 FRAC val-
ues from all possible combinations of com-
paring two frequency responses. The FRAC
values comparing different measurement sets
are grouped into comparisons across the vi-
bration period (M1 & M3, M2 & M3, M1 & M4
and M2 & M4) and comparisons of measure-
ment sets that have only a playing test hap-
pening in between (M1 & M2 and M3 & M4).
The distributions of FRAC values in these two
groups are presented for both violins in Fig-
ure 4.
A pairwise comparison of the groups applying a Wilcoxon Rank Sum Test shows that for both
violins, the similarity of the measurements across the vibration period is significantly lower than
the similarity of the measurements separated in time only by a playing test. The P-values of
the pairwise comparisons are listed in Table 3.
5
==PAGE:14==
Figure 4: Pairwise comparisons of FRAC distribu-
tions between measurement sets across
the vibrating period and across only a play-
ing test.
The effect size is estimated by calculating the
Hodges-Lehman estimator which is the me-
dian of all possible pairwise differences be-
tween the groups [8]. A 95 % confidence in-
terval is calculated from a bootstrap distribu-
tion of 1000 Hodges-Lehmann estimators.
Figure 5 shows the FRAC distributions for all
combinations of measurement sets without
grouping them in comparisons across vibra-
tion period and across playing test only. This
view allows a more precise insight into which
measurement sets differ the most from each
other, i.e. the FRAC values are the smallest.
The FRAC comparisons that contain M3, the
measurement directly after the vibration pe-
riod, are the lowest. A closer look at shifts
in frequency and amplitude of characteristic
modes showed that the frequencies vary less
than 3% and the amplitudes less than 4 dB
between the measurement sets.
Table 3: Pairwise comparisons of measurement sets across the vibrating period and across only a play-
ing test: P-Values from a Wilcoxon Rank Sum Test and 95 % confidence interval of Hodges-
Lehmann estimator as a measure of effect size.
FRAC comparison
Violin(s)
P-Value
Hodges-Lehmann
Across vibrating period & playing test
A (vibrated)
< 0.0001 (***)
 −9.57+0.22
−0.22

· 10−2
B (unvibrated)
< 0.0001 (***)
 −6.97+0.07
−0.09

· 10−2
Across vibrating period
A & B
0.0003 (**)
 −3.56+0.06
−0.05

· 10−2
Across playing test
0.6525 (ns)
 4.9+0.6
−0.6

· 10−3
Figure 5: All FRAC comparisons of two measurement sets, each consisting of 100 combinations of indi-
vidual measurements
6
==PAGE:15==
Discussion
Bridge Admittance
Throughout the measurement period, the bridge admittance of both violins were subject to
changes. These were quantified by comparing the measurements taken at different times using
the frequency response assurance criterion.
When the FRAC data is split up into comparisons across vibration period and comparisons
across playing tests only, the FRAC values across vibration period are lower. This suggests
that the violins change more during the four-week vibration period compared to when there is
only one playing test between the measurements. This is true for both the non-vibrated and the
vibrated violin, with the difference being greater for the vibrated violin. If instead of grouping the
FRAC results, all FRAC comparisons of measurement sets are considered separately, it ap-
pears that the FRAC values that include the third measurement (M3, directly after the vibration
period) are the lowest. However, it is also noticeable that the FRAC comparisons with the fourth
measurement are again higher, i.e. the bridge admittance in the first and second measurement
are more similar to the fourth measurement than to the third. This suggests that the observed
change is temporary.
During the vibrating period, the violins were in a cellar room that was somewhat colder and more
humid than the room where the measurements were made and where the violins were usually
stored. It is possible that the change in bridge admittance is partly caused by the changes in
the environmental conditions like humidity and temperature. The measurements were taken
immediately after the end of the vibration period, so the wood of the violins may not yet have
adapted to the change in environment.
However, for the overall assessment of the observed changes, it is important to note that the fre-
quencies of characteristic modes fluctuated by less than 3 %. These small changes are smaller
than the just noticeable difference found in [9].
Perceptual Study
The only factor that had a significant influence on the rating in all categories in the playing test
was the choice of reference violin. The participants always rated the test violin higher than
the reference violin, regardless of which violin was the reference violin. Merely designating
one violin as the reference violin seems to have triggered a bias. Various explanations for
this phenomenon are possible. Possibly there was an expectation that the reference violin is
something ”basic” and the test violins are expected to be something special or better. In addition,
the choice of the scale from −5 to 5 in combination with the wording of the question could have
had an influence. The question was asked in such a way that if the test violin was rated stronger
in a category than the reference violin, a positive score was given and whenever the reference
violin was rated stronger, a negative score was given. It is possible that the test participants
were more reluctant to give negative scores than positive ones. The playing order of the violins
could also contribute to the bias towards the test violin. Because the reference violin was always
played first, the violinists were already more familiar with the task when playing the test violin
and may have felt more confident.
This aspect is also a possible explanation for why the test violins were judged easier to play in
the second repetition of the experiment than in the first. There were no statistically significant
differences in the before and after comparison. Although there was a small trend in favour of the
vibrated violin in the Preference and in the categories Richness, Ease and Experience, this was
not statistically significant and the effect was clearly smaller than the bias due to the selection
of the reference violin.
7
==PAGE:16==
Conclusion
This study investigated whether an artificial vibration stimulation simulating playing changes
the bridge admittance of a violin, and whether the changes can be perceived by experienced
violinists when playing. The results of the measurements showed that the bridge admittance
of a violin stimulated for four weeks changed more than that of a violin stored under the same
conditions. However, the difference is small compared to the absolute change of both violins,
so it is assumed that other environmental effects have a stronger influence. It could not be
clearly determined whether the difference is perceptible. There were no statistically significant
differences in the ratings by experienced violinists before and after the vibration period. A small
trend was overshadowed by a bias due to the choice of reference violin.
In future studies, environmental effects on bridge admittance could be investigated in more
detail to better isolate other effects. In addition, the type and duration of excitation could be
varied and the perceptual study could be repeated with a third violin as a general reference
violin and with more violinists.
References
[1]
Claudia Fritz et al. “Player preferences among new and old violins”. In: Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences 109.3 (2012), pp. 760–763.
[2]
Claudia Fritz et al. “Listener evaluations of new and Old Italian violins”. In: Proceedings
of the National Academy of Sciences 114.21 (2017), pp. 5395–5400.
[3]
DG Hunt and E Balsan. “Why old fiddles sound sweeter”. In: Nature 379 (1996), pp. 681–
681.
[4]
Carleen Maley Hutchins and OE Rodgers. “Methods of changing the frequency spacing
(delta) between the A1 and B1 modes of the violin”. In: Catgut Acoustical Society Journal
2.1 (1992), pp. 13–19.
[5]
Ra Inta, John Smith, and Joe Wolfe. “Measurement of the effect on violins of ageing and
playing”. In: Acoustics Australia 33.1-25 (2005).
[6]
Charalampos Saitis et al. “Effect of task constraints on the perceptual evaluation of vio-
lins”. In: Acta Acustica united with Acustica 101.2 (2015), pp. 382–393.
[7]
Randall J Allemang. “The modal assurance criterion–twenty years of use and abuse”. In:
Sound and vibration 37.8 (2003), pp. 14–23.
[8]
Myles Hollander, Douglas A Wolfe, and Eric Chicken. Nonparametric statistical methods.
John Wiley & Sons, 2015.
[9]
Claudia Fritz et al. “Perceptual thresholds for detecting modifications applied to the acous-
tical properties of a violin”. In: The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America 122.6
(2007), pp. 3640–3650.
8
==PAGE:17==
1
Background
1.1
Perceptual Evaluation of Violins
The field of violin acoustics research has over the decades (or even centuries) pursued an
important goal: To establish a link between subjective perceptual evaluations of violin qualities
and the precise attributes of its physical structure and dynamic behaviour. To achieve this,
researchers have explored the extraction of relevant information from measurements such as
admittance and radiation. However, a notable challenge arises from the ambiguity surrounding
the concept of ”quality” in relation to violins. Earlier studies attempting to relate measurable
characteristics to desired tonal properties have often relied on the subjective judgements of
authors, individual violinists or luthiers [10], [11], [12].
Over the past 20 years, the field of instrumental acoustic research has witnessed the integration
of more sophisticated methods adopted from the field of psychology.
Efforts are underway to enhance our comprehension of how musicians assess specific attributes
of violins. Evaluations of violins generally take place through either playing or listening tests.
However, conducting accurate listening tests poses a challenge due to the inability to separate
the musician from the musical instrument itself. The same violin can produce markedly different
sounds depending on the individual playing it.
To address this issue, blindfolded listening tests require not only the listeners but also the vio-
linists to be blinded [13]. A combined approach of listening and playing tests can be employed
by allowing different violinists to take turns playing while the rest of the group forms the listening
panel (e.g. [5]).
When evaluating violins in playing tests, it is sensible to design the task in a comparative man-
ner, as this approach is more economically viable. Additionally, it has been found beneficial for
participants to use their own bows during the evaluation process, as they typically use their own
bows when trying out new instruments. The bow effectively becomes an extension of the arm
while playing the violin, and an unfamiliar bow introduces additional variability into the process
[13].
It has been observed that violinists display higher levels of self-consistency and agreement with
each other when the evaluation tasks are more focused and clearly defined. By narrowing down
the objectives of the evaluation, violinists tend to provide more consistent responses and exhibit
a greater degree of consensus [6].
Can Forced Vibrations Transform the Sound of New Violins?
9
==PAGE:18==
1.2
Bridge Admittance of Violins
One simple measure that can capture the structural vibration of violins is the bridge admittance.
It assesses the bridge’s ability to transmit vibrations from the strings to the body of the instru-
ment, producing sound. The bridge admittance is a mechanical frequency response, defined
as the ratio between the velocity and force applied to the string position on the bridge.
To measure the bridge admittance, the bridge is typically hit with an impact hammer on the
G-string corner and the velocity is recorded on the opposite E-string corner. The strings are
damped during the measurement [14].
There are three strongly radiating modes below 700 Hz that characterise the sound of violins and
are often referred to as ”signature modes” of violins. The lowest mode is a Helmholtz-type cav-
ity mode around 280 Hz which is called the A0 mode. The plate modes B1−(centred typically
between 430 Hz and 480 Hz) and B1+ (between 510 Hz and 580 Hz) arise through bending of
top and back plate and radiate strongly through the f holes [12]. A visualisation of the vibrational
pattern from 3D laser vibrations scans can be found here.
Figure 1.1: Example
bridge
admittance
adopted
from [9]
In the bridge admittance curve the amplitude
of the A0 mode is much smaller than of the
B1 modes. An example for a typical bridge
admittance is shown in Figure 1.1.
Claudia Fritz conducted a study examining
the perceptual thresholds for alterations in
bridge admittance.
In this research, force
recordings were made while a violin was be-
ing played. The recordings were filtered with
modified bridge admittances with varying de-
grees of change.
Trained listeners demon-
strated the ability to detect changes ranging
from 3 to 5 dB in the amplitude of specific
modes. The just noticeable difference in fre-
quency changes was around 3-5% [9].
1.3
Frequency Response Assurance Criterion
To compare two frequency responses (H1 and H2), the Frequency Response Assurance Cri-
terion (FRAC) can be applied. FRAC is a symmetric measure of correlation, used to quantify
the similarity between two complex frequency responses that represent the same input-output
relationship [7]. As long as the comparison involves the same discrete frequencies in both fre-
quency responses, the FRAC can be evaluated across the entire or a limited frequency range
(ω1 to ω2).
FRAC =
Pω2
ω=ω1 H1(ω)H2∗(ω)
2
Pω2
ω=ω1 H1(ω)H1∗(ω) Pω2
ω=ω1 H2(ω)H2∗(ω)
(1.1)
The formula describes a squared hermitian scalar product of the two frequency responses,
normalised to 1. By multiplying corresponding frequency bins, it is for example sensitive to
differences in centre frequency and amplitude of characteristic peaks.
10
Can Forced Vibrations Transform the Sound of New Violins?
==PAGE:19==
2
Experimental Design
2.1
Bridge Admittance Measurements
Measurement Setup and Instrumentation
For the measurements, the violin was placed horizontally in a wooden frame in a position that
closely resembles the position in which it is played. The lower bout was held by two shoulder
rest feet and the neck rested on a slightly resilient rubber band, as it would typically rest on the
thumb when playing. Next to the wooden frame a vibration exciter was mounted on a tripod,
so that it was decoupled from the wooden frame in which the violin was lying. The exciter was
connected to the G-string corner of the violin bridge via a force transducer (B&K type 8230). A
laser vibrometer (Polytec type PDV-100) was pointed at the opposite E-string corner.
The force transducer was gently pushed against the bridge and a counter-pressure was created
by attaching a small mass (70 g) to the bridge with a cord and hanging it over the frame (Figure
2.1b). In this way, gravity was used to push the bridge against the force transducer so that
contact was not lost during the measurement. This step only served as stabilisation and testing
showed that the measured bridge admittance did not change significantly through this way of
attaching compared to a mere contact connection.
For the measurement of bridge admittance, the strings were damped with a card that was
clamped between the strings (under D and A string) as shown in Figure 2.1a.
To calibrate the vibrometer and force transducer, an accelerometer (B&K type 4344) and a
calibrator (B&K type 4294) were also required (see section 2.1). The signals from all transducers
(force transducer, accelerometer and laser vibrometer) were analysed with a FFT Frequency
Analyser (B&K Pulse type 3560), with Pulse Noise and Vibration Software (type 7700). Force
transducer and accelerometer were connected to the frequency analyser via a charge pre-
amplifier (Nexus 2692).
(a) Violin with dampened strings in measurement posi-
tion
(b) Connection between bridge and force transducer
Figure 2.1: Measurement setup
Can Forced Vibrations Transform the Sound of New Violins?
11
==PAGE:20==
In each measurement set, both violins were measured alternately 10 times. It was therefore
necessary to re-position the violins before each measurement. This involved aligning the vio-
lins so that the laser was centred on the E-string corner and the force transducer was stable
against the bridge with a gentle pressure.
During the measurement, the coherence was always being monitored. This ensured that the
measurement was reliable. If the force transducer slipped off during the measurement, the
coherence would drop. In these cases, the position of the violin was corrected and the mea-
surement repeated. The tuning of the violins was checked before each measurement.
It is common practice to excite the bridge with an impact hammer instead of a driving force for
bridge admittance measurements [14]. The shaker excitation was chosen in this study because
it was easier to obtain repeatable results. Pilot tests using an impact hammer (B&K type 8202)
revealed that its relatively large size compared to the violin bridge made it very difficult to strike
the bridge in precisely such a way that neither clipping nor multiple strokes of the hammer
occurred.
Another pilot test on a cello showed that the bridge admittance measured with the hammer
generally corresponds to the result with the driving force excitation. However, the continuous
contact to the force transducer adds some mass to the bridge, which may lead to a damping
effect at higher frequencies. This was not compensated for, but it is a bias that should be
constant over all measurements.
Calibration
Figure 2.2: Calibration setup
Before starting the bridge admittance mea-
surements, the force transducer and the laser
vibrometer had to be calibrated. For this pur-
pose, an additional accelerometer (B&K type
4393) was used. The accelerometer was cal-
ibrated with an electrodynamic vibration cali-
brator (B&K Type 4294) that produces a con-
stant harmonic motion at 159 Hz with a RMS
velocity of 10 mm/s.
After calibrating the accelerometer, the force
transducer and laser vibrometer were cali-
brated. For this purpose, the force transducer
was attached to the shaker.
A mass was
screwed onto the force transducer, to which
the accelerometer was glued with beeswax.
The laser vibrometer was aligned with the
back of the accelerometer.
In this setup
(shown in Figure 2.2), an excitation signal from the shaker can be measured simultaneously
by the force transducer, accelerometer and laser.
During broad band excitation, the ratio F/a was measured and the gain in the channel of the
force transducer was adjusted so that the measured apparent mass matched the known mass
(the block of mass plus the mass of the accelerometer).
To calibrate the laser, the velocity of the mass was measured simultaneously by the accelerom-
eter and the laser vibrometer. The gain for the vibrometer was adjusted until the laser sig-
nal matched the accelerometer signal meaning the inter-channel transfer function measured in
Pulse was 1.
12
Can Forced Vibrations Transform the Sound of New Violins?
==PAGE:21==
2.2
Four-Week Vibration Excitation
Figure 2.3: Setup for long-term vibration ex-
citation
Excessive violin playing was simulated by exciting
the bridge of the violin from the side, as shown in Fig-
ure 2.3. The point of excitation was the same as in
the bridge admittance measurements. This way, the
bridge was excited in the direction in which the most
force is applied when the strings are bowed [15]. To
ensure that the connection from the shaker to the vi-
olin bridge was reliable, the shaker was screwed to
a metal fixture. A fork-shaped piece of plastic and
some blue tac ensured that the connection to the
bridge did not slip.
In this setup, the violin was continuously excited for
four weeks. The other violin was kept in an open vi-
olin case right next to it, so that it was exposed to
the same environmental conditions such as temper-
ature and humidity at all times. Both violins were
tuned regularly during this period.
The excitation signal was a logarithmic sawtooth
sweep from 100 to 1000 Hz of 15 seconds duration.
The intention was to get a frequency excitation as
wide as possible. White or pink noise would also
have made this possible, but noise is very different
from a realistic excitation of a violin. When playing
the violin, no more than two strings are bowed at the
same time, which then vibrate including their over-
tones.
x(t) = A · sawtooth
 
2πf1T
ln(f2/f1)
"f2
f1
t/T
−1
#!
(2.1)
Figure 2.4: Power spectrum of logarithmic saw-
tooth sweep excitation
For this reason, a sweep seemed suitable to
gradually move through all frequencies. Using
a sawtooth as an excitation was motivated by
the fact that the idealised triangular vibration of
the string at the contact point with the bridge
corresponds to a sawtooth [16].
The signal
in Equation (2.1) is constructed from a normal
sawtooth wave using an exponentially rising fre-
quency f(t) = f1 · (f2/f1)t/T with starting fre-
quency f1 = 100 Hz, final frequency f2 = 1000
Hz and duration T = 15 s. The power spec-
trum of the sawtooth sweep excitation signal is
shown in Figure 2.4.
Can Forced Vibrations Transform the Sound of New Violins?
13
==PAGE:22==
2.3
Playing Tests with Violinist
In the playing test, the test persons answered the questions in the questionnaire (Figure 2.5)
on the basis of their experience of playing short passages that were provided and belonged to
the respective questions.
Before each playing test, one of the two violins was marked as the reference violin with a large
green gift ribbon around the scroll. In the first round of playing test, the reference violin was
swapped after each test participant. In the follow up playing test, the participants completed
the test in a different order. Therefore, it was ensured that each participant received the same
reference violin in both playing tests.
The two violins were in violin cases on a table on which a third violin case was also placed. The
area of the room where the violins were stored was separated from the rest of the room by a
curtain. When entering the room, the participants walked past the table and saw three violin
cases. They were informed that they would go through the same experiment twice, each time
comparing one test violin with the reference violin in different categories.
At the beginning of the experiment, the questionnaire and the sheet music for the playing tasks
were shown and talked through. Then the lights were dimmed and the participants were given
both violins. They attached the shoulder rests, played the open strings and tuned the instru-
ments to familiarise themselves with the violins.
In the playing test, the violinists played the playing tasks for which the sheet music is shown
in Figure 2.6. The playing tasks for the categories Dynamic and Richness are adopted from
[6]. For the category Ease (ease of playing / articulation / responsiveness), the playing task
consisted of the first ten bars of Violin Concerto No.3 in G major, K216 by Wolfgang Amadeus
Mozart. This piece was chosen because it contains fast passages, chords, different bowing
techniques and is well known so test participants were familiar with the piece.
The sequence was first played on the reference violin and then on the test violin. After playing,
the violinists answered the corresponding rating tasks. The violinists were allowed to repeat
the playing task after they had played both violins if they were still not sure about their rating.
However, they always had to play the reference violin first and then the test violin, so that the
test violin was always the last violin played. After answering the rating task, they moved on to
the next playing task and were not allowed to change their previous answers.
Only the first three questions had a specific playing task assigned to them. The remaining
questions could either be answered based on the experience they had gained from the previ-
ous playing tasks, or they could briefly play something else on both violins.
The last question ”Which violin would you pay more for?” only appeared on the questionnaire,
after all other questions were answered. This was to not make the violinists think too much
about their preference, but rather concentrate on the specific categories.
After the questionnaire was completed, the test violin was taken back, the shoulder rest re-
moved, secretly slightly detuned behind the curtain, supposedly exchanged by the second test
violin and returned. The participants had to reattach the shoulder rest and tune the instrument
again and repeated the questionnaire assuming they were rating a different violin.
14
Can Forced Vibrations Transform the Sound of New Violins?
==PAGE:23==
Figure 2.5: Questionnaire used in the Playing Tests
(a) Dynamic range (Dynamic) (adopted from [6])
(b) Richness of sound (adopted from [6])
(c) Ease of playing / articulation / responsiveness (Ease): Beginning of Mozart Violin Concerto No.3 in G
major, K216.
Figure 2.6: Playing Tasks related to the first three questions of the questionnaire
Can Forced Vibrations Transform the Sound of New Violins?
15
==PAGE:24==
16
Can Forced Vibrations Transform the Sound of New Violins?
==PAGE:25==
3
Results
3.1
Bridge Admittance Measurement
In the paper, the measured bridge admittance was only shown up to 1 kHz. In fact, however,
measurements were made up to 12.8 kHz. Figure 3.1 therefore shows how the bridge admit-
tance continues above 1 kHz. In Figure 3.1a each curve is an average of the 10 measurements
within one set. Figure 3.1b shows the respective standard deviation. The bridge admittance
tends to decrease towards higher frequencies. At 2890 Hz there is a sharp peak in some mea-
surements. The standard deviation is also greatest at this frequency. Apart from this peak, the
frequency-dependent standard deviation varies between 1 and 4 dB.
During each measurement the coherence was tracked. For each of the eight sets the 10 co-
herehence measurements are shown in Figure 3.2. Below 250 Hz the coherence is low in many
measurements. Around 2890 Hz there is often a dip, and between 7 kHz and 9 kHz the coher-
ence drops towards zero.
(a) Mean bridge admittance of each set of measure-
ments.
(b) standard deviation of each set of bridge admittance
measurements
Figure 3.1: Mean and standard deviation of all sets of bridge admittance measurements
Can Forced Vibrations Transform the Sound of New Violins?
17
==PAGE:26==
Figure 3.2: Coherence curves from all measurement sets of bridge admittance
18
Can Forced Vibrations Transform the Sound of New Violins?
==PAGE:27==
FRAC Calculations
The different measurement sets were compared with each other using the FRAC (explained
in Section 1.3) evaluated between 270 Hz and 2800 Hz. This criterion always compares only
two individual frequency responses. In the paper, in order to compare two sets, all hundred
possible pairs were used to compare a frequency response from one set with one from the
other set (Figure 5). In order to better evaluate these comparisons, a look was also taken at
how similar the measurements within a set are to each other. In a set of 10 measurements
there are 45 possible permutations for comparing two different frequency responses. Figure
3.3 shows the distributions of all the FRAC comparisons within all eight sets.
Another way of comparing two set of measurements using FRAC is to compute the FRAC of
the mean bridge admittance measurements of both sets, instead of taking the single individual
measurements. This way, there is only one FRAC value indicating the similarity between two
measurement sets. To get an idea of how stable this mean FRAC is, the mean can be calcu-
lated from bootstrapped samples of measurements. Figure 3.4 shows the FRAC comparisons
across different measurement sets for both violins. The observed trend is the same as when
using all combinations of single measurements (Figure 5). However, using this visualisation,
differences become a little clearer. Generally, comparisons across the vibration period result in
lower FRAC values.
The fourth measurement set, though, has more similarity to the measurements before the vi-
bration period than the third set, which was measured directly after the vibration period.
Figure 3.3: FRAC of all combinations of two bridge admittance measurements within the same set of
measurements
Can Forced Vibrations Transform the Sound of New Violins?
19
==PAGE:28==
Figure 3.4: All FRAC comparisons of two measurement sets, calculated from 100 bootstrapped means
of each set of measurements
Characteristic Modes
To investigate changes in the bridge admittance more closely, it was tested if any of the main
modes change in frequency or amplitude. The modes were detected by running a peak detec-
tion in pre-defined frequency regions. In all 80 measurements the signature modes A0, B1−
and B1+ could be detected. From visual inspection of the mean bridge admittance it was no-
ticeable that the mode around 780 Hz in the third measurement was somewhat shifted to lower
frequencies. Therefore, this mode and also the following two modes were included in this anal-
ysis.
An example of that peak detection is shown in Figure 3.5. Since the 6th mode was not so
pronounced in violin B (the unvibrated violin), the peak detection did not work reliably for that
mode. To quantify changes in amplitude and frequencies of modes across measurement sets,
pairwise comparisons were performed by computing the Hodges-Lehmann estimator [8] as a
Figure 3.5: Peak detection for one example of a
bridge admittance curve
measure of difference in median. A bootstrap
re-sampling procedure by randomly sam-
pling with replacement from the combined
data of the two populations was performed
1000 times. For each bootstrap sample, the
Hodges-Lehmann estimator was calculated,
and from the bootstrap distribution, a 95%
confidence interval was computed. Figure 3.6
shows the mode differences in frequency and
amplitude of the five modes between the mea-
surement sets for both violins.
The differ-
ences in amplitude are up to 4 dB. The largest
frequency shift is around 21 Hz.
The rela-
tive changes in centre frequency between the
measurement sets are less than 3 % for all
modes.
20
Can Forced Vibrations Transform the Sound of New Violins?
==PAGE:29==
A0 Mode
B1−
B1+ Mode
Mode 4
Mode 5
Figure 3.6: Hodges-Lehmann estimator of differences in frequency and amplitude of the main modes in
the bridge admittance between measurement sets
Can Forced Vibrations Transform the Sound of New Violins?
21
==PAGE:30==
3.2
Playing Tests
Correlations of Ratings
Figure 3.7: Pearson correlation coefficient between rat-
ing categories
In order to understand the importance of
different rating categories, a Pearson cor-
relation matrix was computed, which is
shown in Figure 3.7.
There is a strong
correlation (r = 0.72) between Ease and
Experience scores and a moderate corre-
lation (r = 0.46) between Richness and
Experience scores, indicating that a violin
was regarded as experienced (that it was
played a lot) if it was also perceived as
easy to play and/or rich sounding. The lin-
ear dependency of Richness and Experi-
ence and Ease and Experience are visu-
alised in Figure 3.8.
Ease and Experience were the strongest
predictors for Preference.
Figure 3.9 shows the distributions of Ease
and Experience scores divided up into pre-
ferred and non-preferred violin.
Figure 3.8: Correlation of Richness and Ease
scores with Experience scores
(a) Ease
(b) Experience
Figure 3.9: Correlation of Ease and Experience
scores with Preference
22
Can Forced Vibrations Transform the Sound of New Violins?
==PAGE:31==
Ratings
The scores from the four rating tasks are shown in Figure 3.10. Each response is either from
the first playing test (before vibration period) or from the second test (after vibration period),
with either violin A (the vibrated violin) or violin B as the reference violin and either from the first
or second repetition of the experiment. The results in Figure 3.10 are broken down by these
three categories (before/after, reference violin and repetition) to visualise the respective effects.
The P-value of a Wilcoxon Rank Sum Test of the groups being compared is also marked in the
figures.
All shown rating scores refer to violin A as the test violin and violin B as the reference violin. The
scores that were collected under the opposite designations have already been inverted. The
before/after comparison in Figure 3.10a shows that the categories Richness, Ease and Expe-
rience were scored higher after the vibration period. However, the difference is not statistically
significant.
Looking at the results grouped by reference violin in Figure 3.10b, it is noticeable that all cat-
egories were scored higher when B was the reference violin. In the cases where A was the
reference violin, the mean scores in all categories are negative, whereas they are positive for
reference violin B. Since the scores for reference violin A were inverted, this means that in prin-
ciple the test violin was rated higher than the reference violin, regardless of which of the two
violins was the reference violin and which the test violin. This effect is also statistically signif-
icant. In Figure 2a, the scores are grouped by reference violin as well as by before/after. It is
clear from visual inspection that the bias due to the choice of reference violin is much stronger
than a slight trend towards higher ratings after vibration.
The scores split up by first and second repetition of the experiment are shown in Figure 3.10c.
For all four rating categories there are no significant differences between the ratings in the first
and second repetition. There might be a small effect in the Ease scores, as the P-value from
Wilcoxon Rank Sum Test is close to the significance level of 0.05.
In order to examine possible effects of the different conditions more closely and to better eval-
uate them, a mixed models analysis was carried out, which is described in more detail in the
next section.
Mixed Models
A mixed models analysis was performed in two different ways for every rating category. The first
version was following a bottom-up approach, starting with a simple model that only takes the
Violinist as a random effect and in a second adding one of the factors (before/after, reference
violin or repetition) as a predictor. The AIC values of these models and the P-Values indicating
if the predictor has a significant effect on the score in the respective rating category are shown
in Table 2.
The AIC value (Akaike Information Criterion) is used to estimate the prediction error. The AIC
allows comparing models to each other, balancing goodness of fit and over-fitting [17].
A more detailed mixed models analysis was also carried out using a top-down approach. For
the scores in each response category a linear mixed effect model is built up taking the three
factors reference violin, Repetition and before/after and their interactions as predictors.
The significance of each fixed effect is tested by sequentially dropping one term at a time using
Satterthwaite’s method. Then the model is simplified by removing the least significant effect
and using all remaining fixed effects to fit an updated model. This procedure is repeated until all
remaining predictors are significant. For the scores of Dynamic, Richness and Experience, the
final model includes only the reference violin. For the scores of Ease, the final model includes
both the reference violin and the repetition.
Can Forced Vibrations Transform the Sound of New Violins?
23
==PAGE:32==
(a) Before/After vibration period
(b) Reference violin (ViolinRef)
(c) Repetition (Rep)
Figure 3.10: Results of the playing test: Scores of rating tasks grouped by different conditions.
24
Can Forced Vibrations Transform the Sound of New Violins?
==PAGE:33==
In each iteration, the AIC is computed. For the Dynamic and Ease scores, the first model which
includes all effects and their interactions, fits best based on the AIC. For Experience, the last
iteration, including only the reference violin, has the lowest AIC. In the top-down analysis of the
Richness model, the model that includes the reference violin, the repetition and the interaction of
refernce violin and repetition has the lowest AIC. All important coefficients of the mixed models
that were the starting point of the top down procedure are listed in the tables below.
Table 3.1, 3.2, 3.3 and 3.4 show the standard deviation of the random effects and the estimates
and standard error for the fixed effects. Using the effects on the Dynamic scores as an example,
here is an explanation of how these tables are to be read:
The random effects are split up into the effect of the individual test participant and residual ef-
fects. For the Dynamic model, the random effect of the individual test participant accounts for
a standard deviation of 0.5078 in Dynamic scores. The residual standard deviation is 2.0893
and accounts for the variance that is not explained by the other random and fixed effects in
the model. Under fixed effects, the first entry is the intercept. In this example the estimated
intercept is −1.4827, indicating the expected Dynamic score when all other predictors are zero
meaning in this case that it is the first repetition of the playing test before vibration period with
violin A as reference violin.
The estimated coefficient for the ViolinRefB variable is 2.7684. This suggests that, compared
to the reference level (ViolinRefA), being in the ViolinRefB category is associated with an
increase in Dynamic of approximately 2.7684.
ViolinRefB×Rep2 is the interaction term between ViolinRefB and Rep2. The estimated coeffi-
cient is 0.0095, indicating that the combined effect of being in ViolinRefB and Rep2 is associated
with an increase in Dynamic of approximately 0.0095 units compared to the reference level.
Table 3.5 shows the results of the hypothesis tests for each fixed effect in all models. In all
categories, the reference violin has significant effect. In ease of playing, the repetition is also
significant.
Table 3.1: Dynamic scores: Random effects and fixed effects
Random effects
Name
Std. Dev.
Violinist
(Intercept)
0.5078
Residual
2.0893
Fixed effects
Estimate
Std. Error
(Intercept)
−1.4827
0.9004
ViolinRefB
2.7684
1.1802
Rep2
0.1565
1.1361
Before/After=After
0.1326
1.1361
ViolinRefB×Rep2
0.0095
1.2924
ViolinRefB×Before/After=After
−1.0170
1.2966
Rep2×Before/After=After
−0.3577
1.2924
Can Forced Vibrations Transform the Sound of New Violins?
25
==PAGE:34==
Table 3.2: Richness scores: Random effects and fixed effects
Random effects
Name
Std.Dev
Violinist
(Intercept)
0.7908
Residual
1.8067
Fixed Effect
Estimate
Std. Error
(Intercept)
−0.9446
0.8323
ViolinRefB
0.9978
1.0997
Rep2
0.2922
0.9824
Before/After=After
0.2862
0.9824
ViolinRefB×Rep2
1.3499
1.1175
ViolinRefB×Before/After=After
0.5333
1.1253
Rep2×Before/After=After
−0.4814
1.1175
Table 3.3: Ease scores: Random effects and fixed effects
Random effects
Name
Std.Dev
Violinist
(Intercept)
0.0000
Residual
2.2330
Fixed effects
Estimate
Std. Error
(Intercept)
−0.6279
0.9311
ViolinRefB
1.6319
1.2140
Rep2
−1.4576
1.2140
Before/After=After
0.9424
1.2140
ViolinRefB×Rep2
1.1690
1.3810
ViolinRefB×Before/After=After
0.5677
1.3823
Rep2×Before/After=After
−1.3639
1.3810
Table 3.4: Experience scores: Random effects and fixed effects
Random effects
Name
Std.Dev
Violinist
(Intercept)
1.102
Residual
1.854
Fixed effects
Estimate
Std. Error
(Intercept)
−1.1691
0.9167
ViolinRefB
2.1142
1.2185
Rep2
−0.4694
1.0079
Before/After=After
0.8799
1.0079
ViolinRefB×Rep2
0.7776
1.1465
ViolinRefB×Before/After=After
−0.7010
1.1579
Rep2×Before/After=After
−0.0911
1.1465
26
Can Forced Vibrations Transform the Sound of New Violins?
==PAGE:35==
Table 3.5: Type III Analysis of Variance for linear mixed models of all rating categories
Dynamic model
AIC = 184.38
Factor
F value
P value
ViolinRef
9.9619
0.01583 *
Rep
0.0007
0.97843
Before/After
0.7323
0.40006
ViolinRef×Rep
0.0001
0.99421
ViolinRef×Before/After
0.6153
0.44000
Rep×Before/After
0.0766
0.78429
Richness model
AIC = 177.27
Factor
F value
P value
ViolinRef
6.8903
0.02783 *
Rep
1.6902
0.20486
Before/After
0.3079
0.58350
ViolinRef×Rep
1.4591
0.23784
ViolinRef×Before/After
0.2246
0.63930
Rep×Before/After
0.1856
0.67012
Ease model
AIC = 187.22
Factor
F value
P value
ViolinRef
13.0856
0.00093 ***
Rep
5.0716
0.03070 *
Before/After
0.6201
0.43631
ViolinRef×Rep
0.7165
0.40305
ViolinRef×Before/After
0.1686
0.68383
Rep×Before/After
0.9753
0.33015
Experience model
AIC = 181.78
Factor
F value
P value
ViolinRef
5.9363
0.04386 *
Rep
0.0484
0.82766
Before/After
0.6984
0.41113
ViolinRef×Rep
0.4599
0.50407
ViolinRef×Before/After
0.3665
0.55029
Rep×Before/After
0.0063
0.93731
Can Forced Vibrations Transform the Sound of New Violins?
27
==PAGE:36==
28
Can Forced Vibrations Transform the Sound of New Violins?
==PAGE:37==
4
Further Discussion and Outlook
4.1
Bridge Admittance Measurements
Validity of Measurements
Comparing the measured bridge admittance curves with examples from the literature (see Fig-
ure 1.1), it is noticeable that the bridge admittance is comparatively low at higher frequencies
and that fewer resonance peaks can be observed above approximately 3000 Hz. It is not clear
whether this difference is due to the fact that comparative measurements from the literature
were taken on much higher quality violins, whose sound characteristics are far superior to the
violins in this study. Possibly it is also due to the additional mass that the bridge was subjected
to during the driving excitation, thus dampening higher frequencies. Pilot measurements on a
cello showed that similar results were achieved with hammer excitation as with white noise exci-
tation, but the additional mass could have a stronger influence on a violin than on a cello. Since
the measurements were reproducible and in this work only bridge admittance curves measured
in the same setup were compared, a possible bias at higher frequencies was not investigated
further. An analysis of the coherence showed that the measurements are reliable from above
250 Hz to 270 Hz. At 2890 Hz there was a sharp peak in the bridge admittance and a dip in
the coherence. It could not be determined exactly how this occurred, but it is suspected to be
an artefact and not a resonance peak. The upper limit to which the measurement is reliable is
between 7 kHz and 8.5 kHz, depending on the measurement. Above this frequency, the coher-
ence drops towards 0. Based on these observations, the reliable and relevant frequency range
for the FRAC calculation was narrowed down to 270 Hz to 2800 Hz.
Observed Changes
The FRAC comparisons have shown that the bridge admittance immediately after the vibra-
tion period (measurement 3) differs the most from the measurements before the vibration pe-
riod. After the second playing test (measurement 4), the bridge admittance curves are again
more similar to before the vibration period. This trend is evident for both violins, but somewhat
stronger for the vibrated one. Tracking the changes in amplitude and frequency of the modes
was not very conclusive. In both violins, changes were observed. The changes in amplitude,
however, are in the same range as the standard deviation of the measurements. This makes
it impossible to reliably identify relevant changes, if there are any. The fluctuations in the fre-
quency of individual modes were significantly stronger (up to 21 Hz). Again, there is no clear
trend in how the vibrated and non vibrated violin differ from each other. The strongest frequency
shifts occur in the fourth mode of the vibrated violin between the second and third and between
the first and third measurement. However, the centre frequencies of the A0 mode and the B1−
mode fluctuate more in the non vibrated violin. The relative changes in frequency of individual
modes between the four measurement sets were less than 3%. The just noticeable difference
for trained listeners was found to be about three percent [9]. Thus, these changes are probably
too subtle to be perceptually relevant.
When assessing the overall change in bridge admittance over the entire time frame of the exper-
iment based on FRAC calculations and mode shifts, it appears that during the vibration period,
the vibrated violin changes slightly more than the non-vibrated violin. However, the non-vibrated
violin also changed and the difference between changes in the unvibrated and vibrated violin is
relatively small compared to the absolute changes. It can therefore be assumed that there are
other factors that cause stronger effects than vibration. One possible factor is the environmen-
tal conditions of temperature and humidity, that changed throughout the experiment, but should
Can Forced Vibrations Transform the Sound of New Violins?
29
==PAGE:38==
have effected both violins in a very similar way. Distinguishing a possible effect of vibration
from other environmental factors, requires a more detailed investigation into how sensitive the
measurement – in particular the FRAC – reacts to controlled changes in the environment.
4.2
Playing Tests
The correlations of the rating scores (Section 3.2) imply that violinists associate the ability of
a violin to respond easily to their articulation with it having been played a lot (high Experience
score). In addition, violins that were rated as more experienced were also rated as more expen-
sive. This observation can be seen as a tentative confirmation that violinists associate positive
qualities of violins with the fact that they have been played a lot. Therefore, it stands to reason
that a change in a violin that results in it being assessed as more experienced and easier re-
sponding is desirable.
Overall, there was a large variance in the ratings. The mixed models analysis showed that there
was no significant effect of whether the playing test was before the vibration period or after the
vibration period in any of the rating categories. Measured by the AIC value, the models that
take the reference violin into account as a predictor were the best. however, it must be said
that the AIC values for all models are relatively close to each other. The residual variance is
relatively large in all models, so the models cannot fully predict the data. The only effect that
was repeatedly confirmed by several different approaches of fitting the models was the refer-
ence violin. Since the order in which the violins were played depended on the reference violin,
it could be that this effect is mainly due to the fact that the violinists became more warmed up
and more familiar with the playing tasks towards the end. To reduce this possible bias, it would
have been good to offer the violinists a longer warm-up phase on a third violin.
The rating categories allow for a certain amount of interpretation, so everyone has their own
definition of terms like richness or ease of playing. From listening to the playing tests, how-
ever, I can say from my own experience that the sound of the violins depended strongly on who
played the violins. For example, some test persons were able to get more dynamic range out
of one violin, while for others it was the other way round. From just listening, I usually had an
idea of what the participant would say, and this guess was confirmed in most cases.
To better understand how differently the participants understand the rating tasks, it would be
helpful to combine playing tests and listening tests. For each violinist, all the others could be-
come the listening panel. However, such a combined study is much more time-consuming and
requires that all violinists are available at the same time or that they feel comfortable being
recorded.
The question about dynamic range could have been split into two questions. The dynamic range
could be limited either because it is harder to play loudly or because it is harder to play softly.
This distinction was not made, but it could have been used to get more precise information
about possible differences in dynamic range.
4.3
Final Remarks
Returning to the initial question of whether forced vibrations can transform the sound of violins,
the findings of this study indicate that the specific vibration stimulation employed here did not
cause any relevant changes. However, this does not rule out the possibility that alternative ap-
proaches, which involve much stronger vibrations and intentional stimulation of specific frequen-
cies may lead to relevant changes. Such a method is described by Gerhard A. v. Reumont [18]
and expertly implemented by Matthias Lehmann on high-quality stringed instruments through a
sophisticated manual process [19].
For this particular study, the objective was to choose an excitation that closely resembled the
intensity and frequency content of natural violin playing. It would be worthwhile to systematically
investigate the possible effects of other forms of forced vibrations in future research.
30
Can Forced Vibrations Transform the Sound of New Violins?
==PAGE:39==
Bibliography
[1]
Claudia Fritz et al. “Player preferences among new and old violins”. In: Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences 109.3 (2012), pp. 760–763.
[2]
Claudia Fritz et al. “Listener evaluations of new and Old Italian violins”. In: Proceedings
of the National Academy of Sciences 114.21 (2017), pp. 5395–5400.
[3]
DG Hunt and E Balsan. “Why old fiddles sound sweeter”. In: Nature 379 (1996), pp. 681–
681.
[4]
Carleen Maley Hutchins and OE Rodgers. “Methods of changing the frequency spacing
(delta) between the A1 and B1 modes of the violin”. In: Catgut Acoustical Society Journal
2.1 (1992), pp. 13–19.
[5]
Ra Inta, John Smith, and Joe Wolfe. “Measurement of the effect on violins of ageing and
playing”. In: Acoustics Australia 33.1-25 (2005).
[6]
Charalampos Saitis et al. “Effect of task constraints on the perceptual evaluation of vio-
lins”. In: Acta Acustica united with Acustica 101.2 (2015), pp. 382–393.
[7]
Randall J Allemang. “The modal assurance criterion–twenty years of use and abuse”. In:
Sound and vibration 37.8 (2003), pp. 14–23.
[8]
Myles Hollander, Douglas A Wolfe, and Eric Chicken. Nonparametric statistical methods.
John Wiley & Sons, 2015.
[9]
Claudia Fritz et al. “Perceptual thresholds for detecting modifications applied to the acous-
tical properties of a violin”. In: The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America 122.6
(2007), pp. 3640–3650.
[10]
CM Hutchins. “A measurable controlling factor in the tone and playing qualities of violins”.
In: Catgut Acoust. Soc. J.(Series II) 1 (1989), pp. 10–15.
[11]
Heinrich Dünnwald. “Deduction of objective quality parameters on old and new violins”.
In: Catgut Acoust. Soc. J 1.7 (1991), pp. 1–5.
[12]
George Bissinger. “Structural acoustics of good and bad violins”. In: The Journal of the
Acoustical Society of America 124.3 (2008), pp. 1764–1773.
[13]
Claudia Fritz and Danièle Dubois. “Perceptual evaluation of musical instruments: State of
the art and methodology”. In: Acta Acustica united with Acustica 101.2 (2015), pp. 369–
381.
[14]
Erik V Jansson. “Admittance measurements of 25 high quality violins”. In: Acta Acustica
united with Acustica 83.2 (1997), pp. 337–341.
[15]
Cheng Zhong Zhang et al. “Experimental and Numerical Studies of Violin Bridge Vibration
Mechanism”. In: Key Engineering Materials 579 (2014), pp. 536–541.
[16]
Erwin Schoonderwaldt. “Mechanics and acoustics of violin bowing: Freedom, constraints
and control in performance”. PhD thesis. KTH, 2009.
[17]
Hirotugu Akaike. “A new look at the statistical model identification”. In: IEEE transactions
on automatic control 19.6 (1974), pp. 716–723.
[18]
G.A. Reumont. Theorie und Praxis des Vibrationsentdämpfens zur Resonanzverbesserung
von Musikinstrumenten: Beseitigung von Wolftönen und andere Regulierungsarbeiten.
Verlag der Instrumentenbau-Zeitschrift, 1996. isbn: 9783877101735.
[19]
Matthias Lehmann. Vibrelax – Relaxation of vibrations. http://www.streicherklang.de/
englisch/vibrelax.html. [Online; accessed 14-July-2023].
Can Forced Vibrations Transform the Sound of New Violins?
31
==PAGE:40==
”What truly defines violin excellence? If the answer is truly excellent violinists, then the reliability-
reproducibility of their psychoacoustic judgments must draw more attention. It would seem illogical
to expect violinists who pride themselves on their personal sound not to prefer certain violins over
others because they are better at creating that sound. If excellent violinists cannot agree on a quality
rating because of sound preferences −or worse, rate two quite different sounding violins as good
−shouldn’t it follow that scientific measurements could do no better?”
∼George A. Bissinger (Excerpt from his conclusion of [12])
Technical
University of
Denmark
Department of Electrical and Photonics Engineering
Ørsteds Plads, Building 352
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
