==PAGE:1==
Acute effects of physical exercise measured
using proton and phosphorous magnetic res­
onance spectroscopy
Master Thesis
DTU Health Tech
Department of Heath Technology
==PAGE:2==
Acute effects of physical exercise measured using proton and phosphorous magnetic
resonance spectroscopy
Master Thesis
June 2023
By
Kirsten Suze Peeters
Supervisors:
Lars Hanson, Associate Professor, DTU ­ MR physicist, DRCMR
Carl­Johan Boraxbekk, Professor, KU ­ Senior researcher, DRCMR
Naiara Demnitz, Postdoc, DRCMR
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the customary
bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Heath Technology, Ørsteds Plads, Building 345C, 2800
Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.healthtech.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Preface
This thesis was written in partial fulfilment of the degree Master of Science in Biomedical Engi­
neering at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, and the University of Copenhagen, KU.
It was conducted at the Danish Research Centre for Magnetic Resonance, DRCMR, over the
period February 2023 ­ June 2023.
Kirsten Suze Peeters ­ s213007
Signature
Date
ii
30 - 06 - 2023
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
Physical exercise is generally considered to be beneficial for health and well­being, but knowl­
edge about exercise­induced changes in brain health and their underlying pathways remains
limited. Understanding the fate of the additional brain uptake of glucose and lactate, which
has been shown to be a response to exercise, is necessary for understanding the underlying
mechanisms of exercise in the brain, and ultimately could aid in understanding the beneficial
effects of exercise on cognitive health. The current study uses proton magnetic resonance spec­
troscopy (1H­MRS) to investigate acute metabolite concentration changes caused by a single
bout of intensity­controlled exercise, by addressing two problems: enabling intensity­controlled
exercise on the Philips Achieva 7.0T, and investigating the dynamics of brain metabolite con­
centrations as am acute result of exercise. This thesis shows that set­up calibration can be
performed, but with low reliability. It also shows that in­scanner exercise in the Achieva 7.0T is
feasible, although protocols should be revised to increase heart rate to more than 69% of max­
imal heart rate, which was the highest seen in this study. With regards to effects on metabolite
ratios, no common trends over all subjects were found. The most consistent findings in terms of
pre­ versus post­exercise change are a decrease of Cr/NAA+NAAG and an increase of GABA/­
NAA+NAAG and GSH/NAA+NAAG. In terms of post­exercise trends, the most consistent find­
ings are an increasing trend in Cr/NAA+NAAG, GABA/NAA+NAAG and mIns/NAA+NAAG. This
thesis shows that in­house set­up calibration, and set­up and protocol development are highly
challenging and time­intensive processes. Therefore, using subject­specific intensity­controlled
exercise protocols and universal, potentially commercially available set­ups is recommended,
to facilitate consistency and reproducibility. Moreover, this thesis shows the complexity, but
also the high potential of further examination of the acute dynamic effects of exercise on brain
metabolite concentrations. Many considerations are suggested to be taken into account when
researching exercise­induced metabolite concentration changes with 1H­MRS, which can hope­
fully be assistive in designing better studies to move the field forwards. Current protocols should
be optimised, and once trusted, exploring different exercise intensity, types, voxel locations and
modality combinations are exciting next steps in this field.
iii
==PAGE:5==
Contents
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Thesis motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.1.1
Measuring brain metabolism dynamics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.1.2
Exercise . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.2
Thesis aim
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.3
Thesis outline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2
Quantifiable in­scanner exercise
5
2.1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.1.1
Current set­up
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.1.2
7T compatibility . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.2
Set­up calibration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2.1
Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2.2
Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.2.3
Results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.2.4
Discussion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.2.5
Conclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.3
7.0T compatibility . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.3.1
Set­up and exercise protocol development
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.3.2
Final set­up and exercise protocol variations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3
Brain metabolism
18
3.1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.1.1
Dynamic 1H­MRS
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.1.2
Voxel location . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.1.3
Brain metabolites . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.1.4
Time courses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.2
Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.2.1
Data acquisition
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.2.2
Motion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.2.3
Metabolite quantification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.3
Results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.3.1
Data acquisition
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.3.2
Motion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.3.3
Preprocessing, spectral fitting and quality assessment . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.3.4
Quantification, stability and trends
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3.4
Discussion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
4
Conclusion and future outlook
47
Bibliography
48
A Data alignment calibration
52
B Calculated power: two methods
55
iv
==PAGE:6==
1
Introduction
1.1
Thesis motivation
Physical exercise is generally considered to be beneficial for health and well­being. The effects
on physical health are extensively studied and largely understood. Knowledge about exercise­
induced changes in brain health and their underlying pathways, however, remains limited.
In earlier research aiming to understand these mechanisms, three different pathways of change
are suggested and investigated: Brain structural and functional mechanisms, psychosocial
mechanisms and cellular and molecular mechanisms (Stillman et al., 2020). In terms of psy­
chosocial mechanisms, both mood and sleep have been suggested to be effected by exercise
and might contribute to cognition and brain effects (Stillman et al., 2020). Exercise is reported
to improve both mood and cognitive function following exercise, which could suggest a causal
or correlational link. Similarly, sleep and cognitive function also concurrently improve following
exercise. Structural and functional changes are widely reported. With different modalities, a
wide spread of both global and local effects throughout the brain is shown (Basso and Suzuki,
2017). For example, exercise is reported to increase EEG theta activity in the hippocampus and
enhance delta, theta, alpha and beta power in the cortex (Basso and Suzuki, 2017), it is shown
to reduce rate of brain atrophy (Dunås et al., 2021) and and it is reported to increase brain
connectivity (Stillman et al., 2020). With regards to neurochemical mechanisms, reported in­
vivo effects mainly constitute of indirect measurements of brain molecules, for example through
measuring in the bloodstream or cerebrospinal fluid (Stillman et al., 2020). The next step is to
try and understand neurochemical effects in the brain itself as a result of exercise.
Earlier research on explaining those effects has focused on long­term interventions (Hillman
et al., 2008). However, many confounding effects, varying between individuals, occur in these
long­term studies. Additionally, longitudinal studies require large amounts of resources, since
multiple follow­up scans are often necessary. Single bout exercise studies can be performed to
observe acute exercise­induced effects, in a less resource­intensive way and with a decreased
amount of confounding factors. Since the acute effects of a single bout of exercise have been
hypothesised to predict long lasting effects (Voss et al., 2020), investigating neurochemical
changes on a short time scale after exercise can be highly informative.
The available research on the acute effects of exercise on brain metabolism shows that exercise
causes differences in uptake of ratios of oxygen and glucose equivalents in the brain (Dalsgaard
et al., 2003; Ide et al., 2000). During and right after vigorous exercise, the amount of glucose and
lactate taken up by the brain is higher than the amount that gets oxidised to CO2. What happens
to the extra glucose and lactate taken up is largely unknown, but it is clear that processes other
than simple oxidation must be at play. It is for example hypothesised that the excess lactate and
glucose are used in the synthesis of different neurotransmitters, to replenish metabolite stores
or simply accumulate in the brain (Maddock et al., 2011).
Understanding the fate of the additional uptake of glucose and lactate is necessary for getting
a grasp of what goes on in the brain as a result of exercise, and ultimately could aid in under­
standing the beneficial effects of exercise on cognitive performance and brain health.
1.1.1
Measuring brain metabolism dynamics
Previous studies have investigated cerebral metabolism using 18F­fluorodeoxyglucose positron
emission tomography (FDG­PET), which can measure brain glucose uptake and is thus a mea­
sure for the over­all brain metabolism (Gaitán et al., 2019, Ueno­Pardi et al., 2022, Robinson
1
==PAGE:7==
Figure 1.1: Delays between end of exercise and start of post­exercise acquisition, as reported in an unpublished
systematic review from Ryberg et al. A generalised lactate concentration curve is plotted here as an example. *Rai
et al. (2018) report that all acquisitions took place within 15 minutes, but does not specify an exact delay. ­ Borrowed
from an unpublished systematic review by Ryberg et al.
et al., 2018, Dougherty et al., 2017). This method, however, does not allow for measuring indi­
vidual metabolites. Besides, the associated radiation exposure can be harmful. Other methods
that can quantify brain metabolites are invasive (e.g. biopsies), have a low temporal resolution
or are limited to analysing single metabolites (Castro et al., 2014).
Magnetic resonance spectroscopy (MRS) is a research technique that can be used to detect
metabolic concentrations and ratios in a non­invasive manner. In the context of the current
study, specifically proton magnetic resonance spectroscopy (1H­MRS) is a relevant and pow­
erful technique, because of its ability to enable the investigation of changes in multiple brain
metabolite concentrations. The technique was used in this research to study brain metabolism
changes induced by physical exercise.
Several 1H­MRS studies have been conducted that investigate exercise­induced brain metabolism
changes (Çaglar et al., 2005; Coxon et al., 2018; Dalsgaard et al., 2003; Maddock et al., 2011;
Maddock et al., 2016; Rai et al., 2018). A recent, not yet published systematic review by Ry­
berg et al. shows that existing research on this topic has not yielded conclusive results. The
studies included in the review have focused on reporting differences between one prex­ and
one or multiple post­exercise average metabolite concentrations in the brain. Using averages
is usually because 1H­MRS typically requires measurements over long time periods for them
to have a significantly good signal to noise ratio (SNR). Important to note is that acquisition in
the included studies has been done with different delays between end of exercise and start of
post­exercise scanning, as shown in Figure 1.1.
As mentioned, an acquisition approach in which is averaged over longer time periods is effec­
tive for reducing spectral noise, or rather increasing SNR. However, it also causes loss of the
temporal information of these metabolic changes. To date, little is known about the time courses
of metabolite change, especially in the early moments after exercise. These time courses are
relevant to understand when interpreting data acquired at different time periods and with dif­
ferent delays after exercise, as in the review. To learn more about the dynamic behaviour of
metabolite concentrations, a more continuous approach can be explored using shorter, subse­
quent time intervals and a minimal delay. To the authors knowledge, this type of research has
not been performed before.
To overcome the issue of low SNR, experiments should be conducted using ultra­high field
MRS. The higher field strength increases the signal sensitivity, which enables the investigation
2
==PAGE:8==
of shorter time intervals. Additionally, different methods for processing the acquired data can
be explored to reduce the need for high SNR.
To reduce the delay between end of exercise and acquisition, execution of physical exercise in
the MR scanner can be explored. This would remove the transportation and patient preparation
time, which leaves only a delay caused by essential steps in preparing MRS acquisition, such
as voxel localisation and shimming.
The minimal delay acquired using this approach, in combination with the high sensitivity ac­
quired with ultra­high field MRS, will enable investigation of the dynamical behaviour of metabo­
lite concentrations as an acute result of physical exercise.
1.1.2
Exercise
When researching the effects of exercise on metabolite concentrations in the brain, being able
to quantify energy used during in­scanner exercise is relevant, since exercise intensity affects
the physiological and metabolic stress on muscles (Coyle, 2000), which could influence brain
metabolism (Dalsgaard et al., 2003). Quantification would enable researching how exercise
intensity affects brain metabolism changes, and could aid in understanding results of similar
studies with different exercise protocols. It can be done in a an absolute sense, by reporting
the actual amount of energy expenditure, or in a relative sense, by reporting individual exercise
maxima (Normand­Gravier et al., 2022). No clear consensus exists about the best way to report
exercise intensities. For quantifying energy use with a set­up, however, general quantification
of absolute energy usage is most evident.
At the DRCMR, an ergometry set­up has previously been developed and used to aid in the inves­
tigation of dynamic phosphorous metabolism in muscle. This set­up enables moderate physical
exercise in a Philips Achieva 3.0T scanner. In order to quantify the energy use of participants
exercising with this ergometer, theoretical calculations must be performed. For reliable report­
ing of these values, a robust calibration must be executed. Additionally, this ergometry set­up
is specifically designed for the Philips Achieva 3.0T scanner. A similar set­up or a modified
version of the current set­up should be constructed for application in an ultra­high field scanner,
i.e. the Philips Achieva 7.0T scanner installed at the DRCMR.
1.2
Thesis aim
The overarching question attended to in this thesis was: ‘What are the early time courses of
brain metabolism as an acute result of intensity­controlled exercise?’ In this pilot study, two
parts of the problem were addressed.
1. How to enable MRS acquisition after intensity­controlled exercise with minimal delay on the
Philips Achieva 7.0T scanner?
2. What are the dynamics of metabolite concentrations in the brain as an acute result of exer­
cise?
To reach these aims, firstly, steps were taken to aid in developing a quantifiable, adjustable and
easy­to­use exercise protocol that can be applied inside the Philips Achieva 7.0T MR scanner,
in order to decrease MRS scan delay in exercise­induced brain metabolism research. Secondly,
an exploratory analysis of dynamic metabolite concentrations was performed, in order to gain
insight in exercise­induced metabolic behaviour. Ultimately, the goal of this pilot study was to
guide the design of future research on the development of exercise protocols for promoting
brain health, by making steps to establish an appropriate experimental set­up, paradigm and
analysis approach.
3
==PAGE:9==
1.3
Thesis outline
This first chapter introduced the motivation and aim for this thesis, and describes an outline for
the following chapters.
The second chapter of this thesis will focus on the first thesis aim. After briefly introducing more
background theory, one section follows about the theoretical calibration and practical validation
experiments of the existing ergometry set­up, followed by a section on the protocol development
for exercise in the Philips Achieva 7.0T.
Chapter three is dedicated to the second thesis aim, investigating the dynamics of exercise­
induced metabolite concentrations. The first section introduces more background theory on
MRS, brain metabolism and expected changes during exercise. The second section describes
the methods for this part of the study, highlighting the exercise, scanning and data analysis
protocols. This is followed by a section on results and discussion.
Chapter four poses an over all conclusion on the thesis, and describes a future outlook with
regards to the performed research.
4
==PAGE:10==
2
Quantifiable in­scanner exercise
2.1
Introduction
Exercise protocols for research are highly variable. This is caused by the large amount of as­
pects of exercise that can influence outcomes in different types of research, such as exercise
intensity, duration and targeted muscle groups. Exercise intensity is a particularly important
variable to control, since the differences it causes in physiological and metabolic stress on mus­
cles could influence outcomes greatly. Additionally, exercise intensity is a commonly reported
measure in exercise related studies and often used as a method of comparison.
Research on exercise is done extensively, so many intensity­controlled exercise protocols and
approaches exist. However, applying those directly in an MR scanner is hardly possible, be­
cause of several restricting factors. First of all, the subject in the scanner is in a supine position,
which limits the possibilities for conducting physical exercise greatly. Secondly, the bore of a
typical MR scanner is narrow. Specifically the Philips Achieva 7.0T has a narrow bore, which
decreases the possibilities for motion. Leg motion is partly possible, but the use of other limbs
is restricted or highly inconvenient. Furthermore, when a subject is in the scanner for a brain
scan, their head is fixated in the head coil. Thus, during exercise, the head should stay as still
as possible, both to protect the head coil and to remain rightly positioned in the coil to prevent
movement artefacts. Lastly, the use of exercise equipment in an MR scanner is limited, since
anything containing ferromagnetic materials is not allowed in the scanner room. This is due to
the interaction between the magnetic field of the scanner and these materials, which can pose
serious dangers and accidents. The dangers of the magnetic field are not only problematic for
the use of equipment itself; it also limits the possibilities for quantifying exercise, since devices
to do so are generally not MR compatible.
Currently used equipment for in­scanner exercise partly navigates around these challenges, but
is limited. Examples are isometric hand grip exercise devices (Knobelsdorff­Brenkenhoff et al.,
2013), weights (Tawara and Nishiyama, 2021), supine stepping equipment (Hollnagel et al.,
2011, Forouzan et al., 2014), supine ergometry (Bal­Theoleyre et al., 2016), or self built equip­
ment (Layec et al., 2008, Raymer et al., 2006). All of these are designed and built with MR safe
materials. They do not, however, solve the issues concerning subject movement inherent to
exercise. Furthermore, they are not compatible with all scanner types, typically only with scan­
ners with a wide bore compared to the Philips Achieva 7.0T. The equipment described is used
for different applications. Isometric hand grip exercise, using weights and self built equipment
are generally used in exercise protocols targeting specific muscles, often in combination with
muscle MRI or MRS. Stepping and cycling ergometry are more commonly used for heart rate
elevating exercise, often in cardiac MRI.
2.1.1
Current set­up
At the DRCMR, a set­up has been developed for in­scanner exercise, which is shown in Figure
2.1. The set­up consists of a rope, which is meant to connect to the subject’s foot. Pulling this
rope rotates a small wheel, which lifts a small weight, and simultaneously drives the rotation of a
flywheel. This flywheel is restricted in its motion by a rope brake, creating resistance which the
subject works against when pulling. The mechanics will be elaborated on in section 2.2. The
ergometer is equipped with MR compatible rotary encoders measuring rotation speed of the
two moving wheels, which allows for calculating exercise intensity. However, no calibration and
validation of these calculations has been performed yet, which is essential for reliably applying
them.
5
==PAGE:11==
Figure 2.1: The ergometry set­up at DRCMR in the Achieva 3.0T. A rope attaches the foot in the scanner on the
right to the small wheel in set­up on the left. Picture borrowed from a bachelor thesis by Naaby and Thorup Hald
(2014).
2.1.2
7T compatibility
In this study, 1H­MRS is used while subjects perform exercise in a Philips Achieva 7.0T scanner.
Thus, a set­up that is compatible with this scanner is needed. The current set­up is designed for
the Philips Achieva 3.0T scanner, so the possibility of adjusting and transferring it to the 7.0T is
investigated. If not possible, an alternative exercise protocol will be developed, which is similar
to the existing protocol, so that eventually, the old and new set­up can be combined to a system
that is both quantifiable and compatible with the Achieva 7.0T.
6
==PAGE:12==
2.2
Set­up calibration
2.2.1
Background
To calibrate the set­up available at the DRCMR, it is essential to understand the underlying
physics. This section aims to describe the mechanical concepts at play, and how they influence
the forces within the device.
The set­up was designed to mimic the working mechanism of typical upright ergometers such
as the Monark systems. They are designed to follow relatively simple mathematics. By making
some general assumptions, the work done is mostly considered to be the force due to the
braking mass multiplied by the distance travelled by the flywheel (Gordon et al., 2004). Divided
by time, this gives a simplified version of power output. The next subsections explain these
calculations and the implications of the given assumptions.
2.2.1.1
Theoretical calculation of power output
The available set­up at DRCMR is schematically displayed in Figure 2.2. It contains two mech­
anisms that use energy resulting in movement. Mechanism one is the movement of the small
wheel and the related pulling weight. Mechanism two is the movement of the flywheel, work­
ing against the braking weight. Energy usage can thus be split into the pulling weight related
energy and the braking weight related energy. Frictional forces not caused by the brake and
mechanical losses due to transmission are neglected. Work (in J) done on the pulling weight
Figure 2.2: Simplified, schematic representation of the ergometry set­up. The curved arrows indicate the movement
of the small wheel and the flywheel. d: distance pulled, mp: pulling weight, mb: braking weight. Picture borrowed
from a bachelor thesis by Naaby and Thorup Hald (2014), and adjusted.
can be calculated as follows:
Wp = mp · g · d
(2.1)
mp signifies the mass of the pulling weight (kg), g is the gravitational acceleration constant
(m/s2), and d is the rope displacement per pull (m). The work calculated here consist fully of
the change in potential energy of the pulling weight. It is assumed that the rotation of the wheel
does not cause friction, and the rope does not elongate.
By pulling the rope, not only is the small wheel rotated and the pulling weight moved upwards,
but force is also transferred to the flywheel through a series of wheels and ball bearings. To
keep the flywheel spinning during consecutive pulls, the transferred force needs to be enough
to overcome the braking power.
The braking power is defined as the power slowing down the flywheel. The gravitational force
7
==PAGE:13==
on the breaking weight creates friction between the rope and the flywheel. The resulting torque
from this force, following (Franklin et al., 2005), is calculated as
T = (F1 −F2)rfw
(2.2)
Here, T is torque (N/m), F1 is the gravitational force on the braking weight (N), F2 is the
resulting tensile force in the horizontal part of the rope (N) and rfw the radius of the flywheel
(m).
The gravitational force on the braking weight (F1) is represented as mb · g , with mb the braking
mass (kg) and g the gravitational acceleration (m/s2). Assuming that the gravitational force is
fully transformed into frictional force, and no tensile forces are transferred to the horizontal part
of the rope, ergo F2 = 0N, the equation can be simplified. The braking force F1 −F2 can now
be equated with F1. This assumption is done in accordance with the simplification generally
applied in calculations on rope­braked ergometers (Gordon et al., 2004). The torque now can
be calculated as
T = mb · g · rfw
(2.3)
The resulting braking power can be calculated as
Pb = T · ω
(2.4)
where ω is angular velocity of the flywheel (rad/s). Total power would thus be presented as
Ptot = T · ω + Wp/t
(2.5)
with t the total time interval of one pulling cycle (including the relaxation) (s).
In Monark systems, work done is directly translated to flywheel movement, and there is no
equivalent of the pulling weight component. Thus, in that device, total power can be simplified
to Ptot = T · ω, the rotational equivalent of force times distance.
In this set­up used in this study, the pulling weight played a quantifiable role, so it was included
in further calculations.
2.2.1.2
Assumptions and calibration
The tensile forces in the horizontal part of the braking rope are assumed non­existent. However,
they have not been quantified and could actually be non­zero. According to Gordon et al. (2004)
and Franklin et al. (2005), who studied the discrepancies between the simplified calculations
and the actual mechanics at play in ergometers, assuming a tension of 0 N in the horizontal part
of the braking rope leads to an overestimation of the power and the work done. Gordon et al.
(2004) report an overestimation of 10%, and Franklin et al. (2005) describe an overestimation of
18%. These values are high, and thus have a great impact on exercise protocols if not corrected
for.
Additionally, it is highly possible that the transmission of forces within the set­up does not occur
entirely frictionless, whereas that is an assumption that was made. For example, additional fric­
tion in the ball bearings could occur. It can therefore be expected that the calculations presented
above are not fully accurate.
Performing calibration experiments allows us to find values to correct for factors not explicitly
taken up in work and power calculations. This will allow us to correct for both of the assumptions
described. By modelling the variables that could contain tensile forces, frictional forces and
other unknown contributions, calibration constants can make up for the discrepancies without
being specific.
8
==PAGE:14==
2.2.2
Methods
The following section specifies the methods used to calibrate the set­up. It explains the experi­
ment protocol, followed by a description of the data analysis approach.
2.2.2.1
Protocol
The calibration experiment was executed by measuring tensile forces, and rotational speed and
displacement of both the flywheel and the small wheel connected to the pulling rope. Tensile
forces were measured dynamically, using a force transducer (Verniers). Rotational speed and
displacement were registered using rotary encoders. Prior to the experiment, the force trans­
ducer was calibrated with a 3­point calibration with a zero weight condition, a weight of 0.26 kg
and a weight of 0.48 kg. The click sensors were zeroed at the start of each measurement.
To prepare the calibration, the set­up was patched and cleaned, in order to ensure the least
amount of unexplained frictional forces.
The experiment was conducted by first spinning the flywheel to be near steady state. Subse­
quently, approximately 40 consecutive pulls on the pulling rope were performed, which imitated
the kicking of the foot when the set­up is used in practice. The experiment was repeated with
a variety of braking weights, in duplo. The used weights were 0 g, 25 g, 50 g and 75 g. The
weight connected to the pulling rope that was used, weighed 0.52 kg. The pull frequency was
not controlled, meaning it might have varied within and between experiments.
2.2.2.2
Data analysis
Prior to any calculations, the force sensor and rotary encoder data sets were aligned and inter­
polated, in order to allow for further analysis. Subsequently, the average power in each pull was
calculated in two ways. Firstly, it was calculated based on the theoretical calculations explained
before, by measuring rotational speed and distance travelled by the flywheel. This gives the fol­
lowing equation, acquired by implementing equation 2.1, 2.3 and 2.4 in equation 2.5, renaming
Ptot to Ppull,rotary for specificity.
Ppull,rotary = ω(mb · g · rfw) + d(mp · g)/t
(2.6)
Secondly, the average power per pull was calculated by finding the average force that was
applied per pull, multiplying that by the distance travelled by pulling (which was measured with
the rotary encoder of the small wheel), and dividing it by the pull duration. This is captured in
the following formula:
Ppull,force = Fpull,avg ∗d/t
(2.7)
Here, Fpull,avg is the average of the measured force during the pull (in N).
A linear regression was performed in order to quantify the relation between both data sets, by
predicting Ppull,force, the actual power output, from Ppull,rotary, the power output that can be
measured in the scanner.
2.2.3
Results
In an attempt to accurately calibrate the set­up at the DRCMR, two methods were used to
quantify subject power output. This section shows the results of the steps taken in this process.
It displays the results of data alignment of the two methods, comparison of the calculated power
values and regression analysis results.
All acquired data were loaded into MATLAB (The MathWorks Inc., 2022) for processing. Visual
inspection showed that the data from the rotary encoders and the data from the force sensor,
while both acquired along with time data, were not aligned. Figure 2.3 shows the faulty alignment
of this raw data. It can be seen that the rotary encoder data and force sensor data seem to
have a different frequency. To ensure that the power calculations of the two methods were
actually quantifying power during the same pulling period, data were aligned. This was firstly
9
==PAGE:15==
Figure 2.3: An example of misaligned force sensor and rotary encoder data. The data sets oscillate with different
frequencies and their peaks do not align.
done by simply aligning the start of the first pull. However, this did not properly align the data
sets because of the difference in frequency. The approach was advanced by including manual
selection of both the first and last overlapping pull and scaling the data sets to each other. An
example of alignment can be seen in Figure 2.4. It can be seen that the local minima in the
rotary encoder data, which signify the start of the pulls, align well with the start of the pulls in
the force data, which corresponds to the local minima right before the increase. The end of the
pulls in the force data are seen when the force values returns to baseline after the high peak.
This aligns well with the end of the pulls in the rotary sensor data, which corresponds with the
local maxima.
With properly aligned data, the average power per pull values were calculated using both meth­
ods. Figure 2.5 shows an example of the calculation results for one of the measurements. It
can be seen that the two methods do not put forward the same power values. There seems to
be a scaling offset. Additionally, the power calculated form the force sensor data has more
variability, while the power output calculated with the rotary encoders shows more stability.
Linear regression was performed to find a correction factor relating the rotary encoder based
power output to the force sensor based power output. To this extent, the data of all measure­
ments were combined. Figure 2.6 shows a scatter plot of the data points used for regression,
as well as the calculated calibration curve and residuals. The extracted calibration curve is
Ppull,force = 1.808Ppull,rotary −0.5319, with an R2 value of 0.4359. The residuals have a norm of
7.8419.
2.2.4
Discussion
The results suggest using the calibration curve Ppull,force = 1.808Ppull,rotary −0.5319 to correct
power values when measuring with the rotary encoders approach. However, the low R2 value
and high residuals imply a poor fit.
The primary expected cause of the poor fit is that the mechanical losses due to force transmis­
sion and frictional forces not caused by the brake, which were assumed negligible, actually play
a large role in power calculations. If these forces and losses are present, more power is neces­
10
==PAGE:16==
Figure 2.4: An example of aligned force sensor and rotary encoder data. The data sets oscillate with the same
frequency and their increase starts at the same time points.
Figure 2.5: An example of the power output calculated with both methods.
11
==PAGE:17==
Figure 2.6: Results of regression. Top: scatter plot with calibration curve. Bottom: residuals. Power difference here
is defined as power from force sensor minus power from rotary encoders
sary to have the same forces transferred to the flywheel and pulling weight. This means higher
forces would be necessary, which would explain the high values of the force measurement
based power output data compared to the rotary encoder based power outputs. Whether this
can explain an offset of approximately 1 W, the difference between the average power output
of both methods, is difficult to assess and should be investigated further.
An additional explanation for the poor fit is the high degree of variability in the force sensor
based power data. The pulls in the experiment were performed in a regular manner, so high
variability is not to be expected. The high variability in the force sensor based power data could
firstly be explained by the choice of calculation. The time periods in which the force data are
evaluated are, after alignment of the two data sets, determined by the start points of a pull
in the rotary encoder data. The start of each pull is marked the last local minimum before
the rotary encoder value starts to increase. Since force is evaluated over the full cycle, any
registered forces in the relaxation phase, which do not contribute to the pulling, are included in
the average and thus distort the calculation. Generally, it would not be expected to register any
force in the period in between pulls. However, there was a complication with the set­up during
testing, which might have induced some flawed measurements. The downward motion of the
pulling weight, meant to bring the pulling rope back to the initial position after a pull, was too slow
due to an unexpected and unexplained high friction between the rope and the wheel or in the
wheel bearing. To overcome this, the rope was pulled back manually. This could have impacted
the results, as it could have introduced artefacts in the force data during resting periods, which
would then be included in the calculations.
A second explanation of high force sensor based power data variability lies in the alignment
12
==PAGE:18==
of the two data sets. If the alignment is slightly off, which could well be due to the inclusion
of a manual step, the time over which the force data are evaluated might be shifted and thus
wrong. Shifted time frames would include data that does not belong to the specific pull, meaning
the average force might be wrong. A counterargument would be that the shift is expected
to be similar for all pulls, or would gradually move further in one direction. This is expected,
since the missing force data at the beginning of the pull will be replaced by the force data
at the beginning of the next pull and vice versa. Variability would only be seen if there is a
large variation in pull duration, which did not occur. Additionally, not a gradual trend, but high
variability between consecutive data points, is seen. Thus, data misalignment might not explain
the variable behaviour fully.
To investigate if the misalignment is the error source, and to improve that error, better alignment
methods should be explored. For example, the relaxation data of the rotary encoders could
be zeroed, followed by cross­correlation of the results with the force measurement data to find
maximal average forces. Another next step would be to look into the time registration of both
the force sensor and the rotary encoder data, which is saved using a raspberry pi programme.
In principle, the expectation would be that both types of data collection have accurate time
registration. Figuring out which one of the two encounters a time delay and how to remove it
could potentially solve the issue.
Other limitations of the current calibration method are the two following: Firstly, the force sensor
used was only suitable for forces of maximum 50 N, and no other sensors with higher ranges
were available. This does not reflect the forces expected when the set­up is used as intended.
The larger forces expected might influence the relation between the two methods of calculation.
Secondly, the current calibration method assumes correctness of the calculation method using
the force sensor. However, this method might contain inaccuracies as well, which are now not
considered.
Lastly, the assumption was made that the tensile forces in the horizontal part of the braking
rope are negligible. When implementing this assumption, Gordon et al. (2004) and Franklin
et al. (2005) reported overestimations of calculated work and power values of 10% and 18%
respectively. Interestingly, the values calculated with this assumption actually underestimate
the values based calculated based on the force sensor data, meaning the reported power output
values of the two calculation methods would actually diverge if tensile forces in the horizontal
part of the braking rope are included in the model. This discrepancy should be studied further.
Considering the poor fit and lack of obvious explanations, reliable calibration in the performed
manner is not expected to be feasible. Additionally, it is doubted whether reporting absolute
exercise intensities is informative for exercise performed in a scanner. Steenhorst et al. (2023)
tells that supine exercise reduced heart rate measurements by 10­20%, even under similar
absolute intensity. Quantifying exercise intensity in a subject­specific way, for example by re­
porting it as percentage of maximum heart rate or maximum oxygen uptake, might be a more
accurate and suitable approach.
2.2.5
Conclusion
To conclude, it was found that the current best way to correct rotary encoder based power
calculations, is by using the following formula: Ppull,rotary = 1.808Ppull,force −0.5319.
Improved calibration methods are necessary to confirm this relation in a reliable manner. For
further exercise research using this set­up, it is suggested to look at subject­specific exercise
intensity if possible and relevant, by recording heart rate data and reporting intensity in terms of
percentage of maximum heart rate reached. This is an easy­to­implement and robust measure
that is widely used, making it more suitable for research comparison.
13
==PAGE:19==
2.3
7.0T compatibility
2.3.1
Set­up and exercise protocol development
The initially envisioned approach for enabling exercise in the Philips Achieva 7.0T was to adjust
the available ergometer set­up at DRCMR to fit the scanner. However, this ergometer set­up
was found not to be compatible with the Philips Achieva 7.0T, since the patient table of this
scanner is designed differently; the patient support control panel in the Achieva 7.0T is placed
at the end of the table top instead of next to the bore, which is in the way for the set­up rope and
hinders set­up fixation to the table. For exploring the exercised­induced dynamics of metabolite
concentrations in this study, working in a 7.0T field was considered essential, because of the
higher SNR it can achieve which is necessary to reliably detect smaller metabolites in short
time frames. Thus, for the sake of being able to explore dynamics in this project, an alternative
exercise set­up and protocol was developed, which was designed to be compatible with the
7.0T scanner.
The new protocol was aimed to be heart rate (HR) elevating. This was done to make its intensity
easily quantifiable within the scanner environment; HR can simply be monitored with existing,
MR­safe equipment. HR is a subject­dependent variable, so it is not a direct way of quantifying
the absolute intensity of exercise in general. However, reporting it as percentage of maximum
heart rate (%MHR), which is commonly done, allows for subject­independent comparisons. For
simplification, the exact exercise intensity, type, muscle target group and other variables were
thus not taken into consideration specifically. To, in the future, also be able to directly calculate
energy expenditure using the set­up, it was attempted to use the same physical mechanisms as
with the existing set­up. This would facilitate an easier integration of the two. An important focus
was to make the protocol intense enough to actually cause changes in physiological response,
hoping to induce changes in brain metabolites. This was all done while trying to maintain subject
stillness in the scanner as well as possible.
The set­up was developed based on the already available equipment. Two leg holders were
available, enabling comfortable support of the leg(s), which are easily adjusted to participant
size. One of the leg holders supports one leg only, the other one supports two. The decision
was made to use the holder for two legs, as that would allow for an exercise protocol engaging
both legs, which is likely to be more HR elevating than a protocol involving one leg only.
Several protocols have been investigated. The main bottleneck for designing a protocol was the
small scanner bore, which does not have sufficient space for large movements. Leg movement
was for example restricted to lower leg kicking only, because there was a lack of space for
the knees to engage the upper legs as well. To intensify the kicking exercise with the lower
legs, weights, sandbags and resistance bands have been experimented with. Eventually, it
was decided to use a resistance band, looped around the ankles, to cause a resistive force
while kicking and with that, increase exercise intensity. The band was preferred over weights
and sandbags for its stability and versatility.
It must be noted that the use of resistance bands deviates from the calibrated set­up. The
resistive force of the band increases with the height of the leg, pulling down more forcefully
when the leg is fully stretched. In contrast, the calibrated set­up has a constant resistive force,
assuming the flywheel spins at constant speed. This should be considered when attempting to
transfer the physical principles and intensity calculations from the old to this new set­up.
14
==PAGE:20==
2.3.2
Final set­up and exercise protocol variations
Because of the exploratory nature of this pilot study, the exercise protocol and set­up have
been developed throughout the experiments described in chapter 3 of this thesis. The following
set­ups were used.
• v1.0: The initial set­up consisted of two loops of a resistance band, sticking out from under
the leg holder plate. The rest of the band was pushed down between the leg holder and a
wooden board to keep it in place. Each of the loops was intended to be used around one
ankle of the participants. To adjust the amount of resistance, the sports resistance band
could be pulled backwards. This set­up was used with subject 1 and 2.
• v1.1: To make it easier to adjust the tightness of the resistance band, i.e. the amount of
resistance, a readjustment of the band was done. The same band was used, but instead
of creating loops, the ends were tied to the ankles directly. The principle did not change.
The set­up is pictured in Figure 2.7. This set­up was used with subject 3.
• v2.0: Since the resistance band broke due to wear and tear, and no replacement was
available, the set­up was adjusted. This version consisted of multiple rubber bands at­
tached to the base plate of the leg holder with a rope, and attached on an ankle strap on
the other end. The amount of rubbers could be increased and decreased to adjust the
amount of resistance, and the ankle straps were used for comfort. The set­up is pictured
in Figure 2.8 and Figure 2.9. This set­up was used with subject 4.
Figure 2.7: Set­up v1.1, which was used with subject 3. The ends of the resistance bands were adjusted so they
could be tied to the subjects ankles.
The following protocols were used.
• v1.0: In the initial exercise protocol, the subject was asked to kick their feet in an alter­
nating manner at a moderate speed for a duration of 5 minutes. This exercise protocol
was used with subject 1. The subject reported that the protocol did not succeed in getting
them to feel a raised HR.
15
==PAGE:21==
Figure 2.8: Set­up v2.0, which was used with subject 4. The restance band was replaced with rubber bands, which
were attached to the leg holder board on one side, and to ankle straps on the other side.
Figure 2.9: Set­up v2.0, while in use. This set­up was used with subject 4. The restance band was replaced with
rubber bands, which were attached to the leg holder board on one side, and to ankle straps on the other side.
16
==PAGE:22==
• v2.0: In the second iteration of the exercise protocol, subjects were asked to kick their feet
in an alternating manner at high speed for 30 seconds, after which a 15 second resting
period was provided. This was repeated ten times. This high­intensity interval approach
was chosen to increase the intensity of the protocol, while including periods of rest for the
targeted muscle. This exercise protocol was used with subject 2.
• v2.1: Since the protocol still did not provide the intended intensity, the exercise period was
adjusted to last 45 seconds. The resting period and amount of iterations stayed the same.
This protocol was used for subject 3 and 4.
The set­up and protocol variation is summarised in Table 2.1.
ID
Set­up
Exercise protocol
Subject 1
v1.0 ­ resistance band
v1.0 ­ continuous (5 minutes)
Subject 2
v1.0 ­ resistance band
v2.0 ­ intervals (30 seconds ­ 15 seconds)
Subject 3
v1.1* ­ resistance band, updated
v2.1 ­ intervals (45 seconds ­ 15 seconds)
Subject 4
v2.0 ­ rubber bands
v2.1 ­ intervals (30 seconds ­ 15 seconds)
Table 2.1: Differences in set­up and exercise protocol per subject. *This set­up broke halfway through the experiment.
This is elaborated on in Section 3.4.
17
==PAGE:23==
3
Brain metabolism
3.1
Introduction
3.1.1
Dynamic 1H­MRS
The set­ups and protocols described in chapter 2 were developed to enable quantification of
metabolites after in­scanner exercise by the use of MRS. MRS is a technology that uses the nu­
clear magnetic resonance (NMR) phenomena to quantify the concentrations of specific atoms
in, for example, brain or muscle tissue. Nuclei with an odd number of nucleons, such as hydro­
gen (1H) and phosphorous (31P), often possess the property of nuclear spin. This behaviour
creates a very weak magnetic moment around the spinning axes. In standard environments,
the magnetic moments caused by this behaviour are pointing in random directions, resulting in
zero net magnetisation. However, when these nuclei are brought into an external magnetic field
(B0), such as the one generated in an MR­scanner, the nuclear spin axes start aligning in the
direction of that magnetic field. They do not align fully, but will start precessing around the axis
of B0. This will result in a positive net magnetisation in the direction of B0.
The frequency of precession around B0, called the resonance or Larmor frequency (f), is spe­
cific to each type of nucleus and is dependent on the field strength B0 according to
f = γB0
(3.1)
where γ is the gyromagnetic ratio in MHz/T, specific to each type of nucleus.
These differences in Larmor frequencies can be used to perturb specific nuclei. Using a transmit
radio frequency (RF) coil, electromagnetic radio frequency pulses can be applied perpendicular
to the B0 field, creating a so­called B1 field. These RF pulses can be tuned to match the Larmor
frequency of the nucleus of interest. Upon application of these RF pulses, the nuclei of interest
are excited and their magnetisation will (partly) tip towards the transversal plane. The net trans­
verse magnetisation, which is still precessing at the Larmor frequency around B0 and thus has
an oscillating pattern, induces a current in the receive RF coil, which represents the MR signal.
The oscillating pattern is the result of the sinusoidal signal caused through precession and a
decay of transverse magnetisation. This decay is caused by dephasing of the individual nuclei
spins due to natural atomic and molecular mechanisms (spin­spin interactions), and by field
inhomogeneities. The signal resulting from the current induced in the receive RF coil is called
a free induction decay (FID).
The electrons surrounding each of the nuclei, making up the so­called electron cloud, can move.
Their movement generates a local electromagnetic field, which counteracts the B0 field. This
results in a reduction of the effective field experienced by the nucleus. This concept is called
shielding. Shielding thus influences the magnetic field felt by the nucleus, which alters the
frequency of the registered signal of that specific nucleus, as is given by
feff = γ · B0 · (1 −σ)
where feff is the effective frequency and σ is the shielding constant, which depends on the local
nuclear electron cloud.
The recorded FID is thus a combination of signals of all excited nuclei of interest in different
electron environments and with slightly different frequencies. These deviations from the Lar­
mor frequency are called the chemical shift. By taking the fast Fourier transform of the time
18
==PAGE:24==
series of the signal, a signal­frequency plot is generated, which is called a spectrum. Since
frequency is dependent on the field strength (Formula 3.1.1), it is conventional to transform
the x­axis to display the difference from the Larmor frequency, e.g. the chemical shift, in parts
per million (ppm). The resulting signal­chemical shift spectra show peaks at different chemical
shifts, depicting the amount of nuclei in those specific chemical environments. The area under
the peak is a measure for the relative concentration of the linked metabolite.
In this thesis, the nucleus of choice was 1H, the proton, because of its high abundance in human
tissue. This enables easier detection and helps distinguish many metabolites, since hydrogen
is a common atom in many molecules.
Scanners with a B0 field of 1.5T and 3.0T are the state of the art in the clinical setting. However,
scanners with higher magnetic fields show higher spectral resolution. This makes it easier to dis­
tinguish different metabolite contributions to the spectra, increasing the amount of metabolites
that can be accurately quantified using this technology. For example, glutamate and glutamine
are more easily quantified reliably in higher fields (Terpstra et al., 2016). Additionally, ultra­high
field scanners show a higher sensitivity, since SNR is improved. Therefore, higher fields allow
not only for quantifying more metabolites, but also for using shorter scan times. Since shorter
echo times can be used to achieve similar data quality using ultra­high field scanners, advance­
ments have been made on dynamic or functional MRS (fMRS). That is, metabolite time courses
have been investigated by evaluating acquired data averaged over subsequent time intervals.
For example, Boillat et al., 2020 used fMRS to research the dynamics of brain metabolite con­
centration in the visual cortex as a response to visual stimulation. For the purpose of this study,
ultra­high field MRS was used for dynamic quantification of brain metabolites.
3.1.2
Voxel location
In order to investigate localised metabolite concentrations in MRS, a voxel of interest (VOI)
needs to be specified. By combining three slice selective pulses, a specific region can be
excited while the rest of the brain is not.
In this study, the anterior cingulate cortex (ACC) was chosen as region of interest. The motiva­
tion for choosing this area is twofold. First of all, an upcoming study at DRCMR, to which this
study forms an informative exploration, will investigate cognitive and age related differences
linked to exercise­induced brain metabolism. The ACC has been shown to exhibit metabolism
change related to cognitive ageing (Lind et al., 2020, Rai et al., 2018). Therefore, the ACC is
one of the primary focus regions in the upcoming study, which makes it a logical VOI for the
current research as well. Secondly, the ACC is a relatively easy voxel to use in spectroscopy,
as it is easy to locate and lies relatively far from the skull. This ensures that inclusion of the skull
will not happen and data will not get distorted.
3.1.3
Brain metabolites
The metabolites concentration changes in the ACC were investigated in this study. The metabo­
lites of interest were N­acetylaspartate (NAA) and N­acetylaspartylglutamate (NAAG), choline
containing compounds (tCho), creatine and phosphocreatine (tCr), gamma­aminobutyric acid
(GABA), glutamate and glutamine (Glx), myo­inositol (mIns), lactate (Lac) and glutathione (GSH).
The following subsections describe their roles in the brain.
3.1.3.1
NAA + NAAG
N­acetylaspartate (NAA) is highly abundant in the brain. It is considered a marker for neuronal
density, thus NAA decrease is seen in conditions known to cause loss of neurons, such as
multiple sclerosis (MS) and stroke. It is also known to decrease with age, which is in line with
commonly reported age­related decrease in neural density (Eylers et al., 2016).
N­acetylaspartylglutamate (NAAG) is a peptide neurotransmitter synthesised from NAA and
glutamic acid. The 1H­MRS peaks for NAA and NAAG are overlapping and difficult to evaluate
19
==PAGE:25==
on their own. Thus, often the combination of the two metabolites is taken as a concentration
measure. NAA has a slow turnover, meaning its concentration is stable over short time spans.
However, it is known that part of the NAA is used to synthesise NAAG. The combined con­
centration however, does not change through this process (Landim et al., 2016, Castellano et
al., 2012). That makes NAA+NAAG a good candidate for a reference metabolite in dynamic
1H­MRS.
Mostly, NAA levels have not been reported to change after acute exercise (Çaglar et al., 2005,
Coxon et al., 2018, Maddock et al., 2011). However, Maddock et al., 2016 suggest an acute
increase in NAA due to exercise. Effects on NAA+NAAG were not reported.
3.1.3.2
tCho
Choline containing compound concentrations, or tCho for short, are thought to reflect cell mem­
brane turnover, since these compounds play an essential role in membrane synthesis (Tayebati
and Amenta, 2013). No significant changes in tCho concentrations have been reported as an
acute result of exercise (Çaglar et al., 2005, Coxon et al., 2018, Maddock et al., 2011, Maddock
et al., 2016).
3.1.3.3
tCr
Creatine (Cr) and phosphocreatine(PCr), together named tCr, act as energy buffer and shuttle
in cellular energy metabolism, especially in muscle. In many pathologies, a decreased brain
tCr level is seen. Brain creatine may decrease with age (Laakso et al., 2003). Brain creatine
deficits could be induced by acute exercise (Dolan et al., 2019, Dennis et al., 2015, Roschel
et al., 2021). However, contrasting results have also been reported (Maddock et al., 2011).
Commonly, the concentration of tCr is considered relatively stable in the brain. This behaviour
makes tCr a good candidate for a reference metabolite in dynamic 1H­MRS. However, its con­
centration seems to be affected by exercise, as that directly impacts energy metabolism crea­
tine is involved in. Thus, for the purpose of this study, it is not considered a suitable reference
metabolite.
3.1.3.4
GABA
GABA is an important inhibitory neurotransmitter, which is influenced by many processes, such
as menstruation, alcohol abuse, epilepsy and depression. It is reported to increase following
bouts of exercise (Coxon et al., 2018, Maddock et al., 2011).
3.1.3.5
Glx
Glx is the collective term for glutamate (Glu) and glutamine (Gln), two significantly overlapping
metabolites that are difficult to distinguish using 1H­MRS. Glu is easily converted to Gln and
vice versa, as part of the Glu/Gln cycle. Glu is a major excitatory neurotransmitter, the most
abundant one in the brain, and is considered important for memory and cognition. It is also a
component necessary for the synthesis of other metabolites, e.g. glutathione (GSH). Following
exercise, Glx is shown to increase (Maddock et al., 2011, Maddock et al., 2016, Świątkiewicz
et al., 2023). However, conflicting results exist (Dennis et al., 2015).
3.1.3.6
mIns
The role of myo­inositol in the brain is not well­known. It is often considered to be linked with
glial activity (Best et al., 2014, Njau et al., 2016, Foley et al., 2017), and altered levels have
been detected in patients with several disorders, such as Alzheimer’s disease (AD), multiple
sclerosis (MS), mild cognitive impairment (MCI) and brain injury. In the kidneys, it is known
to play an important role in osmotic regulation. As an acute result of exercise, no significant
changes in myo­inositol have been reported (Coxon et al., 2018, Maddock et al., 2016).
3.1.3.7
Lac
Lactate plays an important role in energy metabolism, as it is the end product of anaerobic
glycolysis. It often increases both globally and in the brain as a result of restricted oxygen
20
==PAGE:26==
supply. Thus, after anaerobic exercise, brain Lac levels have been shown to rise (Świątkiewicz
et al., 2023).
3.1.3.8
GSH
The antioxidant glutathione plays an important role in maintaining the structure of red blood cells
and in neutralising free radicals and other reactive compounds in the blood. In many diseases
and in ageing, depletion of GSH is reported. Brain GSH concentration is also shown to decrease
as a result of acute moderate exercise (Rai et al., 2018).
3.1.4
Time courses
As explained, exercise causes different ratios of oxygen and glucose equivalent uptake in the
brain, which has been hypothesised to be the result of synthesis of neurotransmitters, replenish­
ment of metabolite stores and/or metabolite accumulation in the brain. Some knowledge exists
about the amount and direction of metabolite concentration change as a result of exercise, how­
ever the time courses those different metabolite concentrations follow remain unknown. In phos­
phorus magnetic resonance spectroscopy (31P­MRS) in muscle, changes in PCr concentration
as a result of muscle contraction can typically be characterised to be exponential (Meyerspeer
et al., 2021). Similar patterns were expected to be seen in brain metabolism.
21
==PAGE:27==
3.2
Methods
3.2.1
Data acquisition
3.2.1.1
Participants
Four volunteering participants were recruited for this pilot study, of which two male and two
female. All were healthy young adults. They were advised not to perform heavy exercise before
the session. The only exclusion criterion was having contraindications to MRI.
3.2.1.2
1H­MRS acquisition protocol
The protocol, schematically visualised in Figure 3.1, started with screening and preparation
steps, followed by pre­exercise scanning, a period of in­scanner exercise, a second set of prepa­
ration steps and ending with a post­exercise scanning sequence. Spectroscopy was performed
Figure 3.1: 1H­MRS acquisition protocol. *Time varies between subjects.
using a Philips Achieva 7.0T full body scanner, combined with a 32­channel receive head coil
and a dual transmit coil. The MR sequence started with a SmartBrain survey, for voxel local­
isation. The voxel of interest (VOI) was placed on the anterior cingulate cortex (ACC), sized
20x20x20 mm3. An sLASER sequence (TR/TE = 3800/28 ms, bandwidth = 4 kHz, data points
= 2048) was used to acquire localised single voxel 1H­MRS spectra. This sequence was pre­
ferred over STEAM and PRESS sequences, since PRESS has bad localisation in 7T scanners,
and STEAM, although capable of reaching shorter TR and TE, generates only half of the signal
strength compared to sLASER (Öz et al., 2021).
Over the four sessions, TE varied slightly from the aimed value. The deviations can be seen
in Table 3.1. No spectral averaging was performed upon acquisition; spectral data were saved
for each repetition separately. B0 VOI shimming was done using the FASTMAP method. VA­
POR water suppression was performed, and at the beginning of each sequence, a non­water­
suppressed spectrum was acquired. For subject 4, an interleaved water acquisition approach
was taken, in which an additional non­water­suppressed spectrum was acquired after every
16th shot.
After exercise, a second SmartBrain survey was done for automatic re­localisation of the voxel.
FASTMAP shimming was performed again before the post­exercise acquisition. This was nec­
essary to adjust for potential subject movement due to the exercise protocol, and to ensure
similar quality of shim in the pre­ and post­exercise condition.
The baseline acquisition consisted of 48 repetitions and post­exercise acquisition of 400 repeti­
tions. In subject 1, the pre­exercise acquisition consisted of 32 repetitions and the post­exercise
acquisition of 160 repetitions, as reported in Table 3.1. For subject 1, a post­session structural
T1­weighted 3D multi­shot gradient echo scan was acquired.
To control the exercise load on participants and to verify that the subjects were working, HR
was recorded. HR data were monitored with a Philips Expression MR400 Patient Monitor. The
pre­exercise HR estimate was extracted during the pre­exercise scan. For the during­exercise
HR estimate, the monitored data were reported at the end of each exercise bout and averaged.
22
==PAGE:28==
ID
TE [ms]
Repetitions
Water suppression
pre
post
pre
post
Subject 1
28.22
28.22
32
160
single shot
Subject 2
23.85
23.85
48
400
single shot
Subject 3
29.32
29.25
48
400
single shot
Subject 4
29.69
29.17
48
400
interleaved (every 16 shots)
Table 3.1: Sequence setting deviations. TE: echo time
3.2.2
Motion
With an exercise bout in between two spectroscopy sessions, participant movement is expected.
To account for this, the voxel is re­positioned before the start of the post­exercise acquisition
based on a second SmartBrain survey. To check the accuracy of the re­positioning, voxel move­
ment was assessed. The pre­exercise SmartBrain scan was registered to the post­exercise
SmartBrain scan using rigid transformation (6 degrees of freedom) with the FSL tool FLIRT. Two
voxel masks were extracted based on the position of the pre­ and post­exercise voxel. Subse­
quently, the pre­exercise voxel mask was transformed with FSL FLIRT using the transformation
matrix generated by registration of the SmartBrain images. The resulting transformed voxel
location was compared to the post­exercise voxel location, the overlay was visualised using
FSLEyes and the percentage of voxel overlap was calculated using MATLAB (The Mathworks
Inc., 2022).
3.2.3
Metabolite quantification
A pipeline for quantifying metabolite concentrations and investigate trends was developed, using
preprocessing in MATLAB, peak quantification with spectral quantification software LCModel
(Provencher, 2014), and postprocessing in MATLAB.
3.2.3.1
Preprocessing, spectral fitting and quality assessment
Raw spectral data were preprocessed using an adapted in­house toolbox in MATLAB. Channels
with noise levels lower than 0.2 were not used, as this suggests broken preamplifiers. Data
were downsampled and eddy current correction was performed using existing in­house MATLAB
scripts. Additionally, spectral alignment and phasing were done. Both the spectra acquired pre­
and post­exercise were averaged and saved in blocks of 16. All spectra were also averaged
and saved over the full pre­ and post­exercise acquisition periods. For subject 4, these steps
were also taken in blocks of 4, 8 and 32.
The resulting spectra were imported into LCModel for fitting, quality assessment and metabo­
lite quantification. The imported spectra underwent spectral phasing and frequency shifting by
LCModel. Spectral fitting was performed in LCModel using an in­house basis set acquired for
a previous study on the same scanner, using a similar MRS protocol with comparable echo
time (TE = 30 ms). The metabolites included in the basis set are alanine (Ala), ascorbate
(Asc), aspartate (Asp), creatine (Cr), gamma­aminobutyric acid (GABA), glutamine (Gln), gluta­
mate (Glu), glycine (Gly), myo­inositol (mIns), lactate (Lac), phosphocholine (PCho), phospho­
creatine (PCr), phosphoetanolamine (PE), scyllo­inositol (sIns), taurine (Tau), glucose (Glc),
glycerophosphocholine (GPC), glutathione (GSH), N­acetylaspartate (NAA), N­acetyl­aspartyl­
glutamate (NAAG), and macromolecules (MM). All metabolites in the set were quantified, but
only the metabolites of interest were reported, which are GABA, Lac, GSH, PCho+PCG, Cr+PCr,
NAA+NAAG and Glu+Gln.
All metabolite spectra were saved individually in order to enable investigation of dynamic changes.
Optimally, a look would be taken at metabolite quantities in singular spectra to be able to inves­
tigate changes in the shortest time steps possible. However, sensitivity in 1H­MRS is generally
23
==PAGE:29==
not high enough to accurately quantify metabolites in single spectra. This is specifically prob­
lematic for difficult to quantify metabolites with small peaks, such as Lac and GABA.
Saving the spectra individually allows for many different ways of averaging, grouping and pro­
cessing the individual spectra. Two approaches were considered: applying a moving average
and averaging in blocks. The first approach was dismissed, as it would cause dependence be­
tween consecutive metabolite ratio values, which would complicate data interpretation. Thus,
spectral data were averaged in blocks. In order to settle on a block size for the continuation of
our data analysis, the influence of the block size was inspected. The spectra of subject 4, which
were averaged in blocks of 4, 8, 16 and 32, were used to quantify metabolite ratios as specified
in the next subsection, and their values were compared.
The acquired spectral fits and metabolite concentrations outputted through LC­Model are ac­
companied by quality values. Spectral quality assessment was performed by evaluation of
SNR, full width at half­maximum (FWHM) and standard error estimates or Cramér­Rao lower
bounds (%SD, CRLB), which are outputted in each LCModel analysis. The SNR here is defined
as the spectral maximum minus the baseline, divided by twice the root mean squared residuals
(Provencher, 2014). The FWHM roughly estimates the spectral linewidth. These single values
give an indication of spectral quality, but can not used separately. Metabolite specific %SD
values give a more robust and useful measure of spectral quality, as they include resolution,
noise level, and other factors (Provencher, 2014).
Spectra were omitted when FWHM exceeded 0.1 ppm, based on the approach of Lind et al.
(2020), who used a similar acquisition method. None of the spectra were omitted based on this
quality requirement. Quantified metabolites with a %SD value of 20% or higher were omitted,
which is a generally used rough criterion for acceptable reliability (Provencher, 2014). For addi­
tional exploratory analysis, specifically of GABA and Lac ­ which are lowly abundant metabolites
and are difficult to quantify reliably, a second approach was taken in which only metabolite quan­
tifications with an %SD value exceeding 35% were omitted. This value was chosen to allow for
inclusion of a minimum of 60% of the measurements. In subject 2 for GABA and subject 4 for
Lac, there were not enough accurately quantified data points to comply with this minimum. SNR
values were used for further analysis of the spectra.
3.2.3.2
Quantification, stability and trends
Metabolite quantification was done by expressing concentrations relative to NAA+NAAG con­
centrations, as the NAA+NAAG concentration was expected to be stable throughout exercise.
Additionally, metabolite concentrations were scaled against the concentration calculated from
the unsuppressed water peak acquired at the start of each acquisition (pre­ and post­exercise).
For subject 4, metabolite concentrations were also quantified relative to the water concentra­
tions in the interleaved single shot unsuppressed water acquisitions. The quantified metabolite
concentration values from LCModel were extracted and saved using MATLAB. Measurements
not meeting the quality thresholds were omitted. All analyses were performed on the basis of
individual subject measurements. Additionally, the results of the different subjects were com­
pared to find common trends.
In this study, NAA+NAAG was used as the main reference metabolite. The stability of the ref­
erence metabolite is essential for meaningful assessment of metabolite ratios over time. When
the reference metabolite is not stable, it is difficult to establish whether metabolite ratio changes
are due to reference instability or actual change of the metabolite of interest.
One way to evaluate stability of the signal of the reference metabolite is to investigate its value
over time, scaled to the value of the water concentration in the first unsuppressed water peak.
This was done using the same processing and quantification pipeline as for the quantification of
the ratios of the other metabolites against NAA+NAAG, however now scaled against water. The
24
==PAGE:30==
NAA+NAAG/water signal was visually assessed to check for stability. However, this approach
requires the assumption that the water signal itself was stable during the full post­exercise ac­
quisition.
The stability of the water signal can be assessed by acquiring interleaved unsuppressed water
measurements. The acquisition protocol used with subject 4 included measurement of unsup­
pressed water measurements after every 16th shot in the post­exercise scan. The acquired
FIDs were preprocessed using the same pipeline used for the water­suppressed spectra. The
stability of the water signal was investigated by extracting the first data point of each acquired
FID, which represents the concentration of water in the measurement.
NAA+NAAG stability can not be scaled against one unsuppressed water concentration if the
assumption of a stable water signal is wrong. Therefore, the NAA+NAAG signal was also eval­
uated scaled to the interleaved water concentrations.
The metabolite ratios acquired in the pre­exercise spectroscopy functioned as a baseline to
compare the post­exercise data to. That would allow for seeing if exercising actually impacts
metabolite concentration ratios in the ACC, i.e. whether there was a change between the pre­
exercise and post­exercise data. Since the pre­exercise metabolite ratios were recorded in rest,
they were assumed to be stable throughout the scan. To verify this assumption, the stability of
the pre­exercise data was visually evaluated.
To assess if metabolite ratios changed as an acute result of exercise, pre­ and post­exercise
data were compared. This was done by evaluating the differences between the metabolite ratios
of the averaged full pre­ and post­exercise exercise period. Additionally, the pre­exercise ratios
were visually compared to the post­exercise ratios.
To investigate how metabolite ratios developed over time after the post­exercise scan, time
courses were evaluated. This was done by visual inspection. Additionally, linear models were
fitted to investigate trends.
25
==PAGE:31==
3.3
Results
3.3.1
Data acquisition
During this study, exercise and acquisition protocol have been developed throughout the exper­
iments, as method development was a big part of the aim of this study. Where possible, both
exercise and acquisition protocol were kept similar. However, some deviations were applied
when they were hypothesised to improve study outcome, or when necessary due to set­up
problems. The changes in exercise protocol were summarised earlier in Table 2.1 and have
been extensively described in section 2.3.2, and the differences in acquisition parameters were
mentioned before in Table 3.1 and described in section 3.2.1.2.
The recorded HR data, which were acquired to control the exercise load on participants and
to verify that the subjects were working, are summarised in Table 3.2. For subject 1 and 3
the Philips Expression MR400 Patient Monitor was not available, so HR readings were done
using the pulse oximeter (Philips, Best, the Netherlands) in the Philips Achieva 7.0T. For subject
1, these read­outs were unstable. For subject 3, HR was roughly estimated from the pulse
oximeter data for both pre­ and during­exercise condition. It can be seen that subject 4 had the
highest HR increase, while subject 3 had the lowest.
ID
pre­exercise
post­exercise (mean ± sd)
post­exercise %MHR
Subject 1
not reported
not reported
not reported
Subject 2
75 BPM
124 ± 3 BPM
64%
Subject 3
80 BPM
110 BPM
56%
Subject 4
65 BPM
133 ± 9 BPM
69%
Table 3.2: Approximate heart rate measurements before and during exercise protocol. The post­exercise values
show the mean and standard deviation of the heart rate after each exercise bout. %MHR: percentage of maximum
heart rate.
To keep track of the delay between end of exercise and post­exercise acquisition, the time re­
quired for VOI placement and reshimming was recorded. Post­exercise acquisition was initiated
3.5 to 4 minutes after the end of the last exercise bout.
3.3.2
Motion
To verify the voxel placement in the post­exercise scan, rigid registrations were performed us­
ing the FSL tool FLIRT, and voxel overlap was calculated using the Dice overlap coefficient
(Dice, 1945). Figure 3.2 shows the result of registration of the pre­exercise SmartBrain to the
post­exercise SmartBrain. For subject 1, the structural T1­weighted 3D multi­shot gradient echo
scan ­ acquired after post­exercise 1H­MRS acquisition ­ was used instead of the post­exercise
SmartBrain survey. The voxels visualised in yellow show the actual voxel location used in the
post­exercise acquisition. The voxels in white visualise the pre­exercise voxel location regis­
tered to the post­exercise structural scan, e.g. the location on the post­exercise structural scan
that corresponds to the voxel location on the pre­exercise structural scan. It can be seen that
the white and yellow voxels are overlapping well (0.77 ± 0.07). The individual Dice scores are
reported in Table 3.3.
3.3.3
Preprocessing, spectral fitting and quality assessment
This section will validate processing steps and assess the quality of spectra and spectral data.
An example of a singular spectrum, quantified by LCModel, can be seen in Figure 3.3. It shows
large residuals, low SNR and the %SDs reported indicate low quantification accuracy for e.g.
Lac, GSH and GABA. To determine an appropriate block size, sizes of 4, 8, 16 and 32 were
visually inspected for subject 4. Figure 3.4 shows the resulting data for tCr. It can be seen that
with blocks of 4 and 8, the data are noisy, with average SNR of 16 and 20 respectively. With
26
==PAGE:32==
(a) Subject 1
(b) Subject 2
(c) Subject 3
(d) Subject 4
Figure 3.2: Voxel movement between the pre­ and post­exercise scan. The post­exercise voxel is shown in white.
The pre­exercise voxel, registered to the post­exercise structural image, is shown in yellow. The background shows
the post­exercise structural image, which is a T1­weighted 3D multi­shot gradient echo for subject 1 and a SmartBrain
survey for subject 2, 3 and 4.
27
==PAGE:33==
ID
Dice score voxel overlap
Subject 1
0.87
Subject 2
0.67
Subject 2
0.74
Subject 4
0.78
Table 3.3: Dice coefficient for all subjects, representing overlap between the pre­ and post­exercise VOI location.
Calculated between the pre­exercise voxel, registered to the post­exercise space, and the post­exercise voxel.
blocks of 16 and 32, the data are much smoother, with average SNR of 26 and 32 respectively.
Block size 16 was used for further data analysis, in order not to include unnecessary noise, while
keeping relevant data recognisable. The reported SNR, FWHM and %SD values outputted by
Figure 3.3: Example of LCModel output of the single, non­averaged data of one acquisition. Black visualises the
signal, red signifies the fitted model. The top figure visualises residuals. The output table on the right lists calculated
concentrations, ratios, and quality values.
LCModel were used for quality assessment. For each of the subjects, the mean SNR and
FWHM are reported in table 3.4 for each of the spectral averaging methods. There were no
data points with an FWHM value higher than the quality threshold set at 0.1 ppm, so no spectral
quantification were omitted on that basis. The stability of both SNR and FWHM were checked
and no strange deviations have been identified. %SD values are specific for the quantification
of each metabolite in each subject. Data points with %SD values exceeding 20 were omitted.
3.3.4
Quantification, stability and trends
In the next subsection, the acquired metabolite concentrations will be introduced. To start with,
the results about the stability of the reference metabolite will be presented. Then, for each
metabolite, we will take a look at baseline stability, the difference between pre­ and post­exercise
and the trends over time post­exercise.
28
==PAGE:34==
Figure 3.4: Example of the effect of different block sizes. This figure shows tCr/NAA+NAAG ratios for block sizes 4,
8, 16 and 32 for subject 4.
3.3.4.1
Reference metabolite stability
NAA+NAAG was used as reference metabolite in this study. To analyse the stability of this
metabolite, which is essential for evaluating other metabolite ratios, NAA+NAAG was assessed
as referenced to the initial, unsuppressed water peak. To do so, the assumption was made that
the water concentration and field inhomogeneity were constant over the experiment. For each
of the participants, the resulting plots can be seen in Figure 3.5. The figure shows that the value
deviates mainly between pre­ and post­exercise, but also over time and between subjects. To
understand whether these fluctuations were due to actual NAA+NAAG concentration change
over time, or due to the false assumption that the water concentration an field inhomogeneity
were constant, a better look was taken at the unsuppressed water signals. For subject 4, un­
suppressed water peaks were recorded after every 16 shots. The real values of the first FID
points of each of these recordings, which are a relative measure for the water concentration,
were extracted and plotted as seen in Figure 3.6. This way, water signal change over time could
be assessed. It can be seen that the first signal seems higher than the others, which are similar
but not constant. Additionally, the signal in measurement 21 seems exceptionally high.
If NAA+NAAG and water are both varying in a similar fashion, this could be caused by external
factors affecting the signals of both metabolites (and all other metabolites in the VOI), such as
field inhomogeneity. Looking at their ratio at different time points will cancel out those external
factors. A stable NAA+NAAG/water ratio over time means that either one of the metabolites
can be a feasible reference, correcting for external factors that affect all metabolites of interest
29
==PAGE:35==
Subject
spectral averaging method
mean SNR (± sd)
mean FWHM (± sd)
1
blocks of 16
33.4 ± 0.7
0.0245 ppm ± 0.0016 ppm
1 pre and 1 post block
44.0 ± 7.1
0.0260 ppm ± 0.0042 ppm
2
blocks of 16
23.5 ± 1.5
0.0339 ppm ± 0.0039 ppm
1 pre and 1 post block
35.0 ± 8.5
0.0395 ppm ± 0.0092 ppm
3
blocks of 16
32.6 ± 1.3
0.0244 ppm ± 0.0015 ppm
1 pre and 1 post block
50 ± 10.6
0.0245 ppm ± 0.0021 ppm
4
blocks of 16
26.1 ± 9.1
0.0315 ppm ± 0.0028 ppm
1 pre and 1 post block
44.5 ± 6.4
0.0310 ppm ± 0.0028 ppm
Table 3.4: Spectral quality assessment. SNR: signal to noise ratio, FWHM: full width at half maximum, sd: standard
deviation.
in a similar way.
The NAA+NAAG values for subject 4 were obtained both as a ratio to the first unsuppressed
water peak signal of the sequence ­ visualised in Figure 3.7(a) ­ and as a ratio to the unsup­
pressed water peak signal acquired right before every block of 16 shots, shown in Figure 3.7(b).
This second plot thus shows the NAA+NAAG/water ratios over time. Mind that the pre­exercise
concentrations in both plots are referenced to the first and only unsuppressed water in the pre­
exercise scan, as no additional unsuppressed water peaks were acquired pre­exercise. It can
be seen that in both of the situations, the ratio changes with time. This is especially visible be­
tween acquisition sessions. The post­exercise ratios against the first water peak seem stable.
The post­exercise ratios against the interleaved water peaks seem to vary more, specifically in
the blocks post 1 and post 21. Looking at the absolute unsuppressed water amounts, the same
blocks show to be deviating.
As NAA+NAAG does not seem to vary greatly, it was used as reference metabolite in all further
analyses.
3.3.4.2
tCho
Baseline stability In Figure 3.8, the pre­exercise ratio of tCho against NAA+NAAG is visualised
in red. The ratio seems to vary slightly, but does not seem to have a trend over time.
Difference pre­ and post­exercise Figure 3.9 shows the tCho/NAA+NAAG ratio during the
total pre­exercise scan and during the full post­exercise scan. It can be seen that the ratio
seems to be increased after exercise for subject 2. For subject 3, a decreasing trend between
pre­ and post­exercise is seen.
Post­exercise trends As shown in Figure 3.8, the tCho/NAA+NAAG ratio post­exercise seems
to follow an increasing trend for subject 2. For the other subjects, no trend is seen. Linear model
fitting shows similar results, with a slope of 18.6 · 10−6 for subject 2 and slopes smaller than
±10 · 10−6 for the other subjects. The trend in subject 2 seems to diverge from the baseline.
3.3.4.3
tCr
Baseline stability In Figure 3.10, the pre­exercise ratio of tCr against NAA+NAAG is visualised
in red. The ratios do not seem to be changing, although in subject 3, the ratio seems to increase
within the pre­exercise scan.
Difference pre­ and post­exercise Figure 3.11 shows the tCr/NAA+NAAG ratio during the
total pre­exercise scan and during the full post­exercise scan. For subjects 3 and 4, the tCr/­
NAA+NAAG ratio seem to follow a decreasing trend.
Post­exercise trends As shown in Figure 3.10, the tCr/NAA+NAAG ratio post­exercise seems
to follow an increasing trend for subject 1 and 2. For the other subjects, no trend is seen. Linear
30
==PAGE:36==
Figure 3.5: NAA+NAAG/water ratios over time for each of the subjects. Each pre­ and post­exercise block consists
of 16 spectra, acquired during a total time of 60.8 seconds. For subject 4, there is an extra delay of TE=3.8s between
each block in the post­exercise measurements.
model fitting shows similar results, with a slope of 18.4 · 10−6 and 29.4 · 10−6 for subject 1 and
2 respectively, and slopes smaller than ±10 · 10−6 for the other subjects. The trends in both
subject 1 and 2 seem to converge to the baseline.
3.3.4.4
GABA
Note that for GABA evaluation, the quality control threshold of %SD<20 was increased to
%SD≤35.
Baseline stability In Figure 3.12, the pre­exercise ratio of GABA against NAA+NAAG is visu­
alised in red. The ratios do not seem to be changing.
Difference pre­ and post­exercise Figure 3.13 shows the GABA/NAA+NAAG ratio during the
total pre­exercise scan and during the full post­exercise scan. For subjects 1 and 4, the GABA/­
NAA+NAAG ratio seem to follow an increasing trend.
Post­exercise trends As shown in Figure 3.12, the GABA/NAA+NAAG ratio post­exercise
seems to follow an increasing trend for subject 3 and 4. For the other subjects, no trend is
seen. Linear model fitting shows similar results, with a slope of 14.2 · 10−6 and 24.7 · 10−6 for
subject 3 and 4 respectively, and slopes smaller than ±10 · 10−6 for the other subjects. The
trends in both subject 3 and 4 seem to diverge from the baseline.
31
==PAGE:37==
Figure 3.6: Water concentration (a.u.) in the interleaved water­unsuppressed acquisitions, extracted as the real
value of the first FID point of the measurements.
Figure 3.7: NAA+NAAG/water ratios for subject 4. (a) ratio of NAA+NAAG values to the value of the first unsup­
pressed water peak, (b) ratio of NAA+NAAG values to the values of their respective unsuppressed water peak.
32
==PAGE:38==
Figure 3.8: tCho/NAA+NAAG ratios over time for each of the subjects. Each pre­ and post­exercise block consists of
16 spectra, acquired during a total time of 60.8 seconds. For subject 4, there is an extra delay of TE=3.8s between
each block in the post­exercise measurements.
Figure 3.9: tCho/NAA+NAAG ratios before and after exercise for each of the subjects. For subject 1, the pre­exercise
block consists of 32 spectra (121.6 seconds) and the post­exercise block consists of 160 spectra (608 seconds).
For subjects 2, 3 and 4, the pre­exercise block consists of 48 spectra (182.4 seconds) and the post­exercise block
consists of 400 spectra (1520 seconds). For subject 4, the post­exercise block also includes time for interleaved
water acquisition, meaning the total time covers 1611.2 seconds.
33
==PAGE:39==
Figure 3.10: tCr/NAA+NAAG ratios over time for each of the subjects. Each pre­ and post­exercise block consists of
16 spectra, acquired during a total time of 60.8 seconds. For subject 4, there is an extra delay of TE=3.8s between
each block in the post­exercise measurements.
Figure 3.11: tCr/NAA+NAAG ratios before and after exercise for each of the subjects. For subject 1, the pre­exercise
block consists of 32 spectra (121.6 seconds) and the post­exercise block consists of 160 spectra (608 seconds).
For subjects 2, 3 and 4, the pre­exercise block consists of 48 spectra (182.4 seconds) and the post­exercise block
consists of 400 spectra (1520 seconds). For subject 4, the post­exercise block also includes time for interleaved
water acquisition, meaning the total time covers 1611.2 seconds.
34
==PAGE:40==
Figure 3.12: GABA/NAA+NAAG ratios over time for each of the subjects. Each pre­ and post­exercise block consists
of 16 spectra, acquired during a total time of 60.8 seconds. For subject 4, there is an extra delay of TE=3.8s between
each block in the post­exercise measurements.
Figure 3.13: GABA/NAA+NAAG ratios before and after exercise for each of the subjects. For subject 1, the pre­
exercise block consists of 32 spectra (121.6 seconds) and the post­exercise block consists of 160 spectra (608
seconds). For subjects 2, 3 and 4, the pre­exercise block consists of 48 spectra (182.4 seconds) and the post­
exercise block consists of 400 spectra (1520 seconds). For subject 4, the post­exercise block also includes time for
interleaved water acquisition, meaning the total time covers 1611.2 seconds.
35
==PAGE:41==
Figure 3.14: Glx/NAA+NAAG ratios over time for each of the subjects. Each pre­ and post­exercise block consists of
16 spectra, acquired during a total time of 60.8 seconds. For subject 4, there is an extra delay of TE=3.8s between
each block in the post­exercise measurements.
Figure 3.15: Glx/NAA+NAAG ratios before and after exercise for each of the subjects. For subject 1, the pre­exercise
block consists of 32 spectra (121.6 seconds) and the post­exercise block consists of 160 spectra (608 seconds).
For subjects 2, 3 and 4, the pre­exercise block consists of 48 spectra (182.4 seconds) and the post­exercise block
consists of 400 spectra (1520 seconds). For subject 4, the post­exercise block also includes time for interleaved
water acquisition, meaning the total time covers 1611.2 seconds.
36
==PAGE:42==
3.3.4.5
Glx
Baseline stability In Figure 3.14, the pre­exercise ratio of Glx against NAA+NAAG is visualised
in red. The ratio seems to vary slightly, but doesn’t seem to have a trend over time.
Difference pre­ and post­exercise Figure 3.15 shows the Glx/NAA+NAAG ratio during the
total pre­exercise scan and during the full post­exercise scan. The Glx/NAA+NAAG ratio for
subject 3 seems to follow a decreasing trend with exercise.
Post­exercise trends As shown in Figure 3.14, the Glx/NAA+NAAG ratio post­exercise seems
to follow a decreasing trend for subject 2 and 3, while it seems to follow an increasing trend for
subject 4. For subject 1, no trend is seen. Linear model fitting shows similar results, with a
slope of −14.2·10−6, −12.0·10−6 and 30.3·10−6 for subject 2, 3 and 4 respectively, and a slope
smaller than ±10 · 10−6 for subject 1. The trends in both subject 2 and 3 seem to diverge from
the baseline, while the trend for subject 4 seems to converge to the baseline.
3.3.4.6
mIns
Baseline stability In Figure 3.16, the pre­exercise ratio of mIns against NAA+NAAG is visu­
alised in red. The ratio seems to increase within the pre­exercise scan for subject 2. For the
other subjects, no change is obvious.
Difference pre­ and post­exercise Figure 3.17 shows the mIns/NAA+NAAG ratio during the
total pre­exercise scan and during the full post­exercise scan. The ratios seems to follow a
decreasing trend with exercise in subject 1.
Post­exercise trends As shown in Figure 3.16, the mIns/NAA+NAAG ratio post­exercise seems
to follow an increasing trend for subject 1, 2 and 4. For subject 3, no trend is seen. Linear model
fitting shows similar results, with a slope of 22.2 · 10−6, 101.9 · 10−6 and 11.5 · 10−6 for subject
1, 2 and 4 respectively, and a slope smaller than ±10 · 10−6 for subject 3. The trends in both
subject 1 and 4 seem to converge to the baseline, while the trend in subject 2 seems to diverge
from the baseline.
3.3.4.7
Lac
Note that for Lac evaluation, the quality control threshold of %SD<20 was increased to %SD≤35.
Baseline stability In Figure 3.18, the pre­exercise ratio of Lac against NAA+NAAG is visu­
alised in red. The ratios seem to be increasing within the pre­exercise scan for subject 1 and
2.
Difference pre­ and post­exercise Figure 3.19 shows the Lac/NAA+NAAG ratio during the to­
tal pre­exercise scan and during the full post­exercise scan. For subjects 2, the Lac/NAA+NAAG
ratio seem to follow a decreasing trend.
Post­exercise trends As shown in Figure 3.18, the Lac/NAA+NAAG ratios post­exercise don’t
seem to follow any increasing or decreasing trends for any of the subjects. Linear model fitting
shows similar results, with slopes smaller than ±10 · 10−6 for all subjects.
3.3.4.8
GSH
Baseline stability In Figure 3.20, the pre­exercise ratio of GSH against NAA+NAAG is visu­
alised in red. The ratio does not seem to be changing.
Difference pre­ and post­exercise Figure 3.21 shows the GSH/NAA+NAAG ratio during the
total pre­exercise scan and during the full post­exercise scan. The ratio increases with exercise
for subject 2, and also seems to follow an increasing trend with exercise for subject 1.
Post­exercise trends As shown in Figure 3.20, the GSH/NAA+NAAG ratio post­exercise seems
to follow an increasing trend for subject 2. For the other subjects, no trend is seen. Linear model
fitting shows similar results, with a slope of 23.7 · 10−6 for subject 2, and slopes smaller than
±10 · 10−6 for the other subjects. The trend in subject 2 seems to diverge from the baseline.
37
==PAGE:43==
Figure 3.16: mIns/NAA+NAAG ratios over time for each of the subjects. Each pre­ and post­exercise block consists
of 16 spectra, acquired during a total time of 60.8 seconds. For subject 4, there is an extra delay of TE=3.8s between
each block in the post­exercise measurements.
Figure 3.17: mIns/NAA+NAAG ratios before and after exercise for each of the subjects. For subject 1, the pre­
exercise block consists of 32 spectra (121.6 seconds) and the post­exercise block consists of 160 spectra (608
seconds). For subjects 2, 3 and 4, the pre­exercise block consists of 48 spectra (182.4 seconds) and the post­
exercise block consists of 400 spectra (1520 seconds). For subject 4, the post­exercise block also includes time for
interleaved water acquisition, meaning the total time covers 1611.2 seconds.
38
==PAGE:44==
Figure 3.18: Lac/NAA+NAAG ratios over time for each of the subjects. Each pre­ and post­exercise block consists
of 16 spectra, acquired during a total time of 60.8 seconds. For subject 4, there is an extra delay of TE=3.8s between
each block in the post­exercise measurements.
Figure 3.19: Lac/NAA+NAAG ratios before and after exercise for each of the subjects. For subject 1, the pre­
exercise block consists of 32 spectra (121.6 seconds) and the post­exercise block consists of 160 spectra (608
seconds). For subjects 2, 3 and 4, the pre­exercise block consists of 48 spectra (182.4 seconds) and the post­
exercise block consists of 400 spectra (1520 seconds). For subject 4, the post­exercise block also includes time for
interleaved water acquisition, meaning the total time covers 1611.2 seconds.
39
==PAGE:45==
Figure 3.20: GSH/NAA+NAAG ratios over time for each of the subjects. Each pre­ and post­exercise block consists
of 16 spectra, acquired during a total time of 60.8 seconds. For subject 4, there is an extra delay of TE=3.8s between
each block in the post­exercise measurements.
Figure 3.21: GSH/NAA+NAAG ratios before and after exercise for each of the subjects. For subject 1, the pre­
exercise block consists of 32 spectra (121.6 seconds) and the post­exercise block consists of 160 spectra (608
seconds). For subjects 2, 3 and 4, the pre­exercise block consists of 48 spectra (182.4 seconds) and the post­
exercise block consists of 400 spectra (1520 seconds). For subject 4, the post­exercise block also includes time for
interleaved water acquisition, meaning the total time covers 1611.2 seconds.
40
==PAGE:46==
3.4
Discussion
Earlier studies have reported several findings on acute exercise­induced metabolite concentra­
tion changes. The results of this thesis showed some similarities, but also some interesting
deviations from the commonly reported patterns. For tCho, a ratio increase for subject 2 and a
decreasing trend for subject 3 were seen, and no obvious patterns for subject 1 and 4. These
exercise­related changes are unexpected based on previous studies (Çaglar et al., 2005, Coxon
et al., 2018, Maddock et al., 2011, Maddock et al., 2016). The observed trends could be due
to natural variability of tCho in the ACC. Regarding tCr, decreasing trends were observed in
subject 3 and 4. This finding is in line with the hypothesised behaviour based on most earlier
research (Dolan et al., 2019, Dennis et al., 2015, Roschel et al., 2021), but conflicts with the
findings of Maddock et al. (2011). Examination of GABA, when softening our quality require­
ments to include all data points quantified with %SD≤35, showed increasing trends in subjects
1 and 4, which is in line with the hypothesised behaviour based on earlier research (Coxon
et al., 2018, Maddock et al., 2011). In one subject, insufficient data were quantified reliably,
limiting the ability to draw conclusive results. For Glx, a decreasing trend was seen in sub­
ject 3. This finding conflicts with the hypothesised behaviour based on earlier research, which
mostly reports an increase in Glx due to exercise (Maddock et al., 2011, Maddock et al., 2016,
Świątkiewicz et al., 2023). Dalsgaard et al. (2003) reported a decrease, however. The finding
from this study opens the debate on the direction of change of Glx concentrations resulting
from exercise, as it disagrees with most of the reported findings. Regarding mIns, a decreasing
trend in subject 1 could be observed. Similar to tCho, exercise­related changes in mIns are not
expected based on previous studies (Coxon et al., 2018, Maddock et al., 2016). The observed
trend could be explained by natural variability of mIns in the ACC. For Lac, when softening
our quality requirements to include all data points quantified with %SD≤35, a decreasing trend
was seen in subject 3. This finding contradicts the hypothesised behaviour based on earlier
research, in which Lac is reported to increase as an acute result of exercise (Świątkiewicz et al.,
2023). Regarding GSH, a ratio increase for subject 1 and an increasing trend for subject 2 could
be observed, and no obvious patterns were seen for subject 3 and 4. These findings conflict
with the expected behaviour based on earlier research, in which GSH is reported to decrease
as an acute result of exercise (Rai et al., 2018).
The time trends that brain metabolite ratios follow after exercise have not been reported in
earlier studies. The findings of this thesis revealed trends for some metabolites in some subjects
based on visual inspection. Since these trends were not obvious, it was decided to evaluate
the trends only with linear models, in order to not overfit. Thus, only visual inspection and
calculations of slope were used for evaluation. For tCho, an increasing trend was seen in
subject 2, which diverged from the baseline after exercise. This could be a continuation of
the response to exercise, suggesting time courses are slow. However, initially no differences
caused by exercise were expected. For tCr, an increasing trend converging to the baseline
was seen in subject 1 and 2. These subjects did not show an overall difference in pre­post,
however it is possible that the tCr/NAA+NAAG ratio decreased in the early time frames after
exercise, which was not captured by the pre­post analysis due to averaging over the whole
time period. The trend observed here could possibly be explained as a convergence back to
baseline after this tCr/NAA+NAAG decrease. This would mean that the creatine time courses
are fast. For GABA, an increasing trend diverging from the baseline after exercise was observed
in subject 3 and 4. This could be a delayed response to exercise, suggesting time courses are
slow. For Glx, a decreasing trend diverging from baseline could be seen for subjects 2 and
3, which could reflect a delayed response to exercise in subject 2 and a continuation of the
response to exercise in subject 3. Nevertheless, an increasing trend converging to baseline
was observed for subject 4. This subject did not show an overall pre­post difference. Possibly,
the Glx/NAA+NAAG decreased in the early time frames after exercise, which was not captured
41
==PAGE:47==
by the pre­post analysis due to averaging over the whole time period. The trend observed
here could possibly be explained as a convergence back to baseline after this Glx/NAA+NAAG
decrease. Combined with the observed results for subjects 2 and 3, that would suggest variable
Glx time courses between subjects. For mIns, an increasing trend towards baseline could be
seen in subject 1 and 4, which could signify the return towards baseline after a decrease of mIns
concentration due to exercise, which was seen in subject 1. However, subject 2 showed an
increase diverging from the baseline. This could be an overshooting response, compensating
the initial behaviour. For Lac, no post­exercise trends were seen. For GSH, an increasing trend
diverging from the baseline was observed for subject 2. This could be a continuation of the
response to exercise, suggesting time courses are slow.
The findings and trends reported in this study were primarily descriptive and based on visual as­
sessments, lacking statistical analysis. Both the pre­post differences and post­exercise trends
did not reveal consistent patterns across all participants for most metabolites, and the observed
changes were moderate and inconsistent.
In the analysis of the data presented in this thesis, an important factor that was disregarded is
the amount of natural variability of metabolite concentrations in the ACC. To evaluate changes in
individuals, it is essential to have such a measure to comment on observed differences, change
sizes and trends. Generally, this is overcome by performing group analyses, however that was
not feasible with the currently available data. Another approach could be to apply statistical
tests such as t­tests or ANOVAs to the data mean and variance of each subject in each con­
dition. However, in this study the variability in exercise protocols between the subjects did not
allow for such comparisons. A third approach is to evaluate the percentage of non­overlapping
data (Scruggs & Mastropieri, 2021), which quantifies the amount of data points exceeding the
extrema of the data set it is compared to, an approach mainly used in single subject treatment
evaluation. Applying this approach could be a useful continuation of the current study.
An important assumption made in this research is that metabolite ratios in rest, such as during
the pre­exercise baseline scan, were stable. This is essential, since metabolite ratio changes
can not be attributed to exercise if the baseline is varies in itself. As seen in this thesis, most
metabolic baselines seemed stable, although some variability in the baseline values was seen
for specific metabolites. For tCr, mIns and Lac, a trend was seen in 1, 1 and 2 subjects re­
spectively. Further quantification and statistical analysis of these trends, again with regards to
known baseline variability, are necessary to assess their significance. For better assessment
of baseline stability, longer baseline scans would be beneficial.
The baseline variability can have several causes. First of all, the variability might be due to
natural fluctuations in metabolite concentrations, which constantly occur as the brain stays in
homeostasis. Secondly, the subjects might not have been in a full resting state during the base­
line scan due to the movement of getting in the scanner and adjusting the set­up. Additionally,
there were no strict inclusion criteria regarding factors such as caffeine consumption, food con­
sumption or recent exercise. While it is uncertain whether these factors directly induce baseline
variability, they could potentially create differences.
Reference metabolite instability is another factor that could contribute to inconsistency and vari­
ability in the results of this study. Figure 3.5 shows mild variability in NAA+NAAG, mainly visible
when comparing pre­ and post­exercise ratios but also seen within acquisitions. This variation
does not seem to be systemic, since the ratio of NAA+NAAG over interleaved water, visualised
in Figure 3.7(b), does not show increased stability compared to the NAA+NAAG ratio to the
first water peak, shown in Figure 3.7(a). This suggests that either water, NAA+NAAG or both
are unstable. The stability of the interleaved water peaks displayed in 3.6 suggests that water
is relatively stable, but not in the first measurement. Additionally, there seems to be an unex­
42
==PAGE:48==
pected change in the peak of measurement 21. The high water value in the first measurement
can be explained by the use of a short relaxation time. The relaxation time used in this study
was short in order to investigate dynamic metabolite changes and capture multiple metabolites.
It is possible that this time is too short for the water signal to recover fully, meaning it will, after
repetitive excitation and relaxation, reach a steady­state with a lower signal than observed in
the first measurement. The deviation of measurement 21 is unexpected and no explanation
seems obvious. The variability in water concentration over time seems to be the main cause of
variable patterns seen in the NAA+NAAG/interleaved water ratio, as differences are observed
in the same measurements (1 and 21). Thus NAA+NAAG is assumed to be the most stable
reference metabolite, and is not expected to cause high distortion of metabolite ratio data.
One more factor that can lead to inconclusive results is subject motion. Even small motion can
largely influence spectroscopy data. First of all, movement will cause the shim that was set at
the beginning of acquisition to not correct well for field inhomogeneity anymore. Secondly, it
causes the VOI to have a changed position in brain, or rather, the brain changes its position
with respect to the VOI, meaning signals are coming from a different area with different compo­
sition. The composition of brain matter in the initially selected voxel has a large influence on
spectroscopy signals, since grey matter (GM), white matter (WM) and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF)
have different metabolite concentrations. When movement changes the ratios of these tissue
types in the voxel of interest, changes in measured metabolic concentrations are inevitable.
Similarly, this is relevant for longitudinal and cross­sectional studies, where comparisons can
only accurately be made when these partial volume effects are accounted for. This can be done
by using the structural scan for voxel placement to perform GM, WM and CSF segmentation.
By calculating the respective volumes of the segmented tissue types, metabolite concentrations
can be corrected using a linear combination of tissue specific metabolite concentrations (Tal et
al., 2012).
Partial volume effects were not corrected for in this study, since the structural images used,
being SmartBrain surveys, were thought to be of too low resolution for accurate segmenta­
tion. However, it would be a relevant correction to do in future studies, both to correct for pre­
and post­exercise voxel composition changes and to enable cross­sectional comparisons. It
is recommended to acquire a high resolution structural scan before or after pre­exercise and
after post­exercise. It is not desirable to acquire one before post­exercise, since that would
delay time between end of exercise and start of acquisition, which would cause loss of dynamic
metabolite information.
Since no partial volume effect correction was used in this study and shimming variation main­
tains a concern, subject motion was evaluated. Figure 3.2 and Table 3.3 show that the voxels
before and after exercise overlap quite nicely, with dice scores of 0.77 ± 0.07, which seems com­
parable to dice scores reported in research with a semi­automated voxel placement approach
(Bishop et al., 2021). However, it must be noted that the transformations to acquire the regis­
tered voxels have been performed on SmartBrain surveys, which are fast scans with low spacial
resolution. For more accurate transformation, using higher resolution images would be benefi­
cial. To do so, a structural T1­weighted scan could be acquired before or after the pre­exercise
acquisition, and after the post­exercise acquisition. Mind that including such a scan before
the post­exercise acquisition should be avoided, as these scans take significantly more time,
increasing the delay between end of exercise and start of post­exercise acquisition. Adding
T1­Weighted image sequences before or after pre­exercise and after post­exercise scanning is
feasible, but will increase total scan time, which is undesirable.
The good results of the registration show that the voxel location can be accurately replicated by
the SmartBrain algorithm when used before and after exercise. However, it must be said that this
43
==PAGE:49==
does not completely remove worries about movement artefacts. In the post­exercise condition, it
is expected that subjects might have experienced heavy breathing in the first couple of minutes,
which can easily lead to movement issues after relocalisation of the voxel. It must be noted
that for subject 1, a structural T1­weighted scan, acquired after the post­exercise scan, was
used as a reference instead of the SmartBrain survey acquired before. This was done because
the SmartBrain scan before post­exercise acquisition was not available. Using a scan acquired
after acquisition is only feasible when the participant did not move during the post­exercise scan.
If movement took place within that time frame, it could be that the suggested voxel location by
the SmartBrain algorithm was initially correct, but lost its accuracy after. However, this is not
expected to have happened, especially since the voxel overlap in this subject is the highest
among the for subjects (0.86).
An additional explanation of the inconsistency and moderate nature of the results lies with the
variability in the exercise protocol. Since data collection and protocol development happened
simultaneously throughout this research, all subjects experienced a slightly different exercise
routine or set­up. These differences in circumstances might have differently impacted brain
metabolism changes.
Subject 1 was the only subject performing a protocol with continuous exercise, whereas the
other subjects performed exercise in ten exercise­rest intervals. Exercising in a repetitive man­
ner with rest periods in between enables higher intensity during the exercise bouts. However,
using a continuous exercise protocol the HR increase might be more gradual and consistent, as
a result of endurance exercise. Short term effects might subside within the breaks, not accumu­
lating enough to generate a long term effect. Subject fitness could also influence this behaviour;
a fit person might have more ease in returning to baseline throughout rest, while a non­fit subject
would not.
The duration of exercise in the intervals was increased after testing with subject 2 based on
participant evaluation. It was hypothesised that lengthening the exercise bout would contribute
to higher perceived exercise intensity and larger heart rate increase. The difference in bout
length and with that potentially also exercise intensity, could have influenced the observability
of the results of this study.
Subject 3 experienced set­up failure halfway the exercise routine. The routine was therefore
paused for an estimated time of 1­2 minutes, and then resumed. This period of rest caused a
decrease in HR, and could have caused a halt in metabolic response to exercise. It is difficult
to interpret how that influenced eventual metabolic results, but it is expected to have had an
impact mainly on the magnitude of change. In the second half of the protocol, after failure, one
of the legs was not restrained anymore, which allowed for free kicking instead of kicking against
resistance. Thus, total intensity of the exercise is expected to have been reduced, which once
again is expected to have negatively affected the metabolic change magnitude.
Because of the failure, the set­up was updated before being used by subject 4. Lack of adequate
materials caused a slight deviation from the original set­up, which might have influenced the
resulting exercise experience.
It is also feasible that some or all of the applied exercise protocols did not manage to cause
sufficient brain metabolite change. It was seen that heart rate increases in this study were
moderate, with reported %MHR values of 56%, 64% and 69%. Although heart rate is not a all­
encompassing measure for exercise intensity, it is indicative for the efforts the body is making.
%MHR values reached in earlier brain­exercise studies included the in the not yet published
review by Ryberg et al. vary from 85.5% to 93.9%. Moderate­intensity physical activity is clas­
sified as activity with a target HR of between 64% and 76% of your maximum heart rate. For
44
==PAGE:50==
vigorous­intensity, those values are 77% and 93% respectively (“Part a: Executive Summary”,
2009). In table 3.2, it can be observed that those intensities were barely reached within this
study; subject 2 and 4 reached moderate­intensity exercise, the HR of subject 3 was lower, and
for subject 1, no data are available. Possibly, the exercise protocol was thus not intense enough
to induce brain metabolism changes. The patterns found could be a reflection of the common
variability of brain metabolite concentrations, not affected by the protocol.
Result quality is highly susceptible to choices made in (pre)processing of the raw data. Several
factors have had an impact on the results discussed in this thesis, for example in the preprocess­
ing pipeline used to prepare spectral data for metabolite quantification in LCModel. Specifically
spectral alignment and phasing are essential components. Before averaging blocks of raw sin­
gle spectra to increase SNR, it is important that all spectra have their peaks in the same location
and that all peaks are pointing in the same direction. If either of those is not the case, the result­
ing average spectrum will have a broader line width and lower peaks, which leads to decreased
specificity in metabolite quantification. Spectral alignment and phasing were implemented in
the preprocessing pipeline, but can not be assumed perfect. It is to be expected that small
deviations in results were caused by misalignment and phasing divergences.
These deviations are especially relevant in large blocks. In the assessment of pre­ and post­
exercise differences, the decision was made to average all spectra before exercise into one
pre­spectrum, and all spectra after exercise into a one post­spectrum. By approaching the
averaging this way, all alignment and phasing deviations accumulate into one larger deviation.
It is thus essential to ensure high quality phasing and peak alignment. An alternative approach
would be not to average at all, but to input data of single measurements into LCModel. This
would remove the need for peak alignment, and phasing is automatically performed in LCModel
as a part of the analysis. If desirable, averaging quantification results after analysis is still
possible, for which quantification uncertainties should be taking into account as specified in
the LCModel manual (Provencher, 2014). A large disadvantage of using this approach, is that
some metabolites (e.g. GABA and Lac) are hard to quantify, especially in single spectra which
have a low SNR. Thus, the suggested approach could also lead to information loss. Therefore,
pre­analysis alignment and phasing is highly recommended.
Regardless of alignment and phasing, the ideal block size to average quantification results in
stays an interesting topic to be studied, to find an optimal trade­off between quantifiability of
small metabolites, i.e. high SNR, and high temporal resolution. Not averaging all spectra to­
gether also allows for investigating the effects of exercise on different time frames. Looking at
just the average to find out if differences from the baseline occur is limited, because no knowl­
edge is available on when to expect these changes. It could well be that the response only
comes into effect after a longer period of time. By averaging in the first time points, this effect
could be missed in the current analysis approach. To add to that, it is also highly possible that ef­
fects happen early in post­exercise acquisition, and are already counteracted, and maybe even
overshot, within the same acquisition session. This would flatten or even completely cancel
out results. Potentially even, this behaviour could appear before acquisition starts, meaning an
observed overshoot, caused as a response to acute decrease, could be misinterpreted as an
increased response to exercise, or vice versa.
To ensure acquiring data as early as possible after exercise, efforts were made to minimise the
delay in this study. As specified, the delay between the end of exercise and the start of the post
exercise scan was minimised to 3.5 to 4 minutes. This time was essential for voxel relocalisation
and ensuring similar shim quality in the pre­ and post­exercise scan and could not be shortened
in this study.
To solve this issue, an approach using a sequence including motion correction was explored.
45
==PAGE:51==
Unfortunately, the sequences showed some issues which were attended to only late in the
thesis period. It was decided not to implement it this late in the study, in order not to introduce
more variability. However, this motion correction algorithm, which updates voxel location and
first order shim throughout acquisition period, would be an interesting approach to study. The
algorithm is initiated with a voxel localisation and shimming procedure before the pre­exercise
acquisition. It would be interesting to enable the sequence all the way throughout the scan,
so during pre­exercise acquisition, during exercise and during post­exercise acquisition. This
way, there is no delay after exercise which would allow for investigating the early dynamics. A
concern is that the performance of the motion correction algorithm might be too greatly impacted
by the excessive amount of motion during exercise. It is possible that the algorithm is not
capable of maintaining the same location and shim over time. Furthermore, a concern is that
shim quality and thus data quality decreases over time, because only the first order shim is
updated using this method. This could confound with the effects of exercise itself, distorting the
data.
The results observed in this study were based on quantification of metabolites in a voxel in the
ACC. Whether changes in this brain region resulted from brain activation because of exercise,
or were the result of a more global and physiological exercise response, is not easily defined.
This is important however, since Lind et al. (2020) showed that local differences in metabolite
concentration and change exist, specifically with regards to ageing. To get an understanding of
the localisation of the effects, it is advised to control for global changes using additional mea­
surement techniques. For example, it could be interesting to record blood lactate throughout
the course of the experiment. Lactate can cross the blood­brain barrier, which suggests concen­
tration differences in the brain could be a direct effect of global lactate change. To understand
if changes in brain lactate correlate with global change, are resulting from pure brain lactate
changes, or both, global and brain responses should be compared. Additionally, it is advised
to include a control region in the study set­up. By performing the same experiments with a VOI
placed on a region were no change is expected, specific changes to ACC metabolism can be as­
sessed. Finding these regions of non­activation can be done using fMRI. This technique could
also be used to assess if brain activation is actually present in the ACC in relation to exercise.
This data could prove informative for more educated voxel placement.
46
==PAGE:52==
4
Conclusion and future outlook
The current study sheds a light on designing studies on metabolite change time courses caused
by intensity­controlled exercise. The question ‘What are the early time courses of brain metabolism
as an acute result of intensity­controlled exercise?’ was attended to by addressing two problems:
enabling intensity controlled exercise on the Philips Achieva 7.0T, and investigating the dynam­
ics of brain metabolite concentrations as a result of exercise using proton magnetic resonance
spectroscopy (1H­MRS). Regarding intensity­controlled exercise on the 7.0T scanner, this the­
sis shows that both reliably calibrating in­house set­ups and developing stable in­house set­ups
are highly challenging and time­intensive processes. For future research, it is recommended to
design exercise protocols that are intensity­controlled in a subject­specific manner as opposed
to an absolute manner. Reporting percentage of maximum heart rate (%MHR) facilitates con­
trolling and comparing intensity values within and between studies, and was hypothesised to
make comparisons with other protocols more accurate (Normand­Gravier et al., 2022). Using a
universal, potentially commercially available set­up is advised, since this ensures consistency
throughout the study and facilitates reproducibility. Concerning the acute brain metabolite con­
centration dynamics following exercise, this thesis shows the complexity of investigating those
time courses. The performed research demonstrates results on a single­subject case basis
with limited generalisability. Nonetheless, there is high potential for further examination of the
acute dynamic effects of exercise on brain metabolism. This study shows many considerations
to be taken into account when researching exercise­induced metabolism change with 1H­MRS,
which can hopefully be assistive in designing more robust studies to move the field forwards.
In addition to replicating the conducted research in a more controlled manner with a larger
subject pool, implementing the suggested considerations, there are many other directions to
explore within this topic. Once trusted protocols and processing pipelines are established, an
interesting continuation of this project would be to assess whether brain metabolic changes can
account for changes of brain health and cognition between subjects. This would enable us to in­
vestigate links between exercise and brain health, ultimately bringing us closer to development
of exercise protocols for promoting brain health. Furthermore, assessing the impact of differ­
ent exercise intensity and duration on metabolism changes would be a relevant next step, to
inform us on development of the most suitable protocols for inducing beneficial brain metabolite
changes. Another direction with the same aim would be investigation of different types of exer­
cise, such as aerobic versus anaerobic or cardiovascular versus muscular training. Finally, an
interesting next step for investigation is researching different voxel locations and sizes, which
could provide valuable insights into the diversity of the brain metabolism response to exercise
through different brain regions, and how that correlates to brain health.
47
==PAGE:53==
Bibliography
Bal­Theoleyre, L., Lalande, A., Kober, F., Giorgi, R., Collart, F., Piquet, P., Habib, G., Avieri­
nos, J. F., Bernard, M., Guye, M., & Jacquier, A. (2016). Aortic function’s adaptation
in response to exercise­induced stress assessing by 1.5t mri: A pilot study in healthy
volunteers. PLoS ONE, 11. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0157704
Basso, J. C., & Suzuki, W. A. (2017). The effects of acute exercise on mood, cognition, neuro­
physiology, and neurochemical pathways: A review. Brain Plasticity, 2. https://doi.org/
10.3233/bpl-160040
Best, J. G., Stagg, C. J., & Dennis, A. (2014). Chapter 2.5 ­ other significant metabolites: Myo­
inositol, gaba, glutamine, and lactate. In C. Stagg & D. Rothman (Eds.), Magnetic reso­
nance spectroscopy (pp. 122–138). Academic Press. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/
10.1016/B978-0-12-401688-0.00010-0
Bishop, J. H., Geoly, A., Khan, N., Tischler, C., Krueger, R., Amin, H., Baltusis, L., Wu, H.,
Spiegel, D., Williams, N., & Sacchet, M. D. (2021). Real­time semi­automated and au­
tomated voxel placement for repeated acquisition magnetic resonance spectroscopy.
medRxiv. https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.09.23.21264046
Boillat, Y., Xin, L., van der Zwaag, W., & Gruetter, R. (2020). Metabolite concentration changes
associated with positive and negative bold responses in the human visual cortex: A
functional mrs study at 7 tesla. Journal of Cerebral Blood Flow and Metabolism, 40.
https://doi.org/10.1177/0271678X19831022
Çaglar, E., Sabuncuo￿lu, H., Keskin, T., Işikli, S., Keskil, S., & Korkusuz, F. (2005). In vivo hu­
man brain biochemistry after aerobic exercise: Preliminary report on functional magnetic
resonance spectroscopy. Surgical Neurology, 64. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.surneu.2005.
07.032
Castellano, G., Dias, C. S., Foerster, B., Li, L. M., & Covolan, R. J. (2012). Naa and naag
variation in neuronal activation during visual stimulation. Brazilian Journal of Medical
and Biological Research, 45. https://doi.org/10.1590/S0100-879X2012007500128
Castro, V., Valenzuela, C., Sanchez, J., Pena, K., Perez, S., Ibarra, J., & Villagran, A. (2014).
An update of the classical and novel methods used for measuring fast neurotransmitters
during normal and brain altered function. Current Neuropharmacology, 12. https://doi.
org/10.2174/1570159x13666141223223657
Coxon, J. P., Cash, R. F., Hendrikse, J. J., Rogasch, N. C., Stavrinos, E., Suo, C., & Yücel,
M. (2018). Gaba concentration in sensorimotor cortex following high­intensity exercise
and relationship to lactate levels. Journal of Physiology, 596. https://doi.org/10.1113/
JP274660
Coyle, E. F. (2000). Physical activity as a metabolic stressor. American Journal of Clinical Nu­
trition, 72. https://doi.org/10.1093/ajcn/72.2.512s
Dalsgaard, M. K., Nybo, L., Cai, Y., & Secher, N. H. (2003). Cerebral metabolism is influenced
by muscle ischaemia during exercise in humans. Experimental Physiology, 88. https:
//doi.org/10.1113/eph8802469
Dennis, A., Thomas, A. G., Rawlings, N. B., Near, J., Nichols, T. E., Clare, S., Johansen­Berg,
H., & Stagg, C. J. (2015). An ultra­high field magnetic resonance spectroscopy study of
post exercise lactate, glutamate and glutamine change in the human brain. Frontiers in
Physiology, 6. https://doi.org/10.3389/fphys.2015.00351
Dice, L. (1945). Measures of the amount of ecologic association between species. Ecology, 26.
48
==PAGE:54==
Dolan, E., Gualano, B., & Rawson, E. S. (2019). Beyond muscle: The effects of creatine supple­
mentation on brain creatine, cognitive processing, and traumatic brain injury. European
Journal of Sport Science, 19. https://doi.org/10.1080/17461391.2018.1500644
Dougherty, R. J., Schultz, S. A., Kirby, T. K., Boots, E. A., Oh, J. M., Edwards, D., Gallagher, C. L.,
Carlsson, C. M., Bendlin, B. B., Asthana, S., Sager, M. A., Hermann, B. P., Christian,
B. T., Johnson, S. C., Cook, D. B., & Okonkwo, O. C. (2017). Moderate physical activity
is associated with cerebral glucose metabolism in adults at risk for alzheimer’s disease.
Journal of Alzheimer’s Disease, 58. https://doi.org/10.3233/JAD-161067
Dunås, T., Wåhlin, A., Nyberg, L., & Boraxbekk, C. J. (2021). Multimodal image analysis of
apparent brain age identifies physical fitness as predictor of brain maintenance. Cerebral
Cortex, 31. https://doi.org/10.1093/cercor/bhab019
Eylers, V. V., Maudsley, A. A., Bronzlik, P., Dellani, P. R., Lanfermann, H., & Ding, X. Q. (2016).
Detection of normal aging effects on human brain metabolite concentrations and mi­
crostructure with whole­brain mr spectroscopic imaging and quantitative mr imaging.
American Journal of Neuroradiology, 37. https://doi.org/10.3174/ajnr.A4557
Foley, J. F., Nair, K. V., Vollmer, T., Stephenson, J. J., Niecko, T., Agarwal, S. S., & Watson, C.
(2017). Long­term natalizumab treatment is associated with sustained improvements in
quality of life in patients with multiple sclerosis. Patient Preference and Adherence, 11.
https://doi.org/10.2147/PPA.S134865
Forouzan, O., Flink, E., Warczytowa, J., Thate, N., Hanske, A., Lee, T., Roldan­Alzate, A.,
François, C., Wieben, O., & Chesler, N. C. (2014). Low cost magnetic resonance imaging­
compatible stepper exercise device for use in cardiac stress tests. Journal of Medical
Devices, Transactions of the ASME, 8. https://doi.org/10.1115/1.4027343
Franklin, K. L., Gordon, R. S., Baker, J. S., & Davies, B. (2005). Mechanics of a rope­braked
cycle ergometer flywheel and its use for physiological measurement. Research in Sports
Medicine, 13. https://doi.org/10.1080/15438620500359919
Gaitán, J. M., Boots, E. A., Dougherty, R. J., Oh, J. M., Ma, Y., Edwards, D. F., Christian, B. T.,
Cook, D. B., & Okonkwo, O. C. (2019). Brain glucose metabolism, cognition, and car­
diorespiratory fitness following exercise training in adults at risk for alzheimer’s disease.
Brain Plasticity, 5. https://doi.org/10.3233/bpl-190093
Gordon, R. S., Franklin, K. L., Baker, J., & Davies, B. (2004). Accurate assessment of the brake
torque on a rope­braked cycle ergometer. Sports Engineering, 7. https://doi.org/10.
1007/bf02844051
Hillman, C. H., Erickson, K. I., & Kramer, A. F. (2008). Be smart, exercise your heart: Exercise
effects on brain and cognition. https://doi.org/10.1038/nrn2298
Hollnagel, C., Brügger, M., Vallery, H., Wolf, P., Dietz, V., Kollias, S., & Riener, R. (2011). Brain
activity during stepping: A novel mri­compatible device. Journal of Neuroscience Meth­
ods, 201. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jneumeth.2011.07.022
Ide, K., Schmalbruch, I. K., Quistorff, B., Horn, A., & Secher, N. H. (2000). Lactate, glucose and
o2 uptake in human brain during recovery from maximal exercise. Journal of Physiology,
522. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1469-7793.2000.t01-2-00159.xm
Knobelsdorff­Brenkenhoff, F. V., Dieringer, M. A., Fuchs, K., Hezel, F., Niendorf, T., & Schulz­
Menger, J. (2013). Isometric handgrip exercise during cardiovascular magnetic reso­
nance imaging: Set­up and cardiovascular effects. Journal of Magnetic Resonance Imag­
ing, 37. https://doi.org/10.1002/jmri.23924
Laakso, M. P., Hiltunen, Y., Könönen, M., Kivipelto, M., Koivisto, A., Hallikainen, M., & Soininen,
H. (2003). Decreased brain creatine levels in elderly apolipoprotein e ε4 carriers. Journal
of Neural Transmission, 110. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00702-002-0783-7
Landim, R. C., Edden, R. A., Foerster, B., Li, L. M., Covolan, R. J., & Castellano, G. (2016).
Investigation of naa and naag dynamics underlying visual stimulation using mega­press
49
==PAGE:55==
in a functional mrs experiment. Magnetic Resonance Imaging, 34. https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.mri.2015.10.038
Layec, G., Bringard, A., Vilmen, C., Micallef, J. P., Fur, Y. L., Perrey, S., Cozzone, P. J., &
Bendahan, D. (2008). Accurate work­rate measurements during in vivo mrs studies of
exercising human quadriceps. Magnetic Resonance Materials in Physics, Biology and
Medicine, 21. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10334-008-0117-3
Lind, A., Boraxbekk, C. J., Petersen, E. T., Paulson, O. B., Siebner, H. R., & Marsman, A. (2020).
Regional myo­inositol, creatine, and choline levels are higher at older age and scale
negatively with visuospatial working memory: A cross­sectional proton mr spectroscopy
study at 7 tesla on normal cognitive ageing. Journal of Neuroscience, 40. https://doi.
org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2883-19.2020
Maddock, R. J., Casazza, G. A., Buonocore, M. H., & Tanase, C. (2011). Vigorous exercise
increases brain lactate and glx (glutamate+glutamine): A dynamic 1h­mrs study. Neu­
roImage, 57. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2011.05.048
Maddock, R. J., Casazza, G. A., Fernandez, D. H., & Maddock, M. I. (2016). Acute modulation
of cortical glutamate and gaba content by physical activity. Journal of Neuroscience, 36.
https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3455-15.2016
Meyerspeer, M., Boesch, C., Cameron, D., Dezortová, M., Forbes, S. C., Heerschap, A., Jene­
son, J. A., Kan, H. E., Kent, J., Layec, G., Prompers, J. J., Reyngoudt, H., Sleigh, A.,
Valkovič, L., Kemp, G. J., Baligand, C., Carlier, P. G., Chatel, B., Damon, B., … Willis, D.
(2021). 31p magnetic resonance spectroscopy in skeletal muscle: Experts’ consensus
recommendations. https://doi.org/10.1002/nbm.4246
Njau, S., Joshi, S. H., Leaver, A. M., Vasavada, M., van Fleet, J., Espinoza, R., & Narr, K. L.
(2016). Variations in myo­inositol in fronto­limbic regions and clinical response to elec­
troconvulsive therapy in major depression. Journal of Psychiatric Research, 80. https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.jpsychires.2016.05.012
Normand­Gravier, T., Britto, F., Launay, T., Renfree, A., Toussaint, J. F., & Desgorces, F. D.
(2022). Exercise dose equalization in high­intensity interval training: A scoping review.
International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health, 19. https://doi.org/
10.3390/ijerph19094980
Öz, G., Deelchand, D. K., Wijnen, J. P., Mlynárik, V., Xin, L., Mekle, R., Noeske, R., Scheenen,
T. W., Tkáč, I., Andronesi, O., Barker, P. B., Bartha, R., Berrington, A., Boer, V., Cudalbu,
C., Emir, U. E., Ernst, T., Fillmer, A., Heerschap, A., … Wilson, M. (2021). Advanced
single voxel 1h magnetic resonance spectroscopy techniques in humans: Experts’ con­
sensus recommendations. https://doi.org/10.1002/nbm.4236
Part a: Executive Summary. (2009). Nutrition Reviews, 67(2), 114–120. https://doi.org/10.1111/
j.1753-4887.2008.00136.x
Provencher, S. W. (2014). Lcmodel & lcmgui user’s manual. LCModel version, 6(3).
Rai, S., Chowdhury, A., Reniers, R. L., Wood, S. J., Lucas, S. J., & Aldred, S. (2018). A pilot
study to assess the effect of acute exercise on brain glutathione. Free Radical Research,
52. https://doi.org/10.1080/10715762.2017.1411594
Raymer, G. H., Allman, B. L., Rice, C. L., Marsh, G. D., & Thompson, R. T. (2006). Charac­
teristics of a mr­compatible ankle exercise ergometer for a 3.0 t head­only mr scanner.
Medical Engineering and Physics, 28. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.medengphy.2005.07.021
Robinson, M. M., Lowe, V. J., & Nair, K. S. (2018). Increased brain glucose uptake after 12
weeks of aerobic high­intensity interval training in young and older adults. Journal of
Clinical Endocrinology and Metabolism, 103. https://doi.org/10.1210/jc.2017-01571
Roschel, H., Gualano, B., Ostojic, S. M., & Rawson, E. S. (2021). Creatine supplementation
and brain health. https://doi.org/10.3390/nu13020586
50
==PAGE:56==
Scruggs, T. E., & Mastropieri, M. A. (2021). How to summarize single­participant research: Ideas
and applications. https://doi.org/10.4324/9781410608260-5
Steenhorst, J. J., Hirsch, A., van den Berg, L. E., Kamphuis, L. S., Merkus, D., Boersma, E., &
Helbing, W. A. (2023). Standardizing submaximal exercise intensities for use of supine
push–pull exercise during cardiovascular magnetic resonance. Clinical Physiology and
Functional Imaging, 43. https://doi.org/10.1111/cpf.12784
Stillman, C. M., Esteban­Cornejo, I., Brown, B., Bender, C. M., & Erickson, K. I. (2020). Effects
of exercise on brain and cognition across age groups and health states. Trends in Neu­
rosciences, 43. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tins.2020.04.010
Świątkiewicz, M., Gaździński, S., Madeyski, M., Kossowski, B., Langfort, J., Bogorodzki, P.,
Zawadzka­Bartczak, E., Sklinda, K., Walecki, J., & Grieb, P. (2023). Increased brain 1h­
mrs glutamate and lactate signals following maximal aerobic capacity exercise in young
healthy males: An exploratory study. Biology of Sport. https://doi.org/10.5114/biolsport.
2023.118335
Tal, A., Kirov, I. I., Grossman, R. I., & Gonen, O. (2012). The role of gray and white matter
segmentation in quantitative proton mr spectroscopic imaging. NMR in Biomedicine, 25.
https://doi.org/10.1002/nbm.2812
Tawara, N., & Nishiyama, A. (2021). Muscle functional mri of exercise­induced rotator cuff mus­
cles. Investigative Magnetic Resonance Imaging, 25. https://doi.org/10.13104/imri.
2021.25.1.1
Tayebati, S. K., & Amenta, F. (2013). Choline­containing phospholipids: Relevance to brain
functional pathways. Clinical Chemistry and Laboratory Medicine, 51. https://doi.org/
10.1515/cclm-2012-0559
Terpstra, M., Cheong, I., Lyu, T., Deelchand, D. K., Emir, U. E., Bednařík, P., Eberly, L. E.,
& Öz, G. (2016). Test­retest reproducibility of neurochemical profiles with short­echo,
single­voxel mr spectroscopy at 3t and 7t. Magnetic Resonance in Medicine, 76. https:
//doi.org/10.1002/mrm.26022
Ueno­Pardi, L. M., Souza­Duran, F. L., Matheus, L., Rodrigues, A. G., Barbosa, E. R., Cunha,
P. J., Carneiro, C. G., Costa, N. A., Ono, C. R., Buchpiguel, C. A., Negrão, C. E., Lorenzi­
Filho, G., & Busatto­Filho, G. (2022). Effects of exercise training on brain metabolism
and cognitive functioning in sleep apnea. Scientific Reports, 12. https://doi.org/10.1038/
s41598-022-13115-2
Voss, M. W., Weng, T. B., Narayana­Kumanan, K., Cole, R. C., Wharff, C., Reist, L., Dubose,
L., Sigurdsson, G., Mills, J. A., Long, J. D., Magnotta, V. A., & Pierce, G. L. (2020).
Acute exercise effects predict training change in cognition and connectivity. Medicine
and Science in Sports and Exercise, 52. https://doi.org/10.1249/MSS.0000000000002115
51
==PAGE:57==
A
Data alignment calibration
Figure A.1: Aligned force sensor and rotary encoder data sets for measurement 1.
Figure A.2: Aligned force sensor and rotary encoder data sets for measurement 2.
52
==PAGE:58==
Figure A.3: Aligned force sensor and rotary encoder data sets for measurement 3.
Figure A.4: Aligned force sensor and rotary encoder data sets for measurement 4.
Figure A.5: Aligned force sensor and rotary encoder data sets for measurement 5.
53
==PAGE:59==
Figure A.6: Aligned force sensor and rotary encoder data sets for measurement 6.
Figure A.7: Aligned force sensor and rotary encoder data sets for measurement 7.
Figure A.8: Aligned force sensor and rotary encoder data sets for measurement 8.
54
==PAGE:60==
B
Calculated power: two methods
(a) Power output calculated with both methods for measurement
1.
(b) Power output calculated with both methods for measurement
2.
(c) Power output calculated with both methods for measurement
3.
(d) Power output calculated with both methods for measurement
4.
55
==PAGE:61==
(a) Power output calculated with both methods for measurement
5.
(b) Power output calculated with both methods for measurement
6.
(c) Power output calculated with both methods for measurement
7.
(d) Power output calculated with both methods for measurement
8.
56
==PAGE:62==
57
==PAGE:63==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Ørsteds Plads, Building 345C
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.healthtech.dtu.dk
