==PAGE:1==
Post-construction subway noise analysis
of sources and transmission paths
Niels Peter Moos
June 25, 2023
DTU Electro
Department of Acoustic Technology
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Post-construction subway noise analysis of sources and transmission paths
Støjanalyse af kilder og transmissionsveje efter Metroens byggeri
Master Thesis
July, 2023
By
Niels Peter Moos
s173830
Supervisors:
Jonas Brunskog, Associate Professor at DTU
Rasmus Stahlfest Holck Skov, Acoustic Specialist at Force Technology
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title,
etc.
Published by:
DTU, Department of Acoustic Technology, Elektrovej, building 352, 2800
Kongens Lyngby Denmark
www.electro.dtu.dk
==PAGE:4==
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
I want to thank my supervisors Jonas Brunskog from DTU and Rasmus Stahlfest Holck
Skov from FORCE Technology, for helping me through the project and supporting me
with information and guidance whenever necessary.
Furthermore, I would like to thank my colleagues in the Acoustics department at FORCE
Technology for supplying me with support and guidance on multiple occasions.
I also thank Andreas Havreland and Jacob Holm Winther from Hottinger Brüel and Kjær
for their assistance with calibration and accelerometer knowledge.
My thanks also go to the ten people who let me into their apartments and measured the
noise; this project would not have been the same without any measurements.
Finally, I want to thank my family, who have always supported me through my studies.
Without them, I would have never made it this far.
ii
Post-construction subway noise analysis of sources and transmission paths
==PAGE:6==
Abstract
Ground-borne vibrations caused by the Metro Cityring in Copenhagen cause audible vi-
brations in the apartments nearby the Metro tracks. Original model-based calculations
showed that the Metro would not be audible in apartments; however, the apartment build-
ings represent various structure types, and measurements show that audible vibrations
are present for most Metro passages. Several unsuccessful initiatives have been made in
the Metro tunnels; thus, addressing the structural issues could reduce the sound radiation
caused by vibrations in the elements. This thesis aims to develop a measurement procedure
for the vibrations caused by the Metro Cityring, investigate differences in the acceleration
levels on structural elements, and determine if solutions can be found to reduce the sound
radiation in the apartments.
To develop the measurement procedure, equipment was tested through initial measure-
ments in an apartment close to the tunnels of the Metro Cityring.
The results were
analyzed, and the method was evaluated to develop a final measurement procedure. The
measurement procedure included three microphones and five accelerometers simultane-
ously measuring multiple elements’ acceleration and sound pressure levels. Field measure-
ments were conducted in ten buildings close to the Metro Cityring tunnels. The results
were analyzed for each location individually and then compared between sites. Finally,
potential solutions were also investigated.
The results showed that the acceleration and sound pressure levels in apartments near the
Metro stations were mainly in the 125- to 200Hz 1/3-octave band. Apartments further
from the station were more impacted in the 160- to the 250Hz 1/3-octave band. The
passage durations were longer in apartments close to the stations.
Elements with the
highest acceleration levels were the ceilings and lightweight interior walls. Solutions were
investigated for the apartments, however, due to the difference in stratified layers and the
spread in building construction types it was not possible to find a universally applicable
solution.
Post-construction subway noise analysis of sources and transmission paths
iii
==PAGE:7==
iv
Post-construction subway noise analysis of sources and transmission paths
==PAGE:8==
Contents
Preface
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
i
Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
1
Introduction
1
2
Concepts and Background
3
2.1
Railway Noise . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Underground wave propagation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.3
Structure-borne sound . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.4
Transfer Path Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.4.1
Signal analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.4.2
Multiple coherence . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.5
Legislation on subway noise . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3
Methodology
13
3.1
Plan for development of the measurement procedure . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.2
Measurement plan - Initial measurements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.3
Measurement procedure - Field measurements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.4
Equipment
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.4.1
Mounting of accelerometers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.4.2
Positioning of equipment
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.5
Analysis of Metro passages
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.5.1
Analysis example one
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.5.2
Analysis example two
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.5.3
Analysis example three
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4
Results and analysis
31
4.1
Initial measurements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.2
Field measurements results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
4.3
Similarities between results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
70
4.4
Suggestions for solutions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
72
5
Discussion
75
5.1
Measurement procedure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
75
5.2
Field Measurements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
76
5.2.1
Uncertainty of measurement values . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
77
5.3
Solutions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
77
5.4
Future use of the measurement procedure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
78
6
Conclusion and Future work
79
6.1
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
80
Bibliography
81
A Appendix
85
A.1 Reports . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
85
A.1.1
Olufsvej(1) Ground floor - 2100 København Ø . . . . . . . . . . . . .
85
Post-construction subway noise analysis of sources and transmission paths
v
==PAGE:9==
A.1.2
Olufsvej(2) Ground floor - 2100 København Ø . . . . . . . . . . . . .
89
A.1.3
Kertemindegade, 2nd floor - 2100 København Ø
. . . . . . . . . . .
93
A.1.4
Carit Etlars Vej(1), ground floor - 1814 Frederiksberg
. . . . . . . .
98
A.1.5
Holger Danskes Vej, ground floor - 2000 Frederiksberg . . . . . . . . 103
A.1.6
Tåsingegade(1), ground floor - 2100 København Ø . . . . . . . . . . 107
A.1.7
Tåsingegade(2), ground floor - 2100 København Ø . . . . . . . . . . 111
A.1.8
Nørrebrogade, 3rd floor - 2100 København Ø . . . . . . . . . . . . . 115
A.1.9
Carit Etlars Vej(2,1), ground floor - 1814 Frederiksberg
. . . . . . . 119
A.1.10 Carit Etlars Vej(2,2), 2nd floor - 1814 Frederiksberg . . . . . . . . . 124
A.2 Dewesoft Setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 129
A.2.1
Setting up the math module . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 129
A.2.2
Setting up the Modal Test module . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 129
A.2.3
Setting up the sound level module
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 130
vi
Post-construction subway noise analysis of sources and transmission paths
==PAGE:10==
1
Introduction
Since its construction in 2019, the M3 line of the Metro Cityring in Copenhagen has caused
audible noises in apartments which have annoyed the residents [1][2]. The annoyance has
received considerable media attention over the years [3][4][5][6] in attempts to have the
Metro company address these issues and gain compensation for the annoyance. Following
the numerous complaints, the Metro company has attempted several solutions[7] to lower
the vibrations in the tunnel however with little or no success[8]. Attempts to solve the
vibration issues in the tunnel did not prove helpful; a new perspective on finding solutions
could take its starting point in analyzing the structural problems.
More Metro lines are being planned in Copenhagen[9], and light rails are being constructed
to increase public transportation nationwide. Although both types of transportation may
prove useful, ensuring that neighboring residents to the rails are not annoyed is important.
Solving the issues prior to constructing the railways would be the optimal case; however,
unforeseen vibration problems require a procedure for implementing practical solutions
post-construction.
The noise originates from the Metro passing by below ground, creating vibrations. The
vibrations are transmitted through stratified layers, each impacting the waves differently.
Once the waves arrive at the buildings, the structural elements are excited, and the vi-
brations spread throughout the elements. Bending waves in the structural elements cause
sound to radiate from the surfaces, making the Metro passage audible.
Addressing the solutions requires information about the cause of the problem. In this
case, the issues are vibration-based, which causes sound to radiate from the structural
elements in buildings. This project aims to develop a measurement method to measure
the vibrations and to determine if certain construction elements are more prone to carry
vibrations than others.
To underline the concepts and give insight into the transmission path from the railway to
radiated noise, the thesis begins with a chapter on concepts and definitions. This chapter
briefly provides an overview of railway noise, underground wave propagation, structure-
borne sound, and transfer path analysis.
The chapter is concluded with a section on
legislation on subway noise. Subsequently, a methodology chapter containing the plan
for developing the measurement procedure is presented. The results and analysis section
examines the initial measurements conducted to set the framework for a final procedure
to use later in field measurements. The field measurement results from ten buildings in
Copenhagen are presented and compared, to investigate if there are similarities between the
results. The thesis is concluded after discussing the results and measurement procedure.
Lastly, future works for the procedure are presented, highlighting possible projects to
refine the method and create solutions.
Post-construction subway noise analysis of sources and transmission paths
1
==PAGE:11==
2
Post-construction subway noise analysis of sources and transmission paths
==PAGE:12==
2
Concepts and Background
The vibrations caused by the subway travel through stratified layers of soil before reaching
the construction where they are transmitted between several elements before being radi-
ated into the individual apartment. As this thesis does not investigate each step of the
full complex transmission path, an introduction to the concepts is given in this chapter.
Initially, a description of railway noise relevant to this project is given. Subsequently, the
propagation of waves through underground soils and the impact of the stratified struc-
ture is described. Afterward, the transmission of vibrations through building construction
elements and the sound radiation is introduced in the structure-borne sound section. Sub-
sequently, as multiple coherence was used to validate passages in the result section, a
description of the relevant calculations in this area is introduced. Finally, a brief overview
of the legislation on subway noise and measurement parameters used is presented.
2.1
Railway Noise
Defining the noise originating from the source is of great importance to understand both
how to measure the noise and how to present potential solutions. As the speed of the
trains also defines the type of noise created[10], it is worth mentioning that the maximum
speed of the Metro on the Cityring is 90km/h[11]. The speed of the trains varies, both as
the trains accelerate and decelerate, but also when the trains are sped up slightly to catch
up with the schedule. Air-borne noise is not the cause of radiated sound in the buildings
and is thus outside the scope and is therefore not covered in this project.
The noise which contributes the most from railways is the rolling noise caused by roughness
on the surface of the rails and irregularity of the train wheels[12][13]. It is possible to grind
the rails and wheels to reduce such irregularities and this is done four times each year[8].
The general frequency range of rolling noise is from about 100-5kHz of which the highest
levels appear from 500-2.5kHz. The noise caused by the Metro is likely up to 300Hz [14]
in the apartments, indicating that a lot of the frequencies are dampened through the
stratified layers. This is further explained in section 2.2.
When the roughness of both wheels and rails is exceptionally high, it can cause impact
noises from the trains. During deceleration, it is possible for a wheel to lock in place
and slide along the tracks causing a flat surface to occur on the wheels. The size of the
wheel flat correlates to the way it can be treated. Larger wheel flats require non-linear
analysis[10] whereas smaller flats can be treated as regular roughness in the wheel. Impact
noises in rails are mostly caused by discontinuities in rails which could be joints, switches,
and frogs1. When the wheels travel from one rail to another, a difference in height and
width can cause impact noise.
Trains can also cause parametric excitations, which can be particularly significant when
working with ground-borne vibrations[10][15]. The parametric excitation is caused by the
sleeper-passing frequency, which depends on the train speed and the distance between the
sleepers. At this frequency, resonances will occur in the track which can contribute to the
structure- and ground-borne vibrations.[16].
The vibrations are treatable by vibration isolation and isolating the rail from the ground[17].
In tunnels slab tracks are often used in combination with soft supports to lower the levels
1A structure in the railways that supports the wheels allowing them to cross onto other tracks.
Post-construction subway noise analysis of sources and transmission paths
3
==PAGE:13==
which otherwise would be high in the slab track. Further information on various types of
tracks and their damping effect can be found in [17].
2.2
Underground wave propagation
To fully understand the transmission path from the tunnel to the apartments, the transmis-
sion path through the varying layers of underground becomes a relevant factor. However,
as it is not the entire topic of this thesis, a more thorough presentation of the topic may be
found in [18] and [19]. Furthermore, the explanations given in this chapter are primarily
based on the two references.
Three wave types are primarily encountered when studying responses from vibrations in
the ground, the P-wave, the S-wave, and the Rayleigh wave. The P-wave is short for either
primary or pressure wave. The wave has the highest wave speed of the three and is the
first to arrive at a point of measurement. Furthermore, the wave is pure pressure. The
S-wave is an abbreviation for the secondary or shear wave as the wave arrives after the
P-wave and is purely shear. As the wave is shear, the S-wave can be further divided into
two separate waves. The first is the SH-wave which moves horizontally and the second is
the SV-wave which moves vertically. The Rayleigh wave is slower than the S-wave and
travels along the surfaces of solids. As the waves are traveling through different materials,
defining the wave speeds in different media is important. Examples of materials and wave
speeds are shown in Figure 2.1.
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
3500
4000
4500
5000
Granite & gneiss
Limestone & slate
Brittle rock
Morain, soaked
Morain
Sand, soaked
Sand & Gravel
Clay, soaked
Clay & silt
S-wave
P-wave
Figure 2.1: Comparisons of wave speeds of P- and S-waves in common underground
materials. Adapted from [18]
As seen in Figure 2.1 the velocities of the waves vary greatly. In addition to the variance
between materials, the internal differences between P- and S-wave velocities also differ.
This is especially the case for the soaked materials where the soil and water are combined
as one material. In combination with the changes in velocities, because the P- and S-waves
expand into a volume, they are vulnerable to geometrical damping. The Rayleigh waves
are not as affected by geometrical damping as they move on the surface and not through
a volume.
The impact of the geometrical damping depends on the dimension of the wave. As Rayleigh
4
Post-construction subway noise analysis of sources and transmission paths
==PAGE:14==
waves only move on surfaces, they cannot be three-dimensional. The P- and S-waves,
however, can be and the energy will spread with 1/r2. For the two-dimensional case the
Rayleigh waves will act similarly to the P- and S- waves for which the energy is proportional
to 1/r. When a one-dimensional case is analyzed, geometrical damping does not impact
any of the mentioned wave types[18].
The impedance of each layer will impact the energy of the waves traveling through stratified
layers. The impedance is described by z = ρc where ρ denotes the material density and
c the speed of sound in the material. When the waves travel between two materials, the
amount of energy transferred to the second layer depends on the impedance mismatch. A
large difference between in impedance of the two materials will lead to the waves being
reflected, whereas a perfect match will lead to all the energy being transmitted. Waves
traveling through materials will be dampened differently depending on the material. The
damping can be frequency dependent, but some soils have shown less frequency dependence
on the damping[20].
As waves propagating underground will be impacted by both distance and changes in ma-
terial properties, it is evident that investigating the underground’s exact impact is outside
this project’s scope. The factors described in this section indicate that the underground
layers between the tunnels and apartments can change how much the level of vibration
damping..
2.3
Structure-borne sound
The structure-borne sound becomes one of the last steps in the transmission path from
the tunnel to the apartments. Firstly, a brief introduction will be given to the types of
waves, then to sound radiation. Examples of the wave types are shown in Figure 2.2.
Figure 2.2: The three wave types described in this project. (a) depicts longitudinal
waves, (b) torsional, and (c) bending waves. From [21].
Post-construction subway noise analysis of sources and transmission paths
5
==PAGE:15==
Several wave types can occur when a structure vibrates. The first wave type is a longitu-
dinal wave, which propagates in the direction the object is vibrating. Displacement also
occurs perpendicular to the direction of vibration; however, the sound radiation caused
by such displacements can be neglected.
The second wave type is shear waves, for which the deformations occur transversely to the
direction of propagation. If occurring in rods, the waves cause the cross-section to twist.
The characteristic impedance of the longitudinal and shear waves is high, resulting in
a good ability to transmit between elements and conversion into the final wave type,
bending waves. The wave type moves transversely to the direction of propagation and
the surface of the structure[21]. The movement of the bending waves in structures causes
waves in adjacent media e.g., air. This further explains how this type of wave causes
sound radiation. Additionally, the wave type is more complex as the waves are dispersive,
meaning the waves travel at different phase speeds at different frequencies[22].
This can be further seen by examining the Equation 2.3.1 describing the phase speed for
bending waves,
cb = √ω 4
√
B′
ρh
(2.3.1)
where B′ denotes the bending stiffness per unit width of the plate, ρ the density, and h
the plate thickness. The bending stiffness per unit width can furthermore be seen to be
highly dependent on the plate thickness in Equation 2.3.2
B′ =
Eh3
12(1 −ν).
(2.3.2)
E denotes the Youngs Modulus, and ν the poisons ratio. The frequency at which the
phase speed of the bending wave is equivalent to the speed of sound in air is called the
critical frequency. The frequency is determined as
fc = c2
0
2π
√
m′′
B′ ,
(2.3.3)
where c0 denotes the speed of sound in air and m′′ = ρh is the mass per unit area. At the
critical frequency fc, the radiation will be close to 1. The radiation factor is dependent
on the frequency and is defined as
σ(ω) =
P(ω)
ρ0c0S
⟨
v2(ω)
⟩,
(2.3.4)
where P(ω) is the average radiated sound power, ρ0, c0 the density and the speed of sound
of the fluid, S the plate size, and
⟨
v2(ω)
⟩
the spatial mean-square velocity of the plate
[23].Equation 2.3.4 describes the ability of a plate to radiate into a medium compared to a
piston in a baffle. Several equations have also been created to estimate radiation eﬀiciency
theoretically, which can be used when analyzing possible solutions. As such equations
are not applied in this project, they are not shown; however, the reader is referred to
[24][25]. One theoretical equation will be used to provide an example of the difference in
6
Post-construction subway noise analysis of sources and transmission paths
==PAGE:16==
radiation eﬀiciency between materials later. The radiation eﬀiciency can depend on the
entire structure and its connection to other elements[26]. As mentioned previously, the
radiation eﬀiciency depends on the frequency. For f << fc the sound radiation will be
much less than one. This is due to the maximum and minimums of the bending wave
canceling each other out. However, the radiation eﬀiciency increases once the frequency
approaches the critical frequency, from approximately 1/2fc according to the theoretical
equations. The radiation eﬀiciency will be highest at the critical frequency, and at f > fc,
the sound will be radiated into the far field [23].
As the critical frequency varies between material types and thicknesses, the radiation
eﬀiciency is briefly investigated to show the differences among three walls of similar size,
5m × 2.5m × 0.09m. The values of Young’s Modulus, Poisson’s ratio, density, and critical
frequency can be found in Table 2.1. In Figure 2.3, three elements of similar dimensions are
compared for separate materials. In Figure 2.4, the radiation eﬀiciency of plasterboard of
size 25m2 is compared to a concrete element of size 12.5m2. Both elements are of thickness
0.09m. The theoretical radiation eﬀiciency is estimated using Equation 2.3.5[27].
σ = a
λ
∫π
0


sin
((√
fc/f −cosθ
)
ka/2
)
(√
fc/f −cosθ
)
ka/2


2
dθ
(2.3.5)
In Equation 2.3.5, a =
√
S, where S is the surface area. λ denotes the wavelength at the
given frequency and k is the wavenumber. Note that the equation can be turned into a
sinc function.
Table 2.1: Table values for the three materials. From [28]
Youngs Modulus,
E [N/m2]
Poisson’s ratio,
ν
Density,
ρ, [kg/m3]
fc
Brick
1.6 × 1010
0.22
2.2 × 103
260
Plaster
7.0 × 109
0.3
1.2 × 103
284
Concrete (light)
3.8 × 109
0.2
1.3 × 103
413
102
103
Frequency [Hz]
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
10
Radiation efficiency,
  [dB]
Brick
Plasterboard
Concrete
Figure 2.3: Radiation eﬀiciency of elements of brick, plaster, and concrete. Element
sizes are 5m × 2.5m × 0.09m. Material properties can be found in Table 2.1.
Post-construction subway noise analysis of sources and transmission paths
7
==PAGE:17==
102
103
Frequency [Hz]
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
10
Radiation efficiency,
  [dB]
Plasterboard, S = 25m2
Concrete, S = 12.5m2
Figure 2.4: Radiation eﬀiciency of elements of plaster and concrete. Element sizes are
25.5m × 0.09m and 12.5m × 0.09m respectively.
Material properties can be found in
Table 2.1
From Figure 2.3 it is clear that each material performs differently, although brick and
plasterboard appear slightly similar. Once the element size of the plasterboard is doubled
in Figure 2.4, the sound radiation below the critical frequency becomes worse, and equiv-
alent to concrete from approximately 150Hz and below. Thus it is important to keep the
dimensions and material properties of the elements in mind when analyzing the results.
2.4
Transfer Path Analysis
Transfer path analysis is used in this project by determining the multiple coherence to val-
idate passages. Initially, the signal analysis required is presented, subsequently, the mul-
tiple coherence is shown, followed by an example elaborating on the calculation method.
2.4.1
Signal analysis
The autocorrelation function is shown in Equation 2.4.1.
Rxx(τ) = lim
T→∞
1
T
∫T/2
−T/2
x(t)x(t + τ) dt
(2.4.1)
The autocorrelation function is used to describe the statistical relationship between a value
of a signal at time t and another time t + τ. By Fourier transforming the autocorrelation
function, the power spectral density is obtained, shown in Equation 2.4.2.
Sxx(ω) =
∫∞
−∞
Rxx(τ)e−jωτ dτ
(2.4.2)
The power spectral density, or autospectrum, denotes the correlation of the signal to itself.
Similar equations can be used to describe the relationship between two signals. The cross-
correlation function is defined as
Rxy(τ) = lim
T→∞
1
T
∫T/2
−T/2
y(t)x(t + τ) dt,
(2.4.3)
8
Post-construction subway noise analysis of sources and transmission paths
==PAGE:18==
and similarly to the autocorrelation describes the statistical relationship between the sig-
nals x and y. The cross-power spectrum is defined as
Sxy(ω) =
∫∞
−∞
Rxy(τ)e−jωτ dτ
(2.4.4)
and contrary to the autospectrum is most often complex[29]. Using these estimations, it
is possible to determine the frequency response function which is determined as
H(ω) = Sxy(ω)
Sxx(ω),
(2.4.5)
where the autospectrum comes from Equation 2.4.2 and the cross correlation from Equa-
tion 2.4.4. The ordinary coherence is then determined as
γ2
xy(ω) =
|Sxy(ω)|2
Sxx(ω)Syy(ω).
(2.4.6)
The ordinary coherence is a function of frequency for which 0 ≤γ2
xy(ω) ≤1. It shows the
coherence between the two signals x and y. If γ2
xy(ω) = 1, the two signals are perfectly
coherent and the opposite if γ2
xy(ω) = 0.
2.4.2
Multiple coherence
If multiple input signals, x = x1(t), x2(t), ...xq(t) are recorded, it is possible to show their
coherence to an output signal y(t). The method can be applied for Multiple Input Multiple
Output (MIMO) and Multiple Input Singular Output(MISO) used in this project. The
MISO coherence was used to validate each metro passage individually. Calculating the
multiple coherence is a complex process; thus the general equations required will be shown
first and an example is shown subsequently.
The frequency response function for conditioned inputs is first determined by
Lij = Sij·(i−1)!
Sii·(i−1)!
i, j = 1, 2, ..., q, q + 1.
(2.4.7)
Where q denotes the total number of inputs, Sij·(i−1)! the cross-spectrum and Sii·(i−1)!
the autospectrum. This type of frequency response function is similar to Equation 2.4.5,
however, in the derivation the output noise is minimized. The derivation of this type of
frequency response function is not relevant for this scope, thus the reader is referred to
Chapters 5.1 and 10.2 of [30].
Equation 2.4.7 can be used to remove linear effects from other signals, this process is
shown in Equation 2.4.8 using the autospectrums of two signals.
S(q+1)(q+1)·q! = S(q+1)(q+1)·(q−1)! −Lq(q+1)S(q+1)q·(q−1)!
(2.4.8)
The notation S(q+1)(q+1)·q! denotes that linear effects of Sq! have been removed from the
signal S(q+1)(q+1). By writing q!, the notation is abbreviated, so for e.g. 5 signals the
notation S55·4·3·2·1 = S55·4!. Once the conditioned autospectra have been determined, the
partial coherence can be determined by
Post-construction subway noise analysis of sources and transmission paths
9
==PAGE:19==
γ2
iy·(i−1)! =
|Siy·(i−1)!|2
Sii(i−1)!Syy·(i−1)!
.
(2.4.9)
Partial coherence denotes the relationship of an input signal, x1(t) with the effects of
another input signal, x2(t), removed to an output signal y(t). In Equation 2.4.9 Syy denotes
the autospectrum of the output signal y. The multiple coherence is then determined by
γy:q! = 1 −
[
(1 −γ2
1y)(1 −γ2
2y·1) · · · (1 −γ2
qy·(q−1)!)
]
,
(2.4.10)
which can be abbreviated to
γ2
y:q! = γ2
y:x = Syy −Snn
Syy
.
(2.4.11)
The notation y : x denotes the portion of y(t) which is caused by x = x1(t), x2(t), ...xq(t).
Similar to the ordinary coherence function, partial and multiple coherence is also between
0 and 1. It is important to note, that several special cases occur for multiple coherence
when only two inputs are used which are not described here. The reader is referred to [30]
for the specific cases.
Ordering of the signals when removing linear effects is important for the analysis. How-
ever, ordering is diﬀicult, especially when more than two inputs are used[30]. The ap-
proach which is used for the case of > 2 inputs, is to compute the ordinary coherence,
Equation 2.4.6, between each input and the output. The order is then determined by
analyzing the coherence at each frequency and ordering the inputs so the highest ordi-
nary coherence is the first input and the lowest ordinary coherence is the last. This can
occasionally result in errors but these errors are not common [30].
Calculating multiple coherence Example
Assume four inputs and one output is used for the given example. In correspondence with
this thesis, the input is four accelerometers and the output is a microphone. In order
to clearly explain the process of reaching the partial coherence values to determine the
multiple coherence, the process will be split into several steps.
Step 1
Four values are necessary to obtain the conditioned autospectrum of signal two without the
linear effects of signal one: The autospectrums of signal one and two, the cross-spectrum
between the two signals, and the optimum frequency response function. The auto- and
cross-spectrums are determined using Equation 2.4.2 and Equation 2.4.4 respectively, and
the frequency response function is determined using Equation 2.4.7.
L12 = S12
S11
(2.4.12)
To remove the linear effects of this signal Equation 2.4.8 is used.
S22·1 = S22 −L12S11
(2.4.13)
10
Post-construction subway noise analysis of sources and transmission paths
==PAGE:20==
Repeat the process of removing signal one from accelerometers 2, 3, and 4, and also the
output signal from the microphone which will be denoted as number 5. S22·1, S33·1, S44·1,
and S55·1.
Step 2
Using the newly obtained autospectrums of all the signals without the linear effects of
signal one, a similar process is repeated, now by removing signal two from the resulting
autospectrums. For the first case of removing the linear effects of signal two from signal
three, the cross-spectrum of S22·1 and S33·1, S23·1 must be determined along with the
transfer function L23 which is determined as
L23 = S23·(1)
S22·(1)
.
(2.4.14)
The linear effects are then removed as in step one by
S33·2! = S33·1 −L23S22·1
(2.4.15)
This process is then repeated to remove the linear effects of signal two from signals four and
five so the resulting autospectrums now are S33·2!, S44·2! and S55·2!. Once calculated repeat
the process by removing signal three from signal four and five, and finally remove signal
four from signal five. The sum of the determined components then gives the autospectrum
of the output, signal 5, by
S55 =
4
∑
i=1
|Li5|2Sii·(i−1)! + S55·4!
(2.4.16)
The partial coherence functions can then be determined by using Equation 2.4.9, and
subsequently Equation 2.4.10 to determine the multiple coherence between the four input
signals from the accelerometers and the output signal in the microphone.
2.5
Legislation on subway noise
Metro lines are a recent component of the public transportation network in Denmark.
Longer sections of underground railways have not been a large part of the railway network
in Denmark; thus, specific legislation regarding noise from underground railways is yet
to be made. FORCE Technology has made an investigation[31] into exposure levels from
Metros in other countries. The table of thresholds is shown in Table 2.2
Post-construction subway noise analysis of sources and transmission paths
11
==PAGE:21==
Table 2.2: Thresholds for Metro noise in different countries. (1) Day and night values
regarding structure-borne sound in buildings caused by industry or commercial businesses.
(2) 10-minute equivalent level (LAeq,LF 10min) in respectively the day- (7-18) and night
period (18-07). (3) 24-hour equivalent level for indoor train traﬀic LAeq,24. (4) LAeq in the
day- (7-18) and night period (18-07). (5) Day- and night values where the maximum level
is not exceeded 95% of the time. (6) For planning and existing railways, respectively. (7)
Day and night values. (8) LpA,max,FAST between 22 and 07. From[31]
A-weighted sound pressure level [dB re 20µPa]
LpA,LF
LAeq
LpA,max,SLOW
LpA,max,FAST
L5
Norway
-
32
32
Sweden
-
30
-
-
Great Britain
-
-
35/40(6)
-
Germany
35/25 (1)
-
45/35 (7)
-
Australia
-
40/35 (5)
-
-
Denmark
25/20 (2)
30/25 (4)
-
40 (8)
-
Denmark
30(3)
-
-
-
As the previous measurements conducted by FORCE Technology focused on LpA,max,FAST
values, they are also used in this project to make values comparable for future use. As
the project aims to measure the audible noise caused by sound radiation, the A-weighting
is relevant as this describes how humans perceive the noise. Furthermore, as the passages
are brief, the maximum values and the fast time weighting describe the passage well. The
slow weighting may misinterpret the level of the passage, especially for shorter passages.
Although the investigation from FORCE Technology investigated KB-weighted acceler-
ation levels, Law, the weighting does not reflect vibrations in 1/3-octave bands above
160Hz very well due to the steep weighting above this band. Thus KB-weighting is not
used. A-weighting the results instead could potentially reflect the vibrations more cor-
rectly; however, as the solutions should be focused on generally lowering the vibrations
and sound radiated from the elements, no weighting is applied for the acceleration levels
in this project to show the present levels. The maximum and FAST time weighting is,
however, used to make the acceleration levels more comparable with sound pressure levels.
12
Post-construction subway noise analysis of sources and transmission paths
==PAGE:22==
3
Methodology
This thesis aimed to establish an accurate measurement procedure for identifying struc-
tural components in apartments that generate excessive sound radiation. A comprehensive
four-step approach is devised to achieve this goal, ensuring optimal results.
This chapter provides an overview of the preliminary and on-site measurements and the
devices employed. Subsequently, a section elaborates on the methodology for analyzing
each Metro passage (pass by).
3.1
Plan for development of the measurement procedure
The procedure has been developed using four steps shown in Figure 3.1 and described
below.
Equipment testing
Initial Field Test
Re-evaluation of method and 
equipment
Field Measurements
Figure 3.1: The four-step process of creating the procedure
Equipment testing is the first step and is about testing the available equipment to
investigate questions such as: What types of devices are required? How much equipment
could be necessary? How much equipment is available? How is the equipment utilized
correctly?
Once these questions have been answered, the preliminary work starts for the second step:
creating an initial measurement procedure. As this is the first draft of the measurement
procedure, smaller details in steps are not essential. The process should include how to set
up the equipment, how to set up the measurement software, and measurement duration.
Once the initial measurement plan is ready, step two begins, the Initial Field Test. Dur-
ing these measurements, notes should be taken if something is too challenging. This could
e.g., be a time-consuming step or if something is impossible. Different equipment should
also be tested to investigate whether the equipment can be used for the measurements.
The initial measurements are important as the data from these measurements sets the
framework for the field measurements later in the project.
Re-evaluation of procedure and equipment follows the initial measurements. Here
the results are analyzed to investigate what frequencies are most impacted, if any devices
obtain different results, and if the procedure obtained the wanted results. Following the
result analysis, the procedure should be evaluated to create a robust plan for the field
measurements. The final measurement procedure should include a step-by-step guide to
setting up the equipment and any general measurement requirements.
When the measurement procedure is finalized, the Field Measurements begin. It is
likely that following the initial field measurements, some evaluation will be required to
optimize the procedure. The procedure should then be optimized and tested to achieve a
final version that can be repeated.
Post-construction subway noise analysis of sources and transmission paths
13
==PAGE:23==
3.2
Measurement plan - Initial measurements
As described in section 3.1, these measurements aim not to determine which element is
likely to exhibit the highest sound radiation. Still, they are more focused on equipment ex-
perience and understanding local data collection. As a week is available, the measurement
process is listed here.
• Monday: Testing of equipment setup. Where is it possible to measure?
• Tuesday: Measurements during the rush hour and morning (06-11)
– After rush hour measurements, testing of different accelerometers
• Wednesday: Measurements during the night (21-03)
– Test measurements in the basement as disturbance should be low during this
period
• Thursday: Supplementary mid-day measurements and basement measurements
– Any leftover necessary comparisons and supplementary data collection for Metro
passages are made here.
• Friday: Packing down equipment
3.3
Measurement procedure - Field measurements
The final version of the measurement procedure used is presented in this section. It consists
of three individual parts:
1. Prior measurements
2. Equipment setup
3. Measurements
It is important to note that the number of recorded passages for each element was incon-
sistent between locations. For the first measurements, a minimum of 10 passages were not
measured on each surface due to lack of time. The following measurements attempted to
measure at least 10 passages for each element, which was achieved in most cases.
Another important note is that reverberation time measurements were conducted at each
location; however, issues were encountered with the software used for Field Measurements
as some bands had negative reverberation times. Thus the reverberation times are not
shown in the report - instead, the reverberation time is rated on a scale of 1 to 4 following
the descriptions in [32] translated in Table 3.1.
Table 3.1: Rating of reverberation times in accommodation spaces translated from [32].
Residences, furnishing
Rating
t500Hz
[sec.]
Heavily furnished, small room
1
0.3
Regularly furnished
2
0.5
Sparsely furnished
3
0.7
Not furnished
4
1
Prior to measurements
14
Post-construction subway noise analysis of sources and transmission paths
==PAGE:24==
1. Test that all equipment works as intended. This also includes cables.
2. To reduce setup time, connect as much equipment as possible before leaving.
Equipment setup
1. Take pictures of the room before equipment setup for personal reference.
2. Measure the room’s dimensions and note them for later reference. Wall types (heavy-
weight or lightweight) and sketches of door and window locations should also be
noted, including any confirmed material information.
3. Using masking tape, mark up each accelerometer and microphone position in the
room and basement. A washer should be glued on the tape for all accelerometer
positions as described in subsection 3.4.1.
Two accelerometer positions on each
element and one reference accelerometer position were planned. Seven microphone
positions were planned in the room, one of which was a reference position. In the
basement, two accelerometer positions on one wall and two microphone positions
were planned in the room.
4. For consistency in the data and minimizing errors, each device should always use
the same channel. Each device was connected in the following way:
(a) Channel 1: Reference microphone
(b) Channel 2: Microphone 2
(c) Channel 3: Microphone 3 (also used for basement)
(d) Channel 4: Reference accelerometer
(e) Channel 5: Accelerometer 2
(f) Channel 6: Accelerometer 3
(g) Channel 7: Accelerometer 4
(h) Channel 8: Accelerometer 5 (also used for basement)
5. Calibrate all equipment. This is essential to trust the measured data.
Measurements
1. Check that all devices are in their first positions and that all equipment works as
intended (no background noise or unexpected levels).
2. Measure at least 10 passages to involve variation in the data, as each passage can
differ. 1 One round corresponds to a minimum of 10 measured passages.
3. If measuring in basement
(a) After a round of measurements, change the accelerometers and microphones to
their second position. After the second position, move the equipment used in
the basement to the apartment for the final two rounds of measurements.
4. If no basement measurements are conducted
1To see the variation in each passage, one could look at either LpA,max,F AST level variation for each
passage in the appendix (e.g. Figure A.23) or variations for both LpA,max,F AST and La,max,F AST in each
1/3 octave band (e.g. Figure 4.21).
Post-construction subway noise analysis of sources and transmission paths
15
==PAGE:25==
(a) Conduct three rounds of measurements, moving the equipment to the pre-
located measurement locations.
5. Reverberation time measurements - Conduct reverberation time measurements
for the room. This is primarily used to describe how furnished the room is. These
should only be done in the apartment. Note: Although the reverberation time results
were not shown in this report due to faulty results, they are recommended to perform
to accurately describe the room.
3.4
Equipment
This section presents two tables describing the equipment used for the initial and field
measurements. Below each table is a brief description of why some of the specific equip-
ment was used and their role. It is important to mention that the equipment noted in the
tables only shows what was used. When packing for the measurements extra equipment
was always brought along in case any equipment should fail. The equipment for the initial
measurement is shown in Table 3.2.
Table 3.2: Devices used for initial measurements. NI (National Instruments)
Type
Manufacturer
Equipment-ID
Amount
Note
DAQ
NI
NI cDAQ-9174
1
Sound card
NI
NI 9234
1
Sound card
NI
NI 9250
3
Accelerometer
Metra
KS78C.100
5
Accelerometer
Brüel & Kjær
8306
1
Accelerometer
Brüel & Kjær
4378
1
Accelerometer
Brüel & Kjær
4381
2
Microphone, 1/1”
Brüel & Kjær
4145
2
Used for mic 1
Pre-amplifier
Brüel & Kjær
2539
1
Used for mic 1
Pre-amplifier
Brüel & Kjær
2645
1
Used for mic 2
Power supply
Brüel & Kjær
Type 2804
1
Used for 8306
Power supply
Brüel & Kjær
Type 5935
1
Used for mics
Calibrator
Brüel & Kjær
4231
1
For mics
Calibrator
Brüel & Kjær
4294
1
For KS78C.100
A DAQ from NI was used for the initial measurements, along with three type 9250 sound
cards and one type 9234 sound card. Type 9250 has two inputs each, and the 9234 card
has four inputs. The 9234 had higher background levels than the 9250s and was used less.
Four types of accelerometers were used to test the internal noise, sensitivity, and ability
to record the passages. The sensitivity of the KS78C.100 was not similar to the other
accelerometers, but five were available, making it relevant to test whether they would be
usable. The other accelerometer types were building-acoustic accelerometers. However,
not as many were available for the measurements.
The Type 4145 Microphones were used as their sensitivity in lower frequency ranges is
high. 1/1” inch was chosen over 1/2” as they have lower background noise levels.
The devices used for the field measurements are shown in Table 3.3.
16
Post-construction subway noise analysis of sources and transmission paths
==PAGE:26==
Table 3.3: Devices used for final measurements
Type
Manufacturer
Equipment-ID
Qty.
Note
DAQ
DEWESOFT
Sirius Acc V2
1
Accelerometer
Metra
KS78C.100
4
Accelerometer
Brüel & Kjær
8306
1
Microphone 1/1”
Brüel & Kjær
4132
2
Used for mic 1 & 2
Microphone 1/1”
Brüel & Kjær
4161
1
Used for mic 3
Pre-amplifier
Brüel & Kjær
2539
1
Used for mic 1
Pre-amplifier
Brüel & Kjær
2645
1
Used for mic 2
Pre-amplifier
Brüel & Kjær
2669
1
Used for mic 3
Power supply
Brüel & Kjær
2804
1
Used for 8306
Power supply
Brüel & Kjær
5935
1
Used for mic 1 & 2
Power supply
Brüel & Kjær
5935L
1
Used for mic 3
Calibrator
Brüel & Kjær
4230
1
For microphones
Calibrator
Brüel & Kjær
4294
1
For KS78C.100
The DAQ from Dewesoft was used for the field measurements as it had eight channels,
and using the software supplied by Dewesoft allowed for viewing multiple channels live
and conducting data analysis effectively.
The KS78C.100 accelerometers were used as they were able to record the acceleration
levels of the building elements, and 5 of them were available for use. Only four, however,
were used in these measurements. Furthermore, the background level in the devices was
found to be lower when using the Dewesoft DAQ. The Type 8306 accelerometer acted
as the reference accelerometer during the field measurements as it is a building acoustic
accelerometer with high sensitivity[33] even at very low frequencies. As the accelerometer
had not been used for a while, the accelerometer was calibrated by Brüel and Kjær in
Virum prior to the field measurements.
Two types of 1-inch microphones were used (as three of the same type were unavailable).
1-inch microphones were used instead of 1/2” as these microphones have lower noise floors.
Although most sound pressure levels recorded in the field measurements were high, the
initial measurements indicated that the sound pressure level could vary between passages.
Thus, low noise floors in the microphones were necessary.
The sensitivity of the two
microphones is not identical; however, it is similar in the measurement range of interest.
The type 4230 sound calibrator was used as the 4231 was not available.
Type 4231
is recommended for further measurements as the tone does not stop until the button
is pressed, simplifying microphone calibrations far from the measurement station. The
4294 accelerometer calibrator is used to calibrate the KS78C.100 accelerometers.
The
accelerometer Type 8306 requires a much larger calibrator which was not available for
the measurements. Thus it was calibrated using the sensitivity values supplied from the
calibration at B&K. A portable calibrator such as B&K Type 4809 can, however, be used.
3.4.1
Mounting of accelerometers
A mounting platform is used to mount the Type 8306 accelerometer from Brüel and Kjær,
as seen in Figure 3.2.
Post-construction subway noise analysis of sources and transmission paths
17
==PAGE:27==
Figure 3.2: Mounting of accelerometer Type 8306 from B&K. See [34] Miljøstyrelsen,
1983 for more information on the plate.
The measurement probe is 15cm in diameter and 1.5cm in thickness and allows the ac-
celerometer to be fixed onto a thread. Further characteristics of the probe can be found
in [34] by Miljøstyrelsen. It is important to note that the plate acts as a low-pass fil-
ter - however, this does not impact the frequency range measured in this project. This
accelerometer was solely used for measurements on the floor as it weighs 0.6kg.
This
accelerometer was used for testing if the other KS78C.100 accelerometers missed any fre-
quency content during the measurements.
The KS78C.100 accelerometers were used to measure acceleration levels on walls and ceil-
ings. To mount the accelerometers, a mounting method was developed to avoid damaging
the walls and easily move them around between measurements. The mounting method
consisted of a piece of masking tape on the wall and then gluing the washer to the masking
tape on the wall. Using the magnet attachment for the accelerometers, it was possible
to keep them mounted for the full duration of the measurements. The dimensions of the
washers were:
• Inner diameter: 6.4mm
• Outer diameter: 18mm
• Thickness: 1.6mm
The thin masking tape allows for easy setup on walls and was used to write position names
on it, simplifying the process of changing positions between measurements. Using a thin
layer of glue to attach the washer to the masking tape makes it possible to minimize
damping caused by the layers. This was furthermore tested to see if any clear damping
was visible, where the differences were negligible. To further reduce the possibility of noise
from the cable, blu-tack is used to lower the drag on the cable. The mounting method is
shown in Figure 3.3.
18
Post-construction subway noise analysis of sources and transmission paths
==PAGE:28==
Figure 3.3: Mounting of KS78C.100 accelerometers using masking tape, glue, and a
washer. The cable is attached to the wall with blu-tack to reduce noise from potential
drag in the cable.
3.4.2
Positioning of equipment
As the positioning of equipment is important for the results of the measurements[35], the
guidelines described in Orientation 43[32] regarding choices of measurement positions have
been followed. This was done to ensure good measurement positions. This was, however,
not possible in all cases, as room sizes varied greatly, and some rooms were too small.
Thus, it was decided to use seven positions for microphones to minimize the overall effect
of room modes. The height of all positions is pre-planned as [0.9m, 1m, 1.25m, 1.4m,
1.6m, 1.8m, 2m]. Three microphones are used for the measurements. Two microphones
move around between measurements, and the microphone at h = 1m is used as a reference
microphone throughout all measurements. The reference position allows for a constant
result to compare with the measurement results.
Although three positions on each surface would be ideal for the accelerometers, two posi-
tions are measured on each surface due to time constraints in setting up and the number of
measurements needed to perform. The positions are non-symmetric and spaced suﬀiciently
apart to avoid modes in the plate. The accelerometers also have a reference position; the
type 8603 accelerometer is used on the floor throughout all measurements.
3.5
Analysis of Metro passages
As the content of the Metro passages differs not only between locations but also between
trains, the procedure used to analyze the passages from the field measurements is described
in this section. Each passage is validated using the same procedure, a flow diagram is
presented in Figure 3.4 showing the process of evaluating a passage.
Post-construction subway noise analysis of sources and transmission paths
19
==PAGE:29==
Figure 3.4: Flow diagram describing the process of validating a Metro passage.
As seen in Figure 3.4, the initial three steps are focused on isolating the passage to find
if anything is audibly impacting the recording. Step 1 is focused on isolating the passage,
whereas the goal of step 2 is to ensure potential background noise is not audibly impacting
the passage. In step 3, the acceleration- and sound pressure levels in 1/3-octave bands over
time are analyzed to examine whether they are consistent. When the consistency has been
analyzed and it is clear how the high levels are distributed among the 1/3-octave bands,
step 4 begins. In this step, the frequency content is analyzed for both microphones and
accelerometers to see if any background noise or issues with the equipment impacts the
frequency content of the measurement. If so, the passage is discarded. Step 5 considers the
multiple coherence between the microphones and the accelerometers. The passage is valid
if the coherence is high in frequency bands where most of the content was seen in step 3
and low in other areas. The following three sections examine examples to give the reader
insight into analyzing the results. Three figures showing the displays from Dewesoft will
be presented for each example, each figure followed by a step-by-step analysis following
the process described in Figure 3.4. The setup for the analysis in Dewesoft is shown in
section A.2.
20
Post-construction subway noise analysis of sources and transmission paths
==PAGE:30==
3.5.1
Analysis example one
Figure 3.5: Example one of the steps one and two in the process of validating a passage.
Top left: LpA,FAST and LpA,max,FAST . Top right: The current LpA,FAST values for
the three microphones and 1/3 octave band analysis over time of the reference micro-
phone. Bottom left: Accelerometers 1-4 in m/s2 over time. Bottom right: Reference
accelerometer (red) and accelerometer 1 in m/s2 over time.
For this passage, LpA,max,FAST for each microphone is seen in the top left of Figure 3.5
along with the maximum level recorded for each passage. A time analysis of 1/3-octave
bands from the first microphone is shown to the left. In the bottom two figures, the values
of the acceleration levels from the accelerometers are displayed in m/s2. This is also the
view used when measuring at a location, as it gives an overview of levels recorded by each
instrument and if any issues happen at the site. However, The main focus is isolating
the passage and listening to it to ensure that it is correctly isolated. The clip appears to
include the passage well, and no background noise affects the noise from the Metro.
Post-construction subway noise analysis of sources and transmission paths
21
==PAGE:31==
Figure 3.6: Example one of steps three and four in the process of validating a passage.
Left column: 1/3 octave band analysis over time of accelerometers in La,FAST [dB re
1µm/s2]. Right column: 1/3 octave band analysis over time of microphones in LpA,FAST
[dB]
In Figure 3.6, two columns of 1/3-octave band time analysis are shown. The left column
of the figures is for the accelerometers shown in dB. The Z-axis is shown on the left with
the rainbow-colored scale. The y-axis is the frequency bands shown to the right in the
figure. In this passage, the main audible content is in the 200Hz band, which can be
seen from the right column of figures, displaying LpA,max,FAST over time. This content is
also noticeable in the accelerometers and acceleration levels in the surrounding 1/3-octave
bands, which do not appear audible. As there are visible similarities and no background
noise seems to affect the measured 1/3-octave bands, the multiple coherence in Figure 3.7
will be analyzed next.
22
Post-construction subway noise analysis of sources and transmission paths
==PAGE:32==
Figure 3.7: Example one of step five in the process of validating a passage. Top fig-
ure:Multiple coherence between the accelerometers and each microphone from 112 to
315Hz.Bottom figure: Multiple coherence between the accelerometers and microphones
from 0 to 1kHz
The top plot in Figure 3.7displays the multiple coherence from 112 to 315Hz to examine
more closely. A larger overview is given from 0 to 1kHz in the bottom field. In this case,
most frequency content appeared in the 200Hz band, with lower levels in the surrounding
bands. Thus the coherence is expected to be high up to about 250Hz, which is approxi-
mately where the coherence falls off in the bottom plot in Figure 3.7. Thus this passage
is validated.
Post-construction subway noise analysis of sources and transmission paths
23
==PAGE:33==
3.5.2
Analysis example two
Figure 3.8: Example two of steps one and two in the process of validating a passage. Top
left: LpA,FAST and LpA,max,FAST . Top right: The current LpA,FAST values for the three
microphones and 1/3 octave band analysis over time of the reference microphone. Bottom
left: Accelerometers 1-4 in m/s2 over time. Bottom right: Reference accelerometer (red)
and accelerometer 1 in m/s2 over time.
Steps one and two are completed by analyzing Figure 3.8 where it is evident that the
response is weak, indicating that the passage may not be valid. However, the passage was
slightly audible, and some content is seen, mainly in the 250Hz band.
24
Post-construction subway noise analysis of sources and transmission paths
==PAGE:34==
Figure 3.9: Example two of steps three and four in the process of validating a passage.
Left column: 1/3 octave band analysis over time of accelerometers in La,FAST [dB re
1µm/s2]. Right column: 1/3 octave band analysis over time of microphones in LpA,FAST
[dB]
Moving on to Figure 3.9, it is clear that the acceleration levels are barely present. The
coherence, albeit the low levels, will still be analyzed in the next step.
Post-construction subway noise analysis of sources and transmission paths
25
==PAGE:35==
Figure 3.10:
Example two of step five in the process of validating a passage.
Top
figure:Multiple coherence between the accelerometers and each microphone from 112 to
315Hz.Bottom figure: Multiple coherence between the accelerometers and microphones
from 0 to 1kHz
By examining Figure 3.10 a small increase in the coherence is seen around 160Hz. However,
as the coherence is not high in the expected area, and the acceleration and sound pressure
levels are too low to clearly indicate the change in frequency content, the passage is
discarded.
26
Post-construction subway noise analysis of sources and transmission paths
==PAGE:36==
3.5.3
Analysis example three
Figure 3.11: Example three of steps one and two in the process of validating a passage.
Top left: LpA,FAST and LpA,max,FAST . Top right: The current LpA,FAST values for
the three microphones and 1/3 octave band analysis over time of the reference micro-
phone. Bottom left: Accelerometers 1-4 in m/s2 over time. Bottom right: Reference
accelerometer (red) and accelerometer 1 in m/s2 over time.
In this final example, Figure 3.11 is initially analyzed. The sound pressure levels recorded
look fine; perhaps the clip could be adjusted slightly so as not to include too much content
following the passage. However, in the bottom left corner plot, one of the accelerometers
appears to either record very high acceleration levels or have issues with a connection.
Post-construction subway noise analysis of sources and transmission paths
27
==PAGE:37==
Figure 3.12: Example three of steps three and four in the process of validating a passage.
Left column: 1/3 octave band analysis over time of accelerometers in La,FAST [dB re
1µm/s2]. Right column: 1/3 octave band analysis over time of microphones in LpA,FAST
[dB]
This is further analyzed in Figure 3.12, where accelerometer 4 appears to have substantial
acceleration levels in all octave bands. In this case, it was caused by a loose cable that was
fixed during the measurement. However, the data recorded by the remaining accelerom-
eters and microphones appear similar in frequency content; thus, the multiple coherence
can still be analyzed by omitting accelerometer 4 from the coherence calculation.
28
Post-construction subway noise analysis of sources and transmission paths
==PAGE:38==
Figure 3.13: Example three of step five in the process of validating a passage. Top
figure:Multiple coherence between the accelerometers and each microphone from 112 to
315Hz.Bottom figure: Multiple coherence between the accelerometers and microphones
from 0 to 1kHz
The coherence is displayed in Figure 3.13, showing that the data from the remaining
devices can be exported. The absence of one accelerometer, in this case, is insignificant as
the remainder of the measurements clearly showed a response.
Post-construction subway noise analysis of sources and transmission paths
29
==PAGE:39==
30
Post-construction subway noise analysis of sources and transmission paths
==PAGE:40==
4
Results and analysis
Measurement results and analysis are presented in this chapter. The initial measurement
results are presented first, followed by a brief evaluation of the measurements and what
was concluded to improve the field measurements. Subsequently, the field measurement
results are presented, then compared to find any similarities between the results of the
measurement locations. Finally, a selection of solutions is suggested.
4.1
Initial measurements
In this section, the results of the initial measurements are shown. These measurements
were performed over 5 days as described in section 3.2. The initial measurements’ goals
were to obtain results to analyze what frequency bands were impacted, evaluate the use
of the equipment and the software, and figure out a final measurement procedure. Thus
all three elements are analyzed in this section.
The initial measurements were done at Carit Etlars Vej.
An introductory table with
information about the location can be found in Table 4.1.
Table 4.1: Measurement location information.
Date and time of measurement
March 6th - 10th, 2023
Measurement room
Livingroom
Basement measurements
✓
Location on road
South-western end
Floor
2nd floor
Construction year
1980
Building Type
E3
Reverberation time rating
2
Soil type [36]
Boulder clay
The first analysis of interest is determining what frequency content is relevant to analyze
during Metro passages. In Figure 4.1, a 1/3-octave band analysis has been conducted over
a 45s period to establish background noise for two microphones and two accelerometers.
The results of the background noise analysis are then compared with a Metro passage to
analyze the frequency behavior.
Post-construction subway noise analysis of sources and transmission paths
31
==PAGE:41==
50
63
80
100
125
160
200
250
315
400
500
630
800
1000
1250
1600
2000
2500
3150
4000
5000
1/3-Octave Band Center Frequency [Hz]
-10
-5
0
5
10
15
Sound pressure Level,
 LpA,FAST[dB]
Background level
Passage values
(a) Energy average of the two microphones in the apartment.
50
63
80
100
125
160
200
250
315
400
500
630
800
1000
1250
1600
2000
2500
3150
4000
5000
1/3-Octave Band Center Frequency [Hz]
40
45
50
55
60
Vibration Acceleration Level
 La,FAST[dB]
Background level
Passage values
(b) Accelerometer Type 4381
50
63
80
100
125
160
200
250
315
400
500
630
800
1000
1250
1600
2000
2500
3150
4000
5000
1/3-Octave Band Center Frequency [Hz]
40
45
50
55
60
Vibration Acceleration Level
 La,FAST[dB]
Background level
Passage values
(c) Accelerometer KS78C.100
Figure 4.1: Frequency comparison of vibration acceleration levels La,max,FAST [dB re
1µm/s2] as well as A-weighted sound pressure level LpA,max,FAST [dB] for a background
clip of 45s and a passage.
32
Post-construction subway noise analysis of sources and transmission paths
==PAGE:42==
From the measured results in Figure 4.1, it is evident that from approximately 500Hz, the
level differences between background levels and a passage become neglectable. In bands
below 100Hz, the frequency content of the passage appears to fall below the background
level. This is also the case in Figure 4.1c. Results in Figure 4.1b show more differences
below 100Hz, indicating that some vibrations are present in this range. Thus the vibrations
and sound pressure levels are analyzed between 50 and 500Hz.
Another interest was to investigate how divided the octave bands should be. Thus the
results are compared between 1/3- and 1/12-octave bands in Figure 4.2.
The results from microphones and accelerometers do not show significant differences by
splitting up the bands further than 1/3-octave. Thus it can be concluded results can be
analyzed in 1/3-octave bands.
Furthermore, it was interesting to investigate how much of the frequency content is masked
by the background noise when a passage appears quiet. This is calculated by energy sub-
traction, correcting for the background noise from the passage. The results are compared
for the microphones and the two accelerometers in Figure 4.3.
The results in Figure 4.3a show that some of the microphone content is masked by back-
ground noise in the 315Hz band and below 80Hz. However, Figure 4.1a indicates that the
highest sound pressure levels are not found in these bands, indicating that the masking by
background noise in this band can be neglected. In Figure 4.3b, content from the louder
passage becomes masked by background noise, indicating that the two passages compared
may not be impacted similarly from a frequency point of view. Figure 4.3c shows most
1/3 octave bands where the frequency content is masked by background noise. However,
observing the results from the accelerometer type 4381 with lower background levels Fig-
ure 4.1b, shows some of the largest differences in these bands. This indicates that the
KS78C.100 can still measure the impacted bands even in quiet passages. It is, however,
likely that other surrounding bands will become masked by background levels.
Due to the variation in frequency content from different Metro passages, it was interesting
to investigate if two Metro passages made by the same Metro would be similar. Rejseplanen
live map [37] was used to track the Metros live by selecting a Metro and checking the option
”Follow this train.” The results are shown in Figure 4.4.
By comparing the frequency content of both accelerometers in Figure 4.4, can be seen that
to see that the frequency content does not vary much between the two separate passages.
Some slight differences are, however, noticeable. For both the sound pressure levels in
Figure 4.4a and the acceleration levels from Type 4381 in Figure 4.4b, can be seen that to
see large changes most notably in the 160Hz 1/3-octave band. This is likely explained by
the train accelerating slightly faster than in the first passage. Thus, measuring the same
train twice is unnecessary, as it will likely lead to a similar result.
Post-construction subway noise analysis of sources and transmission paths
33
==PAGE:43==
50
63
80
100
125
160
200
250
315
400
500
1/3-Octave Band Center Frequency [Hz]
-20
-15
-10
-5
0
5
10
15
20
Sound pressure Level,
 LpA,FAST[dB]
1/3 Octave
1/12 Octave
(a) Energy average of the two microphones in the apartment.
50
63
80
100
125
160
200
250
315
400
500
1/3-Octave Band Center Frequency [Hz]
25
30
35
40
45
50
55
60
65
Vibration Acceleration Level,
 La,FAST[dB]
1/3 Octave
1/12 Octave
(b) Accelerometer Type 4381
50
63
80
100
125
160
200
250
315
400
500
1/3-Octave Band Center Frequency [Hz]
25
30
35
40
45
50
55
60
65
Vibration Acceleration Level,
 La,FAST[dB]
1/3 Octave
1/12 Octave
(c) Accelerometer KS78C.100
Figure 4.2: Comparison of vibration acceleration levels La,max,FAST [dB re 1µm/s2] as
well as A-weighted sound pressure level LpA,max,FAST [dB] in 1/3-octave bands and 1/12-
octave bands
34
Post-construction subway noise analysis of sources and transmission paths
==PAGE:44==
50
63
80
100
125
160
200
250
315
400
500
1/3-Octave Band Center Frequency [Hz]
-10
-5
0
5
10
15
20
25
Sound pressure Level,
 LpA,FAST[dB]
Loud passage
Quiet passage
(a) Energy average of the two microphones in the apartment.
50
63
80
100
125
160
200
250
315
400
500
1/3-Octave Band Center Frequency [Hz]
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
55
60
65
Vibration Acceleration Level,
 La,FAST[dB]
Loud passage
Quiet passage
(b) Accelerometer Type 4381
50
63
80
100
125
160
200
250
315
400
500
1/3-Octave Band Center Frequency [Hz]
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
55
60
65
Vibration Acceleration Level,
 La,FAST[dB]
Loud passage
Quiet passage
(c) Accelerometer KS78C.100
Figure 4.3: Comparison of vibration acceleration levels La,max,FAST [dB re 1µm/s2] as
well as A-weighted sound pressure level LpA,max,FAST [dB] of a quiet passage and a loud
passage. Values not shown are caused by background levels being higher than passage
levels.
Post-construction subway noise analysis of sources and transmission paths
35
==PAGE:45==
50
63
80
100
125
160
200
250
315
400
500
1/3-Octave Band Center Frequency [Hz]
-10
-5
0
5
10
15
20
Sound pressure Level,
 LpA,FAST[dB]
First passage
Second passage
(a) Energy average of the two microphones in the apartment.
50
63
80
100
125
160
200
250
315
400
500
1/3-Octave Band Center Frequency [Hz]
35
40
45
50
55
60
65
Vibration Acceleration Level,
 La,FAST[dB]
First passage
Second passage
(b) Accelerometer Type 4381
50
63
80
100
125
160
200
250
315
400
500
1/3-Octave Band Center Frequency [Hz]
35
40
45
50
55
60
65
Vibration Acceleration Level,
 La,FAST[dB]
First passage
Second passage
(c) Accelerometer KS78C.100
Figure 4.4: Comparison of vibration acceleration levels La,max,FAST [dB re 1µm/s2] as
well as A-weighted sound pressure level LpA,max,FAST [dB] of the same train passing by
on separate occasions.
36
Post-construction subway noise analysis of sources and transmission paths
==PAGE:46==
Some of the Metro trains are known to be noisier than others, i.e., due to more roughness
on the wheels.
As the number of passengers is lower at night, these specific Metros
are taken out of service, reducing the annoyance in the residences above the tunnels.
Thus measurements were conducted during nighttime from 23:00-02:00 to investigate any
apparent differences. Due to the variation in levels between passages, comparing individual
passages from daytime to an individual from nighttime does not show differences correctly.
Thus the LpA,max,FAST from five randomly selected passages during the day and five
passages during the night are compared in Figure 4.5. The daytime measurements are
from 9:30 to 11:30.
The LpA,max,FAST value for a passage is arithmetically averaged
between the two microphones in the room during the measurements.
1
2
3
4
5
Passage number
20
22
24
26
28
30
Sound pressure Level,
 LpA,max,FAST[dB]
Avg. day
Avg night
Passage daytime
Passage nighttime
Figure 4.5: Comparison of sound pressure levels LpA,max,FAST from five passages during
the day and the night. It is not known whether the trains are the same.
Although LpA,max,FAST was only exported for five passages, it is evident that no difference
is seen between the two averages.
The difference between the two measurements was
mainly the duration between passages, as fewer trains are used during the nighttime. It
was also the experience during the night that the passages were not less audible than the
daytime Metro trains. Another difference between day and night was the general traﬀic.
To create a thorough measurement procedure, some of the most notable experiences gained
through the initial measurements are noted and implemented in the final measurement
procedure described in section 3.3.
The first notable experience concerns the setup time of the equipment. As a lot of equip-
ment is brought along, setting up the equipment also takes a long time. Thus, connecting
as much equipment as possible beforehand reduces the setup time drastically.
Throughout the initial measurements, the software NoiseLAB was used. The experience
was when using several devices and channels, as in this project, the software could not
view multiple channels simultaneously. This made spotting errors in specific equipment,
such as loose connections, diﬀicult. Following the initial test measurements, the Dewesoft
software and DAQ were used instead, as this increased the number of channels and had
endless possibilities for viewing live measurement data.
It was attempted to conduct measurements in the basement and apartment simultane-
ously, but this was unsuccessful as the equipment was overloaded during the measurement
periods.
Furthermore, using two separate computers to measure in the basement and
Post-construction subway noise analysis of sources and transmission paths
37
==PAGE:47==
apartment simultaneously was inconvenient, notably due to the distance from the apart-
ment to the basement. Thus simultaneous basement measurements are not suggested in
apartments on higher floors.
The mounting method described in subsection 3.4.1 of accelerometers was extremely eﬀi-
cient, making it simple to move the devices around the room.
Although accelerometers of Type 4381 had lower background levels and could measure
lower acceleration levels, it was decided that using similar equipment for comparing mea-
surement data from different surfaces was of higher importance due to data quality and
consistency. Furthermore, the KS78C.100 accelerometers were experienced to have lower
background levels when using the Dewesoft equipment rather than the National Instru-
ments sound cards and DAQ. Thus the KS78C.100 accelerometers are used for the field
measurements.
Lastly, it was experienced that measuring acceleration levels on windows was diﬀicult
due to noise outside also causing the windows to vibrate. Thus, measurements are not
conducted on windows in this thesis.
38
Post-construction subway noise analysis of sources and transmission paths
==PAGE:48==
4.2
Field measurements results
The field measurement results are presented in this section and cover the results of the
measurements described in section 3.3.
The measurement procedure changed slightly
after Olufsvej(2), as a better way was found to conduct the measurements and record
more passages. Thus the results at Olufsvej(1) and (2) do not have as many valid passages
recorded in the basement. The changes revolved around removing repetitive measurements
in the apartments while simultaneously measuring in the basement.
Although background levels could be a good comparison to show the difference between
no acceleration level and when the Metro is passing by, it was found that each building
element had slightly different background levels. An example from Holger Danskes Vej
is shown in Figure 4.6. The low levels at the beginning of the clip are caused by filter
ringing, which in the setup has been set to ”skip filter ringing” to misleading values.
Figure 4.6:
Example of background level difference on accelerometers depending on
the surface. The x-axis denotes time, the y-axis (shown to the right on plots) displays
the frequency bands, and the color scale to the left depicts the dB levels. Top figure:
Microphone 2, 1/3-octave band analysis over time of LpA,FAST . Center: Accelerometer
on the floor, 1/3-octave band analysis over time of La,FAST . Bottom: Accelerometer on
a lightweight wooden wall, 1/3-octave band analysis over time of La,FAST
From the shown example in Figure 4.6, it is possible to see that the background levels
may differ depending on the surface on which the accelerometer is.
In this example,
LpA,max,FAST is shown in the top figure to show that no large audible background noise is
present, and La,max,FAST is shown in the bottom two. Acc 2 in the center figure is placed
on the floor, whereas Acc 3 is placed on a lightweight wooden wall. The differences are
most notable from the 250Hz band and below, where the highest acceleration levels are
found. Thus background levels are not shown. It was, however, experienced that when no
vibrations were present, the background level in most cases was below 50dB La,max,FAST .
A results report is presented in the subsequent sections for each measured site. The main
results for a site are presented as two figures. The left figure will depict the maximum
Post-construction subway noise analysis of sources and transmission paths
39
==PAGE:49==
LpA,max,FAST and La,max,FAST values recorded in each band recorded over the entire
measurement period. The figure to the right shows the arithmetic average LpA,max,FAST
and La,max,FAST values recorded on each element. Corresponding sections with additional
results and information are presented in the appendix.
This includes microphone and
accelerometer locations, LpA,max,FAST for each passage, a sketch of the tunnels from krak.
dk, and a copy of the results with similar y-axis for all locations. The y-axis is not similar
for all locations in the result section, as this section is focused more on the individual
results at each location. Results, where the y-axis has been made similar, can be found in
the appendix for each location. Finally, an overview of the M3 line on the Metro cityring
is shown in Figure 4.7 along with dots representing measurement locations.
Figure 4.7: Overview of site measurement locations. 1 Is Olufsvej (1) and (2). 2 is
Kertemindegade. 3 is Carit Etlars Vej (1), (2,1), and (2,2). 4 is Holger Danskes Vej. 5 is
Tåsingegade (1) and (2). 6 is Nørrebrogade. The M3 Metro tunnels have been sketched
in red. Map from [38].
40
Post-construction subway noise analysis of sources and transmission paths
==PAGE:50==
Olufsvej(1), Ground floor - 2100 København Ø
Table 4.2: Measurement location information.
Date and time of measurement
Wednesday, May 3rd, 2023. 10:00 - 12:00
Measurement room
Kitchen - dining area (Kitchen not measured)
Basement measurements
✓
Location on road
South-western end
Floor
Ground floor
Construction year
1891
Building Type[39]
E4 (Class F)[40]
Reverberation time rating
3
Soil type [41]
Fill(1-5m), gravel(6-7m), sand(8-16), gravel(17-
20m), sand (20-24m), limestone(24-35m)
Passage lengths
Min.: 4s
Max.: 15s
Avg.: 9s
Most impacted 1/3-octave bands
125
160
200
Along the road are terraced brick houses. The measurements did not include the kitchen’s
walls, floor, and ceiling area.
Extra information on the site can be found in subsec-
tion A.1.1. The max vibration acceleration level is shown in Figure 4.8a, and the average
max level is displayed in Figure 4.8b. Comparisons of measurements in the basement and
apartment are shown in Figure 4.9 for the most impacted 1/3-octave bands.
125
160
200
1/3-Octave Band Center Frequency [Hz]
55
60
65
70
75
80
85
90
Vibration Acceleration Level, La,max,FAST [dB]
25
30
35
40
45
50
Sound pressure Level, LpA,max,FAST[dB]
Floor
Ceiling
Wall 1
Wall 2
Wall 3
Wall 4
LpA,max,FAST
(a) Maximum levels
125
160
200
1/3-Octave Band Center Frequency [Hz]
55
60
65
70
75
80
85
90
Vibration Acceleration Level, La,max,FAST [dB]
25
30
35
40
45
50
Sound pressure Level, LpA,max,FAST[dB]
Floor
Ceiling
Wall 1
Wall 2
Wall 3
Wall 4
LpA,max,FAST
(b) Average maximum levels
Figure
4.8:
1/3-octave maximum and average maximum vibration acceleration
level La,max,FAST [dB re 1µm/s2],⃝, and 1/3-octave A-weighted sound pressure level
LpA,max,FAST [dB] (△) between all measured passages for the three impacted bands for
valid passages.
Post-construction subway noise analysis of sources and transmission paths
41
==PAGE:51==
1
2
3
4
5
Passage number
60
70
80
90
Vibration Acceleration Level,
 La,max,FAST [dB]
20
25
30
35
40
45
Sound pressure Level,
 LpA,max,FAST[dB]
Floor(Apt.)
Wall 4(Apt.)
Wall 3(Bsmt.)
Mic 1 & 2 (Apt.)
Mic 3(Bsmt.)
(a) 125Hz Band
1
2
3
4
5
Passage number
60
70
80
90
Vibration Acceleration Level,
 La,max,FAST [dB]
20
25
30
35
40
45
Sound pressure Level,
 LpA,max,FAST[dB]
Floor(Apt.)
Wall 4(Apt.)
Wall 3(Bsmt.)
Mic 1 & 2 (Apt.)
Mic 3(Bsmt.)
(b) 160Hz Band
1
2
3
4
5
Passage number
60
70
80
90
Vibration Acceleration Level,
 La,max,FAST [dB]
20
25
30
35
40
45
Sound pressure Level,
 LpA,max,FAST[dB]
Floor(Apt.)
Wall 4(Apt.)
Wall 3(Bsmt.)
Mic 1 & 2 (Apt.)
Mic 3(Bsmt.)
(c) 200Hz Band
Figure 4.9: Comparison of 1/3-octave vibration acceleration levels La,max,FAST [dB re
1µm/s2],⃝, as well as 1/3-octave A-weighted sound pressure level LpA,max,FAST [dB]
(△, +) recorded in the basement (Bsmt.) and apartment(Apt.) for the three impacted
bands for the validated passages.
42
Post-construction subway noise analysis of sources and transmission paths
==PAGE:52==
Table 4.3: Overview of building elements measured in the room. Important notes: 1.
The surface area includes windows and doors. 2. The kitchen area is not included.
Building element
Type
Surface area
Flooring
Parquet
∼22.1m2
Ceiling
Partially suspended ceiling (see
subsection A.1.1 for sketch)
∼22.1m2
Wall 1
Exterior, heavyweight, glass door
∼13.3m2
Wall 2
Interior, lightweight covering (heavyweight behind)
∼17.4m2
Wall 3
Exterior, heavyweight, 2 windows
∼9.4m2
Wall 4
Interior, lightweight
∼12m2
From Table 4.3, it is evident that the element sizes differ vastly. Thus low values from wall
3 are likely to radiate more eﬀiciently than expected. There appears to be consistency
between the maximum and average maximum acceleration levels where the floor and ceiling
are highest. Regarding sound pressure levels, the 160Hz band appears to be impacted
the most on average; however, the difference between this and the neighboring bands is
approximately 2dB. Walls 1, 3, and 4 show the lowest acceleration levels, both on average
and at the maximum levels. Wall 3 is less than half the size of the ceiling and floor,
indicating that the low acceleration levels could still cause higher radiation.
Furthermore, windows are located on these surfaces; a precise result on sound radiation
from these elements is diﬀicult to obtain.
On average, Figure 4.8b shows the highest
acceleration levels in the 125Hz and 160Hz bands and the lowest in the 200Hz band. This
indicates that the radiation eﬀiciency is likely higher in the 200Hz band. The influence of
the windows on the sound radiation should be investigated further, as they can vibrate
more easily and may radiate more sound. Although the highest acceleration levels were
found in the floor and ceiling, as Wall 3 is much smaller than the other surfaces, it is likely
this element is radiating more sound than expected. However, as windows are placed on
this wall, determining the exact radiation caused by the surface is complex. It is concluded
that creating solutions for the floor, ceiling, and wall 2 should most eﬀiciently lower the
sound radiation, as these elements have high acceleration levels and are thinner, likely
resulting in a lower critical frequency.
Furthermore, from Figure 4.9, it is evident that damping from the basement to the ground
floor is neglectable, as the sound pressure levels in all three bands are approximately
identical.
Although wall 3 was not measured on the ground floor amid the basement
measurements, the average results of wall 3 during the basement measurements in the
[125, 160, 200] bands, respectively, are [80, 76, 74], while the average of wall 3 in the
apartment is [66, 64, 58]. It is, however, important to note that only one measurement
location on wall 3 in the basement was used, while two were used on the ground floor.
Post-construction subway noise analysis of sources and transmission paths
43
==PAGE:53==
Olufsvej(2), Ground floor - 2100 København Ø
Table 4.4: Measurement location information.
Date and time of measurement
Wednesday, May 3rd, 2023. 14:00 - 16:00
Measurement room
Kitchen - dining area (Kitchen not measured)
Basement measurements
✓
Location on road
North-western end
Floor
Ground floor
Construction year
1891
Building Type[39]
E4(Class F)[40]
Soil type [41]
Fill(1-5m), gravel(6-7m), sand(8-16), gravel(17-
20m), sand (20-24m), limestone(24-35m)
Reverberation time rating
2
Passage lengths
Min.: 5s
Max.: 12s
Avg.: 9s
Most impacted 1/3-octave bands
125
160
200
Along the road are terraced brick houses. The measurements did not include the kitchen’s
walls, floor, and ceiling area. Extra location on the site can be found in subsection A.1.2.
The maximum vibration acceleration level is shown in Figure 4.10a, and the average max-
imum level is displayed in Figure 4.10b. Comparisons of measurements in the basement
and apartment are shown in Figure 4.11 for the most impacted 1/3-octave bands.
125
160
200
1/3-Octave Band Center Frequency [Hz]
65
70
75
80
85
90
95
Vibration Acceleration Level, La,max,FAST [dB]
25
30
35
40
45
50
Sound pressure Level, LpA,max,FAST[dB]
Floor
Ceiling
Wall 1
Wall 2
Wall 3
Wall 4
LpA,max,FAST
(a) Maximum levels
125
160
200
1/3-Octave Band Center Frequency [Hz]
65
70
75
80
85
90
95
Vibration Acceleration Level, La,max,FAST [dB]
25
30
35
40
45
50
Sound pressure Level, LpA,max,FAST[dB]
Floor
Ceiling
Wall 1
Wall 2
Wall 3
Wall 4
LpA,max,FAST
(b) Average maximum levels
Figure 4.10:
1/3-octave maximum and average maximum vibration acceleration
level La,max,FAST [dB re 1µm/s2],⃝, and 1/3-octave A-weighted sound pressure level
LpA,max,FAST [dB] (△) between all measured passages for the three impacted bands for
valid passages.
44
Post-construction subway noise analysis of sources and transmission paths
==PAGE:54==
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Passage number
50
60
70
80
90
Vibration Acceleration Level,
 La,max,FAST [dB]
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
Sound pressure Level,
 LpA,max,FAST[dB]
Floor(Apt.)
Wall 4(Apt.)
Wall 3(Bsmt.)
Mic 1 & 2 (Apt.)
Mic 3(Bsmt.)
(a) 125Hz Band
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Passage number
50
60
70
80
90
Vibration Acceleration Level,
 La,max,FAST [dB]
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
Sound pressure Level,
 LpA,max,FAST[dB]
Floor(Apt.)
Wall 4(Apt.)
Wall 3(Bsmt.)
Mic 1 & 2 (Apt.)
Mic 3(Bsmt.)
(b) 160Hz Band
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Passage number
50
60
70
80
90
Vibration Acceleration Level,
 La,max,FAST [dB]
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
Sound pressure Level,
 LpA,max,FAST[dB]
Floor(Apt.)
Wall 4(Apt.)
Wall 3(Bsmt.)
Mic 1 & 2 (Apt.)
Mic 3(Bsmt.)
(c) 200Hz Band
Figure 4.11: Comparison of 1/3-octave vibration acceleration levels La,max,FAST [dB
re 1µm/s2],⃝, as well as 1/3-octave A-weighted sound pressure level LpA,max,FAST [dB]
(△, +) recorded in the basement (Bsmt.) and apartment(Apt.) for the three impacted
bands for the validated passages.
Post-construction subway noise analysis of sources and transmission paths
45
==PAGE:55==
Table 4.5: Overview of building elements measured in the room. Important notes: 1.
The surface area includes windows and doors. 2. The kitchen area is not included.
Building element
Type
Surface area
Flooring
Wooden
∼22.1m2
Ceiling
N/A
∼22.1m2
Wall 1
Exterior, heavyweight, glass door
∼14.2m2
Wall 2
Interior, heavyweight
∼17.4m2
Wall 3
Exterior, heavyweight 2 windows
∼9.4m2
Wall 4
Interior, partially lightweight, (see
partially heavyweight, wooden door
∼12m2
For this location, the element size vary greatly as seen in Table 4.5. The pattern in the
maximum vibration acceleration levels in Figure 4.10a is not completely similar to the
average in Figure 4.10b. The sound pressure level, albeit a small difference, shows the
highest levels in the 160Hz 1/3-octave band. The size of the difference is insuﬀicient to
neglect the other bands; thus, the focus should be on creating a solution that dampens the
entire range from the 125 to the 200Hz band. On average, the acceleration levels appear
clumped up; however, the elements with the highest levels also occur with the highest
levels on maximum. In the 125Hz band, wall 4 likely has a mode as the maximum levels
are slightly higher than the other elements. In the 160Hz band, the top three appear
to be walls 3, 4, and the floor; however, the levels do not differ much from the other
elements, especially on average. Due to wall 3 being an exterior heavyweight wall with
windows, the windows may radiate more sound than the walls - however, this requires
further measurements to confirm. For this location, due to the results being clumped, it is
diﬀicult to determine which surface is most likely to exhibit the highest sound radiation.
However, as modes are likely present in some elements, it is recommended that solutions
are focused on the floor and wall 4 to reduce the levels most eﬀiciently.
As with Olufsvej (1), a similar conclusion can be drawn by comparing the basement
and ground floor measurements. The sound pressure levels are almost identical in the
basement and ground floor, suggesting that one or multiple surfaces radiate as eﬀiciently
in the basement as on the ground floor.
46
Post-construction subway noise analysis of sources and transmission paths
==PAGE:56==
Kertemindegade, 2nd floor - 2100 København Ø
Table 4.6: Measurement location information.
Date and time of measurement
Wednesday, May 10th, 2023. 10:30 - 12:30
Measurement room
Living room
Basement measurements
-
Location on road
North-western side
Floor
2nd floor
Construction year
1918
Building Type[39]
E1(Class F)[40]
Reverberation time rating
3
Soil type [42]
Fill(0-2m),
clay(2-5m),
sand(5-15m),
limestone(15-30m)
Passage lengths
Min.: 3s
Max.: 9s
Avg.: 6s
Most impacted 1/3-octave bands
160
200
250
As this apartment was situated further from the station, acceleration levels and sound
pressure levels were not high in the 125Hz band due to the trains not breaking while
passing by this location.
The maximum acceleration levels, as well as sound pressure
levels in the corresponding bands, can be seen in Figure 4.12a, and the average levels are
shown in Figure 4.12b. Extra location on the site can be found in subsection A.1.3
160
200
250
1/3-Octave Band Center Frequency [Hz]
50
55
60
65
70
75
80
Vibration Acceleration Level, La,max,FAST [dB]
10
15
20
25
30
35
Sound pressure Level, LpA,max,FAST[dB]
Floor
Ceiling
Wall 1
Wall 2
Wall 3
Wall 4
LpA,max,FAST
(a) Maximum levels
160
200
250
1/3-Octave Band Center Frequency [Hz]
50
55
60
65
70
75
80
Vibration Acceleration Level, La,max,FAST [dB]
10
15
20
25
30
35
Sound pressure Level, LpA,max,FAST[dB]
Floor
Ceiling
Wall 1
Wall 2
Wall 3
Wall 4
LpA,max,FAST
(b) Average maximum levels
Figure 4.12:
1/3-octave maximum and average maximum vibration acceleration
level La,max,FAST [dB re 1µm/s2],⃝, and 1/3-octave A-weighted sound pressure level
LpA,max,FAST [dB] (△) between all measured passages for the three impacted bands for
valid passages.
Post-construction subway noise analysis of sources and transmission paths
47
==PAGE:57==
Table 4.7: Overview of building elements measured in the room. Important note: 1.
The surface area includes windows and doors.
Building element
Type
Surface area
Flooring
Wood
∼18m2
Ceiling
N/A
∼18m2
Wall 1
Exterior, heavyweight (brick),
1 window with glass door
∼8.9m2
Wall 2
Interior, lightweight
∼11.1m2
Wall 3
Interior, heavyweight with glass door
∼8.9m2
Wall 4
Interior, lightweight
∼9.2m2
For this location, most of the walls are approximately half the size of the floor and ceiling.
Results in Figure 4.12 show that although the ceiling can achieve high acceleration levels
in all bands, it is primarily the 200Hz band that has the greatest impact on average. From
the sound pressure levels, the 200- and 250Hz bands have the highest levels on maximum.
The difference between the average acceleration results in each band in Figure 4.12b is
approximately 5dB, making it diﬀicult to distinguish which elements are most likely to
radiate the most sound. However, as the smaller elements are likely to radiate sound more
eﬀiciently, it is likely that walls 3 and 4 along with the ceiling have the highest overall
levels. Thus it is suggested that solutions are focused on these elements.
48
Post-construction subway noise analysis of sources and transmission paths
==PAGE:58==
Carit Etlars Vej (1), Ground floor - 1814 Frederiksberg
Table 4.8: Measurement location information.
Date and time of measurement
Thursday, May 11th, 2023. 12:00 - 14:00
Measurement room
Living room
Basement measurements
✓
Location on road
Midpoint, eastern side
Floor
Ground floor
Construction year
1934
Building Type[39]
E1 / E2 (Class F/E)[40]
Reverberation time rating
2
Soil type [43]
Fill(0-3m), clay(3-8m), sand(8m), limestone(9-
28m)
Passage lengths
Min.: 5s.
Max.: 13s
Avg.: 7s
Most impacted 1/3-octave bands
160Hz
200Hz
250Hz
For this location, occasional correlated content was found in the 125 and 315Hz bands,
which is not shown as it was rarely present. The sketches of the microphone and ac-
celerometer positions are shown in subsection A.1.4. The maximum values are shown in
Figure 4.13a and the average maximum values are displayed in Figure 4.13b. Comparisons
of measurements in the basement and apartment are shown in Figure 4.14 for the most
impacted 1/3-octave bands. Information about the building elements can be found in
Table 4.9.
160
200
250
1/3-Octave Band Center Frequency [Hz]
50
55
60
65
70
75
80
85
90
Vibration Acceleration Level, La,max,FAST [dB]
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
Sound pressure Level, LpA,max,FAST[dB]
Floor
Ceiling
Wall 1
Wall 2
Wall 3
Wall 4
LpA,max,FAST
(a) Maximum levels
160
200
250
1/3-Octave Band Center Frequency [Hz]
50
55
60
65
70
75
80
85
90
Vibration Acceleration Level, La,max,FAST [dB]
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
Sound pressure Level, LpA,max,FAST[dB]
Floor
Ceiling
Wall 1
Wall 2
Wall 3
Wall 4
LpA,max,FAST
(b) Average maximum levels
Figure 4.13:
1/3-octave maximum and average maximum vibration acceleration
level La,max,FAST [dB re 1µm/s2],⃝, and 1/3-octave A-weighted sound pressure level
LpA,max,FAST [dB] (△) between all measured passages for the three impacted bands for
valid passages.
Post-construction subway noise analysis of sources and transmission paths
49
==PAGE:59==
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Passage number
50
60
70
80
90
Vibration Acceleration Level,
 La,max,FAST [dB]
10
20
30
40
50
Sound pressure Level,
 LpA,max,FAST[dB]
Floor(Apt.)
Wall 1(Apt.)
Wall 4(Apt.)
Wall 1(Bsmt.)
Mic 1 & 2 (Apt.)
Mic 3(Bsmt.)
(a) 160Hz Band
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Passage number
50
60
70
80
90
Vibration Acceleration Level,
 La,max,FAST [dB]
10
20
30
40
50
Sound pressure Level,
 LpA,max,FAST[dB]
Floor(Apt.)
Wall 1(Apt.)
Wall 4(Apt.)
Wall 1(Bsmt.)
Mic 1 & 2 (Apt.)
Mic 3(Bsmt.)
(b) 200Hz Band
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Passage number
50
60
70
80
90
Vibration Acceleration Level,
 La,max,FAST [dB]
10
20
30
40
50
Sound pressure Level,
 LpA,max,FAST[dB]
Floor(Apt.)
Wall 1(Apt.)
Wall 4(Apt.)
Wall 1(Bsmt.)
Mic 1 & 2 (Apt.)
Mic 3(Bsmt.)
(c) 250Hz Band
Figure 4.14: Comparison of 1/3-octave vibration acceleration levels La,max,FAST [dB
re 1µm/s2],⃝, as well as 1/3-octave A-weighted sound pressure level LpA,max,FAST [dB]
(△, +) recorded in the basement (Bsmt.) and apartment(Apt.) for the three impacted
bands for the validated passages.
50
Post-construction subway noise analysis of sources and transmission paths
==PAGE:60==
Table 4.9: Overview of building elements measured in the room. Important note: 1.
The surface area includes windows and doors.
Building element
Type
Surface area
Flooring
Wood
∼28.5m2
Ceiling
N/A
∼28.5m2
Wall 1
Exterior, heavyweight (brick), 2 windows
∼19.2m2
Wall 2
Interior, heavyweight
∼14.5m2
Wall 3
Interior, heavyweight
∼10.5m2
Wall 4
Interior, lightweight
∼8.1m2
Table 4.9 shows large differences among the surface elements, especially walls 3 and 4 are
almost 1/3 the size of the ceiling and floor. Analyzing the results from Carit Etlars Vej(1)
in Figure 4.13, a pattern is seen between Figure 4.13a and Figure 4.13b. The correlation
between bands in acceleration- and sound pressure levels is clear, showing that the 250Hz
band, although having consistent content, is not the largest contributor to the noise.
The 160Hz and especially the 200Hz 1/3-octave band appear to have significantly higher
levels; thus, the rest of the analysis is focused on these bands. The spread between the
results in the 160Hz band is larger than in the 200Hz band where the spread on average is
approximately 5dB. The ceiling and wall 4 show the highest levels in both bands, whereas
the floor only greatly impacts the 160Hz band, falling off vastly in the higher frequency
bands. Wall 1 has two large window sections; they may further contribute to the large
levels recorded in the 200Hz 1/3-octave band, as the average maximum levels are close to
wall 4. However, this requires further measurements to investigate. The two elements to
improve this apartment would be the ceiling and wall 4 due to the high levels from the
smaller surface area and the higher levels in the 160Hz band.
A comparison of the recorded levels from the simultaneous basement and apartment mea-
surements reveals that the vibrations are dampened from the room in the basement below
the apartment to the ground floor.
The damping is visible on the acceleration levels,
although the difference is not substantial, especially on Wall 1 in the basement and apart-
ment, as it is the same exterior wall.
Post-construction subway noise analysis of sources and transmission paths
51
==PAGE:61==
Holger Danskes Vej, Ground floor - 2000 Frederiksberg
Table 4.10: Measurement location information.
Date and time of measurement
Thursday, May 11th, 2023. 12:00 - 14:00
Measurement room
Living room
Basement measurements
✓
Location on road
Midpoint, northern side
Floor
Ground floor
Construction year
1976
Building Type [39]
E3 (Class D)[40]
Soil type [44]
Fill(0-1m),
clay(1-4m),
sand(4-15m),
limestone(15-30m)
Reverberation time rating
2
Passage lengths
Min.: 4s.
Max.: 13s
Avg.: 8s
Most impacted 1/3-octave bands
125Hz
160Hz
200Hz
250Hz
The sound of the trains accelerating and braking was audible in this apartment. Thus
frequency content was continuously present from the 125Hz to the 250Hz band. A total of
30 valid passages for each surface were recorded. The sketch of the room, microphone and
accelerometer positions, and an overview of the registered LpA,max,FAST for all passages
can be found in subsection A.1.5. The maximum and average levels comparisons are shown
in Figure 4.15 and information about the construction is shown in Table 4.11.
125
160
200
250
1/3-Octave Band Center Frequency [Hz]
55
60
65
70
75
80
85
90
95
Vibration Acceleration Level, La,max,FAST [dB]
25
30
35
40
45
50
Sound pressure Level, LpA,max,FAST[dB]
Floor
Ceiling
Wall 1
Wall 2
Wall 3
Wall 4
LpA,max,FAST
(a) Maximum levels
125
160
200
250
1/3-Octave Band Center Frequency [Hz]
55
60
65
70
75
80
85
90
95
Vibration Acceleration Level, La,max,FAST [dB]
25
30
35
40
45
50
Sound pressure Level, LpA,max,FAST[dB]
Floor
Ceiling
Wall 1
Wall 2
Wall 3
Wall 4
LpA,max,FAST
(b) Average maximum levels
Figure 4.15:
1/3-octave maximum and average maximum vibration acceleration
level La,max,FAST [dB re 1µm/s2],⃝, and 1/3-octave A-weighted sound pressure level
LpA,max,FAST [dB] (△) between all measured passages for the three impacted bands for
valid passages.
52
Post-construction subway noise analysis of sources and transmission paths
==PAGE:62==
Table 4.11: Overview of building elements measured in the room. Important note: 1.
The surface area includes windows and doors.
Building element
Type
Surface area
Flooring
Parquet
∼27m2
Ceiling
N/A
∼27m2
Wall 1
Exterior, lightweight, 2 windows and a glass door
∼13.1m2
Wall 2
Interior, heavyweight
∼12.5m2
Wall 3
Interior, heavyweight
∼10m2
Wall 4
Interior, heavyweight
∼8.25m2
Table 4.11 shows that most wall elements are approximately 1/3 the size of the floor
and ceiling elements. Results from the measurements show the accordance between the
maximum and the average maximum levels shown in Figure 4.15 for both acceleration
and sound pressure levels. Aside from the vibration acceleration levels recorded on the
floor, the 200Hz band appears worst for both acceleration and sound pressure levels,
where the maximum is approximately 7dB higher than the surrounding bands as seen
in Figure 4.15b.
An interesting result is the large difference between the average and
maximum sound pressure levels recorded in the 125, 160, and 250Hz bands. This result
is important to remember when selecting the elements to create solutions for, as these
bands may not often be excited, but when they are, the sound is greatly radiated by the
surface(s). The spread of the data on maximum is large, especially in the lower bands.
On average, the spread is at least 10dB in each band, indicating that the vibrations vary
between surfaces. Walls 1 and 2 consistently show high levels in most bands, and the floor
likely has modes in the 125 and 160Hz bands. Albeit the large surface area on the floor,
creating a solution for the floor and walls 1 and 2 could likely lower the vibrations.
Post-construction subway noise analysis of sources and transmission paths
53
==PAGE:63==
Tåsingegade(1), Ground floor - 2100 København Ø
Table 4.12: Measurement location information.
Date and time of measurement
Monday, May 15th, 2023. 11:30 - 13:30
Measurement room
Bedroom
Basement measurements
✓
Location on road
Midpoint, southern side
Floor
Ground floor
Construction year
1920
Building Type [39]
E1(Class F)[40]
Soil type [45]
Fill(0-0.5m),
clay(0.5-1.5m),
sand(1.5-17m),
gravel(17-18m), limestone(18-45m)
Reverberation time rating
1
Passage lengths
Min.: 2s.
Max.: 10s
Avg.: 5s
Most impacted 1/3-octave bands
160Hz
200Hz
250Hz
This apartment was situated between stations, thus frequency content in the 125Hz band
was rarely present as the trains did not break or accelerate when passing by. Occasional
content was found in the 315Hz band; however, it was too inconsistent to give reliable data.
Extra site information can be found in subsection A.1.6. The maximum and average levels
comparisons are shown in Figure 4.16 and basement measurements in Figure 4.17.
160
200
250
1/3-Octave Band Center Frequency [Hz]
50
55
60
65
70
75
80
85
Vibration Acceleration Level, La,max,FAST [dB]
15
20
25
30
35
40
Sound pressure Level, LpA,max,FAST[dB]
Floor
Ceiling
Wall 1
Wall 2
Wall 3
Wall 4
LpA,max,FAST
(a) Maximum levels
160
200
250
1/3-Octave Band Center Frequency [Hz]
50
55
60
65
70
75
80
85
Vibration Acceleration Level, La,max,FAST [dB]
15
20
25
30
35
40
Sound pressure Level, LpA,max,FAST[dB]
Floor
Ceiling
Wall 1
Wall 2
Wall 3
Wall 4
LpA,max,FAST
(b) Average maximum levels
Figure 4.16:
1/3-octave maximum and average maximum vibration acceleration
level La,max,FAST [dB re 1µm/s2],⃝, and 1/3-octave A-weighted sound pressure level
LpA,max,FAST [dB] (△) between all measured passages for the three impacted bands for
valid passages.
54
Post-construction subway noise analysis of sources and transmission paths
==PAGE:64==
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
Passage number
45
50
55
60
65
70
75
Vibration Acceleration Level,
 La,max,FAST [dB]
10
20
30
40
Sound pressure Level,
 LpA,max,FAST[dB]
Floor(Apt.)
Wall 1(Apt.)
Wall 4(Apt.)
Wall 3(Bsmt.)
Mic 1 & 2 (Apt.)
Mic 3(Bsmt.)
(a) 160Hz Band
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
Passage number
45
50
55
60
65
70
75
Vibration Acceleration Level,
 La,max,FAST [dB]
10
20
30
40
Sound pressure Level,
 LpA,max,FAST[dB]
Floor(Apt.)
Wall 1(Apt.)
Wall 4(Apt.)
Wall 3(Bsmt.)
Mic 1 & 2 (Apt.)
Mic 3(Bsmt.)
(b) 200Hz Band
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
Passage number
45
50
55
60
65
70
75
Vibration Acceleration Level,
 La,max,FAST [dB]
10
20
30
40
Sound pressure Level,
 LpA,max,FAST[dB]
Floor(Apt.)
Wall 1(Apt.)
Wall 4(Apt.)
Wall 3(Bsmt.)
Mic 1 & 2 (Apt.)
Mic 3(Bsmt.)
(c) 250Hz Band
Figure 4.17: Comparison of 1/3-octave vibration acceleration levels La,max,FAST [dB
re 1µm/s2],⃝, as well as 1/3-octave A-weighted sound pressure level LpA,max,FAST [dB]
(△, +) recorded in the basement (Bsmt.) and apartment(Apt.) for the three impacted
bands for the validated passages.
Post-construction subway noise analysis of sources and transmission paths
55
==PAGE:65==
Table 4.13: Overview of building elements measured in the room. Important note: 1.
The surface area includes windows and doors.
Building element
Type
Surface area
Flooring
Wooden
∼10m2
Ceiling
N/A
∼10m2
Wall 1
Exterior, heavyweight, 1 window
∼6.3m2
Wall 2
Interior, lightweight
∼11.6m2
Wall 3
Interior, heavyweight, wooden door
∼6.3m2
Wall 4
Interior, heavyweight
∼11.6m2
Table 4.13 shows that most surfaces are of similar sizes, however, walls 1 and 3 are half
the size of the remaining walls. Figure 4.16 shows similar results for both maximum and
average maximum levels for both the acceleration and sound pressure levels, indicating
which elements are worth creating solutions for. The 250Hz band appears worst for sound
pressure level, whereas the remaining bands are not as high, although not neglectable. The
spread between the results is similar in each 1/3-octave band on average, at approximately
10dB. The most impactful element overall is the ceiling, as the vibration levels are high
for both the average and maximum results, notably in the 250Hz band in Figure 4.16a.
Furthermore, wall 4 shows consistently high acceleration levels for all bands in both figures
and has equivalent acceleration levels to the ceiling on average. As wall 3 is a smaller
surface, the high acceleration levels indicate that this surface could be exhibiting high
sound radiation. As noted in Table 4.13, a window is placed on wall 1. Albeit the low
acceleration level results from the wall, the window could also contribute greatly to the
sound pressure level; however, this requires further investigation.
On this basis, it is
recommended that solutions are focused on the ceiling and wall 3 to most effectively lower
the sound pressure levels.
The comparison of acceleration and sound pressure levels between the basement and the
apartment shows that the sound pressure levels are dampened through the structure.
Wall 3 in the basement is comparable to wall 3 in the apartment, which was not measured
simultaneously. Although wall 4 is closer to wall 1, the comparison is not focused here as
it is lightweight. Thus, a comparison of wall 1 in the apartment and wall 3 in the basement
shows a reduction in the vibration levels in all bands except passage 6.
56
Post-construction subway noise analysis of sources and transmission paths
==PAGE:66==
Tåsingegade(2), Ground floor - 2100 København Ø
Table 4.14: Measurement location information.
Date and time of measurement
Monday, May 22nd, 2023. 11:30 - 13:00
Measurement room
Bedroom
Basement measurements
-
Location on road
Midpoint, southern side
Floor
Ground floor
Construction year
1920
Building Type [39]
E1(Class F)[40]
Soil type [45]
Fill(0-0.5m),
clay(0.5-1.5m),
sand(1.5-17m),
gravel(17-18m), limestone(18-45m)
Reverberation time rating
2
Passage lengths
Min.: 2s.
Max.: 7s
Avg.: 4s
Most impacted 1/3-octave bands
160Hz
200Hz
250Hz
This apartment was situated between stations, thus frequency content in the 125Hz band
was rarely present as the trains did not break or accelerate when passing by. Occasional
content was found in the 315Hz band; however, it was too inconsistent to give reliable
data.
The sketch of the room, microphone, accelerometer positions, and an overview
of the recorded LpA,max,FAST for all passages, can be found in subsection A.1.7.
The
maximum and average levels comparisons are shown in Figure 4.18. Information about
the construction is shown in Table 4.15.
160
200
250
1/3-Octave Band Center Frequency [Hz]
50
55
60
65
70
75
80
85
Vibration Acceleration Level, La,max,FAST [dB]
15
20
25
30
35
40
Sound pressure Level, LpA,max,FAST[dB]
Floor
Ceiling
Wall 1
Wall 2
Wall 3
Wall 4
LpA,max,FAST
(a) Maximum levels
160
200
250
1/3-Octave Band Center Frequency [Hz]
50
55
60
65
70
75
80
85
Vibration Acceleration Level, La,max,FAST [dB]
15
20
25
30
35
40
Sound pressure Level, LpA,max,FAST[dB]
Floor
Ceiling
Wall 1
Wall 2
Wall 3
Wall 4
LpA,max,FAST
(b) Average maximum levels
Figure 4.18:
1/3-octave maximum and average maximum vibration acceleration
level La,max,FAST [dB re 1µm/s2],⃝, and 1/3-octave A-weighted sound pressure level
LpA,max,FAST [dB] (△) between all measured passages for the three impacted bands for
valid passages.
Post-construction subway noise analysis of sources and transmission paths
57
==PAGE:67==
Table 4.15: Overview of building elements measured in the room. Important note: 1.
The surface area includes windows and doors.
Building element
Type
Surface area
Flooring
Wooden
∼13.8m2
Ceiling
N/A
∼13.8m2
Wall 1
Exterior, heavyweight, 1 window
∼8.1m2
Wall 2
Interior, lightweight, wooden door
∼12.4m2
Wall 3
Interior, heavyweight,
∼8.1m2
Wall 4
Interior, heavyweight
∼12.4m2
Vast differences are not shown between the surface areas as seen in Table 4.15.
For
Tåsingegade(2), the maximum and average maximum sound pressure levels show con-
sistency regarding which band has the highest acceleration and sound pressure levels.
However, the pattern in the acceleration levels is inconsistent, making it diﬀicult to con-
clude which element is most likely to radiate the largest amount of sound. Overall the
200 and 250Hz 1/3 octave bands appear to be the most impactful as the highest sound
pressure levels and the largest difference between average maximum to maximum levels
are seen here. For both cases, it is evident that the floor causes the largest vibrations;
thus, a focus should be on creating a solution for dampening this element. For maximum
levels, wall 2 has the second highest overall, and this trend is approximately the same in
Figure 4.18b. It is important to note that a large window is placed on wall 1, so although
the element has the lowest acceleration levels overall, the window can have higher levels.
This, however, requires further investigation to confirm. Thus, it is concluded that floor
and wall 2 should be focused on when analyzing solutions, as these are the most prominent.
58
Post-construction subway noise analysis of sources and transmission paths
==PAGE:68==
Nørrebrogade, 3rd floor - 2200 København N
Table 4.16: Measurement location information.
Date and time of measurement
Wednesday, May 24th, 2023. 12:00 - 13:30
Measurement room
Kitchen
Basement measurements
-
Location on road
Midpoint, northern side
Floor
3rd floor
Construction year
1901
Building Type [39]
E1 (Class F)[40]
Soil type [46]
Fill(0-1m),
clay(1-4.5m),
sand(4.5-17m),
clay(17-18m), limestone(18-30m)
Reverberation time rating
3
Passage lengths
Min.: 2s.
Max.: 7s
Avg.: 5s
Most impacted 1/3-octave bands
125Hz
160Hz
200Hz
Measurements were done in the kitchen, where all walls were covered in tiles up to a
height of 1.7m. As the apartment was close to the station, frequency content was rarely
recorded above the 250Hz band.
The sketch of the room, microphone, accelerometer
positions, and an overview of the registered LpA,max,FAST for all passages can be found in
subsection A.1.8. The comparisons of maximum and average maximum levels are shown
in Figure 4.19. Information about the construction is shown in Table 4.17.
125
160
200
1/3-Octave Band Center Frequency [Hz]
50
55
60
65
70
75
80
85
90
Vibration Acceleration Level, La,max,FAST [dB]
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
Sound pressure Level, LpA,max,FAST[dB]
Floor
Ceiling
Wall 1
Wall 2
Wall 3
Wall 4
LpA,max,FAST
(a) Maximum levels
125
160
200
1/3-Octave Band Center Frequency [Hz]
50
55
60
65
70
75
80
85
90
Vibration Acceleration Level, La,max,FAST [dB]
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
Sound pressure Level, LpA,max,FAST[dB]
Floor
Ceiling
Wall 1
Wall 2
Wall 3
Wall 4
LpA,max,FAST
(b) Average maximum levels
Figure 4.19:
1/3-octave maximum and average maximum vibration acceleration
level La,max,FAST [dB re 1µm/s2],⃝, and 1/3-octave A-weighted sound pressure level
LpA,max,FAST [dB] (△) between all measured passages for the three impacted bands for
valid passages.
Post-construction subway noise analysis of sources and transmission paths
59
==PAGE:69==
Table 4.17: Overview of building elements measured in the room. Important note: 1.
The surface area includes windows and doors.
Building element
Type
Surface area
Flooring
Linoleum
∼10.5m2
Ceiling
N/A
∼10.5m2
Wall 1
Interior, heavyweight, 2 door openings
∼9m2
Wall 2
Interior, heavyweight,
∼9.3m2
Wall 3
Interior, heavyweight, 1 door opening
∼6.5m2
Wall 4
Partially Ex-/interior, heavyweight, 1 window
∼8.3m2
In Table 4.17, the element surface areas are approximately similar. It is, however, im-
portant to remember that as parts of the walls are covered in tiles, the sound radiation
will likely differ in these areas compared to areas not covered by tiles. The results of the
measurements on Nørrebrogade show good consistency from maximum to average maxi-
mum sound pressure levels. On average, the 200Hz band is generally the most impacted
band for both acceleration and sound pressure levels, although the vibration levels in the
160Hz band do not differ much from the 200Hz band. The ceiling stands out substantially
from the other elements, which appear to have similar acceleration levels in all bands on
average. As the acceleration levels in the ceiling are as high as they are in this apartment,
it is suggested that a solution is created for this element to lower the levels eﬀiciently.
60
Post-construction subway noise analysis of sources and transmission paths
==PAGE:70==
Carit Etlars Vej (2,1), Ground floor - 1814 Frederiksberg
Table 4.18: Measurement location information.
Date and time of measurement
Wednesday, May 31st, 2023. 10:30 - 12:30
Measurement room
Living room
Basement measurements
✓
Location on road
Midpoint, western side
Floor
Ground floor
Construction year
1934
Building Type [39]
E1 (Class F)[40]
Soil type [43]
Fill(0-3m), clay(3-8m), sand(8m), limestone(9-
28m)
Reverberation time rating
2
Passage lengths
Min.: 5s.
Max.: 13s
Avg.: 7s
Most impacted 1/3-octave bands
125Hz
160Hz
200Hz
For this location, occasional correlated content was found in the 250Hz band, which is not
shown as it was rarely present. The sketches of the microphone and accelerometer positions
are shown in subsection A.1.9. The maximum values are shown in Figure 4.20a and the
average maximum values are displayed in Figure 4.20b. Comparisons of measurements in
the basement and apartment are shown in Figure 4.21 for the most impacted 1/3-octave
bands. Information about the building elements can be found in Table 4.19.
125
160
200
1/3-Octave Band Center Frequency [Hz]
55
60
65
70
75
80
85
90
Vibration Acceleration Level, La,max,FAST [dB]
15
20
25
30
35
40
Sound pressure Level, LpA,max,FAST[dB]
Floor
Ceiling
Wall 1
Wall 2
Wall 3
Wall 4
LpA,max,FAST
(a) Maximum levels
125
160
200
1/3-Octave Band Center Frequency [Hz]
55
60
65
70
75
80
85
90
Vibration Acceleration Level, La,max,FAST [dB]
15
20
25
30
35
40
Sound pressure Level, LpA,max,FAST[dB]
Floor
Ceiling
Wall 1
Wall 2
Wall 3
Wall 4
LpA,max,FAST
(b) Average maximum levels
Figure 4.20:
1/3-octave maximum and average maximum vibration acceleration
level La,max,FAST [dB re 1µm/s2],⃝, and 1/3-octave A-weighted sound pressure level
LpA,max,FAST [dB] (△) between all measured passages for the three impacted bands for
valid passages.
Post-construction subway noise analysis of sources and transmission paths
61
==PAGE:71==
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
Passage number
50
60
70
80
Vibration Acceleration Level,
 La,max,FAST [dB]
0
10
20
30
40
Sound pressure Level,
 LpA,max,FAST[dB]
Floor(Apt.)
Wall 1(Apt.)
Wall 4(Apt.)
Wall 4(Bsmt.)
Mic 1 & 2 (Apt.)
Mic 3(Bsmt.)
(a) 125Hz Band
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
Passage number
50
60
70
80
Vibration Acceleration Level,
 La,max,FAST [dB]
0
10
20
30
40
Sound pressure Level,
 LpA,max,FAST[dB]
Floor(Apt.)
Wall 1(Apt.)
Wall 4(Apt.)
Wall 4(Bsmt.)
Mic 1 & 2 (Apt.)
Mic 3(Bsmt.)
(b) 160Hz Band
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
Passage number
50
60
70
80
Vibration Acceleration Level,
 La,max,FAST [dB]
0
10
20
30
40
Sound pressure Level,
 LpA,max,FAST[dB]
Floor(Apt.)
Wall 1(Apt.)
Wall 4(Apt.)
Wall 4(Bsmt.)
Mic 1 & 2 (Apt.)
Mic 3(Bsmt.)
(c) 200Hz Band
Figure 4.21: Comparison of 1/3-octave vibration acceleration levels La,max,FAST [dB
re 1µm/s2],⃝, as well as 1/3-octave A-weighted sound pressure level LpA,max,FAST [dB]
(△, +) recorded in the basement (Bsmt.) and apartment(Apt.) for the three impacted
bands for the validated passages.
62
Post-construction subway noise analysis of sources and transmission paths
==PAGE:72==
Table 4.19: Overview of building elements measured in the room. Important note: 1.
The surface area includes windows and doors.
Building element
Type
Surface area
Flooring
Wood
∼9.6m2
Ceiling
N/A
∼9.6m2
Wall 1
Interior, heavyweight
∼7.3m2
Wall 2
Interior, lightweight
∼11.8m2
Wall 3
Interior, lightweight
∼7.3m2
Wall 4
Interior, heavyweight, door and window
∼11.8m2
Table 4.19 shows that the elements are of very similar sizes, thus the size of the elements
will not change the radiation results much. Analyzing the results from Carit Etlars Vej(2,1)
in Figure 4.13, a clear pattern is shown between Figure 4.13a and Figure 4.13b.
The
correlation between bands in acceleration- and sound pressure level is also clear, showing
that the 250Hz band, although consistent content, is not the largest contributor to the
noise. The 160Hz and especially the 200Hz 1/3-octave band are worth creating solutions
for.
Thus the rest of the analysis is focused on these bands.
The ceiling and wall 4
show the highest levels in both bands, whereas the floor only greatly impacts the 160Hz
band. A similar conclusion can be drawn for both maximum and average maximum levels,
leading to the conclusion that these surfaces are most likely a large cause of the vibrations
traveling through the building. Wall 1 has two large window sections, and it is possible
that they further contribute to the large levels recorded in the 200Hz 1/3-octave band,
as the average maximum levels are close to that of wall 4. However, this requires further
measurements to investigate; thus, the two elements to improve this apartment would be
wall 3 and the ceiling.
A comparison of the recorded levels from the simultaneous basement and apartment mea-
surements reveals that the vibrations are dampened from the basement below the apart-
ment to the ground floor. Wall 4 in the apartment, corresponds to the same wall in the
basement. The damping is visible on the acceleration levels, although the difference is
not substantial in most bands. Most notable is the damping in the 200Hz band where the
acceleration levels appear much larger than in the apartment; however, the sound pressure
levels do not show a similar difference.
Post-construction subway noise analysis of sources and transmission paths
63
==PAGE:73==
Carit Etlars Vej (2,2), 2nd floor - 1814 Frederiksberg
Table 4.20: Measurement location information.
Date and time of measurement
Wednesday, May 31st, 2023. 15:00 - 17:00
Measurement room
Bedroom
Basement measurements
-
Location on road
Midpoint, western side
Floor
Ground floor
Construction year
1906
Building Type [39]
E1 (Class F)[40]
Reverberation time rating
3
Soil type [43]
Fill(0-3m), clay(3-8m), sand(8m), limestone(9-
28m)
Passage lengths
Min.: 1s.
Max.: 7s
Avg.: 5s
Most impacted 1/3-octave bands
125Hz
160Hz
200Hz
For this location, occasional correlated content was found in the 250Hz band, which is
not shown as it was rarely present. The sketches of the microphone and accelerometer
positions are shown in subsection A.1.10. The maximum values are shown in Figure 4.22a
and the average maximum values are displayed in Figure 4.22b. Information about the
building elements can be found in Table 4.21.
125
160
200
1/3-Octave Band Center Frequency [Hz]
50
55
60
65
70
75
80
85
Vibration Acceleration Level, La,max,FAST [dB]
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
Sound pressure Level, LpA,max,FAST[dB]
Floor
Ceiling
Wall 1
Wall 2
Wall 3
Wall 4
LpA,max,FAST
(a) Maximum levels
125
160
200
1/3-Octave Band Center Frequency [Hz]
50
55
60
65
70
75
80
85
Vibration Acceleration Level, La,max,FAST [dB]
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
Sound pressure Level, LpA,max,FAST[dB]
Floor
Ceiling
Wall 1
Wall 2
Wall 3
Wall 4
LpA,max,FAST
(b) Average maximum levels
Figure 4.22:
1/3-octave maximum and average maximum vibration acceleration
level La,max,FAST [dB re 1µm/s2],⃝, and 1/3-octave A-weighted sound pressure level
LpA,max,FAST [dB] (△) between all measured passages for the three impacted bands for
valid passages.
64
Post-construction subway noise analysis of sources and transmission paths
==PAGE:74==
Table 4.21: Overview of building elements measured in the room. Important note: 1.
The surface area includes windows and doors.
Building element
Type
Surface area
Flooring
Wood
∼19.8m2
Ceiling
N/A
∼19.8m2
Wall 1
Interior, heavyweight
∼15m2
Wall 2
Exterior, heavyweight, one window
∼11.8m2
Wall 3
Interior, lightweight, double door
∼15m2
Wall 4
Interior, heavyweight, door
∼11.8m2
Table 4.21 shows that most of the elements do not differ much in surface areas.
The
largest differences are seen between walls 2 and 4 and the floor and ceiling. The results
from Carit Etlars Vej (2,2) on the second floor show a reasonable correlation between
maximum and average maximum levels. Analyzing the sound pressure level results in
Figure 4.22a and Figure 4.22b, it is clear that the majority of the noise is in the 160- and
200Hz 1/3-octave bands. The ceiling and wall 1 have the highest levels in both octave
bands. Because wall 1 is an interior heavyweight wall going from the basement to the
roof, the increased acceleration levels likely originate from the basement. This wall was,
however, not measured in the basement; thus, it requires further measurements to confirm
the hypothesis. The maximum and average acceleration values also stick out for wall 4 in
the 160Hz band, indicating that this wall may contribute greatly to the sound pressure
level. Furthermore, wall 4 has high acceleration levels in the most impacted bands, in
combination with the lower surface area this wall is likely radiating more eﬀiciently. Due
to wall 2 being an exterior wall with a large window area, the window could contribute
greatly; however, this also requires further investigation. Based on the result analysis, it
is concluded that solutions should be focused on the ceiling and walls 1 and 4.
Post-construction subway noise analysis of sources and transmission paths
65
==PAGE:75==
Result comparison, Olufsvej - 2100 Østerbro
Before comparing the results from Olufsvej, a few notes are worth making.
The two
buildings are on opposite sides of the road; thus, they are mirrored. The wall numbers in
the results previously described correspond to the same walls in each building (wall 1 =
wall 1, wall 2 = wall 2, etc.). Olufsvej (1) is closer to the tunnels as it is on the southwestern
end of the road. See Figure A.10 for an estimate of the tunnel locations in the area. The
differences are found by subtracting the results in Olufsvej(1) from Olufsvej(2). Results
are shown in Figure 4.23.
125
160
200
1/3-Octave Band Center Frequency [Hz]
-10
-5
0
5
10
15
20
Difference in
Vibration Acceleration Level, La,max,FAST [dB]
-5
-4
-3
-2
-1
0
1
2
3
4
5
Difference in
Sound pressure Level, LpA,max,FAST[dB]
Floor
Ceiling
Wall 1
Wall 2
Wall 3
Wall 4
LpA,max,FAST
(a) Maximum levels
125
160
200
1/3-Octave Band Center Frequency [Hz]
-10
-5
0
5
10
15
20
Difference in
Vibration Acceleration Level, La,max,FAST [dB]
-5
-4
-3
-2
-1
0
1
2
3
4
5
Difference in
Sound pressure Level, LpA,max,FAST[dB]
Floor
Ceiling
Wall 1
Wall 2
Wall 3
Wall 4
LpA,max,FAST
(b) Average maximum levels
Figure 4.23: Difference in 1/3-octave maximum and average maximum vibration accel-
eration level La,max,FAST [dB re 1µm/s2],⃝, and 1/3-octave A-weighted sound pressure
level LpA,max,FAST [dB] (△) for each element between the two locations. For Olufsvej (1),
the total passages used for the analysis for each element were: Floor: 20, Ceiling: 14, Wall
1: 13, Wall 2: 11, Wall 3: 10, Wall 4: 20. For Olufsvej (2): Floor: 23, Ceiling: 15, Wall
1: 16, Wall 2: 11, Wall 3: 6, Wall 4: 23.
The results in Figure 4.23 show shallow differences among the sound pressure levels in the
three impacted 1/3 octave bands. For the maximum levels, the differences in the 125 and
200Hz bands are neglectable, and in the 160Hz band, it is 2dB, indicating that it is most
likely due to a train being slightly higher in one passage. The average sound pressure
levels show the biggest difference, approximately 2.5dB in the 125Hz band.
Comparing the most impacted elements in each location clarifies considerable differences
between the two locations. The floor was an issue in both areas, whereas Olufsvej(1) had
issues with the ceiling and wall 2, and Olufsvej (2) had problems with wall 4. The floor
and ceiling appear to have higher average and maximum acceleration levels in the 200Hz
band. This suggests that lower frequencies affect buildings closer to the tunnels more.
This appears to be the case for all the elements in Olufsvej (2). Wall 2 has neglectable
66
Post-construction subway noise analysis of sources and transmission paths
==PAGE:76==
differences on average between the two locations as seen in Figure 4.23b; however, wall
4 appears substantially more excited in all bands in Olufsvej (2), indicating the role the
element plays in acceleration levels.
Post-construction subway noise analysis of sources and transmission paths
67
==PAGE:77==
Result comparison, Carit Etlars Vej (2) - 1814 Frederiksberg
As the measurements from Carit Etlars Vej (2,1) and (2,2) were conducted in the corre-
sponding rooms on two separate floors, it is interesting to compare the measured results
to see if any correlations and further conclusions can be made. Here it is particularly
interesting to examine the results and see if it is possible to determine a transmission path
of the vibrations. The difference is calculated by subtracting the measured values on the
ground from the 2nd floor. A positive value will thus mean an increase, whereas a negative
value will indicate a reduced value on the 2nd floor compared to the ground floor.
125
160
200
1/3-Octave Band Center Frequency [Hz]
-25
-20
-15
-10
-5
0
5
10
Difference in
Vibration Acceleration Level, La,max,FAST [dB]
-5
-4
-3
-2
-1
0
1
2
3
4
5
Difference in
Sound pressure Level, LpA,max,FAST[dB]
Floor
Ceiling
Wall 1
Wall 2
Wall 3
Wall 4
LpA,max,FAST
(a) Maximum levels
125
160
200
1/3-Octave Band Center Frequency [Hz]
-25
-20
-15
-10
-5
0
5
10
Difference in
Vibration Acceleration Level, La,max,FAST [dB]
-5
-4
-3
-2
-1
0
1
2
3
4
5
Difference in
Sound pressure Level, LpA,max,FAST[dB]
Floor
Ceiling
Wall 1
Wall 2
Wall 3
Wall 4
LpA,max,FAST
(b) Average maximum levels
Figure 4.24: Difference in 1/3-octave maximum and average maximum vibration accel-
eration level La,max,FAST [dB re 1µm/s2],⃝, and 1/3-octave A-weighted sound pressure
level LpA,max,FAST [dB] (△) for each element between the two locations. For the ground
floor, 20 passages were measured on average for each element, and on the second floor 19
passages were recorded per element.
From the results shown in Figure 4.24, it is clear that the differences in maximum levels
in Figure 4.24a are not as similar to those on average in Figure 4.24b. The level difference
in the 125- and 160Hz bands is almost neglectable from the maximum levels, as they are
less than 2dB. The 200Hz band, however, had 4dB higher levels in the 200Hz. These
differences are negligible as the differences are approximately 1dB and could come down
to which passages are recorded. This result shows that although the vibrations must travel
through multiple elements from the ground floor to the second floor, the frequency bands
are impacted similarly. A clear difference is seen on wall 3 when analyzing the individual
components. This is of interest, as a large difference was expected from wall 2 as it is a
gypsum wall splitting the room in two on the ground floor and an exterior brick wall on
the second floor. The largest differences for the remaining elements are in the floor and
ceiling in the 125 and 160Hz bands and Wall 1 in the 200Hz band. The differences are,
however, below 5dB LpA,max,FAST on average, thus not very large. As described in the
68
Post-construction subway noise analysis of sources and transmission paths
==PAGE:78==
results for the ground floor and second floor, large acceleration values were found in the
ceiling for both apartments, suggesting that a solution for this element could lower the
levels.
Post-construction subway noise analysis of sources and transmission paths
69
==PAGE:79==
4.3
Similarities between results
To compare the results, a Table 4.22 shows the elements with the highest acceleration
levels for each location. The elements included are the ones where it has been suggested
to find a solution for that type of element.
Table 4.22: Overview of elements with the largest acceleration levels and locations
Location
Floor
Ceiling
Wall
Olufsvej (1)
x
x
x
Olufsvej (2)
x
x
Kertemindegade
x
x
Carit Etlars Vej (1)
x
x
Holger Danskes Vej
x
x
Tåsingegade (1)
x
x
Tåsingegade (2)
x
x
Nørrebrogade
x
Carit Etlars Vej (2,1)
x
x
Carit Etlars Vej (2,2)
x
x
Total
4
7
8
From Table 4.22, it is evident that, in most cases, the largest acceleration levels are
recorded in the ceiling and the walls. Correlating the floor construction types with high
acceleration levels does not reveal a reason behind the increased levels, as most of the
buildings are of type E1 and are likely to have the same floor construction.
Passage duration is also interesting; thus, each location’s average, maximum, and minimum
are shown in Figure 4.25.
Location
Duration [s]
Figure 4.25: Overview of minimum, maximum, and average passage duration at each
location.
The averages are determined as
70
Post-construction subway noise analysis of sources and transmission paths
==PAGE:80==
tmax = 1
n
n
∑
i=1
tmax,n
tavg = 1
n
n
∑
i=1
tavg,n
tmin = 1
n
n
∑
i=1
tmin,n.
(4.3.1)
Where tmax,n denotes the maximum duration of a passage at a site, tavg,n the average,
and tmin,n the minimum. The results are shown as horizontal lines in Figure 4.25.
Results shown in Figure 4.25 show some interesting consistencies. All locations where
the average length of the passage is above the average of all measured locations have
maximum durations above 10 seconds. A similar conclusion can be made for locations
with passage durations below the overall mean have a minimum below the minimum.
This is likely due to each location’s distance to a station. Locations not close to a station
are Kertemindegade and the two addresses on Tåsingegade. The lower passage durations
from Nørrebrogade and Carit Etlars Vej(2,2) are likely explained by the apartments being
on the third and second floors, respectively.
The soil types were obtained through drilling reports from Aarsleff JV. Drilling locations
were not at exact measurement locations, but the nearest available data was used. Com-
paring the layers down to 25m in depth several differences are clear from Table 4.23. At
Olufsvej the Limestone layer is 6m deeper than at other locations and no clay was found in
the layers either. Figure 2.1 show that P- and S- waves have similar speeds in both sand,
gravel, and clay; however, wave speeds in limestone are approximately 10 times larger. As
gravel and sand have approximately the same density[47], the impedance of both materials
can be assumed to be approximately equivalent. A low variance in soil types from the
tunnel to the building will thus likely cause the vibrations to be transmitted more easily.
Sites 2, 4, 5, and 6 show very similar stratification as opposed to Carit Etlars Vej where
the limestone layer is not as far down. Although the impedance mismatch will be small
from limestone to sand or clay, it is likely the vibrations are easily transmitted through
the layer of limestone causing high vibrations.
Post-construction subway noise analysis of sources and transmission paths
71
==PAGE:81==
Table 4.23: Soil differences between locations. 1 Is Olufsvej (1) and (2). 2 is Kerte-
mindegade. 3 is Carit Etlars Vej (1), (2,1), and (2,2). 4 is Holger Danskes Vej. 5 is
Tåsingegade (1) and (2). 6 is Nørrebrogade. Site IDs correspond to Figure 4.7.
Site ID
Depth[m]
1
2
3
4
5
6
1
Fill
2
Gravel
3
Clay
4
Sand
5
Limestone
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
4.4
Suggestions for solutions
It is important to note that any suggested solutions in this section have not been simulated
or tested in any way. Thus there is no guarantee that they will reduce the noise. Solutions
described in this section originate from [39] and [48], where images of the solutions can also
be seen. Solutions to the problem are a project in itself, as the construction types must
be measured. Configurations on attachments to current constructions without creating a
more eﬀicient radiator are essential. Furthermore, ensuring the new elements do not have
natural frequencies in the most impacted bands is important, as this will not reduce the
vibration acceleration levels.
Most older constructions in building type E1 have a layer of clay in the horizontal division,
as this procedure was used earlier to prevent fire from spreading to higher floors. Insulation
may also replace the clay; if that is the case, the vibrations will likely be worse [39].
Changing the floor construction is likely the most diﬀicult, as effective reductions for
vibrations require replacing the floor construction with a new one. To lower the vibrations
in the floor, it is possible to insert damping pads, commonly made of rubber, into the top
side of the beam to limit the transmission of vibrations into the upper layers of the floor.
72
Post-construction subway noise analysis of sources and transmission paths
==PAGE:82==
The clay layer should still be in the construction, and if it has been replaced by insulation,
it must be re-established by plates with similar weight and density of clay. The downside of
the solution is, however, the reduction of the room height, which requires changing doors
and radiators in the rooms. It is also necessary to ensure that the horizontal divisions
can carry the new floor as it can be heavy. Newer constructions, E3, are of concrete, and
the floors are on soft bricks, which can be interchanged with bricks which can dampen
more effectively and lower the vibrations transmitted from the concrete structure to the
flooring.
The ceilings are less troublesome to create solutions for as they will not require changing
as many other elements in the building. However, to effectively reduce the levels from the
ceilings, it is recommended to install supplementary partition walls[39]. A ceiling solution
without removing the current ceiling requires a large floor-to-ceiling height as it will be
reduced by a minimum of 105mm[39]. The ceiling construction consists of load-bearing
profiles attached to rail profiles on the walls. Between the old ceiling and the insulation is
a cavity of approximately 95mm, 2/3 of which should be filled with mineral wool. Below
the insulation are two layers of gypsum plates with assembling points offset.
As many of the highest vibration acceleration levels are in the lightweight walls, an example
of a solution is given. Several older buildings use partition walls made of boards or slabs.
It is suggested that these are removed, and new walls are erected.
The new double-
layer partition wall can consist of gypsum boards as the outer layer, bar- and rail profiles
holding mineral wool, and a cavity separating a similar construction to the opposite room.
If it is a heavyweight wall of bricks, it is possible to erect a freestanding supplementary
partition wall. The construction type is similar to half the double-layer partition wall,
and the cavity size depends on the current wall construction. The cavity is essential for
heavyweight walls, as this will allow the radiation of the heavyweight wall to be absorbed
by the insulation in the lightweight wall.
For the solutions, reducing the transmission of vibrations from the construction to the
new elements is important. This can be done by using dampers in the connections and
lowering the amount and area of connections from the old construction to the solution.
Furthermore, examples in [48] show that increasing the weight of the elements can increase
the sound
Erecting a new lightweight wall, using steel posts and isolation has been proved to improve
the reduction in lower frequencies by the wall[48]. The attachment of the steel post to the
construction can further have a foam layer to reduce vibration transmission to the outer
layers. A similar principle has the same effect for horizontal divisions [48].
Reinforcement of light- and heavyweight walls has also proven useful up to 200Hz in [49].
For lightweight constructions, it was found that increasing the cavity and 3 layers of plates
could improve the absorption. Furthermore, results from [50] also show that improving
the windows in the wall can increase the damping of the elements above 125Hz.
A universally applicable solution could be to dampen the vibrations before they reach the
buildings as in [51].
Post-construction subway noise analysis of sources and transmission paths
73
==PAGE:83==
74
Post-construction subway noise analysis of sources and transmission paths
==PAGE:84==
5
Discussion
In this chapter, the results and findings are discussed. Initially, the measurement procedure
and use of equipment are discussed. This is followed by a discussion of the results from
the initial measurements and then a discussion of the results from the field measurements.
5.1
Measurement procedure
The plan for developing the measurement procedure described in section 3.1 was found
eﬀicient. When using a large amount of equipment and obtaining a large amount of data,
it is important to understand how to use it correctly and organize measurements and
data. The results of the initial measurements presented the most significant findings that
laid the groundwork for the field measurement procedure. Through experience with the
equipment, the technique was developed for measuring the noise disturbance caused by
the Metro. Although conducting more field measurements could result in a more well-
founded comparison and analysis, creating an eﬀicient and repeatable procedure was more
important than gaining more data.
The equipment used in the field measurements was able to capture the vibration accelera-
tion levels and the sound pressure levels. Although the three sound pressure level receiver
configurations were not similar, differences between results were neglectable, especially as
the results with the largest impact are the average maximum levels.
Using the type 8306 accelerometer as a reference was initially considered a good idea;
however, in hindsight, the fifth available KS78C.100 accelerometer should have been used.
This was due to the sensitivity of the accelerometer and mounting method differing from
the others, resulting in occasional differing results.
Using five of the same accelerom-
eters would have resulted in the vibration data from the reference accelerometer being
comparable to the other accelerometers.
Replacing the NI DAQ and soundcards was constructive for the equipment and software
measurements. This was due to the possibilities in the available channels and the software’s
user-friendliness, allowing for a straightforward data analysis setup.
As a lot of information was gathered through thorough measurements, it was found that
measuring at more points would not contribute significantly to the overall measurement
validity. Although data analysis and measuring for a longer duration was simple, keeping
the duration of the measurement procedure short was important. The setup time was
approximately one hour at each location, and taking down the equipment was marginally
shorter. At sites where measurements were also conducted in the basement, four rounds
of approximately 30-minute measurements were performed as opposed to no basement
measurements, three rounds of 30-minute measurements. The measurement duration also
varied slightly between locations, as both tunnels were not audible everywhere, resulting
in a longer period between the passages and, thus, longer measurement times.
As equipment may perform differently, using similar equipment was a relevant method of
reducing assumptions. However, as the receiver configurations were not similar, it was
assumed they could perform similarly as their sensitivity was comparable in the relevant
frequency bands.
Post-construction subway noise analysis of sources and transmission paths
75
==PAGE:85==
5.2
Field Measurements
The results of the field measurements show that the acceleration levels measured on the
elements are distinguishable. Measurements in the basement revealed if any damping was
occurring from the cellar to the ground floor. In some locations, such as Olufsvej (1) in
Figure 4.9 on page 42, the amount of damping from basement to ground floor was almost
neglectable, whereas Carit Etlars Vej (1) in Figure 4.14 on page 50, showed low damping
in the 200Hz band, but higher damping in the 160Hz band. The basement measurements
could show if the vibration levels were higher or lower to a lesser or greater extent and
which frequency bands were least dampened by the structure. If used to determine the
transmission path through the entire building, more thorough measurements would be
necessary, as only one element was measured for some of the locations in this project.
Conducting measurements on this scale results in large amounts of data with endless
analysis possibilities.
As the Metro passages measured in this project varied from 1 -
15 seconds, comparing results in a manner that made sense was diﬀicult. The variations
in duration also extended to frequency content, resulting in the 1/3-octave band result
analysis, which was also used for [52].
The procedure of identifying which elements are of the most value to create solutions for
was by comparing the maximum levels recorded to the average of the maximum level of
each passage. Although calculating the sound radiation by each surface for the passages
could potentially supply more accurate information, it would require more information
about the building and construction materials to give accurate results. Furthermore, data
analysis would become far more complex as each measurement location would have differ-
ent materials and element sizes. The results of displaying LpA,max,FAST and La,max,FAST
were suﬀicient to differentiate the elements and answer the research question regarding
structural elements most likely to exhibit the highest sound radiation.
By comparing which elements have the largest acceleration levels in each location, it is
possible to see differences in the acceleration levels. The data suggest that a wall or the
ceiling has the highest acceleration levels in most cases, as seen in Table 4.22. Most cases,
the highest acceleration levels were measured on lightweight walls, likely made of gypsum
board, and in the ceilings. However, concluding the sound radiation without the exact
radiation eﬀiciency was diﬀicult. Calculating precise sound radiations would, at this point,
be complex for some elements, as holes are in them due to walls or windows, making the
shape more complex. Thus, comparing acceleration levels was still useful as it showed
that each element vibrates differently. This addresses the research question regarding the
categorization of the elements and the coherence and discrepancies of the noise sources
in each building.
As many of the constructions are old, the construction methods of
the elements are likely similar. However, investigating the exact structure elements was
outside the scope of this thesis.
The impacted frequency bands correspond to similar measurements made in soil layers in
[53]. Furthermore, the frequency content recorded in the apartments somewhat matches
[14]; however, more content was experienced below 100Hz.
The comparison of the stratified layers close to measurement locations revealed similar-
ities between some places; however, two of the sites had a unique distribution of layers.
Comparing the impact of the layers would require vibration measurements on multiple
surfaces in the basement and tunnel to show clear differences between acceleration levels.
This could be of interest as a future project to investigate if there is a correlation between
stratification and the vibrations caused in the structure.
76
Post-construction subway noise analysis of sources and transmission paths
==PAGE:86==
The generalizability of the results is limited by only having conducted measurements at
ten locations.
Although the results from the locations show a pattern, measuring at
more locations could reveal a more distinct pattern among the surfaces with the largest
acceleration levels.
Several variables are not controllable when performing practical measurements in a limited
amount of time. It was common that the Metro passages could differ by 15dB at a single
location, making it diﬀicult to ensure suﬀicient passages were recorded to conduct the
analysis. Furthermore, background noise from the street and surrounding apartments can
easily impact the measurements. Thus, measurements were optimal to conduct between
10:00 and 15:00, as most people are not home during this period, reducing impact sounds
and vibrations from surrounding apartments.
5.2.1
Uncertainty of measurement values
Although it has not been within this project’s scope to determine if measured values have
exceeded legislative noise limits, the uncertainty of the measured levels is worth discussing
briefly.
Uncertainty of noise measurements has been described in [54].
The standard
deviation from measurement equipment is σi < 0.5dB. Variation caused by the source is
noted to be σk = 0.5 −1dB when only one measurement is performed. However, this
value will be higher due to varying levels evident from, e.g., Figure A.3. However, the
uncertainty will fall because three microphones were used simultaneously to record the
sound pressure levels. Furthermore, uncertainty has also been assigned to the weather
σm.
However, as the measurements are performed inside, the weather conditions will
likely have less impact. The final uncertainty is calculated as[54]
σ =
√
σ2
i + σ2
k + σ2m.
(5.2.1)
When measuring vibrations, the uncertainty can be approximately 5-7dB [55]. It is, how-
ever, important to mention that this project has not focused on measuring if limits have
been exceeded. Thus this uncertainty is disregarded.
Overall the uncertainty can have a high impact on the measurements due to the many
varying passages; however, the uncertainty is reduced due to the number of recorded pas-
sages. The uncertainty is further reduced by the simultaneous measurements on multiple
surfaces.
5.3
Solutions
Following the principles suggested in the results section, solutions can be created to lower
the sound radiation into the apartments from the Metro. They can be tested in a labora-
tory; however, it is important to note that the construction of acoustic laboratories may
not allow the vibrations to transmit similarly to the apartments. Variance in structure
and soil differed between locations; thus, creating a universally applicable solution guar-
anteed to work in all cases is diﬀicult. Each site must be analyzed individually to develop
solutions. Although the keys have been connected with damping layers, there is a risk
that the new construction will become a better sound radiator. Potentially, a universal
solution could be to dig a trench around the buildings as researched in [51]. It may not
be the simplest, most realistic solution, but it is possible to lower the vibrations this way.
Post-construction subway noise analysis of sources and transmission paths
77
==PAGE:87==
5.4
Future use of the measurement procedure
As the measurement procedure is elaborate, it is not applicable in all situations. In cases
of machine noise, the measurement procedure could be applied to identify the noise source.
This is noted in [30], where partial coherence could play a bigger role.
In this case, the equipment was suﬀicient to measure passages simultaneously. Less equip-
ment would have imposed higher uncertainty, whereas more equipment would unnecessar-
ily drag out the measurement duration. It could, however, improve the uncertainty if all
walls were measured simultaneously so the variance between the trains could be neglected
more.
78
Post-construction subway noise analysis of sources and transmission paths
==PAGE:88==
6
Conclusion and Future work
This thesis aimed to construct a measurement procedure that could most effectively de-
termine the elements most likely to exhibit high sound radiation and suggest solutions for
them.
The research questions which the thesis aimed to answer were:
1. Using the available equipment, how can the best procedure of measuring the noise in
the building be developed, and what does it look like?
2. What assumptions are necessary when developing the measurement procedure?
3. What building elements are likely to exhibit the highest sound radiation, and can they
be categorized?
4. What are the subsoil differences between the measurement locations, and how do they
impact the transmission path from the subway tunnel to the building?
5. What coherence and discrepancies exist among the structural noise sources of each
building? (Wall, floor, and ceiling)
6. Having addressed the sources and transmission paths of the noise, what could a
solution be?
The conclusion for each question is written separately in the paragraphs below.
A plan was set to develop a measurement procedure using the available equipment. The
initial measurements ensured that insight was given into the data collection process and
data quality and that the capabilities of available equipment were tested. The subsequent
re-evaluation of the procedure and equipment led to an eﬀicient measurement procedure,
which, as shown in the results section, made it possible to discern acceleration levels
between construction elements.
Necessary assumptions were found through different effects of damping in the subsoil,
distances to the tunnels, and equipment choices. As acceleration levels were analyzed, one
assumption was assuming the sound radiation of the elements from the measured levels
and material types and sizes. As two random positions were measured on walls, another
assumption was that these positions were suﬀicient to describe the acceleration level of the
wall. Finally, an assumption in the equipment was made that the measured data would
be reliable and have low uncertainty.
The measurement results were analyzed in each location by comparing the maximum
acceleration-, La,max,FAST , and sound pressure level, LpA,max,FAST , to the average max-
imum values measured from each Metro passage. Comparing the data from the ten field
measurement sites, results showed that the elements most likely to exhibit the highest
sound radiation were the ceiling and lightweight walls. Although the elements’ sizes were
considered, it is the conclusion that determining the sound radiation based on the ac-
celeration levels is diﬀicult as the composition of some elements was more complex than
others.
The transmission path from the tunnel to the radiated sound in the apartment was de-
scribed in the background section to supply insight into the complexity of the system
which was being measured. Information about the stratified layers near the measurement
Post-construction subway noise analysis of sources and transmission paths
79
==PAGE:89==
site was acquired and compared, and the impact of the changing layers and depth was
described theoretically. This was suﬀicient to obtain a general knowledge of the effects of
the changing subsoil layers.
As acceleration levels were found on all elements in each element, they were likely all noise
sources of radiation. However, some elements had larger acceleration levels, and overall
the elements most likely to exhibit high sound radiation were ceiling and lightweight wall
elements. High acceleration levels were found in the floor construction for four of the ten
measured locations.
Providing guaranteed solutions requires several simulations and test measurements not
within this project’s scope. Furthermore, it was found that creating a universally applica-
ble solution would be diﬀicult due to the difference in constructions, subsoil, and impacted
frequency bands. Suggestions for solutions were, however, provided.
6.1
Future work
This thesis creates a baseline for measuring and comparing vibration acceleration and
sound pressure levels caused by the Metro. However, it was found that further studies
into some topics are required to analyze the apartments and supply guaranteed solutions.
As mentioned in the results section, windows could also be a likely source of sound radia-
tion. A further study into the impact of the windows could be carried out to understand
their effects and if they differ between locations.
No measurements were conducted in the tunnel to analyze the frequency content created by
the Metro at the origin. Thus it would be of great interest to see if the frequency content
in the tunnels is comparable with the results in the apartments shown in this project.
Another interesting point would be investigating the difference between the tunnels in
apartments and the underground.
As the sound radiation was not calculated in this project, it could be interesting to inves-
tigate if it shows different results than those presented here.
80
Post-construction subway noise analysis of sources and transmission paths
==PAGE:90==
Bibliography
1.
TV2. Naboer chokeret over støj fra ny metro: - Det havde været rart at vide. https:
//nyheder.tv2.dk/samfund/2019-09-27-naboer-chokeret-over-stoej-fra-ny-metro-
det-havde-vaeret-rart-at-vide (2019).
2.
Berlingske. Her er gaderne hvor flest klager over metroens larm. https : / / www .
berlingske.dk/hovedstaden/her-er-gaderne-hvor-flest-klager-over-metroens-larm
(2019).
3.
(DR), D. R. Støj og støv om natten: Metro-naboer har fået 400 millioner kroner som
plaster på såret. https://www.dr.dk/nyheder/regionale/hovedstadsomraadet/stoej-
og-stoev-om-natten-metro-naboer-har-faaet-400-millioner (2019).
4.
(DR), D. R. Et år med ny metro - et år med støjklager: ’Jeg får trykken for brystet
og hjertebanken’. https://www.dr.dk/nyheder/regionale/hovedstadsomraadet/et-
aar-med-ny-metro-et-aar-med-stoejklager-jeg-faar-trykken (2020).
5.
(DR), D. R. Stadig ingen dækning i Cityringen: ’Uproffesionelt, at det ikke er ordnet’.
https://www.dr.dk/nyheder/regionale/hovedstadsomraadet/stadig-ingen-daekning-
i-cityringen-uprofessionelt-det-ikke-er (2020).
6.
(DR), D. R. Efter Skinneslibning: Klagerne vælter stadig ned over den nye metro.
https://www.dr.dk/nyheder/indland/efter-skinneslibning-klagerne-vaelter-stadig-
ned-over-den-nye-metro (2020).
7.
Kosmopol, T. Beboere plages af støj fra metroen - nu skal der sættes ind med tre
tiltag. https://www.tv2kosmopol.dk/koebenhavn/beboere- plages- af- stoej- fra-
metroen-nu-skal-der-saettes-ind-med-tre-tiltag (2021).
8.
Hansen, F. M. Sidste redskab i vaerktojskassen spiller fallit: Skinne-smoring daemper
ikke metrostoj. Ingenioren. https://ing.dk/artikel/sidste-redskab-vaerktoejskassen-
spiller-fallit-skinne-smoering-daemper-ikke-metrostoej (2023).
9.
Metroselskabet. Tillægsnotat til forundersøgelse af Metrobetjening af Lynetteholm.
https://m.dk/media/5425/tillaegsnotat-til-forundersoegelse-af-metrobetjening-af-
lynetteholm-lilla-linje-m5-oest-amagerbrogade.pdf (2022).
10.
Brunskog, J. Railway noise: a literature survey (2007).
11.
Metro. De nye tog på M3 og M4 - Metroen https://m.dk/om-metroen/metroens-
koncept/togsystemet/de-nye-tog-p%C3%A5-m3-og-m4/ (2023).
12.
THOMPSON, D. & JONES, C. A review of the modelling of wheel/rail noise gener-
ation. Journal of Sound and Vibration 231, 519–536. issn: 0022-460X. https://www.
sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0022460X99925427 (2000).
13.
Kurzweil, L. Ground-borne noise and vibration from underground rail systems. Jour-
nal of Sound and Vibration 66, 363–370. issn: 0022-460X. https://www.sciencedirect.
com/science/article/pii/0022460X79908538 (1979).
14.
Li, Q., Luo, Y. & Liu, Y. Experimental Research on Identification of Ground-borne
Noise from Subway Lines Based on Partial Coherence Analysis. Procedia Engineer-
ing 144. International Conference on Vibration Problems 2015, 1150–1157. issn:
1877-7058. https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1877705816303022
(2016).
15.
Nordborg, A. Vertical Rail Vibrations: Parametric Excitation. acta acustica 84, 289–
300. https://www.ingentaconnect.com/contentone/dav/aaua/1998/00000084/
00000002/art00010?crawler=true (1998).
Post-construction subway noise analysis of sources and transmission paths
81
==PAGE:91==
16.
FÄRM, J. Interior structure-borne sound caused by the sleeper-passing frequency.
Journal of Sound and Vibration 231, 831–837. issn: 0022-460X. https : / / www .
sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0022460X9992566X (2000).
17.
Thompson, D. in Railway Noise and Vibration (ed Thompson, D.) 437–464 (Elsevier,
Oxford, 2009). isbn: 978-0-08-045147-3. https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/B978008045147300013X.
18.
Andersen, L. Linear Elastodynamic Analysis (Aalborg University, 2006).
19.
James, D. Encyclopedia of Solid Earth Geophysics (Springer New York, NY, 1990).
20.
Of Technology, G. I. Frequency dependence of dynamic soil properties. https://apps.
peer.berkeley.edu/lifelines/Workshop304/pdf/o_Rix.pdf.
21.
Ohlrich, M. Structure-borne sound and vibration. Vibration and waves in solid struc-
tures at audible frequencies (Part 1) (Note 7022, Acoustic technology, DTU Elektro,
Technical University of Denmark, 2011).
22.
University, P. S. Structural Acoustics Tutorial - Part 1: Vibrations in structures.
Acoustics Today. https://www.docenti.unina.it/webdocenti-be/allegati/materiale-
didattico/129193 (2006).
23.
Mørkholt, J. Structural vibration and sound radiation from plates part 3 (Note 7031,
Acoustic technology, DTU Elektro, Technical University of Denmark, 2011).
24.
Cremer, L., M, H. & Ungar, E. Structure-Borne Sound - 2nd Edition (Springer Verlag
Berlin, 1988).
25.
Cremer, L. & M, H. Körperschall (2., völlig neubearbeitete Auflage (Springer Verlag
Berlin, 1996).
26.
Arenas, J. & Crocker, M. Sound Radiation Eﬀiciency of a Baffled Rectangular Plate
Excited by Harmonic Point Forces Using its Surface Resistance Matrix. International
Journal of Acoustics and Vibration 7, 217–229 (Jan. 2002).
27.
Lindblad, S. G. & Gudmundsson, S. Akustik V (Lunds Tekniska Högskola, Bygnad-
sakustik, 1981).
28.
Fahy, F. J. Sound and structural vibration. Academic Press, London (1985).
29.
Jacobsen, F. Signal analysis (Note 7001, Acoustic technology, DTU Elektro, Technical
University of Denmark, 2011).
30.
Bendat, J. S. & Piersol, A. G. Engineering Applications of correlations and spectral
analysis (John Wiley & Sons, 1980).
31.
Måling af støj fra Metro Cityringen i 16 boliger i 2020 Projekt (FORCE-Technology
(Kommisarius Ekspropriationskomissionen), Denmark, 2020). https://komoe.dk/wp-
content/uploads/2020/12/119-36367-Kommissarius_Ekspropriationskommissionen_
M%C3%A5ling-af-st%C3%B8j-fra-Metro-Cityringen-i-16-boliger-TC-101603rev2.
pdf.
32.
Referencelaboratoriet. Valg af måle- og beregningspositioner. Orientering nr. 43 fra
miljøstyrelsens referencelaboratorium for støjmålinger. https://referencelaboratoriet.
dk//wp-content/uploads/2011/01/rl3110-Orientering-nr-43.pdf (2010).
33.
Kjær, B.
bibinitperiod. Instructions and applications (Unknown, 1974).
34.
Miljøstyrelsen. Retningslinier for måling og vurdering af vibrationer i det eksterne
miljø. Nyt fra miljøstyrelsen. https://referencelaboratoriet.dk/wp-content/uploads/
1983 _ NFM _ Retningslinjer - for - maalinger - og - vurdering - af - vibrationer - i - det -
eksterne-miljoe.pdf (1983).
35.
Mai, J. Measurement of low frequency structure-borne sound and vibrations (Technical
University of Denmark, 2021).
36.
Boliga. DinGeo - Geodata på alle adresser i hele Danmark https://www.dingeo.dk/
(2023).
82
Post-construction subway noise analysis of sources and transmission paths
==PAGE:92==
37.
Rejseplanen. Rejseplanen livemap https://www.rejseplanen.dk/bin/help.exe/mn?
L=vs_livemap&tpl=fullscreenmap (2023).
38.
Krak. Krak.dk - Opdag nærheden https://www.krak.dk/ (2023).
39.
Rasmussen, B. & Petersen, C. M. Lydisolering mellem boliger - eksisterende byggeri,
SBi-anvisning 243 (Kailow Graphic A/S, 2014).
40.
Rasmussen, B. Implementering af lydkvalitet ved recovering af etagebyggeri https://
www.nabostoej.aau.dk/digitalAssets/843/843468_slides-website-lydkvalitetrenoveringetageboliger-
20juni2020.pdf (2023).
41.
JV, A. Borerapport Olufsvej 28 https://jupiter.geus.dk/cgi-bin/svgrapport.dll?
borid=423914&format=pdf (2023).
42.
JV, A. Borerapport Vordingborggade 9 https://jupiter.geus.dk/cgi-bin/svgrapport.
dll?borid=423920&format=pdf (2023).
43.
JV, A. Borerapport Carl Bernhardsvej 17 https://jupiter.geus.dk/cgi-bin/svgrapport.
dll?borid=423965&format=pdf (2023).
44.
JV, A. Borerapport Holger Danskes Vej 54 https : / / jupiter . geus . dk / cgi - bin /
svgrapport.dll?borid=423956&format=pdf (2023).
45.
JV, A. Borerapport Hesseløgade 21 https://jupiter.geus.dk/cgi-bin/svgrapport.dll?
borid=423923&format=pdf (2023).
46.
JV, A. Borerapport Nørrebrogade 140 https://jupiter.geus.dk/cgi-bin/svgrapport.
dll?borid=423948&format=pdf (2023).
47.
Toolbox, E. Dirt and Mud - Densities https://www.engineeringtoolbox.com/dirt-
mud-densities-d_1727.html (2023).
48.
Homb, A., Hveem, S. & Strøm, S. Lydisolerende konstrukjoner (1983).
49.
Ny viden om lavfrekvent lydisolation af boliger i områder med vindmøller Projekt
(Miljø- og Fødevarerministeriet - Miljøstyrelsen, Denmark, 2017).
50.
Litteraturundersøgelse vedrørende lavfrekvent støj, infralyd og lydskabte vibrationer fra
fly Projekt (FORCE-Technology (Forsvarsministeriets Ejendomsstyrelse), Denmark,
2021).
51.
Xi, Z., Weili, L., Benhai, L., Jiaofen, Q. & Cheng, L. Vibration isolation effects of
barriers filled with ceramsite and Sand: Full-scale model test and numerical inves-
tigation. Construction and Building Materials 341, 127789. issn: 0950-0618. https:
//www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0950061822014635 (2022).
52.
Ma, M., Li, M., Qu, X. & Zhang, H. Effect of passing metro trains on uncertainty of
vibration source intensity: monitoring tests. Measurement 193, 110992. issn: 0263-
2241. https : / / www . sciencedirect . com / science / article / pii / S0263224122002652
(2022).
53.
Mouzakis, C., Vogiatzis, K. & Zafiropoulou, V. Assessing subway network ground
borne noise and vibration using transfer function from tunnel wall to soil surface mea-
sured by muck train operation. Science of The Total Environment 650, 2888–2896.
issn: 0048-9697. https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0048969718339123
(2019).
54.
Referencelaboratoriet. Ubestemthed ved støjmålinger. Orientering nr. 16 fra miljøstyrelsens
referencelaboratorium for støjmålinger. https://referencelaboratoriet.dk/wp-content/
uploads/2018/02/reflab_Orientering_16.pdf (1991).
55.
Referencelaboratoriet. Lavfrekvent støj, infralyd og vibrationer i eksternt miljø. Ori-
entering nr. 9 fra miljøstyrelsens referencelaboratorium for støjmålinger (1997).
Post-construction subway noise analysis of sources and transmission paths
83
==PAGE:93==
84
Post-construction subway noise analysis of sources and transmission paths
==PAGE:94==
A
Appendix
A.1
Reports
A.1.1
Olufsvej(1) Ground floor - 2100 København Ø
Figure A.1: Microphone positions for Olufsvej (1). Orange text is horizontal distance,
green text is vertical distance.
Post-construction subway noise analysis of sources and transmission paths
85
==PAGE:95==
Figure A.2: Accelerometer positions for Olufsvej (1). The room is squished together, to
show all surfaces. New surfaces/areas are marked by the ”−· ·−” lines
86
Post-construction subway noise analysis of sources and transmission paths
==PAGE:96==
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
Passage number
25
30
35
40
45
50
Sound pressure Level, LpA,max,FAST[dB]
Position change
Position change
Position change
Position change
Included
Not included
Figure A.3: Overview of average LpA,max,FAST between 3 microphones for all passages. Passages not validated to be in the analysis are marked
with red.
Post-construction subway noise analysis of sources and transmission paths
87
==PAGE:97==
125
160
200
1/3-Octave Band Center Frequency [Hz]
50
55
60
65
70
75
80
85
90
95
Vibration Acceleration Level, La,max,FAST [dB]
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
Sound pressure Level, LpA,max,FAST[dB]
Floor
Ceiling
Wall 1
Wall 2
Wall 3
Wall 4
LpA,max,FAST
(a) Maximum levels
125
160
200
1/3-Octave Band Center Frequency [Hz]
50
55
60
65
70
75
80
85
90
95
Vibration Acceleration Level, La,max,FAST [dB]
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
Sound pressure Level, LpA,max,FAST[dB]
Floor
Ceiling
Wall 1
Wall 2
Wall 3
Wall 4
LpA,max,FAST
(b) Average maximum levels
Figure A.4: Maximum and average maximum vibration acceleration level La [dB re
1µm/s2],⃝, and A-weighted sound pressure level LpA,max,FAST [dB] (△) between all
measured passages for the three impacted bands for valid passages.
Y-axis scaling is
set similarly to similar plots in the appendix.
Figure A.5: Map from [38]. The dotted gray lines approximate the locations of the
subway tunnels.
88
Post-construction subway noise analysis of sources and transmission paths
==PAGE:98==
A.1.2
Olufsvej(2) Ground floor - 2100 København Ø
Figure A.6: Microphone positions for Olufsvej (2). Orange text is horizontal distance,
green text is vertical distance.
Post-construction subway noise analysis of sources and transmission paths
89
==PAGE:99==
Figure A.7: Accelerometer positions for Olufsvej (2). The room is squished together, to
show all surfaces. New surfaces/areas are marked by the ”−· ·−” lines
90
Post-construction subway noise analysis of sources and transmission paths
==PAGE:100==
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
Passage number
25
30
35
40
45
50
55
Sound pressure Level, LpA,max,FAST[dB]
Position change
Position change
Position change
Position change
Included
Not included
Figure A.8: Overview of average LpA,max,FAST between 3 microphones for all passages. Passages not validated to be in the analysis are marked
with red.
Post-construction subway noise analysis of sources and transmission paths
91
==PAGE:101==
125
160
200
1/3-Octave Band Center Frequency [Hz]
50
55
60
65
70
75
80
85
90
95
Vibration Acceleration Level, La,max,FAST [dB]
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
Sound pressure Level, LpA,max,FAST[dB]
Floor
Ceiling
Wall 1
Wall 2
Wall 3
Wall 4
LpA,max,FAST
(a) Maximum levels
125
160
200
1/3-Octave Band Center Frequency [Hz]
50
55
60
65
70
75
80
85
90
95
Vibration Acceleration Level, La,max,FAST [dB]
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
Sound pressure Level, LpA,max,FAST[dB]
Floor
Ceiling
Wall 1
Wall 2
Wall 3
Wall 4
LpA,max,FAST
(b) Average maximum levels
Figure A.9: Maximum and average maximum vibration acceleration level La [dB re
1µm/s2],⃝, and A-weighted sound pressure level LpA,max,FAST [dB] (△) between all
measured passages for the three impacted bands for valid passages.
Y-axis scaling is
set similarly to similar plots in the appendix.
Figure A.10: Map from [38]. The dotted gray lines approximate the locations of the
subway tunnels.
92
Post-construction subway noise analysis of sources and transmission paths
==PAGE:102==
A.1.3
Kertemindegade, 2nd floor - 2100 København Ø
Figure A.11: Microphone positions for Kertemindegade. Orange text is horizontal dis-
tance, green text is vertical distance.
Post-construction subway noise analysis of sources and transmission paths
93
==PAGE:103==
Figure A.12: Accelerometer positions for Kertemindegade. The room is squished to-
gether, to show all surfaces. New surfaces/areas are marked by the ”−· ·−” lines
94
Post-construction subway noise analysis of sources and transmission paths
==PAGE:104==
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
Passage number
15
20
25
30
35
40
Sound pressure Level, LpA,max,FAST[dB]
Position change
Position change
Included
Not included
Figure A.13: Overview of average LpA,max,FAST between 3 microphones for all passages. Passages not validated to be in the analysis are
marked with red.
Post-construction subway noise analysis of sources and transmission paths
95
==PAGE:105==
160
200
250
1/3-Octave Band Center Frequency [Hz]
50
55
60
65
70
75
80
85
90
95
Vibration Acceleration Level, La,max,FAST [dB]
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
Sound pressure Level, LpA,max,FAST[dB]
Floor
Ceiling
Wall 1
Wall 2
Wall 3
Wall 4
LpA,max,FAST
(a) Maximum levels
160
200
250
1/3-Octave Band Center Frequency [Hz]
50
55
60
65
70
75
80
85
90
95
Vibration Acceleration Level, La,max,FAST [dB]
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
Sound pressure Level, LpA,max,FAST[dB]
Floor
Ceiling
Wall 1
Wall 2
Wall 3
Wall 4
LpA,max,FAST
(b) Average maximum levels
Figure A.14: Maximum and average maximum vibration acceleration level La [dB re
1µm/s2],⃝, and A-weighted sound pressure level LpA,max,FAST [dB] (△) between all mea-
sured passages for the three impacted bands for valid passages. Y-axis scaling is set simi-
larly to similar plots in the appendix.
Figure A.15: Map from [38]. The dotted gray lines approximate the locations of the
subway tunnels.
96
Post-construction subway noise analysis of sources and transmission paths
==PAGE:106==
Post-construction subway noise analysis of sources and transmission paths
97
==PAGE:107==
A.1.4
Carit Etlars Vej(1), ground floor - 1814 Frederiksberg
Figure A.16: Microphone positions for Carit Etlars Vej(1). Orange text is horizontal
distance, green text is vertical distance.
98
Post-construction subway noise analysis of sources and transmission paths
==PAGE:108==
Figure A.17: Accelerometer positions for Carit Etlars Vej(1). The room is squished
together, to show all surfaces. New surfaces/areas are marked by the ”−· ·−” lines
Post-construction subway noise analysis of sources and transmission paths
99
==PAGE:109==
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
Passage number
20
25
30
35
40
Sound pressure Level, LpA,max,FAST[dB]
Position change
Position change
Position change
Included
Not included
Figure A.18: Overview of average LpA,max,FAST between 3 microphones for all passages. Passages not validated to be in the analysis are
marked with red.
100
Post-construction subway noise analysis of sources and transmission paths
==PAGE:110==
160
200
250
1/3-Octave Band Center Frequency [Hz]
50
55
60
65
70
75
80
85
90
95
Vibration Acceleration Level, La,max,FAST [dB]
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
Sound pressure Level, LpA,max,FAST[dB]
Floor
Ceiling
Wall 1
Wall 2
Wall 3
Wall 4
LpA,max,FAST
(a) Maximum levels
160
200
250
1/3-Octave Band Center Frequency [Hz]
50
55
60
65
70
75
80
85
90
95
Vibration Acceleration Level, La,max,FAST [dB]
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
Sound pressure Level, LpA,max,FAST[dB]
Floor
Ceiling
Wall 1
Wall 2
Wall 3
Wall 4
LpA,max,FAST
(b) Average maximum levels
Figure A.19: Maximum and average maximum vibration acceleration level La [dB re
1µm/s2],⃝, and A-weighted sound pressure level LpA,max,FAST [dB] (△) between all mea-
sured passages for the three impacted bands for valid passages. Y-axis scaling is set simi-
larly to similar plots in the appendix.
Post-construction subway noise analysis of sources and transmission paths
101
==PAGE:111==
Figure A.20: Map from [38]. The dotted gray lines approximate the locations of the
subway tunnels.
102
Post-construction subway noise analysis of sources and transmission paths
==PAGE:112==
A.1.5
Holger Danskes Vej, ground floor - 2000 Frederiksberg
Figure A.21: Microphone positions for Holger Danskes Vej. Orange text is horizontal
distance, green text is vertical distance.
Post-construction subway noise analysis of sources and transmission paths
103
==PAGE:113==
Figure A.22: Accelerometer positions for Holger Danskes Vej. The room is squished
together, to show all surfaces. New surfaces/areas are marked by the ”−· ·−” lines
104
Post-construction subway noise analysis of sources and transmission paths
==PAGE:114==
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 1011121314151617181920212223242526272829303132333435363738394041424344454647
Passage number
30
35
40
45
50
Sound pressure Level, LpA,max,FAST[dB]
Position change
Position change
Included
Not included
Figure A.23: Overview of average LpA,max,FAST between 3 microphones for all passages. Passages not validated to be in the analysis are
marked with red.
Post-construction subway noise analysis of sources and transmission paths
105
==PAGE:115==
125
160
200
250
1/3-Octave Band Center Frequency [Hz]
50
55
60
65
70
75
80
85
90
95
Vibration Acceleration Level, La,max,FAST [dB]
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
Sound pressure Level, LpA,max,FAST[dB]
Floor
Ceiling
Wall 1
Wall 2
Wall 3
Wall 4
LpA,max,FAST
(a) Maximum levels
125
160
200
250
1/3-Octave Band Center Frequency [Hz]
50
55
60
65
70
75
80
85
90
95
Vibration Acceleration Level, La,max,FAST [dB]
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
Sound pressure Level, LpA,max,FAST[dB]
Floor
Ceiling
Wall 1
Wall 2
Wall 3
Wall 4
LpA,max,FAST
(b) Average maximum levels
Figure A.24: Maximum and average maximum vibration acceleration level La [dB re
1µm/s2],⃝, and A-weighted sound pressure level LpA,max,FAST [dB] (△) between all mea-
sured passages for the three impacted bands for valid passages. Y-axis scaling is set simi-
larly to similar plots in the appendix.
Figure A.25: Map from [38]. The dotted gray lines approximate the locations of the
subway tunnels.
106
Post-construction subway noise analysis of sources and transmission paths
==PAGE:116==
A.1.6
Tåsingegade(1), ground floor - 2100 København Ø
Figure A.26: Microphone positions for Tåsingegade (1). Orange text is horizontal dis-
tance, green text is vertical distance.
Post-construction subway noise analysis of sources and transmission paths
107
==PAGE:117==
Figure A.27: Accelerometer positions for Tåsingegade (1). The room is squished to-
gether, to show all surfaces. New surfaces/areas are marked by the ”−· ·−” lines
108
Post-construction subway noise analysis of sources and transmission paths
==PAGE:118==
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 1011121314151617181920212223242526272829303132333435363738394041424344454647
Passage number
20
25
30
35
40
45
Sound pressure Level, LpA,max,FAST[dB]
Position change
Position change
Position change
Included
Not included
Figure A.28: Overview of average LpA,max,FAST between 3 microphones for all passages. Passages not validated to be in the analysis are
marked with red.
Post-construction subway noise analysis of sources and transmission paths
109
==PAGE:119==
160
200
250
1/3-Octave Band Center Frequency [Hz]
50
55
60
65
70
75
80
85
90
95
Vibration Acceleration Level, La,max,FAST [dB]
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
Sound pressure Level, LpA,max,FAST[dB]
Floor
Ceiling
Wall 1
Wall 2
Wall 3
Wall 4
LpA,max,FAST
(a) Maximum levels
160
200
250
1/3-Octave Band Center Frequency [Hz]
50
55
60
65
70
75
80
85
90
95
Vibration Acceleration Level, La,max,FAST [dB]
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
Sound pressure Level, LpA,max,FAST[dB]
Floor
Ceiling
Wall 1
Wall 2
Wall 3
Wall 4
LpA,max,FAST
(b) Average maximum levels
Figure A.29: Maximum and average maximum vibration acceleration level La [dB re
1µm/s2],⃝, and A-weighted sound pressure level LpA,max,FAST [dB] (△) between all mea-
sured passages for the three impacted bands for valid passages. Y-axis scaling is set simi-
larly to similar plots in the appendix.
Figure A.30: Map from [38]. The dotted gray lines approximate the locations of the
subway tunnels.
110
Post-construction subway noise analysis of sources and transmission paths
==PAGE:120==
A.1.7
Tåsingegade(2), ground floor - 2100 København Ø
Figure A.31: Microphone positions for Tåsingegade (2). Orange text is horizontal dis-
tance, green text is vertical distance.
Post-construction subway noise analysis of sources and transmission paths
111
==PAGE:121==
Figure A.32: Accelerometer positions for Tåsingegade (2). The room is squished to-
gether, to show all surfaces. New surfaces/areas are marked by the ”−· ·−” lines
112
Post-construction subway noise analysis of sources and transmission paths
==PAGE:122==
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
Passage number
20
25
30
35
40
Sound pressure Level, LpA,max,FAST[dB]
Position change
Position change
Included
Not included
Figure A.33: Overview of average LpA,max,FAST between 3 microphones for all passages. Passages not validated to be in the analysis are
marked with red.
Post-construction subway noise analysis of sources and transmission paths
113
==PAGE:123==
160
200
250
1/3-Octave Band Center Frequency [Hz]
50
55
60
65
70
75
80
85
90
95
Vibration Acceleration Level, La,max,FAST [dB]
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
Sound pressure Level, LpA,max,FAST[dB]
Floor
Ceiling
Wall 1
Wall 2
Wall 3
Wall 4
LpA,max,FAST
(a) Maximum levels
160
200
250
1/3-Octave Band Center Frequency [Hz]
50
55
60
65
70
75
80
85
90
95
Vibration Acceleration Level, La,max,FAST [dB]
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
Sound pressure Level, LpA,max,FAST[dB]
Floor
Ceiling
Wall 1
Wall 2
Wall 3
Wall 4
LpA,max,FAST
(b) Average maximum levels
Figure A.34: Maximum and average maximum vibration acceleration level La [dB re
1µm/s2],⃝, and A-weighted sound pressure level LpA,max,FAST [dB] (△) between all mea-
sured passages for the three impacted bands for valid passages. Y-axis scaling is set simi-
larly to similar plots in the appendix.
Figure A.35: Map from [38]. The dotted gray lines approximate the locations of the
subway tunnels.
114
Post-construction subway noise analysis of sources and transmission paths
==PAGE:124==
A.1.8
Nørrebrogade, 3rd floor - 2100 København Ø
Figure A.36: Microphone positions for Nørrebrogade. Orange text is horizontal distance,
green text is vertical distance.
Post-construction subway noise analysis of sources and transmission paths
115
==PAGE:125==
Figure A.37: Accelerometer positions for Nørrebrogade. The room is squished together,
to show all surfaces. New surfaces/areas are marked by the ”−· ·−” lines
116
Post-construction subway noise analysis of sources and transmission paths
==PAGE:126==
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
Passage number
25
30
35
40
45
50
Sound pressure Level, LpA,max,FAST[dB]
Position change
Position change
Included
Not included
Figure A.38: Overview of average LpA,max,FAST between 3 microphones for all passages. Passages not validated to be in the analysis are
marked with red.
Post-construction subway noise analysis of sources and transmission paths
117
==PAGE:127==
125
160
200
1/3-Octave Band Center Frequency [Hz]
50
55
60
65
70
75
80
85
90
95
Vibration Acceleration Level, La,max,FAST [dB]
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
Sound pressure Level, LpA,max,FAST[dB]
Floor
Ceiling
Wall 1
Wall 2
Wall 3
Wall 4
LpA,max,FAST
(a) Maximum levels
125
160
200
1/3-Octave Band Center Frequency [Hz]
50
55
60
65
70
75
80
85
90
95
Vibration Acceleration Level, La,max,FAST [dB]
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
Sound pressure Level, LpA,max,FAST[dB]
Floor
Ceiling
Wall 1
Wall 2
Wall 3
Wall 4
LpA,max,FAST
(b) Average maximum levels
Figure A.39: Maximum and average maximum vibration acceleration level La [dB re
1µm/s2],⃝, and A-weighted sound pressure level LpA,max,FAST [dB] (△) between all mea-
sured passages for the three impacted bands for valid passages. Y-axis scaling is set simi-
larly to similar plots in the appendix.
Figure A.40: Map from [38]. The dotted gray lines approximate the locations of the
subway tunnels.
118
Post-construction subway noise analysis of sources and transmission paths
==PAGE:128==
A.1.9
Carit Etlars Vej(2,1), ground floor - 1814 Frederiksberg
Figure A.41: Microphone positions for Carit Etlars Vej(2,1). Orange text is horizontal
distance, green text is vertical distance.
Post-construction subway noise analysis of sources and transmission paths
119
==PAGE:129==
Figure A.42: Accelerometer positions for Carit Etlars Vej(2,1). The room is squished
together, to show all surfaces. New surfaces/areas are marked by the ”−· ·−” lines
120
Post-construction subway noise analysis of sources and transmission paths
==PAGE:130==
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
Passage number
20
25
30
35
40
45
Sound pressure Level, LpA,max,FAST[dB]
Position change
Position change
Position change
Included
Not included
Figure A.43: Overview of average LpA,max,FAST between 3 microphones for all passages. Passages not validated to be in the analysis are
marked with red.
Post-construction subway noise analysis of sources and transmission paths
121
==PAGE:131==
125
160
200
1/3-Octave Band Center Frequency [Hz]
50
55
60
65
70
75
80
85
90
95
Vibration Acceleration Level, La,max,FAST [dB]
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
Sound pressure Level, LpA,max,FAST[dB]
Floor
Ceiling
Wall 1
Wall 2
Wall 3
Wall 4
LpA,max,FAST
(a) Maximum levels
125
160
200
1/3-Octave Band Center Frequency [Hz]
50
55
60
65
70
75
80
85
90
95
Vibration Acceleration Level, La,max,FAST [dB]
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
Sound pressure Level, LpA,max,FAST[dB]
Floor
Ceiling
Wall 1
Wall 2
Wall 3
Wall 4
LpA,max,FAST
(b) Average maximum levels
Figure A.44: Maximum and average maximum vibration acceleration level La [dB re
1µm/s2],⃝, and A-weighted sound pressure level LpA,max,FAST [dB] (△) between all mea-
sured passages for the three impacted bands for valid passages. Y-axis scaling is set simi-
larly to similar plots in the appendix.
122
Post-construction subway noise analysis of sources and transmission paths
==PAGE:132==
Figure A.45: Map from [38]. The dotted gray lines approximate the locations of the
subway tunnels.
Post-construction subway noise analysis of sources and transmission paths
123
==PAGE:133==
A.1.10
Carit Etlars Vej(2,2), 2nd floor - 1814 Frederiksberg
Figure A.46: Microphone positions for Carit Etlars Vej(2,2). Orange text is horizontal
distance, green text is vertical distance.
124
Post-construction subway noise analysis of sources and transmission paths
==PAGE:134==
Figure A.47: Accelerometer positions for Carit Etlars Vej(2,2). The room is squished
together, to show all surfaces. New surfaces/areas are marked by the ”−· ·−” lines
Post-construction subway noise analysis of sources and transmission paths
125
==PAGE:135==
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
Passage number
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
Sound pressure Level, LpA,max,FAST[dB]
Position change
Position change
Included
Not included
Figure A.48: Overview of average LpA,max,FAST between 3 microphones for all passages. Passages not validated to be in the analysis are
marked with red.
126
Post-construction subway noise analysis of sources and transmission paths
==PAGE:136==
125
160
200
1/3-Octave Band Center Frequency [Hz]
50
55
60
65
70
75
80
85
90
95
Vibration Acceleration Level, La,max,FAST [dB]
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
Sound pressure Level, LpA,max,FAST[dB]
Floor
Ceiling
Wall 1
Wall 2
Wall 3
Wall 4
LpA,max,FAST
(a) Maximum levels
125
160
200
1/3-Octave Band Center Frequency [Hz]
50
55
60
65
70
75
80
85
90
95
Vibration Acceleration Level, La,max,FAST [dB]
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
Sound pressure Level, LpA,max,FAST[dB]
Floor
Ceiling
Wall 1
Wall 2
Wall 3
Wall 4
LpA,max,FAST
(b) Average maximum levels
Figure A.49: Maximum and average maximum vibration acceleration level La [dB re
1µm/s2],⃝, and A-weighted sound pressure level LpA,max,FAST [dB] (△) between all mea-
sured passages for the three impacted bands for valid passages. Y-axis scaling is set simi-
larly to similar plots in the appendix.
Post-construction subway noise analysis of sources and transmission paths
127
==PAGE:137==
Figure A.50: Map from [38]. The dotted gray lines approximate the locations of the
subway tunnels.
128
Post-construction subway noise analysis of sources and transmission paths
==PAGE:138==
A.2
Dewesoft Setup
The setup for the measurements in Dewesoft is briefly described in this section. Only the
setup is described, and the displays are up to the user.
The modules required to run the measurements in Dewesoft are:
• Math module
• Modal Test module
• Octave analysis module
• Sound level meter module
A.2.1
Setting up the math module
The following calculations are used in the math module:
• Octave analysis of microphones and accelerometers. The setup for the analysis are:
– Calculation: True Octave (ANSI, IEC)
– Calculation type: Block history (33,333ms)
– Analysis type: 1/3
– Frequency weighting: A for microphones, Z for accelerometers
– Averaging type: Exponential, 0,125s
– Lower band frequency: 50Hz, skip filter ringing
• Convert the pressure values from microphones to dB using 20 log10
(
p
20µPa
)
.
• Convert the acceleration values from accelerometers to dB using 20 log10
(
p
1µm/s2
)
.
• Use the Basic Statistics to find the maximum, time-based, and single value for each
input.
• Extract the maximum value from each band by writing the input followed by xxx,
where xxx denotes the specific frequency band.
A.2.2
Setting up the Modal Test module
• Use the test method ”ODS”
• In the Excitation section, choose the accelerometers and a hanning window with
overlap 75%.
• In the Response section, insert the microphones.
• For the FRF, choose resolution 1Hz and averaging type Linear.
• For the output channels, only the coherence is relevant. Do not use the multiple
coherence while measuring, and only enable it when zooming in on smaller regions,
as the calculations are extensive.
Post-construction subway noise analysis of sources and transmission paths
129
==PAGE:139==
A.2.3
Setting up the sound level module
• For the channels, select your microphones
• Frequency weighting: A
• Time weighting: F (fast)
• Output time channels: Lp (SPL)
• Output calculated channels: Overall values
130
Post-construction subway noise analysis of sources and transmission paths
==PAGE:140==
Post-construction subway noise analysis of sources and transmission paths
131
==PAGE:141==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Elektrovej, building 352
2800 Kongens Lyngby
Phone +45 4525 3949
www.electro.dtu.dk
