==PAGE:1==
Analysis of multi­year household travel diary
data using dynamic topic models
Master Thesis
DTU Technology, Management and Economics
Transport Division
==PAGE:2==
Analysis of multi­year household travel diary data using dynamic topic models
Master Thesis
June, 2023
By
Zsófia Könyves
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU Technology, Management and Economics, Bygningstorvet, Building
116, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.man.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over five months at the Section for Transport Division,
Department of Technology, Management and Economics, at the Technical University of
Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment for the degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc
Eng.
Zsófia Könyves ­ s210719
22. June 2023
ii
Analysis of multi­year household travel diary data using dynamic topic models
==PAGE:4==
Acknowledgements
I would like to express my gratitude to Rico Krueger, Assistant Professor at DTU, and
Jeppe Rich, Professor and Head of Section at DTU, for their guidance and support through­
out the research process. Their expertise and valuable insights have greatly contributed
to the successful completion of this thesis.
Analysis of multi­year household travel diary data using dynamic topic models
iii
==PAGE:5==
Abbreviations
LDA
Latent Dirichlet Allocation
TU
Transportvane­Undersøgelsen/Danish National Travel Survey
DTM
Dynamic Topic Modeling
iv
Analysis of multi­year household travel diary data using dynamic topic models
==PAGE:6==
Abstract
Understanding behavior in a dynamic context is essential for predicting, intervening, and
making informed decisions. Travel behavior analysis helps to understand people’s travel
habits and the factors that influence their decisions. While previous studies have exam­
ined travel behavior based on specific transport choices, grouping individuals based on
multiple characteristics could provide a more comprehensive understanding. This work
explores the use of topic modeling, a machine learning tool to aggregate high dimen­
sional data, and identify underlying patterns by finding topics ”topics” in travel behavior
using multiyear household travel diary data from Denmark.
This study is exploratory, it aims to determine whether topic modeling can give new in­
sights to travel behavior analysis. Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA) and dynamic topic
modeling (DTM), a static and a dynamic model, are tested. While LDA assumes that the
topics are constant across all times, DTM consider the ”evolution of topics over time”.
The study’s findings demonstrate that the tested topic modeling methods can effectively
analyze multiyear household travel diary data and provide meaningful topics that can
contribute to further research. Both of LDA and DTM resulted in meaningful topics that
consist of socioeconomic and travel attributes. Comparing the two models, LDA offers
more interpretable topics, while DTM exhibits greater coherence and robustness.
Analysis of multi­year household travel diary data using dynamic topic models
v
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Abbreviations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
v
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Background and motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Objectives and research questions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Scope and Limitations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Literature Review
4
2.1
Analysing dynamic behaviour . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2
National travel surveys . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.3
Travel behavior analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
3
Methodology
8
3.1
Latent Dirichlet Allocation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3.2
Dynamic topic modeling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.3
Model selection and evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
4
Data Collection and Preparation
15
4.1
Data sources and description . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
4.2
Data pre­processing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
5
Results and findings
17
5.1
Overview of the results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
6
Discussion
30
6.1
Interpretation of the results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
6.2
Future research . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
6.3
Conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
Bibliography
34
vi
Analysis of multi­year household travel diary data using dynamic topic models
==PAGE:8==
A Appendix
38
A.1 Vocabulary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38
A.2 LDA model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 44
A.3 LDA topics for different number of topics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
A.4 PyLDAvis visualization for the whole document and topics 2­7 . . . . . . . . 52
A.5 LDA topics with different random state values . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 60
A.6 DTM model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 62
A.7 DTM Intertopic Distance Maps for different time slices . . . . . . . . . . . . 62
Analysis of multi­year household travel diary data using dynamic topic models
vii
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
1.1
Background and motivation
Understanding behavior in a dynamic context refers to the ability to comprehend how indi­
viduals or systems behave and interact with their environment over time, considering the
evolving circumstances and changing conditions. It allows to make accurate predictions,
design effective interventions, and make policies based on informed decisions (Borysov
and Rich 2021). Travel behavior analysis is an important focus of studies that helps to un­
derstand people’s travel habitat and the factors that influence their decisions. There have
been several studies conducted focusing on the changing patterns of travel behavior.
A research have shown that people who cycle share certain characteristics, like pref­
erence for shorter travel distances, a desire for convenient and safe cycling infrastruc­
ture, and a willingness to endure some discomfort or inconvenience in exchange for the
health and environmental benefits of cycling (Buehler and Pucher 2012). This example
demonstrates that by identifying these characteristics, policies and infrastructure can be
developed that are better suited for the needs of cyclists.
However, grouping people based on the choice of transport may not give a full picture of
someone’s travel behaviour, therefore, it could be beneficial to find groups among people
based on more than one characteristics. A possible tool for finding underlying patterns
that can also aggregate high dimensional data could be topic modeling which is a widely
used machine learning tool for finding ”topics” in discrete data (H. U. Asuncion, A. U.
Asuncion, and Taylor 2010).
By creating travel diaries of households and applying topic modeling on the data, a more
comprehensive understanding of the activities and preferences of travelers can be pro­
vided by identifying common themes and patterns. Secondly, the factors that influence
travel behavior can be uncovered, like trip purpose or mode of transportation. Finally,
new groups of people can be identified with similar transport choices and preferences
that have not been recognized before.
Using dynamic topic models have the advantage of considering the time element, in other
words, the changes in topics over time (Blei and Lafferty 2006). By applying it to house­
Analysis of multi­year household travel diary data using dynamic topic models
1
==PAGE:10==
hold’s travel data and comparing the results to the Latent Dirichlet Allocation’s (LDA), it
will be possible to see whether the travel behavior of people changed over the years.
1.2
Objectives and research questions
The aim of this study is to test whether topic models could provide a more comprehensive
understanding of household travel behavior by using dynamic topic models and LDA.
In the existing literature, there are no studies that have used topic modeling on cross­
sectional panel travel data before. Therefore, this study is exploratory, it aims to test a
new method to determine whether topic modeling can give new insights to travel behavior
analysis. Furthermore, most works focus on a single attribute e.g. car ownership and
analyse it across different groups. By analyzing multiyear travel diary data, trends and
patterns in household travel behavior can be uncovered, and the factors that influence
travel decisions can be identified, like trip purpose, travel mode, and demographic char­
acteristics of the household members. The insights gained from this analysis could be
useful for the development of transportation policies and services so they better meet the
needs of households and promote sustainable travel behavior. Overall, this study seeks
to answer the question: how can dynamic topic models and LDA be used to analyze mul­
tiyear household travel diary data, and what insights can be gained into household travel
behavior including patterns, trends and different topics?
The outline of the thesis consists of the followings. Section 2 covers the overview of
studies focusing on travel behavior changes. Section 3 is the methodology. Section 4
covers the details the data preprocessing and provides information about the data itself.
In Section 5 the results of the topic models are presented, and they are discussed in
Section 6 while also touching upon the limitations. Furthermore, the conclusion of the
thesis is presented.
1.3
Scope and Limitations
The data used for the analysis comes from the Danish National Travel Survey (TU, ver­
sion: TU0621v1) covering the period from May 2006 to December 2021. It is an interview
survey whose purpose is to map the travel behavior of the Danish population. The survey
tries to clarify the following five central questions: how much, how, where, when, and why
people travel? It is based on an interview with one person covering questions of transport
and activities of the household during one day.
2
Analysis of multi­year household travel diary data using dynamic topic models
==PAGE:11==
This study also has limitations, that are the followings:
Availability of the data: the dataset does not have any information about travel behavior
post­pandemic, therefore, it may not represents the travel patterns 100% accurately since
it is known that the COVID­19 regulations greatly affected people’s lives (Rafiq et al. 2022;
Wu and Lau 2022).
Interpretability of results: The topics resulting from the topic modeling may not be easily
interpretable. Furthermore, the topic labels are assigned by humans, therefore, it can be
biased.
Human behavior complexity: Human behavior is complex, and travel decisions are no
exceptions. The model may not capture all the variables and factors that influence travel
behavior.
Computational complexity: Due the computational complexity of dynamic topic models,
LDA and the time constraint, not all the possible options are tested and this may limit the
speed and efficiency of the analysis.
Analysis of multi­year household travel diary data using dynamic topic models
3
==PAGE:12==
2
Literature Review
2.1
Analysing dynamic behaviour
Panel methods and pseudo­panel methods are the most common ways to analyse dy­
namic behavior (Kitamura 1990; Deaton 1985). Panel data is also known as longitudinal
data, refers to the repeated observation that is collected over time from multiple units or
individuals. Panel data analysis is a statistical method that is used to investigate both
cross­sectional and time­series data (Frees et al. 2004). Panel data can be particularly
useful due its characteristics that it allows researchers to study changes over time within
a population while accounting for individual­level factors that may influence the outcome.
However, it also comes with challenges: the respondents can get bored of the tasks re­
lated to the survey and the quality of their responses drops (Borysov and Rich 2021). In­
dividuals with certain characteristics are more likely to stop participating than others, and
this can cause bias in the survey results. Due all these reasons collecting longitudinal
data is expensive and there is also a limitation on the number of recurring respondents.
The will to overcome the challenges around the collection of longitudinal data led to in­
creased attraction towards pseudo­panel methods that come from repeated cross­sectional
data (Borysov and Rich 2021). Pseudo panels involve aggregating data into cohorts, as­
suming representative individuals within each cohort. However, creating cohorts requires
a trade­off between the number of individuals within each cohort and the number of co­
horts. Pseudo panels have been used in economic and transportation studies. Despite
overcoming the difficulties around data collection, these methods also have disadvan­
tages. The quality of these types of data is less reliable since it involves aggregation
during the creation of cohorts or representative individuals, unlike longitudinal data that
consist of different, distinguishable parts or elements.
2.2
National travel surveys
National Travel Surveys are a unique data source that offer several advantages (Carrone,
Monteiro, and Rich 2021). First of all, they provide a way to access panel data with fraction
of the original cost that retains all the attributes of a regular cross­sectional travel survey.
This is particularly advantageous as panel data allows for the examination of individual­
4
Analysis of multi­year household travel diary data using dynamic topic models
==PAGE:13==
level changes in travel behavior over time.
Secondly, due the irregularly spaced observations, they are also representative (Carrone,
Monteiro, and Rich 2021). The panel composition is based on randomly selected individu­
als from the population, ensuring that the panel data remains representative of the broader
population.
Moreover, the irregular spacing of panel observations indirectly introduces heterogeneity
into the data (Carrone, Monteiro, and Rich 2021). The time intervals between consecutive
panel observations can vary considerably, capturing different periods. This heterogeneity
adds richness to the dataset and enables researchers to explore the temporal dynamics
of travel choices and preferences.
Finally, the respondents are less likely to experience survey exhaustion or reduced mo­
tivation to participate due to the longer time intervals between survey waves (Carrone,
Monteiro, and Rich 2021). This enhances the quality and reliability of the data obtained
from the panel participants.
2.3
Travel behavior analysis
Travel behavior is an essential aspect of human life that influences people’s daily activities
and impacts the environment, economy, and society. The study of travel behavior exam­
ines the choices people make about how to travel, why they travel, and when they travel.
Understanding travel behavior is critical for developing effective transportation policies,
reducing traffic congestion, promoting sustainable transportation options, and improving
the overall quality of life.
Studying the dynamics of behavioral preferences in any field including transportation has
implications for both models and predictions, as well as policy design and its intended
targets (Borysov and Rich 2021). By research in this area different groups of people can
be identified who may be more likely to change their behavior, and this can highlight po­
tential opportunities for intervention. Additionally, it can identify life­course periods where
such changes may be more challenging to achieve.
It is trivial that people’s preferences and everyday practices change over time, and trans­
portation choices are not different (Borysov and Rich 2021). There are countless studies
that have a focus on different factors that influences travel choices. The vast majority
of studies analyse the reasons why car ownership changes because this is one of the
Analysis of multi­year household travel diary data using dynamic topic models
5
==PAGE:14==
biggest factor in households’ travel habits (Nolan 2010). By gaining understanding about
this topic, actions can be made to promote sustainable alternatives for transportation.
According to a study where they analysed longitudinal data, the biggest factor on car
ownership is the income level and car ownership history (Nolan 2010). They have also
found correlation with the household size, in particular families with smaller children are
more likely to have a car. When taking household that were present in all the analysed
periods, they have found the 14% never owned a car while when treating the data as
cross­sectional this was 22%. The most probable reason behind this is that approximately
20% of the household go from not owning a car to having one or the opposite. It was also
found that people are likely to buy a first vehicle if they have not had before when there is
a change in the household composition e.g. birth of a child (Khan and Habib 2021). On
the other hand, households are highly likely to end temporary vehicle ownership states
when the household composition changes negatively e.g. someone’s death or members’
move­out. They have also found that people living in mix land use neighborhoods are
likely to stay car­free longer suggesting that actions taken to encourage people to not to
travel by car can be effective.
Similar conclusion were made in other studies as well: people living in higher­density,
mixed­use neighborhoods, (so called traditional, neo­traditional, or new urban areas),
prefer walking more and rely less on driving compared to those residing in lower­density,
single­use residential (suburban) areas (Mokhtarian and Cao 2008; Cervero and Duncan
2003; Crane and Crepeau 1998; Frank et al. 2006).
Other studies have focused on the differences in travel behavior among the generations.
It was found in a study that there are three main reasons behind the dissimilarities be­
tween Generation X and Y, namely, demographic, periodic and cohort related factors by
analysing longitudinal data from Germany (Krueger, Rashidi, and Vij 2020).
Overall, it can be concluded that changes in someone’s socio­economic and family sta­
tus will most likely lead to to different transport choices. In other words, marriage, birth
and new housing situations or car ownership are all factors that have an affect on some­
one’s travel habits (De Haas et al. 2018; Müggenburg, Busch­Geertsema, and Lanzendorf
2015). All the above mentioned studies focus on the individuals, however, it may not be
immediately apparent how variations in such alterations are spread among diverse pop­
ulations (Borysov and Rich 2021). In these works, typically, the issue is addressed by
examining the impact of strategic decisions and external socio­economic factors on travel
6
Analysis of multi­year household travel diary data using dynamic topic models
==PAGE:15==
habits.
Analysis of multi­year household travel diary data using dynamic topic models
7
==PAGE:16==
3
Methodology
3.1
Latent Dirichlet Allocation
LDA is a flexible generative probabilistic model that can be seen as a technique for dimen­
sionality reduction of discrete data (Blei, Ng, and Jordan 2003). There are three stages of
the data structure in LDA: document, topic and word (unit of discrete data). A document
refers to a piece of text or a data sample that we aim to analyze using LDA e.g. article,
online review etc. (Vayansky and Kumar 2020). In the context of LDA, a document is
treated as a collection of words or tokens (Blei, Ng, and Jordan 2003). A topic represents
a theme or a concept that captures the underlying meaning or content of a set of words.
In LDA, each document is assumed to be generated from a mixture of topics, and each
word in the document is associated with one particular topic. Topics are represented as
probability distributions over words, indicating the likelihood of each word occurring in a
given topic. A word represents the unit of discrete data present in the documents. In LDA,
words are the basic building blocks that are used to construct documents. Each word in a
document is assumed to be generated from one of the topics present in the document and
their number is fixed for all documents. The distribution of words across topics provides
insights into the latent structure of the documents.
Before the learning process of the LDA algorithm can be started, the Dirichlet priors need
to determined, namely, the number of topics K, α that controls the sparsity of document­
topic distribution and β that controls the sparsity of the topic­word distribution (Wang,
Feng, and Dai 2018). The generative process of LDA consists of the following steps
(Blei, Ng, and Jordan 2003):
1. Choosing the number of words N in the document. Assumed to have Poisson distri­
bution (ξ).
2. Choosing the document­topic distribution θ with Dirichlet distribution and α parameter.
3. For each wn word of the N words in the document D:
• Pick a topic (zn) according to the topic probabilities.
• Pick a wn word from p(wn/zn, β), a multinomial probability of zn topic.
8
Analysis of multi­year household travel diary data using dynamic topic models
==PAGE:17==
The joint distribution of θ topic mixture is the following:
p(θ, z, w|α, β) = p(θ|α)
N
∏
n=1
p(zn|θ)p(wn|zn, β)
By summing over topic z and integrating over θ, the likelihood of a document is obtained
(Wang, Feng, and Dai 2018):
p(w|α, β) =
∫
p(θ|α)
( N
∏
n=1
∑
zn
p(zn|θ)p(wn|zn, β)
)
dθ
Lastly, the probability of D corpus is the product of all the documents’ probabilities in the
corpus (D):
p(D|α, β) =
M
∏
d=1
∫
p(θd|α)
( Nd
∏
n=1
∑
zdn
p(zdn|θd)p(wdn|zdn, β)
)
dθd
Based on the first two equation, the θ can be inferred the following way:
p(θ, y|w, α, β) = p(θ, z, w|α, β)
p(w|α, β)
The LDA model’s exact parameter inference cannot be calculated, therefore, an estima­
tion method, like Gibbs sampling is needed (Wang, Feng, and Dai 2018). Gibbs sampling
is often used in topic modeling because it works well with Dirichlet priors (Steyvers and
Griffiths 2007).
On Figure 3.1 the ”plate notation” of the LDA process can be seen (Blei, Ng, and Jordan
2003). It shows how the model is generated. The rectangles, ”plates”, are replicates. The
circles are the parameters: Z and W are word level parameters and are sampled once
per word per document; θ is a document level parameter, sampled once per document
and finally, α and β are corpus level variables, sampled once during the process.
It is important to note that LDA is different from a simple Dirichlet clustering method (Blei,
Ng, and Jordan 2003). In those, a two­level model is used. It involves sampling a Dirichlet
distribution once for the entire corpus, selecting a multinomial clustering variable once for
Analysis of multi­year household travel diary data using dynamic topic models
9
==PAGE:18==
Figure 3.1: The generative process of LDA (Blei, Ng, and Jordan 2003). K stand for
the sampling of each topic. The M outer rectangle represents sampling process within
each document. The inner rectangle N is the sampling process for each document.
each document in the corpus, and then selecting a set of words for the document condi­
tional on the cluster variable. LDA, on the other hand, introduces an additional level in
the model, resulting in a three­level hierarchical structure. The topic node is sampled re­
peatedly within each document. This allows for documents to be associated with multiple
topics, unlike in the classical clustering model where they are restricted to one topic.
LDA also comes with limitations. The result of different estimation methods used for α and
β can lead to different result for the same set of data depending on the initial conditions
which leads to issues with reproducibility (Steyvers and Griffiths 2007). LDA also faces
challenges with sparsity when dealing with large vocabularies in corpora (Blei, Ng, and
Jordan 2003; Vorontsov and Potapenko 2014). Furthermore, it relies on assumptions
that may not be effective for generating accurate and realistic topic models in real­world
datasets. It assumes a fixed and known number of topics, disregards correlations between
topics, and assumes independence between documents and words within documents
(Blei, Ng, and Jordan 2003; Blei 2012). These assumptions limit LDA’s ability to handle
big data and make predictions for new documents. Training the model is also prone to
”order effects”, resulting in variations in results based on the order of the training data
(Agrawal, Fu, and Menzies 2018).
10
Analysis of multi­year household travel diary data using dynamic topic models
==PAGE:19==
During the analysis Gensim was used for the LDA modeling, which is a widely­used
Python library for topic modeling.
3.2
Dynamic topic modeling
Traditional approaches, like to above mentioned LDA, treat all documents within a cor­
pus interchangeable, neglecting the temporal dynamics that can significantly impact the
topics (Vayansky and Kumar 2020; Blei, Ng, and Jordan 2003). To address this lim­
itation, dynamic topic models (DTM) were introduced which consider the ”evolution of
topics over time” (Blei and Lafferty 2006). Dynamic topic modeling is a technique for an­
alyzing discrete data that evolves over time. By capturing the changing nature of topics
and uncovering temporal patterns in large corpora, it provides valuable insights beyond
traditional static topic modeling approaches. By incorporating temporal dynamics, DTM
provides a more nuanced understanding of topic evolution and enables the exploration of
shifting themes within a corpus (Vayansky and Kumar 2020). This is particularly crucial
when analyzing datasets spanning long periods, where topics can vary significantly due to
societal changes, scientific advancements, or cultural shifts. For example, by analysing
science articles its effectiveness was demonstrated in capturing temporal patterns that
e.g. the topic Atomic physics has different most popular words: the word matter’s proba­
bility gradually decreased over time while quantum’s increased (Blei and Lafferty 2006).
By modeling the evolution of topics and their prevalence in different time periods, dynamic
topic modeling reveals shifts and patterns within discrete data over time.
During DTM modeling, Dirichlet distribution cannot be used for α and β because it is
not suitable for sequential modeling. Therefore, the natural parameters of each topic,
denoted as βt,k, are chained in a state space model that evolves with Gaussian noise.
The simplest form of this is the following where t is time slice:
βt,k|βt−1,k ∼N(βt−1,k, σ2I)
Within DTM, the uncertainty regarding topic proportions specific to each document is rep­
resented using a logistic normal distribution with a mean of α. The sequential relationship
between models is captured by the following dynamic model:
αt|αt−1 ∼N(αt−1, δ2I)
Analysis of multi­year household travel diary data using dynamic topic models
11
==PAGE:20==
The generative process DTM (Blei and Lafferty 2006):
1. Pick topics: βt|βt−1 ∼N(βt−1, σ2I).
2. Pick αt|αt−1 ∼N(αt−1, δ2I).
3. For each document:
(a) Pick η ∼N(αt, a2I).
(b) For each word:
i. Pick Z ∼Multinomial(π(η)).
ii. Pick Wt,d,n ∼Multinomial(π(βt, z)).
The π is used to map the multinomial paramters to the mean parameters.
On Figure 3.2 the graphical representation of a DTM can be found.
One challenge in DTM is selecting a discrete unit of time, which raises questions about the
loss of information by not having a continuous time element (Blei and Lafferty 2006). Ad­
ditionally, DTM does not consider correlations between topics for simplicity. Furthermore,
determining the optimal number of topics also remains a challenge.
During the analysis Gensim was used for the dynamic topic modeling, which offers an
implementation of dynamic topic modeling known as LDASeq.
12
Analysis of multi­year household travel diary data using dynamic topic models
==PAGE:21==
Figure 3.2: The generative process of DTM for two time slices (Blei and Lafferty 2006).
K stand for the sampling of each topic. The M outer rectangle represents sampling
process within each document. The inner rectangle N is the sampling process for each
document. Both α and β parameters evolve over time.
3.3
Model selection and evaluation
The two, most used measure of topic models are the perplexity and coherence score
(Wintner, Goldwater, and Riezler 2014). Coherence score aim to measure the similarity
of word pairs to provide a quantitative value of topic interpretability (Röder, Both, and
Hinneburg 2015). In the analysis the UMass coherence is used that is calculated the
following way (Stevens et al. 2012):
CUMass = logD(υi, υj) + ϵ
D(υj)
where D(υi, υj) is the number of documents where words υi and υj occur together and
D(υj) is the number of documents where υj occurs. Choosing the model that has the
Analysis of multi­year household travel diary data using dynamic topic models
13
==PAGE:22==
highest coherence value results in better interpretable topics (Röder, Both, and Hinneburg
2015).
Perplexity shows that how accurate the topic model is. The lower the value, the higher
the accuracy (Zhao, Du, and Buntine 2017). It is calculated the following way (Blei, Ng,
and Jordan 2003):
perplexity = exp(−
∑M
d=1 log p(wd)
∑M
d=1 Nd
)
Intertopic distance refers to the measure of dissimilarity or separation between differ­
ent topics within a topic model. It quantifies the degree to which topics are distinct from
each other based on their underlying word distributions. A smaller intertopic distance indi­
cates that topics are more distinct and less overlapping, while a larger intertopic distance
suggests that topics are more similar or share common words.
14
Analysis of multi­year household travel diary data using dynamic topic models
==PAGE:23==
4
Data Collection and Preparation
4.1
Data sources and description
For the analysis, the TU data is used that has information about Danish household’s travel
behaviour is used. Danish National Travel Survey gathers information on travel behavior
from a representative sample of Danish individuals with the age range of 10 and 84 years
(Christiansen 2018; Carrone, Monteiro, and Rich 2021). The Center for Transport Analyt­
ics at the Technical University of Denmark is responsible for administration. Since 2006,
the data has been consistently accumulated. Annually, an average of 8,200 individuals
took part in the interviews, until 2021 December 196 013 people all together (Transport­
vaneundersøgelsen (TU) n.d.). To make sure that the collected data is representative of
the Danish population, participants are chosen via a means of a stratified random sam­
ple procedure from the Danish Civil Registration System (Carrone, Monteiro, and Rich
2021). The TU data’s collection design is cross sectional, however, some people have
participated several times because replacement sample procedure is used. The survey
includes the following information without attempting to be comprehensive: distance, time,
purpose, trip start and end location, number and age of fellow travelers, chosen type of
transportation for each trip of the day; number of trips a day, distance from home to near­
est station, household income, number and age of household members and number of
cars in the household. Furthermore, the data is supplemented with the population size
from Denmark Statistics.
4.2
Data pre­processing
The original dataset contains integer values for the corresponding information category
e.g. purpose, therefore, it was necessary to revise it so it will be eligible for topic mod­
eling. The aim of the data pre­processing was to have a dataframe in the end, where
each row corresponds to one document that contains all the information of a household’s
characteristics and trips a day.
The first step was to replace all integer categories with the actual text according to Danish
National Travel Survey ­ catalogue of variables (Christiansen and Baescu 2022). For the
different locations, instead of the actual municipality, a grouping was used from Denmark
Analysis of multi­year household travel diary data using dynamic topic models
15
==PAGE:24==
Statistics. The information of the trips a day was not aggregated and did not contain
categories, therefore it needed to be modified e.g. trip purpose and duration belongs to
a specific trip not to all trips a day. To overcome this, new columns were created e.g.
distance of travel due errand, school/work leisure etc. The information of households and
their trips used for topic modeling can be found in Table 4.1. The full list of the input
information can be found in Appendix A.1.
Table 4.1: Summary of Variables
Variable
Primary stay of the day, municipality group
Primary stay of the day, purpose
Home, town size
Distance to nearest station from home
Municipality group of home
Car availability in household
Number of people in household
Household’s income, price index 2000
Transport mode chain for the entire day
Nuclear family type
Number of trips a day
Primary mode of transport for the entire day
Total duration of trips a day
Travel time a day due work or school
Travel time a day due errand
Travel time a day due leisure
Travel time a day due business
Bicycle or skateboard distance a day
Car type vehicle distance a day
Public transportation distance a day
Walking distance a day
Car/van trips as passenger: Relation to the driver’s trip
Car/van trips with passenger: Relationship driver/passenger
Age group of the household member
16
Analysis of multi­year household travel diary data using dynamic topic models
==PAGE:25==
5
Results and findings
5.1
Overview of the results
5.1.1
LDA results
In this section, the results of the LDA model is presented. The model was created using
Gensim and it can be found in Appendix A.2. The most important parameter in topic
modeling is the number of topics. To determine the optimal value, the U­mass coherence
score and perplexity were calculated of the LDA models with different topic number. An
overview of the scores can be seen on Figure 5.1 and in Table 5.1
No. of Topics
Coherence Value
Perplexity
2
­1.1979
­4.413
3
­1.2486
­4.385
4
­1.2595
­4.389
5
­1.3241
­4.389
6
­1.5586
­4.422
7
­1.3695
­4.411
8
­2.6451
­4.397
9
­4.5037
­4.4
10
­7.9414
­4.387
11
­8.8715
­4.391
12
­9.6667
­4.39
13
­10.5085
­4.403
14
­9.843
­4.407
Table 5.1: Coherence score and perplexity values for different numbers of topics.
There is a big drop in coherence after the model with seven topics, the highest value is
for two topics. By looking at the actual topics and top words of the different models, the
model with seven topics is the most interpretable one because the other models with less
topics are too general, while there is more differentiation at seven topics. The LDA models
with less than seven topic and their corresponding top words can be found in Appendix
A.3. There is only a minor difference among the perplexity values, therefore, this does
Analysis of multi­year household travel diary data using dynamic topic models
17
==PAGE:26==
Figure 5.1: The U­mass coherence score and perplexity for different number of top­
ics. The perplexity values are infinitesimal, therefore, Gensim automatically converts
them to log scale. Thus, the higher the perplexity, the better.
not influence the decision on the optimal number of topics. Furthermore, maximizing
perplexity will not lead to better interpretable results (Chang et al. 2009).
18
Analysis of multi­year household travel diary data using dynamic topic models
==PAGE:27==
An overview of the seven topics with their top words and probabilities can be seen in
Table 5.2. All the values are significantly bigger than 1/182 = 0, 005 (182 is the number of
unique values in the whole dataset) which would be the probability if every word had the
same probability across the topics.
Table 5.2: The topics and corresponding top words with their probability for the
LDA model with seven topics. The titles of the topics were added manually. During the
LDA modeling, discrete IDs were used and the ”Word” in the table refers to the original
meaning of the ID.
Word
Probability
Topic 1: Families
Travel time a day due business None
0.049
Public transportation distance a day None
0.049
Nuclear family type Couple with child/children
0.047
Age group of the household member 10­19
0.042
Bicycle or skateboard distance a day None
0.042
Number of people in household Three or four
0.041
Walking distance a day None
0.04
Age group of the household member Under 10
0.037
Car availability in household Two cars
0.034
Travel time a day due errand None
0.033
Topic 2: Couples’ travels
Number of people in household Two
0.074
Nuclear family type Couple
0.067
Travel time a day due work or school None
0.061
Public transportation distance a day None
0.057
Travel time a day due business None
0.053
Bicycle or skateboard distance a day None
0.052
Car availability in household One car
0.047
Primary mode of transport for the entire day Passenger car
0.037
Walking distance a day None
0.033
Transport mode chain for the entire day Driver of passenger car
0.032
Topic 3: Young adults in Capital Region
Primary stay of the day, municipality group Hovedstadskommuner
0.14
Analysis of multi­year household travel diary data using dynamic topic models
19
==PAGE:28==
Table 5.2: The topics and corresponding top words with their probability for the
LDA model with seven topics. The titles of the topics were added manually. During the
LDA modeling, discrete IDs were used and the ”Word” in the table refers to the original
meaning of the ID.
Word
Probability
Municipalty group of home Hovedstadskommuner
0.138
Home, town size 282911 and over
0.136
Distance to nearest station from home 0,8 km or less
0.069
Car type distance a day None
0.048
Travel time a day due business None
0.031
Car availability in household No car
0.029
Travel time a day due errand None
0.028
Age group of the household member 20­29
0.026
Total duration of trips a day More than 80 minutes
0.026
Topic 4: Students biking in Aarhus
Transport mode chain for the entire day Bicycle
0.115
Primary mode of transport for the entire day Bicycle
0.107
Car type distance a day None
0.092
Bicycle or skateboard distance a day Under 5 km
0.057
Municipalty group of home Aarhus
0.054
Primary stay of the day, purpose School, educational institution
0.051
Bicycle or skateboard distance a day 5­10 km
0.046
Car availability in household Three or more cars
0.045
Primary stay of the day, municipality group Aarhus
0.04
Travel time a day due work or school Under 20 minutes
0.032
Topic 5: Long trips in Odense
Total duration of trips a day More than 80 minutes
0.209
Car type distance a day More than 60 km
0.154
Travel time a day due leisure More than 60 minutes
0.109
Number of trips a day Five or more
0.093
Travel time a day due errand More than 60 minutes
0.046
Travel time a day due work or school None
0.04
Municipalty group of home Odense
0.035
20
Analysis of multi­year household travel diary data using dynamic topic models
==PAGE:29==
Table 5.2: The topics and corresponding top words with their probability for the
LDA model with seven topics. The titles of the topics were added manually. During the
LDA modeling, discrete IDs were used and the ”Word” in the table refers to the original
meaning of the ID.
Word
Probability
Primary stay of the day, municipality group Odense
0.035
Transport mode chain for the entire day Driver of other motorized road
vehicle
0.034
Primary mode of transport for the entire day Van
0.031
Topic 6: Drop­off of kids
Car/van trips with passenger: Relationship driver/passenger Family
member who lives in my household
0.3
Transport mode chain for the entire day Passenger car passenger
0.121
Car/van trips as passenger: Relation to the driver’s trip We went to­
gether, we were to go from the same place to the same place
0.115
Primary stay of the day, purpose School, educational institution
0.057
Car/van trips as passenger: Relation to the driver’s trip I was collect­
ed/brought, the entire car trip was for my sake
0.056
Car/van trips with passenger: Relationship driver/passenger Friend,
neighbour, other family
0.044
Car/van trips as passenger: Relation to the driver’s trip I got a lift in
the car, a detour was taken for my sake
0.027
Primary mode of transport for the entire day Passenger car
0.027
Car type distance a day 5­10 km
0.027
Car/van trips as passenger: Relation to the driver’s trip I got a lift, there
was no detour
0.025
Topic 7: Walking in Aalborg
Primary mode of transport for the entire day Walk or run
0.167
Transport mode chain for the entire day Walk
0.136
Car type distance a day None
0.118
Walking distance a day Under 5 km
0.091
Walking distance a day 5­10 km
0.066
Travel time a day due leisure 40­60 minutes
0.065
Analysis of multi­year household travel diary data using dynamic topic models
21
==PAGE:30==
Table 5.2: The topics and corresponding top words with their probability for the
LDA model with seven topics. The titles of the topics were added manually. During the
LDA modeling, discrete IDs were used and the ”Word” in the table refers to the original
meaning of the ID.
Word
Probability
Travel time a day due work or school None
0.048
Primary stay of the day, purpose Leisure round trip
0.044
Primary stay of the day, municipality group Aalborg
0.04
Municipalty group of home Aalborg
0.039
To analyse the topics further, the intertopic distance map was created via multidimen­
sional scaling using pyLDAvis. This can be found on Figure 5.2 alongside with the most
relevant terms for Topic 1. Blue represents the overall term frequency across all topics
while red is the term frequency for Topic 1. On the Intertopic Distance Map, the hori­
zontal axis is the Principal Component 1 and the vertical axis is Principal Component 2.
The paramater λ is set to 0,6 suggested by a study (Sievert and Shirley 2014). A higher λ
value will prioritize more relevant and representative terms for each topic, filtering out less
informative or common terms. On the other hand, a lower λ value will include a broader
range of terms, including those that may be less distinctive or specific to the topic. Figure
5.2 demonstrates that the term frequencies within the topic are significantly different from
the overall one. The most salient terms across all topics and the top 30 relevant terms for
topics 2­7 can be found in Appendix A.4.
The Intertopic Distance Map on Figure 5.2 shows that Topic 4, 5, 6 and 7 are distinct
smaller topics, while topic 1, 2 and 3 are more overlapping and they also share some top
words like ”Travel time due business None”. By looking at all the top words for these three
topics, it is obvious that they are distinct groups that share certain characteristics.
22
Analysis of multi­year household travel diary data using dynamic topic models
==PAGE:31==
Figure 5.2: Intertopic Distance Map and the most relevant words for the LDA model with seven topics.
==PAGE:32==
5.1.2
DTM results
Similarly to the LDA model, Gensim was used to create the DTM model. The model can be
found in Appendix A.6. The number of topics was determined by maximizing the average
coherence score across all time slice. An overview of the results can be seen on Figure
5.3.
Figure 5.3: The U­mass coherence score for different number of topics. The average
coherence score is the average of the coherence scores of models for each time slice with
the same number of topics.
The coherence score has the maximum when the number of topics is nine, thus, this
was chosen for further analysis. The top words for the model and the changes in their
probabilities can be seen on Figure 5.4.
For further analysis, the intertopic distance map was created for various time slices. The
map for time slice 1 can be seen on Figure 5.5 and for time slice 4 on Figure 5.6. The
intertopic distances across the other time slices are not significantly different for most
of the time slices, however, the map changes for time slices 4, 6 and 7 although the
marginal topic distribution stays the same for the corresponding topics. Other examples
of the intertopic maps for different time slices can be found in Appendix A.7.
Since LDA is known to be proned to ”order effects” (Agrawal, Fu, and Menzies 2018),
different start points were tested to see whether the results are similar. The LDA model
proved to be sensitive to the different random state values. See results in Appendix A.5.
24
Analysis of multi­year household travel diary data using dynamic topic models
==PAGE:33==
Figure 5.4: DTM model with 9 topics and the corresponding top words with probabilities
(a) Topic 1
(b) Topic 2
(c) Topic 3
Analysis of multi­year household travel diary data using dynamic topic models
25
==PAGE:34==
(d) Topic 4
(e) Topic 5
(f) Topic 6
26
Analysis of multi­year household travel diary data using dynamic topic models
==PAGE:35==
(g) Topic 7
(h) Topic 8
(i) Topic 9
Analysis of multi­year household travel diary data using dynamic topic models
27
==PAGE:36==
Figure 5.5: Intertopic Distance Map and the most relevant words of topic 1 for the DTM model with nine topics for the year 2006 (time slice 1)
==PAGE:37==
Figure 5.6: Intertopic Distance Map and the most salient words for the DTM model with nine topics for the year 2010 (time slice 4)
==PAGE:38==
6
Discussion
6.1
Interpretation of the results
The best LDA model had seven topics. Topic 1 includes households with child(ren), no
business­related travel, and a lack of public transportation and bicycle usage. They pri­
marily rely on private vehicles for their daily transportation needs. This topic is in line with
findings of previous studies that suggest that people are likely to get their first car when
there is an addition to the family (Khan and Habib 2021). Topic 2 appears to represent
households with couples and a lack of travel associated with work or school commitments.
These households typically have one car available and rely on passenger cars as their
primary mode of transportation throughout the day. Topic 3 focuses on travel patterns
in the Hovedstadskommuner (Capital Region) and highlights the characteristics of urban
areas with a high population density. The presence of long trip duration, relatively short
distance to the nearest station align with the commuting patterns and lifestyle in major
cities. Households here mainly consist of young adults who have no car. Topic 4 in­
dicates a strong presence of bicycles as the primary mode of transport among student,
especially in Aarhus. It is interesting that these household typically have three or more
cars, but the distance taken by car is 0. Topic 5 reflects longer duration trips, covering
distances exceeding 60 km and taking more than 80 minutes. This suggests a focus on
travel activities associated with leisure and potentially includes multiple trips throughout
the day within Odense. It is interesting that travel time due to work or school is not a
significant factor in this topic. Topic 6 is about passenger car trips. The drivers and pas­
sengers are usually family members or friends, and the purpose indicates that these trips
often revolve around school or educational institutions. This topic definitely could be a
focus of an analysis whether other types of transports are available here or what option
would make them change their habits since the distance with car is relatively short. Topic
7 emphasizes walking as the primary mode of transportation, particularly for distances
under 5 km. This topic aligns with the concept of walkability and suggests a preference
for shorter walking trips, potentially for leisure activities.
The DTM with nine topics was the most coherent. Majority of the words’ probabilities do
not change significantly over time as it can be seen on Figure 5.4. Topic 1 seems to
30
Analysis of multi­year household travel diary data using dynamic topic models
==PAGE:39==
represent households with younger and/or older children. They primarily rely on passen­
ger cars for transportation. Majority of the probabilities is stable over time, only the age
group related attributes change as it can be seen on Figure 5.4a. Topic 2 characterizes
households with couples with a single car. They live in land municipalities and primarily
use passenger cars for transportation, particularly for shopping. Similar to Topic 1, travel
related to work or school is negligible. According to the probabilities, they are less likely
to own one car over time, but it is unclear whether they will have none or more than one.
Topic 3 focuses on couples, with the workplace as the primary purpose of the day. Public
transportation and walking distances are minimal, indicating a reliance on passenger cars
for commuting to work. Travel due to business or leisure is not significant in this topic.
Topic 4 highlights bicycle usage as the primary mode of transport. Individuals in this
topic have a preference for cycling, especially for distances under 5 km. They are likely
families with children and have short travel times for work or school. Car type distances
are negligible. The bicycle usage starts to decrease from the year 2014 but from 2020 it
increases again. This coincides with the start of the COVID­19 pandemic. Topic 5 em­
phasizes carpooling and car trips with passengers who are family members living in the
same household. The purpose of travel is not business­related or for errand. This topic
reflects the dynamics of shared car trips within a family context, although the likelihood
of the relationship being family members between the driver and passenger decreases
over time. Topic 6 is centered around the Hovedstadskommuner (Capital Region). Travel
distances to the nearest station are short, indicating easy access to public transportation.
The primary purpose of the day is the workplace, and there is a mix of car availability,
including households with one or no cars. The long travel time a day and the workplace
as purpose indicates that these are probably trips taken during rush hours. Topic 7 rep­
resents households with teenagers and school­related trips. The primary purpose of the
day is school or educational institutions. There are no significant distances covered by
car types, and travel times due to work or school are longer than 60 minutes. Topic 8 fo­
cuses on long­duration trips, with distances exceeding 60 km and travel times for leisure
exceeding 60 minutes. The number of trips made is also higher, suggesting a more ac­
tive travel pattern. Public transportation and bicycle usage are minimal. Topic 9 highlights
walking as the primary mode of transportation, with distances under 5 km. Car distances
and public transportation usage are negligible, and there is no significant travel related to
work or school. Interestingly, despite having a car, walking is the primary transport of the
day.
Analysis of multi­year household travel diary data using dynamic topic models
31
==PAGE:40==
Both of LDA and DTM model’s topics consist of a mix of socio­economic and travel at­
tributes. This has good and bad sides as well, since it is an interesting finding to connect
the personal attributes with the travel behavior, however, the causal relationship is ques­
tionable. DTM models are less sensitive to the changing number of topics in terms of
coherence compared to the LDA models but require more computational power. The
LDA model is also sensitive to the random state. Furthermore, comparing the actual top­
ics of the best LDA and DTM model, LDA provides topics that are easier to distinguish
and interpret.
A possible use case of this clustering method could be dynamic population synthesis for
travel forecasting with activity sequence models. Unlike classic clustering techniques, this
method can handle complex data. Based on the person’s cluster their activity sequence
can be predicted. This has been done in literature with only socio­demographic attributes
(Ahmed, Moreno, and Moeckel 2021), therefore the work presented in this thesis could
provide a more nuanced and accurate prediction with clusters based on socio­economic
and travel behavior.
6.2
Future research
Integration of post­pandemic data: As mentioned, incorporating data from the post­
pandemic period would provide insights into how travel behavior has been impacted by the
COVID­19 pandemic. Analyzing the changes in topics and travel patterns during and after
the pandemic can reveal the long­term effects on transportation choices and preferences.
Exploration of BERT topics: BERT is a natural language processing model that can
capture intricate semantic relationships in text data. Applying BERT­based topic modeling
techniques to the household data can potentially yield more nuanced and contextually rich
topics, enhancing the understanding of travel behavior.
Investigation of a larger number of topics: The thesis discussed the analysis with
seven topics in LDA and nine topics in DTM. Expanding the number of topics could pro­
vide a finer­grained characterization of different household profiles and travel patterns.
By increasing the granularity, researchers can capture more specific behaviors and po­
tentially identify previously unnoticed trends or subgroups within the data.
Comparison of LDA, DTM, and other topic modeling techniques: Alongside LDA and
DTM, future research can explore other topic modeling algorithms and compare their per­
32
Analysis of multi­year household travel diary data using dynamic topic models
==PAGE:41==
formance in analyzing household data. Evaluating the effectiveness and interpretability
of different models, such as Non­negative Matrix Factorization (NMF) or Correlated Topic
Model (CTM) which uses the correlation between topics to help its predictions, can pro­
vide valuable insights and help identify the most suitable method for the specific research
context.
6.3
Conclusion
In conclusion, the analysis of multi­year household data using dynamic topic modeling
provided valuable insights into the travel behavior and characteristics of different house­
hold types. The best LDA model identified seven topics, while the most coherent DTM
model had nine topics.
The LDA model’s topics revealed distinct patterns related to households with children,
couples, urban areas, students, leisure activities, school­related trips, and walking as
the primary mode of transportation. These topics provided insights into the preferences,
habits, and travel patterns of various household types. Similarly, the DTM model’s top­
ics highlighted different household profiles, including those with younger/older children,
couples with a single car, commuters, cyclists, carpooling families, urban dwellers, school­
related trips, long­distance trips, and walkers.
Comparing the two models, LDA proved to be more interpretable, allowing for easier
distinction and interpretation of topics. On the other hand, DTM models demonstrated
greater robustness in terms of coherence, even when the number of topics changed.
However, DTM models required more computational power.
This thesis proved that topic modeling methods such as LDA and DTM can be used to
aggregate high dimensional data and they also provide meaningful topics that can be the
foundation of other travel behavior related researches.
Overall, this thesis expands our knowledge of travel behavior analysis and provides a new
tool for future research.
Analysis of multi­year household travel diary data using dynamic topic models
33
==PAGE:42==
Bibliography
Borysov, Stanislav S and Jeppe Rich (2021). “Introducing synthetic pseudo panels: appli­
cation to transport behaviour dynamics”. In: Transportation 48.5, pp. 2493–2520.
Buehler, Ralph and John Pucher (2012). “Walking and cycling in Western Europe and the
United States: trends, policies, and lessons”. In: Tr News 280.
Asuncion, Hazeline U, Arthur U Asuncion, and Richard N Taylor (2010). “Software trace­
ability with topic modeling”. In: Proceedings of the 32nd ACM/IEEE international con­
ference on Software Engineering­Volume 1, pp. 95–104.
Blei, David M and John D Lafferty (2006). “Dynamic topic models”. In: Proceedings of the
23rd international conference on Machine learning, pp. 113–120.
Rafiq, Rezwana et al. (2022). “Impact of working from home on activity­travel behavior
during the COVID­19 Pandemic: An aggregate structural analysis”. In: Transportation
Research Part A: Policy and Practice 159, pp. 35–54.
Wu, Alex Qitao and Virginia Meng­Chan Lau (2022). “COVID­19­induced negative emo­
tions and the impacts on personal values and travel behaviors: a threat appraisal per­
spective”. In: Journal of Hospitality and Tourism Management 51, pp. 143–155.
Kitamura, Ryuichi (1990). “Panel analysis in transportation planning: An overview”. In:
Transportation Research Part A: General 24.6, pp. 401–415.
Deaton, Angus (1985). “Panel data from time series of cross­sections”. In: Journal of
econometrics 30.1­2, pp. 109–126.
Frees, Edward W et al. (2004). Longitudinal and panel data: analysis and applications in
the social sciences. Cambridge University Press.
Carrone, Andrea Papu, Mayara Moraes Monteiro, and Jeppe Rich (2021). “Modelling car
ownership dynamics based on irregularly spaced panel data”. In: Travel Behaviour and
Society 25, pp. 223–232.
Nolan, Anne (2010). “A dynamic analysis of household car ownership”. In: Transportation
research part A: policy and practice 44.6, pp. 446–455.
Khan, Nazmul Arefin and Muhammad Ahsanul Habib (2021). “When do households make
vehicle transactions? What type of vehicle households choose after transaction events?”
In: Travel Behaviour and Society 22, pp. 32–47.
34
Analysis of multi­year household travel diary data using dynamic topic models
==PAGE:43==
Mokhtarian, Patricia L and Xinyu Cao (2008). “Examining the impacts of residential self­
selection on travel behavior: A focus on methodologies”. In: Transportation Research
Part B: Methodological 42.3, pp. 204–228.
Cervero, Robert and Michael Duncan (2003). “Walking, bicycling, and urban landscapes:
evidence from the San Francisco Bay Area”. In: American journal of public health 93.9,
pp. 1478–1483.
Crane, Randall and Richard Crepeau (1998). “Does neighborhood design influence travel?:
A behavioral analysis of travel diary and GIS data”. In: Transportation Research Part D:
Transport and Environment 3.4, pp. 225–238.
Frank, Lawrence D et al. (2006). “Many pathways from land use to health: associations
between neighborhood walkability and active transportation, body mass index, and air
quality”. In: Journal of the American planning Association 72.1, pp. 75–87.
Krueger, Rico, Taha H Rashidi, and Akshay Vij (2020). “X vs. Y: an analysis of intergener­
ational differences in transport mode use among young adults”. In: Transportation 47.5,
pp. 2203–2231.
De Haas, MC et al. (2018). “Travel pattern transitions: applying latent transition analysis
within the mobility biographies framework”. In: Transportation Research Part A: Policy
and Practice 107, pp. 140–151.
Müggenburg, Hannah, Annika Busch­Geertsema, and Martin Lanzendorf (2015). “Mobil­
ity biographies: A review of achievements and challenges of the mobility biographies
approach and a framework for further research”. In: Journal of Transport Geography
46, pp. 151–163.
Blei, David M, Andrew Y Ng, and Michael I Jordan (2003). “Latent dirichlet allocation”. In:
Journal of machine Learning research 3.Jan, pp. 993–1022.
Vayansky, Ike and Sathish AP Kumar (2020). “A review of topic modeling methods”. In:
Information Systems 94, p. 101582.
Wang, Wenxin, Yi Feng, and Wenqiang Dai (2018). “Topic analysis of online reviews for
two competitive products using latent Dirichlet allocation”. In: Electronic Commerce Re­
search and Applications 29, pp. 142–156.
Steyvers, Mark and Tom Griffiths (2007). “Probabilistic topic models”. In: Handbook of
latent semantic analysis. Psychology Press, pp. 439–460.
Vorontsov, Konstantin and Anna Potapenko (2014). “Tutorial on probabilistic topic mod­
eling: Additive regularization for stochastic matrix factorization”. In: Analysis of Images,
Analysis of multi­year household travel diary data using dynamic topic models
35
==PAGE:44==
Social Networks and Texts: Third International Conference, AIST 2014, Yekaterinburg,
Russia, April 10­12, 2014, Revised Selected Papers 3. Springer, pp. 29–46.
Blei, David M (2012). “Probabilistic topic models”. In: Communications of the ACM 55.4,
pp. 77–84.
Agrawal, Amritanshu, Wei Fu, and Tim Menzies (2018). “What is wrong with topic mod­
eling? And how to fix it using search­based software engineering”. In: Information and
Software Technology 98, pp. 74–88.
Wintner, Shuly, Sharon Goldwater, and Stefan Riezler (2014). “Proceedings of the 14th
Conference of the European Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics”.
In: Proceedings of the 14th Conference of the European Chapter of the Association for
Computational Linguistics.
Röder, Michael, Andreas Both, and Alexander Hinneburg (2015). “Exploring the space of
topic coherence measures”. In: Proceedings of the eighth ACM international conference
on Web search and data mining, pp. 399–408.
Stevens, Keith et al. (2012). “Exploring topic coherence over many models and many
topics”. In: Proceedings of the 2012 joint conference on empirical methods in natural
language processing and computational natural language learning, pp. 952–961.
Zhao, He, Lan Du, and Wray Buntine (2017). “A word embeddings informed focused topic
model”. In: Asian conference on machine learning. PMLR, pp. 423–438.
Christiansen, Hjalmar (2018). “Beregning af usikkerhed og varians for Transportvaneun­
dersøgelsen”. In: Proceedings from the Annual Transport Conference at Aalborg Uni­
versity. Vol. 25. 1.
Transportvaneundersøgelsen (TU) (n.d.). URL: https://www.man.dtu.dk/myndighedsbetjening/
transportvaneundersoegelsen-tu-. (accessed: 14.05.2023).
Christiansen, Hjalmar and Oana Baescu (2022). The Danish National Travel Survey ­
catalogue of variables. Documentation note. TU 2006­21, version 1. DTU, Center for
Transport Analytics.
Chang, Jonathan et al. (2009). “Reading tea leaves: How humans interpret topic models”.
In: Advances in neural information processing systems 22.
Sievert, Carson and Kenneth Shirley (2014). “LDAvis: A method for visualizing and in­
terpreting topics”. In: Proceedings of the workshop on interactive language learning,
visualization, and interfaces, pp. 63–70.
36
Analysis of multi­year household travel diary data using dynamic topic models
==PAGE:45==
Ahmed, Usman, Ana Tsui Moreno, and Rolf Moeckel (2021). “Microscopic activity se­
quence generation: a multiple correspondence analysis to explain travel behavior based
on socio­demographic person attributes”. In: Transportation 48.3, pp. 1481–1502.
Analysis of multi­year household travel diary data using dynamic topic models
37
==PAGE:46==
A
Appendix
A.1
Vocabulary
Table A.1: All unique attributes used in the modeling with their corresponding ID.
ID
Word
1
Primary stay of the day, municipality group Hovedstadskommuner
2
Primary stay of the day, municipality group Oplandskommuner
3
Primary stay of the day, municipality group Provinsbykommuner
4
Primary stay of the day, municipality group Landkommuner
5
Primary stay of the day, municipality group Aarhus
6
Primary stay of the day, municipality group Aalborg
7
Primary stay of the day, municipality group Odense
8
Primary stay of the day, municipality group Abroad
9
Primary stay of the day, municipality group Continental Shelf
10
Primary stay of the day, municipality group Christiansø
11
Primary stay of the day, purpose Home
12
Primary stay of the day, purpose School, educational institution
13
Primary stay of the day, purpose Shopping
14
Primary stay of the day, purpose Workplace
15
Primary stay of the day, purpose Visit family/friends
16
Primary stay of the day, purpose Holiday, excursion
17
Primary stay of the day, purpose Do sports
18
Primary stay of the day, purpose Summer cottage, allotment
19
Primary stay of the day, purpose Meetings, conferences (business)
20
Primary stay of the day, purpose Social/health
21
Primary stay of the day, purpose Meetings in private context
22
Primary stay of the day, purpose Entertainment
23
Primary stay of the day, purpose School excursions etc.
24
Primary stay of the day, purpose Other leisure activity
25
Primary stay of the day, purpose Customer or client visit (as part of my job)
26
Primary stay of the day, purpose Other business trip
38
Analysis of multi­year household travel diary data using dynamic topic models
==PAGE:47==
Table A.1: All unique attributes used in the modeling with their corresponding ID.
ID
Word
27
Primary stay of the day, purpose Other errand
28
Primary stay of the day, purpose Business services, trade (this is my job)
29
Primary stay of the day, purpose Commercial transport of persons
30
Primary stay of the day, purpose Escorting to/from activity
31
Primary stay of the day, purpose Leisure round trip
32
Primary stay of the day, purpose Other commercial transport
33
Primary stay of the day, purpose Commercial transport of goods
34
Primary stay of the day, purpose Escorting to/from transport
35
Primary stay of the day, purpose Collect/bring objects
36
Primary stay of the day, purpose Church, Religious services
37
Primary stay of the day, purpose Youth center, youth club, after­school center
38
Primary stay of the day, purpose (Unknown leisure)
39
Primary stay of the day, purpose Nursery, crèche, day care
40
Home, town size 282911 and over
41
Home, town size 31980­282910
42
Home, town size Under 4053
43
Home, town size 4054­31979
44
Distance to nearest station from home 0.8 km or less
45
Distance to nearest station from home 0.8­1.8 km
46
Distance to nearest station from home 5.3 or more
47
Distance to nearest station from home 1.8­5.3 km
48
Municipality group of home Hovedstadskommuner
49
Municipality group of home Provinsbykommuner
50
Municipality group of home Oplandskommuner
51
Municipality group of home Landkommuner
52
Municipality group of home Aarhus
53
Municipality group of home Aalborg
54
Municipality group of home Odense
55
Municipality group of home Christiansø
56
Car availability in household: No car
57
Car availability in household: One car
Analysis of multi­year household travel diary data using dynamic topic models
39
==PAGE:48==
Table A.1: All unique attributes used in the modeling with their corresponding ID.
ID
Word
58
Car availability in household: Two cars
59
Car availability in household: Three or more cars
60
Number of people in household: Two
61
Number of people in household: Five or more
62
Number of people in household: Three or four
63
Number of people in household: One
64
Household’s income: 250­442
65
Household’s income: Under 250
66
Household’s income: 614 and over
67
Household’s income: 442­613
68
Transport mode chain for the entire day: Walk
69
Transport mode chain for the entire day: Passenger car passenger
70
Transport mode chain for the entire day: Bicycle
71
Transport mode chain for the entire day: Driver of passenger car
72
Transport mode chain for the entire day: Train/bus in combination with car
73
Transport mode chain for the entire day: Driver of other motorized road vehicle
74
Transport mode chain for the entire day: Passenger in other motorized road vehicle
75
Transport mode chain for the entire day: Train/bus in combination with bicycle
76
Transport mode chain for the entire day: Other/miscellaneous
77
Transport mode chain for the entire day: Train
78
Transport mode chain for the entire day: Collective bus
79
Transport mode chain for the entire day: Train + bus in combination
80
Transport mode chain for the entire day: Airplane
81
Nuclear family type: Single
82
Nuclear family type: Single with child/children
83
Nuclear family type: Couple
84
Nuclear family type: Couple with child/children
85
Number of trips a day: One or none
86
Number of trips a day: Two
87
Number of trips a day: Five or more
88
Number of trips a day: Three or four
40
Analysis of multi­year household travel diary data using dynamic topic models
==PAGE:49==
Table A.1: All unique attributes used in the modeling with their corresponding ID.
ID
Word
89
Primary mode of transport for the entire day: Walk or run
90
Primary mode of transport for the entire day: Bicycle
91
Primary mode of transport for the entire day: Passenger car
92
Primary mode of transport for the entire day: Van
93
Primary mode of transport for the entire day: Collective/public bus
94
Primary mode of transport for the entire day: S­train
95
Primary mode of transport for the entire day: Other train
96
Primary mode of transport for the entire day: Moped 30
97
Primary mode of transport for the entire day: Moped 45
98
Primary mode of transport for the entire day: Skateboard/roller skates/scooter
99
Primary mode of transport for the entire day: Horse carriage, horse
100
Primary mode of transport for the entire day: Disability moped (electric)
101
Primary mode of transport for the entire day: Electric scooter etc.
102
Primary mode of transport for the entire day: Lorry
103
Primary mode of transport for the entire day: Motorcycle
104
Primary mode of transport for the entire day: Tractor, working vehicle
105
Primary mode of transport for the entire day: Taxi cab
106
Primary mode of transport for the entire day: Tourist coach, rented bus
107
Primary mode of transport for the entire day: Metro train
108
Primary mode of transport for the entire day: Dial­a­ride, flexible transport service
109
Primary mode of transport for the entire day: Light rail/tram
110
Primary mode of transport for the entire day: Ferry, water bus
111
Primary mode of transport for the entire day: Pleasure boat
112
Primary mode of transport for the entire day: Airplane
113
Total duration of trips a day: 14 minutes or less
114
Total duration of trips a day: 14­40 minutes
115
Total duration of trips a day: 40­80 minutes
116
Total duration of trips a day: More than 80 minutes
117
Travel time a day due work or school: None
118
Travel time a day due work or school: Under 20 minutes
119
Travel time a day due work or school: 20­40 minutes
Analysis of multi­year household travel diary data using dynamic topic models
41
==PAGE:50==
Table A.1: All unique attributes used in the modeling with their corresponding ID.
ID
Word
120
Travel time a day due work or school: More than 60 minutes
121
Travel time a day due work or school: 40­60 minutes
122
Travel time a day due errand: 40­60 minutes
123
Travel time a day due errand: Under 20 minutes
124
Travel time a day due errand: None
125
Travel time a day due errand: 20­40 minutes
126
Travel time a day due errand: More than 60 minutes
127
Travel time a day due leisure: 40­60 minutes
128
Travel time a day due leisure: None
129
Travel time a day due leisure: 20­40 minutes
130
Travel time a day due leisure: Under 20 minutes
131
Travel time a day due leisure: More than 60 minutes
132
Travel time a day due business: None
133
Travel time a day due business: 20­40 minutes
134
Travel time a day due business: More than 60 minutes
135
Travel time a day due business: 40­60 minutes
136
Travel time a day due business: Under 20 minutes
137
Bicycle or skateboard distance a day: None
138
Bicycle or skateboard distance a day: 10­20 km
139
Bicycle or skateboard distance a day: 5­10 km
140
Bicycle or skateboard distance a day: Under 5 km
141
Bicycle or skateboard distance a day: 20­30 km
142
Bicycle or skateboard distance a day: 30­60 km
143
Bicycle or skateboard distance a day: More than 60 km
144
Car type distance a day: 30­60 km
145
Car type distance a day: 5­10 km
146
Car type distance a day: None
147
Car type distance a day: 10­20 km
148
Car type distance a day: More than 60 km
149
Car type distance a day: Under 5 km
150
Car type distance a day: 20­30 km
42
Analysis of multi­year household travel diary data using dynamic topic models
==PAGE:51==
Table A.1: All unique attributes used in the modeling with their corresponding ID.
ID
Word
151
Public transportation distance a day: None
152
Public transportation distance a day: More than 60 km
153
Public transportation distance a day: Under 5 km
154
Public transportation distance a day: 20­30 km
155
Public transportation distance a day: 5­10 km
156
Public transportation distance a day: 30­60 km
157
Public transportation distance a day: 10­20 km
158
Walking distance a day: None
159
Walking distance a day: Under 5 km
160
Walking distance a day: 5­10 km
161
Walking distance a day: 10­20 km
162
Walking distance a day: 20­30 km
163
Walking distance a day: 30­60 km
164
Walking distance a day: More than 60 km
165
Car/van trips as passenger: Relation to the driver’s trip:
I was collected/brought, the entire car trip was for my sake
166
Car/van trips as passenger: Relation to the driver’s trip:
We went together, we were to go from the same place to the same place
167
Car/van trips as passenger: Relation to the driver’s trip:
I got a lift in the car, a detour was taken for my sake
168
Car/van trips as passenger: Relation to the driver’s trip:
I got a lift, there was no detour
169
Car/van trips with passenger: Relationship driver/passenger:
Family member who lives in my household
170
Car/van trips with passenger: Relationship driver/passenger:
Friend, neighbour, other family
171
Car/van trips with passenger: Relationship driver/passenger: Work colleague
172
Car/van trips with passenger: Relationship driver/passenger:
Another person from my household
173
Car/van trips with passenger: Relationship driver/passenger: Others
174
Car/van trips with passenger: Relationship driver/passenger:
Analysis of multi­year household travel diary data using dynamic topic models
43
==PAGE:52==
Table A.1: All unique attributes used in the modeling with their corresponding ID.
ID
Word
Combination hereof
175
Age group of the household member: Under 10
176
Age group of the household member: 10­19
177
Age group of the household member: 20­29
178
Age group of the household member: 30­39
179
Age group of the household member: 40­49
180
Age group of the household member: 50­59
181
Age group of the household member: 60­69
182
Age group of the household member: 70 and over
A.2
LDA model
1
docs = list(grouped_docu_lda['document'].str.split())
2
3
# Create Dictionary
4
id2word = corpora.Dictionary(docs)
5
6
# Create Corpus
7
texts = docs
8
9
# Term Document Frequency
10
corpus = [id2word.doc2bow(text) for text in texts]
11
12
# Build LDA model
13
lda_model7 = gensim.models.ldamodel.LdaModel(corpus=corpus ,
14
id2word=id2word ,
15
num_topics=7,
16
random_state=100,
17
update_every=1,
18
chunksize=100,
19
passes=10,
20
alpha='auto',
21
per_word_topics=True)
22
# Print the Keyword in the topics
23
print(lda_model7.print_topics())
24
doc_lda = lda_model7[corpus]
44
Analysis of multi­year household travel diary data using dynamic topic models
==PAGE:53==
Listing A.1: LDA model
A.3
LDA topics for different number of topics
A.3.1
Number of topics: 2
Word
Probability
Topic 0:
Travel time a day due business None
0.043
Car type distance a day None
0.039
Primary stay of the day, municipality group Hovedstadskommuner
0.037
Municipalty group of home Hovedstadskommuner
0.036
Home, town size 282911 and over
0.036
Public transportation distance a day None
0.033
Travel time a day due errand None
0.028
Car availability in household One car
0.025
Distance to nearest station from home 0,8 km or less
0.022
Nuclear family type Couple with child/children
0.022
Topic 1:
Public transportation distance a day None
0.042
Bicycle or skateboard distance a day None
0.041
Primary mode of transport for the entire day Passenger car
0.039
Travel time a day due business None
0.038
Walking distance a day None
0.032
Transport mode chain for the entire day Driver of passenger car
0.03
Car/van trips with passenger: Relationship driver/passenger Family
member who lives in my household
0.024
Car availability in household Two cars
0.021
Nuclear family type Couple with child/children
0.021
Travel time a day due leisure None
0.021
A.3.2
Number of topics: 3
Analysis of multi­year household travel diary data using dynamic topic models
45
==PAGE:54==
Word
Probability
Topic 0:
Travel time a day due work or school None
0.052
Number of people in household Two
0.05
Nuclear family type Couple
0.045
Bicycle or skateboard distance a day None
0.045
Travel time a day due business None
0.044
Public transportation distance a day None
0.044
Car/van trips with passenger: Relationship driver/passenger Family
member who lives in my household
0.04
Primary mode of transport for the entire day Passenger car
0.035
Car availability in household One car
0.031
Walking distance a day None
0.026
Topic 1:
Nuclear family type Couple with child/children
0.042
Public transportation distance a day None
0.04
Bicycle or skateboard distance a day None
0.039
Age group of the household member 10­19
0.039
Walking distance a day None
0.036
Primary mode of transport for the entire day Passenger car
0.036
Age group of the household member Under 10
0.035
Number of people in household Three or four
0.034
Car availability in household Two cars
0.033
Transport mode chain for the entire day Driver of passenger car
0.032
Topic 2:
Car type distance a day None
0.047
Municipalty group of home Hovedstadskommuner
0.044
Home, town size 282911 and over
0.043
Travel time a day due business None
0.043
Primary stay of the day, municipality group Hovedstadskommuner
0.039
Travel time a day due errand None
0.032
Public transportation distance a day None
0.029
Distance to nearest station from home 0,8 km or less
0.026
46
Analysis of multi­year household travel diary data using dynamic topic models
==PAGE:55==
Word
Probability
Nuclear family type Couple with child/children
0.026
Age group of the household member 40­49
0.026
A.3.3
Number of topics: 4
Word
Probability
Topic 0:
Car/van trips with passenger: Relationship driver/passenger Family
member who lives in my household
0.188
Transport mode chain for the entire day Passenger car passenger
0.076
Car/van trips as passenger: Relation to the driver’s trip We went to­
gether, we were to go from the same place to the same place
0.072
Travel time a day due work or school None
0.049
Primary mode of transport for the entire day Passenger car
0.045
Car/van trips as passenger: Relation to the driver’s trip I was collect­
ed/brought, the entire car trip was for my sake
0.035
Car type distance a day Under 5 km
0.029
Car/van trips with passenger: Relationship driver/passenger Friend,
neighbour, other family
0.028
Car availability in household One car
0.027
Car type distance a day 5­10 km
0.026
Topic 1:
Public transportation distance a day None
0.044
Bicycle or skateboard distance a day None
0.04
Nuclear family type Couple with child/children
0.039
Walking distance a day None
0.038
Travel time a day due business None
0.036
Age group of the household member 10­19
0.036
Primary mode of transport for the entire day Passenger car
0.033
Number of people in household Three or four
0.032
Car availability in household Two cars
0.032
Age group of the household member Under 10
0.032
Topic 2:
Municipalty group of home Hovedstadskommuner
0.051
Analysis of multi­year household travel diary data using dynamic topic models
47
==PAGE:56==
Word
Probability
Home, town size 282911 and over
0.05
Car type distance a day None
0.05
Primary stay of the day, municipality group Hovedstadskommuner
0.046
Travel time a day due business None
0.043
Travel time a day due errand None
0.031
Public transportation distance a day None
0.03
Distance to nearest station from home 0,8 km or less
0.03
Transport mode chain for the entire day Bicycle
0.027
Car availability in household One car
0.026
Topic 3:
Number of people in household Two
0.07
Nuclear family type Couple
0.064
Travel time a day due work or school None
0.052
Public transportation distance a day None
0.05
Bicycle or skateboard distance a day None
0.047
Travel time a day due business None
0.046
Car availability in household One car
0.031
Primary mode of transport for the entire day Passenger car
0.03
Transport mode chain for the entire day Driver of passenger car
0.029
Walking distance a day None
0.027
A.3.4
Number of topics: 5
Word
Probability
Topic 0:
Travel time a day due work or school None
0.088
Number of people in household Two
0.06
Public transportation distance a day None
0.055
Nuclear family type Couple
0.053
Bicycle or skateboard distance a day None
0.05
Travel time a day due business None
0.046
Car availability in household One car
0.038
Primary mode of transport for the entire day Passenger car
0.032
Age group of the household member 70 and over
0.031
48
Analysis of multi­year household travel diary data using dynamic topic models
==PAGE:57==
Word
Probability
Walking distance a day None
0.03
Topic 1:
Car/van trips with passenger: Relationship driver/passenger Family
member who lives in my household
0.146
Transport mode chain for the entire day Passenger car passenger
0.059
Travel time a day due leisure More than 60 minutes
0.057
Car/van trips as passenger: Relation to the driver’s trip We went to­
gether, we were to go from the same place to the same place
0.056
Total duration of trips a day More than 80 minutes
0.053
Travel time a day due work or school None
0.049
Primary mode of transport for the entire day Passenger car
0.04
Number of trips a day Five or more
0.033
Travel time a day due business None
0.028
Car/van trips as passenger: Relation to the driver’s trip I was collect­
ed/brought, the entire car trip was for my sake
0.027
Topic 2:
Car type distance a day None
0.067
Municipalty group of home Hovedstadskommuner
0.063
Home, town size 282911 and over
0.062
Primary stay of the day, municipality group Hovedstadskommuner
0.061
Travel time a day due business None
0.046
Distance to nearest station from home 0,8 km or less
0.037
Travel time a day due errand None
0.033
Transport mode chain for the entire day Bicycle
0.033
Primary mode of transport for the entire day Bicycle
0.031
Car availability in household One car
0.03
Topic 3:
Number of people in household Two
0.049
Public transportation distance a day None
0.049
Bicycle or skateboard distance a day None
0.047
Nuclear family type Couple
0.046
Walking distance a day None
0.038
Analysis of multi­year household travel diary data using dynamic topic models
49
==PAGE:58==
Word
Probability
Transport mode chain for the entire day Driver of passenger car
0.038
Travel time a day due business None
0.037
Primary stay of the day, purpose Workplace
0.035
Primary mode of transport for the entire day Passenger car
0.035
Travel time a day due errand None
0.033
Topic 4:
Nuclear family type Couple with child/children
0.062
Age group of the household member 10­19
0.055
Age group of the household member Under 10
0.049
Number of people in household Three or four
0.047
Age group of the household member 40­49
0.045
Public transportation distance a day None
0.045
Travel time a day due business None
0.038
Bicycle or skateboard distance a day None
0.037
Walking distance a day None
0.036
Car availability in household Two cars
0.029
A.3.5
Number of topics: 6
Word
Probability
Topic 0:
Car/van trips with passenger: Relationship driver/passenger Family
member who lives in my household
0.187
Transport mode chain for the entire day Passenger car passenger
0.076
Car/van trips as passenger: Relation to the driver’s trip We went to­
gether, we were to go from the same place to the same place
0.072
Primary mode of transport for the entire day Passenger car
0.068
Car/van trips as passenger: Relation to the driver’s trip I was collect­
ed/brought, the entire car trip was for my sake
0.035
Travel time a day due work or school None
0.031
Car type distance a day Under 5 km
0.029
Car/van trips with passenger: Relationship driver/passenger Friend,
neighbour, other family
0.027
Car type distance a day 10­20 km
0.025
50
Analysis of multi­year household travel diary data using dynamic topic models
==PAGE:59==
Word
Probability
Car type distance a day 5­10 km
0.024
Topic 1:
Travel time a day due work or school None
0.085
Number of people in household Two
0.057
Public transportation distance a day None
0.05
Nuclear family type Couple
0.05
Bicycle or skateboard distance a day None
0.05
Travel time a day due business None
0.049
Car availability in household One car
0.039
Age group of the household member 70 and over
0.03
Primary stay of the day, purpose Shopping
0.027
Walking distance a day Under 5 km
0.023
Topic 2:
Car type distance a day None
0.064
Home, town size 282911 and over
0.061
Municipalty group of home Hovedstadskommuner
0.061
Primary stay of the day, municipality group Hovedstadskommuner
0.059
Travel time a day due business None
0.044
Transport mode chain for the entire day Bicycle
0.042
Public transportation distance a day None
0.039
Primary mode of transport for the entire day Bicycle
0.039
Distance to nearest station from home 0,8 km or less
0.037
Travel time a day due errand None
0.033
Topic 3:
Public transportation distance a day None
0.052
Number of people in household Two
0.05
Nuclear family type Couple
0.047
Transport mode chain for the entire day Driver of passenger car
0.047
Walking distance a day None
0.046
Bicycle or skateboard distance a day None
0.046
Primary mode of transport for the entire day Passenger car
0.045
Primary stay of the day, purpose Workplace
0.039
Analysis of multi­year household travel diary data using dynamic topic models
51
==PAGE:60==
Word
Probability
Travel time a day due business None
0.038
Travel time a day due leisure None
0.037
Topic 4:
Nuclear family type Couple with child/children
0.069
Age group of the household member 10­19
0.062
Age group of the household member Under 10
0.055
Number of people in household Three or four
0.052
Age group of the household member 40­49
0.048
Public transportation distance a day None
0.044
Travel time a day due business None
0.041
Bicycle or skateboard distance a day None
0.038
Walking distance a day None
0.034
Car availability in household Two cars
0.031
Topic 5:
Total duration of trips a day More than 80 minutes
0.136
Car type distance a day More than 60 km
0.07
Travel time a day due work or school More than 60 minutes
0.054
Bicycle or skateboard distance a day None
0.043
Travel time a day due leisure More than 60 minutes
0.038
Primary stay of the day, municipality group Hovedstadskommuner
0.038
Travel time a day due errand None
0.034
Municipalty group of home Hovedstadskommuner
0.034
Home, town size 282911 and over
0.03
Travel time a day due business None
0.028
A.4
PyLDAvis visualization for the whole document and
topics 2­7
52
Analysis of multi­year household travel diary data using dynamic topic models
==PAGE:61==
Figure A.1: Intertopic Distance Map and the most salient words for the LDA model with seven topics
==PAGE:62==
Figure A.2: Intertopic Distance Map and the most relevant words for the LDA model with seven topics
==PAGE:63==
Figure A.3: Intertopic Distance Map and the most relevant words for the LDA model with seven topics
==PAGE:64==
Figure A.4: Intertopic Distance Map and the most relevant words for the LDA model with seven topics
==PAGE:65==
Figure A.5: Intertopic Distance Map and the most relevant words for the LDA model with seven topics
==PAGE:66==
Figure A.6: Intertopic Distance Map and the most relevant words for the LDA model with seven topics
==PAGE:67==
Figure A.7: Intertopic Distance Map and the most relevant words for the LDA model with seven topics
==PAGE:68==
A.5
LDA topics with different random state values
60
Analysis of multi­year household travel diary data using dynamic topic models
==PAGE:69==
Topic
Random State 54
Random State 134
Random State 100
1
175, 178, 84, 61, 54, 7, 134, 87, 25, 8
116, 131, 117, 87, 148, 160, 126, 137, 127, 53
169, 117, 4, 51, 69, 166, 87, 116, 131, 15
2
146, 89, 68, 159, 56, 137, 86, 124, 177, 81
146, 151, 132, 70, 90, 124, 84, 89, 179, 62
146, 160, 116, 138, 72, 93, 56, 157, 131, 154
3
1, 48, 40, 44, 45, 57, 66, 115, 88, 141
1, 48, 40, 44, 132, 60, 14, 115, 57, 45
117, 89, 146, 68, 13, 159, 113, 5, 52, 182
4
117, 60, 83, 151, 57, 132, 137, 87, 159, 91
146, 5, 52, 137, 132, 124, 158, 128, 116, 62
70, 90, 146, 140, 139, 114, 56, 118, 12, 113
5
179, 12, 176, 61, 84, 118, 138, 124, 113, 130
169, 91, 151, 132, 179, 69, 84, 166, 137, 176
132, 151, 137, 158, 91, 128, 57, 71, 124, 60
6
70, 90, 146, 52, 139, 151, 140, 132, 114, 5
60, 83, 117, 151, 137, 132, 91, 57, 71, 158
84, 62, 176, 175, 179, 178, 12, 61, 118, 58
7
132, 158, 151, 137, 128, 62, 91, 124, 58, 84
71, 151, 91, 137, 14, 158, 132, 128, 84, 176
1, 48, 40, 44, 73, 92, 177, 159, 56, 45
Table A.2: Top words of models with different random state. Random state 100 was used to the results presented in the thesis. It can be
seen that there are similar topics e.g. topic 3 for random state 54 & 134 and topic 7 for random state 100, but not even here are all the top words
the same.
Analysis of multi­year household travel diary data using dynamic topic models
61
==PAGE:70==
A.6
DTM model
1
# group the data by time slice and count the number of documents in each group
2
time_slices = random_sample.groupby('DiaryYear')['SessionId'].count().tolist()
3
4
num_time_slices = len(time_slices)
5
6
docs = list(grouped_docu_dyn['document'].str.split())
7
8
# create dictionary
9
id2word = Dictionary(docs)
10
11
# create corpus
12
texts = docs
13
corpus = [id2word.doc2bow(text) for text in texts]
14
15
# build DTM model
16
dtm_model = ldaseqmodel.LdaSeqModel(corpus=corpus , id2word=id2word ,
17
alphas=0.125, initialize='gensim',
18
lda_model=lda_model2 , random_state=42,
19
lda_inference_max_iter=25,
20
time_slice=time_slices ,
21
num_topics=2, passes=10, chunksize=100,
22
em_min_iter=6, em_max_iter=20)
Listing A.2: DTM model
A.7
DTM Intertopic Distance Maps for different time slices
62
Analysis of multi­year household travel diary data using dynamic topic models
==PAGE:71==
Figure A.8: Intertopic Distance Map and the most relevant words of topic 2 for the DTM model with nine topics for time slice 3.
==PAGE:72==
Figure A.9: Intertopic Distance Map and the most relevant words of topic 3 for the DTM model with nine topics for time slice 6.
==PAGE:73==
Figure A.10: Intertopic Distance Map and the most relevant words of topic 4 for the DTM model with nine topics for time slice 9.
==PAGE:74==
Figure A.11: Intertopic Distance Map and the most relevant words of topic 5 for the DTM model with nine topics for time slice 12.
==PAGE:75==
Figure A.12: Intertopic Distance Map and the most relevant words of topic 6 for the DTM model with nine topics for time slice 16.
==PAGE:76==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Bygningstorvet, Building 116
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.man.dtu.dk
