==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Master Thesis
Real-Time ECG Monitoring Mobile App for SUDEP
Risk Mitigation
Adrian Macarenco (s202415)
Kongens Lyngby 2023
==PAGE:2==
DTU Health tech
Department of Health Technology
Technical University of Denmark
Ørsteds Plads, Building 345C
DK-2800 Kgs. Lyngby
healthtech-info@dtu.dk
www.healthtech.dtu.dk/
==PAGE:3==
Summary
Epilepsy, a neurological disorder marked by recurrent seizures, is a global health con-
cern affecting approximately 50 million people worldwide. One of the most severe and
least understood outcomes of this condition is SUDEP (Sudden Unexpected Death
in Epilepsy), which impacts 1 in every 1,000 individuals with epilepsy. Interestingly,
almost half of post-mortem examinations suggest that SUDEP cases are not associ-
ated with seizures, leading to the conclusion that other aspects such as cardiac and
respiratory conditions could contribute to SUDEP.
In this context, the monitoring of cardiac and respiratory functions during seizures
using real-time ECG data emerges as a potential preventive strategy. The Movesense
MD sensor, a wearable device that measures and records physiological signals, includ-
ing ECG data, is a key tool in this approach.
This thesis presents the design and development of a mobile application aimed at
enabling epilepsy patients to monitor real-time ECG data sent by the Movesense MD
sensor. The application’s design places a strong emphasis on usability and accessibility
to ensure that all users, regardless of their abilities and technical expertise, can use it
effectively. The design process follows an User Centred Design (UCD) methodology
and adheres to Apple’s Human Interface Guidelines, which provide design principles
and recommendations for creating user interfaces that adhere to iOS design standards.
A qualitative study involving epilepsy patients will be carried out to evaluate the
usability and perceived usefulness of this system. The ultimate goal is to contribute
to the development of a system that can assist in better managing cardio-respiratory
abnormalities in epilepsy patients and lowering their risk of Sudden Unexpected Death
in Epilepsy (SUDEP).
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This master thesis was prepared at the Department of Health Technology at the
Technical University of Denmark in fulfillment of the requirements for acquiring a
Master Science degree in Computer Science and Engineering.
Kongens Lyngby, June 30, 2023
Adrian Macarenco (s202415)
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
The author expresses gratitude to Jakob E. Bardram, his supervisor, for providing
continuous feedback and insightful ideas throughout this project. Furthermore, the
author appreciates Jakob’s technical assistance when addressing the implementation
of the Server Upload feature.
The author is also grateful to his co-supervisor, ying Gu, for her extraordinary
support, which included assistance in procuring the required hardware. Ying’s prompt
actions were especially remarkable when she quickly procured a new Movesense device
to resolve a significant obstacle involving Faros iOS incompatibility. In addition, the
author thanks ying for her active participation as a collaborator, subject, user, and
co-supervisor during the design and development phases, as evidenced by their weekly
meetings.
In addition, the author wishes to express gratitude to the MonstarLab team, with
special thanks to his manager Jesper Christiansen, who provided understanding and
consistent support throughout the thesis process. Christian Thompson and Tobias
Vogt collaborated as participants, subjects, and evaluators.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Summary
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
Contents
vii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Research Questions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Goals and Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.4
Thesis Overview
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Background and related work
5
2.1
Sudden Unexpected Death in Epilepsy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Electrocardiogram
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.3
Related work: Mobile App for ECG monitoring . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3
Design process
13
3.1
User Centered Design
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.2
Prototype . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4
Software design
25
4.1
System design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.2
Database design
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4.3
Software architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.4
Modularization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
5
Implementation
31
5.1
Movesense API integration
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
5.2
Data management
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
5.3
Lock Screen Widget
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
5.4
Carp integration
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
5.5
ECG Data Transmission Policies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
==PAGE:10==
viii
Contents
6
Validation
49
6.1
User study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
6.2
Data analysis study
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
6.3
Accessibility study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
7
Results and Discussion
55
7.1
Analysis of Studies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
7.2
Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
8
Conclusion
69
A
Acronyms
71
B
Appendix
73
B.1
User Centered Design
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
73
B.2
Study results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
77
B.3
Faros implementation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
92
C
Appendix
99
C.1 EpiHeartMonitor Application . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
99
Bibliography
101
==PAGE:11==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
1.1
Background
Epilepsy is a neurological disorder characterized by recurrent seizures that affects ap-
proximately 50 million people worldwide [Fis+14]. The estimate indicates that about
3.85 percent (1 in every 26 people) will develop epilepsy in their lifetime [Thu+11].
SUDEP is sudden and unexpected death of an epilepsy person without any obvi-
ous cause of death concluded by the post-mortem examination [THF14]. Moreover,
SUDEP affects 1 in every 1,000 epilepsy people [Dev11].
SUDEP is considered as associated with cardio-respiratory arrests [Nas11]. Ac-
cording to previous studies almost half of post-mortem examination suggest SUDEP
cases are not associated with seizure [LS01]. This led to the conclusion that other as-
pects, such as cardiac and respiratory conditions, could contribute to SUDEP. There-
fore, monitoring changes in cardiac and respiratory function during seizures will give
valuable insight into the pathophysiology of SUDEP and help develop preventive
strategies.
An electrocardiogram (ECG) is a non-invasive device that is used to measure
the heart’s electrical activity and can provide valuable information about the heart’s
rhythm and its electrical activity. By streaming an electrocardiogram, an epileptic
patient can monitor heart activity during an attack and provide medical professionals
with valuable data for her SUDEP risk assessment.
Movesense MD is a wearable sensor that can be used to measure and record
physiological signals, including ECG data. The device can transmit data to a mobile
device for analysis and is light and small, making it simple to wear and use. The
Movesense MD device provides reliable and accurate measurements of heart activity
through its built-in ECG function. The device is designed for everyday use. It is small
and light, making it comfortable to wear for extended periods. Its long battery life
ensures that it can continuously monitor and transmit data for prolonged durations,
ensuring comprehensive tracking.
However, despite the capabilities of the Movesense MD sensor in measuring and
recording physiological signals, including ECG data, there are certain limitations that
warrant the need for a mobile application. Considering the uncertainties related to
SUDEP prediction, an effective solution could be a mobile application that enables
individuals with epilepsy to monitor ECG data from the Movesense MD sensor in
real-time. In addition, the data could be stored in the cloud for further analysis,
==PAGE:12==
2
1 Introduction
aiming to identify patterns that may indicate SUDEP. The proposed app would serve
two purposes: first, as an epilepsy management tool with a focus on live ECG data
visualization; and second, as an intermediate actor that facilitates the transmission
of ECG data from the wearable device to a remote server. In order for the app to be
used effectively and eﬀiciently by a wide range of users, regardless of their abilities
and technical expertise, it is essential that it places a strong emphasis on usability
and accessibility.
Usability and accessibility are two essential app features that can have a great
impact on an app’s effectiveness and user adoption. The app will be created with a
focus on usability and an intuitive and user-friendly interface that walks users through
the process of monitoring and analyzing their ECG data to meet the needs and goals
of patients and healthcare professionals. The app will be created with a focus on
accessibility so that it can meet a variety of needs, including support for assistive
technologies and clear, concise, and understandable language.
With an emphasis on usability and accessibility, we will discuss the creation and
assessment of the app for streaming ECG data to epilepsy patients in this thesis.
As well as going over the design and development process, we’ll also talk about the
feedback and testing from users. Ultimately, we want to develop a tool that can assist
in better managing cardio-respiratory abnormalities in epilepsy patients and lowering
their risk of SUDEP.
1.2
Research Questions
• Question 1: What is the UX design that encourages epilepsy patients to use
a mobile application that streams ECG data? What are the main features the
application must have?
• Question 2: How can these features be integrated into a mobile app with
real-time functionality?
• Question 3: What are the main usability and accessibility requirements for
the ECG control and monitoring mobile application for epilepsy patients, and
how can these be implemented into the system design?
• Question 4: What is the state of the art in live ECG monitoring mobile
applications?
1.3
Goals and Methods
The objective of this master’s thesis is to design and implement a mobile applica-
tion that monitors real-time ECG data specifically for individuals with epilepsy. To
achieve this objective, the following goals have been identified:
• Goal 1: Design a mobile application applying UX knowledge.
==PAGE:13==
1.4 Thesis Overview
3
• Goal 2: Integrate a real-time ECG device with a cloud-based service for up-
loading ECG data.
• Goal 3: Determine the key usability and accessibility requirements for the ECG
control and monitoring mobile application for epilepsy patients and incorporate
them into the system design.
• Goal 4: Explore the state of the art of live ECG monitoring mobile applications.
• Goal 5: Conduct a user-oriented study to evaluate the usability of the mobile
app.
• Goal 6: Conduct a data analysis study to assess the accuracy of the ECG data
stored on the server.
1.4
Thesis Overview
• Background and related work will include SUDEP’s epidemiology, risk fac-
tors, pathophysiology, impact on quality of life, prevention strategies, and the
use of wearable ECG devices. subsequently concludes with a discussion of avail-
able mobile applications for ECG monitoring and the necessity of an epilepsy-
specific mobile app.
• Design process will focus on the UCD methodology applied to the design of
the ECG monitoring mobile application. It describes the principles and steps
of UCD, such as comprehending user requirements through interviews and the
creation of personas. The chapter then describes the design characteristics de-
termined by user expectations. The section then addresses the iterative creation
of prototypes using the Figma software.
• Implementation will describe the technical implementation in Swift of the
EpiHeartMonitor mobile application described in Chapters 3 and 4.
• Validation will provides an overview of the three study setups conducted by the
author in order to validate the application, with an emphasis on the tools and
methodologies used. The first study was a user study in which an individual was
recruited to test and evaluate the product. The second study was a data analysis
conducted by the author to guarantee accurate data transmission between the
wearable device and the server. Finally, an accessibility study was conducted
to evaluate the application’s main accessibility features.
• Results and Discussion will present the results of the conducted studies.
It analyzes how each study result validates the application and provides an
analysis of each study result. In addition, the chapter includes a discussion of
the system’s strengths, limitations, and potential for development based on the
findings of the study.
• Conclusion will present a comprehensive summary of the thesis findings and
responses to the thesis’s research questions.
==PAGE:14==
4
==PAGE:15==
CHAPTER 2
Background and
related work
The second chapter offers an overview of SUDEP, including its epidemiology, risk
factors, pathophysiology, impact on quality of life, and prevention strategies. Fur-
thermore, it examines related research on mobile applications for ECG monitoring
and emphasizes the significance of user feedback in the design of effective mobile
health applications.
2.1
Sudden Unexpected Death in Epilepsy
Epilepsy is a complex, enduring neurological condition marked by repetitive, spon-
taneous seizures. It arises due to atypical electrical activity in the brain, causing
various symptoms, including convulsions, loss of consciousness, and sensory distur-
bances [Fis+05]. Around the world, approximately 50 million individuals suffer from
epilepsy, resulting in substantial medical, psychosocial, and financial consequences
[Org19].
In spite of progress in treatment, epilepsy is associated with a higher probability
of untimely death. One of the most severe outcomes related to epilepsy is Sudden
Unexpected Death in Epilepsy (SUDEP). This pertains to the abrupt, inexplicable
passing away of an individual having epilepsy with no other reason of death detected
during an autopsy [Dev11].
2.1.1
Epidemiology of SUDEP
SUDEP incidence is estimated at approximately 1 in 1,000 individuals with epilepsy
each year
[Hes+11].
Nonetheless, these figures might not accurately reflect the
true occurrence since incidents of SUDEP are frequently overlooked or unrecorded.
Significantly, the likelihood of experiencing SUDEP varies among individuals with
epilepsy, and various factors that increase this risk have been recognized.
These
factors include the frequency of generalized tonic-clonic seizures, early epilepsy onset,
poor seizure control, polytherapy with antiepileptic drugs, and nocturnal seizures
[Ryv+13].
==PAGE:16==
6
2 Background and related work
2.1.2
Risk Factors for SUDEP
Individuals with poorly controlled seizures, particularly generalized tonic-clonic seizures,
are at an elevated risk of SUDEP. Early onset of epilepsy, especially childhood onset,
additionally appears to correlate with multiplied risk. Complex medication regimens,
which suggest inadequate management of seizures or the presence of severe forms of
epilepsy, represent yet another noteworthy risk element. The occurrence of seizures
during sleep or nocturnal seizures can also raise SUDEP risk due to the likely absence
of assistance during a seizure occurrence [Ryv+13].
2.1.3
Pathophysiology of SUDEP
The pathophysiology underlying SUDEP remains an active area of research, with
several proposed mechanisms. These generally revolve around seizure-related respi-
ratory dysfunction, cardiac arrhythmia, and autonomic dysregulation. Post-mortem
findings often suggest significant pulmonary edema and neurogenic pulmonary edema,
indicating possible seizure-related respiratory dysfunction [NHM07].
Cardiac arrhythmia is another significant pathophysiological aspect of SUDEP.
Convulsions have the potential to cause irregularities in the heart’s rhythm, such as
ictal sinus tachycardia, ictal bradycardia, and postictal asystole. Mounting evidence
additionally suggests a rise in the frequency of arrhythmogenic syndromes like Long
QT syndrome and Brugada syndrome in epilepsy patients [NHM07].
2.1.4
Impact on Quality of Life
The risk of SUDEP can have significant psychological impacts on patients with
epilepsy and their families, often contributing to anxiety and depression. The ap-
prehension of SUDEP has the potential to adversely impact the quality of life of
patients and create diﬀiculties for healthcare providers who strive to maintain trans-
parency regarding the risks of SUDEP while being mindful of the possibility of causing
anxiety or fear.
Understanding and addressing these challenges is an essential aspect of epilepsy
care. As such, clinicians must employ a patient-centered approach, facilitating open
discussions about SUDEP while providing reassurance and outlining potential risk
mitigation strategies.
2.1.5
Prevention of SUDEP
SUDEP prevention strategies mainly focus on optimizing seizure control, educating
patients and caregivers about SUDEP, and modifying identified risk factors. Recent
initiatives aim to provide nighttime surveillance or observation for patients with a
heightened risk of SUDEP, as there has been a rise in the occurrence of SUDEP
while they are asleep.
These may involve the usa of auditory aids or alerts that
trigger upon identification of seizure occurrence.
==PAGE:17==
2.2 Electrocardiogram
7
The advent of wearable technology represents a promising frontier in SUDEP pre-
vention.
Wearable devices equipped with sensors that can detect abnormal heart
rhythms offer the potential for real-time monitoring. This enables prompt interven-
tion when irregular cardiac activity is detected, which is therefore indicative of a
potential SUDEP episode. This live monitoring can be essential, as heart rhythm
disorders are abrupt and demand prompt attention.
This method takes advantage of the progress in modern technology and the preva-
lence of portable connectivity, providing a proactive resolution that elevates the pa-
tient’s security and tranquility. Unlike traditional methods that react to seizures, this
approach shifts the paradigm towards prevention through continuous monitoring and
timely intervention.
Additionally, wearable devices that can detect anomalous motions linked with
epileptic seizures could also aid in SUDEP prevention. These devices, built upon
sophisticated algorithms, decipher the movement data of the user, distinguishing
between regular and seizure-related movements.
2.2
Electrocardiogram
An Electrocardiogram (ECG) is a medical test that detects heart problems by measur-
ing the electrical activity generated by the heart as it contracts. As a non-invasive,
painless test with rapid outcomes, electrocardiograms have become crucial instru-
ments in the field of healthcare.
The cardiac muscle produces electric impulses that travel through the heart in
a highly controlled and orderly manner, producing a specific sequence of contrac-
tions. These electrical signals originate in the sinoatrial node (the heart’s natural
pacemaker), and subsequently, they disseminate throughout the atria, arrive at the
atrioventricular node, and finally enter the ventricles, causing them to contract.
An ECG tracing represents the electrical activity of the heart. Every heartbeat
is represented by distinct waves (P, Q, R, S, and T) that match particular stages of
the heart’s electrical process.
2.2.1
Clinical Applications of ECG
ECGs are frequently used to detect various heart ailments, including arrhythmias,
heart attacks, and other abnormalities in the heart’s structure.
Regular electrocardiograms are also useful for observing cardiac wellbeing in pa-
tients with pre-existing heart conditions or those at risk, providing medical profession-
als with insights into how a patient’s heart condition is progressing or their reaction
to therapy.
Recent studies indicate that specific ECG irregularities may be more widespread
among individuals with epilepsy, potentially offering a non-invasive approach to de-
tecting individuals with a heightened risk of SUDEP [Ryv+13].
==PAGE:18==
8
2 Background and related work
2.2.2
Understanding ECG Results
A typical ECG waveform consists of the P wave, QRS complex, and T wave. Each
wave corresponds to a specific part of the heart’s electrical cycle.
Figure 2.1: Fundamental ECG waveforms, intervals and segments [AB20].
Abnormal ECG patterns can indicate various heart conditions. For example, an
ST segment elevation can indicate a myocardial infarction, while an irregular QRS
complex may suggest an arrhythmia.
Arrhythmias, or abnormal heart rhythms, are typically detected through distinc-
tive patterns on an ECG. This could involve irregularities in the P wave, QRS complex,
or T wave.
2.2.3
Wearable ECG Devices and Their Importance
The latest technological progress has facilitated the development of wearable ECG
devices. Contrary to traditional ECGs, these devices are portable, which gives users
the ability to track their heart function in real-time, outside of clinical facilities.
Continuous electrocardiogram monitoring may assist in identifying intermittent
or subtle arrhythmias that could be overlooked during a routine ECG examination.
Furthermore, it can provide invaluable information regarding how heart activity varies
in response to daily activities or particular triggers.
Wearable ECG devices empower individuals to take a more proactive role in con-
trolling their health. Real-time data can assist patients in making lifestyle changes,
alert them to potential problems, and help them seek medical attention promptly
[Bau+16].
==PAGE:19==
2.2 Electrocardiogram
9
2.2.4
Modern ECG Monitoring Technologies
ECG technology has significantly evolved, from the first bulky, static devices to com-
pact, wearable, and even implantable units.
Modern devices often integrate with
smartphone applications, providing easy access to real-time data.
While Holter monitors have traditionally been used for long-term heart rhythm
monitoring, they can be bulky and uncomfortable. Modern wearable ECG devices
provide a convenient and comfortable alternative, enabling continuous heart monitor-
ing.
Artificial Intelligence (AI) is increasingly being incorporated into ECG monitoring
systems, with algorithms capable of detecting subtle changes or patterns in heart
rhythms that might be indicative of specific heart conditions.
2.2.5
Real-Time ECG Monitoring
Real-time ECG monitoring provides immediate feedback on heart activity, allowing
for timely intervention in the event of an emergency.
It is particularly useful in
managing conditions such as epilepsy, where a timely response to heart rate changes
could be lifesaving.
Despite its benefits, real-time ECG monitoring poses several challenges, including
data privacy and security issues, as well as ensuring the accuracy and reliability
of continuous data.
However, ongoing technological advancements are continually
addressing these challenges.
Future trends in real-time ECG monitoring include the integration of AI algo-
rithms for enhanced diagnostic capabilities, as well as the development of even more
compact, accurate, and user-friendly wearable devices.
2.2.6
Movesense MD Sensor
The Movesense MD sensor is a small, wearable device capable of recording high-
quality ECG information.
It’s specifically created for continuous, real-time heart
tracking, making it an important tool for managing conditions such as epilepsy.
The Movesense MD sensor is designed to function as a device for measuring both
ECG and motion signals.
It transmits the signals it records to other devices for
analysis via BLE technology.
Movesense MD extracts R-peaks from the recorded
ECG signal with a modified Pan-Tompkins algorithm, permitting measurement of
the R-R interval and subsequent calculation of heart rate [Mov20].
The Movesense MD sensor is characterized by its key features, such as its lightweight
and waterproof design, long battery life, and high-quality ECG data. The device can
be comfortably worn for prolonged periods, making continuous heart activity moni-
toring feasible.
The Movesense MD sensor pairs seamlessly with a mobile application, providing
developers with accessible and easy-to-integrate Bluetooth Low Energy (BLE) connec-
tivity. This results in platform versatility, as the technology is capable of establishing
==PAGE:20==
10
2 Background and related work
a connection with mobile devices running on both Android and iOS operating sys-
tems.
2.3
Related work: Mobile App for ECG monitoring
According to earlier studies, ECG monitoring can improve the detection of cardiac
events that could cause SUDEP and help with epilepsy diagnosis and treatment. Ex-
isting ECG monitoring devices, however, are frequently large and expensive, making
them unsuitable for long-term use by patients in their daily lives, while free apps
target general users or fitness users that generally do not fit epilepsy patients needs.
2.3.1
Mobile Cardiac Telemetry
Bittium’s Mobile Cardiac Telemetry app is a mobile app for people with cardiac
problems that allows users to continuously monitor heart function. It integrates a
Bittium Faros ECG device, which allows ECG streaming and real-time arrhythmia
detection. The service enables continuous remote monitoring outside of the hospital
for up to 30 days. Rapid response to potential problem situations is made possible
by remote monitoring. The patient can use a digital diary in the mobile application
to record symptoms, activity, and sleep during an ECG recording.
Using remote
analysis tools, the specialist can monitor the patient’s health on a daily basis and,
based on the information they receive, determine how long the required recording
period should last.
2.3.2
Beurer HealthManager Pro
ECG functionality is available to users of the mobile health app HealthManager Pro.
Users can easily record their ECG readings and follow them over time in the app
with the help of an external ECG device. The app is a complete tool for monitoring
cardiovascular health because it also has features like heart rate monitoring and blood
pressure tracking. The app is not epilepsy patient-oriented; it is a general health
monitoring app. The app allows users to record and save ECG readings; it does not
support real-time ECG monitoring.
2.3.3
KardiaMobile
AliveCor’s KardiaMobile is a smartphone app with real-time ECG monitoring fea-
tures. The KardiaMobile ECG device, a compact device that snaps onto the back of
a smartphone or tablet, is intended to function in tandem with the app. A medical-
grade ECG reading can be obtained using the device’s two metal electrodes, which the
user applies to their fingers. Users can quickly record and save real-time ECG read-
ings using the KardiaMobile app. The app also has a feature called SmartRhythm
==PAGE:21==
2.3 Related work: Mobile App for ECG monitoring
11
that tracks heart rate and rhythm using artificial intelligence and alerts the user if
an irregularity is found.
2.3.4
Biostrap
Users of the Biostrap app can view comprehensive ECG data, including heart rate
variability, respiratory rate, and heart rate recovery. The app integrates a wearable
wristband device to get data. Advanced analytics tools are also included in the app,
enabling users to monitor their development over time and spot trends and patterns in
their ECG data. One of the distinguishing characteristics of Biostrap is its capacity to
analyze ECG data in real-time and offer individualized feedback and coaching based
on the user’s present fitness level and heart rate. The app also offers a variety of
features for tracking workouts, such as automatic exercise recognition and in-depth
performance analysis. Generally, the Biostrap app is oriented toward fitness users
and does not have medical device integration.
2.3.5
EpDetect
Developed to notify caregivers when a seizure occurs, EpDetect is a mobile epilepsy
seizure alert application. To identify movements that might be seizure-related, the
app uses the phone’s accelerometer and gyroscope sensors. The app notifies desig-
nated caregivers of seizure detection and sends them a notification with the seizure’s
time and location.
Since EpDetect doesn’t keep track of the patient’s heart rate or rhythm, it lacks
ECG capabilities. Instead, it only uses the phone’s sensors to identify seizure activity.
2.3.6
EpiWatch
Johns Hopkins University created the research app EpiWatch to use the Apple Watch
to track epilepsy patients’ seizures. The app makes use of the watch’s sensors, such
as the accelerometer and gyroscope, to identify unusual movements that could be
seizure-related. The app prompts the user to enter seizure details, including the type
and duration, when one is detected. EpiWatch doesn’t have ECG capabilities because
it does not integrate a heart rate sensor. It does, however, give patients a way to
monitor their seizures and get in touch with their medical professionals. Along with
seizure management advice, the app also provides educational materials on epilepsy.
Designing mobile health applications that are user-friendly and accessible to a
variety of patients has been heavily researched in terms of usability and accessibility.
There have been several studies highlighting the significance of incorporating user
feedback into the design of mobile health applications to enhance usability and patient
satisfaction [Har+17].
Overall, there is still a need for an extensive and practical mobile app that is es-
pecially created for streaming ECG data to epilepsy patients, despite prior attempts
==PAGE:22==
12
2 Background and related work
to develop mobile ECG monitoring systems for patients with epilepsy and signifi-
cant research on designing user-friendly and accessible mobile health applications.
Movesense MD device in combination with the proposed mobile app, epilepsy pa-
tients will have access to a practical and reliable tool for real-time ECG monitoring.
The device is a great option for monitoring heart activity during seizures due to its
small size, long battery life, and precise recording system. By creating and analyzing
a mobile app that satisfies the particular demands and needs of epilepsy patients for
ECG monitoring, this thesis seeks to fill this gap in the literature.
==PAGE:23==
CHAPTER 3
Design process
The creation of user-friendly and intuitive applications is covered under app design.
The process entails a deliberate and methodical strategy for developing the User
Interface (UI) and User Experience (UX) in order to guarantee that the application
fulfills the requirements and expectations of its designated users.
Throughout the app design process, this thesis project followed the principles of
UCD. The design process of UCD centers around the users, prioritizing the com-
prehension of their needs, actions, and preferences. This involved conducting user
studies, constructing personas, and iteratively evaluating and enhancing the design
based on valuable user feedback.
3.1
User Centered Design
UCD is a commonly acknowledged design methodology that forms the foundation
for creating effective and user-centric applications [ND88].The core concept of UCD
revolves around prioritizing the users in the design process and involving them as
dynamic contributors throughout the entire design phase. The ultimate goal of User-
Centered Design is to create applications that not only meet functional requirements
but also offer an user interface that is shaped by user needs.
The UCD methodology involves various key steps. The first step is to establish a
thorough understanding of the target users using methodologies like user interviews
and observations. This empowers the creation of personas, which are fictitious repre-
sentations of different user archetypes, encapsulating their characteristics, objectives,
and pain points. These personas act as directing frameworks for creating informed
design choices, prioritizing the requirements and preferences of the users at the fore-
front.
Furthermore, UCD highlights the importance of iterative design and assessment.
Prototypes are created and put through usability testing and user feedback sessions.
This cyclic process allows ongoing refinement and enhancement of the design, ensuring
that it meets the specific needs and expectations of the users. By engaging users in
the evaluation, UCD strives to discover usability problems, address the user’s needs,
and eventually produce a remarkably user-friendly and satisfying application.
==PAGE:24==
14
3 Design process
Figure 3.1: User-Centered Design Process [Usa].
3.1.1
Understanding User Needs
An intricate understanding of the needs and expectations of the end users and inter-
ested parties marks the beginning of the UCD process.
For this venture, two distinct persona types were created to represent the users
of the application.
The first type is represented by epilepsy people who want to
visualize their live ECG data. Their primary objective is to monitor their cardiac
activity in real time and gain insights into their health condition. The second type
is represented by researchers who want to have ECG data on a server so that they
can utilize the data for their research. The objective of these researchers is to make
use of the information for their own research purposes, leveraging it to further their
studies and contribute to the understanding of epilepsy and associated disorders.
Persona 1: Mike
Mike, a 35-year-old software engineer, found his life intertwined with epilepsy
five years ago.
As an individual who navigates the digital world with ease, Mike
is familiar with the domains of mobile applications and wearable devices.
Mike’s
aspirations center around the capability to monitor his heart activity during seizures,
providing a wealth of information for his SUDEP risk assessment. His quest also
drives him to seek an application that can seamlessly track his ECG data and pill
intake in real-time, all within an easy-to-use mobile app.
Persona 2: Anna
Anna, a 50-year-old school teacher, has been living with epilepsy for ten years.
Despite her limited experience with technology, Anna’s desire to better manage her
epilepsy motivates her willingness to learn. Her concerns about her risk of SUDEP
have sparked a determination to be proactive in managing it.
Like Mike, Anna
==PAGE:25==
3.1 User Centered Design
15
aims to monitor her cardiac activity during seizures to provide valuable data for the
evaluation of the risk of SUDEP.
Persona 3: Mary
Mary is a research and study expert in cases related to SUDEP with a keen in-
terest in analyzing Electrocardiogram (ECG) data. Her focus is to comprehend the
trends and patterns associated with SUDEP by conducting extensive research. As
someone well-versed in data analysis and interpretation, Mary needs a mobile appli-
cation that can seamlessly integrate with a wearable ECG device. Her requirements
include displaying real-time data in a meaningful and comprehensive way and the ne-
cessity for cloud storage to store the collected ECG data. Mary specifically requires
the app to transmit data to the cloud in real-time, as she aims to analyze it promptly
and utilize predictive modeling techniques to identify potential SUDEP patterns. Ad-
ditionally, Mary intends to monitor medication consumption to gain a more profound
understanding of its impact on ECG variations.
By exploring the requirements and anticipations of both types of users, we can
ensure that the application is shaped in a way that is user-friendly and aligned with
the project’s objectives.
3.1.2
User Target Interview: Understanding User Expectations
By directly engaging with the target users, valuable perspectives can be obtained to
guide the design and development of a mobile app. This interview aims to explore
users’ experiences, particular feature preferences and concerns, and the significance
they attribute to the accessibility and usability aspects of the app.
• Question 1: Could you please share your experience regarding the
ECG monitoring process?
By understanding participants’ experiences, we can acquire insights into their
acquaintance with ECG surveillance and any challenges they might have con-
fronted.
• Question 2: What specific features or functionalities would you like
to see in an application designed to assist with epilepsy management
and ECG monitoring?
This question aims to reveal the users’ preferred capabilities and features of the
app, enabling us to align the application with their requirements and prefer-
ences.
• Question 3: In your opinion, what is the biggest issue when using an
app that connects to a wearable device?
Identifying possible challenges, we can address any issues associated with wear-
able device connectivity and enhance the overall user experience.
==PAGE:26==
16
3 Design process
• Question 4: On a scale from 0 to 10, where 0 represents the least
importance and 10 signifies the highest importance, how important
is accessibility for an ECG monitoring mobile app to you?
This inquiry evaluates the participants’ prioritization of accessibility function-
alities in the app, providing insights into their demands for inclusivity and ease
of use.
• Question 5: On the same scale, how important is usability for an
ECG monitoring mobile app to you?
This inquiry evaluates the participants’ emphasis on intuitive and user-friendly
design in the app, which will assist us in giving priority to the usability aspects.
3.1.3
Designed Features
The resulting features are a reflection of user expectations and insights gathered from
user target interviews. The following key features have been identified based on these
considerations:
• Live Visualization of ECG Data with Customization and Accessibility
One of the main features of the application is the live visualization of ECG data.
Users can view their real-time ECG data through an intuitive and customizable
visualization interface. The solution allows users to personalize the visualiza-
tion settings according to their preferences. Accessibility is given priority, with
UI components designed to be easily readable and adjustable for users with
varying visual capabilities, emphasizing inclusivity and user friendliness. The
incorporation of an app localization feature can be considered for the purpose
of enhancing accessibility.
• User-Friendly Bluetooth Connection Usability
Recognizing the importance of wearable device connectivity status, the applica-
tion ensures a user-friendly Bluetooth connection experience. Users can easily
access the connection status and battery level of their wearable devices within
the app’s interface. A lock screen widget has been designed to address this
matter. This improves the overall usability and user experience, allowing users
to easily link up and interact with their wearable devices.
• Server Uploading Feature for Data Management
To fulfill the researchers needs for cloud storage, the application integrates a
server uploading feature. This functionality enables the app to securely store
their ECG data on a remote server, ensuring data integrity and availability.
• Pill Intake Feature for Medication Tracking
==PAGE:27==
3.2 Prototype
17
Based on the researchers requirements, a pill intake feature has to be integrated.
This functionality allows researchers to correlate ECG data with specific pill
intakes.
3.2
Prototype
Once the user expectations were identified and established as feature requirements,
the next step of the design procedure was to create an application prototype.
To achieve this, the author of the thesis used Figma software, a platform for
designing and prototyping. Figma empowers designers to create interactive and visu-
ally pleasing prototypes, which facilitate a realistic preview of the application’s user
interface and functionality.
The first step involved transforming the established feature prerequisites into a
visual representation of the mobile interface for the user. This included designing
the layout, navigation flows, and interactive components of the UI solution. Utilizing
Figma’s selection of design assets and cooperative features, the author was able to
produce an initial prototype that mirrored the desired user experience.
3.2.1
First prototype
The first prototype included a comprehensive ”Getting Started” flow that allowed
users to create their accounts. The prototype further showcased a tabbar navigation
with two primary tabs: ”Dashboard” and ”Profile.”
Within the ”Dashboard” tab, the prototype integrated functionalities such as de-
vice scanning and connection. Users are able to connect/disconnect and also visualize
a live preview of their ECG data. Additionally, an expanded view of their ECG data
is available.
To enhance the user experience, the prototype provides three customization op-
tions for ECG visualization.
The first controller allows them to select the ECG
intervals in seconds. The second controller is a color picker for the graph color while
also addressing accessibility needs. The last is the ECG frequency selector, which
served as a device control functionality, giving them control over the sampling rate
or the speed at which the ECG data was captured and displayed.
The initial prototype was shared with users to collect valuable feedback, which
was then utilized to iterate and refine the design. The author used a Figma prototype
sharing link, allowing users to interact with the product design and functionality. This
feedback-driven iteration process aimed to improve usability and align it more with
users expectations.
First prototype link.
==PAGE:28==
18
3 Design process
Figure 3.2: Main screens of the first prototype.
3.2.2
First prototype feedback
The input from users was collected using the comments feature in the Figma proto-
type. Users found it easy to use and intuitive. The Tabbar solution as the primary
navigation and the use of navigation flows as navigation actions added to a native plat-
form application feel, making the application simple, visually attractive, and familiar
to users.
Users’ feedback:
• The main screen’s connect/disconnect button was not aligned with the overall
app design, suggesting a potential design inconsistency.
• Users expressed confusion about the ECG expanded screen, specifically regard-
ing the ECG History view and its purpose.
• Uncertainty about the purpose of the medication list, leaving users unsure of
its intended functionality within the app.
Researcher’s feedback:
• There was a suggestion to consider implementing a pill intake feature in the
app, allowing users to track their pill intake.
• There were questions raised regarding the significance and necessity of the ECG
History view within the app.
==PAGE:29==
3.2 Prototype
19
3.2.3
Second prototype
In the second prototype, the input from the users regarding the design and features of
the initial prototype was considered, resulting in multiple changes and improvements.
To improve the user experience, the user interface solution incorporated valuable
feedback from users.
A noteworthy change made in accordance with feedback from researchers and
users was the creation of a dedicated section for pill intake tracking. This resulted in
a new ”Track Intake” tabview. Additionally, based on both user types feedback, the
decision was made to remove the ECG History segmented controller option from the
expanded ECG Settings screen.
Figure 3.3: Track pill intake feature.
Similarly to the first prototype step, the second prototype was shared through a
Figma sharing URL.
Second prototype link.
3.2.4
Second prototype feedback
Regarding the new ”Track intake” section feedback, it was positive, with people
finding it intuitive and easily accessible. Furthermore, they considered the ”Intake
history” and ”Edit intake” screens intuitive, referencing the iOS native app similarity.
Users’ feedback:
• The device connectivity is not really clear, it is just buttons that state the
connection status.
==PAGE:30==
20
3 Design process
Researcher’s feedback:
• Consider the device battery information when the device is connected.
• Accountless app feature for users that just want to visualize ECG without pro-
viding any personal data.
After taking into account the feedback provided, the requested changes were im-
plemented in the design. The battery level icon was added to the device cell on the
Dashboard screen. A ”Skip” action was added in the ”Getting Started” screen so
that users can skip the personal data setup and navigate directly to the main screen.
Additionally, the connectivity problem was addressed.
Before discussing the solution to the connectivity problem, the final prototype can
be accessed through the following Figma link:
Second prototype link.
3.2.5
Lock Screen Widget: Enhanced Connectivity and Battery
Status Display
Given the Bluetooth connectivity status, the author conducted research on available
iOS APIs and identified two potential solutions.
Apple recently released two new iOS features: Live Activities and the Lock Screen
Widget.
Live Activites are updated based on real-time events and activities directly on
the Lock Screen. It is designed to display information about events such as sports
scores, food delivery, taxi updates, and more without unlocking the iPhone. This
feature eliminates the need to open the app just to access the visualization of a given
product’s status.
==PAGE:31==
3.2 Prototype
21
Figure 3.4: Live Activities examples [Maca].
Lock Screen Widget is similar to Live Activities; it is also displayed on the Lock
Screen. As compared to the previous feature, Lock Screen Widget is especially useful
for users to keep track of essential information on the go. Lock Screen Widgets in iOS
have standardized sizes, offering three variants: half-width, quarter-width, and inline.
These indicate that the Lock Screen Widget is not designed for complex visualization
but rather for displaying essential data, ensuring that the user experience is clutter-
free and smooth.
Figure 3.5: Lock Screen Widget examples [Macb].
Considering our scenario, it would be feasible to use either Live Activities or a
Lock Screen Widget for displaying the connection status and the device battery level.
However, it is noteworthy that Live Activity is essentially designed to represent real-
time actions that have an important visualization. While our ECG data stream and
server updates can be considered live activities, their visualization is not important
for our users. ECG visualization is the only candidate for a Live Activity feature,
==PAGE:32==
22
3 Design process
but displaying a live ECG graph on a lock screen may be distracting while also using
a lot of CPU resources. On the other hand, the Lock Screen Widget offers a more
elegant solution in a compact and accessible format.
Figure 3.6: EpiHeartMonitor Lock Screen Widget.
The installation procedure for the Lock Screen is not the simplest endeavor a
user may undertake. This procedure requires a series of actions that may not be
immediately apparent or obvious. As a result, a comprehensive installation guide has
been included in the app’s profile. This article intends to provide users with detailed
instructions for installing the EpiHeartMonitor Lock Screen Widget.The guide should
be displayed within the app, appearing for the first time when the user activates the
app after connecting a device. Screenshots illustrating the guide flow are shown in
Figure 3.7
Figure 3.7: Lock Screen Installation Guide.
==PAGE:33==
3.2 Prototype
23
3.2.6
Final prototype
The final prototype was created through an iterative prototyping process while taking
the feedback received from users into account. This method required multiple adjust-
ments to features, sections, styling, and navigation based on user suggestions. The
Appendix contains a collection of all the screens(see Figure B.3). The main screens
of the application are illustrated in Figure 3.8.
Figure 3.8: EpiHeartMonitor main screens.
==PAGE:34==
24
==PAGE:35==
CHAPTER 4
Software design
This chapter will address the solution design system, describing aspects such as soft-
ware architecture and database design. In addition, the modularized approach will be
discussed, along with its significance for a modern application promoting scalability,
maintainability, and reusability.
4.1
System design
The ApiHeartMonitor application serves a dual role, addressing the needs of both
researchers end epilepsy users who want to visualize and monitor their cardiac elec-
troactivity and researchers or professionals seeking to analyze the stored ECG data
on the server side. While the design process for the application solution was described
in the previous chapter, the current chapter will tackle the technical design aspect of
the plugin role of the application.
At a macro level, the technology solution comprises three core components: the
wearable device, the mobile application, and the cloud server. These components
function within a unidirectional data flow: the device sends data to the mobile appli-
cation, and the mobile application securely stores the data on the server.
Figure 4.1: System Components Data Flow.
The mobile solution plays a pivotal plugin role, bridging device data to the cloud.
It is crucial that it implement a robust server uploading policy while also guaranteeing
the integrity, authenticity, and completeness of the received data.
EpiHeartMonitor integrates the CACHET Research Platform (CARP) Web Ser-
vices API for server upload. CARP Web Services by Bardram is a versatile platform
designed to carry out mobile health studies where data is collected from participants
smartphones and wearable devices. The system provides a safe hosting infrastructure
==PAGE:36==
26
4 Software design
managed by the Copenhagen Center for Health Technology (CACHET), ensuring
data privacy and protection. There are two main reasons for choosing this frame-
work. Firstly, its robust security policy offers a trustworthy environment for storing
sensitive health data.
Secondly, CARP Web Services offers flexibility through its
file-controller API. The only prerequisite in order to use CARP’s service is to have
a predefined Study in its system and use the given StudyId when uploading to the
server.
By leveraging CARP Web Services, the research project gains a comprehensive,
scalable, and flexible platform that offers robust technical support and configuration
options.
4.2
Database design
EpiHeartMonitor uploads files in the format of a SQLite database. SQLite is a rela-
tional local database system that offers a serverless and configuration-free database
engine. Its purpose is to be embedded within applications, allowing the local client
to store, retrieve, and manage data eﬀiciently.
There are several reasons that led to the SQLite database solution.
One key
reason is its compatibility with the CARP Web Service file-controller API. The server
solution we chose supports a single file upload. SQLite provides an inherent solution
for supporting multi-operation locking mechanisms, dealing with the likely occurrence
of race conditions when multiple operations are performed asynchronously. Moreover,
considering the various client side data management requirements, such as uploading,
saving, and temporary caching before server upload, SQLite is an optimal solution.
It fulfills two-fold roles by serving as the file format for server uploads and as a local
temporary storage solution for effective data management.
==PAGE:37==
4.3 Software architecture
27
Figure 4.2: SQLite Database Tables.
In Figure 4.2 , the SQLite database scheme is presented. There are five existing
tables: Users, Ecgevents, Medications, ActiveIngredients and Intakes. The Users table
does not have any relationships as it solely represents the local user in the database.
The Ecgevents table has two fields: the timestamp and the ECG comma-separated
values text. A medication can have multiple active ingredients, this is why its id is a
foreign key for the ActiveIngedients table. Medication ID is also a foreign key in the
Intakes table that represents the pill intake records.
4.3
Software architecture
EpiHeartMonitor follows the Model-View-ViewModel software architecture. Model-
View-ViewModel (MVVM) is a design pattern that divides the application into three
distinct parts: the Model, The View and the ViewModel.
The model represents
data types that are shaped by the business logic; the View is the user interface, and
the ViewModel functions as an intermediary between the Model and the View. The
MVVM architecture promotes a distinct separation of responsibilities, improves code
organization, and elevates testability and maintainability.
==PAGE:38==
28
4 Software design
EpiHeartMonitor uses SwiftUI for developing its UI. SwiftUI is a modern UI frame-
work provided by Apple that supports the MVVM pattern. SwiftUI is a declarative,
state-driven framework that streamlines user interface development. Despite Apple
having not oﬀicially provided software architecture recommendations, SwiftUI’s APIs
such as @ObservedObject and @State, indicate the adoption of a state-driven archi-
tecture.
4.4
Modularization
Within an application, there are multiple functional features and their supporting
features such as Bluetooth client and API client. These features, whether functional
or supportive, frequently require reuse across different modules, applications, and even
platforms to prevent redundancy. To accomplish this, developers aim to modularize
these components. However, in the Swift environment, available tools, such as static
frameworks, target frameworks, and Cocoa Pods, often pose challenges of complexity
in configuration, debugging, and lack of intuitiveness.
Fortunately, Apple launched Swift Package Manager in 2018. Swift Package Man-
ager (SPM) is their first-party solution for dependency management that offers a
robust system for modularizing project components. SPM streamlines the process by
using a Package.swift file, where the modules are configured, providing transparency
in managing and maintaining its contents. This method ensures a clean and eﬀicient
way to handle dependencies. Moreover, with Xcode support, every single component
can be built and tested in isolation, further promoting clean code, maintainability
and improving code reusability and flexibility.
Figure 4.3: Package.swift example.
==PAGE:39==
4.4 Modularization
29
Furthermore, SPM is also great for external dependency management. If a module
requires an external dependency, it can be easily added to that individual module.
This offers granular control over modules.
EpiHeartMonitor uses SPM to modularize its components and manage their ex-
ternal dependencies. Figure 4.4 presents its modules, grouping them by their func-
tionality.
Figure 4.4: EpiHeartMonitor Modules.
==PAGE:40==
30
==PAGE:41==
CHAPTER 5
Implementation
This chapter describes the technical implementation of the EpiHeartMonitor mobile
application described in Chapter 3 and 4. The author will start by explaining the
process of integrating the Movesense MD sensor. Subsequently, a detailed description
of the SQLite implementation. This will be followed by the CARP integration and
then the Lock Screen Widget implementation.
5.1
Movesense API integration
The Movesense MD sensor can be seamlessly integrated into applications by utilizing
the Movesense API. The API documentation [Mov] offers detailed information on how
to utilize these functionalities effectively, making it an essential reference for develop-
ers looking to incorporate Movesense capabilities into their applications. The device
offers a wide range of features, including sensor data collection, device configuration,
and real-time monitoring.
The device supports BLE technology; therefore, its integration requires the use
of Apple’s Core Bluetooth framework [Appc]. Core Bluetooth is an iOS Framework
provided by Apple to build Bluetooth Low Energy applications that communicate
with hardware devices.
5.1.1
MovesenseApi-iOS
Mikko Eronen [Mik] has developed a Swift API that provides an Event-based Swift
API for communicating with Movesense sensors through BLE. His implementation
utilizes the Core Bluetooth framework [Appc] and provides an extensive range of func-
tionality. The EpiHeartMonitor app requires device scanning, device connectivity,
HR and ECG subscriptions, battery level, and system settings. Mikko’s implementa-
tion fulfills all of the author’s needs. The primary advantage of utilizing Mikko’s API
[Mik] is its support for SPM integration. This allows for easy integration, as discussed
in Chapter 4, without the need for a dependency wrapper or other workaround.
Listing 5.1 highlights how is MovesenseApi-iOS [Mik] added as a dependency in
the Package.swift SPM file configuration.
==PAGE:42==
32
5 Implementation
1 .target(
2
name: "Model",
3
dependencies: [
4
.product(name: "MovesenseApi", package: "MovesenseApi-iOS")
5
]
6 )
Listing 5.1: MovesenseApi Dependency.
5.1.2
Bluetooth client
Section 4.3 explores the concept of the ViewModel layer, which functions as the
holder of the view state and enables interaction with services to modify the state.
In this specific scenario, the author designed the bluetooth service interface, named
BluetoothClient, to act as a client. This client is injected as a dependency into all
ViewModels that communicate with the Movesense sensor. Given the current con-
text, the author designed the bluetooth service interface as a client: BluetoothClient.
BluetoothClient is injected as a dependency into all ViewModels that interact with
the Movesense sensor.
Interacting with BLE devices means that the client has to perform work asyn-
chronously. In Swift, there are several approaches to accomplishing this, including
the use of completion handlers, observers, and async/await. For the purpose of this
project, the author has chosen the async/await API due to its readability and sim-
plicity.
1 public struct BluetoothClient {
2
public var isDeviceConnected: () -> Bool
3
public var getDeviceBattery: (DeviceWrapper) async throws -> Int
4
public var scanDevices: () -> Void
5
public var stopScanningDevices: () -> Void
6
public var getDevice:(DeviceNameSerial) -> DeviceWrapper?
7
public var getDiscoveredDevices: () -> [DeviceWrapper]
8
public var getDeviceBatteryPercentage: (DeviceWrapper) async throws
,→-> Int
9
public var getDeviceEcgInfo: (DeviceWrapper) async throws ->
,→MovesenseEcgInfo
10
public var discoveredDevicesStream: () -> AsyncStream<DeviceWrapper>
11
public var connectToDevice: (DeviceWrapper) async throws ->
,→DeviceWrapper
12
public var disconnectDevice: (DeviceWrapper) async throws ->
,→DeviceWrapper
13
public var disconnectionStream: () -> AsyncStream<MovesenseDevice>
14
public var subscribeToEcg: (DeviceWrapper, Int) -> Void
15
public var unsubscribeEcg: (DeviceWrapper) -> Void
==PAGE:43==
5.1 Movesense API integration
33
16
public var subscribeToHr: (DeviceWrapper) -> Void
17
public var unsubscribeHr: (DeviceWrapper) -> Void
18
public var hrStream: () -> AsyncStream<MovesenseHeartRate>
19
public var dashboardEcgPacketsStream: () -> AsyncStream<MovesenseEcg>
20
public var settingsEcgPacketsStream: () -> AsyncStream<MovesenseEcg>
21
}
Listing 5.2: BluetoothClient Interface.
Encapsulating itself within its own module, it ensures that it can be built and tested
in isolation.
To effectively handle dependencies such as the BluetoothClient, the
author used Point-Free’s Dependencies API [Poi], which allows the provision of live,
failing, and test values based on the context. This is achieved by conforming to the
DependencyKey protocol and providing at least the liveValue.
1 extension BluetoothClient: DependencyKey {
2
public static var liveValue: BluetoothClient {
3
let bluetoothManager = BluetoothManager()
4
5
return .init(
6
isDeviceConnected: { bluetoothManager.isDeviceConnected },
7
getDeviceBattery: { try await bluetoothManager.
,→getDeviceBattery($0) },
8
// inititializer implementation
9
settingsEcgPacketsStream: { bluetoothManager.
,→settingsEcgPacketsStream }
10
)
11
}
12 }
Listing 5.3: BluetoothClient Services.
5.1.3
Bluetooth manager
When liveValue is initialized, BluetoothClient extension uses an instance of the Blue-
toothManager class. BluetoothManager is a class that interacts directly with MovesenseApi-
iOS [Mik]. The manager keeps track of the state of the connected device and executes
device commands.
By conforming to the Observer protocol defined in MovesenseApi-iOS [Mik], it
can capture the Movesense responses that can be grouped in 3 types of responses:
Movesense API Event, Movesense Device Event and Movesense Operation
Event. Movesense API Event is related to device connection management, such as
==PAGE:44==
34
5 Implementation
discovered, connected, and disconnected. Movesense Device Event is similar to the
previous type, except that this event is not caused by a command sent to the device,
for example if the connection is lost. Movesense Operation Event is related to sub-
scriptions such as ECG, Heart Rate, Accelerometer, Gyro. Another operation Blue-
toothManager is tasked with is to bridge the completion handler and delegate callback
asynchronous work to the new async/await world. It uses async/await continuation
[Appb] and async stream continuation [Appa] every time an MovesenseApi-iOS event
is received.
Figure 5.1: Movesense Integration Overview.
Figure 5.1 illustrates end-to-end MovesenseApi-iOS API [Mik] integration. View-
Model communicates whit the BluetoothClient dependency that is injected into it,
which subsequently uses BluetoothManager functionality that interacts with MovesenseApi-
iOS API.
==PAGE:45==
5.2 Data management
35
5.2
Data management
Data management is an important aspect of mobile app development, as it requires
stable and accurate handling of sensitive input like personal data and authentication
credentials, as well as application-specific data. In the case of the EpiHeartMonitor
app, the data can be classified into two distinct categories.
The first category pertains to the research analysis data; it has a deterministic
save-upload-clear policy and should be uploaded as a bundle.
The second category consists of data that is primarily related to the app fea-
tures implementation, including ECG configuration, information about previously
connected device, authentication tokens, and more.
To meet these requirements, two different persistent data approaches were imple-
mented. As discussed in Section 4.2, the first solution involves SQLite database, while
the second is a custom Persistent Client that saves information in JSON files on the
disk.
5.2.1
SQLite implementation
Apple provides an in-built SQLite database implementation for iOS. However, inte-
grating it demands following various steps, as demonstrated in the Kodeco SQLite
tutorial [Kod]. These steps imply a C API interactor and tedious callbacks, which
are not straight-forward and time-consuming for a simple use case such as EpiHeart-
Monitor. This led the author to explore alternative solutions that could provide a
swift implementation suitable for the thesis context.
Several options were available, including FMDB[ccg], Realm[Mon], SQLite.swift[Steb]
and more. The author chose the SQLite.swift solution for several reasons. As illus-
trated in Listing 5.4, it provides a pure Swift interface, ensuring type safety while also
supporting optional-aware SQL expression building. It also comes with automatically-
typed data access mapping, mapping Swift types directly to their SQLite counter-
parts.
1 private let users = Table("users")
2 private let userId = Expression<String>("id")
3 private let fullName = Expression<String?>("full_name")
Listing 5.4: SQLite Swift Interface.
Ultimately, SQLite.swift[Steb] offers developers a versatile solution that has been
extensively tested and has a proactive community, ensuring continuous support and
development.
==PAGE:46==
36
5 Implementation
The selected library offers a modern dependency integration alternative with SPM.
Hence, incorporating it in the EpiHeartMonitor project requires adding just two lines
of code in the Package.swift file (lines 2 and 9 in Listing 5.5).
1
dependencies: [
2
.package(url: "https://github.com/stephencelis/SQLite.swift.git
,→", from: "0.14.1"),
3
],
4
targets: [
5
.target(
6
name: "DBManager",
7
dependencies: [
8
"Model",
9
.product(name: "SQLite", package: "SQLite.swift")
10
]
11
)
12
]
Listing 5.5: SQLite.Swift SPM Integration.
Generally, the SQLite integration overview is analogous to the integration of
Movesense presented in figure 5.1. Each one involves identical components: firstly, a
client that is injected into the ViewModel and a manager that provides functionality
to the client. The manager directly interacts with the dependency library. Client
and manager have their own module, this offers a clear separation of responsibilities
and enables building and testing in isolation. The author has created a DBClient
that is injected as a dependency into the ViewModels. ViewModels can use the client
functionality to perform database operations, as highlighted in Listing 5.6. The client
performs asynchronous work using DBManager.
1 public class AddMedicationViewModel: ObservableObject {
2
@Dependency (\.dbClient) var dbClient
3
// Implementation
4
func addMedication() {
5
// Functionality logic
6
let medication = try await dbClient.createMedication(
,→medicationName, validIngredients)
7
}
8 }
Listing 5.6: DBClient Esage Example.
==PAGE:47==
5.2 Data management
37
The DBManager class has a database connection reference that is stored locally.
The path of the database file is provided as an environment variable, which has
been set in such a way that it is backed up by iCloud, ensuring that users’ data is
safeguarded and avoiding any potential loss of data.
1 dbBasePath: NSSearchPathForDirectoriesInDomains(
2
.documentDirectory, .userDomainMask, true
3
).first!
Listing 5.7: Database Environment Path URL Variable.
DBManager behavior is very similar to the REST API. It implements functions
that interact with the database using the database connection. It implements opera-
tions such as get, create, update, and delete for each of the existing database entities.
Listing 5.8 shows create user operation the manager executes.
1 public func addUser(userId: String, fullName: String?, birthday: Date?,
,→gender: String?, weight: Double?, height: Double?, diagnosis:
,→String?) async throws -> User {
2
return try await withCheckedThrowingContinuation { cont in
3
do {
4
let insert = users.insert(self.userId <- userId, self.fullName
,→
<- fullName, self.birthday <- birthday, self.gender <-
,→
gender, self.weight <- weight, self.height <- height,
,→self.diagnosis <- diagnosis)
5
_ = try dbConnection.run(insert)
6
cont.resume(returning: .init(
7
id: userId,
8
fullName: fullName,
9
birthday: birthday,
10
gender: gender,
11
weight: weight,
12
height: height,
13
diagnosis: diagnosis
14
))
15
} catch {
16
cont.resume(throwing: error)
17
}
18
}
19 }
Listing 5.8: Add User DBManager Function.
==PAGE:48==
38
5 Implementation
The function uses withCheckedThrowingContinuation closure to bridge the
asynchronous work from the completion handler to the async/await world. Then, in-
side the closure, it tries to execute the insert query using the dbConnection instance.
This task has to be encapsulated into a do-try-catch Swift statement for proper ex-
ception handling. Upon successful execution of the operation, the async/await con-
tinuation returns a Void response. However, if an error occurs during the operation,
the continuation throws the corresponding error.
The same approach is applied for the remaining functions related to users, active-
Ingredients, intakes, ecgEvents, medications tables.
5.2.2
Persistence Client
Persistence Client is designed the same way BluetoothClient and DBClient were
designed. They follow the client pattern, having it’s own SPM module. Persistence
Client is responsible for saving data persistently on the disk. It creates, reads, and
writes to specific JSON format files. To fulfill these requirements, a FileClient helper
type is used. FileClient implements the load and save functionalities of a generic
Value type that conforms to the Codable protocol.
1 public struct FileClient<Value> {
2
3
public var load: () -> Value?
4
public var save: (Value?) -> Void
5
6
public init(load: @escaping () -> Value?, save: @escaping (Value?)
,→
-> Void) {
7
self.load = load
8
self.save = save
9
}
10 }
Listing 5.9: FileClient Type.
By conforming to this protocol, the client gains the capability to encode and
decode a specific object of type Value to and from data.
1 private func saveValue<Value>(
2
_ value: Value?, forKey key: String,
3
in directory: FileManager.SearchPathDirectory = .documentDirectory
4 ) where Value: Codable {
5
let url = getDirectoryURL(directory).appendingPathComponent(key)
6
==PAGE:49==
5.2 Data management
39
7
guard let value = value else {
8
try? FileManager.default.removeItem(at: url)
9
return
10
}
11
12
do {
13
let data = try JSONEncoder().encode(value)
14
try data.write(to: url, options: .atomic)
15
} catch {
16
print("did not write to url \(url.absoluteString) due to: \(error
,→)")
17
}
18 }
19
20 private func loadValue<Value>(
21
forKey key: String, in directory: FileManager.SearchPathDirectory = .
,→documentDirectory
22 ) -> Value? where Value: Codable {
23
let path = getDirectoryURL(directory).appendingPathComponent(key)
24
do {
25
let data = try Data(contentsOf: path)
26
return try JSONDecoder().decode(Value.self, from: data)
27
} catch {
28
print("\(#function) No value decoded for key: \(key) error: \(
,→error.localizedDescription)")
29
return nil
30
}
31 }
Listing 5.10: Load and Save File Client Implementations.
Each function of Persistence Client uses a File Client implementation, providing a
key of type String that is appended to the file’s path. This approach ensures that each
type of saved information has its own dedicated file. Figure 5.11 showcases the live
value of the Persistence Client and the corresponding file name for each implemented
type.
1 extension PersistenceClient {
2
public static func live(keyPrefix: String) -> Self {
3
.init(
4
user: .live(key: keyPrefix + ".savedUser"),
5
deviceNameSerial: .live(key: keyPrefix + ".
,→savedConnectedNameSerialDevice"),
6
deviceConfigurations: .live(key: keyPrefix + ".
,→savedConnectedDeviceConfigurations"),
==PAGE:50==
40
5 Implementation
7
ecgConfiguration: .live(key: keyPrefix + ".
,→savedEcgViewConfiguration"),
8
medications: .live(key: keyPrefix + ".savedMedications"),
9
medicationIntakes: .live(key: keyPrefix + ".
,→savedMedicationIntakes"),
10
apiTokenWrapper: .live(key: keyPrefix + ".apiTokenWrapper"),
11
prevEcgUploadingDate: .live(key: keyPrefix + ".
,→prevEcgUploadingDate")
12
)
13
}
14 }
Listing 5.11: Persistence Client Live Value.
Persiste Client is shared and utilized across View Models in a similar manner as the
previous dependency clients. By leveraging Point-Free’s [Poi] @Dependency annota-
tion, the same liveValue instance can be accessed by the application’s ViewModels.
5.3
Lock Screen Widget
Lock Screen Widgets, as their name implies, are small applications that offer easily
accessible content that remains visible on the lock screen of the mobile device.
Lock Screen Widgets are available on iOS 16+ and they are developed using the
Apple WidgetKit framework [Appg]. WidgetKit is a toolkit that is used to build
home screen widgets, Live Activities Widget and Lock Screen for multiple platforms,
including iOS, watchOS, iPadOS and macOS.
To specify the widget type, Apple has implemented an enumeration type (Enum)
that defines widget’s size and shape. The available homescreen types are systemSmall,
systemMedium, systemLarge, and systemExtraLarge.
The Lock Screen Widget features add three more cases that are associated with
this specific widget.
• accessoryRectangular
This type can showcase multiple lines of text or small visualizations. It can be
used to display a wide range of information, such as calendar events, their time
and location, or a list of items. It has a width that spans half of the screen’s
width, while the height is fixed. These dimensions make this type the largest
variant available.
• accessoryInline
The second case provides a single row of text and an optional image.
It is
centered on top of the OS time view. Some available implementations are, for
example, weather with an appropriate image or the number of unread emails.
==PAGE:51==
5.3 Lock Screen Widget
41
• accessoryCircular
The last Lock Screen variant displays its data in a circular view. It’s usually
used to display metrics, progress views, or gauges. It can be used to display
wearable device battery, fitness metrics, or temperatures.
On a lock screen,
there can be a maximum of four accessoryCircular Lock Screen Widgets.
According to subsection 3.2.6 the author implemented an accessoryRectangular
Lock Screen Widget.
To add a Widget to the project, a new target called Wid-
getExtension was added.
A widget extension represents a lightweight application
that is linked to the main app. It can execute its own code and display the con-
tent accordingly. As a result, a new EpiHeartMonitorWidgetsExtension widget
target was added to the project. Additionally, two files are automatically generated
by Xcode: EpiHeartMonitorWidgetsBundle.swift and EpiHeartMonitorWidgets.swift.
By conforming to the WidgetBundle protocol, the first file specifies the view that is
used to create the WidgetView. Listing 5.12 highlights its implementation.
1 import WidgetKit
2 import SwiftUI
3
4 @main
5 struct EpiHeartMonitorWidgetsBundle: WidgetBundle {
6
var body: some Widget {
7
EpiHeartMonitorWidgets()
8
}
9 }
Listing 5.12: EpiHeartMonitor Widget Bundle.
While the bundle file implementation was relatively straightforward, the View file
is slightly more complex and requires specific implementations. Prior to delving into
its explanation, it is important to present a summary of the widget update cycle and
how the EpiHeartMonitor application enables it.
==PAGE:52==
42
5 Implementation
Figure 5.2: Lock Screen Widget Update Flow.
It is important to mention that direct communication between the mobile app
and its Lock Screen Widget is not possible. The communication is mediated by the
operating system for multiple reasons beyond the scope of this implementation. To
establish this indirect communication, a designated target capability named App
Groups had to be assigned to both application and widget targets. By enabling
App Groups with the same suiteName, the operating system grants multiple apps
developed by the same team access to a shared container. This container provides
User Defaults persistence memory access for apps within the same app group. User
Defaults is a database where key-value pairs can be persistently stored across the app
group.
Figure 5.2 illustrates the update flow of a lock screen widget.
Considering a
scenario where the app is in the background and has ongoing code execution to handle
a device disconnection event callback. Upon receiving the didDisconnect event, it is
necessary to mirror this state in the Widget view on the Lock Screen. The following
==PAGE:53==
5.3 Lock Screen Widget
43
steps outline the flow presented in Figure 5.2:
1. Firstly, the app updated the value of the ”isConnected” key of the UserDefaults
suite with the common suiteName.
2. Next, it notifies the operating system to update the timeline of the Widget of
a given kind.
3. Subsequently, the operating system communicates to the specific widget that it
should refresh.
4. Finally, the widget fetches the data from the common UserDefaults suite and
updates its views accordingly.
For managing the updating and fetching of the connection status and battery level,
a WidgetClient has been created. WidgetClient follows the client pattern the author
presented in the previous sections. Having its own modules enables sharing it across
the main app target and the widget target. It owns the kind, suiteName, connection,
and battery level keys as static properties.
1 public struct WidgetClient {
2
static let suiteName = "group.Epilepsy-ECG.shared"
3
static let isConnectedKey = "isDeviceConnected"
4
static let deviceBatteryPercentageKey = "deviceBatteryPercentage"
5
static public let kind = "EpiHeartMonitorWidgets"
6
7
public var updateConnectionStatus: (_ isConnect: Bool) -> Void
8
public var updateBatteryPercentage: (_ newValue: Int) -> Void
9
public var fetchConnectionStatus: () -> Bool?
10
public var fetchBatteryPercentage: () -> Int?
11 }
Listing 5.13: Widget Client Implementation.
To highlight the first and second steps from Figure 5.2, the following calls are
needed:
1 widgetClient.updateConnectionStatus(isDeviceConnected)
2 WidgetCenter.shared.reloadTimelines(ofKind: WidgetClient.kind)
Listing 5.14: Update WidgetClient data and reload Widget timeline.
Moving to step number three, the system executes the command by invoking
WidgetCenter which reloads the timelines for all configured widgets belonging to the
given kind. Ultimately, to ensure the widget view is refreshed accordingly, the timeline
callback is handled within the Provider structure type, which has been automatically
generated by Xcode in the EpiHeartMonitorWidgets.swift file.
==PAGE:54==
44
5 Implementation
The Provider delegate function callback that is called when the system reloads
the timeline is called getTimeline. This function returns the state of WidgetView,
specifically, in the thesis project, it is referred to as EpiHeartMonitorWidgetsEn-
tryViewModel. The following listing demonstrates the EpiHeartMonitor timeline
implementation.
1 func getTimeline(for configuration: EpiHeartMonitorStatusIntent, in
,→context: Context, completion: @escaping
2 (Timeline<EpiHeartMonitorWidgetsEntryViewModel>) -> ()) {
3
guard
4
let isConnected = widgetClient.fetchConnectionStatus(),
5
let batteryPercentage = widgetClient.fetchBatteryPercentage()
,→else {
6
let vm = EpiHeartMonitorWidgetsEntryViewModel(isConnected: false,
,→
batteryPercentage: -1)
7
completion(.init(entries: [vm], policy: .atEnd))
8
return
9
}
10
11
let vm = EpiHeartMonitorWidgetsEntryViewModel(isConnected:
,→isConnected, batteryPercentage: batteryPercentage)
12
13
let timeline = Timeline(entries: [vm], policy: .atEnd)
14
completion(timeline)
15 }
Listing 5.15: EpiHeartMonitor Timeline Implementation.
Whenever this function callback is received, it attempts to fetch the connection
status and the battery percentage values (code lines 4 and 5 in Listing 5.16). If either
of them is missing (nil), it indicates that they were never set and the default view
state should be displayed. Otherwise, the view model is initialized using the existing
values and triggers the WidgetView refresh.
5.4
Carp integration
As presented in Section 4.1, the EpiHeartMonitor app integrates the file-controller
API [CAC] provided by CARP Web Services. According to the API documentation,
this endpoint offers flexibility, allowing the authenticated client to upload files in
various formats. The request body must contain the file in a multipart/form-data
type.
To handle authentication, the author first implemented an AuthenticationHan-
dler that uses CARP system credentials to request an access token. If the token is
missing or expired, the solution integrates the PersistenceClient feature introduced
==PAGE:55==
5.4 Carp integration
45
in Section 5.2.2. AuthenticationHandler is an actor type, which is a Swift reference
type and is similar to a class; additionally, it offers concurrency safety. To ensure this
feature, actors methods that access their data have to be implemented using the new
async/await API. The reason AuthenticationHandler type has to be concurrently safe
is that the ApiToken data cannot be edited and read at the same time, thus avoiding
data races.
The implementation includes a static function named performAuthenticatedU-
ploadRequest, which takes an URL request and file path URL as parameters. The
function verifies if a valid access token is available. If a valid token exists, it performs
the authenticated upload request. However, if the response indicates a 401 error code,
it requests a new access token.
1 public func performAuthenticatedUploadRequest(_ request: URLRequest, _
,→fromFile: URL) async throws -> (Data, URLResponse) {
2
do {
3
let tokens = try await validTokens()
4
do {
5
let response = try await performAuthenticatedUploadRequest(
,→request, fromFile, accessToken: tokens.accessToken)
6
if
7
let code = (response.1 as? HTTPURLResponse)?.statusCode,
,→code == 401 {
8
throw URLError(.userAuthenticationRequired)
9
}
10
return response
11
} catch let error as URLError where error.code == .
,→userAuthenticationRequired {
12
let newTokens = try await Self.getNewAccessToken(
13
getTokenUrl: getTokenUrl,
14
carpUsername: self.carpUsername,
15
carpPassword: self.carpPassword,
16
networkRequest: self.networkRequest)
17
self.apiTokens = newTokens
18
let response = try await performAuthenticatedUploadRequest(
,→request, fromFile, accessToken: newTokens.accessToken)
19
return response
20
}
21
} catch {
22
apiTokens = nil
23
throw error
24
}
25 }
Listing 5.16: EpiHeartMonitor timeline implementation.
==PAGE:56==
46
5 Implementation
In the absence of a valid token, the authentication handler requests a new access
token using its saved credentials. The newly received token is then stored in the
Persistence Client and used to perform the upload request.
At the time of implementing the authentication handler, there was no existing
API for using the refresh token. As a future improvement, it is recommended to
integrate a refresh token mechanism. This would involve getting a refresh token and
using it to retrieve subsequent access tokens, resulting in a more optimized process.
Additionally, the current system injects static CARP credentials as environment vari-
ables. It is recommended to consider alternative methods and potentially integrate
CARP’s Study APIs.
5.5
ECG Data Transmission Policies
The app was designed with policies for updating the local database and uploading to
the server to ensure accurate data transmission between the device and the CARP
system. Both of these operations utilize an asynchronous timer-driven cycle. When
the user establishes a connection with the device, the cycles begin.
The local database is updated every five seconds by appending the contents of a
local array variable. Upon successful completion of the local database update, the
local array’s elements are removed, and it begins to buffer new elements. This task’s
implementation can be found in Listing 5.17.
1 // Saves ecg data to the local db every 5 seconds
2 private func startLocalUpdateTimerTask() {
3
dbUpdateTask = Task(priority: .background, operation: { [weak self,
,→clock, localDbUpdateInterval] in
4
for await _ in clock.timer(interval: .seconds(
,→localDbUpdateInterval)) {
5
do {
6
try await self?.updateLocalDbData()
7
}
8
}
9
})
10 }
Listing 5.17: Local database update task.
The data gathered from the ECG device comprises a timestamp and an array
of ECG values. However, the provided timestamp is not universal but relative to
the device’s internal clock.
This internal device clock is initialized either during
the installation of the device’s software or when the device is reset. However, the
initial time of the device clock cannot be retrieved, making the timestamp of the
device impracticable. To address this issue, a solution was implemented: whenever
data is received from the Movesense sensor, an Universal Time Coordinated (UTC)
==PAGE:57==
5.5 ECG Data Transmission Policies
47
timestamp is generated, appended to the ECG data, and stored in the local database.
The application therefore utilizes its own absolute time for the ECG timestamp.
The task of uploading to the server occurs every five minutes or when the applica-
tion is opened, if necessary. Once an upload completes, ECG information in the local
database is deleted. This strategy of uploading data to the server upon app launch
is predominantly implemented due to the fact that users frequently close the app
within a five-minute interval. Therefore, the data stored locally must be uploaded
the following time the application is launched. It is important to avoid updating the
application when it is closed, as the uploading process can take a significant amount
of time on slow Internet connections and therefore may fail due to app closing time
constraints. Starting the upload when the app launches ensures that the local data
will be uploaded successfully. This task’s execution is depicted in Listing 5.18.
1 private func startServerDbUploadTimerTask() {
2
serverUploadTask = Task(priority: .background, operation: { [weak
,→self, clock, serverUploadInterval] in
3
for await _ in clock.timer(interval: .seconds(
,→serverUploadInterval)) {
4
do {
5
try await self?.uploadDbToServerIfNecessary()
6
}
7
}
8
})
9 }
Listing 5.18: Server upload task.
==PAGE:58==
48
==PAGE:59==
CHAPTER 6
Validation
6.1
User study
A user study was undertaken to examine and assess the usability and accessibility
of EpiHeartMonitor. In this instance, the app was utilized by an individual with
epilepsy for a duration of one day, and their feedback was gathered to evaluate the
performance of the app.
System Usability Scale (SUS) was utilized to evaluate the application’s usability.
This scale, comprised of ten straightforward items, provides a comprehensive view of
personal usability evaluation.
Due to the diﬀiculty of recruiting individuals with epilepsy who are willing to use
the application for an extended period, the user evaluation was limited to a single
participant. In addition to presenting the SUS scale, an interview was conducted
with the participant. The interview focused on app-specific details rather than the
broader evaluation addressed by SUS queries.
The user assessed the usability of
features such as the ECG streaming visualization, Lock Screen Widget, and Pill
Tracker functionality. In addition, the participant was invited to provide enhancement
suggestions.
6.1.1
Study setup
TestFlight facilitated the distribution of the application, and the user received a
mobile device along with the Movesense MD device. The user was provided with
detailed instructions on how to mount and operate the wearable device.
6.2
Data analysis study
A study focusing on data analysis was carried out to assess whether the data up-
loaded by the app to the CARP system maintains the integrity, authenticity, and
completeness of the received data.
==PAGE:60==
50
6 Validation
6.2.1
Study setup
For this study, the Xcode IDE was utilized with debugging prints, the Proxyman app
was employed to monitor the phone network traﬀic, and the Postman application was
utilized to check the data sent to the server.
In order to analyze the ECG data, the author added debug print commands to
the project’s codebase to observe the raw data transmitted by the Movesense device.
Each time the EpiHeartMonitor app receives data from the device, a timestamp is
allocated, and the data is stored in a SQLite database. Later, this information is
uploaded to the server. The additional print statements were helpful for contrasting
the raw data received from the ECG device with the data stored in the SQLite
database file transmitted to the server.
1
private func subscribeToEcgStream() {
2
for await ecgData in bluetoothClient.dashboardEcgPacketsStream()
,→{
3
let newRecording = (ecgData, Date())
4
print(" ￿ \(newRecording.1.description) \(newRecording.0.
,→samples.commaSeparatedString())")
5
ecgDataEvents.append(newRecording)
6
}
7
}
Listing 6.1: ECG raw data print.
In addition, print statements were incorporated to monitor the local data updates
and the completion of the server upload task. The addition of these print statements
to Xcode made it easier to comprehend the values and timing of particular actions,
such as local data storage and server update procedures.
1
private func updateLocalDbData() async throws {
2
let localData = ecgDataEvents.map { ($0.1, $0.0.samples.
,→commaSeparatedString()) }
3
try await self.dbClient.addEcg(localData)
4
print("Update local data ￿\(Date().description)")
5
}
6
7
private func uploadDbToServer() async throws {
8
print("Update server started ￿￿\(Date().description)")
9
try await apiClient.uploadDbFile()
10
try await dbClient.clearEcgEvents()
11
print("Update server completed ￿￿\(Date().description)")
12
13
}
Listing 6.2: Local update and server update tasks prints.
==PAGE:61==
6.3 Accessibility study
51
As described in the Implementation section, once the ECG data is transmitted,
both the local ECG storage and server uploading processes occur in a recurring cycle.
The server uploads occur every five minutes, while the local updates occur every five
seconds. Nevertheless, for the purposes of this validation, the author modified the
upload assignment interval. It was considered impracticable to verify a cycling action
by waiting for such a lengthy duration. Therefore, the server upload interval was
changed to fifteen seconds. Consequently, local database modifications occur every
five seconds during the validation procedure, while server uploads occur every fifteen
seconds.
The following tool was employed: Proxyman, an effective proxy application that
facilitates the monitoring of mobile internet traﬀic. Proxyman enables the monitoring
and analysis of network requests. In order to validate the project, it was necessary
to examine the files sent from the app to the server. To facilitate this, the proxy con-
figuration was configured on both the mobile device and the computer in accordance
with the documentation provided by Proxyman[Pro].
Finally, the author utilized Postman. Postman is used in this context to facilitate
various API testing and request handling.
Specifically, it was used to verify the
existence of uploaded data on the server and ensure that it corresponds to the identity
created by the application during the upload process.
This validation phase was
required for every upload to ensure data consistency and accuracy.
6.3
Accessibility study
The author assessed the app’s accessibility to specific UI properties, Voice Over and
font size, using the app itself. In addition, a custom-designed accessibility testing app
was employed. Stark, an application that can be incorporated as a plugin in Figma,
was utilized to evaluate the accessibility scores of UI elements. The findings from this
study will be presented in a subsequent chapter.
6.3.1
Voice over
Voice Over, an essential step in reviewing mobile applications accessibility [Har], was
thoroughly tested by the author. This accessibility feature can be enabled by accessing
Settings -> Accessibility -> Voice Over -> Switch on Voice Over in the Settings
application of the phone.
==PAGE:62==
52
6 Validation
Figure 6.1: Voice Over Setting.
Enabling this setting automatically activates the Voice Over feature for all UI ele-
ments that have implemented this feature. A validation of the EpiHeartMonitor app
has been done, and the actions have been recorded. The resulting video showcasing
the Voice Over testing can be found at the following address.
6.3.2
Dynamic font type
The Dynamic Type feature on iOS is an important accessibility function that allows
users to customize the font size of the user interface according to their preferences.
Similar to Voice Over, the Dynamic Type options can be set through the device’s
Settings app. The font size can be adjusted at the system level by following the path:
Settings -> Accessibility -> Display Text Size -> Larger Text Size, or on a specific
app level by changing, Settings -> Accessibility -> Per-App Settings -> Add App ->
Larger Text.
==PAGE:63==
6.3 Accessibility study
53
Figure 6.2: Dynamic Type Setting.
Activating this function automatically adjusts the font dimensions for applica-
tions that support it. The author conducted a validation of the EpiHeartMonitor
application, capturing screenshots of its main sections.
6.3.3
UI Controllers’ Contrast
Stark is a tool for performing design product accessibility audits. It evaluates various
accessibility components, with particular focus on the application’s contrast, which
is essential for ensuring accessibility, ethics, and inclusivity. With Stark integrated
as a Figma plugin, designers can easily select and evaluate particular UI elements for
accessibility.
==PAGE:64==
54
6 Validation
Figure 6.3: Stark Figma Plugin.
The author conducted validation of UI controllers, including buttons, selectors,
and pickers, to assess their contrast. The resulting Stark scores were registered and
will be addressed in Chapter 7.
==PAGE:65==
CHAPTER 7
Results and Discussion
In this chapter, the outcomes of the studies outlined in Chapter 6 will be presented.
Additionally, a comprehensive discussion of these findings, along with the system’s
strengths, limitations, and potential future improvements, will be addressed.
7.1
Analysis of Studies
7.1.1
User study
It was requested that the participant completes the SUS questionnaire. Using the fol-
lowing formula, an overall rating was calculated based on the scores the user assigned
to the application.
SUS Score =
( 10
∑
i=1
Score Contribution
)
∗2.5
(7.1)
where
Score Contribution =
{
User response value −1
for odd-numbered items
5 −User response value
for even-numbered items
By applying the formula to the questionnaire responses presented in B.4, the score
assigned to the application by the participant is 75 points.
==PAGE:66==
56
7 Results and Discussion
Grade
SUS
Percentile range
Adjective
Acceptable
NPS
A+
84.1-100
96-100
Best Imaginable
Acceptable
Promoter
A
80.8-84.0
90-95
Excellent
Acceptable
Promoter
A-
78.9-80.7
85-89
Acceptable
Promoter
B+
77.2-78.8
80-84
Acceptable
Passive
B
74.1 – 77.1
70 – 79
Acceptable
Passive
B-
72.6 – 74.0
65 – 69
Acceptable
Passive
C+
71.1 – 72.5
60 – 64
Good
Acceptable
Passive
C
65.0 – 71.0
41 – 59
Marginal
Passive
C-
62.7 – 64.9
35 – 40
Marginal
Passive
D
51.7 – 62.6
15 – 34
OK
Marginal
Detractor
Table 7.1: SUS Grading Scale [Jef].
According to the data presented in Table 7.1, the EpiHeartMonitor app’s usability
score lies within the range of a B grade, which corresponds to a score between 74.1
and 77.1. To be noted here, is the fact that the average SUS score is 68, and that
scores above 80 are considered as exceptional [Mas]. Consequently, the application’s
usability score is above average and close to an exceptional rating, signifying a highly
favorable evaluation.
In addition to the SUS evaluation, the author conducted a comprehensive inter-
view in which the user was asked more specific questions regarding the EpiHeartMon-
itor app. This interview’s full transcript is presented in Section B.2.1.
The general app usability feedback was very positive, the user found the app easy
to use and intuitive, despite being an Android user.
The feedback regarding the
app’s usability was very positive. The user found the app to be intuitive and simple
to navigate, despite being an Android user.
The user commended the Lock Screen Widget, describing it as highly practical and
useful for recording ECG data in the background. He particularly liked the design’s
clarity and simplicity.
Additionally, he had positive feedback about the ECG visualization, appreciating
the lucidity it provided in monitoring his pulse. However, he proposed an improve-
ment: a continuous visualization in which the signal graph always appears at the end,
arguing that this would be easier to follow than the current model, which resumes
from the beginning whenever it reaches the end of the graph. He also called attention
to the ECG’s sensitivity to noise, implying that frequent movement introduced some
disturbance to the readings.
He found the pill intake feature to be beneficial, especially from an epilepsy man-
agement standpoint, acknowledging the fact that he frequently forgets whether or not
he has taken his medication.
Nonetheless, he emphasized the usefulness of the app’s guides. Specifically, he
was able to install the Lock Screen Widget by following its instructions, a notable
accomplishment given the inherent complexity of the implementation process.
==PAGE:67==
7.1 Analysis of Studies
57
7.1.2
Data study
The author validated the data using the instruments described in Section 6.2. The
study’s conclusions are presented in this subsection.
In order to validate this task, there are three fundamental data properties that
must be observed:
• Data authenticity - the values of the data received from the Movesense Device
remained unaltered.
• Data integrity - there is no missing data, which could have been caused by
numerous operations or other concurrent asynchronous database tasks.
• Continuity Across Multiple App Usage Cycles - similar to data integrity,
but it extends beyond a single recording session per app opening.
Locally
preserved data, which was not updated to the server due to app termination, is
effectively sent to the server upon app relaunch.
The author utilized the Xcode outputs, which contained raw ECG data values, and
compared them to the data stored in the database file, which was then transmitted to
the server. If the server responded with a successful transfer confirmation, we could
assume that the file sent with the request was effectively stored on the server.
The data analysis followed the session lifecycle of an application. Opening the ap-
plication, establishing a connection with the device, and initiating ECG data stream-
ing. Following two cycles of data uploading to the server and local data saving tasks,
the author terminated the application. The app was then restarted and evaluated to
determine whether the data, which had been saved locally prior to app termination,
was effectively uploaded to the server.
==PAGE:68==
58
7 Results and Discussion
Figure 7.1: Proxyman EpiHeartMonitor file upload CARP requests..
As appears in Listing B.1, two successful requests were sent to the CARP Web
Services API, which corresponds with the Xcode server upload task logs.
The author extracted the values from the files included in each request and opened
them in a text editor application. The author began by locating the very first values
from the Xcode records, which should correspond to the corresponding data in the
database file. Both the timestamp and ECG values were discovered to be identical,
validating the data’s authenticity. The upper window of Figure 7.2 displays the Xcode
logs, while the lower window displays the file sent to the CARP system.
Figure 7.2: Data authenticity validation..
==PAGE:69==
7.1 Analysis of Studies
59
The author then proceeded to validate the integrity of the data by inspecting
the data received by the app during the uploading task’s operation. Accessing or
modifying a file for uploading should not result in the loss of data, so it was crucial to
analyze this particular data. In order to investigate this, the author centered on the
initial data uploading task and localized the received data. This information should
not have been present in the initial database file, as it was already being sent to the
server. However, it should not be absent in the second file. This was determined by
searching for ECG value records between the ”upload task started” and ”upload task
completed” logs. Figure 7.3 displays Xcode logs in the top window, with the first
uploading task file in the bottom left corner and the second uploading task file in the
bottom right corner.
Figure 7.3: Data integrity validation..
The author then tested whether locally stored data was sent to the server upon
reopening the application. Only the values that weren’t saved locally should have been
absent from the sent file when the application was reopened. In order to conduct this
test, the application was reopened, which triggered a new API call, which revealed
that locally stored data had not been synced with the server. The file that was sent
when the application was accessed was then investigated using a text editor. It was
discovered that the data stored locally but not sent to the server, as indicated in
the Xcode records, could be found in the cloud-sent database file. In addition, the
data that was printed in the logs but not preserved locally was indeed absent, further
validating the test’s success.
==PAGE:70==
60
7 Results and Discussion
Figure 7.4: Data continuity validation.
The upper window of Figure 7.4 displays the Xcode logs, while the lower window
displays the third file sent to the CARP system.
The saved file data was then tested using Postman and a GET endpoint designed
to retrieve the stored data. Unfortunately, this endpoint did not return the actual
stored data; rather, it returned only the generic information saved during the upload
request. Despite this, the author was able to effectively validate and verify each of
the three upload task requests.
This study ultimately enabled the author to validate the desired data properties,
namely authenticity, integrity, and continuity, across multiple app usage cycles. It
is essential to note, however, that one aspect of the validation procedure involved
reducing the time between uploading jobs from five minutes to fifteen seconds.
7.1.3
Accessibility study
7.1.3.1
Voice Over
As presented in Section 6.3, the author conducted validation tests on the applica-
tion’s accessibility features. The first test focused on evaluating the Voice Over app’s
capabilities. A screen recording demonstrating the application behavior throughout
this test can be accessed at the following link.
==PAGE:71==
7.1 Analysis of Studies
61
Figure 7.5: Voice Over EpiHeartMonitor main screens.
EpiHeartMonitor integrates the Voice Over functionality for every button and la-
bel, ensuring accessibility for users with visual impairments. Furthermore, it provides
audio feedback for activities related to device connection and disconnection.
Once the device is connected, the battery level is assessed, and the battery per-
centage is announced to the user. Similarly, the app communicates the average heart
rate measurement through sound. These features are vital in providing essential in-
formation to the user. The EpiHeartMonitor feature is active only if Voice Over is
enabled in the Settings app on the phone.
7.1.3.2
Dynamic Type font
In terms of Dynamic Type font sizes, it is essential to consider the recommendations
given by Apple’s Human Interface Guidelines [Appd]. According to these guidelines,
it is recommended to support a minimum font size of 17 pt for the body text. Research
indicates that more than 40% of iOS users adjust their font size to better suit their
requirements[Kri]. Noteworthy applications including AirBnb [Noa] and PDF Viewer
[Stea] have analyzed their individual statistics, which reveal that around 30% of their
users prefer a personalized font size. These findings emphasize the significance of
diverse font size support to ensure optimal accessibility for all users.
==PAGE:72==
62
7 Results and Discussion
Figure 7.6: User Dynamic Type adoption of PDF Viewer [Stea].
As illustrated in Figure 7.6 PDF Viewer app users supporting up to Extra Ex-
tra Extra Large Content Font (XXXL) size covers 98,88% of their users preferences.
Raising support to Accessibility Medium (AX M) would increase the percentage by
0,64 making a total of 99.52%.
Considering PDF Viewer user adoption, EpiHeartMonitor has been tested for
AX M font.
Figure 7.7: EpiHeartMonitor Accessibility Medium Dynamic Type.
==PAGE:73==
7.1 Analysis of Studies
63
As shown in Figure 7.7, the EpiHeartMonitor labels demonstrate clarity and read-
ability, meeting the accessibility requirements of around 99% of users, according to
Figure 7.6. This result signifies a positive outcome for the EpiHeartMonitor accessi-
bility features.
Furthermore, by enlarging the font size options to include two additional size units,
reaching up to Accessibility Extra Large (AX XL), the coverage can be extended to
cover around 99.95% of users, as evidenced by the findings from PDF Viewer users.
The outcomes are illustrated in Figure 7.8,where some labels may appear slightly
compressed but remain easy to read for users.
Figure 7.8: EpiHeartMonitor Accessibility Extra Large Dynamic Type.
7.1.3.3
UI Controllers’ Contrast
To evaluate the accessibility contrast of the application, the writer utilized the AA
and AAA compliance levels according to the Web Content Accessibility Guidelines
(WCAG) 2.0 standards. These standards establish the fundamental requirements for
contrast ratios between background colors and text to ensure a great experience for
all users, including those with colorblindness and cognitive or neurological disorders.
The levels of priority for AA and AAA are as follows [Sta]:
• Single A is the minimum level of requirement that all digital products must
implement. This is essential while simultaneously expresses the minimal level
of attention an author could dedicate to this aspect.
• Double A (AA) requires a contrast ratio of at least 4.5:1 for normal text and
3:1 for large text. This is an acceptable level for most of digital products.
==PAGE:74==
64
7 Results and Discussion
• Triple A (AAA) necessitates a contrast ratio of at least 7:1 for normal text and
4.5:1 for large text. AAA is a gold standard level of the contrast accessibility.
It marks the edge between a good and an excellent inclusiveness experience.
Large Text is defined as text that is at least 18 pt or 14 pt and bold for regular
text.
Two key UI components, namely the primary and secondary buttons, were se-
lected for the evaluation test. These components were picked based on their frequent
appearance and significance as fundamental user interactions within the application.
The primary button component of the EpiHeartMonitor app has a purple back-
ground with a hex color value of #7C5AA4. The button text, displayed in 17 regular
SF Pro font in white color, is categorized as Normal text. To evaluate the accessibility
of this button, the Stark plugin was utilized, and the results are depicted in Figure
7.9.
Figure 7.9: Primary Button Contrast Result.
The result highlights its conformance to the AA of WCAG standard. This level of
compliance is commendable and aligns with the standards observed in many modern
==PAGE:75==
7.2 Discussion
65
digital applications. The text size is nearly meeting the criteria for being labeled as
Large Text (18 pt), falling just below the AAA standard.
The secondary button component of the EpiHeartMonitor app has a gray back-
ground with a hex color value of #D8DADC. The button text, displayed in 17 size
regular SF Pro font in black, is categorized as Normal text. The following 7.10 Figure
showcases its contrast results.
Figure 7.10: Secondary Button Contrast Result.
The second evaluation result is better, as it complies with the AAA WCAG stan-
dard. This level is considered the gold standard in terms of accessibility.
7.2
Discussion
In this section, a thorough discussion on utilization will be presented, emphasizing
the project’s strengths, limitations, and areas for improvement. The objective is to
critically assess the findings and insights gathered throughout the studies, highlighting
various aspects of the application’s effectiveness and performance.
==PAGE:76==
66
7 Results and Discussion
7.2.1
Strengths
The strengths of the application are discussed in this subsection. These are mainly
obtained from the findings of the studies presented in Section 7.1 .
• In the context of the EpiHeartMonitor application, one of its main strengths is
the inclusion of the Lock Screen Widget, which reflects the device connection
status. User feedback from User Study 6.1 emphasized the importance of this
feature, stating that it is easily accessible and practical for supervising the
connection status.
Notably, while the feedback originated from an user from epilepsy management
target group, the potential benefits of this feature extend to a wider user range,
including researchers using the app for their investigations. The importance of
providing research participants with real-time feedback regarding device con-
nectivity holds significant value.
• The user study highlighted another advantage of the app: its clarity, with well-
separated app sections.
The ECG feature, which is the app’s main feature,
stands out for its accessibility and user-friendly adjustments.
It presents a
convenient preview on the Dashboard screen, ensuring effortless accessibility
for users.
• In the second analysis, the application showcased its aptitude to respect data
integrity, authenticity, and completeness. As shown in Data Study (Section6.2),
the challenge of acquiring data at 128 Hz or 256 Hz frequencies while persistently
saving it on both the device and the server was successfully handled by the
application.
• The EpiHeartMonitor application demonstrated a versatile adoption of accessi-
bility features, as shown in Section 6.3. It aptly incorporates the Voice Over
feature, which enables users with visual deficiencies to browse and engage with
buttons and labels. Furthermore, it supports Dynamic Type font sizes, accom-
modating users who favor customized font modifications. These functionalities
collectively improve the accessibility and user-inclusiveness of the application,
ensuring a great experience for a diverse user base.
7.2.2
Limitations
There are several limitations in terms of development and evaluation that need to be
acknowledged and may result in concerns or unpredictable outcomes:
• Throughout the User Study phase (Section 6.1), the application was tested by
a single user as a result of diﬀiculties in recruiting participants with epilepsy.
This constraint of having only one user for testing may introduce potential
biases and not provide a comprehensive representation of the user base, leading
to potentially misleading conclusions.
==PAGE:77==
7.2 Discussion
67
• One more limitation of the app is its exclusive support for the iOS platform. As
a result of this limitation, the testing and usage of the app were restricted to
iOS users only. This limitation can pose diﬀiculties when taking into account
both epilepsy and researchers users.
• The present Lock Widget implementation has a limitation. While conducting
tests, the author came across a bug related to the widget’s state when the app
is closed by the system. While the widget correctly reflects the connectivity
status when the app is terminated by the user, there is a rare situation where
the application can be stopped by the system.
This termination can occur
unexpectedly and is influenced by different factors like system memory and
CPU usage. In such a scenario, the widget fails to indicate that the connection
has been lost.
Unfortunately, there is no straightforward way to handle this event because
the application does not have a callback, particularly for this system-initiated
termination.
• Currently, the system is restricted in that information is sent to the server at
a predetermined and unchangeable rate. This is a limitation for researchers
who need greater flexibility in receiving data pace according to their research
findings. The current rigid updating system calls an upgraded solution to tackle
this constraint.
7.2.3
Improvements
There are several areas within the application that could benefit from enhancements.
The subsequent considerations should be addressed:
• To overcome the limitation of not being able to control the server upload rate,
the implementation of remote control integration for server upload rate is pro-
posed as a solution. This solution eliminates the previous restriction that pre-
vented researchers from controlling the rate at which data was uploaded to the
server.
Utilizing Firebase Remote Configuration is a viable implementation option for
this solution. This method retrieves the current configured uploading interval
from the remote configuration when the application initiates. When a group of
researchers collaborating on a project can coordinate to achieve the intended
value, this solution is effective. However, if multiple researchers require vary-
ing upload timeframes, the system may need to be modified to accommodate
multiple configurations for various research requirements.
• A potential workaround can be implemented to solve the problem of the Lock
Screen Widget being terminated by the system.
Despite the fact that this
solution is nondeterministic, it provides a method to address the existing issue.
==PAGE:78==
68
7 Results and Discussion
By enabling remote fetch capabilities, an application can execute a section of
code even after it has been terminated. A validation can be conducted within
this code block to verify any connected devices. If BluetoothManager detects no
connected devices, the Lock Screen connection status can be changed to signify
disconnection.
The proposed workaround has its own limitations. The developer can specify a
minimum interval for the execution of the code sequence during configuration.
However, setting a minimum interval does not guarantee that the code will
execute precisely at that time. The operating system determines the actual ex-
ecution time based on app usage, resources available, and other variables. This
method offers a potential solution to the termination problem and maintains
accurate connection status information on the Lock Screen Widget.
• A potential uploading capability enhancement is mutually exclusive with the
previously suggested improvement 7.2.3. Using a dedicated streaming service
to transmit the data in real-time without predetermined time intervals is an-
other alternative. However, it is essential to consider whether live transmission
is required to meet the requirements of the researchers. In addition, the imple-
mentation of this feature may have a significant influence on battery life, and
the CPU utilization should be studied thoroughly. Before implementing this
feature, a comprehensive evaluation of the prospective benefits and drawbacks
is required.
• Improving data transmission security is essential.
The application currently
transfers a SQLite database file to the CARP system. It is important to note
that SQLite files can be readily interpreted using a code editor, as depicted in
Section 6.2. This exposes a security flaw, as the data is not presently suﬀiciently
secured. Encrypting the data prior to its transmission to the server could be a
potential solution to this problem, ensuring its confidentiality throughout the
process.
• The Movesense API provides a variety of data endpoints, including ECG, ac-
celerometer, gyroscope, and temperature. While the project’s primary focus is
on ECG data, it is reasonable to consider incorporating accelerometer data for
future research analysis. It is essential to note, however, that this integration
may affect the app’s resource optimization. Before implementing this feature,
a comprehensive analysis of its resource impact should be conducted.
• The application’s structure is extremely modular, allowing its modules to be
built and tested independently. This architecture provides ample opportunity
for additional unit testing. This can substantially improve code quality and
code stability.
==PAGE:79==
CHAPTER 8
Conclusion
To conclude, an examination of the original research questions that formed the basis
of our premise will be presented.
• What is the UX design that encourages epilepsy people to use a mo-
bile application that streams ECG data? What are the main needed
features the application must have?
The UCD iterative design methodology was used to develop the UX design
of the application.
Continuous user feedback influenced the design process,
enabling the app’s refinement and development. The two distinct user groups,
epilepsy patients and researchers, contributed important insights that shaped
the application’s common features. The customization options for ECG and
the server uploading functionality were influenced by the feedback of epilepsy
patients, whereas the medication intake tracking was influenced by the feedback
of researchers. The Lock screen widget was identified as a requirement shared
by both user categories, thereby enhancing the user experience overall.
• How can these features be integrated into a mobile app with real-time
functionality?
Using modern Swift APIs, the aforementioned features were integrated into
an iOS application. As a result of using async/await to handle asynchronous
duties, ECG data could be updated locally and on the server with greater
eﬀiciency. The Lock Screen Widget functionality was implemented using the
SwiftUI framework, which provided a streamlined and intuitive user interface.
In addition, the project’s modularization strategy enabled flawless functionality
sharing between the main app target and the Lock Screen Module, thereby
ensuring eﬀicient code organization and maintenance.
• What are the main usability and accessibility requirements for ECG
control and monitoring mobile application for epilepsy patients and
how can these be implemented into the system design?
Following user interviews and iterative design, the essential usability and ac-
cessibility requirements for the ECG control and monitoring mobile application
for epilepsy patients were identified. Accessibility features such as Voice Over
[Appe] and Dynamic Type [Appf] were recognized alongside usability features
such as the Lock Screen Widget and app localization. Moreover, ensuring app
==PAGE:80==
70
8 Conclusion
intuitiveness, simplicity, and usability emerged as important considerations for
the intended user base.
• What is the state of art of live ECG monitoring mobile applications?
In related work, the state of the art in live ECG monitoring mobile applications
for epilepsy patients has been investigated. Existing solutions, including Bit-
tium’s Mobile Cardiac Telemetry, Beurer HealthManager Pro, KardiaMobile
by AliveCor, and Biostrap, provide ECG monitoring capabilities but are pre-
dominantly intended for cardiac patients or general health monitoring. These
applications provide features such as ECG monitoring in real-time, heart rate
tracking, and data analysis.
However, they lack features tailored to the re-
quirements of patients with epilepsy.
Using the Movesense MD sensor and
the EpiHeartMonitor application, this thesis provides epilepsy patients with a
reliable ECG monitoring tool in real-time that can satisfy their needs.
Application Validation
Three validation studies were conducted on the final product, each focusing on a
distinct aspect: usability, data transmission analysis, and accessibility.
An app user with epilepsy completed a SUS questionnaire based on-one day app
usage as part of the initial study. The collected data was used to evaluate the usability
of the EpiHeartMonitor app, which received a score of 75, which is above average and
close to the exceptional threshold, indicating a highly positive evaluation. In addition,
an interview was conducted in which notable app features such as ECG visualization,
the Lock Screen Widget, and the Pill Intake Tracker were highlighted.
The author conducted the second study, which involved validating the applica-
tion’s functionality by analyzing the data transmitted by it. This required comparing
the data sent to the CARP server with the data received from the Movesense device.
The author was able to successfully validate this aspect of the investigation.
The final study, also conducted by the author, focused on accessibility. The study
examined the design requirements for Voice Over, Dynamic Type fonts, and Color
Contrast. The author effectively validated these aspects of accessibility, resulting in
a positive evaluation.
Multiple potential enhancement areas have been identified. Priority number one is
improving security, as the current method for uploading SQLite database files lacks
suﬀicient security. A potential improvement could entail the use of an alternative
uploading service, which could mitigate the SQLite-intrinsic security vulnerability.
Incorporating remote settings could further improve support for research users if
implemented.
==PAGE:81==
APPENDIX A
Acronyms
PDR
Project Definition Report
ILO
intended learning objectives
IPR
Intellectual Property Rights
SUDEP Sudden Unexpected Death in Epilepsy
ECG
Electrocardiogram
BLE
Bluetooth Low Energy
CARP CACHET Research Platform
CACHET Copenhagen Center for Health Technology
SPM
Swift Package Manager
MVVM Model-View-ViewModel
BLE
Bluetooth Low Energy
XXXL
Extra Extra Extra Large Content Font
AX M
Accessibility Medium
AX XL Accessibility Extra Large
WCAG Web Content Accessibility Guidelines
UCD
User Centred Design
AI
Artificial Intelligence
SUS
System Usability Scale
UTC
Universal Time Coordinated
UI
User Interface
UX
User Experience
==PAGE:82==
72
==PAGE:83==
APPENDIX B
Appendix
In the Appendix B documentation regards the design process and Faros implementa-
tion will be found.
B.1
User Centered Design
The author has conducted two interviews to understand potential users needs and
requirements. The outcome of the interviews is presented below.
Participant 1: Christian (epilepsy person, middle-aged adult)
Question 1: Could you please share your experience regarding the ECG monitoring process?
Christian’s Answer: I haven’t done that on any wearable. I worked with a
wearable for an app, but haven’t really interacted with such a device.
Question 2: What specific features or functionalities would you like to see in an application
designed to assist with epilepsy management and ECG monitoring?
Christian’s Answer: Monitoring the heart activity in case of a concerning
pattern.
Question 3: In your opinion, what is the biggest issue when using an app that connects to
a wearable device?
Christian’s Answer: I wanted it connected all the time. Having to click a
connect button and waiting is hard. The connection itself is the most annoying
thing. The feel, more direct feel to it - have feedback of the connection.
Question 4: On a scale from 0 to 10, where 0 represents the least importance and 10 signifies
the highest importance, how important is accessibility for an ECG monitoring
mobile app to you?
Christian’s Answer: UX accessibility is very important. It should be clear.
But it is hard to achieve that. It should be clear and simple for the connection
status, so I would rate it as 9. For secondary sections, I would rate it around
5-6.
==PAGE:84==
74
B Appendix
Question 5: On the same scale, how important is usability for an ECG monitoring mobile
app to you?
Christian’s Answer: I would rate usability as 8. I would like to have more
options and be more involved in it, so it is not only a background task that runs
but also has some evolving features.
Participant 2: Tobias (youth person with cardiac problems)
Question 1: Could you please share your experience regarding the ECG monitoring process?
Tobias’s Answer: I’ve tried 15 times, holter monitoring. It monitors the heart
rhythm. The annoying part is that if I feel symptoms, I can’t get the feedback
instantly. The process is very time-consuming. I actually want to see what
my heart is doing, but I can’t see the visualization. Around 80% of people
with heart problems need coaching about anxiety. It is so stressful not knowing
what’s going on.
Question 2: What specific features or functionalities would you like to see in an application
designed to assist with epilepsy management and ECG monitoring?
Tobias’s Answer: Two things: visualization of the ECG and a feature about
irregular heartbeats, similar to the Apple Health app.
Question 3: In your opinion, what is the biggest issue when using an app that connects to
a wearable device?
Tobias’s Answer: Connection issues and how accurate it is. Connection sta-
tus.
Question 4: On a scale from 0 to 10, where 0 represents the least importance and 10 signifies
the highest importance, how important is accessibility for an ECG monitoring
mobile app to you?
Tobias’s Answer: Intuitively, I would rate it as 10. Overall UX accessibility,
contrast is not that important. I think it would be great to have a localized
application that offers multi language support.
Question 5: On the same scale, how important is usability for an ECG monitoring mobile
app to you?
Tobias’s Answer: I would rate usability as 10. It should be super easy to use
this kind of app. It should only show you the info that you need to know.
==PAGE:85==
B.1 User Centered Design
75
Figure B.1: First prototype screens collection.
==PAGE:86==
76
B Appendix
Figure B.2: Second prototype screens collection.
==PAGE:87==
B.2 Study results
77
Figure B.3: Final prototype screens collection.
B.2
Study results
B.2.1
User study
During the user study, Christian, the participant evaluated the EpiHeartMonitor
application using SUS. Figure B.4 depicts his evaluation.
==PAGE:88==
78
B Appendix
Figure B.4: SUS Questionnaire.
In addition, the author conducted an interview in which specific questions were
addressed.
Question 1: How easy or diﬀicult was it to set up and start using the app?
Christian’s Answer: Very easy.
Question 2: Were there any functions or features that were hard to find or use?
Christian’s Answer: No, they were easily accessible.
==PAGE:89==
B.2 Study results
79
Question 3: Was there anything in the app you found confusing or hard to understand?
Christian’s Answer: ECG Preview called in both preview.
Question 4: Did the ECG live capabilities work as you expected them to?
Christian’s Answer: Almost, I would like to see it like a “snake” instead of
a ”worm”. Generally yes.
Question 5: Did the pill intake tracker function correctly?
Christian’s Answer: Generally yes. I found a bug in time of the pill, it does
not set the pill to now date once the first pill was tracked.
Question 6: Did the device connection status widget work well, and was it easy to under-
stand?
Christian’s Answer: I think it was a good idea. It requires it use the device.
It is very convent. The guide was useful to install a Lock Screen, it worked even
for me, despite not being an IOS user.
Question 7: What did you like the most about the app?
Christian’s Answer: I like the ECG, you could see the two phases of the
heartbeat, high enough resolution to do that. I think it is a good feature to
have the pill tacker. I think the Lock Screen widget is a very good thing, it is
simple and it shows the device connection and batter statuses, that is useful
and easy to access. I used the widget while I was testing the app.
Question 8: What did you like the least?
Christian’s Answer: ECG noise sensibility. But I suspect it is a hardware
problem.
Question 9: Were you satisfied with the app and its features?
Christian’s Answer: Yes.
Question 10: Are there any features that you think should be added to the app?
Christian’s Answer: Epilepsy type should offer a preset list and possible to
add a custom.
Question 11: How could the app be improved to better meet your needs?
Christian’s Answer: Rolling display, it clears it instead of starting from the
beginning.
Additionally, Christian provided some notes he took while testing and how he
thinks the ECG view can be improved.
==PAGE:90==
80
B Appendix
Figure B.5: Christian’s testing notes.
B.2.2
Data study
The data analysis study outlined in Section 6.2 necessitated the use of ECG values
print logs. The following lines were generated using Xcode, with the addition of a
==PAGE:91==
B.2 Study results
81
vertical bar character to create line breaks:
1 ￿ 
2
2023-06-27T21:26:30.151
,→0,0,-1,-2,-3,-6,-6,-9,-15,-12,-25,-20,-10,-67,8,120￿ 
3
2023-06-27T21:26:30.263 -123,-335,249,1549,2513,2375, |
,→1564,1017,975,897,660,547,465,343,251,164￿ 
4
2023-06-27T21:26:30.385 63,-47,-101,-45,75,123,53,-60,|
,→-141,-185,-225,-263,-298,-322,-335,-353￿ 
5
2023-06-27T21:26:30.503 -344,-346,-332,-416,-891,-1042, |
,→461,3166,4686,3532,1004,-586,-656,-423,-664,-893￿ 
6
2023-06-27T21:26:30.653 -848,-819,-823,-792,-763,-750,|
,→-739,-705,-667,-631,-591,-548,-500,-450,-407,-359￿ 
7
2023-06-27T21:26:30.773 -302,-250,-199,-128,-31,49,111,|
,→174,231,272,283,254,163,-24,-277,-533￿ 
8
2023-06-27T21:26:30.893 -734,-881,-991,-1049,-1055,-1041,-1039,|
,→-1033,-1000,-947,-903,-884,-863,-819,-766,-748￿ 
9
2023-06-27T21:26:31.015 -751,-739,-702,-667,-657,-660,-643,-610,-600,|
,→-627,-632,-601,-560,-538,-539,-536￿ 
10
2023-06-27T21:26:31.133 -517,-490,-463,-451,-450,-446,-428,-407,|
,→-409,-427,-466,-501,-473,-343,-172,-74￿ 
11
2023-06-27T21:26:31.253 -103,-179,-224,-233,-222,-214,-221,-232,|
,→-235,-221,-170,-132,-99,-257,-699,-451￿ 
12
2023-06-27T21:26:31.404 1456,3919,4568,2739,348,-602,-235,17,-280,|
,→-472,-400,-347,-336,-317,-294,-264￿ 
13
2023-06-27T21:26:31.525 -221,-182,-142,-96,-56,-25,15,66,126,172,223,|
,→295,369,435,507,592￿ 
14
2023-06-27T21:26:31.644 678,740,773,791,796,750,590,335,41,-233,|
,→-448,-608,-703,-744,-754,-752￿ 
15
2023-06-27T21:26:31.763 -735,-706,-664,-626,-598,-565,-529,-493,-466,|
,→-454,-454,-452,-437,-428,-417,-402￿ 
16
2023-06-27T21:26:31.883
,→-398,-392,-384,-380,-379,-369,-348,-340,-349,-342,|
,→-308,-271,-267,-284,-284,-268￿ 
17
2023-06-27T21:26:32.003 -260,-276,-316,-363,-364,-253,-77,52,60,-25,-103,|
,→
-131,-131,-120,-113,-99￿ 
18
2023-06-27T21:26:32.156 -76,-79,-62,-46,-11,-64,-538,-763,644,3377,|
,→5092,4131,1635,-58,-217,19￿ 
19
2023-06-27T21:26:32.304 -218,-467,-427,-399,-409,-381,-341,-298,|
,→-268,-237,-210,-175,-138,-95,-43,4￿ 
20
2023-06-27T21:26:32.393 32,54,84,142,203,261,322,387,449,495,514,|
,→526,532,506,421,246￿ 
21
2023-06-27T21:26:32.514 19,-203,-374,-486,-561,-610,-621,-613,-588,|
,→-562,-533,-499,-468,-435,-413,-401￿ 
22
2023-06-27T21:26:32.633 -388,-376,-356,-334,-318,-312,-312,-304,|
,→-296,-295,-300,-304,-289,-277,-273,-268￿ 
23
2023-06-27T21:26:32.753 -257,-245,-229,-230,-224,-217,-206,-205,|
,→-211,-223,-247,-303,-345,-291,-132,28￿ 
24
2023-06-27T21:26:32.904 79,27,-52,-96,-101,-101,-98,-102,-104,|
,→-110,-111,-85,-49,-7,-247,-764￿ 
25
2023-06-27T21:26:33.023 -359,1800,4324,4871,3019,721,-243,-122,|
,→-119,-416,-501,-432,-425,-410,-383,-360￿ 
26
2023-06-27T21:26:33.144 -325,-285,-250,-223,-192,-157,-124,-84,|
,→-42,10,67,110,155,209,268,334￿ 
27
2023-06-27T21:26:33.265 391,439,473,492,510,512,461,330,130,-89,|
==PAGE:92==
82
B Appendix
,→-293,-457,-570,-628,-647,-648￿ 
28
2023-06-27T21:26:33.414 -648,-630,-602,-566,-541,-527,-509,-486,|
,→-463,-444,-426,-408,-392,-389,-395,-399￿ 
29
2023-06-27T21:26:33.503 -394,-377,-367,-363,-363,-355,-335,-320,|
,→-317,-319,-319,-303,-287,-271,-262,-253￿ 
30
2023-06-27T21:26:33.654 -238,-234,-248,-286,-345,-368,-298,-144,|
,→6,60,6,-83,-134,-142,-143,-143￿ 
31
2023-06-27T21:26:33.773 -151,-151,-146,-145,-115,-81,-42,-249,|
,→-745,-433,1568,4022,4627,2855,580,-374￿ 
32
2023-06-27T21:26:33.893 -176,-82,-375,-500,-435,-423,-414,-386,|
,→-360,-327,-297,-267,-237,-201,-163,-116￿ 
33
2023-06-27T21:26:34.013 -72,-33,5,57,105,156,207,262,325,394,|
,→452,489,508,523,516,470￿ 
34
2023-06-27T21:26:34.133 345,145,-87,-293,-451,-556,-633,-676,|
,→-683,-667,-642,-620,-595,-565,-537,-510￿ 
35
2023-06-27T21:26:34.253 -493,-484,-472,-458,-440,-427,-416,-411,|
,→-414,-409,-410,-408,-389,-368,-362,-365￿ 
36
2023-06-27T21:26:34.405 -360,-343,-331,-325,-318,-304,-295,-283,|
,→-263,-247,-242,-234,-223,-222,-235,-267￿ 
37
2023-06-27T21:26:34.523 -303,-339,-335,-240,-61,89,114,22,-97,-162,|
,→-157,-138,-144,-154,-132,-119￿ 
38
2023-06-27T21:26:34.644 -121,-121,-105,-60,-314,-815,-282,2008,4480,|
,→4812,2815,559,-289,-131,-181,-486￿ 
39
2023-06-27T21:26:34.764 -539,-467,-460,-441,-403,-371,-344,-319,-278,|
,→-226,-187,-161,-121,-66,-18,18￿ 
40
2023-06-27T21:26:34.883 49,105,167,225,272,323,378,425,463,477,488,|
,→493,456,339,159,-60￿ 
41
2023-06-27T21:26:35.003 -259,-411,-511,-561,-583,-596,-597,-579,-550,|
,→-525,-506,-491,-473,-451,-433,-417￿ 
42
2023-06-27T21:26:35.154 -403,-400,-393,-386,-374,-364,-361,-360,-358,|
,→-361,-353,-334,-308,-291,-291,-288￿ 
43
2023-06-27T21:26:35.281 -279,-262,-247,-247,-252,-249,-242,-244,|
,→-276,-316,-311,-224,-77,40,70,16￿ 
44
2023-06-27T21:26:35.410 -55,-94,-103,-100,-92,-95,-87,-91,-96,-65,|
,→-27,-4,-255,-675,-101,2057￿ 
45
2023-06-27T21:26:35.515 4257,4321,2239,149,-412,-6,61,-267,-377,|
,→-308,-298,-280,-244,-208,-176,-144￿ 
46
2023-06-27T21:26:35.633 -110,-74,-34,5,35,71,115,169,223,273,331,|
,→389,456,526,590,648￿ 
47
2023-06-27T21:26:35.754 687,722,751,742,665,491,239,-35,-282,-469,|
,→-586,-639,-648,-644,-637,-617
48 Update local data ￿2023-06-27 19:26:35 +0000￿ 
49
2023-06-27T21:26:35.904 -592,-563,-545,-520,-490,-457,-437,-432,|
,→-426,-404,-386,-381,-389,-391,-376,-363￿ 
50
2023-06-27T21:26:36.023 -349,-348,-351,-346,-338,-325,-315,-311,|
,→-299,-289,-281,-284,-301,-347,-397,-375￿ 
51
2023-06-27T21:26:36.143 -242,-71,35,28,-46,-111,-141,-146,-126,|
,→-120,-116,-117,-131,-116,-89,-35￿ 
52
2023-06-27T21:26:36.263 -64,-510,-775,511,3152,4909,4102,1716,9,|
,→-207,2,-232,-483,-449,-407,-404￿ 
53
2023-06-27T21:26:36.383 -376,-345,-316,-281,-250,-226,-196,-167,|
,→-124,-78,-44,0,43,92,141,182￿ 
54
2023-06-27T21:26:36.503 234,298,352,396,426,453,474,479,442,335,|
,→155,-58,-260,-412,-521,-585￿ 
55
2023-06-27T21:26:36.655 -616,-614,-584,-553,-542,-536,-524,-495,|
==PAGE:93==
B.2 Study results
83
,→-458,-431,-417,-407,-392,-382,-375,-365￿ 
56
2023-06-27T21:26:36.773 -357,-343,-338,-342,-338,-328,-323,-319,|
,→-310,-297,-291,-286,-275,-260,-247,-242￿ 
57
2023-06-27T21:26:36.893 -243,-246,-268,-322,-370,-337,-192,-24,|
,→57,29,-45,-99,-121,-129,-126,-128￿ 
58
2023-06-27T21:26:37.014 -128,-132,-145,-125,-93,-34,-81,-559,-797,|
,→550,3219,4967,4161,1788,58,-237￿ 
59
2023-06-27T21:26:37.134 -94,-316,-524,-488,-457,-451,-421,-391,-362,|
,→-333,-302,-269,-235,-197,-161,-122￿ 
60
2023-06-27T21:26:37.253 -84,-39,15,65,110,145,193,243,292,330,355,|
,→370,382,382,352,263￿ 
61
2023-06-27T21:26:37.404 109,-80,-261,-404,-496,-551,-575,-585,-581,|
,→-569,-546,-523,-502,-483,-460,-443￿ 
62
2023-06-27T21:26:37.523 -425,-407,-389,-378,-372,-373,-364,-357,|
,→-348,-343,-339,-329,-325,-316,-305,-297￿ 
63
2023-06-27T21:26:37.643 -290,-287,-274,-263,-256,-247,-242,-236,|
,→-237,-256,-290,-347,-362,-275,-112,33￿ 
64
2023-06-27T21:26:37.765 73,16,-59,-110,-123,-124,-123,-125,-124,|
,→-125,-128,-107,-78,-21,-189,-713￿ 
65
2023-06-27T21:26:37.883 -520,1417,4011,4914,3358,1032,-145,-133,|
,→-108,-395,-502,-436,-429,-426,-405,-381￿ 
66
2023-06-27T21:26:38.003 -349,-310,-272,-236,-211,-181,-148,-105,|
,→-60,-16,15,56,94,146,196,244￿ 
67
2023-06-27T21:26:38.154 285,316,338,350,359,355,305,191,16,-184,|
,→-352,-475,-561,-614,-641,-642￿ 
68
2023-06-27T21:26:38.273 -629,-605,-569,-545,-525,-510,-487,-461,|
,→-446,-432,-416,-410,-407,-403,-393,-378￿ 
69
2023-06-27T21:26:38.393 -369,-362,-365,-367,-362,-346,-325,-313,|
,→-312,-304,-293,-275,-261,-249,-235,-231￿ 
70
2023-06-27T21:26:38.513 -229,-234,-244,-261,-299,-342,-324,-205,|
,→-30,74,52,-37,-109,-126,-121,-115￿ 
71
2023-06-27T21:26:38.633 -113,-117,-113,-132,-130,-94,-45,-31,|
,→-402,-819,105,2616,4711,4365,2072,125￿ 
72
2023-06-27T21:26:38.753 -281,-6,-143,-458,-474,-409,-395,-358,|
,→-330,-315,-294,-263,-216,-174,-136,-107￿ 
73
2023-06-27T21:26:38.905 -75,-28,25,74,111,148,204,269,327,369,|
,→403,446,485,507,523,507￿ 
74
2023-06-27T21:26:39.023 417,238,10,-197,-362,-487,-579,-628,-633,|
,→-617,-588,-553,-529,-507,-491,-472￿ 
75
2023-06-27T21:26:39.145 -449,-434,-422,-404,-388,-378,-372,-357,|
,→-334,-325,-336,-352,-349,-333,-318,-303￿ 
76
2023-06-27T21:26:39.263 -294,-286,-276,-272,-259,-243,-231,-228,|
,→-238,-254,-282,-330,-343,-259,-108,24￿ 
77
2023-06-27T21:26:39.383 62,16,-61,-107,-121,-114,-106,-114,-112,|
,→-106,-121,-105,-77,-22,-138,-629￿ 
78
2023-06-27T21:26:39.503 -579,1138,3681,4689,3193,843,-305,-130,|
,→59,-257,-457,-390,-347,-340,-313,-281￿ 
79
2023-06-27T21:26:39.654 -248,-215,-186,-152,-110,-68,-30,3,41,|
,→85,132,182,235,286,334,390￿ 
80
2023-06-27T21:26:39.773 449,503,548,575,596,598,535,383,149,|
,→-106,-332,-503,-611,-659,-667,-662￿ 
81
2023-06-27T21:26:39.893 -653,-628,-590,-557,-529,-513,-493,-468,|
,→-444,-427,-420,-410,-399,-384,-381,-380￿ 
82
2023-06-27T21:26:40.015 -373,-366,-364,-361,-357,-343,-329,-327,|
,→-319,-305,-284,-275,-279,-275,-255,-243￿ 
==PAGE:94==
84
B Appendix
83
2023-06-27T21:26:40.134 -242,-258,-281,-331,-378,-344,-198,-22,|
,→70,39,-38,-101,-122,-120,-114,-113￿ 
84
2023-06-27T21:26:40.253 -119,-120,-136,-124,-94,-37,-28,-458,-870,|
,→215,2905,5051,4666,2338,343,-175￿ 
85
2023-06-27T21:26:40.404 -64,-268,-514,-492,-458,-467,-439,-404,|
,→-375,-344,-320,-285,-249,-213,-177,-141￿ 
86
2023-06-27T21:26:40.524 -95,-55,-20,18,55,103,152,194,235,274,|
,→301,318,320,317,286,203￿ 
87
2023-06-27T21:26:40.643 59,-125,-297,-426,-523,-579,-609,-612,|
,→-596,-581,-564,-539,-509,-477,-457,-440￿ 
88
2023-06-27T21:26:40.763 -427,-410,-395,-386,-373,-365,-357,-350,|
,→-345,-339,-337,-335,-329,-320,-304,-289
89 Update server started ￿￿2023-06-27 19:26:40 +0000￿ 
90
2023-06-27T21:26:40.884 -282,-277,-271,-260,-246,-241,-238,-230,|
,→-220,-207,-208,-217,-234,-268,-315,-336
91 Update local data ￿2023-06-27 19:26:40 +0000￿ 
92
2023-06-27T21:26:41.306 -257,-95,49,92,37,-45,-92,-98,-85,-80,|
,→-91,-94,-97,-105,-84,-60￿ 
93
2023-06-27T21:26:41.344 20,-103,-665,-644,1183,3950,5202,3841,|
,→1406,-7,-118,-93,-380,-499,-444,-436￿ 
94
2023-06-27T21:26:41.367 -428,-393,-362,-327,-294,-261,-234,-200,|
,→-169,-128,-91,-54,-12,32,79,130￿ 
95
2023-06-27T21:26:41.392 168,204,239,282,318,339,342,342,340,306,|
,→202,39,-136,-299,-425,-509￿ 
96
2023-06-27T21:26:41.513 -551,-565,-573,-569,-548,-510,-477,-461,|
,→-445,-430,-417,-402,-383,-357,-343,-342￿ 
97
2023-06-27T21:26:41.632 -339,-332,-312,-303,-314,-339,-351,-338,|
,→-311,-295,-286,-281,-280,-275,-248,-214
98 Update server completed ￿￿2023-06-27 19:26:41 +0000￿ 
99
2023-06-27T21:26:41.753 -207,-233,-253,-239,-214,-205,-205,-197,|
,→-192,-185,-186,-227,-305,-341,-247,-61￿ 
100
2023-06-27T21:26:41.904 84,99,19,-61,-85,-83,-78,-85,-100,-99,|
,→-100,-115,-102,-71,-1,-142￿ 
101
2023-06-27T21:26:42.024 -679,-641,1121,3763,4926,3578,1230,-99,|
,→-146,-72,-349,-506,-467,-449,-430,-390￿ 
102
2023-06-27T21:26:42.143 -359,-335,-307,-278,-235,-193,-163,-134,|
,→-102,-66,-22,17,59,98,140,181￿ 
103
2023-06-27T21:26:42.293 223,266,298,320,339,356,359,324,218,51,|
,→-144,-331,-474,-574,-630,-648￿ 
104
2023-06-27T21:26:42.384 -648,-630,-612,-593,-575,-558,-534,-513,|
,→-497,-483,-475,-464,-458,-450,-440,-433￿ 
105
2023-06-27T21:26:42.503 -427,-421,-414,-407,-403,-395,-381,-372,|
,→-374,-374,-351,-326,-309,-311,-316,-309￿ 
106
2023-06-27T21:26:42.654 -289,-276,-269,-263,-259,-254,-240,-229,|
,→-224,-227,-243,-267,-302,-309,-231,-81￿ 
107
2023-06-27T21:26:42.774 52,86,26,-64,-112,-120,-114,-109,-118,-117,|
,→-118,-130,-105,-70,-13,-119￿ 
108
2023-06-27T21:26:42.893 -627,-655,1003,3616,4812,3452,1067,-228,-160,|
,→15,-275,-464,-403,-373,-363,-330￿ 
109
2023-06-27T21:26:43.013 -295,-267,-244,-210,-175,-147,-114,-73,|
,→-24,14,53,99,149,204,248,291￿ 
110
2023-06-27T21:26:43.134 337,380,431,478,501,521,531,515,416,221,|
,→-30,-257,-425,-540,-617,-653￿ 
111
2023-06-27T21:26:43.254 -661,-640,-612,-589,-563,-537,-514,-485,|
,→-462,-450,-436,-427,-418,-406,-394,-384￿ 
==PAGE:95==
B.2 Study results
85
112
2023-06-27T21:26:43.405 -372,-367,-364,-361,-361,-360,-350,-337,|
,→-319,-303,-296,-287,-280,-273,-259,-249￿ 
113
2023-06-27T21:26:43.523 -234,-223,-216,-210,-220,-240,-273,-298,|
,→-269,-171,-42,51,60,11,-53,-84￿ 
114
2023-06-27T21:26:43.644 -86,-80,-81,-92,-89,-94,-97,-69,-33,-1,|
,→-261,-707,-130,2050,4219,4235￿ 
115
2023-06-27T21:26:43.764 2161,139,-357,28,30,-322,-411,-323,-297,|
,→-282,-252,-220,-185,-156,-131,-98￿ 
116
2023-06-27T21:26:43.883 -63,-23,13,52,96,138,184,237,284,328,378,|
,→451,518,561,582,599￿ 
117
2023-06-27T21:26:44.003 620,616,536,359,112,-142,-348,-497,-592,|
,→-647,-669,-663,-639,-603,-576,-559￿ 
118
2023-06-27T21:26:44.154 -539,-510,-475,-449,-436,-426,-419,-407,|
,→-394,-385,-380,-386,-383,-376,-368,-357￿ 
119
2023-06-27T21:26:44.274 -347,-342,-337,-326,-313,-301,-296,-288,|
,→-280,-268,-260,-250,-229,-220,-223,-237￿ 
120
2023-06-27T21:26:44.394 -265,-310,-334,-272,-130,14,84,60,-11,|
,→-73,-106,-116,-111,-108,-102,-93￿ 
121
2023-06-27T21:26:44.543 -102,-94,-67,-13,-11,-443,-826,277,2936,|
,→5010,4567,2246,304,-170,-43,-245￿ 
122
2023-06-27T21:26:44.633 -480,-455,-430,-442,-409,-370,-335,-306,|
,→-283,-250,-213,-179,-140,-99,-56,-21￿ 
123
2023-06-27T21:26:44.753 16,57,100,134,176,222,261,297,319,336,|
,→350,351,328,248,112,-73￿ 
124
2023-06-27T21:26:44.904 -253,-393,-500,-571,-606,-614,-600,-581,|
,→-559,-530,-500,-475,-456,-444,-434,-426￿ 
125
2023-06-27T21:26:45.023 -407,-389,-378,-375,-373,-362,-351,-347,|
,→-345,-339,-330,-322,-317,-315,-309,-300￿ 
126
2023-06-27T21:26:45.145 -283,-273,-269,-266,-257,-242,-238,-235,|
,→-235,-244,-268,-315,-350,-303,-161,1￿ 
127
2023-06-27T21:26:45.281 74,36,-52,-110,-121,-122,-121,-123,-130,|
,→-125,-141,-144,-116,-66,-32,-389￿ 
128
2023-06-27T21:26:45.406 -858,-53,2413,4674,4610,2457,389,-242,|
,→-91,-221,-492,-487,-428,-440,-434,-412￿ 
129
2023-06-27T21:26:45.505 -374,-329,-298,-266,-234,-203,-167,-129,|
,→-83,-40,0,39,78,124,166,215￿ 
130
2023-06-27T21:26:45.656 262,300,331,351,363,370,346,272,131,-64,|
,→-255,-410,-523,-589,-624,-633￿ 
131
2023-06-27T21:26:45.774 -630,-616,-586,-555,-526,-504,-483,-457,|
,→-438,-427,-417,-407,-393,-382,-379,-377￿ 
132
2023-06-27T21:26:45.893 -365,-352,-349,-349,-349,-339,-323,-307,|
,→-299,-293,-289,-277,-261,-252,-246,-242
133 Update local data ￿2023-06-27 19:26:45 +0000￿ 
134
2023-06-27T21:26:46.014 -234,-225,-217,-205,-205,-224,-270,-330,|
,→-341,-252,-89,50,87,33,-42,-85￿ 
135
2023-06-27T21:26:46.134 -97,-97,-93,-98,-105,-110,-127,-113,-76,|
,→-3,-44,-540,-796,551,3203,4896￿ 
136
2023-06-27T21:26:46.253 4033,1671,19,-204,-41,-269,-483,-442,|
,→-415,-419,-394,-363,-325,-298,-274,-242￿ 
137
2023-06-27T21:26:46.404 -202,-163,-127,-94,-53,-12,39,78,120,168,|
,→211,257,298,332,363,385￿ 
138
2023-06-27T21:26:46.524 405,411,379,280,108,-91,-285,-442,-556,|
,→-626,-642,-628,-612,-603,-591,-564￿ 
139
2023-06-27T21:26:46.644 -530,-504,-479,-461,-443,-426,-414,-404,|
,→-395,-385,-379,-380,-376,-370,-365,-350￿ 
==PAGE:96==
86
B Appendix
140
2023-06-27T21:26:46.764 -334,-315,-304,-313,-311,-297,-273,-259,|
,→-256,-246,-236,-235,-235,-226,-208,-197￿ 
141
2023-06-27T21:26:46.884 -201,-219,-250,-280,-283,-217,-85,47,100,|
,→61,-18,-70,-88,-91,-90,-95￿ 
142
2023-06-27T21:26:47.004 -88,-89,-107,-88,-50,10,-121,-639,-612,1117,|
,→3714,4765,3267,881,-295,-120￿ 
143
2023-06-27T21:26:47.155 72,-244,-457,-396,-355,-342,-313,-281,-249,|
,→-219,-187,-156,-114,-73,-38,-5￿ 
144
2023-06-27T21:26:47.274 28,70,124,174,221,267,327,398,454,492,515,|
,→550,581,583,527,386￿ 
145
2023-06-27T21:26:47.394 173,-68,-298,-472,-587,-650,-675,-675,-655,|
,→-629,-601,-579,-550,-512,-477,-456￿ 
146
2023-06-27T21:26:47.514 -442,-440,-437,-422,-402,-386,-384,-387,|
,→-385,-375,-361,-352,-352,-350,-349,-337￿ 
147
2023-06-27T21:26:47.634 -319,-306,-301,-290,-276,-264,-267,-272,|
,→-284,-309,-349,-354,-271,-116,14,60￿ 
148
2023-06-27T21:26:47.754 12,-63,-117,-140,-137,-118,-125,-131,-130,|
,→-133,-107,-75,-30,-103,-544,-653￿ 
149
2023-06-27T21:26:47.906 763,3240,4526,3325,980,-345,-212,96,-162,|
150
-431,-392,-329,-317,-278,-233,-219￿ 
151
2023-06-27T21:26:48.024 -206,-185,-142,-89,-49,-23,13,60,118,168,|
152
209,251,301,368,437,506￿ 
153
2023-06-27T21:26:48.143 565,611,641,653,650,603,456,212,-72,-318,|
154
-487,-596,-662,-691,-696,-680￿ 
155
2023-06-27T21:26:48.263 -650,-607,-572,-556,-541,-517,-475,-441,|
156
-427,-422,-415,-403,-394,-392,-387,-378￿ 
157
2023-06-27T21:26:48.383 -370,-362,-357,-351,-341,-334,-331,-326,|
158
-315,-296,-287,-280,-267,-252,-249,-259￿ 
159
2023-06-27T21:26:48.504 -272,-286,-324,-364,-338,-204,-37,60,45,|
160
-30,-93,-115,-118,-115,-121,-131￿ 
161
2023-06-27T21:26:48.654 -124,-130,-129,-104,-68,-14,-301,-826,-232,|
162
2143,4611,4841,2765,544,-226,-55￿ 
163
2023-06-27T21:26:48.773 -147,-470,-519,-457,-462,-443,-407,-371,|
164
-335,-298,-272,-248,-223,-189,-149,-110￿ 
165
2023-06-27T21:26:48.894 -69,-24,19,56,97,146,206,254,288,308,324,|
166
346,354,334,255,102￿ 
167
2023-06-27T21:26:49.014 -92,-289,-450,-564,-643,-683,-686,-670,|
168
-644,-623,-597,-570,-540,-508,-482,-464￿ 
169
2023-06-27T21:26:49.135 -453,-437,-417,-406,-401,-398,-390,-380,|
170
-371,-364,-360,-358,-352,-343,-331,-320￿ 
171
2023-06-27T21:26:49.254 -318,-307,-288,-280,-280,-281,-277,-263,|
172
-254,-245,-241,-238,-237,-257,-304,-361￿ 
173
2023-06-27T21:26:49.404 -366,-255,-89,34,43,-29,-106,-141,-145,|
174
-141,-139,-147,-150,-155,-176,-165￿ 
175
2023-06-27T21:26:49.546 -131,-53,-148,-695,-790,903,3713,5200,|
176
4019,1540,-31,-216,-148,-429,-591,-542￿ 
177
2023-06-27T21:26:49.643 -529,-516,-477,-448,-413,-379,-350,-318,|
178
-282,-249,-215,-182,-136,-91,-54,-19￿ 
179
2023-06-27T21:26:49.764 22,73,124,163,202,237,261,272,281,279,|
180
236,131,-22,-190,-348,-481￿ 
181
2023-06-27T21:26:49.884 -573,-617,-633,-636,-629,-611,-580,|
182
-551,-525,-500,-476,-450,-427,-410,-402,-398￿ 
183
2023-06-27T21:26:50.004 -383,-362,-345,-336,-334,-331,-328,|
184
-320,-306,-298,-288,-279,-276,-262,-252,-240￿ 
185
2023-06-27T21:26:50.156 -227,-215,-203,-198,-199,-194,-184,|
==PAGE:97==
B.2 Study results
87
186
-165,-153,-150,-142,-137,-128,-123,-121,-111￿ 
187
2023-06-27T21:26:50.274 -110,-109,-121,-136,-165,-218,-235,|
188
-141,23,152,158,81,4,-29,-22,-15￿ 
189
2023-06-27T21:26:50.393 -16,-33,-36,-30,-39,-32,-10,51,-21,|
190
-542,-689,874,3619,5160,4074,1633￿ 
191
2023-06-27T21:26:50.515 46,-133,-31,-293,-479,-428,-414,-416,|
192
-379,-344,-311,-288,-266,-234,-203,-168￿ 
193
2023-06-27T21:26:50.634 -130,-92,-50,-9,30,69,109,150,196,237,|
194
271,309,337,353,358,364￿ 
195
2023-06-27T21:26:50.754 344,275,141,-31,-198,-347,-458,-524,|
196
-551,-560,-568,-558,-526,-495,-475,-459
197 Update local data ￿2023-06-27 19:26:50 +0000￿ 
198
2023-06-27T21:26:50.904 -440,-419,-403,-388,-372,-364,-358,-354,|
199
-345,-328,-320,-320,-329,-323,-308,-295￿ 
200
2023-06-27T21:26:51.024 -289,-285,-273,-261,-250,-242,-241,-232,|
201
-217,-213,-218,-218,-200,-174,-160,-160￿ 
202
2023-06-27T21:26:51.144 -158,-148,-140,-141,-139,-128,-118,-114,|
203
-117,-118,-109,-104,-97,-102,-122,-144￿ 
204
2023-06-27T21:26:51.265 -183,-198,-145,-28,87,138,117,56,-2,-32,|
205
-42,-29,-15,-11,-9,-32￿ 
206
2023-06-27T21:26:51.384 -45,-20,29,44,-338,-748,212,2756,4836,|
207
4439,2116,173,-227,36,-119,-428￿ 
208
2023-06-27T21:26:51.504 -432,-375,-380,-359,-322,-283,-250,-229,|
209
-202,-166,-122,-87,-52,-13,27,65￿ 
210
2023-06-27T21:26:51.654 103,140,187,239,291,341,393,432,456,|
211
470,475,471,431,309,122,-84￿ 
212
2023-06-27T21:26:51.773 -269,-412,-517,-584,-608,-605,-593,|
213
-575,-546,-515,-492,-471,-448,-429,-412,-400￿ 
214
2023-06-27T21:26:51.894 -388,-369,-359,-359,-363,-359,-353,|
215
-342,-333,-330,-334,-332,-318,-301,-292,-287￿ 
216
2023-06-27T21:26:52.015 -278,-272,-259,-242,-231,-224,-216,-210,|
217
-200,-195,-187,-181,-168,-164,-160,-149￿ 
218
2023-06-27T21:26:52.133 -140,-139,-134,-127,-120,-119,-123,-118,|
219
-119,-144,-189,-215,-170,-57,67,136￿ 
220
2023-06-27T21:26:52.254 113,44,-22,-47,-46,-41,-48,-62,-62,-68,|
221
-65,-41,9,8,-393,-746￿ 
222
2023-06-27T21:26:52.405 329,2888,4804,4225,1896,81,-217,26,-165,|
223
-454,-451,-401,-411,-385,-351,-323￿ 
224
2023-06-27T21:26:52.524 -293,-262,-227,-194,-163,-125,-89,-50,|
225
-10,24,64,105,151,202,248,290￿ 
226
2023-06-27T21:26:52.643 332,359,389,409,424,409,356,240,61,-145, |
,→-329,-467,-553,-602,-630,-633￿ 
227
2023-06-27T21:26:52.764 -626,-606,-576,-549,-528,-508,-480,-456, |
,→-445,-435,-424,-406,-388,-379,-371,-370￿ 
228
2023-06-27T21:26:52.884 -372,-359,-353,-350,-350,-345,-333,-320, |
,→-307,-300,-297,-294,-287,-277,-267,-263￿ 
229
2023-06-27T21:26:53.004 -255,-241,-227,-217,-221,-222,-207,-189, |
,→-176,-182,-180,-171,-157,-145,-147,-149￿ 
230
2023-06-27T21:26:53.186
,→-151,-165,-195,-240,-240,-164,-38,67,103,75,15,-45,-77,-83,-75,-71￿ 
231
2023-06-27T21:26:53.274 -75,-80,-98,-83,-51,22,-90,-633,-651, |
,→1104,3834,5105,3773,1348,-51,-125￿ 
232
2023-06-27T21:26:53.394 -55,-350,-509,-451,-447,-447,-415,-384, |
,→-346,-314,-288,-254,-218,-184,-148,-115￿ 
233
2023-06-27T21:26:53.516
==PAGE:98==
88
B Appendix
,→-75,-33,7,43,79,121,166,212,252,287,318,343,350,343,308,239￿ 
234
2023-06-27T21:26:53.634 122,-42,-221,-381,-493,-559,-600,-616,-619, |
,→-608,-579,-549,-527,-509,-490,-460￿ 
235
2023-06-27T21:26:53.754 -434,-421,-414,-403,-384,-373,-365,-365, |
,→-363,-348,-341,-337,-336,-329,-314,-308￿ 
236
2023-06-27T21:26:53.905 -306,-297,-286,-273,-265,-253,-245,-243, |
,→-242,-231,-220,-209,-206,-196,-192,-185￿ 
237
2023-06-27T21:26:54.024
,→-172,-165,-161,-162,-167,-171,-165,-164,-186,-230,-254,|
238
-221,-117,4,78,85￿ 
239
2023-06-27T21:26:54.144 31,-48,-103,-122,-106,-96,-97,-107,-131,-125,|
240
-91,-38,-36,-445,-860,123￿ 
241
2023-06-27T21:26:54.264 2667,4733,4372,2124,205,-259,-82,-260, |
,→-525,-517,-484,-492,-462,-422,-389,-363￿ 
242
2023-06-27T21:26:54.383
,→-340,-308,-270,-232,-200,-169,-135,-92,-50,-6,36,89,134,180,224,268￿ 
243
2023-06-27T21:26:54.504 310,335,346,351,334,277,158,-15, |
,→-214,-394,-530,-620,-675,-689,-686,-669￿ 
244
2023-06-27T21:26:54.656 -647,-620,-591,-569,-547,-526,-506, |
,→-485,-473,-465,-454,-444,-424,-404,-395,-398￿ 
245
2023-06-27T21:26:54.802 -403,-397,-390,-382,-374,-359,-342, |
,→-331,-325,-310,-294,-282,-280,-280,-270,-256￿ 
246
2023-06-27T21:26:54.906 -243,-234,-227,-216,-195,-181,-189, |
,→-202,-189,-185,-218,-255,-261,-197,-90,18￿ 
247
2023-06-27T21:26:55.013
,→84,87,26,-52,-96,-89,-64,-56,-65,-81,-94,-65,-27,20,-88,-549￿ 
248
2023-06-27T21:26:55.134 -563,1020,3538,4663,3284,921,-310, |
,→-143,108,-176,-407,-353,-307,-310,-279,-239￿ 
249
2023-06-27T21:26:55.254
,→-208,-179,-152,-112,-68,-33,-1,37,76,119,163,225,291,353,408,459￿ 
250
2023-06-27T21:26:55.403
,→519,587,639,672,689,702,678,558,346,79,-173,-371,-517,-604,-641,-647
,→￿ 
251
2023-06-27T21:26:55.524 -639,-633,-614,-585,-549,-520,-493, |
,→-473,-458,-444,-420,-392,-379,-373,-370,-357￿ 
252
2023-06-27T21:26:55.644 -350,-363,-366,-353,-328,-321,-323, |
,→-317,-302,-292,-282,-280,-264,-252,-238,-225￿ 
253
2023-06-27T21:26:55.765
,→-222,-219,-214,-204,-196,-210,-233,-262,-265,-201,-89,23,86,71,6,-63
,→
254 Update server started ￿￿2023-06-27 19:26:55 +0000
255 Update local data ￿2023-06-27 19:26:55 +0000￿ 
256
2023-06-27T21:26:55.883
,→-100,-105,-99,-101,-95,-88,-102,-89,-58,6,-76,-574,-672,906,3553,4890
,→￿ 
257
2023-06-27T21:26:56.003 3659,1267,-128,-133,30,-269,-481,-416,-381, |
,→-387,-357,-326,-289,-255,-226,-191
258 Update server completed ￿￿2023-06-27 19:26:56 +0000￿ 
259
2023-06-27T21:26:56.154
,→-148,-114,-80,-49,-6,42,85,131,179,231,285,341,409,465,505,527￿ 
260
2023-06-27T21:26:56.276 539,539,487,361,167,-63,-274,-442,-562, |
,→-625,-649,-647,-639,-627,-607,-572￿ 
261
2023-06-27T21:26:56.394 -540,-511,-497,-468,-444,-424,-410,-402, |
,→-393,-378,-368,-364,-364,-358,-348,-336￿ 
262
2023-06-27T21:26:56.514 -331,-337,-334,-321,-311,-297,-288,-280, |
==PAGE:99==
B.2 Study results
89
,→-274,-269,-259,-252,-242,-236,-231,-223￿ 
263
2023-06-27T21:26:56.633
,→-214,-207,-194,-195,-218,-261,-296,-249,-132,-7,67,65,16,-47,-90,-112
,→￿ 
264
2023-06-27T21:26:56.753 -108,-100,-105,-105,-118,-120,-98,-51,-1, |
,→-326,-829,-102,2365,4742,4794,2639￿ 
265
2023-06-27T21:26:56.906 480,-214,-57,-174,-468,-489,-438,-447,|
266
-422,-385,-350,-315,-289,-256,-225,-190￿ 
267
2023-06-27T21:26:57.024 -147,-107,-73,-43,-1,52,99,145,194,246,|
268
298,338,374,401,419,424￿ 
269
2023-06-27T21:26:57.143 407,336,197,2,-195,-362,-490,-580,-633, |
,→-644,-636,-618,-596,-571,-544,-516￿ 
270
2023-06-27T21:26:57.264 -487,-458,-435,-416,-403,-387,-371,-357, |
,→-357,-359,-354,-338,-322,-315,-311,-310￿ 
271
2023-06-27T21:26:57.384 -305,-297,-286,-278,-255,-213,-188,-204, |
,→-234,-249,-228,-199,-186,-175,-165,-152￿ 
272
2023-06-27T21:26:57.504 -144,-146,-139,-133,-146,-168,-195,-197, |
,→-148,-59,47,118,120,64,-19,-72￿ 
273
2023-06-27T21:26:57.654 -79,-57,-49,-64,-80,-102,-93,-43,20,20, |
,→-400,-823,129,2647,4737,4433￿ 
274
2023-06-27T21:26:57.774 2218,284,-199,-24,-183,-450,-443,-393, |
,→-402,-399,-393,-363,-317,-275,-244,-205￿ 
275
2023-06-27T21:26:57.894 -154,-99,-66,-46,-23,22,78,132,177,226, |
,→273,323,370,410,441,465￿ 
276
2023-06-27T21:26:58.015 472,434,351,211,28,-174,-360,-500,-584, |
,→-627,-642,-648,-640,-622,-602,-575￿ 
277
2023-06-27T21:26:58.134 -547,-518,-491,-478,-466,-449,-438,-431, |
,→-416,-388,-381,-404,-427,-426,-406,-388￿ 
278
2023-06-27T21:26:58.254 -391,-383,-361,-340,-341,-346,-344,-329, |
,→-308,-291,-286,-280,-284,-289,-287,-267￿ 
279
2023-06-27T21:26:58.404 -240,-230,-240,-258,-272,-291,-315,-309, |
,→-228,-102,-5,6,-56,-136,-181,-183￿ 
280
2023-06-27T21:26:58.524 -166,-166,-176,-178,-186,-196,-183,-146, |
,→-84,-299,-810,-458,1602,4022,4513,2694￿ 
281
2023-06-27T21:26:58.643 487,-375,-161,-117,-423,-532,-474,-457, |
,→-433,-406,-386,-344,-283,-244,-228,-215￿ 
282
2023-06-27T21:26:58.764
,→-168,-105,-64,-43,-3,72,149,189,205,241,311,392,449,495,539,566￿ 
283
2023-06-27T21:26:58.883 550,464,300,87,-134,-326,-479,-599,-669, |
,→-702,-704,-699,-679,-634,-583,-556￿ 
284
2023-06-27T21:26:59.004 -547,-525,-492,-473,-473,-469,-444,-406, |
,→-394,-407,-417,-416,-402,-394,-395,-385￿ 
285
2023-06-27T21:26:59.154 -370,-352,-355,-370,-367,-340,-317,-305, |
,→-305,-305,-304,-298,-279,-269,-258,-255￿ 
286
2023-06-27T21:26:59.273 -272,-304,-330,-317,-249,-149,-46,8,-2,-71, |
,→-148,-176,-161,-135,-136,-150￿ 
287
2023-06-27T21:26:59.394 -152,-157,-141,-115,-69,-129,-532,-625, |
,→752,3170,4416,3175,790,-531,-336,71￿ 
288
2023-06-27T21:26:59.514
,→-128,-409,-387,-324,-316,-282,-234,-198,-174,-142,-95,-47,-16,9,41,95
,→￿ 
289
2023-06-27T21:26:59.634 150,203,256,313,372,434,514,608,679,723,750,|
290
787,814,762,600,351￿ 
291
2023-06-27T21:26:59.753 61,-207,-430,-592,-687,-733,-743,-745, |
,→-725,-695,-657,-618,-582,-553,-525,-503￿ 
==PAGE:100==
90
B Appendix
292
2023-06-27T21:26:59.904 -482,-457,-430,-409,-404,-408,-405, |
,→-400,-391,-386,-381,-367,-345,-325,-318,-317￿ 
293
2023-06-27T21:27:00.023 -314,-305,-288,-273,-270,-266,-260, |
,→-265,-287,-314,-295,-211,-95,5,60,63￿ 
294
2023-06-27T21:27:00.145 -2,-96,-148,-132,-79,-73,-108,-121, |
,→-124,-101,-66,-28,-21,-376,-749,182￿ 
295
2023-06-27T21:27:00.266 2624,4612,4205,1943,73,-266,45,-86, |
,→-403,-416,-347,-341,-326,-289,-244,-206￿ 
296
2023-06-27T21:27:00.384 -176,-145,-108,-67,-33,5,43,87,133,184,242,|
297
296,348,412,473,534￿ 
298
2023-06-27T21:27:00.503 583,620,643,648,603,481,275,27,-207, |
,→-394,-539,-639,-694,-701,-691,-669￿ 
299
2023-06-27T21:27:00.654 -642,-613,-578,-552,-520,-490,-466,-450, |
,→-431,-407,-389,-378,-375,-379,-383,-382￿ 
300
2023-06-27T21:27:00.773 -372,-356,-353,-352,-351,-350,-340,-328,-328, |
,→-327,-321,-303,-291,-284,-284,-282
301 Update local data ￿2023-06-27 19:27:00 +0000￿ 
302
2023-06-27T21:27:00.894 -273,-275,-287,-304,-341,-349,-294, |
,→-190,-88,-36,-42,-85,-149,-196,-214,-210￿ 
303
2023-06-27T21:27:01.014 -221,-242,-241,-245,-227,-199,-164,-156,-525, |
,→-949,-43,2482,4661,4419,2155,119￿ 
304
2023-06-27T21:27:01.134 -408,-187,-304,-578,-588,-546,-549,-521,-485, |
,→-454,-422,-390,-350,-313,-276,-233￿ 
305
2023-06-27T21:27:01.253 -187,-138,-87,-42,5,58,132,198,258,320,382,|
306
445,499,531,539,496￿ 
307
2023-06-27T21:27:01.406 388,209,-14,-228,-419,-562,-664,-729,-756, |
,→-754,-734,-696,-663,-633,-606,-576￿ 
308
2023-06-27T21:27:01.524 -547,-527,-514,-497,-470,-440,-431,-420, |
,→-409,-402,-400,-396,-386,-378,-382,-374￿ 
309
2023-06-27T21:27:01.644 -358,-344,-339,-339,-326,-307,-302,-300, |
,→-300,-287,-275,-269,-272,-289,-300,-276￿ 
310
2023-06-27T21:27:01.764 -213,-126,-58,-15,-4,-36,-90,-135,-146, |
,→-129,-118,-129,-130,-121,-117,-87￿ 
311
2023-06-27T21:27:01.883 -39,5,-169,-626,-388,1469,3845,4475, |
,→2753,488,-431,-128,75,-197,-353,-272￿ 
312
2023-06-27T21:27:02.004 -213,-198,-189,-192,-187,-162,-121, |
,→-68,-20,13,57,93,137,184,229,280￿ 
313
2023-06-27T21:27:02.155 329,384,444,509,582,643,688,721,733,712,|
314
632,467,230,-28,-256,-431￿ 
315
2023-06-27T21:27:02.274 -560,-633,-665,-663,-652,-637,-614,-583,-548, |
,→-510,-478,-451,-433,-409,-380,-358￿ 
316
2023-06-27T21:27:02.394 -341,-342,-341,-337,-331,-323,-319,-317,-310, |
,→-302,-292,-284,-276,-270,-257,-246￿ 
317
2023-06-27T21:27:02.515 -232,-229,-226,-221,-208,-198,-191,-180,-171, |
,→-166,-164,-164,-159,-156,-167,-191￿ 
318
2023-06-27T21:27:02.634 -219,-223,-165,-56,45,97,92,42,-20,-67,-89,|
319
-83,-75,-88,-85,-81￿ 
320
2023-06-27T21:27:02.754 -84,-65,-40,12,-167,-674,-419,1553,4087, |
,→4831,3133,806,-266,-147,-65,-349￿ 
321
2023-06-27T21:27:02.904 -461,-398,-392,-387,-357,-323,-287,-250, |
,→-216,-179,-139,-105,-69,-25,10,51￿ 
322
2023-06-27T21:27:03.024 95,140,187,239,302,368,428,483,520,551,574,|
323
579,534,416,224,10￿ 
324
2023-06-27T21:27:03.144 -191,-351,-469,-543,-583,-595,-594, |
,→-583,-563,-532,-507,-484,-459,-436,-408,-380￿ 
==PAGE:101==
B.2 Study results
91
325
2023-06-27T21:27:03.264 -358,-346,-339,-329,-321,-318,-313, |
,→-312,-304,-296,-296,-294,-292,-285,-271,-260￿ 
326
2023-06-27T21:27:03.384 -256,-257,-252,-234,-224,-228,-234, |
,→-228,-215,-202,-193,-185,-188,-182,-177,-165￿ 
327
2023-06-27T21:27:03.504 -152,-154,-163,-166,-171,-180,-203,-222,|
328
-216,-145,-45,38,73,59,2,-55￿ 
329
2023-06-27T21:27:03.656 -105,-118,-98,-86,-94,-104,-123,-116, |
,→-77,-29,-34,-388,-787,59,2478,4573￿ 
330
2023-06-27T21:27:03.774 4301,2044,43,-401,-73,-133,-441,-487, |
,→-415,-397,-378,-345,-320,-288,-253,-216￿ 
331
2023-06-27T21:27:03.894 -176,-143,-115,-67,-15,30,57,91,153,216,270,|
332
318,376,444,506,554￿ 
333
2023-06-27T21:27:04.013 589,598,588,515,371,175,-45,-254,-429, |
,→-558,-628,-660,-665,-666,-655,-632￿ 
334
2023-06-27T21:27:04.133 -608,-570,-535,-515,-501,-492,-466,-444, |
,→-425,-415,-409,-402,-404,-402,-403,-390￿ 
335
2023-06-27T21:27:04.254 -378,-367,-367,-366,-364,-350,-332,-318, |
,→-314,-310,-302,-287,-275,-268,-254,-241￿ 
336
2023-06-27T21:27:04.404 -235,-244,-249,-238,-229,-235,-261,-282, |
,→-266,-202,-116,-33,8,7,-49,-107￿ 
337
2023-06-27T21:27:04.524 -139,-134,-117,-125,-144,-142,-150,-139, |
,→-103,-65,-68,-385,-727,118,2435,4386￿ 
338
2023-06-27T21:27:04.644 4000,1719,-202,-510,-59,-75,-396,-450, |
,→-364,-344,-333,-303,-269,-237,-204,-165￿ 
339
2023-06-27T21:27:04.765 -124,-88,-60,-20,32,76,120,165,221, |
,→281,343,412,479,550,614,664￿ 
340
2023-06-27T21:27:04.883 699,711,689,609,442,201,-68,-309,-485, |
,→-602,-680,-720,-722,-698,-670,-651￿ 
341
2023-06-27T21:27:05.004 -632,-609,-569,-536,-508,-484,-461, |
,→-441,-426,-418,-418,-416,-402,-384,-373,-367￿ 
342
2023-06-27T21:27:05.155 -372,-365,-350,-343,-340,-334,-323, |
,→-309,-302,-288,-283,-268,-259,-247,-229,-225￿ 
343
2023-06-27T21:27:05.294 -227,-223,-222,-232,-262,-289,-254, |
,→-151,-37,36,43,11,-42,-91,-122,-123￿ 
344
2023-06-27T21:27:05.410 -104,-108,-113,-122,-122,-87,-58,-10, |
,→-207,-737,-439,1642,4255,4989,3231,860￿ 
345
2023-06-27T21:27:05.514 -222,-138,-114,-422,-519,-453,-445,-431, |
,→-399,-374,-336,-309,-278,-247,-210,-171￿ 
346
2023-06-27T21:27:05.634 -124,-77,-37,-7,32,81,133,184,225,277, |
,→339,392,427,447,459,452￿ 
347
2023-06-27T21:27:05.753 403,290,116,-80,-270,-421,-522,-585,-616, |
,→-622,-614,-591,-573,-551,-529,-502
348 Update local data ￿2023-06-27 19:27:05 +0000￿ 
349
2023-06-27T21:27:05.906 -474,-453,-430,-410,-395,-381,-367,-359, |
,→-353,-352,-344,-338,-333,-323,-318,-311￿ 
350
2023-06-27T21:27:06.024 -298,-291,-281,-278,-270,-256,-248,-238, |
,→-234,-227,-217,-207,-195,-188,-190,-190￿ 
351
2023-06-27T21:27:06.144
,→-187,-185,-200,-233,-250,-213,-118,-12,57,70,34,-24,-72,-101,-95,-84
,→￿ 
352
2023-06-27T21:27:06.264 -90,-99,-112,-115,-85,-46,7,-211, |
,→-734,-405,1678,4235,4904,3142,818,-230￿ 
353
2023-06-27T21:27:06.384 -143,-129,-411,-497,-439,-438,-434, |
,→-404,-369,-332,-298,-264,-232,-201,-169,-129￿ 
354
2023-06-27T21:27:06.504 -90,-52,-15,28,75,128,172,214,260,311,360,|
==PAGE:102==
92
B Appendix
355
394,416,431,429,392￿ 
356
2023-06-27T21:27:06.654 294,126,-75,-265,-408,-513,-574,-606, |
,→-616,-610,-594,-574,-546,-526,-505,-487￿ 
357
2023-06-27T21:27:06.774 -466,-448,-433,-422,-411,-398,-387,-380, |
,→-378,-374,-365,-352,-346,-345,-344,-339￿ 
358
2023-06-27T21:27:06.894 -327,-313,-301,-292,-282,-270,-257, |
,→-248,-243,-240,-234,-227,-220,-207,-206,-223￿ 
359
2023-06-27T21:27:07.015 -260,-281,-244,-143,-33,31,39,10, |
,→-44,-88,-108,-108,-106,-114,-114,-123￿ 
360
2023-06-27T21:27:07.134 -133,-107,-67,-5,-227,-753,-381, |
,→1737,4238,4801,2983,704,-258,-134,-127,-416￿ 
361
2023-06-27T21:27:07.254 -501,-441,-435,-420,-387,-363,-327, |
,→-295,-263,-229,-199,-159,-114,-73,-38,-6￿ 
362
2023-06-27T21:27:07.404 39,88,134,174,208,260,316,362,392,401,|
363
411,414,375,265,85,-115￿ 
364
2023-06-27T21:27:07.524 -294,-434,-531,-600,-637,-641,-630, |
,→-608,-587,-568,-551,-529,-498,-475,-462,-453￿ 
365
2023-06-27T21:27:07.644 -445,-426,-412,-404,-401,-395,-386, |
,→-377,-374,-372,-366,-356,-345,-339,-334,-325￿ 
366
2023-06-27T21:27:07.764 -314,-306,-298,-288,-281,-276,-267, |
,→-257,-246,-243,-249,-252,-264,-290,-323,-321￿ 
367
2023-06-27T21:27:07.884 -251,-137,-43,-5,-37,-102,-162,-191, |
,→-199,-200,-213,-221,-223,-239,-230,-202￿ 
368
2023-06-27T21:27:08.004 -138,-238,-746,-809,804,3419,4697, |
,→3452,1087,-292,-331,-199,-464,-637,-583,-565￿ 
369
2023-06-27T21:27:08.156 -566,-526,-488,-458,-438,-415,-382, |
,→-343,-307,-262,-225,-186,-138,-87,-42,-11￿ 
370
2023-06-27T21:27:08.274 25,75,136,194,236,266,288,308,329, |
,→313,220,51,-160,-364,-520,-625￿ 
371
2023-06-27T21:27:08.394 -679,-707,-717,-718,-706,-677,-651, |
,→-622,-598,-573,-549,-535,-519,-501,-484,-472￿ 
372
2023-06-27T21:27:08.513 -469,-465,-447,-428,-427,-434,-431, |
,→-406,-382,-373,-366,-345,-319,-309,-314,-311￿ 
373
2023-06-27T21:27:08.634 -296,-271,-259,-249,-231,-240,-269, |
,→-299,-300,-228,-112,-5,53,45,-5,-62￿ 
374
2023-06-27T21:27:08.754 -97,-103,-86,-83,-96,-106,-113,-87, |
,→-40,8,-35,-466,-699,555,3088,4684￿ 
375
2023-06-27T21:27:08.905 3763,1384,-190,-237,89,-112,-398, |
,→-380,-312,-302,-271,-241,-213,-174,-141,-107￿ 
376
2023-06-27T21:27:09.023 -71,-39,0,41,87,133,179,226,265, |
,→310,366,420,480,541,587,619￿ 
377
2023-06-27T21:27:09.144 634,641,616,511,317,70,-167,-353,-492, |
,→-572,-606,-608,-594,-581,-558,-531￿ 
378
2023-06-27T21:27:09.266 -500,-476,-454,-429,-412,-404,-393,-384, |
,→-368,-356,-356,-349,-344,-332,-316,-306
Listing B.1: ECG value logs.
B.3
Faros implementation
The initial Faros integration project branch can be found here.
==PAGE:103==
B.3 Faros implementation
93
The most relevant types will be presented in the appendix, namely the Bluetooth-
Manager class and the ECGPacket model have been created.
ECGPacket Model
1 [language=Swift,basicstyle=\ttfamily,columns=fullflexible ,postbreak=\mbox{\
textcolor{red}{$\hookrightarrow$}\space},breaklines=true,caption=ECG Packet
type interface,label=ecgpackettype]
2 import Foundation
3
4 public struct ECGPacket {
5
let signature: String
6
let flag: UInt8
7
let packetNumber: UInt32
8
let ecgData: [Int16]
9
let accelerometerData: (x: Int16, y: Int16, z: Int16)
10
let marker: UInt16
11
let rrInterval: Int16?
12
let temperature: UInt16?
13
let batteryVoltage: UInt16?
14
let timestamp: UInt32?
15
let pacemakerEvents: [PacemakerEvent]
16
let reserved: [UInt8]
17
let padding: [UInt8]?
18
let checksum: UInt16
19 }
20
21 public extension ECGPacket {
22
init?(data: Data) {
23
guard data.count >= 25 else { return nil }
24
25
signature = String(bytes: data[0..<3], encoding: .ascii) ?? ""
26
guard signature == "MEP" else { return nil }
27
28
flag = data[3]
29
packetNumber = data[4...7].withUnsafeBytes { $0.load(as: UInt32.self)
}.byteSwapped
30
31
// ECG data
32
ecgData = [
33
Int16(bigEndian: data.subdata(in: 8..<10).withUnsafeBytes { $0.load
(as: Int16.self) }),
34
Int16(bigEndian: data.subdata(in: 10..<12).withUnsafeBytes { $0.
load(as: Int16.self) }),
35
]
36
// Accelerometer data
37
let accelX = data[10...11].withUnsafeBytes { $0.load(as: Int16.self) }.
bigEndian
38
let accelY = data[12...13].withUnsafeBytes { $0.load(as: Int16.self) }.
bigEndian
39
let accelZ = data[14...15].withUnsafeBytes { $0.load(as: Int16.self) }.
bigEndian
40
accelerometerData = (accelX, accelY, accelZ)
41
42
// Marker data
43
marker = data[16...17].withUnsafeBytes { $0.load(as: UInt16.self) }.
==PAGE:104==
94
B Appendix
bigEndian
44
45
// RR-interval
46
if flag & 1 == 1 {
47
rrInterval = Int16(bigEndian: data.subdata(in: 20..<22).
withUnsafeBytes { $0.load(as: Int16.self) })
48
} else {
49
rrInterval = nil
50
}
51
52
// Assuming the temperature , batteryVoltage , and timestamp are always
available
53
temperature = UInt16(bigEndian: data.subdata(in: 22..<24).
withUnsafeBytes { $0.load(as: UInt16.self) })
54
batteryVoltage = UInt16(bigEndian: data.subdata(in: 24..<26).
withUnsafeBytes { $0.load(as: UInt16.self) })
55
timestamp = UInt32(bigEndian: data.subdata(in: 26..<30).withUnsafeBytes
{ $0.load(as: UInt32.self) })
56
57
// Assuming the pacemakerEvents are not always available
58
if data.count > 30 {
59
pacemakerEvents = [
60
PacemakerEvent(data: data.subdata(in: 30..<32)),
61
PacemakerEvent(data: data.subdata(in: 32..<34)),
62
]
63
} else {
64
pacemakerEvents = []
65
}
66
67
let reservedStartIndex = 30
68
let reservedEndIndex = reservedStartIndex + 5
69
reserved = Array(data[reservedStartIndex..<reservedEndIndex])
70
71
let paddingStartIndex = reservedEndIndex
72
let paddingEndIndex = paddingStartIndex + 1
73
padding = Array(data[paddingStartIndex..<paddingEndIndex])
74
75
checksum = UInt16(bigEndian: data.subdata(in: data.count - 2..<data.
count).withUnsafeBytes { $0.load(as: UInt16.self) })
76
77
}
78 }
79
80 struct PacemakerEvent {
81
let isDetected: Bool
82
let timestamp: UInt16
83
84
init(data: Data) {
85
isDetected = (data[0] & 0x80) != 0
86
timestamp = UInt16(data[0] & 0x7F) | UInt16(data[1]) << 7
87
}
88 }
.
==PAGE:105==
B.3 Faros implementation
95
BluetoothManager class
1 [language=Swift,basicstyle=\ttfamily,columns=fullflexible ,postbreak=\mbox{\
textcolor{red}{$\hookrightarrow$}\space},breaklines=true,caption=Faros
Bluetooth Manager,label=farosbluetotthmanager]
2 public class BluetoothManager: NSObject {
3
typealias PeripheralContinuation = CheckedContinuation <CBPeripheral , Error>
4
5
private var centralManager: CBCentralManager!
6
private var connectingPeripheral: CBPeripheral?
7
8
private var connectingContinuation: PeripheralContinuation?
9
10
var peripheralContinuation: AsyncStream <CBPeripheral >.Continuation!
11
var ecgPacketContinuation: AsyncStream <ECGPacket >.Continuation!
12
13
lazy var peripheralStream: AsyncStream <CBPeripheral > = {
14
.init { cont in
15
peripheralContinuation = cont
16
}}()
17
18
public lazy var ecgPacketsStream: AsyncStream <ECGPacket> = {
19
.init { cont in
20
ecgPacketContinuation = cont
21
}}()
22
23
public override init() {
24
super.init()
25
centralManager = CBCentralManager(delegate: self, queue: nil)
26
}
27 }
28
29 //MARK: Public Interface
30 public extension BluetoothManager {
31
func scanAvailableDevices() -> AsyncStream <CBPeripheral > {
32
centralManager.scanForPeripherals(withServices: nil)
33
return peripheralStream
34
}
35
36
func connectToPeripheral(_ peripheral: CBPeripheral) async throws ->
CBPeripheral {
37
return try await withCheckedThrowingContinuation { cont in
38
connectingContinuation = cont
39
centralManager.connect(peripheral)
40
connectingPeripheral = peripheral
41
}
42
}
43 }
44
45 //MARK: CBCentralManagerDelegate
46 extension BluetoothManager: CBCentralManagerDelegate {
47
public func centralManagerDidUpdateState(
48
_ central: CBCentralManager
49
) {
50
if central.state == .poweredOn {
==PAGE:106==
96
B Appendix
51
print("￿￿powered on")
52 //
centralManager.scanForPeripherals(withServices: nil)
53
}
54
}
55
56
public func centralManager(
57
_ central: CBCentralManager ,
58
didDiscover peripheral: CBPeripheral ,
59
advertisementData: [String : Any], rssi RSSI: NSNumber
60
) {
61
peripheralContinuation.yield(peripheral)
62
}
63
64
public func centralManager(
65
_ central: CBCentralManager ,
66
didConnect peripheral: CBPeripheral
67
) {
68
if peripheral == connectingPeripheral {
69
connectingContinuation?.resume(returning: peripheral)
70
} else {
71
connectingContinuation?.resume(throwing: BluetoothError.
failedToConnectToGivenDevice)
72
}
73
}
74
75
public func centralManager(
76
_ central: CBCentralManager ,
77
didFailToConnect peripheral: CBPeripheral ,
78
error: Error?
79
) {
80
if let error = error {
81
connectingContinuation?.resume(throwing: error)
82
} else {
83
connectingContinuation?.resume(throwing: BluetoothError.
failedToConnect)
84
}
85
}
86 }
87
88 extension BluetoothManager: CBPeripheralDelegate {
89
public func peripheral(
90
_ peripheral: CBPeripheral ,
91
didDiscoverIncludedServicesFor service: CBService,
92
error: Error?
93
) {
94
95
}
96
97
public func peripheral(
98
_ peripheral: CBPeripheral ,
99
didDiscoverCharacteristicsFor service: CBService,
100
error: Error?
101
) {
102
103
}
==PAGE:107==
B.3 Faros implementation
97
104 }
105
106 enum BluetoothError: Error {
107
case
failedToConnect
108
case failedToConnectToGivenDevice
109 }
.
==PAGE:108==
98
==PAGE:109==
APPENDIX C
Appendix
Appendix C contains documents relevant to this project.
C.1
EpiHeartMonitor Application
This sections specifies the URL to the source code of the EpiHeartMonitor application.
It can be found in the following link: EpiHeartMonitor Github repository.
==PAGE:110==
100
==PAGE:111==
Bibliography
[AB20]
Roberta Avanzato and Francesco Beritelli. “Automatic ECG Diagnosis Us-
ing Convolutional Neural Network.” In: Electronics 9 (June 2020), page 951.
doi: 10.3390/electronics9060951.
[Appa]
Apple. Async stream continuation. https://developer.apple.com/
documentation/swift/asyncstream/continuation.
[Appb]
Apple. Checked continuation. https://developer.apple.com/documentation/
swift/checkedcontinuation.
[Appc]
Apple. Core Bluetooth. https://developer.apple.com/documentation/
corebluetooth.
[Appd]
Apple. Human Interface Guidelines Typography. https://developer.
apple.com/design/human-interface-guidelines/typography.
[Appe]
Apple. Scaling Fonts Automatically. https://developer.apple.com/
documentation/uikit/uifont/scaling_fonts_automatically.
[Appf]
Apple. Supporting VoiceOver in your app. https://developer.apple.
com/documentation/accessibility/supporting_voiceover_in_your_
app/.
[Appg]
Apple. Widget Kit Documentation. https://developer.apple.com/
documentation/widgetkit.
[Bau+16]
Mathias Baumert et al. “QT interval variability in body surface ECG:
measurement, physiological basis, and clinical value: position statement
and consensus guidance endorsed by the European Heart Rhythm Asso-
ciation jointly with the ESC Working Group on Cardiac Cellular Electro-
physiology.” en. In: Europace 18.6 (January 2016), pages 925–944.
[CAC]
CACHET. Create file. https://cans.cachet.dk/dev/swagger- ui/
index.html.
[ccg]
ccgus. FMDB. https://github.com/ccgus/fmdb.
[Dev11]
Orrin Devinsky. “Sudden, unexpected death in epilepsy.” In: New Eng-
land Journal of Medicine 365.19 (2011), pages 1801–1811. doi: 10.1016/
S1474-4422(16)30158-2.
==PAGE:112==
102
Bibliography
[Fis+05]
Robert S. Fisher et al. “Epileptic Seizures and Epilepsy: Definitions Pro-
posed by the International League Against Epilepsy (ILAE) and the Inter-
national Bureau for Epilepsy (IBE).” In: Epilepsia 46.4 (2005), pages 470–
472. doi: https://doi.org/10.1111/j.0013-9580.2005.66104.x.
eprint: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1111/j.0013-
9580.2005.66104.x. url: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/
abs/10.1111/j.0013-9580.2005.66104.x.
[Fis+14]
Robert S. Fisher et al. “ILAE Oﬀicial Report: A practical clinical defini-
tion of epilepsy.” In: Epilepsia 55.4 (2014), pages 475–482. doi: 10.1111/
epi.12550.
[Har]
Harvard. Test Accessibility with an iPhone. https://accessibility.
huit.harvard.edu/practices.
[Har+17]
Richard Harte et al. “A Human-Centered Design Methodology to Enhance
the Usability, Human Factors, and User Experience of Connected Health
Systems: A Three-Phase Methodology.” In: JMIR Human Factors (2017).
[Hes+11]
D C Hesdorffer et al. “Estimating risk for developing epilepsy: a population-
based study in Rochester, Minnesota.” en. In: Neurology 76.1 (January
2011), pages 23–27.
[Jef]
Jeff Sauro. 5 Ways to Interpret a SUS Score. https://measuringu.com/
interpret-sus-score/.
[Kod]
Kodeco. SQLite with Swift tutorial. https://www.kodeco.com/6620276-
sqlite-with-swift-tutorial-getting-started.
[Kri]
Kristaps Grinbergs. Embracing the Dynamic Type. https : / / fassko .
medium.com/embracing-the-dynamic-type-d8df6701aa19.
[LS01]
Samden D. Lhatoo and Josemir W.A.S. Sander. “Cause-Specific Mortality
in Epilepsy.” In: Current Opinion in Neurology 14.2 (2001), pages 189–195.
doi: 10.1111/j.1528-1167.2005.00406.x.
[Maca]
MacRumors. How to Enable Live Activities on iPhone. https://www.
macrumors.com/how-to/enable-live-activities-ios/.
[Macb]
MacStories. iOS 16 Lock Screen Widgets. https://www.macstories.net/
stories/ios-16-lock-screen-widgets-the-macstories-roundup/.
[Mas]
Masha Panchenko. Measuring the Intangible. Usability Metrics. https:
//www.eleken.co/blog-posts/usability-metrics.
[Mik]
Mikko Eronen. MovesenseApi-iOS. https://github.com/mikkojeronen/
MovesenseApi-iOS.
[Mon]
MongoDB. Realm. https://realm.io/.
[Mov]
Movesense. Movesense API Documentation. https://www.movesense.
com/docs/esw/api_reference.
==PAGE:113==
Bibliography
103
[Mov20]
Movesense. OP174 MOVESENSE MD User Guide. English. Movesense.
December 14, 2020. 24 pages.
[Nas11]
Lina Nashef. “Sudden unexpected death in epilepsy: terminology and def-
initions.” In: Epilepsia 52.Suppl. 7 (2011), pages 6–8. doi: 10.1111/j.
1528-1157.1997.tb06130.x.
[ND88]
Donald A. Norman and Stephen W. Draper. “User Centered System De-
sign: New Perspectives on Human-Computer Interaction.” In: 1988.
[NHM07]
Lina Nashef, Neeti Hindocha, and Andrew Makoff. “Risk factors in sudden
death in epilepsy (SUDEP): the quest for mechanisms.” en. In: Epilepsia
48.5 (April 2007), pages 859–871.
[Noa]
Noah Martin. Supporting Dynamic Type at Airbnb. https://medium.
com/airbnb- engineering/supporting- dynamic- type- at- airbnb-
b47c68b0c998.
[Org19]
World Health Organization. Epilepsy: a public health imperative: sum-
mary. Technical documents. 2019, 12 p.
[Poi]
Point-Free. Dependencies. https://github.com/pointfreeco/swift-
dependencies.
[Pro]
Proxyman. iOS Proxyman setup. https://docs.proxyman.io/debug-
devices/ios-device.
[Ryv+13]
Philippe Ryvlin et al. “Incidence and mechanisms of cardiorespiratory ar-
rests in epilepsy monitoring units (MORTEMUS): a retrospective study.”
en. In: Lancet Neurol 12.10 (September 2013), pages 966–977.
[Sta]
Stark. What is AA vs AAA. https://www.getstark.co/support/
education/what-is-aa-vs-aaa.
[Stea]
Stefan Kieleithner. Improving Dynamic Type Support. https://pspdfkit.
com/blog/2018/improving-dynamic-type-support/.
[Steb]
Stephen Celis. SQLite.swift. https : / / github . com / stephencelis /
SQLite.swift.
[THF14]
David J. Thurman, Dale C. Hesdorffer, and Jacqueline A. French. “Sud-
den unexpected death in epilepsy: Assessing the public health burden.”
In: Epilepsia 55.10 (2014), pages 1479–1485. doi: https://doi.org/10.
1111/epi.12666.
[Thu+11]
David J. Thurman et al. “Standards for Epidemiologic Studies and Surveil-
lance of Epilepsy.” In: Epilepsia 52.Suppl. 7 (2011), pages 2–26. doi: 10.
1111/j.1528-1167.2011.03121.x.
[Usa]
Usability.gov. User-Centered Design Basics. https://www.usability.
gov/what-and-why/user-centered-design.html.
==PAGE:114==
