==PAGE:1==
DTU Wind
Dynamic modelling and control in Power 
Factory of hybrid power plants for ancillary 
services provision
Enrique Garcia Rico 
DTU Wind-M-0626 
June 2023
==PAGE:2==
DTU Wind-M-0626 
June 2023
Project period: 
January - June 2023
ECTS: 30
Education: Master of Science
Supervisor(s):
Anca Daniela Hansen
Kaushik Das
Soheil Pouraltafi-Kheljan
DTU Wind and Energy Systems
Remarks:
This report is submitted as partial 
fulfillment of the requirements for 
graduation in the above education at the 
Technical University of Denmark.
Technical University of Denmark 
Department of Wind and Energy Systems 
Frederiksborgvej 399
DK-4000 Roskilde
www.wind.dtu.dk
Author: Enrique Garcia Rico
Title:
Dynamic modelling and control in Power 
Factory of hybrid power plants for ancillary 
services provision
DTU Wind and Energy Systems is a department of the 
Technical University of Denmark with a unique 
integration of research, education, innovation and 
public/private sector consulting in the field of wind and 
energy. Our activities develop new opportunities and 
technology for the global and Danish exploitation of 
wind and energy. Research focuses on key technical-
scientific fields, which are central for the development, 
innovation and use of wind energy and provides the 
basis for advanced education.
==PAGE:3==
Summary
The rising integration of large-scale renewable sources has led to growing concerns for
power system stability and reliability. Renewable energy sources will eventually need to
fulfil the services traditionally provided by conventional power plants. In this concern,
hybrid power plants have several advantages over single-type technologies by integrating
several generating technologies to mitigate the intrinsic variability of renewable energy
sources. Several control architectures have been proposed for single-type technologies.
However, limited publications are related to integrating several technologies, including
wind power plants, solar power plants, and energy storage systems.
To address this gap, this thesis is centered on developing a dynamic model and control
strategy for a co-located hybrid power plant composed of wind, solar power and an energy
storage system for ancillary services provision. The primary research questions focus on
the control’s effectiveness in regulating active and reactive power and determining their
ability to provide frequency and voltage ancillary services.
To achieve these objectives, detailed dynamical models are developed using Power Factory
software, accompanied by designing and implementing a hierarchical control system for
the hybrid power plant. The control architecture incorporates three control levels: the
hybrid power plant, plant, and asset levels. The hybrid power plant regulates the power
at the point of common coupling by dispatching power from the sub-plants depending on
their available power. Simultaneously, the plant control levels regulate power production
by sending power references to individual assets depending on their available power, and
asset control levels regulate the power at the local level. The active power controller of the
hybrid power plant incorporates a subordinated frequency droop controller to adapt the
power under frequency deviations. Similarly, the reactive power controller implements a
voltage droop controller to adjust the reactive power in response to voltage deviations.
This implementation enhances the coordination between the sub-plants and prevents them
from counteracting during frequency and voltage events.
The performance of the hybrid power plant, along with its control strategies, is evaluated
using an IEEE 12-bus system under varying wind speeds and solar irradiation conditions.
The results proved an effective coordination between the sub-plants and proved their
capacity to regulate the power under the outage of wind and solar power plant assets.
The frequency control has been proven highly effective, with successful power dispatch
coordination between the plants; the system contributes to the frequency containment
process, supporting the frequency above 49.5 Hz. The voltage control enables the dispatch
of reactive power to support steady-state voltage deviations below 5%.
Overall, this thesis demonstrates the ability of the control to regulate active and reac-
tive power, with acceptable performance. Moreover, the frequency and voltage controller
proves to be effective in providing ancillary services. Thus, the control architecture con-
tributes to integrating renewable energy sources into the grid, enhancing stability and
reliability while enabling ancillary services.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
I would like to express my sincere gratitude to my supervisors for providing me with the
opportunity to work alongside them and collaborate on the development of this thesis.
Their invaluable support and inspiration have played an integral role in shaping the
outcome of this research.
I would like to express my gratitude to my family and friends for their continuous support
and motivation throughout my thesis. Their encouragement has been greatly appreciated
and has helped me stay motivated during challenging times.
I would also like to acknowledge the professors and fellow students at DTU who have con-
tributed to my academic journey. Their collaboration and guidance have been invaluable
in shaping my research and expanding my knowledge in the field.
Thank you to everyone who has played a part in my master’s studies and thesis. Your
support has been significant and deeply appreciated.
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Summary
i
Acknowledgements
iii
1
Introduction
3
1.1
Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.2
Objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.3
Assumptions and limitations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.3.1
Thesis outline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2
State of art for modelling and control of Hybrid power plants
9
2.1
Hybrid power plant control
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.2
Power system frequency and voltage control . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.2.1
Frequency control
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.2.2
Voltage control . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.3
State of the art for Hybrid power Plant Assets
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.3.1
Wind turbines
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.3.2
Photovoltaic System . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.4
Energy Storage System . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3
Dynamic modelling and control
21
3.1
Hybrid power plant control
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.2
Wind Power plant
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.2.1
Wind turbine
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
3.3
Model Performance for the wind turbine . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
3.4
Solar Power Plant
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
3.4.1
Photovoltaic system . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
3.5
Model Performance of the photovoltaic system
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
3.6
Battery Energy Storage System
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
3.7
Model Performance of the BESS
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
3.8
Hybrid power plant topology
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
3.9
Power System model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
3.9.1
Control parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
4
Simulations, results and analysis
53
4.1
Enhanced Power Control Performance: Analysis of Turbulent Weather
Conditions, Control Functions, and Outage Events . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
4.1.1
Curtailment of Solar Power plant and 24MW outage impact in wind
power plant assets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
4.1.2
Curtailment of Wind Power plant and 24MW outage from solar power 57
4.2
Enhanced Ancillary services: Analysis of Power control during Frequency
Events . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
4.2.1
Enhanced Ancillary services: Sensitivity analysis for frequency con-
trol
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
4.3
Enhanced Ancillary services: Analysis of Power Control during voltage
Events . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
==PAGE:8==
vi
CONTENTS
4.3.1
Enhanced Ancillary services: Sensitivity analysis for voltage control
64
5
Conclusions
67
5.1
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
68
A Appendix
71
A.1 Hybrid power plant control
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
71
A.1.1
Frequency controller Parameters
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
71
A.1.2
Voltage controller Parameters
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
71
A.1.3
Dispatch control test
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
72
A.2 Wind turbine Type IV
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
75
A.3 Solar power plant . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
78
A.3.1
Renewable energy electrical control REEC B
. . . . . . . . . . . .
78
A.3.2
Renewable energy generator converter (inverter) model REGC A
80
A.4 Battery Energy Storing System . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
82
A.4.1
Parameters for Simple battery model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
82
A.5 HPP Topology
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
82
A.6 IEEE 12-bus system parameters
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
82
A.6.1
Generation units . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
82
A.6.2
Loads . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
82
A.6.3
Transformers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
84
A.6.4
Transmission lines
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
85
A.7 Performance results for HPP control . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
85
A.7.1
Curtailment of Solar Power plant and and 24MW outage in wind
power plant assets - scenario 1a
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
85
A.7.2
Curtailment of Wind Power plant and and 24MW outage from solar
power - scenario 1b . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
89
Bibliography
95
==PAGE:9==
List of abbreviations
AEP Annual Energy production
BESS Battery Energy Storage System
CAPEX Capital expenditure
ES Energy storage
ESS Energy storage system
EMS Energy management system
FFR Fast frequency reserve
FCR Frequency containment reserve
FRR Frequency restoration reserve
HPP Hybrid power plant
LOCE Levelized cost of energy
MPPT Maximum power point tracking
NREL National Renewable Energy laboratory
PCC Point of common coupling
PCS Power collection system
PoC Point of connection
PV Photovoltaic
PVS Photovoltaic Systems
RES Renewable energy sources
ROCOF Rate of change of frequency
TSO Transmission system operator
WPP Wind Power plant
WT Wind Turbine
==PAGE:10==
2
CONTENTS
==PAGE:11==
Chapter 1
Introduction
1.1
Background
Over the past two centuries, the extensive use of fossil fuels has led to increased global tem-
peratures, while its decreasing accessibility has made it even more expensive through the
years[3]. Additionally, it is anticipated that human development, economic growth, pop-
ulation expansion, and technological advancements will collectively lead to a substantial
surge in energy and electricity consumption in the forthcoming years [6]. Consequently,
international entities have established targets to mitigate climate change by reducing
the use of fossil fuels and transitioning towards Renewable Energy Sources (RES). For
instance, the European Union has established several goals for 2030, including a 40%
reduction in greenhouse emissions and a minimum renewable energy share of 32% [7].
Furthermore, Denmark is committed to phasing out the use of fossil fuels by 2050 [8].
Considering these economic and environmental concerns, the adoption of RES, such as
wind and solar, has been on the rise. Furthermore, the Levelized Cost of Energy (LCOE)
for such technologies has decreased over the last decades [4]. However, the increasing
penetration of RES in the power system brings new challenges, especially regarding power
quality, reliability and stability such as :
1. High variability and uncertainty associated with variable renewable energy sources,
such as wind and solar, pose a threat to power system stability. Therefore, the is
an increasing need for short-term balancing and operational reserve capacity[11].
2. The intrinsic variability and uncertainty of renewable energy sources compromise
their reliability, especially in isolated systems, where there is a greater need for
energy storage [11].
3. The decrease in the power system inertia due to the use of power converters, leads
to decoupling the generator frequency with the grid frequency. This reduction in
inertia significantly impacts frequency stability by causing a higher rate of change of
frequency (ROCOF) in the presence of power imbalances between production and
consumption [10].
In this context, the implementation of Hybrid Power Plants (HPPs) as a combination of
renewable energy technologies with energy storage systems has gained momentum, aiming
to enhance reliability and efficiency [1],[4]. This integration enables higher penetration of
renewable energies in the power system.
==PAGE:12==
4
Introduction
HPPs, as defined by National Renewable Energy Laboratory (NREL) contain two or more
generation technologies along with an Energy Storage System (ESS) to produce electricity
or other products, such as hydrogen [12]. The HPPs can be physically connected at a
Point of Common Coupling (PCC) or virtually connected through a telecommunication
system. In this study, the term HPP refers explicitly to the former topology known as
"Co-located HPP", where all the assets are physically connected to a PCC. Typically
HPPs are owned by a single company, enabling them to participate in different markets
due to their enhanced controllability. Moreover, the active and reactive power commands
from the Transmission System Operator (TSO) are only involving the HPP PCC.
The development of HPPs as a combination of wind, solar and ESS offers several advan-
tages when compared to single-technology-based power plants [4],[5] :
• Increased availability - The complementary nature of solar and wind resources
improves energy availability and represents an increase in AEP and a capacity factor
of the HPP, and the ESS enables energy curtailment for situations with high wind
and solar irradiation.
• Decrease in variability - The diversification of energy resources gets to smooth
power production and power fluctuations from individual assets in the HPP. Further-
more, the ESS provides an additional source of energy that contributes to reducing
the intrinsic variability from RES.
• Increase in capacity factor - Given the fact that individual technologies such
as solar and wind energy generally have low capacity factors, the electrical infras-
tructure (i.e. cables, converters and transformers) remains sub-utilized for their
capacity. Therefore, overplanting either wind and/or solar energy along with an
ESS would increase the overall capacity factor of the HPP and potentially reduce
the LCOE.
• Cost reduction and revenue increase - The increased capacity factor, combined
with the ESS gives the possibility to increase AEP and enable the HPP to optimize
the use of land and electrical infrastructure. Through optimal design and operation,
the HPP can maximize profit from different markets such as energy market and
ancillary services. For example, the ESS system helps curtail energy for low spot
market prices and dispatch the energy at higher market prices. Besides this, there
is also the possibility to over plant existing wind farms by installing solar PV and
battery units to reduce the cost of developing a HPP. However, such projects should
comply with the maximum injectable power at the PCC and further grid restrictions
from TSO.
• Enhanced Ancillary services capability - The relevance of improving ancillary
services capability has increased due to reduced subsidies for renewable energy[9].
Consequently, power plant operators and developers are increasingly focused on op-
timizing their investments and facilitating the integration of HPP into the ancillary
services market.
Moreover, power curtailment can be achieved by operating RES assets under their
rated power or utilizing the ESS to deliver active power. Additionally, the presence
of frequency converters enlarge their capabilities to provide active power/frequency
control or reactive power/voltage control.
==PAGE:13==
1.2 Objectives
5
• Increase wind turbine lifetime- The lifetime of the wind turbine may be in-
creased by minimizing the loads in the wind turbine by using solar PV and the
ESS, depending on the weather conditions.
The rising integration of large-scale renewable energy sources has led to a growing need to
address power system stability and reliability concerns. Renewable energy power plants
will eventually fulfil part of the duties of conventional generators, including active and
reactive power regulation, frequency control, and voltage control. Therefore, achieving an
optimal integration of renewable energy sources represents a main research area driven
by the need to meet stricter grid code regulations.
Existing literature proposes various centralized control architectures to provide active or
reactive power for single-type technologies, enhancing their frequency and voltage control
capabilities [14],[15],[16]. However, limited publications are related to integrating several
technologies, including wind power plants, solar power plants, and energy storage systems.
To address this gap, this thesis is focused on designing and implementing a dynamic model
and control system in DigSilent Power Factory for a co-located hybrid power plant. The
proposed control architecture aims to coordinate the assets of the hybrid power plant,
enabling effective regulation of both active and reactive power, while facilitating frequency
and voltage control for the grid.
1.2
Objectives
The main objective of this work is to develop a dynamic model in DigSilent Power factory
for a HPP, incorporating aggregated models of a wind power plant (WPP), solar power
plant (SPP), and energy storage system (ESS). By Develop and implement a control
architecture with three control levels: HPP, sub-power plants and asset control. Focusing
on developing a HPP controller capable of regulating active and reactive power while
providing frequency and voltage control for the grid.
Investigate the performance of the individual assets and the HPP at the point of com-
mon coupling (PCC) through various scenarios. Examine the coordination between the
sub-plants to ensure the effective control of active and reactive power and evaluate the
performance of the dynamic model and control system through different simulated sce-
narios.
These tasks will be addressed by developing dynamical models for aggregates power plants
(wind, solar and storage) to asses their individual performance under different scenarios.
Proposing a HPP controller to provide ancillary services to the grid and assessing its
performance under different scenarios targets to answer the following research questions:
1. How effective is the developed HPP control in regulating active and reactive power for
fluctuating wind and solar irradiation conditions?
2. What is the performance of the coordination between the wind power plant, solar
power plant and energy storage system for different operating conditions?
==PAGE:14==
6
Introduction
3. How does the HPP perform during the outage of one of the assets?
4. Is the HPP able to provide frequency ancillary services and what is the impact of the
HPP control parameters on the frequency?
5. Is the HPP able to provide voltage ancillary services, and what is the impact of the
HPP control parameters on the voltage at the point of common coupling?
1.3
Assumptions and limitations
The assumptions considered in this project are as follows :
• The communication delays between different control levels are disregarded as the
primer focus is on HPP control architecture and coordination between the HPPs’
assets.
• Weather conditions are assumed to be the same for each type of technology, i.e. no
wake effects are considered for the wind power plant, and no shadow effects for the
photovoltaic solar power plant. Additionally, all generation-type technologies have
the same operating conditions in respect to active and reactive power production.
These assumptions are made to represent each generation of technology as a single
aggregated model.
• The configuration of the photovoltaic array and energy storage system, along with
the connection of the DC-link circuit, are not considered in order to simplify the
dynamical model and reduce computational resources.
• A linear relationship between the state of charge (SOC) and the terminal voltage
is assumed for the BESS, disregarding temperature and degradation effects, i.e.
constant battery capacity is assumed.
• Economical feasibility and market participation aspects are out of the scope of the
studies.
• Ramp rate constraints are neglected.
• Reactive power capabilities are defined with steady state analysis with a maximum
value of 82 MVAr at the HPP PCC.
The primary objective of this study is to create a dynamic model in DigSilent Power
Factory for a Hybrid Power Plant (HPP), integrating aggregated models of a Wind Power
Plant (WPP), Solar Power Plant (SPP), and Energy Storage System (ESS). The focus is
on developing and implementing a hierarchical control architecture consisting of three
levels: HPP, sub-power plants, and asset control. The HPP controller aims to regulate
both active and reactive power, while also providing frequency and voltage control for the
grid.
==PAGE:15==
1.3 Assumptions and limitations
7
1.3.1
Thesis outline
Chapter 2 - State of art for modelling and control of hybrid power plants
This chapter is divided into three sections. The first one introduces relevant control ar-
chitectures present in the literature. The second section introduces frequency and voltage
principles in the power system. At last, brief research is performed to select suitable gen-
eration technologies, considering their ability to control both active and reactive power.
These sections conclude with the proposed technologies for the integration of the HPP
Chapter 3 - Dynamic modelling and control
This chapter introduces the hierarchical control architecture starting from the central
HPP control, sub-plant and asset control levels. The relevant models are tested through
means of simulations, to validate their dynamical behaviour and control.
Chapter 4 - Simulation, results and analysis
In this chapter, the hybrid power plant is integrated with the individual asset models and
connected to the power system. Additionally, a series of simulations are performed to
asses active and reactive power control and additional functionalities for frequency and
voltage control.
Chapter 5 - Conclusions
The final chapter offers a concise summary of the key findings in this master thesis. It
addresses the research questions posed in Chapter 1, highlighting the main outcomes and
achievements. Additionally, the chapter proposes future lines of work to improve and
further develop the research area.
==PAGE:16==
8
Introduction
==PAGE:17==
Chapter 2
State of art for modelling and
control of Hybrid power plants
2.1
Hybrid power plant control
Several control architectures have been proposed in the literature to provide active and re-
active power for single-type technologies based on central control architectures [14],[35],[50].
[14] proposes a central control architecture for a WPP with two levels of control: the plant
control and asset control level. The former controls the power at the Point of Common
coupling (PCC), by dispatching a power reference to individual assets depending on their
available power. Simultaneously, the assets control the power injection at their point of
connection (PoC). This approach enables the coordination of assets to regulate active and
reactive power at the WPP PCC. Furthermore, it proposes an automatic frequency and
voltage control through a droop control at the plant control level.
[65] presents a novel hierarchical control architecture for a co-located hybrid power plant.
This architecture consists of four levels of control: An Energy management system (EMS),
a hybrid power plant control, along with plant and asset control levels. The main objective
of the EMS is to provide the optimal bidding strategies to participate in the market. At
the same time, a central HPP controller is used to dispatch the power and energy in
real-time. The research focuses on coordinating and integrating different control levels,
such as the EMS with the HPP controller, and the HPP with the sub-plant controls. This
control strategy enables frequency and voltage control coordination between the assets
while considering time delays. However, such research does not address the dynamical
model of individual assets, and the implementation of automatic voltage or frequency
control.
A generic topology of a co-located Hybrid power plant inspired by [65] is depicted in
Figure 2.1. Where the individual Wind Turbines (WT), Photovoltaic (PV) and Energy
Storage (ES) are aggregated into a single WPP, SPP and ESS through a Power Collection
System (PCS), each sub-plant is consequently connected to the HPP via the HPP PCS.
Each WT, PV and ES controller uses the measurements at their PoC shown as wti, pvi, esi.
The measurements at the PoC of each sub-plant (shown as wpp, spp, ess) are also present
to provide information for the sub-plant control levels. Lastly, the measurements at the
HPP PCC are present to provide information for the high-level control known as the HPP
control.
Inspired by [65], A hierarchical control architecture is proposed for a co-located HPP as
depicted in Figure 2.2. Such architecture is composed of three control levels: The HPP
==PAGE:18==
10
State of art for modelling and control of Hybrid power plants
control, the plant control and the asset control level. The HPP control sends commands
to the lower control levels, shown with blue arrows, and the lower control levels send state
signals to the central HPP control, represented with red arrows.
Figure 2.1: HPP topology representing power collector system (PCS) and measurement
points inspired from [65]
Figure 2.2: HPP central control architecture inspired from [65]
Based in [14], a central control architecture is proposed for the HPP control. As seen
in Figure 2.3, the HPP control acts as a central controller which has as input the TSO
commands, measurements for the HPP PCC, available power and stored energy from the
plant levels. The output of the controller is set by the dispatch function that sends a
power reference to plant-level controllers while considering the available power of each
power plant. In the development of this thesis, the latency of communication signals
between the control levels is neglected.
==PAGE:19==
2.1 Hybrid power plant control
11
As previously mentioned, the HPP must provide advanced ancillary services for the grid,
such as control functions for active and reactive power. The control functionalities for
the control are described as follows [14]:
Figure 2.3: Hybrid Power plant level inspired from [14]
Active Power Control
• Balance control - The active power production can be adjusted both upward and
downward at a constant level set by the TSO. The set point, with a resolution of
0.1 kW, is determined in accordance with grid code regulations in Denmark [60].
• Delta control - The HPP operates with a constant power reserve derived from the
total available power from renewable energy assets. This function is particularly
useful, enabling power dispatch for a frequency or voltage event.
• Maximum power point tracking - The HPP provides the maximum available
power from renewable energy assets. In this case, the ESS is inactive to provide an
additional upward or downward reserve for any frequency events.
• Power gradient limiter - The gradient limiter determines the maximum speed
at which the active power can be changed. As stipulated by grid code regulations,
its purpose is to enhance the power system stability by allowing additional time for
other power plants to adapt their production levels in response to changes in wind
speed or solar irradiance [62].
• Automatic Frequency control - The HPP must be able to adapt the active
power production to compensate for frequency deviations measured at PCC
Reactive Power
• Reactive Power Control - The hybrid power plant is required to regulate the
production or absorption of a constant amount of reactive power specified by the
TSO.
• Automatic Voltage Regulation - The TSO can request the HPP to adapt the
reactive power production or absorption to compensate for the voltage deviations
at the PCC.
==PAGE:20==
12
State of art for modelling and control of Hybrid power plants
2.2
Power system frequency and voltage control
One of the main challenges in integrating a high share of RES in the power system is
mainly related to dynamic security and reliability. The balance between power generation
and consumption is mainly reflected in the system frequency and local voltage. In order
to prevent frequency and voltage deviations, power plants must be able to control and
adapt their power output to the instructions sent by the TSO. The relationship between
frequency and voltage is briefly described in this section, along with an introduction to
the most relevant control strategies in the literature.
2.2.1
Frequency control
Active power balance between generation and consumption is necessary to regulate the
system frequency at a nominal value of 50Hz (or 60Hz). The relationship may be expressed
by the swing equation for synchronous machines:
Pmech −Pelec = d
dt(1
2Jω2
m)
(2.1)
where Pmech represents the power from the generating unit (W), Pelec represents the
electrical power (demand) (W), J represents the combined moment of inertia of the ro-
tating mass (kg/m2), and ωmech represents the rotational speed (rad/s) which is directly
linked to the electrical frequency of the power system. Equation 2.1 demonstrates that
frequency is increased with an excess in active power generation and decreases when
demand exceeds power generation.
Transmission system operators (TSOs) play a crucial role in ensuring power balance
within the system. In situations where there is a deficit in power production, TSOs employ
upward reserves or implement load shedding by disconnecting loads to maintain the power
balance [58]. Grid codes establish a frequency range for which all the generation units
have to remain connected. For instance, the Danish grid code mandates the continuous
operation of Wind Power Plants (WPPs) within a frequency range of 49.5 Hz to 50.5 Hz.
The WPPs may participate in frequency control if the frequency exceeds these limits.
However, they can disconnect after a certain time period as mentioned in[62]. There are
three main categories for frequency control as outlined in [61] :
Fast Frequency Reserve (FFR) - The FFR aims to assist the FCR by providing a fast
power response for a short period. Activation of this control occurs when the threshold
of 49.5Hz-50.1Hz is crossed. As established by the Danish grid code, the full activation
time ranges between 0.7-1.3 seconds [61]. The key objective of the FFR is to mitigate
the rate of change of frequency (ROCOF) [59]. The frequency control concludes once
the frequency reaches its minimum value. The duration of such an event lacks consensus
as it depends on the overall inertia of the system. Nevertheless, the Danish grid code
specifies a minimum duration of up to 30 seconds [60]. Typically, the implementation of
FFR control occurs at an asset level to enable a fast response from the generating units
[4].
Frequency Containment Reserves (FCR) - The FCR aims to balance the system and
restore the normal frequency band between 49.9 Hz to 50.1Hz. The FCR must be activated
==PAGE:21==
2.2 Power system frequency and voltage control
13
Figure 2.4: Frequency Control [59]
within 5 to 30 seconds. Such frequency response is performed automatically at a plant
level. This control is usually implemented with a droop control with a dead band to
prevent it from overacting during normal operation [59] [60].
Frequency Restoration Reserves (FRR) - The FRR, also known as secondary frequency
reserve, has the objective of restoring the frequency to the nominal value of 50Hz (or
60Hz), after reaching stability. Such frequency response can be activated automatically
or manually with a proportional controller.
TSO uses manual activation to mitigate
congestion in the grid [63]
For the scope of this thesis, the attention is mainly drawn to the capacity of the HPP
controller to regulate the production to participate in FCR and FRR. The operation of
the active power control should consider the plant coordination to perform balance, delta
and maximum power point tracking (MPPT).
2.2.2
Voltage control
The voltage level of a point of connection is related to the balance between reactive power
generation and consumption. Such a relationship can be expressed by a simplified power
system model with a generator and a load connected through a transmission line. The
voltage gradient, as introduced in [64] can be represented as follows:
Figure 2.5: Single line diagram of a simple power system [64]
==PAGE:22==
14
State of art for modelling and control of Hybrid power plants
∆V = E −V = (R + jX)
P −jQ
E

= RP + XQ
E
+ j XP −RQ
E
= ∆VP + j∆VQ ≈∆VP = RP + XQ
E
(2.2)
Where E is the sending end voltage, V is the receiving end voltage, P and Q are the
active and reactive power transmitted, and R and X are the resistance and reactance of
the transmission line.
In most power systems, X >> R, indicating a strong correlation between voltage gradient
and reactive power (∆V ∝Q). Therefore, the voltage gradient (∆V ) determines the
reactive power transfer [64]. TSO ensures the grid’s safe operation by ensuring voltage
levels across the transmission system. Grid code regulations specify a certain voltage range
for which the power plants must remain connected. As defined by the Danish Grid code,
the normal operating voltage for a WPP has a range of Un ±10% [60]. Furthermore, WPPs
with a capacity above 25 MW must have reactive power and voltage control. Reactive
power control involves regulating the production or absorption of reactive power at a
constant level requested by TSO. While the voltage control is centred on regulating the
voltage at the PCC. This control can be performed automatically using a droop control
as implemented in [14].
Overall, the central HPP requires effectively managing both reactive power and voltage
control at the point of common coupling. To ensure efficient operation, coordinating plant
control levels is essential to prevent them from counteracting each other.
2.3
State of the art for Hybrid power Plant Assets
As previously mentioned, an aggregated model will be used for each type of technology,
including the wind power plant (WPP), solar power plant (SPP), and Energy storage
system (ESS) to reduce computational resources for the simulations. This section aims
to discuss the current state of the art for each generation of technology, to define the
characteristics of the dynamical models with the most convenient technologies, with a
realistic approach.
It is relevant to mention that active power dispatch for energy storage systems is possi-
ble with frequency converters. However, the non-dispatchable renewable energy sources
require additional control functionalities to operate at de-rated power [66].
For wind
turbines, this involves the regulation of the rotor speed through pitch control and for a
photovoltaic system, it is necessary to control the DC-link voltage [4] introduced in this
section.
==PAGE:23==
2.3 State of the art for Hybrid power Plant Assets
15
2.3.1
Wind turbines
Wind turbines are classified depending on their ability to control the speed and power of
the wind turbine. Regarding speed control, there are two main classes: fixed-speed and
variable-speed wind turbines. The former type of wind turbine is equipped with a squirrel
cage induction generator that is directly connected to the grid, and the rotational speed
is linked to the grid frequency regardless of the wind speed [13]. Whereas variable-speed
wind turbines can change the rotational speed to reach an optimum tip speed ratio (λopt)
and extract maximum aerodynamic power in a wide range of wind speeds.
The main types of wind turbines are fixed-speed wind turbines (type A), composed of a
squirrel cage induction generator (SCIG) directly connected to the grid via a capacitor
bank for reactive power compensation (due to the reactive power consumption of the
SCIG). Variable speed wind turbine (type B) is directly connected to the grid. It uses
a wound rotor induction generator (WRIG) with a variable resistance to control the
generator’s slip and speed.
Figure 2.6: Variable speed wind turbine type C with doubly fed induction generator
(DFIG) and wind turbine type D with a permanent magnet synchronous generator
(PMSG) and a full-size frequency converter [13]
As seen in Figure 2.6, a variable speed wind turbine with a partial frequency converter
(type C) uses a doubly fed induction generator (DFIG) to provide a variable speed range of
±30% around the synchronous speed [17]. Lastly, the variable speed wind turbine (Type
D) has the generator connected to a full-scale frequency converter. The generator can
be a permanent magnet synchronous generator (PMSG) or a wounded rotor synchronous
generator (WRSG) with a speed range from 0% to 100% of the synchronous speed[13].
The power curve of variable speed turbines is characterized by two main regions: power
optimization and power limitation above rated wind speed. The former region is char-
acterized by operating the wind turbine at an optimum pitch angle of zero degrees for
maximum power point tracking (MPPT). The power limitation zone uses pitch control
to regulate the rotational speed and limit the power to its nominal value.
==PAGE:24==
16
State of art for modelling and control of Hybrid power plants
Conventional generators in service are being displaced with the increasing wind capacity
in the power system, and there has been an increasing concern about their capability to
provide ancillary services for frequency and voltage control. Such regulation capabilities
require a fast and flexible control of active and reactive power taken into consideration
for the selection of the most appropriate technology for the purpose of this work.
In terms of frequency ancillary services, wind turbine type A and C have an inertial
response due to their direct connection to the grid. However, their main disadvantage
relates to their high mechanical and fatigue stress, lack of optimization of aerodynamic
power and their reactive power consumption that would not allow them to participate in
voltage support for the grid [20]. Wind turbine types C and D provide higher flexibility
in active power as they can operate with a power reserve through the pitch control,
and emulate a virtual inertial response for frequency deviations [18]. The operation and
performance of a doubly fed induction generation of wind turbine type C and a permanent
magnet synchronous generator type D are compared in [19], [20]. The main advantages
of wind turbine type D are its wider range of operational speed, and lower maintenance
cost due to the lack of gearbox when using a PMSG. In addition to this, the grid-side
converter is capable of providing reactive power for voltage control. This work will use
a wind turbine type D model with a full-scale converter to provide active and reactive
power at the WPP level.
2.3.2
Photovoltaic System
In general terms, photovoltaic devices use sunlight to eject electrons from the materials
and create electricity. Furthermore, semiconductors with p-n junctions are commonly used
to prevent the recombination of the electron after the hole-electron separation occurs. The
voltage at the terminals of the PV cell is a consequence of the p-n junction band, which
is also characterized by the material properties and the atmospheric conditions [27]. As
seen in [29] there are several types of photovoltaic technologies that may be classified
depending on the type of material, crystalline structure, topology, and the presence of
tracking systems. For the scope of this work, only the last two will be mentioned to
develop a dynamic model of a solar power plant (SPP).
The performance of a single cell is mainly driven by solar irradiation and temperature
conditions, however, for constant irradiation and temperature, the operation of the PV
cell is commonly represented by their DC voltage and current (V-I curve). Figure 2.7a
represents a V-I curve for a solar cell, characterised by an open circuit voltage (Voc),
a short circuit current (Isc) and a maximum power point (Pmax) at a voltage Vmp and
current Imp. It can be seen from Figure 2.7a that the active power generation can be
regulated by controlling the output voltage. This enables the PV system to operate in a
de-loaded region and maintain a power reserve for ancillary services as in [35].
Figure 2.7b shows the power and voltage of the photovoltaic panel (V-P) at different solar
irradiation levels to represent the correlation between both variables. It may be seen from
both figures, that there is a non-linear relationship in both the V-I and V-P curves.
The characteristics of a PV panel (composed of several cells) may have different current-
voltage characteristics due to partial shading in some of the cells. The main issue with
==PAGE:25==
2.3 State of the art for Hybrid power Plant Assets
17
partial shading relates to the difficulties in finding the maximum power point for the whole
arrangement. In [36], several techniques are proposed to approximate the maximum power
point, such as Perturb and observer (P&O), incremental conductance, fuzzy-logic and the
constant voltage method. A constant voltage method is implemented in section 3.4 as
it offers acceptable performance and accuracy for the dynamic model while disregarding
partial shading effects [41].
(a) V-I and V-P curves of a photovoltaic
cell [30]
(b) V-P curves for different solar radia-
tion [31]
Figure 2.7: Performance curve for a photovoltaic cell with open circuit voltage (Voc),
short circuit current (Isc) and maximum power point voltage (Vmp) and current (Imp)
Solar arrangements interconnected to AC grids, require inverters to exchange the power
effectively using the MPPT. There are different topologies to integrate the PV panels
and the frequency converters. Figure 2.8 shows three ways of connecting the photovoltaic
systems (PVS) to an AC bus. It is important to mention that the capacity of the inverters
differs for each topology. The module inverter uses individual inverters for each panel.
They have a relatively low power capacity, and the AC bus synchronisation must be
performed individually. The string converter topology has a higher capacity as it converts
the power from several panels connected in series. In this case, the synchronization with
the grid is performed in blocks of panels. Lastly, the central inverter topology involves
connecting all of the PV panels in the system to a single frequency converter designed for
the whole capacity of the PVS.
Figure 2.8: Different topologies for inverter connections [33]
In large utility-scale PV installations, string and central inverters are the two most com-
mon topologies for connecting PV panels to an AC bus. String inverters offer distinct
advantages regarding reliability, flexibility, and power management over the central topol-
ogy. Firstly, the failure of a single-string inverter does not compromise the overall power
==PAGE:26==
18
State of art for modelling and control of Hybrid power plants
production of the entire plant. Secondly, string inverters are flexible and can accommodate
various PV panel configurations, making them favourable for capacity expansion. Lastly,
string inverters provide greater control over the performance of PV arrays, allowing for
different operating points within the SPP.
Solar tracking systems offer an alternative to increasing electricity generation in SPP
by actively orienting the panels to capture more solar energy. These systems may have
one axis of rotation (north-south) or two axis of rotation (north-south and east-west).
Single-axis rotation systems can adapt to seasonal changes, whereas two-axis systems can
align the panel throughout the day. Such tracking systems have a better performance in
arid regions. However, the increased installation, operation and maintenance cost must
be evaluated for their economic feasibility [34]. Due to the extent of this work and the
aforementioned factors, the solar panels will be mounted as fixed type.
Commonly, areas with high wind resources tend to have lower levels of solar power due
to the complementary nature of wind and solar energy. The co-located hybrid power
plant is assumed to have a higher wind availability than solar availability, and installing
a tracking system would not cover the additional associated costs. Furthermore, the SPP
will use string inverters as they represent higher power management and flexibility in the
arrangement of the photovoltaic panels. The active power dispatch capability must be
implemented using the MPPT and controlling the inverter as in [35]. Furthermore, string
inverters will be used for providing reactive power for voltage regulation as outlined in
[40].
2.4
Energy Storage System
Energy Storage systems have been increasingly important in modern power networks, as
they contribute to peak-shaving and reduce the variability of renewable energy resources,
from small-scale systems to large-scale stationary storage.
There are various options
for energy storage (ES) as outlined in [49] and [48], ranging from kinetic energy using
pumped-hydro storage to super capacitors, flywheels and chemical energy storage using
Battery Energy Storage Systems (BESS). BESS have been proven highly effective for
various applications due to its numerous advantages such as plug-and-play capabilities,
scalability, high power and energy density, fast response and geographical independence.
BESS has been widely used to improve the performance of renewable energy systems in
either micro-grids or hybrid renewable energy systems. Given their advantages, the ESS
for the HPP will is composed of a BESS, and this section the most relevant characteristics
of this technology.
Battery energy storage systems are composed of a Battery system with DC/AC converters
controlled through a Battery energy management system as seen in Figure 2.9.
The
battery systems can store electrical energy as chemical energy. They are composed of
battery cells connected in parallel and series to increase the current or voltage at their
terminals. The bidirectional frequency converter is used to convert the power from the
DC battery to the AC grid and vice-versa.
Lastly, the battery management system
(BMS) aims to monitor the stored energy and control the power transfer with the DC/AC
converter.
==PAGE:27==
2.4 Energy Storage System
19
Figure 2.9: General configuration of a Battery energy storage system with connection to
an AC grid [44]
BESS systems have been employed for various applications as outlined in [50],[49], raging
from direct applications, where the BESS supplies active power to mitigate fluctuations in
renewable energy generation, to indirect applications, that provide reactive power for volt-
age control through a frequency converter, similar to a static compensator (STATCOM)
[50].
There are different types of electrochemical technologies, such as Lead-acid batteries
(LAB), Lithium-ion batteries (LIB), Sodium Sulfur Batteries (NAS) and Vanadium Redox
Flow Batteries (VRB), to mention some examples. [45] presents a comparison study of
various types of battery technologies in an HPP with an SPP and WPP, considering
the ageing of the batteries.
This research performs an optimization problem aiming
to minimize the operating cost and maximize profit while considering different markets
(such as day ahead and hour ahead). Such studies reveal that LIB resulted in the highest
operating profits, whereas LAB had the shortest payback period, and VRB demonstrated
the least degradation from cycling. Furthermore, the differences for each technology lie
in their efficiency, their maximum depth of discharge (DOD), number of cycles, the range
in the state of charge (SOC) and costs, as introduced in Table 2.1.
Technology
LAB
LIB
NAS
VRB
Charging Efficiency (ηch)
0.78
0.99
0.89
0.85
Discharging Efficiency (ηdis )
0.78
0.99
0.89
0.85
Maximum DOD (DODmax)
70%
80%
100%
75%
Maximum SOC (SOCmax)
100%
100%
100%
100%
Minimum SOC (SOCmin)
30%
20%
0%
25%
Number of cycles* (Ncycle)
1500
2500
2500
12000
Power Rating Cost (A$/kW)
411
1566
663
1152
Energy Rating Cost(A$/kWh)
424
3262
663
577
O&M Cost (A$/year/kW)
33.4
28.8
68.3
65.2
Table 2.1: Parameters of different battery technologies [45],[50], *Number of Cycles with
maximum DOD
Lithium-ion batteries have multiple advantages, such as higher efficiency, reasonable DOD
and long life expectancy.
For these reasons, the selected technology for the BESS is
composed of a Lithium-ion-battery. The ageing and self-discharge characteristics of the
battery are not considered for the scope of this work and the energy efficiency is assumed
to be 100%. Furthermore, implementing the BESS enables the provision of active power,
and the control of the frequency converter must enable the provision of reactive power.
==PAGE:28==
20
State of art for modelling and control of Hybrid power plants
==PAGE:29==
Chapter 3
Dynamic modelling and control
3.1
Hybrid power plant control
The main objective of the HPP central controller is to regulate active and reactive power
at the PCC. In addition, the HPP must offer ancillary services comparable to those
provided by conventional power plants.
To achieve this, HPP, wind, and solar plant
controllers must be enhanced with additional control functions to achieve dispatchablity
and operate at a de-rated power. As described in section 2.1, the central control must
account for several operation functionalities requested by TSO depicted in Figure 3.1.
Figure 3.1: Control functions for Hybrid power plant [14]
The control architecture of the HPP depicted in Figure 3.2 facilitates its operational
capabilities by integrating a control functions block, a main controller, and a dispatch
control. The HPP model serves as a central unit, receiving inputs such as orders from the
TSO, measurements from the PCC, available power, and stored energy from sub-plant
levels. The detailed functionality of each block is presented below:
Control Functions
The inputs of the control function model are the TSO orders to determine several control
strategies for both active and reactive power. The active power control enables operation
for MPPT, balance, and delta control as depicted in Figure 3.1. Whereas the reactive
power control enables the injection or consumption of reactive power at the PCC. Fur-
thermore, the switch and reactive power models implement a power rating limiter of
100kW/s and 10MVAr/s to satisfy grid code regulations in Denmark [60]. However, such
rate limiters are not utilized to demonstrate the control functionalities unless indicated.
Main Controller
The main controller is responsible for regulating the active and reactive power, specifi-
cally for FRR and FCR. Notice that the automatic frequency and voltage controls are
==PAGE:30==
22
Dynamic modelling and control
Figure 3.2: Central HPP control inspired from [14]
implemented at the main controller to prevent counteraction between sub-plants and the
asset levels. Referring to Figure 3.2, The inputs to the main controller are the power
commands from the control functions block, the measurements at the PCC, stored en-
ergy and the available power of the sub-plants. Notice two separate control loops exist:
one for active power and another for reactive power control that are described as follows:
Active Power Control
The objective of the active power control is to regulate the power at the HPP PCC. It
utilizes inputs such as measurements at the HPP PCC, power reference P HP P
ref
from the
control functions, and frequency controller ∆Pfreq. The active power control employs a
PI controller with an anti-windup mechanism, as described in [70], and is limited to the
maximum available power from the sub-plants. The maximum available power P HP P
max
is
determined by the MPPT from the RES and the available power from the BESS, which
depends on the stored energy.
• Active Power- Frequency controller -
The subordinated controller maintains
frequency within acceptable limits by modifying the power reference ∆Pfreq based on
frequency deviations measured at the PCC. The frequency controller adopts a similar
methodology to that presented in [14] for WPP and [56] for SPP . It incorporates a droop
control mechanism, which adjusts the power output in response to frequency deviations
measured at the HPP PCC, as expressed by the following equation:
∆f/fnom = −kdroop∆Pfreq/PPnom
(3.1)
The droop parameter (kdroop) in Equation 3.1 represents "the percentage of frequency
change required to move a unit from no load to full load" [58]. According to frequency
control requirements, droop values should range between 2% and 12% [60]. The controller
must remain inactive for deviations below 0.1 Hz, and the FCR should be released at 49.5
Hz [68]. To ensure compliance with regulatory standards and prevent excessive response
to minor deviations, the frequency dead band is set between 49.8 Hz and 50.2 Hz. Detailed
information on the droop values used for the controller can be found in A.1.1.
Reactive Power Control
==PAGE:31==
3.1 Hybrid power plant control
23
The objective of the reactive power control is to regulate the power at the HPP PCC. It
utilizes measurements at the PCC, the power reference from the control functions QHP P
ref
and the voltage controller ∆Qvol. A PI controller is employed to achieve accurate power
output by adjusting the power reference QHP P
disp . The PI controller incorporates an anti-
wind-up mechanism from [70] constrained by the maximum reactive power available. The
availability of reactive power is determined by the capacity of the assets and the active
power dispatched to each sub-plant, represented as: Qava =
q
SHP P
n
−P P ∗2
dip, where
SHP P
n
denotes the nominal power of the assets and P ∗2
dip represents the active power
dispatched by the sub-plants.
• Reactive Power - Voltage controller - The subordinated controller maintains
voltage levels within acceptable limits at the HPP PCC by modifying the reactive power
∆Qvol in response to voltage deviations measured at the PCC. The voltage droop mech-
anism is inspired from [14], incorporating a droop control strategy determined by the
following equation:
∆V/Vnom = −kdroopv∆Qvol/Qnom
(3.2)
The voltage droop kdroopv represents the percentage of voltage required to produce a
change in reactive power from 0 to 1pu. Following grid code regulations outlined in [68]
and [60], reactive power provision for voltage control should span a voltage range between
0.95 to 1.05 pu. The droop (slope) should fall within the range of 2-7%, accompanied
by a dead band of ± 5%. Consequently, the voltage dead band for the controller is set
between 0.96 and 1.04 pu, with corresponding droop values detailed in A.1.2.
Dispatch
The dispatch control use the power reference from the main controller (P HP P
disp , QHP P
disp )
to send individual power reference to each sub-plant depending on their available power
P HP P
ava
from WPP, SPP and stored energy from the BESS. There are several strategies
to dispatch the power, but the one presented in this work is defined by the following
principles:
1. Whenever there is a surplus in available power from wind and solar sub-plants, the
power is used to recharge the battery if the SOC allows it.
2. Power curtailment can be applied to the SPP or WPP, enabling the sub-plants’
de-rated operation. Implementing power curtailment in wind turbines helps reduce
the mechanical stress associated with power production, thus potentially extending
the life span of turbine components. Moreover, the de-rated operation of the SPP
can improve the capability of providing a fast response power reserve.
3. Whenever there is a power deficit from Renewable energy resources, the BESS may
provide additional power if the SOC allows it.
4. To extend the life span of the BESS, the dispatch function constraints the battery
discharge if the stored energy falls below a SOC of 0.2. Furthermore, the charging
operation is limited to a maximum SOC of 0.8 [45],[50].
5. Reactive Power dispatch preference is also adjustable to utilize the assets depending
on market strategies or weather conditions.
For instance, the SPP can provide
reactive power for low solar irradiation conditions similar to [40]. Similarly, the
WPP can provide reactive power during low wind speed conditions.
==PAGE:32==
24
Dynamic modelling and control
Active Power Dispatch
The dispatch control is composed of three stages. The first one determines the BESS’s
operational range and power set point.
The second one is to dispatch the sub-plant
with the higher dispatch priority, in this case, the SPP, and the thirst stage involves the
dispatch for the second-highest priority, in this case, the WPP. Both the second and third
stages utilize MPPT (option A) or power curtailment (Option B).
Figure 3.3: Active Power dispatch logic, where EBESS, P BESS
N
, P HP P
disp , P ∗
ava is the stored
energy, nominal power of the BESS, power reference from main controller and available
power. lim(P, min.max) represents a function that limits the calculated value ’P’ within
a minimum and maximum range
The dispatch control is represented in Figure 3.3. The first stage of the dispatch begins
by determining the maximum and minimum power of the BESS based on its stored
energy EBESS (SOC) and the nominal power of the converter P BESS
n
. Such stage is
responsible for charging or discharging the battery in response to a surplus or deficit in
power conditions, determined by the demanded power P HP P
disp
and the available power
from wind and solar power plant ( P HP P
av
= P W P P
av
+ P SP P
av
). Consequently, the power
==PAGE:33==
3.1 Hybrid power plant control
25
of the BESS is determined by the difference between the requested power P HP P
disp
and
the available power P HP P
av
, constrained within the maximum and minimum power limit
using the function lim(P HP P
disp
−P HP P
av
,P BESS
min
,P BESS
max
) where a positive value indicates
discharging, while a negative value indicates charging the BESS.
In the second stage, the power reference P HP P
disp
and available power from the highest
dispatch priority asset, in this case, P SP P
av
are utilized to meet the demand. If the power
reference is fulfilled by such sub-plant, it enters into power curtailment with the option
to charge the BESS (scenario 1b and 2b Figure 3.3). Suppose the power reference can
not be fulfilled in this stage. In that case, the sub-plant follows MPPT (scenario 2a), and
the remaining power requirement is fulfilled by the remaining sub-plant (WPP) in the
third dispatch stage. The third dispatch considers the remaining power with the option
to follow MPPT (3a) or perform power curtailment by charging the BESS (3b).
Active power Dispatch for different power set points/ demands
To demonstrate active power dispatch, simulations are performed to review all stages and
scenarios. The first simulation reflects the priority for active power dispatch, where the
BESS is recharged until reaching its maximum level to exemplify scenarios 1b, 2a, 2b,
3a and 3b from Figure 3.3. The second scenario demonstrates the active power dispatch
when the requested power exceeds the available power from wind and solar sub-plants,
where the BESS contributes to regulating the power until reaching the minimum level of
stored energy.
The first simulation is performed for a total available power of 50MW, where 20MW
corresponds to the WPP and 30MW from the SPP. Initially, the BESS has stored energy
of 74% (SOC = 0.74). Changes in the active power set points for the HPP are performed
every 300 seconds corresponding to 50MW, 20MW, and 10MW.
==PAGE:34==
26
Dynamic modelling and control
Figure 3.4: Active power dispatch for an available power of 50MW and initial stored
energy of 74%. The active power steps are performed every 300 seconds corresponding to
50MW, 20 MW, and 10MW.
The results of the dispatch function are presented in Figure 3.4, illustrating the active
power allocation. Grey doted line represents the available power for each power plant and
blue lines indicate the dispatch signals for WPP, SPP, and BESS. The battery’s stored
energy is displayed in blue, with a maximum state of charge (SOC) of 0.8, indicated by
a red line.
During the initial 300 seconds, WPP and SPP operate in MPPT to meet the demand (sce-
narios 2a and 3a). At 300 seconds, the SPP remains in MPPT, while charging the BESS
and curtailing WPP (proving scenarios 1b, 2b and 3b). After 750 seconds, BESS charging
stops after reaching its maximum SOC of 0.8, decreasing the active power dispatch for
the SPP. Figure 3.4 illustrates the expected behaviour for these scenarios, however A.1.3
provides a similar demonstration when curtailing the SPP.
The second simulation is performed for a total available power of 130 MW and an initial
stored energy of 22.5%. Power set points for the HPP are changed every 300 seconds,
corresponding to 140MW, 130MW and 100MW. The results are introduced in Figure 3.5.
Grey signals indicate the available power, while blue lines indicate the dispatched power
from the sub-plants. Lastly, the stored energy and minimum state of charge are present
in blue and red lines.
To fulfil the demand in the first 300 seconds, all the assets operate at MPPT, and the BESS
provides a maximum power of 10MW. After 150 seconds, the BESS stops discharging as it
reaches its minimum SOC of 0.2 (to exemplify scenario 1a), which leads to a power deficit
of 10MW until the power demand is decreased. Notice that the SPP remains in MPPT
==PAGE:35==
3.1 Hybrid power plant control
27
Figure 3.5: Active power dispatch for an available power of 130MW and initial stored
energy of 22%. The active power steps are performed every 300 seconds corresponding to
140MW, 130 MW, and 100MW.
due to its higher dispatch priority, whereas the WPP is curtailed to meet the demand
while recharging the BESS to exemplify scenarios 1b,2a, and 3b from the dispatch logic
(see Figure 3.3). A similar scenario may be seen in Figure A.2 with the curtailment of
the SPP to meet the demand.
Reactive Power Dispatch
In a similar manner, the dispatch control sends reactive power set points to sub-plants by
considering power reference from the main controller QHP P
disp , and the available reactive
power. The available reactive power is calculated by using the nominal power of each sub-
plant and their power reference expressed by the equation: Qav =
q
S2n −P ∗2
disp, where S2
n
and P ∗
disp represent the nominal power and the active power dispatched to the sub-plant.
The reactive power dispatch is performed in three stages. The first stage corresponds
to the highest dispatch priority, in this case, the WPP; the following stage considers the
second dispatch priority, in this case, the SPP. The third and last stage involves the
BESS as the last reactive power resource. The reactive power dispatch allows preferential
use of the WPP or the SPP to enhance controllability. For instance, the SPP may be
prioritised for providing reactive power during periods of low active power production (at
night)[40], while the WPP may be prioritized during low wind conditions. The dispatch
logic is depicted in Figure 3.6. Notice that, in this case, the dispatch priority is defined
for the WPP. Moreover, reactive power dispatch of each sub-plant Q is limited to the
minimum and maximum reactive power available (Qmin,Qmax) by using a limitation
function denoted as lim(Q,Qmin,Qmax).
==PAGE:36==
28
Dynamic modelling and control
Figure 3.6: Reactive power Dispatch logic, where QHP P
disp , Q∗
disp, Q∗
av is the reactive power
reference from the main controller, dispatch power and available power from sub-plants
considering their nominal power (Sn) and active power dispatch Q∗
av =
q
S2n −P ∗2
disp
Reactive power Dispatch for different power set points/ demands
This section demonstrated different scenarios for reactive power dispatch by making steps
in the demanded power QHP P
disp The dispatch function is tested for a topology with a WPP,
SPP, and BESS having a nominal capacity of 114.4 MVA, 44MVA and 10MVA. The active
power dispatch for HPP is set to operate at maximum power, meaning 104MW of wind
power, and 33MW of solar with 0MW for the BESS. Steps in reactive power are performed
every 300 seconds corresponding to 80MVAr, 60MVAr and 20MVAr.
The results for the reactive power dispatch are introduced in Figure A.3. Given each
sub- plant’s size and active power dispatch, the total reactive power available equals 97.9
MVAr (47.66 MVAr from the WPP, 29.1MVAr from SPP and 10MVAr from the BESS).
For the first 300 seconds, the reactive power demand of 80MVAr is fulfilled by dispatching
signals to all the assets, with 3.2MVAr belonging to the lowest dispatch priority repre-
sented by the BESS (demonstrating scenarios 1a, 2a and 3b). At 300 seconds, the dispatch
demand is set to 60MVAr. Notice reactive power of SPP and BESS is set to zero due
to their low dispatch priority in the logic (representing scenarios 2b, and 3b). The last
300 seconds represent scenario 1b, where the wind power plant covers the 20MVAr de-
mand from the main controller. Lastly, the energy storage remains constant as the BESS
operates at 0MW (neither charging nor discharging). A.1.3 introduces the active power
dispatch for this same scenario considering the SPP with the highest priority level.
==PAGE:37==
3.2 Wind Power plant
29
Figure 3.7: Reactive Power dispatch, for an available reactive power of 97.9 MVAr with
steps in reactive power set points every 300 seconds corresponding to 80MVAr, 60MVAr,
and 20MVAr
3.2
Wind Power plant
The main objective of the wind power plant controller is to measure and regulate the
power at the WPP point of common coupling, by sending a power reference to the wind
turbines, depending on their available power. Therefore, the input to the central WPP
controller is the power dispatch signals from the HPP control level, power measurements
at the WPP point of common coupling, and the available power from the wind turbines.
Figure 3.8: Wind Power plant control level inspired from [14]
Figure 3.8 demonstrates the implementation of the wind power plant control, which incor-
==PAGE:38==
30
Dynamic modelling and control
porates active and reactive power controls to regulate the power according to the dispatch
signals from the HPP controller. The dispatch block utilizes the output of the PI con-
trollers and the total available power of the WPP. This dispatch function restricts the
individual power reference to their respective maximum available power. Additionally,
the dispatch of reactive power is constrained by the capacity of the asset, and the active
power reference Qava =
p
S2n −P 2
set, where Sn represents the rated power of the asset and
Pset is the active power reference for the individual WT. As depicted in Figure 2.1, the
WTs are aggregated into a single model and connected to the WPP via a power collection
system. For this reason, the controller outputs are connected to one single wind turbine
(hence n = 1 in Figure 3.8).
3.2.1
Wind turbine
As discussed in subsection 2.3.1, the WPP is composed by an aggregated model of a
WT type D, which is also known as type 4 in accordance with the International Elec-
trotechnical Commission (IEC). The IEC-61400-27-1 defines standard simulation models
for the different types of wind turbines. For such standards, there are two models for a
wind turbine type 4: type 4A WT, which ignores aerodynamic and mechanical models,
resulting in the absence of power oscillations in simulations, and type 4B, which assumes
a constant aerodynamic thrust and adds a two mass mechanical model to account for
power oscillations [21].
Figure 3.9: Wind turbine model inspired from [22]
The WT developed for the WPP uses the wind turbine type 4B structure and has been
inspired from [22]. The proposed model, as seen in Figure 3.9 consists of an aerodynamic
model, a pitch control, a two-mass mechanical model, an electrical control system for
active and reactive power, and a static generator model from DigSILENT Power Factory.
Aside from the mentioned models, a wind speed block and two look-up tables are im-
plemented to compute the total available power for a given wind speed and MPPT. A
selection block selects the minimum power reference between the power set point and the
optimal power from the MPPT lookup table. The selected wind turbine has a nominal
power of 2MW, a rotor radius of 80m and the parameters are available in A.2
Aerodynamic model
==PAGE:39==
3.2 Wind Power plant
31
As proposed by the IEC standard, the wind turbine model has an aerodynamic and a
pitch control model. The aerodynamic model is based on a two-dimensional lookup table
to obtain the torque coefficient as a function of the pitch angle θ and the tip speed ratio
λ, Cq(θ, λ) as seen in Figure 3.10. The tip speed ratio and Power are therefore expressed
as follows:
λ = ωrot · R
u
(3.3)
Paero = Trotor · ωrotor = 1
2 · ρ · π · R3 · u2 · ωrotor · Cq(θ, λ)
(3.4)
Figure 3.10: Aerodynamic model inspired from [24]
where: ρ is the air density [km/m2], u is the wind speed in [m/s], and R is the radius of
the wind turbine rotor [m].
To account for the proper dynamical behaviour of the wind turbine rotor, the pitch
control has to provide the input signal for the aerodynamic model. The pitch will then
provide relevant information on the operating point for the wind turbine, especially when
operating with a power reserve; the pitch control will regulate the rotational speed through
the pitch angle, affecting the aerodynamic power of the turbine.
Furthermore, the aggregated WT implements an additional signal to emulate the dis-
connection of multiple wind turbines (WTs). To accomplish this simulation, the WPP
control must detect the outage, and adjust the power dispatch accordingly. However, the
individual WTs do not sense such outages and must not modify their operation for such
events. To address this, the doted signal Kwt is introduced to reflect the outage with no
pitch or rotational speed changes for the (aggregated) WT. Kwt is defined as the ratio
of the operational wind turbines that are connected and online (Kwt = nonline/ PN
i ni,
where nonline represent the number of wind turbines connected, and PN
i ni, represents
the total number of WTs in the WPP).
Pitch control
The objective of the pitch control is to adjust the pitch angle to control the generator
rotational speed and the WT power. The pitch control is composed of a PI controller
and an actuator. As seen in Figure 3.11, the input of the PI controller uses the error
signal between the rotational speed and the (nominal) reference speed to set a pitch angle
reference.
To represent the pitch with a realistic approach, an actuator composed of a servo mecha-
nism with a time constant (Tservo) and a limitation for both the pitch angle and its rate
==PAGE:40==
32
Dynamic modelling and control
of change is implemented. The actuator input is the error between the measured pitch θ
and the pitch angle reference that corrects the error signal.
Figure 3.11: Pitch angle control inspired from [22]
It is important to mention two operating points for the wind turbine: the power opti-
mization zone for wind speeds below the rated speed and a power limitation zone for wind
speeds above the rated speed. In the power optimization zone, the error signal would be
negative and thus, the pitch will remain at its minimum and optimal value of 0 degrees.
While, in the power limitation zone, the pitch control will act by pitching to follow the
nominal rotational speed and limit the power production of the wind turbine to its rated
value.
Mechanical Model
The mechanical model of the shaft is highly important to link the mechanical dynamics of
the rotor with the electric power of the generator. For this reason, a two-mass mechanical
model is proposed to represent the drive train of the WT, as seen in Figure 3.12. A large
mass represents the WT rotor with rotor inertia Jrot, and a small mass represents the
generator inertia Jgen. Furthermore, the high-speed shaft is assumed to be stiff, while the
low-speed shaft (rotor side) is represented with a stiffness k and a damping c. Lastly, the
high-speed shaft and the low-speed shaft are connected by an ideal gearbox with a gear
ratio ngear. However, wind turbine type 4 has a direct drive (without a great box), and
the gear ratio is equal to 1. The dynamics of the 2 mass mechanical model are represented
Figure 3.12: Two mass mechanical model [24]
with the following equations:
Trot −Tshaft = Jrot ˙ωrot
(3.5)
Tshaft −Tgen = Jgen ˙ωgen
(3.6)
==PAGE:41==
3.2 Wind Power plant
33
Tshaft = c∆ω + k∆ω = c(ωrot −ωgen
ngear
) + k(θrot −θgen
ngen
)
(3.7)
Where : Trot is the aerodynamic torque, ωrot is the rotational speed of the rotor , θrot is
the rotor angle , Jrot is the inertia of the rotor, Tgen is the generator torque , ωgen is the
rotational speed of the generator, θgen is the generator angle.
These equations can be represented in the frequency domain and per unit values by using
the following equations:
ωrot,pu =
1
2sHrot,pu
(Trot,pu −Tshaft,pu)
(3.8)
ωgen,pu =
1
2sHgen,pu
(Tshaft,pu −Trot,pu)
(3.9)
Tshaft,pu = c∆ω + k∆ω
(3.10)
These equations had been used to represent the two mass mechanical model as seen in
Figure 3.13, where Paero is the aerodynamic power, Pairgap [pu] is the measured power of
the generator, Hrot [pu] is the rotor inertia, Hgen [pu] is the generator inertia, ωrot [pu] is
the rotational speed of the rotor, and ωgen [pu] is the rotational speed of the generator.
Figure 3.13: Two mass mechanical model implementation in frequency domain [22]
Generator model
The generator system is modelled with a static generator component included in DigSI-
LENT PowerFactory, with a nominal capacity of 2MW. The static generator is typically
used as a static (non-rotating) generator, where the grid-side converter defines the wind
turbine response seen from the grid. Furthermore, the static generator can be modelled as
a current or voltage source [25]. For the current studies, the current source model is used.
This has been done to simplify the conditions of the DC link between the machine-side
frequency converter and the grid-side converter. The active and reactive power controllers
then control the dq-currents for the static generator, and a phase-locked loop is used to
synchronize the frequency converter with the grid.
==PAGE:42==
34
Dynamic modelling and control
Active power control
The active power control is composed of a PI controller, which uses the error signal
between the measured active power of the WT and the active power reference.
The
control loop may be seen in Figure 3.14 and includes a filter to remove switching harmonics
produced by the inverter [40].
Figure 3.14: Wind turbine Active and reactive power control loops inspired from [22]
MPPT lookup table and power reference selection
The generator speed serves as input for the maximum power point tracking (MPPT) look-
up table. The optimum active power is provided as a function of the generator speed by
the MPPT look-up table. As a result, it specifies the optimum aerodynamic power and
maximum power coefficient (Cp) up to nominal rotational speed.
Figure 3.15: Maximum power point tracking and active power reference for wind turbine
inspired from [23]
The minimum value between the optimal power production and the power set point from
the WPP controller defines the reference for the active power control.
Therefore the
selection model (Figure 3.15) allows the wind turbine to operate under power curtail-
ment mode whenever the power set point is less than the optimal power defined by the
MPPT lookup table. Furthermore, whenever the power set point is above the MPPT,
the power reference is provided by the MPPT lookup table until the nominal rotational
speed is reached. The rate of change (ROC) limiter has been employed in the wind tur-
bine to provide additional functionalities. However, this block is not necessary for the
functionalities of the wind turbine controller.
Reactive power control
The wind turbine reactive power control uses the error signal between the reactive power
measurement with the reactive power reference set by the higher-level controller. The PI
control is implemented to set the reference for the static generator as seen in Figure 3.14.
==PAGE:43==
3.3 Model Performance for the wind turbine
35
Total Available power
Figure 3.9 show the implementation of the block to calculate the available power. The
model takes the wind speed as input for the power curve of the P-V lookup table. The
lookup table incorporates the optimal pitch angle for each wind speed, providing the
maximum power available at that particular wind speed. Calculating the available power
is highly useful for the dispatch of energy set by the higher-level controller.
3.3
Model Performance for the wind turbine
A series of simulations are performed to test the functionality and performance of WT
type 4. The layout for the simulation in Figure 3.16 consists of an external grid, one step-
up transformer, a collection cable, and the wind turbine represented by a built-in static
generator model in DigSILENT. The power measurements for the active and reactive
power control are performed at the terminals of the WT.
Figure 3.16: Wind turbine type 4 layout
The simulation to test the wind turbine performance was first done to test the system
under deterministic wind speeds for the power optimization and power limitation of the
asset. A second set of simulations is performed to test the wind turbine for full load and
partial load operation with steps in active power set point and lastly, the wind turbine is
tested to review the performance under reactive power set point.
Model Performance under deterministic wind speeds
To evaluate the performance of the model, a set of deterministic wind conditions is em-
ployed, disregarding any turbulence, tower shadow, or wind shear conditions. The first
simulation steps of 1m/s are performed every 20 seconds. The signals from the wind tur-
bine i.e. wind speed [m/s], pitch angle [deg], generator speed [up], and the active power
[pu] from the generator are shown to review the behaviour of the asset.
==PAGE:44==
36
Dynamic modelling and control
Figure 3.17: Steps in constant wind speed of 1m/s from 12m/s to 20m/s. Signals: Wind
speed [m/s], Pitch [deg], generator speed [pu], Active power measurements [pu]
Figure 3.17 show the performance of the wind turbine under wind steps of 1m/s from
the rated wind speed of 12m/s to 20m/s. This region belongs to the power limitation,
where the pitch control acts to regulate the generator speed and thus limits the wind
turbine power to its nominal value. The dynamic response of the pitch and generator
speed do not present big overshoots or oscillations. Whereas the power controller limits
the power of the static generator with deviations below 0.5%. The dynamical behaviour
of the pitch and generator speed get stabilized in a longer time period when compared to
the power controller as they are subject to the aerodynamic and inertial characteristics
of the mechanical system.
==PAGE:45==
3.3 Model Performance for the wind turbine
37
Figure 3.18: Steps in constant wind speed of 1m/s from 12m/s to 4m/s. Signals: Wind
speed [m/s], Pitch [deg], generator speed [pu], Active power measurements [pu]
Figure 3.18 show the wind turbine under wind steps of 1m/s from the rated wind speed
of 12m/s to 4m/s. This region belongs to the power optimization zone, where the pitch
control remains inactive at the optimal pitch of 0°. While the power controller is using
the reference from the maximum power point tracking signal. Thus the generator speed
and pitch angle remain under the optimum conditions to extract the maximum power
for each wind speed. Furthermore, the active power control follows the reference with
minimum overshoots and settling times below ten seconds.
==PAGE:46==
38
Dynamic modelling and control
Figure 3.19: Steps in active power reference Pref of 0.25pu from 1 pu to 0.125 pu for a
constant wind speed of 13m/s. Signals: Pitch angle [deg], rotor speed [pu], shaft torque
[up], and active power [pu]
Figure 3.19 represents the dynamical behaviour of the wind turbine under a constant
wind speed of 13m/s and steps in active power reference Pref of 0.25 pu from 1pu to
0.125pu. The behaviour of the pitch control sets the rotational speed to follow the power
set point with no overshoots or oscillations in either the pitch, generator speed or shaft
torque. Furthermore, the zoom-in images show the dynamics of the generator speed that
presents a damping after 2 seconds. The wind turbine dynamics are also present in shaft
torque with minimum oscillations. The oscillations of the shaft torque are damped within
4 seconds, and the drive train is not mechanically stressed as there are no oscillation
values below zero. Lastly, the active power controller follows the reference with a time
response below one second due to the fast response of the frequency converter.
==PAGE:47==
3.3 Model Performance for the wind turbine
39
Figure 3.20: Steps in Reactive power reference Qref for a 13m/s constant wind speed.
Signals: Pitch angle [deg], rotor speed [pu], Active power [pu], Active power reference
[pu], reactive power [pu], reactive power reference [pu]
Figure 3.20 represents the dynamical behaviour of the wind turbine for steps in a reactive
power setpoint of 0.1 pu every 20 seconds from -0.1 to -0.5pu under a wind speed of
13m/s. Figure 3.20 shows the voltage in the wind turbine point of connection (PoC),
the generator speed, active and reactive power measurements, and set points. It is firstly
noted that the changes in reactive power do not affect the active power or the generator
speed. Furthermore, for an active power set point of 0.91pu, the maximum reactive power
absorption is set to 0.41pu, proving that the power set points respect the power rating of
the converter. Lastly, there is no voltage control at the asset level and thus the voltage
gets to drop as the reactive power consumption increases.
==PAGE:48==
40
Dynamic modelling and control
3.4
Solar Power Plant
As seen in Figure 3.21, the solar power plant control input is the active power and reactive
power set points sent from the HPP control. Furthermore, the active power reference is
limited to the maximum available power in the SPP with the min block. A dispatch
function is implemented to determine power set points to the PV system considering the
maximum available power and the capacity of the PV system.
The PV control level implements the asset control level to regulate both active and reactive
power locally and calculates the available power with the MPPT using the constant
voltage method. Lastly, the Limit block is implemented to regulate the signals to the
maximum available power and the capacity of the inverter. Such limit function has the
option to prioritize either active power or reactive power according to Equation 3.11.
Figure 3.21: Solar power plant control diagram inspired from [22]
Sconv =
p
P 2 + Q2
(3.11)
Maximum Power Point Tracking
The maximum power point tracking is based on a constant voltage (CV) algorithm con-
sidering the fact that the voltage has a logarithmic relationship with the solar irradiance,
while the voltage at the maximum power is a fixed percentage of the open circuit voltage
for a wide range of irradiance [41]. This relationship is valid as long as there is no partial
shading in the photovoltaic system. However, no partial shading conditions are considered
for the dynamical simulations. Furthermore, the dynamical model assumes that all the
photovoltaic system is exposed to the same irradiance and temperature conditions. The
expressions to estimate the maximum power point considering standard test conditions
(STC) are present from Equation 3.12 - 3.15, where Vm and Im represent the voltage and
current at the maximum power point (Pm).
T = Tα + G
800 · NOCT −293
(3.12)
Vm = V ′
m

1 + c (T −Tref) + ln

1 + bG −Gref
Gref

(3.13)
==PAGE:49==
3.4 Solar Power Plant
41
Im = I′
m
G
Gref
[1 + a (T −Tref)]
(3.14)
Pm = Vm · Im
Pnom
(3.15)
Gref, Tref, Tinf,NOCT represent the reference solar irradiance, reference temperature of
the PV panel, the ambient temperature, and the normal operating cell temperature as
stated in Table 3.1. V ′
m and I′
m are the voltage and current at the maximum power point
provided by the manufacturer under STC. Furthermore, a,b, and c are correction factors
obtained from extensive experimental data from [42]. Lastly, the maximum power point
is expressed in per unit values in Equation 3.15 using the photovoltaic panel’s nominal
power.
Name
Units
Value
Pn
Wp
225
V ′
m
V
44.2
I′
m
A
5.1
NOCT
K
318
Gref
W/m2
1000
Tref
K
298
Tinf
K
298
a
K−1
0.00055
b
0.5
c
K−1
0.00288
Table 3.1: Photovoltaic panel parameters for MPPT [41]
3.4.1
Photovoltaic system
The dynamical modelling for the Solar power plant had been implemented by using the
Western Electricity Coordinating Council (WECC) model for large-scale PV plants, avail-
able in the DigSilent library. The WECC model is one of the most widely used models for
photovoltaic systems and uses a current source for the interaction between the PV system,
and the AC PoC [43]. Such a current source may be modelled with a PV system or a
static generator. For this model, the PV system is implemented using a static generator,
with the following control system introduced in Figure 3.22.
Figure 3.22: Block diagram for WECC large scale PV system inspired from [38]
==PAGE:50==
42
Dynamic modelling and control
• PV Control: This module represents the PV and SPP controllers.
This model
uses the MPPT and the power reference from the central HPP controller to set a
reference for the active and reactive power.
• REEC B: This module represents the renewable electrical control of the inverter. It
uses the voltage, active, and reactive power measurements and set points from the
plant control to send the (active and reactive) current commands to the generator
side converter.
• REGC A: Represent the Generator/Converter (inverter) interface with the grid. It
processes the real and reactive current commands and set the active and reactive
current for the grid.
Renewable energy electrical control (REEC B) model
The renewable electrical control model is composed of active, reactive power subsystems
and a current limit logic as seen from Figure 3.22. The active current is defined through
the active power reference and the voltage measurement at the inverter terminals from
the AC bus. The reactive power control system provides the reactive current command
to the current injection model. The reactive current command is subject to limits, with
the following reactive power control modes:
• Constant power factor, based on the inverter power factor reference.
• Constant reactive power, based on the reference power from the plant control.
• Constant voltage control, based on the terminal voltage of the converter.
• Local coordinate reactive/voltage control.
For the scope of this thesis, only the constant reactive power control will be implemented,
as seen in Figure 3.23.
The constant reactive power is selected as the central HPP
controller sends the reference value to coordinate the supply of reactive power at the
point of common coupling. However, a detailed description for the rest of the modes
can be seen in [37],[39]. Figure 3.23 represents the active and constant reactive power
subsystems. Once again, the filters are employed to remove switching harmonics produced
by the inverter [40].
Figure 3.23: Renewable energy electrical control REEC_B model for PV systems [39]
A detailed diagram for the REEC B controller is also available in the appendix Figure A.6.
Lastly, the Current limit logic considers the maximum capacity of the generator converter
(inverter) model.
==PAGE:51==
3.5 Model Performance of the photovoltaic system
43
Renewable energy generator/converter (REGC A) model
Figure 3.24: Renewable generator converter (REGC A) [39]
The proposed model integrates a current control mechanism to deliver real and reactive
power components to the network based on received current commands from the current
limit logic. The current injection encompasses the following functionalities:
• A high voltage reactive power logic limits the reactive current injected into the
network to prevent the machine from exceeding voltage limits at the terminal of the
inverter bus.
• A low-voltage active power logic is designed to capture the characteristics of active
power during low-voltage dips. This is performed by linearly reducing the active
power when the voltage drops to low levels.
3.5
Model Performance of the photovoltaic system
A series of simulations are performed to test the functionality and performance of the
solar power plant (SPP). The layout for the simulation is similar to the one introduced
for the WPP in Figure 3.16, where the solar power plant will be the only asset connected
to the network.
The simulations to test the performance would first introduce the performance of the SPP
under deterministic irradiance conditions. A second set of simulations are performed to
assess the performance of the solar power plant for different active and reactive power set
points.
==PAGE:52==
44
Dynamic modelling and control
Solar power plant under deterministic irradiance
To evaluate the functionality of the solar power plant, a set of deterministic irradiance
conditions are employed, assuming constant temperature and irradiation in the photo-
voltaic system. The SPP is set to irradiate from standard test conditions of 1000 W/m2
and decrease in steps of 200 W/m2 every ten seconds. After reaching 400W/m2, the
irradiance starts increasing in similar steps every 10 seconds until reaching the initial
irradiance.
Figure 3.25: SPP under steps in solar irradiance of 200 W/m2 every ten seconds, from
1000Wm2 to 400Wm2. Signals: irradiance [W/m2], reactive power [pu] and active power
[pu].
Figure 3.25 provides the response of the solar power plant for different levels of irradiance,
where the active power signal shows the MPPT of the system. It is shown that the irra-
diance decreases by 60% whereas the active power decrease to a minimum value of 0.258
pu, representing a total decrease of 74%. This is related to the maximum power point
tracking and constant voltage method, where the voltage has a logarithmic relationship
with solar irradiance as expressed in Equation 3.13 along with a nonlinear relationship
with power as seen in Figure 2.7b.
Solar power plant performance under changes in active and reactive power
The power control of the solar power plant is tested through a simulation that performs
changes in active and reactive power. For the first 100 seconds, the reactive power remains
constant at 0.5pu, The active power is decreased in steps of 0.25pu from 0.75pu to 0.25pu.
After one hundred seconds, the active power remains constant at 0.25pu, while the reactive
power is increased in steps of 0.25pu, from 0.5 to 1pu.
==PAGE:53==
3.6 Battery Energy Storage System
45
Figure 3.26: SPP under steps in Active Power of 0.25 pu every forty seconds, from 0.75
to 0.25pu. After 100 seconds, an increase of 0.25 in reactive power is performed from 0.5
to 1pu. Signals: Voltage [pu], active power [pu] and reactive power [pu].
Figure 3.26 proves that the control of active and reactive power are mutually independent.
Meaning that changes in active power do not impact reactive power, and vice versa. The
voltage at the connection point exhibits an expected increase corresponding to the rise in
reactive power. It is observed that both active and reactive power controls attain their
reference values within 500ms. Notably, the converter’s capacity restricts the supply of
reactive power, resulting in a limitation of 0.968 pu instead of the desired 1 pu.
3.6
Battery Energy Storage System
The battery energy storage system is composed by two main subsystems: a power conver-
sion system and an energy storage system (ESS). The energy storage system represents
the technology used to store or extract energy, which in this case is represented by a
Lithium-ion battery. The electrochemical battery is then connected to a power conver-
sion system (inverter/rectifier) that transforms the DC voltage from the battery to the
AC voltage for the grid. The dynamical model from the library of DigSilent PowerFac-
tory is utilized with an additional reactive power control for the converter depicted in
Figure 3.27a. Due to the high efficiency of Lithium-io batteries, an efficiency of 100% will
==PAGE:54==
46
Dynamic modelling and control
be used, whereas the capacity of the 10MW battery is considered to be a constant value
of 20MWh, with no battery degradation or self-discharge.
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.27: a Dynamical model for the battery energy storage system inspired from [46]
and b simple battery equivalent circuit composed by: internal voltage (Ui), resistance
(Ricell) and terminal voltage (Ut) [52]
Battery Model
The battery model is represented by a simplified electrical equivalent with a terminal
voltage, internal voltage, and an internal resistance which are a function of several vari-
ables such as the state of charge and temperature of the battery [52]. The state of charge
(SOC) represents the currently available energy stored for its capacity. If the battery is
fully loaded or recharged, the SOC is one, and it is zero if the battery is empty.
In the implemented model incorporates certain assumptions to simplify the system while
preserving the relevant dynamics. Firstly, the battery is assumed to have a discharge
limit of 20%, and a charge limit of 80% [52].
The relationship between the internal
voltage of the battery and the state of charge is considered linear, as described in [54],
and shown in Equation 3.16. Secondly, the internal resistance is considered constant, as
it is typically small for high current applications [53]. Lastly, the most relevant variables
for the battery system are presented in Table 3.2, and the electrical representation and
model are depicted in Figure 3.28
Ucell = UmaxSOC + Umax(1 −SOC) −IcellRi
(3.16)
Name
Units
Value
Cell Capacity
Ah
40.
Umin
V
12.
Umax
V
13.85
Ricell
ohm
0.001
Cells in parallel
-
595.
Cells in row
65.
Table 3.2: Battery model parameters
==PAGE:55==
3.6 Battery Energy Storage System
47
Figure 3.28: Simplified Battery model in DigSilent [53]
The simplified battery model is depicted in Figure 3.28. This model takes the DC-current
(I) as an input to calculate the cell voltage, terminal voltage, and SOC according to the
parameters in Table 3.2 and Equation 3.16. The integrator
1
sT counts the current flowing
into and out of the battery and divides it with the battery capacity (C) to determine the
state of charge (hence SOC = SOCo +
R i(t)
C dt). Furthermore, the battery model frame
in Figure 3.29 is necessary to determine the current of the battery and the dynamics of
the DC system.
Figure 3.29: Battery Model Frame [53]
Charge Controller
As seen in Figure 3.27a, the battery uses a charge controller to have an appropriate
operation of the battery by considering the following boundary conditions [45]: The
battery can only consume active power if the SOC is below 0.8. The battery can only
provide active power if the SOC is above 0.2. The battery should charge after reaching
the minimum state of charge (SOC = 0.2). Lastly, the total output of active and reactive
power should not exceed the charging power of 10MW. The Charge controller as seen in
Figure 3.30 is composed of two main parts. The first one is a charging logic to comply with
boundary conditions as previously described. The second part limits the absolute value of
the current according to the maximum apparent power of the converter S =
p
P 2 + Q2,
where S, P and Q represent the apparent power, active and reactive power. The delta_i
signal is defined as the difference between the reference from the PQ controller and the
limited current from the charging logic. The feedback of such signal (to the PI controller)
ensures the correct (anti-windup) operation of the control.
Active and Reactive Power controller (P-Q Control)
The input for the PQ control is the measurements and set points for active and reactive
==PAGE:56==
48
Dynamic modelling and control
Figure 3.30: Charge Controller for the Battery energy storage system [53]
Figure 3.31: Active and reactive power control for the BESS [53]
power from the HPP controller (see Figure 3.31). The active power control uses a charge
control feedback signal (delta_i) that prevents a potential wind-up. Notice that a first-
order filter is applied to the power measurements to attenuate the noise originated from
switching components, and enhance control performance. Furthermore, the error signal
between the reference and the measurements is the input to a proportional and integral
controller, determining the direct and quadrature currents (idref, iqref) for the charge
controller.
3.7
Model Performance of the BESS
In this section, a simulation is performed to test the performance of the 20MWh battery
and its active power control.
The simulation consists of three stages: discharge, no
charge/discharge, and charge.
For the first 50 seconds, the battery is discharged at
maximum power (10MW). Following that, the battery does not charge or discharge from
50 to 100 seconds, and the power is set to zero MW. Subsequently, during the recharge
phase from 100 to 150 seconds, the battery is recharged at a maximum power input of
10MW. The results are depicted in Figure 3.32 provide the signals for both the active
reference and measurement in MW, the stored energy (SOC), the terminal voltage (in
==PAGE:57==
3.7 Model Performance of the BESS
49
Volts), and the output current of the BESS (in pu). It is relevant to mention that the
terminal voltage is measured for a set of batteries, for the purpose of this thesis, the DC
circuit is not considered.
As seen from Figure 3.32, the battery is following the reference
Figure 3.32: Battery Energy Storage set to steps in active power every 50 seconds. BESS
starts to discharge at 10MW, at 0 MW and charging at 10MW
signal with smooth transitions and settling time below 600 ms with similar behaviour
in the output current. Furthermore, the linear relationship of the terminal voltage with
the SOC is appreciated during the discharge and charging phases. As seen in the first
50 seconds, the terminal voltage is linearly decreased as the battery gets to discharge,
between 50 to 100 seconds they both remain constant and during the recharging phase,
they are both increasing their value. Lastly, the 20MWh capacity is proven as the battery
reaching a state of charge of 0.493 pu after 50 seconds.
Edis = Pdis · t = (10MW)(
50s
3600s/h) = 0.13889MWh
(3.17)
where Edis, Pdisand t represent the discharged energy, the discharging power and the
time. Furthermore, the final state of charge is provided by the following equation.
SOCf = Eo −Edis
C
= 10 −0.13889MWh
20MWh
= 0.493pu
(3.18)
Where SOCf, ESo, Edis and C represent the final state of charge, the initial energy stored,
the discharged energy, and the capacity of the battery.
==PAGE:58==
50
Dynamic modelling and control
3.8
Hybrid power plant topology
As previously mentioned, part of the main advantages of developing a co-located hybrid
power plant relates to the increased power availability and a higher capacity factor of
the electrical infrastructure. Several aspects must be taken into consideration for the
design of a hybrid power plant: such as Technical and regulatory limitations for power
injection at the PCC, sitting assessment for renewable energy resources, business strategy
to participate in energy markets and ancillary services for the grid, etc. However, the
design optimization of a HPP, involves extensive studies with several aspects beyond the
scope of this study. For this reason, the approach for the implemented topology relies on
developing a hybrid power plant for an existing wind farm. As inspired from [69], with
further adaptations to compensate losses through PCS. The size of the WPP is set to
104MW with 2MW wind turbines, each with a 2.2 MVA frequency converter. The size of
the SPP corresponds to 33MW and is composed of 2MVA string inverters with an active
power capacity of 1.5MW. Lastly, the BESS is set to 20MWh with a maximum power
of 10MW. It is worth mentioning that both the SPP and WPP frequency converters are
determined to achieve a power factor of 0.98 (leading) at the HPP PCC. Furthermore, as
seen from Figure 3.33, the WT and PV arrays use a step-up transformer from 0.96kV to
30kV and a power collector system that builds the SPP and WPP together. Furthermore,
the measurements used for control functions are indicated with red circles in Figure 3.33.
Figure 3.33: Hybrid power plant topology
==PAGE:59==
3.9 Power System model
51
Figure 3.34: IEEE 12-bus system topology [67]
3.9
Power System model
The grid model implementation is based on a widely used 12-bus system for wind integra-
tion studies, available from IEEE [67]. The 12-bus system represents an isolated power
system based in the topology of the UK. Such islanded system is suitable for the sim-
ulation, as it simplifies the system’s topology by excluding intercontinental connections
to other systems. Despite this simplification, the isolated system retains the dynamical
characteristics observed in conventional power systems with traditional power plants.
The 12-bus system is mainly composed of thermal power plants and is divided into four
different areas. Area 1 has the highest thermal power plant with industrial and residential
loads. Area 2 is predominated by hydropower plant generation with small rural loads.
Area 3 consists of industrial loads with thermal power generation, while Area 4 (bus
5) is the designated point of connection for the hybrid power plant. Furthermore, the
droop control of conventional power plants is set with a reasonable value of 5%, while the
modified values for the power system are present in section A.6
3.9.1
Control parameters
All three levels’ cascaded control are tuned individually with inspiration from [55] and us-
ing the Ziegler-Nichols self-oscillation method [57]. Control tuning initiated with the asset
levels, following with the plants and HPP levels. The corresponding control parameters
are presented as follows:
Level
HPP
SPP,WPP
BESS
PV,WT
Kp
0.9
0.15
0.45
1
Ti [s]
1
0.1
0.1
0.01
Table 3.3: Active and reactive power control parameters: Gain K and time constant Ti
==PAGE:60==
52
Dynamic modelling and control
==PAGE:61==
Chapter 4
Simulations, results and analysis
A series of simulations are performed under two main situations to demonstrate an ef-
fective power regulation from the HPP control. The first set of simulations encompasses
active and reactive power control functions with internal events within the sub-plant lev-
els, and the second set of situations is related to frequency and voltage events in the
grid. The HPP is connected to bus 5 from the IEEE 12 bus system through a step-up
transformer to reach 230kV.
4.1
Enhanced Power Control Performance: Analysis
of Turbulent Weather Conditions, Control Func-
tions, and Outage Events
The first set of scenarios considers fluctuating weather conditions characterized by solar
irradiation ranging between 980 to 1000 W/m2 and wind speed varying between 11.4 -
11.9 m/s. The HPP is set for different operating conditions every 50 seconds.
For the first 50 seconds, the HPP operates at maximum power point tracking. Conse-
quently, between 50-100 seconds, the operation is changed to a power balance for 110MW.
At 100 seconds, the HPP enters delta mode with a power reserve of 15MW. After 150
seconds, the HPP returns to a power balance of 110MW. At 200 seconds, the HPP expe-
riences an outage of 12 wind turbines during solar curtailment scenario and 16 PV arrays
during wind power curtailment. Each scenario corresponds to a power decrease of 24MW.
The outage of assets at the sub-plant level assesses the system’s capability to regulate
the power. Both scenarios will review the response of the BESS to compensate for such
disturbance.
For Solar Power plant curtailment, the WPP is given the highest priority for active
power dispatch, while the SPP curtails its active power to charge the BESS. Additionally,
the SPP is assigned as the highest dispatch priority for reactive power to utilize the
capacity of the 44MVA asset.
For Wind power plant curtailment, the SPP is given the highest priority for active
power dispatch, while the WPP is used to charge the BESS. In this scenario, the WPP
has the highest dispatch priority for reactive power to utilize the capacity of the 114.4
MVA asset.
==PAGE:62==
54
Simulations, results and analysis
The reactive power is set to 0 MVAr from the start; the TSO sends a reactive power
request to inject 20MVAr at 250 seconds. Such scenarios are summarized below and intend
to demonstrate the capability of the HPP to regulate power under different operating
conditions for MPPT, balance and delta and reactive power regulation.
Time [s]
0-50
50-100
100-150
150
200
250
Operation
MPPT
Balance
Delta
Balance
SPP Curtailment
outage of 12 WT
P W P P
max
= 80MW
Reactive Power
Pbalance = 110MW
Pdelta = 15MW
Pbalance = 110MW
scenario 1b
outage of 16 PV
P SP P
max = 9MW
QHP P
ref
= 20MV Ar
4.1.1
Curtailment of Solar Power plant and 24MW outage impact
in wind power plant assets
To optimize the coordination and performance of the HPP for this scenario, modifications
were made to the control parameters of the SPP as explained in A.7.1. The results for
the curtailment of the SPP are presented in Figure 4.2. During the initial 50 seconds,
the HPP implements maximum power point tracking, while the BESS remains inactive at
0MW. In maximum power point tracking operation, the active power reference (denoted
in red) corresponds to the maximum available power from the renewable energy sources
(gray line in Figure 4.2a). It is worth noting that the measured active power follows the
power reference with a lower power output at the sub-plant and HPP PCC due to the
losses by the 10km power collector cables.
When the system enters to power balance at 50 seconds,the hybrid power plant has
a smooth transition within 1.5 seconds to deliver 110MW, while effectively regulating
reactive power at 0 MVAr. It can be noted from Figure 4.2b, that the wind power plant
remains in MPPT due to its high dispatch priority. Moreover, the solar power plant enters
curtailment mode while charging the BESS at full power of 10MW. Notably, fluctuations
in active power occur at the HPP PCC, with maximum deviations of 0.8MW (present in
A.7.1). These deviations can be attributed to several factors requiring investigation in
future research. Factors of interest encompass the control tuning at both plant and asset
levels, including parameters associated with the WECC model, such as time delays and
transfer functions for converter controls.
Between 100 to 150 seconds, the delta control is imposed, and the HPP operates with a
constant power reserve of 15MW noted at 136 seconds of the simulation in Figure 4.2a.
As seen from Figure 4.2b, the active power is effectively controlled at the point of common
coupling by curtailing the SPP and charging the battery.
After 150 seconds, the HPP successfully returns to balance operation followed by an
outage of 12 WT at 200 seconds.
This event highlights two significant observations.
Firstly, the sudden decrease in active power leads to a corresponding increase in reactive
power, prompting assets to reduce their reactive power to meet the 0 MVAr demand.
Secondly, the central control demonstrate its capability to restore power output after 3
seconds (A.7.1).
During this process, the SPP ramps up production to meet MPPT,
while the BESS is utilized to stabilize the power output at 110MW. At 250 seconds, the
==PAGE:63==
4.1 Enhanced Power Control Performance: Analysis of Turbulent Weather
Conditions, Control Functions, and Outage Events
55
reactive power demand of 20MVAr is fulfilled within 2 seconds, by the increasing the
reactive power from the SPP (see Figure 4.2c ). Additional information regarding asset
levels are provided in A.7.1.
Figure 4.1 illustrates acceptable measurements of frequency and voltage at the point of
common coupling. As anticipated, the frequency fluctuations are directly correlated with
changes in the active power. Similarly, the voltage is directly influenced by the reactive
power, reaching a maximum value of 1.033pu for a reactive power injection of 20MVAr.
Figure 4.1: Frequency and Voltage at point of common coupling for different operating
conditions with Solar power plant curtailment
==PAGE:64==
56
Simulations, results and analysis
(a) Hybrid power plant signals for Active and Reactive power at PCC
(b) Sub-plant signals for Active power
(c) Sub-plant signals for Reactive power
Figure 4.2: Curtailment of Solar Power plant and and 24MW outage in wind power
==PAGE:65==
4.1 Enhanced Power Control Performance: Analysis of Turbulent Weather
Conditions, Control Functions, and Outage Events
57
4.1.2
Curtailment of Wind Power plant and 24MW outage from
solar power
The results from wind curtailment are introduced in Figure 4.3 and 4.4. Maximum power
point tracking is successfully performed in the initial 50 seconds of the simulation while the
BESS remain inactive at 0MW. Such operation point is performed by sending an active
power reference equal to the total available power from the renewable energy plants. At
50 seconds, the HPP enters into power balance of 110MW with a smooth transition of
2 seconds, while regulating reactive power at 0 MVAr. During power balance, the wind
power plant is effectively curtailed to charge the battery at a maximum power of 10MW.
Thus controlling the active power for hybrid power plant PCC with deviations bellow
0.07 MW .
During delta control, the active power of the WPP is increased to operate with a constant
reserve power of 15MW from 100 to 150 seconds Figure 4.4a. At 150 seconds, the HPP
has a smooth transition to power balance until reaching the outage of 24MW of solar
power. Following such event, the WPP operates at maximum power point tracking, and
the BESS starts discharging to stabilize the power at 110MW after 3 seconds. The step
in reactive power is preformed at 250, where the WPP increases its reactive power to
meet the demand, while the remaining sub-plants operate at 0MVAr. Further analysis
for asset levels is introduced in further detail in the appendix.
Figure 4.3: Frequency and Voltage at point of common coupling for wind power curtail-
ment
==PAGE:66==
58
Simulations, results and analysis
(a) Hybrid power plant signals for Active and Reactive power at PCC
(b) Sub-plant signals for Active power
(c) Sub-plant signals for Reactive power
Figure 4.4: Curtailment of Wind Power plant and and 24MW outage in solar power
==PAGE:67==
4.2 Enhanced Ancillary services: Analysis of Power control during Frequency Events59
4.2
Enhanced Ancillary services: Analysis of Power
control during Frequency Events
This section is focusing on creating a frequency event within the IEEE 12-bus system and
asses the reaction of the active power control. A series of simulations are performed for
constant wind and solar irradiance of 16 m/s and 1000 W/m2. Furthermore, the relevant
signals are introduced to review the response of the system.
In the first scenario, the power from the wind power plant is utilized to charge the BESS
while regulating power output to fulfil the demand. From the start, the TSO sets a re-
active power command of 0MVAr. At the same time, the HPP is set for delta control
considering a power reserve of 30MW. Consequently, the maximum power output is lim-
ited to 107MW with 0MVAr at the HPP PCC. At 50 seconds a load event is triggered to
create a frequency event. Specifically, load L01 experiences a 50% increase, transitioning
from 300MW to 450MW.
At first, the attention is drawn to a 4% frequency droop to review the coordination of
the sub-plants for providing an effective frequency control. At last, the impact of the
frequency controller is assessed with a sensitivity analysis using three droop values: 4%,
6% and 12%.
The results for a 4% frequency droop are introduced in Figure 4.5. The figure illustrates
signals for the measured frequency, the minimum frequency dead band set at 49.8Hz, the
output of the frequency controller (’Pref’) , the active power reference and the active
power measured at the Hybrid power plant point of common coupling.
In the initial 50 seconds, the HPP effectively provides a frequency reserve of 30MW. After
the load increase at 50 seconds, the grid frequency experiences a decline. At the same
time, frequency containment reserves from the power system are released to reduce the
rate of change as it reaches a minimum value of 49.52Hz. In addition to this, the frequency
controller of the HPP becomes active after crossing the minimum frequency dead band
of 59.8 Hz, resulting in a power output increase of 20.6 MW as indicated by ’Pfreq’ in
Figure 4.5.
Consequently, the HPP’s active power reflects this increase, reaching a maximum power
output of 127.6 MW. It is worth noting a minor deviation between the power reference
and the measured power, which will be further examined by analysing the sub-plants’
contribution.
Figure 4.6 presents the coordinated response of the sub-plants. Notice that at the initial
50 seconds, the BESS is charged at its maximum power of 10MW. Following the frequency
event, the HPP controller initiates the operation of the WPP at MPPT. However, due to
losses in power collector systems, the power output of the WPP and SPP are reduced from
their reference value. To compensate for such losses, the central HPP control regulates
the charge of the BESS, enabling it to provide the reference power.
==PAGE:68==
60
Simulations, results and analysis
Figure 4.5: HPP control response to a 150MW load increase in L01. Signals for measured
frequency, minimum frequency dead band, frequency control output (Pfreq), Active power
measurement and references at the HPP PCC
Figure 4.6: Coordinated Sub-Plant Response to a 150MW Load Increase in L01. Active
power reference and measurements for the WPP, SPP, and BESS are depicted.
==PAGE:69==
4.2 Enhanced Ancillary services: Analysis of Power control during Frequency Events61
4.2.1
Enhanced Ancillary services: Sensitivity analysis for fre-
quency control
As discussed in subsection 2.2.1 , Generating units must remain connected for a frequency
range between 49.5 Hz to 50.5 Hz. Thus, the aim of the controller is to provide ancillary
services to regulate the frequency at such limits. Considering the 50% load increase in
L01, the system is required to compensate for the additional demand of 150MW. To
evaluate the droop value that ensures the frequency within permissible limits, a series of
simulations have been conducted with droops for 4%, 6% and 12%.
The results from the droop sensitivity analysis are presented in Figure 4.7. In the first
plot, the frequency measurements are introduced along with their minimum values ranging
from 49.52Hz to 49.49Hz. The second plot provides the active power measured at the
hybrid power plant point of common coupling. As anticipated the frequency response is
improved with lower droop settings. Based on the analysis, it can be concluded that a 4%
droop provides the best response for the stability of the system, whereas the 6% droop is
also capable of regulating the frequency within the permissible limit. Hence, for the given
network and load scenario, the frequency droop between 4% to 6% should be considered.
In addition to this, the HPP must have a minimum power increase of 14.3 MW as seen
from the 6% droop results. Thus a minimum power reserve of 15MW is required.
Figure 4.7: Frequency response to 150MW load increase in L01. Impact with no frequency
control, and frequency droops settings of: 4%, 6% and 12%
==PAGE:70==
62
Simulations, results and analysis
4.3
Enhanced Ancillary services: Analysis of Power
Control during voltage Events
This section focuses on assessing the reactive power-voltage control of the hybrid power
plant by creating a voltage event within the IEEE-12 bus system. The hybrid power
plant is operated at a power balance of 110MW with a leading power factor of 0.98,
corresponding to 23.34 MVAr at the HPP PCC. Environmental conditions with high
wind speed of 16 m/s and solar irradiation of 1000 W/m2, are considered.
Throughout this section, the dispatch of reactive power prioritizes the SPP for both active
and reactive power, in order to evaluate the coordination with the BESS and WPP.
The voltage event is initiated by an increase in reactive power load. Specifically, load L05
experiences a 50% increase, from 92.6 MVAr to 138.9 MVAr. This load increase serves
as a test case to evaluate the performance of the automatic voltage controller. For this
study, an initial droop of 2% is implemented to review the coordination of the assets for
providing additional reactive power. Further on, a sensitivity analysis is utilized to review
the effects of increasing the droop.
The results are introduced in Figure 4.8, the figure illustrates the signals for the measured
voltage, minimum voltage deadband set at 0.97pu, the output of the voltage controller
(’Qvol’), the reactive power reference to the PI central controller, and reactive power
measurements at the hybrid power plant point of common coupling.
At the start of the simulation, the reactive power set point is successfully regulated by
at 22.34MVAr. After 50 seconds, the voltage experiences a sharp decrease due to the
demand increase of 46.3MVAr, reaching a minimum value of 0.92pu. As a consequence,
the voltage control creates a sharp increase seen in the reactive power reference (red
signal from Figure 4.8). Notice the maximum reference value is not reached however, this
is further discussed by reviewing the coordination of the sub-plants. At the end of the
simulation, the voltage reaches a steady value of 0.96pu. Furthermore, the active power is
rapidly stabilized to the reference of 110MW due to the in-dependency from the reactive
power control loop.
==PAGE:71==
4.3 Enhanced Ancillary services: Analysis of Power Control during voltage Events 63
Figure 4.8: Voltage response for a 46.3 MVAr load increase in L05. Signals for measured
voltage, minimum voltage dead band , voltage control output (Qvol), Reactive and active
power measurement and references at the HPP PCC
The reactive power contribution from each sub-plant is depicted in Figure 4.9. The signals
for reactive power for the WPP, SPP and BESS are represented in red, while reactive
power references are represented in blue. During the initial 50 seconds, the dispatch of
reactive power is performed by the SPP to fulfull a power factor of 0.98 at the HPP PCC.
Following the voltage drop, the solar power plant raises the reactive power output until
reaching the maximum power. Hence, due to the dispatch strategy, the SPP performs
MPPT, reaching 33MW. Thus, the remaining power of the 44MVA asset level corresponds
to 29.1 MVAr. Considering the reactive power losses from the transformer, the SPP is
able to deliver 28.6 MVAr at the point of common coupling. Consequently, the central
HPP controller enables the provision of reactive power from the WPP to fulfil the new
reactive power set point.
==PAGE:72==
64
Simulations, results and analysis
Figure 4.9: Subplant response for a 46.3 MVAr load increase in L05. Signals for reactive
power measurement and references at the sub plant PCC including WPP, SPP and BESS
4.3.1
Enhanced Ancillary services: Sensitivity analysis for volt-
age control
At last, a sensitivity analysis is performed to asses the capability to withstand a reactive
power load increase of 46.3 MVAr at bus 5 with a minimum voltage of 0.95pu. A series
of simulations are performed for droop values of 2%, 4% and 7%.
The results from the droop sensitivity analysis are presented in Figure 4.10.
Signals
for the voltage measurements and reactive power output are introduced with automatic
voltage control for droop values of 2%, 4% and 7%.
It is noted that the presence of
the automatic voltage control has a significant impact on voltage recovery above 0.95%.
The highest voltage recovery is related to a 2% droop, with a voltage of 0.96pu after 70
seconds, followed by droops of 4% and 7%. Thus proving that a low droop value has a
higher voltage support contribution. Further on, it is relevant to notice that these droop
control is not recovering the initial voltage, as the reactive power demand of 46.3MVA is
not fully covered by the local increase from the HPP. For such a situation, the reactive
power reference must adapt to compensate for the additional demand.
==PAGE:73==
4.3 Enhanced Ancillary services: Analysis of Power Control during voltage Events 65
Figure 4.10: Voltage support to a 46.3 MVAr load increase in L05. Signlas for voltage
measurements, and reactive power at HPP without automatic voltage control, and droop
values of 2%, 4% and 7%
==PAGE:74==
66
Simulations, results and analysis
==PAGE:75==
Chapter 5
Conclusions
The primary objective of the thesis was centred on the implementation of a central hy-
brid power plant control, able to regulate both active and reactive power, while enhancing
frequency and voltage control. In addition to this, part of the objective included the devel-
opment of the sub-plants of wind and solar power plants integrated with a battery energy
storage system. To achieve the objective, detailed models were developed for the individ-
ual assets represented by a wind turbine type 4, battery energy storage and photovoltaic
system according to Western Electricity Coordinating Council (WECC) standards.
Given the inherent variability of weather conditions, control functionalities were imple-
mented to enable active power dispatch by operating at de-rated conditions. Through
extensive simulations, the individual performance of each technology was successfully
demonstrated, showcasing their effective control of active and reactive power through fre-
quency converters. Most importantly, the simulations reflect the dynamic behaviour of
the individual assets.
The hybrid power plant controller implemented in this research focuses on providing an
effective power control, while incorporating additional functionalities to provide ancillary
services to the grid. For this, a hierarchical control architecture has been developed to
the specific requirements of the hybrid power plant.
This includes additional control
functionalities for active power regulation, automatic frequency, and voltage control.
Power regulation is initially addressed by implementing independent control loops for ac-
tive and reactive power with anti-windup proportional-integral controllers and a dispatch
function. The proportional-integral control has been proven highly effective in compen-
sating for power losses from power collector systems and transformers, as it dynamically
adjusts the power references sent to the dispatch function.
The dispatch function plays a crucial role in the overall control strategy. As it determines
the allocation of power references to the sub-plants based on their available power. Fur-
thermore, the proposed dispatch function provides high flexibility, allowing to customize
the priority for active and reactive power dispatch. This enables higher utilization of
the assets depending on weather conditions. For instance, during periods of low solar
irradiation at night, the solar power plant can be utilized to provide reactive power.
The findings of the research provide a strong evidence for the effectiveness of active
power regulation under fluctuating weather conditions. Through proper control coordi-
nation between the sub-plants under different operating conditions, the controllers and
the functions from the hybrid power plant and lower control layers have demonstrated
their successful implementation. Moreover, additional scenarios involving the outage of
==PAGE:76==
68
Conclusions
individual assets reveals the robustness of the control layers and their ability to withstand
such outages with a recovery time of 3s. This has been achieved by adjusting the power
references for the remaining online assets, ensuring the provision of active and reactive
power at the hybrid power plant point of common coupling.
The enhancement of the hybrid power plant controller with automatic frequency control
has proven to be highly effective. The system has improved the frequency containment
process by implementing a frequency droop controller capable of adjusting the active
power production. Simulations conducted for a frequency event involving a load increase
of 150MW in L01, have demonstrated the hybrid power plant’s ability to maintain the
frequency above the permitted limit of 49.5 Hz. This accomplishment was achieved by
setting droop values from 4% to 6% and ensuring a minimum power reserve of 15MW.
Voltage control has also been successfully implemented at the hybrid power plant control
level. Through a voltage droop control, the hybrid power plant has demonstrated its capa-
bility to adjust the reactive power production at the hybrid power plant point of common
coupling, effectively supporting steady state voltage deviation below 5%.
Simulations
involving different droop parameters have confirmed the effective coordination of assets
in providing reactive power at the point of common coupling. The results validate the
PI controller in compensating for reactive power losses from sub-plant transformers, and
their successful coordination with the dispatch function. The voltage control has proven
to be effective for regulating steady-state voltage for a reactive power load increase of
46.3MVAr in load L05. By injecting a minimum of 33 MVAr into the grid, the voltage
control has successfully limited the voltage drop bellow 5% at the hybrid power plant
point of common coupling.
In overall, the hybrid power plant demonstrates is ability to regulate active and reac-
tive power with acceptable performance.
Moreover, the control proves its robustness
with the ability to withstand asset outages from wind and solar assets by dispatching
power from the online assets and battery energy storage system. Additionally, events for
under-frequency and voltage further highlight the controller’s ability to provide ancillary
services through the effective coordination between the sub-plants. The proposed control
architecture and its additional control functionalities contribute to the integration of re-
newable energy sources into the grid, enhancing stability and reliability while enabling
the provision of ancillary services.
5.1
Future work
The objectives stated for this thesis are achieved within the scope and limitations. The
developed hybrid power plant represents a promising approach to coordinating the assets;
however, there are several aspects that require further investigation and improvement as
described below:
• Time delays significantly affect the measurement and communication processes
across the three control layers. A comprehensive understanding and mitigation of
these delays are necessary to enhance overall control stability and ensure reliable
operation in real-world applications.
==PAGE:77==
5.1 Future work
69
• Active Power resolution requires further improvements to meet the resolution
requirements set by the Danish grid code. Enhancements in control tuning at sub-
plant and asset levels are necessary to ensure accurate power control to achieve the
desired resolution of 0.1kW.
• Dynamic modelling can be improved by simulating individual assets to consider
the additional power fluctuation inside each sub-plant.
This would increase the
variability and provide a more realistic approach to the control of the hybrid power
plant.
• Enhancing frequency control by addressing the rate of change of frequency in
addition to the frequency droop controller. This would reduce frequency nadir and
enhance stability.
• Enhancing Voltage control improvements by implementing tap changing trans-
formers controls at sub-plant levels for voltage control purposes would increase the
robustness of the control and extend the lifetime of frequency converter controllers
allowing them to operate below their maximum capacity.
• Economical and market participation can be considered to determine the eco-
nomic feasibility and optimum size for each type of technology for market partici-
pation.
In conclusion, further research should focus on addressing the effects of time delays,
improving power resolution, incorporating frequency droop, tap changing transformers for
voltage control, including individual assets instead of an aggregated model, and including
economical aspects. By tackling these areas, the hybrid power plant system can be further
optimized, achieving a greater grid compatibility with higher economical incentives.
==PAGE:78==
70
Conclusions
==PAGE:79==
Appendix A
Appendix
A.1
Hybrid power plant control
A.1.1
Frequency controller Parameters
The droop, nominal frequency and nominal power define the frequency controller. The
nominal power of the HPP has been defined after performing a load flow analysis setting
generators at full active power with a (leading) power factor of 0.98 to operate within
grid code regulations [68]. Considering PCS losses, the power at the HPP PCC reaches a
value of 145MW. The active power considered to calculate the frequency bias [ MW/Hz]
is defined through the following equation:
B = −∆P
∆f =
Pn
kdroop · fn
[MW/Hz]
(A.1)
Considering a nominal power of the HPP at the PCC Pn = 145MW, and a nominal
frequency fn = 50Hz the droop and bias values utilized in this thesis are available below:
Kdroop
%
4
6
12
B
MW/Hz
72.5
48.33
24.166
A.1.2
Voltage controller Parameters
The following equation represents the droop and voltage bias in [MVAr/kV]:
B = −∆Q
∆V =
Qn
Kdroopv · Vn
[MV Ar/Hz]
(A.2)
The reactive power capabilities at the HPP PCC have been tested through power flow
simulations, with maximum power. The maximum reactive power at the HPP PCC equals
82MVAr. The droop and bias values are introduced below:
Kdroopv
%
2
4
7
B
MVAr/kV
124.2
62.12
5.09
==PAGE:80==
72
Appendix
A.1.3
Dispatch control test
Active Power Dispatch This section represent the logic of the dispatch function with
two main scenarios. The first one considers a surplus in active power, while the second
one introduce a deficit in the available power from the WPP and SPP.
The first simulation is performed for a total available power of 50MW, where 20MW
correspond to the WPP and 30MW from the SPP. The BESS has an initial stored energy
corresponding to a SOC = 0.74. Changes in the active power set points for the HPP are
performed every 300 seconds corresponding to 50MW, 20MW and 10MW.
Figure A.1: Active power dispatch for active power, for an available power of 50MW and
initial stored energy of 74%. Steps in active power request every 300 seconds belonging to
50MW, 20 MW and 10MW. Signals for Available power are in grey, active power dispatch
in blue for each sub-plant, and stored energy (SOC) for BESS
The results of the dispatch function are presented in Figure A.1, illustrating the active
power allocation. Grey shading represents the available power for each power plant, while
blue lines indicate the dispatch signals for WPP, SPP, and BESS. The battery’s stored
energy is displayed in blue, with a maximum state of charge (SOC) of 0.8, indicated by
a red line. During the initial 300 seconds, WPP and SPP operate in MPPT to meet
the demand (scenarios 2a and 3a). Notably, WPP remains in MPPT, as solar power is
curtailed after 300 seconds (entering scenario 3b), with WPP meeting the demand and
simultaneously recharging the BESS. After 750 seconds, the BESS stops charging after
reaching its maximum SOC of 0.8.
The second simulation is performed for a total available power of 130 MW and an initial
==PAGE:81==
A.1 Hybrid power plant control
73
stored energy of 22.5%. Power set points for the HPP are changed every 300 seconds,
corresponding to 140MW, 130MW and 100MW. The results are introduced in Figure A.2.
Gray signals indicate the available power, while blue lines indicate the dispatched power
from the sub-plants. Lastly, the stored energy and minimum state of charge are present
in blue and red lines.
Figure A.2: Active power dispatch for an available power of 130MW and initial stored
energy of 22%. The active power steps are performed every 300 seconds corresponding to
140MW, 130 MW and 100MW, and represented in red. Signals for Available power are
indicated in grey, active power dispatch in blue, and stored energy (SOC) for BESS
To fulfil the demand in the first 300 seconds (Figure A.2), all the assets operate at MPPT,
and the BESS provides a maximum power of 10MW. After 150 seconds, the BESS stops
discharging as it reaches its minimum SOC of 0.2 (to exemplify scenario 1a).
Notice
that the WPP remains in MPPT due to its higher dispatch priority, whereas the SPP is
curtailed to meet the demand while recharging the BESS to represent scenarios ( 1b,2a
and 3b from the dispatch logic in Figure 3.3).
Reactive Power Dispatch
The dispatch function is tested for a topology with a WPP, SPP and BESS nominal
capacity of 114.4 Mw, 44MW and 10MW. The active power dispatch for HPP is set to
operate at maximum power of 104MW of wind power, 33MW of solar and 0MW for the
BESS. Steps in reactive power are performed every 300 seconds corresponding to 80MW,
60MW and 20MW.
The results for the reactive power dispatch are introduced in Figure A.3. Given the size
and active power dispatch of each sub-plant, the total reactive power available equals 97.9
MVAr. This includes 47.66 MVAr from the WPP, 29.1MVAr from SPP and 10MVAr from
the BESS. Initially, for the first 300 seconds, the reactive power is fulfilled by dispatching
signals to all the assets, demonstrating scenarios 1a,2a and 3a. Subsequently, the WPP
==PAGE:82==
74
Appendix
Figure A.3: Reactive Power dispatch, for an available reactive power of 97.9 MVAr with
steps in reactive power set points every 300 seconds corresponding to 80MVAr, 60MVAr
and 20MVAr.The first signal in red indicates the input to the dispatch control. Gray
signals indicate the available reactive power and blues signals represent the dispatched
power
==PAGE:83==
A.2 Wind turbine Type IV
75
Figure A.4: Active Power dispatch for maximum available power
and BESS have their reactive power set to zero due to their lower dispatch priority
(representing scenarios 2b,3b). The last 300 seconds represent scenario 1b, where the
solar power plant covers the full amount of reactive power. The active power dispatch is
introduced in Figure A.4 to clarify the availability of reactive power.
A.2
Wind turbine Type IV
The parameters for the proposed wind turbine model may be seen in the following section:
Pitch control
==PAGE:84==
76
Appendix
Tpitch [s]
Blade Angle controller time constant
0.1
Tservo [s]
Servo time constant
0.1
Kpitch [deg/pu]
Blade angle controller gain
86
Pitch_min [deg]
Minimum blade angle
0
Pitch_max [deg]
Maximum blade angle
30
rate_max [deg/s]
opening rate of change limit
10
Table A.1: Pitch control model parameters
Aerodynamic model
rho [kg/m^3]
Air density
1.225
Rotdiam [m]
Rotor diameter
80
Pnom [MW]
Nominal Power
2
Table A.2: Aerodynamic model parameters
Two mass model:
Hgen [s]
Inertia constant of generator
1.07
Hwtr [s]
Inertia constant of wind turbine rotor
6.65
Kshaft [pu]
Shaft stifness
85.265
Cshaft [pu]
Shaft damping
4
Table A.3: Two mass mechanical model parameters [22]
==PAGE:85==
A.2 Wind turbine Type IV
77
Kpm
Power measurement filter gain
1
Tpm [s]
Power measurement filter time constant
0.01
Kp [pu]
Active power control gain
1
Tp [s]
Active power control time constant
0.1
P_max [pu]
Maximum active power reference
1
P_min
Minimum active power reference
0
Table A.4: Active power control parameters
Kqm
Power measurement filter gain
1
Tqm [s]
Power measurement filter time constant
0.01
Kq [pu]
Reactive power control gain
1
Tq [s]
Active power control time constant
0.1
Q_max [pu]
Maximum reactive power reference
1
Q_min
Minimum reactive power reference
-1
Table A.5: Reactive power control parameters
==PAGE:86==
78
Appendix
A.3
Solar power plant
A.3.1
Renewable energy electrical control REEC B
Figure A.5: Detailed diagram for Renewable energy electrical control [39]
The control modes for the electrical control is defined by the following table.
Figure A.6: Control Modes for REEC B
The input parameters for the Renewable energy are defined by the following table:
==PAGE:87==
A.3 Solar power plant
79
REEC_B Input Parameters [37]
Name
Description
Typical Values
PFflag
Constant Q (0) or PF (1) local control
-
Vflag
Local Q (0) or voltage control (1)
-
Qflag
Bypass (0) or engage (1) inner voltage regulator loop
-
Pqflag
Priority to reactive current (0) or active current (1)
-
Trv
Terminal bus voltage filter time constant (s)
0.01 to 0.02
Vdip
Low voltage condition trigger voltage (pu)
0.0 to 0.9
Vup
High voltage condition trigger voltage (pu)
1.1 to 1.3
Vref0
Reference voltage for reactive current injection (pu)
0.95 to 1.05
dbd1
Overvoltage deadband for reactive current injection (pu)
-0.1 to 0.0
dbd2
Undervoltage deadband for reactive current injection (pu)
0.0 to 0.1
Kqv
Reactive current injection gain (pu/pu)
0.0 to 10.0
Iqhl
Maximum reactive current injection (pu on mbase)
1.0 to 1.1
Iqll
Minimum reactive current injection (pu on mbase)
-1.1 to -1.0
Tp
Active power filter time constant (s)
0.01 to 0.02
Qmax
Maximum reactive power when Vflag = 1 (pu on mbase)
-
Qmin
Minimum reactive power when Vflag = 1 (pu on mbase)
-
Kqp
Local Q regulator proportional gain (pu/pu)
-
Kqi
Local Q regulator integral gain (pu/pu-s)
-
Vmax
Maximum voltage at inverter terminal bus (pu)
1.05 to 1.15
Vmin
Minimum voltage at inverter terminal bus (pu)
0.85 to 0.95
Kvp
Local voltage regulator proportional gain (pu/pu)
-
Kvi
Local voltage regulator integral gain (pu/pu-s)
-
Tiq
Reactive current regulator lag time constant (s)
0.01 to 0.02
Tpord
Inverter power order lag time constant (s)
-
Pmax
Maximum active power (pu on mbase)
1.0
Pmin
Minimum active power (pu on mbase)
0.0
dPmax
Active power up-ramp limit (pu/s on mbase)
-
dPmin
Active power down-ramp limit (pu/s on mbase)
-
Imax
Maximum apparent current (pu on mbase)
1.0 to 1.3
==PAGE:88==
80
Appendix
A.3.2
Renewable energy generator converter (inverter) model
REGC A
Figure A.7: Detailed diagram for Renewable energy converter model REGC A [37]
Input parameters and sample settings for Renewable energy generator converter.
==PAGE:89==
A.3 Solar power plant
81
REGC A Input Parameters [37]
Name
Description
Typical Values
RefFlag
Plant level reactive power (0) or voltage control (1)
-
VcompFlag
Reactive droop (0) or line drop compensation (1)
-
Freq_flag
Governor response disable (0) or enable (1)
0
Tfltr
Voltage and reactive power filter time constant (s)
0.01 to 0.02
Vbus
Monitored bus number
-
FromBus
Monitored branch “from” bus number
-
ToBus
Monitored branch “to” bus number
-
Ckt
Monitored branch circuit designation
-
Rc
Line drop compensation resistance (pu on mbase)
-
Xc
Line drop compensation reactance (pu on mbase)
when VcompFlag = 1
-
Kc
Reactive droop (pu on mbase) when VcompFlag = 0
-
dbd
Reactive power deadband (pu on mbase) when
RefFlag = 0; Voltage deadband (pu) when RefFlag = 1
-
emax
Maximum Volt/VAR error (pu)
-
emin
Minimum Volt/VAR error (pu)
-
Kp
Volt/VAR regulator proportional gain (pu/pu)m
-
Kq
Volt/VAR regulator integral gain (pu/pu-s)
-
Qmax
Maximum plant reactive power command (pu on mbase)
-
Qmin
Minimum plant reactive power command (pu on mbase)
-
Vfrz
Voltage for freezing Volt/VAR regulator integrator (pu)
0.0 to 0.9
Tft
Plant controller Q output lead time constant (s)
-
Tfv
Plant controller Q output lag time constant (s)
0.15 to 5.0
fdbd1
Overfrequency deadband for governor response (pu)
0.01
fdbd2
Underfrequency deadband for governor response (pu)
-0.01
Ddn
Down regulation droop (pu power/pu freq on mbase)
20.0 to 33.3
Dup
Up regulation droop (pu power/pu freq on mbase)
0.0
Tp
Active power filter time constant (s)
0.01 to 0.02
femax
Maximum power error in droop regulator (pu on mbase)
-
femin
Minimum power error in droop regulator (pu on mbase)
-
Kpg
Droop regulator proportional gain (pu/pu)
-
Kig
Droop regulator integral gain (pu/pu-s)
-
Pmax
Maximum plant active power command (pu on mbase)
1.0
Pmin
Minimum plant active power command (pu on mbase)
0.0
Tlag
Plant controller P output lag time constant (s)
0.15 to 5.0
==PAGE:90==
82
Appendix
A.4
Battery Energy Storing System
A.4.1
Parameters for Simple battery model
Name
Description
Value
SOC0
State of charge at initialisation pu
1
C
Cell Capacity Ah
40
Umin
Voltage of empty cell V
12
Umax
Voltage of full cell V
13.85
CellsParallel
Amount of parallel cells ínt
595
CellsinRow
Amount of cells in parallel int
65
Ri
Internal Resistance per cell ohm
0.001
A.5
HPP Topology
A.6
IEEE 12-bus system parameters
A.6.1
Generation units
The modified values for the Cogeneration power plants are introduced in Table A.6
CPP
Units
Capacity (MVA)
1
6
750
2
2
320
2b
2
160
3
2
384
4
3
474
Table A.6: Data for Cogeneration power plants
A.6.2
Loads
Load
Active power (MW)
L01
300
L02
250
L03
350
L04
300
L05
100
L06
150
Table A.7: Load parameters for the 12-bus system
==PAGE:91==
A.6 IEEE 12-bus system parameters
83
Figure A.8: Hybrid Power plant topology in Power Factory
==PAGE:92==
84
Appendix
Figure A.9: IEEE 12-bus system power flow simulation
A.6.3
Transformers
From-To Bus
Type
Capacity (MVA)
Uk %
Vector Group
1-7
Autotransformer
500
13
YNYN
1-9
Step-up
800
12
YNYN
2-10
Step-up
350
12
YNYN
2-10b
Step-up
350
12
YNYN
3-8
Autotransformer
500
13
YNYN
3-11
Step-up
400
10
YNYN
6-12
Step-up
500
11
YNYN
Table A.8: Transformer parameters for the 12-bus system
==PAGE:93==
A.7 Performance results for HPP control
85
A.6.4
Transmission lines
From-To Bus
Length (km)
R (pu)
X (pu)
B (pu)
1-2
100
0.01131
0.08998
0.18377
1-6
300
0.03394
0.26994
0.55130
2-5
400
0.0453
0.3599
0.7351
3-4
100 (x2)
0.0057
0.0450
0.3675
4-5
150
0.0170
0.1350
0.2757
4-6
300
0.03394
0.26994
0.55130
7-8
600
0.0159
0.1721
3.2853
Table A.9: Transmission line parameters for the 12 bus system
A.7
Performance results for HPP control
A.7.1
Curtailment of Solar Power plant and and 24MW outage
in wind power plant assets - scenario 1a
To address the observed limitations in the initial simulations, adjustments to the control
parameters where necessary. The existing control parameters setting resulted in a slower
response from the SPP, related to the different dynamics of WECC model. This slow
response led to power deviations of ± 4MW. Therefore, an additional control tuning was
performed to enhance the response by introducing the following control settings :
Level
SPP
PV
Kp
0.15
0.45
Ti s
0.03
0.01
Table A.10: Active and reactive power control parameters
This section contains further figures that highlight the dynamic model in further detail.
Figure A.10: Active power deviations for a power balance of 110MW for fluctuating wind
speed and solar irradiation between 11.2-11.9m/s and 980-1000 W/m2 with solar power
curtailment
==PAGE:94==
86
Appendix
Figure A.11: Enhanced Active power control for a 24MW outage of wind power. wind
speed ranges between 11.2-11.9m/s and solar irradiation varies between 980-1000 W/m2
Asset level analysis
For this scenario, a number of wind turbines are disconnected, whereas the remaining
wind turbines do not respond to such outage. In order to account for this scenario, the
WPP level senses the outage in available power and adapts the power dispatched to the
aggregated wind turbine. In addition to this, the WPP sends a signal to the aggregated
WT model which affects the aerodynamic power according to the outage.
Thus the
mechanical and electrical power are being affected to reflect the outage of 24MW. The
signals for the wind turbine and all the assets as present bellow.
==PAGE:95==
A.7 Performance results for HPP control
87
Figure A.12: Wind turbine signals for Active power, reactive power, pitch, rotational
speed and torque
==PAGE:96==
88
Appendix
Figure A.13: Active power at asset level for SPP curtailment and 24 MW outage from
wind power
==PAGE:97==
A.7 Performance results for HPP control
89
Figure A.14: Reactive power at asset level for SPP dispatch for a step in reactive power
of 20 MVAr
A.7.2
Curtailment of Wind Power plant and and 24MW outage
from solar power - scenario 1b
This section demonstrated the relevant deviations of active power and asset level signals
for different operating conditions every 50 seconds. The first 50 seconds, the HPP operates
a MPPT, followed by a transition to power balance of 110MW from 50 to 100 seconds.
After 100 seconds, the power plant operated in delta mode with a power reserve of 15
MW and transitions back to power balance after 150 seconds. At 200 seconds, there is an
outtage of 16 PV arrays accounting for a total loss of 24MW in the system. Prompting
==PAGE:98==
90
Appendix
the WPP to operate at MPPT, where the BESS is discharge to reach 110MW at the point
of common coupling. Lastly, there is a step in reactive power to 20MVAr.
The signals from the wind turbine are relevant to demonstrate the operation for power
curtailment for a power balance of 110MW. Such operation is performed by increasing
the pitch angle to reduce the aerodynamic torque and decrease the power as seen from
the WT signals. Maximum power point tracking is achieved by pitching the blades to
an optimum angle to maximize the aerodynamic torque and power. Furthermore, it is
relevant to mention that the reactive power is provided by the frequency converter and is
decoupled from the active power control.
Figure A.15: Active power deviations for a power balance of 110MW for fluctuating
wind speed and solar irradiation between 11.2-11.9m/s and 980-1000 W/m2 with wind
curtailment
Asset level Signals This case introduces the curtailment of wind power, the signals for the
wind turbine are represented in Figure A.16. For the first 50 seconds, the WT operates
at MPPT. At 50 seconds there is a smooth transition to power balance, in which the
wind turbine curtails its energy by pitching the blades. The pitch control follows the
reference power with no overshoots in either the shaft torque or the rotational speed. As
expected, the torque is reduced as an effect of the pitch angle following the reference for
lower aerodynamic efficiency.
==PAGE:99==
A.7 Performance results for HPP control
91
Figure A.16: Wind turbine signals for Active power, reactive power, pitch, rotational
speed and torque
==PAGE:100==
92
Appendix
Figure A.17: Active power at asset level for WPP curtailment and 24 MW outage from
solar power
==PAGE:101==
A.7 Performance results for HPP control
93
Figure A.18: Reactive power at asset level for WPP dispatch for constant reactive power
of 0 MVAr and a step in 20 MVAr reactive power at 250 seconds
==PAGE:102==
94
Appendix
==PAGE:103==
Bibliography
[1] Taskin Jamal and Sayedus Salehin. Hybrid renewable energy sources power systems.
Hybrid Renewable Energy Systems and Microgrids, pages 179–214, 2020.
[2] Florian Barbieri, Sumedha Rajakaruna, and Arindam Ghosh. Very short-term photo-
voltaic power forecasting with cloud modeling: A review. Renewable and Sustainable
Energy Reviews, 75:242–263, 2017.
[3] J. Hansen, M. Sato, P. Kharecha, D. Beerling, R. Berner, V. Masson-Delmotte,
M. Pagani, M. Raymo, D. L. Royer, and J. C. Zachos.
Target atmospheric co2:
Where should humanity aim? Open Atmospheric Science Journal, page 20, 2008.
[4] Kaushik
Das,
Anca
Daniela
Hansen,
Divyanagalakshmi
Haribabu
Vangari,
Matti Juhani Koivisto, Poul Ejnar Sørensen, and Müfit Altin. Enhanced features
of wind based hybrid power plants.
Proceedings of the 4th International Hybrid
Power Systems Workshop, 2019.
[5] Lennart
Petersen,
Bo
Hesselbæk,
Antonio
Martinez,
Roberto
M.
Borsotti-
Andruszkiewicz, German Claudio Tarnowski, Nathan Steggel, and Dave Osmond.
Vestas power plant solutions integrating wind, solar pv and energy storage. Proceed-
ings of the 3rd International Hybrid Power Systems Workshop, 2018.
[6] BP. Bp energy outlook 2018. edition 2018.
[7] EU.
2030 climate and energy framework - existing ambition.
"https:
//climate.ec.europa.eu/eu-action/climate-strategies-targets/
2030-climate-energy-framework_en".
[8] Danish Energy Agency. Danish climate policies.
[9] Ren21. Renewables 2017 global status report.
[10] Kamala Sarojini Ratnam, K. Palanisamy, and Guangya Yang. Future low-inertia
power systems: Requirements, issues, and solutions - a review. Renewable and Sus-
tainable Energy Reviews, 124:109773, 2020.
[11] Falko Ueckerdt, Robert Brecha, and Gunnar Luderer. Analyzing major challenges of
wind and solar variability in power systems. Renewable Energy, 81:1–10, 2015.
[12] Katherine Dykes. Opportunities for research and development of hybrid power plants.
NREL, 2019.
[13] Anca Daniela Hansen and L.H. Hansen. Wind turbine concept market penetration
over 10 years (1995-2004). Wind Energy, 10(1):81–97, 2007.
[14] A.D. Hansen, Poul Ejnar Sørensen, F. Iov, and F. Blaabjerg. Centralised power con-
trol of wind farm with doubly fed induction generators. Renewable Energy, 31(7):935–
951, 2006.
==PAGE:104==
96
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[15] Clyde Loutan, Peter Klauer, Sirajul Chowdhury, Stephen Hall, Mahesh Morjaria,
Vladimir Chadliev, Nick Milam, Christopher Milan, and Vahan Gevorgian. Demon-
stration of essential reliability services by a 300-mw solar photovoltaic power plant.
Technical report, National Renewable Energy Lab.(NREL), Golden, CO (United
States), 2017.
[16] Adarsh Nagarajan, Dylan S Cutler, Aadil Latif, Xiangkun Li, Richard Bryce, Ying
Shi, Jin Tan, Peter Gotseff, Ershun Du, Murali M Baggu, et al.
Value streams
from distribution grid support using utility-scale vanadium redox flow battery: Nrel-
sumitomo electric battery demonstration project. Technical report, National Renew-
able Energy Lab.(NREL), Golden, CO (United States), 2018.
[17] Thomas Ackermann. Wind Power in Power Systems. John Wiley and Sons, 2005.
[18] Ziping Wu, Wenzhong Gao, Tianqi Gao, Weihang Yan, Huaguang Zhang, Shijie Yan,
and Xiao Wang. State-of-the-art review on frequency response of wind power plants
in power systems. Journal of Modern Power Systems and Clean Energy, 6(1):1–16,
2018.
[19] Tripura Pidikiti and G. Tulai Ram Das. Analysis and performance evaluation of
dfig and pmsg based wind energy systems. International Journal of Computing and
Digital Systems, 8(6):557–563, 2019.
[20] Hemant Ahuja, G. Bhuvaneswari, and R. Balasubramanian. Performance comparison
of dfig and pmsg based wecs. Iet Conference Publications, 2011(579):P33, 2011.
[21] R. Villena-Ruiz, A. Honrubia-Escribano, F. Jiménez-Buendía, J.L. Sosa-Avendaño,
S. Frahm, P. Gartmann, J. Fortmann, P.E. Sørensen, and E. Gómez-Lázaro. Exten-
sive model validation for generic iec 61400-27-1 wind turbine models. International
Journal of Electrical Power perturb Energy Systems, 134:107331, 2022.
[22] Anca Daniela Hansen and Ioannis D. Margaris. Type iv wind turbine model. 2014.
[23] Müfit Altin, Anca Daniela Hansen, Ömer Göksu, Nicolaos Antonio Cutululis, and
Poul Ejnar Sørensen.
Wind turbine and wind power plant modelling aspects for
power system stability studies. Proceedings of the International Conference on Wind
Energy Grid-adaptive Technologies 2014, 2014.
[24] A.D. Hansen, C. Jauch, Poul Ejnar Sørensen, F. Iov, and F. Blaabjerg. Dynamic
wind turbine models in power system simulation tool digsilent. page 80 s., 2004.
[25] DIgSILENT GmbH. Technical reference. 2022.
[26] Pramod Jain. Wind energy engineering. McGraw-Hill, 2011.
[27] Eduardo Lorenzo, Gerardo L Araujo, and Andrés Cuevas. Electricidad solar: inge-
niería de los sistemas fotovoltaicos. Progensa Seville, 1994.
[28] Martin A. Green, Ewan D. Dunlop, Jochen Hohl-Ebinger, Masahiro Yoshita, Nikos
Kopidakis, Karsten Bothe, David Hinken, Michael Rauer, and Xiaojing Hao. Solar
cell efficiency tables (version 60). Progress in Photovoltaics: Research and Applica-
tions, 30(7):687–701, 2022.
[29] NREL National Renewable Energy Laboratory. Best research-cell efficiency chart.
==PAGE:105==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
97
[30] Ababacar Ndiaye, Cheikh Kébé, Abderafi Charki, Papa Ndiaye, Vincent Sambou,
and Abdessamad Kobi.
Degradation evaluation of crystalline-silicon photovoltaic
modules after a few operation years in a tropical environment.
Solar Energy,
103:70–77, 05 2014.
[31] Cheng-Tao Tsai and Sin-Hua Chen. Pv power-generation system with a phase-shift
pwm technique for high step-up voltage applications. International Journal of Pho-
toenergy, 2012, 07 2012.
[32] Vu Phap and Hang Le. Comparison of central inverter and string inverter for solar
power plant: Case study in vietnam. pages 11–23, 12 2019.
[33] Pedro Ponce, Arturo Molina, Omar Mata, Luis Ibarra, and Brian MacCleery. Power
system fundamentals. CRC Press, 2017.
[34] Easan Drury, Anthony Lopez, Paul Denholm, and Robert Margolis. Relative per-
formance of tracking versus fixed tilt photovoltaic systems in the usa. Progress in
Photovoltaics: Research and Applications, 22(12):1302–1315, 2014.
[35] Siyang Liao, Jian Xu, Yuanzhang Sun, Yi Bao, and Bowen Tang. Wide-area mea-
surement system-based online calculation method of pv systems de-loaded margin
for frequency regulation in isolated power systems. Iet Renewable Power Genera-
tion, 12(3):335–341, 2018.
[36] Amirnaser Yazdani, Anna Rita Di Fazio, Hamidreza Ghoddami, Mario Russo,
Mehrdad Kazerani, Juri Jatskevich, Kai Strunz, Sonia Leva, and Juan A. Mar-
tinez. Modeling guidelines and a benchmark for power system simulation studies
of three-phase single-stage photovoltaic systems. Ieee Transactions on Power Deliv-
ery, 26(2):1247–1264, 2011.
[37] WECC. Pv power plant dynamic model specification. 2014.
[38] Maria Nuschke, Sören Lohr, Adrien Guironnet, and Marianne Saugier. Implemen-
tation and validation of the generic wecc photovoltaics and wind turbine generator
models in modelica. In Modelica Conferences, pages 633–642, 2021.
[39] EPRI. Model user guide for generic renewable energy system models. 2015.
[40] Vishal Varma and S. T. Nagarajan. Pv solar farm as statcom for voltage regulation.
2016 Ieee 7th Power India International Conference, Piicon 2016, page 8077279,
2016.
[41] Catalin I. Ciontea, Dezso Sera, and Florin Iov. Influence of resolution of the input
data on distributed generation integration studies. 2014 International Conference
on Optimization of Electrical and Electronic Equipment, Optim 2014, pages 673–
680, 2014.
[42] Jinhui Xue, Zhongdong Yin, Bingbing Wu, and Jun Peng. Design of pv array model
based on emtdc/pscad.
Asia-pacific Power and Energy Engineering Conference,
Appeec, page 4918269, 2009.
[43] Jin Ma, Da-Wei Zhao, Min-Hui Qian, Ling-Zhi Zhu, and Hua Geng. Modelling and
validating photovoltaic power inverter model for power system stability analysis.
Journal of Engineering, 2017(13):6 pp., 2017.
==PAGE:106==
98
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[44] Sinclair Pienaar, Kanzumba Kusakana, and Patrick Manditereza. Usage of battery
energy storage systems to defer substation upgrades. 10 2018.
[45] Yuqing Yang, Chris Menictas, Stephen Bremner, and Merlinde Kay. A comparison
study of dispatching various battery technologies in a hybrid pv and wind power
plant. Ieee Power and Energy Society General Meeting, 2018-:8585803, 2018.
[46] TongLe Ding, Gang Wang, and HaiFeng Li. Dynamic modeling and simulation anal-
ysis on micro-grid based on digsilent. In 2011 International Conference on Advanced
Power System Automation and Protection, volume 2, pages 1240–1245. IEEE, 2011.
[47] Imre Gyuk, Pramod Kulkarni, Joseph H. Sayer, John D. Boyes, Garth P. Corey, and
Georgianne H. Peek. The united states of storage. Ieee Power and Energy Magazine,
3(2):31–39, 2005.
[48] Franck Soleil Mpio Mviri. Battery storage systems in electric power grid: A review.
Journal of Physics: Conference Series, 2276(1):012016, 2022.
[49] Ami Joseph and Mohammad Shahidehpour. Battery storage systems in electric power
systems. 2006 Ieee Power Engineering Society General Meeting, Pes, page 1709235,
2006.
[50] Divya K Chandrashekhara and Jacob Østergaard. Battery energy storage technology
for power systems-an overview.
Electric Power Systems Research, 79(4):511–520,
2009.
[51] Massimo Ceraolo. New dynamical models of lead-acid batteries. Ieee Transactions
on Power Systems, 15(4):1184–1190, 2000.
[52] Nosh K. Medora and Alexander Kusko. Dynamic battery modeling of lead-acid bat-
teries using manufacturers’ data. Intelec, International Telecommunications Energy
Conference (proceedings), pages 227–232, 2005.
[53] DIgSILENT. Powerfactory application example. battery energy storing system. 2010.
[54] Francisco M. Gonzalez-Longatt and Samir M. Alhejaj. Enabling inertial response in
utility-scale battery energy storage system. Ieee Pes Innovative Smart Grid Tech-
nologies Conference Europe, pages 605–610, 2016.
[55] Ding Wang, Yangwu Shen, Jian Zuo, Min Xu, Wei Cao, Ming Yi, and Yunhui Huang.
Voltage/reactive power coordination control between energy storage power station
and clean energy plant connected toac/dc hybrid system. In 2021 IEEE 4th Inter-
national Electrical and Energy Conference (CIEEC), pages 1–5. IEEE, 2021.
[56] Shutang You. Photovoltaic (pv) virtual inertia and fast frequency regulation in high
pv power grids. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.11340, 2020.
[57] Katsuhiko Ogata et al. Modern control engineering, volume 5. Prentice hall Upper
Saddle River, NJ, 2010.
[58] Anca Daniela Hansen, Poul Ejnar Sørensen, Lorenzo Zeni, and Müfit Altin. Fre-
quency control modelling - basics. 2016.
[59] Daniel Vázquez Pombo, Florin Iov, and Daniel Ioan Stroe. A novel control archi-
tecture for hybrid power plants to provide coordinated frequency reserves. Energies,
12(5):919, 2019.
==PAGE:107==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
99
[60] DK Energinet. Technical regulation 3.2. 5 for wind power plants above 11 kw. Tech.
Rep., 2016.
[61] Niklas Modig, Robert Eriksson, Pia Ruokolainen, Jon Nerbø Ødegård, Simon
Weizenegger, and Thomas Dalgas Fechtenburg. Overview of frequency control in
the nordic power system. Nordic Analysis Group, 2022.
[62] Abdul Basit, Anca Daniela Hansen, Ioannis Margaris, and Jens Carsten Hansen. A
review of grid requirements for wind farm in denmark and china. 2012.
[63] Nordic Operations Development Group.
Nordic balancing philosophy.
Nordic
Analysis Group, 2021. Available in : https://energinet.dk/media/fmqpjmvc/nordic-
balancing-philosophy-updated-2021.pdf.
[64] Iñigo Martinez de Alegría, Jon Andreu, José Luis Martín, Pedro Ibañez, José Luis
Villate, and Haritza Camblong. Connection requirements for wind farms: A survey on
technical requierements and regulation. Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews,
11(8):1858–1872, 2007.
[65] Qian Long, Kaushik Das, Daniel V. Pombo, and Poul E. Sørensen. Hierarchical con-
trol architecture of co-located hybrid power plants. International Journal of Electrical
Power and Energy Systems, 143:108407, 2022.
[66] Qian Long, Kaushik Das, and Poul Sørensen. Hierarchical frequency control of hybrid
power plants using frequency response observer. page 10, 2022.
[67] Andrzej Adamczyk, Mufit Altin, Ömer Göksu, Remus Teodorescu, and Florin Iov.
Generic 12-bus test system for wind power integration studies. In 2013 15th European
Conference on Power Electronics and Applications (EPE), pages 1–6. IEEE, 2013.
[68] European Network of Transmission System Operators for Electricity. Requirements
for generators. In https://www.entsoe.eu/networkcodes/rfg/.ENTSO, 2016.
[69] Daniel Vázquez Pombo. Coordinated frequency and active power control of hybrid
power plants. 2018.
[70] C BOHN and DP ATHERTON. An analysis package comparing pid antiwindup
strategies. Ieee Control Systems Magazine, 15(2):34–40, 1995.
