==PAGE:1==
Micropollutant removal from hospital wastew­
ater by biofilm and membrane bioreactors
Fjernelse af mikroforurenende stoffer fra hospi­
talsspildevand ved hjælp af biofilm­ og membran­
bioreaktorer
Master’s Thesis
Signe Wobeser Brødsgaard
DTU Sustain
Department of Environmental and Resource Engineering
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Micropollutant removal from hospital wastewater by biofilm and membrane biore­
actors
Fjernelse af mikroforurenende stoffer fra hospitalsspildevand ved hjælp af biofilm­ og
membranbioreaktorer
Master’s Thesis
June, 2023
By
Signe Wobeser Brødsgaard
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Signe 2023
Published by:
DTU, Department of Environmental and Resource Engineering, Bygn­
ingstorvet, Bygning 115, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.sustain.dtu.dk
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This 30 ECTS­points master thesis has been prepared between January and July 2023
at the Section for Water Technology and Processes, Department of Environmental and
Resource Engineering, at the Technical University of Denmark.
The target audience for this master’s thesis is fellow students at the same academic level
who show an interest in the topic.
This project was accomplished alongside the PRESAGE project, with the full title:
”Potential of decentralized wastewater treatment for preventing the spread of antibiotic
resistance, organic micropollutants, pathogens and viruses”
The pilots at the wastewater treatment unit at Herlev Hospital have therefore been used
in collaboration with all the involved within the PRESAGE project.
Signe Wobeser Brødsgaard ­ s155637
ii
Micropollutant removal from hospital wastewater by biofilm and membrane bioreactors
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
The main source of micropollutants in the aquatic environment is effluent from wastewater
treatment plants with hospital wastewater (HWW) considered as hot spots. This is due
to the fact that wastewater treatment plants (WWTPs) were designed to remove easily
biodegradable carbon, nitrogen, and phosphorus along with microbial organisms but not
complex and diverse organic micropollutants (OMPs), including antibiotic­resistant genes
and bacteria (ARGs, ARBs).
In this thesis, the OMP removal and involved biotransformation pathways of the biomass
in four pilot scale reactors: An integrated fixed film activated sludge (IFAS) membrane
bioreactor (MBR) followed by a polishing moving bed bioreactor (MBBR) and an MBR
followed by a polishing MBBR is evaluated. The carriers used for IFAS and the polishing
MBBRs are K5 AnoxKaldnesTM. Solid retention time (SRT) was aimed to be 30 days and
hydraulic retention time (HRT) on 2 days.
To evaluate the OMP removal, an investigation of the removal kinetics of nine OMPs (1H­
benzotriazole, atenolol, azithromycin, ciprofloxacin, diclofenac, iomeprol, sulfamethoxa­
zole, trimethoprim and venlafaxine) has been accomplished by the conduction of 24­hour
batch experiments using biomass from the pilot reactors. Allylthiourea (ATU) was added
to a final concentration of 10 mg/L to suppress nitrifying activity. Anoxic conditions were
obtained with KNO3 as nitrate source and sparging of N2­gas. An initial OMP concentra­
tion of 10 μg/L beyond background concentrations was obtained by spiking.
Based on physical­chemical properties, literature review and interpretation of the results a
distinction between sorption processes and biotransformation was obtained to make com­
parisons between different conditions, types of biomass and OMPs possible. Diclofenac
and venlafaxine were deemed recalcitrant and excluded from the comparisons.
For trimethoprim and ciprofloxacin a possible link between nitrifying activity is suggested.
For sulfamethoxazole, iomeprol, and atenolol other biotransformation pathways than ni­
trification was suggested.
Higher removal rate, kbio, compared to anoxic conditions were found for 1H­benzotriazole,
atenolol, azithromycin, ciprofloxacin, iomeprol, sulfamethoxazole, and trimethoprim in the
MBR Sludge. For 1H­benzotriazole, ciprofloxacin, iomeprol, and sulfamethoxazole sorp­
tion was deemed negligible in the MBR Sludge. In addition, 1H­benzotriazole, iomeprol,
and ciprofloxacin only reached substantial biotransformation during oxic conditions in the
MBR Sludge.
Trimethoprim, iomeprol and 1H­benzotriazole obtained significantly higher removal rates
in the IFAS biomass compared with the MBR Sludge. Likewise with sulfamethoxazole and
atenolol during anoxic conditions. It is suggested that the IFAS­MBR biomass potentially
can obtain improved OMP removal compared to the MBR Sludge.
Micropollutant removal from hospital wastewater by biofilm and membrane bioreactors
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
Signe Wobeser Brødsgaard, MSc Civil Engineering, DTU Sustain
[Borja Valverde Pérez], [Associate Professor], [DTU Sustain ­ Water Technology & Pro­
cesses]
[Ravi Kumar Chhetri], [Senior Researcher], [DTU Sustain ­ Water Technology & Pro­
cesses]
[I would like to give a special thanks to my supervisors, Associate Professor Borja Valverde
Pérez and Senior Researcher Ravi Kumar Chhetri, who have been a great help and sup­
port throughout the project. The help I received was in relation to the understanding of
theoretical aspects and approaches, planning and execution of experiments, and inter­
pretation, discussion, and presentation of results. Furthermore, I was supported to come
to terms with difficulties and unforeseen events throughout the project.]
[Alexandros Georgios Bernar Ntynez], [Research Assistant], [DTU Sustain]
[Nikos­Alexandros Kalaitzidis], [Research Assistant], [DTU Sustain]
[Mateus Cottorello Fonsêca], [Guest PhD], [DTU Sustain]
[Mónika Büki], [Student Assistant], [DTU Sustain]
[Karthik Kumar Chandrasekar], [Student Assistant], [DTU Sustain]
[Vasileia Stoumpou], [Student Assistant], [DTU Sustain]
[I would like to thank Alexandros Georgios Bernar Ntynez and Nikos­Alexandros Kalaitzidis,
Mateus Cottorello Fonsêca, Mónika Büki, Karthik Kumar Chandrasekar, and Vasileia
Stoumpou for the good collaboration and success full work in Herlev and the laboratories
at DTU. It has been a pleasure to have your company during the maintenance, sampling
and analysis of the pilots. Overmore, Alexandros, and Nikos did my TOC analysis, thank
you.]
[Kai Tang], [Senior Researcher], [DTU Sustain ­ Water Technology & Processes]
[I would like to thank Senior Researcher Kai Tang for the help and support throughout the
project. The help I received was in relation to planning the experimental setup, feedback
and ideas for conducting experiments, and interpretation and presentation of results. Spe­
cially thank you for running the OMP analysis (HPLC­MS/MS) and the subsequent data
extraction.]
[Emma Egholm Gravenhorst], [laboratory technician], [DTU Sustain]
[I would like to thank, Emma Egholm Gravenhorst for running all my nutrient analysis
samples.]
[Anja and Karsten], [Technicians at the WWTF in Herlev]
[I would also like to thank Anja and Karsten at the wastewater facility in Herlev. They were
happy to help, interested, positive, and solution­oriented.]
iv
Micropollutant removal from hospital wastewater by biofilm and membrane bioreactors
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Aim of the Project
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Hypothesis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.4
Assumptions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.5
Constraints . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Theory
5
2.1
Micropollutants . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Physical­Chemical Properties and Fate Processes . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3
OMP removal in Waste Water Treatment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.4
Selection of indicator micropollutants . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
3
Materials and Methods
15
3.1
PRESAGE Pilot Reactors at Herlev Hospital . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
3.2
Batch experiments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
3.3
Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
3.4
Calculations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
4
Results and Discussion
21
4.1
Biomass Characteristics, Nitrification, and Denitrification . . . . . . . . . . . 21
4.2
Investigation of OMP Removal
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
4.3
Sources of Error and limitations and Outlook
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
5
Conclusion
37
Bibliography
39
A How a wastewater treatment plant functions
43
B Elaborated Procedure for Batch Experiments
45
B.1 Aim and Hypothesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
B.2 Experimental Set­up and Conditions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
B.3 Experimental plan
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46
C Main Results
50
C.1 Nutrient Removal in the Batch Experiments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 50
C.2 Interpretation of the OMP removal results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 52
C.3 OMP removal in the batch experiments
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 59
D Assesment of chemicals in the environment
64
Micropollutant removal from hospital wastewater by biofilm and membrane bioreactors
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Micropollutant removal from hospital wastewater by biofilm and membrane bioreactors
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
1.1
Motivation
In Denmark there are more than 13,783 approved pharmaceuticals (2021), though many
of them have the same active compound, resulting in approximately 1,100 (2016) differ­
ent pharmaceutical substances being used in Denmark (Nielsen, 2016; Tranekær et al.,
2021). The pharmaceuticals are active substances excreted from patients mainly by urine
(Nielsen, 2016). Some pharmaceuticals are transformed in the patients e.g. by conjuga­
tion, others are designed to be excreted without transformation (UNESCO & HELCOM,
2017).
Hospital wastewater (HWW) contains a complex mixture of pharmaceuticals, antibiotic­
resistant genes­ and bacteria (ARGs, ARBs), biocides, and radioactive isotopes typically
transported by sewers to the municipal treatment plant (Nielsen, 2016). It is deemed
that organic micropollutants (OMPs), ARBs, and ARGs are mainly released and spread
into the environment via effluent from wastewater treatments plants (WWTPs) with HWW
considered as hot spots (Ahtisham & Iqbal, 2022; Buelow et al., 2021; Carballa et al.,
2004; Felis et al., 2020; Y. Liu et al., 2020; UNESCO & HELCOM, 2017; Verlicchi et al.,
2013a).
The effluent concentrations of OMPs are not currently included in the routine monitoring
of the WTTPs. However, studies have found several compounds above the predicted no
effect concentration (PNEC) in WTTP effluents indicating potential harm to the aquatic
life and environment (Carballa et al., 2004; DHI, 2021a, 2021b; Nielsen, 2016; Tranekær
et al., 2021).
A study located in the area of the Baltic Sea found that 9 out of 118 investigated pharma­
ceuticals were removed with efficiency above 95% by conventional WWTPs. And half of
the pharmaceuticals were removed with an efficiency below 50%. The same study esti­
mated a release of 1.8 thousand tons of pharmaceuticals and their byproducts per year
into The Baltic Sea from WWTPs (UNESCO & HELCOM, 2017). This is due to the fact that
the WWTPs were built to remove easily biodegradable carbon, nitrogen, and phosphorus
along with microbial organisms but not complex and diverse micropollutants, including
ARGs/ARBs (Ahtisham & Iqbal, 2022; Carballa et al., 2004; Felis et al., 2020; Verlicchi
et al., 2013a). Appropriate management and treatment of wastewater are of increasing
interest due to the growing realisation that the release of micropollutants into the environ­
ment is a global emerging concern (Felis et al., 2020; UNESCO & HELCOM, 2017). The
environmental impacts of OMPs can be limited by source­control or end­of­pipe control
(Bertram et al., 2022). Meaning that either the use or production of a compound must
be controlled (limited/decreased/banned) or the contaminants must be removed/treated
before being released into the environment. As the use of pharmaceuticals most likely
will increase, proper wastewater treatment is crucial (Akhtar & Umair, 2022a). Hence, the
use of advanced and unconventional treatment strategies must be investigated (Mohiddin
& Srinivasulu, 2022; UNESCO & HELCOM, 2017; Verlicchi et al., 2013a).
The PRESAGE project is carried out between 6 partner universities in Brazil, Denmark,
France, Germany, Portugal, and Spain (Omil et al., 2020). The project aims to assess
the influence of operating parameters within different innovative treatment schemes for
decentralised wastewater treatment with a focus on the fate and behaviour of OMPs,
Micropollutant removal from hospital wastewater by biofilm and membrane bioreactors
1
==PAGE:10==
ARMs, and ARGs. The studied decentralised treatment technologies are compact tech­
nologies such as membrane bioreactors (MBRs), with high sludge retention time (SRT)
and biomass concentrations and therefore greater microbial diversity (Al­Asheh et al.,
2021). Four different demo sites with pilot scale treatment technologies are under inves­
tigation: 1) A membrane anaerobic reactor with an additional hybrid anoxic/aerobic MBR,
2) an integrated fixed film activated sludge system with an MBR followed by a polishing
moving bed bioreactor (IFAS­MBR­MBBR), 3) an MBR­MBBR, and 4) an anaerobic biofilm
reactor. The project anticipates providing new scientific and technological knowledge that
can be integrated into the development of sustainable decentralised treatment processes
with high­quality effluents suitable for reuse. Two of the demo sites, the IFAS­MBR­MBBR
and the MBR­MBBR, are located in Denmark.
1.2
Aim of the Project
The aim of this thesis is to evaluate the performance of the four pilot­scale biofilm and
MBR (demo sites 2 and 3 in the PRESAGE project) with respect to the removal of OMPs.
Along with this, the involved biotransformation pathways will be evaluated.
The aim is motivated by the similarity of some of the subtopics of the PRESAGE project
but carried out independently. The subtopics of the PRESAGE project are related to the
fate of OMPs in the biological treatment related to microbial composition and metabolic
activity (Omil et al., 2020).
Batch experiments are conducted to investigate biomass activity and removal kinetics,
kbio, considering pseudo­first­order kinetics (Joss et al., 2006). The results from the batch
experiments are used as a basis to investigate the overall performance of the pilot reactors
in Herlev. The theoretical knowledge provided in the theory section about environmental
chemistry and biology, along with a literature study of OMP removal in common and ad­
vanced processes of WWTPs, laid a basis for justification, comparison, and discussion of
the results.
1.3
Hypothesis
In order to achieve the aims of this master thesis, a set of hypotheses is constructed based
on a preceding literature study. The literature study resulted in the following key points:
1. Ammonia oxidizing bacteria (AOB) is the most important factor for cometabolism
(Su et al., 2021).
2. Nitrifying microorganisms have higher biotransformation rates than heterotrophs.
However, heterotrophs have a wider spectrum of reaction types and metabolic ver­
satility that allow them to further biodegrade different OMPs and metabolites (Kennes­
Veiga et al., 2022).
3. For different chemical structures of OMPs, the biotransformation pathway is either
oxidative or reductive (Alvarino et al., 2017; Falås, 2013). However, the OMP re­
moval efficiency is lower during anoxic conditions due to the lower redox potential
(Kennes­Veiga et al., 2022).
4. For the IFAS set­up two types of microbial communities can be formed, one in the
sludge and one on the carriers (biofilm). The combination increases the overall
removal of micro­pollutants (Escolà Casas et al., 2015; Falås, 2013).
From these four key points, the following hypotheses are constructed. These will be tested
by carrying out batch experiments and subsequently either be confirmed or rejected.
2
Micropollutant removal from hospital wastewater by biofilm and membrane bioreactors
==PAGE:11==
1. Most of the compounds that are effectively removed during oxic conditions (nitrifi­
cation) will not be removed during the inhibition of nitrifying bacteria because AOB
is the main pathway of biotransformation.
2. The oxic batch experiments will achieve higher removal rates of OMPs, kbio, com­
pared to anoxic conditions.
3. Some compounds will either be removed during oxic or anoxic conditions.
4. The combined effect of suspended biomass and biofilm on carriers will result in a
higher removal rate, kbio, compared to the suspended biomass of the MBR.
1.4
Assumptions
A set of assumptions have been formulated in order to simplify the investigations. The
assumptions describe premises on which the investigations and experiments depend:
1. The bioreactors are comparable as they are working in parallel and with similar
operational conditions (e.g. inlet concentrations, loading rates, suspended biomass
wasting rate, and temperature).
2. The investigated OMPs can be used as indicator compounds, as they have different
physical­chemical properties, and are representative of the compounds normally
found in HWW and the environment (Goonesekera et al., 2022; Omil et al., 2020;
Tranekær et al., 2021; UNESCO & HELCOM, 2017).
3. The OMPs are mainly cometabolically biotransformed along with the elimination of
macropollutants (Kennes­Veiga et al., 2022).
4. The fate of a compound (sorption vs degradation) can be estimated based on its
physical­chemical properties (Baun et al., 2017; Kovalova et al., 2012a; Suárez et
al., 2008).
5. To investigate the biological activity of the pilot reactors the batch experiments are
adequate. Escolà Casas et al. (2015) investigated the removal of OMPs in an IFAS
setup. The removal kinetics found in a batch experiment similar to the set­up in
this thesis was compared to a continuous flow experiment. The results matched for
several compounds especially those that are excreted unchanged. Similar investi­
gations of removal kinetics are found in several other studies of different types of
biomass (Burzio et al., 2022; Falås, 2013; Joss et al., 2006; Polesel et al., 2017;
Tang et al., 2017a; Torresi et al., 2016; Torresi et al., 2017; Tran et al., 2009).
6. Addition of allylthiourea (ATU) is suitable for the inhibition of nitrifying bacteria (Tor­
resi et al., 2016; Tran et al., 2009).
7. Joss et al. (2006) stated that sorption can be neglected for OMPs with Kd < 0.1L/gss
1.5
Constraints
A complete resemblance of reality is hard to obtain through experiments. The degree of
resemblance is constrained by limitation, selection, and abstraction made when designing
and conducting the experiments. Therefore, the constraints are listed in the following:
Size limitation:
• The performance of the pilot reactors is assumed to differ to some extent from
the performance of a full­scale system. Here loading rates, microbial commu­
nity, volumes, hydraulic retention time, solid retention time and other opera­
tional conditions may differ from what can be achieved in a full­scale plant.
• The term ”micropollutants” covers a lot of different compounds. This thesis is
restricted to only include nine OMPs.
Micropollutant removal from hospital wastewater by biofilm and membrane bioreactors
3
==PAGE:12==
.
Selection:
• The investigated OMPs will only resemble compounds with similar physical­
chemical properties.
• It is only removal rates from the aqueous phase that are reported (Carballa
et al., 2004; UNESCO & HELCOM, 2017).
• Alvarino et al. (2017) states the necessity of a proper understanding of the
removal mechanisms of the wastewater treatment technologies, including the
operational conditions, and microbial community linked to sorption and bio­
transformation. Hence:
– Information about metabolites is not attained in this thesis.
– Further study of the present microbial communities like Torresi (2017) is
necessary to fully conclude the metabolic pathways.
– Due to the limited time available, steady­state operational conditions in
the pilot reactors was not completely achieved in the pilots. Hence, it is
open for discussion how well the results resemble the specific operational
conditions of the pilots.
– Due to time limitations, different operational conditions for the pilots were
not tested. More experiments and further research are necessary to opti­
mise and fully investigate the potential of the setup.
– Escolà Casas et al. (2015) stated that processes such as de­conjugation,
bonding to particles, or formation from other metabolites are important to
consider. Further study of OMP concentrations in the sludge is necessary
to clearly distinguish between adsorption and degradation of the specific
biomass (Carballa et al., 2004).
Abstraction:
• The aforementioned challenge with inappropriate wastewater treatment cov­
ers a spectrum of disciplines (politics/chemistry/biology/medicine/etc.), hence,
the overall best solution is achieved through an interdisciplinary and holistic
approach, where this thesis only covers a small part of this. For example:
– Other conditions such as energy requirements, Life Cycle Assessment
(LCA) of the materials, and comparison to similar processes and methods
are not investigated.
– The compared biological treatment methods in this thesis resemble only
a part of all the available treatment methods suited for OMP removal in
wastewater (Mohiddin & Srinivasulu, 2022).
4
Micropollutant removal from hospital wastewater by biofilm and membrane bioreactors
==PAGE:13==
2
Theory
In this section, the theoretical background for the choices, discussions, and conclusions
made in this thesis are presented. As the target audience is students with a similar aca­
demic level as that of the author’s, a thorough and accessible presentation of the theory is
attempted. The aim is to enable the reader to interpret and critically evaluate the choices,
results, and discussions conducted in this report.
The section contains:
• An introduction to micropollutants.
• Physical­chemical properties and fate processes.
• OMP removal in wastewater treatment.
• A presentation of MBR, MBBR and IFAS­MBR.
• A Presentation of investigated OMPs and their physical­chemical properties.
2.1
Micropollutants
2.1.1
A definition of micropollutants
In this master thesis, the term micropollutants will be used to cover compounds of an­
thropogenic origin found in the environment at concentrations from micrograms down to
picograms per liter or kilogram. The micropollutants are divided into three types (Bertram
et al., 2022; Mohiddin & Srinivasulu, 2022; Valverde­Pérez & Vezzaro, 2022):
• The OMPs such as pharmaceuticals, personal care products (PCPs), polyfluoroalkyl
substances (PFASs), pesticides, plastics, and nanomaterials which can be synthet­
ically manufactured or naturally occurring.
• The inorganic micropollutants cover metals such as heavy metals, trace metals, and
metalloids.
• The biological micropollutants such as ARBs and ARGs. (Ahmad et al., 2022).
The main focus of this thesis is on OMPs and in Section 2.4 the specific target compounds
will be presented.
2.1.2
Where do they come from?
The micropollutants are all of anthropogenic origin but are characterised by two different
main pathways into the environment (Bertram et al., 2022):
• Point sources that are stationary sources such as wastewater from housing, hospi­
tals, and industry.
• Non­point sources that are unspecific such as runoff from agriculture, roads, and
roofs.
The very diverse characteristics and various sources of micropollutants result in a wide
range of distribution and concentration in the environment. But, the concentration and
occurrence of micropollutants are highly correlated to densely populated regions where
the use of e.g. pharmaceuticals are higher (Mohiddin & Srinivasulu, 2022). Depending on
the pharmaceutical and its mode of action the rate of excretion and metabolism changes
(Akhtar & Umair, 2022a; Nielsen, 2016). However, it is estimated that approximately
70% of antibiotics are released from the human body through urine or faeces along with
other pharmaceuticals and their metabolites (Ahtisham & Iqbal, 2022; Tang et al., 2017b).
Micropollutant removal from hospital wastewater by biofilm and membrane bioreactors
5
==PAGE:14==
The most common pharmaceuticals found in wastewater are psychoactive drugs, anal­
gesics, anti­inflammatory drugs, antibiotics, and the active compounds in the conception
pill (Tranekær et al., 2021). Furthermore, HWW is demonstrated as a hot spot of phar­
maceuticals and for the selection of ARBs and the spread of ARGs and other pathogens
(Buelow et al., 2021; Felis et al., 2020; Verlicchi et al., 2013a). The main source of mi­
cropollutants in the aquatic environment is effluent from WWTPs (Akhtar & Umair, 2022b;
UNESCO & HELCOM, 2017; Verlicchi et al., 2013a).
2.1.3
Impact of OMPs on the environment
The impacts on biota and human health of OMPs are largely unknown but are deemed
a global emerging concern (Reif et al., 2013; UNESCO & HELCOM, 2017). A few well­
documented effects of OMPs released into the environment are (Ahtisham & Iqbal, 2022;
Bertram et al., 2022; Tranekær et al., 2021; UNESCO & HELCOM, 2017):
• The feminising of male fish due to the hormone 7α­ethinylestradiol (EE2) (estro­
genicity).
• A mass kill of oriental white­backed vultures due to the high concentrations of di­
clofenac.
• Examples of altered behaviour of fish due to psychotherapeutic drugs (such as ven­
lafaxine).
• Biocides interfere with sex hormones and the reproductive system.
In the environment, OMPs can cause genetic mutations and damage the genetic informa­
tion in a cell (known as mutagenicity and genotoxicity). OMPs act as stressors towards the
bacterial populations in the environment, which can result in a reduction of the biodiver­
sity of the microbial ecosystems. The presence of OMPs can also increase the selection
of bacterial pathogens comprising the risk of disease in humans, animals, and plants.
(Ahtisham & Iqbal, 2022; Buelow et al., 2021)
Prokaryotes, bacteria, and archaea reproduce asexually, with a process called binary fis­
sion. This results in a lack of heritable variation and risk of gradual accumulation of point
mutations. This is overcome by the exchange of genetic information (genes or genetic
material) by horizontal gene transfer (HGT). The most dominant route of HGT is conjuga­
tion, transformation, transduction, and vesiduction. HGT can happen across species and
is recognised as a major driver for the prevalence and spread of ARGs. The selection and
transfer of ARGs are linked to a broad range of OMPs including antibiotics, non­antibiotic
pharmaceuticals, disinfectants, preservatives, and pesticides, but also increased CO2
levels due to global warming. Heavy metals, ibuprofen, and diclofenac have a significant
impact on the spread of ARGs. In polluted environments, high amounts of ARGs are
found in biofilms, in which gene transfer is facilitated. When the microbial communities
in the environment are subject to pollution with ARGs, the pool of resistant genes in the
environment increases along with the risk of transmission of these genes into pathogenic
bacteria. (Ahtisham & Iqbal, 2022; Buelow et al., 2021; Felis et al., 2020; Y. Liu et al.,
2020; Sadava et al., 2009)
2.2
Physical­Chemical Properties and Fate Processes
The physical­chemical properties of the investigated compounds will be used to explain
and demonstrate the involved removal mechanisms. In WWTPs the three main removal
processes of OMPs are: Volatilisation (depending on KH), sorption (depending on KOC,
Kow, pKa, and Kd), biotransformation and chemical transformation (Alvarino et al.,
2017; Baun et al., 2017; Suárez et al., 2008; Torresi, 2017; Verlicchi et al., 2013a).
6
Micropollutant removal from hospital wastewater by biofilm and membrane bioreactors
==PAGE:15==
2.2.1
Volatilisation and Sorption
Based on different physical­chemical properties such as polarity, solubility, vapour pres­
sure, molecular weight, acid dissociation constant (pKa), Henry’s Law constant (KH),
octanol­water partitioning constant (Kow), and the distribution constant between organic
carbon and water (Koc), a qualitative evaluation of the environmental fate concurrent to
the fate in wastewater treatment of OMPs can be made. Table 2.1 can be used to get
an overall idea of the inherent properties of a chemical and estimate if a neutral organic
compound will vaporise, adsorb and/or bioaccumulate and/or biodegrade. (Baun et al.,
2017; Mohiddin & Srinivasulu, 2022; Suárez et al., 2008; Verlicchi et al., 2013a)
Table 2.1: Table of chemical properties used to estimate the environmental fate of a com­
pound. The table is based on the book ”Environmental Risk Assessment of Chemicals”
provided in course 12237: Chemicals in the Environment by Baun et al. (2017), and Joss
et al. (2006), and Torresi (2017)
Inherent Property
Typical values
Interpretation
Henry’s law constant
KH
< 3 · 10−7
3 · 10−7 < KH < 10−5
10−5 < KH < 10−3
> 10−3
Less volatile than water
Slow rate of volatilisation
Significant rate of volatilisation
Volatile in water
Partitioning coefficient
between
octanol and water
Kow > 10, 000
logKow>4
Liphophillic and
potentially
bioaccumulative
Adsorption coefficient
Koc
0­50
50­150
150­500
500­2000
2000­5000
>5000
Very large mobility in soil
Large mobility in soil
Medium mobility in soil
Low mobility in soil
Very small mobility in soil
Immobile
Solid­liquid partitioning
Kd
Less than 10% sorbed
(Eq. 3.2, Section 3.4)
Sorption can be
neglected with respect to
biotransformation
The rate of volatilisation, is defined by Henry’s law constant, KH and describes the ten­
dency of a compound to leave the aqueous phase (Baun et al., 2017). Stripping of OMPs
in wastewater treatment is deemed negligible for compounds with a KH < 10−5 (Joss et
al., 2006).
Sorption can be determined for neutral compounds and solids with an organic carbon
content above 2% by the adsorption coefficient between organic carbon and water, Koc.
Low values of Koc indicate large mobility in soil, meaning less sorption with organic carbon
(Baun et al., 2017). Absorption is when OPMs moves from the water phase into a cell
or into the lipid fraction of sludge. It is driven by the hydrophobicity of the OMP. Hence,
absorption is mainly a pathway for small and lipophilic compounds (strong interaction
with sludge: logKow > 4, weak interaction with sludge: 2 < logKow < 4) (Suárez et
al., 2008). Adsorption is the case of an OMP adhered to any surface in the system
(biotic and abiotic). It can be an electrostatic interaction of cationic species (positively
charged OMPs) and biomass that are commonly negatively charged (Alvarino et al., 2017;
Suárez et al., 2008; Torresi, 2017). The solid­liquid distribution coefficient Kd describes
the equilibrium between sorbed OMPs to biomass and the dissolved concentration in
wastewater systems. The process is reversible, hence, both sorption and desorption
Micropollutant removal from hospital wastewater by biofilm and membrane bioreactors
7
==PAGE:16==
occur simultaneously, affecting the amount of bio­available OMPs in the water phase.
The equilibrium is reached rather fast, within 0.5­1 h in activated sludge (Falås, 2013;
Joss et al., 2006; Torresi, 2017).
Depending on pH, organic acids and bases can be on dissociated or non­dissociated
form, characterised by the acid dissociation constant, pKa. The ionisation happens in­
stantly as the equilibrium between neutral, anionic, cationic, and zwitterionic species is
reached. Anionic OMPs will have a negative charge, cationic a positive charge and zwitte­
rionic equal negative and positive charges. It is between the positive charge of OMPs and
the negatively charged surface of biomass that electrostatic interactions occur. (Alvarino
et al., 2017; Suárez et al., 2008; Torresi, 2017)
In Figure 2.1 the process of adsorption and absorption as described above is illustrated.
Figure 2.1: Illustration of adsorption and absorption. Adsorption is the adhesion of an
OMP to the biomass (including biofilm) or to the membrane of the MBR. Absorption is
when the OMP passes through a lipid membrane. An absorbed OMP will be inside the
lipid fraction of biomass or the cell of a microbe.
2.2.2
Abiotic and Biotic Transformation
Some of the compounds will undergo abiotic transformation processes or biotic trans­
formation in which they change the chemical structure and thereby behaviour/fate in the
environment. The degradation can be complete mineralisation, resulting in CO2, H2O,
and inorganic salts. If the degradation is incomplete, metabolites will occur. The metabo­
lites often have a greater water solubility, but can be more or less hazardous to the en­
vironment than the mother compound. (Baun et al., 2017; Carballa et al., 2004; Torresi,
2017)
Abiotic Transformation
The most important abiotic transformation processes are hydrolysis, and photolysis
(Ahtisham & Iqbal, 2022; Baun et al., 2017). Hydrolysis is the chemical reaction be­
8
Micropollutant removal from hospital wastewater by biofilm and membrane bioreactors
==PAGE:17==
tween the compound and water. Hydrolysis is pH­dependent and some functional groups
are often inert to hydrolysis: Alcohols, alkanes, alkenes, benzenes, biohenyles, certain
esters, polycyclic aromatics, and ketones. Photolysis is the direct decomposition of a
compound with the absorption of light as the first step. The process is depending on
different environmental factors and the structure of a compound along with its ability to
absorb light. However, photolysis and chemical hydrolysis are deemed insignificant in
the removal of pharmaceuticals in wastewater (Torresi, 2017). (Ahtisham & Iqbal, 2022;
Baun et al., 2017)
Figure 2.2: Figure illustrating the biotransformation processes. The microbes produce en­
zymes to release energy used for maintenance and growth. Cometabolism is the break­
down of similar compounds by enzymes, resulting in no growth or energy for the microbes.
Biotransformation results in the OMPs being completely mineralised, partially mineralised,
or intact (recalcitrant compounds) (Alvarino et al., 2017)
Biotic transformation
Biotic transformation is the degradation of substances related to microbial activity. Metabolic
biotransformation is the degradation of substances due to enzymatic activity resulting
in energy released for growth and maintenance in the biomass. Cometabolic biotrans­
formation is the degradation of non­growth substances. It is assumed that during the
elimination of organic carbon, nitrogen, and phosphorus, OMPs are cometabolically bio­
transformed. (Carballa et al., 2022; Kennes­Veiga et al., 2022; Reif et al., 2013)
The compounds taken up and used by the microbes are controlled by absorption, hence
the ability to move across the cell membrane limits the uptake. To accommodate this,
extracellular enzymes are used to hydrolyse bigger compounds into smaller compounds.
The intracellular enzymes can further break down the compounds resulting in either min­
eralisation or metabolites. It is common to detect increasing concentrations of metabolites
in the WWTP effluent due to microbial degradation (UNESCO & HELCOM, 2017). In Fig­
ure 2.2 the main mechanisms of biotransformation as described above are illustrated.
(Alvarino et al., 2017; Kennes­Veiga et al., 2022; Reif et al., 2013; Valverde­Pérez &
Vezzaro, 2022)
Nitrification
During nitrification, ammonium (NH+
4 ) is first oxidised to hydroxyl­amine (NH2OH) by
AOB and the enzyme ammonia monooxygenase (AMO). NH2OH is then oxidised to nitrite
Micropollutant removal from hospital wastewater by biofilm and membrane bioreactors
9
==PAGE:18==
(NO−
2 ) by the enzyme hydroxylamine oxireductase (HAO). This process is called nitritation
and is also carried out by ammonia­oxidising archaea (AOA) and complete ammonia­
oxidising bacteria (ComAOB). (Su et al., 2021; Torresi, 2017) NO−
2 is oxidised to ni­
trate (NO−
3 ) by nitrite­oxidising bacteria (NOB) and the enzyme nitrite oxireductase (NXR)
through the processes nitratation. The bacteria responsible for nitrification (AOB, AOA,
ComAOB, and NOB) are all chemolithoautotrophs using inorganic carbon for biomass
synthesis and one of the respective nitrogen species for oxidation (energy). (Su et al.,
2021; Torresi, 2017)
Denitrification
During denitrification, nitrate or nitrite are reduced to dinitrogen (N2) and thereby re­
moved from the water phase. The process of complete denitrification is divided into four
steps. First nitrate is reduced to nitrite catalysed by the enzyme nitrate reductase (NAR).
Then nitrite is reduced to nitric oxide (NO by nitric oxide reductase (NOR). Thirdly, ni­
tric oxide is reduced to nitrous oxide N2O by NOR. And lastly, nitrous oxide is reduced
to nitrogen gas by the enzyme nitrous oxide reductase (NOS). Denitrification is carried
out during anoxic conditions by heterotrophic bacteria utilising a range of biodegradable
organic carbon sources.
Cometabolic OMP biotransformation
The enzymes are not completely specific, hence they can bind and transform compounds
similar to the target substrate resulting in cometabolism. Su et al. (2021) coupled the
nitrification rates (in presence of AOB and AMO) of different biomass to the degrada­
tion rates of different OMPs.
Su et al. (2021) concluded that the main driver for the
cometabolism of OMPs in wastewater treatment is the ammonia­oxidising bacteria (AOB).
This biotransformation is a result of the direct reactions catalysed by AMO, and indirectly
by abiotic transformation due to the production of reactive nitrogen species (hydrolysis).
Polesel et al. (2017) found a correlation between denitrification rates and degradation
rates of OMPs. Similarly Alvarino et al. (2017) states that, due to the different chemi­
cal structures of OMPs and their respective oxidative or reductive pathways, integrating
different redox potentials enhances the removal efficiencies. Casas et al. (2015) linked
biotransformation of OMPs with nitrogen and chemical oxygen demand (COD) removal,
indicating cometabolic OMP removal. According to Kennes­Veiga et al. (2022), OMPs are
only proven to be metabolised by heterotrophs and at higher concentrations than typically
found in wastewater. Cometabolism and metabolism might coexist, be interrelated and
substitutable. Due to the complexity of the microbial community and metabolic network,
a clear distinction between the metabolic pathways is hard to obtain (Kennes­Veiga et al.,
2022).
Conjugation
Another common chemical transformation, deconjugation, also occurs for some OMPs in
bioreactors. Some pharmaceuticals are transformed in the patients e.g. by conjugation,
others are designed to be excreted without transformation. Conjugation occurs primarily
in the liver, where the compound is made water soluble by adding a functional group. The
compound is therefore no longer detectable. However, in the WWTP the compound can
deconjugate, where the functional group is removed enabling detection of the compound
again. This happens in the activated sludge by the β­glucuronidase enzyme secreted by
E. coli. In Figure 2.2 this process is illustrated by adding an extra functional group to
the ”big­sized” OMP (lower right corner). (Nielsen, 2016; Su et al., 2021; Torresi, 2017;
UNESCO & HELCOM, 2017)
10
Micropollutant removal from hospital wastewater by biofilm and membrane bioreactors
==PAGE:19==
2.3
OMP removal in Waste Water Treatment
In this section, the conventional WWTPs will be presented to take stock of the current
technology. Furthermore, the theory behind MBR which is the main technology inves­
tigated along with activated sludge and moving bed bioreactors will be presented. To
understand how to optimise and adapt the treatment of wastewater containing OMPs, a
small overview of how conventional WWTPs work is given in Appendix A.
2.3.1
Conventional Activated Sludge (CAS)
In the secondary treatment of conventional WWTPs, CAS is the most common biomass
used. The biomass is held in suspension in mixed tanks, called bioreactors, followed by a
secondary clarifier retaining the biomass and controlling the SRT. Multiple compartments
of bioreactors can be run aerobic, anoxic, and anaerobic enabling C, N, and P removal.
Organic compounds (lipids, proteins, carbohydrates, and some micropollutants) biode­
grade by anabolic and catabolic reactions resulting in the development and growth of the
biomass. It is in this type of biomass cometabolic (and metabolic) biotransformation of
OMPs is observed and investigated. As already stated in the introduction and in Section
2.1.2 and 2.1.3 the removal of OMPs by conventional sludge is inadequate.
Many different types of biomass and biological treatment strategies are invented and in­
vestigated. MBRs, and MBBRs can substitute the activated sludge and operate at higher
biomass concentrations allowing treatment of higher loads. In this type of biological treat­
ment, the microorganisms can grow in flocs as CAS, or on different types of support
material (membrane or carriers) to form biofilms (Torresi, 2017).
2.3.2
Physical­Chemical Treatment Strategies
When the biological treatment is insufficient, physical­chemical strategies can be imple­
mented (such as the chemical precipitation of phosphate in the secondary sedimentation
of conventional wastewater treatment, see Appendix A) (Goswami et al., 2018).
Coagulation & Flocculation:
By making use of coagulation and flocculation adsorption is improved. By adding a co­
agulant, the particles are positively charged thus improving adsorption to the negatively
charged biomass. The addition of flocculant results in larger particles (flocs) increasing
the sorption due to larger surface area. This type of treatment is generally suited for
hydrophobic compounds. Investigating the Kow of hydrophobic OMPs, the tendency of
sorption can be determined. However, compounds with low sorption potential (low Kd
and Kow) will not be retained and other treatment strategies are necessary. (Alvarino et
al., 2017; Goswami et al., 2018; Valverde­Pérez & Vezzaro, 2022)
Activated Carbon and Advanced Oxidation Processes
OMPs with low affinity to sorb to sludge may have a high affinity to other sorption agents
such as activated carbon (Alvarino et al., 2017). Activated carbon comes in many con­
formations with different potentials, e.g. granular, powdered, pellets. In activated carbon
the OMPs are removed by diffusion; the smaller the activated carbon particles, the larger
the surface area, yielding a lower diffusion resistance. Diclofenac and trimethoprim can
be removed from the water phase effectively with activated carbon. During advanced oxi­
dation processes, chemical oxidation results in complete mineralisation or transformation
to less toxic forms. The most effective oxidation process is the generation of hydroxyl
radicals. A well­known chemical oxidation treatment is ozone treatment, which is more
effective during low COD concentrations, hence it is commonly applied as a polishing step
(Casas et al., 2015; Nielsen, 2016). (Alvarino et al., 2017; Goswami et al., 2018)
Micropollutant removal from hospital wastewater by biofilm and membrane bioreactors
11
==PAGE:20==
2.3.3
Biological Treatment Strategies
The removal of OMPs in biological treatment depends on a large set of factors. Bioavail­
ability, the microbial community, contact time (hydraulic retention time (HRT)), the chem­
ical structure of the OMP, and applied redox conditions are among the most important
factors influencing transformation (Alvarino et al., 2017; Goswami et al., 2018; Torresi,
2017). However, during the biological treatment, abiotic processes are still taking place,
as discussed in Section 2.2.2. Higher cometabolic biotransformation rates are expected
with increased primary substrate loading rates. However, starvation has also led to im­
proved biotransformation (Kennes­Veiga et al., 2022). Tran et al. (2009) found that a
supplement of ammonium and organic substrates enhanced the OMP removal in an en­
riched nitrifying culture. Similarly, Polesel et al. (2017) found increased removal rates with
increasing organic substrate availability.
Sorption to Different types of Biomass
The mass transfer between OMPs and microorganisms is determined by the type and size
distribution of the biomass. In general, sorption enhanced with decreasing size, due to the
increase of surface area. Reactors operating at higher biomass concentrations will also
increase the sorption. As already mentioned the pH affects the sorption of OMPs due to
the electrostatic interactions between charged OMPs and biomass. Higher contact times
(HRT) increase the absorption of lipophilic OMPs. (Alvarino et al., 2017)
The sorption on biofilm differs from suspended biomass.
Because biofilms are con­
structed by extracellular polymeric substances (EPS) the sorption will differ from direct
interaction with biomass cells. The differences are characterised by decreasing interac­
tion with lipophilic OMPs (logKow > 4), and increasing electrostatic interactions with both
cationic and anionic functional groups. The electrostatic interactions between cationic
OMPs and biomass, high porosity and surface area available are the most important fac­
tors for improved sorption to biofilms. (Alvarino et al., 2017; Torresi et al., 2017)
2.3.4
Membrane Bioreactors, Moving Bed Bioreactors and Integrated
Fixed­film Activated Sludge Bioreactors
MBRs were developed commercially in the late 1960s by the Dorr­Oliver research pro­
gram. The MBR represents a combination of filtration and bioreactors and results in a
clear and reasonable disinfected effluent depending on the pore size. The filtration can
happen in different regimes: Microfiltration 0.1­1 μm (MF), Ultrafiltration 0.01­0.1 μm (UF),
nanofiltration 1­2 nm (NF), reverse osmosis <1 nm (RO), (and forward­ osmosis (FO)).
MF and UF are usually used in MBRs for wastewater treatment.
The membranes can be placed either outside the activated sludge reactor, or it can be
submerged. Submerged MBRs are most viable to implement in WWTPs, as they require
a lower pressure. And the aeration and prevention of fouling are merged by releasing
bubbles against the membrane. The technology is deemed useful for upgrading outdated
facilities, by increasing treatment capacity without demanding extra land. The membranes
are made from different types of materials, with different properties, such as whether it is
hydrophobic or hydrophilic, and if it has chemical and/or temperature resistance (making
it possible to use aggressive cleaning and disinfection). (Al­Asheh et al., 2021; Alvarino
et al., 2017; Led et al., 2021; Reif et al., 2013)
Moving bed bioreactors (MBBRs) were invented by Halvard Odegaard in Trondheim in
the late 1980s and were patented in 1996. It is commonly used to remove organic com­
pounds and nitrogen and phosphorus, but it has been discovered that they also remove
other pollutants in the water. MBBRs are used to treat drinking water, household wastew­
ater as well as industrial wastewater. The MBBRs are commonly used as a polishing step
12
Micropollutant removal from hospital wastewater by biofilm and membrane bioreactors
==PAGE:21==
and are often combined with advanced oxidation technologies. The use of advanced ox­
idation increased the removal efficiencies along with a decrease in the operational costs.
(Led et al., 2021)
MBR integrated systems represents a broad range of different combinations of treatment
strategies. One of these combinations is the biofilm MBR, or the IFAS­MBR. Hybas™is
the name of the AnoxKaldnes IFAS system. The carriers used in this system are the same
as the ones used in MBBR treatment. In the system, the suspended solid concentration
is minimised, the microbial activity is improved, and the fouling of membranes is reduced.
(Goswami et al., 2018)
Removal of OMPs using MBR and IFAS­MBR
The removal of OMPs in MBR biomass and IFAS­MBR biomass follows the same pro­
cesses as already described in Section 2.2 above. However, physical retention by the
membrane (size exclusion is only relevant for nanofiltration and reverse osmosis mem­
branes) and interaction with the cake layer formed on the membrane surface is added.
The removal of OMPs using MBR and MBR integrated systems is influenced by various
factors including microbial community, the structure of the microbes, microbial activity,
and operational conditions. (Alvarino et al., 2017; Goswami et al., 2018)
In MBRs, absorption and adsorption can take place on the suspended biomass, on the
membrane surface, and in the cake layer on top of the membrane. For charged and
hydrophobic membranes sorption processes can occur in and on the membrane. Fur­
thermore, there will build up a ”cake layer”/biofilm on top of the membranes of the MBR.
This will lead to a smaller effective pose size than provided by the membrane itself result­
ing in a physical retention of particles along with sorption to biofilm. (Alvarino et al., 2017;
Goswami et al., 2018)
The overall OMP removal efficiency for MBRs is better for endocrine disrupting com­
pounds followed by beta blockers which are followed by pharmaceutical compounds fol­
lowed by pesticides (Goswami et al., 2018).
2.4
Selection of indicator micropollutants
Generally, the OMPs have been chosen to have different physical­chemical properties
with molecular weights in the range of 119­749 g/mol, logKOW 0.16­4.02, and different
expectations of biodegradability and sorption processes, as seen in Table 2.3.
The OMPs are chosen to have different inherent physical­chemical properties based
on Table 2.1. It is seen in Table 2.3 that there are five types of pharmaceuticals: An
analgesic, four antibiotics, one anti­corrosion, one antidepressant and one beta­blocking
agent. The structure and size (mass) of the compounds are very different from the small­
est 1H­benzotriazole to the largest azithromycin. The physical­chemical properties of the
compounds will be used to evaluate if the OMP is degraded due to sorption processes or
biotransformation. In the cases where Kd­values are missing the Koc­values and logKow­
values can be used to estimate sorption. 1H­benzotriazole and iomeprol are not lipophilic
and sorption in soil is very unlikely, hence absorption and adsorption in sludge are not
expected for these compounds. Nielsen (2016) found in 2012/2013 that the yearly use of
iodinated contrast media in Herlev Hospital was 900 kg. In the HWW approx. 82% (739
kg/y) of the iodinated contrast media was measured. Iomeprol was the contrast media
found with the highest concentration in this thesis.
In the literature review by Tranekær et al. (2021) a set of possible focus compounds in a
Danish context was proposed. Of these azithromycin, diclofenac, and venlafaxine were
Micropollutant removal from hospital wastewater by biofilm and membrane bioreactors
13
==PAGE:22==
Figure 2.3:
Chosen OMPs under investigation in this master thesis ­ which will be
changed. In Kovalova et al. (2012b) a literature review including charge, Kd, kbio­values
for all OMPs. No Kd­values were found for 1H­benzotriazole and iomeprol.
found to have concentrations above PNEC values in the outflow from hospitals, for ven­
lafaxine there are detected negative environmental effects. In the same study, it is pointed
out that 1H­benzotriazole, diclofenac, and venlafaxine are used in Schwitzerland as in­
dicator compounds. A Swedish stakeholder has also pointed towards ciprofloxacin, sul­
famethoxazole, and trimethoprim as indicator compounds (UNESCO & HELCOM, 2017).
Sulfamethoxazole and venlafaxine are currently on the EU watchlist (European Commis­
sion, 2022). In the PRESAGE project ciprofloxacin, sulfamethoxazole and trimethoprim
are chosen as focus compounds (Omil et al., 2020).
14
Micropollutant removal from hospital wastewater by biofilm and membrane bioreactors
==PAGE:23==
3
Materials and Methods
In this section the experimental set­up and the materials used are described. The section
contains:
• Description of the four pilot scale reactors at Herlev hospital.
• The experimental set­up and procedure for the batch reactors at DTU sustain.
• Description of the conducted sample preparation, analysis and measurements.
• Description of relevant equations and calculations.
3.1
PRESAGE Pilot Reactors at Herlev Hospital
Herlev Hospital is one of the largest hospitals in Denmark with 425,000 citizens affiliated,
around 600 employees, and 670,000 yearly ambulant patients (Herlev kommune, 2019;
Lindberg, 2022). The treatment unit on the hospital area is cleaning the wastewater with
state of the art cleaning methods. The plant was built in 2013­2014 and has been running
since May 2014 (Herlev kommune, 2019). The plant is dimensioned to treat an average
inflow of 500 cubic metres per day and consists of a primary treatment step; a 1.5 mm
belt screen facility, a secondary treatment step; an MBR stage with two parallel biolog­
ical process tanks follow by ceramic membranes with a pore size of 0.2 μm. The SRT
for the MBR stage is estimated to 30 days. Phosphorous is removed with addition of an
aluminium coagulant, polyaluminium chloride, before the membrane filter units. Further­
more, the treatment facility has a polishing step consisting of two parallel lines with ozone,
granular activated carbon (GAC) and ultraviolet (UV) treatment (Nielsen, 2016).
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.1: Sketch of the experimental set­up placed in the wastewater treatment unit
of Herlev Hospital. a) Bioreactor 1: IFAS, MBR, and MBBR, b) Bioreactor 2: MBR and
MBBR. The MBRs are polypropylene 0.2 μm flat sheet membrane, carriers used in the
IFAS­MBR and the MBBRs are K5 AnoxKaldnesTM. The sampling locations are marked
with red stars, 1­5 for Bioreactor 1, and A­E for Bioreactor 2.
Inside the wastewater treatment facility (WWTF) in Herlev, four pilot­scale reactors are
Micropollutant removal from hospital wastewater by biofilm and membrane bioreactors
15
==PAGE:24==
installed in two series called: Bioreactor 1 and Bioreactor 2. The reactors treat the HWW
after the 1.5 mm screening facility and a small settling tank. The four reactors conduct two
different treatment strategies: i) an integrated fixed film activated sludge (IFAS/HYBASTM)
reactor combined with an MBR followed by a polishing MBBR, see Figure 3.1a, and ii) an
MBR followed by a polishing MBBR, see Figure 3.1b.
The MBRs are a polypropylene 0.2 μm flat sheet membrane from Alfa Laval, with an
optimal total suspended solids (TSS) range of 3 to 14 g/L. Operated with a sequence
of 10 min filtration, 2 min relaxation, and 10­sec backwashing. The carriers used in the
IFAS/HYBASTM and the MBBRs are K5 AnoxKaldnesTM (AnoxKaldnes, Lund, Sweden).
To control the SRT, a fixed volume is wasted through the drain at the bottom of the MBR
reactors.
The pumping sequence is controlled by an online monitoring program which turns off the
inlet pump if the water level is high in the MBR tanks, and turns off the permeate pump if
the water level is low in the MBR tanks. To mitigate membrane fouling the MBR is aerated
with coarse bubbles. The MBBR polishing pilots are aerated and thereby well mixed.
The pilot reactors were installed December 2023 and seeded with sludge from the biolog­
ical treatment of the wastewater treatment unit of Herlev Hospital. The TSS was aimed to
be around 10 g/L, the HRT set to 2 days (Volume 400 L and flow 138 mL/min). The SRT
was set to 30 days starting from the 24th of March.
3.2
Batch experiments
In late March 2023, four batch experiments were conducted in order to investigate the
biological activity of the MBBR carriers. Late April and start May additionally nine batch
experiments were conducted to investigate the biological activity of the IFAS Sludge, IFAS
Carriers and MBR Sludge. In this section the set­up and experimental procedures are
described.
The 13 batches are described in Table 3.1. To investigate and discuss the biological ac­
tivity of the biofilm on the carriers found in the polishing MBBRs, two different conditions
were tested: i) Aerated and ii) non­aerated with addition of KNO3, resulting in four exper­
iments in total (Table 3.1). In addition, to investigate and discuss the biological activity
of the biofilm on the IFAS Carriers and the sludge of the IFAS and MBR, three different
conditions were tested: i) Aerated, ii) N2 sparged with the addition of KNO3, and iii) Aer­
ated with ATU to suppress nitrifying activity resulting in nine experiments in total (Table
3.1). These conditions were chosen to follow the removal of pharmaceuticals along with
nitrification and denitrification. Due to the natural fluctuations of the HWW content and
the assumption not all compounds are always used, the batches were spiked with the
OMPs of interest. The spiking should result in an initial concentration of 10 μg/L beyond
background concentrations (Burzio et al., 2022; Escolà Casas et al., 2015).
3.2.1
Procedure
Biomass was collected in Herlev from sampling locations 2 and 4 in Figure 3.1a and B
and D in Figure 3.1b the day before the execution of the 24­h batch experiment. HWW
was collected after 1.5 mm screening and used as feed. The biomass was stored at room
temperature, the HWW was stored at 5°C for the MBBR experiments and at 15°C for
the IFAS and MBR experiments, respectively. The set­up just before the sampling has
started is seen in Figure 3.2. In Appendix B.3 a thorough description and explanation
of the experimental set­up is found. The methanol solutions of pharmaceuticals were
measured out and left in a fume­hood for approximately 40 min to evaporate to avoid
the addition of organic carbon similar to Burzio et al., 2022; Torresi et al., 2016. The
16
Micropollutant removal from hospital wastewater by biofilm and membrane bioreactors
==PAGE:25==
Table 3.1: Data from 13 batch experiments conducted on MBBR carriers March­May
2023. The first four experiments (1.1, 1.2, 2.1, and 2.2) were run with starting tempera­
tures around 10°C, and without N2 sparging. The latter nine had a starting temperature
around 17­20°C, and the anoxic were sparged with N2, and KNO3 was used as a nitrate
source. pH was kept between 7 and 9 with 1M HCl.
Biomass
Filling ratio
HWW
[L]
Redox Condition
Oxygen Level
[mg/L]
ID
MBBR 1
50%
167 Carriers/L
1.7
Aerobic
8­10
1.1
Anoxic
0.02­4
1.2
MBBR 2
50%
167 Carriers/L
1.7
Aerobic
8­11
2.1
Anoxic
0.01­7
2.2
IFAS Sludge
0.4L
1.6
Aerobic
6­9
3.1
Anoxic
0.01­4
3.2
Aerobic
AOB supressed
6­9
3.3
IFAS Carriers
20%
134 Carriers/L
1.8
Aerobic
6­9
4.1
Anoxic
0.01­2
4.2
Aerobic
AOB supressed
7­9
4.3
MBR Sludge
0.4 L
1.6
Aerobic
2­9
5.1
Anoxic
0.02­0.09
5.2
Aerobic
AOB supressed
3­9
5.3
HWW is aerated with aquarium pumps or sparged with N2 gas. The amount of KNO3 was
estimated from the total COD in the inlet. Using 2.86
gN
gCOD = mgNO3 −N to ensure
excess concentrations of nitrate to ensure full biological oxygen demand (BOD) removal
via denitrification (Valverde­Pérez & Vezzaro, 2022). Other studies added KNO3 to start
concentrations of 100­104 mgNO3 −N/L (Polesel et al., 2017) and 15 mgNO3 −N/L
(Burzio et al., 2022). ATU was added to a concentration of 10 mg/L (Elad et al., 2023;
B. Liu et al., 2018; Torresi et al., 2016; Torresi et al., 2017).
The starting point of the 24­h sampling is the addition of biomass (Figure 3.2). 10 Sam­
ples for OMP, nutrient and dissolved organic carbon (DOC) analysis were collected at
different intervals, the sampling schemes are found in Appendix B.3.2. To retain a con­
stant concentration of biomass, carriers were removed accordingly during the sampling
(Torresi et al., 2016). See Appendix B.3 for more information.
3.3
Analysis
In the following a short description of the analyses are given as well as the reference
literature, where more details are found.
Nutrient samples are filtered by 0.2 μm nylon filters (Agilent Technologies, Germany)
and diluted 1:5 with Milli­Q water to a total volume of 6 mL. The samples are stored at
4°C. The analysis was conducted with an automated wet chemistry analyser (continuous
flow analyser), San++ Classic, Skalar Analytical B.V., The Netherlands. The analysis
is based on chemical reactions occurring between the samples and reagents, and the
concentration of the analysed nutrients is determined by colorimetry. DOC samples are
filtered by 0.2 μm nylon filters (Agilent) and diluted 1:3 with Milli­Q water to a total volume
Micropollutant removal from hospital wastewater by biofilm and membrane bioreactors
17
==PAGE:26==
Figure 3.2: Picture of the set­up just before the beginning of the MBR sludge experiments.
The sludge is made ready in 2 L beakers next to their respective 5 L beaker aerated with
fish pumps or sparged with N2. KNO3 is added to the HWW and mixed well
of 15 mL. Samples are stored at 4°C and analysed.
TSS, volatile suspended solids (VSS) and attached biomass concentrations. The
attached biomass concentration was analysed in accordance to Torresi et al., 2016 and
Burzio et al., 2022 by weighing the dried carriers which are then cleaned, dried and
weighed again. For TSS duplicates of 5 mL samples are run through a 47 mm glass
fibre filter (WhatmanTM) filters and left in the oven for approximately 1.5 h and then in the
desiccator for approximately 20 min before weighing and calculating of TSS. The filters
are then inserted into the high­temperature oven overnight, then cooled in the desiccator
and weighed to find VSS.
HPLC­MS/MS (High Performance Liquid Chromatography­Mass Spectrometry) samples
comprised of 5 mL sample from the batches and 1.3 mL methanol was filtered with 0.2
μm PTFE filters (Agilent Technologies, Germany) into 2 mL, 9 mm clear glass vials with
a screw top (Mikrolab, Aarhus, Denmark). From these 0.99 μL sample and 0.01 μL in­
ternal standard were pipetted into brown glass vials with a screw top (Mikrolab, Aarhus,
Denmark) and mixed well. The OMP analysis was carried out with an HPLC from Agi­
lent (1290 Infinity II Model) with double mass spectrometry (MS/MS). A ZORBAX Eclipse
Plus column (Agilent) with a C18 alkane stationary phase, inner diameter of 2.1 mm and
column length of 1.8 µm, conducted the separation of compounds.
3.4
Calculations
The data from the HPLC MS/MS analysis were treated in Agilent MassHunter software to
fit the results to the calibration curve produced by an internal standard sequence. Here­
after the data was treated in GraphPad Prism 9 in which nonlinear fits (according to Eq.
?? were made resulting in a set of kbio­values for each of the investigated compounds
and the respective biomass and batch condition. (Tang et al., 2017a)
Joss et al. (2006) investigated the biological degradation of 25 OMPs in batch experi­
18
Micropollutant removal from hospital wastewater by biofilm and membrane bioreactors
==PAGE:27==
ments and observed pseudo­first­order degradation kinetics for all of them. The biological
degradation of OMPs was classified as:
• kbio < 0.1
L
gss · d: No substantial degradation <20% reduction.
• 0.1
L
gss · d < kbio < 10
L
gss · d: Partial removal between 20% and 90%.
• kbio > 10
L
gss · d: More than 90% removal by biological degradation. The specific
degradation efficiency is strongly dependent on reactor configuration.
This thesis will use the same classification in the assessment of obtained kbio values found
from the observed pseudo­first­order degradation kinetics:
dCi
dt =
−kbio
(1 + Kd · XSS) · Ci · XSS
(3.1)
Where kbio is the biotransformation rate in
L
gTSS·d, XSS is the biomass concentration in gTSS
L ,
Kd the solid liquid partitioning coefficient in L
g, and Ci the concentration of OMP in µg/L.
The solid liquid partitioning coefficient, Kd is defined for equilibrium:
Kd =
X
XSS · S
(3.2)
Where S is the soluble OMP concentration in µg/L and X the sorbed OMP concentration
in µg/L. (Joss et al., 2006)
The nitrification rate is based on the removal of NH+
4 which is the first step of nitrification
as described in Section 2.2.2. The denitrification rate is based on the removal of total
nitrogen (TN) which is assumed to be caused by degassed N2. Similarly, the removal
rate of phosphorus is also calculated for the batch experiments.
Removalrate
[
mgsubstrate
gbiomass · hour
]
=
Cstart −Cend
biomass · time
(3.3)
Removal efficiencies are calculated as the removal in per cent
Removal% = Cinitial −Cend
Cinitial
· 100
(3.4)
An estimate of the combined removal for IFAS is calculated based on the filling ratio,
which is 20% Carriers and 80% Sludge as in Eq. 3.5. The true combined effect is possibly
different and must be further examined.
IFAS = 0.8 · IFASSludge + 0.2 · IFASCarriers
(3.5)
So the combined kbio­values are calculated as:
kbio,IFAS = 0.8 · kbio,IFASSludge + 0.2 · kbio,IFASCarriers
(3.6)
To determine if there is a statistically significant difference between two sets of results
statistical tests are conducted. The tests that will be used in this report are a paired t­test
comparing conditions within the same type of biomass and a two­sample t­test, comparing
Micropollutant removal from hospital wastewater by biofilm and membrane bioreactors
19
==PAGE:28==
the individual groups with similar conditions. To conduct the t­test it must be assumed that
the data is normally distributed, due to the lack of replicates.
The t­test is made in ExcelTM, where the P­values are calculated. The null hypothesis
states that there is no difference between the two groups that have been compared. This
hypothesis is rejected if the P­value is below 0.05 choosing a significance level of 5%.
The P­value is 2­tailed because the mean in the one group could be smaller than the
mean of the group it is compared to. These statistical tests are only used as a guideline
for the interpretation of the results because of the small sample size. The risk of type I
and II errors is not evaluated.
Other statistical measures are the R2­values, and 95% confidence intervals obtained from
the fitting of kbio­values in GraphPad Prism 9. These are used to evaluate the credibility
of the obtained values.
20
Micropollutant removal from hospital wastewater by biofilm and membrane bioreactors
==PAGE:29==
4
Results and Discussion
As stated in Section 1.2, this thesis aims to evaluate the removal of OMPs of the four
pilot reactors, with the associated 5 types of biomass. In this section, the results from the
batch experiments will be presented with respect to the aim and hypothesis of this thesis.
The results, possible biotransformation pathways, and comparison to other studies will
continually be discussed and evaluated. However, the results will be presented with the
following structure:
• Biomass characteristics: Biomass concentration, rate of nitrification and denitrifica­
tion.
• Evaluation of separation between sorption and biotransformation processes.
• Evaluation of possible comparisons between different OMPs, types of biomass, and
conditions.
• Acceptance or rejection of the four hypotheses.
• Sources of error, limitations and credibility of the results.
• Outlook
4.1
Biomass Characteristics, Nitrification, and Denitrification
In the following, a general presentation of the performance of the 5 types of biomass will
be made. In Table 4.1 the initial concentrations of biomass and macronutrients are shown.
This concentration is the initial mix of HWW and biomass collected from the pilot reactors
in Herlev and used to normalise removal rates to biomass. In Figure 4.1, the change in
concentration with time for the different nitrogen species is shown to investigate nitrifi­
cation and denitrification processes. In Table C.1 (Appendix C.1) the rate of phosphate,
PO3−
4 , ammonium, NH+
4 , and TN in the batch experiments are given. The removal rates of
nitrification and denitrification are later used to couple the OMPs removal to the respective
processes.
In Table 4.1, the starting conditions of the batches are listed. The batches using the same
HWW as feed are written in the same formatting. From the table, it can be seen that the
HWW varies with respect to DOC, TSS, ammonia, and phosphate concentrations. The
bold value highlighted in IFAS Sludge represents a very high TSS from the HWW (the
IFAS Sludge alone was only measured to be 1.23 g/L, this high concentration of biomass
in the batch originated from the HWW used, with a TSS of 7.80 g/L). It is seen that the
amount of MBR Sludge was significantly higher than the other batches except for the
anoxic IFAS Sludge. However, this high concentration of biomass originated from the
MBR sludge, which was very thick in the MBR pilot reactor on the sampling day. During
all the MBR experiments, the same hospital inlet water was used, with a TSS of 0.33 g/L.
The bold values in Table 4.1 for NOx were measured a month after the batch experiments.
Approximately 3 g KNO3 was added hence the actual amount of NOx­N during the batch
is deemed higher. The highlighted value for DOC is measured after 20 min.
In the supplementary Excel file: DataTreatment.xlsx, all measures along with photos and
descriptions of the batch experiments are found. Other studies used a biomass concen­
tration of approximately 3 g/L (Burzio et al., 2022; Falås, 2013) and 0.51 g/L (Joss et al.,
2006) for similar types of batch experiments, hence in this study the TSS concentrations
for anoxic IFAS Sludge and all MBR Sludge batches are high. In Escolà Casas et al.
(2015) the total attached solids (TAS) was 2.4 g/L for K5 carriers (from a HYBASTM tank,
Micropollutant removal from hospital wastewater by biofilm and membrane bioreactors
21
==PAGE:30==
Table 4.1: Starting conditions in the different batch experiments. TAS for batches with
carriers, and initial TSS (biomass is a mix of sludge and HWW). The batches using the
same HWW as feed are written with similar formatting. It is observed the HWW used
as feed varies in DOC and TSS. The bold value highlighted in IFAS Sludge represents a
very high TSS from the HWW. The bold values for NOx were measured a month after the
batches were run, the true amount of NOx is deemed higher. The bold value for DOC is
measured after 20 min.
TSS/TAS
PO3−
4
NH+
4
NOx
DOC
Batch
Redox condition
Biomass
(g/L)
HWW
(g/L)
(mg­P/L)
(mg­N/L)
(mg­N/L)
(mg/L)
Oxic
2.16
1.55
6.2
31.5
1.7
78.8
Anoxic
6.48
7.80
9.1
25.8
52.2
27.0
IFAS
Sludge
Oxic AOB suppressed
1.61
­
10.0
42.6
1.5
76.7
Oxic
0.65
1.55
6.2
36.4
<1
101.6
Anoxic
0.71
7.80
7.0
23.9
47.0
34.3
IFAS
Carriers
Oxic AOB suppressed
0.93
­
10.7
49.0
1.2
107.3
Oxic
5.13
8.3
46.1
<1
129.2
Anoxic
4.30
8.2
49.5
22.5
114.2
MBR Sludge
Oxic AOB supressed
4.86
0.33
8.5
46.6
<1
138.9
Oxic
0.64
­
13.3
44.4
1.8
150.0
MBBR 1
Carriers
Anoxic
0.67
­
16.7
44.1
23.3
156.7
Oxic
0.48
­
4.6
35.2
1.5
1304.7
MBBR 2
Carriers
Anoxic
0.37
­
4.7
36.9
19.6
1247.4
50% filling ratio, HRT 3 hours) receiving HWW from an activated sludge tank. In a polish­
ing MBBR for the same set­up a TAS of 1 g/L was obtained. Similar TAS for K5 carriers is
found in Casas et al. (2015), of 3.1 g/L for MBBR and 0.5 g/L for polishing MBBR. Torresi
et al. (2017) used TAS of 0.8 g/L for three types of Z carriers in nitrifying MBBRs (HRT 2
hours). It is deemed that the similar HRT and set­up are comparable to this study. From
this comparison, it is assessed that the biomass on the carriers used in this thesis is low
even when taking the different filling ratios into account.
The IFAS Carriers achieved a removal rate of 2.28 mgNH+
4 −N
gTSS·h
during oxic conditions, the
polishing MBBR 1 and 2 achieved a removal rate of 1.45 and 1.48 mgNH+
4 −N
gTSS·h
, respectively,
during oxic conditions (Table C.1, Appendix C.1). Hence the most active investigated
biomass with respect to nitrification are deemed the K5 carriers. Tran et al. (2009) es­
tablished a threshold for a low nitrifying activity to be < 5 mgNH+
4 −N
gTSS·h
. However, Burzio et
al. (2022) stated high nitrification rates of 0.86­0.96 mgNH+
4 −N
gTSS·h
. In Figure 4.1 the different
measured nitrogen species as a function of time is plotted for the 5 types of biomass and
during the 3 conditions. Here it is also observed that the IFAS Carriers are the most effec­
tive at converting ammonia into nitrate and most likely also perform some denitrification
during oxic conditions due to the features of the biofilm. The IFAS Carriers seemed to
transform all ammonia into nitrate. Looking at the formation of nitrate (0­30 mg/L) the
MBR Sludge seems to achieve a good nitrification rate. However, the rate is normalised
with biomass concentration, resulting in the low rate on 0.2 mgNH+
4 −N
gTSS·h
(Table C.1, Appendix
C.1). In Figure 4.1, it is seen that the addition of ATU clearly inhibited the AOBs as no
nitrite and nitrate are formed nor removed. Hence, the assumption that ATU can inhibit
nitrification is consistent with Torresi et al. (2016) and Tran et al. (2009).
With respect to the rate of denitrification, it is observed in Table C.1 that the IFAS Carriers
22
Micropollutant removal from hospital wastewater by biofilm and membrane bioreactors
==PAGE:31==
0:00:00
4:00:00
8:00:00
12:00:00
16:00:00
20:00:00
24:00:00
0
10
20
30
40
50
Oxic
Time(h)
Concentration (mg/L)
0:00:00
4:00:00
8:00:00
12:00:00
16:00:00
20:00:00
24:00:00
0
20
40
60
Anoxic
Time(h)
Concentration (mg/L)
0:00:00
4:00:00
8:00:00
12:00:00
16:00:00
20:00:00
24:00:00
35
40
45
50
55
ATU inhibited
Time(h)
Concentration (mg/L)
0:00:00
4:00:00
8:00:00
12:00:00
16:00:00
20:00:00
24:00:00
0.090
0.095
0.100
0.105
0.110
Oxic
Time(h)
Concentration (mg/L)
0:00:00
4:00:00
8:00:00
12:00:00
16:00:00
20:00:00
24:00:00
0
5
10
15
Anoxic
Time(h)
Concentration (mg/L)
0:00:00
4:00:00
8:00:00
12:00:00
16:00:00
20:00:00
24:00:00
0.090
0.095
0.100
0.105
0.110
ATU inhibited
Time(h)
Concentration (mg/L)
0:00:00
4:00:00
8:00:00
12:00:00
16:00:00
20:00:00
24:00:00
0
10
20
30
40
Oxic
Time(h)
Concentration (mg/L)
0:00:00
4:00:00
8:00:00
12:00:00
16:00:00
20:00:00
24:00:00
0
20
40
60
Anoxic
Time(h)
Concentration (mg/L)
0:00:00
4:00:00
8:00:00
12:00:00
16:00:00
20:00:00
24:00:00
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
ATU inhibited
Time(h)
Concentration (mg/L)
0:00:00
4:00:00
8:00:00
12:00:00
16:00:00
20:00:00
24:00:00
0
50
100
150
200
250
Oxic
Time(h)
Concentration (mg/L)
0:00:00
4:00:00
8:00:00
12:00:00
16:00:00
20:00:00
24:00:00
0
50
100
150
Anoxic
Time(h)
Concentration (mg/L)
0:00:00
4:00:00
8:00:00
12:00:00
16:00:00
20:00:00
24:00:00
30
40
50
60
70
ATU inhibited
Time(h)
Concentration (mg/L)
NH4
+
NO3
NO2
TN
IFAS Sludge
IFAS Carriers
MBR Sludge
MBBR 1
MBBR 2
Figure 4.1: Nitrogen performance of the batch experiment plotted as concentrations as a
function of time. Here it is seen, that the ATU with success inhibited nitrification as there
is no production of nitrite and almost no nitrate. The decrease of NH+
4 can be due to
heterotrophic activity. The decrease in TN indicates that some denitrification still occurs.
reach the highest rates of 8.75 and 3.44 mgTN−N
gTSS·h
during oxic conditions and anoxic condi­
tions, respectively. Similarly, the carriers from the polishing MBBR 2, reach 3.78 mgTN−N
gTSS·h
during anoxic conditions.
In Appendix C.1 Figure C.1 the removal of phosphate, ammonia and DOC is found. Rel­
atively high removal of phosphate was observed for all types of biomass during oxic and
anoxic conditions. This is also the case with DOC. In addition, in Appendix C.1 Figure
Micropollutant removal from hospital wastewater by biofilm and membrane bioreactors
23
==PAGE:32==
C.2, the removal in per cent for MBR and IFAS Sludge and Carriers is found.
Subconclusion on Biomass
From this, it can be concluded that the macronutrients are biotransformed in all types of
biomass. However, the highest nitrification and denitrification rate is found in the IFAS
Carriers. In addition, the MBBR Carriers showed good phosphate removal qualities. The
inhibition of AOB activity by ATU was successful, making the comparison of OMP removal
in the respective conditions possible. In the investigation of OMP removal, the different
concentrations of biomass especially in the MBR batches and the high TSS in the HWW
used during anoxic batches for IFAS Carriers and Sludge must be taken into account.
The TSS was in these batches deemed high compared to other studies. The TAS on the
carriers is deemed relatively low compared to other studies.
4.2
Investigation of OMP Removal
4.2.1
General OMP Removal Performance
The investigation of OMP removal in the five different biomass and during the three dif­
ferent conditions will be made in accordance with the hypotheses stated in Section 1.3.
The OMP removal was plotted as a function of time, and the kbio­values were obtained
for all batch experiments. It is deemed that kbio­values obtained with an R2<0.5 are inap­
propriate to describe the removal. The low R2­values can be explained by the scattered
nature of the results, which also increased the 95% confidence intervals of the kbio­values.
However, some of the low R2­values might be explained by no removal. This must be ex­
amined by looking at the change in concentration over time.
The experiments with the polishing MBBRs were the first to be executed and were mainly
used as training due to the difficulties in obtaining a smooth sampling and experimental
procedure. For MBBR 1 only three out of 18 kbio­values had an R2>0.5. For MBBR 2
seven out of 18 kbio­values had an R2>0.5. To avoid false conclusions based on poor
data sampling (mainly MBBR 1), the fact that the results of the MBBRs cannot be used to
compare ATU inhibition with OMP removal, and to simplify the discussion, the polishing
MBBRs are not included in the following.
As stated in Section 2.2.2, the two main pathways in the removal of OMPs in biological
wastewater treatment are sorption and biotransformation. To investigate the biotransfor­
mation pathway (hypotheses 1­3) and biomass performance (hypothesis 4) it is important
to be able to distinguish microbial removal from sorption.
Torresi et al. (2017) investigated sorption in biofilm. Electrostatic interactions between
positively charged OMPs and negatively charged biomass were suggested to play a ma­
jor role in sorption to biofilm. For atenolol and venlafaxine sorption was deemed a sig­
nificant removal pathway.
Hence, the positively charged compounds in this study (atenolol, azithromycin, trimetho­
prim and venlafaxine) are assumed to be removed by sorption mechanisms. Ciprofloxacin
is zwitterionic, its positively charged functional groups are expected to adsorb to the
biomass. The negatively charged 1H­benzotriazole, diclofenac and sulfamethoxazole can
be assumed based on this study to have negligible sorption (Section 2.4, Table 2.3). Joss
et al. (2006) neglected sorption for compounds with a Kd smaller than 10% (0.1 L/g). In
this study azithromycin was found to sorb with a Kd­value of 0.2 L/g. In Falås (2013)
sorption to TSS < 3 g/L was limited (<25%) for atenolol and sulfamethoxazole. However,
in this thesis, this assumption might not hold for the anoxic IFAS Sludge and Carriers and
MBR batches where the TSS was above 3 g/L.
24
Micropollutant removal from hospital wastewater by biofilm and membrane bioreactors
==PAGE:33==
In Falås (2013) and Torresi (2017) it is stated that sorption is a rapid mechanism, for which
equilibrium is reached within 30 min to 1 hour. In Falås (2013) the effect of desorption
during solid­water equilibrium and how it can lead to an underestimation of the actual kbio is
discussed. Likewise, OMPs with high Kd may lead to an overestimation (1+Kd · Xbiomass)
of the actual biological rate constants, according to Equation 3.1 and 3.2 presented in
Section 3.4.
Hence, for OMPs where no removal is observed for one condition, sorption can be deemed
negligible in the removal during other conditions, which is the case of 1H­benzotriazole
in anoxic MBR Sludge (Figure 4.2). On the contrary, compounds with a fast drop during
the first hour followed by slow removal might indicate fast initial removal by sorption. In
this case the kbio­value should have been defined by the change in concentration after
an hour, to avoid overestimation. The higher the Kd of the OMP or TSS of the batch
the higher the overestimation. Interestingly, this is also observed for 1H­benzotriazole in
IFAS Sludge (Figure 4.2. For 1H­benzotriazole no Kd­values were found, but based on
the physical­chemical properties it was deemed not to sorb (Section 2.4).
1H-Benzotriazole
0
4
8
12
16
20
24
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
IFAS Carriers
1H-Benzotriazole
0
4
8
12
16
20
24
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
IFAS Sludge
1H-Benzotriazole
0
4
8
12
16
20
24
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
MBR Sludge
Oxic
Oxic ATU Inhibited
Anoxic
Ct/C0
Time (h)
Time (h)
Time (h)
Ct/C0
Figure 4.2: Relative removal of 1H­Benzotrialzole for IFAS Carriers, IFAS Sludge and
MBR Sludge during the three different conditions. For IFAS Sludge a clear drop at the
beginning of the experiment is seen for the anoxic, indicating sorption. For the MBR
Sludge anoxic no removal is observed, hence sorption is negligible.
As sorption is related to biofilm and particle size (Alvarino et al., 2017; Torresi et al., 2017),
this observation is only valid when comparing conditions across one type of biomass, as
the Kd value changes from biomass to biomass. Furthermore, for carriers with thick biofilm
but 0.8 gTAS/L, sorption equilibria were first reached after 4 hours (Torresi et al., 2017).
As the thickness of biofilm on the carriers is not measured, sorption equilibria might be
slower in the batches with carriers. For 1H­benzotriazole (Figure 4.2) it is determined that
the anoxic IFAS Sludge batch shows sorption behaviour and that sorption processes in
MBR Sludge are negligible.
Another factor to investigate is the background concentrations found in the HWW used in
the batches. Torresi et al. (2016) found that the removal of iodinated x­ray compounds was
increased after approximately 230 days due to the fact that the microorganisms developed
Micropollutant removal from hospital wastewater by biofilm and membrane bioreactors
25
==PAGE:34==
a capability to degrade some OMPs during exposure. Hence, the biological removal might
be improved for compounds with high background concentrations (>10 µg/L from the spike
solution).
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
16
24
Ciprofloxacin
Time(h)
Ct/C0
IFAS Carriers
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
16
24
Ciprofloxacin
Time(h)
IFAS Sludge
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
16
24
Ciprofloxacin
Time(h)
Ct/C0
MBR Sludge
Oxic
Oxic ATU Inhibited
Anoxic
Figure 4.3: Relative removal of ciprofloxacin for IFAS Carriers, IFAS Sludge and MBR
Sludge during the three different conditions.
In Figure 4.3, the processes at the beginning of the experiments are enhanced by scaling
the x­axis. This is made because an increase in the concentration of several OMPs at
the beginning of some of the batches is observed. Similar to ciprofloxacin (Figure 4.3),
increasing concentrations are also observed for azithromycin, 1H­benzotriazole, trimetho­
prim, and iomeprol. These fluctuations could be explained by deconjugation or desorption
processes. Deconjugation is however only expected for atenolol, diclofenac, and sul­
famethoxazole (Kovalova et al., 2012b). The background concentration of ciprofloxacin
is deemed ”middle high”, with start concentrations around 65 μg/L (Table 2.3). With the
relatively high TSS in the HWW used in the anoxic IFAS Carriers and IFAS Sludge ex­
periments, desorption could explain the high increase during the IFAS Sludge experiment
(where less biological activity is present in order to faster decrease the released com­
pound, compared to the IFAS Carriers) (Figure 4.3). Similarly, the high TSS of the MBR
Sludge could cause the same reaction.
In Table C.2, Appendix C.2 it is attempted to collect all the above for each OMP to inves­
tigate how affected each compound is by sorption, and how it can be used to investigate
the possible biotransformation pathways.
Diclofenac and venlafaxine are deemed recalcitrant due to the very low removal rates
and the fact that seven out of nine kbio­values had an R2<0.5 (see Appendix C.3, Table
C.5). Other studies similarly deemed these compounds hard to degrade or recalcitrant
in a HYBAS set­up, and for CAS (Burzio et al., 2022; Escolà Casas et al., 2015). Casas
et al. (2015) found diclofenac to follow a two­phase first­order kinetics in a staged MBBR
set­up (due to initial sorption). Suggesting an overestimation of removal rates using first­
order kinetics. However, some studies found improved degradation of diclofenac with
increasing nitrification rates (Torresi et al., 2016; Tran et al., 2009).
26
Micropollutant removal from hospital wastewater by biofilm and membrane bioreactors
==PAGE:35==
Subconclusion on general OMP removal
From the results and discussion provided in Table C.2 and the section above it can be
concluded that a clear distinction between sorption processes and biotransformation in the
removal of the investigated OMPs generally is hard due to a lot of unknown factors and the
scattered nature of the data. To give an overview of which OMPs can be used for different
comparisons in the following discussion of the hypotheses, Table 4.2 is constructed.
Table 4.2: X marks a valid comparison based on no sorption and kbio­values with R2 >
0.5 (X) marks a valid comparison with respect to obtained kbio­values, but must include
the different TSS in the interpretation, due to possible sorption processes. (no anoxic
removal)/(no ATU removal) is when a comparison between oxic and anoxic removal might
be relevant despite poor kbio­values (due to no removal).
OMP
Biomass
Oxic vs
ATU inhibition
Oxic vs
anoxic
Biomass
comparison
(condition)
1H­benzotriazole
IFAS
(anoxic)
MBR
X
Atenolol
IFAS
X
(X)
(All)
MBR
(X)
(X)
Azithromycin
IFAS
X
ATU inhibited
MBR
Ciprofloxacin
IFAS
(no ATU
removal)
(X)
Oxic
MBR
X
(no anoxic
removal)
Iomeprol
IFAS
(anoxic)
MBR
X
(no anoxic
removal)
Sulfamethoxazole
IFAS
X
X
All
MBR
X
X
Trimethoprim
IFAS
X
(X)
(All)
MBR
(X)
(X)
From Table 4.2 it can be concluded that hypothesis 1 can be discussed on the basis
of: i) sulfamethoxazole removal for all types of biomass, ii) atenolol, trimethoprim, and
azithromycin removal by the IFAS Sludge and Carriers, and iii) ciprofloxacin and iome­
prol removal in the MBR Sludge. In the comparisons of oxic and anoxic conditions, sul­
famethoxazole removal for all types of biomass and 1H­benzotriazole, ciprofloxacin and
iomeprol removal in the MBR Sludge can be used as a basis for discussion.
Atenolol and azithromycin were deemed to have a significant removal by sorption, similar
to other studies (Joss et al., 2006; Torresi et al., 2017). The high TSS in anoxic IFAS
Sludge and Carriers batches and MBR batches are therefore assumed to be incomparable
with the removal obtained during significantly lower TSS (as discussed in Section 4.1).
4.2.2
Hypothesis 1: The effect of AOB inhibition on OMP removal
To test the linkage between OMP removal and nitrification, the batch experiments were
run with ATU to inhibit AOB. Hence, nitrification must be the main pathway if OMPs are
more effectively removed during oxic conditions compared to the AOB suppression. In
addition to this, the best comparison between nitrification and other metabolic pathways
is obtained in the biomass that attained the highest nitrification rates. Hence, the most
Micropollutant removal from hospital wastewater by biofilm and membrane bioreactors
27
==PAGE:36==
reliable comparisons are between the IFAS Carriers.
In Figure 4.4, the estimated kbio­values (with R2 > 0.5) are shown for IFAS Sludge and
Carriers and MBR Sludge run during oxic and ATU inhibited conditions. The black error
bars represent the 95% confidence interval of the kbio, reflecting the scattered nature of
the majority of the data. The batch experiments for the polishing MBBR were run without
ATU inhibition, hence they cannot be used to investigate this hypothesis. The choice of
data is based on Table 4.2. In Appendix C.3, Table C.5, all the results of the OMP removal
for the 13 batch experiments can be found.
In Figure 4.4, atenolol, iomeprol and sulfamethoxazole show no significant difference be­
tween the two conditions, due to overlapping confidence intervals. Azithromycin was
clearly better removed during ATU inhibition but with overlapping confidence intervals for
the IFAS Carriers. Ciprofloxacin and trimethoprim were significantly better removed with­
out ATU inhibition.
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Atenolol Oxic
Atenolol ATU Inhibited
Azithromycin Oxic
Azithromycin ATU Inhibited
Ciprofloxazin Oxic
Ciprofloxazin ATU Inhibited
Iomeprol Oxic
Iomeprol ATU Inhibited
Sulfamethoxazole Oxic
Sulfamethoxazole ATU Inhibited
Trimethoprim Oxic
Trimethoprim ATU Inhibited
kbio (L g-1 d-1)
IFAS Sludge
IFAS Carriers
MBR Sludge
Figure 4.4: Comparison of the kbio­values obtained in the oxic and AOB inhibited batches.
95% confidence intervals are plotted as black error bars. The grey lines divide the com­
pounds into groups of the same compound to ease comparison. Only kbio with R2 > 0.5
are shown.
All kbio and their respective R2 value are found in Appendix C.3, Table
C.5. Atenolol, iomeprol and sulfamethoxazole show no significant difference between
the two conditions. Azithromycin was significantly better removed during ATU inhibition.
Ciprofloxacin and trimethoprim seemed to be better removed without ATU inhibition. Di­
clofenac, 1H­Benzotriazole, and venlafaxine did not have adequate kbio values for this
type of comparison.
Trimethoprim removal during oxic conditions is clearly better without ATU inhibition for
IFAS Carriers. Indicating nitrification as a possible pathway for the biotransformation of
trimethoprim. Similarly, improved removal with AOB present is observed for ciprofloxacin.
28
Micropollutant removal from hospital wastewater by biofilm and membrane bioreactors
==PAGE:37==
The fact that atenolol, iomeprol, and sulfamethoxazole show similar trends, with insignifi­
cant differences between OMP removal during oxic and ATU­inhibited conditions, can in­
dicate that other removal pathways than AOB cometabolism are important for the removal
of these compounds. Tran et al. (2009) concluded that biotransformation processes in the
presence of ATU might be due to the activity of heterotrophic microorganisms.
1H-Benzotriazole
0
4
8
12
16
20
24
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
MBR Sludge
Atenolol
0
4
8
12
16
20
24
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
MBR Sludge
Trimethoprim
0
4
8
12
16
20
24
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
MBR Sludge
Iomeprol
0
4
8
12
16
20
24
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
MBR Sludge
Sulfamethoxazole
0
4
8
12
16
20
24
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
MBR Sludge
Ct/C0
Time(h)
Oxic
Oxic ATU Inhibited
Anoxic
Ct/C0
Ct/C0
Time(h)
Figure 4.5:
Removal of 1H­benzotriazole, trimethoprim, atenolol, iomeprol and sul­
famethoxazole in MBR sludge during the three conditions.
In Figure 4.5 the oxic and ATU inhibited removal of 1H­benzotriazole, trimethoprim, atenolol,
iomeprol and sulfamethoxazole is observed to be similar, but much better than the anoxic
removal for the MBR Sludge (Appendix C.3, Table C.5). Therefore the removal can be
linked to biological degradation, but not AOB, as no change was observed in the oxic and
ATU inhibited (and the very low nitrification rates). However, for atenolol and trimetho­
prim, sorption processes might interfere with this conclusion.
In addition to this, 1H­
benzotriazole and iomeprol are observed to have very little change in concentrations in
anoxic MBR sludge. Hence, the observed removal of iomeprol, 1H­benzotriazole is sug­
gested to be only due to biological degradation.
Subconclusion for hypothesis 1
The most reliable results, resulting in the best comparison between nitrification and other
metabolic pathways are between the IFAS Carriers run oxic and oxic with ATU inhibition.
This is because this biomass attained the highest nitrification rates (10 times higher than
Micropollutant removal from hospital wastewater by biofilm and membrane bioreactors
29
==PAGE:38==
the IFAS and MBR Sludge).
The confidence intervals of most kbio are overlapping, see Figure 4.4, indicating no sig­
nificant difference in the removal of the respective OMPs when comparing oxic and ATU
inhibited kbio­values. Hence, sulfamethoxazole, iomeprol, atenolol and to some extent
azithromycin are deemed to be removed equally during oxic and ATU inhibited condi­
tions. Suggesting other biotransformation pathways than nitrification. However, other
studies have linked the removal of atenolol with nitrification (Escolà Casas et al., 2015;
Torresi et al., 2016). Similar to this study, Torresi et al. (2016) found a positive correlation
between atenolol removal and biomass thickness and a high sorption affinity to biofilm
and it was suggested that AOB is not the main pathway for the removal of atenolol. How­
ever, opposite to this study, Torresi et al. (2016) found a negative correlation between
sulfamethoxazole removal and biomass thickness indicating a link to nitrification. Sim­
ilarly, Su et al. (2021) linked the functional groups of sulfamethozaxol and trimetroprim
(and venlafaxine and diclofenac) to AOB transformation.
However, in this thesis, trimethoprim and ciprofloxacin are showing a significant difference
in the two conditions and a possible link between AOB activity is suggested, in agreement
with Su et al. (2021). This is, however, conflicting with Torresi et al. (2016), who found a
positive correlation between the removal of trimethoprim and biofilm thickness, indicating
other microbial species than AOBs are important for the biotransformation of this OMP.
In Kennes­Veiga et al. (2022) trimethoprim is suggested to be cometabolically biotrans­
formed by aerobic heterotrophic cultures and anoxic denitrification.
For azithromycin, a better removal during ATU inhibition was observed in the three types
of biomass. However, this observation was only significant for IFAS Sludge, which is
deemed not as good at IFAS Carriers to conclude on the biotransformation of nitrifying
bacteria, due to the low nitrification rate and possible sorption processes with the high
TSS.
4.2.3
Hypothesis 2: The effect of different redox conditions on OMP
removal rates
To test if the oxic OMP removal rates generally are higher than anoxic due to the lower
oxidation potential (Kennes­Veiga et al., 2022), the oxic kbio­values are compared with
the anoxic.
Investigating all kbio and their respective R2 value (found in Appendix C.3, Table C.5),
the highest removal rate was obtained in the anoxic IFAS Carriers batches. However, in
Table 4.2 the best comparisons between oxic and anoxic biotransformation are based on
kbio­values obtained in MBR biomass for 1H­benzotriazole, ciprofloxacin, iomeprol, and
sulfamethoxazole. In addition, sulfamethoxazole can for IFAS biomass be included in the
investigation. For these results, it can be assumed, that the differences observed are
only dependent on the biological activity because sorption processes can be neglected in
these cases.
Revisiting Table C.2, Appendix C.2 and Figure 4.4, Section 4.2.2 it is generally observed
that the oxic conditions have higher rates than the anoxic for 1H­benzotriazole, atenolol,
azithromycin, ciprofloxacin, iomeprol, sulfamethoxazole, and trimethoprim in the MBR
sludge. This is in accordance with the observations made in Burzio et al. (2022). In
the anoxic IFAS Carriers, the highest kbio­value was obtained for sulfamethoxazole on
2.53
L
g·d and removal at 76%. This is a relatively high removal because other studies
usually have increasing concentrations at the beginning of batch experiments because
of deconjugation (Casas et al., 2015; Kovalova et al., 2012a). However, Polesel et al.
30
Micropollutant removal from hospital wastewater by biofilm and membrane bioreactors
==PAGE:39==
(2017) obtained kbio­values between 0.7
L
g·d and 3.5
L
g·d in a denitrifying MBBR similar to
this set­up.
To test if there generally are higher kbio values during oxic conditions compared to the
anoxic, a two­tailed paired t.test was conducted for all kbio­values of the investigated
OMPs and biomass. The t.test was conducted to make a general comparison of the
two conditions (oxic and anoxic) for each type of biomass. The biggest difference was
observed for the MBR, where a p­value of 0.057 indicates a significant difference between
oxic and anoxic kbio­values with a significance level of 6%. This emphasises that a lower
removal rate truly was observed for seven out of nine compounds discussed above. How­
ever, of these only 1H­benzotriazole, ciprofloxacin, iomeprol, and sulfamethoxazole can
be linked directly to the biotransformation, neglecting sorption processes.
Subconclusion Hypothesis 2:
The hypothesis can be accepted for the MBR sludge, where 1H­benzotriazole, atenolol,
azithromycin, ciprofloxacin, iomeprol, sulfamethoxazole, and trimethoprim were signifi­
cantly slower removed during anoxic conditions. This is confirmed by the paired t.test
with a p­value of 0.057 for the removal rates and for the removal in per cent with a p­value
of 0.015. For 1H­benzotriazole, ciprofloxacin, iomeprol, and sulfamethoxazole the differ­
ence in removal is only influenced by microbial activity. The hypothesis is neither rejected
nor accepted for the IFAS biomass due to the incomparable conditions for the oxic and
anoxic with respect to the HWW used as feed.
4.2.4
Hypothesis 3: Identification of compounds removed by oxic vs
anoxic pathways
To investigate whether a specific OMP follows oxic or anoxic biotransformation pathways,
the difference between OMP removal rates is compared for oxic vs anoxic batches, similar
to Hypothesis 2. To improve the foundation of the argumentation on whether a compound
is biotransformed oxic or anoxic, a literature review investigating kbio­values for MBBR,
IFAS/HYBAS and CAS, was made (Appendix C.3, Table C.3). Similar, but more extensive
reviews are conducted by Kovalova et al. (2012a), Mortensen (2021), and Torresi (2017).
The mean and interval of the values were calculated and plotted against the obtained
kbio­values with R2 > 0.5 in Figure 4.6 and 4.7.
As concluded in Section 4.2.3, the high removal during most of the anoxic batches run for
IFAS Carriers and Sludge indicate sorption to suspended solids as an important pathway
­ making the comparison between oxic and anoxic kbio values difficult and unreasonable
for this type of biomass. However, for sulfamethoxazole, sorption can be neglected and
therefore the results can be included. In Figure 4.7 the kbio results for IFAS and MBR
biomass are compared to literature. For IFAS Carriers a significantly higher removal of
sulfamethoxazole is obtained in the anoxic batch compared to the oxic. On the contrary, a
significantly higher removal is observed for the oxic MBR sludge compared to the anoxic.
In the IFAS Sludge, the oxic removal is slightly higher. This pattern is also found in the
literature, where Polesel et al. (2017) found kbio values in the same range for denitrify­
ing MBBRs and Burzio et al. (2022) found better oxic removal compared to anoxic for
CAS. Kennes­Veiga et al. (2022) list different OMP and their possible cometabolic bio­
transformation. According to this study sulfamethoxazole is biotransformed via aerobic
heterotrophic cultures, aerobic nitrifying cultures and anoxic denitrification pathways in
agreement with the observations above.
In Figure 4.6, the anoxic removal of atenolol is significantly higher than the oxic for the
IFAS Carriers. This might be due to the electrostatic interactions between the positively
charged atenolol and the high amount of negatively charged biomass creating a large
Micropollutant removal from hospital wastewater by biofilm and membrane bioreactors
31
==PAGE:40==
0
1
2
3
4
1H-Benzotriazole Oxic
1H-Benzotriazole Anoxic
Atenolol Oxic
Atenolol Anoxic
Azithromycin Oxic
Azithromycin Anoxic
Ciprofloxazin Oxic
Ciprofloxazin Anoxic
Diclofenac Oxic
Diclofenac Anoxic
10
20
30
40
50
60
kbio (L g-1 d-1)
IFAS Sludge
IFAS Carriers
MBR Sludge
Litterature MBBR
Litterature IFAS/HYBAS
Litterature CAS
Figure 4.6: kbio values for OMPs obtained in the IFAS Carriers, IFAS Sludge and MBR
Sludge and found in the literature study: CAS kbio­values from Joss et al. (2006), Falås
(2013), and Burzio et al. (2022). MBBR kbio­values from Escolà Casas et al. (2015), Casas
et al. (2015), Polesel et al. (2017) and HYBAS kbio­values from Falås (2013) and Escolà
Casas et al. (2015)
surface area for the adsorption. However, it might be due to other removal pathways than
AOB cometabolism. For instance, Burzio et al. (2022) found atenolol to be transformed
both oxic and anoxic, but with higher rates for oxic conditions. Torresi et al. (2017) sug­
gested other pathways than nitrification to be important for the removal of atenolol. Sim­
ilarly, Polesel et al. (2017) found an increased removal of atenolol during denitrification.
However, in Table C.1, Appendix C.1 the denitrification rate is higher (8.75 mg−N
gTSS·h) in the
oxic than in the anoxic batch (3.44 mg−N
gTSS·h). Hence, the higher removal during anoxic con­
ditions most likely is due to sorption processes, and not higher microbial activity. Kennes­
Veiga et al. (2022) suggested atenolol to be cometabolically biotransformed by hydrolysis
during aerobic conditions, which might be the observation in MBR Sludge (in spite of over­
lapping confidence intervals). Normalising the results with respect to microbial diversity
and activity can improve the interpretation of the microbial activity (Burzio et al., 2022;
Elad et al., 2023; Mortensen et al., 2023; Torresi, 2017).
Looking into the removal of trimethoprim in Figure 4.7, a similar contradiction can be ob­
served. In the values obtained in the literature, higher anoxic removal rates of trimetho­
prim are found in CAS, and the opposite is observed for MBBR. In this thesis, the op­
posite was the case: Considerably higher oxic removal rates compared to anoxic for the
32
Micropollutant removal from hospital wastewater by biofilm and membrane bioreactors
==PAGE:41==
0
1
2
3
4
Iomeprol Oxic
Iomeprol Anoxic
Sulfamethoxazole Oxic
Sulfamethoxazole Anoxic
Trimethoprim Oxic
Trimethoprim Anoxic
Venlafaxine Oxic 
Venlafaxine Anoxic 
10
20
30
40
50
60
kbio (L g-1 d-1)
IFAS Sludge
IFAS Carriers
MBR Sludge
Litterature MBBR
Litterature IFAS/HYBAS
Litterature CAS
Figure 4.7: kbio values for OMPs obtained in the IFAS Carriers, IFAS Sludge and MBR
Sludge and found in the literature study: CAS kbio­values from Joss et al. (2006), Falås
(2013), and Burzio et al. (2022). MBBR kbio­values from Escolà Casas et al. (2015), Casas
et al. (2015), Polesel et al. (2017) and HYBAS kbio­values from Falås (2013) and Escolà
Casas et al. (2015)
MBR Sludge, which had significantly lower removal rates compared to the IFAS Carriers.
The higher removal rates of trimethoprim in anoxic IFAS Sludge and Carriers are most
likely due to sorption processes. Kennes­Veiga et al. (2022) suggested trimethoprim to
be cometabolically biotransformed by aerobic heterotrophic cultures and denitrification,
which can support the relatively slow removal rates for both redox conditions in the MBR
Sludge. Burzio et al. (2022) discussed the contradictory results of the removal of trimetho­
prim obtained in several studies relating the differences to the initial concentrations of the
compound.
For 1H­benzotriazole sorption processes can be deemed negligible for MBR Sludge, but
not IFAS Sludge and Carriers. Hence, the oxic or anoxic biotransformation pathway of
this compound cannot be defined for the IFAS Sludge and Carriers. The oxic removal in
MBR Sludge, however, might be the preferred biotransformation pathway (In Figure 4.6).
This is in accordance with literature where higher removal rates were obtained during
oxic conditions for CAS (Falås, 2013). Similarly, iomeprol and ciprofloxacin seem to be
preferably biotransformed during oxic conditions when comparing kbio­values from MBR
Sludge and literature.
Micropollutant removal from hospital wastewater by biofilm and membrane bioreactors
33
==PAGE:42==
Subconclusion Hypothesis 3:
As for hypothesis 2, the most unambiguous conclusions are assumed to be based on the
MBR results.
Investigating the removal in percent for MBR Sludge, the removal was found to be signif­
icantly higher during oxic conditions. Sulfamethoxazole and trimethoprim acheived 71%
and 70% removal in the oxic batch compared to 34% and 23% in the anoxic, respectively.
Similarly, iomeprol is removed by 62% in the oxic and 1% in the anoxic, 1H­benzotriazole
45% oxic and 10% anoxic and ciprofloxacin with 27% oxic and negative removal dur­
ing anoxic. Indicating that these compounds surely are better removed in oxic condi­
tions. However, implementing the classification scheme presented in Section 3.4 only
more than 20% degradation can be deemed substantial. Hence, the hypothesis can be
accepted for 1H­benzotriazole, iomeprol, and ciprofloxacin, where only oxic conditions
result in substantial biotransformation, and all achieved significantly higher kbio values
during oxic conditions. Atenolol was removed by more than 99% for all MBR batches.
Contrary to venlafaxine and diclofenac, which according to the classification scheme in
Section 3.4 reflect no substantial degradation in either redox state.
For sulfamethoxazole, the hypothesis can be rejected, as the compound was found to
be degraded during all types of conditions, in accordance with the literature. Similarly,
atenolol and trimethoprim showed opposite removal pathways for the IFAS Carriers com­
pared to MBR sludge, however, no clear pattern was observed in the literature. Based on
the results of this thesis, the hypothesis is suggested to be rejected. However, investiga­
tion and normalisation of microbial diversity and activity are proposed.
4.2.5
Hypothesis 4: The combined effect of IFAS performs better than
MBR sludge
To investigate this hypothesis, the joined effect of IFAS Carriers and IFAS Sludge on kbio­
values and removal in per cent were calculated in accordance to Eq. 3.5.
Based on Table 4.2 the kbio values calculated for the combined IFAS Biomass are com­
pared with the MBR Sludge. In Figure 4.8 it is seen that the removal of trimethoprim,
iomeprol and 1H­benzotriazole is significantly higher in the IFAS biomass compared with
the MBR Sludge. This is also the case for sulfamethozaxole and atenolol during anoxic
conditions.
Hence for the compared seven compounds five are found to be significantly better re­
moved in the IFAS biomass when investigating the removal rates.
To compare the overall performance of the IFAS biomass and the MBR Sludge results
the student t.test in ExcelTM was conducted for each condition. Because the samples
originated from different batches, the 2­tailed, 2­sample test for equal/unequal variances
was used. The equal variances were deemed from an F.test also run in ExcelTM. The only
comparison with unequal variance was the oxic kbio­values. The p­values can be found
in Table 4.3, where it can be seen that the largest difference is for the oxic conditions
with respect to the removal in percentage. This difference is significant at a significance
level of 8%. Regarding the kbio­values the largest difference is seen for the anoxic results.
However, the p­value is so large, the difference cannot be deemed significant.
Table 4.3
Condition
Oxic
Anoxic
ATU Inhibited
P­value %
0.087
0.231
0.406
P­value kbio
0.512
0.268
0.562
34
Micropollutant removal from hospital wastewater by biofilm and membrane bioreactors
==PAGE:43==
0
1
2
1H-Benzotriazole Anoxic
Atenolol Oxic
Atenolol Anoxic
Atenolol ATU Inhibited
Azithromycin ATU Inhibited
Ciprofloxazin Oxic
Iomeprol Anoxic
Sulfamethoxazole Oxic
Sulfamethoxazole Anoxic
Sulfamethoxazole ATU Inhibited
Trimethoprim Oxic
Trimethoprim Anoxic
Trimethoprim ATU Inhibited
5
10
15
kbio (L g-1 d-1)
MBR Sludge
IFAS combined
Figure 4.8: kbio obtained in MBR Sludge compared to an estimated combined effect of
the sludge and attached biomass present in the IFAS MBR.
Subconclusion Hypothesis 4:
The results obtained in this thesis indicate a better performance of the IFAS biomass,
with five out of seven compared compounds obtaining a better removal. The high p­
values obtained in the t.tests stress that a general conclusion cannot be made. Hence,
the performance should be compared for each individual compound. Based on this, the
hypothesis is suggested to be accepted, however, further experiments and studies are
strongly suggested due to the limitations of this study discussed in Section 4.3.
4.3
Sources of Error and limitations and Outlook
This section aims to clarify sources of error, limitations, and further investigations relevant
to the experimental set­up, data treatment and conclusions.
4.3.1
Sources of Error
As the author had to become familiar with the experimental set­up, mistakes were made
during the set­up, sampling and data treatment. A few examples of these mistakes are:
Adding too much or too little KNO3 due to calculation errors, making wrong dilutions, and
spills/splashes. The set­up also failed a couple of times in keeping a constant mixing, as
reported in the supplementary Excel sheet: DataTreatment.xlsx. Another issue was the
data treatment in GraphPad Prism, here I did not succeed in fitting the exact time intervals
for the samplings. Hence, some of the data points are associated with inaccurate time
steps. In addition to this, some nutrient and DOC samples were first analysed several
weeks after the sampling, possibly affecting the results.
Micropollutant removal from hospital wastewater by biofilm and membrane bioreactors
35
==PAGE:44==
4.3.2
Treatment of Outliers and Faulty Data
During the preparation of the 130 OMP samples for HPLC­MS/MS analysis, a few did
not get an adequate volume of internal standards due to lacking pipetting skills. These
samples where not encountered in the data analysis: 1.1.1, 1.2.7, 4.1.1, 4.3.1, 5.2.3,
5.2.6, 5.2.7, 5.3.7, 5.3.9 (the numbers are in accordance with Appendix B.3.2). Another
outlier for trimethoprim, 4.1.2, was observed and removed. Other outliers could have
been investigated further using statistical methods.
In addition, Polesel et al. (2017) observed an increase of the aqueous concentration with
+16% on average. This increase was due to the evaporation of WW during the batch
experiment. In this thesis, a similar increase in concentrations was observed in some of
the batches with ciprofloxacin, diclofenac and iomeprol. To obtain more reliable results
replicates of each batch experiment should be made. Allowing the conclusions to be
based on statistical evidence. Control experiments based on investigation of sorption
processes and evaporation would increase the credibility of the results.
In addition, it is important to bear in mind, that the biomass was sampled from the pilot
reactors before stable conditions with respect to TSS, COD and nitrogen removal was
reached. For example, the nitrogen removal during this thesis sampling is reported in
Appendix C.2 Figure C.3 and C.4. This is also expressed in the relatively low TAS and
TSS in the IFAS Carriers and Sludge and the very high TSS of MBR Slugde (Section
4.1). Hence for future investigations, stable conditions in the pilot reactors and similar
concentrations of macronutrients is suggested.
4.3.3
Outlook
In other studies, the comparison of OMP removal rates of different biological processes is
supported by analysis of the microbial community (Burzio et al., 2022; Elad et al., 2023;
Mortensen et al., 2023). Normalising not just the biomass but also with respect to the
microbial community a better comparison between different biotransformation pathways
can be obtained.
Furthermore, to make one able to investigate biotransformation, sorption and retrans­
formation processes should be eliminated or further investigated to distinguish between
the processes. Some of the differences observed in the literature indicate different be­
haviours of OMPs in different types of biomass. For example, concluded Torresi (2017)
that sorption increases with biofilm thickness in accordance with Alvarino et al. (2017)
that found increasing sorption for decreasing particle size (as described in Section 2.2).
Furthermore, different operational conditions and the effect of the membrane and pos­
sible cake layer (building up during operation) on the membrane were not investigated.
Sorption processes, especially interaction between lipophilic OMPs and the hydrophobic
membrane, the effective pore size during the build­up of biofilm/cake layer and the micro­
bial diversity and metabolic pathways are deemed important to fully explore the potential
of OMP removal.
Obtaining reliable kbio, Kd and other rate constants can be implemented in models used to
forecast the removal in full­scale processes. Falås (2013) predicted removal efficiencies
with 25% accuracy. Casas et al. (2015) compared batch experiments to continuous flow
experiments using stages MBBR reactors treating HWW. A general overestimation of the
removal rates in the batches was observed. However, the results coincided for the OMPs
that don’t conjugate, sorb or are formed by other metabolites. By decoupling biotransfor­
mation and sorption and linking them to e.g. TSS or nitrogen removal, the monitoring and
assessment of OMP removal in biological treatment of wastewater can be simplified.
36
Micropollutant removal from hospital wastewater by biofilm and membrane bioreactors
==PAGE:45==
5
Conclusion
In this thesis, the OMP removal and involved biotransformation pathways of the biomass
in four pilot scale reactors: An IFAS­MBR followed by a polishing MBBR and an MBR
followed by a polishing MBBR was evaluated.
To evaluate the OMP removal, an investigation of the removal kinetics of nine OMPs (1H­
benzotriazole, atenolol, azithromycin, ciprofloxacin, diclofenac, iomeprol, sulfamethoxa­
zole, trimethoprim and venlafaxine) has been accomplished by the conduction of 24­hour
batch experiments using biomass from the pilot reactors. In total 13 batches with differ­
ent types of biomass (IFAS Sludge and Carriers, MBR Sludge and two polishing MBBR
Carriers) and conditions (oxic, anoxic and ATU inhibition) were made. During the 24­
hour batch experiments, 10 samples for OMP, nutrient and DOC analysis were collected.
The biotransformation rate, kbio, was found using a pseudo­first­order degradation kinetic
model. OMP removal in percent along with nitrification and denitrification was calculated.
Based on physical­chemical properties, literature review, and interpretation of the results,
a distinction between sorption processes and biotransformation was obtained in order to
make comparisons between different conditions, types of biomass and OMPs possible.
In addition, the specific properties of the different types of biomass were also included.
The results from the polishing MBBRs were excluded to simplify the comparisons and
avoid false conclusions based on data deemed inadequate. Diclofenac and venlafaxine
were deemed recalcitrant and also excluded from the comparisons. This resulted in a
comparison between three conditions (oxic, anoxic and ATU inhibition), three types of
biomass (IFAS and MBR Sludge and Carriers) and seven OMPs, which served as a basis
for the settlement of the hypotheses.
In the following, the hypotheses will be confirmed or rejected with reference to the most
important results:
1. Most of the compounds that are effectively removed during oxic conditions (nitrifi­
cation) will not be removed during the inhibition of nitrifying bacteria because AOB
is the main pathway of biotransformation
The hypothesis is accepted for trimethoprim and ciprofloxacin which obtained
a significant difference in the two conditions, and a possible link between AOB
activity is suggested.
The hypothesis is rejected for sulfamethoxazole, iomeprol, and atenolol which
were found to be removed equally well during oxic and ATU inhibited condi­
tions. This suggests that there may be other biotransformation pathways than
nitrification.
2. The oxic batch experiments will achieve higher removal rates of OMPs, kbio, com­
pared to anoxic conditions.
The hypothesis can be accepted for 1H­benzotriazole, atenolol, azithromycin,
ciprofloxacin, iomeprol, sulfamethoxazole, and trimethoprim in the MBR Sludge.
For 1H­benzotriazole, ciprofloxacin, iomeprol, and sulfamethoxazole sorption
was deemed negligible.
The hypothesis is neither rejected nor accepted for the IFAS biomass as the
conditions were deemed incomparable.
3. Some compounds will either be removed during oxic or anoxic conditions
Micropollutant removal from hospital wastewater by biofilm and membrane bioreactors
37
==PAGE:46==
The hypothesis is accepted for 1H­benzotriazole, iomeprol, and ciprofloxacin
which only reached substantial biotransformation during oxic conditions.
The hypothesis can be rejected for sulfamethoxazole which was found to bio­
transform during all types of conditions, in accordance with the literature
For atenolol, azithromycin and trimethoprim the hypothesis is rejected. How­
ever, more investigation e.g. normalisation of microbial diversity and activity is
proposed.
4. The combined effect of suspended biomass and biofilm on carriers will result in a
higher removal rate, kbio, compared to the suspended biomass of the MBR.
The hypothesis was neither accepted nor rejected due to an inconclusive com­
parison of the biomass.
However, trimethoprim, iomeprol and 1H­benzotriazole obtained significantly
higher removal rates in the IFAS biomass compared with the MBR Sludge. This
is also the case for sulfamethoxazole and atenolol during anoxic conditions.
For the improvement of future experiments, the following implementations are suggested
to increase the credibility of the conclusions:
1 Control experiments to investigate sorption processes and evaporation.
2 Analysis of the microbial community to support the investigation of microbial activity
and diversity.
3 Investigation of different operational conditions and stability.
38
Micropollutant removal from hospital wastewater by biofilm and membrane bioreactors
==PAGE:47==
Bibliography
Ahmad, S., Mughal, A., & Abbas, S. (2022). Chp. 3: Impact of antibiotic­resistant on the
environment. Elsevier Inc. https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-323-90555-8.00009-X
Ahtisham, M., & Iqbal, M. (2022). Chp. 16: Microcontaminants in wastewater. Elsevier Inc.
https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-323-90555-8.00018-0
Akhtar, N., & Umair, S. (2022a). Chp. 1: Introduction to environmental micropollutants.
Elsevier Inc. https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-323-90555-8.00010-6
Akhtar, N., & Umair, S. (2022b). Chp. 17: Ecotoxicological risk assessment of environ­
mental micropollutants. Elsevier Inc. https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-323-90555-
8.00004-0
Al­Asheh, S., Bagheri, M., & Aidan, A. (2021). Membrane bioreactor for wastewater treat­
ment: A review. Case Studies in Chemical and Environmental Engineering, 4(April).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cscee.2021.100109
Alvarino, T., Suarez, S., Lema, J., & Omil, F. (2017). Understanding the sorption and
biotransformation of organic micropollutants in innovative biological wastewater
treatment technologies. Science of the Total Environment, 615, 297–306. https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2017.09.278
Baun, A., Nyholm, N., & Kusk, K. O. (2017). Environmental Risk Assessment of Chemi­
cals.
Bertram, M. G., Martin, J. M., Wong, B. B., & Brodin, T. (2022). Quick guide Micropollu­
tants. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cub.2021.11.038
Buelow, E., Ploy, M.­c., & Dagot, C. (2021). ScienceDirect Role of pollution on the selec­
tion of antibiotic resistance and bacterial pathogens in the environment. Current
Opinion in Microbiology, 64, 117–124. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mib.2021.10.005
Burzio, C., Ekholm, J., Modin, O., Falås, P., Svahn, O., Persson, F., Erp, T. V., Gustavsson,
D. J. I., & Wil, B.­m. (2022). Removal of organic micropollutants from municipal
wastewater by aerobic granular sludge and conventional activated sludge. https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.jhazmat.2022.129528
Carballa, M., Lema, J. M., Kennes­veiga, D. M., & Lorena, G. (2022). Enzymatic cometabolic
biotransformation of organic micropollutants in wastewater treatment plants : A
review. Bioresource Technology, 344. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biortech.2021.
126291
Carballa, M., Omil, F., Lema, J. M., Llompart, M., García­Jares, C., Rodríguez, I., Gómez,
M., & Ternes, T. (2004). Behavior of pharmaceuticals, cosmetics and hormones in
a sewage treatment plant. Water Research, 38(12), 2918–2926. https://doi.org/
10.1016/J.WATRES.2004.03.029
Casas, M. E., Chhetri, R. K., Ooi, G., Hansen, K. M., Litty, K., Christensson, M., Kragelund,
C., Andersen, H. R., & Bester, K. (2015). Biodegradation of pharmaceuticals in
hospital wastewater by staged Moving Bed Biofilm Reactors (MBBR). Water Re­
search, 83, 293–302. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.watres.2015.06.042
DHI. (2021a). Handleplan for antibiotika, 1–6.
DHI. (2021b). Handleplan for smertestillende lægemiddelstoffer, 2–6.
Elad, T., Hally, M. P., Domingo­Félez, C., Knoop, O., Drewes, J. E., Valverde­Pérez, B.,
& Smets, B. F. (2023). Exploring the effects of intermittent aeration on the perfor­
mance of nitrifying membrane­aerated biofilm reactors. Science of the Total Envi­
ronment, 891(May), 164329. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2023.164329
Micropollutant removal from hospital wastewater by biofilm and membrane bioreactors
39
==PAGE:48==
Escolà Casas, M., Chhetri, R. K., Ooi, G., Hansen, K. M., Litty, K., Christensson, M.,
Kragelund, C., Andersen, H. R., & Bester, K. (2015). Biodegradation of pharma­
ceuticals in hospital wastewater by a hybrid biofilm and activated sludge system
(Hybas). Science of the Total Environment, 530­531, 383–392. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.scitotenv.2015.05.099
European Commission. (2022). COMMISSION IMPLEMENTING DECISION (EU) 2022/1307
of 22 July 2022. Off. J. Eur. Union, 197(July), 117–121.
Falås, P. (2013). Micropollutant removal by attached and suspended growth in a hybrid
biofilm­activated sludge process. Water Research, 47, 4498–4506. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.watres.2013.05.010
Felis, E., Kalka, J., Sochacki, A., Kowalska, K., Bajkacz, S., Harnisz, M., & Korzeniewska,
E. (2020). Antimicrobial pharmaceuticals in the aquatic environment ­ occurrence
and environmental implications. European Journal of Pharmacology, 866(November
2019), 172813. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejphar.2019.172813
Goonesekera, E. M., Helgeland, I., Nurczynska, H., Søholm, J., Fan, F., Rumbau, M. S. C.,
Vogel, J., Valverde­Pérez, B., Albrechtsen, H.­J., & Kjær, K. B. (2022). Final report
for MUDP project: The non­biological on­site treatment system.
Goswami, L., Vinoth Kumar, R., Borah, S. N., Arul Manikandan, N., Pakshirajan, K., &
Pugazhenthi, G. (2018). Membrane bioreactor and integrated membrane biore­
actor systems for micropollutant removal from wastewater: A review. Journal of
Water Process Engineering, 26(October), 314–328. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jwpe.2018.10.024
Herlev kommune. (2019). Tilslutningstilladelse for spildevand fra renseanlæg på Herlev
Hospital. (December), 1–38.
Joss, A., Zabczynski, S., Göbel, A., Hoffmann, B., Löffler, D., McArdell, C. S., Ternes,
T. A., Thomsen, A., & Siegrist, H. (2006). Biological degradation of pharmaceuti­
cals in municipal wastewater treatment: Proposing a classification scheme. Water
Research, 40(8), 1686–1696. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.watres.2006.02.014
Kennes­Veiga, D. M., Gónzalez­Gil, L., Carballa, M., & Lema, J. M. (2022). Enzymatic
cometabolic biotransformation of organic micropollutants in wastewater treatment
plants: A review. Bioresource Technology, 344. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biortech.
2021.126291
Kovalova, L., Siegrist, H., Singer, H., Wittmer, A., & Mcardell, C. S. (2012a). Hospital
Wastewater Treatment by Membrane Bioreactor : Performance and Efficiency for
Organic Micropollutant Elimination.
Kovalova, L., Siegrist, H., Singer, H., Wittmer, A., & Mcardell, C. S. (2012b). Supporting
information for: Hospital Wastewater Treatment by Membrane Bioreactor: Perfor­
mance and Efficiency for Organic Micropollutant Elimination.
Led, K. O. (, Bjerregaard, R. (, & Nielsen, M. R. ( (2021). Kortlægning af renseteknologier
Til målrettet spildevandsrensning for metaller og miljøfremmede stoffer på central­
renseanlæg. Miljøstyrrelsen.
Lindberg, L. (2022). Hele Nyt Hospital Herlev er nu åbnet. Retrieved March 10, 2023,
from https://www.herlevhospital.dk/presse-og-nyt/pressemeddelelser-og-nyheder/
nyheder/Sider/Nyt-Hospital-Herlev.aspx
Liu, B., Terashima, M., Quan, N. T., Ha, N. T., Chieu, L. V., Goel, R., & Yasui, H. (2018).
Determination of optimal dose of allylthiourea ( ATU ) for the batch respirometric
test of activated sludge Bing Liu , Mitsuharu Terashima , Nguyen Truong Quan ,
Nguyen Thi Ha , Le Van Chieu , Rajeev Goel and Hidenari Yasui. Water Science
& Technology, 2876–2885. https://doi.org/10.2166/wst.2018.282
40
Micropollutant removal from hospital wastewater by biofilm and membrane bioreactors
==PAGE:49==
Liu, Y., Tong, Z., Shi, J., Jia, Y., Yang, K., & Wang, Z. (2020). Correlation between Exoge­
nous Compounds and the Horizontal Transfer of Plasmid­Borne Antibiotic Resis­
tance Genes. Microorganisms, 8.
Mohiddin, J., & Srinivasulu, M. (2022). Chp. 12: Occurrence and fate of micropollutants
in surface waters. https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-323-90555-8.00023-4
Mortensen, A. T., Goonesekera, E. M., Dechesne, A., Elad, T., Tang, K., Andersen, H. R.,
Smets, B. F., & Valverde­p, B. (2023). Methanotrophic oxidation of organic microp­
ollutants and nitrogen upcycling in a hybrid membrane biofilm reactor ( hMBfR )
for simultaneous O 2 and CH 4 supply. 242(May). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
watres.2023.120104
Mortensen, A. T. (2021). Removal of organic micropollutants present in secondary efflu­
ents from municipal wastewater treatment plants with methane oxidizing bacteria
(tech. rep.). DTU.
Nielsen, U. ( (2016). Full scale advanced wastewater treatment at Herlev Hospital.
Omil, F., Zaiat, M., Andersen, H. R., Melo, L., Pinilli, E., & Berendonk, T. U. (2020).
PROJECT : PRESAGE.
Polesel, F., Torresi, E., Loreggian, L., Casas, M. E., Christensson, M., Bester, K., & Plósz,
B. G. (2017). Removal of pharmaceuticals in pre­denitrifying MBBR – Influence
of organic substrate availability in single­ and three­stage configurations. Water
Research, 123, 408–419. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.watres.2017.06.068
Reif, R., Omil, F., & Lema, J. M. (2013). Chp. 9: Removal of Pharmaceuticals by Membrane
Bioreactor ( MBR ) Technology (2nd ed., Vol. 62). Elsevier B.V. https://doi.org/
10.1016/B978-0-444-62657-8.00009-4
Sadava, D., Hillis, D. M., Heller, H. G., & Berenbaum, M. R. (2009). Life The Science of
Biology (Ninth). The Courier Companies, INC.
Su, Q., Schittich, A. R., Jensen, M. M., Ng, H., & Smets, B. F. (2021). Role of ammonia
oxidation in organic micropollutant transformation during wastewater treatment:
Insights from molecular, cellular, and community level observations. Environmen­
tal Science and Technology, 55(4), 2173–2188. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.est.
0c06466
Suárez, S., Carballa, M., Omil, F., & Lema, J. M. (2008). How are pharmaceutical and
personal care products (PPCPs) removed from urban wastewaters? Reviews in
Environmental Science and Biotechnology, 7(2), 125–138. https://doi.org/10.
1007/s11157-008-9130-2
Tang, K., Ooi, G. T., Litty, K., Sundmark, K., Kaarsholm, K. M., Sund, C., Kragelund, C.,
Christensson, M., Bester, K., & Andersen, H. R. (2017a). Removal of pharma­
ceuticals in conventionally treated wastewater by a polishing moving bed biofilm
reactor (MBBR) with intermittent feeding. Bioresource Technology, 236, 77–86.
https://doi.org/10.1016/J.BIORTECH.2017.03.159
Tang, K., Ooi, G. T., Litty, K., Sundmark, K., Kaarsholm, K. M., Sund, C., Kragelund, C.,
Christensson, M., Bester, K., & Andersen, H. R. (2017b). Removal of pharma­
ceuticals in conventionally treated wastewater by a polishing moving bed biofilm
reactor (MBBR) with intermittent feeding. Bioresource Technology, 236, 77–86.
https://doi.org/10.1016/J.BIORTECH.2017.03.159
Torresi, E. (2017). Removal of Micropollutants in Moving Bed Biofilm Reactors (MBBRs)
­ Microbial Diversity and Functional Relationships, 78.
Torresi, E., Fowler, S. J., Polesel, F., Bester, K., Andersen, H. R., Smets, B. F., Plósz,
B. G., & Christensson, M. (2016). Biofilm thickness influences biodiversity in ni­
trifying MBBRs ­ Implications on micropollutant removal. Environmental Science
and Technology, 50(17), 9279–9288. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.est.6b02007
Micropollutant removal from hospital wastewater by biofilm and membrane bioreactors
41
==PAGE:50==
Torresi, E., Polesel, F., Bester, K., Christensson, M., Smets, B. F., Trapp, S., Andersen,
H. R., & Gy, B. (2017). Diffusion and sorption of organic micropollutants in bio fi
lms with varying thicknesses. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.watres.2017.06.027
Tran, N. H., Urase, T., & Kusakabe, O. (2009). The characteristics of enriched nitrifier
culture in the degradation of selected pharmaceutically active compounds. 171,
1051–1057. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhazmat.2009.06.114
Tranekær, C., Andersen, M. B. O., & Fyrstenborg, R. (2021). Medicinrester I Spildevand
Og Vandmiljø.
UNESCO, & HELCOM. (2017). Pharmaceuticals in the aquatic environment of the Baltic
Sea region – A status report.
Valverde­Pérez, B., & Vezzaro, L. (2022). DTU Lectures in course 12110 Wastewater
engineering: Treatment and recourse recovery, spring 22. 1 February 2022 ­ 1
December 2022.
Verlicchi, P., Zambello, E., & Aukidy, M. A. (2013a). Removal of Pharmaceuticals by Con­
ventional Wastewater Treatment Plants (2nd ed., Vol. 62). Copyright © 2013 Else­
vier B.V. All rights reserved. https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-444-62657-8.00008-2
Verlicchi, P., Zambello, E., & Aukidy, M. A. (2013b). Removal of Pharmaceuticals by Con­
ventional Wastewater Treatment Plants (2nd ed., Vol. 62). Copyright © 2013 Else­
vier B.V. All rights reserved. https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-444-62657-8.00008-2
42
Micropollutant removal from hospital wastewater by biofilm and membrane bioreactors
==PAGE:51==
A
How a wastewater treatment plant
functions
To understand how to optimise and adapt the treatment of wastewater containing OMPs,
a small overview of conventional WTTPs is given. This section is based on (Ahtisham &
Iqbal, 2022; Led et al., 2021; Mohiddin & Srinivasulu, 2022; Valverde­Pérez & Vezzaro,
2022; Verlicchi et al., 2013a).
Figure A.1: Conventional wastewater treatment directly adopted from Verlicchi et al.,
2013a.
In Figure A.1 the sequence of conventional wastewater treatment is presented, and a
thorough explanation of each step is given. The liquid phase of the wastewater undergoes
the following steps:
• Preliminary treatment (physical):
– Screens and sieves removing big solids (in sequence)
– Grit chambers (discrete settling regime) in which the process of sedimentation
and flotation are combined to remove grease and oils along with sand.
– Equalisation or buffer tanks ensure constant flow and loading.
• Primary treatment (physical and chemical):
– Primary clarifiers (flocculent settling regime)
– Filtration with micro­sieves, drum filters, belt filters, and membranes (micro/ul­
tra/polymeric/ceramic) represent substitutions for primary clarifiers that can op­
timise the use of space.
– pH adjustment to improve buffer capacity for the nitrification process where
alkalinity is consumed.
– Coagulation­flocculation which improves attraction (sorption) and stabilises floc
formation.
– Chemical precipitation of phosphorus and heavy metals.
• Secondary treatment (biological):
– Activated sludge (biomass) removes C, N, and P and biodegrades organic
compounds anaerobically, aerobically, and anoxic.
– Several advanced treatment strategies can be used as substitutes.
• Secondary sedimentation (physical and chemical):
Micropollutant removal from hospital wastewater by biofilm and membrane bioreactors
43
==PAGE:52==
– Secondary settlers are used to decouple the solid and hydraulic retention times
(SRT and HRT), to clarify the effluent, and to increase the solid content in
sludge increasing the performance on the anaerobic digestion.
– Alternatives to this are membrane and biofilm reactors, which need a much
smaller land footprint.
– To improve the settling chemical coagulation and flocculation can be conducted.
• Tertiary treatment, (advanced methods not commonly applied)
– Activated carbon
– Disinfection
– Chemical oxidation
– Membrane filtration, lagoons, sandfiltration, reverse osmosis and forward os­
mosis
The preliminary treatment of the wastewater is important for a functioning treatment
plant and to decrease the need for maintenance along with avoiding operational problems
such as clogging and sedimentation. Big objects and sand are removed to avoid clog­
ging and sedimentation in the downstream processes and pumps. The sedimentation of
heavy particles reduces the chemical oxygen demand in the bioreactor downstream. Oil
and grease are recovered as early as possible to preserve energy and produce the high­
est amounts of methane possible by anaerobic digestion. If it is not recovered the need for
aeration in the bioreactor increases. In the buffer tanks, pumps can be used to control flow
downstream. Concentration peaks (e.g. ammonium loads) can be decreased by dilution.
The purpose of primary treatment is mainly to reduce the chemical oxygen demand,
and thereby reduce the need for aeration and the release of CO2 which is important to
improve the climate impact of the treatment. The chemical oxygen demand is reduced by
the removal of heavy particles and organic matter. In the secondary treatment activated
sludge is the most common method. The conventional way to use activated sludge is to
hold biomass (bacteria, protozoa, rotifers, and fungi) in suspension in mixed tanks, and
bioreactors, followed by a secondary clarifier to retain the biomass and control the sludge
retention time (SRT). Multiple compartments of bioreactors can be run aerobic, anoxic,
and anaerobic enabling C, N, and P removal. Organic compounds (lipids, proteins, car­
bohydrates, and some micropollutants) biodegrade by anabolic, and catabolic reactions
resulting in the development and growth of the biomass. In parallel with these processes,
the cometambolic transformation of OMPs is observed. Membrane bioreactors (MBRs),
and moving bed bioreactors (MBBRs) can substitute the activated sludge but are op­
erating at higher biomass concentrations allowing treatment of higher loads. After the
bioreactor, a secondary clarifier decouples the SRT and the hydraulic retention time
(HRT) and clarifies the effluent by retaining biomass. Most biomass is recirculated to the
bioreactor while a small fraction is sent to digestion. The sedimentation can be chemically
enhanced by flocculation and coagulation. In some WTTPs further treatment strategies,
tertiary treatment, such as ozonation, UV treatment, activated carbon, and membrane
filtration are added to the system to allow higher quality in the effluent Tang et al., 2017b.
44
Micropollutant removal from hospital wastewater by biofilm and membrane bioreactors
==PAGE:53==
B
Elaborated Procedure for Batch
Experiments
B.1
Aim and Hypothesis
Aim: To understand which metabolic pathways in the pilot are most important for the
removal of OMPs. By comparing three conditions: I) Aerobic. II) Anaerobic with N2 and
addition of KNO3 as nitrate source. III) Aerobic + suppression of using Allylthiourea (ATU)
as inhibitor (added to a final conc on 10mg/L. The pilots in Herlev are run with an SRT on
30 days and an HRT on 2 days (volume 400 L and flow 138mL/min).
Hypothesis: AOB is the most important factor for cometabolism (Su et al., 2021), lower
OMP removal efficiencies during anoxic conditions (Kennes­Veiga et al., 2022)), nitrify­
ing microorganisms have higher biotransformation rates than heterotrophs, heterotrophs
have a wider spectrum of reaction types and metabolic versatility that allow them to further
biodegrade many OMPs and TPs (Kennes­Veiga et al., 2022).
B.2
Experimental Set­up and Conditions
First 2 batches (either one of two MBBR carriers) will be tested during aerobic conditions
and anaerobic conditions. Later 3 batches (either IFAS sludge or IFAS carriers or MBR
sludge) will be analysed under three conditions: Aerobic, anoxic, and suppression of AOB.
Resulting in 2x2 and 3x3 = 13 experiments.
Batches ID:
1. MBBR 1 K5 Carriers: filling ratio 50% =167 carriers/L = 334 carriers + 1.7L HWW
effluent (remove 2.5 carriers pr 15mL sample)
2. MBBR 2 K5 Carriers: filling ratio 50% =167 carriers/L = 334 carriers + 1.7L HWW
effluent (remove 2.5 carriers pr 14mL sample)
3. IFAS Sludge: 0.4 L activated sludge to 1.6 L HWW effluent.
4. IFAS K5 Carriers: filling ratio: 20% = 67 carriers/L = 134 carriers + 1.8L HWW
effluent (remove 1 carriers pr 15 mL sample)
5. MBR Sludge: 0.4 L activated sludge to 1.6 L HWW effluent.
Batch condition ID:
1. Aerobic:
To compare the set­up with the pilots in Herlev. And to get the overall removal rates.
2. Anoxic (no aeration only stirring) + addition of nitrate (as electron acceptor):
To favor denitrification ­ Comparing removal efficiencies with condition 1 it can be
calculated how much of the OMP removal the denitrifying heterotrophs accounts for.
3. Suppression of AOB (not for MBBR):
By suppressing AOB and compare with condition 1, I can calculate how much of the
OMP removal the AOB accounts for. The inhibitor: Allylthiourea (ATU) add to a final
conc on 10mg/L (suppresses all nitrifying bacteria).
Micropollutant removal from hospital wastewater by biofilm and membrane bioreactors
45
==PAGE:54==
B.3
Experimental plan
B.3.1
Procedure by task:
Collecting activated sludge and carriers from Herlev pilots <24 hour before:
Materials:
• Bluecap bottles for the sludge + carriers (2L)
• 5 L inlet water (HWW effluent from primary treatment) to feed the reactors at DTU.
• 334 carriers pr batch (MBBR) or 134 carriers pr bacth (IFAS) or 2 L activated slugde
from each of the tanks.
• HWW effluent is stored in a 15°C room (b113) and biomass at room temperature.
• Carriers for MBBR are stored in permeate water, IFAS carriers with activated sludge.
Analysis:
• TSS and VSS of activated sludge and HWW effluent
• TOC, DOC , sCOD and SKALAR of activated sludge and HWW effluent
• Based on tCOD analysis the addition of potassium nitrate is calculated (Valverde­
Pérez & Vezzaro, 2022):
tCOD
2.86
gN
gCOD = mgNO3 −N
(B.1)
Find all materials needed for the experiment:
• Biomass
• HWW
• Standard pharmaceutical spikesolution (methanol solution) provided by Senior Re­
searcher Kai Tang, DTU.
• Spikesolution of Trimethoprim (Alfa Aesar, Germany) and Ciprofloxacin (Millipore­
Sigma, USA) in methanol.
• 3x 5L glass beaker
• 3 fishpumps + tubing providing the aeration for the two aerobic batches.
• N2 is provided by the inbuilt system in the laboratory.
• Multimeter with pH and oxygen probe (calibrated)
• Pipettetips/pipettes (5mL, 10mL, 1mL)
• Racks, labels, pen, paper, timer
• SKALAR plastic tubes (2x12 per batch with labels) + 0.2μm filters (3x10 per batch)
+ syringes (10 per batch)
• Glass vials for OMP (10 per batch with labels) + Methanol + glass pipettes (1x5mL
pr batch + 2x2mL)
• Glass vials for TOC analysis (12 per batch all proper labelled)
• miliQ water to dilute samples and rinse glass pipettes
46
Micropollutant removal from hospital wastewater by biofilm and membrane bioreactors
==PAGE:55==
• DI water to rinse
• 70% ethanol or similar to disinfect surfaces in case of spillage.
• 4x2L beaker to measure HWW effluent and activated slugde.
• 3x400 mL beakers to rinse glass pipettes and pH and oxygen probe
• Plastic bag to collect garbage
1 h before 24H batch experiments:
2 mL spike solution standard chemicals + 2 mL spike solution with ciprofloxacin and
trimethoprim are added to the 5 L beakers using a 2mL glass pipette and set to evaporate
in the fume hood. With this spiking, an initial concentration of app 10 μg/L should be ob­
tained. When the methanol is evaporated (app. 40 min) the inlet water 1.8L/1.6L/1.7L is
added and well mixed, for experiments with IFAS carriers/activated sludge/MBBR carri­
ers respectively. For anoxic experiments KNO3 is added to a concentration of tCOD/2.86
mg/L to the HWW effluent. (cite elena + falås). For AOB inhibited experiments 20 mg
ATU is added to each batch to reach a concentration of 10mg/L.
The experiment starts with the addition of carriers/sludge. pH and OD are measured
during of the experiments. If pH exceeds 8.5 HCL 1M is added (40 μL at a time) until pH8
is reached.
24H Batch experiments:
• Before the first sample is collected the system will get 1 min to mix.
• The experiments will run semi parallel with app. 10 min delay. See sampling sched­
ules below.
• For each time I take a sample, I will take 5 mL for OMP using a glass pipette, and
app 10 mL filtered for DOC and SKALAR, 10 mL is used for TSS/VSS. TSS/VSS is
only taken in the beginning and end of the experiment.
• SKALAR samples will be diluted 1/5 and DOC 1/3. The filtered samples are stored
at 4°C and analysed within a week.
• 5 mL sample is collected in glass pipette into a glass vial in which 1.3 mL methanol
is added. The sample is then cooled in freezer (within an hour). The glass pipette
is cleaned in miliQ water by gently flushing 3 times.
• 15 mL is thereby taken out for each sampling ­ this will result in removing 1 or 2.5
carriers to keep the filling ratio on 67/L and 167/L. In total 134 and 334 carriers will
be added and 11 or 27 removed to keep the filling ratio in each batch.
• After the experiment 10 carriers are collected to weigh the biomass Tang et al.,
2017a and 5 carriers are collected for microbial analysis (out of scope of this thesis).
B.3.2
Sampling
Sample IDs
All samples are marked with 3 numbers, marking: Biomass, condition, and time, as pre­
sented in Table B.1. The table provides the sample IDs for the set­up. The first number
refers to the biomass, second the conditions for the batch. The third number refers to the
time for the sampling.
Micropollutant removal from hospital wastewater by biofilm and membrane bioreactors
47
==PAGE:56==
Table B.1: Sample IDs for biomass, condition, and time
Biomass ID
Condition ID
Time ID
1
MBBR 1 Carriers
1
Aerobic
1
00:01:00
2
MBBR 2 Carriers
2
Anearobic with NO3
2
00:20:00
3
IFAS Slugde
3
AOB suppressed
3
00:40:00
4
IFAS Carriers
4
01:20:00
5
MBR Sludge
5
02:10:00
6
04:00:00
7
06:00:00
8
07:30:00
9
12:00:00
10
24:00:00
Sampling Schemes
To optimate the experimental set up. Two and three batches where run in parallel following
the schemes provided in Table ??. The actual sampling time differs a bit from batch to
batch. The exact sampling time is noted in the raw data sheet.
Table B.2: Sample Scheme used for taking samples running two batches at a time (MBBR
and IFAS Biomass). For some samples taken after the first 40 min the intervals are slightly
different.
Start
Time
Sampling
interval
Sample 1:
Sample 2:
08:00:00
00:01:00
08:01:00
08:11:00
08:10:00
00:20:00
08:20:00
08:30:00
00:40:00
08:40:00
08:50:00
01:20:00
09:20:00
09:30:00
02:10:00
10:10:00
10:20:00
04:00:00
12:00:00
12:10:00
06:00:00
14:00:00
14:10:00
07:30:00
15:30:00
15:40:00
12:00:00
20:00:00
20:10:00
00:00:00
08:00:00
08:10:00
Resulting in:
• 2x10 OMP and SKALAR analysis
• 2x10 DOC + 2x TOC (inlet + biomass) + 2xDOC (inlet + biomass)
• 8 TSS/VSS (HWW effluent x2, activated sludge x2, start batch 1 and 2, and end
batch 1 and 2)
• 2 x 10 carriers for biomass + 2 x 5 carriers for microbial analysis
• tCOD analysis of inlet to calculate addition of KNO3
48
Micropollutant removal from hospital wastewater by biofilm and membrane bioreactors
==PAGE:57==
Table B.3: Sample Scheme used for taking samples running three batches at a time
(MBR­biomass). For some samples taken after the first 40 min the intervals are slightly
different. The bold appointed times two people are needed.
Start
Time
Sampling
interval
Condition 1:
Condition 2:
Condition 3:
08:00:00
00:01:00
08:01:00
08:11:00
08:21:00
08:10:00
00:20:00
08:20:00
08:30:00
08:40:00
08:20:00
00:40:00
08:40:00
08:50:00
09:00:00
01:20:00
09:20:00
09:30:00
09:40:00
02:10:00
10:10:00
10:20:00
10:30:00
04:00:00
12:00:00
12:10:00
12:20:00
06:00:00
14:00:00
14:10:00
14:20:00
07:30:00
15:30:00
15:40:00
15:50:00
12:00:00
20:00:00
20:10:00
20:20:00
24:00:00
08:00:00
08:10:00
08:20:00
Resulting in:
• 3x10 OMP and SKALAR analysis
• 3x10 DOC + 2x TOC (Inlet + biomass) + 2xDOC (inlet + biomass)
• 10 TSS/VSS (2xHWW effluent, 2xactivated sludge, start batch 1, 2, and 3, and end
batch 1,2, and 3)
• 3 x 10 carriers for biomass + 3 x 5 carriers for microbial analysis
• tCOD analysis of inlet to calculate addition of KNO3
Micropollutant removal from hospital wastewater by biofilm and membrane bioreactors
49
==PAGE:58==
C
Main Results
C.1
Nutrient Removal in the Batch Experiments
In the following additional graphs and tables with respect to nutrient removal in the batch
experiments are presented.
Table C.1: The removal of phosphate, PO3−
4 , ammonium, NH+
4 , and TN in the batch
experiments. The biomass is given as TAS for the carriers and TSS for the sludge. The
removal rates are calculated with Eq. 3.3 and 3.4. The numbers highlighted in bold,
represent the 3 highest removal rates for phosphate, ammonium (nitrification) and TN
(denitrification). The high amount of biomass for IFAS Sludge during the anoxic batch
experiment is caused by a very high amount of TSS in the HWW used.
Batch
Redox condition
Biomass
PO3−
4
Removal
NH+
4 Removal
TN Removal
Mean
(gTSS/L)
STD
(g/L)
mg­P/
gTSS · h
(%)
mg­N/
gTSS · h
(%)
mg­N/
gTSS · h
(%)
IFAS
Sludge
Oxic
2.16
0.0424
0.07
59.35
0.19
30.79
2.39
67.56
Anoxic
6.48
0.4313
0.03
80.80
0.14
99.54
0.36
55.24
Oxic AOB suppressed
1.61
0.0608
0.06
23.62
0.17
15.04
0.09
8.01
IFAS
Carriers
Oxic
0.65
0.0014
0.26
65.85
2.28
98.35
8.75
67.12
Anoxic
0.71
0.0039
0.32
77.14
1.39
99.58
3.44
57.60
Oxic AOB supressed
0.93
0.0040
0.12
25.70
0.29
13.18
0.82
34.50
MBR Sludge
Oxic
5.13
0.3250
0.04
56.02
0.20
54.40
0.05
11.97
Anoxic
4.30
0.1460
0.00
3.68
0.00
­0.71
0.22
29.98
Oxic AOB supressed
4.86
0.3440
0.03
45.56
0.02
5.26
0.12
22.84
MBBR 1
Carriers
Oxic
0.64
0.0015
0.52
60.53
1.45
50.39
1.46
42.61
Anoxic
0.67
0.0025
0.62
60.18
0.88
32.35
1.19
28.70
MBBR 2
Carriers
Oxic
0.48
0.0011
0.39
97.83
1.48
48.65
2.26
49.71
Anoxic
0.37
0.0007
0.36
67.02
1.25
29.81
3.78
48.90
50
Micropollutant removal from hospital wastewater by biofilm and membrane bioreactors
==PAGE:59==
0
4
8
12
16
20
24
0
5
10
15
PO4
3-
Time(h)
Concentration (mg/L)
0
4
8
12
16
20
24
0
5
10
15
20
PO4
3-
Time(h)
Concentration (mg/L)
0
4
8
12
16
20
24
0
5
10
15
PO4
3-
Time(h)
Concentration (mg/L)
0
4
8
12
16
20
24
0
5
10
15
NH4
+
Time(h)
Concentration (mg/L)
0
4
8
12
16
20
24
0
20
40
60
NH4
+
Time(h)
Concentration (mg/L)
0
4
8
12
16
20
24
35
40
45
50
55
NH4
+
Time(h)
Concentration (mg/L)
0
4
8
12
16
20
24
0
5
10
15
DOC
Time(h)
Concentration (mg/L)
0
4
8
12
16
20
24
0
500
1000
1500
DOC
Time(h)
Concentration (mg/L)
0
4
8
12
16
20
24
0
50
100
150
DOC
Time(h)
Concentration (mg/L)
IFAS Sludge
IFAS Carriers
MBR Sludge
MBBR 1
MBBR 2
Anoxic
OXIC
ATU Inhibited
Figure C.1: Removal of macro pollutants in all the batch experiments plotted as concen­
trations as a function of time.
Micropollutant removal from hospital wastewater by biofilm and membrane bioreactors
51
==PAGE:60==
Figure C.2: The removal percent of macronutrients in all of the different types of biomass.
Generally are organic carbon, nitrogen and phosphorus removed in all types of biomass
The nitrifing bacteria uses inorganic carbon ­ hence the IC removal should be better in
the oxic experiments compared to the ATU inhibited. Which is also the case.
The organic carbon removal is clearly better for the oxic conditions and in the MBR sludge
compared to the IFAS (the MBR sludge was also with a way higher concentration!)
Total nitrogen however, seems to be removed most efficient by the aerobic IFAS biomass.
And for some weird reson was all NH4 removed in the anoxic experiment with IFAS
biomass? (So if there are good OMP removal in this ­ there might be something linked
to NH4 removal?. The same goes for P, which is also very well removed in the oxic and
anoxic IFAS biomass. But also in the aerobic MBR biomass.
C.2
Interpretation of the OMP removal results
In this thesis the main aim is to evaluate the removal of OMPs with the different biomass.
In this evaluation, the potential sorption and biotransformation pathways are attempted to
be separated in order to link the removal of OMPs to biotransformation. Along with this,
52
Micropollutant removal from hospital wastewater by biofilm and membrane bioreactors
==PAGE:61==
nitrification rates and denitrification rates can be used to further link the biotransformation
to the respective processes.
The status of nitrogen performance in the pilot plants is found in Figure C.3 and C.4.
Looking at the formation of nitrate in the permeate from the MBR reactor (left middle) and
the IFAS­MBR (right middle) during the sampling for the batch experiments fluctuations
can be observed. This indicates that a truly steady state performance with respect to
nitrification was not yet reached.
17-01
19-01
24-01
27-01
31-01
03-02
07-02
10-02
14-02
17-02
21-02
24-02
27-02
03-03
06-03
17-03
21-03
24-03
28-03
31-03
04-04
11-04
18-04
21-04
25-04
28-04
02-05
04-05
08-05
12-05
15-05
17-05
22-05
0
2
4
6
8
20
45
70
NH4-N (mg/L)
Polishing MBBR-MBR
Inlet-MBR
MBR-permeate
SRT=30 days
HRT=4 days
17-01
19-01
24-01
27-01
31-01
03-02
07-02
10-02
14-02
17-02
21-02
24-02
27-02
03-03
06-03
17-03
21-03
24-03
28-03
31-03
04-04
11-04
18-04
21-04
25-04
28-04
02-05
04-05
08-05
12-05
15-05
17-05
22-05
0
2
4
6
10
30
50
70
NH4-N (mg/L)
IFAS-permeate
Polishing MBBR-IFAS
Inlet-IFAS
SRT=30 days
HRT=4 days
17-01
19-01
24-01
27-01
31-01
03-02
07-02
10-02
14-02
17-02
21-02
24-02
27-02
03-03
06-03
17-03
21-03
24-03
28-03
31-03
04-04
11-04
18-04
21-04
25-04
28-04
02-05
04-05
08-05
12-05
15-05
17-05
22-05
0.0
0.5
1.0
10
20
30
40
50
60
NO3-N (mg/L)
Polishing MBBR-MBR
Inlet-MBR
MBR-permeate
SRT=30 days
HRT=4 days
17-01
19-01
24-01
27-01
31-01
03-02
07-02
10-02
14-02
17-02
21-02
24-02
27-02
03-03
06-03
17-03
21-03
24-03
28-03
31-03
04-04
11-04
18-04
21-04
25-04
28-04
02-05
04-05
08-05
12-05
15-05
17-05
22-05
0
10
20
30
NO3-N (mg/L)
IFAS-permeate
Polishing MBBR-IFAS
Inlet-IFAS
SRT=30 days
HRT=4 days
17-01
19-01
24-01
27-01
31-01
03-02
07-02
10-02
14-02
17-02
21-02
24-02
27-02
03-03
06-03
17-03
21-03
24-03
28-03
31-03
04-04
11-04
18-04
21-04
25-04
28-04
02-05
04-05
08-05
12-05
15-05
17-05
22-05
0
2
4
6
NO2-N (mg/L)
Polishing MBBR-MBR
Inlet-MBR
MBR-permeate
SRT=30 days
HRT=4 days
17-01
19-01
24-01
27-01
31-01
03-02
07-02
10-02
14-02
17-02
21-02
24-02
27-02
03-03
06-03
17-03
21-03
24-03
28-03
31-03
04-04
11-04
18-04
21-04
25-04
28-04
02-05
04-05
08-05
12-05
15-05
17-05
22-05
0
1
2
NO2-N (mg/L)
IFAS-permeate
Polishing MBBR-IFAS
Inlet-IFAS
SRT=30 days
HRT=4 days
Figure C.3: Nitrogen performance Pilots, these plots will be made prettier
Micropollutant removal from hospital wastewater by biofilm and membrane bioreactors
53
==PAGE:62==
19-01
24-01
27-01
31-01
03-02
07-02
10-02
14-02
17-02
21-02
24-02
27-02
03-03
06-03
17-03
21-03
24-03
28-03
31-03
04-04
11-04
18-04
21-04
25-04
28-04
02-05
04-05
08-05
12-05
15-05
17-05
22-05
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Permeate Performance
Sampling date
mg-N/L
NH4-N (mg/L) IFAS-MBR
NH4-N (mg/L) MBR
NO3-N (mg/L) IFAS-MBR
NO3-N (mg/L) MBR
Figure C.4: Nitrate formation from ammonia in the permeate from the pilot reactors during
the period of this thesis. Due to the very instable performance a steady state performance
of the pilots was not obtained with respect to nitrification.
In Table C.2 the most likely pathway (sorption of biotransformation) is investigated for
each compound, for each of the three types of biomass (IFAS Sludge, IFAS Carriers, and
MBR Sludge) and each of the three conditions (oxic, anoxic, oxic ATU inhibited).
Table C.2: Overview of each investigated OMP. The left column is graphs of the removal
of IFAS and MBR biomass, and the right column is five discussion points: 1: presents
ionic speciation for pH interval 7­9, literature Kd­values from Kovalova et al. (2012b) and
background concentrations based on the concentrations measured in the HPLC­MS/MS
subtracted the 10 μg/L added with the spiking solution. 2: Discussion on the basis of 1, if
sorption can be neglected or not. 3: Interpretation of the plotted changes in concentration
with time for the three types of biomass during three conditions. Specifically looking for
sorption behaviour. 4: Discussion of fluctuations in the plots can be due to sorption/des­
orption or conjugation based on 1. 5: Which type of biomass obtained kbio with R2 >0.5
to compare between conditions.
Relative
removal
in
IFAS
and
MBR
Sludge and Carriers
Fate based on physical­chemical properties
& Suggested transformation pathway
54
Micropollutant removal from hospital wastewater by biofilm and membrane bioreactors
==PAGE:63==
1H-Benzotriazole
0
4
8
12
16
20
24
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
IFAS Carriers
1H-Benzotriazole
0
4
8
12
16
20
24
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
IFAS Sludge
1H-Benzotriazole
0
4
8
12
16
20
24
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
MBR Sludge
Oxic
Oxic ATU Inhibited
Anoxic
Ct/C0
Time (h)
Time (h)
Time (h)
Ct/C0
1H­benzotriazole:
1 Anionic, no Kd­values, no conjugation,
high background concentrations.
2 Based on the negative charge sorption
might not be significant.
3 Interpretation of figure: No removal is seen
in the MBR Sludge during anoxic condi­
tions. A fast drop is seen during anoxic
conditions in the IFAS Sludge (high TSS
of HWW).
4 Fluctuations might be due to sorption/des­
orption equilibrium (high background con­
centration).
5 Based on kbio with R2 >0.5 MBR results
can be used to determine the difference
between oxic and anoxic removal.
The
data is too scattered for IFAS results.
Atenolol
0
4
8
12
16
20
24
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
Time(h)
Ct/C0
IFAS Carriers
Atenolol
0
4
8
12
16
20
24
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
Time(h)
Ct/C0
IFAS Sludge
Aerobic
Aerobic + ATU
(inhibit ammonia
oxidation)
Anaerobic
Atenolol
0
4
8
12
16
20
24
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
Time(h)
Ct/C0
MBR Sludge
Atenolol:
1 Cationic, most Kd­values < 0.1 L/g, conju­
gation, small background concentrations.
2 Based on the positive charge sorption
might be significant despite the low Kd­
values.
3 Interpretation of figure: Removal is seen
for all conditions and types of biomass. A
fast drop is seen during anoxic conditions
in the IFAS Sludge (high TSS of HWW).
4 Fluctuations might be due to sorption/des­
orption equilibrium or conjugation.
5 Based on kbio with R2 >0.5 results from
MBR and IFAS Sludge and Carriers can
be used to determine the difference be­
tween oxic and anoxic removal and oxic
and ATU inhibited removal. For IFAS Car­
riers the anoxic kbio is most likely overesti­
mated with (1+kd · Xbiomass)
Micropollutant removal from hospital wastewater by biofilm and membrane bioreactors
55
==PAGE:64==
Azithromycin
0
4
8
12
16
20
24
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
Time(h)
Ct/C0
IFAS Carriers
Azithromycin
0
4
8
12
16
20
24
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
Time(h)
Ct/C0
IFAS Sludge
Azithromycin
0
4
8
12
16
20
24
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
Time(h)
Ct/C0
MBR Sludge
Aerobic
Aerobic + ATU
(inhibit ammonia
oxidation)
Anaerobic
Azithromycin:
1 Cationic, most Kd­values > 0.1 L/g, no
conjugation, small background concentra­
tions.
2 Based on the positive charge and high Kd­
values sorption is deemed significant.
3 Interpretation of figure: Removal is seen
for all conditions and types of biomass. A
fast drop is seen during anoxic conditions
in the IFAS Sludge (high TSS of HWW).
4 Fluctuations might be due to sorption/des­
orption equilibrium.
5 Based on kbio with R2 >0.5 results from
IFAS biomass can be used to compare
oxic and oxic ATU inhibited conditions.)
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
16
24
Ciprofloxacin
Time(h)
Ct/C0
IFAS Carriers
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
16
24
Ciprofloxacin
Time(h)
IFAS Sludge
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
16
24
Ciprofloxacin
Time(h)
Ct/C0
MBR Sludge
Oxic
Oxic ATU Inhibited
Anoxic
Ciprofloxacin:
1 Zwitter ionic, most Kd­values > 0.1 L/g, no
conjugation, middle background concen­
trations.
2 Based on the equal number of positively­
and negatively­charged functional groups
and the high Kd­values sorption might be
significant.
3 Interpretation of figure: Generally low re­
moval rates.
(7­30%) removal is calcu­
lated for IFAS biomass.
4 To investigate desorption/sorption, the x­
axis is scaled. Fluctuations might be due
to sorption/desorption equilibrium. Due to
similar behaviour of fluctuations in MBR
batches, the three conditions can be com­
pared despite the R2 > 0.5.
5 Based on kbio with R2 >0.5 results from
IFAS Carriers can be used to determine
the difference between oxic and anoxic
removal.
For IFAS Carriers the kbio for
anoxic removal is most likely overesti­
mated with (1+kd · Xbiomass). The low R2
value for IFAS Carriers ATU inhibited,
might be due to no removal. The MBR re­
sults can be compared despite being scat­
tered.
56
Micropollutant removal from hospital wastewater by biofilm and membrane bioreactors
==PAGE:65==
Diclofenac
0
4
8
12
16
20
24
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
IFAS Carriers
Diclofenac
0
4
8
12
16
20
24
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
IFAS Sludge
Diclofenac
0
4
8
12
16
20
24
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
MBR Sludge
Oxic
Oxic ATU Inhibited
Anoxic
Ct/C0
Time (h)
Time (h)
Time (h)
Ct/C0
Diclofenac:
1 Anionic, some Kd­values > 0.1 L/g, conju­
gation, no background concentrations.
2 Based on negative charge and the diverse
Kd­values, sorption might be insignificant.
3 Interpretation of figure: Generally low re­
moval rates.
4 Fluctuations are most likely due to conju­
gation, but sorption/desorption equilibrium
cannot be ruled out.
5 Based on kbio with R2 >0.5 results no
data can be used to determine the dif­
ference between oxic and anoxic removal
or oxic and ATU inhibited removal.
For
IFAS Carriers the kbio for anoxic removal
was the only approved kbio (0.23 L/g · d)
and is most likely overestimated with
(1+kd · Xbiomass). The rest of the results are
too scattered.
Iomeprol
0
4
8
12
16
20
24
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
Time(h)
Ct/C0
IFAS Carriers
Iomeprol
0
4
8
12
16
20
24
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
Time(h)
Ct/C0
IFAS Sludge
Iomeprol
0
4
8
12
16
20
24
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
Time(h)
Ct/C0
MBR Sludge
Oxic
Oxic ATU Inhibited
Anoxiic
Iomeprol:
1 Neutral, no Kd­values, no conjugation,
very high background concentrations.
2 Based on neutral and absent Kd­values no
prediction of sorption can be made.
3 Interpretation of figure: No removal or for­
mation of iomeprol during anoxic condi­
tions for the MBR Sludge. Relatively high
removal rates for IFAS Sludge and Carri­
ers anoxic.
4 Fluctuations observed for all oxic condi­
tion is most likely due to sorption/des­
orption equilibrium also based on the
high background concentrations (similar to
ciprofloxacin).
5 Based on kbio with R2 >0.5 results from
MBR can be used to determine the dif­
ference between oxic and ATU inhibited
removal, possible also oxic and anoxic
removal.
For IFAS Carriers the kbio for
anoxic removal is most likely overesti­
mated with (1+kd · Xbiomass).
The rest of
the results are too scattered.
Micropollutant removal from hospital wastewater by biofilm and membrane bioreactors
57
==PAGE:66==
Sulfamethoxazole
0
4
8
12
16
20
24
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
Time(h)
Ct/C0
IFAS Carriers
Sulfamethoxazole
0
4
8
12
16
20
24
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
Time(h)
Ct/C0
IFAS Sludge
Sulfamethoxazole
0
4
8
12
16
20
24
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
Time(h)
Ct/C0
MBR Sludge
Aerobic
Aerobic + ATU
(inhibit ammonia
oxidation)
Anaerobic
Sulfamethozaxole:
1 Anionic, no Kd­values > 0.1 L/g, conjuga­
tion, small background concentrations.
2 Based on the negative charge and low Kd­
values, no significant sorption is expected.
3 Interpretation of figure: All batches show
removal.
4 The small fluctuations observed are most
likely due to conjugation, the background
concentration is deemed low based on the
starting concentrations (where most of the
compound had not deconjugated yet).
5 Based on kbio with R2 >0.5 results from
all batches can be used to determine the
difference between oxic and ATU inhibited
removal and oxic and anoxic removal. Due
to the expected low amount of sorption,
this can be neglected in the interpretations.
Trimethoprim
0
4
8
12
16
20
24
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
IFAS Carriers
Trimethoprim
0
4
8
12
16
20
24
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
IFAS Sludge
Trimethoprim
0
4
8
12
16
20
24
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
MBR Sludge
Aerobic
Aerobic + ATU
(inhibit ammonia
oxidation)
Anaerobic
Trimethoprim:
1 Cationic, most Kd­values > 0.1 L/g, no
conjugation, no background concentra­
tions.
2 Based on the positive charge and high Kd­
values significant sorption is expected.
3 Interpretation of figure: IFAS Sludge has
very scattered data. MBR Sludge has ini­
tial increasing concentrations for all condi­
tions.
4 The fluctuations observed are most likely
due to sorption/desorption.
5 Based on kbio with R2 >0.5 results from
IFAS Carriers and MBR can be used to de­
termine the difference between oxic and
ATU inhibited removal and oxic and anoxic
removal.
For IFAS Carriers the kbio for
anoxic removal is most likely overesti­
mated with (1+kd · Xbiomass). Investigating
the TSS of the MBR batches, the high­
est TSS was in the oxic, and lowest in the
anoxic. Hence, differences in the removal
rates for MBR Sludge during different con­
centrations might be due to sorption.
58
Micropollutant removal from hospital wastewater by biofilm and membrane bioreactors
==PAGE:67==
Venlafaxine
0
4
8
12
16
20
24
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
IFAS Carriers
Venlafaxine
0
4
8
12
16
20
24
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
IFAS Sludge
Venlafaxine
0
4
8
12
16
20
24
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
MBR Sludge
Oxic
Oxic ATU Inhibited
Anoxic
Ct/C0
Time (h)
Time (h)
Time (h)
Ct/C0
Venlafaxine
1 Cationic, some Kd­values > 0.1 L/g, no
conjugation, no background concentra­
tions.
2 Based on the positive charge and some
Kd­values, sorption is expected.
3 Interpretation of figure: Very small removal
rates and increasing concentrations for
oxic conditions for all biomasses.
4 The fluctuations observed are most likely
due to sorption/desorption.
5 Based on kbio with R2 >0.5, no results can
be used to determine the difference be­
tween oxic and ATU inhibited removal and
oxic and anoxic removal.
C.3
OMP removal in the batch experiments
In the following all data obtained in the experiments are shown.
Micropollutant removal from hospital wastewater by biofilm and membrane bioreactors
59
==PAGE:68==
Figure C.5: The main results for the nine OMP investigated and the 5 types of biomass.
To investigate the joined effect of the IFAS Carriers and IFAS Sludge, these are added
up as 20% carriers + 80% sludge for the IFAS results. The number written in red are
based on data, where a clear outlier in the data generated from MassHunter is excluded.
The background colours of the kbio indicate good vs poor removal with dark green indicat­
ing good removal (> 10L · g−1 · d−1), bright green indicating 5­10 L · g−1 · d−1, brightest
green indicating 0.1­5 L · g−1 · d−1 and red indicating poor removal (< 0.1L · g−1 · d−1) (in
accordance with Joss et al. (2006)). R2<0.5 are coloured red and R2>0.5 are green. The
R2 values describe how well the fitted kbio value fits the actual data. For the red values
less than 50% of the variation can be explained by the obtained kbio, hence these values
are deemed inappropriate to describe the removal.
In Figure C.6 all obtained kbio with their respective 95% confidence intervals are plotted.
It is observed that most compounds are removed with a kbio>0.1 (Lg−1d−1) indicating
60
Micropollutant removal from hospital wastewater by biofilm and membrane bioreactors
==PAGE:69==
0
1
2
3
4
1H-Benzotriazole Oxic
1H-Benzotriazole Anoxic
1H-Benzotriazole ATU Inhibited
Atenolol Oxic
Atenolol Anoxic
Atenolol ATU Inhibited
Azithromycin Oxic
Azithromycin Anoxic
Azithromycin ATU Inhibited
Ciprofloxazin Oxic
Ciprofloxazin Anoxic
Ciprofloxazin ATU Inhibited
Diclofenac Oxic
Diclofenac Anoxic
Diclofenac ATU Inhibited
Iomeprol Oxic
Iomeprol Anoxic
Iomeprol ATU Inhibited
Sulfamethoxazole Oxic
Sulfamethoxazole Anoxic
Sulfamethoxazole ATU Inhibited
Trimethoprim Oxic
Trimethoprim Anoxic
Trimethoprim ATU Inhibited
Venlafaxine Oxic
Venlafaxine Anoxic
Venlafaxine ATU Inhibited
20
40
60
kbio (L g-1 d-1)
MBBR 1
MBBR 2
IFAS Sludge
IFAS Carriers
MBR Sludge
IFAS
combined
Figure C.6: All kbio results plotted, with 95% confidence intervals (black lines) for each
compound, condition and batch.
Micropollutant removal from hospital wastewater by biofilm and membrane bioreactors
61
==PAGE:70==
Figure C.7: The removal % of all OMPs in the IFAS slude, IFAS carriers and MBR..
C.3.1
Literature Review
A small literature review was made to compare the kbio values.
62
Micropollutant removal from hospital wastewater by biofilm and membrane bioreactors
==PAGE:71==
Table C.3: Different kbio obtained in similar biomass and conditions as this thesis, A refers
to Joss et al. (2006), B to Falås (2013), C to Burzio et al. (2022), D to Escolà Casas et al.
(2015), E to Casas et al. (2015), F to Polesel et al. (2017)
Compound
1­H Benzotrialzole
Atenolol
Azithromycin
Ciprofloxacin
Diclofenac
Biomass
kbio
Oxic
kbio
Anoxic
Ref.
kbio
Oxic
kbio
Anoxic
Ref.
kbio
Oxic
kbio
Anoxic
Ref.
kbio
Oxic
kbio
Anoxic
Ref.
kbio
Oxic
kbio
Anoxic
Ref.
CAS
0.41­0.44
<0.1
B
0.51
0.62
C
<0.13
A
<0.1
<0.1
A, B
MBBR
1.956­3.264
1.1­2.4
E, F
0.245­0.754
E
0.08­0.51
E
0.62­0.36
0­0.05
E, F
Hybas
<0.1
B
2.95­8.78
0.05­0.08
D
Compound
Iomeprol
Sulfamethoxazole
Trimethoprim
Venlafaxine
biomass
kbio
Oxic
kbio
Anoxic
Ref.
kbio
Oxic
kbio
Anoxic
Ref.
kbio
Oxic
kbio
Anoxic
Ref.
kbio
Oxic
kbio
Anoxic
Ref.
CAS
1.2­1.6
A
1.68
1.21
C
<0.04
0.81
C
<0.04
<0.04
C
MBBR
0.60­1.61
0.26
E, D
0.19­0.26
1­3.5
E, F
0.68­0.70
0.1­0.3
E, F
0.096­0.35
0.02­0.06
E, F
Hybas
0.58­1.14
D
0.138­0.24
D
0.129­0.185
D
0.03­0.06
D
Micropollutant removal from hospital wastewater by biofilm and membrane bioreactors
63
==PAGE:72==
D
Assesment of chemicals in the
environment
A common way to assess the distribution of a chemical in the environment is to set up
a mass balance using the fugacity concept also known as Mackay­models. Based on
physical­chemical properties of a specific compound the distribution in up to six differ­
ent environmental compartments can be estimated. (Baun et al., 2017) Micropollutants
are found in plants, and tissues of a wide array of species from osprey, Greenland killer
whales, roach, and amphipod species (living in the deep ocean) (Bertram et al., 2022).
This bioaccumulation happens either directly by diffusion, adsorption, or active uptake
from the surroundings, which is known as bioconcentration, or indirectly with the con­
sumption of polluted feed. The latter is also known as biomagnification and describes
the increase of micropollutants up through the food chain. Persistent and very lipophilic
compounds (LogKow ≥6) tend to biomagnify (Baun et al., 2017; Bertram et al., 2022).
The bioconcentration factor (BCF) is used to assess the potential of a compound to
bioaccumulate in the aquatic environment. BCF describes the relationship between the
concentration of a substance in the organism and the concentration in the surrounding
environment at equilibrium (Baun et al., 2017). Chemicals with a BCF ≥500 can be clas­
sified as bioaccumulative, according to REACH. When experimental data is not available
BCF can be estimated from the partitioning coefficient between octanol and water (Kow)
and the logBCF from the logKow, and with a larger uncertainty from the water solubility.
Kow > 10,000 and logKow > 4 can be classified as potentially bioaccumulative, according
to REACH.
KH < 3 · 10−7 are less volatile than water and tend to stay in the water phase, whereas
KH > 10−3 are volatile in aqueous solution and tend to go to the gas phase. (Baun et al.,
2017)
Table D.1: An overview of the dependency of pKa and pH on organic acids and bases.
The table is based on the book ”Environmental Risk Assessment of Chemicals” by Baun
et al. (2017)
Dissociation/
non­dissociation of
organic acids and bases
depends on pH and the
acid dissociation constant
pKa.
Organic acid
pH = pKa
pH > pKa
pH < pKa
Organic base
pH = pKa
pH > pKa
pH < pKa
Form that dominates:
50/50 of each form
Dissociated form
Non­dissociated form
Form that dominates:
50/50 of each form
Non­dissociated form
Dissociated form
Biodegradation can happen aerobically and anaerobically. The OECD’s test strategy de­
scribes whether a compound is ready biodegradable or inherent biodegradable. If a
compound is inherently biodegradable further testing will be made to distinguish between
non­biodegradable, partially biodegradable, or inherent biodegradable. If a compound
is partially or inherently biodegradable they are further tested to get more detailed infor­
mation about the biodegradability kinetics and the metabolic pathways of the compound,
64
Micropollutant removal from hospital wastewater by biofilm and membrane bioreactors
==PAGE:73==
see Table D.2, in Appendix D. For easily biodegradable compounds the investigation of
metabolites and their environmental effects should be further studied UNESCO and HEL­
COM, 2017. Some compounds are found to be persistent, bioaccumulative, and toxic,
PBT compounds, and are considered to be compounds of high concern within the Reg­
istration, Evaluation, Authorisation, and Restriction of Chemical Substances (REACH)
regulation. Baun et al., 2017
Table D.2: An overview of biodegradability. The table is based on the book ”Environmental
Risk Assessment of Chemicals” by Anders Baun, Niel Nyholm and K. Ole Kusk (2017).
Strategy
Typical values
Interpretation
OECD
Biodegradability tests:
Level 0
Level 1
Level 2
OECD AS
simulation test
70% DOC removal or 60%
removal of theoretical
oxygen consumption
within 28 days and in a
time interval of max 10 day
70% DOC removal or 60%
removal of theoretical
oxygen consumption
within 28 days
<20% degradation within
28 days
20­70% degradation within
28 days
>70% degradation within
28 days
SRT and
degradation kinetics
Ready biodegradable
Inherent biodegradable
Non­biodegradable
Partially biodegradable
Inherent biodegradable
Investigation of
Metabolites and
mineralisation
Danish EPA
BOD5
COD ≥0.5
Easiliy biodegradable
PBT classification:
Persistence (P)
Bioaccumulation (B)
Toxicity (T)
Half lives in:
Marine water > 60 d
Fresh water > 40 d
Marine sediments >180 d
Freshwater sediments > 120 d
Soil > 120 d
BCF > 2000
NOEC > 0.01 mg/L
Carcinogenic
Mutegenic
Toxic for reproduction
T; R48/ Xn; R48
If all three are fulfilled the
compound can be classified
as a PBT compound
Micropollutant removal from hospital wastewater by biofilm and membrane bioreactors
65
==PAGE:74==
D.0.1
Toxicity
To determine if a compound is toxic EU is making use of the CLP regulations, in which
compounds are classified within acute toxicity and chronic effects. This regulations is
using ecotoxicity tests: Baun et al., 2017
• Algal test for chronic toxicity, where the growth rate inhibition is measured as a
function of the concentration, resulting in effect concentrations (EC­values)
• Daphnia test for acute toxicity, where the immobilising is measured, resulting in
immobilising Concentrations (IC­values).
• Fish test for acute toxicity, where death is measured, resulting in lethal concentra­
tions (LC­values)
• Lowest Observed Effect Concentration (LOEC) values describe the minimum con­
centration with a statistical significant effect
• No Observed Effect Concentration (NOEC) values are the maximum concentration
with a statistically insignificant effect.
• The predicted no­effect concentration (PNEC) is found using the lowest LC50 value,
EC50, or NOEC divided by an assessment factor: 1000­10 depending on the amount
of available data.
The ecotoxicity tests are often referred to as EC50, IC50, or LC50 values which describe
the concentration where the growth rate is inhibited by 50% or 50% of the organisms
died, respectively. It is important to compare the ecotoxicity with an estimate of the ex­
pected concentration of a compound in the environment (PEC). If PEC/PNEC « 1 there
is generally no reason for concern. Baun et al., 2017; Led et al., 2021; Verlicchi et al.,
2013b
66
Micropollutant removal from hospital wastewater by biofilm and membrane bioreactors
==PAGE:75==
Micropollutant removal from hospital wastewater by biofilm and membrane bioreactors
67
==PAGE:76==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Bygningstorvet, Bygning 115
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.sustain.dtu.dk
