==PAGE:1==
M.Sc Thesis
Master of Science In Engineering
Advanced Hand-Based Biometrics for Foren-
sics
Durita Kvilt Jónsdóttir - s173807
==PAGE:2==
Supervisor: Christian D. Jensen
Co-supervisors: Prof. Dr. Christian Rathgeb & Dr. Lazaro Janier Gonzalez-Soler & MsC.
Daniel Fischer
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Technical University of Denmark
Matematiktorvet
Building 303B
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
==PAGE:3==
Summary
In many forensic scenarios criminals often attempt to conceal their identity by cover-
ing their face and other distinctive features. In such cases, the material can however
reveal other unique features which can be used for identification, such as the hand(s).
Many state-of-the-art (SOTA) hand-based biometric systems can accurately identify
individuals in constrained environments. Nevertheless, for forensic investigations, the
environment is often unconstrained, and the identification becomes considerably more
challenging, resulting in a decrease in accuracy.
In this project, different ways of enhancing the performance of SOTA hand-based
identification models in unconstrained environments are explored. This is done by
determining the performance improvements of implementing hand-alignment, fusion
and loss function optimization. Multiple hand-alignment methods are explored, in-
cluding a simple rotation, an aﬀine transformation and a palmprint extraction. Fur-
thermore, several fusion techniques are evaluated, including both score level and rank
level approaches, while only one alternative loss function was evaluated, namely the
additive angular margin loss.
The results of this study highlight that applying hand-alignment and fusion tech-
niques can improve the identification rate of the SOTA hand-based identification mod-
els. Specifically, the simple hand-alignment and the score level fusion with Weibull
normalization emerge as the superior methods. Combining both hand-alignment and
fusion techniques, reports the highest absolute performance improvement, as much as
18.8%. However, the results obtained from implementing the additive angular margin
loss function are inconclusive, as they do not consistently improve performance.
Despite optimizing the SOTA models, the identification rate in unconstrained
environments is far from optimal.
Therefore, future research is required to deter-
mine if there exist other methods leading to even higher performance improvements.
This includes exploring other hand-alignment methods, image enhancement and using
large-scale data.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This thesis is written at the Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer sci-
ence of the Technical University of Denmark in fulfillment for the requirements of a
MSc in Human-Centered Artificial Intelligence. It is conducted over a period of five
months, from February 1st, 2023, to July 1st, 2023, and represents a workload of 30
ECTS points. The thesis is supervised by Prof. Dr. Christian Rathgeb, Dr. Lazaro
Janier Gonzalez-Soler and MsC. Daniel Fischer.
The main objective of this thesis is to investigate how to improve the performance
of state-of-the-art Hand-Based biometric identification systems for forensic investiga-
tion, specifically focusing on unconstrained environments.
Copenhagen, 1st July 2023
Durita Kvilt Jónsdóttir
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
Throughout the course of this project, many people have generously provided their
expertise, time and resources to contribute to the development and refinement of the
project.
I would like to thank:
• Prof. Dr. Christian Rathgeb for his general guidance, advise and feedback
throughout the project.
• Dr. Lazaro Janier Gonzalez-Soler for his provision of necessary resources
and help regarding various technical aspects of this project.
• MsC. Daniel Fischer for preparing the servers and granting me access, per-
mitting me to conduct the experiments for this project.
Additionally, I would like to express my gratitude to all the above for the regular
follow-up meetings and always being prepared to answer any questions I have.
Furthermore, I would like to thank Associate Prof. Christian D. Jensen and
Prof.
Dr.
Christoph Busch for helping with the administrative and practical
aspects of the thesis.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Abbreviations
SOTA
State-of-the-art
SAC
Simple Alignment with Cropping
AA
Aﬀine Alignment
AAC
Aﬀine Alignment with Cropping
PA
Palmprint Alignment
RF
Rank Level Fusion
SF
Score Level Fusion
SFWN
Score Level Fusion using Weibull Normalization
EWRF
Exponential Weighted Rank Level Fusion
AML
Additive Angular Margin Loss
CD
Cross-dataset
==PAGE:10==
viii
==PAGE:11==
Contents
Summary
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
Abbreviations
vii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Motivation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Research Questions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Thesis Contributions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.4
Outline of Thesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Fundamentals
5
2.1
Biometrics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.1.1
Architecture of a General Biometric System . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.1.2
Identification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.1.3
Controlled Versus Uncontrolled Environments . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.1.4
Multialgorithmic Systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.1.4.1
Decision Level Fusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.1.4.2
Score Level Fusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.1.4.3
Feature Level Fusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.1.5
Evaluation Metrics for Identification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.2
Machine Learning Overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.2.1
Support Vector Machine . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.2.2
Deep Neural Networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.2.3
Convolutional Neural Networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.2.4
ResNet Architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.3
Geometric Transformation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3
Hand-Based Identification
17
3.1
Related Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.2
Challenges . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
==PAGE:12==
x
Contents
4
Experimental setup
21
4.1
Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.1.1
NTU-PI . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.1.2
HaGRID
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4.2
Hand-Based Identification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4.2.1
Attentive but Diverse Person Re-Identification (ABD) . . . . .
25
4.2.2
Relation-Aware Global Attention for Person Re-identification
(RGA) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4.2.3
Multi-branch with Attention Network for Hand-Based Person
Recognition (MBA)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.2.4
Implementation Details
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4.3
Hand-Alignment
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4.3.1
Simple Alignment with Cropping (SAC) . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.3.2
Aﬀine Alignment with and without Cropping (AA and AAC) .
29
4.3.3
Palmprint Alignment (PA)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.4
Multialgorithmic Fusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.4.1
Exponential Weighted Rank Level Fusion (EWRF) . . . . . . .
31
4.4.2
Score Level Fusion using Weibull Normalization (SFWN)
. . .
33
4.5
Loss Function Optimization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4.5.1
Additive Angular Margin Loss (AML) . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4.6
Evaluation Scenarios . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
5
Results and Discussion
39
5.1
Evaluation Scenario 1: Baseline Evaluation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
5.2
Evaluation Scenario 2: Hand-Alignment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
5.3
Evaluation Scenario 3: Fusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
5.4
Evaluation Scenario 4: Hand-Alignment and Fusion . . . . . . . . . . .
47
5.5
Evaluation Scenario 5: Loss Function Optimization . . . . . . . . . . .
49
5.6
Evaluation Scenario 6: Cross-dataset (CD) Evaluation . . . . . . . . .
51
5.7
Summary of Evaluation Scenarios . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
6
Conclusion
57
7
Future Work
59
7.1
Hand-Alignment
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
7.2
Image Enhancement and Segmentation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
7.3
Improve RGA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
7.4
Multibiometric System . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
7.5
Large-Scale Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
Appendices
63
Appendix A
Figures
65
==PAGE:13==
Contents
xi
Bibliography
71
==PAGE:14==
xii
==PAGE:15==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
1.1
Motivation
A biometric system enables automated recognition of individuals based on their bio-
logical and behavioral characteristics [1]. Some commonly used characteristics include
fingerprints, face, hand, and iris. The request for biometric systems has increased in
recent years and is used in many different sectors such as health technology, security,
and forensics.
For forensics investigation, biometric systems have been applied since the mid-
1960s when the automatic fingerprint identification system (AFIS) was formally in-
troduced. Since then, remarkable progress has been made not only in using finger-
prints but also in using other biometric characteristics such as gait, iris, and face [2].
However, in many forensic scenarios criminals often attempt to conceal their identity
by covering their face and other distinctive features. In such cases, the material can
however reveal other unique features which can be used for identification, including
the hand(s).
Hand-based identification is a biometric system, identifying individuals based on
the characteristics and features of their hands. The hand has multiple distinctive fea-
tures, one of them being geometry. Early approaches mainly used this characteristic
for recognition, however throughout the years, systems started using other features
such as palmprint, veins pattern or fingerprint. Extracting these biometric features
from the hand can be achieved in different ways, where recent studies suggest a grow-
ing trend in employing machine learning [3]. Many SOTA hand-based identification
models report a high level of accuracy in constrained environments [4,5]. However, in
forensic investigations, the environment is often unconstrained, meaning that some
data acquisition parameters are not controllable such as image resolution or hand po-
sition. In unconstrained environments the identification becomes considerably more
challenging, resulting in a significant decrease in accuracy [6].
The aim of this project is to inspect ways of improving the identification rate of
SOTA hand-based identification systems in unconstrained environments, specifically
within the context of forensics. Various approaches are implemented and evaluated,
including hand-alignment, fusion and loss function optimization.
==PAGE:16==
2
1 Introduction
1.2
Research Questions
The specific research questions of this project are stated as:
1. How can the performance of current SOTA hand-based identification systems be
improved in unconstrained environments?
2. To which extent can the performance of current SOTA hand-based identification
systems be improved in unconstrained environments?
3. What are the costs of improving current SOTA hand-based identification sys-
tems?
1.3
Thesis Contributions
The key contributions of this thesis are outlined, but not limited to, the following list:
• Development of a simple hand-alignment technique which improves the identi-
fication rate of SOTA hand-based identification systems in unconstrained envi-
ronments
• Introduction of a simple multialgorithmic system which improves the identifica-
tion rate of SOTA hand-based identification systems in unconstrained environ-
ments
• Demonstration of a more complex multialgorithmic system, based on combining
fusion and hand-alignment, which increases the performance as much as 18.8%
from best baseline
• Proposing future research for further improving hand-based identification in
unconstrained environments
1.4
Outline of Thesis
This remainder of this paper is organized as follows:
• Section 2 introduces the fundamentals, including topics such as biometrics, ma-
chine learning, and geometric transformations.
• Section 3 presents the related work in the field of hand-based identification and
the challenges which arise in unconstrained environments.
• Section 4 provides a description of the experimental setup and an overview of
the evaluation scenarios of this project.
==PAGE:17==
1.4 Outline of Thesis
3
• Section 5 reports and discusses the results obtained for each evaluation scenario.
• Section 6-7 presents the conclusion and future work.
==PAGE:18==
4
==PAGE:19==
CHAPTER 2
Fundamentals
This chapter presents the fundamentals, which provide a basic understanding of the
topic and theory covering this project. This includes general concepts about biomet-
rics, machine learning and geometric transformation described in respectively Section
2.1, 2.2 and 2.3.
2.1
Biometrics
Biometrics are the biological measurements, specifically physical or behavioral char-
acteristics of individuals, which can be extracted and used in biometric systems for
recognition [1]. Some physical characteristics include fingerprints, face, iris, hands,
DNA while behavioural characteristics include signature, gait, and voice. An optimal
biometric characteristic should be universal, unique, permanent, collectable, and re-
peatable. These are all desirable properties for achieving good subject discrimination
and reliable recognition performance [7].
2.1.1
Architecture of a General Biometric System
A general biometric system outlines the fundamental structure shared by all bio-
metric systems. Figure 2.1 illustrates the information flow and architecture of the
general biometric system, which consists of a number of subsystems such as data
capture, signal processing, data storage, comparison and decision. Essentially, the
general biometric system functions by capturing biometric samples, extracting the
distinctive features and comparing it to one or multiple stored references. Based on
the comparison score, a decision regarding the verification or identification claim is
made. Samples or extracted features can be stored as a reference in the data storage
subsystem [8].
Note, a captured biometric sample is often referred to as a query and is presented
to a biometric system for identification or verification. The query is compared to one
or multiple known identities, called references, typically stored in a database [1].
==PAGE:20==
6
2 Fundamentals
Figure 2.1. Architecture of a general biometric system [8, Figure 1].
2.1.2
Identification
The decision of a general biometric system can either be to verify or identify a person’s
identity. Verification refers to either confirming or rejecting the claimed identity of an
individual and can be used for personal authentication or access control applications.
The process consists of comparing the query with previously enrolled reference for
the claimed individual and to verify whether it is a match [8].
Identification refers to determining a person’s identity from a set of known iden-
tities. The process involves searching the reference database for the correct match.
Usually, the identification system returns a ranked candidate list, where the position
of a candidate is ordered by descending similarity score or ascending dissimilarity
score. The length of the candidate list can either be determined manually, by se-
lecting candidates with a similarity score above a threshold or as a combination of
both [8]. If the candidate list is empty, it indicates that no match was found. However,
if the candidate list is not empty there are one or more possible candidates.
Most real-life identification scenarios will encounter subjects which may or may
not already be registered within the system’s reference database. The identity of the
subject can therefore be unknown, and it will not always be possible to find a correct
match, known as open-set identification.
There are, however, cases, where all
possible subjects are with certainty registered in the system. In these cases, referred
to as closed-set identification, the system does not have to consider whether there
is a match or not, but solely to find the correct one [8].
==PAGE:21==
2.1 Biometrics
7
2.1.3
Controlled Versus Uncontrolled Environments
The data capturing subsystem, as seen in Figure 2.1, can collect biometric samples
under either constrained or unconstrained environments. If the environment is con-
strained, some data acquisition parameters are controllable such as lighting, position,
background and image resolution. On the contrary, if samples are collected under
unconstrained or uncooperative environments there is little to no control over the
acquisition parameters [9]. Examples of hand images taken under constrained and
unconstrained environments are illustrated in Figure 2.2. Access control is an ex-
ample of a constrained environment, where lighting, placement of system and image
resolution usually can be controlled. Criminal material is typically captured under
unconstrained environments, containing much variation in lighting, distance to object
and quality.
((a))
((b))
Figure 2.2. Samples from (a) constrained and (b) unconstrained environments. (a) First
set of images are from the NTU-PI dataset [9, Figure 4(a)] and (b) the second set of image
are from the 11K hands dataset [4, Figure 3]
2.1.4
Multialgorithmic Systems
A biometric system can use multiple types of biometric characteristics, algorithms, or
biometric sensors for recognition, collectively referred to as multibiometric systems.
When the system combines multiple algorithms, it is known as a multialgorithmic
system. A multialgorithmic system receives one sample with one type of characteristic
and processes it, using two or more algorithms. The algorithms are typically combined
using either decision, score or feature level fusion, see architectures in respectively
==PAGE:22==
8
2 Fundamentals
Figure 2.3(a), 2.3(b) and 2.3(c).
The score and decision level fusion are applied
after the comparison subsystems, while the feature level fusion is applied before.
Generally, the advantage of such a multibiometric system is that it leads to improved
performance and reduced risk [10].
((a))
((b))
((c))
Figure 2.3. Different levels of fusion: (a) decision, (b) score and (c) feature level fusion [10,
Figure 3]
2.1.4.1
Decision Level Fusion
Decision level fusion is applied after the decision subsystem, see architecture in Figure
2.3(a). The decision subsystem outputs the binary result reject or accept of a poten-
==PAGE:23==
2.1 Biometrics
9
tial match. The decisions from the different components/algorithms are then fused
together, resulting in a combined decision. When fusing a small number of decisions,
logical functions, such as the AND and OR operators, are usually implemented to
formulate the fusion rules. However, when the systems have many decisions to fuse,
it is more appropriate to use voting schemes such as majority voting. This requires
that the decision outcome is formulated as logical values, e.g. 1 and 0 [10].
2.1.4.2
Score Level Fusion
The score level fusion is applied after the comparison but before the decision sub-
system, see architecture in Figure 2.3(b). The comparison subsystem computes a
similarity or dissimilarity score for every potential match, known as the comparison
score. The scores from the different algorithms are fused together and fed into the
decision subsystem. The decision subsystem then determines, depending on the fused
score and predetermined acceptance threshold, whether a match has been found. The
scores can be normalized before applying fusion, ensuring meaningful combinations
and results [10].
Another form of the score level fusion is the rank level fusion which contains
multiple indices based on the score [10].
In other words, it assigns a rank to all
candidates depending on the received score.
2.1.4.3
Feature Level Fusion
The architecture of the feature level fusion is seen in Figure 2.3(c), illustrating that
fusion is applied after the feature extraction and before the comparison. The extracted
features can be fused in different ways, the simplest being combing the features into
a feature vector and applying feature classification. To achieve better performance,
the features can be normalized before being fed to the fusion module [10].
2.1.5
Evaluation Metrics for Identification
Evaluation metrics are used to determine the performance of an algorithm. Selecting
the appropriate evaluation metric(s) depends on the specific context, requirements,
and importance of different types of errors. Within biometrics, the evaluation metrics
will differ for identification and verification systems. Some common evaluation metrics
for identification systems include false-negative identification rate (FNIR) and false-
positive identification rate (FNIR). The metrics estimate the proportion at which a
system respectively falsely rejects or falsely accepts a match. Another, commonly
used metric is the true-positive identification rate (TPIR), which measures the
rate at which a system correctly identifies individuals. TPIR and FNIR are closely
related, where the relationship is mathematically described in Equation 2.1 [8]
TPIR(N, R, T) = 1 −FPIR(N, R, T)
(2.1)
==PAGE:24==
10
2 Fundamentals
where N is the number of references or know identities, R is the rank index and
T is the threshold used in comparison between query and reference. TPIR computes
the proportion of times which the correct identity is included in the candidate list.
If the threshold is set to zero, the system will return the top R candidates. If the
threshold is non-zero, the system will return R or less candidates with comparison
scores exceeding the threshold [8].
In closed-set scenarios, identification performance can be displayed as a cumula-
tive match characteristic (CMC) plot. The CMC plots the TPIR(N,R,0) as a
function of R, giving a clear overview of the correct identification rate at rank 1 to
R [8].
Accuracy is another widely used metric, computing the rate at which the model
produces the correct output [11]. In closed-set scenarios, the terms accuracy, TPIR or
identification rate, all refer to the proportion of examples which the model correctly
identifies individuals.
2.2
Machine Learning Overview
According to Goodfellow et al. ”A machine learning algorithm is an algorithm that is
able to learn from data.” [11]. While fixed programs with explicitly programmed rules
may suﬀice in certain cases, they are not always optimal when dealing with complex
data. In such cases, machine learning proves to be a great tool that can learn without
being explicitly programmed.
Machine learning algorithms can be broadly categorized into supervised or unsu-
pervised learning, depending on what kind of data it has to learn from. An algorithm
is considered unsupervised when it learns from unlabeled data or features, finding
useful and meaningful patterns without explicitly knowing the correct answer [11].
A machine learning algorithm is supervised, when presented with labeled train-
ing data consisting of both features and a corresponding target/label. The goal is
to learn the relationship or mapping between the features and the corresponding la-
bel, enabling accurate predictions on new unseen features. Supervised algorithms
can be further subcategories into classification or regression, depending on the task.
A regression task predicts numerical values, while a classification task predicts
discrete values [11]. For example, predicting stock prices (numerical) is a regression
task, while predicting whether a person will lose or gain money on the stock market
(discrete) is a classification task.
When applying machine learning models, it is crucial that they perform well on
unseen data, since it provides an approximation of real-world performance.
As a
result, common practices include having separate datasets for training and testing,
usually created by splitting the original dataset. The models are then trained on the
==PAGE:25==
2.2 Machine Learning Overview
11
training dataset and evaluated on the unseen test dataset [11].
Some examples of supervised models include Logistic Regression, Support Vector
Machines (SVM) and Deep Neural Networks (DNN). This chapter will dive further
into the theory behind SVM and DNN, specifically exploring different kinds of DNN
such as the Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN).
2.2.1
Support Vector Machine
A Support Vector Machine (SVM) is a supervised machine learning model predicting
class identities [11]. Generally, the SVM uses linear classifiers to find a hyperplane
maximizing the margin between classes, as seen in Figure 2.4. The margin represents
the distance from the hyperplane to the closest data-points, called support vectors,
in each class.
Figure 2.4. Optimal hyperplane H maximizing the margin between classes [12, Figure 8.3]
The kernel-based SVM additionally enables the separation of nonlinearly separable
data. By utilizing kernels, is it possible to compute the relationship between observa-
tions in higher dimensions, as visualized in Figure 2.5. It is important to note, that
the kernel-based SVM does not explicitly transform the data into higher-dimensions,
as that would increase the computational complexity, but simply calculates the rela-
tionship there [12].
2.2.2
Deep Neural Networks
Another commonly used algorithm is the deep neural network, which is a part of
a more modern machine learning subfield called deep learning.
Neural networks
are inspired by the human brain, consisting of billions of neurons which are inter-
connected and collectively process and transmit chemical and electrical signals. Just
like the brain, a neural network consists of connected neurons processing and trans-
mitting data [13]. Figure 2.6 illustrates a deep feed-forward network, also called a
feed-forward neural network, consisting of an input layer, an output layer and three
==PAGE:26==
12
2 Fundamentals
Figure 2.5. Hyperplane separating classes when mapping data from (b) lower-dimensional
space to (b) higher-dimensional space [12, Figure 8.5]
hidden layers. A feed-forward neural network only processes data in one direction,
from left to right, where each layer processes the data from previous layers [11].
Figure 2.6. Feed-forward neural network with 5 layers [13, Figure 10.6]
The network learns through training, using features as input and its corresponding
target as the optimal output. The training data specifies the desired output value of
the final layers, namely a value as close to the target as possible. However, there are
no such restrictions on the hidden layers, allowing the learning algorithm to decide
how to best utilize them [11].
Every neuron in the hidden layers computes an activation value and transmits it
to the neurons of the next layer. The activation values are typically computed by
mathematically combining the inputs, the corresponding weights, and a bias. The re-
sulting value is then passed through an activation function, resulting in an activation
==PAGE:27==
2.2 Machine Learning Overview
13
value. The weights and biases are the parameters which the network seeks to learn.
Early in the training process, the network may produce outputs far from the correct
target. However, as the training proceeds, the weights and biases are adjusted, and
the network will start to produce more accurate predictions. The process of modifying
these parameters is facilitated by a learning algorithm, such as backpropagation [13].
2.2.3
Convolutional Neural Networks
Figure 2.7. CNN architecture [14, Figure 9.19]
Figure 2.8. 2x2 max-pooling [14, Figure 9.23]
One specialized type of feed-forward neural network is the Convolutional Neu-
ral Network (CNN), shown to be very effective in processing images. CNN can
detect patterns in images through the convolution of local filters upon the input. The
architecture of a CNN usually consists of multiple convolutional and pooling layers,
followed by a fully-connected layer as illustrated in Figure 2.7. The convolution layers
are the building blocks of a CNN, containing several filters meant to capture features
of the input such as edges, shapes, or textures. The filters can be described as weight
matrices, where the goal is to learn to optimal weight values through training the
==PAGE:28==
14
2 Fundamentals
network.
The convolution layer returns the filtered input or feature map as seen
in Figure 2.7, which is subsequently passed to an activation function, introducing
nonlinearity in the model. To extract coarse features and reduce dimensionality, con-
volutional layers are normally followed by a pooling layer. Two popular approaches
include the average pooling and max pooling. The max pooling works by extracting
the max value within a NxN block, see example of 2x2 max-pooling in Figure 2.8 [14].
After repeating the convolution and pooling a desired number of times, the ex-
tracted features are combined and flattened to create a 1D feature vector.
This
feature vector is fed into the fully connected neural network, see Figure 2.7, which
ultimately predicts the final output [14].
2.2.4
ResNet Architecture
Figure
2.9.
Residual
learning [15, Figure 2]
One commonly used CNN is the Residual Network
(ResNet), which was proposed to address the challenges
that arise when training deeper neural networks. These
challenges include the problem of vanishing or exploding
gradients and performance degradation. ResNet tackles
these challenges, especially the degradation of deep net-
works, by using a deep residual learning framework [15].
In ResNet, instead of letting the layers learn a desired
underlying mapping H(x), the network learns the residual
mapping F(x) = H(x)−x, as seen in Figure 2.9. The ad-
vantage is that the residual mapping is easier to learn and can with few computations
be recast into the desired mapping. The residual learning is realized by introducing
shortcut connections, skipping one or more layers. In ResNet the shortcut connection
is the identity mapping, seen in Figure 2.9, which adds the identity to the outputs of
the stacked layers [15].
The ResNet architecture comes in many different depths, such as ResNet-18,
ResNet-50, and ResNet-100, where the number indicates how many layers the model
consists of [15].
2.3
Geometric Transformation
Geometric transformation refers to the process of transforming images geometrically,
while keeping the pixel values unchanged. The pixel positions (x,y) can be mapped
into the transformed positions (x’,y’) by applying transformation such as translation,
scaling, rotation or shearing [16].
Translating an image simply includes shifting the pixels (x,y) vertically or hori-
zontally with some offset ∆x and ∆y. Figure 2.10(b) shows the result of applying
translation to the input image shown in Figure 2.10(a).
==PAGE:29==
2.3 Geometric Transformation
15
Figure 2.10. Different transformation [16, Figure 10.1]
Scaling an image refers to adjusting the size in the x- and/or y-directions. The
new pixel positions of the scaled image are computed by multiplying the old position
with a scaling factor, as in Equation 2.2. Figure 2.10(c) visualizes the result of scaling
the input image in Figure 2.10(a).
[x′
y′
]
=
[Sx
0
0
Sy
] [x
y
]
(2.2)
Rotating an image is achieved by rotating all pixels by a given angle θ. As demon-
strated in Equation 2.3 the rotated positions are computed by multiplying the input
positions with a counterclockwise rotation matrix. Figure 2.10(d) shows the result of
rotating the input image in Figure 2.10(a).
==PAGE:30==
16
2 Fundamentals
[x′
y′
]
=
[cosθ
−sinθ
sinθ
cosθ
] [x
y
]
(2.3)
Like translation, shearing an image includes shifting the pixel positions. However,
unlike translation, the pixels are shifted by an amount dependant on their position.
All pixels will therefore not be shifted equally, resulting in the sheared format. Shear-
ing an image can be done by applying Equation 2.4, see example in Figure 2.10(e).
[x′
y′
]
=
[ 1
Bx
By
1
] [x
y
]
(2.4)
The mentioned transformations can be combined in various ways, by multiplying
their respective transformation matrices. Some examples include the rigid transfor-
mation and the aﬀine transformation. A rigid transformation consists of rotation and
translation while an aﬀine transformation consists of translation, rotation, scaling,
and shearing. A example of the aﬀine transformation is seen in Figure 2.10(f).
Image registration refers to the process of mapping a template image to a reference
image, so they fit together in the best possible way. In this scenario, the goal is to
estimate the parameters of the optimal geometric transformation T, which can be
done using a set of corresponding landmarks annotated in both the input and the
reference image. The parameters of the transformation matrix will depend on what
type of transformation has been selected. For example, in rigid transformations, T
consists of three parameters: ∆x, ∆y, and θ. These parameters can be estimated by
minimizing the objective function such as the sum of squared distances between the
landmarks in the template and reference image [16].
==PAGE:31==
CHAPTER 3
Hand-Based
Identification
This chapter dives into prior and current research in the field of hand-based biometric
systems and discusses the current challenges when applied in unconstrained environ-
ments. To address these challenges, the chapter collects insights from other fields,
e.g., face recognition, where similar issues have been encountered.
3.1
Related Work
Hand-Based identification is a biometric system, identifying individuals based on the
unique characteristics and features of their hands. Early hand-based biometric sys-
tems relied on hand geometry as the primary biometric characteristic and the first
device using such feature was already patented in 1971 by Robert Miller. The device
employed pattern recognition through mechanical means, utilizing four spring bars
to measure finger length and match it with patterns on a user’s identity card. Sub-
sequently, the first hand-scanner, Identimat, was developed based on Miller’s patent.
It operated by having users place their hands on grooves and scanned the photocells
underneath. In the mid-1980s, Recognition System Inc. introduced and started sell-
ing modern hand scanners capable of capturing 3D hand images and in 1995, BioMet
Partners, Inc. developed a two-finger hand scanner, utilizing the geometry of the
index and middle fingers [3].
While the first biometric systems primarily relied on hand geometry, ongoing
research has explored using other features of the hand. Depending on which feature
is extracted, hand-based biometric systems can be categorized into the following
groups [3]:
• hand geometry and handshape
• palmprint
• fingerprint
• topography (finger, hand)
==PAGE:32==
18
3 Hand-Based Identification
Mostly older research is categorized into these four groups, hand geometry [17],
palmprint [18], fingerprint [19], and finger/hand topography [20]. Newer studies show
a growing trend in using deep learning which, instead of manually extracting specific
features, automatically extracts relevant information from the hand. The advantage
of such approaches is that they can leverage all available hand characteristics, rather
than being restricted to a single feature. However, it is worth noting that some cur-
rent deep learning based research still focuses solely on specific hand characteristics,
such as the palmprint [9,21].
In 2019, Afifi proposed a CNN-based model for hand-based identification [4]. Afifi
states, that most SOTA hand-based identification methods follow the traditional
pipeline by extracting handcrafted features.
As CNN’s have been out-performing
hand-engineered feature-based methods, Afifi proposes a new model consisting of two
modules. The first module is a two-stream CNN model, where each stream focuses on
learning respectively global and local features. The second module employs a SVM
classifier to perform identification using the extracted features. The model demon-
strated better, or on-par accuracy compared to previous SOTA algorithms, when
evaluated on the 11K dataset. The 11K dataset is also proposed by Afifi and con-
tains images of both the palm and dorsal side of the hand, captured under controlled
conditions with consistent alignment and a uniform white background. Additionally,
the study found that the dorsal side of human hands is found to have effective dis-
tinctive features, which are equal or even superior to those found in the palm side of
the human hand.
Later in 2019, Chen et al.
introduced the Attentive but Diverse Person Re-
Identification (ABD-Net) [22]. ABD-Net was initially developed for person re-identification
but can easily be adapted for hand-based person identification. By incorporating at-
tention modules and diversity regularization’s in the network ABD-net learns more
representative, robust and discriminate features compared to other methods that of-
ten capture correlated and non-diverse features [22].
In 2020, Zhang et al. [23] proposed the Relation-Aware Global Attention for Per-
son Re-identification (RGA-Net). Like ABD-Net, RGA-Net utilizes attention mecha-
nisms and was initially developed for body-based person re-identification. The model
was designed with the idea to capture global structural information for better atten-
tion learning.
Another method proposed in 2020 is the Identification Based on Hand Images Us-
ing Deep Learning Methods (HandNet) by Yuan et al. [24]. This method introduces a
two-stream end-to-end recognition network that combines preprocessing of hand im-
ages, CNN networks, and an SVM classifier module. HandNet takes both RGB and
Near-Infrared (NIR) images of the hand as input. The RGB image is fed to stream 1
of the CNN, while the NIR image is fed to stream 2. The extracted features from both
streams are then combined and passed to the classifier. HandNet was trained on the
==PAGE:33==
3.2 Challenges
19
Forensic Skin Image Databases of Nanyang Technological University and evaluated
on the PolyU hand dorsal dataset. The dataset used for training contains RGB and
NIR hand dorsal images, while the evaluation dataset consists of RGB hand dorsal
images. HandNet demonstrates better performance compared to other SOTA meth-
ods such as VGG16, SqueezeNet, and the model presented by Afifi [4].
In 2022, Baisa et al. [25] proposed the Global and Part-Aware Network (GPA-Net)
for hand-based person identification. The author highlights that some of the current
SOTA method e.g., the model proposed by Afifi, is not end-to-end and that the au-
thors treat the images in unusual ways. Additionally, many methods only consider
the local features and not the global. To address these shortcomings, GPA-Net was
developed as an end-to-end model that learns both global and local features. Evalua-
tion on the 11K and HD datasets demonstrated performance improvements compared
to baseline models such as ResNet50 and VGG19-bn.
Another SOTA method introduced by Baisa et al. in 2022 is the Multi-Branch
with Attention Network for hand-based Person Recognition (MBA-Net) [5].
Like
ABD-Net and RGA-Net, MBA-Net incorporates both channel and spatial attention
modules. To address the issues and weaknesses related to the attention mechanism,
particularly pixel shuffling, the authors incorporated relative positional encodings
into the spatial attention module to capture the spatial positions of pixels. MBA-Net
demonstrated SOTA performance, outperforming GPA-Net, ABD-Net, and RGA-Net
when evaluated on the 11K and HD datasets.
3.2
Challenges
The mentioned SOTA methods report high accuracy when evaluated on constrained
datasets like 11K or HD. However, it is important to note that none of these pro-
posed methods are evaluated in unconstrained environments. Baisa et al. claims that
GPA-Net and MBA-Net allow for a deeper exploration of features in less controlled
environments, but since their evaluations are conducted to constrained settings, the
accuracy of these claims remains uncertain.
In the context of unconstrained environments, research focusing on hand-based
identification remains limited. However, in 2020 Matkowski et al. [9] proposed an
unconstrained palmprint dataset NTU-PI and an end-to-end palmprint recognition
model. The model consists of two different CNN architectures: ROI Localization and
Alignment Network (ROI-LAnet) and Feature Extraction and Recognition Network
(FERnet). They outperform other SOTA palmprint recognition models and achieved
a 41.92% rank-1 accuracy on NPU-PI. However, it is important to note that this study
only utilized palmprints for identification and considered right and flipped left hands
==PAGE:34==
20
3 Hand-Based Identification
(of the same subject) as different subjects, which deviates from standard practices.
In 2023, research conducted by Zyla [6] demonstrates a significant decrease in
accuracy for ABD-Net, RGA-Net and MBA-Net when operating in unconstrained
environments. When trained and tested on the unconstrained dataset HaGRID pre-
sented by Kapitanov et al. [26], the accuracy drops to 59.5% or less [6]. The accuracy
further decreased to 12.5% or lower when trained and tested on NPU-PI, a more
diverse and complex unconstrained dataset [9]. These algorithms generally have dif-
ficulty with hand-based recognition in unconstrained environments and given that
forensic images and videos are often captured under such condition, it is likely that
these algorithms will perform poorly in forensic investigation [6].
In summary, research in the field of hand-based identification has primarily fo-
cused on constrained environments, while there is limited research available for un-
constrained scenarios. Existing studies in unconstrained environments indicate poor
performance due to images having varying backgrounds, hand positions, and resolu-
tion. However, similar challenges have been identified in other related fields such as
face recognition, which have received more research attention.
For face recognition, researchers have explored various methods to overcome the
discussed challenges in unconstrained environments. Techniques such as pose-invariant
face recognition have shown promising results, as well as the utilization of CNN-based
models and large-scale training data to enhance performance [27]. Recent studies
have also highlighted the benefits of employing deep learning for pose alignment [28],
exploring alternative loss functions like the Angular Margin Loss [29], and utilizing
multimodal systems [30].
==PAGE:35==
CHAPTER 4
Experimental setup
This chapter presents the experimental setup of this project, including a description of
all utilized datasets, algorithms and their processing and implementation methodolo-
gies in respectively Section 4.1 and 4.2. Furthermore, a description of the implemented
optimization methods hand-alignment, fusion and loss function are provided respec-
tively in Section 4.3, 4.4 and 4.5. Finally, an overview of all conducted experiments
is provided in the form of evaluation scenarios.
4.1
Data
This project utilized two unconstrained datasets, namely NTU-PI and HaGRID. The
following part of this chapter will describe the datasets in detail and explain how they
were processed for the purpose of this project.
4.1.1
NTU-PI
Figure 4.1. Sampled hand images from NTU-PI [9, Figure 4(a)]
NTU-PI is an unconstrained palm-dataset proposed by Matkowski et al. [9] in
2020. It consists of 7781 hand images from 2035 different palms and 1093 different
subjects. It was proposed for the purpose of studying the performance of hand-based
identification in unconstrained environments, such as many forensic scenarios. The
dataset was established by scraping images from the internet and extracting any
detected hands. Samples from the dataset are seen in Figure 4.1, illustrating high
==PAGE:36==
22
4 Experimental setup
variation in hand gestures, viewpoint and background. The authors state, that the
dataset is diverse by representing different ethnicity groups, sex, and ages.
Figure 4.2. Samples from NTU-PI with quality score under 10
For this project, the NTU-PI dataset was processed as in [6]. The initial processing
steps involved removing all images, with a quality score under 10. Examples of low-
quality images are illustrated in Figure 4.2. Additionally, all left-hand images were
excluded, resulting in a dataset of only right hands, see Figure 4.3 illustrating four
processed samples. The resulting dataset contained 2839 images, a reduction of 64%
from the initial 7881 images.
Figure 4.3. Samples from NTU-PI after applying processing steps
Subsequently, the dataset was split into train, query, and reference, using a train-
ing fraction of 50%. While the training set would remain constant for all splits, the
query and reference were split randomly. Therefore, to achieve more reliable results
and enable a 5-fold evaluation, the data was split five times. All splits are closed-set
scenarios, where all presented subjects are registered in the reference dataset.
The training data contains images of 366 different subjects, while the query and
reference dataset each represent 365 subjects, as seen in Table 4.1. It’s worth noting
that Zyla [6] reported 477 subjects for training, query, and reference, which is more
than reported in this project. It seems that the processing steps in this project ex-
cluded more images than reported by [6], resulting in a smaller dataset and ultimately
the discrepancy in number of subjects.
4.1.2
HaGRID
In 2022 Kapitanov et al. [26] presented the Hand Gesture Recognition Image Dataset
(HaGRID). The dataset has a size of approximately 716 GB consisting of more than
==PAGE:37==
4.1 Data
23
Dataset
Gestures
Number of iden-
tities
Number
of
im-
ages
NTU-
PI
Natural gestures
Train: 366
Train: 1969
Query: 365
Query: 505
Gallery: 365
Gallery: 365
HaGRID
Palm gestures
Train: 1032
Train: 6205
Query: 555
Query: 2604
Gallery: 555
Gallery: 555
Table 4.1. Overview of datasets used in this project. States dataset name, which gestures
are seen in the images and the number of images used as well as the number of identities
550 thousand images. Furthermore, the dataset is divided into 18 different hand-
gesture classes, see Figure 4.4, each containing more than 30.000 images. Like NTU-PI
the HaGRID dataset is unconstrained, containing variations in background, lighting
condition and distance to object.
However, some parameters are controlled such
as hand gesture and image resolution, making it an easier unconstrained dataset.
Additionally, most images are taken indoors and for many subjects the background
remains consistent across all images, also contributing to it being more constrained.
Kapitanov et al. splits the dataset, using a training fraction of 92%. The training
data contains on average 28.300 images per class, while the test data contains ap-
proximately 2.400 images per class. In [6], palm and stop gestures from the test set
are utilized, excluding all training data. On the contrary, this project used the palm
gestures, marked in Figure 4.4, from the training set, which resulted in a significantly
larger dataset of 28.326 images.
Preparing the dataset for the purpose of this project was done by the code of [6].
The processing steps included removing images with a quality score under 10, only
keeping right-hand images and only selecting subjects with more than one sample.
Figure 4.5 shows four samples from the HaGRID dataset after applying the processing
steps. These steps reduced the dataset to 9364 images, a reduction of 67%.
Finally, the data was split into train, query, and reference five times using a
training fraction of 65%. The training set consists of 1032 different subjects while the
query and reference has 555 subjects each, as shown in Table 4.1. All possible subjects
of the query are represented in the reference set, indicating a closed-set scenario.
==PAGE:38==
24
4 Experimental setup
Figure 4.4.
18 different hand-gestures available in the HaGRID dataset [26, Figure 1].
Utilized gestures are marked in red.
Figure 4.5. Four processed HaGRID samples
4.2
Hand-Based Identification
This project only evaluated a few of the most competitive SOTA hand-based identifi-
cation systems, including the Attentive but Diverse Person Re-Identification (ABD),
Relation-Aware Global Attention for Person Re-identification (RGA), and Multi-
branch with Attention Network for hand-based Person Recognition (MBA). This
chapter will explain the architecture of the three models and present the implemen-
tation details.
==PAGE:39==
4.2 Hand-Based Identification
25
4.2.1
Attentive but Diverse Person Re-Identification (ABD)
Attentive but Diverse Person Re-Identification (ABD) [22] was proposed in 2019 by
Chen et al.. It was originally designed for person re-identification but can, with minor
modifications, be utilized for hand-based identification.
The authors address the
challenge associated with attention mechanisms, including a general lack of diversity
in feature embeddings. To overcome the issue, they propose the ABD-Net, which
integrates both attention modules and diversity regularization, ensuring attentive
but diverse learning.
Figure 4.6. ABD-net architecture [22, Figure 4].
The ABD-net architecture, visualized in Figure 4.6, consists of a ResNet-50 back-
bone, later split into two branches: the attentive branch and the global branch.
Throughout the network, attention is applied using the Channel Attention modules
(CAM) and Positional Attention Modules (PAM), to respectively capture channel-
wise and spatial-wise features. To promote diverse features, the attention modules
are followed by either Orthogonality Regularization on Weight (OW) or Orthogonal-
ity Regularization on Feature (OF). Note, that the global branch does not incorporate
attention modules, enabling it to learn more global structural information. Finally,
the output of both the global and attentive branch is concatenated, producing the
final feature embedding.
The difference between using only attention modules and using attention modules
with diversity regularization (ABD-net), is seen in figure 4.7. The Figure shows that
by using attention mechanisms, the model learns to focus on important features but
may become overly focused on specific regions, such as the arm or the t-shirt. By
implementing the diversity regularization, the network learns more general features
while still excluding less relevant features like the background.
==PAGE:40==
26
4 Experimental setup
Figure 4.7. Visualization of (i) original image, (ii) Attentive feature maps and (iii) attentive
and diverse feature maps (L equals large values and S small values) [22, Figure 1].
4.2.2
Relation-Aware Global Attention for Person Re-identification
(RGA)
Relation-Aware Global Attention for Person Re-Identification (RGA) was proposed
in 2020 by Zhang et al. [23]. Like ABD-net, it was originally designed for person
re-identification but can be adapted for hand-based identification. The authors ar-
gue that previous approaches using attention mechanism ignore the global structure
patterns, leading to worse performance. Therefore, Zhang et al. present the RGA-
Net which additionally captures the global structure information for better attention
learning.
Figure 4.8. Relation-aware global attention modules [23, Figure 3]
RGA-net utilizes relation-aware global attention modules, which enables it to learn
both local and global structures. Specifically, the network incorporates two types
of relation-aware global attention module, namely the spatial relation aware global
attention and the channel relation-aware global attention, see the architectures in
Figure 4.8. Both types operate by stacking the relations, i.e., its pairwise correlations
with all the feature positions, and the feature itself together. The spatial relation-
==PAGE:41==
4.2 Hand-Based Identification
27
aware global attention module captures the relationship between different regions
(spatial-wise), while the channel relation-aware global attention module extracts the
relationships between different feature maps (channel-wise).
Figure 4.9.
Visualizatoin of (a) orignal image, (b) spatial attention without exploring
relations and (c) RGA-net which additionally captures global structure patterns [23, Figure
1].
Figure 4.9 shows the difference between using spatial information without explor-
ing relations and using attention mechanisms which capture global relations (RGA-
net). The Figure illustrates that RGA-net is better at capturing more important
features and suppressing less important ones like the background.
4.2.3
Multi-branch with Attention Network for Hand-Based Person
Recognition (MBA)
In 2022, Baisa et al. [5] proposed the Multi-Branch with Attention Network for Hand-
Based Person Recognition (MBA-Net).
Just like ABD-Net and RGA-Net, MBA-
Net is an attention-based model incorporating both channel and spatial attention
modules. However, MBA-Net takes into consideration additional challenges, such as
computational ineﬀiciency and the issue of pixel shuffling.
To address the computational ineﬀiciency, Baisa et al. only applies the attention
modules to low-resolution feature maps in later stages of the network.
Furthermore, to overcome the issue of pixel shuffling, the network incorporates
relative positional encoding into the spatial attention, enabling it to capture the spa-
tial positions of pixels.
Figure 4.10 illustrates the architecture of the MBA-net. The architecture consists
of a backbone, based on the first 3 layers of ResNet-50, followed by three branches,
each responsible for extracting specific features. The first branch incorporates Spatial
Attention Module with Relative Positional Encodings (SAM-RPE), capturing spatial
==PAGE:42==
28
4 Experimental setup
Figure 4.10. MBA architecture [5, Figure 2]
positions of pixels. The second branch simply applies the fourth layer of the backbone,
enabling the network to learn global structural information. The third branch incor-
porates Channel Attention Module (CAM), which focuses on learning channel-wise
features.
Each branch’s output is then fed into a fully-connected layer, followed by batch
normalization, leaky rectified linear units, and dropout, resulting in three 2048-
dimensional column feature vectors. Finally, a classification layer is applied to predict
the identity (ID) of each input based on the extracted features.
4.2.4
Implementation Details
The three models, ABD, RGA, and MBA are implemented and evaluated in Pytorch
using the code provided in [6]. The models were trained and tested using an NVIDIA
A100 80GB PCIe GPU and the model parameters were set to match those in [6].
Specifically, RGA was trained for 600 epochs, while MBA and ABD were trained for
100. The image sizes were adjusted to fit the settings of the corresponding models,
namely 256x256 pixels for ABD and RGA, and 356x356 pixels for MBA. Additionally,
an Adam optimizer was used for all three models.
4.3
Hand-Alignment
Some face-recognition studies in unconstrained environments demonstrate that apply-
ing pose alignment leads to an increase in performance. Therefore, to explore whether
such improvements are also observed in hand-based recognition, similar approaches
were adopted in this study, namely the implementation of hand-alignment.
Four
different alignment methods were implemented: Simple Alignment with Cropping
==PAGE:43==
4.3 Hand-Alignment
29
(SAC), Aﬀine Alignment with and without cropping (AAC and AA) and Palmprint
Alignment (PA) using ROI-LAnet. Examples of applying the four different alignment
methods to NTU-PI and HaGRID are seen in respectively Figure 4.15 and 4.16. All
alignment methods, except the last, rely on the landmarks detected by MediaPipe [31]
which are demonstrated in Figure 4.11. Note that if MediaPipe fails to detect any
landmarks, the original image is returned without any alignment.
The error rate
of MediaPipe on the NTU-PI and HaGRID dataset is respectively
132
2839 ≈5% and
252
9364 ≈2.5%.
The rest of this chapter will dive further into the mathematical and implementa-
tion details of the alignment methods SAC, AA, AAC and PA.
Figure 4.11. 21 detected hand-landmarks by MediaPipe [31]
4.3.1
Simple Alignment with Cropping (SAC)
The first employed alignment method was the SAC technique. It is inspired by Yörük
et al [32] and performs both rotation and cropping of an image. The method uses
two landmarks, namely 5 and 17 (as annotated in Figure 4.11), to define a pivot line
that needs to be rotated to achieve symmetry around the x-axis. The angle between
the pivot line and the x-axis is computed and used as a parameter for the rotation
matrix. After estimating the rotation matrix, the image is rotated and cropped by
identifying the smallest bounding box that encloses all 21 landmarks. Figure 4.12
illustrates an input image together with the two detected landmarks, and the result
of applying SAC to it.
4.3.2
Aﬀine Alignment with and without Cropping (AA and AAC)
The second alignment method uses image registration to compute an aﬀine transfor-
mation, enabling both rotation, scaling, translation, and shearing. Unlike the first
method, it uses five landmarks, namely 0, 5, 9, 13, and 17 annotated in Figure 4.11,
to estimate the aﬀine transformation. The image registration uses a set of detected
landmarks and reference landmarks, where the goal is to find an optimal mapping
which minimizes the least squares. The reference or ground truth landmarks were
==PAGE:44==
30
4 Experimental setup
((a))
((b))
Figure 4.12. Sample image from NTU-PI (a) with detected landmarks (5 and 17, which
collectively define the pivot line) and (b) the result of applying SAC
determined by manually examining various hand positions and defining the optimal
positions.
After estimating the aﬀine transformation, the image was transformed. Similar to
the SAC method, it is also possible to apply cropping (AAC) to the aﬀine alignment
(AA). An example of applying AA and AAC is seen in Figure 4.13, where Figure
4.13(a) shows a input image together with both the detected landmarks and the
ground truth landmarks. Figure 4.13(b) shows the final result after applying the AA,
and Figure 4.13(c) illustrates the result of applying the AAC.
((a))
((b))
((c))
Figure 4.13. Sample image from NTU-PI (a) with detected and ground truth landmarks.
(b) Shows the result of applying AA and (c) AAC.
==PAGE:45==
4.4 Multialgorithmic Fusion
31
4.3.3
Palmprint Alignment (PA)
The final alignment method utilized in this project is PA or ROI-LAnet, proposed
by Matkowski et al [9], which is a palmprint extraction model.
The model was
implemented using the pretrained model on NTU-PI, found at an open-source code
repository at [33]. The original implementation of the network was in MATLAB, and
as a result, MATLAB was the platform used to implement the pretrained network in
this project.
Figure 4.14. ROI-LAnet architecture [9, Figure 8]
PA is a CNN-based model, see architecture in Figure 4.14, taking an image of
a hand as input and returning the palmprint.
The model consists of a trainable
Localization Network, which outputs the estimated normalized coordinates ˆθ of the
hand landmarks. The coordinates are forwarded to a grid generator which transforms
a regular square grid G to a deformed grid Tˆθ(G) based on ˆθ. Finally, the palmprint
is sampled into a regular grid using a bilinear sampler, which takes the deformed grid
Tˆθ(G) as input. In [9], the PA model uses a Thin Plate Spline transformation Tˆθ,
since it proved most powerful in other contexts.
4.4
Multialgorithmic Fusion
The advantage of applying fusion is that it generally leads to an increase in perfor-
mance of a biometric system. This project soley focuses on multialgorithmic systems,
where algorithms, applied to the same sample, are fused to produce a collective output.
Both score and rank level fusion approaches are implemented since they demonstrated
high performance in [34].
The rest of this section will discuss the mathematical details of the selected rank
and score level fusion and how they were implemented.
4.4.1
Exponential Weighted Rank Level Fusion (EWRF)
Initially, multiple rank level fusion approaches were implemented in this project, in-
cluding the Borda Count, Weighted Borda Count, and three methods proposed by
Kumar et al. [35], collectively referred to as non-linear weighted rank level fusion.
However, after a few test cases, it was obvious that one method was consistently
==PAGE:46==
32
4 Experimental setup
((a))
((b))
((c))
((d))
((e))
((f))
((g))
((h))
((i))
((j))
((k))
((l))
((m))
((n))
((o))
Figure 4.15. (a, f, k) Showing NTU-PI samples, with the application of (b, g, l) SAC, (c,
h, m) AA, (d, i, n), AAC and (e, j, o) PA.
outperforming the other, namely one of the nonlinear methods. The corresponding
formula of the best method is shown in Equation 4.1
Cp =
N
∑
i=1
wiexp(ri(p))
(4.1)
where ri(p) is the rank assigned to the p’th candidate by the i’th matcher/al-
gorithm and wi represents the weight assigned to the i’th algorithm. This method,
named Exponential Weighted Rank Level Fusion (EWRF), was implemented by utiliz-
ing the provided distance matrices from the evaluation, along with a set of estimated
weights. First, the distance matrices containing the distance/dissimilarity scores be-
tween queries and references were cast into a rank scale where the best match received
M votes, the second-best M-1 votes and so on. Then, the weights were computed
by first restructuring the distance matrices and concatenating them with the target
(match/non-match) and secondly applying logistic regression. Finally, after comput-
ing the weights and ranks, the result of the EWRF is computed by Equation 4.1.
==PAGE:47==
4.4 Multialgorithmic Fusion
33
((a))
((b))
((c))
((d))
((e))
((f))
((g))
((h))
((i))
((j))
((k))
((l))
((m))
((n))
((o))
Figure 4.16. (a, f, k) Showing HaGRID samples, with the application of (b, g, l) SAC, (c,
h, m) AA, (d, i, n), AAC and (e, j, o) PA.
4.4.2
Score Level Fusion using Weibull Normalization (SFWN)
Only two score level fusion approaches were implemented: Score Level Fusion with
Min-Max Normalization and Score Level Fusion with Weibull Normalization, pro-
posed by Pradhan et al. [34]. Again, after a few test cases, it was obvious that one
method was outperforming the other, namely the Score Level Fusion with Weibull
Normalization (SFWN).
According to [34], the Weibull normalization is well suited for identification sce-
narios, since it is an extreme value analysis as illustrated in Figure 4.17. The Weibull
distribution is fitted to the top n scores, where the best case is when the genuine
score (match) shows up in the tail. In those cases, the best score in the tail is an
outlier with respect to the Weibull distribution model.
The SFWN was implemented by converting the distance matrices obtained during
evaluation into similarity matrices. Then, the Weibull normalization algorithm, as de-
scribed in Figure 4.18, was applied. For every presented subject, the top 10 reference
scores were used to fit the Weibull distribution and ultimately to normalize the scores.
After normalization, the scores from all algorithms were summarized, resulting in the
==PAGE:48==
34
4 Experimental setup
Figure 4.17. Weibull Distribution [34, Figure 3(B)]
Figure 4.18. Weibull algorithm [36, Algorithm 1]
final fused scores.
4.5
Loss Function Optimization
Selecting the loss function is crucial as it can significantly influence the performance
of a model. One recently proposed loss function, showing SOTA performance for face
recognition, is the Additive Angular Margin Loss (AML). In this project, the AML
is implemented to investigate whether it can further improve performance in the case
of hand-based identification in unconstrained environments.
The remainder of this section will describe the AML, including its theoretical
foundations and the implementation details within this project.
4.5.1
Additive Angular Margin Loss (AML)
The AML is based on the margin-loss strategy illustrated in Figure 4.19, which inserts
a geodesic distance margin m between the sample and centers. The margin forces
==PAGE:49==
4.5 Loss Function Optimization
35
larger discrimination between classes, enabling it to obtain highly discriminative fea-
tures.
Figure 4.19. Different loss strategies [29, Figure 1]
As seen in Figure 4.20, the AML computes the cosine distance as the dot product
between the normalized features and normalized weights. The arc-cosine function is
applied to calculate the angle between the estimated DCNN features and the target
weights.
The additive angular margin is added to the target angle and a cosine
function is applied. Then the result is re-scaled and fed into an already established
loss function, in this case the SoftMax [29].
Figure 4.20. Angular Margin Loss [29, Figure 2]
The implementation details of the AML followed the code found at the open-source
repository in [37]. The loss function was implemented in both ABD and MBA and
can be utilized when running the models by defining the parameter –loss as AML.
Both ABD and MBA use the Cross Entropy loss function instead of the SoftMax
visualized in Figure 4.20.
==PAGE:50==
36
4 Experimental setup
4.6
Evaluation Scenarios
In summary, three different SOTA hand-based identification models were evaluated,
specifically ABD, RGA and MBA, on two unconstrained datasets NTU-PI and Ha-
GRID. The result of this experiment is referred to as the baseline evaluation, while
the remaining experiments assess how much the described methods, specifically hand-
alignment, fusion and loss function optimization can increase the performance from
baseline. All conducted experiments of this project are divided into different evalu-
ation scenarios. Table 4.2 offers an overview of all evaluation scenarios, providing a
brief descriptions, a reference to the corresponding descriptions/results section, and
states the data used for respectively training and testing.
In each evaluation scenario, the respective models are evaluated on five query/ref-
erence splits, each returning a distance matrix and the computed CMC values. The
results are then reported as the 5-fold mean and standard deviation of the CMC
values.
==PAGE:51==
4.6 Evaluation Scenarios
37
Evaluation
Scenario
Description
Train + test scenar-
ios
Baseline
evaluation
Evaluates the three baseline models
ABD, RGA and MBA (see sec. 5.1).
1. NTU-PI + NTU-PI
2. HaGRID + HaGRID
Hand-
alignment
Assess the performance improvements
achieved by implementing multiple
different alignment methods (see sec.
5.2).
1. NTU-PI + NTU-PI
2. HaGRID + HaGRID
Fusion
Evaluates the performance
enhancements achieved by applying
rank and score level fusion to different
combinations of the baseline models
(see sec. 5.3).
1. NTU-PI + NTU-PI
2. HaGRID + HaGRID
Hand-
alignment
and Fusion
Evaluates the performance
improvements of combining fusion and
alignment techniques (see sec. 5.4).
1. NTU-PI + NTU-PI
2. HaGRID + HaGRID
Loss Function
Optimization
Evaluates the performance
improvements of implementing the
Additive Angular Margin Loss (see sec.
5.5).
1. NTU-PI + NTU-PI
2. HaGRID + HaGRID
Cross-dataset
evaluation
Assesses the performance
improvements of doing a cross-dataset
evaluation (see sec. 5.6).
1. HaGRID + NTU-PI
2. NTU-PI + HaGRID
Table 4.2. Summary of all evaluation scenarios. Provides a brief description, reference to
description/result section and states the utilized training and testing data (see details about
data in Table 4.1).
==PAGE:52==
38
==PAGE:53==
CHAPTER 5
Results and Discussion
The primary objective of this project is to investigate how to improve the perfor-
mance of hand-based identification systems in forensics scenarios, specifically in un-
constrained environments (see research questions in Section 1.2). To achieve the goals,
techniques such as hand-alignment, fusion, and loss functions optimization are inves-
tigated and evaluated in different evaluation scenarios described in Table 4.2. This
section presents and discusses the results obtained from all evaluation scenarios. The
Tables included in this section will report the 5-fold mean rank-1, 5, and 10 accuracies,
while the Figures will display the CMC curves (5-fold mean and standard deviation)
for Rank-1 to Rank-20.
5.1
Evaluation Scenario 1: Baseline Evaluation
The initial evaluation scenario aims to establish a baseline assessment of the hand-
based identification models MBA, ABD, and RGA on the datasets NTU-PI and
HaGRID. This baseline serves as a reference point for evaluating the improvement
of hand-alignment, fusion, and loss function optimization. By comparing the perfor-
mance of the models before and after applying these methods, any observed improve-
ments can be identified.
Models
Rank-1 (%)
Rank-5 (%)
Rank-10 (%)
ABD
11
21.2
27.7
RGA
4.6
8.4
11.8
MBA
13.2
22.7
28.4
Table 5.1.
5-fold mean accuracy of the baseline models on NTU-PI. Best results are
highlighted in bold.
Table 5.1 and Figure 5.1(a) present the results of training and testing the models
==PAGE:54==
40
5 Results and Discussion
(MBA, ABD and RGA) on NTU-PI. The results illustrate that MBA is the best
performing model with rank 1, 5 and 10 accuracies of respectively 13.2%, 22.7% and
28.4%. ABD ranks as the second-best model, while RGA demonstrates the lowest
performance.
((a))
((b))
Figure 5.1. 5-fold CMC curves for baseline models trained and tested on (a) NTU-PI and
(b) HaGRID. Mean rank accuracy is represented by lines, while the colored area indicates
the standard deviation.
Similarly, Table 5.2 and Figure 5.1(b) present the results of training and testing the
models on HaGRID. Once again, MBA demonstrates the highest performance, with
rank 1, 5, and 10 accuracies of respectively 60.7%, 72.4% and 76.8%. ABD follows
as the second-best model, while RGA exhibits the poorest performance among the
evaluated models.
Models
Rank-1 (%)
Rank-5 (%)
Rank-10 (%)
ABD
52.7
67.1
73.2
RGA
19
28.2
33.3
MBA
60.7
72.4
76.8
Table 5.2.
5-fold mean accuracy of the baseline models on HaGRID. Best results are
highlighted in bold.
Consistently, across both datasets, HaGRID and NTU-PI, the models maintain
the same performance ranking, with MBA as the top-performing model, followed by
ABD and then RGA. These findings closely align with the results reported in [6].
==PAGE:55==
5.2 Evaluation Scenario 2: Hand-Alignment
41
There are some differences in the specific results, which may be caused by the size
differences in the used datasets, as described in Section 4.1, as well as the inclusion of
a 5-fold cross-evaluation in this study. However, most importantly, the overall trends
in performance are consistent, with MBA and ABD consistently outperforming RGA,
and both studies highlight the challenge of achieving satisfactory accuracies in uncon-
strained environments.
Both this project and [6] demonstrate that the identification rate of RGA is low
compared to MBA and ABD. However, a different study [5], which evaluates some
SOTA models on two constrained datasets, indicates that RGA reports comparable
performance to ABD, even outperforming it on multiple occasions. This suggests
that the parameters for RGA may not have been optimally selected in this project.
Typically, when working with machine learning models, the dataset is split into
training, validation and testing sets. The validation set is used to assess the actual ex-
pected outputs and to ensure optimal hyperparameter selection, such as the number
of epochs. However, for RGA, the last epoch, specifically epoch 600 in this project,
is considered as the optimal and selected as the final model. This approach is likely
to have led to overfitting/underfitting and prevented the model from reaching its full
potential, leading to the poor performance reported in this study.
Furthermore, there is a substantial difference in the performance for NTU-PI
compared to HaGRID. The accuracy is notably higher on the latter, which also cor-
responds to the findings in [6]. HaGRID is an easier unconstrained dataset character-
ized by less variations in hand positions and background. The HaGRID dataset only
includes one gesture, the palm, whereas NTU-PI includes natural gestures with sig-
nificantly higher variation. These factors contribute to the lower accuracy observed
in NTU-PI compared to HaGRID.
Since this study performed a 5-fold evaluation, it can be inferred that the results
are more reliable compared to [6]. However, it is important to note that the 5-fold
evaluation was performed using a consistent training set and randomly split query/ref-
erence (test) sets. In other words, the models were trained once and evaluated on
five different test splits. Optimally, both training and test should be randomly split,
and all models should be trained and evaluated on each split. This approach would
provide even more reliable and robust results.
5.2
Evaluation Scenario 2: Hand-Alignment
The objective of the second evaluation scenario is to investigate the potential perfor-
mance improvements of applying hand-alignment to the two datasets, compared to
the baseline evaluation in section 5.1. To reach the objective, four different alignment
methods are applied, before training and testing the models, including: SAC, AA,
==PAGE:56==
42
5 Results and Discussion
AAC and PA (see Section 4.3 for detailed description of methods). For each align-
ment method, only the ranked accuracy of the best performing model is reported.
The complete results can be found in Figure A.1, A.2, A.3, and A.4 in the appendix.
These results will not be discussed in this project, but merely a comment will be
made on which model reports the best performance.
Models
Rank-1 (%)
Rank-5 (%)
Rank-10 (%)
MBA
13.2
22.7
28.4
MBA with SAC
16.6
26.5
33
MBA with AA
14
24.5
30.5
MBA with AAC
15.5
26
33.2
MBA with PA
16.9
27.6
33.7
Table 5.3. 5-fold mean accuracy of baseline models with alignment on NTU-PI. Best results
are highlighted in bold.
Table 5.3 and Figure 5.2(a) illustrate the results of applying hand-alignment to
the models trained and evaluated on the NTU-PI dataset. Additionally, the ranked
accuracy of best baseline model, MBA, is stated for better comparison. The results
highlight that MBA with PA exhibits the best performance, reporting rank 1, 5, and
10 accuracies of respectively 16.9%, 27.6% and 33.7%. For the three ranks, the largest
absolute improvement is observed at rank-10 of 5.3%, compared to the best baseline
accuracy of 28.4%. Following closely behind is MBA with SAC, which demonstrates
nearly comparable performance, followed by MBA with AAC and then MBA with
AA.
Table 5.4 and Figure 5.2(b) present the results of the best baseline model, MBA,
and the results obtained by applying hand-alignment to the HaGRID dataset. The
results for HaGRID illustrate that MBA with SAC is the best performing model,
having rank 1, 5 and 10 accuracies of respectively 65.5%, 76.9% and 80.4%. This
corresponds to an absolute improvement of 4.8% in rank-1 accuracy, compared to
the best baseline accuracy of 60.7%. MBA with AA follows closely behind as the
second-best performing method, almost overlapping as visualized in Figure 5.2(b).
MBA with AAC is the third best while MBA with PA is the worst method, exhibit-
ing worse performance than the baseline.
It is worth noting that the alignment method showing the most significant perfor-
mance improvement varies for the HaGRID and NTU-PI datasets. The PA method,
==PAGE:57==
5.2 Evaluation Scenario 2: Hand-Alignment
43
((a))
((b))
Figure 5.2. 5-fold CMC curves of best baseline model, MBA, and applying models with
hand-alignment to (a) NTU-PI and (b) HaGRID. Mean rank accuracy is represented by
lines, while the colored area indicates the standard deviation.
Models
Rank-1 (%)
Rank-5 (%)
Rank-10 (%)
MBA
60.7
72.4
76.8
MBA with SAC
65.5
76.9
80.4
MBA with AA
65.4
76.5
80.2
MBA with AAC
63
73.9
77.8
MBA with PA
42.9
56
61.7
Table 5.4. 5-fold mean accuracy of applying four different alignment methods to NTU-PI
dataset before training and testing the models. Best results are highlighted in bold.
which focuses solely on extracting the palm of the hands, performs best for NTU-PI.
However, it results in a significant decrease in performance for HaGRID compared to
the baseline. This difference suggests that while excluding noise and variations bene-
fits the NTU-PI dataset, it may also result in the exclusion of important features such
as hand geometry and other relevant information for the HaGRID dataset. If the PA
method excludes relevant information for the HaGRID dataset, it is also reasonable
to assume that it may do the same for NTU-PI. However, since the noise is so high in
the NTU-PI dataset, excluding it may compensate for the loss of important features.
SAC, on the other hand, is increasing the performance for both datasets, emerging
==PAGE:58==
44
5 Results and Discussion
as the top alignment method for HaGRID and the second-best for NTU-PI, almost
matching the performance of PA. The SAC solely aligns the pivot line of the hand with
the x-axis, not considering that the finger positions still may have varying positions.
The method demonstrates that a simple rotation of the hand can significantly improve
recognition accuracy.
Regarding the AA and AAC, an increase from baseline is also observed for both
datasets. Both methods seek to map the fingers and palm of the hand to match the
optimal reference set of landmarks. It is done by scaling, rotating, translating and
shearing so the detected landmarks fit the reference landmarks best. As a result,
they change the general geometry of the hand, such as length and thickness of fingers,
possibly leading to alteration of identity.
It is worth noting that AAC outperforms AA for NTU-PI but underperforms for
HaGRID. In other words, applying cropping to the aﬀine alignment improves perfor-
mance on NTU-PI but worsens it for HaGRID. The purpose of cropping is to exclude
background noise, and the expectation was that it would always lead to an improve-
ment. However, this is not the case for HaGRID and the reason for this decrease
is uncertain. One hypothesis is that in some cases, excessive cropping might occur
e.g., excluding fingertips. Another possibility is that the background serves as an im-
portant feature for HaGRID. It is known that HaGRID exhibits less variation in the
background, and for certain individuals, the background remains consistent across
images.
Generally, excluding as much variation and noise as possible leads to an improve-
ment in performance for NTU-PI, but it may also result in the exclusion of important
features. The same observation can be made for HaGRID, where it becomes more
certain that there are crucial features outside of the palm that are important for cor-
rect identification. The exact nature of these features, whether it is the background,
hand geometry, or something else, remains uncertain. The challenge lies in finding a
balance between reducing noise, which is more prominent in NTU-PI, and preserving
the essential features necessary for accurate identification.
The findings suggest that substantial improvements can be achieved by applying
simple hand-alignment methods such as SAC. SAC is a simple python script, which is
easy to implement, has a low runtime and requires minimal disk space. In other words,
this evaluation scenario demonstrates the possibility of improving the performance of
current SOTA hand-based identification models at a relatively low cost in terms of
complexity and computational resources.
5.3
Evaluation Scenario 3: Fusion
The aim of the third evaluation scenario is to investigate the potential increase in
performance by utilizing fusion techniques. As mentioned in Section 4.4, two different
==PAGE:59==
5.3 Evaluation Scenario 3: Fusion
45
fusion methods are evaluated, namely the EWRF and the SFWN.
The evaluation scenarios consists of applying EWRF and SFWN to two differ-
ent models combinations: the top-two and top-three best performing models. For
each fusion method, only the rank accuracy of the best performing combination is
reported. The complete results of this evaluation scenario can be found in Figure
A.5 and A.6 in the appendix. These results will not be discussed in this project, but
merely a comment will be made on which fused model combinations report the best
performance.
Models
Rank-1
(%)
Rank-5
(%)
Rank-10
(%)
MBA
13.2
22.7
28.4
EWR on ABD and MBA
12.4
25.8
31.9
SFWN on ABD and MBA
15.9
28.7
34.3
Table 5.5.
5-fold mean accuracy of applying SFWN and EWRF to baseline models on
NTU-PI dataset. Best results are highlighted in bold.
Table 5.5 and Figure 5.3(a) present the results of applying the fusion techniques to
the baseline models trained on NTU-PI. To illustrate the performance improvements
more effectively, they also include the rank accuracy of the best baseline model, MBA.
The results show that SFWN on ABD and MBA performs best with rank 1, 5 and
10 accuracies of respectively 15.9%, 28.7% and 34.3%. The most significant absolute
improvement is observed at rank-5, with an increase of 6% compared to the best
baseline model, having an accuracy of 22.7%. Although EWRF on ABD and MBA
also enhances the performance compared to the baseline, it falls short of surpassing
SFWN.
Table 5.6 and Figure 5.3(b) present the results of the best baseline model, MBA,
and the results of applying the fusion techniques to the baseline models trained on Ha-
GRID. SFWN is identified as the best performing method for rank-1 accuracy, while
EWRF yields highest performance for rank-5 and rank-10 accuracies. The largest
improvement is seen at rank-10 of 7.5%, going from an identification rate of 76.8% to
84.3%.
It should be noted that the best fusion method varies between the two datasets,
HaGRID and NTU-PI. While SFWN performs best for NTU-PI and is also the top
performer for HaGRID in terms of rank-1 accuracy, it is outperformed by EWRF
in terms of Rank-5 and Rank-10 accuracies on HaGRID. Therefore, it is diﬀicult to
determine which method is superior for HaGRID, as the choice depends on whether
a higher rank-1 accuracy or better performance in Rank-5 and Rank-10 is prioritized.
==PAGE:60==
46
5 Results and Discussion
((a))
((b))
Figure 5.3. 5-fold CMC curves of applying SFWN and EWRF to baseline models on (a)
NTU-PI and (b) HaGRID dataset. Mean rank accuracy is represented by lines, while the
colored area indicates the standard deviation.
Models
Rank-1
(%)
Rank-5
(%)
Rank-10
(%)
MBA
60.7
72.4
76.8
EWRF on ABD and MBA
54.7
80.6
84.3
SFWN on ABD and MBA
64.8
77.5
82.5
Table 5.6.
5-fold mean accuracy of applying SFWN and EWRF to baseline models on
HaGRID dataset. Best results are highlighted in bold.
However, in most cases SFWN demonstrates highest performance and it is therefore
reasonable to assume that SFWN is the preferred fusion approach.
Overall, a significant improvement in performance is observed when applying
SFWN, especially combining ABD and MBA. Including RGA in the fusion leads
to a decrease in performance, see Figure A.5 and A.6 in the appendix. The imple-
mentation of the SFWN is relatively simple and the code itself requires minimal disk
space. It is, however, important to note that SFWN relies on two different recognition
models, which inevitably increases the complexity, the required disk space, and the
runtime. The runtime may however be expedited by running the models in parallel.
In summary, this evaluation scenario demonstrates the possibility of improving
the performance of current SOTA hand-based identification models, at the cost of
==PAGE:61==
5.4 Evaluation Scenario 4: Hand-Alignment and Fusion
47
increasing especially the complexity and required disk space.
5.4
Evaluation Scenario 4: Hand-Alignment and
Fusion
In the previous evaluation scenarios (sections 5.2 and 5.3), a performance improve-
ment is observed when applying alignment and fusion techniques individually. Build-
ing upon those findings, the aim of the fourth evaluation scenario is to explore the po-
tential performance increase achieved by combining the two techniques. RGA, which
showed a decrease in performance in section 5.3, is not considered in this evaluation
scenario as it is unlikely to contribute to a performance increase.
This evaluation scenario consists of multiple experiments involving the fusion of
various models with alignment. Initially, the two best models with alignment (from
Table 5.3 or 5.4) are selected and fused using SFWN and EWRF. The third best
model with alignment is then included in the fusion, followed by the fourth best, re-
sulting in a fusion of all alignment methods and their respective best model. For both
the HaGRID and NTU-PI datasets, the only fused model is MBA since it consistently
outperforms other models. In other words, the explained experiments do not include
models such as ABD, which could potentially further increase the performance, as
seen in Section 5.3. For this reason, additional experiments are performed, this time
including the ABD model. The new experiments initially fuse the best model (MBA)
with alignment and the best ABD model with alignment. Only SFWN is applied, as
it consistently outperforms EWRF. Next, the second-best model (MBA) with align-
ment is included, followed by the third best. This section will only present the best
fusion results. However, refer to Figure A.7 and A.8 in the appendix for full results.
Models
Rank-1
(%)
Rank-5
(%)
Rank-10
(%)
MBA
13.2
22.7
28.4
EWRF on MBA with PA, SAC,
AAC & ABD with PA
19.5
32.6
40
SFWN on MBA with PA, SAC,
AAC & ABD with PA
26.3
38.9
47.2
Table 5.7. 5-fold mean accuracy of applying SFWN and EWRF to models with alignment
on NTU-PI. Best results are highlighted in bold.
==PAGE:62==
48
5 Results and Discussion
Table 5.7 and Figure 5.4(a) present the results of applying the described fusion
and alignment combinations to NTU-PI, together with the best baseline model, MBA.
The results for NTU-PI highlight that SFWN outperforms EWRF, having rank 1, 5
and 10 accuracies of respectively 26.3%, 38.9% and 47.2%. This means an increase
in rank-10 of 18.8%, compared to best baseline accuracy of 28.4%.
((a))
((b))
Figure 5.4. 5-fold CMC curves of applying SFWN and EWRF to models with alignment
on (a) NTU-PI and (b) HaGRID dataset. Mean rank accuracy is represented by lines, while
the colored area indicates the standard deviation.
Similarly, the results of applying the described fusion and alignment combinations
to the HaGRID dataset are presented in Table 5.8 and Figure 5.4(b) together with
the baseline MBA. The results demonstrate that SFWN is out-performing the EWRF,
with rank-1, 5 and 10 accuracies of 77%, 86.4% and 89.4%, respectively. This is an
increase in rank-1 of approximately 16.3%, compared to best baseline accuracy of
60.7%.
Models
Rank-1
(%)
Rank-5
(%)
Rank-10
(%)
MBA
60.7
72.4
76.8
EWRF
on
MBA
SAC,
AA,
AAC & ABD SAC
68.8
85
88.3
SFWN on MBA with SAC, AA
& ABD with SAC
77
86.4
89.4
Table 5.8. 5-fold mean accuracy of applying SFWN and EWRF to models with alignment
on HaGRID. Best results are highlighted in bold.
==PAGE:63==
5.5 Evaluation Scenario 5: Loss Function Optimization
49
While there could have been many more fusion and alignment combinations, the
presented results are already quite comprehensive. The results show that the optimal
fusion and alignment combination differs between the NTU-PI and HaGRID datasets.
For NTU-PI, the best results are obtained by applying SFWN to MBA SAC & MBA
PA & MBA AAC & ABD PA. On the other hand, for HaGRID, the best solution
involves applying SFWN to MBA SAC & MBA AA & ABD SAC.
These results demonstrate that it is possible to improve the performance, in ab-
solute terms, as much as 18.8%. Unfortunately, these improvements come at a cost,
where in the case of NTU-PI, four models need to be trained, stored and running
on the input while HaGRID requires three models. Deploying an increased number
of models together with the application of different hand-alignment methods will
inevitably increase the complexity, the required disk space, and likely the runtime.
Compared to only applying either fusion or hand-alignment as seen in Section 5.2
and 5.3, this approach comes at a greater cost, but also achieves better performance
improvements.
Depending on the specific use-case, it is crucial to consider the trade-offs be-
tween improvement and computational cost.
As shown in Figure A.7 and A.8 in
the appendix, a performance improvement is also observed when fusing less complex
model combinations. It is therefore possible to decrease the complexity, however at
the cost of also decreasing the accuracy. It is also possible to only apply fusion or
hand-alignment, if minimizing the complexity is the highest priority. Generally, de-
termining the best solution depends on whether maximizing accuracy or keeping the
system as simple as possible is the primary objective.
5.5
Evaluation Scenario 5: Loss Function Optimization
The aim of the fifth evaluation scenario is to examine the potential performance
improvement by utilizing additive angular margin loss (AML) as an alternative loss
function for ABD and MBA.
Models
Rank-1 (%)
Rank-5 (%)
Rank-10 (%)
ABD with AML
10.2
21.3
28.8
MBA with AML
13.2
22.4
28.8
Table 5.9. 5-fold mean accuracy of using AML for training models ABD and MBA on the
NTU-PI dataset. Best results are highlighted in bold.
==PAGE:64==
50
5 Results and Discussion
The findings regarding the use of AML for ABD and MBA on the NTU-PI dataset
are presented in Table 5.9 and Figure 5.5(a). The Figure also provides the CMC
curves for the two baseline models ABD and MBA. The results for NTU-PI indicate
a potential increase in performance when employing AML for ABD. The same is seen
for MBA for the higher ranks, see rank-20 in Figure 5.5(a). However, for the lower
rank accuracies, of MBA with AML, there is a decrease in performance.
((a))
((b))
Figure 5.5. 5-fold CMC curves of using AML for training models ABD and MBA on (a)
NTU-PI and (b) HaGRID. Figures report performance of both baselines models, ABD and
MBA, as well as the performance of using AML for both models. Mean rank accuracy is
represented by lines, while the colored area indicates the standard deviation.
Table 5.10 and Figure 5.5(b) display the results regarding the use of the AML
for ABD and MBA on the HaGRID dataset. The Figure also provides the ranked
accuracy of the two baseline models ABD and MBA, allowing for a direct comparison.
The outcomes reveal an increase in performance for MBA when using AML, while a
decrease for ABD.
Models
Rank-1 (%)
Rank-5 (%)
Rank-10 (%)
ABD with AML
50
64.5
70.5
MBA with AML
62.4
75
79.2
Table 5.10. 5-fold mean accuracy of using AML for training models ABD and MBA on
the HaGRID dataset. Best results are highlighted in bold.
Generally, the results do not indicate that the adoption of the AML consistently
results in improved performance. To be precise, they demonstrate both performance
==PAGE:65==
5.6 Evaluation Scenario 6: Cross-dataset (CD) Evaluation
51
increase and decrease for both NTU-PI and HaGRID. These findings contrasts with
other studies, such as the work by Deng et al. [29], which demonstrates that AML
surpasses the SOTA for unconstrained face verification. Initially, it was expected that
by applying AML, similar improvements would be observed in unconstrained hand-
based identification. However, it is important to note that the study is conducted on
datasets with a significantly larger number of images and identities, compared to the
datasets used in this project. The difference in the dataset’s size may explain why a
clear increase in performance is not found. Further research is necessary to determine
the extent to which AML can enhance performance, in hand-based identification in
unconstrained scenarios.
5.6
Evaluation Scenario 6: Cross-dataset (CD)
Evaluation
The purpose of the sixth evaluation scenario is to examine whether any performance
improvement can be achieved through cross-dataset (CD) evaluation. This involves
training models on the NTU-PI dataset and evaluating them on HaGRID, and vice
versa. In this experiment, the best baseline model, and the best model for all four
alignment methods are used, which includes MBA, MBA with SAC, MBA with AA,
MBA with AAC, and MBA with PA. The baseline MBA model is evaluated on the
CD without any alignment, while the models with alignment are evaluated on the
CD with the corresponding alignment method applied.
Models
Rank-1 (%)
Rank-5 (%)
Rank-10 (%)
CD MBA
10
18.7
23.4
CD MBA with SAC
12.8
21.3
27.2
CD MBA with AA
14.6
22.9
27.8
CD MBA with AAC
14.7
24.2
30.4
CD MBA with PA
16.9
28.6
35.8
Table 5.11. 5-fold mean accuracy of cross-dataset evaluation from HaGRID to NTU-PI.
Best results are highlighted in bold.
Initially, the mentioned models (MBA, MBA SAC, MBA AA, MBA AAC, and
MBA PA) are trained on HaGRID and evaluated on NTU-PI. The results, presented
==PAGE:66==
52
5 Results and Discussion
in Table 5.11 and Figure 5.6(a), state that the best CD model is MBA with PA,
with rank 1, 5 and 10 accuracies of respectively 16.9%, 28.6% and 35.8%. Comparing
the results of MBA with PA, with the corresponding model trained on NTU-PI (see
Table 5.3), a slight improvement is observed. In other words, when evaluating on
NTU-PI, MBA with PA trained on HaGRID outperforms MBA with PA trained on
NTU-PI. This is noteworthy because MBA with PA trained on HaGRID performs
poorly when evaluated on HaGRID (see Table 5.4), but exceptionally well on NTU-PI.
This finding supports the claim that while the PA method effectively excludes noise,
which is particularly beneficial for NTU-PI, it also excludes important features, which
are particularly crucial for HaGRID. The remaining evaluated models, illustrated in
in Table 5.11 and Figure 5.6(a), generally exhibit worse or comparable performance
compared to the corresponding models trained on NTU-PI (see Table 5.3).
This CD evaluation, from HaGRID to NTU-PI, generally shows a performance
decrease when compared to the corresponding models trained on NTU-PI. However,
when comparing the results of this CD evaluation with the best baseline model (MBA)
trained on NTU-PI (see Table 5.1), multiple models show improved performance in-
cluding MBA with PA, MBA with AAC and MBA with AA, which improves the
rank-1 and 5 accuracies. In other words, MBA with PA, MBA with AAC, and MBA
with AA, trained on HaGRID, have higher identification rates on NTU-PI than MBA
trained on NTU-PI. In conclusion, models trained on HaGRID may be used for iden-
tification on the NTU-PI dataset.
((a))
((b))
Figure 5.6. 5-fold CMC curves of cross-dataset evaluation from (a) HaGRID to NTU-PI
and (b) NTU-PI to HaGRID. Mean rank accuracy is represented by lines, while the colored
area indicates the standard deviation.
Secondly, the mentioned models are trained on NTU-PI and evaluated on HaGRID.
The results are presented in Table 5.12 and Figure 5.6(b), demonstrating a significant
decrease in accuracy compared to the corresponding models trained on HaGRID (see
Table 5.2 and 5.4). The best-performing model is MBA with AAC with rank 1, 5 and
==PAGE:67==
5.7 Summary of Evaluation Scenarios
53
10 accuracies of respectively 34.3%, 46% and 51.7%. This is an absolute decrease, in
rank-1, of 28.7%, compared to the corresponding model trained on HaGRID with an
accuracy of 63% (see Table 5.4). If the results of this CD evaluation are compared
with the baseline model MBA trained on HaGRID (see Table 5.2), a decrease in
accuracy is again observed for all models. In conclusion, there is no performance
improvement observed in doing a CD evaluation from NTU-PI to HaGRID; rather,
the opposite is observed.
Models
Rank-1 (%)
Rank-5 (%)
Rank-10 (%)
CD MBA
32.3
43.4
48.8
CD MBA with SAC
34
45.5
51
CD MBA with AA
33
44.6
50.1
CD MBA with AAC
34.3
46
51.7
CD MBA with PA
26.9
37.6
42.9
Table 5.12. 5-fold mean accuracy of cross-dataset evaluation from NTU-PI to HaGRID.
Best results are highlighted in bold.
Generally, the CD evaluation does not lead to an increase in performance; rather,
it results in a decrease. Especially, the models trained on NTU-PI perform poorly on
HaGRID. Conversely, doing a CD evaluation from HaGRID to NTU-PI also generally
results in a decrease in performance, although not as significant as in the previous case.
These findings correspond with other studies, such as in [6], which also illustrates a
general decrease in performance when conducting CD evaluations between HaGRID
and NTU-PI.
5.7
Summary of Evaluation Scenarios
This section provides a comprehensive summary of all the evaluation scenarios, high-
lighting the most significant findings and presenting the best performing models from
each scenario. Additionally, it computes the performance improvement compared to
the best baseline model in absolute terms, as: new_accuray−best_baseline_accuracy.
For NTU-PI, a summary, demonstrating the best model from each evaluation sce-
nario, is presented in Figure 5.7(a) and Table 5.13. Table 5.13 additionally provides
the computed absolute performance improvement, compared to best baseline, MBA.
==PAGE:68==
54
5 Results and Discussion
Models
Rank-1 (%)
Rank-5 (%)
Rank-10 (%)
MBA (5.1)
13.2
22.7
28.4
MBA PA (5.2)
16.9 (3.7%)
27.6 (4.9%)
33.7 (5.3%)
SFWN
on
ABD
and
MBA (5.3)
15.9 (2.7%)
28.7 (6%)
34.3 (5.9%)
SFWN on MBA PA &
MBA SAC & MBA AAC
& ABD PA (5.4)
26.3 (13.1%)
38.9 (16.2%)
47.2 (18.8%)
MBA ML (5.5)
13.2 (0%)
22.4 (-0.3%)
28.8 (0.4%)
CD MBA PA (5.6)
16.9 (3.7%)
28.6 (5.9%)
35.8 (7.4%)
Table 5.13. Summary of the best models from each evaluation scenario evaluated on NTU-
PI. Provides the 5-fold mean accuracy and the absolute increase, highlighted in green, or
absolute decrease, highlighted in red, compared to the best baseline model. Best results are
highlighted in bold.
The results indicate that almost all evaluation scenarios yield some form of improve-
ment. The most significant improvement is observed when combining alignment and
fusion techniques, specifically when employing SFWN on MBA with PA, MBA with
SAC, MBA with AA, and ABD with PA. The least improvement is observed when
utilizing the AML, which additionally leads to a decrease in rank-5 accuracy.
Similarly, for HaGRID, a summary is presented in Figure 5.7(b) and Table 5.14,
demonstrating the best model from each evaluation scenario. Table 5.14 also provides
the calculated absolute performance improvement compared to best baseline, MBA.
All evaluation scenarios show an increase in performance, except for the CD evalu-
ation, which results in a significant decrease in performance. The most significant
improvement is achieved when combining alignment and fusion techniques, specifi-
cally when employing SFWN on MBA with SAC, MBA with AA, and ABD with
SAC.
In summary, various approaches have been explored to improve performance for
hand-based identification in unconstrained scenarios. Different alignment and fusion
techniques have demonstrated their effectiveness in enhancing performance, especially
when combined. However, generally conducting CD evaluations leads to a decrease
in performance, although there are a few exceptions. The impact of using the AML
==PAGE:69==
5.7 Summary of Evaluation Scenarios
55
((a))
((b))
Figure 5.7. Summary of the best models from each evaluation scenario evaluated on (a)
NTU-PI and (b) HaGRID. Figures show the 5-fold CMC curves. Mean rank accuracy is
represented by lines, while the colored area indicates the standard deviation.
is not yet conclusive and requires further investigation to fully determine if and how
much it can improve performance.
==PAGE:70==
56
5 Results and Discussion
Models
Rank-1 (%)
Rank-5 (%)
Rank-10
(%)
MBA (5.1)
60.7
72.4
76.8
MBA SAC (5.2)
65.5 (4.8%)
76.9 (4.5%)
80.4 (3.6%)
SFWN on ABD and MBA
(5.3)
64.8 (4.1%)
77.5 (5.1%)
82.5 (5.7%)
SFWN
on
MBA
SAC
&
MBA AA & ABD SAC (5.4)
77 (16.3%)
86.4 (14%)
89.4 (12.6%)
MBA ML (5.5)
62.4 (1.7%)
75 (2.6%)
79.2 (2.4%)
CD MBA AAC (5.6)
34.3 (-26.4%)
46 (-26.4%)
51.7 (-25.1%)
Table 5.14.
Summary of the best models from each evaluation scenario evaluated on
HaGRID. Provides the 5-fold mean accuracy and the absolute increase, highlighted in green,
or absolute decrease, highlighted in red, compared to the best baseline model. Best results
are highlighted in bold.
==PAGE:71==
CHAPTER 6
Conclusion
This study presents various approaches to improve the identification rate of current
SOTA hand-based identification systems, specifically ABD, MBA, and RGA, in un-
constrained environments represented by the NTU-PI and HaGRID datasets. The
findings address the research questions outlined in Section 1.2, providing insights into
how, how much and at what cost the performance of the biometric systems can be
improved.
The results demonstrate that the performance can be improved by applying hand-
alignment and fusion techniques. Specifically, the hand-alignment method yielding
highest performance improvements is the SAC method, which achieves a rank-1 ac-
curacy of 16.6% for NTU-PI and 65.5% for HaGRID. This represents a difference or
absolute increase of respectively 3.4% and 4.8%, compared to the best baseline rank-
1 accuracies of 13.2% and 60.7%. Additionally, SFWN applied to ABD and MBA
reports the highest performance increase compared to other fusion approached and
achieves rank-1 accuracies for NTU-PI and HaGRID of respectively 15.9% and 64.8%.
Moreover, combining hand-alignment and fusion leads to the highest overall increase
in performance, although the specific combination varies for HaGRID and NTU-PI.
For NTU-PI the highest rank-1 accuracy of 26.3% is achieved by applying SFWN to
four models: MBA with three different hand-alignment methods (PA, SAC, AAC)
and ABD with PA. For HaGRID a rank-1 accuracy of 77% is attained by applying
SFWN to three models: MBA with two different hand-alignment methods (SAC, AA)
and ABD with SAC.
However, it is important to note that the observed performance improvements
come at the cost of increasing the complexity, runtime and required disk space. The
study demonstrates that increasing accuracy additionally increases the cost and vice
versa. The selection of appropriate approach therefore depends on whether maximiz-
ing accuracy or keeping the system as simple as possible is the primary objective.
==PAGE:72==
58
==PAGE:73==
CHAPTER 7
Future Work
While this project has been exploring and determining different methods for improv-
ing performance of hand-based identification in unconstrained environments, some
questions remain unanswered and areas uncharted.
This chapter will propose fu-
ture research based on the insights and limitations identified in this study, outlining
potential subjects and methods to further investigate.
7.1
Hand-Alignment
This study has demonstrated that the application of hand-alignment increases the
performance of hand-based identification in unconstrained environments. Neverthe-
less, it is important to acknowledge that the explored hand-alignment methods are
limited and possess some disadvantages. Specifically, the PA method excludes im-
portant features necessary for accurate identification, the SAC method only performs
a simple rotation of the full image, not considering the intra variations of the hand
such as different finger positions and gestures, and AA and AAC deform the hand
at the risk at not preserving the identify. These observations suggest that there is
potential in exploring or developing even better hand-alignment solutions.
Since the research on hand-alignment is limited, it may be beneficial to find inspi-
ration from more well-established areas such as face normalization/alignment. Face
normalization has long been used for face recognition in unconstrained environments,
demonstrating significant improvements in the recognition accuracy. Many different
face normalization methods exist, where some of the most recent include, building 3D
models of 2D faces [30,38] and using Generative Adversarial Networks (GAN’s) [39,40].
It is recommended to further research such methods and their potential adaptation
for hand-alignment to ultimately determine if they lead to higher performance im-
provements.
7.2
Image Enhancement and Segmentation
The results of applying the PA method, which only extracts the palm of the hand,
highlight the importance of keeping features outside of the palm while also removing
noise such as varying backgrounds, illumination, and low-quality images.
Accord-
==PAGE:74==
60
7 Future Work
ing to [3], incorporating different image processing steps can effectively reduce noise
and ensure high hand-based recognition accuracy. These include image enhancement,
hand segmentation and finally hand-alignment if the position of the hand is not
fixed [3]. The image processing steps included in this study were limited to exclud-
ing low-quality images and implementing hand-alignment techniques. This suggests
that there is potential for further improving the identification rate by incorporating
image enhancement techniques and by segmenting the hands.
Many different im-
age enhancement and hand segmentation approaches exist, where some examples are
described in respectively [2,41] and [42].
7.3
Improve RGA
The results of this study showed that RGA demonstrated poor performance, possibly
due to its ineffective hyperparameter selection, particularly in terms of the number
of epochs chosen. Some studies have demonstrated comparable performance between
ABD and RGA and it would therefore be advisable to fully explore its potential
for hand-based identification in unconstrained environments before excluding it from
future experiments. It is recommended to employ proper validation techniques and
consider selecting the best epoch based on the model’s performance on the validation
set. This would help ensure optimal parameter selection and prevent under- or over-
fitting, potentially leading to improved results for RGA in future studies.
7.4
Multibiometric System
This project has only considered the case where one source of information is available
for identification, specifically an image of an individual’s hand. However, in many
real-life scenarios, additional information may be available such as one or more video
tracks, multiple images, and demographic information provided by witnesses. It is
crucial to include all available sources of information about the individual, since it
is likely to improve performance compared to using only a single still image of the
hand.
In [30], multiple sources of information are used for improving face recognition
for forensics. Score level fusion is applied in two layers: fusion within one type of
media and fusion across different types of media.
The authors demonstrate that
significant performance improvements can be achieved by using multiple sources of
information, rather than one. This could also be the case for hand-based identification
in unconstrained environments.
==PAGE:75==
7.5 Large-Scale Data
61
7.5
Large-Scale Data
Utilizing large scale datasets, often consisting of millions of datapoints, generally
leads to improved recognition accuracy [40, 43–45].
Nevertheless, the size of the
datasets utilized in this study was relatively small, both in terms of number of images
and number of subjects. Therefore, future research should explore using large scale
datasets, potentially leading to higher performance improvements.
This requires the availability of large-scale datasets, which is usually challenging
in practice. However, techniques such as data augmentation can be used to increase
the size of the already existing datasets. A variety of different data augmentation
approaches exist, where some examples include information dropping [46] or DNN-
based approaches to augment hand pose images [47].
As previously discussed, the studies demonstrating performance improvements by
implementing the AML are using much larger datasets than this study. Therefore,
by utilizing large scale datasets it also becomes feasible to investigate the potential
improvements of implementing the AML.
==PAGE:76==
62
==PAGE:77==
Appendices
==PAGE:78==
==PAGE:79==
APPENDIX A
Figures
((a))
((b))
Figure A.1. 5-fold CMC curve for baseline models with SAC trained and evaluated on (a)
NTU-PI and (b) HaGRID
==PAGE:80==
66
Appendix A Figures
((a))
((b))
Figure A.2. 5-fold CMC curve for baseline models with AA trained and evaluated on (a)
NTU-PI and (b) HaGRID
((a))
((b))
Figure A.3. 5-fold CMC curve for baseline models with AAC trained and evaluated on (a)
NTU-PI and (b) HaGRID
==PAGE:81==
Appendix A Figures
67
((a))
((b))
Figure A.4. 5-fold CMC curve for baseline models with PA trained and evaluated on (a)
NTU-PI and (b) HaGRID
((a))
((b))
Figure A.5. 5-fold CMC curve of applying EWRF to baseline models trained and evaluated
on (a) NTU-PI and (b) HaGRID
==PAGE:82==
68
Appendix A Figures
((a))
((b))
Figure A.6. 5-fold CMC curve of applying SFWN to baseline models trained and evaluated
on (a) NTU-PI and (b) HaGRID
((a))
((b))
Figure A.7. 5-fold CMC curve of combining EWRF and hand-alignment methods on (a)
NTU-PI and (b) HaGRID
==PAGE:83==
Appendix A Figures
69
((a))
((b))
Figure A.8. 5-fold CMC curve of combining SFWN and hand-alignment methods on (a)
NTU-PI and (b) HaGRID
==PAGE:84==
70
==PAGE:85==
Bibliography
[1]
International Organization for Standardization, “Information technology - Vo-
cabulary - Part 37: Biometrics,” Standard ISO/IEC 2382-37, ISO, 2017.
[2]
M. Tistarelli and C. Champod, eds., Handbook of Biometrics for Forensic Science.
Gewerbestrasse 11, 6330 Cham, Switzerland: Springer, 2017.
[3]
K. Prihodova and M. Hub, “Hand-based biometric recognition technique – sur-
vey,” Advances in Science, Technology and Engineering Systems Journal, vol. 5,
pp. 689–698, 11 2020.
[4]
M. Afifi, “11k hands: Gender recognition and biometric identification using a
large dataset of hand images,” 2019.
[5]
N. L. Baisa, B. Williams, H. Rahmani, P. Angelov, and S. Black, “Multi-branch
with attention network for hand-based person recognition,” 2022.
[6]
K. M. Zyla, “Hand-based biometrics for forensic analysis,” 01 2023.
[7]
International Organization for Standardization, “Information technology — Secu-
rity techniques — Biometric information protection,” Standard ISO/IEC 24745,
ISO, 2011.
[8]
International Organization for Standardization, “Information technology — Bio-
metric performance testing and reporting — Part 1: Principles and framework,”
Standard ISO/IEC 19795-1, ISO, 2021.
[9]
W. M. Matkowski, T. Chai, and A. W. K. Kong, “Palmprint recognition in un-
controlled and uncooperative environment,” IEEE Transactions on Information
Forensics and Security, vol. 15, pp. 1601–1615, 2020.
[10] International Organization for Standardization, “Information technology — Bio-
metric information - Multimodal and other multibiometric fusion,” Standard
ISO/IEC TR 24722, ISO, 2015.
[11] I. Goodfellow, Y. Bengio, and A. Courville, Deep Learning. MIT Press, 2016.
http://www.deeplearningbook.org.
==PAGE:86==
72
Bibliography
[12] D. Zhang, Support Vector Machine, pp. 201–228. Cham: Springer International
Publishing, 2021.
[13] X. Huang, G. Jin, and W. Ruan, Deep Learning, pp. 109–177. ?: Springer Nature
Singapore, 2023.
[14] D. Zhang, Artificial Neural Network, pp. 201–228. Cham: Springer International
Publishing, 2021.
[15] K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, and J. Sun, “Deep residual learning for image recogni-
tion,” 2015.
[16] R. R. Paulsen and T. B. Moeslund, Introduction to Medical Image Analysis.
Springer, 2020.
[17] S. Sharma, S. R. Dubey, S. K. Singh, R. Saxena, and R. K. Singh, “Identity
verification using shape and geometry of human hands,” Expert Systems with
Applications, vol. 42, no. 2, pp. 821–832, 2015.
[18] A. Kumar, “Toward more accurate matching of contactless palmprint images un-
der less constrained environments,” IEEE Transactions on Information Forensics
and Security, vol. 14, no. 1, pp. 34–47, 2019.
[19] R. Vyas and A. Kumar, “A collaborative approach using ridge-valley minutiae
for more accurate contactless fingerprint identification,” 2019.
[20] S. Joardar, A. Chatterjee, and A. Rakshit, “A real-time palm dorsa subcuta-
neous vein pattern recognition system using collaborative representation-based
classification,” IEEE Transactions on Instrumentation and Measurement, vol. 64,
no. 4, pp. 959–966, 2015.
[21] B. Liu, Z. Wang, and J. Feng, “Palmnet: A robust palmprint minutiae extraction
network,” in Pattern Recognition (C. Wallraven, Q. Liu, and H. Nagahara, eds.),
(Cham), pp. 459–473, Springer International Publishing, 2022.
[22] T. Chen, S. Ding, J. Xie, Y. Yuan, W. Chen, Y. Yang, Z. Ren, and Z. Wang,
“Abd-net: Attentive but diverse person re-identification,” in 2019 IEEE/CVF
International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), pp. 8350–8360, 2019.
[23] Z. Zhang, C. Lan, W. Zeng, X. Jin, and Z. Chen, “Relation-aware global attention
for person re-identification,” 2020.
[24] Y. Yuan, C. Tang, S. Xia, Z. Chen, and T. Qi, “Handnet: Identification based
on hand images using deep learning methods,” in Proceedings of the 2020 4th
International Conference on Vision, Image and Signal Processing, ICVISP 2020,
(New York, NY, USA), Association for Computing Machinery, 2021.
==PAGE:87==
Bibliography
73
[25] N. L. Baisa, B. Williams, H. Rahmani, P. Angelov, and S. Black, “Hand-based
person identification using global and part-aware deep feature representation
learning,” 2022.
[26] A. Kapitanov, A. Makhlyarchuk, and K. Kvanchiani, “Hagrid - hand gesture
recognition image dataset,” 2022.
[27] A. I. Awad and M. Fairhurst, “8. recent advances in unconstrained face recogni-
tion,” 2018.
[28] K. Zhang, Z. Zhang, Z. Li, and Y. Qiao, “Joint face detection and alignment us-
ing multitask cascaded convolutional networks,” IEEE Signal Processing Letters,
vol. 23, no. 10, pp. 1499–1503, 2016.
[29] J. Deng, J. Guo, N. Xue, and S. Zafeiriou, “Arcface: Additive angular mar-
gin loss for deep face recognition,” in 2019 IEEE/CVF CONFERENCE ON
COMPUTER VISION AND PATTERN RECOGNITION (CVPR 2019), IEEE
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 4685–4694, IEEE;
CVF; IEEE Comp Soc, 2019. 32nd IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision
and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), Long Beach, CA, JUN 16-20, 2019.
[30] L. Best-Rowden, H. Han, C. Otto, B. F. Klare, and A. K. Jain, “Unconstrained
face recognition: Identifying a person of interest from a media collection,” IEEE
Transactions on Information Forensics and Security, vol. 9, no. 12, pp. 2144–
2157, 2014.
[31] https://developers.google.com/mediapipe/solutions/vision/hand_
landmarker.
[32] E. Yoruk, E. Konukoglu, B. Sankur, and J. Darbon, “Shape-based hand recog-
nition,” IEEE Transactions on Image Processing, vol. 15, no. 7, pp. 1803–1815,
2006.
[33] matkowski
voy,
“Palmprint-recognition-in-uncontrolled-and-uncooperative-
environment.”
https://github.com/matkowski-voy/Palmprint-
Recognition-in-the-Wild, 2023.
[34] A. Pradhan, J. He, and N. Jiang, “Score, rank, and decision-level fusion strategies
of multicode electromyogram-based verification and identification biometrics,”
IEEE Journal of Biomedical and Health Informatics, vol. 26, no. 3, pp. 1068–
1079, 2022.
[35] A. Kumar and S. Shekhar, “Personal identification using multibiometrics rank-
level fusion,” IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics, Part C
(Applications and Reviews), vol. 41, no. 5, pp. 743–752, 2011.
==PAGE:88==
74
Bibliography
[36] W. Scheirer, A. Rocha, R. Micheals, and T. Boult, “Robust fusion: Extreme
value theory for recognition score normalization,” in Computer Vision – ECCV
2010 (K. Daniilidis, P. Maragos, and N. Paragios, eds.), (Berlin, Heidelberg),
pp. 481–495, Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2010.
[37] M. Huber, “Mask-invariant face recognition through template-level knowl-
edge distillation.” https://github.com/fdbtrs/Masked-Face-Recognition-
KD, 2023.
[38] H. Ouanan, M. Ouanan, and B. Aksasse, “Myface: Unconstrained face recogni-
tion,” in Advanced Information Technology, Services and Systems (M. Ezziyyani,
M. Bahaj, and F. Khoukhi, eds.), (Cham), pp. 86–94, Springer International
Publishing, 2018.
[39] Y. Qian, W. Deng, and J. Hu, “Unsupervised face normalization with extreme
pose and expression in the wild,” in 2019 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 9843–9850, 2019.
[40] A. Kammoun, R. Slama, H. Tabia, T. Ouni, and M. Abid, “Fnr-gan: Face
normalization and recognition with generative adversarial networks,” in Image
and Vision Computing (W. Q. Yan, M. Nguyen, and M. Stommel, eds.), (Cham),
pp. 131–143, Springer Nature Switzerland, 2023.
[41] O. S. Pianykh, Image Enhancement, pp. 59–77. Cham: Springer International
Publishing, 2014.
[42] G. Benitez-Garcia, N. Takayama, J. Olivares-Mercado, G. Sanchez-Perez, and
H. Takahashi, “Comparison of real-time CNN-based methods for finger-level
hand segmentation,” in International Workshop on Advanced Imaging Technol-
ogy (IWAIT) 2022 (M. Nakajima, S. Muramatsu, J.-G. Kim, J.-M. Guo, and
Q. Kemao, eds.), vol. 12177, p. 121770P, International Society for Optics and
Photonics, SPIE, 2022.
[43] A. Halevy, P. Norvig, and F. Pereira, “The unreasonable effectiveness of data,”
IEEE Intelligent Systems, vol. 24, no. 2, pp. 8–12, 2009.
[44] I. Masi, A. Tran, T. Hassner, G. Sahin, and G. G. Medioni, “Face-specific data
augmentation for unconstrained face recognition,” International Journal of Com-
puter Vision, vol. 127, pp. 642–667, 2019.
[45] Y. Shi and A. K. Jain, “Boosting unconstrained face recognition with auxiliary
unlabeled data,” 2021.
[46] P. Chen, S. Liu, H. Zhao, and J. Jia, “Gridmask data augmentation,” 2020.
[47] K. Seo, H. Cho, D. Choi, and J.-D. Park, “Implicit semantic data augmentation
for hand pose estimation,” IEEE Access, vol. 10, pp. 84680–84688, 2022.
