==PAGE:1==
Pupil behavior in listening and speaking time
of interactive communication
Pioneering exploration of cognitive demands in
effortful conversations
Master Thesis
DTU Health Tech
Department of Health Technology
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Pupil behavior in listening and speaking time of interactive communication
Pioneering exploration of cognitive demands in effortful conversations
Master Thesis
July 2, 2023
By
Pablo Castro Ilundain
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cusВӯ
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Eriksholm Research Centre, 2020
Published by:
DTU, Department of Health Technology, Гҳrsteds Plads, Building 352,
2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.hea.healthtech.dtu.dk
ISSN:
[0000Вӯ0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000Вӯ00Вӯ0000Вӯ000Вӯ0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000Вӯ0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000Вӯ00Вӯ0000Вӯ000Вӯ0] (printed version)
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
This MSc thesis conducts an analysis of pupil behavior and eye gaze movements during
interactive communication complementing the ongoing AMEND (vAlid outcoMe mEasure
for commuNication Difficulty) [1] research project. This thesis was made possible thanks
to a collaboration with the company Eriksholm Research Centre, which is part of Oticon.
Pupillometry and eye gaze tracking data are collected within specific speaking and lisВӯ
tening windows, which are further processed and analyzed in order extract meaningful
conclusions. The study examines the cognitive load or listening effort experienced during
interactive communication, while also exploring the influence of various noise conditions
and hearing aid settings. As this is a pioneering project in the field, this research lays
the groundwork for what should be the expected outcomes on any similar work within the
field. Giving out insights into the understanding of communication dynamics as well as
contributing to quantifying the impact of various conditions and hearing aid settings on
communication processes.
ii
Pupil behavior in listening and speaking time of interactive communication
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank greatly both supervisors of this thesis, as theyвҖҷve always been there
to help and guide me in the right direction. This whole Msc thesis would not have been
possible without your knowledge, support and mentoring. Thank you so much to both:
вҖў Susan Aliakbary Hosseinabadi (sulb@eriksholm.com), Scientist, Eriksholm ReВӯ
search Centre.
вҖў Dorothea Wendt (dowe@eriksholm.com), Principal Scientist, Eriksholm Research
Centre.
I would also like to thank all the colleagues from Eriksholm Research Centre for the unВӯ
conditional support, motivation and gratitude that they have given me all throughout my
master thesis research as well as some of the other projects related to my вҖҷStudent AsВӯ
sistantвҖҷ position.
I also want to thank my partner, Helen, not only for being supportive every step of the way
but also for being my main source of motivation and happiness from the first day I arrived
to Denmark until today.
Lastly, I want to thank DTU itself for giving me the opportunity of a lifetime and I specially
want to thank all the friends IвҖҷve made thanks to DTU, which come from different courses,
clubs and even departments.
Pupil behavior in listening and speaking time of interactive communication
iii
==PAGE:6==
Contents
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Nomenclature and Abbreviations
v
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Context and motivation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Hypothesis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.4
Goals and methods
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2
Methods
5
2.1
Test setup and apparatus . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Test participants
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3
Test workflow . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.4
Test conditions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.5
Data analysis and processing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3
Results
21
3.1
Communication dynamics results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
3.2
Pupil size results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
3.3
Fixation duration results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
4
Discussion
37
4.1
Pupillometry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
4.2
Fixation duration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
4.3
General observations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
5
Conclusion
41
Bibliography
43
A Appendix
47
iv
Pupil behavior in listening and speaking time of interactive communication
==PAGE:7==
Nomenclature and Abbreviations
The next list describes several abbreviations and symbols that will be later used within
the body of the document
AMEND vAlid outcoMe mEasure for commuNication Difficulty
ANS
Autonomous Nervous System
CSC
Communicative State Classification
DSST Digit Symbol Substitution Test
EEG
Electroencephalogram
FTO
Floor Transfer Offset
HINT Hearing In Noise Test
HI
Hearing Impaired
HL
Hearing Level
IPU
InterВӯPausal Unit
LMM
Linear Mixed Model
MAD
Median Absolute Deviation
MoCA Montreal Cognitive Assessment
MPD
Mean Pupil Dilation
NAN
Not A Number
NH
Normal Hearing
PNS
Parasympathetic Nervous System
PPD
Peak Pupil Dilation
PTA
Pure Tone Audiometry
REM
Real Ear Measurement
RMS
Root Mean Square
RT60 Reverberation Time
SHL
Simulated Hearing Loss
SNR
SignalВӯtoВӯNoise Ratio
SNS
Sympathetic Nervous System
SPL
Sound Pressure Level
TP
Test Participant
VAD
Voice Activity Detection
VBDS Visual Backward Digit Span
Pupil behavior in listening and speaking time of interactive communication
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Pupil behavior in listening and speaking time of interactive communication
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
1.1
Context and motivation
Communication is a dynamic and complex process as it needs to consider the behaviour
from the interlocutor(s). Many researches have been conducted to investigate details of
communication by using linguistic, social, psychological and anthropological approaches.
Difficulty in communication is one of the most disabling consequences for people living
with hearing loss. Individuals that suffer from any type of hearing loss will most likely
find it challenging to engage, follow and comprehend daily conversations, specially in
noisy conditions, which usually results in an increment of difficulty in regular dayВӯtoВӯday
situations. In the long run, communication difficulties ultimately lead to social isolation,
reduced selfВӯesteem and increased stress and anxiety.
As described by Andersen et al. in 1982 [2], presbycusis is a very common slowly proВӯ
gressive impairment of the auditory pathways that starts during the fourth decade of life
that results in gradual hearing losses. This decline is more pronounced for higher freВӯ
quencies compared to lower frequencies. Research has given evidence of a notable corВӯ
relation between hearing loss and challenges in communication [3], meaning that speech
intelligibility is also affected greatly by hearing loss. This has lead to the fact that more
recent studies aimed to study the effect of communication difficulty on various groups of
communication outcomes.
Knowing this, a handful of studies suggest that physiological measures such as pupilВӯ
lometry [4] [5] [6], heart rate [7] and electroencephalography (EEG) [8] contain important
information about different cognitive processes like attention, perception and sensation.
This processes are mainly controlled by the autonomous nervous system (ANS). This
system is divided in distinct components that are antagonistic to each other, these are
the sympathetic nervous system (SNS) and the parasympathetic nervous system (PNS).
These mechanisms are responsible for a вҖқfightВӯorВӯflightвҖқ or a вҖқfeedВӯandВӯbreedвҖқ response,
respectively. Any sudden change in a physiological measure can then be explained as a
body response from the sympathetic nervous system to some stimuli.
The main objective of this project, that this masterвҖҷs thesis is associated with, is to estiВӯ
mate or predict a global marker or indicator that resembles communication difficulty during
interactive communication by using different communication outcomes. Furthermore, this
thesis will primarily concentrate on the examination of pupillometry and fixation duration
data. These metrics measure both the dilation (expansion) or contraction of the pupils and
the duration of gaze fixation on a specific point over a period of time, respectively. The
main focus is on the processed responses of multiple test participants (normal hearing
and hearing impaired) in different conditions. These measures, when analyzed properly,
could give an insight into the mechanisms underlying listening or communication diffiВӯ
culties specially for population that suffer from hearing loss. On the long run, this could
end up contributing to the development of more advanced and effective communication
technologies to be implemented in assistive devices such as hearing aids.
As a matter of fact, the World Health Organization (WHO) [9] has reported that by 2050,
nearly 2.5 billion people will live with some degree of hearing loss and at least 700 million
of those people will require rehabilitation services such as hearing aids. The scientific
community, as well as hearing aids manufacturers have invested a lot of resources and
effort to investigate different strategies, not only for the assessment and treatment of
Pupil behavior in listening and speaking time of interactive communication
1
==PAGE:10==
hearing impairments, but also for the development of new and improved devices. AddiВӯ
tionally, there is great interest on developing optimal strategies for fitting the hearing aids.
The availability, distribution and overall quality of hearing aids have come a long way but
these devices still face some limitations.
One of the biggest challenges that individuals with hearing loss can normally come across
on their day to day life is the вҖқcocktail party problemвҖқ, which happens whenever thereвҖҷs
a considerable amount of background noise somewhere caused by many different indiВӯ
viduals talking simultaneously. This situation makes it almost impossible for the hearing
impaired to focus attention or to differentiate any individual voices. This, and many other
hearing challenges could easily be tackled with future technology by researching on seВӯ
lective attention, listening and/or speaking effort and communication difficulty.
1.2
Background
This thesis is classified within the research category of cognitive studies, specifically exВӯ
ploring interactive communication. It utilizes pupillometry, eye gaze derived measures
and features to examine cognitive aspects of different phases of the communication proВӯ
cess (speaking and listening). Research projects within this category strive to discover,
unveil and deliver a deeper understanding or knowledge about the human auditory sysВӯ
tem, communication dynamics and cognitive processes. This type of projects usually
involve many different test participants, a controlled lab environment with precise meaВӯ
surement devices and/or complex modelling to obtain data that, after a processing and
filtering phase, can draw meaningful conclusions that could potentially lead up to the disВӯ
covery of cognitive behavioral processes. Although certain aspects can be controlled
within an experiment setup, external factors like light conditions or subjectsвҖҷ limitations
may introduce some variability. This pioneer research project is unique, as no previous
research to this day have explored pupillometry or eye movement behavior in an interacВӯ
tive communication setting, more specifically, within communication dynamics of listening
and speaking.
As mentioned in [4], psychologists have been involved with pupillary studies since the
early 1960s when many different research labs studying experimental psychology and
psychopathology published various reports. The most controversial approaches at the
time were presented on a series of papers written both by Eckhard H. Hess and James
M. Polt: вҖқPupil Size as Related to Interest Value of Visual StimuliвҖқ [10] and вҖқPupil Size
in Relation to Mental Activity during Simple Problem SolvingвҖқ [11]. These papers stated
that pupil dilation occurs in response to positive affect stimuli and constriction in response
to negative affect. Some years later, Hess and Polt also explored pupil dilation during
mental activities, which was later on picked up by other scientists, such as Kahneman
and Beatty, who would work on the development of some of the concepts of cognitive
psychology.
Linguistics is a interdisciplinary field of study that investigates many different aspects of
human language (some examples can be seen in table 1.1). In 1974, Harvey Sacks,
Emanuel Schegloff and Gail Jefferson developed a method for conversation analysis in
the paper вҖқA Simplest Systematics for the Organization of TurnВӯTaking for ConversationвҖқ
[12], which consists on examining the structure and organization of speech in interactive
conversations. The influence of this method is unmatched, as it is still used to this day
as a basis for the classification and/or definition of conversational features such as gaps,
pauses, turns and overlaps. These terms, when combined, create the frame from which a
conversation is built upon. Intrinsic characteristics such as the number of repetitions, order
2
Pupil behavior in listening and speaking time of interactive communication
==PAGE:11==
of appearance, durations and so on, will portray lots of information about communication
difficulty, conversational effort and many more.
Table 1.1: Basic aspects or categories of linguistics and their respective focus areas.
Categories
Focus area
Phonetics
Sounds in language
Phonology
Organization of sounds in language
Morphology
Structure of words
Syntax
Structure of sentences
Semantics
Meaning in language
Pragmatics
Use of language in context
1.3
Hypothesis
The purpose of this thesis is to gain a more profound understanding of communication
effort, investment and arousal in a realistic conversation by analyzing pupil diameter and
fixation duration measures in different conditions, both for individuals with ageВӯrelated
normal hearing (NH) as well as hearing impaired (HI). The key motivation is to extract
and examine different features from pupillometry data categorized in different experiment
conditions to check whether or not there is a clear connection between them.
As previously stated, this thesis is a research collaboration with Eriksholm Research
Centre, or more specifically the AMEND project [1]. In terms of timeline, the AMEND
project planned for two years with two experimental phases: AMEND I, which involved
dyadic conversation between ageВӯrelated NH participants with completed data collection
in Spring 2022. AMEND II conducted conversation between NHВӯHI participants which
data collection done in Spring 2023.
Most conventional methods of hearing rehabilitation donвҖҷt really take into account an inВӯ
dividualвҖҷs practical ability to communicate, understand and/or process any conversation.
This is mainly due to the nature of human communication, which makes it almost imposВӯ
sible to objectively quantify the difficulty or effort from the individuals involved. For this
reason, many recent studies such as the one from Haro et. al. (2021) [13], have started
to correlate physiological measures to the aforementioned conversation difficulty just to
grasp into how these mechanisms work and what can be predicted to happen in different
scenarios. This knowledge can not only be used in the development of advanced rehaВӯ
bilitation devices for the cognitive impaired individuals, but also in the initial assessment
and/or intervention strategies so that the whole extent of a personвҖҷs impairment is known
and treated properly.
This thesis tested the validity of the following hypotheses:
вҖў H1 : Cognitive load will rise with increasing task demands during speaking and
listening, which will be reflected on the response from both pupil size and fixation
duration measures.
вҖў H2 : Pupillometry features can serve as markers for cognitive load or effort in both
cohorts of normal hearing and hearing impaired participants.
вҖў H3 : Pupil size and fixation duration responses during speaking and listening time
windows will exhibit variations across different noise conditions, indicating a correВӯ
lation with communication difficulty or effort. It is expected that higher levels of task
Pupil behavior in listening and speaking time of interactive communication
3
==PAGE:12==
demand elicit equally higher responses.
вҖў H4 : The effectiveness of hearing aids (with and without noise suppression) will be
reflected when comparing aided and unaided results across different noise condiВӯ
tions.
1.4
Goals and methods
As previously mentioned, both AMEND I and AMEND II are pioneer projects in the sense
that there are no other examples of pupillometry or eye gaze related studies involving
interactive communication between two participants which have to solve a diapix [14] task.
Based on this, the results that come out of this study are quite important to the scientific
community as they will help set the bar on what type of behavioral pupil responses should
be expected, specially those regarding listening and speaking times in a conversation.
Hypothesis will also be tested out and results will be compared to many other similar
pupillometry studies to convey similarities in attention and effort decoding and whether if
thereвҖҷs any similar behavioral pattern happening in a conversation in comparison to just
listening to a stimulus.
This research also aims to provide a deeper understanding on how cognitive processes
happen in realВӯtime and how can they be translated into more meaningful principles such
as attention, effort, memory and so on.
Mainly pupillometry and fixation duration reВӯ
sponses and/or features from different speaking or listening time periods are going to
be used to accomplish the aforementioned research goal.
4
Pupil behavior in listening and speaking time of interactive communication
==PAGE:13==
2
Methods
The aim of this chapter is to lay the theoretical foundations and concepts that will serve
as the basis for the interpretation and analysis of the results presented in the following
chapters. Additionally, this chapter will also provide information regarding the experimenВӯ
tal setup, including the participants involved, the workflow of the tasks, as well as the
different noise conditions and hearing aid settings.
2.1
Test setup and apparatus
2.1.1
Sound Wave Lab
The Sound Wave lab at Eriksholm Research Centre was used throughout the whole
project to gather data for every Test Participant (TP). A schematic of the room (4.35 x
3.57 x 2.5 [m]) can be seen in fig. 2.1, the room was equipped with:
вҖў Eight loudspeakers (Genelec Z8000aНҫ Lisalmi, Finland) spread equally distanced in
a ring with diameter of 2.5 [m] .
вҖў Two Tobii 3 glasses (see section 2.1.2 for more information).
вҖў Eight cameras (Vicon VeroНҫ Oxford, UK) placed on the walls that form a motion
tracking system.
вҖў Two wireless headВӯworn microphones (DPA 4488Нҫ AllerГёd, Denmark).
вҖў Two wristbands (Empatica E4Нҫ Milano, Italy).
вҖў One sound card (FerroFish Pulse 16MXНҫ Linz am Rhein, Germany) connected to a
computer running MATLAB [15] (Matlab R2021aНҫ Natick, USA).
вҖў Three triggerВӯboxes to help synchronize all simultaneous recordings.
Figure 2.1: Diagram of the test room (Sound Wave Lab, Eriksholm Research Centre).
Pupil behavior in listening and speaking time of interactive communication
5
==PAGE:14==
MATLAB [15] was used in order to start each of the trials and to synchronize audio inВӯ
puts/outputs as well as the triggerВӯboxes. Data collection from other devices was done
by using their associated proprietary software such as Tobii Glasses 3 Controller, Vicon
Nexus and Empatica E4 Realtime. The room can be classified as nonВӯreverberant, as
indicated by the measured reverberation time (RT30) of around 0.23 seconds.
2.1.2
EyeВӯtracking device
EyeВӯtracking data were recorded continuously for each test participant across entire exВӯ
periment. A pair of wearable eye trackers were used for this purpose (Tobii Pro Glasses
3Нҫ Danderyd, Sweden), as seen in fig. 2.2. In AMEND II, if any TP had any type of vision
impairment such as farsightedness (hyperopia) or nearsightedness (myopia), corrective
lenses were added to the glasses.
Figure 2.2: Tobii Pro Glasses 3: Head and recording units.
Data was collected at a sampling frequency of 50 Hz, capturing pupil size or diameter (in
mm) for each pupil, the relative 2D and 3D gaze (in mm), and the corresponding sample
validity of these measurements. All measurements were conducted in the same lab with
almost identical luminosity levels across visits.
2.2
Test participants
As previously stated in section 1.3, each of the parts of AMEND were carried out by
different test participants:
вҖў AMEND I: 24 ageВӯrelated NH participants (13 females, 11 males) with age range
of 56 to 73 years old. Average hearing thresholds were 26 dB Hearing Level (HL)
across six octave frequency bands from 250 Hz to 8 kHz.
вҖў AMEND II: 12 ageВӯrelated NH participants and 12 HI participants with different
severity levels of hearing loss ranging from 30 to 65 dB HL. Their age range was
from 51 to 72 years old. Average hearing thresholds were 25 dB HL for the NH
participants and 43 dB HL for the HI participants.
All participants enrolled in the project were native danish speakers with an acceptable
eyesight that permitted them, with or without correction lenses, to see clearly up to a
6
Pupil behavior in listening and speaking time of interactive communication
==PAGE:15==
distance of 1.5 m. Homogeneous groups of pairs with mixed gender and hearing were
created for the experimental phase (AMEND I: NH pairs, AMEND II: NH paired with HI).
To ensure impartiality and prevent any biases or interpersonal communication strategies,
all recruited participants were mutually unfamiliar with one another. Lastly, participants
were requested to sign a consent form approved by the ScienceВӯEthics Committee for the
Capital Region of Denmark (reference number HВӯ16036391) and they were paid a small
monetary compensation for their participation.
2.3
Test workflow
In both AMEND I and AMEND II, NH participants had a single visit to Eriksholm where their
hearing was initially assessed through an audiometry, followed by the activities from visit
2. However, for HI participants in AMEND II, the activities were divided into two separate
visits to Eriksholm.
2.3.1
Visit 1
During the first visit, participants underwent several cognitive and auditory assessments
in order to estimate how challenging will the next visit be and also to provide a baseline
of how each participant will perform, based on their estimated capacities or abilities. The
estimated time this visit takes is around 2 hours for HI and 1 hour for NH participants.
Firstly, the cognitive tests were: the Montreal Cognitive Assessment (MoCA) [16], which
was used to screen or detect mild cognitive impairment. The Digit Symbol Substitution
Test (DSST) [17] was administered to evaluate cognitive speed, attention, and working
memory. Similarly, the Visual Backward Digit Span (VBDS) [18] test was used to measure
working memory capacity and cognitive strategies used to solve the task.
On the other hand, the audiometryВӯrelated assessments were: the Hearing in Noise Test
(HINT) [19], which was used to assess speech intelligibility in noisy environments, while
Real Ear Measurement (REM) and Pure Tone Audiometry (PTA) were used to evaluate
hearing sensitivity and the amplification effect of hearing aids inside the ear.
2.3.2
Visit 2
When participants arrived to the facilities, they were greeted by a qualified clinical audiВӯ
ologist who first explained the experimental procedure and the task itself, then asked the
TPs to sign their consent and, lastly, carry out the necessary audiometry measurement
(which will also be compared to the one realized in Visit 1). Then, the participants were
taken to the lab and they were seated face to face, as stated in fig. 2.1. The experimenters
then fitted the participants the Tobii glasses and the headВӯworn microphones (as well as
some other apparatus not related to the contents of this thesis).
In order for participants to engage in a faceВӯtoВӯface dyadic conversation, the subjects were
asked to solve a Diapix task [14] by looking for a maximum of 12 differences between
two different drawings (one for each TP). These drawings depict 3 possible scenarios, a
beach, a forest or a city (ordered in trios, maintained from trial to trial) and they belong to
the original Diapix corpus (Baker & Hazan, 2011) [14] but with the original text translated to
danish. Once the participants were familiarized with the task, they went through a training
phase which consisted on them practicing the Diapix task for around 30 seconds in the
вҖқQuietвҖқ condition, to ensure that they were able to make a balanced conversation during
the test.
Measurements were then carried out with the participants working together to solve the
task. The time limit for each trial was set to be 4 minutes and if the participants found
Pupil behavior in listening and speaking time of interactive communication
7
==PAGE:16==
12 differences before this time, the test was halted and the completion time noted. The
estimated time it takes to fully complete this visit was around 2.5 hours.
2.4
Test conditions
As seen previously in section 2.3.2, the second visit involved the main experiment trials,
realized with different conditions. These conditions differ from one phase of the project to
another, as mentioned in section 1.3:
вҖў AMEND I: Four test conditions: Quiet, SHL (Simulated Hearing Loss), N60 and
N70. In both the Quiet and SHL conditions, there was no background noise (N0).
However, in the Quiet condition, the participants had nonВӯoccluded ear canals, while
in the SHL condition, their ear canals were occluded with a pair of earplugs (Alpine,
MusicSafe ProНҫ Soesterberg, Netherlands), which were used for simulating a (conВӯ
ductive) hearing loss of around 25 dB in average across the regular octave freВӯ
quency bands. For the other two conditions, multiВӯtalker babble noise was preВӯ
sented at 60 (N60) and 70 (N70) dBA from all the loudspeakers, respectively. The
noise level was calibrated with a sound level meter (Bruel & KjГҰr 2250Нҫ NГҰrum,
Denmark) and a reference microphone placed in both talkers positions.
вҖў AMEND II: The noise conditions remained identical to those in AMEND I, with the
exception of the SHL condition, which was eliminated due to the impracticality of
completion for HI participants. The three noise conditions, Quiet, N60 and N70 were
paired with different scenarios for the HI participants. In the Aided condition (AA or
AB), HI participants wore hearing aids with different settings (A or B), while in the
unaided condition (UN), they did not wear hearing aids at all. The hearing aids (OtiВӯ
con More 1Нҫ SmГёrum, Denmark) were fitted using VAC+ (Oticon standard) for each
HI participant and the dome type was chosen by the support audiologist, which was
mainly the one that HI participants were more familiar with (open or power domes
preferred more than closed domes). Settings A or B correspond to the hearing aids
Help Level (HL) of 3 and 6. Sanchez Lopez [20] demonstrated, and as it can be
seen both in table A.1 and in fig. A.1, that the primary distinction between settings
HL3 (AA) and HL6 (AB) lies in the amount of noise reduction they apply, leading to
big contrasts in speech intelligibility. Finally, the combinations of N0, N60, N70 with
UN, AA, AB yield a total of 9 different test conditions.
2.5
Data analysis and processing
From all the data gathered by all different apparatus mentioned in section 2.1.1, only
speech and eye tracking data will be further analyzed, as they form the basis of this
thesis. This section will evaluate gathered data from all trials both from AMEND I and
AMEND II, which were automatically split in different audio or eye tracking files that were
synchronized with each other (trial by trial) thanks to the trigger boxes. It is also important
to mention that both eye tracking and speech data were gathered and also processed
using MATLAB [15] (Matlab R2021aНҫ Natick, USA).
2.5.1
Preprocessing
The Tobii Pro Glasses 3, as described in section 2.1.2, is a device that captures many
different eye features simultaneously. This allowed for the investigation or exploration of
other eye characteristics (such as gaze) rather than just pupillometry, with the intention
of testing or identifying whether if any of these features is an indicator of actual cognitive
load for the TP.
Preprocessing is an essential step or phase in eye tracking data analysis that, given the
8
Pupil behavior in listening and speaking time of interactive communication
==PAGE:17==
raw data from the measurements, removes outliers and/or artifacts that are expected to
happen due to some of the factors listed in section 2.5.2. The purpose of the preprocessВӯ
ing phase is to ensure the quality and consistency of the data that will be subsequently
used for the analysis. It is common practice in pupillometry and eye gaze related studВӯ
ies to choose one preprocessing method or pipeline but, in this thesis, all data including
pupil size and eye gaze will be preprocessed with two different methods (described in
section 2.5.1 and section 2.5.1), which will serve as a robust form of validation between
both methods. This approach allows a comprehensive assessment and comparison of
the performance and reliability of both methods.
Pupil data preprocessing
According to the literature [21], there isnвҖҷt a standard preprocessing method for pupil data
as it should be chosen according to the type of experiment, the setup/capture device
chosen, its sampling frequency and also, on the duration of the measurements.
In this thesis, the preВӯprocessing of the pupillometry primarily focused on the removal of
outliers, following the method described by Kret et al. (2018) [22]. This method aims to
identify three different types of invalid/erroneous pupil size samples (which can be seen in
fig. 2.3): (1) Dilation speed outliers and edge artifacts: Samples characterized by having
values that significantly differ from their adjacent samplesНҫ (2) TrendВӯline deviation outliers:
samples with a disproportionate deviation from a smooth pupil trend lineНҫ (3) Temporally
isolated samples: bogus samples separated in time in small chunks, easily identifiable.
0
0.5
1
Time [s]
2.8
3
3.2
3.4
3.6
Pupil diameter [mm]
(1)
0
0.5
1
Time [s]
3
3.5
4
4.5
(2)
0
0.5
1
Time [s]
3
3.2
3.4
3.6
3.8
(3)
Figure 2.3: Raw pupil size data showing the three aforementioned types of erroneous
samples ((1), (2) and (3)) that will be the target for the preprocessing pipeline defined by
Kret et al. (2018).
Due to the existence of gaps or nonВӯuniform sampling in the data, the changes in value
from sample to sample cannot be compared directly. This issue is solved by Kret et al.
(2018) [22] with the introduction of the concept of normalized dilation speed, which is the
ratio between the absolute change of the values in samples and its separation in time.
Being (d(i)) the pupil dilation time series with timestamps (t(i)), the normalized dilation
speed (dвҖІ(i)) at each sample (i), can be calculated as the maximum absolute normalized
Pupil behavior in listening and speaking time of interactive communication
9
==PAGE:18==
change relative to either the prior or subsequent sample,
dвҖІ(i) = max

d(i) вҲ’d(i вҲ’1)
t(i) вҲ’t(i вҲ’1)
 ,

d(i + 1) вҲ’d(i)
t(i + 1) вҲ’t(i)


.
(2.1)
To detect dilation speed outliers, the median absolute deviation (MAD) method is utilized,
which was defined by Leys et al. (2013) [23]. The MAD method is a reliable dispersion
metric that is not affected by outliers and it is calculated as,
MAD = median
 dвҖІ(i) вҲ’median(dвҖІ(i))

.
(2.2)
By using a constant (n), the threshold from which the dilation speed outliers are defined
can be calculated as,
Threshold = median(dвҖІ(i)) + n В· MAD.
(2.3)
Any sample with a calculated dilation speed above the threshold is now defined as an
outlier and will be rejected. Also, in order to remove edge artifacts that may occur around
gaps, typically caused by eye blinks, samples within 50 ms of gaps will be rejected. In this
case, a gap is defined as any data sections without values (designated as вҖқNot A NumberвҖқ
(NaN)) with a duration of at least 75 ms.
Samples that have a strong deviation from the trend line, which is generated right after
the dilation speed threshold is applied, will also be rejected. A new trend line can be
generated, using the data without the newly rejected samples, and it is possible that some
of the previously discarded samples are reintroduced because their deviation from the new
trend line is within range. A sparsity filter is also introduced by Kret et al. (2018) [22] to
remove samples bordering gaps smaller than 50 ms, this ensures that noisy samples as
well as those generated by a glitch in the eyetracker are removed from the data.
Gaze data preprocessing
Gaze data was preprocessed using the вҖқPUPILSвҖқ pipeline, which was released together
with an article created by RelaГұoВӯIborra et al. (2020) [24]. The pipeline classifies pupillomВӯ
etry samples as three possible events such as blinks, saccades and fixations and then,
preprocesses the raw pupil size data accordingly. In our case, вҖқPUPILSвҖқ is used only
for detecting fixations in the data, as those time chunks will later be used for calculating
fixation duration.
In order for the pipeline [24] to detect blinks, an alternative method was used instead of
utilizing the normalized dilation speed as discussed earlier in section 2.5.1. This method
states that, a blink is defined as region of outlier samples where the measured pupil size
is smaller than three standard deviations below the average pupil size of the entire trial,
as it is recommended by Winn et al. (2018) [21]. Additionally, data chunks containing
вҖқNaNвҖқ or вҖқ0вҖқ values were also classified as blinks.
The вҖқPUPILSвҖқ pipeline [24] can either calculate the angular velocity for X and Y or it can
also accept the angular velocity as an input parameter in order to use it for the detection
of saccades. Tobii Pro Glasses 3 estimates threeВӯdimensional (3D) gaze with a specific
coordinate system in which the axes are oriented as follows: when viewed from the perВӯ
spective of the subject, the XВӯaxis points horizontally to the left side, the YВӯaxis points
vertically upwards and the ZВӯaxis points forward. Being the origin (0,0,0), the middle point
between the two eyes placed within the glasses. Therefore, the angular velocity, vgaze,
was given to вҖқPUPILSвҖқ as an input, and it was calculated as:
10
Pupil behavior in listening and speaking time of interactive communication
==PAGE:19==
vgaze =
q
v2
Оё вҲ—cos(П•)2 + v2
П•,
(2.4)
being Оё the azimuth, П• the elevation and also vОё and vП• their respective velocities, which
were calculated as,
vОё = вҲҶОё
вҲҶt
and
vП• = вҲҶП•
вҲҶt .
(2.5)
Both the azimuth, Оё, and the elevation, П•, are the result of the transformation of 3d gaze
samples from cartesian to spherical coordinates. A saccade is detected whenever the
angular velocity, vgaze, exceeds a certain velocity threshold, which in this case is set to 30
[degrees/s] or [В°/s]. Also, in order to classify an event as a saccade, its duration must be
of at least 10 ms.
Figure 2.4: Event detection or classification steps in the вҖқPUPILSвҖқ pipeline by RelaГұoВӯ
Iborra et al. (2020) [24], ordered from top to bottom (blink, saccade and fixation events).
The events are presented along with the corresponding data (pupil diameter or angular
velocity) that contributed to their estimation. In this example, blink events were detected
because of gaps in the data (NaNs), not because of the standard deviation threshold.
Pupil behavior in listening and speaking time of interactive communication
11
==PAGE:20==
Once blinks and saccades are already classified, fixations are defined as all the remaining
time intervals in the data which havenвҖҷt been classified yet. This fixation events will be the
time chunks from which samples will be used in order to calculate the fixation duration for
each trial. An example of the sequence of classification of events can be seen in fig. 2.4.
2.5.2
Data inclusion requirements
As it is mandatory on any study involving eyeВӯtracking data, it is always important to exВӯ
clude trials that donвҖҷt comply with certain criteria aimed at ensuring some degree of acВӯ
curacy and integrity in the data.
Table 2.1: Total number of trials in AMEND I and AMEND II, from the descriptions seen
in section 2.2 and section 2.4.
Conditions
Repetitions
TPs
Total trials
NonВӯrejected trials
AMEND I
4
2
24
192
131
AMEND II
9
1
24
216
123
The total number of trials per part of the project, as seen in table 2.1, is not equivalent to
the actual number of files selected for data analysis due to factors such as:
вҖў Missing recordings: Due to data not recorded in one or both devices (microphones
and/or glasses), which renders the analysis impossible. Or due to connectivity probВӯ
lems, storage or battery issues, etc.
вҖў UnВӯcalibrated eyeВӯtracking data: Whenever the eyeВӯtracking calibration, was too
difficult to perform for any of the TPs, it was skipped and this resulted in data loss,
gaze estimation inaccuracies and an overall poor data quality.
вҖў Individual eye disorders: As stated by Holmqvist et al. (2023) [25], participants
with older ages are likely to have droopy eyelids, cataracts, macular degeneration
or many other eye ailments. This ultimately results in eyeВӯtracking recordings with
either data losses (gaps), altered eye gaze/movements or a compromise in data
quality.
вҖў EyeВӯblinks: Considered as the most common data loss and systematic error factor,
which means that blinks create big gaps as well as outliers in all trials. This will later
on be fixed with processing.
вҖў Device location: Changes in the placement of any of both devices affect data qualВӯ
ity and, in some extreme cases, it can also happen to make a recording worthless,
specially for eyeВӯtracking.
Knowing the main factors for missing data chunks and poorer data quality, if a trial is set
to be used in the analysis, it has to meet the following criteria:
1. Data loss: Preprocessed data for a given trial cannot have a data loss greater than
40%, meaning that the data must contain less than 40% NaN values.
2. Delays: Maximum permitted delay within the number of eyeВӯtracking data samples
and their respective timestamps is 0.5 seconds, while the maximum allowable delay
between speech and eyeВӯtracking data is 1 second.
3. File association: Trials consist of two distinct files, one for speech data and another
one for eyeВӯtracking data. If any of the files is missing, the trial isnвҖҷt valid.
12
Pupil behavior in listening and speaking time of interactive communication
==PAGE:21==
4. NonВӯempty files: All files must contain nonВӯempty variables, which sometimes is
the case for speech data.
2.5.3
Processing
Now that both the raw gaze and pupil size data have been preprocessed (in order to
diminish the negative effect of blinks, nonВӯuniform sampling, artifacts and data losses),
next step consists of defining how to transform the valid raw samples (those that have not
been discarded after preprocessing) into separate pupil diameter and fixation duration
time signals.
Pupil diameter
As mentioned earlier in Section 2.5.1, the preprocessed pupil size data solely consists
of вҖқvalidвҖқ or вҖқnonВӯerroneousвҖқ samples. Consequently, it is expected that the number of
preprocessed samples will be lower than that of raw samples. To proceed with the proВӯ
cessing of pupil size data from a trial, it is necessary that the proportion of preprocessed
samples containing missing values (NaNs) is below 40% of the total number of samples,
as previously explained on section 2.5.2. Taking advantage of the fact that each trial inВӯ
cludes pupil size data from both eyes, the pupil diameter signal selected for a trial will be
derived from the eye with the fewer number of NaNs after the preprocessing step.
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Time [s]
Pupil size
(separated vertically for clarity)
1
2
3
4
Figure 2.5: Example of pupil size data processing steps. Raw data, marked as 1 , is
comprised of gaps, blinks and edge artifacts. Preprocessed data, marked as 2 , has
excluded blink and edge artifact samples. Gaps are then interpolated, marked as 3 .
And lastly, the data is lowВӯpass filtered, marked as 4 .
In order to transform the preprocessed signal into a continuous pupil diameter signal, the
first step is to linearly interpolate the chunks of missing data so that the signal doesnвҖҷt
contain NaN values, similarly to what Winn et al. (2018) [21] described also as the next
step after deВӯblinking.
Secondly, the data is lowВӯpass filtered at 2 Hz (filter duration of 0.5 s) mainly due to the
fact that Klingner et al. (2011) [26] found out that any pupil fluctuations faster than 10
Hz are not correlated accross eyes, meaning that any pupil response faster than 10 Hz
Pupil behavior in listening and speaking time of interactive communication
13
==PAGE:22==
should not be analyzed further as it probably is the result of artifacts, blinks or any other
source of erroneous data. LowВӯpass filtering creates artifacts at the start and the end of
the filtered signal (big peak and dip respectively) because the lowВӯpass window values go
from 0 to 1, this is taken care for by assigning the value of those peak/dip artifact samples
as the Mean Pupil Dilation (MPD) of each trial (which wonвҖҷt affect as much to the overall
response).
A visual representation of the overall processing from the raw data to the pupil size signal
can be seen in fig. 2.5. The final processed signal has a distinct smoothness as well
as an absence of any data losses, which indicates that all processing techniques have
successfully turned the raw signal into a much more comprehensive and recognizable
signal when compared to the results from any other pupillometry studies.
Baseline correction
Pupil dilation is commonly measured by assessing the change in pupil size relative to
the time just before a stimulus is presented, rather than reporting the absolute pupil size
[27]. Usually, baseline pupil size typically varies among participants, fluctuates over time
within individuals, and gradually decreases during a testing session. These sources of
variability at a trialВӯlevel as well as at a participantВӯlevel, can easily be solved by making
sure that the number of participants and the duration of the trials were large enough.
In this thesis, the baseline is calculated separately for each speaking or listening window.
This approach ensures that each response is equally estimated based on its own baseline,
allowing us to gather these individual responses and subsequently compare them across
different conditions. The chosen duration of baseline was of 0.5 seconds, as it is long
enough to mitigate the possible effect of blinks and also short enough not to interfere with
the previous windowвҖҷs completion. Knowing that D is the absolute pupil size (also known
as diameter), the baselined pupil size, Dbaselined, is then calculated as,
Dbaselined(t) = D(t) вҲ’B(t),
(2.6)
being B the baseline calculated as an average,
B(t) = 1
n
n
X
i=1
bi = b1 + b2 + В· В· В· + bn
n
,
(2.7)
with n being the number of samples contained inside the baseline time interval, ranging
from 0.5 seconds prior to the windowвҖҷs start until the start of the window itself.
Fixation duration
Eye movements and cognitive load have been suggested to be correlated or linked in a
recent novel study by Cui et al. (2023) [28]. The study tends to suggest that the neural
activity in brain regions that handle eye movements are modulated to some extent with
listening effort. In order to extract fixation duration from the preprocessed gaze data, the
methodology from the aforementioned paper by Cui et al. (2023) [28] was replicated.
The data that will be utilized to estimate fixation duration, corresponds to the regions of
preprocessed 3D gaze samples previously classified as fixations in section 2.5.1, by using
the вҖқPUPILSвҖқ pipeline [24].
Fixation duration is calculated, sample by sample, as the number of previous and posteВӯ
rior samples whose euclidean distance with the current sample is less than or equal to
the radius of a sphere (in the end it is divided by the sampling frequency, so that its unit is
seconds). This theoretical sphere represents the fovea or foveal area, the central region
of the retina in the human eye that is key for visual perception and also fixation. The fovea
14
Pupil behavior in listening and speaking time of interactive communication
==PAGE:23==
is characterized by a high density of cone cells, which are specialized photoВӯreceptor cells
that are responsible for color and detailed visual acuity. Due to its small size and concenВӯ
trated cone cell distribution, the fovea enables the capture of fine details and provides a
high level of visual clarity within a limited field of view.
Figure 2.6: Fixation duration calculation for one gaze sample (current sample). The sum
of all contiguous previous and posterior samples with a distance less than the radius (given
by the foveal area of 1.5В°), divided by the sampling frequency, is the fixation duration for
the current sample (in this case is 4.16 seconds or 208 contiguous samples). Other gaze
samples are shown in gray.
The width in degrees of the fovea is needed to calculate the radius of the aforemenВӯ
tioned theoretical sphere. The measure of the foveal areaвҖҷs width was first introduced by
Helmholtz in 1868, by defining the concept of the thumbвҖҷs rule, a rule that suggests that
the visual angle formed by the thumb held at armвҖҷs length corresponds to a small integer
value. An initial study by Robert P. OвҖҷShea in 1991 [29] concluded that the visual angle for
the width of the thumb is around 2В°, with the thumbnail width estimated at approximately
1.5В°. For this reason, the value used in the processing of this thesis as the fovea visual
angle is 1.5В°. In fig. 2.6, an example of the calculation of the fixation duration from one
sample in particular is shown.
Once the fixation duration has been calculated, the signal is low pass filtered with a hamВӯ
ming window at 2 Hz (duration of 0.5 s). This is done with the help of a zeroВӯphase digital
filter that ignores NaNs. An example of the fixation duration processing can be found in
fig. 2.7, in which it can be easily seen that blink and saccadic regions will not be used on
Pupil behavior in listening and speaking time of interactive communication
15
==PAGE:24==
the estimation of the fixation duration.
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Time [s]
Fixation duration
(separated vertically for clarity)
1
2
Figure 2.7: Example of fixation duration data processing steps. Gaze data is preproВӯ
cessed first (as explained in section 2.5.1), the regions that are not marked as fixations,
which are saccades and blinks (shown as turquoise vertical rectangles in the figure), will
be ignored during the raw fixation duration, marked as 1 (which explains the gaps in the
raw fixation duration). Then, the fixation duration is lowВӯpass filtered, marked as 2 .
2.5.4
Speech data
The desired outcome from the microphone recordings are both the listening and speakВӯ
ing windows for each subject on each trial. In order to do so, the audio tracks from each
subject (coming through the headВӯworn microphones mentioned in section 2.1.1) were
analyzed individually for each trial using the Communicative State Classification (CSC)
algorithm described in a study by SГёrensen et al. (2021) [30]. Conversations are fundaВӯ
mentally structured in turns that alternate (or not) between speakers, this transition from
one talker to another is named floorВӯtransfer. The timing involved in turnВӯtaking has been
termed as the floorВӯtransfer offset (FTO), which is defined as the interval from when a
person stops talking to when another person starts talking.
The algorithm [30] was responsible of labelling short 4 ms segments as either speech
(1) or no speech (0), with the use of Voice Activity Detection (VAD), based on the Root
Mean Square (RMS) value of each segment. This 250 Hz binary activity array output was
then used to classify the conversation, thanks to the CSC algorithm, into six possible time
groups or windows:
1. Utterances: Also named interpausal units (IPUs), these are windows that contain
connected speech with silences no bigger than 180 ms.
2. Turns: Duration of IPUs by one talker, delimited by floorВӯtranfers.
3. Gaps: Silence during floorВӯtransfers.
4. Pauses: Silence in turns (no floorВӯtransfer).
16
Pupil behavior in listening and speaking time of interactive communication
==PAGE:25==
5. OverlapВӯBetween: Overlapping speech during a floorВӯtransfer.
6. OverlapВӯWithin: Fully overlapped speech occurring on someoneвҖҷs turn.
Figure 2.8: Simple sketch of the output of the CSC algorithm by SГёrensen et al. (2021)
[30], which classifies gaps, pauses, turns, overlaps (within and between) as well as utterВӯ
ances or IPUs (speaking or listening).
The utterances or IPUs were then used to define either speaking or listening windows,
depending on which talker belongs to which channel for a specific trial. In fig. 2.8, there
is a visual representation of all the possible groups in a conversation, with the addition
of the classification of utterances or IPUs as either speaking or listening. Note that, all
speaking windows translate to listening windows for the other talker and viceversa.
The CSC algorithm [30] was applied to each nonВӯrejected trial for both AMEND I and
AMEND II, with the duration of the windows shown as histogram plots in both section 3.1.1
and section 3.1.2 respectively. Additionally, their averages are also displayed in the вҖқRawвҖқ
row in both table 3.1 and table 3.2. After a preliminary analysis, it becomes apparent
that the duration for speaking and listening (IPUs) windows, is relatively shorter in our
analysis when compared to an example study by Levinson et al. (2015) [31] that shared
the maximum silence duration within IPUs of 180 ms.
Speaking and listening windows must be large enough in order to be able to fully capture
both the response of the pupil (dilation) as well as the response of the eye gaze or moveВӯ
ments (fixations). In order to do so, the initial raw speaking and listening windows from
the outcome of the algorithm by SГёrensen et al. (2021) [30], were further processed in
the following sequence (shown in fig. 2.9):
вҖў Merge any consecutive windows from the same type (speaking or listening) if thereвҖҷs
a time interval between them smaller or equal to 0.3 seconds.
вҖў Discard any windows with a duration smaller or equal to 0.5 seconds.
вҖў Merge windows again, this time allowing for a time interval smaller or equal to 2
seconds.
вҖў Discard again, only for those windows with a duration smaller or equal to 1 second.
Pupil behavior in listening and speaking time of interactive communication
17
==PAGE:26==
вҖў Split overlapsВӯwithin into new separate windows and ignore overlapsВӯbetween, keepВӯ
ing only the window with the latest active talker.
The reasoning for selecting these different thresholds in the processing of speaking and
listening windows is that, given the fact that the aforementioned algorithm by SГёrensen et
al. (2021) [30] works with audio as an input, it is expected that not all of the outcome winВӯ
dows directly correspond to speech. Many undesired participantВӯrelated sources of noise
happened during the trials, some examples are laughter, coughing, expressions for agreeВӯ
ment such as вҖқjaвҖқ, вҖқuhВӯhuhвҖқ and many more. Literature by Levinson (2015) [31], Schegloff
(2000) [32] and Gravano (2012) [33] have managed to define different categories in order
to describe sources of вҖқnoiseвҖқ in the overlapВӯwithin windows, such as, simultaneous start
from both talkers, turnВӯtaking attempts, uncompleted turns and some more. Processing
both speaking and listening windows ensures that participant responses are fully captured
while also effectively filtering out undesired rapid windows.
0
5
10
15
20
Time [s]
Merge < .3
Discard < .5
Merge < 2
Discard < 1
Split overlaps
Figure 2.9: Example of the postВӯprocessing sequence, from bottom to top, applied to
both speaking and listening windows obtained using the CSC algorithm by SГёrensen et
al. (2021) [30]. The initial raw windows, on the bottom, undergo the aforementioned
processing sequence to finish as the processed speaking and listening windows on the
top. Color legend is shown both in fig. 3.1 and in fig. 3.2
2.5.5
Pupillometry features
In order to analyze the pupil size results after processing, itвҖҷs good practice to define some
key features that can represent many different aspects of the pupil response over time,
providing an easy measure for each window to relate and compare between different TPs
and conditions. The features chosen for further analysis were:
вҖў Mean Pupil Dilation (MPD): Estimated as the average pupil size value within a
specific window. It provides a reliable representation of the general level of arousal
or cognitive load experienced by the individual. As indicated in an article by Ahmad
et al. (2020) [34], not only MPD was found to be the most prominent eye feature but
also it concluded that higher mean pupil dilation values generally indicate increased
arousal or cognitive load, while lower values suggest reduced arousal or cognitive
demand.
18
Pupil behavior in listening and speaking time of interactive communication
==PAGE:27==
вҖў Slope: First coefficient of a linear regression fitted using the pupil size values within
a specific window. It captures the steepness or incline of the response, reflecting
the speed or the rate of change (and its intensity).
вҖў Peak Pupil Dilation (PPD): Maximum pupil size value within a specific window.
This feature indicates moments of overall heightened attention, emotional arousal,
or cognitive engagement in a window. It provides insights into the salience or signifВӯ
icance of the pupil response from a TP within a certain window and noise condition
or hearing aid setting.
By considering these three pupil size features in the analysis of the results, a compreВӯ
hensive understanding of the different pupil dynamic response can be gained. Enabling a
simple assessment within different windows of the cognitive load and cognitive processВӯ
ing for different conditions. These features will later on be compared against each other
in search of statistically significant differences.
2.5.6
Linear Mixed Modelling
Linear Mixed Models (LMMs), also known as mixedВӯeffects models or hierarchical linear
models, are a powerful statistical framework for analyzing data that exhibit both fixed and
random effects, as explained in an article by Singmann et al. (2019) [35]. LMMs expand
from traditional linear regression models by incorporating random effects, which account
for the variability between the groups or clusters in the data.
In this case, this framework will be used with the measures obtained from the pupil feaВӯ
tures estimated from samples belonging to different windows, as defined in section 2.5.5,
all data from the features corresponding to AMEND I and AMEND II will be collected in two
different tables. The variables (table columns) of the table are: Subject (TP associated
number), activity (window being either speaking or listening), noise condition (or hearing
aid setting in AMEND II) and lastly, the three estimated features within the window: MPD,
Slope and PPD.
To fit the LMM to the data from the features, MATLABвҖҷs [15] builtВӯin function fitlme()
was used with the default optional parameters. The input arguments where the aforeВӯ
mentioned tables and a formula which defined the fixed effects and the random effects
for the fitting of the model. The different formulas can be seen in listing 2.1, with the feaВӯ
ture of interest first (as the response variable), the activity and noise condition or hearing
aid setting as the fixed effects for the intercept and, lastly, the subject as each level of the
grouping of the random effect for the intercept.
The intercept is the reference from which the model will estimate the differences with, in
our case, we chose our intercept to be the speaking or listening activity combined with
either the quiet noise condition or the unВӯaided hearing aid setting.
1
% Formulas to differentiate between noise conditions
2
form_N_MPD='MPD~Activity*Noise+(1|Subject)';
3
form_N_Slope='Slope~Activity*Noise+(1|Subject)';
4
form_N_PPD='PPD~Activity*Noise+(1|Subject)';
5
6
% Formulas to differentiate between hearind aid settings
7
form_S_MPD='MPD~Activity*Setting+(1|Subject)';
8
form_S_Slope='Slope~Activity*Setting+(1|Subject)';
9
form_S_PPD='PPD~Activity*Setting+(1|Subject)';
Listing 2.1: Formulas for fitting LMMs in MATLAB [15].
Pupil behavior in listening and speaking time of interactive communication
19
==PAGE:28==
20
Pupil behavior in listening and speaking time of interactive communication
==PAGE:29==
3
Results
This chapter will present the results from both AMEND I and AMEND II, these results
were evaluated and analyzed based on the hypothesis presented in section 1.3. The
main objective of this chapter is to present all processed data from the experiments in
order to give out a simple and clear representation of the findings. These will later on be
used to form a discussion to describe the behavioral responses and to what extent are
they dependant to any of the different conditions or groups of participants.
3.1
Communication dynamics results
The raw windows obtained with the method described previously in section 2.5.4, belong
to different types. The utterances are classified into either speaking or listening, dependВӯ
ing on the actions of each speaker. Additionally, each trial will then contain (or not) differВӯ
ent windows named as: Speak, Listen, Gap, Pause, OverlapВӯWithin, OverlapВӯBetween or
Turn.
The windowsвҖҷ durations shown in both section 3.1.1 (AMEND I) and section 3.1.2 (AMEND
II), reveal a great difference on their time distribution when comparing both the raw to the
processed windows, seen in fig. 3.1 and fig. 3.2 respectively. This duration difference,
corresponds to 4 seconds approximately, indicating that once speaking and listening winВӯ
dows are processed (with the method defined in section 2.5.4), they will then be large
enough in size to fully capture pupil and fixation responses to each event (speaking or
listening) from each participant.
3.1.1
AMEND I
Table 3.1: Average duration (in seconds) from the histograms shown in fig. 3.1.
Avg. duration [s]
Speak
Listen
Gap
Pause
OLW
OLB
Turn
Raw
1.09
1.12
0.49
0.55
0.30
0.38
1.99
Processed
5.12
5.33
2.00
2.36
1.98
1.50
7.06
Pupil behavior in listening and speaking time of interactive communication
21
==PAGE:30==
0
2
4
Time [s]
Bin Count
0
2
4
Time [s]
Bin Count
0
2
4
Time [s]
Bin Count
0
2
4
Time [s]
Bin Count
0
2
4
Time [s]
Bin Count
0
2
4
Time [s]
Bin Count
0
2
4
Time [s]
Bin Count
Speak
Listen
Gap
Pause
O.Within
O.Between
Turn
(a) Raw windows.
0
2
4
Time [s]
Bin Count
0
2
4
Time [s]
Bin Count
0
2
4
Time [s]
Bin Count
0
2
4
Time [s]
Bin Count
0
2
4
Time [s]
Bin Count
0
2
4
Time [s]
Bin Count
0
2
4
Time [s]
Bin Count
Speak
Listen
Gap
Pause
O.Within
O.Between
Turn
(b) Processed windows.
Figure 3.1: Histograms of the duration from both the raw and processed CSC outcome
measures (different windows) in AMEND I, obtained by the method described in secВӯ
tion 2.5.4. The average duration of each type of window is shown on table 3.1.
3.1.2
AMEND II
Table 3.2: Average duration (in seconds) from the histograms shown in fig. 3.2.
Avg. duration [s]
Speak
Listen
Gap
Pause
OLW
OLB
Turn
Raw
0.90
0.88
0.60
0.59
0.25
0.23
2.12
Processed
4.92
4.657
1.99
2.66
1.46
1.67
6.654
22
Pupil behavior in listening and speaking time of interactive communication
==PAGE:31==
0
2
4
Time [s]
Bin Count
0
2
4
Time [s]
Bin Count
0
2
4
Time [s]
Bin Count
0
2
4
Time [s]
Bin Count
0
2
4
Time [s]
Bin Count
0
2
4
Time [s]
Bin Count
0
2
4
Time [s]
Bin Count
Speak
Listen
Gap
Pause
O.Within
O.Between
Turn
(a) Raw windows.
0
2
4
Time [s]
Bin Count
0
2
4
Time [s]
Bin Count
0
2
4
Time [s]
Bin Count
0
2
4
Time [s]
Bin Count
0
2
4
Time [s]
Bin Count
0
2
4
Time [s]
Bin Count
0
2
4
Time [s]
Bin Count
Speak
Listen
Gap
Pause
O.Within
O.Between
Turn
(b) Processed windows.
Figure 3.2: Histograms of the duration from both the raw and processed CSC outcome
measures (different windows) in AMEND II, obtained by the method described in secВӯ
tion 2.5.4. The average duration of each type of window is shown on table 3.2.
3.2
Pupil size results
This section presents the pupil size results derived from all the nonВӯrejected trials in
AMEND I and AMEND II. All these processing steps are described in details in chapВӯ
ter 2. Results are presented in the form of pupil diameter over time (AMEND I in fig. 3.3
and AMEND II in fig. 3.6 and fig. 3.8) and also in the form of grouped pupil size features
(AMEND I in fig. 3.5 and AMEND II in fig. 3.9 and fig. 3.10). The results are separated by
different test conditions and/or by hearing aid settings (only for HI in AMEND II).
Pupil behavior in listening and speaking time of interactive communication
23
==PAGE:32==
3.2.1
AMEND I
0
1
2
3
Time [s]
3.35
3.4
3.45
3.5
Pupil diameter [mm]
Event onset
0
1
2
3
Time [s]
3.35
3.4
3.45
3.5
Event onset
(a) Pupil size.
0
1
2
3
Time [s]
-0.06
-0.04
-0.02
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
Pupil baseline difference [mm]
Event onset
Baseline
0
1
2
3
Time [s]
-0.06
-0.04
-0.02
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
Event onset
Baseline
(b) Baselined pupil size.
Figure 3.3: Global pupil size results averaged across participants and separated differВӯ
ent test conditions, with events being either speaking or listening windows (left and right
panels, respectively) in AMEND I. Color legend is shown on fig. 3.4.
Quiet
SHL
N60
N70
Test conditions:
(a) Test conditions.
Speak
Listen
Types of windows:
(b) Window types.
Figure 3.4: Color legend in AMEND I.
24
Pupil behavior in listening and speaking time of interactive communication
==PAGE:33==
Quiet
SHL
N60
N70
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
5
Pupil diameter [mm]
Speaking
Quiet
SHL
N60
N70
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
5
Listening
(a) MPD.
Quiet
SHL
N60
N70
-100
-50
0
50
100
Slope [mm/s]
Speaking
Quiet
SHL
N60
N70
-100
-50
0
50
100
Listening
(b) Mean Slope.
Quiet
SHL
N60
N70
3
4
5
6
Pupil diameter [mm]
Speaking
Quiet
SHL
N60
N70
3
4
5
6
Listening
(c) PPD.
Figure 3.5: Pupil size features (MPD, Slope and PPD) in AMEND I separated by different
test conditions, calculated from the samples within the same time interval as in fig. 3.3b
(from 0 to 3 s after event onset). Features belong to both speaking and listening windows
(left and right panels, respectively). Color legend is shown on fig. 3.4.
Pupil behavior in listening and speaking time of interactive communication
25
==PAGE:34==
3.2.2
AMEND II
0
1
2
3
Time [s]
3.25
3.3
3.35
3.4
3.45
3.5
3.55
3.6
Pupil diameter [mm]
Event onset
0
1
2
3
Time [s]
3.25
3.3
3.35
3.4
3.45
3.5
3.55
3.6
Event onset
(a) Pupil size, NH.
0
1
2
3
Time [s]
-0.08
-0.06
-0.04
-0.02
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
Pupil baseline difference [mm]
Event onset
Baseline
0
1
2
3
Time [s]
-0.08
-0.06
-0.04
-0.02
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
Event onset
Baseline
(b) Baselined pupil size, NH.
Figure 3.6: Normal hearing (NH) pupil size results averaged across participants and sepВӯ
arated by noise conditions, with events being either speaking or listening windows (left
and right panels, respectively) in AMEND II. Color legend is shown on fig. 3.7.
Quiet
N60
N70
Test conditions:
(a) Test conditions.
UN
AA
AB
Hearing aid settings:
(b) Hearing aids settings.
Speak
Listen
Types of windows:
(c) Window types.
Figure 3.7: Color legend in AMEND II.
26
Pupil behavior in listening and speaking time of interactive communication
==PAGE:35==
0
1
2
3
Time [s]
3.2
3.25
3.3
3.35
3.4
3.45
Pupil diameter [mm]
Event onset
0
1
2
3
Time [s]
3.2
3.25
3.3
3.35
3.4
3.45
Event onset
(a) Pupil size, HI.
0
1
2
3
Time [s]
-0.05
0
0.05
Pupil baseline difference [mm]
Event onset
Baseline
0
1
2
3
Time [s]
-0.05
0
0.05
Event onset
Baseline
(b) Baselined pupil size, HI.
Figure 3.8: Hearing impaired (HI) pupil size results averaged across participants and
separated by noise conditions, with events being either speaking or listening windows
(left and right panels, respectively) in AMEND II. Color legend is shown on fig. 3.7.
Pupil behavior in listening and speaking time of interactive communication
27
==PAGE:36==
Quiet
N60
N70
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
5
5.5
Pupil diameter [mm]
Speaking
Quiet
N60
N70
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
5
5.5
Listening
(a) MPD.
Quiet
N60
N70
-100
0
100
200
Slope [mm/s]
Speaking
Quiet
N60
N70
-100
0
100
200
Listening
(b) Mean Slope.
Quiet
N60
N70
3
4
5
6
Pupil diameter [mm]
Speaking
Quiet
N60
N70
3
4
5
6
Listening
(c) PPD.
Figure 3.9: Pupil size features (MPD, Slope and PPD) in AMEND II separated by noise
conditions, calculated from the samples within the same time interval as in fig. 3.6b (from
0 to 3 s after event onset). Features belong to both speaking and listening windows (left
and right panels, respectively). Color legend is shown on fig. 3.7.
28
Pupil behavior in listening and speaking time of interactive communication
==PAGE:37==
UN
AA
AB
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
5
5.5
Pupil diameter [mm]
Speaking
UN
AA
AB
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
5
5.5
Listening
(a) MPD.
UN
AA
AB
-50
0
50
100
150
200
Slope [mm/s]
Speaking
UN
AA
AB
-50
0
50
100
150
200
Listening
(b) Mean Slope.
UN
AA
AB
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
5
Pupil diameter [mm]
Speaking
UN
AA
AB
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
5
Listening
(c) PPD.
Figure 3.10: Pupil size features (MPD, Slope and PPD) for HI in AMEND II separated by
hearing aids settings (as described in section 2.4), calculated from the samples within the
same time interval as in fig. 3.8b (from 0 to 3 s after event onset). Features belong to
both speaking and listening windows (left and right panels, respectively). Color legend is
shown on fig. 3.7.
Pupil behavior in listening and speaking time of interactive communication
29
==PAGE:38==
3.2.3
Statistic analysis of pupil size features
To improve the characterization of the pupil features, it is required to conduct an statistical
analysis. A mere representation of the features, such as in the form of boxВӯandВӯwhisker
plots (as exemplified in fig. 3.5), is insufficient to fully quantify and characterize the feaВӯ
tures. The chosen pВӯvalue threshold, typically set at 0.05 (or 5eВӯ2), is underscored in the
literature [35] as an essential step when performing a LMM analysis.
Evaluating the pВӯvalue against this threshold holds key importance in determining the staВӯ
tistical significance and meaningful differences between a given condition and the interВӯ
cept while minimizing the risk of Type I errors. Another crucial aspect in the LMM analysis
is the presence of zero (or not) within the confidence bound estimates. This determinaВӯ
tion is based on evaluating the signs of the lower and upper bounds. The absence of zero
within the confidence bound indicates statistical significance, providing evidence of a genВӯ
uine effect. On the other hand, the presence of zero suggests potential nonВӯsignificance
of the effect.
Therefore, LMMs are used exactly as described in section 2.5.6, in search of significant
differences between intercepts and conditions, resulting in the following metrics:
AMEND I:
In AMEND I feature analysis, the intercept or reference condition corresponds to the quiet
condition in either speaking or listening windows. The output metrics of the LMM for
various features, namely MPD, Slope, and PPD, are presented in table 3.3, table 3.4, and
table 3.5 correspondingly.
Table 3.3: LMM metrics from the MPD feature (as represented in fig. 3.5a) separated by
noise conditions and belonging to either speaking or listening windows, extracted from
data in AMEND I.
Noise
Estimate
SE
t stat
DOF
pВӯvalue
Lower
Upper
Speaking
Quiet
3.3835
0.0755
44.801
2389
1.03eВӯ318
3.2354
3.5316
SHL
0.0717
0.0116
6.1679
2389
8.10eВӯ10
0.0489
0.0945
N60
0.0514
0.0111
4.6366
2389
3.73eВӯ06
0.0297
0.0732
N70
0.0858
0.0101
8.5604
2389
1.98eВӯ17
0.0661
0.1054
Listening
Quiet
3.4023
0.0763
44.576
2417
3.1eВӯ317
3.2526
3.552
SHL
0.0786
0.0116
6.7421
2417
1.94eВӯ11
0.0557
0.1015
N60
0.0415
0.0110
3.7649
2417
1.70eВӯ04
0.0199
0.0632
N70
0.0591
0.0101
5.8573
2417
5.34eВӯ09
0.0392
0.0788
30
Pupil behavior in listening and speaking time of interactive communication
==PAGE:39==
Table 3.4: LMM metrics from the Slope feature (as represented in fig. 3.5b) separated by
noise conditions and belonging to either speaking or listening windows, extracted from
data in AMEND I.
Noise
Estimate
SE
t stat
DOF
pВӯvalue
Lower
Upper
Speaking
Quiet
4.3982
0.8593
5.1185
2389
3.32eВӯ07
2.7132
6.0831
SHL
0.0551
0.9447
0.0583
2389
0.9535
Вӯ1.7974
1.9076
N60
1.1279
0.8937
1.262
2389
0.2071
Вӯ0.6247
2.8805
N70
1.2947
0.8205
1.5784
2389
0.1146
Вӯ0.3139
2.904
Listening
Quiet
4.1535
0.5698
7.2898
2417
4.18eВӯ13
3.0362
5.2708
SHL
Вӯ0.6554
0.8928
Вӯ0.7341
2417
0.4629
Вӯ2.4062
1.0953
N60
Вӯ0.7495
0.8377
Вӯ0.8947
2417
0.3708
Вӯ2.3922
0.8932
N70
Вӯ3.1889
0.7914
Вӯ4.0296
2417
5.76eВӯ05
Вӯ4.7407
Вӯ1.6371
Table 3.5: LMM metrics from the PPD feature (as represented in fig. 3.5c) separated by
noise conditions and belonging to either speaking or listening windows, extracted from
data in AMEND I.
Noise
Estimate
SE
t stat
DOF
pВӯvalue
Lower
Upper
Speaking
Quiet
3.6055
0.0878
41.082
2389
1.46eВӯ279
3.4334
3.7776
SHL
0.0901
0.0161
5.5908
2389
2.52eВӯ08
0.0584
0.1216
N60
0.0511
0.0154
3.3213
2389
9.09eВӯ04
0.0209
0.0812
N70
0.1260
0.0139
9.081
2389
2.19eВӯ19
0.0988
0.1532
Listening
Quiet
3.62
0.0879
41.166
2417
3.57eВӯ281
3.4475
3.7924
SHL
0.1017
0.0157
6.4744
2417
1.15eВӯ10
0.0709
0.1325
N60
0.0415
0.0149
2.79
2417
5.31eВӯ03
0.0123
0.0706
N70
0.0892
0.0136
6.573
2417
6.02eВӯ11
0.0626
0.1158
From these tables, the pВӯvalues that are smaller than the aforementioned threshold are
marked in bold. Meaning that, for the MPD and PPD features, each one of the noise
conditions (SHL, N60 and N70) are significantly different from the reference (Quiet) both
for speaking and listening. As for the slope feature, the only significant difference can be
found in listening windows between the вҖқN70вҖқ noise condition and the вҖқQuietвҖқ reference.
AMEND II:
For the noise condition analysis in AMEND II, the intercept or reference condition also
corresponds to quiet test condition in either speaking or listening windows (same as in
AMEND I). The LMM output metrics for the MPD, Slope and PPD features are shown in
table 3.6, table 3.7 and table 3.8. Once again, pВӯvalues smaller than the threshold (0.05)
are marked in bold.
Pupil behavior in listening and speaking time of interactive communication
31
==PAGE:40==
Table 3.6: LMM metrics from the MPD feature (as represented in fig. 3.9a) separated by
noise conditions and belonging to either speaking or listening windows, extracted from
data in AMEND II.
Noise
Estimate
SE
t stat
DOF
pВӯvalue
Lower
Upper
Speaking
Quiet
3.3013
0.0931
35.445
2289
9.44eВӯ220
3.1186
3.4839
N60
0.0214
0.0112
1.9078
2289
0.0565
Вӯ0.0006
0.0434
N70
0.1259
0.0112
11.208
2289
2.01eВӯ28
0.1039
0.1479
Listening
Quiet
3.3025
0.0907
36.405
2224
4.94eВӯ228
3.1246
3.4804
N60
0.0075
0.0113
0.6579
2224
0.5106
Вӯ0.0148
0.0297
N70
0.1313
0.0114
11.51
2224
8.03eВӯ30
0.1089
0.1536
Table 3.7: LMM metrics from the Slope feature (as represented in fig. 3.9b) separated by
noise conditions and belonging to either speaking or listening windows, extracted from
data in AMEND II.
Noise
Estimate
SE
t stat
DOF
pВӯvalue
Lower
Upper
Speaking
Quiet
3.6234
0.6384
5.6759
2288
1.55eВӯ08
2.3715
4.8752
N60
Вӯ0.5301
0.9123
Вӯ0.581
2288
0.5613
Вӯ2.3191
1.259
N70
Вӯ0.4697
0.9151
Вӯ0.5132
2288
0.6079
Вӯ2.2642
1.3249
Listening
Quiet
2.7673
0.5945
4.6548
2224
3.43eВӯ06
1.6015
3.9332
N60
1.5682
0.8481
1.849
2224
0.0646
Вӯ0.0950
3.2314
N70
Вӯ0.2955
0.8529
Вӯ0.3465
2224
0.729
Вӯ1.968
1.377
Table 3.8: LMM metrics from the PPD feature (as represented in fig. 3.9c) separated by
noise conditions and belonging to either speaking or listening windows, extracted from
data in AMEND II.
Noise
Estimate
SE
t stat
DOF
pВӯvalue
Lower
Upper
Speaking
Quiet
3.5514
0.116
30.629
2289
5.85eВӯ173
3.3241
3.7788
N60
0.0467
0.0145
3.2029
2289
1.38eВӯ3
0.0181
0.0754
N70
0.1681
0.0146
11.49
2289
9.48eВӯ30
0.1394
0.1968
Listening
Quiet
3.5506
0.1124
31.595
2224
2.66eВӯ181
3.3302
3.7709
N60
0.0268
0.0149
1.7876
2224
0.07398
Вӯ0.0026
0.0562
N70
0.1661
0.0151
11.022
2224
1.52eВӯ27
0.1365
0.1956
For the MPD feature, significant differences were observed in both speaking and listening
conditions in the вҖқN70вҖқ condition. However, no significant differences were detected in the
slope feature. On the other hand, the PPD feature exhibited differences with the вҖқN60вҖқ
and вҖқN70вҖқ conditions in the speaking windows, as well as a significant difference in the
вҖқN70вҖқ condition during the listening windows.
As for the analysis of the hearing aid settings in AMEND II, the intercept or reference
haring aid setting is the unВӯaided hearing aid setting (UN) both for speaking and listening
windows. The LLMs metrics are shown in table 3.9, table 3.10 and table 3.11 for the MPD,
slope and PPD features. Any pВӯvalue smaller than the threshold (0.05) is marked in bold.
32
Pupil behavior in listening and speaking time of interactive communication
==PAGE:41==
Table 3.9: LMM metrics from the MPD feature (as represented in fig. 3.10a) separated
by hearing aid settings and belonging to either speaking or listening windows, extracted
from data in AMEND II.
Setting
Estimate
SE
t stat
DOF
pВӯvalue
Lower
Upper
Speaking
UN
3.3146
0.0971
34.15
1159
1.94eВӯ177
3.1241
3.505
AA
Вӯ0.015
0.0171
Вӯ0.8784
1159
0.37992
Вӯ0.0486
0.0185
AB
Вӯ0.0681
0.0171
Вӯ3.988
1159
7.08eВӯ05
Вӯ0.1016
Вӯ0.0346
Listening
UN
3.3088
0.0976
33.89
1160
1.48eВӯ175
3.1172
3.5003
AA
0.0137
0.0174
0.7868
1160
0.4316
Вӯ0.0204
0.0478
AB
Вӯ0.0528
0.0175
Вӯ3.0178
1160
0.0026
Вӯ0.0871
Вӯ0.0185
Table 3.10: LMM metrics from the Slope feature (as represented in fig. 3.10b) separated
by hearing aid settings and belonging to either speaking or listening windows, extracted
from data in AMEND II.
Setting
Estimate
SE
t stat
DOF
pВӯvalue
Lower
Upper
Speaking
UN
3.7951
0.8193
4.632
1158
4.02eВӯ06
2.1877
5.4025
AA
0.2132
1.24
0.1719
1158
0.8636
Вӯ2.2198
2.6461
AB
Вӯ2.0032
1.244
Вӯ1.6103
1158
0.1076
Вӯ4.4439
0.4375
Listening
UN
3.9449
0.7074
5.5765
1160
3.05eВӯ08
2.5569
5.3328
AA
Вӯ1.2864
1.0618
Вӯ1.2116
1160
0.2259
Вӯ3.3696
0.7968
AB
0.0468
1.0685
0.0438
1160
0.965
Вӯ2.0495
2.1432
Table 3.11: LMM metrics from the PPD feature (as represented in fig. 3.10c) separated
by hearing aid settings and belonging to either speaking or listening windows, extracted
from data in AMEND II.
Setting
Estimate
SE
t stat
DOF
pВӯvalue
Lower
Upper
Speaking
UN
3.5662
0.1005
35.475
1159
3.11eВӯ187
3.3689
3.7634
AA
Вӯ0.0261
0.0222
Вӯ1.1786
1159
0.2388
Вӯ0.0696
0.0174
AB
Вӯ0.079
0.0221
Вӯ3.5721
1159
3.68eВӯ04
Вӯ0.1224
Вӯ0.036
Listening
UN
3.5567
0.1024
34.72
1160
1.07eВӯ181
3.3557
3.7577
AA
Вӯ0.0025
0.0222
Вӯ0.1126
1160
0.9104
Вӯ0.0461
0.0411
AB
Вӯ0.0572
0.0224
Вӯ2.5589
1160
0.0106
Вӯ0.1012
Вӯ0.0134
Both the MPD and PPD features indicated significant differences between the reference
setting (UN) and the setting B (AB), both in speaking and listening windows. The slope,
as seen previously with the analysis of the noise conditions, didnвҖҷt give out any significant
difference.
In general, all features gave out significant differences, specially the MPD and PPD feaВӯ
tures which, compared to the slope, highlighted many more pВӯvalues lower than the
threshold (0.05). These will later on be discussed on chapter 4.
Pupil behavior in listening and speaking time of interactive communication
33
==PAGE:42==
3.3
Fixation duration results
This section presents the fixation duration results derived from the nonВӯrejected trials in
AMEND I and AMEND II. More specifically, it showcases the fixation duration in secВӯ
onds over time, obtained within speaking or listening time windows. These measures
are displayed in fig. 3.11 for AMEND I and also in fig. 3.13 and fig. 3.14 for AMEND II.
The calculation and processing of these fixation duration signals over time is stated in
section 2.5.3.
3.3.1
AMEND I
0
1
2
3
Time [s]
0.4
0.45
0.5
Fixation duration [s]
Event onset
0
1
2
3
Time [s]
0.4
0.45
0.5
Event onset
Figure 3.11: Fixation duration global results averaged across participants separated by
different test conditions, with events being either speaking or listening windows in AMEND
I. Color legend is shown on fig. 3.12.
Quiet
SHL
N60
N70
Test conditions:
(a) Test conditions.
Speak
Listen
Types of windows:
(b) Window types.
Figure 3.12: Color legend in AMEND I. Plotted again for visual clarity.
34
Pupil behavior in listening and speaking time of interactive communication
==PAGE:43==
3.3.2
AMEND II
0
1
2
3
Time [s]
0.42
0.44
0.46
0.48
0.5
0.52
0.54
Fixation duration [s]
Event onset
0
1
2
3
Time [s]
0.42
0.44
0.46
0.48
0.5
0.52
0.54
Event onset
Figure 3.13: Fixation duration results from normal hearing (NH) TPs, averaged across
participants separated by noise conditions, with events being either speaking or listening
windows in AMEND II. Color legend is shown on fig. 3.7.
0
1
2
3
Time [s]
0.35
0.4
0.45
0.5
Fixation duration [s]
Event onset
0
1
2
3
Time [s]
0.35
0.4
0.45
0.5
Event onset
Figure 3.14: Fixation duration results from hearing impaired (HI) TPs, averaged across
participants separated by noise conditions, with events being either speaking or listening
windows in AMEND II. Color legend is shown on fig. 3.7.
Pupil behavior in listening and speaking time of interactive communication
35
==PAGE:44==
36
Pupil behavior in listening and speaking time of interactive communication
==PAGE:45==
4
Discussion
In this chapter, an examination of the findings presented in chapter 3 is conducted. With
the main focus on testing the validity of the hypothesis initially proposed in section 1.3.
The analysis of the results and their statistical measures were presented in order to give
out a clear understanding of the research outcomes. This thesis can be summarized as
an inВӯdepth investigation into pupillometry and fixation measures, with a specific emphasis
on the speaking and listening times for each participant. This characteristic is the primary
difference with the analyses conducted within the AMEND study thus far.
Taking into consideration the absence of prior studies similar to AMEND, i.e., investigaВӯ
tions involving physiological measures during large interactive communication periods beВӯ
tween two unfamiliar talkers, and also, the distinctiveness of my thesis within the AMEND
project, it can be confidently inferred that the pioneering outcomes presented hold considВӯ
erable significance within the field. These findings will then provide a foundation in terms
of expected results and response patterns if a similar study was to take place. AdditionВӯ
ally, it is crucial to identify the factors that can clarify the observed behavioral outcomes,
which could be related to the task, the subjects (and their hearing) or even the lab setup
itself.
Upon analyzing the results from the fixation durations and pupil size measures together
(as seen in section 3.3 and section 3.2 respectively), a significant synchronized negative
correlation between these measures is evident for most of the results. This finding sugВӯ
gests that fixations and pupil size are potentially regulated by similar brain mechanisms,
leading to synchronized behavioral responses. Additionally, it can also be stated that the
findings provide substantial evidence to validate all of the hypothesis described in secВӯ
tion 1.3, namely H1, H2, H3 and H4. This holds true as most of the results align with the
predicted outcomes and also demonstrate a consistent and statistically significant correВӯ
lation. A more inВӯdepth discussion on each measure will be presented later in section 4.1
and section 4.2.
4.1
Pupillometry
An article by Laeng et al. (2012) [36], based on some studies done with animals, sugВӯ
gested that tonic activity (non timeВӯlocked stimuli activity) of the Locus Coeruleus (LC),
which is part of the brain that plays a major role in regulating arousal and attention [37],
is associated with the tendency of switching to abandon a current task for another, while
phasic activity is related to the processing of taskВӯrelevant events that are being attended.
These activities can be indexed from pupil size measures and could explain most of the
global results shown in section 3.2.
As for the AMEND I pupil size results, which are shown both in section 3.2.1 and secВӯ
tion 3.2.3 respectively, it can clearly be seen that the most demanding noise conditions
were вҖқN70вҖқ for speaking and вҖқSHLвҖқ for listening (as they elicited peaks in the responses)
and also, in contrast, the least challenging condition was вҖқQuietвҖқ. These results aligned
with our initial expectations, thus providing a reference or benchmark for understanding
the responses of NH participants in an interactive communication (for AMEND II). When
speaking, increasing background noise exerts more effort, specially if itвҖҷs babble noise.
This type of noise resembles speech from many different talkers which would potentially
decrease intelligibility, demanding higher cognitive load. Moreover, it is likely that speakВӯ
ers will raise their voice in order to be understood by the listener. Listening becomes
Pupil behavior in listening and speaking time of interactive communication
37
==PAGE:46==
more demanding when the ear canal is obstructed by an earplug, eliciting a bigger pupil
dilation than the challenge of the addition of background noise (without earplugs). This efВӯ
fect is likely attributed to the subjectsвҖҷ unfamiliarity with wearing earplugs, specially during
conversations that require clear intelligibility.
AMEND II pupil diameter results, as shown in in section 3.2.2 and section 3.2.3, denote
a large difference in cognitive load from NH and HI with the вҖқN70вҖқ noise condition when
compared to вҖқQuietвҖқ and вҖқN60вҖқ, both for speaking and listening times. This can clearly be
seen in the nonВӯbaselined pupil diameter results shown in fig. 3.6a and fig. 3.8a. It is also
significant to point out that thereвҖҷs a relatively similar increase in the pupil size features
from one noise condition to the next (fig. 3.9), both for speaking and listening windows.
Lastly, the impact of different hearing aid settings on the cognitive load of HI participants
(as illustrated in fig. 3.10) is worth mentioning. Setting A demonstrates an improvement
of variability in the features when compared to the unВӯaided condition, while setting B
significantly reduces pupil diameter, indicating reduced effort which can be attributed to
improved speech intelligibility. This contrast in results from one setting to another is exВӯ
plained with the fact that, setting A was designed to enhance the overall SignalВӯtoВӯNoise
Ratio (SNR) of the entire acoustic environment, while setting B prioritizes enhancing the
SNR through directional focus towards the line of sight of the hearing aid user, this is a
technique known as вҖқbeamВӯformingвҖқ. The nature of the task itself, with both talkers always
facing each other, will contribute to the positive effects of setting B, as beamВӯforming is
most effective when the speech source is directly in front.
In the appendix, figures from fig. A.2 to fig. A.7 show the AMEND II pupil diameter reВӯ
sponses over time, with and without baseline correction, from NH and HI participants
combined with different hearing aids settings. These figures demonstrate a reduction in
cognitive load among HI participants as they received increased noise reduction through
their hearing aids. Furthermore, the figures reveal an adaptation process from NH particВӯ
ipants based on whether the HI participants were wearing hearing aids (or not) and the
specific settings used. Meaning that NH participants demonstrate a perceptible ability to
recognize and adapt their communication strategies based on their own perception of the
ease of communication of HI participants.
One of, if not the most important, topics of discussion in the processing of this thesis is
the baseline. As stated in section 2.5.3, the baseline is defined as the 0.5 seconds time
interval that precedes an event onset, that is, the start of a speaking or listening window.
There are several reasons to support the selection of this baseline for the study. Firstly,
previous evidence [21] states that, the baseline level from a TP steadily drops with time.
In addition, having such large duration of trials, we realized that, there was a necessity
for the baseline to differ not only between trials but also within a trial. Another reason for
choosing this particular baseline is that, it was observed that most participants were able
to predict the turns in the conversations, particularly when there is no overlap between
or within events. Lastly, by choosing a baseline so closely related to events, we aim
to capture and account for any potential anticipatory or preparatory processes that may
occur. This ensures that the estimated baselined pupil size solely reflects the response
from a subject to an event, that is, the difference between the preparatory phase leading
up to the event and the event itself. One key limitation of this method is the potential
overlap of baseline intervals with previous windows, meaning that, the baseline itself may
be more associated with the preceding window rather than anticipating the upcoming one,
resulting in distorted or even negativeВӯpeak baselined pupil responses.
38
Pupil behavior in listening and speaking time of interactive communication
==PAGE:47==
4.2
Fixation duration
As seen previously on section 2.5.3, a novel study by Cui et al. (2023) [28] has managed
to define a new measure of cognitive load by using eye gaze movements. In the study
[28], the tasks were quite controlled in terms of fixation, stimuli and duration when comВӯ
paring to the tasks in AMEND. The fixation duration findings from the study [28], suggest
a correlation between fixations and cognitive load or listening effort, similar to the existВӯ
ing relationship also observed with pupil size. Likewise, the worse the noise conditions,
the bigger the elicited response of fixation duration, which is exactly the same behavior
as in pupil size. Previously, on section 4.1, we explored the challenges and limitations
associated with establishing a reliable baseline, then, by employing fixation durations as
a cognitive measure, we would observe responses that are independent of any baseline.
The analysis of the fixation duration results from both AMEND I and AMEND II (presented
in section 3.3.1 and section 3.3.2, respectively), revealed that a majority didnвҖҷt show a
response that aligned with the anticipated results. The expected pattern, as demonstrated
in the study by Cui et al. (2023) [28], suggested that higher task demands correspond to
an increase in the fixation duration response. This finding may be closely linked to the
nature of the task performed by the participants, which required them to intentionally focus
on the diapix [14] pictures. The task demanded them to concentrate on the pictures either
to comprehend any differences communicated by the other participant (listening effort) or
to effectively describe any differences to the other participant (speaking effort).
Furthermore, it is important to note that the results, particularly for AMEND II, demonВӯ
strate fixation duration responses whose peaks are synchronized across different noise
conditions. The consistency of this synchronization indicates that fixation duration is a
reliable measure when it comes to portraying cognitive load. The results also indicate
a distinction between speaking and listening windows, depicted by initial negative peaks
and large initial positive peaks respectively. Additionally, the findings suggest that as the
task demands increase, participants tend to spend less time fixating in speaking windows
and, completely in opposite, participants fixate more in listening windows (in line with the
results from Cui et al. (2023) [28]).
These observations suggest that participants may choose to avert their gaze from the picВӯ
ture while speaking, possibly to ensure a successful communication. In contrast, during
listening, participants tend to fixate and scan the picture, which made it easier to comВӯ
pare the spoken information with the visual task, enabling them to distinguish differences
faster. It was initially expected that lip reading would influence results during listening,
especially as task demands increased. However, this assumption was proven false, with
the exception of the HI participants (seen in fig. 3.14), which may already be accustomed
to relying on lip reading on a daily basis in order to enhance speech understanding.
In the appendix, figures from fig. A.8 to fig. A.13 show the AMEND II fixation duration
responses over time from NH and HI participants combined with different hearing aids
settings. These figures further illustrate the previously mentioned adaptation process obВӯ
served for NH participants in section 4.1. Additionally, the figures reveal a similarity in both
shape and magnitude between the responses of HI participants without wearing hearing
aids and those using setting B. This emphasizes how important settings are in specific
environments, as they not only enhance frequencies affected with hearing loss but also
enable HI participants to achieve a more вҖқnaturalвҖқ response by effectively suppressing
unwanted noise. This phenomenon is similar to how the brain filters out unwanted stimВӯ
uli through auditory processing mechanisms, particularly in challenging situations like the
вҖқcocktail party problemвҖқ (described in section 1.1).
Pupil behavior in listening and speaking time of interactive communication
39
==PAGE:48==
4.3
General observations
After addressing the particular aspects of the discussion related to pupillometry and fixВӯ
ation duration measures, both found in section 4.1 and section 4.2 respectively, we now
take a broader perspective that will eventually lead to more general discussion points.
One examined aspect was the duration of any type of overlaps during conversations. As
the pairs of participants did more trials, the percentage of overlaps decayed, indicating
that naturalistic communication between participants involved minimal instances of simulВӯ
taneous speech. This finding suggests that both NH and HI participants have developed
effective strategies to cope with each otherвҖҷs communication styles, resulting in more reВӯ
fined and efficient communication dynamics over time. Another important aspect related
to the interactive communication is the even distribution of utterances between talkers,
assuring balanced conversations rather than the presence of a dominant вҖқleaderвҖқ in the
conversation. Meaning that, for most cases, individuals shared both participation to conВӯ
tribute and engagement in the dialogue.
The reason behind choosing the diapix [14] framework as the task, was to ensure an interВӯ
active communication environment during the trials, even if the conversations were solely
related to the task. However, this introduces certain limitations in terms of the generalizВӯ
ability of the communication when compared to freeВӯtopic or spontaneous conversations,
which are much similar to the natural conversations we aim to capture. Additionally, esВӯ
tablishing a 4 minute limit for each trial aimed to minimize the effects of fatigue on particВӯ
ipants, making sure that their performance and engagement remained consistent during
trials.
To ensure a balanced and natural conversation, it was crucial to only recruit participants
that were completely unfamiliar with each other. This inclusion criterion aimed to avoid
a common вҖқshared languageвҖқ among them, which is a phenomenon studied by Thomas
et al. (2013) [38]. The aforementioned study suggests that shared languages are viВӯ
tal for enhancement and collaboration while communicating, which would contradict the
intended purpose of capturing unbiased and authentic interactive conversations.
As mentioned earlier, this thesis serves as a pioneering project within the field, estabВӯ
lishing a foundation for future work and research. Even thought there are various differВӯ
ent aspects to polish, this thesis has provided a solid framework that can be utilized for
similar studies in the future. However, we would like to propose suggestions for further
exploration in future work within the field. Firstly, it would be interesting to extract comВӯ
pletely different pupil size features, particularly those closely linked to response delays
and conditionВӯbased variations. Additionally, improvements can be made when establishВӯ
ing the pupil baseline, by identifying specific regions of stability within the data. Moreover,
the processing of speaking and listening windows could be changed for more precision
and to add discrimination for nonВӯrelevant speech information. Lastly, we believe that
some modifications to the test setup, including making the task more natural and changВӯ
ing all test conditions, could end up greatly enhancing the ecological validity of the study.
Lastly, it is important to note that in our analysis, we did not utilize the Bonferroni correction
[39] to adjust the pВӯvalues for multiple comparisons. The Bonferroni correction [39] is a
statistical method used to adjust pВӯvalues for multiple comparisons, reducing the risk of
falseВӯpositive results. It increases the significance threshold for individual comparisons,
which as stated in section 2.5.6, was of 0.05. However, due to the limited amount of
individual subject data across conditions, the impact for not using the aforementioned
correction on the statistical significance of our results, is unlikely to have affected the
overall interpretation and statistical significance and robustness of the findings.
40
Pupil behavior in listening and speaking time of interactive communication
==PAGE:49==
5
Conclusion
In this MSc thesis, a comprehensive analysis of pupil behavior and eye gaze moveВӯ
ments during interactive communication has been conducted, complementing the ongoing
AMEND research project [1]. The key finding of this research, since the beginning, has
been the identification of behavioral or cognitive differences between speaking and listenВӯ
ing in interactive communication. The analysis has concluded that these differences play
a vital role in understanding the cognitive processes involved in communication. AdditionВӯ
ally, the study has explored the distinction between arousal and attention, which greatly
helped establishing a foundation for how nuanced mechanisms underlying communicaВӯ
tion dynamics work in natural conversations between two unВӯfamiliarized talkers.
To summarize, this masterвҖҷs thesis has effectively accomplished its primary research
objectives. It presented and conducted a comprehensive analysis of results obtained
from traditional pupil diameter measures and novel fixation duration measures. Holding
promise for the development of improved treatment options and also laying a solid founВӯ
dation for future investigations in the field.
Notably, the research revealed a strong correlation between cognitive load or effort, and
environmental speechВӯshaped noise. As the noise conditions worsen, an increase is obВӯ
served in both pupil and fixation behavioral measures. Research also revealed numerous
behavioral differences in conversations between pairs of participants composed excluВӯ
sively of NH individuals versus pairs consisting of one individual with HI and one NH
individual. Meaning that, NH participants demonstrate distinct adaptive communication
strategies when engaging in conversations with NH or HI participants.
The results from HI individuals wearing hearing aids demonstrate a decrease on cogniВӯ
tive load, which would potentially lead to an increase of intelligibility in noisy environments.
This improvement is not only attributed to the use of hearing aids but also to selecting setВӯ
tings efficiently. Considering how large was the level in both noise conditions on the study,
it was not surprising to find that setting B (AB), which had the greatest noise reduction,
outperformed setting A (AA). Additionally, the same setting B also demonstrated a better
performance in the quiet condition, which further proves the beneficial effect of hearing
aids on any type of acoustic environment.
The performance of the chosen pupil size features, ranked in terms of ability to identify
statistical different after fitting an LMM, were MPD, PPD and slope. However, it is noteВӯ
worthy that certain features, such as MPD and PPD, appeared to convey more information
when analyzing different test conditions. This suggests that some pupil size features are
more effective than others, making them better suited for assessing and quantifying the
cognitive demands associated with the task or condition being analyzed.
In conclusion, this MSc thesis contributes to the understanding of interactive communicaВӯ
tion by analyzing pupil behavior and eye gaze movements. The findings emphasize the
differences between speaking and listening, as well as the relationship between arousal
and attention. The results of this research provide valuable insights into behavioral comВӯ
munication effort and dynamics, as well as how to interpret distinct physiological measures
under various test conditions and hearing aid settings. Looking ahead, future work can
build upon these findings and explore within all aspects covered by this thesis, in order to
achieve more naturalistic approaches to the study of interactive communication in real or
natural conversational settings.
Pupil behavior in listening and speaking time of interactive communication
41
==PAGE:50==
42
Pupil behavior in listening and speaking time of interactive communication
==PAGE:51==
Bibliography
[1]
Susan Aliakbary Hosseinabad (sulb@eriksholm.com) et al. AMEND: Valid Outcome
Measure for Communication Difficulty. Eriksholm Research Centre, LinkГ¶ping UniВӯ
versity (LiU), Technical University of Denmark (DTU), 2022.
[2]
Ar Arnesen. вҖңPresbyacusis: Loss of neurons in the human cochlear nucleiвҖқ. eng. In:
Journal of Laryngology and Otology 96.6 (1982), pp. 503вҖ“511. ISSN: 17485460,
00222151. DOI: 10.1017/S002221510009277X.
[3]
Gunay Kirkim et al. вҖңHearing loss and communication difficulty in the elderlyвҖқ. eng.
In: Mediterranean Journal of Otology 3.3 (2007), pp. 126вҖ“132. ISSN: 13055267.
[4]
Stuart R. Steinhauer and Gad Hakerem. вҖңThe Pupillary Response in Cognitive PsyВӯ
chophysiology and SchizophreniaвҖқ. eng. In: Annals of the New York Academy of
Sciences 658.1 Psychophysiol (1992), pp. 182вҖ“204. ISSN: 17496632, 00778923.
DOI: 10.1111/j.1749-6632.1992.tb22845.x.
[5]
Tepring Piquado, Derek Isaacowitz, and Arthur Wingfield. вҖңPupillometry as a meaВӯ
sure of cognitive effort in younger and older adultsвҖқ. In: Psychophysiology 47 (3
2010), pp. 560вҖ“569. ISSN: 14698986. DOI: 10.1111/j.1469-8986.2009.00947.x.
[6]
Avashna Govender and Simon King. вҖңUsing pupillometry to measure the cognitive
load of synthetic speechвҖқ. In: vol. 2018ВӯSeptember. International Speech CommuВӯ
nication Association, 2018, pp. 2838вҖ“2842. DOI: 10.21437/Interspeech.2018-1174.
[7]
Soroosh Solhjoo et al. вҖңHeart Rate and Heart Rate Variability Correlate with Clinical
Reasoning Performance and SelfВӯReported Measures of Cognitive LoadвҖқ. In: SciВӯ
entific Reports 9 (1 Dec. 2019). ISSN: 20452322. DOI: 10.1038/s41598-019-50280-3.
[8]
M. P. Paulraj et al. вҖңAuditory evoked potential response and hearing loss: A reВӯ
viewвҖқ. eng. In: Open Biomedical Engineering Journal 9 (2015), pp. 17вҖ“24. ISSN:
18741207. DOI: 10.2174/1874120701509010017.
[9]
World Health Organization (WHO). Deafness and hearing loss. 2023. URL: https:
//www.who.int/news-room/fact-sheets/detail/deafness-and-hearing-loss (visited on
06/19/2023).
[10]
Eckhard H. Hess and James M. Polt. вҖңPupil Size as Related to Interest Value of ViВӯ
sual StimuliвҖқ. In: Science 132.3423 (1960), pp. 349вҖ“350. ISSN: 00368075, 10959203.
URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/1706082 (visited on 02/20/2023).
[11]
Eckhard H. Hess and James M. Polt. вҖңPupil Size in Relation to Mental Activity durВӯ
ing Simple ProblemВӯSolvingвҖқ. In: Science 143.3611 (1964), pp. 1190вҖ“1192. ISSN:
00368075, 10959203. URL: http : / / www . jstor . org / stable / 1712692 (visited on
02/20/2023).
[12]
Harvey Sacks, Emanuel A. Schegloff, and Gail Jefferson. вҖңA Simplest SystematВӯ
ics for the Organization of TurnВӯTaking for ConversationвҖқ. und. In: Language 50.4
(1974), p. 696. ISSN: 15350665, 00978507. DOI: 10.2307/412243.
[13]
Stephanie Haro et al. вҖңEEG Alpha Power and Pupil Diameter Reflect Endogenous
Auditory Attention Switching and Listening EffortвҖқ. In: (2021). DOI: 10.1101/2021.
07.29.453646. URL: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.07.29.453646.
[14]
Rachel Baker and Valerie Hazan. вҖңDiapixUK: Task materials for the elicitation of
multiple spontaneous speech dialogsвҖқ. eng. In: Behavior Research Methods 43.3
(2011), pp. 761вҖ“770. ISSN: 15543528, 1554351x. DOI: 10.3758/s13428-011-0075-y.
[15]
MATLAB R2021a. version: 9.10.0.2198249 (R2021a) Вӯ Update 8. Natick, Massachusetts:
The MathWorks Inc., 2021.
Pupil behavior in listening and speaking time of interactive communication
43
==PAGE:52==
[16]
Ziad S. Nasreddine et al. вҖңThe Montreal Cognitive Assessment, MoCA: A brief
screening tool for mild cognitive impairmentвҖқ. eng. In: Journal of the American GeriВӯ
atrics Society 53.4 (2005), pp. 695вҖ“699. ISSN: 00028614, 15325415. DOI: 10.1111/
j.1532-5415.2005.53221.x.
[17]
Judith Jaeger. вҖңDigit symbol substitution testвҖқ. eng. In: Journal of Clinical PsychopharВӯ
macology 38.5 (2018), pp. 513вҖ“519. ISSN: 1533712x, 02710749. DOI: 10.1097/
JCP.0000000000000941.
[18]
Sven Hilbert et al. вҖңThe digit span backwards task: Verbal and visual cognitive strateВӯ
gies in working memory assessmentвҖқ. eng. In: European Journal of Psychological
Assessment 31.3 (2015), pp. 174вҖ“180. ISSN: 21512426, 10155759. DOI: 10.1027/
1015-5759/a000223.
[19]
Jens Bo Nielsen and Torsten Dau. вҖңThe Danish hearing in noise testвҖқ. eng. In: InterВӯ
national Journal of Audiology 50.3 (2010), pp. 202вҖ“208. ISSN: 17088186, 14992027.
DOI: 10.3109/14992027.2010.524254.
[20]
Raul SanchezВӯLopez et al. вҖңTowards Auditory ProfileВӯBased HearingВӯAid Fittings:
BEAR Rationale and Clinical ImplementationвҖқ. eng. In: Audiology Research 12.5
(2022). Ed. by Agnieszka Szczepek, pp. 564вҖ“573. ISSN: 20394349, 20394330.
DOI: 10.3390/audiolres12050055.
[21]
Matthew B. Winn et al. вҖңBest Practices and Advice for Using Pupillometry to MeaВӯ
sure Listening Effort: An Introduction for Those Who Want to Get StartedвҖқ. eng. In:
Trends in Hearing 22 (2018), pp. 1вҖ“22. ISSN: 23312165. DOI: 10.1177/2331216518800869.
[22]
Mariska E. Kret and Elio E. SjakВӯShie. вҖңPreprocessing pupil size data: Guidelines
and codeвҖқ. eng. In: Behavior Research Methods 51.3 (2019), pp. 1336вҖ“1342. ISSN:
15543528, 1554351x. DOI: 10.3758/s13428-018-1075-y.
[23]
Christophe Leys et al. вҖңDetecting outliers: Do not use standard deviation around the
mean, use absolute deviation around the medianвҖқ. eng. In: Journal of Experimental
Social Psychology 49.4 (2013), pp. 764вҖ“766. ISSN: 10960465, 00221031. DOI:
10.1016/j.jesp.2013.03.013.
[24]
Helia RelaГұoВӯIborra and Per BГҰkgaard. вҖңPUPILS pipeline: A flexible Matlab toolbox
for eyetracking and pupillometry data processing [arXiv]вҖқ. eng. In: Arxiv (2020), 4
pp.
[25]
Kenneth Holmqvist et al. вҖңEye tracking: empirical foundations for a minimal reporting
guidelineвҖқ. mul. In: (2023).
[26]
Jeff Klingner, Barbara Tversky, and Pat Hanrahan. вҖңEffects of visual and verbal
presentation on cognitive load in vigilance, memory, and arithmetic tasksвҖқ. In: PsyВӯ
chophysiology 48 (3 2011), pp. 323вҖ“332. ISSN: 14698986. DOI: 10.1111/j.1469-
8986.2010.01069.x.
[27]
Jackson Beatty and Brennis LuceroВӯWagoner. вҖңThe pupillary system.вҖқ In: (2000).
[28]
M. Eric Cui and BjГ¶rn Herrmann. вҖңEye movements decrease during effortful speech
listeningвҖқ. In: bioRxiv (2023). DOI: 10.1101/2023.02.08.527708. eprint: https://
www.biorxiv.org/content/early/2023/02/09/2023.02.08.527708.full.pdf. URL:
https://www.biorxiv.org/content/early/2023/02/09/2023.02.08.527708.
[29]
RP OSHEA. вҖңTHUMB RULE TESTED Вӯ VISUAL ANGLE OF THUMBS WIDTH IS
ABOUT 2 DEGвҖқ. eng. In: Perception 20.3 (1991), pp. 415вҖ“418. ISSN: 14684233,
03010066. DOI: 10.1068/p200415.
[30]
A. Josefine Munch SГёrensen, Michal Fereczkowski, and Ewen N. MacDonald. вҖңEfВӯ
fects of Noise and Second Language on Conversational Dynamics in Task DiaВӯ
logueвҖқ. eng. In: Trends in Hearing 25 (2021), p. 23312165211024482. ISSN: 23312165.
DOI: 10.1177/23312165211024482.
44
Pupil behavior in listening and speaking time of interactive communication
==PAGE:53==
[31]
Stephen C. Levinson and Francisco Torreira. вҖңTiming in turnВӯtaking and its implicaВӯ
tions for processing models of languageвҖқ. eng. In: Frontiers in Psychology 6 (2015),
p. 731. ISSN: 16641078. DOI: 10.3389/fpsyg.2015.00731.
[32]
Emanuel A. Schegloff. вҖңOverlapping talk and the organization of turnВӯtaking for conВӯ
versationвҖқ. eng. In: Language in Society 29.1 (2000), pp. 1вҖ“63. ISSN: 00474045,
14698013. DOI: 10.1017/s0047404500001019.
[33]
AgustГӯn Gravano, Julia Hirschberg, and Е tefan BДӣnuЕЎ. вҖңAffirmative cue words in
taskВӯoriented dialogueвҖқ. eng. In: Computational Linguistics 38.1 (2012), pp. 1вҖ“39.
ISSN: 15309312, 08912017. DOI: 10.1162/COLI_a_00083.
[34]
Muneeb Imtiaz Ahmad et al. вҖңA framework to estimate cognitive load using physioВӯ
logical dataвҖқ. eng. In: Personal and Ubiquitous Computing (2020), pp. 1вҖ“15. ISSN:
16174917, 16174909. DOI: 10.1007/s00779-020-01455-7.
[35]
Henrik Singmann and David Kellen. вҖңAn Introduction to Mixed Models for ExperiВӯ
mental PsychologyвҖқ. und. In: New Methods in Cognitive Psychology (2019). DOI:
10.4324/9780429318405-2.
[36]
Bruno Laeng, Sylvain Sirois, and Gustaf GredebГӨck. вҖңPupillometry: A window to the
preconscious?вҖқ eng. In: Perspectives on Psychological Science 7.1 (2012), pp. 18вҖ“
27. ISSN: 17456924, 17456916. DOI: 10.1177/1745691611427305.
[37]
Jennifer A. Ross and Elisabeth J. Van Bockstaele. вҖңThe Locus CoeruleusВӯ NoreВӯ
pinephrine System in Stress and Arousal: Unraveling Historical, Current, and FuВӯ
ture PerspectivesвҖқ. eng. In: Frontiers in Psychiatry 11 (2020), p. 601519. ISSN:
16640640. DOI: 10.3389/fpsyt.2020.601519.
[38]
Joyce Thomas and Deana McDonagh. вҖңShared language:Towards more effective
communicationвҖқ. eng. In: Australasian Medical Journal 6.1 (2013), pp. 46вҖ“54. ISSN:
19361935, 18361935. DOI: 10.4066/AMJ.2013.1596.
[39]
C.E. Bonferroni. Teoria statistica delle classi e calcolo delle probabilitГ . PubbliВӯ
cazioni del R. Istituto superiore di scienze economiche e commerciali di Firenze.
Seeber, 1936. URL: https://books.google.dk/books?id=3CY-HQAACAAJ.
Pupil behavior in listening and speaking time of interactive communication
45
==PAGE:54==
46
Pupil behavior in listening and speaking time of interactive communication
==PAGE:55==
A
Appendix
Table A.1: Different Help levels in noise prescription with both NALВӯNL2 and VAC+.
Figure A.1: Output SNR enhancement as a function of input SNR for each HL [20].
Pupil behavior in listening and speaking time of interactive communication
47
==PAGE:56==
A.0.1
AMEND II Вӯ Additional results
Pupil diameter
0
1
2
3
Time [s]
3.3
3.4
3.5
3.6
3.7
Pupil diameter [mm]
Event onset
0
1
2
3
Time [s]
3.3
3.4
3.5
3.6
3.7
Event onset
(a) Pupil size, UN, NH.
0
1
2
3
Time [s]
-0.06
-0.04
-0.02
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
Pupil baseline difference [mm]
Event onset
Baseline
0
1
2
3
Time [s]
-0.06
-0.04
-0.02
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
Event onset
Baseline
(b) Baselined pupil size, UN, NH.
Figure A.2: Normal hearing (NH), in unВӯaided condition (UN), pupil size results averaged
across participants and separated by noise conditions, with events being either speaking
or listening windows (left and right panels, respectively) in AMEND II. Color legend is
shown on fig. 3.7.
48
Pupil behavior in listening and speaking time of interactive communication
==PAGE:57==
0
1
2
3
Time [s]
3.15
3.2
3.25
3.3
3.35
3.4
3.45
3.5
Pupil diameter [mm]
Event onset
0
1
2
3
Time [s]
3.15
3.2
3.25
3.3
3.35
3.4
3.45
3.5
Event onset
(a) Pupil size, UN, HI.
0
1
2
3
Time [s]
-0.1
-0.05
0
0.05
Pupil baseline difference [mm]
Event onset
Baseline
0
1
2
3
Time [s]
-0.1
-0.05
0
0.05
Event onset
Baseline
(b) Baselined pupil size, UN, HI.
Figure A.3: Hearing impaired (HI), in unВӯaided condition (UN), pupil size results averaged
across participants and separated by noise conditions, with events being either speaking
or listening windows (left and right panels, respectively) in AMEND II. Color legend is
shown on fig. 3.7.
Pupil behavior in listening and speaking time of interactive communication
49
==PAGE:58==
0
1
2
3
Time [s]
3.25
3.3
3.35
3.4
3.45
3.5
3.55
3.6
Pupil diameter [mm]
Event onset
0
1
2
3
Time [s]
3.25
3.3
3.35
3.4
3.45
3.5
3.55
3.6
Event onset
(a) Pupil size, AA, NH.
0
1
2
3
Time [s]
-0.1
-0.05
0
0.05
0.1
Pupil baseline difference [mm]
Event onset
Baseline
0
1
2
3
Time [s]
-0.1
-0.05
0
0.05
0.1
Event onset
Baseline
(b) Baselined pupil size, AA, NH.
Figure A.4: Normal hearing (NH), in aided setting A condition (AA), pupil size results
averaged across participants and separated by noise conditions, with events being either
speaking or listening windows (left and right panels, respectively) in AMEND II. Color
legend is shown on fig. 3.7.
50
Pupil behavior in listening and speaking time of interactive communication
==PAGE:59==
0
1
2
3
Time [s]
3.2
3.3
3.4
3.5
3.6
Pupil diameter [mm]
Event onset
0
1
2
3
Time [s]
3.2
3.3
3.4
3.5
3.6
Event onset
(a) Pupil size, AA, HI.
0
1
2
3
Time [s]
-0.15
-0.1
-0.05
0
0.05
0.1
Pupil baseline difference [mm]
Event onset
Baseline
0
1
2
3
Time [s]
-0.15
-0.1
-0.05
0
0.05
0.1
Event onset
Baseline
(b) Baselined pupil size, AA, HI.
Figure A.5: Hearing impaired (HI), in aided setting A condition (AA), pupil size results
averaged across participants and separated by noise conditions, with events being either
speaking or listening windows (left and right panels, respectively) in AMEND II. Color
legend is shown on fig. 3.7.
Pupil behavior in listening and speaking time of interactive communication
51
==PAGE:60==
0
1
2
3
Time [s]
3.2
3.25
3.3
3.35
3.4
3.45
3.5
3.55
Pupil diameter [mm]
Event onset
0
1
2
3
Time [s]
3.2
3.25
3.3
3.35
3.4
3.45
3.5
3.55
Event onset
(a) Pupil size, AB, NH.
0
1
2
3
Time [s]
-0.1
-0.05
0
0.05
Pupil baseline difference [mm]
Event onset
Baseline
0
1
2
3
Time [s]
-0.1
-0.05
0
0.05
Event onset
Baseline
(b) Baselined pupil size, AB, NH.
Figure A.6: Normal hearing (NH), in aided setting B condition (AB), pupil size results
averaged across participants and separated by noise conditions, with events being either
speaking or listening windows (left and right panels, respectively) in AMEND II. Color
legend is shown on fig. 3.7.
52
Pupil behavior in listening and speaking time of interactive communication
==PAGE:61==
0
1
2
3
Time [s]
3
3.1
3.2
3.3
3.4
Pupil diameter [mm]
Event onset
0
1
2
3
Time [s]
3
3.1
3.2
3.3
3.4
Event onset
(a) Pupil size, AB, HI.
0
1
2
3
Time [s]
-0.06
-0.04
-0.02
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
Pupil baseline difference [mm]
Event onset
Baseline
0
1
2
3
Time [s]
-0.06
-0.04
-0.02
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
Event onset
Baseline
(b) Baselined pupil size, AB, HI.
Figure A.7: Hearing impaired (HI), in aided setting B condition (AB), pupil size results
averaged across participants and separated by noise conditions, with events being either
speaking or listening windows (left and right panels, respectively) in AMEND II. Color
legend is shown on fig. 3.7.
Pupil behavior in listening and speaking time of interactive communication
53
==PAGE:62==
Fixation duration
0
1
2
3
Time [s]
0.35
0.4
0.45
0.5
Fixation duration [s]
Event onset
0
1
2
3
Time [s]
0.35
0.4
0.45
0.5
Event onset
Figure A.8: Normal hearing (NH), in unВӯaided condition (UN), fixation duration results
averaged across participants and separated by noise conditions, with events being either
speaking or listening windows (left and right panels, respectively) in AMEND II. Color
legend is shown on fig. 3.7.
0
1
2
3
Time [s]
0.3
0.35
0.4
0.45
0.5
0.55
0.6
Fixation duration [s]
Event onset
0
1
2
3
Time [s]
0.3
0.35
0.4
0.45
0.5
0.55
0.6
Event onset
Figure A.9: Hearing impaired (HI), in unВӯaided condition (UN), fixation duration results
averaged across participants and separated by noise conditions, with events being either
speaking or listening windows (left and right panels, respectively) in AMEND II. Color
legend is shown on fig. 3.7.
54
Pupil behavior in listening and speaking time of interactive communication
==PAGE:63==
0
1
2
3
Time [s]
0.4
0.45
0.5
0.55
0.6
0.65
Fixation duration [s]
Event onset
0
1
2
3
Time [s]
0.4
0.45
0.5
0.55
0.6
0.65
Event onset
Figure A.10: Normal hearing (NH), in aided setting A condition (AA), fixation duration
results averaged across participants and separated by noise conditions, with events being
either speaking or listening windows (left and right panels, respectively) in AMEND II.
Color legend is shown on fig. 3.7.
0
1
2
3
Time [s]
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
Fixation duration [s]
Event onset
0
1
2
3
Time [s]
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
Event onset
Figure A.11: Hearing impaired (HI), in aided setting A condition (AA), fixation duration
results averaged across participants and separated by noise conditions, with events being
either speaking or listening windows (left and right panels, respectively) in AMEND II.
Color legend is shown on fig. 3.7.
Pupil behavior in listening and speaking time of interactive communication
55
==PAGE:64==
0
1
2
3
Time [s]
0.35
0.4
0.45
0.5
0.55
0.6
0.65
Fixation duration [s]
Event onset
0
1
2
3
Time [s]
0.35
0.4
0.45
0.5
0.55
0.6
0.65
Event onset
Figure A.12: Normal hearing (NH), in aided setting B condition (AB), fixation duration
results averaged across participants and separated by noise conditions, with events being
either speaking or listening windows (left and right panels, respectively) in AMEND II.
Color legend is shown on fig. 3.7.
0
1
2
3
Time [s]
0.35
0.4
0.45
0.5
0.55
0.6
0.65
0.7
Fixation duration [s]
Event onset
0
1
2
3
Time [s]
0.35
0.4
0.45
0.5
0.55
0.6
0.65
0.7
Event onset
Figure A.13: Hearing impaired (HI), in aided setting B condition (AB), fixation duration
results averaged across participants and separated by noise conditions, with events being
either speaking or listening windows (left and right panels, respectively) in AMEND II.
Color legend is shown on fig. 3.7.
56
Pupil behavior in listening and speaking time of interactive communication
==PAGE:65==
Pupil behavior in listening and speaking time of interactive communication
57
==PAGE:66==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Гҳrsteds Plads, Building 352
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.hea.healthtech.dtu.dk
