==PAGE:1==
Master Thesis Novo Nordisk
Influence of Crystallinity on the Material Properties of
Micro Moulded Components
Materials and Manufacturing Engineering
Submission: 2023, 28 July
==PAGE:2==
Influence of Crystallinity on the Material Properties of Micro Moulded Components
Student no.
Authors
s210529
Martin Vest Schelbli
s200356
Maria Frederiksen
Supervisor DTU:
Guido Tosello
Supervisor Novo Nordisk:
Rasmus Knudsen
Specialist DFM & Injection Moulding
Stakeholders Novo Nordisk:
Daniel Patrick Godskesen True
Teamleader
Modelling & Simulation Department
Mechanical Engineering Department
2
==PAGE:3==
Influence of Crystallinity on the Material Properties of Micro Moulded Components
Abstract
Injection moulding of micro components is under rapid development in the medical
industry as it is widely used in drug delivery devices. The object of this master thesis
is to investigate potential changes to the mechanical properties when scaling down
from macro to micro injection moulded components. The project takes its off-set in
the Injection Moulding Mindset and ISO 527, which is conventionally used for macro
moulded components, however, this thesis further critically access their applicability
for micro injection moulded components. It was found that this mindset could not
be applied 1:1 with micro moulded components, because a narrower cavity increases
the injection pressure and thereby also shear stress. At the same time, the injection
moulding of the micro component is challenged by an increased cooling rate compared
to the larger volume-to-area ratio. This can result in a smaller degree of crystallinity in
micro components and an increased skin layer, which reduces yield strength and makes
the material more ductile. These findings are particularly critical considering the high-
temperature requirements during the injection moulding process for a material like
PEEK. Another challenge when working with micro components is how to accurately
measure any changes in order to get reliable results.
We found DIC more suitable
than the conventionally used tensile testing machine, as DIC allows more specific local
measurements compared to the average value given using the tensile testing machine.
1
==PAGE:4==
Influence of Crystallinity on the Material Properties of Micro Moulded Components
Preface
This master’s thesis is offered by the Technical University of Denmark (DTU) within
the field of Material and Manufacturing Engineering. The project has progressed over
the period from 28th. of February to 28th. of July, 2023. The workload of the project
has been equally divided between the two candidates and has fulfilled 30 ECTS points.
The project has been carried out in collaboration with Novo Nordisk A/S Hillerød
in the Modelling and Simulation department of the DDS Organisation.
An earlier
project of the material POM became the link to the master’s thesis, since both projects
are aimed at injection moulding of components and its influence on the mechanical
properties. This project focuses on micro moulded components in the material PEEK,
how it is processed with a conventional injection moulding machine, and tested for
its mechanical properties which is largely associated with the degree of crystallinity.
This thesis has helped to acquire knowledge in the field of injection moulding of micro
components, since there are advanced challenges in processing with a conventional
injection moulding mindset thus the properties are maintained. Quality assurance is
important in medical companies, it is therefore a desire to acquire knowledge within
the field to injection mould micro components with a new mindset.
2
==PAGE:5==
Influence of Crystallinity on the Material Properties of Micro Moulded Components
Acknowledgements
We would like to thank everyone who contributed to and helped with this project,
as well as DTU and Novo Nordisk A/S for making this possible. Furthermore, thanks
for being allowed to work in a more practical way with materials, measuring equipment
and industrial process machines. We would like to thank Guido Tosello for his expertise
and guidance for the meetings, it has been very rewarding.
A special thank you to the employees of Novo Nordisk DDS who have helped us
through the project: A thanks to Gabriel Jørgensen who has helped prepare the micro
fixtures, dilution and airbrush for spray painting of pigmentation, epoxy moulding of
the micro specimens and otherwise being available at any time.
Thanks to Henrik
Ljunggreen for helping with measurements and lending measuring equipment. Thanks
to Angelos Liakos for following along with the project, and help to prepare micro
specimens with microtome cuts and later training in the use of the microscope. Thanks
to Michael Pedersen for the guidance in setting up DIC measuring equipment when
specimens was pulled and guidance regarding the analysis of results. Thanks to Laurits
Olesen for the help in calculating the mechanical properties, also thanks for the initial
structural analysis of the micro fixture. Thanks to Daniel True for following up on us
with milestone meetings. In particular, we want to express our sincere gratitude to
Rasmus Knudsen for his commitment to our project, sharing his knowledge and time
with us. Thank you for your learning within the injection moulding field and guidance
with simulations.
3
==PAGE:6==
Influence of Crystallinity on the Material Properties of Micro Moulded Components
Contributions
Table 1 shows a list of the persons who have contributed and involved in this Master
Thesis, where NN stands for Novo Nordisk. None means the work have been done by
Maria and Martin.
Section
Contributions
Source
1 Introduction
None
-
2 Test specimens
and equipments
a) Construction
of mould tool
b) Construction
of micro fixture
c) Simulation
of micro fixture
a) Brian Møller,
Tooling Department (HN Group)
b) Gabriel Jørgensen,
Principal Technician at Prototype Lab (NN)
c) Laurits Højgaard Olesen,
Applied Mathematics Specialist at
Modelling & Simulation (NN)
3 Establishing an
Injection Moulding
Process
None
-
4 Material - What
drives the mechanical
properties?
None
-
5 Structural Simulation
Methodology and
Injection Moulding
Trials
a) Injection moulding
trials organised
and supervised
by Maria and Martin
a) Regin Jensen, Operator (NN)
6 Test Methodology
and Results of the
Mechanical Properties
a) Epoxy of
the specimens
b) CT-scan of
the specimens
a) Gabriel Jørgensen,
Principal Technician at Prototype Lab (NN)
b) Jan Andreasen, Senior R&D engineer and
Yongying Dai, Research Scientist at
CT, Experiments & Support (NN)
7 Discussion of the
Mechanical Properties
a) Old case study
of SOMA project
a) Rasmus Peter Knudsen,
Senior Mechanical Engineer at
Modelling & Simulation (NN)
8 Conclusions
None
-
9 Future work
None
-
Table 1: Contribution list of persons involved in this Master Thesis
4
==PAGE:7==
Contents
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Project background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Novo Nordisk DDS Organisation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Scope of the project . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3.1
Research questions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Test specimens and equipments
5
2.1
Mould design
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2
Fixture for the specimens
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3
Establishing an Injection Moulding Process
11
3.1
Scientific moulding mindset
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.2
Mould temperature . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.3
Melt temperature . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.3.1
Viscoelastic behaviour
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.4
Filling of the mould cavity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.4.1
PvT diagram
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.5
Packing pressure
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.6
Cooling time . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.7
Ejection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4
Material - What drives the mechanical properties?
22
4.1
Material properties of PEEK . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4.2
Crystallization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.3
Skin layer thickness . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4.4
Shear induced layers
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
5
Structual Simulation Methodology and Injection Moulding Trials
29
5.1
Setting up a Virtual Moulding Trials in Moldflow
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
5.1.1
Model generation with mesh . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
5.1.2
Process settings in Moldflow . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
5.1.3
Skin Layer Fraction at end of filling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
5.2
Injection moulding trials and discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
5.3
Post-Simulations to Validate the results in Moldflow . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
6
Test Methodology and Results of the Mechanical Properties
45
6.1
Sufficient sample size . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
6.2
Uniaxiel Tensile Testing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
6.2.1
True stress-strain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
6.3
Digital Image Correlation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
6.3.1
GOM Correlate setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
6.4
Characterization of the Material Structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
6.4.1
Differential Scanning Calorimetry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
5
==PAGE:8==
Influence of Crystallinity on the Material Properties of Micro Moulded Components
6.4.2
Polymerization microscope . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
6.4.3
CT scan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
7
Discussion of the Mechanical Properties
69
7.1
Results and Discussion of Tensile Modulus . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
7.2
Results and Discussion of Yield Strength . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
72
7.3
Discussion of the SOMA project . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
75
8
Conclusions
77
9
Future work
79
References
I
A Appendix - Structural analysis of the micro fixture
IV
B Appendix - Process data sheets
V
C Appendix - Weight, dimensions and variations
XI
D Appendix - CMM measurements
XVIII
E Appendix - Setup of experimental testing
XIX
F Appendix - DSC
XXX
G Appendix - Result of tensile modulus for the mechanical properties XXXIV
H Appendix - Result of yield point for the mechanical properties
XL
6
==PAGE:9==
Influence of Crystallinity on the Material Properties of Micro Moulded Components
1
Introduction
Injection moulding of smaller components has gradually become a more widespread trend
among larger companies [1, p. 65]. Processes are initiated with a focus on miniaturizing
devices with the perspective of saving material, decreasing the weight making the device
lighter and improve the user-friendliness among customers or completely design new smaller
devices containing micro components or features. Micro injection moulding can be classified
in different sub fields, among others a component containing micro features like a wall
thickness [2, p. 57].
The medical industry is one of the more common industries where micro injection moulding
is applied to manufacture high quality components. Micro injection moulding is not just
a down scaling from conventional injection moulding [2, p. 220], more things are to be
considered regarding the manufacturing process. One thing that is highly important for a
company like Novo Nordisk, is that their devices lives up to the standards that enable their
device products to be quality approved for the medical market.
Manufacturing of devices containing components with micro wall thicknesses or features,
sets high demands for the injection moulding process, as the component simply solidifies
to fast during the injection moulding process. This can create potential design risks since
the material’s mechanical properties are influenced by the process condition. Taking ISO
standards into consideration, they do not provide information about micro injection moulding
below 0.5 mm wall thickness. Novo Nordisk is therefore interested in expanding their field
of knowledge and getting more information about material properties of injection moulded
micro components or features.
1.1
Project background
Originally, this project was sat up to gather information to develop the Self-orienting millimeter-
scale applicator (SOMA) pill capsule in the material PEEK, where the wall thickness was
in the micrometers range of 0.5 mm down to 0.1 mm. In the initial injection moulding
processes, it was observed that there was a difference in the appearance of the capsule, even
though the mould temperature was set within recommendation, there was still a difference
in the materials behavior. It was evident that there was a difference that could be seen
from the transparency of the material which is obvious in Figure 1. This further raised
questions about whether the mechanical properties could thereby also be different and was
the essential finding that started our project.
When examining the material suppliers data sheets about the recommended mold tempera-
ture, it turned out that the material were still within the recommended range. Obliviously
other parameters must drive the mechanical behavior when scaling down components. This
is an important finding as structural simulations rely on material data coming from relative
thick test specimens, that do not represent micro components or features very well. In a
crystalline material like PEEK, it likely comes down to the degree of crystallinity that is
highly dependent of the cooling rates of the material.
Page 1 of 79
==PAGE:10==
Influence of Crystallinity on the Material Properties of Micro Moulded Components
Figure 1: Housing component in the Self-orienting millimeter-scale applicator (SOMA)
capsule project. Housing component moulded with a relative change in mould temperature
of 20 ◦C. The left is clearly more amorphous than the right [3]
1.2
Novo Nordisk DDS Organisation
Novo Nordisk is a global healthcare company who produces and delivers insulin to people
with diabetes and other chronic diseases. Novo Nordisk was founded in 1923 in Denmark,
where the headquartered is placed near Copenhagen[4]. Most of the injection moulded pen
devices to deliver insulin have been developed by the Devices & Delivery Solutions (DDS)
organisation.
This master thesis is associated with the modeling and simulation department in DDS, which
is also responsible for the underlying structural analyses, moulding simulation, design for
manufacturing (DFM), tolerances and kinematics. The department focuses on and ensures
the robustness of all Novo Nordisk devices. It is important to know the actual mechanical
properties in components, when designing with a safety factor of 1.4, used in order to oversize
the part to be sure that components do not fail undesirably [5].
1.3
Scope of the project
In collaboration with the Modelling and Simulation department, the Master Thesis focus on
what happens to the mechanical properties when scaling down from macro to micro moulded
components in PEEK, and whether the ISO standard 527[6][7] is sufficient to characterize
the mechanical properties in micro components. When scaling down the wall thickness from
macro (millimeters) to micro (micrometers) components, to what degree is the mechanical
properties also scaled down? This statement has lead us to the scope of this project:
1.3.1
Research questions
When down scaling from macro to micro, why is it necessary to understand and
measure the mechanical properties for micro components or features?
To help us answer this question, additional sub-questions listed below has been formulated:
Page 2 of 79
==PAGE:11==
Influence of Crystallinity on the Material Properties of Micro Moulded Components
What drives the mechanical properties from a microstructure point of view?
This sub-question is mainly driven by how the physical mechanisms from a micro-structural
point of view influence the mechanical behaviour when extending tensile test specimens
until fracture. Underlying the term microstructure, it will be essential to investigate the
crystalline structure. Especially, considering a micro wall thickness, the cavity volume is
limited and even small adjustments of the process parameters including filling time and
mould temperature can have significant effects.
It has been found from a previous study[8] that the skin layer is thicker when the temperature
difference between melt and mould temperature is higher.
In that case, the micro wall
thickness will be cooled down faster due to the surface-to-volume ratio is higher than the
macro wall thickness. Therefore, it is of high interest to investigate the skin layers’ effect
on mechanical properties due to scaling in the wall thickness, as well as the relationship
between mould and melt temperature.
Micro structural investigations will be carried out using a polymerization microscope in
advantage to characterise the microstructural layers. Moreover, the previous study[8] also
provided results that the strength increased with increasing mould temperature. According
to Laursen[9] and Leo[10], both indicates that the morphology and the degree of crystallinity
affects the mechanical properties. Therefore, the crystallinity will be measured applying
differential scanning calometry (DSC).
Novo Nordisk applies the scientific moulding mindset when establishing an in-
jection moulding process, can the same mindset be used when scaling down
components or features in the micro range?
Process parameters for the varying wall thicknesses are investigated by incorporating scien-
tific moulding mindset [11] to obtain a stable process. To what degree can this be taken
into account when the wall thickness is reduced to micro? Material suppliers data sheet are
developed by testing test specimens following the ISO-standards. However, it is relatively
new that an ISO standard [12] was produced focusing on injection moulding processing of
specimens with a micro wall thickness. The material supplier therefore does not provide
this information.
It can therefore be difficult to design components based on structural
simulations considering micro injection moulding.
Investigations will be carried out using tensile testing and further examine the relationship
between varying wall thicknesses and mechanical properties. Moreover, CT scanning can
help to verify the dimensions of the components or features and check for voids.
If we assume there is a difference between micro and macro related to mechanical proper-
ties, can this be correlated with the applied settings of process parameters when observing
Moldflow simulations of the frozen skin layer fraction?
Page 3 of 79
==PAGE:12==
Influence of Crystallinity on the Material Properties of Micro Moulded Components
Novo Nordisk rely primarily on an universal tensile testing machine when mea-
sure the mechanical properties. They have started to implement Digital Image
Correlation (DIC), which is a newer technology when measuring the mechanical
properties, so what are pros and cons using the different measuring techniques?
Today, data is primarily collected by an extensometer that measures the mechanical be-
haviour of a material based on an engineering stress-strain curve. However, digital image
correlation (DIC) is a method that has the ability to collect data and measure in the software
called GOM Correlate at a local measuring point to obtain local strain and calculate true
stress. It is therefore by itself another method to collect data and relevant to ask if this
method yields more reliable data?
When using DIC, it is necessary to spray paint pigments onto tensile test specimens to
monitor elongation. This raises the question to what degree the pigmentation repeatability
and quality have on the results.
Page 4 of 79
==PAGE:13==
Influence of Crystallinity on the Material Properties of Micro Moulded Components
2
Test specimens and equipments
This project will focus on three different tensile test specimens. The first test specimen have
a wall thickness of 1.5 mm and have been designed according to ISO 527-2[7] 1A, where it
have been scaled down with a scale factor 1:2.5. The second test specimen have the same
dimensions apart from the wall thickness which is 1.0 mm. These two test specimens are
categorized as the macro specimens. The third test specimen have a wall thickness of 0.5
mm and have been designed according to ISO 527-2 1A, where it have been scaled down
with a scale factor 1:8. This test specimen are categorized as the micro specimen. All three
test specimen is illustrated on Figure 2, where the wall thickness is the nominal size from
the CAD drawings.
Figure 2: 1.5 mm and 1.0 mm wall thickness specimens scaled down with a factor 1:2.5 and
0.5 mm wall thickness specimen scaled down with a factor 1:8 from ISO 527-2 1A
In the rest of this project, the three test specimens will be designated as:
• 1.5 mm thickness specimen
• 1.0 mm thickness specimen
• 0.5 mm thickness specimen
All the nominal dimensions according to the CAD drawings is listed in Table 2 and can
be seen in Figure 3. These dimensions also comply with ISO 20753[12] from "Table 4 -
dimensions of reduced-scale test specimens".
Page 5 of 79
==PAGE:14==
Influence of Crystallinity on the Material Properties of Micro Moulded Components
Figure 3: Technical drawing of a tensile test specimens from ISO 527-2 type 1A and 1B
test specimen [7]
Specimen type
1.5mm
1.0mm
0.5mm
Down-scaled according to ISO 572, 1A
1:2.5
1:8
l3
Overall length
68
21.3
l1
Length of narrow parallel-sided portion
32
10
r
Radius
9.6
3
l2
Distance between broad parallel-sided portions
43.7
13.7
b2
Width at ends (cross sectional area)
8
2.5
b1
Width at narrow portion
4
1.3
h
Wall thickness
1.5
1.0
0.5
L0
Gauge length
20
10
L
Initial distance between fixture
46
14.4
Table 2: Dimensions in millimeters of the nominal tensile test specimens from CAD
drawings, that are down-scaled with a scale factor of 1:2.5 and 1:8 inspired by ISO 527-2
type 1A test specimen [7]
Although there is an ISO standard for the micro specimen, it is of interest to investigate the
effect on the mechanical properties to conclude the impact when scaling down according to
ISO 527-2 [7].
Page 6 of 79
==PAGE:15==
Influence of Crystallinity on the Material Properties of Micro Moulded Components
2.1
Mould design
Novo Nordisk has prior for this project purchased a mould that is capable of producing
specimens where the wall thickness can be adjusted. The mould has developed by Novo
Nordisk and manufactured by a tool maker externally.
The mould has been designed to better maintain mould temperature. This is achieved by
implementing insulation plates, pressurized water lines for water temperatures at 140-180
◦C in the mould base, and internally electric heating cartridges for the cavity plates. The
insulation plates are the ones surrounding the mould box in Figure 4. The heating cartridges
are located inside the cavity plate ensuring a more stable temperature and controlled by
thermocouple transducers.
Figure 4: Moveable mould half with
surrounding insulation plates
Figure 5: Insert to adjust the wall thickness
of micro and macro specimens
To adjust the wall thickness of the specimen, the ejector plates inside the cavity itself are
the ones that are adjusted in their positions. To adjust this, the ejection cylinder in the
bottom in Figure 6 is pulled forward to allow space for an insert to be mounted (see Figure
5). Depending on the insert thickness, the ejection plate will shift its position and adjust
the thickness of the specimen in this way.
For a given insert applied, enables the opportunity to mould in different wall thicknesses,
that goes from 1.5-1.0 mm for the macro specimen and 0.7-0.2 mm for the micro specimen
with an adjustability of 0.1 mm. As explained in Section 2, this investigation will focus on
1.5 mm and 1.0 mm wall thickness of the macro specimen and 0.5 mm wall thickness of
the micro specimen. Figure 6 also shows that the insert varies the thickness for the macro
and micro cavities at the same time thus 1.5 mm and 0.5 mm thickness specimens can be
injection moulded in same session without changing the insert. However, the bushing shown
Page 7 of 79
==PAGE:16==
Influence of Crystallinity on the Material Properties of Micro Moulded Components
in Figure 7 needs to be turned in the direction of the desired moulded specimen. Both
specimens cannot be moulded in one shot, only one at a time to ensure some process control
and stability.
Figure 6: Ejection and variable wall thickness adjustment system inside the mould [13]
Considering the ejector system, it is a two step-step ejection sequence. First step is pushing
on the entire specimen area, allowing the specimen being pushed out of the cavity without
deforming. Second step is local ejector pins that push the specimens from the surface of the
specimen shaped insert.
The cold runner system is shared by the macro and micro specimen cavity, which results
in a 2 times thicker for the macro specimen and 6 times thicker for the micro specimen,
the measurements are carried out on the thickest location on the coldrunner and in the
gauge length of the specimen. According to Beaumount, J. the sufficient size of the cold
runner relative to the moulded specimen is recommended to be minimum 1.5 times thicker
[14, p. 134], to have an optimal flow rate without the resulting injection pressure increases
unnecessarily.
Page 8 of 79
==PAGE:17==
Influence of Crystallinity on the Material Properties of Micro Moulded Components
Figure 7: Movable half cavity design with turnable bushing allowing for the macro or micro
specimen to be moulded
2.2
Fixture for the specimens
The gripping section of the specimens are customized thus those are more extended for the
fixtures to improve the gripping. This is allowed according to ISO 20753 [12] as an advantage
when the specimens are scaled down from ISO 527 A1 [7].
The convectional fixtures for macro specimens were simply too large to grip around the micro
specimens. Therefore, in collaboration with the Tool Shop from Novo Nordisk, a specific
fixture tool was developed for the micro specimens in order to achieve the best possible result
when tensile testing. In Figure 8 (a) and (b) the two different fixture setups are presented
for the micro and macro specimens. This fixture is of course for the gripping sections of
both ends of the specimen. As can be seen in Figure 8a the conventional fixtures then has
the ability to grip the micro fixtures.
The design of the fixtures for the micro specimens can be seen in Figure 9.
When the
micro specimen is fixed, the moveable part (marked yellow) is lowered on top of the gripping
section, a small adjustable clamp is used to apply force by screwing from above with a torque
Page 9 of 79
==PAGE:18==
Influence of Crystallinity on the Material Properties of Micro Moulded Components
screwdriver to ensure same clamping torque from test to test. The clamp is rough on the
surface that contacts the specimen gripping section thus friction is prevented.
(a) Setup of micro fixtures
(b) Setup of conventional fixtures
Figure 8: Setup of the fixtures, mounting tensile test specimens in the tensile test machine
This is a new way of extending specimens, the approach is not written anywhere in relation to
ISO standards. The Modeling & Simulation Department performed structural simulations
on this radically new approach gripping on tensile test specimen, to ensure it would not
impact results in a unintended way (see Appendix A). The results showed that even if the
screw is tightened, the clamping force would not exceed the limit to impact the gauge area.
Figure 9: 3D model of the micro fixtures, including features to optimize the fixture ability
[15]
Page 10 of 79
==PAGE:19==
Influence of Crystallinity on the Material Properties of Micro Moulded Components
3
Establishing an Injection Moulding Process
Before understanding the micro injection moulding, the principle behind injection moulding
needed to be stated first. Figure 10 shows the machine Novo Nordisk have made available
during the period of this project when moulding the specimens. It is a special laboratory
electric machine called Arburg Allrounder 470 A 1000, built to enable swapping of injection
units ranging from 15, 18, 25, 32 mm and micro injection moulding unit.
The reason why a micro injection moulding unit has not been used, is because development
projects like these must be able to be implemented in high volume productions. Therefore,
it is not feasible at this time to make use of the micro injection molding unit, as the final
high volume setups for hundreds of millions components will be on traditional equipment
[16].
Figure 10: Conventional injection moulding machine at Novo Nordisk moulding laboratory,
Arburg Allrounder 470 A 1000
A prerequisite for the moulding process is first to dry the polymer granulate to get rid of
unwanted moisture. Second step is to fill the granulate into the hopper, and the plasticiza-
tion starts as granulate is fed into the injection unit. The granulate transits from solid to
liquid state due to friction of the turning screw and the heaters are applied to maintain the
temperature above the melting point, thus the unit is ready to inject molten polymer into
the mould cavity.
Figure 11 shows a flow chart of the injection moulding process step by step. The injection
moulding cycle time counter starts with mould closing, mould half’s are clamped together,
injection of molten polymer, mould cavity is packed, the moulding will cool parallel with the
unit produces a new dose. The mould opens and ejection of the moulded part takes place.
The sequence starts over continuously.
Page 11 of 79
==PAGE:20==
Influence of Crystallinity on the Material Properties of Micro Moulded Components
Figure 11: Illustrated flow diagram of the injection moulding process
Figure 12 illustrates the screw inside the injection unit. When moulded the specimens, a
screw size of 15 mm was used. The heaters is set to gradually increase towards the injection
chamber, it is only at the final section of the screw where the temperature is above melting
temperature. The actual process settings used in our injection moulding trials, see Appendix
B.
Figure 12: Illustration of the injection injecting unit build up
In Novo Nordisk, they develop the injection moulding process based on the recommended
material data coming from the material suppliers. Therefore, an investigation of the mould-
ing parameters is of great interest to examine how the adjusting of the processing condition
within the recommended range influences the internally micro structure of the material by
measuring of the mechanical properties. The idea is to establish a healthy process, and then
challenge a few key parameters that greatly affects the crystallinity, including filling time and
mould temperature. To do this, the investigation is carried out with the scientific moulding
mindset decribed in Section 3.1.
Page 12 of 79
==PAGE:21==
Influence of Crystallinity on the Material Properties of Micro Moulded Components
3.1
Scientific moulding mindset
This mindset is developed to maintain material properties by avoiding stressing the material
unnecessary and at the same time have a stable injection moulding process. The scientific
moulding mindset was developed for everyone to understand an optimal way to set process
parameters and not only scientists [17].
Novo Nordisk operate with the scientific moulding mindset while setting process parameters
such as filling time and packing pressure when injection moulding macro parts. There is
cases where Novo Nordisk put this mindset aside, but doing so by knowing the risk. From
an earlier study of moulded macro specimens for a POM material [8] we could conclude that
this mindset is a good mindset to avoid stressing the material unnecessary and have a stable
moulded process. But is it possible to use this scientific moulding mindset when injection
moulding micro parts?
The quick answer is no and the reason why is more complex. When designing micro parts
the dimensions is going to be smaller, which result in cooling the parts faster in the cavity
when moulded. Because the parts cool down faster, a faster filling time and therefore a
higher injection pressure is often required. This is illustrated on Figure 13 where the range
of filling time is more narrow and injection pressure is higher when down scaling in thickness.
It means that the material is going to be more stressed due to the high filling pressure. If the
mindset was used for micro parts, it could end up with a short shot, because it will freeze
of before the cavity is filled [2, p. 31].
Figure 13: Theoretical U-curves [18, p. 23] representing the pressure as a function of filling
time for specimen thicknesses 1.5, 1.0 and 0.5 mm
Page 13 of 79
==PAGE:22==
Influence of Crystallinity on the Material Properties of Micro Moulded Components
If the melt is injected really fast the resistance to flow is high resulting in a high injection
pressure. This is the case for the left side of the curves. On the right side of the curve, if
you inject too slow, the melts starts to cool and the resistance to flow increases, which also
results in a high injection pressure. When a scientific moulding mindset is followed, it is
desired to be within the dashed area. Since the injection pressure as a function of filling is
part of the filling phase, it will be more detailed walk-through in the filling Section 3.4.
3.2
Mould temperature
After turning on the injection moulding machine, the mould is warmed up to reach the desired
temperature. Setting the right mould temperature is an important parameter which not only
affects the flow rate in relation to the viscosity being reduced with increased temperature,
but it also influences the degree of crystallization.
The recommended mould temperature for PEEK grade from the manufacturer to choose a
mold temperature between 175 and 205 ◦C. However, this is a relatively broad range because
there is no differentiation between large and small injection moulded parts. It will have a
significant impact on the properties of the material if the mould temperature is set too low
due to the effects of high cooling rates and skin layer which is further described in Section
4.3. Therefore, it is relevant to make adjustments to this parameter to examine the output of
this in relation to the mechanical properties. In other words, we can manipulate the process
with injection moulding depending on which properties are preferred, since crystallization
is highly dependent on the mould temperature, which helps to keep the temperature long
enough for the occurrence of crystalline structure to have better conditions to grow.
3.3
Melt temperature
Another important process parameter that is the melt temperature which ensures the mate-
rial to be molten with a viscosity to flow sufficiently. When establishing an optimal injection
process, a balance between process parameters should be found. The melting point (Tm)
for the given PEEK is 343 ◦C. From this temperature, the material appears with a molten
consistency, however the state of the melt is not viscous enough to flow efficiently with lower
pressure requirement through the nozzle into the mould cavity without freezing off. The
material supplier recommends a melt temperature upwards 375-395 ◦C.
The melt temperature is like mould temperature an important parameter related to the
formation of crystallization and is connected with the cooling rate. Establishing an efficient
moulding process with the right conditions is a science. To achieve this, the effect of different
settings between the process parameters must be tested.
3.3.1
Viscoelastic behaviour
PEEK is a thermoplastic polymer that exhibit a viscoelastic behavior above glass transition
temperature (Tg) [18, p. 8], above this temperature the polymer has a rubber-like consistency.
Page 14 of 79
==PAGE:23==
Influence of Crystallinity on the Material Properties of Micro Moulded Components
When the temperature reaches the (Tm) the materials is in its molten state but also behaves
elastically due to applied load when injected into the mould cavity. This viscoelastic behavior
is driven by the randomly arranged molecule chains which allows diffusive movement when
injected. When the load is removed, the polymer tends to recover to a relaxed state[18, p. 8]
like a solid elastic. This behavior can cause difficulties when implementing simulations to
predict an optimal moulding process. This will be further discussed later in the report.
Figure 14: Viscosity as a function of shear rate and melt temperature for PEEK-CLASSIX
[19]
In the diagram in Figure 14 above, the viscosity is plotted as a function of shear rate, which
has an essential connection with the viscoelasticity due to the melts resistance to flow. A
higher viscosity of the melt will need more applied force to flow which are greatly related to
the temperature. Considering a moulding process, a shear rate upwards 1000-10000 1/s is
typical in the cavity. Shear rate is an important parameter as it affects the amount of shear
heating and yields a significant lower viscosity which increases the flow ability [18, p. 10].
3.4
Filling of the mould cavity
Another key process parameter when establishing a moulding process is the filling time or
flow rate to fill the mould cavity. This should be appropriately sized to ensure the correct
amount of material is injected for a specific period of time. Figure 15 illustrates how the melt
flows, namely a phenomena called fountain flow. However, there are more things to consider
when determining and understanding the filling of the cavity in relation to the mechanical
Page 15 of 79
==PAGE:24==
Influence of Crystallinity on the Material Properties of Micro Moulded Components
properties, namely skin layer thickness and shear layer which is further described in later
Sections 4.3 and 4.4.
The filling of the cavity is dependent on the injection speed with a corresponding injection
pressure that can be used as an indicator of how the material is forced due to resistance to
flow inside of the mould cavity. As the flow front of the melt contacts the steel mould walls
the material starts decreasing in temperature and becomes more viscous due to an increased
cooling rate of the environment from the mould walls. Especially, the fact that the melt
increases in viscosity eventually along the flow length, the injection moulding machine must
use more force to overcome the resistance to flow and thus the injection pressure increases.
Another contribution is the surface area to volume ratio that tends to be larger in micro
parts, the material is cooled more rapidly [2, p. 31].
Figure 15: Illustration of the fountain flow behavior[10]
Based on the above mentioned effect of viscosity, it is important to find a suitable injection
speed to ensure a sufficient melt flow. Otherwise, there is a chance that the moulded part
will short shot resulting from the melt flow freezes off before the cavity has been completely
filled.
Opposite, considering a too fast filling of the cavity increases the shear rate and
induces material to be sheared on top of the layers. This can cause damaging of the mould
cavity due to high volume productions with high cyclic pressure, which can further lead to
reduced part quality [20].
For micro injection moulding, to avoid a too viscous behavior of the melt thus preventing
the gate and moulded specimen to freeze of too early, a faster injection speed is often applied
with the purpose to prevent the material solidifying and fill the cavity sufficiently. However,
this comprises with the scientific injection moulding mindset, mentioned from Section 3.1
since faster filling consequently increases the shear stress as the required injection pressure
increases, but is need to keep the melt flowing and prevents cool down of the material.
Especially, the area around the gate will be more affected due to the melt is continuously
flowing through this region for a longer time until the cavity is filled.
Figure 13 visualise how we expect the pressure to turn out as a function of filling time for the
three specimen thicknesses. It should be stated that this is a theoretical example. The fact
that the specimen thickness decreases and the flow length in the micro specimen is shorter,
the cavity filling time will be lower/faster thus the amount of material is injected faster
which influences the injection pressure to increase due to the aforementioned effect of shear
Page 16 of 79
==PAGE:25==
Influence of Crystallinity on the Material Properties of Micro Moulded Components
stress. Based on these theoretical u-curves, the most optimal filling time would be at the
bottom of the curve where the pressure is not unnecessarily increased on either side of the
curve. Furthermore, it is expected that the u-curve for the micro specimen will shift with
a more narrow process window when the thickness is decreased. Therefore, it will also be
more limited to establish an ideal process setting, since on this scale it is about milliseconds
during the filling, even small variations can have an impact on the output. In Figure 13 the
dashed lines indicates process windows for the specimen thicknesses 1.5 and 0.5 mm when
it comes to selecting an optimal process setting.
When moulding micro specimens, due to the faster filling, it should be decided where the
switch over position should be located. There is two approaches that can be followed to
achieve a stable moulding process. Therefore, by simulating the filling time, either the switch
over is positioned outside the cavity in the coldrunner and filled with packing pressure. Or
if this is difficult to prevent, a safe choice can be overfilling the specimen in the filling phase.
What is undesired with regard to the micro specimens is having a switchover positioned in
the gauge area as it can have an effect on the tensile tests.
3.4.1
PvT diagram
PEEK is a semi-crystalline material which is important to consider when it comes to its
behaviour transforming from a melt to a solid polymer during injection moulding. It volu-
metrically shrinks upwards roughly 30% [10] if no compensation with material takes place
in the packing phase.
Figure 16: PvT diagram of semi-crystalline PEEK [19]
Page 17 of 79
==PAGE:26==
Influence of Crystallinity on the Material Properties of Micro Moulded Components
In Figure 16 the specific volume is shown as a function of temperature. The diagram is
applied to indicate that temperature and injection pressure has an influence on melt density
and therefore also the solidified specimens final density since the specific volume is the
reciprocal of density. Therefore, as the pressure increases the melt density increases as well
which means that more material in weight [g] can enter the cavity per unit [cm3]. It is also
why we cannot make a 1:1 comparison between process parameters, when we for instance
make a study of changing the flow rate with a corresponding injection pressure at a given
temperature, the melt density has the ability to change.
Switch over: When the cavity of the specimen has been 98 % visually filled controlled by
velocity, a switchover from velocity to pressure (V/P) control occurs and the packing phase
starts where pressure is the driving force to pack the cavity.
3.5
Packing pressure
Packing pressure is applied to compensate for phase change in volumetric shrinkage occurring
during the injection moulding process. It was mentioned in Section 3.4.1 that PEEK as a
semi-crystalline polymer shrinks volumetrically upwards roughly 30 % without the advantage
of packing pressure. When the packing phase and pressure is included, the specimens shrinks
approx. 1.2 % [21].
Figure 17: An idealised cavity and electric pressure curve for injection moulding (not in
scale) [20, p. 222]
Page 18 of 79
==PAGE:27==
Influence of Crystallinity on the Material Properties of Micro Moulded Components
After injection velocity controlled filling of the cavity the machine switches over to pressure
controlled packing as illustrated in Figure 17. Here implies that the packing pressure should
be in the range of 70-100 % the filling pressure. If the packing pressure is much lower than
the injection pressure the screw will spring back at V/P to build up a pressure to pack
with. This will cause instability because the screw does this movement within milliseconds.
Therefore it is essential to have an optimal packing pressure corresponding with the injection
pressure to ensure a stable moulding process. This was experienced in an earlier study [8]
where different packing pressure values was examined to find an optimal process setting.
It is not possible to achieve the same packing pressure profile across different specimen size,
since a decrease in specimen thickness will lead to an increased injection pressure requirement
and subsequently a different packing pressure requirement. Considering the pvT diagram in
Figure 16 one can see that when we increase in injection pressure, it will influence the specific
volume and therefore also the density of the melt. This is just to indicate that we cannot
suddenly make a 1:1 comparison between process parameters. Temperature and injection
pressure goes hand in hand with each other, for instance if the flow rate is increased due
to increase of injection pressure, will let more material inside the cavity considering a lower
specific volume of the melt.
In our case considering the long thin walled specimens a higher packing pressure is needed
due to the ratio between the surface area and volume, which is much higher for the micro
specimen and therefore more exposed to cooling and thereby also shrinkage.
Over packing
In some cases it can happen that the packing pressure is set too high which means that a too
high volume of the cushion has been used with a specific flow rate during the packing time[22].
In some cases, shrinkage goes toward 0 %, and can even result in a negative shrinkage value,
which means that the material expands after demoulding. This often happens around the
gate area, as this is the area with the most efficient packing for the longest time.
Packing time
It should be mentioned that packing time is one of the most important process parameters.
If the packing time is set too short, then the pressure build up in the cavity, would relieve
it selves when packing time runs out, this results in backflow through the gate, meaning we
actually remove material from the cavity. Back flow is when the melt is going back towards
the screw and the weight will be affected by this thus more unstable. To find the most
suitable packing time, a test can be carried out to identify when there is enough material
entered in the mould cavity before the gate freeze of or the part stops gaining weight. The
packing time after gate freezes off does not influence the part dimensions, it is only waste
of time and energy. This is presented in Figure 18, where an example is illustrated showing
that after 6 seconds, the part does not further increase in weight.
Page 19 of 79
==PAGE:28==
Influence of Crystallinity on the Material Properties of Micro Moulded Components
Figure 18: At 6 seconds the gate is frozen, preventing any additional packing and
subsequently weight increase of the part
3.6
Cooling time
Before it is possible to eject the component, it requires the component to be given some
cooling time to solidify. This time is inclusive the packing time and takes place at the same
time as the injection molding machine prepares a new dose of material.
According to Leo [10] the cooling time can be estimated by this rule of thumb: The cooling
time can be estimated by this rule of thumb:
tcool = 3 ∗th2
where th is the thickness of the moulded component, the cooling time is therefore thickness
depended. Following this rule of thumb, when injection moulding specimens at thicknesses
at 1.5 mm and below, the cooling time theoretically ends within 7 seconds.
It is important that the material has completely solidified before the mould opens.The cooling
time used in this project was set at 20 s, far higher than the estimated 7 seconds. However,
this is because the coldrunner is thicker and requires longer cooling time. This is also due to
preventing the moulded specimens to deflect at ejection. In addition, in order to achieve the
highest possible degree of crystallinity, it will only be beneficial to have the material lying
in a hot mold for a long time thus the material gradually decreases with a relatively low
cooling rate. This has been done for scientific reasons. In a high-volume production, this
is not feasible, as you generally want as fast cycle times as possible. This means that the
measurements of the crystallinity in this project is optimistic compared with if it was in an
actual production.
Page 20 of 79
==PAGE:29==
Influence of Crystallinity on the Material Properties of Micro Moulded Components
3.7
Ejection
Before ejection of the moulded component can take place, the ejection temperature has to be
reached, which is 294 ◦C for PEEK [19]. However, just because the ejection temperature is
reached the coldrunner might need more time too cool down and if the moulded component
is not completely solidified the injection moulding machine cannot run fully automatic.
Another issue is due to the moulded component can warp and deform, in this case longer
cooling time and lower ejection temperature is required. The 294 ◦C ejection temperature is
a value recommended by the material supplier based on the geometry of the component.
Page 21 of 79
==PAGE:30==
Influence of Crystallinity on the Material Properties of Micro Moulded Components
4
Material - What drives the mechanical properties?
To investigate how the specimen thickness influence the materials properties, including the
mechanical ones, it is relevant to take into consideration how the crystallization occurs in
the material both in macro and micro injection moulded components. PEEK is one of the
high performance polymers based on its properties. This depends highly on the degree of
crystallinity but also the processing conditions set by the parameters described from Section
3. In particular, the mould temperature and the filling time have been investigated in terms
of their influence on the properties.
4.1
Material properties of PEEK
The polymer used in this Thesis is a PEEK grade named PEEK-CLASSIX BC3 Nautral.
It is a bio-compatible thermoplastic semi-crystalline material. PEEK is primary used in
medical devices based on its high chemically resistant and great combination of strength,
stiffness and toughness. According to the material supplier, one of the materials key features
is its processability to mould thin walled components [23] with a low melt viscosity and yet
keep some strong material properties. The properties is listed below:
Property
Units
BC3 Natural,
Low melt viscocity
General
Relative Density (crystalline)
[g/cm3]
1.30
Typical Level of Crystallinity
[%]
30-35
Mold Shrinkage [3 mm thick plaque, 210°C]
[%]
1.2
Mechanical
Tensile Strength
23°C
[Mpa]
100
Elongation at Break
23°C
[%]
>20
Thermal
Melting Point [Tm]
[°C]
343
Glass Transition Temperature [Tg]
[°C]
143
Crystallization Temperature [Tc] (from moldflow)
[°C]
303
Table 3: Properties of PEEK-CLASSIX BC3 Nautral[21]
The suppliers of PEEK-CLASSIX polymers have some recommended ranges to be considered
when injection moulding[24] which is listed below:
• Conventionally processed at 360 °C to 400 °C
• Mould temperature range 175 °C to 205 °C
• Minimum gate diameter or thickness at 1 mm
• Injection pressure of 70 to 140 MPa
• Packing pressure of 40 to 100 MPa
• Using the recommended injection moulding conditions, the crystallinity should nomi-
nally be 30 %
Page 22 of 79
==PAGE:31==
Influence of Crystallinity on the Material Properties of Micro Moulded Components
4.2
Crystallization
PEEK being a semi-crystalline polymer consists of a structure where amorphous and crys-
talline regions partially occur and are the key factor of driving the mechanical properties.
The amorphous molecular chains links the crystalline parts together. The fraction of crys-
talline regions within the polymer is called degree of crystallinity [25] and is an essential
measurement to find out how much the material has crystallized depending on the speci-
men thickness. This will be investigated using the measurement tool Differential Scanning
Calorimetry (DSC) in Section 6.4.1.
An example of a curve measured with DSC indicating how PEEK behaves when heated up
gradually, is showed in Figure 52. It shows that eventually as temperature is increased the
material starts to behave with the heat flow. The first curve goes from the solid to the
liquid state as it reaches the melting point, meaning that the PEEK material absorbs heat
and the melting temperature therefore takes place in the endothermic area [25, p. 90-91].
After the melting point, the material is in the amorphous state. The second curve returns
due to cooling down the material and now decreases from liquid towards the solid state,
meaning that the material removes heat and the crystallization temperature takes place in
the exothermic area.
Figure 19: An example of a measurement with DSC, Heat flow as a function of
temperature of PEEK, including the Tg, Tm and Tc [26]
Crystallization occurs on the basis of propagated nucleus within a molten polymeric structure
and is a result of a thermal molecular motion [25], temperature is therefore an important
factor to allow nucleus to form and grow. This formation occurs in the state below the
melting temperature Tm and above the glass transition temperature Tg. The crystallization
Page 23 of 79
==PAGE:32==
Influence of Crystallinity on the Material Properties of Micro Moulded Components
can be affected by degradation above Tm due to the high temperature and on the other hand
cannot form below Tg as the polymer melt has solidified [10]. This means that there is a
window of 200 ◦C from the Tm at 343 ◦C towards the Tg at 143 ◦C where crystallization are
more likely to form.
Figure 20: Illustration of a semi-crystalline and amorphous structure
Considering the injection moulding process, when the material is heated above the melting
point, the polymer chains consisting of macro molecules are moveable and can entangle
freely with each other in the amorphous state. When the polymer is then injected during
the moulding process, the polymer chains are elongated with the flow through the coldrunner
and inside the mould cavity longitudinally. While the polymer chains are being elongated,
they tends to disentangle until the melt becomes relaxed, the molecules becomes re-entangled
[25, p. 214]. The resulting molecule arrangement defines the structure whether it will be
crystalline or amorphous or both when it is semi-crystalline in our case 20. Small nucleation’s
has already started propagating during the elongational flow which is can also be called
"flow induced nucleation", this will be further described in Section 4.4 and its effect on the
mechanical properties. With regard to the inside of the cavity, the nucleation will form
an ordered structure between the arranged molecules. There will therefore be a difference
between whether the polymer chains has been arranged on the basis of an increased shear
induced flow, or in a more relaxed state. In other words, the temperature gradient is crucial,
since the temperature will be higher for the melt that is more relaxed relative to the melt
that is exposed to more movement.
For crystallization is the temperature and thus the
cooling rate the key factor that determines the degree of crystallinity. Nucleation that has
received more heat over time has a tendency to grow larger than the crystal structure that
has been more in motion. Furthermore, will the propagating crystals orient while forming
in areas where shear stress is higher due to the elongational flow. While more relaxed melt
tends to form less oriented crystals[10].
4.3
Skin layer thickness
During the filling of the cavity a side effect that was not explained in details in Section 3.
The formation of skin layer has an influence on the morphology of the internal structure and
thereby also the mechanical properties.
Page 24 of 79
==PAGE:33==
Influence of Crystallinity on the Material Properties of Micro Moulded Components
The underlying driving force is highly related to the cooling effect in the outermost interface
between the plastic and the relative colder mould walls. The material in the outermost layer
will instantly freeze due to the temperature difference at the interface between the melt
and mould temperature as a sort of quenching process. There is a tendency that the skin
layer thickness increases with a larger temperature difference at this interface. One of the
key process parameters besides the mould temperature is the flow rate, for instance filling
with high speed, more heated material can bring the cooling effect down thus decreasing the
formation of skin layer [10].
To decrease the formation of skin layer the mould temperature and the machine filling time
which determines the flow rate can be adjusted in advantage. Because the flow of the melt
appears with different behavior depending on the temperature gradient. Considering the
melt longitudinally and also the melt from the skin layer towards the center is gradually
cooled down highly affects the viscosity and eventually also the generation of skin layer
thickness.
However, the core within the interior of the melt located at the inlet of the
cavity has a significantly higher temperature gradient due to continuously injected material
through the gate, which in addition keeps the gate open to feed the mould. The melt in the
interior therefore has a lower cooling rate than the material closer to the skin layer. This is
illustrated in Figure 21, with colors showing the frozen skin layer and molten core relative
to the flow direction.
Figure 21: Illustration of the fountain flow effect and formation of skin layer
The consequence of the skin layer being instantly freezed off tends to result in a structure
that has a very low degree of crystallinity in the outermost layer closest to the mould walls [9,
p. 27]. This results from the quenching effect where a small amount of crystals has formed.
Furthermore, the structure in this region is formed on the basis of molecular chains that have
not been exposed to the effect of elongational flow. The molecular chains appear therefore
with a poor presence of arrangement or regularity between other closely adjacent molecular
chains. The structure in this region is therefore highly amorphous when solidified [25].
As already mentioned, the thickness of the outermost amorphous skin layer can be manipu-
lated, for example, by setting a faster injection speed or increasing the mould temperature if
a thinner skin layer is desired. However, one cannot avoid the fact that there will always be
a frozen skin layer present in relation to the relatively higher temperature difference. When
it comes to moulding micro thickness components, the thickness of the skin layer will have
Page 25 of 79
==PAGE:34==
Influence of Crystallinity on the Material Properties of Micro Moulded Components
a ductile behavior [9, p. 114], especially if it is assumed as in Figure 22 that the skin layer
thickness is equivalent to the skin layer thickness of a macro component. Percentage-wise
the amorphous skin layer will presumably account for more of the cross-sectional area in the
micro specimen and will be a disadvantage if the properties that the skin layer exhibits were
not the intention for a given application.
Figure 22: Assumption of formed frozen skin thickness, percentage-wise differing in
respectively 1.5 and 0.5 mm thickness specimens
4.4
Shear induced layers
The second outermost layer, is highly affected by the melt flow and the accompanying shear
rate, which means that the molecular chains has been oriented in the direction of the elon-
gational flow and thereby given the outcome of the oriented crystallization. If a sufficient
process condition is obtained by setting the injection moulding parameters, there may be
chances for a shish-kebab structure to form in this region. The prerequisite for this is to
have a flow induced nuclei formation [25, p. 70], which precisely happens by molecular chains
extending with a higher degree of shear stress occurring at the sub-skin layer where the flow
rate is lower due to the higher viscous melt related to the cooling conditions. It is often not
completely certain that the right prerequisites can be created in relation to a given material.
Therefore, it can be difficult to form this structure, however elongated crystalline structure
which is essentially present by the shear induced layer, can still produce high mechanical
properties in terms of stiffness and strength.
Figure 23: Illustration of velocity profile of flow front (flow rate) influence on the
orientation of molecular chains. Flow rate increases during scenarios a-c [10]
Page 26 of 79
==PAGE:35==
Influence of Crystallinity on the Material Properties of Micro Moulded Components
In Figure 23 velocity profiles are illustrated for three different scenarios a-c located at the
sub-skin layer. Scenario a) has a zero velocity flow rate compared with the others b) and
c) where the flow rate gradually increases. As can be seen, the flow front tends to be more
narrow with increasing flow rate, which influences the molecular orientation and thus also
the elongation of the chains which will be longer extended due to higher shear rate in the
outer area [25, p. 70]. However, shear rate should not be solely described as a positive thing
since it contributes to degradation of the material’s properties, especially the mechanical
ones. In Figure 24 regions on the ’dogbone’ specimen has been marked with red arrows
where the flow front converges from the gripping area towards the gauge area, as well as the
gate region yields a higher degree of shear rate and subsequently shear stress due to this
converging flow with a narrower pass through of the melt thus increased flow rate. To some
degree, the material may be more stressed internally at those areas and therefore more prone
to withstand load when pulled in tension.
Considering the inner region, this structure has been formed as already mentioned on the
basis of a flow rate which has been exposed to a lower cooling rate since the core melt
keeps the middle region warm for a longer time, which has an insulating effect [25, p. 216].
The melt will thus have a higher ability to relax and influences the molecules to remain
entangled, this phenomena is present in Figure 23 scenario a). This leads to a formation of
nucleis which has optimal conditions to grown without being affected by motion from the
elongational flow. The degree of crystallinity is thus increased and further results in larger
crystals. Moreover, for the core layer molecular chains tends to be less affected by shear
rate, therefore the propagated structure appears unoriented.
Figure 24: Illustration of shear induced areas related to converging flow passages
The orientation of the crystal structure is highly related to the mechanical properties. In
Figure 25 a red line is shown across the structure indicating the shear rate profile. The
Figure shows that the strength is highest in the outer shear layer compared to the core
structure where the strength is significantly lower. At the same time, it is evident that there
Page 27 of 79
==PAGE:36==
Influence of Crystallinity on the Material Properties of Micro Moulded Components
is a lower shear induced stress at the outermost skin layer, which indicates a lower degree of
crystallinity.
Figure 25: Morphology behavior in the thickness of a PP material, the red line indicates
the materials strength depending on crystallinity and its orientation [10]
Page 28 of 79
==PAGE:37==
Influence of Crystallinity on the Material Properties of Micro Moulded Components
5
Structual Simulation Methodology and Injection Mould-
ing Trials
A series of Moldflow analysis was performed to get an insight of the injection molding process
before the moulding trials. This is also to predict what the outcome of the simulated skin
layer fraction is, and other findings that are noteworthy about the simulations.
Moldflow are capable of simulating the injection moulding process virtually.
This gives
tremendous value as it can help understand the filling pattern and help understand and
build up an ideal moulding process from established moulding process parameters. In this
thesis Moldflow was used to:
1. Setup a model with a sufficient mesh size to determine and establish an optimal filling
time and switch over position V/P
2. Setup an injection moulding trial with simulated process parameters from Moldflow
3. Generation of a post-simulations in Mouldflow to setup with applied moulding settings
from the trial to verify the results
5.1
Setting up a Virtual Moulding Trials in Moldflow
5.1.1
Model generation with mesh
In general, it is important to have an accurate model and good material data when estab-
lishing a virtual moulding trial to avoid the principal "garbage in, garbage out" (GIGO). It
starts with setting up the sufficiently meshed model, capable of predicting a more reliable
result. When running the simulations, models are meshed with different mesh size according
to the given specimen thickness and volume, to accurately predict the actual flow behav-
ior. In general, we are most interested in what happens in the gate and part section when
performing the simulation, therefore the mesh size for these areas are smaller compared to
the cold runner with a courser mesh size. Furthermore, the model is based on 3D using
’tetrahedral elements’ (tetra) which roughly speaking uses mathematical models in form of
tetrahedral triangles to determine the pressure, temperature gradient or the flow rate as
examples across these elements.
In other words, more elements through the thickness will give a more detailed simulation
and thus become more accurate but also takes longer time to simulate because the total
amount of elements increases through the thickness. An example of three different tetras is
shown on Figure 26. Novo Nordisk often use 12 tetra of macro components or 16 tetra with
a smaller local thickness area or features.
Page 29 of 79
==PAGE:38==
Influence of Crystallinity on the Material Properties of Micro Moulded Components
Figure 26: Simulated 0.5 mm thickness specimen, cross sectional view of the gauge area,
from left to right, 12 tetra, 20 tetra and 40 tetra
In this simulation study section we will find out whether the model size has an influence on
the results regarding the skin layer fraction. There is a presumption that if the thickness
of the moulded component is in micro scale, it would be safer to consider a model with a
larger number of tetras thus a simulation based on a larger model (see Table 4) with more
collected data points [2, p. 225].
0.5 mm thickness
specimen
12 tetra
20 tetra
40 tetra
Model size [Number of elements]
1018191
1674467
3246632
Table 4: Model sizes with respectively 12, 20 and 40 tetras of 0.5 mm thickness specimen
5.1.2
Process settings in Moldflow
In Moldflow the melt temperature was kept constant at 375 ◦C for all three specimen thick-
nesses. This temperature is in the middle of the recommended melt temperature range by
the material supplier [24]. However, it turned out that an increase had to be made during
the moulding trials. This will be described in the injection molding Section 3. With regard
to the mold temperature, this was set as a starting point set at 190 ◦C, which is the middle
value of what the material suppliers has recommended.
Determination of filling time
The criteria to establish an optimal filling time is developed based on the scientific moulding
mindset mentioned with the U-curves in Figure 13 with the focus on taking care of the
Page 30 of 79
==PAGE:39==
Influence of Crystallinity on the Material Properties of Micro Moulded Components
material and its properties during the moulding process. However, for micro size components
or features it can be preferred to increase the injection speed, to prevent the melt cooling
down to much during filling, that could otherwise result in a short shot.
To help better understand and select an optimal filling time the simulated "temperature at
flow front" plot is used. Internally in Novo Nordisk the simulation department operates with
the rule of thumb, that shear heating the temperature should not exceed 5 ◦C and nor exceed
a 10 ◦C temperature drop during filling of the cavity. This means that the temperature should
not deviate further from the processing temperature (375 melt temperature), than a limit of
380 ◦C due to shear heating and 365 ◦C due to temperature drop.
Simulated filling time
Figure 27 shows 3 different cavity filling times and the resulting shear heating and melt
temperature drop that is plotted with the temperature at the flow front of 1 mm thickness
specimen. The temperature at flow front is 378 ◦C within the criteria of shear heating, the
corresponding machine filling time of 0.6 seconds. The temperature at flow front was also
plotted for respectively 0.5 and 0.4 seconds, though with exceeding melt temperature above
the criteria of 380 ◦C due to shear heating.
Figure 27: Example of temperature at flow front plot for machine filling times showing the
actual shear heating and temperature drop
Further increasing the machine filling time resulted in a temperature drop below the starting
point of 375 ◦C. Therefore, 0.6 seconds in this case was chosen as the most optimal.
Page 31 of 79
==PAGE:40==
Influence of Crystallinity on the Material Properties of Micro Moulded Components
Setting switchover position V/P
It is difficult to get a V/P at 99% of the cavity in the micro specimens, as the cold runner
account for more than 98% of the total shot weight. To avoid a V/P in the gauge area, the
V/P is sat outside the specimen cavity. Doing so will result in cavity filling in the packing
phase. Therefore, as can be seen in Figure 28 the switchover position was in the beginning
of the gate region corresponding to a 96.6 % filled volume.
Figure 28: Switchover position of 0.5 mm thickness specimen at 96.6 % filled
In Table 5, the process settings are listed for the velocity controlled phase right be the
switchover to pressure controlled packing of the mould cavity. It can be observed from the
Table that 1.0 mm and 1.5 mm thickness specimen has the same injection speed of 2.4 cm3,
however 1.0 mm results in a faster machine filling time and the required injection pressure
increases.
Thickness
specimen
Volume
filled
Injection
speed
Machine
filling time
Cavity
filling time
Machine
injection pressure
[mm]
[%]
[cm3/s]
[s]
[s]
[bar]
1.5 (12 tetra)
99
2.4
0.75
0.39
1040
1.0 (12 tetra)
99
2.4
0.65
0.30
1450
0.5 (20 tetra)
96.6
1.5
0.59
0.04
450
Table 5: Process settings at the switchover point with the parameters 190 ◦C mould
temperature and 375 ◦C melt temperature
Page 32 of 79
==PAGE:41==
Influence of Crystallinity on the Material Properties of Micro Moulded Components
It was expected that the injection pressure would increase even further when injection mould-
ing the 0.5 mm thickness specimen. Due to the filling of 0.5 mm thickness specimen, the
volume filled is 96.6 % at the switchover position. The cavity filling is therefore not included
and result in a lower machine injection pressure. Equally for all specimen thicknesses is that
they share the same coldrunner geometry which is also why the machine filling times are so
close to each other. When it comes to the cavity filling times, there is a larger difference due
to the specimen volumes.
Setting packing pressure
From the scientific moulding mindset point of view, we know that when switching from
velocity controlled pressure to packing of the mould cavity. The packing pressure in Novo
Nordisk is often 70-100 % the injection pressure to ensure a more stable moulding process,
to prevent a spring back of the screw, if packing pressure is much lower than filling pressure.
In Table 6 relevant process settings of the packing phase for the specimens are shown.
Thickness
specimen
[mm]
1.5
(12 tetra)
1.0
(12 tetra)
0.5
(20 tetra)
Injection pressure
[bar]
1050
1460
450
Packing pressure
[bar]
1050
1450
500
Packing time
[seconds]
4
4
4
Table 6: Selected process settings for the packing phase including the packing pressure and
packing time
The packing time was determined to be 4 seconds for 1.5 mm thickness specimen as to ensure
enough material has entered the cavity before the gate freezes of and the specimen stops
gaining weight. The optimal packing time for the micro specimen is lower than 4 second,
but it was decided to keep the packing time constant for all specimens in Table 6 to be more
comparable due to the results. All process settings are established, see Figure 29, to start
the injection molding session of the different specimen thicknesses.
Figure 29: Relevant process settings in Moldflow for 0.5 mm thickness specimen, including
mould and melt temperature, flow rate, switch over and packing phase
Page 33 of 79
==PAGE:42==
Influence of Crystallinity on the Material Properties of Micro Moulded Components
5.1.3
Skin Layer Fraction at end of filling
The skin layer as was mentioned in 4.3 is formed by the temperature difference between melt
and mould temperature due to a quenching effect. It can be simulated in Moldflow with the
plot "Skin Layer Fraction at end of fill" to investigate the amount of frozen layer where an
more amorphous structure is expected. The plot is generated on the basis of the filling phase
which means the key factor for the formation of skin layer is the influence of flow rate. As
the flow front reaches the end of the cavity the plot stops building frozen layer.
Since the frozen layer fraction plot is developed over time, different frozen layers fractions is
expected throughout the specimen. In Figure 30 (a), the skin layer fraction at end of fill is
plotted for the 1.5 mm thickness specimen with 12 tetras. Here it can be seen that the flow
front reaching the end of the cavity (the blue region) has not formed skin layer, whereas the
gripping area after the gate region suffers longer time where the melt flows continuously and
skin layer can form. It can also be seen that the frozen skin layer increases from the end of
the cavity towards the gate region.
It can be observed in the plot 30 (b) with 20 tetras that through the thickness no skin layer
is formed in the gate end. This correlates with continuously melt flow entering the gate
keeping this region heated thus the skin layer cannot propagate.
Figure 30: Simulated skin layer fraction at end of fill for 1.5 thickness specimen, with a
simulation of 50% less frozen layer in finer mesh density
Table 7 shows the variation of skin layer fraction along the specimens.
Page 34 of 79
==PAGE:43==
Influence of Crystallinity on the Material Properties of Micro Moulded Components
Thickness
specimen
Gate
Middle
End
[mm]
[%]
[%]
[%]
1.5 (12 tetra)
7.6
6.6
6.6
1.0 (12 tetra)
6.5
4.6
4.5
0.5 (20 tetra)
1.8
1.5
0.4
Table 7: Resulting skin layer fractions,
monitored at gate, middle and end region
Figure 31: Definition of measuring positions
on the gauge area
As already described in the generation of the models Section 5.1.1, the 0.5 mm thickness
specimen has been simulated with different model sizes by increasing the tetras from 12-80
tetras through the thickness. In Table 8 the model size and its influence on the skin layer
fraction is presented. The measuring point is in the middle region of the specimen. The
simulated frozen skin layer fraction decreases with increasing tetras. It was first expected a
thinner skin layer thickness with increasing tetras through the specimen on the basis that
there are more elements that can be analyzed to improve the mesh quality.
Thickness
specimen
12 tetra
20 tetra
40 tetra
80 tetra
1.5 mm
6.6 %
3.3 %
-
-
1.0 mm
4.6 %
3.0 %
-
-
0.5 mm
3.0 %
1.5 %
0.2 %
0.0 %
Table 8: Tetrahedral elements influence on the resulting frozen skin layer fractions
This smaller study of tetra’s effect on the frozen skin layer fraction is mainly applied to
the 0.5 mm thickness specimen in order to get a more detailed view of the analysis of the
skin layer thickness. As an example, considering 80 elements through the specimen, has
more data points for Moldflow to analyze a skin layer thickness of 60 µm compared with 12
elements.
This observation has been investigated further, the assumption about the simulation being
more detailed when increasing the number of tetras still remains, though it is not only
the skin layer that is accounted for with a more detailed view but also injection speed. A
temperature plot on Figure 32 was inspected for 0.5 mm thickness specimen, it could be
observed that the temperature would increase upwards approx. 413 ◦C due to shear heating.
This compromises with the earlier stated criterion of a maximum 5 ◦C due to shear heating.
It can be concluded that this criteria is not useful for micro moulded components, a higher
range of temperature would be more suitable. However the temperature at flow front in
Figure 32 is on the basis of 20 tetras due to the micro specimen. If 12 tetras was applied
instead, the resulting shear heating would be lower.
Page 35 of 79
==PAGE:44==
Influence of Crystallinity on the Material Properties of Micro Moulded Components
Figure 32: Melt temperature 395 ◦C resulting in a shear heating of 18 ◦C
When increasing the model size, it can be worth to include the cavity filling time influence
on shear heating in the mindset when prediction the skin layer fraction. The amount of
shear heating is higher due to the fast cavity filling time. Considering a larger model size
which makes sense why the plot cannot predict a skin layer.
Moldflow simulations was used to verify process parameters like melt temperature, mould
temperature and filling time. These parameters are later used as the starting point when
establishing the injection moulding process. Furthermore, we now have an idea of what we
can expect in relation to the skin layer thicknesses. How much the results are valid for
respectively 12 tetra of the macro specimens and 20 tetra for the micro specimens, will be
further investigated.
Since there are more elements through the specimen thickness at 20 tetra and the result
shows a smaller skin layer, it can be observed that a smaller skin layer is formed at the end
of fill, which may indicate that the largest part of the skin layer is formed in the packing
phase. Therefore, it can be concluded that there is room for improvement in Moldflow to
predict the skin layer.
5.2
Injection moulding trials and discussion
The injection moulding trials started by setting the temperature-based process parameters,
respectively mould and process temperature. Filling time was set, and VP adjusted to reach
Page 36 of 79
==PAGE:45==
Influence of Crystallinity on the Material Properties of Micro Moulded Components
a filling degree of 95-98% visually before switching to the packing phase. When we were
satisfied with the filling of the volume, an estimated packing pressure could be set with the
corresponding packing time, which also had to be carefully monitored due to over packing.
Specimens had to be continuously taken out and measured in the thickness to see whether
they agreed with the nominal thickness. Normally it is not necessary since a consistent
quality is expected.
It should be stated that the moulded specimens suddenly are not the originally nominal
thickness. The tables shows the resulting thickness have been moulded in 1.4 mm (nominal
1.5 mm), 1.0 mm (nominal 1.0 mm), 0.5 mm (nominal 0.7 mm) and 0.3 mm (nominal 0.5
mm). The reason for this will be discussed further in this section.
We have an assumption that the deviation is caused by thermal expansion affecting the tool
steel, because the moulded specimens was processed in our project with a higher mould
temperature than they were at the toolmaker. This can resulting in expanding and limiting
the space within the cavity. This lead us further to measuring the depth of the cavity with a
coordinate measuring machine (CMM), where it was found that there is a deviation on 0.1
mm both for the macro and micro cavity depth, it can be found in Appendix D. Another
assumption that can cause deviation is with regard to the surface area of the cavity plate,
which can result in an increased compression of the ejector system, especially in the micro
cavity when the high cavity injection pressure occurs.
It can be stated that the mould for the project is complex, which has been due to several
uncertainties. For example, the nominal 1.0 mm is injection moulded without deviations,
while the nominal 1.5 has deviated by 0.1 mm. Considering the nominal 0.5 mm thickness
specimen, the moulding trial resulted in a moulded specimen with a thickness of 0.3 mm.
Therefore, was another moulding trial performed to mould the actual 0.5 mm thickness, to
do this an insert for 0.7 mm nominal thickness was applied instead.
Another observation according to the thickness of the specimens was the variation along the
length and was measured using a micrometer. The measurements of the thickness specimens
of 1.4 and 1.0 mm, respectively are given by Appendix C. It was observed that no deviation
was present in the micro specimens. For the 1.4 mm thickness specimen it can be observed
that a variation in the thickness is occurring at the gate region (1.36 mm thickness) towards
the end of the specimen (1.45 mm thickness. And for the 1.0 mm thickness specimen from the
gate region (1.02 mm thickness) towards the end of the specimen (0.92 mm thickness). This
corresponds with processing condition where high machine injection pressure thus also high
cavity injection pressure is applied to mould the specimens. The mould steel tends to deform
due to mould deflection. This was experienced in [22] where a strain gauge was applied to
monitor the deformability of the mould cavity, which agreed with predictive modelling of
elastic volumetric expansion during the packing phase. Therefore, this is also worth having in
mind considering the measurements of variation in thickness. To validate the measurements
further, CT-scans has been performed which appear in Section 6.4.3.
In Table 9 is the processing temperature set to 395 ◦C, different from what first was decided
namely 375 ◦C. However it turned out not to be an optimal moulding process indicated from
Page 37 of 79
==PAGE:46==
Influence of Crystallinity on the Material Properties of Micro Moulded Components
the ejection of the specimen as it got stuck when demoulding. Though, it should be stated
that it got stuck on the fixed half of the mould, therefore it is not related to any issues with
the ejection phase which takes place on the moveable half. We suspected that this was due
to the temperature difference at the interface between the nozzle and the inlet of the cold
runner as seen in Figure 33. An indication showed from the appearance of the material,
as it got somewhat amorphous on the moulded part (particularly in the beginning of the
cold runner). The temperature difference between the nozzle and coldrunner has been too
large due to heat transferred from the nozzle, resulting in a too low processing temperature.
Therefore, was the melt temperature increased thus the melt did not solidify as quickly and
thereby resulted in a more stable demoulding.
Figure 33: Temperature difference at interface between nozzle and coldrunner
In Figure 34 the micro 0.3 mm thickness specimens with adjusted mould temperature are
presented. It can be observed that the left specimen moulded with 175 ◦C has resulted in
a short shot. The middle specimen moulded with 190 ◦C has a somewhat great appearance
visually. The specimen moulded with 205 ◦C is more soft at demoulding and resulted in some
deflection. However, even though deflection have occurred, according to the theory a higher
moulding temperature should yield better material properties due to a slower cooling rate
related to the crystallization as mentioned in Section 4.2. The deformation when moulding
the micro specimens at 205 ◦C is mainly caused by the warmer material that gives the
moulded specimen the softer properties thus more prone to distortion when ejection, this
combined with it being more sticky causes the material to be pulled off at ejection, is what
makes that curved appearance.
Page 38 of 79
==PAGE:47==
Influence of Crystallinity on the Material Properties of Micro Moulded Components
Figure 34: Moulded 0.3 mm thickness specimen, processed with varying mould temperature
From Tables 9 and 10, when comparing the moulding trials of the macro and micro thickness
specimens it can be seen that the flow rate has been increased significantly from 5.5 unit
to 22 cm3/s. To secure actually filling the cavity, the machine injection time had to be set
extremely high. This injection speed has resulted in a significantly higher machine injection
pressure used to fill the cavity. This is proof that while trying to follow a healthy injection
moulding mindset to preserve material properties by running a stable process, this is not
always easy to achieve, especially when micro moulded components are considered.
Specimen
thickness
Mould
temperature
Machine
filling time
Injection
speed
Machine
injection
pressure
Switch over
position
Packing
pressure
[mm]
[◦C]
[s]
[cm3/s]
[bar]
[cm3]
[bar]
1.4 (1.5)
190
0.71
5.5
1710
0.7
1250
1.0 (1.0)
190
0.66
5.5
1830
0.95
1300
0.5 (0.7)
190
0.15
22
2250
1.3
1250
0.3 (0.5)
190
0.15
22
-
1.3
1250
Table 9: Injection moulding process parameters for specimen thicknesses, 1.4 mm, 1.0 mm
and 0.3 mm with 190 ◦C mould temperature and 395 ◦C processing temperature B
Page 39 of 79
==PAGE:48==
Influence of Crystallinity on the Material Properties of Micro Moulded Components
Specimen
thickness
Mould
temperature
Machine
filling time
Injection
speed
Machine
injection
pressure
Switch over
position
Packing
pressure
[mm]
[◦C]
[s]
[cm3/s]
[bar]
[cm3]
[bar]
0.3 (0.5)
175
0.15
22
2250
1.3
1250
0.3 (0.5)
190
0.15
22
-
1.3
1250
0.3 (0.5)
205
0.15
22
2150
1.3
1250
Table 10: Injection moulding process parameters of 0.3 mm thickness specimen with
adjusting of the mould temperature ± 15 ◦C deviating from 190 ◦C and a processing
temperature at 395 ◦C B
The reason why no resulting machine injection pressure appears for 0.3 mm thickness spec-
imen 190 ◦C mould temperature is because of lost information. Due to the results for 205
◦C and 175 ◦C mould temperatures from Table 10, a presumption of the machine injection
pressure is to be in the middle range, approx. 2200 bar.
The injection moulding trials of the micro specimens were all simulated to switch over at
approx. 96 % filled volume positioned in the cold runner. This turned out not to be feasible
as the specimen would not fill in the packing phase. To ensure filling of the cavity, an high
injection speed was required, and the switchover was moved out the cavity, so the specimen
would be filled in the filling phase.. A decision was taken, to complete the moulding trials
by having the micro specimens filled within in the velocity controlled phase resulting in a
100% filled volume.
What Moldflow and the injection machine does not take into consideration is the viscoelastic
behavior of the material which can be difficult to account for when injection moulding at
this level of injection speed for such small volumes. However, there is an iteration method
to help take this into account by doing a reverse simulation where the process settings used
from the injection moulding machine in the laboratory are applied in post-simulations. In
the simulation the machine response of the injection profile (the actual movement of the
screw).
This actual movement does fit 1:1 on what the machine is set to do.
It is the
compressibility due to viscoelasticity of the material that can be the issue when injection
moulding at elevated machine injection pressures. To get a more realistic insight of the
moulding process, this machine response time is accounted for in the following Section 5.3
5.3
Post-Simulations to Validate the results in Moldflow
Post mould simulations was performed taking into account compressibility of the material
when injected with high pressure [2, p. 224]. It is also interesting to investigate the frozen
skin layer fraction with the actual machine settings, to inspect the output with revised
process settings.
The response time for the moulding machine has a significant influence, especially in micro
components as the actual cavity filling time often is shorter than the machine response time.
Page 40 of 79
==PAGE:49==
Influence of Crystallinity on the Material Properties of Micro Moulded Components
. As thermoplastics is quite compressible seen in the pvT diagram from Section 3.4.1, it is
evident that due to fast injection speeds, the dosed material will be compressed a lot before
it actually starts moving. To take this into account, we build this into our simulations by
taking the material in the front zone of the barrel should be modelled together with the
already made predictive models. This material is marked with red in Figure 35. In the
further section, the dosed material will be described as a hotrunner, which basically means
it is a channel where plastic is kept at specified molten temperature.
Figure 35: Illustration of the front barrel including the screw and nozzle, the zone with the
used positions to model the hotrunner
The data from the injection moulding machine provided important information of the dif-
ferent screw positions inside the barrel in the front zone. The ram position is the starting
position for the material that is applied for each injection (velocity controlled phase) until
it reaches the switchover position. The packing phase starts and shrinkage compensation
begins. When the packing phase ends the remaining unused material is called cushion which
in injection moulding always should be slightly above 0 seen in Figure 35. If the cushion
goes to 0, then more material could potentially be pushed into the cavity, why the remaining
cushion always needs to be above 0.
The packing phase ends after the packing time has been reached. At this point we can
obtain the final screw positions including the ram, switchover and cushion positions. Those
positions are used to specify the ram positions that can be modelled in Moldflow to account
for the material in the front barrel. This is shown in Figure 36. The hotrunner is the same for
all models since the macro and micro specimens are injection moulded by the same machine.
However, the data is of cause different because less material is needed to injection mould
the micro specimens.
In this way, we can account for some of the viscoelastic material
behaviour when the melt is compressed in the filling and packing phase.
The resulting
Page 41 of 79
==PAGE:50==
Influence of Crystallinity on the Material Properties of Micro Moulded Components
injection moulding process with regard to the post-simulations are given by the settings in
Table 11. A new model was build with a specimen thickness of 0.3 mm to get an insight of
the moulding process.
Figure 36: Modelled machine barrel and dosed volume to take into account viscoelastic
behaviour.
Specimen
thickness
Machine
filling
time
Cavity
filling
time
Injection
speed
Machine
injection
pressure
Switch
over
position
Packing
pressure
[mm]
[s]
[s]
[cm3/s]
[bar]
[mm]
[bar]
1.4 (1.5)
1.29
0.22
5.37
1320
3.96
1250
1.0 (1.0)
1.26
0.21
4.95
1735
5.37
1300
0.5 (0.7)
0.36
0.01
11.52
1845
7.36
1250
0.3 (0.5)
0.37
0.02
10.6
2145
7.36
1250
Table 11: Post-simulations of the moulding process settings including the hot runner for all
specimen thicknesses, 1.4 mm, 1.0 mm, 0.5 mm and 0.3mm
Comparing post mould simulations in Table 11, it can be observed that the cavity filling time
is below 1 second for all thickness specimens with different injection speeds. The resulting
machine injection pressure is increased drastically as the thickness of the specimens are
reduced. A reduction from 0.25 to 0.04 seconds in cavity filing time when comparing 1.4
Page 42 of 79
==PAGE:51==
Influence of Crystallinity on the Material Properties of Micro Moulded Components
mm and 0.3 mm thickness specimens, shows a difference of approx. 1000 bar in the resulting
machine injection pressure. We can therefore not follow the scientific moulding mindset 1:1,
the micro cavity has to be filled fast to prevent short shot and accept the high machine
injection pressure. In Table 12 it can be observed the machine injection pressure decreases
with increasing mould temperature which can be connected with the melts ability to flow
with less resistance due to a lower viscosity.
Specimen
thickness
Mould
temp.
Machine
filling
time
Cavity
filling
time
Injection
speed
Machine
injection
pressure
Switch
over
position
Packing
pressure
0.3 (0.5)
175
0.36
0.01
11.6
1870
7.36
1250
0.3 (0.5)
190
0.36
0.01
11.52
1845
7.36
1250
0.3 (0.5)
205
0.36
0.01
11.36
1790
7.36
1250
Table 12: Post-simulations of the moulding process settings including the hot runner for
0.3mm thickness specimen at different mould temperatures
A finding which helps indicate the viscoelastic behavior of the material and its ability to
be compressed is shown in Figure 37.
The actual machine filling start at approx.
0.11
seconds later before the material has responded to the high machine injection pressure. This
means, according to the simulations, the machine uses this amount of time before it responds
to physically move material inside the coldrunner. This shown behavior is general for all
thickness specimens.
Figure 37: Filling time of 0.3 mm thickness specimen, indicating the response time for the
machine to built up an actual pressure
Page 43 of 79
==PAGE:52==
Influence of Crystallinity on the Material Properties of Micro Moulded Components
The skin layer fraction simulation results listed in Table 13. It is shown that less amount of
skin layer thickness is present compared with the predictive simulations from Table 7 of the
injection moulding trials. Furthermore, for both Tables before and after the post-simulations,
the resulting skin layer fraction shows no presence of the injection moulded micro specimens.
Which makes sense, as the result is formed by looking at the skin layer the end of fill, since
the filling is so fast no skin is developed in the plot. However, it does not mean there is no
skin layer, it is just not developed during filling.
Specimen
thickness
Gate
Middle
End
[mm]
[%]
[%]
[%]
1.4
4.7
4.0
3.6
1.0
4.1
2.8
2.6
0.5
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.3
0.0
0.0
0.0
Table 13: Post-simulations, frozen skin layer
fraction at end of fill
Figure 38: Definition of measuring positions
on the gauge area
During the modelling and simulations, several findings were made that could help us better
understand the injection moulding trials. Simulations can be complex related to the applied
material and geometry, they are therefore only valid in certain contexts and there can be
limitations connected with Moldflow and the software packages. When it comes to injection
moulding of micro parts it will benefit to implement verification’s of the predictive results
[2, p. 228].
Taking simulations of the skin layer fraction at end of fill into consideration for the micro
injection moulded specimens, questions rises how the results of the simulations corresponds
with the actual moulded specimens. This will be further investigated in Section 6.4.2, where
microtome cuts are applied to characterize the micro structural features of the skin layer
with a polarized microscope.
Page 44 of 79
==PAGE:53==
Influence of Crystallinity on the Material Properties of Micro Moulded Components
6
Test Methodology and Results of the Mechanical Prop-
erties
Various test methods have been used in the project to collect data of the mechanical prop-
erties, including uniaxial tensile testing subsequently with Digital Image Correlation (DIC).
When experimenting, it is a good idea to revise the set-up of experiments continuously to
ensure that experiments are carried out in the best possible way in terms of maintaining a
sufficient repeatability.
Another Section is included of how the specimens was prepared for measurements and char-
acterization of the internal structure, including Differential Scanning Calometry (DSC) to
measure the degree of crystallinity, Polymerization microscope and CT-scan to characterize
the internal features.
The approach to collect the result of the mechanical properties is stated below:
• Testing of a sufficient sample size
• Obtain mechanical properties by collecting data of an engineering stress-strain curve
when using an universal testing machine
• Get an accurate result of strain data and measure stress by using DIC, where pigmen-
tation on the specimens is needed
• Pigmentation is needed to measure data points with the DIC approach
• Collecting correlation between the two approaches and analyse the digital image by
using software GOM Correlate
6.1
Sufficient sample size
According to ISO 527 [6], minimum five test specimens should be tested for each required
directions because variation can occur. Variation can be caused by several process setting
parameters associated the conditions, as mentioned in Section 3. We have therefore asked
ourselves the question of which number of test specimens is sufficient with consideration of
obtaining reliable result that is within a certain confidence interval. According with ISO
8256 [27] when a coefficient of variation has a value less than 5%, a minimum number of 5
test specimens should be sufficient. It could be observed that the standard deviation kept
increasing after 5 tests, hence 10 tensile tests were chosen for the two configurations; 0.3 mm
and 1.4 mm thickness specimens. (See Tables 14 and 15).
However, 6 test specimens turned out to be a sufficient sample size for 1.4 mm thickness
specimen and 7 test specimen for 0.3 mm thickness specimen according to how the standard
deviation behaves. In this connection, it should be stated that the average and corresponding
standard deviation is based on the yield strength as the measuring point because this is one
the mechanical properties Novo Nordisk rely heavily on when designing parts.
Page 45 of 79
==PAGE:54==
Influence of Crystallinity on the Material Properties of Micro Moulded Components
Furthermore, arrow (↓-↑) symbolizes the direction of the gate section relative to the fixation
in the tensile testing machine. This is done to prevent that the gate direction could vary the
test result. It could be observed that the gate direction do not have a high influence.
0.3 mm
Yield
strength
Average
Standard
deviation
Coefficient of
Variation
Test 1 ↓
102.25
102.25
0.00
0.00%
Test 2 ↓
102.28
102.27
0.02
0.02%
Test 3 ↓
101.68
102.07
0.28
0.27%
Test 4 ↓
101.84
102.01
0.26
0.26%
Test 5 ↓
102.31
102.07
0.26
0.26%
Test 6 ↑
101.90
102.04
0.25
0.24%
Test 7 ↑
102.96
102.18
0.40
0.39%
Test 8 ↑
102.37
102.20
0.38
0.37%
Test 9 ↑
102.12
102.19
0.36
0.35%
Test 10 ↑
102.76
102.25
0.38
0.37%
Table 14: 10 tensile test have been performed of 0.3 mm thickness specimens to find out
that 7 test specimens are a sufficient number relative to the outcome of standard deviation
1.4 mm
Yield
strength
Average
Standard
deviation
Coefficient of
Variation
Test 1 ↓
93.26
93.26
0.00
0.00%
Test 2 ↓
92.51
92.88
0.38
0.40%
Test 3 ↓
92.83
92.87
0.31
0.33%
Test 4 ↓
93.04
92.91
0.28
0.30%
Test 5 ↓
92.83
92.90
0.25
0.27%
Test 6 ↑
92.19
93.05
0.75
0.80%
Test 7 ↑
94.71
92.92
0.66
0.71%
Test 8 ↑
92.61
93.00
0.71
0.77%
Test 9 ↑
92.65
92.96
0.68
0.73%
Test 10 ↑
92.60
92.92
0.66
0.71%
Table 15: 10 tensile test have been performed of 1.4 mm thickness specimens to find out
that 6 test specimens are a sufficient number relative to the outcome of standard deviation
6.2
Uniaxiel Tensile Testing
In this section, we are focusing on the possibility to get a more accurate result of the
mechanical properties to avoid overcompensate a component or features when designing.
A uniaxiel tensile testing machine has been used to measure the mechanical properties with
the use of an implemented grips operation which makes it possible to measure the extension
of a test specimen. The tensile tests is prepared by inserting the specimen between two grips
Page 46 of 79
==PAGE:55==
Influence of Crystallinity on the Material Properties of Micro Moulded Components
in the vertical direction and then pulled by a constant rate until it fractures. This machine
has provided us with engineering stress-strain curves, which indicate the mechanical behavior
of the material in terms of deformation when the material is loaded.
Engineering stress-strain
The stress-strain curves from uniaxial tensile testing gives an engineering result of the me-
chanical properties. Due to an extensomenter, an average value within this length is provide
and can be categorised as an engineering result . The data provided by the extensometer can
be converted to a engineering stress and engineering strain by applying following expressions
from ISO 527-1 [6] and [28]:
σeng = F
A0
and
ϵeng = L −L0
L0
= ∆L
L0
(1)
where σeng is the engineering stress, F is the force or load and A0 is the nominal cross-
sectional area, meaning that the area is constant. ϵeng is the engineering strain, ∆L is the
change of the length and L0 is the nominal length, meaning that the length is constant.
Figure 39 illustrates an example of an engineering stress-strain curve for PEEK, including
the properties of tensile modulus, yield point and fracture point. When we refer to the me-
chanical properties in the project, these expressions are the ones referred to. An explanation
of the engineering stress-strain curve will be further described.
Figure 39: Illustration of a stress-strain curve for PEEK including the tensile modulus,
yield point, fracture point and its behavior over time
Page 47 of 79
==PAGE:56==
Influence of Crystallinity on the Material Properties of Micro Moulded Components
Tensile modulus
In the start of a tensile test, the elastic region occur first. Here the stiffness is defined by
using Hooks law, stating that the stress is equal to the tensile modulus multiplied with the
strain, if we assume a straight line [28]. This information is useful to see how much the
material deform to a particular load, meaning that a higher tensile modulus the material
have, the more force is needed to deform the material.
For polymers in reality, do not have a straight line in the elastic region and therefore a trend
line is used in the start of curve to determine the tensile modulus. According to ISO 527-1 [6]
this slope is between 0.05% and 0.25% strain and can be calculated by following expression:
E = σ1 −σ2
ϵ1 −ϵ2
(2)
where, σ1 is the stress at ϵ1 = 0.25% strain and σ2 is the stress at ϵ2 = 0.05% strain.
Yield point
After the elastic region, the material has a more elastic-plastic behavior until it reaches the
elastic limit. At this point, the material yields and transitions to plastic deformation [28].
This transition point is what we call yield point.
Fracture point
After the yield point, the curve starts to decrease in the stress because of the cross-sectional
area deforms while the length is extended, as Figure 40 illustrates, also known as the necking
area. Eventually, the molecule chains starts to align parallel in the extended direction. When
the molecular chain orientation is aligned parallel, the material gets stronger and stiffer
resulting in a higher stress value, also known as the strain hardening [29]. Afterwards, the
polymer chains cannot withstand any more load and will eventually fracture.
Figure 40: Illustration of a specimen, where the cross-sectional area deform when extended
6.2.1
True stress-strain
To get a more accurate stress-strain result, true stress and local strain can be monitored
by the measuring approach of DIC, which will be further explained in Section 6.3. It is
a measuring technique that is applied to validate the conventional uniaxial tensile testing
approach. To measure the true stress and local strain, the instantaneous cross-sectional
area during the test is applied. It can be difficult to obtain, and is one of the reasons why
Page 48 of 79
==PAGE:57==
Influence of Crystallinity on the Material Properties of Micro Moulded Components
engineering stress-strain results often are used. The expression of calculating true stress and
true strain is given by the equations:
σt = F
Ai
and
ϵt = ln(ϵe + 1)
(3)
where σt is the true stress, Ai is the instantaneous area. This area is the cross sectional
area that change over time. True strain ϵt is the integration of the changed length over a
certain time which is also known as logarithmic strain. Since local strain can be read in
GOM Correlate, true strain is not calculated of the results.
The true stress is increasing more because of the cross sectinoal area, compared with engi-
neering stress that will decrease after reaching the yield point as illustrated in Figure 41.
This is related to the cross sectional area A [28] that remains constant using and exten-
someter on the uniaxial tensile test machine. If a large plastic deformation occur, there is
a difference between the two curves, since the true stress measured with a local point can
take into account the displacement in the cross sectional direction as well. Therefore, in this
project we will focus mostly on true stress and local strain, since it gives a more accurate
result then engineering stress-strain. Figure 41 also shows that the two curves is similar in
the elastic region but different in the plastic region.
Figure 41: Illustration of an engineering stress-strain curve vs the true stress and local
strain for PEEK
DIC is a method that can collect data and those data can be added in the software GOM
Correlate, where the result of local strain can be found by adding a local point and true
stress can be calculated. This measures a specific point, as illustrated in Figure 42, on the
specimen instead of an average of the length, as already stated. When using the result of
yield point from the engineering stress-strain curve, an average of the length is included
when designing a part, meaning that there is a risk of the part is being oversized when
Page 49 of 79
==PAGE:58==
Influence of Crystallinity on the Material Properties of Micro Moulded Components
designing and at the same time a safety factor is added [5]. Although, considerations of DIC
takes longer time and costs more, the result gives the possibility to avoid overcompensate
the component or feature to some extend when designing.
Figure 42: Illustration of an specimen with an extensometer or a measuring point to collect
true strain
In our experiment, there is mostly focus on the measurements of the tensile modulus and
yield point. According to ISO 527 [6], it is recommended that the strain rate when testing the
tensile modulus should be near 1% of the gauge length per minute. It is also recommended
to use a faster speed when testing the yield point, so we decided a strain rate near 1% of the
gauge length per second in cooperation with Novo Nordisk. If the material is strained until
0.25% when measuring the tensile modulus, the same specimen can be used to measure the
yield point. The applied strain rates of the tensile tests can be seen in Table 16. It should
be stated that polymers change over time due to post-crystallization, therefore the tensile
tests of the specimen was done after 48 hours [25, p. 76].
Specimen
size
Tensile modulus
Strain rate [mm/min]
Yield point
Strain rate [mm/s]
Corresponding
to:
Macro
0.25
-
1%min of 25mm
-
0.25
1%s of 25mm
Micro
0.1
-
1%min of 10mm
-
0.1
1%s of 10mm
Table 16: Applied strain rates when testing specimens on the uniaxial tensile testing machine
Engineering vs true stress-strain
Even if the engineering stress-strain curve gives a more quick result and at the same time is
cheaper. True stress-strain curves has the potential to provide more accurately results thus
influence the structural analyses and further influence the design on the basis of designing
smaller parts or thinner wall thicknesses, where less material is need and still be within the
specification of the desired mechanical properties.
6.3
Digital Image Correlation
DIC setup is illustrated in Figure 43. After moulding the specimens, pigmentation is applied
with spray paint which is a procedure in itself and will described further in Section below.
Page 50 of 79
==PAGE:59==
Influence of Crystallinity on the Material Properties of Micro Moulded Components
The pigmentation is sprayed onto the gauge area. Afterwards, images every second are taken
simultaneous with the tensile test running and the data from DIC is directly transferred to
an external computer.
This method is using a software program called GOM Correlate
where the local displacement of the pigmentation can be monitored along a series of images
over time. The result is then collected in GOM Correlate by applying a measuring point or
extensometer at a given position.
Figure 43: Illustration of the DIC setup, with applied pigmentation on the specimen and
camera taking images over time
The measuring point is applied on the specimen where eventually have a higher strain level
in a certain area and this will be taken as the starting point when the different samples
are compared. However, a sufficient quality of pigmentation is needed when using GOM
Correlate to apply measuring points that does not get lost during the extension.
Pigmentation on the specimens
The application of pigments is not the easiest process and it is crucial in the fact that it
determines the measuring points that must later be read in the GOM Correlate, where the
quality of the results depends on this process. It has been stated from two articles[30][31]
that more methods can be used in advantage to apply pigments on specimens, however some
methods has been found more effective than others, for instance an air brush and at the
same time it can be observed that some methods affects the quality of measuring the strain
in a negative way, for instance powder. Based on those two articles, it have been decided to
make pigments with an air brush, and spend time setting up the air brush to find the best
quality in GOM correlate. The setup for using the airbrush is showed in Figure 44.
Page 51 of 79
==PAGE:60==
Influence of Crystallinity on the Material Properties of Micro Moulded Components
Figure 44: Setup of the pigmentation for micro specimen with paint in the airbrush and a
ruler in the right side to monitor the spraying distance
To challenge if airbrush is an optimal method to apply pigments on the specimens, a smaller
study has been carried out to test the condition of pigments (see appendix E, Table E.33).
According to the actual procedure of applying the pigments, inspiration has been drawn from
an article that dealt with this type of processing in pursuing the best suitable condition[32].
Certain painting parameters including airflow, spraying distance, work pressure, spraying
time and dilution has been investigated as guidelines to test influence of these on the pigment
condition. A general overview of the spray paint conditions and how the pigments size is
influenced can be seen in Table 17.
Spray paint parameters
Influence on size of pigments
The airflow is determined by the spray outlet
of the nozzle which gets less narrow adjusted
by the number of turns the screw is turned
Increase of air flow tends to
increase pigment size
The spraying distance is dimensional
from the nozzle to the specimen
Increase of spraying distance
tends to decrease pigment size
Work pressure is the pressure of the
air adjusted from the compressor
Increase of working pressure
tends to decrease pigment size
Dilution is the amount of thinner in percentage
mixed with the black spray painting
Increase of dilution tend to
increase pigment size
Table 17: Air brush spray painting parameters influence on the size of pigments
Page 52 of 79
==PAGE:61==
Influence of Crystallinity on the Material Properties of Micro Moulded Components
A sample size of five for each of the parameters was tested onto regular painting paper
to adjust between ranges of optimal and suboptimal condition and to save the relatively
expensive PEEK material. The testing of condition was iterated, thus continuously exported
to DIC to inspect the quality of pigments and so that the software has the highest ability to
correlate the displacement from the specimens when extended.
An essential requirement due to quality of condition is stated that the pigmentation should
be minimum 3-5 pixel size corresponding with a diameter dimension of approx. 0.006 mm,
a lower size than this will act as background noise [32]. The software has better measuring
opportunities if there is a higher contrast between pigments and background of specimen
thus the software can differentiate between extended and non-extended areas. However, it
was observed from our own experimental work that the pigments of smaller sizes did not
necessarily have a negative influence on the monitoring in GOM Correlate. In fact, it was
found to have a direct positive effect at the pigmentation size of 3-5 pixels.
In Figure 45 the pigmentation tests 1.3-1.5 from the experimental work are presented, which
turned out to have a suitable quality condition sufficiently for GOM Correlate to read.
This pigmentation have therefore been applied throughout the project as guidelines and the
specimens have been painted according to this condition.
What was essential in the sample group 1, adjusting of the regulation screw which determines
the air flow was investigated. The resulting pigmentation was deviating from 1-5 pixels size.
A presumption may be that there have been improvements in the software’s ability to monitor
the pigments with a newer version compared to when the investigation from the article took
place, making it possible to monitor a smaller size of pigments.
(a) Test 1.3, air flow 3x screw
turns
(b) Test 1.4, air flow 4x
screw turns
(c) Test 1.5, air flow 5x screw
turns
Figure 45: Samples 1.3, 1.4 and 1.5 suitable pigmentation with a proper quality condition,
sufficiently for GOM Correlate to read off
Page 53 of 79
==PAGE:62==
Influence of Crystallinity on the Material Properties of Micro Moulded Components
Camera setup
For DIC experimental testing we first used the camera Nikon D5300. Different setups where
tested (see Appendix E) to get the best patterns quality in GOM Correlate.
Here the
quality where different, depending on whether it was macro or micro specimen. After some
time, Novo Nordisk provide us with another camera setup, as showed in Figure 46, there is
purchased specifically for use by DIC. The new camera setup, improved the quality in GOM
Correlate. From the previous study of the old camera setup (Appendix E), it turned out
that light also had a huge influence on the quality in GOM Correlate. With the new camera
setup, extra light was already mounted above the camera, which also shows in the Figure 46.
As described in Section 6.3, the the camera is connected to a computer which has a program
where the various settings can be changed, such as time per image and. In addition, the
images that are taken are transferred directly to GOM Correlate where the data is analyzed.
Figure 46: Camera setup of digital image correlation with implanted light
6.3.1
GOM Correlate setup
In GOM Correlate the relevant areas of interest can be analysed. The quality condition
of the pigmentation is checked for the specimens (see Appendix E Table E.34-E.38). The
quality should be at least approx. 4 as shown in Figure 47. This quality control is based on
the aforementioned camera settings. In this way, the best possible output is built up from
several reliable data points.
Page 54 of 79
==PAGE:63==
Influence of Crystallinity on the Material Properties of Micro Moulded Components
Figure 47: Quality control of the pigmentation on a micro specimen before use of tensile
test, where the green ares means good quality. X, Y and Z directions is defined and aligned
with the specimen
The coordinate system is then determined in such a way that compensation is made if the
specimen is set slightly offset from the start in the fixture. Afterwards we measure the strain
by choosing that the displacement takes place in the Y direction. Measuring points are set
so that we can monitor the strain locally, this is beneficial when measuring the maximum
strain at the yield point.
Figure 48 shows two different scenarios of measuring the tensile modulus within the strain
interval 0.05-0.25 %, local points and extensometer. When adding a meassuring point in
GOM Correlate, the results are quite sensitive and shows large deviations The results of the
measurements are highly dependent on the location of the measuring points. It is therefore
misleading following this approach applying local strain because the stiffness shows to be
higher for the areas that is less strained (blue and green areas) and more ductile in the red
area since this area is gradually the most strained and starts with the necking behavior.
Page 55 of 79
==PAGE:64==
Influence of Crystallinity on the Material Properties of Micro Moulded Components
An better approach was investigated using an extensometer and follow the approach when
measuring engineering strain instead of local strain. In the elastic region, it has been assumed
that the cross sectional area remans the same. This was also what we observed when applying
an extensometer in GOM Correlate to measure the tensile modulus.
Figure 48: Two different measuring approaches yielding wastly different results across 3
fixed measuring points
It is evident from Figure 49 that there is a clear difference between the measuring points
of local strain, there is a variation from approx 26 GPa to 33 GPa.
The extensometer
however, takes into account an average value along the whole gauge length which gives a
more repidable result.
Page 56 of 79
==PAGE:65==
Influence of Crystallinity on the Material Properties of Micro Moulded Components
Figure 49: Example of local point 1, 2 and 3 in the gauge area influence on the tensile
modulus vs an extensometer in the gauge area, where the extensometer gives a more
reliable result
As mentioned, engineering strain is calculated by ∆L
L . The nominal length is not the same
when using tensile test machine and GOM Correlate. For example with macro specimen,
the nominal length is approx 52 mm when using the tensile test machine, which is the length
between grips, see Figure 50. Whereas the nominal length in GOM Correlate is set to 20
mm, which is the gauge length of the specimen. Due to this difference of nominal length
and because a precisely defined extensometer can be applied in the GOM Correlate, makes
the result from GOM Correlate more reliable.
Figure 50: Different length of extensometer on the specimen, where the length between
grips is used in tensile testing machine while the gauge length is used in GOM Correlate
Page 57 of 79
==PAGE:66==
Influence of Crystallinity on the Material Properties of Micro Moulded Components
6.4
Characterization of the Material Structure
In this section, the materials internal structure will be examined of all three specimen thick-
nesses in the sense of measuring the degree of crystallinity and characterizing the internal
structure from a microscopic point of view. CT-scans of the specimens give an indication
how much the material has deviated related to shrinkage and if there are any internal defects.
Results are shown and partial conclusions along the way.
6.4.1
Differential Scanning Calorimetry
As the mechanical properties are connected with the degree of crystallinity, measurements
has been performed by using Differential Scanning Calorimetry (DSC) Q2000 test machine
as shown in Figure 51. Before measuring, preparations were necessary where samples were
cut of the specimens with a weight of 10 mg of the macro specimens and 2 mg for the micro
specimens. Afterwards the samples were sealed inside a pan with a lid on top and added
inside a carousel showed in Figure 51. Second the nitrogen needs to be turned on, before
starting the DSC machine.
Figure 51: Differential Scanning Calorimetry (DSC) machine, model Q2000
It is relevant to investigate to what degree the crystallinity has an effect along the specimen
of the 1.4 mm thickness specimen. Furthermore, measurements of the middle gauge area
are compared between macro and micro specimens. The measurements are used to calculate
the degree (percentage) of crystallinity in the specimens. in Figure 52 the curves shows the
heat flow as temperature is increased. To calculate the degree of crystallinity, the melting
Page 58 of 79
==PAGE:67==
Influence of Crystallinity on the Material Properties of Micro Moulded Components
temperature is relevant due to how much energy is applied when PEEK transits from the
solid to liquid state, meaning that the process is in the endothermic area because energy is
used to melt the material [25, p. 90-91].
Figure 52: Illustration of a heat-up curve, going from solid to liquid in DSC of PEEK,
including the glass transition temperature Tg and melting temperature Tm [26]
The degree of crystallinity is measured with following equation 4.
%crystallinity = |∆Hm|
|∆Hlit| ∗100
(4)
where ∆Hm is the enthalpy of melting and can be obtained from the result in Appendix
F. ∆Hlit is the enthalpy of melting for 100% crystalline PEEK material, which is 130 J/g,
found in literature [33]. The results of the degree of crystallinity is presented in Table 18.
Thickness specimen
Gate region
Middle region
End region
% crystallinity =
1.5 mm
28,38
28,62
28,71
1.0 mm
28,58
0.5 mm
25,62
0.3 mm
24,04
Table 18: % Crystallinity measured with DSC
Here it can be observed that going from 1.4 mm to 0.5 mm thickness specimen, the crystill-
inity decreases approx 3%, while going down from 1.4 mm to 0.3 mm thickness specimen,
the crystillinity decreases approx 5%. Furthermore, 1.4 mm thickness specimen shows that
there is not a difference on the crystallization along the specimen. When scaling down in
Page 59 of 79
==PAGE:68==
Influence of Crystallinity on the Material Properties of Micro Moulded Components
thickness to the micro 0.5 mm and 0.3 mm thickness specimens shows a minor difference in
the crystallinity.
6.4.2
Polymerization microscope
In the investigation of characterizing the internal micro structure, cross sectional cuts were
made using a microtome cutting machine, Leica Rotary Supercut 2065 in Figure 55, that
have the precision to cut extremely thin slices. Experimental work were carried out in order
to achieve the best opportunity to identify micro features including the skin layer, shear
layers and core structure. It would make sense that the thinner the thickness, the more you
can see with cross polarized light, however it must be said that this process becomes more
difficult as the thickness of the slice is decreased, considering handling with a tweezers as
seen in Figure 54. We attempted a range from 5-30 µm, however the slices with thickness
10-15 µm needed a few attempts before the alignment between the glass frame succeeded
without folding. Slices at thicknesses below 10 was not possibly for us. In Figure 54 a
microtome slice is shown for a macro specimen.
Figure 53: Epoxy moulding of a micro
specimen
Figure 54: Microtome slice of a macro
specimen
Figure 55: Microtome cutting machine
Leica Rotary Supercut 2065
Page 60 of 79
==PAGE:69==
Influence of Crystallinity on the Material Properties of Micro Moulded Components
Before slices could be made, the moulded specimens had to be prepared by roughly cutting
them at the desired location to be characterized. These samples were then embedded in epoxy
as seen in Figure 53, in a specific shape allowing the samples to be inserted sufficiently in
the microtome cutting machine.
According to the chosen cross sectional areas to be investigated in Figure 56, the microtome
cuts was made based on our assumption that the micro structure in the gate region of the
specimen may be of a different character compared with the middle and the end of the gauge
area. This is, among other things, due to a higher degree of aligned molecular chains and
thus also oriented crystallization which has been induced by an increased velocity profile due
to the converging flow phenomena.
Figure 56: Marked lines indicate chosen cross sectional cutting locations areas to examine
the internal morphology
Another thing that may affect the micro structure is the cooling rate, which differ along
the moulded specimen with the flow direction. Theoretically, there should be a difference
between the two ends of the specimen, since the melt solidifies first at the end and last in the
gate region. Therefore, the temperature must have been higher for a longer time in the gate
region, which is the driving force for crystallization to have the right conditions to grow.
Page 61 of 79
==PAGE:70==
Influence of Crystallinity on the Material Properties of Micro Moulded Components
Figure 57: Cross sectional cut of 0.3mm specimen thickness, gauge area closest to gate
region, 20 µm slice, 20x optical magnification
Figure 58: Cross sectional cut of 0.3mm specimen thickness, gauge area in the middle, 20
µm slice, 20x optical magnification
Page 62 of 79
==PAGE:71==
Influence of Crystallinity on the Material Properties of Micro Moulded Components
Figures 57-58 are presented the resulting microtome cuts The samples is 20 µm thin slices
of the 0.3mm thickness specimen both located in the gauge area with the varying location
(close to gate area and middle of the gauge area). The samples are slices of the cross section,
which means it is perpendicular with the flow direction.
It can be observed that the crystals in the core region is of a larger size than in the sides
where increased shear motion has affected the possibility for the crystals to grow. The core
structure is thus less affected due to continuously flow of melt that gives the structure a
more relaxed state to grow.
When comparing the two micro graphs in Figures 57-58, we can observed there is a minor
difference according to the crystal structure in the core region. The gauge area closest to the
gate (Figure 57) shows to have formed larger crystals compared with the cross sectional cut
of the middle gauge region (Figure 58), which may be caused by the cooling conditions, in
fact that the cooling rate tends to be higher eventually as the melt reaches the end (opposite
side of the gate). But the difference is not sufficiently remarkable for immediate conclusions
to be drawn solely on the basis of this.
It is difficult to see if there is a difference between the same two micrographs relative to
the shear and skin layer thickness. It can be observed, these thicknesses is more or less the
same. But the cavity filling of the 0.3 mm specimen is injection moulded within milliseconds.
Theoretically, the shear rate should be higher due to convergent flow from gate region towards
gauge area compared with the end of the moulded specimen, however the resulting injection
pressure shows to be relatively high for those long thin walled specimens. So therefore would
it make sense that the shear induced layer is difficult to differentiate between whether it is
the beginning or end of the specimen.
It should be mentioned that the focus decreases with increasing magnification, therefore
only one side of skin layer has been focused on thus we can compare the skin layer thickness
between the output of moulded specimens (1.4mm and 0.3mm). This comparison is presented
in Figures 61-62,
In addition, it should be noted that the cut is either parallel or perpendicular to the flow
direction, which can be seen on the track from the knife when the sample was brought down
over the cutting edge applied with shear force. This has meant that the sides, depending on
the cutting direction, may have been affected so that the thickness of the sides is increased due
to smeared material. The thickness of the skin layer/shear layer can therefore be misleading
and appear thicker than it actually is because of this.
Page 63 of 79
==PAGE:72==
Influence of Crystallinity on the Material Properties of Micro Moulded Components
Figure 59: Cross sectional cut of 1.4mm specimen thickness, gauge area closest to gate
region, 20 µm slice, 5x optical magnification
Figure 60: Cross sectional cut of 1.4mm specimen thickness, gauge area in the middle, 20
µm slice, 5x optical magnification
Page 64 of 79
==PAGE:73==
Influence of Crystallinity on the Material Properties of Micro Moulded Components
Figure 61: Skinlayer thickness of 1.4mm specimen thickness, gauge area closest to gate
region, 20 µm slice, 20x optical magnification
Figure 62: Skinlayer thickness of 0.3mm specimen thickness, gauge area in the middle, 10
µm slice, 20x optical magnification
Page 65 of 79
==PAGE:74==
Influence of Crystallinity on the Material Properties of Micro Moulded Components
It has been investigated from earlier studies, that the outermost layers in which contacts the
mould walls firstly by the melt flow can be designated as the skin layer [9, pp.24-25] [34, p.
1155]. Another way to categorise that it is the skin layer present in the outermost section of
the specimen is by including the term birefringence [35, p. 19]. Without going too much into
details, it is the property that gives an indication about whether a material can be crystalline
or more amorphous. A refractive index has been created which tell whether the transmitted
light moves faster or slower, where the outcome can be read from its colour. The fact that the
material is more amorphous in the skin layer means that the light is transmitted, which can
be seen in the color difference. This appears more clearly in the 1.4 mm specimen thickness,
whereas in the 0.3 mm specimen thickness this is not as clear.
This skin layer thickness has been marked in micro graphs in Figures 61 and 62, and consti-
tutes with a magnitude of roughly 60 and 20 µm, respectively. With regard to the 1.4 mm
thickness specimen, this corresponds well with our predictive and revised Moldflow simula-
tions of the frozen skin layer fraction at end of filling providing the values listed in the table
below:
Thickness
specimen
Moldflow simulations
frozen skin layer
fraction at end of fill
Revised simulations
frozen skin layer
fraction at end of fill
Moulded specimens
skin layer thickness
1.4 mm
6 %
4 %
60 µ m = 4.3 %
0.3 mm
1 %
0 %
20 µ m = 7.4 %
Table 19: Moldflow simulations: Predictive and revised simulations of the Frozen skin layer
fraction at end of fill compared with the actual moulded specimens skin layer thickness
However, for the 0.3 mm specimen thickness, there is a mismatch between our simulations
compared with the actual moulded specimen skin layer thickness. When we got the outcome
of the revised simulations from the micro specimens, the melt flow had already solidified in
the filling phase within a millisecond. Here it could well be imagined that the underlying
mathematics used to calculate the frozen skin layer has difficulty working optimally when
the process proceeds at this speed.
Taking the volume-area ratio into account, it makes sense that during the injection moulding
of our 0.3 mm thickness specimen, the cooling is faster at the surface area compared with
the 1.3 mm thickness specimen that has a higher volume-area ratio and is thus cooled down
less rapidly, resulting in a lower skinlayer thickness percentage-wise.
6.4.3
CT scan
Several manual measurements have been made with both calipers and micrometers of the
specimens (see Appendix C), a CT scanner, Zeiss Metrotom 800 machine, is used to verify the
dimensions. CT is a computed tomography method that gives a 3D image of the structures
of the specimens and can be used as a quality control [36]. Novo Nordisk is using CT scan
among other things when checking the thickness variation and deviations of the geometric
Page 66 of 79
==PAGE:75==
Influence of Crystallinity on the Material Properties of Micro Moulded Components
regard to best fit scan, the nominal CAD model. In addition to checking the dimensions,
we also used the result to check for shrinkage. A software called vgstudio max have been
used to analyse the result from CT scan. Figure 63 shows the CT scan of 1.4 and 0.3 mm
thickness specimens. It can be observed that 1.4 mm thickness specimen, Figure 63a, have
a higher deviation between the grips area and gauge length. It can be due to the narrow
space, where the flow rate increases. For 0.3 mm thickness specimen, Figure 63b, it can be
observed a high deviation across the whole specimen. This result can be misleading as the
specimen tries to be within the best fit scan which is 0.5 mm.
(a) 1.4 mm thickness specimen
(b) 0.3 mm thickness specimen
Figure 63: CT scan in 3D with a deviation scale of 0.2 mm [37]
Figure 63b also shows an elevation where the ejector pins push the specimen out, meaning
that this will be including when the specimen tries to lay within the best fit scan. The
reason why this elevation occur can be due to the high mould temperature that is used when
injection moulding PEEK and because of the CMM measurement D that shows a deviation
of 0.1 mm, that was explained in Section 5.2.
A caliper in the program were used to measure the dimensions, such as, total length, cross
section and thickness of the specimens as seen in Table 20. The shrinkage is calculated
from the nominal length. The geometry agrees with the manual measurements that had
been made and can be seen in Appendix C. The shrinkage of 1.4 mm and 1.0 mm thickness
specimen is 0.4 % or below, while for 0.3 mm thickness specimen is near 1 %.
When looking at Figure 64 for 1.4 mm thickness specimen, it can be observed that the gauge
area is bent. This can be due to the deflection, that occurs when the ejector pins push the
specimen out of the mould. Four ejector pins is used to push out the macro specimens, while
only two ejector pins is used for micro specimens.
Page 67 of 79
==PAGE:76==
Influence of Crystallinity on the Material Properties of Micro Moulded Components
Thickness
specimen
Cross
section
Thickness
Total
Length
Norminal
Length
Shrinkage
[mm]
[mm]
[mm]
[mm]
[mm]
[%]
1.4
3.18
1.38
79.66
80
0.43
1.0
3.19
0.94
79.89
80
0.14
0.3
1.01
0.24
14.86
15
0.93
Table 20: Result of CT scan for the geometry and deviation of specimens 1.4 mm, 1.0 mm
and 0.3 mm thickness
Figure 64: CT scan of 1.4 mm specimen thickness regarding to the best fit scan, CAD
model [37]
Page 68 of 79
==PAGE:77==
Influence of Crystallinity on the Material Properties of Micro Moulded Components
7
Discussion of the Mechanical Properties
Throughout the previous Section 5 involving measurement techniques, simulations and char-
acterization of the microstructure, various partial results were presented. These have been
underlying findings that have been discussed, how they can be related to the mechanical
properties which will be the final results of this project. In this section, focus will be on
the influence of the mechanical properties when scaling down the thickness. In the following
Section there will be focus on scaling down of the thickness and its influence on the mechan-
ical properties. And a section of the influence on the mechanical properties when adjusting
the mould temperature for micro thickness specimens.
In this Section, the most essential results are compared of the mechanical properties. In
Appendix G and H, all the results of the tensile tests are presented, where arrows indicates
the direction of the gate location in the fixture (↑= gate placed up; ↓= gate placed down),
this turned out not to have an influence on the results. In addition, a star (*) next to the
arrow will indicate if the fracture point occurs near the gate. In general, the tensile tests
fractured in the opposite end of the gate. If the test and the result in the tables are written
in italics, it is declared as an outlier and is therefore not incorporated into the average and
standard deviation results.
7.1
Results and Discussion of Tensile Modulus
When measuring the tensile modulus of the specimens, it should be stated that some uncer-
tainties have occurred doing the tests. It can be observed that the tensile modulus is lower
for the micro specimens compared with the macro specimens, this could be due to the lower
strain rate for micro specimens. The tensile modulus was measured from 0.05 % to 0.25
% strain according to ISO 527-1, but it could be observed from Appendix G that a more
linear trendline appears when increasing the strain interval. Because the result build upon
ISO 527-1, it have been chosen to go with the result of tensile modulus measuring with a
strain from 0.05 % to 0.25 %. Due to the time limit and number of specimens moulded,
only four of each type of specimen have been tested when measuring the tensile modulus,
and the result indicates that more tests are needed due to the high standard deviation. The
tensile modulus is not given for PEEK-Classix BC3 by the material suppliers, therefore a
comparison is made with the tensile modulus for PEEK 150G, where the tensile modulus is
3700 MPa [38]. According to the supplier it is their recommendation to choose this PEEK
grade, because it has similar mechanical properties. The tensile modulus on 3700 MPa is
inserted in the following histograms as a horizontal line.
Discussion of the mechanical properties when scaling down
In Figure 65, it can be observed that 1.4 mm thickness specimen have the highest tensile
modulus, and at the same time the highest standard deviation. It is worth considering, even
though this test specimen has the highest strength regarding the stiffness. The down scaling
Page 69 of 79
==PAGE:78==
Influence of Crystallinity on the Material Properties of Micro Moulded Components
of thicknesses between specimens should not have an influence on the tensile modulus, since
it is material determined.
When comparing with the result from 1.4 mm to 1.0 mm thickness specimen, the tensile
modulus is lower which can be connected with the moulding process. It was earlier presented
in Table 11 and 9 of the injection moulding trials. It appears that the machine injection
pressure was higher, related to the thickness compared with the flow length. Theoretically,
at a elevated machine injection pressure, thus also cavity injection pressure indicates the
material has been moulded with an increased amount of shear stress. As a consequence the
structure of the material can be affected and thereby also its properties. The same trend is
not present in the micro specimens, which have otherwise been injection moulded at high
resulting machine injection pressures as well. We have an assumption that this is caused by
the thickness to flow length ratio, which is lower in the micro specimens.
Figure 65: Result of tensile modulus when scaling down specimen thickness, strain rate of
0.25 mm/min for macro, and 0.10 mm/min for micro
Discussion of the mechanical properties in micro specimens when changing mould
temperature
Mould temperature is important to crystallization as described in 4.2.
In the following
Section, mould temperatures influence on mechanical properties will be analysed with focus
on the specimen thickness of 0.3 mm. It was chosen not to focus on mould temperature for
0.5 mm thickness specimen based on the result of the skin layer thickness is larger for 0.3
mm thickness specimen and the degree of crystalline is lower. It was therefore assumed that
the effect of the mould temperature would be lower for 0.5 mm thickness specimen. The
Page 70 of 79
==PAGE:79==
Influence of Crystallinity on the Material Properties of Micro Moulded Components
adjustment of mould temperature is within recommendation of the material supplier [21], as
already stated and will be in the range of 175, 190 and 205 ◦C.
Considering the results of the tensile modulus in Figure 66, the micro specimens processed
with 175 ◦C mould temperature shows a higher standard deviation. This can be connected
with the unstable moulding trial, due to a decreased mould temperature. This is evident from
the Figure 67 where the majority of the processed specimens for 175 ◦C mould temperature
resulted in short shot. Lower mould temperature leads to the melt becoming more viscous
and has a higher resistance to flow, which is also what the resulting machine injection pressure
indicates from the moulding trials in Table 10.
Figure 66: Result of yield strength when adjusting the mould temperature for micro
specimens, strain rate of 0.10 mm/min
The moulded test specimens with 190 ◦C and 205 ◦C mould temperature, has a similar result
according to the tensile modulus. However, 205 ◦C has a larger standard deviation, which
can be connected with the higher moulding temperature resulting in a deformation of the
specimen during the ejection (see Figure 67).
Page 71 of 79
==PAGE:80==
Influence of Crystallinity on the Material Properties of Micro Moulded Components
Figure 67: 0.3 mm thickness specimen, from the left to right side moulded at 175 ◦C, 190
◦C and 205 ◦C mould temperature
7.2
Results and Discussion of Yield Strength
For structural simulations Novo Nordisk primarily use yield strength as a design criteria, to
avoid material yielding in a device. To summarize, the following results of yield strength are
measured with DIC and accounts for true yield stress and local strain. Furthermore, is the
yield strength of 100 MPa specified from the material supplier, inserted in the diagrams as
a horizontal line.
Discussion of the mechanical properties when scaling down
Comparing 1.4 and 1.0 mm thickness specimens, almost the same yield strength can be
observed. While the micro specimens with wall thickness of 0.5 mm and 0.3 mm, the yield
strength decreases significantly. This behavior can be connected to the degree of crystallinity
from Table 18 where it decreases with the thickness specimen. Therefore, it can be stated
that a higher degree of crystallinity increases the yield strength. Scaling down from 1.4 mm
to 0.5 mm thickness specimen, the yield strength decreases with approx. 10% while scaling
down from 1.4 mm to 0.3 mm thickness specimen, the yield strength decreases with approx.
25 %. This makes sense as the cooling rate of the wall thickness is higher and therefore
less crystals to form and grow and gives a more amorphous structure and leads to a ductile
behavior, which can also be seen on the curves for the micro specimens in Figure 68 before
they reaches the yield point. The high standard deviation of micro specimens can be due
to the short cavity filling time where the material is being more stressed, compared to the
macro specimens.
Page 72 of 79
==PAGE:81==
Influence of Crystallinity on the Material Properties of Micro Moulded Components
Figure 68: Result of yield strength when scaling down specimens thickness, strain rate of
0.25 mm/s for macro, and 0.10 mm/s for micro
If these results are to be implemented in a designed component or function, it may be
advantageous to take into account that the strength is reduced when scaling down from
macro to micro. According to these results a factor of 0.9 can be multiplied when the yield
strength is reduced by 10 % or multiplied by 0.75 when reduced by 25 %. With this pointed
out, it must be mentioned that this result is material dependent, and additional test and
studies must be performed for each material. Novo Nordisk primarily use PP and POM
and it would be highly relevant to investigate to what degree those polymer trends can be
replicated with regard to the yield strength.
Discussion of the mechanical properties in micro specimens when changing mould
temperature
It can be observed from Figure 69 that the yield strength and standard deviation is lower
for the moulded micro specimens at 190 ◦C mould temperature compared with 175 ◦C. It
means that, even with a lower yield strength, in this situation the injection moulding process
with 190 ◦C mould temperature is preferable. Figure 67 from injection moulding trials also
shows an improved quality specimen when going from 175 ◦C to 190 ◦C mould temperature.
Page 73 of 79
==PAGE:82==
Influence of Crystallinity on the Material Properties of Micro Moulded Components
Figure 69: Result of yield strength when changing the mould temperature, strain rate of
0.10 mm/s
Closer examination of 205 ◦C mould temperature from Figure 69 into consideration, a higher
yield strength and lower standard deviation can be observed when comparing with 190 ◦C.
From a mechanical properties point of view, it is preferable to go with the higher mould
temperature, but due to Figure 67 showing deformed specimens processed with 205 ◦C.
It indicates that the scientific injection moulding mindset can be followed to some extent.
It is an advantage to design components or features to be mouldable in the middle range
of mould and melt temperature recommended by the material supplier.
However when
injection moulding micro components, high demands are being set for the machine and its
processability.
On the basis on our results when moulding micro specimens, a narrower
process window can be observed and it is therefore preferred to run the mould temperature
on the warmer side. To prevent the risk of short shot, by allowing the material to be molten
for longer time. This is one of the consequences when scaling down from macro to micro.
The yield strength is nearly the same for 175 ◦C and 205 ◦C. The moulded 0.3 mm thickness
specimens with 190 ◦C mould temperature is lower in yield strength than the other two
adjusted mould temperatures. For the 205 ◦C mould temperature shows the lowest standard
deviation, which can indicate that the moulding process has been more stable with elevated
mould temperature.
Even-though extensive work was performed to establish what sample size needed to be
tested. In Section 6.1 the amount of outliers observed from Appendix H in FigureH.106 and
Page 74 of 79
==PAGE:83==
Influence of Crystallinity on the Material Properties of Micro Moulded Components
FigureH.104 indicates that more tensile test specimens needs to be tested, to conclude if
the outliers are a general behavior or a coincidence. There is an assumption regarding the
175 ◦C mould temperature, that the same behavior will occur due to the injection moulding
condition indicated from the short shot.
7.3
Discussion of the SOMA project
This thesis was initiated to support the SOMA project, that faced serious structural issues.
Would it be possible to avoid some of the problems that arose back then with the knowledge
this project has gained? To recap the two larges issues that made this project relevant for
Novo Nordisk, Figure 70 shows the same version of SOMA, with different moulding and
processing conditions from 1 to 2 and a different gate and process location from 2 to 3.
The first capsule looks more transparent, which indicates a more amorphous structure and
low/lack of mould or melt temperature control.
Figure 70: Three SOMA capsules, same version, with better mould and processing
conditions and different gate location [3]
The second capsule was injection moulded with improved mould and melt control.
Its
appearance is less transparent and therefore more crystallized, however the surface quality
and color indicates it is still poorly crystallized. An air trap is also formed during filling.
In the third version, the same mould was applied with a new location of the gate to fix
the air trap. A better process and control of mould and melt temperature and the capsule
appeared to more crystallized from a visual point of view. A new issue came up related to
reduced material properties connected with scaling down the wall thickness.
Having a holistic view on the SOMA project while applying the knowledge gained in this
thesis, several issues can be highlighted.
• Process window of injection moulding micro parts is quite narrow
Page 75 of 79
==PAGE:84==
Influence of Crystallinity on the Material Properties of Micro Moulded Components
• The degree of crystallinity is greatly affected by a good melt and mould temperature
control
• The yield strength is anisotropic throughout the part depending on the local thickness
A snap fit feature in the SOMA capsule was designed with a micro wall thickness, where
a CT-scan shows a defect??. Figure 71 shows the structural simulation before and after
multiplying with a factor of 0.8 in order to avoid this defect. Here it can be seen in a) that
the local strain is increased upwards 3.3 % compared with the original structural simulation
b) that is strained 2.6 %. Hereby, could a larger plastic deformation have been predicted by
implementing this factor to the structural simulation.
Figure 71: Structural simulation of the SOMA capsule in Abaqus [39]
Figure 72: CT-scan of the SOMA capsule [39]
Page 76 of 79
==PAGE:85==
Influence of Crystallinity on the Material Properties of Micro Moulded Components
8
Conclusions
In this thesis when scaling down from macro to micro specimens, it has been concluded
that the mechanical properties are dependent on the injection moulding process and the
measuring method. The focus has been on the material PEEK, that is processed with high
melt and mould temperature. It is of paramount importance that the mould tool is capable of
reaching and maintaining the mould temperature of PEEK, as it determines the polymeric
structure thus it has a more sufficiently condition to crystallize and form structure. The
initial statement that further became the main research question is stated below:
When scaling down from macro to micro, why is it necessary to understand and measure the
mechanical properties for micro components or features?
• This thesis showed a reduction in yield strength of 10 % when scaling down from 1.4
mm to 0.5 mm thickness specimen and 25 % when scaling down from 1.4 mm to 0.3
mm thickness specimen. This corresponds with a factor of 0.9 and 0.75 which Novo
Nordisk can include in their safety factor in the product design phase to compensate
for the reduction.
Several key findings have been discovered to come up with the initial statement which are
listed underneath the following research questions:
What drives the mechanical properties from a microstructure point of view?
• A clear connection exist between the degree of crystallinity and mechanical proper-
ties. The result showed a significantly decrease in yield strength with lower degree of
crystallinity when scaling down from macro to micro thickness specimen.
• A difference appears from cross polarized light microscope when characterizing the
morphology between the macro and micro specimens. Based on the surface area to
volume ratio of the specimen, the cooling rate tends to be higher for the micro moulded
specimens since the measured skin layer thickness was percentage-wise 3 % larger than
the macro specimen. A higher degree of amorphous structure thus appears in the micro
specimens, which constitute a more ductile behavior.
Novo Nordisk applies the scientific moulding mindset when establishing an injection moulding
process, can the same mindset be used when scaling down components or features in the micro
range?
• Injection moulding of thin walled micro specimens sets high demands for the mould-
ing machine and its processability. The scientific moulding mindset was part of the
considerations to pursue a stable moulding process, however it was experienced that
it could not be completely followed when moulding micro thin-walled specimens. A
significantly faster cavity filling time was used to fill the cavity resulting in a high
machine injection pressure, knowing the risk of stressing the material.
Page 77 of 79
==PAGE:86==
Influence of Crystallinity on the Material Properties of Micro Moulded Components
• The moulding processes for macro and micro moulded specimens, respectively, were not
comparable. Due to the faster cavity filling time, increased machine injection pressure
and shear rates in the cavity has a higher influence on the molecular orientation and
the condition for the crystallization.
• Simulations was performed to further investigate the formation of skin layer. However
the measured skin layer fraction of the micro specimens could not be predicted in
Moldflow as the cavity injection time was simply to fast for a frozen layer to develop
during the filling phase where the result is generated. There is a presumption whether
this is due to the viscoelastic behavior that is present at high machine injection pressure
which Moldflow has difficulties in taking into account.
• Working with thin-wall micro specimens, a more narrow process window can be ex-
pected.
It is therefore an advantage if the moulder opts for a mould temperature
as close as possible near the middle range of the recommended temperature from the
supplier and preferably offset to the higher side to open up the process window slightly.
Novo Nordisk rely primarily on an universal tensile testing machine when measure the me-
chanical properties. They have started to implement Digital Image Correlation (DIC), which
is a newer technology when measuring the mechanical properties, so what are pros and cons
using the different measuring techniques?
• DIC can be used when considering the measurements of the yield strength, where the
software GOM Correlate has the ability to include measuring points of local strain at
the most strained area. True stress can be calculated and gives a higher result of yield
strength. This is important to Novo Nordisk as the structural department often design
with the criteria no yielding allowed. In this case not using DIC approach will result
in overoptimistic structural predictions.
• When focusing on measuring tensile modulus, both measuring approaches whether it
is the uniaxial tensile test machine or DIC, the results are comparable. However, it is
preferable to apply the DIC measuring approach on the basis of its ability to measure
locally, which is concluded to be more accurate.
Page 78 of 79
==PAGE:87==
Influence of Crystallinity on the Material Properties of Micro Moulded Components
9
Future work
This thesis focused on the mechanical properties when scaling down and changed the mould
temperature of micro specimen. But through the thesis, several relevant questions came up
and it is there in our opinion important to look into the stated points below:
• Due to the more linear curve of tensile modulus when going up in strain for components
or features scaled down from ISO 527-2, it could be interesting to challenge ISO 527-1
and see if a strain at 0.05 % to 0.25 % is the right way to measure tensile modulus or
going example from 0.3 % to 0.5 % strain gives a more reliable result.
• More tests of PEEK micro specimens are needed to conclude whether our results of
yield strength can be repeated. At the same time, it could be interesting to do the
procedure of other polymers like PP and POM, to see what trend they have and
whether it can be compared with the trend observed in PEEK.
• After a component has been injection molded and post-crystallized, there is a whole
new line of work to carry out afterwards regarding shelf life, product life cycle, perfor-
mance of the component in use, and the influence of time during the product lifetime.
It is therefore important to investigate material creep, relaxation, and recovery, in order
to verify whether the component is going to maintain consistent mechanical properties
at low stress and deformation over time.
Page 79 of 79
==PAGE:88==
Influence of Crystallinity on the Material Properties of Micro Moulded Components
References
[1] C. Volosencu, New Technologies – Trends, Innovations and Research. Janeza Trdine 9,
51000 Rijeka, Croatia: InTech, April 2012. ISBN: 978-953-51-0480-3.
[2] G. Tosello, Micro Injection Moulding. 2018. ISBN: 978-1-56990-653-8.
[3] N. Nordisk, “Housing component in the self-orienting millimeter-scale applicator
(soma).” 2023.
[4] Novo Nordisk, “Who we are.” Available at
https://www.novonordisk.com/about/who-we-are.html. Accessed on 26-06-2023.
[5] W. Mascarenhas, C. Ahrens, and A. Ogliari, “Design criteria and safety factors for
plastic components design,” Materials Design, 2003.
[6] ISO 527-1, “Plastics - Determination of tensile properties - Part 1: General principles,”
standard, International Organization for Standardization, Geneva, CH, 2012.
[7] ISO 527-2, “Plastics - Determination of tensile properties - Part 2: Test conditions for
moulding and extrusion plastic,” standard, International Organization for
Standardization, Geneva, CH, 2012.
[8] M. V. Schelbli and M. Frederiksen, “Special course Novo Nordisk - Determination of
POM Mechanical Properties in ideal and sub-optimal Injection Moulding conditions
using Digital Image Correlation,” Feb 2023.
[9] J. L. Laursen, Processability, microstructure and impact properties of injectionmoulded
poly(oxymethylene). 2009. ISBN: 987-87-92481-05-4.
[10] V. Leo, “Bims 1 - understanding injection molding of thermoplastics - the key to
optimum plastic part design.” 2023.
[11] S. E. Jay, Moldflow Design Guide: A Resource for Plastic Engineers. 2006. ISBN:
978-1-56990-403-0.
[12] ISO 20753, “Plastics - Test specimens,” standard, International Organization for
Standardization, Geneva, CH, 2018.
[13] N. Nordisk, “3d model of the produced mould for the master thesis: Influence of
crystallinity on the material properties of micro moulded components.” 2023.
[14] J. Beaumount, Runner Gating Design Handbook. Hanser, 2004.
[15] N. Nordisk, “3d model of the produced micro fixture for the master thesis: Influence of
crystallinity on the material properties of micro moulded components.” 2023.
Page I of LI
==PAGE:89==
Influence of Crystallinity on the Material Properties of Micro Moulded Components
[16] J. S. Sie, “Feasibility and Process Capability of Micro Injecton Moulding for Medical
High-Volume Production,” Master’s thesis, Technical University of Denmark - DTU,
2020.
[17] O. Yaşar, Integrated Education and Learning - Chapter: Scientific Thinking: A
Mindset for Everyone. January 2023.
[18] J. Shoemaker, Moldflow Design Guide. 2006. ISBN: 978-3-446-40640-7.
[19] Autodesk Moldflow database, “Simulations program.” Available at
https://www.autodesk.com/products/moldflow/overview, 2023. Accessed on
28-07-2023.
[20] R. Kent, Energy Management in Plastics Processing, Chapter 5 Processing. Tangram
Technology Ltd, 2018.
[21] Invibio, “Properties of peek-classix™- natural granular.” 2023.
[22] V. L. . C. Cuvelliez, “The effect of the packing parameters, gate geometry, and mold
elasticity on the final dimensions of a molded part,” 1996.
[23] Invibio, “Peek-classix®.” 2023.
[24] Invibio, “Peek-classix™- injection molding guide.” 2023.
[25] G. W. Ehrenstein, Polymeric Materials - Structure - Properties - Applications. 2001.
ISBN: 1-569900-310-7.
[26] TA Instruments, “TA Universal Analysis.” Available at
https://www.tainstruments.com/, 2023. Accessed on 28-07-2023.
[27] ISO 8256, “Plastics - Determination of tensile-impact strength,” standard,
International Organization for Standardization, Geneva, CH, 2004.
[28] D. Roylance, “Stress-strain curves,” Department of Materials Science and Engineering,
August 23, 2001.
[29] V. Leo, “Bims 2 - understanding injection molding of thermoplastics - the key to
material selection, part design and performance.” 2023.
[30] J. D. Y. Barrangera, P. Doumalin and A. Germaneau, “Digital Image Correlation
accuracy: influence of kind of speckle and recording setup,” pp. 6 – Fig. 4 Influence of
the speckle pattern on strain measurements, 2010.
[31] T. G. . C. L. Palanca M., “The use of digital image correlation in the biomechanical
area: a review,” pp. 4–8, 21 Dec 2015.
[32] L. Lionello, G. Christofolini, “A practical approach to optimizing the preparation of
speckle patterns for digital-image correlation,” 2014.
Page II of LI
==PAGE:90==
Influence of Crystallinity on the Material Properties of Micro Moulded Components
[33] R. L. Blaine, “Thermal applications note - polymer heats of fusion,” TA Instruments,
109 Lukens Drive, New Castle DE 19720, USA. Accessed on 13-07-2023.
[34] J. Bowman, “The structure and mechanical properties of an injection-moulded acetal
co-polymer,” 1981.
[35] A. F. Frandsen, Polarized Light Microscopy. Florida Institute of Technology,
Melbourne Campus, 2016.
[36] T. G. Burger, “Reducing cooling time in SLS Additive Manufacturing process,”
Master’s thesis, Technical University of Denmark - DTU, 2021.
[37] N. Nordisk, “Ct-scan made for the master thesis: Influence of crystallinity on the
material properties of micro moulded components.” 2023.
[38] Victrex, “Victrex™peek - the foundation of victrex innovations.” 2023.
[39] N. Nordisk, “Structural simulation of the soma capsule in abaqus.” 2023.
Page III of LI
==PAGE:91==
Influence of Crystallinity on the Material Properties of Micro Moulded Components
A
Appendix - Structural analysis of the micro fixture
A quick calculation made of Laurits Højgaard Olesen from Novo Nordisk, where he pull the
specimen made of PP, where the "file" part is pushed with 0 mm, 0.004 mm and 0.02 mm
correspond to 0%, 1% and 5% compression. The simulation below shows that a 5%
compression failed, evener under preload at 2% compression. He concluded that the fixture
works fine and no indication of the shoulders should not include. He also made a model
(green model), to show that a suggestion to make a draft closes to the gauge area (marked
orange).
Undeformed
Grip area
PP 0% compression with a 0.8 mm extension
PP 1% compression with a 0.8 mm extension
Page IV of LI
==PAGE:92==
Influence of Crystallinity on the Material Properties of Micro Moulded Components
B
Appendix - Process data sheets
Table B.21: Process data sheet for specimen thickness 1.5 mm of injection moulding trials
Page V of LI
==PAGE:93==
Influence of Crystallinity on the Material Properties of Micro Moulded Components
Table B.22: Process data sheet for specimen thickness 1.0 mm of injection moulding trials
Page VI of LI
==PAGE:94==
Influence of Crystallinity on the Material Properties of Micro Moulded Components
Table B.23: Process data sheet for specimen thickness 0.5 mm of injection moulding trials
Page VII of LI
==PAGE:95==
Influence of Crystallinity on the Material Properties of Micro Moulded Components
Table B.24: Process data sheet for specimen thickness 0.3 mm at 190 mould temperature
of injection moulding trials
Page VIII of LI
==PAGE:96==
Influence of Crystallinity on the Material Properties of Micro Moulded Components
Table B.25: Process data sheet for specimen thickness 0.3 mm at 175 mould temperature
of injection moulding trials
Page IX of LI
==PAGE:97==
Influence of Crystallinity on the Material Properties of Micro Moulded Components
Table B.26: Process data sheet for specimen thickness 0.3 mm at 205 mould temperature
of injection moulding trials
Page X of LI
==PAGE:98==
Influence of Crystallinity on the Material Properties of Micro Moulded Components
C
Appendix - Weight, dimensions and variations
Specimen thickness variations
All of the moulded specimens were at an initial state measured with regard to weight,
nominal length, thickness variation etc., to have a starting point that can be compared
between the different thicknesses of specimens. The measurements has been carried out by
following ISO 294-1 approach to measuring of the thickness, considering three measuring
points distributed along the gauge length. Two additional measuring points have been
added to measure the thickness at the gate inlet and the end of the specimen as shown in
C.73. For each measuring point, 10 measurements were carried out manually by using a
micrometer and averaged.
Figure C.73: Measuring points of thickness along the specimens 1.4, 1.0 0.5 and 0.3 mm
Thickness variation with the perspective of volumetric shrinkage tends to be expected
along the longitudinal direction corresponding with the flow length linearly through the
specimen. This phenomena is highly dependent on temperature and injection pressure
which influences the formation of molecular arrangement and thus also the degree of
crystallinity formed. It is expected that both the weight and the thickness towards the
elongational flow direction will gradually decrease.
It have been discussed that the variation in the micro specimen can be due to having a
larger fraction of amorphous structure in the end of the specimen resulting from an
increased skin layer thickness. The fact that amorphous material shrinks less than
crystalline material may also have a small contribution to the deviation. But if we consider
the PEEK material shrinks up to approx. 2% and then a little less in the end region of the
specimen due to amorphous structure, the deviation would only account for a few microns.
Therefore, we are back to the assumption about the construction of the the mould
including mechanical components behind the ejection system.
The specimen thickness variation in general can caused by other reasons. The mould
tooling that is exposed to high forces induced by internal pressure in the cavity when melt
is injected with certain moulding conditions. Whether it is high or low injection pressure,
the mould tooling will to some degree deform due to mould deflection.
Page XI of LI
==PAGE:99==
Influence of Crystallinity on the Material Properties of Micro Moulded Components
Table C.27: Weight and measurements of 10 1.5 mm thickness specimens moulded at 190
◦C mould temperature
Page XII of LI
==PAGE:100==
Influence of Crystallinity on the Material Properties of Micro Moulded Components
Table C.28: Weight and measurements of 10 1.0 mm thickness specimens moulded at 190
◦C mould temperature
Page XIII of LI
==PAGE:101==
Influence of Crystallinity on the Material Properties of Micro Moulded Components
Table C.29: Weight and measurements of 10 0.5 mm thickness specimens moulded at 190
◦C mould temperature
Page XIV of LI
==PAGE:102==
Influence of Crystallinity on the Material Properties of Micro Moulded Components
Table C.30: Weight and measurements of 10 0.3 mm thickness specimens moulded at 190
◦C mould temperature
Page XV of LI
==PAGE:103==
Influence of Crystallinity on the Material Properties of Micro Moulded Components
Table C.31: Weight and measurements of 10 0.3 mm thickness specimens moulded at 175
◦C mould temperature
Page XVI of LI
==PAGE:104==
Influence of Crystallinity on the Material Properties of Micro Moulded Components
Table C.32: Weight and measurements of 10 1.5 mm thickness specimens moulded at 205
◦C mould temperature
Page XVII of LI
==PAGE:105==
Influence of Crystallinity on the Material Properties of Micro Moulded Components
D
Appendix - CMM measurements
Page XVIII of LI
==PAGE:106==
Influence of Crystallinity on the Material Properties of Micro Moulded Components
E
Appendix - Setup of experimental testing
Pigmentation:
To obtain the best quality of the our result in GOM correlate, we decided to make a quality
test with different pigmentation, where we changed different settings. From an article[32],
it have been stated that the pigmentation size should be minimum 3-5 pixels, otherwise it
will not be detected and act as background noise. After the pigmentation test we could
conclude that this is not true in our case. Here we get better quality with a smaller size of
pixels, this could be due to the fact that the article is from 2014 and the software have been
development since that year and can therefore give a better quality with smaller size of
pigments. From the same article it is stated that a pixel size of pigment should be approx
10 corresponding with 0.06 mm. For the tests we are using an air brush, Figure E.74
Figure E.74: Air brush
Note on pigment size:
• Increasing spraying distance tends to decrease pigment size, reduction of the scatter
• Increasing air flow tends to increase pigment size, increase of the scatter
• Increasing working pressure tends to decrease pigment size, reduction of the scatter
• Increase of dilution tends to increase pigment size, reduction of the scatter
Process:
For all test the nozzle size was sat to 0.8 mm, the spray angle was sat to 90 ◦and the spray
time was approximately < 2 seconds. There have been used a water based paint. There
were taken pictures of the pigments on the white paper, to see that quality in GOM
correlate. The used camera was a Nikon D5300 with a lens of 60mm and the settings was
sat to ISO 1000, F7.1 and 1/40 for the closing time.
Page XIX of LI
==PAGE:107==
Influence of Crystallinity on the Material Properties of Micro Moulded Components
Conclusion:
From all the test seen below, we found out that the best quality in GOM correlate, we are
going to use an air flow of 3x - 5x number of turns on the screw (test 1.3, 1.4, 1.5),
a working pressure at 0.1 bar (test 3.1) and a spray distance of 10 cm (test 4.1).
We also found out that the dilution in percent did not have a huge influence on the quality.
With this information it is possible to make repeatability pigments on the specimens.
Table E.33 shows each test and the settings there was sat doing the test. While Figure
E.75, E.76, E.77, E.78, E.79 shows the pigment tests and Table E.34, E.35, E.36, E.37,
E.38 shows the quality from 0-10 in GOM correlate, where 4 and up is good condition and
1.2 is bad condition.
Test
Spray
distance
[cm]
Air flow
[number
of turns
on screw]
Working
pressure
[bar]
Dilution
[%]
Pigmentation
size (1 pixel
= 0.006 mm)
[pixels]
1.1
30
1 x
0.25
[-]
(1- 5)
1.2
30
2 x
0.25
[-]
(1- 5)
1.3
30
3 x
0.25
[-]
(1- 5)
1.4
30
4 x
0.25
[-]
(1- 5)
1.5
30
5 x
0.25
[-]
(1- 5)
2.1
30
6 x
0.25
[-]
(1- 5)
2.2
30
7 x
0.25
[-]
(1- 5)
2.3
30
8 x
0.25
[-]
(1- 5)
2.4
30
9 x
0.25
[-]
(1- 5)
2.5
30
10 x
0.25
[-]
(1- 5)
3.1
30
6 x
0.1
[-]
(3-7)
3.2
30
6 x
0.05
[-]
(3-12)
3.3
30
6 x
0.025
[-]
(3-10)
3.4
30
6 x
<0.025
[-]
(3-15)
3.5
30
6 x
<<0.025
[-]
(3-16)
4.1
10
6 x
0.05
[-]
(1-12)
4.2
20
6 x
0.05
[-]
(2-12)
4.3
30
6 x
0.05
[-]
(3-12)
4.4
40
6 x
0.05
[-]
(3-12)
4.5
50
6 x
0.05
[-]
(3-12)
5.1
30
6 x
0.05
10
(5-11)
5.2
30
6 x
0.05
20
(4-10)
5.3
30
6 x
0.05
30
(4-20)
5.4
30
6 x
0.05
40
(3-21)
5.5
30
6 x
0.05
50
(4-15)
Table E.33: Experimentation of pigmentation with an airbrush
Page XX of LI
==PAGE:108==
Influence of Crystallinity on the Material Properties of Micro Moulded Components
(Test 1.1, air flow 1x)
(Test 1.2, air flow 2x)
(Test 1.3, air flow 3x)
(Test 1.4, air flow 4x)
(Test 1.5, air flow 5x)
Figure E.75: Test 1.1-1.5 of pigmentation on white paper with black paint, painted with an
airbrush where the air flow have been changed
Pigments applied with airbrush
Quality condition determined with
GOM Correlate
Test 1.1
2.8
Test 1.2
3.1
Test 1.3
4.5
Test 1.4
4
Test 1.5
4.7
Table E.34: Test 1.1-1.5 of pigmentation on white paper with black paint and camera
settings: Lens = 60mm; Shutter speed = 1/40; F-stop number = F7.1; ISO number = 1000
Page XXI of LI
==PAGE:109==
Influence of Crystallinity on the Material Properties of Micro Moulded Components
(Test 2.1, air flow 6x)
(Test 2.2, air flow 7x)
(Test 2.3, air flow 8x)
(Test 2.4, air flow 9x)
(Test 2.5, air flow 10x)
Figure E.76: Test 2.1-2.5 of pigmentation on white paper with black paint, painted with an
airbrush where the air flow have been changed
Pigments applied with airbrush
Quality condition determined with
GOM Correlate
Test 2.1
3.8
Test 2.2
3.2
Test 2.3
4
Test 2.4
3.8
Test 2.5
3
Table E.35: Test 2.1-2.5 of pigmentation on white paper with black paint and camera
settings: Lens = 60mm; Shutting speed = 1/40; F-stop number = F7.1; ISO number =
1000
Page XXII of LI
==PAGE:110==
Influence of Crystallinity on the Material Properties of Micro Moulded Components
(Test 3.1, wp. 0.1)
(Test 3.2 wp. 0.05)
(Test 3.3 wp. 0.025)
(Test 3.4, wp. <0.025)
(Test 3.5, wp. «0.025)
Figure E.77: Test 3.1-3.5 of pigmentation on white paper with black paint, painted with an
airbrush where the working pressure have been changed
Pigments applied with airbrush
Quality condition determined with
GOM Correlate
Test 3.1
3
Test 3.2
1.5
Test 3.3
2.1
Test 3.4
-
Test 3.5
-
Table E.36: Test 3.1-3.5 of pigmentation on white paper with black paint and camera
settings: Lens = 60mm; Shutter speed = 1/40; F-stop number = 7.1; ISO number = 1000
Page XXIII of LI
==PAGE:111==
Influence of Crystallinity on the Material Properties of Micro Moulded Components
(Test 4.1, sp. 10)
(Test 4.2, sp. 20)
(Test 4.3, sp. 30)
(Test 4.4, sp. 40)
(Test 4.5, sp. 50)
Figure E.78: Test 4.1-4.5 of pigmentation on white paper with black paint, painted with an
airbrush where the spray distance have been changed
Pigments applied with airbrush
Quality condition determined with
GOM Correlate
Test 4.1
3.5
Test 4.2
3
Test 4.3
2
Test 4.4
1.2
Test 4.5
1.2
Table E.37: Test 4.1-4.5 of pigmentation on white paper with black paint and camera
settings: Lens = 60mm; Shutter speed = 1/40; F-stop number = 7.1; ISO number = 1000
Page XXIV of LI
==PAGE:112==
Influence of Crystallinity on the Material Properties of Micro Moulded Components
(Test 5.1, dilution 10)
(Test 5.2, dilution 20)
(Test 5.3, dilution 30)
(Test 5.4, dilution 40)
(Test 5.5, dilution 50)
Figure E.79: Test 5.1-5.5 of pigmentation on white paper with black paint, painted with an
airbrush where the dilution have been changed
Pigments applied with airbrush
Quality condition determined with
GOM Correlate
Test 5.1
2
Test 5.2
2
Test 5.3
1.4
Test 5.4
1.2
Test 5.5
2.5
Table E.38: Test 5.1-5.5 of pigmentation on white paper with black paint and camera
settings: Lens = 60mm; Shutter speed = 1/40; F-stop number = 7.1; ISO number = 1000
Page XXV of LI
==PAGE:113==
Influence of Crystallinity on the Material Properties of Micro Moulded Components
Camera:
For this experimental testing we used the camera Nikon D5300 for all tests. Figure E.80
shows the Nikon D5300. We tried with different lens, and found out that the 60mm lens
gave the best patterns quality in GOM correlate. The camera was placed on a stand with a
short distends. To make sure that the camera stand still while taking image, a button with
a cable was added to the camera. All the image was taken in black and white with a
manual mode and some extra light was added. Because of the manual mode, it was
important to consider three elements of exposure: aperture, shutter speed, and ISO. Table
E.39 explain the three exposure and its functions.
Figure E.80: Camera Nikon D5300
Camera setting
Influence on the image
Aperture tells how small or large the opening
of the lens are and can therefore control the
amount of light coming through.
It can be set in the camera with the f-stop number.
So a smaller f-stop number gives a
larger opening and therefore gives
more light and vice versa.
Shutter speed tells how long time
the shutter of the camera stays open.
If the shutter speed is sat fast,
a small amount of light will be
let in and vice versa.
ISO stands for International Organization of
Standardization, that is the light sensitivity
of the camera sensors.
A higher ISO gives a lighter image
and a lower ISO gives a darker
image.
Table E.39: Three elements of exposure: aperture, shutter speed, and ISO
Different setups of the camera was tested and it could be concluded that a aperture if F8,
shutter speed 1/50 and ISO 500 gives the best quality in GOM correlate of micro parts
0.5mm specimens. For macro parts 1.5mm specimens, the best setup was aperture F8,
shutter speed 1/50 and ISO 1000. The test of different camera setups and the quality in
GOM correlate can be seen in the tables below (table E.41; E.42; E.43; E.40; E.44; E.45).
Figure E.80 also shows where each used buttons is placed on the camera. Patterns quality
in GOM correlate goes from 0 (bad) to 5 (good). Three types of lenses have been tested:
Page XXVI of LI
==PAGE:114==
Influence of Crystallinity on the Material Properties of Micro Moulded Components
180mm 1:3.5 ; 60mm 1:2:8 D ; 18-55mm 1:3.5-5.6. The test there have been used to take
image of, is the test from the pigmentation. The distance measured is from the specimen to
the start of the lens and is different from macro to micro but for both it can be concluded
from table E.40 that close as possible is the best solution. When taking image, one image
per seconds is being taken into its stops (or reach 999 image). If a video is taking instead,
50 image is taking per seconds. Going from image to video there is no huge different of the
quality in GOM correlate and have therefore not been tested closely.
Distance
Macro (1.5mm specimen)
Micro (0.5mm specimen)
Quality in GOM
Close
30 cm
20 cm
3.8
Medium
40 cm
25 cm
3
Far
60 cm
40 cm
2.4
Far away
100 cm
70 cm
1.2
Table E.40: Quality in GOM correlate of the camera distance from macro and micro parts
Test
Lens
Distance
Shutter speed
F-stop number
ISO number
Quality in GOM
1.3
180 mm
Close
1/40
F5
400
1.2
1.3
180 mm
Close
1/40
F5
800
1.8
1.3
180 mm
Close
1/40
F5
2000
1.9
2.1
60 mm
Close
1/50
F8
250
2.5
2.1
60 mm
Close
1/50
F8
320
2.9
2.1
60 mm
Close
1/50
F8
400
3
2.1
60 mm
Close
1/50
F8
500
3.5
2.1
60 mm
Close
1/50
F8
640
3.8
2.1
60 mm
Close
1/50
F8
800
3.9
2.1
60 mm
Close
1/50
F8
1000
4.1
2.1
60 mm
Close
1/50
F8
1250
4
2.1
60 mm
Close
1/50
F8
1600
4
2.1
60 mm
Close
1/50
F8
2000
4
2.1
60 mm
Close
1/50
F8
2500
3.9
2.1
60 mm
Close
1/50
F8
3200
3.5
2.1
18-55mm
Close
1/50
F8
1000
2
2.1
18-55mm
Close
1/50
F8
1250
2
2.1
18-55mm
Close
1/50
F8
1600
2
2.1
18-55mm
Close
1/50
F8
2000
1.9
Table E.41: Quality in GOM correlate of the changed ISO number
Page XXVII of LI
==PAGE:115==
Influence of Crystallinity on the Material Properties of Micro Moulded Components
Test
Lens
Distance
Shutter speed
F-stop number
ISO number
Quality in GOM
3.1
180 mm
Close
1/30
F5
1600
1.3
3.1
180 mm
Close
1/40
F5
1600
1.3
1.3
180 mm
Close
1/50
F5
1600
2
1.3
180 mm
Close
1/60
F5
1600
1.9
2.1
60 mm
Close
1/10
F8
1000
3
2.1
60 mm
Close
1/20
F8
1000
3.8
2.1
60 mm
Close
1/30
F8
1000
4.1
2.1
60 mm
Close
1/40
F8
1000
4.2
2.1
60 mm
Close
1/50
F8
1000
4
2.1
60 mm
Close
1/60
F8
1000
3.9
2.1
60 mm
Close
1/80
F8
1000
3.6
2.1
18-55mm
Close
1/30
F8
1600
1.9
2.1
18-55mm
Close
1/40
F8
1600
2
2.1
18-55mm
Close
1/50
F8
1600
2
2.1
18-55mm
Close
1/60
F8
1600
2
2.1
18-55mm
Close
1/80
F8
1600
1.9
Table E.42: Quality in GOM correlate of the changed shutter speed
Test
Lens
Distance
Shutter speed
F-stop number
ISO number
Quality in GOM
1.2
180 mm
Close
1/40
F3.5
1600
1.2
1.2
180 mm
Close
1/40
F5.6
1600
1.5
1.2
180 mm
Close
1/40
F7.1
1600
1.5
1.2
180 mm
Close
1/40
F9
1600
2
1.2
180 mm
Close
1/40
F11
1600
1.9
2.1
60 mm
Close
1/50
F3.5
1000
2.5
2.1
60 mm
Close
1/50
F4
1000
3.2
2.1
60 mm
Close
1/50
F5
1000
4
2.1
60 mm
Close
1/50
F5.6
1000
4
2.1
60 mm
Close
1/50
F6.3
1000
4.2
2.1
60 mm
Close
1/50
F7.1
1000
4.2
2.1
60 mm
Close
1/50
F8
1000
4.2
2.1
60 mm
Close
1/50
F9
1000
4
2.1
60 mm
Close
1/50
F10
1000
3.5
2.1
60 mm
Close
1/50
F11
1000
3.5
2.1
18-55mm
Close
1/50
F6.3
1600
1.2
2.1
18-55mm
Close
1/50
F7.1
1600
1.2
2.1
18-55mm
Close
1/50
F8
1600
1.8
2.1
18-55mm
Close
1/50
F9
1600
2.1
2.1
18-55mm
Close
1/50
F10
1600
2.3
Table E.43: Quality in GOM correlate of the changed aperture (F-stop number)
Page XXVIII of LI
==PAGE:116==
Influence of Crystallinity on the Material Properties of Micro Moulded Components
Lens
Shutter speed
F-stop number
ISO number
Quality in GOM
60mm
1/50
F8
320
3.1
60mm
1/50
F8
400
3.3
60mm
1/50
F8
500
3.5
60mm
1/50
F8
640
2.9
60mm
1/50
F8
800
2.6
60mm
1/50
F8
1000
2.5
60mm
1/60
F8
500
2.8
60mm
1/50
F8
500
3.5
60mm
1/40
F8
500
2.9
60mm
1/30
F8
500
2.8
60mm
1/20
F8
500
2.8
60mm
1/10
F8
500
1.2
60mm
1/50
F6.3
500
2
60mm
1/50
F7.1
500
3
60mm
1/50
F8
500
3.5
60mm
1/50
F9
500
3
60mm
1/50
F10
500
2.9
Table E.44: Quality in GOM correlate of the micro part, PEEK 0.5mm thickness
Lens
Shutter speed
F-stop number
ISO number
Quality in GOM
60mm
1/50
F8
400
2.6
60mm
1/50
F8
500
3
60mm
1/50
F8
1000
3.8
60mm
1/50
F8
1200
3.2
60mm
1/50
F8
2400
2.6
60mm
1/50
F8
3400
1.2
60mm
1/80
F8
1000
2.5
60mm
1/60
F8
1000
3
60mm
1/50
F8
1000
3.8
60mm
1/40
F8
1000
3
60mm
1/30
F8
1000
2.5
60mm
1/20
F8
1000
1.2
60mm
1/50
F6.3
1000
2.2
60mm
1/50
F7.1
1000
3.2
60mm
1/50
F8
1000
3.8
60mm
1/50
F9
1000
3.1
60mm
1/50
F10
1000
2.8
Table E.45: Quality in GOM correlate of the macro part, PEEK 1.5mm thickness
Page XXIX of LI
==PAGE:117==
Influence of Crystallinity on the Material Properties of Micro Moulded Components
F
Appendix - DSC
Table F.46: Calculation and result from DSC of % crystallinity
Figure F.81: Result from DSC of 1.5mm thickness specimen in the gate region
Page XXX of LI
==PAGE:118==
Influence of Crystallinity on the Material Properties of Micro Moulded Components
Figure F.82: Result from DSC of 1.5mm thickness specimen in the middle region
Figure F.83: Result from DSC of 1.5mm thickness specimen in the end region
Page XXXI of LI
==PAGE:119==
Influence of Crystallinity on the Material Properties of Micro Moulded Components
Figure F.84: Result from DSC of 1.0mm thickness specimen in the middle region
Figure F.85: Result from DSC of 0.5mm thickness specimen in the middle region
Page XXXII of LI
==PAGE:120==
Influence of Crystallinity on the Material Properties of Micro Moulded Components
Figure F.86: Result from DSC of 0.3mm thickness specimen in the middle region
Page XXXIII of LI
==PAGE:121==
Influence of Crystallinity on the Material Properties of Micro Moulded Components
G
Appendix - Result of tensile modulus for the mechan-
ical properties
Result of tensile modulus when scaling down
Figure G.87: Engineering stress as a function of engineering strain from GOM, with
different thickness specimens at 190 ◦C mould temperature, tested with ≈1 % of the gauge
length mm/min
Tensile Modulus [MPa]
Thcikness
specimen
Measurement
method
Test 1
Test 2
Test 3
Test 4
Average
STD
Instron
3613
3197
3961
3113
3471
340
1.5 mm
GOM
3727
3306
3763
2627
3356
458
Instron
3038
3441
3872
3646
3499
307
1.0 mm
GOM
2473
2925
3468
3318
3046
386
Instron
3010
3219
3081
3239
3137
95
0.5 mm
GOM
2994
3057
3278
3194
3131
111
Instron
3561
3885
3222
3623
3573
236
0.3 mm
GOM
3132
3126
3224
3264
3187
59
Table G.47: Mechanical properties result of tensile modulus for thickness specimens at 190
◦C mould temperature test 1-4
Page XXXIV of LI
==PAGE:122==
Influence of Crystallinity on the Material Properties of Micro Moulded Components
Figure G.88: Eng. stress vs eng. strain curve of 1.4 mm thickness specimen
Figure G.89: Eng. stress vs eng. strain curve of 1.0 mm thickness specimen
Page XXXV of LI
==PAGE:123==
Influence of Crystallinity on the Material Properties of Micro Moulded Components
Figure G.90: Eng. stress vs eng. strain curve of 0.5 mm thickness specimen
Figure G.91: Eng. stress vs eng. strain curve of 0.3 mm thickness specimen
Page XXXVI of LI
==PAGE:124==
Influence of Crystallinity on the Material Properties of Micro Moulded Components
Result of tensile modulus when changing mould temperature
Figure G.92: Engineering stress as a function of engineering strain from GOM, 0.3 mm
thickness specimens at different mould temperatures tested with ≈1 % of the gauge length
mm/min
Tensile Modulus [MPa]
Thcikness
specimen
Measurement
method
Test 1
Test 2
Test 3
Test 4
Average
STD
Instron
#DIV/0!
538
538
3782
1619
1529
0.3 mm 175
GOM
25698
387
274
3747
1469
1611
Instron
3554
3334
3376
3303
3392
98
0.3 mm 205
GOM
2665
3385
3351
3364
3191
304
Table G.48: 0.3 mm thickness specimen at different mould temperature 1-4, results of
tensile modulus
Page XXXVII of LI
==PAGE:125==
Influence of Crystallinity on the Material Properties of Micro Moulded Components
Figure G.93: Eng. stress vs eng. strain curve of 0.3 mm thickness specimen at 175 mould
temperature
Figure G.94: Eng. stress vs eng. strain curve of 0.3 mm thickness specimen at 205 mould
temperature
Page XXXVIII of LI
==PAGE:126==
Influence of Crystallinity on the Material Properties of Micro Moulded Components
Curve of tensile modulus for 0.5 mm specimens at different strain
Figure G.95: Eng. stress vs eng. strain curve of 1.5 mm thickness specimen at a strain
from 0.05 % to 0.25 %
Figure G.96: Eng. stress vs eng. strain curve of 1.5 mm thickness specimen at a strain
from 0.3 % to 0.5 %
Page XXXIX of LI
==PAGE:127==
Influence of Crystallinity on the Material Properties of Micro Moulded Components
H
Appendix - Result of yield point for the mechanical
properties
Yield point for 1.4 mm thickness specimen - data from GOM Correlate
Figure H.97: Eng. stress vs nom. strain curve of 1.4 mm thickness specimen
Figure H.98: True stress vs local strain curve of 1.4 mm thickness specimen
Page XL of LI
==PAGE:128==
Influence of Crystallinity on the Material Properties of Micro Moulded Components
Table H.49: Mechanical properties result of 1.4 mm thickness specimen
Page XLI of LI
==PAGE:129==
Influence of Crystallinity on the Material Properties of Micro Moulded Components
Yield point for 1.0 mm thickness specimen - data from GOM Correlate
Figure H.99: Eng. stress vs nom. strain curve of 1.0 mm thickness specimen
Figure H.100: True stress vs local strain curve of 1.0 mm thickness specimen
Page XLII of LI
==PAGE:130==
Influence of Crystallinity on the Material Properties of Micro Moulded Components
Table H.50: Mechanical properties result of 1.0 mm thickness specimen
Page XLIII of LI
==PAGE:131==
Influence of Crystallinity on the Material Properties of Micro Moulded Components
Yield point for 0.5 mm thickness specimen - data from GOM Correlate
Figure H.101: Eng. stress vs nom. strain curve of 0.5 mm thickness specimen
Figure H.102: True stress vs local strain curve of 0.5 mm thickness specimen
Page XLIV of LI
==PAGE:132==
Influence of Crystallinity on the Material Properties of Micro Moulded Components
Table H.51: Mechanical properties result of 0.5 mm thickness specimen
Page XLV of LI
==PAGE:133==
Influence of Crystallinity on the Material Properties of Micro Moulded Components
Yield point for 0.3 mm thickness specimen at 190 mould temperature - data
from GOM Correlate
Figure H.103: Eng. stress vs nom. strain curve of 0.3 mm thickness specimen
Figure H.104: True stress vs local strain curve of 0.3 mm thickness specimen
Page XLVI of LI
==PAGE:134==
Influence of Crystallinity on the Material Properties of Micro Moulded Components
Table H.52: Mechanical properties result of 0.3 mm thickness specimen
Page XLVII of LI
==PAGE:135==
Influence of Crystallinity on the Material Properties of Micro Moulded Components
Yield point for 0.3 mm thickness specimen at 175 mould temperature - data
from GOM Correlate
Figure H.105: Eng. stress vs nom. strain curve of 0.3 mm thickness specimen at 175 mould
temperature
Figure H.106: True stress vs local strain curve of 0.3 mm thickness specimen at 175 mould
temperature
Page XLVIII of LI
==PAGE:136==
Influence of Crystallinity on the Material Properties of Micro Moulded Components
Table H.53: Mechanical properties result of 0.3 mm thickness specimen at 175 mould
temperature
Page XLIX of LI
==PAGE:137==
Influence of Crystallinity on the Material Properties of Micro Moulded Components
Yield point for 0.3 mm thickness specimen at 205 mould temperature - data
from GOM Correlate
Figure H.107: Eng. stress vs nom. strain curve of 0.3 mm thickness specimen at 205 mould
temperature
Figure H.108: True stress vs local strain curve of 0.3 mm thickness specimen at 205 mould
temperature
Page L of LI
==PAGE:138==
Influence of Crystallinity on the Material Properties of Micro Moulded Components
Table H.54: Mechanical properties result of 0.3 mm thickness specimen at 205 mould
temperature
Page LI of LI
