==PAGE:1==
DTU Wind
Development and testing of smart charging 
strategies for a workplace parking lot
Kristoﬀer Laust Pedersen
TU Wind-M-0680
Ju
3
==PAGE:2==
DTU Wind-M-0680 
June 2023
Project period: 
January - June 2023
ECTS: 30
Education: Master of Science
Supervisor(s):
Jan Engelhardt
Mattia Marinelli
Simone Striani
Xihai Cao
DTU Wind and Energy Systems
Remarks:
This report is submitted as partial 
fulfillment of the requirements for 
graduation in the above education at the 
Technical University of Denmark.
Technical University of Denmark 
Department of Wind and Energy Systems 
Frederiksborgvej 399
DK-4000 Roskilde
www.wind.dtu.dk
Author: Kristoffer Laust Pedersen
Title:
Development and testing of smart charging 
strategies for a workplace parking lot
DTU Wind and Energy Systems is a department of the 
Technical University of Denmark with a unique 
integration of research, education, innovation and 
public/private sector consulting in the field of wind and 
energy. Our activities develop new opportunities and 
technology for the global and Danish exploitation of 
wind and energy. Research focuses on key technical-
scientific fields, which are central for the development, 
innovation and use of wind energy and provides the 
basis for advanced education.
==PAGE:3==
Development and testing of smart charging strategies for a workplace parking lot
Master Thesis
June, 2023
By
Kristoffer Laust Pedersen
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
#
Published by:
DTU, Department of Wind and Energy Systems, Frederiksborgvej 399,
4000 Roskilde Denmark
www.wind.dtu.dk
ISSN:
[0000-0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000-00-0000-000-0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000-0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000-00-0000-000-0] (printed version)
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over five months at the Section for Power and Energy Sys-
tems, Department of Wind and Energy Systems, at the Technical University of Denmark,
DTU, in partial fulfilment for the degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng.
Kristoffer Laust Pedersen - s153266
Signature
Date
ii
Development and testing of smart charging strategies for a workplace parking lot
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
The need for Electric Vehicle Supply Equipment, EVSE, is increasing as the transportation
sector swiftly transforms to electric drive trains. The integration of EVSEs in the grid
carries both challenges, such as overloading of the distribution grid and opportunities of
providing flexibility for intermittent source or grid instabilities. By implementing real-time
control of clusters of smart chargers, both challenges and opportunities can be addressed.
This thesis proposes a distributed control architecture which promises various advantages
over the conventional central architecture of cluster control systems. The architecture
builds on the commercial agents of aggregators. A Cloud aggregator, CA, participates in
real-time flexibility by controlling a cluster of EVSEs. To take the local control actions for
each EVSE, the Virtual Aggregator, VA, is contained in the EVSE. Specifically for a cluster,
a coordinated response to CA control signals is wanted. It is thus investigated how the
VAs within a cluster can collaborate to respond to multiple parallel charging sessions.
The core focus of the project is to enable autonomous decision-making of each VA. With
information on the expected departure time and requested energy from the user, the op-
tion to provide flexibility is enabled. The information allows to schedule chargers for later
charging as a control option. It is shown that the scheduling among chargers provides
the best results of providing flexibility, power transfer efficiency and accommodating the
user needs. The proposed architecture relies on the total cluster consumption at the Point
of Common Coupling, PCC, and the charging-based priority as the only two necessary
parameters to be shared between the VAs. The cluster can thereby take distributed deci-
sions which secure scheduling and adherence to a cluster-wide CA set point signal.
The control architecture has been tested on a real-life parking lot cluster with 6 AC EVSEs
at DTU Risø Research Facilities. The 6 EVSE share a PCC capacity of 22 kW. The control
has been implemented modularly in a central controller. Despite the neglect of delays
and multi-threading, the emulated system has showcased the dynamic response of the
strategy in preparation for integration into the EVSE control system.
As a completely autonomous system, the cluster of VAs exhibits a collaborative capability
to respond to a real-time changing power reference signal from the CA and concurrently
control the scheduling to ensure all user requests are satisfied. The tests expose EV
behaviours which are significant for developing a dynamic cluster control system, as the
on-board chargers have diverse behaviours, which complicates the operation of the clus-
ter.
The analysis employed four consecutive methods; define significant objectives, consoli-
date them into a strategy, support the strategy with a control architecture, and develop
the corresponding control system. The developed controllers in the system take individ-
ual decisions, enabling simple control of the cluster consumption with minimal information
sharing with the CA. Hence, the solution promises a smooth integration of EV charging
clusters in the electric grid.
Development and testing of smart charging strategies for a workplace parking lot
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
I want to thank my team of enthusiastic supervisors, who have provided a thorough insight
into the topic and have always been eager to discuss and share ideas. I would also like to
thank the PES group staff and the ACDC project participants, who have been supportive
whenever assistance was needed.
I would further like to thank my family and friends for being supportive and showing interest
throughout the work of the thesis. Especially my girlfriend Blanca and dog Helga who has
been caring and supportive with more than I have been able to give back.
The work in this thesis has been supported by the research project ACDC (EUDP grant nr:
64019-0541) www.acdc-bornholm.eu www.acdc-bornholm.eu and by the research project
EV4EU (Horizon Europe grant no. 101056765 ) ev4eu.eu
Thank you!
iv
Development and testing of smart charging strategies for a workplace parking lot
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
2
Background
3
2.1
EV charging . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Flexibilty in the power system . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.3
Control architecture
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
2.4
Related work of the ACDC project
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3
Contribution
17
3.1
Research objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
4
Method
19
4.1
Analysis of objectives
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
4.2
A compromise of the objectives into a strategy
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
4.3
Architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
4.4
Build of strategy
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
5
Implementation
37
5.1
Emulation of a distributed system . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
5.2
Testbench functions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
6
Results and Discussion
41
6.1
Overview of tests . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
6.2
Making space . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
6.3
Scheduling of long term charging . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46
6.4
Varying CA reference signal with a single EV
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 48
6.5
Varying CA reference with two competing EVs
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51
6.6
Communication failure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53
7
Conclusion
55
7.1
Key findings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 55
7.2
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 56
Bibliography
57
A Calculation of reference power in states
61
B Preliminary tests
62
Development and testing of smart charging strategies for a workplace parking lot
v
==PAGE:8==
List of Abbreviations
AWS amazon web service.
BTM behind the meter.
CA cloud aggregator.
CC Circle Consult.
CCCV constant current constant voltage.
CP pontrol pilot.
CPO charge point operator.
DER distributed energy resource.
DSO distribution system operator.
EV electric vehicle.
EVSE electric vehicle supply equipment.
FSM finite state machine.
FTPCC front of the point of common coupling.
OBC on board charger.
OOP object oriented programming.
PCC point of common coupling.
PP proximity pilot.
PV photovoltaic.
RES renewable energy source.
SOC state of charge.
TSO transmission system operator.
V1G Uni-directional smart charger (oppose to V2G) bi-directional smart charger.
VA virtual aggregator.
vi
Development and testing of smart charging strategies for a workplace parking lot
==PAGE:9==
Nomenclature
Latin Letters
Dn
Duty cycle
[%]
f
frequency
[Hz]
Iallowed
Allowed Current
A
Communicated by EVSE
to EVCharging
J
inertia
Ncluster
number of electric vehicle supply equip-
ment (EVSE) in cluster
Pe
Converter connected units
[kW]
PC
Nameplate power capacity
[kW]
(=Specific power capacity)
Pdb
Deadband power
[kW]
Pm
Mechanical generation
[kW]
sEV SE
state of hardware
see Section 2.4
sV A
Current finite state machine (FSM) state
of VA
t
time
[h], [s]
Greek Letters
1ϕ
utilizing 1 phase
3ϕ
utilizing 3 phases
Φ
set of 3 phase specific values
ϕallowed
control parameter of charging phases.
[]
ρ
priority
ρr
relative priority
[0..1]
ρbc
broadcasted priority
[0..1]
ρint
internal priority
[0..1]
Development and testing of smart charging strategies for a workplace parking lot
vii
==PAGE:10==
List of Figures
2.1
The components and their power line connections. Each CH contains two
EVSE units. The RES and Uncontrollable Demand are placeholders for
distributed renewables and household loads. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
The Type 2 (Mennekes) EVSE to electric vehicle (EV) charging cable and
the internal connection lines evblog.wanjon.nl.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.3
The conversion from PWM-signal duty cycle Iallowed
. . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.4
Total charging efficiency of a Nissan Leaf and a Peugeot 208e charging at
ϕallowed = 1ϕ and ϕallowed = 3ϕ respectively [23]. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.5
Interpretation of the setup with the physical components and controlling
components of the setup in the ACDC November 2022 presentation. Ar-
rows indicate with their color the means of communication between the
different components.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
2.6
The physical setup with the PCC, chargers and 3 EVs Connected. The
point of common coupling (PCC) is positioned approximately 10 meters
from the chargers, as the pictures have been taken from both sides of the
setup. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
2.7
graphical interpretation of the algorithm made by Nissan. It resembles the
control system. Names of parameters have been translated into the termi-
nology of this thesis. Mark *1-3 is explained with Eq. (2.5), Figure 2.8 and
Figure 2.9 respectively.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
2.8
Calculator for Tentative Charge Power. Mark *4 is explained Figure 2.10.
. 16
2.9
Decision tree for Plug Edge Signal. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
2.10 Decision tree for Tentative Charge Power. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
4.1
Generic user behaviour of workplace parking lot. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
4.2
ρ-dispatch of 6 EVs at time t. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
4.3
Two schemes for dividing the limited shared resource: PC,PCC. . . . . . . . 24
4.4
The architecture of the proposed system . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
4.5
virtual aggregator (VA) control scan cycle progress . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
4.6
FSM, sV A, states and transitions between different states. The grey regions
indicate groups with some similar transitions. The colour scheme is further
utilized in the result section. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
4.7
The main control loop of a VA.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
4.8
Pref,i blocks for the two steady state sV A states. The rest of the states are
placed in appendix A.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
5.1
The system communication lines with the ControlCode containing objects
for chargers and VAs. Only hardware and logic-containing elements are
mentioned. Mediums of communication are shown as arrows of different
colours. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38
6.1
Results of the ability to make space. At mark *2 and *3 is further described
in Figure 6.2 and Figure 6.3.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
6.2
Zoomed in view on mark *2 to highlight the dynaics in the switch. . . . . . . 45
6.3
Zoomed in view on mark *3 to highlight a case of overcompensation. . . . . 46
6.4
Results of long term charging. Mark * 2 is zoomed in in Figure 6.5 . . . . . 47
6.5
Zoomed in view on mark *2 to highlight the dynamics in the switch. . . . . . 48
viii
Development and testing of smart charging strategies for a workplace parking lot
==PAGE:11==
6.6
Result of a single VA response to changing Pref,CA.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . 49
6.7
Result of two VAs response to changing Pref,CA. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51
6.8
Result of lost communication with PCC. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53
B.1 The BMW charging at charger 3 at mark *3 the Constant Voltage power
curve initiates and the EV reach state of charge (SOC) = 1 at mark *4 where
charging stops. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 62
Development and testing of smart charging strategies for a workplace parking lot
ix
==PAGE:12==
List of Tables
2.1
Voltage levels of the pontrol pilot (CP) generated by the EV for EVSE to
interpret.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Resistances Rc of the cable proximity pilot (PP) connection and the allowed
current, Iallowed, which the cable can handle.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
x
Development and testing of smart charging strategies for a workplace parking lot
==PAGE:13==
1
Introduction
It is a governmental goal of Denmark to reduce carbon emissions by 70 % in 2030[1]. The
electric energy and transportation sectors are bound to undergo huge transitions to meet
this goal. It is a supplementary political ambition to have 1 million EVs by that time [2]
and further stop sales of new fossil-fueled vehicles by the same year[1]. As the number
of EVs increases, the number of EVSE, needs to follow. The EVSE is a crucial part of this
thesis, defined as the electrical circuit equipment necessary to charge 1 EV at a time, i.e.
One charger may contain two EVSEs and, thereby, two plugs.
With the EVs coming to the grid, more power and energy are needed. The most critical
problem arises from the power needed if all EVs charge simultaneously [3]. Integrating
EV charging with controls becomes an asset for the market equal to that of battery stor-
age units[4]. Battery storage units may participate by shifting power consumption and
levitating the stress on the grid[5].
To accommodate the need for charging, there will be a need for a range of charging sta-
tions. Sevdari et al. [6] describe how the range goes from destination chargers at house-
holds and workplaces to charging destinations at dedicated charging hubs. For longer
hauls, destination chargers are placed strategically on highways to allow for fast charging
of up to 1000 kW. Destination chargers are placed where the parking time exceeds the
needed charging time as the user intends to be at the location. The destination chargers
are, therefore, usually AC chargers with a capacity of up to 22 kW.
Thingvad et al. found in [7] that for Denmark, 5.39 % of the power necessary for driving
can be charged at workplace parking lots. Charge points at workplaces are compelling
cases as user behaviour as a population is predictable. A typical charging session at a
workplace starts at the beginning of the workday and ends when the employee is off from
work. To forecast the behaviour is especially interesting in combination with knowledge of
the users, as it is also expected that the charging necessary for the daily commute is less
than the charging capacity an AC charge point may provide. These two aspects allow
shifting their consumption without compromising the users’ service.
Integrating EVs into the electrical grid does come with challenges [4]. The challenge
mainly resides in the power domain (as opposed to the energy domain)[8]. Bowen et al.
[9] have gathered data for a workplace parking lot where the charging has been found to
take place with a pattern which will generate a peak demand. For DC charging, Engelhardt
et al. [10] discuss the challenge, which is also present there. The limitations experienced
in the connection point of a cluster of slow chargers share similarities to those experienced
by a DC fast charging [11], [12], [13], [14].
To overcome the challenges, AC EV smart charging is seen as a solution. Smart chargers
defer by implementing functions that allow active control of the charging process to adapt
to an outside signal [6], [5]. These signals could potentially be from any entity with an
(economic) incentive to control the mentioned challenges. Sevdari further notes that the
OCPP protocol allows a central entity to control multiple chargers to overcome the men-
tioned challenges. Fauziah et al. evaluated a system [15] which utilized the protocol for
control of a charger from a charging station management system. By letting the central
charging station management system become a cloud aggregator (CA) appointed by the
charge point operator (CPO) multiple challenges can be addressed. The current central
Development and testing of smart charging strategies for a workplace parking lot
1
==PAGE:14==
control architecture is easily implemented, but as discussed by Han et al.[16] increases
complexity when the system size increases.
Addressing the prospect of utilizing the transportation sector going electric as a means
to the anticipated concerns of the electrical energy sector requires leaps in EV charging
research. Much has already been done and will be presented now as the background for
this thesis.
This thesis builds from Chapter 2 ‘Background’, providing a review of the studied litera-
ture. This leads to the problem statement in Chapter 3 ‘contribution’. To initiate Chapter 4
‘Method’, the thesis objectives will be individually analysed in further detail, and the out-
come hereof will be merged into a signal strategy. To keep the general applicability, the
proposed architecture solution is described as the final part of Chapter 4 ‘Method’. The im-
plementation of the proposed solution is described in Chapter 5 ‘Implementation’, where it
is applied to a real-life system. In Chapter 6 ‘Results’, the tests of the implementation are
presented and discussed. This leads to the concluding remarks of the thesis in Chapter 7.
2
Development and testing of smart charging strategies for a workplace parking lot
==PAGE:15==
2
Background
This chapter explores the intricacies of EV charging, its dynamics, and the concept of
flexibility in the power system. It delves into various control architectures employed to
manage the increasing demand for EV charging and provides an overview of the related
work already performed in the ACDC project.
2.1
EV charging
The basic topic in the thesis is the charging of EVs. Therefore, the technical details of
the charging process are essential to highlight. For this thesis, the basic setup, as shown
in Figure 2.1, describes the generic connection for a workplace parking lot. AC charg-
ing which will be investigated in this thesis distinguished from DC charging by letting the
AC/DC conversion take place in the on board charger (OBC). The OBC is thus the con-
trolling unit of the charging which adjusts to the need of the battery and the grid. The OBC
is typically rated for PC,OBC = 11 kW to 22 kW if charging on all three phases, 3ϕ. Some
EVs are still observed which charges only through one phase, 1ϕ, with different power
ratings. AC charging, therefore, takes the AC power at 230 VLN to the EV, where the OBC
controls the load. The EVSE differs from a usual power outlet by providing local knowl-
edge of the grid constraints of the EV, just like a maritime pilot in the shipping industry
boards large vessels to assist in navigating the specific harbour. All the EVSE connect to
their PCC from which additional capacity constraints may come into play for the combined
cluster. At the top of the distribution grid is the transformer, trafo, that connects it to the
transmission system. The cluster naturally shares the transformer connection to the grid
with some other demand in households and workplaces, and additional renewable energy
source (RES).
PCC
RES
Trafo
OBC
Battery
Noncontrolled
Demand
EVSE
EVSE
Charger
Charger
Charger
EVSE
EVSE
EVSE
EVSE
Power lines
Figure 2.1: The components and their power line connections. Each CH contains two
EVSE units. The RES and Uncontrollable Demand are placeholders for distributed re-
newables and household loads.
For a workplace which will be utilized for this thesis, it is estimated to have a range of
4 EVSEs to 30 EVSEs. If a larger number is introduced at the same parking lot, the archi-
tecture may be revised as the power line topology complexity may increase equally. The
EVSEs could be contained in any arrangement of chargers at no specific configuration.
Development and testing of smart charging strategies for a workplace parking lot
3
==PAGE:16==
2.1.1
Electric vehicle supply equipment
The term EVSE is used for the electric circuits that reside in a charger. Several EVSEs may
be included in a charger to charge multiple EVs from the same charger. From a control
perspective, the EVSE provides local information on the grid to the EV. The grid AC power
lines are directly connected to the EV through the cable. The only power electronics are
relays and power line measurements to ensure that if the EV violates grid rules, it opens
the relays to stop the charging session.
Figure 2.2: The Type 2 (Mennekes) EVSE to EV charging cable and the internal connec-
tion lines evblog.wanjon.nl.
New smart chargers also feature to switch a 3ϕ to 1ϕ charging by opening the relays for
phase L2, and L3 see Figure 2.2 as the only control of the charging process performed
directly by the EVSE [17].The control parameter will for this thesis be ϕallowed, and either
take the value 1ϕ or 3ϕ. This feature can benefit the grid if the primary phase has more
available power than the other two phases. This would be the case when a photovoltaic
(PV) unit is connected as RES on just a single phase. Switching off the two phases tests
on some of today’s EVs shows this feature open for additional capabilities discussed in
Section 2.4 and limitations discussed in Section 2.1.3.
2.1.2
Charging communication
For this thesis, we will primarily work with AC charging in the EU. The dominating connec-
tion between the EVSE and EV in the EU is with a Type 2 connection cable as shown in
Figure 2.2. The cable is described in the standard[18]. The cable consists of 5 power lines,
one for each phase (L1-L2-L3), the neutral, and a line for potential ground (earth). On top
are two lines for communication: CP and PP which provides valuable communication to
enable smart charging. The shared information is therefore explained below.
Control Pilot: EVSE to EV communication
For the communication protocol, the standard [18] refers to the standard: [19]. The CP
is utilized for communication between the EVSE and EV. Its medium is a combination of
4
Development and testing of smart charging strategies for a workplace parking lot
==PAGE:17==
Table 2.1: Voltage levels of the CP generated by the EV for EVSE to interpret.
Vnom
[V ]
Interpretation
12
No EV connected
9
EV connected not ready
6
EV ready
3
EV ready, ventilation required
a PWM signal generated by the EVSE to communicate the allowed current, Iallowed, and
an array of resistors on the EV side communicating information about the charging status.
The PWM signal informs the EV of the current limitations, which it should consider when
charging with the function visualized in Figure 2.3.
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Dn[%]
0
20
40
60
80
Iallowed[A]
Reserved for digital
Figure 2.3: The conversion from PWM-signal duty cycle Iallowed
Even though the protocol allows for a signal of up to 80 A, the components both on the grid
side and by the OBC of current systems constrain the charging power to PC,OBC = 22 kW,
hence 32 A (3ϕ).
Information is also shared through the CP line in the opposite direction. This is provided
by letting the PWM signal see a changeable array of resistors on the EV side to reveal
different voltage drops back to the EVSE. The nominal values and their interpretation is
presented in Table 2.1
As this is the only communication line defined in the protocol, no other information sharing
exists between the EV and EVSE. It is therefore not possible with this standard to let the
EV identify itself or provide its SOC for the EVSE [20].
Proximity Pilot: cable to EVSE and EV communication
The PP communication is also described in the standard [19] but differs as the cable is a
passive element without any control logic. The critical parameter for the cable to reveal is
its current capacity. That is the cross-sectional area of the power lines, which is listed in
table Table 2.2. For the ability to be revealed, a coding resistor (Rc) is connected between
the CP and ground.
The PP, therefore, provides valuable information which puts an upper constraint on the
charging current. This information is also provided to the EV, which will adhere to it, and
the Iallowed from the EVSE through the CP.
Development and testing of smart charging strategies for a workplace parking lot
5
==PAGE:18==
Table 2.2: Resistances Rc of the cable PP connection and the allowed current, Iallowed,
which the cable can handle.
Imax
[A]
nominal Rc
[Ω]
0
0
13
1500
20
680
32
220
63(3ϕ)
70(1ϕ)
100
For local grid control, it is necessary to have the geographically stationary unit, i.e. the
EVSE controlling, as it is responsible for keeping within the local constraints and has com-
munication set up with other grid controlling units. And for the EVSE, only two variables
are practically possible to control:
1. Iallowed per phase: which can be set to 0 A or a range from 6 A up to the constaints
of the hardware present.
2. ϕallowed: 1ϕ or 3ϕ
It should again be noted that these variables are upper limits of the actual charging. The
EV may, at any time, choose to diverge downwards.
2.1.3
EV charging dynamics
As the EVSE only may provide the upper limits for the charging process and the EV user
and their EV have autonomy of their own, these parameters from the OBC dynamics and
the user should also be considered as their decisions within the EVSE constraints also
affects the quality of the control by the EVSE. The parameters and decisions of the EV
and user of the EV will therefore be discussed to provide the background of their dynamics
in different situations.
High SOC charging behaviour
As the battery capacity is a given parameter that sets the upper limit of how much to
charge for any session, there exist two different behaviours the EV may produce when
an EV wants to stop charging. Either the EV has programmed a specific upper limit, e.g.
SOC = 80 % at which it stops charging, or it engages the constant voltage behaviour of
the constant current constant voltage (CCCV)see. sectionSection 2.1.3 behoviour. CCCV
is the charging behaviour of an OBC to have a constant current flow towards the battery
by satisfying V = Vint + Ibat · Rint, where Vint, the internal voltage, will increase with SOC
[21]. When the maximum allowed voltage forced on the battery is reached, the OBC will
keep this voltage for the remaining charging session until SOC = 100 % is reached. A
preliminary test has shown that the total power consumption starts to decrease about 10
minutes before the EV reaches SOC = 1 (see appendix B), with a 11 kW charging session
independent of the CP signal from the EVSE.
Accuracy towards a Power setpoint
When the battery is SOC << 100 % the charging will use the converter hardware, the user
set max charging current in the EV, and the Iallowed as the upper boundary constraints of
the converter throughput. However, as discussed by [17] and [22], the converter hardware
may not be accurate to the constraint of the Iallowed. This may be caused by a mismatch
6
Development and testing of smart charging strategies for a workplace parking lot
==PAGE:19==
in the consumption of the three phases or simply that the logic of the OBC counts in its
precision and, therefore, intentionally sets a lower setpoint. For this thesis, power control
is one of the objectives, which relates to the current communicated from the EVSE as
Iallowed =
Pref
VLN·ϕ · cos(θ). The EVs will produce or consume reactive power, and the line
to neutral voltage, VLN, will not constantly be 230 V (LN). The former causes the power
output will be lower than what is wanted from a direct calculation of Pref. The latter also
impacts the equation but can be overcome as the EVSE can measure the voltage and
use it for the calculation.
On another note, by [17], it is observed how the OBC manages to stay within the require-
ments of the protocol to respond to a change in the Iallowed given by the EVSE within 5
seconds. This will become very useful when closing the control loops in the EVSE.
Efficiency of charging
Lastly, as a note on the OBC behaviour is how effectively the energy from the grid is
transferred to the battery. When dealing with power, one of the major issues will always
be to convert power as efficiently as possible. For the full charging process of a charging
session, this is given as follows:
ηcharging = ∆EEV
∆Egrid
(2.1)
≈ηconverter · ηbattery
(2.2)
Where ∆EEV is the energy delivered to the battery of the EV within the charging session
and ∆Egrid is the energy taken from the grid. The main losses in AC charging arise from
the converter and the battery’s internal resistance (joulean losses). These components
reside in the EV and therefore come with a very different nature for a parking lot. As input
for this research, the results of a simple test carried out with the OBC charging of a 1ϕ
EV (Nissan Leaf) and a 3ϕ Peugeot 208e charging at both ϕallowed = 3ϕ and ϕallowed =
1ϕ shows the efficiency at different power levels. The measurements on both sides of
the OBC give converter efficiency, which, combined with the internal resistance explicitly
found for the Leaf in [21], may provide the total efficiency which is given in Figure 2.4. The
calculations for the joulean losses are based directly on the empirical found data from the
Leaf and are assumed to be the same for the Peugeot 208e. The internal resistance and
voltage do depend both on the temperature and the SOC but is, for this purpose, assumed
constant at 170 mΩand 360 V on the battery side. Thus from this empirical data, it may
be assumed that the OBCs are optimised for charging at PC,OBC.
Note that the customer is charged based on ∆Egrid; therefore, the EV manufacturers are
incentivised to implement a high efficiency. In contrast, from a purely economic viewpoint,
the charge point operator wants the EVs to charge at low power to get low efficiency.
2.1.4
User behaviour
On the EV side, the periphery outermost entity of the ’system’ is the users who, as opposed
to a stationary battery, only have the flexibility provision as a secondary objective of the EV.
Every EV will, therefore, only be connected to the grid-specific period when it is not driving
and the user has plugged it in. As this thesis focus is on Uni-directional smart charger
(oppose to V2G) bi-directional smart charger (V1G) the amount of charge needed for each
EV is from a cluster perspective predefined. Thingvad et al. [7] has found the distance
driven by the Danish population. And with the driving efficiency of the EV that gives the
energy needed, e.g. each day. Some of this energy may be charged at a workplace
parking lot. Workplace parking lot chargers distinguish as destination chargers used by
employees coming into work. A typical workday has a length of 8 h to 10 h [24], [9]. The
Development and testing of smart charging strategies for a workplace parking lot
7
==PAGE:20==
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
P[kW]
65
70
75
80
85
90
2[%]
leaf
208 1?
208 3?
Figure 2.4: Total charging efficiency of a Nissan Leaf and a Peugeot 208e charging at
ϕallowed = 1ϕ and ϕallowed = 3ϕ respectively [23].
amount of energy necessary for a typical day is on average 50 km/day for those who have
good parking conditions at their workplace in Denmark [7]. This amounts to an average
charging power:
Pavg =
50 km d−1
6 km kWh−1
1
{6 h to 9 h} = 0.93 kW to 1.38 kW
(2.3)
where 6 km kWh−1 is assumed as average driving efficiency of EVs [21]. This rough es-
timation does not consider how EV users will behave when given the ratio between em-
ployees who want to charge at work and the number of EVSE available at the worksite.
Further, some may not even plug in daily, especially if the ratio of EVSEs per EV is low.
The fact that the necessary charging power is less than the capability of a single charger
(at 11 kW to 22 kW) is one of the prime motivations for this thesis which will utilise this
freedom to provide flexibility.
2.2
Flexibilty in the power system
The electrical energy sector is also undergoing the same transition towards a more sustain-
able future as the transportation sector. The RES planned to take over energy production
is known for being intermittent and less incentivised to participate in providing flexibility.
Wind turbines, PV, and nuclear have a high investment cost but low operation and mainte-
nance costs. This incentivises them to produce at maximum power rather than offsetting
their setpoint to enable participation in providing flexibility. At the same time, wind tur-
bines and PV cause a need for flexibility as their production is weather dependent. Lastly,
introducing RES will put the conventional generators to rest, removing the usual flexibility
providers. This is further outlined in [25, p.21], which states that flexibility will be needed
in future energy systems.
8
Development and testing of smart charging strategies for a workplace parking lot
==PAGE:21==
2.2.1
Introduction to types of flexibility
For a healthy electrical energy system, it is vital to have providers of flexibility for four
different domains; wholesale market, transmission system operator (TSO), distribution
system operator (DSO) and behind the meter (BTM) [5].
The wholesale market utilises the competitive market structure to shift elastic demand.
Hourly dynamic price schemes have recently been introduced for regular household cus-
tomers and are, therefore, easily accessible[26]. The price indicates where bids for selling
and buying energy for a given hour have met. For EVs, it is especially interesting to look
at the changes in price throughout the day[27]. For this type, the power system will ’com-
pensate’ the provider with a lower price by shifting their load to a price valley[28].
Thingvad et al. [29] have covered the TSO needs, mainly frequency regulation. This is
done by addressing the relationship between active power and frequency with the swing
equation interpreted below:
P c
m + P nc
m −(P c
e + P nc
e ) = J · (2π)2 · f df
dt
(2.4)
Where f is the frequency, J is the inertia of the synchronously connected units, t is time,
Pm is the grid-connected mechanical machines (with generation convention), and Pe is the
converter connected units(with consumer convention). The superscript c and nc denote
controllable and non-controllable, respectively. The equation shows how any mismatch
in the energy grid between the uncontrolled and controlled units on the left-hand side
will cause the df
dt to be nonzero, and thereby the frequency will deviate. EV chargers
participating in the controlling belong to the group P c
e . The markets differ by the activation
criteria, mandatory response time, and most importantly, the capacity [29]. López et al.
[26] report a tendency in European markets to lower the capacity barriers for smaller
entities to participate. Currently, the minimum bidding capacity for the Danish TSO is
0.1 MW to 5 MW depending on the service and region (DK1, DK2)[30].
The DSOdomain further focuses on the parameters specific to the local area of the dis-
tribution network. The focus is, therefore, the voltage and congestion control. Voltage
may be addressed with control of the reactive power, and as this is not directly possible
with the EVSE explained in Section 2.1, it will not be further investigated. However, con-
gestions are a more relevant case. With the recently added loads in the distribution grid,
upgrading the distribution grid (transformer stations and cables) will not have the neces-
sary capacity[25]. Especially as the congestion is a measure of the current through cables
or the apparent power of a transformer, these relate more to the control variables of EV
charging [31].
Lately, the interest in Behind The Meter, BTM services has increased as self-consumption
of produced energy is incentivised by the price difference of power sold and bought from
the grid [32]. This type of flexibility requires a control connection between an energy
source connected on the local side of the billing meter in combination with flexible de-
mand[33]. This topic is explored in depth by the [6] and [34] in simulation environments
connecting the EV consumption control directly to the output of PVs or wind turbines,
which is mutually connected inside the same meter.
2.2.2
Aggregators
For the four domains, the response needs to be linked to the flexibility providers, i.e. the re-
sponsible needs a backend architecture to control the setpoints of the flexibility providers.
For distributed entities, like EV chargers, an aggregator coordinates the setpoints of a
larger population to meet the desired need of the responsible party[35]. The aggregator
Development and testing of smart charging strategies for a workplace parking lot
9
==PAGE:22==
has no physical control in/output; however, it takes input from other entities and sends
control signals to generate an economic benefit for the distributed units.
Three main architectures for controlling distributed units are Central, Decentral and Dis-
tributed Control[16]. The architectures will be discussed in the next section. For the cen-
tral control architecture, all setpoints go through a central Cloud Aggregator, CA, where all
decisions for the system are taken, and specific setpoint values are sent back to the units.
With a decentralized architecture, all units have a VA, which takes its own decisions only
considering its output. The distributed architecture utilizes both a central CA, which may
send out control signals, and VAs that can take local decisions themselves, but where
they consider the CA control signal whenever it is present[5].
2.2.3
EV providing flexibility
To address the aspects of providing flexibility generally, there are specific requirements
set by the responsible parties that need to be met by the technology before it can partic-
ipate in the flexibility markets. The authors of [6] have gathered an extensive review of
the possibilities for clustered EVs to provide the flexibility needed by the TSO and DSO
technically.
In parallel to the controlling is a need for a financial architecture. To incentivise all parties
of the system to participate, all parties should get a share of the economic benefits. The
financial architecture is less time critical as the settlements are done after a session. The
Charge Point Operator, CPO, is linked to the CA (who may operate multiple clusters) and
will gain financially from decisions made by the CA [6]. The CPO should therefore decide
how to financially include the possible gains of flexibility participation with the EV users
who provide their capacity for the services [36].
2.3
Control architecture
As a component, an EV charger alone may only control its consumption. It does therefore
require collaboration to provide acceptable integration and flexibility. For collaboration
between autonomous components, it is imperative to define where decisions can be made
and what information to communicate between nodes of the architecture. Every use case
is different and should be fitted specifically for the application.
It is suggested for distributed energy resource (DER) in general by [16] and specifically
for EV charging by [28] to maturing the distributed control architecture as it has promising
advantages in future flexibility providing system. Even though distributed architecture has
been discussed for decades, confusion still exists on the definition and will therefore need
to be introduced.
2.3.1
Introduction to distributed architectures
Control architectures for DERs have been investigated in [16] and specifically for EV
charging in [28]. It may rely on vertical communication to a unit with a broader perspective
than the distributed units. But also horizontal information sharing, either through shared
memory or directly between the units[16].
A distributed architecture benefits from the possibility of communicating in the most rel-
evant manner. If a signal is needed by a charger measured close by, there is no need
to communicate through a central entity in the cloud. However, a unit with a systemwide
perspective may broadcast a need for flexibility to the entire cluster. The complexity of
a distributed system may increase with the different types of communication included.
Therefore, developing a structure that fits the application’s purpose and specific needs for
sharing information is essential.
10
Development and testing of smart charging strategies for a workplace parking lot
==PAGE:23==
An exciting approach to the architecture is found in [35], which seeks to have multiple
units make decisions in a market-based manner for the distribution grid.
2.3.2
Comparison to other control architectures
Focus has been on the distributed architecture, which now will be compared to the central
and decentralized control architecture.
Central control architecture builds from a single central controller which makes decisions
for all entities. The controller receives all periphery data input directly and, based upon
those, takes a decision and sends setpoint values to the periphery output. The decen-
tralized, on the other hand, has no real-time communication. All units have a predefined
behaviour to inputs, e.g. multiple droop controllers reacting to the frequency.
Compared to central architecture, the distribution has the benefit of more local control. As
the possible decisions are taken in the local unit, there is no need to share data. This both
increases the privacy and information isolation as well resilience to operation failures of
the central unit [16]. It is a further advantage that the response time of local control is faster
and independent from the central controller [37]. Most importantly, with the increasing
number of EVSEs that need to be controlled, the centralised control architecture will have
a significant increase in complexity [16]. The downside of a distributed system is the
chances of reaching suboptimal states as the distributed control units will have to take their
own decision, which may cause a lack of broad overview and instability in the output[16].
Compared to a decentralised system, there are advantages to the ability to control the sys-
tem. As the decentralised system relies on predetermined, non-real-time control schemes,
there is only a limited possibility to provide flexibility and monitor the individual controls
[16]. A distributed architecture also relies on the same local decision-maker. But inte-
grates a chance to communicate with other units to reach a collaborative response to a
signal of needed flexibility. The issue of the distributed architecture comes when integrat-
ing additional units into the system and ensuring that data is kept private.
Distributed architectures have now been generally discussed compared to the central and
decentralised. The distributed control architecture is not as matured yet, and therefore,
multiple sub-architectures exist [16]. These will best suit different scenarios, and individual
assessments should be done for each application. With the rapid increase of chargers, a
scalable solution should be integrated and investigated.
2.4
Related work of the ACDC project
The Autonomously Controlled Distributed Chargers project is led by DTU and started in
April 2020 and is set to be terminated September 2023[38].
2.4.1
Demonstration setup
Within the ACDC project, a physical system has already been set up. The chargers are
developed by the participating stakeholder Circle Consult (CC), who has also set up the
amazon web service (AWS), which hosts a secure connection to the chargers. The AWS
connection enables DTU to control the setpoint for the chargers and get feedback from it
through a prototype server, Whiteboard. The full setup is depicted in Figure 2.5 and the
specific functionality of each component is described below.
Chargers
The chargers of the ACDC project has throughout this thesis period been those depicted
in Figure 2.6b. They have 2 plugs each connected to their own EVSE circuit inside. The
control interface for the chargers goes through AWS. The VA functionallity has already
been included in the chargers. The internal VAs will however function as a relay directly
Development and testing of smart charging strategies for a workplace parking lot
11
==PAGE:24==
Power lines
Charger
Charger
Through AWS
Internally
PCC*2
VA
VA
VA
VA
RES
Trafo
Primary
VA*
Figure 2.5: Interpretation of the setup with the physical components and controlling com-
ponents of the setup in the ACDC November 2022 presentation. Arrows indicate with
their color the means of communication between the different components.
passing the Iallowed read in AWS to the control unit of the CP. To control the chargers a
Json message should be sent to AWS containing the charger name, EVSE name, the
Iallowed, and the ϕallowed. As feedback from the chargers the code gets the charger status,
sEV SE. This data is relayed through AWS to Whiteboard and may take one of four string
states:
• Charging
• Connected
• Idle
• Error
Luckily the chargers has no need to bill the customers as they still lack the metering board.
This further disables the controlcode to know the exact consumption of each EVSE.
On top of the normal work is being done to integrate the possibility to dynamically turn
the phases so that the EV on line L1-L2-L3 of Figure 2.2 sees B-C-A or C-A-B of the grid.
This specifically becomes useful in combination with the control of ϕallowed as described in
Section 2.1. With this functionality, the smart charger is enabled to align the consumption
on the phases or perform voltage control for the grid. For this thesis, it has however not
been fully implemented and will therefore not be utilized.
Point of common coupling
The two chargers are supplied with power through a single point of common coupling. A
PIOT (Power IOT) smart meter developed for SYSLAB at DTU is situated at the coupling
(see Figure 2.6a). It contains a meter which, for the full cluster, measures voltage, current,
power, reactive power and apparent power for each phase. Additionally, it measures the
frequency of the system. The collected data is broadcast to energidata.dk as the generic
data acquisition server of the PIOTs. The ACDC project has, from there, developed a
python script, query_PIOT.py, which subscribes to the data and brings it to the Whiteboard
for ACDC project-specific purposes.
Webpage
To provide a user interface a prototype webpage has been set up on a DTU server. The
webpage is for the prototype chargers the interface where the users insert data of their
requested charging. The data collected from the users is stored in a SQLite database
12
Development and testing of smart charging strategies for a workplace parking lot
==PAGE:25==
(a) The PCC and Chargers in back-
ground
(b) Chargers on lightpole with one EV
connected each.
Figure 2.6: The physical setup with the PCC, chargers and 3 EVs Connected. The PCC
is positioned approximately 10 meters from the chargers, as the pictures have been taken
from both sides of the setup.
format database.db. For each entry the following data is stored:
• Entry time, as < Y Y Y Y −MM −DDHH : MM : ss.µµµµµµ >
• Plug number
• Name of user
• EV model
• Wanted energy in kWh
• Arrival time as < HH : MM >.
• Departure time as < HH : MM >.
• Email of user.
Whiteboard
The Whiteboard has been mentioned a few times throughout the presentation of the
demonstration setup. It is a simple database which allows scripts running both inside
and outside the SYSLAB domain to pass information to each other. The Whiteboard re-
sides on a prototype server setup by Oliver Gehrke, specifically for the ACDC project. Any
entry in the database contains the following four data points:
• Source: The unit that sent it there.
• Time: Epoch timestamp of when the Whiteboard received the data.
• Key: The parameter name.
• Value.
2.4.2
Preliminary implementation of sharing strategy
Another participating stakeholder is the automobile manufacturer Nissan, which has been
developing a priority-based sharing strategy.
As the most recent test within the ACDC project, it provides the foundation for further
work within the ACDC project within the domain of sharing strategies. The algorithm and
Development and testing of smart charging strategies for a workplace parking lot
13
==PAGE:26==
main ideas have therefore been visually explained in Figure 2.7 (and subfigures). The
explanation only provides an overview of the ideas and functions that are implemented in
the algorithm. The code is a pure dynamic control system. The dynamic control is hard
coded to the setup used in November 2022, with a preset tdep and Ewanted; hence the
only input for the code is the connection status of each EVSE and Pref,CA and Pmeas,PCC.
The sEV SE is utilized to initiate the charging session. If it is Charging or Connected, the
session is on otherwise values like Pavg and ρ is set to 0. As may be seen in the figure,
it contains three inputs. The charging status of each EVSE, Power reference and power
measured at PCC. The user input is for this demonstration, not an input, hence when an
EV connects, it is assumed that the user has inserted how much energy they want (from
10 kWh to 30 kWh) and how much time the EV will be parked. (all at 7 h).
To let the chargers compete for the available power, the parameter priority, ρ, is introduced.
The idea is that the chargers or EVSEs contain the same algorithm, but they act differently
based on ρ. For Nissans code, it is given by:
ρ =
{
0.05 + 0.1 · Pavg,full
PC,EV SE
if Ereq is reached
0.15 + 0.8 ·
Pavg
PC,EV SE
otherwise
(2.5)
Where Pavg is the average power needed for the rest of the session to reach the energy
demanded (Ereq) by the user before the given departure time (tdep). After Ereq is reached,
the priority is instead found with the average power needed to reach SOC = 100 % by using
Pavg,full. PC of the EVSE normalizes the power to within the capability of the charger or
EVSE (22 kW). From Eq. (2.5), it is seen that ρ first and foremost is given to an EV that
has not yet reached the goal; a minimum of ρ = 0.15 and entities that already have been
satisfied will only have ρ < 0.15 if their Pavg > PC. For those who have not yet reached
their Ereq, the highest ρ will be granted to entities with a higher urgency to receive power.
With this strategy, it is observed that the charged energy may go above the negotiated
energy the user wants. The priority of the charger is as described above, a value of the
needed power used on the charger level in Figure 2.8 where it is utilized to calculate the
tentativeChargePower as the gain variable of the in case the Perror is below 0 hence a
decrease of the cluster consumption is necessary.
14
Development and testing of smart charging strategies for a workplace parking lot
==PAGE:27==
Plug
charger
Plug
in code P2I ->I2P
connect
Status
Scan cycle progression
cal
Tentative
Charge
Power *2
Plug
Edge
Signal
charger
Required
Power
calPriority*1
charger
Priority
tentative
Charge
Power
cal
Plug
Edge
Signal *3
Sanity
Check
For 'activation' 
of algorithm
calRequired
Power
calPriority*1
P2I
AWS
simply
calculated
variable
Variable
function block
Figure 2.7: graphical interpretation of the algorithm made by Nissan. It resembles the
control system. Names of parameters have been translated into the terminology of this
thesis. Mark *1-3 is explained with Eq. (2.5), Figure 2.8 and Figure 2.9 respectively.
Development and testing of smart charging strategies for a workplace parking lot
15
==PAGE:28==
CentralSignal
PriorityForCal
ChargerPriority
tentative
Charge
Power
pre
Tentative
Charge
Power
filter
Tentative
Charge
Power*4
Limiter
tentative
Charge
Power
Figure 2.8: Calculator for Tentative Charge Power. Mark *4 is explained Figure 2.10.
<6A
>6A*'ActivePlugsOnCharger'
Else:
>=6A 
AND 
<=6A*'ActivePlugsOnCharger'
tentative
Charge
Power
Start
No plug gets power:
PlugEdgeSignal[0..1] = 0
Plugs share (with
priority)
Only One gets power
Figure 2.9: Decision tree for Plug Edge Signal.
>6A
>6A
Else:
<=6A
Pre
Tentative
Charge
Power
Start
Power was availible
last scan for the
charger
Power was
insufficient last scan
Or charging was not
necessary
>6A
Else:
<=6A
Tentative
Charge
Power
Yes
No
MaxEnergy
reached
It could be active in
this scan as well
<0A
>=0A AND < 6A/3
Else:
>=6A/3
CentralSignal
Should decrease
No possibility to get
started
Plenty of power
availible
>6A
Else:
<=6A
Tentative
Charge
Power
Charging can start
Figure 2.10: Decision tree for Tentative Charge Power.
16
Development and testing of smart charging strategies for a workplace parking lot
==PAGE:29==
3
Contribution
A distributed architecture is expected to have increased reliability and scalability when ex-
tending the perspective into the future with an increased EV population. The ACDC project
has an architecture supporting this further investigation in a structure where changes are
easily implemented. The project, which will be finalised in September 2023, aims to pro-
vide a real-life system with a distributed control strategy implemented, which further re-
quires the tying of ends to be ready.
As described in Section 2.4.2, the code is implemented in a nonscalable control strategy
but has been tested in a realistic confined environment. To prove the applicability in real-
life scenarios, the control code should handle the random variety implicated by putting real
users with EVs into the algorithm. In other words, the control code should go one step
further toward robust real-life applicability. Additionally, the control and data structure is
not designed to be split into separate units, i.e. not made for distributed control. It should,
therefore, also be important in this project to ensure transparency of the solution to run
on distributed units.
A further challenge that should be addressed is the need for full autonomy. A fault-tolerant
system that can react simultaneously to inputs from all sides (CA and users) is needed.
This will provide an insight into the dynamics which arise from the user interactions with
a cluster that provides flexibility [39], [40].
As opposed to the above, the literature contains multiple implementations of CA and com-
plete system control systems. This may be simulated or in real-life, and utilise model
predictive control or optimisation (either simulated or on simple real-life systems), which
provide model predictive control, optimisation or control on the CA level[41]. Further ma-
turing of the distributed control architecture is necessary to prove its capabilities. A VA
cluster system that provides easy and modular controllability by a CA should be investi-
gated. This should be found before further research can be done into the algorithms of
the CA and its application on real-life clusters[40]. Therefore this thesis will not focus on
the optimisation or algorithms included in the CA but rather on how the VAs should react
to the signals from it.
3.1
Research objectives
The gaps mentioned above have brought the author of this thesis towards solving the
most crucial issues for further work within the field. A distributed autonomous control ar-
chitecture for the base level of EV charging clusters should be built as it has advantageous
features. It should operate with a user and CA interface to enable participation in flexibility
services.
Through this project, a strategy for a real-life implementable distributed smart control sys-
tem will be developed for a cluster of chargers sharing a connection point to the grid. The
strategy should take into account the following objectives:
• Increase the capability to respond to a CA signal.
• Increase the efficiency of the charging process.
• Fullfil the needs of the users.
It is further the goal of the thesis to implement the strategy with a distributed control archi-
tecture to provide a real-life setup that can further examine its usability. To the possible
Development and testing of smart charging strategies for a workplace parking lot
17
==PAGE:30==
extent, the implementation should utilise current standards and the communication limita-
tions hereof.
A real-life implementation of the strategy on a small cluster should be made. As the novel
technology of EV charging and its further capabilities has not fully developed, a demonstra-
tion platform hereof will serve with great value for further research[42]. A demonstration
will provide novel insight into the barriers met when trying to control diverse EV charging
from logic included in the EVSE and aid in defining the possible strategies.
The overall goal is to provide a technical view of how an easily controllable cluster of
chargers may become a beneficial macroeconomic participant in both the energy and
transportation sectors.
18
Development and testing of smart charging strategies for a workplace parking lot
==PAGE:31==
4
Method
As this thesis aims to generate a multi-objective strategy and provide a distributed architec-
ture that supports this, the three mentioned objectives will first be analysed. The analysis
will indulge in the range to which each objective can be reached, providing the foundation
for deciding the strategy that will be a compromise between the objectives. The strategy
which is wanted to fulfil is key to have defined before the necessary information sharing
and decision making will be discussed as the architecture of the system. And lastly the
complete way that each unit will behave is defined as the generic build of the system.
4.1
Analysis of objectives
The three objectives focus on three different ends of the system. The user wants a certain
amount of energy delivered to the EV at a specific time. Efficiency focuses on the internal
working of the process of taking energy from one place to another. And finally, the pro-
vision of flexibility disregards any of the two previously mentioned but purely on how the
system may (as a blackbox) shift the energy consumption in time. Each objective will be
analysed and consolidated into a formal objective function.
4.1.1
Providing flexibility
Providing flexibility with a generic parking lot as in Figure 2.1 can be considered a ser-
vice to anybody in front of the point of common coupling (FTPCC). As mentioned in the
background providing flexibility.
Within the distributed control architecture, the CA provides the control interface to any
FTPCC. Within the CA, multiple different algorithms may be deployed to provide the ser-
vices which, e.g. provides the best economic outcome for the charge point operator. The
work of this thesis will not investigate the multiple algorithms but further investigate how
the provision of flexibility may be communicated further to the EVSE. As the EVSE can
control EV’s upper current limit and if an EV should be charging as 1ϕ or if capable 3ϕ.
The information from the CA would be sufficient to have a set of three power values, Φ,
one for each phase, which the cluster should strive to consume if charging is possible.
This will enable the CA to control the cluster’s overall consumption by levelling all three
values or have a skew alignment if the FTPCC service is to consume on a specific phase,
e.g. due to local RES production in that particular phase.
The essence of this argument is, therefore, the notion that the CA will put the upper limit
of the power it wants the cluster to consume at PCC, and the VAs should strive as a group
to be always below but as close as possible at all instances of time. From the objective
of the VAs as a group, the objective can therefore be formalised as:
max
PP CC,ϕ,t
∑
t
L3
∑
ϕ=L1
PPCC,ϕ,t
(4.1)
Subject to:
0 ≤PPCC,ϕ,t ≤Pref,CA,ϕ,t
: ∀ϕ, ∀t
(4.1a)
Where t denotes the discrete time instance and the phases from The objective function
arises as there will be situations where the cluster cannot provide the consumption that
the CA asks for as no EVs are connected.
Development and testing of smart charging strategies for a workplace parking lot
19
==PAGE:32==
4.1.2
Efficiency
The Internal charging process also impacts the decision-making for a charging strategy.
As highlighted in Figure 2.4, the charging process does have the best efficiency when
the OBC is allowed to charge at a power level close to the PC,OBC. The extent to which
charging efficiency should be considered is possible to debate as it is a question of a few
per cent. However, implementing the strategy on larger clusters will add to a significant
loss, worth considering. The objective function that the VA may consider for having a high
efficiency may therefore be assumed as:
max
Pi,t
∑
t
NEV SE
∑
i=1
Pi,t · ui,t · ∆tt
(4.2)
Subject to:
ui,t =
{
1
: if: Pi,t > PC,OBC,i
2
0
: Otherwise
: ∀i, ∀t
(4.2a)
In Eq. (4.2a) division by two is chosen from looking at Figure 2.4. A direct effect of this
objective function is that with a limited amount of energy to charge (as is the case for V1G),
maximizing the amount of energy set above a threshold minimises energy charged with
power below the threshold. This objective function takes a high degree of assumption.
However, for this thesis, it will suffice.
4.1.3
User needs
At the other end of the flexibility provision is another entity the VAs may consider: the
users. The charging behaviour can be assumed at a workplace as visualized in Figure 4.1.
The constraining elements of the charging capacity of the cluster are seen in an example
where four EVs connect. ∑
i PC,OBC,i is the sum of the charging capacity of all the EVs
connected, increasing as they connect and decreasing as they leave. The total capacity
of the cluster is set at PC,PCC,i = 20 kW.
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
t[H]
0
10
20
30
40
50
P[kW]
Epcc
' PC,OBC,i
PC,PCC
Figure 4.1: Generic user behaviour of workplace parking lot.
By integrating the resulting function of the binding constraint, the total consumption of
the cluster can be found to be EPCC = 180 kWh. However, as stated in Section 2.1, the
incentive to provide flexibility comes from the realization that less energy is needed. For
20
Development and testing of smart charging strategies for a workplace parking lot
==PAGE:33==
this example, the combined required energy of the users is ∑Ereq,i = 120 kWh, which is
shown as the grey-shaded area as EPCC = Ereq. It has been ’frontloaded’ in the first part
of the session, from the realization that further EVs may connect at any time. The further
60 kWh of energy available underneath both constraints but not part of the grey required
energy, is what may be utilized for flexibility (hence, Pref,CA may, for this example, deviate
downward from PC,PCC by a total of 60 kWh without compromising the need of the users).
It should now be apparent that the flexibility may only be provided given that it is known
when the user departs again, and how much energy they want. Without this information,
each VA could not determine if the EV connected could wait with charging for later. As a
cluster, it is assumed that the information can be provided to the CA regarding forecasting.
This forecasting is also necessary to project the price scheme for the users, as a high
number of users wanting to charge will cause congestion. Thus the market mechanisms
of the algorithm incentivise users to charge when no other EVs are there. It is further
realized that the pricing cannot only be based on real-time data of EVs connected, as this
would incentivise a ‘first-come lowest price scheme’ (Even though it may be of interest to
the company next to the parking lot to have the employees coming in early for the lowest
price). This also aligns with the idea of the ACDC project that the users should insert the
data directly at the EVSE without the need to consult the cloud.
The proposed pricing scheme will also be mentioned to clarify the purpose. To incentivise
the users also to participate in the flexibility services, they should be parking as long as
possible and for V1G capable of charging an amount 0 < Ereq < PC,OBC · t. Usually,
they should pay for the energy they consume from the grid. However, the price may be a
function of their input when they negotiate at the initiation of the session:
Cπ = Echarged,π · c(Ereq,π, ∆tπ)
(4.3)
Where Cπ is the total price of the entire session, and c is the price function which outcome
is apparent to the, at the initial negotiation. After this agreement has been made (between
the user and CPO), it is the assignment of the VA to secure that the negotiated power is
reached. This brings us to the objective function of the user perspective, which the VA
should consider:
max
Pi,t
∑
t
∑
π
Pi,t · τi,t · ∆tt
(4.4)
Subject to:
Pi∈ψπ,t ≤PC,OBC,π
: ∀t∀π
(4.4a)
∑
t
Pi∈ψπ,t · δtt ≤Ereq,π
: ∀π
(4.4b)
τi,t =
{
1
: if: tarr,π ≤t ≤tdep
0
: Otherwise
: ∀π, ∀t
(4.4c)
Where the subscript i ∈ψπ indicates the VA indicies i which belongs to the session π It is
assumed that the EVs charging capability, PC,OBC,π, is a constant throughout the session.
τ has been set to 0 for any time outside the user’s given parking period, as charging may
not be possible in that period of the given EV. If the EV stays for longer and Ereq has not
been reached it should of course still keep charging, though the objective function should
not incentivise it.
Development and testing of smart charging strategies for a workplace parking lot
21
==PAGE:34==
4.2
A compromise of the objectives into a strategy
The three objective functions highlighted above are three different views but all with the
cluster of VAs as the subject. They will now serve as the foundation for the strategy
followed by the cluster of VAs.
4.2.1
Power division
When dealing with limited resources, a choice has to be made of who will get power and
who will not. This could be treated for every instance in time, but also for the charging
sessions; hence who will get the energy? Answering this may not be the exclusive choice
of an engineer; however, an argument will now be made on this behalf. Throughout the
project period, two schemes have been brought up; power scheduling and power sharing.
Sharing is the democratic, fair option where the power is evenly distributed among the con-
nected EVs. If one EV cannot consume some of the power distributed to it, this capacity
of the PCC will still be available. If other EVs still can consume more, they can take over
the otherwise wasted consumption possibility. The shared limited resource is distributed
fairly for everybody at every time instance. Scheduling is a more market-based approach
where the limited resource is distributed among several EVs to fulfil precisely their needs.
If more EVs are connected than the capacity to provide power, some will be scheduled
for later charging. When observing the power distribution at a specific instance in time,
this option seems biased and unwanted from a democratic point of view. However, if the
aggreement is met, the users disregard when the energy actually was delivered within
the time window. As already discussed, the scheduling further suggests a market-based
structure for the user needs in Section 4.1.3. From a scheduling perspective, the choice
of who gets power can be decided by altering the economic dispatch into a ρ-dispatch
illustrated in Figure 4.2. The 6 EVs are inserted with a decreasing priority. Their width
represents their capability to consume power, PC,OBC. For this specific time, t, EV 1 and
EV 2 are allowed to charge at full capacity. EV 4, EV 5 and EV 6 have a too low ρ and
will not be able to charge at time t as this would overload the PCC, PC,PCC. EV 3 will
then be the marginal consumer, and thus consume to the constraint of the shared capac-
ity P3 = PC,PCC −(PC,OBC,1 + PC,OBC,2). This equation is the ideal fit for the system
and does not indicate any closed-loop controlling, which will be considered later. The two
schemes have different foundations, but a strategy may still be founded as a mixture of
the two. It is necessary to decide if the strategy should be based on democratic sharing
or a market-based scheduling scheme.
To decide on the founding scheme, the two schemes are consolidated with the perspective
of the technical objectives in Figure 4.3. The figure shows the performance of the two
schemes under the following CA and user behaviour:
1. A constant CA signal: Pref,CA = 10 kW
2. EV1 Connects at t = 1 h and requests Ereq,1 = 60 kWh within ∆t = 10 h.
3. EV2 Connects at t = 2 h and requests Ereq,2 = 40 kWh within ∆t = 4 h.
For the two EVs connected, their charging session is shown in terms of accumulated
charged energy on the left axis and power consumption on the right axis.
The flexibility objective wants PPCC as close to Pref,CA as possible. This is fulfilled in both
schemes in t = 1 h to 9 h as the sharing has two EVs consuming 5 kW, in t = 2 h to 6 h.
However, for the sharing scheme in Figure 4.3a, the energy charged to EV1 in this period
replaces the opportunity to charge it later. It is therefore observed that the scheduling
outperforms the sharing in t = 9 h to 11 h where the Pref,CA is met with the consumption
of EV1. The efficiency objective tends to the scheduling scheme equally, as the two EVs
will be charging at half PC,OBC in t = 2 h to 6 h, which will bring the charging of both EVS
22
Development and testing of smart charging strategies for a workplace parking lot
==PAGE:35==
P
1
EV2
EV3
EV4
EV5
EV6
EV1
Figure 4.2: ρ-dispatch of 6 EVs at time t.
to a lower efficiency. Lastly, the user objective should also be taken into account. Here
the goal is to charge the EVs at the user’s request. When looking at the figure, it is seen
that EV 2 disconnects at t = 6 h where it has reached EC,left = 20 kWh for the sharing
and EC,left = 0 kWh for the scheduling.
Throughout the rest of this thesis, the scheme which will be at focus will therefore be the
scheduling as it has the best chances of fulfilling the objectives.
4.2.2
Neccessity for inter-VA communication
As it may have become apparent to the reader, the wanted strategy discussed above
requires communication to let the other VAs evaluate if their priority allows them to charge.
Another related issue arises from the non-linear initiation behaviour of a charging session.
This makes it challenging for a VA where a new EV just has connected with high ρ to start
charging without having other VAs making space.
Real-life implementation does generate an increased number of scenarios to consider
compared to simulations and laboratory tests. For a scheduling strategy, the case that
requires the most pressure on the distributed control system is when a new EV is plugged
in, and EVs are already charging at the capacity of the PCC. For this scenario, the new
EV should be granted all the power it needs, as stated in Figure 4.2, and the marginal
EV should decrease its consumption. The problem arises now from the large gap to start
charging: The EVSE is only capable of controlling the EV charging to 0 A or ≥6 A =
4.38 kW3ϕ. A distributed control, therefore, has four options to communicate between the
new VA and the marginal VA that it should decrease its power:
• Constantly sacrificing a margin on the PCC capacity of 4.38 kW3ϕ.
• Every 15 minutes the marginal consumer momentarily drops 4.38 kW3ϕ.
• Overload PCC momentarily when starting up.
• Communicate a need to start charging via an independent communication line.
If neither of the options is chosen, the system will default to a first come, first serve strategy,
which will not make the new EV charge within time. A constant sacrifice of the capacity is
an unnecessary limitation of the system, which will affect the PC,PCC during steady state
Development and testing of smart charging strategies for a workplace parking lot
23
==PAGE:36==
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
t[H]
0
20
40
60
Echarged[kWh]
0
5
10
P[kW]
Echarged,1
Echarged,2
P1
P2
PC,PCC
(a) Sharing approach
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
t[H]
0
20
40
60
Echarged[kWh]
0
5
10
P[kW]
Echarged,1
Echarged,2
P1
P2
PC,PCC
(b) Scheduling approach
Figure 4.3: Two schemes for dividing the limited shared resource: PC,PCC.
24
Development and testing of smart charging strategies for a workplace parking lot
==PAGE:37==
operation and therefore affect the total energy that may be delivered, Ecluster, as well.
Letting the marginal consumer drop the power consumption every 15 minutes to allow
for utilisation of the PC,PCC during steady state would increase Ecluster from the previous
option. When utilising this option, the operator should be aware of other dynamic mech-
anisms that may overlap with the momentary drops, as additional VAs charging may use
it to charge even more. Overloading the PCC capacity from the startup of the new EV
charging until the marginal VA react to the overload is also a viable option in cases where
the PC,PCC is not a hard constraint. The last option to communicate it through an indepen-
dent communication line will affect the Ecluster least. Depending on the communication
line delays, this option will have a Ecluster very close to that of an ideal central control
system.
The latter option of having the information in an independent communication line has been
chosen for this thesis. The decision has been made to ensure that the fuse of the PCC
will not open and further optimise the Ecluster in alignment with the objectives.
4.2.3
Information being shared
For the strategy discussed so far, it should be clear that a certain amount of information
is necessary to share between the VAs. To review, it should be shared when a VA wants
to start charging, and further, it should be possible to compare the ρ to that of others. For
a VA to decide its priority allows it to participate, it must be compared to the marginal VA.
If its own ρ is higher, it may charge at its capacity, and conversely, if it is below, it should
stop charging and wait for later. To define ρmarginal for all other VAs, there should be
a distinction between those charging and those not charging. Lastly, it should be noted
that if a VA wants to force itself into charging, it is unnecessary to share the ρ for the VA
simultaneously. It is therefore suggested to have a single parameter being broadcasted
between the VAs, ρbc, which takes a specific value if the VA wants to inform of its new
entrance if it is charging shares its ρ, and otherwise, if it does not want to be charging
(because its ρ is too low or no EV is connected).
4.2.4
Final remarks on the strategy
Multiple perspectives have been discussed throughout this section compromising into
a strategy. They have provided each their argumentation to provide a single strategy.
Changing slightly on one of the objectives or the tightness of the constraints may offer
the possibility of going for a very different strategy. The strategy proposed in this thesis
is primarily based on a ρ based scheduling which allows a market-based distribution of
the limited resource PC,PCC. Further, it secures that the VAs can provide a collaborative
response to the Pref,CA-signal. To increase the efficiency this can secondarily be a mutual
response. There is now a foundation for sharing information between decision-making
entities. The last objective of the thesis is to provide a robust distributed architecture to
support the strategy this will now be discussed.
4.3
Architecture
As the objectives have been merged into a single strategy, the information-sharing and
decision-making architecture is to be settled. As architecture is the backbone of communi-
cation and decision-making, it has, up until now, been confined and will now be presented
explicitly. Some argumentation may seem redundant to previously made arguments but
consolidates the decisions made for the architecture.
The point of having a distributed control for EV charging is to have as short control loops
as possible without losing functionality. Fast both in terms of few nodes, distance to travel
but most importantly reliant and short delays of time critical information.
Development and testing of smart charging strategies for a workplace parking lot
25
==PAGE:38==
Information needs to be propagated from those with a flexibility need: TSO, DSO, RES
production or PCC measurements, to those providing the flexibility, specifically the EVSE.
Decisions may be taken along the path of the information. However, to provide a simple,
robust, private and fast-reacting system, data should be aggregated at all nodes, and
only the necessary information should be shared with other nodes. This will secure an
efficient system which is efficient even when scaled up. It should be mentioned that the
architecture considerations defined here only focus on the information and not the topol-
ogy of how the data is being shared, e.g. on a shared server, directly between all units or
passed between physical units.
4.3.1
Information in and out of system boundary
To structure the architecture of a system, the most relevant parameters are where and
how the periphery information is available to the system and where the outputs are that
the system should control. Participation in flexibility provisioning requires data common to
the entire electrical system within PCC can react to FTPCC signals. This may be signals
from RES-production, transformer stations, DSO, or TSO. To enable the control loop of the
system, its current performance should be provided to the system in terms of Pmeas,PCC,Φ
measured at PCC.
At the other end of the system, EVSE-specific data inputs sEV SE,i, i, Pmeas,i are unique to
each EVSE. Further, the user input (Ereq,i, tdep,i), which is π-specific, may also be consid-
ered to be addressed to each EVSE as i ∈ψπ. User input is therefore suggested within
the ACDC project to have gathered directly at each EVSE. It is also within each EVSE
that the only outputs of the system are as each EVSE can control the ϕallowed and Iallowed,i
again for all EV SEi. It, therefore, suggests that information streams should all end within
the EVSEs.
4.3.2
Aggregators
The information crossing the boundaries into the system may be picked up by any aggre-
gator to be processed and further distributed to have the information ends at the EVSE.
As the background suggests, the CA is necessary to connect with the FTPCC interactions.
This enables a single ’point of attack’ where all FTPCC entities may communicate with
the cluster. If the interface updates, the change only needs to be made at the CA point.
Further, the calculations may be energy-consuming and require a timed response of the
VAs and thus should not be in each VA.
The ACDC project has been presented in Section 2.4 with a Master VA role, which the first
VA took with an EV connecting. The purpose was to organise the VA’s specific setpoint
values. This architecture, therefore, had both a Master VA and the VA as two separate
aggregators within the control loop from the PCC. The role of a Master VA should be possi-
ble for every VA, so they all have the same information stream available. Lastly, the need
for communicating between the VAs who had the role of Master VA was an unnecessary
addition to the information flow. It has, therefore, for this thesis, been removed from the
structure so that the CA communicates directly to each VA.
As stated above, all the EVSE and session-specific data is directly available at each EVSE.
It is, therefore, very compelling to have an aggregator that can swiftly react to the infor-
mation without the need for any communication. The resulting unit is the VA which con-
trols precisely one set of outputs. It could also have been a VA for each charger, as the
EVSEs would share the internal control hardware. However, as this project builds to be
scalable, modularity is preferred. If an implementation has VAs residing on the same con-
trol hardware, a connection may be formed between those VAs to communicate with high
26
Development and testing of smart charging strategies for a workplace parking lot
==PAGE:39==
reliability.
4.3.3
Internal information paths
As it has been found that decisions should be taken by two types of aggregators, CA and
VAs, the intention is to share a minimum of information between the aggregators while
still upholding the functionality. From the CA, it has therefore been determined that it
broadcasts three values Pref,CA,Φ. This enables the system to react to any flexibility need
it can provide. It has been a goal to avoid information sharing between the VAs. However,
this was not possible, as the analysis has shown. It has, though, been possible to keep
the information shared as low as possible, and this has resulted in just the parameter ρbc,i
for each EV SEi, containing information if the VA wants to start charging, and in case it is
setting; ρint.
Further, the PCC measurements should be broadcasted for the VAs . This information is
specific to the cluster but is bypassed CA handling. This is first of all since the PCC is
assumed to be part of the system and geographically closer to the VAs than the CA. It is
further a time-critical control loop information where the shortest path possible is preferred,
and information is therefore broadcasted directly from the PCC to the VAs.
4.3.4
Proposal for a distributed architecture
From the discussion above of the aggregators and the information streams necessary,
the complete distributed architecture proposed for a working place parking lot is shown in
Figure 4.4.
User input
User input
User input
User input
User Input
VA
VA
VA
VA
VA
VA
PCC
Hardware level
RES
Trafo
Control Software level
Control Boarder Centralized
Distributed
CA
DSO
TSO
price
RES
RT 
Forecast
up/down
regulation
Charger
Charger
Charger
Power lines
Communication
Figure 4.4: The architecture of the proposed system
The figure separates the hardware in the distribution grid from the control software con-
Development and testing of smart charging strategies for a workplace parking lot
27
==PAGE:40==
trolling entities with the horizontal dotted line. The diagonal dotted line indicates where
the central control domain is separated from the distributed control. The central control
suggests that the units report to a single point from which power is individually set. The
distributed control can only be extended to this border as the units RES and Trafo is not
(yet) enabled for distributed controlling, where their information could be directly shared
with the VAs.
As an architecture between the controlling units has been formulated, which supports the
wanted strategy, the information available to each control unit has been defined, and the
internal control of each unit can now be defined.
4.4
Build of strategy
As it has been settled on how the architecture should be for the system to satisfy the objec-
tives, the internal decision-making of the different units should be defined. In other words,
the logic of the entities in the control level of Figure 4.4 should be defined to describe
how the strategy is obtained. The role of the CA, as has been discussed previously, is
to aggregate the data from entities acquiring flexibility and determine a setpoint, Pref,CA,
that satisfies their needs. For these decisions, the CA should have a select few consider-
ations and constraints of the cluster implemented in its decision-making. For this thesis,
the goal is to operate with local decision-making in the VAs to liberate the CA from these
considerations and still obtain the same purpose. The focus of this thesis is purely on the
building of a VA control algorithm that is generic and independent of the number of EVs it
should collaborate with.
A robust decision-making structure should be built where the possible combinations of
inputs and states of the charging session should be considered. A finite state machine
is specifically good at handling those and is therefore chosen to be at the heart of the
decision-making.
The controller scan cycle is primarily adapted from Programmable Logic Controller and
microcontroller architectures and is visualized in Figure 4.5. Each block in the diagram
has exclusive rights to write to specific variables, which other blocks may read. One
block primarily reads variables written by a block earlier in the scan cycle than itself. It,
therefore, follows that the inputs are updated in the internal variables. Internal logic values
are calculated, and the output is sent to the periphery output. This structure has high
reliability directly in the design, providing a great sense of freedom to the programmer.
When the focus is on the scan cycle, the standard [19] states as normative that the OBC
should react to changes in the CP PWM signal within 5 seconds. As different EVs have
different response times within the 5 sec, it is suggested to keep a scan time for the VA
at a minimum of 5 sec to free the control from any complexity arising from this random
deviation.
The logic included in each block of the VA scan Figure 4.5 will now be described further.
Especially the Finite State Machine (sV A), priorities and Power reference are crucial to
this thesis.
Update input
Scan start
End of scan
Calculate
Calculate
Calculate
Calculate
Calculate
Figure 4.5: VA control scan cycle progress
28
Development and testing of smart charging strategies for a workplace parking lot
==PAGE:41==
4.4.1
Update input
Initially, in the scan of the VA, all the external parameters from other control entities or
physical changes measured at the EVSE are retrieved and cached as internal variables.
All of the necessary parameters for the VA are shown in Figure 4.4 where a separate
function within the update input for each communication line ensures modularity of the
build in terms of hardware and software independence, e.g. the communication line from
the CA may change medium or from 3ϕ to Φ and can then be handled in a single explicit
location. How each parameter is fetched depends on the hardware implementation and
will be further discussed in Section 5.1.
4.4.2
Energy handler
As the first thing to calculate within the VA scan is pure calculations that update parame-
ters dependent on multiple inputs from the physical system, hence the power should be
integrated and added to the already charged amount of energy. For the discrete system,
this is:
Echarged = Echarged,prev + Pmeas · δt
(4.5)
Where Pmeas naturally is measured directly at the EVSE and δt is the time since the last
update of Echarged.
The function here may be omitted in some implementations in case this is directly provided
by lower levels of the EVSE system in parallel with Pmeas, as the scan time of the VA will
be at a minimum of 5 sec the precision of Echarged may be undesirably low.
4.4.3
Finite state machine
The finite state machine is central to the behaviour of the VA as it defines the sV A. In
a dynamic control system as presented in Section 2.4.2, the multiple VAs have similar
responses differing by their ρ. Different reaction patterns are necessary to allow new EVs
to enter charging sessions and, more importantly, to enable elevated controllability of the
scheduling. For different reactions a FSM is introduced in the VAs . sV A is specific to
the VA, and any transition between states depends primarily on its input parameters. The
particular state of the VA thereby sets deterministic the behaviour of the output of the VA
depending on the history seen by the VA.
Figure 4.6 visually explains all the states and their transitions. The states are organized
in groups which firstly is based on the usual sequence of the states through a charging
session and secondly is based on regions. The three regions, Active, Powered and Enters,
indicate states with substantial relations. The Enters-region is explicitly the three states
where a VA broadcasts to the other VAs that it needs more power. This broadcast will
make all VAs in the Powered-region transition to one of the two making space states. For
any non-clarified points in the figure, the purpose of all states and the transitions out of
each state will now be further described.
0: Idle
The Idle state is the default state the VAs will take whenever a system restart is initiated.
In this state, the VA will be looking for a valid combination of user inputs (Ereq and tdep)
and an EV being present (sEV SE = {Connected, Charging}). How the user input may
affect an ongoing charging is also an implementation-dependent decision, should a user
be able to update the to a sooner tdep in case something immediate comes up in their plans.
However, for this thesis, it is assumed that the user only inputs data at the beginning of the
session and will be constant parameters until the end. The VA will proceed to starting
point when both conditions are present.
Development and testing of smart charging strategies for a workplace parking lot
29
==PAGE:42==
Active
Powered
Enters
10
Single VA 
Control
0
Idle
1
Starting Point 
3
Queue
4
Queue
Hysteresis
13
Making space 
as marginal
7
Take minimum
8
Increase
6
Wait for space
12
Making space
11
Multi VA
control
17 
Disconnected
18
Session ended
15
Dumb charging
Time in state
Nobody in Enters
No PCC Comm
Re-connection
Another Enters
Nobody in Enters
Nobody in Enters
Another Enters
PCC comm Restored
Diconnected
Constraint
reached
Charging started
No other charging OR
and Nobody in Enters)
User input & Connected
& Nobody in Enters
Figure 4.6: FSM, sV A, states and transitions between different states. The grey regions
indicate groups with some similar transitions. The colour scheme is further utilized in the
result section.
1: Starting Point
The starting point is a decision state where the VA decides how to initiate the charging
session depending on the newly specified user inputs and the information available from
the other VAs and the PCC. At this state, the VA evaluates the charging status of all
other VAs through their broadcasted priority, ρbc (The parameter will be further detailed in
Eq. (4.8), here the information extracted is presented). It evaluates three conditions that
may bring this VA to start charging:
1. If no other VA is charging
2. If no other VA is currently entering and this VA has a higher priority than the marginally
consuming VA
No other VA may be entering as the system is built only to have one VA starting its charging
session at a time. If non of the conditions are satisfied, then the VA may remain in the
state, waiting for the entering VA to transition to a steady state charging state. The VA
will more likely transit to the queuing state as the internal priority, ρint, is less than the
marginal consuming VAs .
3: Queue
The queuing state is intended for scheduling VAs where immediate charging is not urgent
enough to let them charge immediately. This may be both new VAs joining a charging
session and VAs that have been ’pushed out’ of the Powered-region. In this state, the VA
is still active as an EV with proper user input is present; however not powered. When a VA
is queued, it constantly seeks any opportunity to charge again. This may come from two
conditions. Either the VA sees that the VAs in the Powered-region cannot consume the
power requested by the CA, and it will transit to Wait for Space (which only is to ensure
that it is the only one doing so). The other option is that charging at this VA over time has
become urgent as those charging may get a lower priority, and those in the queue will get
30
Development and testing of smart charging strategies for a workplace parking lot
==PAGE:43==
a higher priority. If this happens, it will transit into the Queue Hysteresis state.
4: Queue Hysteresis
Whenever a VA is queued, there will be a time when the ρ of it has surpassed those already
charing. This happens naturally as the EVs not charing will come closer to their departure
time without getting any power, whereas those charging will lower their ρ as they charge.
When a non-charging VA suddenly changes to have a higher priority than the marginally
consuming VA, it should decide when to enter charging. Entering immediately would
cause two VAs to have a constant battle to be charging. This would highly impact the
overall EC,cluster as the switch will have the power consumption drop-down momentarily.
Therefore a hysteresis is implemented, which allows the currently marginally charging VA
to charge for a given period before the VA in the queue goes to Wait for Space.
The transition out of this state could take many different forms, leading to a more ’true’
scheduling or higher security of reaching Ereq in time.
6: wait for space
This state is the only entrance to allow an actual PWM signal to be sent on the CP line. In
this state, the VA has decided that it wants power and broadcasts a signal in the ρbc that it
wants power. This state is also included to ensure that multiple VAs are not simultaneously
in the Enters-region. Therefore, the minimum time in this state needs to be one scan
time; for the others to know, they should also not go to Enters-region. There is only one
transition out of the state, which will be when the VA observes that the PCC has space,
namely when the error between the reference and the measured power of the cluster is
is large enough to allow starting to charge:
Perror,PCC = Pref,CA −Pmeas,PCC ≤4.38 kW3ϕ
(4.6)
7: Take Minimum
When entering this state, the VA has assured that it is the only VA allowed to increase its
power consumption and that the PCC has power space to initiate the charging. Therefore,
the EV will not be allowed to consume any power until this state. When the EV has
responded to the allowance and started charging, the EVSE gets a signal back sEV SE =
Charging, which is utilized as a transition towards the Increaser state.
8: Increaser
In the increaser state, the VA continuously allows the EV to charge with increasing power.
The increase of the Pref naturally depends on the power decrease made by the other
VAs in response to the broadcast of a need for power. The VA may secondarily utilize
this state to conduct empirical evaluations of additional OBC parameters such as 1ϕ or
3ϕ charging and PC,OBC. This functionality will, however, not be utilized for this thesis but
discussed in the Section 5.1.
When gradually increasing the Pref, other constraints will end as the binding constraint
of the charging. When this is the case and the Pref no longer is met by the Pmeas of
the EVSE itself, then the VA has reached the empirically charging limit and no longer
needs exclusive access to increase Pref it will therefore make the transition into the normal
charging operation state.
10: Single VA Control
Specific parameters can be omitted from the control loop whenever a single VA charges.
This will further be explained in Section 4.4.5. Therefore a separate state is included that
conducts this behaviour. Therefore, the only specific transition out of this state is if another
VA is in Enters-region. Suppose a VA is in this state and another is in Enters-region. In
that case, it has already been evaluated that the other VA has a higher ρ, and this VA
becomes V Amarginal and transits directly to making space marginal.
Development and testing of smart charging strategies for a workplace parking lot
31
==PAGE:44==
11: Multi VA Control
This serves as the most steady charging state where the VAs , in collaboration, will be
controlling their consumption to the need of the CA. Again the specific control loop is
explained in Section 4.4.5. The first VA that has entered or is in a situation where all VAs
charging has reached their requested energy, except this VA, will make an immediate
transition as it is the only one in the Powered-region. When steadily charging in this state,
another event that can cause a transition is the need for a new VA to Enter. If another
VA broadcasts a requirement to enter, all VAs in this state will evaluate if they are the
marginally consuming VA, hence the VA charging with the lowest ρbc. If that is the case,
the transition will be to the state of Making Space as Marginal. Otherwise, it will transit
to the Making Space state.
12: Making space
A VA will only find itself in this state when another wants to enter, and another VA already
charging will be in the Making Space as Marginal. Hence the total number of VAs in the
Powered-region is larger than 3. In this state, a VA will keep a steady charging power and
let the VA entering and the VA in Making Space as Marginal handle any necessary con-
trol. However, the VAs in this state will still survey if they suddenly become the marginal
consumer and then transition to Making Space as Marginal. When the VA who was en-
tering no longer broadcasts that it needs the power, a change may again be made back
to Multi VA Control.
13: Making space as marginal
If another VA is entering, the VA with the lowest priority and charging will be the V Amarginal
responsible for ensuring that the new VA entering is given the necessary power. There-
fore only one VA will be in this state at any given time. As the marginal consumer Pref
will steadily decrease, described in Section 4.4.5. If the lower limit of what is accepted
as efficient charging power is breached, the VA will transition to the Queue state as this
VA no longer has priority to participate in charging. Whenever there is no longer a VA
broadcasting it enters, a transition back to the steady charging in Multi VA control is
made.
15: Dumb Charging
Any communication failure will, for this build, lead to a situation where the strategy is
impossible to fulfil. Therefore they will lead to this state where the VA will initiate a charge
without any input considerations. The VAs caught in this state may return to the regular
smart charging operation when the communication is re-established. All VAs will then
proceed to the Starting Point state as the distributed control units need a renegotiation.
17: Disconnected
If the EVSE finds the cable has been disconnected, it will transit to this state. This may
arise from many outside circumstances and may, in most cases, result in a terminated
charging session; however, if it were a fault, the charging would still be possible to restart
within the same session. If a reconnection is made, the VA will transit to a new decision-
making of how to proceed in the state Starting Point. If this does not occur, a transition
will be performed out of this state again when the departure time given by the user tdep
will cause a transition to the Session Ended condition.
18: Session ended
The final state that a VA will take within any charging session is to finalize the session
after all power has been shut. All variables are reset to default values, and specifically for
this build, the VA waits until both the EV is disconnected and tdep is reached. These will
be the last conditions of the session and enable the VA to go back to Idle, where a new
session may start.
32
Development and testing of smart charging strategies for a workplace parking lot
==PAGE:45==
General transitions
In addition to all the transitions specific to certain states, The VA needs a few transitions
with a broader perspective. From all states in the Active-region, abnormal hardware sit-
uations may interfere. For now, two transitions are possible. Firstly a persistent commu-
nication failure may cause a shift to the Dumb Charging state. Secondly, a stop of the
charging session, i.e. sEV SE = Idle, cause a transition to the state Disconnected. From
the more confined Powered-region, there is the apparent transition that the charging may
have ended as the Echarged have reached Ewanted, hence EC = 0 kW.
4.4.4
Priority
The priority as Pavg was already introduced in Section 2.4.2 and is a convenient measure
of how urgent charging is for the user. The concepts of a broadcasted ρbc and an internal
ρint priority have also been introduced in the section above and will now be elaborated
upon. The internal priority is, to some extent, inherited from Section 2.4.2. The difference
is that ρint only is an operational parameter when the VA is actively participating in the
smart charging:
ρint =
{
Ereq−Echarged
tdep−tnow·PC,EV SE
if: Starting Point ≤sV A ≤Making Space as Marginal
0
otherwise
(4.7)
Remarks that the two values Ereq and tdep are constants for the charging session, but
tnow continuously increases to increase ρint and whenever the EV is charging Echarged
increases to lower ρint. From the implementation in Section 2.4.2, a lesson learned is
that power is shared (making those with very high priority get suboptimal power as a
sharing strategy). Moreover, the strategy was implemented on a first come, first serve.
With the FSM, sharing has now been turned towards a higher emphasis on scheduling.
The concept of making space for a new VA has been discussed in Section 4.2, which
requires that it broadcast information that it needs to get into the market. This information
will be integrated into the priority broadcast to the other VAs :
ρbc =











0
if: sV A ≤Queue Hysteresis
0
if: Dumb Charging ≤sV A
1
if: Wait For Space ≤sV A ≤Increase
ρint
otherwise
(4.8)
As may be seen above, the priority is broadcasted as 0 also when it is in the
sV A = {Queue, Queue Hysteresis}. This makes it possible to distinguish those getting
power from those not charging. This differentiation brings forward the ρbc of the VA, which
is at the margin of not being allowed to charge, namely V Amarginal and its ρmarginal, which
also has been discussed with the FSM. That the VAs in the queue does not broadcast
their ρint does, however, come with the downside that they lose the capability to determine
which should be the next to enter when capacity is available. This feature is not considered
for this implementation as it would be trivial to implement on top, but for long charging
sessions it will not be important who gets into charging first.
An additional priority-related parameter is introduced for the power calculations to deter-
mine how much responsibility the individual VA has for minimizing Perror,PCC. A high-
priority VA should be eager to increase its power consumption when needed but less
Development and testing of smart charging strategies for a workplace parking lot
33
==PAGE:46==
willing to decrease its consumption if required. To ensure that the right amount of respon-
sibility is taken, the parameter relative priority, ρr, is introduced:
ρr =
ρint
∑Ncluster
i=1
ρbc,i
(4.9)
Where Ncluster is the number of EVSEs in the cluster. Therefore, ρr yields the part for
which this VA can take responsibility when increasing. And when decreasing Pcluster the
part which it should not take responsibility of, but rather all the others.
The three parameters ρint, ρbc and ρr are, therefore, three dependent variables that, in
each their way, aid the VA in making decisions that are in alignment with the other VAs
who also takes part in the control.
4.4.5
Power reference
The reader should realize how the VA has been prepared to participate in the cluster’s
behaviour to control the power consumption, i.e. make Pcluster to align with Pref,CA. The
participation depends firstly on sV A, e.g. VAs with no EV connected or in the queue cannot
participate. The control loop from the setpoint of the CA has been presented in Figure 4.7.
The figure relates to the communication lines in Figure 4.4, but with a focused view on the
internal components.
VA
VA
EVSE HW
DEIF HW
CA
P2I
I2PWM
Measurement
Proximity
Measurement
EV
PCC
To other VAs
+
-
+
+
Control signal
Power lines
Figure 4.7: The main control loop of a VA.
The CA decision-making provides a continuous data stream of three setpoints values
for the cluster, Pref,CA,Φ. One for each phase. This signal is fetched by each VA and
subtracted by the measured power of the cluster to yield Perror,PCC,Φ. The minimum
error is then found and multiplied by 3 to indicate the total amount of power that may
be addressed with the output handle availible for the VA (setting Iallowed). This assumes
3ϕ charging. However, if already charging with ϕallowed = 1ϕ, it may utilize the specific
phase instead. The Perror,PCC,3ϕ is then fed into the Pref,i block, which has sV A specific
behaviour. The two most interesting cases are highlighted in Figure 4.8, where the other
states’ behaviour may be seen in appendix A.
When a VA has sV A = Single VA Control, it knows that it is the only VA controlling the
PPCC. Hence it may act as a normal single controller. The selector box in Figure 4.8a
has the following outcome:
Pref,i =
{
Pref,i,prev
if: 0 kW ≤Perror,PCC,3ϕ ≤Pdb
Pref,i,prev + Perror,PCC,3ϕ
otherwise
(4.10)
34
Development and testing of smart charging strategies for a workplace parking lot
==PAGE:47==
+
+
(a) sV A = Single VA Control
0
+
+
(b) sV A = Multi VA Control
Figure 4.8: Pref,i blocks for the two steady state sV A states. The rest of the states are
placed in appendix A.
This indicates that the control system is satisfied with the current power consumption if
it is within a deadband below the setpoint from the CA. And if not, this VA will take full
responsibility for adding the error to its setpoint. When the case is that a group of VAs
is stationary and powered, they will have the state sV A = Multi VA Control seen in
Figure 4.8b, where:
Pref,i =





Pref,i,prev
if: 0 kW ≤Perror,PCC,3ϕ ≤Pdb
Pref,i,prev + Perror,PCC,3ϕ · ρr
if: Pdb ≤Perror,PCC,3ϕ
Pref,i,prev + Perror,PCC,3ϕ · (1 −ρr)
otherwise
(4.11)
The selector box utilizes the Pref,i,prev, when Perror,PCC,3ϕ is within the deadband, the ρr
gain when it is otherwise positive and (1 −ρr) when it is negative1.
An architecture with deterministic actions has now been developed where the VAs as a
cluster are able to respond in accordance with the three objectives for the VA. It is thus
time to test it out in real-life implementation.
1After testing it has been theoretically detected that the equation will overcompensate when more than
two EVs are connected. It should therefore more correctly be: ρr =
(1−ρr)
(Npowered−1) Npowered > 1. This does
not affect the tests performed for this thesis as it is never tested with more than two EVs in this state.
Development and testing of smart charging strategies for a workplace parking lot
35
==PAGE:48==
36
Development and testing of smart charging strategies for a workplace parking lot
==PAGE:49==
5
Implementation
To test the build described above, the test setup described in Section 2.4.1 has been used
as the foundation; changes have been made as this is a new iteration on the setup that
seeks to be a more confined distributed architecture. As the first section title indicates,
this is not entirely true to the proposed build of Section 4.4. The discrepancy has been
necessary from hardware constraints, which will be highlighted throughout the section, to
guide work on the subsequent iterations of the ACDC project. A section then describes the
extra testbench functionalities implemented to ensure that the tests can be performed and
appropriately visualised. The documentation provided further highlights considerations to
establish the best foundation for testing the build’s functionality with the setup.
5.1
Emulation of a distributed system
This section will concurrently describe how the implementation of the build has been per-
formed and adapted to the existing hardware. Much of the generic design has been
described above and will not be additionally described here. The implementation of this
control is mainly produced in Python. The code is stored in a git repository but contains
confidential matter. It is, therefore, not reported in this thesis but may become publicly
available at a later point.
5.1.1
Central controller emulating distributed control
As also seen in Section 2.4.1, the architecture resembles a central controller, as all code to
control is positioned in one unit, giving individual setpoints for each EVSE. This structure
has neither been possible to change nor wanted for this first trial of having a distributed
strategy controlling multiple chargers. It has not been desired since the central control pro-
vides a platform where changes in the control code are easily implemented, and changes
in the firmware of the EVSE require too heavy involvement of Circle Consult.
The architecture of the code has been completely transformed from the implementation in
Section 2.4.2. A resemblance of distributed architecture with object oriented programming
(OOP) was drawn, which provides vital usability. In OOP, the programming is built from
the perspective of objects. A key aspect of OOP is encapsulating data and functions
into objects (Python: Classes). The data is private to each object, and the functions are
shared for objects of the same type. The modularity of OOP makes it very convenient for
emulating distributed systems.
The control logic of the chargers has therefore been implemented as the ControlCode.py
code in Figure 5.1 where the controlling part of a charger is emulated as an object, CH,
and with two VA child objects (one for each EVSE). The emulated architecture, therefore,
has no impact on the build of the VA in Section 4.4 as they live inside the chargers and
only may change the input/output formats, i.e. the object of a CH and VA may be taken
directly from the control code and inserted within a hardware charger and function there.
The emulation thereby seeks to have code which inherits that data is only explicitly shared
among different units and therefore controlled to the data detailed in Figure 5.1.
5.1.2
Scan cycle and multithreading
However, a compromise of the emulation is made as the distributed control is made single-
threaded. An aspect that has to be considered with the method is that ControlCode.py
puts all the control into a single thread to be run on with a single kernel of the server. With
Development and testing of smart charging strategies for a workplace parking lot
37
==PAGE:50==
Power lines
ControlCode.py
PCC
Hardware level
Control Software level 
Webpage
Server 1 / Local PC
Server 2 / syslab maven
VA
VA
VA
VA
VA
VA
CH
CH
CH
db2whiteboard.py
CA
query_PIOT.py
Charger
Charger
Charger
Solid: Time critical
Dashed: Non time critical
Power lines
AWS
Internal
.csv
Whiteboard
energidata.dk
database.db
.csv-files
Figure 5.1: The system communication lines with the ControlCode containing objects for
chargers and VAs. Only hardware and logic-containing elements are mentioned. Medi-
ums of communication are shown as arrows of different colours.
a distributed architecture, the controllers will run their scan cycle asynchronically and even
out of phase. This may cause issues that will not be sighted with this testing method.
The scan cycle of the ControlCode.py has further been set to 10 sec plus an additional
0.1 sec per charger to allow time between sending packages to AWS. This will not stress
the system from the control engineering perspective as the controlled real-life system
should respond to changes within 5 sec. It was in the preliminary tests found that the
communication to AWS was interrupted when running below 10 sec. It is a parameter that
could later be an optimization investigation.
Therefore, the combination of the two aspects mentioned above assures unintendedly
that approximately 10 sec pass after the last change of any PWM signal until the following
scan of the VAs is initiated.
5.1.3
Communication lines
It can further be seen in Figure 5.1 that all communication of inputs to the VAs has now
been transferred to propagate through Whiteboard. During the building of the architecture,
it has been an ongoing issue to get through firewalls with publicly accessible data, such
as user input and visualization on the one side and connection to AWS on the other. As
the final system is thought to have user inputs directly at the chargers, this is not seen as a
problem of priority. All ControlCode communication has been made as links in Whiteboard
to work around the firewall. The ControlCode has been liberated on the input side and may
38
Development and testing of smart charging strategies for a workplace parking lot
==PAGE:51==
be positioned in any domain dependent on the AWS needs. The modular implementation
which has been described in the Build Section 4.4 enables to replace of the inputs to
more secure connections from the CA, PCC and other VAs when the control functions
have shown its applicability and should be prepared for further implementation.
5.1.4
EVSE measurement feedback
Another deficit impacting the implementation is the direct feedback on the charging pro-
cess. As may be seen in Figure 5.1, the VAs only gets sEV SE as feedback from the EVSE.
The parallel development within the hardware has not been able to provide measurements
directly of the power flow through the EVSE. It is a critical issue for the current strategy
but is expected to be implemented later as it is essential information for users’ billing. For
the implementation, the feedback of the Pmeas,i,Φ has therefore been omitted and does
not provide a limit of the Pref,i. The control loop in the VA, thus, may unintendedly operate
with an unwanted large error between the Pref,i and the actual Pi,Φ. This will generate a
slower response to a lowering of its power consumption, which may cause other VAs to
respond before this VA provides any response on the PPCC,Φ. The case further disables
the VA to evaluate the PC,OBC and whether it is a 1ϕ OBC as sought in Section 4.4.3
sV A = Increaser. Without this information, the VA may get stuck in sV A = Increaser as
the expected power consumption is not reached, which would make the VA transit to the
Controlling states.
5.1.5
User input from webpage
Another difference seen between the proposed build in Figure 4.4 and the emulating sys-
tem in Figure 5.1 is the user input. Again, the hardware is not currently able to com-
municate with the users. The user communication is therefore provided by the ACDC
webpage Section 2.4.1. The script, db2whiteboard.py developed within this thesis runs
on the webpage’s server. The script runs every 10 sec to search the database for any
valid entry and send the Ereq and tdep to Whiteboard for each VA to react upon.
5.1.6
Continuity of the runtime
Another issue caught in the preliminary testing was the code’s continuity. In the first im-
plementations that included a changing Pref,i i ∈{1..6}, the code stopped after a period
of up to 2 h. For the ACDC project, it is essential to have a system that can also run when
it is not supervised with operators ready to restart the code.
As code seldom crashes from internal errors, it was found that the issue was within the
communication with other entities. Bugfixing showed that when the data was sent to AWS,
it required feedback from the AWS that the message was received; otherwise, the third-
party functions would cause the code to stop. Therefore, every location with inputs or
outputs has been enclosed in an exception-handling routine. The output communication
drops a message in the terminal of which communication is lost, and the code may con-
tinue. A default value (usually a specific negative value) for the input has been set for the
parameter. This enables the following program to know that communication is lost and
may react to it, e.g. by going to sV A = Dumb Charging.
5.2
Testbench functions
In addition to the developed system described above, a few extra functions have been
made to surround the system with an environment where it is possible to perform all the
tests. As the tests are performed on real hardware and with real EVs and a beta setup for
taking user input, this is all at a point where it should be. However, the generation of the
signals that the CA broadcasts to the VA and the data output are testbench parts neces-
sary to test but should be kept separate from the implemented code. Further development
Development and testing of smart charging strategies for a workplace parking lot
39
==PAGE:52==
has also been done to ensure smooth debugging throughout the testing.
5.2.1
Debugging of system
The whole setup on which the strategy tests have been performed has multiple parallel
development tracks, and faults have been shown to occur throughout the control loop.
This brought up the need for a simple open loop controller in which an individual Iallowed
could be sent through AWS to the EVSE hardware from the control code. This open
control allowed for fast testing of the hardware, if it was able to charge and able to react
to a change in the Iallowed.
The other way arround the code was also made to enable debugging of the software.
This was simply implemented with a question for the operator when starting the script if
the output of the code should be published to AWS. This option was utilized when running
a new function for the first time and check if it had an expected behaviour.
5.2.2
Emulation of CA signal
The script Gen_P_ref_for_CA.py has been produced to generate the power reference
signal, which may be the output of any computation of the CA. The script creates a se-
ries of timestamps and Pref,CA,3ϕ values representing a constant, steps or sinus power
setpoint signal. The steps and sinus have a maximum and minimum power setpoint and
sampling time (time between steps), and further, the step function has the step size in
kW. These essential functions enable simple tests which provide great insight into the
system’s behaviour. The script may be run on a different kernel parallel to the Control-
Code.py of the Local PC to generate/overwrite the file P_ref.csv-file. This enables the
test system operator to change the setpoints, directly affecting the running control code.
The CA will then read the P_ref.csv-file for each scan, take the most recent value from the
time series, and broadcast it to the VAs in Whiteboard. The most recent value ensures
that the CA still has a value to broadcast even if the file has not been updated with new
fitting time series. However, it will just be running with the constant of the last value in the
time series. It is also be noted here that the P_ref.csv file contains 3ϕ-values- where the
only logic inside the CA is to distribute the power equally into each phase for a Φ-signal,
a power reference for each phase.
5.2.3
Data logging
Lastly, the emulation of the system requires data to be extracted. This has been one
of the arguments for keeping the single-threaded emulation and reporting this thesis.
With all the code running in ControlCode.py, the data logging has been possible to im-
plement as a non-intrusive and straightforward part of the code. Non-intrusive as it is
completely separated from the controlling code and only takes the object’s stored vari-
ables at the end of each scan and extracts them into its data structure, a dict. This
way, the data logging is inherent in the control code and will not be passed on when
the Charger.py and VirtualAggregator.py code is passed to an actual implementation.
When the code is implemented, a different method for data logging needs to be devel-
oped. The logging implemented in the Conctrolcode is stored in a dict which is stored in
the file CCLog_<final_timestamp>.csv-file (CC, in this case, referring to ControlCode, and
the <> is a placeholder) as a timestamp time series when the code is stopped. The same
file format is utilized with the data logged in prova2.csv by query_PIOT.py, developed
before I initiated the project. This file both contains the PCC measurements and sEV SE
and is logging at approximately 1 sec sampling time. With the two .csv-files mentioned
above and the manual control input file P_ref.csv from the emulation of the CA signal, all
the necessary data for evaluation of the cluster’s behaviour is gathered and ready to be
utilized for the tests.
40
Development and testing of smart charging strategies for a workplace parking lot
==PAGE:53==
6
Results and Discussion
6.1
Overview of tests
In this section, an overview and introduction to reading the results of the tests conducted
are provided, followed by a detailed analysis of five different tests that offer valuable in-
sights into the system’s functionality.
Tests have been selected and designed to provide insight into the dynamics of a larger
cluster, the relative drop may seem high when an ev goes to zero for another to take over,
however, the relative drop of the cluster will be less as the cluster increases. Throughout
the tests, it is the intention to test all the significant transitions in the FSM Figure 4.6 by
letting one VA pass it.
All the tests described below have been performed on the same code. It is, therefore
essential to highlight that no manual settings have been necessary to switch between
different modes for different tests to showcase the abilities.
The first two test shows how the system reacts to different user and EV behaviour. Test
three and four show how the system responds to changes in the Pref,CA signal with a
single VA and two competing VAs controlling, respectively. The final test shows how the
system will react to a communication failure. The test cases will be described with the
purpose of the test, the testing procedure and thereafter the actual outcome of the per-
formed tests will be displayed and discussed. Some tests have time intervals of particular
interest, which will be further highlighted.
6.1.1
General conditions for the tests
For the tests, a few conditions have to be satisfied by the EVs to get a For all tests, EVs
are utilized with SOC = 15 % to 85 % as the EVs charging behaviour is assumed constant
in this region. The upper limit will therefore be considered when entering the user input
data.
Furthermore, the tests will only be carried out with 3ϕ EVs as the system is unable to
determine if an EV only charges 1ϕ and will therefore not be able to react accordingly.
6.1.2
Introduction to reading the test result figure
A short introduction to how the result plots are read should be made. The plots gather
many parameters that will dynamically affect each other. Each pair of VA, EVSE, plug,
and its connected EV will have the same ID number and colour code throughout the plots
in this Results section (one EV may be connected to different EVSEs and thereby have
an other ID). Refer to the first test Figure 6.1 for this introduction. sEV SE refers to the
published by the EVSE to Whiteboard and is closely related to the voltage level of the CP
(see: Section 2.1.2). EVs may be in connected either because charging has not started
yet, as user input needs to be present, they are in the queue, or charging has ended.
Which of the three may be seen in the plot below: sV A is also a digital state variable and
thus can take any value from Figure 4.6. The plot only has labels for a select number
of states. The background colours of the figure refer directly to the colours of the state
machine in Figure 4.6 and should give the reader a good understanding of the immediate
behaviour of the VA. The following plot of the priority ρ also indicates much of the behaviour
and both have the internal, ρint, and broadcast, ρbc, where the internal is utilized for its
own decisions and the broadcast states how others should react to it. The reader may
Development and testing of smart charging strategies for a workplace parking lot
41
==PAGE:54==
be reminded by this figure that ρbc = 1 for any VA in the green Enters group of sV A. The
last plot shows the actual results of the system’s performance in power consumption. All
values are on a 3ϕ base, hence the sum of the three phases. By looking at the control
loop in Figure 4.7 it may be observed that the minimum error, ϕmin is utilized therefore
being a source of the discrepancy between Pref,CA and Pmeas,PCC as some EVs have
an unbalanced consumption on the 3 phases. Also, keep in mind that the ∑Ncluster
i=1
Pref,i
ideally should match Pref,CA and thereby also Pmeas,PCC however as there is no feedback
for this system it will not always be the case.
As we have been through the basic interpretation of the figures, the reader is assumed to
know the dynamics represented in the result figures.
42
Development and testing of smart charging strategies for a workplace parking lot
==PAGE:55==
6.2
Making space
As mentioned in the method, the users’ perspective should be considered and instantly
allow a user with high priority to start charging immediately. To showcase this, a cluster
with Pref,CA = 21 kW has been set up where three EVs connect, with new EVs always
connecting with a larger priority than the prior. After charging the high-priority EV, the
others should regain the power to charge until they have fulfilled the Ereq,i given by the
user.
For this test, the following procedure was followed:
1. Set a constant reference signal from CA: Pref,CA = 21 kW
2. Plug 3: Connect BMW i3 with user input: ∆t = 1 h, Ereq,3 = 5 kWh,
3. Wait for steady consumption.
4. Plug 4: Connect Renault Megane with user input: ∆t = 0.75 h, Ereq,4 = 5 kWh,
5. Wait for steady consumption.
6. Plug 5: Connect Peugeot 208e with user input: ∆t = 0.5 h, Ereq,5 = 5 kWh
The energy needed for the entire cluster is therefore 15 kWh within 1 hour, which schedul-
ing enables to reach. The input for the Peugeot 208e is, however more critical with a
Pavg = 10 kW which is close to the OBC capability of 11 kW.
Error
Idle
Connected
Charging
sEV SE
*1
*2
*3
*4
EVSE 3
EVSE 4
EVSE 5
Idle
Queue
Take Min.
Multi
Dumb
Done
sV A
VA 3
VA 4
VA 5
0
1
;
3bc
4bc
5bc
3int
4int
5int
0
300
600
900
1200
1500
1800
2100
2400
2700
time [sec]
0
10
20
P[kW]
Pref,3
Pref,4
Pref,5
Pref,CA
Pmeas,3?
Figure 6.1: Results of the ability to make space. At mark *2 and *3 is further described in
Figure 6.2 and Figure 6.3.
It is seen in figure Figure 6.1 that charging starts when the first EV connects and is given
more power on Pref,3 = 22 kW than the EV can consume (seen on Pmeas,PCC = 10.5 kW).
When the second EV connects at mark *1 and starts charging VA 3 assures that it gets
the requested power by decreasing Pref,3. As Pref,3 > PEV,3 this has no real effect on
the power consumed by EV 3. Now after mark *1 the two EVs have a combined con-
sumption close to Pref,CA and when EV 5 connects it overtakes the power consumption
at mark *2. The dynamics of the overtaking are further discussed below with Figure 6.2.
After mark *2, we have the wanted situation where the two EVs with the highest ρ are
charging, namely EV 4 and 5. This should be a steady charging until one reaches a
lower priority than VA 3 in the queue. However, a situation occurs at mark *3, which is
Development and testing of smart charging strategies for a workplace parking lot
43
==PAGE:56==
further discussed with Figure 6.3, which shuffles the charging and suddenly VA 3 and 5
is charging where VA 3 has a lower priority than VA 4 in the queue. Therefore observed
that sV A,4 = Queue_hysteresis, where it stays for 10 minutes before it again takes over
charging.
In the period where all 3 EVs are connected, between mark *3 and *4, it is further observed
how the priority of VA 5 is increasing to 0.99. The total time given for VA 5 from the start of
charge to tdep is 22 min as charging has to be initiated with the key present for the Peugeot.
Therefore the Pavg = 5 kWh
22 min = 13.6 kW which is more than the the Peugeots PC,OBC and
therefore impossible to reach within tdep. In other words, the priority increases as the
denominator increases faster than the numerator in Eq. (4.7). As the result shows the
VA keeps charging with ρ = 0.99 from 1613 sec to 1903 sec to ensure that the negotiated
energy is reached. This could represent a pricy option chosen by a user who wants to
leave as soon as possible but needs a certain amount of energy to reach their next charge
point.
As the PCC has a PC,PCC = 22 kW, any combination of user input that combined goes
above this should be avoided. For this system where PC,PCC = PC,EV SE which normal-
izes the ρ function, a sum of all priorities should never be above 1. If that is the case
then the average power wanted by the users is higher than the power the cluster may
provide and some users will not be charged. This should be considered when designing
the pricing function in Eq. (4.3).
6.2.1
*2 Zoom: Taking over power
A deeper dive into the dynamics when one VA takes over power is highlighted with Fig-
ure 6.2 where the full-time scale is 100 sec just after the takeover is initiated at mark *2.
The process is initiated as user input becomes present for VA 5, and it seems that its
ρint,5 > ρbc,j ∀j ̸= 5, and therefore goes to sV A = wait_for_space and broadcasts
ρbc,5 = 1. In the next scan cycle of the centralized control format, all other charging EVs
adapt. VA 5 goes to the stationary power output state sV A = Making_space and VA 3 with
the lowest ρbc transits to sV A = Making_space_as_marginal. The latter therefore now
takes the role of gradually scaling down Pref,3. As it reaches below the efficient charging
limit it stops charging and transits to sV A = Queue. When the marginal consumer stops
charging the Perror,PCC is sufficient for VA 5 to initiate charging and Pmeas,PCC increases
back up to the control deadband of 1 kW within the Pref,CA. All in all, the manoeuvre to
take over power functioned as intended with a total energy transfer loss of approximated
as the integral between Pmeas,PCC and the steady consumption of P = 20 kWh:
section 1:
qEloss,1 =4 kW · {495 sec to 515 sec} = 4 kW · 20 sec = 0.022 kWh
(6.1)
section 2:
Eloss,2 =10 kW · {515 sec to 545 sec} = 10 kW · 30 sec = 0.083 kWh
(6.2)
total:
Eloss =Eloss,1 + Eloss,2 = 0.11 kWh
(6.3)
6.2.2
*3 Zoom: Overcompensating scenario
In this short timescale, the input acts unexpectedly for the algorithm forcing it to generate
an unintended output. The outcome has already been discussed above that a VA with
lower priority pushes the marginal consuming EV down into the queue. As may be seen in
Figure 6.3 the trigger is when EVSE 5 with the Peugeot suddenly changes from charging to
connected. This is caused by the behavior of the Peugeot that immediately stops charging
when the keys are brought near the vehicle, as if ‘now the user needs the EV and charging
should stop’. The VA has not implemented any logic to react to this behavior and stays
44
Development and testing of smart charging strategies for a workplace parking lot
==PAGE:57==
Error
Idle
Connected
Charging
sEV SE
*2
EVSE 3
EVSE 4
EVSE 5
Idle
Queue
Take Min.
Multi
Dumb
Done
sV A
VA 3
VA 4
VA 5
0
1
;
3bc
4bc
5bc
3int
4int
5int
460
470
480
490
500
510
520
530
540
550
560
570
time [sec]
0
10
20
P[kW]
Pref,3
Pref,4
Pref,5
Pref,CA
Pmeas,3?
Figure 6.2: Zoomed in view on mark *2 to highlight the dynaics in the switch.
in sV A = Multi_VA_Control. This leaves a Perror,PCC = 10 kWh which is seen by the
other two VAs . VA 4 with the Renault that has a PC,EV = 22 kW ramps up the Pref,4 to
close the gap. VA 3, who is in the queue, reacts by entering the charging market and
starts charging as it still sees a positive Perror,PCC. To sum up, at 725 sec consumption
is at 0 kW, leaving VA 3 and 4 to ramp up. And simultaneously the Peugeot at EVSE 5
is restarting its charging. Leaving all EVs in a ramp-up state. It is therefore seen that
Pmeas,PCC reach 33.5 kWfar above Pref,CA. When the cluster still is in the states to allow
another to enter, the marginal consumer (VA 4) and the VA entering (VA 3) are those
reacting to the Perror,PCC, and both react by bringing charging to a stop. At 746 sec VA 4
transits to the queue as it assumes no power is available for it any longer, and VA 3 can
take over as usual again.
This case is surely something that can and should be prevented in any commercial im-
plementation. A recommendation to EV producers is that EVs should aim at a more con-
tinuous charge pattern. Similarly, the VA control should be allowed a certain period of
instability of the error between the Pref,CA and Pmeas,PCC before VAs initiate the transi-
tion from the queue to actual charging. A simple note also is that it should be prevented
with less aggressive control algorithms.
Development and testing of smart charging strategies for a workplace parking lot
45
==PAGE:58==
Error
Idle
Connected
Charging
sEV SE
*3
EVSE 3
EVSE 4
EVSE 5
Idle
Queue
Take Min.
Multi
Dumb
Done
sV A
VA 3
VA 4
VA 5
0
1
;
3bc
4bc
5bc
3int
4int
5int
700
710
720
730
740
750
760
770
780
790
800
time [sec]
0
10
20
30
P[kW]
Pref,3
Pref,4
Pref,5
Pref,CA
Pmeas,3?
Figure 6.3: Zoomed in view on mark *3 to highlight a case of overcompensation.
6.3
Scheduling of long term charging
This test will showcase the dynamics of priority and scheduling by having two EVs with
long-term charging sessions. The two EVs will have the same departure time but with
different energy demands and should showcase how they both end their charging within
a short time of each other.
1. Set a constant reference signal from CA: Pref,CA = 11 kW
2. Plug 3: Connect Volvo XC40 with user input: ∆t = 3 h, Ereq,3 = 20 kWh,
3. Wait for steady consumption.
4. Plug 5: Connect Renault Megane with user input: ∆t = 3 h, Ereq,5 = 10 kWh,
Pref,CA is set below EC,cluster as this brings the PCC constraint down to the same as
for one EV. This helps showcase the scheduling and makes the algorithm more reliable
when the EVSE has no ’private’ power measurement feedback. As the PCC is set to not
consume more than 11 kW the two EVs should be able to charge within: t = 30 kWh
11 kW =
2.72 h.
46
Development and testing of smart charging strategies for a workplace parking lot
==PAGE:59==
Error
Idle
Connected
Charging
sEV SE
*1
*2
*3
EVSE 3
EVSE 5
Idle
Queue
Take Min.
Multi
Dumb
Done
sV A
VA 3
VA 5
0
1
;
3bc
5bc
3int
5int
0
1800
3600
5400
7200
9000
10800
time [s]
0
10
20
P[kW]
Pref,3
Pref,5
Pref,CA
Pmeas,3?
Figure 6.4: Results of long term charging. Mark * 2 is zoomed in in Figure 6.5
It can be observed in Figure 6.4 how the test with the above recipe has been performed.
For the first hour, EV 3 is changing steadily at the 11 kW power set by the CA. VA 5 can be
seen in the queue as it immediately found that Perror,PCC could not allow a VA with lower
priority than those already charging to intervene. After the first hour follows two hours
with a distinct charging pattern. Mark *1 and *2 showcases two consecutive events of the
pattern and have been chosen in the finishing part as the control parameters are more
apparent. At mark *1, it is observed that VA 3 transits to sV A = Queue_Hysteresis as it
now has a larger ρint than the marginal charging VA broadcasts. VA 3 then waits in the
hysteresis for 10 minutes until mark *2 which is more elaborate in Figure 6.5. At mark *2
VA 3 has determined that after waiting for the 10 min it should start its charge and goes
into the Entering region where it broadcasts a ρbc,5 = 1. VA 3 reacts by going directly
to sV A = making_space_as_marginal and puts down its power consumption. First to a
Pref,5 = 6.3 kW. Then at the next scan, the cal_state sees that Pref,5,prev < 6.9 kW3ϕ =
10 A, and therefore puts the VA into the Queue and charging stops. When VA 5 has
stopped a normal initiation sequence is performed by VA 3, where the OBC connected
exhibits a smooth ramp up of the power consumption which is approximately 35 sec.
In Figure 6.5 a loss of energy transfer is observed. 40 sec of 10 kW power lost for ev-
ery switch, which gives a lost energy transfer of 0.111 kWh. Which has less impact on
EC,cluster than the other options discussed in the method section for detecting new users.
However, it could be better with a more true scheduling algorithm where any VA is parked
in the queue.
In order to reach real scheduling the transition criteria from the queue could be altered from
having higher priority than one charging to just putting itself in the back. This does however
require that the PC of the EV is known as it is essential for this calculation. Otherwise,
it becomes a gamble of ’how long do I trust I can be not charging before I need to get
back in’. And further, any ’miscalculation/misestimation of EVs would hit customers very
unevenly.
Development and testing of smart charging strategies for a workplace parking lot
47
==PAGE:60==
Error
Idle
Connected
Charging
sEV SE
*2
EVSE 3
EVSE 5
Idle
Queue
Take Min.
Multi
Dumb
Done
sV A
VA 3
VA 5
0
1
;
3bc
5bc
3int
5int
7550
7560
7570
7580
7590
7600
7610
7620
7630
time [sec]
0
10
20
P[kW]
Pref,3
Pref,5
Pref,CA
Pmeas,3?
Figure 6.5: Zoomed in view on mark *2 to highlight the dynamics in the switch.
6.4
Varying CA reference signal with a single EV
Above it has been shown how the system functions with respect to distinct user behaviours
and satisfies their needs. The focus will now move to how the system reacts in regards to
the grid, more specifically, the Pref,CA signal. As the system operates under two different
modes, if there is a single or multiple EVs connected a test of both will be performed. First,
a test with a single EV will be conducted where a generated step down and up signal is
imposed by Pref,CA. The procedure is as follows:
1. Set a constant reference signal from CA: Pref,CA = 21 kW
2. Plug 4: Connect Renault Megane with user input: ∆t = 1 h, Ereq,4 = 5 kWh,
3. Wait for steady consumption.
4. Change to a constant reference signal from CA: Pref,CA = 14 kW
5. Wait for steady consumption.
6. Change to a constant reference signal from CA: Pref,CA = 21 kW
7. Repeat from step 4 a couple of times
For this test, the Renault Megane is utilized which first of all deviates by having PC,OBC =
22 kW, but also has in preliminary results shown to be very aligned on the consumption
of all
48
Development and testing of smart charging strategies for a workplace parking lot
==PAGE:61==
Error
Idle
Connected
Charging
sEV SE
*1
*2
*3
EVSE 4
Idle
Queue
Take Min.
Multi
Dumb
Done
sV A
VA 4
0
1
;
4bc
4int
0
300
600
900
time [sec]
0
10
20
P[kW]
Pref,4
Pref,CA
Pmeas,3?
Figure 6.6: Result of a single VA response to changing Pref,CA.
It should be reminded here that this only tests one VAs ability to adapt the power output
and therefore does not test the collaborative decisionmaking as the VA is steadily work-
ing in sV A = single_VA_control. Throughout Figure 6.6 it can be seen that the VA and
EV in collaboration alter the control signal and thereafter the Pmeas,PCC to accommodate
the reference signal from the CA. Explicitly at mark *1 the Pref,CA changes from 22 kW
to 14 kW which is followed by the VA reference signal 16 sec later and the measurement
again reacts 2 sec after that and stabilizes at the new setpoint within 3 sec more. The
ControlCode.py is set to run the code every 10 sec+0.1·Nchargers, and can therefore not
explain the 16 sec delay alone. But a communication failure is suspected as the change at
mark *1 is the only change with a delay more than 10.2 sec. The most likely is that the CA
could not read the .csv file, which could have been non-readable during the write of the
new values. In this case, it defaults to the previous value stored in the CA internal mem-
ory. Another point could be when the CA writes its internal value Pref,CA,Φ to Whiteboard
for the VAs to read them. At mark *2, the step is in the other direction, which from the
control perspective has no effect, but the OBC reaction may be observed slightly slower
as the ramp-up time should be more controlled where the ramp-down acts to be below
the allowed current as fast as possible.
Mark *3 in Figure 6.6 highlights a slight change in the power reference which is caused by
an operator mistake to have inserted 22 kW in the first place. The Pref,5, therefore, ends
higher than the OBC is capable of. No immediate response is therefore seen at *mark 3
as Pmeas,PCC still is below the new Pref,CA
Related to this test is a theoretical observation. This system is later tested if a commu-
nication fault occurs between the PCC and all VAs . However, a much worse scenario
could play out for this system if every VA loses connection to the other VAs and therefore
would conclude that they should be in sV A = single_VA_control. This would cause an
extremely overcompensating system and should be avoided with the same measures as
when PCC communication is lost.
As a single VA, it is capable of providing flexibility within its abilities. The time delay
Development and testing of smart charging strategies for a workplace parking lot
49
==PAGE:62==
currently depends primarily on the scan cycle time of the VAs . The scan cycle time
should be possible to get down to 6 sec (5 sec for EV to react according to [19] and 1 sec
to sample the measurements at PCC and provide it for the VA again) without causing
oscillation.
50
Development and testing of smart charging strategies for a workplace parking lot
==PAGE:63==
6.5
Varying CA reference with two competing EVs
As mentioned in the previous section, the more interesting case in relation to distributed
control should also be tested. Namely when multiple EVs charges simultaneously and
reacts in collaboration to changes in Pref,CA. This will be tested through both a step
response and a triangular step sequence as follows:
1. Set a constant reference signal from CA: Pref,CA = 22 kW
2. Plug 4: Connect Renault Megane with user input: ∆t = 1 h, Ereq,4 = 5 kWh,
3. Plug 5: Connect Peugeot 208e with user input: ∆t = 0.5 h, Ereq,5 = 5 kWh
4. Wait for steady consumption.
5. Change to a constant reference signal from CA: Pref,CA = 14 kW
6. Wait for steady consumption.
7. Change to a constant reference signal from CA: Pref,CA = 21 kW
8. Set an triangula step signal from CA: Pref,CA = {21 kW to 15 kW : 2 kW every 20 sec}
Error
Idle
Connected
Charging
sEV SE
*1
*2
*3
*4
EVSE 4
EVSE 5
Idle
Queue
Take Min.
Multi
Dumb
Done
sV A
VA 4
VA 5
0
1
;
4bc
5bc
4int
5int
0
300
600
900
1200
1500
time [s]
0
10
20
P[kW]
Pref,4
Pref,5
Pref,CA
Pmeas,3?
Figure 6.7: Result of two VAs response to changing Pref,CA.
In Figure 6.7 t = 0 sec is set when both VAs charges at steady state in sva = multi_VA_control,
and hence the startup is not shown. They have different Pref initially as VA 5 was acti-
vated last with the highest priority and thereby able to take all the power it wanted (13.8 kW
given by the proximity). At mark *1, the step down is performed and causes the two
EVs to lower their Pref. VA 5 responds by reducing Pref,5 by 2 kW, and VA 3 with the
lower priority responds with 5 kW, as their response is dependent on their relative priority
ρrelative. For this response, it is observed that an additional response is required to reach
Pmeas,PCC < Pref,CA. This comes the discrepancy PC,OBC,5 = 11 kW < Pref,5 = 13.8 kW
and therefore its respons has no effect on the Pmeas,PCC. That VA 4 has to go further down
in Pref,4 to 4.68 kW has the effect that the EV itself stops charging immediately (seen both
in its sEV SE and Pmeas,PCC dropping to the 10 kW consumed by EV 5). the two controllers
then enter an overcompensating control scenario as EV 4 is in an ON/OFF state. As this
does not showcase the system from the best sides we swiftly move to the step up at mark
*2. Here again, the actual participation of VA 5 is not seen in the Pmeas,PCC. The system
does, however recover to a consumption within the control dead band of Pref,CA as VA 4
for each scan cycle minimises Perror,PCC. In the section where the system responds to
Development and testing of smart charging strategies for a workplace parking lot
51
==PAGE:64==
the triangle step signal, it is shown that two EVs follow nicely but have issues reaching
the peaks, which only last for 20 seconds. On the bright side, as the priorities’ relative
magnitudes change and are equal at mark *3, it is possible to spot a significant system
enhancement. When VA 5 suddenly has a lower priority than VA 4, it tends towards a
control where the PC,OBC,5 = 11 kW > Pref,5 and the control reactions are more true to
the output.
It could be that the EVs reaching their negotiated energy should have a milder transition
towards not charging. This will, of course, only help in these situations, not if the user
suddenly stops charging. As it is observed that an EV stops charging when it is allowed
less than ≈5 kW3ϕ, it should be taken into account that the manufacturers of the EVs and
OBC already have implemented the efficiency considerations of Section 4.1.2.
When a step down is experienced, the EVs use (1 −ρrelative) as the gain for their scaling.
This works very well for a two-EV system as they will ’take the other VA’s part and step
down. This should be overcome by utilising a less aggressive control in Section 2.4 or
having a different gain function for the negative Perror case. It should maybe be explored
to have the same gain for all Powered VAs which is a function of the actively charging
EVs, and loosen more on what the VAs decide to do. As we see in Figure 6.7 after *1, VA
4 might want to stay above a certain threshold when participating in the charging, and the
others will still take responsibility for removing the excess power. However, this approach
would probably require more information to be shared.
Variations in the reference signal from CA cannot theoretically be met if it goes below
n · 6 A to 7 A as EVs would have to stop charging or go into the queue. In other words:
There is a constraint from the EVs that they cannot provide more variation flexibility than
from n · 6 A to 7 A to their upper limit often PC,OBC = 11 kW.
52
Development and testing of smart charging strategies for a workplace parking lot
==PAGE:65==
6.6
Communication failure
Communication failures are an important aspect when preparing for real-life implemen-
tation, which has had little consideration throughout the thesis. With the emulated sys-
tem, the test should still reflect the distributed control system’s most critical and probable
lost connection. Returning to Figure 4.4, this can be identified as the communication of
Pmeas,PCC from the PCC to the VAs. The connection to the CA is also meaningful, but in
case of loss, it should be considered constant from the last trusted value, as this is a safe
estimation that loses the participation in the control code.
For this test, the following procedure was followed:
1. Set a constant reference signal from CA: Pref,CA = 21 kW
2. Plug 3: Connect BMW i3 with user input: ∆t = 0.5 h, Ereq,3 = 3 kWh,
3. Wait for steady consumption.
4. Plug 5: Connect Peugeot 208e with user input: ∆t = 0.5 h, Ereq,5 = 2 kWh
5. stop the code QueryPIOT.py
6. Make manual readings on the PCC with timestamp reference of changes in the
power
7. Wait for steady consumption.
8. Restart the code QueryPIOT.py
For this test, the data acquisition is going to deviate slightly as an intended lost communi-
cation between the PCC and VAs requires that the power is not automatically tracked by
the code that both makes Pmeas,PCC available in Whiteboard and logs it in the .csv file.
However, manual readings are still possible directly on the PCCs hardware display.
Error
Idle
Connected
Charging
sEV SE
*1
*2
*3
EVSE 3
EVSE 5
Idle
Queue
Take Min.
Multi
Dumb
Done
sV A
VA 3
VA 5
0
1
;
3bc
5bc
3int
5int
0
60
120
180
240
300
360
time [sec]
0
10
20
P[kW]
Pref,3
Pref,5
Pref,CA
Pmeas,auto,3?
Pmeas,man,3?
Figure 6.8: Result of lost communication with PCC.
For this test, the timeframe of Figure 6.8 has been scaled to show the critical part of
reacting to the fault and restarting regular operation. The test indicates that the commu-
nication is lost at mark *1 and 31 sec later at mark *2. Both VAs react as the timestamp
of the last reading in Whiteboard is more than 30 seconds old. They respond by going
immediately to sV A = dumb where their reference is a hardcoded fraction of cluster capac-
ity: Pref,i = PC,P CC
NEV SE =
22 kW
4 EVSEs = 5.5 kW for i = [3, 5]. This is a safe consumption for this
Development and testing of smart charging strategies for a workplace parking lot
53
==PAGE:66==
parking lot as the state may be utilized for all communication loss, and the VA assumes
no communication is present; therefore, every other charger may charge with the same
power without violating the PC,PCC. The manual readings confirm the consumption drop:
Pmeas,PCC = 10.4 kW, which is half the PC,PCC as only two EVs are charging. After steady
consumption, at mark *3, the communication is intentionally restored, and the VAs transit
from sV A = dumb to restart their smart charging. One VA by the other, as only one can be
in the Entering states concurrently.
The restarting sequence could be optimized as the entire system intentionally consumes
0 kW. Letting the chargers go directly back into their previous charging state should be
considered for such an implementation. Further optimizations would include that the com-
munication within the charger should be regarded as not failing. One VA in dumb charg-
ing may, in that case, borrow power from the other if it is in an inactive state: (sV A =
{Idle, Disconnected or Done}). These considerations are all application dependent, and
this thesis has, therefore, only considered one scenario, which serves to showcase the
general method of the system.
54
Development and testing of smart charging strategies for a workplace parking lot
==PAGE:67==
7
Conclusion
7.1
Key findings
This thesis has developed and implemented a charging strategy based on a distributed
control architecture. The aim was to autonomously make the VAs take three perspectives
into account, each having its objective; provide flexibility, be energy efficient and accom-
modate the user requirements. The strategy was implemented and tested in an emulated
state with a real-life charging system. The key findings are highlighted within each field as
the thesis has brought together the domains of distributed autonomous control, strategies
and real-life implementation.
For the strategy, the objectives provided an unexpectedly high preference towards schedul-
ing. It was realized that flexibility is only possible if user needs have been acquired (or
boldly assumed). With the user needs available, it was discovered that equality of power
is secondary to ’equality’ of energy for the users. Therefore, a scheduling scheme based
on the user needs has provided the strategy’s foundation, which theoretically yields the
highest systemwide energy throughput at high efficiency. Hence satisfying both users,
flexibility acquires and ensures an efficient system.
For a distributed control architecture, this project has brought the foundation for a mod-
ular build system. The focus has been on the control level of the VAs and how much
self-governing they may perform. It was found that the cluster of VAs autonomously could
adjust to a common periphery signal in collaboration while making individual decisions that
enable charging those with the highest priority. This was obtained while PCC measure-
ments and the VA’s priority was broadcasted for the VAs to evaluate. The critical finding
is that the VAs can control their common consumption with a single cluster-specific set-
point being shared down from the CA; no need to share data with the CA or include a local
central control unit with redundancy requirements. As the architecture has been emulated
with a small parking lot, the minimal need for sharing information between the lowest level
of VAs suggests good scalability capabilities.
Some barriers have been observed within EV controllability for real-life implementation
and testing. With the testing platform encouraging testing iterations, the strategy was in-
crementally developed to overcome the smart charging of real EVs. Outside the scope of
the charging protocols, the manufacturers may develop the EV’s behaviour freely. Some
are biased towards the user objective, elegantly stopping charging when the user is as-
sumed to use the EV. Others with a supposed bias on the efficiency objective have in-
cluded their constraint to stop the charging if the allowance from the EVSE forces a
low-efficiency charging session. Such behaviours may bring challenges to a clustered
dynamic control system. Therefore, looking at further confinement of EV’s charging be-
haviour is recommended for progress within the field.
The thesis has thus provided a surge towards distributed control of smart charging as re-
sults have provided valuable first insights into the barriers and possibilities that arise from
coupling the parallel transitions of the transportation and electric generation sectors. Clus-
ters of EV chargers where the user needs are requested may provide flexibility. It requires
a back-end charging structure where the modular Cloud Aggregator, Virtual Aggregator,
has intrinsic advantages.
Development and testing of smart charging strategies for a workplace parking lot
55
==PAGE:68==
7.2
Future work
The work of this thesis serves new experimental insight, which should be a base for fu-
ture research. Focus has been on the control capabilities of the VAs , which is part of a
more extensive unanswered system. The distributed control architecture has not been
functionally implemented. These two perspectives will now be discussed, and finally, a
recommendation for the immediate work necessary, which could be considered in the
subsequent iterations of the system.
A cluster of VA controllers and their dynamics has been pivotal for this thesis. It has been
developed as a modular control system module to provide simple interfacing from the
Cloud Aggregator. However, it should be coupled with a Cloud aggregator responsible
for multiple EV clusters and other flexibility providers to offer a complete system assess-
ment. With the simple interface, it is believed that Cloud Aggregator may be developed
with Model Predictive Control or Optimization schemes to provide the necessary real-time
system behaviour. It should be coupled with a pricing scheme for the negotiation process
with the users, which could be calculated simultaneously at the CA and broadcast daily
to the VAs for their complete real-time independent behaviour.
This project has been on a path towards proving the applicability of distributed architec-
ture. A few steps are still necessary to come to the point of a fully functional distributed
architecture. Firstly the emulated system should detach the different control units in time
by making multi-threaded control. Then thoughts should be put into the desired topol-
ogy for the architecture sharing of information (Utilizing a local server, broadcasting or
subscription-based). Thirdly the VA structure may be directly implemented in VAs with
the appropriate information and communication technologies applied. At that point, it will
be possible to optimize the control loops and further investigate the impact of the delays
in the system. Then it should be finally possible to examine the full scale of advantages
of the distributed control architecture.
The final remark goes to the most immediate actions which arise when the available infor-
mation for the VA increase. The internal power measurements of the EVSE are expected
to be available for the VAs soon. This has been a significant control barrier in this thesis.
When the hardware has it implemented, the FSM and control loop may need a revisit.
When the VA can evaluate the performance of the OBC connected, it may provide phase
balancing with 1ϕ EVs. And most notably, it enables a shorter control loop where the VA
knows the response of its control output.
56
Development and testing of smart charging strategies for a workplace parking lot
==PAGE:69==
Bibliography
[1]
The Danish Government and Radikale Venstre and Socialistisk Folkeparti and En-
hedslisten. Grøn omstilling af vejtransporten. 2020.
[2]
J. Ostergaard, C. Ziras, H. W. Bindner, et al. “Energy Security Through Demand-
Side Flexibility: The Case of Denmark”. In: IEEE Power and Energy Magazine 19
(2 2021), pages 46–55. DOI: 10.1109/MPE.2020.3043615.
[3]
M. Muratori. “Impact of uncoordinated plug-in electric vehicle charging on residential
power demand”. In: Nature Energy 3 (3 2018), pages 193–201. DOI: 10.1038/s415
60-017-0074-z.
[4]
J. Engelhardt. “Reconfigurable Batteries in Electric Vehicle Fast Chargers: Towards
Renewable-Powered Mobility”. In: Downloaded from orbit.dtu.dk on 2023/05/20 (2022).
DOI: 10.11581/dtu.00000254.
[5]
S. Striani, K. Sevdari, L. Calearo, P. B. Andersen, and M. Marinelli. “Barriers and
Solutions for EVs Integration in the Distribution Grid”. In: 2021 56th International
Universities Power Engineering Conference (UPEC) (2021), pages 1–6. DOI: 10.1
109/UPEC50034.2021.9548235.
[6]
K. Sevdari, L. Calearo, P. B. Andersen, and M. Marinelli. “Ancillary services and
electric vehicles: An overview from charging clusters and chargers technology per-
spectives”. In: Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews 167 (2022), page 112666.
DOI: 10.1016/j.rser.2022.112666.
[7]
A. Thingvad, P. B. Andersen, T. Unterluggauer, C. Træholt, and M. Marinelli. “Elec-
trification of personal vehicle travels in cities - Quantifying the public charging de-
mand”. In: eTransportation 9 (2021), page 100125. DOI: 10.1016/J.ETRAN.2021.10
0125.
[8]
J. Ramsebner, A. Hiesl, R. Haas, et al. “Smart charging infrastructure for battery
electric vehicles in multi apartment buildings”. In: Smart Energy 9 (2023), page 100093.
DOI: 10.1016/j.segy.2022.100093.
[9]
A. Bowen, J. Engelhardt, T. Gabderakhmanova, M. Marinelli, and G. Rohde. “Bat-
tery Buffered EV Fast Chargers on Bornholm: Charging Patterns and Grid Inte-
gration”. In: 2022 57th International Universities Power Engineering Conference
(UPEC) (2022), pages 1–6. DOI: 10.1109/UPEC55022.2022.9917690.
[10]
J. Engelhardt, J. M. Zepter, J. P. Sparssø, and M. Marinelli. Real-life demonstration
of a hybrid EV fast charging station with reconfigurable battery technology enabling
renewable-powered mobility. 2023.
[11]
J. Engelhardt, J. M. Zepter, T. Gabderakhmanova, G. Rohde, and M. Marinelli.
“Double-String Battery System with Reconfigurable Cell Topology Operated as a
Fast Charging Station for Electric Vehicles”. In: Energies 14 (9 2021), page 2414.
DOI: 10.3390/en14092414.
[12]
J. Engelhardt, T. Gabderakhmanova, G. Rohde, and M. Marinelli. “Reconfigurable
Stationary Battery with Adaptive Cell Switching for Electric Vehicle Fast-Charging”.
In: IEEE, 2020, pages 1–6. ISBN: 978-1-7281-1078-3. DOI: 10.1109/UPEC49904.2
020.9209774.
[13]
J. Engelhardt, J. M. Zepter, T. Gabderakhmanova, and M. Marinelli. “Energy man-
agement of a multi-battery system for renewable-based high power EV charging”.
In: eTransportation 14 (2022), page 100198. DOI: 10.1016/j.etran.2022.100198.
Development and testing of smart charging strategies for a workplace parking lot
57
==PAGE:70==
[14]
N. Erdogan, S. Kucuksari, and J. Murphy. “A multi-objective optimization model for
EVSE deployment at workplaces with smart charging strategies and scheduling
policies”. In: Energy 254 (2022), page 124161. DOI: 10.1016/j.energy.2022.124161.
[15]
K. Fauziah, Y. Astriani, D. A. Renata, et al. “Design of AC Electric Vehicle Supply
Equipment based on Safety Standard”. In: 2021 3rd International Conference on
High Voltage Engineering and Power Systems (ICHVEPS) (2021), pages 425–430.
DOI: 10.1109/ICHVEPS53178.2021.9600963.
[16]
X. Han, K. Heussen, O. Gehrke, H. W. Bindner, and B. Kroposki. “Taxonomy for
Evaluation of Distributed Control Strategies for Distributed Energy Resources”. In:
IEEE Transactions on Smart Grid 9 (5 2018), pages 5185–5195. DOI: 10.1109/TSG.
2017.2682924.
[17]
K. Sevdari, S. Striani, P. B. Andersen, and M. Marinelli. “Power Modulation and
Phase Switching Testing of Smart Charger and Electric Vehicle Pairs”. In: 2022 57th
International Universities Power Engineering Conference (UPEC) (2022), pages 1–
6. DOI: 10.1109/UPEC55022.2022.9917660.
[18]
Dansk Standard. IEC 62196-2:2020: Plugs, socket-outlets, vehicle connectors and
vehicle inlets - Conductive charging of electric vehicles - Part 2: Dimensional com-
patibility requirements for AC pin and contact-tube accessories. 2020.
[19]
Dansk Standard. IEC 61851-1:2019: Electric vehicle conductive charging system –
Part 1: General requirements. 2019.
[20]
L. Calearo, M. Marinelli, and C. Ziras. “A review of data sources for electric vehicle
integration studies”. In: Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews 151 (2021),
page 111518. DOI: 10.1016/j.rser.2021.111518.
[21]
M. Marinelli, L. Calearo, J. Engelhardt, and G. Rohde. “Electrical Thermal and Degra-
dation Measurements of the LEAF e-plus 62-kWh Battery Pack”. In: 2022 Interna-
tional Conference on Renewable Energies and Smart Technologies (REST) (2022),
pages 1–5. DOI: 10.1109/REST54687.2022.10023130.
[22]
A. Zecchino, A. Thingvad, P. B. Andersen, and M. Marinelli. “Test and modelling of
commercial V2G CHAdeMO chargers to assess the suitability for grid services”. In:
World Electric Vehicle Journal 10 (2 2019). DOI: 10.3390/wevj10020021.
[23]
M. Marinelli. https://www.linkedin.com/posts/mattiamarinelli_a-while-ago-i-presented-
the-efficiency-curves-activity-7055816423318642690-w7t_?utm
_source=shareutm_medium=member_desktop. 2023.
[24]
Z. J. Lee, T. Li, and S. H. Low. “ACN-Data: Analysis and Applications of an Open
EV Charging Dataset”. In: Proceedings of the Tenth ACM International Conference
on Future Energy Systems (2019), pages 139–149. DOI: 10.1145/3307772.3328313.
[25]
H. W. Bindner and O. Gehrke. System control and communication. Risø DTU - Na-
tional Laboratory for Sustainable Energy, 2009. ISBN: 9788755037540.
[26]
Z. López, I. Saviuc, A. Puskas, K. Rollert, and P. Bertoldi. “Explicit Demand Re-
sponse for small end-users and independent aggregators Status, context, enablers
and barriers”. In: (2022). DOI: 10.2760/625919.
[27]
J. Hildermeier, J. Burger, A. Jahn, and J. Rosenow. “A Review of Tariffs and Services
for Smart Charging of Electric Vehicles in Europe”. In: Energies 16 (1 2022), page 88.
DOI: 10.3390/en16010088.
[28]
J. García-Villalobos, I. Zamora, J. S. Martín, F. Asensio, and V. Aperribay. “Plug-in
electric vehicles in electric distribution networks: A review of smart charging ap-
proaches”. In: Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews 38 (2014), pages 717–
731. DOI: 10.1016/j.rser.2014.07.040.
[29]
A. Thingvad, C. Ziras, G. L. Ray, J. Engelhardt, R. R. Mosbæk, and M. Marinelli.
“Economic Value of Multi-Market Bidding in Nordic Frequency Markets”. In: 2022
58
Development and testing of smart charging strategies for a workplace parking lot
==PAGE:71==
International Conference on Renewable Energies and Smart Technologies, REST
2022 (2022). DOI: 10.1109/REST54687.2022.10023471.
[30]
Energinet. https://energinet.dk/El/Systemydelser/Introduktion-til-Systemydelser/Oversigt-
over-systemydelser/. 2023.
[31]
C. Dharmakeerthi, N. Mithulananthan, and T. Saha. “Impact of electric vehicle fast
charging on power system voltage stability”. In: International Journal of Electrical
Power & Energy Systems 57 (2014), pages 241–249. DOI: 10.1016/j.ijepes.2013.12
.005.
[32]
M. Tveit, ; Halldis, K. ; Sevdari, et al. Behind-the-meter residential electric vehicle
smart charging strategies: Danish cases. DTU, 2022.
[33]
J. M. Zepter, J. Engelhardt, T. Gabderakhmanova, and M. Marinelli. “Re-Thinking
the Definition of Self-Sufficiency in Systems with Energy Storage”. In: 2022 Inter-
national Conference on Smart Energy Systems and Technologies (SEST) (2022),
pages 1–6. DOI: 10.1109/SEST53650.2022.9898436.
[34]
S. Striani, K. Sevdari, M. Marinelli, V. Lampropoulos, Y. Kobayashi, and K. Suzuki.
“Wind Based Charging via Autonomously Controlled EV Chargers under Grid Con-
straints”. In: 2022 57th International Universities Power Engineering Conference
(UPEC) (2022), pages 1–6. DOI: 10.1109/UPEC55022.2022.9917883.
[35]
X. Han, H. W. Bindner, J. Mehmedalic, and D. V. Tackie. “Hybrid control scheme for
distributed energy resource management in a market context”. In: 2015 IEEE Power
& Energy Society General Meeting 2015-September (2015), pages 1–5. DOI: 10.1
109/PESGM.2015.7286000.
[36]
S. Lai, J. Qiu, Y. Tao, and J. Zhao. “Pricing for Electric Vehicle Charging Stations
Based on the Responsiveness of Demand”. In: IEEE Transactions on Smart Grid
14 (1 2023), pages 530–544. DOI: 10.1109/TSG.2022.3188832.
[37]
M. R. B. Khan, R. Jidin, and J. Pasupuleti. “Multi-agent based distributed control
architecture for microgrid energy management and optimization”. In: Energy Con-
version and Management 112 (2016), pages 288–307. DOI: 10.1016/j.enconman.2
016.01.011.
[38]
DTU. https://www.acdc-bornholm.eu/. 2020.
[39]
A. Malkova, S. Striani, J. M. Zepter, M. Marinelli, and L. Calearo. Laboratory valida-
tion of electric vehicle smart charging strategies. 2023.
[40]
X. Cao, S. Striani, C. Ziras, and M. Marinelli. “A semi-distributed charging strategy
for electric vehicle clusters”. In: 8th International Conference on Sustainable and
Renewable Energy Engineering. (2023).
[41]
J. Hu, H. Morais, T. Sousa, and M. Lind. Electric vehicle fleet management in smart
grids: A review of services, optimization and control aspects. 2016. DOI: 10.1016
/j.rser.2015.12.014.
[42]
T. Gabderakhmanova, J. Engelhardt, J. M. Zepter, et al. “Demonstrations of DC Mi-
crogrid and Virtual Power Plant Technologies on the Danish Island of Bornholm”. In:
2020 55th International Universities Power Engineering Conference (UPEC) (2020),
pages 1–6. DOI: 10.1109/UPEC49904.2020.9209853.
Development and testing of smart charging strategies for a workplace parking lot
59
==PAGE:72==
60
Development and testing of smart charging strategies for a workplace parking lot
==PAGE:73==
A
Calculation of reference power in states
+
+
sV A = Single VA Control
0
+
+
sV A = Multi VA Control
sV A = Not powered
sV A = Take Minimum
sV A = Making Space
+
-
+
sV A = Making Space as Marginal
+
+
sV A = Increase
sV A = Dumb Charging
Development and testing of smart charging strategies for a workplace parking lot
61
==PAGE:74==
B
Preliminary tests
Error
Idle
Connected
Charging
sEV SE
*1
*2
*3
*4
EVSE 3
Idle
Queue
Take Min.
Multi
Dumb
Done
sV A
VA 3
0
1
;
3bc
4bc
0
300
600
900
1200
1500
1800
2100
2400
2700
3000
3300
3600
3900
4200
4500
4800
5100
5400
time [s]
0
10
20
P[kW]
Pref,3
Pref,CA
Pmeas,3?
Figure B.1: The BMW charging at charger 3 at mark *3 the Constant Voltage power curve
initiates and the EV reach SOC = 1 at mark *4 where charging stops.
62
Development and testing of smart charging strategies for a workplace parking lot
==PAGE:75==
Development and testing of smart charging strategies for a workplace parking lot
63
==PAGE:76==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Frederiksborgvej 399
4000 Roskilde
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.wind.dtu.dk
