==PAGE:1==
Visualization of Chemical
Processes in Cancer Vaccines
Adrienne Cohrt
Kongens Lyngby 2023
IMM-M.Sc.-2023
==PAGE:2==
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Richard Petersens Plads, building 324,
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3351
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk IMM-M.Sc.-2023
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Medicine has progressed to the point that diseases once incurable are now be-
coming preventable. This is the goal driving the current cancer vaccine research
happening at DTU chemistry. In order to spread awareness of this research and
its progress and secure future funding, an animated video has been made in col-
laboration with the chemistry department to explain this new vaccine concept
and the processes that make it work. This paper discusses the research and
development that went into creating this video.
==PAGE:4==
Preface
This thesis was prepared at the Technical University of Denmark in fulfillment
of the requirements of a MSc in Human-Centered Artificial Intelligence with a
focus in Computer Graphics. The thesis was carried out from February 1st, 2023
to July 23rd, 2023 under the supervision of associate professor Jeppe Revall
Frisvad, DTU Compute, Department of applied mathematics and computer
science and in partnership with professor Mads Hartvig Clausen, Department
of Chemistry and researcher Cecilia Roman´o, Department of Chemistry.
Kongens Lyngby, 23-July-2023
Adrienne Cohrt
==PAGE:5==
iii
==PAGE:6==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
ii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Motivation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
The vaccine . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Project scope . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Background
4
2.1
The First process . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2
The Second process . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.3
The animation process . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3
Methods
8
3.1
Noise in animation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3.2
Particles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.3
Keyframing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
4
Implementation
12
4.1
Importing proteins . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
4.2
Cell visualization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
4.2.1
Structure
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
4.2.2
Particles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4.2.3
Coloring . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
4.3
Animating the video . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4.3.1
Main movement and camera work
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4.3.2
Secondary procedural movement . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4.3.3
Lighting and visibility . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
==PAGE:7==
CONTENTS
v
4.4
Post-production text . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
5
Results
23
5.1
Evolution of the project . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
5.1.1
Object evolution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
5.1.2
Animation evolution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
5.2
Final products
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
6
Conclusion
29
6.1
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
6.2
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
Bibliography
32
==PAGE:8==
Chapter 1
Introduction
This chapter introduces the thesis, gives an overview of the motivation for the
project, and presents the thesis goals and structure. This thesis content centers
around the novel cancer vaccine research currently under development at DTU
and the visualization of the biological processes involved.
1.1
Motivation
The motivation for this project comes from DTU chemistry where progress in
research and development has been made on a novel cancer vaccine. A visual
representation was requested by the department in order to better illustrate the
biological processes happening and to better understanding for the furthering of
the research. This paper outlines the development and animation processes used
to create a video for this purpose. The final project and video will be provided
to DTU chemistry so as to further their research and education efforts. Links
to the final products can be found in section 5.2.
==PAGE:9==
1.2 The vaccine
2
1.2
The vaccine
As part of their ongoing research, the DTU chemistry department has been
working with the α-Galactosylceramide (α-GalCer) molecule as a way to carry
cancer information into the body and trigger an immune response. The discovery
of tumor-associated carbohydrate antigens (TACAs) on the surface of cancer
cells has prompted the discovery and creation of TACA–α-GalCer constructs
which have produced the first carbohydrate-based cancer vaccines. At this stage
their results have proven successful in vivo and a visual aid was requested in
order to illustrate the process and better facilitate understanding and design of
future experiments. The biological reaction during vaccination consists of two
distinct processes [1], one involving the dendritic cell (DC) and another involving
the B cell as seen in figure 1.1. While in the final video these two process are
illustrated as sequential, it is important to note that they will naturally occur
simultaneously in the body. For the purposes of this paper, we will refer to
them as the first and second process for clarity’s sake and also in reference to
the final order of the animation.
Figure 1.1: The first process on the left involving the dendritic cell and the
second process on the right involving the B cell
1.3
Project scope
The main goal of this project is to model and animate the key components
and interactions of the vaccine process.
The animation will need to convey
==PAGE:10==
1.3 Project scope
3
a clear visual sense of how the cells, proteins, and other components present
and interact with each other. This thesis presents a video designed to meet all
of these requirements in order to further the development and research of the
vaccine.
The thesis is structured as follows:
• Chapter 2 provides a general background on the biological processes being
visualized and an overview of animation techniques.
• Chapter 3 goes through the methods and principles used in the video.
• Chapter 4 provides insight into the implementation of the project and how
these methods were applied.
• Chapter 5 discusses the final video and its impacts so far.
• Chapter 6 concludes this thesis and addresses future developments possible
with the project.
==PAGE:11==
Chapter 2
Background
This section describes the two main biological sequences happening during the
vaccination process and goes into detail about the interactions and key play-
ers involved.
It also provides an overview into several animation techniques
developed over the years and some of their applications.
2.1
The First process
This process involves a main interaction between the invariant natural killer T
cell (INKT) and the dendritic cell (DC). In this process liposomes containing
the α-GalCer molecule are injected into the body where they come into contact
with a DC. The α-GalCer molecule also carries tumor-associated carbohydrate
antigens (TACAs) forming a TACA–α-GalCer construct.
The liposomes are
incorporated into the DC and the α-GalCer molecule is presented on the surface
of the cell via the CD1d protein. In the same area can also be found the INKT
which has T-cell receptors (TCR) along its surface. These TCR can interact
with the α-GalCer and the CD1d to form a ternary complex. An exploded view
of this complex can bee seen in figure 2.1 showing the structure and relative size
of the three components.
==PAGE:12==
2.2 The Second process
5
Figure 2.1: An exploded view of the ternary complex in a 3D render, the
CD1d protein is blue, the α-GalCer molecule is in the center with
no TACA tag, the TCR is yellow
The TCR engagement and formation of this complex allows for a rapid response
from the INKT which triggers the release of cytokines which will spread through-
out the system and are responsible for the stimulation of antibody production
in the body.
2.2
The Second process
This process involves the B cell where it also encounters liposomes from the
vaccine injection. The B cell can interact with the liposomes in two ways. The
liposome can be incorporated into the cell as is done in the first process, or
the liposome and B cell can interact through the TACA tags present on the α-
GalCer molecule. The TACA tags carry information common to a specific type
of cancer which enables the B cell to start producing short term antibodies (IgM)
for this. The presence of more cytokines from an INKT provides the necessary
motivation for the short term antibodies to become long-term antibodies (IgG)
thus giving better protection to the body against the cancer.
==PAGE:13==
2.3 The animation process
6
2.3
The animation process
The purpose of animation is designed to bring life, movement, and visual appeal
to storytelling. It creates the illusion of motion through a series of static images
and is used today in many applications from entertainment to education to
marketing. This project aims to create an animation of the biological processes
described above utilizing various techniques in a way that is both accurate and
yet visually coherent for the viewer.
To this effect several animation techniques were investigated to determine what
might be a good fit for this project. If we take a look back at more traditional
or 2D approaches, they relied on methods like story-boarding, multiplane back-
grounds, and rotoscoping. [2] [3] Many of these techniques were defined and
developed in the 1930s and 1940s. One of the most notable examples is Dis-
ney’s creation of Snow White and the Seven Dwarves. In this film a technique
called rotoscoping was used where the movements of the main characters were
traced frame by frame from a live-action recording so that they would be more
realistic and complex. The backgrounds were also hand drawn, but in several
different layers, and when filmed the layers were panned at varying speeds ac-
cording to their distance from the viewer. This gave the viewer a sense of depth
and perspective when moving through the animated scene.
Later on these techniques would slowly evolve and adapt to be used in 3D
animation which includes modeling, rigging, motion capture, and computer-
generated imagery (CGI). These techniques are the industry standard today.
Modeling creates a three dimensional object which can then be manipulated in
a variety of ways. One of these is through rigging or skeletal animation. Skeletal
animation is the embedding of a series of rods and articulation points into an
object which provides both structure and range of movement.
This system
can then be defined by a predetermined set of movements either manually or
procedurally, resulting in an animation. Motion capture can be described as the
more technologically advanced cousin of rotoscoping which reads a live actors
movements through a series of sensors directly on the body and translates those
onto a rigged frame for animation. The image below shows the character Gollum,
both in the 1977 animated Hobbit film where his movements were hand drawn
using rotoscoping, and in the Fellowship of the Ring produced in 2001 which
used motion capture technology to translate the physical movements from Andy
Serkis to the big screen.
==PAGE:14==
2.3 The animation process
7
Figure 2.2: 2D animation using roto-
scoping
Figure 2.3: 3D motion capture
==PAGE:15==
Chapter 3
Methods
This chapter describes the methods and concepts used in order to visualize the
vaccine process. It is divided into several sections with the first section covering
the noise function and how it is applied in visualization and animation. The
remaining sections are dedicated to the effect of particle systems in computer
graphics and digital animation and the concept of keyframing and its nuances
and how it has become an established tool still used in the film industry.
3.1
Noise in animation
Noise, in the context of this project does not refer to low resolution or the
presence of unwanted visual artifacts. The meaning of noise in this paper refers
specifically to the use of a pseudo-random pattern of values which can be applied
in varying ways to create unique visual effects including terrain generation,
textures, and animations. A commonly used variation of this, and the form
focused on in this project is called Perlin noise developed by Ken Perlin [4].
Perlin noise generates smooth and continuously varying random values from
coordinate inputs and can be extended into several dimensions.
The inputs
come from a grid of random gradient vectors where the dot products between
them have been calculated. A smooth interpolation is then applied over the
==PAGE:16==
3.2 Particles
9
product values giving a seamless yet constant variation between 0 and 1. These
values can then be applied in many settings and uses like terrain generation,
clouds, texturing, or simply randomizing values over time.
One of the first
applications for this was the 1982 film Tron where it was used to add texture
and visual interest into a highly cybernetic virtual world. Another more recent
application is in the 1.18 version of the popular game Minecraft where the terrain
generation switched to a perlin base in order to incorporate cave systems into
the worlds.
Figure 3.1: two examples of perlin noise, 1982 Tron on the left, 1.18 minecraft
terrain generation on the right
3.2
Particles
Particle systems are a technique developed in computer graphics to simulate
and manage a large number of small objects. These systems can be used to
represent a variety of different elements without a solid defined structure like
smoke, explosions, rain, and fire. The particles that make up these systems are
each assigned a set of properties including position, size, velocity, and lifespan
to name a few but they are all part of the same cloud and help to define its
volume.
One of the earliest appearances of particle systems in film was seen in the gene-
sis sequence of Star trek II: The Wrath of Kahn as a means to represent ’fuzzy’
objects like fire. [5] The particles were distributed in concentric rings surround-
ing a point of origin on the planet as seen in figure 3.2. These particles were
then each used to spawn their own particle systems which then represented the
fire spreading across the surface as seen in figure 3.3.
==PAGE:17==
3.3 Keyframing
10
Figure 3.2: Distribution
of
par-
ticle systems on the
planet’s surface
Figure 3.3: Expanding wall of fire
In the years since, they have become an industry standard for modeling multiple
points which can be influenced by group parameters and still have individual
movement and appearances.
There are two common types of particle systems today, emission and hair. Emis-
sion particle systems will continually spawn new particles from a source with
defined lifespans. By incorporating physics such as gravity and wind these par-
ticles can be used for a wide range of visual effects such as smoke from a chimney
or water from a fountain. The other particle type is hair particles which are
particles generated at specified locations on a surface and thus have a static
origin point. They generally do not die, but like the emission particles, the in-
troduction of physical forces can lend itself to a very life-like appearance. They
are commonly used to render hair, fur, and other fiber-like elements.
3.3
Keyframing
Animation can be defined as a series of images in tight succession to give the
appearance of movement. One way to control this movement and make it believ-
able is to start with the key positions of a sequence and then fill in the images
in between. Techniques like this were used in some of the early Disney hand
drawn animations. A key artist would illustrate a series of important poses for
a character and then another artist called an in-betweener would come in and
draw all the frames in between the key artist frames. In this way the overall
movements and poses could be planned and controlled by the head artist, yet
time and money could be saved by delegating the majority of the work to oth-
ers. This concept persists today even with the advent of computer animation.
==PAGE:18==
3.3 Keyframing
11
A 3D model can be built and different positions for it can be set at various time
points. The computer then undertakes the work of generating all of the frames
from one time point to the next without the object ever being manually moved.
This is especially helpful for procedural and looping sequences. A circuit or path
can be mathematically defined for an object and then the computer can take
over the work of rendering along the pre-defined parameters and outputting a
seamless product.
Another benefit of using keyframing in computer animation is the amount of
control that it provides the animator in terms of motion, speed, and smoothness.
The frames between each keyframe can be rendered in many different ways as the
only parameters that are actually defined are those of the keyframes themselves.
Two examples of this are linear interpolation and spline interpolation [6]. Linear
interpolation is the direct movement from one point to another. There is no
variation in speed or deviation in position other than a straight path from one
keyframe to the next like in figure 3.4. This can give a very abrupt appearance
like a ball hitting a wall and coming to a complete stop or a cannon firing.
Spline interpolation creates a more curved and gradual transition before and
after keyframes as seen in figure 3.5.
This gives a smoother effect like the
gradual acceleration of a car or the sinking of a object into something soft.
Figure 3.4: Linear interpolation
Figure 3.5: Spline interpolation
==PAGE:19==
Chapter 4
Implementation
This section describes the implementation process used for the different aspects
of the visualization and animation processes. The chapter is divided into four
main sections with the first discussing the process used in bring biologically
accurate proteins into a digital 3D environment. The next section addresses the
various steps used in modeling the main cells present in the vaccine. Afterwards
is a section discussion the animation portion of the project and how this was
achieved. Finally is a section covering the verbose version of the video and the
how and why of its creation.
4.1
Importing proteins
The central feature in this research video is the ternary complex which is com-
prised of the CD1d protein, α-GalCer molecule, and RCA protein. It is therefore
important that these models be as accurate as possible so that they can be eas-
ily recognized. This was achieved using information from the protein data bank
PDB ([7]) and with the help of the molecular nodes add on created by Brady
Johnston [8]. The add on gives blender the ability to access the PDB website
and download the data there for a specific model. The information initially
consists of a point cloud accompanied by a few other parameters and then the
==PAGE:20==
4.2 Cell visualization
13
molecular nodes are used to convert this data into various visual representa-
tions. Colors and materials can be adjusted based on the atom or sequence,
and the surface can take the appearance of several well known models including
the traditional stick-and-ball, ribbons, or a surface representation. Using this
add on to visualize the PDB information provided the flexibility to represent
the biological structures in a way that would best fit the videos intention. In
the figure below you can see the same structure (the TCR protein) visualized
in three different forms.
Figure 4.1: On the left is a classic stick-and-ball model of the TCR, the center
is a ribbon representation, and on the right is a surface model
The molecular nodes also provide the capability to show chemical bonds and
different states of the molecule if they are included in the PDB data. When
the different states are imported into blender and looped they form a wiggling
animation which can be further modified and used for various purposes. The
PDB models used in this project carried no such information, but this is a
capability of the add-on for other projects.
4.2
Cell visualization
Along with the ternary complex, four main cells are present in the final video
including the dendritic cell (DC), B cell, the invariant natural killer T cell
(INKT), and the liposomes. All four of these are influenced both by particle
systems and noise either in their movement or their appearance.
==PAGE:21==
4.2 Cell visualization
14
4.2.1
Structure
There were three main methods used in creating the surface structures seen
on the cells. The liposome cloud is built using standard icospheres as bases.
Their bumpy surfaces come from the use of a physics-based rendering (PBR)
material created by Lennart Demes [9]. The displacement and roughness maps
input through shader nodes give texture and pattern to the surface which is
further enhanced with surface shadows provided by the ambient occlusion map.
All of these maps are connected to a geometry node network in blender along
with a color map where several parameters were adjusted to achieve the final
appearance.
Figure 4.2: Lipo and lipo cloud
==PAGE:22==
4.2 Cell visualization
15
Figure 4.3: Lipo image texture nodes
The dendritic cell surface was extruded and hand modeled to imitate the ten-
tacle like effect of dendrites. It was then assigned as a soft body with collision
properties. This gave the object a degree of free movement and provided the
ability to react to outside stimuli such as the incoming INKT.
==PAGE:23==
4.2 Cell visualization
16
Figure 4.4: the Dendritic cell (DC)
In both the INKt and the B cell an icosphere was deformed using a cloud texture
which uses perlin noise to give a more irregular and organic shape. This surface
was then duplicated and set to a slightly smaller scale within the first so that
each cell has both an identically shaped inner and outer surface. This double
surface was important for the particle systems and coloring described in sections
4.2.2 and 4.2.3.
Figure 4.5: showcasing materials of B cell and INKT
==PAGE:24==
4.2 Cell visualization
17
4.2.2
Particles
Blender has the capability of both hair and emission particle systems and both
systems were used in this project.
The liposome cloud is actually rendered
using a hair system based on an invisible emitter and allows for the uniform
appearances between each liposome and easy editing of the cloud as a whole.
Despite this, it also allows for semi-independent rotation, scale, and movement.
The B cell utilizes two emission particle systems to produce the antibodies
seen emitting from the surface at different times. Again the system provides
for uniform appearance and scale while allowing for independent rotation and
lifespans allowing the particles to be ’switched on and off’.
Figure 4.6: IgM
Figure 4.7: IgG
The INKT relies on both types of particle systems for its appearance.
The
surface proteins are the result of a hair system rendered on the outer surface.
The cytokines are an emission system originating from the inner surface. In
blender it is not possible to have both kinds of systems on the same surface so
this was the initial motivation behind the double surface structure. It was also
important to allow the emitting cytokines to be ignored by the collision system
of the INKT, otherwise they remained trapped inside the outer surface of the
cell and never exited to became visible.
==PAGE:25==
4.2 Cell visualization
18
4.2.3
Coloring
The inner and outer surfaces of the B cell and INKT were also both key players
in the coloring and general appearance of these cells.
The outer surface of
both cells provides a main color to the cell and some subsurface scattering to
add depth. Both surfaces are highly transmissive with the outer surface being
slightly less. There is a small roughness factor to both to reduce shine with the
inner one being slightly larger. The inner surfaces are only a white base with no
scattering which lessens the intensity of the main color and gives a translucent
look to the cell without it becoming completely see through. This gives a more
delicate and organic appearance to the cells and contributes to the biologic feel
of the video.
Figure 4.8: outer
Figure 4.9: inner
==PAGE:26==
4.3 Animating the video
19
4.3
Animating the video
Several techniques and principles were used in the making of the final product.
The main movement and timing was achieved through keyframing along with a
few of the principles of animation as outlined by John Lasseter[2]. Secondary
movements were done procedurally and strategic use of lighting and visibility
was implemented to draw the viewers attention to different aspects of the ani-
mation.
4.3.1
Main movement and camera work
For this project the main movement technique involved was keyframing along
with a few relevant principles of animation. Almost every object used this with
the main influence coming through the camera. The initial framing was done
with a pose-to-pose approach in order to nail down the main movements and
interactions of the cells. From here, the keyframes were added and adjusted as
needed to give a smoother, more well paced effect. The very first test render
had a duration of about 30 seconds. This version was very helpful in analyzing
the staging for the first process so that all of the components and interactions
were clearly visible, but it was deemed far to fast paced for an informational
video. The timing between keyframes was then stretched to slow down the video
without sacrificing frame rate and quality.
Figure 4.10: Blender dope sheet showing the keyframes set for each element
of the animation
==PAGE:27==
4.3 Animating the video
20
4.3.2
Secondary procedural movement
The concentrated liposome cloud seen in the background is meant to represent
the introduction of the vaccine into the body. In order to give the appearance
of a fluid environment and to add visual complexity to the scenes the liposomes
float around seemingly at random and independent of the main objects in the
foreground. This was achieved by using geometry nodes and connecting a noise
texture node into the position as seen in figure 4.11.
Figure 4.11: Noise used to effect motion in geometry nodes
4.3.3
Lighting and visibility
The final steps applied to the animation sequence involved the manipulation
of the lighting and visibility of certain objects. The central interaction in the
vaccine is the formation of the ternary complex. In order to draw attention
to this, a light source was placed in the center of the screen at this point and
its power levels were defined at strategic points. Up until the formation the
power level is kept at zero so as to render the light invisible. From this point
over the next fifty frames, the power was increased to its maximum giving a
spotlight effect and drawing the viewers eye to this interaction as can be seen
in the images below.
==PAGE:28==
4.4 Post-production text
21
Figure 4.12: off
Figure 4.13: on
In addition to the spotlight, a few other visibility adjustments were made. The
final surface of both the B cell and the INKT are highly reflective as can still be
seen in figure 4.13. For the two main lighting sources the glossy option for the
ray visibility was disabled. This removed the large glare spots present on the
front of both of the cells. It was also noted that the final seconds of the video
were visually very chaotic with the emission of cytokines, antibodies, and the
liposome cloud still moving around in the background. To solve this issue the
liposome cloud begins to discretely move out of view at around 58 seconds into
the video. Due to this, by the time the final scene is in frame the liposomes are
gone, thus greatly reducing the complexity and allowing the viewer to better
maintain focus.
4.4
Post-production text
The final video for this project has been produced in two versions. The first
is an image only render consisting of just the objects and animations thus far
discussed. The second version includes the placement of text or subtitles at
specific times and locations in order to aid in the identification and naming of
key components. The decision for this was made in order to increase the video’s
usefulness and user friendliness.
The aim was to both aid in understanding
and widen the video’s potential audience for individuals who may not already
have the background knowledge necessary to recognize these processes. A few
examples of the text can be seen in the images below, and a link to both versions
of the videos can be found in section 5.2.
==PAGE:29==
4.4 Post-production text
22
Figure 4.14: Subtitle examples
==PAGE:30==
Chapter 5
Results
This chapter discusses the results and effectiveness for the various aspects of the
project. It is divided into two sections. The first section explores the progression
throughout the project and how it has changed. The other section looks at the
final products as as whole and discusses their impact so far. In this section can
also be found links to the final products.
5.1
Evolution of the project
During the first half of this project the focus centered around only completing
the animation of the first process. At this early stage the main cells in play went
through several different design changes both for appearance reasons as well as
to keep the editing and computational complexity at an acceptable level.
5.1.1
Object evolution
Throughout the modeling process there were several iterations of the key cells,
namely the DC, the INKT, and the liposomes.
==PAGE:31==
5.1 Evolution of the project
24
The DC started as a simple sphere populated with many CD1d proteins across
its surface, similar to the INKT’s present configuration. Through research and
collaboration with the chemistry department the proteins were removed and long
tentacle-like structures were added to more accurately represent what would be
found in the body.
The shape of the INKT was established fairly early on in the project however the
coloring and material used for its appearance went through several iterations.
As the final structure of the DC had many variations in thickness across its
body and appendages it responded very well to a simple coloring scheme with
full subsurface scattering. This gave it a more blue appearance towards the
center while transitioning to pink and lighter shades towards the tips. A similar
visual interest was desired for the INKT but as this structure is consistent in its
thickness this approach resulted in a bland matte solid coloring. The idea was
then to try a PBR material and apply it to the INKT. A marble patterning was
chosen for its veins and variation in color, but while this looked nice on its own,
the visual contrast between it and the DC was deemed too great and it was
far too reflective causing issues with glare and lighting artifacts. At this point
the problems discussed in section 4.2.2 were discovered so color experimentation
shifted to include the new dual-surface approach. The high transmission values
in the final product gives the feeling of a very thin skin surrounding the cell
with the variation in color suggesting possible structures within the cell. this
was deemed acceptable and became the final surface material which was then
later copied for use on the B cell.
Figure 5.1: solid color with only
subsurface scattering
Figure 5.2: marble PBR textur-
ing
==PAGE:32==
5.1 Evolution of the project
25
Figure 5.3: final dual surface appearance
Another object that went through several iterations was the liposome seen at the
very start of the video. Since the start of the project involved the importation
of the proteins from the protein data bank it was assumed that this level of
technical detail would be maintained throughout the project. The first iteration
of the liposome involved a model of the individual lipids into a bi-layer that
would then make up the liposome vessel as seen in figure 5.4. It was quickly
determined that this level of detail would be lost upon introduction of the larger
cells so this idea was discarded. It is also important to note that even in the final
version of the video the liposome is not accurately scaled with the rest of the
cells present as this would render the liposome so small as to be imperceptible.
Figure 5.4: Original lipid layer construction
Once this was realized, a simple sphere shape was used and a PBR gravel tex-
==PAGE:33==
5.1 Evolution of the project
26
ture was found to give the surface some irregularities and a nod towards the
lipids which compose its surface. A request was then made by the chemistry
department if there could be not only one liposome, but a cloud of them present
so as to show that its presence would not be an isolated occurrence but rather
the result of a vaccine injection. This was achieved by duplicating the original
model across an invisible surface and then providing motion to the cloud using
a moving distortion source. It was quickly discovered that this method did not
allow for easy adjustments of the liposomes as a whole. It also meant that the
processing power required for all of these new objects increased exponentially.
This was not sustainable on the equipment available for this project so another
solution was found. Instead of using duplication, the liposome cloud was created
through another particle system. This meant that not only were the resulting
particles easily edited and future animations could be applied, but that the
processing power required even to view these remained at an acceptable level.
This is because, unless specifically directed, particle systems do not create real
copies of all the objects generated. They remain as instances only to mirror the
original object and still using the same source data.
5.1.2
Animation evolution
A constant byproduct of the animation process was the making of ’viewport
animations’. These were quickly rendered versions of the current animation as a
whole, containing accurate timing and framing yet only showing colors and ma-
terials in a much simpler preview form. These viewport animations were quick
and simple to create, taking only a few minutes each and allowed for a much
faster iteration and error correction process. Once the initial movements were
established for the first process, it was determined that the entire animation was
too fast paced with the entire thing only lasting approximately thirty seconds.
The keyframe spacings were all doubled, thus slowing down the animation with-
out sacrificing the frame rate. In addition through a series of more viewport
animations the final timings were slowly achieved by lengthening key portions
in order to better focus and draw the viewers attention.
Another key aspect of the animation process was the change in lighting as the
project progressed. The first few animations were very dark due to the presence
of only a single light source. This prompted the addition of a second light source
near the ternary complex so that this part of the video would be more visible.
Instead this light source was found to be distracting and poorly placed by not
properly emphasizing the action taking place and then clipping into the INKT
cell and lighting it up, thus drawing the viewers attention further away from
the formation of the ternary complex. This was then changed into the timed
ternary spotlight seen in the final version with both improved timing as well as
==PAGE:34==
5.1 Evolution of the project
27
an improved location.
Figure 5.5: Light source shifting into the INKT due to poor timing and loca-
tion
One final adjustment was made as a direct result of the first fully rendered video.
Despite the constant generation of the viewport animations they do not show
a great amount of detail when it comes to lighting and reflections in particular.
It was discovered that the prototype antibodies for the second process, which
started as emissive points of light instead of the geometric shapes seen in figures
4.7 and 4.6, were visible during the first process as the red and green reflections
towards the top of the INKT in figure 5.6. The antibody models were adjusted
to be more accurate and non emissive while improvements were made to reduce
the shininess and reflectivness of the INKT material.
Figure 5.6: Lighting artifacts on the INKT as a result of emissive particles
and a reflective surface
==PAGE:35==
5.2 Final products
28
5.2
Final products
The final rendered video for this project can be found at https://drive.google.
com/file/d/19u108y20MKSY77MDTS0kNjWVTmDu9cMK/view?usp=sharing and the
alternate version with captions can be found at https://drive.google.com/
file/d/1sStoeZbkXjZKqI6dbrPOxax7PvjaPSOO/view?usp=sharing.
The second process was originally delegated as an ’extra’ depending on the
results of the first. This first prototype for the animation was finished to an
acceptable level and fully rendered out as a shorter version in June and given to
DTU chemistry in order to facilitate their work at a conference and hopefully
obtain funding for their research. This prototype was met with enthusiasm by
both sides and has sparked interest in the project. Although no decisions have
been made to date, the potential contributors are interested in hearing more.
==PAGE:36==
Chapter 6
Conclusion
This chapter concludes the thesis with a summary of the final animated product,
its usefulness, and proposals for future works.
6.1
Summary
In this thesis an animation was created in order to visualize the novel can-
cer vaccine being developed by DTU Chemistry.
It has been used so far to
aid understanding in hopes of raising funds for their continued research. It is
hoped that in the future this animation will continue to prove useful in further-
ing understanding of the biological processes involved so as to aid in further
experimental designs.
6.2
Future work
As this thesis concludes I would like to like to outline a few aspects of the
project that could have been improved given more time. The general smoothness
of the animation is uneven at certain points in the video, particularly in the
==PAGE:37==
6.2 Future work
30
repetitiveness that can be seen through the dendrite movements. It was noticed
that the appearance of this was greatly improved and the jerkiness less noticeable
when the animation was played at a slower speed. However, due to time and
computational restraints the total frame count was not increased to compensate
for this. The frame speed was also not adjusted so as not to sacrifice the video
quality.
One more aspect that would improve the biological accuracy of the video would
be to adjust the interaction between the liposomes and the cells when the lipo-
some is absorbed. The idea to have the cell slightly bulge outwards to encompass
the liposome as it becomes part of the cell wall would have been more consistent
with the usual behavior of liposomes than it entering the cell as a whole and
then dissolving into nothing. However, due to time constraints this minor detail
was left as is, so attention could be focused in other areas.
A final area for improvement would be the overall lighting.
Despite adding
more source lights to the project the final portion on the animation is still
relatively dark and poorly lit. Enhanced lighting would greatly improve the
overall appearance of the video and could be used to further direct the viewer
attention when necessary.
==PAGE:38==
6.2 Future work
31
==PAGE:39==
Bibliography
[1] Zheng Liu and Jun Guo. Nkt-cell glycolipid agonist as adjuvant in synthetic
vaccine. Carbohydrate Research, 452:78–90, 2017.
[2] John Lasseter. Principles of traditional animation applied to 3d computer
animation. SIGGRAPH ’87, pages 35–44, 1987.
[3] Jessica K. Hodgins, James F. O’Brien, and Robert E. Bodenheimer Jr. Com-
puter animation. Wiley Encyclopedia of Electrical and Electronics Engineer-
ing, 3:686–690, 1999.
[4] Ken Perlin. An image synthesizer. ACM SIGGRAPH Computer Graphics,
19(3):287–296, 1985.
[5] William T. Reeves. Particle systems - a techniquw for modeling a class of
fuzzy objects. ACM Transactions on Graphics, 2(2):91–108, 1983.
[6] Kenny Erleben, John Sporring, Knud Henriksen, and Henrik Dohlmann.
Physics-Based Animation. Charles River Media, Inc., 2005.
[7] RCSB Protein Data Bank.
https://www.rcsb.org/structure/2PO6.
Ac-
cessed: 2023-07-21.
[8] Brady Johnston. Molecularnodes. https://github.com/BradyAJohnston/
MolecularNodes, 2023.
[9] Lennart Demes.
ambient3d:
3d assets without restrictions.
https://
ambientcg.com/view?id=Gravel029, 2023.
