==PAGE:1==
DTU Wind
An optimisation of hybrid power plant 
design under variable pricing scenarios
Harrison Obed Butler
DTU Wind-M-0657
June 2023
==PAGE:2==
DTU Wind-M-0657 
June 2023
Project period: 
January - June 2023
ECTS: 30
Education: Master of Science
Supervisor(s):
Matti Juhani Koivisto
Sumanth Yamujala
Megha Gupta
DTU Wind and Energy Systems
Christos Ordoudis
ØRSTED
Remarks:
This report is submitted as partial 
fulfillment of the requirements for 
graduation in the above education at the 
Technical University of Denmark.
Technical University of Denmark 
Department of Wind and Energy Systems 
Frederiksborgvej 399
DK-4000 Roskilde
www.wind.dtu.dk
Author: Harrison Obed Butler
Title:
An optimisation of hybrid power plant 
design under variable pricing scenarios
DTU Wind and Energy Systems is a department of the 
Technical University of Denmark with a unique 
integration of research, education, innovation and 
public/private sector consulting in the field of wind and 
energy. Our activities develop new opportunities and 
technology for the global and Danish exploitation of 
wind and energy. Research focuses on key technical-
scientific fields, which are central for the development, 
innovation and use of wind energy and provides the 
basis for advanced education.
==PAGE:3==
Thursday 22nd June, 2023
Contents
1
Abstract
1
2
Introduction
2
2.1
Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2.2
Objectives and Focus areas . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.3
Report Outline
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
3
State of the art
5
3.1
The Hybrid power plant . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
3.2
Energy markets in Europe . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
4
Analysed scenarios
9
4.1
Investigated parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
4.2
Market regions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
4.3
Pricing Scenarios . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
4.4
Site locations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
5
Methodology
21
5.1
HyDesign Software . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
5.2
Input Variations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
6
Results
26
6.1
Historic pricing results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
6.2
Nominal pricing results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
6.3
High-price pricing results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
6.4
Mid-price results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
6.5
High-variation results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
6.6
Combined Onshore analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
6.7
Combined Offshore analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
7
Discussion
44
7.1
limitations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
8
Conclusion
46
9
References
48
10 Appendix
51
10.1 Results tables . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
10.2 Input Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
i
==PAGE:4==
Thursday 22nd June, 2023
Nomenclature
AEP
Annual Energy Production
CAPEX Capital Expenditure
DTU
Technical University of Denmark
EMS
Energy Management System
EU
European Union
GHI
Global horizontal irradiance
GUF
Grid Utilisation Factor
GWA Global Wind Atlas
HPP
Hybrid power plant
LCOE Levelised cost of energy
NPV
Net Present Value
OPEX Operational Expenditure
P2X
Power-to-X
PV
Photovoltaic
VRE
Variable renewable energy
VRES Variable renewable energy source
ii
==PAGE:5==
Thursday 22nd June, 2023
1
Abstract
This report investigates the profitability of Hybrid Power Plants subject to different pricing sce-
narios. The declining value factor of renewable energy across Europe as well as the necessity of
more Renewable energy sources as part of the green transition form the main motivation for this
project. A total of 15 sites across the market zones of SE1, UK, FR1, DK1 and DE are subject to 5
different pricing scenarios and result in 75 different power plant configurations. The selected sites
include both the onshore and offshore environment. The HyDesign software is used to generate the
optimal Hybrid power plant configuration via a surrogate based optimisation engine. The results
show that the most significant factors affecting the profitability of a Hybrid power plant are the
mean electricity price, weather resource and weather resource-price correlation. The variability of
price seems to have little effect on the profitability of a power plant.
1
==PAGE:6==
Thursday 22nd June, 2023
2
Introduction
2.1
Motivation
The use of renewable energy sources in Europe has increased significantly in recent years and is
expected to increase further in the future, especially in light of targets and goals set by the EU[1].
One such renewable energy source, the Hybrid power plant aids in the fulfillment of these goals
by combining the generation capabilities of both wind and solar power with energy storage and
conversion options.
There have been many studies regarding the minimisation of energy costs through minimisation
of LCOE as well as maximising energy production or AEP. In contrast to this, the study of rev-
enue maximisation is an area of relative novelty within the field of VRES studies. This Revenue
maximisation is important as it improves the economic viability of VRE plants and thus makes
investments in the crucial green transition more reliable. This is especially pertinent in the future
as VRESs are likely to become more common and value factors likely to reduce. In order to ensure
the success of the green transition in Europe, investors need to be confident that they will receive
an adequate return on their investment.
With VRESs becoming more ubiquitous in Europe as well as more competitive VRES power
prices, support payments and subsidies for renewable energy plants are in some cases being re-
placed by full market integration[2]. This means that future Hybrid power plants may have to
produce enough revenue from direct sale to power markets without support payments in order to
make a profit. Without this safety net, it is becoming ever more important for potential Hybrid
power plants to secure revenue streams in order to ensure a profitable project. Ensuring this prof-
itability is not a trivial task since there are many influences on the revenues of a Hybrid power
plant. The regional energy market that is participated within as well as site location have a great
impact on both the energy prices and energy production available to a hybrid power plant [3]. Fur-
thermore, the presence of the "self cannibalisation effect" during large production of renewable
energy sources can reduce the captured market value of renewable energy producers[4].
Mitigating these threats to the revenue streams of VRESs is what forms the main motivation for
this thesis project. If the green transition is going to be successfully undertaken in Europe, there
needs to be sufficient incentive and confidence from investors. Though this may seem an avaricious
motivator from a surface level the necessity for economic success of VRES sources is imperative
for their widespread use. Furthermore, if potential VRES projects can be proven to be profitable
ventures additional interest and support can be gathered in order to accelerate the green transition.
2
==PAGE:7==
Thursday 22nd June, 2023
2.2
Objectives and Focus areas
The objectives of this report are to understand the main drivers of optimal HPP sizing for NPV/-
CAPEX ratio. The NPV/CAPEX is chosen as the parameter to be optimised since it represents the
normalised profitability of a project to it’s capital costs. The NPV indicates how profitable a project
will be and considers the time value of money with a discount factor. This value is divided by the
CAPEX in order to allow comparison for sites with differing costs. Overall the NPV/CAPEX rep-
resents how profitable a project is relative to the invested capital expenditure. Using only the NPV
would make comparison of sites with different CAPEXs more difficult and as such NPV/CAPEX
is favoured. The main topics which are targeted for closer analysis are:
• The main drivers which make HPPs more or less profitable; what are the most important
factors in deciding this?
• The drivers behind capacity sizing of a HPP; when and why do Solar and Wind installations
make for better or worse investments?
• The correlations of VRE production with energy price fluctuation and how this affects opti-
mal HPP sizing
• The drivers behind battery usage and what makes the use case for batteries more profitable
• The influence of different market zones on the optimal sizing of a HPP
• The effect of different temporal nature price series on the optimal sizing of a HPP
2.3
Report Outline
• State of the art - This section presents the current state of the art and associated technolo-
gies. Hybrid power plants and European energy markets are discussed.
• Analysed scenarios - This section presents the full scope of the analysed cases. The reasons
for the selected parameters as well as the assumptions made are presented.
• Methodology -This section presents HyDesign software. Additionally, the software inputs
are introduced and their connection to the various analysed scenarios are explained.
• Results -This section presents the various results and explains them in the form of selected
graphs.
3
==PAGE:8==
Thursday 22nd June, 2023
• Discussion - This sections discusses and explains the results depth. All significant factors
contributing to the generated results are considered. Limitations and potential gaps in the
results are also presented.
• Conclusion - This sections presents the overarching findings of the thesis.
4
==PAGE:9==
Thursday 22nd June, 2023
3
State of the art
3.1
The Hybrid power plant
As opposed to their conventional counterparts Hybrid power plants incorporate multiple different
generation technologies which work in conjunction with storage and/or P2X components.
Figure 1: La Plana Hybrid power plant in Spain [5]
One of the main advantages of Hybrid power plants is their ability to take advantage of overplant-
ing. Overplanting is a design variable of a power plant and is defined by the amount of generation
capacity which exceeds the grid transmission capacity. Hybrid power plants can take advantage
of the negative correlation between Solar and Wind generation in order to overplant the site. The
likelihood of high production of both solar and wind is low thus meaning that likelihood of ex-
ceeding transmission capacity is also low. This allows hybrid power plants to spend less on grid
connection infrastructure per unit capacity installed compared to other power plants.
In addition to this, the energy storage and conversion units bring advantages to the hybrid power
plant not available to more conventional power plants. The use of energy storage allows for energy
to be stored when sale to the market is not favourable or possible. This may be due to low market
prices or to output exceeding the transmission capacity. This stored power can be later sold to
market when conditions become favourable once more. The use of energy conversion via P2X
technologies is much the same, with the ability to convert energy being used when sale to market
is unfavourable or not possible as discussed before. Depending on the storage medium, it can then
be sold or utilised as desired later on.
5
==PAGE:10==
Thursday 22nd June, 2023
The hybrid power plant analysed in this report will consist of 3 components: Wind power, Solar
power and Battery Storage. Wind and solar production components will cover the energy pro-
duction of the plant. For the solar component data for modern utility scale PV plants have been
selected. For the wind power, data of a typical on/offshore turbine has been used respective of the
site location. Furthermore for the energy storage and conversion options a Li-ion battery unit has
been modelled. The primary data source for the technology data is the publicly available technol-
ogy data from the Danish energy agency [6] .
3.2
Energy markets in Europe
In Europe there are multiple methods of power sales which vary depending on the country. Some
of the most common energy markets used are Day ahead, intra-day and balancing markets. These
markets facilitate the sale of power from energy generators at differing levels of time advance re-
spectively. Day ahead markets show the offered prices and generation quantities from generators
24 hours in advance. Intra-day and balancing markets operate in much the same way with the
principal difference being the number of hours at which the prices and generation amounts are
offered. In general intra-day and balancing markets operate with lower hours of advance. Larger
generators with lower ramp rates and marginal costs tend to dominate sale of power through day
ahead markets whereas generators with high ramp rates and marginal costs see more use in balanc-
ing markets where they ensure grid stability and prevent blackouts. For the purposes of this report
the day ahead market is focused on due to the scope of the Master thesis and the available timescale.
The marginal costs of energy generators is an important metric as generators will usually not pro-
duce power at market clearing prices lower than this to avoid running at a financial loss. Despite
this, there are rare periods of negative prices. These negative prices are caused by a lack of flex-
ibility of conventional generators such as Lignite and Nuclear plants which cannot economically
start or stop power production[7]. This leads to a situation where too much power is supplied to
the grid and as such the energy price becomes negative. Usually, however, the Market clearing
price is dictated by the reverse merit order curve whereby generators bid the amount of power they
can produce for each hour as well as the price at which they are willing to sell the power. The
market clearing price is then taken as the price required to ensure that the load of the given hour
is supplied, starting from the lowest bid price and working up. Thus the market clearing price is
directly affected by the amount of generated power from each generator as well as the bid price.
In energy systems without variable power generation the merit order curve will remain static since
the generation capacity is constant for traditional generators such as lignite and gas plants. This
means that assuming constant price bids the market price is dictated by the load alone. In other
words the potential supply is fixed and the demand is variable thus the demand drives the price.
In energy systems with VRESs the supply is not fixed as the generation capacity depends on the
weather resource at the given time. This means that energy markets with large VRE penetration
6
==PAGE:11==
Thursday 22nd June, 2023
are driven not only by the demand but also by the supply at a given time. Since the marginal
costs of VRESs tend to be lower than those of traditional generators, the market clearing price
can reduce significantly during periods of large VRE production. This happens since the market
is flooded with large amounts of low cost energy which pushes out some of the higher cost tradi-
tional generators. This in turn can reduce the received revenue of VRESs which is reffered to as
the "self-cannibalisation effect".
In addition to this, the different market regions in Europe have varied generation mixes leading to
different received prices and price drivers. Depending on the specific European market region the
influence of different threats and opportunities will be present. For example, the negative corre-
lation of wind generation with the price of a market region increases with the installed wind ca-
pacity[8]. As such for Regions with more installed wind generation such as the UK, Germany and
Denmark this may be more prevalent. As discussed before the self-cannibalisation effect threatens
the revenue potential of energy producers. This is particularly potent for generators whose produc-
tion correlates with these lower price periods. For example wind generators will be more at risk
from suffering from these effects than solar generators during periods of large wind energy pro-
duction as they are more likely to produce power during these events where low prices are present.
As such, important factors for prospective VRES sites are the correlation of market prices with
overall VRES generation of the same type (wind/solar) as well as the correlation of the weather
resource at the site with the overall weather resource of the region.
Moreover, the generation capacities of nearby countries can also affect the energy price with inter-
national energy exports. For example, the effect of Norwegian Hydro power on electricity prices
in central western Europe is well attested. Research shows that Norwegian hydro power not only
reduces the power price in Central-west Europe but also reduces the volatility as well[9]. Fur-
thermore, studies on the effects of increased Hydropower penetration on energy market price find
that it reduces the mean energy price [10]. Hydropower is not the only power source which can
affect prices through energy exports, rather it’s low marginal costs and large capacities present in
Norway make it influential. As such, energy prices in European markets are influenced by the
neighbouring countries generation although this influence may be greater or weaker depending on
both the generated power and transmission capacities [11].
Similar to wind power the installed capacity of solar has a negative correlation with the average
energy price [12]. Indeed according to research the value factor of solar reduces steeper than the
value factor for wind for increasing penetration within the market[13]. The principal reason for
this is that solar generation is more concentrated in time making it more susceptible to "cannibali-
sation" events.
Within Europe the deployment of VRES is changing the way that the energy markets behave. In
particular, it is affecting the received market prices of power producers, and threatens the captured
market value of VRE producers. Research shows that increased deployment of VRES causes a sys-
tematic decline of the average market revenues for VRE plants[14]. In addition to this, increasing
7
==PAGE:12==
Thursday 22nd June, 2023
VRES penetration is likely to reduce overall price variation by increasing the amount of near zero
marginal cost producers in the energy mix [15]. Also, liberalized electricity markets like many of
those present in Europe increase the risks for investors of high CAPEX, low OPEX plants such
as solar and wind power[16]. Additional research shows that projections of energy systems with
greater renewable penetration leads to lower energy prices overall whereas an increase in the price
of ancillary markets is present[17]. With all of this in mind, it is highly possible that the average
power price received by future VRESs in Europe will be lower than previous years.
8
==PAGE:13==
Thursday 22nd June, 2023
4
Analysed scenarios
This project aims to investigate the NPV to CAPEX ratio of Hybrid power plants, due to this, it is
important to investigate different factors which affect this. The factors which are investigated in
this project have been chosen due to the fact that they are significant for the resultant NPV/CAPEX
ratio and that they can be modelled in the thesis timescale with the available tools.
4.1
Investigated parameters
The three chosen factors to investigate in this report are:
• Site Location
• Market Region
• Pricing Scenario
These factors have been chosen since they each have a large effect directly or indirectly on the
NPV to CAPEX ratio of a hybrid power plant.
Firstly, the location of a hybrid power plant has a large influence on the available weather re-
sources, which in turn affect the amount of power which can be produced. An example of this is
the wind resource at the site. A key detail of this resource the distribution of the wind at each dif-
ferent speed, which directly affects the wind power which may be extracted at that site. Similarly,
the GHI represents the solar radiation which is received by a surface horizontal to the ground, this
quantity shows the potential energy that a solar plant could make at a given location. In addition to
this the location of site will affect it’s correlation to the overall aggregate generation of the market
region. This is important as the aggregate generation of a market region will be significant in driv-
ing the electricity price. Therefore, the correlation to the aggregate generation will likely affect the
correlation to the overall price received.
Additionally, the CAPEX of a HPP can vary significantly with the site location due to ease of site
access or the need for more expensive construction methods. An example of this is the higher
associated CAPEX of offshore wind turbine installation compared to onshore turbines. Both of
these factors influence the NPV to CAPEX ratio of a prospective HPP. The former via affecting
the sale of power to the chosen energy market and the latter via the total cost of the CAPEX.
Secondly, the Market region also has a significant effect. This is because the specific market re-
gion participated within dictates which power prices shall be received when selling electricity on
the market. The generation mix of a market region determines the merit order curve and sub-
sequent market clearing price. Additionally, the dominance of different VRESs such as solar or
wind can cause prices to correlate with the presence of the respective resource i.e windy or sunny
9
==PAGE:14==
Thursday 22nd June, 2023
weather. Furthermore, presence of VRES within a market region affects the strength of the "self-
cannibalisation effect" and the captured market value of VRE producers. The import and export of
power also affects the received power price, for example, in countries close to large producers of
Hydro power the price can be greatly affected by this. This is because the low marginal costs of
producing hydro power mean it can strongly influence the market clearing price if large amounts
are supplied. Other external factors such as political and economic ones can also affect the received
power prices both on a short and long term.
Finally, the pricing scenario is the third investigated parameter. This pricing scenario represents
the projection of electricity prices for a specific market region. Since predictions and projections
of future conditions are never certain it is important to analyse multiple different pricing scenar-
ios in order to simulate the effects of different future scenarios. As can be seen from the current
Russian-Ukrainian war the effects of external hard-to-predict political factors can have very strong
consequences for energy producers. As such, from the perspective of an investor or HPP owner
it is important to analyse multiple different projections. This helps to quantify the robustness of
different technology options within the HPP generation mix and thus ensure a financially viable
project. These pricing scenarios are intended to model the long term price trends associated within
the market regions and to provide realistic projections which can be used as a basis for investment
decisions.
4.2
Market regions
Several Market regions of key interest were identified with supervision from Ørsted. These were
: DE, GB, DK1, SE1 and FR which correspond to Germany, the UK, West Denmark, Northern
Sweden and France (in the case of Sweden and Denmark a subdivision was selected thus the 1 is
present). These market regions were selected since together they have viable onshore and offshore
sites for a HPP. Furthermore, each market region has a different generation mix and the effects
thereof can be analysed in relation to the results. SE1 is a hydro-power influenced market zone due
to it’s proximity to Norwegian hydropower plants. GB and DK1 have a large installed wind ca-
pacity so the price correlation to overall wind generation in these zones could produce interesting
results. Likewise FR is a more solar driven market region due to the greater amount of installed
solar power.
Figure 2 shows the daily correlation between the price and total Day-ahead forecasted generations
from each market zone. These daily values for both price and forecasted generation are the daily
averages respectively. The data for both forecasted production and energy price was acquired from
the ENTSO-E restful API [18]. As can be seen in both subfigures each market zone has different
correlations with the forecasted VRES generation. For example the French price shows a very
strong negative correlation with its respective solar forecast, the same can also be seen to a lower
extent with Great Britain and Germany. The French price also shows negative correlations with
10
==PAGE:15==
Thursday 22nd June, 2023
other countries forecasted generations, though this is likely due to the fact that all market zones are
located relatively close together and as such the solar generation of the french zone will correlate
with the generation of the other zones. Additionally, Danish and German energy prices show a
strong negative correlation with their respective wind forecast. The Swedish wind forecast shows
little correlation to the other price zones, aside from a positive correlation with the French price. A
possible explanation for this is that the greater distance between Sweden and the other price zones
which makes transmission of power more difficult between the price zones. It should be noted
that these matrices indicate correlation which does not necessarily mean causation, although the
VRES forecast and subsequent production will affect the energy price as discussed previously, it
is not the only driver. One such example of an alternate driver could be that of demand fluctuation,
where increased demand increases price. These changes in demand can often change with the
abundance of VRESs e.g increased energy demand in winter for heating and lighting coinciding
with annual fluctuation of wind availability. There are also many other potential causes for energy
price fluctuations, however, the overall correlation with availability VRES can have important
implications on the profitability and subsequent optimal design of a VRE plant.
(a) Daily correlation between price and total forecasted wind production (2016)
(Includes both on and offshore plants)
11
==PAGE:16==
Thursday 22nd June, 2023
(b) Daily correlation between price and total forecasted solar production (2016)
(Sweden does not yet have any utility scale solar plants)
Figure 2: Weekly correlations between price and DA forecast of VRES generations for 2016 (His-
torical pricing scenario)
4.3
Pricing Scenarios
In this report both Historical price data and Projected price data were used for simulations. The
Historical price data used represents an average year for spot price activity in a pre-Ukrainian war
Europe. The Projected data represents different possible spot price activities for the year of 2030.
2030 was chosen as the year for projections as there was data available regarding the price data
as well as the CAPEX and OPEX of the different HPP technologies present. For all scenarios the
price used corresponds to 2015 Euros and inflation effects have been accounted for accordingly.
Table 1 gives a brief overview of the of the used scenarios.
12
==PAGE:17==
Thursday 22nd June, 2023
Scenario name
Price Data source
Weather year
Historical
ENTSOE API
2016
Nominal
REALISE project
2012
High-price
REALISE project
2012
High-Variation
REALISE project
2012
Mid-price
REALISE project
2012
Table 1: Pricing scenarios overview
Historical pricing scenario
The Historical price time series for each of the relevant market zones was acquired using the
ENTSO-E restful API [18]. This provided hourly day ahead electricity prices for the chosen mar-
ket regions of GB, FR, DE, DK1 and SE1. The longest continuous data window for day ahead
prices for these market regions was from the start of 2015 to the end of 2020. From this interval
a time series for use as the historical time series was chosen. The chosen year was 2016, this year
was chosen as all selected market zones had complete data for this time range. Furthermore, the
effects of the war in Ukraine along with any other anomalous events were not captured allowing
this time series to be treated as a default control year. Additionally, the quality and integrity of the
input data had to be verified in order to ensure reasonable results would be generated.
Figure 3: Correlation Matrix of Historical price timeseries
13
==PAGE:18==
Thursday 22nd June, 2023
As we see in Figure 3 the price timeseries show positive correlations for all combinations. Some
timeseries are more correlated than others which is expected due to the different proximities and
transmission capacities between each region. This is seen in the high correlation of Danish prices
with the German ones and in the lower correlation between British and Swedish prices. The be-
low Figures 5,4 show the histograms as well as the standard deviation, min, max values and mean
value of each timeseries. These plots show that the input data is of acceptable quality with the
histograms maintaining a relatively similar distribution in each case. We note that the presence
of negative prices in each timeseries is seldom as in reality and that the standard deviations of all
timeseries are similar.
Figure 4: Mean,Min,Max and Standard deviation of Historical price timeseries
14
==PAGE:19==
Thursday 22nd June, 2023
Figure 5: Histograms of Historical price timeseries (Y axis is logarithmic scaled)
Alternate pricing scenarios
In addition to the historical pricing scenarios, 4 future projections of pricing scenarios were also
used as inputs for HyDesign. These future pricing scenarios were a selection of scenarios from the
REALISE project [19]. The Realise project presents pricing scenario projections though use of the
open source energy system modelling tool Balmorel. The report contains many different scenarios
each for the years 2025, 2035 and 2045, each individual scenario is generated by adjustment of
the input factors: Onshore wind cost, Offshore wind cost, Solar PV cost, Natural gas price, CO2
tax, Heat pump cost, Electrolyser cost. For this thesis project the 2025 projections were used in
order to correlate with static input data corresponding to 2030 projections. This decision was taken
since within the Realise project it is assumed that the investment decisions take time to be reflected
within the energy system, it is assumed in the project that the 2025 scenario is reflected in the
energy system of 2030. Another important factor to consider when using price time series is the
corresponding weather time series as without synchronisation between these two the correlations
between VRES production and price value is lost completely. For all the Realise price projections
the corresponding weather year is that of 2012. As such the correct weather timeseries are also
used in Hydesign to ensure the aforementioned price-weather dependencies are captured.
15
==PAGE:20==
Thursday 22nd June, 2023
The REALISE report presents a nominal price projection for the aforementioned years, in addi-
tion to this alternate scenarios are available. A total of 34 scenarios are available through input
variation including the nominal scenario. From these 34 variations 4 were selected to be used as
inputs for this project. The 4 selected projections correspond to scenarios R1, R4 ,R10 and R30
from the project respectively. For the purposes of this report these scenarios are labelled Nominal,
High-price, Mid-price , High-variation. The pricing scenarios were chosen on the basis of provid-
ing sufficiently different scenarios from which meaningful conclusions could then be drawn. As
such, a number of factors were considered when assessing the difference between scenarios such
as: Average spot price, Standard deviation, Max spot price and price variation of spot price.
Of these 4 factors the first three are self-explanatory, however the price variation is slightly more
complicated. In the below figure the price variation (Vp) is calculated as the average daily variation
(Vd) divided by the overall average price (P). The average daily variation (Vd) is calculated as
the average value of the Daily max price value (Dmax) minus the minimum price value (Dmin).
This price variation may have implications on Battery usage within the HPP as a greater variation
would mean a greater temporal variation in the value of energy, thus meaning the CAPEX cost of
the battery may be justified if enough power can be sold at high power price times.
Vd = (Dmax −Dmin)
(1)
Vp = Vd
P
(2)
16
==PAGE:21==
Thursday 22nd June, 2023
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 6: Average spot price, Standard deviation, Max spot price and Vp of Alternate pricing
scenarios
4.4
Site locations
The various site locations were chosen in order to ensure variation of site environment (off/on-
shore), weather resource and geographic location within each of the previous selected market re-
gions. Firstly, both on and offshore sites have been selected for each market region where possible,
this is in order to help analyse the performance of this different types of plants in the results.
Secondly, the weather resource across the selected sites is varied, this is primarily achieved by
choosing locations with differing levels of weather resource for both wind and solar. Existing
wind, solar and hybrid plants have been used in the analysis to try to attain some locations with
strong wind resources and others with strong solar resources. In addition to this, some sites have
17
==PAGE:22==
Thursday 22nd June, 2023
been used which do not have any existing plants, however the resources at these sites have been
verified to be sufficient with use of online resources [20], [21]. In the results and subsequent dis-
cussion the optimal sizing compared to the real sizing of the some of the plants will be analysed.
Finally the geographic location of each site is sufficiently varied in order to ensure that each site is
not too close to each other as this would cause a very large correlation in the weather resource and
overall set of generated results would be less significant.
Following selection of the site locations CORRES was used [22] for all locations to verify both
the solar and wind resource. CORRES is a software developed bu DTU Wind and Energy systems
which can be used to generate simulations of VRE performance for past years via weather reanal-
ysis. Figure 7 shows the results for each of the sites.
(a) Onshore
(b) Offshore
Figure 7: Weather characteristics of sites from CORRES simulation
The above figures show acceptable weather characteristics for the selected set of sites. Negative
correlation between solar and wind generation can be seen for all onshore locations except FR1. In
general wind and solar resources have negative correlations and thus we would expect to see all lo-
cations with a negative correlation, FR1 does not show this negative correlation as it is located near
Perpignan in the south of France where the "Mistral" has a strong effect. The "Mistral" is a local
weather phenomenon which is associated with strong northwesterly winds and subsequent sunny
weather[23]. For this reason the positive wind-solar correlation for this location is considered ac-
ceptable. Aside from this, the average wind and solar capacity factors for each location varies.
The UK, Danish and first German sites show strong wind resources due to their proximity to the
18
==PAGE:23==
Thursday 22nd June, 2023
coast, likewise the solar resource is stronger in the french locations due to their more southerly
location. Regarding the offshore locations a large wind resource can be seen for all locations. FR3
shows a slightly lower capacity factor than might have been expected. This is surprising as this
location corresponds to the planned Saint Brieuc wind farm, however the capacity factor is not
extremely low and is only slightly lower than the other locations. Thus, it was decided to keep FR3
in the location set since the weather resource is still of an acceptable magnitude. Furthermore, an
opportunity is presented to investigate how the optimisation for a slightly poorer offshore site may
differ from the other sites with a greater wind resource . Overall the CORRES results show that
the onshore and offshore locations show acceptable weather characteristics.
A table describing the final set of site locations as well as a map showing these locations within
Europe can be seen below in Table 2 and Figure 8.
Market region
Site name
Site description
Latitude, Longitude
Altitude
GB
UK1
Isle of Wight southern coast
50.587°N, -1.298°E
150m
UK2
Hornsea 3 offshore park
53.885°N, 1.791°E
0m
UK3
Hywind offshore park
57.290°N, -1.210E°
0m
FR
FR1
Perpigan onshore wind
42.722°N, 2.740E°
122m
FR2
Bordeaux Solar plant
44.725°N, -0.801E°
61m
FR3
Saint Brieuc offshore farm
48.858N°, -2.532E°
0m
DE
DE1
Butjadingen Peninsula
53.593N°, 8.299E°
0m
DE2
Neuhandberg Solar plant
52.614N°, 14.240E°
63m
DE3
Arkona offshore park
54.782N°, 14.121E°
0m
SE1
SE1
Markbygden II onshore wind farm
65.579N°, 20.245E°
369m
SE2
Gallivare
65.799N°, 23.030E°
36m
SE3
Jokkmokks
66.787N°, 20.823E°
333m
DK1
DK1
Holmen II hybrid plant
55.847N°, 8.332E°
1m
DK2
Thorup onshore wind farm
57.000N°, 9.234E°
1m
DK3
Thor offshore wind farm
56.369N°, 8.014E°
0m
Table 2: Location Data of Selected sites
19
==PAGE:24==
Thursday 22nd June, 2023
Figure 8: Map of selected site locations and price zones (In this maps the market zones of DE, UK
and SE1 are shown as GE, GB and SW1 respectively)
20
==PAGE:25==
Thursday 22nd June, 2023
5
Methodology
5.1
HyDesign Software
The Hydesign software which was used extensively throughout this project is a powerful optimi-
sation tool specifically designed for Hybrid power plants. The Hydesign software aims to optimise
the design, technology sizing and energy management strategy of a Hybrid power plant with regard
to a chosen objective function e.g min. LCOE, max NPV, max NPV/CAPEX.
The Main features of HyDesign are listed below:
• Optimal capacity sizing and choice of technology for wind, solar,energy storage and P2X
technologies
• Optimal site layout of Turbines and PV panels to reduce negative interactions
• Site selection through correlation analysis between VRES resources
• Optimisation of HPP power and energy systems for different use cases
• Risk profiling of future HPP design
• Design of shared electrical collection system for AC/DCcoupled HPPS.
The Hydesign software uses the OpenMDAO platform in python in order to solve the coupled
optimisation problems involved within the overall optimisation problem. OpenMDAO itself is an
open-source computing platform in python for multidisciplinary optimisation problems. The over-
all optimisation problem of Hydesign consists of multiple coupled optimisation problems since the
inputs to each of the separate optimisations are not independent of the inputs to the other optimisa-
tions. In Hydesign there are two nested optimisations, firstly the the outer optimisation determines
the capacities and design parameters of both the generation and storage technologies. Secondly,
the inner optimisation handles the EMS and determines the operation of energy storage technolo-
gies and grid dispatch.
The below figure illustrates the coupled optimisation process in the workflow of Hydesign for
optimal HPP capacity sizing.
21
==PAGE:26==
Thursday 22nd June, 2023
Figure 9: The models for wind power plant(WPP), photovoltaic (PVP), and energy management
systems (EMS) are all given design variables by the optimisation engine. The WPP and PVP
models are input information from the user-provided weather conditions. Operational timeseries
are produced using this data and used by a finance model. A quantity of interest is then sent to the
optimisation engine via the finance model.
Inputs
In order to run the Hydesign software a number of user specified inputs are required. Most of the
input data can be split into 4 Categories, Site data and technology specific data for Wind, solar
and battery options. Two additional user specified inputs are the chosen objective function and
the price timeseries. The latter input contains the hourly power price data which is important for
revenue calculation of the HPP. The below table 3 shows in detail all the required inputs in order
to run HyDesign.
Technology Variables
Wind
Solar
Battery
Site variables
Wind Turbine cost
Solar PV cost
Battery energy cost
Lat/Longitude
Civil works cost
Hardware installation cost
Battery Power cost
Altitude
Fixed O&M cost
Inverter cost
Misc.costs*
Grid capacity
Variable O&M cost
Fixed O&M cost
Grid control system cost
Discount factor
Power plant efficiency
Degradation rate (p.a)
Depth of discharge
Land cost
Rotor diameter (ref.)
Land use per MW
O&M cost
Balance of system cost
Hub height (ref.)
WACC
Min. storage capacity
Grid connection cost
Rated power (ref.)
-
Charging efficiency
Start year of operation
WACC
-
Price reduction (p.a)
Plant lifespan
-
-
WACC
Price timeseries
-
-
-
Corporate Tax rate
Table 3: Hydesign Inputs
* Battery Balance of Plant + installation + commissioning cost
22
==PAGE:27==
Thursday 22nd June, 2023
Outputs
Some of the most significant outputs are the capacity sizing of the Hybrid power plant along with
the objective function of max NPV/CAPEX. This sizing optimisation details the optimal capacities
which should be installed in order to maximise the NPV/CAPEX of the Hybrid power plant. In
addition to this, the sizing optimisation also provides information of the physical characteristics of
the generation technology e.g hub height, rotor diameter. Table 4 below details the full outputs of
the HyDesign sizing optimisation.
Design Variables
Output variables
Wind
Solar
Battery
Finance model
Rotor diameter, Hub height
Ac Power
Power rating
NPV/CAPEX
Specific power
Surface tilt angle
Energy storage capacity
IRR
Rated power
Surface azimuth angle
Number of Batteries
LCOE
Number of turbines
DC/AC ratio
-
AEP
Wind Power density
-
-
NPV
Table 4: HyDesign Outputs
5.2
Input Variations
In coordination with the analysed cases, some of the input data is altered by the user. Not all of the
input data is altered for each case however, leading to the separation of the input data into static
and variable. As discussed in the analysed cases sections the three main parameters to vary in
each case are Market region, pricing scenario and Site location. Thus it is required to correlate the
variations in each of these parameters into the aforementioned HyDesign inputs from table 3
The data which is varied in order to model these parameters are the Latitude and longitude, Altitude
and Price timeseries. Changing the site location is handled by altering the input data of Latitude/-
Longitude and Altitude. The variations in market region and pricing scenario are accounted for by
varying the input price timeseries.
23
==PAGE:28==
Thursday 22nd June, 2023
Figure 10: Analysed case parameters and corresponding HyDesign input data to vary
The above figure visualizes the corresponding changes in HyDesign input data for the variations
of the analysed case parameters. Any change in one of the case parameters requires a change to
the linked HyDesign Inputs. It should be noted that a change in market region without a change in
pricing scenario also mandates a different input price time series. As discussed previously in the
analysed scenarios section, a total of 75 simulations are run. The 3 different site locations for each
of the 5 selected market regions leads to a total of 15 different locations. Thus 15 corresponding
sets of Latitude/Longitude and Altitude data must be used. Additionally, with the 5 selected market
regions and 5 pricing scenarios 25 different price timeseries are used in the simulation process.
The list of Latitude/Longitude as well as Altitude for the 15 different locations has been provided
in Table 2. Due to the length of the timeseries data it is not possible to provide in such a format.
The utilised time series will however, be available upon request.
Data adjustment for site environment
Since the analysed site locations include both onshore and offshore locations a necessary adjust-
ment to the HyDesign inputs is needed to ensure the input data is accurate and the results are
reliable. In general, the offshore environment has a significant impact on the CAPEX costs of
wind as well as the OPEX. Additionally, the turbine characteristics and grid connection costs in
the offshore environment are different to those in the onshore environment. Furthermore, offshore
solar installations are not included in this report and as such all solar inputs in the offshore envi-
ronment are not utilised. Failing to account for the environment change in the model would lead to
24
==PAGE:29==
Thursday 22nd June, 2023
inaccurate simulation results. As such, in order to ensure reliable simulation results the HyDesign
inputs corresponding to these differences must be changed depending on the site location being on-
shore or offshore. This leads to the synchronous adjustment of the static inputs with site location.
Thus 2 sets of static inputs are needed, one for onshore and one for offshore. This synchronous
adjustment of this data is important as not to increase the total number of simulations, since using
the incorrect static inputs for a site location would lead to an irrelevant simulation with incorrect
inputs. The inputs which are altered with site location environment are referred to as synchronous
variables. It should be noted that the Cost of Battery implementation would likely be different
in the offshore environment, despite this a reliable source could not be found for this. As such it
is assumed in this report that the battery implementation is identical in cost in the offshore and
onshore environment. The full list of synchronous variables for the site environment is listed in
Table 5
Wind
Site variables
Wind Turbine cost
Grid capacity
Civil works cost
Grid connection cost
Fixed O&M cost
Plant lifespan
Variable O&M cost
Land cost
WACC
-
Rotor diameter (ref.)
-
Hub height (ref.)
-
Rated power (ref.)
-
Table 5: Synchronous Hydesign inputs for site environment
25
==PAGE:30==
Thursday 22nd June, 2023
6
Results
In this section the results and the significant trends therein are presented. Certain visualisations
will be presented in order to further explore the results of each price projection. Finally, visuali-
sations allowing comparison of results across all price projections will be presented. The results
are also available as full tables for each price projection for the offshore and offshore sites in the
appendix.
GUF and Overplanting ratio
Within the results two new metrics will be introduced: the GUF (GUF) and Overplanting ratio
(OR). These 2 outputs have not yet been defined yet are fairly simple metrics. The GUF represents
the Grid utilisation factor and is defined as the average ratio of Power dispatched to the grid (PD)
over the grid capacity (CG).
GUF =
PD
CG

(3)
The Overplanting ratio represents the extent to which a HPP is overplanted. It is defined as the sum
of VRE generation capacity divided by the grid capacity. In this case the VRE generation consists
solely of Wind capacity (Cw) and Solar capacity (Cs).
OR = Cw + Cs
CG
(4)
26
==PAGE:31==
Thursday 22nd June, 2023
6.1
Historic pricing results
(a)
(b)
Figure 11: Historical Scenario optimal VRE capacities and capacity factors from CORRES
The results from the historical pricing scenario show that the installed capacities of Wind and So-
lar power follow the available weather resource at the site. This can be seen in 11 particularly for
sites FR2 and DK2 where we see a large deployment of solar and wind power correlating to the
relevant CORRES average capacity factors of solar and wind respectively. The results of DE2 and
FR2 correlate nicely with the real world plants as both are solar power plants in real life and in the
simulation results have opted for much greater solar capacities than wind.
FR1 shows a different results to this, however opting for a solar dominated HPP on an existent
wind site. This difference is caused by FR1 having a larger solar resource than wind resource as
seen in the capacity factors from CORRES. The results of UK1 and FR1 show the importance of
wind and solar resource correlation on the optimal HPP design. Both FR1 and UK1 have impres-
sive wind and solar resources, so we might expect to see similar optimal plant designs. However,
due to the positive correlation of FR1 regarding the wind and solar power (as can be seen in Figure
7) the potential for overplanting is much lower. For UK1 a negative correlation is present meaning
that there is a greater overplanting potential as solar and wind resources are less likely to occur at
the same time. For this reason we see FR1 opt for a solar dominated HPP where as UK1 opts for a
large deployment of both technologies.
27
==PAGE:32==
Thursday 22nd June, 2023
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 12: Historical Scenario optimal Battery capacities, GUF, Overplanting and NPV/CAPEX
ratios
The Battery deployment shows that batteries are not favoured at all for plants with only one present
VRES such as FR2, SE2 and SE3, this could be explained by situations where the potential rev-
enues of arbitrage are smaller than the potential revenues of an increased quantity of power sold.
In situations like this it is more profitable to invest in a greater generation capacity and thus we see
no battery usage. Additionally, for plants with only VRES type the potential to overplant is lower
and this may also reduce the profitability of the battery usage.
The battery deployment seems to increase for sites with greater relative wind deployment as com-
pared to solar power. This can be seen by comparing the battery results for DE1, DK1, DK2, SE1
with sites UK1 and FR1. This could be due to the negative associated wind price correlation which
can be seen in Figure 2. Additionally, we also see that in this simulation the GUF does not seem
to follow the NPV/CAPEX with both FR1 and FR2 having low GUF values but retaining positive
28
==PAGE:33==
Thursday 22nd June, 2023
NPV/CAPEX values. However, the GUF does appear to be proportional to the overplanting ratio,
this is expected as more generation capcity should lead to more power being produced and hence
a greater GUF. Regarding the NPV/CAPEX we see in these results that most sites have negative
value which would indicate an economically infeasible venture, however in reality it is likely that
in the year of 2016 many VRE producers would have access to support payments which could
increase the revenues and thus NPV/CAPEX ratio of many of the sites.
(a)
(b)
Figure 13: Historical Scenario optimal VRE capacities, GUF and NPV/CAPEX (offshore sites)
The offshore results in Figure 13 shows that there is little correlation between GUF and overplant-
ing ratio in relation to the NPV/CAPEX. Site DK3 has a very large GUF of approximately 0.6 yet
has a very low NPV/CAPEX ratio. In contrast both UK sites have lower GUFs and have positive
NPV/CAPEX ratios. Similarly there seems to be little connection between overplanting ratio and
NPV/CAPEX the results for both UK sites differ greatly to sites DK3 and DE3 with similar over-
planting ratios.
The reason for the positive NPV/CAPEX ratios of the UK sites is likely due to the greater average
price as seen in Figure 4 and also due to the more advantageous price-wind correlation as in Figure
2. Furthermore the UK sites have a slightly better capacity factor which can be seen in Figure 7.
This greater capacity factor is not enough in itself to create a positive NPV as we see DK3 with a
much greater GUF and much lower NPV.
Similar to the onshore results we see that most of the offshore sites are not considered to be eco-
nomically profitable projects, however, once again no support payments have been modelled mean-
ing that the real life situation could be considerably different to the one seen here.
29
==PAGE:34==
Thursday 22nd June, 2023
6.2
Nominal pricing results
(a)
(b)
Figure 14: Nominal Scenario optimal VRE capacities and capacity factors from CORRES
Figure 15: Correlation of electricity prices from Nominal scenario with site weather resources
(Wind speed at 100m, GHI)
In the Nominal pricing scenario we see that the HPP configuration is once again dependent on the
available weather resources. Likewise, the real life solar sites FR2 and DE2 show a preference
towards solar power. However, DE2 also shows a significant deployment of wind power. This
difference is likely due to DE2 having a moderate wind resource and a slightly better solar re-
source present where as FR2 has a poor wind resource and an exceptional solar resource. This
relative difference appears to be an important factor in deciding the optimal HPP configuration as
the only site which opts for a configuration different to the relative difference in weather resource
is FR1 which has a greater solar resource than wind yet opts for more wind power than solar power.
30
==PAGE:35==
Thursday 22nd June, 2023
This can be explained by Figure 23 which shows that FR1 has a significant positive correlation
associated with the wind resource which is not present in other sites. This scenario means that
wind power is heavily favoured for the FR1 site. Analysing sites DK1 and DK2 also show how
small differences between sites can significantly alter the optimal HPP design. DK2 opts for a
wind only plant whereas DK1 opts for a signifcant wind and solar capacities. This difference can
be explained by DK2’s relatively higher wind resource and lower solar resource combined with it’s
lower negative correlation associated with wind power.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 16: Nominal Scenario Optimal Battery capacities, GUF, Overplanting and NPV/CAPEX
ratios
We see once more, that all sites opting for one type of weather resource do not opt for any battery
usage. Aside from this we see that HPP sites with large solar and significant wind power such
as DE1, DE2, DK1 and FR1 favour larger battery usage. This larger battery usage for these sites
could be explained by the larger negative correlation associated with solar power as can be seen in
31
==PAGE:36==
Thursday 22nd June, 2023
figure 23.
The GUF seems to be important but not decisive regarding the NPV/CAPEX maximisation. There
is one site with a medium GUF with a non-profitable NPV/CAPEX ratio in DE2 however many of
the sites with lower NPV/CAPEX ratios also have lower GUFs such as FR2, SE3 and SE1. The
lower performance of DE2 could be explained by its reliance on solar power which in this scenario
has a large negative correlation with the price, likewise FR2 also suffers from this.
Finally the overplanting ratio seems to have little connection the overall NPV/CAPEX ratio as SE1
shows a larger overplanting with a low NPV/CAPEX whereas DE1 also shows large overplanting
with a profitable NPV/CAPEX.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 17: Nominal Scenario optimal Battery capacities, wind resource-price correlations and
Price variation data(Vp, St.dev) (Offshore sites)
32
==PAGE:37==
Thursday 22nd June, 2023
The most significant trend of the offshore results in the nominal pricing scenario was the relation
of battery capacity to price correlation. The above figure shows that sites FR3 and UK3 opt for
large batteries with sites DE3 and UK2 with smaller batteries and finally DK3 with no battery at
all, which correlates to the negative price correlations seen between the offshore wind resource and
market price.
The battery is employed in greater quantities in sites which suffer less from lower value factors.
This is not expected behaviour as we would expect to see the opposite regarding relation to the
wind-price correlations. The reason for this behaviour could be explained by the differences in
temporal nature of the different market zones. With reference to Figure 17 (c) we see that the
French market zone has greater daily variation and standard deviations than the Danish and German
and British market zones with the Danish market having the lowest values. Additionally, the
negative price correlation of DK3 is only slightly worse than that of UK2 but the results show that
this difference is enough to nullify the use case of the battery, which could further be explained by
this difference of behaviour of the market regions.
33
==PAGE:38==
Thursday 22nd June, 2023
6.3
High-price pricing results
Figure 18: NPV/CAPEX ratios for High-price scenario
Figure 19: Correlation of electricity prices from High-price scenario with site weather resources
(Wind speed at 100m, GHI)
The main trend of this pricing scenario is the increase in NPV/CAPEX for all HPP sites. This
increase is caused by the greatly increases average spot price as seen in Figure 6. This increase
in spot price increases the revenues produced by the HPPs and subsequently we see much more
profitable HPPs. Indeed all sites but SE1 show positive NPV/CAPEX values. The sites which do
not have profitable or instead have very low NPV/CAPEX ratios are SE1 and SE3 which are lo-
cated in the SE1 market zone. This market has the lowest average spot price, in addition to this the
site locations have some the poorest weather resources. The negative correlations between VRE
production and market prices are not very low indicating that this is not as significant of a factor as
the 2 previously mentioned. This pricing scenario reinforces the significance of spot price average
34
==PAGE:39==
Thursday 22nd June, 2023
and weather resource availability as a major factor affecting HPP profitability.
Figure 20: Correlation Matrix of selected High-Price Scenario Outputs
Figure 20 shows the correlations of the objective function of NPV/CAPEX with other results. High
correlations between NPV/CAPEX and GUF as well as capacity factors of Wind and Solar can be
seen, this is expected as it both the capacity factor and GUF represent the ability of a larger quan-
tity of power to be sold to the market. In addition to this the overplanting ratio and wind-price
correlation also show positive correlations, although not as strong as those previously mentioned.
Unexpectedly a strong negative correlation is seen between the solar-price correlation and NPV/-
CAPEX, this can however be explained by the correlation between the solar capacity factor and the
solar-price correlation. We see a strong negative correlation between these two factors represent-
ing the fact that locations with larger solar capacity factors suffer from negative price correlations
associated with solar power and price time series. This suggests that the solar capacity factor is
more important in determining the NPV/CAPEX than the solar-price correlation.
This effect appears to be similar for wind power, however it is not so strong as for solar. We see that
wind-price correlations also have a negative correlation with wind capacity factors, however the
correlation between wind-price correlation and NPV/CAPEX remains positive. This correlation is
35
==PAGE:40==
Thursday 22nd June, 2023
also being affected by the positive correlation between wind resource and price value of the site
FR1 which seems to be exceptionally high and may be due to the Mistral wind.
(a)
(b)
Figure 21: High-price Scenario optimal, NPV/CAPEX, C.F and wind resource-price correla-
tion(Offshore Sites)
The offshore results from this scenario show that the NPV/CAPEX is influenced strongly by both
the capacity factor and wind-price correlation. Figure 21 shows this with site FR3 having a lower
C.F and NPV/CAPEX whereas DE3 has a larger C.F and corresponding NPV/CAPEX. This is
not the only factor, however as site UK3 has a greater NPV/CAPEX yet lower C.F than site DK3.
This is explained by the wind-price correlation as we see UK3 with a significantly higher wind-
price correlation than DK3. This increases the value factor for UK3 and thus allows this greater
NPV/CAPEX despite the lower C.F than DK3.
36
==PAGE:41==
Thursday 22nd June, 2023
6.4
Mid-price results
(a)
Figure 22: Mid-price scenario optimal NPV/CAPEX and capacity factors
Figure 23: Correlation of electricity prices from Mid-price scenario with site weather resources
(Wind speed at 100m, GHI)
The results of the Mid-price scenario emphasize the influence of capacity factor and weather-price
correlation on the resultant NPV/CAPEX, similar to the high price results. In the above Figure
22 we see that the sites with the greatest NPV/CAPEX ratios correspond to the sites with the the
greatest wind C.F, namely DE1, DK2 and UK1. This favour towards wind power is likely due to
the low value factor of solar power in this scenario with sites such as FR2 with a negative NPV/-
CAPEX ratio despite an impressive solar C.F. This means that on average each unit of wind power
generates more revenue than each unit of solar power, hence why we see the favour towards wind
power.
37
==PAGE:42==
Thursday 22nd June, 2023
(a)
(b)
Figure 24: Mid-price scenario optimal Battery capacities and VRE capacities
In addition to this the battery capacities show strong correlation with the amount of installed solar
power which can be explained by the very low solar value factor in this scenario. The batteries
are employed more in the sites which choose to install more solar power in order to avoid the low
associated prices which coincide with solar generation. This can be seen for sites DE2, DK1, DK2,
FR1, FR2 and UK1 which all opt for large batteries as well as large solar installations. Interest-
ingly, the sites FR2 and DE2 with the largest solar capacities opt for the largest battery energies
but not the largest battery powers.
Figure 25: Mid-price scenario optimal NPV/CAPEX and C.F (Offshore Sites)
The offshore results from this scenario show much the same trends as discussed previously. The
38
==PAGE:43==
Thursday 22nd June, 2023
battery usage is correlated with the price variability of each market zone as discussed in the nominal
pricing scenario. In addition to this, the overall NPV/CAPEX ratio is correlated to the C.F of each
site as can be seen in the above figure.
6.5
High-variation results
(a)
(b)
Figure 26: High-variation scenario optimal Battery capacities and Price variation data (Vp, St.dev)
The High variation pricing results show an interesting trend regarding the battery usage, similar to
that seen in the Nominal results. We see in Figure 26 that sites FR1 and UK1 opt for the largest
battery capacities of both power and energy. This seems to correlate with the variation as we see
that both the standard deviation and price variation are greater in these market zones. Interestingly,
site FR2 does not opt for any battery technology at all. This mirrors the trend seen in the Nominal
battery results where sites with only one VRES capacity do not opt for batteries as FR2 opts for a
solar-only plant. A potential explanation for this behaviour is the reduced need for curtailment re-
duction caused by a lack of overplanted VRES of different technologies, alternatively these results
could signify scenarios where the revenue of extra generation is greater than the potential revenues
of arbitrage.
39
==PAGE:44==
Thursday 22nd June, 2023
(a)
(b)
Figure 27: High-variation scenario optimal Battery capacity and Mean electricity price (Offshore
Sites)
Regarding the offshore results we would expect to see an increased use of batteries in order to
capitalise on the potential revenues of arbitrage. However, this is not the case. In this scenario
only sites FR3 and UK2 opt for batteries with the latter opting for a relatively small capacity. This
lack of battery capacity may be due to the slight increase in average spot price in this scenario in
comparison to the nominal scenario. This may cause the case for a battery to be less favourable as
the increased average spot price also increases the value of simply increasing the amount of power
supplied to the grid. In this case this increases value attributed to more generation may outweigh
the potential revenues of arbitrage.
40
==PAGE:45==
Thursday 22nd June, 2023
6.6
Combined Onshore analysis
Figure 28: Combined Scenarios correlation Matrix (Onshore Sites)
Figure 28 shows the correlations of selected input and output variables, from this figure the trends
across the multiple pricing scenarios can be analysed. We see that the most significant factor affect-
ing the NPV/CAPEX ratio of a HPP is the mean spot price (Mean el. price) with a high correlation
of 0.89. This number reflects the results seen in the High-pricing scenario where all sites had a
significantly increased NPV/CAPEX due to this increase in mean spot price.
Following this we see that both wind and solar C.F show positive correlations with the overall
NPV/CAPEX too. This is seen in the results as sites such as SE1 ,DE2 and SE3 consistently at-
tained lower NPV/CAPEX ratios and also had a lower relative C.F. The results also suggest that
Price variation Vp and Overplanting have little overall correlation with the NPV/CAPEX as both
show very weak correlations. In order to investigate the effect of Vp further simulations would have
to be run where this is the only changing factor as from the current set of results it is difficult to
ascertain exactly how significant of an effect this has when other significant factors such as the the
mean spot price and C.F are changing.
41
==PAGE:46==
Thursday 22nd June, 2023
Interestingly, the Wind and Solar price correlations show opposite trends with one another. The
Wind resource-price correlation is positively correlated to NPV/CAPEX and Solar resource-price
correlation is negatively correlated to the NPV/CAPEX. We would expect to see both values posi-
tive as an increasing Wind/Solar resource-price correlation will increase the value factor of a HPP.
However, in these results the negative correlation of the Solar-price correlation can be explained
by the relatively low solar C.F available across the sites. In these results, since solar power is gen-
erally used less across all sites than wind the solar-price correlation is less impactful as the value
factor of solar power is less important than the value factor of wind. If the location set were to be
changed to include more sites with Higher solar C.F and lower Wind C.F we would expect to see
this become more important and, like the wind-price correlation, result in a positive correlation.
Having said this, the wind-price correlation shows a weaker correlation than the wind C.F suggest-
ing that while it is significant, it is less significant than the C.F.
Finally, the GUF shows a positive correlation with the NPV/CAPEX ratio as expected as this GUF
represents the ability to sell more power to the grid. We expect to see this positive correlation as
selling a larger quantity of power will increase the overall generated revenue for a given HPP site
and price timeseries.
Aside from the NPV/CAPEX correlations we see positive correlation between Overplanting and
price variation as well as Battery energy and power. This suggests that Overplanting is a more prof-
itable option with increasing price variation, and is more profitable when combined with battery
usage. The price variation shows a positive correlation with battery power and energy although
this value is not very great suggesting that while it does increase the suitability of battery usage it
is not greatly significant. As mentioned before, further simulation with Vp should be carried out in
order to analyse the effect further.The Battery power and energy show positive correlations with
GUF indicating that these technologies are effective in increasing the GUF. Additionally positive
correlations are seen with both wind and solar capacity factors indicating that these batteries are
more profitable at sites with greater weather resources.
42
==PAGE:47==
Thursday 22nd June, 2023
6.7
Combined Offshore analysis
Figure 29: Combined Scenarios Correlation Matrix (Offshore Sites)
Figure 29 similarly to the previous figure compares the correlations of various input and output
data this time for the offshore results. Once again we see a large correlation between the mean spot
price and NPV/CAPEX again emphasizing that this is a very important factor. Furthermore, we
see positive correlations for both the wind C.F and Wind-price correlation. Interestingly, we see
that there is a greater correlation with the wind-price correlation than with the C.F. This could be
due to the fact that all the sites, with the possible exception of FR3 have a large C.F in the range
of 0.5-0.6 (FR3 is slightly below this). Due to this narrow band of C.F it may be giving a lower
correlation, this could lead to the conclusion that C.F is not such an important factor. However,
since there are no sites with a low C.F this figure may be misleading. Repeating the results with
additional poorer C.F sites could help to address this. The positive correlation with the wind-price
correlation is expected and shows that an increased value-factor is important in the NPV/CAPEX
ratio. Interestingly, we see a negative correlation associated with Vp and the NPV/CAPEX, how-
ever we also see a negative correlation between Vp and the mean spot price meaning that it is
43
==PAGE:48==
Thursday 22nd June, 2023
hard to determine whether or not the price variation is causing a lower NPV/CAPEX. Similar to
the onshore results, additional simulations should be carried out in order to determine this effect.
Another important point to make regarding the batteries is that in this project only the day-ahead
market was considered. In reality the inclusion of ancillary markets could have greatly affected the
use case of the battery as the batteries would be able to take advantage of arbitrage across multiple
markets, not only the day-ahead. This could increase the profitability of the use of batteries and
thus the subsequent optimal capacity.
7
Discussion
Regarding the capacity sizing of Wind and solar generation the results show primarily expected
behaviour. Good examples of this are all Danish sites as well as sites DE1 and FR2. These sites
follow the relative C.F of the available weather resources with their generation composition. That
is to say, FR2 has a strong solar C.F yet very weak wind C.F therefore we see in all results that
FR2 opts heavily in favour for solar power. Similarly, the Danish sites and DE1 opt more for wind
power yet also choose to opt for solar power since the relative solar resource is not so poor as com-
pared to the wind resource of FR2. Some deviations in this trend can be explained by the value
factor of a given weather resource. FR1 shows that in many cases it opts for a larger deployment
of wind power than solar power despite having the greater relative solar C.F. This occurs due to
FR1 having a positive correlation of spot price and wind resource.
Sites DE2 and SE1 show unexpected behaviour yet follow the trend seen with sites DE1, DK sites
and FR2. The unexpected behaviour in this case arises from the fact that both DE2 and SE1 are
the location of real life solar and wind plants respectively. DE2 is the site of the largest solar plant
in Germany, Neuhardenberg, and SE1 is the site of the largest wind farm in Sweden, Markbygden.
Due to this a heavy respective bias to solar and wind power would be expected at these sites. This
may not have be reflected in the results due to the fact that the meteorological timeseries used is
only 1 year in length, thus an exceptional year could present a C.F which is atypical. Alternatively,
the ERA5 dataset as well as the GWA scaling which was used may not have been of a sufficient
resolution to capture local weather effects. In the case of Markygbden at least, the wind farm is
located on a plateau between two river valleys and takes advantage of the wind accelerating over
hills [24]. As such, a misrepresentation of the C.F of a site could lead to the unexpected behaviour
of the results.
The weather resource-price correlations were shown to effect the results as explained with site
FR1. However, the case of FR2 shows that this is not the single deciding factor. FR2 shows a large
negative value factor associated with solar and a slightly positive factor for wind. Despite this,
site FR2 consistently opted for solar power due to it’s much higher relative C.F. This suggests that
44
==PAGE:49==
Thursday 22nd June, 2023
the value factor is more important for deciding the generation mix when a site has decent weather
resources for both wind and solar.
A potential shortfall of the results was seen in all pricing scenarios apart from the Historical one
where a negative correlation was seen for solar across all sites which was larger than the respective
wind one. This likely biased the simulations against solar power and thus performing additional
simulations where wind power suffers from a worse value-factor could provide some interesting
results.
One clear trend of the results was the importance of the average spot price on the overall NPV/-
CAPEX ratio. This was seen to consistently have a significant positive correlation across all sites.
This also has implications regarding the different market zones since Sweden had a lower average
spot price across the board. While this may have advantages for consumers, it is definitely a nega-
tive factor when considering the NPV/CAPEX ratio of potential HPPs. This is seen in the results,
where even in the High price scenario Sweden has some of the lowest NPV/CAPEX ratios with
SE1 having a negative value. This, however, is likely a double effect of poor weather resources
and a poor average spot price. For both the onshore and offshore results this was by far the most
significant factor in determining the NPV/CAPEX. The price variation seems to have had little
noticeable effect on the overall NPV/CAPEX yet is hard to say this conclusively, since whenever
the price variation was altered other significant factors were also altered. In order to ascertain the
effect this has on the overall NPV/CAPEX timeseries of different price variations should be simu-
lated for a single site where all other factors remain constant. In the case of these results however,
it seems that the price variation has little effect on the overall NPV/CAPEX.
The price variation does seem to slightly increase the profitability of battery usage as positive
correlations are seen for the both the energy and power for the onshore results. The offshore
results show a small positive correlation for the battery power yet show no correlation for battery
energy. Due to the fact that less simulations were run for the offshore environment its possible that
this lack of correlation for battery energy would increase for more simulated sites as is the case for
the onshore results. Despite this the correlation is weak for the onshore results as well. In order to
investigate this further the aforementioned additional simulations should be performed.
45
==PAGE:50==
Thursday 22nd June, 2023
7.1
limitations
The main limitation encountered was related to the running of the HyDesign software. Unfortu-
nately, there were many issues encountered when attempting to run the Hydesign software on the
DTU computer cluster. These problems were so prevalent, that, in order to overcome them it was
decided to run HyDesign on a local device. While this did allow HyDesign to be run without as
many issues, the local device that was available did not have the same specifications as the DTU
computer cluster. Crucially, the local device used had much less memory than the DTU cluster.
This meant that some of the parameters had to be set to a lower level when running the HyDesign
software. This caused the Hydesign software to run the initial assembly model less than usual be-
fore training a surrogate model. Due to this, the surrogate model and subsequent results therefrom
from the local device was likely of a lower quality than that which would have been attained from
the DTU computer cluster. This may be why there are multiple instances of near identical HPP
configurations in the results. This issue could likely have been fixed with more time available to
fix the multitude of issues encountered when running the HyDesign software.
8
Conclusion
The mean spot price, weather resource and weather-price correlation are the most significant fac-
tors in determining the NPV/CAPEX. The mean spot price is the most significant factor in deter-
mining the overall NPV/CAPEX of a HPP site. Across all sites and all pricing scenarios strong
correlations between this value and the objective function were observed. Furthermore, market
zones with a lower mean price exhibit less profitable sites, such as those in market zone SE1.
Following this, the weather resource is the second most important factor in determining the NPV/-
CAPEX. Sites with a greater C.F of wind or solar showed more profitable HPP than those with
poorer resources. Sites such as FR1 and UK1 exhibit this difference clearly when compared to
poorer resource sites DE2 and SE3. The results show that it is important to have at least one high
C.F be it solar or wind, however it is not necessary to have both a high wind and solar C.F in
order to attain a profitable HPP. In addition to this the solar generation resource seems to be less
valuable than the wind resource for the selected sites. This is likely due to the low number of high
solar C.F sites present across the selected sites which leads to the solar resource being valued less.
Additionally the weather resource is, as expected very important in determining the optimal HPP
configuration with sites opting in favour of resources in which they have a good C.F.
Finally, the weather price correlation shows that is also important in deciding the optimal HPP
design as well as the NPV/CAPEX as it influences the value factor of each site. For sites such
as FR1 which have both a high solar and wind C.F this price correlation is important in deciding
46
==PAGE:51==
Thursday 22nd June, 2023
the optimal HPP configuration. In other sites where one weather resource is much greater than the
other, this is less important. In the offshore case this weather-price correlation is important for the
overall NPV/CAPEX as it also affects the value factor, there is however little effect on the optimal
configuration as there is no alternative weather resource available.
The effects of price variation seem to be minimal in this set of results as little change is seen in the
high variation case. For the onshore case there seems to be a slight increase in the profitability of
battery usage although there is not a strong correlation here. In order to determine the effect of this
price variation further cases should be analysed. Despite this, it seems to have a minimal effect on
the resultant NPV/CAPEX in this et of results.
47
==PAGE:52==
Thursday 22nd June, 2023
9
References
[1]
European commission. Renewable energy targets. URL: https://energy.ec.europa.
eu/topics/renewable-energy/renewable-energy-directive-targets-
and-rules/renewable-energy-targets_en.
[2]
Danish energy agency and CNREC. “Spot market models for renewable energy integration
- international experience”. In: (May 2020).
[3]
Das, K., Cossu, A., Sørensen, P. E., Murcia Leon, J. P. “Component sizing of an utility-scale
hybrid power plant”. In: (2022).
[4]
Javier López Prol, Karl W. Steininger, David Zilberman. “The cannibalization effect of wind
and solar in the Californiawholesale electricity market”. In: Energy Economics 85.104552
(2020).
[5]
HIGREEW. Official certification of the La Plana Facility. URL: https://higreew-
project.eu/official-certification-of-the-la-plana-facility/.
[6]
Danish Energy Agency: Technology Data. URL: https://ens.dk/en/our-services/
projections-and-models/technology-data.
[7]
Philipp Götz et al. “Negative Electricity Prices: Causes and Effects”. In: (Aug. 2014). URL:
https://www.agora-energiewende.de/en/publications/negative-
electricity-prices-causes-and-effects/.
[8]
Katrin Schaber, Florian Steinke, and Thomas Hamacher. “Transmission grid extensions for
the integration of variable renewable energies in Europe: Who benefits where?” In: En-
ergy Policy 43 (2012), pp. 123–135. ISSN: 0301-4215. DOI: https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.enpol.2011.12.040. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/S0301421511010469.
[9]
I. Graabak et al. “Balancing future variable wind and solar power production in Central-
West Europe with Norwegian hydropower”. In: Energy 168 (2019), pp. 870–882. ISSN:
0360-5442. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.energy.2018.11.068. URL:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0360544218322801.
[10]
Olukunle O Owolabi et al. “A robust statistical analysis of the role of hydropower on the
system electricity price and price volatility”. In: Environmental Research Communications
4.7 (July 2022), p. 075003. DOI: 10 . 1088 / 2515 - 7620 / ac7b74. URL: https :
//dx.doi.org/10.1088/2515-7620/ac7b74.
[11]
Dogan Keles et al. “Cross-border effects in interconnected electricity markets - an anal-
ysis of the Swiss electricity prices”. In: Energy Economics 90 (2020), p. 104802. ISSN:
0140-9883. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eneco.2020.104802. URL:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0140988320301420.
48
==PAGE:53==
Thursday 22nd June, 2023
[12]
Zsuzsanna Csereklyei, Songze Qu, and Tihomir Ancev. “The effect of wind and solar power
generation on wholesale electricity prices in Australia”. In: Energy Policy 131 (2019), pp. 358–
369. ISSN: 0301-4215. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.enpol.2019.04.
007. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0301421519302435.
[13]
Lion Hirth. “Market value of solar power: Is photovoltaics cost-competitive?” In: IET Re-
newable Power Generation 9.1 (2015), pp. 37–45. DOI: https : / / doi . org / 10 .
1049/iet-rpg.2014.0101. URL: https://ietresearch.onlinelibrary.
wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1049/iet-rpg.2014.0101.
[14]
Alexander Zipp. “The marketability of variable renewable energy in liberalized electric-
ity markets – An empirical analysis”. In: Renewable Energy 113 (2017), pp. 1111–1121.
ISSN: 0960-1481. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.renene.2017.06.
072. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0960148117305761.
[15]
Eric Paul Johnson and Matthew E Oliver. “Renewable energy and wholesale electricity price
variability”. In: IAEE Energy Forum; First Quarter. International Association for Energy
Economics: Bergen, Norway. 2016.
[16]
Anthony D. Owen. “Do Liberalized Electricity Markets Discourage Investment in Renew-
able Energy Technologies?” In: The Electricity Journal 27.8 (2014), pp. 53–59. ISSN: 1040-
6190. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tej.2014.09.001. URL: https:
//www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1040619014002036.
[17]
Peng Zou et al. “Electricity markets evolution with the changing generation mix: An em-
pirical analysis based on China 2050 High Renewable Energy Penetration Roadmap”. In:
Applied Energy 185 (2017), pp. 56–67. ISSN: 0306-2619. DOI: https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.apenergy.2016.10.061. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.
com/science/article/pii/S0306261916315045.
[18]
Transparency Platform RESTful API. URL: https://transparency.entsoe.eu/
dashboard/show.
[19]
REALISE: Renewable Energy Analytics for Lifetime Investment and Systems Engineering.
URL: https://wind.dtu.dk/projects/research-projects/realise.
[20]
Global wind atlas. URL: https://globalwindatlas.info/en/.
[21]
Global Solar atlas. URL: https://globalsolaratlas.info/map.
[22]
Juan Pablo Murcia et al. “Validation of European-scale simulated wind speed and wind
generation time series”. In: Applied Energy 305 (2022), p. 117794. ISSN: 0306-2619. DOI:
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apenergy.2021.117794. URL: https://
www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0306261921011296.
[23]
The Mistral wind – how, when and where! URL: https://ventomaritime.dk/
blog/mistral-wind-how-when-and-where.
49
==PAGE:54==
Thursday 22nd June, 2023
[24]
Markbygden 1101 – Europe’s Largest Onshore Windfarm. URL: https://www.ctc-
n . org / products / markbygden - 1101 - europe - s - largest - onshore -
windfarm.
50
==PAGE:55==
Thursday 22nd June, 2023
10
Appendix
10.1
Results tables
Historical scenario
Site Name
Output Variable
DE1
DE2
DK1
DK2
FR1
FR2
SE1
SE2
SE3
UK1
clearance [m]
41.00
39.00
39.00
39.00
39.00
15.00
15.00
15.00
39.00
39.00
sp [m2/W]
217.00
255.00
255.00
255.00
255.00
341.00
341.00
341.00
255.00
255.00
p_rated [MW]
5.00
5.00
5.00
5.00
5.00
4.00
4.00
4.00
5.00
5.00
Nwt
2.00
46.00
46.00
46.00
46.00
37.00
37.00
37.00
46.00
46.00
wind_MW_per_km2 [MW/km2]
8.07
7.89
7.89
7.89
7.89
7.42
7.42
7.42
7.89
7.89
solar_MW [MW]
393.00
16.00
16.00
16.00
16.00
350.00
350.00
350.00
16.00
16.00
surface_tilt [deg]
49.71
13.15
13.15
13.15
13.15
27.30
27.30
27.30
13.15
13.15
surface_azimuth [deg]
195.50
165.60
165.60
165.60
165.60
208.46
208.46
208.46
165.60
165.60
DC_AC_ratio
1.26
1.36
1.36
1.36
1.36
1.76
1.76
1.76
1.36
1.36
b_P [MW]
30.00
64.00
64.00
64.00
64.00
23.00
23.00
23.00
64.00
64.00
b_E_h [h]
10.00
4.00
4.00
4.00
4.00
8.00
8.00
8.00
4.00
4.00
cost_of_battery_P_fluct_in_peak_price_ratio
0.15
12.12
12.12
12.12
12.12
6.84
6.84
6.84
12.12
12.12
NPV_over_CAPEX
-0.06
-0.25
-0.41
-0.35
-0.45
-0.53
-0.48
0.14
-0.27
0.24
NPV [MEuro]
-12.20
-81.45
-130.75
-115.47
-144.26
-164.87
-149.38
42.86
-86.20
78.99
IRR
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.07
0.00
0.08
LCOE [Euro/MWh]
31.42
27.16
33.85
28.28
36.10
40.17
35.55
26.53
25.82
25.42
CAPEX [MEuro]
188.39
328.53
322.64
328.53
322.64
311.18
311.18
311.18
322.64
328.53
OPEX [MEuro]
4.88
4.52
4.23
4.46
4.16
8.29
8.28
8.61
4.58
4.62
penalty lifetime [MEuro]
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
AEP [GWh]
595.03
1063.93
832.63
1019.39
778.32
766.93
866.82
1173.17
1105.34
1141.34
GUF
0.23
0.40
0.32
0.39
0.30
0.29
0.33
0.45
0.42
0.43
grid [MW]
300.00
300.00
300.00
300.00
300.00
300.00
300.00
300.00
300.00
300.00
wind [MW]
10.00
230.00
230.00
230.00
230.00
148.00
148.00
148.00
230.00
230.00
solar [MW]
393.00
16.00
16.00
16.00
16.00
350.00
350.00
350.00
16.00
16.00
Battery Energy [MWh]
300.00
256.00
256.00
256.00
256.00
184.00
184.00
184.00
256.00
256.00
Battery Power [MW]
30.00
64.00
64.00
64.00
64.00
23.00
23.00
23.00
64.00
64.00
Total curtailment [GWh]
165.67
0.00
0.00
0.06
0.00
415.71
596.90
3556.55
0.00
0.00
Awpp [km2]
1.24
29.14
29.14
29.14
29.14
19.93
19.93
19.93
29.14
29.14
Rotor diam [m]
171.28
158.00
158.00
158.00
158.00
122.21
122.21
122.21
158.00
158.00
Hub height [m]
126.64
118.00
118.00
118.00
118.00
76.11
76.11
76.11
118.00
118.00
Table 6: Historical Scenario Onshore results
51
==PAGE:56==
Thursday 22nd June, 2023
Site Name
Output Variable
DE3
FR3
UK2
UK3
DK3
clearance [m]
10.00
52.00
28.00
14.00
10.00
sp [m2/W]
328.00
304.00
320.00
311.00
306.00
p_rated [MW]
16.00
17.00
19.00
16.00
18.00
Nwt
65.00
71.00
53.00
60.00
58.00
wind_MW_per_km2 [MW/km2]
8.01
9.42
5.17
6.72
5.68
solar_MW [MW]
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
surface_tilt [deg]
50.00
49.58
6.88
10.35
4.92
surface_azimuth [deg]
165.74
168.31
195.30
150.99
202.36
DC_AC_ratio
2.00
1.18
1.86
1.96
1.43
b_P [MW]
26.00
87.00
95.00
71.00
33.00
b_E_h [h]
10.00
5.00
3.00
2.00
2.00
cost_of_battery_P_fluct_in_peak_price_ratio
20.00
11.81
19.58
11.51
8.32
NPV_over_CAPEX
-0.48
-0.42
0.02
0.00
-0.45
NPV [MEuro]
-669.33
-732.37
34.38
6.40
-673.31
IRR
0.00
0.00
0.06
0.05
0.00
LCOE [Euro/MWh]
34.19
41.55
31.83
32.55
30.41
CAPEX [MEuro]
1388.84
1728.11
1442.04
1359.15
1480.18
OPEX [MEuro]
58.68
64.04
55.58
56.14
59.75
penalty lifetime [MEuro]
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
AEP [GWh]
4489.56
4371.37
4841.37
4575.53
5277.37
GUF
0.51
0.50
0.55
0.52
0.60
grid [MW]
1000.00
1000.00
1000.00
1000.00
1000.00
wind [MW]
1040.00
1207.00
1007.00
960.00
1044.00
solar [MW]
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Battery Energy [MWh]
260.00
435.00
285.00
142.00
66.00
Battery Power [MW]
26.00
87.00
95.00
71.00
33.00
Total curtailment [GWh]
0.00
6745.17
0.16
0.00
0.00
Awpp [km2]
129.87
128.20
194.91
142.75
183.93
Rotor diam [m]
249.22
266.83
274.95
255.94
273.67
Hub height [m]
134.61
185.42
165.48
141.97
146.84
Number_of_batteries
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
Table 7: Historical Scenario Offshore results
52
==PAGE:57==
Thursday 22nd June, 2023
Nominal scenario
Site Name
Output Variable
DE1
DE2
DK1
DK2
FR1
FR2
SE1
SE2
SE3
UK1
clearance [m]
56.00
14.00
56.00
10.00
56.00
10.00
14.00
10.00
50.00
44.00
sp [m2/W]
359.00
205.00
359.00
319.00
359.00
316.00
214.00
266.00
264.00
288.00
p_rated [MW]
10.00
2.00
10.00
5.00
10.00
1.00
5.00
4.00
3.00
6.00
Nwt
28.00
99.00
28.00
49.00
28.00
3.00
48.00
79.00
72.00
34.00
wind_MW_per_km2 [MW/km2]
5.11
5.76
5.11
9.00
5.11
9.00
8.20
5.99
8.42
8.94
solar_MW [MW]
232.00
290.00
232.00
0.00
232.00
330.00
342.00
0.00
86.00
52.00
surface_tilt [deg]
19.68
22.89
19.68
50.00
19.68
43.80
35.62
0.00
22.87
17.10
surface_azimuth [deg]
172.95
200.13
172.95
210.00
172.95
210.00
174.73
150.00
198.26
175.38
DC_AC_ratio
1.12
1.75
1.12
1.00
1.12
1.63
1.01
1.00
1.23
1.59
b_P [MW]
40.00
59.00
40.00
0.00
40.00
0.00
7.00
0.00
11.00
8.00
b_E_h [h]
7.00
8.00
7.00
1.00
7.00
3.00
4.00
1.00
9.00
7.00
cost_of_battery_P_fluct_in_peak_price_ratio
5.31
5.61
5.31
6.08
5.31
0.00
19.98
0.00
13.04
17.41
NPV_over_CAPEX
0.32
-0.12
0.20
0.58
0.21
-0.08
-0.41
0.03
-0.31
0.44
NPV [MEuro]
126.45
-47.94
80.28
148.14
83.92
-13.32
-173.70
8.97
-96.14
122.51
IRR
0.08
0.00
0.07
0.11
0.07
0.00
0.00
0.06
0.00
0.09
LCOE [Euro/MWh]
24.35
34.16
25.15
20.39
27.09
26.64
38.00
24.64
33.74
23.63
CAPEX [MEuro]
392.98
407.06
392.98
256.99
392.98
168.67
420.52
356.24
311.47
279.30
OPEX [MEuro]
6.84
9.65
6.80
4.62
6.69
5.18
7.31
6.15
5.42
4.44
penalty lifetime [MEuro]
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
AEP [GWh]
1451.40
1141.11
1400.84
1140.41
1294.50
633.00
978.16
1295.55
827.08
1044.71
GUF
0.55
0.43
0.53
0.43
0.49
0.24
0.37
0.49
0.31
0.40
grid [MW]
300.00
300.00
300.00
300.00
300.00
300.00
300.00
300.00
300.00
300.00
wind [MW]
280.00
198.00
280.00
245.00
280.00
3.00
240.00
316.00
216.00
204.00
solar [MW]
232.00
290.00
232.00
0.00
232.00
330.00
342.00
0.00
86.00
52.00
Battery Energy [MWh]
280.00
472.00
280.00
0.00
280.00
0.00
28.00
0.00
99.00
56.00
Battery Power [MW]
40.00
59.00
40.00
0.00
40.00
0.00
7.00
0.00
11.00
8.00
Total curtailment [GWh]
317.61
477.26
367.65
0.00
1390.58
277.71
318.96
1.20
0.00
0.00
Awpp [km2]
54.84
34.40
54.84
27.22
54.84
0.33
29.28
52.76
25.64
22.82
Rotor diam [m]
188.32
111.45
188.32
141.27
188.32
63.48
172.48
138.37
120.29
162.87
Hub height [m]
150.16
69.73
150.16
80.63
150.16
41.74
100.24
79.19
110.14
125.43
Table 8: Nominal Scenario Onshore results
53
==PAGE:58==
Thursday 22nd June, 2023
Site Name
Output Variable
DE3
FR3
UK2
UK3
DK3
clearance [m]
27.00
29.00
52.00
29.00
10.00
sp [m2/W]
273.00
305.00
304.00
305.00
296.00
p_rated [MW]
14.00
11.00
17.00
11.00
14.00
Nwt
78.00
82.00
71.00
82.00
74.00
wind_MW_per_km2 [MW/km2]
5.40
5.21
9.42
5.21
5.00
solar_MW [MW]
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
surface_tilt [deg]
11.26
22.70
49.58
22.70
0.00
surface_azimuth [deg]
167.30
205.90
168.31
205.90
182.50
DC_AC_ratio
1.06
1.04
1.18
1.04
1.00
b_P [MW]
93.00
92.00
87.00
92.00
0.00
b_E_h [h]
6.00
10.00
5.00
10.00
1.00
cost_of_battery_P_fluct_in_peak_price_ratio
19.90
17.85
11.81
17.85
13.29
NPV_over_CAPEX
0.10
-0.20
-0.02
0.09
0.18
NPV [MEuro]
163.41
-260.44
-37.65
115.32
256.32
IRR
0.06
0.00
0.00
0.06
0.07
LCOE [Euro/MWh]
32.42
39.04
35.00
34.82
29.10
CAPEX [MEuro]
1643.21
1302.68
1728.11
1302.68
1440.06
OPEX [MEuro]
69.40
58.05
68.54
61.72
67.41
penalty lifetime [MEuro]
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
AEP [GWh]
5571.29
3773.09
5295.54
4345.68
5655.59
GUF
0.64
0.43
0.60
0.50
0.65
grid [MW]
1000.00
1000.00
1000.00
1000.00
1000.00
wind [MW]
1092.00
902.00
1207.00
902.00
1036.00
solar [MW]
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Battery Energy [MWh]
558.00
920.00
435.00
920.00
0.00
Battery Power [MW]
93.00
92.00
87.00
92.00
0.00
Total curtailment [GWh]
2305.37
0.39
11559.99
0.00
0.00
Awpp [km2]
202.35
173.04
128.20
173.04
207.20
Rotor diam [m]
255.53
214.29
266.83
214.29
245.40
Hub height [m]
154.76
136.14
185.42
136.14
132.70
Table 9: Nominal Scenario Offshore results
54
==PAGE:59==
Thursday 22nd June, 2023
High-price scenario
Site Name
Output Variable
DE1
DE2
DK1
DK2
FR1
FR2
SE1
SE2
SE3
UK1
clearance [m]
50.00
10.00
10.00
50.00
56.00
10.00
50.00
10.00
50.00
50.00
sp [m2/W]
264.00
226.00
342.00
264.00
359.00
308.00
264.00
246.00
264.00
264.00
p_rated [MW]
3.00
4.00
5.00
3.00
10.00
1.00
3.00
4.00
3.00
3.00
Nwt
72.00
99.00
64.00
72.00
28.00
3.00
72.00
68.00
72.00
72.00
wind_MW_per_km2 [MW/km2]
8.42
5.00
5.42
8.42
5.11
8.19
8.42
5.35
8.42
8.42
solar_MW [MW]
86.00
0.00
0.00
86.00
232.00
313.00
86.00
0.00
86.00
86.00
surface_tilt [deg]
22.87
50.00
50.00
22.87
19.68
50.00
22.87
50.00
22.87
22.87
surface_azimuth [deg]
198.26
150.00
188.44
198.26
172.95
210.00
198.26
210.00
198.26
198.26
DC_AC_ratio
1.23
1.02
1.00
1.23
1.12
1.82
1.23
1.00
1.23
1.23
b_P [MW]
11.00
0.00
0.00
11.00
40.00
0.00
11.00
0.00
11.00
11.00
b_E_h [h]
9.00
6.00
6.00
9.00
7.00
8.00
9.00
2.00
9.00
9.00
cost_of_battery_P_fluct_in_peak_price_ratio
13.04
0.00
5.30
13.04
5.31
1.83
13.04
20.00
13.04
13.04
NPV_over_CAPEX
1.59
0.83
1.91
1.58
2.37
1.05
-0.20
0.85
0.08
1.81
NPV [MEuro]
495.03
408.08
600.01
493.41
931.09
184.34
-62.19
282.17
24.05
563.65
IRR
0.18
0.12
0.21
0.18
0.24
0.14
0.00
0.13
0.06
0.20
LCOE [Euro/MWh]
24.92
34.08
20.87
24.52
27.11
27.00
41.50
25.17
33.74
24.80
CAPEX [MEuro]
311.47
494.16
313.92
311.47
392.98
174.80
311.47
332.27
311.47
311.47
OPEX [MEuro]
6.08
7.24
5.88
6.13
6.69
5.50
5.05
5.39
5.42
6.08
penalty lifetime [MEuro]
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
AEP [GWh]
1149.93
1266.29
1374.92
1166.87
1293.74
651.20
663.69
1169.61
827.06
1155.09
GUF
0.44
0.48
0.52
0.44
0.49
0.25
0.25
0.45
0.31
0.44
grid [MW]
300.00
300.00
300.00
300.00
300.00
300.00
300.00
300.00
300.00
300.00
wind [MW]
216.00
396.00
320.00
216.00
280.00
3.00
216.00
272.00
216.00
216.00
solar [MW]
86.00
0.00
0.00
86.00
232.00
313.00
86.00
0.00
86.00
86.00
Battery Energy [MWh]
99.00
0.00
0.00
99.00
280.00
0.00
99.00
0.00
99.00
99.00
Battery Power [MW]
11.00
0.00
0.00
11.00
40.00
0.00
11.00
0.00
11.00
11.00
Total curtailment [GWh]
0.00
2249.48
101.14
0.00
1399.29
86.31
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Awpp [km2]
25.64
79.20
59.04
25.64
54.84
0.37
25.64
50.82
25.64
25.64
Rotor diam [m]
120.29
150.12
136.44
120.29
188.32
64.30
120.29
143.89
120.29
120.29
Hub height [m]
110.14
85.06
78.22
110.14
150.16
42.15
110.14
81.94
110.14
110.14
Table 10: High-price Scenario Onshore results
55
==PAGE:60==
Thursday 22nd June, 2023
Site Name
Output Variable
DE3
FR3
UK2
UK3
DK3
clearance [m]
21.00
52.00
10.00
16.00
31.00
sp [m2/W]
343.00
304.00
314.00
331.00
353.00
p_rated [MW]
14.00
17.00
11.00
13.00
17.00
Nwt
73.00
71.00
96.00
81.00
67.00
wind_MW_per_km2 [MW/km2]
6.75
9.42
5.00
7.52
6.07
solar_MW [MW]
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
surface_tilt [deg]
22.64
49.58
0.00
48.28
45.44
surface_azimuth [deg]
200.88
168.31
168.87
153.27
168.98
DC_AC_ratio
1.82
1.18
1.97
1.55
1.86
b_P [MW]
87.00
87.00
94.00
4.00
85.00
b_E_h [h]
1.00
5.00
1.00
1.00
2.00
cost_of_battery_P_fluct_in_peak_price_ratio
14.96
11.81
20.00
18.48
15.33
NPV_over_CAPEX
1.72
1.18
1.60
2.08
1.65
NPV [MEuro]
2264.49
2035.84
2187.10
2798.45
2395.55
IRR
0.18
0.14
0.17
0.20
0.17
LCOE [Euro/MWh]
31.35
39.24
32.67
32.36
29.35
CAPEX [MEuro]
1314.91
1728.11
1363.22
1345.01
1453.18
OPEX [MEuro]
62.63
65.29
72.00
65.65
66.82
penalty lifetime [MEuro]
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
AEP [GWh]
4849.23
4635.10
5041.26
4855.21
5625.44
GUF
0.55
0.53
0.58
0.55
0.64
grid [MW]
1000.00
1000.00
1000.00
1000.00
1000.00
wind [MW]
1022.00
1207.00
1056.00
1053.00
1139.00
solar [MW]
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Battery Energy [MWh]
87.00
435.00
94.00
4.00
170.00
Battery Power [MW]
87.00
87.00
94.00
4.00
85.00
Total curtailment [GWh]
0.00
8291.97
105.41
8.17
6729.37
Awpp [km2]
151.41
128.20
211.20
140.02
187.73
Rotor diam [m]
227.97
266.83
211.20
223.62
247.62
Hub height [m]
134.98
185.42
115.60
127.81
154.81
Table 11: High-price Scenario Offshore results
56
==PAGE:61==
Thursday 22nd June, 2023
Mid-price scenario
Site Name
Output Variable
DE1
DE2
DK1
DK2
FR1
FR2
SE1
SE2
SE3
UK1
clearance [m]
15.00
13.00
56.00
56.00
56.00
41.00
14.00
15.00
50.00
56.00
sp [m2/W]
289.00
208.00
359.00
359.00
359.00
217.00
249.00
314.00
264.00
359.00
p_rated [MW]
3.00
8.00
10.00
10.00
10.00
5.00
5.00
4.00
3.00
10.00
Nwt
96.00
36.00
28.00
28.00
28.00
1.00
64.00
86.00
72.00
28.00
wind_MW_per_km2 [MW/km2]
7.59
6.49
5.11
5.11
5.11
8.07
9.00
6.03
8.42
5.11
solar_MW [MW]
53.00
399.00
232.00
232.00
232.00
393.00
37.00
22.00
86.00
232.00
surface_tilt [deg]
3.59
48.23
19.68
19.68
19.68
49.71
48.61
38.66
22.87
19.68
surface_azimuth [deg]
178.11
206.40
172.95
172.95
172.95
195.50
195.40
167.70
198.26
172.95
DC_AC_ratio
1.31
1.13
1.12
1.12
1.12
1.26
1.00
1.15
1.23
1.12
b_P [MW]
70.00
29.00
40.00
40.00
40.00
30.00
0.00
10.00
11.00
40.00
b_E_h [h]
2.00
10.00
7.00
7.00
7.00
10.00
7.00
5.00
9.00
7.00
cost_of_battery_P_fluct_in_peak_price_ratio
9.05
0.59
5.31
5.31
5.31
0.15
7.10
17.44
13.04
5.31
NPV_over_CAPEX
0.76
0.01
0.37
0.47
0.40
-0.01
-0.28
0.15
-0.20
0.56
NPV [MEuro]
251.51
3.11
145.63
186.58
158.82
-2.21
-108.84
52.80
-62.01
218.98
IRR
0.12
0.05
0.09
0.10
0.09
0.00
0.00
0.07
0.00
0.10
LCOE [Euro/MWh]
22.13
34.94
25.15
23.90
27.07
30.58
36.65
25.33
33.74
24.04
CAPEX [MEuro]
330.13
558.23
392.98
392.98
392.98
182.20
394.65
355.64
311.47
392.98
OPEX [MEuro]
7.33
8.78
6.80
6.87
6.69
4.78
5.59
6.74
5.42
6.85
penalty lifetime [MEuro]
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
AEP [GWh]
1421.73
1396.80
1401.09
1473.89
1295.13
580.18
928.78
1283.51
827.10
1467.98
GUF
0.54
0.53
0.53
0.56
0.49
0.22
0.35
0.49
0.31
0.56
grid [MW]
300.00
300.00
300.00
300.00
300.00
300.00
300.00
300.00
300.00
300.00
wind [MW]
288.00
288.00
280.00
280.00
280.00
5.00
320.00
344.00
216.00
280.00
solar [MW]
53.00
399.00
232.00
232.00
232.00
393.00
37.00
22.00
86.00
232.00
Battery Energy [MWh]
140.00
290.00
280.00
280.00
280.00
300.00
0.00
50.00
99.00
280.00
Battery Power [MW]
70.00
29.00
40.00
40.00
40.00
30.00
0.00
10.00
11.00
40.00
Total curtailment [GWh]
2.15
1463.46
358.49
604.69
1370.81
217.19
65.46
664.36
0.00
545.79
Awpp [km2]
37.93
44.36
54.84
54.84
54.84
0.62
35.56
57.03
25.64
54.84
Rotor diam [m]
114.97
221.29
188.32
188.32
188.32
171.28
159.90
127.36
120.29
188.32
Hub height [m]
72.48
123.65
150.16
150.16
150.16
126.64
93.95
78.68
110.14
150.16
Table 12: Mid-price Scenario Onshore results
57
==PAGE:62==
Thursday 22nd June, 2023
Site Name
Output Variable
DE3
FR3
UK2
UK3
DK3
clearance [m]
52.00
29.00
10.00
20.00
16.00
sp [m2/W]
304.00
305.00
325.00
300.00
326.00
p_rated [MW]
17.00
11.00
14.00
14.00
12.00
Nwt
71.00
82.00
73.00
73.00
91.00
wind_MW_per_km2 [MW/km2]
9.42
5.21
5.13
7.18
7.24
solar_MW [MW]
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
surface_tilt [deg]
49.58
22.70
50.00
0.60
28.73
surface_azimuth [deg]
168.31
205.90
187.11
185.26
162.69
DC_AC_ratio
1.18
1.04
1.00
1.53
1.30
b_P [MW]
87.00
92.00
0.00
14.00
39.00
b_E_h [h]
5.00
10.00
1.00
10.00
4.00
cost_of_battery_P_fluct_in_peak_price_ratio
11.81
17.85
20.00
13.59
16.57
NPV_over_CAPEX
0.21
-0.04
0.28
0.32
0.35
NPV [MEuro]
369.35
-48.64
379.14
462.03
483.35
IRR
0.07
0.00
0.08
0.08
0.08
LCOE [Euro/MWh]
33.83
39.03
31.75
32.71
30.03
CAPEX [MEuro]
1728.11
1302.68
1338.46
1432.18
1388.39
OPEX [MEuro]
69.45
58.05
62.50
62.81
74.67
penalty lifetime [MEuro]
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
AEP [GWh]
5502.26
3773.21
4829.06
4894.17
5615.88
GUF
0.63
0.43
0.55
0.56
0.64
grid [MW]
1000.00
1000.00
1000.00
1000.00
1000.00
wind [MW]
1207.00
902.00
1022.00
1022.00
1092.00
solar [MW]
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Battery Energy [MWh]
435.00
920.00
0.00
140.00
156.00
Battery Power [MW]
87.00
92.00
0.00
14.00
39.00
Total curtailment [GWh]
11542.04
0.00
0.00
0.06
2741.53
Awpp [km2]
128.20
173.04
199.37
142.30
150.91
Rotor diam [m]
266.83
214.29
234.19
243.76
216.49
Hub height [m]
185.42
136.14
127.10
141.88
124.24
Table 13: Mid-price Scenario Offshore results
58
==PAGE:63==
Thursday 22nd June, 2023
High-Variation scenario
Site Name
Output Variables
DE1
DE2
DK1
DK2
FR1
FR2
SE1
SE2
SE3
UK1
clearance [m]
50.00
10.00
50.00
19.00
56.00
12.00
50.00
50.00
25.00
56.00
sp [m2/W]
264.00
232.00
264.00
213.00
359.00
200.00
264.00
264.00
220.00
359.00
p_rated [MW]
3.00
3.00
3.00
7.00
10.00
2.00
3.00
3.00
5.00
10.00
Nwt
72.00
86.00
72.00
37.00
28.00
0.00
72.00
72.00
80.00
28.00
wind_MW_per_km2 [MW/km2]
8.42
5.00
8.42
5.46
5.11
9.00
8.42
8.42
5.01
5.11
solar_MW [MW]
86.00
400.00
86.00
65.00
232.00
331.00
86.00
86.00
126.00
232.00
surface_tilt [deg]
22.87
20.84
22.87
34.77
19.68
50.00
22.87
22.87
43.04
19.68
surface_azimuth [deg]
198.26
210.00
198.26
152.12
172.95
210.00
198.26
198.26
151.20
172.95
DC_AC_ratio
1.23
1.00
1.23
1.59
1.12
1.56
1.23
1.23
1.04
1.12
b_P [MW]
11.00
7.00
11.00
23.00
40.00
0.00
11.00
11.00
10.00
40.00
b_E_h [h]
9.00
1.00
9.00
2.00
7.00
6.00
9.00
9.00
1.00
7.00
cost_of_battery_P_fluct_in_peak_price_ratio
13.04
14.79
13.04
18.62
5.31
0.00
13.04
13.04
6.48
5.31
NPV_over_CAPEX
0.29
-0.08
0.23
0.37
0.32
-0.15
-0.39
-0.04
-0.17
0.39
NPV [MEuro]
91.46
-32.08
70.54
154.39
126.78
-24.87
-122.78
-12.58
-97.28
154.23
IRR
0.08
0.00
0.07
0.09
0.08
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.09
LCOE [Euro/MWh]
24.92
31.95
25.72
23.80
27.13
26.68
41.50
30.01
32.94
24.09
CAPEX [MEuro]
311.47
416.27
311.47
415.35
392.98
162.26
311.47
311.47
572.73
392.98
OPEX [MEuro]
6.08
8.98
5.98
5.60
6.69
4.91
5.05
5.67
8.42
6.85
penalty lifetime [MEuro]
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
AEP [GWh]
1149.95
1212.79
1108.53
1490.33
1293.25
605.52
663.68
938.82
1502.48
1465.73
GUF
0.44
0.46
0.42
0.57
0.49
0.23
0.25
0.36
0.57
0.56
grid [MW]
300.00
300.00
300.00
300.00
300.00
300.00
300.00
300.00
300.00
300.00
wind [MW]
216.00
258.00
216.00
259.00
280.00
0.00
216.00
216.00
400.00
280.00
solar [MW]
86.00
400.00
86.00
65.00
232.00
331.00
86.00
86.00
126.00
232.00
Battery Energy [MWh]
99.00
7.00
99.00
46.00
280.00
0.00
99.00
99.00
10.00
280.00
Battery Power [MW]
11.00
7.00
11.00
23.00
40.00
0.00
11.00
11.00
10.00
40.00
Total curtailment [GWh]
0.00
590.19
0.00
10.12
1436.73
238.45
0.00
0.00
4361.21
612.76
Awpp [km2]
25.64
51.60
25.64
47.47
54.84
0.00
25.64
25.64
79.88
54.84
Rotor diam [m]
120.29
128.31
120.29
204.56
188.32
112.84
120.29
120.29
170.11
188.32
Hub height [m]
110.14
74.16
110.14
121.28
150.16
68.42
110.14
110.14
110.05
150.16
Table 14: High-variation Scenario Onshore results
59
==PAGE:64==
Thursday 22nd June, 2023
Site Name
Output Variable
DE3
FR3
UK2
UK3
DK3
clearance [m]
29.00
10.00
12.00
10.00
18.00
sp [m2/W]
305.00
295.00
334.00
311.00
296.00
p_rated [MW]
11.00
17.00
13.00
12.00
14.00
Nwt
82.00
61.00
93.00
87.00
74.00
wind_MW_per_km2 [MW/km2]
5.21
5.00
6.39
5.60
5.91
solar_MW [MW]
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
surface_tilt [deg]
22.70
0.00
35.09
50.00
2.72
surface_azimuth [deg]
205.90
195.52
201.41
150.00
173.73
DC_AC_ratio
1.04
1.00
1.11
1.00
1.04
b_P [MW]
92.00
0.00
92.00
0.00
0.00
b_E_h [h]
10.00
1.00
2.00
1.00
3.00
cost_of_battery_P_fluct_in_peak_price_ratio
17.85
7.57
16.72
0.14
18.27
NPV_over_CAPEX
0.07
-0.06
0.05
0.29
0.23
NPV [MEuro]
95.78
-85.58
75.65
390.14
333.10
IRR
0.06
0.00
0.06
0.08
0.07
LCOE [Euro/MWh]
33.79
35.67
33.94
32.37
29.38
CAPEX [MEuro]
1302.68
1491.73
1489.48
1367.68
1450.32
OPEX [MEuro]
62.86
56.93
75.56
68.36
67.22
penalty lifetime [MEuro]
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
AEP [GWh]
4504.62
4417.54
5203.06
4982.32
5619.63
GUF
0.51
0.50
0.59
0.57
0.64
grid [MW]
1000.00
1000.00
1000.00
1000.00
1000.00
wind [MW]
902.00
1037.00
1209.00
1044.00
1036.00
solar [MW]
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Battery Energy [MWh]
920.00
0.00
184.00
0.00
0.00
Battery Power [MW]
92.00
0.00
92.00
0.00
0.00
Total curtailment [GWh]
0.50
0.00
11590.22
0.00
0.00
Awpp [km2]
173.04
207.40
189.09
186.34
175.20
Rotor diam [m]
214.29
270.87
222.61
221.65
245.40
Hub height [m]
136.14
145.44
123.31
120.82
140.70
Table 15: High-variation Scenario Offshore results
60
==PAGE:65==
Thursday 22nd June, 2023
10.2
Input Data
Input Group
Input description
Value
Unit
Wind
Wind Turbine cost
0.64
MEUR/MW
Wind plant civil works cost
0.26
MEUR/MW
Wind fixed O&M cost per year
12600
EUR/MW
Wind variable O&M cost per year
1.35
EUR/MWh
Wind power plant efficiency
95
%
Wind turbine rotor diameter - reference
145
m
Wind turbine hub height - reference
100
m
Wind power rated - reference
5
MW
WACC
5.2
%
Solar
Solar PV cost
0.38
MEUR/MW
Solar PV Installation hardware cost
0.1
MEUR/MW
Solar PV Inverter cost
0.02
MEUR/MW
Solar fixed O&M cost
9500
EUR/MW
Solar PV annual degradation rate
0.3
%
Land use per MW solar
12.26
km2
WACC
5.3
%
Battery
Battery energy cost
62000
EUR/MWh
Battery power cost
16000
EUR/MW
Battery Balance of Plant + installation + commissioning cost
36000
EUR/MW
Grid control system cost
9000
EUR/MW
Battery O&M Cost *
0
EUR/MW
Battery Depth of discharge
90
%
Battery minimum energy storage capacity
70
%
Battery charging efficiency
98
%
Battery annual price reduction
5
%
WACC
8
%
Site variables
Grid Capacity
300
MW
Discount factor
7
%
Land cost
600,000
EUR/km2
HPP grid connection cost
0.05
MEUR/MW
HPP start of operation year
2030
-
HPP lifespan
25
years
HPP balance of system cost
119940
EUR/MW
Corporate tax rate
22
%
Table 16: Onshore input data
* No cost since battery replacement is modelled
61
==PAGE:66==
Thursday 22nd June, 2023
Input Group
Input description
Value
Unit
Wind
Wind Turbine cost
0.63
MEUR/MW
Wind plant civil works cost
0.35
MEUR/MW
Wind fixed O&M cost per year
36660
EUR/MW
Wind variable O&M cost per year
3.66
EUR/MWh
Wind power plant efficiency
95
%
Wind turbine rotor diameter - reference
270
m
Wind turbine hub height - reference
155
m
Wind power rated - reference
20
MW
WACC
7.1
%
Battery
Battery energy cost
62000
EUR/MWh
Battery power cost
16000
EUR/MW
Battery Balance of Plant + installation + commissioning cost
36000
EUR/MW
Grid control system cost
9000
EUR/MW
Battery O&M Cost *
0
EUR/MW
Battery Depth of discharge
90
%
Battery minimum energy storage capacity
70
%
Battery charging efficiency
98
%
Battery annual price reduction
5
%
WACC
8
%
Site variables
Grid Capacity
1000
MW
Discount factor
7
%
Land cost
0
EUR/km2
HPP grid connection cost
0.24
MEUR/MW
HPP start of operation year
2030
-
HPP lifespan
30
years
HPP balance of system cost
119940
EUR/MW
Corporate tax rate
22
%
Table 17: Offshore input data
* No cost since battery replacement is modelled
62
