==PAGE:1==
Multi-physics simulation of heat, fluid flow
and microstructural conditions during metal
additive manufacturing
Master Thesis
DTU Mechanical Engineering
Department of Civil Engineering
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Multi-physics simulation of heat, fluid flow and microstructural conditions during
metal additive manufacturing
Master Thesis
July, 2023
By
Kanav Jain
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Civil Engineering, Lyngby, Building 425, 2800 Kgs.
Lyngby Denmark
https://construct.dtu.dk/
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over six months at the Manufacturing Engineering Depart-
ment, Department of Civil Engineering, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in
partial fulfilment for the degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of physics, computer
simulations and material science or metallurgy.
Kanav Jain - s213126
Signature
Date
ii
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Additive manufacturing of metals is a very powerful manufacturing method that offers
many advantages over traditional subtractive manufacturing. For metals however, this
process is very complicated with particularly high solidification cooling rates that lead to
unique columnar microstructure and high residual stresses.
Simulation of metal additive manufacturing is an active topic of research and this involves
many different physical phenomena at many different length scales. This thesis aims
to combine a meso scale large surface deformation fluid dynamics model with a cellular
automata microstructure evolution model to simulate directed energy deposition of 316-L
stainless steel.
We use Flow-3D to develop a mesoscopic model considering thermal, fluid and powder
calculations using a finite volume method and we couple this one way with a modified ver-
sion of a cellular automata method called GAReD to simulate mesh independent isotropic
grain growth in 2D. We validate both these models and separately to highlight the capabil-
ity of each model standalone and then show the results from the multi scale model for both
laser spot welding and directed energy deposition and compare them with experimental
images.
The results highlight that our models perform very well and the predictions are in fair
agreement with experimental evidences. The mesoscopic model is well validated against
a test case highlighted in the thesis. The microstructural model is validated for isotropic
growth and capabilities like directional growth are highlighted, showing the generality of
the method. The multi scale model also shows promising results but is held back by the
2D nature of the microstructure model and cannot capture all aspects of grain growth in
a complex case like directed energy deposition.
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
Kanav Jain, MSc Civil Engineering, DTU
Dr. Mohamad Bayat, Assistant Professor, Department of Civil and Mechanical Engineer-
ing, Technical University of Denmark
Thanks for being the main supervisor and helping me with Flow-3D and writing my thesis.
Without your support, the project would be infeasible.
Dr. Olga Zinovieva, Lecturer (Mechanical Engineering) , University of New South Wales
Thanks for being my supervisor and guiding me through developing the microstructure
simulation and helping me with the Cellular Automata in particular.
Dr. Venkata Karthik Nadimpalli, Researcher, Department of Civil and Mechanical En-
gineering, Technical University of Denmark
Thank you for helping me with the experimental part of the thesis and providing the results
I neeeded to validate my simulations against which is one of the major milestones of the
thesis.
iv
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
2
Literature Review
3
2.1
Part Scale Models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Deposition Scale Models
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.3
Microstructure Models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.4
Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3
Theory
7
3.1
Heat Transfer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.2
Fluid Mechanics
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3.3
Dendrites . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.4
Nucleation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
4
Methods
11
4.1
Numerical Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
5
Results
21
5.1
Results from the Meso Scale Model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
5.2
Results from the Microstructure Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
5.3
Results of Coupling of Fluid Dynamics and Microstructure Models
. . . . . 32
5.4
Parametric Study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
6
Conclusion
41
Bibliography
43
A Microstructure simulation code
49
A.1 Coding the sim . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 50
A.2 Validation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 61
A.3 Test with Real Data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 70
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
Additive manufacturing (AM), including methods such as 3D printing, has emerged as a
highly versatile technique for creating parts from various materials. Unlike conventional
subtractive manufacturing processes such as milling, which involve the removal of ma-
terial from a workpiece, AM constructs parts by solidifying material in layers to form a
three-dimensional structure . This approach to manufacturing has gained substantial trac-
tion due to the numerous benefits it offers.
Plastics are frequently used in AM due to their low melting points and favourable mechan-
ical properties. However, the application of AM for metals, while more challenging due
to their higher melting points, has sparked considerable interest in the research commu-
nity. The potential benefits of metal AM could bring significant advancements to various
industries.
Figure 1.1: An additive manufactured combustion chamber for a NASA rocket is shown
mid-process1
Additive manufacturing offers almost limitless control over part geometry since it builds
components layer by layer. This process allows for the creation of complex geometries at
the same cost as simpler shapes, leading to a more streamlined design process. More-
over, AM facilitates rapid prototyping, as the complexity of the parts does not extend the
manufacturing time. An example of the capabilities of AM is NASA’s test launch of a
rocket composed entirely of 3D printed parts, as shown in Fig. 1.1.
Metal AM involves the layer-by-layer printing process, akin to conventional 3D printing,
but with a variety of methods specific to metals. The ASTM Standard F27922 classifies
AM processes into two categories: Directed Energy Deposition (DED) and Powder Bed
Fusion (PBF), with further divisions based on the source of energy (laser, electron beam,
plasma arc, or gas plasma arc). Fig. 1.2 illustrates these processes.
This thesis focuses on Laser DED, a process in which one or more metal powder streams
are melted by a laser and deposited onto a base plate. Metallurgical considerations are
crucial in this process, given the high heating and cooling rates involved. The grain struc-
ture and texture significantly impact the final mechanical properties of the part, neces-
sitating careful control and understanding of subsequent heat treatments to achieve the
desired properties.
1
==PAGE:10==
(a) DED3. (A) is laser DED using powder and (B)
is Electron Beam DED using a wire feed
(b) PBF4
Figure 1.2: Images of different AM processes for metals. DED for Laser and Electron
Beam is shown, and a general representation for PBF is shown
Microstructure control can be achieved by adjusting various parameters such as metal-
lurgy, laser spot size, laser power, scan speed, and powder feed rate. Characterizing
these parameters through experiments is a time-consuming and complex process. As
such, simulations prove to be invaluable for understanding how to optimize process pa-
rameters to control apart’s properties. Simulations offer the advantage of easily modifying
process parameters, allowing for the simultaneous study of various scenarios.
Laser DED involves a complex interplay of physical phenomena such as heat transfer,
fluid dynamics, solidification, and vaporization, all of which affect the accuracy of the sim-
ulation. These phenomena operate on different scales: heat transfer primarily occurs
on a macro scale, while the fluid mechanics within the melt pool—which influence both
its shape and the heat transfer due to advection—operate on a meso scale. The melt
pool also hosts a plethora of phenomena such as solidification drag and the Marangoni
effect, which need to be managed at this scale. Grain structure, on the other hand, must
be addressed at the micro scale, and involves several phenomena that, under the right
conditions, can lead to the formation of dendrites and specific grain textures.
The aim of this thesis is to develop a multi-scale approach that simulates the melt pool at
the meso scale, and then uses those results in a micro-scale simulation to predict grain
evolution during a DED process for 316-L Stainless Steel. This involves the implementa-
tion of a technique to simulate microstructure evolution, and the development of a pipeline
to transfer the results from the meso-scale simulation to the micro-scale simulation for
predicting grain structure.
2
==PAGE:11==
2
Literature Review
For simulating something as complex as metal additive manufacturing (MAM), there are
many different techniques that can be used. These cover various different phenomena in
various different ways, each of this, have their own advantages and drawbacks.
The first consideration is the length-scale. According to literature, there are 3 major scales
in MAM: the part scale, the deposition scale and finally, the micro scale. The part scale
considers a macroscopic formulation and it includes continuum-based physics like heat
transfer and stress evolution. The deposition scale model is a meso scale model that
goes deeper than the former and captures phenomena occurring in the vicinity of the melt
pool using methods like computational fluid dynamics (CFD), Lagrangian mechanics (LS)
to simulate the powder stream interaction and so on. Finally, we have micro scale models
that evaluate the evolution of the grain structure during the process.
2.1
Part Scale Models
Part-scale models for MAM have been developed to counteract the computational re-
quirements of meso-scale simulations, which are time-consuming and resource-intensive.
These models are designed to efficiently simulate the thermo-mechanical conditions of a
real-size part. Among these, the inherent strain (IS) method, originally proposed in the
1970s for welding, has been adapted for use in MAM. The IS method streamlines the
process by replacing transient thermo-mechanical analysis with a quasi-static mechan-
ical analysis. However, given the complex strain and stress evolution in MAM due to
multi-track and multi-layer characteristics, the original IS method has often fallen short.
Therefore, modifications of the IS method have been proposed, with a focus on improving
the calculation of inherent strains. These modifications involve analytical, numerical, and
empirical methods5,6.
One adaptation of the IS method is the modified inherent strain (MIS) method, which offers
more accurate predictions for MAM processes. The MIS method is a two-step process: a
meso-scale detailed process simulation is first used to extract the inherent strain values,
followed by a layer-by-layer quasi-static analysis using these extracted inherent strains to
predict residual stress and distortions for the entire part7–9. Examples of MIS applications
include the work of Yaghi et al.10, who evaluated the distortion of a double cantilever beam
fabricated by the Laser Powder Bed Fusion (L-PBF) . In another study, Alvarez et al.11
applied thermal shrinkage strains layer-by-layer in an elastoplastic FE model to predict
distortion in the L-PBF process. Similarly, Keller and Ploshikhin12developed a multi-scale
simulation framework to predict distortion for MAM parts. These methods provide a way
to more accurately simulate the MAM process and predict the resulting distortions and
stresses.
2.2
Deposition Scale Models
Deposition scale models are dedicated to melt pool in MAM processes and thereby con-
sider and simulate relevant physics which take place near the melt pool. The main pur-
pose of fluid-based deposition-scale models is to predict the thermo-fluid conditions inside
the melt pool. This involves CFD and there can be many approximations made while im-
plementing the models. Based on how the models treat the free surface of the melt pool,
they can be divided into 3 types. These are the flat surface models, small deformation
models and large surface deformation models.
3
==PAGE:12==
Figure 2.1: A mesh diagram illustrating the inherent strain methodology13
2.2.1
Flat Surface Models
Flat surface models, as per their name, assume that the upper surface of the melt pool is
flat, incorporating neither the recoil pressure, nor surface tension. The Marangoni effect,
however, is taken into account in such models, since it is one of the major forces involved
in the fluid movement. The deposition, either in the form of a powder bed or an added
track, is therefore considered as a continuum block, see Fig. 2.2.
Works like the ones done by He, Fuerschbach, and DebRoy14, Mukherjee et al. 201815,
use an in house code which uses FVM. Some of the models like the one by T. N. Le and
Lo16 are done using FEM software like ANSYS, and some like D. Zhang et al.17 and Bayat
et al.18 are made using COMSOL, in which, in all the mentioned cases, the top exposed
surface of the computational domain is assumed to be flat.
Figure 2.2: Image of the melt pool with velocity vectors19
2.2.2
Small Surface Deformation Models
Small deformation models (SSDs) consider more physics as compared to their peers
reviewed in the preceding section. The surface can have a curvature and surface tension
and recoil pressure are also accounted for in the model. These models, however, do not
track the shape of the powder particles, where they instead use a continuum approach
for the powder particles’ addition.
Models developed by Gan et al.20–22, use the Arbitrary Lagrangian Eulerian (ALE) tech-
nique to track the surface of the melt pool. They can simulate many phenomena like the
inverse Marangoni effect which is caused due to the formation of concentration gradient
of a surface active element inside the melt pool. Other models by Kumar and Roy23, use
other techniques like Finite Volume Method (FVM). Zhao et al.24 use a Volume of Fluid
(VOF) method, while Chen et al.25 have had success with their FEM method as well, using
the level set (LS) method to track the surface.
4
==PAGE:13==
Figure 2.3: Illustration of a SSD model using the level set method25
2.2.3
Large Surface Deformation Models
Large surface deformation models are similar to the small surface deformation models,
but they include the powder physics as well. The powder particles are considered as the
bulk material which makes the model more powerful and allows the tracking of keyhole
porosities and even laser ray tracing to simulate the laser interaction better.
Some examples of such models are as follows: Khairallah and Anderson26 have used
an FEM based model using ALE - 3D. Shrestha and Chou27 , Yu et al.28 and Xia et al.29
have used FVM based models modelling the laser as a volumetric heat source using the
VOF method as well. Bayat et al.30 also used a combined CFD - DEM (discrete element
method) approach to simulate a powder bed containing Steel and Cu10Sn.
These models are very accurate with respect to the physics they consider. However, they
are incredibly computationally expensive and only cover a small computational domain.
Compared to the real world then, they can deviate a lot if the environment outside the
domain is not accounted for. An example of this would be a multi layer deposition where
the heat from the previous layers isn’t accounted for which would lead to a significant
variation in the melt pool dimensions.
2.3
Microstructure Models
To simulate the microstructure, there are also 3 different methods: Phase Field Modelling
(PFM) , the Kinetic Monte Carlo Method (MC) , and the Cellular Automata (CA) Method31.
2.3.1
Phase Field Models
The Phase Field models simulate the dendrites most accurately. They consider all vari-
ables to be continuous across the solid - liquid surface and work towards minimizing the
free energy. However, this makes the model very computationally expensive and able to
work only on a very small domain. Usually, temperature gradients from an FEM simulation
give the boundary conditions to the PFMs as an input for simulation.
Farzadi et al.32 used PFM to simulate columnar dendrite growth in an Al-Cu welding case.
Gong and Chou33 , Fallah et al.34 and Acharya et al.35 have used a 2D PFM to evaluate
different AM processes with great accuracy.
2.3.2
Monte Carlo Method
The Monte Carlo method is a meso scale method that uses probabilistic methods to deter-
mine the evolution of the grain structure. It simulates grains as cells that can flip in a way
that minimizes the energy. This is comparatively inexpensive and MC simulations can be
done in 3D for large domain sizes. They are also very useful in predicting the evolution
of grains in the Heat Affected Zones (HAZ). However, it does not take into account grain
orientation and directional grain growth.
5
==PAGE:14==
Figure 2.4: Dendrites as simulated by a Phase Field model34
Rogers e al.36 used MC to predict the 3D microstructure for single pass Electron Beam
welding. Mishra, Debroy et al.37 also used a similar model for a simulating grain growth
in the Heat Affected Zone of Titanium welds.
2.3.3
Cellular Automata Method
Cellular automata is a mix of probabilistic and deterministic methods. This is also a meso
scale method for grain evolution during AM where the mesh is made of cubic elements
which have rules for growth as defined by an algorithm. This is moderately expensive and
can be performed in 3D as well, like the MC method in a reasonable time.
Zinovieva et al.38 have used CA to simulate columnar growth with a selective laser melting
process in 2D as well as 3D. In studies like the one by Koepf et al.39, analytical thermal
solutions are used to simulate the solidification as well. There is also a Modified Cellular
Automata (MCA) method being used by Zhu, Lee et al.40 which is being used to solve
momentum and species transport equations, however, this hasn’t been used in AM at the
time of writing since it works at micro scales and isn’t suited to the meso scale.
2.4
Motivation
All the different models work very well at their own scale and constant development is
being made on all fronts. However, all of these phenomena contribute heavily to the final
mechanical properties; from the residual stresses to the final grain structure. Hence, there
is a need of developing techniques for multi scaling these simulations, or in other word,
cross-linking these models across several length-scales.
Many of the above works use different techniques for multi scaling. The FEM techniques
use a finer mesh near the laser to simulate the process with finer detail, however, this
leaves behind much of the physics going on at fine scales. Many of the works use a one
way coupling where they use the results of the higher scale simulation as a boundary
condition for the smaller scale one. This has proven quite useful but it has the downside
that phenomena happening at a smaller scale can’t affect phenomena at a bigger scale
since it is only one way coupled.
In this thesis, we use a FVM and VOF method based Large Surface Deformation CFD
simulation in Flow-3D41 (using the AM and Weld Modules) developed by Bayat et al.42 to
simulate the melt pool for a Directed Energy Deposition (DED) process. Using a modified
version of the cellular automata method developed by M. Marek31, this simulation is one
way coupled to a microstructure model evaluating the grain growth in 2D during this pro-
cess. The ultimate aim is to use these microstructural predictions for predicting the part’s
realistic mechanical properties using for instance crystal plasticity calculations under the
flag of material multi-scaling43.
6
==PAGE:15==
3
Theory
Fusion-based processes such as welding and laser cladding (DED) entail a long list of
physical phenomena ranging from liquid metal flow, heat transfer, solidification, evapora-
tion, microstructural growth and nucleation, etc., thus we need to simulate the motion of
the fluid, the heat transfer, and the solidification of the fluid. We will discuss each of these
in turn.
The simulation of Heat transfer is done by Flow-3D and the microstructure simulation is
coupled with the temperature field to provide the growth rates.
3.1
Heat Transfer
We can write the heat transfer equation19,44 as:
h(T) = href +
Z T
Tref
ρcp(T)dT + fl(T).∆Hf
(3.1)
∂
∂t(ρh) +
∂
∂xj
(ρujh) =
∂
∂xk

k ∂T
∂xk

+
X
˙q′′′
r
(3.2)
−k ∂T
∂xn

Ω
= ϵζ

T 4 −T 4
surr

+ hconv [T −Tsurr ] +
X
˙q′′
Λ
(3.3)
where ρ (kg.m−3) is the density, cp (J.kg−1.K−1) is the specific heat at constant pres-
sure, fl is the dimensionless fraction liquid, Hf (J/kg) is the latent heat of fusion, k
(J.m−1.K−1.s−1) is the thermal conductivity , u (m/s) is the velocity vector, ˙q′′′
r (J.m−3.s−1)
represents the volumetric heat sources, ζ (W.m−2.K−4) is the Stefan-Boltzmann constant,
ϵ is the dimensionless emissivity coefficient of the material and ˙q′′
Λ (J.m−2.s−1) represents
the surface heat sources. href (W.m−2.K−1) is the reference enthalpy, Tref (K) is the
reference temperature, and ∆Hf (J/kg) is the latent heat of fusion.
Eq. (3.1) defines the heat content in a volume. This is integrated from a reference tem-
perature to the current temperature including the impact of the release or gain of latent
heat of fusion due to solidification and melting. Eq. (3.2) is the heat transfer equation in
the fluid and the term fluid in this thesis covers both the solid as well as the liquid phases.
In order, the terms relate to internal energy change, advection, diffusion and volumetric
heat sources. Eq. (3.3) is the surface equation where the terms are diffusion, radiation,
surface convection and the surface heat sources respectively.
3.1.1
Laser Interaction
The laser beam in the model has a direction, a condensation lens radius and a focal point
distance i.e. the distance between the condensation lens radius and the focal point of
the laser. Depending on the size of the focal and condensation radius, the beam can be
configured to be conical or cylindrical in shape. A conical laser configuration in Flow-3D
is shown in Fig. 3.1.
7
==PAGE:16==
Figure 3.1: An arbitrary laser shape from Flow-3D. The condensation lens radius is 1cm
and the spot radius is 0.15cm. The laser is focused on the metal region which is on the
bottom and we can see a conical shape that is typical in gaussian beams
We are only using cylindrical beams throughout. The laser has a heat flux associated
with it which is spread over the beam in a Gaussian fashion. The exact function for a
cylindrical laser beam is:
˙q′′
laser(r) = ηL
2Ph
πr2
b
exp

−r2
r2
b

(3.4)
where ηL (dimensionless) is the absorptivity, Ph (W or Js−1) is the laser power, rb (m) is
the laser radius, and r (m) is the radial distance from the center of the beam. The heat
flux ˙q′′
laser has units of Jm−2s−1 or equivalently W.m−2.
3.2
Fluid Mechanics
The motion of the fluid, molten metal is a very big part of the overall physics. Some of the
basic equations that govern the physics are:
∂(ρ)
∂t + ∂(ρui)
∂xi
=
X ˙S′′′
mass
(3.5)
ρ
 ∂
∂tui +
∂
∂xj
(ujui)

= −∂p
∂xi
+ ρgi + ∂
∂xi
(τij) +
X ˙S′′′
mom,i
(3.6)
τij = µf
 ∂ui
∂xj
+ ∂uj
∂xi

(3.7)
where ρ (kg.m−3) is the density, u (m.s−1) is the velocity, p (Pa or N.m−2) is the pressure,
g (m.s−2) is the acceleration due to gravity, and τ (Pa or N.m−2) is the shear stress
tensor. The term ˙S′′′mass (kg.m−3.s−1) is the volumetric mass source term, and ˙S′′′mom, i
(N.m−3 or kg.m−2.s−2) is the volumetric momentum source term. The term µf (Pa.s or
kg.m−1.s−1) is the dynamic viscosity.
These are just the Navier stokes equations for laminar flow for incompressible fluid with
some source terms added for the different boundary conditions. Eq. (3.5) refers to mass
8
==PAGE:17==
Figure 3.2: Illustration of different scales of dendritic growth during solidification45. We
are approximating them as the meso scale in our case
conservation, Eq. (3.6) refers to the momentum balance and Eq. (3.7) refers to the
viscous stress inside the liquid.
3.3
Dendrites
At the macro scale, the solidification is handled by Eq. (3.2) which considers the solidifi-
cation to be a uniform front. However, we know that for additive manufacturing, steel will
grow in the form of dendrites epitaxially.
Dendrite formation happens because of an interplay between the concentration gradient
in front of the solid interface and the temperature gradient causing any instabilities in the
surface to grow faster. This is also called ‘constitutional undercooling’. This is illustrated
in Fig. 3.3. Dendrites at different scales are treated differently. In Fig. 3.2, we can see
how they are treated at the macro, meso, micro and nano cases. Each of these require dif-
ferent analytical and numerical techniques to simulate and we are working with the meso
scale approximation of dendrites growing as grains with a preferred direction of growth.
The micro scale simulation requires concentration modelling as described previously, and
would be better suited to the phase field model to handle.
The growth velocity of these dendrites as a function of undercooling(∆T) is given by46:
v(∆T) =
Dl
5.51π2Γ
∆T 2.5
(−m(1 −k0)C0)1.5
(3.8)
where v (m/s) is the dendrite growth velocity, ∆T (K) is the temperature difference, Dl
(m2/s) is the solute diffusion coefficient in the liquid, Γ (Km) is the Gibbs-Thomson coef-
ficient, m (K/wt%) is the liquidus slope, k0 is the dimensionless partition coefficient, and
C0 (wt%) is the initial concentration
The parameters47 we use in (3.8) for steel 316-L are: DL = 1.8 × 10−9m2/s, Γ = 3 ×
10−7Km, mL = −2K/wt%, k = 0.9 and C0 = 17wt% .
9
==PAGE:18==
Figure 3.3: Growth morphology45 as a function of thermal gradient(G). TL is the liquidous
temperature which changes with concentration.
3.4
Nucleation
Nucleation density in the melt is described46 by the very simple equation:
dn
d∆T =
nmax
√
2π∆Tσ
exp

−(∆T −∆TN)2
2∆T 2σ

(3.9)
where nmax(m−2) is the maximum density of nuclei, ∆TN is the mean nucleation under-
cooling, and ∆Tσ is the standard deviation of the undercooling. These parameters are
obtained by fitting simulations to experiments.
10
==PAGE:19==
4
Methods
4.1
Numerical Methods
The equations listed in. 3 are in their strong forms, while for simulation purposes, these
have to be discretized on a numerical grid network. This section is about the numerical
methods used for discretizing these equations.
4.1.1
Flow 3D - Fluid Dynamics and Heat Transfer
In this work, all the mesoscopic phenomena are resolved by Flow-3D41. We are using both
the AM and the weld modules. This program uses its own propriety ways of solving many
of the different equations from particle dynamics, laser interaction, to the fluid dynamics
and solidification.
The mesoscopic model in Flow-3D uses the Finite Volume Method (FVM) in a Cartesian
mesh configuration for solving the thermal and fluid mechanics problems. The particles’
thermo-fluid conditions are captured in a Lagrangian framework using lumped thermal
capacity and drag coefficients..
Figure 4.1: Illustration of VOF19. We have shown a cross section perpendicular to the
path of the laser in a Powder Bed Fusion (PBF) process. The VOF method is used for
FVM calculations and the LS method is used for Lagrangian calculations
Free surface tracking is carried out using the VOF method described earlier. In VOF,
there is a flag variable F which determines how full a certain cell is with fluid. A value of
0 means a void cell and a value of 1 means the cell is full of fluid. Any value in between
means the cell is partially full of fluid. We use this flag variable to convert the different
fluid surface boundary conditions to volumetric sources using the Volume of Fluid(VOF)
method. Fig. 4.1 illustrates the Volume of Fluid and Level Set methods.
The conversion of a surface boundary condition to a volumetric boundary condition is
shown in Table 4.1. We multiply the terms by the gradient of the scalar field F. We also
add a stabilizer term to the final result so that the resulting energy flux or pressure is
concentrated in the fluid regions more than the void regions.
11
==PAGE:20==
Table 4.1: Conversion of surface boundary conditions to volumetric terms
Surface condition
VOF method
Stabilizer term
˙q′′(W.m−2)
˙q′′.∇F
2 ¯
ρcp
ρcp,metal+ρcp,air
˙F ′′(N.m−2)
˙F ′′.∇F
2¯ρ
ρmetal+ρair
There are many different boundary conditions that are applied on the fluid which cover
many forces and fluxes. These are :
Surface tension - Marangoni Effect
Surface tension is applied as a surface boundary force on the top of the liquid in (3.6) and
it looks like (4.1):
˙S′′′
mom,cap,i = κσ.(∇F)i
(4.1)
˙S′′′
mom,marangoni,i = ∂γ
∂T [∇Ti −ni(∇Tknk)].(∇F)i
(4.2)
where κ(1/m) is the curvature, σ(N/m) is the surface tension, and ∇F(1/m) is the gradi-
ent of the phase fraction. ∂γ
∂T (N/m.K) is the temperature gradient of the surface tension,
∇Ti and ∇Tk(K/m) are temperature gradients, ni and nk are unit normal vectors.
The Marangoni48 effect (4.2) is the movement of liquid on the surface due to a gradient
in surface tension. The liquid on the surface moves away from the hot zone where the
surface tension is lower and towards the cold zone where surface tension is higher.
Solidification drag and Buoyancy
When the temperature of the liquid is between the solidus and liquidous regions, a ‘mushy’
zone is formed. In this zone, the liquid is more viscous and also has to flow along the solid
particles being formed. Both of these factors add drag to this zone. This drag is modeled49
in (3.6) by:
˙S′′′
mom,drag and buoy.i = Kc(1 −fliq)2
Ck + f3
liq
ui + ρgiβ∆T
(4.3)
where Kc(m²/s) is a negative constant, Ck is a dimensionless constant, fliq is the dimen-
sionless fraction of liquid, and ui (m/s) is the velocity. The second term in the equation
is related to buoyancy50,51, given by the Boussinesq approximation, where ρ(kg/m³) is
the density, g(m/s²) is the gravitational acceleration, β(1/K) is the coefficient of thermal
expansion, and ∆T(K) is the temperature difference.
Evaporation
The evaporation is modelled by:
˙q′′′
evap = p0∆Hv(1 −βr)
r
M
2πRT exp
∆HvM(T −Tvap)
RTvapT

.|∇F|
(4.4)
where p0(Pa) is the reference pressure, ∆Hv(J/kg) is the heat of vaporization, βr is the
dimensionless reflection coefficient, M(kg/mol) is the molar mass, R(J/(mol.K)) is the
universal gas constant, T and Tvap(K) are the temperature and vaporization temperature
respectively, and ∇F(1/m) is the gradient of the phase fraction.
12
==PAGE:21==
Laser heat and recoil pressure
The laser is, as previously discussed, a cylindrical Gaussian heat source. Due to the heat
of the laser, the fluid vaporizes and this applies a pressure on the top of the liquid called
the ‘recoil pressure’. These are given by :
˙S′′′
mom,rec,i = p0 exp
∆HvM(T −Tvap)
RTvapT

.(∇F)i
(4.5)
˙q′′′
laser = η 2P
πr2
b
exp

−2r2
r2
b

.|∇F|
(4.6)
4.1.2
Cellular Automata - Microstructure
At the surface, the Cellular Automata(CA) simulation is a very simple process: if there
is a seed grain with cells near it growing with a certain growth rate, the concentration in
all cells near the growing cell increases by the growth rate times the timestep. Once the
growing cells are full, they all become seed grains and cells near them start growing.
We are performing CA in 2-D for this project even though the methods stated are easily
extrapolated to 3-D. There can be certain artefacts in the simulations compared to reality
because of the reduced dimensionality which can be corrected by increasing it, however,
it costs significant computing power and time, which, due to the rapid prototyping required,
was invaluable in getting the project off the ground. Hence, despite the methods being
discussed are general, they will be tailored to the 2-D case being used in the project.
Also, the methods used and developed are general enough that with different formulations
for the fields, we could adopt this method for different materials and different physical
processes as well.
For accommodating this, there are 2 fields present over the mesh: a State field and a
Concentration field.
• The state field is an integer that describes whether the cell is currently growing (-ve),
completely grown(+ve), or not growing(0).
• The concentration field describes how much of the cell is full. It goes from 0 to 1 for
each cell.
In Fig. 4.2, we can observe the growth of a seed through one of its surrounding cells.
We can see how when the cells fill up, their state flips sign and become seed cells. The
surrounding cells then take the growing state and start growing.
Mesh Anisotropy
This simple CA clearly illustrates that the growth is mesh dependant. The cells will grow in
a fashion depending on the neighborhood we choose. We can choose all the surrounding
neighbors(Moore neighborhood) as shown or just the up, down, left and right ones(Von
Neumann Neighborhood). In the first case, we will get a square shape as seen and in the
second case, a diamond shape. This is depicted schematically in Fig. 4.3.
However, we desire a realistic circular shape that is mesh independent. To achieve this,
we will follow the growth anisotropy reduction with the Diffusion method (GARED52) where
we try to modify the growth rate depending on a ‘pilot’ field. This field φ is obtained by
performing diffusion on the state field where seeds are present. This ‘smoothes out’ the
state field and we can calculate a reduced velocity vred using this φ, which will aim to make
the growth mesh independent.
13
==PAGE:22==
(a) Concentration at t=0
(b) State at t = 0
(c) Concentration at t = 5
(d) State at t = 5
(e) Concentration at t = 10
(f) State at t = 10
Figure 4.2: Growth with CA and a growth rate(G) = 0.1
14
==PAGE:23==
(a) Moore Neighborhood
(b) Von Neumann Neighborhood
Figure 4.3: Growth of seed using different neighborhoods52
φ0 =
(
1,
if State > 0
0,
otherwise
(4.7)
φn+1 = φn + Dr∇2φ
(4.8)
Equations (4.7) and (4.8) describe how the pilot field evolves in pseudo time, n. The grid
spacing in this case is taken as 1. The constant Dr is also of concern and is useful when
tuning the model. Using this φ, we calculate a normalized φ using:
φ =
φ
(φneigh)max
(4.9)
After using (4.9), we can calculate vred and consequently the corrected growth rate ∆C
given the physical growth rate ∆g using the equations (4.10) and (4.11). There are again
some constants β and γ which are hyperparameters that need to be tuned.
vred = β(φ)γ
(4.10)
∆Ci,j = ∆gi,jvred
i,j
(4.11)
Finally, we can obtain growth that looks circular as can be seen in Fig. 4.4.
Redistribution
There are some discretization errors that occur during the filling of the cells. For example:
say that the growth rate is 0.3. The cells will fill up to 0.9 and then in the next step go to
1. This loses 0.2 in each cell which can add up over time and make the process mesh
dependant in a way again.
To fix this, we use a redistribution algorithm52 shown in Fig. 4.5:
• If a cell has a value above 1 after a timestep, calculate the number of cells around
it that are empty and not growing
• Distribute the excess evenly among the cells near the overflown cell
• Set the cell’s state to seed cell (positive) and the state of the empty cells(now having
some concentration) to growing(negative)
15
==PAGE:24==
(a) Without correction
(b) With correction
Figure 4.4: Growth from a seed at the same timestep with and without the isotropy cor-
rection
(a) Concentration before overflow
(b) Concentration after redistribution
Figure 4.5: Redistribution occurring for a growth rate of 0.3
16
==PAGE:25==
Table 4.2: Modifications to convert single grain to multiple grains
Original paper
Modification
Only 3 states: 0(void), 1(seed) and 2(grow-
ing). This can accommodate only 1 grain and
how to add more is not clear
3 possible states: 0(void), +ve (seed) and -
ve (growing). This means we can add infinite
grains to the mesh
What happens when two grains meet each
other is trivial since they have the same grain
identity.
In the new algorithm, we could have kept a
track of how much of each grain was within
each cell. However, that is too complex and
so, when a cell fills up, the nearest zero neigh-
bors start growing with that identity.
However, at low growth rates (∆C < 0.1), the redistribution algorithm adds too much
computational cost to be justified and is turned off.
Multiple grains
The paper52 this algorithm was originally published in uses the algorithm with only a single
grain. However, we need to modify it for use for many different grains. This causes a lot
of considerations and Table 4.2.
Dendritic growth
Now that we have achieved mesh independent growth, we would like a way to impart
directional growth in the grains. How we do it is by calculating the gradient of the pilot
field, finding the orientation of the resulting vector field, and calculating the new velocity
as a function of orientation using (4.12) where µ0 is the growth rate.
vred = µ(θ)
(4.12)
µ = µ0(1 + ϵ cos (mk(θ −θ0)))
(4.13)
Here, mk decides the symmetry of the crystals. mk = 4 implies there are 4 principal
directions of growth and so on. θ0 is just an offset for the specific grain and decides the
global orientation of the grain. ϵ defines how strong the anisotropy effect is. An example
of dendritic growth can be seen in Fig. 4.6.
However, this algorithm proves too expensive to do for a bigger mesh, and therefore, we
will not be using this further. If we had more time and resources, we would investigate
the effects of these parameters in our final simulations but for the time being, this part is
just for illustrating how powerful the CA method can be.
4.1.3
Multi scaling
Carrying over information from the meso scale to the micro scale is one of the major
concerns for this process. Since our solidification model is not coupled with segregation,
we can just use the temperature field obtained from the meso scale simulation.
The CA simulation needs the mesh to be uniform. This combined with the need for making
the mesh finer means we need to interpolate the fields in question to a regular mesh with
a finer spacing. For reducing computational complexity, we use a linear interpolation of
the fields to use in the CA simulation.
For the CA simulation, it is very important that there is an upper limit for the growth in a
cell, so we need to subdivide the timestep. This is done again using a linear method.
Therefore, interpolation is done in both the spatial and linear dimensions to achieve the
fields required for the microstructure simulation.
17
==PAGE:26==
(a) Initial structure
(b) Grains growth
(c) Grain impingement
(d) Final Structure
Figure 4.6: Directional grain growth with mk = 5, ϵ = 0.2
18
==PAGE:27==
The growth rate for the microstructure simulation was obtained using the interpolated
temperature in (3.8).
19
==PAGE:28==
20
==PAGE:29==
5
Results
This section describes the results obtained during the course of the project and the con-
ditions and constants used to solve the relevant equations. There are 3 major sections :
the meso scale model, the microstructure model, and finally, the results we obtain from
performing a microstructure simulation on the meso scale model output,
5.1
Results from the Meso Scale Model
The Meso Scale Model is a Flow-3D model which was developed by Mohamad Bayat et
al42. This model is used to handle the laser interaction, powder streams, and the actual
melt pool mechanics and heat transfer.
There are many physics models being incorporated into the model:
1. Heat Transfer : A first order explicit scheme is used for handling the heat transfer
equations
2. Solidification : Solidification is presumed to not include shrinkage.
3. Surface Tension : We are using a pre-defined surface tension which has a contact
angle of 90◦
4. Viscosity : We are modeling the melt as a viscous liquid with laminar flow and a
no-slip boundary condition on the walls.
5. Laser : We are using a cylindrical laser beam with a Gaussian heat distribution
Throughout the meso scale simulation, we use Stainless Steel 316-L as our material. The
parameters for the same are listed in the Table 5.1.
5.1.1
Spot welding
The mesh is made up of 2 regions: a fine mesh region in the melt zone and a coarse
mesh underneath. This is illustrated in Fig 5.1 . The fine mesh has a spacing of 0.05mm
and the coarse mesh has a spacing of 0.5mm. All the mesh elements are cubic in shape.
Since spot welding is a radially symmetric process, we could have applied cylindrical
boundary conditions. However, for this case, we applied a symmetry plane along the Y
axis and the laser is placed on the symmetry plane.
The laser has a power of 5000W. The spot size of the laser is 0.5mm. The laser is turned
on for 0.1s and then is turned off and the material is allowed to solidify for a further 0.1s
which can be seen in Fig. 5.4. The rate at which information is extracted changes from
0.05s per time step while the laser is on to 0.001s during solidification.
We can see a keyhole being formed initially, which further deepens and penetrates much
further by the time the laser is turned off at t = 0.1s. After that, cooling and solidification
begins occurring. We can see that the final shape on the top is almost conical due to the
recoil pressure and the marangoni effect shifting fluid away from the heated region in the
center with a lower surface tension towards the regions on the edge with a higher surface
tension.
21
==PAGE:30==
Table 5.1: Material properties of Stainless Steel 316-L. The tables are used for tempera-
ture dependant properties. The values are linearly interpolated and are constants outside
the specified range. The units are in CGS for convenience.
(a)
Property
Value
Melting Point (K)
1730
Viscosity (g/cm/s)
0.06
Emmissivity
0.4
Liquidus temperature (K)
1733
Solidus temperature (K)
1693
Latent Heat of Fusion (J/kg)
2.72 × 105
(b) Density (g/cm3)
Value
Temp
7.9
300
7.71
1000
7.43
1700
7.14
2000
6.74
3000
(c) Specific Heat (erg/g/K)
Value
Temp
4.34 × 106
300
4.98 × 106
1000
9.65 × 106
1700
5.31 × 106
2000
6 × 106
3000
(d)
Thermal
Conductivities
(erg/cm/s/K)
Value
Temp
1.396 × 106
300
2.496 × 106
1000
3.595 × 106
1700
1.897 × 106
2000
2.225 × 106
3000
(e) Surface Tension (g/s2)
Value
Temp
4000
1600
4000
1700
3282
1710
2250
3000
2250
3200
22
==PAGE:31==
Figure 5.1: Image of the geometry in spot welding. On top is the fine mesh and on the
bottom is the coarse mesh.
(a) t = 0.05s
(b) t = 0.1s
(c) t = 0.11s
(d) t = 0.157s
Figure 5.2: Profiles of the spot welding along the Y axis. At t = 0.05s, it can be clearly
seen that a key hole is formed which is further expanded till t = 0.1s after which the steel
begins solidifying.
23
==PAGE:32==
Figure 5.3: Dimensions of the melt region for spot welding in cm. w = 0.172cm, h =
0.393cm
Figure 5.4: The volume of the melt pool as a function of time. The first 3 time steps are
very coarse since solidification was the focus of the simulation
24
==PAGE:33==
5.1.2
Direct Energy Deposition - Validation
The next case we will look at is a single track Directed Energy Deposition (DED) case. We
have 3 powder streams converging on the surface of a base plate and a powerful laser
heating the powder particles. These molten particles hit the base plate causing some of
the fluid to melt and also deposit onto the base plate. Both the powder streams and the
laser move over the base plate together in a line. The geometry can be seen in Fig. 5.5.
Figure 5.5: Mesh for the DED simulation along the y axis.. The 3 regions are visible: the
top void region with the 3 powder streams, the fine mesh and the coarse mesh underneath.
This process also has a symmetry plane along the laser path. However, we simulate the
whole process. The upper and lower coarse blocks have a mesh spacing of 1mm and the
fine mesh has a spacing of 0.1875mm with all the mesh elements being cubic. Symmetry
conditions are applied on the X and Y planes.
The laser power is 2100W, and the spot radius is 1.5mm. The scan speed is 1.66cm/s in
the X direction. There are 3 particle sources which converge at the center on the base
plate where the laser also strikes. There are 4 classes of particles with size ranging from
1.5×10−5m to 5×10−5m. These can be seen in Fig. 5.6. The simulation is run till t = 2.1s
with a time step of 0.05s.
The melt pool grows in the beginning and then expands in volume to a constant value of
around 5 × 10−3cm3. We can see that the melt pool geometry doesn’t look smooth which
is because of the mesh size not being discreet enough. This can also be the reason of
the oscillation of the melt pool volume.
To validate this simulation, experiments have been performed with these exact parame-
ters. The cross section perpendicular to the laser direction has been analyzed. This can
be seen in Fig. 5.8. It can be seen in the experiment that the depression indicating the
laser is off axis implying that the powder streams did not focus properly on along the laser.
This also causes the powder to absorb lesser heat from the laser leading to the smaller
height and width. However, the results are within 20% of the experiment and therefore,
we can be pretty sure the model is accurate and we will consider it validated.
25
==PAGE:34==
Figure 5.6: A representation of the process at t = 1.75s. The three particle streams
can be seen with the particle sizes being shown 50 times larger. It can be seen that
the temperature of the particles rises due to interaction with laser and they melt before
reaching the melt in the bulk.
26
==PAGE:35==
(a) The volume- time graph of the melt pool.
(b) X, t = 0.05s
(c) Y, t = 0.05s
(d) X, t = 0.15s
(e) Y, t = 0.15s
(f) X, t = 0.40s
(g) Y, t = 0.40s
(h) X, t = 0.70s
(i) Y, t = 0.70s
Figure 5.7: Melt pool geometry and volume as a function of time. The melt pool reaches
a quasi steady state at near t = 0.5s. The figures are slices along the X and the Y axes.
The color indicates solid fraction with blue being 1 and red being 0. The melt pool volume
becomes near constant at around t = 0.4s.
27
==PAGE:36==
(a) Experimental cross section, w =
3.38mm, h = 1.13mm
(b) Simulation cross section, w
=
4.1mm, h = 1.26mm
Figure 5.8: Cross sections perpendicular to the path of the laser. It can be seen that the
numerical cross section is bigger both in height and width.
28
==PAGE:37==
5.2
Results from the Microstructure Model
5.2.1
Circularity analysis
A major part of the microstructure model is to ensure that we achieve mesh anisotropy.
The aim is to first achieve circular grains and somehow ensure that they are perfectly
circular, in agreement with physics. To achieve this, we have many constants listed in
section 4.1.2.
Firstly, we have to define ‘circularity’52. We start with a seed in the center of our simulation
domain (201 x 201) and a G = 0.01/step. We calculate all the distance r of the cells which
are growing after 50,000 steps and calculate the circularity by:
cerr = rmax −rmin
ravg
(5.1)
A major part of the time is spent on doing the diffusion of the pilot field. Hence, we require
that we can achieve the maximum ‘amount’ of diffusion possible which means that we
want the highest value for Dr in (4.8). In 2-D, we use the value:
Dr = 0.24
(5.2)
This is on the limit of stability for the 2-D diffusion scheme. We also use 3 diffusion steps
since we believe that diffusion extending to 3 mesh steps should smoothen out the growth
rate enough.
We are now left with are the constants β and γ in (4.10) which need to be tuned. There is
however, a relation between them. A planar front growing in one direction should have a
vred = 1. This can be applied both analytically and computationally to obtain a constraint
leaving only one unknown.
Finally, we can perform a parametric sweep where we use γ as the independent param-
eter. We solve the value of β using this value and finally, perform the circularity analysis.
Finally, we choose the minima and sweep through it again with a finer step and repeat
this twice to achieve an optimal value of parameters. In Fig. 5.9, it can be seen that we
have an optimal value for γ = 1.76 which ensures the maximum circularity.
29
==PAGE:38==
Figure 5.9: cerr as a function of γ . The minimum of cerr = 0.037 is obtained at γ = 1.76
5.2.2
Polymer Recrystallization - Validation
To validate the model, we choose the a case involving polymer recrystallization53. We
initialize the mesh with a certain number of nuclei (5.3), assign a growth rate (5.4), and plot
the recrystallized fraction α as a function of time. We also have an analytical expression
(5.5) for the crystal fraction which we can compare the numerical recrystallized fraction
with.
N(T) = 1.458

N0 exp(φ(T 0
m −T))
2/3
(5.3)
G(T) = G0 exp

−
U∗
R(T −T∞) −
Kg
T(T 0m −T)

(5.4)
αanal = 1 −exp(−πNG2t2)
(5.5)
The simulation domain is a rectangle of size 4 mm x 4 mm subdivided into a 600 x 600 grid.
The parameters used in the simulation54 are N0 = 17.4 × 106/m3, φ = 0.155, U∗/Rg =
755K, Kg = 534858K2, T 0
m = 467K and G0 = 2.1 × 104m/s.
The analytical and the numerical curves in Fig 5.10 seem to fit very well which implies a
good agreement of the model with theory. This case was used to validate the isotropic
growth part of the model in which grains grow in a circular way.
30
==PAGE:39==
Figure 5.10: Comparison of analytical and numerical curves of recrystallized fraction with
respect to time. The temperature is in Kelvin and time is in seconds.
5.2.3
Subjective overview of Casting
To simulate another well known case, casting was simulated in a very basic way. We
simulate a 100 x 100 mesh with a spacing of 1mm. On the edges, we initialize a few
different grains We initialize the domain with a temperature of 1800K and cool down the
walls linearly down to 300K with a diffusion coefficient just below the maximum diffusion
coefficient allowed by the 2D explicit diffusion scheme (D = 0.24).
Using this temperature field, we calculate the undercooling and finally the growth velocity
using (3.8). Then, we impose a maximum growth limit and change our time step accord-
ingly. We get a grain structure like we would expect of this very basic simulation in Fig.
5.11. The grains grow along the sides where the growth rate is high because of higher
undercooling. Then, they grow towards the center together, as can be seen from the cir-
cle being formed and finally, finish growing at t = 2.32s. A maximum growth of 0.1 has
been used per cell and the time step was adjusted accordingly per step.
31
==PAGE:40==
(a) t = 0s
(b) t = 0.66s
(c) t = 1.57s
(d) t = 2.32s
Figure 5.11: Casting simulation for steel with a 100 x 100 mesh and temperature diffusion
simulated by cooling down the boundaries.
5.3
Results of Coupling of Fluid Dynamics and
Microstructure Models
The meso scale simulation from Flow-3D outputs the results as temperature fields on the
mesh which we can extract from the output. Then, we take a slice along a 2D plane. We
then interpolate these fields onto a finer cubic mesh. Using the temperature field to then
calculate the growth velocities, we step through time setting an upper limit on the global
growth and interpolating through the time steps till we reach the final time step.
The parameters47 we use in (3.8) for steel 316-L are: DL = 1.8 × 10−9m2/s, Γ = 3 ×
10−7Km, mL = −2K/wt%, k = 0.9 and C0 = 17wt% .
5.3.1
Spot Welding
The spot welding simulation shows us what we would expect in Fig. 5.12. The grains on
the edges of the melt solidify inwards and converge at the center. An upwards curved
shape can be seen forming in the grains in the middle of a melt pool vertically which is
also expected experimentally. This causes very easy cracking along the grain boundaries
along the center line. We can also see in the simulation that the grains are much more
thin at the bottom and very columnar.
There are many reasons why the simulated images differ from The grains close to the heat
affected zone aren’t changed in the numerical method however, as can be seen in the
experimental EBSD images in Fig. 5.13 . This is because we don’t simulate grain growth
32
==PAGE:41==
(a) t = 0s
(b) t = 0.1s
(c) t = 0.13s
(d) t = 0.157s
(e) t = 0s
(f) t = 0.1s
(g) t = 0.13s
(h) t = 0.157s
Figure 5.12: Microstructure simulation of spot welding (Fig. 5.2). Some artefacts can be
seen on the bottom and are the result of the time step being too big initially. The solid
fraction is also shown from Flow-3D at the same time steps with blue being 0 and red
being 1.
in the heat affected regions. We can also see that the experimental images have new
grains being nucleated during growth which we don’t simulate either. Also, as previously
mentioned, the directional growth of the grains isn’t considered in the numerical model so
there is no change in texture during growth.
Figure 5.13: Electron Backscatted Diffration (EBSD) images of different welds55. Case
a) is the most similar to ours and we can observe the grain morphology looks similar to
the numerical case
33
==PAGE:42==
(a) t = 0.35s
(b) t = 0.75s
(c) t = 1.5s
(d) t = 2.1s
Figure 5.14: Microstructure simulation of single track DED (Fig. 5.6). This is a cross
section along the laser axis. Angled columnar grains can be seen growing from the base
plate. The slice is taken along the laser at y = 0cm
5.3.2
Laser Cladding
The simulation of the DED case is done along 2 of the axes: one along the laser axis (Fig.
5.14) and one perpendicular to it (Fig. 5.15).
In the cross section along the laser axis, it can be seen that the grains grow in long columns
at an angle to the vertical. This is determined by the ratio of the growth speed of the grains
to the velocity of the laser. If for example, the undercooling was increased, the growth
speed would increase and the angle of the grains would be lesser with the vertical.
The section perpendicular to the laser axis also provides insights into the growth of the
grains. We initially form an elevation due to the front of the melt pool which then reduces
because of the laser passing though and then we observe the growth happening further.
We can see that for the final shape, the grains first move inwards and then finally grow
equiaxed around the edges.
For this case however, we can see that the simulation parameters need to be adjusted
to get a more informative picture. The mesh resolution is too coarse for this case as we
don’t have enough mesh information to properly simulate grain texture. Also, since we
can see that grains grow in a diagonal way along the laser, this simulation being in 2D is
a major downside as, in reality, the grains aren’t growing from the bottom epitaxially but
from ‘behind’ the plane. Also, the experimental picture shows equiaxed grains nucleating
near the edges due to the high undercooling present which we don’t capture either in the
model without nucleation.
34
==PAGE:43==
(a) t = 1.05s
(b) t = 1.1s
(c) t = 1.15s
(d) t = 1.2s
(e) t = 1.25s
(f) t = 1.3s
Figure 5.15: Microstructure simulation of single track DED (Fig. 5.6). This is a cross
section perpendicular to the laser axis. Grains can be seen growing towards the center
line at first and then diverging away. The slice is taken at x = 3cm. The last picture is an
experimental EBSD image by Zhihao Pan
5.4
Parametric Study
5.4.1
Spot Welding
The spot welding simulation was performed for a number of different laser powers. The
nominal case is 5000W, but the simulation was also performed for 1000, 2000, 3000 and
4000W. The dimensions of the melt pool are shown for the different laser powers in Fig.
5.16.
Running the microstructure simulation for the cases with laser power 1000, 3000 and 5000W,
we can see a clear increase in the size of the melt pool from 2.5×10−4cm3 to 1.6×10−3cm3
to 3.5×10−3cm3 for the different cases in Fig. 5.17. The grain morphology doesn’t change
35
==PAGE:44==
(a) 1000W, h = 0.002cm, w = −cm
(b) 2000W, h = 0.128cm, w = 0.09cm
(c) 3000W, h = 0.233cm, w = 0.115cm
(d) 4000W, h = 0.315cm, w = 0.135cm
(e) 5000W, h = 0.393cm, w = 0.172cm
Figure 5.16: The melt region size as a function of the laser power in spot welding. We
can see that the height is the major change in the different laser powers and the width
changes slowly in the regions where the melt pool is almost cylindrical. The liquid at the
top can be seen moving away from the the center due to the Marangoni effect towards
the edge which also affects the width at the top, making it bigger than the spot size which
is 0.5mm
much in the first two cases. However we can see that while going from 3000W to 5000W,
we can see much bigger grains in the upper part.
36
==PAGE:45==
(a) 3000W, Volume - time curve
(b) 1000W, Microstructure
(c) 3000W, Volume - time curve
(d) 3000W, Microstructure
(e) 3000W, Volume - time curve
(f) 5000W, Microstructure
Figure 5.17: Volume time curves of the melt pool and final microstructures for different
laser powers during spot welding
5.4.2
Laser Cladding
The nominal power used in the laser cladding case was 2100W. Another case was simu-
lated with a power of 3000W with all the other parameters remaining the same to illustrate
the effect of the laser power on the melt pool size and shape. We can see in Fig. 5.18
that the increase in laser power leads to increased recoil pressure which in turn leads to
a shallower melt pool, and also a deeper melt pool.
A comparison of the melt pool volumes with time in Fig. 5.19 also shows that the melt pool
increases in volume from a stable volume of about 5×10−3cm3 to a little over 8×10−3cm3.
The variations in the melt pool volume can be observed in the higher power case as well.
37
==PAGE:46==
(a) 2100W, Solid fraction, Y = 0cm
(b) 3000W, Solid fraction, Y = 0cm
(c) 2100W, Solid fraction, X = 3.2cm
(d) 3000W, Solid fraction, X = 3.2cm
Figure 5.18: Pictures of the solid fraction at different slices taken for the low power and
the high power case at t = 1.3s. We can see the high recoil pressure from the higher
power laser leads to a flatter and deeper melt pool.
However, the variations appear to be lower than in the lower power case.
38
==PAGE:47==
(a) 2100W
(b) 3000W
Figure 5.19: Volume time plots
of the two cases for DED.
39
==PAGE:48==
40
==PAGE:49==
6
Conclusion
The overall and initial goals of the project are as listed below, which are to:
• Develop and validate a meso scale simulation that captures the physics of the melt
pool, powder particles and the laser accurately
• Develop and validate a standalone micro scale simulation that can capture grain
growth dynamics in an accurate way
• Develop a methodology to cross-link the two simulations (multi-scaling) and develop
a method for predicting the grain structure in DED
Using Flow-3D to resolve the mesoscopic scale and developing a CA simulation to resolve
the grain growth, we have made significant progress towards our goals.
• The mesoscopic simulation is validated against an experimental test case and ap-
propriately capture the involved physics of DED at the meso scale.
• The CA simulation was validated for isotropic growth and shown to be general
enough to accommodate directional growth
• The multi scale simulation showed promising results in the cases that were suitable
for it to handle
However, there are still many improvements that can be made to the project. They weren’t
able to be implemented because of the time constraints of the project. However, looking
at the results, these improvements would provide significant value to the project.
• The CA code could be made more efficient and parallelized so that we could extend
the method to 3D
• Directional growth could also be made more efficient to implement so we can sim-
ulate the texture in the grains as well as their morphology
• Nucleation could be implemented along with interpolation in the CA method. This
would also require tuning the parameters for nucleation using experiments on 316L
Stainless Steel.
• Along with temperature, we could also simulate the concentration field in the CA to
simulate dendrite formation
• The Flow-3D simulation could benefit from further refinement of the mesh near the
melt region to resolve the region we want to perform multi scaling on even further
and obtain better results
41
==PAGE:50==
42
==PAGE:51==
Bibliography
1.
Kilkenny, N. S. 3D Printed Rocket Launched Using Innovative NASA Alloy https:
//www.nasa.gov/feature/glenn/2023/3d-printed-rocket-launched-using-innovative-
nasa-alloy. Accessed: 2023-06-15. 2023.
2.
DebRoy, T. et al. Additive manufacturing of metallic components – Process, struc-
ture and properties. Progress in Materials Science 92, 112–224. ISSN: 0079-6425.
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0079642517301172 (2018).
3.
Sing, S., Tey, C., Tan, J., Huang, S. & Yeong, W. Y. 2 - 3D printing of metals in
rapid prototyping of biomaterials: Techniques in additive manufacturing. Woodhead
Publishing Series in Biomaterials (ed Narayan, R.) 17–40. https://www.sciencedirect.
com/science/article/pii/B9780081026632000022 (2020).
4.
Isachenkov, M., Chugunov, S., Akhatov, I. & Shishkovsky, I. Regolith-based additive
manufacturing for sustainable development of lunar infrastructure – An overview.
Acta Astronautica 180 (Jan. 2021).
5.
Ueda, Y., Fukuda, K., Nakacho, K. & Endo, S. A New Measuring Method of Residual
Stresses with the Aid of Finite Element Method and Reliability of Estimated Values.
Journal of the Society of Naval Architects of Japan 1975, 499–507 (1975).
6.
Ueda, Y., Fukuda, K. & Tanigawa, M. New Measuring Method of 3-Dimensional
Residual Stresses Based on Theory of Inherent Strain. Journal of the Society of
Naval Architects of Japan 1979, 203–211 (1979).
7.
Liang, X., Chen, Q., Cheng, L., Hayduke, D. & To, A. Modified inherent strain method
for efficient prediction of residual deformation in direct metal laser sintered compo-
nents. Computational Mechanics 64 (Dec. 2019).
8.
Liang, X., Cheng, L., Chen, Q., Yang, Q. & To, A. C. A modified method for esti-
mating inherent strains from detailed process simulation for fast residual distortion
prediction of single-walled structures fabricated by directed energy deposition. Addi-
tive Manufacturing 23, 471–486. ISSN: 2214-8604. https://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/S2214860418304858 (2018).
9.
Chen, Q. et al. An inherent strain based multiscale modeling framework for simu-
lating part-scale residual deformation for direct metal laser sintering. Additive Man-
ufacturing 28, 406–418. ISSN: 2214-8604. https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S2214860418310583 (2019).
10.
Yaghi, A., Afazov, S., Holloway, A. & Denmark, W. COMPARISON OF FAST FINITE
ELEMENT MODELLING TECHNIQUES FOR PREDICTION OF DISTORTION AND
RESIDUAL STRESSES IN LASER POWDER BED FUSION in (Sept. 2017).
11.
Alvarez, P. et al. Computationally efficient distortion prediction in powder bed fusion
additive manufacturing. Int. J. Eng. Res. Sci 2, 39–46 (2016).
12.
Keller, N. & Ploshikhin, V. New Method for fast predictions of residual stress and
distortion of AM parts in (Aug. 2014).
13.
Setien, I. et al. Empirical methodology to determine inherent strains in additive man-
ufacturing. Computers & Mathematics with Applications 78. Simulation for Additive
Manufacturing, 2282–2295. ISSN: 0898-1221. https : / / www . sciencedirect . com /
science/article/pii/S0898122118302839 (2019).
14.
He, X., Fuerschbach, P. W. & DebRoy, T. Heat transfer and fluid flow during laser
spot welding of 304 stainless steel. Journal of Physics D: Applied Physics 36, 1388.
https://dx.doi.org/10.1088/0022-3727/36/12/306 (May 2003).
43
==PAGE:52==
15.
Mukherjee, T., Wei, H., De, A. & DebRoy, T. Heat and fluid flow in additive manu-
facturing—Part I: Modeling of powder bed fusion. Computational Materials Science
150, 304–313. ISSN: 0927-0256. https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0927025618302635 (2018).
16.
Le, T.-N. & Lo, Y.-L. Effects of sulfur concentration and Marangoni convection on
melt-pool formation in transition mode of selective laser melting process. Materials
& Design 179, 107866. ISSN: 0264-1275. https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S0264127519303041 (2019).
17.
Zhang, D. et al. Thermofluid field of molten pool and its effects during selective
laser melting (SLM) of Inconel 718 alloy. Additive Manufacturing 21, 567–578. ISSN:
2214-8604. https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2214860417300969
(2018).
18.
Baere, D. D., Bayat, M., Mohanty, S. & Hattel, J. Thermo-fluid-metallurgical mod-
elling of the selective laser melting process chain. Procedia CIRP 74. 10th CIRP
Conference on Photonic Technologies [LANE 2018], 87–91. ISSN: 2212-8271. https:
//www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2212827118308199 (2018).
19.
Bayat, M., Mohanty, S. & Hattel, J. H. A systematic investigation of the effects of
process parameters on heat and fluid flow and metallurgical conditions during laser-
based powder bed fusion of Ti6Al4V alloy. International Journal of Heat and Mass
Transfer 139, 213–230. ISSN: 0017-9310. https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S0017931019300742 (2019).
20.
Gan, Z., Yu, G., He, X. & Li, S. Numerical simulation of thermal behavior and mul-
ticomponent mass transfer in direct laser deposition of Co-base alloy on steel. In-
ternational Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer 104, 28–38. ISSN: 0017-9310. https:
//www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0017931016310377 (2017).
21.
Gan, Z., Liu, H., Li, S., He, X. & Yu, G. Modeling of thermal behavior and mass
transport in multi-layer laser additive manufacturing of Ni-based alloy on cast iron.
International Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer 111, 709–722. ISSN: 0017-9310.
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0017931017301928 (2017).
22.
Gan, Z., Yu, G., He, X. & Li, S. Surface-active element transport and its effect on
liquid metal flow in laser-assisted additive manufacturing. International Communi-
cations in Heat and Mass Transfer 86, 206–214. ISSN: 0735-1933. https://www.
sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0735193317301409 (2017).
23.
Kumar, A. & Roy, S. Effect of three-dimensional melt pool convection on process
characteristics during laser cladding. Computational Materials Science 46, 495–506.
ISSN: 0927-0256. https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0927025609001608
(2009).
24.
Zhao, J. et al. Multicomponent multiphase modeling of dissimilar laser cladding pro-
cess with high-speed steel on medium carbon steel. International Journal of Heat
and Mass Transfer 148, 118990. ISSN: 0017-9310. https://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/S001793101930969X (2020).
25.
Chen, Q., Guillemot, G., Gandin, C.-A. & Bellet, M. Numerical modelling of the impact
of energy distribution and Marangoni surface tension on track shape in selective
laser melting of ceramic material. Additive Manufacturing 21, 713–723. ISSN: 2214-
8604. https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2214860417304670 (2018).
26.
Khairallah, S. A. & Anderson, A. Mesoscopic simulation model of selective laser
melting of stainless steel powder. Journal of Materials Processing Technology 214,
2627–2636. ISSN: 0924-0136. https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0924013614002234 (2014).
44
==PAGE:53==
27.
Mesoscopic Simulation Model to Predict Temperature Distribution and Melt Pool
Size During Selective Laser Scanning Volume 1: Additive Manufacturing; Bio and
Sustainable Manufacturing (June 2018), V001T01A043. eprint: https://asmedigitalcollection.
asme . org / MSEC / proceedings - pdf / MSEC2018 / 51357 / V001T01A043 / 2519964 /
v001t01a043-msec2018-6644.pdf. https://doi.org/10.1115/MSEC2018-6644.
28.
Yu, G. et al. On the role of processing parameters in thermal behavior, surface mor-
phology and accuracy during laser 3D printing of aluminum alloy. Journal of Physics
D: Applied Physics 49, 135501. https://dx.doi.org/10.1088/0022-3727/49/13/135501
(Feb. 2016).
29.
Xia, M. et al. Porosity evolution and its thermodynamic mechanism of randomly
packed powder-bed during selective laser melting of Inconel 718 alloy. International
Journal of Machine Tools and Manufacture 116, 96–106. ISSN: 0890-6955. https:
//www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0890695516305387 (2017).
30.
Bayat, M., Mohanty, S. & Hattel, J. H. Multiphysics modelling of lack-of-fusion voids
formation and evolution in IN718 made by multi-track/multi-layer L-PBF. Interna-
tional Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer 139, 95–114. ISSN: 0017-9310. https:
//www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0017931018351020 (2019).
31.
Tan, J. H. K., Sing, S. L. & Yeong, W. Y. Microstructure modelling for metallic additive
manufacturing: a review. Virtual and Physical Prototyping 15, 87–105. eprint: https:
//doi.org/10.1080/17452759.2019.1677345. https://doi.org/10.1080/17452759.2019.
1677345 (2020).
32.
Farzadi, A., Do-Quang, M., Serajzadeh, S., Kokabi, A. H. & Amberg, G. Phase-
field simulation of weld solidification microstructure in an Al–Cu alloy. Modelling and
Simulation in Materials Science and Engineering 16, 065005. https://dx.doi.org/10.
1088/0965-0393/16/6/065005 (Aug. 2008).
33.
Gong, X. & Chou, K. Phase-Field Modeling of Microstructure Evolution in Electron
Beam Additive Manufacturing. JOM 67, 1176–1182 (May 2015).
34.
Fallah, V., Amoorezaei, M., Provatas, N., Corbin, S. & Khajepour, A. Phase-field
simulation of solidification morphology in laser powder deposition of Ti–Nb alloys.
Acta Materialia 60, 1633–1646 (Feb. 2012).
35.
Radhakrishnan, B. et al. Phase Field Simulations of Microstructure Evolution in
IN718 using a Surrogate Ni–Fe–Nb Alloy during Laser Powder Bed Fusion. Met-
als 9, 14 (Dec. 2018).
36.
Rodgers, T. M., Madison, J. D. & Tikare, V. Simulation of metal additive manufac-
turing microstructures using kinetic Monte Carlo. Computational Materials Science
135, 78–89. ISSN: 0927-0256. https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0927025617301751 (2017).
37.
Mishra, S. & Debroy, T. Measurements and Monte Carlo simulation of grain growth
in the heat-affected zone of Ti–6Al–4V welds. Acta Materialia 52, 1183 (Feb. 2004).
38.
Zinoviev, A., Zinovieva, O., Ploshikhin, V., Romanova, V. & Balokhonov, R. Evo-
lution of grain structure during laser additive manufacturing. Simulation by a cellu-
lar automata method. Materials & Design 106, 321–329. ISSN: 0264-1275. https:
//www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0264127516307481 (2016).
39.
Koepf, J. et al. Numerical microstructure prediction by a coupled finite element cel-
lular automaton model for selective electron beam melting. Computational Materials
Science 162, 148–155 (Mar. 2019).
40.
Zhu, M. F., Lee, S. Y. & Hong, C.-P. Modified cellular automaton model for the pre-
diction of dendritic growth with melt convection. Physical review. E, Statistical, non-
linear, and soft matter physics 69 6 Pt 1, 061610 (2004).
45
==PAGE:54==
41.
Flow Science, Inc. FLOW-3D AM - Additive Manufacturing Simulation Software https:
//www.flow3d.com/products/flow3d-am/. Accessed: 2023-06-15. 2023.
42.
Bayat, M. et al. On the role of the powder stream on the heat and fluid flow condi-
tions during Directed Energy Deposition of maraging steel—Multiphysics modeling
and experimental validation. Additive Manufacturing 43, 102021. ISSN: 2214-8604.
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S221486042100186X (2021).
43.
Bayat, M. et al. Holistic computational design within additive manufacturing through
topology optimization combined with multiphysics multi-scale materials and process
modelling. Progress in Materials Science 138, 101129. ISSN: 0079-6425. https://
www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0079642523000610 (2023).
44.
Zhang, Y., Matthews, S., Tran, A. & Hyland, M. Effects of interfacial heat trans-
fer, surface tension and contact angle on the formation of plasma-sprayed droplets
through simulation study. Surface and Coatings Technology 307, 807–816. ISSN:
0257-8972. https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0257897216309501
(2016).
45.
Stefanescu, D. M. Science and Engineering of Casting Solidification ISBN: 978-3-
319-15693-4. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-15693-4 (Springer, 2015).
46.
Tsai, D.-c. & Hwang, W.-S. A Three Dimensional Cellular Automaton Model for
the Prediction of Solidification Morphologies of Brass Alloy by Horizontal Contin-
uous Casting and Its Experimental Verification. Materials Transactions 52, 787–794
(2011).
47.
Zinovieva, O., Zinoviev, A., Ploshikhin, V., Romanova, V. & Balokhonov, R. A solu-
tion to the problem of the mesh anisotropy in cellular automata simulations of grain
growth. Computational Materials Science 108, 168–176. ISSN: 0927-0256. https:
//www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0927025615003857 (2015).
48.
Rapp, B. E. in Microfluidics: Modelling, Mechanics and Mathematics (ed Rapp, B. E.)
421–444 (Elsevier, Oxford, 2017). ISBN: 978-1-4557-3141-1. https://www.sciencedirect.
com/science/article/pii/B9781455731411500204.
49.
S eta, B. et al. Transitions between nonlinear regimes in melting and liquid bridges
in microgravity. International Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer 193, 122984. ISSN:
0017-9310. https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0017931022004574
(2022).
50.
Bayat, M., Mohanty, S. & Hattel, J. Thermo-fluid-metallurgical modelling of laser-
based powder bed fusion process (Oct. 2018).
51.
Voller, V. & Prakash, C. A fixed grid numerical modelling methodology for convection-
diffusion mushy region phase-change problems. International Journal of Heat and
Mass Transfer 30, 1709–1719. ISSN: 0017-9310. https://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/0017931087903176 (1987).
52.
Marek, M. Grid anisotropy reduction for simulation of growth processes with cellular
automaton. Physica D: Nonlinear Phenomena 253, 73–84. ISSN: 0167-2789. https:
//www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0167278913000845 (2013).
53.
Liu, Z., Ouyang, J., Zhou, W. & Wang, X. Numerical simulation of the polymer crys-
tallization during cooling stage by using level set method. Computational Materials
Science 97, 245–253. ISSN: 0927-0256. https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S0927025614007125 (2015).
54.
Yang, B. et al. Numerical prediction of phase-change heat conduction of injection-
molded high density polyethylene thick-walled parts via the enthalpy transforming
model with mushy zone. Polymer Engineering & Science 48, 1707–1717. eprint:
https://4spepublications.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1002/pen.21076. https:
//4spepublications.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/pen.21076 (2008).
46
==PAGE:55==
55.
Jiang, Z. et al. Grain refinement and laser energy distribution during laser oscillating
welding of Invar alloy. Materials & Design 186, 108195 (Nov. 2019).
47
==PAGE:56==
48
==PAGE:57==
A
Microstructure simulation code
This appendix is where I have inserted the major code used for this project. The code
can be a bit messy and redundant at some points. However, I think it’s still important
to include for a complete understanding of the implementation if required. The code is
written in Python 3.10.9 using jupyter notebooks to make testing easier.
49
==PAGE:58==
1
from __future__ import print_function
2
from ipywidgets import interact , interactive , fixed, interact_manual
3
from tqdm import tqdm
4
from tqdm import trange
5
from time import sleep
6
import os
7
import sys
8
9
import numpy as np
10
import scipy.sparse as sps
11
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
12
import scipy
13
from scipy.interpolate import RegularGridInterpolator as rgi
14
from numba import jit,prange
A.1
Coding the sim
1
def genColors(size,n,ntypes=None):
2
if ntypes is None:
3
ntypes = n
4
Colors = np.zeros(size,dtype='int')
5
6
poss = np.random.randint(0,size ,(n,2))
7
8
for i,pos in enumerate(poss):
9
Colors[pos[0],pos[1]] = i%ntypes +1
10
11
for i in range(Colors.shape[0]):
12
for j in range(Colors.shape[1]):
13
x = poss[:,0]-i
14
y = poss[:,1]-j
15
Colors[i,j] = np.argmin(x**2+y**2)%ntypes+1
16
return Colors
1
def genState(size,n=1,ntypes = None,center = False,r=0):
2
3
if center:
4
State = np.zeros(size,dtype='int')
5
pos = (size[0]//2,size[1]//2)
6
if not r:
7
State[pos[0],pos[1]] = -1
8
else:
9
State[ np.maximum(pos[0]-r,0):np.minimum(pos[0]+r+1,size[0]),
10
np.maximum(pos[1]-r,0):np.minimum(pos[1]+r+1,size[1])] = 1
11
findInterface(State)
12
C = np.zeros(size)
13
C[State >0] = 1
14
return C,State
15
16
if not ntypes:
17
ntypes = n
18
19
State = np.zeros(size,dtype='int')
20
21
poss = np.random.randint(0,size ,(n,len(size)))
22
if not r:
23
for i,pos in enumerate(poss):
50
==PAGE:59==
24
State[pos[0],pos[1]] = -(i%ntypes +1)
25
if r:
26
for i,pos in enumerate(poss):
27
28
State[ np.maximum(pos[0]-r,0):np.minimum(pos[0]+r+1,size[0]),
29
np.maximum(pos[1]-r,0):np.minimum(pos[1]+r+1,size[1])] = (i%
ntypes +1)
30
findInterface(State)
31
32
C = np.zeros(size)
33
C[State >0] = 1
34
35
36
return C,State
A.1.1
Isotropic growth
1
@jit(nopython=True,parallel=True,fastmath=True)
2
def findInterface(State:np.ndarray ,poss:np.ndarray=None):
3
4
State2 = np.zeros((State.shape[0]+2,State.shape[1]+2))
5
State2[1:-1,1:-1] = State
6
State3 = State2.copy()
7
8
if poss is not None:
9
for idx in prange(len(poss)):
10
pos = poss[idx]
11
Neigh = State2[pos[0]:pos[0] + 3, pos[1]:pos[1] + 3]
12
for xn in range(3):
13
for yn in range(3):
14
if Neigh[xn,yn] == 0:
15
Neigh[xn,yn] = -State2[pos[0] + 1, pos[1] + 1]
16
State3[pos[0]:pos[0] + 3, pos[1]:pos[1] + 3] = Neigh
17
18
else:
19
20
for x in prange(State.shape[0]):
21
for y in prange(State.shape[1]):
22
if State2[x+1,y+1]>0:
23
Neigh = State2[x:x + 3, y:y + 3]
24
for xn in range(3):
25
for yn in range(3):
26
if Neigh[xn,yn] == 0:
27
Neigh[xn,yn] = -State2[x + 1, y + 1]
28
State3[x:x + 3, y:y + 3] = Neigh
29
State[:, :] = State3[1:-1, 1:-1]
30
# State[:, :] = State2[1:-1, 1:-1]
31
return
1
@jit(nopython=True,parallel=True)
2
def redistribute(C:np.ndarray ,State:np.ndarray ,poss:np.ndarray=None):
3
4
C2 = np.zeros((C.shape[0]+2,C.shape[1]+2))
5
C2[1:-1,1:-1] = C.copy()
6
7
State2 = np.zeros((State.shape[0]+2,State.shape[1]+2))
8
State2[1:-1,1:-1] = State.copy()
9
10
if poss is not None:
51
==PAGE:60==
11
for idx in prange(len(poss)):
12
pos = poss[idx]
13
NeighS = State2[pos[0]:pos[0]+3,pos[1]:pos[1]+3]
14
NeighC = C2[pos[0]:pos[0]+3,pos[1]:pos[1]+3]
15
16
Residuals = NeighC[1,1] - 1
17
counts = np.count_nonzero(NeighS <0)
18
if counts:
19
for xn in range(3):
20
for yn in range(3):
21
if NeighS[xn,yn]<0:
22
NeighC[xn,yn] = NeighC[xn,yn] + Residuals/counts
23
C2[pos[0]:pos[0]+3,pos[1]:pos[1]+3] = NeighC
24
25
else :
26
for x in prange(State.shape[0]):
27
for y in prange(State.shape[1]):
28
NeighS = State2[x:x+3,y:y+3]
29
NeighC = C2[x:x+3,y:y+3]
30
31
Residuals = np.maximum(NeighC[1,1] - 1,0)
32
counts = np.count_nonzero(NeighS <0)
33
if counts:
34
for z in range(9):
35
if NeighS[z//3,z%3]<0:
36
NeighC[z//3,z%3] = NeighC[z//3,z%3] + Residuals/
counts
37
38
C2[x:x+3,y:y+3] = NeighC
39
40
State[:,:] = State2[1:-1,1:-1]
41
C[:,:] = C2[1:-1,1:-1]
42
return
1
@jit(nopython=True,parallel=True)
2
def normalize(phi:np.ndarray , State:np.ndarray = None):
3
4
phi2 = np.zeros((phi.shape[0]+2, phi.shape[1]+2))
5
6
phi3 = phi.copy()
7
phi2[1:-1,1:-1] = phi
8
9
if State is None:
10
for i in prange(phi.shape[0]):
11
for j in prange(phi.shape[1]):
12
Neigh = phi2[i:i+3,j:j+3]
13
if Neigh.any():
14
phi3[i,j] = phi2[i+1,j+1]/np.max(Neigh)
15
return phi3
16
17
else:
18
for i in prange(phi.shape[0]):
19
for j in prange(phi.shape[1]):
20
Neigh = phi2[i:i+3,j:j+3]
21
if Neigh.any() and (State[i,j]<0):
22
phi3[i,j] = phi2[i+1,j+1]/np.max(Neigh)
23
return phi3
52
==PAGE:61==
1
def coef(shape):
2
Dx = 1
3
Dy = 1
4
aS = Dy*np.ones(shape)
5
aW = Dx*np.ones(shape)
6
aE = Dx*np.ones(shape)
7
aN = Dy*np.ones(shape)
8
aP = -(aE+aW+aS+aN)
9
return aS,aW,aP,aE,aN
10
11
def Neumann(aS,aW,aP,aE,aN):
12
#West
13
aP[:,0] = aP[:,0] + aW[:,0]
14
aW[:,0] = 0
15
#East
16
aP[:,-1] = aP[:,-1] + aE[:,-1]
17
aE[:,-1] = 0
18
#South
19
aP[0,:] = aP[0,:] + aS[0,:]
20
aS[0,:] = 0
21
#North
22
aP[-1,:] = aP[-1,:] + aN[-1,:]
23
aN[-1,:] = 0
24
return aS,aW,aP,aE,aN
25
26
def Assemble(aS, aW, aP, aE, aN):
27
shape = aS.shape
28
size = np.prod(shape)
29
30
diagP = aP.reshape((size))
31
diagS = aS[1:,:].reshape(size-shape[1])
32
diagW = aW.reshape(size)[1:]
33
diagE = aE.reshape(size)[:-1]
34
diagN = aN[:-1,:].reshape(size-shape[1])
35
36
A = sps.diags([diagP,diagS,diagW,diagE,diagN],
37
[0,-shape[1],-1,1,shape[1]],shape=(size,size),format='csc')
38
return A
39
40
def Diffmat(arr,Dr=0.24,n=3):
41
shape = arr.shape
42
coeffs = Neumann(*coef(shape))
43
D = Assemble(*coeffs)
44
return (sps.eye(np.prod(shape)) + Dr*D ) **n
45
46
def doDiff(State:np.ndarray ,diffmat:sps.csc_matrix):
47
48
State2:np.ndarray = State.flatten()
49
State2[State2 <0] = 0
50
51
phi = diffmat*State2
52
53
phi = phi.reshape(State.shape)
54
55
return phi
Optimal parameters
• K = 3
53
==PAGE:62==
• γ = 1.79
• Dr = 0.24
1
n = 3
2
idealGamma = 1.79
3
Dr= 0.24
4
gamma = 1.764
1
def solveBeta(gamma=idealGamma ,n=n):
2
state = np.zeros((3,3*n))
3
state[:,:n+1] = 1
4
state[:,n+1] = -1
5
phi = doDiff(state,Diffmat(state,Dr=Dr,n=3))
6
phiNorm = normalize(phi,state)
7
return (phiNorm[1,n+1])**(-gamma)
1
beta = solveBeta()
2
print(beta)
1
3.2823941738315927
1
def solveVred(phi,State,beta=beta,gamma=idealGamma):
2
phiNorm = normalize(phi,State)
3
4
vred = np.zeros(phiNorm.shape)
5
where = State <0
6
vred[where] = beta*(phiNorm[where]**gamma)
7
8
return vred
1
def CAStep(C,State,G,phi,vred,redist=False, upperlim = None):
2
3
upperlimflag = False
4
updateflag = 0
5
6
redistLimit = 0.01
7
8
gr = G*vred
9
10
C[State <0] = C[State <0] + gr[State <0]
11
12
if (gr>=redistLimit).any():
13
redist = True
14
15
if upperlim is not None:
16
if (gr[State <0]>upperlim).any():
17
upperlimflag = True
18
return C,State,updateflag ,upperlimflag
19
20
# Checking if any cell is full
21
54
==PAGE:63==
22
Cgreater = C>=1
23
Cgreater[State >0] = 0
24
25
where = None
26
27
while Cgreater.any():
28
29
where = np.array(np.where((C>=1) & (State <0))).T
30
# Set the state to new
31
32
State[Cgreater] = -State[Cgreater]
33
34
# Updating the states
35
36
findInterface(State,poss=where)
37
38
if redist:
39
# Redistributing
40
whereRedist = np.array(np.where(C>1)).T
41
redistribute(C,State)
42
43
C[State >0] = 1
44
45
# Updating the phi, vred and G
46
47
updateflag = 1
48
49
# Setting the boundary conditions back
50
Cgreater = C>=1
51
Cgreater[State >0] = 0
52
53
return C,State,updateflag ,upperlimflag
1
def runCA(size,G,gamma,ngrains = None,n=None,r=1,nevery=1,upperlim = None):
2
3
beta = solveBeta(gamma = gamma)
4
if ngrains:
5
C,State = genState(size,n=ngrains)
6
else:
7
C,State = genState(size,center=True)
8
9
# Initial phi and vred for the first step
10
phi = np.ones(State.shape)
11
vred = np.ones(State.shape)
12
13
# Generate the diffusion matrix
14
diffmat = Diffmat(State,Dr=0.24,n=3)
15
16
if n:
17
Clist = np.zeros((n,*size))
18
Statelist = np.zeros((n,*size))
19
20
for i in range(n):
21
C,State,update,upperlimflag = CAStep(C,State,G,phi,vred,upperlim =
upperlim)
22
if upperlimflag:
23
return Clist,Statelist ,upperlimflag
24
if update:
25
phi = doDiff(State,diffmat)
26
vred = solveVred(phi,State,beta,gamma)
55
==PAGE:64==
27
Clist[i] = C
28
Statelist[i] = State
29
else:
30
Clist = [C.copy()]
31
Statelist = [State.copy()]
32
i=0
33
while (C<1).any():
34
C,State,update,upperlimflag = CAStep(C,State,G,phi,vred,upperlim =
upperlim)
35
if upperlimflag:
36
return Clist,Statelist ,upperlimflag
37
if update:
38
phi = doDiff(State,diffmat)
39
vred = solveVred(phi,State,beta,gamma)
40
if i%nevery == 0:
41
Clist.append(C.copy())
42
Statelist.append(State.copy())
43
i+=1
44
return Clist,Statelist ,upperlimflag
1
def mu(phi,mu0,eps0,m,thetas,State):
2
3
angles = np.zeros(phi.shape)
4
mu = np.zeros(phi.shape)
5
6
where = State <0
7
# Find angle between gradient and x axis
8
angles[where] = np.arctan2(*np.gradient(phi,))[where]
9
10
# Find mu
11
mu[where] = mu0*(1+eps0*np.cos(m*(angles[where]-thetas[where])) )
12
13
return mu
1
def AnalRN(TN,Tliq=1733):
2
delT = np.clip(Tliq - TN,a_min=0,a_max=None)
3
4
Dl = 1.8E-9
5
ml = -2
6
k = 0.9
7
Gamma = 3E-7
8
C0 = 17
9
10
RN = Dl/(5.51*np.pi**2 *(-ml*(1-k))**1.5 * Gamma)* delT**2.5/C0**1.5
11
12
# m/s to cm/s
13
return RN*100
14
15
nmax = 1E9 # 1/m3
16
17
def AnalNdDelT(Temp,nmax,DelTmean ,DelTSig ,Tliq = 1733):
18
19
# DelT = Tliq -np.mean(Temp[Temp<Tliq])
20
DelT = np.clip(Tliq - Temp,a_min=0,a_max=None)
21
return nmax/(DelTSig*np.sqrt(2*np.pi))*np.exp(-(DelT-DelTmean)**2/(2*
DelTSig**2))
56
==PAGE:65==
1
def runGrowthSim(dx,State,time,G,upperlim = 0.1,every=True,meltplace = None):
2
3
time_sim = [time[0]]
4
5
C = np.zeros(State.shape)
6
C[State >0] = 1
7
8
phi = np.ones(State.shape)
9
vred = np.ones(State.shape)
10
diffmat = Diffmat(State,Dr=0.24,n=3)
11
12
Statelist = [State.copy()]
13
Clist = [C.copy()]
14
15
for i in trange(len(time)-1):
16
17
if meltplace is not None:
18
State[meltplace[i] != 0] = 0
19
C[meltplace[i] != 0] = 0
20
findInterface(State)
21
22
while time_sim[-1]<time[i+1]:
23
24
dtsim = time[i+1]-time_sim[-1]
25
26
# Linear interpolation of G
27
Gstep =
G[i]*(1- (time_sim[-1] - time[i])/(time[i+1]-time[i]) ) +
G[i+1]*(1- (time[i+1] - time_sim[-1])/(time[i+1]-time[i]))
28
29
# Trial step
30
Cnew,Statenew ,updateflag ,upperlimflag = CAStep(C.copy(),
31
State.copy(),
32
Gstep*dtsim/dx,
33
phi,
34
vred,
35
upperlim=upperlim
36
)
37
38
if upperlimflag:
39
# Define a dt to satisfy the limit / 2
40
dtsim = (upperlim * dx) / (2*np.max( (Gstep * vred)[State <0] )
)
41
42
# Step
43
Cnew,Statenew ,updateflag ,upperlimflag = CAStep(C.copy(),
44
State.copy(),
45
Gstep*dtsim/dx,
46
phi,
47
vred,
48
upperlim=upperlim
49
)
50
51
# Update
52
C = Cnew
53
State = Statenew
54
55
if updateflag:
56
phi = doDiff(State,diffmat)
57
vred = solveVred(phi,State,beta,gamma)
58
59
if every:
57
==PAGE:66==
60
Clist.append(C.copy())
61
Statelist.append(State.copy())
62
63
time_sim.append(time_sim[-1]+dtsim)
64
65
if not every:
66
Clist.append(C.copy())
67
Statelist.append(State.copy())
68
return time_sim ,Statelist ,Clist
A.1.2
Test cases for illustration
Show without phi
1
size = (100,100)
2
G = 0.3
3
4
Clist,Statelist ,upperlimflag = runCA(size=size, G=G, gamma=0,nevery=1)
5
Clistcirc ,Statelistcirc ,upperlimflag= runCA(size=size, G=G, gamma=1.79,nevery
=1)
1
@interact(x = (0,len(Clist)-1),y = (0,len(Clistcirc)-1))
2
def plot(x,y):
3
fig,axs = plt.subplots(2)
4
fig.set_figwidth(18)
5
fig.set_figheight(10)
6
a=axs[0].imshow(Clist[x],origin='lower',vmin=0)
7
fig.colorbar(a)
8
b=axs[1].imshow(Clistcirc[y],origin='lower',vmin=0,vmax=1)
9
fig.colorbar(b)
Do parametric study for circularity
1
def circularity(Clist,after = 1):
2
3
center = np.array(Clist.shape[1:],dtype='int')/2
4
5
step = int(len(Clist)*after -1)
6
C = Clist[step]
7
indices = np.indices(C.shape)
8
9
dist = indices - center[:,np.newaxis ,np.newaxis]
10
distances = np.sqrt( np.sum( dist**2 ,axis = 0))
11
12
cond = (C>0) & (C<1)
13
R = distances[cond] + C[cond]-0.5
14
if len(R) and np.mean(R):
15
return (np.max(R)-np.min(R))/np.mean(R)
16
else :
17
return 0
1
def doCircAnal(gamma):
2
Clist,_,_ = runCA(n=5000,size = (201,201), G = 0.01,gamma= gamma)
3
return circularity(Clist)
58
==PAGE:67==
1
n = 20
2
gammas = np.linspace(0,3,n)
3
cerrs = np.zeros(n)
4
for i in tqdm(range(n)):
5
cerrs[i] = doCircAnal(gammas[i])
1
          2
100%|| 20/20 [03:50<00:00, 11.55s/it]
1
ranges = [(gammas[np.argmin(cerrs)-1] + gammas[np.argmin(cerrs)])/2, (gammas[
np.argmin(cerrs)+1] + gammas[np.argmin(cerrs)])/2]
1
plt.plot(gammas,cerrs,'.-')
2
plt.ylabel('$c_{err}$')
3
plt.xlabel('$\gamma$')
1
n=10
2
gammas = np.linspace(ranges[0],ranges[1],n)
3
cerrs = np.zeros(n)
4
for i in tqdm(range(n)):
5
cerrs[i] = doCircAnal(gammas[i])
1
          2
100%|| 10/10 [01:56<00:00, 11.60s/it]
1
plt.plot(gammas,cerrs,'.-')
2
plt.ylabel('$c_{err}$')
3
plt.xlabel('$\gamma$')
1
ranges = [(gammas[np.argmin(cerrs)-1] + gammas[np.argmin(cerrs)])/2, (gammas[
np.argmin(cerrs)+1] + gammas[np.argmin(cerrs)])/2]
2
ranges
1
[1.7543859649122806, 1.7719298245614035]
1
n=10
2
gammas = np.linspace(ranges[0],ranges[1],n)
3
cerrs = np.zeros(n)
4
for i in tqdm(range(n)):
5
cerrs[i] = doCircAnal(gammas[i])
59
==PAGE:68==
1
          2
100%|| 10/10 [01:53<00:00, 11.36s/it]
1
plt.plot(gammas,cerrs,'.-')
2
plt.ylabel('$c_{err}$')
3
plt.xlabel('$\gamma$')
1
gamma = gammas[np.argmin(cerrs)]
2
print(gamma)
1
1.7641325536062378
1
np.min(cerrs)
1
0.03784237301775173
γ value
1
gamma = 1.7641325536062378
Dendritic growth
1
m = 5
2
eps = 0.2
3
nevery = 10
4
5
ngrains = 20
6
C,State = genState((300,300),n=ngrains ,r=3)
7
# C,State = genState((200,200),center=True)
8
9
# deltaT = np.linspace(1,2,State.shape[0])/1E2
10
deltaT = 1E-2
11
12
graintheta = np.random.uniform(0,2*np.pi,ngrains)
13
graintheta[0] = 0
14
# graintheta = np.ones(ngrains)*np.pi/180*22.5
15
print(graintheta/np.pi*180)
16
thetas = np.zeros(State.shape)
17
thetas[State <0] = graintheta[-State[State <0]-1]
18
19
beta = solveBeta(gamma = gamma)
20
21
# Initial phi and vred for the first step
22
phi = np.ones(State.shape)
23
vred = np.ones(State.shape)
24
25
G = mu(phi,mu0=1,eps0=0,m=0,thetas=thetas ,State=State)*deltaT
26
60
==PAGE:69==
27
# Generate the diffusion matrix
28
diffmat = Diffmat(State,Dr=0.24,n=3)
29
30
31
Clist = [C.copy()]
32
Statelist = [State.copy()]
33
Glist = [phi.copy()]
34
i=0
35
36
while (C<1).any():
37
C,State,update,upperlimflag = CAStep(C,State,G,phi,vred,redist=True)
38
if update:
39
phi = doDiff(State,diffmat)
40
vred = solveVred(phi,State,beta,gamma)
41
42
thetas[:,:] = 0
43
thetas[State <0] = graintheta[-State[State <0]-1]
44
G = mu(phi,mu0=1,eps0=eps,m=m,thetas=thetas ,State=State)*deltaT
45
46
if i%nevery == 0:
47
Clist.append(C.copy())
48
Statelist.append(State.copy())
49
Glist.append(phi.copy())
50
i+=1
51
Clist.append(C.copy())
52
Statelist.append(State.copy())
53
Glist.append(phi.copy())
1
[
0.
271.13204396 112.68648117
46.40181553 320.81275303
2
334.30674442 137.65287966 340.49584548 187.31389595 241.71835013
3
82.56139549 301.04972165 251.16092403 294.87717112
72.52051395
4
200.70227972 236.64411699 146.87162591
21.62004827 134.66959007]
1
@interact(x = (0,len(Clist)-1))
2
def plot(x):
3
# Set colorbars to 0-1
4
fig,axs = plt.subplots(2)
5
fig.set_figwidth(18)
6
fig.set_figheight(15)
7
a=axs[0].imshow(Clist[x],origin='lower',vmin=0,vmax=1)
8
fig.colorbar(a)
9
b=axs[1].imshow(Statelist[x],origin='lower')
10
fig.colorbar(b)
11
# c=axs[2].imshow(Glist[x],origin='lower')
12
# fig.colorbar(c)
A.2
Validation
A.2.1
Polymer Recrystallization
1
def GrowthT(T):
2
N0 = 17.4E6
3
v0 = 2.1E4
4
UbyR = 755
5
Kg = 534858
6
T0m = 467
61
==PAGE:70==
7
phi = 0.155
8
Tg = 266
9
rho = 900
10
cp = 2.14E3
11
kp = 0.193
12
return v0*np.exp(-(UbyR)/(T-Tg+30))*np.exp(-Kg/(T*(T0m-T)))
13
14
def Nucleation(T):
15
N0 = 17.4E6
16
phi = 0.155
17
v0 = 2.1E4
18
UbyR = 755
19
Kg = 534858
20
T0m = 467
21
Tg = 266
22
rho = 900
23
cp = 2.14E3
24
kp = 0.193
25
return 1.458*(N0*np.exp(phi*(T0m-T)))**(2/3)
1
def numAlpha(imagelist):
2
alphas = np.zeros(len(imagelist))
3
alphas = np.sum(Clist,axis=tuple(range(1,len(Clist.shape))))/np.product(
Clist.shape[1:])
4
return alphas
5
6
def analAlpha(T):
7
t = np.linspace(0,6,600)
8
alphas = 1-np.exp(-np.pi*Nucleation(T)*(GrowthT(T)**2)*(t**2))
9
return t,alphas
1
def runCAAlpha(size,G,gamma,ngrains = None):
2
alphs = [0]
3
4
beta = solveBeta(gamma = gamma)
5
if ngrains:
6
C,State = genState(size,n=ngrains)
7
else:
8
C,State = genState(size,center=True)
9
10
# Initial phi and vred for the first step
11
phi = np.ones(State.shape)
12
vred = np.ones(State.shape)
13
14
# Generate the diffusion matrix
15
diffmat = Diffmat(State,Dr=0.24,n=3)
16
17
i=0
18
Statelist = []
19
while (C<1).any():
20
C,State,update,upperlimflag = CAStep(C,State,G,phi,vred,redist = True)
21
Statelist.append(State.copy())
22
if update:
23
phi = doDiff(State,diffmat)
24
vred = solveVred(phi,State,beta,gamma)
25
26
alphs.append(np.sum(C)/np.product(C.shape))
27
i+=1
62
==PAGE:71==
28
29
return alphs,Statelist
1
L = 2E-4
2
area = L**2
3
4
# Ts = np.array([340,345,350,355,360])
5
Ts = np.array([340])
1
domainsize = (600,600)
2
dx = L/domainsize[0]
3
dt = 4/1E5
4
numAlphas = []
5
analAlphas = []
6
7
for i,T in enumerate(tqdm(Ts)):
8
nseeds = int(Nucleation(T)*area)
9
Growthrate = GrowthT(T)*dt/dx
10
11
numalph ,Statelist = runCAAlpha(domainsize , G=Growthrate , gamma=gamma,
ngrains=nseeds)
12
tnum = np.arange(len(numalph))*dt
13
14
numAlphas.append((tnum,numalph))
15
tanal,analaplh = analAlpha(T)
16
analAlphas.append((tanal,analaplh))
1
for i in range(len(numAlphas)):
2
plt.plot(numAlphas[i][0], numAlphas[i][1],
3
label='Anal Temp = {}'.format(Ts[i]))
4
plt.plot(analAlphas[i][0], analAlphas[i][1],'--',
5
label='Sim Temp = {}'.format(Ts[i]))
6
plt.legend()
7
plt.xlabel('time')
8
plt.ylabel('$\\alpha$')
9
plt.xlim(0,0.4)
10
# plt.savefig('Polymer Recryst.png',bbox_inches='tight')
1
(0.0, 0.4)
A.2.2
Do a test with different grain orientations
1
m = 4
2
eps = 0.2
3
nevery = 10
4
5
ngrains = 20
6
C,State = genState((200,200),n=ngrains)
7
State[:,:] = 0
8
9
for i in range(ngrains):
10
y = np.random.randint(0,200,1)
63
==PAGE:72==
11
State[y,5] = -i-1
12
# C,State = genState((200,200),center=True)
13
14
# deltaT = np.linspace(1,2,State.shape[0])/1E2
15
deltaT = 5E-3
16
17
graintheta = np.random.uniform(0,2*np.pi,ngrains)
18
# graintheta = np.ones(ngrains)*np.pi/180*22.5
19
print(graintheta/np.pi*180)
20
thetas = np.zeros(State.shape)
21
thetas[State <0] = graintheta[-State[State <0]-1]
22
23
beta = solveBeta(gamma = gamma)
24
25
# Initial phi and vred for the first step
26
phi = np.ones(State.shape)
27
vred = np.ones(State.shape)
28
29
G = mu(phi,mu0=1,eps0=0,m=0,thetas=thetas ,State=State)*deltaT
30
31
# Generate the diffusion matrix
32
diffmat = Diffmat(State,Dr=0.24,n=3)
33
34
35
Clist = [C.copy()]
36
Statelist = [State.copy()]
37
Glist = [phi.copy()]
38
i=0
39
bar = tqdm(total=100)
40
while (C<1).any():
41
C,State,update = CAStep(C,State,G,phi,vred)
42
if update:
43
phi = doDiff(State,diffmat)
44
vred = solveVred(phi,State,beta,gamma)
45
46
thetas[:,:] = 0
47
thetas[State <0] = graintheta[-State[State <0]-1]
48
G = mu(phi,mu0=1,eps0=eps,m=m,thetas=thetas ,State=State)*deltaT
49
50
if i%nevery == 0:
51
Clist.append(C.copy())
52
Statelist.append(State.copy())
53
Glist.append(phi.copy())
54
value = np.sum(C)/np.product(C.shape)
55
bar.update(value*100)
56
i+=1
57
bar.close()
58
Clist.append(C.copy())
59
Statelist.append(State.copy())
60
Glist.append(phi.copy())
1
[324.71638621 122.39096655 294.98063448
24.42554696 173.48734082
2
69.51871198 190.3307617
182.86328547 166.52081852 300.0441771
3
65.69661952
65.38502314 350.64845507 200.15930988
67.18489072
4
124.78103202 316.25289598 266.56385469
63.54640875 227.25544199]
5
6
7
2364086.312719619it [02:41, 14609.93it/s]
64
==PAGE:73==
1
np.cos( 4 * graintheta)
1
array([-0.77862064, -0.63693794, -0.17231659, -0.13402403,
0.89840627,
2
0.14046661,
0.75099859,
0.98008743,
0.58896046, -0.50266856,
3
-0.12556737, -0.14711731,
0.79434911,
0.1626847 , -0.021997
,
4
-0.75612912, -0.99617706,
0.97136454, -0.27252148, -0.98762884])
1
[np.count_nonzero(Statelist[-1][:,-1]==_) for _ in range(1,ngrains+1)]
1
[0, 0, 0, 0, 69, 0, 84, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 31, 0, 16, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0]
1
@interact(x = (0,len(Clist)-1))
2
def plot(x):
3
# Set colorbars to 0-1
4
fig,axs = plt.subplots(2)
5
fig.set_figwidth(18)
6
fig.set_figheight(15)
7
a=axs[0].imshow(Clist[x],origin='lower',vmin=0,vmax=1)
8
fig.colorbar(a)
9
b=axs[1].imshow(Statelist[x],origin='lower')
10
fig.colorbar(b)
11
# c=axs[2].imshow(Glist[x],origin='lower')
12
# fig.colorbar(c)
A.2.3
Do a casting with a gaussian growth field
1
# Initialize the field
2
3
size = (200,300)
4
5
State= np.zeros(size)
6
C = np.zeros(size)
7
8
# Initialize random grains on the edges
9
10
n = 10
# Number of grains on each side
11
xs = np.random.randint(0,size[1],(2*n))
12
ys = np.random.randint(0,size[0],(2*n))
13
14
for i in range(4*n):
15
if i//n == 0:
16
State[ys[i],0] = i+1
17
if i//n == 1:
18
State[ys[i],-1] = i+1
19
if i//n == 2:
20
State[0,xs[i-2*n]] = i+1
21
if i//n == 3:
22
State[-1,xs[i-2*n]] = i+1
23
24
findInterface(State)
25
C[State >0] = 1
65
==PAGE:74==
1
mesh = np.meshgrid(np.arange(size[0]),np.arange(size[1]),indexing='ij')
2
3
Gauss = np.exp(-((mesh[0]-size[0]/2)**2/(size[0]**2)+(mesh[1]-size[1]/2)**2/(
size[1]**2))*10)
4
Gauss.min()
5
6
# Generate growth rate
7
8
G0 = 1E-3
9
Scale = 3E-3
10
G = G0 + (1-Gauss)*Scale
1
beta = solveBeta(gamma = gamma)
2
3
# Initial phi and vred for the first step
4
phi = np.ones(State.shape)
5
vred = np.ones(State.shape)
6
7
# Generate the diffusion matrix
8
diffmat = Diffmat(State,Dr=0.24,n=3)
9
10
Clist = [C.copy()]
11
Statelist = [State.copy()]
12
i=0
13
while (C<1).any():
14
C,State,update,upperlimflag = CAStep(C,State,G,phi,vred,upperlim=0.1)
15
if upperlimflag:
16
print('Upper limit reached')
17
break
18
if update:
19
phi = doDiff(State,diffmat)
20
vred = solveVred(phi,State,beta,gamma)
21
Clist.append(C.copy())
22
Statelist.append(State.copy())
23
i+=1
24
Clist.append(C.copy())
25
Statelist.append(State.copy())
1
@interact(x = (0,len(Clist)-1))
2
def plot(x):
3
fig,axs = plt.subplots(2)
4
fig.set_figwidth(18)
5
fig.set_figheight(10)
6
a=axs[0].imshow(Clist[x],origin='lower')
7
fig.colorbar(a)
8
b=axs[1].imshow(Statelist[x],origin='lower')
9
fig.colorbar(b)
A.2.4
Casting test with Analytical growth and nucleation
1
def runCasting(size,
2
ngraininit = 0,
3
Tmax=1800,
4
Tmin=300,
5
Tsteps=20_000,
6
Dt=0.25,
66
==PAGE:75==
7
slice_every:int=10,
8
nuclmean=15,
9
nuclsig=5,
10
nuclscale=1/20):
11
12
# Initialize the field
13
14
State= np.zeros(size)
15
C = np.zeros(size)
16
17
# Initialize random grains on the edges
18
19
n = ngraininit
# Number of grains on each side
20
xs = np.random.randint(0,size[1],(2*n))
21
ys = np.random.randint(0,size[0],(2*n))
22
23
for i in range(4*n):
24
if i//n == 0:
25
State[ys[i],0] = i+1
26
if i//n == 1:
27
State[ys[i],-1] = i+1
28
if i//n == 2:
29
State[0,xs[i-2*n]] = i+1
30
if i//n == 3:
31
State[-1,xs[i-2*n]] = i+1
32
33
findInterface(State)
34
C[State >0] = 1
35
36
# Setting diffusion parameters
37
dx = 1E-5
38
mesh = np.meshgrid(np.arange(size[0]),np.arange(size[1]),indexing='ij')
39
40
tf = 10
41
42
# Temperature diffusion and growth rate
43
44
T = np.linspace(Tmax,Tmin,Tsteps+1)
45
t = np.linspace(0,tf,Tsteps+1)
46
47
Temp = np.ones(size)*T[0]
48
49
Tdiffmat = Diffmat(Temp,Dr = Dt,n=1)
50
51
Templist = np.zeros((Tsteps//slice_every+1,*size))
52
53
for i in range(len(t)-1):
54
55
Temp[:,0] = T[i]
56
Temp[:,-1] = T[i]
57
Temp[0,:] = T[i]
58
Temp[-1,:] = T[i]
59
60
Temp = (Tdiffmat@Temp.reshape(-1)).reshape(size)
61
if not i%slice_every:
62
Templist[i//slice_every] = Temp.copy()
63
Templist[-1] = Temp.copy()
64
65
# Calculating nucleation
66
RNlist = AnalRN(Templist)
67
dNdT = AnalNdDelT(Templist ,nmax,nuclmean ,nuclsig)
68
Tliq = 1733
67
==PAGE:76==
69
delT = np.clip(Tliq-Templist[1:],a_min=0,a_max=None) - np.clip(Tliq-
Templist[:-1],a_min=0,a_max=None)
70
dN = dNdT[1:]*delT*dx**2*nuclscale
71
plist = np.random.random(dN.shape)
72
73
print('Starting CA')
74
# Doing CA sim
75
beta = solveBeta(gamma = gamma)
76
77
# Initial phi and vred for the first step
78
phi = np.ones(State.shape)
79
vred = np.ones(State.shape)
80
81
# Generate the diffusion matrix
82
diffmat = Diffmat(State,Dr=0.24,n=3)
83
84
Clist = [C.copy()]
85
Statelist = [State.copy()]
86
i=0
87
for j in range(Tsteps//slice_every):
88
89
G = RNlist[j]/1E3
90
C,State,update,upperlimflag = CAStep(C,State,G,phi,vred,upperlim=None)
91
if upperlimflag:
92
print('Upperlimit reached')
93
return Statelist ,upperlimflag
94
if update:
95
phi = doDiff(State,diffmat)
96
vred = solveVred(phi,State,beta,gamma)
97
Clist.append(C.copy())
98
Statelist.append(State.copy())
99
i+=1
100
101
# Do nucleation
102
whereNucl = np.where((plist[j]<dN[j]) & (State <=0))
103
nNucl = len(whereNucl[0])
104
State[whereNucl] = np.random.randint(1,50,nNucl)
105
findInterface(State)
106
107
108
Clist.append(C.copy())
109
Statelist.append(State.copy())
110
return Statelist ,upperlimflag
1
def runTempDiff(size,Dt,Tmax,Tmin,Tsteps ,slice_every):
2
# Temperature diffusion and growth rate
3
4
T = np.linspace(Tmax,Tmin,Tsteps+1)
5
Temp = np.ones(size)*T[0]
6
7
Tdiffmat = Diffmat(Temp,Dr = Dt,n=1)
8
9
Templist = np.zeros((Tsteps//slice_every ,*size))
10
11
for i in range(Tsteps):
12
13
Temp[:,0] = T[i]
14
Temp[:,-1] = T[i]
15
Temp[0,:] = T[i]
16
Temp[-1,:] = T[i]
68
==PAGE:77==
17
Temp = (Tdiffmat@Temp.reshape(-1)).reshape(size)
18
19
if not i%slice_every:
20
Templist[i//slice_every] = Temp.copy()
21
return np.array(Templist)
1
size = (100,100)
2
State= np.zeros(size)
3
C = np.zeros(size)
4
5
# Initialize random grains on the edges
6
7
n = 10
# Number of grains on each side
8
xs = np.random.randint(0,size[1],(2*n))
9
ys = np.random.randint(0,size[0],(2*n))
10
11
for i in range(4*n):
12
if i//n == 0:
13
State[ys[i],0] = i+1
14
if i//n == 1:
15
State[ys[i],-1] = i+1
16
if i//n == 2:
17
State[0,xs[i-2*n]] = i+1
18
if i//n == 3:
19
State[-1,xs[i-2*n]] = i+1
20
21
findInterface(State)
22
C[State >0] = 1
1
temps = runTempDiff(State.shape ,0.25,1800,300,10_000 ,1)
2
GrowthRate = AnalRN(temps)
1
timelist = np.linspace(0,10,len(GrowthRate))
1
time_sim ,Statelist ,Clist = runGrowthSim(0.1,State,timelist ,GrowthRate ,upperlim
= 0.1,every=False)
1
@interact(x = (0,len(Statelist)-1))
2
def plot(x):
3
print(time_sim[x])
4
fig,axs = plt.subplots(2)
5
fig.set_figwidth(18)
6
fig.set_figheight(10)
7
a=axs[0].imshow(Clist[x],origin='lower')
8
fig.colorbar(a)
9
b=axs[1].imshow(Statelist[x],origin='lower')
10
fig.colorbar(b)
69
==PAGE:78==
A.3
Test with Real Data
A.3.1
Importing, slicing and interpolating
1
# Import mesh data from the meso scale simulation
2
3
fields= [_[:-4] for _ in os.listdir() if '.npy' in _]
4
for _ in fields:
5
exec(_ + " = np.load( '"+_+".npy')")
6
print(fields)
1
['f', 'fs', 'MeshX', 'MeshY', 'MeshZ', 'p', 'time', 'tn', 'singletrackState ']
1
dx = MeshX[1,0,0] - MeshX[0,0,0]
2
dy = MeshY[0,1,0] - MeshY[0,0,0]
3
dz = MeshZ[0,0,1] - MeshZ[0,0,0]
4
print(dx,dy,dz)
1
0.0187500006 0.01869166 0.018000009999999983
A.3.2
Take a slice near the solidification zone
1
yslice = np.shape(MeshY)[1]//2
2
# yslice = np.shape(MeshX)[0]//2
3
# yslice = 0
1
MeshY[0,yslice ,0]
1
0.0
1
@interact(x = (0,len(tn)-1))
2
def plot(x):
3
fig,axs = plt.subplots(1)
4
fig.set_figheight(8)
5
# a = axs.imshow((fs[x,:,yslice ,:]).T,origin='lower')
6
a = axs.imshow((fs[x,yslice ,:,:]).T,origin='lower')
7
fig.colorbar(a)
1
interactive(children=(IntSlider(value=21, description='x', max=42), Output()),
_dom_classes=('widget-interact…'
1
# xmin,xmax = 0, 300
2
# zmin, zmax = 0,25
3
4
xmin, xmax = 35,70
5
zmin, zmax = 0,20
70
==PAGE:79==
A.3.3
Interpolating
1
N_div = 10
2
L = min(dx,dz)/N_div
3
4
# # Slice along Y
5
# x = np.arange(MeshX[xmin ,0,0],MeshX[xmax ,0,0],L)
6
7
# Slice along X
8
x = np.arange(MeshY[0,xmin,0],MeshY[0,xmax ,0],L)
9
z = np.arange(MeshZ[0,0,zmin],MeshZ[0,0,zmax],L)
1
T,X,Z = np.meshgrid(time,x,z,indexing='ij')
1
# Interpolating linearly
2
3
# # Y axis
4
# TN = scipy.interpolate.interpn((time,MeshX[:,0,0],MeshZ[0,0,:]),tn[:,:,
yslice ,:],(T,X,Z),method='linear')
5
# FS = scipy.interpolate.interpn((time,MeshX[:,0,0],MeshZ[0,0,:]),fs[:,:,
yslice ,:],(T,X,Z),method='nearest')
6
# FN = scipy.interpolate.interpn((time,MeshX[:,0,0],MeshZ[0,0,:]),f[:,:,yslice
,:],(T,X,Z),method='nearest')
7
8
# X axis
9
TN = scipy.interpolate.interpn((time,MeshY[0,:,0],MeshZ[0,0,:]),tn[:,yslice
,:,:],(T,X,Z),method='linear')
10
FS = scipy.interpolate.interpn((time,MeshY[0,:,0],MeshZ[0,0,:]),fs[:,yslice
,:,:],(T,X,Z),method='nearest')
11
FN = scipy.interpolate.interpn((time,MeshY[0,:,0],MeshZ[0,0,:]),f[:,yslice
,:,:],(T,X,Z),method='nearest')
A.3.4
Obtaining Growth Velocities
Solidus curve
1
Tdot = np.gradient(TN,time,axis = 0)
2
gradX = np.gradient(TN,x,axis=1)
3
gradZ = np.gradient(TN,z,axis=2)
4
gradX[np.isclose(FN,0)] = 0
5
gradZ[np.isclose(FN,0)] = 0
1
grad = np.sqrt(gradX**2+gradZ**2)
2
RN = np.zeros(TN.shape)
3
RN[np.invert(np.isclose(grad ,0))] = -Tdot[np.invert(np.isclose(grad ,0))]/grad[
np.invert(np.isclose(grad ,0))]
4
RN[RN<0] = 0
# Growth Velocity positive
1
# More Filters on RN
2
3
RN[np.isclose(FS,1)] = 0
71
==PAGE:80==
1
@interact(x = (0,len(RN[:,0,0])-1))
2
def plot(x):
3
fig,axs = plt.subplots(2)
4
fig.set_figheight(8)
5
a = axs[0].imshow((RN[x]).T,origin='lower')
6
fig.colorbar(a)
7
b = axs[1].imshow(FS[x].T,origin='lower')
8
fig.colorbar(b)
9
print(np.mean(RN[x][RN[x]>0]))
Explicit formula for 316-L steel
1
RN_anal = AnalRN(TN)
2
RN_anal[FN<0.9] = 0
# Only in metal
1
@interact(x = (0,len(RN_anal[:,0,0])-1))
2
def plot(x):
3
fig,axs = plt.subplots(3)
4
fig.set_figheight(8)
5
a = axs[0].imshow((RN_anal[x]>0).T,origin='lower')
6
fig.colorbar(a)
7
b = axs[1].imshow(((FS[x]<1)&(RN_anal[x]>0)).T,origin='lower')
8
fig.colorbar(b)
9
b = axs[2].imshow((FS[x]).T,origin='lower')
10
fig.colorbar(b)
11
print(np.mean(RN_anal[x][RN_anal[x]>0]))
A.3.5
Initialize the State mesh
1
State = genColors(X.shape[1:], n = 20000,ntypes=48)
1
plt.imshow(State)
1
<matplotlib.image.AxesImage at 0x26a0bd3ce80 >
1
np.sqrt(np.multiply(*X.shape[1:])/20000) * L
1
0.003434183032979404
1
C = np.zeros(State.shape,dtype='float')
2
C[State >0] = 1
72
==PAGE:81==
A.3.6
Run the algorthm
New solution
1
meltplace = (TN>1733) | (FN<0.9)
2
3
time_sim , Statelist ,Clist = runGrowthSim(L,State,time,RN_anal ,upperlim = 0.1,
every=False,meltplace=meltplace)
Results
1
@interact(x = (0,len(Statelist)-1))
2
def plot(x):
3
print(time[x])
4
fig,axs = plt.subplots(1)
5
# fig.set_figheight(15)
6
fig.set_figwidth(15)
7
a = axs.imshow((Statelist[x]).T ,origin='lower',vmin=0)
8
fig.colorbar(a)
9
# b = axs[1].imshow(FS[x+startstep].T,origin='lower')
73
==PAGE:82==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Lyngby, Building 425
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
https://construct.dtu.dk/
