==PAGE:1==
DTU Wind
Advanced modelling of offshore energy hubs 
for real-time demonstrations
Dávid Martini
DTU Wind-M-0658
June 2023
==PAGE:2==
DTU Wind-M-0658 
June 2023
Project period: 
January - June 2023
ECTS: 30
Education: Master of Science
Supervisor(s):
Hjörtur Jóhannsson
Brynjar Sævarsson
DTU Wind and Energy Systems
Remarks:
This report is submitted as partial 
fulfillment of the requirements for 
graduation in the above education at the 
Technical University of Denmark.
Technical University of Denmark 
Department of Wind and Energy Systems 
Frederiksborgvej 399
DK-4000 Roskilde
www.wind.dtu.dk
Author: Dávid Martini
Title:
Advanced modelling of offshore energy hubs 
for real-time demonstrations
DTU Wind and Energy Systems is a department of the 
Technical University of Denmark with a unique 
integration of research, education, innovation and 
public/private sector consulting in the field of wind and 
energy. Our activities develop new opportunities and 
technology for the global and Danish exploitation of 
wind and energy. Research focuses on key technical-
scientific fields, which are central for the development, 
innovation and use of wind energy and provides the 
basis for advanced education.
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
One of the most promising renewable energy resource for Denmark and the North Sea
area is wind energy, more specifically offshore wind. Several wind farm installations are
already functioning on the North Sea, but there is still a large potential of power generation
to be exploited. The next step in the development of offshore wind farms is the offshore
energy hub concept, and one of the biggest projects focusing on it is the North Sea Wind
Power Hub programme.
As the project is still in an early phase, it is necessary to conclude studies about the
feasibility, safety, and operation of the hub. This project has the main goal of developing
a general simulation model that can be later used to test and evaluate the system. The
simulation platform is the RTDS1, one of the most recognised power system simulators.
The modelling of components were carried out from a lower level as RSCAD2 did not
always have available implementations. The project focuses on the most complicated
and crucial components of the transmission system, the inverters. Two kind of control
strategies were developed, a grid following and a grid forming control. Additionally, current
limitation and fault tolerant operation were also considered.
The developed hub configurations are purely converter based, therefore zero inertia mod­
els. Two HVDC links were considered connecting the hub to the main grid, one with each
control strategy applied on the offshore side. One of the two developed models is coupled
only on the AC side, the other one on both the AC and DC side. On the generation side
a converter based single wind farm was used.
The simulations of the developed model showed that the models behave as expected, and
they reflected the strengths and weaknesses of the implemented configurations. Finally,
suggestions were made on possible future developments.
1Real Time Digital Simulator, RTDS Technologies Inc.
2The software package for simulations on the RTDS.
Advanced modelling of offshore energy hubs for real­time demonstrations
iii
==PAGE:4==
Acknowledgements
I would like to express my thanks to all of my supervisors Hjörtur Jóhannsson, Mirza
Nuhic and Brynjar Sævarsson for their help and support throughout this thesis project.
Their continuous guidance and helpful advice always assisted me through the challenges
of this project.
I would also like to thank my family and friends for their encouragement and support all
through my studies, and most importantly, my lovely girlfriend Fanni, for always being
there for me along this exciting journey.
David Martini ­ s212905
Signature
Date
iv
Advanced modelling of offshore energy hubs for real­time demonstrations
23/06/2023
==PAGE:5==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Short summary of literature . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.2
Problem statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.3
Thesis structure and learning objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2
Modelling of energy island components
5
2.1
Modelling environment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Voltage source converters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.3
Grid following converter . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.3.1
Phase locked loop . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.3.2
Current control loop
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.3.3
Active power and frequency control
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.3.4
Reactive power and AC voltage control
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
2.3.5
DC voltage control . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
2.3.6
Current limiting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.4
Grid forming converter . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
2.4.1
Active and reactive power control . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
2.4.2
Virtual impedance and transient virtual impedance . . . . . . . . . . 14
2.5
Model validation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
2.5.1
Grid following converter . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
2.5.2
Grid forming converter . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
2.6
Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
3
Offshore energy hub model
20
3.0.1
Choice of electrical transmission type
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
3.0.2
OEH generic electrical concept . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
3.1
Detailed system description . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
3.1.1
HVDC links . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
3.1.2
Wind farm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
4
Simulations
25
4.1
AC­coupled model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
4.1.1
Increase of generation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
4.1.2
Decrease of generation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
4.1.3
Setpoint change
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
4.1.4
Disconnection of Link 2
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
4.1.5
Fault ride through
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
4.2
AC­DC­coupled model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
5
Conclusions
32
5.1
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
References
34
Advanced modelling of offshore energy hubs for real­time demonstrations
v
==PAGE:6==
A Appendix
37
vi
Advanced modelling of offshore energy hubs for real­time demonstrations
==PAGE:7==
1
Introduction
Climate change is one of the most pressing issues of our time and requires immediate and
sustained action from governments, businesses, and individuals. Human activities, such
as burning fossil fuels, deforestation, and industrial processes, have led to an increase
in atmospheric concentrations of carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gases, trapping
more heat and leading to global warming. This warming is causing changes in the Earth’s
climate, leading to rising sea levels, more frequent and intense natural disasters, and loss
of biodiversity. The impacts of climate change are already being felt and will only worsen
if we do not take action.
There is a widespread consensus about the need for reducing the global greenhouse
gas emissions in order to avoid severe climate change [1]. The European Union has
already set ambitious climate goals as part of its commitment to addressing the climate
crisis. As part of the European Green Deal [2], the target aims to reduce the greenhouse
gas emissions by at least 55% by 2030, compared to 1990 levels, and achieve carbon
neutrality by 2050. This requires significant efforts in transitioning to renewable energy
sources and improving energy efficiency, as well as promoting sustainable practices in
areas such as agriculture, transportation, and industry.
Denmark is one of the countries leading the way in the transition to a low­carbon econ­
omy. The country has set ambitious climate targets, such as reducing greenhouse gas
emissions by 70% by 2030 and becoming carbon neutral by 2050 [3]. Denmark has a
long history of investing in renewable energy, particularly wind energy, and has become
a global leader in this area. Today, wind energy is the largest contributor to Denmark’s
power mix, providing more than 40% of the country’s electricity [4].
Renewable energy sources play a crucial role in reducing greenhouse gas emissions and
achieving climate goals. These sources, such as wind, solar, hydro, and geothermal,
emit less or no greenhouse gases compared to fossil fuels, and are abundant and widely
available. The transition to renewable energy sources will not only help reduce emissions,
but also create new jobs, increase energy security, and improve public health by reducing
air pollution.
The transition to electrofuels, also known as e­fuels, is seen as a way to decarbonize
sectors such as aviation and shipping that are difficult to electrify directly. Electrofuels
are made from renewable electricity and carbon dioxide and are a promising solution for
reducing emissions in these sectors. The production of electrofuels requires significant
amounts of renewable energy, which can come from sources such as wind and solar.
The energy required for the transition to electrofuels depends on several factors, such
as the efficiency of the production process, the source of renewable electricity, and the
demand for the e­fuels. Nevertheless, it is important to ensure that the energy used in the
production of e­fuels does not come at the expense of other low­carbon energy needs.
For example, it is essential to prioritize the use of renewable energy for electrifying the
transportation sector and reducing emissions in other sectors, rather than using it for the
production of e­fuels. In the case of Denmark, the most appropriate choice for providing
the required energy from renewable sources would probably be wind power.
Denmark, with its high share of electricity production coming from wind energy, is one of
the pioneer countries in the wind power technology. Many big Danish company (such as
Advanced modelling of offshore energy hubs for real­time demonstrations
1
==PAGE:8==
Energinet, the Danish transmission system operator (TSO), Vestas, the world’s largest
wind­turbine manufacturer, or Ørsted, Denmark’s main energy company), but also the
Danish state is actively researching in this field. This continuous research establishes a
ground for future development projects and a better and better use of the available natural
resources.
Offshore wind farms in the Nordic area have already had many of their milestones, but
there is still a huge potential in this area to be exploited. Report [5] presents an economic
analysis of the offshore wind potential in the North Sea. The analysis concentrates on
the North Sea area because that is where the most of the offshore wind infrastructure
is planned. With assumptions like the generated electricity is being market based and
radially connected wind farms, it was found that Denmark has a potential to become a
significant net exporter of offshore wind energy by 2050. More precisely, a total of 25­35
GW installed capacity was suggested including the already existing installations. The cal­
culated long­run capture price for offshore wind is an upper bound, which has a possibility
to be optimized (i.e. decreased) by using more advanced transmission concepts.
Figure 1.1: Map of areas indicating the location of island and offshore wind in the North
Sea. The Danish Energy Agency[6].
Such a concept is the offshore energy island or energy hub (OEH). Many countries and
companies are showing high interest in the OEHs nowadays. With OEHs, the wind tur­
bines can be placed further away from the coast, and the generated power can be dis­
tributed better as it can be used for interconnection as well. The main advantage of
OEHs compared to the already existing radially connected wind farms is the form of power
transmission: for higher power and longer distance transmission HVDC becomes more
cost effective than HVAC sea cables [7]. The energy island also creates a possibility
for concentrated installation of Power­to­X (PtX), energy storage or any kind of supple­
mentary devices instead of distributing between the wind farms, which further induces
2
Advanced modelling of offshore energy hubs for real­time demonstrations
==PAGE:9==
cost­efficiency. However, it has to be mentioned that PtX and energy storage technolo­
gies are yet not mature enough to allow us to say with certainty they can be deployed on
the islands.
The Danish Folketing (parliament) decided to start planning the development of two en­
ergy islands in June 2020. One of them is planned to be on the island of Bornholm, which
is a natural island in the Baltic Sea, while the other one is planned for the North Sea in the
form of an artificial island. Both have a planned capacity of 3 GW to be achieved by 2030.
This total capacity of 6 GW is enough to provide the average electricity consumption of 6
million households [8]. The North Sea Wind Power Hub (NSWPH) project is being carried
out by the joint forces of Energinet, Gasunie (European energy infrastructure company),
and TenneT (Dutch­German TSO). As a target for the whole North Sea region, a total gen­
eration capacity of 65 GW is planned by 2030, distributed between the three individual
energy hub of the three country [9].
1.1
Short summary of literature
Although the offshore energy island projects are still in their early phases, quite a few
studies can already be found around this topic. In this section a short summary of the
relevant literature will be presented.
Preliminary studies analyzed how energy hubs contribute to social welfare increase in
Europe [10], and how OEHs help achieving decarbonisation at minimum cost in invest­
ment planning and operational optimization prospective [11]. It was also shown that OEHs
provide a more efficient generation than individually connected wind farms [12]. Different
transmission architectures [13], and the impact of hydrogen investments was also inves­
tigated with positive results [14]. Economic studies showed the profitability and the cost
effectiveness of OEHs [5] [15].
The MultiDC project [16] is a research project that focuses on the challenges of the
NSWPH project and HVDC lines. As the name suggests, the main focus is on the HVDC
technology, but a few studies were already carried out generally for the NSWPH project
too. Some of them were already mentioned in the previous paragraph, and there is one
more worth mentioning: [17] included a techno­economic assessment of different grid
configurations (effect of frequency and voltage level), dynamic studies for a low­ and a
zero­inertia system, and an analysis of simulation tools for such systems.
Furthermore, several reports can be found on the website of the NSWPH program [18].
The studies about the geological placement and the environmental conditions are ap­
proaching their final state. From the technical side however, only a few studies were
carried out so far, the two most relevant are:
Active Power Control of Wind Hub [19]
The main scope of the study was to review methods of controlling active power for the
two different topologies (AC and DC) of the offshore hubs. The studies were performed
using Electromagnetic Transient (EMT) simulation in PSCAD software. It was concluded
that both the AC and DC hub topology has its own advantageous and disadvantageous
in terms of controller complexity, but the AC hub configuration is more suitable for an
interconnected hub system.
AC Voltage and Frequency Control of Wind Hub [20]
As a continuation of the previous study [19], the main objective of this study was to evalu­
ate the voltage and frequency stability of the two different topologies of the offshore hubs.
The studies demonstrate that from a stability perspective both hub topologies are equally
Advanced modelling of offshore energy hubs for real­time demonstrations
3
==PAGE:10==
feasible, it is difficult to find a clear winner, and further (economic) investigations were
suggested.
1.2
Problem statement
As the OEH projects are first of a kind, there are still many challenges that need to be
addressed. The current state of the projects can be defined with the help of the Tech­
nology Readiness Level (TRL), a method developed by NASA and adopted by the EU
for research and innovation projects [21]. The phase of preliminary studies associated
with TRL 1 and 2 is already passed. TRL 3 and 4 imply “Experimental proof of concept”
and “Technology validated in lab”, which can also be considered complete as most of the
technology of the energy hub’s subcomponents, like wind turbines or power converters, is
matured. TRL 5 is defined as “Technology validated in relevant environment (industrially
relevant environment in the case of key enabling technologies)”. This level is very impor­
tant in a large­scale project as such major investments require a lot of verification before
implementation. Since these validations and the related simulations are still ongoing, the
project is in TRL 5.
The studies mentioned in the previous section show a very promising future for OEHs,
however, at this point in the project it is crucial to study and simulate the technical con­
cepts on a deeper level. Previous studies so far only focused on basic models for the hub
topology, but in order to achieve effective operation, the investigation of different, more
detailed topologies is beneficial. These models can be constructed in the RSCAD soft­
ware and simulated on an RTDS simulator. The RTDS simulator with its capabilities for
macro­ and microgrid modelling qualifies as relevant simulation environment.
Therefore, the aim of this master thesis was to construct and study different hub topologies
in the RSCAD software. The developed models are expected to be useful for further
investigations by PowerLabDK.
1.3
Thesis structure and learning objectives
In the first chapter, an introduction was given to the project by explaining the motivation
and the previous progress behind it.
The following chapter is dedicated to the background knowledge needed for the project. In
the first phase of the project, the modelling environment was discovered. Then, the focus
of the development was decided to be the voltage source converters and their control,
and they were studied at a deeper level. Finally, the selected concepts were turned into
implementations, and were validated through simulation results.
The third chapter presents the offshore energy hub’s concept and the implementation of
the complete models. The expected goals were to gain an understanding of different hub
topologies and to construct complete models with the desired features.
In the fourth chapter, the simulation results of the developed energy hub models are pre­
sented. The learning objectives consisted of setting up the test cases, and identifying and
interpreting the relevant results.
Finally, the conclusion summarizes the whole work and makes suggestions for future
development.
4
Advanced modelling of offshore energy hubs for real­time demonstrations
==PAGE:11==
2
Modelling of energy island components
In this chapter, the individual components of the OEH model will be presented. Compo­
nents were used from three main categories:
• Cables: DC, AC
• Transformers: 525/400 kV, 400/66 kV, 66/66 kV
• Voltage source converters: Grid forming and grid following converters for the HVDC
links, and a grid following converter for the wind farm.
For the modelling of the cables and transformers, the built­in configurable models in
RSCAD were used.
The modelling of the voltage source converters was done by utilizing the built­in average
value models in RSCAD, which will be discussed in section 2.2. The main focus of the
project was on the control of the converters. RSCAD does not have any implementation
for VSC control, hence the development had to be started from a low level.
In the rest of this chapter, first, the modelling environment is briefly introduced, then the
VSC modelling is discussed. Afterwards, the theory of the converter control methods are
presented, and finally, the implemented models are validated through simulation results.
2.1
Modelling environment
The offshore energy hub model was developed for an RTDS simulator. The RTDS (Real
Time Digital Simulator) is a well­known real­time power system simulation platform devel­
oped by RTDS Technologies Inc., which is capable of simulating both HVAC and HVDC
systems.
The user interface of the RTDS simulator is the RSCAD program, developed by the same
company. The software version used throughout this project is RSCAD FX 1.4.
RSCAD does not have such an extensive control library as for example Power Factory
has, and the overall amount of online support is also less. Therefore, the learning curve
of RSCAD turned out to be a longer process, than initially expected and lasted throughout
the whole project. Starting from the security and the connection to the RTDS machine,
many things had to be learned even before starting the developments. There are several
different modules in RSCAD, from which the FileManager, Draft, Runtime, and Cable
modules were mainly used.
Other than the real­time simulation capability, a major advantage of the RTDS is the
hardware­in­loop testing feature. Although this option was not utilized in this project, it
is worth consideration for future simulations.
2.2
Voltage source converters
The high voltage direct current (HVDC) technology is used in electric transmission sys­
tems mainly because it is capable of transmitting large amount of power over long dis­
tances with high efficiency compared to conventional AC technology. For submarine links,
it is especially useful to choose HVDC over HVAC because the high capacitance of the
cable would require too much charging current and therefore reactive power compensa­
tion in the AC configuration. The first commercial HVDC project was carried out in 1954
Advanced modelling of offshore energy hubs for real­time demonstrations
5
==PAGE:12==
in Sweden, where an under­sea cable interconnection was installed between the island
of Gotland and the mainland.
In the first phase of the development, the HVDC transmissions were based on mercury­
arc valves. In the 1970s thyristor­based line commutated converters were introduced,
and they became the dominant technology in HVDC systems. Lately, the development
of higher rated insulated­gate bipolar transistors (IGBS) not only made the application of
voltage source converters (VSC) attractive from the technological point of view, but also
made it economically feasible. Today, the VSC technology is considered mature and it is
widely used in the new installations.
Figure 2.1: Two­level VSC
Modern voltage source converters are mostly based on IGBTs due to their improved,
higher switching frequency. The most basic configuration is a two­level converter that
uses pulse width modulation (PWM) for synthesizing sinusoidal waveforms. Such a con­
verter can be seen in Figure 2.1. It is capable of producing two voltage levels, +UDC and
−UDC.
Figure 2.2: Modular multilevel converter [22]
6
Advanced modelling of offshore energy hubs for real­time demonstrations
==PAGE:13==
Two­level converters are usually used up to 1 MVA, for higher power applications, mod­
ular multilevel converters (MMC) can be used. MMCs consist of multiple submodules
connected in series, which creates 2N + 1 steps of voltage levels between +N · UDC
and −N · UDC. The modular construction has the advantage of good voltage and power
scalability and reduced harmonics and switching losses. The submodules and the con­
figuration of an MMC is illustrated in Figure 2.2.
However, for simulations where the electronic switching transients and the resulting har­
monics are not of interest, the average value model (AVM) can be used instead of the
above­described switching models. The AVM uses the same control loops as the switch­
ing models, but instead of simulating the switching of IGBTs, it creates a pure sinusoidal
output wave. It acts like a controllable voltage source, which directly receives the desired
voltage signal. Its main advantage is that it does not require as small timesteps as the
switching model due to the switching frequency, therefore is more applicable to real­time
simulations because of the smaller computational need.
Figure 2.3: Average value VSC model in RSCAD [23]
As the focus of this project is rather on the energy hub topology and control than the
individual VSCs, the AVM model was used for simulating the converters.
2.3
Grid following converter
Grid following converters (GFL) can be used in conventional AC grids, where a differ­
ent device – mostly synchronous machines – define the grid voltage and therefore the
frequency. GFLs act as a current source that synchronizes and follows the grid. The
converter can be configured to perform several different control actions between the grid
and the DC side.
The control strategy of a single HVDC link between two AC grids, or in case of the OEH
between the main grid and the point of common coupling (PCC), usually has the configu­
ration presented in Figure 2.4. The offshore converter controls the active power, while the
onshore converter controls the DC voltage. The power flow can be bidirectional, which
means that the energy hub can not only supply power into the main grid, but it can also
receive power if necessary, e.g. in low wind scenarios. The active and reactive power
can be controlled independently, therefore the reactive power can be controlled at each
converter separately [24].
Advanced modelling of offshore energy hubs for real­time demonstrations
7
==PAGE:14==
Figure 2.4: General control strategy of a VSC based HVDC link [24]
The control system of a VSC consists of two parts: a fast inner current control loop, and
several outer control loops achieving the desired control strategy (P/Q/VDC/VAC control).
The inner loop is controlling the AC currents with the reference signals received from
the slower outer loops. The active power reference value can be derived from the active
power, the DC voltage, or the frequency controller. Similarly, the reactive power reference
can be obtained from the reactive power or the AC voltage controller. A combination of
these outer loop controllers has to be selected based on the application.
The following description of the controller components describes the implemented mod­
els, and was based on the implementation in [17]. Three slightly different control methods
were implemented for the three applications of the GFL converter in the system: convert­
ers for the onshore and offshore side of the HVDC link, and wind farm converter.
As the offshore converter has the most features out of the above mentioned, the figures
in this section will be based on the details of this converter. The other types of converter
control methods will also be discussed, but without separate figures. When not otherwise
indicated, the implementation matches in all three converters (e.g. in the case of the PLL
or the inner current control loop).
2.3.1
Phase locked loop
Phase synchronization is an important aspect of GFLs. The phase angle and the grid volt­
age have to be detected in order to synchronize the power delivery of the converter. Sev­
eral methods exist in the literature for acquiring the phase angle, such as zero­crossing
detection or the phase locked loop (PLL). In this project, the latter method was used.
Figure 2.5: Block diagram of PLL
PLL achieves phase tracking by utilizing the Clarke and Park transformation [25]. The
8
Advanced modelling of offshore energy hubs for real­time demonstrations
==PAGE:15==
tracking of sinusoidal waveforms is a rather difficult task because of the fast changes in
the reference signal, and this makes controller tuning equally challenging. Instead, using
the transformed form of the sinusoidal signs in the dq0 framework makes the tracking
much more convenient: under balanced network conditions, the values are constant, and
the disturbances are more easily tracked. Figure 2.5 shows the block diagram of the PLL.
The goal of the PLL is to keep the Vq signal at 0, which means that the input signal from
the grid (Vg) and the converter’s phase are matching. The control action is performed by
the PI controller, which provides the frequency deviation from the nominal frequency in
rad/s as an output. After a multiplication with 2πf and an integration, this gives the phase
angle of the converter.
2.3.2
Current control loop
The implemented inner current controller also uses the dq framework. As mentioned be­
fore, it receives the reference signals (i∗
d, i∗
q) and outputs the voltage modulation reference
values (vmd, vmq). PI controllers are used due to their simple yet robust design, however,
according to [26], the PI current controllers do not have satisfactory tracking performances
when they have to regulate coupled systems. Therefore, cross­coupling terms and volt­
age feed forward is introduced to the control design in order to improve the performance
of the inner loop [26].
Figure 2.6: Block diagram of the inner current control loop
2.3.3
Active power and frequency control
The active power control can be based on only the active power difference from the set­
point, or also on the frequency deviations in order to provide a frequency response. If the
frequency control is not applied, the controller strictly follows the power setpoint, unless
a droop gain is added. The droop parameter has to be applied when more than one con­
trollers are controlling the active power in the system, in order to provide power sharing.
The output of the control loop is the i∗
d reference signal.
The control structure presented in Figure 2.7 is the one applied on the offshore GFL con­
verter.
The converter of the wind farm does not have the frequency control included, as it is
expected to follow the power setpoints strictly, so changes in the power production of the
Advanced modelling of offshore energy hubs for real­time demonstrations
9
==PAGE:16==
wind farm can be simulated.
Figure 2.7: Frequency and active power control of the offshore GFL converter.
2.3.4
Reactive power and AC voltage control
As it was mentioned before, the reactive power can be controlled separately with a refer­
ence value at each converter in the system. However, the reactive power balance have
to be ensured to keep the voltage level at 1.0 pu, so at least one of the converters need
to have a loose setpoint. For this purpose, AC voltage control can be implemented in the
control logic by adding a voltage error term and introducing a droop gain to the reactive
power error. Accordingly, the control logic illustrated by Figure 2.8 was implemented, and
was used at the offshore GFL.
The onshore converters are connected to the main grid, where the reactive power support
need is defined by the network conditions. In this implementation, the reactive power
setpoint should therefore be controlled by the TSO’s control. Thus, there is no need for
voltage control and the reactive power setpoints can be followed directly.
As for now, the same control strategy is applied on the wind farm, as it is sufficient for the
OEH model’s testing. If the control objectives and requirements will be more detailed in
the later phases of the OEH projects, the control logic can be adjusted.
Figure 2.8: Reactive power and AC voltage control loop.
2.3.5
DC voltage control
The DC voltage relates to the power transferred by the converter, therefore the output of
the DC voltage controller is i∗
d. The converters on the onshore side of the HVDC links
utilize the DC voltage control.
When separate HVDC links are used, the controller presented in Figure 2.9 can be ap­
plied. If the DC side of the HVDC system is coupled however, a droop gain has to be
10
Advanced modelling of offshore energy hubs for real­time demonstrations
==PAGE:17==
introduced since more converters are controlling the same DC voltage.
Figure 2.9: DC current control with PI controller
2.3.6
Current limiting
Since the IGBTs used in VSCs are sensitive to high currents and the output current of a
converter can significantly increase during a fault event or even at a larger load change,
it is necessary to ensure proper current limiting in the control loops in order to prevent
device damage.
One of the simplest methods for current limiting is using saturation. Figure 2.10 shows
the block diagram of the control system when the saturation blocks are added. They limit
the dq current reference signals with the limits based on Equations 2.1­2.4.
Figure 2.10: Complete converter control with current limiting by saturation
idmin = −1
(2.1)
idmax = 1
(2.2)
iqmin = −
√
(1 −i2
dref)
(2.3)
iqmax =
√
(1 −i2
dref)
(2.4)
The above described protection however is only sufficient for normal grid conditions. Once
a fault occurs and the grid voltage falls below a specified value, a fault ride­through control
has to be applied. Wind turbines above 11kW can disconnect from the grid based on
Energinet’s regulation if the grid voltage falls below 0.8 pu [27]. However, the HVDC
links can stay connected at voltages below 0.8 pu in order to provide voltage support and
prevent the blackout.
Advanced modelling of offshore energy hubs for real­time demonstrations
11
==PAGE:18==
In such a situation, the active power has to be limited by setting i∗
d to 0, and the active
power support is provided by allowing −1 < i∗
q < 1. This ride through control was imple­
mented on the model in a simple form for all converters, but as it will be illustrated later,
its functioning was not completely sufficient.
2.4
Grid forming converter
The increasing share of renewable generation in the power system means more and more
converter based solutions, less synchronous machines, and therefore less system inertia.
As long as there are synchronous machines in the grid, grid following converters are
suitable solutions, but since zero inertia microgrids are considered as optimal solutions for
some specific applications, there is a need for grid forming converter (GFC) control. Such
an application of zero inertia microgrids is the OEH [28], which explains the importance
of the discussion on GFC control.
Zero inertia grids have no synchronous machines defining the grid voltage and frequency
that GFLs could follow. Hence, a device with grid forming control has to be applied,
otherwise, the grid would lose synchrony. Grid forming converters, or virtual synchronous
machines (VSM), have a main goal of mimicking the behaviour of synchronous generators
[29].
The grid requirements of GFCs are not yet well established, but the system operator of the
UK, National Grid had the attempt to define them. These requirements can be considered
as guidelines in the early development of the OEH [30]:
• Behave as a voltage source behind a constant Thevenin impedance in the frequency
range of 5 Hz ­ 1 kHz [31].
• Instantaneous response for faults and load changes.
• Operate as a sink/source for harmonics and unbalance current.
Many different implementations of GFCs exist in the literature, as both the outer and the
inner control loop can have different design characteristics. When choosing the design
to be implemented in this project, the three concepts in [32] were considered. These
three GFC structures are the following: (i) GFC with cascaded voltage control and current
control, (ii) with inner current control only, (iii) with no inner loop. The comprehensive
study of the three concepts in [32] is shortly summarised here:
• It is difficult to ensure passive impedance behaviour at a wider frequency range for
the controllers with inner loops. This might arise unstable oscillations under weak
network conditions.
• The dynamic response of the controller with no inner loop and with only inner current
loop appeared to be similar to a voltage source behind fixed reactance. On the
other hand, the impedance of the cascaded inner control loop is found to be slow
acting because of the loop delays. This resulted higher instantaneous active and
reactive power for grid events. The slow acting impedance can also cause issues
with dynamic power sharing and current limiting.
• A study with a synchronous generator (SG) connected to the network showed that
the damping of the electromechanical mode is generally better for the controller with
no inner loop and only inner loop, than for the one with cascaded loops. However,
it is possible to achieve similar damping with cascaded loops by applying a proper
control design and higher switching frequency.
12
Advanced modelling of offshore energy hubs for real­time demonstrations
==PAGE:19==
As there was only limited information available on the hub configuration and therefore on
the system that the GFC will be applied on, the simple control structure with no inner loop
was implemented. If in the future phases of the project a more specific control objective
will be defined, the inner control loops can easily be added.
The structure of the implemented GFC can be seen in Figure 2.11.
Figure 2.11: Grid forming control without an inner loop
As already mentioned before, GFCs are expected to behave like a voltage source con­
verter behind an impedance. A droop­based reactive power loop is responsible for main­
taining the desired voltage amplitude, while the phase angle and the frequency are con­
trolled by the inertia loop. Current limiting is once again a very important aspect for the
protection of the VSC, and it was realized via virtual impedance and virtual transient
impedance.
2.4.1
Active and reactive power control
The active power loop control (PLC) is responsible for mimicking the behaviour of a syn­
chronous generator. Many different solutions exist for the P­f relation, for example the
a conventional droop, or a second order function. In this implementation, the PLC block
in Figure 2.11 approximates the swing equation with a droop gain and a low pass filter.
The droop gain defines the magnitude, while the time constant of the filter defines the
quickness of the frequency response.
The reactive power loop control (QLC) ensures the reactive power sharing between con­
verters with a droop parameter. A low pass filter is also added for additional delay.
Advanced modelling of offshore energy hubs for real­time demonstrations
13
==PAGE:20==
Equations 2.5 and 2.6 describe the QLC and PLC blocks in Figure 2.11.
PLC = Kp ·
1
1 + sTinert
(2.5)
QLC = Kq ·
1
1 + sTQLC
(2.6)
2.4.2
Virtual impedance and transient virtual impedance
Virtual impedance based current limiting was applied based on [33]. The emulated volt­
age drop on the virtual resistive and inductive circuit is subtracted from the dq voltage
reference signals, as it was indicated in Figure 2.11.
In order to prevent static voltage drop and at the same time have enough resistance to pro­
vide enough damping for the network resonance modes, the transient virtual impedance
was realized by introducing high pass filtering. The implemented solutions are shown in
Eq. 2.7 and 2.8.
∆vd = Rvirtid
s
s + ωhpf
−ωLvirtiq
s
s + ωhpf
(2.7)
∆vq = Rvirtiq
s
s + ωhpf
+ ωLvirtid
s
s + ωhpf
(2.8)
Similarly to the GFL, a fault ride­through control also needs to be and was implemented
for the GFC. Its behaviour will be discussed in Chapter 4.
2.5
Model validation
The converter models described in section 2.3 and 2.4 were implemented in RSCAD,
and in order to confirm their expected behaviours, they were validated on simple test
scenarios. The following scenarios were considered:
1. Passive load change: 43.56 Ωconnected on the 66 kV bus, which corresponds to
100 MW load at the rated voltage level.
2. Passive load change: 0.1348 H inductance connected on the 66 kV bus, which
corresponds to 100 MVAr at the rated voltage level.
3. Setpoint change: ­100 MW change in the active power setpoint. This results the
same direction of power flow, as if the load was increased.
4. Setpoint change: AC voltage (­2% pu) or reactive power setpoint change.
5. Current limiter test with setpoint change.
In all of the following test scenarios the power flows from the DC to the AC side. The
opposite power transfer capability of the converters was also tested, and the results were
found symmetric. To avoid repetitiveness, these results were not included in this report.
2.5.1
Grid following converter
The test configuration of the GFL can be seen in Figure 2.12. A DC voltage source is con­
nected to the DC side of the converter, which behaves as an infinite power source. Then,
there are three components connected to the AC hub bus (which is also the PCC): an infi­
nite AC voltage source, a synchronous condenser, and a passive load. The passive load
14
Advanced modelling of offshore energy hubs for real­time demonstrations
==PAGE:21==
was used only in test scenario 1 and 2. The AC voltage source is always connected ini­
tially to help the system initialization by serving as a slack power source. For test scenario
1 and 2 it disconnects from the grid, but for test scenario 3, 4 and 5, it stays connected.
Finally, the SC is needed in the system because it defines the voltage and the frequency
of the grid, hence it stays connected in all scenarios. This also means that it might have
some influence on the response of the converter as it will be described later.
Figure 2.12: Test configuration of the GFL converter.
Passive load change
The responses of the first and second test scenarios are depicted
in Figure 2.13. Both the active and reactive power of the converter adapts to the change
on the load side, however an initial oscillation can be noticed in both cases, which can
be explained with the interaction of the fast response of the converter and the relatively
slower response of the SC. On the other hand, the significant overshoot of the active
power response is a tuning issue, and can be tuned for the specific model later.
Figure 2.13: P and Q response of the GFL for the passive load change (Scenario 1­2).
Advanced modelling of offshore energy hubs for real­time demonstrations
15
==PAGE:22==
Setpoint change
Figure 2.14a shows the response of the converter for a setpoint change.
It reacts much faster and without any disturbance. As for Figure 2.14b, the converter was
configured for vac control instead of Q control, therefore the voltage­setpoint change was
tested, and it performed as expected.
(a)
(b)
Figure 2.14: P and vac setpoint change test of the GFL (Scenario 3­4).
Current limitation
In this test scenario, the active power setpoint was changed from 0
to 2 times the rated power. In such cases, the converter current should be limited based
on Eq. 2.1­2.4. Active power is given priority in normal operation, which means that when
operating close to its maximum capacity, the converter limits the reactive power with iqref.
Figure 2.15a shows the saturation of id, while Figure 2.15b depicts how the q­axis current
limits change. Although the limits are correct, iq still exceeds 0: the limits only limit the
current references that the converter follows.
(a)
(b)
Figure 2.15: Current limiter test of the GFL (Scenario 5).
16
Advanced modelling of offshore energy hubs for real­time demonstrations
==PAGE:23==
2.5.2
Grid forming converter
The test setup of the GFL converter can be seen in Figure 2.16. Similarly to the previous
configuration, there is a DC voltage source on the DC side, and on the AC side the AC
voltage source and the passive load can be found. The synchronous condenser was not
included as the GFC serves its purpose.
Figure 2.16: Test configuration of the GFL converter.
Passive load change
The results for test scenario 1 can be seen in Figure 2.17. After
the increase in the load, the GFC adapts its power output automatically to ­100 MW.
However, the increased current also results higher reactive power consumption in the
transformers, which causes a drop in the voltage level throughout the grid because the
converter tries to keep its reactive power at the setpoint (0 MVAr) and therefore does not
completely compensate the system. This is also the reason why the converter’s active
power output falls below 100 MW.
The frequency of the system reflects the same, and it follows the active power of the
converter. There is a deviation in the steady state from 50 Hz because the active power
setpoint is also manually set and is still at 0 MW.
(a)
(b)
Figure 2.17: Power output and frequency response for the passive load change test of
the GFC (Scenario 1).
Advanced modelling of offshore energy hubs for real­time demonstrations
17
==PAGE:24==
Both the frequency and the voltage deviation can be corrected by adjusting the P and Q
setpoints of the converter.
The test results from the inductive load change were not included here because they did
not provide additional information. As the load changed, the converter quickly started
providing high amounts of reactive power, but since the two sides were not immediately
in balance, the voltage started decreasing. This caused an oscillation in all of the system
quantities until the reactive power at the load and the reactive power support from the
converter were balanced. This behaviour was caused by the static Q setpoint.
Setpoint change
Test scenario 3 resulted nothing unexpected: the active power output
was adjusted to the setpoint without any issue (Figure 2.18a), and the correct frequency
response can be seen in Figure 2.18b. The frequency response is in the positive direction
because the converter transfers power towards the AC side, and creates a surplus there
until the AC source adapts its output. The frequency response can be adjusted with the
droop and the filter time constant to get the desired output.
(a)
(b)
Figure 2.18: Setpoint change test of the GFC (Scenario 3).
On the other hand, the setpoint change for the reactive power presented an unwanted
behaviour. Figure 2.19 shows an oscillation in both P and Q after the setpoint change,
but shortly after, the oscillations are dampened and the power outputs are correct.
18
Advanced modelling of offshore energy hubs for real­time demonstrations
==PAGE:25==
Figure 2.19: P and Q response for Scenario 4.
Current limitation
The current limitation with virtual impedance also worked as ex­
pected. For a positive change in the active power setpoint, the virtual impedance outputs a
positive change fore both ∆vd and ∆vq. These values are subtracted from the modulation
reference signals, therefore limiting id and creating a reactive power response.
The values of Rvirt and Lvirt were chosen so that the X/Rvirt ratio is 5, as it was sug­
gested in [33]. In has to be noted though, that these parameters were tuned by hand, for
an optimal performance they should be fine­tuned.
(a)
(b)
Figure 2.20: Current limitation test of the GFC (Scenario 5).
2.6
Summary
The simulation results of the different test cases showed the advantages and limitations
of the developed control strategies. Overall, the validation can be considered successful,
and the developed models are applicable to the construction of the OEH models.
Advanced modelling of offshore energy hubs for real­time demonstrations
19
==PAGE:26==
3
Offshore energy hub model
In this chapter, first a high­level system description will be introduced. As an input to
this project, Energinet presented high­level conceptual descriptions of a generic offshore
energy hub, without naming specific countries, detailed topologies, or specific solutions
[34]. Afterwards, the developed OEH models will be discussed in detail.
3.0.1
Choice of electrical transmission type
One of the major design decisions to be made for the electrical transmission of OEHs
is whether the HVDC­VSC interconnectors of the hub should be coupled on the AC or
the DC offshore substation. This decision has an impact on multiple aspects of the hub
design, such as [34]:
1. Cost of the electrical infrastructure
2. Transmission losses
3. Electrical system robustness
4. Market operation of the electrical components
5. The future expandability of the system
HVDC­VSC systems that are coupled on the DC side are referred to as multi­terminal
HVDC (MTDC). The alternative for MTDC for OEHs would be to couple the systems on
the AC side, which is comparable to common point­to­point HVDC systems, with the main
distinction that all the offshore HVDC­VSC converters of the OEH in such case will be
connected to the same offshore AC network. Meshed MTDC systems have two main
advantages compared to meshed point­to­point HVDC systems: fewer HVDC converter
terminals are needed when expanding the interconnector capacity, and power losses are
lower when utilizing the HVDC systems as interconnectors, as the power has to go through
fewer AC/DC conversions.
Several international research programmes have identified the MTDC technology as the
optimal technology of the future for large­scale renewable energy integration [35] [36]. Al­
though the MTDC technology seems to be the obvious choice for OEHs, the most impor­
tant drawback needs to be mentioned: the technology readiness level of the technology.
As mentioned before, the NSWPH project is also expected to be carried out in the co­
operation of multiple countries and therefore system operators. This arises an additional
challenge of achieving commercially competitive multi­vendor HVDC systems, which is
the so­called multi­vendor interoperability. Multi­vendor interoperability is the capability
of integrating systems from different vendors together. Discussion of the multi­vendor
interoperability problem can be found in [37], but it will not be further discussed in this
work.
3.0.2
OEH generic electrical concept
The general topology of the offshore energy hub presented in Figure 3.1 is a convenient
starting point for the first phase of the project. The DC coupling satisfies the requirement
of future expandability of the system, which is needed for additional interconnections to
neighbour countries or other offshore systems. At the same time, the coupling at the AC
side provides a fall­back solution, which helps mitigate control and stability risks. If wind
farms, PtX, and storage facilities are connected on the HVAC substation, they are able
20
Advanced modelling of offshore energy hubs for real­time demonstrations
==PAGE:27==
to exchange power without the limitation of the DC configuration. The coupling on both
sides allows exploiting the advantages of both solutions. A comprehensive comparison
table of the advantages and disadvantages of the system coupling options was presented
in [34], and is also included in the Appendix of this work.
Figure 3.1: Electrical concept for the first phase of an offshore Energy Hub connecting 4
GW to two onshore areas, Area A and Area B, with potential extension to new hubs or
areas [34].
3.1
Detailed system description
In this section, the details of the developed models will be presented. As a starting point
in the development, a low inertia model [38] was studied, which was developed by Brynjar
Sævarsson in contribution to the MultiDC project [16]. Later this model provided a refer­
ence for cable types, parameters, and the voltage levels into the model of this project.
Two hub configurations were implemented. The first one, similarly to the low inertia model,
is coupled only on the AC side. This configuration is presented in Figure 3.2. For the
second model, the coupling on the DC side was added, which means that it is coupled
on both sides. This latter model is depicted by Figure 3.3. Both of the figures present
the onshore side on the left, the HVDC links in the middle, and the offshore side on the
right with the HUB_1 bus as the point of common coupling. On the other side, both of the
models have the same wind farm, presented in Figure 3.4.
Advanced modelling of offshore energy hubs for real­time demonstrations
21
==PAGE:28==
Figure 3.2: OEH configuration with AC­coupled model.
Figure 3.3: OEH configuration with coupling on both AC and DC side.
Figure 3.4: Wind farm model, and the connection to the AC substation of the hub.
22
Advanced modelling of offshore energy hubs for real­time demonstrations
==PAGE:29==
The parameters of each cable, transformer and converter can be found in Appendix A
(Table A.2­A.4). Most of the converter control parameters were taken from [38] and re­
mained unchanged (e.g. inner loop, onshore converter parameters), while some others
were tuned by hand to reach the desired performance (e.g. GFC control parameters,
droop values). Due to the high number and minor direct meaning of these parameters,
PI controller parameters are not included in the report. Generally used droop settings are
included in the Appendix in Table A.5.
3.1.1
HVDC links
Both models have two HVDC links as a connection between the main grid and the OEH.
Each link has a rating of 2100 MVA, making up for a total of approx. 4 GW production
capability of the hub. The rated voltage level of the onshore terminals (Bus ONSHORE_1
and ONSHORE_2) and the AC bus of the hub is 400 kV, since it is a standard voltage
level in HVAC systems.
The converters of the HVDC links are configured in a way so that the DC voltage level is
double the RMS AC voltage. The commercially available VSC based HVDC transmission
system of Siemens1 is capable of connecting to AC grids with up to 525 kV, therefore
this value was chosen as the AC side voltage level of the converters. Hence, the DC
voltage level has become 1050 kV, although such a configuration is not used in a real­
world application yet. These voltage levels are not hard­coded in the model, they can
easily be adjusted to different values in the future if desired.
For the conversion from 400 to 525 kV and back, transformers were added on both sides of
the HVDC link. The power measurements of the converters are based on the 525 kV side
of the converters, but the 400 kV side is also measured in order to take the transformer
losses into account. As these measurements are used for the HVDC control, a low pass
filter is added to the measurement block, so small, high­frequency oscillations coming
from numerical limitations do not cause unwanted control actions.
Shunt capacitors (Cshunt = 695µF) are applied on both sides of the DC cable in order
to provide damping for short­term imbalances in the system. They are also beneficial
during faults. For example, in case of a short­circuit event on the onshore AC side, the
AC voltage drops, which then limits the power transfer capability of the onshore converter.
This creates excess power in the hub, since the wind farm’s generation does not change
immediately as it relies on slower communication or manual setpoint change. The excess
power initiates a rise in the DC voltage, but for a short time, this is dampened by the shunt
capacitors. This does not solve the problem of handling the excess power, but provides
a bit more time for the control loops to react.
The excess power power can be handled by a DC chopper, which is a controlled re­
sistance connected between the DC terminal and the ground. If a fault is detected, the
excess power is dissipated through the resistance by activating the transistor connected
to it. DC choppers are shown to be effective not only in point­to­point, but also multi
terminal HVDC systems [39], therefore they are applicable for both models in this work.
However, they could not be added due to time limitations, so they are left for future work.
The HVDC links are connected to AC voltage sources on the onshore side, which act like
separate infinite grids, mimicking the transmission grid of e.g. Denmark and the Nether­
lands.
1https://www.siemens­energy.com/global/en/offerings/power­transmission/portfolio/transformers/hvdc­
transformers.html
Advanced modelling of offshore energy hubs for real­time demonstrations
23
==PAGE:30==
For the initialization of the system, a DC voltage source is connected to the offshore DC
terminals. As the black­start of the system was not a scope of this project, these voltage
sources ensure that the DC voltage is at the nominal level after the initialization is done.
The offshore AC bus also has an AC voltage source connected to it for the same reason
(can be seen in Figure 3.4.
3.1.2
Wind farm
The wind farm is modeled with a VSC, and DC voltage source on its DC side. The indi­
vidual wind turbines and their behaviour are not captured by this configuration, but it is
a close approximation of Type 4 wind turbines because of the converter­based coupling.
The wind farm’s power rating is 800 MVA.
As mentioned before, the wind farm converter operates in a grid following control mode,
and it sets the active and reactive power injection to the grid strictly. In the first approach,
the wind farm provides no ancillary services, but later at the examination of the loss of
Link 2 a frequency response was implemented to its control.
The voltage level of the wind farm is 66 kV, as it is the highest commercially available
option. The technical and economical advantages of a 66 kV system were analyzed in
[40]. The main benefits compared to the 33 kV system are the reduced CAPEX and the
fewer offshore substations required.
Two transformers are used for the connection of the wind farm. A 400/66 kV transformer
connects one side of the AC cable to the main AC bus (HUB_1), and the other side of the
cable is connected to the converter through a 66/66 kV coupling transformer. The latter
provides a direct power measurement point for the wind farm.
24
Advanced modelling of offshore energy hubs for real­time demonstrations
==PAGE:31==
4
Simulations
In this chapter, the simulation results of the developed models will be presented.
4.1
AC­coupled model
First, the simulations with the AC­coupled model will be presented. The following test
scenarios were considered:
• Increase in the generation of the wind farm from 0 to 500 MW.
• Decrease in the generation of the wind farm from 0 to 500 MW.
• Change in the GFC’s active power setpoint.
• Disconnection of HVDC Link 2 under low and high load.
• Symmetric phase to ground fault at the hub’s AC bus.
Throughout the discussion of the simulation results, the onshore converters will be ab­
breviated as ON_1 and ON_2, and the offshore converters as OFF_1 (GFC) and OFF_2
(GFL).
4.1.1
Increase of generation
Figure 4.1 presents the active power of each converter in the system. Initially, there was
no active power generation and transfer. The dark blue curve indicates the increase in
the generation. The ramp­up and ramp­down of the wind farm’s active power was limited
to 800 MW/s, which is much higher than realistic values for change in the wind power, but
suitable for testing.
Figure 4.1: P response of the converters for the 500 MW increase of generation.
The black and the red curves correspond to the power transferred by OFF_1 and OFF_2.
OFF_1 adapts faster to the change and takes up more power in the beginning because
of its controller setting, but once the generation stops increasing, the power flow starts to
shift towards OFF_2. The reason of this is the strict power control of OFF_1: since its P
Advanced modelling of offshore energy hubs for real­time demonstrations
25
==PAGE:32==
setpoint was not changed from 0, the converter tries to limit its P transfer to 0. As OFF_2
has a frequency response, it takes the active power from OFF_1 until the frequency is
higher than 50 Hz (which happens when OFF_1’s active power transfer is higher than its
setpoint). The system arrives in a new steady state, when OFF_1 reaches its setpoint.
The power of the onshore converters are depicted with the green (ON_1) and the light blue
(ON_2) curves on the figure. They follow power transfer of the the offshore converters
based on the DC voltage. The small oscillations in their power transfer is negligible, so
their performance is satisfactory.
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.2: Q response of the converters (4.2a), and the change in the hub voltage and
frequency (4.2b) for the 500 MW increase of generation.
Figure 4.2a shows the reactive power output of each converter. The red curve indicates
that mainly OFF_2 provides the Q support at the hub as it controls the AC voltage, while
OFF_1 has a strict Q setpoint. Initially, OFF_2 absorbs 43 MVAr reactive power generated
by the wind farm connection’s AC cable. The increase in the reactive power need is
caused by the increased active power transfer on the transformers.
The voltage level of the hub corresponds to this reactive power change, as it indicates
a deficit of Q with the dip in Vac. Finally, the frequency of the grid reflects the increased
power transfer of the GFC. The frequency restores to 50 Hz in the same manner as the
GFC’s active power approaches its setpoint.
4.1.2
Decrease of generation
The change in the wind farm’s active power is the same as in the previous case, but in the
opposite direction, as described by the dark blue curve of Figure 4.3. Since OFF_2 can
not ramp down as fast as the wind farm, OFF_1 balances the system by providing active
power to OFF_2 until it ramps down. This is not necessarily the expected behaviour for
such a case, as the two links are exchanging power between the two main grids. On the
other hand, this proves that the OEH can be used as an interconnection, which can be an
advantage.
26
Advanced modelling of offshore energy hubs for real­time demonstrations
==PAGE:33==
Figure 4.3: P response of the converters for the 500 MW decrease in the generation.
4.1.3
Setpoint change
In this scenario, the active power setpoint of OFF_1 was changed from 0 to ­250 MW,
meaning that it is supposed to transfer half of the total generation through Link 1, while
leaving the other half of the generated power to Link 2. The results are displayed in Figure
4.4.
It can be seen that the distribution of lower flow between the two links can be controlled by
this setpoint. Therefore, a higher level controller should control this variable based on the
information of the main grids, and the expected power between the systems. The OEH’s
system operator or a master controller would fulfill this role.
Figure 4.4: P response of the converters for the setpoint change of OFF_1.
4.1.4
Disconnection of Link 2
The loss of one of the links was considered a possible fault scenario. In the current config­
uration with only one grid forming converter, if the link that contains this converter is lost,
the system fails since there will be no devices defining the grid voltage. For this reason,
Advanced modelling of offshore energy hubs for real­time demonstrations
27
==PAGE:34==
the loss of Link 1 is not presented here, as it causes the system to lose synchronization
immediately.
On the other hand, the system is able to recover after the loss of Link 2. However, the
control strategy of the two remaining converters (GFC and wind farm) have to be revised.
In the current configuration, both converters control the active and reactive power flow,
and leave no room for error. Unless the power balance is secured manually at all times
by the setpoints, this causes contradictory control actions, and system failure once Link
2 is lost. The balancing function that is implemented in the GFL has to be implemented
in the remaining two converters.
The power balancing was implemented by adding a frequency response to the wind farm’s
controller, and AC voltage control to the GFC control. This results the wind farm to not
force the active power defined by the setpoint through the system, and react to the fre­
quency change caused by the GFC. Also, the reactive power of the wind farm can still
be set with the setpoint, but the GFC adjusts its reactive power so that the hub voltage
stays stable at the voltage setpoint (normally 1.0 pu). The complete system (with Link 2)
is equally functional with this new control as with the previous one, the only difference is
the different control strategy.
The loss of Link 2 was simulated by opening a breaker at the connection to the AC bus of
the hub. In the low load scenario OFF_2 provided ­20 MW and ­20 MVAr, while in the high
load scenario ­500 MW and 17 MVAr to the hub before the disconnection. Figure 4.5a
and 4.5b show how the system adapts to the loss of Link 2 in regards of active power. It
can be seen that the GFC quickly changes its transferred power in both bases.
(a) Low load
(b) High load
Figure 4.5: P response of the hub side converters for the disconnection of Link 2.
The reactive power responses are presented in Figure 4.6. An overshoot in both offshore
converter’s reactive power is noticeable in both cases, but it appears more drastically in
the high load scenario. This is most probably caused by the control parameters setting,
but the fine tuning turned out to be difficult by hand, therefore left for future work.
28
Advanced modelling of offshore energy hubs for real­time demonstrations
==PAGE:35==
(a) Low load
(b) High load
Figure 4.6: Q response of the hub side converters for the disconnection of Link 2.
Figure 4.7 depicts the hub voltage and frequency for the two scenarios. The oscillation
of the hub voltage in both scenarios also suggests a tuning issue in the reactive power
control. The same oscillation probably appears in the reactive power curves as well in
Figure 4.6b, but it is not noticeable by eye due to the scaling.
(a) Low load
(b) High load
Figure 4.7: Hub voltage and frequency response for the disconnection of Link 2.
4.1.5
Fault ride through
As it was mentioned before, the normal current limiting is not sufficient for fault handling,
and a fault ride through (FRT) control has to be implemented. For all of the hub side
converters the same, simple fault control strategy was implemented: if the hub voltage
falls below 0.8 pu, the active power is limited to zero, and the converter provides full
reactive power support to recover the voltage.
Advanced modelling of offshore energy hubs for real­time demonstrations
29
==PAGE:36==
The control strategy was tested on a symmetric phase to ground short circuit event, and
the results are presented in Figure 4.8. The fault was cleared manually after 0.1 s, and
the fault resistance was set to 50 Ω, which is much lower in a real situation, but this setting
allowed the examination of the system response without crashing the simulation.
By looking at the figures, it is clear that the control strategy is not sufficient. OFF_2 and
the wind farm converter does not exceed their power limits, but OFF_1 reaches even
twice its rated power in the active power output. The voltage level falls below 0.8 pu
during the fault, and it quickly recovers for a short time period. However, probably due to
overcorrection of the voltage in the fault control, the converters try to reduce the voltage in
the normal control, and this causes an oscillation in the voltage as an interference of the
two control strategies. Once the fault is cleared, the amplitude of the oscillation increases
even higher.
In order to solve this issue, a FRT curve could be used, which defines the amount of
reactive power support based on the voltage level. The FRT curve was not implemented
in this model, and is left for future work.
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.8: Active power and hub voltage response of the system for the symmetric fault.
4.2
AC­DC­coupled model
In the following, the simulation results of the model with a coupling on both sides will be
presented. As the model is unchanged between the offshore converters and the wind
farm, its behaviour is the same as the AC­coupled model’s on the hub side. Hence, these
results will not be presented, only the differences will be in focus.
The test scenario for this model is the same as the previous model’s first test scenario,
the increase in the generation of the wind farm from 0 to 500 MW.
30
Advanced modelling of offshore energy hubs for real­time demonstrations
==PAGE:37==
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.9: Active power of the onshore converters, and DC voltages in the HVDC system
for the increase in the generation.
Figure 4.9a shows that the onshore converters share the increased load of the links
equally. The two curves overlap completely, this is the reason why the black curve is
not displayed. Compared to Figure 4.1 it is easy to see how their behaviour changed.
The slight oscillation in the active power is dampened after approx. 4­5 seconds, and the
same is reflected in the DC voltage.
Finally, Figure 4.9b depicts the voltage level at both onshore terminals and at the offshore
common terminal. Similarly to the active power, the voltage level of the onshore terminals
match exactly, and the blue curve overlaps with the red one. The onshore converters
control the DC voltage at the onshore terminals, therefore the voltage there approaches
1.0 pu in the steady state. The voltage at the offshore common terminal is slightly higher,
which is necessary for the power transfer through the line.
Advanced modelling of offshore energy hubs for real­time demonstrations
31
==PAGE:38==
5
Conclusions
The purpose of this work was to develop a general model of an offshore energy hub and
validate it through simulations. The main focus of the modelling was on the VSCs and
their control strategies.
Initially, the modelling environment was introduced and studied in regard to already exist­
ing components. The voltage source converter control was identified as the key element
in the development, and different control strategies were studied.
The grid following and the grid forming converter control structure were presented in detail,
including options for active and reactive power, AC and DC voltage, and frequency control
strategies. Current limitation and fault ride­through control were also briefly discussed. At
the end of the section, the constructed models were successfully validated with simulation
results.
Afterwards, the offshore energy hub concept and different topologies were presented.
Two zero­inertia models were then implemented and discussed thoroughly, one of them
with only AC­side coupling, and the other one with coupling on both the AC and DC ter­
minals. Both models include one wind farm and two HVDC links.
In the last phase of the project, several test cases were designed for the assessment of
the developed models. The functioning of the models was investigated through these
test cases. During the normal operation scenarios, the behaviours were proven to be
adequate. The AC­coupled model was also able to handle the loss of an HVDC link with
a modified control strategy. In the fault simulations, the models did not have a satisfactory
response, but suggestions for improvements were made. The importance of the design
of control strategies was emphasized, as many times the solution of a problem could be
achieved in different ways.
Overall, the main goal of this thesis to develop a general model of the offshore energy
hub in RSCAD as well as the learning objectives in Section 1.3 were accomplished.
5.1
Future work
During the development of the project, several topics were discovered that would need
more research. Many of these were already mentioned, but the following list summarizes
these topics, and suggests areas for future investigations:
• Implementation of a master controller, which actively distributes the generation be­
tween the links.
• More advanced model implementation for the wind farm, and extension of its gen­
eration capacity.
• Implementation of a DC chopper for fault protection of the HVDC link.
• More detailed implementation of the fault ride through control.
• Implementation of islanding detection for the GFL, so the system can handle the
loss of the GFC.
• Detailed description of the grid requirements, control objectives, and expectations
of the energy hub. This is quite an extensive task, but crucial for simulation model
developments, otherwise only general models can be tested.
32
Advanced modelling of offshore energy hubs for real­time demonstrations
==PAGE:39==
• Optimization of control parameters either by analytical methods, like small signal
analysis, or by numerical methods.
• Hardware in loop testing to test the interaction of the developed models and a real
grid.
• Investigation of different types and locations of fault.
• Addition of a PtX or energy storage unit to the hub.
Advanced modelling of offshore energy hubs for real­time demonstrations
33
==PAGE:40==
References
[1]
Masson­Delmotte V. et al. (eds.) IPCC Climate Change 2021: The Physical Sci­
ence Basis. Contribution of Working Group I to the Sixth Assessment Report of the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. 2021. URL: www.ipcc.ch/assessment-
report/ar6/.
[2]
European Green Deal. URL: https://www.consilium.europa.eu/en/policies/green-
deal/.
[3]
Klima­ Energi­ og Forsyningsministeriet. LBK no. 2580 of 13/12/2021: The Climate
Act. URL: https://www.consilium.europa.eu/en/policies/green-deal/.
[4]
Birte Holst Jørgensen, Peter Hauge Madsen, and Karina Remler. IEA Technology
Collaboration Programme: Report 2021 Denmark. URL: https://usercontent.one/
wp/iea-wind.org/wp-content/uploads/2022/12/IEA_Wind_TCP_AR2021_Denmark.
pdf?media=1675080948.
[5]
Danish Energy Agency. Offshore Wind Potential in the North Sea: Long­run supply
curves and cross­country competitiveness. 2021. URL: https://ens.dk/sites/ens.dk/
files/Vindenergi/offshore_wind_potential_in_the_north_sea.pdf.
[6]
Danish Energy Agency. Denmark’s Energy Islands. URL: https://ens.dk/en/our-
responsibilities/energy-islands/denmarks-energy-islands.
[7]
X. et al. Xiang. “Cost Analysis and Comparison of HVAC, LFAC and HVDC for Off­
shore Wind Power Connection”. In: 12th IET International Conference on AC and
DC Power Transmission (2016). DOI: https://doi.org/10.1049/cp.2016.0386.
[8]
Energinet. Energy Islands in Denmark. URL: https://en.energinet.dk/infrastructure-
projects/energy-islands/.
[9]
Hubs and spokes – viable beyond theory. Sharing of Feasibility Results. Tech. rep.
North Sea Wind Power Hub Programme, Nov. 2022.
[10]
Andrea Tosatto et al. “North Sea Energy Islands: Impact on national markets and
grids”. In: Energy Policy 167 (2022), p. 112907. ISSN: 0301­4215. DOI: https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.enpol.2022.112907. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S030142152200132X.
[11]
Hongyu Zhang et al. “Modelling and analysis of offshore energy hubs”. In: Energy
261 (2022), p. 125219. ISSN: 0360­5442. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.energy.
2022.125219.
[12]
Matti Koivisto, Juan Gea­Bermúdez, and Poul Sørensen. “North Sea offshore grid
development: combined optimisation of grid and generation investments towards
2050”. In: IET Renewable Power Generation 14.8 (2020), pp. 1259–1267. DOI:
https://doi.org/10.1049/iet-rpg.2019.0693.
[13]
Juan Gea­Bermúdez et al. “Optimal generation and transmission development of
the North Sea region: Impact of grid architecture and planning horizon”. In: Energy
191 (2020), p. 116512. ISSN: 0360­5442. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.energy.
2019.116512.
[14]
Goran Durakovic, Pedro Crespo del Granado, and Asgeir Tomasgard. “Powering
Europe with North Sea offshore wind: The impact of hydrogen investments on grid
infrastructure and power prices”. In: Energy 263 (2023), p. 125654. ISSN: 0360­
5442. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.energy.2022.125654.
[15]
Christian Thommessen et al. “Techno­economic system analysis of an offshore en­
ergy hub with an outlook on electrofuel applications”. In: Smart Energy 3 (2021),
p. 100027. ISSN: 2666­9552. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.segy.2021.100027.
34
Advanced modelling of offshore energy hubs for real­time demonstrations
==PAGE:41==
[16]
MultiDC project. URL: http://www.multi-dc.eu/.
[17]
Georgios Misyris et al. “North Sea Wind Power Hub: System Configurations, Grid
Implementation and Techno­economic Assessment”. In: Proceedings of CIGRE 2020.
CIGRE 2020 ; Conference date: 23­08­2020 Through 28­08­2020. CIGRE (Interna­
tional Council on Large Electric Systems), 2020.
[18]
North Sea Wind Power Hub. Knowledge articles. URL: https://northseawindpowerhub.
eu/knowledge.
[19]
North Sea Wind Power Hub. Dynamic Stability Studies Offshore Grid: Active Power
Control of Wind Hub. 2021. URL: https://northseawindpowerhub.eu/knowledge/
active-power-control-of-wind-hub.
[20]
North Sea Wind Power Hub. Dynamic Stability Studies Offshore Grid: AC Voltage
and Frequency Control of Wind Hub. 2022. URL: https://northseawindpowerhub.eu/
knowledge/ac-voltage-and-frequency-control-of-wind-hub.
[21]
Technology readiness levels (TRL); Extract from Part 19 ­ Commission Decision
C(2014)4995. URL: https://ec.europa.eu/research/participants/data/ref/h2020/wp/
2014_2015/annexes/h2020-wp1415-annex-g-trl_en.pdf.
[22]
Murthy Priya, Kola MuraliKumar, and P. Ponnambalam. “VSC Based Modular Mul­
tilevel Converter For Grid Applications Using PI Controller”. In: 2019 Innovations
in Power and Advanced Computing Technologies (i­PACT). Vol. 1. 2019, pp. 1–6.
DOI: 10.1109/i-PACT44901.2019.8959970.
[23]
POWER SYSTEM COMPONENTS MANUAL. RTDS Technologies Inc. 2023.
[24]
Ana­Irina Stan and Daniel­Ioan Stroe. “Control of VSC­based HVDC transmission
system for offshore wind power plants”. MA thesis. Aalborg, Denmark: Aalborg Uni­
versity, 2010.
[25]
Prabha S. Kundur. Power system stability and control. Mc Graw Hill Education,
1994.
[26]
Marian Kazmierkowski et al. Control in Power Electronics. Academic Press, 2002.
[27]
Technical regulation 3.2.5 for wind power plants above 11 kW ­ 13/96336­43. Tech.
rep. Energinet, 2017.
[28]
Georgios S. Misyris et al. “Zero­Inertia Offshore Grids: N­1 Security and Active
Power Sharing”. In: IEEE Transactions on Power Systems 37.3 (2022), pp. 2052–
2062. DOI: 10.1109/TPWRS.2021.3113274.
[29]
Qing­Chang Zhong and Tomas Hornik. “Synchronverters: Grid­Friendly Inverters
That Mimic Synchronous Generators”. In: Control of Power Inverters in Renewable
Energy and Smart Grid Integration. 2012, pp. 277–296. DOI: 10.1002/9781118481806.
ch18.
[30]
Stability pathfinder – draft grid code – grid forming and request for information feed­
back. Tech. rep. National Grid ESO, Oct. 2019.
[31]
High Penetration of Power Electronic Interfaced Power Sources and the Potential
Contribution of Grid Forming Converters. Tech. rep. ENTSO­E, 2019, p. 32.
[32]
Kanakesh Vatta Kkuni. “Assessment and Augmentation of Power Converter Control
Towards Enhanced Power System Stability”. PhD thesis. Technical University of
Denmark, Aug. 2021.
[33]
Andrew D. Paquette and Deepak M. Divan. “Virtual impedance current limiting for
inverters in microgrids with synchronous generators”. In: 2013 IEEE Energy Con­
version Congress and Exposition. 2013, pp. 1039–1046. DOI: 10.1109/ECCE.2013.
6646818.
[34]
Offshore Energy Hubs ­ High Level System Description and Requirements. URL:
https://en.energinet.dk/about-our-reports/reports/offshore-energy-hubs/.
[35]
Best Paths project. URL: http://www.bestpaths-project.eu/.
Advanced modelling of offshore energy hubs for real­time demonstrations
35
==PAGE:42==
[36]
Progress on Meshed HVDC Offshore Transmission Networks. URL: https://www.
promotion-offshore.net/.
[37]
ENTSO­E Position on Offshore Development ­ Interoperability. URL: https://www.
entsoe.eu/news/2021/01/25/third-entso-e-position-paper-on-offshore-development-
focuses-on-interoperability/.
[38]
B. Sævarsson et al. “Low­Inertia Offshore Energy Hub: Small Signal Stability Anal­
ysis and Critical Parameters”. 2023.
[39]
Christoph Nentwig et al. “Application of DC choppers in HVDC grids”. In: 2016 IEEE
International Energy Conference (ENERGYCON). 2016, pp. 1–5. DOI: 10.1109/
ENERGYCON.2016.7513951.
[40]
Anna Ferguson et al. Benefits in moving the intra­array voltage from 33 kV to 66 kV
AC for large offshore wind farms. Tech. rep. Atkins plc, Newcastle upon Tyne and
Carbon Trust, London, United Kingdom.
36
Advanced modelling of offshore energy hubs for real­time demonstrations
==PAGE:43==
A
Appendix
Table A.1: Advantages and disadvantages of solutions for coupling the electrical compo­
nents [34].
Advantages
Disadvantages
AC­
coupling
• DC cable voltage levels can
be different if this is economi­
cally feasible
• Technology is mature in re­
gards to components
• High risk of AC side control
and stability problems.
• AC­interoperability is an is­
sue, and HVDC vendors and
wind power plant owners will
have to cooperate.
• If DC cable voltages aren’t
aligned, the system can only
in a limited ex­ tent be ex­
panded into a MTDC configu­
ration in the future.
• Higher losses when used as
interconnector.
DC­
coupling
• Lower losses when used as
interconnector
• Lower control and stability risk
and complexity on the AC­
side due to coupling of fewer
systems. The AC­side is sim­
ilar to classical HVDC con­
nected offshore wind.
• Transmission capacity can be
expanded in the future without
constructing extra converters
offshore.
• Multi­terminal HVDC opera­
tion is less mature and no
standards or grid­codes exist
• Multi­vendor
interoperability
has not been demonstrated,
and there is a high risk for
vendor
lock­in
and
signifi­
cantly weakened negotiating
position of the system opera­
tor
• Depends
on
HVDC
circuit
breaker technology for which
there is no operational experi­
ence in Europe
• DC cable voltage must be
aligned between parties
• The expandability of the AC­
side
may
be
limited
with­
out
the
400
kV
AC
bus,
and the capacity for connect­
ing large­scale consumption
plants, such as PtX may be
limited.
Advanced modelling of offshore energy hubs for real­time demonstrations
37
==PAGE:44==
Both AC
and DC
coupling
The advantages for each solution
above (depends on mode of oper­
ation) and:
• Reduced control and stability
risk, as the possibility to con­
nect on either the DC or AC
side provides redundancy.
• The AC­side coupling can be
commissioned and tested in
the first step, while MTDC op­
eration with testing of con­
trol systems and HVDC circuit
breaker is implemented at a
later stage
• More
attractive
as
multi­
vendor
demonstrator
for
project
owner
due
to
risk
mitigation
through
the
fall
back option of AC coupling
Will have the disadvantages for
both solutions
Table A.2: Transformer parameters
Vprim[kV ]
Vsec[kV ]
S[MV A]
RCu[pu]
Xleak[pu]
T_ON_1
525
400
2100
0.01
0.15
T_ON_2
525
400
2100
0.01
0.15
T_OFF_1
525
400
2100
0.01
0.15
T_OFF_2
525
400
2100
0.01
0.15
T_hub_1
66
400
800
0.01
0.15
T1_WF_1
66
66
800
0.01
0.15
Table A.3: Cable parameters
Length[km]
R[Ω/km]
L[Ω/km]
C[MΩ∗km]
HVDC LINK 1
200
0.011
­
­
HVDC LINK 2
200
0.011
­
­
WIND FARM 1 CABLE
50
0.0064
0.0091
0.001
Table A.4: Converter parameters
VDC[kV ]
V ac[kV ]
S[MV A]
RAC[Ω]
LAC[H]
RDC[Ω]
CDC[uF]
ON_1
1050
525
2100
1e­8
1e­6
1e­6
1e­6
ON_2
1050
525
2100
1e­8
1e­6
1e­6
1e­6
OFF_1
1050
525
2100
1e­8
0.025
1e­6
1e­6
OFF_2
1050
525
2100
1e­8
0.025
1e­6
1e­6
WF_1
132
66
800
1e­8
1e­9
1e­6
1e­6
38
Advanced modelling of offshore energy hubs for real­time demonstrations
==PAGE:45==
Table A.5: General droop setting. The same values were applied in all cases where droop
was needed.
Variable
Droop value
P
5%
Q
3%
Advanced modelling of offshore energy hubs for real­time demonstrations
39
==PAGE:46==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Frederiksborgvej 399
DK­4000 Roskilde
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.wind.dtu.dk
