==PAGE:1==
Modelling the effects of energetic and mod-
ulation masking on the intelligibility of non-
vocoded and vocoded speech
Master Thesis
Cathrina Veigel
DTU Hearing Systems
Department of Health Technology
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Modelling the effects of energetic and modulation masking on the intelligibility of
non-vocoded and vocoded speech
Master Thesis
July 1, 2023
By
Cathrina Veigel
Supervisors:
Helia Relaño-Iborra
Torsten Dau
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Published by:
DTU, Department of Health Technology, Oersteds Plads, Building 352,1,
2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
https://www.hea.healthtech.dtu.dk/
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over five months (= 30 ECTS) at the Hearing System
Group, Department of Health Technology, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU,
in partial fulfillment for the degree Master of Engineering Acoustics, MSc.
Cathrina Veigel - s212712
Signature
Date
ii
Modelling the effects of masking on the intelligibility of vocoded speech
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Vocoded speech can be used to simulate aspects of cochlear implant (CI) listening. Mod-
elling the intelligibility of such stimuli in normal-hearing (NH) listeners may lead to valuable
insights into the auditory processing of CI listeners. The present study replicated and ex-
tended a dataset collected by Oxenham and Kreft (2014) using two types of vocoders, a
tone vocoder and a tone vocoder that simulates the effects of current spread in CIs. In
order to evaluate the relative contributions of energetic and modulation masking across
vocoder-types, three maskers were considered: speech-shaped noise, pure-tone com-
plexes (PT) and noise-modulated tone complexes. In addition, the present study used
speech intelligibility models to simulate and predict NH listeners’ performance obtained
with these stimuli. Models that include a temporal processing stage accounting for mod-
ulation masking were considered. They accounted for the increased speech intelligibility
in the PT condition as compared to the performance obtained with maskers exhibiting
inherent modulations, both in the unprocessed and vocoded conditions. Additionally, the
models predicted similar speech intelligibility performance for all three maskers when us-
ing the vocoder with current spread, in line with the data. The model simulations presented
here support the hypothesis that overall masker energy, and not modulation energy, de-
termines speech intelligibility in CI listening. However, overall prediction offsets for the
vocoder with current spread indicate that the effects limiting the speech perception in CI-
simulated listening are not yet fully captured by the models. Possible explanations for the
reduced speech intelligibility in the vocoder with current spread include distortions in the
speech’s fundamental frequency contour and other informational masking effects not ac-
counted for by envelope-based models. Further investigations are needed to understand
the specific mechanisms that limit speech perception in this vocoder. However, based on
the models’ accurate predictions across maskers within vocoders, the envelope-based
models might provide a valuable framework to study masking effects on vocoded speech
and relate the outcomes to actual CI listening.
Modelling the effects of masking on the intelligibility of vocoded speech
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
This master thesis project was only possible thanks to my supervisors Professor Torsten
Dau and Helia Relaño-Iborra. It was great working together. I would like to thank them for
the frequent meetings, guidance throughout the project, inspiring discussions, support in
technical and understanding issues, and all the encouragement when I needed it.
I would also like to thank everyone at the Hearing Systems Section at DTU. It is an amaz-
ing working environment and when needed, I could always count on someone to help.
Special thanks to Rikke Sørensen who was a big help with any questions regarding test
participant handling, to Abigail Kressner who provided the DAST measurement software
I used in my study as well as assistance in calibrating the equipment, and to Caroline van
Oosterhout who helped me with the practicalities concerning test participant compensa-
tion.
Moreover, I want to thank Andrew Oxenham for clarifications concerning the stimuli used
in the study I worked with and an interesting discussion about his and my work. Thanks
also to Heather Kreft for sending the speech and noise files as well as the matlab code
for the vocoders they used in their study, so I could use the exact implementation for the
modelling work.
Finally, a big tanks to all my friends here in Denmark, for all the love and support and for
making me feel at home. A special thanks to Tyson and Hella who wrote their thesis in the
same building as I did - the frequent breaks with table tennis, table football, walks around
the campus and/or talks about everything and nothing were a big source of motivation,
fun, and release of pressure. Another special thanks to my flatmates Dhruv and Sara
for the exchange of experiences about each other’s thesis work and for always listening
when I was frustrated at home. I am really grateful for my dear friend Heli, who gave me
advice about English grammar and sentence structure. Of course, I also want to thank
my family and friends in Germany and France who supported me with motivational words
and love despite the big distance between us.
iv
Modelling the effects of masking on the intelligibility of vocoded speech
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
Nomenclature . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
vii
1
Introduction
1
2
Background
3
2.1
Speech intelligibility and masking . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Cochlear implants and simulations by vocoders . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.3
Oxenham and Kreft (2014)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.4
Speech intelligibility models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.4.1
sESPM and mr-sEPSM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.4.2
sEPSMcorr and sEPSMcorr2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.4.3
sCASP
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3
Methods
9
3.1
Data Collection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.1.1
Subjects . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.1.2
Stimuli . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.1.3
Conditions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
3.1.4
Procedure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
3.2
Modelling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
4
Results
17
4.1
Data Collection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
4.2
Modelling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
4.2.1
Unprocessed . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
4.2.2
Tone-excited envelope vocoder . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
4.2.3
Tone-excited envelope vocoder with simulated current spread . . . . 20
5
Analysis
23
5.1
Modulation energy change by vocoding processes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
5.2
Effect of vocoding strategies on the waveform of speech envelope . . . . . 25
5.3
Distortion of the fundamental frequency of speech due to spectral smearing 26
6
Discussion
29
6.1
Data Collection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
6.2
Modelling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
6.2.1
Unprocessed . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
6.2.2
Tone-excited envelope vocoder . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
6.2.3
Tone-excited envelope vocoder with simulated current spread . . . . 31
6.2.4
Perspectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
7
Conclusion
35
Bibliography
37
Modelling the effects of masking on the intelligibility of vocoded speech
v
==PAGE:8==
A Detailed model descriptions
41
A.1 sEPSM and mr-sEPSM
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
A.2 sEPSMcorr and sEPSMcorr2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42
A.3 sCASP
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
B Data selection process
46
C Measurement Software
47
D Additional Modelling: sEPSM with band importance function
48
D.1 Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 48
D.2 Results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49
D.3 Discussion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 50
E
Additional Figures
52
vi
Modelling the effects of masking on the intelligibility of vocoded speech
==PAGE:9==
Nomenclature
4-PTA average pure tone threshold at frequencies 0.5, 1, 2 and 4 kHz
ρ
Pearson’s correlation coefficient
BIF
band importance function
CI
cochlear implant
dB
Decibel
F0
fundamental frequency
HL
hearing level
Hz
Hertz
MAE
mean absolute error
mr-sEPSM multi-resolution speech-based envelope power spectrum model
MT
modulated tone complex
PT+2LF pure tones masker with two additional frequencies at 89 and 211 Hz
PT
pure tone complex
RMS
root mean squared
sCASP speech-based computational auditory signal processing and perception model
sEPSMcorr speech-based envelope power spectrum model with correlation backend
sEPSM speech-based envelope power spectrum model
SII
speech intelligibility index
SNRenv envelope power signal-to-noise ratio
SNR
signal-to-noise ratio
SPL
sound pressure level
SSNbp bandpass filtered speech shaped noise with cutoff frequencies 284 and 8332 Hz
SSN
speech shaped (Gaussian) noise
STI
speech transmission index
STOI short-time objective intelligibility measure
unpro unprocessed condition
voc1
tone-excited envelope vocoder condition
voc2
tone-excited envelope vocoder with additional simulation of current spread in CIs
condition
Modelling the effects of masking on the intelligibility of vocoded speech
vii
==PAGE:10==
viii
Modelling the effects of masking on the intelligibility of vocoded speech
==PAGE:11==
1
Introduction
In everyday communication of humans, understanding spoken language plays a major
role, especially in noisy conditions. People with hearing loss or cochlear implants (CI) of-
ten face considerable challenges when it comes to comprehending speech in background
noise (e.g. Peters et al., 1998, Zeng, 2004) whereas normal-hearing listeners typically do
not encounter significant difficulties in this task. It is important to explore and understand
the impacts of different kinds of background noise on speech perception in both, nor-
mal hearing (NH) and hearing impaired (HI) listeners, e.g. to develop and improve noise
reduction algortihms in hearing aids and CIs.
Speech intelligibility models are a powerful tool to connect the physical characteristics
of speech and various measures used to evaluate speech intelligibility, such as sentence
recognition scores. They are helpful in investigating fundamental factors that contribute to
human understanding in different listening scenarios. Additionally, by replicating human
behavior, models become valuable for the advancement of algorithms used in speech
transmission, hearing aids, and telecommunication technologies. An early example of
a speech intelligibility model is the speech intelligibility index (SII, ANSI/ASA S3.5-1997,
R2020), which can predict speech intelligibility in background noise. The predictions are
generated by calculating a weighted average of the long-term signal-to-noise ratio (SNR)
in different frequency bands, using clean speech and noise as inputs. It relies on the
assumption that the content of speech in different spectral bands is not equally important
for intelligibility. In the SII this is reflected by weighting the model parameters (audibil-
ity) of each frequency band according to a band importance function (BIF). It was shown
that these BIFs depend on the speech material, e.g. on the redundancy of the sentences
(Pavlovic, 1987). Another approach to model speech intelligibility has been the analysis
of stimulus characteristics in the modulation domain. Modulations refer to slowly varying
changes of the signal’s sound pressure level over time. These changes are distinct from
the rapid fluctuations of the temporal fine structure, which represent the detailed timing
and phase information of the signal (S. P. Bacon and Grantham, 1989). Models like the
speech transmission index (STI, Steeneken and Houtgast, 1980), the speech-based en-
velope power spectrum model (sEPSM, Jørgensen and Dau, 2011) or the speech-based
computational auditory signal processing and perception model (sCASP, Relaño-Iborra,
Zaar, et al., 2019) showed that utilizing such modulation information of both the speech
and noise is useful to account for speech intelligibility of NH listeners in various back-
ground conditions. However, most speech intelligibility models are challenged in accu-
rately characterizing decreased speech perception in HI listeners or CI users (e.g. Glas-
berg and Moore, 1989, Peters et al., 1998, Zeng, 2004, Relaño-Iborra, Zaar, et al., 2019).
A method to partly incorporate CI perception mechanisms into existing speech intelligibil-
ity models is to predict the understanding of vocoded speech in NH listeners (Chen and
Loizou, 2011). Several studies (e.g. Dorman et al., 1998, Fu and Nogaki, 2005, Oxen-
ham and Kreft, 2014) have shown that vocoded speech can reflect perceptional aspects
of CI listening. As stated by Chen and Loizou (2011), modeling work on such data could
help to understand the auditory signal processing of CI users better and be used for the
development of new speech processing strategies in CIs.
The vocoded speech intelligibility dataset considered in the present study was collected by
Oxenham and Kreft (2014). They showed that modulations inherent to background noise
have different masking effects on the speech intelligibility of NH and CI or CI-simulated
Modelling the effects of masking on the intelligibility of vocoded speech
1
==PAGE:12==
listeners. Using Gaussian noise, pure tone complexes, and noise-modulated tone com-
plexes, they manipulated the inherent temporal fluctuations of maskers.
The results
showed that NH listeners exhibited better performance with the tone-complex masker
that has no inherent modulations compared to the Gaussian noise condition including in-
herent modulations. This finding supported the hypothesis that modulation masking has a
detrimental effect on speech perception (e.g.Jørgensen and Dau, 2011, Jørgensen, S. D.
Ewert, et al., 2013, Stone et al., 2012). However, the improved performance was not ob-
served in CI listeners, and the same lack of improvement was found in NH listeners when
the stimuli were generated using a vocoding procedure that simulated the processing
strategies employed in CIs. This discovery resulted in the hypothesis that, in CI listen-
ers, speech intelligibility is not determined by modulation energy but rather by the overall
energy of the masker.
The aim of the present project was to (a) replicate and extend the data collected by Oxen-
ham and Kreft (2014) and (b) utilize speech intelligibility models to predict the different
modulation and energetic masking effects in NH and simulated CI listeners. It is hy-
pothesized that speech intelligibility models that include a modulation-frequency selec-
tive processing stage are able to account for the lack of improved performance in tonal
maskers of CI-simulated listeners. As these modulation-based models use envelope in-
formation of the speech and noise signals to predict speech perception, they are assumed
to capture differences in inherent modulations between maskers. This hypothesis was in-
vestigated by the usage of two computational auditory models: sEPSMcorr2 (correlation-
based sEPSM, Relaño-Iborra, May, et al., 2016 and Steinmetzger, Zaar, et al., 2019) and
sCASP.
A short description of the dataset by Oxenham and Kreft (2014), of the models consid-
ered and of some theory about speech intelligibility in general is provided in the back-
ground chapter 2. The methods of the data collection and modelling work are presented
in chapter 3. The results are shown in chapter 4 followed by an analysis of the signals
in chapter 5. The outcomes of the data collection and modelling work are discussed in
chapter 6, followed by an overall conclusion summarizing the main findings of the project
(chapter 7).
2
Modelling the effects of masking on the intelligibility of vocoded speech
==PAGE:13==
2
Background
2.1
Speech intelligibility and masking
Intelligibility refers to the ability of speech or speech-like material to be understood by
listeners. Speech intelligibility is influenced by multiple factors, such as the clarity of
speech sounds, the presence of background noise or competing sounds, the acoustic
quality of the audio signal, and the listener’s auditory capabilities and cognitive processes
(e.g. Kießling et al., 2018). Measurements of speech intelligibility typically involve tasks
that assess the percentage of correctly recognized speech units (e.g. phonemes, sylla-
bles, words or sentences) at different presentation levels or signal-to-noise ratios (SNRs).
When measuring speech intelligibility in background noise, the concept of auditory mask-
ing comes into play. Auditory masking describes the reduced intelligibility of a target
auditory signal when it is presented together with another (masker) signal, compared to
its presentation in isolation (e.g. investigated by Hawkins and Stevens, 1950). Usually,
three types of masking are distinguished:
1. Energetic masking:
This term characterizes the masking effect caused by the competition between the
target signal and the masker signal at the periphery of the auditory system, specifi-
cally due to overlapping excitation patterns in the cochlea or auditory nerve (Durlach
et al., 2003). In other words, the energy of the masking signal overlaps with the
energy of the target signal in the same frequency range, which makes it more chal-
lenging for the listener to perceive and understand the target signal.
2. Modulation masking:
This type of masking refers to the interference or degradation of a target signal
caused by inherent temporal envelope fluctuations (modulations) in the masker sig-
nal. It was shown to strongly contribute to the masking of speech in NH listeners
(e.g. Jørgensen and Dau, 2011, Jørgensen, S. D. Ewert, et al., 2013, Stone et al.,
2012, Oxenham and Kreft, 2014).
3. Informational masking:
This term is often used to describe any masking effect that cannot be attributed to
energetic masking (Durlach et al., 2003). Informational masking is thought to result
from central mechanisms whereas energetic masking is located in the peripheral
system. An effect considered as informational masking is for example the eleva-
tion in thresholds caused by stimulus uncertainty in both frequency and modulation
frequency domain (Durlach et al., 2003. Conroy and Kidd, 2021).
2.2
Cochlear implants and simulations by vocoders
A cochlear implant is a neuroprosthesis that directly stimulates the sensory nervous sys-
tem (Kießling et al., 2018): In case of profound hearing loss due to loss of hair cells in the
inner ear, an electrode positioned within the cochlear spiral is used for transmitting au-
ditory information directly to the auditory nerve. Modern multi-channel electrode designs
allow for direct neural stimulation at different cochlear locations using electric stimuli that
represent acoustic information picked up by an external microphone. In CIs, the main cue
delivered to the auditory nerve is envelope information of the acoustic signal (e.g. Brown
and S. Bacon, 2010). There exist many different strategies to stimulate the auditory nerve
fibers, such as continuous interleaved sampling (CIS), simultaneous analog stimulation
Modelling the effects of masking on the intelligibility of vocoded speech
3
==PAGE:14==
(SAS) or channel-specific sampling sequence (CSSS), to name a few (Kießling et al.,
2018). The choice of strategy may vary depending on the specific needs and preferences
of the recipient. Other differences across cochlear implant users are e.g. variations in
the survival of cell bodies in the spiral ganglion and variances in the positioning of the
electrodes in relation to the remaining neural tissue (Dorman et al., 1998). These fac-
tors contribute to the complexity and diversity of outcomes observed in cochlear implant
research.
To study effects of CI processing, while minimizing the variability in outcomes, vocoder
simulations of CI listening can be tested in NH listeners (e.g. Dorman et al., 1998, Fu and
Nogaki, 2005, Bingabr et al., 2008, Crew and Galvin, 2012, Oxenham and Kreft, 2014).
Certain perceptual effects due to the limited spectral resolution of CI listeners can be well
reflected by vocoder strategies, as e.g. shown by Oxenham and Kreft (2014). Crew and
Galvin, 2012 state that two main factors limit spectral resolution in CI listeners:
1. number of implanted electrodes, or in case of current steering: virtual channels
2. amount of current spread due to channel interaction of the electrodes
Channel interactions in CIs can occur due to unintended electric field interactions between
nearby electrodes causing an overlapping spread of neural excitation on the auditory
nerve (Crew and Galvin, 2012). This phenomenon limits the number of useful concur-
rent electrodes as in the case of nearby electrodes, CI users are not able to distinguish
which one was stimulated (Brown and S. Bacon, 2010). This is why mainly envelope in-
formation is delivered to the auditory nerve. Envelope vocoder can simulate this loss of
temporal fine-structure and limited spectral resolution. However, the results have to be
interpreted with caution when referring to real CI listening, as these simulations do not
completely represent the complex processing of CI hearing.
In the study of Steinmetzger and Rosen (2015), a noise-excited envelope vocoder and
Dudley-vocoder (Dudley, 1939) were used to synthesize speech in different amounts of
channels. The noise-vocoding resulted in a speech signal that was completely aperiodic
with only information about the envelope of the speech signal but without any information
about the fundamental frequency (F0) contours of the speech. Contrary, the Dudley-
vocoder was designed to preserve the F0 contours. Another approach was taken by
Oxenham and Kreft (2014) who used tone-excited envelope vocoders (Whitmal et al.,
2007) to simulate limited spectral resolution. An advantage of this type of vocoding is that
it avoids introducing intrinsic modulations due to band-limited noise carriers. However,
Brown and S. Bacon (2010) state that vocoders with sinusoidal carriers may provide more
pitch information in the resulting speech signal than vocoders that use noise-band carriers.
Current spread due to interaction of the CI-electrodes can be simulated by e.g. using
a tone-excited envelope vocoder and incorporating weighted envelope information from
neighboring vocoder channels into the final envelope used to modulate the pure-tone of
the respective vocoder band (Crew and Galvin, 2012, Oxenham and Kreft, 2014).
2.3
Oxenham and Kreft (2014)
Oxenham and Kreft (2014) systematically investigated the effects of modulations on speech
intelligibility in NH and CI listeners in the presence of background noise, by manipulating
inherent temporal fluctuations of maskers. As the focus of the present study was on the
NH data of Oxenham and Kreft (2014), these results are summarized in the following.
For reference, speech intelligibility measurements in background noise were conducted
with unprocessed stimuli. The other two conditions consisted of the signals being pro-
cessed through a tone-excited envelope vocoder and a vocoder with simulated current
4
Modelling the effects of masking on the intelligibility of vocoded speech
==PAGE:15==
spread of CIs. In each condition, three maskers were considered: speech-shaped Gaus-
sian noise (SSN, with inherent modulations), a pure-tone complex (PT, without inherent
modulations) and a modulated tone complex (MT, with inherent modulations that match
those produced with SSN at the output of the tone-excited envelope vocoder). Speech
intelligibility was measured in four NH listeners at different SNRs.
The measured thresholds of the study conducted by Oxenham and Kreft (2014) are shown
in Figure 2.1. In the unprocessed condition (unpro, top left), NH listeners took advantage
of the lack of modulation and spectral sparsity of the PT masker, reaching thresholds close
to 100% correct understanding even at the lowest SNR of -15 dB (around 80% correct).
Adding modulations reduced the thresholds slightly at low SNRs. The performance in the
spectral dense SSN was much lower compared to the tonal maskers, with thresholds de-
creasing to almost 0% correct at -15 dB SNR. In the vococded condition (voc1, top right), a
slight overall drop of performance compared to the unprocessed condition was observed,
caused by the loss of spectral resolution and temporal fine structure. The listeners still
showed better performance in the PT masker compared to the SSN masker. However, the
spectral sparse MT masker with inherent modulations led to the same thresholds as the
Figure 2.1: Data of normal-hearing listeners replotted from Oxenham and Kreft (2014) for the
three conditions unprocessed (unpro, top left), tone-excited envelope vocoded (voc1, top right)
and vocoded with simulated current spread (voc2, bottom) and the three masker types speech
shaped noise (SSN), pure tone complex (PT) and modulated tone complex (MT). The proportion
of words correctly reported is plotted as a function of signal-to-noise ratio. The standard error of
the mean between listeners is represented by error bars.
Modelling the effects of masking on the intelligibility of vocoded speech
5
==PAGE:16==
SSN masker, as MT was designed to mimic the modulations of SSN at the output of each
vocoder channel. In the vocoded condition with simulated current spread (voc2, bottom),
overall performance was further reduced and no difference between the three masker
types was observed, indicating that eliminating inherent fluctuations from the maskers
has no beneficial effect on speech perception in CI simulated NH listeners. These results
of the vocoder with simulated spread were very similar to the performance of CI users
in the three maskers (Oxenham and Kreft, 2014). Thus, Oxenham and Kreft (2014) hy-
pothesized that in CI hearing, speech perception is primarily determined by the overall
energy of the masker in each cochlear implant channel, regardless of fluctuations. They
assumed a trade-off between spectral resolution and fluctuations inherent to noise in CI
speech perception: As spectral resolution decreases due to limited channels and current
spread, speech perception becomes more challenging but at the same time, the impact
of noise fluctuations diminishes due to temporal envelope summation across channels.
An attempt to model the effect of the different maskers used in Oxenham and Kreft (2014)
on speech intelligibility of NH listeners in the unprocessed condition was taken by Veigel
(2022). The considered model was the speech-based envelope power spectrum model
(sEPSM, Jørgensen and Dau, 2011, described in the following section). The sEPSM was
found to assign significance to low-frequency regions that were assumed unimportant in
the unprocessed condition in Oxenham and Kreft (2014). A detailed explanation of the
masker design, their energy distributions and the resulting underlying assumption in Ox-
enham and Kreft (2014) is presented in section 3.1. The masker design resulted in an
overshooting of model outputs in auditory filters below the vocoder channels in the sEPSM
(Veigel, 2022). Therefore saturated predictions of 100% correct were observed for the
PT masker. Considering these model outcomes, it seems like speech information in fre-
quency regions below and above the vocoder cutoff-frequencies used in Oxenham and
Kreft (2014) holds relevance for speech understanding and masking in these regions has
an impact on the speech intelligibility, contrary to the underlying assumption in Oxenham
and Kreft (2014). Veigel (2022) proposed a possible solution to reduce the effect of over-
shooting auditory filters in the sEPSM through the implementation of a band-importance
function within the model. The band-importance function assigns weights to the frequency
bands, reflecting the respective contribution of each band to speech intelligibility in NH lis-
teners.
2.4
Speech intelligibility models
The models considered in the present study and in the project by Veigel (2022) are pre-
sented in short. A detailed description of the signal processing stages of each model is
provided in Appendix A. All considered models contain a temporal processing stage.
2.4.1
sESPM and mr-sEPSM
The speech-based envelope power spectrum model (sEPSM, Jørgensen and Dau, 2011)
is inspired by the concept first introduced by Dubbelboer and Houtgast (2008) of consid-
ering changes of modulations in both, the speech signal and the noise to predict speech
intelligibility. This is in contrast to the speech transmission index (STI, Houtgast et al.,
1980), where only the modulations of clean speech are considered. In the model by
Dubbelboer and Houtgast (2008), the signal-to-noise ratio of the clean speech modula-
tions to the noise (S/N)mod and interaction modulations of the noisy speech were con-
sidered the determinant factor for speech intelligibility. The sEPSM, however, assumes
that the speech modulations are masked by the inherent modulations of the noise alone,
interaction modulations of the noisy speech are neglected. Based on the envelope power
spectrum model (EPSM; Dau et al., 1999, S. Ewert and Dau, 2000) which predicts am-
6
Modelling the effects of masking on the intelligibility of vocoded speech
==PAGE:17==
plitude modulation detection and masking of non-speech signals, the envelope power
signal-to-noise ratio (SNRenv) is the decision metric of the sEPSM. The model was shown
to account for conditions of speech in stationary noise, effects of reverberation and spec-
tral subtraction noise reduction algorithms on speech perception. Later, the sEPSM was
extended by Jørgensen, S. D. Ewert, et al. (2013) to the multi-resolution sEPSM, estimat-
ing the SNRenv on a time-segment basis in order to account for conditions with fluctuating
noise.
2.4.2
sEPSMcorr and sEPSMcorr2
The correlation speech-based envelope power spectrum model (sEPSMcorr, Relaño-Iborra,
May, et al., 2016) combines the front end of the mr-sEPSM with a correlation back end
as used in the short-time objective intelligibility measure (STOI, Taal et al., 2011). STOI is
based on the idea that speech intelligibility is determined by the similarity between noisy
and clean speech, thus a comparison of the clean and noisy speech output of a front end
is performed using cross-correlation. The correlation in the sEPSMcorr is based on the sig-
nals in the envelope domain, containing similar processing stages as the envelope based
mr-sEPSM. The model demonstrated its ability to consider the impacts of both stationary
and fluctuating background noise, as well as non-linear distortions such as spectral sub-
traction, phase jitter, and ideal time-frequency segregation (Relaño-Iborra, May, et al.,
2016). However, it fails to account for the effects of reverberation on speech perception.
Later, modifications to the sEPSMcorr were applied by Steinmetzger, Zaar, et al., 2019 to
preserve the differences between aperiodic and periodic sounds.
2.4.3
sCASP
The speech-based computational auditory signal processing and perception model (sCASP,
Relaño-Iborra, Zaar, et al., 2019) is an extension of the CASP model (Jepsen et al.,
2008) towards speech intelligibility prediction. The model integrates a non-linear auditory-
inspired preprocessing stage with a backend that relies on cross-correlation between
clean and degraded speech representations in the modulation envelope domain. It was
shown by Relaño-Iborra, Zaar, et al. (2019) that the model effectively captures speech
intelligibility degradation caused by factors such as additive noise, phase-jitter distortion,
single-channel noise reduction, as well as improvements resulting from ideal binary mask
processing. Moreover, due to its realistic non-linear auditory preprocessing, the model
demonstrated sensitivity to stimulus-level effects in auditory perception, including limita-
tions in audibility at low levels and compromised speech intelligibility at high levels.
Modelling the effects of masking on the intelligibility of vocoded speech
7
==PAGE:18==
8
Modelling the effects of masking on the intelligibility of vocoded speech
==PAGE:19==
3
Methods
The project consisted of both, an experimental part to replicate and extend the data from
Oxenham and Kreft (2014) and a modeling part to predict the observed masking effects
on vocoded speech using auditory models. The experimental design closely followed
that of Oxenham and Kreft (2014) with an extension to investigate the importance of low
frequency regions on speech intelligibility (Veigel, 2022). The modeling work was entirely
based on the data collected in the present study.
3.1
Data Collection
3.1.1
Subjects
A total amount of 12 normal-hearing, native English-speaking listeners were tested. Nor-
mal hearing was defined as having an average pure tone threshold of less than 20 dB
hearing level (HL) at frequencies 0.5, 1, 2 and 4 kHz (4-PTA) and self-reporting no history
of hearing disorders. Prior to participation, all listeners provided informed written consent.
Due to technical issues, not all collected data for each listener was usable, causing differ-
ent amount of data points per measurement condition. In order to preserve comparability
across conditions, four data points per condition were selected. The selection process
is described in appendix B. The final dataset contained 10 listeners (four females and
six males, aged between 20-58 years with different nationalities: United States, United
Kingdom, Ireland, Canada and Australia).
3.1.2
Stimuli
The speech material was the AzBio speech corpus (Spahr et al., 2012), consisting of 15
lists of 20 sentences. The sentences are grammatically correct and consist of 3 to 12
words. Each list includes sentences spoken by four different talkers: two male and two
female talkers.
The same three maskers as in Oxenham and Kreft (2014) were considered in the present
study, namely speech shaped noise (SSN), pure tone complex (PT) and modulated tone
complex (MT). The SSN was created by spectrally shaping Gaussian noise to match the
long-term spectrum of the AzBio speech corpus, the resulting spectrum is shown in Fig-
ure 3.1 (third panel, left). The overall level of the speech shaped noise was the same as
the average level of all AzBio sentences. The SSN contains inherent temporal fluctuations
as the modulation spectrum in Figure 3.1 (third panel, right) illustrates. The PT complex
was created by summing 16 sinusoidal tones matching the center frequencies of the stan-
dard clinical map for Advanced Bionics CIs: 333, 455, 540, 642, 762, 906, 1076, 1278,
1518, 1803, 2142, 2544, 3022, 3590, 4264 and 6665 Hz. The amplitude of each tone was
set to match the root mean squared (RMS) level of the SSN passed through the vocoder
channel with the respective center frequency, such that the local level in each vocoder
channel for the PT masker was the same as for SSN. As shown in Figure 3.1 (second
panel, left), the spectral shape of the PT masker matched that of SSN (and the speech
corpus). However, the overall level of the PT masker was around 3.3 dB lower than the
overall level of the SSN and AzBio speech corpus, as the lowest lower cutoff frequency
of the vocoder was at 284 Hz and the highest higher cutoff frequency at 8332 Hz. Energy
of the SSN that is present below and above those frequencies, respectively, are not rep-
resented in the PT masker, resulting in a lower overall level. The modulation spectrum
of the PT masker in Figure 3.1 (second panel, right) shows no inherent temporal fluctu-
ations except beating caused by interactions of the different tones. The lowest beating
Modelling the effects of masking on the intelligibility of vocoded speech
9
==PAGE:20==
Figure 3.1: Spectra (left) and modulation spectra (right) of the three masker types used in the
experiment, similar to Oxenham and Kreft (2014). Top: modulated tone complex (MT), second:
pure tone complex (PT), third: speech-shaped noise (SSN), fourth: pure tone complex with two
more low frequencies at 89 and 211 Hz (PT+2LF), bottom: band-passed speech-shaped noise
(SSNbp).
10
Modelling the effects of masking on the intelligibility of vocoded speech
==PAGE:21==
frequency however is well above the for speech intelligibility important modulation fre-
quencies around 4-16 Hz (Oxenham and Kreft, 2014). The MT complex was generated
by modulating pure tones of the same frequencies as the PT masker with the temporal
envelope of the SSN filtered into the respective vocoder subband. The envelope of each
subband, extracted using Hilbert transform, was lowpass-filtered with a cutoff frequency
of 50 Hz before modulating the respective tone. This introduced inherent modulations
similar to those produced by noise at the output of CIs, shown in the spectrum and modu-
lation spectrum of the MT masker in Figure 3.1 (top). As for the PT complex, the RMS of
each modulated tone in the MT complex was the same as the SSN noise at the output of
the vocoder subband with the respective center frequency. Again, the overall level of the
MT masker was around 3.2 dB lower than the overall level of the SSN and the average
AzBio sentence.
An additional PT masker with two more low-frequency pure tones at 89 and 211 Hz was
created using the same approach as for the PT masker. Those two frequencies were cho-
sen to have a distance of 122 Hz to each other and the next higher frequency component
in order to avoid additional beating frequencies. The spectral shape matched that of the
SSN as shown in Figure 3.1 (forth panel, left). Its overall level was 1.2 dB lower than the
overall level of SNN. Additionally, another masker (SSNbp) was created by bandpass fil-
tering the SSN using the lowest low cutoff frequency and the highest high cutoff frequency
of the vocoder, namely 284 and 8332 Hz, as the cutoff frequencies of the fir1 bandpass
filter. The spectrum is shown in Figure 3.1 (bottom left). The overall level was 1 dB higher
compared to MT and PT. The modulation spectra of the two maskers (Figure 3.1, fourth
and fifth panel, right) did not change compared to SSN and PT (second and third panel,
right).
As mentioned, the overall level of the maskers differed from one another, due to the design
of the maskers based on local levels in the vocoder channels rather than overall levels. To
visualize this effect in more detail, Figure 3.2 shows the relative energy distribution across
vocoder channels for the different maskers and the speech used in the data collection here
and by Oxenham and Kreft (2014). The colors do not represent a specific energy value
but show the relations across maskers and vocoder channels as well as above/below the
Figure 3.2: Relative energy distribution of the signals used in Oxenham and Kreft (2014) and
the new data collection in the unprocessed condition based on vocoder channels with the center
frequencies [Hz] shown on top in red squares. The respective cutoff frequencies [Hz] are shown
in red below. The colors do not represent a specific energy value but show the relations across
maskers and vocoder channels as well as above/below the vocoder channels in the unprocessed
condition. Squares with no filling mean no energy content. speech = AzBio speech corpus (Spahr
et al., 2012), SSN = speech shaped noise, PT = pure tone complex, MT = modulated tones com-
plex, PT+2LF = pure tone complex with additional low frequencies at frequencies indicated in the
figure [Hz], SSNbp = bandpass filtered speech shaped noise.
Modelling the effects of masking on the intelligibility of vocoded speech
11
==PAGE:22==
vocoder channels in the unprocessed condition. It clearly shows that the energy within
one vocoder channel is maintained across maskers, they all have the same local level
based on the vocoder channels. However, unprocessed speech shaped noise does have
energy above and below the vocoders’ lowest and highest cutoff frequency whereas the
pure and modulated tone complexes do not have energy in those regions. This results in
a higher overall level of the SSN compared to PT and MT. Also the unprocessed AzBio
sentences consist of energy in the low and high frequency regions. The PT+2LF masker
was designed to have additional frequency content in the region below the lowest channel
of the vocoder. The bandpassed noise in contrast was designed to be more similar to the
PT and MT maskers by having no energy content in the regions outside the vocoder
channels.
3.1.3
Conditions
The stimuli were either presented unprocessed (unpro), processed through a tone-excited
envelope vocoder (voc1) or a tone-excited envelope vocoder with additional simulation of
current spread in CIs (voc2). The matlab implementations of the two vocoders were
provided by Oxenham and Kreft (2014). The processing algorithm of voc1 is shown in
Figure 3.3. The input signal was filtered into 16 frequency subbands with the cutoff and
center frequencies of the standard clinical map of Advanced Bionics CIs. From each
subband, the hilbert envelope was extracted and lowpass-filtered through a fourth-order
Butterworth filter with a cutoff frequency of 50 Hz. The resulting envelope of each subband
was used to modulate a sinusoidal tone at the center frequency of the respective subband.
Figure 3.3: Schematic diagram of the tone-excited envelope vocoder (voc1). The input signal
is passed through an filterbank and the temporal envelope is extracted from each band. Each
envelope gets lowpass-filtered with a cut-off frequency of 50 Hz. These are the final subband
envelopes used to modulate the sinusoidal carriers with the frequency of the respective band.
The output signal is the summed modulated carriers. Diagram was adapted from Oxenham and
Kreft (2014).
The algorithm of voc2 with simulated current spread is shown in Figure 3.4. Again, the
input signal was fitered into 16 subbands and the temporal envelope of each band was
extracted. The output of each subband in this vocoder was a weighted sum of the intesity
envelopes of all input subbands. This was done using the equation
ei(t) =
v
u
u
t
16
X
n=1
(wi,nen(t))2,
(3.1)
where ei represents the temporal envelope at the output of subband i and n is the input
subband number. Accordingly, en is the temporal envelope of the input subband n and
12
Modelling the effects of masking on the intelligibility of vocoded speech
==PAGE:23==
wn is the weight that is applied to en. The weight was an attenuation of 8 dB per octave
on both sides of subband n.
Figure 3.4: Schematic diagram of the tone-excited envelope vocoder simulating current spread in
CI listening (voc2). The input signal is passed through an filterbank and the temporal envelope is
extracted from each band. The squared weighted contributions from each subband are summed
and square-rooted, resulting in the final subband envelopes used to modulate the sinusoidal carri-
ers with the frequency of the respective band. The output signal is the summed modulated carriers.
Diagram was taken from Oxenham and Kreft (2014).
3.1.4
Procedure
The speech and masker signals were combined, with the speech presented consistently at
a level of 65 dB SPL. Prior to the onset of each sentence, the masking noise was gated on,
and after the sentence, it was gated off, both with a duration of one second. The resulting
mixture was then delivered to listeners in three different processing conditions: unpro,
voc1 and voc2. The same SNRs as in Oxenham and Kreft (2014) were employed for
each condition, with the exception of voc2. To shorten the time of the overall experiment,
the 15 dB SNR was omitted in this condition. All stimuli were generated and processed
using matlab. Details regarding the measurement software and the specific adjustments
made for this study can be found in Appendix C.
The measurements took place in a listening booth, and the stimuli were presented in
stereo through Sennheiser HD650 headphones. To ensure accurate headphone output
levels, the equipment was calibrated using an ear simulator with a flat plate adaptor and
a sound level meter. Listeners responded to the presented sentences by verbally repeat-
ing the words they heard and understood into a microphone. They were encouraged to
make guesses for individual words, even if they did not understand the entire sentence.
The responses were scored by an external tester. The final outcome was determined by
calculating the proportion of correctly repeated words out of the total number of words
presented. Half of an AzBio sentence list (10 sentences) was completed for each condi-
tion, masker type and masker level. As the speech material was equalized for full lists of
20 sentences (Spahr et al., 2012), a potential influence on list difficulty due to the division
into lists of 10 sentences was reduced by presenting the half-size lists in a balanced order
across listeners. In order to reduce measurement time further, only two conditions (unpro
- voc1; voc1 - voc2; voc2 - unpro) were measured for each participant. This decision was
based on the assumption that the variability between participants, all normal-hearing and
native English speakers, would be minimal. The order of starting conditions was counter-
balanced across participants, and the SNR and masker type within each condition were
presented in random order.
Each experimental condition included a training phase to familiarize the participants with
Modelling the effects of masking on the intelligibility of vocoded speech
13
==PAGE:24==
the task and stimuli. In the unpro condition, a single list of 10 sentences was presented at
an SNR of 0 dB using the SSN masker. For the voc1 condition, two lists were used: the
first without any masker and the second with SSN at an SNR of 5 dB. During this training,
the experimenter provided immediate feedback by repeating the original sentence back
to the participant after their response, facilitating the connection between the spoken and
perceived information. In the voc2 condition, four training lists were completed. The first
two lists were presented in quiet, with the original sentence displayed on a screen for
the participant to read while listening to the stimuli. The third list was also presented in
quiet, but without the visual input. Following the participant’s response, the experimenter
repeated the original sentence back. The final training list was presented with SSN noise
at an SNR of +20 dB, and once again, the experimenter repeated the correct sentence
after the participant’s response.
3.2
Modelling
Two speech intelligibility models were tested and analyzed, each of them consisting of a
temporal processing stage, namely a modulation filterbank. The models are the speech-
based envelope power spectrum model with a correlation back-end (sEPSMcorr2, Relaño-
Iborra, May, et al., 2016 and Steinmetzger, Zaar, et al., 2019, described in subsec-
tion 2.4.2) and the speech-based computational auditory signal processing and perception
model (sCASP, Relaño-Iborra, Zaar, et al., 2019, described in subsection 2.4.3). Addition-
ally, as suggested by Veigel (2022), the speech-based envelope power spectrum model
(sEPSM, Jørgensen and Dau, 2011, described in subsection 2.4.1) with the addition of
a band-importance function was tested. This modelling work, however, is elaborated in
Appendix D as it was a side investigation of this project.
The model predictions of the sEPSMcorr2 and sCASP were evaluated in all three condi-
tions measured in the experimental study: unpro, voc1 and voc2. In the unprocessed
condition, the sEPSMcorr2 model was calibrated to the human data measured in the un-
processed SSNbp condition. This fitting condition was chosen to secure similar energy
distributions between markers. In the voc1 condition, model calibration was performed
using human data from the vocoded SSN condition, to provide some information about
the influence of vocoding on speech intelligibility to the model. The template was vocoded
speech. In the voc2 condition, the fitting condition of the voc1 condition was kept in or-
der to explore the differences between the two processing strategies. Additionally, the
fitting was conducted using the SSN data of the voc2 condition, with the voc2 speech as
template.
The calibration was always conducted by optimizing the free parameters a and b in Equa-
tion A.10 based on average model outputs of 100 sentences for all SNRs of the respective
fitting condition. The respective model parameters for each calibration are given in Ta-
ble 3.1. Similarly, the model predictions of the PT and MT masker were always evaluated
using 100 sentences. To reduce computational power, all stimuli were down-sampled to
22.05 kHz. The accuracy of the predictions in the different conditions and maskers were
studied visually and in terms of their Pearson’s correlation (ρ) with the respective human
data and the mean absolute error (MAE).
14
Modelling the effects of masking on the intelligibility of vocoded speech
==PAGE:25==
Table 3.1: Fitted values of the free parameters a and b of the logistic function to map the
sEPSMcorr2 (Relaño-Iborra, May, et al., 2016 and Steinmetzger, Zaar, et al., 2019) and sCASP
(Relaño-Iborra, Zaar, et al., 2019) predictions to human data. This was done for the AzBio speech
corpus (Spahr et al., 2012) in different fitting conditions: unprocessed speech-shaped noise (unpro
SSN) with clean speech as template, vocoded1 speech-shaped noise (voc1 SSN) with vocoded1
speech as template and vocoded2 speech-shaped noise (voc2 SSN) with vocoded2 speech as
template. voc1 is a tone-excited envelope vocoder and voc2 a vocoder with simulated current
spread of CIs.
sEPSMcorr2
sCASP
fitting cond.
a
b
a
b
unpro SSNbp
-8.3
20.4
-56.7
11.2
voc1 SSN
-3.6
11.2
-15.6
6.7
voc2 SSN
-1.5
8.4
-9.0
6.8
Modelling the effects of masking on the intelligibility of vocoded speech
15
==PAGE:26==
16
Modelling the effects of masking on the intelligibility of vocoded speech
==PAGE:27==
4
Results
4.1
Data Collection
The mean results of four listeners are shown in Figure 4.1. The top left panel represents
the data collected in the unprocessed condition (unpro), the top right panel shows the
data of the tone-vocoded condition (voc1) and the bottom panel visualizes the data of the
tone-vocoded condition with additional simulation of current spread (voc2). The different
masker types are denoted by different symbols and colors. In the unpro condition (top
left), NH listeners were able to benefit from the lack of modulation and spectral sparsity of
the PT masker (green triangles), achieving good understanding of sentences even at low
SNRs. However, introducing amplitude modulation to the tone masker (MT, blue circles)
slightly affected performance, but it remained higher than in the spectrally dense SSN
Figure 4.1: Results from the three conditions unprocessed (unpro, top left), tone-excited envelope
vocoded (voc1, top right) and vocoded with simulated current spread (voc2, bottom). The graph
illustrates the relationship between the proportion correctly reported words and the signal-to-noise
ratios for the maskers speech shaped noise (SSN), pure tone complex (PT) and modulated tone
complex (MT). Two additional maskers are displayed with dashed lines in the unpro condition:
bandpass filtered speech-shaped noise (SSNbp, yellow triangles) and a tone complex with two
more low frequencies at 89 and 211 Hz (PT+2LF, purple cyrcles). The standard error of the mean
between listeners is show by error bars.
Modelling the effects of masking on the intelligibility of vocoded speech
17
==PAGE:28==
masker (red squares). Removing masker energy of the SSN masker in the high and low
frequencies (SSNbp, yellow triangels, dashed line) improved performances compared to
SSN. On the other side, adding frequency content to the PT masker in the low frequen-
cies (PT+2LF, purple diamonds, dashed line) reduced performance somewhat at very low
SNR (-15 dB SNR) compared to the PT masker. Passing speech and maskers through
voc1 (Figure 4.1, top right) resulted in lower overall performance due to the loss of spectral
resolution and the original temporal fine structure (Hopkins and Moore, 2010, Oxenham
and Kreft, 2014). MT and SSN produced similar results, as each tone in the MT masker
was modulated to mimic the temporal envelope of the SSN. In the PT masker, listeners
performed better than in the MT and SSN, as expected for a masker without inherent mod-
ulations (Stone et al., 2012, Oxenham and Kreft, 2014). Limiting the spectral resolution
of NH listeners further by simulating current spread (voc2, Figure 4.1, bottom) had a big
impact on speech intelligibility. Performance in the presence of any masker was greatly
reduced compared to the voc1 condition. Additionally, the previously observed benefit of
the PT masker disappeared, no major difference between the three masker types was
observed.
4.2
Modelling
4.2.1
Unprocessed
Figure 4.2 presents the human thresholds (open symbols) and model predictions (filled
symbols) for the three maskers in the unprocessed condition. Both, the predictions of
the sEPSMcorr2 (left) and the sCASP (right) models are displayed. The corresponding
error metrics are provided in Table 4.1. In the fitting condition, the SSNbp masker (yel-
low triangles) was used, leading to a accurate alignment between the model predictions
and the human data for this masker in both models (ρ = 0.99 and MAE ≈3%). The
models accurately captured the variations in performance across SNR for the PT masker
(green triangles) with Pearson’s correalation coefficients around 1 and low MAEs (0.67%
for sEPSMcorr2 and 2.48% for sCASP). Moreover, the models’ predictions reflect the per-
(a) sEPSMcorr2
(b) sCASP
Figure 4.2: Unprocessed data (unpro, open symbols) and predictions (filled symbols) of the
sEPSMcorr2 (left) and sCASP (right). The three masker shown are band-passed speech shaped
noise (SSNbp), pure tone complex (PT) and modulated tone complex (MT). Fitting was conducted
with the unpro SSNbp (yellow triangles) and clean speech as template. Proportion words correct
are shown as a function of signal-to-noise ratio, the standard error of the mean between listeners
is show by error bars (open symbols).
18
Modelling the effects of masking on the intelligibility of vocoded speech
==PAGE:29==
formance drop resulting from the addition of modulation content in the MT masker (blue
circles, ρ = 1). The predictions of sEPSMcorr2 in the MT masker are however slightly lower
than the human data (MAE = 5.81%) whereas the sCASP model predicted thresholds well
in line with the data (MAE = 1.95%).
Table 4.1: Pearson’s correlation coefficient (ρ) and mean average error (MAE) between behavioral
data and predictions of the models sEPSMcorr2 and sCASP for the unprocessed condition (unpro).
Fitting of each model was conducted with unpro SSNbp and clean speech as template. The
metric was percent correct understood words in the maskers band-passed speech shaped noise
(SSNbp), pure tone complex (PT) and modulated tone complex (MT).
unpro - sEPSMcorr2
unpro - sCASP
ρ
MAE (%)
ρ
MAE (%)
SSNbp
0.99
2.85
0.99
3.44
PT
1
0.67
0.99
2.48
MT
1
5.81
1
1.95
4.2.2
Tone-excited envelope vocoder
Figure 4.3 displays the listener’s data (open symbols) and model predictions (filled sym-
bols) across maskers for the tone-excited envelope vocoder (voc1). The left panel corre-
sponds to predictions obtained with sEPSMcorr2, while the right panel shows the sCASP
predictions. The error metrics are presented in Table 4.2. The fitting was performed us-
ing the SSN masker (red squares). Consequently, the models accurately predicted the
thresholds for the SSN masker in this condition (ρ = 1 and MAE < 2.5%). Similar thresh-
olds for the MT and SSN maskers were predicted in both models (blue circles and red
squares, respectively), in line with the human data (ρ = 0.99 and MAE ≈5%). Also in
both models, the predictions for the PT masker (green triangles) were higher compared
to the SSN and MT masker predictions. This trend was also observed in the measure-
ments, listeners showed better performances in the vocoded PT masker condition due to
(a) sEPSMcorr2
(b) sCASP
Figure 4.3: Human data (open symbols) and predictions (filled symbols) of the sEPSMcorr2 (left)
and the sCASP (right) for stimuli processed through a tone-excited envelope vocoder (voc1). The
three masker were speech shaped noise (SSN), pure tone complex (PT) and modulated tone
complex (MT). Fitting was conducted on voc1 SSN (red squares) and voc1 speech as template.
Proportion words correct are shown as a function of signal-to-noise ratio, the standard error of the
mean between listeners is show by error bars (open symbols).
Modelling the effects of masking on the intelligibility of vocoded speech
19
==PAGE:30==
the lack of inherent modulations. However, both models underestimated the benefit of
the non-modulated PT masker, whereby sEPSMcorr2 predictions are about 5% closer to
the human data (MAE = 11.41%) compared to sCASP (MAE = 16.56%).
Table 4.2: Pearson’s correlation coefficient (ρ) and mean average error (MAE) between behav-
ioral data and predictions of the models sEPSMcorr2 and sCASP for the tone-excited envelope
vocoded condition (voc1). Fitting of each model was conducted with voc1 SSN and voc1 speech
as template. The metric was percent correct understood words in the maskers speech shaped
noise (SSN), pure tone complex (PT) and modulated tone complex (MT).
voc1 - sEPSMcorr2
voc1 - sCASP
ρ
MAE (%)
ρ
MAE (%)
SSN
1
1.99
1
2.46
PT
0.98
11.41
0.96
16.56
MT
0.99
4.87
0.99
5.23
4.2.3
Tone-excited envelope vocoder with simulated current spread
Figure 4.4 shows the human data (open symbols) and model predictions (filled symbols)
for the different maskers in the tone-excited envelope vocoder with simulated current
spread condition (voc2). The left panel corresponds to sEPSMcorr2 predictions, while the
right panel represents the sCASP predictions. Error metrics are shown in Table 4.3. Main-
taining the same model calibration as in the voc1 condition, the models failed to predict
the overall decrease in performance observed in the human data of the voc2 condition.
The predicted thresholds (filled symbols) generally exhibit higher values for all maskers,
resulting in relatively large MAEs. The predictions of the sCASP model are somewhat
closer to the human data (MAE between 29.25 and 34.62%) compared to the sEPSMcorr2
(MAE between 35.53 and 42.16%). The reduced performance towards lower SNR is well
reflected in the predictions of both models and for each masker (ρ > 0.94) with a plateau
(a) sEPSMcorr2
(b) sCASP
Figure 4.4: Human data (open symbols) and predictions (filled symbols) of the sEPSMcorr2 (left)
and the sCASP (right) for stimuli processed through a tone-excited envelope vocoder with sim-
ulated current spread of CIs (voc2). The three masker were speech shaped noise (SSN), pure
tone complex (PT) and modulated tone complex (MT). Fitting was conducted on voc1 SSN and
voc1 speech as template, as for the vocoder 1 condition. Proportion words correct are shown as a
function of signal-to-noise ratio, the standard error of the mean between listeners is show by error
bars (open symbols).
20
Modelling the effects of masking on the intelligibility of vocoded speech
==PAGE:31==
effect at high SNRs. Furthermore, sEPSMcorr2 and sCASP accurately predicted the re-
lationship across maskers, with similar performance predictions for SSN, MT, and PT
maskers, aligning with the human data.
Table 4.3: Pearson’s correlation coefficient (ρ) and mean average error (MAE) between behavioral
data and predictions of the models sEPSMcorr2 and sCASP for the tone-excited envelope vocoded
condition with simulated current spread of CIs (voc2). Fitting of each model was conducted with
voc1 SSN and voc1 speech as template (FIT:voc1). The metric was percent correct understood
words in the maskers speech shaped noise (SSN), pure tone complex (PT) and modulated tone
complex (MT).
voc2 (FIT:voc1) - sEPSMcorr2
voc2 (FIT:voc1) - sCASP
ρ
MAE (%)
ρ
MAE (%)
SSN
0.95
38.98
0.97
33.5
PT
0.94
42.16
0.95
34.62
MT
0.97
35.53
0.97
29.25
By fitting the models to the SSN masker in voc2 (Figure 4.5 and Table 4.4), the models’
predictions show a strong agreement with the behavioral data for all three maskers. The
predictions lie in the same range as the human data, showing relatively low MAEs between
6 and 9% for the PT and MT maskers. However, the plateau effect observed between 10
and 20 dB SNR in the measured data is not represented in the models’ predictions.
(a) sEPSMcorr2
(b) sCASP
Figure 4.5: Human data (open symbols) and predictions (filled symbols) of the sEPSMcorr2 (left)
and the sCASP (right) for stimuli processed through a tone-excited envelope vocoder with simu-
lated current spread of CIs (voc2). The three masker were speech shaped noise (SSN), pure tone
complex (PT) and modulated tone complex (MT). Fitting was conducted on voc2 SSN and voc2
speech as template. Proportion words correct are shown as a function of signal-to-noise ratio, the
standard error of the mean between listeners is show by error bars (open symbols).
Modelling the effects of masking on the intelligibility of vocoded speech
21
==PAGE:32==
Table 4.4: Pearson’s correlation coefficient (ρ) and mean average error (MAE) between behavioral
data and predictions of the models sEPSMcorr2 and sCASP for the tone-excited envelope vocoded
condition with simulated current spread of CIs (voc2). Fitting of each model was conducted with
voc2 SSN and voc2 speech as template (FIT:voc2). The metric was percent correct understood
words of in the maskers speech shaped noise (SSN), pure tone complex (PT) and modulated tone
complex (MT).
voc2 (FIT:voc2) - sEPSMcorr2
voc2 (FIT:voc2) - sCASP
ρ
MAE (%)
ρ
MAE (%)
SSN
0.98
3.6
0.98
3.44
PT
0.85
6.58
0.85
7.542
MT
0.89
8.56
0.9
8.84
22
Modelling the effects of masking on the intelligibility of vocoded speech
==PAGE:33==
5
Analysis
Since NH listeners cannot achieve 100% speech intelligibility using the vocoder with sim-
ulated current spread even in quiet conditions (O’Neill et al., 2021), it appears that the
introduction of spectral spread during the vocoding process itself results in speech distor-
tion that limits intelligibility. To quantitatively assess the reduction in model output solely
attributed to the vocoding processes, speech without any interfering noise in the condi-
tions unpro, voc1, and voc2) was used as the target, with unprocessed speech always
as the template. The average raw model output of 50 sentences was computed and is
presented in Table 5.1 for the two models sCASP and sEPSMcorr2. In order to provide a
basis for comparison, the performance of listeners in the SSN condition at 0 dB SNR is
also included.
Table 5.1: Model outputs of sEPSMcorr2 and sCASP to the target speech alone in the unprocessed
(unpro), tone-excited envelope vocodered (voc1) and the vocoded with simulated spectral spread
(voc2) conditions. Unprocessed speech always served as template. Raw output are the correla-
tion coefficients (χ) which was also transferred to percentages (%). Measured thresholds (Pcorrect)
of the different conditions in the speech-shaped noise (SSN) masker at 0 dB SNR are presented
as a comparison.
sEPSMcorr2
sCASP
data SSN @ 0 dB SNR
χ
in %
χ
in %
Pcorrect (%)
unpro
6
100
0.96
100
97
voc1
2.53
42.2
0.19
19.8
54
voc2
2.37
39.5
0.17
17.7
11
The correlation-based back end of the models exhibits a major difference between unpro
speech and voc1 speech, particularly in the case of sCASP, where the correlation co-
efficient decreases by 80.2%. This reduction is higher than the decrease in intelligibility
observed in human listeners between these two conditions (43%). Although a direct com-
parison may not be entirely valid due to the additional masking of SSN in all human data
conditions, it provides a rough indication of the perception of vocoded speech. It is not
surprising that the models show a greater drop in correlation from unpro to voc1, given the
disparity in overall SNR resulting from speech information in the frequency range below
the vocoder channels in the unpro condition (section 3.1). The high model output reduc-
tion from unpro to voc1 speech in Table 5.1 supports the selection of SSN in the vocoded
condition to calibrate the models.
Listeners exhibited an additional 43% reduction in intelligibility from the voc1 without spec-
tral spread to the voc2 with added spectral spread. However, the raw outputs of the mod-
els only indicate a 2.7% decrease for sEPSMcorr2 and a 2.1% decrease for the sCASP
model. This clearly demonstrates that the models do not capture the cue that makes
speech significantly more challenging to understand speech in the voc2 condition com-
pared to voc1. This raises the question of how exactly the introduced spectral spread
distorts the speech envelope and why it has minimal impact on the cross-correlation per-
formed by the two models.
Modelling the effects of masking on the intelligibility of vocoded speech
23
==PAGE:34==
5.1
Modulation energy change by vocoding processes
Oxenham and Kreft (2014) showed that the relative modulation energy in SSN is dimin-
ished by the vocoding process with spectral smearing, i.e. voc2. This effect was illustrated
in Oxenham and Kreft (2014) by comparing the modulation spectra of the vocoder’s re-
sponse to noise with and without spectral spread. A visualization demonstrating a similar
effect for the SSN used in the present study can be found in Figure E.1. The slightly
reduced modulation energy in the voc2 SSN with spectral spread explains why different
types of maskers with and without inherent modulations exhibit a more comparable mask-
ing effect in the voc2 condition, as observed in both the measured data and the model
predictions. However, this does not account for the overall loss of intelligibility attributed
to spectral spread observed in the behavioral data. Figure 5.1 shows the same analysis
for the speech signal. It displays the spectra of the vocoder’s response to speech without
and with spectral smearing (voc1 and voc2, respectively) for both individual channels and
the sum of all channels. Once again, spectral smearing results in a reduction of modu-
lation energy across all vocoder channels, possibly explaining the overall drop in speech
intelligibility observed in the voc2 condition.
Figure 5.1: Modulation spectra for speech, averaged across all AzBio Sentences. Top panel
shows the modulation spectrum averaged across the 16 vocoder channels for the independent
channels (as used in vocoder 1 in the experiment, blue line) and after simulating current spread
(as used in vocoder 2, red line). Bottom panels show the modulation spectra at the outputs of the
individual vocoder channels.
24
Modelling the effects of masking on the intelligibility of vocoded speech
==PAGE:35==
5.2
Effect of vocoding strategies on the waveform of speech
envelope
To examine the impact of spectral smearing on the envelope of the speech signal in
the sEPSMcorr2, a vocoded sentence was used as input, both with and without spectral
spread. No masking signal was introduced. The top panel of Figure Figure 5.2 illustrates
the speech envelope for the auditory filter centered at 1000 Hz. Notably, despite higher
envelope amplitudes in the voc2 compared to the voc1 signal, the overall waveform re-
mains similar when adding spectral spread in the vocoding process. This effect becomes
even more pronounced when examining the output of the modulation filters in the 1000
Hz auditory filter (middle panel in Figure 5.2). It should be noted that the modulation filters
centered at 16, 32, and 64 Hz were excluded due to the selection algorithm employed in
sEPSMcorr2. The envelopes of the voc1 and voc2 sentences at the output of the modu-
lation filters are very similar. Minor differences are observable, but the overall temporal
shape remains largely unchanged when adding spectral spread. Inspection of the cor-
relogram for this auditory filter (Figure 5.2, bottom) shows high correlation coefficients
close to 1 across the majority of the considered time windows. This finding aligns with
the observations of similar envelope shapes in the middle panel. The detailed waveform
analysis was conducted specifically for the 1000 Hz auditory filter to illustrate the effect,
but similar behavior can be observed in other channels.
Figure 5.2: In the top panel, the temporal envelope of the sentence ”The pool was filled with dirt
and leaves.” at the output of the auditory filter with the center frequency 1000 Hz in the sEPSMcorr2
is shown. The sentence was either tone-excited envelope vocoded without (voc1, green) or with
spectral spread (voc2, red). In the middle panel, the outputs of each modulation filter with center
frequencies fcmod of this auditory filter are displayed for the same sentence. At the bottom, the
correlation coefficients of each modulation filter and each time window are illustrated in the form
of a correlogram.
Modelling the effects of masking on the intelligibility of vocoded speech
25
==PAGE:36==
The sCASP model also shows a resemblance in the envelope characteristics between a
vocoded sentence with and without spectral spread. This phenomenon is briefly illustrated
in Appendix E for the auditory filter centered at 1058 Hz. However, as a consequence of
the more realistic preprocessing stages involving expansion, adaptation, and non-linear
transformations within the sCASP model, the time-domain signal of the auditory filter is
noisier in comparison to the sEPSMcorr2 model. The similarities between the vocoded
signals are marginally less prominent in the sCASP model. Nevertheless, the inclusion
of spectral spread only slightly distorts the envelopes within the modulation filters, also in
the sCASP model.
5.3
Distortion of the fundamental frequency of speech due to
spectral smearing
The fundamental frequency (F0) plays a role in comprehending speech, especially when
faced with challenging listening situations like the presence of background noise or compet-
ing-talker scenarios (Brown and S. Bacon, 2010, Mesiano, 2022). To investigate how the
two vocoding strategies influence the F0 of speech, the F0 contour of two exemplary sen-
tences spoken by a female and male talker, was extracted using Praat (Boersma and
Weenink, 2023). These contours are shown in Figure 5.3 for the unprocessed (unpro,
top), vocoded (voc1, middle) and vocoded with simulated curred spread (voc2, bottom)
sentences. Additionally, the F0 dynamic range (F0min-F0max) and the mean (F0mean) of
the two sentences in the different conditions are summarized in Table 5.2.
In the unprocessed condition (Figure 5.3, top), changes in the F0 over time are observable
for both talkers. Notably, the F0 for the female talker exhibits an upward trend towards
the end, likely due to the sentence being a question. The F0 range for the sentence by a
female talker spans from 183 to 403 Hz, whereas for the male talker, it spans from 95 to
450 Hz (Table 5.2).
Table 5.2: Dynamic ranges (f0min-f0max) and mean F0 value (F0mean) of the two AzBio sentence
”Can you type forty words per minute?” (female) and ”He drank to excess after the hamster’s
death.” (male) extracted using Praat (Boersma and Weenink, 2023). The sentences were either
unprocessed (unpro), tone-excited envelope vocoded (voc1) or vocoded with simulated current
spread (voc2).
female
male
unpro
voc1
voc2
unpro
voc1
voc2
F0min (Hz)
183
54
107
95
90
107
F0max (Hz)
403
180
152
450
303
152
F0mean (Hz)
255
154
108
144
217
108
When the sentences were processed using voc1 (middle panels in Figure 5.3), the vari-
ations in F0 become smaller. In the case of the sentence spoken by the female talker,
the F0 range shifts to 54-180 Hz. Notably, the maximum F0 in the voc1 sentence is lower
than the minimum F0 in the unpro sentence. However, some variations in F0 over time
can still be observed (middle, left panel), although they do not follow to the same pattern
as the unprocessed sentence. For example, the F0 rise at the end, characteristic of a
question, is no longer visible. Additionally, the mean F0 is reduced by 100 Hz due to the
vocoding process. The opposite trend is observed for the sentence by the male talker.
The F0 in the voc1 condition is found to be higher compared to the unpro condition. While
the dynamic range is reduced by 100 Hz on the upper bound, it still falls within a similar
26
Modelling the effects of masking on the intelligibility of vocoded speech
==PAGE:37==
(a) female unpro
(b) male unpro
(c) female voc1
(d) male voc1
(e) female voc2
(f) male voc2
Figure 5.3: F0 contours extracted with Praat (Boersma and Weenink, 2023): AzBio sentence
”Can you type forty words per minute?” spoken by a female talker (left panels) and ”He drank to
excess after the hamster’s death.” spoken by a male talker (right panels). The sentences were
either unprocessed (unpro, top), tone-excited envelope vocoded (voc1, middle) or vocoded with
simulated current spread (voc2, bottom).
range as the unpro sentence. Again, the observable temporal variations in the F0 contour
do not appear to align with the unpro contour.
When incorporating spectral spread into the vocoding process (voc2, bottom panels in
Figure 5.3), the temporal fluctuations in F0 are completely smoothed out for both the
female and male talkers. Furthermore, the two sentences exhibit identical dynamic ranges
(107-152 Hz) and mean values (108 Hz).
Modelling the effects of masking on the intelligibility of vocoded speech
27
==PAGE:38==
28
Modelling the effects of masking on the intelligibility of vocoded speech
==PAGE:39==
6
Discussion
6.1
Data Collection
The relationships between the maskers in Oxenham and Kreft (2014) were successfully
reproduced for all three conditions: unpro, voc1, and voc2. However, it is noteworthy that
the thresholds obtained in this study were generally lower than those reported in Oxenham
and Kreft (2014) across all conditions. Also, more variability of the thresholds measured
in the voc2 condition was observed. Several potential factors contributing to these effects
are considered in the following.
Firstly, it is important to note that in the current study, headphones were used instead of
a single loudspeaker. This choice may have an impact on the measured thresholds, as it
eliminates the effects of room acoustics and the influence of the head and pinna. How-
ever, considering that the measurements in Oxenham and Kreft (2014) were conducted
in a soundproofed booth, it is assumed that any potential influences from these factors
would be negligible.
Secondly, it should be noted that there were differences in the scoring of listener re-
sponses between the present study and Oxenham and Kreft (2014). In the previous
study, participants typed what they heard using a computer keyboard, while in the present
study, listeners verbally reported their responses into a microphone and the responses
were evaluated by a tester located outside of the listening booth. It is important to consider
that this tester was not a native English speaker, which could have potentially influenced
the accuracy of rating due to limitations in language proficiency and potential acoustic
limitations introduced by the path trough the microphone and headphones.
Another aspect to consider is the potential influence of varying dialects among the listen-
ers, despite all participants self-reporting as native English speakers. These dialects were
United Kingdom, United States, Canadian, and Australian English. The AzBio speech
material used in the study was recorded by talkers from Arizona, United States. The dif-
ferences in pronunciation between the speech material and what the listeners are used
to may have impacted the results of the present study. In contrast, the study conducted
by Oxenham and Kreft (2014) consisted presumably only of participants from the United
States.
Furthermore, in the present study, the speech-shaped noise was generated based on the
average long-term spectrum of all AzBio sentences. This noise was employed to create
the tonal maskers. Notably, the newly created noise showed a less smooth profile, more
closely resembling the spectrum of the speech, in contrast to the noise used by Oxenham
and Kreft (2014). The observed differences in energy levels between the two noises may
have had an impact on the energetic masking effect of the noise. Specifically, the higher
energy present in some frequency regions could have contributed to lower thresholds
across all three masker conditions in the present study.
An additional factor that influenced the outcomes of the current study is related to the
necessity of discarding and re-measuring specific data points, which led to variations in
the listener sample even within the same condition. While it was assumed that the impact
of this factor would be minimal, given that all tested listeners were normal-hearing and
native English speakers, it is possible that it had some effect on the final results as the
balancing of conditions and lists was disrupted.
The observed plateau effect at high SNRs in the voc2 condition deviates from the results
reported in Oxenham and Kreft (2014) and contrasts with the data obtained from CI lis-
Modelling the effects of masking on the intelligibility of vocoded speech
29
==PAGE:40==
teners in the same study. However, a study conducted by O’Neill et al. (2021), utilizing
the same voc2 to simulate the effect of current spread in CI listening, reported a similar
plateau effect when using a different speech material. Even in quiet conditions, speech
intelligibility in the voc2 condition showed limitations, with thresholds comparable to those
observed at an SNR of 10 dB. In similar measurements with CI listeners conducted by
O’Neill et al. (2021), the plateau effect was not observed, suggesting a potential limitation
of the voc2 in simulating the perception of CI listeners above a SNR of 10 dB.
Finally, the thresholds for the additional maskers PT+2LF and SSNbp in the unpro con-
dition changed compared to the thresholds of the PT and SSN maskers, respectively. In
the PT+2LF with additional frequency content below the lowest cutoff frequency of the
vocoder, thresholds of proportion correct understood words decreased slightly at the low-
est SNR. The thresholds for the bandpass filtered SSN increased compared to the SSN,
supporting the hypothesis that speech content in the frequencies below and above the
vocoder channels is utilized for speech understanding. These findings contradict the un-
derlying assumption of Oxenham and Kreft (2014), that masking in those regions does
not affect speech intelligibility in the unpro condition.
6.2
Modelling
6.2.1
Unprocessed
In the unprocessed condition, the sEPSMcorr2 and sCASP were shown to accurately ac-
count for (i) improved speech intelligibility due to spectral sparsity of a masker (ii) re-
duced speech perception when the masker exhibited inherent modulations and (iii) the
differences in speech intelligibility across SNRs. The models were calibrated to a fitting
condition with similar energy distribution and overall level as the PT and MT maskers,
namely the bandpass-filtered speech-shaped noise. This adjustment in combination with
the usage of correlation-based models successfully solved the problem of saturated pre-
dictions in spectral sparse markers observed in Veigel (2022). Comparing the predictions
of sEPSMcorr2 and sCASP, a notable difference in the MT masker was observed. The
sCASP model outperformed the sEPSMcorr2 with a MAE of only 1.95% between predic-
tions and data, compared to 5.81% in the sEPSMcorr2. This improved predictive power
is presumably due to the sCASP model’s implementation of a more realistic auditory pre-
processing.
6.2.2
Tone-excited envelope vocoder
By passing both, speech and masker through a tone-excited envelope vocoder (voc1),
speech content in the spectral gaps of spectral sparse maskers like the PT and MT com-
plexes is removed. This results in similar thresholds for the MT and SSN maskers. The
sEPSMcorr2 and sCASP could account for this effect, predicting similar performances for
the MT and SSN masker. Furthermore, the models also accounted for the advantage due
to the absence of inherent modulations in the PT masker, indicating the models’ ability
to account for differences among maskers. However, it must be noted that the mod-
els underestimated the benefit experienced by NH listeners in the PT masker, whereby
sEPSMcorr2 captured the effect to a greater extent (MAE = 11.41% with PT masker) than
the sCASP (MAE = 16.56%).
In the voc1 condition, the model has a limitation concerning its understanding of the vocod-
ing process and its impact on speech intelligibility in NH listeners. The choice of employing
a vocoded fitting instead of an unprocessed one may initially appear arbitrary, consider-
ing that voc1 retains the envelope information crucial for the model’s speech intelligibility
prediction. However, Oxenham and Kreft (2014) attributed the reduced speech intelli-
gibility in the voc1 condition to two factors: spectral resolution loss and the absence of
30
Modelling the effects of masking on the intelligibility of vocoded speech
==PAGE:41==
original temporal fine structure. The model, which relies on envelope information to pre-
dict speech intelligibility, does not account for the absence of fine structure unless it is
fitted to a condition that already consists of this performance loss. Additionally, as de-
scribed in section 3.1, the speech signal envelopes in each vocoder channel undergo
low-pass filtering before modulating the corresponding pure tones. This filtering process
was assumed to have no impact on speech intelligibility, but the process still removes
speech information biasing the correlation with unprocessed speech. This bias can be
surpassed by employing a vocoded fitting condition instead. Lastly, the vocoding process
also removes speech information in the frequency regions outside of the vocoder chan-
nels (below 285 and above 8333 Hz) that is present in the unprocessed condition. The
masker has no energy in those frequency regions and its level remains the same before
and after vocoding. This results in an overall SNR mismatch between unprocessed and
vocoded conditions, that the model cannot account for. Hence, with an unprocessed fit-
ting condition, the correlation between vocoded target and unprocessed template would
be much lower just because of this mismatch in the low and high frequency channels.
6.2.3
Tone-excited envelope vocoder with simulated current spread
In order to explore the differences between the two processing strategies, namely tone-
excited envelope vocoder (voc1) and vocoder with simulated current spread of CIs (voc2),
and their influence on speech perception, the same fitting condition as in voc1 was applied
to model the voc2 data. The key distinction between the two vocoder strategies is the in-
clusion of simulated current spread in voc2. By incorporating this spectral smearing effect,
the NH data with voc2 processing aligns with the data obtained from CI listeners (Oxen-
ham and Kreft, 2014), suggesting that comparable speech perception can be achieved
in NH listeners through the introduction of simulated current spread. The modeling of
this effect was assumed to provide valuable insights into the auditory cues utilized for
speech comprehension in CI listeners. The sEPSMcorr2 and sCASP in the voc2 condition
effectively accounted for (i) the drop of speech intelligibility with reduced SNR and (ii) the
similarity in speech perception thresholds across different maskers. However, both mod-
els failed to accurately predict the overall reduction in speech intelligibility experienced by
NH listeners in the voc2 condition.
Notably, the model’s calibration to the SSN in the voc1 condition already accounted for
the major influences on speech intelligibility caused by the loss of temporal fine struc-
ture and spectral resolution. The primary disparity between the two vocoders lies in the
simulation of current spread in voc2, achieved by incorporating weighted envelope in-
formation from neighboring vocoder channels into the final envelope used to modulate
the pure-tone of the respective vocoder band (section 3.1). The models’ predictions are
based on envelope information, and they have demonstrated the ability to capture the
smoothed inherent modulations in the MT and SSN maskers due to this simulated current
spread. These findings support the hypothesis by Oxenham and Kreft (2014) that modu-
lation energy does not limit speech intelligibility in the voc2 condition, and consequently,
in CI listeners. Oxenham and Kreft (2014) further concluded that speech perception in
the voc2 condition primarily depends on the overall energy of the masker within each
vocoder channel, regardless of fluctuations. The sEPSMcorr2 results suggest that this en-
ergetic masking within vocoder channels is not well reflected due to the model’s reliance
on envelope information, whereas spectral information is not explicitly incorporated in the
decision metric. Surprisingly, despite incorporating a more realistic consideration of ener-
getic masking and across auditory frequency channel processing, the sCASP model, too,
failed to account for the general reduction in speech intelligibility due to the introduction of
simulated current spread in the voc2 condition. The offset of the predictions was however
Modelling the effects of masking on the intelligibility of vocoded speech
31
==PAGE:42==
slightly lower in the sCASP (MAE = 29.25 - 34.62%) compared to sEPSMcorr2 (MAE =
35.53 - 42.16%), particularly evident at lower SNRs. This outcome challenges the as-
sumption made by Oxenham and Kreft (2014) that the observed performance loss in the
voc2 condition is primarily a consequence of energetic masking within the vocoder chan-
nels. Instead, it appears that the inclusion of simulated spread during the vocoder process
introduces distortions to the speech signal itself, consequently reducing speech intelligi-
bility. This hypothesis is supported by the plateau effect observed in human thresholds
at high SNRs within the voc2 condition (Figure 4.1), which was even more pronounced
in the study conducted by O’Neill et al. (2021). Remarkably, even in quiet conditions,
normal hearing listeners were unable to comprehend 100% of the vocoded speech with
simulated current spread.
It was shown, that the spectral spread reduces modulation energy in both the speech and
noise signal, meaning that slow temporal variations of the speech itself are smoothed
out. This speech envelope information serves as a critical cue utilized by the auditory
system for speech comprehension (e.g. Apoux and S. P. Bacon, 2008). Loss of this
information independent of any masking effects could explain a general decrease in the
speech intelligibility performance of voc2 speech. Both considered models, sEPSMcorr2
and sCASP, base their predictions on the envelope information of signals. Technically,
they are capable of predicting the loss of speech intelligibility due to modulation energy
loss. However, even though there was a reduction of modulation energy in the speech
signal, this reduction is not major. It is likely that this slight decrease explains the minor
drop of the models’ outputs under the voc2 condition (correlation coefficients in Table 5.1),
but it does not represent the 43% reduction in performance observed by human listeners
at 0 dB SNR in the voc2 condition compared to the voc1 condition.
The spectral spread in voc2 is achieved by summing weighted envelopes from all chan-
nels into the envelope of a single vocoder channel, which is then used to modulate a tone
with the corresponding center frequency. This process results in the addition of congruent
information into the vocoder channels. As revealed by the internal analysis, the shape of
the envelope is distorted primarily as an increase in energy, while the overall shape of
the envelope remains consistent. Thus, the outputs of the two vocoders are highly corre-
lated. Since the decision metric of the models relies on cross-correlation, the models do
not predict any decrease in speech intelligibility resulting from the introduction of spectral
spread. This raises the question of which cue in the speech is distorted by voc2, making
it more challenging to comprehend speech to the extent that even in quiet, NH listeners
do not achieve 100% speech intelligibility (O’Neill et al., 2021).
One possible explanation can be found in the work of Brown and S. Bacon (2010), who
suggested that the presence of the fundamental frequency (F0) of the target talker con-
tributes to speech intelligibility, also in the presence of competing speech. As stated by
Brown and S. Bacon (2010) and Mesiano (2022), F0 is an important acoustic cue for
speech understanding, e.g. the temporal contour of F0 (i.e. F0 variations over time) in
a speech signal contains valuable information regarding specific voice characteristics, in-
cluding the speaker’s gender (Honorof and Whalen, 2010), intentions and emotions (Mur-
ray and Arnott, 1993), as well as prosodic elements that contribute as cues for syntax
and grammatical structure (Ladd, 2008). In a study conducted by Mesiano (2022), it was
shown that the ability to differentiate between speech signals becomes challenging when
both the F0 contours in a target and competing talker are relatively flat. However, when
F0 variations are introduced in only one of the two signals, discrimination of the target
speech becomes easier. Similarly, Brown and S. Bacon (2010) stated that F0 variations
are beneficial for speech reception. Analysis of the speech signals in the present study
32
Modelling the effects of masking on the intelligibility of vocoded speech
==PAGE:43==
revealed that the process of vocoding distorts the F0 contour of speech. Voc1 keeps
some discernible variations over time, in line with the assumption that some F0 infor-
mation is retained in tone-vocoders (Brown and S. Bacon, 2010). In contrast, voc2 with
added spectral spread completely smooths out the F0 contour, resulting in an identical
low dynamic range of only 45 Hz for sentences spoken by both male and female talkers.
Consequently, this absence of F0 variations could potentially account for a portion of the
reduced speech intelligibility performance observed in the voc2 condition. This hypothesis
is supported by the data of Steinmetzger and Rosen (2015), who observed an improve-
ment in speech perception when using the Dudley vocoder compared to a simple noise
vocoded condition. The Dudley vocoder preserves the F0 contour of speech, whereas
noise vocoding eliminates this cue. However, the observed enhancement at 0 dB SNR
using speech-shaped noise was approximately 20% compared to the 43% difference be-
tween the vocoders considered in the present study. A direct comparison is not possible
due to the different vocoding procedures (i.e., noise vocoding vs. tone vocoding). Nev-
ertheless, the data from Steinmetzger and Rosen (2015) indicates that the loss of F0
variation resulting from the addition of spectral spread does explain partly but not fully the
reduction in speech intelligibility in voc2. It is not clear, how the remaining drop of perfor-
mance in the voc2 condition can be explained. Further investigations are necessary, e.g.
considering other known informational masking phenomenons like stimulus uncertainty
(Durlach et al., 2003, Conroy and Kidd, 2021).
It is worth noting that the sEPSMcorr in Steinmetzger, Zaar, et al. (2019) was not able
to predict the slightly better performance of listeners with Dudley-vocoded speech, sup-
porting the hypothesis that speech intelligibility decrease due to F0 distortion is a cue that
envelope based models cannot account for. An option to capture this loss of speech intel-
ligibility in the voc2 condition due to F0 degradation might be the usage of the hearing-aid
speech perception index (HASPI, Kates and Arehart, 2014). This model is capable of de-
tecting changes in the temporal fine structure of speech and assessing the degree to which
the envelope’s time-frequency modulation has been preserved. Thus, it takes both tem-
poral fine structure (e.g. F0 contour) and envelope information into account. Moreover,
it was demonstrated that the model’s predictions were accurate when speech’s higher
frequencies were subjected to noise vocoding.
When considering correlation-based models such as the sEPSMcorr2 or sCASP, some
information about the amount of performance loss due to added spectral spread has to
be provided to the model. As shown in the modelling work, this can be achieved by fitting
the model to the behavioral data of the speech-shaped noise in the voc2 condition. By
doing so, both models accurately predicted thresholds for all three maskers within the ex-
pected percentage range. This finding highlights the capability of sEPSMcorr2 and sCASP
to capture differences across various maskers. It is however important to note that the
measured data in the voc2 condition showed high variability, due to external factors dis-
cussed partially in section 6.1. These external factors, which are not accounted for in the
models, contribute to relatively high prediction errors compared to, for instance, predic-
tions in the unprocessed condition. It is assumed that predicting the data of Oxenham and
Kreft (2014) would result in fewer discrepancies between the human data and predictions
in the voc2 condition, as their data had lower variability.
Building upon the discovery of the models being able to account for across masker and
SNR differences by keeping one calibration within the same condition, an alternative ap-
proach could involve fitting the model to SSN data from both vocoders simultaneously.
This approach resembles the methodology employed by Taal et al. (2011) who used data
from all considered conditions for the calibration of the STOI model. Relaño-Iborra, Zaar,
Modelling the effects of masking on the intelligibility of vocoded speech
33
==PAGE:44==
et al. (2019) as well utilized SSN data from unprocessed and processed data for the
calibration in the ideal binary masking condition when dealing with limited unprocessed
SSN data for a specific speech material. By adopting this strategy, information regard-
ing speech perception in both vocoding processes would be integrated into the models.
Consequently, the models are expected to effectively account for differences between
maskers and SNRs across both vocoded conditions while retaining the same calibration.
6.2.4
Perspectives
Despite the difficulties in predicting the general reduction of speech intelligibility due to
simulated current spread in the vocoding process, both considered models sEPSMcorr2
and sCASP were able to predict masking effects in unprocessed and vocoded speech re-
sulting from inherent modulations of noise. With preliminary information about the process
of vocoding through calibration to the specific vocoder, accurate predictions for all vocoder
conditions considered in this study were obtained. These results support the hypothesis
that the envelope-based models are able to capture differences in inherent modulations
between maskers and indicate that the models can be used to predict speech intelligi-
bility performances of vocoded speech. As the vocoder with simulated current spread
of CIs was shown to represent CI listening accurately (Oxenham and Kreft, 2014), mod-
els’ predictions and simulations of speech intelligibility in various background scenarios
using this vocoder might be used to help in the development of new speech processing
strategies for CIs. The predictions could be used e.g. to adjust the parameters of new
noise-suppression algorithms or provide guidance when selecting other signal processing
parameters used in the implementation of CI stimulation strategies.
34
Modelling the effects of masking on the intelligibility of vocoded speech
==PAGE:45==
7
Conclusion
The modulation masking effects observed in Oxenham and Kreft (2014) could success-
fully be replicated: Normal-hearing listeners showed increased speech intelligibility in
a masker without inherent modulations as compared to the performance obtained with
maskers containing inherent modulations. When processing the signals through a vocoder
simulating the effects of current spread in CIs, listeners obtained similar speech intelligibil-
ity performance for all maskers independent of their inherent modulation content, similar
to performances observed in CI listeners (Oxenham and Kreft, 2014). Furthermore, it was
shown that energy below 284 and above 8332 Hz in maskers does influence the masking
of speech in normal-hearing listeners, contradicting to an underlying assumption made in
Oxenham and Kreft (2014).
Two models that include a temporal processing stage accounting for modulation masking
were considered to predict the data collected in the present study: the speech-based
envelope power spectrum model with a correlation decision metric (sEPSMcorr2, Relaño-
Iborra, May, et al., 2016 and Steinmetzger, Zaar, et al., 2019) and the speech-based
computational auditory signal processing and perception model (sCASP, Relaño-Iborra,
Zaar, et al., 2019). Both models accounted for (i) the increased speech intelligibility in
a masker without inherent fluctuations, both in the unprocessed and vocoded condition
(ii) the similar performance for all maskers with and without inherent modulations when
using a vocoder that simulates the current spread of CIs. Thus, as hypothesized, the
envelope-based models were able to capture differences in inherent modulations between
maskers. These model results support the hypothesis of Oxenham and Kreft (2014), that
overall masker energy determines speech intelligibility in (simulated) CI listening rather
than modulation energy. However, overall prediction offsets for the vocoder with current
spread indicate that the effects limiting the speech perception in CI-simulated listening
are not yet fully captured by the models. Possible explanations are reduced variations
of the speech’s fundamental frequency contour due to the introduced current spread or
other informational masking effects that are not captured by models that rely on envelope
information. Further investigations on the exact mechanisms limiting speech perception
in the vocoder simulating current spread are necessary. However, based on the models’
accurate predictions when calibrating to the specific vocoder condition, the sEPSMcorr2
and sCASP seem to provide a valuable framework to study masking effects on vocoded
speech and relate the outcomes to actual CI listening. This might be useful to investigate
and improve implementations of CI speech coding strategies.
Modelling the effects of masking on the intelligibility of vocoded speech
35
==PAGE:46==
36
Modelling the effects of masking on the intelligibility of vocoded speech
==PAGE:47==
Bibliography
ANSI/ASA S3.5-1997 (R2020). Methods for Calculation of the Speech Intelligibility Index.
(American National Standard Institute, Acoustical Society of America).
Apoux, Frédéric and Sid P. Bacon (2008). “Differential contribution of envelope fluctuations
across frequency to consonant identification in quiet”. In: The Journal of the Acoustical
Society of America 123.5, pp. 2792–2800. ISSN: 0001-4966. DOI: 10.1121/1.2897916.
Arnal, Luc H. et al. (2015). “Human Screams Occupy a Privileged Niche in the Communi-
cation Soundscape”. In: Current Biology 25.15, pp. 2051–2056. ISSN: 0960-9822. DOI:
10.1016/j.cub.2015.06.043.
Bacon, Sid P. and D. Wesley Grantham (1989). “Modulation masking: Effects of modula-
tion frequency, depth, and phase”. In: The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America
85.6, pp. 2575–2580. ISSN: 1520-8524. DOI: 10.1121/1.397751.
Bingabr, Mohamed, Blas Espinoza-Varas, and Philipos C. Loizou (2008). “Simulating the
effect of spread of excitation in cochlear implants”. In: Hearing Research 241.1-2, pp. 73–
79. ISSN: 03785955. DOI: 10.1016/j.heares.2008.04.012.
Boersma, Paul and David Weenink (2023). Praat: Doing phonetics by computer (version
6.3.10). URL: praat.org.
Brown, Christopher and Sid Bacon (2010). “Fundamental frequency and speech intelligi-
bility in background noise”. In: Hearing Research 266.1-2, pp. 52–59. ISSN: 03785955.
DOI: 10.1016/j.heares.2009.08.011.
Chen, Fei and Philipos C. Loizou (2011). “Predicting the intelligibility of vocoded speech”.
In: Ear and Hearing 32.3, pp. 331–338. DOI: 10.1097/AUD.0b013e3181ff3515.
Conroy, Christopher and Jr. Kidd Gerald (2021). “Informational masking in the modulation
domain”. In: The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America 149.5, pp. 3665–3673.
ISSN: 0001-4966. DOI: 10.1121/10.0005038.
Crew, Joseph D. and John J. Galvin (2012). “Channel interaction limits melodic pitch per-
ception in simulated cochlear implants”. In: The Journal of the Acoustical Society of
America 132.5, EL429–EL435. ISSN: 1520-8524. DOI: 10.1121/1.4758770.
Dau, Torsten, Jesko Verhey, and Armin Kohlrausch (1999). “Intrinsic envelope fluctuations
and modulation-detection thresholds for narrow-band noise carriers”. In: The Journal
of the Acoustical Society of America 106.5, pp. 2752–2760. ISSN: 1520-8524. DOI:
10.1121/1.428103.
Dorman, Michael F. et al. (1998). “The recognition of sentences in noise by normal-hearing
listeners using simulations of cochlear-implant signal processors with 6–20 channels”.
In: The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America 104.6, pp. 3583–3585. ISSN: 1520-
8524. DOI: 10.1121/1.423940.
Dubbelboer, Finn and Tammo Houtgast (2008). “The concept of signal-to-noise ratio in the
modulation domain and speech intelligibility”. In: The Journal of the Acoustical Society
of America 124.6, p. 3937. ISSN: 1520-8524. DOI: 10.1121/1.3001713.
Dudley, Homer (1939). “Remaking Speech”. In: The Journal of the Acoustical Society of
America 11.2, pp. 169–177. ISSN: 0001-4966. DOI: 10.1121/1.1916020.
Durlach, Nathaniel I. et al. (2003). “Note on informational masking (L)”. In: The Journal
of the Acoustical Society of America 113.6, pp. 2984–2987. ISSN: 0001-4966. DOI:
10.1121/1.1570435.
Ewert, Stephan and Torsten Dau (2000). “Characterizing frequency selectivity for enve-
lope fluctuations”. In: The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America 108.3, p. 1181.
ISSN: 1520-8524. DOI: 10.1121/1.1288665.
Modelling the effects of masking on the intelligibility of vocoded speech
37
==PAGE:48==
Fu, Qian-Jie and Geraldine Nogaki (2005). “Noise Susceptibility of Cochlear Implant Users:
The Role of Spectral Resolution and Smearing”. In: Journal of the Association for Re-
search in Otolaryngology 6.1, pp. 19–27. ISSN: 1525-3961. DOI: 10.1007/s10162-004-
5024-3.
Glasberg, Brian R. and Brian C. J. Moore (1989). “Psychoacoustic abilities of subjects
with unilateral and bilateral cochlear hearing impairments and their relationship to the
ability to understand speech”. In: Scandinavian audiology. Supplementum 32. ISSN:
0107-8593.
Hawkins J. E., Jr. and S. S. Stevens (1950). “The Masking of Pure Tones and of Speech
by White Noise”. In: The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America 22.1, pp. 6–13.
ISSN: 0001-4966. DOI: 10.1121/1.1906581.
Honorof, Douglas N. and D. H. Whalen (2010). “Identification of speaker sex from one
vowel across a range of fundamental frequencies”. In: The Journal of the Acoustical
Society of America 128.5, pp. 3095–3104. ISSN: 1520-8524. DOI: 10.1121/1.3488347.
Hopkins, Kathryn and Brian C. J. Moore (2010). “The importance of temporal fine struc-
ture information in speech at different spectral regions for normal-hearing and hearing-
impaired subjects”. In: The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America 127.3, pp. 1595–
1608. ISSN: 1520-8524. DOI: 10.1121/1.3293003.
Houtgast, Tammo, Herman J. M. Steeneken, and R. Plomp (1980). “Predictiong speech
intelligibility in rooms from the modulation transfer function. I. General room acoustics”.
In: Acustica 46.1, pp. 60–72.
ISO 389-7 (2005). Reference Zero for the Calibration of Audiometric Equipment—part 7:
Reference Threshold of Hearing under Free-field and Diffuse-field Listening Conditions.
(International Organization for Standardization, Geneva, Switzerland).
Jepsen, Morten L., Stephan D. Ewert, and Torsten Dau (2008). “A computational model
of human auditory signal processing and perception”. In: The Journal of the Acoustical
Society of America 124.1, pp. 422–438. ISSN: 0001-4966. DOI: 10.1121/1.2924135.
Jørgensen, Søren and Torsten Dau (2011). “Predicting speech intelligibility based on the
signal-to-noise envelope power ratio after modulation-frequency selective processing”.
In: The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America 130.3. DOI: 10.1121/1.3621502.
Jørgensen, Søren, Stephan D. Ewert, and Torsten Dau (2013). “A multi-resolution envelope-
power based model for speech intelligibility”. In: The Journal of the Acoustical Society
of America 134.1. DOI: 10.1121/1.4807563.
Joris, P., C. Schreiner, and A. Rees (2004). “Neural processing of amplitude-modulated
sounds”. In: Physiological Reviews 84, pp. 541–577. DOI: 10.1152/physrev.00029.2003.
Kates, James M. and Kathryn H. Arehart (2014). “The Hearing-Aid Speech Perception In-
dex (HASPI)”. In: Speech Communication 65, pp. 75–93. ISSN: 0167-6393. DOI: https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.specom.2014.06.002.
Kießling, Jürgen, Birger Kollmeier, and Uwe Baumann (2018). Versorgung mit Hörgeräten
und Hörimplantaten: 173 Abbildungen. 3., vollständig überarbeitete und erweiterte Au-
flage. Stuttgart and New York: Georg Thieme Verlag. ISBN: 9783132402003.
Ladd, D. Robert (2008). Intonational Phonology. Cambridge University Press. ISBN: 9781-
139473996.
Lee, Sungmin and Lisa Lucks Mendel (2017). “Derivation of frequency importance func-
tions for the AzBio sentences”. In: The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America
142.6, pp. 3416–3427. ISSN: 1520-8524. DOI: 10.1121/1.5014056.
Lopez-Poveda, Enrique A. and Ray Meddis (2001). “A human nonlinear cochlear filter-
bank”. In: The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America 110.6, pp. 3107–3118. ISSN:
0001-4966. DOI: 10.1121/1.1416197.
38
Modelling the effects of masking on the intelligibility of vocoded speech
==PAGE:49==
Mesiano, Paolo (2022). “Assessing the effects of fundamental-frequency dynamics on the
intelligibility of competing voices”. In: Contributions to Hearing Research 56. [PhD dis-
sertation], Technical University of Denmark (DTU), Department of Health Technology,
Hearing Systems.
Murray, Iain R. and John L. Arnott (1993). “Toward the simulation of emotion in synthetic
speech: A review of the literature on human vocal emotion”. In: The Journal of the
Acoustical Society of America 93.2, pp. 1097–1108. ISSN: 1520-8524. DOI: 10.1121/1.
405558.
O’Neill, Erin R. et al. (2021). “Role of semantic context and talker variability in speech
perception of cochlear-implant users and normal-hearing listeners”. In: The Journal of
the Acoustical Society of America 149.2, pp. 1224–1239. ISSN: 0001-4966. DOI: 10.
1121/10.0003532. eprint: https://pubs.aip.org/.
Oxenham, Andrew J. and Heather A. Kreft (2014). “Speech Perception in Tones and Noise
via Cochlear Implants Reveals Influence of Spectral Resolution on Temporal Process-
ing”. In: Trends in Hearing 18, pp. 1–14. DOI: 10.1177/2331216514553783.
Pavlovic, Chaslav V. (1987). “Derivation of primary parameters and procedures for use in
speech intelligibility predictions”. In: The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America
82.2, pp. 413–422. ISSN: 1520-8524. DOI: 10.1121/1.395442.
Peters, Robert W., Brian C. J. Moore, and Thomas Baer (1998). “Speech reception thresh-
olds in noise with and without spectral and temporal dips for hearing-impaired and
normally hearing people”. In: The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America 103.1,
pp. 577–587. ISSN: 1520-8524. DOI: 10.1121/1.421128.
Relaño-Iborra, Helia, Tobias May, et al. (2016). “Predicting speech intelligibility based on
a correlation metric in the envelope power spectrum domain”. In: The Journal of the
Acoustical Society of America 140.4. DOI: 10.1121/1.4964505.
Relaño-Iborra, Helia, Johannes Zaar, and Torsten Dau (2019). “A speech-based compu-
tational auditory signal processing and perception model”. In: The Journal of the Acous-
tical Society of America 146.5. DOI: 10.1121/1.5129114.
Schreiner, Christoph E. and Gerald Langner (1988). “Periodicity coding in the inferior col-
liculus of the cat. II. Topographical organization”. In: Journal of Neurophysiology 60.6,
pp. 1823–1840. DOI: 10.1152/jn.1988.60.6.1823.
Spahr, Anthony J. et al. (2012). “Development and validation of the AzBio sentence lists”.
In: Ear and hearing 33.1. DOI: 10.1097/AUD.0b013e31822c2549.
Steeneken, Herman J. M. and Tammo Houtgast (1980). “A physical method for measuring
speech–transmission quality”. In: The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America 67.1,
pp. 318–326. ISSN: 1520-8524. DOI: 10.1121/1.384464.
Steinmetzger, Kurt and Stuart Rosen (2015). “The role of periodicity in perceiving speech
in quiet and in background noise”. In: The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America
138.6, pp. 3586–3599. ISSN: 1520-8524. DOI: 10.1121/1.4936945.
Steinmetzger, Kurt, Johannes Zaar, et al. (2019). “Predicting the effects of periodicity on
the intelligibility of masked speech: An evaluation of different modelling approaches and
their limitations”. In: The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America 146.4, p. 2562.
DOI: 10.1121/1.5129050.
Stone, Michael A., Christian Füllgrabe, and Brian C. J. Moore (2012). “Notionally steady
background noise acts primarily as a modulation masker of speech”. In: The Journal
of the Acoustical Society of America 132.1, pp. 317–326. ISSN: 1520-8524. DOI: 10.
1121/1.4725766.
Taal, Cees H. et al. (2011). “An Algorithm for Intelligibility Prediction of Time–Frequency
Weighted Noisy Speech”. In: IEEE Transactions on Audio, Speech, and Language Pro-
cessing 19.7, pp. 2125–2136. DOI: 10.1109/TASL.2011.2114881.
Modelling the effects of masking on the intelligibility of vocoded speech
39
==PAGE:50==
Veigel, Cathrina (2022). Modelling the effects of modulation masking on the intelligibility
of vocoded speech. [Special Course Report], Technical University of Denmark (DTU),
Department of Health Technology, MSc Engineering Acoustics.
Whitmal, Nathaniel A. et al. (2007). “Speech intelligibility in cochlear implant simulations:
Effects of carrier type, interfering noise, and subject experience”. In: The Journal of the
Acoustical Society of America 122.4, pp. 2376–2388. ISSN: 1520-8524. DOI: 10.1121/
1.2773993.
Zeng, Fan-Gang (2004). “Trends in Cochlear Implants”. In: Trends in Amplification 8.1,
pp. 1–34. ISSN: 1084-7138. DOI: 10.1177/108471380400800102.
40
Modelling the effects of masking on the intelligibility of vocoded speech
==PAGE:51==
A
Detailed model descriptions
A.1
sEPSM and mr-sEPSM
Figure A.1 shows the main structure of the processing steps in mr-sEPSM. Both, the
noise alone and the noisy speech are passed separately through a gammatone filterbank
of 22 filters with 1/3-octave spacing covering a range from 63 Hz to 8 kHz. This step
represents the auditory filtering of the basilar membrane. The envelope of each filter
output is extracted using Hilbert transform. The 22 envelope signals are used as input
to a modulation filterbank of eight second-order bandpass filters with octave spacing and
center frequencies ranging form 2 to 256 Hz in parallel with a third-order low-pass filter with
a cutoff frequency of 1 Hz. Only modulation filters with center frequencies below a quarter
of the respective auditory center frequency are used for the model predictions. Each
temporal output of the modulation filters is segmented by rectangular windows with no
overlap. The durations of the windows are inversely proportional to the center frequency
of the corresponding modulation filter. For each of these windows, the envelope power is
calculated as
Penv,i(p, n) =
1
[ ¯E(p)2]/2[ei(p, n, t) −ei(p, n)]2,
(A.1)
where E(p, t) represents the Hilbert envelope as a function of time t of a given auditory
filter p, and e(p, n, t) is the corresponding output of the modulation filter n. The bars indi-
cate the average over time. The power is normalized by the squared time average of the
envelope such that it is independent of the overall level of the stimulus i.e. only depends
on the power of the modulation. The SNRenv is then calculated for each temporal segment
i of every modulation filter n and each auditory filter p as
SNRenv,i(p, n) = Penv,S+N,i(p, n) −Penv,N,i(p, n)
Penv,N,i(p, n)
,
(A.2)
Figure A.1: Sketch of the processing steps of the mr-sEPSM, taken from Jørgensen, S. D. Ewert,
et al. (2013). The input to the model is the noise alone (gray) and the noisy speech (black),
which are first processed separately: the signals are passed through a filterbank representing
the auditory filters, followed by an envelope extraction using the Hilbert transform. The Envelope
signals get filtered by a modulation filterbank. The envelope power of each channel is calculated
in multi-resulution temporal windows. The outputs are then used to calculate the SNRenv which in
the end gets averaged across time and auditory and modulation channels. The single SNRenv is
the input to the ideal observer which predicts the percentage of correct words.
Modelling the effects of masking on the intelligibility of vocoded speech
41
==PAGE:52==
where Penv,S+N,i represents the normalized envelope power of the noisy speech and
Penv,N,i of the speech alone, accordingly. The SNRenv,i values are averaged across the
number of temporal segments I(n) for each modulation filter, resulting in a two dimensional
matrix of 9 x 22 values:
SNRenv(p, n) =
1
I(n)
I(n)
X
i=1
SNRenv,i(p, n).
(A.3)
A combined overall SNRenv is obtained by first integrating the values across modulation
filters as
SNRenv(p) =
v
u
u
t
9
X
n=1
SNR2
env(p, n),
(A.4)
and finally likewise across peripheral filters:
SNRenv =
v
u
u
t
22
X
p=1
SNR2
env(p).
(A.5)
Using a statistically ideal observer, this overall SNRenv is transformed into a sensitivity
index d′ = k · (SNRenv)q. The constants k and q are empirically determined, q is assumed
to be independent of the used speech material whereas k depends on the speech material
and is, therefore, a free parameter in the model fitting procedure (Jørgensen, S. D. Ewert,
et al., 2013). The sensitivity index is translated into a percentage of correctly understood
words using a m-alternative forced choice model in combination with an unequal-variance
Gaussian model:
Pcorrect(d′) = Φ

d′ −µN
q
σ2
S + σ2
N

,
(A.6)
where Φ denotes the cumulative normal distribution and the values σN and µN are depen-
dant on the response-set size of the speech material m. The variance of the speech σS
is another free parameter of the model fitting and is assumed to be related to the redun-
dancy of the speech material. For a detailed explanation of the ideal observer concept
see Jørgensen and Dau (2011).
The main differences between sEPSM (Jørgensen and Dau, 2011) and mr-sEPSM (Jør-
gensen, S. D. Ewert, et al., 2013) are less modulation filters in the sEPSM and the short-
term estimation of SNRenv in the mr-sEPSM. In conditions with stationary noise, the two
models give similar predictions of speech intelligibility but only mr-sEPSM can account for
fluctuating noise (Jørgensen, S. D. Ewert, et al., 2013).
A.2
sEPSMcorr and sEPSMcorr2
An overview of the sEPSMcorr model structure is shown in Figure A.2 (left). The signals are
filtered by a gammatone filterbank consisting of 22 filters with 1/3-octave spacing ranging
from 63 Hz to 8 kHz. Only channels with a stimulus level above the hearing threshold in
quiet (ISO 389-7, 2005) are processed further. The hilbert envelope of each frequency
channel is extracted. In order to reflect the sluggishness of the auditory system to follow
42
Modelling the effects of masking on the intelligibility of vocoded speech
==PAGE:53==
(a) sEPSMcorr
(b) sCASP
Figure A.2: Sketch of the processing steps of the sEPSMcorr (left), taken from Relaño-Iborra, May,
et al., 2016 and sCASP (right), taken from Relaño-Iborra, Zaar, et al. (2019). For both models,
clean speech and noisy/degraded/processed speech are input to the model. In the sEPSMcorr
(left), both are passed trough an auditory gammatone filterbank, followed by an envelope extract-
ing, modulation filterbank and a logarithmic amplitude compression. In the back-end of the model,
the two outputs of the front-end are analyzed in short time windows and finally cross-correlated.
In the sCASP (right) the input signals are first processed through outer- and middle ear filters.
The auditory filtering is represented by the non-linar DRNL filterbank. For each auditory band, the
envelope is extracted and quadratically expanded. Before the modulation filterbank, the signals
are passed through a chain of adaption loops. The internal representations of each modulation
subband are short-time correlated and averaged, resulting in one correlation value as model out-
put.
fast envelope fluctuations, the envelope of each channel is filtered by a first-order low-pass
filter with a cutoff frequency of 150 Hz (S. Ewert and Dau, 2000). The envelope time-singal
is passed through the same moudlation filterbank as in mr-sEPSM (Jørgensen, S. D. Ew-
Modelling the effects of masking on the intelligibility of vocoded speech
43
==PAGE:54==
ert, et al., 2013). In contrast to mr-sEPSM, another Hilbert envelope is calculated for the
output time signals of the modulation filters centered above 10 Hz, but the time signal of
modulation filters with center-frequencies below 10 Hz remain unchanged. This process-
ing step models the modulation-phase sensitivity along the auditory pathway (Schreiner
and Langner, 1988). In order to satisfy Weber’s law, the outputs of each channel is loga-
rithmically compressed.
The model’s back-end processes the modulation filtered outputs in time segments with
durations inversely proportional to the corresponding modulation filter center frequency
and without overlap, as in the mr-sEPSM. Only modulation filters with center frequencies
below one-quarter of the respective auditory center frequencies are considered in the
model. Segment-by-segment, the output of each modulation and auditory filter are corss-
correlated with zero lag between the clean speech x and noisy speech y vectors. The
correlation coefficient χ′ is defined as
χ′
k,j,i = (xk,j,i −xk,j,i) · (yk,j,i −yk,j,i)
||xk,j,i −xk,j,i|| · ||yk,j,i −yk,j,i||,
(A.7)
where the correlation is calculated for each time segment k, modulation filter j and audi-
tory filter i seperately. The coefficient is ranging from -1 to 1. As segments with negative
correlations are assumed not to contribute to intelligibility, negative correlations are set
to 0. Using a ”multiple looks” approach, the correlation values are then integrated across
time acoording to
χj,i =
v
u
u
t
K(j)
X
k=1
(χk,j,i)2.
(A.8)
K(j) indecates the number of segments of modulation filter j. The obrained values are
finally averaged across all modulation and gammatone filters by
χ =
1
(I −Iexc) · J −Jexc
·
X
ij
χj,im,
(A.9)
with the total number of gammatone filters I and the total number of moudlation filters
J. Iexc are the excluded auditory filters where the stimulus energy is below the hearing
threshold and Jexc are the excluded modulation filters centered at frequencies below one
forth of the corresponding auditory center frequency.
A logistic function is applied to the correlation based output of the model to create a map-
ping between the correlation coefficient χ and the intelligibility scores according to
Φ(χ) =
100
1 + e(a·χ+b) ,
(A.10)
with a an b representing the free parameters. The logistic function has to be calibrated to
a fitting condition in order to get the optimal values a and b.
In the modified version sEPSMcorr2 by Steinmetzger, Zaar, et al. (2019) a full-wave rec-
tification of the output of the modulation filters was applied instead of the second Hilbert
envelope extraction after the modulation filterbank in the sEPSMcorr. As shown by Stein-
metzger, Zaar, et al., 2019, full-wave rectification preserves fine signal details and reduces
the influence of phase differences by omitting the signal polarity whereas the envelope
44
Modelling the effects of masking on the intelligibility of vocoded speech
==PAGE:55==
extraction smooths the fine details of the signal out and the phase information is not fully
discarded. Furthermore, a modulation filter selection algorithm was added to the model,
which excludes the modulation filters with broadband modulation power of unprocessed
speech below a specified relative threshold. One reason for this modification was the
assumption that speech does not carry relevant linguistic information at modulation fre-
quencies between 16 and 64 Hz (Arnal et al., 2015, Joris et al., 2004). The modified model
is called sEPSMcorr2.
A.3
sCASP
The model processing stages of sCASP are schematically visualized in Figure A.2 (page
43, right), it closely follows the structure of the original CASP model (Jepsen et al., 2008).
The model takes unprocessed clean speech (template) and noisy or degraded speech
mixtures (target) as inputs and begins by filtering the input signals through finite impulse
response filters that replicate the transfer functions of the outer and middle ear in the
human auditory system. Subsequently, the signals pass through a dual-resonance non-
linear filterbank (DRNL, Lopez-Poveda and Meddis, 2001) that consists of linear and non-
linear paths. The linear path includes gain, gammatone, and lowpass filters, while the
non-linear path employs gammatone filters, a broken-stick nonlinearity, and additional
gammatone and lowpass filters. The output of the DRNL incorporates the effects of non-
linear basilar-membrane processing, accounting for level-dependent compression and
auditory-filter tuning. Internal noise is then added to the DRNL outputs to simulate au-
dibility limitations. The auditory filtering is followed by envelope extraction, implemented
as half-wave rectification and second-order low-pass filtering with a cuttoff-frequency of
1 kHz. The resulting envelopes are expanded quadratically to represent intensity-like in-
formation. Additionally, the model incorporates adaptation effects using a chain of five
feedback loops. The last stage of the auditory preprocessing is a modulation analysis,
achieved through a low-pass filter with cutoff frequency 150 Hz followed by a bank of
frequency-shifted first-order low-pass filters (i.e. acting as bandpass filters) parallel to a
second-order low-pass filter with cutoff frequency 2.5 Hz. The initial two band-pass fil-
ters maintain a fixed bandwidth of 5 Hz, whereas the widths of the remaining filters are
adjusted logarithmically, with a quality factor of 2. For modulation channels above 10
Hz, only the absolute values of the modulation filter outputs are considered, while for
modulation channels below 10 Hz, the real part is utilized. This processing was applied
to account for reduced modulation-phase sensitivity. Only modulation subbands whose
center frequency is below 1/4 of the auditory-band center frequency are further processed
to extract internal representations of the template and target signals.
The internal representations obtained from the auditory preprocessing stages contain in-
formation related to time, audio frequency, and modulation frequency. The sCASP back-
end assumes independent processing across modulation channels but analyzes the con-
tribution of all auditory channels simultaneously for each modulation frequency. This is
achieved by grouping subbands with the same modulation frequency, generating separate
spectrogram-like representations for each modulation channel (referred to as ”modulation-
spectrograms”). In contrast to the sEPSMcorr model, which treats the dimensions of the
internal representation independently, the sCASP model considers joint correlation across
time and audio frequency. The correlation values are computed by cross-correlating the
modulation-spectrograms of the target and template signals using short time windows.
The correlation values are then averaged across time windows and modulation frequen-
cies, resulting in a single value representing the model output for each pair of input sig-
nals. To transform the correlation values into speech intelligibility scores, the same logistic
function as in sEPSMcorr (Equation A.10) is applied.
Modelling the effects of masking on the intelligibility of vocoded speech
45
==PAGE:56==
B
Data selection process
The underling assumption for the data selection process was that only insignificant across
testperson variability exists, as all listeners were normal-hearing and native English-speaking.
Full datasets of four measurements per condition and per masker were selected according
to the following rules:
1. Maximization of amount of data points from the same person.
2. Minimization of the number of testpersons.
3. Selection according to the chronological order of the measurements.
When the first rule did not apply, the second was used and so on. The final dataset
according to this selection rules is shown in Table B.1.
Table B.1: Data included in the final dataset per testperson after removing invalid data due to
technical issues. The order of testpersons in the table reflects the chronological order of the
measurements. The total amount of data available per condition and masker is shown in the last
row. Four data points were selected for each condition and masker, shown in green. The data of
the test persons in yellow were completely discarded.
46
Modelling the effects of masking on the intelligibility of vocoded speech
==PAGE:57==
C
Measurement Software
The measurement software used for data collection was an adjusted version of the Dan-
ish Sentence Test (DAST) software, a software developed for the Larger Danish corpus
for sentence testing-project at the Hearing Science Section at the Technical University of
Denmark. The Danish sentence test speech material was replaced with the AzBio speech
material, resulting in a need for adjustments of the sound pressure level reference val-
ues to ensure appropriate output levels. To validate the accuracy of the sound pressure
level, the measurement equipment was calibrated before the start of the study. The user
interface of the application during the testing process is shown in Figure C.1. Prepared
csv-files containing relevant information such as presentation order, lists, conditions, and
other parameters specific to each test participant were imported into the measurement
software. During the testing process, the tester’s role primarily involved marking the cor-
rectly repeated words and clicking the ”continue” button.
Figure C.1: matlab user interface of the measurement software used in the data collection. Ad-
justed DAST software from the Larger Danish corpus for sentence testing-project at the Hearing
Science Section at the Technical University of Denmark. CSV files for each test participant were
created, specifying which list for which condition and SNR should be used, such that lists were
balanced across test participants. Correct repeated words were marked by the tester.
Modelling the effects of masking on the intelligibility of vocoded speech
47
==PAGE:58==
D
Additional Modelling: sEPSM with band
importance function
In prelimnary investigations by Veigel (2022), the sEPSM was shown to break down for
tonal markers in the unprocessed condition. The reason was found to be the model as-
signing importance to frequency regions that only consist of speech information, resulting
in very high signal-to-noise ratios in the envelope domain in those auditory filters. One
approach to avoid this effect was proposed by Veigel (2022) and consists of applying band
importance functions (BIF) to the sEPSM model. This idea is based on classical speech
intelligibility prediction models, such as the speech intelligibility index (ANSI/ASA S3.5-
1997, R2020), in which BIFs play a crucial role by assigning weights to the frequency
bands. These weights reflect the respective contributions of each band to speech intelli-
gibility in normal-hearing listeners. As a side investigation in this master thesis, a BIF was
applied to the sEPSM and the effect on the predictions was analyzed.
D.1
Methods
The sEPSM model was extended by the BIF of the AzBio speech material (Lee and
Mendel, 2017). The specific 1/3-octave-weights of the BIF are shown in Table D.1. As
the lowest frequency band of the BIF has cutoff-frequencies of 0 and 180 Hz whereas the
sEPSM has five auditory channels in this frequency region, the BIF-value of the lowest
band was equally distributed over the respective auditory filter channels. The changed
values are marked with a star* in table D.1. The weighting was applied on the SNRenv
value of each auditory filter. In order to stay in the same value range as the original sEPSM
model, the value after applying the weight was multiplied by 22, the number of auditory
channels.
Additionally, to investigate on the importance of the lowest frequency channels without
any weighting in the higher auditory filters, the original sEPSM model was reduced by
the lowest 6 auditory filters (fc = 63, 80, 100, 125, 160, 200 Hz) without applying any
BIF (16auditChan). These 6 filters were chosen as they were shown to have very high
Table D.1: Band importance function (BIF, measured by Lee and Mendel, 2017 for the AzBio
speech material) used to adjust the sEPSM (Jørgensen and Dau, 2011). The table shows the
weighting (BIFAzBio) for each 1/3-octave-frequency band with center frequency cfaudit. The lowest
frequency band of the BIF ranges from 0 to 180 Hz. Given that the sEPSM model has five auditory
filters within this frequency range, the BIF-value of the 160 Hz band was divided by five to ensure
equal weighting across these auditory filters. These adjusted values are denoted by a star* for
reference.
cfaudit (Hz)
63
80
100
125
160
200
250
BIFAzBio
0.0044*
0.0044*
0.0044*
0.0044*
0.0044*
0.0241
0.0174
...
315
400
500
630
800
1000
1250
1600
...
0.0135
0.0308
0.0542
0.0871
0.0743
0.0735
0.0972
0.1021
...
2000
2500
3150
4000
5000
6300
8000
...
0.0913
0.0965
0.0791
0.0665
0.0365
0.0257
0.0085
48
Modelling the effects of masking on the intelligibility of vocoded speech
==PAGE:59==
SNRenv values in the pure tone and modulated tone complexes resulting in the over-
estimation of the percent correct understood words (see Veigel, 2022 for details). The
model calibration was performed with the SSN data for each model adjustment (BIFAzBio,
16auditChan) separately in order to get the individual sets of free model parameters: sen-
sitivity index k and σs. The respective values can be found in Table D.2. Model predictions
for each masker type and each SNR were averaged over 100 AzBio sentences.
Table D.2: Values of model parameters k, q, σs and m, calibrated on the unprocessed speech-
shaped noise masker with the AzBio speech corpus (Spahr et al., 2012), for the original
sEPSM model (Jørgensen and Dau, 2011) and the adjusted sEPSM models with added band-
importance function of the AzBio material (BIFAzBio) and without the lowest six auditory channels
(16auditChan). Values for q and m were kept from Jørgensen and Dau (2011).
model
k
q
σs
m
original sEPSM
0.48
0.5
1.47
8000
sEPSM with BIFAzBio
0.59
0.5
1.35
8000
sEPSM with 16auditChan
0.65
0.5
1.29
8000
D.2
Results
The data of each masker (open symbols) and the respective model predictions (filled sym-
bols) of the two adjusted sEPSM versions with added band-importance function (BIFAzBio,
left) and with removed lowest six auditory filters (16auditChan, right) are shown in Fig-
ure D.1. The SSN masker was the fitting condition in both model versions.
(a) sEPSM with BIFAzBio
(b) sEPSM with 16auditChan
Figure D.1: Unprocessed data (unpro, open symbols) and predictions of the sEPSM (Jørgensen
and Dau, 2011) with added band-importance function (BIFAzBio, left, filled symbols) and removed
lowest six auditory filters (16auditChan, right, filled symbols) for the three masker speech shaped
noise (SSN), pure tone complex (PT) and modulated tone complex (MT). Proportion words correct
as a function of signal-to-noise ratio, the standard error of the mean between listeners is show by
error bars (open symbols).
The accuracy of the model’s predictions for each masker type is quantified in terms of
Pearson’s correlation coefficient (ρ) with the corresponding human data and the mean
absolute error (MAE) in Table D.3. Clearly visible in Figure D.1, PT predictions generated
by both versions of the model were no longer saturated at 100%, unlike the predictions of
Modelling the effects of masking on the intelligibility of vocoded speech
49
==PAGE:60==
the original sEPSM model in Veigel (2022). However, it is noteworthy that the predictions
obtained using the sEPSM model with BIFAzBio were consistently lower compared to the
corresponding human data, for both PT and MT maskers. By just removing the lowest six
frequency channels from the sEPSM (16auditCan) the model predictions for both maskers
closely follow the human data across SNRs. In line with these visual observations, the
predictive power of the sEPSM with BIFAzBio was lower (ρ = 0.96, MAE = 6% for PT and
ρ = 0.93, MAE = 11.88% for MT) compared to the sEPSM with 16auditChan (ρ = 1, MAE
= 3.75% for PT and ρ = 0.99, MAE = 3.69% in MT). In both model versions, the MAE of
the fitting condition is relatively high (5.34% with BIFAzBio and 7.49% with 16auditChan).
Table D.3: Pearson’s correlation coefficient (ρ) and mean average error (MAE) between behavioral
data and predictions (sEPSM, Jørgensen and Dau, 2011) with added band-importance function
of the AzBio material (BIFAzBio) and without the lowest six auditory channels (16auditChan). The
metric was percent correct understood words of AzBio (Spahr et al., 2012) in the maskers speech
shaped noise (SSN), pure tone complex (PT) and modulated tone complex (PT). The SSN masker
data served as fitting condition for the model.
sEPSM with BIFAzBio
sEPSM with 16auditChan
ρ
MAE (%)
ρ
MAE (%)
SSN (fit)
0.99
5.32
0.99
7.49
PT
0.96
6
1
3.75
MT
0.93
11.88
0.99
3.69
D.3
Discussion
As predicted by Veigel (2022), the addition of a band-importance function to the sEPSM
model counter-balanced the effect of high importance on frequency bands lacking masker
content in the PT and MT conditions. As shown in Table D.1, the BIF of the AzBio speech
material did assign only little importance to the lowest and highest frequency bands, in
line with the assumption in Oxenham and Kreft (2014). However, the predictions of the
sEPSM with added BIF were not as precise as expected, taking into account that the
BIF was measured by Lee and Mendel (2017) for the exact speech material used here.
However, the simple exclusion of the six lowest frequency bands, which demonstrated
overshooting in the PT and MT masker conditions, yielded improved predictions com-
pared to incorporating the BIF. The predictions demonstrate excellent alignment with the
empirical data across all masker conditions, raising the question of whether the exclusion
of overshooting frequency bands in the sEPSM serves as a viable solution to avoid the
problem caused by frequency-sparse markers.
The BIF derived by Lee and Mendel (2017) suggests that the lowest six frequency bands
retain a certain degree of importance for speech understanding, albeit relatively minor
(approximately 6% of the overall importance). Interestingly, despite this indication, incor-
porating the BIF into the sEPSM model yielded less favorable predictions. However, the
selective removal of auditory filters from the sEPSM model solely based on the observa-
tion of overshooting in specific masker conditions appears arbitrary and lacks a systematic
justification. In light of the data collection results and the BIF, it becomes evident that the
primary issue lies with the fitting condition, i.e. the SSN masker includes energy in fre-
quency bands (both low and high) which were shown to affect speech intelligibility. The
overall level of the SSN masker is hence higher compared to the PT and MT maskers.
The difference in energy distribution between the maskers leads to a mismatch that sig-
nificantly impacts the model’s predictive performance.
Hence, a more viable solution, aligning with the findings of the experimental study, would
50
Modelling the effects of masking on the intelligibility of vocoded speech
==PAGE:61==
involve modifying the fitting condition to the bandpass-filtered SSN masker condition. This
fitting condition ensures a closer resemblance in terms of energy distribution to the PT
and MT markers in the unprocessed condition, thereby enhancing the model’s validity
and impartiality in its predictions for those two markers.
Modelling the effects of masking on the intelligibility of vocoded speech
51
==PAGE:62==
E
Additional Figures
Figure E.1: Modulation spectra for the speech-shaped noise (SSN) used in the present study.
Top panel shows the modulation spectrum averaged across the 16 vocoder channels for the inde-
pendent channels (as used in vocoder 1 in the experiment, blue line) and after simulating current
spread (as used in vocoder 2, red line). Bottom panels show the modulation spectra at the outputs
of the individual vocoder channels.
52
Modelling the effects of masking on the intelligibility of vocoded speech
==PAGE:63==
Figure E.2: In the top panel, the temporal envelope of the sentence The pool was filled with dirt
and leaves. at the output of the auditory filter with the center frequency 1000 Hz in the sCASP. The
sentence was either tone-excited envelope vocoded without (voc1, green) or with spectral spread
(voc2, red). In the middle panel, the outputs of each modulation filter with center frequencies fcmod
of this auditory filter are displayed for the same sentence.
Modelling the effects of masking on the intelligibility of vocoded speech
53
==PAGE:64==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Oersteds Plads, Building 352,1
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
https://www.hea.healthtech.dtu.dk/
