==PAGE:1==
Developing a map of circular economy initia­
tives for Denmark’s cement manufacturing in­
dustry to integrate with the EU­TIMES energy­
climate mitigation model
Master Thesis
DTU Sustain
Department of Environmental and Resource Engineering
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Developing a map of circular economy initiatives for Denmark’s cement manufac­
turing industry to integrate with the EU­TIMES energy climate mitigation model
Master Thesis
June, 2023
By
Arvind Chauhan
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Environmental and Resource Engineering, Bygn­
ingstorvet, Building 115, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
https://sustain.dtu.dk/en
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over five months at the Section for Materials & Durability,
Department of Environmnetal and Resource Engineering, DTU Sustain at the Technical
University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment for the degree Master of Science in En­
gineering, MSc Eng.
Arvind Chauhan ­ s210248
Signature
Date
ii
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
The global construction sector poses significant environmental challenges, accounting for
50% of all extracted material use, 30% of the EU’s waste generation, and 5­12% of green­
house gas emissions[1]. As population growth accelerates, the demand for infrastructure
such as housing, bridges, and roads increases. This trend could potentially deplete our
natural resources if current consumption rates persist. Thus, the principles of the circular
economy, which advocate for sustainable resource use, need to be implemented, despite
their current under­quantification.
In this project, circular economy initiatives are explored through a case study focusing
on cement manufacturing in Denmark. The aim is to develop a conceptual model to
evaluate the recycling potential of ultrafine concrete waste particles (UFCWP), extracted
from advanced recycling technologies, in the production of Portland cement clinkers. The
study initially identifies advanced technologies employed in the recycling of End­Of­Life
(EOL) concrete, specifically the Advanced Dry Recovery (ADR) [2]and Heating and Air
Classification Systems (HAS) technologies[3], developed under the C2CA[4] and VEEP
projects[5]. These technologies play a key role in managing EOL concrete waste by cat­
egorizing particles based on size and extracting coarse, fine, and ultrafine aggregates.
Crushed particles (0­12 mm) undergo ADR processing, which separates them into coarse
aggregates (4­12 mm) and fine aggregates (0­4 mm). These fine aggregates are then fur­
ther processed by HAS, dividing them into fine and ultrafine particles (0­0.25 mm). The
potential of these ultrafine particles for incorporation into the raw meal for cement clinkers
is explored in this study.
To assess the potential for substituting UFCWP in the raw meal for cement clinker pro­
duction, a conceptual theoretical stoichiometry mass balance model was developed. The
XRF chemical analysis of raw materials is pivotal in preparing the raw meal, which adheres
to stringent boundary conditions of LSF, SM, and AM, computed using an Excel­based
tool. Various combinations were explored to find possible solutions within the boundary
conditions that have a chemical composition similar to that of Portland cement clinker.
The study concludes that direct incorporation of UFCWP into the raw meal is not viable.
However, a chemical blend of fly ash and UFCWP, each contributing 50%, provides a fea­
sible alternative, achieving a maximum replacement of 23.53% (with 11.77% attributed to
UFCWP) within the established boundary conditions LSF 97, SM 2.5, and AM 1.5.
This study underscores the complexities of implementing the circular economy initiative
of incorporating UFCWP in Portland clinker raw meal within the construction sector, high­
lighting the need for ongoing research and improvements in this field.
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
Arvind Chauhan, MSc Environmental Engineering, DTU
Author of this master thesis.
My deepest gratitude goes to my parents, who have generously supported me, both emo­
tionally and financially, throughout my educational journey. The chance they have given
me is truly priceless, and their unwavering faith in me has been my constant source of
strength.
I owe profound gratitude to Ana Teresa Macas Lima. Her knowledge and experience
guided me throughout this project, and her support was instrumental in expanding my
horizons. Her motivational approach helped me solve problems independently, yet she
was always ready to step in when I struggled. Our discussions greatly influenced my
work, and the time she invested in addressing my concerns was truly appreciated.
I also want to extend my gratitude to Wolfgang Kunther for his steadfast support during this
project. His valuable feedback on cement topics was instrumental in facilitating a deep
understanding of the subject, which reflected in the project findings. Both Ana Teresa and
Wolfgang’s encouragement helped me explore the project from various perspectives. I
am incredibly thankful for their motivation and support during challenging times.
A heartfelt thank you goes out to my brother, Anshul Chauhan. Despite his demanding
schedule, he never hesitated to help me with Python issues, even if it meant engaging in
late­night discussions. His support has been nothing short of extraordinary. Also, I wish
to extend my appreciation to my friend Antarlina. Her companionship during the project
and her constant push to meet my thesis goals have been invaluable.I must also thank
my friend Zheng Lu, with whom I shared numerous enlightening discussions.
My gratitude extends to Sofia Simões, who provided assistance in incorporating the EU­
TIMES model into my research.
In sum, I am humbly grateful to everyone who has been part of this journey. Your contri­
butions have truly shaped my educational experience.
iv
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
List of Tables . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
vi
List of Figures
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ix
1
Introduction
2
1.1
Research questions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Cement manufacturing in Denmark
4
2.1
Value chain of cement in Denmark . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2
Cement types used in Denmark . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
3
Circular economy practices within cement manufacturing
7
3.1
Recycling of Concrete: . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.2
Industrial Symbiosis: . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.3
Use of alternative fuels: . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
4
Methodology
10
4.1
Research methodology
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
4.2
Denmark’s Cement Industry: Production, Consumption and Concrete Waste
(2015­2020) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
4.3
Technologies used for to convert EOL concrete into clean aggregates and
UFCWP . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
4.4
Material flow analysis of EOL concrete recycling technologies and energy
data for process development in EU­TIMES model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
4.5
Preparation of raw meal for portland cement clinkers
. . . . . . . . . . . . 17
5
Results and Discussions
22
6
Conclusions and Recommendations
30
7
List of assumptions
32
Bibliography
33
A Appendix
36
v
==PAGE:8==
Abbreviations
Table 1: List of Abbreviation and full names
Abbreviation
Full name
CE
Circular Economy
C&D waste
Construction and Demolition waste
C2CA
Concrete to cement and aggregate technology
ADR
Advanced Drying Recovery
HAS
Heating Air and Classification System
UFCWP
Ultrafine concrete waste particles (0­0.25mm)
FA
Flyash
SCM
Supplementary Cementitious materials
XRF
X­ray Fluorescence
LSF
Lime saturation factor
SM
Silica Modulus
AM
Alumina Modulus
C2S
2CaO*SiO2­Diacalcium silicate
C3S
3CaO*SiO2­Tricalcium silicate
C3A
3CaO*Al2O3­Tricalcium aluminate
C4AF
4Ca*Al2O3*Fe2O3­Tetracalcium aluminoferrite
C4AF
4Ca*Al2O3*Fe2O3­Tetracalcium aluminoferrite
C
CaO
S
SiO2
A
Al2O3
F
Fe2O3
L.O.I
Loss of Ignition
EOL
End of life
BAU
Business as usual
DS/EN 197­1
Composition, specification and conformity criteria for common cements
EU
European Union
CEMBUREAU
The European Cement Association which represents
the interests of the cement industry across Europe.
vi
==PAGE:9==
List of Tables
1
List of Abbreviation and full names . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
vi
2.1
Types of cement used in Denmark with its chemical composition based on
(source of information: EN 197­1,[12] and cement & beton handbook[13]) .
6
4.1
Annual production, consumption, and generation of concrete waste from
2015 to 2020) [sources: [22][10][24][26][23]] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
4.2
Dis­aggregated energy data for Crushing, ADR and HAS technologies along
with material flow at each step [source:[30]] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
4.3
XRF chemical analysis of chalk and Sand (% by mass) used for raw meal
preparation in portland cement clinkers [39] [36]
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
4.4
limitations to the amount of other oxides % by mass in cement as specified
in EU code[12] and research article [42] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
4.5
XRF chemical compositions of FA, UFCWP[40] and blend of FA with UFCWP
at different mixing percentages. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
5.1
Testing for different possible boundary condition for Scenario­1(BAU) when
XRF chemical analysis at FA 100% and UFCWP 0% is used in making
portland cement clinkers. The values of chalk, sand, FA and iron ore are in
mass % and sum of all represents 100%.(Arrowhead signifies an increasing
sequence of LSF, SM, AM ranges, as well as a rising percentage mix of
chalk, sand, FA, and iron ore).
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
5.2
Scenario­1(BAU) rawmeal mix design at best combination of LSF 97, SM
2.4 and AM 1.8 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
5.3
Testing for different possible boundary condition for Scenario 2 when XRF
chemical analysis of blend of FA at 50% and UFCWP are 50% used in
making portland cement clinkers. The values of chalk, sand, FA and iron
ore are in mass % and sum of all represents 100%(Arrowhead signifies an
increasing sequence of LSF, SM, AM ranges, as well as a rising percentage
mix of chalk, sand, FA, and iron ore). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
5.4
List of best combinations for scenario 2(recycling UFCWP) by using chem­
ical analysis at different mixing proportion of FA and UFCWP given in ta­
ble 4.5 used in rawmeal preparation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
5.5
Scenario 2(recycling UFCWP) rawmeal mix design at best combination of
LSF 97, SM 2.5 and AM 1.5 by using chemical analysis of blend of FA at
50% and UFCWP at 50% for prepartion of rawmeal. . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
5.6
Amount of raw materials needed for manufacturing of 1 tonne of cement
clinkers for Scenario­1(BAU)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
5.7
Amount of raw materials needed for manufacturing of 1 tonne of cement
clinkers for Scenario­2(recycling UFCWP) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
5.8
Quantitative evaluation of UFCWP recovery from concrete waste via ad­
vanced recycling technologies (2015­2020) based on 11.77% UFCWP re­
cycling rate[sources: [22][10][24][26]]
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
vii
==PAGE:10==
A.1 Testing for different possible boundary condition for Scenario 2 when XRF
chemical analysis of UFCWP at 100% used in making portland cement
clinkers. The values of chalk, sand, FA and iron ore are in mass % and
sum of all represents 100% (Arrowhead signifies an increasing sequence
of LSF, SM, AM ranges, as well as a rising percentage mix of chalk, sand,
FA, and iron ore). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
A.2 Testing for different possible boundary condition for Scenario 2 when XRF
chemical analysis of blend of FA at 10% and UFCWP at 90% used in mak­
ing portland cement clinkers. The values of chalk, sand, FA and iron ore
are in mass % and sum of all represents 100% . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
A.3 Testing for different possible boundary condition for Scenario 2 when XRF
chemical analysis of blend of FA at 20% and UFCWP at 80% used in mak­
ing portland cement clinkers. The values of chalk, sand, FA and iron ore
are in mass % and sum of all represents 100% . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
A.4 Testing for different possible boundary condition for Scenario 2 when XRF
chemical analysis of blend of FA at 30% and UFCWP at 70% used in mak­
ing portland cement clinkers. The values of chalk, sand, FA and iron ore
are in mass % and sum of all represents 100% . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
A.5 Testing for different possible boundary condition for Scenario 2 when XRF
chemical analysis of blend of FA at 40% and UFCWP at 60% used in mak­
ing portland cement clinkers. The values of chalk, sand, FA and iron ore
are in mass % and sum of all represents 100% . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38
A.6 Testing for different possible boundary condition for Scenario 2 when XRF
chemical analysis of blend of FA at 60% and UFCWP at 40% used in mak­
ing portland cement clinkers. The values of chalk, sand, FA and iron ore
are in mass % and sum of all represents 100% . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38
A.7 Scenario 2(recycling UFCWP) rawmeal mix design at best combination of
LSF 97, SM 2.6 and AM 1.8 when rawmeal is prepared by XRF chemical
analysis of blend of FA at 60% and UFCWP 40% . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
A.8 Testing for different possible boundary condition for Scenario 2 when XRF
chemical analysis of blend of FA at 70% and UFCWP at 30% used in mak­
ing portland cement clinkers. The values of chalk, sand, FA and iron ore
are in mass % and sum of all represents 100% . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
A.9 Scenario 2(recycling UFCWP) rawmeal mix design at best combination of
LSF 97, SM 2.5 and AM 1.8 when rawmeal is prepared by XRF chemical
analysis of blend of FA at 70% and UFCWP 30%
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
A.10 Testing for different possible boundary condition for Scenario 2 when XRF
chemical analysis of blend of FA at 80% and UFCWP at 20% used in mak­
ing portland cement clinkers. The values of chalk, sand, FA and iron ore
are in mass % and sum of all represents 100% . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
A.11 Scenario 2(recycling UFCWP) rawmeal mix design at best combination of
LSF 97, SM 2.4 and AM 1.8 when rawmeal is prepared by XRF chemical
analysis of blend of FA at 80% and UFCWP 20%
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
A.12 Testing for different possible boundary condition for Scenario 2 when XRF
chemical analysis of blend of FA at 90% and UFCWP at 10% used in mak­
ing portland cement clinkers. The values of chalk, sand, FA and iron ore
are in mass 90% and sum of all represents 100% . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
A.13 Scenario 2(recycling UFCWP) rawmeal mix design at best combination of
LSF 97, SM 2.4 and AM 1.8 when rawmeal is prepared by XRF chemical
analysis of blend of FA at 90% and UFCWP 10%
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42
viii
==PAGE:11==
A.14 Oxides names in each rawmaterial . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
ix
==PAGE:12==
List of Figures
1.1
Cement and steel consumption with population increase [7] . . . . . . . . .
2
2.1
Cement manufacturing value chain for grey cement at Aalborg Portland,
Denmark (adapted from [11] [10]) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
3.1
Industrial symbiosis facilitating exchanges of resources like materials and
energy in Aalborg city. [10]) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
4.1
Schematic representation of the research methodology adopted in this Project 10
4.2
A. Illustration of ADR working principles B. ADR industrial setup (sourced:[3]) 12
4.3
ADR three output based on particle size: Coarse particles (4­12 mm), Air
knife (1­4mm) and rotor (less than 1 mm) (sourced:[29]) . . . . . . . . . . . 13
4.4
1. Illustration of HAS working principles(left) B. HAS industrial setup (sourced:[3]) 14
4.5
a. Input fine particles with contamination (0­4mm) HAS two output based
on particle size: b.
fine particles (0.25­4 mm), c.
UFCWP(0­0.25MM)
(sourced:[29]) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
4.6
Material flow from wet processing of EOL concrete with energy demand [30] 15
4.7
Material flow of EOL concrete with energy demand when advance recycling
technologies ADR and HAS are implemented [30]
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
4.8
Approximate mineral quantities observed during the transition from raw
meal to clinker(adopted from[34]) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
4.9
Chemical reactions at different temparatures of burning rawmeal(adapted
from[34])
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
5.1
Scenario­1(BAU): Production of portland cement clinkers at Denmark by
incorporating FA in conventional raw materials such as Chalk, sand and
iron oxide and utilization of 90% crushed concrete waste as road subbase
and filler material.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
5.2
Scenario­2(Recycling UFCWP): Production of portland cement clinkers at
Denmark by incorporating mixture of UFCWP with FA in conventional raw
materials which are extracted from EOL life concrete waste by adopting
ADR and HAS technology [3]. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
5.3
Representation of three main oxides of rawmeal mix obtained for Scenario­
1(BAU) at best combination of LSF, SM and AM
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
5.4
Representation of three main oxides of rawmeal mix obtained for Scenario
2(recycling UFCWP) at best combination of LSF, SM and AM . . . . . . . . 27
5.5
Comparison of Scenario­1(BAU) with Scenario­2(recycling UFCWP) to see
replacement potential of UFCWP in rawmeal for portland cement clinkers . 28
A.1 Example of excel tool
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
1
==PAGE:13==
1
Introduction
Building materials form the core of our built environment, from buildings and bridges to
tunnels and roads that surround us. These structures have been instrumental to the pro­
gression of human civilization, offering protection against the harsh environment. Over
18 million direct jobs are generated by the construction industry in the European Union,
which accounts for nearly 9% [6]. However, as the population has grown, we have ex­
cessively exploited the Earth’s resources without considering future generations and the
need for product development with fewer materials.
This overexploitation risks depleting raw materials in the near future and contributes to
numerous environmental problems such as climate change, human and terrestrial eco­
toxicity, and ozone depletion. The construction industry alone consumes a substantial
proportion of the resources extracted worldwide. Given the projected population increase
by the end of this decade, the strain on environmental resources will likely intensify.
The sector consumes a substantial amount of resources, which accounts for over half of
all materials extracted, as well as 35% of all waste generated within the EU. A signifi­
cant portion of national greenhouse gas emissions comes from the construction sector,
accounting for between 5 and 12% [1].
Figure 1.1: Cement and steel consumption with population increase [7]
Therefore, it is crucial to utilize resources effectively, necessitating investment in product
design and research and development to conserve resources for the future. With this goal
in mind, CO2NSTRUCT [8], a project funded by the EU Horizon research and innovation
initiative, aims to identify, test, and quantify the impacts of the circular economy on climate
mitigation. This is done by focusing on six key carbon­intensive materials: cement, steel,
brick, glass, wood, and insulation materials. As part of this project, my thesis investigates
the cement industry specifically in Denmark, with the research objectives outlined below.
Thus, the principles of the circular economy, which advocate for sustainable resource use,
need to be implemented, despite their current under­quantification. In this project, circular
economy initiatives are explored through a case study focusing on cement manufacturing
2
==PAGE:14==
in Denmark. The aim is to develop a conceptual model to evaluate the recycling potential
of ultrafine concrete waste particles (UFCWP), extracted from advanced recycling tech­
nologies, in the production of Portland cement clinkers.
1.1
Research questions
1. What are the various Circular Economy (CE) measures currently adopted in the cement
industry, and what unexplored methods exist that could significantly promote the Circular
Economy within this industry?
2. What is the volume of concrete waste generated in Denmark, and how is the mass flow
of this waste characterized?
3. What are the latest technologies available for converting concrete waste into coarse
and fine aggregate waste, which can then be used as raw materials in the production of
cement clinker?
4. What is the potential for recycling coarse aggregate (CA) and fine aggregate (FA) waste
in portland cement production?
5. Is the volume of waste generated sufficient for meeting cement production needs, or
is there a requirement for more or less waste to meet demand?
3
==PAGE:15==
2
Cement manufacturing in Denmark
Cement, a crucial binding material in the construction industry, plays a vital role in the
construction of various structures and infrastructures such as buildings, airport runways,
aprons, dams, bridges, tunnels, and roads. By blending cement with fine aggregates and
water, mortar is formed, which is a crucial element in masonry. On the other hand, mixing
cement with both fine aggregates (such as sand), coarse aggregates (like gravel), and
water, results in concrete. Remarkably, concrete is the second most consumed material
globally, only trailing behind water [9].
Aalborg Portland, a subsidiary of the Cementir Group, boasts a rich history spanning 133
years as the only producer of grey and white cement in Denmark. Nestled in the city of
Aalborg, in northern Denmark, the company has the capacity to produce approximately
3 million tonnes of cement annually, including grey cement (2 million tonnes) and white
cement (1 million tonnes)[9]. The majority of the grey cement caters to the domestic
market, whereas the white cement reaches over 70 countries worldwide. The production
facility at Rørdal in Aalborg is equipped with 6 kilns [9].
2.1
Value chain of cement in Denmark
The manufacturing processes for grey and white cement are fundamentally identical, dif­
fering primarily in the configuration of the kilns [10].The cement production value chain in
Denmark [9],[10] comprises several sequential steps explained below:
2.1.1
Extraction of raw materials:
In cement manufacturing, chalk and sand are the two main raw materials used in Den­
mark. Chalk is extracted from chalk pits using giant excavators. Sand is dug at Sand­
mosen and dredged at Hals Barre to maintain Limfjord navigability.
2.1.2
Initial processing of raw materials:
Chalk is transported to the plant via a conveyor belt, where it is combined with water in
a slurry drum. Sand mills crush sand into finer particles. Afterwards, chalk and sand are
combined to form a kiln slurry, which is then dispatched to the kiln system.
2.1.3
Production of clinker through Kiln process:
Kiln slurry is combined with flyash(FA) and pyrite ash depending on type of cement and
sent to a dry crusher. Here, it is converted into raw meal with the aid of hot flue gases.
The raw meal is subsequently conveyed to a cyclone pre­heater, where it is heated to
700°C. The material then moves to calciners, heated to 900°C where liberation of CO2
takes places from chalk. Afterwards material moves to a 74m long rotary kiln, where it
is gradually heated to 1500°C to form cement clinkers. These clinkers are then cooled
in a clinker cooler and stored in clinker storage. Various fossil fuels, including petroleum
coke, coal, and alternative fuels such as non­recyclable waste and biomass (e.g., sewage
sludge, meat, and bone meal) from other industries, are used to heat the kiln to high
temperatures.
2.1.4
Grinding and blending:
The cement clinkers are grounded in a cement mill into fine powder and mixed with other
supplementary cementitious materials (SCMs) like gypsum, fly ash, chalk, and calcinated
clay to create different types of cement. The cement is then transferred to storage silos.
4
==PAGE:16==
2.1.5
Packaging and distribution of cement:
The cement is packaged in 25 kg bags and 1000­1500 kg big bags and transported via
various means, including trucks, trains, and ships. fig. 2.1 illustrates the value chain of
cement manufacturing at Aalborg Portland in Denmark .
Figure 2.1: Cement manufacturing value chain for grey cement at Aalborg Portland, Den­
mark (adapted from [11] [10])
2.2
Cement types used in Denmark
The European standard CEN DS/EN 197­1, 2011 [12], provides definitions for 27 com­
monly used types of cement in the European market, which are classified into five main
types: CEM I, II, III, IV, and V. In Denmark, the cement industry primarily utilizes two types
of cement, namely CEM I and II, which have different subtypes based on their strength
development, heat development, chemical composition and colour shown in table 2.1.
In Denmark, it is mandatory for all cement products to adhere to the specifications outlined
in the cement standard DS/EN 197­1 [12], which is supplemented by DS/INF 135. These
requirements ensure that the cement meets certain quality standards and must be CE­
5
==PAGE:17==
marked. The marking on the cement bag must include important information such as the
type designation, strength class, and sulphate resistance marking, as specified in DS/EN
197­1. Additionally, the bag should also display markings for alkali content and sulphate
resistance in accordance with DS/INF 135. These markings provide essential information
for users and ensure the proper selection and use of cement in construction projects.
Table 2.1: Types of cement used in Denmark with its chemical composition based on
(source of information: EN 197­1,[12] and cement & beton handbook[13])
6
==PAGE:18==
3
Circular economy practices within
cement manufacturing
Global population growth is driving a parallel increase in infrastructure demand, including
building, bridges, dams, tunnels, and more. The construction of these structures imposes
a significant burden on our resources, accounting for half of the material extraction world­
wide and generating 35% of the total waste in the European Union[1] .
To address these challenges, a circular economy (CE) model appears to be a promising
solution. By using this model, products can be designed more sustainably, thus increasing
resource efficiency and mitigating environmental damage. In accordance with European
Union definitions [14],
”the circular economy is a model of production and consumption, which involves sharing,
leasing, reusing, repairing, refurbishing and recycling existing materials and products as
long as possible.”
This approach allows us to create sustainable products with extended lifespans. Reduc­
ing waste generation, reducing resource consumption, and reducing our environmental
impact are all benefits of this approach. Numerous articles [15], [16], [17], [18] have pro­
vided insights into the implementation of circular economy principles within the cement
industry. In the upcoming sections, we will explore these principles in detail and assess
their practical integration in cement production, with a specific focus on Denmark.
3.1
Recycling of Concrete:
In the face of increasing environmental pressures and resource limitations, the cement
industry is poised for a paradigm shift. A crucial element of this transformation is the
adoption of the circular economy model, which places particular emphasis on resource
recovery and recycling. Among the various strategies, recycling concrete [15] stands
out as a particularly effective measure of reducing industry reliance on raw materials for
concrete and cement manufacturing.
This master’s thesis investigates a key technology capable of the effective separation
of fine and coarse aggregates from waste concrete, alongside the extraction of ultrafine
concrete waste particles(UFCWP) from the separated fine aggregates.A detailed analysis
of each technology, including its operational details and potential for material recovery, will
be presented in subsequent chapters. These UFCWP can be used as raw materials to
produce various types of cement used within the EU based on DS/EN 197­1[12].
In this project, a conceptual framework has been developed to assess the maximum per­
centage of UFCWP that can be incorporated into the rawmeal for Portland cement clinker
production in Denmark. The model aims to determine the optimal replacement rate of
UFCWP in order to achieve the desired performance and quality of the cement clinkers
while maximizing the utilization of waste materials.
3.2
Industrial Symbiosis:
The term industrial symbiosis refers to the collaboration between industrial companies lo­
cated close together to exchange resources like raw materials, energy, water, and heat in
which wastes and byproducts of one company are recycled into raw materials for another
[19].
7
==PAGE:19==
The largest instance of industrial symbiosis in Denmark occurs at Aalborg Portland. This
symbiosis helps to reduce reliance on fossil fuels and promotes efficient utilization of nat­
ural resources, as illustrated in the figure Figure 3.1. This plant uses by­products from
other industries as raw materials. These include coal­fired power plant fly ash, pyrite
ash containing ferrous oxide from sulfuric acid manufacturing, and Oxiton’s aluminous
by­product from aluminium oxide filtration. The plant also uses flue­gas desulfurization
(FGD) gypsum from the North Jutland power station as raw material, while white slurry
from the cement plant is used for scrubbing flue gases at power plants.
As discussed in Section section 3.3, alternative fuels, which are byproducts from other
industries, accounted for 30.2% of the total thermal energy requirement in cement kilns
in 2022[9]. Furthermore, the Aalborg Portland cement plant provides district heating for
25,000 homes in Aalborg City and district cooling for Aalborg University Hospital using
cold water from chalk pits. [9].
Figure 3.1: Industrial symbiosis facilitating exchanges of resources like materials and
energy in Aalborg city. [10])
8
==PAGE:20==
3.3
Use of alternative fuels:
The most common fuel source for kiln in cement manufacturing is mix of coal, pet coke,
biomass and waste materials.The coal is carbon intensive fuel sources and 30­40% of
carbon emission in clinker production arises from sources of fuel [20]. Use on waste ma­
terial will help reduce dependency on carbon intensive fuel and helps to achieve industrial
symbiosis which discussed in detail in next head.
Across Europe, alternative fuels accounted for 46% of total cement kiln fuel demand in
2017, with biomass accounting for 16% [21]. The European Cement Association, CEM­
BUREAU, plans to increase this to 60% by 2030, and further to 90% by 2050, with the
proportion of biomass in the fuel mix rising to 30% in 2030 and 50% by 2050[21].
In Aalborg Portland[9], Denmark, alternative fuels, which accounted for 30.2% of the total
thermal energy used in cement kilns as of 2022, include refuse­derived fuel, recycled
rubber granulates, meat and bone meal, wood chips, nut shells, and troldtekt panels.
9
==PAGE:21==
4
Methodology
4.1
Research methodology
The research methodology for this project is represented in fig. 4.1. A thorough literature
review was conducted to establish project goals. This step was followed by identifying
suitable advance technologies for concrete recycling. A key part of the research involved
understanding the chemical composition of raw materials, such as chalk, sand, iron oxide,
fly ash, and UFCWP, and defining the methods of preparing rawmeal and the limiting
parameters like LSF, SM and BM used for the preparation of Portland cement clinkers
rawmeal.
Once the data was collected, multiple scenarios were developed with the aim to determine
the maximum potential for incorporating UFCWP into raw meal. Finally, a conceptual
model was created based on stoichiometric mass balance to evaluate the feasibility of
a closed­loop recycling system for UFCWP derived from waste concrete into Portland
cement clinkers.
Figure 4.1: Schematic representation of the research methodology adopted in this Project
4.2
Denmark’s Cement Industry: Production, Consumption
and Concrete Waste (2015­2020)
To comprehend the closed­loop recycling of cement, it’s crucial to first understand the
mass flow of cement and concrete waste. The initial task of this project was to investigate
the production and consumption of cement in Denmark. The annual production data,
spanning from 2015 to 2020, was extracted from Aalborg portland environmental reports
2019 [10] and the cembureau annual reports 2020[22].
The actual consumption of cement in Denmark requires data for both import and export,
which was sourced from the trade map website [23], a platform that provides international
10
==PAGE:22==
trade statistics. The actual consumption was calculated by adding the production volume
and import quantities and then subtracting the export volume as provided in table 4.11.
The consumption was found to be lower than production, indicating that the majority of the
cement produced in Denmark is consumed domestically with only a small amount being
imported.
Knowing the annual concrete waste generation in Denmark, and where it’s redirected, is
of significance considering its potential to serve as a substitute for some raw materials in
cement and concrete production. This knowledge is a key aspect of fostering a circular
economy and establishing a closed loop system. The data on concrete waste from 2015
to 2020 has been compiled and presented in table 4.1.From the six­year trend analysis,
it was observed that cement production is approximately double the amount of concrete
waste produced. Based on Danish waste statistics [24] and [25], 90% of collected con­
crete waste is crushed and diverted to recycling as road sub­base material or as filler
material.
To achieve a carbon­neutral cement industry and reduce dependence on new raw materi­
als, it is imperative to sustainably utilize this waste fraction to extract mineral resources. As
road construction is expected to plateau in the future and the trend shows an increase in
concrete waste, this project aims to investigate advanced technologies to extract coarse,
fine, aggregates and ultrafine particles from EOL concrete waste. The description and
mass flow from these advanced EOL concrete recycling technologies will be provided in
the following section.
Table 4.1: Annual production, consumption, and generation of concrete waste from 2015
to 2020) [sources: [22][10][24][26][23]]
4.3
Technologies used for to convert EOL concrete into
clean aggregates and UFCWP
In the Netherlands, approximately 40% of C&D waste is composed of EOL concrete[27].
Out of this, 97% of the collected concrete waste is crushed and used as road base mate­
rial, while around 3% is processed into clean aggregates using wet technology[27]. For
comparative purposes, the use of wet technology is discussed in section 4.3.3, although it
is less commonly employed. The Netherlands is facing a shortage of natural aggregates,
1A comma serves as a thousand separator, and a dot as a decimal separator
11
==PAGE:23==
which is driving the emphasis on recycling EOL concrete[25]. It is expected that the vol­
ume of EOL concrete waste will increase, while road construction is projected to stabilize
by 2025[27].
Under the C2CA project in collaboration with GBN Group and TU Delft[4] , the ADR tech­
nology[2] [3] has been developed to convert EOL concrete waste into aggregates of differ­
ent sizes, as described in section 4.3.1. This project, along with the VEEP project[5], has
also contributed to the development of the HAS technology[3] explained in section 4.3.2,
which is used for extracting cement ultrafines from the fine particles (0­4mm) obtained
through ADR.
4.3.1
Adavanced Dry Recovery (ADR)
ADR system[28], developed under the EU­funded C2CA project in collaboration between
GBN Group and TU Delft and patented by TU Delft (publication number: WO 2012/015299
A1), is an innovative concrete recycling technology[4]. Unlike wet technology, the ADR
system operates without the use of water, that’s why it is named ”dry” process.The working
principle and industrial setup of the ADR system is illustrated in fig. 4.2.
Figure 4.2: A. Illustration of ADR working principles B. ADR industrial setup (sourced:[3])
12
==PAGE:24==
It is designed to separate wet crushed concrete waste based on particle size by utilizing
kinetic energy to break the water bonds present in smaller particles. The system has a
current design capacity of 50 tons per hour, and the crushed concrete waste used in the
process typically has a moisture content of around 5­8% [3]. The ADR system consists of
two main components: the rotor and the air shifter. It works by feeding crushed concrete
waste particles ranging from 0 to 12 mm in size into the system, which are then sorted
into three different particle size distributions: coarse recycled aggregate (4­12 mm), air
knife (1­4 mm), and rotor (less than 1 mm) particles shown in fig. 4.3 .
Figure 4.3: ADR three output based on particle size: Coarse particles (4­12 mm), Air knife
(1­4mm) and rotor (less than 1 mm) (sourced:[29])
The coarse recycled aggregates (4­12 mm) are typically used in concrete manufacturing,
while the particles sized 0­4 mm undergo further processing in the HAS technology to
extract old hardened cement paste and remove any remaining contamination, such as
wood or wool etc. One of the key features of the ADR system is its mobility, flexibility,
and energy efficiency, which make it a suitable for multiple concrete recyling companies
to share together.
4.3.2
Heating air and classification system (HAS)
The HAS setup[3] is an additional technology that complements the ADR system, de­
signed to separate fine particles (0.25­4mm) from UFCWP (0­0.25mm) using the prin­
ciples of gravitational counterflow and centrifugal­counterflow zones. A patent for this
technology has been filed by TU Delft with application number N2020846[3]. In the HAS
setup, the classifier is designed around rising air flow within a vertical chamber, which
facilitates efficient separation of fine particles from UFCWP with 3 tons per hour capacity.
The input material for the HAS technology is the fine particles (0­4 mm) obtained from the
ADR process, which fall from the top of the vertical chamber. Hot air blowing from the
bottom of the chamber creates a drag force that acts against gravity. Inside the vertical
chamber, horizontal staggered tubes are installed to increase the residence time of fine
particles, promoting better particle­gas interaction and this complex interaction leads to
the spalling phenomenon. Coarser particles move downward, while lighter particles fol­
low the direction of the hot air towards the cyclone. The HAS setup consists of several
components, as shown in Figure 4.4:
1. Burner: This component generates hot air with temperatures up to 700°C, fueled by
diesel. The hot gas in the HAS setup removes moisture and destroys undesirable con­
taminants, such as wood and plastics.
2. Compressor: It draws in air and circulates the warm air from the cyclone, while also
blowing a portion of the vapor­saturated air into the atmosphere and pressure valve reg­
ulates this airflow.
3. Cyclone:This vortex separation system utilizes a centrifugal­counterflow zone to sep­
arate ultrafine concrete waste particles from the air stream, allowing the particles to fall
13
==PAGE:25==
down.
Figure 4.4:
1.
Illustration of HAS working principles(left) B. HAS industrial setup
(sourced:[3])
4. Vibrators: It helps in keeping downward movement of of fine particles.
This technology is effective in separating dry fine particles ranging from 0.25 to 4 mm, as
well as UFCWP with a size of 0­0.25mm,as illustrated in Figure 4.5. To achieve further
separation of the hardened cement from the fine particles (0.25 to 4 mm), autogenous
milling can be adopted.
Figure 4.5: a. Input fine particles with contamination (0­4mm) HAS two output based on
particle size: b. fine particles (0.25­4 mm), c. UFCWP(0­0.25MM) (sourced:[29])
4.3.3
Wet Technology
The wet processing technology and it energy data is given in research article [30] sup­
plementary material, which talks about eco­efficiency of concrete recycling technologies
14
==PAGE:26==
and data was collected from a plant situated in Utrecht, Netherlands. The material flow
analysis with energy demand for operating the technology is shown in fig. 4.6.In the case
of wet treatment, the concrete waste is transported to the treatment plant where it un­
dergoes crushing and subsequent sieving to obtain two material fractions: 1. Recycled
coarse aggregates (RCA) measuring 4­22 mm in size, and 2. Sieved sand (SS) with a
particle size below 4 mm. The RCA is then subjected to a water bed washing process
to obtain clean, high­grade RCA that can be used as a substitute for new concrete ag­
gregates in concrete manufacturing. On the other hand, the SS consists of a mixture of
hydrated cement, sand, dirt, and contaminants. Due to this composition, it is not suitable
for high­grade applications and is therefore sold at a lower price for earthwork purposes.
The sludge generated during this process is directed to landfills. The plant operates with
an efficiency of 150 tonnes per hour.
Figure 4.6: Material flow from wet processing of EOL concrete with energy demand [30]
4.4
Material flow analysis of EOL concrete recycling
technologies and energy data for process development
in EU­TIMES model
To analyze the role of energy technologies and their innovation in various industries, in­
cluding the construction sector, the JRC­EU­TIMES model [31] is employed to align with
the EU’s energy and climate change policy objectives. Specifically, the model focuses on
the energy demand associated with different technologies used in clinker production, such
as dry, wet, and semi­dry processes, as well as the fuel sources utilized (e.g., coal, gas,
oil). In order to incorporate advanced technologies for concrete recycling and promote
the principles of the circular economy within the cement sector, the EU­TIMES model re­
quires the inclusion of new process inputs related to the energy requirements of ADR and
HAS technology.
The material flow analysis and energy demands of End­of­Life (EOL) concrete processed
through ADR and HAS technology are visualized in a fig. 4.7, and the disaggregated en­
ergy data for process development in the EU­TIMES model is presented in table 4.2. All
of the data utilized in this analysis is derived from the research article [30] and its sup­
15
==PAGE:27==
plementary material, which provide insights into the eco­efficiency of advanced concrete
recycling.
Figure 4.7: Material flow of EOL concrete with energy demand when advance recycling
technologies ADR and HAS are implemented [30]
Table 4.2: Dis­aggregated energy data for Crushing, ADR and HAS technologies along
with material flow at each step [source:[30]]
16
==PAGE:28==
4.5
Preparation of raw meal for portland cement clinkers
4.5.1
Important minerals in clinkers and factor affecting their quality
The four primary minerals found in cement clinkers are alite (C3S), belite (C2S), aluminate
(C3A), and ferrite (C4AF). In the cement industry C, S, A, and F represent CaO, SiO2,
Al2O3, and Fe2O3, respectively. Alite and belite, the two predominant calcium silicate
minerals, play a crucial role in the strength development, long­term structural integrity,
and durability of Portland cement [32].These compounds, known as Bogue’s compounds,
are named after Dr. Robert Herman Bogue, who developed a formula to theoretically
calculate the mineral composition of clinkers[33].The typical mass(%) ranges of the four
primary minerals in European clinker are as follows: C3S at 45­65%, C2S at 10­30%, C3A
at 5­12%, and C4AF at 6­12% [32]. Although Bogue’s formula offers a theoretical means
to compute these compounds, advancements in X­ray diffraction (XRD) have enabled
the direct measurement of clinker mineralogy. Calculations differ between the Bogue and
XRD methods due to the presence of contaminants in mineral phases. For example,
alite is measured in greater quantities with XRD than with Bogue’s formula, while belite is
measured in lesser amounts[34].
Figure 4.8: Approximate mineral quantities observed during the transition from raw meal
to clinker(adopted from[34])
Figure 4.9: Chemical reactions at different temparatures of burning rawmeal(adapted
from[34])
During calcination at temperatures between 800­900°C, calcium carbonate undergoes a
17
==PAGE:29==
reduction in mass of roughly 44%[34]. It is at this stage that belite begins to form, as
demonstrated in Figure 4.8.Different bogue’s compounds formed at different tempera­
tures, as demonstrated in Figure 4.9. Silica SiO2 has a melting point of about 1700◦C,
and lime (CaO) has a melting point above 2500◦C [34]. The liquid phase (or flux) is es­
sential for chemical reactions rate and the mixing of CaO with SiO2. The liquid phase
is provided by the alumina and iron oxide present in raw meal[32]. X­ray diffraction and
electron microscopy is used to check quality of the cement clinker crystals [35].
The factors affecting clinker quality are
1. Contamination of limestone and other raw materials affects quality of the clinkers.
2. Coarse grain size of limestone and quartz reduces burnibility. The raw meal fineness
should fall within 10­15% on 90 µm sieve[34].
3. Cooling speed and temparature can affect the quality of the clinker. Rapid cooling is
adoped at temperature less than 1200◦C to avoid conversion of (C3S) to (C2S) and stop
increase formation of the free lime (FL)which generally present in 1­2%[34].
This study is primarily focused on raw meal preparation and the potential for maximum the­
oretical replacement of raw materials by incorporating UFCWP . However, actual testing
XRD studies are necessary to calculate quanities of Bogue’s compound and determine
clinker quality. In subsection 4.5.2, the process of prepartion of raw meal is discussed
where XRF chemical analysis and main ratios such as LSF, SM and AM is used to pro­
duce a chemical analysis of raw meal which is similiar to the portland cement clinkers.
It will help in achieving chemical reaction and burnability of the raw material to produce
good quality clinkers.
4.5.2
Raw meal prepartion and XRF chemical analysis
The production of cement clinker requires the essential components lime (CaO), silica
(SiO2), alumina (Al2O3), and iron oxide (Fe2O3). Chalk and sand, prevalent in Denmark,
are the primary sources of lime and silica in rawmeal. Due to the unavailability of specific
local sand data, CEN standard sand in accordance with EN 196­1[36] is used for rawmeal
preparation. Fly ash, a by­product of coal­fired power plants, substitutes for natural clay
which fulfil the need of silica and alumina in rawmeal, reducing the necessity for quarrying.
Pyrite ash, a by­product of sulfuric acid production, is utilized as an iron oxide source. For
this study, we’ve substituted pyrite cinders[37] another waste product from sulfuric acid
production for Turkey plant as source of iron oxide due to the absence of XRF chemical
analysis data of pyrite ashes used in Denmark. The detailed assumptions about raw
materials can be found in list of assumption section7.
The production process of cement raw meal requires regular testing, which includes XRF
chemical analysis, burnability tests, thermogravimetric analysis, and assessments for
fineness and particle size distribution [35]. The extent to which clinker minerals amal­
gamate largely depends on the mineralogy of the raw materials. Coarser silica particles
in rawmeal might increase the belite crystal clusters, which could hamper burnability and
alite formation. As indicated in [34], the particle size for calcium carbonate should be
below 125 µm, while for quartz(sand), it should be less than 45 µm.
XRF chemical analysis is very important to determine the percentages of primary oxides
and detecting any impurities within the raw materials. Such contaminants, coupled with
the fineness of limestone and other raw materials, can significantly influence burnability,
energy consumption, and the quality of clinkers [34]. In XRF chemical analysis[38], raw
meal samples are exposed to X­rays, causing particle excitation. Each element emits
unique light, and measuring this light reveals the quantity of oxide in the sample.
18
==PAGE:30==
While preparing the raw meal, it’s essential to monitor three key ratios and specify bound­
ary conditions to ensure optimal clinker quality. These ratios are the Lime Saturation
Factor (LSF), Silica Modulus (SM), and Alumina Modulus (AM). The XRF chemical anal­
ysis for chalk and FA utilized in raw meal computation is taken from Denmark study [39]
and tabulated in table 4.3. The specifications and analysis for the standard sand [36] used
are provided in table 4.3. The UFCWP’s XRF is shown in table 4.5 and is referenced from
the research article [40], which focuses on the extracting ultrafine particles from concrete
waste fines (0­4mm) obtained from ADR technology using HAS laboratory setup.
Table 4.3: XRF chemical analysis of chalk and Sand (% by mass) used for raw meal
preparation in portland cement clinkers [39] [36]
4.5.3
Incorporation of UFCWP in cement clinker raw meal and challenges
associated to recycling
In the C2CA project conducted in the Netherlands [41][4], a multi­story government build­
ing was demolished. The demolition resulted in concrete waste primarily composed of
CEM I and CEM III types of cement found out by visual inspection. Notably, CEM III ce­
ment carries a significant amount of blast furnace slag, leading to a high concentration
of iron oxide in the waste. Conversely, in Denmark, cements types used are CEM­1 and
CEM­II [12]. Consequently, Danish concrete waste likely holds a greater chance of higher
concentration of lime and silica, offering more potential for chalk and sand substitution.
Using the ADR and HAS technologies, the UFCWP acquired from the laboratory setup of
HAS [40] showed high levels of lime (CaO) and silica (SiO2), as shown in XRF chemical
analysis (table 4.5). In this master’s project, the UFCWP is employed to create raw meal
by checking different combinations of boundary conditions for LSF, SM, and AM. The
main aim of study was to identify theorectically the maximum potential replacement rate
for chalk, sand, and specific FA components by using UFCWP. The XRF chemical analysis
data for UFCWP is assumed to be same as obtained from study mentioned above [40] to
that of Danish concrete waste, due to absence of local data.
Table 4.4: limitations to the amount of other oxides % by mass in cement as specified in
EU code[12] and research article [42]
As highlighted in subsection 4.5.2, contamination in the raw materials can adversely im­
19
==PAGE:31==
pact the quality and burnability of clinker. Research articles, such as [43], have explored
the effects of adding CaSO4 to the cement clinker’s mineralogy. These studies, which
used XRD/Rietveld and SEM/EDX analyses to examine the crystallography of the clinker,
found that increasing the amount of sulfate in the raw meal can stabilize belite (C2S) min­
erals. This increase, however, also leads to the generation of free lime (CaO) enriched
with sulfates, which can impede the formation of alite minerals. Therefore, maintaining
control over contamination levels in the raw meal is essential, and the maximum accept­
able limits of other oxides in cement are provided in table 4.4. In order to check maximum
replacement level of UFCWP in rawmeal a blend of chemical compositions of Flyash(FA)
and UFCWP at various mixing percentages is created which is shown in the table 4.5
and that each specific blend is tested in raw meal preparation as shown in results and
discussion chapter 5.
Table 4.5: XRF chemical compositions of FA, UFCWP[40] and blend of FA with UFCWP
at different mixing percentages.
4.5.4
Boundary conditions for LSF, SF and AM
The preparation of raw meal for cement clinkers involves consideration of three main ra­
tios: LSF, SM, and AM. Among these three ratios, LSF is the most important as it governs
the relative proportions of Alite and Belite in the cement clinkers, as derived from high­
temperature phase equilibrium studies [32].
1. A higher LSF can increase the difficulty of burning, tend to produce unsound cement
with more free lime, increase the C3S content, and reduce C2S. This leads to slow setting
but high early strength[35].
2. A higher SM can lead to difficulty in burning and increased fuel consumption. This can
deteriorate the kiln lining and result in slow setting and hardening of cement[35].
3. A higher AM can lead to harder burning, increased fuel consumption, an increased pro­
portion of C3A, and a reduction in C4AF. This reduction in the liquid phase can increase
viscosity at the liquid phase, resulting in quicker setting and early strength[35].
Given these effects, it is crucial to achieve certain boundary conditions for the raw meal
mixture to ensure good quality clinker formation. Various studies [42] [44] [45] [46] have
explored the use of construction and demolition waste in raw meal for cement clinker
production, with emphasis on these three ratios: LSF, SM, and AM. According to the
20
==PAGE:32==
research article [42], certain boundary conditions should be followed in preparing the raw
meal to achieve desirable cement clinker mineralogy. The boundary conditions used in
prepartion of rawmeal in this sudy as shown in equations 4.1,4.2 4.3 are based on the
sources [32], [35], [34], and [42] which are chosen in order to comply with portland cement
clinkers in chemical compositions.The patent document [47] from Aalborg Portland on
cement composition states a preferred LSF of at least 0.95 or 95 %, and preferably at
least 0.97 or 97 %, aligning with the boundary conditions for raw meal as per the book
chapter on cement manufacturing [34], where the clinker LSF is generally lower than 2 %
of the raw meal.
97 < LSF =
100CaO
2.8SiO2 + 1.18Al2O3 + 0.65Fe2O3
< 99
(4.1)
2.4 < SM =
SiO2
Al2O3 + Fe2O3
< 2.6
(4.2)
1.5 < AM = Al2O3
Fe2O3
< 1.8
(4.3)
The calculation of the rawmeal is performed using an Excel calculation sheet, which
involves 4 main equations based on key boundary conditions.
These equations are
solved using the Crammer’s rule of matrices, which is further explained in detail in Sec­
tion chapter 5. A more comprehensive explanation of the calculations can be found in
appendix A.0.2, and a screenshot of the Excel calculation tool is presented in fig. A.1.
The information regarding the raw meal preparation, including the relevant Excel calcu­
lation sheet, was obtained from a word document and Excel sheet shared in the com­
ments section of the website [48]. The original content was provided by Ted Krapkat,
BAppSc(Chem), from Cement Australia. Unfortunately, precise referencing for the docu­
ment and Excel tool is unavailable due to the nature of their original sources.
21
==PAGE:33==
5
Results and Discussions
This project explores two different scenarios, which are illustrated in figure fig. 5.1 and
fig. 5.2 and explained further below:
Figure 5.1: Scenario­1(BAU): Production of portland cement clinkers at Denmark by
incorporating FA in conventional raw materials such as Chalk, sand and iron oxide and
utilization of 90% crushed concrete waste as road subbase and filler material.
Figure 5.2: Scenario­2(Recycling UFCWP): Production of portland cement clinkers at
Denmark by incorporating mixture of UFCWP with FA in conventional raw materials which
are extracted from EOL life concrete waste by adopting ADR and HAS technology [3].
1. In Scenario­1 (BAU), we consider the typical BAU production of Portland cement
clinkers in Denmark. This involves using traditional raw materials, namely chalk, sand,
iron oxide along with FA. Oxiton, an alumina­rich compound, replaces some amount of
FA in the cement rawmeal, while gypsum is mixed with crushed cement clinkers to make
22
==PAGE:34==
CEM­1 Portland cement. Oxiton, being a minor constituent, are not considered in raw
meal production in this project. Additionally, End­of­Life (EOL) concrete waste is typically
crushed, with 90% used as a road sub­base; this material could potentially be utilized for
cement or concrete production.
2. Scenario­2 (Recycling UFCWP) explores the application of ADR and HAS technol­
ogy[3] to treat EOL concrete waste in Denmark, resulting in UFCWP. This scenario in­
tegrates UFCWP and FA with conventional raw materials such as chalk and sand for
the preparation of rawmeal for portland cement clinkers. The objective is to assess the
potential of UFCWP recycling in the manufacture of portland cement clinkers.
The XRF chemical analysis for each raw material is used to calculate both the final XRF
chemical analysis of the rawmeal mix and the contribution of each raw material to the final
rawmeal of cement clinker, in terms of mass percentage. Four linear equations, designed
around four constraints relating to LSF, SM, AM ­ detailed in subsection 4.5.4, and the
sum of all raw materials equating to 100%, are developed. These equations, explained
in appendix A.0.2, are represented as equations A.1, A.2, A.3, and A.4. Together, they
form a square matrix, as demonstrated in equation A.16 within the appendix, which is then
solved using an excel calculation sheet. Cramer’s rule is applied to resolve these simulta­
neous 4 equations ­ a detailed explanation of this method can be found in appendix A.0.2.
The best combination of LSF, SM, and AM represents the maximum percentage of fly
ash replacement in the rawmeal mix in Scenario 1 or the mixture of fly ash and UFCWP
in Scenario 2.By exploring all possible boundary conditions for LSF, SM, and AM, we
identify the best combination of these parameters to achieve maximum FA replacement
in Scenario 1 which is highlighted in yellow colour shown in Tabletable 5.1.
Table 5.1: Testing for different possible boundary condition for Scenario­1(BAU) when
XRF chemical analysis at FA 100% and UFCWP 0% is used in making portland cement
clinkers. The values of chalk, sand, FA and iron ore are in mass % and sum of all rep­
resents 100%.(Arrowhead signifies an increasing sequence of LSF, SM, AM ranges, as
well as a rising percentage mix of chalk, sand, FA, and iron ore).
The XRF chemical analysis of each raw material, as well as the rawmeal mix’s chemical
23
==PAGE:35==
analysis used in the production of Portland cement clinkers for Scenario­1(BAU) is dis­
played in table 5.2. The chemical composition of the rawmeal mix is the result of the best
combination of LSF, SM, and AM values, which are 97, 2.4, and 1.8 respectively, within
the prescribed boundary conditions mentioned in subsection 4.5.4. This best combination
facilitates the attainment of the highest fly ash replacement rate of 17.48% in the rawmeal
mix for Scenario­1(BAU).
Table 5.2: Scenario­1(BAU) rawmeal mix design at best combination of LSF 97, SM 2.4
and AM 1.8
Figure 5.3: Representation of three main oxides of rawmeal mix obtained for Scenario­
1(BAU) at best combination of LSF, SM and AM
”A ternary diagram represents three­component systems and are conveniently presented
24
==PAGE:36==
as triangular diagrams where each side corresponds to an individual system”[34]. It pro­
vides an ideal method for visualizing the triad of primary oxides—CaO, SiO2, and Al2O3—
that constitute the rawmeal used in cement clinker or final cement production. A ternary
diagram is devised by considering that the collective percentages of CaO, SiO2, and
Al2O3 sum up to 100%. Figure fig. 5.3 illustrates the ternary diagram for the rawmeal
mix design for Portland cement clinkers in Scenario­1(BAU), obtained by applying best
combination of LSF, SM and AM as shown in table 5.2.
The chemical composition of different oxides in mixtures of FA and UFCWP at differ­
ent proportions is detailed in table 4.5. These XRF chemical analyses, having differing
percentages of FA and UFCWP, are utilized in making the raw meal and examined for
different combinations of LSF, SM, and AM under Scenario­2 (Recycling UFCWP). Each
potential combination within the boundary conditions for LSF, SM, and AM—outlined in
subsection 4.5.4 equations 4.1, 4.2, and 4.3—is tested across different percentages of FA
and UFCWP mixtures, as displayed in appendices table A.1 , table A.2,table A.3,table A.4
,table A.5 , table A.6, table A.8, table A.10, and table A.12. It is seen from tables, no so­
lution fits within the boundary conditions for portland clinker rawmeal mix when the XRF
chemical analysis of UFCWP is used completely (100%)table A.1, and when mixtures of
FA and UFCWP at ratios of FA10% & UFCWP 90% table A.2, FA20% & UFCWP 80%
table A.3, FA30% & UFCWP 70% table A.4, FA40% & UFCWP 60% table A.5 are used
in raw meal preparation.
Table 5.3: Testing for different possible boundary condition for Scenario 2 when XRF
chemical analysis of blend of FA at 50% and UFCWP are 50% used in making portland
cement clinkers. The values of chalk, sand, FA and iron ore are in mass % and sum of all
represents 100%(Arrowhead signifies an increasing sequence of LSF, SM, AM ranges,
as well as a rising percentage mix of chalk, sand, FA, and iron ore).
However, when the chemical analysis of each oxides for mixture with equal parts of FA
and UFCWP (50% each) is used to create the raw meal in Scenario 2 (recycling UFCWP),
the most optimal combination is seen in table 5.3. The orange and yellow colors represent
the only viable solutions at this mixing ratio, with the yellow highlighting indicating the best
combination among all tested mixtures.
25
==PAGE:37==
The best combinations of LSF, SM, and AM, that fall within the boundary conditions out­
lined in subsection 4.5.4 equations 4.1, 4.2, and 4.3, are compiled in table 5.4. These
are best combinations derived from the chemical analysis of varying mix ratios of FA and
UFCWP. Notably, the best among all these combination for scenario 2—highlighted in
yellow—emerges when a 50:50 mixture of FA and UFCWP is used in raw meal prepa­
ration, enabling a maximum replacement rate of 23.53%. The red highlighting indicates
instances when UFCWP’s chemical analysis is directly employed in the raw meal, while
the green highlighting represents Scenario 1 (BAU) where the chemical analysis of FA is
used directly in the raw meal mix formulation.
Table 5.4: List of best combinations for scenario 2(recycling UFCWP) by using chemi­
cal analysis at different mixing proportion of FA and UFCWP given in table 4.5 used in
rawmeal preparation
Table 5.5: Scenario 2(recycling UFCWP) rawmeal mix design at best combination of LSF
97, SM 2.5 and AM 1.5 by using chemical analysis of blend of FA at 50% and UFCWP
at 50% for prepartion of rawmeal.
The XRF chemical analysis of each raw material, in addition to the chemical analysis of
26
==PAGE:38==
the raw meal mix used in producing portland cement clinkers for Scenario 2 (recycling
UFCWP), is shown in table 5.5. By using the chemical analysis of a mixture composed
of 50% FA and 50% UFCWP in the raw meal and setting the LSF, SM, and AM values to
97, 2.5, and 1.5 respectively, we achieve the highest replacement rate of 23.53%.
Figure fig. 5.4 represents the ternary diagram for the raw meal mix design for Portland
cement clinkers under Scenario 2 (recycling UFCWP).
Figure 5.4: Representation of three main oxides of rawmeal mix obtained for Scenario
2(recycling UFCWP) at best combination of LSF, SM and AM
5.0.1
Scenarios­1(BAU) Vs Scenario­2 (recycling UFCWP)
The comparison between Scenario 1 (BAU) and the potential for incorporating UFCWP
into the raw meal under Scenario 2 (recycling UFCWP) is illustrated in fig. 5.5.The data
indicates that up to 23.53% replacement can be achieved using a mixture of FA and
UFCWP, each constituting 50%, while UFCWP alone has the potential to replace 11.77%
in the raw meal of cement clinkers. This integration leads to a significant reduction in the
usage of chalk, from 80.09% to 74.89%, and sand, from 1.24% to 0.25%. However, it’s
crucial to remember that these recycling rates may vary depending on the specific chemi­
cal composition of the raw materials used. During the preparation of raw meal for cement
clinkers, it’s crucial to remember that producing one tonne of cement clinkers requires
more than one tonne of raw materials, as a significant portion is lost, especially in the
case of chalk during the calcination process. This is shown for Scenario 1 (BAU) in ta­
ble 5.6 and for Scenario 2 (recycling UFCWP) in table 5.7. The LOI (Loss on Ignition)
represents the weight loss of material during the burning process. For instance, chalk
has an LOI of 41.80%, indicating a substantial loss of CO2 and water during calcination,
with CO2 constituting the majority of the lost mass.
27
==PAGE:39==
Figure 5.5: Comparison of Scenario­1(BAU) with Scenario­2(recycling UFCWP) to see
replacement potential of UFCWP in rawmeal for portland cement clinkers
Table 5.6: Amount of raw materials needed for manufacturing of 1 tonne of cement clinkers
for Scenario­1(BAU)
Table 5.7: Amount of raw materials needed for manufacturing of 1 tonne of cement clinkers
for Scenario­2(recycling UFCWP)
28
==PAGE:40==
5.0.2
Exploring UFCWP extraction potential through advanced recycling
of concrete waste in Denmark (2015­2020)
The data for cement production from 2015 to 2019 was gathered from Aalborg Portland’s
2019 environmental report [10], while the data for 2020 was sourced from CEMBUREAU’s
annual report [22]. The concrete waste data were taken from waste statistics 2015 [24]
and 2020 [26] published by the Danish Environmental agency. As shown in table 5.81, the
annual production of concrete waste rose from 1.06 million tonnes to 1.201 million tonnes
between 2015 and 2020, while cement production increased from 1.9 million tonnes to
2.4 million tonnes. Since data on the percentages of each type of cement, 2.2, used
in Denmark is not available, an assumption is made that the annual cement production
consists of approximately 80% portland cement clinkers and 20% SCM. This assumption
is used for calculating UFCWP at a replacement rate of 11.77%, as shown in column 6 of
table 5.8.”
If we were to apply ADR and HAS technologies to crushed concrete waste, and assuming
100% of the concrete waste is processed, we could extract approximately 67,904 tonnes
of UFCWP in 2015 and 76,864 tonnes in 2020 as shown in table 5.8.
Based on the findings of this project, if we were to prepare a rawmeal mixture consisting
chemical composition of 50% fly ash and 50% UFCWP blend along with other raw mate­
rials, we would achieve a replacement rate of 11.77% for UFCWP. In practical terms, this
would necessitate the use of 179,023 tonnes of UFCWP in 2015 and 225,888 tonnes in
2020 as shown in table 5.8. This implies that approximately 3 times more concrete waste,
on average, was required to meet this demand.
Nevertheless, it’s crucial to note that this replacement rate could fluctuate based on the
specific chemical properties of the sand used in Denmark, in comparison to the standard
sand used in this project. Variations could also arise from the different chemical charac­
teristics of sand procured from different quarries, and the iron oxide source, pyrite ash,
used within the Danish context. Hence, any uncertainties in these variables could alter
the final results.
Table 5.8: Quantitative evaluation of UFCWP recovery from concrete waste via advanced
recycling technologies (2015­2020) based on 11.77% UFCWP recycling rate[sources:
[22][10][24][26]]
1A comma serves as a thousand separator, and a dot as a decimal separator
29
==PAGE:41==
6
Conclusions and Recommendations
1. Based on the eco­efficiency study of concrete recycling techniques [30], shows that
the utilization of ADR and HAS technology on crushed end­of­life concrete waste can
generate approximately 6.4% UFCWP (0­0.25mm) from the total waste. In simpler terms,
for every 100 tonnes of processed concrete waste, we can extract about 6.4 tonnes of
UFCWP. In our study, we utilized these recovered UFCWP to examine its replacement
potential with raw materials used in the production of portland cement clinker.
2. The XRF chemical analysis of raw materials and UFCWP is crucial for assessing the
chemical composition of the raw meal mix used for the production of the portland cement
clinkers. This process allows to verify whether the mix aligns with the necessary chemical
composition for cement clinkers, facilitating optimal chemical reactivity and burnability,
while mitigating potential anomalies to produce high­quality clinkers.
3. In this study, we found that when the chemical composition of a 50% fly ash and
50% UFCWP blend is used alongside other raw materials to prepare rawmeal compo­
sitions for portland cement clinkers, a maximum replacement of 23.53% of the raw
material can be achieved. Within this mixture, UFCWP alone accounts for 11.77% of
the substitution. On the other hand, when we exclusively use the chemical analysis of
UFCWP, in conjunction with other raw materials in cement clinker rawmeal preparation,
solution is not possible within the set boundary conditions, as demonstrated in table A.1.
4. The data from the previous five years (2015­2020) illustrate that cement production
was roughly double the amount of concrete waste produced annually.Therefore, based
on assumptions 5 7, if we process 100% of the concrete waste while fully incorporat­
ing the UFCWP in portland cement clinker production—extracted using ADR and HAS
technology—we would require approximately 3 times more UFCWP at 11.77% replace­
ment rate, as indicated in table 5.8.
5. The potential replacement rate of UFCWP is influenced by factors such as the con­
tamination levels in UFCWP, the precise chemical composition of raw materials, the
boundary conditions of LSF, SM, and BM, and boundary condition modification for
fuel efficiency optimizations in plant. A detailed discussion of the assumptions regard­
ing the raw materials used for producing portland cement clinker can be found in 7. For
this study, the chemical analysis of UFCWP, obtained from concrete waste in the Nether­
lands, was used to analyze its replacement potential in Danish cement manufacturing.
These factors could substantially influence the overall recycling rate.
Based on the outcomes of this study, the following recommendations and future work are
suggested to accurately find out the actual recycling potential through experimental data,
as listed below.
1. It is recommended to collect concrete waste samples from a variety of sources such
as structures exposed to aggressive climates like coastal or industrial complexes and
normal residential complex. Make archetypes of concrete waste based on exposure to
aggressive, medium, and mild environments. This is because structures exposed to more
hostile environments have higher chances of sulphate, chloride and other contamination,
which can significantly reduce recyclability. Performing an evaluation of the mass flow of
concrete waste to ascertain whether a significant portion of the waste is originating from
30
==PAGE:42==
mild, medium, or harsh climate exposure structures could aid in quantifying uncertainties
in recycling potential across all architypes of concrete waste.
2. A recommendation is to establish mobile ADR and HAS facilities for experiments or
to transport crushed concrete waste samples to the Netherlands for further processing
to extract UFCWP. Subsequently, the samples should undergo XRF chemical analysis
to identify the chemical composition of various oxides and potential contaminants. Given
that Denmark’s cement production predominantly involves CEM I and II types, the UFCWP
extracted through these technologies will likely contain a higher lime content compared
to the UFCWP used in this research. The UFCWP used in this study originated from
concrete waste from a building in the Netherlands that contain CEM I and III type cement.
3. By adopting the approach used in this study to prepare the raw meal, incorporating the
actual chemical composition of all raw materials from Denmark, along with the relevant
LSF, SM, and AM boundary conditions used in Danish cement production. Carry out sev­
eral trials, blending UFCWP from concrete waste with either a mix of fly ash and UFCWP
or a UFCWP blend containing silica and lime, to maximize recycling potential. Taking into
account the varied sources of raw materials like sand, fly ash, or iron, formulate a raw
meal with all conceivable combinations to estimate potential uncertainties in the recycling
rate. In addition, performing lab kiln tests to assess clinker quality and conducting a cost­
benefit analysis based on these results could offer insights into the viability of adopting
this technology on a large scale.
4.Further research is required to gain a deeper understanding of the impacts of sulphates
[43] and other contaminants, such as chlorides—which are particularly prevalent in coastal
structures—on the mineralogy of clinker derived from concrete waste. These factors can
significantly affect the potential for concrete waste recyclability.
5.Additional studies into the use UFCWP as a SCM in CEM­II type cement should be
conducted. This could present an effective strategy for producing low CO2 footprint ce­
ment. Moreover, incorporating UFCWP in portland cement clinker can aid in reducing the
extraction of raw materials, thereby supporting the circular economy.
31
==PAGE:43==
7
List of assumptions
Raw materials:
1. The sand used by Aalborg Portland is extracted from Sandmosen and dredged at Hals
Barre; it is a sea material. Due to the lack of data on sand for Denmark, CEN standard
sand based on EN 196­1 [36] is used for rawmeal preparations of cement clinkers.As per
the EN 196­1 standard [36], this sand should contain at least 98% silica content. The
remaining 2% is presumed to be contaminated by various types of oxides like iron, potas­
sium, and sodium, but not by calcium oxide. This is why the loss of ignition is reported as
zero for this case. These potential contaminants are not listed in the standard, so they are
assumed to be zero when calculating oxides mix percentages of the raw meal for cement
clinkers.
2. The XRF chemical compositions of chalk, fly ash [49] and UFCWP [40] contain other
contaminants such as TiO2, Cl,P2O5, Cr2O3, MnO which are not included in the cal­
culation of oxides mix percentages for the raw meal in cement clinkers manufacturing.
They are excluded because their quantities are very small and do not significantly affect
the chemical composition of the clinkers, with concentrations of approximately 0.13% in
chalk, around 1.45% in fly ash, and 0.54% in UFCWP.
3. Pyrite cinders, a waste product of sulphuric acid manufacturing from a facility in Turkey,
are assumed to be the iron oxide source. Conversely, in Denmark, pyrite ash, another
byproduct from sulphuric acid production, serves as the iron oxide source. However, due
to an absence of XRF chemical analysis data for the pyrite ash used in Denmark, the XRF
chemical analysis data for pyrite cinders [37] is employed in formulating the raw meal for
cement clinkers.
4. In Danish cement manufacturing, Oxiton – a byproduct from aluminium oxide filtration
– is used, comprising less than 1% of all raw materials [10]. The shutdown of coal­fired
power plants has led to reduced fly ash production, resulting in an increased use of Oxiton
in raw meals. However, due to its minimal contribution and the lack of available chemical
analysis data, it was not considered in the raw meal preparation for this study.
Concrete waste:
5.To estimate the peak potential of UFCWP extraction in Denmark, we used the mass
balance procedure detailed in [30] and illustrated in fig. 4.7. This analysis was carried out
on concrete waste and cement production data from 2015­2020, under the assumption
that 100% of concrete waste will be crushed and then go through advanced ADR and
HAS processing. It was also assumed that all UFCWP obtained would be channelled into
cement production and results are tabulated in table 5.8.
6.The XRF chemical analysis data for UFCWP, utilized in this study, is derived from a
laboratory­scale research project [40], which focused on extracting cementitious powder
from crushed concrete fines (0­4 mm) using HAS technology. In this research, UFCWP
is denoted as the finer fraction (FF)[40]. These ADR fines (0­4 mm) stem from a case
study [41] undertaken under the C2CA project. This project entailed the demolition and
subsequent recycling of End­of­Life (EOL) concrete from two government complex towers
in Groningen, the Netherlands. Based on visual inspection, the concrete waste from this
case was found to contain CEM I and CEM III cement types, while CEM I and II types of
cement are predominantly used in Denmark.
32
==PAGE:44==
Bibliography
[1]
Building and construction,EU accessed on May 15, 2023. URL: https : / / single -
market-economy.ec.europa.eu/industry/sustainability/buildings-and-construction_en.
[2]
S. Lotfi et al. A mechanical process for in situ recycling of eol concrete. 13th ed.
SB13 Organisers, 2013, pp. 9–10. ISBN: 9789810773779. URL: https://repository.
tudelft.nl/islandora/object/uuid%5C%3Ad208625f-0b2f-4269-a764-c419fecd902b.
[3]
Abraham T. Gebremariam et al. “Innovative technologies for recycling End­of­Life
concrete waste in the built environment”. In: Resources, Conservation and Recy­
cling 163 (Dec. 2020). ISSN: 18790658. DOI: 10.1016/j.resconrec.2020.104911.
[4]
Concrete to cement and aggegate technology, accessed on March 15, 2023. URL:
https://www.c2ca-technology.nl/en/about/.
[5]
HAS, accessed on March 25, 2023. URL: http://www.veep-project.eu/.
[6]
CONSTRUCTION SECTOR, accessed on June 15, 2023. URL: https : / / single -
market-economy.ec.europa.eu/sectors/construction_en.
[7]
E.M. Gartner K.L. Scrivener V.M. John. Eco­efficient cements: Potential, econom­
ically viable solutions for a low­CO2, cement­based materials industry. United Na­
tions Environment Program, 2016. ISBN: 9788121900034. URL: https://wedocs.
unep.org/bitstream/handle/20.500.11822/25281/eco_efficient_cements.pdf%20,
%20accessed%20April%201,%202023).
[8]
co2nstruct, accessed on June 15, 2023. URL: https://co2nstruct.dtu.dk/.
[9]
Aalborg Portland ESG Report 2022. Tech. rep. Aalborg Portland, 20.04.2023. URL:
https://www.aalborgportland.dk/wp- content/uploads/2023/04/ESG_Rapport-
2022.pdf.
[10]
Aalborg Portland Environmental Report 2019, accessed on 14 Feb. 2023. Tech. rep.
Aalborg Portland, 2019. URL: https://www.aalborgportland.dk/wp-content/uploads/
2020/10/Aalborg_Portland_Environmental_Report_2019_web.pdf.
[11]
Aalborg portland A/S Halil halilov. Introduction to Aalborg Portland’s cement produc­
tion, accessed on May 10, 2023. URL: https://www.ucn.dk/media/r55a33pl/visit-
from-ucn-13042023.pdf.
[12]
European standard European Committee for Standardization (CEN). Cement­Del
1: Sammensaetning, krav til egenskaber og overensstemmelses­kriterier for almin­
delige cementer Cement­Part 1: Composition, specifications and conformity criteria
for common cements. Tech. rep. 2012.
[13]
Aalborg portland A/S. Cement og Beton bogen 2023, accessed on April 10, 2023.
Tech. rep. 2023. URL: https://www.aalborgportland.dk/cement-og-beton-haandbog/.
[14]
Circular Economy,EU accessed on May 1, 2023. URL: https://www.europarl.europa.
eu/news/en/headlines/economy/20151201STO05603/circular-economy-definition-
importance-and-benefits.
[15]
CEMBUREAU. Cement,Concrete and circular economy, accessed on June 10, 2023.
Tech. rep. 2016. URL: https://circulareconomy.europa.eu/platform/sites/default/
files/cement_concrete_the_circular_economy.pdf.
[16]
Circular Economy cement, accessed on June 15, 2023. URL: https://gccassociation.
org/sustainability-benefits-of-concrete/circular-economy/.
[17]
Circular Economy cement, accessed on June 15, 2023. URL: https://www.mckinsey.
com/industries/engineering- construction- and- building- materials/our- insights/the-
circular-cement-value-chain-sustainable-and-profitable.
33
==PAGE:45==
[18]
Circular Economy cement, accessed on June 15, 2023. URL: https://www.weforum.
org/agenda/2022/11/circularity-a-key-enabler-to-reach-net-zero-in-concrete-and-
cement/.
[19]
Industrial Symbiosis, accessed on May 15, 2023. URL: https : / / nordregio . org /
nordregio-magazine/issues/industrial-symbiosis/what-is-industrial-symbiosis/.
[20]
Aurélie ”Favier et al. ”A sustainable future for the European Cement and Con­
crete.Industry: Technology assessment for full decarbonisation of the industry by
2050”. Tech. rep. 2018. DOI: 10.3929/ethz-b-000301843.
[21]
”CEMBUREAU”. ”REACHING CLIMATE NEUTRALITY ALONG THE CEMENT AND
CONCRETE VALUE CHAIN BY 2050 Cementing the European Green Deal”. Tech.
rep. 2020. URL: https://cembureau.eu/library/reports/2050- carbon- neutrality-
roadmap/.
[22]
Cembureau. Cembureau activity report 2020, accessed on Feb. 10, 2023. 2021.
URL: https://cembureau.eu/media/1sjf4sk4/cembureau-activity-report-2020.pdf.
[23]
Cement import and export data for Denmark, accessed on March 17, 2023. URL:
https://www.trademap.org/Index.aspx.
[24]
Miljøstyrelsen. , accessed on Feb. 18, 2023. August, 2022. URL: https://www2.
mst.dk/udgiv/publications/2017/08/978-87-93614-20-8.pdf.
[25]
Establishing effective markets for secondary building materials. Danish Environ­
mental Protection Agency, 2019. ISBN: 9788770380522.
[26]
Miljøstyrelsen. Affaldsstatistik2020, accessed on Feb. 18, 2023. December, 2022.
URL: https://www2.mst.dk/Udgiv/publikationer/2022/12/978-87-7038-463-6.pdf.
[27]
Mingming Hu et al. “An approach to LCSA: The case of concrete recycling”. In:
International Journal of Life Cycle Assessment 18.9 (Nov. 2013), pp. 1793–1803.
ISSN: 09483349. DOI: 10.1007/s11367-013-0599-8.
[28]
Walter de Vries and Peter Rem. “ADR: A classifier for fine moist materials”. In: Sep­
arating Pro­environment Technologies for Waste Treatment, Soil and Sediments
Remediation (Jan. 2012), pp. 43–58.
[29]
TUD­ADR­STRU­TIIH­TECN. D5.1­Demonstration of new advanced recycling tech­
nologies for EoL concrete waste, waste building glass and insulating mineral wool
waste. Tech. rep. 2016. URL: http : / / www . veep - project . eu / Page . aspx ? CAT =
DELIVERABLES&IdPage=501653bd-2226-44fa-b34f-eaad1e3b335d.
[30]
Chunbo Zhang et al. “Eco­efficiency assessment of technological innovations in
high­grade concrete recycling”. In: Resources, Conservation and Recycling 149
(Oct. 2019), pp. 649–663. ISSN: 18790658. DOI: 10.1016/j.resconrec.2019.06.023.
[31]
GAGO DA CAMARA SIMOES Sofia; NIJS Wouter; RUIZ CASTELLO Pablo; SGOBBI
Alessandra; RADU Daniela; BOLAT Pelin; THIEL Christian; PETEVES Efstathios.
The JRC­EU­TIMES model ­ Assessing the long­term role of the SET Plan Energy
technologies. Tech. rep. 2014. DOI: 10.2790/97596. URL: https://publications.jrc.ec.
europa.eu/repository/handle/JRC85804.
[32]
Graeme Moir. “1 ­ Cements”. In: Advanced Concrete Technology. Ed. by John New­
man and Ban Seng Choo. Oxford: Butterworth­Heinemann, 2003, pp. 3–45. ISBN:
978­0­7506­5686­3. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-075065686-3/50277-9.
URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/B9780750656863502779.
[33]
R. H. Bogue. “Calculation of the Compounds in Portland Cement”. In: Industrial &
Engineering Chemistry Analytical Edition 1.4 (1929), pp. 192–197. DOI: 10.1021/
ac50068a006. eprint: https://doi.org/10.1021/ac50068a006. URL: https://doi.org/10.
1021/ac50068a006.
[34]
Peter del Strother. “2 ­ Manufacture of Portland Cement”. In: Lea’s Chemistry of
Cement and Concrete (Fifth Edition). Ed. by Peter C. Hewlett and Martin Liska.
34
==PAGE:46==
Fifth Edition. Butterworth­Heinemann, 2019, pp. 31–56. ISBN: 978­0­08­100773­
0. DOI: https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / B978 - 0 - 08 - 100773 - 0 . 00002 - 2. URL: https :
//www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/B9780081007730000022.
[35]
T.K. Chatterjee. “Burnability and Clinkerization of Cement Raw Mixes”. In: Advances
in Cement Technology. Ed. by S.N. GHOSH. Pergamon, 1983, pp. 69–113. ISBN:
978­0­08­028670­9. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-08-028670-9.50009-0.
URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/B9780080286709500090.
[36]
European standard European Committee for Standardization (CEN). Metoder til
prøvning af cement­Del 1: Styrkebestemmelse Methods of testing cement­Part 1:
Determination of strength. Tech. rep. 2016.
[37]
I. Alp et al. “Potential use of pyrite cinders as raw material in cement production:
Results of industrial scale trial operations”. In: Journal of Hazardous Materials 166.1
(July 2009), pp. 144–149. ISSN: 03043894. DOI: 10.1016/j.jhazmat.2008.10.129.
[38]
Analyzing the Composition of Cement ­ XRF Sample Prep, accessed on June 18,
2023. URL: https://www.azom.com/article.aspx?ArticleID=15510.
[39]
S. Ferreiro, D. Herfort, and J. S. Damtoft. “Effect of raw clay type, fineness, water­
to­cement ratio and fly ash addition on workability and strength performance of cal­
cined clay – Limestone Portland cements”. In: Cement and Concrete Research 101
(Nov. 2017), pp. 1–12. ISSN: 00088846. DOI: 10.1016/j.cemconres.2017.08.003.
[40]
Somayeh Lotfi and Peter Rem. “Recycling of End of Life Concrete Fines into Hard­
ened Cement and Clean Sand”. In: Journal of Environmental Protection 07 (Jan.
2016), pp. 934–950. DOI: 10.4236/jep.2016.76083.
[41]
Somayeh Lotfi et al. “Mechanical recycling of EOL concrete into high­grade aggre­
gates”. In: Resources, Conservation and Recycling 87 (2014), pp. 117–125. ISSN:
0921­3449. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.resconrec.2014.03.010. URL: https:
//www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0921344914000688.
[42]
Hichem Krour et al. “Incorporation rate of recycled aggregates in cement raw meals”.
In: Construction and Building Materials 248 (July 2020). ISSN: 09500618. DOI:
10.1016/j.conbuildmat.2020.118217.
[43]
Mieke De Schepper et al. “Sulfates in Completely Recyclable Concrete and the
effect of CaSO4 on the clinker mineralogy”. In: Construction and Building Materials
137 (Apr. 2017), pp. 300–306. ISSN: 09500618. DOI: 10.1016/j.conbuildmat.2017.
01.127.
[44]
F.N. Costa and D.V. Ribeiro. “Evaluation of phase formation and physical­mechanical
properties of Portland cements produced with civil construction waste”. In: Cement
5 (Sept. 2021), p. 100012. ISSN: 26665492. DOI: 10.1016/j.cement.2021.100012.
[45]
Fernanda Nepomuceno Costa, Daniel Véras Ribeiro, and Cléber Marcos Ribeiro
Dias. “Portland clinker with civil construction waste: influence of pellet geometry
on the formation of crystalline phases”. In: Ambiente Construído 20.4 (Dec. 2020),
pp. 205–223. ISSN: 1415­8876. DOI: 10.1590/s1678-86212020000400468.
[46]
Cécile Diliberto et al. “Valorisation of recycled concrete sands in cement raw meal for
cement production”. In: Materials and Structures/Materiaux et Constructions 50.2
(Apr. 2017). ISSN: 13595997. DOI: 10.1617/s11527-017-0996-8.
[47]
Cement compostion, accessed on June 11, 2023. URL: https://patents.justia.com/
patent/5584926.
[48]
Ted Krapkat. Rawmix caculation, accessed on April 17, 2023. URL: https://www.
cemnet.com/Forum/thread/149516?page=3.
[49]
S. Ferreiro et al. “Influence of fineness of raw clay and calcination temperature on
the performance of calcined clay­limestone blended cements”. In: Applied Clay Sci­
ence 169 (Mar. 2019), pp. 81–90. ISSN: 01691317. DOI: 10.1016/j.clay.2018.12.021.
35
==PAGE:47==
A
Appendix
A.0.1
Different combinations of boundary conditions at different mixing
percentages of FA and UFCWP and rawmeal mix design table at
best combination of LSF, SM and AM
Table A.1: Testing for different possible boundary condition for Scenario 2 when XRF
chemical analysis of UFCWP at 100% used in making portland cement clinkers. The
values of chalk, sand, FA and iron ore are in mass % and sum of all represents 100%
(Arrowhead signifies an increasing sequence of LSF, SM, AM ranges, as well as a rising
percentage mix of chalk, sand, FA, and iron ore).
Table A.2: Testing for different possible boundary condition for Scenario 2 when XRF
chemical analysis of blend of FA at 10% and UFCWP at 90% used in making portland
cement clinkers. The values of chalk, sand, FA and iron ore are in mass % and sum of all
represents 100%
36
==PAGE:48==
Table A.3: Testing for different possible boundary condition for Scenario 2 when XRF
chemical analysis of blend of FA at 20% and UFCWP at 80% used in making portland
cement clinkers. The values of chalk, sand, FA and iron ore are in mass % and sum of all
represents 100%
Table A.4: Testing for different possible boundary condition for Scenario 2 when XRF
chemical analysis of blend of FA at 30% and UFCWP at 70% used in making portland
cement clinkers. The values of chalk, sand, FA and iron ore are in mass % and sum of all
represents 100%
37
==PAGE:49==
Table A.5: Testing for different possible boundary condition for Scenario 2 when XRF
chemical analysis of blend of FA at 40% and UFCWP at 60% used in making portland
cement clinkers. The values of chalk, sand, FA and iron ore are in mass % and sum of all
represents 100%
Table A.6: Testing for different possible boundary condition for Scenario 2 when XRF
chemical analysis of blend of FA at 60% and UFCWP at 40% used in making portland
cement clinkers. The values of chalk, sand, FA and iron ore are in mass % and sum of all
represents 100%
38
==PAGE:50==
Table A.7: Scenario 2(recycling UFCWP) rawmeal mix design at best combination of LSF
97, SM 2.6 and AM 1.8 when rawmeal is prepared by XRF chemical analysis of blend of
FA at 60% and UFCWP 40%
Table A.8: Testing for different possible boundary condition for Scenario 2 when XRF
chemical analysis of blend of FA at 70% and UFCWP at 30% used in making portland
cement clinkers. The values of chalk, sand, FA and iron ore are in mass % and sum of all
represents 100%
39
==PAGE:51==
Table A.9: Scenario 2(recycling UFCWP) rawmeal mix design at best combination of LSF
97, SM 2.5 and AM 1.8 when rawmeal is prepared by XRF chemical analysis of blend of
FA at 70% and UFCWP 30%
Table A.10: Testing for different possible boundary condition for Scenario 2 when XRF
chemical analysis of blend of FA at 80% and UFCWP at 20% used in making portland
cement clinkers. The values of chalk, sand, FA and iron ore are in mass % and sum of all
represents 100%
40
==PAGE:52==
Table A.11: Scenario 2(recycling UFCWP) rawmeal mix design at best combination of LSF
97, SM 2.4 and AM 1.8 when rawmeal is prepared by XRF chemical analysis of blend of
FA at 80% and UFCWP 20%
Table A.12: Testing for different possible boundary condition for Scenario 2 when XRF
chemical analysis of blend of FA at 90% and UFCWP at 10% used in making portland
cement clinkers. The values of chalk, sand, FA and iron ore are in mass 90% and sum of
all represents 100%
41
==PAGE:53==
Table A.13: Scenario 2(recycling UFCWP) rawmeal mix design at best combination of
LSF 97, SM 2.4 and AM 1.8 when rawmeal is prepared by XRF chemical analysis of
blend of FA at 90% and UFCWP 10%
A.0.2
Calculating four component cement rawmeal mix by using
Cramer’s rule
The comprehensive description provided herein, alongside the relevant excel calculation
sheet used for making raw meal, was extracted from a word document and excel sheet
available in the comments section of the website [48]. The original content was provided
by Ted Krapkat, BAppSc(Chem), from cement Australia. Regrettably, precise referencing
is not available for this document and the excel tool due to the nature of their original
sources. To ensure the accuracy of the information provided in the excel sheet, a verifi­
cation process has been conducted using python code to minimize potential errors.
To solve a four component raw mix calculation requires four simultaneous equations of
the form:
aW + bX + cY + dZ = e
(A.1)
fW + gX + hY + iZ = j
(A.2)
kW + lX + mY + nZ = o
(A.3)
pW + qX + rY + sZ = t
(A.4)
Where the letters W, X, Y and Z represent the unknown percentages of each of the four
raw materials, and the letters a, b, c, d, e, f, g, h, i, j, k, l, m, n, o, p, q, r, s, and t are
numerical coefficients.
Since the sum of the four component percentages in any raw mix is always 100%, There­
fore we can write the first equation as
W + X + Y + Z = 100
(A.5)
Therefore, in the equations above;­ a =1, b=1, c=1, d=1 and e =100. However, we still
need to provide three more equations. These equations come from the three quality
42
==PAGE:54==
control parameters LSF, SR and AR which are critical inputs into the raw mix calculation.
Each of these three parameters can be calculated using the chemical analysis of the four
components and the percentage of each in the raw mix.
So, if we let the chemical analysis of each component be…
Table A.14: Oxides names in each rawmaterial
...AR of the raw mix can be calculated as:
AR = W ∗A1 + X ∗A2 + Y ∗A3 + Z ∗A4
W ∗F1 + X ∗F2 + Y ∗F3 + Z ∗F4
(A.6)
AR ∗(W ∗F1 + X ∗F2 + Y ∗F3 + Z ∗F4) = W ∗A1 + X ∗A2 + Y ∗A3 + Z ∗A4 (A.7)
AR∗W ∗F1+AR∗X∗F2+AR∗Y ∗F3+AR∗Z∗F4 = W ∗A1+X∗A2+Y ∗A3+Z∗A4 (A.8)
(AR∗F1−A1)∗W +(AR∗F2−A2)∗X+(AR∗F3−A3)∗Y +(AR∗F4−A4)∗Z = 0 (A.9)
We now have the second simultaneous equation in the form:
fW + gX + hY + iZ = j
where:
f = AR ∗F1 −A1
g = AR ∗F2 −A2
h = AR ∗F3 −A3
i = AR ∗F4 −A4
j = 0
The third equation comes from evaluating the SR, which can be calculated as:­
SR =
W ∗S1 + X ∗S2 + Y ∗S3 + Z ∗S4
W ∗A1 + X ∗A2 + Y ∗A3 + Z ∗A4 + W ∗F1 + X ∗F2 + Y ∗F3 + Z ∗F4
(A.10)
SR ∗(W ∗A1 + X ∗A2 + Y ∗A3 + Z ∗A4
+ W ∗F1 + X ∗F2 + Y ∗F3 + Z ∗F4)
= W ∗S1 + X ∗S2 + Y ∗S3 + Z ∗S4
(A.11)
(SR ∗A1 + SR ∗F1 −S1) ∗W
+(SR ∗A2 + SR ∗F2 −S2) ∗X
+(SR ∗A3 + SR ∗F3 −S3) ∗Y
+(SR ∗A4 + SR ∗F4 −S4) ∗Z = 0
(A.12)
43
==PAGE:55==
We now have the third simultaneous equation in the form:
kW + lX + mY + nZ = o
where:
k = SR ∗A1 + SR ∗F1 −S1
l = SR ∗A2 + SR ∗F2 −S2
m = SR ∗A3 + SR ∗F3 −S3
n = SR ∗A4 + SR ∗F4 −S4
o = 0
The fourth and last simultaneous equation is derived from the LSF, which can be calcu­
lated as:­
LSF = 100 ∗(W ∗C1 + X ∗C2 + Y ∗C3 + Z ∗C4)
2.8 ∗(W ∗S1 + X ∗S2 + Y ∗S3 + Z ∗S4)
+1.18 ∗(W ∗A1 + X ∗A2 + Y ∗A3 + Z ∗A4)
+0.65 ∗(W ∗F1 + X ∗F2 + Y ∗F3 + Z ∗F4)
LSF ∗(2.8 ∗W ∗S1 + 2.8 ∗X ∗S2 + 2.8 ∗Y ∗S3 + 2.8 ∗Z ∗S4 + 1.18 ∗W ∗A1 + 1.18 ∗X ∗A2
+1.18 ∗Y ∗A3 + 1.18 ∗Z ∗A4 + 0.65 ∗W ∗F1 + 0.65 ∗X ∗F2 + 0.65 ∗Y ∗F3 + 0.65 ∗Z ∗F4)
= 100 ∗W ∗C1 + 100 ∗X ∗C2 + 100 ∗Y ∗C3 + 100 ∗Z ∗C4
(A.13)
(LSF ∗2.8 ∗S1 + LSF ∗1.18 ∗A1 + LSF ∗0.65 ∗F1 −100 ∗C1) ∗W+
(LSF ∗2.8 ∗S2 + LSF ∗1.18 ∗A2 + LSF ∗0.65 ∗F2 −100 ∗C2) ∗X+
(LSF ∗2.8 ∗S3 + LSF ∗1.18 ∗A3 + LSF ∗0.65 ∗F3 −100 ∗C3) ∗Y +
(LSF ∗2.8 ∗S4 + LSF ∗1.18 ∗A4 + LSF ∗0.65 ∗F4 −100 ∗C4) ∗Z = 0
(A.14)
This is the fourth equation we need, and is in the form;­
pW + qX + rY + sZ = t
where
p = (LSF ∗2.8 ∗S1 + LSF ∗1.18 ∗A1 + LSF ∗0.65 ∗F1 −100 ∗C1)
q = (LSF ∗2.8 ∗S2 + LSF ∗1.18 ∗A2 + LSF ∗0.65 ∗F2 −100 ∗C2)
r = (LSF ∗2.8 ∗S3 + LSF ∗1.18 ∗A3 + LSF ∗0.65 ∗F3 −100 ∗C3)
s = (LSF ∗2.8 ∗S4 + LSF ∗1.18 ∗A4 + LSF ∗0.65 ∗F4 −100 ∗C4)
t = 0
(A.15)
The four simultaneous equations:
aW + bX + cY + dZ = e
fW + gX + hY + iZ = j
kW + lX + mY + nZ = o
pW + qX + rY + sZ = t
44
==PAGE:56==
can be expressed in matrix form as:


a
b
c
d
f
g
h
i
k
l
m
n
p
q
r
s




W
X
Y
Z

=


e
j
o
t


(A.16)
By using this matrix form of our four simultaneous equations we can solve them by using
Cramer’s rule. Cramer’s rule can be used with square matrices (ie 2x2, 3x3, 4x4… etc)
to individually calculate the unknowns in simultaneous equations by using matrix deter­
minants.
The determinant of the coefficient matrix in our case is expressed as:
D =

a
b
c
d
f
g
h
i
k
l
m
n
p
q
r
s

and the determinants of the four unknowns W, X, Y & Z are expressed as ;­
DW =

e
b
c
d
j
g
h
i
o
l
m
n
t
q
r
s

DX =

a
e
c
d
f
j
h
i
k
o
m
n
p
t
r
s

DY =

a
b
e
d
f
g
j
i
k
l
o
n
p
q
t
s

DZ =

a
b
c
e
f
g
h
j
k
l
m
o
p
q
r
t

Using these five determinants, Cramer’s rule allows us to calculate the values of the un­
knowns in our four simultaneous equations via the following formulae;­
W = Dw
D , X = Dx
D , Y = Dy
D , Z = Dz
D
The determinants D, Dw, Dx, Dy & Dz are evaluated by cross multiplication which in this
45
==PAGE:57==
case gives the following formulae for each of the determinants:
D = (a ∗g ∗m ∗s) + (a ∗h ∗n ∗q) + (a ∗i ∗l ∗r) −(a ∗i ∗m ∗q) −(a ∗g ∗n ∗r) −(a ∗h ∗l ∗s)
−(f ∗b ∗m ∗s) −(f ∗c ∗n ∗q) −(f ∗d ∗l ∗r) + (f ∗d ∗m ∗q) + (f ∗b ∗n ∗r) + (f ∗c ∗l ∗s)
+ (k ∗b ∗h ∗s) + (k ∗c ∗i ∗q) + (k ∗d ∗g ∗r) −(k ∗d ∗h ∗q) −(k ∗b ∗i ∗r) −(k ∗c ∗g ∗s)
−(p ∗b ∗h ∗n) −(p ∗c ∗i ∗l) −(p ∗d ∗g ∗m) + (p ∗d ∗h ∗l) + (p ∗b ∗i ∗m) + (p ∗c ∗g ∗n)
Dw = (e ∗g ∗m ∗s) + (e ∗h ∗n ∗q) + (e ∗i ∗l ∗r) −(e ∗i ∗m ∗q) −(e ∗g ∗n ∗r) −(e ∗h ∗l ∗s)
−(j ∗b ∗m ∗s) −(j ∗c ∗n ∗q) −(j ∗d ∗l ∗r) + (j ∗d ∗m ∗q) + (j ∗b ∗n ∗r) + (j ∗c ∗l ∗s)
+ (o ∗b ∗h ∗s) + (o ∗c ∗i ∗q) + (o ∗d ∗g ∗r) −(o ∗d ∗h ∗q) −(o ∗b ∗i ∗r) −(o ∗c ∗g ∗s)
−(t ∗b ∗h ∗n) −(t ∗c ∗i ∗l) −(t ∗d ∗g ∗m) + (t ∗d ∗h ∗l) + (t ∗b ∗i ∗m) + (t ∗c ∗g ∗n)
Dx = (a ∗j ∗m ∗s) + (a ∗h ∗n ∗t) + (a ∗i ∗o ∗r) −(a ∗i ∗m ∗t) −(a ∗j ∗n ∗r) −(a ∗h ∗o ∗s)
−(f ∗e ∗m ∗s) −(f ∗c ∗n ∗t) −(f ∗d ∗o ∗r) + (f ∗d ∗m ∗t) + (f ∗e ∗n ∗r) + (f ∗c ∗o ∗s)
+ (k ∗e ∗h ∗s) + (k ∗c ∗i ∗t) + (k ∗d ∗j ∗r) −(k ∗d ∗h ∗t) −(k ∗e ∗i ∗r) −(k ∗c ∗j ∗s)
−(p ∗e ∗h ∗n) −(p ∗c ∗i ∗o) −(p ∗d ∗j ∗m) + (p ∗d ∗h ∗o) + (p ∗e ∗i ∗m) + (p ∗c ∗j ∗n)
Dy = (a ∗g ∗o ∗s) + (a ∗j ∗n ∗q) + (a ∗i ∗l ∗t) −(a ∗i ∗o ∗q) −(a ∗g ∗n ∗t) −(a ∗j ∗l ∗s)
−(f ∗b ∗o ∗s) −(f ∗e ∗n ∗q) −(f ∗d ∗l ∗t) + (f ∗d ∗o ∗q) + (f ∗b ∗n ∗t) + (f ∗e ∗l ∗s)
+ (k ∗b ∗j ∗s) + (k ∗e ∗i ∗q) + (k ∗d ∗g ∗t) −(k ∗d ∗j ∗q) −(k ∗b ∗i ∗t) −(k ∗e ∗g ∗s)
−(p ∗b ∗j ∗n) −(p ∗e ∗i ∗l) −(p ∗d ∗g ∗o) + (p ∗d ∗j ∗l) + (p ∗b ∗i ∗o) + (p ∗e ∗g ∗n)
Dz = (a ∗g ∗m ∗t) + (a ∗h ∗o ∗q) + (a ∗j ∗l ∗r) −(a ∗j ∗m ∗q) −(a ∗g ∗o ∗r) −(a ∗h ∗l ∗t)
−(f ∗b ∗m ∗t) −(f ∗c ∗o ∗q) −(f ∗e ∗l ∗r) + (f ∗e ∗m ∗q) + (f ∗b ∗o ∗r) + (f ∗c ∗l ∗t)
+ (k ∗b ∗h ∗t) + (k ∗c ∗j ∗q) + (k ∗e ∗g ∗r)) −(k ∗e ∗h ∗q) −(k ∗b ∗j ∗r) −(k ∗c ∗g ∗t)
−(p ∗b ∗h ∗o) −(p ∗c ∗j ∗l) −(p ∗e ∗g ∗m) + (p ∗e ∗h ∗l) + (p ∗b ∗j ∗m) + (p ∗c ∗g ∗o)
where: a = 1, b = 1, c = 1, d = 1, e = 100
f = (AR*F1 ­ A1)
g = (AR*F2 ­ A2)
h = (AR*F3 ­ A3)
i = (AR*F4 ­ A4)
j = 0
k = (SR*A1 + SR*F1 ­ S1)
l = (SR*A2 + SR*F2 ­ S2)
m = (SR*A3 + SR*F3 ­ S3)
n = (SR*A4 + SR*F4 ­ S4)
o = 0
p = (LSF*2.8*S1 + LSF*1.18*A1 +LSF*0.65*F1 ­ 100*C1)
q = (LSF*2.8*S2 + LSF*1.18*A2 +LSF*0.65*F2 ­ 100*C2)
r = (LSF*2.8*S3 + LSF*1.18*A3 +LSF*0.65*F3 ­ 100*C3)
s = (LSF*2.8*S4 + LSF*1.18*A4 +LSF*0.65*F4 ­ 100*C4)
t = 0
Before substituting these coefficients into the determinant formulae we can simplify them
because, in our case, the coefficients j , o and t are all equal to zero. This means that any
term in the determinants which contains any of these coefficients as a multiplier can be
removed, because that term will always evaluate to zero. This significantly simplifies the
four determinants of the unknowns, and they become:
46
==PAGE:58==
Dw = (e*g*m*s)+(e*h*n*q)+(e*i*l*r)­(e*i*m*q)­(e*g*n*r)­(e*h*l*s)
Dx = ­(f*e*m*s)+(f*e*n*r)+(k*e*h*s)­(k*e*i*r)­(p*e*h*n)+(p*e*i*m)
Dy = ­(f*e*n*q)+(f*e*l*s)+(k*e*i*q)­(k*e*g*s)­(p*e*i*l)+(p*e*g*n)
Dz = ­(f*e*l*r)+(f*e*m*q)+(k*e*g*r)­(k*e*h*q)­(p*e*g*m)+(p*e*h*l)
Also , since a = b = c = d = 1, these letters can be removed as multipliers from the formula
for D i.e.
D = (g*m*s)+(h*n*q)+(i*l*r)­(i*m*q)­(g*n*r)­(h*l*s)­(f*m*s)­(f*n*q)­(f*l*r)+(f*m*q)
+(f*n*r)+(f*l*s) +(k*h*s)+(k*i*q)+(k*g*r)­(k*h*q)­(k*i*r)­(k*g*s) ­(p*h*n)­(p*i*l)
­(p*g*m)+(p*h*l)+(p*i*m)+(p*g*n)
Now, by substituting the coefficient values into the simplified equations for D, Dw, Dx,
Dy & Dz, the percentages of the mix components W, X, Y, & Z can be calculated using
the formulae;­
W = Dw
D , X = Dx
D , Y = Dy
D , Z = Dz
D
Finally, to simplify the calculation and allow automatic recalculation of raw mix percent­
ages when changing any of the raw material chemistry variables or the LSF, SR and AR
targets these calculation above and the coefficients can be incorporated into a simple
excel spreadsheet (example as shown in fig. A.1).
Figure A.1: Example of excel tool
47
==PAGE:59==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Bygningstorvet, Building 115
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
https://sustain.dtu.dk/en
