==PAGE:1==
Machine Learning for Electroencephalography
Based Dementia Classification
Master thesis in collaboration with OptoCeutics and
Technical University of Denmark (DTU)
Author
Katrine Dam Christensen (s174154)
Supervisors
Kristoffer Hougaard Madsen, Associate Professor
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science Cognitive Systems
Mark Alexander Henney, Industrial PhD Candidate
Department of Applied Mathematics Cognitive Systems
Report type
Master thesis
ECTS points
35
Project duration
02/01/2023 - 02/07/2023
==PAGE:2==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over six months at the Department of Health Technology, at the
Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment for the degree Master of Science in
Engineering, MSc Eng.
Author - s174154
............................................................................................
Date
............................................................................................
Signature
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Distinguishing neurocognitive disorders (NCD) can be difficult due to similarities in their symp-
toms, but is important to insure correct treatment. Graph theory is a useful tool for characteris-
ing complex networks, and has previously been applied in conjunction with functional imaging.
The functional imaging captures temporal and spatial patterns of neuronal communication be-
tween brain regions, which is then mapped to graph nodes and edges representing the brain
regions and communication between them respectively.
Although recent papers have attempted to utilize graph theory to characterize brain network
dysfunction in order to classify NCDs, a large scale evaluation of relevance of the different graph
theory metrics has yet to be identified.
This thesis seeks to examine the utility of various graph theory metrics for classifying NCDs,
by focusing on the task of discriminating between 16 healthy controls and 15 patients with
Parkinson’s disease (PD) based on global (graph), regional and local (node) characterization of
the brain network.
Changes in brain network characteristics of PD patients compared to healthy age matched
controls were evaluated using Imaginary Coherence (ImCoh) and as a measure of connectivity
between individual electrode placements during resting-state electroencephalography (EEG).
Application of thresholding is nontrivial and has high impact on the ability to discern net-
work differences between the two groups. Therefore, optimization of graph thresholding was
implemented to increase sparsity of the graphs and remove weaker connections, using both
weight-based and density-based methods. Optimal thresholds often differed across frequency
bands and spatial level (global, regional and local graph metrics).
The graph metrics were used for classification using Logistic Regression (LogReg) and Support
Vector Classifiers (SVC), from which the most informative graph features were the node degree,
closeness vitality and effective size. The three graph metrics reflect the integration, importance
and redundancy of a node in the graph.
The LogReg with density-based thresholding achieved an average f1-score of 0.726 with only
36 features, all of which were node degree, closeness vitality and effective size features. This
illustrates the potential capabilities of these three feature types for classification of NCDs in
future studies, yet the results are based on a limited PD data set, with the models’ ability to
generalize being unknown and could therefore be overfitted to the data. Additionally the degree
of cognitive impairment could either be classified using multi-class or ideally using regression to
better capture the continuous spectrum of cognitive impairment. Further work must be done to
sufficiently evaluate the potential of graph theory for classifying various NCDs, yet this thesis
provides preliminary results that suggests its promising application for diagnostics of PD.
==PAGE:4==
Resum´e
Differentiering af neurokognitive lidelser kan besværliggøres af overlappende symptomer, men
er vigtig for at sikre korrekt behandling. Graf teori er et nyttigt værktøj til karakterisering af
komplekse netværker. Det har tidligere været brugt i samspil med funktionel billeddannelse,
som opfanger b˚ade tids- og lokations aspekter af neuronale kommunikations mønstre mellem
forskellige dele af hjernen, hvilket overføres til graf noder og kanter der repræsenterer henholdsvis
hjernens regioner og kommunikationen imellem dem.
Selvom artikler for nyligt har forsøgt at benytte graf teori til karakterisering af dysfunktion af
hjernens netværk i forsøg p˚a at klassificere neurokognitive lidelser, mangler der en overordnet
evaluering af relevansen af de forskellige graf teori metrikker.
Denne afhandling forsøger at undersøge brugbarheden af diverse graf teori metrikker brugt til
klassificering af neurokognitive lidelser, ved at fokusere p˚a differentiering af 16 raske kontroller
og 15 patienter med Parkinson’s sygdom baseret p˚a global (graf), regional og lokal (node) karak-
terisering af hjernens netværk.
Strukturændringer af hjernens netværk for Parkinson’s patienter sammenlignet med alders
matchet kontroller blev evalueret ved brug af Imaginary Coherence (ImCoh) som m˚al for kon-
nektivitet mellem individuelle elektrode placeringer for elektroencefalografi (EEG) under hvile.
Brugen af thresholding er ikke triviel og har en stor indflydelse p˚a evnen til at adskille netværks
forskelle mellem to forskellige grupper. Derfor blev optimering af thresholding implementeret
ved brug af vægt-baserede og densitets-baserede metoder, hvilket forenkler grafen og fjerne
svage forbindelser. Optimale thresholds varierede ofte mellem frekvensb˚and og niveau (globale,
regionale og lokale graf metrikker).
Graf metrikkerne blev brugt til klassificering ved brug af logistisk regression (LogReg) og Sup-
port Vector Classifiers (SVC), for hvilke de mest informative graf metrikker var node degree,
closeness vitality og effective size.
De tre grafmetrikker reflekterer integration, vigtighed og
redundans af en node i grafen.
Logistisk regression med densitets-baseret thresholding opn˚aede en gennemsnitlig f1-score p˚a
0.726 med kun 36 metrikker, hvoraf alle metrikkerne var enten node degree, closeness vitality
eller effective size. Dette illustrerer disse metrikkers potentielle evner til i fremtidige studier
at klassificere neurokognitive lidelser. Dog er resultaterne baseret p˚a et begrænset Parkinson’s
data sæt, hvor modellens evne til at generalisere er uvis og kunne derfor være overfittet til data.
Graden af kognitiv svækkelse kunne yderligere enten klassificeres ved brug af flere klasser eller
ideelt set ved brug af regression til at fange det kontinuerlige spektrum af kognitiv svækkelse.
Videre arbejde m˚a udføres for tilstrækkeligt at kunne evaluere potentialet for graf teori til
klassificering af forskellige neurokognitive lidelser. Denne afhandling indledende resultater der
indikerer at brugen af graf teori skulle være lovende inden for diagnostik af Parkinson’s sygdom.
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
Thanks to Kristoffer Hougaard Madsen for your guidance and for making this thesis possi-
ble. Thank you to Mark Alexander Henney for all of your help and for being a daily source of
motivation. Thank you to Simon Yamazaki Jensen for our long and fruitful discussions at home.
A special thanks to the team at OptoCeutics for all of your advice and for providing a great
environment for me to work on my thesis.
Thanks to all of the people who have helped review my thesis: Henrik Enggaard Hansen, Bir-
gitte Trærup Christensen, Luna Skytte Hansen, Simon Yamazaki Jensen, Ngoc Mai Nguyen and
Marianne Christensen.
Thank you to my family for your loving support and faith in me.
In loving memory of GC
==PAGE:6==
Abbreviations and Acronyms
AD
Alzheimer’s Disease
Coh
Coherence
Cohy
Coherency
CV
Cross-Validation
DMN
Default Mode Network
DTU
Danish Technical University
EEG
Electroencephalography
ec
Eyes Closed
eo
Eyes Open
HC
Healthy Control
ICA
Independent Component Analysis
ImCoh
Imaginary Coherence
iEEG
Intracranial Electroencephalography
LogReg
Logistic Regression
NCD
Neurocognitive disorder
MCI
Mild Cognitive Impairment
MMSE
Mini-Mental State Examination
MST
Minimum Spanning Tree
PD
Parkinson’s Disease
PD-CN
Parkinson’s Disease - Cognitively Normal
PD-D
Parkinson’s Disease - Dementia
PD-MCI
Parkinson’s Disease - Mild Cognitive Impairment
PD-SCI
Parkinson’s Disease - Severe Cognitive Impairment
PSD
Power Spectral Density
RFE
Recursive Feature Elimination
RFECV
Recursive Feature Elimination with Cross-Validation
rbf
Radial Basis Function
rs
Resting State
SFS
Sequential Feature Selection
SNR
Signal-to-Noise Ratio
SVC
Support Vector Classifier
SVM
Support Vector Machine
SW
Small-World
==PAGE:7==
Nomenclature
A
Adjacency matrix
C
Regularization parameter
C(G)
Clustering Coefficient of a graph
c
Communities within a graph
D
Density
E[·]
Expected value
F
Fourier Transform
f
Frequency
G
Graph
Ge
Ego graph
Gl
Lattice graph
Gr
Random graph
Gsub
Subgraph
L(G)
Average shortest path length of a graph
Lt
Number of lattice graphs
N
Total number of nodes in graph
n
Node
R
Number of random graphs
t
Time
th
Threshold value
w
Weights
γ
Kernel coefficient
ξ
Slack parameter
τ
Time shift
Φ
Phase
==PAGE:8==
Contents
1
Introduction
1
2
Theory
2
2.1
The Human Brain
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2.2
Electroencephalography (EEG) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2.3
Neurocognitive disorder (NCD) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.4
Brain Signals and Connectivity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.5
Brain Networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.5.1
Network Characterization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2.6
Classifiers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3
Methods
21
3.1
Parkinson’s Disease data set . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.2
Signal processing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.3
Classification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4
Results
32
4.1
Graph Threshold Optimization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4.2
Classification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4.3
Feature Importance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.4
Permutation testing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
5
Discussion
46
6
Conclusion
50
7
References
51
A Appendix
58
A.1 Project Plan
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
A.2 Removal of ICA components, EEG channels and EEG time segments . . . . . . .
60
A.3 Brain Regions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
A.4 Total Number of Features per Graph . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
A.5 Network Features Overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
A.6 F1-scores for threshold values of the individual frequency bands . . . . . . . . . .
77
A.7 Model Performance of SVC ’rbf’
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
87
A.8 AD and PD findings in the literature . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
88
A.9 Python Scripts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
93
A.9.1
bidsify.py . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
94
A.9.2
inspect data.py . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
95
A.9.3
preprocessing.py
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
99
A.9.4
connectivity.py . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 104
A.9.5
feature extraction.py . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 107
A.9.6
classification.py . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 112
A.9.7
util.py . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 124
==PAGE:9==
Katrine Dam Christensen
02/07/2023
Technical University of Denmark
1
Introduction
It is estimated that around 14 % of all people older than 72 have a form of Neurocognitive
disorder (NCD), more commonly referred to as dementia. An NCD is characterized by impair-
ment of daily life activities differentiated from those expected during normal aging. Currently,
researchers are targeting biomarkers to detect early onset or for aiding in evaluation of possible
treatments. The different types of NCDs can have similar symptoms and neurophysiological
findings, though the underlying cause, and therefore treatments, varies.
The focus of this thesis is on characterizing Parkinson’s Disease (PD), which over time can lead
to the development of an NCD. PD shares many characteristics of pathology with that of the
most abundant cause of NCD, namely Alzheimer’s Disease (AD), one of them being that they
both can lead to brain network dysfunction. [15] To better understand the difference between
the networks of the healthy vs. diseased human brain, its internal connections measured using
Electroencephalogram (EEG) can be simplified and visualized using graph theory. The first use
of graph theory on EEG data was on AD patients in 2007 and continues to be used today to
investigate the usages of graph theory to characterize different types of neurological diseases.
Recently, structural brain networks have gained the attention of the neuroscientific community
for its link to cognitive function.
This thesis sought to examine the importance of different graph theory features for classify-
ing PD and healthy control (HC) subjects using a variety of graph metrics derived from the
Imaginary Coherence (ImCoh) between different regions of the brain during a resting-state
Electroencephalogram (rsEEG).
Based on graph theory, it might be possible to not only characterize the differences in network
structure of the HC and NCD subjects, but also aid in distinguishing various types of NCDs
based on their underlying cause. Additionally, it could aid in quantifying the progression of
the cognitive impairment, as some of the currently used methods like the Mini-Mental State
Examination (MMSE) struggle to capture changes in cognition during the early stages.
1 of 135
==PAGE:10==
Katrine Dam Christensen
02/07/2023
Technical University of Denmark
2
Theory
2.1
The Human Brain
Anatomy and common labeling of the brain can be seen in Figure 1. A deep fissure splits the
brain into two halves, namely the left and right hemisphere, which communicate through nerve
fibers located at the base of the fissure.[54]
Figure 1: Sagittal plane of brain lobes and their primary function. Modified image from [85].
The functional part of the brain consists mainly of networks of neurons, which serve to distribute
the activity of the brain such that information is shared and processed across different regions.
The communication between neurons is mediated through chemically induced electrical poten-
tials. The neuronal networks of the brain operate at both a spatial and temporal level and some
neurological diseases can affect the functioning of these neuronal networks. In order to have an
exchange of information from one brain region to another there must exist an anatomical struc-
ture that connects the two regions. Cognitive functions rely on the flexibility and adaptability
of the brain networks in order to make fast changes based on the change in cognitive tasks.[78]
Reconstruction of the anatomical structures happen on a larger timescale, therefore Pascal Fries
[29] proposed a hypothesis which enables fast dynamical changes, namely the ’communication-
through-coherence’ hypothesis. It is based on the idea that the phase locking (synchronization
of the phase of their oscillations) of two groups of neurons determines the ease by which the
two can communicate, since neuronal groups that are in phase will be excitable at the same
time. Pascal Fries describes this as the communication windows for input and output for the
two neuronal groups being open at the same time.[29] Oscillatory synchronization thereby serves
as the driving factor for construction of larger networks and propagation of information from
one neural population to another.[20]
2.2
Electroencephalography (EEG)
By placing electrodes on the scalp, neural activity can be assessed through measuring of the
voltage fluctuations. The measured EEG signals are defined as the change in electrical potential
between the measurement electrode and the reference electrode provided in units of micro volt.
The oscillations of the neural populations within the brain are reflected in the measured EEG
signals. EEG has a high temporal resolution enabling the measuring of cognitive processes in
the brain.[20] On the other hand it has a poorer spatial resolution limited by the number of and
placement of electrodes along with the greater distance between the neurons inside the brain
and electrodes on the scalp. What is measured by the electrodes is the activity of neural sources
residing within the brain linearly projected onto the scalp. An electrode thereby measures the
2 of 135
==PAGE:11==
Katrine Dam Christensen
02/07/2023
Technical University of Denmark
joined activity of multiple sources, each located internally in the brain at a certain distance from
the electrode. Activity from the one neural source can therefore be picked up by two or more
neighbouring electrodes via projection or simply by propagation of the signal on the scalp. This
is referred to as volume conduction and is most problematic when dealing with the scalp EEG
recordings as opposed to e.g. intracranial electroencephalography (iEEG).
The signals are initially in what is referred to as the sensor-space, since the measured signals
reflect the projection of source activity onto the scalp. The EEG signals can be transformed
into source-space as a weighted sum of all measured signals, which reflects an estimation of the
underlying activity at selected locations within the brain, with increasing number of electrodes
improving the interpolation of the source activity.[46] The mapping from sensor to source-space
requires assumptions regarding the head shape, brain shape and conductivity of the tissues.
EEG can be used to measure brain activity when performing a task or during rest which is
referred to as resting state (rs). The EEG signals are easily affected by electrical noise from
the power lines and EEG artifacts such as eye-movement, head muscle activation, electrode
displacement and electrical interference.[46] The brain activity is often examined within certain
frequency bands that reflect different functions of the brain, as described in Table 1. The limits
of are not standardized, leading papers to often use slightly different ranges of frequency bands,
as evident in Appendix A.8 Tables 29 and 30. The ranges defined in Table 1 are the ones used
for the entirety of this thesis.
Frequency band
Range
Physiological and cognitive function
δ
Delta-band
1-4 Hz
Deep sleep and repairing [18]
θ
Theta-band
4-8 Hz
Memory and cognitive control [20]
α
Alpha-band
8-12 Hz
Present during eyes closed (ec) and resting state (rs) [58]
β
Beta-band
12-30 Hz
Focusing, thinking, perception and sustained attention [18]
γ
Gamma-band
30-45 Hz
Learning, extreme focus and high cognitive processing [18]
Table 1: Range of frequency bands and some of the brain functions they cover.
During rsEEG aging is associated with a global increase in power of the lower frequencies and a
decrease in activity in the alpha band.[35] Age matched HC are therefore necessary in order to
correctly characterize the affected brain function associated with a given neurological disease.
The signals measured during and EEG can help identify alterations in brain functioning of mul-
tiple neurological diseases. Some diseases have fewer and hard to discern symptoms at onset
and diagnostic tools like imaging and EEG can aid in diagnosing some of these diseases earlier.
Other neurological diseases like dementia might rely mainly on evaluation of performance of
daily tasks, observable symptoms and cognitive tests.
A common tools for grading the global cognitive function of a patient is the MMSE, which attends
to assessment of orientation, registration, attention and calculation, recall and language. The
examination consists of questions and tasks, each correct response equals 1 point with a total of
30 point possible. The general grading of MMSE scores in terms of cognitive function can aid
in classifying patients as either Cognitively Normal (CN) or having Mild Cognitive Impairment
(MCI), Moderate Cognitive Impairment or Severe Cognitive Impairment (SCI). The MMSE score
are to be expected to decrease with age and increase with educational level.[66] The cognitive
function is a continuous spectrum and classification is used to group people of similar level of
impairment and possibly similar symptoms or lack thereof. The MMSE score has limitations
when it comes to diagnosing MCI, hence other cognitive assessment methods might be of more
use if MCI is suspected.[43]
3 of 135
==PAGE:12==
Katrine Dam Christensen
02/07/2023
Technical University of Denmark
2.3
Neurocognitive disorder (NCD)
NCD, normally referred to as dementia, is a mental disorder that affects the cognitive functions
of the patient including thinking and memory.[53] There exists different types of dementia,
Alzheimer’s type dementia being the most abundant. The common types of dementia includes:
[17, 6]
• Alzherimer’s Disease Dementia: caused by accumulation of tau-tangles inside the
neurons and beta-amyloid protein buildup outside the neurons, it initially affects mainly
the short term memory.
Symptoms will progressively worsen over time, and includes
confusion, disorientation among others. Accounts for ∼60-80% of all cases of dementia.
• Cerebroascular Dementia: connected to strokes or other types of compromised blood
flow to areas of the brain. Symptoms depend on the affected brain region and will abruptly
worsen as new cases of strokes occur. Accounts for ∼5-10% of all cases of dementia.
• Dementia with Lewy Bodies: is the accumulation of alpha-synuclein in the neurons of
the brain, resulting in symptoms similar to that of Alzheimer’s Disease like memory loss
and confusion, whilst also having sleep pattern disturbances. Parkinsonian movement and
balance problems can also occur.
• Fronto-temporal Dementia: is characterized by atrophy of the frontal and temporal
lobes affecting behavior and personality. Unlike Alzheimer’s Disease the memory is not
affected in the early stages of the disease.
• Parkinson’s Disease Dementia: is the accumulation of alpha-synuclein in substantia
nigra, thought to degrade the dopamine producing nerve cells. Dementia is thought to
manifest when the alpha-synuclein accumulates in the cortex (similar to Dementia with
Lewy Bodies) or beta-amyloid and tau-tangles accumulation (similar to that of Alzheimer’s
Dementia).
• Mixed Dementia: the presence of more than one type of dementia. Resulting symptoms
will be a mixture of the underlying dementia causes.
• Reversible dementia: could be due to reasons such as high brain pressure, vitamin
deficiency, thyroid hormone imbalance or medically induced.
Even though there are many underlying causes of dementia, common for them all is the resulting
affected cognitive function often graded by severity into mild cognitive impairment (MCI), mod-
erate cognitive impairment and severe cognitive impairment (SCI). Distinction between different
types of NCDs is often difficult due to overlapping symptoms.[8]
Parkinson’s Disease
PD is a chronic progressive neurological degenerative disorder characterized by a lack of dopamin-
ergic neurons in the basal ganglia, which functions by inhibiting unnecessary movements. This
is important for starting, stopping and monitoring movement of the body. PD is a hypokinetic
disease of diminished motor activity, but apart from motor symptoms around 20 % of PD pa-
tients will at a later stage develop severe dementia with an average onset around 10 years after
the PD diagnosis [7], though with a slower rate of decline as apposed to AD. The cognitive dys-
function of PD patients often affect frontal lobe executive function (initiating and performing
tasks), memory retrieval and visuospatial discrimination.[27]
PD patients have been found to have dysfunction of the Default Mode Network, which is char-
acterized by an increased basal activity during rest and decreased activity during cognitive
tasks.[25, 69] Other neurological findings for PD are presented in Appendix A.8 Table 28.
4 of 135
==PAGE:13==
Katrine Dam Christensen
02/07/2023
Technical University of Denmark
2.4
Brain Signals and Connectivity
Brain connectivity refers to the relationship between two or more regions of the brain. Bivariate
connectivity is a measure of activity between only two brain sites as opposed to multivariate
connectivity. Bivariate connectivity has the advantage of simplicity and is more easily imple-
mented and interpreted, yet has the added disadvantage of possible inflation of estimates of
connectivity if the underlying network is actually multivariate. Being that the brain is in fact
highly multivariate, bivariate connectivity measures might suggest a direct connection between
two areas even if the measured connectivity is based on a third shared connection.[20]
The connectivity can be calculated as a measure of correlation, which would be referred to
as functional connectivity, while connectivity based on causality is referred to as effective
connectivity.[20] Throughout this thesis EEG based functional connectivity will be used, and
will therefore for simplicity be referred to simply as “connectivity”.
Different methods for calculating connectivity exists, most of them being based on either the
power or phase of the measured signals.
The two methods reflect different aspects of the
physiological dynamics of the brain, as power reflects the amount of neurons that are active
within the neural population while phase reflects the temporal timing of activity within a neural
population.[46] The phase based connectivity measures at a given frequency are based on the
phase differences between two given signals, for EEG provided by two different electrodes or
source locations. It is based on the principle that functionally coupled neural populations are
phase synchronized in their oscillations. Under the assumption that there is no time-lag between
the measured electrical potential at the scalp and the source activity, phase-based connectivity
has the advantage that it has the ability to discern zero-phase difference components which
can be caused by instantaneous spurious interactions of volume conduction. The power based
connectivity is based on the correlation of time-frequency power of two given signals, for which
the time and frequency is not necessarily the same for both signals.[20]
Brain connectivity can therefore be used to map out the different aspects of the brain network
to asses network disruptions related to neurological diseases.[78] Given the various connectivity
measures, the choice of connectivity method should be based on the specific use case, as no
method is suitable for all possible intended purposes of brain network assessment. The relation
between the three connectivity measures coherency, coherence and imaginary coherence is cov-
ered in the remainder of this section, yet many other applicable connectivity measures exists.
In order to clarify the differences between the three connectivity measures an example is pro-
vided for the case of two measures signals xi(t) and xj(t).
Given the signal xi(t) its Fourier Transform is given as:[67]
Xi(f) = F[xi(t)] = |Xi(f)| · eIΦi(f) = Re[Xi(f)] + I · Im[Xi(f)]
(1)
where F denotes the Fourier Transform, |Xi(f)| is the magnitude (see Equation (4)) and Φi is
the phase (see Equation (5)). The frequency domain signal can be represented by its real (Re)
and imaginary (Im) part as:
Re[Xi(f)] =Mag[Xi(f)] · cos

Phase[Xi(f)]

(2)
Im[Xi(f)] =Mag[Xi(f)] · sin

Phase[Xi(f)]

(3)
where Mag[Xi(f)] is the magnitude and Phase[Xi(f)] is the phase.
5 of 135
==PAGE:14==
Katrine Dam Christensen
02/07/2023
Technical University of Denmark
In polar coordinates the Fourier Transform of the signal is given by its magnitude and phase.
The magnitude of the signal in the frequency domain is equal to the amplitude of the sine wave
which is represented in polar coordinates as the length of the vector, see Figure 2a.[67]
|Xi(f)| = Mag[Xi(f)] =
p
Re[Xi(f)]2 + Im[Xi(f)]2
(4)
The phase of the signal in the frequency domain is equal to the phase of the sine wave which is
represented in polar coordinates as the angle of the vector, see Figure 2a.[67]
Φi(f) = Phase[Xi(f)] = arctan
Im[Xi(f)]
Re[Xi(f)]

(5)
The auto-correlation of the signal xi is given as:[59]
Rxixi(τ) = E
h
xi(t) · xi(t + τ)
i
(6)
where E[·] denotes the expected value and τ is the time shift.
For the two signals, xi(t) and xj(t), the cross-correlation between them denoted Rxixj(τ) will
be given as:[59]
Rxixj(τ) = E
h
xi(t) · xj(t + τ)
i
(7)
where it applies that Rxixj(τ) = Rxjxi(−τ). The cross-correlation can be seen as a measure of
similarity between the two signals.[67]
Under the assumption that Xi(f) is at least wide-sense stationary, the power spectral density
(PSD) Sxixi(f) can be calculated as the Fourier Transform of the time average of the auto-
correlation.[60] Similarly the PSD can be calculated based on the Fourier Transform of the
signals:[57]
Sxixi(f) = F[Rxixi(τ)] = E
h
Xi(f) · X∗
i (f)
i
= E
h
|Xi(f)| · eIΦi(f) · |Xi(f)| · e−IΦi(f)i
= E
h
|Xi(f)|2 · eIΦi(f)−IΦi(f)i
= E
h
|Xi(f)|2i
(8)
where X∗
i (f) denotes the complex conjugate of Xi(f) and the expected value is calculated as the
average over a certain number of time segments to get the time average. Xi(f) was expanded
based on Equation (1), where |Xi(f)| is the magnitude of the signal. Sxixi(f) has no imaginary
part since the difference in phase to itself is always 0 and sin(0) = 0 in Equation (3).[67]
The cross-power spectral density (cross-PSD) is then the Fourier Transform of the cross-correlation.[60]
Similar to PSD it can also be calculated based on the Fourier Transform of the signals:[57]
Sxixj(f) = F[Rxixj(τ)] = E
h
Xi(f) · X∗
j (f)
i
= E
h
|Xi(f)| · eIΦi(f) · |Xj(f)| · e−IΦj(f)i
= E
h
|Xi(f)| · |Xj(f)| · eIΦi(f)−IΦj(f)i
= E
h
|Xi(f)| · |Xj(f)| · eI∆Φ(f)i
(9)
where ∆Φ(f) is difference in phase, defined as Φi(f) −Φj(f).
It applies that Sxixj(f) = S∗
xjxi(f).[60]
6 of 135
==PAGE:15==
Katrine Dam Christensen
02/07/2023
Technical University of Denmark
(a) Frequency domain signals Xi(f) and Xj(f) de-
picted by the two vectors. The length of the vector
is equal to the magnitude of the signal (|Xi(f)|)
and the phase is the angle of the vector (Φi(f)).
(b) PSDs (Sxixi(f) and Sxjxj(f)) and cross-PSD
(Sxixj(f)) of signals Xi(f) and Xj(f).
Figure 2: Polar coordinate representation of a) frequency domain signals Xi(f) and Xj(f) and
b) their PSD and cross-PSD. Images are modified reconstructions of Figure 2 from [11].
Figure 2 shows an example of the polar representation of Equations (1), (6) and (7). From
Figure 2b it is seen that the PSD of Xi(f) and Xj(f) being Sxixi(f) and Sxjxj(f) respectively,
are represented by arrows with an angle of zero, since the PSDs have no imaginary part, and
a length of |Xi(f)|2 and |Xj(f)|2 respectively. The cross-PSD on the other hand is represented
by an arrow of length |Xi(f)| · |Xi(f)| · eI∆Φ(f).
In Figure 3 is shown visualizations of the effect of time averaging the cross-spectra for three
different cases of (a) zero phase difference, (b) constant phase difference and (c) random phase
differences. It has previously been stated that the angle of the arrow is dependent on the phase
difference between the two signal, which is also the case for time averaging of the cross-spectra
if the phase difference is constant across the time segments.
For the case of random phase
difference the changing phase difference between time segments ultimately causes the angles of
the individual arrows of the cross-spectra for each time segment, when averaged over time, to go
towards zero. Therefore the time averaged cross-spectrum arrow of the random phase differences
in Figure 3c has a length of 0, as opposed to the two cases of constant phase in Figures 3a and 3b
where the length of the time averaged cross-spectrum arrow is equal to the average length of
the cross-spectra arrows for each of the time segments. The time averaging is applied such that
only phase differences that are non-random are preserved, based on the idea that two neural
populations that oscillate at a constant phase difference are functionally coupled such that the
timing of their oscillatory activity becomes synchronized.[20]
7 of 135
==PAGE:16==
Katrine Dam Christensen
02/07/2023
Technical University of Denmark
(a) time averaging of zero phase difference (∆Φ) between four different time segments.
(b) time averaging of π/2 phase difference (∆Φ) between four different time segments.
8 of 135
==PAGE:17==
Katrine Dam Christensen
02/07/2023
Technical University of Denmark
(c) time averaging of random phase differences (∆Φ) between four different time segments. The length
of the time averaged cross-spectrum is equal to 0, visualized as a dotted line around (0,0).
Figure 3: Polar coordinate representation of the effect of time averaging multiple cross-spectra
(cross-PSDs) for different cases of phase differences between the two signals xi(t) and xj(t).
The examples are illustrated at a given frequency f, for a) constant zero phase difference, b)
constant π/2 phase difference and c) non-constant random phase difference. For all three cases
the cross-spectra of the two signals (Sxixj(f)) are depicted in polar coordinates for each of the
four time segments, along with the time averaged cross-spectrum depicted by the blue arrow.
The images are modified reconstructions of Figure 3 from [11].
If there is no phase difference between the two signals averaged over multiple time segments, the
angle of the vector will be 0, similarly if there is a general phase difference between the two signals
averaged over multiple time segments the angle of the vector will be equal to the phase difference
in radians. If there is not a consistent phase difference between the signals across multiple time
segments, then the phase difference will be random for each time segment and will average out
towards zero consequently causing the length (magnitude) of the arrow to converge to zero.[11]
Not applying time averaging would cause all time segment cross-spectra to have a phase and a
non-zero magnitude, from which it is impossible to determine if the measured phase difference
is actually constant over time or if it is simply a single sample of a random phase difference signal.
A neurological example of random phase difference could be measurement of two brain regions
that are not synchronized in their oscillations. Constant non-zero phase difference could indi-
cate synchronization of the brain region and can be assumed to be either directly or indirectly
connected. Constant zero-phase can be seen if the same noise artifact is present in the two elec-
trodes at the same time (zero time-lag) which is the case for artifacts explained by the common
reference problem and volume conduction, which are further explained in Section 2.4.
9 of 135
==PAGE:18==
Katrine Dam Christensen
02/07/2023
Technical University of Denmark
Given the PSD and cross-PSD defined in Equations (8) and (9), the connectivity measure
coherency can be defined as:[57]
Cohyxixj(f) =
E
h
Sxixj(f)
i
r
E
h
Sxixi(f)
i
· E
h
Sxjxj(f)
i
(10)
Coherency is calculated between two signals at a given frequency f and is equal to the normal-
ized cross-spectrum. Given that the power spectral densities of the signals always have zero
phase, the denominator has no imaginary part. The cross-PSD can have both a real and an
imaginary part, and coherency can therefore have both a real and imaginary part as well. A
polar representation of the coherency is depicted as the purple arrow in Figure 4.
Coherence of the two signals is defined as the real part of coherency:[57]
Cohxixj(f) = Re

Cohyxixj(f)

=
Cohyxixj(f)
 =
E
h
Sxixj(f)
i
r
E
h
Sxixi(f)
i
· E
h
Sxjxj(f)
i
(11)
where | · | denotes the absolute value. This means that coherence has no imaginary part, as
depicted by the red arrow in Figure 4.
Imaginary coherence of the two signals is defined as the imaginary part of coherency:
ImCohxixj(f) = Im

Cohyxixj(f)

=
Im

E
h
Sxixj(f)
i
r
E
h
Sxixi(f)
i
· E
h
Sxjxj(f)
i
(12)
Therefore the imaginary coherence is purely imaginary, as depicted by the blue arrow in Figure 4.
The relation between coherency, coherence and imaginary coherence is visualized in polar coor-
dinates in Figure 4.
Figure 4: Polar coordinate representation of coherency (Cohyxixj) and its real and imaginary
part being coherence (Cohxixj) and imaginary coherence (ImCohxixj) respectively. Here repre-
sented for a given frequency f.
10 of 135
==PAGE:19==
Katrine Dam Christensen
02/07/2023
Technical University of Denmark
Due to the limitations of estimating the phase of a signal, the phase will always in radians be
estimated as a value in the range of [0:2π[, as any phase above this would simply be equiva-
lent to taking a given number of trips around the unit circle, while negative phases would be
equivalent of moving in the opposite direction around the unit circle. Phase differences (∆Φ)
on the other hand can take on negative values, now limited to the range of ]-2π:2π[. Based
on this range of possible values for phase difference, the imaginary coherence will be 0 when
the phase differences is equal to either [ -π, 0, π ], assuming that ±2π is not a possible phase
difference value. Since the polar representation of phase is cyclic on the unit circle, actual phase
differences of multiples of ±π would also result in an imaginary coherence of 0. For ∆Φ = 0 the
two signals must have identical phase, while for ∆Φ = −π and ∆Φ = π the two signals have
opposite phase (in terms on phase within [0:2π[ range of the unit circle). The case of ∆Φ = π
is depicted in time segment 3 of Figure 3c, which from a physiological perspective would corre-
spond to two neural populations oscillating completely out of phase. Based on the hypothesis of
’communication-through-coherence’ explained in Section 2.1 the two neural populations would
have minimal overlap of their corresponding input and output windows, thereby minimizing the
ease by which the two populations can communicate.
The imaginary coherence therefore removes the connectivity components that arise from zero
time-lag processes caused by volume conduction and common referencing along with connectivity
of completely out of phase neural populations.
Under the assumption that both the phase
coupling between two brain regions at a certain frequency and the value of the phase difference
reflects the ability or ease by which the two regions can communicate, the utilization of ImCoh
only eliminates components that are assumed to not reflect true brain connectivity.
“True
brain connectivity” being used to describe measured connectivity that reflects an actual direct
connection between the two brain regions through which information can be shared.[57]
Interpretation of Connectivity
The common reference problem occurs when all electrodes share the same reference electrode,
where all of the electrodes therefore reflects the measured activity at the reference electrode.
This would in turn cause spurious correlations between the channels, that does not reflect true
connections within the brain. This can be avoided by selecting a different method of referencing
or by selecting a connectivity measure that omits zero time-lagged components, since the effect
of referencing affects all channels at the same time there will be zero time-lag between the ref-
erencing component of the channels.[11]
The common input problem is where two measured sources are not directly connected but both
receiving a common input from a third source. The common input to the two measured sources
can have the same or different time-lags. For the case of identical time-lags for the two sources
coherence would suggest a neuronal interaction between the two measured sources resulting in
spurious interference from which incorrect conclusions about the connection between the two
sources could be drawn. Using connectivity measures such as imaginary coherence would solve
this problem as it omits all connections between sources that are based on zero time-lag.[11]
Volume conduction can affect the calculated connectivity measures due to two (often neighbour-
ing) electrodes measuring the same electronic signal originating directly from one area of the
brain or by two electrodes measuring the same signal due to propagation of the signal on the
scalp of the subject. The signal originating from one area of the brain is assumed to instanta-
neously be measured at the electrodes, thus having zero time-lag and thereby also zero phase-lag
between the signals measured at the two electrodes. This introduces a high connectivity which
could be a result of either neighbouring electrodes measuring the same signal or true connectivity
of two brain regions, thereby limiting the interpretability of the results.[21]
11 of 135
==PAGE:20==
Katrine Dam Christensen
02/07/2023
Technical University of Denmark
The effects of volume conduction can be limited by e.g. application of the inverse method to
estimate the source activity or using specific phase-based connectivity measures that are insen-
sitive to volume conduction artifacts.[57] If the connectivity measure ignores zero phase-lag it
is assumed that contribution of volume conduction is omitted from the data, but at the cost of
also excluding the possible true fast connectivity at zero time delay.[22] From a physiological
perspective the communication between two regions is expected to have a time delay propor-
tional to the length of the path the signal travels, which means that at least non-neighbouring
brain regions are expected to have non-zero time delay.[63]
If two electrodes are affected by the same artifact is might cause the connectivity to be high and
proper artifact removal is therefore important prior to calculating connectivity, if the connec-
tivity is sought to reflect only the brain activity. Another disadvantage of connectivity is that
differences in connectivity values can simply be due to differences in signal-to-noise ratio, and the
impact of noise should be sought decreased both during data acquisition and preprocessing.[11]
2.5
Brain Networks
As depicted in Figure 5 a graph (G) consists of nodes (n) and edges (e) connecting the individual
nodes to each other. A brain network can be represented as a graph or adjacency matrix as
seen in Figure 5g and Figure 5h respectively. The graph form consists of a visual representation
of the nodes and edges, while the adjacency matrix (A) of shape [N,N], where N is the total
number of nodes in the graph, can be used to display the edges of pairwise node combinations.
As can be seen in Figure 5 the graph can be either directed (a,e) or undirected (c,g). For di-
rected graphs the connection between two nodes has directionality indicated by the edges being
drawn as arrows (→), the direction of the arrow indicating the flow of information. An edge
between two nodes (n1 and n2) can therefore e.g. exists when going from n1 to n2 but not when
going from n2 to n1.[26]. Undirected graphs has no directionality thus the edges are drawn as
lines (-) and the adjacency matrix is symmetric around its diagonal. For undirected graphs a
connection between e.g. node 1 (n1) and node 2 (n2) therefore corresponds to both an edge
going from n1 to n2 AND n2 to n1. Undirected graphs can be the result of a lack of causality,
that only a connection between two nodes is observed but the direction of flow of information
is unknown. Directed graphs can therefore offer a more detailed depiction of a network structure.
Also evident from Figure 5 is that a graph can be either weighted (a,c) where all edges have
individual weights or binary (e,g) where all nodes have a weight of either 0 or 1.
12 of 135
==PAGE:21==
Katrine Dam Christensen
02/07/2023
Technical University of Denmark
(a) Weighted directed graph.
(b) Adjacency matrix (A) of graph in Figure 5a.
(c) Weighted undirected graph.
(d) Adjacency matrix (A) of graph in Figure 5c.
(e) Binary directed graph.
(f) Adjacency matrix (A) of graph in Figure 5e.
(g) Binary undirected graph.
(h) Adjacency matrix (A) of graph in Figure 5g.
Figure 5: Example of weighted, binary, directed and undirected graphs consisting of 5 nodes
with edges between them. Left side sub-figures are visualization of the graph and the right side
sub-figures are the corresponding adjacency matrices (A), where self-loops are omitted (diagonal
elements are equal to zero).
13 of 135
==PAGE:22==
Katrine Dam Christensen
02/07/2023
Technical University of Denmark
When measuring brain signals using EEG, nodes correspond to the individual electrodes placed
on the scalp (sensor level) or internal locations interpolated from the electrodes (source level).
It can be hard to directly infer anything from visual inspection of the adjacency matrix, which
might be possible for the graph. The graph representation can have an added information about
the spatial positioning of the nodes. For graphs based on EEG measurements the node posi-
tioning corresponds to the EEG electrode layout or interpolated positions thereof.
Neighbouring nodes are defined as two nodes that are directly connected to each other via an
edge. Two nodes (ni and nj) are connected by a path if there exists a sequence of nodes (first
and last node in the sequence being ni and nj respectively) with intermediate edges.[68] The
length of the path between ni and nj is equal to the number of edges on the path, defined as:
|path(ni, nj)|
A neighbour graph Gn(ni) is a subgraph of G defined for a specific node ni. The neighbour
graph of node ni is equal to a subgraph consisting of the neighbouring nodes of node ni (with
or without the inclusion of node ni itself) along with all of the edges between them.
A node is referred to as an articulation point if by removing the node and its associated edges
the graph would become disconnected.[14]
A graph can be subdivided into groups of more densely connected nodes, also referred to as
communities. The communities of a graph can be found using many different algorithms, with
the resulting communities (c) being given as:
c = [c(n1), c(n2), ..., c(nN)]
where each element of the vector is an integer value between 1 and the total number of commu-
nities within the graph. The value of ci representing the community number of the community
containing node i.
An equivalent random graph Gr is constructed by swapping the edges of the original graph G,
whilst preserving the degree of each node. The degree of a node being the number of edges
directly connected to it, see Equation (23) in Appendix A.5.
The equivalent lattice graph Gl is a regular form of a reconstructed graph, where the edges
are swapped whilst keeping the graph from becoming disconnected. The two graph types rep-
resent opposite ends of the spectrum random ↔deterministic, evident for some of the main
graph characterization metrics such as Clustering Coefficient (C(G)) and Average Shortest Path
Length (L(G)). Formulas and descriptions of the two graph metrics can be seen in Appendix A.5
Table 15. For equivalent random and lattice graphs with a sufficiently large number of nodes
and edges, the following applies: [44]
C(Gr) ≪C(Gl)
(13)
L(Gr) ≪L(Gl)
(14)
such that a random graph is characterized by having both low clustering coefficient and low
average shortest path length, the opposite of which applies to the lattice graph.
14 of 135
==PAGE:23==
Katrine Dam Christensen
02/07/2023
Technical University of Denmark
Graph Thresholding
The idea of thresholding weighted edges of a graph is based on removing the edges that contain
mostly smaller spurious connections, enabling calculation of certain network metrics, emphasis-
ing certain properties of the network topology and lastly reducing the computational cost by
limiting the number of edges in the graph.
When thresholding a graph, often times edges with a weight smaller than a chosen threshold
(th) are set equal to 0 or −1 (depending on the range of the connectivity measure). It can also
be decided to keep the edge weights above the threshold and set the ones below equal to 0, or
any variation thereof. This method is based on the assumption that the edge weights reflects
the importance of the edge, i.e. the greater the weight the higher the importance, which might
not be the case for brain interactions.[39] In order to reduce the number of connections not
reflecting true brain connectivity, as these tend to greatly affect the estimation of some graph
metrics, it has been suggested to remove as many edges as possible.[86]
A higher threshold value would remove the effects of “smaller” spurious connections and result
in graphs containing only the strongest connections. Choosing a high threshold simultaneously
eliminates the weaker connections which are important for network stability and maintaining
connections between functional brain modules or regions. Threshold at lower values can however
also be useful for distinguishing different groups for certain connectivity measures and graph
features.[1] The thresholding process is therefore not trivial and thought should be given to
both the choice of threshold method and value. Thresholding as a processing step for binariz-
ing a weighted graph can in turn be used to enable the calculation of certain network metrics.[78]
To calculate some of the network features and for the extracted features to vary between different
binary graphs, it is sought to threshold the edges such that the graph is neither disconnected nor
fully connected. Fully connected binary graphs result in identical features across multiple graphs
while disconnected graphs prevent the calculation of features like path lengths and clustering
coefficient (see feature formulas and descriptions in Appendix A.5 Table 15 ).[1, 78]
A fully connected node is when a node shares an edge with all other nodes, while a fully
disconnected node is when the node has no edges. Therefore the threshold value (th) must
comply with the following for all nodes, based on edge weights in the adjacency matrix:
N
min
j=1 (Aij) < thi <
N
max
j=1 (Aij)
(15)
where thi is the threshold value for node i, Aij is the weight of the edge between node i and
node j and N is the total number of nodes in the graph. Since a common threshold value is
to be applied to the entire graph, the threshold value must comply with the threshold limits
defined for each node as in Equation (15) if it is sought to avoid both fully connected and fully
disconnected graph. Yet for the purpose of this thesis, it is only sought to avoid the cases of
a fully connected graph and disconnected graph, meaning all nodes can not be fully connected
and no node must be disconnected.
A fully connected graph is when all possible edges are present in the graph. This can be avoided
by simply selecting a graph threshold (thG) value that is higher than the minimum edge value
for all nodes, thereby remove at least one or more edges from the graph. A disconnected graph
is when one or more nodes are not connected to any of the other node in the graph. This can
be avoided by selecting a thG lower than the smallest of the maximum edge values calculated
for each node, such that the node with the lowest maximum edge is not disconnected from the
15 of 135
==PAGE:24==
Katrine Dam Christensen
02/07/2023
Technical University of Denmark
graph. Therefore the threshold for the entire graph (thG) should comply with the following:
N
min
i=1
 N
min
j=1 (Aij)

< thG <
N
min
i=1

N
max
j=1 (Aij)

(16)
Apart from applying the same threshold value to all nodes within a graph, the same threshold is
also to be applied to all subjects within a study in order to be able to compare them. Therefore
the lower bound of the subject threshold (thSub) range should be equal to the highest minimum
thG and the upper bound of the thSub range should be equal to the lowest of the maximum thG.
The subject threshold should therefore comply with the following:
S
max
s=1
 N
min
i=1
 N
min
j=1 (Aij)

< thSub <
S
min
s=1
 N
min
i=1

N
max
j=1 (Aij)

(17)
where S is the total number of subjects. The minimum and maximum of Equation (17) shows
the range of general subject threshold values thSub that are applicable for all subject while avoid-
ing fully connected graphs and disconnected graph. To calculate the range in Equation (17) the
function called find min max threshold was constructed, as seen in Appendix A.9.7. The func-
tion calculates the general threshold interval of each frequency band for all epochs from a single
subject. Thresholding of each frequency band individually is necessary since most average brain
connectivity values are expected to differ between frequency bands.[20]
Many different thresholding techniques exist that are based on either thresholding by a fixed
weight value (weight-based), fixed percentage of edges (density-based), window-thresholding,
distances between nodes, consensus thresholding, standard deviation based or algorithm based
methods like minimum spanning tree (MST). Thresholds can also be applied at either a global
(graph) or local (node) level.[39, 86]
Weight-based thresholding
Weight-based thresholding can be problematic when comparing different subject groups. Firstly,
the subject-to-subject variation might cause there to not exist a threshold value that satisfies
the threshold intervals of all subjects (if min > max). Secondly, the possible differences between
groups in terms of network features might be difficult to distinguish from the more simple dif-
ferences in number of edges in the graphs. Density-based thresholding can therefore be used
to insure that each graph contains the same amount of edges, and thereby all have the same
density (as defined by Equation (22) in Appendix A.5).
The weight-based thresholding of the adjacency matrix for a resulting weighted or binary graph
is for single and multi thresholding defined as:
single threshold
single threshold
resulting in a weighted graph:
resulting in a binary graph:
Aij =
 Aij
if Aij > th
0
otherwise
Aij =
 1
if Aij > th
0
otherwise
multiple thresholds
multiple thresholds
resulting in a weighted graph:
resulting in a binary graph:
Aij =
 Aij
if th0 < Aij < th1
0
otherwise
Aij =
 1
if th0 < Aij < th1
0
otherwise
th being the selected single threshold, while th0 and th1 are the lower and upper bound of the
window thresholding (multiple thresholds).
16 of 135
==PAGE:25==
Katrine Dam Christensen
02/07/2023
Technical University of Denmark
Density-based thresholding
The density-based thresholding (also referred to as percentage-based thresholding) technique is
based on having a fixed value of density (see Equation (22) in Appendix A.5), resulting in all
graphs having the same density and therefore also the same total amount of edges (provided
that all graphs have the same number of nodes). One problem with this approach would be that
for fixed density and total number of nodes, some of the network features introduced in Sec-
tion 2.5.1 would be identical across all graphs, rendering these features useless for distinguishing
differences between the graphs at a later stage.[86]
The conversion of a range of weight-based thresholds (th) in Equation (16) to a range of density-
based percentage thresholds (th%) can be calculated as:


1
N(N −1) ·
N
X
i,j=1,i̸=j
σ(Aij, min(thG))

< th%
G <


1
N(N −1) ·
N
X
i,j=1,i̸=j
σ(Aij, max(thG))


(18)
where N is the total number of nodes in the graph G and σ(Aij, min(thG) and σ(Aij, max(thG)
are defined as the number of edges smaller than or equal to the minimum threshold value and
number of edges smaller than the maximum threshold value:
σ(Aij, min(thG)) =
 1
if Aij ≤min(thG)
0
otherwise
σ(Aij, max(thG)) =
 1
if Aij < max(thG)
0
otherwise
where min(thG) and max(thG) are the minimum and maximum graph threshold respectively,
which corresponds to the left and right side of Equation (16) respectively.
In order to threshold a graph based on a percentage, the edge values of a graph can be sorted
from smallest to highest, hereafter referred to as a 1D array denoted Asorted. Density-based
thresholding can be defined as:
single threshold
single threshold
resulting in a weighted graph:
resulting in a binary graph:
Aij =
 Aij
if Aij > th
0
otherwise
Aij =
 1
if Aij > th
0
otherwise
where the threshold value (th) is derived based on the sorted edge weights (Asorted) and the
threshold percentage (th%) as:
th = Asorted[⌊len(Asorted) · th%⌋]
such that the threshold value is equal to the edge value for which all edges smaller than and
equal to the threshold make up a fixed percentage (th%) of the number of edges in the graph.
17 of 135
==PAGE:26==
Katrine Dam Christensen
02/07/2023
Technical University of Denmark
2.5.1
Network Characterization
The topology of a graph can be characterized by different network metrics referred to as fea-
tures, which can be extracted at both node level (local), graph level (global) or for a region or
grouping of nodes. The features reflect different characteristics about the distribution of edges
between the nodes of the graph. An overview of features including their formula and description
is included in Table 15 in Appendix A.5.
Some features can be calculated using weighted edges, and others require a binarized graph. As
previously explained thresholding can be used to binarize a graph by means of either a weight
based or density based approach. Both approaches can cause variations in feature values, and
the threshold value should be selected with this in mind.
Global network features are a generalization of the network and similar feature values does not
necessarily mean similar networks, as structurally different networks can yield the same global
feature values.[1] The graph based features are often calculated as either the sum or the average
of the node based features.
2.6
Classifiers
Logistic Regression
The logistic regression (LogReg) is a linear model based on probabilities, where classification is
acquired by thresholding probabilities at 0.5. The LogReg works by fitting a logistic function
(sigmoidal curve) to the training data. The logistic function is seen in Figure 6 given by:
ˆp(xi, w) = P(y = 1|xi, w) =
1
1 + exp(−xi · w)
where ˆp(xi, w) is the probability of the positive class (y = 1) given the data point xi and weights
w, xi is the data point of subject i, w are the feature weights and y is the output.[72]
Figure 6: Logistic function in one dimension.
For the data points it applies that xi ∈Rn+1, meaning xi is a vector of length n+1, n being the
number of features, with the first element of xi being 1. For the feature weights it applies that
w ∈Rn+1 with the first element of w being w0. The w0 weight affects the center of the function
18 of 135
==PAGE:27==
Katrine Dam Christensen
02/07/2023
Technical University of Denmark
while the remaining feature weights determines the slope of the logistic function in each of the
n dimensions, where large weights results in steeper slopes.
When fitting a LogReg the following optimization problem seeks to minimize the cost function:
min
w

cost function
z
}|
{
−C ·
n
X
i=1

yi log(ˆp(xi, w) + (1 −yi) · log(1 −ˆp(xi, w))

|
{z
}
log likelihood
+
r(w)
|{z}
regularization

where w are the feature weights, C is the regularization parameter (the inverse of the reg-
ularization strength) which for high values means that the log likelihood is penalised higher
than then feature weights in order to minimize the cost function. Lower values of C therefor
results in a stronger regularization, while the opposite is also true.[72] As regularization is ap-
plied to avoid over-fitting and increase generalization, lower values of C can lead to under-fitting.
The regularization term r(w) can be set to either ’L1’, ’L2’, the combination of ’L1’ and ’L2’
(ElasicNet) or entirely removed, where L1 is the l1-norm = absolute value of the weight (L1 =
||w||1) and L2 is the l2-norm squared = the weight squared (L2 = 1
2||w||2
2).[72]
Support Vector Classifier
A Support Vector Machine (SVM) is a method that linearly combines features for solving either
a regression or classification problem. For classification a Support Vector Classifier (SVC) is used
to construct a hyper-plane (decision boundary) in a multi-dimensional space. The SVC seeks
to fit the hyper-plane to the training data such that data points are correctly classified while
the distance from the hyper-plane to the nearest data points is maximized. The distance from
hyper-plane to nearest data point is referred to as the margin, and any data points lying within
or on the margin boundaries are considered support vectors. When the margin is maximized
the ability of the model to generalize is often increased.[71]
Figure 7: SVC decision boundary in two dimensions. Figure inspired by Figure 7.3 of [12].
19 of 135
==PAGE:28==
Katrine Dam Christensen
02/07/2023
Technical University of Denmark
SVC seeks to optimize the following constrained cost function:
min
w,b,ξ
1
2||w||2
2 + C
n
X
i=1
ξi

yi(wT ϕ(xi) + b) ≥1 −ξi,
ξi ≥0,
i = 1, ..., n
where w are the weights (w ∈Rp), b is the intercept, n is the number of training data points, C
is the regularization parameter, ξi is the slack parameter and sign(wT ϕ(x) + b) is the prediction
of the label based on the sign (+/-). It is sought to maximize the width of the margin, defined
as
2
||w||2 , which is equal to minimizing 1
2||w||2
2, where ||w||2
2 is the squared l2-norm.[71]
The slack parameter (ξi) is the distance to margins function for which it applies that:
ξi = 0
for correctly classified data points outside or on the margin
0 < ξi < 1
for correctly classified data points inside the margin and on
the right side of the decision boundary
ξi = 1
for data points on the decision boundary
ξ > 1
for incorrectly classified data points
The addition of the slack parameter transforms the SVM from a hard margin to a soft margin,
where the optimization problem can be solved under the constraints when the two data distribu-
tions are not fully linearly separable. For any data point not positioned on the decision boundary
or correctly classified outside the margin the slack parameter is defined as ξi = |ti−y(xi)|, where
ti is the target value.[12]
Higher values of C therefore causes the misclassified data points to be more heavily penalized
in the cost function, resulting in a smaller margin. Higher values of C makes the model more
sensitive to outliers.
Two of the possible kernels (K(x, x′)) for an SVC are defined as:[71]
Linear
’linear’
K(x, x′) = −1 + w
Radial basis function
’rbf’
K(x, x′) = exp(−γ||x −x′||2)
where γ is the kernel coefficient determining the amount of influence the individual training data
points has, given that it determines the width of the ’rbf’ kernel. The kernels can transform the
data into higher order feature space where the data might be more easily linearly separable.[71]
20 of 135
==PAGE:29==
Katrine Dam Christensen
02/07/2023
Technical University of Denmark
3
Methods
3.1
Parkinson’s Disease data set
Data was obtained from the OpenNeuro database (accession number ds002778), hereafter re-
ferred to as the San Diego data set.[70]
The San Diego data set is comprised of eyes-open resting-state EEG data from 31 subjects (15
PD patients and 16 age-matched controls HC) - prior to releasing the EEG data the authors
removed one PD subject due to the presence of facial dyskinesia (involuntary movements of the
face) during the EEG measurement. PD subjects were classified as having mild to moderate PD
with stages II to III on the Hoehn and Yahr scale.[30] Data includes EEG measurements from 32
channels placed according to Figure 8. Signals were recorded during resting state for a duration
of minimum 3 minutes for each subject with a sampling frequency of 512 Hz. Data was collected
using a ActiveTwo Biosemi Instrumentation system with the left and right mastoids as reference.
Figure 8: Electrode placement of BioSemi 32 channel EEG device used for data collection of the
SanDiego dataset, with colored regions as defined by Aljalal et al. 2022 [4].
The subjects were instructed to relax and focus their gaze on a white cross on a screen. For the
PD subjects data was acquired for both on- and off-medication, yet only off-medication EEG
data will be used in this project. For the off-medication measurements the minimum number of
hours since last dose of medication was 12 hours. Additional meta data of medications, doses
and time between doses can be acquired from the paper by George et al. 2013 [30] that is
based on a more extensive version of the SanDiego data set including measurements during a
stop-signal task. The provided data was not entirely in compliance with the standard of Brain
Imaging Data Structure (BIDS).[62] Basic statistics of the metadata for the PD and HC subjects
of the San Diego data set can be seen in Table 2.
21 of 135
==PAGE:30==
Katrine Dam Christensen
02/07/2023
Technical University of Denmark
15 PD
16 HC
Age
63.3 ± 8.2
63.5 ± 9.7
Sex
F=8, M=7
F=9, M=7
Hand
L=0, R=15
L=0, R=16
MMSE
28.9 ± 1.0
29.2 ± 1.1
NAART
46.1 ± 6.5
49.1 ± 7.1
Disease Duration
4.5 ± 3.5
-
Table 2: Basic statistics of meta data for the San Diego data set.[30] Values include sample
mean and sample standard deviation, Left- or Right-handedness (Hand) [R=right, L=left], Mini-
Mental State Examination (MMSE) score, North American Reading Test (NAART) score.
3.2
Signal processing
The signal processing pipeline is depicted in Figure 9, the corresponding processing scripts can be
found Appendix A.9. For reproducibility purposes the random state seed was for all applicable
processing steps set equal to 8.
Figure 9: Signal processing pipeline. The dark blue boxes represents individual Python scripts
which can be found in Appendices A.9.1 to A.9.5.
The following pages contain detailed descriptions of each processing step depicted in Figure 9.
22 of 135
==PAGE:31==
Katrine Dam Christensen
02/07/2023
Technical University of Denmark
Bidsify
BIDS conversion
The SanDiego dataset was not entirely BIDS compliant and BIDS conversion was therefore
initially applied to the source data, using the bidsify.py script in Appendix A.9.1. The slightly
modified data is subsequently referred to as raw data.
Preprocessing and artifact removal
Prior to calculation of connectivity the data must be cleaned as much as possible through noise
reduction. This was done to decrease the possible influence of noise on the estimation of brain
connectivity, since some artifacts and noise can produce high connectivity values that does not
reflect true brain connections. All preprocessing was performed using the preprocessing.py script
in Appendix A.9.3.
Remove extra EEG channels
Apart from the regular 32 channels of the SanDiego dataset 8 extra channels and a status chan-
nel exists in the dataset, which were removed prior to filtering of the signals. The excluded extra
channels are: [ ’EXG1’, ’EXG2’, ’EXG3’, ’EXG4’, ’EXG5’, ’EXG6’, ’EXG7’, ’EXG8’, ’Status’ ]
Most commonly occurring non-brain EEG artifacts include eye-blinks, eye-movement, head
muscle activation, electrode displacement and 50/60 Hz electrical interference from the power
lines.[46] Some artifact like power line noise is consistent throughout the entire EEG signal at
a fixed frequency, making removal of this particular artifact a fast and easy process. Other
artifacts require more complicated methods.
Band-pass filter
Removal of power line artifacts is not necessary for the current processing pipeline, as only
frequencies from 1 to 45 Hz will be further processed. If higher frequency bands were to be
included in future studies it would require applying e.g. a notch filter centered at 60 Hz. To
remove any baseline wandering or low frequency drifts all channels are band pass filtered using
an FIR hamming window with a lower pass-band edge of 1 Hz and an upper pass-band edge
of 45 Hz since for the current application only frequencies up until the gamma band are to be
evaluated further.
The manual removing of non-constant artifacts with varying frequencies can be time consuming
when dealing with larger data sets, and requires high level of knowledge regarding EEG and
artifacts types while also being a quite subjective process. Depending on the quality of the EEG
data, manual removal of artifacts might result in loss of large amounts of data. Often times the
frequency range of the artifacts coincide with the frequencies of interest in the later analysis,
preventing the use of more simple filtering solutions.
Visual inspection of EEG and ICA
Visual inspection of the EEG signals in the time domain, is used to identify noise filled channels
(due to e.g. electrode displacement) and time segments (due to e.g. eye-blinks or head move-
ments). In order to avoid the loss of data from removal of all affected segments and channels,
periodically recurring higher amplitude noise elements like eye-blinks can be “subtracted” from
the signal, thereby preserving a large amount of data.
Remove eye-blinks
The semi-automated artifact removal technique Independent Component Analysis (ICA) is used
due to its speed and slightly more objective means of removing artifacts. ICA is used to split
the EEG signal into separate statistically independent components. Components that contain
23 of 135
==PAGE:32==
Katrine Dam Christensen
02/07/2023
Technical University of Denmark
non-neural artifacts such as eye-blinks can subsequently be subtracted from the corresponding
channel. Performing ICA therefore still requires knowledge about the shape of the artifacts in
order to remove the correct components. For eye-blink artifact identification the raw filtered
data over time is inspected along with inspection of ICA components over time and topological
distribution of component weights of the individual channels.[20] An example of the plots used
for visual inspection can be seen in Figure 20.
The artifact removal process is especially important when calculating brain connectivity, as ar-
tifacts that affects more than a single electrode could result in higher estimates of connectivity.
This complicates the interpretation of the result, since not all estimated connections would be
due to true brain interactions. Additionally artifact removal also aids in increasing the signal-
to-noise ratio (SNR), which enables the analysis of useful brain signals that would otherwise be
“hidden” in the higher amplitude noise.[11]
Interpolate bad EEG channels
It is sought to keep the number of channels the same for each subject, which poses a problem
when some of the EEG data contains bad channels. An example of a noisy channel can be seen
in Figure 18. One simple method would be that when a bad channel was identified for a specific
subject, that channel was subsequently removed for all other subjects. This insures that all
subjects have the same channels, but it also means a lot of otherwise clean and useful data is
discarded. This also poses the problem that for large data sets it is possible that all channels
would have to be removed, thereby prohibiting any further analysis. Another method would
be to interpolate the missing channel based on the remaining “good” channels.[20] It should be
noted that this could be cause for concern if other connectivity measures were to be calculated
that are not insensitive to zero time-lag components. This is due to fact that interpolation of
a ’bad’ channel is a weighted summation of the signals from the surrounding ’good’ channels,
with zero time-lag. This would increase the connectivity values of the neighbouring nodes at
zero time-lag (zero phase difference).
Since the connectivity measure chosen in this thesis enables the use of this method, the ’bad’
channels were interpolated using the spherical splines method.[51]
Annotate bad EEG time segments
Based on visual inspection the noisy time segments were annotated as ’bad’, meaning that these
annotated segments will not pass the later segmentation step as all segments containing data
annotated as ’bad’ are excluded from further processing. An example of a noisy time segment
can be seen in Figure 19.
Annotate bad beginning and end of EEG data
Events of start and stop of data collection was provided for some of the subjects, and everything
prior to the start-event and after the stop-event were subsequently annotated as ’bad’. If start
and stop events were not provided for a subject they were chosen to default to 1s being anno-
tated as ’bad’ in the beginning and end of the EEG data. This was done to account for possible
disturbances in the beginning and end of the EEG measuring.
The excluded components for each subject along with description of exclusion criteria can be
seen in Appendix A.2. The mapping of which ICA components, EEG channels and EEG time
segments to be removed from each subject is seen in Table 13 of Appendix A.2. The removal
of these elements are done to acquire a higher SNR prior to connectivity calculations, as is it
sought to calculate the connectivity based mainly on recordings of true brain activity as opposed
to muscle activity or other general artifacts.[11]
24 of 135
==PAGE:33==
Katrine Dam Christensen
02/07/2023
Technical University of Denmark
Connectivity
Connectivity calculations were performed using the connectivity.py script in Appendix A.9.4,
which outputs adjacency matrices for each epoch, frequency band and subject.
Frequency bands
The EEG data was split into five frequency bands based on Table 1 along with one additional
frequency band spanning all of the frequencies in the other bands. All filtering was performed
using FIR filters.
Epoching
The EEG data for each frequency band is divided into 60 s epochs by splitting the EEG signal
into non-overlapping consecutive epochs across all channels. Since the total duration of EEG
sampling for the SanDiego dataset was minimum 3 minutes for each subject, each subject would
have a total of 3 epochs where any additional epochs were excluded.
Segmentation
Each epoch within each frequency band is further split into 5 s non-overlapping segments across
all channels. A maximum of 12 segments can be extracted from each epoch, with any segment
containing data annotated as ’bad’ being excluded from further processing. The rejected seg-
ments for each subject is listed in Table 14 of Appendix A.2.
Connectivity calculations
Connectivity is calculated using imaginary coherence (ImCoh) as a measure of connectivity be-
tween all pairs of nodes for each subject, epoch and frequency band, using the connectivity.py
script in Appendix A.9.4. The ImCoh is used for EEG connectivity calculations since volume
conduction artifacts do not affect the imaginary part of coherency, assuming that there is no
time-lag between the source activity and the electrical potential measured at the scalp. It is
therefore assumed that ImCoh reflects true underlying interactions between brain regions.[57]
The implemented MNE function [50] is based on the assumptions that each epoch is an in-
dependent sample of the same connectivity network and that within each epoch the spectral
components are stationary. The calculated connectivity measure of each epoch should not be
assessed as a function of time and connectivity is therefore calculated as an average over multiple
time segments.[52]
The resulting data is a connectivity matrix of size [N × N] for each of the three epochs for each
subject, where N is the number of EEG channels.
Feature extraction
Graph conversion
Each of the connectivity matrices are converted to an un-directed graph by using the connectivity
matrix as the adjacency matrix of the graph.
Graph thresholding
Both weight-based and density-based thresholding was performed on the extracted graphs, based
on the theory explained in Section 2.5. Since some of the features to be calculated are depen-
dent on all nodes being connected to the graph, the function find min max threshold was
constructed (see util.py in Appendix A.9.7). It finds both the weight-based and density-based
minimum and maximum thresholds for each frequency band, given that the graph should not
be disconnected nor fully connected for all subjects.
Based on the possible threshold ranges, thresholds (th) were selected at increments of 0.01 for
weight-based and 0.1 for density-based such that: minimum ≤th ≤maximum.
25 of 135
==PAGE:34==
Katrine Dam Christensen
02/07/2023
Technical University of Denmark
Weight-based thresholding
Frequency
Minimum
Maximum
Tested Threshold Range
Band
th value
th value
and Step Size
Delta (δ)
-0.090
-0.006
[-0.08 : -0.01]
in steps of 0.01
Theta (θ)
-0.088
-0.024
[-0.08 : -0.03]
in steps of 0.01
Alpha (α)
-0.085
-0.022
[-0.08 : -0.03]
in steps of 0.01
Beta (β)
-0.058
-0.017
[-0.05 : -0.02]
in steps of 0.01
Gamma (γ)
-0.046
0.006
[-0.04 : 0.00]
in steps of 0.01
All bands
-0.040
-0.010
[-0.04 : -0.01]
in steps of 0.01
(a) Threshold ranges for weight-based thresholding
Density-based thresholding
Frequency
Minimum
Maximum
Tested Threshold Range
Band
th value
th value
and Step Size
Delta (δ)
0
0.431
[0.1 : 0.4]
in steps of 0.1
Theta (θ)
0
0.369
[0.1 : 0.3]
in steps of 0.1
Alpha (α)
0
0.423
[0.1 : 0.4]
in steps of 0.1
Beta (β)
0
0.512
[0.1 : 0.5]
in steps of 0.1
Gamma (γ)
0
0.476
[0.1 : 0.4]
in steps of 0.1
All bands
0
0.494
[0.1 : 0.4]
in steps of 0.1
(b) Threshold ranges for density-based thresholding.
Table 3: Minimum and maximum threshold (th) values along with tested thresholds for each
frequency band using (a) weight-based or (b) density-based thresholding.
The threshold range and tested thresholds can be seen in Table 3 for the weight-based and
density-based thresholding. The same thresholds for each frequency band were applied to all
subjects, such that any edge weight below the threshold is set equal to 0 while all edge weights
above the threshold are set equal to 1, resulting in binarized graphs.
In order to select the optimal threshold value for each frequency band, all combinations of weight-
based or density-based thresholds for the six frequency bands were tested based on the CV setup
in Figure 10. The f1-score of each inner fold was evaluated based on only the logistic regression
(LogReg, C=1) classifier trained on the inner train set (Dtrain(inner)) and tested on the inner
test set (Dtest(inner)). The average f1-score across all inner folds was acquired for all outer folds,
such that the average f1-score could be calculated across the outer folds. The resulting f1-scores
are seen in Table 7 and Table 9. In order to initially investigate any performance related effects
of graph-based, node-based and region-based features, the f1-score was also evaluated for each
of the feature methods separately. The combination of all features is also tested, to capture
coupling between features to a greater extent. The results of the optimization of threshold value
for each frequency band individually are included in Appendix A.6 Tables 18 to 25.
As classification is to be performed on all features and frequency bands simultaneously, the
threshold values used in the following processing steps are chosen as the combination of thresh-
olds across all frequency bands with the highest f1-score, as presented in Table 7 and Table 9.
26 of 135
==PAGE:35==
Katrine Dam Christensen
02/07/2023
Technical University of Denmark
Feature calculation
For each subject a feature vector was constructed for each 1 minute epoch. The feature vector
includes features calculated at different spatial levels, namely graph, node and region level for
each frequency band. The types of features are listed below, for which the description and for-
mula can be found in Table 15 of Appendix A.5. The total number of features per graph equals
2.292, per the calculations shown in Appendix A.4.
All features are numerical and the possible ranges of values are included in Appendix A.5 Table 15
for most features. Since a majority of the features have a range of [0 : 1] or [0 : N −1], N being
the total number of nodes in the graph, scaling of the features is applied prior to classification.
If any feature was incalculable, meaning it obtained a value of ∞, it was set equal to 0. The
features and subjects where this applies can be found in Table 16 of Appendix A.5.
Graph-based features:
• Density
• Diameter
• Radius
• Global degree
• Avg. clustering coefficient
• Avg. shortest path length
• Wiener index
• SW index (sigma)
• SW index (omega)
• Global efficiency
• Avg. local efficiency
• S-metric
• Modularity1
Node-based features:
• Clustering Coefficient
• Degree
• Degree centrality
• Betweenness centrality
• Closeness centrality
• Current flow betweenness
centrality
• Current flow closeness cen-
trality
• Closeness vitality
• Constraint
• Effective size
• Eccentricity
Region-based features:
• Region average of all node
based features
• Ratio of edges within re-
gion
• Ratio of edges between re-
gions
1The communities used to calculate modularity were generated using the Louvain Community Detection Al-
gorithm.
27 of 135
==PAGE:36==
Katrine Dam Christensen
02/07/2023
Technical University of Denmark
3.3
Classification
Models and hyper-parameters
Support Vector Classifiers (SVC) and Logistic Regression (LogReg) were used to classify the data
based on the selected features. Prior to classification the labels PD and HC were label encoded
such that PD=1 and HC=0. The scoring parameter for all steps including hyper-parameter
tuning, feature selection and model evaluation was selected to be the f1-score, calculated as:
f1 = 2 · precision · recall
precision + recall
precision =
TP
TP + FP
recall =
TP
TP + FN
where precision is equal to the number of true positive (TP) results divided by the total number
of positive labels (the fraction of positives correctly labelled) and recall equals the number of
true positives (TP) divided by the number of labels that were actually supposed to be classified
as positives (the fraction of correctly classified positives (TP) over misclassified negatives (false
negatives, FN)). The f1-score is a harmonic weighted mean of the precision and recall, and its
values ranges from 0 to 1, with 1 being the best.[73]
The tested hyper-parameters for the LogReg and SVC can be seen in Table 4 and Table 5
respectively.
Hyper-parameter
Tested settings
solver:
’liblinear’
penalty:
L2
maximum iterations:
100
regularization coefficient (C):
[ 0.0001, 0.001, 0.01, 0.1, 1, 10 ]
Table 4: Tested LogReg hyper-parameter settings.
Different solvers exists, but were not tested due to time restraints. The L2 penalty is equal to
ridge regression, which in combination with the selected regularization coefficients (C) penalises
large weight in the model, ultimately smoothing its decision boundary. For the parameter C is
applies that the lower the value the stronger the regularization strength.
Hyper-parameter
Tested settings
penalty:
squared L2
kernel:
[ ’rbf’ , ’linear’ ]
regularization parameter (C):
[ 0.0001, 0.001, 0.01, 0.1, 1, 10 ]
gamma (γ):
[ ’scale’, ’auto’ ]
Table 5: Tested SVC hyper-parameter settings.
All kernel types use the regularization parameter C. The lower the regularization parameter,
the stronger the regularization and the more heavily penalized the the feature weights. The
kernel type determines the “shape” of the decision boundary, where the tested settings for C
and γ were based on the advised exponential grid search of these parameters.[71]
28 of 135
==PAGE:37==
Katrine Dam Christensen
02/07/2023
Technical University of Denmark
Splitting of Data
Initially all data (Dall) is randomly shuffled and split into 10 outer folds for model evaluation,
each fold consisting of Dtest(outer) and Dtrain(outer). The Dtrain(outer) data of each outer fold
is then split into 9 inner folds for model selection, each fold consisting of Dtest(inner) and
Dtrain(inner). Figure 10 shows the setup for the inner and outer folds for cross-validation, also
referred to as nested cross-validation.
Figure 10: Diagram of nested cross-validation using 10 outer folds and 9 inner folds, meaning
the test set in the outer and inner folds (Dtest(outer) and Dtest(inner)) are of the same size.
Each the outer and inner folds were generated by stratifying according to label (PD or HC),
meaning that the ratio of PD and HC is sought to be same in both the test set and train set.
Since features are extracted for each 1 minute of EEG data and the total measuring time being
3 minutes there exists 3 data points for each subject. These data points from the same sub-
ject must therefore be grouped to avoid data leakage when splitting data into test and train.
The splits were therefore also generated based on grouping of the subject ID such that all data
from a single subject belongs to either the test or train set, meaning a subject can not be both
trained and tested on within the same fold. This is done to insure that the test data is indeed
independent of the train data.
29 of 135
==PAGE:38==
Katrine Dam Christensen
02/07/2023
Technical University of Denmark
The purpose of the outer folds is model evaluation through estimation of the generalization of
the model while the inner folds are for model selection including hyper-parameter tuning and
feature selection.
The processing steps performed in the inner folds are for each tested classifier type as follows:
• Feature scaling of the features in Dtrain(inner) and Dtest(inner) of each fold, based on the
mean and standard deviation of the features in Dtrain(inner).
• Cross-validated hyper-parameter tuning using grid search of all parameters. Across
all inner folds the best model was selected as the one having the highest mean test score,
using f1-score as the scoring method.
• Feature selection was performed using the parameters of the previously selected best
model and cross-validated across the exact same inner folds as used for the hyper-parameter
tuning. For the LogReg and SVC using the ’linear’ kernel, Recursive Feature Elimination
(RFE) was performed, which provides the ranking of each feature. The SVC with ’rbf’
kernel instead used Sequential Feature Selection (SFS). The Dtrain(inner) data within each
inner fold was then updated by removing all of the eliminated features.
• Cross-validated hyper-parameter tuning was then again performed on the new data
set of Dtrain(inner) which consists of a subset of features. Cross-validation was performed
using exactly the same inner folds as previously. The best model was again selected as the
one having the highest mean f1-score averaged across all inner folds.
The processing of the inner folds was repeated for each of the outer folds, acquiring mean f1-
scores for each outer fold and classifier type. The mean f1-score and parameters of the best
model in each outer fold are provided in Section 4 Table 11 for each classifier type.
Feature Scaling
Standard scaling was performed for each individual feature such that new feature values (xnew)
are calculated as:
xnew = x −µ
σ
(19)
where x is the old feature value, µ and σ are the mean and standard deviation respectively for
the feature values of all data points in Dtrain(inner). Therefore the test set is scaled based on
the mean and standard deviation of the training data to avoid data leakage.
Hyper-parameter Tuning
The tuning of hyper-parameters was performed in the inner folds, by means of cross-validated
grid search using the GridSearchCV function with f1-score as the scoring method. The applica-
tion of grid search ensures that all combinations of hyper-parameters are tested.
Feature Selection
Features are removed from the dataset to improve performance and reduce computational cost
by reducing the dimensionality of the data. It was deemed impossible within the time frame to
test all combinations of features, as the feature space is rather large and the computational cost
would be to high. Elimination of features was performed using either cross-validated Recursive
Feature Elimination (RFE) or cross-validated Sequential Feature Selection (SFS), both using
f1-score as the scoring method. The feature elimination was cross-validated across the same
inner folds as the hyper-parameter tuning.
RFE needs the model to generate feature weights or coefficients, limiting its use to only be ap-
plicable for the LogReg and SVC with ’linear’ kernel. For RFE both the step size and minimum
30 of 135
==PAGE:39==
Katrine Dam Christensen
02/07/2023
Technical University of Denmark
number of features selected were both set equal to 1. The RFE starts with all features and then
iteratively removes the feature with the lowest model weight, each time evaluating the f1-score
and fitting the model on the new subset of features. Using RFE with cross-validation (RFECV)
the algorithm also determines the number of features to select.
For SVC with ’rbf’ kernel SFS was applied using the ’forward’ method, setting the number of
features to select equal to 30. This method does not need individual feature weights, as the
full feature set is evaluated, and then leaving one feature out at a time and evaluating which
omitted feature yielded the highest increase in f1-score. This process is performed iteratively
until the intended number of features is reached.
The Best Model
For each classifier type the best model was defined by the feature subspace of the most selected
features across the outer fold. The number of features selected for each model was defined as
all features selected by M or more models. M being an integer between 1 and 10, for which
is applies that M is the highest number of models a feature has been included in, that yields
greater than 5 total selected features. Since the regularization parameter relates to the number
of features in the feature space, the hyper-parameters are cross-validated over the outer folds
for the reduced features space. The best models are defined in Table 12.
Feature Importance
The features selected for each model of the outer folds are evaluated based on the distribution
of features within the categories of:
• Frequency band: delta, theta, alpha, beta, gamma and all bands
• Spatial level: graph, node and region
• Feature type: density, degree, clustering coefficient, betweenness centrality, closeness
centrality, current flow betweenness centrality, current flow closeness centrality, closeness
vitality, constraint, effective size, eccentricity, edges within, edges between, modularity,
s-metric, efficiency, sigma, omega, wiener index, average shortest path length, radius and
diameter
Statistical Analysis
Based on the obtained mean f1-scores of the individual classifier types, the model performance
was evaluated using resampling in the form of random permutation testing. Permutation was
performed using the features selected for the best models.
The process of permutation was implemented such that the labels of the entire dataset were
randomly shuffled, whilst maintaining the same label for each of the three observations (epochs)
for each subject. The data was then split into the outer fold, while stratifying for both label and
group (subject) in each split. Thereby the splitting of data into 10 folds such that no subject
was present in both a train and a test set to avoid data leakage and the labels were sought
balanced as much as possible between the test and train set.
Within each outer fold the hyper-parameters were tuned as described earlier, training data was
fitted to the best performing model and predictions were made using the corresponding test
data resulting in an f1-score for the corresponding outer fold.
The average f1-score was then calculated across all outer folds for each classifier type, the results
of which are seen in Table 12.
This process was repeated 10.000 times to estimate the null-distribution of the average f1-scores
of the models, as seen in Figure 17 and to obtain a p-value for the model performance, the
results of which can be seen in Table 12.
31 of 135
==PAGE:40==
Katrine Dam Christensen
02/07/2023
Technical University of Denmark
4
Results
4.1
Graph Threshold Optimization
The multiple threshold values of Table 3 were evaluated to determine the optimal threshold
values for each frequency band individually (Tables 6 and 8) and for the combination of all
frequency bands (Tables 7 and 9). The f1-score columns of the tables contain f1-scores calculated
for the single frequency band and threshold value, while the combined f1-score in the bottom of
the table is calculated for the combination of all frequency bands and their respective individually
optimized threshold values. The cells of the tables containing the f1-scores are colored based on
the value of the cell, such that the colors are a gradient from 1 (green) to 0.5 (yellow) to 0 (red).
The f1-scores of all individual threshold values can be seen in Appendix A.6 Tables 18 to 25 and
the violin plots of all combinations of threshold values can be seen in Figures 22 and 23.
Weight-based thresholding
Weight-based thresholding - threshold optimization of each frequency band individually
Frequency
graph
node
region
graph+node+region
band
th
f1-score
th
f1-score
th
f1-score
th
f1-score
Delta (δ)
-0.03
0.573
-0.07
0.584
-0.08
0.611
-0.07
0.560
Theta (θ)
-0.07
0.466
-0.03
0.499
-0.06
0.508
-0.03
0.500
Alpha (α)
-0.08
0.372
-0.04
0.572
-0.03
0.559
-0.03
0.550
Beta (β)
-0.02
0.499
-0.05
0.545
-0.02
0.568
-0.04
0.523
Gamma (γ)
-0.01
0.479
0.00
0.475
-0.04
0.520
0.00
0.483
All bands
-0.01
0.297
-0.02
0.507
-0.04
0.522
-0.01
0.457
↓
↓
↓
↓
f1-score =
0.570
0.471
0.561
0.509
(combined)
Table 6: Optimal weight-based thresholds and f1-scores for each frequency band individually.
Weight-based thresholding - threshold optimization of combination of all frequency bands
Frequency
graph
node
region
graph+node+region
band
th
median f1
th
median f1
th
median f1
th
median f1
Delta (δ)
-0.01
0.580
-0.08
0.479
-0.02
0.561
-0.01
0.566
Theta (θ)
-0.03
0.555
-0.07
0.485
-0.07
0.557
-0.03
0.549
Alpha (α)
-0.03
0.568
-0.03
0.477
-0.07
0.553
-0.03
0.540
Beta (β)
-0.03
0.584
-0.05
0.483
-0.04
0.555
-0.05
0.560
Gamma (γ)
0.00
0.585
-0.04
0.514
-0.04
0.557
-0.04
0.555
All bands
-0.04
0.586
-0.04
0.472
-0.04
0.561
-0.03
0.554
↓
↓
↓
↓
f1-score =
0.654
0.580
0.626
0.630
(combined)
Table 7: Optimal weight-based thresholds and f1-scores for combination of all frequency band.
From Table 6 it is seen that the graph-based features have some of the lowest f1-scores. Across
all spatial levels the delta band has highest f1-score, with the region-based features resulting in
the only f1-score above 0.6. For each spatial level it also follows that the combined f1-score does
not surpass the largest of the f1-scores obtained for the individual frequency bands, with the
combined f1-score of the node-based features even performing worse than any of the individual
frequency bands. The combined frequency bands in Table 7 resulted in increased combined
f1-scores of all spatial levels.
32 of 135
==PAGE:41==
Katrine Dam Christensen
02/07/2023
Technical University of Denmark
Density-based thresholding
Density-based thresholding - threshold optimization of each frequency band individually
Frequency
graph
node
region
graph+node+region
band
th
f1
th
f1
th
f1
th
f1
Delta (δ)
0.3
0.307
0.1
0.523
0.1
0.596
0.4
0.508
Theta (θ)
0.3
0.321
0.2
0.526
0.2
0.546
0.3
0.508
Alpha (α)
0.4
0.466
0.3
0.581
0.3
0.526
0.4
0.643
Beta (β)
0.4
0.410
0.1
0.511
0.2
0.568
0.4
0.488
Gamma (γ)
0.4
0.422
0.1
0.482
0.1
0.449
0.4
0.474
All bands
0.4
0.186
0.2
0.447
0.1
0.527
0.4
0.378
↓
↓
↓
↓
f1-score =
0.511
0.470
0.582
0.560
(combined)
Table 8: Optimal density-based thresholds and f1-scores for each frequency band individually.
Density-based thresholding - threshold optimization of combination of all frequency bands
Frequency
graph
node
region
graph+node+region
band
th
median f1
th
median f1
th
median f1
th
median f1
Delta (δ)
0.2
0.516
0.4
0.419
0.1
0.523
0.4
0.536
Theta (θ)
0.3
0.499
0.1
0.408
0.1
0.523
0.1
0.525
Alpha (α)
0.3
0.503
0.3
0.419
0.3
0.528
0.4
0.549
Beta (β)
0.2
0.524
0.1
0.428
0.3
0.550
0.4
0.550
Gamma (γ)
0.4
0.520
0.1
0.431
0.2
0.533
0.1
0.534
All bands
0.3
0.505
0.2
0.417
0.1
0.525
0.3
0.551
↓
↓
↓
↓
f1-score =
0.622
0.500
0.609
0.639
(combined)
Table 9: Optimal density-based thresholds and f1-scores for combination of all frequency band.
For the density-based individually optimized thresholds in Table 6 the graph-based features
have some of the lowest f1-scores, as was also the case for the weight-based. The alpha band has
the highest performance across all tested spatial levels apart from region-based. The combina-
tion of all frequency bands in Table 7 resulted in increased combined f1-scores of all spatial levels.
For weight-based threshold the highest combined f1-score was seen at the graph-level, as opposed
to the graph+node+region level for the density-based thresholding. Since feature selection was
to be applied to the entire feature space, the optimal threshold values in Table 10 were selected
based on the spatial level of graph+node+region in Tables 7 and 9.
Frequency
band
Weight-based
th value
Density-based
th value
Delta (δ)
-0.01
0.4
Theta (θ)
-0.03
0.1
Alpha (α)
-0.03
0.4
Beta (β)
-0.05
0.4
Gamma (γ)
-0.04
0.1
All bands
-0.03
0.3
Table 10: Optimal threshold (th) values for the graph+node+region level at each frequency
band for weight-based and density-based thresholding.
33 of 135
==PAGE:42==
Katrine Dam Christensen
02/07/2023
Technical University of Denmark
4.2
Classification
Classification was performed for the LogReg and SVC using the optimized threshold values in
Table 10. Table 11 includes the f1-scores, optimized hyper-parameters and number of selected
features of the best LogReg and SVC ’linear’ models of each outer cross-validation fold. The
SVC ’rbf’ models having restricted number of features is not directly comparable to the models
in Table 11, and the results are therefore included Appendix A.7 Table 26.
weight-based thresholding
Outer
LogReg
fold
C
# features
f1
0
0.1
17
0.857
1
0.1
2598
0.667
2
0.0001
2405
0.000
3
1
2296
0.600
4
1
2385
0.250
5
0.001
6
0.333
6
0.01
5
0.500
7
0.01
3
0.000
8
0.001
2359
0.667
9
0.1
7
0.833
mode:
average:
average:
0.1
1208
0.471
(a) weight-based LogReg performance.
density-based thresholding
Outer
LogReg
fold
C
# features
f1
0
0.0001
834
0.545
1
0.0001
988
0.400
2
0.0001
848
0.000
3
0.1
32
0.545
4
0.0001
914
0.500
5
0.1
1
0.364
6
0.0001
702
0.545
7
0.0001
771
0.250
8
0.0001
2202
0.667
9
10
5
0.545
mode:
average:
average:
0.0001
730
0.436
(b) density-based LogReg performance.
density-based thresholding
Outer
SVC
fold
kernel
C
# features
f1
0
’linear’
0.001
1014
0.615
1
’linear’
0.01
620
0.571
2
’linear’
0.01
1781
0.286
3
’linear’
0.001
1279
0.750
4
’linear’
0.0001
2655
1.000
5
’linear’
0.0001
434
0.000
6
’linear’
0.0001
905
0.667
7
’linear’
0.001
660
0.250
8
’linear’
0.0001
2693
0.400
9
’linear’
0.1
2736
0.769
mode:
mode:
average:
average:
’linear’
0.0001
1478
0.531
(c) density-based SVC ’linear’ performance.
Table 11: Cross-validated f1-score performance of (a) weight-based LogReg, (b) density-
based LogReg and (c) density-based SVC ’linear’ models. Hyper-parameters were optimized
for each outer fold using the optimal threshold values from Table 10. The number of feature
is denoted ’# features’, ’C’ = regularization parameter and ’f1’ = the f1-score of each of the
outer folds. Bottom row includes the mode or average of the hyper-parameters and values in
the columns above.
34 of 135
==PAGE:43==
Katrine Dam Christensen
02/07/2023
Technical University of Denmark
4.3
Feature Importance
Figures 11 to 13 depicts the distribution of frequency bands, spatial levels and feature types for
the selected features of each outer fold model in Table 11. The top row of each plot shows the
distribution of the categories in the full data set of 2772 individual features.
(a) Frequency band distribution for LogReg with weight-based thresholding.
(b) Frequency band distribution for LogReg with density-based thresholding.
35 of 135
==PAGE:44==
Katrine Dam Christensen
02/07/2023
Technical University of Denmark
(c) Frequency band distribution for SVC ’linear’ with density-based thresholding.
Figure 11: Percentage distribution of frequency bands in the selected features of the outer models
for (a) weight-based LogReg, (b) density-based LogReg and (c) density-based SVC ’linear’.
Based on Figure 11 there seems to be no tendencies of selecting features from any specific fre-
quency band, as the individual models’ distribution of selected features roughly corresponds to
the distribution of the full data. All features are calculated for all frequency bands, meaning all
frequency bands are evenly represented in the full data.
The largest deviation from the distribution in the full data set is seen for the weight-based and
density-based LogReg models of outer folds (0,5,6,7,9) and (5,9) respectively, which are also the
models with the smallest number of selected features. The 3rd outer fold of the density-based
also has quite few selected features compared to the remaining folds, yet the distribution of
frequency bands only differs slightly from the full data.
Similarly as for the frequency band distribution in Figure 11, the spatial level distribution in
Figure 12 generally has distributions that resemble the full data, with deviations from this being
seen for the weight- and density-based LogReg models with 32 or fewer selected features. All
outer fold models of density-based SVC ’linear’ in Figure 12c are similar to that of the full data.
36 of 135
==PAGE:45==
Katrine Dam Christensen
02/07/2023
Technical University of Denmark
(a) Spatial level distribution for LogReg with weight-based thresholding.
(b) Spatial level distribution for LogReg with density-based thresholding.
(c) Spatial level distribution for SVC ’linear’ with density-based thresholding.
Figure 12: Percentage distribution of spatial levels in the selected features of the 10 models, for
(a) weight-based LogReg, (b) density-based LogReg and (c) density-based SVC ’linear’.
37 of 135
==PAGE:46==
Katrine Dam Christensen
02/07/2023
Technical University of Denmark
The distribution of feature types of the selected feature for the outer fold models is seen in
Figure 13, with features of different spatial levels grouped together for the same feature types.
(a) Feature type distribution for LogReg with weight-based thresholding.
(b) Feature type distribution for LogReg with density-based thresholding.
38 of 135
==PAGE:47==
Katrine Dam Christensen
02/07/2023
Technical University of Denmark
(c) Feature type distribution for SVC ’linear’ with density-based thresholding.
Figure 13: Percentage distribution of feature type in the selected features of the 10 models, for
(a) weight-based LogReg, (b) density-based LogReg and (c) density-based SVC ’linear’.
The weight-based LogReg models in Figure 13a with the lowest number of selected features,
namely outer folds (0,5,6,7,9), have features solely from the categories of degree, closeness vital-
ity, effective size and wiener index. Of these the best performing outer folds 0 and 9 are both
comprised of a combination of degree, closeness vitality and then either effective size or wiener
index. For the remaining models the high number of selected features, means the distributions
are very similar to that of the full data set.
For the density-based LogReg in Figure 13b it seems that the most prominent features are
degree, closeness vitality, effective size and eccentricity. Notably outer folds (3,5,9) have the
fewest number of features of which only combinations of degree, closeness vitality and effective
size features were selected.
The most prominent feature types of the density-based SVC ’linear’ models in Figure 13c are
also degree, closeness vitality and effective size.
For all three tested classifiers the most prominent feature types were found to be degree, close-
ness vitality and effective size.
Apart from the distribution of the feature types for each outer fold individually it was sought to
assess which specific features that appear across the models of the outer folds. Figure 14 shows
the counts of each individual feature as the number of outer folds where the corresponding feature
had been selected. The degree, closeness vitality, effective size, wiener index and eccentricity
features have been colored to highlight their presence across the outer fold models.
39 of 135
==PAGE:48==
Katrine Dam Christensen
02/07/2023
Technical University of Denmark
(a) Individual features included in 6 or more LogReg models, for the weight-based thresholding.
(b) Individual features included in 8 or more LogReg models, for the density-based thresholding.
40 of 135
==PAGE:49==
Katrine Dam Christensen
02/07/2023
Technical University of Denmark
(c) Individual features included in 8 or more SVC ’linear’ models, for the density-based thresholding.
Figure 14: Bar plot of the number of representation of an individual feature in each of the
outer folds for the (a) weight-based LogReg, (b) density-based LogReg and (c) density-based
SVC ’linear’ models. The bars are color coded based on feature type to highlight the closeness
vitality, degree, wiener index and effective size.
With degree, closeness vitality and effective size being the most prominent feature types in Fig-
ure 13, the most frequently selected individual features in Figure 14 are almost entirely of these
three types. The weight-based LogReg in Figure 14b additionally has wiener index features
and the smallest overlap in terms of feature selection, partly due to the majority of the models
having very few selected features relative to the total number of features in the full data set. The
density-based LogReg in Figure 14b on the other hand has most prominent features exclusively
from the three feature types. The density-based SVC ’linear’ in Figure 14c consists mainly of
the three feature types, yet 7 out of the 296 displayed features belong to the feature types of
ratio of edges between, closeness centrality, clustering coefficient and s-metric.
The highest performing models of LogReg were seen for the weight-based 0th and 9th outer
folds, and the features selected by the two are seen in Figure 15. The models have an overlap
of 2 of the features which are both closeness vitality. All of the remaining features in Figure 15
are also represented in Figure 14a.
41 of 135
==PAGE:50==
Katrine Dam Christensen
02/07/2023
Technical University of Denmark
Figure 15: Bar plot of the number of representation of an individual feature in the LogReg
models of the weight-based 0th and 9th outer fold.
Figure 16 depicts only the node-based features of the LogReg models, though the weight-based
models have 4 additional graph-based wiener index features at four different frequency bands
and the density-based models have an additional 4 region-based average degree features from
the delta and gamma band. It can be noted that degree and closeness vitality features tend to
be positioned mainly in the frontal to central part of the brain, with effective size being most
prominent in the left occipital region.
The two features degree and closeness vitality are often included together for the same frequency
band at the same node placement. Frequency bands on the other hand seems to have no distinct
patters related to node positions.
42 of 135
==PAGE:51==
Katrine Dam Christensen
02/07/2023
Technical University of Denmark
(a) Most occurring node-based feature types of the weight-based LogReg models.
(b) Most occurring node-based feature types of the density-based LogReg models.
Figure 16: Occurrence of the most prominent node-based feature types depicted in Figures 14a
and 14b, namely closeness vitality, degree, effective size and eccentricity, for the (a) weight-based
and (b) density-based LogReg models at each node position. A colored dot represents a single
feature at that node position, the above text denoting the corresponding frequency band.
43 of 135
==PAGE:52==
Katrine Dam Christensen
02/07/2023
Technical University of Denmark
4.4
Permutation testing
Based on the models in Table 11 the best model of LogReg and SVC ’linear’ were defined by the
feature subspace of the most selected features across the outer fold, with the number of features
for each model being as defined in Table 12.
The average f1-scores in Table 12 were cross-validated across the outer folds, for which hyper-
parameter tuning was also applied.
Based on 10.000 permutations only the p-value of the
LogReg density-based model was below 0.05 %. This indicates a low probability of acquiring
an f1-score through random shuffling of the labels that is higher than the LogReg density-based
average f1-score of 0.726, as can also be visually estimated from Figures 17a and 17b. This is
subsequently also the model that had the highest average f1-score of the best models in Table 12
yet the lowest average f1-score of the original models in Table 11.
Model:
LogReg
SVC ’linear’
Thresholding method:
weight
density
density
Number of features selected:
7
36
296
Minimum number of models:
7
8
10
Average f1-score:
0.575
0.726
0.492
P-value:
0.0543
0.0011
0.2471
Table 12: Performance of best models of each tested classifier type. The minimum number of
models being the number of outer fold models the features were selected in and p-value being
the probability of observing an average f1-score above the average f1-score of the model, when
randomly shuffling the labels.
(a) LogReg model with weight-based thresholding. Red line indicating the best model average f1-score
at 0.575, with 543/10.000 of the iterations being above the average f1-score.
44 of 135
==PAGE:53==
Katrine Dam Christensen
02/07/2023
Technical University of Denmark
(b) LogReg model with density-based thresholding. Red line indicating the best model average f1-score
at 0.726, with 11/10.000 of the iterations being above the average f1-score.
(c) SVC ’linear’ model with density-based thresholding. Red line indicating the best model average
f1-score at 0.492, with 2471/10.000 of the iterations being above the average f1-score.
Figure 17: Histogram of 10.000 iterations of average f1-scores calculated across the outer folds,
as an estimation of the null-distribution. The red vertical line indicates the average f1-score for
the best model using the correct labels.
45 of 135
==PAGE:54==
Katrine Dam Christensen
02/07/2023
Technical University of Denmark
5
Discussion
Thresholding
Based on the individually optimized threshold values in Tables 6 and 8 the combination of fre-
quency bands does not increase performance notably, yet the lack of improvement could be due
to the increase in the size of the feature space long with a fixed C parameter.
For the individually optimized weight-based threshold values in Table 6 there seems to be little
to no agreement on optimal threshold value across frequency bands or spatial levels, suggesting
that it might be beneficial to also threshold the spatial levels individually if multiple spatial lev-
els are intended to be used for future classification. This of course would add to the complexity
of the model, and could make it harder to interpret the results in terms of feature importance.
The density-based threshold in Table 8 have a greater overlap, which could be due to fewer
threshold values were tested.
Optimizing for all combinations of threshold values, see Tables 7 and 9, resulted in increased
f1-scores for all spatial levels, suggesting that if multiple frequency bands are to be included the
threshold values should be optimized across all frequency bands combined. This in turn meant
that most of the optimal threshold values differed between optimizing individual or combined
frequency bands.
In Table 12 the optimal threshold values of the combined feature space of graph+node+region
were mostly minimum and maximum threshold values, suggesting that optimal performance of
the features can be obtained by increasing graph sparsity in some frequency bands and decreas-
ing it in others, as was also evident from the violin plots in Figures 22 and 23 of Appendix A.6.
Similar findings for different feature types were reported by Philips et al. 2015 [64], where op-
timal range of graph sparsity for measuring the difference in Pearson correlation between AD
dementia groups and HC were seen to differ between different graph metrics. The paper by
Adamovich et al. 2022 [1] found significant changes in global connectivity measures (equal to
some of the graph based features tested in this thesis) as a function of threshold, further under-
lining the high impact of graph thresholding on the final results of a paper. The entirety of the
thesis illustrates that the choice of threshold method and value is non-trivial when taking both
frequency bands, models and feature types into account.
For this thesis fully connected and disconnected graph were avoided by incorporating constraints
into determining the threshold ranges, as described in Section 2.5. Fully connected graphs were
avoided since binarized fully connected graphs are indistinguishable from each other. Discon-
nected graphs on the other hand prevent the calculation of multiple features derived from path
lengths, since just a single disconnected node in the graph results in multiple node- and graph-
level features being incalculable, zero or infinite (see Table 17).
Based on the result in Figure 14 the most frequently selected features for both weight- and
density-based thresholding includes degree, closeness vitality and effective size, which are among
the ones affected by disconnected graphs. If a similar setup including these three features is to be
used in the future it would not be recommended to extend the threshold value range to higher
values than defined by Equation (17), as this would result in increased sparsity, introducing
disconnected graphs.
Alternatively methods should be incorporated to handle disconnected
graphs and nodes. The current minimum and maximum threshold values are calculated based
on the connectivity values of all subjects, meaning the ranges are likely to differ when applied to
other data sets and the span of the threshold ranges are expected to grow smaller for increasing
sizes of data sets.
46 of 135
==PAGE:55==
Katrine Dam Christensen
02/07/2023
Technical University of Denmark
Model performance
The models in Table 11 have a large variation in f1-scores and number of selected features of the
outer folds, resulting in average f1-scores around 0.5 with the best performing classifier being
the density-based SVC ’linear’. Some of the worst performing outer fold appear to be consistent
across the different classifiers, suggesting that the test data in outer fold 2 and 7 might differ
substantially from the corresponding training data.
The poor average performance could be due to the limitation in data size, yet other papers have
with the same data set managed to obtain accuracies of 96.13 [37], 98, 99.7 and 99.9 [4] when
comparing PD off medication vs. HC using either artificial neural networks, convolutional neural
networks, k-nearest neighbours or least-squares SVM.[74] These classifications were not based
on connectivity measures but mostly spectral decomposition, power and statistical measures,
indicating that PD and HC can be sufficiently separated using the San Diego data set. The
lower performance scores of Table 11 might therefore be due to the selected feature space or
non-optimal processing of thresholding, hyper-parameters feature selection or classifiers.
Feature Importance
There was found no tendencies of selecting features from specific frequency bands, which was
as expected when including multiple features, since AD and PD literature reports significant
differences for various features and frequency bands, see Appendix A.8 Tables 27 and 28.
Similarly none of the spatial levels tends to be over-represented in the models of Figure 12,
for which the graph level features were expected to be included to a higher degree based on
the over-representation of graph level analysis as opposed to node level in the literature, see
Appendix A.8 Tables 27 and 28. It was also expected that when not limiting the number of
features, the node level features, containing more detailed information about the graph, would
be able to represent the underlying brain network to a greater extend than the averaged out
features of both the region and graph level features. The more simple features of the graph
and region level where included based on other scientific findings from Tables 27 and 28 and
to possibly asses the usability of simplified features in combination with simpler classifier models.
Out of the 22 general feature types in Figure 13, degree, closeness vitality and effective size were
the most frequently selected. Despite the low performance of the models in Table 11 the three
feature types are still thought to reflect the differences between PD and HC that are measur-
able in the San Diego data set. The best models consisting of the most selected features were
comprised mainly of these three feature types, as seen in Figure 14.
The combination of degree, closeness vitality and effective size yields a measure of both the
integration, importance and redundancy of a node, which captures different aspects of the brain
network structure and possible change in length of signal pathways as a result of damages.
In Figure 16 the selected features of the best LogReg models were mapped onto their node
position, revealing a tendency for pairing of the degree and closeness vitality for the same node
position and frequency band. This could suggest a feature pair suitable for capturing a specific
characteristic of the brain network. The node pairs were mainly located in the frontal to central
region, which is in line with the finding of Aljalal et al. 2022 [4], who also based on the San
Diego data set the found most informative features to be positioned in the frontal area. Similarly
an AD study by Mehraram et al. 2020 [45] found reduced connectivity in the frontal region.
Hassan et al. 2017 [33] found functional connectivity to decrease as PD progresses, with loss
of connectivity between the frontal and temporal region thought to be an indicator of mild- to
moderate cognitive impairment for PD patients.
47 of 135
==PAGE:56==
Katrine Dam Christensen
02/07/2023
Technical University of Denmark
The paper by Mehraram et al. 2020 [45] found significant differences in global degree when
comparing PD to PD-Dementia (PD-D) and PD-D to AD. Hassan et al. 2017 [33] found no
significant differences between PD-CN, PD-MCI and PD-SCI using graph or node-to-node based
features, and postulated that the normalized features used (clustering coefficient, path length,
strength and global efficiency) might not be sensitive enough for detecting the reorganization
of the brain networks of PD patients with varying degrees of cognitive impairment, and that
more advanced graph and node based might detect these alterations. The features presented
in the thesis are thought to be of higher complexity and its findings are in line with those of
Hassan et al., being that more simple features might not be adequate for capturing the complex
brain network modifications thought to proceed during progression of neurological diseases and
cognitive impairment.
Papers reporting scientific findings for PD patients using closeness vitality and effective size
have not yet been identified. Additionally all of the graph theory derived features reported in
Table 28 of Appendix A.8 are on a graph level or averages of specific node positions or node
pairs. No papers have been identified that includes features to the extent covered in this thesis,
being that most PD graph theory papers mainly include path length and clustering coefficient.
Many papers provide results based on significance between PD and HC for individual graph
based features within each frequency band at given thresholds, and therefore does not include
the possible tendencies across frequency bands or features. Post-hoc evaluation of violin plots
of the most frequently used features in this thesis showed that there were some slight differences
in the distribution of PD and HC, yet none of them showed signs of possible application for
univariate classification. The workings of the brain is quite complex, and most node features or
graph averages thereof will struggle to capture all of the characteristics of the network even in
a simplified form of only 32 node positions.
Permutation Testing
For the best models in Table 12 the only tested model with a p-value below 0.05 for the per-
mutation testing was the density-based LogReg best model that reached an average f1-score of
0.726. This suggest the possibilities of acquiring sufficient validation performance on a limited
feature space of only 36 features, all from the three best feature types.
When limiting the feature space to the most frequently selected features across the outer folds,
they are selected based on classifiers that together have seen the entire data set. The average
f1-scores in Table 12 might therefore reflect overfitted models since the f1-scores could not be
acquired for unseen data in order to asses the generalization of the models. The best models
were included to reflect the possibilities within the San Diego data to distinguish the PD and
HC classes, and to asses which features might be best for this specific classification problem.
Apart from not being able to asses the generalization of the model within the same data set,
since all data has been used, the models are also only trained on data acquired from a single
EEG device for a small set of subject representing only HC and a single neurological disease,
namely PD. If a better generalization is preferred, then additional data sets should be included
to better capture the variation of neurological diseases, age, dementia stages and EEG devices
along with other factors.
The classifiers trained on the San Diego data set are likely to capture the effects of PD on the
human brain network, for which it can not be stated to what degree cognitive impairment and
dementia is reflected in the data or models. With PD patients on average developing dementia
48 of 135
==PAGE:57==
Katrine Dam Christensen
02/07/2023
Technical University of Denmark
10 years after their PD diagnosis, and mild-, moderate- and severe cognitive impairment likely
preceding the dementia diagnosis, some of the included patients might already be experiencing
cognitive symptoms despite the MMSE scores not suggesting a significant difference in cognitive
function between PD and HC. A study by Mamikonyan et al. 2009 [43] even found that 1/3
of PD patients with a normal MMSE score had a mild cognitive impairment when evaluated
using other cognitive impairment test including Hopkins Verbal Learning Test (memory), Stroop
Color-Word Test (executive function) and Tower of London-Drexel, indicating that early cogni-
tive impairment in PD patients can be missed when only assessing the MMSE score.
To better capture the cognitive impairment aspect of dementia, it should be sought to acquire
data that better captures the spectrum of cognitive impairment along with a wider range of
cognitive function scoring methods.
Reflections on project plan, goals and learning objectives
Graph thresholding was underestimated in terms of both computational time and possible ef-
fects on results. Based on findings of Adamovich et al. 2022 [1] it was decided to also include
threshold optimization in stead of randomly selecting threshold values. Optimizing across com-
binations of possible threshold values for all frequency bands yielded high computational costs,
with total time for calculating optimal thresholds for weight- and density-based thresholding
exceeding a week for each tested spatial level. This greatly exceeded the estimated duration of
signal processing, see Gantt chart in Appendix A.1. The individual two weeks of signal process-
ing were indented for the processing of AD data, which had to be postponed and lastly omitted
from the thesis due to time constrains, causing the 6. learning objective to not be met.
Additionally general computational time was also underestimated, since some classifiers took
too much time to be include within the provided time frame, given the limitations on process-
ing power. Initially the polynomial kernel was also intended to be included as one of the SVC
models, but was cut do to very high computational time. The remaining parts of the Gantt
chart were followed by writing theory and methods as each computational step was implemented.
The overall project goal was constructed based on the inclusion of both PD and AD, which with
AD not included prohibits the comparison of the two disease models.
Future work
The entirety of this thesis was based on the considerations of both AD and PD, as it was
intended to also include comparisons between the two diseases. This thesis functions as the pre-
liminary work into characterizing neurological diseases using machine learning and graph theory.
The NIA-AA research framework [34] puts emphasis on the Alzheimer’s and cognitive contin-
uum, suggesting that regression as opposed to classification might better capture the continuous
change of AD patients, applicable to all neurological diseases causing cognitive impairment. The
use of other connectivity measures and features could be included in futures studies, along with
data of a wider range of neurological diseases and severity of cognitive impairment.
The current SanDiego data is measured during for eo-re-EEG, a less used condition compared to
ec [46], which is also confirmed by the majority of the papers included in Tables 29 and 30 being
for the ec-rsEEG condition. Acquire ec-rs-EEG data, would be of interest since the ec condition
has been said to be more sensitive when assessing brain activity [46] and is also recommended
by Babiloni 2021 [10] for measuring AD patients.
49 of 135
==PAGE:58==
Katrine Dam Christensen
02/07/2023
Technical University of Denmark
6
Conclusion
This thesis constitutes the preliminary work on evaluating the usability of graph theory metrics
for characterizing brain network dysfunction of neurocognitive disorders. Logistic Regression
and Support Vector Classifiers were used to classify Parkinson’s Disease patients from healthy
controls using graph theory metrics based on Imaginary Coherence of resting-state EEG as a
measure of connectivity between brain regions.
The effect of graph thresholding was investigated, for which it was found that optimal threshold
value varied greatly between frequency bands and spatial level, with neither weight-based or
density-based thresholding consistently performing better than the other. This suggests that
choice of method and optimization should depend on the specific use case, as non optimal thresh-
old could reduce differences between the groups sought to be differentiated.
For classification of PD and HC no preference for the models to select features of specific fre-
quency bands or spatial level was found. The feature types of most importance were found to
be node degree, closeness vitality and effective size, with their overwhelming presence in the
selected features across all tested models indicating the possible usage of these three features
for network based classification of PD in future studies. A simplified model of the best features
reached an f1-score of 0.726 for a logistic regression model using density-based thresholding and
only 36 total features, however the generalization is undetermined and the model could therefore
be overfitted. The model’s selection of features reflects patterns of high estimated importance
of node degree and closeness vitality within the same frequency band and node position in the
frontal region and effective size mainly in the left occipital region.
Theses results are based on small data set of a single type of NCD reflecting only mild cognitive
impairment, and the generalizability of the proposed features of importance and graph theory in
general must be evaluated across a broader spectrum of cognitive impairment before is usability
can be fully evaluated.
It is therefore proposed that future studies should asses if the findings of degree, closeness vitality
and effective size importance can be replicated for other data sets, and further investigate the
ability for graph theory based classification to generalize across different neurological disorders
and degrees of cognitive impairment, with thoughtful consideration for the importance of the
thresholding process.
50 of 135
==PAGE:59==
Katrine Dam Christensen
02/07/2023
Technical University of Denmark
7
References
[1] Timofey Adamovich, Ilya Zakharov, Anna Tabueva, and Sergey Malykh. The thresholding
problem and variability in the EEG graph network parameters. Scientific Reports, 12(1),
12 2022. doi:10.1038/s41598-022-22079-2.
[2] Saeedeh Afshari and Mahdi Jalili. Directed Functional Networks in Alzheimer’s Disease:
Disruption of Global and Local Connectivity Measures. IEEE Journal of Biomedical and
Health Informatics, 21(4):949–955, 7 2017. doi:10.1109/JBHI.2016.2578954.
[3] Majid Aljalal, Saeed A. Aldosari, Khalil Alsharabi, Akram M. Abdurraqeeb, and Fahd A.
Alturki. Parkinson’s Disease Detection from Resting-State EEG Signals Using Common
Spatial Pattern, Entropy, and Machine Learning Techniques. Diagnostics, 12(5), 5 2022.
doi:10.3390/diagnostics12051033.
[4] Majid Aljalal, Saeed A. Aldosari, Marta Molinas, Khalil AlSharabi, and Fahd A. Al-
turki.
Detection of Parkinson’s disease from EEG signals using discrete wavelet trans-
form, different entropy measures, and machine learning techniques.
Scientific Reports,
12(1):22547, 12 2022. URL: https://www.nature.com/articles/s41598-022-26644-7,
doi:10.1038/s41598-022-26644-7.
[5] Akram Alqesmah, Khaled A. A. Alloush, Anwar Saleh, and G. Deepak.
Entire
Harary index of graphs.
Journal of Discrete Mathematical Sciences and Cryp-
tography,
25(8):2629–2643,
2022.
URL:
https://www-scopus-com.proxy.findit.
cvt.dk/record/display.uri?eid=2-s2.0-85106297211&origin=inward&txGid=
c5c5136ff8db80970ee9a4ee205dc02d.
[6] Alzheimer’s Association. Alzheimer’s Association Report - 2019 Alzheimer’s disease facts
and figures. Technical report, 3 2019. URL: https://www-sciencedirect-com.proxy.
findit.cvt.dk/science/article/pii/S1552526019300317.
[7] Alzherimer’s
Association.
Parkinson’s
Disease
Dementia,
2023.
URL:
https:
//www.alz.org/alzheimers-dementia/what-is-dementia/types-of-dementia/
parkinson-s-disease-dementia.
[8] Alzherimer’s Association.
What Is Dementia?, 2023.
URL: https://www.alz.org/
alzheimers-dementia/what-is-dementia.
[9] Stefan Appelhoff, Matthew Sanderson, Teon L Brooks, Marijn Van Vliet, Romain
Quentin, Chris Holdgraf, Maximilien Chaumon, Ezequiel Mikulan, Kambiz Tavabi, Richard
H¨ochenberger, Dominik Welke, Clemens Brunner, Alexander P Rockhill, Eric Larson,
Alexandre Gramfort, and Mainak Jas. MNE-BIDS: Organizing electrophysiological data
into the BIDS format and facilitating their analysis. 2019. doi:10.21105/joss.01896.
[10] Claudio Babiloni, Xianghong Arakaki, Hamed Azami, Karim Bennys, Katarzyna Blinowska,
Laura Bonanni, Ana Bujan, Maria C. Carrillo, Andrzej Cichocki, Jaisalmer de Frutos-Lucas,
Claudio Del Percio, Bruno Dubois, Rebecca Edelmayer, Gary Egan, Stephane Epelbaum,
Javier Escudero, Alan Evans, Francesca Farina, Keith Fargo, Alberto Fern´andez, Raffaele
Ferri, Giovanni Frisoni, Harald Hampel, Michael G. Harrington, Vesna Jelic, Jaeseung
Jeong, Yang Jiang, Maciej Kaminski, Voyko Kavcic, Kerry Kilborn, Sanjeev Kumar, Alice
Lam, Lew Lim, Roberta Lizio, David Lopez, Susanna Lopez, Brendan Lucey, Fernando
Maest´u, William J. McGeown, Ian McKeith, Davide Vito Moretti, Flavio Nobili, Giuseppe
Noce, John Olichney, Marco Onofrj, Ricardo Osorio, Mario Parra-Rodriguez, Tarek Rajji,
Petra Ritter, Andrea Soricelli, Fabrizio Stocchi, Ioannis Tarnanas, John Paul Taylor, Stefan
51 of 135
==PAGE:60==
Katrine Dam Christensen
02/07/2023
Technical University of Denmark
Teipel, Federico Tucci, Mitchell Valdes-Sosa, Pedro Valdes-Sosa, Marco Weiergr¨aber, Gor-
sev Yener, and Bahar Guntekin. Measures of resting state EEG rhythms for clinical trials
in Alzheimer’s disease: Recommendations of an expert panel. Alzheimer’s and Dementia,
17(9):1528–1553, 9 2021. doi:10.1002/alz.12311.
[11] Andr´e M. Bastos and Jan Mathijs Schoffelen. A tutorial review of functional connectivity
analysis methods and their interpretational pitfalls. Frontiers in Systems Neuroscience,
9(JAN2016), 1 2016. doi:10.3389/fnsys.2015.00175.
[12] Christopher M. Bishop.
Sparse Kernel Machines.
In Pattern Recognition and Machine
Learning, chapter 7, pages 325–358. Springer, Cambridge, 2006.
[13] Stephen P. Borgatti. Structural Holes: Unpacking Burt’s Redundancy Measures. CONNEC-
TIONS, 20(1):35–38, 1997. URL: http://www.analytictech.com/connections/v20(1)
/holes.htm.
[14] Ulrik Brandes and Thomas Erleback.
Network Analysis - Methodological Foundations.
Springer, 2005.
URL: https://link-springer-com.proxy.findit.cvt.dk/book/10.
1007/b106453.
[15] Freddy W. Cao and Elizabeth M. Long.
Disorders of Thought, Emotion and Memory.
In Porth’s Essentials of Pathophysiology, chapter 18, pages 459–480. Wolters Kluwer, 5
edition, 2020.
[16] Giordano Cecchetti, Federica Agosta, Silvia Basaia, Camilla Cividini, Marco Cursi, Roberto
Santangelo, Francesca Caso, Fabio Minicucci, Giuseppe Magnani, and Massimo Filippi.
Resting-state electroencephalographic biomarkers of Alzheimer’s disease.
NeuroImage:
Clinical, 31:102711, 1 2021. doi:10.1016/J.NICL.2021.102711.
[17] Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
Alzheimer’s Disease and Healthy Aging -
About Dementia, 4 2019. URL: https://www.cdc.gov/aging/dementia/index.html#:
~:text=Dementia%20is%20not%20a%20specific,a%20part%20of%20normal%20aging.
[18] D. Chan, H. J. Suk, B. Jackson, N. P. Milman, D. Stark, S. D. Beach, and L. H. Tsai.
Induction of specific brain oscillations may restore neural circuits and be used for the
treatment of Alzheimer’s disease. Journal of Internal Medicine, 290(5):993–1009, 11 2021.
doi:10.1111/joim.13329.
[19] Aaron Clauset, M E J Newman, and Cristopher Moore. Finding community structure in
very large networks. 2004.
[20] Mike X. Cohen. Analyzing Neural Time Series Data - Theory and Practice. The MIT Press,
2014.
[21] Mike X. Cohen.
Graph Theory.
In Analyzing Neural Time Series Data - Theory and
Practice, chapter 31, pages 429–446. The MIT Press, 9 2014.
[22] Mike X. Cohen.
Data analysis lecturelets by Mike X Cohen: Phase-based connectivity
analyses, 1 2015. URL: https://mikexcohen.com/lectures.html.
[23] Bal´azs Czigler, D´ora Csik´os, Zolt´an Hidasi, Zs´ofia Anna Ga´al, ´Eva Csibri, ´Eva Kiss,
P´al Salacz, and M´ark Moln´ar.
Quantitative EEG in early Alzheimer’s disease patients
- power spectrum and complexity features. International journal of psychophysiology : of-
ficial journal of the International Organization of Psychophysiology, 68(1):75–80, 4 2008.
URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/18093675/, doi:10.1016/J.IJPSYCHO.2007.
11.002.
52 of 135
==PAGE:61==
Katrine Dam Christensen
02/07/2023
Technical University of Denmark
[24] Willem de Haan,
Yolande A.L. Pijnenburg,
Rob L.M. Strijers,
Yolande van der
Made, Wiesje M. van der Flier, Philip Scheltens, and Cornelis J. Stam.
Func-
tional neural network analysis in frontotemporal dementia and Alzheimer’s disease
using EEG and graph theory.
BMC Neuroscience,
10(1):1–12,
8 2009.
URL:
https://bmcneurosci.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/1471-2202-10-101,
doi:10.1186/1471-2202-10-101/FIGURES/6.
[25] Pauline Delaveau, Pilar Salgado-Pineda, Philippe Fossati, Tatiana Witjas, Jean Philippe
Azulay, and Olivier Blin.
Dopaminergic modulation of the default mode network in
Parkinson’s disease. European Neuropsychopharmacology, 20(11):784–792, 11 2010. doi:
10.1016/j.euroneuro.2010.07.001.
[26] Narsingh Deo. Graph Theory with Applications to Engineering & Computer Science. Dover,
Mineola, New York, 2016.
[27] Jason R. Faulhaber and Cynthia Bautista. Disorders of Motor Function. In Porth’s Essen-
tials of Pathophysiology, chapter 15, pages 379–411. Wolters Kluwer, 5 edition, 2020.
[28] Noa Fogelson, Ling Li, Yuan Li, Miguel Fernandez-del Olmo, Diego Santos-Garcia, and Avi
Peled. Functional connectivity abnormalities during contextual processing in schizophrenia
and in Parkinson’s disease. Brain and Cognition, 82(3):243–253, 8 2013. doi:10.1016/J.
BANDC.2013.05.001.
[29] Pascal Fries. A mechanism for cognitive dynamics: Neuronal communication through neu-
ronal coherence. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 9(10):474–480, 2005. doi:10.1016/j.tics.
2005.08.011.
[30] Jobi S. George, Jon Strunk, Rachel Mak-Mccully, Melissa Houser, Howard Poizner, and
Adam R. Aron. Dopaminergic therapy in Parkinson’s disease decreases cortical beta band
coherence in the resting state and increases cortical beta band power during executive
control. NeuroImage: Clinical, 3:261–270, 2013. doi:10.1016/j.nicl.2013.07.013.
[31] Chun Xiao Han, Jiang Wang, Guo Sheng Yi, and Yan Qiu Che. Investigation of EEG
abnormalities in the early stage of Parkinson’s disease. Cognitive Neurodynamics, 7(4):351–
359, 8 2013. doi:10.1007/s11571-013-9247-z.
[32] Derek L. Hansen, Ben Shneiderman, Marc A. Smith, and Itai Himelboim. Calculating and
visualizing network metrics. Analyzing Social Media Networks with NodeXL: Insights from
a Connected World, pages 79–94, 1 2020. doi:10.1016/B978-0-12-817756-3.00006-6.
[33] M. Hassan, L. Chaton, P. Benquet, A. Delval, C. Leroy, L. Plomhause, A. J.H. Moonen,
A. A. Duits, A. F.G. Leentjens, V. van Kranen-Mastenbroek, L. Defebvre, P. Derambure,
F. Wendling, and K. Dujardin. Functional connectivity disruptions correlate with cognitive
phenotypes in Parkinson’s disease. NeuroImage: Clinical, 14:591–601, 1 2017. doi:10.
1016/J.NICL.2017.03.002.
[34] Clifford R. Jack, David A. Bennett, Kaj Blennow, Maria C. Carrillo, Billy Dunn, Saman-
tha Budd Haeberlein, David M. Holtzman, William Jagust, Frank Jessen, Jason Karlaw-
ish, Enchi Liu, Jose Luis Molinuevo, Thomas Montine, Creighton Phelps, Katherine P.
Rankin, Christopher C. Rowe, Philip Scheltens, Eric Siemers, Heather M. Snyder, Reisa
Sperling, Cerise Elliott, Eliezer Masliah, Laurie Ryan, and Nina Silverberg. NIA-AA Re-
search Framework: Toward a biological definition of Alzheimer’s disease, 4 2018. URL:
https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/29653606/, doi:10.1016/j.jalz.2018.02.018.
53 of 135
==PAGE:62==
Katrine Dam Christensen
02/07/2023
Technical University of Denmark
[35] Zahra Jafari, Bryan E. Kolb, and Majid H. Mohajerani.
Neural oscillations and brain
stimulation in Alzheimer’s disease. Progress in Neurobiology, 194, 11 2020. doi:10.1016/
j.pneurobio.2020.101878.
[36] Mahdi Jalili.
Graph theoretical analysis of Alzheimer’s disease: Discrimination of AD
patients from healthy subjects. Information Sciences, 384:145–156, 4 2017. doi:10.1016/
j.ins.2016.08.047.
[37] Smith K. Khare, Varun Bajaj, and U. Rajendra Acharya. Detection of Parkinson’s disease
using automated tunable Q wavelet transform technique with EEG signals. Biocybernetics
and Biomedical Engineering, 41(2):679–689, 4 2021. doi:10.1016/j.bbe.2021.04.008.
[38] Seyed Alireza Khoshnevis and Ravi Sankar.
Classification of the stages of Parkinson’s
disease using novel higher-order statistical features of EEG signals. Neural Computing and
Applications, 33(13):7615–7627, 7 2021. doi:10.1007/s00521-020-05505-2.
[39] Dominik Klepl, Fei He, Min Wu, Daniel J. Blackburn, and Ptolemaios Sarrigiannis. EEG-
Based Graph Neural Network Classification of Alzheimer’s Disease: An Empirical Eval-
uation of Functional Connectivity Methods. IEEE Transactions on Neural Systems and
Rehabilitation Engineering, 30:2651–2660, 2022. doi:10.1109/TNSRE.2022.3204913.
[40] Vito Latora and Massimo Marchiori. Efficient behavior of small-world networks. Physical
Review Letters, 87(19):198701–1, 11 2001. doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.87.198701.
[41] Zhibao Li, Chong Liu, Qiao Wang, Kun Liang, Chunlei Han, Hui Qiao, Jianguo Zhang,
and Fangang Meng. Abnormal Functional Brain Network in Parkinson’s Disease and the
Effect of Acute Deep Brain Stimulation. Frontiers in Neurology, 12:1675, 10 2021. doi:
10.3389/FNEUR.2021.715455/BIBTEX.
[42] T Locatelli, M Cursi, D Liberati, M Franceschi, and G Comi. EEG coherence in Alzheimer’s
disease. Electroencephalography and clinical Neurophysiology, 106:229–237, 1998.
[43] Eugenia Mamikonyan, Paul J. Moberg, Andrew Siderowf, John E. Duda, Tom Ten Have,
Howard I. Hurtig, Matthew B. Stern, and Daniel Weintraub. Mild cognitive impairment
is common in Parkinson’s disease patients with normal Mini-Mental State Examination
(MMSE) scores.
Parkinsonism and Related Disorders, 15(3):226–231, 3 2009.
doi:10.
1016/j.parkreldis.2008.05.006.
[44] Sergei Maslov and Kim Sneppen. Specificity and Stability in Topology of Protein Networks.
Science, 296(5569):910–913, 5 202. URL: https://www-science-org.proxy.findit.cvt.
dk/doi/10.1126/science.1065103.
[45] Ramtin Mehraram, Marcus Kaiser, Ruth Cromarty, Sara Graziadio, John T. O’Brien, Al-
ison Killen, John Paul Taylor, and Luis R. Peraza.
Weighted network measures reveal
differences between dementia types: An EEG study. Human Brain Mapping, 41(6):1573–
1590, 4 2020. URL: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1002/hbm.24896,
doi:10.1002/HBM.24896.
[46] Aleksandra Miljevic, Neil W Bailey, Fidel Vila-Rodriguez, Sally E Herring, and Paul B
Fitzgerald. EEG-connectivity: A fundamental guide and checklist for optimal study design
and evaluation. Technical report.
[47] Francesca Miraglia, Fabrizio Vecchio, Chiara Pappalettera, Lorenzo Nucci, Maria Cotelli,
Elda Judica, Florinda Ferreri, and Paolo Maria Rossini. Brain Connectivity and Graph
Theory Analysis in Alzheimer’s and Parkinson’s Disease: The Contribution of Electrophys-
iological Techniques. Brain sciences, 12(3), 3 2022. URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.
gov/35326358/, doi:10.3390/BRAINSCI12030402.
54 of 135
==PAGE:63==
Katrine Dam Christensen
02/07/2023
Technical University of Denmark
[48] MNE. mne-bids - version 0.10. URL: https://mne.tools/mne-bids/stable/index.html.
[49] MNE. mne - version 1.3.0, 2022. URL: https://zenodo.org/record/7671973.
[50] MNE.
mne-connectivity
-
version
0.5.0,
2023.
URL:
https://mne.tools/
mne-connectivity/stable/index.html.
[51] MNE developers. MNE raw - interpolate bads, 2023. URL: https://mne.tools/stable/
generated/mne.io.Raw.html#mne.io.Raw.interpolate_bads.
[52] MNE
Developers.
mne connectivity.spectral connectivity epochs,
1
2023.
URL:
https://mne.tools/mne-connectivity/stable/generated/mne_connectivity.
spectral_connectivity_epochs.html.
[53] NATIONAL INSTITUTE FOR CLINICAL EXCELLENCE. Health Technology Appraisal
- Donepezil, galantamine, rivastigmine and memantine for the treatment
}of mild to moderate Alzheimer’s disease. Technical report, 2009.
[54] National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke. Brain Basics: Know Your Brain,
3 2023.
URL: https://www.ninds.nih.gov/health-information/public-education/
brain-basics/brain-basics-know-your-brain.
[55] NetworkX. NetworkX - version 2.8.8, 2023. URL: https://networkx.org/.
[56] NetworkX
Developers.
local efficiency,
2023.
URL:
https://networkx.org/
documentation/stable/reference/algorithms/generated/networkx.algorithms.
efficiency_measures.local_efficiency.html#networkx.algorithms.efficiency_
measures.local_efficiency.
[57] Guido Nolte, Ou Bai, Lewis Wheaton, Zoltan Mari, Sherry Vorbach, and Mark Hallett.
Identifying true brain interaction from EEG data using the imaginary part of coherency.
Clinical Neurophysiology, 115(10):2292–2307, 10 2004. doi:10.1016/j.clinph.2004.04.
029.
[58] Optoceutics. Natural Brainwaves: A Novel Therapeutic Target to Restore Brain Health, 7
2021. URL: https://optoceutics.com/brainwaves/.
[59] Peyton Z. Peebles. Random Processes. In Probability, Random Variables, and Random
Signal, chapter 6-7, pages 142–171. McGraw-Hill, 2 edition, 1987.
[60] Peyton Z. Peebles. Spectral Characteristics of Random Processes. In Probability, Random
variables, and Random Signal Principles, chapter 7, pages 172–204. McGrawHill, 2 edition,
1987.
[61] Alejandro Armando Pel´aez Su´arez, Sheila Berrillo Batista, Ivonne Pedroso Ib´a˜nez, En-
rique Casabona Fern´andez, Marinet Fuentes Campos, and Lilia Morales Chac´on. EEG-
Derived Functional Connectivity Patterns Associated with Mild Cognitive Impairment in
Parkinson’s Disease. Behavioral Sciences 2021, Vol. 11, Page 40, 11(3):40, 3 2021. URL:
https://www.mdpi.com/2076-328X/11/3/40/htm, doi:10.3390/BS11030040.
[62] Cyril R. Pernet, Stefan Appelhoff, Krzysztof J. Gorgolewski, Guillaume Flandin, Christophe
Phillips, Arnaud Delorme, and Robert Oostenveld. EEG-BIDS, an extension to the brain
imaging data structure for electroencephalography. Scientific Data, 6(1), 12 2019. doi:
10.1038/S41597-019-0104-8.
[63] Spase Petkoski and Viktor K. Jirsa.
Transmission time delays organize the brain
network synchronization.
The Royal Society Publishing, 4 2019.
URL: https://
royalsocietypublishing.org/doi/10.1098/rsta.2018.0132.
55 of 135
==PAGE:64==
Katrine Dam Christensen
02/07/2023
Technical University of Denmark
[64] David J. Philips, Alec McGlaughlin, David Ruth, Leah R. Jager, and Anja Soldan. Graph
theoretic analysis of structural connectivity across the spectrum of Alzheimer’s disease -
The Improtance of graph creation methods - Phillips. NeuroImage: Clinical, 7:377–390,
2015.
[65] Jesus Poza, Maria Garcia, Carlos Gomez, Alejandro Bachiller, Alicia Carreres, and
Roberto Hornero.
Characterization of the spontaneous electroencephalographic activity
in Alzheimer’s disease using disequilibria and graph theory. Proceedings of the Annual In-
ternational Conference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society, EMBS,
pages 5990–5993, 2013. doi:10.1109/EMBC.2013.6610917.
[66] PsychDB. Mini-Mental Status Exam (MMSE), 6 2021. URL: https://www.psychdb.com/
cognitive-testing/mmse.
[67] Sadasivan Puthusserypady. 22052: Applied Signal Processing - Lecture Notes, 1 2020.
[68] Diestel Reinhard. Graph Theory. Springer, Hamburg, 5th edition, 2017.
[69] Irena Rektorova, Lenka Krajcovicova, Radek Marecek, Michal Mikl, and Ivan Rektor. P1-
340: Default mode network in patients with Parkinson’s disease dementia. Alzheimer’s &
Dementia, 7(4S Part 6), 7 2011. doi:10.1016/j.jalz.2011.05.620.
[70] Alexander P. Rockhill, Nicko Jackson, Jobi George, Adam Aron, and Nicole C. Swann. UC
San Diego Resting State EEG Data from Patients with Parkinson’s Disease, 5 2020. URL:
https://openneuro.org/datasets/ds002778/versions/1.0.2.
[71] scikit learn developers. 1.4. Support Vector Machines. URL: https://scikit-learn.org/
stable/modules/svm.html#.
[72] scikit learn developers.
1.1. Linear Models, 2023.
URL: https://scikit-learn.org/
stable/modules/linear_model.html#logistic-regression.
[73] scikit learn developers.
3.3. Metrics and scoring:
quantifying the quality of predic-
tions, 2023.
URL: https://scikit-learn.org/stable/modules/model_evaluation.
html#precision-recall-f-measure-metrics.
[74] Mohamed Shaban and Amy W. Amara. Resting-state electroencephalography based deep-
learning for the detection of Parkinson’s disease.
PLoS ONE, 17(2 February), 2 2022.
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0263159.
[75] L´ıvia Shirahige, Marina Berenguer-Rocha, Sarah Mendon¸ca, S´ergio Rocha, Marcelo Cairr˜ao
Rodrigues, and K´atia Monte-Silva. Quantitative Electroencephalography Characteristics for
Parkinson’s Disease: A Systematic Review. Journal of Parkinson’s Disease, 10(2):455–470,
2020. doi:10.3233/JPD-191840.
[76] C. J. Stam, W. De Haan, A. Daffertshofer, B. F. Jones, I. Manshanden, A. M. Van Cap-
pellen Van Walsum, T. Montez, J. P.A. Verbunt, J. C. De Munck, B. W. Van Dijk, H. W.
Berendse, and P. Scheltens. Graph theoretical analysis of magnetoencephalographic func-
tional connectivity in Alzheimer’s disease. Brain, 132(1):213–224, 1 2009. URL: https:
//academic.oup.com/brain/article/132/1/213/287071, doi:10.1093/BRAIN/AWN262.
[77] C. J. Stam, B. F. Jones, G. Nolte, M. Breakspear, and Ph Scheltens. Small-world networks
and functional connectivity in Alzheimer’s disease. Cerebral Cortex, 17(1):92–99, 1 2007.
doi:10.1093/cercor/bhj127.
56 of 135
==PAGE:65==
Katrine Dam Christensen
02/07/2023
Technical University of Denmark
[78] Cornelis J. Stam and Jaap C. Reijneveld. Graph theoretical analysis of complex networks
in the brain. Nonlinear Biomedical Physics 2007 1:1, 1(1):1–19, 7 2007. URL: https:
//nonlinearbiomedphys.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/1753-4631-1-3, doi:
10.1186/1753-4631-1-3.
[79] Rene L. Utianski, John N. Caviness, Elisabeth C.W. van Straaten, Thomas G. Beach, Brit-
tany N. Dugger, Holly A. Shill, Erika D. Driver-Dunckley, Marwan N. Sabbagh, Shyamal
Mehta, Charles H. Adler, and Joseph G. Hentz. Graph theory network function in Parkin-
son’s disease assessed with electroencephalography. Clinical Neurophysiology, 127(5):2228–
2236, 5 2016. doi:10.1016/J.CLINPH.2016.02.017.
[80] Thilo Van Eimeren, Oury Monchi, ; Benedicte Ballanger, and Antonio P Strafella. Dysfunc-
tion of the Default Mode Network in Parkinson Disease A Functional Magnetic Resonance
Imaging Study. Technical Report 7, 2009. URL: http://www.fil.ion.ucl.ac.uk/spm;.
[81] Fabrizio Vecchio, Francesca Miraglia, Francesca Al´u, Alessandro Orticoni, Elda Judica,
Maria Cotelli, and Paolo Maria Rossini. Contribution of Graph Theory Applied to EEG
Data Analysis for Alzheimer’s Disease Versus Vascular Dementia Diagnosis. Journal of
Alzheimer’s Disease, 82(2):871–879, 1 2021. doi:10.3233/JAD-210394.
[82] Fabrizio Vecchio, Francesca Miraglia, Camillo Marra, Davide Quaranta, Maria Gabriella
Vita, Placido Bramanti, and Paolo Maria Rossini. Human Brain Networks in Cognitive
Decline: A Graph Theoretical Analysis of Cortical Connectivity from EEG Data. Journal
of Alzheimer’s Disease, 41(1):113–127, 1 2014. doi:10.3233/JAD-132087.
[83] Fabrizio Vecchio, Chiara Pappalettera, Francesca Miraglia, Francesca Al`u, Alessan-
dro Orticoni, Elda Judica, Maria Cotelli, Francesca Pistoia, and Paolo Maria Rossini.
Graph Theory on Brain Cortical Sources in Parkinson’s Disease:
The Analysis of
‘Small World’ Organization from EEG. Sensors 2021, Vol. 21, Page 7266, 21(21):7266,
10 2021. URL: https://www.mdpi.com/1424-8220/21/21/7266/htmhttps://www.mdpi.
com/1424-8220/21/21/7266, doi:10.3390/S21217266.
[84] Ruofan Wang, Jiang Wang, Haitao Yu, Xile Wei, Chen Yang, and Bin Deng. Decreased
coherence and functional connectivity of electroencephalograph in Alzheimer’s disease.
Chaos: An Interdisciplinary Journal of Nonlinear Science, 24(3):033136, 9 2014. URL:
https://aip.scitation.org/doi/abs/10.1063/1.4896095, doi:10.1063/1.4896095.
[85] Weill Institute for Neurosciences - Memory and Aging Center.
Behavior & Per-
sonality
Changes,
2023.
URL:
https://memory.ucsf.edu/caregiving-support/
behavior-personality-changes.
[86] Andrew
Zalesky.
Network
statistics
and
thresholding,
6
2017.
URL:
https:
//www.humanbrainmapping.org/files/2017/ED%20Courses/Course%20Materials/
Brain_Graphs_Zalesky_Second.pdf.
57 of 135
==PAGE:66==
Katrine Dam Christensen
02/07/2023
Technical University of Denmark
A
Appendix
A.1
Project Plan
Project description
Parkinson’s Disease (PD) is a neurodegenerative disease and a prevalent cause of dementia. It
shares neuronal networks characteristics with Alzheimer’s Disease (AD), another common cause
of dementia. PD and AD share pathological changes of the default mode network compared
to healthy controls [80, 69, 25] in Functional magnetic resonance imaging, which indicate an
alteration of the flow of information between regions of the brain. In electroencephalography
(EEG) studies, PD patients show an increase in the lower- and a decrease in the higher frequency
bands [75], similar to that of AD [35]. Several multivariate discriminatory models have been
employed to distinguish PD patients from healthy controls (HCs) using resting state (rs-)EEG
data.[74, 3, 38]
This project will attempt to employ state-of-the-art machine learning methods for discovering
characteristic brain network changes in rs-EEG that differentiate PD and HC cohorts along
with AD and HC. The models will subsequently be tested on the opposite dataset, such that
the model trained on PD and HC data is tested on AD and HC data and vice versa, to fur-
ther investigate differences and similarities between the two diseases.
From the rs-EEG the
Imaginary Coherence (ImCoh) is used as a measure of brain connectivity between each EEG
electrode pair. A graph is constructed based on the thresholded connectivity measures, where
multiple thresholding techniques will be tested due to the difficulty of obtaining comparable
thresholded graphs across multiple subjects. Simple graph characteristic features like degree,
clustering coefficient, characteristic path length etc. to be used for classification are extracted
for multiple frequency bands. The classification model should be easy to interpret and therefore
includes training of both Support Vector Classification (SVC) and Logistic Regression (LogReg)
Classification with regularization on number of features in the model and with Recursive Fea-
ture Elimination (RFE) to evaluate feature importance. Model optimization is performed using
nested cross-validation (CV) for hyper-parameter tuning.
The dataset with 15 PD and 16 HC subjects is obtained from the open source OpenNeuro
database (accession number ds002778). Prior to project admission it was planned to use the
dataset with 10 AD and 5 HC subjects obtained from the ALZLIGHT Pilot study (ClinicalTri-
als.gov Identifier: NCT04574921) through existing collaborations between Zealand University
Hospital and DTU Compute, but in the meantime access was also granted to a larger dataset of
230 subjects split into groups of 33 Healthy Controls Elders (60+ years old), 34 Subjective Cog-
nitive Decline, 79 Mild Cognitive Impairment, 48 AD and 36 Healthy Young (25-40 years old).
The larger AD dataset was acquired through signing of a non-disclosure agreement, samples of
the data can be acquired from zenodo.org (identifier: 4316608).
58 of 135
==PAGE:67==
Katrine Dam Christensen
02/07/2023
Technical University of Denmark
Learning objectives
1. Understand electrophysiology of EEG
2. Understand and implement pre-processing of EEG data
3. Extract relevant physiological features from EEG data
4. Train Classifier to distinguish between PD and HC groups
5. Evaluate performance of classification using cross-validation and resampling
6. Use developed methods transferred to AD data and investigate similarities of groups
Project goal
To construct classifiers for distinguishing between HC subjects and PD patients along with HC
subjects and AD patients, and then later test the classifiers with data from the opposite disease
dataset. The classification should be based on graph network features extracted from measures
of EEG based connectivity, and the importance of each feature should be evaluated for both
diseases.
Gantt chart
59 of 135
==PAGE:68==
Katrine Dam Christensen
02/07/2023
Technical University of Denmark
A.2
Removal of ICA components, EEG channels and EEG time segments
The removal of ICA components, EEG channels and time segments through visual inspection
is determined based the following criteria, examples of which can be seen in Figure 20. Firstly
EEG channels are marked for removal, secondly time segments are marked for removal, thirdly
ICA components are marked for removal and lastly the EEG time segments to be removed are
double checked after removal of the selected ICA components. As proposed by Cohen [20], for
the purpose of reproducibility the removed ICA components, EEG channels and time segments
for each subject are listed in Table 13.
Criteria for removal of an EEG channel are:
• Channel is deemed noisy for more than half of the duration of the EEG measurement time.
See example in Figure 18a.
• High power over all frequencies relative to all other channels.
See example in Figure 18b.
Criteria for removal of an EEG time segment are:
• EEG channels are visually estimated to be highly affected by noise other than eye blinks.
See example in Figure 19.
Criteria for removal of an ICA eye-blink component are:
• Temporal element similar to that of an approximate blinking length and rate.
See example in the first row of Figure 20b.
• Periodic and non-noise like temporal occurrence of ’eye-blinks’ in the segment image.
See example in the top right of Figure 20c.
• High weighting of the electrodes in the prefrontal region (Fp1, Fp2, AF3, AF4).
See example of ICA component ICA000 in Figure 20a.
• Non-noise like smooth decaying frequency spectrum, with presence of lower frequencies.
See example in the top left of Figure 20c.
60 of 135
==PAGE:69==
Katrine Dam Christensen
02/07/2023
Technical University of Denmark
(a) EEG channels in time-domain. Noise filled channel marked as red (Fp1).
(b) EEG channels in frequency-domain as power spectra.
Figure 18: Noisy EEG channel Fp1 of subject hc2 shown in (a) time- and (b) frequency-domain.
Figure 19: Noisy EEG segment [57:60]s of subject pd19.
61 of 135
==PAGE:70==
Katrine Dam Christensen
02/07/2023
Technical University of Denmark
(a) ICA components topographical plot
(b) ICA components over time
(c) ICA component 0
Figure 20: Example of visual inspection of EEG and ICA for subject hc31 where ICA component
0 is removed in correspondence to the listed criteria. (a) topographical plot of presence of ICA
at each electrode position, (b) ICA components as a function of time and (c) detailed time and
frequency plots for ICA component 0. Figures were generated using the inspect data.py script
in Appendix A.9.2, where AU denotes Arbitrary Units.
62 of 135
==PAGE:71==
Katrine Dam Christensen
02/07/2023
Technical University of Denmark
Subject
ID
ICA
comp.
EEG
channels
EEG
time segments [s]
hc1
0
-
-
hc2
0
Fp1
[16:17],[19:20],[36:47]
pd3
0
-
[1:2],[6:8]
hc4
-
-
-
pd5
0
-
[14:20],[51:59],[126:129],[133:135],[143:149],[190:193]
pd6
0
-
[60:64]
hc7
0
-
[189:192]
hc8
0
-
[46:48],[147:149],[190:191]
pd9
0, 1
-
[187:191]
hc10
0
-
[36:39],[197:199]
pd12
0
-
-
pd11
0
-
-
pd13
0
-
-
pd14
0, 1
-
[50:53], [187:196], [212:216]
pd16
0
-
[18:21],[91:92],[151:154],[187:188]
pd17
0
P8
[184:189]
hc18
1
-
[50:52],[172:173],[184:186]
pd19
0
-
[57:60],[85:88],[155:158]
hc20
2
-
-
hc21
0, 1
-
[114:116]
pd22
0, 2
F7, FC5
-
pd23
3
-
[31:39],[54:57],[102:109],[128:138],[146:150],[170:182]
hc24
0
-
[61:62],[123:124]
hc25
0
-
[37:39],[168:173]
pd26
0
-
[15:18],[31:39],[53:57],[75:77],[93:96],[101:102],
[106:120],[132:134],[145:164],[186:189]
pd28
0, 1
-
-
hc29
0
-
-
hc30
0
F8
-
hc31
0
-
[82:85],[111:113],[117:123],[142:150],[167:150]
hc32
1
-
-
hc33
0
-
-
Table 13: All removed elements of data for each subject of the SanDiego data set. Removed
elements are in the form of ICA components (component number), EEG channels (channel
name) or EEG time segments (time interval to be removed defined as [start:stop]).
Note that for each subject the additional channels: ’EXG1’, ’EXG2’, ’EXG3’, ’EXG4’, ’EXG5’,
’EXG6’, ’EXG7’, ’EXG8’ and ’Status’ were removed prior to filtering of the signals.
63 of 135
==PAGE:72==
Katrine Dam Christensen
02/07/2023
Technical University of Denmark
Sub
Dropped segments
Epoch 1
Epoch 2
Epoch 3
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
hc1
hc2
pd3
hc4
pd5
pd6
hc7
hc8
pd9
hc10
pd12
pd11
pd13
pd14
pd16
pd17
hc18
pd19
hc20
hc21
pd22
pd23
hc24
hc25
pd26
pd28
hc29
hc30
hc31
hc32
hc33
Table 14: Segments dropped within the three epochs for each subject. Initial segment was dropped for all subjects to avoid any possible disturbances
or noise in the measured signals at the beginning. Red color indicates that the segment has been dropped.
64 of 135
==PAGE:73==
Katrine Dam Christensen
02/07/2023
Technical University of Denmark
A.3
Brain Regions
The EEG electrodes were grouped into 8 regions shown in Figure 21. Two groupings of regions
exists: [left, center and right] part of the brain and the typical subdivision of the brain into
lobes [frontal, central, temporal, parietal and occipital] lobe.
Figure 21: EEG electrode positions and brain regions.
A.4
Total Number of Features per Graph
Total number of graph based features:
# graph features =
Number of
graph features
|
{z
}
12
·
Number of
graphs
| {z }
1
= 12
Total number of node based features:
# node features =
Number of
node features
|
{z
}
11
·
Number of
nodes
| {z }
31
= 341
Total number of within region based features:
# within region features =
Number of
within region features
|
{z
}
2
·
Number of
regions
| {z }
8
= 16
Total number of between region based features:
# between region features =
Number of
between region features
|
{z
}
1
·
Number of
between regions
|
{z
}
13
= 13
Total number of features per individual graph of a subject for each frequency band:
# graph features
|
{z
}
12
+ # node features
|
{z
}
341
+ # within region features
|
{z
}
16
+ # between region features
|
{z
}
13
= 382
Total number of features per individual graph of a subject:
# features
|
{z
}
382
·
Number of
frequency bands
|
{z
}
6
= 2.292
65 of 135
==PAGE:74==
Katrine Dam Christensen
02/07/2023
Technical University of Denmark
A.5
Network Features Overview
List of network feature formula for un-weighted and un-directed graphs omitting self-loops. The
included features are a non-exhaustive selection of both graph-based, node-based and region-
based features.
For all formulas it applies that:
A
= adjacency matrix (symmetric for undirected graphs)
com
= communities of nodes
G
= graph
Ge(n)
ego graph of a node
Gl
= equivalent lattice graph
Gr
= equivalent random graph
N
= total number of nodes in graph
n
= node
reg
= region of nodes
General
Number of possible edges
The maximum number of edges in an undirected graph (G) that has a total of N nodes.
mmax(G) = 1
2N(N −1)
(20)
Number of edges
The total number of edges in a graph.
m(G) = 1
2
N
X
i,j=1
Aij
(21)
where Aij is the value of the adjacency matrix corresponding to the edge between node i
and node j. For an unweighted (binary) graph the value of Aij is 1 if an edge connects
node i and j and 0 otherwise. The sum of values of the adjacency matrix is divided by 2
as un-directed adjacency matrices are symmetric, thereby each edge is represented twice
at both location Aij and Aji
Range: [0-mmax]
Density
The density (D) of a graph is a measure of how connected a graph is, defined as the
fraction of edges present in the graph out of all possible edges.
D(G) = 2 · m(G)
N(N −1) =
m(G)
mmax(G)
(22)
where m(G) is the number of edges in the graph and mmax(G) is the number of possible
edges in the graph.
Range: [0:1]
A density of 0 means that the graph has no edges (fully disconnected) and a density of 1
means that the graph has the maximum number of edges (fully connected). Any number
between 0 and 1 reflects the ratio of edges that exists in the graph out of all possible edges.
66 of 135
==PAGE:75==
Katrine Dam Christensen
02/07/2023
Technical University of Denmark
Degree
Node degree
[40]
The number of edges connected to node i, also equal to the number of neighbouring nodes
to node i. Node degree is also referred to as local degree.
k(ni) =
N
X
j=1
Aij
(23)
Range: [0:N-1]
A node degree of 0 means that the node is not connected to any other nodes, and the
graph is therefore disconnected. The distribution of node degrees for the entire graph can
also be used to describe the network.[68]
Linear dependence with: degree centrality
Global degree
[40]
The average number of edges connected to a node in the graph (G).
k(G) = 1
N ·
N
X
i=1
k(ni) = 2 · m(G)
N
(24)
where k(ni) is the node degree and m(G) is the number of edges in the graph.
Range: [0:N-1]
A value of 0 indicates the graph is fully disconnected and N-1 that it is fully connected.
Clustering Coefficient
The clustering coefficient is the degree to which a node is a part of a cluster, while the av-
erage clustering coefficient is the tendency for nodes to form clusters within the graph.[10]
Clustering Coefficient
[78]
The clustering coefficient (C) of a node is a measure of how clustered the node and its
neighbouring surroundings are.
C(ni) =
Number of edges between ni’s neighboring nodes
Number of possible edges between ni’s neighboring nodes
(25)
Range: [0:1]
The higher the value the more clustered the node is. Clustering coefficient can be inter-
preted as a measure of network durability, such that high values indicate that if a node
was lost at that location there is a high likelihood that the neighbouring nodes would still
be connected and thereby to some degree preserve the function of the affected area.[78]
Avg. Clustering Coefficient
[40]
The average clustering coefficient is also referred to as the global clustering coefficient and
is simply the average clustering coefficient of all nodes in the graph.
C(G) = 1
N ·
N
X
i=1
C(ni)
Range: [0:1]
The higher the value the more clustered the graph is on average. A value of 1 would
indicate a fully connected graph [77] and 0 a fully disconnected graph.
67 of 135
==PAGE:76==
Katrine Dam Christensen
02/07/2023
Technical University of Denmark
Path Length
[78]
A path length is the distance between two nodes calculated as the number of edges on the
path between them, and is defined as:
|path(ni, nj)|
(26)
where path(ni, nj) is a all possible paths between node i and j while |·| denotes the length
of the path.
Range: [1:N-1]
For calculating the path length between all pairs of nodes, it is assumed that the graph
is not disconnected, meaning that there exists a path between all pairs of nodes. If the
graph is disconnected, non-existing paths are commonly given an infinite path length [78].
A path length of N-1 is only possible if all nodes are arranged in succession with node i
and j being at each end.
Shortest Path Length
[40, 78]
The minimum number of edges needed to form a path between node i and node j, and
thereby the shortest path between them is defined as:
S(ni, nj) =
N
min
i,j=1, i̸=j |path(ni, nj)|
(27)
Range: [1:N-1]
A value of 1 indicates that node i and j are directly connected to each other and are
thereby neighbouring nodes. A shortest path length of N-1 is only possible if all nodes are
arranged in succession with node i and j being at each end.
Average Shortest Path Length
[40, 78]
Also referred to as: Characteristic Path Length
The average shortest path length of all pairs of nodes. It describes how well connected
the graph is and can be seen as a measure of how easily information can be distributed to
other areas of the network.[78]
L(G) =
1
N · (N −1) ·
N
X
i,j=1, i̸=j
S(ni, nj)
(28)
Range: [0:1]
An average shortest path length of 0 means that the graph is fully disconnected and a
value of 1 means that it is fully connected. The summation is averaged by dividing by
N · (N −1), being the total number of edges in the graph when omitting self-loops.
Linear dependence with: wiener index
Wiener Index
Also referred to as: Sum of Shortest Path Lengths
The sum of all shortest path lengths between all pairs of nodes.
W(G) =
N
X
i,j=1, i̸=j
S(ni, nj)
(29)
Range: [0:N(N-1)]
68 of 135
==PAGE:77==
Katrine Dam Christensen
02/07/2023
Technical University of Denmark
If the sum of all shortest paths is equal to 0 the graph is fully disconnected and N ·(N −1)
if the graph is fully connected since the total number of possible shortest paths (omitting
self-loops when i ̸= j) is N · (N −1). If the graph is disconnected the Wiener Index would
be infinite.
Linear dependence with: average shortest path length
Eccentricity
The length of the longest of the shortest path connecting node i to all other nodes.
Ecc(ni) =
N
max
j=1 S(ni, nj)
(30)
Range: [0:N-1]
A value of 0 meaning that the graph is fully disconnected. A longest shortest path length
of N-1 is only possible if all nodes are arranged in succession with node i being at one of
the ends.
A node is referred to as the central node is the node that has eccentricity equal to the
radius of the graph. The absolute centre of a graph is the node with the lowest eccentricity.
Radius
The length of the shortest of the longest shortest path between all pairs of nodes, which
is the same as minimum eccentricity.
Rad(G) =
N
min
i,j=1,i̸=j S(ni, nj) =
N
min
i=1 Ecc(ni)
(31)
Range: [0:?]
Diameter
The length of the longest of the longest shortest path between all pairs of nodes, which is
the same as maximum eccentricity.
Dia(G) =
N
max
i,j=1,i̸=j S(ni, nj) =
N
max
i=1 Ecc(ni)
(32)
Range: [?:N-1]
Efficiency of a path
[40]
The efficiency of a pair of nodes (node i and node j) is the inverse of the shortest path
length between them.
Eff(ni, nj) =
1
S(ni, nj)
(33)
Range: [
1
N−1:∞]
An efficiency of
1
N−1 is possible only if all nodes are arranged in succession with node i and
j being at either end, being a case of ’worst’ efficiency in exchange of information between
node i and node j. An efficiency of ∞being if the two nodes can not be connected by any
path. The ’best’ exchange of information is obtained for the efficiency value of 1, when the
path between two nodes is equal to 1 and they are therefore directly connected making
them neighbouring node.
Efficiency of a path is therefore simply a transformation of shortest path length.
69 of 135
==PAGE:78==
Katrine Dam Christensen
02/07/2023
Technical University of Denmark
Global Efficiency
[5]
The global efficiency is the average efficiency of all pairs of nodes and is used to quantify
the efficiency by which information is exchanged within the graph network.
Eff(G) =
1
N · (N −1) ·
N
X
i,j=1, i̸=j
1
S(ni, nj)
(34)
The global efficiency of a graph is the normalized Harary Index, which is the sum of the
reciprocal of distances between all pairs of nodes.[5]
Avg. Local Efficiency
[56]
Local efficiency of a node i is equal to the average global efficiency of a subgraph Gsub
consisting of node i and all of its neighbouring nodes (the nodes directly connected to
node i by an edge). The average local efficiency is therefore the average local efficiency
calculated over all nodes in the graph.
AvgLocEff(G) = 1
N ·
N
X
i=1
Eff(Gsub(ni))
(35)
where Gsub(ni) is the subgraph that includes node i and all of its neighbouring nodes (all
nodes directly connected to node i by an edge).
Small-world
Small-worldness covers the combination of high local connectivity and hubs connecting
distant nodes from different clusters.[10]
Small-worlds networks are characterized by high clustering coefficient and low average
shortest path length, which is based on optimized state of minimizing resource cost and
maximizing the flow of information between the components of the network.
Small-world index (sigma)
[78]
The ratio of global clustering coefficient compared to that of an equivalent random graph
(Gr) over the ratio of average shortest path length compared to that of an equivalent
random graph.
SW σ(G) = C(G)/ ¯C(Gr)
L(G)/¯L(Gr)
(36)
where C(G) and L(G) are the global clustering coefficient and average shortest path length
respectively.
¯C(Gr) and ¯L(Gr) are the global clustering coefficient and average shortest
path length calculated as the average over a fixed number (R) of equivalent random graphs
(Gr), for Gr = [Gr
1, Gr
2, ..., Gr
R] defined as:
¯C(Gr) = 1
R
R
X
i=1
C(Gr
i )
70 of 135
==PAGE:79==
Katrine Dam Christensen
02/07/2023
Technical University of Denmark
¯L(Gr) = 1
R
R
X
i=1
L(Gr
i )
where Gr
i is the i’th random graph, each random graph being based on the nodes and
edges of the original graph (G) and R being the total number of realizations of a random
graph. A random graph is constructed by randomly swapping the edges of the original
graph, while the resulting random graph is still connected.[78]
It is therefore a measure of how similar the graph (G) is to a random graph (Gr). Therefore
the more clustered the nodes and the shorter the paths between the nodes, the less random
the graph and the higher the value of sigma. A value of sigma above 1 means that the
graph can be classified as a small-world graph.
Small-world index (omega)
[78]
The ratio of the average shortest path length of an equivalent random graph (Gr) compared
to the graph (G) minus the ratio of the global clustering coefficient for the graph (G)
compared to an equivalent lattice graph (Gl).
SW ω(G) =
¯L(Gr)
L(G) −C(G)
¯C(Gl)
(37)
where C(G) and L(G) are the global clustering coefficient and average shortest path length
respectively. ¯L(Gr) is the average shortest path length calculated as the average over a
fixed number (R) of equivalent random graphs (Gr) and ¯C(Gl) is the global clustering
coefficient calculated as the average over a fixed number (Lt) of equivalent lattice graphs
(Gl), for Gr = [Gl
1, Gl
2, ..., Gl
Lt]:
¯C(Gl) = 1
Lt
Lt
X
i=1
C(Gl
i)
where Gl
i is the i’th lattice graph, each lattice graph being based on the nodes and edges of
the original graph (G), Lt is the total number of realizations of a lattice graph. A lattice
graph is constructed by latticizing the original graph (G) by swapping its edges.
The omega value is a measure of how similar the graph is to a random graph and a lattice
graph. Lattice graphs are characterized by their high values of both C and L while random
graphs have low values of both C and L.[78] Negative values means high similarity with a
lattice graph and positive values means high similarity with a random graph. Values close
to zero increases the small-world characteristics of the graph.
Centrality
Degree Centrality
The fraction of nodes that node i is directly connected to.
degree centrality(ni) = k(ni)
N −1
(38)
Range: [0:1]
The degree centrality is simply the normalized node degree and the two features will
therefore have a linear correlation of 1.
Linear dependence with: node degree
Betweenness Centrality
71 of 135
==PAGE:80==
Katrine Dam Christensen
02/07/2023
Technical University of Denmark
The betweenness of a node i is the ratio of shortest paths that pass through the node.
betweenness centrality(ni) =
N
X
j,k=1, j̸=k̸=i
σ(nj, nk|ni)
σ(nj, nk)
(39)
where σ(nj, nk) is the number of shortest paths between node j and k and σ(nj, nk|ni)
are the number of shortest paths between node j and k that pass through node i.
The betweenness relates to the importance of the node in terms of propagation of informa-
tion between different brain regions. High values of betweenness are therefore associated
with high importance and thereby also could result in higher consequences for the function-
ing of the network if that specific node was lost.[78] Normalized betweenness centrality of
1 means that all shortest paths between all pairs of nodes pass through the single node, in-
dicating that the node is an important link between brain regions. Betweenness centrality
of 0 means that none of the shortest paths pass through the single node.
Closeness Centrality
Closeness Centrality is equal to N-1 times the reciprocal of the Average Shortest Path
Length calculated only over the shortest paths between node i and all other nodes in the
graph.
closeness centrality(ni) =
N −1
PN−1
j=1 S(ni, nj)
(40)
Range: [ 2(N−1)
N(N+1):1]
Higher values of closeness centrality indicates a higher degree of centrality of the node.
A value of 1 would indicate that the node is directly connected to all other nodes in the
graph, since the sum of shortest paths would be equal to N −1. If all nodes were placed
in succession with node i at one of the ends, the sum of shortest paths would be equal to
N(N + 1)/2 resulting in the lowest possible closeness centrality of
2(N−1)
N(N+1).
Current Flow Betweenness centrality
[14]
Also referred to as: Random-Walk Betweenness Centrality
For formula see the NetworkX current flow betweenness centrality algorithm.
Current Flow Closeness centrality
[14]
Also referred to as: Information Centrality
For formula see the NetworkX current flow closeness centrality algorithm.
Closeness Vitality
[14]
The closeness vitality of a node ni is the change in the sum of shortest path lengths for
all node pairs when omitting node ni. Since the sum of shortest path lengths is equal to
the Wiener Index, the closeness vitality can be calculated as:
closeness vitality(ni) = W(G) −W(G −ni)
(41)
where W(G) is the Wiener Index of the entire graph G and W(G−ni) is the Wiener Index
calculated for all nodes in graph G apart from node ni.
72 of 135
==PAGE:81==
Katrine Dam Christensen
02/07/2023
Technical University of Denmark
The closeness vitality of a node indicates the importance of the node in the graph, by
representing the change of path lengths between all pairs of nodes if node ni is removed
from the graph. Removing a node from the graph will mean that the Wiener index is
summed over one less node, and subsequently could reduce the sum, but if the node is of
high importance in graph (e.g. if many shortest paths pass through the node or if the node
is an articulation point where removing it would cause the graph to become disconnected)
the Wiener Index could increase, resulting in negative closeness vitality values. If the
graph becomes disconnected by removing ni the closeness vitality would be -∞.[14]
Mutual weight
The mutual weight (mw) of two node is equal to the sum of the edge weight in both
directions.
mw(ni, nj) = Aij + Aji
where A is the adjacency matrix such that Aij is edge weight from node i to node j and Aji
is edge weight from node j to node i. Given that the adjacency matrix of an undirected
graph is symmetric, the mutual weight between two nodes is simply mw(ni, nj) = 2·Aij. If
the graph is also binary the mw is 2 if the two nodes are directly connected (neighbouring
nodes) and 0 otherwise.
The normalized mutual weight (nmw) is calculated as:
nmw(ni, nj) =
mw(ni, nj)
P
nk∈Gn(ni) mw(ni, nk)
(42)
where Gn(ni) denotes the sub graph of neighbouring nodes of node i. For a binary un-
weighted graph the normalized mutual weight therefore equals
2
2·len(Gn(ni)) if node i and j
are neighbouring and 0 otherwise. The length (len) equals the number of nodes in a graph.
As the number of neighbouring nodes increases, the normalized mutual weight decreases.
Local constraint
The local constraint (loc con) between two nodes neighbouring nodes
loc con(ni, nj) =

nmw(ni, nj) +
X
nk∈Gn(ni)
nmw(ni, nk) · nmw(nk, nj)
2
(43)
which for binary undirected graphs can be rewritten as:
loc con(ni, nj) =

mw(ni, nj)
2 · len(Gn(ni)) +
X
nk∈Gn(ni)
mw(ni, nk)
2 · len(Gn(ni)) ·
mw(nk, nj)
2 · len(Gn(nk))
2
where nmw is the normalized mutual weight and mw is the mutual weight. Since nk ∈
Gn(ni), mw(ni, nk) is for binary undirected graphs always equal to 2.
We therefore have:
loc con(ni, nj) =

mw(ni, nj)
2 · len(Gn(ni)) +
X
nk∈Gn(ni)
2 · mw(nk, nj)
4 · len(Gn(nk)) · len(Gn(ni))
2
Range: [0:1]
A value of 0 is obtained when nj is not a neighbouring node of either ni or nk, and 1 is
e.g. obtained for the case of ni only having 1 neighbouring node (omitting self-loops).
When the number of neighbouring nodes of ni increases, the value within (·)2 decreases.
73 of 135
==PAGE:82==
Katrine Dam Christensen
02/07/2023
Technical University of Denmark
Constraint
The constraint of a node is the sum of the local constraints to its neighbouring nodes.
constraint(ni) =
X
nj∈Gn(ni)
loc con(ni, nj)
(44)
where Gn(ni) is the neighbour graph of node ni and loc con(ni, nj) is the local constraint
between node i and j.
Effective size
[13]
It is a measure of redundancy of a node based on the number of edges between its neigh-
bouring nodes.
effective size(n) = len(Gn(ni)) −2 · m(Gn(ni))
len(Gn(ni))
(45)
where Gn(ni) is the neighbour graph for node ni, a neighbour graph being a subgraph
of G containing only the neighbouring nodes of node ni (excluding ni from the subgraph
as well). The length (len) of the graph denotes the number of nodes in the graph and
m(Gn(Ni)) denotes the total number of edges in the neighbouring graph, as defined by
Equation (21).
Range: [1:m(Gn(ni))]
The higher the number of neighbouring nodes and the lower the number of edges be-
tween them, the higher the effective size. The effective size decreases with 2/len(G) per
additional edge between the neighbouring nodes. If there exists zero edges between the
neighbouring nodes, then the effective size of the node is equal to the number of neigh-
bouring nodes (or simply the number of nodes in the ego graph m(Gn(ni)) not including
node ni). When the number of edges between the neighbouring nodes is equal to the
maximum number of edges mmax(Gn(ni)) the effective size is equal to 1.
The 2·m(Gn(ni))
len(Gn(ni)) part of the equation is known as redundancy, which is also equal to the
average degree of the neighbouring nodes. Alternatively effective size can then also be
described as the size of the neighbouring graph (in number of nodes) minus the average
degree of the neighbouring nodes.
Modularity
[32]
The modularity (Q) of a binary undirected graph can be seen as a measure of how well the
graph has been divided into communities.[19] It reflects the degree to which a graph can be
subdivided into delineated groups of nodes (communities).[10] Modularity is defined as the
fraction of edges within a group or community (com) minus the fraction of edges within
the group or community if all edges in the graph were redistributed randomly. Positive
modularity therefore suggest that there are more edges within the group than expected if
the edges were distributed randomly.[32]
Q(G) =
1
2 · m(G)
N
X
i,j=1, i̸=j

Aij −k(ni) · k(nj)
2 · m(G)

· δ

com(ni), com(nj)

(46)
where the delta function δ

com(ni), com(nj)

is defined as:
δ

com(ni), com(nj)

=
 1
if com(ni) = com(nj)
0
otherwise
74 of 135
==PAGE:83==
Katrine Dam Christensen
02/07/2023
Technical University of Denmark
where com(ni) denotes the community (com) to which node i belongs. The delta function
therefore has a value of 1 if the two nodes belong to the same community and 0 otherwise.
In Equation (46) the part defined as:
1
2 · m(G)
N
X
i,j=1, i̸=j
Aij · δ

c(ni), c(nj)

is the fraction of edges that are inside the communities of the graph, while:
k(ni) · k(nj)
2m
is the probability that an edge exists between node i and j if connections between all
nodes of the graph were made at random while maintaining the same degree for both nodes.
Modularity will be high for graphs where the communities are based on good divisions of
the network, given that good divisions maximize the number of edges inside the commu-
nities and minimize the number of edges between communities. The closer the fraction of
edges that are inside the communities of the graph is similar to that of a random graph
the closer the modularity would be to zero. In general modularity values above 0.3 indi-
cates significant community structures within the graph.[19] Negative values occur if there
exists less edges within the community than the number of edges expected to be within
the community given the probability of the existence of an edge.
Range: [-1:1]
S-metric
The sum of the product of node degrees for all pairs of nodes. The inverse of the s-metric
is also referred to as the Randic Index, where the lower the Randic Index the more robust
the graph is. Subsequently the higher the s-metric the more robust the graph would be.
s-metric(G) =
N
X
i,j=1, i̸=j
k(ni) · k(nj)
(47)
Edge Ratio
The extent to which a region of nodes is connected to itself (within region) or other regions
(between regions). These features were designed by the author.
Ratio of Edges Within Region
Ewithin(regi) =
Number of edges between nodes within region i
Number of possible edges between nodes within region i
(48)
where regi is the i’th region consisting of a subset of nodes.
Range: [0:1]
Ratio of Edges Between Regions
Ebetween(regi, regj) =
Number of edges between region i and region j
Number of possible edges between region i and region j
(49)
where the two regions regi and regj no not contain any of the same nodes.
Range: [0:1]
Table 15: Graph-, node- and region-based graph metrics calculated for un-weighted un-directed
graphs.
75 of 135
==PAGE:84==
Katrine Dam Christensen
02/07/2023
Technical University of Denmark
Feature modifications
If any features resulted in a value of −∞or ∞the values were changed based on the value range
of the feature. Table 16 shows the features and subjects that contained ±∞values. In Table 16
the values of −∞occur when omitting node ni results in the graph becoming disconnected, for
which the wiener index would be equal to ∞.
Feature name
Affected nodes / regions
Affected
subjects
calculated
value
updated
value
Closeness vitality
Nodes: [F7, F3, FC1, C3, Fp2]
Regions: [left,right,frontal,central]
8,18,21,23
−∞
0
Table 16: Feature modifications in cases of values of ±∞.
Feature limitations
If a node (nx) becomes disconnected from the rest of the graph, it will affect multiple of the
features listed in Table 15 and result in both infinite or zero values along with incalculable
features due to zero division, as seen in Table 17.
Features related to the degree of a node
node
degree
k(nx)
= 0
node
degree centrality
degree centrality(nx)
= 0
node
betweenness centrality
betweenness centrality(nx)
= 0
node
constraint
constraint(nx)
= 0
node
effective size
effective size(nx)
= division by 0
node
clustering coefficient
C(nx)
= division by 0
graph
clustering coefficient
C(G)
= division by 0
graph
small-word index sigma
SW σ
= division by 0
graph
small-word index omega
SW ω
= division by 0
Features related to path lengths
graph
average shortest path length
L(G)
= ∞
graph
wiener index
W(G)
= ∞
node
eccentricity
Ecc(nx)
= ∞
graph
radius
Rad(G)
= ∞
graph
diameter
Dia(G)
= ∞
node
closeness centrality
closeness centrality(nx)
= 0 (1/∞)
node
closeness vitality 2
closeness vitality(nx)
= ∞
Table 17: Resulting values of features affected if a node is disconnected from the graph.
2specifically for closeness vitality it will only result in infinite values if nx is the only disconnected node in the
graph, if multiple disconnected notes exists the values would be 0.
76 of 135
==PAGE:85==
Katrine Dam Christensen
02/07/2023
Technical University of Denmark
A.6
F1-scores for threshold values of the individual frequency bands
The f1-scores for the thresholds of the individual frequency bands can be seen in Section 4.1
Tables 18 to 25. The f1-scores are calculated based on the individual frequency bands thresh-
olded with different threshold values for both weight-based and density-based thresholding. The
f1-scores are calculated as an average over all outer and inner folds. For Tables 18 to 25 the
cells of the table are colored based on the value of the cell, such that the colors are a gradient
from 1 (green) to 0.5 (yellow) to 0 (red). Bold font indicates the highest f1-score within each
frequency band and ’-’ is used to indicate that the threshold value was not tested.
For each of the tables the highest f1-score and corresponding threshold value for each frequency
band are included in Tables 6 and 8 of Section 4, were the f1-score is then calculated for the
combination of the individually best performing threshold values of each frequency.
Weight-based thresholding
f1-score of threshold values for each frequency band individually
-0.08
-0.07
-0.06
-0.05
-0.04
-0.03
-0.02
-0.01
0.00
Delta
0.537
0.539
0.545
0.535
0.567
0.573
0.558
0.554
-
Theta
0.439
0.466
0.403
0.338
0.241
0.195
-
-
-
Alpha
0.372
0.348
0.318
0.245
0.178
0.218
-
-
-
Beta
-
-
-
0.377
0.440
0.477
0.499
-
-
Gamma
-
-
-
-
0.392
0.477
0.467
0.479
0.436
All bands
-
-
-
-
0.232
0.225
0.255
0.297
-
Table 18: F1-scores for different thresholds evaluated for each frequency band individually.
Each f1-score is based on the individual frequency bands using graph-based features and
weight-based thresholding. Highest f1-score for each frequency band is written in bold font.
f1-score of threshold values for each frequency band individually
-0.08
-0.07
-0.06
-0.05
-0.04
-0.03
-0.02
-0.01
0.00
Delta
0.567
0.584
0.523
0.522
0.521
0.506
0.490
0.482
-
Theta
0.453
0.489
0.454
0.436
0.439
0.499
-
-
-
Alpha
0.466
0.468
0.475
0.485
0.572
0.551
-
-
-
Beta
-
-
-
0.545
0.488
0.489
0.415
-
-
Gamma
-
-
-
-
0.473
0.424
0.465
0.446
0.475
All bands
-
-
-
-
0.483
0.473
0.507
0.476
-
Table 19: F1-scores for different thresholds evaluated for each frequency band individually.
Each f1-score is based on the individual frequency bands using node-based features and
weight-based thresholding. Highest f1-score for each frequency band is written in bold font.
f1-score of threshold values for each frequency band individually
-0.08
-0.07
-0.06
-0.05
-0.04
-0.03
-0.02
-0.01
0.00
Delta
0.610
0.571
0.545
0.536
0.523
0.524
0.540
0.538
-
Theta
0.481
0.479
0.508
0.498
0.463
0.474
-
-
-
Alpha
0.463
0.508
0.540
0.516
0.533
0.559
-
-
-
Beta
-
-
-
0.525
0.525
0.541
0.568
-
-
Gamma
-
-
-
-
0.520
0.495
0.465
0.466
0.491
All bands
-
-
-
-
0.522
0.460
0.468
0.438
-
Table 20: F1-scores for different thresholds evaluated for each frequency band individually.
Each f1-score is based on the individual frequency bands using region-based features and
weight-based thresholding. Highest f1-score for each frequency band is written in bold font.
77 of 135
==PAGE:86==
Katrine Dam Christensen
02/07/2023
Technical University of Denmark
As the three spatial levels, namely graph-based, node-based and region-based, are combined for
all graphs prior to performing the final training of classifiers, the threshold optimization was also
performed on the joined feature space. The results of threshold optimization for the combination
of graph-based, node-based and region-based features is seen in Table 21.
f1-score of threshold values for each frequency band individually
-0.08
-0.07
-0.06
-0.05
-0.04
-0.03
-0.02
-0.01
0.00
Delta
0.550
0.560
0.560
0.533
0.531
0.525
0.506
0.510
-
Theta
0.456
0.440
0.442
0.366
0.375
0.500
-
-
-
Alpha
0.419
0.448
0.435
0.501
0.543
0.550
-
-
-
Beta
-
-
-
0.477
0.523
0.517
0.443
-
-
Gamma
-
-
-
-
0.441
0.464
0.453
0.469
0.483
All bands
-
-
-
-
0.372
0.437
0.445
0.457
-
Table 21: F1-scores for different thresholds evaluated for each frequency band individually. Each
f1-score is based on the individual frequency bands using the joined graph+node+region-
based features and weight-based thresholding. Highest f1-score for each frequency band is
written in bold font. For delta band the threshold -0.07 and -0.06 appear to both have the
highest f1-score, yet prior to rounding the threshold value of -0.07 had the highest f1-score.
The graph-based features of Table 18 indicates that the delta band has the highest f1-scores
and is fairly stable across all threshold values, with all f1-scores being above 0.5, while the all
bands consistently has very low performance across all threshold values. All frequency bands
apart from delta all have f1-scores less than 0.5. For bands such as theta and alpha the choice of
threshold value has a higher impact on the f1-score. The f1-score of the theta and alpha band
tends to decrease with increasing threshold value, suggesting that graph based-features within
these frequency bands decreases in performance as the graphs get more sparse.
The node-based features in Table 19 have a higher f1-score than the graph-based features at all
threshold values and frequency bands apart from delta: th = [−0.06 : −0.01], beta: th = −0.02
and gamma: th = [−0.03 : −0.01].
The region-based features in Table 20 slightly outperforms the node-based features for most
threshold values, and therefore also outperforms the graph-based when assessing the optimal
threshold value f1-scores. The f1-score of 0.610 for the delta band at th = −0.08 being the only
performance above 0.6 for the weight-based thresholding of any spatial level and threshold value.
Between the three spatial levels, there is no overlap of which threshold value has the highest
performance, apart from beta: th = −0.02 that is the highest performing threshold value for
both the graph-based and region-based features.
The graph+node+region-based features combined in Table 21 overall does not have better
performance than the individual spatial levels.
The optimal threshold values of the combined spatial levels overlaps with the node-based opti-
mal thresholds for both the delta, theta and gamma band, and overlaps with the alpha and all
bands for the region-based and graph-based features respectively.
78 of 135
==PAGE:87==
Katrine Dam Christensen
02/07/2023
Technical University of Denmark
Density-based thresholding
f1-score of threshold values for each frequency band individually
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
Delta
0.195
0.200
0.307
0.273
-
Theta
0.192
0.229
0.321
-
-
Alpha
0.176
0.121
0.153
0.466
-
Beta
0.202
0.177
0.277
0.410
0.375
Gamma
0.157
0.166
0.202
0.422
-
All bands
0.161
0.164
0.182
0.186
-
Table 22: F1-scores for different thresholds evaluated for each frequency band individually.
Each f1-score is based on the individual frequency bands using graph-based features and
density-based thresholding. Highest f1-score for each frequency band is written in bold font.
f1-score of threshold values for each frequency band individually
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
Delta
0.523
0.504
0.491
0.513
-
Theta
0.496
0.526
0.515
-
-
Alpha
0.443
0.451
0.581
0.559
-
Beta
0.511
0.495
0.483
0.487
0.425
Gamma
0.482
0.421
0.434
0.441
-
All bands
0.438
0.447
0.410
0.362
-
Table 23: F1-scores for different thresholds evaluated for each frequency band individually.
Each f1-score is based on the individual frequency bands using node-based features and
density-based thresholding. Highest f1-score for each frequency band is written in bold font.
f1-score of threshold values for each frequency band individually
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
Delta
0.596
0.583
0.558
0.579
-
Theta
0.541
0.546
0.519
-
-
Alpha
0.453
0.525
0.526
0.500
-
Beta
0.566
0.568
0.560
0.487
0.435
Gamma
0.449
0.420
0.373
0.415
-
All bands
0.527
0.518
0.486
0.428
-
Table 24: F1-scores for different thresholds evaluated for each frequency band individually.
Each f1-score is based on the individual frequency bands using region-based features and
density-based thresholding. Highest f1-score for each frequency band is written in bold font.
As the three spatial levels, namely graph-based, node-based and region-based, are combined for
all graphs prior to performing the final training of classifiers, the threshold optimization was also
performed on the joined feature space. The results of threshold optimization for the combination
of graph-based, node-based and region-based features is seen in Table 25.
79 of 135
==PAGE:88==
Katrine Dam Christensen
02/07/2023
Technical University of Denmark
f1-score of threshold values for each frequency band individually
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
Delta
0.327
0.271
0.482
0.508
-
Theta
0.255
0.270
0.508
-
-
Alpha
0.217
0.290
0.439
0.643
-
Beta
0.294
0.194
0.448
0.488
0.412
Gamma
0.313
0.219
0.204
0.474
-
All bands
0.297
0.242
0.375
0.378
-
Table 25: F1-scores for different thresholds evaluated for each frequency band individually. Each
f1-score is based on the individual frequency bands using the joined graph+node+region-
based features and density-based thresholding. Highest f1-score for each frequency band is
written in bold font.
The graph-based features of Table 22 have highest performance for higher threshold values at
0.3 or 0.4, yet the none of the f1-score are above 0.5, suggesting overall poor performance of
density based thresholding for graph features on each frequency band individually. As opposed
to the weight-based threshold of graph features the performance here tends to increase rather
than decrease for increasing threshold values.
The node-based features in Table 23 have a higher f1-score than the graph-based features at
all threshold values and frequency bands. As opposed to the tendency for higher performance
at higher threshold values for the graph-based features the node-based features tends to have
higher performance at lower threshold values. The gamma and all bands are the only frequency
bands that for all threshold values does not exceed a performance of 0.5.
The region-based features in Table 24 to a higher degree outperforms the node-based features
for most threshold values than was the case for the weight-based thresholding. The region-based
features have a higher f1-score than the node-based features at all threshold values and frequency
bands apart from alpha: th = [0.3, 0.4], beta: th = 0.4 and gamma: th = [0.1 : 0.4]. Like the
node-based features the highest performance is generally seen at lower threshold values, the
opposite of which was seen for the graph-based features.
Between the three spatial levels there is a higher degree of overlap of which threshold value has
the highest performance than for the weight-based thresholding, as node-based and region-based
have an overlap of optimal thresholds for all frequency bands except beta and all bands.
The graph+node+region-based features combined in Table 25 does not have better perfor-
mance than the individual spatial levels, apart from th = 0.4 for both the alpha, beta and gamma
band. The alpha band at th = 0.4 being the only density-based thresholding performance above
0.6 when individually optimizing the frequency bands.
The optimal threshold values of the combined spatial levels overlaps with the graph-based op-
timal thresholds for all frequency bands except delta, and therefore shares the graph-based
tendencies for higher threshold values to perform better.
80 of 135
==PAGE:89==
Katrine Dam Christensen
02/07/2023
Technical University of Denmark
Figures 22 and 23 depicts the violin plots of f1-scores calculated for all combinations of weight-
based and density-based thresholds respectively. The violin plots are provided for each spatial
level individually and for the combination of all levels (graph+node+region), each violin plot
depicting the distribution of f1-scores for a single threshold within a given frequency band.
(a) distribution of f1-scores for delta band
(b) distribution of f1-scores for theta band
(c) distribution of f1-scores for alpha band
81 of 135
==PAGE:90==
Katrine Dam Christensen
02/07/2023
Technical University of Denmark
(d) distribution of f1-scores for beta band
(e) distribution of f1-scores for gamma band
(f) distribution of f1-scores for all bands
Figure 22: Violin plots of the distribution of f1-scores for all combinations of thresholds
shown for all spatial levels at the fixed threshold values of each frequency band. F1-scores were
calculated using weight-based thresholding for each level individually and for the combina-
tion of them all (graph+node+region).
82 of 135
==PAGE:91==
Katrine Dam Christensen
02/07/2023
Technical University of Denmark
For the graph-based violin plots in Figure 22 generally have the highest f1-scores across all fre-
quency bands, with almost all f1-scores are above 0.5. All of the region-based violin plots have
a median f1-score above 0.5, while for the node-based on the other hand, only the gamma band
at th = −0.04 has a median value above 0.5. The distribution of the graph+node+region-
based violin plots for all frequency bands tends to be most similar to that of the region-based.
The change in f1-score as a function of threshold level for each of the different frequency bands
a spatial levels is described in the following:
• For the delta band the distribution of f1-scores of the node-based features tend to decrease
with increasing threshold value.
• For the theta band the distribution of f1-scores of the node-based features tend to decrease
with increasing threshold value.
• For the alpha band the distribution of f1-scores is seemingly not affected greatly by the
change in threshold value, with the only noticeable changes being an increased variance of
the graph and graph+node+region level.
• For the beta band the distribution of f1-scores across all spatial levels tends to decrease
only for the highest threshold value.
• For the gamma the distribution of f1-scores of the node-based features tends to decrease at
increasing threshold value while the graph-based tends to increase. The remaining levels
seem to only have slight changes in the distribution of f1-scores as a function of threshold
value.
• For the all bands the distribution of the f1-scores shifts downwards at higher threshold
values for all spatial levels.
In summary the all bands has the most consistent change in f1-score distribution as a function
of threshold value across all spatial levels, namely a decrease in f1-score for increasing threshold
value. The gamma band had both an increase and a decrease in f1-scores for increasing threshold
value, for the graph-based and node-based features respectively.
83 of 135
==PAGE:92==
Katrine Dam Christensen
02/07/2023
Technical University of Denmark
(a) distribution of f1-scores for delta band
(b) distribution of f1-scores for theta band
(c) distribution of f1-scores for alpha band
84 of 135
==PAGE:93==
Katrine Dam Christensen
02/07/2023
Technical University of Denmark
(d) distribution of f1-scores for beta band
(e) distribution of f1-scores for gamma band
(f) distribution of f1-scores for all bands
Figure 23: Violin plots of the distribution of f1-scores for all combinations of thresholds
shown for all spatial levels at the fixed threshold values of each frequency band.
F1-scores
were calculated using density-based thresholding for each level individually and for the
combination of them all (graph+node+region).
85 of 135
==PAGE:94==
Katrine Dam Christensen
02/07/2023
Technical University of Denmark
For the graph-based violin plots in Figure 23 only some median values are above 0.5, whereas
for the node-based all f1-scores are below 0.5 with median values around 0.4. For region-
based and graph+node+region-based most of the f1-scores are above 0.5.
The change in f1-score as a function of threshold level for each of the different frequency bands
and spatial levels is described in the following:
• For the delta band the distribution of f1-scores for the graph-based features seems to have
a local maximum performance threshold value while the remaining spatial levels appear
stable across all threshold values.
• For the theta band the distribution of f1-scores at all spatial levels appear stable across all
threshold values.
• For the alpha band the distribution of f1-scores for the region-based features tends to
decrease slightly at increasing threshold value while the remaining spatial levels appear
stable across all threshold values.
• For the beta band the distribution of f1-scores for the graph- and region-based features
seems to have a local maximum performance threshold value while the graph+node+region
features tend to increase with increasing threshold value.
• For the gamma band the distribution of f1-scores for the node- and region-based features
tends to decrease at increasing threshold value, while the graph-based tend to increase.
• For the all bands the distribution of f1-scores at all spatial levels appear stable across all
threshold values.
In summary at threshold values of 0.4 for the alpha band and 0.4 and 0.5 for the beta band are
the only times that the graph+node+region features noticeably outperforms all of the individual
spatial levels.
Similar to the weight-based violin plots in Figure 22, the graph+node+region level seems most
comparable to that of the region level, but for the beta band the combination of graph+node+region
even outperforms the region level at high threshold values.
A main difference in the findings from the weight-based and density-based distribution of f1-
scores is that for density-based thresholding the region-based features are often comparable to
or even better than the graph-based, the opposite of which was the case for the weight-based
f1-score distributions.
86 of 135
==PAGE:95==
Katrine Dam Christensen
02/07/2023
Technical University of Denmark
A.7
Model Performance of SVC ’rbf’
Table 26 includes the model performance of SVC ’rbf’ kernel with fixed number of features
at 30. The ’rbf’ kernel therefore didn’t have the same freedom in terms of method of feature
selection, which was due to the very high computation time using this specific classifier with
large feature space. The f1-scores indicates a distinctive difference between weight-based and
density-based SVC ’rbf’, with a significant difference between the average f1-scores (p-value ¡
0.05). It should be noted that the threshold values were optimized using a LogReg classifier,
and the performance in Table 26b does therefore not necessarily reflect optimal performance.
weight-based thresholding
Outer
SVC
fold
kernel
C
γ
# features
f1
0
’rbf’
1
’scale’
30
0.667
1
’rbf’
10
’scale’
30
0.857
2
’rbf’
1
’scale’
30
0.667
3
’rbf’
10
’scale’
30
0.545
4
’rbf’
10
’scale’
30
0.500
5
’rbf’
10
’scale’
30
0.364
6
’rbf’
10
’scale’
30
0.200
7
’rbf’
1
’scale’
30
0.250
8
’rbf’
10
’scale’
30
0.444
9
’rbf’
10
’scale’
30
0.714
mode:
mode:
mode:
average:
average:
’rbf’
10
’scale’
30
0.521
(a) weight-based SVC ’rbf’ performance.
density-based thresholding
Outer
SVC
fold
kernel
C
γ
# features
f1
0
’rbf’
10
’scale’
30
0.222
1
’rbf’
1
’scale’
30
0.000
2
’rbf’
0.0001
’scale’
30
0.000
3
’rbf’
0.0001
’scale’
30
0.500
4
’rbf’
0.0001
’scale’
30
0.286
5
’rbf’
10
’auto’
30
0.400
6
’rbf’
1
’auto’
30
0.000
7
’rbf’
10
’auto’
30
0.286
8
’rbf’
10
’auto’
30
0.000
9
’rbf’
10
’auto’
30
0.000
mode:
mode:
mode:
average:
average:
’rbf’
10
’scale’/’auto’
30
0.169
(b) density-based SVC ’rbf’ performance.
Table 26: Cross-validated f1-score performance of (a) weight-based and (b) density-based
SVC ’rbf’ models with optimized parameters for each outer fold, using optimal threshold values
from Table 10. Where ’rbf’ = radial basis function kernel, γ = ’rbf’ kernel coefficient, ’C’ =
regularization parameter and f1 = the average f1-score of each of the outer folds. Bottom row
includes the mode or average of the parameters and values in the columns above.
87 of 135
==PAGE:96==
Katrine Dam Christensen
02/07/2023
Technical University of Denmark
A.8
AD and PD findings in the literature
Tables 27 and 28 contain the EEG findings of AD and PD based on the papers listed in Tables 29
and 30 respectively.
Table 27 contains the EEG findings of AD patients. The arrows ↑and ↓indicates that the
feature is either increased or decreased for AD relative to HC. Red colored text indicates that
the feature was calculated based on a weighted graph as opposed to a binary graph.
Table 28 contains the EEG findings of PD patients of different stages of cognitive impairment.
The arrows ↑and ↓indicates that the feature is either increased or decreased for PD relative to
HC. If two classes are mentioned in brackets, e.g. MCI vs. CN, an increase would indicate that
the first mentioned class is greater than the latter class and vice versa. If nothing is mentioned
in the brackets then the comparison is between PD and HC, where an increase would mean that
PD is greater than HC. If only one class is mentioned then the comparison is between that class
and HC, where an increase would mean that the feature is higher for the stated class than for
HC. Red colored text indicates that the feature was calculated based on a weighted graph as
opposed to a binary graph.
88 of 135
==PAGE:97==
Katrine Dam Christensen
02/07/2023
Technical University of Denmark
Frequency Bands
Features
Delta
Theta
Alpha
Alpha-1
Alpha-2
Beta
Gamma
Path Length
↑
[65]
[84, 82, 65]
[84]
[84, 16]
[84]
[84]
(PL)
↓
[16]
[76]
[65]
[65]
Characteristic
↑
[45]
path length (L)
↓
Normalized L
↑
↓
[24]
[24]
Clustering Coefficient
↑
[82]
[82, 16]
[82]
[65]
[65]
(C)
↓
[65]
[84, 65]
[45]
[76, 24, 84]
[84, 16]
[77, 24, 84]
[84]
Normalized C
↑
↓
[24]
[24]
Small-World Index
↑
[81]
(SW)
↓
[84, 81]
[84, 81]
[84]
[84]
[84]
[84]
Small-World sigma (σ)
↑
↓
[24]
Global Efficiency
↑
(GE)
↓
[84]
[84]
[84]
[84]
[84, 2]
[84]
Local Efficiency
↑
[2]
(LE)
↓
[84] [36]ec
[84] [36]ec
[36]ec
[84]
[84]
[84] [36]ec
[84] [36]ec
Modularity
↑
↓
[36]ec
[36]ec
[36]ec
[36]ec
[36]ec
Degree
↑
Correlation (R)
↓
[24]
[24]
Relative Power
↑
[23]
↓
[23]
Table 27: Summary of EEG findings for Alzheimer’s Disease (AD) patients vs. Healthy Control (HC). Table includes information from existing
summary table from [47] (omitting incorrectly reported result of Stam 2007). ↑indicates AD is increased relative to HC, ↓indicates AD is decreased
relative to HC and. Red results indicates that the features were based on weighted graphs instead of binary graphs, and ’ec’ indicates that the EEG
results were obtained during eyes closed. Frequency bands beta 1, 2 and 3 omitted due to lack of findings.
89 of 135
==PAGE:98==
Katrine Dam Christensen
02/07/2023
Technical University of Denmark
Frequency Bands
Features
Delta
Theta
Alpha
Alpha-1
Alpha-2
Beta
Degree (K)
↑
↓
[45] (D)
[45] (D vs AD)
Characteristic
↑
[28](pt)
[45] (D)(D vs AD)
path length (L)
↓
[61](MCI)
[61](CN)(MCI)
[61](CN)
Normalized L
↑
[79](CN)
[79](CN)
[79](CN)
[79](CN)
[79](CN)
↓
[79](D vs CN)
Clustering
↑
[28] (ps+pt)
[28] (pt)
Coefficient (C)
↓
[61](MCI)
[45] (D)
[61](CN)
Normalized C
↑
[79](CN)
[79](CN)
[79](CN)
[79](CN)
[79](CN)
↓
[79](MCI vs CN)
[79](D vs CN)
Small-World
↑
[45] (D vs AD)
[83]
Index (SW)
↓
[83]
Kappa w
↑
[79](CN)
[79](CN)
↓
[79](CN)
[79](MCI vs CN)
(D vs CN)(CN)
[79](CN)
Modularity
↑
[79](CN)
[45] (D)(D vs AD)
[79](CN)
[45] (D)(D vs AD)
[79](D vs CN)
[79](CN)
[79](D vs CN)
[79](CN)
[45] (D vs AD)
[79](CN)
Local Efficiency
(LE)
↓
[61](CN)
[61](CN)
Relative
↑
[33] (SCI vs NC)
[33] (SCI vs MCI)
[31]
[33] (SCI vs NC)
[33] (SCI vs MCI)
[41]
Power
↓
[31]
[33] (SCI vs NC)
[33] (SCI vs MCI)
[41], [31]
Table 28: Summary of EEG findings for PD studies. Table is based on articles from the existing summary table in [47]. Red results indicates
that the features were based on weighted graphs and not binary graphs. Gamma omitted due to lack of findings. AD: Alzheimer’s Disease, PD:
Parkinson’s Disease, D: PD-D Parkinson’s Disease Dementia, CN: PD-CN Parkinson’s Disease Cognitively Normal, MCI: PD-MCI Parkinson’s
Disease Mild Cognitive Impairment, SCI: PD-SCI Parkinson’s Disease Severe Cognitive Impairment, ps: predictive sequence, pt: predictive target.
90 of 135
==PAGE:99==
Katrine Dam Christensen
02/07/2023
Technical University of Denmark
Some specifications of the papers from which the EEG findings in Tables 27 and 28 were gathered are included in Tables 29 and 30. The reference
summary includes information about the respective studies, the tested frequency bands and the method used to calculate brain connectivity.
α
β
Ref.
Author, Year
Type
Participants
Method
δ
θ
α-1
α-2
β-1
β-2
β-3
γ
[16]
Cecchetti, 2021
ec
39 AD vs.
86 MCI vs. 33 HC
Lagged Linear
Coherence
1.5-4
4-8
8-10
10-12
12-18
18-20
20-30
-
[45]
Mehraram, 2020
ec
21 PD-D vs.
32 AD vs. 18 HC
Weighted Phase
Lag Index
-
4-7.5
8-13.5
14-20.5
-
-
[2]
Afshari, 2017
ec
25 AD vs. 26 HC
Directed Transfer
Function
0.5-3
3-7
7-13
13-30
-
[36]
Jalili, 2017
eo
ec
23 AD vs. 25 HC
Pearson Correlation
Coefficient
1-3
3-7
7-13
13-30
30-50
[82]
Vecchio, 2014
ec
174 AD vs.
154 MCI vs. 50 HC
Lagged Linear
Coherence
2-4
4-8
8-10.5
10.5-13
13-20
20-30
-
30-45
[84]
Wang, 2014
ec
14 AD vs. 14 HC
Coherence
0.5-4
4-7
8-10
10-12
13-30
30-40
[65]
Poza, 2013
ec
32 AD vs. 25 HC
Euclidean
Distance
1-4
4-8
8-10
10-13
13-30
30-40
[24]
Haan, 2009
ec
20 AD(mm) vs.
23 HC
Synchronization
Likelihood
0.5-4
4-8
8-10
10-13
13-30
30-45
[23]
Czigler, 2008
eo*
ec*
12 AD vs. 12 HC
Synchronization
Likelihood
0.5-4
4-8
8-11
11-14
14-25
25-35
-
-
[42]
Locatelli, 1998
ec
10 AD vs. 10 HC
Coherence
0.5-4
4-8
8-12
12-30
-
Table 29: Reference summary of AD papers used in Table 27. All study types are resting state EEG if nothing else is stated. AD: Alzheimer’s
Disease, EEG: Electroencephalogram, HC: Healthy Control, MCI: Mild Cognitive Impairment, mm: mild to moderate, ec: eyes-closed, eo: eyes-
open, ERP: event related potential. *EEG resting state is assumed for this study since nothing was stated in the paper.
91 of 135
==PAGE:100==
Katrine Dam Christensen
02/07/2023
Technical University of Denmark
α
β
Ref.
Author, Year
Type
Participants
Method
δ
θ
α-1
α-2
β-1
β-2
γ
[4] *
Aljalal, 2022
eo
15 PD vs. 16 HC
Discrete Wavelet
Transform
0-16, 16-32, 32-64, 64-128, 128-256
[41]
Li, 2021
ec
20 PD(off) vs. 21 HC
Phase Locking
Value
-
4-8
8-13
13-20
20-30
-
[61]
Su´arez, 2021
ec
15 PD-CN vs.
15 PD-MCI vs. 26 HC
Synchronization
Likelihood
1-4
4-7
8-12
13-20
-
[83]
Vecchio, 2021
ec
13 PD vs. 13 HC
Intracortical Lagged
Linear Connectivity
2-4
4-8
8-10.5
10.5-13
13-20
20-30
30-45
[45]
Mehraram, 2020
ec
21 PD-D vs.
32 AD vs. 18 HC
Weighted Phase
Lag Index
-
4-7.5
8-13.5
14-20.5
-
[33]
Hassan, 2017
ec
63 PD-CN vs.
46 PD-MCI vs.
15 PD-SCI
Phase Locking
Value
0.5-4
4-8
8-10
10-13
13-30
30-45
[79]
Utianski, 2016
ec
18 PD-D vs.
13 PD-MCI vs.
57 PD-CN vs. 57 HC
Phase Lag Index
2.5-4
4-8
8-10
10-13
13-30
-
[28]
Fogelson, 2013
ERP
15 PD vs. 15 HC
Synchronization
Likelihood
-
4-8
8-12
12-28
-
[31]
Han, 2013
ec
15 PD vs. 15 HC
-
0-4
4-8
8-13
13-30
-
Table 30: Reference summary of PD papers used in Table 28. All study types are rsEEG. HC: Healthy Control, MCI: Mild Cognitive Impairment, PD:
Parkinson’s Disease (PD-MCI: Parkinson’s Disease with mild cognitive impairment, PD-SCI: Parkinson’s Disease with severe cognitive impairment,
PD-CN: Parkinson’s Disease with normal cognition, PD-D: Parkinson’s Disease with dementia), ec: eyes-closed, eo: eyes-open, ERP: event related
potential. References marked with * indicate that the paper used the SanDiego dataset also used in this thesis.
92 of 135
==PAGE:101==
Katrine Dam Christensen
02/07/2023
Technical University of Denmark
A.9
Python Scripts
All processing and classification is performed in Python using packages of NetworkX [55], MNE [49], MNE-BIDS [48, 9] and MNE-connectivity [50].
Figure 24: Processing pipeline of the python script.
The Python scripts in the following sections includes: bidsify.py, inspect data.py, preprocessing.py, connectivity.py, feature extraction.py,
classification.py and util.py.
93 of 135
==PAGE:102==
Katrine Dam Christensen
02/07/2023
Technical University of Denmark
A.9.1
bidsify.py
The main reason for the data not being BIDS compliant was that ’gender’ was used instead of
’sex’ which caused issued for the MNE-bids functions.[48] It should be noted that additional
errors in the data files include:
• power line noise defined as 50 Hz instead of 60 Hz in file: data/source/sub-?/ses-?/eeg/sub-
? ses-? task-rest eeg.json for subject hc21, hc25, hc31 and hc32.
• data acquisition time had been overwritten due to preprocessing of subject pd6 and pd16.
1
# BIDSIFY data
2
3
#%% PACKAGES AND PATHS
4
# import
packages
5
import pandas
as pd
6
from
pathlib
import Path
7
import
s h u t i l
8
9
# construct
paths
10
a n a l y s i s d i r = Path (
f i l e
) . parent
11
data dir = a n a l y s i s d i r . parent . parent / ”data”
12
s o u r c e d i r = data dir
/ ” source ”
13
raw dir = data dir
/ ”raw”
14
15
#%% COPY FOLDERS
16
# copy
a l l
content
from
source
d i r e c t o r y
to a newly
constructed raw
d i r e c t o r y
17
s h u t i l . copytree ( source dir , raw dir )
18
19
#%% LOAD PARTICIPANT META DATA
20
# read
dataframe
of
su bje cts
meta data
21
df pd = pd . read csv ( raw dir / ” p a r t i c i p a n t s . tsv ” ,
sep=’ \ t ’ )
22
23
# Make data BIDS compliant :
24
# change column name from
’ gender ’
to
’ sex ’
in
compliance
with BIDS standards
25
df pd . rename ( columns = { ’ gender ’ : ’ sex ’ } , inplace=True )
26
27
# save
updated
p a r t i c i p a n t s
data
to raw
f o l d e r
28
df pd . to csv ( raw dir / ” p a r t i c i p a n t s . tsv ” ,
sep=”\ t ” )
94 of 135
==PAGE:103==
Katrine Dam Christensen
02/07/2023
Technical University of Denmark
A.9.2
inspect data.py
1
# inspect
data
2
3
4
# %%
5
from math import nan
6
from mne bids
import BIDSPath ,
read raw bids
7
import mne
8
from
pathlib
import Path
9
import pandas
as pd
10
import numpy as np
11
import
seaborn
as
sns
12
import
matplotlib . pyplot
as
plt
13
from mne . preprocessing
import ICA
14
# %gui
qt
15
# %matplotlib
qt
16
17
a n a l y s i s d i r = Path (
f i l e
) . parent
18
data dir = a n a l y s i s d i r . parent . parent / ”data”
19
raw dir = data dir
/ ”raw”
20
d e r i v a t i v e s d i r = data dir
/ ” d e r i v a t i v e s ”
21
22
# READ PARTICIPANTS DATAFRAME
23
df pd = pd . read csv ( raw dir / ” p a r t i c i p a n t s . tsv ” ,
sep=’ \ t ’ )
24
nSub = len (np . unique ( df pd . p a r t i c i p a n t i d ) )
# number of
s u b j e c t s
25
26
#%% PLOT RAW DATA
27
s=28
28
print ( f ” Subject :
{ s }” )
29
i i = 1 # i n i t i a l i z e
the
subject
30
31
# s e l e c t
subject
(pd/hc + ID) and
s e s s i o n
( on/ o f f
medication )
32
sub = df pd . p a r t i c i p a n t i d [ s ] [ 4 : ]
# extract
subject ID
33
subID = df pd . p a r t i c i p a n t i d [ s ] [ 6 : ]
# extract
subject ID number
34
ses = df pd . p a r t i c i p a n t i d [ s ] [ 4 : 6 ]
# extract
subject
d i s e a s e
(pd/hc )
35
l a b e l = ses
36
# f o r PD s ubj ect s :
37
i f
ses == ’pd ’ :
38
ses = ’ on ’
# s e l e c t PD s e s s i o n
’ o f f ’
medication
as
opposed
to
’ on ’
39
40
# Read data
41
bids path = BIDSPath( subject=sub ,
s e s s i o n=ses ,
task=’ r e s t ’ ,
42
datatype=’ eeg ’ ,
root=data dir /” source ” ,
extension=’ . bdf ’ )
43
raw = read raw bids ( bids path=bids path ,
verbose=False )
44
45
raw . plot ()
46
47
bids path = BIDSPath( subject=sub ,
s e s s i o n=ses ,
task=’ r e s t ’ , processing=’ f i l t e r e d ’ ,
48
datatype=’ eeg ’ ,
root=d e r i v a t i v e s d i r ,
extension=’ . edf ’ )
49
r a w f i l t = read raw bids ( bids path=bids path ,
verbose=False )
50
51
r a w f i l t . plot ()
52
53
#%%
54
s=10
55
print ( f ” Subject :
{ s }” )
56
i i = 1 # i n i t i a l i z e
the
subject
57
58
# s e l e c t
subject
(pd/hc + ID) and
s e s s i o n
( on/ o f f
medication )
59
sub = df pd . p a r t i c i p a n t i d [ s ] [ 4 : ]
# extract
subject ID
60
subID = df pd . p a r t i c i p a n t i d [ s ] [ 6 : ]
# extract
subject ID number
95 of 135
==PAGE:104==
Katrine Dam Christensen
02/07/2023
Technical University of Denmark
61
ses = df pd . p a r t i c i p a n t i d [ s ] [ 4 : 6 ]
# extract
subject
d i s e a s e
(pd/hc )
62
l a b e l = ses
63
# f o r PD s ubj ect s :
64
i f
ses == ’pd ’ :
65
ses = ’ o f f ’
# s e l e c t PD s e s s i o n
’ o f f ’
medication
as
opposed
to
’ on ’
66
67
# Read data
68
bids path = BIDSPath( subject=sub ,
s e s s i o n=ses ,
task=’ r e s t ’ , processing=’ f i l t e r e d ’ ,
69
datatype=’ eeg ’ ,
root=d e r i v a t i v e s d i r ,
extension=’ . edf ’ )
70
r a w f i l t = read raw bids ( bids path=bids path ,
verbose=False )
71
72
r a w f i l t . plot ()
73
74
#%% ICA
75
76
s=27
77
# s e l e c t
subject
(pd/hc + ID) and
s e s s i o n
( on/ o f f
medication )
78
sub = df pd . p a r t i c i p a n t i d [ s ] [ 4 : ]
# extract
subject ID
79
subID = df pd . p a r t i c i p a n t i d [ s ] [ 6 : ]
# extract
subject ID number
80
ses = df pd . p a r t i c i p a n t i d [ s ] [ 4 : 6 ]
# extract
subject
d i s e a s e
(pd/hc )
81
l a b e l = ses
82
# f o r PD s ubj ect s :
83
i f
ses == ’pd ’ :
84
ses = ’ o f f ’
# s e l e c t PD s e s s i o n
’ o f f ’
medication
as
opposed
to
’ on ’
85
86
print ( f ” Subject :
{sub}” )
87
88
# Read data
89
bids path = BIDSPath( subject=sub ,
s e s s i o n=ses ,
task=’ r e s t ’ , processing=’ f i l t e r e d ’ ,
90
datatype=’ eeg ’ ,
root=d e r i v a t i v e s d i r ,
extension=’ . edf ’ )
91
r a w f i l t = read raw bids ( bids path=bids path ,
verbose=False )
92
93
r a w f i l t . plot ()
94
95
# SET MONTAGE
96
montage = mne . channels . make standard montage ( ’ biosemi32 ’ )
97
r a w f i l t . set montage ( montage )
98
99
# ICA
100
ica = ICA( random state=8)
101
ica . f i t ( r a w f i l t )
102
ica . p l o t s o u r c e s ( r a w f i l t )
103
# ica . plot components ( i n s t = r a w f i l t ,
cnorm = TwoSlopeNorm( vcenter =0) ,
colorbar=
True )
104
ica . plot components ( i n s t = r a w f i l t ,
colorbar=True )
105
# NOTE:
to
access
d e t a i l e d
p l o t s
of
s p e c i f i c
components ,
c l i c k
the
plot
of
the
component when in
the
i n t e r a c t i v e
window .
106
# the
i n t e r a c t i v e
window
i s
generated when running
the
’ plot components ’
function
above .
107
108
#%% Generate
dataframe
of ICA components
to be removed from each
subject
109
110
data sub = df pd . p a r t i c i p a n t i d . values
111
data ica =
[ 0 , 0 , 0 , [ ] , 0 , 0 , 0 , 0 , [ 0 , 1 ] , 0 , 0 , 0 , 0 , [ 0 , 1 ] , 0 , 0 , 1 , 0 , 2 , [ 0 , 1 ] , [ 0 , 2 ] , 3 , 0 , 0 , 0 , [ 0 , 1 ] , 0 , 0 , 0 , 1 , 0 ]
112
113
df remove = pd . DataFrame ( data=data sub , columns=[ ’ subject ID ’ ] )
114
115
df remove [ ’ICA components ’ ] = data ica
116
96 of 135
==PAGE:105==
Katrine Dam Christensen
02/07/2023
Technical University of Denmark
117
#%%
118
s = 19
119
# s e l e c t
subject
(pd/hc + ID) and
s e s s i o n
( on/ o f f
medication )
120
sub = df pd . p a r t i c i p a n t i d [ s ] [ 4 : ]
# extract
subject ID
121
subID = df pd . p a r t i c i p a n t i d [ s ] [ 6 : ]
# extract
subject ID number
122
ses = df pd . p a r t i c i p a n t i d [ s ] [ 4 : 6 ]
# extract
subject
d i s e a s e
(pd/hc )
123
l a b e l = ses
124
# f o r PD s ubj ect s :
125
i f
ses == ’pd ’ :
126
ses = ’ o f f ’
# s e l e c t PD s e s s i o n
’ o f f ’
medication
as
opposed
to
’ on ’
127
128
print ( f ” Subject :
{sub}” )
129
130
# Read data
131
bids path = BIDSPath( subject=sub ,
s e s s i o n=ses ,
task=’ r e s t ’ , processing=’ f i l t e r e d ’ ,
132
datatype=’ eeg ’ ,
root=d e r i v a t i v e s d i r ,
extension=’ . edf ’ )
133
r a w f i l t = read raw bids ( bids path=bids path ,
verbose=False )
134
135
# c h a n n el c ol o rs = {}
136
# keys = r a w f i l t . ch names
137
# values = [ ’ r ’]+[ ’ k ’ ] ∗( len ( r a w f i l t . ch names ) −1)
138
# f o r
i , k in
enumerate ( keys ) :
139
#
c h a n ne l c ol o rs [ k ] = values [ i ]
140
# print ( c h an n el c ol or s )
141
142
# r a w f i l t . plot ()
143
r a w f i l t . plot psd ( fmin=0,fmax=100)
144
# r a w f i l t . plot psd ()
145
146
147
#%%
148
f o r
s
in
range (0 , nSub) :
149
# s e l e c t
subject
(pd/hc + ID) and
s e s s i o n
( on/ o f f
medication )
150
sub = df pd . p a r t i c i p a n t i d [ s ] [ 4 : ]
# extract
subject ID
151
subID = df pd . p a r t i c i p a n t i d [ s ] [ 6 : ]
# extract
subject ID number
152
ses = df pd . p a r t i c i p a n t i d [ s ] [ 4 : 6 ]
# extract
subject
d i s e a s e
(pd/hc )
153
l a b e l = ses
154
# f o r PD s ubj ect s :
155
i f
ses == ’pd ’ :
156
ses = ’ o f f ’
# s e l e c t PD s e s s i o n
’ o f f ’
medication
as
opposed
to
’ on ’
157
158
print ( f ” Subject :
{sub}” )
159
# Read data
160
# bids path = BIDSPath( subject=sub ,
s e s s i o n=ses ,
task =’ r e s t ’ , processing =’
f i l t e r e d ’ ,
161
#
datatype=’eeg ’ ,
root=d e r i v a t i v e s d i r ,
extension = ’.
edf ’)
162
# r a w f i l t = read raw bids ( bids path=bids path ,
verbose=False )
163
# Read data
164
bids path = BIDSPath( subject=sub ,
s e s s i o n=ses ,
task=’ r e s t ’ ,
165
datatype=’ eeg ’ ,
root=data dir /” source ” ,
extension=’ .
bdf ’ )
166
raw = read raw bids ( bids path=bids path ,
verbose=False )
167
# Read data
168
bids path = BIDSPath( subject=sub ,
s e s s i o n=ses ,
task=’ r e s t ’ , processing=’
f i l t e r e d ’ ,
169
datatype=’ eeg ’ ,
root=d e r i v a t i v e s d i r ,
extension=’ . edf ’
)
170
r a w f i l t = read raw bids ( bids path=bids path ,
verbose=False )
171
172
ch remove = [ ’EXG1 ’ , ’EXG2 ’ , ’EXG3 ’ , ’EXG4 ’ , ’EXG5 ’ , ’EXG6 ’ , ’EXG7 ’ , ’EXG8 ’ , ’ Status ’ ]
97 of 135
==PAGE:106==
Katrine Dam Christensen
02/07/2023
Technical University of Denmark
173
raw . drop channels ( ch remove )
174
175
raw . compute psd ( n f f t =5000) . plot ( average=’mean ’ )
176
177
raw . plot psd ()
178
179
#%%
180
s = 15
181
# s e l e c t
subject
(pd/hc + ID) and
s e s s i o n
( on/ o f f
medication )
182
sub = df pd . p a r t i c i p a n t i d [ s ] [ 4 : ]
# extract
subject ID
183
subID = df pd . p a r t i c i p a n t i d [ s ] [ 6 : ]
# extract
subject ID number
184
ses = df pd . p a r t i c i p a n t i d [ s ] [ 4 : 6 ]
# extract
subject
d i s e a s e
(pd/hc )
185
l a b e l = ses
186
# f o r PD s ubj ect s :
187
i f
ses == ’pd ’ :
188
ses = ’ o f f ’
# s e l e c t PD s e s s i o n
’ o f f ’
medication
as
opposed
to
’ on ’
189
190
print ( f ” Subject :
{sub}” )
191
# Read data
192
# bids path = BIDSPath( subject=sub ,
s e s s i o n=ses ,
task =’ r e s t ’ , processing =’ f i l t e r e d
’ ,
193
#
datatype=’eeg ’ ,
root=d e r i v a t i v e s d i r ,
extension = ’. edf ’)
194
# r a w f i l t = read raw bids ( bids path=bids path ,
verbose=False )
195
# Read data
196
bids path = BIDSPath( subject=sub ,
s e s s i o n=ses ,
task=’ r e s t ’ ,
197
datatype=’ eeg ’ ,
root=data dir /” source ” ,
extension=’ . bdf ’ )
198
raw = read raw bids ( bids path=bids path ,
verbose=False )
199
200
raw . plot psd ()
98 of 135
==PAGE:107==
Katrine Dam Christensen
02/07/2023
Technical University of Denmark
A.9.3
preprocessing.py
1
# Preprocessing
of PD data
f o r
Master
Thesis
2
# Author :
Katrine Dam Christensen
3
# Email :
kdc@optoceutics . com
4
5
# This
s c r i p t
performs
the
data
cleaning
and
general
preprocessing
6
7
#%% Import
packages
8
import mne
9
from mne bids
import BIDSPath ,
read raw bids ,
write raw bids
10
from mne . preprocessing
import ICA
11
import numpy as np
12
import pandas
as pd
13
from
pathlib
import Path
14
from tqdm import tqdm
15
16
import
warnings
17
warnings . f i l t e r w a r n i n g s ( ” ignore ” )
# ignore
a l l
printed
future
warning
18
19
# Set
parameters
20
RANDOM STATE = 8
# random
s t a t e
21
22
L FREQ = 1
# lower
frequency bound
[ Hz ]
23
H FREQ = 45
# upper
frequency bound
[ Hz ]
24
25
DURATION REMOVE = 1
# duration
to remove from
s t a r t
and
end
of
s i g n a l
i f
nothing
e l s e
i s
defined
[ s ]
26
27
# Construct
paths
28
a n a l y s i s d i r = Path (
f i l e
) . parent
29
data dir = a n a l y s i s d i r . parent . parent / ”data”
30
raw dir = data dir
/ ”raw”
31
d e r i v a t i v e s d i r = data dir
/ ” d e r i v a t i v e s ”
32
33
#%% LOAD PARTICIPANT DATA
34
df pd = pd . read csv ( raw dir / ” p a r t i c i p a n t s . tsv ” ,
sep=’ \ t ’ )
# read
dataframe
of
s u b j e cts
meta data
35
N SUB = df pd . p a r t i c i p a n t i d . nunique ()
# number of
s u b j e c t s
in
dataframe
36
37
# The inspect data . py
s c r i p t
performs
v i s u a l
i n s p e c t i o n
and ICA on the
data ,
38
# from which
i s
was determined which
channels
or
time
segments were contaminated
with
noise
39
# and which ICA components
contained
eye−blinks
and were
t h e r e f o r e
to be removed .
40
# Below
i s
l i s t e d
the components ,
channels and time
segments
to be removed from
each
subject .
41
42
# ICA components
to be removed from each
subject
43
# subject number :
[ component number( s ) ]
44
comps to remove = {
45
0:
[ 0 ] ,
46
1:
[ 0 ] ,
47
2:
[ 0 ] ,
48
3:
[ ] ,
49
4:
[ 0 ] ,
50
5:
[ 0 ] ,
51
6:
[ 0 ] ,
52
7:
[ 0 ] ,
53
8:
[ 0 , 1 ] ,
54
9:
[ 0 ] ,
55
10:
[ 0 ] ,
56
11:
[ 0 ] ,
57
12:
[ 0 ] ,
99 of 135
==PAGE:108==
Katrine Dam Christensen
02/07/2023
Technical University of Denmark
58
13:
[ 0 , 1 ] ,
59
14:
[ 0 ] ,
60
15:
[ 0 ] ,
61
16:
[ 1 ] ,
62
17:
[ 0 ] ,
63
18:
[ 2 ] ,
64
19:
[ 0 , 1 ] ,
65
20:
[ 0 , 2 ] ,
66
21:
[ 3 ] ,
67
22:
[ 0 ] ,
68
23:
[ 0 ] ,
69
24:
[ 0 ] ,
70
25:
[ 0 , 1 ] ,
71
26:
[ 0 ] ,
72
27:
[ 0 ] ,
73
28:
[ 0 ] ,
74
29:
[ 1 ] ,
75
30:
[ 0 ] ,
76
}
77
78
# EEG channels
to be removed from each
subject
79
# subject number :
[ channel name( s ) ]
80
channels to remove = {
81
0:
[ ] ,
82
1:
[ ’Fp1 ’ ] ,
83
2:
[ ] ,
84
3:
[ ] ,
85
4:
[ ] ,
86
5:
[ ] ,
87
6:
[ ] ,
88
7:
[ ] ,
89
8:
[ ] ,
90
9:
[ ] ,
91
10:
[ ] ,
92
11:
[ ] ,
93
12:
[ ] ,
94
13:
[ ] ,
95
14:
[ ] ,
96
15:
[ ’P8 ’ ] ,
97
16:
[ ] ,
98
17:
[ ] ,
99
18:
[ ] ,
100
19:
[ ] ,
101
20:
[ ’F7 ’ , ’FC5 ’ ] ,
102
21:
[ ] ,
103
22:
[ ] ,
104
23:
[ ] ,
105
24:
[ ] ,
106
25:
[ ] ,
107
26:
[ ] ,
108
27:
[ ’F8 ’ ] ,
109
28:
[ ] ,
110
29:
[ ] ,
111
30:
[ ] ,
112
}
113
114
# EEG time
segments
to be removed from each
subject
( each
segments
i s
given
as
[
start , stop ]
in
seconds )
115
# subject number :
[ [ start , stop ]
of
segment ( s )
in
seconds ]
116
times to remove = {
117
0:
[ ] ,
118
1:
[ [ 1 6 , 1 7 ] , [ 1 9 , 2 0 ] , [ 3 6 , 4 7 ] ] ,
119
2:
[ [ 1 , 2 ] , [ 6 , 8 ] ] ,
100 of 135
==PAGE:109==
Katrine Dam Christensen
02/07/2023
Technical University of Denmark
120
3:
[ ] ,
121
4:
[ [ 1 4 , 2 0 ] , [ 5 1 , 5 9 ] , [ 1 2 6 , 1 2 9 ] , [ 1 3 3 , 1 3 5 ] , [ 1 4 3 , 1 4 9 ] , [ 1 9 0 , 1 9 3 ] ] ,
122
5:
[ [ 6 0 , 6 4 ] ] ,
123
6:
[ [ 1 8 9 , 1 9 2 ] ] ,
124
7:
[ [ 4 6 , 4 8 ] , [ 1 4 7 , 1 4 9 ] , [ 1 9 0 , 1 9 1 ] ] ,
125
8:
[ [ 1 8 7 , 1 9 1 ] ] ,
126
9:
[ [ 3 6 , 3 9 ] , [ 1 9 7 , 1 9 9 ] ] ,
127
10:
[ ] ,
128
11:
[ ] ,
129
12:
[ ] ,
130
13:
[ [ 5 0 , 5 3 ] , [ 1 8 7 , 1 9 6 ] , [ 2 1 2 , 2 1 6 ] ] ,
131
14:
[ [ 1 8 , 2 1 ] , [ 9 1 , 9 2 ] , [ 1 5 1 , 1 5 4 ] , [ 1 8 7 , 1 8 8 ] ] ,
132
15:
[ [ 1 8 4 , 1 8 9 ] ] ,
133
16:
[ [ 5 0 , 5 2 ] , [ 1 7 2 , 1 7 3 ] , [ 1 8 4 , 1 8 6 ] ] ,
134
17:
[ [ 5 7 , 6 0 ] , [ 8 5 , 8 8 ] , [ 1 5 5 , 1 5 8 ] ] ,
135
18:
[ ] ,
136
19:
[ [ 1 1 4 , 1 1 6 ] ] ,
137
20:
[ ] ,
138
21:
[ [ 3 1 , 3 9 ] , [ 5 4 , 5 7 ] , [ 1 0 2 , 1 0 9 ] , [ 1 2 8 , 1 3 8 ] , [ 1 4 6 , 1 5 0 ] , [ 1 7 0 , 1 8 2 ] ] ,
139
22:
[ [ 6 1 , 6 2 ] , [ 1 2 3 , 1 2 4 ] ] ,
140
23:
[ [ 3 7 , 3 9 ] , [ 1 6 8 , 1 7 3 ] ] ,
141
24:
[ [ 1 5 , 1 8 ] , [ 3 1 , 3 9 ] , [ 5 3 , 5 7 ] , [ 7 5 , 7 7 ] , [ 9 3 , 9 6 ] , [ 1 0 1 , 1 0 2 ] , [ 1 0 6 , 1 2 0 ] , [ 1 3 2 , 1 3 4 ] , [ 1 4 5 , 1 6 4 ] , [ 1 8 6 , 1
142
25:
[ ] ,
143
26:
[ ] ,
144
27:
[ ] ,
145
28:
[ [ 8 2 , 8 5 ] , [ 1 1 1 , 1 1 3 ] , [ 1 1 7 , 1 2 3 ] , [ 1 4 2 , 1 5 0 ] , [ 1 6 7 , 1 7 0 ] ] ,
146
29:
[ ] ,
147
30:
[ ] ,
148
}
149
150
#%% LOAD EEG DATA + FILTER DATA + REMOVE DATA
151
152
df pd [ ’ID ’ ] = np . zeros (N SUB)
# add
subject ID column to
dataframe
153
df pd [ ’PD’ ] = np . zeros (N SUB)
# add
subject PD column to
dataframe
154
155
f o r
s
in tqdm( range (N SUB) ) : # f o r
each
subject :
156
# s e l e c t
subject
(pd/hc + ID) and
s e s s i o n
( on/ o f f
medication )
157
sub = df pd . p a r t i c i p a n t i d [ s ] [ 4 : ]
# extract
subject ID
158
subID = df pd . p a r t i c i p a n t i d [ s ] [ 6 : ]
# extract
subject ID number
159
ses = df pd . p a r t i c i p a n t i d [ s ] [ 4 : 6 ]
# extract
subject
d i s e a s e
(pd/hc )
160
161
df pd [ ’ID ’ ] [ s ] = subID
# save
subject ID number
162
163
# s e s s i o n
( ses )
f o r
healty
control
(HC)
i s
by
d e f a u l t
’ hc ’
164
# ses
f o r
Parkinsons
Disease
(PD)
i s
e i t h e r
f o r
on medication
’ on ’
or
o f f
medication
’ o f f ’ .
165
# f o r PD s ubj ect s
s e l e c t
s e s s i o n :
166
i f
ses == ’pd ’ :
167
df pd .PD[ s ] = 1
# save pd as a
v a r i a b l e
in
dataframe
(1 = pd ,
0 = hc )
168
ses = ’ o f f ’
# s e l e c t PD s e s s i o n
’ o f f ’
medication
as
opposed
to
’ on ’
169
170
# READ DATA #################################
171
# Read eeg
data
172
bids path = BIDSPath( subject=sub ,
s e s s i o n=ses ,
task=’ r e s t ’ ,
173
datatype=’ eeg ’ ,
root=raw dir ,
extension=’ . bdf ’ )
174
raw = read raw bids ( bids path=bids path ,
verbose=False )
175
raw . load data ( verbose=False )
# load
eeg
data
176
177
# Read task
events
101 of 135
==PAGE:110==
Katrine Dam Christensen
02/07/2023
Technical University of Denmark
178
bids path events = BIDSPath( subject=sub ,
s e s s i o n=ses ,
task=’ r e s t ’ , processing=’
f i l t e r e d ’ ,
179
datatype=’ eeg ’ ,
root=d e r i v a t i v e s d i r ,
extension=’ . tsv ’
)
180
f i l e p a t h s t r = bids path events . basename . s p l i t ( ” ” )
181
filename = bids path events . basename + ’ events . tsv ’
182
df events = pd . read csv ( d e r i v a t i v e s d i r / f i l e p a t h s t r [ 0 ] / f i l e p a t h s t r [ 1 ] / ’ eeg
’ / filename ,
sep=’ \ t ’ )
183
184
# REMOVE EXTRA CHANNELS #####################
185
ch names = raw . i n f o . ch names
# extract
channel names
186
ch remove = [ ’EXG1 ’ , ’EXG2 ’ , ’EXG3 ’ , ’EXG4 ’ , ’EXG5 ’ , ’EXG6 ’ , ’EXG7 ’ , ’EXG8 ’ , ’ Status ’ ]
# channels
to be removed
187
raw . drop channels ( ch remove )
# only
include
the
f i r s t
32
channels
(
exclude
the
extras )
188
189
# FILTERING #################################
190
# Band−pass :
remove below 1 Hz and above 45 Hz
191
r a w f i l t = raw . copy () . f i l t e r ( l f r e q=L FREQ,
h freq=H FREQ,
method=’ f i r ’ ,
verbose=False )
192
193
# SET MONTAGE OF ELECTRODES #################
194
montage = mne . channels . make standard montage ( ’ biosemi32 ’ )
195
r a w f i l t . set montage ( montage ,
verbose=False )
196
197
# DATA CLEANING #############################
198
# Remove eye−blinks
using
independent component
a n a l y s i s
(ICA)
199
ica = ICA( random state=RANDOM STATE)
# set up ICA
200
ica . f i t ( r a w f i l t , verbose=False )
# f i t
f i l t e r e d
data
to ICA
201
raw rem = r a w f i l t . copy ()
# make copy
of
data
202
i f
len ( comps to remove [ s ] )
!=
0: # i f
there
e x i s t s ICA components
to be
removed from
current
subject :
203
ica . exclude = comps to remove [ s ]
# exclude
chosen ICA components
204
ica . apply( raw rem , verbose=False )
# apply ICA to
data
205
206
# I n t e r p o l a t e EEG channels
207
i f
len ( channels to remove [ s ] )
!=
0: # i f
there
e x i s t s EEG channels
to be
i n t e r p o l a t e d
from
current
subject :
208
raw rem . i n f o [ ’ bads ’ ] = channels to remove [ s ]
# mark channel ( s )
as bad
209
raw rem = raw rem . i n t e r p o l a t e b a d s ( reset bads=True ,
verbose=False )
#
i n t e r p o l a t e
bad channels
210
211
# Annotate time
segments
(mark bad segments )
212
i f
len ( times to remove [ s ] )
!=
0: # i f
there
e x i s t s EEG time
segments
to be
removed from
current
subject :
213
times = np . array ( times to remove [ s ] )
# extract
time
segments
to be
removed from
current
subject
214
onsets = times [ : , 0 ]
# extract
sement
onset
[ s ]
215
durations = times [: ,1] −times [ : , 0 ]
# c a l c u l a t e
duration
of
segment
[ s
]
216
d e s c r i p t i o n s = [ ’ bad ’ ]
∗len ( onsets )
# set
d e s c r i p t i o n
of
segment
( Note
:
must
s t a r t
with
’ bad ’)
217
bad annot = mne . Annotations ( onsets ,
durations ,
descriptions ,
orig time=
raw rem . i n f o [ ’ meas date ’ ] ) # create
annotations
218
# NOTE:
when using
’ meas date ’
( p o s s i b l e
e r r o r
in
time
of
f i r s t
sample
when using
orig time
/ meas date .
Link :
https ://mne . t o o l s / s t a b l e /
generated /mne . Annotations . html )
219
raw rem . set annotations ( bad annot ,
verbose=False ) # set
annotations
220
221
# Define and annotate
start −stop
events
222
onsets = df events . onset . values
# extract
event
onsets
223
s t a r t s t o p = onsets [ onsets > 0]
# exclude
event
at
time = 0
[ s ]
224
FS = int ( raw rem . i n f o [ ’ s f r e q ’ ] )
# extract
sampling
frequency
102 of 135
==PAGE:111==
Katrine Dam Christensen
02/07/2023
Technical University of Denmark
225
# set
de fa ul t
s t a r t
and stop
event
times
226
s t a r t t i m e = DURATION REMOVE
# s t a r t
time
[ s ]
227
stop time = int ( len ( raw rem ) /FS−DURATION REMOVE) # stop
time
[ s ]
228
f o r
ss
in
s t a r t s t o p : # i f
s t a r t
and/ or
stop
events
e x i s t s
229
# i f
event
i s
i n s i d e
the
f i r s t
25% of
the
data AND not
within
the
s e l e c t e d
s t a r t
duration
to remove by
d e f a u l t
230
i f
ss <(len ( raw rem ) /FS∗0.25) and ss>s t a r t t i m e :
231
s t a r t t i m e = ss
# r e d e f i n e
s t a r t
event
time
[ s ]
232
# i f
event
i s
i n s i d e
the
l a s t 25% of
the
data AND not
within
the
s e l e c t e d
stop
duration
to remove by
d e f a u l t
233
i f
ss >(len ( raw rem ) /FS∗0.75) and ss<stop time :
234
stop time = ss
# r e d e f i n e
stop
event
time
[ s ]
235
# annotate
s t a r t
stop
events
as bad segments
236
onsets = np . array ( [ 0 ,
stop time ] )
# defi ne
event
onsets
[ s ]
237
durations = np . array ( [ start time , raw rem . times [ −1]])−onsets # c a l c u l a t e
duration
of
segment
[ s ]
238
d e s c r i p t i o n s = [ ’ bad
s t a r t ’ ,
’ bad stop ’ ] # set
d e s c r i p t i o n s
of
events
( Note :
must
s t a r t
with
’ bad ’)
239
# NOTE:
when using
’ meas date ’
( p o s s i b l e
e r r o r
in
time
of
f i r s t
sample when
using
orig time
/ meas date .
Link :
https ://mne . t o o l s / s t a b l e / generated /mne .
Annotations . html )
240
annotations = raw rem . annotations
# read
annotations
from raw
object
241
annotations . append ( onsets ,
durations ,
d e s c r i p t i o n s ) # append
start −stop
events
to
e x i s t i n g
annotations
242
raw rem . set annotations ( annotations ,
verbose=False ) # set new annotations
243
244
# the
annotations
s t a r t i n g
with
’ bad ’
w i l l
insure
that
the
l a t e r
generated EEG
segments
245
# that
contain
data
annotated
with
’ bad ’
are
excluded
from
f u r t h e r
processing
246
247
# SAVE DATA #################################
248
# Save ” preprocessed
f i l t e r e d ”−data and ” preprocessed and data removed”−data
to
d e r i v a t i v e s
f o l d e r
249
b i d s o u t p a t h f i l t e r e d = BIDSPath( subject=sub ,
s e s s i o n=ses ,
task=’ r e s t ’ ,
s u f f i x=’ eeg ’ ,
datatype=’ eeg ’ ,
250
root=d e r i v a t i v e s d i r ,
processing=” f i l t e r e d ” )
251
write raw bids ( r a w f i l t ,
bids path=b i d s o u t p a t h f i l t e r e d ,
overwrite=True ,
verbose=False ,
252
allow preload=True ,
format=”EDF” )
253
bids out path removed = BIDSPath( subject=sub ,
s e s s i o n=ses ,
task=’ r e s t ’ ,
s u f f i x
=’ eeg ’ ,
datatype=’ eeg ’ ,
254
root=d e r i v a t i v e s d i r ,
processing=”dataremoved” )
255
write raw bids ( raw rem ,
bids path=bids out path removed ,
overwrite=True ,
verbose=False ,
256
allow preload=True ,
format=”EDF” )
257
258
# Save updated
dataframe
to
d e r i v a t i v e s
f o l d e r
259
df pd . to csv ( d e r i v a t i v e s d i r
/
’ df pd . tsv ’ ,
sep=”\ t ” )
103 of 135
==PAGE:112==
Katrine Dam Christensen
02/07/2023
Technical University of Denmark
A.9.4
connectivity.py
The connectivity is calculated using the spectral connectivity epochs function from the
mne connectivity library.
Using the MNE function with mode = ’multitaper’ long buffer-
zones at the ends of the segments are not necessary, which would not be the case if mode
= ’cwt morlet’ (continuous wavelet transform using Morlet wavelets) was used.[52] The MNE
defines ImCoh similar to Section 2.4 Equation (12).[52]
1
# Author :
Katrine Dam Christensen
2
# Email :
kdc@optoceutics . com
3
4
# This
s c r i p t
c a l c u l a t e s
connectivity
f o r
a l l
s u b j e c t s
within
the
defined
frequency
bands .
5
6
#%% IMPORT PACKAGES
7
import math
8
import mne
9
from
mne connectivity
import
s p e c t r a l c o n n e c t i v i t y e p o c h s
10
import numpy as np
11
from mne bids
import BIDSPath ,
read raw bids
12
import pandas
as pd
13
from
pathlib
import Path
14
from tqdm import tqdm
15
16
import
warnings
17
warnings . f i l t e r w a r n i n g s ( ” ignore ” )
# ignore
a l l
printed
future
warning
18
19
#%% SETUP ###############################################
20
# SET PARAMETERS
21
# Segmentation
parameters
22
DURATION EPOCH = 60
# duration
of
epoch
[ s ]
23
DURATION SEGMENT = 5
# duration
of
segment
[ s ]
24
DURATION EEG = 60∗3
# minimum duration
of
eeg
[ s ]
25
N EPOCHS NEEDED = int (DURATION EEG/DURATION EPOCH) # number of
epochs
needed
26
N SEG PER EPOCH POSSIBLE = DURATION EPOCH/DURATION SEGMENT # number of
p o s s i b l e
segments
per
epoch
27
PERCENT REJECTED ERROR = 50
# minimum percentage
of
r e j e c t e d
segments
needed
to
r a i s e
an ERROR message
28
29
# Frequency bands :
data
format = band name , l f r e q , h freq
30
bands = [ [ ’ delta ’ , 1 , 4 ] , [ ’ theta ’ , 4 , 8 ] , [ ’ alpha ’ , 8 , 1 2 ] , [ ’ beta ’ , 1 2 , 3 0 ] , [ ’gamma ’
, 3 0 , 4 5 ] , [ ’ a l l
bands ’ , 1 , 4 5 ] ]
31
d f f r e q = pd . DataFrame ( data = bands ,
columns=[ ’ band ’ , ’ l f r e q ’ , ’ h freq ’ ] )
32
N FREQ = d f f r e q . shape [ 0 ]
# number of
frequency
bands
33
34
PRINT = True
35
36
# CONSTRUCT PATHS
37
a n a l y s i s d i r = Path (
f i l e
) . parent
38
data dir = a n a l y s i s d i r . parent . parent / ”data”
39
raw dir = data dir
/ ”raw”
40
d e r i v a t i v e s d i r = data dir
/ ” d e r i v a t i v e s ”
41
42
# READ PARTICIPANTS DATAFRAME
43
df pd = pd . read csv ( raw dir / ” p a r t i c i p a n t s . tsv ” ,
sep=’ \ t ’ )
44
N SUB = len (np . unique ( df pd . p a r t i c i p a n t i d ) )
# number of
s u b j e c t s
45
46
#%% ITERATION OVER SUBJECTS
47
i = 1 # i n i t i a l i z e
48
f o r
s
in tqdm( range (N SUB) ) :
49
i i = 1 # i n i t i a l i z e
the
subject
50
104 of 135
==PAGE:113==
Katrine Dam Christensen
02/07/2023
Technical University of Denmark
51
# S e l e c t
subject
(pd/hc + ID) and
s e s s i o n
( on/ o f f
medication )
52
sub = df pd . p a r t i c i p a n t i d [ s ] [ 4 : ]
# extract
subject ID
53
subID = df pd . p a r t i c i p a n t i d [ s ] [ 6 : ]
# extract
subject ID number
54
ses = df pd . p a r t i c i p a n t i d [ s ] [ 4 : 6 ]
# extract
subject
d i s e a s e
(pd/hc )
55
l a b e l = ses
# set
subject
l a b e l
56
# f o r PD s ubj ect s :
57
i f
ses == ’pd ’ :
58
ses = ’ o f f ’
# s e l e c t PD s e s s i o n
’ o f f ’
medication
as
opposed
to
’ on ’
59
60
# Read EEG data
61
bids path eeg = BIDSPath( subject=sub ,
s e s s i o n=ses ,
task=’ r e s t ’ , processing=’
dataremoved ’ ,
62
datatype=’ eeg ’ ,
root=d e r i v a t i v e s d i r ,
extension=’ . edf ’
)
63
r a w f i l t = read raw bids ( bids path=bids path eeg ,
verbose=False )
64
r a w f i l t . load data ( verbose=False )
65
N CHANNELS = len ( r a w f i l t . i n f o . ch names )
# number of EEG channels
66
FS = int ( r a w f i l t . i n f o [ ’ s f r e q ’ ] )
# extract
sampling
frequency
67
68
# column names
f o r
subject
dataframe
with
only
the 32
channels
69
col names = [ ’ subject ID ’ , ’ l a b e l ’ , ’ epoch ’ , ’ frequency band ’ ]+ r a w f i l t . i n f o [ ’
ch names ’ ]
70
71
# ITERATION OVER FREQUENCY BANDS
72
f o r
f
in
range (N FREQ) : # f o r
each
frequency band :
73
# f i l t e r
eeg
s i g n a l
to
the
frequency band
74
L FREQ = d f f r e q . l f r e q [ f ]
# lower
frequency bound
75
H FREQ = d f f r e q . h freq [ f ]
# upper
frequency bound
76
raw freq = r a w f i l t . copy () . f i l t e r ( l f r e q=L FREQ,
h freq=H FREQ,
method = ’
f i r ’ ,
verbose=False ) # f i l t e r
data
77
78
N EPOCHS = math . f l o o r ( len ( raw freq ) /FS/DURATION EPOCH) # number of
p o s s i b l e
epochs
79
i f N EPOCHS < N EPOCHS NEEDED and
i i ==1:
80
print ( f ” Subject :
{sub}” )
81
print ( ”ERROR:
number of
epochs
i s
lower
than
3 , meaning
s u f f i c i e n t
amount of
data
w i l l
be
l o s t
i f
t h i s
i s
not
r e c t i f i e d . ” )
82
e l i f N EPOCHS > N EPOCHS NEEDED and
i i ==1:
83
print ( f ” Subject :
{sub}” )
84
print ( ”ERROR:
number of
epochs
i s
higher
than
3 , meaning
a d d i t i o n a l
epochs
e x i s t s
f o r
the
current
subject . ” )
85
86
# Calculate
connectivity
f o r
each epoch
87
f o r
e
in
range (N EPOCHS) :
88
# crop
eeg
data
to
current
epoch
89
raw epoch = raw freq . copy () . crop ( tmin=e∗DURATION EPOCH, tmax=(e+1)∗
DURATION EPOCH, include tmax=False )
90
91
# s p l i t
epoch
into
smaller
segments
92
segments = mne . make fixed length epochs ( raw epoch ,
duration=
DURATION SEGMENT,
preload=True ,
re je ct b y an no ta ti on = True ,
verbose=False )
93
segments array = segments . get data () # extract
segment data
as numpy
arrays
94
seg drop log = segments . drop log
# extract
dropped segments
log
95
seg drop = np . zeros ( [ len ( seg drop log ) , 1 ] )
# premake
zeros
array
96
f o r
seg
in
range ( len ( seg drop log ) ) :
97
i f
seg drop log [ seg ] :
98
seg drop [ seg ] = 1
# set
segments
equal
to 1 (1 =
segment dropped )
99
105 of 135
==PAGE:114==
Katrine Dam Christensen
02/07/2023
Technical University of Denmark
100
# c a l c u l a t e
connectivity
f o r
each segment
within
the
epoch −but
return
only an average
connectivity
matrix
101
# [ average
over
segments
withnin
each
frequency band
s e p e r a t e l y ]
102
cc = s p e c t r a l c o n n e c t i v i t y e p o c h s ( data=segments array ,
method=’ imcoh ’ ,
s f r e q=FS , mode=’ multitaper ’ ,
103
fmin=L FREQ,
fmax=H FREQ,
faverage=True ,
verbose=False )
104
cc data = np . squeeze ( cc . get data ( output=’ dense ’ ) )
# get
connectivity
matrix
data
105
106
# save
connectivity
matrix
f o r
each epoch
in a dataframe
107
meta = np . repeat ( [ [ subID , label , e , d f f r e q . band [ f ] ] ] , N CHANNELS, axis =0)
108
data = np . append (meta , cc data , axis =1)
109
110
i f
i == 1: # i f
t h i s
i s
the
very
f i r s t
time
t h i s
l i n e
i s
run
111
df segments dropped = pd . DataFrame ( data = { ’ subject ID ’ :
[ subID ] ,
’ epoch ’ :
[ e ] ,
’ segments dropped ’ :
[ seg drop ] } )
112
i = 0 # update
i t e r a t o r
113
e l i f
f == 0: # only
f o r
the
f i r s t
frequency band
114
df seg drop = pd . DataFrame ( data = { ’ subject ID ’ :
[ subID ] ,
’ epoch ’ :
[ e ] ,
’ segments dropped ’ :
[ seg drop ] } )
115
df segments dropped = df segments dropped . append ( df seg drop )
116
117
# append
current
data
array
to combined
array
f o r
the
subject
118
i f
i i == 1: # i f
i t
i s
the
i n i t a l
i t e r a t i o n
f o r
the
subject ,
then
create
the
subject
array
119
subject array = data
120
i i = 0 # i n s u r e s
t h i s
i f
statement
does
not run
again
i n t i l
a new
subject
i s
i n i t i a l i z e d
121
e l s e : # i f
subject
array
has
already
be
created ,
then
j u s t
append data
122
subject array = np . append ( subject array ,
data , axis =0)
123
124
i f PRINT:
125
print ( f ” Subject :
{sub}” )
126
f o r
e
in
range (N EPOCHS) :
127
N REJECT = round(sum( df segments dropped [ ’ segments dropped ’ ] . values [ e
] ) [ 0 ] )
128
print ( f ”Epoch {e +1}: {N REJECT}/{ round (N SEG PER EPOCH POSSIBLE) }
r e j e c t e d
segments” )
129
i f N REJECT/N SEG PER EPOCH POSSIBLE > (PERCENT REJECTED ERROR/100) :
130
print ( f ”ERROR:
percentage
of
r e j e c t e d
segments
f o r
t h i s
epoch
i s
higher
than {PERCENT REJECTED ERROR}%” )
131
132
# convert
subject
array
to
dataframe
133
d f c c = pd . DataFrame ( data=subject array , columns=col names )
# dataframe
of
s i n g l e
subject ,
a l l
epochs ,
a l l
frequency
bands
134
135
# save
connectivity
dataframe
using BIDS
f i l e
structure
( s i n g l e
subject )
136
bids out path = BIDSPath( subject=sub ,
s e s s i o n=ses ,
task=’ r e s t ’ ,
s u f f i x=’ eeg ’ ,
datatype=’ eeg ’ ,
137
root=d e r i v a t i v e s d i r ,
processing=”
connectivityMatrix ” )
138
f i l e p a t h s t r = bids out path . basename . s p l i t ( ” ” )
139
filename = bids out path . basename + ’ . csv ’
140
d f c c . to csv ( d e r i v a t i v e s d i r / f i l e p a t h s t r [ 0 ] / f i l e p a t h s t r [ 1 ] / ’ eeg ’ / filename )
141
142
# save
segments dropped
dataframe
( a l l
s u b j e c t s )
143
filename = ’ segments dropped . csv ’
144
df segments dropped . to csv ( d e r i v a t i v e s d i r / filename )
106 of 135
==PAGE:115==
Katrine Dam Christensen
02/07/2023
Technical University of Denmark
A.9.5
feature extraction.py
1
# Author :
Katrine Dam Christensen
2
# Email :
kdc@optoceutics . com
3
4
# This
s c r i p t
c a l c u l a t e s
f e a t u r e s
f o r
each
subject
based on
t h e i r
connectivity
values .
5
6
#%% IMPORT PACKAGES #####################################
7
from
pathlib
import Path
8
import numpy as np
9
import pandas
as pd
10
from mne bids
import BIDSPath
11
from tqdm import tqdm
12
13
from
u t i l
import ∗
# u t i l
contains
functions
generated by the
author
14
15
import
warnings
16
warnings . f i l t e r w a r n i n g s ( ” ignore ” )
# ignore
a l l
future
warnings
printed by netwokrx
functions
17
18
# import
s h u t i l
19
# copy README f i l e
20
# src = a n a l y s i s d i r . parent . parent / ”README.md”
21
# dst = a n a l y s i s d i r
/ ”README.md”
22
# s h u t i l . copy ( src ,
dst )
23
24
#%% SETUP ###############################################
25
# Set
parameters
26
FEATURE MODE = ’ graph ’
# f e a t u r e
c a l c u l a t i o n
can be
performed
at
’ graph ’ ,
’ node ’
or
’ region ’
l e v e l
27
THRESHOLD MODE = ’ density ’
# thresholding mode can be
’
weight ’
or
’ density ’
28
29
TH STEP WEIGHT = 0.01
# step
s i z e
of
weight−based
thresholds
30
TH MIN WEIGHT = −1
# minimum threshold
value
using
weight−based
thresholding
31
TH MAX WEIGHT = 1
# maximum threshold
value
using
weight−based
thresholding
32
TH STEP DENSITY = 0.1
# step
s i z e
of
density−based
thresholds
33
TH MIN DENSITY = 0
# minimum threshold
value
using
density−based
thresholding
34
TH MAX DENSITY = 1
# maximum threshold
value
using
density−based
thresholding
35
36
# Construct
paths
37
a n a l y s i s d i r = Path (
f i l e
) . parent
38
data dir = a n a l y s i s d i r . parent . parent / ”data”
39
raw dir = data dir
/ ”raw”
40
d e r i v a t i v e s d i r = data dir
/ ” d e r i v a t i v e s ”
41
42
# READ PARTICIPANTS DATAFRAME
43
df pd = pd . read csv ( raw dir / ” p a r t i c i p a n t s . tsv ” ,
sep=’ \ t ’ )
44
N SUB = len (np . unique ( df pd . p a r t i c i p a n t i d ) )
# number of
s u b j e c t s
45
46
#%% FIND THRESHOLD RANGE ################################
47
48
i = 1
# i t e r a t o r
49
# f o r
each
subject
50
f o r
s
in
range (0 ,N SUB) :
107 of 135
==PAGE:116==
Katrine Dam Christensen
02/07/2023
Technical University of Denmark
51
# s e l e c t
subject
(pd/hc + ID) and
s e s s i o n
( on/ o f f
medication )
52
sub = df pd . p a r t i c i p a n t i d [ s ] [ 4 : ]
# extract
subject ID
53
subID = df pd . p a r t i c i p a n t i d [ s ] [ 6 : ]
# extract
subject ID number
54
ses = df pd . p a r t i c i p a n t i d [ s ] [ 4 : 6 ]
# extract
subject
d i s e a s e
(pd/hc )
55
56
# f o r PD s ubj ect s :
57
i f
ses == ’pd ’ :
58
ses = ’ o f f ’
# s e l e c t PD s e s s i o n
’ o f f ’
medication
as
opposed
to
’ on ’
59
60
bids in path = BIDSPath( subject=sub ,
s e s s i o n=ses ,
task=’ r e s t ’ ,
s u f f i x=’ eeg ’ ,
datatype=’ eeg ’ ,
61
root=d e r i v a t i v e s d i r ,
processing=”
connectivityMatrix ” )
62
f i l e p a t h s t r = bids in path . basename . s p l i t ( ” ” )
63
filename = bids in path . basename + ’ . csv ’
64
# import
connectivity
dataframe
65
d f c c = pd . read csv ( d e r i v a t i v e s d i r / f i l e p a t h s t r [ 0 ] / f i l e p a t h s t r [ 1 ] / ’ eeg ’ /
filename ,
sep=’ , ’ )
66
67
# c a l c u l a t e
minima and maxima threshold
68
df minmax freq ,
df minmax = find min max threshold ( d f c c )
69
70
freq bands = np . unique ( df minmax [ ’ frequency band ’ ] )
# frequency
bands
71
72
# f o r
each
subject
append dataframe
to
get
threshold
range
f o r
each
frequency
band
of
each
subject
73
i f
i == 1:
74
df minmax freq sub = df minmax freq
75
i = 0
76
e l s e :
77
df minmax freq sub = pd . concat ( [ df minmax freq sub , df minmax freq ] ,
ignore index=True )
78
79
M i n t h f r e q t o t a l = np . zeros ( len ( freq bands ) )
80
Max th freq total = np . zeros ( len ( freq bands ) )
81
M i n p c f r e q t o t a l = np . zeros ( len ( freq bands ) )
82
Max pc freq total = np . zeros ( len ( freq bands ) )
83
84
print ( ’ For
a l l
sub jec ts
threshold
must be :\ n
’ )
85
DECI = 5 # number of
decimals
to be
included when printing
threshold
values
86
f o r
f
in
range (0 , len ( freq bands ) ) :
87
# c a l c u l a t e
min(max) and max(min)
over
a l l
s u b j e c t s
f o r
each
frequency band
88
M i n t h f r e q t o t a l [ f ] = np .max( df minmax freq sub [ df minmax freq sub [ ’ frequency
band ’ ] == freq bands [ f ] ] [ ’ min th freq ’ ] . values )
89
Max th freq total [ f ] = np .min( df minmax freq sub [ df minmax freq sub [ ’ frequency
band ’ ] == freq bands [ f ] ] [ ’ max th freq ’ ] . values )
90
91
M i n p c f r e q t o t a l [ f ] = np .max( df minmax freq sub [ df minmax freq sub [ ’ frequency
band ’ ] == freq bands [ f ] ] [ ’ min pc freq ’ ] . values )
92
Max pc freq total [ f ] = np .min( df minmax freq sub [ df minmax freq sub [ ’ frequency
band ’ ] == freq bands [ f ] ] [ ’ max pc freq ’ ] . values )
93
94
# t e s t
i f
frequency
bands
thresholding
i s
p o s s i b l e
f o r
current
dataset
95
i f
M i n t h f r e q t o t a l [ f ] < Max th freq total [ f ] :
96
abs th = ’ p o s s i b l e ’
97
e l s e :
98
abs th = ’IMPOSSIBLE ’
99
i f
M i n p c f r e q t o t a l [ f ] < Max pc freq total [ f ] :
100
pc th = ’ p o s s i b l e ’
101
e l s e :
102
pc th = ’IMPOSSIBLE ’
103
print ( ’ Frequency band
’ + df minmax freq [ ’ frequency band ’ ] . values [ f ] + ’
: ’ )
108 of 135
==PAGE:117==
Katrine Dam Christensen
02/07/2023
Technical University of Denmark
104
print ( ’ Absolute
thresholding
i s
’ + abs th + ’ :
’ + s t r (round(
M i n t h f r e q t o t a l [ f ] ,DECI) ) + ’ < th < ’ + s t r (round( Max th freq total [ f ] ,
DECI) )
+ ’ . ’ )
105
print ( ’ Percentage
thresholding
i s
’ + pc th + ’ :
’ + s t r (round(
M i n p c f r e q t o t a l [ f ] ,DECI) ) + ’ < pc < ’ + s t r (round( Max pc freq total [ f ] ,
DECI) )
+ ’ .\ n ’ )
106
107
108
# c a l c u l a t e
min(max) and max(min)
f o r
thresholds
over
frequency
bands
109
Min th all = np .max( df minmax freq sub [ ’ min th freq ’ ] . values )
110
Max th all = np .min( df minmax freq sub [ ’ max th freq ’ ] . values )
111
112
Min pc all = np .max( df minmax freq sub [ ’ min pc freq ’ ] . values )
113
Max pc all = np .min( df minmax freq sub [ ’ max pc freq ’ ] . values )
114
115
# t e s t
i f
thresholding
i s
p o s s i b l e
f o r
current
dataset
116
i f
Min th all < Max th all :
117
a l l a b s t h = ’ p o s s i b l e ’
118
e l s e :
119
a l l a b s t h = ’IMPOSSIBLE ’
120
i f
Min pc all < Max pc all :
121
a l l p c t h = ’ p o s s i b l e ’
122
e l s e :
123
a l l p c t h = ’IMPOSSIBLE ’
124
125
print ( ’ Absolute
thresholding
over
a l l
frequency
bands
i s
’ + a l l a b s t h + ’ :
’ +
s t r (round( Min th all ,DECI) ) + ’ < th < ’ + s t r (round( Max th all ,DECI) )
+ ’ . ’ )
126
print ( ’ Percentage
thresholding
over
a l l
frequency
bands
i s
’ + a l l p c t h + ’ :
’ +
s t r (round( Min pc all ,DECI) ) + ’ < pc < ’ + s t r (round( Max pc all ,DECI) )
+ ’ .\ n
’ )
127
128
# predefine
p o s s i b l e
range
of
threshold
values
based on
predefined minimum ,
maximum and step
s i z e .
129
FACTOR = 100
130
weight th = np . arange (TH MIN WEIGHT∗FACTOR,TH MAX WEIGHT∗FACTOR+TH STEP WEIGHT∗
FACTOR,TH STEP WEIGHT∗FACTOR) /FACTOR
131
density th = np . arange (TH MIN DENSITY∗FACTOR,TH MAX DENSITY∗FACTOR+TH STEP DENSITY
∗FACTOR,TH STEP DENSITY∗FACTOR) /FACTOR
132
133
# set
thresholding
values
f o r
each
frequency band
134
f w e i g h t a l l b a n d s = weight th [ ( M i n t h f r e q t o t a l [ 0 ] < weight th ) ∗( weight th <
Max th freq total [ 0 ] ) ] # a l l
bands
135
f d e n s i t y a l l b a n d s = density th [ ( M i n p c f r e q t o t a l [ 0 ] < density th ) ∗( density th
< Max pc freq total [ 0 ] ) ] # a l l
bands
136
137
f weight alpha = weight th [ ( M i n t h f r e q t o t a l [ 1 ] < weight th ) ∗( weight th <
Max th freq total [ 1 ] ) ] # alpha
138
f d e n s i t y a l p h a = density th [ ( M i n p c f r e q t o t a l [ 1 ] < density th ) ∗( density th <
Max pc freq total [ 1 ] ) ] # alpha
139
140
f weight beta = weight th [ ( M i n t h f r e q t o t a l [ 2 ] < weight th ) ∗( weight th <
Max th freq total [ 2 ] ) ] # beta
141
f d e n s i t y b e t a = density th [ ( M i n p c f r e q t o t a l [ 2 ] < density th ) ∗( density th <
Max pc freq total [ 2 ] ) ] # beta
142
143
f w e i g h t d e l t a = weight th [ ( M i n t h f r e q t o t a l [ 3 ] < weight th ) ∗( weight th <
Max th freq total [ 3 ] ) ] # delta
144
f d e n s i t y d e l t a = density th [ ( M i n p c f r e q t o t a l [ 3 ] < density th ) ∗( density th <
Max pc freq total [ 3 ] ) ] # delta
145
146
f weight gamma = weight th [ ( M i n t h f r e q t o t a l [ 4 ] < weight th ) ∗( weight th <
Max th freq total [ 4 ] ) ] # gamma
147
f density gamma = density th [ ( M i n p c f r e q t o t a l [ 4 ] < density th ) ∗( density th <
109 of 135
==PAGE:118==
Katrine Dam Christensen
02/07/2023
Technical University of Denmark
Max pc freq total [ 4 ] ) ] # gamma
148
149
f w e i g h t t h e t a = weight th [ ( M i n t h f r e q t o t a l [ 5 ] < weight th ) ∗( weight th <
Max th freq total [ 5 ] ) ] # theta
150
f d e n s i t y t h e t a = density th [ ( M i n p c f r e q t o t a l [ 5 ] < density th ) ∗( density th <
Max pc freq total [ 5 ] ) ] # theta
151
152
thresholds weight = [ f weight all ba nd s , f weight alpha , f weight beta ,
f weight delta , f weight gamma , f w e i g h t t h e t a ]
153
t h r e s h o l d s d e n s i t y = [ f d e n s i t y a l l b a n d s , f density alpha , f d e n s i t y b e t a ,
f d e n s i t y d e l t a , f density gamma , f d e n s i t y t h e t a ]
154
155
i f THRESHOLD MODE == ’ weight ’ :
156
thresholds = thresholds weight
157
filename = ’ t h r e s h o l d s
’+THRESHOLD MODE+’ . csv ’ # defi ne
filename
f o r
threshold
values
f i l e
158
159
e l i f THRESHOLD MODE == ’ density ’ :
160
thresholds = t h r e s h o l d s d e n s i t y
161
filename = ’ t h r e s h o l d s
’+THRESHOLD MODE+’ . csv ’ # defi ne
filename
f o r
threshold
values
f i l e
162
163
# save
threshold
values
as
csv
f i l e
164
df th = pd . DataFrame ( thresholds )
165
df th . to csv ( d e r i v a t i v e s d i r / filename , sep=’ , ’ )
166
167
168
#%% FEATURE EXTRACTION ##################################
169
170
# Perform
f eatur e
extraction
171
i = 1
# i t e r a t o r
that
ensures
array
i s
generated
during
f i r s t
i t e r a t i o n
172
f o r
s
in tqdm( range (0 ,N SUB) ) :
173
# s e l e c t
subject
(pd/hc + ID) and
s e s s i o n
( on/ o f f
medication )
174
sub = df pd . p a r t i c i p a n t i d [ s ] [ 4 : ]
# extract
subject ID
175
subID = df pd . p a r t i c i p a n t i d [ s ] [ 6 : ]
# extract
subject ID number
176
ses = df pd . p a r t i c i p a n t i d [ s ] [ 4 : 6 ]
# extract
subject
d i s e a s e
(pd/hc )
177
178
# f o r PD s ubj ect s :
179
i f
ses == ’pd ’ :
180
ses = ’ o f f ’
# s e l e c t PD s e s s i o n
’ o f f ’
medication
as
opposed
to
’ on ’
181
182
bids in path = BIDSPath( subject=sub ,
s e s s i o n=ses ,
task=’ r e s t ’ ,
s u f f i x=’ eeg ’ ,
datatype=’ eeg ’ ,
183
root=d e r i v a t i v e s d i r ,
processing=”
connectivityMatrix ” )
184
f i l e p a t h s t r = bids in path . basename . s p l i t ( ” ” )
185
filename = bids in path . basename + ’ . csv ’
186
# import
connectivity
dataframe
187
d f c c = pd . read csv ( d e r i v a t i v e s d i r / f i l e p a t h s t r [ 0 ] / f i l e p a t h s t r [ 1 ] / ’ eeg ’ /
filename ,
sep=’ , ’ )
188
189
# c a l c u l a t e
f e a t u r e s
f o r
a l l
epochs and
a l l
frequency
bands
f o r
current
subject
190
d f f e a t u r e s s u b = f eatur e ( df cc ,
thresholds=thresholds ,
threshold mode=
THRESHOLD MODE,
feature mode=FEATURE MODE)
191
192
# save
dataframe
to
’ a l l
s ubj e c t s ’−dataframe
193
i f
i ==1: # i f
t h i s
i s
the
f i r s t
i t e r a t i o n
then :
194
# generate
’ a l l
su bje cts ’−dataframe
195
d f f e a t u r e s a l l = d f f e a t u r e s s u b
196
i = 0
110 of 135
==PAGE:119==
Katrine Dam Christensen
02/07/2023
Technical University of Denmark
197
e l s e :
198
# append
’ s i n g l e
subject ’−dataframe
to
’ a l l
s u b j e c t s ’−dataframe
199
d f f e a t u r e s a l l = pd . concat ( [ d f f e a t u r e s a l l , d f f e a t u r e s s u b ] , ignore index
=True )
200
201
# save
dataframe
of
s i n g l e
subject
using BIDS
f i l e
structure
202
bids out path = BIDSPath( subject=sub ,
s e s s i o n=ses ,
task=’ r e s t ’ ,
s u f f i x=’ eeg ’ ,
datatype=’ eeg ’ ,
203
root=d e r i v a t i v e s d i r ,
processing=” f e a t u r e s ” )
204
f i l e p a t h s t r = bids out path . basename . s p l i t ( ” ” )
205
filename = bids out path . basename + ’ . csv ’
206
d f f e a t u r e s s u b . to csv ( d e r i v a t i v e s d i r / f i l e p a t h s t r [ 0 ] / f i l e p a t h s t r [ 1 ] / ’ eeg ’
/ filename )
207
208
# save
dataframe
of
a l l
su bje cts
209
filename = ’ d f f e a t u r e s a l l
’+FEATURE MODE+’
’+THRESHOLD MODE+’ . csv ’
210
d f f e a t u r e s a l l . to csv ( d e r i v a t i v e s d i r / filename )
111 of 135
==PAGE:120==
Katrine Dam Christensen
02/07/2023
Technical University of Denmark
A.9.6
classification.py
For the classification script the variables THRESHOLD MODE is selected as either ’weight’
or ’density’ while MODEL is selected as either ’logreg’, ’svclinear’ or ’svcrbf’. The SVC using
polynomial kernel was also implemented but not used, but can be accessed by setting MODEL
equal to ’svcpoly’.
1
#%% c l a s s i f i c a t i o n
model
2
from
pathlib
import Path
3
import numpy as np
4
import
sklearn
5
import pandas
as pd
6
import math
7
from
sklearn . linear model
import
LogisticRegression
8
from
sklearn . svm import SVC
9
from
sklearn . model selection
import GridSearchCV ,
StratifiedKFold ,
PredefinedSplit
10
from
sklearn . metrics
import
f 1 s c o r e
11
from
sklearn . p i p e l i n e
import
Pipeline
12
from
sklearn . preprocessing
import
StandardScaler
13
from
sklearn . f e a t u r e s e l e c t i o n
import RFECV,
SequentialFeatureSelector
14
from tqdm import tqdm
15
16
import
matplotlib . pyplot
as
plt
17
18
# construct
paths
19
a n a l y s i s d i r = Path (
f i l e
) . parent
20
data dir = a n a l y s i s d i r . parent . parent / ”data”
21
raw dir = data dir
/ ”raw”
22
d e r i v a t i v e s d i r = data dir
/ ” d e r i v a t i v e s ”
23
f i g u r e s d i r = a n a l y s i s d i r . parent . parent . parent / ” f i g u r e s ”
24
25
# set
data
parameters
26
FEATURE MODE = ’ graph−node−region ’
# f e a t u r e
c a l c u l a t i o n
can be
performed
at
’ graph ’ ,
’ node ’
or
’ region ’
l e v e l
27
THRESHOLD MODE = ’ weight ’
# thresholding mode can be
’ weight ’
or
’ density ’
28
29
MODEL = ’ s v c l i n e a r ’
30
31
# read
data
32
filename = f ’ d f f e a t u r e s a l l g r a p h {THRESHOLD MODE}. csv ’
33
d f f e a t u r e s a l l g r a p h = pd . read csv ( d e r i v a t i v e s d i r / filename ,
sep=’ , ’ )
34
35
filename = f ’ d f f e a t u r e s a l l n o d e {THRESHOLD MODE}. csv ’
36
d f f e a t u r e s a l l n o d e = pd . read csv ( d e r i v a t i v e s d i r / filename ,
sep=’ , ’ )
37
38
filename = f ’ d f f e a t u r e s a l l r e g i o n {THRESHOLD MODE}. csv ’
39
d f f e a t u r e s a l l r e g i o n = pd . read csv ( d e r i v a t i v e s d i r / filename ,
sep=’ , ’ )
40
41
42
#%% SET PARAMETERS
43
44
RANDOM STATE = 8
# set
random
s t a t e
45
N EPOCHS = 3
# number of
epoch
to
include
( exculde
a d d i t i o n a l
epochs )
46
47
# cr o s s
v a l i d a t i o n
48
N OUTER FOLDS = 10
# number of
outer
f o l d s
in k−f o l d
cross −v a l i d a t i o n
49
N INNER FOLDS = 9
# number of
inner
f o l d s
in k−f o l d
cross −v a l i d a t i o n
50
51
# Set
parameter
values
f o r
c l a s s i f i e r s
52
i f THRESHOLD MODE == ’ weight ’ :
53
t h v a l u e s s e l e c t e d = [ −0.01 , −0.03 , −0.03 , −0.05 , −0.04 , −0.03]
54
e l s e :
112 of 135
==PAGE:121==
Katrine Dam Christensen
02/07/2023
Technical University of Denmark
55
t h v a l u e s s e l e c t e d = [ 0 . 4 , 0 . 1 , 0 . 4 , 0 . 4 , 0 . 1 , 0 . 3 ]
56
57
# Support
Vector
C l a s s i f i e r
(SVC)
58
# hyper−parameter
combinations
( svc )
59
# l i n e a r + C
60
# poly + degree + gamma + C
61
# rbf + gamma + C
62
# sigmoid + gamma + C
63
64
parameters svc poly = {
65
’ c l f
k e r n e l ’ :
[ ’ poly ’ ] ,
66
’ c l f
C ’ :
[0 . 0 00 1 ,
0.001 ,
0.01 ,
0.1 ,
1 ,
10] ,
67
’ clf
gamma ’ :
[ ’ s c a l e ’ , ’ auto ’ ] ,
68
’ c l f
d e g r e e ’ :
[ 2 ] ,
69
# ’ c l f
d e g r e e ’ :
[ 2 , 3 , 4 , 5 , 6 ] ,
70
}
71
72
parameters svc rbf = {
73
’ c l f
k e r n e l ’ :
[ ’ rbf ’ ] ,
74
’ c l f
C ’ :
[0 . 0 00 1 ,
0.001 ,
0.01 ,
0.1 ,
1 ,
10] ,
75
’ clf
gamma ’ :
[ ’ s c a l e ’ , ’ auto ’ ] ,
76
}
77
78
p a r a m e t e r s s vc l in ea r = {
79
’ c l f
k e r n e l ’ :
[ ’ l i n e a r ’ ] ,
80
’ c l f
C ’ :
[0 . 0 00 1 ,
0.001 ,
0.01 ,
0.1 ,
1 ,
10] ,
81
}
82
83
# L o g i s t i c
Regression
( LogReg )
84
parameters logreg = {
85
’ c l f
p e n a l t y ’ :
[ ’ l2 ’ ] ,
86
’ c l f
C ’ :
[0 . 0 00 1 ,
0.001 ,
0.01 ,
0.1 ,
1 ,
10] ,
87
}
88
89
90
#%% PREPARE DATA
91
i f THRESHOLD MODE == ’ density ’ :
92
# change
the
threshold
value column ( in
density
graph
f i r s t ) #############
93
# NOTE:
manual changing due to
e r r o r
i s
f e a t u r e e x t r a c t i o n
s c r i p t
94
d f f e a t u r e s a l l g r a p h [ ’ threshold
value ’ ] = round(1−d f f e a t u r e s a l l g r a p h [ ’
density
( graph ) ’ ] , 2 )
95
96
# Remove any
p o s s i b l e
ad di ti on a l
threhsolds ##############################
97
# set
conditions
f o r
which data
i s
to be removed .
98
# Condition :
frequency band = ’ a l l
bands ’ AND threshold = 0.5
99
# NOTE:
the
removal
of
t h i s
data
i s
only
to be performed due to a
e r r o r when
d e f i n i n g
the
thresholds .
100
# Density−based
threhsolding
of
0.5
in
a l l −bands was not
a p p l i c a b l e
f o r
a l l
subjects ,
and the
threshold
value
i s
t h e r e f o r e
excluded
from the
study .
101
th remove index = np . array ( d f f e a t u r e s a l l g r a p h [ ’ frequency band ’ ] == ’ a l l
bands ’ ) & np . array ( d f f e a t u r e s a l l g r a p h [ ’ threshold
value ’ ] == 0 . 5 )
102
d f f e a t u r e s a l l g r a p h = d f f e a t u r e s a l l g r a p h [˜ th remove index ] # only
use
the
data
that
does NOT apply
to
the
conditions
above
103
104
# change
the
threshold
value column
#####################################
105
# NOTE:
manual changing due to
e r r o r
i s
f e a t u r e e x t r a c t i o n
s c r i p t
106
d f f e a t u r e s a l l n o d e [ ’ threshold
value ’ ] = d f f e a t u r e s a l l g r a p h [ ’ threshold
value ’ ] . values
107
d f f e a t u r e s a l l r e g i o n [ ’ threshold
value ’ ] = d f f e a t u r e s a l l g r a p h [ ’ threshold
value ’ ] . values
108
109
# Remove addional
average
degree
columns
that
were
included by mistake
113 of 135
==PAGE:122==
Katrine Dam Christensen
02/07/2023
Technical University of Denmark
110
a v e r a g e d e g r e e c o l s = [ col
f o r
col
in
d f f e a t u r e s a l l r e g i o n . columns
i f
’ . ’
in
col
]
111
d f f e a t u r e s a l l r e g i o n = d f f e a t u r e s a l l r e g i o n . drop ( average degree cols , axis =1)
112
113
# Remove any
p o s s i b l e
ad di ti on al
epochs ######################################
114
d f f e a t u r e s a l l g r a p h = d f f e a t u r e s a l l g r a p h . drop ( d f f e a t u r e s a l l g r a p h [
d f f e a t u r e s a l l g r a p h [ ’ epoch ’ ] . values > (N EPOCHS−1) ] . index )
115
d f f e a t u r e s a l l n o d e = d f f e a t u r e s a l l n o d e . drop ( d f f e a t u r e s a l l n o d e [
d f f e a t u r e s a l l n o d e [ ’ epoch ’ ] . values > (N EPOCHS−1) ] . index )
116
d f f e a t u r e s a l l r e g i o n = d f f e a t u r e s a l l r e g i o n . drop ( d f f e a t u r e s a l l r e g i o n [
d f f e a t u r e s a l l r e g i o n [ ’ epoch ’ ] . values > (N EPOCHS−1) ] . index )
117
118
# Extract
f e a t u r e s
and meta data
119
df meta node = d f f e a t u r e s a l l n o d e [ d f f e a t u r e s a l l n o d e . columns [ 1 : 7 ] ]
# extract
meta data
120
d f f re q n ode = d f f e a t u r e s a l l n o d e . drop ( d f f e a t u r e s a l l n o d e . columns [ 0 : 7 ] , axis =1)
# drop meta columns and frequency band column
121
122
df meta region = d f f e a t u r e s a l l r e g i o n [ d f f e a t u r e s a l l r e g i o n . columns [ 1 : 7 ] ]
# extract
meta data
123
d f f r e q r e g i o n = d f f e a t u r e s a l l r e g i o n . drop ( d f f e a t u r e s a l l r e g i o n . columns [ 0 : 7 ] ,
axis =1)
# drop meta columns and frequency band column
124
125
df graph = d f f e a t u r e s a l l g r a p h . r e s e t i n d e x ( drop=True )
126
df node = df freq node . r e s e t i n d e x ( drop=True )
127
d f r e g i o n = d f f r e q r e g i o n . r e s e t i n d e x ( drop=True )
128
129
# Combine the
dataframes
130
# meta data
i s
only
included
f o r
’ graph ’
dataframe
131
d f f e a t u r e s a l l g r a p h n o d e r e g i o n = pd . concat ( [ df graph , df node , d f r e g i o n ] , axis =1)
132
133
134
print ( f ’ Feature names of −i n f
values :
{ d f f e a t u r e s a l l g r a p h n o d e r e g i o n . columns .
values [ np . sum( d f f e a t u r e s a l l g r a p h n o d e r e g i o n . values == −math . inf , axis =0)
>0]} ’ )
135
s p i k e c o l s = [ col
f o r
col
in
d f f e a t u r e s a l l g r a p h n o d e r e g i o n . columns
i f
’
c l o s e n e s s
v i t a l i t y ’
in
col ]
136
subs = d f f e a t u r e s a l l g r a p h n o d e r e g i o n [ ’ subject ID ’ ] [ np .sum(
d f f e a t u r e s a l l g r a p h n o d e r e g i o n . values == −math . inf , axis =1)>0]
137
print ( f ’ Subject ID of −i n f
values :
{ subs } ’ )
138
139
a = d f f e a t u r e s a l l g r a p h n o d e r e g i o n . replace ( t o r e p l a c e=−math . inf , value=−1)
140
141
d f f e a t u r e s a l l g r a p h n o d e r e g i o n . replace ( t o r e p l a c e=−math . inf , value=−1, inplace=
True )
142
143
#%%
144
# Divide
dataframe
into
i n d i v i d u a l
dataframes
f o r
each
threshold
value
145
146
# Extend number of
f e a t u r e s
based on
a d d i t i o n a l
columns
147
# add
p r e f i x
to
the
e x i s t i n g
column names based on frequency band
148
f r e q = np . unique ( d f f e a t u r e s a l l g r a p h n o d e r e g i o n [ ’ frequency band ’ ] . values )
149
N FREQ = len ( freq )
# number of
frequency
bands
150
N SUB = len (np . unique ( d f f e a t u r e s a l l g r a p h n o d e r e g i o n [ ’ subject ID ’ ] ) )
151
152
dataframes freq = [ ]
153
f o r
f
in
range (N FREQ) :
154
d f f r e q = d f f e a t u r e s a l l g r a p h n o d e r e g i o n [ d f f e a t u r e s a l l g r a p h n o d e r e g i o n [
’ frequency band ’ ] == f req [ f ] ] # extract
data
f o r
current
frequency band
155
d f f r e q = d f f r e q . r e s e t i n d e x ( drop=True )
# r e s e t
indexing
of
dataframe
156
df meta = d f f r e q [ d f f r e q . columns [ 1 : 7 ] ]
# extract
meta data
114 of 135
==PAGE:123==
Katrine Dam Christensen
02/07/2023
Technical University of Denmark
157
d f f r e q = d f f r e q . drop ( d f f r e q . columns [ 0 : 7 ] , axis =1)
# drop meta columns
and frequency band column
158
i f
f == 0: # print
i n f o
to
insure
the
c o r r e c t
columns
are
used
as meta and
f ea ture
data
159
print ( f ”Meta data
s e l e c t e d
as :
{ df meta . columns} ” )
160
print ( f ” Feature
data
s e l e c t e d
as :
{ d f f r e q . columns} ” )
161
s u f f i x = s t r ( ’
( f r ’ + s t r ( f ) +’
’+ s t r ( f r e q [ f ] ) +’ ) ’ )
# create
s u f f i x
to be
added to
a l l
feat ure
names ( evaluated
f o r
current
frequency band )
162
d f f r e q = d f f r e q . a d d s u f f i x ( s u f f i x )
# add
s u f f i x
163
164
df meta freq = pd . concat ( [ df meta , d f f r e q ] , axis =1)
165
df meta freq = df meta freq . drop ( columns=[ ’ frequency band ’ ] ) # drop
the
frequency band column from the
dataframe
166
167
dataframes freq . append ( df meta freq )
# save
dataframes
f o r
each
frequency band ( a l l
thresholds )
168
169
170
# s p l i t
data
based on
thresholds
171
th value = t h v a l u e s s e l e c t e d [ f ]
# extract
s e l e c t e d
threshold
f o r
current
frequency band
172
173
df meta freq th = df meta freq [ df meta freq [ ’ threshold
value ’ ] . values ==
th value ]
174
df meta freq th = df meta freq th . r e s e t i n d e x ( drop=True )
175
df meta th = df meta freq th [ df meta freq th . columns [ 0 : 5 ] ]
176
d f f r e q t h = df meta freq th . drop ( df meta freq th . columns [ 0 : 5 ] , axis =1)
#
drop meta columns and frequency band column
177
i f
f == 0:
178
# create
dataframe
( a l l
frequency
bands ,
but
i n d i v i d u a l
thresholds )
179
d f f r e q t h r e s h o l d = pd . concat ( [ df meta th , d f f r e q t h ] , axis =1)
180
e l s e :
181
d f f r e q t h r e s h o l d = pd . concat ( [ d f f r e q t h r e s h o l d , d f f r e q t h ] , axis =1)
182
183
184
d f f e a t u r e s a l l e x t e n d e d = d f f r e q t h r e s h o l d
185
# d f f e a t u r e s a l l e x t e n d e d = dataframes freq [ 0 ]
186
187
# e x t r a c t s
l a b e l s
(y) and
f e a t u r e s
(X)
188
label names = [ ’HC’ , ’PD’ ]
189
lab = d f f e a t u r e s a l l e x t e n d e d . get ( ’ l a b e l ’ ) . values
190
# one hot
encode
l a b e l s
191
l a b e l s=−np . ones (( len ( lab ) ) )
192
l a b e l s [ lab == ’ hc ’ ] = 0
# 0 = hc
193
l a b e l s [ lab == ’pd ’ ] = 1
# 1 = pd
194
195
feature names = np . array ( d f f e a t u r e s a l l e x t e n d e d . columns [ 5 : ] )
196
f e a t u r e s = d f f e a t u r e s a l l e x t e n d e d . get ( feature names ) . values
197
print ( f ”Meta data
s e l e c t e d
as :
{ d f f e a t u r e s a l l e x t e n d e d . columns [ 0 : 5 ] }
” )
198
print ( f ” Feature
data
s e l e c t e d
as :
{ d f f e a t u r e s a l l e x t e n d e d . columns [ 5 : ] }
” )
199
200
# defi ne X ( f e a t u r e s ) , y ( l a b e l s ) and groups
( s u b j e c t s )
201
X all = f e a t u r e s
202
y a l l = l a b e l s
203
g r o u p s a l l = d f f e a t u r e s a l l e x t e n d e d [ ’ subject ID ’ ] . values
204
205
206
# S p l i t
data
into
t r a i n
and
t e s t
f o r
c r o s s
v a l i d a t i o n
in
outer and inner
f o l d
207
# ###########################################################################
208
# The f o l l o w i n g
l i n e s
of
code
contain
s p l i t t i n g
using
the
StratifiedGroupKFold
function
from the
sklearn
library ,
209
# which was
discovered
to
have a
f a r
from
optimal
s t r a t i f i c a t i o n .
Therefore a more
manual approach was implemented below .
115 of 135
==PAGE:124==
Katrine Dam Christensen
02/07/2023
Technical University of Denmark
210
# Link
t i l
github
i s s u e :
https :// github . com/ s c i k i t −learn / s c i k i t −learn / i s s u e s
/24656#issuecomment −1483160854
211
212
# # predefine
s p l i t s
of
outer and inner
f o l d
( s t r a t i f y
f o r
groups )
213
# s g k f o u t e r = StratifiedGroupKFold ( n s p l i t s=N OUTER FOLDS, s h u f f l e=True ,
random state=RANDOM STATE)
214
# s g k f i n n e r = StratifiedGroupKFold ( n s p l i t s=N INNER FOLDS, s h u f f l e=True ,
random state=RANDOM STATE)
215
# print ( ’ StratifiedGroupKFold ’)
216
# f o r
i ,
( train index ,
t e s t i n d e x )
in
enumerate ( s g k f o u t e r . s p l i t ( X all , y a l l ,
groups=g r o u p s a l l ) ) :
217
#
print ( f ”Fold { i } : ” )
218
#
# print ( f ”
Subject
t r a i n :
{np . unique ( g r o u p s a l l [ t r a i n i n d e x ] ) }”)
219
#
# print ( f ”
Subject
t e s t :
{np . unique ( g r o u p s a l l [ t e s t i n d e x ] ) }”)
220
#
print ( f ”
Labels
r a t i o
t r a i n :
{sum( y a l l [ t r a i n i n d e x ] ) / len ( y a l l [
t r a i n i n d e x ] ) }”)
221
#
print ( f ”
Labels
r a t i o
t e s t :
{sum( y a l l [ t e s t i n d e x ] ) / len ( y a l l [ t e s t i n d e x
] ) }”)
222
# ############################################################################
223
224
# set up
s p l i t t e r
f o r
outer and inner
f o l d s
225
s k f o u t e r = StratifiedKFold ( n s p l i t s=N OUTER FOLDS, s h u f f l e=True , random state=
RANDOM STATE)
226
s k f i n n e r = StratifiedKFold ( n s p l i t s=N INNER FOLDS, s h u f f l e=True , random state=
RANDOM STATE)
227
228
ps inner = [ ]
# premake
l i s t
f o r
s p l i t s
of
inner
f o l d s
f o r
each
outer
f o l d
229
230
subIDs single = np . unique ( g r o u p s a l l )
# subject
IDs ( as
s i n g l e
datapoint )
231
l a b e l s i n g l e = np . zeros ( [ N SUB , 1 ] )
# l a b e l s
of
each
subject
( as
s i n g l e
datapoint )
232
233
f o r
i
in
range (N SUB) : # f o r
a l l
s u b j e c t s
234
s u b l a b e l m u l t i p l e = y a l l [ np . where ( g r o u p s a l l == subIDs single [ i ] ) ]
#
extract
the
l a b e l s
of
the
multiple
datapoints
from the
current
subject
235
l a b e l s i n g l e [ i ] = np . mean( s u b l a b e l m u l t i p l e )
# save
the mean l a b e l
value
as
the
the
l a b e l
of
the
current
subject
236
237
print ( ’ StratifiedKFold −outer ’ )
238
t e s t f o l d s o u t e r = np . zeros ( [ len ( g r o u p s a l l ) , 1 ] )
# premake
array
239
# OUTER CV SPLIT
240
# s p l i t
subject ID ’ s
into
f o l d s
while
s t r a t i f y i n g
f o r
l a b e l
241
f o r
i outer ,
( train index ,
t e s t i n d e x )
in enumerate( s k f o u t e r . s p l i t ( subIDs single ,
l a b e l s i n g l e ) ) : # s p l i t
based on
subject ID ( which
s t r a t i f y i n g
f o r
l a b e l )
242
243
# t e s t
and
t r a i n
index
i s
of
subject ID ( outer
loop )
244
# print
information :
245
print ( f ”Outer
f o l d
{ i o u t e r }: ” )
246
print ( f ”
Subject
t r a i n :
{ subIDs single [ t r a i n i n d e x ]} ” )
247
print ( f ”
Subject
t e s t :
{ subIDs single [ t e s t i n d e x ]} ” )
248
# print ( f ”
Labels
r a t i o
t r a i n :
{np . mean( l a b e l s i m p l e [ t r a i n i n d e x ] ) }”)
249
# print ( f ”
Labels
r a t i o
t e s t :
{np . mean( l a b e l s i m p l e [ t e s t i n d e x ] ) }”)
250
251
s u b I D s s i n g l e t e s t = subIDs single [ t e s t i n d e x ]
# extract
subject ID
of
the
su bje cts
in
t e s t
s p l i t
of
the
current
f o l d
252
253
g r o u p s a l l t r a i n = g r o u p s a l l . copy ()
# copy groups
(
multiple )
254
f o r
j
in
range ( len ( s u b I D s s i n g l e t e s t ) ) : # f o r
each
subject
in
the
t e s t
s p l i t
of
the
current
f o l d
255
t e s t f o l d s o u t e r [ g r o u p s a l l == s u b I D s s i n g l e t e s t [ j ] ] = i o u t e r # at
the
index
p o s i t i o n
of
the
s u b j e c t s
datapoints
save
the
outer
f o l d
number (
116 of 135
==PAGE:125==
Katrine Dam Christensen
02/07/2023
Technical University of Denmark
i )
256
257
g r o u p s a l l t r a i n [ g r o u p s a l l == s u b I D s s i n g l e t e s t [ j ] ] = −1 # set
multiples
of
subject
IDs
in
t e s t
set
equal
to −1
258
g r o u p s a l l t r a i n = g r o u p s a l l t r a i n [ g r o u p s a l l t r a i n
!= −1] # remove
a l l
values
from group
array
that
contains
t e s t
subject ID ( equal
to −1)
259
# print ( g r o u p s a l l t r a i n )
260
# extract
the
subject
IDs and
l a b e l s
f o r
the
t r a i n
data
in
the
current
outer
f o l d
261
s u b I D s s i n g l e t r a i n = subIDs single [ t r a i n i n d e x ]
262
l a b e l s i n g l e t r a i n = l a b e l s i n g l e [ t r a i n i n d e x ]
263
264
print ( ’ StratifiedKFold −inner ’ )
265
t e s t f o l d s i n n e r = np . zeros ( [ len ( g r o u p s a l l t r a i n ) , 1 ] )
# premake array
266
# INNER CV SPLIT
267
# s p l i t
subject ID ’ s
into
f o l d s
while
s t r a t i f y i n g
f o r
l a b e l
268
f o r
i i n n e r ,
( tra in in de x in ne r ,
t e s t i n d e x i n n e r )
in enumerate( s k f o u t e r .
s p l i t ( s u b I D s s i n g l e t r a i n , l a b e l s i n g l e t r a i n ) ) : # s p l i t
based on
subject
ID ( which
s t r a t i f y i n g
f o r
l a b e l )
269
# t e s t
and
t r a i n
index
i s
of
subject ID ( inner
loop )
270
# print
information :
271
print ( f ” Inner
f o l d
{ i i n n e r }: ” )
272
print ( f ”
Subject
t r a i n :
{ s u b I D s s i n g l e t r a i n [ t r a i n i n d e x i n n e r ]} ” )
273
print ( f ”
Subject
t e s t :
{ s u b I D s s i n g l e t r a i n [ t e s t i n d e x i n n e r ]} ” )
274
# print ( f ”
Labels
r a t i o
t r a i n :
{np . mean( l a b e l s i m p l e [ t r a i n i n d e x ] ) }”)
275
# print ( f ”
Labels
r a t i o
t e s t :
{np . mean( l a b e l s i m p l e [ t e s t i n d e x ] ) }”)
276
277
s u b s t e s t i n n e r = s u b I D s s i n g l e t r a i n [ t e s t i n d e x i n n e r ]
# extract
subject ID of
the
sub j e c t s
in
t e s t
s p l i t
of
the
current
inner
f o l d
278
279
f o r
j
in
range ( len ( s u b s t e s t i n n e r ) ) : # f o r
each
subject
in
the
t e s t
s p l i t
of
the
current
inner
f o l d
280
t e s t f o l d s i n n e r [ g r o u p s a l l t r a i n == s u b s t e s t i n n e r [ j ] ] = i i n n e r #
at
the
index
p o s i t i o n
of
the
s u b j e c t s
datapoints
save
the
f o l d
number ( i )
281
# print ( t e s t f o l d s i n n e r )
282
# save
predefined
s p l i t s
f o r
the
inner
f o l d s
f o r
every
outer
f o l d .
283
ps inner . append ( PredefinedSplit ( t e s t f o l d s i n n e r ) )
284
285
# create
predefined
outer and inner
s p l i t s
f o r
a l l
f o l d s
including
groups
of
datapoints
f o r
each
subject
(now containing
a l l
datapoints )
286
ps outer = PredefinedSplit ( t e s t f o l d s o u t e r )
287
288
# print
information
to
check
that
the manual
s p l i t t i n g
performs
i d e n t i c a l
s p l i t t i n g
compared to
the
StratifiedKFold
function
( which does
not
enable
grouping )
289
f o r
i ,
( train index ,
t e s t i n d e x )
in enumerate( ps outer . s p l i t ( X all ,
y a l l ,
g r o u p s a l l ) ) :
290
print ( f ”Fold { i }: ” )
291
print ( f ”
Subject
t r a i n :
{np . unique ( g r o u p s a l l [ t r a i n i n d e x ] ) }” )
292
print ( f ”
Subject
t e s t :
{np . unique ( g r o u p s a l l [ t e s t i n d e x ] ) }” )
293
print ( f ”
Labels
r a t i o
t r a i n :
{np . mean( y a l l [ t r a i n i n d e x ] ) }” )
294
print ( f ”
Labels
r a t i o
t e s t :
{np . mean( y a l l [ t e s t i n d e x ] ) }” )
295
296
N DATA, N FEATURE = f e a t u r e s . shape
297
298
# change
a l l −i n f
or
i n f
v a r i a b l e s ################################
299
300
# X all [ X all == −math . i n f ] = 0
301
# X all [ X all == math . i n f ] = 0
302
303
304
117 of 135
==PAGE:126==
Katrine Dam Christensen
02/07/2023
Technical University of Denmark
305
###################################################################
306
#%% CLASSIFICATION ################################################
307
###################################################################
308
309
class
MyPipeline ( Pipeline ) :
310
@property
311
def
c o e f
( s e l f ) :
312
return
s e l f .
f i n a l e s t i m a t o r . c o e f
313
@property
314
def
feature importances ( s e l f ) :
315
return
s e l f .
f i n a l e s t i m a t o r . feature importances
316
317
# i n i t i a l i z e
c l a s s i f i e r s
using
standarization
of
f e a tu e s
318
# standardization :
’ with mean=False ’
equals mean
i s
c a l c u l a t e d
f o r
t r a i n i n g
samples
319
#
’ with std=False ’
equals
std
i s
c a l c u l a t e d
f o r
t r a i n i n g
samples
320
# Support
Vector
C l a s s i f i e r
321
svc = SVC()
322
p i p e s v c l i n e a r = MyPipeline ( [
323
( ’ s c a l e ’ ,
StandardScaler ( with mean=False , with std=False ) ) ,
324
( ’ c l f ’ ,
svc )
325
] )
326
327
p i p e s v c r b f = MyPipeline ( [
328
( ’ s c a l e ’ ,
StandardScaler ( with mean=False , with std=False ) ) ,
329
( ’ c l f ’ ,
svc )
330
] )
331
332
pipe svc poly = MyPipeline ( [
333
( ’ s c a l e ’ ,
StandardScaler ( with mean=False , with std=False ) ) ,
334
( ’ c l f ’ ,
svc )
335
] )
336
337
# L o g i s t i c
Regression
338
logreg = LogisticRegression ( s o l v e r=’ l i b l i n e a r ’ , penalty=’ l2 ’ , dual=False , max iter
=100)
339
p i p e l o g r e g = MyPipeline ( [
340
( ’ s c a l e ’ ,
StandardScaler ( with mean=False , with std=False ) ) ,
341
( ’ c l f ’ ,
logreg )
342
] )
343
344
# premake
arrays
to
s t o r e
data
345
best model svc rbf hyper param = [ ]
# hyper−parameters
of
best
model
346
best model svc rbf hyper param 2 = [ ]
347
best model svc poly hyper param = [ ]
348
best model svc poly hyper param 2 = [ ]
349
best model svc linear hyper param = [ ]
350
best model svc linear hyper param 2 = [ ]
351
best model logreg hyper param = [ ]
352
best model logreg hyper param 2 = [ ]
353
t r a i n e r r o r s v c = [ ]
# t r a i n i n g
e r r o r
of
model
354
t r a i n e r r o r l o g r e g = [ ]
355
f 1 s c o r e l o g r e g = [ ]
# score
of
model
356
f 1 s c o r e s v c p o l y = [ ]
357
f 1 s c o r e s v c r b f = [ ]
358
f 1 s c o r e s v c l i n e a r = [ ]
359
l o g r e g f e a t u r e r a n k i n g = [ ]
# f e a t u r e
ranking
360
s v c l i n e a r f e a t u r e r a n k i n g = [ ]
361
s v c p o l y f e a t u r e r a n k i n g = [ ]
362
s v c r b f f e a t u r e r a n k i n g = [ ]
363
364
365
118 of 135
==PAGE:127==
Katrine Dam Christensen
02/07/2023
Technical University of Denmark
366
###################################################################
367
# OUTER FOLDS #####################################################
368
###################################################################
369
f o r
i outer ,
( train outer index ,
t e s t o u t e r i n d e x )
in tqdm(enumerate( ps outer .
s p l i t ( X all , y a l l ) ) ) :
370
print ( f ”OUTER FOLD { i o u t e r }: ” )
371
# Define
t r a i n
and
t e s t
s p l i t
f o r
current
outer
f o l d .
372
# t r a i n
( outer )
set
373
X train outer = X all [ t r a i n o u t e r i n d e x ]
# data
374
y t r a i n o u t e r = y a l l [ t r a i n o u t e r i n d e x ]
# l a b e l s
375
g r o u p s t r a i n o u t e r = g r o u p s a l l [ t r a i n o u t e r i n d e x ]
# groups
376
# t e s t
( outer )
set
377
X test outer = X all [ t e s t o u t e r i n d e x ]
# data
378
y t e s t o u t e r = y a l l [ t e s t o u t e r i n d e x ]
# l a b e l s
379
g r o u p s t e s t o u t e r = g r o u p s a l l [ t e s t o u t e r i n d e x ]
# groups
380
381
# NOTE:
hyper−parameter
tuning and RFE are
performed
s e p e r a t e l y
but on the
exact same
f o l d s .
382
# Meaning the hyper−parameters
are
cross −validated
across
a l l
inner
folds ,
383
# and the
featu re
elimination
i s
then
al so
cross −validated
across
a l l
inner
f o l d s .
384
385
###############################################################
386
# INNER FOLDS #################################################
387
###############################################################
388
i f MODEL == ’ logreg ’ :
389
# LogReg ############################################################
390
print ( ’ LogReg ’ )
391
# Hyper−parameter
tuning −−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−
392
# set up grid
search on model hyper−parameters
f o r
current
outer
f o l d
393
g r i d l o g r e g = GridSearchCV ( estimator=pipe logreg , param grid=
parameters logreg , scoring=’ f1 ’ , cv=ps inner [ i o u t e r ] )
394
# f i t
data
f o r
a l l
hyper−parameters
395
g r i d l o g r e g . f i t (X = X train outer , y = y t r a i n o u t e r )
396
# extract
best
model
397
best model logreg = g r i d l o g r e g . b e s t e s t i m a t o r
398
# s to r e
hyper−parameters
f o r
best
model
399
best model logreg hyper param . append ( best model logreg . get params () )
400
print ( f ”Best model ( before
r f e ) :
{ best model logreg [ ’ c l f ’ ]} ” )
401
402
# Recursive
Feature
Elimination
(RFE) −−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−
403
# f i t
the
best
model
404
best model logreg = best model logreg . f i t (X=X train outer ,
y=y t r a i n o u t e r
)
405
# perform RFE on best
model
406
r f e c v = RFECV( estimator=best model logreg , m i n f e a t u r e s t o s e l e c t =1, step =1,
scoring=’ f1 ’ , cv=ps inner [ i o u t e r ] )
407
r f e c v = r f e c v . f i t (X=X train outer , y=y t r a i n o u t e r )
408
l o g r e g f e a t u r e r a n k i n g . append ( r f e c v . ranking )
# extract
fea ture
scoring
409
# print ( f ”Number of
f e a t u r e s :
{ r f e c v . n f e a t u r e s
}”)
410
# print ( f ”Mean t e s t
score :
{ r f e c v . c v r e s u l t s
[ ’ mean test score ’ ] [ r f e c v .
n feat ures
−1]}”)
411
# Update data
(X) by removing
f e a t u r e s
based on
r f e c v
ranking
412
X train outer new logreg = X train outer [ : , r f e c v . support ]
413
X test outer new logreg = X test outer [ : , r f e c v . support ]
414
415
# Hyper−parameter
tuning
( again ) −−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−
416
# set up grid
search on model hyper−parameters
f o r
current
outer
f o l d
417
g r i d l o g r e g 2 = GridSearchCV ( estimator=pipe logreg , param grid=
parameters logreg , scoring=’ f1 ’ , cv=ps inner [ i o u t e r ] )
418
# f i t
data
f o r
a l l
hyper−parameters
119 of 135
==PAGE:128==
Katrine Dam Christensen
02/07/2023
Technical University of Denmark
419
g r i d l o g r e g 2 . f i t (X=X train outer new logreg ,
y=y t r a i n o u t e r )
# f i t
to
updated data
( f e a t u r e s
removed )
420
# extract
best
model
421
best model logreg 2 = g r i d l o g r e g 2 . b e s t e s t i m a t o r
422
# s to r e
hyper−parameters
f o r
best
model
423
best model logreg hyper param 2 . append ( best model logreg 2 . get params () )
424
print ( f ”Best model ( a f t e r
r f e ) :
{ best model logreg 2 [ ’ c l f ’ ]} ” )
425
426
# Performance −−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−
427
# f i t
best
model to
the
current
t r a i n i n g
data
of
the
outer
428
best model logreg 2 . f i t ( X train outer new logreg , y t r a i n o u t e r )
429
y pred = best model logreg 2 . predict ( X test outer new logreg ) # make
p r e d i c t i o n s
430
f 1 s c o r e l o g r e g . append ( f 1 s c o r e ( y t e s t o u t e r , y pred ) ) # f1−score
431
432
433
i f MODEL == ’ svcpoly ’ :
434
# Support
Vector
C l s s i f i e r
(SVC) ####################################
435
# kernel = ’ poly ’
436
print ( ”SVC −’ poly ’ ” )
437
# Hyper−parameter
tuning −−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−
438
# set up grid
search on model hyper−parameters
f o r
current
outer
f o l d
439
g r i d s v c p o l y = GridSearchCV ( estimator=pipe svc poly , param grid=
parameters svc poly , scoring=’ f1 ’ , cv=ps inner [ i o u t e r ] , n jobs=−1,
verbose =3)
440
# f i t
data
f o r
a l l
hyper−parameters
441
g r i d s v c p o l y . f i t (X=X train outer ,
y=y t r a i n o u t e r )
442
# extract
best
model
443
best model svc poly = g r i d s v c p o l y . b e s t e s t i m a t o r
444
# s to r e
hyper−parameters
f o r
best
model
445
best model svc poly hyper param . append ( best model svc poly . get params () )
446
top models = np . arange (0 , len ( g r i d s v c p o l y . c v r e s u l t s
[ ’ r a n k t e s t s c o r e ’ ]
== 1) ) [ g r i d s v c p o l y . c v r e s u l t s
[ ’ r a n k t e s t s c o r e ’ ] == 1]
447
f o r tm in
range ( len ( top models ) ) :
448
print ( g r i d s v c p o l y . c v r e s u l t s
[ ’ params ’ ] [ top models [ tm ] ] )
449
mean test score poly = g r i d s v c p o l y . c v r e s u l t s
[ ’ mean test score ’ ] [
top models [ 0 ] ]
450
print ( f ”Best model
’ poly ’ :
{ best model svc poly [ ’ c l f ’ ] } ” )
451
# print ( f ”Mean t e s t
score
’ poly ’ :
{ mean test score poly }”)
452
453
# Recursive
Feature
Elimination
(RFE) −−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−
454
s f s = SequentialFeatureSelector ( estimator = best model svc poly ,
n f e a t u r e s t o s e l e c t =30, d i r e c t i o n=’ forward ’ , scoring=’ f1 ’ , cv=ps inner [
i o u t e r ] )
455
s f s . f i t (X=X train outer , y=y t r a i n o u t e r )
456
s v c p o l y f e a t u r e r a n k i n g . append ( s f s . get support () )
457
X train outer new svc poly = X train outer [ : , s f s . get support () ]
458
X test outer new svc poly = X test outer [ : , s f s . get support () ]
459
460
# Hyper−parameter
tuning
( again ) −−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−
461
# set up grid
search on model hyper−parameters
f o r
current
outer
f o l d
462
g r i d s v c p o l y 2 = GridSearchCV ( estimator=pipe svc poly , param grid=
parameters svc poly , scoring=’ f1 ’ , cv=ps inner [ i o u t e r ] )
463
# f i t
data
f o r
a l l
hyper−parameters
464
g r i d s v c p o l y 2 . f i t (X=X train outer new svc poly ,
y=y t r a i n o u t e r )
#
f i t
to
updated data
( f e a t u r e s
removed )
465
# extract
best
model
466
best model svc poly 2 = g r i d s v c p o l y 2 . b e s t e s t i m a t o r
467
# s to r e
hyper−parameters
f o r
best
model
468
best model svc poly hyper param 2 . append ( best model svc poly 2 . get params
() )
469
print ( f ”Best model ( a f t e r
r f e ) :
{ best model svc poly 2 [ ’ c l f ’ ] } ” )
470
120 of 135
==PAGE:129==
Katrine Dam Christensen
02/07/2023
Technical University of Denmark
471
# Performance −−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−
472
# f i t
best
model to
the
current
t r a i n i n g
data
of
the
outer
473
best model svc poly 2 . f i t ( X train outer new svc poly , y t r a i n o u t e r )
474
y pred = best model svc poly 2 . predict ( X test outer new svc poly ) # make
p r e d i c t i o n s
475
f 1 s c o r e s v c p o l y . append ( f 1 s c o r e ( y t e s t o u t e r , y pred ) ) # f1−score
476
477
478
i f MODEL == ’ svcrbf ’ :
479
# Support
Vector
C l s s i f i e r
(SVC) #####################################
480
# kernel = ’ rbf ’
481
print ( ”SVC −’ rbf ’ ” )
482
# Hyper−parameter
tuning −−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−
483
# set up grid
search on model hyper−parameters
f o r
current
outer
f o l d
484
g r i d s v c r b f = GridSearchCV ( estimator=pipe svc rbf , param grid=
parameters svc rbf , scoring=’ f1 ’ , cv=ps inner [ i o u t e r ] )
485
# f i t
data
f o r
a l l
hyper−parameters
486
g r i d s v c r b f . f i t (X = X train outer , y = y t r a i n o u t e r )
487
# extract
best
model
488
best model svc rbf = g r i d s v c r b f . b e s t e s t i m a t o r
489
# s to r e
hyper−parameters
f o r
best
model
490
best model svc rbf hyper param . append ( best model svc rbf . get params () )
491
492
# extract
index
of
best
models
( where rank == 1)
493
top models = np . arange (0 , len ( g r i d s v c r b f . c v r e s u l t s
[ ’ r a n k t e s t s c o r e ’ ]
== 1) ) [ g r i d s v c r b f . c v r e s u l t s
[ ’ r a n k t e s t s c o r e ’ ] == 1]
494
print ( ”Best model ( s )
parameters
’ rbf ’ : ” )
495
f o r tm in
range ( len ( top models ) ) : # f o r
each
best
model
496
print ( g r i d s v c r b f . c v r e s u l t s
[ ’ params ’ ] [ top models [ tm ] ] ) # print
the
parameters
f o r
the
best
model
497
# extract mean t e s t
score
f o r
best
model ( t h i s
value
i s
the same
f o r
a l l
other
best
models
i f
these
e x i s t )
498
m e a n t e s t s c o r e r b f = g r i d s v c r b f . c v r e s u l t s
[ ’ mean test score ’ ] [
top models [ 0 ] ]
499
print ( f ”Best model
’ rbf ’ :
{ best model svc rbf [ ’ c l f ’ ] } ” )
500
print ( f ”Best model −mean t e s t
score
’ rbf ’ :
{ m e a n t e s t s c o r e r b f }” )
501
502
# Recursive
Feature
Elimination
(RFE) −−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−
503
s f s = SequentialFeatureSelector ( estimator = best model svc rbf ,
n f e a t u r e s t o s e l e c t =30, d i r e c t i o n=’ backward ’ , scoring=’ f1 ’ , cv=ps inner [
i o u t e r ] )
504
s f s . f i t (X=X train outer , y=y t r a i n o u t e r )
505
s v c r b f f e a t u r e r a n k i n g . append ( s f s . get support () )
506
X train outer new svc rbf = X train outer [ : , s f s . get support () ]
507
X test outer new svc rbf = X test outer [ : , s f s . get support () ]
508
509
# Hyper−parameter
tuning
( again ) −−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−
510
# set up grid
search on model hyper−parameters
f o r
current
outer
f o l d
511
g r i d s v c r b f 2 = GridSearchCV ( estimator=pipe svc rbf , param grid=
parameters svc rbf , scoring=’ f1 ’ , cv=ps inner [ i o u t e r ] )
512
# f i t
data
f o r
a l l
hyper−parameters
513
g r i d s v c r b f 2 . f i t (X=X train outer new svc rbf ,
y=y t r a i n o u t e r )
# f i t
to
updated data
( f e a t u r e s
removed )
514
# extract
best
model
515
best model svc rbf 2 = g r i d s v c r b f 2 . b e s t e s t i m a t o r
516
# s to r e
hyper−parameters
f o r
best
model
517
best model svc rbf hyper param 2 . append ( best model svc rbf 2 . get params () )
518
print ( f ”Best model ( a f t e r
r f e ) :
{ best model svc rbf 2 [ ’ c l f ’ ] } ” )
519
520
# Performance −−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−
521
# f i t
best
model to
the
current
t r a i n i n g
data
of
the
outer
522
best model svc rbf 2 . f i t ( X train outer new svc rbf , y t r a i n o u t e r )
121 of 135
==PAGE:130==
Katrine Dam Christensen
02/07/2023
Technical University of Denmark
523
y pred = best model svc rbf 2 . predict ( X test outer new svc rbf ) # make
p r e d i c t i o n s
524
f 1 s c o r e s v c r b f . append ( f 1 s c o r e ( y t e s t o u t e r , y pred ) ) # f1−score
525
526
527
i f MODEL == ’ s v c l i n e a r ’ :
528
# Support
Vector
C l s s i f i e r
(SVC) #####################################
529
# kernel = ’ l i n e a r ’
530
print ( ”SVC −’ l i n e a r ’ ” )
531
# Hyper−parameter
tuning −−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−
532
# set up grid
search on model hyper−parameters
f o r
current
outer
f o l d
533
g r i d s v c l i n e a r = GridSearchCV ( estimator=p i p e s v c l i n e a r , param grid=
parameters svc linear , scoring=’ f1 ’ , cv=ps inner [ i o u t e r ] )
534
# f i t
data
f o r
a l l
hyper−parameters
535
g r i d s v c l i n e a r . f i t (X = X train outer , y = y t r a i n o u t e r )
536
# extract
best
model
537
b e s t m o d e l s v c l i n e a r = g r i d s v c l i n e a r . b e s t e s t i m a t o r
538
# s to r e
hyper−parameters
f o r
best
model
539
best model svc linear hyper param . append ( b e s t m o d e l s v c l i n e a r . get params
() )
540
541
# extract
index
of
best
models
( where rank == 1)
542
top models = np . arange (0 , len ( g r i d s v c l i n e a r . c v r e s u l t s
[ ’ r a n k t e s t s c o r e ’
] == 1) ) [ g r i d s v c l i n e a r . c v r e s u l t s
[ ’ r a n k t e s t s c o r e ’ ] == 1]
543
print ( ”Best model ( s )
parameters
’ l i n e a r ’ : ” )
544
f o r tm in
range ( len ( top models ) ) : # f o r
each
best
model
545
print ( g r i d s v c l i n e a r . c v r e s u l t s
[ ’ params ’ ] [ top models [ tm ] ] ) # print
the
parameters
f o r
the
best
model
546
# extract mean t e s t
score
f o r
best
model ( t h i s
value
i s
the same
f o r
a l l
other
best
models
i f
these
e x i s t )
547
m e a n t e s t s c o r e l i n e a r = g r i d s v c l i n e a r . c v r e s u l t s
[ ’ mean test score ’ ] [
top models [ 0 ] ]
548
print ( f ”Best model
’ l i n e a r ’
( before
r f e ) :
{ b e s t m o d e l s v c l i n e a r [ ’ c l f ’ ]} ” )
549
550
# Recursive
Feature
Elimination
(RFE) −−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−
551
# f i t
the
best
model
552
b e s t m o d e l s v c l i n e a r = b e s t m o d e l s v c l i n e a r . f i t (X = X train outer , y =
y t r a i n o u t e r )
553
# perform RFE on best
model
554
r f e c v = RFECV( estimator=best model svc linear , m i n f e a t u r e s t o s e l e c t =1,
step =1, scoring=’ f1 ’ , cv=ps inner [ i o u t e r ] )
555
r f e c v = r f e c v . f i t (X=X train outer , y=y t r a i n o u t e r )
556
s v c l i n e a r f e a t u r e r a n k i n g . append ( r f e c v . ranking )
# extract
fea ture
scoring
557
print ( f ”Number of
f e a t u r e s
’ l i n e a r ’ :
{ r f e c v . n f e a t u r e s }” )
558
print ( f ”Mean t e s t
score
’ l i n e a r ’ :
{ r f e c v . c v r e s u l t s
[ ’ mean test score ’ ] [
r f e c v . n feat ures
−1]}” )
559
# Update data
(X) by removing
f e a t u r e s
based on
r f e c v
ranking
560
X t r a i n o u t e r n e w s v c l i n e a r = X train outer [ : , r f e c v . support ]
561
X t e s t o u t e r n e w s v c l i n e a r = X test outer [ : , r f e c v . support ]
562
563
# Hyper−parameter
tuning
( again ) −−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−
564
# kernel = ’ l i n e a r ’
565
# set up grid
search on model hyper−parameters
f o r
current
outer
f o l d
566
g r i d s v c l i n e a r 2 = GridSearchCV ( estimator=p i p e s v c l i n e a r , param grid=
parameters svc linear , scoring=’ f1 ’ , cv=ps inner [ i o u t e r ] )
567
# f i t
data
f o r
a l l
hyper−parameters
568
g r i d s v c l i n e a r 2 . f i t (X = X train outer new svc linear , y = y t r a i n o u t e r )
# f i t
to
updated data
( f e a t u r e s
removed )
569
# extract
best
model
570
b e s t m o d e l s v c l i n e a r 2 = g r i d s v c l i n e a r 2 . b e s t e s t i m a t o r
571
# s to r e
hyper−parameters
f o r
best
model
122 of 135
==PAGE:131==
Katrine Dam Christensen
02/07/2023
Technical University of Denmark
572
best model svc linear hyper param 2 . append ( b e s t m o d e l s v c l i n e a r 2 .
get params () )
573
print ( f ”Best model
’ l i n e a r ’
( a f t e r
r f e ) :
{ b e s t m o d e l s v c l i n e a r 2 [ ’ c l f ’ ] } ”
)
574
575
# Performance −−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−
576
# f i t
best
model to
the
current
t r a i n i n g
data
of
the
outer
577
b e s t m o d e l s v c l i n e a r 2 . f i t ( X train outer new svc linear , y t r a i n o u t e r )
578
y pred = b e s t m o d e l s v c l i n e a r 2 . predict ( X t e s t o u t e r n e w s v c l i n e a r ) #
make p r e d i c t i o n s
579
f 1 s c o r e s v c l i n e a r . append ( f 1 s c o r e ( y t e s t o u t e r , y pred ) ) # f1−score
580
581
# Save
f e a t ure
ranking ,
f1−s c o r e s
and
best
model parameters
as
dataframe
582
f i l e n a m e f e a t u r e r a n k i n g = f ’ df feature ranking thresholdmode −{THRESHOLD MODE}
model−{MODEL} tes t −1. csv ’
583
f i l e n a m e f 1 s c o r e s = f ’ df f1 −scores thresholdmode −{THRESHOLD MODE} model−{MODEL}
t e s t −1. csv ’
584
filename best model = f ’ df best −model−parameters thresholdmode −{THRESHOLD MODE}
model−{MODEL} tes t −1. csv ’
585
586
i f MODEL == ’ logreg ’ :
587
l o g r e g f e a t u r e r a n k i n g = pd . DataFrame ( data = l o g r e g f e a t u r e r a n k i n g )
588
l o g r e g f e a t u r e r a n k i n g . to csv ( f i l e n a m e f e a t u r e r a n k i n g )
589
590
f 1 s c o r e l o g r e g = pd . DataFrame ( data = f 1 s c o r e l o g r e g )
591
f 1 s c o r e l o g r e g . to csv ( f i l e n a m e f 1 s c o r e s )
592
593
best model logreg hyper param 2 = pd . DataFrame ( data =
best model logreg hyper param 2 )
594
best model logreg hyper param 2 . to csv ( filename best model )
595
596
i f MODEL == ’ svcpoly ’ :
597
d f f e a t u r e r a n k s v c p o l y = pd . DataFrame ( data = s v c p o l y f e a t u r e r a n k i n g )
598
d f f e a t u r e r a n k s v c p o l y . to csv ( f i l e n a m e f e a t u r e r a n k i n g )
599
600
f 1 s c o r e s v c p o l y = pd . DataFrame ( data = f 1 s c o r e s v c p o l y )
601
f 1 s c o r e s v c p o l y . to csv ( f i l e n a m e f 1 s c o r e s )
602
603
best model svc poly hyper param 2 = pd . DataFrame ( data =
best model svc poly hyper param 2 )
604
best model svc poly hyper param 2 . to csv ( filename best model )
605
606
i f MODEL == ’ svcrbf ’ :
607
d f f e a t u r e r a n k s v c r b f = pd . DataFrame ( data = s v c r b f f e a t u r e r a n k i n g )
608
d f f e a t u r e r a n k s v c r b f . to csv ( f i l e n a m e f e a t u r e r a n k i n g )
609
610
f 1 s c o r e s v c r b f = pd . DataFrame ( data = f 1 s c o r e s v c r b f )
611
f 1 s c o r e s v c r b f . to csv ( f i l e n a m e f 1 s c o r e s )
612
613
best model svc rbf hyper param 2 = pd . DataFrame ( data =
best model svc rbf hyper param 2 )
614
best model svc rbf hyper param 2 . to csv ( filename best model )
615
616
i f MODEL == ’ s v c l i n e a r ’ :
617
d f f e a t u r e r a n k s v c l i n e a r = pd . DataFrame ( data = s v c l i n e a r f e a t u r e r a n k i n g )
618
d f f e a t u r e r a n k s v c l i n e a r . to csv ( f i l e n a m e f e a t u r e r a n k i n g )
619
620
f 1 s c o r e s v c l i n e a r = pd . DataFrame ( data = f 1 s c o r e s v c l i n e a r )
621
f 1 s c o r e s v c l i n e a r . to csv ( f i l e n a m e f 1 s c o r e s )
622
623
best model svc linear hyper param 2 = pd . DataFrame ( data =
best model svc linear hyper param 2 )
624
best model svc linear hyper param 2 . to csv ( filename best model )
123 of 135
==PAGE:132==
Katrine Dam Christensen
02/07/2023
Technical University of Denmark
A.9.7
util.py
1
# IMPORT PACKAGES
2
import math
3
import numpy as np
4
import pandas
as pd
5
import networkx
as nx
6
import networkx . algorithms . community as nx comm
7
import
re
8
9
def
find min max threshold ( d f c c ) :
10
””” Calculates
the minimum and maximum threshold
value
f o r
a
connectivity
11
matrix ,
provided
that
the
threshold
value
should be lower
than
the
12
lowest maximum of
each
channel
( graph
should
not be
f u l l y
disconnected )
13
and
l a r g e r
than
the
l a r g e s t minimum of
each
channel
( graph
should
not
14
be
f u l l y
connected ) .
The dataframe can
contain
connectivity
matrices
15
f o r
multiple
frequency
bands and epochs .
16
17
Call
the
function
l i k e
t h i s :
18
min th ,
max th ,
df minmax = find min max threshold ( d f c c )
19
20
Args :
21
d f c c
( DataFrame ) :
dataframe
containing
connectivity
matrix
f o r
a
22
s i n g l e
subject ,
a l l
epochs and
a l l
frequency
bands .
23
Columns of
dataframe
should be :
24
c o l s = [ ’ subject ID ’ , ’ epoch ’ , ’ frequency band ’ , ’ node1 ’ , . . . , ’ nodeN ’ ] ,
25
where
’ subject ID ’
i s
a number ,
’ epoch ’
i s
epoch number
[ 0 . . E−1] ,
26
’ frequency band ’
i s
the name of
the band ( e . g .
alpha
or
beta )
27
used
before
c a l c u l a t i n g
connectivity ,
where
t o t a l
number of
28
frequency
bands used
i s F,
and the
’ node ’
are
one column
f o r
each
29
of
the
included
nodes
[ 1 . .N] , N being
the
t o t a l
amount of
nodes .
30
Total number of
rows
in
dataframe
i s
then N∗E∗F.
31
32
Returns :
33
df minmax freq
( DataFrame ) : minimum and maximum threshold
values
f o r
34
each
frequency band
of
a
s i n g l e
sucject ,
provided
that
the
graph
35
should
not be
f u l l y
connected
or
disconnected .
36
df minmax ( DataFrame ) : minimum and maximum threshold
values
37
ca lc ul at ed
f o r
each epoch and each
frequency band .
38
”””
39
40
bands = np . unique ( d f c c [ ’ frequency band ’ ] )
# frequency
bands
41
N FREQ = len ( bands )
# number of
frequency
bands
42
43
epochs = np . unique ( d f c c [ ’ epoch ’ ] )
# epochs
44
N EPOCHS = len ( epochs )
# number of
epochs
45
46
subID = np . unique ( d f c c [ ’ subject ID ’ ] ) [ 0 ]
# subject ID
47
48
col names = [ ’ subject ID ’ , ’ l a b e l ’ , ’ epoch ’ , ’ frequency band ’ , ’ min th ’ , ’ max th ’ , ’
min pc ’ , ’ max pc ’ ]
49
col names 2 = [ ’ subject ID ’ , ’ l a b e l ’ , ’ frequency band ’ , ’ min th freq ’ , ’
max th freq ’ , ’ min pc freq ’ , ’ max pc freq ’ ]
50
51
DEFALUT MIN DIAG VALUE = −100
# Default
value
of
diagonal when
c a l c u l a t i n g maximum threshold
52
DEFALUT MAX DIAG VALUE = 100
# Default
value
of
diagonal when
c a l c u l a t i n g minimum threshold
53
54
55
i = 1
# a c t i v a t e
i t e r a t o r
56
i i = 1
# a c t i v a t e
i t e r a t o r
57
124 of 135
==PAGE:133==
Katrine Dam Christensen
02/07/2023
Technical University of Denmark
58
f o r
f
in
range (0 ,N FREQ) :
59
f o r
e
in
range (0 ,N EPOCHS) :
60
# f o r
s e l e c t e d
frequency band and epoch ,
extract
connectivity
matrix
61
df co nn ect iv it y ma tr ix = d f c c [ ( d f c c [ ’ frequency band ’ ] == bands [ f ] ) &
( d f c c [ ’ epoch ’ ] == e ) ]
62
63
l a b e l = df co nn ect iv it y m a t r i x . l a b e l . values [ 0 ]
64
65
# remove meta data
66
df co nn ect iv it y ma tr ix = d f c o n n e c t i v i t y m a t r i x . drop ( columns=[ ’Unnamed
:
0 ’ , ’ subject ID ’ , ’ l a b e l ’ , ’ epoch ’ , ’ frequency band ’ ] )
67
68
N CHANNELS = len ( df co n n e c t i v i t y m a t r i x . columns )
# number of
channels
69
70
data cc = df co nn ect iv i t y m a t r i x . values
# extract
data
71
72
# set
diagonal
equal
to
zeros
( ensuring
s e l f −loops
are
omitted )
73
data cc [ np . d i a g i n d i c e s (N CHANNELS, ndim=2) ] = 0
74
75
# i f
data
i s
empty
76
i f
np .sum( data cc ) == 0:
77
print ( ’ERROR:
Data
i s
empty ’ )
78
# i f
data
i s NOT symmetric
79
e l i f
np .sum(np . t r i u ( data cc , k=1)) == 0 or np .sum(np . t r i l ( data cc , k=−1)
) == 0:
80
# data
i s
not
symmetrical
because
e i t h e r
lower
or
upper
t r i a n g l e
i s
empty
81
# mirror
data
along
diagonal
82
data cc mir = np . rot90 (np . f l i p l r ( data cc ) )
83
# create
symmetrix matrix
84
data = data cc + data cc mir
85
# i f
data
i s
symmetric
86
e l s e :
87
data = data cc
88
89
# FIND MINIMUM
90
# set
diagonal
equal
to maximum d e f a u l t
value
91
data [ np . d i a g i n d i c e s (N CHANNELS, ndim=2) ] = DEFALUT MAX DIAG VALUE
92
# c a l c u l a t e
minima
f o r
each row
of
the
data
( each
channel )
93
min channel = np . amin ( data , axis =1)
94
# c a l c u l a t e
minima of
the minima values
95
min th = np .min( min channel )
96
97
# c a l c u l a t e
percentage minima
98
# find
number of
values
below
threshold
99
n True = np .sum( data [ data!=DEFALUT MAX DIAG VALUE] <= min th )
100
min pc = n True /(N CHANNELS∗(N CHANNELS−1))
101
102
# FIND MAXIMA
103
# set
diagonal
elements
equal
to minimum d e f a u l t
value
104
data [ np . d i a g i n d i c e s (N CHANNELS, ndim=2) ] = DEFALUT MIN DIAG VALUE
105
# c a l c u l a t e
minima
f o r
each row
of
the
data
106
max channel = np . amax( data , axis =1)
107
# c a l c u l a t e maxima of
the maxima values
108
max th = np .min( max channel )
109
110
# c a l c u l a t e
percentage maxima
111
# find
number of
values
below
threshold
112
n True = np .sum( data [ data!=DEFALUT MIN DIAG VALUE] < max th )
113
# max pc = n True /(N CHANNELS∗∗2)
114
max pc = n True /(N CHANNELS∗(N CHANNELS−1))
115
125 of 135
==PAGE:134==
Katrine Dam Christensen
02/07/2023
Technical University of Denmark
116
# save
min th and max th
values
along
with meta data
117
df mm = pd . DataFrame ( data =[[ subID , label , e , bands [ f ] , min th , max th ,
min pc , max pc ] ] , columns=col names )
118
119
i f
i == 1: # i f
i n i t a l
loop
i s
run ,
then
create
dataframe
120
df minmax = df mm
121
i = 0
# deactivate
i t e r a t o r
122
e l s e : # e l s e
concatenate
dataframe
123
df minmax = pd . concat ( [ df minmax , df mm ] )
124
125
# c a l c u l a t e max(min) and min(max)
f o r
current
subject
and frequency band (
average
over
epochs )
126
min th freq = np .max( df minmax [ df minmax [ ’ frequency band ’ ] == bands [ f ] ] [ ’
min th ’ ] . values )
127
# c a l c u l a t e
min( max th )
f o r
current
frequency band
128
max th freq = np .min( df minmax [ df minmax [ ’ frequency band ’ ] == bands [ f ] ] [ ’
max th ’ ] . values )
129
# c a l c u l a t e max( min pc )
f o r
current
frequency band
130
min pc freq = np .max( df minmax [ df minmax [ ’ frequency band ’ ] == bands [ f ] ] [ ’
min pc ’ ] . values )
131
# c a l c u l a t e
min( max pc )
f o r
current
frequency band
132
max pc freq = np .min( df minmax [ df minmax [ ’ frequency band ’ ] == bands [ f ] ] [ ’
max pc ’ ] . values )
133
134
# save max(min) and min(max)
values
f o r
each
frequency band along
with
meta data
135
d f f r e q = pd . DataFrame ( data = [ [ subID , label , bands [ f ] , min th freq ,
max th freq , min pc freq , max pc freq ] ] , columns=col names 2 )
136
137
i f
i i == 1: # i f
i n i t a l
loop
i s
run ,
then
create
dataframe
138
df minmax freq = d f f r e q
139
i i = 0
# deactivate
i t e r a t o r
140
e l s e : # e l s e
concatenate
dataframe
141
df minmax freq = pd . concat ( [ df minmax freq , d f f r e q ] )
142
143
return
df minmax freq ,
df minmax
144
145
146
def
f e a t u r e ( df cc , thresholds = 0 , threshold mode = ’ weight ’ , feature mode=’ graph ’ ) :
147
””” Function
e x tr a ct s
a
s i n g l e
graph from dataframe
of
adjacency
matrices
based
148
on
connectivity .
The function
thresholds
graphs
based on
e i t h e r
’ weight ’
149
or
’ density ’
based
approach .
After
thresholding
the
function
c a l l s
another
150
function
f o r
graph based
fea tu r e
c a l c u l a t i o n .
151
152
Author :
Katrine Dam Christensen
( kdc@optoceutics . com)
153
Date :
05−01−2023
154
155
Args :
156
d f c c
( DataFrame ) :
dataframe
containing
connectivity
matrix
f o r
a
157
s i n g l e
subject ,
a l l
epochs and
a l l
frequency
bands .
158
Columns of
dataframe
should be :
159
c o l s = [ ’ subject ID ’ , ’ epoch ’ , ’ frequency band ’ , ’ node1 ’ , . . . , ’ nodeN ’ ] ,
160
where
’ subject ID ’
i s
a number ,
’ epoch ’
i s
epoch number
[ 0 . . E−1] ,
161
’ frequency band ’
i s
the name of
the band ( e . g .
alpha
or
beta )
162
used
before
c a l c u l a t i n g
connectivity ,
where
t o t a l
number of
163
frequency
bands used
i s F,
and the
’ node ’
are
one column
f o r
each
164
of
the
included
nodes
[ 1 . .N] , N being
the
t o t a l
amount of
nodes .
165
Total number of
rows
in
dataframe
i s
then N∗E∗F.
166
thresholds
( array ) :
array
[F x 1]
of
arrays
[T x 1]
containing
values
167
ranging
from −1 to
1 ,
f o r
b i n e r i z i n g
the
connectivity
values .
168
Where F i s
the number of
frequency
bands
in
which
f e a t u r e s
are
to
169
be
ca lc ul at ed
and T are
the number of
threshold
to be
tested
f o r
170
each
frequency band .
Each value
of
the
array
should be the
126 of 135
==PAGE:135==
Katrine Dam Christensen
02/07/2023
Technical University of Denmark
171
threshold
f o r
the
coresponding
frequency band .
172
Order
of
frequency
bands
i s
a l p h a b e t i c a l .
I f
threshold mode =
173
’ weight ’
then
the
array
values
should be the
threshold
values ,
174
and
i f
’ threshold mode ’ = ’ density ’
then
the
array
values
should
175
be
proportion
values .
176
threshold mode
( s t r i n g ) :
’ weight ’
or
’ density ’ . Mode i s
used
to
177
dertermine
thresholding
method ,
where
’ weight ’
thresholding
178
means an
absolute
threshold
value
i s
used
f o r
thresholding
a l l
179
edges and
f o r
’ density ’
thresholding
the
binarized
graph
i s
180
constructed by
s e t t i n g
a
f i x e d
percentage
of
edges
in
the graph ,
181
such
that
a l l
graphs
w i l l
have the same number of
edges .
182
feature mode
( l i s t
of
s t r i n g ) :
’ graph ’ ,
’ region ’
or
’ node ’ .
183
Mode i s
used
to
determine
i f
f e a t u r e s
are
to be
c a l c u l a t e d
on a
184
graph ,
region
or node
l e v e l .
I f
multiple
f e a t u r e
modes are
185
provided ,
the
c al cu la t e d
f ea t u e s
f o r
each mode are
added to
the
186
fea ture
vector .
187
188
Returns :
189
d f f e a t u r e s s u b
( DataFrame ) :
dataframe
containing
meta data and
190
fea ture
vector
f o r
a
s i n g l e
subject ,
a l l
epochs and
191
a l l
frequency
bands .
192
”””
193
194
bands = np . unique ( d f c c [ ’ frequency band ’ ] )
# frequency
bands
195
N FREQ = len ( bands )
# number of
frequency
bands
196
197
epochs = np . unique ( d f c c [ ’ epoch ’ ] )
# epochs
198
N EPOCHS = len ( epochs )
# number of
epochs
199
200
subID = np . unique ( d f c c [ ’ subject ID ’ ] ) [ 0 ]
# subject ID
201
202
# Error
messages :
203
i f
type( thresholds ) != np . ndarray :
204
print ( ”ERROR!
Variable
’ thresholds ’ must be
of
type : numpy . ndarray .\ n” )
205
206
i f
thresholds . ndim > 2:
207
print ( ”ERROR!
Variable
’ thresholds ’ must be 1D array .\ n” )
208
F = len ( thresholds )
# extract number of
frequency band
provided
209
i f
F != len (np . unique ( d f c c [ ’ frequency band ’ ] ) ) :
210
print ( ”ERROR!
Variable
’ thresholds ’ must contain
one
value
f o r
each
frequency band in
d f c c .\ n” )
211
print ( f ” Variable
’ thresholds ’ must
t h e r e f o r e
be
of
length { len (np . unique (
d f c c [ ’ frequency band ’ ] ) ) }.\ n” )
212
f o r
f
in
range (N FREQ) :
213
i f
np .min( thresholds [ f ] ) < −1:
214
print ( f ”ERROR!
Variable
’ thresholds ’ must have a minimum value
of
−1.\
n Currently
frequency band {bands [ f ]}
contains
value
outside
the
range .
\n” )
215
i f
np .max( thresholds [ f ] ) > 1:
216
print ( f ”ERROR!
Variable
’ thresholds ’ must have a maximum value
of
1.\ n
Currently
frequency band {bands [ f ]}
contains
value
outside
the
range .
\n” )
217
218
219
i n i t i a l = 1
220
f o r
f
in
range (0 ,N FREQ) : # f o r
each
frequency band
221
f o r
e
in
range (0 ,N EPOCHS) : # f o r
each epoch
222
223
# f o r
s e l e c t e d
frequency band and epoch ,
extract
connectivity
matrix
dataframe
224
df co nn ect iv it y ma tr ix = d f c c [ ( d f c c [ ’ frequency band ’ ] == bands [ f ] ) &
( d f c c [ ’ epoch ’ ] == e ) ]
127 of 135
==PAGE:136==
Katrine Dam Christensen
02/07/2023
Technical University of Denmark
225
l a b e l = d f c c . l a b e l [ 0 ] # save
l a b e l
226
227
# remove meta data
228
df co nn ect iv it y ma tr ix = d f c o n n e c t i v i t y m a t r i x . drop ( columns=[ ’Unnamed
:
0 ’ , ’ subject ID ’ , ’ l a b e l ’ , ’ epoch ’ , ’ frequency band ’ ] )
229
data = df co nn ect iv it y m a t r i x . values
# extract
connectivity
matrix
values
230
231
# convert
connectivity
matrix
to a graph
232
G = nx . from numpy array ( data )
233
# extract
adjacency
matrix from graph
234
A = nx . to numpy array (G)
# instead
of
j u s t
using
’
data ’
matrix ,
t h i s
adjacency
matrix
i s
now symmetrical
235
236
N NODES = G. number of nodes ()
# number of
nodes
in
graph
237
238
T = len ( thresholds [ f ] )
# number of
thresholds
f o r
current
frequency band
239
240
f o r
t
in
range (0 ,T) : # f o r
each
threshold
241
th = thresholds [ f ] [ t ]
# extract
threshold
value
f o r
current
frequency band and
threshold
loop
i t e r a t i o n
242
243
# Perform
e i t h e r
weight−based
or
density
based
thresholding
of
the
graph
244
# ’ weight ’ = absolute
thresholding
245
i f
threshold mode == ’ weight ’ :
246
threshold value = th
247
# b i n a r i z e
edge
values by thresholding
248
A th = A. copy ()
# make copy
of A
f o r
thresholding
249
A th [A <= threshold value ] = 0
# set
values
below
threshold
equal
to
zero
250
A th [A > threshold value ] = 1
# set
values
above
threshold
equal
to
one
251
A th [ np . d i a g i n d i c e s (N NODES, ndim=2) ] = 0
# set
diagonal
equal
to
zero
again
( to
avoid
s e l f
loops )
252
th col name = ’ threshold
[ weighted ] ’
# defin e
threshold
value column name f o r
dataframe
253
254
# ’ density ’ = percentage
thresholding
255
e l i f
threshold mode == ’ density ’ :
256
threshold per = th
257
A sort = np . so rt (A[ np . t r i l i n d i c e s (N NODES, k=−1) ] )
# extract
only
lower
t r i a n g l e
of A ( to
get
a l l
edge
values
represented
only
once )
258
# find
the
edge
value
equal
to
the
chosen
percentage
threshold
259
threshold value = A sort [ math . f l o o r ( len ( A sort ) ∗threshold per )
−1] # −1 due to
zero−indexing
in
python
260
# b i n a r i z e
edge
values by thresholding
261
A th = A. copy ()
# make copy
of A
f o r
thresholding
262
A th [A <= threshold value ] = 0
# set
values
below
threshold
equal
to
zero
263
A th [A > threshold value ] = 1
# set
values
above
threshold
equal
to
one
264
A th [ np . d i a g i n d i c e s (N NODES, ndim=2) ] = 0
# set
diagonal
equal
to
zero
again
( to
avoid
s e l f
loops )
265
th col name = ’ threshold
[ density ] ’
# defined
threshold
value column name f o r
dataframe
266
e l s e :
267
print ( ” I n c o r r e c t
threshold mode !
Accepted
thresholding
modes
are
’ weighted ’
or
’ density ’ . ” )
128 of 135
==PAGE:137==
Katrine Dam Christensen
02/07/2023
Technical University of Denmark
268
269
G = nx . from numpy array ( A th )
# convert
adjacency
matrix
to
graph
270
271
i f
nx . is connected (G) == False : # check
i f
graph
i s
connected
272
print ( ’NOTE:
skipped
threshold ,
sub
’+s t r ( subID )+ ’ ,
f r e q
’+
s t r ( f )+’ ,
epoch
’+s t r ( e )+’ ,
th
’+s t r ( t )+’ . ’ )
273
continue
274
275
# Add node names to
graph
276
mapping = {}
277
keys = range (G. number of nodes () )
278
values = df co nn ec t i v i t y m a t r i x . columns . values
# node names
279
f o r
i
in
keys :
280
mapping [ i ] = values [ i ]
281
G = nx . r e l a b e l n o d e s (G, mapping )
# add
l a b e l s
to
graph
282
283
# c a l c u l a t e
f e a t u r e s
f o r
current
graph
284
d f o n l y f e a t u r e s r o w =
f e a t u r e c a l c (G, feature mode )
285
286
# save
f eatur e
values
to
dataframe
with metadata
287
df meta = pd . DataFrame ( data = [ [ subID , label , e , bands [ f ] ,
threshold mode , threshold value ] ] , columns=[ ’ subject ID ’ , ’ l a b e l ’
, ’ epoch ’ , ’ frequency band ’ , ’ threshold mode ’ , ’ threshold
value ’ ] )
288
d f f e a t u r e s r o w = pd . concat ( [ df meta , d f o n l y f e a t u r e s r o w ] , axis =1)
289
290
# append to
dataframe
291
i f
i n i t i a l == 1:
292
d f f e a t u r e s s u b = d f f e a t u r e s r o w
# i f
t h i s
i s
the
f i r s t
i t e r a t i o n
then
generate
the
subject
dataframe
293
i n i t i a l = 0
294
e l s e :
295
d f f e a t u r e s s u b = pd . concat ( [ d f f e a t u r e s s u b , d f f e a t u r e s r o w ] ,
ignore index=True )
296
297
return
d f f e a t u r e s s u b
298
299
300
def
f e a t u r e c a l c (G, feature mode ) :
301
””” Function
c a l c u l a t e s
graph
metrics
based on a
s i n g l e
graph .
The function
302
can
c a l c u a l t e
both graph −, region−and node−based
features ,
including :
303
Density ,
Degree ,
Average
c l u s t e r i n g
c o e f f i c i e n t ,
Average
s h o r t e s t
path
length ,
304
Wiener index ,
Small−world
c o e f f i c i e n t
( sigma ) ,
Small−world
c o e f f i c i e n t
(omega)
305
and Modularity .
306
307
Author :
Katrine Dam Christensen
( kdc@optoceutics . com)
308
Date :
05−01−2023
309
310
Args :
311
G (Graph) :
Binary
undirected
graph
of
shape
[N,N] , N i s
number of
nodes
312
feature mode
( s t r i n g ) :
can be
’ graph ’ ,
’ region ’
or
’ node ’ .
313
Mode i s
used
to
determine
i f
f e a t u r e s
are
to be
c a l c u l a t e d
at a
314
graph ,
region
or node
l e v e l .
I f
multiple
f e a t u r e
modes are
provided ,
315
the
ca lc ul at ed
featues
f o r
each mode are
added to
the
f e a t u r e
vector .
316
317
Returns :
318
d f f
( DataFrame ) :
dataframe
containing
1D f e a t u r e
vector .
319
”””
320
321
SEED = 8
322
323
# Define
brain
regions
as
groups
of
e l e c t r o d e s
( nodes )
129 of 135
==PAGE:138==
Katrine Dam Christensen
02/07/2023
Technical University of Denmark
324
nodes = np . array (G. nodes () )
325
r e g i o n l e f t = nodes [ [ i
f o r
i ,
s
in enumerate( nodes )
i f
len ( re . f i n d a l l ( r ’ \d+’ , s
) ) > 0
i f
( int ( re . f i n d a l l ( r ’ \d+’ , s ) [ 0 ] ) %2) !=
0 ] ] # a l l
odd numbered nodes
326
r e g i o n r i g h t = nodes [ [ i
f o r
i ,
s
in enumerate( nodes )
i f
len ( re . f i n d a l l ( r ’ \d+’ ,
s ) ) > 0
i f
( int ( re . f i n d a l l ( r ’ \d+’ , s ) [ 0 ] ) %2) == 0 ] ] # a l l
even numbered
nodes
327
r e g i o n c e n t e r = nodes [ [ i
f o r
i ,
s
in enumerate( nodes )
i f
’ z ’
in
s ] ] # a l l
nodes
containing
’ z ’
328
r e g i o n f r o n t a l = np . array ( [ ’Fp1 ’ , ’AF3 ’ , ’F7 ’ , ’F3 ’ , ’F4 ’ , ’F8 ’ , ’AF4 ’ , ’Fp2 ’ , ’Fz ’ ] )
329
r e g i o n c e n t r a l = np . array ( [ ’FC1 ’ , ’FC5 ’ , ’C3 ’ , ’C4 ’ , ’FC6 ’ , ’FC2 ’ , ’Cz ’ ] )
330
region temporal = np . array ( [ ’T7 ’ , ’T8 ’ ] )
331
r e g i o n p a r i e t a l = np . array ( [ ’CP1 ’ , ’CP5 ’ , ’P7 ’ , ’P3 ’ , ’Pz ’ , ’P4 ’ , ’P8 ’ , ’CP6 ’ , ’CP2 ’ ] )
332
r e g i o n o c c i p i t a l = np . array ( [ ’PO3 ’ , ’O1 ’ , ’Oz ’ , ’O2 ’ , ’PO4 ’ ] )
333
334
regions = [ r e g i o n l e f t , r e g i o n r i g h t , region center , r e g i o n f r o n t a l ,
r e g i o n c e n t r a l , region temporal , r e g i o n p a r i e t a l , r e g i o n o c c i p i t a l ]
335
regions names = [ ’ r e g i o n l e f t ’ , ’ r e g i o n r i g h t ’ , ’ r e g i o n c e n t e r ’ , ’ r e g i o n f r o n t a l ’
, ’ r e g i o n c e n t r a l ’ , ’ region temporal ’ , ’ r e g i o n p a r i e t a l ’ , ’ r e g i o n o c c i p i t a l ’ ]
336
337
regions between r1 = [ r e g i o n l e f t ,
r e g i o n l e f t ,
r e g i o n r i g h t ,
r e g i o n f r o n t a l ,
r e g i o n f r o n t a l , r e g i o n f r o n t a l , r e g i o n f r o n t a l , r e g i o n c e n t r a l , r e g i o n c e n t r a l
, r e g i o n c e n t r a l , region temporal , region temporal , r e g i o n p a r i e t a l ]
338
regions between r2 = [ r e g i o n r i g h t ,
region center ,
region center ,
r e g i o n c e n t r a l , region temporal , r e g i o n p a r i e t a l , r e g i o n o c c i p i t a l ,
region temporal , r e g i o n p a r i e t a l , r e g i o n o c c i p i t a l , r e g i o n p a r i e t a l ,
r e g i o n o c c i p i t a l , r e g i o n o c c i p i t a l ]
339
regions between names = [ ’ r e g i o n b e t w e e n l e f t r i g h t ’ , ’
r e g i o n b e t w e e n l e f t c e n t e r ’ , ’ r e g i o n b e t w e e n r i g h t c e n t e r ’ ,
340
’ r e g i o n b e t w e e n f r o n t a l c e n t r a l ’ , ’
region between frontal temporal ’ , ’
r e g i o n b e t w e e n f r o n t a l p a r i e t a l ’ , ’
r e g i o n b e t w e e n f r o n t a l o c c i p i t a l ’ ,
341
’ region between central temporal ’ , ’
r e g i o n b e t w e e n c e n t r a l p a r i e t a l ’ , ’
r e g i o n b e t w e e n c e n t r a l o c c i p i t a l ’ ,
342
’ region between temporal parietal ’ , ’
reg ion bet ween tem poral occ ipita l ’ ,
343
’ r e g i o n b e t w e e n p a r i e t a l o c c i p i t a l ’ ]
344
345
# t e s t
i f
graph
i s
directed
346
i f G. i s d i r e c t e d () :
347
dir = True
348
349
# premake
frequency
l i s t
and column names
l i s t
350
f e a t u r e s l i s t = [ ]
351
col names = [ ]
352
353
# GRAPH BASED FEATURES ##########################################
354
i f
feature mode == ’ graph ’ :
355
# Density
356
f e a t u r e s l i s t . append (nx . density (G) )
357
col names . append ( ’ density
( graph ) ’ )
358
359
# Diameter
360
f e a t u r e s l i s t . append (nx . diameter (G) )
361
col names . append ( ’ diameter
( graph ) ’ )
362
363
# Radius
364
f e a t u r e s l i s t . append (nx . radius (G) )
365
col names . append ( ’ radius
( graph ) ’ )
366
367
# Global
degree
368
deg = [ val
f o r
,
val
in G. degree () ]
130 of 135
==PAGE:139==
Katrine Dam Christensen
02/07/2023
Technical University of Denmark
369
f e a t u r e s l i s t . append (np . average ( deg ) )
370
col names . append ( ’ degree
( graph ) ’ )
371
372
# Average
c l u s t e r i n g
c o e f f i c i e n t
373
f e a t u r e s l i s t . append (nx . a v e r a g e c l u s t e r i n g (G) )
374
col names . append ( ’ average
c l u s t e r i n g
c o e f f i c i e n t
( graph ) ’ )
375
376
# Average
s h o r t e s t
path
length
377
f e a t u r e s l i s t . append (nx . av e r a ge s h o r t e s t p a t h l e n g t h (G) )
378
col names . append ( ’ average
s h o r t e s t
path
length
( graph ) ’ )
379
380
# Wiener index
(sum of
s h o r t e s t
path
lengths )
381
f e a t u r e s l i s t . append (nx . wiener index (G) )
382
col names . append ( ’ wiener
index
( graph ) ’ )
383
384
# Small−world
c o e f f i c i e n t
( sigma )
385
f e a t u r e s l i s t . append (nx . sigma (G, n i t e r =10, seed=8))
386
col names . append ( ’ sigma
( graph ) ’ )
387
388
# Small−world
c o e f f i c i e n t
(omega)
389
f e a t u r e s l i s t . append (nx . omega(G, seed=8))
390
col names . append ( ’omega ( graph ) ’ )
391
392
# Global
e f f i c i e n c y
393
f e a t u r e s l i s t . append (nx . g l o b a l e f f i c i e n c y (G) )
394
col names . append ( ’ e f f i c i e n c y
( graph ) ’ )
395
396
# Average
l o c a l
e f f i c i e n c y
397
f e a t u r e s l i s t . append (nx . l o c a l e f f i c i e n c y (G) )
398
col names . append ( ’ avg
l o c a l
e f f i c i e n c y
( graph ) ’ )
399
400
# s
metric
401
f e a t u r e s l i s t . append (nx . s metric (G, normalized=False ) )
402
col names . append ( ’ s−metric
( graph ) ’ )
403
404
# COMMUNITY BASED FEATURES
405
com = nx comm . louvain communities (G,
seed=8)
406
407
# modularity
408
f e a t u r e s l i s t . append (nx comm . modularity (G, com) )
409
col names . append ( ’ modularity
( graph ) ’ )
410
411
# REGION BASED FEATURES ( subgraphs ) ###########################
412
i f
feature mode == ’ region ’ :
413
414
# between
regions
edges
415
f o r
rr
in
range ( len ( regions between names ) ) :
416
region1 = regions between r1 [ rr ]
# s e l e c t
region
1
417
region2 = regions between r2 [ rr ]
# s e l e c t
region
2
418
419
A = nx . to numpy array (G)
# extract
adjacency
matrix
420
421
ID r1 = np . expand dims (np . i s i n ( nodes , region1 ) , axis =1) # index
p o s i t i o n
( bool )
f o r
nodes
in
region
422
ID r2 = np . expand dims (np . i s i n ( nodes , region2 ) , axis =1) # index
p o s i t i o n
( bool )
f o r
nodes
in
region
423
# within
region
edges
424
A r1 = np . repeat ( ID r1 , len ( nodes ) , axis =1)
425
A r2 = np . repeat (np . rot90 ( ID r2 ) , len ( nodes ) , axis =0)
426
A rr = A r1∗A r2
427
AA = A∗A rr
428
429
# Ratio
of
edges
131 of 135
==PAGE:140==
Katrine Dam Christensen
02/07/2023
Technical University of Denmark
430
r a t i o = sum(sum(AA) ) / ( len ( region1 ) ∗len ( region2 ) )
431
432
f e a t u r e s l i s t . append ( r a t i o )
433
col names . append ( ’ Ratio
of
edges
between
( ’+s t r ( regions between names [
rr ] )+’ ) ’ )
434
435
# within
region
edges
436
f o r
r
in
range ( len ( regions names ) ) :
437
438
# skip
temporal
regions
s i n c e
there
are
to
few nodes
in
t h i s
region
(
l e s s
than
4)
439
i f
regions names [ r ] == ’ region temporal ’ :
440
print ( ’ Feature
c a l c u l a t i o n
skipped
f o r
temporal
region
due to
lack
of
nodes
in
region
( l e s s
than
4) ’ )
441
continue # skip
c a l c u l a t i o n s
f o r
t h i s
region
and continue
with
next
region
442
443
# create
region
444
region = regions [ r ]
445
446
A = nx . to numpy array (G)
# extract
adjacency
matrix
447
448
ID r = np . expand dims (np . i s i n ( nodes , region ) , axis =1) # index
p o s i t i o n
(
bool )
f o r
nodes
in
region
449
# within
region
edges
450
A r1 = np . repeat ( ID r , len ( nodes ) , axis =1)
451
A r2 = np . repeat (np . rot90 ( ID r ) , len ( nodes ) , axis =0)
452
A rr = A r1∗A r2
453
AA = A∗A rr
454
455
# Ratio
of
edges
456
r a t i o = (sum(sum(AA) ) /2) /
(( len ( region ) ∗len ( region )−len ( region ) ) /2)
457
458
f e a t u r e s l i s t . append ( r a t i o )
459
col names . append ( ’ Ratio
of
edges
within
( ’+s t r ( regions names [ r ] )+’ ) ’ )
460
461
462
###################################################
463
# Node based
f e a t u r e s
averaged
within
each
region #
464
###################################################
465
466
# Clustering
c o e f f i c i e n t
467
dict = nx . c l u s t e r i n g (G)
468
avg = 0
469
f o r
key
in
dict :
470
i f
key
in
region : # i f
node
i s
part
of
region
471
avg = avg + ( dict [ key ]/ len ( region ) ) # add to
average
value
472
f e a t u r e s l i s t . append ( avg )
473
col names . append ( ’ Average
c l u s t e r i n g
c o e f f i c i e n t
( ’+s t r ( regions names [
r ] )+’ ) ’ )
474
475
# Degree
476
f o r
key ,
val
in G. degree () :
477
f e a t u r e s l i s t . append ( val )
478
col names . append ( ’ Average
degree
( ’+s t r ( regions names [ r ] )+’ ) ’ )
479
480
# Degree
c e n t r a l i t y
481
dict = nx . d e g r e e c e n t r a l i t y (G)
482
avg = 0
483
f o r
key
in
dict :
484
i f
key
in
region : # i f
node
i s
part
of
region
485
avg = avg + ( dict [ key ]/ len ( region ) ) # add to
average
value
486
f e a t u r e s l i s t . append ( avg )
132 of 135
==PAGE:141==
Katrine Dam Christensen
02/07/2023
Technical University of Denmark
487
col names . append ( ’ Average
degree
c e n t r a l i t y
( ’+s t r ( regions names [ r ] )+’
) ’ )
488
489
# Betweenness
c e n t r a l i t y
490
dict = nx . betweenness centrality (G)
491
avg = 0
492
f o r
key
in
dict :
493
i f
key
in
region : # i f
node
i s
part
of
region
494
avg = avg + ( dict [ key ]/ len ( region ) ) # add to
average
value
495
f e a t u r e s l i s t . append ( avg )
496
col names . append ( ’ Average
betweenness
c e n t r a l i t y
( ’+s t r ( regions names [
r ] )+’ ) ’ )
497
498
# Closeness
c e n t r a l i t y
499
dict = nx . c l o s e n e s s c e n t r a l i t y (G)
500
avg = 0
501
f o r
key
in
dict :
502
i f
key
in
region : # i f
node
i s
part
of
region
503
avg = avg + ( dict [ key ]/ len ( region ) ) # add to
average
value
504
f e a t u r e s l i s t . append ( avg )
505
col names . append ( ’ Average
c l o s e n e s s
c e n t r a l i t y
( ’+s t r ( regions names [ r
] )+’ ) ’ )
506
507
# Current
flow
c l o s e n e s s
c e n t r a l i t y
508
dict = nx . c u r r e n t f l o w c l o s e n e s s c e n t r a l i t y (G)
509
avg = 0
510
f o r
key
in
dict :
511
i f
key
in
region : # i f
node
i s
part
of
region
512
avg = avg + ( dict [ key ]/ len ( region ) ) # add to
average
value
513
f e a t u r e s l i s t . append ( avg )
514
col names . append ( ’ Average
current
flow
c l o s e n e s s
c e n t r a l i t y
( ’+s t r (
regions names [ r ] )+’ ) ’ )
515
516
# Current
flow
betweenness
c e n t r a l i t y
517
dict = nx . c u r r e n t f l o w b e t w e e n n e s s c e n t r a l i t y (G)
518
avg = 0
519
f o r
key
in
dict :
520
i f
key
in
region : # i f
node
i s
part
of
region
521
avg = avg + ( dict [ key ]/ len ( region ) ) # add to
average
value
522
f e a t u r e s l i s t . append ( avg )
523
col names . append ( ’ Average
current
flow
betweenness
c e n t r a l i t y
( ’+s t r (
regions names [ r ] )+’ ) ’ )
524
525
# Closeness
v i t a l i t y
526
dict = nx . c l o s e n e s s v i t a l i t y (G)
527
avg = 0
528
f o r
key
in
dict :
529
i f
key
in
region : # i f
node
i s
part
of
region
530
avg = avg + ( dict [ key ]/ len ( region ) ) # add to
average
value
531
f e a t u r e s l i s t . append ( avg )
532
col names . append ( ’ Average
c l o s e n e s s
v i t a l i t y
( ’+s t r ( regions names [ r ] )+
’ ) ’ )
533
534
# Constraint
535
dict = nx . constraint (G)
536
avg = 0
537
f o r
key
in
dict :
538
i f
key
in
region : # i f
node
i s
part
of
region
539
avg = avg + ( dict [ key ]/ len ( region ) ) # add to
average
value
540
f e a t u r e s l i s t . append ( avg )
541
col names . append ( ’ Average
c o ns t r a in t
( ’+s t r ( regions names [ r ] )+’ ) ’ )
542
543
# E f f e c t i v e
s i z e
133 of 135
==PAGE:142==
Katrine Dam Christensen
02/07/2023
Technical University of Denmark
544
dict = nx . e f f e c t i v e s i z e (G)
545
avg = 0
546
f o r
key
in
dict :
547
i f
key
in
region : # i f
node
i s
part
of
region
548
avg = avg + ( dict [ key ]/ len ( region ) ) # add to
average
value
549
f e a t u r e s l i s t . append ( avg )
550
col names . append ( ’ Average
e f f e c t i v e
s i z e
( ’+s t r ( regions names [ r ] )+’ ) ’ )
551
552
# E c c e n t r i c i t y
553
dict = nx . e c c e n t r i c i t y (G)
554
avg = 0
555
f o r
key
in
dict :
556
i f
key
in
region : # i f
node
i s
part
of
region
557
avg = avg + ( dict [ key ]/ len ( region ) ) # add to
average
value
558
f e a t u r e s l i s t . append ( avg )
559
col names . append ( ’ Average
e c c e n t r i c i t y
( ’+s t r ( regions names [ r ] )+’ ) ’ )
560
561
# NODE BASED FEATURES ###################################################
562
i f
feature mode == ’ node ’ :
563
564
# Clustering
c o e f f i c i e n t
565
dict = nx . c l u s t e r i n g (G)
566
f o r
key
in
dict :
567
f e a t u r e s l i s t . append ( dict [ key ] )
568
col names . append ( ’ c l u s t e r i n g
c o e f f i c i e n t
( ’+s t r ( key )+’ ) ’ )
569
570
# Degree
571
f o r
key ,
val
in G. degree () :
572
f e a t u r e s l i s t . append ( val )
573
col names . append ( ’ degree
( ’+s t r ( key )+’ ) ’ )
574
575
# Degree
c e n t r a l i t y
576
dict = nx . d e g r e e c e n t r a l i t y (G)
577
f o r
key
in
dict :
578
f e a t u r e s l i s t . append ( dict [ key ] )
579
col names . append ( ’ degree
c e n t r a l i t y
( ’+s t r ( key )+’ ) ’ )
580
581
# Betweenness
c e n t r a l i t y
582
dict = nx . betweenness centrality (G)
583
f o r
key
in
dict :
584
f e a t u r e s l i s t . append ( dict [ key ] )
585
col names . append ( ’ betweenness
c e n t r a l i t y
( ’+s t r ( key )+’ ) ’ )
586
587
# Closeness
c e n t r a l i t y
588
dict = nx . c l o s e n e s s c e n t r a l i t y (G)
589
f o r
key
in
dict :
590
f e a t u r e s l i s t . append ( dict [ key ] )
591
col names . append ( ’ c l o s e n e s s
c e n t r a l i t y
( ’+s t r ( key )+’ ) ’ )
592
593
# Current
flow
betweenness
c e n t r a l i t y
594
dict = nx . c u r r e n t f l o w b e t w e e n n e s s c e n t r a l i t y (G)
595
f o r
key
in
dict :
596
f e a t u r e s l i s t . append ( dict [ key ] )
597
col names . append ( ’ current
flow
betweenness
c e n t r a l i t y
( ’+s t r ( key )+’ ) ’ )
598
599
# Current
flow
c l o s e n e s s
c e n t r a l i t y
600
dict = nx . c u r r e n t f l o w c l o s e n e s s c e n t r a l i t y (G)
601
f o r
key
in
dict :
602
f e a t u r e s l i s t . append ( dict [ key ] )
603
col names . append ( ’ current
flow
c l o s e n e s s
c e n t r a l i t y
( ’+s t r ( key )+’ ) ’ )
604
605
# Closeness
v i t a l i t y
606
dict = nx . c l o s e n e s s v i t a l i t y (G)
134 of 135
==PAGE:143==
Katrine Dam Christensen
02/07/2023
Technical University of Denmark
607
f o r
key
in
dict :
608
f e a t u r e s l i s t . append ( dict [ key ] )
609
col names . append ( ’ c l o s e n e s s
v i t a l i t y
( ’+s t r ( key )+’ ) ’ )
610
611
# Constraint
612
dict = nx . constraint (G)
613
f o r
key
in
dict :
614
f e a t u r e s l i s t . append ( dict [ key ] )
615
col names . append ( ’ cons t r a in t
( ’+s t r ( key )+’ ) ’ )
616
617
# E f f e c t i v e
s i z e
618
dict = nx . e f f e c t i v e s i z e (G)
619
f o r
key
in
dict :
620
f e a t u r e s l i s t . append ( dict [ key ] )
621
col names . append ( ’ e f f e c t i v e
s i z e
( ’+s t r ( key )+’ ) ’ )
622
623
# E c c e n t r i c i t y
624
dict = nx . e c c e n t r i c i t y (G)
625
f o r
key
in
dict :
626
f e a t u r e s l i s t . append ( dict [ key ] )
627
col names . append ( ’ e c c e n t r i c i t y
( ’+s t r ( key )+’ ) ’ )
628
629
# Generate
dataframe
630
d f f = pd . DataFrame ( data = [ f e a t u r e s l i s t ] ,
columns = col names )
631
632
return
d f f
135 of 135
