==PAGE:1==
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Electronics
Building the Smallest Terahertz Cross
Correlation Spectroscopy System in the World
Submitted in Partial Fulfillment of the Requirements for the Degree of
Master of Science in Autonomous Systems
Author:
Jonas Sikorskis
Supervisors:
Bjùrn Hübschmann Mùlvig
Simon Jappe Lange
Oscar Garcia Garcia
Thorsten Bñk
Mads Ehrhorn
July 20, 2023
==PAGE:2==
ªBroliai seserys, imkit mane ir skaitykit
Ir tatai skaitydami permanykit:
Mokslo šito t˙evai jÅusu˛ trokšdavo tur˙etiº
-Martynas Mažvydas
To my late grandfather, a phenomenal physicist, professor, inventor, and humorist
Antanas ˇCesnys, who instilled in me a love of science and without who I would not be
where I am today.
In the company of his 36 inventions, Antanas poses as my grandma Regina smiles from
behind
==PAGE:3==
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
Over the past 50 years, terahertz (THz) radiation, with its unique properties, has gar-
nered significant interest amongst the scientific community. However, the lack of com-
mercially available compact and robust THz systems has limited its utilization in in-
dustrial settings. This thesis aims to develop a portable, handheld THz device based
on the ªCross-Correlation Spectroscopyº platform developed at the Technical Univer-
sity of Denmark (DTU). The project encompasses mechanical development to enhance
the device’s portability, particularly focusing on exploring the feasibility of utilizing a
voice coil actuator (VCA) for the delay unit of the system.
Furthermore, the study aims to determine the effectiveness of incorporating a small and
cheap broadband light source coupled with an optical amplifier. This involves making
the amplifier function properly, characterizing its optical output, as well as generating
and detecting THz radiation using a suitable motion control system. By achieving
these objectives, the project aims to contribute to the development of a practical, user-
friendly, and commercially viable handheld THz system.
i
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
I want to extend my heartfelt thanks to my supervisors, Simon Jappe Lange, Thorsten
Bñk, Oscar Garcia Garcia, Bjùrn Hübschmann Mùlvig, and Mads Ehrhorn for their
consistent support and guidance during the running of this project as well as their will-
ingness and enthusiasm to assist at all times.
==PAGE:6==
Contents
Abstract
i
Acknowledgements
ii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Objectives
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.3
Structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2
Terahertz Theory
6
2.1
Terahertz . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.1.1
Time Domain Spectroscopy
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.1.2
Cross Correlation Spectroscopy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.1.3
Current System . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3
Linear Drive Design
17
3.1
Mechanical system . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.1.1
Linear drive selection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.2
Electronics
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.3
Software . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.3.1
External Timer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.3.2
Encoder mode interface
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3.3.3
PWM Generation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3.3.4
PID Controller . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.3.5
Program overview
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
iii
==PAGE:7==
4
Source & Amplifier
36
4.0.1
System setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
4.0.2
Characterization of BOA output . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
4.0.3
Generating and detecting THz . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
Conclusion
50
Bibliography
50
Appendix
56
iv
==PAGE:8==
Introduction
The term ªterahertzº (THz) has been around since the early mid-1970s [1] to describe
wavelengths that fall below the far infrared region. Even though the term has been
used for decades, the lack of THz wave generation, transmission, and detection sys-
tems made the region of terahertz hardly accessible. As a result, this region was re-
ferred to as the ªTerahertz Gapº [2]. Fortunately, the last 30-40 years have witnessed
remarkable technological advancements in photonics and electronics, enabling to
bridge this gap and explore the realm of terahertz frequencies [3]. The progress is
clearly reflected in Figure 1.1, which illustrates the number of articles published on
terahertz from the 1970s to 2023, where new techniques, methods, and fundamental
findings appear regularly.
Figure 1.1: Number of publications
in a given year in the field of THz
radiation. The numbers are taken
from www.dimensions.ai using the
title query "THz OR terahertz". This
query does not include all publica-
tions on this subject, nor do all of
the returned publications exclusively
discuss THz radiation. However,
the general trend should not be
influenced by this.
THz radiation can penetrate common non-conductive and non-polar materials, and
provide non-invasive, non-contact, non-ionizing detection without known health risk
1
==PAGE:9==
[4]. As a result, it can uncover information about the composition, thickness, con-
ductivity, and chemical reactivity of materials. This makes THz radiation an attrac-
tive tool for a variety of applications in research and industry, such as authentication
of artworks by imaging of hidden paint layers on canvas [5], non-invasive concealed
weapon identification [6], the distinction between benign and malignant brain tumors
[7], security screening of letters, envelopes and small packages, checking for foreign
bodies and insects inside of packaged food containers, quality control of different ma-
terials in an industrial environment, and many more [8].
1.1
Motivation
While THz has received significant scientific attention, it has been sparsely exploited
in the industry due to the lack of commercially available compact and robust systems.
Currently sold systems are predominantly designed for laboratory environments and
are not tailored towards portability - they are characterized by their larger size and
weight, with the smaller options measuring around 180x450x560 mm (H x W x L)
and weighing over 20 kg [9]. Furthermore, only a few are plug-and-play systems,
such as the TERA K15 by Menlo Systems, and TeraFlash Pro by Toptica, (Figure
1.2). Other commercially accessible terahertz systems, such as the TDS1008-wol
by BATOP Optoelectronics require the user to have a femtosecond laser, as well as
carefully set up the system by aligning the laser and securing other components such
as mirrors and antennas to their designated positions on an optical table [10]. This is
depicted in Figure 1.3.
(a) TERA K15 by Menlo Systems
(600x200x900 mm, 34kg). Source:[11]
(b) TeraFlash pro by Toptica
(180x450x560 mm, 20kg). Source:[9]
Figure 1.2: Plug-N-Play THz systems
2
==PAGE:10==
Figure 1.3: TDS10XX-wol by BATOP optoelectronics (∼100x500x900 mm).
Source:[10]
To use THz radiation outside of a scientific library, it is crucial to have a robust and
small system. Currently, no THz systems exist that conform to these two criteria,
leading to an extensive range of untapped potential for THz in industrial applications.
However, with the right THz system, this potential can be realized.
It is important to note that in 2011, a small handheld battery-powered terahertz system
( Figure 1.4) with the dimensions of 216 x 178 x 102 mm and a weight of less than
4.3 kg had been created by Zomega Terahertz Corporation. Unfortunately due to this
company not existing anymore, it is difficult to determine whether this product was
something commercially available or was taking its first steps in the R&D field. What
is known, is that it was created for real-time spectroscopy and had a built-in spectral
library and identification software. Nonetheless, no handheld THz system exists at
present.
3
==PAGE:11==
(a) Zomega Micro-Z
(b) Person Holding
Zomega Micro-Z
Figure 1.4: Handheld THz system by Zomega Terahertz Corporation
Even though the terahertz market is lagging behind its scientific counterpart, accord-
ing to ªCoherent Market Insightsº the market is expected to grow at a compound an-
nual growth rate (CAGR) of around 23.7% for the next ten years, going from 421 mil-
lion USD to 2.8 billion USD (Figure 1.5). In comparison, some of the fast-growing
technologies these days, such as 3D printing, drones and unmanned aerial vehicles
(UAVs), and artificial intelligence have a CAGR of 18% [12], 11.67% [13], and 39.7%
[14] respectively. By creating a handheld terahertz device the hope is to tap into this
rapidly expanding market and be the key drivers for the widespread adoption of THz
technology in the broader industry.
Figure 1.5: 23.7% CAGR Projected THz Market Growth 2022-2030 [15]
4
==PAGE:12==
1.2
Objectives
The new THz system builds upon the experience gained from work at DTU over the
past five years on a technology platform called ªCross-Correlation Spectroscopyº
(THz-CCS). The goal of this thesis is to try and improve upon this platform. The main
objective is to make a system that could be used for more applications than solely a
lab environment, meaning the system has to be portable and should not require heavy
machinery to set it in place or take measurements. This thesis tests out ideas pro-
posed by the team that could not be pursued due to time constraints and is split into
two main parts.
First part
The first part focuses on the development of an alternative mechanical stage (delay
unit) to sample the terahertz pulse at different positions in order to reconstruct it. In
more detail, the objectives are to define the mechanical requirements for the move-
ment, create a functional delay unit, test and quantify the mechanical stability, and
lastly compare the movement to a commercially available linear stage by Zaber.
Second part
The second part tests a different light source coupled to an optical amplifier to deter-
mine if it is better than the light source used in the current system. In more detail, the
objectives are to make the amplifier work, characterize the optical output, and finally
use it to generate a terahertz pulse.
1.3
Structure
Chapter THz Theory will explain the basic understanding of terahertz radiation, as
well as compare two spectroscopic techniques - time-domain spectroscopy and cross-
correlation spectroscopy. Chapter Linear Drive Design will describe the mechanical,
electronic, and software design process of a different delay unit approach. Chapter
Source & Amplifier will test an alternative cheaper and smaller power solution. Fi-
nally, the closing chapter Conclusion will reflect on the accomplishments of the the-
sis.
5
==PAGE:13==
Terahertz Theory
2.1
Terahertz
The terahertz band is part of the electromagnetic spectrum spanning from 0.1 THz to
10 THz (1 THz = 1012 Hz). Although the boundaries for the spectrum region are not
strictly defined, the aforementioned range is the common definition in literature [16].
Nonetheless, this region occupies the middle ground where the ranges of microwaves
and infrared light (IR) waves overlap, as seen in Figure 2.1. The typical values of the
terahertz band can be found in Table 2.1.
Figure 2.1: The terahertz band in the electromagnetic spectrum. Source: [17]
6
==PAGE:14==
Table 2.1: Typical values of the Terahertz band [18]
THz region limits
Limits average
Frequency:
1011 Hz < ν < 1013 Hz
1 THz
Period:
0.1 ps < T < 10 ps
1 ps
Wavenumber:
3 cm−1 < k < 300 cm−1
33 cm−1
Wavelength:
30 µm < λ < 3 mm
300 µm
Photon energy:
0.4 meV < W < 40 meV
4 meV
As mentioned earlier, terahertz radiation exhibits fascinating characteristics, such as
its ability to penetrate various materials and its sensitivity to molecular vibrations -
qualities that have led to the development of a field called terahertz spectroscopy. This
field involves the analysis of materials and molecules based on their interaction with
terahertz waves. By studying the interactions between terahertz radiation and mat-
ter, scientists can gain valuable insights into the properties and behavior of materials
at the molecular level, such as the information on the drying process and final thick-
ness of paint coatings [19]. Among the various spectroscopic techniques, time-domain
spectroscopy is predominantly used in terahertz research.
The following subsections will explain the time-domain and cross-correlation spec-
troscopy systems from a systems engineering perspective. The aim is to present a
concise explanation of the fundamental working principles of spectroscopic systems,
without diving too deep into the physics behind every part of the system.
2.1.1
Time Domain Spectroscopy
Terahertz time-domain spectroscopy (THz-TDS) requires only a few components: a
source of light, a delay unit, a lock-in amplifier, and two antennas - an emitter and a
detector. To begin, THz-TDS starts with a light source in the form of a laser which
generates an ultrashort femtosecond pulse. This pulse travels to a beam splitter which
splits it into two branches. Using mirrors, one of the branches is guided on a biased
photoconductive antenna (PCA), or in other words - the emitter. When the generated
pulse illuminates the antenna, it makes the semiconductive material conductive, gen-
7
==PAGE:15==
erating free carriers. The bias voltage, supplied by an external power source, acceler-
ates the free carriers, which as a result radiates THz waves [20].
The other branch of the beam splitter travels through a delay unit and illuminates the
other antenna - the detector. Unlike the emitter - the detector does not have a bias sup-
plied by a power supply. Rather, the THz field generated by the emitter irradiates the
illuminated detector antenna, generating a photocurrent. This photocurrent is pro-
portional to the amplitude of the THz field amplitude [21]. The process of the pulse
getting split and illuminating the detector and emitter can be seen in Figure 2.2a.
Since the described method only measures the THz field amplitude at one point, a
delay unit is needed to sample the pulse at different positions. By moving a pair of
mirrors within the delay unit, the distance for the light to travel to the detector is in-
creased. By measuring the photocurrent in increments, the full pulse can be recon-
structed. This principle is illustrated in Figure 2.2b.
(a) THz TDS setup
(b) Illustration of delay unit sampling
Figure 2.2: THz Time-Domain spectroscopy system. Source: [22]
8
==PAGE:16==
It is important to note that the measured current from the detector, formed by photo-
generated carriers is at the microampere level [23], which implies that the signal is
buried in noise. To enhance the signal quality, a lock-in amplifier (LIA) is used. To
improve the signal, the LIA first removes the DC bias from the signal. It is crucial to
do, as amplifying an offset signal by a large gain of 10,000 and more will offset the
signal dramatically, as demonstrated in Figure 2.3.
Figure 2.3: Signal amplification by 10,000 with and without removing the offset
After removing the DC bias voltage, the input of the LIA is multiplied, or modulated,
by a reference signal that matches the input frequency. The same frequency guaran-
tees phase synchronization between the input and reference signals. This is advan-
tageous, because once multiplied, the two signals constructively interfere, resulting
in a stronger combined signal, while out-of-phase signals cancel each other out. Af-
ter modulation, the LIA applies a low pass filter to the signal to get rid of most of the
noise - the noise that is left is mainly around the frequency of the signal. Finally, the
signal is amplified.
Despite the state-of-the-art nature of TDS, this particular method presents several
challenges when considering its viability as a commercially available product. Most
importantly, the femtosecond laser is an expensive item, costing in the range of 74,500
9
==PAGE:17==
- 1,860,000 DKK ($10,000 - $250,000) [24]. In addition, it is a large piece of equip-
ment that is mainly designed to be used in a laboratory environment. Without the right
technical expertise, operating such a device could pose serious health risks if not han-
dled correctly. Finally, in environments where vibrations are imminent, the use of
free-space propagation opens the doors for the possible misalignment of mirrors that
guide the ultrashort pulse.
To reduce or even eliminate such a problem, an all-fiber system would be beneficial,
but unfortunately for the TDS system, that would lead to a sub-optimal system per-
formance due to dispersion in the fibers. By passing an ultrashort laser pulse through
a fiber, the different wavelengths of the laser spread out due to the different veloci-
ties at each wavelength of light. As a result, the total energy would distribute over a
longer interval of time, decreasing the intensity of the light. Since the generated ter-
ahertz electric field from the antenna is proportional to the intensity of the light [25],
the generated THz would have a smaller amplitude. Thus a TDS fiber-based propaga-
tion is sub-optimal as it decreases the efficiency of the THz amplitude.
By using another spectroscopic technique, called cross-correlation spectroscopy, some
of these issues can be resolved, as it presents a cost-efficient and versatile alternative
to common terahertz time-domain spectroscopy.
2.1.2
Cross Correlation Spectroscopy
For cross-correlation spectroscopy (CCS), the setup is similar to the one used in TDS,
except that instead of an expensive femtosecond laser, a relatively inexpensive light
source, such as an amplified spontaneous emission (ASE) source with a single-mode
optical fiber output is used. In the CCs system the light source emits an incoherent
wave that is split 50-50 using a beam splitter. One branch goes through the delay unit
and illuminates a biased PCA, where once again free carriers are accelerated within
the semiconductive material of the antenna, generating THz radiation. The photocur-
rent of the emitter Ie is calculated using Ohm’s law, or in other words, by the product
of the photoconductivity σe and the emitter bias voltage Ue. The conductivity is ex-
pressed as 1
R, where R is the resistance of the semiconductor in the PCA.
10
==PAGE:18==
Ie = Ue · 1
R
= Ue ·σe
(2.1)
The conductivity of the antenna’s semiconductor is described as the convolution of the
product of the antenna’s emitter response function, which is a characteristic of the an-
tenna Ge(t), and the light intensity I(t) at the current time, as well as the initial time.
The previous time is taken into account due to the non-ideal nature of the antenna -
the emission of THz radiation does not occur instantly upon illuminating the semicon-
ductive material. Instead, a certain amount of time is required for the free carriers to
accelerate.
σe(t) =
Z t
−∞Ge
 t′
I
 t −t′
dt′
(2.2)
The electric field of the terahertz radiation ETHz(t) emitted from the emitter PCA is
proportional to the derivative of conductivity [25]. Since the conductivity relates to
the speed at which electrical signals or currents can propagate through a conductor,
the derivative gives the acceleration, which is proportional to the electric field of the
terahertz radiation.
ETHz(t) ∝d
dt σe(t)
(2.3)
This concludes one of the branches. Returning to the other branch split by the beam-
splitter, it travels to the other antenna and illuminates the detector. For the detector,
the photoconductance is analogous to the emitter, except for a different impulse re-
sponse - Gd.
σd(t) =
Z t
−∞Gd
 t′
I
 t −t′
dt′
(2.4)
Unlike the emitter, the detector does not have a bias voltage supplied. The bias of the
detector antenna is created by the incoming THz field from the emitter, which drives
a photocurrent J(t). The current meter from the detector antenna detects the time-
11
==PAGE:19==
averaged value of the photocurrent, or the cross-correlation of the electric field and
the fluctuating light intensity [26].
JCC(t) ∝
Z ∞
−∞ETHz
 t′
σd
 t′ −t

dt
(2.5)
Inserting Equations 2.3, 2.2, and 2.4 into Equation 2.5, Equation 2.6 is obtained. In
order to simplify comprehension and eliminate the integrals, the Fourier transform is
taken.
JCC(t) ∝
Z ∞
−∞
 d
dt
Z t
−∞Ge
 t′
I
 t −t′
dt′

·
Z t
−∞Gd
 t′′
·I
 t −t′′
dt′′

·
 t′′′ ·t

dt′′′
(2.6)
By transforming it into the frequency domain via the Fourier transform, Equation 2.7
is obtained [25], where ˆJCC(ω), ˆGe(ω), ˆGd(ω), and ˆI(ω) are the Fourier transforma-
tions of JCC(t), Ge(t), Gd(t), and I(t) respectively.
ˆJCC(ω) ∝ω ˆGe(ω) ˆGd(ω)|ˆI(ω)|2
(2.7)
These functions describe how the system responds to different frequencies. The im-
pulse response functions Ge(t), Gd(t), like ω, also have a lowpass characteristic with
a continuous phase. By taking the Fourier transform of the light intensity function
I(t) the signal is represented as a sum of sinusoidal components at different frequen-
cies, meaning that the Fourier transform retains the phase information of the original
signal, which is an incoherent wave. In Equation 2.7, instead of just the Fourier trans-
form of the intensity, the term is the absolute square of intensity. Taking the absolute
square eliminates the phase information, only retaining the magnitude. In the context
of the Fourier transforms, it means that the phase information of the signal I(t) is lost
when considering the absolute squared magnitude |ˆI(ω)|2.
This is of great importance as this equation shows that regardless of the source’s phase
the spectrum remains coherent. Despite using incoherent light, the cross-correlation
exhibits a pulse-like waveform in the time domain due to its dependence on the abso-
12
==PAGE:20==
lute squared intensity of ˆI(ω).
Figure 2.4: A THz-CCS experiment utilizing PCAs and an incoherent light source
for detection and emission. The green trace on the lower black line indicates a typical
electrical field profile as a function of time, extracted from the THz-CCS measure-
ments. Source: [25]
2.1.3
Current System
Having explained the theory, this section will dive deeper into the current system
used in the laboratory and most importantly describe the delay unit part of the system.
Most commonly used in TDS systems, the delay unit is a motorized linear stage, such
as the LTS300C by ThorLabs, which moves a set of mirrors back and forth to sample
terahertz pulse as seen in Figure 2.5. As discussed before, such a system is suitable
for a laboratory environment, but in order to use it in the outside world where various
disturbances are present, it must be more robust.
13
==PAGE:21==
motorised linear stage
Increase
Mirrors
light from
beam splitter
light to
detector
Mirrors
Figure 2.5: Motorised linear stage moving a set of mirrors to change the delay, allow-
ing to sample the THz pulse, seen on the right
To make a device more resilient to vibrations, the system developed at the Department
of Electrical and Photonics Engineering at the Technical University of Denmark is
designed to be an almost all-fiber system and rely as little as possible on free-space
propagation. As previously explained, it is sub-optimal to do so in a THz-TDS sys-
tem, so the other possibility is in the CCS system.
2.1.3.1
Fiber stretchers
For the delay unit, this THz-CCS system uses fiber optic cables wrapped around piezo-
electric crystals that can stretch the optical fibers, resulting in a delay of the light [27].
In the current system, a fiber stretcher is introduced in both arms, as shown in Fig-
ure 2.6. To achieve the required delay, one is contracted, while the other is expanded.
This reduces the amount of fiber, as if two fiber stretchers were placed in one arm, the
other would have to have the corresponding length of fibers as the first arm for the sig-
nal to correlate. In other words, if the lengths are not the same, the signals from the
detector and emitter will not correlate.
14
==PAGE:22==
ASE
50:50
TX
RX
LOCK-IN
AMP.
Fiber Stretcher
Fiber Stretcher
Figure 2.6: THz-CCS system with fiber stretchers as the delay unit
Even though using fiber stretchers gets rid of mirrors that reflect the light source to
create a delay, the idea has its own drawbacks. Firstly, by using two fiber stretchers,
the problem of unequal stretching is more imminent. Temperature fluctuations can
affect the strain applied to the fiber, so by having two fiber stretchers, the possibility
of one stretching more than the other arises. This can lead to an uncontrolled delay in
the system.
Furthermore, most commercially available fiber stretchers offer a stretch of around
≈0.035 - 20 µ
V [28, 29]. To achieve a longer delay would require either having a few
of them coupled together or increasing the number of windings or the supplied volt-
age of a fiber stretcher. To be more specific, if a delay of 25mm (84 picoseconds) is
required, by using commercial off the shelf component such as the fiber stretcher by
FS, with a piezoelectric tube of radius r = 30 mm, tube thickness t = 1 mm, piezo-
electric strain constant d31 = −2.65×10−10 m/V, the change in optical path length is
approximated to
∆L = N∆c,
(2.8)
where N is the number of windings and ∆c is the change in circumference ∆c = 2π∆r.
∆r is calculated
∆r = d31
V
t

r −t
4

.
(2.9)
15
==PAGE:23==
By substituting ∆r back into the Equation 2.8 the following is obtained
∆L = N 2πd31V
t

r −t
4

,
(2.10)
which with the values mentioned earlier equates to ∆L ≈NV × (−50 nm) [30]. Fi-
nally, to obtain the aforementioned delay of 25 mm with the least amount of wind-
ings, the maximum allowed voltage of 2000V for the fiber stretcher is used, resulting
in a total of 250 windings, or 47.12 m worth of fiber cable.
Using fiber stretchers causes another problem - high losses in the system. Most of it
does not arise from the fiber stretchers themselves but from the components required
to compensate for the birefringence in the optical fibers. As a result of the high losses,
a more powerful source is required to supply the antennas with the necessary power.
While fiber stretchers are relatively insensitive to external vibrations, intense or fre-
quent vibrations can still introduce unwanted strain variations on the fiber which can
result in undesired changes in the optical signal. Furthermore, excessive vibrations
may lead to mechanical fatigue, compromising the performance or lifespan of the de-
vice [31]. Also, fiber stretchers are very expensive ranging from 13000 DKK to 33000
DKK (2000 USD - 5000 USD) [32], as they involve sophisticated design and precise
manufacturing processes to ensure the fiber is stretched the exact amount when wind-
ing. Lastly, and probably most importantly, mishandling and accidentally touching the
fiber stretcher could result in serious injury or death due to the high voltage.
To overcome these concerns and improve the overall functionality of the delay unit,
an alternative approach can be considered. One promising solution involves utilizing
a voice coil actuator (VCA) to move the antenna with high precision and speed. By
mounting the antenna directly on the moving stage, the delay unit is moved from the
optical path to the THz path. This solves the problem of extreme precision when cou-
pling in and out of fibers to align the 10-micrometer cores perfectly. Misalignment in
the THz path has a higher tolerance, which will be explained in more detail in the up-
coming chapter. Finally, a VCA-based delay unit eliminates the need for high voltage,
reducing the associated health risks and enhancing user safety and compatibility, as a
12V supply is easier to supply than the 500-2000V required for the fiber stretchers.
16
==PAGE:24==
Linear Drive Design
This chapter will explain the steps to design, build, and control a linear drive system
to achieve the required movement using the VCA. Before that, it is important to un-
derstand what a voice coil actuator is. The VCA is an electromagnetic device that pro-
duces linear motion. Within its structure lies a coil wrapped inside a case, surrounding
a permanent magnet with an attached shaft to translate the movement, as illustrated
in Figure 3.1. Passing current through the coil generates an electromagnetic field that
interacts with the static magnetic field of the permanent magnet, resulting in a force
that drives it to move along the desired path.
Figure 3.1: Voice coil actuator. Source: [33]
3.1
Mechanical system
Linear stages used in TDS systems mostly comprise of a single motor coupled to a
lead screw that drives a stage linearly back and forth, similar to the one seen in Fig-
ure 3.2. To achieve high accuracy, the driving motors are geared down so that a single
17
==PAGE:25==
rotation of the motor’s shaft converts to a fraction of the lead screw’s rotation. This
makes it easily controllable, although difficult to achieve fast movements. The voice
coil actuator (VCA), on the other hand, can provide fast movement with 5 µm resolu-
tion.
Figure 3.2: Linear Stage.
Source: [34]
Replacing the fiber-stretcher delay unit in the optical path
with the VCA delay unit in the THz path allows the an-
tennas to be mounted directly on the VCA. Without hav-
ing the delay unit in the optical path means that almost all
fiber and fiber components can be removed except for the
beamsplitter. Instead of 120m of fiber for each arm, only
a few meters are necessary, thus making the whole system
smaller, which once again is crucial to making it portable.
To move an antenna with the linear actuator, a linear
guide to support and enable smooth movement of the an-
tenna had to be selected. Other than moving the antenna with the least resistance, the
linear guide system had to ensure that the moving antenna is always directed head-on
toward the opposite antenna. By having the moving antenna veer off by some angle,
the possibility of misaligning the antennas can occur, leading to "losing" the pulse and
seeing nothing, as the detector would not receive the THz field generated by the emit-
ter. Different types of linear guides were available for the movement, but choosing the
right type was crucial to ensure the required motion.
3.1.1
Linear drive selection
To begin selecting a linear drive system, a list of requirements for the movement had
to be made. The limits of how much the antennas could misalign without completely
losing the THz signal were investigated, as it dictated the maximum off-axis toler-
ance for the linear guide system. The lower the tolerance was, the more expensive the
linear guides would be due to the increasing complexity of the manufacturing pro-
cess. In order to reduce the overall cost of the terahertz system, the cheapest guide
that achieved the movement with the required tolerance had to be chosen.
The THz signal cutoff experiment was conducted by mounting two DTS25 dovetail
18
==PAGE:26==
translation stages by Thorlabs on top of each other to create a two-axes translation
system. The antenna was then mounted, as seen in Figure 3.3a, where the red arrows
depict the two axes along which the antenna was moved. Each of the dovetail stages
had a locking bracket limiting the translation in each axis to ±14mm. All the posi-
tions where the voice coil was placed for each THz reading are shown in Figure 3.3b.
With this setup, the antennas were first aligned so that a THz pulse was detected and
then The THz pulse was plotted for each position. The result of all the individual THz
pulses can be seen in Figure 3.3b.
(a) Isometric view
(b) Front view with the positions where
measurements were done
Figure 3.3: Linear dovetail mechanism setup for moving the antenna in two axes to
test the limits of the THz signal cut-off
Interestingly, the THz pulse is still detected at the extreme points of ±14mm. Un-
fortunately, the antenna positions could not be increased further, due to the locking
mechanism limits. Nonetheless, it is evident from Figure 3.4, that the terahertz pulse
had the highest amplitude at X and Y being 0, or "dead center", with a cut-off fre-
quency of 1.5THz. Comparing it to the furthest misalignment, such as when X and
Y were at −14mm, the amplitude is lower, shifted by around 2-3 picoseconds, and
has a THz cut-off frequency of 0.75THz. Even though the THz pulse is still visible,
the strength of it decreases by half. The figure containing only the two graphs for the
aforementioned pulses can be found in Appendix 7.
19
==PAGE:27==
Figure 3.4: THz pulse in the time and frequency domain for each of the positions
described earlier
This experiment disproved the hypothesis that the limit of completely losing the THz
pulse was in the millimeter range. Even though there was such big room for error, it is
almost impossible to have a linear stage for this short of a movement move off-axis by
14mm in both directions. Nonetheless, having such a large possible tolerance meant
that many different varieties of linear guides could be used, so a thorough investiga-
tion had to be conducted. To facilitate such a 5 µm resolution movement, a precise
linear guide had to be selected.
Three options were identified: magnetic linear guide, needle roller guide, and air bear-
ing guide. Magnetic linear guides use magnets to levitate the platform off the guide,
which due to the relatively large air gap, reduces friction and allows for extremely
precise movement [35]. Air bearings also provide frictionless motion, by creating a
thin film of pressurized air to support a load [36]. Needle guides, although also prov-
ing great accuracy, in contrast to the other two, do not create any air gap - the platform
moves on needle rollers, which makes the linear guide’s size more compact [37]. In
addition, it requires less maintenance and is easier to manufacture, thus reducing the
20
==PAGE:28==
overall cost.
Scouring online for the three linear motion guides to have a rail length of 30mm and
a base large enough to mount the antennas, it was evident that there were endless
classes for different types of precision levels, stiffness levels, etc. which had different
names from company to company. Furthermore, the more accurate they were stated
to be, the more expensive they got. After having spent a lot of time investigating the
different marketplaces and trying to find the best fit, a definite decision could not be
made. With the advice from the mechanical engineers responsible for manufacturing
the parts, to avoid spending upwards of 3000 DKK for a linear guide only to realize
later that it was not a good fit, it was decided that the best first step would be to build a
test setup with easily accessible cheap parts and have it as the base model. Having this
base of reference, an iterative process could be started where improvements could be
made and then tested again until the perfect movement is achieved for the lowest cost.
The simplest and cheapest solution for a linear movement was to use linear bushing
with ceramic ball bearings, which cost 88 DKK (11.8 EUR) a piece. The working
principle is shown in Figure 3.5 where the linear bushing (3) slides on a rod (2) via
small ceramic balls (1) that roll in the same direction (4) of the rod’s movement. They
recirculate by only having one side of the balls in contact with the rod, keeping the
other one that is going in the opposite direction, hidden within the bushing’s material
as seen in Figure 3.5b. These linear bushings with ball bearings provide a tolerance of
0.1 - 0.2 mm for the movement.
1
3
2
4
(a) Transparent outer case
1
3
2
4
(b)
Figure 3.5: Linear Ball bearing
A component was then designed to house the two linear bushings on each side of the
antenna, which was held in place by an M3 dowel screw as depicted by Figure 3.6.
21
==PAGE:29==
Having two rods on each side of the antenna not only made the system more rigid, but
most importantly constrained the movement to a single axis. Furthermore, by using
linear ball bearings, the device could be used in any orientation - be it upside down or
sideways as the forces pushing on the ball bearings would be the same, as opposed to
a platform on a guide rail, where the load forces would change if it was rotated side-
ways. This made the device easier to use.
(a) Isometric view
(b) Cross section view
Figure 3.6: Linear platform housing a pair of linear bearings (blue) and the antenna
It was important to have the force from the actuator’s rod act on the center of mass
of the whole platform to avoid any moments of force that could make the movement
stutter or need more force to move. As a result, a bracket to transfer the movement
from the voice coil to the antenna holder was made. Depicted in Figure 3.7, the bracket
was positioned sideways to decrease the width of the whole platform - if the bracket
was placed in line with the two rods, additional horizontal space would have been
needed to make to make it all fit. It was important to keep the delay unit as small as
possible to eventually have the smallest possible enclosure for this system. Unfortu-
nately, the bracket had to be elongated by 2.5 cm to accommodate for the minimum
10-20 mm radius [38] of the optical fiber cables connected to the antenna to ensure
they would not break.
22
==PAGE:30==
(a) Oriented view
(b) Back View
Figure 3.7: Bracket connecting the voice coil stroke rod with the antenna platform
As this device was not yet robustly controlled - testing them with the expensive pho-
toconductive antennas mounted would not be the wisest choice. By excluding the
antenna setup, the platform mass would decrease by around 70 grams, which would
influence the characteristics of the movement when controlling the actuator, as less
mass would require less force for the movement. An assembly with the exact mass of
the antenna setup was designed and manufactured. As seen in Figure 3.8. This was
comprised of a cylinder with the same diameter as the antenna, so it would fit in the
housing, as well as a small laser pointer. The idea of using the laser pointer was to
later characterize the movement of the system by pointing the laser onto a flat sur-
face, such as a wall, and plot the change in the two axes when the VCA was moving
at different speeds to various setpoints. Unfortunately, due to time constraints, this
experiment could not be conducted.
Figure 3.8: Laser pointer with the adaptor
23
==PAGE:31==
The base of the delay unit was fitted to have M6 holes with an equal spacing of 25
mm, so it could be easily screwed down on an optic table, as seen in Figure 3.9. To
accentuate once again, the whole unit was designed to be symmetric, which would
ensure that all the forces acting on the main assembly were equal on both sides, and
no additional unequal moments of force would be present. The only trade-off for such
a safe way of designing was that the size of the delay unit was longer, as the bracket
had to be made to accommodate the optical fiber cables.
Figure 3.9: Isometric view of the delay unit assembly
Having the linear guide designed, the way to actuate and control the voice coil actua-
tor will be explained in the following sections.
3.2
Electronics
The components were selected before the start of the thesis. The main component
was the voice coil - the SDLM-025-095-01-05 by Moticont with a stroke length of
25.4 mm and a step resolution of 5 µm. At first, the same company’s driver was used
24
==PAGE:32==
along with their software (AdvancedWare v5.8), but after much work, it still did not
behave correctly. The newest version of the software (v7) did not support the VCA,
and the old version (v5.8) kept crashing. Lastly, but arguably most importantly, the
whole enclosure of the provided driver was large, which decreased the portability fac-
tor of the system. Ultimately, it was decided to order a small driver ªVoice Coil Motor
Driver with PWM Input, 810 Seriesº from Moticont and create custom code to run
it. For that, a Nucleo F446RE development board with an STM32F446RE microcon-
troller unit was used. Lastly, an external power supply alongside a laptop to run the
code was needed. The wiring schematic can be seen in Figure 3.11.
(a) SDLM-025-095-
01-05 voice coil
motor
(b) Voice coil driver
810 series
(c) NUCLEO F446RE
Microcontroller
Figure 3.10: Components used
25
==PAGE:33==
Figure 3.11: Wiring schematic of the system
3.3
Software
As the Nucleo board uses an STM32 microprocessor, the "STM32CubeIDE" software
is the optimal choice for embedded programming in C. This integrated development
environment (IDE) simplifies the setup for the general purpose input/output (GPIO)
pins, connectivity settings, timers, and more by providing a simple graphical user in-
terface that automatically updated the necessary code.
The program had to be robust as well as accurately control the actuator. To ensure that
events were processed at intervals with high precision, general-purpose timers with
global interrupts were used. This made sure that a specific code block would be exe-
cuted in a timely manner, no matter what was happening in the code elsewhere. In to-
tal three timers were required for the program - one to control the speed of the VCA,
another to control the position of the actuator, and the third - to read the encoder val-
ues from the integrated optical encoder in the VCA. The setup and theory of each will
now be explained.
26
==PAGE:34==
3.3.1
External Timer
Timers work on a simple basis - a counter increments upwards to a predetermined
value, triggers an interrupt, resets, and then starts to increment again. This cycle re-
peats endlessly where after each interrupt, a timer callback function can be executed,
which interrupts any other code that is happening in the program, to run the code
within the function. This is better than having the code in the main loop as it ensures
that the block of code is run at specific intervals. Since this happens in the micro-to-
millisecond range, the callback function must have only fast-executing code.
The timer trigger frequency is determined by the timer clock’s frequency TIM_CLK,
the prescaler PSC, and the auto-reload register ARR, which defines the value to which
the counter counts up. Since the clock’s frequency is provided in the datasheet, the
trigger frequency can be easily calculated using Equation 3.1 by selecting the correct
prescaler value [39]. An illustration of a timer’s working principle is depicted in Fig-
ure 3.12.
Trigger Frequency =
TIM_CLK
((PSC +1)×(ARR+1)),
(3.1)
Figure 3.12: Timer counter example, where ARR = 200, TIM_CLK = 80MHz,
Prescaler = 400000
27
==PAGE:35==
3.3.2
Encoder mode interface
As the voice coil has an implemented optical encoder, one of the timers was set to
"encoder mode". From the two outputs TI1 and TI2, which have a phase shift of 90◦,
the sequence of transitions that generate count pulses are evaluated. The direction of
the signal is determined by which output channel turned high first. Depending on the
sequence, the counter counts up or down between 0 and the auto-reload value, which
in this case was left unchanged at 633550 [40]. By having two channels, jitter, which
might occur if the sensor is positioned near one of the switching points, is compen-
sated. The way the encoder mode works is illustrated in Figure 3.13. Finally, to reset
the trigger at the mechanical zero position of the VCA, an additional encoder output is
used which turns high when the motor’s stroke length is at 0. The pseudocode can be
found in Appendix 1.
Figure 3.13: Example of counter operation in encoder interface mode. Source: [40]
3.3.3
PWM Generation
To vary the speed of the motor, pulse width modulation (PWM) is used as it allows
for precise and efficient speed regulation [41]. In itself, PWM is a modulation tech-
nique that generates variable-width pulses to represent the amplitude of an analog
input signal [42]. In other words, it is basically a digital square wave signal, where its
ON time duration can be adjusted to required needs [43]. According to the correspon-
dence with Moticont, the manufacturer and supplier of the VCA, the PWM frequency
28
==PAGE:36==
for optimal operation is 20 kHz. Knowing the timer clock’s frequency, which is 180
MHz according to the datasheet, the frequency can be calculated using Equation 3.2.
Frequency = TIM_CLK
Prescaler
(3.2)
Using the PWM signal, the motor’s speed could be controlled by adjusting the duty
cycle, which represents the ratio of the "on" time to the total time period of the signal.
By varying the duty cycle within the range of 0-100%, the average power supplied to
the motor is altered. By increasing the duty cycle, the motor receives a higher average
voltage, resulting in faster movement and vice versa. This method of motor control
allows for fine-grained speed adjustment, enabling smooth acceleration and decelera-
tion. The duty cycle in percentage is calculated using Equation 3.3, where CCRx and
ARRx are user-defined variables corresponding to the current controlled reduction
and auto-reload register respectively [43]. By changing these values, the duty cycle
can be changed to 0-100% to control the speed of the motor.
Duty cycle (%) = 100× CCRx
ARRx
(3.3)
3.3.4
PID Controller
As the method for obtaining encoder values and adjusting the motor’s speed is estab-
lished, a way to control the position of the motor is necessary. This controller works
on a negative feedback loop, where it operates by minimizing the error between a
desired setpoint and an actual value, thereby determining the VCA’s movement and
speed. (See Figure 3.14 for reference.)
PID
+
Set Point
VCA Encoder Output
e(t)
u(t)
-Σ
VCA
Figure 3.14: PID Controller block diagram
29
==PAGE:37==
By tuning three gain parameters: proportional (Kp), integral (Ki), and derivative (Kd),
the response of the signal is tuned. Looking at each of the three parameters, the pro-
portional controller P = Kpe(t) is dependent upon the present error e(t): the larger
the gain, the larger the response of the error, which affects the speed at which the con-
troller responds to changes in the system. Since there might be steady-state error us-
ing the P controller, the integral controller I =
R t
0 e(τ)dτ corrects for it by accumulat-
ing the error over time. Finally, derivative control D = Kd d
dt e(t) anticipates the future
behavior of the error, which gives a "kick start" for the output, thereby increasing the
system response [44]. The PID controller is the sum of all the individual controllers
and is shown in Equation 3.4, where e(t) is the error signal and u(t) is the output of the
PID controller. Since the controller only consists of three gains, tuning the system re-
sponse is straightforward. Table 3.1 describes how increasing the three gains affects
the system’s response.
u(t) = P+I +D
= Kpe(t)+Ki
Z t
0 e(τ)dτ +Kd
d
dt e(t)
(3.4)
Table 3.1: Effect of Gain increases on Control System Performance [44]
Gain
Rise Time
Overshoot
Settling Time
Steady-State Error
Kp
Decrease
Increase
Small Change
Decrease
Ki
Decrease
Increase
Increase
Decrease Significantly
Kd
Minor Decrease
Minor Decrease
Minor Decrease
No Effect
When considering the VCA, the primary concern is settling time - the faster it is, the
less time it takes to sample the THz pulse. Secondly, the overshoot is best kept to a
minimum, as in some cases it might cause damage - if the setpoint is set to the max-
imum stroke length, due to an overshoot the rod would strike the limit and stop the
moving platform abruptly, potentially damaging both the voice coil actuator and the
expensive antennas mounted on the platform. To select the setpoint for the controller,
there were two paths - speed and position. Speed was the better option, as setting the
required speed and not worrying about anything is easier than setting step lengths and
worrying about the delays in between.
30
==PAGE:38==
3.3.4.1
Speed Controlled PID
To be speed controlled, the error e(t) is defined by the difference of the wanted speed
(setpoint) with the elapsed speed. The elapsed time is simply calculated by dividing
the elapsed distance by the timer period since that is already defined. Based on the
error value, the duty cycle is set to 0-100% to either slow down or speed up the move-
ment. As seen in Figure 3.15, this worked well for high speeds of ≈150 −200 mm
s .
Unfortunately, fast speeds mean that if something goes wrong, the consequences are
worse compared to a slow movement - more damage to the platform, the VCA, and
the antennas.
Figure 3.15: VCA moving back and forth at 165 mm/s with a 5 seconds delay be-
tween each movement
Slower speeds were required for better control and safety - if something went wrong,
the device could be switched off immediately. Unfortunately, it was not achievable to
mimic the slow constant 3-5 mm
s speed of the linear stage made by Zaber, since the
minimum duty cycle to move the rod was already a speed of 130 mm
s . By switching
the duty cycle on and off extremely fast, the lowest speed of 10 mm
s was achieved.
Unfortunately, once a small disturbance was introduced to the system, such as a small
vibration of the table the device was placed on, the rod started aggressively speed-
ing as seen in Figure 3.16, which is the worst case for the expensive antennas, as
31
==PAGE:39==
that would most likely damage them. No matter how much the gain parameters were
tuned, the output for slower movements was not satisfactory, thus to avoid spending
too much time, the setpoint-controlled PID was designed instead.
Figure 3.16: VCA designed to move back and forth at a constant 10 mm/s
3.3.4.2
Position Controlled PID
The error e(t) for this method is the difference between the setpoint position and the
current position, where the greater the error, the more power is given to the actua-
tor. Due to reasons that will be explained in section 4.0.3, the step length was set
to 100 µm. With the gain parameters set to Kp = 0.001, Kd = 2 × 10−4, and Ki =
1 × 10−4 a settling time of ≈120 ms was achieved as seen in Figure 3.17. Trying
to improve the system response time and decrease the overshoot by trial and error
seemed to be working great, until during one experiment the motor started oscillating
aggressively and the microcontroller exploded. Fortunately, it seemed the driver and
motor were unharmed, but out of fear of something like that happening again, further
tuning was aborted. The settling time of around 120 milliseconds was deemed enough
for the delay unit test with the antenna.
32
==PAGE:40==
Figure 3.17: VCA movement for a step length of 100 µm
3.3.5
Program overview
Having all the timers set and correctly working, the overall working of the program
can now be explained. The main loop code is simple: since the actuator was actuated
to extend fully and then retract, a while loop was created to increase the set-point po-
sition by a step length until it reached the maximum length of 25.4mm, then slowly
decreased until it was back at 0. The pseudocode can be found in Appendix 2.
Outside of the main loop, the encoder timer callback function was reading the encoder
parameters and Timer 3 was generating a PWM frequency at 20 kHz as described ear-
lier. As for the third timer - Timer 5, it was responsible for homing the VCA after all
the initializations, controlling the position/speed, and incrementing a counter every
time the timer was triggered to keep track of time. Lastly, it was responsible for send-
ing the necessary information via USB to be later plotted and evaluated. The pseu-
docode of this block is described below:
33
==PAGE:41==
1: function TIMER 5 CALLBACK
▷Function from HAL Library
2:
if Homing Completed then
3:
PID Controller()
4:
UART →setpoint,time, position
5:
end if
6:
if Homing NOT Completed then
7:
Set Motor direction
8:
Set Motor ON
9:
if Homing NOT Completed then
10:
if Homing_PIN == 1 then
▷Check for home position
11:
Encoder counter = 0
▷Reset Timer/Encoder Counter
12:
Homing completed = 1
13:
end if
14:
end if
15:
end if
16: end function
Since Timer 5 was responsible for all the aforementioned processes, the danger of
creating an endless loop within the timer callback function was possible. If the timer
interrupt period was faster than the time it took for the callback function to run line
by line, the code would be stuck in an endless loop - the program would trigger an
interrupt and would start the execution of the code, but the code would not complete
before the next trigger creating an infinite cycle. To avoid such a loop, it was neces-
sary to know how fast the code takes and account for additional time to the processes
outside of the time, such as the algorithms in the main loop.
The duration of specific lines of code was recorded with an oscilloscope, where a
GPIO pin was set high at the start, and low at the end of the code. For timer 5, the
calculations for the PID control took 4.8 microseconds, and sending the data over
USB - a whopping 970 microseconds. Storing variables in internal memory took 970
nanoseconds, but due to its limited capacity of 1Mb, this method was not plausible
for long experiments. For calculating all the data and sending it over USB, the fastest
trigger period for Timer 5 was theoretically around 1 ms, but having this would mean
nothing else within the code could be executed. By trial and error, a 2 millisecond pe-
riod was selected, which was accomplished by setting the prescaler and auto-reload
register to 100 and 1799 respectively as previously described by Equation 3.1. The
34
==PAGE:42==
clock’s frequency was left unchanged at the maximum of 180MHz. By inspecting
Figure 3.18, the block diagram of the whole program can be seen.
Declare variables, function prototypes
Start
Initialize timer 2,3,5, and UART 
communication
int main(void)
Start timers
Start UART
Homing
Transmit 
"HANDSHAKE"
TIM 2 (Encoder 
mode)
TIM 3
TIM 5
PID Controller & 
Time
PWM Generation
If PIN_B_5 is 
high
Counter ++
Counter 
reset to 0
Yes
No
Position 
setpoint
Delay
UART Transmit
-Time
-Setpoint
-Current position
Figure 3.18: Block diagram of the main code
Finally, having designed the holder and linear guide for the VCA, as well as pro-
grammed it, a working delay unit was achieved. It was ready to test against the linear
actuator stage made by Zaber to compare the output of the generated pulses. Before
that was done, a different light source had to be tested and set up. This will be ex-
plained in the following chapter.
35
==PAGE:43==
Source & Amplifier
The system developed at DTU uses an ASE as the light source, which generates 300
mW of unpolarized light. As mentioned in section ªCurrent Systemº, once the light
reaches the beam splitter, it is split evenly in half, resulting in 150 mW for each branch.
The light then passes through 120 meters of fiber (Figure 4.1) and due to the birefrin-
gence compensation, experiences a high loss. This loss leads to only 30 mW reaching
each of the antennas. By discarding fiber-stretchers as a delay unit and replacing them
with the VCA delay unit, the problem of high losses is no more relevant, thus allow-
ing a lower power source.
ASE
50:50
TX
RX
LOCK-IN
AMP.
Fiber Stretcher
Fiber Stretcher
Figure 4.1: THz-CCS system with fiber stretchers as the delay unit
For the lower power source, a superluminescent diode (SLD) can be used. Not only
36
==PAGE:44==
does it mimic the ASE’s output, but most importantly it is only a fraction of the ASE’s
size. This allows to minimize the whole THz-CCS system drastically, which is key to
making the system more portable.
To select a suitable SLD, it must have a bandwidth equivalent to that of the antenna’s
not to be the limiting factor of the system. By selecting a lower bandwidth power
source, the antenna’s full bandwidth would not be harnessed, and by having a band-
width much higher, the additional power would be wasted. Since the antenna has a
bandwidth of 2.5 THz [45], an SLD with the same highest frequency has to be chosen.
The highest frequency is determined by the largest difference in the power source. For
a power source with a center wavelength of 1550 nm (the same as the ASE), a band-
width of at least 20 nm is required. This is calculated by converting the wavelengths
1540 nm and 1560 nm to frequency by
f = speed of light
λ
,
(4.1)
which results in 194.6704 THz and 192.17 THz respectively, and after subtraction
equals to 2.5 THz. Therefore, to obtain a single pulse in the time domain, a broadband
SLD of at least 20 nm bandwidth at 1550 nm center wavelength is needed.
Although the SLD seems like the perfect choice, it cannot output the required 60 mW,
or 30 mW for each antenna, as it is only capable of outputting 0.75 - 40 mW at 1550
nm [46]. Fortunately, by adding an additional component, such as a booster optical
amplifier (BOA), the small input power of the SLD can be amplified to output the
necessary power for illuminating the antennas. A BOA is used instead of a semi-
conductor optical amplifier (SOA) due to its ability to amplify only one polarization,
as opposed to the polarization insensitivity of the SOA [47]. This makes the system
more efficient and does not require any polarizing optics before each antenna.
The following sections will describe the experimental setup, as well as the experiment
itself to find out whether using the SLD combined with the BOA is a viable solution
to replace the ASE.
37
==PAGE:45==
4.0.1
System setup
Since an SLD was not provided, an attenuated ASE output was used to mimic the low
output power of the SLD. To control the booster optical amplifier, two commercially
available control units were used - a temperature controller (TEC200C) and a laser
diode controller (LD210C). They ensured that the BOA behaved as specified in the
datasheets.
Before supplying power to the BOA, the controllers were configured correctly by
setting everything according to Table4.1. By not doing so, the possibility of damag-
ing not only the BOA, but the antennas themselves could arise. Firstly, the fuses of
the power supply were replaced to work with the 230V power outlets as seen in Fig-
ure 4.2. This ensured that if something went wrong with the outlets - the controllers
would not get damaged, thus protecting the sensitive equipment.
(a) Device with 150V Fuse
(b) Replacing the fuses
(c) Fully assembled with a 230V
fuse
Figure 4.2: Changing 150V fuse to 230V fuse
Table 4.1: Setup settings for the TED200C and LDC210C control units
TED200C
LDC210C
Setup
−→
TH 20k Ω
Const
−→
I
Ilim
−→
1.5A
Ilim
−→
900mA
Tset
−→
10kΩ
LD POL
−→
AG
Before mounting the BOA, the 14-Pin butterfly laser diode mount was modified by
interchanging the corresponding PCB,as seen in Figure 4.3 to facilitate the correct
38
==PAGE:46==
BOA type. An improper setup could lead to damaging the BOA, thus everything was
done with utmost scrutiny.
(a) LM14S2 with the back case
removed
(b) LM14S2 with "Type 1 adap-
tor"
(c) LM14S2 fully assembled
Figure 4.3: Type 1 Adaptor setup
Having the setup correctly ensured that the BOA would behave as intended. Finally,
for the BOA to achieve an output of 60mW, or 30mW for each of the antennas the
input is calculated by first converting the required output power of 60 mW to dBm
P[dBm] = 10log P[mW]
1 mW
(4.2)
which results in 17.7815 dBm [48]. By inspecting the graph ªGain vs Output Power,
I = 900 mAº from the BOA’s datasheet, as seen in Figure 4.4, the gain of 24.49 dB is
determined.
39
==PAGE:47==
Figure 4.4: Gain vs. Output Power, I =900mA [49]
Finally having the two values for the gain and the output power, the input could be
calculated according to equation 4.3 [50], which results in an input power of -7.11
dBm, or converted to mW - 0.19 mW. The intermediate calculations can be found in
Appendix 3.
Pin, [dBm] = Pout, [dBm] −Gain[dB]
(4.3)
Having the setup and the input power attenuated to around 0.19 mW, the characteriza-
tion of the output could be done.
4.0.2
Characterization of BOA output
To begin with, it is of interest to see how the BOA changes the spectrum of the sig-
nal. To observe that, measurements were taken by connecting the source, in this case,
the ASE-C4H-SM-N-M by BoxOptronics to an optical spectrum analyzer (OSA) by
Ando. Since the raw output power of the ASE would damage the expensive OSA, an
attenuator was used to limit the input power to 10 mW. Immediately after powering
on the ASE, readings of 10 min intervals for 15 hours were taken.
40
==PAGE:48==
From the results shown in Figure 4.5 the following conclusion can be made: after be-
ing turned on, the ASE needs time to settle, which by inspection takes around 40-50
minutes (Appendix 5), with major fluctuations around the peaks during the first 30
minutes and then smaller ones until it settles. Once it has settled, the signal starts ris-
ing very slowly again. From the graph, it is clear that most of the fluctuation in the
signal happens at the 1532 nm, 1545 nm, and 1556 nm wavelengths.
Figure 4.5: ASE Spectrum change over 15 hours
The same experiment was conducted with the BOA connected to the ASE to see if
anything changed. Instead of 15 hours, the BOA was left for 25 hours to obtain more
data as the lab was free. Identically to the ASE results, it takes 40-50 min for the sig-
nal to settle (Appendix 6), which means that the BOA does not increase the settling
time. The interesting thing that does change is the "direction" of the signal movement.
As seen in Figure 4.6, it initially starts low, then moves up as it settles, and then as
time passes by, slowly creeps down again which is the opposite of the down-and-up
movement of the ASE. The signal appears to have more noise than the signal from the
ASE, possibly due to the BOA operating in the nonlinear regime that starts at 15dBm
(31.6mW)[49].
41
==PAGE:49==
Figure 4.6: BOA Spectrum change over 25 hours
To get a better understanding of how different the BOA spectrum is to the ASE de-
tails like the overall maximum power drift, maximum power drift per wavelength and
signal similarity will be calculated.
4.0.2.1
Power meter & OSA
Before advancing to the aforementioned calculations, it was important to guarantee
that the instruments used to measure the signal’s power gave correct and matching
results. This was done to avoid supplying the antennas with too much power, which
would cause irreversible damage. To confirm whether the readings correctly matched,
a 50-50 beam splitter was placed after the BOA, with each branch going to one of the
measurement instruments - a handheld power meter and the OSA. After tuning the
attenuator to a specific power value visible on the handheld power meter, a scan of the
spectrum from the OSA was taken. To get the total power, the area under the signal
was then calculated using integration:
Total Power =
Z λmax
λmin
Power(λ)dλ
(4.4)
After the measurements, it was evident that the values did not match, and after careful
inspection of the calculation methods and debugging of the code, the problem was
still present.
42
==PAGE:50==
To get a better understanding of what was happening, more measurements were taken
and plotted, with a line being fitted between the points. In Figure 4.7a, although the
graph seems linear, the calculations from the OSA give values 1.6-1.7 times larger
than the power meter, where the difference increases as power increases, meaning it is
not completely linear.
Before concluding, it was necessary to confirm which of the two was outputting the
correct power. Once again, by not being sure, the possibility of burning the extremely
expensive PCA antennas could occur. For verification, the same 50-50 beam splitter
experiment was done, except instead of the OSA, a calibrated power meter was used.
Having plotted the results in Figure 4.7b, it is evident that the handheld power meter
is displaying the exact values as opposed to the OSA.
Figure 4.7: Power Meter measurements
4.0.2.2
Maximum Power Drift
To see how much the power drifted over time, the maximum power drift was calcu-
lated. To do so, the total power of each signal was calculated, and then the lowest
and highest values were determined and compared relatively. This resulted in a total
power drift of 4.2% and 3.8% for the BOA and ASE respectively. From this it can be
43
==PAGE:51==
concluded that once the BOA is introduced to the system, the maximum power drift
increases minimally, only by 0.5%, therefore the signals are comparable to each other.
4.0.2.3
Maximum Power Drift for Specific wavelength
To dive deeper, the relative maximum power drift Pdri ft for the specific wavelength
was calculated by subtracting the maximum power Pmax and minimum power Pmin and
converted to output the maximum power drift for specific wavelength in percentage by
Pdri ft[%] = 100· Pmax −Pmin
Pmax
.
(4.5)
The results are shown in Figure 4.8. For this measurement, the BOA has larger max-
imum power drift by ≈5 −8% at wavelengths of 1520-1540 nm and 1550-1565 nm
compared to the OSA. Around 1550 nm, the maximum change is almost the same as
that from the ASE but is still higher by around 1%. Once again this proves that the
BOA does not affect the spectrum in a significant way.
Figure 4.8: Maximum Change for specific wavelength
4.0.2.4
Signal similarity
Finally to determine how much the signal’s shape changed over time from the ASE
and the BOA, a method called cosine similarity was used [51]. This method calculates
the cosine of an angle between two vectors, which can range from -1 to 1. A value
44
==PAGE:52==
of 1 indicates that the vectors are identical, a value of -1 indicates they are exactly
opposite, and a value of 0 indicates they are completely dissimilar.
From the ASE as well as the BOA data, the last measurement was defined as vector A
and it was compared to all the previous ones by calculating the cosine similarity. As
seen in Figure 4.9, the BOA exhibits better performance than the ASE, as the signal
shape does not change that much from 2-13 hours. The signal similarity of the BOA
starts to fluctuate after hour 14, but due to the missing data from the ASE, no compar-
ison can be made. Thus in this test, the BOA outperforms the ASE by changing the
shape of the signal less.
cosine similarity =
A·B
∥A∥∥B∥
(4.6)
Figure 4.9: Cosine Similarity plot of the ASE and BOA
From these findings, it can be concluded that by utilizing a booster optical amplifier
the spectrum of the signal is altered insignificantly, by slightly increasing the maxi-
mum total power drift as well as the power drift for each wavelength, but improving
the shape similarity over time. As a result, this method poses no risks of changing the
THz signal itself, nor burning the photoconductive antennas when illuminating them.
45
==PAGE:53==
The last and final step is to merge the voice coil actuator delay unit and the BOA to
generate a THz pulse and compare it to that sampled using a commercially available
linear stage.
4.0.3
Generating and detecting THz
To finally evaluate the voice coil actuator, a setup was designed to compare its THz
pulse sampling output with that of the linear stage actuator. The system setup is de-
picted in Figure 4.10 where the 25 mW of power required for each of the antennas
was supplied by the BOA amplifying the 0.19 mW from the ASE. The BOA was con-
nected to the temperature and laser diode controllers, TED200C and LDC210C re-
spectively. For the lock-in amplifier, the Stanford SR830 was used. The physical setup
can be seen in Appendix 8.
ASE
LOCK
IN AMP
Voice Coil
BOA
LDC
TEC
REF
RX
TX
USB
50:50
Figure 4.10: THz-CCS delay unit experiment setup. REF was used to generate the
reference frequency
Before starting the test it was crucial to find the necessary step length for the actua-
tors to accurately capture the THz signal and avoid the loss of important signal infor-
mation. Furthermore, it was important to minimize the potential for aliasing, where
high-frequency components are mistakenly interpreted as lower frequencies. This was
46
==PAGE:54==
done by applying the Nyquist Theorem which states that to represent a continuous-
time signal in its discrete form, the sampling rate must be at least twice the highest
frequency component present in the signal [52]. As described in section ªSource &
Amplifierº, the highest frequency component was 2.5 THz. With that, the calculations
for the smallest step length could be made, where the frequency f of 2.5 THz and the
speed of light were used for
dx = 2· f
c .
(4.7)
With the aforementioned values, the length dx was calculated to be 166.7 µm.
Utmost importance was taken in testing all the components to prevent any damage to
the expensive antennas, especially by moving them using the voice coil. During these
tests, it was discovered that the linear actuator’s encoder was not working correctly
- over time it veered off from the correct value. For example, if the voice coil was
homed, then moved back and forth, and then extended to the known limit, the number
would change each time. The faster the oscillation of the VCA, the greater the error
was. To circumvent this problem the voice coil was moved to a position, then homed
where the timer was reset and eventually moved to a new position. From a 1 hour test,
it seemed that this was the most reliable way to move the coil to the required posi-
tions. This was done to avoid going to a distance near the stroke limit, having the en-
coder miscount, and trying to go beyond the possible stroke length, eventually hitting
the limit and stopping the antennas abruptly.
Having set up all the components, measurements in 75 µm increments were taken.
Figure 4.11a depicts that although there is a resemblance of a THz signal, the sig-
nal seems extremely noisy. The test was repeated and although the set-points were
identical, the output was not an exact match to the previous test. After going to each
position, the motor remained still for over 3 seconds, which gave some room for in-
creasing the time constant on the lock-in amplifier from 10ms to 300 ms to reduce
the noise in the signal. Although this adjustment improved the signal slightly, it still
did not resemble the THz signal sampled using the linear stage from Zaber, as seen in
Figure 4.11b.
47
==PAGE:55==
(a) two identical test of moving to a position,
homing and then moving to another position
(b) Voice coil tests compared to a linear stage
Figure 4.11: Generated THz sampling using voice coil and linear stage from Zaber
It was then decided to test the position by homing only once and moving in incre-
ments as slowly as possible. Each time the encoder value would be monitored to
power off the motor abruptly if anything happened out of the ordinary. The first prob-
lem encountered with this method was that at lower positions 0−7 mm the rod would
not move at all, then for higher positions until 9.5 mm the actuator would lag be-
hind by 1000 −1300 µm, and only for distances afterward would it behave correctly.
After manually tuning the controller to get a better response, the best proportional
gain value could not be found. This was mainly due to the power supply switching
to "current-controlled" when the set-point was set to larger distances in the 15-22mm
range, which meant that the motor was needing more than 1A of current. By lowering
the gain that problem was fixed, but then the lower distances would misbehave. After
much trial and error, the issue was solved by a simple "if-statement" that regulated the
proportional gain for different position ranges as shown in Table 4.2.
Table 4.2: Values of KP based on different conditions.
Condition
Value of KP
setpoint ≥11500
2.7×10−7
11500 > setpoint > 8000
5.2×10−7
setpoint ≤8000
7×10−7
Even with this solution, the voice coil struggled to move the first 7mm, it either was
48
==PAGE:56==
not doing anything or oscillating out of control, which was dangerous for the anten-
nas. To avoid burning any components, as well as damaging the antennas, the stroke
length for the voice coil was limited to 7-22mm, to give some room for overshoots in
the upper boundaries. This method of incremental movement proved to be superior
to the position-homing-position method, as the sampled THz pulse mirrored the one
obtained from the Zaber linear stage as seen in Figure 4.12. This proves that the voice
coil can be used instead of the linear actuator as it outputs the same results.
Figure 4.12: Sampled THz pulse with the linear actuator and voice coil with the same
step size of 15 µm
49
==PAGE:57==
Conclusion
Although the entire enclosure of the THz-CCS system was not designed and manufac-
tured, the findings in this thesis are important in improving upon the current THz-CCs
system. By testing a different delay unit and a cheaper and smaller light source, this
thesis proves that the size of the current system can be significantly reduced, making
it more portable.
Revisiting the objectives of this project, almost all of them were accomplished, be-
sides one. For the VCA, a delay unit was designed programmed, and manufactured.
Its functionality was tested by moving the antenna and comparing the two sampled
THz pulses - one with the VCA and one with the motorized stage by Zaber. The test
displayed that the two methods produced an almost identical signal. Quantifying the
mechanical stability of the VCA could not be conducted due to a lack of time, al-
though all of the required components were designed and manufactured.
Regarding the second part of the thesis - all set objectives were accomplished: the
low power output from the attenuated ASE was successfully amplified by the BOA as
calculated, the characterization of the signal from the BOA was compared to that of
the ASE, and a THz pulse was successfully generated by supplying the antennas with
the required power.
Therefore, this thesis proves that it is a good idea to replace the fiber stretcher unit
delay in the optical path and use a voice coil actuator to create a delay in the THz path
instead. Due to not having the huge losses explained in the thesis, an SLD combined
with the BOA can be used as the power source. This is important not only because it
reduces the cost of the system, but the smaller power source, lack of long distances
of optic fiber cables required for the fiber stretchers, and the fiber components for the
birefringence compensation, allow for the system to be drastically minimized.
50
==PAGE:58==
Bibliography
[1]
J. W. Fleming. ªHigh Resolution Submillimeter-Wave Fourier-Transform Spec-
trometry of Gasesº. In: IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory and Tech. (1974), pp. 1023±
1025.
[2]
Jun Zhang, Song Li, and Weidong Le. ªAdvances of terahertz technology in
neuroscience: Current status and a future perspectiveº. In: 24.12 (2021), p. 1.
[3]
Sergey Mitryukovskiy. ªCoherent Secondary Radiation from Femtosecond
Laser Filamentsº. In: (2014), p. 61.
[4]
Jie Wang et al. ªTerahertz nondestructive imaging for foreign object detection
in glass fibre-reinforced polymer composite panelsº. In: Infrared Physics Tech-
nology (2019), pp. 36±44.
[5]
Aurèle J. L. Adam et al. ªTeraHertz imaging of hidden paint layers on canvasº.
In: Opt. Express (2009), pp. 3407±3416.
[6]
Steven R. Murrill et al. ªTerahertz imaging system performance model for
concealed-weapon identificationº. In: Appl. Opt. (2008), pp. 1286±1297.
[7]
Limin Wu et al. ªStudy of in vivo brain glioma in a mouse model using continuous-
wave terahertz reflection imagingº. In: Biomed. Opt. Express (2019), pp. 3953±
3962.
[8]
Terasense. Terasense terahertz imaging Applications. Accessed on June 18,
2023. URL: %7Bterasense.com/applications/%7D.
[9]
TeraFlash pro. Accessed: June 5, 2023. URL: %5Curl%7Bwww.toptica.com/
products/terahertz-systems/time-domain/teraflash-pro%7D.
51
==PAGE:59==
[10]
TDS10XX-wol. Accessed: June 5, 2023. URL: %5Curl%7Bwww.batop.de/
products/terahertz/THz-spectrometer/pre-assembled-terahertz-
spectrometer.html%7D.
[11]
TERA K15 All fiber-coupled Terahertz Spectrometer. Accessed on July 16,
2023. Menlo Systems. URL: %7Bwww.menlosystems.com/products/thz-
time-domain-solutions/terak15-terahertz-spectrometer%7D.
[12]
Global 3D Printing Market Size, Share Industry Growth Analysis Report by
Offering (Printer, Material, Software, Service), Process, Application, Vertical,
Technology and Region - Growth Drivers and Industry Forecast to 2028. Ac-
cessed on June 18, 2023. Markets and Markets. 2023. URL: %7Bwww.researchandmarkets.
com/reports/5396943/global-3d-printing-market-size-share-and-
industry#cat-pos-2%7D.
[13]
Drones Market: Global Industry Trends, Share, Size, Growth, Opportunity
and Forecast 2023-2028. Accessed on June 18, 2023. IMARC Group. 2023.
URL: %7Bwww.researchandmarkets.com/report/unmanned-aerial-
vehicles-uavs-drones#cat-pos-1%7D.
[14]
Global Artificial Intelligence (AI) Market: Investments vs Potential. Accessed
on June 18, 2023. BCC Research. 2022. URL: %7Bwww.researchandmarkets.
com / reports / 5007782 / global - artificial - intelligence - ai -
market#src-pos-2%7D.
[15]
Coherent Market Insights Pvt Ltd. Terahertz Technologies Market, by Type of
Technology, by the End-User, by Region - Size, Share, Outlook, and Oppor-
tunity Analysis, 2022 - 2030. Accessed on June 5, 2023. 2022. URL: www .
researchandmarkets.com/reports/5626513/terahertz-technologies-
market-by-type-of#product--toc.
[16]
Xiaoxia Yin, Brian W.-H. Ng, and Derek Abbott. Terahertz imaging for biomed-
ical applications: pattern recognition and tomographic reconstruction. Springer,
2012. 315 pp.
[17]
Martin Pätzold. ªGraphical models and simulation for THz-imagingº. PhD the-
sis. 2018.
52
==PAGE:60==
[18]
Gerald J. Wilmink and Jessica E. Grundt. ªInvited Review Article: Current
State of Research on Biological Effects of Terahertz Radiationº. In: Journal
of Infrared, Millimeter, and Terahertz Waves 32 (2011), pp. 1074±1122.
[19]
Takeshi Yasui et al. ªTerahertz paintmeter for noncontact monitoring of thick-
ness and drying progress in paint filmº. In: Appl. Opt. (2005), pp. 6849±6856.
[20]
John David Jackson. Classical electrodynamics. 3rd ed. New York: Wiley,
1999.
[21]
Hiroshi Murakami. ªProtein and Water Confined in Nanometer-Scale Reverse
Micelles Studied by Near Infrared, Terahertz, and Ultrafast Visible Spectro-
scopiesº. In: Advances in Protein Chemistry and Structural Biology. Vol. 93.
Elsevier, 2013, p. 195.
[22]
D. Molter et al. ªTwo decades of terahertz cross-correlation spectroscopyº. In:
Applied Physics Reviews (2021), p. 021311.
[23]
Zhaohui Zhang, Yongli Liu, and Xinyong Zhu. ªDesign of an Adaptive Lock-in
Amplifier for the Terahertz Systemº. In: Journal of Physics: Conference Series
1865.2 (2021), p. 022010.
[24]
FIBER LASERS, Comparison Shop Fiber Lasers from Industry Leading Brands.
Accessed on July 1, 2023. Laser Lab Source Group. URL: %7Blaserlabsource.
com/Solid-State-Lasers/fiber-lasers%7D.
[25]
Bjùrn Hübschmann Mùlvig et al. ªTerahertz Cross-Correlation Spectroscopy
and Imaging of Large-Area Grapheneº. In: Sensors 23.6 (2023), p. 3297.
[26]
O. Morikawa, M. Tonouchi, and M. Hangyo. ªA cross-correlation spectroscopy
in subterahertz region using an incoherent light sourceº. In: Applied Physics
Letters 76 (2000), pp. 1519±1521.
[27]
Johan éstergaard Knarreborg et al. ªMeasuring Maritime Paint Thickness un-
der Water Using THz Cross-Correlation Spectroscopyº. In: Applied Sciences
12.23 (2022), p. 12397.
[28]
PZ1 High-speed Fiber Stretcher. Optiphase ± A Halliburton Service. 2015.
URL: www.optiphase.com/data_sheets/PZ1_Data_Sheet_Rev_G.pdf.
53
==PAGE:61==
[29]
Compact Time Delay Coils. Accessed on June 25, 2023. Newport Corporation.
URL: %7Bwww.newport.com/f/compact-time-delay-coil%7D.
[30]
FS Optical Fiber Stretcher Datasheet. PiezoDrive. 2022. URL: www.piezodrive.
com/wp-content/uploads/2022/02/FS-Manual-R4-2.pdf.
[31]
N. Krumbholz et al. ªA fiberstretcher operating as an optical delay line in a
fiber-coupled THz spectrometerº. In: 2008 33rd International Conference on
Infrared, Millimeter and Terahertz Waves. IEEE, 2008, pp. 1±2.
[32]
FS ± Optical Fiber Stretcher. Accessed on July 19, 2023. PiezoDrive. URL:
%7Bwww.piezodrive.com/optics/fs-optical-fiber-stretcher%7D.
[33]
Everything You Need to Know About Voice Coil Motors. Accessed on July 19,
2023. Stanford Magnets. URL: %7Bwww.stanfordmagnets.com/everything-
you-need-to-know-about-voice-coil-motor.html%7D.
[34]
Aluminum Automatic Ball Screw Linear Actuator. Accessed on July 20, 2023.
Indiamart. URL: %7Bwww.indiamart.com/proddetail/ball- screw-
linear-actuator-22523336297.html%7D.
[35]
Linear Slides. Accessed on July 8, 2023. IQS Directory. URL: %7Bwww.iqsdirectory.
com/articles/linear-slide.html%7D.
[36]
Danielle Collins. The basics of air bearings. Accessed on July 8, 2023. Linear
Motion Tips. URL: %7Bwww.linearmotiontips.com/air-bearings/%7D.
[37]
Needle roller linear guideways; why you should use them. Accessed on July
8, 2023. PM. URL: %7Bwww . pm . nl / en / products / linear / linear -
components/why-using-needle-roller-linear-guideways%7D.
[38]
Single Mode Fiber. Accessed on July 14, 2023. ThorLabs. URL: %7Bwww .
thorlabs.com/newgrouppage9.cfm?objectgroup_id=949%7D.
[39]
ST. AN4013 Application note, p. 11.
[40]
ST. RM0390 Reference manual, pp. 546±548.
[41]
Tony R. Kuphaldt. Lesson in electric circuits: an encyclopedic text & reference
guide. United Kingdom: Koros Press Limited, 2011, pp. 546±548.
[42]
The ROV Manual. Elsevier, 2014.
54
==PAGE:62==
[43]
Dogan Ibrahim. Designing Embedded systems with 32-bit PIC Microcontrollers
and MikroC. Kidlington, Oxford, UK: Newnes, 2014. 472 pp.
[44]
Driver PID Settings. Accessed on July 11, 2023. ThorLabs. URL: %7Bwww .
thorlabs.com/newgrouppage9.cfm?objectgroup_id=9013%7D.
[45]
Toptica Photonics. Supplementary Datasheet cw Terahertz Emitter/Receiver,
p. 11.
[46]
1550 nm CWL Superluminescent Diodes. Accessed on July 16, 2023. Thor-
Labs. URL: %7Bwww.thorlabs.com/newgrouppage9.cfm?objectgroup_
id=3902%7D.
[47]
C-Band Optical Amplifiers (BOAs and SOAs), 1550 nm. Accessed on July 17,
2023. ThorLabs. URL: %7Bwww . thorlabs . com / newgrouppage9 . cfm ?
objectgroup_id=3901%7D.
[48]
I. J. Bahl. Fundamentals of RF and microwave transistor amplifiers. Wiley,
2009.
[49]
BOA 1550P Specification Sheet. Mar. 10, 2021.
[50]
Russell Hoppenstein. Understanding TRF370x Quadrature Modulator Gain
Parameters. 2008.
[51]
Grigori Sidorov, Arturo Hernandez-Aguirre, and Carlos Garc’ia. ªAdvances in
Soft Computingº. In: 2010, p. 180.
[52]
H. Nyquist. ªCertain topics in telegraph transmission theoryº. In: Proceedings
of the IEEE 90.2 (2002), pp. 280±305.
55
==PAGE:63==
Appendix
Appendix 1
1: function ENCODER CALLBACK
▷Function from HAL Library
2:
count ←optical encoder count
3:
distance_um ←count converted to micrometers
4:
if Homing_PIN == 1 then
▷Check for home position
5:
Encoder counter = 0
▷Reset Timer/Encoder Counter
6:
end if
7: end function
Appendix 2
1: Initialize Timers 2, 3, 4, 5
2: Home the voice coil
3: Send handshake via UART
4: procedure MAIN
5:
while setpoint is not stoke length maximum do
6:
increase setpoint by step size
7:
end while
8:
while setpoint is not home do
9:
decrease setpoint by step size
10:
end while
11: end procedure
Appendix 3. Equations for calculating the input power for the BOA1550P output of
60mW.
Known:
Pout = 60 mw
(4.8)
56
==PAGE:64==
Gain, obtained by looking at the y-axis intersection point of the 1550nm wavelength
in Figure 4.4:
A = 24.49 dB
(4.9)
Converted to [dBm]:
Pout, [dBm] = 10×log P[mW]
1 mW
= 10×log
60
1 mW
= 17.7815 [dBm]
(4.10)
Calculations to obtain Pin, [dBm]:
Pin, [dBm] = Pout, [dBm] −Gain[dB]
= 17.7815−24.9
= −7.11 [dBm]
(4.11)
And finally converted to Pin, [mW]:
Pin, [mW] = 1mW ·10( −7.11
10 ) = 0,19 mW
(4.12)
57
==PAGE:65==
Appendix 4: Block diagram of the programming code
58
==PAGE:66==
Appendix 5: ASE Spectrum, first 7 measurements
Appendix 6: BOA Spectrum, first 7 measurements
59
==PAGE:67==
Appendix 7: THz pulse comparison at the center and extreme points of the two-axes
linear stage
60
==PAGE:68==
Appendix 8: Experiment setup for comparing the THz sampling using the VCA and
Zaber stage
61
