==PAGE:1==
Technical University of Denmark
Master’s thesis
Modeling of mechanical properties of
concatenated ring networks
Al´ız Hanga Lelik
May 29, 2023
Supervisor:
Anne Ladegaard Skov
Danish Polymer Centre,
Technical University of Denmark
Co-supervisor:
Jakob Wohlert
Department of Fibre and Polymer
Technology,
KTH Royal Institute of Technology
==PAGE:2==
Contents
Acknowledgements
2
Abstract
3
List of symbols and abbreviations
4
1
Introduction
5
2
Literature review
7
2.1
Traditional covalently linked silicone elastomers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.1.1
Structure
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.1.2
Properties . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.1.3
Applications . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.2
Silicone elastomers with concatenated ring structures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.3
Rubber elasticity models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.3.1
Hooke’s law . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.3.2
Affine and phantom network models
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.3.3
Slip link model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3
Experimental
18
3.1
Materials
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.1.1
HV-formulations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2
==PAGE:3==
CONTENTS
Al´ız Hanga Lelik
3.1.2
EX-formulations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.1.3
Sample preparation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.2
Measurements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.2.1
Tensile testing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.2.2
Shear testing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4
Results and discussion
23
4.1
The effect of the filler on the mechanical properties . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.2
The effect of the solvent on the curing time and the mechanical properties
. . .
26
4.3
Modifying the slip-link model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.4
Applying the modified slip-link model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.4.1
Filled systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.4.2
Unfilled systems at high deformations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
4.4.3
Discussion of the application of the model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
4.5
Data cleaning, sources of error . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
5
Conclusion
49
5.1
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
Bibliography
52
List of figures
57
List of tables
59
Appendix
62
A
Material information . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
B
Mechanical properties . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
C
Modelling results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
1
==PAGE:4==
Acknowledgements
First and foremost, I would like to thank my primary supervisor, Anne Ladegaard Skov, for
letting me take part in this interesting project and for all the intriguing discussion and advice
regarding the results every step of the way. I would also like to thank Jakob Wohlert, for agree-
ing to co-supervise this project, all the insight on structuring the thesis and all the encouraging
words.
I would like to extend my sincere thanks to Liyun Yu for giving me an amazing introduction
the laboratory instruments and processes and always being very helpful; and to Nikoline Stig
Frederiksen for providing me with the data on her samples to broaden the scope of my analysis.
Lastly, I wish to express my appreciation for my fellow polymer technology students and
the Urban Outfitters team for making the last two years the entertaining journey it was.
2
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Silicone elastomers which have a network structure different from the traditional crosslinked
network have the potential to form materials with very low modulus and high elongation. One
of these unconventional network structures is concatenated ring networks, which have been the
focus of research in the Danish Polymer Centre. Previous results suggest that the slip-link
model used to model the mechanical properties is unsatisfying at high strains and does not
provide a good fit to the stress-strain curves of commercial ring network formulations with
added filler. This thesis focuses on modifying the slip-link model. The hypothesis is that by
combining it with Hooke’s law describing elastic behaviour, one can obtain a more flexible
model that fits the stress-strain curves of several different formulations very well. Samples
with different amounts of added solvent during curing have been made, with the intention of
softening the material by creating a looser network, however, it was found that unexpectedly,
this has mostly increased the modulus in the commercial formulations. The modified slip-link
model was verified on the tensile data of these samples and the analysis of the parameters of
the modified slip-link model against the moduli of the sample has revealed further possible
structural differences between the samples.
3
==PAGE:6==
List of symbols and abbreviations
α
molecular deformation ratio [-]
E
Young’s modulus [MPa]
Eapparent
apparent modulus, parameter of the modified slip-link model
[MPa]
ε
strain, ultimate strain [%]
εred,min
the strain at which the reduced stress reaches its minimum,
parameter of the modified slip-link model [%]
η
sliding parameter of the slip-link model [-]
EX050, EX100old, EX100new
commercial medium and high elongation concatenated ring
network silicone elastomer formulations
Φ
average functionality of crosslinker [-]
G
shear modulus [MPa]
G′, G′′
storage and loss modulus, respectively [MPa]
Gc, Gs
contributions to the modulus from crosslinks and entangle-
ments respectively, parameters of the slip-link model [MPa]
HV-15, HV-22, HV-31
α-monovinyl-ω-monohydride terminated polydimethylsilox-
ane prepolymers
λ
extension ratio [-]
LVE
linear viscoelasticity
MW
molecular weight [g/mol or kDa]
ν
Poisson’s ratio [-]
n
chain number density [1/m3]
PDMS
polydimethylsiloxane
R2
coefficient of determination [-]
SD
standard deviation
σ
stress, ultimate stress [MPa]
σeng
engineering stress [MPa]
σred
reduced stress [-]
tanδ
the ratio of storage and loss moduli in linear viscoelasticity
testing [-]
THF
tetrahydrofurane
4
==PAGE:7==
Chapter 1
Introduction
Polymers that display rubber-like behaviour with both viscous and elastic components [1], also
known as elastomers are present in various applications, accounting for a 65 billion EUR market
(23.6% of all polymers) in the European Union alone [2]. Silicone rubbers are the biggest family
of inorganic elastomers [3], offering outstanding temperature- and chemical resistance with a
wide range of mechanical properties, suitable for high performance applications.
One of the applications in the focus of ongoing research in the Danish Polymer Centre is
the possibility of using electroactive silicone elastomers in actuators, mimicking biological tissue
[4, 5]. This application calls for materials with softness and elasticity, which is hard to find
in traditional crosslinked elastomers. To circumvent the limitations on achieving low moduli,
several strategies can be employed, from lowering the crosslinking density, to modifying the
structure of the main chain to achieve a more loose network - all leading to a lower modulus
[6].
Recently, a silicone material with unprecedented softness was synthesized by Hu et al [7, 8].
The material does not contain covalent cross-links, instead, the polymer chains form a network
of concatenated rings. The concatenated ring network has been synthesized without the use of
a covalent crosslinker, as opposed to earlier findings with catenate structures [9]. It has shown
a new type of elastic behaviour with high extensibility and excellent strain recovery, which has
been connected to the concatenated ring structure and was not previously attained by other
methods of creating softer elastomeric materials.
Traditional models of tensile behaviour, such as the affine model have been applied to
the measurements performed on the concatenate ring network material. It has been found,
that while they do not describe the tensile behaviour of this material accurately, the slip-link
model of Thirion and Weil [10] can be fit to its stress-strain curves with high accuracy, at
low extensions - at high extensions it starts to deviate considerably. This model can take into
account the sliding nature of the network connections, allowing for more freedom than the
sterically hindered crosslinks.
The primary goal of this thesis is to modify the slip-link model in a way that makes it
5
==PAGE:8==
Chapter 1. Introduction
Al´ız Hanga Lelik
applicable to the full extension range. The main hypothesis is that by combining the slip-
link model with other expressions of rubber elasticity, we can obtain a model that fulfills
this requirement.
Understanding the contribution from different structural features in the
parameters in this model can provide valuable information on how the structure of the elastic
network defines the mechanical behaviour.
Furthermore, the effect of added solvent during curing is evaluated on samples with and
without silica filler. The hypothesis is that the concatenated ring networks will behave similarly
to traditional elastomers - the intended effect of the added solvent is a lowered modulus from
a more loose network structure [11]. The samples with filler were based on Goff et al’s work,
aiming to create elastomers with high extension, without specific regard for the modulus [12].
The modified model is applied to the stress-strain curves obtained from tensile measurements
on all these samples, and the quality of the fit is assessed. The objective is to create a model,
which is applicable to samples with different behaviours, providing a basis for connecting the
structural differences with their differences in properties.
6
==PAGE:9==
Chapter 2
Literature review
2.1
Traditional covalently linked silicone elastomers
2.1.1
Structure
Silicone elastomers are a family of synthetic polymers used in a wide range of applications
due to their unique combination of physical and chemical properties [13]. A large subset of
main components in these systems are polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) chains, comprised of
siloxane monomers, as presented in figure 2.1.1, but silicone elastomers with other polysiloxane
compositions are also in use. This thesis only focuses on ring networks prepared from PDMS-
based systems.
Figure 2.1.1: Structure of a linear polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) chain. [14]
To prepare the elastomers, these chains are typically functionalised, introducing vinyl- and
hydride groups, creating multi-functional crosslinkers besides the linear PDMS chains; and
then crosslinked in a platinum-catalysed hydrosilylation reaction, as shown in figure 2.1.2.
Other possible reaction paths include Sn-catalysed condensation or peroxide catalysed radical
reactions of the long chains and the crosslinkers [6].
7
==PAGE:10==
Chapter 2. Literature review
Al´ız Hanga Lelik
Figure 2.1.2: Typical reaction to prepare a crosslinked silicone elastomer [15]
This network of covalent bonds connecting the chains gives elastomers their key properties,
namely the ability to deform and then regain their shape without significant permanent defor-
mation, resulting in a highly flexible and elastic material. Figure 2.1.3 shows a typical reaction
reaction between vinyl and hydride groups in functionalised telechelic PDMS chains, which is
the chain propagation step in the formation of the silicone rubbers.
Figure 2.1.3: Example reaction between the hydride and the vinyl groups of telechelic functional
PDMS chains. Based on [16], for simplicity bifunctional PDMS chains portrayed.
The degree of crosslinking and the length of the chain segments between crosslinking points
has a great effect on the properties of the product - the higher the network density is, the more
stiff the material is expected to be [13]. This can be controlled by modifying the molecular
weight of the polymer chains, or the amount and functionality of the crosslinking agent used;
as well as by changing the reaction conditions such as temperature and time of the crosslinking
process. This allows for some level of fine-tuning to suit certain applications. Generally, using
precursors with higher molecular weights leads to a lower network density, therefore yielding
a softer material and higher ductility. Deviating from stochiometric conditions between the
crosslinker and the long polymer chains also leads to a softer product, due to the higher ratio
of dangling chains and higher sol fraction (chains attached covalently to the main network) in
the system [17].
Many silicone rubber formulations contain particulate fillers mixed into the system, in order
to improve mechanical or other properties, such as the dielectric permittivity [13]. Silica is the
most common filler, but in the recent years, there has been extensive research in the use of
a wide range of materials, including metal oxides, clays, metallic nanoparticles, carbon black
and carbon nanotubes, among many others [18]. Due to the low surface tension of the matrix,
these fillers often require thermal, chemical or other surface treatments.
8
==PAGE:11==
Chapter 2. Literature review
Al´ız Hanga Lelik
2.1.2
Properties
While the ideal rubber is purely elastic, in a practical sense, elastomers have viscoelastic prop-
erties in experimental measurements, and silicone rubbers are no exception. This means that,
while elastic behaviour is dominant in their deformation, they also show some extent of viscous
loss. Looking at the elastic properties, we can see that at small deformations, they generally
obey Hooke’s law of elastic behaviour, however at higher strains they deviate from it consider-
ably. Young’s moduli E calculated from the slope of the initial linear stage of the stress-strain
curve reach a few MPa at most [19], placing silicone elastomers in the family of soft materials,
but also have a lower limit at around 0.6 MPa, explained by the entanglement threshold [20].
This is an issue, since for many applications, softer materials are preferred.
Ultimate strain values of 600-700 % along with ultimate stresses of 10-13 MPa can be
reached in unfilled samples [13]. With added fillers, this strength can be increased, although
compromising the extensibility - however, in the case of some non-traditional silica-filled elas-
tomers, up to 5000% strain alongside 10 MPa tensile strength was reported [12]. The effect
of fillers is highly dependent not only on the chemical composition and amount used, but the
shape and orientation of the particles as well [18].
To account for the cross-section of the sample changing during testing, which, at high
extensions can highly affect the results, the reduced stress σred (equation 2.1.1) is used instead
of the so-called engineering stress σeng, where λ is the extension ratio, given by the length of
the extended specimen divided by the length of the original specimen.
σred =
σeng
λ −λ−2
(2.1.1)
When looking at the stress-strain curves recorded during tensile testing, we can see that
the elastomers’ behaviour deviates from linear (purely elastic) considerably. There exist several
models aiming to explain these behaviours, which are further explored in section 2.3.
While ultimate properties are important, cyclic loading better approximates typical use
cases for silicone elastomers, especially in the biomedical fields.
In these applications, the
materials often need to withstand thousands of strain cycles without significant loss of properties
[21]. Under cyclic loading, we can observe a hysteresis in the stress-strain curve (figure 2.1.4),
meaning that there is energy lost as dissipated heat during the cycle, and that there are higher
stresses present at the same strain, during loading, than during unloading. This phenomenon
is characteristic of viscoelastic materials.
Generally, silicone elastomers are highly elastic, meaning that the amount of energy lost is
comparatively low. Another important parameter is the phase shift between stress and strain
versus time, describing how quickly the deformation of the material follows the forces acting on
it. In silicone rubbers this is comparatively low, add not highly frequency dependent, compared
to other elastomers [22]. Silicone elastomers also do not show a memory effect, meaning that
the observed stress-strain curve is not dependent on what amplitude and frequency of strain
the material has experienced before [23].
9
==PAGE:12==
Chapter 2. Literature review
Al´ız Hanga Lelik
Figure 2.1.4: Typical stress-strain curves recorded during cycling testing of a silicone elastomer (based
on a sample of EX100new formulation).
Both with unfilled and filled elastomers, we can observe, that the sample does not always
return to its original length during the cycling testing, however the reason for that is slightly
different for the two. For unfilled samples, the deformation is only via the reorganization of
the polymer chains in the system, therefore the strain recovery is entropy-driven, as they take
up a less organized configuration. The low mobility of the chains in rubbers however makes it
so that this process is slow, instead of being instantaneous, thus the samples will only recover
entirely, if given enough time to do so [24].
Filled elastomers exhibit further phenomena during cyclic loading. The material may suffer
permanent set, which means some residual strain might still remain, even with time. This
residual strain might accumulate over time, significantly changing the dimensions of the prod-
uct. This can be caused by the reorganizing of the network around the filler particles, or by
post-curing when extended [13, 25].
The Mullins effect is when the material is repeatedly
extended, and the stress corresponding to the same strain lowers considerably from the first
extension [13]. If a higher strain is applied, then between the previous and the new maximum,
the material follows the same path as if it was the first cycle again. This stress-softening effect
(also observable in the example in figure 2.1.4) is challenging to explain and accurately predict,
and despite there existing phenomenological descriptions, the exact cause is still unknown [25,
26].
On very soft materials, shearing tests are often easier and more reliable, than tensile tests.
From measurements with oscillatory strain at a fixed ω angular frequency, we obtain the storage
modulus G′, connected to the elastic component of the deformation, and the loss modulus G′′,
which is related to the viscous component, denoting the energy lost to heat dissipation. Figure
2.1.5 shows a how the storage and the loss moduli typically change with changing frequencies - at
lower frequencies, the storage modulus reaches a plateau, with an increase at higher frequency,
while the loss modulus continuously decreases at low frequencies [24, 27]. On filled elastomers,
the so-called Payne effect is also observed, which is the observed decrease of the storage modulus
at high frequencies, leading to several plateaus on the frequency-modulus curve [28].
This
phenomenon can be attributed to the molecules of the elastomer matrix detaching from the
10
==PAGE:13==
Chapter 2. Literature review
Al´ız Hanga Lelik
surface of the filler particles at high strains.
Figure 2.1.5: Typical storage and loss moduli of a silicone elastomer in oscillating shear (based on a
sample of EX100 new with 50% added THF).
Assuming an incompressible network with a Poisson’s ratio of 0.5 (which silicone elastomers
are sufficiently close to), we can connect the shear and the elastic moduli by the following
expression,
E = 2(1 + ν)G
(2.1.2)
where G = G′(ω →0) [4]. Generally, silicone elastomers possess lower viscous loss than
their acrylic or natural rubber counterparts [4, 22].
Another important property, making silicone elastomers suitable to a wide range of applica-
tions, is their excellent heat resistance. Their usability window is unusually wide, between -100
°C and up to 350 °C depending on the exact composition [13], due to the low glass transition
temperature (-126 °C) and the stability of the Si-O bonds in the backbone. Due to the low
reactivity of these bonds, silicone rubbers are also especially UV- and chemically resistant, as
well as hydrophobic.
2.1.3
Applications
Commercial formulations are usually shipped in kits of two premixes, one of them denoted the
”polymer” and the other the ”crosslinker”, however these both also might contain polymeric
components as well as catalysts, reinforcing resins and fillers and other additives, such as UV-
stabilizers [13] - the exact composition is often not known to the consumer. Depending on the
formulation, curing can take place at room temperature or may require higher temperatures.
The first step to processing these formulations is ensuring the appropriate mixing of the
components, which can be achieved via different methods such as mechanical stirrers (low
11
==PAGE:14==
Chapter 2. Literature review
Al´ız Hanga Lelik
viscosity liquids) or roll mills (high viscosity).
This usually introduces air bubbles, which
need to be removed, as they compromise the integrity of the elastomer. Depending on the
manufacturability (viscosity and curing time, most importantly) of the formulation and the
end product itself, two-component silicone elastomers can be processed in many different ways,
including continuous processes like extrusion and continuous film casting, and batch processes
such as transfer moulding and injection moulding. In laboratory conditions, usually the film
forming ability of the material is assessed [4].
The advantageous properties of silicone elastomers, which can be easily tailored through
structural variations have made them desirable for a wide range of applications, from domestic
uses such as sealant rings, baking tools and adhesives, to fields with advanced technologies
like biomedical devices (implants, drug delivery methods) and specialised electronics [13]. One
of these electromechanical applications in the focus of current research is the use of silicone
elastomers in dielectric actuators, as well as sensors and generators, for which silicone elastomers
are advantageous due to their high dielectric breakdown strength, besides their previously
mentioned good strain recovery, low viscous loss and outstanding stability. Their low dielectric
permittivity is circumvented by the use of electrically active fillers. Dielectric actuators based
on synthetic rubbers have potential in mimicking biological tissues [5], possibly to used in the
fabrication of artificial muscles [4]. However, for this application, and others such as stretchable
electronics, a softness lower than the limit posed by the entanglement threshold, alongside high
achievable elongation and good strain recovery are all required, which cannot be reached by
traditional covalent networks.
2.2
Silicone elastomers with concatenated ring structures
Many strategies have been employed in order to improve the properties of silicone elastomers,
tailored specifically for these applications that require higher stretchability or a softer material
than what commercial covalently crosslinked networks can provide. One family of such solu-
tions is where crosslinked networks are modified, either by changing the number of crosslinks,
creating more sparse or dense networks; or by combining the crosslinked polymer either with
an other crosslinked network (interpenetrating networks) or with added solvent during the cur-
ing [11], leading to a looser network and a more soft material. Higher softness can also be
achieved by modifying the silicone main chains in the precursor, grafting side-chains to it, lead-
ing to a bottle-brush structure which has lower network density after curing than traditional
silicone elastomers. These formulations however often have poor strain recovery, making them
unsuitable for applications with repeated actuation [7].
Another family of non-traditional silicone elastomers involves non-covalently linked net-
works. In these networks, the junction points of the network are topological, instead of covalent.
Topological junction points are more mobile, allowing for different deformation behaviour from
the stiff, sterically hindered covalent crosslinks [29]. The focus of this thesis is on elastomers
with a concatenated ring structure, as shown in figure 2.2.1.
12
==PAGE:15==
Chapter 2. Literature review
Al´ız Hanga Lelik
Figure 2.2.1: Concatenated ring network in relaxed and stretched state [7]
These elastomers were previously prepared from α-monovinyl-ω-monohydride telechelic PDMS,
reacting with a Pt-catalyst without the use of a multifunctional crosslinker [7]. This synthesis
is simpler and more straightforward than most previous approaches in making polycatenate
ring-like networks [30]. In this system, intra- and intermolecular reactions can both occur,
forming rings or long, linear polymer chains with unreacted end groups. NMR measurements
have confirmed a low number of unreacted end groups and no covalent crosslinking, verifying
the ring structure. Confirming the structure by other methods, for example imaging, has proven
to be difficult [31]. This type of catenate ring network in PDMS was reported earlier as well
[9], and the possible kinetics [32, 33] and the possibly topological features of the end products
[34] of such reactions have been studied. However, these reactions still used a crosslinker to
connect the ends of the polymer chains, as opposed to the more recent approach.
Figure 2.2.2: Elastically active and inactive rings in the system [7]
Not all rings present in the system are part of the elastically active network. As presented
in figure 2.2.2, some rings are not connected to main network, forming the sol fraction. Others
are only connected to one ring, and so they show no elastic activity, but they still affect
13
==PAGE:16==
Chapter 2. Literature review
Al´ız Hanga Lelik
the viscous behaviour of the material. Samples made from different molecular weight PDMS
were prepared and compared to a reference, traditional unfilled elastomer and a PDMS melt.
Rotational rheological measurements showed that at low angular frequencies, the samples reach
a plateau in the storage modulus [7, 8], which is lower than the limit posed by the entanglement
threshold for traditional crosslinked networks. Similar rheological behaviour was observed on
polybutadiene ring systems [35]. While it is known, that a higher sol fraction also decreases
the modulus, as mentioned before, this was not entirely the case for this novel elastomer. The
sol fraction coming from isolated rings was measured by swelling experiments, and was found
to be lower than what would be required to lower the storage modulus to this extent. This
is explained by the dangling rings acting as internally trapped plasticizers, as well as by the
mobility of the topological crosslinks. The higher swelling ratio of the ring-structure samples
compared to the traditional elastomers also aligns with the expected chain slipping behaviour
from this system.
Tensile tests showed that the samples exhibited 400-1200% strain at break and up to 96%
strain recovery after three cycles of loading, with moduli as low as 0.049 MPa [7, 8], whereas
the conventional crosslinked system (precursor molecular weight: 15 kDa) reached only 130%
with a 0.84 MPa modulus. The extensibility increased and the modulus decreased with the
increase of the molecular weight of the precursor (from 4 kDa to 27 kDa). This tensile data was
used as input to different physical models of rubber elasticity, which will be further detailed in
the next section.
2.3
Rubber elasticity models
Elastomers have a characteristic S-shaped stress-strain curve upon uniaxial deformation, as
presented in figure 2.3.1.
Figure 2.3.1: Typical stress-strain curve of an elastomer (based on a sample of HV-15 with 10 % added
THF).
This stress-strain curve usually has three regions. In the initial, linear stage the material acts
14
==PAGE:17==
Chapter 2. Literature review
Al´ız Hanga Lelik
elastic, following Hooke’s law. At higher deformations, the so-called strain-softening occurs, as
the engineering stress isn’t linearly proportional to the strain anymore. In the third stage we
observe strain-hardening, the slope of the curve tending upwards as the material requires more
force to stretch [36]. In the first two stages the main deformation mechanism is the reorganizing
of the chains relative to each other. In the third stage this is not possible anymore, and the
deformation comes from the bond angles stretching - which requires more energy, for that reason
the force (and along with with it, the stress) needed to further stretch the sample is increased.
In the following, some theories aiming to explain and predict these mechanisms are presented.
2.3.1
Hooke’s law
The stress arising during the deformation of an elastic body can be expressed by Hooke’s law
(equation 2.3.1)[24, 37, 38],
σ = Eε
(2.3.1)
where σ is the stress, ε is the strain and E is the aforementioned Young’s modulus, which
connects the force exerted on the material with the deformation, basically giving us how soft
a material is. The Young’s modulus of a material is usually calculated by taking the slope at
the beginning of the stress-strain curve. This expression describes instantaneous and reversible
deformation, which is an abstraction, although some materials such as metals show almost only
elastic deformation [24]. Real materials, like elastomers, usually do not act purely linear for
the entirety of the stress-strain curve, as we have seen in figure 2.3.1, therefore require more
complex expressions to describe their behaviours.
2.3.2
Affine and phantom network models
The theories of rubber elasticity aim to connect the observed macroscopic deformation with
microscopic scale phenomena. Many of them do so by giving an expression for the change in
the free energy of the system during deformation, a so called elastic equation of state (eqn.
2.3.2), where α is the molecular deformation ratio, T is the temperature, k is the Boltzmann
constant and n is the chain number density [39].
σeng = kTn(α −α−2)
(2.3.2)
The affine model, a mathematical representation proposed by Kuhn, Flory and Wall [40,
41, 42] assumes that the ends of the polymer chains are fixed on a non-fluctuating background.
The name comes from the most important property of the model which is affine deformation,
where lines that are parallel in the original material are kept that way after being deformed -
implying a homogeneous material. The elastic stress in the affine model is given by equation
2.3.3, assuming an incompressible network.
15
==PAGE:18==
Chapter 2. Literature review
Al´ız Hanga Lelik
σ = kTn(λ2 −λ−1)
(2.3.3)
One can see, that this equation takes a somewhat similar form to eqn. 2.3.2.
The phantom network model is more sophisticated in that it connects the chain ends to each
other in crosslinks, which fluctuate during the deformation [41, 42, 43]. This model assumes
no spatial restrictions on the polymer chains passing through each other, but it does consider
that only a fraction of the chains and crosslinks are elastically active. This model allows for an
expression for the elastic stress also considering the average functionality of the junctions:
σ = kTn(1 −2
Φ)(λ2 −λ−1)
(2.3.4)
where Φ is the average functionality of the crosslinks.
While these theories give us a good qualitative description, the values gathered from these
equations often do not match the experimental data from tensile testing, suggesting that some
physical phenomena are unaccounted for. Many of these models are phenomenological, meaning
that they provide predictions by fitting to material constants, without giving them a physical
meaning. These material constants usually need to be determined by experiments, adding a
layer of complexity and uncertainty. Some of these models include the Mooney-Rivlin, Ogden
and neo-Hookeian models [44].
Other models attempt to reconcile the differences between the theoretical and the observed
behaviour in a more physical way, by attempting to account for the interactions between the
crosslinks in the network. The constrained junction and diffused constrained models achieve this
by presuming that there is an interaction potential acting between the crosslinks, preventing
them from passing through each other. Edward’s tube model goes further, restricting monomer
fluctuations along the entire polymer chains. These models can provide good approximations
of the stress-strain curve in crosslinked networks [41].
2.3.3
Slip link model
The aforementioned models employed for crosslinked networks, such as the affine model and
its more refined iterations, do not accurately describe the behaviour of the concatenated ring
networks at higher than 50% extension [7]. This is due to the network points in the chemically
crosslinked system being sterically hindered, while the rings have the ability to slide on each
other, This behaviour is better modelled by the so called slip link model, which was previously
successfully applied to monodisperse concatenated ring networks [45]. The silicone ring net-
works previously prepared and the ones examined in this thesis are not monodisperse, which
lessens the accuracy of this model, however previously it has been a good approximation at up
to 500-800% strain.
This model presumes that the crosslinks are a contact point, through which each chain
16
==PAGE:19==
Chapter 2. Literature review
Al´ız Hanga Lelik
is able to slide [46]. The constraint on this sliding, describing how far the chains can slide,
is given by the parameter η. The theoretical value of this parameter is η = 0.2343, which is
obtained by the assumption that the chains in each links on average slide as far as the centres of
their neighbouring links [8, 47, 10]. After reaching the edge of that restraint, the slip-links are
assumed to behave like traditional topological crosslinks - so there are two kinds of contributions
to the stress from the topological connections, ”pseudo-entanglements”, which can relieve stress
by sliding and ”pseudo-crosslinks”, which cannot [8]. With this, we can express the model of
the reduced stress in the following way:
σred = Gc + GsH(λ, η)
(2.3.5)
where Gc and Gs are the contributions from the crosslinks and the entanglements respec-
tively; and H(λ, η) is a strain-dependent term (equation 2.3.6).
H(λ, η) =
λ2
λ2 + λ + 1[
1
(λ + η)2
λ + 1
λ(1 + ηλ2)2]
(2.3.6)
The Gc and Gs parameters are obtained by fitting equations 2.3.5 and 2.3.6 to stress-strain
curves obtained from tensile measurements. This model has been found to provide a good fit
to the behaviour of the concatenated ring networks reported by Pengpeng et al [7], even at
high extensions [8]. While the two parameters still hold limited physical meaning, their ratio
is useful in estimating how the nature of the topological connections in the network defines the
mechanical properties of the material.
17
==PAGE:20==
Chapter 3
Experimental
This experimental section first details the materials and methods used in sample preparation.
Then, the instrumental measurement methods are discussed.
3.1
Materials
As mentioned in the introduction, earlier achievements of the silicone rubber group in the
Danish Polymer Centre have focused on creating novel silicone materials with unprecedented
softness, through achieving a structure different from the traditional crosslinked network. There
exist other techniques to create softer materials, one of them being adding solvent to the samples
while curing, in order to create a looser network.
Besides the modeling of the mechanical
properties, this thesis is set out to evaluate on the effect of added solvent on different samples
with concatenated ring networks.
Formulations with and without added filler have been tested. For each formulation, the
goal was to compare a sample without added solvent with samples with at least two different
amounts of solvent, to be able to assess whether the quantity has any effect.
3.1.1
HV-formulations
The samples composed of α-monovinyl-ω-monohydride terminated polydimethylsiloxane
macromonomers without fillers were made in accordance with the procedure found in the sup-
porting materials of the work of Hu et al. to ensure comparability of the results [7, 8]. According
to this procedure, a ratio of 1 mg of catalyst to every g of prepolymer was used in the sample
mixtures. The macromonomers with different molecular weights (table 3.1.1) and the SIP6830.3
vinyl terminated polydimethylsiloxane catalyst with 3% platinum were supplied by Gelest Inc.,
further information is found in table A.1 of the appendix.
18
==PAGE:21==
Chapter 3. Experimental
Al´ız Hanga Lelik
Table 3.1.1: Molecular weight and dispersity of the α-monovinyl-ω-monohydride terminated poly-
dimethylsiloxane macromonomers [7](supporting information).
Macromonomer
Molecular weight ( ¯
Mn) [kDa]
DM [-]
Purity [%]
HV −15
4
1.1
95-100
HV −22
15
1.2
95-100
HV −31
27
1.2
95-100
Unfortunately, several samples did not cure to a sufficient extent where they were removable
from the substrate without damaging the integrity of the sample. These are marked in table
A.2 of the appendix listing all the samples prepared.
3.1.2
EX-formulations
To assess ring networks with added fillers, the commercial formulations EM2 −EX100 and
EM2 −EX050 from Gelest Inc. were used in combination with added THF solvent ranging
from 5 wt% to 50 wt%. This formulation contains a mix of the HV −15, HV −22 and HV −31
macromonomers [7] with 30 wt% silica filler and is shipped in two components, which are to
be mixed at a 100:1 ratio. The medium elongation EX050 contains lower molecular weight
prepolymers than the high elongation EX100. The composition of the samples prepared is
listed in table A.3 in the appendix. This material is based on the work of Goff et al [12], the
theoretical properties, as listed on the data sheets, are summarized in table 3.1.2.
Table 3.1.2: The properties of the silicone rubbers prepared from the EX100 and EX050 formulations,
from the technical data sheets of the material.
EX100
Elongation at tear failure
2000
%
Tensile strength
6-7
MPa
Durometer
15
Shore A
Specific gravity
1.12
g/ml
Volume resistivity
2.90E+14
ohm*cm
EX050
Elongation at tear failure
1000-1500
%
Tensile strength
3
MPa
Durometer
5
Shore A
Specific gravity
1.06
g/ml
Volume resistivity
2.90E+14
ohm*cm
The batch numbers for all chemicals are listed in table A.1 of the appendix. The earlier and
the newer batch of the EX100 formulation have shown considerable difference in mechanical
properties, which is further detailed in chapter 4. To differentiate, the earlier batch has been
labeled EX100old and the newer batch EX100new throughout the rest of this thesis, whereever
it makes a difference.
19
==PAGE:22==
Chapter 3. Experimental
Al´ız Hanga Lelik
3.1.3
Sample preparation
The preparation process was nearly the same for the two types of materials. For each compo-
sition, 8-12 g of material was prepared in one batch. The samples were mixed using a speed
mixer (DAC150FVZ, Hauschild Co.) at 3500 rpm 2 times for 2 minutes for the EX-samples
and 1 time 2 minutes for the HV-samples. The optimal mixing conditions were determined to
ensure that the components are mixed properly, but the mixture is still viscous enough to fill
the mould smoothly during casting, while keeping bubble formation to a minimum.
The mix was cast into 2 mm thick frames (4.5 x 6 cm for tensile testing, 2 x 2 cm for
linear viscoelasticity testing), which were glued down onto a polyethylene terephtalate (PET)
substrate (figure 3.1.1).
The viscous liquid was smoothed with a blade to ensure uniform
thickness. If the high viscosity of the mixture led to bubble formation or voids, the bubbles
were popped by a needle and the voids were filled with the help of a dropper, before smoothing
again.
Figure 3.1.1: The frame used for casting the tensile samples.
The samples with added THF were left uncovered in a fume hood for 72 hours, allowing for
the solvent to evaporate. This added curing time has also helped the bubbles in the samples
to dissipate. The samples were cured in a vacuum oven in accordance with the previous work
in the group [7, 8], at 80 °C for 8-16 hours in the case of the HV-formulations and 100 °C for
72 hours in the case of the EX-formulations.
20
==PAGE:23==
Chapter 3. Experimental
Al´ız Hanga Lelik
3.2
Measurements
3.2.1
Tensile testing
Tensile testing is a widely used mechanical testing method to assess the material’s strength,
durability, and performance under uniaxial loading. During a tensile test, a specimen of the
material is clamped at each end and loaded with constant strain or displacement speed. The
deformation and the applied force are recorded and with the added input of the sample di-
mensions, the stress-strain curve is calculated. In this thesis, we focus on the tensile strength,
ductility and modulus of the samples, as well as the shape of the stress-strain curve [48].
All samples were tensile tested on an Instron 3340 materials testing system according to
the ASTM D-638 Type V standard, where the width of the dumbbell-shaped sample is 3.18
mm and the length between the gauges is 30 mm. The thickness of the samples was measured
by caliper, by holding them between two layers of substrate to avoid errors from the caliper
pressing into the samples. The substrate thicknesses were then subtracted, yielding the true
thickness, indicated in tables B.1 and B.2 of the appendix. The crosshead speed was set to 500
mm/min for all tests.
The Young’s modulus was determined by fitting the slope of the recorded stress-strain
curve between 5% and 25% strain. Not considering the first few % was necessary, because of
systematic measurement errors (see figure 4.5.2 in section 4.5).
To assess the effect of repeated deformation, cyclic tensile testing used. In cyclic testing,
the sample is not extended until failure, instead it is only extended until a given strain and
then allowed to return to its original strain. This allows for evaluation of the material’s ability
to recover its original shape after loading.
Cycling tests were performed with the same instrument, on samples of EX100 and HV −15
with no solvent and with 10% added THF, to evaluate the difference added filler and solvent
makes on the strain recovery. During these tests, the samples were brought to 100% extension
and allowed to return to 0 3 times, then the same was done to 200% and 300%, then 200% and
100% again, all with a speed of 2.0 mm/s.
3.2.2
Shear testing
Shear testing is another commonly used mechanical testing method to evaluate the behavior
of elastic materials.
Unlike tensile testing, which applies a uniaxial pulling force, typically
parallel to the longest dimension of the sample, shear testing applies a force perpendicular to
the material’s surface, measuring the material’s resistance to forces that cause it to deform
along a plane parallel to its surface. To evaluate elastic materials, oscillatory measurements are
often used, either with constant amplitude or constant frequency of deformation. The forces
are recorded and from that and the geometry of the sample, the storage and loss moduli are
calculated [48].
21
==PAGE:24==
Chapter 3. Experimental
Al´ız Hanga Lelik
The linear viscoelasticity (LVE) of the samples was measured on a using a strain-controlled
rheometer (TA Instruments Ares G2), using small amplitude oscillatory shear with 20 mm
diameter parallel plate geometry. The samples were tempered at 23 °C. The amplitude was
chosen to be 1%, which was verified to be in the linear range by oscillating amplitude tests
between 0.1 and 100 % shear for each sample before the oscillating frequency tests.
The
frequency range examined at constant amplitude was 100 Hz - 0.01 Hz with 3 data points
recorded in each decade.
The intent of the shear test is twofold. The storage modulus is expected to decrease as the
frequency is decreasing, reaching a plateau at low frequencies. The loss modulus is expected to
constantly decrease as the sample undergoes the relaxation process. Observing these confirms
that the entangled structure was achieved during curing. Besides that, the comparison of the
storage moduli gives further information on the elasticity of the network.
While based on
equation 2.1.2, the same trends are expected as in the elastic moduli obtained from tensile
testing, deviations from this can give information on the structure of the network.
22
==PAGE:25==
Chapter 4
Results and discussion
This results section explores the effect of the added filler and solvent on the mechanical prop-
erties separately, before describing the methodology of modifying the slip-link model and the
results of applying the modified model on all results. Finally, the possible sources of errors
and data cleaning methodology is discussed. In total, 14 samples in varying formulations, with
and without filler, with different amounts of added solvent were analysed via tensile and shear
testing.
4.1
The effect of the filler on the mechanical properties
Silica particulate fillers are commonly added to silicone elastomers to improve tear- and di-
electric breakdown strength, or to modify the viscosity of the prepolymer for processing [13].
In this thesis, two commercial formulations with 30wt% silica filler are compared to a con-
catenated ring network with similar chemistry, without added filler (HV −15). Samples with
higher molecular weight precursors (HV −22 and HV −31) have been made, but they were
not tested due to the samples having too low viscosity to produce an even sample in the frame
or becoming damaged during peeling from the substrate, due to not having cured well enough.
On the data obtained from the linear viscoelasticity measurements (see figure 4.2.2 in section
4.2), we can see, that there is no difference in the tanδ values between the formulations with
and without filler. These values between 0.1-0.2 indicate that the sample is solid and shows
mostly elastic behaviour. The storage moduli on the other hand do differ - we can see that,
as expected, the samples with added filler have higher storage moduli. The high elongation
EX100 is significantly less soft than the medium elongation EX050 and the pure HV −15
without filler.
The difference between the moduli is more pronounced when looking at the stress-strain
curves obtained from tensile testing (figures 4.1.1 and 4.1.2). This can also be observed from the
results summarized in table 4.1.1. The EX050 has a similar stress-strain curve to the HV −15,
which is however, the least soft of the HV-formulations [7], with the lowest molecular weight
23
==PAGE:26==
Chapter 4. Results and discussion
Al´ız Hanga Lelik
and prepolymer viscosity. The EX100new curve runs higher, with its characteristic necking
appearing above 500% strain on all samples of this formulation, with or without solvent (some,
but not all EX050 samples also showed necking at high extensions).
Figure 4.1.1: The stress-strain curves recorded during tensile testing the EX100new, EX050 and
HV −15 formulations without added solvent.
The behaviour between the new and the old batch of the EX100 commercial formulation
is different, with the old batch being significantly softer both in tensile and shear testing.
However, their ultimate strain is also lower, and the samples have shown signs of not curing
sufficiently. Therefore, to ensure higher repeatability, for the most of this thesis, the results
obtained from the new batch are taken into account, as the chemical changes in the components
since they have been opened are unknown but could strongly affect the final properties.
Table 4.1.1: The mechanical properties obtained from tensile testing, averaged across specimens from
identical samples for each formulation.
Sample composition
σ [MPa]
SD [MPa]
ε [%]
SD [%]
E [MPa]
SD [MPa]
EX100 old
0.38
0.01
508.4
1.7
0.065
0.007
EX100 old + 5% THF
1.34
-
647.6
-
0.166
0.025
EX100 old + 10% THF
1.14
0.27
646.7
51.8
0.183
0.034
EX100 old + 20% THF
1.17
0.09
581.8
25.7
0.210
0.022
EX100 new
9.69
0.63
1417.7
59.5
0.641
0.037
EX100 new no extra curing
8.35
0.44
1328.2
32.5
0.570
0.107
EX100 new + 10% THF
7.10
2.45
1185.1
168.3
0.676
0.098
EX100 new + 50% THF
5.52
1.18
1175.5
54.0
0.488
0.167
EX050
2.51
0.63
1273.0
205.5
0.276
0.041
EX050 + 10% THF
2.98
0.54
1072.3
207.7
0.375
0.065
EX050 + 20% THF
2.95
1.20
1219.8
43.7
0.310
0.106
HV-15
0.36
0.09
439.9
122.8
0.166
0.031
HV15 + 5% THF
0.08
0.02
1098.0
285.6
0.299
0.101
HV15 + 10% THF
0.29
0.06
1118.9
90.4
0.071
0.018
24
==PAGE:27==
Chapter 4. Results and discussion
Al´ız Hanga Lelik
The mechanical properties show that only the addition of 10% THF to HV −15 has yielded
a softer material than the pure HV −15. The commercial formulations containing filler all
have higher moduli, but also higher ultimate strains, probably the reason for the fillers being
added in the first place.
Figure 4.1.2: Comparison of the stress-strain curves recorded during tensile testing the EX100old,
EX100new, EX050 and HV −15 formulations with 10% THF added.
Comparing the samples with the same amount of added THF (figure 4.1.2), the difference
between the shape of the tensile curves becomes apparent. The stress-strain curves of the EX-
formulations, especially the ones with higher moduli, seem to become close to linear after an
initial stage where they temporarily taper off. The HV −15 however keeps on tapering off,
almost becoming constant until a high strain. The importance of this will be seen in section
4.3.
Figure 4.1.3: The effect of added solvent on the stress-strain curves upon repeated actuation, on a
sample of HV −15 and EX100new. Note, that the y-axes are different, as the two materials have
different moduli by a power of 10.
25
==PAGE:28==
Chapter 4. Results and discussion
Al´ız Hanga Lelik
In figure 4.1.3, the stress-strain curves recorded during cyclic testing on an unfilled (HV −15)
and filled (EX100new) sample are presented. Although there is a high amount of noise in the
data from testing the unfilled formulation, it is still clearly seen that the difference in the
shape of the curve in loading and unloading is negligible, while in the sample with filler, we
can see that this difference is much more pronounced. One can observe the stress-strain curve
following the previous unloading cycle, otherwise known as the Mullins-effect. The permanent
set is present in both formulations, however it is negligible, compared to the strains reached
during testing. This shows that the network is elastic and not only viscous and that while the
rings do slide on each other, this does not lead to reversible deformation.
4.2
The effect of the solvent on the curing time and the
mechanical properties
The effect of the added solvent was already apparent during sample preparation, with all
batches of the EX-formulations. Contrasting to the pot life of 24 hours (indicated on the data
sheet) for the pure EX100 and EX050, the samples with THF have started curing immediately,
becoming highly viscous and unable to flow by the end of the 2x2 min mixing step. This has
lead to some difficulties with the sample preparation, as the more viscous mixture was more
to the formation of bubbles during casting (figure 4.2.1 highlights the difference in samples
with and without solvent).
These bubbles have mostly dissipated during the 72 hour long
evaporation period. There was no strong increase in viscosity with the HV-formulations upon
adding solvent, however the curing time still could have been affected.
26
==PAGE:29==
Chapter 4. Results and discussion
Al´ız Hanga Lelik
Figure 4.2.1: Top sample is EX100new with no added solvent, while the bottom sample contains 10
wt% added THF. After mixing for the same amount of time, the sample without solvent maintained
its low viscosity to flow freely during casting, while the other sample became highly viscous, trapping
air bubbles.
This effect on the curing time has not been quantitatively assessed. A likely explanation
is the added solvent increasing the mobility of the precursor chains, leading to faster curing.
More mobile chains may form shorter rings, which, based on the earlier results [7], leads to
higher moduli.
Figure 4.2.2 provides a comparison of samples of different formulations with and without
added solvent in LVE measurements. One can see that the addition of solvent does not have
an effect on the tanδ, however it increases the storage modulus for both the EX-samples and
the HV-samples. Comparing the tensile curves in figure 4.2.3 gives us similar results. Given
the results of previous research[11], this was not the intended result from adding the solvent
during curing.
27
==PAGE:30==
Chapter 4. Results and discussion
Al´ız Hanga Lelik
Figure 4.2.2: The effect of added solvent during curing on the storage modulus G′ and tanδ measured
by LVE testing of different concatenated ring networks.
Comparing the stress-strain curves recorded during tensile testing (figure 4.2.3), it is even
more clear that the addition of solvent did not yield a softer material for the EX−formulations,
but it did have the desired effect in the HV −15. One further improvement adding solvent
has made in the unfilled samples, is the almost three-fold increase in the ultimate stress (table
4.1.1), however no such effect was observed in the commercial formulations. The formulations
with higher amount of added solvent were more difficult to cast overall, due to the low viscosity
of the mix, which needs to be considered if this method of creating a network with a different
density is employed.
Figure 4.2.3: The effect of added solvent during curing on stress-strain curves measured by tensile
testing of different concatenated ring networks.
In the stress-strain curves of the HV −15 and EX050 formulations on figure 4.2.3, we can
observe that the initial stage of the curve often overlaps in the samples with and without solvent,
and only starts deviating and taking a slightly different shape with an elastic-like behaviour at
high extensions. This will play a role in applying the elastic models in section 4.3.
The effect of the amount of solvent is showcased through the example of two formulations
with added filler in figure 4.2.4. The EX100new samples all have higher storage moduli and
higher strains, than the EX050, but interestingly, the one with the highest modulus in both
28
==PAGE:31==
Chapter 4. Results and discussion
Al´ız Hanga Lelik
cases is the one with 10% added solvent - seemingly, just the presence of solvent leads to a
tougher elastomer, but increasing the amount does have the desired effect of creating a looser
network, therefore a softer material. The EX050 somewhat mirrors this effect, the sample
without solvent being the softest. In the tensile measurements we can see that we have the
toughest materials at 20% solvent, while the LVE testing reveals that at 50% solvent, there is a
drop in storage modulus. Looking back at table 4.1.1, we see that changing the solvent amount
did not have any significant effect on the ultimate strain in any case.
Figure 4.2.4: The effect of added solvent on the storage modulus (left) and the stress-strain curves
(right) in two different formulations.
The hypothesis explaining the unexpected increase in modulus is that in the environment
with solvent, the prepolymer chains have higher mobility, leading to faster curing and to shorter
rings forming, than during normal conditions. Prepolymers with higher molecular weight were
already known to yield softer materials [7], and this result aligns with that. Further added
solvent counteracts this effect, by helping form a more loose network [11].
Since the response to repeated straining is an important characteristic of silicone elastomers,
cyclic testing was also used to evaluate whether the presence of solvent makes any difference
in that regard. On figure 4.2.5 one can see that adding 10% THF to EX100new during curing
has made no difference in the shape of the curves. Some stress softening is still present and
the fraction of energy lost to viscous behaviour doesn’t change, neither does the extent of
permanent set.
29
==PAGE:32==
Chapter 4. Results and discussion
Al´ız Hanga Lelik
Figure 4.2.5: The effect of added solvent on the stress-strain curves upon repeated actuation, on a
sample of EX100new with no solvent and with 10% added THF.
In figure 4.2.6, it is shown that the unfilled HV −15 formulation also does not exhibit
any changes in behaviour upon repeated straining due to added solvent, albeit high amount of
noise is present in both samples, possibly hiding some of the difference. The strain softening
was already less significant than in the EX100new, but this measurement proves that adding
solvent can be used to create a softer material with this formulation, without compromising
the desirable behaviour in cyclic strain.
Figure 4.2.6: The effect of added solvent on the stress-strain curves upon repeated actuation, on a
sample of HV −15 with no solvent and with 10% added THF.
Figure 4.2.7 showcases the fact that doubling the amount of added solvent has also made no
difference in the shapes of the curves in the EX050 sample, apart from increasing the overall
modulus, as previously described.
30
==PAGE:33==
Chapter 4. Results and discussion
Al´ız Hanga Lelik
Figure 4.2.7: The effect of the amount of added solvent on the stress-strain curves upon repeated
actuation, on a sample of EX050 with 10% and 20% added THF.
4.3
Modifying the slip-link model
The slip-link model detailed in section 2.3.3 can be applied on the data obtained from the
tensile tests described previously. Fittings with η values set to 0.1, 0.23, 0.5, 2 and 10 were
performed, to assess the effect of the slipping parameter, the average Gc and Gs values along
with the R2 values characterizing the fit are found in table C.1 of the appendix. Generally,
one can see that in the case of the unfilled systems all η values give a satisfying fit, but the R2
values tend to decrease at η = 2 and 10. The increase in the Gs/Gc ratio with the increase of
the η parameter, noted in the work of Hu et al is also present here, however the change is small
when η is between 0.1 and 0.5. As figure 4.3.1 also shows, the experimental and the fitted data
start to deviate at strains above 800-1000%, regardless of the value of the slipping parameter,
but many samples did not reach that high extension.
31
==PAGE:34==
Chapter 4. Results and discussion
Al´ız Hanga Lelik
Figure 4.3.1: Example of fitting the slip-link model to an HV −15 (unfilled) sample. One can see the
deviation of the measurement data from the model’s prediction at high extensions. (R2 = 0.953)
However, the slip-link model seems to give a significantly worse fit to the experimental data
in the case of the systems with silica filler, as presented through an example in figure 4.3.2.
The expected monotonic increase of the Gs/Gc ratio is not present, as all fittings strongly trend
towards very low Gs values, indicating no contribution from the sliding entanglements. Looking
at the shapes of the stress-strain curves the bad fit is not at all surprising, as the slip-link model
produces a curve that resembles a concave function, tapering off into linear; whereas the strain
in the filled samples shows a more steep increase.
Figure 4.3.2: Example of fitting the slip-link model to an EX100new (filled) sample. The model does
not provide a good fit for most of the extension range (R2 = 0.765).
This suggests that the slip-link model cannot describe the mechanical behaviour of the
elastomers with added filler, consequently some modifications are needed. As detailed in section
4.1, the stress-strain curves of these systems appear to be linear, except in the initial stage of
the deformation. Figure 4.3.3 shows this initial stage, compared with the unfilled samples. One
32
==PAGE:35==
Chapter 4. Results and discussion
Al´ız Hanga Lelik
can notice that up to roughly 70-80% deformation, the general shape of the stress-strain curve
is the same in the filled systems as in the unfilled ones. After that, the linearity is similar to the
behaviour of fully elastic materials, whose behaviour is described by Hooke’s law (eq. 2.3.1).
Figure 4.3.3: Comparison of the initial stage of the tensile curves in different formulations with and
without solvent. The general shape is the same, even though the modulus differs.
Therefore, upon observing this similarity, I have applied the slip-link model on the initial
stage of the deformation, and fit Hooke’s law, according to equation 4.3.1. The Eapparent refers
to that the ”modulus” gained from this expression does not match the modulus of the material
which is obtained from the slope of the stress-strain curve at low deformations.
σeng = Eapparent × ε + σ∗
(4.3.1)
This expression was converted into the reduced stress (equation 4.3.2). One can observe on
figure 4.3.4, that the stress contribution from the slip-link model is monotonically decreasing,
while the contribution from the Hookeian behaviour is monotonically increasing. Consequently,
it is convenient to choose the strain εred,min, where the characteristic minimum (see figure 4.3.4)
of the reduced stress-strain curve occurs, as the point, where the behaviour of the material
swifts. This minimum is present in the data of all filled samples.
σred,linear = Eapparent × ε + σ∗
λ −λ−2
(4.3.2)
33
==PAGE:36==
Chapter 4. Results and discussion
Al´ız Hanga Lelik
Figure 4.3.4: The reduced stress obtained from fitting to the slip-link model and to the Hookiean
equation with the apparent modulus, on the example of an EX100old sample with 10% THF added.
The measured reduced stress reaches a minimum at around 65% strain.
While a simple linear combination of the two contributions seems to be convenient, the
fitting resulting from that approach is unsatisfactory, as the reduced stress from fitting to
Hooke’s law approaches −∞at small deformations and the contribution from the slip-link
model approaches a non-zero constant, as seen in figure 4.3.4.
To circumvent this issue, I have introduced a transitional function (equation 4.3.3, figure
4.3.5):
f(ε) = 1 −exp
 ln(0.5)
2.5εred,min
× ε2.5

(4.3.3)
Where 2.5 is a coefficient used for setting the slope of the curve, and the multiplier of
ln(0.5)/2.5εred,min ensures that the value of this f(ε) function is 0.5 at εred,min. The slope of the
curve can later be modified, to improve the fitting, but for the results presented in this thesis,
it was fixed at 2.5, because in that case, the slope of the transitional function encompasses
roughly 100% strain. As this parameter does not have any physical meaning, setting it to a
more precise value would have been misleading, and possibly a way of overfitting the model to
the measurement data.
34
==PAGE:37==
Chapter 4. Results and discussion
Al´ız Hanga Lelik
Figure 4.3.5: The equation and the shape of the transitional function (εred,min = 65%).
With this transitional function, the full equation describing the reduced stress across the
whole deformation range (using that λ = ε −1):
σred = f(ε)(Gc + GsH(ε, η)) + (1 −f(ε)) Eapparent × ε + σ∗
(ε −1) −(ε −1)−2
(4.3.4)
And converted into engineering stress, this is:
σeng = f(ε)×(Gc +GsH(ε, η))×((ε−1)−(ε −1)−2)+(1−f(ε))×(Eapparent ×ε+σ∗) (4.3.5)
4.4
Applying the modified slip-link model
Since fitting the original slip-link model on the unfilled systems has shown no significant dif-
ference if the η parameter was between 0.1 −0.5, it was been set to the literature value of
0.23 [46] for all the times the modified model has been applied. Only those samples have been
included, where the characteristic minimum in the reduced stress has appeared and thus there
is a contribution from Hookeian behaviour. All of the results in this section are summarized
in table C.2 of the appendix. The algorithms described in this section have been written in
Python, using the curve fit and polyfit functions built in the SciPy library [49].
4.4.1
Filled systems
Table 4.4.1 provides an overview of the parameters obtained from applying the modified slip-
link models on all the systems with filler. More details along with R2 values are found in table
C.2 of the appendix.
35
==PAGE:38==
Chapter 4. Results and discussion
Al´ız Hanga Lelik
Table 4.4.1: The resulting parameters of fitting the modified slip link to the tensile data of silicone
elastomer samples with added filler.
Sample
Gc [MPa]
Gs [MPa]
Gs/Gc [-]
εred.min [%]
Eapparent [MPa]
EX100 old
1.17E-02
2.08E-02
1.99E+00
56.7
0.076
EX100 old + 5% THF
1.27E-02
8.52E-02
1.18E+01
60.0
0.188
EX100 old + 10% THF
4.57E-07
1.18E-01
6.49E+08
48.8
0.189
EX100 old + 20% THF
2.19E-03
1.34E-01
1.29E+11
43.8
0.210
EX100 new
4.45E-02
3.39E-01
1.02E+06
66.3
0.455
EX100 new no drying
2.99E-02
3.64E-01
3.59E+02
72.5
0.377
EX100 new + 10% THF
7.19E-02
3.15E-01
4.79E+00
77.5
0.437
EX100 new + 50% THF
4.27E-02
2.42E-01
6.88E+00
72.5
0.361
EX050
6.39E-02
6.51E-02
1.01E+00
178.8
0.195
EX050 + 10% THF
8.65E-02
8.85E-02
1.03E+00
167.5
0.261
EX050 + 20% THF
6.11E-02
9.15E-02
1.53E+00
140.0
0.179
The predicted stress-strain curves from this model fit very well to the measurement data,
one example is showcased in figure 4.4.1.
In the following, the different model parameters
obtained on different samples are evaluated.
Figure 4.4.1: The measured and the predicted stress-strain curve of an EX100new sample with 50%
added THF. R2 = 0.997
The values of the apparent moduli Eapparent follow a similar trend as the Young’s moduli do,
as it is showcased in figure 4.4.2. Overall, for most samples the apparent modulus is around 40%
lower, but follows the same trend of initially increasing when solvent is added, but decreasing as
the amount of solvent is increased. The difference between E and Eapparent is roughly constant.
36
==PAGE:39==
Chapter 4. Results and discussion
Al´ız Hanga Lelik
Figure 4.4.2: E and Eapparent at different solvent content in the EX100 and EX050 formulations.
Error bars have been omitted for the sake of clarity in the figure, however the parameters of individual
samples are found in appendix C.2.
In figure 4.4.3, it is revealed that the EX050 samples have a minimum in the reduced stress
at a significantly higher extension than the EX100 samples. The location of this minimum
shifts to lower strains when the solvent content is increased for all formulations. This suggests
that the location of the minimum is a structural characteristic, but unconnected to the changes
in modulus, as samples with higher moduli do not always have a lower εred,min value.
Figure 4.4.3: εred,min at different solvent content in the EX100 and EX050 formulations.
On the other hand, the Gs/Gc ratio does not exhibit such clear trends (see figure 4.4.4).
The opposite behaviour of the old and the new batch of the EX100 formulation is clear and
the Gs/Gc ratio moves in a wide range, indicating different structures - more rigid when this
ratio is lower and increasing and the rings are more able to slip on each other. For the EX050,
this ratio stays near 1, indicating even contributions from the rings slipping on each other and
from the entanglements. The high Gs/Gc values would indicate a system where the rings can
freely slip on each other - but based on our previous knowledge, we would expect to observe
this in softer samples, not in the ones which had the highest moduli of them all - but it must
37
==PAGE:40==
Chapter 4. Results and discussion
Al´ız Hanga Lelik
be noted that there is no clear interpretation of this ratio, which has also varied significantly
with the change in the slipping parameter η, which was fixed for these instances of applying
the model. Different η values might describe the structure of our system better.
Figure 4.4.4: Gs/Gc ratio at different solvent content in the EX100 and EX050 formulations. Error
bars have been omitted for the sake of clarity in the figure.
The difference in whether the sliding of chains or the more rigid crosslinks contribute more
to the modulus could highlight structural differences in the samples. One of these could be
a difference in the molecular weight of the rings forming - whether a ring is formed from one
or multiple prepolymer chains is not currently known. Another significant difference might
be in the number of elastically active rings in the concatenated network versus the amount of
dangling and isolated rings acting as an internal plasticizers (see section 2.2).
4.4.2
Unfilled systems at high deformations
The modifications to the original slip-link model were necessary, because that model did not
describe the filled systems accurately. However, the original model also starts to deviate from
the measurement data at high extensions in the case of unfilled systems in a similar way, even
though the R2 values are rather high, around 0.95 (see table C.1). This points to the modified
slip-link model being applicable on unfilled systems as well. An example is shown in figure
4.4.5 and the results of these fittings are summarized in table 4.4.2 as averages, and C.2 of the
appendix for the individual samples.
38
==PAGE:41==
Chapter 4. Results and discussion
Al´ız Hanga Lelik
Figure 4.4.5: The measured and the predicted stress-strain curve of an HV −15 sample with 10%
added THF. R2 = 0.993
Applying the modified model on the pure HV −15 did not make sense, as in those samples,
the ultimate strain was lower than where the sample would have reached a minimum in σred,
therefore the values found in the table come from just the original model, with no εred,min and
Eapparent values. Note, that the tensile data the fitting to the pure HV-15 is based on is from
earlier work in the group.
Table 4.4.2: The results of applying the modified slip link on the silicone elastomer samples without
added filler.
Sample
Gc [MPa]
Gs [MPa]
Gs/Gc [-]
εred.min [%]
Eapparent [MPa]
HV-15
6.38E-02
8.11E-03
1.25E-01
-
-
HV-15 + 5% THF
2.04E-02
1.57E-02
7.58E-01
465.0
0.033
HV-15 + 10% THF
1.63E-02
1.13E-02
7.02E-01
446.7
0.024
Figure 4.4.6: εred,min, E and Eapparent values for the EX050 and HV −15 samples at different solvent
contents. Error bars have been omitted for the sake of clarity in the figure on the left.
One can see in figure 4.4.6, that the εred,min values are significantly higher for unfilled
39
==PAGE:42==
Chapter 4. Results and discussion
Al´ız Hanga Lelik
systems, than for the ones with filler. EX050 was chosen as a basis of comparison, as it has
the most similar mechanical properties, and modulus in particular, to the HV −15. The lower
value of Eapparent compared to the Young’s modulus and its decrease of Eapparent with higher
solvent content is also observed in the unfilled samples, albeit the latter is not as strong as in
the filled samples.
Figure 4.4.7: Gs/Gc values for the EX050 and HV −15 samples at different solvent contents. Error
bars have been omitted for the sake of clarity in the figure.
We obtain very similar Gs/Gc values when applying the model to the HV −15 than we
did with the EX050 (figure 4.4.7). These values around 1 indicate that the contribution to
the shear modulus from the more hindered crosslinks and from the entangled chains sliding on
each other is roughly equal.
The model has been applied to the tensile measurements of other unfilled formulations
as well, which are part of ongoing research at the Danish Polymer Centre, with the aim of
connecting the modeling parameters to the theoretical molecular weight of the rings in the
network.
Tensile measurement data of concatenated ring networks formed from PDMS chains which
are either hydride-terminated on both ends (DMS-HXX) or vinyl-terminated (DMS-VXX) on
both ends are evaluated in this section.
The prepolymers were supplied from Gelest Inc.,
similarly to the samples described in section 3.1. The molecular weights of the precursors,
measured by size exclusion chromatography (SEC) are found in table 4.4.3. For the sake of this
analysis, it was assumed that the molecular weight of the rings formed is the MW of the two
components combined.
40
==PAGE:43==
Chapter 4. Results and discussion
Al´ız Hanga Lelik
Table 4.4.3: The molecular weights of the prepolymers used to form concatenated ring networks. The
accuracy of the SEC measurements is ±10%.
Prepolymer
Molecular weight [g/mol]
DMS-V05
900
DMS-H05
800
DMS-H11
1100
DMS-H21
5200
Not all samples were suitable for applying the modified slip-link model, simply due to not
reaching a strain where their behaviours differ from that which can be described by the original
model - in this section those samples are not included. Table C.3 summarizes the result of
applying the modified model, averaged for each formulation. From the R2 values one can see
that the modified slip-link model provides a good fit for the stress-strain properties of these
formulations, similarly to the α-monovinyl-ω-monohydride terminated HV-15. One example is
shown in figure 4.4.8.
Figure 4.4.8: The modified slip-link model applied on a sample of a concatenated ring network made
from DMS-V05 and DMS-H21 prepolymers. R2 = 0.990
On these samples, determining εred,min was difficult, as oftentimes there was no clear mini-
mum, instead, the reduced stress was seemingly plateauing. The high amplitude of the noise
in the tensile measurements, compared to other samples also lowers the accuracy of the fitting.
We can also see a slight decrease in the predicted stress from the model around εred,min, which
is not analogous with how these samples behave (usually no relaxation is observed), this is
further discussed in section 4.5.
Both the results in table C.3 and the parameters highlighted in figures 4.4.9 and 4.4.10 show
that the different formulations yield very different parameters - pointing us towards that there
might be structural differences between them, despite the same theoretical molecular weight of
rings.
41
==PAGE:44==
Chapter 4. Results and discussion
Al´ız Hanga Lelik
Figure 4.4.9: The εred,min and Eapparent values obtained from the modified slip-link model when applied
on systems of concatenated rings with different molecular weights. Error bars have been omitted for
the sake of clarity.
The decrease in Eapparent with the increase of the theoretical molecular weight of the rings
follows the expected trends, as does the increase in εred,min. However, due to the differences
between formulations and the limited amount of samples, no clear relationship can be pointed
out between the molecular weight and these parameters.
Figure 4.4.10: The Gs/Gc values obtained from the modified slip-link model when applied on systems
of concatenated rings with different molecular weights. Error bars have been omitted for the sake of
clarity.
Gs/Gc also does not show any clear trends here either, with the values differing by several
powers of 10 between formulations. However, this analysis of the parameters obtained from the
modified slip-link model does point us towards the possibility of structural differences between
the samples which are not obvious from the raw tensile data (ultimate strain, stress and Young’s
modulus).
42
==PAGE:45==
Chapter 4. Results and discussion
Al´ız Hanga Lelik
4.4.3
Discussion of the application of the model
To summarize the trends we observe in the model parameters, we can look at them relative to
a mechanical property obtained directly from tensile testing, the Young’s modulus E.
In figure 4.4.11 one can see that generally, εred,min decreases with the increase of the modulus,
however HV −15 + 5%THF and the EX050, EX050 + 10%THF samples had nearly identical
moduli, but the strain at which the reduced stress reached its minimum is very different. This
means that this parameter is not only connected to the modulus of the sample, but the material
compositions also matters.
Figure 4.4.11: The εred,min values obtained when evaluating the reduced stress-strain curves of different
samples, as a function of their Young’s moduli.
Plotting Eapparent against E (figure 4.4.12) reveals that Eapparent is nearly always lower,
often by a constant amount in samples made from the same formulation, the only outlier being
the unfilled samples. In the unfilled samples without solvent however, the strain where the
apparent modulus comes into play was not even reached, therefore it is not surprising that that
formulation does not follow the same trend as the commercial high elongation elastomers.
43
==PAGE:46==
Chapter 4. Results and discussion
Al´ız Hanga Lelik
Figure 4.4.12: The Eapparent values obtained from the modified slip-link model in samples with different
moduli.
Overall, we can say that the model parameters do seem to follow some general trends which
we can in some cases connect to structural features. There is some inconsistent behaviour that
is yet to be explained. The deviation between specimens of the same formulation is generally
rather low (table C.2 in the appendix summarizes this) and the high R2 values mean that the
model predicts well the behaviour of the samples upon uniaxial loading.
While the model fits well to the behaviour of different systems, as demonstrated previously,
it does have some weaknesses which can not be overlooked. Most importantly, even though it
is more flexible than the original slip-link model, it still only fits a certain shape of stress-strain
curves. Therefore its applicability is limited to materials which show both slippage of the chains
and completely elastic behaviour at one point. That being said, if the εred,min is very low, then
this model simplifies to Hooke’s law, and if εred,min is higher than the ultimate strain of the
material, this model can be used just like the original slip-link.
Another big limitation is that in some of the samples, the model seems to deviate consid-
erably from the measurement data around εred,min, as figure 4.4.13 also highlights. The same
weakness is notable in 4.4.8, where around εred,min the predicted stress slightly decreases; how-
ever due to the noise this seemingly does not affect the R2 value. This all points towards that
the description of the transition between the slip-link and the Hookiean behaviour is not ac-
curately described in the current model. One could suggest the modification of the parameter
that describes the slope of the transitional function (eq. 4.3.3), currently set to 2.5, but in this
thesis it is not explored, for the aforementioned reason of avoiding overfitting the model to our
limited samples.
44
==PAGE:47==
Chapter 4. Results and discussion
Al´ız Hanga Lelik
Figure 4.4.13: The considerable deviation of the model and the measured data around εred,min = 60%
This limitation of the parameters and their physical meanings extends to other parameters as
well. The Gc, Gs parameters from the original slip-link model were not given further meaning,
only their ratio is used to extrapolate on structural features. The minimum of the reduced
stress εred,min was extracted from the measurement data, but not connected to the material’s
characteristics. The apparent modulus Eapparent follows similar trends to the actual Young’s
modulus, while being considerably lower - this decrease is not explored in any way. Giving
further meaning to these parameters could extend the model’s applicability.
4.5
Data cleaning, sources of error
In the following, some sources of errors in the measurements and in fitting the models are
discussed.
Even though shearing measurements in range of linear viscoelasticity are fairly
reliable, there are some sources of uncertainty which need to be considered. Precise preparation
and placement of samples are all necessary, to avoid errors in the measurements. Even with
these careful considerations, at high frequencies, the data may be unreliable, as the sample
might slip or detach from the parallel plates, therefore frequencies above 10 Hz were discarded.
There are many sources of systematic and random errors during tensile testing as well. Some
of them are operator errors, such as misalignment of the sample when it is placed between the
grips, not correctly balancing the instrument before starting the test, or setting the grip strength
too low, leading to the sample slipping. Other errors might arise from the sample preparation
process. Bubbles and voids (like the one pictured in figure 4.5.1) decrease the cross-section of the
sample and provide an inhomogenity, from which the fracture can initiate. As a consequence,
the measured tensile strength and strain are lower, than those of a sample without bubbles
would be. Uneven thickness of the samples has a similar effect, where the sections with thinner
cross-sections are subject to higher strains than measured and are more likely to fail. Samples,
where these errors were notably present (slipping, sample breaking at clamping, visible voids at
fracture surface) have been disregarded from calculations of the ultimate stress and strain. We
45
==PAGE:48==
Chapter 4. Results and discussion
Al´ız Hanga Lelik
have also seen from the results of the cyclic testing in section 4.1, that stretching the samples
changes the shape of the later stress-strain curves. Therefore, one has to be careful not to
deform the samples during preparing them for tensile testing (i.e. during peeling them off the
substrate), as that can lead to distortions in the measurement data.
Figure 4.5.1: Visible bubble in the fracture surface of a tensile testing sample.
The first step of handling tensile data was always data cleaning by determining what defor-
mation range is considered for the calculations. Figure 4.5.2 illustrates how the initial 5% and
the last 10-20% of the deformation has been disregarded. The initial spike in stress appears
in all tensile measurements. This throws off the modulus and occasionally the tensile strength
reported in the instrument, which necessitates recalculating them. Fitting any expression to
the tensile data is also shifted by this initial spike, as it has been showcased in figure 4.5.3,
hence it has been disregarded.
46
==PAGE:49==
Chapter 4. Results and discussion
Al´ız Hanga Lelik
Figure 4.5.2: Excluding the initial 5% and the last few % of the tensile curve is necessary, because of
the noise in the data, as exemplified on this sample of EX100old with 5% added THF.
While the last 1-2% of the deformation recorded by the instrument is usually disregarded in
these measurements, for many samples (such as the one in Figure 4.5.2) there is a decrease in
the recorded stress well before that, as the ductile fracture occurs. Therefore, I have chosen to
always disregard the last 10-20% of the deformation, as these anomalies effect the accuracy of
the modeling, and as a result, the fitted model consistently underestimates the measured data.
Figure 4.5.3: Comparison of fitting to cleaned and raw data on a sample of HV −15 with 5% added
THF. R2 = 0.992 and 0.270 respectively.
It must be noted, that necking commonly occurred in the samples from the new batch of
the EX100, well before the fracture of the sample. This caused characteristic ”dips” in the
stress-strain curve (for example in figure 4.1.2). This strongly affects the fitting, as the dips
are even more pronounced in the reduced stress, similarly to other noises in the measurements,
further detailed below. For that reason, I have chosen to cut off all datasets where necking
occurred at 600% strain, for the purposes of applying the modified slip-link model. This means
that the results acquired from those samples cannot necessarily be generalised for the entire
strain range (as we have seen in the case of the EX050 samples, the modified slip-link model
is also deviating from the measurement data from very high extensions).
47
==PAGE:50==
Chapter 4. Results and discussion
Al´ız Hanga Lelik
The tensile measurements all have some level of noise in them, which is typical for soft
materials. The noise becomes even more pronounced in the reduced stress, especially in the
initial stages of the deformation, which can lead to inaccuracies in the fitting of the slip-
link model. The R2 values, when comparing the measured and the fitted reduced stress, are
also distorted by the noise, leading to low values even when the corresponding fit is overall
acceptable. Thus, the R2 values have only been evaluated for for the engineering stress-strain
curves.
This noise also makes it unreliable to determine the minimum of the reduced stress-strain
curve algorithmically, by taking the minimum (even when the minimum is taken only within
a certain range). Therefore I have chosen to choose the minimum by hand for each sample,
rounded up to 5%. Naturally, this has a certain amount of uncertainty as well.
A smoothing algorithm such as a moving average or Savitzky-Golay filter (pre-built into
Python’s SciPy library [50]) could have been employed; however when fitting to data, where
the shape of the curve determines the results, such smoothing can change the shape in ways
which distorts the results [51]. For future work, the effect of employing these functions to
improve the accuracy of determining εred,min is recommended to be assessed.
48
==PAGE:51==
Chapter 5
Conclusion
In summary, the slip-link model previously used to model the tensile properties of concatenated
ring networks was modified to better fit the measurement data of samples at high extensions
and with added filler. The hypothesis that, thanks to combining the slip-link model with the
Hookiean behaviour of elastic materials, we can obtain a model which is more flexible and
better predicts the stress-strain curve in many cases than the ones before, was accepted.
Samples of a concatenated ring network silicone elastomer without filler (HV −15) and dif-
ferent commercial high elongations formulations with added filler were made. The effect of dif-
ferent amount of added THF solvent during curing was examined. It was observed that adding
solvent accelerates the curing, presumably leading to a different structure in the ring network,
judging from the increase in modulus (both in LVE and tensile testing) in the EX−formulations.
Samples with 50% solvent however had lower moduli than the samples with 10%, but not lower
than the samples without any THF, suggesting that at that point, the effect of the solvent
creating a more loose network counteracts the effect it has by accelerating curing via giving the
prepolymer PDMS chains higher mobility. In the unfilled HV −15 formulation, the presence of
only 10% solvent did lead to a softer material than the one without THF and the extensiblity
has highly improved. The addition of solvent had no effect on the behaviour of any of the
materials upon repeated actuation. To summarize, the hypothesis that the concatenated ring
network materials can be made softer by the addition of solvent during curing, was rejected.
Evaluating the parameters obtained from the model, εred,min was found to follow the clearest
trends, taking increased values in softer samples. But in figure 4.4.11 it is also observable that
the material composition plays a role.
Eapparent was also compared to the Young’s moduli
obtained from tensile testing of the samples (figure 4.4.12). These comparisons highlighted
some trends which were not directly observable from the tensile data.
The Gs/Gc ratio varied highly between samples and its interpretation is still somewhat
unclear. Big differences in how the two parameters are fitted might indicate that there are
significant structural differences in the network, such as a different ratio of elastically active
rings versus those which contribute by acting as a plasticizer, or simply a rings with higher
MW forming, which may be able to slide further on each other.
49
==PAGE:52==
Chapter 5. Conclusion
Al´ız Hanga Lelik
5.1
Future work
On traditional crosslinked elastomers, adding silica filler has been known to increase the mod-
ulus, so it is no surprise that the concatenated ring networks mirror these results. However,
the effect of varying filler amounts has not been assessed. On crosslinked networks, the mod-
ulus and tear strength are increased with increasing amount of filler [52, 53], and the same is
expected on the ring networks. What might give additional information on the effect of the
amount of filler on the properties of the material is the change in the parameters obtained from
the modified slip-link model, particularly the shift in εred,min. We have observed that the strain
at which the reduced stress has a minimum is very different for filled and unfilled systems,
but it still remains unknown whether εred,min decreases immediately when filler is added, or if
the change is gradual - the latter would allow for tailoring where the transition between the
slip-link and the Hookiean behaviour occurs.
However, the amount of filler is not the only parameter affecting the mechanical properties.
The size and shape of the particles, along with the orientation (if the particles are anisotropic)
have a major effect. The interfacial interactions between the silica and the PDMS matrix are
also very important, as they essentially define whether the failure of the sample occurs in the
matrix or at the interface. To tailor this interaction, the fillers usually undergo surface treatment
[13, 54]. Since there was no information available on these parameters for the commercial ExSil
EX-050 and EX-100 formulations, these effects were not accounted for.
Similarly, the observed effects on the curing time and its possible impact on the size of the
rings forming was not quantified. Confirming the change in the pot life with shearing rheology
studies on the mixture would be convenient, to observe the time it takes for the mixture to
transition from behaving like a viscous liquid to an elastic solid. Measuring the molecular weight
of the concatenated rings is more difficult, as the usual method of size exclusion chromatography
(SEC) is more suited for linear polymers and is likely to underestimate the size of the rings[55].
This can be improved with employing correction factors [56], or a dual-detector system [57],
which can be a possible solution, to better assess the effect of the molecular weight of the rings,
than just considering the MW of the prepolymer. The swelling experiments used to quantify
the sol fraction on the HV-samples without solvent could be repeated on the samples with
solvent, to see if the different curing conditions caused any changes in that parameter.
Since we see that it is likely that the speed of curing has a non-neglibile effect on the
mechanical properties, different curing conditions (especially the duration and temperature
of the oven curing) can also be explored to finetune these properties. Another area, where
this study only scratches the surface, is the mechanical properties upon repeated actuation.
Some samples were subjected to cyclic testing, for a total of 15 cycles, at a crosshead speed
similar to that which was used in the tensile testing. In some proposed applications of silicone
elastomers, such as biomimicking materials, the material needs to withstand hundreds of cycles
in a short time without significant change in the properties - the tests currently performed do
not provide information on that. Furthermore, the applicability of the mechanical models on
the stress-strain curves gained from cyclic testing was not evaluated.
As discussed before, one of the weaknesses of this model is that not all parameters can be
50
==PAGE:53==
Chapter 5. Conclusion
Al´ız Hanga Lelik
attributed to structural features and therefore lack physical meaning. By further exploring the
structure of the concatenated ring networks in the aforementioned ways, there is a possibility
that the model can be further validated by making these connections.
51
==PAGE:54==
Bibliography
[1]
J. V. Alem´an et al. “Definitions of terms relating to the structure and processing of sols,
gels, networks, and inorganic-organic hybrid materials”. In: Pure and Applied Chemistry
79.10 (2007), pp. 1801–1829. doi: doi:10.1351/pac200779101801.
[2]
Eurostat. Rubber and plastics - European business — Facts and figures. 2006. url: https:
//ec.europa.eu/eurostat/documents/3217494/5706739/KS- BW- 09- 001- 07-
EN.PDF.pdf/575df7d8-b162-4a71-b7b4-b902122c61d3?t=1414774186000 (visited on
04/12/2023).
[3]
I. Manners. “Polymers and the Periodic Table: Recent Developments in Inorganic Polymer
Science”. In: Angewandte Chemie International Edition in English 35.15 (1996), pp. 1602–
1621. doi: https://doi.org/10.1002/anie.199616021.
[4]
F.B. Madsen et al. “The Current State of Silicone-Based Dielectric Elastomer Transduc-
ers”. In: Macromolecular Rapid Communications 37.5 (2016), pp. 378–413. doi: https:
//doi.org/10.1002/marc.201500576.
[5]
M. Vatankhah-Varnosfaderani et al. “Mimicking biological stress–strain behaviour with
synthetic elastomers”. In: Nature 549.7673 (Sept. 2017), pp. 497–501. issn: 1476-4687.
doi: 10.1038/nature23673.
[6]
Pengpeng Hu. “Highly stretchable/soft silicone elastomers with tailored network struc-
tures”. English. PhD thesis. 2021.
[7]
P. Hu et al. “Elastomers without Covalent Cross-Linking: Concatenated Rings Giving
Rise to Elasticity”. In: ACS Macro Letters 9.10 (2020). PMID: 35653663, pp. 1458–1463.
doi: 10.1021/acsmacrolett.0c00635.
[8]
P. Hu et al. “Soft silicone elastomers with no chemical cross-linking and unprecedented
softness and stability”. In: Electroactive Polymer Actuators and Devices (EAPAD) XXII.
Ed. by Yoseph Bar-Cohen. Vol. 11375. International Society for Optics and Photonics.
SPIE, 2020, p. 1137517. doi: 10.1117/12.2557003.
[9]
Z. Rigbi and J.E. Mark. “Concurrent chain extension and crosslinking of hydroxyl-
terminated poly(dimethyl siloxane): Possible formation of catenate structures”. In: Jour-
nal of Polymer Science Part B: Polymer Physics 24.2 (1986), pp. 443–449. doi: https:
//doi.org/10.1002/polb.1986.090240217.
[10]
P. Thirion and T. Weil. “Assessment of the sliding link model of chain entanglement in
polymer networks”. In: Polymer 25.5 (1984), pp. 609–614. issn: 0032-3861. doi: https:
//doi.org/10.1016/0032-3861(84)90027-2.
52
==PAGE:55==
Chapter 5. BIBLIOGRAPHY
Al´ız Hanga Lelik
[11]
A.L. Larsen, P. Sommer-Larsen, and O. Hassager. “How to tune rubber elasticity”. In:
Smart Structures and Materials 2004: Electroactive Polymer Actuators and Devices (EA-
PAD). Ed. by Yoseph Bar-Cohen. Vol. 5385. International Society for Optics and Pho-
tonics. SPIE, 2004, pp. 108–117. doi: 10.1117/12.538057.
[12]
J. Goff et al. “Soft Materials with Recoverable Shape Factors from Extreme Distortion
States”. In: Advanced Materials 28.12 (2016), pp. 2393–2398. doi: https://doi.org/
10.1002/adma.201503320.
[13]
P. Mazurek, S. Vudayagiri, and A.L. Skov. “How to tailor flexible silicone elastomers with
mechanical integrity: a tutorial review”. In: Chem. Soc. Rev. 48 (6 2019), pp. 1448–1464.
doi: 10.1039/C8CS00963E.
[14]
Smokefoot. PDMS structure. This work is licensed under the Creative Commons Attribu-
tion 4.0 International License. 2012. url: https://commons.wikimedia.org/w/index.
php?curid=23410088.
[15]
B. Marciniec. “Hydrosilylation : a comprehensive review on recent advances”. In: 2010.
[16]
P. Hu, J. Madsen, and A.L. Skov. “One reaction to make highly stretchable or extremely
soft silicone elastomers from easily available materials”. In: Nature Communications 13.1
(Jan. 2022), p. 370. issn: 2041-1723. doi: 10.1038/s41467-022-28015-2.
[17]
A.L. Skov and L. Yu. “Optimization Techniques for Improving the Performance of Silicone-
Based Dielectric Elastomers”. In: Advanced Engineering Materials 20.5 (2018), p. 1700762.
doi: https://doi.org/10.1002/adem.201700762.
[18]
D. Paul and J. Mark. “Fillers for polysiloxane (“silicone”) elastomers”. In: Progress in
Polymer Science 35 (July 2010), pp. 893–901. doi: 10.1016/j.progpolymsci.2010.03.
004.
[19]
J. Vaicekauskaite et al. “Mapping the mechanical and electrical properties of commercial
silicone elastomer formulations for stretchable transducers”. In: J. Mater. Chem. C 8 (4
2020), pp. 1273–1279. doi: 10.1039/C9TC05072H.
[20]
K.A. Mazich and M.A. Samus. “Role of entanglement couplings in threshold fracture of
a rubber network”. In: Macromolecules 23.9 (1990), pp. 2478–2483.
[21]
L. Bernardi et al. “On the cyclic deformation behavior, fracture properties and cy-
totoxicity of silicone-based elastomers for biomedical applications”. In: Polymer Test-
ing 60 (2017), pp. 117–123. issn: 0142-9418. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
polymertesting.2017.03.018.
[22]
S. Michel et al. “A comparison between silicone and acrylic elastomers as dielectric mate-
rials in electroactive polymer actuators”. In: Polymer International 59.3 (2010), pp. 391–
399. doi: https://doi.org/10.1002/pi.2751.
[23]
A. D. Drozdov, S. Clyens, and N. Theilgaard. “Multi-cycle deformation of silicone elas-
tomer: observations and constitutive modeling with finite strains”. In: Meccanica 48.8
(Oct. 2013), pp. 2061–2074. issn: 1572-9648. doi: 10.1007/s11012-013-9725-8.
[24]
B. Puk´anszky. Bevezet´es a m˝uanyagok fiizk´aj´aba. Budapest: BME Fizikai K´emia ´es Anyag-
tudm´anyi Tansz´ek, 2012. isbn: 978-963-313-047-6.
53
==PAGE:56==
Chapter 5. BIBLIOGRAPHY
Al´ız Hanga Lelik
[25]
A. Dorfmann and R.W. Ogden. “A constitutive model for the Mullins effect with perma-
nent set in particle-reinforced rubber”. In: International Journal of Solids and Structures
41.7 (2004), pp. 1855–1878. issn: 0020-7683. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
ijsolstr.2003.11.014.
[26]
J. Diani, B. Fayolle, and P. Gilormini. “A review on the Mullins effect”. In: European
Polymer Journal 45.3 (2009), pp. 601–612. issn: 0014-3057. doi: https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.eurpolymj.2008.11.017.
[27]
T.F. Tian et al. “Study of shear-stiffened elastomers”. In: 21.12 (Oct. 2012), p. 125009.
doi: 10.1088/0964-1726/21/12/125009.
[28]
A.D. Drozdov and A. Dorfmann. “The Payne effect for particle-reinforced elastomers”.
In: Polymer Engineering & Science 42.3 (2002), pp. 591–604. doi: https://doi.org/
10.1002/pen.10974.
[29]
Y. Koyama. “Synthesis of topologically crosslinked polymers with rotaxane-crosslinking
points”. In: Polymer Journal 46.6 (June 2014), pp. 315–322. issn: 1349-0540. doi: 10.
1038/pj.2014.9.
[30]
G. Liu et al. “Polycatenanes: synthesis, characterization, and physical understanding”.
In: Chem. Soc. Rev. 51 (12 2022), pp. 4928–4948. doi: 10.1039/D2CS00256F.
[31]
M. Schappacher and A. Deffieux. “Imaging of Catenated, Figure-of-Eight, and Trefoil
Knot Polymer Rings”. In: Angewandte Chemie International Edition 48.32 (2009), pp. 5930–
5933. doi: https://doi.org/10.1002/anie.200900704.
[32]
K. Iwata and T. Ohtsuki. “On catenate network formation by end-linking reactions”.
In: Journal of Polymer Science Part B: Polymer Physics 31.4 (1993), pp. 441–446. doi:
https://doi.org/10.1002/polb.1993.090310408.
[33]
H.L. Trautenberg, J. Sommer, and D. G¨oritz. “Kinetics of network formation by end-
linking: A monte carlo study”. In: Macromolecular Symposia 81.1 (1994), pp. 153–160.
doi: https://doi.org/10.1002/masy.19940810117.
[34]
L.C. DeBolt and J.E. Mark. “Models for the trapping of cyclic poly(dimethylsiloxane)
(PDMS) chains in PDMS networks”. In: Macromolecules 20.10 (Oct. 1987), pp. 2369–
2374. issn: 0024-9297. doi: 10.1021/ma00176a007.
[35]
J. Roovers. “Viscoelastic properties of polybutadiene rings”. In: Macromolecules 21.5
(May 1988), pp. 1517–1521. issn: 0024-9297. doi: 10.1021/ma00183a049.
[36]
J. Davidson and N. Goulbourne. “A nonaffine network model for elastomers undergoing
finite deformations”. In: Journal of Mechanics Physics of Solids 61 (Aug. 2013), pp. 1784–
1797. doi: 10.1016/j.jmps.2013.03.009.
[37]
J.O. Thompson. “Hooke’s Law”. In: Science 64.1656 (1926), pp. 298–299. doi: 10.1126/
science.64.1656.298.
[38]
Lecture notes on Strain for Mechanical properties of Materials. KTH Royal Institute of
Technology, 2021.
[39]
J. E. Mark. “Rubber elasticity”. In: Journal of Chemical Education 58.11 (Nov. 1981),
p. 898. issn: 0021-9584. doi: 10.1021/ed058p898.
54
==PAGE:57==
Chapter 5. BIBLIOGRAPHY
Al´ız Hanga Lelik
[40]
W. Kuhn and F. Gr¨un. “Statistical behavior of the single chain molecule and its relation
to the statistical behavior of assemblies consisting of many chain molecules”. In: Journal
of Polymer Science 1.3 (1946), pp. 183–199. doi: https://doi.org/10.1002/pol.
1946.120010306.
[41]
M. Rubinstein and S. Panyukov. “Elasticity of Polymer Networks”. In: Macromolecules
35.17 (Aug. 2002), pp. 6670–6686. issn: 0024-9297. doi: 10.1021/ma0203849.
[42]
S. Panyukov. “Theory of Flexible Polymer Networks: Elasticity and Heterogeneities”. In:
Polymers 12.4 (2020). issn: 2073-4360. doi: 10.3390/polym12040767.
[43]
P.J. Flory. “Network topology and the theory of rubber elasticity”. In: British polymer
journal 17.2 (1985), pp. 96–102.
[44]
A. Ali, M. Hosseini, and B. Sahari. “A review and comparison on some rubber elasticity
models”. In: Journal of Scientific and Industrial Research 69 (July 2010), pp. 495–500.
[45]
T.A. Vilgis and M. Otto. “Elasticity of entangled polymer loops: Olympic gels”. In: Phys.
Rev. E 56 (2 Aug. 1997), R1314–R1317. doi: 10.1103/PhysRevE.56.R1314.
[46]
S.F. Edwards and Th. Vilgis. “The effect of entanglements in rubber elasticity”. In:
Polymer 27.4 (1986), pp. 483–492. issn: 0032-3861. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/
0032-3861(86)90231-4.
[47]
R.C. Ball et al. “Elasticity of entangled networks”. In: Polymer 22.8 (1981), pp. 1010–
1018. issn: 0032-3861. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/0032-3861(81)90284-6.
[48]
Laboratory exercise notes in ”M˝uanyagok fizik´aja” (Polymer physics). Budapesti M˝uszaki
´es Gazdas´agtudom´anyi Egyetem, M˝uanyag ´es Gumiipari Laborat´orium, 2018.
[49]
scipy.optimize.curvefit. url: https : / / docs . scipy . org / doc / scipy / reference /
generated/scipy.optimize.curve_fit.html (visited on 04/09/2023).
[50]
scipy.signal.savgolfilter. url: https : / / docs . scipy . org / doc / scipy / reference /
generated/scipy.signal.savgol_filter.html (visited on 04/09/2023).
[51]
Al´ız Lelik. “Polimerek anizoterm krist´alyosod´asi folyamat´anak szimul´aci´oja”. Bachelor’s
thesis. Budapest University of Technology and Economics, M˝uanyag ´es Gumiipari Labo-
rat´orium, 2021.
[52]
A. Camenzind et al. “Structure strength of silica-PDMS nanocomposites”. In: Polymer
51.8 (2010), pp. 1796–1804. issn: 0032-3861. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
polymer.2010.02.030.
[53]
J. Liu et al. “Preparation of reactive nano-silica/polydimethylsiloxane composites with
multiple crosslinked network structure and investigation of their mechanical properties”.
In: Composites Communications 19 (2020), pp. 37–41. issn: 2452-2139. doi: https :
//doi.org/10.1016/j.coco.2020.02.003.
[54]
J. Liu et al. “Surface modification of silica and its compounding with polydimethylsiloxane
matrix: interaction of modified silica filler with PDMS”. In: Iranian Polymer Journal 21.9
(2012), pp. 583–589. issn: 1735-5265. doi: 10.1007/s13726-012-0062-x.
[55]
J.S. Higgins et al. “Studies of cyclic and linear poly(dimethyl siloxanes): 12. Observation of
diffusion behaviour by quasielastic neutron scattering”. In: Polymer 24.7 (1983), pp. 793–
799. issn: 0032-3861. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/0032-3861(83)90191-X.
55
==PAGE:58==
Chapter 5. BIBLIOGRAPHY
Al´ız Hanga Lelik
[56]
H. Tobita and N. Hamashima. “Monte Carlo simulation of size exclusion chromatography
for randomly branched and crosslinked polymers”. In: Journal of Polymer Science Part B:
Polymer Physics 38.15 (2000), pp. 2009–2018. doi: https://doi.org/10.1002/1099-
0488(20000801)38:15<2009::AID-POLB60>3.0.CO;2-4.
[57]
K. Mojsiewicz-Pie´nkowska. “Size-exclusion chromatography with evaporative light scat-
tering detection: Method for determination of polydimethylsiloxanes: I. Testing depen-
dence of molecular weight of polydimethylsiloxanes and injected mass upon the detector
signal”. In: Journal of Chromatography B 865.1 (2008), pp. 1–6. issn: 1570-0232. doi:
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jchromb.2008.02.021.
56
==PAGE:59==
List of Figures
2.1.1 Structure of a linear polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) chain. [14] . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.1.2 Typical reaction to prepare a crosslinked silicone elastomer [15]
. . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.1.3 Example reaction between the hydride and the vinyl groups of telechelic functional
PDMS chains. Based on [16], for simplicity bifunctional PDMS chains portrayed. . .
8
2.1.4 Typical stress-strain curves recorded during cycling testing of a silicone elastomer
(based on a sample of EX100new formulation). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.1.5 Typical storage and loss moduli of a silicone elastomer in oscillating shear (based on
a sample of EX100 new with 50% added THF).
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.2.1 Concatenated ring network in relaxed and stretched state [7] . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.2.2 Elastically active and inactive rings in the system [7]
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.3.1 Typical stress-strain curve of an elastomer (based on a sample of HV-15 with 10 %
added THF).
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.1.1 The frame used for casting the tensile samples. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4.1.1 The stress-strain curves recorded during tensile testing the EX100new, EX050 and
HV −15 formulations without added solvent.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4.1.2 Comparison of the stress-strain curves recorded during tensile testing the EX100old,
EX100new, EX050 and HV −15 formulations with 10% THF added. . . . . . . . .
25
4.1.3 The effect of added solvent on the stress-strain curves upon repeated actuation, on
a sample of HV −15 and EX100new. Note, that the y-axes are different, as the two
materials have different moduli by a power of 10.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.2.1 Top sample is EX100new with no added solvent, while the bottom sample contains
10 wt% added THF. After mixing for the same amount of time, the sample without
solvent maintained its low viscosity to flow freely during casting, while the other
sample became highly viscous, trapping air bubbles. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.2.2 The effect of added solvent during curing on the storage modulus G′ and tanδ mea-
sured by LVE testing of different concatenated ring networks.
. . . . . . . . . . . .
28
57
==PAGE:60==
Chapter 5. LIST OF FIGURES
Al´ız Hanga Lelik
4.2.3 The effect of added solvent during curing on stress-strain curves measured by tensile
testing of different concatenated ring networks. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4.2.4 The effect of added solvent on the storage modulus (left) and the stress-strain curves
(right) in two different formulations.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.2.5 The effect of added solvent on the stress-strain curves upon repeated actuation, on
a sample of EX100new with no solvent and with 10% added THF. . . . . . . . . . .
30
4.2.6 The effect of added solvent on the stress-strain curves upon repeated actuation, on
a sample of HV −15 with no solvent and with 10% added THF. . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4.2.7 The effect of the amount of added solvent on the stress-strain curves upon repeated
actuation, on a sample of EX050 with 10% and 20% added THF. . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.3.1 Example of fitting the slip-link model to an HV −15 (unfilled) sample. One can see
the deviation of the measurement data from the model’s prediction at high extensions.
(R2 = 0.953) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4.3.2 Example of fitting the slip-link model to an EX100new (filled) sample. The model
does not provide a good fit for most of the extension range (R2 = 0.765). . . . . . .
32
4.3.3 Comparison of the initial stage of the tensile curves in different formulations with
and without solvent. The general shape is the same, even though the modulus differs. 33
4.3.4 The reduced stress obtained from fitting to the slip-link model and to the Hookiean
equation with the apparent modulus, on the example of an EX100old sample with
10% THF added. The measured reduced stress reaches a minimum at around 65%
strain. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4.3.5 The equation and the shape of the transitional function (εred,min = 65%).
. . . . . .
35
4.4.1 The measured and the predicted stress-strain curve of an EX100new sample with
50% added THF. R2 = 0.997 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
4.4.2 E and Eapparent at different solvent content in the EX100 and EX050 formulations.
Error bars have been omitted for the sake of clarity in the figure, however the pa-
rameters of individual samples are found in appendix C.2.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
4.4.3 εred,min at different solvent content in the EX100 and EX050 formulations. . . . . .
37
4.4.4 Gs/Gc ratio at different solvent content in the EX100 and EX050 formulations.
Error bars have been omitted for the sake of clarity in the figure. . . . . . . . . . . .
38
4.4.5 The measured and the predicted stress-strain curve of an HV −15 sample with 10%
added THF. R2 = 0.993
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
4.4.6 εred,min, E and Eapparent values for the EX050 and HV −15 samples at different
solvent contents. Error bars have been omitted for the sake of clarity in the figure
on the left. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
4.4.7 Gs/Gc values for the EX050 and HV −15 samples at different solvent contents.
Error bars have been omitted for the sake of clarity in the figure. . . . . . . . . . . .
40
58
==PAGE:61==
Chapter 5. LIST OF FIGURES
Al´ız Hanga Lelik
4.4.8 The modified slip-link model applied on a sample of a concatenated ring network
made from DMS-V05 and DMS-H21 prepolymers. R2 = 0.990 . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
4.4.9 The εred,min and Eapparent values obtained from the modified slip-link model when
applied on systems of concatenated rings with different molecular weights. Error
bars have been omitted for the sake of clarity. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
4.4.10The Gs/Gc values obtained from the modified slip-link model when applied on sys-
tems of concatenated rings with different molecular weights. Error bars have been
omitted for the sake of clarity. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
4.4.11The εred,min values obtained when evaluating the reduced stress-strain curves of dif-
ferent samples, as a function of their Young’s moduli. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
4.4.12The Eapparent values obtained from the modified slip-link model in samples with dif-
ferent moduli. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
4.4.13The considerable deviation of the model and the measured data around εred,min = 60% 45
4.5.1 Visible bubble in the fracture surface of a tensile testing sample. . . . . . . . . . . .
46
4.5.2 Excluding the initial 5% and the last few % of the tensile curve is necessary, because
of the noise in the data, as exemplified on this sample of EX100old with 5% added
THF. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
4.5.3 Comparison of fitting to cleaned and raw data on a sample of HV −15 with 5%
added THF. R2 = 0.992 and 0.270 respectively.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
59
==PAGE:62==
List of Tables
3.1.1 Molecular weight and dispersity of the α-monovinyl-ω-monohydride terminated poly-
dimethylsiloxane macromonomers [7](supporting information). . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.1.2 The properties of the silicone rubbers prepared from the EX100 and EX050 formu-
lations, from the technical data sheets of the material. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4.1.1 The mechanical properties obtained from tensile testing, averaged across specimens
from identical samples for each formulation.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4.4.1 The resulting parameters of fitting the modified slip link to the tensile data of silicone
elastomer samples with added filler. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
4.4.2 The results of applying the modified slip link on the silicone elastomer samples with-
out added filler. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
4.4.3 The molecular weights of the prepolymers used to form concatenated ring networks.
The accuracy of the SEC measurements is ±10%. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
A.1 Lot numbers identifying all the chemicals used to prepare the samples . . . . . . . .
62
A.2 The compositions and preparation conditions of the HV-samples.
Note: samples
which were not tested due to not curing or having too low viscosity for the employed
method of casting are also included, marked with italics. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
A.3 The compositions and preparation conditions of the EX-samples . . . . . . . . . . .
63
B.1 The tensile properties of each EX-sample individually . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
B.2 The tensile properties of each EX-sample individually . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
B.2 The tensile properties of each EX-sample individually . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
C.1 The parameters obtained from applying the original slip-link model on each sample
individually . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
C.1 The parameters obtained from applying the original slip-link model on each sample
individually . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
C.1 The parameters obtained from applying the original slip-link model on each sample
individually . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
68
60
==PAGE:63==
Chapter 5. LIST OF TABLES
Al´ız Hanga Lelik
C.1 The parameters obtained from applying the original slip-link model on each sample
individually . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
C.1 The parameters obtained from applying the original slip-link model on each sample
individually . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
70
C.1 The parameters obtained from applying the original slip-link model on each sample
individually . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
71
C.2 The parameters obtained from applying the modified slip-link model on each sample
individually . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
71
C.2 The parameters obtained from applying the modified slip-link model on each sample
individually . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
72
C.3 The results of applying the modified slip-link model on different concatenated ring
networks, for each formulation separately. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
73
61
==PAGE:64==
Appendix
A
Material information
Table A.1: Lot numbers identifying all the chemicals used to prepare the samples
Material name
Composition
Supplier
Lot number
Date opened
(if known)
DMS-HV-15
α-monovinyl-ω-
monohydride
terminated
poly-
dimethylsiloxane
Gelest Inc.
8B-32435
-
DMS-HV-22
α-monovinyl-ω-
monohydride
terminated
poly-
dimethylsiloxane
Gelest Inc.
9B-35064
-
DMS-HV-31
α-monovinyl-ω-
monohydride
terminated
poly-
dimethylsiloxane
Gelest Inc.
1H-38969
-
SIP6830.3-5GM
3.0%
Pt
in
vinyl
terminated
poly-
dimethylsiloxane
Gelest Inc.
0142647824
2021.09.06
EM2-EX100 (old)
part A
Gelest Inc.
KCD-A-35b
2019.03.11
part B
Gelest Inc.
KCD-A-35c
2019.03.11
EM2-EX100 (new)
part A
Gelest Inc.
11617958111
2023.03.17
part B
Gelest Inc.
11617958111
2023.03.17
EM2-EX050
part A
Gelest Inc.
12467986981
2023.03.17
part B
Gelest Inc.
12467986981
2023.03.17
THF
≥99% purity
Sigma-Aldrich
STBJ5575
-
62
==PAGE:65==
Appendix
Al´ız Hanga Lelik
Table A.2: The compositions and preparation conditions of the HV-samples. Note: samples which were not
tested due to not curing or having too low viscosity for the employed method of casting are also included,
marked with italics.
Sample ID
Polymer [g]
Catalyst [mg]
THF [g]
mixing
curing
HV-15 + 5%
THF
5.78
5.72
0.27
3500 rpm
1 min
72 h RT,
24 h 80 °C
HV-15
+
10% THF
7.17
7.40
0.69
3500 rpm
1 min
60h RT,
16 h 80 °C
HV-15 + 20%
THF
5.92
5.86
1.18
3500 rpm
1 min
72 h RT,
24 h 80 °C
HV-22
+
5%
THF
11.7
11.7
0.55
3500 rpm
2x1 min
72 h RT,
24 h 80 °C
HV-22 + 10%
THF
9.03
9.03
0.92
3500 rpm
2x1 min
72 h RT,
24 h 80 °C
HV-31
+
5%
THF
6.43
6.29
0.34
3500 rpm
2x1 min
72 h RT,
16 h 80 °C, 72 h
100 °C
HV-31 + 10%
THF
5.02
4.91
0.52
3500 rpm
2x1 min
72 h RT,
16 h 80 °C, 72 h
100 °C
Table A.3: The compositions and preparation conditions of the EX-samples
Sample ID
Part A [g]
Part B [g]
THF [g]
mixing
curing
EX100 old
13.63
0.137
-
3500 rpm
2 min
72 h 100 °C
EX100 old +
5% THF
6.59
0.066
0.32
3500 rpm
2x2 min
72 h RT,
72 h 100 °C
EX100 old +
10% THF
6.22
0.063
0.62
3500 rpm
2x2 min
72 h RT,
72 h 100 °C
EX100 old +
20% THF
5.31
0.053
1.11
3500 rpm
2x2 min
72 h RT,
72 h 100 °C
EX100 new
5.49
0.055
-
3500 rpm
2 min
72 h RT,
72 h 100 °C
EX100 new no
extra
curing
time
8.67
0.088
-
3500 rpm
2 min
72 h 100 °C
EX100 new +
10% THF
6.65
0.067
0.68
3500 rpm
2x2 min
72 h RT,
72 h 100 °C
EX100 new +
50% THF
6.43
0.064
3.02
3500 rpm
2x2 min
72 h RT,
72 h 100 °C
EX050
5.92
0.061
-
3500 rpm
2 min
72 h RT,
72 h 100 °C
EX050 +
10% THF
6.01
0.063
0.59
3500 rpm
2x2 min
72 h RT,
72 h 100 °C
EX050 +
20% THF
11.14
0.114
2.22
3500 rpm
2x2 min
72 h RT,
72 h 100 °C
EX050 +
50% THF
7.95
0.079
3.87
3500 rpm
2x2 min
72 h RT,
72 h 100 °C
63
==PAGE:66==
Appendix
Al´ız Hanga Lelik
B
Mechanical properties
Table B.1: The tensile properties of each EX-sample individually
Sample ID
σ [MPa]
ε [%]
E [MPa]
t [µm]
HV-15 - 1
0.435
521.6
0.200
-
HV-15 - 2
0.360
469.6
0.169
-
HV-15 - 3
0.224
258.8
0.126
-
HV-15 - 4
0.411
509.5
0.170
-
HV-15 + 5% THF - 1
0.078
929.2
0.244
740
HV-15 + 5% THF - 2
0.059
888.8
0.190
740
HV-15 + 5% THF - 3
0.094
1062.4
0.345
740
HV-15 + 5% THF - 4
0.101
1511.7
0.415
740
HV-15 + 10% THF - 1
0.37
1006.4
0.093
710
HV-15 + 10% THF - 2
0.30
1090.1
0.077
710
HV-15 + 10% THF - 3
0.26
1212.8
0.060
710
HV-15 + 10% THF - 4
0.23
1166.1
0.053
710
Table B.2: The tensile properties of each EX-sample individually
Sample ID
σ [MPa]
ε [%]
E [MPa]
t [µm]
EX100 old - 1
0.39
509.5
0.071
860
EX100 old - 2
0.10
189.1
0.056
860
EX100 old - 3
0.38
507.2
0.067
860
EX100 old + 5% THF - 1
1.34
647.6
0.189
650
EX100 old + 5% THF - 2
0.87
520.4
0.168
650
EX100 old + 5% THF - 3
0.72
477.2
0.140
650
EX100 old + 10% THF - 1
0.74
576.5
0.138
780
EX100 old + 10% THF - 2
1.31
697.4
0.181
780
EX100 old + 10% THF - 3
1.23
670.1
0.198
780
EX100 old + 10% THF - 4
1.30
642.7
0.217
780
EX100 old + 20% THF - 1
1.23
600.7
0.200
650
EX100 old + 20% THF - 2
1.15
559.8
0.241
650
EX100 old + 20% THF - 3
1.24
607.2
0.208
650
EX100 old + 20% THF - 4
1.05
559.5
0.191
650
EX100 new - 1
10.41
1439.2
0.687
1110
EX100 new - 2
9.38
1350.4
0.649
1110
EX100 new - 3
9.27
1463.4
0.630
1110
EX100 new - 4
8.08
1420.8
0.598
1110
EX100 new no drying - 1
1.16
529.0
0.425
1270
EX100 new no drying - 2
1.49
603.1
0.568
1270
EX100 new no drying - 3
8.66
1351.1
0.677
1270
EX100 new no drying - 4
8.03
1305.2
0.611
1270
EX100 new + 10% THF - 1
6.66
1094.9
0.734
1260
EX100 new + 10% THF - 2
10.62
1412.9
0.774
1260
EX100 new + 10% THF - 3
6.11
1204.3
0.553
1260
EX100 new + 10% THF - 4
5.00
1028.3
0.645
1260
EX100 new + 50% THF - 1
6.11
1232.4
0.539
1030
64
==PAGE:67==
Appendix
Al´ız Hanga Lelik
Table B.2: The tensile properties of each EX-sample individually
Sample ID
σ [MPa]
ε [%]
E [MPa]
t [µm]
EX100 new + 50% THF - 2
4.84
1156.3
0.348
1030
EX100 new + 50% THF - 3
4.26
1109.5
0.362
1030
EX100 new + 50% THF - 4
6.87
1203.7
0.702
1030
EX050 - 1
1.69
990.8
0.324
1400
EX050 - 2
2.52
1298.3
0.224
1400
EX050 - 3
2.62
1319.9
0.279
1400
EX050 - 4
3.21
1483.1
0.278
1400
EX050 + 10% THF - 1
3.65
1349.9
0.389
1290
EX050 + 10% THF - 2
3.19
1099.9
0.414
1290
EX050 + 10% THF - 3
2.50
869.7
0.280
1290
EX050 + 10% THF - 4
2.56
969.7
0.420
1290
EX050 + 20% THF - 1
2.07
1169.7
0.217
1420
EX050 + 20% THF - 2
2.47
1239.9
0.287
1420
EX050 + 20% THF - 3
4.31
1249.9
0.425
1420
65
==PAGE:68==
Appendix
Al´ız Hanga Lelik
C
Modelling results
Table C.1: The parameters obtained from applying the original slip-link model on each sample individually
Sample ID
η [-]
Gc [MPa]
Gs [MPa]
Gs
Gc [-]
R2 [-]
EX100 old - 1
0.1
5.12E-02
5.19E-14
1.01E-12
0.874
0.23
5.12E-02
4.09E-17
8.00E-16
0.874
0.5
5.12E-02
4.65E-11
9.09E-10
0.874
2
5.12E-02
2.31E-13
4.52E-12
0.874
10
5.12E-02
6.37E-14
1.24E-12
0.874
EX100 old - 2
0.1
2.51E-02
6.83E-11
2.72E-09
0.810
0.23
2.51E-02
3.13E-11
1.25E-09
0.810
0.5
2.51E-02
3.75E-13
1.49E-11
0.810
2
2.51E-02
3.99E-10
1.59E-08
0.810
10
2.51E-02
1.33E-11
5.30E-10
0.810
EX100 old - 3
0.1
4.63E-02
9.19E-15
1.99E-13
0.815
0.23
4.63E-02
1.04E-09
2.24E-08
0.815
0.5
4.63E-02
4.27E-11
9.22E-10
0.815
2
4.63E-02
5.55E-13
1.20E-11
0.815
10
4.63E-02
1.30E-13
2.81E-12
0.815
EX100 old + 5% THF - 1
0.1
1.41E-01
6.31E-11
4.47E-10
0.875
0.23
1.41E-01
4.06E-13
2.88E-12
0.875
0.5
1.41E-01
2.28E-15
1.61E-14
0.875
2
1.41E-01
1.48E-09
1.05E-08
0.875
10
1.41E-01
3.62E-09
2.56E-08
0.875
EX100 old + 5% THF - 2
0.1
1.08E-01
3.42E-15
3.16E-14
0.842
0.23
1.08E-01
6.50E-10
6.02E-09
0.842
0.5
1.08E-01
1.64E-11
1.52E-10
0.842
2
1.08E-01
5.47E-14
5.07E-13
0.842
10
1.08E-01
2.20E-14
2.04E-13
0.842
EX100 old + 5% THF - 3
0.1
9.23E-02
1.20E-12
1.30E-11
0.853
0.23
9.23E-02
2.97E-15
3.22E-14
0.853
0.5
9.23E-02
9.12E-10
9.89E-09
0.853
2
9.23E-02
7.92E-12
8.58E-11
0.853
10
9.23E-02
1.05E-12
1.13E-11
0.853
EX100 old + 10% THF - 1
0.1
8.76E-02
4.31E-12
4.92E-11
0.872
0.23
8.76E-02
1.56E-14
1.78E-13
0.872
0.5
8.76E-02
3.30E-17
3.77E-16
0.872
2
8.76E-02
3.25E-11
3.72E-10
0.872
10
8.76E-02
1.16E-11
1.33E-10
0.872
EX100 old + 10% THF - 2
0.1
1.32E-01
2.80E-10
2.12E-09
0.883
0.23
1.32E-01
2.84E-12
2.15E-11
0.883
0.5
1.32E-01
2.51E-14
1.91E-13
0.883
2
1.32E-01
2.47E-17
1.87E-16
0.883
10
1.32E-01
2.00E-08
1.52E-07
0.883
EX100 old + 10% THF - 3
0.1
1.31E-01
1.35E-17
1.04E-16
0.891
0.23
1.31E-01
1.80E-11
1.37E-10
0.891
0.5
1.31E-01
1.90E-13
1.45E-12
0.891
2
1.31E-01
1.56E-16
1.20E-15
0.891
66
==PAGE:69==
Appendix
Al´ız Hanga Lelik
Table C.1: The parameters obtained from applying the original slip-link model on each sample individually
Sample ID
η [-]
Gc [MPa]
Gs [MPa]
Gs
Gc [-]
R2 [-]
10
1.31E-01
3.62E-08
2.77E-07
0.891
EX100 old + 10% THF - 4
0.1
1.44E-01
3.19E-10
2.22E-09
0.887
0.23
1.44E-01
2.87E-12
2.00E-11
0.887
0.5
1.44E-01
1.85E-14
1.29E-13
0.887
2
1.44E-01
2.98E-09
2.07E-08
0.887
10
1.44E-01
4.04E-09
2.81E-08
0.887
EX100 old + 20% THF - 1
0.1
1.41E-01
1.64E-17
1.17E-16
0.891
0.23
1.41E-01
1.73E-11
1.23E-10
0.891
0.5
1.41E-01
1.24E-13
8.79E-13
0.891
2
1.41E-01
3.40E-17
2.42E-16
0.891
10
1.41E-01
8.01E-09
5.70E-08
0.891
EX100 old + 20% THF - 2
0.1
1.36E-01
1.20E-16
8.88E-16
0.879
0.23
1.36E-01
9.26E-11
6.82E-10
0.879
0.5
1.36E-01
1.39E-12
1.03E-11
0.879
2
1.36E-01
5.50E-16
4.05E-15
0.879
10
1.36E-01
3.23E-08
2.38E-07
0.879
EX100 old + 20% THF - 3
0.1
1.38E-01
1.49E-18
1.07E-17
0.872
0.23
1.38E-01
5.30E-12
3.83E-11
0.872
0.5
1.38E-01
4.13E-14
2.99E-13
0.872
2
1.38E-01
1.62E-17
1.17E-16
0.872
10
1.38E-01
8.32E-09
6.01E-08
0.872
EX100 old + 20% THF - 4
0.1
1.24E-01
3.16E-16
2.54E-15
0.878
0.23
1.24E-01
1.25E-10
1.01E-09
0.878
0.5
1.24E-01
1.76E-12
1.41E-11
0.878
2
1.24E-01
1.70E-15
1.36E-14
0.878
10
1.24E-01
1.20E-07
9.65E-07
0.878
EX100 new - 1
0.1
3.97E-01
3.28E-16
8.25E-16
0.789
0.23
3.97E-01
1.67E-18
4.20E-18
0.789
0.5
3.97E-01
3.68E-11
9.27E-11
0.789
2
3.97E-01
6.74E-14
1.70E-13
0.789
10
3.97E-01
2.22E-14
5.59E-14
0.789
EX100 new - 2
0.1
4.12E-01
7.14E-18
1.73E-17
0.777
0.23
4.12E-01
1.05E-10
2.55E-10
0.777
0.5
4.12E-01
3.08E-12
7.49E-12
0.777
2
4.12E-01
6.57E-15
1.60E-14
0.777
10
4.12E-01
3.47E-15
8.42E-15
0.777
EX100 new - 3
0.1
3.59E-01
2.14E-14
5.98E-14
0.803
0.23
3.59E-01
2.01E-16
5.61E-16
0.803
0.5
3.59E-01
4.09E-19
1.14E-18
0.803
2
3.59E-01
2.24E-12
6.25E-12
0.803
10
3.59E-01
1.02E-12
2.85E-12
0.803
EX100 new - 4
0.1
3.41E-01
8.51E-14
2.50E-13
0.798
0.23
3.41E-01
1.02E-15
3.00E-15
0.798
0.5
3.41E-01
2.92E-18
8.56E-18
0.798
2
3.41E-01
8.59E-12
2.52E-11
0.798
10
3.41E-01
5.03E-12
1.48E-11
0.798
67
==PAGE:70==
Appendix
Al´ız Hanga Lelik
Table C.1: The parameters obtained from applying the original slip-link model on each sample individually
Sample ID
η [-]
Gc [MPa]
Gs [MPa]
Gs
Gc [-]
R2 [-]
EX100 new no drying - 1
0.1
1.63E-01
4.37E-10
2.68E-09
0.947
0.23
1.63E-01
2.58E-11
1.58E-10
0.947
0.5
1.63E-01
3.21E-13
1.97E-12
0.947
2
1.63E-01
3.78E-11
2.32E-10
0.947
10
1.63E-01
2.14E-07
1.31E-06
0.947
EX100 new no drying - 2
0.1
1.90E-01
1.98E-13
1.04E-12
0.982
0.23
1.90E-01
3.58E-09
1.88E-08
0.982
0.5
1.89E-01
7.09E-03
3.74E-02
0.981
2
1.89E-01
3.02E-02
1.59E-01
0.981
10
1.88E-01
6.09E-01
3.24E+00
0.981
EX100 new no drying - 3
0.1
3.67E-01
8.99E-15
2.45E-14
0.768
0.23
3.67E-01
1.06E-16
2.88E-16
0.768
0.5
3.67E-01
1.79E-19
4.89E-19
0.768
2
3.67E-01
8.53E-13
2.32E-12
0.768
10
3.67E-01
2.66E-13
7.25E-13
0.768
EX100 new no drying - 4
0.1
3.53E-01
6.32E-15
1.79E-14
0.777
0.23
3.53E-01
6.24E-17
1.77E-16
0.777
0.5
3.53E-01
1.26E-19
3.56E-19
0.777
2
3.53E-01
1.47E-12
4.16E-12
0.777
10
3.53E-01
9.28E-13
2.63E-12
0.777
EX100 new + 10% THF - 1
0.1
3.71E-01
1.78E-12
4.79E-12
0.844
0.23
3.71E-01
2.59E-14
6.97E-14
0.844
0.5
3.71E-01
7.88E-17
2.13E-16
0.844
2
3.71E-01
1.78E-11
4.81E-11
0.844
10
3.71E-01
2.35E-12
6.33E-12
0.844
EX100 new + 10% THF - 2
0.1
4.28E-01
1.50E-17
3.52E-17
0.765
0.23
4.28E-01
7.32E-20
1.71E-19
0.765
0.5
4.28E-01
5.73E-12
1.34E-11
0.765
2
4.28E-01
3.43E-15
8.01E-15
0.765
10
4.28E-01
6.05E-16
1.41E-15
0.765
EX100 new + 10% THF - 3
0.1
3.12E-01
1.31E-12
4.18E-12
0.824
0.23
3.12E-01
2.34E-14
7.48E-14
0.824
0.5
3.12E-01
1.28E-16
4.11E-16
0.824
2
3.12E-01
1.11E-10
3.56E-10
0.824
10
3.12E-01
9.99E-11
3.20E-10
0.824
EX100 new + 10% THF - 4
0.1
3.24E-01
6.38E-11
1.97E-10
0.872
0.23
3.24E-01
1.62E-12
4.99E-12
0.872
0.5
3.24E-01
1.26E-14
3.90E-14
0.872
2
3.24E-01
6.95E-10
2.15E-09
0.872
10
3.24E-01
2.16E-10
6.68E-10
0.872
EX100 new + 50% THF - 1
0.1
3.01E-01
4.92E-12
1.63E-11
0.804
0.23
3.01E-01
1.16E-13
3.85E-13
0.804
0.5
3.01E-01
7.53E-16
2.50E-15
0.804
2
3.01E-01
2.72E-10
9.03E-10
0.804
10
3.01E-01
2.29E-10
7.60E-10
0.804
68
==PAGE:71==
Appendix
Al´ız Hanga Lelik
Table C.1: The parameters obtained from applying the original slip-link model on each sample individually
Sample ID
η [-]
Gc [MPa]
Gs [MPa]
Gs
Gc [-]
R2 [-]
EX100 new + 50% THF - 2
0.1
2.44E-01
9.98E-12
4.09E-11
0.789
0.23
2.44E-01
2.69E-13
1.10E-12
0.789
0.5
2.44E-01
4.12E-15
1.69E-14
0.789
2
2.44E-01
5.08E-18
2.08E-17
0.789
10
2.44E-01
3.30E-18
1.35E-17
0.789
EX100 new + 50% THF - 3
0.1
2.43E-01
2.21E-11
9.09E-11
0.817
0.23
2.43E-01
6.78E-13
2.79E-12
0.817
0.5
2.43E-01
1.12E-14
4.60E-14
0.817
2
2.43E-01
1.19E-17
4.90E-17
0.817
10
2.43E-01
6.63E-18
2.73E-17
0.817
EX100 new + 50% THF - 4
0.1
3.44E-01
2.86E-12
8.31E-12
0.822
0.23
3.44E-01
6.99E-14
2.04E-13
0.822
0.5
3.44E-01
3.36E-16
9.77E-16
0.822
2
3.44E-01
5.24E-11
1.53E-10
0.822
10
3.44E-01
1.10E-11
3.19E-11
0.822
EX050 - 1
0.1
1.19E-01
4.75E-16
3.98E-15
0.899
0.23
1.19E-01
6.44E-17
5.41E-16
0.899
0.5
1.19E-01
8.21E-11
6.89E-10
0.899
2
1.19E-01
7.62E-10
6.40E-09
0.899
10
1.19E-01
1.23E-13
1.03E-12
0.899
EX050 - 2
0.1
1.09E-01
7.88E-16
7.23E-15
0.787
0.23
1.09E-01
1.27E-17
1.16E-16
0.787
0.5
1.09E-01
5.45E-11
4.99E-10
0.787
2
1.09E-01
2.06E-14
1.89E-13
0.787
10
1.09E-01
1.12E-15
1.03E-14
0.787
EX050 - 3
0.1
1.19E-01
1.03E-14
8.69E-14
0.811
0.23
1.19E-01
4.56E-16
3.83E-15
0.811
0.5
1.19E-01
3.53E-10
2.96E-09
0.811
2
1.19E-01
2.31E-14
1.94E-13
0.811
10
1.19E-01
1.23E-16
1.03E-15
0.811
EX050 - 4
0.1
1.25E-01
4.07E-17
3.25E-16
0.781
0.23
1.25E-01
3.27E-10
2.61E-09
0.781
0.5
1.25E-01
9.19E-12
7.34E-11
0.781
2
1.25E-01
3.18E-16
2.54E-15
0.781
10
1.25E-01
2.88E-18
2.30E-17
0.781
EX050 + 10% THF - 1
0.1
1.60E-01
8.38E-17
5.22E-16
0.814
0.23
1.60E-01
3.78E-10
2.35E-09
0.814
0.5
1.60E-01
9.27E-12
5.78E-11
0.814
2
1.60E-01
3.15E-17
1.96E-16
0.814
10
1.60E-01
3.34E-10
2.08E-09
0.814
EX050 + 10% THF - 2
0.1
1.77E-01
1.61E-10
9.09E-10
0.847
0.23
1.77E-01
1.40E-11
7.88E-11
0.847
0.5
1.77E-01
1.72E-13
9.68E-13
0.847
2
1.77E-01
4.05E-10
2.28E-09
0.847
10
1.77E-01
1.63E-11
9.18E-11
0.847
EX050 + 10% THF - 3
0.1
1.57E-01
4.22E-13
2.68E-12
0.742
0.23
1.57E-01
1.15E-14
7.31E-14
0.742
69
==PAGE:72==
Appendix
Al´ız Hanga Lelik
Table C.1: The parameters obtained from applying the original slip-link model on each sample individually
Sample ID
η [-]
Gc [MPa]
Gs [MPa]
Gs
Gc [-]
R2 [-]
0.5
1.57E-01
7.60E-17
4.83E-16
0.742
2
1.57E-01
5.56E-11
3.53E-10
0.742
10
1.57E-01
4.49E-11
2.85E-10
0.742
EX050 + 10% THF - 4
0.1
1.73E-01
2.54E-10
1.47E-09
0.852
0.23
1.73E-01
3.47E-11
2.01E-10
0.852
0.5
1.73E-01
6.70E-13
3.88E-12
0.852
2
1.73E-01
9.38E-10
5.44E-09
0.852
10
1.73E-01
4.29E-11
2.49E-10
0.852
EX050 + 20% THF - 1
0.1
1.14E-01
3.81E-18
3.35E-17
0.823
0.23
1.14E-01
6.16E-11
5.42E-10
0.823
0.5
1.14E-01
2.06E-12
1.81E-11
0.823
2
1.14E-01
1.24E-15
1.09E-14
0.823
10
1.14E-01
2.12E-16
1.86E-15
0.823
EX050 + 20% THF - 2
0.1
1.20E-01
3.61E-14
3.00E-13
0.844
0.23
1.20E-01
1.57E-15
1.31E-14
0.844
0.5
1.20E-01
7.57E-10
6.29E-09
0.844
2
1.20E-01
7.00E-14
5.82E-13
0.844
10
1.20E-01
3.36E-16
2.80E-15
0.844
EX050 + 20% THF - 3
0.1
1.93E-01
1.10E-13
5.71E-13
0.792
0.23
1.93E-01
4.81E-15
2.50E-14
0.792
0.5
1.93E-01
1.68E-17
8.69E-17
0.792
2
1.93E-01
1.86E-12
9.67E-12
0.792
10
1.93E-01
1.34E-13
6.93E-13
0.792
HV-15 - 1
0.1
6.52E-02
1.16E-02
1.78E-01
0.995
0.23
6.57E-02
1.67E-02
2.55E-01
0.996
0.5
6.58E-02
2.81E-02
4.26E-01
0.997
2
6.46E-02
1.33E-01
2.05E+00
0.996
10
5.72E-02
2.80E+00
4.90E+01
0.995
HV-15 - 2
0.1
6.13E-02
6.78E-03
1.11E-01
0.997
0.23
6.19E-02
8.67E-03
1.40E-01
0.998
0.5
6.21E-02
1.30E-02
2.10E-01
0.998
2
6.18E-02
5.47E-02
8.86E-01
0.998
10
6.13E-02
5.56E-01
9.08E+00
0.997
HV-15 - 3
0.1
6.17E-02
4.96E-08
8.04E-07
0.989
0.23
6.17E-02
1.22E-10
1.98E-09
0.989
0.5
6.17E-02
1.00E-08
1.62E-07
0.989
2
6.17E-02
9.30E-09
1.51E-07
0.989
10
6.17E-02
1.23E-06
1.99E-05
0.989
HV-15 - 4
0.1
6.54E-02
6.02E-03
9.21E-02
0.998
0.23
6.60E-02
7.04E-03
1.07E-01
0.998
0.5
6.63E-02
9.34E-03
1.41E-01
0.998
2
6.62E-02
3.30E-02
4.98E-01
0.998
10
6.73E-02
1.13E-07
1.68E-06
0.997
HV-15 + 5% THF - 1
0.1
2.10E-02
6.71E-03
3.19E-01
0.976
0.23
2.11E-02
1.08E-02
5.10E-01
0.978
0.5
2.10E-02
1.87E-02
8.87E-01
0.979
2
2.05E-02
7.98E-02
3.89E+00
0.975
70
==PAGE:73==
Appendix
Al´ız Hanga Lelik
Table C.1: The parameters obtained from applying the original slip-link model on each sample individually
Sample ID
η [-]
Gc [MPa]
Gs [MPa]
Gs
Gc [-]
R2 [-]
10
1.86E-02
1.05E+00
5.66E+01
0.972
HV-15 + 5% THF - 2
0.1
1.69E-02
4.21E-03
2.49E-01
0.977
0.23
1.70E-02
6.74E-03
3.96E-01
0.979
0.5
1.70E-02
1.16E-02
6.82E-01
0.979
2
1.67E-02
4.86E-02
2.92E+00
0.977
10
1.56E-02
6.01E-01
3.84E+01
0.976
HV-15 + 5% THF - 3
0.1
2.51E-02
4.77E-03
1.90E-01
0.953
0.23
2.50E-02
9.01E-03
3.60E-01
0.952
0.5
2.49E-02
1.64E-02
6.58E-01
0.952
2
2.47E-02
6.05E-02
2.45E+00
0.950
10
2.51E-02
2.41E-01
9.58E+00
0.960
HV-15 + 5% THF - 4
0.1
2.81E-02
5.05E-03
1.80E-01
0.960
0.23
2.80E-02
9.59E-03
3.42E-01
0.959
0.5
2.80E-02
1.73E-02
6.17E-01
0.959
2
2.78E-02
5.89E-02
2.12E+00
0.958
10
2.89E-02
2.95E-05
1.02E-03
0.970
HV-15 + 10% THF - 1
0.1
2.67E-02
4.19E-03
1.57E-01
0.954
0.23
2.66E-02
8.04E-03
3.02E-01
0.953
0.5
2.66E-02
1.46E-02
5.49E-01
0.953
2
2.64E-02
5.13E-02
1.94E+00
0.953
10
2.73E-02
4.84E-02
1.77E+00
0.963
HV-15 + 10% THF - 2
0.1
2.19E-02
4.40E-03
2.01E-01
0.980
0.23
2.19E-02
7.62E-03
3.48E-01
0.980
0.5
2.18E-02
1.35E-02
6.17E-01
0.980
2
2.16E-02
5.18E-02
2.40E+00
0.979
10
2.13E-02
3.84E-01
1.80E+01
0.981
HV-15 + 10% THF - 3
0.1
1.72E-02
3.93E-03
2.28E-01
0.977
0.23
1.72E-02
6.61E-03
3.84E-01
0.978
0.5
1.72E-02
1.15E-02
6.67E-01
0.978
2
1.70E-02
4.34E-02
2.55E+00
0.976
10
1.69E-02
2.84E-01
1.68E+01
0.979
HV-15 + 10% THF - 4
0.1
1.55E-02
1.57E-03
1.01E-01
0.952
0.23
1.54E-02
3.57E-03
2.31E-01
0.950
0.5
1.54E-02
6.51E-03
4.23E-01
0.950
2
1.55E-02
1.69E-02
1.09E+00
0.952
10
1.58E-02
2.30E-09
1.46E-07
0.958
Table C.2: The parameters obtained from applying the modified slip-link model on each sample individually
Sample
Gc [MPa]
Gs [MPa]
Gs
Gc [-]
εred.min
[%]
Eapparent
[MPa]
R2 [-]
EX100 old - 1
9.19E-03
2.96E-02
3.22E+00
50
0.082
0.999
EX100 old - 2
1.50E-02
9.87E-03
6.58E-01
60
0.064
0.988
EX100 old - 3
1.09E-02
2.28E-02
2.09E+00
60
0.084
0.998
EX100 old + 5% THF - 1
4.59E-03
1.14E-01
2.49E+01
50
0.219
1.000
EX100 old + 5% THF - 2
1.10E-02
8.93E-02
8.11E+00
70
0.187
1.000
71
==PAGE:74==
Appendix
Al´ız Hanga Lelik
Table C.2: The parameters obtained from applying the modified slip-link model on each sample individually
Sample
Gc [MPa]
Gs [MPa]
Gs
Gc [-]
εred.min
[%]
Eapparent
[MPa]
R2 [-]
EX100 old + 5% THF - 3
2.25E-02
5.22E-02
2.32E+00
60
0.157
0.999
EX100 old + 10% THF - 1
5.12E-09
8.83E-02
1.72E+07
50
0.140
0.999
EX100 old + 10% THF - 2
1.70E-06
1.17E-01
6.87E+04
40
0.199
1.000
EX100 old + 10% THF - 3
1.24E-07
1.27E-01
1.02E+06
55
0.197
1.000
EX100 old + 10% THF - 4
5.42E-11
1.40E-01
2.58E+09
50
0.219
1.000
EX100 old + 20% THF - 1
8.74E-03
1.17E-01
1.33E+01
40
0.213
1.000
EX100 old + 20% THF - 2
3.13E-13
1.61E-01
5.16E+11
40
0.213
1.000
EX100 old + 20% THF - 3
3.78E-09
1.34E-01
3.54E+07
50
0.219
1.000
EX100 old + 20% THF - 4
1.12E-06
1.23E-01
1.10E+05
45
0.196
1.000
EX100 new - 1
6.83E-02
3.29E-01
4.82E+00
75
0.482
0.994
EX100 new - 2
1.03E-07
4.17E-01
4.07E+06
50
0.501
0.991
EX100 new - 3
2.62E-02
3.64E-01
1.39E+01
60
0.438
0.991
EX100 new - 4
8.34E-02
2.44E-01
2.93E+00
80
0.400
0.996
EX100 new no drying - 3
5.92E-02
3.35E-01
5.65E+00
80
0.372
0.999
EX100 new no drying - 4
5.52E-04
3.94E-01
7.13E+02
65
0.383
0.994
EX100 new + 10% THF - 1
9.58E-02
3.12E-01
3.26E+00
80
0.454
0.998
EX100 new + 10% THF - 2
6.89E-02
3.83E-01
5.55E+00
80
0.440
0.995
EX100 new + 10% THF - 3
4.14E-02
2.88E-01
6.95E+00
70
0.399
0.993
EX100 new + 10% THF - 4
8.14E-02
2.78E-01
3.41E+00
80
0.454
0.992
EX100 new + 50% THF - 1
4.59E-02
2.70E-01
5.89E+00
70
0.352
0.992
EX100 new + 50% THF - 2
1.70E-02
1.97E-01
1.16E+01
60
0.336
0.985
EX100 new + 50% THF - 3
6.05E-02
1.31E-01
2.17E+00
80
0.343
0.985
EX100 new + 50% THF - 4
4.74E-02
3.71E-01
7.84E+00
80
0.413
0.997
EX050 - 1
7.28E-02
7.96E-02
1.09E+00
175
0.174
0.985
EX050 - 2
5.63E-02
4.55E-02
8.08E-01
175
0.190
0.968
EX050 - 3
6.20E-02
7.03E-02
1.13E+00
175
0.196
0.974
EX050 - 4
6.44E-02
6.51E-02
1.01E+00
190
0.219
0.966
EX050 + 10% THF - 1
9.91E-02
6.82E-02
6.88E-01
250
0.270
0.993
EX050 + 10% THF - 2
9.30E-02
1.03E-01
1.11E+00
150
0.220
0.994
EX050 + 10% THF - 3
7.14E-02
5.89E-02
8.24E-01
120
0.311
0.979
EX050 + 10% THF - 4
8.24E-02
1.24E-01
1.50E+00
150
0.243
0.987
EX050 + 20% THF - 1
4.03E-02
6.95E-02
1.73E+00
120
0.150
0.980
EX050 + 20% THF - 2
5.80E-02
8.21E-02
1.41E+00
150
0.149
0.994
EX050 + 20% THF - 3
8.51E-02
1.23E-01
1.44E+00
150
0.238
0.987
HV-15 + 5% THF - 1
1.94E-02
1.54E-02
7.93E-01
450
0.028
0.997
HV-15 + 5% THF - 2
1.57E-02
1.02E-02
6.49E-01
420
0.022
0.995
HV-15 + 5% THF - 3
2.22E-02
1.71E-02
7.72E-01
520
0.041
0.992
HV-15 + 5% THF - 4
2.44E-02
2.00E-02
8.19E-01
470
0.040
0.997
HV-15 + 10% THF - 1
2.35E-02
1.70E-02
7.24E-01
450
0.040
0.993
HV-15 + 10% THF - 2
1.99E-02
1.31E-02
6.60E-01
450
0.026
0.996
HV-15 + 10% THF - 3
1.57E-02
1.09E-02
6.97E-01
420
0.021
0.994
HV-15 + 10% THF - 4
1.32E-02
9.92E-03
7.50E-01
470
0.024
0.993
72
==PAGE:75==
Appendix
Al´ız Hanga Lelik
Table C.3: The results of applying the modified slip-link model on different concatenated ring networks, for each formulation separately.
Formulation
Gc [MPa]
SD [MPa]
Gs [MPa]
SD [MPa]
Gs
Gc [-]
SD [-]
DMS-V05 DMS-H05 formulation 1
1.20E-01
1.90E-02
4.48E-02
1.64E-02
3.76E-01
1.42E-01
DMS-V05 DMS-H05 formulation 3
4.15E-02
6.92E-03
6.38E-02
1.40E-02
1.59E+00
6.02E-01
DMS-V05 DMS-H11 formulation 2
1.24E-01
-
2.49E-07
-
2.00E-06
-
DMS-V05 DMS-H11 formulation 3
4.46E-02
-
1.09E-07
-
2.44E-06
-
DMS-V05 DMS-H11 formulation 4
9.78E-02
-
1.20E-10
-
1.23E-09
-
DMS-V05 DMS-H21 formulation 1
9.71E-03
3.81E-04
3.12E-02
4.54E-03
3.21E+00
4.60E-01
DMS-V05 DMS-H21 formulation 3
2.34E-09
2.27E-09
4.61E-02
5.34E-03
2.37E+09
4.08E+09
DMS-V05 DMS-H21 formulation 4
1.81E-02
2.69E-03
3.39E-02
5.94E-03
1.92E+00
4.99E-01
Formulation
εred,min [%]
SD [%]
Eapparent [MPa]
SD [MPa]
R2 [-]
SD [-]
DMS-V05 DMS-H05 formulation 1
110
20.0
0.171
0.024
0.999
0.000
DMS-V05 DMS-H05 formulation 3
95
7.1
0.053
0.003
0.995
0.001
DMS-V05 DMS-H11 formulation 2
110
-
0.181
-
0.998
-
DMS-V05 DMS-H11 formulation 3
85
-
0.070
-
0.991
-
DMS-V05 DMS-H11 formulation 4
100
-
0.142
-
0.996
-
DMS-V05 DMS-H21 formulation 1
247
28.9
0.017
0.000
0.986
0.003
DMS-V05 DMS-H21 formulation 3
103
40.4
0.009
0.001
0.985
0.004
DMS-V05 DMS-H21 formulation 4
80
0.0
0.032
0.002
0.996
0.001
73
