==PAGE:1==
Model-driven models
Master Thesis
Pol Garcia Recasens
A project for the Data Science Master’s Degree
in collaboration with the Cognitive Systems section
at Technical University of Denmark
Supervisors: Søren Hauberg, Pablo Moreno-Muñoz
23rd June, 2023
==PAGE:2==
Contents
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Merging models via stochastic masking
7
2.1
Conditional independence and precision matrices . . . . . . . . .
10
2.2
Permutation nature of the Bayesian theory
. . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.3
Merging of models
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3
Experiments
15
3.1
Bayesian Linear Regression
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.2
Ensembling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.2.1
Regression . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.2.2
Classification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4
Symmetries
31
4.1
Intuition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.2
Merging symmetries via masking . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
5
Related work
37
6
Discussion
39
==PAGE:3==
ii
CONTENTS
==PAGE:4==
Chapter 1
Introduction
Large-scale AI models have recently emerged as the state-of-the-art for many
natural language and computer vision tasks (Devlin et al., 2018; Tong et al.,
2022; Bao et al., 2022), being ChatGPT-3 (Radford et al., 2018) the most
well-known and widely-discussed model. Training these models requires a vast
amount of computing resources that ultimately only well-resourced companies
can afford to sustain (Heikkilä, 2023). These companies provide "open" access
to the models, but limit the details about the architecture, data or training pro-
cedures. For instance, OpenAI is keeping ChatGPT-4’s size and inner workings
secret, being ChatGPT-4 the current large model of reference. For this reason,
a democratization of AI is essential to make these systems widely accessible for
scientific study. Additionally, there is a certain need to work on a more open
and collaborative approach to ML development (Raffel, 2023), which involves
creating a set of tools that allow users to develop models in a similar manner to
open-source software.
To develop tools that behave as open-source software, transfer learning is a key
milestone. In particular, this technique, that focus on transferring knowledge
across domains, has allowed the usage of these large, pretrained models as the
starting point for developing effective AI solutions (Zhuang et al., 2020). This
approach has proven to help models converge faster and reduces the depen-
dence on labeled instances (Raffel et al., 2020). However, updating a pretrained
model is often challenging, yet it can be beneficial for improving performance
==PAGE:5==
2
Introduction
and addressing biases, and the cost of re-training the large model from scratch
can run into millions of dollars (Dilmegani, 2023). One crucial component for
democratizing AI development would be a robust and cheap model merging
technique that combines different versions of a specific model into a new into
a new model of similar architecture, that will be named as metamodel in this
manuscript. While some early exploration of this idea has been done (McMahan
et al., 2017; Matena and Raffel, 2022), there is still plenty of room remaining
for new advances, which greatly motivates our research.
In this thesis we introduce stochastic masked merging, a probabilistic approach
that approximates the global posterior distribution of the models using a fac-
torized sum of conditionals.
We empirically demonstrate that our approach
outperforms the current state-of-the-art method, Fisher merging (Matena and
Raffel, 2022), on classification problems.
During the process of merging the
parameters of different models, we are able to optimize the parameters of a
randomly initialized model without re-visiting any data. This aspect holds sig-
nificant importance in merging scenarios involving missing or sensitive data, as
well as in distributed scenarios where we only have access to the weights of
the models. Additionally, we provide an open-source framework written in Py-
Torch (https://github.com/lop1498/model-driven-models) and build from
scratch that implements our method, while replicating state-of-the-art tech-
niques for regression and classification tasks. By combining the strengths of
different models, stochastic masked merging mitigates the limitations of indi-
vidual models, such as overfitting to specific subsets of data or being trapped
in a local optima. This merging process also provides a form of regularization
that can improve the model’s generalization performance and the robustness to
different training settings.
For our work, it is worth noticing that existing merging methods are usually
limited to models trained from the same initialization or fixed seed. This means
that the parameters, from which we then locally approximate the posterior
distribution in order to merge the models, need to be close in parameter space.
Training deep neural networks is a highly non-convex optimization problem,
with the number of local minima growing with the model size (Zhao et al.,
2022), and posing a model unidentifiability problem. Rather than viewing model
unidentifiability (Zhao et al., 2022) as a limitation, we see it as an opportunity
if combined with our approach.
In our study, we additionally investigate a
re-parametrization of the models using symmetries to overcome the fixed seed
limitation. The re-parametrization is done under arbitrary permutations of the
hidden nodes, also named weight-space symmetry, and under arbitrary scaling
with rectified linear-unit (ReLU) nonlinearites (Pourzanjani et al., 2017). We
use weight symmetries and scaling symmetries to find multiple equivalences for
the models, and then place a constraint for identifiability (Pourzanjani et al.,
2017) . Our hypothesis is that by putting a constraint into the different re-
==PAGE:6==
1.1 Background
3
parametrizations of the models, we could achieve a coordinate transformation
that brings models closer in parameter space. This, in turn, would facilitate a
successful merging. Finally, we integrate symmetries into our framework, and
study its performance in merging models.
Figure 1.1: Our hypothesis is that a valid set of parameters for the meta-
model lies in the intersection of the posterior distribution of the
different models. Notice that such parameters should perform well
on both tasks where θMAP1 and θMAP2 have been proven to be of
utility via the MAP loss. This constraint is challenging for model
merging, as model’s parameters might be widely separated and
the distributions might not intersect.
We also conducted experiments involving merging of classification models trained
on disjoint subsets of classes. Ainsworth et al. (2022) investigates the use of per-
mutation symmetries to merge models, trained from different initializations, on
unbalanced, but not disjoint, subsets of classes. One last question arises: can we
merge models that have been trained on different classes? We will also explore
this hypothesis in the context of stochastic masked merging.
1.1
Background
Ensemble learning (Bühlmann, 2012) is a well-known family of transfer learning
methods that combines the predictions of multiple models with the objective
of reducing the model’s error while maintaining the generalization performance.
The main hypothesis is that when models, or weak learners, are correctly com-
bined we can obtain more accurate and/or robust models than before. Bagging
(Breiman, 1996) and boosting (Freund et al., 1996) are the two most common
ensemble learning algorithms, that combine homogeneous weak learners follow-
==PAGE:7==
4
Introduction
ing some kind of deterministic averaging process. However, with the spotlight
on large models, ensemble learning is a clear example of how combining the pre-
dictions of different models is quickly discarded due to the high costs in terms of
time and space. The staggering cost of training overparametrized models from
scratch makes this approach unrealistic, and would widen even more the gap
between the technological haves and have-nots in the AI landascape. Therefore,
there is an urgent need for an efficient knowledge transfer operation among
models. With the democratization of AI in mind, we aim to create a trans-
fer learning technique that merges the models in parameter space into a new
metamodel, eliminating the need for multiple training while facilitating effective
knowledge transfer.
Probabilistic methods offer principled alternatives to obtain metamodels that
still perform well on previous tasks without revisiting data. In this context,
Bayesian modelling (Ghahramani, 2015) provides a principled way to equip NNs
with uncertainty estimates (Gal and Ghahramani, 2016), and enables models to
continually capture past information (Nguyen et al., 2017). Although this theo-
retically motivates the use of Bayesian Neural Networks (BNNs), in practice they
are hard to train and scale with large datasets (Daxberger et al., 2021). Laplace
Approximation (LA) (MacKay, 2003) provides a simpler way to approximate the
posterior distribution of an already trained NN around its point-estimate, turn-
ing it easily into a BNN while benefiting from the large high-performance NN
training. The posterior distribution of a model is key element in the Bayesian
toolkit as it enables probabilistic predictions with predictive uncertainty esti-
mates, helping to assess the reliability of model predictions.
This Bayesian probabilistic view of ML (Bishop and Nasrabadi, 2006) offers an
elegant solution for merging models. Model merging can be framed as maximiz-
ing the joint likelihood of the model’s posterior distribution over parameters for
all models m ∈M (Matena and Raffel, 2022). Due to the high-dimensionality of
neural networks, the evidence of a model
R
p(X|θ)p(θ)dθ is intractable, and so
is its exact posterior. If we assume the posterior distribution of a model m ∈M
to be an isotropic Gaussian centered at θm, with constant variance along all
dimensions, the problem corresponds to Eq 1.1, where I is the identity matrix.
θ∗= argmaxθ
X
i
log p (θ | θi, αI) .
(1.1)
This optimization problem has the following closed form solution (Matena and
Raffel, 2022), that corresponds to averaging the models parameters,
θ∗= 1
M
M
X
i=1
θi.
(1.2)
Averaging the models parameters is also named isotropic merging, and it has
==PAGE:8==
1.1 Background
5
been previously seen in federated learning, providing a decentralized approach to
train machine learning models. The FederatedAveraging (McMahan et al.,
2017) algorithm averages the weights of the models, letting each client do more
than one local gradient descent update. McMahan et al. (2017) briefly intro-
duces the technique in the context of model merging, where each minimodel
(or client in the federated learning context) has been trained from the same
random initialization, and pose good results on training and merging them with
different subsets of MNIST data. Later sections explain why the initialization
of the networks is critical when merging models.
Isotropic merging assumes the models posteriors to be an isotropic Gaussian,
leaving room for more suitable definitions of the posterior.
Fisher merging
(Matena and Raffel, 2022) approximates the posterior using Laplace Approxi-
mation (Daxberger et al., 2021), with the precision of the Gaussian distribution
defined as the Hessian of the log-likelihoods evaluated at the maximum likeli-
hood estimate θMAP. It can be shown that the Fisher information matrix of the
network coincides with the Hessian at modes of the distribution. Since the full
Fisher matrix takes O
 |θ|2
to store and becomes intractable for large models,
this merging technique assumes that the matrix is diagonal, disregarding any
potential correlations among parameters.
However, we are in two extremes: the diagonal of the Fisher matrix assumes a
lot of independence, and the full Fisher matrix is computationally intractable.
As an alternative, Gaussian Processes have dealt with this issue for 20 years:
and the key solution is to apply conditional independence. Recently, to avoid
the use of inducing points, Moreno-Muñoz et al. (2022) proposed a learning
method based on the stochastic computation of conditional distributions be-
tween the datapoints. This idea emerges from the observation from Fong and
Holmes (2020), where the authors theoretically link the marginal-likelihood, a
natural measure of Bayesian statistics to evaluate the model’s fit, with leave-
p-out cross-validation. The use of conditional independence provides a better
merging technique, while bounding the computational cost to the number of
conditioned parameters rather than the whole parameter set.
Finally, since current merging techniques often rely on strong assumptions, in-
cluding the requirement for models to have identical architectures and initial-
izations. The overparametrization of models lead to many equivalent solutions
for the same problem, posing a model unidentifiability problem (Radford et al.,
2018). This also hinders the merging of models, as the parameters of the dif-
ferent models might widely separated in the space. For that reason, researchers
are actively exploring the idea of model symmetries through permutations of
weights to overcome this limitations (Ainsworth et al., 2022; Wortsman et al.,
2022; Pourzanjani et al., 2017). A recent study, Git-Rebasin (Ainsworth et al.,
2022), investigates permutation symmetries of hidden units in the linear mode
==PAGE:9==
6
Introduction
connectivity of SGD solutions. These solutions exhibit constant-loss curves in
parameter space, and by traversing this curve, it becomes possible to adjust
the parameters of models and bring them into the same basin.
The under-
lying idea is that models must learn similar features to accomplish the same
task. However, while Ainsworth et al. (2022) offers valuable insights into this
emerging topic, the proposed parameter alignment method is performed in a
combinatorial manner, making it impractical for merging multiple models.
==PAGE:10==
Chapter 2
Merging models via
stochastic masking
Our work is framed within the context of (regularized) supervised learning,
where the general goal is to learn a function fθ(x) →y from a training dataset
D = (xn, yn)N
n=1. The training dataset is composed of i.i.d input vectors xn ∈
Rp and their corresponding target vectors yn, that can be either continuous
or discrete. The classical approach for supervised learning is to minimize the
empirical risk by optimizing the set of parameters, denoted by θ. This approach
can be viewed through the Bayesian lens as minimizing the sum of the negative
log-likelihood log p(yn | fθ(xn)) of each training sample xn, in addition to a
prior over θ (see 2.1) – weight decay regularizer acts as an isotropic Gaussian
prior N(θ|0, γ2I) (Daxberger et al., 2021). This corresponds to
L(θ) = −log p(θ) +
N
X
n=1
−log p (yn | fθ (xn)) .
(2.1)
In this regard, this minimization leads to a MAP estimate, the set of parameters
θ that maximizes the posterior probability distribution given the observed data.
We approximate the posterior of the model with Laplace approximation (LA)
around θMAP, a method for inference in Bayesian deep learning (Daxberger
et al., 2021; MacKay, 2003). The key advantage of using LA is that it is di-
rectly applicable to most already-trained NNs, adding flexibility to our merging
approach while providing a practical approximation of the posterior.
==PAGE:11==
8
Merging models via stochastic masking
Laplace Approximation.
In particular, the posterior distribution p(θ|X) =
1
Z p(X|θ)p(θ) is intractable due to the normalizing constant Z =
R
p(X|θ)p(θ)dθ,
also named evidence or marginal likelihood (MacKay, 2003), is usually in-
tractable in non-linear models. Laplace approximation (LA) (Daxberger et al.,
2021; MacKay, 2003) provides a Gaussian approximation to the posterior via a
second-order Taylor expansion around the mode of the distribution. The first
term of the expansion typically vanishes due to the local maximum condition of
θMAP, so the covariance of the Gaussian distribution is defined by the quadratic
term that corresponds to the inverse of the Hessian of the log-likelihood eval-
uated at θMAP.
An interesting property, is that the approximation can be
computed post-hoc after the model has been trained with standard regularized
risk minimization techniques such as least-squares regression or cross-entropy
classification (Daxberger et al., 2021). However, it can be also used in an online
manner if preferred (Miani et al., 2022). Therefore, to obtain the approximate
posterior, we first need to find the argmax θMAP of the log-posterior function,
and then compute the inverse of the Hessian matrix at θMAP (i.e define the
covariance of the Gaussian), where
p(θ | D) ≈N(θ|θMAP, Σ)
with
Σ := (∇2
θL(D|θ)|θMAP)−1.
(2.2)
Moreover, we can use the LA to approximate the model’s posterior distribution
and enable probabilistic predictions, and also to approximate the model evidence
and enable model selection (e.g.
hyperparameter tuning) (Daxberger et al.,
2021). The model evidence is a Bayesian natural measure of a model fit (Fong
and Holmes, 2020). In this regard, LA is generally applicable to many trained
neural networks of different sort, and it allows users to transform their standard
NN models into Bayesian NNs easily, without loss of predictive peformance
and making the models able to deal with uncertainty estimates. Intuitively, it
locally approximates the posterior with a Gaussian distribution centered at a
local maximum of the NN, whose covariance matrix corresponds to the local
curvature defined by second order derivatives.
LA benefits from positive semi-definite approximations to the (potentially indef-
inite) Hessian of the log-likelihoods (Daxberger et al., 2021; MacKay, 2003), the
Fisher information matrix is one such choice. One can also use the generalized
Gauss-Newton matrix (GGN) matrix (see 2.3), such that
G(θ) :=
N
X
n=1
J (xn) (∇2
f log p (yn | f)

f=fθMAP(xn))J (xn)⊤,
(2.3)
where J is the NN’s Jacobian matrix. Additionally, in deep LAs, the Fisher ma-
trix and the Gauss-Newton matrix have emerged as the default choice for prac-
titioners. Since these approximations are quadratically large within the number
of parameters, we typically apply further factorization assumptions. The most
==PAGE:12==
9
lightweight is a diagonal factorization which ignores off-diagonal elements (Le-
Cun et al., 1989), used in the Fisher merging technique (Matena and Raffel,
2022). More expressive alternatives are block-diagonal factorizations such as
Kronecker-factored approximate curvature (KFAC) (Botev et al., 2017).
Fisher Information Matrix.
A positive semi-definite approximation to the
Hessian is the Fisher information matrix (FIM) 2.4, defined as the variance of
the gradient of the log-likelihood function respect to θ.
F(θ) :=
X
n
Epθ(y|xn)
h
∇θ log pθ (y | xn) ∇θ log pθ (y | xn)⊤i
(2.4)
The FIM is equal to the negative expected Hessian of log likelihood. Thus, the
immediate application of Fisher information matrix is as drop-in replacement
of Hessian in second order optimization algorithms. One example is Natural
Gradient Descent (Amari, 1998) (NGD), where it is used to adapt the train-
ing optimization to the information geometry of the problem by measuring the
distance between parameters with the Kullback–Leibler divergence between the
resulting distributions rather than their Euclidean distance. Therefore, the gra-
dient update step turns out to be θ = θ −α ˜∇θL(θ), where the natural gradient
˜∇θL(θ) enhances the gradient descent and is defined as follows,
˜∇θL(θ) = F−1∇θL(θ).
(2.5)
Since deep learning models typically consist of millions of parameters, the FIM
is then infeasible to compute, store, or invert. This problem is similar as the one
around why second order optimization methods as NGD are not popular in deep
learning. Our proposed merging solution benefits from conditional independence
to provide a computationally feasible usage of the Fisher matrix.
In the particular case of regression problems, there is not an efficient way to
compute the FIM without considering a Monte-Carlo estimate of the expecta-
tion, and sampling from the data distribution p(yn|xn), named empirical Fisher
approximation, instead of the model distribution pθ(y|xn) does not guarantee
useful second-order information (Kunstner et al., 2019). The empirical Fisher
approach (see 2.6) provides a tractable approximation for the Hessian under
unrealistic conditions, unlikely to be met in practice. For instance, if the model
needs to be able to capture the true data distribution (Kunstner et al., 2019)
– this assumption may hold for classical statistics.
However, this might be
unrealistic for standard machine learning problems in practice.
eF(θ) :=
X
n
∇θ log pθ (yn | xn) ∇θ log pθ (yn | xn)⊤.
(2.6)
Although we have used the empirical Fisher to study our merging technique in
regression problems, most of our effort has been placed on classification problems
==PAGE:13==
10
Merging models via stochastic masking
with a limited number of classes. This means that can exactly compute the
expectation. We add a small positive constant α to the diagonal of the matrix
to address numerical issues when the eigenvalues are close to zero.
2.1
Conditional independence and precision ma-
trices
Conditional distributions are a fundamental component of our merging method
as we decompose the individual log-posteriors of each model as a sum of log-
conditional densities under factorisation. Since we are using LA to construct the
posterior distribution using the Fisher matrix, we are interested in building the
conditionals using precision rather than covariance. In this section we formally
describe the way we obtain approximations of log-conditional densities between
parameters using precision matrices.
Definition.
Being θ a p-dimensional vector of parameters with a multivariate
Gaussian distribution θ ∼N(m, Σ).
Where Σ is referred as the covariance
matrix and ϕ = Σ−1 is known as the precision matrix, when it exists. The
probability density function can be written in terms of the precision matrix as
p(θ) ∝|Φ|1/2 exp

−1
2(θ −m)T Φ(θ −m)

,
(2.7)
where we can partition θ into
θ =
 θ1
θ2

.
(2.8)
The mean and precision matrix are partitioned accordingly as follows
m =
 m1
m2

, Φ = Σ−1 =
 K1
H
HT
K2

.
(2.9)
This sort of partition also satisfies that θi ∼N (mi, Φi), and yield the condi-
tional distribution
θ1 | θ2 ∼N (E [θ1 | θ2] , ϕ (θ1 | θ2))
(2.10)
where ϕ (θ1 | θ2) = K1, and E [θ1 | θ2] = A1x2, with A1 = −K−1
1 H. In the
general case we have
(θ1 | θ2) ∼N
 m1 −K−1
1 H (θ2 −m2) , K1

.
(2.11)
==PAGE:14==
2.2 Permutation nature of the Bayesian theory
11
In stochastic masked merging, the vector of parameters θ corresponds to the
parameters of the metamodel that we optimise. The conditioned parameters θ1
are the masked parameters, and are assumed to be independent. Therefore, we
diagonalise the precision matrix of the conditional distribution, that corresponds
to the submatrix K1 from the original precision matrix ϕ. However, we use the
complete definition of K1 to compute the mean of the conditional distribution,
since it is needed to correct the submatrix H in Eq 2.11.
This is because
using the diagonal of K1 to correct H leads to numerical issues. Although it
would be computationally convenient to use the diagonal to compute the mean,
diag(K−1
1 ) ̸= (diag(K1))−1.
2.2
Permutation nature of the Bayesian theory
When expressing the posterior distribution of θ as a product of individual poste-
rior distributions, we can easily observe a permutation property (see Equation
2.16) linked to Bayesian theory. When permutations are combined with the
underlying conditional structure of the posterior distribution this gives us a
novel way to approximate the individual posterior distribution in model merg-
ing. In the following section, we formalize the construction of the posterior and
observe how the permutation nature of the Bayesian theory arises during the
formulation.
We first define X, as the set of random observations X = {x1, x2, ..., xN} and
π as a random permutation π(X) = {xπ(i)}, ∀i ∈[0, N]. Thus, assuming that
the observations in X are independent and identically distributed (i.i.d), we can
define the posterior distribution of θ over X as
p(θ|X) = 1
Z
N
Y
i=1
p(xi|θ)p(θ),
(2.12)
where we can easily re-write the same equation for subsets of data rather than
single observations, so observations are now partitioned into X = {D1, D2, ..., Dn}.
p(θ|X) = 1
Z
N
Y
i=1
p(Di|θ)p(θ).
(2.13)
Then, if we apply Bayes rule and the marginal likelihood p(Di) is denoted as
the constant Zi, we can get the following expression
p(Di|θ) = p(θ|Di)Zi
p(θ)
,
(2.14)
==PAGE:15==
12
Merging models via stochastic masking
where the prior p(θ) is already known. As a consequence, we can now intro-
duce the posterior distribution of each subset on X into the equation. We are
therefore interested in constructing the global posterior p(θ|X) given all the ob-
servations X as the product of posterior distributions rather than likelihoods.
Importantly, notice that individual posteriors on the model’s parameters will be
approximated using LA. Since we approximate the posteriors individually with
LA. We then reach
p(θ|X) = Z1Z2...Zk
Z
K
Y
k=1
p(θ|Dk)

1
p(θ)(k−1)

.
(2.15)
An important insight here is that we can observe nice properties for permuta-
tion that we will use in the following section. The marginal likelihoods Zk are
constant terms, so we can define the posterior with the following proportion
p(θ|π(X)) ∝
K
Y
k=1
p(θ|π(Dk))
h
p(θ)−(k−1)i
.
(2.16)
Following Eq 2.15, we can write from here on the posterior densities p(θ|Dk)
as pk(θ) to simplify the expression, and the prior distribution p(θ) as p0(θ).
Thus, by applying the logarithm to each side of the equation we have that the
log-posterior of θ is defined as the following sum,
log p(θ) =
K
X
k=1

log pk(θ) −k −1
K
log p0(θ)

+
K
X
k=1
log Zk −log Z,
(2.17)
where Z corresponds to the log-marginal likelihood and it is a constant term.
We simplify equation 2.17 to
log p(θ) ∝
K
X
k=1

log pk(θ) −k −1
K
log p0(θ)

.
(2.18)
One last detail is that in in stochastic masked merging, θ corresponds to the
parameters of the metamodel that we are optimizing during the merging process.
Each model is ideally fitted to a subset of X, and the true posterior that we
aim to approximate is the one defined from the model fitting the whole dataset
X. Intuitively, during the merging process we want to maximize the joint log-
marginal likelihood via the individual posteriors of the models. We minimize
the negative probability values of log p(θ) during merging as the optimization
algorithms used minimize an objective function.
==PAGE:16==
2.3 Merging of models
13
2.3
Merging of models
Building the posterior distribution for every model is computationally expensive.
For that reason, we make use of the properties of probability distributions,
and in particular of the chain rule to decompose each individual posterior
into a sum of log-conditionals. This reduces the computational cost as we can
subsample the sum (expressed as an expectation), while bounding the cost of
the algorithm, that is given the cost of inverting of the precision matrix of
conditioned parameters O(A3), previously seen in section 2.1. The chain rule is
defined as
p(A, B, C) = p(A|B, C)p(B|C)p(C)p(B|A, C)...
(2.19)
We follow the notation of the previous section, writing the posterior pk(θ|X)
of a model k as pk(θ).
Using the properties of probability, we can rewrite
the posterior of each kth model as a sum of conditional distributions between
parameters
log pk(θ) =
D
X
t=1
log pk(θt|θt+1:D)
(2.20)
We adapted the proof of proposition from Moreno-Muñoz et al. (2023) to cou-
ple a conditional structure of the posterior distribution of θ, rather than the
marginal likelihood of X. Here, we see that the value of logk(θ) is invariant
to the choice of the conditional probabilities, if these ones follow the chain-rule
of probability according to the D dimensions of θ. This indicates that we have
D! different choices (Moreno-Muñoz et al., 2022) for the sum of conditional
probabilities in equation 2.20, which allows us to write
log pk(θ) = 1
D!
D!
X
π=1
D
X
j=1
log pk

θ(π)
j
| θ(π)
j:D−1

,
(2.21)
where π indicates a permutation of the indices of parameters.
We use the
following permutation property,
D! >
D
m

, ∀m ∈[1, D]
(2.22)
leading to
log pk(θ) =
1
 D
M

(
D
M)
X
π=1
D
X
j=1
log pk(θ(π)
j
|θ(π)
j:D−1).
(2.23)
If we then swap the order of sums in 2.23 and we fix the index (j) in 2.23, we
can see that there are (D −j + 1) choices for the tokens under evaluation by
==PAGE:17==
14
Merging models via stochastic masking
the probability distribution and
  D
j−1

choices for the rest of conditional factors
(Moreno-Muñoz et al., 2022). We can then write
log pk(θ) =
(
D
j−1)
X
π=1
D−t+1
X
j=1
log pk

θ(π)
j
| θ(π)
(j+1:D)

(2.24)
The previous equation can be written using expectations over the permutations
and masked tokens, allowing us to subsample. If both θj and θ1:D−1 are Gaus-
sian, then the conditional distribution is also Gaussian and exact.
log pk(θ) =
D
X
i=1
Ep,m
h
log pk(θ(p)
i
|θ(p)
1:D−1)
i
(2.25)
Finally, we integrate this construction of the log-posterior using log-conditionals
into Equation 2.18, maximizing the following expression, referred as permutation
loss in following sections, at each merging step
log p(θ) ∝
K
X
k=1
D
X
D=1
Ep,m[log pk(θ(π)
j
|θ(π)
1:D−1)] −k −1
K
log p0(θ(π)
j
|θ(π)
1:D−1). (2.26)
==PAGE:18==
Chapter 3
Experiments
This chapter provides empirical evidence to support the effectiveness of stochas-
tic masked merging. Our merging approach consistently provides good perfor-
mance across all use-cases, beating the state-of-the-art Fisher merging (Matena
and Raffel, 2022) on classification problems. We start by introducing the foun-
dations of our method using Bayesian linear regression, taking advantage of the
analytical properties of linear models. We then extend our technique to address
more complex models trained on regression and classification tasks.
3.1
Bayesian Linear Regression
To ensure that stochastic masked merging yields a good merging performance, a
probabilistic model that is tractable is required as a proof-of-concept. Although
linear models have significant limitations as practical techniques, particularly for
high-dimensionality input problems, they have good analytical properties and
form the foundation for more sophisticated non-tractable models. The simplest
linear model for regression involves a linear combination of input variables, such
as
y(x, w) = w0 + w1x1 + . . . + wDxD.
(3.1)
==PAGE:19==
16
Experiments
The linearity of the model imposes significant limitations, so we usually extend
this class of models by considering linear combinations of nonlinear functions of
the input variables, named basis functions ϕ(x) (Bishop and Nasrabadi, 2006),
y(x, w) = w0 +
M−1
X
j=1
wjϕj(x)
(3.2)
We assume that the target variable t is given by a deterministic function y(x, w)
with an additive Gaussian noise ϵ,
t = y(x, w) + ϵ,
(3.3)
where ϵ is a zero mean Gaussian random variable with precision β. Maximization
of the likelihood function under a conditional Gaussian noise distribution for a
linear model is equivalent to minimizing a sum-of-squares error function (Bishop
and Nasrabadi, 2006), and by setting the gradient to zero we reach the closed
form solution for the maximum likelihood estimate wML,
wML =

ΦTΦ
−1
ΦTt
(3.4)
Still, this linearity in the parameters greatly simplifies the analysis of this class of
models. We can introduce a Bayesian treatment of linear regression by introduc-
ing a prior distribution over the models parameters w (Bishop and Nasrabadi,
2006), treating the parameter β as a know constant. Assuming a zero-mean
isotropic Gaussian prior p(w | α) = N
 w | 0, α−1I

to simplify the treatment,
the corresponding posterior distribution will also be Gaussian and defined as
following,
p(w | t) = N (w | mN, SN)
(3.5)
where
mN = SN

S−1
0 m0 + βΦTt

S−1
N = S−1
0
+ βΦTΦ
(3.6)
If we assume an infinitely broad prior with α →0 (approaching a uniform dis-
tribution), the mean mN reduces to the maximum likelihood estimate given by
equation 3.4. Since we know the exact posterior distribution of a linear regres-
sion model (see 3.5), the next step is to observe that the metamodel’s posterior
approximates the true posterior during the merging process. Specifically, the
true posterior corresponds to the posterior of a model fitted to the whole dataset.
In order to achieve this, we generate a random variable X with target t defined
as 3.3. Each model to merge is fitted to a subset of X, and the metamodel aims
to maximize the joint distribution of the posteriors of the individual models.
It is worth to note that the mean and covariance of each model posterior are
also known. The initial step involves merging the models using their the ex-
act posteriors, with the conditional distribution expressed with the covariance
==PAGE:20==
3.1 Bayesian Linear Regression
17
matrix. Bear in mind that we decompose the log-posterior distribution of each
individual model as a sum of log-conditionals, that can be expressed either with
covariance or precision matrices.
Figure 3.1: The blue and black points represent two different subsets of X,
fitted by two linear regression models. The true posterior corre-
sponds to the posterior of the model fitted to both subsets of X.
First, we define two Bayesian linear models to merge, with 10 dimensions and
a mask of size 3. The merging process is composed of 1000 epochs, where each
epoch corresponds to an optimization step. In particular, we used SGD as the
optimizer, with the parameters of the metamodel randomly initialized from a
fixed seed. In Figure 3.1 we observe the results of the experiment, and we see
how during the merging process the posterior of the metamodel is converging
to the true posterior, as the mean-squared error between the parameters of the
metamodel and the true parameters gets closer to zero.
The next step is to construct the conditional distribution with the precision
matrix, as we have previously described in section 2.1. Since we know the exact
posterior distribution of each model, we expect to obtain similar results to the
ones obtained in the previous experiment. Figure 3.3 illustrates the performance
of our approach, demonstrating how the metamodel effectively approximates the
true model with a similar curve to Figure 3.2. These results build the correct
foundation for the last experiment, that is to study if the Fisher matrix provides
a good approximation to the exact precision matrix in our merging context. In
==PAGE:21==
18
Experiments
Figure 3.2: In Bayesian linear regression we are able to compute the exact
posterior distribution, that is Gaussian.
We can observe how
stochastic masked merging approximates the parameters of the
metamodel to the true parameters. The loss, defined as the joint
posterior distribution via the individual posteriors of the models,
is maximized until convergence.
linear regression, the Fisher matrix is defined as following,
F(θ) = XT X
σ2
,
(3.7)
being the variance σ2 an already known constant. In this regard, we can observe
in Figure 3.4 how the Fisher matrix provides a good approximation to the
precision matrix, although the mean-squared error curve is not exactly identical.
These findings validate the efficacy of our merging technique in approximating
the true posterior distribution, and also provide empirical evidence that supports
the applicability of our merging technique in scenarios where obtaining the true
posterior is computationally infeasible.
3.2
Ensembling
In this section, we study the performance of stochastic masked merging with
non-linear models in the context of ensembling. Ensembling addresses the prob-
lem of combining models defined with the same architecture, and trained on
the same dataset and from the same initialization, in order to obtain better
predictions. The initialization of the ensembles needs to be identical because
current merging techniques require the model’s parameters to be close in param-
eter space. For an effective merging, we have the hypothesis that the posterior
==PAGE:22==
3.2 Ensembling
19
Figure 3.3: Constructing the conditional distribution with precision rather
than covariance matrices holds the performance of our merging
approach. The figure on the left, that describes the mean-squared
error between the true parameters and the parameters of the meta-
posterior, converges to zero with a similar curve as the one seen
in the previous experiment.
Figure 3.4: The results support that Fisher matrix offers a good approxima-
tion to the exact precision matrix.
In this case, we observe a
gradual reduction of the mean-squared error without reaching zero
completely.
distribution of the models must intersect. This is because random initializa-
tions lead to points in parameter space that are far apart, from which we locally
approximate the posteriors. Although this will be explained in depth in the
following section, one can intuitively think about this as the requirement that
all models’ parameters lie in the same basin.
==PAGE:23==
20
Experiments
Ensembling is usually performed by averaging the predictions of the ensembles.
This form of ensembling requires computing the output of all the M ensemble
models, increasing the computational cost by a factor of M compared to comput-
ing the output for a single model. Hence, we study the ensemble techniques that
merge models into a new metamodel for regression and classification problems.
Building on previous experimentation, we compare stochastic masked merging
with Fisher merging and isotropic merging.
It is worth noting that the initialization of the parameters of the metamodel
is an important factor at play. One approach is to use isotropic merging to
initialize them, definining the parameters as θ∗=
1
M
PM
i=1 θi. Even though in
this case the parameters are closer to the optimum, this approach comes at the
cost of falling into a local minima. On the other hand, if we initialize randomly
the parameters of the metamodel, using the seed from which the ensembles are
trained, we aim to optimize the parameters into the same basin as the ensembles
without re-visiting any data. We have successfully tried both approaches, and we
empirically show that given enough merging steps we can optimize a randomly
initialized metamodel to the optimal basin without re-visiting any data.
Furthermore, it is important to recall that the performance of stochastic masked
merging might be affected by edge cases. When ensemble models are ill-defined
or not properly trained, the merging process can result in poor performance. In
such cases, isotropic merging tends to be more effective. This could be attributed
to the fact that the curvature of the individual posteriors is estimated using the
gradients respect to the model’s likelihood, and if the model parameters fall
in a bad local minima, the gradients might lead to a poor construction of the
posterior. However, these situations are not common, in the majority of cases,
where models are successfully trained, our approach outperforms state-of-the-art
merging methods given enough merging steps.
3.2.1
Regression
Snelson.
Once we have built a solid baseline for merging linear models, the
next step is to study the effectiveness of our technique in non-linear regression
models. For this reason, we have considered the Snelson dataset (Snelson and
Ghahramani, 2005). This dataset comprises 200 examples of a few oscillations of
an example function, and has been widely used as a toy dataset to demonstrate
the qualitative behaviour of Gaussian process approximations. It will serve as
a benchmark for merging non-linear regression models. The one-dimensional
Snelson data allows us to plot the samples and the curves associated with each
model, facilitating a visual comparison of each merging technique.
==PAGE:24==
3.2 Ensembling
21
It is important to acknowledge the limitations of sampling from the data distri-
bution pθ(yn|xn) rather than the model distribution pθ(y|xn) (Kunstner et al.,
2019). This corresponds to compute the gradients by backpropagating the mean-
square error between the the output of the model fθ(xn) and the target tn. We
used the empirical Fisher (EM, see equation 2.6) to study the effective of our
technique in merging non-linear regression regression models. Computing the
empirical Fisher matrix involves averaging N vectors of gradients, where N is the
number of samples in the dataset. This can be straightforwardly computed for
neural networks using backpropagation. Therefore, we compute the average of
the gradient vectors and store its square for Fisher merging, which corresponds
to the diagonal elements of the empirical Fisher matrix. For our method, we are
also interested in the off-diagonal elements of the empirical Fisher matrix. Thus,
we store the vector of gradients and during the merging process we calculate
the "full" Fisher matrix on-the-fly by taking the outer product of the gradients
of the masked parameters.
In the experiments, we define the network as a 3-layer MLP with a hidden
dimension of size 16. Each model is trained from the same initialization but with
different learning rates and epochs of training. This corresponds to a "model
soup" ensembling problem (Matena and Raffel, 2022), where the parameters of
the models are close in the parameter space. Following LA (Daxberger et al.,
2021), we train the networks using SGD with weight regularizer (acts as the
prior), and MSE. The network has 321 parameters, and we set the number of
conditioned parameters to 100. The merging process is composed of 300000
steps, and for each step we permute the parameters 20 times to define the
conditionals.
Additionally, we use the TahH activation function rather than
ReLU, as we empirically have seen that the last sets more gradients to zero,
leading to numerical errors when computing inverse operations.
We have compared stochastic masked merging with the state-of-the-art methods.
Results are shown in figure 3.5. We include a short description of the curves
considered:
• Fisher merging – Weigthed-average of the parameters of the models
based on its Fisher information (Matena and Raffel, 2022).
• Isotropic merging – Average of the model parameters.
• Stochastic masked merging – Curve of the metamodel after the merg-
ing process.
• Random initialization – Curve of the randomly initialized metamodel.
The posterior of the metamodel is expected to approximate the true pos-
terior after the merging.
==PAGE:25==
22
Experiments
• Ensembles – Enseble models.
Each model is trained with a different
learning rate and number of epochs, but all of them are initialized identi-
cally.
Figure 3.5: The plot illustrates the curves drawn by each ensemble and the
curve generated by the metamodel with each merging technique.
The curves resulting from Fisher merging and stochastic masked
merging overlap, although both slightly differ from the curve pro-
duced by isotropic merging, that has a slightly higher loss. The
metamodel is initialized with random parameters, corresponding
to the blue curve, and after the merging process is completed, it
correctly fits the data.
Figure 3.6 shows that the merging optimization converges after few steps. Both
the test loss and the permutation loss, that corresponds to the joint distribution
via the sum of log-conditionals of the individual posteriors, converge almost
immediately. In this regard, we can observe in Figure 3.5 that the stochastic
masked merging curve is almost identical to the Fisher merging curve, where
the technique ignores the off-diagonal elements of the precision matrix. Also,
in the regression case our merging does not obtain better merging performance
than SOTA methods. This behaviour is surprisingly different to the behaviour
in classification problems, where the convergence of the loss during merging is
more gradual. We attribute it to the use of the empirical Fisher matrix rather
than the true Fisher. However, the study of this hypothesis is left for future
research.
It is worth to remark that we are not re-visiting any data. The metamodel
parameters are randomly initialized and correspond to the blue curve in figure
==PAGE:26==
3.2 Ensembling
23
Figure 3.6: Results of stochatic masked merging with Snelson dataset. The
performance of the merging is evaluated on two models trained
with the same initialization but different hyperparameters. The
metamodel is randomly initialized. The test loss of the metamodel
gradually decreases and approaches zero throughout the merging
process, indicating that the parameters are being correctly opti-
mized. The joint likelihood of the models posteriors is maximized
and converges after few steps of merging.
3.5. After the merging process the curve is correctly fitting the Snelson function,
with the curvature of the posterior approximated with Fisher. Although there
is room for further improvement of the method, the fact that we can iteratively
optimize the parameters of a model from scratch via a sum of factorized condi-
tionals, while locally approximating the curvature with the Fisher matrix, opens
a big door for model merging. A data-free framework has a special importance
in the context of large models trained with petabytes of data, where it is hard
or even possible to re-visit the data.
3.2.2
Classification
In this section, we aim to extend stochastic masked merging to classification
problems. It is worth to note that the only difference in our method between
regression and classification tasks lies in the construction of the Fisher matrix.
In classification problems, we backpropagate the output of the model for all the
different classes and compute the exact expectation of the true Fisher. Also,
the vector of gradients used for the construction of the Fisher matrix for Fisher
==PAGE:27==
24
Experiments
merging and stochastic masked merging is the same. In all ensemble models,
the learning rate and the number of epochs are the only hyperparameters that
change between trainings. Performance metrics are given by training and vali-
dation cross-entropy losses.
Pin wheel.
We first consider the pin wheel synthetic toy dataset, so we are
computationally able to merge the parameters for a long range of steps. To do
so, we generate a dataset composed of 5 different clusters, with 1000 samples per
cluster and 2 latent dimensions. Figure 3.7 illustrates the dataset. We use neural
networks formed by two hidden layers of dimension 16 and TahH activation
functions. This adds to 400 parameters. We set the number of conditioned or
masked parameters to 200. For each ensemble e ∈E, the number of training
epochs is set to 100 ∗e, and the learning rate to 0.005 ∗e. We use SGD with
batch size of 64. The vector of gradients is the average of the vectors computed
for all the training samples. The number of merging steps is set to 250000,
equivalent to 10h of computing with a Tesla A100 PCIE 40 GB (owned by DTU
Compute).
Figure 3.7: The pin wheel data generated is composed of 5 clusters, with 1000
samples per cluster.
We have conducted empirical experiments to demonstrate that merging models
with a well-constructed posterior yields superior results. Figure 3.8 illustrates
how the test loss of the metamodel gradually decreases to the point where it
achieves higher accuracy on the test dataset compared to Fisher merging and
isotropic merging. Furthermore, we can observe the maximization of the joint
posterior distribution during the merging process until convergence.
==PAGE:28==
3.2 Ensembling
25
Figure 3.8: Performance of stochastic masked merging on the pin wheel
dataset. We merge three models trained from the same initializa-
tion but with different hyperparameters. Specifically, the meta-
model is initialized randomly to the same seed as the individual
models. One can observe that the permutation loss is maximized
during merging, while the test loss decreases and converges to al-
most zero. Importantly, we obtain better results than other merg-
ing methods (see Table 3.1).
One important detail is that the user determines the number of masked param-
eters, which can play a crucial role in the merging process. A larger number
of masked parameters results in a larger matrix that needs to be inverted, po-
tentially leading to impractical computation times. Therefore, it is important
to investigate whether the performance of the merging technique is affected by
the number of masked parameters. Interestingly, we observed that for different
mask sizes (see figure 3.9) the performance results remained almost unchanged.
It is true that bigger mask sizes lead to better merging performance, but the dif-
ference is minimal. One possible explanation for this finding is that the model is
too small and, even with a small mask size, the mask parameters contain enough
information. Additionally, a smaller mask size can potentially be compensated
by a larger number of permutations. The results in figure 3.9 and table 3.1
empirically support our initial idea that higher mask rates leads to a slower but
better merging process.
MNIST.
We present results for merging models trained with the MNIST
(LeCun et al., 1998) dataset, a large database of handwritten digits that is
==PAGE:29==
26
Experiments
Figure 3.9: Comparison of stochastic masked merging across different mask-
ing rates. The networks are composed of 400 parameters. The
metamodel is randomly initialized. We can observe that the loss
curve is identical for all four mask sizes.
Table 3.1: Comparison of test loss on the pin wheel dataset across isotropic
merging, Fisher merging, and stochastic masked merging with dif-
ferent masking rates.
Masking percentage →
0.06
0.125
0.25
0.5
Speedup →
1.395
1.369
1.198
1
Stochastic masked merging
0.0686 ± 0.0062
0.0669 ± 0.0059
0.0661 ± 0.0058
0.0656 ± 0.0057
Isotropic merging
0.1058 ± 0.0041
Fisher merging
0.1081 ± 0.0077
commonly used for training various image processing systems. It is important to
note that as the number of parameters in the models grows, the computational
cost of the merging technique also increases significantly. While the merging
process is performed once after the training of the models, and we might be
able to afford computational expenses, we are constrained in this project by
the amount of available computational power.
Therefore, it is hard to do a
fair comparison between performance results on Pinwheel and MNIST datasets,
as the number of merging steps in the MNIST case is one order of magnitude
smaller. In this regard, we also considered the initialization of the metamodel’s
parameters to the average values of the models’ parameters, known as isotropic
merging. If we start the merging process from a set of parameters than already
lies in the correct basin, we are reducing the number of merging steps required
==PAGE:30==
3.2 Ensembling
27
to achieve a good merging performance.
On the other hand, improving the
performance of the metamodel initializing from isotropic merging means that our
merging approach is effectively optimizing the metamodel’s parameters towards
a better estimate.
Figure 3.10 illustrates the merging process on MNIST, composed of 35000 steps.
Bear in mind that each MNIST image is 28 x 28 pixels in size, so the input
dimension is 784. In contrast, the Pinwheel dataset has a 2-dimensional input.
Consistent with the previous experimental settings, the network used for the
different models is a 3-layer MLP, with each hidden layer composed of 16 hidden
units. We use batch normalization to improve the performance of the models.
This adds to 13232 parameters, out of which we mask 200 parameters.
For
each merging step, we set 10 permutations of the parameters. This is because
increasing the number of permutations helps compensate for a small number of
masked parameters. After the training of the models, we compute the vector
of gradients through backpropagation for 10000 samples, from which we then
construct the Fisher matrix. We set a number of steps equivalent to 10h of
computing with a Tesla A100 PCIE 40 GB (owned by DTU Compute), so we
can observe how the computational cost increases as the number of parameters
grows, and how the number of merging steps is affected.
An important insight here is that we might require a large number of merging
steps to optimize a randomly initialized metamodel. Figure 3.11 gives a global
view of how small is the improvement that we get with 35000 steps. However,
if we initialize the parameters of the metamodel to the average of the models’
parameters, we can reduce the number of steps required to improve the model’s
performance. Although it is impressive that our method can optimize a random
set of parameters without revisiting data, starting the optimization process from
a point close to the optimum is beneficial. Indeed, Figure 3.12 demonstrates how
isotropic merging’s performance improves with just 5000 merging steps. Further
research is necessary to determine the performance limit of our method and the
number of steps required for convergence.
==PAGE:31==
28
Experiments
Figure 3.10: Test loss and permutation loss for 35000 merging steps. The net-
works are composed of 13232 parameters. The parameters of the
metamodel are randomly initialized. We observe a very small
increasing tendency of the permutation loss during the merging
process.
The test loss clearly decreases linearly, but a signifi-
cantly large number of merging steps is required for the merging
to become effective. The parameters of the metamodel are still
far from being correctly optimized.
==PAGE:32==
3.2 Ensembling
29
Figure 3.11: Global comparison of the performance of stochastic masked
merging versus Fisher merging and isotropic merging.
With
35000 merging steps, and with the parameters of the metamodel
randomly initialized, we observe that there is no significant de-
crease in the test loss during the merging process. In the Pin-
wheel case (see Figure 3.8), we were able to optimize the param-
eters within 250000 steps, indicating that a large number of steps
might be required for a succesful merging.
Figure 3.12: With a metamodel initialized to the average of the models’ pa-
rameters and 5000 merging steps, the test loss exhibits a linear
decrease. This provides valuable insights into how our technique
can also be used to fine-tune pretrained models without revisiting
data, effectively guiding the parameters towards a more optimal
point-estimate.
==PAGE:33==
30
Experiments
==PAGE:34==
Chapter 4
Symmetries
Training deep neural networks is a highly non convex optimization problem. The
significant over-parametrization of large models result in a rugged loss landscape
with many equivalent solutions. This ruggedness is connected to flat directions
along which the loss does not change significantly (Garipov et al., 2018) and an
immense amount of geometric repetition. Most of this equivalent solutions are
related to symmetries, parameter transformations that keep the loss invariant
(Zhao et al., 2022). The simplest symmetry was noted by Hecht-Nielsen (1990)
and it states that permuting hidden units, if the weights are adjusted accord-
ingly, won’t change the network’s functionality (Ainsworth et al., 2022). In this
chapter we explore re-parametrization of models through symmetries, aiming to
bring the parameters closer in the weight space in order to to facilitate merging
and overcome the fixed seed limitation.
4.1
Intuition
How can independently trained models with different random initializations and
data batch orders inevitably achieve nearly identical performance? Ainsworth
et al. (2022) points to the existence of some yet uncharacterized invariances in
training dynamics and suggests that permutation symmetries are an important
==PAGE:35==
32
Symmetries
piece at play in neural network training. It is clear that a better understanding
of loss landscape geometry will help better optimization algorithms and merging
techniques.
Ainsworth et al. (2022) proposes three algorithms to standardize the weights of
different models in order to make the loss landscape as flat as possible. The
methods are based on the notion that two models must learn similar features to
accomplish the same task. The most intuitive method is matching activation,
where the authors propose to associate each unit in model A to a unit in model
B via OLS regression matching, assuming that a linear relationship between the
activations of the two models may exist. This results in a permuting matrix P
that produces weights θ′
B with activations that align as closely possible with θA.
Figure 4.1: This figure illustrates linear mode connectivity and loss barriers.
We can observe how parameters θMAP1, θMAP2, and θMAP3 lie
in different basins with loss barriers between each. After the re-
parametrization θMAP1, θMAP2 and θMAP3 lie in the same basin.
Random initializations lead to parameters that are separated in
parameter space. With the permutations and the resulting equiv-
alences, we are able to move the parameters into the same basin.
Git Re-Basin (Ainsworth et al., 2022) focuses on teleporting solutions of different
models into the same basin, and then performs isotropic merging to merge the
models in weight space. Although they explore the strong idea of re-basin differ-
ent models, better merging techniques such as Fisher merging or now stochastic
masked merging can be used to merge the models once re-parametrized. Addi-
tionally, due to the combinatorial nature of the algorithms, this method becomes
impractical for aligning more than two models.
==PAGE:36==
4.2 Merging symmetries via masking
33
Previous work has studied the relationship between different local minima found
during stochastic gradient descent (SGD) and has discovered that they are con-
nected by a path of constant loss (Freeman and Bruna, 2016). This phenomenon
is commonly referred to as mode connectivity. It’s important to note that
the path connecting the minima may not necessarily be linear, and the loss
increase along the path between two solutions is termed the barrier. Figure
4.1 illustrates both concepts- (Ainsworth et al., 2022) builds the conjecture that
most SGD solutions belong to a set whose elements can be permuted so that no
barrier exists on the linear interpolation between parameters.
4.2
Merging symmetries via masking
We explore the power of symmetries and extend stochastic masked merging to
models that are trained from different initializations and have parameters lo-
cated far apart in parameter space. Following (Pourzanjani et al., 2017), we
focus on two manifestations of unidentifiability: weight-space symmetry and
scaling symmetry. The paper also proposes reparameterizations involving pa-
rameter constraints to resolve them in Variational Inference (VI) and Markov
Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC), as a posterior with many equivalent solutions and
unnaturally high curvature is difficult to approximate.
• Weight-space symmetry.
Hidden layers exhibit an exchangeability
property due to the commutative nature of addition. The output of a
hidden unit is determined by the sum of the inputs. If we swap the order
of the summands, we are preserving the output of the hidden unit while
swapping dimensions of the parameters. This results in a new equivalent
point in the parameter space from which we construct a new posterior. We
exploit this symmetry by arbitrary permuting hidden units of a specific
layer and generating new equivalent parameters. Following the example
of (Pourzanjani et al., 2017), equation 4.1 illustrates the exchangeability
properties in hidden units.
h1 = σ (W11x1 + W21x2 + b1)
h2 = σ (W12x1 + W22x2 + b2)
y = w1h1 + w2h2 + c = w2h2 + w1h1 + c
(4.1)
• Scaling symmetry. Under the ReLU activation function, we can scale by
a real scalar α the input weights in a hidden unit (e.g. multiplying W1 and
W2 by α), and then scale down the output y by multiplying by 1/α. This
leaves y invariant. Goodfellow et al. (2016) illustrates this phenomenon
as an hyperbole of equivalent solutions.
==PAGE:37==
34
Symmetries
We compute and store a number of possible permutations for each model post-
hoc after training. Similar to the vector of gradients for the Fisher merging
and stochastic masked merging, we generate a list with vectors of indices, each
corresponding to the order of the parameters permuted. The list is first stored
and then loaded during the merging process. Since the gradients have to be
permuted accordingly, we include in the framework a set of helping functions
that permute both the weights and the gradients.
We integrate symmetries into stochastic masked merging by adding, for each
model m ∈M, the log-posterior of all the model symmetries s ∈S (see equation
4.2). Therefore, we are not only maximizing the joint likelihood of the model
posteriors, but maximizing the joint likelihood of all model symmetries.
log p(θ) ∝
K
X
k=1
S
X
s=1
D
X
D=1
Ep,m[log pk(θ(π)
j
|θ(π)
1:D−1, s)] −k −1
K
log p0(θ(π)
j
|θ(π)
1:D−1, s).
(4.2)
Since scaling symmetries works under ReLU activation functions, not TanH, we
have focused on weight-symmetries. This is because we have empirically seen
that ReLU poses issues in the construction of the individual posterior of each
model, because it sets gradients to zero. The experiments are conducted with
Pinwheel dataset.
Figure 4.2: Performance of stochastic masked merging with three randomly
initialized models.
The merging optimization is composed of
300000 steps. We can observe how the test loss decreases, but falls
into a bad local minima. Having the parameters of the different
models close in space is crucial for a good merging performance.
==PAGE:38==
4.2 Merging symmetries via masking
35
Figure 4.2 illustrates the merging performance of the different techniques give
three randomly initialized models. We observe that stochastic masked merging
on its original form is not free of the fixed seed limitation. This limitation arises
from approximating the posterior of the models locally around a point estimate.
Table 4.1 presents the results of stochastic masked merging with weight per-
mutations. In this case, the optimization process involves 50000 merging steps,
as the computational cost increases when incorporating the additional sum of
symmetries for each step. Additionally, we consider 5 permutations per merging
step, with 5 weight-permutation symmetries per model. The average loss of the
three models is 0.4204, and the lowest metamodel loss after merging is 19.1.
Overall, we are still far from providing a good merging performance when the
models are randomly initialized.
Table 4.1: Comparison of the test performance of the metamodel for the dif-
ferent merging techniques, including stochastic masked merging
(SMM) with weight permutations. The models are randomly ini-
tialized. For a fair comparison we considered 5000 merging steps
also for stochastic masked merging, eventhough we previously com-
puted stochastic masked merging with 300000 steps.
Isotropic merging
Fisher merging
SMM
SMM with weight permutations
25.6014
19.1766
81.2863
80.4719
Figure 4.3: Performance of stochastic masked merging with weight permuta-
tions on merging three randomly initialized models. The merging
optimization is composed of 50000 steps. We are computationally
limited due to the extra sum of symmetries in equation 4.2 that
increases the merging cost substantially. We can observe how the
optimization gets trapped in a bad local minima, far from an ac-
curate point-estimate.
==PAGE:39==
36
Symmetries
The optimization process starts from a random point in parameter space, and is
guided towards a better point-estimate at each merging step. Although weight
symmetries have been introduced, each symmetry is still fixed in parameter
space and its posterior locally approximated. Intuitively, this means that we
are trying to maximize the joint distribution via all individual symmetries for
each model, but the posterior distributions of the symmetries also might not
intersect. Therefore, it is unclear whether we are optimizing towards a better
parameter set. Figure 4.4 illustrates how the optimization gets trapped in a bad
local minima.
These empirical results suggest that by constraining symmetries to a subset of
the parameter space, we may significantly enhance our merging performance.
This idea was also explored by Pourzanjani et al. (2017) to address the uniden-
tifiability problem in NNs in the form of parameter constraints. We studied
parameter constraints in weight-permutation symmetries via ordering of the pa-
rameters. Our hypothesis is that by establishing an implicit order among weight
symmetries, we can bring the parameters of different models closer together in
the parameter space. To achieve this, we initially permute the parameters of
the models using an l2-ordering, and then employ stochastic masked merging.
Figure 4.4: Performance of stochastic masked merging with the weights of
the models initially permuted via l2-ordering. The merging opti-
mization consists of 200000 steps. It can be observed that while
the log-posterior probability is maximized during the optimization
process, this does not correspond to a decrease in the test loss.
==PAGE:40==
Chapter 5
Related work
Model merging.
Most popular approaches for transferring knowledge across
models are based on using a trained network to initialize another network
(Zhuang et al., 2020). Although this has proved to be valuable in various fields
(Radford et al., 2018; Oquab et al., 2014; Raffel et al., 2020), it does have limita-
tions (Matena and Raffel, 2022), such that improvements to pre-trained models
can not be passed to descendants models. One way to overcome those limitations
is merging the models in parameter space and creating a new high-performant
model. In this regard, federated learning McMahan et al. (2017) averages the
weights of different models and providing a decentralized method for training
neural networks. This approach can be framed as maximizing the joint distribu-
tion of the posterior of the models, with each posterior defined as an isotropic
Gaussian. Isotropic merging has also been seen in Polyak averaging (Polyak
and Juditsky, 1992). Current work in merging models concerns improving the
construction of the posteriors.
Laplace approximation.
Laplace approximation (LA) (Daxberger et al.,
2021; MacKay, 2003) uses curvature information of the loss to construct a Gaus-
sian local approximation around a single mode of the distribution. Other ap-
proximation such as Markov Chain Monte Carlo methods (Welling and Teh,
2011; Wenzel et al., 2020) or deep ensembles (Lakshminarayanan et al., 2017)
explore more than one mode. At first, LA was infeasible to use for large neural
==PAGE:41==
38
Related work
networks due to the computation of the exact Hessian, until Botev et al. (2017)
and Martens and Grosse (2015) made possible tractable approximations with
GGN and KFAC matrices.
In the context of model merging, Matena and Raffel (2022) uses LA to propose
a weighted-average merging technique based on the diagonal of the Fisher ma-
trix, were each parameter of the model is weighted with its Fisher information.
Kirkpatrick et al. (2017) developed Elastic Weight Consolidation to solve catas-
trophic forgetting in continual learning, where models are trained to generalize
to numerous tasks with the risk of forgetting the old ones. The algorithm uses
LA with the Fisher diagonal as the precision to integrate the posterior of the
tasks into a loss, slowing down certain weights based on how important they are
in previous tasks.
Fisher matrix.
The Fisher matrix has seen an extensive use in Natural Gra-
dient Descent (NGD) (Amari, 1998). NGD uses the Fisher matrix to perform
gradient descent on a Riemannian manifold, providing a better distance mea-
sure than the Euclidean distance in the standard SGD. It has also been used
in stochastic optimization with Adam (Kingma and Ba, 2014), using a mov-
ing average of the squared gradients to precondition the optimization with an
approximation of the Fisher.
Symmetries.
The over-parametrization of neural networks (NNs) leads to a
very rugged parameter space, with many equivalent solutions or model sym-
metries. Git Re-Basin (Ainsworth et al., 2022) explores symmetries in transfer
learning, aligning the hidden units of two independently trained models in order
to bring the parameters into the same basin and facilitating the further merg-
ing. These alignment is based on the mode connectivity concept introduced by
Freeman and Bruna (2016), which states that SGD solutions are connected in
the loss space by constant loss curves. The model unidentifiability problem on
NNs poses issues for both Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) and Variational
Inference (VI). In this regard, Pourzanjani et al. (2017) studies reparametriza-
tions of the models via parameter constraints to improve the identifiability of
NNs.
==PAGE:42==
Chapter 6
Discussion
This master thesis has presented stochastic masked merging, a probabilistic ap-
proach for model merging. Through the Bayesian lens, model merging corre-
sponds to maximizing the joint distribution via the individual models posteriors
(Matena and Raffel, 2022). The key point of our method lies in approximating
each model posterior distribution through a sum of factorized conditionals. Par-
ticularly, sub-sampling this sum allows us to bound the computational cost of
the merging method without the need of assuming complete independence be-
tween parameters, as it is done by current state-of-the-art. Through extensive
experiments, we have shown successful results for both regression and classifi-
cation tasks, being the best performing method on Pinwheel dataset.
One limiting aspect of the presented method is that looking for a good construc-
tion of the individual posteriors, and therefore guiding the merging optimization
towards a better point-estimate, comes with an increase of the computational
cost. This computational cost grows with the number of parameters of the mod-
els. Although we have theoretically bound the cost to the number of masked
parameters, we have empirically seen that it becomes hard to deal with even for
medium size models. Additionally, our method is still limited to models trained
from the same initialization. The resason behind this point is that we are ap-
proximating the individual posteriors locally around their MAPs, and when the
models are randomly initialized the MAPs might be far separated in parameter
space. Our hypothesis is that a valid set of parameters for the metamodel lies
==PAGE:43==
40
Discussion
in the intersection of the individual posteriors, posing a limitation when the dis-
tributions do not intersect. Even though we have studied re-parametrization of
models through symmetries, aiming to bring the parameters closer in the space,
our approach is still far from overcoming this constraint.
In future work, we plan to work on a computational improvement of the method.
One way to do that is reducing the cost of the inverse operation, performed on
the submatrix of the FIM that is created with the subset of masked parameters
(see Eq 2.11).
This inversion is done for each individual model during each
merging step, which increases the computational burden. To address this, we
can use linear approximation methods to the inverse such as Conjugate gradient
(Shewchuk, 1994).
Other possible directions include stochastically sampling
a subset of parameters from which we construct the conditionals, instead of
dividing the whole set of parameters into masked and non masked subsets.
Finally, an expanded theory and empirical exploration of model symmetries
presents an exciting avenue for future research. It is clear that improving our
understanding of the non-convex deep learning loss landscape is a key milestone
in model merging. The reason for that, is that we might be able to find model
equivalences within the same basin on parameter space, which can facilitate the
further merging.
==PAGE:44==
Bibliography
S. K. Ainsworth, J. Hayase, and S. Srinivasa. Git re-basin: Merging models
modulo permutation symmetries. arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.04836, 2022.
S.-I. Amari. Natural gradient works efficiently in learning. Neural computation,
10(2):251–276, 1998.
H. Bao, L. Dong, S. Piao, and F. Wei.
BEIT: BERT pre-training of image
transformers. International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR),
2022.
C. M. Bishop and N. M. Nasrabadi. Pattern recognition and machine learning,
volume 4. Springer, 2006.
A. Botev, H. Ritter, and D. Barber. Practical gauss-newton optimisation for
deep learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pages 557–
565. PMLR, 2017.
L. Breiman. Bagging predictors. Machine learning, 24:123–140, 1996.
P. Bühlmann. Bagging, boosting and ensemble methods. Springer, 2012.
E. Daxberger, A. Kristiadi, A. Immer, R. Eschenhagen, M. Bauer, and P. Hen-
nig.
Laplace redux-effortless bayesian deep learning.
Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems, 34:20089–20103, 2021.
J. Devlin, M.-W. Chang, K. Lee, and K. Toutanova. BERT: Pre-training of
deep bidirectional transformers for language understanding. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1810.04805, 2018.
C. Dilmegani.
Large language model training in 2023, 2023.
URL https:
//research.aimultiple.com/large-language-model-training/.
==PAGE:45==
42
BIBLIOGRAPHY
E. Fong and C. C. Holmes. On the marginal likelihood and cross-validation.
Biometrika, 107(2):489–496, 2020.
C. D. Freeman and J. Bruna. Topology and geometry of half-rectified network
optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:1611.01540, 2016.
Y. Freund, R. E. Schapire, et al. Experiments with a new boosting algorithm.
In icml, volume 96, pages 148–156. Citeseer, 1996.
Y. Gal and Z. Ghahramani. Dropout as a bayesian approximation: Representing
model uncertainty in deep learning. In international conference on machine
learning, pages 1050–1059. PMLR, 2016.
T. Garipov, P. Izmailov, D. Podoprikhin, D. P. Vetrov, and A. G. Wilson. Loss
surfaces, mode connectivity, and fast ensembling of dnns. Advances in neural
information processing systems, 31, 2018.
Z. Ghahramani. Probabilistic machine learning and artificial intelligence. Na-
ture, 521(7553):452–459, 2015.
I. Goodfellow, Y. Bengio, and A. Courville. Deep learning. MIT press, 2016.
R. Hecht-Nielsen.
On the algebraic structure of feedforward network weight
spaces. In Advanced Neural Computers, pages 129–135. Elsevier, 1990.
M.
Heikkilä.
Generative
ai
risks
concentrating
big
tech’s
power.
here’s
how
to
stop
it.,
2023.
URL
https://www.technologyreview.com/2023/04/18/1071727/
generative-ai-risks-concentrating-big-techs-power-heres-how-to-stop-it/.
D. P. Kingma and J. Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1412.6980, 2014.
J. Kirkpatrick, R. Pascanu, N. Rabinowitz, J. Veness, G. Desjardins, A. A.
Rusu, K. Milan, J. Quan, T. Ramalho, A. Grabska-Barwinska, et al. Over-
coming catastrophic forgetting in neural networks. Proceedings of the national
academy of sciences, 114(13):3521–3526, 2017.
F. Kunstner, P. Hennig, and L. Balles. Limitations of the empirical fisher ap-
proximation for natural gradient descent.
Advances in neural information
processing systems, 32, 2019.
B. Lakshminarayanan, A. Pritzel, and C. Blundell. Simple and scalable predic-
tive uncertainty estimation using deep ensembles. Advances in neural infor-
mation processing systems, 30, 2017.
Y. LeCun, J. Denker, and S. Solla. Optimal brain damage. Advances in neural
information processing systems, 2, 1989.
==PAGE:46==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
43
Y. LeCun, L. Bottou, Y. Bengio, and P. Haffner. Gradient-based learning ap-
plied to document recognition. Proceedings of the IEEE, 86(11):2278–2324,
1998.
D. J. MacKay. Information theory, inference and learning algorithms. Cam-
bridge university press, 2003.
J. Martens and R. Grosse. Optimizing neural networks with kronecker-factored
approximate curvature.
In International conference on machine learning,
pages 2408–2417. PMLR, 2015.
M. S. Matena and C. A. Raffel. Merging models with fisher-weighted averaging.
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:17703–17716, 2022.
B. McMahan, E. Moore, D. Ramage, S. Hampson, and B. A. y Arcas.
Communication-efficient learning of deep networks from decentralized data.
In Artificial intelligence and statistics, pages 1273–1282. PMLR, 2017.
M. Miani, F. Warburg, P. Moreno-Muñoz, N. Skafte, and S. Hauberg. Lapla-
cian autoencoders for learning stochastic representations. Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems, 35:21059–21072, 2022.
P. Moreno-Muñoz, C. Feldager, and S. Hauberg. Revisiting active sets for gaus-
sian process decoders. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
35:6603–6614, 2022.
P. Moreno-Muñoz, P. G. Recasens, and S. Hauberg. On masked pre-training
and the marginal likelihood, 2023.
C. V. Nguyen, Y. Li, T. D. Bui, and R. E. Turner. Variational continual learning.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1710.10628, 2017.
M. Oquab, L. Bottou, I. Laptev, and J. Sivic. Learning and transferring mid-
level image representations using convolutional neural networks. In Proceed-
ings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pages
1717–1724, 2014.
B. T. Polyak and A. B. Juditsky. Acceleration of stochastic approximation by
averaging. SIAM journal on control and optimization, 30(4):838–855, 1992.
A. A. Pourzanjani, R. M. Jiang, and L. R. Petzold. Improving the identifiability
of neural networks for bayesian inference. In NIPS Workshop on Bayesian
Deep Learning, volume 4, page 31, 2017.
A. Radford, K. Narasimhan, T. Salimans, I. Sutskever, et al. Improving language
understanding by generative pre-training. 2018.
==PAGE:47==
44
BIBLIOGRAPHY
C. Raffel. Building machine learning models like open source software. Commun.
ACM, 66(2):38–40, jan 2023. ISSN 0001-0782. doi: 10.1145/3545111. URL
https://doi.org/10.1145/3545111.
C. Raffel, N. Shazeer, A. Roberts, K. Lee, S. Narang, M. Matena, Y. Zhou,
W. Li, and P. J. Liu. Exploring the limits of transfer learning with a unified
text-to-text transformer. The Journal of Machine Learning Research, 21(1):
5485–5551, 2020.
J. R. Shewchuk.
An introduction to the conjugate gradient method with-
out the agonizing pain.
August 1994.
URL http://www.cs.cmu.edu/
~quake-papers/painless-conjugate-gradient.pdf.
E. Snelson and Z. Ghahramani. Sparse gaussian processes using pseudo-inputs.
Advances in neural information processing systems, 18, 2005.
Z. Tong, Y. Song, J. Wang, and L. Wang. VideoMAE: Masked autoencoders
are data-efficient learners for self-supervised video pre-training. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2203.12602, 2022.
M. Welling and Y. W. Teh. Bayesian learning via stochastic gradient langevin
dynamics. In Proceedings of the 28th international conference on machine
learning (ICML-11), pages 681–688, 2011.
F. Wenzel, K. Roth, B. S. Veeling, J. Świątkowski, L. Tran, S. Mandt, J. Snoek,
T. Salimans, R. Jenatton, and S. Nowozin. How good is the bayes posterior
in deep neural networks really? arXiv preprint arXiv:2002.02405, 2020.
M. Wortsman, G. Ilharco, S. Y. Gadre, R. Roelofs, R. Gontijo-Lopes, A. S.
Morcos, H. Namkoong, A. Farhadi, Y. Carmon, S. Kornblith, et al. Model
soups: averaging weights of multiple fine-tuned models improves accuracy
without increasing inference time. In International Conference on Machine
Learning, pages 23965–23998. PMLR, 2022.
B. Zhao, I. Ganev, R. Walters, R. Yu, and N. Dehmamy.
Symmetries, flat
minima, and the conserved quantities of gradient flow.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2210.17216, 2022.
F. Zhuang, Z. Qi, K. Duan, D. Xi, Y. Zhu, H. Zhu, H. Xiong, and Q. He. A
comprehensive survey on transfer learning. Proceedings of the IEEE, 109(1):
43–76, 2020.
